I ,g
/~~~~~~~~~~~~~~i

«, .', T H E ?

H FS T O R Y

OF THE
-R E IGN

OF THE
EMPEROR CARLES V.

WITH

A VIEWof the PROGRESS of SOCIETY in
EUROPE, from the Subversion of the ROMAN EMPIRE,

to the Beginning of the SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

IN FOUR VOLUMES.

By WILLIAM ROBERTS9N, D. D.
PRINCIPAL of the Univcrfity of EIINBURG;H, and HISTO-

RIOGRAPHER to his MAJESTY for SCOTLAND.

A NEW EDITION.

VO L. I.

LONDON:
Printed for W. STRAHAN; T. CADELL, in the

Strand; and J. BA L FOUR, at Edinburgh.

MDCCLXXIV.

# TO THE KING.

TO THE

K I N G.

SI R,
I PRESUME to lay before your

Majesty the Hiflory of a Period,

which, if the abilities of the Writer
were equal to the dignity of the Sub-
ject, would not be unworthy the
attention of a Monarch, who is no
less a Judge than a Patron of Literary
Merit.

HISTORY claims it as her preroga-

tive to offer inftruion to KINGS,
as well as to their people. What
reflctions the Reign of the Emperor

A 3 CH ARLES

CHARLFS V. may fuggefi to Your
Majefly, it becomes not me to con-
jecture. But your Subjects cannot
obfcrve the various calamities, which
that Monarch's ambition to be diftin-
guiflicd as a Conqueror, brought upon
his dominions, without recollecting
the felicity of their own times, and
looking up with gratitude to their
Sovereign, who, during the fervour
of youth, and amidIt the career of
victory, possessed such felf-command,
and maturity of judgment, as to set
bounds to his own triumphs, and
prefer the bleflings of peace to the
splendour of military glory.

POSTERITY will not only celebrate

the Wisdom of Your Majefly's choice,
but will enumerate the many Virtues,
which render Your Reign conspicuous
for a sacred regard to all the duties

incumbent

incumbent on the Sovereign of a Free
People.

IT is our happiness to feel the influ-

ence of these Virtucs; and to live
un(ler the dominion of a Prin'ce, who
delights more in promoting the Pub-
lick Welfare, than in receiving the
juit Praise of his royal beneficence.
I am,

SIR,

YOUR MAJESTY's

Most faithful Subje&,

And moit dutiful Servant,
WILLIAM ROBERTSON.

A4

# THE PREFACE.

THE

PRESA C E.
N~ O period in the history of one's own

country can be confidered as alto-

gether uninteresting. Such transactions as
tend to illustrate the progress of its confli-
tution, laws, or manners, merit the utmost
attention. Even remote and minute events
are objeCts of a curiosity, which, being na-
tural to the human mind, the gratification of
it is attended with pleasure.

BUT, with rcfped to the hiflory of foreign

States, we must set other bounds to our
desire of information. The universal pro-
grefs of science, during the two last centuries,
the art of printing, and other obvious causes,
have filled Europe with fich a multiplicity
of hiflorics, and with fucli vail collecdions
of hiflorical materials, that the term of hlu-
man life is too short for the fludy or even
the perusal of them. It is ncciluy, then,
not only for tliofe who arc called to coiildui

tie

the affairs of nations, but for such asinquire
and reason concerning them, to remain satis-
sied with a general knowledge of distant
events, and to confine their fludy of hiflory
in detail chiefly to that period, in which the
several States of Europe having become inti-
mately connected, the operations of one
power are so felt by all, as to influence their
councils, and to regulate their measures.

SOME boundary, then, ought to be fixed

in order to fcparate thefc periods. An ra
lhould be pointed out, prior to which, each
country, little conncted with those around
it, may trace its own hiflory apart; after
which, the tranfadions of every considerable
nation in Europe become interefling and
infiruive to all. With this intention I
undertook to write the history of the Em-
peror CHARLES V. It was during his ad-
miniltration that the powers of Europe were
formed into one great political system, in
which each took a flation, wherein it has
since remained with less variation, than could
have been expeced after the hocks occa-
sioned by so many internal revolutions, and

so

so many foreign wars. The great events
which happened then have not hitherto spent
their force. The political principles and
maxims, then established, fill continue to
operate. The ideas concerning the balance
of power, then introduced or rendered general,
still influence the councils of nations.

THE age of CHARLES V. may therefore

be confidered as the period at which the
political state of Europe began to afl'ume a
new form. I have endeavourcd to render
my account of it, an introdulion to the
hitfory of Europe filbfequent to his reign.
While his numerous Biographers describe his
personal qualities and ations; while the
hiflorians of different countries relate occur-
rences the confcquences of which were local
or transient, it hath been my purpose to
record only tholie great tranfacions in his
reign, the effeats of which were univcrfal,
or continue to be permanent.

As my readers could derive little inflruc-

tion from such a history of the reign of
CHARLES V. without some information con-

2 corning

cerning the fiate of Europe previous to te
sixteenth century, my desire of supplying
this has produced a preliminary volume, in
which I have attempted to point out and
explain the great cau'es and events, to whose
operation all the improvements in the poli-
tical slate of Europe, friom the fubvcrfion of
the Roman Empire to the beginning of tlic
sixteenth century, must be ascribed. I have
exhibited a view of the progrcfs of focicty
in Europe, not only with refpee to interior
government, laws, and manners, but with re-
fpea to the command of the national force
requisite in foreign operations; and I have
dcIcribcd the political confiitution of the prin-
cipal states in Europe at the time when
Charles V. began his reign.

IN this part of my work I have been led

into fcvcral critical dif(luifitions, which be-
long moic properly to the province of the
lawyer or .antilqualy, than to that of the
hitlrian. T'hcf i hlavc placed at the end of
the 1irP volume, un!er the title of Proofs
and Illullratiiols. r, any of my readers will,
probably, sivc little attention to fulch re-

fcarclies.

fearchcs. To some they may, perhaps, ap-
pear the most curious and intereffing part of
the work. I have carefully pointed out the
sources from which I have Ideived informa-
tion, and have cited the writers on whose
authority I rely with a minute exadnefs,
which might appear to border upon oienta-
tion, if it were possible to be vain of having
read books, many of which nothing but the
duty of examining with accuracy whatever
I laid before the publick, would have induced
me to open. As my inquiries conducted me
often into paths which were obscure or little
frequented, such constant rccourfe to the
authors who have been my guides, was not
only necessary for authenticating the fitas
which are the foundations of my reasonings,
but may be useful in pointing out the way
to such as hall hereafter hold the fame
course, and in enabling them to carry on
their refearchcs with greater facility and
success.

EVERY intelligent reader will observe one

omiflion in my work, the reason of wlicl
it is necefary to explain. I have given no
account of the conquclis of Mexico and

I'cru,

Peru, or of the cablifhment of the Spanish
colonies in the continent and islands of
America. The history of these events I ori-
ginally intended to have related at confider-
able length. But upon a nearer and more
attentive consideration of this part of my
plan, I found that the discovery of the new
world; the slate of focicty among its ancient
inhabitants; their characer, manners, and
arts; the genius of the European settlements
in its various provinces, together with the
influence of there upon the systems of policy
or commerce in Europe, were fubjeas so
splendid and important, that a superficial
view of them could afford little fatisfadion;
to treat of them as extensively as they me-
rited, must produce an episode, difpropor-
tionate to the principal work. I have there-
fore reserved these for a separate history;
which, if the performance now offered to the
publick fliall receive its approbation, I pro-
pose to undertake.

THOUGH, by ,omitting such considerable

but detached articles in the reign of Charles V.
I have circumcfribed my narration within
more narrow limits, I am yet persuaded,

from

from this view of the intention and nature
of the work which I thought it necessary to
lav before my readers, that the plan muff
flill appear to them too extensive, and the
undertaking too arduous. I have often felt
them to be so. But my conviction of the
utility of such a history prompted me to
perrevere. With what success I have exe-
cuted it, the publick must nowjudge. I wait,
in solicitude, for its decision; to which I
Ihall submit with a refpedful silence.

# DIRECTIONS to the BINDER.

DIRECTIONS to the BINDER.
Place the Head of the Author before the Title

Vol. I.
The Head of Charles V. before the Title Vol. II,

- - Francis before the Title Vol. III.
Charles V. expiring, before the Title Vol. IV,

A VIEW

## SECTION I. View of the Progress of Society in Europe, with respect to interior Government, Laws, and Manners.

A
V I E W

OF THE
PROGRESS OF SOCIETY

IN
E U R O P E,

FROM THE
SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRES

TO THE
BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

SECTION I.
View of the Progress of Society in Europe, with refpea

to interior Government, Laws, and Manners.
T WO great revolutions have happened in SxCT I,

the political state, and in the manners ofThe,,t
the European nations. The first was oc- of the Ro

man power
calioned by the progress of the Roman power on the fate

of Europe.

the second by the subversion of the Roman Em-
pire. When the spirit of conquest led the armies
of Rome beyond the Alps, they found all the
countries which they invaded, inhabited by people
whom they denominated barbarians, but who were

VOL. I. B never-

SECT. . nevertheJefs brave and independent. These de-

fended their ancient pofleffions with obfinate va-
lour. It was by the superiority of their discipline,
rather than of their courage, that the Roman
gained any advantage over them. A ingle battle
did not, as among the effeminate inhabitants of
Asia, decide the fate of a Rfate. The vanquiihed
people resumed their arms with fresh spirit, and
their undisciplined valour, animated by the love
of liberty, supplied the want of condu& as well

the detla as of union. During those long and fierce itrug-
tion which
it occasion. gles for dominion or independence, the countries

of Europe were fuccefively laid waste, a great part
of their inhabitants perished in the field, many
were carried into slavery, and a feeble remnant,
incapable of further resistance, submitted to the
Roman power.

The im- THE Romans having thus desolated Europe, set
jproen ,

e ..t..

s

which it i- themselves to civilize it. The form of govern-
ttJl"dud ment which they eflablilhed in the conquered pro-

vinces, though severe, was regular, and preserved
i publick tranquillity. As a consolation for the loss

of liberty, they communicated their arts, sciences,
language, and manners, to their new fubje&ts.
Europe began to breathe, and to recover strength
after the calamities which it had undergone; agri-
culture was encouraged; population increased; the
ruined cities were rebuilt; new towns were founded;
an appearance of prosperity succeeded, and repaired,
in some degree, the havock of war.

THI»

THIS state, however, was far from being happy, SECT. I.

or favourable to the improvement of the human Th bad
mind. The vanquished nations were disarmed by Cofeens.
their conquerors, and overawed by soldiers kept in dominion.
pay to restrain them. They were given up as a
prey to rapacious governors, who plundered them
with impunity; and were drained of their wealth
by exorbitant taxes, imposed with so little atten-
tion to the situation of the provinces, that the
impositions were often increased in proportion to
their inability to support them. They were de-
prived of their most enterprizing citizens, who re-
forted to a distant capital in quest of preferment,
or of riches; and were accustomed in all their
actions to look up to a superior, and tamely to
receive his commands. Under so many depref-
sing circumstances, it was impoflible that they
could retain vigour or generosity of mind. The
martial and independent spirit, which had diftin-
gui[hed their ancestors, became extinct among all
the people fubje&ed to the Roman yoke 5 they loft
not only the habit but even the capacity of decid-
ing for themselves, or of aing from the impulse ,
of their own minds; and the dominion of the
Romans, like that of all great Empires, degraded
and debased the human species [A].

A SOCIETY in this state could not fubtif long. the irrup.

tion of the

There were defets in the Roman government, h",rbar.,us
even in its most perfea form, which threatened its a""'"'
dissolution. Time ripened these original feeds of

[A] NOTE I.

B 2 corruption,

SECT. I. corruption, and gave birth to many new disorders.
L" A conRitution, unsound, and worn out, must have

fallen in pieces of itself, without any external hock.
The violent irruption of the Goths, Vandals, Huns,
and other barbarians hastened this event, and pre-
cipitated the downfal of the Empire. New nations
seemed to arise, and to rush from unknown regions,
in order to take vengeance on the Romans for the
calamities which they had inflicted on mankind.
These fierce tribes either inhabited the various pro-
vinces in Germany which had never been subdued
by the Romans, or were scattered over the vast
countries in the north of Europe, and north-west
of Asia, which are now occupied by the Danes,
the Swedes, the Poles, the fubjets of the Ruffian
Empire, and the Tartars. Their condition, and
transaCtions, previous to their invasion of the Em-
pire, are but little known. All our information
with refpet to there is derived from the Romans;
and as they did not penetrate far into countries
which were at that time uncultivated and unin-
viting, the accounts of their original itate given
by them are extremely imperfect. The rude inha-
bitants themselves, destitute of science, and of re-
cords, without leisure, or curiosity to enquire into
remote events, retained, perhaps, some indiftind
memory of recent occurrences, but beyond there,
all was buried in oblivion, or involved in dark-
ness, and in fable [B].

State of the THE prodigious swarms which poured in upon
o,',wihich the Empire from the beginning of the fourth cen-
hiom which
theyiruad. [B] NOTE 1.

tury

tury to the final extinction of the Roman power, SECT. .
have given rife to an opinion that the countries
whence they issued were crowded with inhabitants;
and various theories have been formed to account
for such an extraordinary degree of population as
hath procured these countries the appellation of
The Storehouse of Nations. But if we confider,
that the countries possessed by the people who in-
vaded the Empire were of vast extent; that a great
part of these was covered with woods and narflt s;
that ome of the most considerable of the barba-
rous nations subsisted entirely by hunting or pal-
turage, in both which states of Ibciety large tracts
of land are required for maintaining a few inha-
bitants; and that all of them were strangers to the
arts and industry, without which population can-
not increase to any great degree, it is evident, that
these countries could not be so populous in ancient
times as they are at present, when they still con-
tinue to be less peopled than any other part of
Europe or of Alia.

BUT if these circumifances prevented the bar- The penle

barous nations from becoming populous, they con- si's' ntr-
tributed to inspire, or to strengthen the martial p'riz.
spirit by which they were diftingui(hed. Inured
by the rigour of their climate, or the poverty of
their foil, to hardships, which rendered their bodies
firm, and their minds vigorous; accustomed to a
course of life which was a continual preparation
for aftion; and disdaining every occupation but
that of war they undertook, and prosecuted their

B 3 military

SEcT. . military enterprizes with an ardour and impetuo-

fity, of which men softened by the refinements
of more polished times can scarcely form any
idea [C].

The mo. THerm first inroads into the Empire proceeded
tirves of their
frnecur- rather from the love of plunder, than from the

f. desire of new settlements. Roused to arms by

rome enterprizing or popular leader, they allied
out of their forests; broke in upon the frontier
provinces with irresistible violence; put all who
opposed them to the sword; carried off the most
valuable effets of the inhabitants; dragged along
multitudes of captives in chains wafted all before
them with fire or sword; and returned in triumph
to their wilds and faftnefles. Their success, toge-
ther with the accounts which they gave of the un-
known conveniencies and luxuries that abounded
in countries better cultivated, or blefied with a
milder climate than their own, excited new adven-
turers, and exposed the frontier to new devastations.

Their re. WHEN nothing was left to plunder in the adja-
sons for set-
ting i the cent provinces, ravaged by frequent incursions, they
o'htieiy marched farther from home, and finding it diffi-
conqutred. cult, or dangerous to return, they began to fettle

in the countries which they had subdued. The
sudden and short excursions in quest of booty,
which had alarmed and disquieted the Empire,
ceased a more dreadful calamity impended.
Great bodies of armed men, with their wives and

[C] NOTE III.

children,

children, and slaves and locks, issued forth, Hie SECT.I.
regular colonies, in quet of new fettlefmes. Peo.
pie who had no cities, and seldom any fixed habi-
tation, were so little attached to their native foil,
that they migrated without reluEtance from one
place to another. New adventurers followed
them. The lands which they deserted were oc-
cupied by more remote tribes of barbarians.
These, in their turn, pushed forward into more Th extent
fertile countries, and, like a torrent continually tfheinct.
increasing, rolled on, and swept every thing be-
fore them. In less than two centuries from their
first irruption, barbarians of various names and
lineage, plundered and took poffeflion of Thrace,
Pannonia, Gaul, Spain, Africa, and at lafi of Italy,
and Rome itself. The vast fabrick of the Roman
power, which it had been the work of ages to per-
set, was in that hort period overturned from the
foundation.

MANY concurring causes prepared the way for The cr-

this great revolution, and ensured success to the ^Uh"i'nce
nations which invaded the Empire. The Roman caiond the

Th-oa downfal of
commonwealth had conquered the world by the llRom"n

Empire.

wisdom of its civil maxims, and the rigour of its
military discipline. But, under the Emperors, the
former were forgotten or despised, and the latter
was gradually relaxed. The armies of the Empire
in the fourth and fifth centuries bore scarcely any
resemblance to thole invincible legions which had
been victorious wherever they marched. Intecad
of freemen, who voluntarily took arms from the

B 4 love

SECT. I. love of glory, or of their country, provincials and

barbarians were bribed or forced into service. They
were too feeble, or too proud to submit to the fa-
tigue of military duty. They even complained of
the weight of their defensive armour, as intole-
rable, and laid it aside. Infantry, from which the
armies of ancient Rome derived their vigour and
liability, fell into contempt; the effeminate and
undisciplined soldiers of later times could hardly
be brought to venture into the field but on horse-
back. These wretched troops, however, were the
only guardians of the Empire. The jealousy of
despotism had deprived the people of the use of
arms; and fubjets oppressed and rendered inca-
pable of defending themselves, had neither spirit
nor inclination to resist their invaders, from whom
they had little to fear, because their condition could
hardly be rendered more unhappy. As the mar-
tial spirit became extin&, the revenues of the Em-
pire gradually diminished. The taste for the luxu-
ries of the Eafft increased to such a pitch in the
Imperial court, that great fums were carried into
India, from which money never returns. By the
vast subsidies paid to the barbarous nations a
still greater quantity of species was withdrawn
from circulation. The frontier provinces wafted
by frequent incursions became unable to pay the
customary tribute; and the wealth of the world,
which had long centered in the capital of the Em-
pire, ceased to flow thither in the fame abundance,
or was diverted into other channels. The limits
of the Empire continued to be as extensive as ever,

while

while the spirit requisite for its defence declined, SECT. I.
and its resources were exhausted. A vaif body, '
languid, and almost unanimated, became incapa-
ble of any effort to save itself, and was easily over-
powered. The Emperors, who had the absolute
direcion of this disordered system, funk in the soft-
ness of eastern luxury, shut up within the walls of
a palace, ignorant of war, unacquainted with as-
fairs, and governed entirely by women and eu-
nuchs, or by ministers equally effeminate, trembled
at the approach of danger, and under circumftan-
ces which called for the utmost vigour in counsel
as well as in aion, discovered all the impotent
irresolution of fear, and of folly.

IN every refpet, the condition of the barbarous The cir.

nations was the reverse of that of the Romans.wh ch cn
Among them, the martial spirit was in full vigour; thibut
their leaders were hardy and enterprizing; the arts the br-:
which had enervated the Romans were unknown tions-
among them; and such was the nature of their mi-
litary inftituions, that they brought forces into the
field without any trouble, and supported them at
little expence. The mercenary and effeminate
troops ltationed on the frontier, atonifhed at their
fierceness, either fled at their approach, or were
routed in the first onset. The feeble expedient
to which the Emperors had recourse, of taking
large bodies of the barbarians into pay, and of
employing them to repel new invaders, instead of
retarding, hastened the deftruaion of the Empire.
They oon turned their arms against their masters,

and

SC.T. I. and with greater advantage than ever: for, by ferv-

- ing in the Roman armies, they had acquired all the

discipline, or skill in war, which the Romans still
retained; and, upon adding these to their native
ferocity, they became altogether irrefiltible.

The pirit BUT though from these, and many other causes,
with which
thy carried the progress and conquests of the nations which
on war' over-ran the Empire, became so extremely rapid,

they were accompanied with horrible devastations,
and an incredible deftrution of the human species.
Civilized nations which take arms upon cool re-
flection, from motives of policy or prudence,
with a view to guard against some distant danger,
or to prevent ome remote contingency, carry on
their hostilities with so little rancour, or animosity,
that war among them is disarmed of half its terrors.
Barbarians are trangers to such refinements. They
rush into war with impetuosity, and prosecute it
with violence. Their sole obje&t is to make their
enemies feel the weight of their vengeance, nor
does their rage subside until it be satiated with in-
fliting on them eveir poflible calamity. It a
with such a spirit that the savage tribes in Ame-
rica carry on their petty wars. It was with the
fame spirit that the more powerful and no less
fierce barbarians in the north of Europe, and of
Asia, fell upon the Roman Empire.

The derfla. WHEREVER they marched, their rout was marked
tion which
theybrought with blood. They ravaged or destroyed all around
u° EU- them. They made no diftintion between what

rope.was

was

was sacred, and what was profane. They refpe&- SLC i. r.
ed no age, or sex, or rank. What escaped the v
fury of the firIt inundation, perished in those which
followed it. The most fertile and populous pro-
vinces were converted into deserts, in which were
scattered the ruins of villages and cities, that as-
forded shelter to a few miserable inhabitants whom
chance had preserved, or the sword of the enemy,
wearied with destroying, had spared. The con-
querors who first fettled in the countries which they
had wafted, were expelled or exterminated by new
invaders, who coming from regions farther re-
moved from the civilized parts of the world, were
still more fierce and rapacious. This brought
new calamities upon mankind, which did not cease
until the north, by pouring forth fucceflive swarms,
was drained of people, and could no longer fur-
nifh inltruments of deftruEtion. Famine and pes-
tilence, which always march in the train of war,
when it ravages with such inconsiderate cruelty,
raged in every part of Europe, and completed its
lufferings. If a man were called to fix upon the
period in the history of the world, during which
the condition of the human race was most calami-
tous and affi&ed, he would, without hesitation,
name that which elapsed from the death of Theo-
dofius the Great, to the establishment of the Lom-
bards in Italy . The contemporary authors who
beheld that scene of desolation, labour and are at a

' Theotofins died A. D. 395, the reign of Alboinus in
Lombardy began A D. 571 ; so that this period was 176 years.

2 loss

SECT. I. loss for exprefllons to describe the horror of it.

fhbefcourge of God, The dejfroyer of nations, are the
dreadful epithets by which they distinguish the molt
noted of the barbarous leaders; and they compare
the ruin which they had brought on the world, to
the havock occasioned by earthquakes, conflagra-
tions, or deL ges, the most formidable and fatal ca-
lamities which the imagination of man can conceive.

Theuniver- BUT no expressions can convey so perfet an idea
fal change
which they of the deftrutive progress of the barbarians as that
occ.ifioned
i tlealte which must strike an attentive observer, when he
of Europe. contemplates the total change, which he will disco-

ver in the state of Europe after it began to recover
some degree of tranquillity towards the close of
the sixth century. The Saxons were by that time
maRters of the outhern, and more fertile provinces
of Britain; the Franks of Gaul; the Huns of
Pannonia; the Goths of Spain; the Goths and
Lombards of Italy and the adjacent provinces.
Scarce any vestige of the Roman policy, jurifpru-
dence, arts, or literature, remained. New forms
of government, new laws, new manners, new dref-
fes, new languages, and new names of men and
countries, were every where introduced. To make
a great or sudden alteration with refpet to any of
these, unless where the ancient inhabitants of a
country have been almost totally exterminated, has
proved an undertaking beyond the power of the
greatest conquerors [D]. The total change which
the settlement of the barbarous nations occasioned

[D] NOTE IV.

in

in the state of Europe, may, therefore, be con- SECT. .
fidered as a more decisive proof, than evert the
testimony of contemporary historians, of the de-
ftructive violence with which there invaders car-
ried on their conquests, and of the havock which
they had made from one extremity of this quarter
of the globe to the other [E].

IN the obscurity of the chaos occasioned by this From this

fiate of dif-
general wreck of nations, we must search for the order the

laws of go-

feeds of order, and endeavour to discover the first vernmen
rudiments of the policy and laws now eftablilhed bli:enuf
in Europe. To this source, the hiflorians of its be traced.
different kingdoms, have attempted, though with
less attention and industry than the importance of
the enquiry merits, to trace back the inititutions
and customs peculiar to their countrymen. It is
not my province to give a minute detail of the pro-
grefs of government and manners in each particu-
lar nation, whose tranfa&ions are the object of the
following history. But, in order to exhibit a just
view of the state of Europe at the opening of the
sixteenth century, it is necessary to look back, and
to contemplate the condition of the northern na-
tions upon their first settlement in those countries
which they occupied. It is necessary to mark the
great steps by which they advanced from barba-
rifm to refinement, and to point out those general
principles and events which, by their uniform as
well as extensive operation, conducted all of them

[E] NOTE V.

to

SacT.. . o that degree of improvement in policy and in

manners which they had attained at the period
when Charles V. began his reign.

The pr;n. WHiN nations fubje& to despotic government
whichthe make conquests, these serve only to extend the
tinhrae dominion and the power of their malter. But ar-
their fettl mies composed of freemen conquer for themselves,
rnents in
Europe, not for their leaders. The people who overturned

the Roman Empire, and fettled in its various pro-
vinces, were of the latter class. Not only the dif-
ferent nations that issued from the north of Europe,
which has always been confidered as the feat of
liberty, but the Huns and Alans who inhabited
part of those countries which have been marked
out as the peculiar region of servitude b, enjoyed
freedom and independence in such a high degree as
seems to be scarcely compatible with a state of so-
cial union, or with the ubordination necessary to
maintain it. They followed the chieftain who led
them forth in quef of new fettlerments, not by con-
firaint, but from choice; not as soldiers whom he
could order to march, but as volunteers who offered
to accompany him [F]. They confidered their
conquests as a common property, in which all had
a title to hare, as all had contributed to acquire
them [G]. In what manner, or by what prin-
ciples, they divided among them the lands which
they seized, we cannot now determine with any

b De I'efprit des loix, liv, 17. ch. 3.
[F] NOTE VI. [Gj NOTE VII.

certainty.

certainty. There is no nation in Europe whose SECT. I.
records reach back to this remote period; and there '"V
is little information to be got from the uniiiftruc-
tive and meagre chronicles, compiled by writers
ignorant of the true end, and unacquainted with
the proper objects of history.

THIS new division of property, however, toge- The feudal

ther with the maxims and manners to which it gave grdu:"lln
rife, gradually introduced a species of government aoblihed
formerly unknown. This singular institution is them
now distinguished by the name of the Feudalfyftemr:
and though the barbarous nations which framed it,
fettled in their new territories at different times,
came from different countries, spoke various lan-
guages, and were under the command of separate
leaders, the Feudal policy and laws were etablifli-
ed, with little variation, in every kingdom of Europe.
This amazing uniformity hath induced ome au-
thors' to believe that all these nations, notwith-
standing so many apparent circumstances of di-
ftintion, were originally the fame people. But it
may be ascribed with greater probability to the
similar fate of society and of manners to which they
were accustomed in their native countries, and to
the imilar situation in which they found themselves
on taking pofflcfion of their new domains.

As the conquerors of Europe had their acqui-
fitions to maintain, not only against such of the

C Procop. de Bcllo Vandal. p. Script, Byz. edit. Ven. vol. i.
P. 345

ancient

SECT. I. ancient inhabitants as they had spared, but against
atonal the more formidable inroads of new invaders, self-
dee"tob tjh defence was their chief care, and seems to have
great obje&
of feudal been the sole object of their first institutions and
poJicy.

policy. Instead of those loose associations, which,
though they scarcely diminished their personal inde-
pendence, had been sufficient for their security
while they remained in their original countries,
they saw the necessity of confederating more closely
together, and of relinquishing some of their private
rights in order to attain publick safety. Every
freeman, upon receiving a portion of the lands
which were divided, bound himself to appear in
arms against the enemies of the community. This
military service was the condition upon which he
received and held his lands, and as they were ex-
empted from every other burden, that tenure,
among a warlike people, was deemed both easy
and honourable. The King or general, who led
them to conquest, continuing still to be the head
of the colony, had, of course, the largest portion
allotted to him. Having thus acquired the means
of rewarding past services, as well as of gaining
new adherents, he parcelled out his lands with this
view, binding those on whom they were bestowed,
to follow his standard with a number of men in
proportion to the extent of the territory which
they received, and to bear arms in his defence.
His chief officers imitated the example of the so-
vereign, and in distributing portions of their lands
among their dependants, annexed the fame condi-

tion

tion to the grant. Thus a feudal kingdom re- SECT.I.
fembled a military eftablifmment, rather than a civil
intitution. The vi6torious army, cantoned out in
the country which it had seized, continued ranged
under its proper officers, and subordinate to military
command. The names of a soldier and of a free-
man were synonymous d. Every proprietor of land,
girt with a sword, was ready to march at the fum-
mons of his superior, and to take the field against
the common enemy.

BUT though the Feudal policy eems to be so The rfetdal

C,'-'~~~~

- ~~government
admirably calculated for defence against the afiaults deferive in

its provifi-

of any foreign power, its provisions for the interior ons or ii-
order and tranquillity of society were extremely de. t'n1oi;:der
fe&ive. The principles of dilorder and corrup-
tion are discernible in that constitution under its
belt and most perfect form. They soon unfolded
themselves, and spreading with rapidity through
every part of the system, produced the molt fatal
effects. The bond of political union was ex-
tremely feeble; the sources of anarchy were innu-
merable. The monarchical and ariftocratical parts
of the constitution, having no intermediate power
to balance them, were perpetually at variance, and
juftling with each other. The powerful vassals of
the crown soon extorted a confirmation for life of
those grants of land, which being at first purely
gratuitous, had been bestowed only during plea.

d Du Cange Glofar. voc. Miht.
VO.. I. C sure.

SE r.T. fire. Not latisfied with this, they prevailed to

have them converted into hereditary poffeflions.
One ftep more completed their usurpations, and
rnndered them unalienable [H]. With an ambi-
tion no less enterprizing, and more preposterous,
they appropriated to themfclves titles of honour,
as well as offices of power or trust. These per-
fonal marks of diltintion, which the publick ad-
miration bellows on illustrious merit, or which the
publick confidence confers on extraordinary abi-
lities, were annexed to certain families, and tranf-
mitted like fiefs, from father to son, by hereditary
right. The crown vassals having thus secured the
poffefion of their lands and dignities, the nature
of the Feudal inflitutions, which though founded
on subordination verged to independence, led them
to new, and till more dangerous encroachments
on the prerogatives of the overeign. They ob-
tained the power of supreme jurisdiction both civil
and criminal within their own territories ; the right
of coining money; together with the privilege of
carrying on war againit their private enemies in
their own name, and by their own authority. The
ideas of political subjection were almost entirely
lolt, and frequently scarce any appearance of feu-
dal i'bordination remained. Nobles who had ac-
quired such enormous power, scorned to confider
themfelvcs as fiubjets. They aspired openly at
being indeperdent: the bonds which connected the
principal nlmembers of the constitution with the
crown, were diflolved. A kingdom considerable

[H] NOTE VIII.

in

in name and in extent, was broken into as many SECT.I.
separate principalities as it contained powerful ba-
rons. A thousand causes of jealousy and discord
fibfifted among them, and gave rife to as many
wars. Every country in Europe, wafted or kept
in continual alarm during these endless contests,
was filled with castles and places of strength, eret-
ed for the security of the inhabitants, not against
foreign force, but against internal hostilities. An
universal anarchy, deflrutive, in a great measure,
of all the advantages which men expet to derive
from society, prevailed. The people, the most
numerous as well as the most useful part of the
community, were either reduced to a state of
actual servitude, or treated with the fame insolence
and rigour as if they had been degraded into that
wretched condition [1]. The King, firipped of al-
moit every prerogative, and without authority to
enact or to execute salutary laws, could neither pro-
ted the innocent, nor punish the guilty. The no-
bles, superior to all restraint, harassed each other
with perpetual wars, oppressed their fellow-fubje&s,
and humbled or insulted their sovereign. To crown
all, time gradually fixed, and rendered venerable this
pernicious fyflem, which violence had eflablifhed.

SucH was the state of Europe with refpet to ri prevnte,,

the interior administration of government from the wife trol, '
leventh to the eleventh century. All the external aiing with

vigour in

operations of its various ftatcs, during this period, tillrexrcr.
were, qs course, extremely feeble. A kingdom ine..

[I] NOTE IX.

C 2 dimem.

SECT. . difinembered, and torn with diffenCion, without

any common interest to rouze, or any common
head to conduct its force, was incapable of acting
with vigour. Almost all the wars in Europe, dur-
ing the ages which I have mentioned, were trifling,
indecisive, and produ*tive of no considerable event.
They resembled the ihort incursions of pirates or
banditti, rather than the steady operations of a
regular army. Every baron, at the head of his
vassals, carried on some petty enterprize, to which
he was prompted by his own ambition, or revenge.
The slate itself, destitute of union, either remained
altogether inactive, or if it attempted to make any
effort, that served only to discover its impotence.
The superior genius of Charlemagne, it is true,
united all these disjointed and discordant members,
and forming them again into one body, restored to
government that degree of ativity which diftin-
guifhes his reign, and renders the transaCtions of
it, objects not only of attention but of admiration
to more enlightened times. But this ate of union
and vigour, not being natural to the feudal govern-
mcnt, was of short duration. Immediately upon
his death, the spirit which animated and sustained
the vast fyftein which he had etabliflied, being
withdrawn, it broke into pieces. All the calamities
which flow from anarchy and discord, return-
ing with additional force, affli&ed the different
kingdoms inzo which his Empire was split.
From that time to the eleventh century, a fuccef-
sion of uninterciting events a ferics of wars, the

motives

motives as well as the consequences of which were SECT .
equally unimportant, fill and deform the annals of -
all the nations in Europe.

To these pernicious effe't&s of the feudal anarchy, The fatal

eft Ls us

may be added its fatal influence on the characr this fLnteof
and improvement of the human mind. If men fienY and
do nt enjoy the protection of regulargovernment, "a's
tog,-thcr with the certainty of personal security,
which naturally flows from it, they never attempt
to make progress in science, nor aim at attaining
rcfinement in taste, or in manners. That period
of turbulence, oppreflion, and rapine, which I have
deklribed, was ill suited to favour improvement in
any of these. In less than a century after the bar-
barous nations fettled in their new conquers, al-
most all the effects of the knowledge and civility
which the Romans had spread through Europe dil-
appeared. Not only the arts of elegance which
mini{ter to luxury, and are iiupported by it, but
many of the useful arts, without which life can
fcarccly be confidered as comfortable, were ne-
gledled or loft. Literature,. science, taste, were
words hardly in use during the ages we are con-
teinplating; or if they occur at any time, emi-
nence in them is ascribed to persons and produc-
tions so contemptible, that it appears their true im-
port was little understood. Persons of the highest
rank, and in the molt eminent flations, could not
crad or write. Many of the clergy did not under-
ltand the breviary which they were obliged daily

C 3 to

SFcr. . to recite; some of them could scarcely read it [K].
~^^v^" All memory of past tranfaacions was loft, or pre-

served in annals filled with trifling events, or le-
gendary tales. Even the codes of laws published
by the several nations which established themselves
in the different countries of Europe, fell into dif-
use, while, in their place, cuforns, vague and ca-
pricious, were substituted. The human mind ne-
gle&ted, uncultivated, and depressed, funk into the
most profound ignorance. Europe did not pro-
duce, during four centuries, one author who merits
to be read, either on account of the elegance of
his composition, or the juftnces and novelty of his
sentiments. There is hardly one invention ufcful
or ornamental to society of which that long period
can boast.

upon re. EVEN the Christian religion, though its precepts
iigion i

are delivered, and its institutions are fixed in scrip-
ture with a precision which should have exempted
them from being misinterpreted or corrupted, de-
generated during those ages of darkness into an
illiberal fuiperflition. The barbarous nations when
converted to Chrifftianity changed the objeEt, not
the spirit of their religious worship. They endea-
voured to conciliate the favour of the true God by
means not unlike to those which they had em-
ployed in order to appease their false deities. In-
stead of aspiring to fanaity and virtue, which alone
can render men acceptable to the great author of

[K] NOTE X.

order

order and of excellence, they imagined that they Scr. r.
satisfied every obligation of duty by a scrupulous -
observance of external ceremonies [L]. Religion,
according to their conception of it, comprehended
nothing elfc; and the rites, by which they per-
fuaded themifelvcs that they hllould gain the favour
of heaven, were of such a nature as might have
been expected from tle rude ideas of the ages
which deviled and introduced them. They wetre
either lb unmeaning as to e altogether unworthy
of the Being to whol1 honour they were confe-
crated ; or so abfiurd as to be a difrace to reason
and humanity [MJ. Charlemagne in F;rance, and
Alfred the Great in England, endeavoured to dif-
pel this daiknefs, and gave their subjes a ort
glimpse of light and knowledge. But the ino-
rance of the age was too powerful for their efforts
and inltitutions. The darkness returned, and set-
tied over Europe more thick and heavy than
formerly.

As the inhabitants of Europe during these cen-,,,, ,h

turies were ltrangers to the arts which mbellilfh l'"'r"''
a poliflled age, they were destitute of the virtues ot tlch,-
which abound among people who continue in a
simple state. Force of m;nd, a fcnfe of perlbnal
dignity, gallantry in enterprize, invincible perfc-
verance in execution, contempt of danger and of
deatl, are the characeriftic virtues of uncivilized
nations. But thelic are all the offspring of equa-

[L] NOTE XI. [M] NOTE XII.

C 4 lity

SECT. . lity and independence, both which the feudal in-
'"^'' flitutions had destroyed. The spirit of domination

corrupted the nobles; the yoke of servitude depref-
fed the people; the generous sentiments inipired
by a sense of equality were extinguished, and no-
thing remained to be a check on ferocity and vio-
lence. Human society is in its most corrupted
tate at that period when men have loft their ori-
ginal independence and simplicity of manners,
but have not attained that degree of refinement
which introduces a cnfe of decorum and of pro-
priety in conduict, as a restraint o:l those passions
which lead to heinous crimes. Accordingly, a
greater number of those atrocious actions which
fill the mind of man with aflonifhment and horror,
occur in the hittory of the centuries under review,
than in that of any period of the fame extent in the
annals of Europe. If we open the history of Gre-
gory of Tours, or of any contemporary author, we
meet with a series of deeds of cruelty, perfidy, and
revenge, so wild and enormous as almost to exceed
belief.

rrqm the BUT, according to the observation of an ele.
beginningof
bhgienf gant a prond profound hitorian , there is an ultimate
enttury go point of depreiflon, as well as of exaltation,
Vcrnmcnt
andmannersfrom which human affairs naturally return in a
begin to
improve. contrary progress, and beyond which they never

pass either in their advancement or decline. When
defects, either in the form, or in the administration

Hume's IHiflory of England, vol. ii .
p. 441,

Of

of government, occasion such disorders in society as SECr. .
are excessive and intolerable, it becomes the corn-
mon interest to discover and to apply such remedies
as will most effctaually remove them. Slight incon-
veniencies may be long overlooked or endured, but
when abuses grow to a certain pitch, the society
muff go to ruin, or muff attempt to reform them.
The disorders in the feudal system, together with
the corruption of tare and manners consequent
upon there, which had gone on increasing during a
long course of years, seem to have attained their
utmost point of excess towards the close of the
eleventh century. From that ra, we may date
the return of government and manners in a con-
trary direction, and can trace a fucceflion of causes
and events which contributed, some with a nearer
and more powerful, others with a more remote and
less perceptible influence, to abolifl confusion and
barbarism, and to introduce order, regularity, and
refinement.

IN pointing out and explaining these causes and Nc,,n.ry to

events, it is not necessary to observe the order of, .''.,','.t
time with a chronological accuracy; it is of more rl"',"!
importance to keep in view their mutual connec- 'r'ii'" I"-
tion and dependence, and to show how the opera- i .l

m -

tion of one event, or one cause, prepared the way
for another, and augmented its influence. We
have hitherto been contemplating the progress of
that darkness which spread over Europe from its
first approach, to the period of greatefr obfcura-
tion a more pleasant exercise begins here, to ob.

serve

SecT. I. serve the first dawnings of returning light, to mark
--J the various accessions by which it gradually in-

creased and advanced towards the full splendor
of day.

Theten. I. THE Crusades, or expeditions in order to
Crusad th rescue the Holy Land out of the hands of Infi-
introduce a dels seem to be the first event that rouzed Eu-
change in
government rope from the lethargy in which it had been long
and man-
Mnr. funk, and that tended to introduce any change in
The more government, or in manners. It is natural to the
raufs of human mind to view those places which have been
hTif^x' distinguished by being the residence of any illuftri-

ous personage, or the scene of any great tranfac-
tion, with some degree of delight and veneration.
From this principle flowed the fuperflitious devo-
tion with which Christians, from the earliest ages
of the church, were accustomed to visit that coun-
try which the Almighty had feleEed as the inhe-
ritance of his favourite people, and in which the
Son of God had accomplished the redemption of
mankind. As this distant pilgrimage could not be
performed without considerable expence, fatigue,
and danger, it appeared the more meritorious, and
came to be confidered as an expiation for almost
every crime. An opinion which spread with ra-
pidity over Europe about the close of the tenth
and beginning of the eleventh century, and which
gained universal credit, wonderfully augmented
the number of credulous pilgrims, and increaf-
ed the ardour with which they undertook this
useless voyage. The thousand years mentioned by

St.

Sr. Joln were supposed to be accomplished, and SECT. .
the end of the world to be at hand. A general
consternation seized mankind; many relinquifihed
their poffefions; and abandoning their friends and
families, hurried with precipitation to the Holy
Land, where they imagined that Christ would
quickly appear to judge the world g. While Pa-
leftine continued subjet to the Caliphs, they had
encouraged the resort of pilgrims to Jerusalem;
and confidered this as a beneficial species of com-
merce, which brought into their dominions gold
and silver, and carried nothing out of them but
relicks and consecrated trinkeis. But the Turks
having conquered Syria about the middle of the
eleventh century, pilgrims were exposed to out-
rages of every kind from these fierce barbarians h.
This change happening precisely at the junLure
when the panic terror which I have mentioned ren-
dered pilgrimages most frequent, filled Europe
with alarm and indignation. Every peron who
returned from Palestine related the dangers which
he had encountered, in visiting the holy city, and
described with exaggeration the cruelty and vexa-
tions of the Turks.

f Revel. xx. 2, 3, 4.
g Chronic. Will. Godelli ap. Bouquet Recueil des Hilloriens

de France, tom. x. p. 262. Vita Abbonis, ibid. p. 332. Chro-
nic. S. Pantaleonis ap. Eccard. Corp. Scrip. medii azvi, vol. i.
p. 909. Annalifla Saxo, ibid. 576.

h Jo. Dan. Schoepflini de facris Gallorum in orientem
expeditionibus, p. 4. Argent. 172Zi. 4to.

WHEN

SZCT. r. WHrN the minds of men were thus prepared, the
The ine. zeal of a fanatical monk, who conceived the idea of
diate oc% leading all the forces of Christendom against the
sion of them,. -

infidels, and of driving them out of the Holy Land
by violence, was sufficient to give a beginning to
that wild enterprize. Peter the hermit, for that
was the name of this martial apostle, run from
province to province with a crucifix in his hand,
exciting Princes and people to this Holy war, and
wherever he came kindled the fame enthusiastic
ardour for it with which he himself was animated.
The council of Placentia, where upwards of thirty
thousand persons were assembled, pronounced the
scheme to have been suggested by the immediate
inspiration of heaven. In the council of Clermont,
fill more numerous, as soon as the measure was
proposed, all cried out with one voice, " It i; the
"' will of God." Persons of all ranks were fiit-
ten with the contagion; not only the gallant nobles
of that age, with their martial followers, whom
the boldness of a romantic enterprize might have
been apt to allure, but men in the more humble
and pacific fittions of life; ecclesiastics of every
order, and even women and children, engaged with
emulation in an undertaking which was deemed
sacred and meritorious. If we may believe the
concurring testimony of contemporary authors, fix
millions of persons assumed the cross ', which was
the badge that distinguished such as devoted them-
selves to this holy warfare. All Europe, fays the

i Fulcherius Carnotenfis ap. Bongarfii Gcfla Dei per Fran-
cos, vol. i. 387. edit. Han. z61 j.

Princess

Princess Anna Comnena, torn up from the foun- SECT. I.
dation, seemed ready to precipitate itself in one
united body upon Asia . Nor did the fumes of
this enthufiafic zeal evaporate at once: the frenzy
was as lasting, as it was extravagant. During two
centuries, Europe seems to have had no obje but
to recover, or keep possession of the Holy Land,
and through that period vast armies continued to
march thither [N].

THE first efforts of valour animated by enthufi- The fuccefi

of the Cru.

afi were irrefiitible; part of the lesser Asia, all Syria fades.
and Palestine were wrested from the infidels; the
banner of the cross was displayed on Mount Sion;
Constantinople, the capital of the Christian empire
in the East, was seized by a body of those adven-
turers, who had taken arms against the Mahome-
tans, and an Earl of Slanders, and his descendants,
kept pofffion of the Imperial throne during half
a century. But though the first impression of the
Crusaders was so unexpeced that they made their
conquests with great ease, they found infinite diffi-
culty in preserving them. Eflablillments so dif-
tant from Europe, surrounded by warlike nations,
animated with fanatical zeal scarcely inferior to
that of the Crusaders themselves, were perpetually
in danger of being overturned. Before the expi- A D. 1191.
ration of the thirteenth century, the Christians were
driven out of all their Asiatic poffeflions, in ac-
quiring of which incredible numbers of men had

k Alexias. lib. x. ap. Byz. script. vol. xi. p. 2z.[.
[N] NOTE XIII.

periflied,

SEcT. I. perished, and immense fums of money had been

T waited. The only common enterprize in which

the European nations ever engaged, and which
all undertook with equal ardour, remains a fingu-
lar monument of human folly.

The henefi- BUT from there expeditions, extravagant as they
ficial rs 'eLt, ,
of th Cru- were, beneficial consequences followed, which had
, s. neither been foreseen nor expecRed. In their pro-

grefs towards the Holy Land, the followers of the
cross marched through countries better cultivated,
and more civilized than their own. Their first ren-
dezvous was commonly in Italy, in which Venice,
Genoa, Pisa and other cities had begun to apply
themselves to commerce, and had made some ad-
vances towards wealth as well as refinement. They
embarked there, and landing in Dalmatia, pursued
their rout by land to Conitantinople. Though the
military spirit had been long extinEt in the eastern
Empire, and a despotism of the worst species had
annihilated almost every publick virtue, yet Con-
ftantinople, having never felt the deftrutive rage
of the barbarous nations, was the greatest, as well
as the most beautiful city in Europe, and the only
one in which there remained any image of the an-
cient elegance in manners and arts. The naval
power of the eastern Empire was considerable.
Manufatures of the molt curious fabrick were
carried on in its dominions. Constantinople was
the only mart in Europe for the commodities of
the East Indies. Although the Saracens and Turks
had torn from the Empire many of its richest pro-

2 vinces,

vinces, and had reduced it within very narrow SECT. r.
bounds, yet great wealth flowed into the capital 'v '
from these various sources, which not only che-
rilhed such a taste for magnificence, but kept alive
. such a relish for the sciences as appears confider-

able when compared with what was known in
other parts of Europe. Even in Asia, the Euro-
peans who had assumed the cross, found the re-
mains of the knowledge and arts which the exam-
ple and encouragement of the Caliphs had diffused
through their Empire. Although the attention of
the historians of the Crusades was fixed on other
obje&s than the Rtate of society and manners among
the nations which they invaded, although most of
them had neither taste nor discernment enough to
describe these, they relate, however, such signal
acs of humanity and generosity in the conduct of
Saladin, as well as rome other leaders of the Ma-
hometans, as give us a very high idea of their
, manners. It was not poflible for the Crusaders to

travel through so many countries, and to behold
their various customs and institutions, without
acquiring information and improvement. Their
views enlarged; their prejudices wore off; new

X ideas crowded into their minds; and they muff have
i been sensible on many occasions of the rusticity of

their own manners when compared with those of a
more polished people. These impreflions were
not so flight as to be effaced upon their return to
their native countries. A close intercourse subsisted
between the East and Weft during two centuries;
new armies were continually marching from Eu-

rope

SEcT. I. rope to Aia, while former adventurers returned

C* - home and imported many of the customs to which

they had been familiarized by a long residence
abroad. Accordingly, we discover, soon after the
commencement of the Crusades, greater splendour
in the courts of Princes, greater pomp in publick
ceremonies, a more refined taste in pleasure and
amusements, together with a more romantic spirit
of enterprize spreading gradually over Europe;
and to these wild expeditions, the effect of super-
flition or folly, we owe the first gleams of light
which tended to dispel barbarity and ignorance.

Their infn. BUT these beneficial consequences of the Crusades

te of p. took place slowly; their influence upon the state
P"ety- of property, and consequently of power, in the dif-

ferent kingdoms of Europe, was more immediate
as well as discernible. The nobles who assumed
the cross, and bound themselves to march to the
Holy Land, soon perceived that great fums were
necessary towards defraying the expence of such a
ditant expedition, and enabling them to appear
with suitable dignity at the head of their vaifals.
But the genius of the feudal system was averse to
the imposition of extraordinary taxes; and sub-
jets in that age were unacctitomed to pay them.
No expedient remained for levying the fums re-
quifite, but the sale of their poffeflions. As men
were inflamed with romantic expecations of the
splendid conquests which they hoped to make in
Asia, and poflfffed with such zeal for recovering the

Ioly

oly Land as swallowed up every other pafion, SECT. .
ey relinquished their ancient inheritances without '^
ny relu&tance, and for prices far below their value,
hat they might sally forth as adventurers in quest
)f new settlements in unknown countries. The
IVlonarchs of the great kingdoms in the weft, none
;'of whom had engaged in the first Crusade, eagerly
seized this opportunity of annexing considerable
Oterritories to their crowns at small expence'. Be-
:fides this, several great barons who periihed in the
tiHoly war, having left no heirs, their fiefs reverted
iof course to their refpe&ive sovereigns; and by
I*thefe accefions of property as well as power taken
ifrom the one scale and thrown into the other, the
'regal authority increased in proportion as that of the
,Aristocracy declined. The absence, too, of many
,potent vassals, accustomed to controul and give law
to their sovereigns, afforded them an opportunity
of extending their prerogative, and of acquiring a
sdegree of weight in the constitution which they

did not formerly possess. To these circumstances,
ve may add, that as all who assumed the cross
were taken under the immediate protetion of the
church, and its heaviest anathemas were denounced
against such as hould disquiet or annoy those who
had devoted themselves to this service; the private
quarrels and hoflilities which banished tranquillity
from a feudal kingdom were suspended or extin-
guifhed; a more general and fiteady adminiltration

' Willelm. Malmfbur. Guibert. Abbas ap. Bongarf. vol. i.
r481.

VoL, . D of
'i

SECT. I. of justice began to be introduced, and some ad.

vances were made towards the establishment of
regular government in the several kingdoms of
Europe [O].

Their com- THE commercial effects of the Crusades were
mercial es-
sect. not less considerable than those which I have al-

ready mentioned. The first armies under the fiand-
ard of the cross, which Peter the hermit and God-
frey of Bouillon led through Germany and Hun-
gary to Constantinople, suffered so much by the
length of the march, as well as by the fierceness
of the barbarous people who inhabited those coun-
tries, that it deterred others from taking the fame
route; so that rather than encounter so many dan-
gers, they chose to go by sea. Veni :e, Genoa, and
Pisa furnished the transports on which hey em.
barked. The fumwhich thefecities received merely
for freight from such numerous armies was im-
mense ". This, however, was but a small part
of what they gained by the expeditions to the
Holy Land; the Crusaders contracted with them
for military stores and provisions; their fleets
kept on the coast as the armies advanced by land;
and supplying them with whatever was wanting,
engrossed all the profits of that lucrative branch
of commerce. The success which attended the
arms of the Crusaders was productive of advantages

m Du Cange Gloffar. voc. Cructfgnatus. Guil. Abbas ap.
Bongarf. vol. i. 480, 482.

[0] NO TE XIV.

Muratori Antiquit. Italic. medii avi, vol. ii. 905.

2 fill

*[ill more permanent. There are charters yet ex- SFCT. I.
sant, containing grants to the Venetians, Pifans, '?
? nd Genoese of the most extensive immunities in
:he several settlements which the Christians made
'ain Asia. All the commodities which they im-
ported or exported are thereby exempted from
:'very imposition; the property of entire suburbs
Sin some of the maritime towns, and of large streets
Pin others, is vested in them; and all queflions
?arising among persons fettled within their pre-
scinds, or who traded under their protection, are
appointed to be tried by their own laws and by
Judges of their own appointment . When the
,Crusaders seized Constantinople, and placed -one
~of their own leaders on the Imperial throne, the
,Italian States were likewise gainers by that event.
iThe Venetians who had planned the enterprize,
and took a considerable part in carrying it into
execution, did not negle& to secure to themselves
the chief advantages redounding from its success.
They made themselves mailers of part of the an-
cient Peleponnefus in Greece, together with some
'of the most fertile ilands in the Archipelago.
Many valuable branches of the commerce, which
formerly centered in Constantinople, were tranf-
'ferred to Venice, Genoa, or Pisa. Thus a fuccef-
sion of events occasioned by the Holy war, opened
various sources, from which wealth flowed in such

Muratori Antiquit. Italic. mcdii avi, vol. ii. 906, &c.

D 2 abundance

SECT. I. abundance in thee cities P, as enabled them, in

concurrence with another institution which shall
be immediately mentioned, to secure their own
liberty and independence.

The efla- I. THE institution to which I alluded was the
bliihment
ofcommu. forming of cities into communities, corporations,
nitiet fa-
vourable to or bodies politick, and granting them the privilege
aodernment of municipal jurifdicion, which contributed more,

perhaps, than any other cau'e to introduce regular
government, police and arts, and to diffuse them
over Europe. The feudal government had dege-
nerated into a system of oppression. The ufurpa-
tions of the nobles were become unbounded and
intolerable: they had reduced the great body of
the people into a state of atual servitude: the
condition of those dignified with the name of free-
men, was often little preferable to that of the other.
Nor was such opprelifon the portion of those alone
who dwelt in the country, and were employed in

The ancient cultivating the estate of their master. Cities and
ite.Of villages held of some great lord, on whom they

depended for protection, and were no less subjeC
to his arbitrary jurifdition. The inhabitants were
deprived of the natural, and most unalienable rights
of humanity. They could not dispose of the es-
fe&s which their own industry had acquired, either
by a latter will, or by any deed executed during

P Villehardouin hilt. de ConfRant. fous 'Empercurs Fran-
cois, 105, &c.

their

heir life q. They had no right to appoint guar- SECT. I.
ians for their children during their minority. -

. They were not permitted to marry without pur-
.J hasing the consent of the lord on whom they de-
i ended r. If once they had commenced a law-suit,

they durst not terminate it by an accommodation,
iobecaufe that would have deprived the lord in
!whose court they plead d, of the perquisites due
;Ato him on passing fntence '. Services of various
'kinds, no less disgraceful than oppreflive, were ex-
.a'ed from them without mercy or moderation.
bThe spirit of industry was checked in ome cities
jby absurd regulations, and in others by un-
,reasonable exations: nor would the narrow and
jopprefflive maxims of a military aristocracy have
?:permitted it ever to rife to any degree of height
for vigour '

, BUT as soon as the cities of Italy began to turn The free-
f their attention towards commerce, and to conceive firt eta.
a some idea of the advantages which they might de- ed
ily.

rive from it, they became impatient to shake off
7 the yoke of their insolent lords, and to eftablilh
| among themselves such a free and equal govern-

q Dacherii Spiceleg. tom. xi. 374, 375. edit. in 4to. Ordo-
nances des Rois de France, tom. iii. zo4. N. 2. 6.

' Ordonances des Rois de France, tom. i p. .2, tom. iii.

z03. N. . Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. iv. p. 20. Dacher. Spicel.
vol. xi. 325, 341.

' Dacher. Spicel. vol. ix. 2z.
'M. 1'Abba Mably obfervat. fur l'hif. de France, tom. ii.
p. . 96.

D 3 ment

SECT. I. ment as would render property secure, and indus-

try flourishing. The German Emperors, especially
those of the Franconian and Suabian lines, as the
feat of their government was far distant from
Italy, poffffed a feeble and imperfect jurifdiaion
in that country. Their perpetual quarrels either
with the Popes or with their own turbulent vassals,
diverted their attention from the interior police of
Italy, and gave conitant employment to their arms.
These circumstances encouraged the inhabitants of
some of the Italian cities, towards the beginning
of the eleventh century, to assume new privileges,
to unite together more closely, and to form them-
selves into bodies politick under the government of
laws eflablifhed by common consent . The rights,
which many cities acquired by bold or fortunate
usurpations, others purchased from the Emperors,
who deemed themselves gainers when they received
large fums for immunities which they were no
longer able to withhold; and ome cities obtained
them gratuitously from the generosity or facility of
the Princes on whom they depended. The great
increase of wealth which the Crusades brought into
Italy, occasioned a new kind of fermentation and
acivity in the minds of the people, and excited
such a general passion for liberty and independence,
that before the conclusion of the last Crusade, all
the considerable cities in that country had either
purchased or had extorted large immunities from
the Emperors [P].

u Murat. Antiquit. Ital. vol. iv. p. 5.
[P] NOTE XV.

tai a

THIS innovation was not long known in Italy SECT. .
fore it made its way into France. Louis the sitro-

i ross, in order to create some power that mightF",d i, ad
t;counterbalance those potent vassals who controuled, in, ohr~f

r gave law to the crown, first adopted the plan of ;s.

'.confer:ing new privileges on the towns ituated-1137.
j-within his own domaine. These privileges were
·rcalled charters of community, by which he en-
I'franchifed the inhabitants, abolished all marks of
'Sfervitude, and formed them into corporations or
bodies politick, to be governed by a council and
. magistrates of their own nomination. These ma-
· giftrates had the right of adminifering justice with-
- in their own precincts, of levying taxes, of embo-
dying and training to arms the militia of the town,
;i which took the field when required by the fove-
4 reign, under the command of officers appointed by
' the community. The great barons imitated the
, example of their monarch, and granted like im-
, munities to the towns within their territories. They
'; had wafted such great fums in their expeditions to
" the Holy Land, that they were eager to lay hold

'

on this new expedient for raising money, by the
/ sale of those charters of liberty. Though the in-

R ftitution of communities was as repugnant to their
maxims of policy, as it was adverse to their power,
they disregarded remote consequences, in order to
obtain present relief. In less than two centuries,
servitude was abolished in most of the towns in
France, and they became free corporations, inficad
of dependent villages, without jurifdition or pri-

D 4 vileges.

SCT. I. vileges [ Q,. Much about the fame period, the

great cities in Germany began to acquire like im-
munities, and laid the foundation of their present
liberty and independence [R]. The practice spread
quickly over Europe, and was adopted in Spain,
England, Scotland, and all the other feudal king-
doms [S].

It hppy THE good effe&ts of this new inflitution were
effeits upon .
the cond immediately felt, and its influence on government
habin ts as well as manners was no less extensive than falu-

tary. A great body of the people was relcafed
from servitude, and from all the arbitrary and grie-
vous impositions to which that wretched condition
had fubjeted them. Towns, upon acquiring the
right of community, became so many little re-
publicks, governed by known and equal laws.
Liberty was deemed iuch an essential and cha.
rateriftic part in their coniitution, that if any save
took refuge in one of them, and resided there dur-
ing a year without being claimed, he was initantly
declared a freeman, and admitted as a member of
the community w

vpen the As one part of the people owed their liberty to
power of the
whility; the erection of communities, another was indebted

to them for their security. Such had been the
Rate of Europe during several centuries, that self-

[QJ NOTE XVI. [R] NOTE XVII.
[S] NOTE XVIII.
w Statut. Humberti Bellojoci Dacher. Spiccl. vol. ix. i8t.
1Z5, Charta Comit. ForcnC ibid. 193.

preservation

preservation obliged every man to court the patron- SECT. I.

J age of some powerful baron, and in times of danger
` his cattle was the place to which all resorted for
! safety. But towns surrounded with walls, whose
i inhabitants were regularly trained to arms, and
: bound by interest, as well as by the most solemn

engagements, reciprocally to defend each other,
afforded a more commodious and secure retreat.
The nobles began to be confidered as of less im.
portance, when they ceased to be the sole guar-
dians to whom the people could look up for pro-
tet&ion against violence.

IF the nobility suffered some diminution of their Upon the
r credit and power by the privileges granted to thehe ro n

cities, the crown acquired an increase of both. As
there were no regular troops kept on foot in any
of the feudal kingdoms, the Monarch could bring
~ no army into the field but what was composed of

soldiers furnilhed by the crown-vaffals, always jea-
lous of the regal authority; nor had he any funds
for carrying on the public service, but such as they
granted him with a very sparing hand. But when
the members of communities were permitted to
bear arms, and were trained to the use of these,
this in some degree supplied the first dfect, and
gave the crown the command of a body of men
independent of its great vassals. The attachment
of the cities to their sovereigns, whom they re-
Spe&ed as the first authors of their liberties, and
whom they were obliged to court s the protectors

of

SrCT. I. of their immunities against the domineering spirit
r -r of the nobles, contributed somewhat towards re-

moving the second evil, as, on many occasions, it
procured the crown supplies of money which added
new force to government x.

Upoa the THE acquisition of liberty made such a happy
increase of
induy. change in the condition of all the members of

communities, as roused them from that inaction
into which they had been funk by the wretch-
ednefs of their former state. The spirit of in-
duftry revived. Commerce became an object of
attention, and began to flourish. Population in-
created. Independence was established; and wealth
flowed into cities which had long been the feat of
poverty and oppreflion. Wealth was accompanied
by its usual attendants, ostentation and luxury;
and though the former was inelegant and cumber-
some, and the latter indelicate, they led gradually
to greater refinement in manners, and in the habits
of life. Together with this improvement in man-
ners, a more regular species of government and
police was introduced. As cities grew to be more
populous, and the occasions of intercourse among
men increased, ltatutes and regulations multiplied
of course, and all became sensible that their com-
mon safety depended on observing them with ex-
atnefs, and on punishing such as violated them,
with promptitude and rigour. Laws and fubordi-

1 Ordon. doi Rois do France, tom. i. 60t, 785, tom. ii.
318, 423.

nation,

nation, as well as polilhed manners, taking their SECT. r.
rife in cities, diffused themselves insensibly through * '
the reft of the society.

III. THE inhabitants of cities having obtained The in,.

personal freedom and municipal jurifdition, soon citis c
acquired civil liberty and political power. It was tical po'er
a fundamental principle in the feudal system osos fmber
policy, that no freeman could be governed or taxed flitution.
unless by his own content. In consequence of this,
the vassals of every baron were called to his court,
in which they established, by mutual consent, such
regulations as they deemed most beneficial to
their small society, and granted their superior such
supplies of money, as were proportional to their
abilities, or to his wants. The barons themselves,
conformably to the fame maxim, were admitted
into the supreme assembly of the nation, and con-
curred with the sovereign in enacing laws, or in
imposing taxes. As the superior lord, according
to the original plan of feudal policy, retained the
direc property of those lands which he granted,
in temporary pofleffion, to his vassals, the law,
even after fiefs became hereditary, still supposed
this original pratice to subsist, and a baron con-
tinued to be confidered as the guardian of all who
resided within his territories. The great council
of each nation, whether distinguished by the name
of a parliament, a diet, the Cortes, or the ates
general, was composed entirely of such barons,
and dignified ccclefiafticksi as held immediately of

the

SECT. I. the crown. Towns, whether situated within the

- royal domaine, or on the lands of a subje&t, de-

pended for protection on the lord of whom they
held. They had no legal name, no political ex-
iftence, which could entitle them to be admitted
into the legislative assembly, orcould give them any
authority there. But as soon as they were enfran-
chifed, and formed into Bodies Corporate, they
became legal and independent members of the
constitution, and acquired all the rights essential
to freemen. Amongst these, the most valuable,
was the privilege of a decisive voice in enacting
public laws, and granting national subsidies. It
was natural for cities, accustomed to a form of
municipal government, according to which no
regulation could be eftablihed within the com-
munity, and no money could be raised but by
their own content, to claim this privilege. The
wealth, the power and consideration which they
acquired on recovering their liberty, added weight
to their claim; and favourable events happened,
or fortunate conjunctures occurred in the different
kingdoms of Europe, which facilitated or for-
warded their obtaining poffeflion of this important
right. In England, one of the first countries in
which the representatives of boroughs were ad-
mitted into the great council of the nation, the
A.D.z6s. barons who took arms against Henry II1. fum-

moned them to attend parliament in order to add
greater popularity to their party, and to strengthen
the barrier against the encroachment of regal power.
In Frances Philip the Fair, a Monarch no less saga-

cious

J

cious than enterprizing, confidered them as inftru- SEcr. r.
ments which might be employed with equal ad- '" '
vantage to extend the royal prerogative, to coun.
terbalance the exorbitant power of the nobles, and
to facilitate the imposition of new taxes. With
these views, he introduced the deputies of such
towns as were formed into communities into the
states general of the nation . In the Empire, the
wealth and immunities of the Imperial cities
placed them on a level with the most considerable
members of the Germanick body. Conscious of
their own power and dignity, they pretended to
the privilege of forming a separate bench in the A. D. 93.
diet; and made good their pretension .

BUT in what way soever the representatives of The hap

cities first gained a place in the legislature, that cfe8t'of
event had great influence on the form and genius of go.mcnr.
government. It tempered the rigour of arilocra-
tical opprefflion, with a proper mixture of popular
liberty: It secured to the great body of the peo-
ple, who had formerly no representatives, aive
and powerful guardians of their rights and privi-
leges: It eftablilhed an intermediate power between
the King and nobles, to which each had recourse
alternately, and which at ome times opposed the
usurpations of the former, on other occasions
checked the encroachments of the latter. As oon

7 Pafquier Recherches de la France, p. 81. edit. Par. 1633.
* Pfeflcl Abrega de 'hiftoire & droit d'Allemnagne, p 4c8.
4SI'

as

SECT. I. as the representatives of communities gained ay
- degree of credit and inflfence in the legislature,

the spirit of laws became different from what it had
formerly been it flowed from new principles; it
was dire&ed towards new objets ; equality, order,
the publick good, and the redress of grievances,
were phrases and ideas brought into ue, and
which grew to be familiar in the statutes and jurif-
prudence of the European nations. Almost all
the efforts in favour of liberty in every country of
Europe, have been made by this new power in the
legislature. In proportion as it rose to confidera-
tion and influence, the severity of the ariifocratical
spirit decreased; and the privileges of the people
became gradually more extensive as the ancient
and exorbitant jurifdition of the nobles was
abridged [T].

The people V. THE inhabitants of towns having been de-
bequityrli dared free by the charters of communities, that
franchie. part of the people which resided in the country,

and was employed in agriculture, began to recover
liberty by enfranchisement. During the rigour of
feudal government, as hath been already observed,
the great body of the lower people was reduced
to servitude. They were slaves fixed to the foil
which they cultivated, and together with it were
transferred from one proprietor to another, by sale,
or by conveyance. The spirit of feudal policy did
not favour the enfranchisement of that order of
men. It was an established maxim, that no vassal

[T] NOTE XIX.

could

could legally diminish the value of a fief, to the SECT.I.
detriment of the lord from whom he had received ' '
it. In consequence of this, manumiflion by the
authority of the immediate master was not valid:
and unless it was confirmed by the superior lord of
whom he held, slaves belonging to the fief did not

* acquire a complete right to their liberty. Thus it
. became necessary to ascend through all the grada.

tions of feudal holding to the King, the lord Para-
mount . A form of procedure so tedious and
troublesome, discouraged the pra&ice of manu-
mission. Domestic or personal slaves often ob-
tained liberty from the humanity or beneficence
of their masters, to whom they belonged in abfo-
lute property. The condition of slaves fixed to
the foil, was much more unalterable.

BUT the freedom and independence which one Themo.
i part of the people had obtained by the institution tivesand

of communities, inspired the other with the moif thirs.O
ardent desire of acquiring the fame privileges; and
their superiors, sensible of the benefits which they
themselves had derived from former conceflions,
were less unwilling to gratify them by the grant
of new immunities. The enfranchisement of slaves
became more frequent; and the Monarchs of
France, prompted by neceflity no less than by
their inclination to reduce the power of the nobles A . rs,
endeavoured to render it general. Louis X. and and 131-.
his brother Philip, iflued ordinances, declaring,

* Etabliffemens de St. Louis, liv. ii. ch. 34. Ordon. tom. i.
283. not. (a).

That
.

SICT. I. A' That as all men were by nature free-born, and

as their kingdom was called the kingdom of Franks,
they determined that it hould be so in reality as
well as in name; therefore they appointed that en.
franchifements ihould be granted throughout the
whole kingdom, upon just and reasonable condi-
tions b." These edics were carried into immediate
execution within the royal domaine. The exam-
ple of their sovereigns, together with the expe&a-
tion of considerable fums which they might raise
by this expedient, led many of the nobles to set
their dependents at liberty; and servitude was gra-
dually abolished in almost every province of the
kingdom [U]. In Italy, the eftablilhment of re-
publican government in their great cities, the ge-
nius and maxims of which were extremely differ-
ent from those of the feudal policy, together with
the ideas of equality, which the progress of com-
merce had rendered familiar, gradually introduced
the practice of enfranchising the ancient predial
slaves. In ome provinces of Germany, the per-
sons who had been subjet to this species of bond-
age, were released; in others, the rigour of their
iRate was mitigated. In England, as the spirit of
liberty gained ground, the very name and idea of
personal servitude, without any formal interpofi-
tion of the legislature to prohibit it, was totally
banilhed.

b Ordon. tom. i. p. 583, 653.
[U] NOTE XX.

THE

Te effecs of such a remarkable change in the Sct. .
ondition of so great a part of the people, could The effect
t fail of being considerable and extensive. The tFhis upo
ubandman, master of his own industry, and fe- Po"";ovnt
ure of reaping for himself the fruits of his labour,
ecame the farmer of the fame fields where he had
ormerly been compelled to toil for the benefit of
nother. The odious names of mafier and of lave,
e most mortifying and deprefling of all diitinc-
ns to human nature, were abolished. New
) rofpects opened, and new incitements to ingenuity

dnd enterprize presented themselves to those who

Yere emancipated. The expectation of bettering
, heir fortune, as well as that of railing themselves

a more honourable condition, concurred in call-
g forth their aivity and genius; and a nume-
us class of men, who formerly had no political
xifence, and were employed merely as infiruments
flabour, became useful citizens, and contributed
wards augmenting the force or riches of the so-
ity, which adopted them as members.

V. THE various expedients which were employedThe intro.
order to introduce a more regular, equal, and more reg o
igorous adminifiration of justice, contributed lrO aJmni.

*'- . .

^ "* ' flraiion of

reatly towards the improvement of society. What jfnic, Coo.
as the particular mode of dispensing justice in the im-
e several barbarous nations which over-ran the otveocat.

.oman Empire, and took poflfefion of its differ-
$nt provinces, cannot now be determined with cer-

inty. We may conclude from the form of go-
ernment eftablilhed among them, as well as from
VOL. I. E their

SECT. I. their ideas concerning the nature of society, that

the authority of the magistrate was extremely li-
mited, and the independence of individuals pro-
portionally great. History and records, as far as
these reach back, justify this conclusion, and re-
present the ideas and exercise of justice in all the
countries of Europe, as little different from those
which nuft take place in a state of nature. To
maintain the order and tranquillity of society by the
regular execution of known laws; to infli& ven.
geance on crimes deftru&ive of the peace and
safety of individuals, by a prosecution carried on
in the name, and by the authority of the commu-
nity to confider the punilhment of criminals as a
public example to deter others from violating the
laws; were objects of government little understood
in theory, and less regarded in pracice. The ma-
giftrate could hardly be said to hold the sword of
justice; it was left in the hands of private per.
sons. Resentment was almost the sole motive for
prosecuting crimes and to gratify that paflion,
was the end and rule in punilhing them. He who
suffered the wrong, was the only person who had a
right to pursue the aggressor, and to exact or to
remit the punishment. From a system of judicial
procedure, o crude and defetive as seems to be
scarcely compatible with the subsistence of civil so.
ciety, disorder and anarchy flowed. Superstition
concurred with this ignorance concerning the na-
ture of government, in obftru&ing the adminiftra-
tion of jufice, or in rendering it capricious and
ithequal. To provide remedies for there evils, so

as

as to give a more regular course to justice, wag, SECT. r.
: during several centuries, one great objec of poli -

tical wisdom. The regulations for this purpose
may be reduced to three general heads: To ex-
e plain these, and to point out the manner in which
| they operated, is an important article in the his-

tory of society among the nations of Europe.

i. THE first considerable Rtep towards etablifi- This efta*

ed by abo-
ing an equal administration ofjuftice, was the abo- lhing the

r. prassic of

lifhment of the right which individuals claimed of priate wat.
waging war with each other, in their own name,
and by their own authority. To repel injuries,
and to revenge wrongs, is no less natural to man
than to cultivate friendlhip: and while society re- Or'gin,,
mains in its most simple state, the former is con- ida,',er,'i
fidered as a personal right no less unalienable than jufli".
the latter. Nor do men in this situation deem that
they have a title to redress their own wrongs alone,
they are touched with the injuries of those with
whom they are connected, or in whose honour they
are interested; and are no less prompt to avenge
them. The savage, how imperfecly soever he
may comprehend the principles of political union,
feels warmly the sentiments of social affecion, and
the obligations arising from the ties of blood. On
the appearance of an injury or affront offered to
his family or tribe, he kindles into rage, and pur.
sues the authors of it with the keenelt refentmenc.
He confiders it as cowardly to expect redress from
any arm but his own, and as infamous to give up
to another the right of determining what rcpara-

E 2 tion

SECT. r. tion he should accept, or with what vengeance he

S hould reft satisfied.

These lead THE maxims and pratice of all uncivilized na,
to the prac.
ticeof pri tions, with refpet to the prosecution and punish.
Tate war. ment of offenders, particularly those of the ancient

Germans, and other Barbarians who invaded the
Roman Empire, are perfe&ly conformable to these
ideas '. While they retained their native fimpli-
city of manners, and continued to be divided into
small tribes or societies, the defects in this imper-
set system of criminal jurisprudence (if it merits
that name) were less sensibly felt. When they
came to fettle in the extensive provinces hich
they had conquered, and to form themselves into
great monarchies; when new objects of ambition
presenting thenfelves, increaed both the number
and the violence of their dissensions, they ought to
have adopted new maxims concerning the redress
of injuries, and to have regulated by general and
equal laws, that which they formerly left to be di-
rected by the caprice of private palion. But
fierce and haughty chieftains, accustomed to avenge
themselves on such as had injured them, did not
think of relinqtifhing a right which they con-
fidered as a privilege of their order, and a mark
of their independence. Laws enforced by the au-
thority of Princes and Magifirates who possesed
little power, commanded no great degree of reve-
rence. The administration of justice among rude

c Tacit. de Mor. German. cap. 21. Veil. Paterc. lib. ii.
c. 18.

illiterate i

I

i-illiterate people, was not so accurate, or decisive, SECT. .

or uniform, as to induce men to submit implicitly to V
its determinations. Every offended baron buckled
on his armour, and fought redress at the head of
his vassals. His adversary met him in like hostile
array. Neither of them appealed to impotent
laws, which could afford them no protecion. Nei-
ther of them would submit points, in which their
passions were warmly interested, to the flow deter-
mination of a judicial enquiry. Both trusted to
their swords for the decision of the contest. The
kindred and dependents of the aggressor, as well
; as of the defender, were involved in the quarrel.
They had not even the liberty of remaining neu-
tral. Such as refused to at in concert with the
party to which they belonged, were not only ex-
posed to infamy, but fubjefted to legal penalties.

THE different kingdoms of Europe were torn Th perni.

and afflited, during several centuries, by intestine '" 'at'
wars, excited by private animofities, and carried
on with all the rage natural to men of fierce man-
ners, and of violent pallions. The estate of every
baron was a kind of independent territory, dif-
joined from those around it, and the hostilities be-
tween them were perpetual. The evil became so
inveterate and deep-rooted, that the form and laws
of private war were ascertained, and regulations
concerning it made a part in the system of jurif-
prudence d, in the fame manner as if this praylice

d Beaumanoir CoufRumes de Beauvoifis, ch. 59, et les notes
de Thaueaflirec, p. 447.

E 3 had

SsCT. 1. had been founded in some natural right of huma-
'L' ' nity, or in the original conffitution of civil society.

Variou me So great was the disorder, and such the calami-
ployedin ties which there perpetual hostilities occasioned,
ada, to that various efforts were made to wrest from the

nobles this pernicious privilege which they claimed.
It was the interest of every sovereign to abolifl a
praacice which almost annihilated his authority.
Charlemagne prohibited it by an express law, as
an invention of the devil to destroy the order and
happiness of society ; but the reign of one Mo-
narch, however vigorous and active, was too hort
to extirpate a custom so firmly eftablilhed. In-
stead of enforcing this prohibition, his feeble fuc.
ceffors durst venture on nothing more than to ap-
ply palliatives. They declared it unlawful for any
person to commence war, until he had ent a for.
mal defiance to the kindred and dependents of his
adversary; they ordained that, after the commis-
sion of the trespass or crime which gave rife to a
private war, forty days must elapse before the per-
(on injured should attack the vassals of his adver-
fary; they enjoined all persons to suspend their
private animofities, and to cease from hostilities
when the King was engaged in any war against the
enemies of the nation. The church co-operated
with the civil magistrate, and interpored its autho-
rity in order to extirpate a practice so repugnant
to the spirit of Christianity. Various councils if-
sued decrees, prohibiting all private wars and

* CspituI, A. P. 8.. Edit. Baluz. Vol. i. p. 371.

denounced

denounced the heaviest anathemas against such as SCT. I.
hould disturb the tranquillity of society, by claim. -
ng or exercising that barbarous right. The aid
of religion was called in to combat and 'ubdue the
ferocity of the times. The Almighty was said to
have manifested, by visions and revelations to dif-
ferent persons, his disapprobation of that spirit of
revenge, which armed one part of his creatures
against the other. Men were required, in the name
of God, to sheath their swords, and to remember
the sacred ties which united them as Christians, and
as members of the fame society. But this junction
of civil and ecclefiaftick authority, though fircngth-
ened by every thing most apt to alarm and to over-
awe the credulous spirit of those ages, produced
no other effect than some temporary fulpenfions of
hofftilities, and a cessation from war on certain days
and seasons consecrated to the more solemn ass of
devotion. The nobles continued to assert this dan-
gerous privilege; they refused to obey some of the
laws calculated to annul or circumscribe it; they
eluded others; they petitioned; they remonstrated;
they struggled ftr the right of private war as the
highest and niolt honourable diftin&ion of their
order. l' en to late as the fourteenth century, we
find the nobles in several provinces of France con-
tending for their ancient method of terminating
their differences by the livord, in preference to that
of submitting them to the decision of any judge.
The final abolition of this pratice in that king-
dom, and the other countries in which it prevailed,
is not to be ascribed so much to the force of fla-

E 4 tutCe

SECT. I. tutes and decrees, as to the gradual increase of the

royal authority, and to the imperceptible progress
ofjufter sentiments concerning government, order,
and public security [X].

The probi. 2. THE prohibition of the form of trial by ju-
bition of
trial by ju. dicial combat, was another considerable ftep to-
dicial corn-
bat, another wards the introduction of such regular government
improve-
ienP l h,e as ecured publick order and private tranquillity.
adminiofra. As the right of private war left many of the quar-
tion of jus-
tice. rels among individuals to be decided, like those

between nations, by arms; the form of trial by
judicial combat, which was eflablifhed in every
country of Europe, banished equity from courts of
juflice, and rendered chance or force the arbiter of
their determinations. In civilized nations, all tranf-
aftions of any importance are concluded in writing.

Defea;in The exhibition of the deed or infirument is full
the judicial
p,^ceeding evidence of the fad, and ascertains with precision
odl'hc id- what each party has ltipulated to perform. But

among a rude people, when the arts of reading and
writing were such uncommon attainments, that to
be master of either, intitled a person to the appel-
lation of a clerk or learned man, scarcely any thing
was committed to writing but treaties between
Princes, their grants and charters to their fubjets,
or such tranfa6tions between private parties as were
of extraordinary consequence, or had an extensive
effe6t. The greater part of affairs in common
life and business, were carried on by verbal con-

[X] NOTE XXI.

tracts

&sor.promifes. This, in many civil 4uefti6ns, 9SCT. I,
t only made it difficult to bring proof futfficient to
tablifh any claim, but encouraged falfehodd and
aud by rendering them extremely easy. Even in
riminal cafes, where a particular faf muf be afg
rtained, or an accusation be disproved, the nature
nd effe& of legal evidence was little understood
y barbarous nations. To define with accuracy
hat species of evidence which a court had reason

to expet; to determine when it ought to insist on
!positive proof, and when it hould be satisfied with

ta proof from circumstances; to compare the tcfti-
mony of discordant witnesses; and to fix the de-
' gree of credit due to each; were difcuflions too
intricate and subtile for the jurisprudence of igrio.
rant ages. In order to avoid encumbering rhem-
selves with these, a more'fimple form of procedure
was introduced into courts as well civil as criminal.
In all cafes, where the notoriety of the fat did
not furnish the clearef and noft diret evidences
the person accused, or he againfi whom an a&ion
was brought, was called legally, or offered volun-
tarily to purge himself by oath; and upon his de-
claring his innocence, he was inftanty acquitted .
This absurd praaice effetually fcreened'guilt and
fraud from detection or punishment, 'by render-
ing the temptation to petjury so powerful, that'it
was not easy to resist it. The pernicious effects
of it were sensibly felt; and in order to guard

f Leg. Burgund. Tit. 8, & 45. Leg. Aleman. 'it.:89. Leg.
Barwar. Tit. 8. § 5. 2. &c.

' galft

SCr. 1. against them, the laws ordained, that oaths hould

vw' be administered with great solemnity, and accom-

panied with every circumstance which could in-
spire religious reverence, or superstitious terror .
This, however, proved a feeble remedy: these
ceremonious rites became familiar, and their im.
preflion on the imagination gradually diminilhed;
men who could venture to disregard truth, were
not apt to startle at the folemnities of an oath.
Their observation of this, put legislators upon de-
vising a new expedient for rendering the purgation
by oath more certain and fatisfatory. They re-
quired the person accused to appear with a certain
number of freemen, his neighbours or relations,
who corroborated the oath which he took, by swear-
ing that they believed all that he had uttered to be
true. hefe were called Compurgators, and their
number varied according to the importance of the
fubje& in dispute, or the nature of the crime with
which a person was charged h. In ome cafes, the
concurrence of no less than three hundred of there
auxiliary witnellis was requisite to acquit the per.
son accused '. But even this device was found to
be ineffc&ual. It was a point of honour with
every man in Europe, during several ages, not to
desert the chief on whom he depended, and to stand
by those with whom the ties of blood connected
him. Whoever then was bold enough to violate

t Du Cange Gloffar. voc. Juramcnitum, vol. iii. p. 1607,
Edit. Benedift. h Du Cange, ibid. vol. iii. p. 1599.

i Spelmn GlolTar. voc. 49tb. Gregor. Turon. His. lib.
viii. C. 9.

the

i the laws, was sure of devoted adherents, willing to SECT. .

abet, and eager to serve him in whatever manner
h he required. . The formality of calling Compur-
gators, proved an apparent, not a real security,
against falsehood and perjury; and the sentences
of courts, while they continued to refer every point

i in question to the oath of the defendant, became
Xfo flagrantly iniquitous as excited universal indig-
nation against this method of procedure k.

SENSIBLE of these defets, but strangers to the Thee in-

troduced the

!tJmanner of correting them, or of introducing a pracice of
·imore proper form, our ancestors, as an infallible hePa'n to
i method of discovering truth, and of guarding
-iagainft deception, appealed to Heaven, and re-
Y ferred every point in dispute to be determined, as

they imagined, by the decisions of unerring wisdom
e and impartialjuftice. The person accused, in or-

der to prove his innocence, submitted, in some
cafes, to trial, by plunging his arm in boiling
water; by lifting a red-hot iron with his naked
hand ; by walking bare-foot over burning
plough- hares; or by other experiments equally
perilous and formidable. On other occasions, he Particulirly
challenged his accuser to fight him in tingle corn- oy"bditi'
bat. All these various forms of trial were con-
duted with many devout ceremonies; the mini-
fters of religion were employed, the Almighty was
I called upon to interpose for the manifestation of
guilt, and for the protection of innocence ; and
whoever escaped unhurt, or came off victorious,

a Lg. Longobard. lib. ii. tit. 55. 34a

was

SICT. I. was pronounced to be acquitted by the Judgmea
X ' of God'.

The intro- AMONG all the whirifical and absurd institutions
dussion of
this praice which owe their existence to the weakness of hu.
favourpedy man reason, this, which submitted questions that
tionof the affected the property, the reputation, and the lives

of men, to the determination of chance, or of
bodily strength and address, appears to be the most
extravagant and preposterous. There were cir-
ctmftances, however, which led the nations of Eu-
rope to confider this equivocal mode of deciding
any point in contest, as a dire& appeal to Heaven,
and a certain method of discovering its will. As
men. are unable to comprehend the manner in which
the Almighty carries on the government of the uni-
verse, by equal, fixed, and general laws, they are
-apt to imagine, that in every cafe which their pas-
sions or interest render important in their own eyes,
the Supreme Ruler of all ought visibly to diplay
his power, in vindicating innocence and punishing
vice. It requires no inconsiderable degree; of fci-
ence and philosophy to corre& this popular error.
But the sentiments prevalent in Europe during the
dark ages, instead of corre&ing, frengthened it.
Religion, for several centuries, consisted chiefly in
believing the legendary hifory of those faints whole
narmes croud and disgrace the Romiih calendar.
The fabulous tales concerning their miracles, had
been declared authentic by the bullsof Popes, and

1' Mrat. Differtatio do udicil Del. Atiquit. Italic. vol.
iii. p. 612

2 the

e decrees of councils they made the great sub- SECT. .
t of the ioftrutions which the clergy offered to
hc people, and were received by them with im-
licit credulity and admiration. By attending to

fe, men were accustomed to believe that the
ftablihed laws of nature might be violated on the

t frivolous occasions, and were taught to look

ather for particular and extraordinary as of
¥ower under the divine administration, than to
contemplate the regular progress and execution of
.a general plan. One superstition prepared the way
lfor another; and whoever believed that the Su-
ipreme Being had interposed miraculously on those
trivial occasions mentioned in legends, could not
but expect his intervention in matters of greater
'importance, when solemnly referred to his decision.

WITH this superstitious opinion, the martial And like.

wife by their

spirit of Europe, during the middle ages, concurred martial
tin etablifhing the mode of trial by judicial com- (pirit.
bat. To be ready to maintain with his sword
whatever his lips had uttered, was the first maxim
of honour with every gentleman. To assert their
own rights by force of arms, to inflit vengeance
on those who had injured or affronted them, were
the diftin&ion and pride of high.fpirited nobles.
The form of trial by combat coinciding with this
maxim, lattered and gratified thcfe paflins. Every
man was the guardian of his own honour, andof
his own life; the justice of his cause, as well as his
future reputation,. depended on his own courage
and prowess. This mode of decision was con-

fidered,

SECT. I. fidered accordingly, as one of the happiest efforts
Y'r-' of wife policy; and as oon as it was introduced,

all the forms of trial by fire or water, and other fu-
perftitious experiments, fell into disuse, or were
employed only in controversies between persons of
inferior rank. The trial by combat was autho-
rized over all Europe, and received in every coun.
try with equal fatisfa&ion. Not only quefions
concerning uncertain or contested fads, but general
and abftrat points in law, were determined by the
issue of a combat; and the latter was deemed a
method of discovering truth more liberal as well
as more fatisfafory, than that by examination and
argument. Not only might parties, whose minds
were exasperated by the eagerness and the hostility
of opposition, defy their antagonist, and require him
to make good his charge, or to prove his innocence,
with his sword; but witnesses, who had no interest
in the issue of the question, though called to declare
the truth by laws which ought to have afforded them
protection, were equally exposed to the danger of
a challenge, and equally bound to assert the vera-
city of their evidence by dint of arms. To com-
plete the absurdities of this military jurisprudence,
even the charater of a judge was not sacred from
its violence. Any one of the parties might interrupt
a judge when about to deliver his opinion; might
accuse him of iniquity and corruption in the most
reproachful terms, and throwing down his gauntlet,
might challenge him to defend his integrity in
the field nor could he, without infamy, refuse

to

o accept the defiance, or decline to enter the lifts SeCr. I.
gainft such an adversary.

THUS the form of trial by combat, like other Itbecom

abuses, spread gradually, and extended to all per-
sons, and almost to all cafes. Ecclefiafticks, women,
minors, superannuated and infirm persons, who could
not with decency or justice be compelled to take
arms, and to maintain their own cause, were obliged
to produce champions, whom they engaged, by as-
feEtion or rewards, to fight their battles. The so-
'lemnities of a judicial combat were such as were
natural in an action, which was confidered both as
a formal appeal to God, and as the final decision
,of questions of the highef moment. Every cir-
i cumftance relating to them, was regulated by the
iedi&s of Princes, and explained in the comments
of lawyers, with a minute and even superstitious
accuracy. Skill in these laws and rites was the
|only science of which warlike nobles boasted, or
; which they were ambitious to attain ".

BY this barbarous custom, the natural courfeThe pei.

of proceeding, both in civil and criminal questions, si" t&a
was entirely perverted. Force usurped the place of
equity in courts of judicature, and justice was ba-
nilhed from her proper mansion. Discernment,
learning, integrity, were qualities less neceflary to
a judge than bodily strength and dexterity in the

m See a curious discourse concerning the laws of judicial

combat, by Thomas of WoodfRock, Duke of Gloucener, uncle
to Richard II. in Spelman's Glofrr. voc. Campri.

use

SECT. I. Use of ars. Daring courage and superior vigour
*- - or address, were of more moment towards securing

the favourable issue of a suit, than the equity of
a cause, or the clearness of the evidence. Men,
of course, applied themselves to cultivate the ta-
lents which they found to be of greatef utility.
As ftrengh of body and address in arms were no
less requisite in those lifts which they were obliged
to enter in defence of their private rights, than in
the field of battle, where they met the enemies of
their country, it became the great obje& of edu.
cation, as well as the chief employment in life, to
acquire these martial accomplishments. The ad-
.ministration ofjuftice, instead of accustoming men
to liften to the voice of equity, or to reverence the
dcifipns of law, added to the ferocity of their
manners, and taught them to confider force as the
great arbiter of right and wrong.

various ex THESE pernicious effects of the trial by combat
·boilngs were so obvious, that they did not altogether escape
ipac. the view of the unobferving age in which it was

introduced. The clergy, from the beginning, re-
mronftrated against it as repugnant to the spirit of
Christianity, and subversive of justice and order ".
But the maxims and palfions which favoured it, had
.taken such hold of the minds of men, that they
disregarded admonitions and censures, which, on
other occaigops, would have struck them with
terror. The evil was too great and inveterate to
yield to that remedy, and continuing to increase,

n Du Cange Glofar. voc. Dmull, vol. ii, p. z675.

the

he civil power at length found it necessary to in- SECT. 1
rpofe. Conscious, however, of their own limited
authority, monarchs proceeded with caution, ad
their first attempts to restrain, or to set any bounds
to this pratice, were extremely feeble. One of the
earlief reftriEtions of this praitice which occurs in
the history of Europe, is that of Henry I. of Eng-
land. It extended no farther than to prohibit
the trial by combat in questions concerning pro-
perty of small value °. Louis VII. of France imi-
tated his example, and issued an edict to the fame
effect P. St. Louis, whole ideas as a legislator were
far superior to those of his age, endeavoured to in.
troduce a more perfect jurisprudences and to sub-
, ftitute the trial by evidence, in place of that by
, combat. But his regulations, with refpe& to this,
were confined to his own domains; for the great
?tvaffals of the crown possessed such independent
authority~ and were so fondly attached to the an-
cient practice, that he durst not venture to extend
it to the whole kingdom. Some barons volunt

rily adopted his regulations. The spirit of courts

ofjuftice became averse to the mode of decifidn
by combat, and discouraged it on every occafior.
The nobles, nevertheless, thought it so honourable
to depend for the security of their lives and for,
tunes on their wn courage alone, and contended

twith so much vehemence for the preservation of
this favourite privilege of their order, that the fdc-

Bruffiel Usage des Fiefs, ol. ii. . 96iz

P Ordon. tom; i. p. 6.
VL; : 1. F ceffrgif

SrCT. I. ceffors of St. Louis, unable to oppose, and afraid
b"J of offending such powerful fubjecs, were obliged

not only to tolerate, but to authorize the practice
which he had attempted to aboliih q. In other
countries of Europe, efforts equally zealous were
employed to maintain the established custom; and
similar concefflons were extorted from their refpec-
tive sovereigns. It continued, however, to be an
obje6t of policy with every monarch of abilities or
vigour, to explode the trial by combat; and vari-
ous edicts were issued for this purpose. But the
observation which was made concerning the right
of private war, is equally applicable to the mode
of trial under review. No custom, how absurd
soever it may be, if it has subsisted long, or de-
rives its force from the manners and prejudices of
the age in which it prevails, was ever abolished
by the bare promulgation of laws and flatutes.
The sentiments of the people mufl change, or some
new power sufficient to counteract it must be in-
troduced. Such a change, accordingly, took place
in Europe, as science gradually increased, and so-
ciety advanced towards more perfect order. In
proportion as the prerogative of Princes extended,
and came to acquire new force, a power, interested
in fupprefing every practice favourable to the in-
dependence of the nobles, was intnoduced. The
struggle, nevertheless, subsisted for several centu-
ries; sometimes the new regulations and ideas
seemed to gain ground; sometimes ancient habits
recurred; and though, upon the whole, the trial

* Ordon. tom. i. p. 328, 390, 435.

d:

y combat went more and more into disuse, yet SSCT.
pnftlances of it occur, as late as the sixteenth cen- <-""
ury, in the history both of France and of Eng.
Sand. In proportion as it declined, the regular
idminiftration ofjuftice was restored, the proceed-
?ngs of courts were dire&ted by known laws, the
'Itudy of these became an objec of attention to
judges, and the people of Europe advanced fast
towards civility, when this great cause of the fero-
tcity of their manners was removed [Y].

' 3. BY authorizing the right of appeal from the The prii.
Ccourts of the Barons to those of the King, and pelingfc
:,fubjecing the decisions of the former to the review t'thoubt

of the latter, a new ftep, not less considerable rns, ano-
;than those which I have already mentioned, was iprtc,-
taken towards eftablilhing the regular, consistent, admnisra-
and vigorous administration of justice. Among o"e.fju
Sall the encroachments of the feudal nobles on
' the prerogative of their Monarchs, their usurping
'the administration of justice with supreme autho-
rity, both in civil and criminal causes, within the
precinfs of their own etates, was the most fin.
gular. In other nations, fubjets have contended
with their Princes, and have endeavoured to ex-
tend their own power and privileges; but in the
history of their struggles and pretensions, we dif-
cover nothing similar to this right which the
feudal barons claimed, and acquired. It mull Ori;rn
have been something peculiar in their genius and and ilde-
manners that suggested this idea, and prompted rifdj;t r

the nobility.
[Y] NOTE XXI[.

F a them

68 A VIEW OF THE
SECT. I. them to insist on such a claim. Among the rude

people who conquered the various provinces of
the Roman Empire, and established new king.
doms there, the paffon of resentment, too impe-
tuous to bear controul, was permitted to remain
almost unrestrained by the authority of laws.
The person offended, as has been observed, re-
tained not only the right of prosecuting but of
punishing his adversary. To him it belonged to
inflict such vengeance as satiated his rage, or to
accept of such fatisfaaion as appeared it. But
while fierce barbarians continued to be the sole
judges in their own cause, their enmities were im-
placable, and immortal; they set no bounds either
to the degree of their vengeance, or to the dura-
tion of their resentment. The excesses which this
occasioned, proved so deftrudive of peace and
order in society, as forced them to think of rome
remedy. At first, arbiters interposed, and by per-
suasion or intreaty prevailed on the party offended
to accept of a fine or composition from the ag-
grefsor, and to drop all farther prosecution. But
as fubmifion to persons who had no legal or magi-
fterial authority was altogether voluntary, it be-
came necessary to eftablilh judges with power
sufficient to enforce their own decisions. The
leader whom they were accustomed to follow and
to obey, whose courage they refpe&ed, and in
whose integrity they placed confidence, was the
person to whom a martial people naturally com-
mitted this important prerogative. Every chieftain
was the commander of his tribe in war, and their

2 judge i.

judge in peace. Every baron led his vassals to SICT. .
the field, and administered justice to them in his
hall. Their high-fpirited dependents would not
lave recognized any other authority, or have sub-
mitted to any other jurifdidion. But in times of
turbulence and violence, the exercise of this new
function was attended not only with trouble, but
with danger. No person could aflume the cha-
raAer of a judge, if he did not poffels power sus-
ficient to protet the one party from the violence
of private revenge, and to compel the other to
accept of such reparation as he enjoined. In con-
fideration of the extraordinary efforts which this
office required, judges, betides the fine which they
appointed to be paid as a compensation to the
person or family who had been injured, levied an
additional fum as a recompence for their own
labour; and in all the feudal kingdoms the latter
was not only as precisely ascertained, but as regu-
larly exated, as the former.

THUS, by the natural operation of circumfianccs Thl extent

peculiar to the manners or political slate of the s of'i,
feudal nations, separate and territorial jurifidicions privilee'
came not only to be established in every kingdom,
but were established in such a way, that the in-
terest of the barons concurred with their ambition
in maintaining and extending them. It was not
merely a point of honour with the feudal nobles
to dispense justice to their vassals; but from the
exercise of that power arose one capital branch of
their revauec and the emoluments of their courts

F 3 were

SEcr. I. were frequently the main support of their dignity.
4-k'' It was with infinite zeal that they asserted and

defended this high privilege of their order. By
this institution, however, every kingdom in Eu-
rope was split into as many separate principalities
as it contained powerful barons. Their vassals,
whether in peace or in war, were hardly sensible
of any authority, but that of their superior lord.
They felt themselves fubje& to no other com.
mand. They were amenable to no other jurif
diation. The ties which linked together these
smaller confederacies became close and firm ; the
bonds of public union relaxed, or were dissolved.
The nobles strained their invention in devising re-
gulations which tended to ascertain and perpetuate
this diftintion. In order to guard against any
appearance of subordination in their courts to
those of the crown, they constrained their mo-
narchs to prohibit the royal judges from enter-
ing their territories, or from claiming any jurif-
diftion there; and if, either through mistake, or
from the spirit of encroachment, any royal judge
ventured to extend his authority to the vassals of
a baron, they might plead their right of exemp-
tion, and the lord of whom they held could not
only rescue them out of his hands, but was inti-
tied to legal reparation for the injury and affront
offered to him. The jurifdi&ion of the royal
judges scarcely reached beyond the narrow limits
of the King's demesnes. Instead of a regular gra-
dation of courts, all acknowledging the authority
of the fame general laws, and looking up to these

as

'Is the guides of their decisions, there were in SFCT.I.

very feudal kingdom a thousand independent tri-
bunals, the proceedings of which were directed by
iocal customs and contradictory forms. The col-
ifion ofjurifdietion among these numerous courts
ften retarded the execution of justice: The
ariety and caprice of their modes of procedure
uft have for ever kept the adminifiration of it

%from attaining any degree of uniformity or per-
'fetion.

ALL the monarchs of Europe perceived there Expedients

en

I sPIOY(d in

iencroachments on theirjurildiEtion, and bore them order to i.
. . . r. mit or abo.
with impatience. But the usurpations of the nobles lin it.
were so firmly established, and the danger of en-
:deavouring to overturn them by open force was

manifest, that they were obliged to remain

pfatisfied with attempts to undermine them. Vari
,ous expedients were employed for this purpose;
each of which merit attention, as they mark the
progress of law and equity in the several kingdoms
of Europe. At first, Princes endeavoured to cir-
cumfcribe the jurifdiEtion of the barons, by per-
mritting them to take cognizance only of smaller
offences, reserving those of greater moment, under
the appellation of Pleas of the Crown, and Royal
Causes, to be tried in the King's courts. This
'affeEted only the barons of inferior note; the more
'powerful nobles scorned such a diltintion, and
not only claimed unlimited jurifdition, but obliged
their sovereigns to grant them charters, con-
veying or recognizing this privilege in the most

F 4 ample

SECT. I. ample form. The attempt, nevertheless, was pro:
% - du&ive of some good consequences, and paved

the way for more. It turned the attention of men
towards a jurifdistion diftinc from that of the
baron whose vassals they were; it accustomed them
to the pretensions of fiperiority which the crown
claimed over territorial judges; and taught them,
when oppressed by their own superior lord, to look
pp to their sovereign as their protector. This
facilitated the introduction of appeals, by which
Princes brought the decisions of the barons' courts
ppder the review of the royal judges. While trial
by combat fubfifed in full vigour, no point de-
jcded according to that mode, could be brought
under the review of another court. It had been
referred to the judgment of God; the issue of
battle had declared his will; and it would have
been impious to have called in question the equity
ps the divine decision. But as soon as that bar-
parous custom began to fall into disuse, Princes
encouraged the vfals of the barons to sue for
redress, by appealing to the royal courts. The
progress of this pratice, however, was flow and
gradual. The first instances of appeals were on
gccount of the delay, or the refusal of jufiice in the
baron's court; and as these were countenanced
by the ideas of subordination in the feudal con-
i'tution, the nobles allowed them to be intro-
duced without much opposition. But when there
were followed by appeals on account of the in-
justice or iniquity of the fenenece, the nobles then
'pgan to be fecpfble, that if this innovation became

general,

general, the shadow of power alone would remain SECT. I.
in their hands, and all real authority and jurif-
dicion would center in those courts which pof?
fefed the right of review. They instantly took
the alarm, remonstrated againif the encroachment,
and contended boldly for their ancient privileges.
But the monarchs in the different kingdoms of
Europe pursucd their plan with steadiness and pru-
dence. Though forced to suspend their opera-
tions on ome occasions, and seemingly to yield
when any formidable confederacy of their vassals
united against them, they resumed their measures
as soon as they observed the nobles to be remiss
or feeble, and puihed them with vigour. They
appointed the royal courts, which originally were
ambulatory, and irregular with respect to their
times of meeting, to be held in a fixed place, and
at stated seasons. They were solicitous to name
judges of more diffinguifhed abilities than such as
presided in the courts of the barons. They added
dignity to their charater, and splendour to their
assemblies. They laboured to render their forms
regular, and their decrees confifent. Such judi-
catories became, of course, the objets of public
confidence as well as veneration. The people,
relinquishing the partial tribunals of their lords,
were eager to bring every fubjeft of contest under
the more equal and discerning eye of those whom
their sovereign had chosen to give judgment in
his name. Thus Kings became once more the
heads of the conununity, and the dispensers of

justice

SECT. . justice to their fubjets. The barons, in some

' kingdoms, ceased to exercise their right of jurif.

diCtion, because it funk into contempt; in others,
it was circumscribed by such regulations as ren.
dered it innocent, or it was entirely abolished by
express tatutes. Thus the administration of jus.
tice taking its rife from one source, and following
one direction, held its course in every slate with
more uniformity, and with greater force [Z].

Theregula- VI. THE forms and maxims of the canon law,
tions of the
anon law which were become universally refpecable from
Pr rptet their authority in the spiritual courts, contributed
adminiitra-

itr- not a little towards these improvements in jurif.

prudence which I have enumerated. If we confider
the canon law politically, and view it either as a
system framed on purpose to assist the clergy in
usurping powers and jurifdistion no less repugnant
to the nature of their function, than inconfiftentwith
the order of government; or as the chief inftru-
ment in establishing the dominion of the Popes,
which hook the throne, and endangered the liber-
ties of every kingdom in Europe, we must pro-
nounce it one of the most formidable engines ever
formed against the happiness of civil society. But
if we contemplate it merely as a code of laws
refpeting the rights and property of individuals,
and attend only to the civil effets of its decisions

The pro. concerning these, it will appear in a different,
sieilc and a much more favourable light. In ages of
afurptioa.

[Z] NO TE XXIII.

ignorance

gnorance and credulity, the ministers of religion SECT. I.
are the obje&s of superstitious veneration. When '
he barbarians who over-ran the Empire first em-
braced the Christian faith, they found the clergy
in poflefion of considerable power; and they
naturally transferred to those new guides the pro-
found fubmiflion and reverence which they were
accustomed to yield to the priests of that religion
which they had forsaken. They deemed their
persons to be as sacred as their function; and
would have confidered it as impious to fubjeft
them to the profane jurifdition of the laity. The
clergy were not blind to the advantages which the
weakness of mankind afforded them. They efta-
blifhed courts, in which every question relating
to their own character, their function, or their pro-
perty was tried. They pleaded, and obtained an
almost total exemption from the authority of civil
judges. Upon different pretexts, and by a multi-
plicity of artifices, they communicated this privi-
lege to so many persons, and extended their jurif-
diCtion to such a variety of cafes, that the greater
part of those affairs which give rife to contest and
litigation, was drawn under the cognizance of the
spiritual courts.

BUT in order to dispose the laity to susser these The plea of

usurpations without murmuring or opposition, it "f',c"fli
was necessary to convince them, that the admi- dnTeAmnot

perfeti than

niftration of justice would be rendered more per- that in the
fe by the eftabliffiment of this new jurifdition.

This

SECT. I. This was not a difficult undertaking, at the period
Y' - -when ecclefiafticks carried on their encroachments

with the greatest success. That scanty portion
of science which served to guide men in the ages
of darkness, was wholly engrossed by the clergy.
They alone were accuitomed to read, to enquire,
and to reason. Whatever knowledge of ancient
jurisprudence had been pTeferved, either by tradi-
tion, or in such books as had escaped the deftruc.
tive rage of barbarians, was poffefled only by
them. Upon the maxims of that excellent system,
they founded a code of laws consonant to the
great principles of equity. Being direEed by fixed
and known rules, the forms of their courts were
ascertained, and their deciflons became uniform
and confitent. Nor did they want authority sus.
ficient to enforce their sentences. Excommunica-
tion and other ecclesiastical censures, were punish.
ments more formidable than any that civil judges
could inflic in support of their decrees.

The gooa IT is not surprising, then, that ecclesiastical
ffiasin jurisprudence should become such an obje of
*nd adopt- admiration and refpe&; that exemption from civil
ing it.

jurifdi&ion was courted as a privilege, and con-
ferred as a reward. It is not surprising, that even
to rude people, the maxims of the canon law
ihould appear more equal and just than that ill-
digested jurisprudence which dire&ed all proceed-
*ings in the civil courts. According to the latter,
the differences between contending barons were

terminated,

etminated, as in a ate of fature, by the sword; SECT. I.
ccording to the former, every matter was sub- '
ie&ed to the decision of laws. The one, by per-
mitting judicial combats left chance and force to
be arbiters of right or wrong, of truth or false-
hood; the other, passed judgment with refpe to
these by the maxims of equity, and the testimony
of witnesses. Any error or iniquity in a sentence
pronounced by a baron to whom feudal jurisdiction
belonged, was irremediable, because originally it
'was fubjeft to the review of no superior tribunal;
the ecclesiastical law established a regular grada-
tion of courts, through all which a cause might be
carried by appeal, until it was determined by that
authority which was held to be supreme in the
church, Thus the genius and principles of the
canon law prepared men for approving those three
great alterations in the feudal jurisprudence which
I have mentioned. But it was not with respect to
these points alone that the canon law suggested
improvements beneficial to society. Many of the
regulations, now deemed the barriers of personal
security, or the safeguards of private property,
are contrary to the spirit, and repugnant to the
maxims of the civil jurisprudence, known in Eu-
rope during several centuries, and were borrowed
from the rules and praaice of the ecclesiastical
courts. By observing the wisdom and equity of
the decifons in these courts, men began to per-
ceive the neceflity either of deserting the martial

tribunals

SECT. I. tribunals of the barons, or of attempting to reform
'^^ them [AA.

The rivali VII. THE revival of the knowledge and fudy of
sh,)aw' the Roman law co-operated with the causes which
more liberal have mentioned, in introducing more just and
ideas con- liberal ideas concerning the nature of government,
cerningjuf-
tice and or- and the administration of justice. Among the ca-

lamities which the devastations of the barbarians
who broke in upon the Empire brought upon
mankind, one of the greatest was their overturn-
ing the system of Roman jurisprudence, the noblest
monument of the wisdom of that great people,

The ci- formed to subdue and to govern the world. The
cumqance .
from whih laws and regulations of a civilized community,
the Roman
law Rl into were altogether repugnant to the manners and
oliv:on. ideas of there fierce invaders. They had refpec

to objecs, of which a rude people had no con-
ception; and were adapted to a slate of society
with which they were entirely unacquainted. For
this reason, wherever they fettled, the Roman
jurisprudence soon funk into oblivion, and lay
buried for ome centuries under the load of those
institutions which the inhabitants of Europe dig-
nified with the name of laws. But towards the
middle of the twelfth century, a copy of Jufi-
nian's Pandecs was accidentally discovered in
Italy. By that time, the slate of society was so
far advanced, and the ideas of men o much en-

(AA] NOTE XXIV.

larged

rged and improved by the occurrences of several SCT. I.
enturies, during which they had continued in ircua.,,.
olitical union, that they were struck with admi- weidch
ation of a system which their ancestors could not revil ofit.
omprehend. Though they had not hitherto at-
ained such a degree of refinement, as to catch
om the ancients a relish for true philosophy, or
peculative science; though they were still insen-
ble to the beauty and elegance of classical com-
ofition; they were sufficiently qualified to judge
ith refpet to the merit of their system of laws,
n which all the points most interesting to man-
ind, and the chief obje&s of their attention in
very age, were fettled with discernment, precision
nd equity. All men of letters studied this new
ience with eagerness; and within a few years
fter the discovery of the Pandecs, professors of
ivil law were appointed, who taught it publickly
n mos countries of Europe.

THE effects of having such a perseEt model to The eflag
udy and to imitate were soon manifest. Men, as oth.i uPo
oon as they were acquainted with fixed and ge- men. nd

the difpen.

eral laws, perceived the advantage of them, and ationof
ecame impatient to ascertain the principles andjufic"
frms by which judges should regulate their deci-
sions. Such was the ardour with which they car-
ried on an undertaking of so great importance to
society, that before the close of the twelfth cen-
tury, the feudal law was reduced into a regular
system; the code of canon law was enlarged and

methodized;

sEr. . methodized and the loose uncertain customs of
'.,',- different provinces or kingdoms were colleted

and arranged with an order and accuracy acquired
from the knowledge of Roman jurisprudence. In
some countries of Europe the Roman law was
adopted as subsidiary to their own municipal law;
and all cafes to which the latter did not extend,
were decided according to the principles of the
former. In others, the maxims as well as forms
of Roman jurisprudence mingled imp0rceptibly
with the laws of the country, and had a powerful,
though less sensible, influence, in improving and
perfeting them [BB]j

rom all THESE various iriprovements in the fyaem oi
there aroe
A diflintion Juriprudence, and adminiltration of jutice, occa.

owfef. sioned a change in manners, of great importance,

and of extensive effect. They gave rife to a dif.
tintion of profeflions they obliged men to cul.
tivate different talents, and to aim at different
accomplishments in order to qualify themselves
for the various departments and fnctnions which
became necessary in ociety . Among uncivilized
nations, there is but one profefion honourable,
that of arms. All the ingenuity and vigour of
the human mind are exerted in acquiring military
skill, or address. The functions of peace are few
and fimpk and require no particular eourfe of

[BB] NOTE XXV.

Dr. Ferguson's Essay on the liltory of Civil Society, part
ik. fe Irduc

education

ducation or of ltudy, as a preparation for dif- SECT. I.
harging them. This was the fate of Europe
uring several centuries. Every gentleman, born
a soldier, scorned any other occupation; he was
taught no science but that of war; even his exer-
cifes and pastimes were feats of martial prowess.
Nor did the judicial character, which persons of
noble birth were alone entitled to assume, demand
any degree of knowledge beyond that which such
untutored soldiers possessed. To recollet a few
traditionary customs which time had confrmed,
and rendered respectable; to mark out the lifts of
battle with due formality; to observe the iflue of
the combat; and to pronounce whether it had
been conducted according to the laws of arms;
included every thing that a baron, who acted as a
udge, found it necessary to understand,
BUT when the forms of legal proceedings were The ekia

of this os

fixed, when the rules of decision were committed fociey.
to writing, and colle&ted into a body, law became
a science, the knowledge of which required a
regular course of itudy, together with long atten.
tion to the practice of courts. Martial and illi-
terate nobles, had neither leisure nor inclination to
undertake a talk so laborious, as well as so foreign
from all the occupations Which they deemed enter-
taining, or suitable to their rank. They gradu-
ally relinquished their places in courts of justice,
where their ignorance exposed them to contempt.
They became weary of attending to the difcufion

VOL. 1. G of

SI:CT. L of cafes, which grew too intricate for them to
11 r Comprehend. Not only the judicial determination

of points which were the subjea of controverly,
but the condu& of all legal business and tranfac.
tions was committed to persons trained by previous
study and application to the knowledge of law.
An order of men, to whom their fellow-citizens
had daily recourse for advice, and to whom they
looked up for decision in their most important
concerns, naturally acquired consideration and in-
fluence in society. They were advanced to ho.
nours which had been confidered as the peculiar
rewards of military virtue. They were entrusted
with offices of the highest dignity, and most exten-
five power. Thus, another profession than that
of arms, came to he introduced among the laity,
and was reputed honourable. The fun&ions of ci-
vil life were attended to. The talents requisite for
discharging them were cultivated. A new road
was opened to wealth and eminence. The arts
and virtues of peace were placed in their proper
rank, and received their due recompence [CC].

The f,,jrit VIII. WHILE improvements so important with
'iofd ,.,ch refpet to the Rate of society and the adminiftra-
me lberal tion ofjufice, gradually made progress in Europe,
ani, mnrc sentiments more liberal and generous had begun
·all e. to animate the nobles. These were inspired by

the spirit of Chivalry, which, though confidered,
commonly, as a wild institution, the effect of

[CC] NOTE XXVI.

caprice,

caprice, and the source of extravagance, arose SECT. L
naturally from, the state of society at that period,
and had a very serious influence in refining the
manners of the European nations. The feudal rigin of
state was a state of perpetual war, rapine, and hiay
anarchy; during which the weak and unarmed
were exposed every moment to insults or injuries.
The power of the sovereign was too limited to
prevent these wrongs; and the administration of
justice too feeble to redress them. There was
scarcely any protection against violence and op-
preflion, but what the valour and generosity of
private persons afforded. The fame spirit ofenter-
prise which had prompted so many gentlemen to
take arms in defence of the oppressed pilgrims in
Palestine, incited others to declare themselves the
patrons and avengers of injured innocence at
home. When the final reduction of the Holy
Land under the dominion of Infidels put an end
to there foreign expeditions, the latter was the
only employment left for the activity and courage
of adventurers. To check the insolence of over-
grown oppressors; to succour the diltreffed; to
rescue the helpless from captivity; to protect, or
to avenge women, orphans, and ecclesiastics, who
could not bear arms in their own defence; to
rcdrcfs wrongs, and to remove grievances were
deemed as of the highest prowess and merit.
Valour, humanity, courtesy, justice, honour, were
the charaeriftic qualities of chivalry. To thele
were added religion, which mingled itself with
every paflion and inflitution during the middle

G 2 ages,

SECT. T. ages, and by infusing a large proportion of enthu.

fialtic zeal, gave them such force, as carried them
to romantic excess. Men were trained to knight-
hood by a long previous discipline; they were
admitted into the order by folemnities no less de-
vout than pompous; every person of noble birth
courted that honour; it was deemed a diftination
superior to royalty; and monarchs were proud to
receive it from the hands of private gentlemen.

Its bene-. THIS singular institution, in which valour, gal-
ialcfftt. lantry, and religion, were so trangely blended,

was wonderfully adapted to the taste and genius
of martial nobles; and its effets were soon visible
in their manners. War was carried on with less
ferocity, when humanity came to be deemed the
ornament of knighthood no less than courage.
More gentle and polished manners were intro-
duced, when courtesy was recommended as the
most amiable of knightly virtues. Violence and
oppression decreased, when it was reckoned meri-
torious to check and to punish them. A fcrupu-
lous adherence to truth, with the moil religious
attention to fulfil every engagement, became the
diftinguilhing characeriftic of a gentleman, be-
cause chivalry was regarded as the school of
honour, and inculcated the most delicate sensibility
with respect to that point. The admiration of
these qualities, together with the high diftintions
and prerogatives conferred on knighthood in every
part of Europe, inspired persons of noble birth on

some

some occasions with a species of military fana- ecTr. r.
ticism, and led them to extravagant enterprises. L'
But they imprinted deeply in their minds the
principles of generosity and honour. These were
Itrengthened by every thing that can affict the
senses, or touch the heart. The wild exploits of
those romantic knights who sallied forth in quest
of adventures, are well known, and have been
treated with proper ridicule. The political and
permanent effeds of the 'spirit of chivalry have
been lets observed. Perhaps, the humanity which
accompanies all the operations of war, the refine-
ments of gallantry, and the point of honour, the
three chief circumftanccs which diftinguiih modern
from ancient manners, may be ascribed in a great
measure to this whimsical institution, seemingly of
little benefit to mankind. The sentiments which
chivalry inspired, had a wonderful influence on
manners and conduct during the twelfth, thir-
teenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth centuries. They
were so deeply rooted, that they continued to
operate after the vigour and reputation of the
intitution itself began to decline. Some confi-
derable tranfaóions, recorded in the following
history, resemble the adventurous exploits of chi-
valry, rather than the well regulated operations
of found policy. Some of the molt eminent per-
fonages, whose characters will be delineated, were
strongly tintured with this romantic spirit. Fran-
cis I. was ambitious to distinguish himself by all
the qualities of an accomplihed knight, and en-

G 3 deavoured

SECT. . deavoured to imitate the enterprising genius of
'L'-' chivalry in war, as well as its pomp and courtesy

during peace. The fame which he acquired by
these splendid a&ions, o far dazzled his more
temperate rival, that he departed on some occa-
sions from his usual prudence and moderation, and
emulated Francis in deeds of prowess, or of gal.
lantry [DD].

The pro. IX. THE progress of science, and the cultiva
grefs of fci.

inc 'as tion of literature, had considerable effea in chang-
naon th'e ing the manners of the European nations, and
nannesc introducing that civility and refinement by which
$nd charac-
twofmen. they are now distinguished. At the time when

their Empire was overturned, the Romans, though
they had loft that corret taste which has rendered
the productions of their ancestors the tandards of
excellence, and models for imitation to succeed-
ing ages, still preserved their love of letters, and

ognonnce cultivated the arts with great ardour. But rude
di ages. barbarians were so far from being struck with any

admiration of these unknown accomplishments,
that they despised them. They were not arrived
at that state of society, when those faculties of the
human mind, which have beauty and elegance
for their objets, begin to unfold themselves.
They were strangers to all those wants and desires
which are the parents of ingenious invention; and
u they did not comprehend either the merit or
utility of the Roman arts, they defftroyed the mo.

[DD] NOTt XXVII.

2 numents

numents of them, with iindifry not inferior to that SECT I.
with which their posterity have since studied to
preserve, or to recover them. The corivulfions
occasioned by their settlement in the Empire ; the
frequent as well as violent revolutions in every
kingdom which they established; together with
the interior defets in the form of government
which they introduced, banilhed security and lei-
sure; prevented the growth of taste, or the culture
of science; and kept Europe, during several cen-
turies, in that slate of ignorance which has been
already described. But the events and inltitutions
which I have enumerated, produced great altera-
tions in society. As Ibon as their operation, in re-
ltoring liberty and independence to one part of the
community, began to be felt; as soon as they be-
gan to communicate to all the members of society
some taste of the advantages arising from com-
merce, from public order, and from personal fecu-
rity, the human mind became conscious of powers
which it did not formerly perceive, and fond of
occupations or puruits of which it was formerly
incapable. Towards the beginning of the twelfth
century, we discern the first symptoms of its
awakening from that lethargy in which it had been
long funk, and observe it turning with curiosity
and attention towards new objecs.

THE first literary eorts, however, of the Euro- The si l-

terary efirt

pean nations in the middle ages, were extremely ili dircd,
ill-direfed. Among nations, as well as individu- ^ndlth
als, the powers of imagination attain ome degree h"

G 4 of

SECT. I. of vigour before the intellectual faculties are much

exercised in speculative or abftrad disquisition.
Men are poets before they are philosophers. They
feel with sensibility, and describe with force, when
they have made but little progress in investigation
or reasoning. The age of Homer and of Hesiod
long preceded that of Thales, or of Socrates. But,
unhappily for literature, our ancestors deviating
from this course which nature points out, plunged
at once into the depths of abstruse and metaphy-
fical inquiry. They had been converted to the
Christian faith, oon after they fettled in their new
conquests. But they did not receive it pure. The
presumption of men had added to the simple and
inftrutive dotrines of Christianity, the theories of
a vain philosophy, that attempted to penetrate into
mysteries, and to decide questions which the li-
mited faculties of the human mind are unable to
comprehend, or to resolve, These over-curious
Speculations were incorporated with the system of
religion, and came to be confidered as the most
essential pa:t of it. As soon, then, as curiosity
prompted men to inquire and to reason, these were
the subje&s which first presented themselves, and
engaged their attention. The scholastic theology,
with its infinite train of bold disquisitions, and sub-
tile distinctions concerning points which are not
the object of human reason, was the first produc-
tion of the spirit of inquiry after it began to re-
fume some degree of activity and vigour in Eu-
rope, It was not this circumstance alone that gave

such

uch a wrong turn to the minds of men, when they SECT. r.
egan again to exercise talents which they had so
ong negle&ed. Most of the persons who attempted
o revive literature in the twelfth and thirteenth
enturies, had received initruition, or derived their
rinciples of science from the Greeks in the eastern
mpire, or from the Arabians in Spain and Africa.
oth there people, acute and inquiistive to excess,
orrupted those sciences which they cultivated.
The former rendered theology a fyilem of fpecu-
lative refinement, or of endless controversy. The
atter communicated to philosophy a spirit of me-
taphyfical and frivolous subtlety. Misled by these
guides, the perlbns who firit applied to cience were
involved in a maze of intricate inquiries. Instead
of allowing their fancy to take its natural range,
and to produce such works of invention as might
have improved their taste, and refined their senti-
ments; inltead of cultivating those arts which em-
bellifh human life, and render it comfortable; they
were fettered by authority, they were led aray
by example, and wafted the whole force of their
genius in speculations as unavailing as they'were
difficult,

BUT fruitless and ill-direted as there fpecula-Th,y hd,

tions were, their novelty rouzed, and their boldness howetr,
interefled the human mind. The ardour with which efrctte.
men pursued those uninviting fludies, was astonish-
ing. Genuine philosophy was never cultivated, in
any enlightened age, with more zeal. Schools, upon
the model of those instituted by Charlemagne,

were

SECT. I. were opened in every cathedral, and almost in
SE~ every monastery of note. Colleges arid univerfi.

ties were erected, and formed into cmmurnities
or corporations, governed by their own laws, and
invested with separate and ettenfve jurifdition
over their 'own members. A regular course of
tfudies was planned. Privileges of great value
Were conferred on matters and scholars. Acade.
mical titles and honours 6f various kinds were in.
vented, as a recompence for both. Nor was it in
the schools alone that superiority in science led to
reputation and authority; it became an object of
refpe& in life, and advanced such as acquired it
to a rank of no inconsiderable eminence. Allured
by all these advantages, an incredible number of
students resorted to those new feats of learning,
and crowded with eagerness into that ew path
which was opened to fame and diftinftion.

A ircum. BUT how considerable soever there firfI efforts
flance which
prevented may appear, there was one circumstance which pre-
ore beitn vented the effecfts of them from being as extensive
veC. as they ought to have been. All the languages in

Europe, during the period under review, were bar.
barous. They were destitute of elegance, of force,
and even of perspicuity. No attempt had been
hitherto made to improve or to polish them. The
Latin tongue was consecrated by the church to re-
ligion. Custom, with authority fcarccly less fa-
cred, had appropriated i t literature. All the
sciences cultivated in the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries, were taught in Latin. All books with

refpet

ft to 'them were wrieh in that lhti'gite. T SECi. r.
ve treated of any important fubje& ih a miodem cr
guage, would have been deemed a degradation
it. This confined science within a very narrow
cle. The learned alone were admitted itb the
pie of knowledge; the gate was shut agi'nft
others, who were allowed to remain involved in
ir former darkness and ignorance.

BUT though science was thus prevented, during Its influece
veral ages, from diffusing itself through society, ermtan.
d its influence much circumscribed; the pro- tntion
res which it made may be mentioned, neverthe-
fs, among the great causes which contributed to
troduce a change of manners into Europe. The
dent, though ill-judged spirit of inquiry which
have described, occasioned a fermentation of mind
at put ingenuity and invention in motion, and
ve them vigour. It led men to a new employment
their faculties, which they found to be agreeable
well as interesting. It accustomed them to ex-
cifes and occupations which tended to soften
eir manners, and to give them some relish for
e gentle virtues, peculiar to nations among
hich science hath been cultivated with success
EE].

X. THE progress of commerce had confiderabfe Thepro.
fluence in polishing the manners of the European mrerce had
ations, and in leading them to order, equal laws, gnce n

mannerr and
tEE] N T XVITI. government.

and

SECT. I. and humanity. The wants of men, in the original
-V~ and most simple state of society, are so few, and

their desires so limited, that they reft contented
with the natural produtions of their climate and
foil, or with what they can add to these by their
own rude induitry. They have no superfluities to
dispose of, and few necessities that demand a sup.
ply. Every little community sublisting on its own
domeftick stock, and satisfied with it, is either un.
acquainted with the flates around it, or at variance

Lown ate of with them. Society and manners must be con.
in the mid- fiderably improved, and many provisions mufi be
die ages made for public order and personal security, before

a liberal intercourse can take place between differ-
ent nations. We find, accordingly, that the firif
effe&t of the settlement of the barbarians in the
Empire, was to divide those nations which the
Roman power had united. Europe was broken
into many separate communities. The intercourse
between these divided fates, ceased almost totally
during several centuries. Navigation was dange.
rous in seas infested by pirates; nor could firan-
gers trust to a friendly reception in the ports of
uncivilized nations. Even between distant parts
of the fame kingdom, the communication was rare
and difficult. The lawless rapine of banditti, to.
gether with the avowed exa&ions of the nobles,
scarcely less formidable and oppressive, rendered
a journey of any length a perilous enterprise. Fixed
to the spot in which they resided, the greater part
of the inhabitants of Europe loft, in a great mea-
sure, the knowledge of remote regions, and were

unacquainted

nacquainted with their names, their situations, SECT. I.
heir climates, and their commodities [FS].

VARIOUS causes, however, contributed to revive clu, of its
he spirit of commerce, and to renew, in some de- ,viv*i.
ree, the intercourse between different nations.
he Italians, by their connetion with Conflanti-
ople and other cities of the Greek empire, had
reserved in their own country some relilh for the
recious commodities and curious manufacures
f the East. They communicated some know-
edge of these to the countries contiguous to Italy.
ut this commerce was extremely limited, nor was
he intercourse which it occasioned between differ-
nt nations considerable. The Crusades, by lead-
ig multitudes from every corner of Europe into
Afa, opened a more extensive communication be-
tween the East and Weft, which subsisted for two
centuries; and though the object of there expe-
ditions was conquest and not commerce; though
the issue of them proved as unfortunate, as the
motives for undertaking them were wild and en-
thufiaftic, their commercial effects, as hath been
hewn, were both beneficial and permanent. Dur-
ing the continuance of the Crusades, the great cities
in Italy, and in other countries of Europe, acquired
liberty, and together with it such privileges as ren-
dered them refpecable and independent commu-
nities. Thus, in every state there was formed a
new order of citizens, to whom commerce pre.
sented itself as their proper objet, and opened to

[FFj NOTE XXIX.

them

SEcT. 1. them a c4rtain path to wealh and dignity. Soon

Y after the cloe of the Holy war, the.rqariner's corn-

pass was invented, which, by rendering navigation
more secure as well as more adventrous, facilitated
the communication between remote nations, and
brought them nearer to each other.
Fir among TH E Italian States, during the fame period, efta-

Italan blifhed a regular commerce with the East in the

ports of Egypt, and drew from thence all the rich
products of the Indies. They introduced into
their own territories manufactures of various kinds,
and carried them on with great ingenuity and vi-
gour. They attempted new arts; and transplanted
from warmer climates, to which they had been
hitherto deemed peculiar, several natural produc-
tions which now furnish the materials of a lucra.
tive and extended commerce. All there commo.
dities, whether imported from Asia, or produced
by their own kill, they disposed of to great ad-
vantage among the other people of Europe, who
began to acquire ome taste of elegance unknown
to their ancetors, or despised by them. During
the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, the commerce
of Europe was almost entirely in the hands of the
Italians, more commonly known in those ages
by the name of Lombards. Companies or fcie-
ties of Lombard merchants fettled in every differ-
et kingdom. They were taken under the inmme-
diate protetijon of the several governments. They
enjoyed extensive privileges and immunities. The
operation of the ancient barbarous lavs, , ..lilltg

;. . .11 1i. ,ei,

frangers, was fipended with refpea to them. SECT..
They became the carriers, the manufacurers, and
the bankers of all Europe.

WHILE the Italians, in the south of Europe, Then by

cultivated trade with such industry and success, H;ciCk.
the commercial spirit awakened in the North to-
wards the middle of the thirteenth century. As the
nations around the Baltick were, at that time, ex-
tremely barbarous, and infested that ea with their
piracies, the cities of Lubeck and Hamburgh,
soon after they began to open ome trade with these
people, found it necefiTry to enter into a league of
mutual defence. They derived such advantages
from this union, that other towns acceded to their
confederacy, and, in a hort time, eighty of the
most cotfiderable cities scattered through those va
countries which stretch from the bottom of the
Baltick to Cologne on the Rhine, joined in the
famous Hanfeatick league, which became so for-
midable, that its alliance was courted, and its en-
mity was dreaded by the greatest monarchs. The
members of this powerful aciation formed the
first fyftematick plan of commerce known in the
middle ages, and conducEed it by common laws
enacted in their general assemblies. They supplied
the reft of urope with naval flores, and pitched
on different towns, he mos eminent of which was
Bruges in Slanders, where they efa1blilhed staples
in which their commerce was regularly carried on.
Thither the ophaard bgogh the pridaitions of

India,

SECT. I. India, together with the manufa&tures of Italy, and
'.' exchanged them for the more bulky, but not less

useful commodities of the North. The Hansea.
tick merchants disposed of the cargoes which they
received from the Lombards, in the ports of the
Baltick, or carried them up the great rivers into
the interior parts of Germany.

Commerce THIS regular intercourse opened between the
mnakes pro.
greisin tc nations in the North and South of Europe, made
Nether-
lands; them sensible of their mutual wants, and created

such new and vast demands for commodities of
every kind, that it excited among the inhabitants
of the Netherlands a more vigorous spirit in car.
rying on the two great manufatures of wool and
flax, which seem to have been considerable in that
country as far back as the age of Charlemagne.
As Bruges became the center of communication
between the Lombard and Hanfeatick merchants,
the Flemings traded with both in that city to such
extent as well as advantage, as spread among them
a general habit of industry, which long rendered
Slanders and the adjacent provinces the most opu.
lent, the most populous, and belt cultivated coun.
tries in Europe.

And in STRUCK with the flourishing state of there pro-
Englnd. vinces, of which he discerned the true cause, Ed-

ward III. of England endeavoured to excite a fpi-
rit of industry among his own fubjeas, who, blind
to the advantages of their situation, and ignorant

of

the source from which opulence was destined S:CT. I.
flow into their country, were so little attentive to --~
eir commercial interets, as hardly to attempt
ofe manufacures, the materials of which they
rnilhed to foreigners. By alluring Flemish arti-
ns to fettle in his dominions, as well as by many
ife laws for the encouragement and regulation of
de, Edward gave a beginning to the woollen
anufac1ures of England, and first turned the ac-
ve and enterprizing genius of his people towards
ofe arts which have raised the English to the
igheft rank among commercial nations.

THIS increase of commerce, and of intercourse The ,erei-
etween nations, how inconiderable soever it may ofl^i.
ppear in refpeEt of their rapid and extensive pro-
refs during the last and present age, seems vast,
hen we compare it with the state of both in Eu-
ope previous to the twelfth century. It did not
ail of producing great effects. Commerce tends
o wear off those prejudices which maintain diltinc-
tion and animosity between nations. It softens and
polishes the manners of men. It unites them by
one of the firongeft of all ties, the desire of sup-
plying their mutual wants. It disposes them to
peace, by eftabli(hing in every state an order of
citizens bound by their interest to be the guardians
of publick tranquillity. As soon as the commercial
spirit begins to acquire vigour, and to gain an as-
cendant in any society, we discover a new genius in
its policy, its alliances, its wars, and its negociations.

VOL. I. H Conspicuous

SECT. I. Conspicuous proofs of this occur in the history of
'*M^~ the Italian States, of the Hanfeatick league, and

the cities of the Netherlands during the period
under review. In proportion as commerce made
its way into the different countries of Europe, they
successively turned their attention to those objects,
and adopted those manners, which occupy and dif.
tinguifh polished nations [GG].

[GG] NOTE XXX.

## SECTION II. View of the Progress of Society in Europe, with respect to the command of the national force requisite in foreign operations.

A
V I E W

OF THE
PROGRESS OF SOCIETY

IN
E U R 0 P E,

EUROPE,

FROM THE
SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,

TO THE
BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

SECTION II.
View of the Progress of Society in Europe, with

refpeI to the command of the national force requi-
Jite in foreign operations.

UCH are the events and institutions, which SECT. 1I.
by their powerful operation contributed, gra- . 7
dually, to introduce more regular government and c.riy ,reatl

improved at

more polished manners into the various nations ofthe begin-
Europe. When we survey the fate of society, or afiegeth
the characer of individuals, at the opening of the ","''

H a fifteenth

SECT. I. fifteenth century, and then turn back to view the
~^^^ condition of both at the time when the barbarous

tribes which overturned the Roman power com-
pleted their settlement in their new conquests, the
progress which mankind had made towards order
and refinement will appear immense.

Still defrc. GOVERNMENT, however, was fill far from ha.
tive with re-
fpefttothe ving attained that tate, in which extensive mo-
command of h ui
the national narchies at with united vigour, or carry on great
force, undertakings with perseverance and success. Small

tribes or communities, even in their rudest state,
may operate in concert, and exert their utmost
force. They are excited to at not by the distant
objecs, or the refined speculations, which interest or
affect men in polished societies, but by their pre-
sent feelings. The insults of an enemy kindle
resentment; the success of a rival tribe awakens
emulation: these palfions communicate from breast
to breast, and all the members of the community,
with united ardour, rush into the field in order to
gratify their revenge, or to acquire diftindion.
But in widely extended states, such as the great
kingdoms of Europe at the beginning of the sis
teenth century, where there is little intercourse
between the distant members of the communi!y,
and where every great enterprize requires previous
concert and long preparation, nothing can rouse
and call forth their united strength, but the abfo-
lute command of a Despot, or the powerful in-
fluence of regular policy. Of the former the vast

Empires

Empires in the East are an example; the irrefift- SCT. If.
ible mandate of the Sovereign reaches the mos
remote provinces of his dominions, and compels
whatever number of his subje&s he is pleased to
summon, to follow his standard. Tie kingdoms
of Europe, in the present age, are an instance of
the latter; the Prince, by the less violent, but no
les effectual operation of laws and a well regu-
lated government, is enabled to avail himself of
the whole force of his state, and to employ it in
enterprizes which require strenuous and perfeve-
ring efforts.

BUT, at the opening of the fifteenth century, The power

ofMonarclil

the political constitution in all the kingdoms of very limit.
Europe was very different from either of these states cd
of government. The several monarchs, though
they had somewhat enlarged the boundaries of pre-
rogative by successful encroachments on the im-
munities and privileges of the nobility, were pof-
sessed of an authority extremely limited. The laws
and interior police of kingdoms, though much im-
proved by the various events and regulations which
I have enumerated, were still feeble and imper-
sect. In every country, a numerous body of no-
bles, who continued to be formidable notwithftand-
ing the various expedients employed to depress
them, watched all the motions of their Sovereign
with a jealous attention, which set bounds to his am.
bition, and either prevented his forming schemes of

H 3 extensive

SECT. II. extensive enterprize, or thwarted the execution
'c_ ' of them.

Their reve- THE ordinary revenues of every Prince were so
nucs lanll. , /

l. extremely iaall as to be inadequate to any great

undertaking. He depended for extraordinary sup.
plies on the good-will of his fubjets, who granted
them often with a reluctant and always with a
sparing hand.

The'r ar- As the revenues of Princes were inconsiderable,
mies unfit
forconquef. the armies which they could bring into the field

were unfit for long and effectual service. Instead
of being able to employ troops trained tp {kill in
arms, and to niilitary subordination, by regular
discipline, Monarchs were obliged to depend on
such forces as their vassals conduced to their
Randard in consequence of their military tenures.
These, as they were bound to remain under arms
only for a ihort time, could not march far from
their usual place of residence, and being more
attached to the lord of whom they held, than to
the Sovereign whom they served, were often as
much disposed to counteract as to forward his
schemes. Nor were they, even if they had been
more subjet to the command of the monarch,
proper instruments to carry into execution any
great and arduous enterprize. The strength of
an army formed either for conquest or defence lies
in infantry. To the liability and discipline of
their legions, confifing chiefly of infantry, the

Romans

iomans during the times of the republick were SiCT. if.
indebted for all their vitories; and when their ^
descendants, forgetting the institutions which had
led them to universal dominion, so far altered their
military system as to place their principal confi-
dence in a numerous cavalry, the undisciplined
impetuosity of the barbarous nations who fought
mostly on foot, was sufficient, as I have already
observed, to overcome them. These nations, soon
after they fettled in their new conquests, unin-
itruced by the fatal error of the Romans, relin-
quifhed the customs of their ancestors, and con-
verted the chief force of their armies into cavalry.
Among the Romans this change was occasioned
by the effeminacy of their troops, who could not
endure the fatigues of service, which their more
virtuous and hardy ancestors sustained with ease.
Among the people who eftablilhed the new mo-
narchies into which Europe was divided, this
innovation in military discipline seems to have
flowed from the pride of the nobles, who scorning
to mingle with persons of inferior rank, aimed at
being distinguished from them in the field as well
as during peace. The institution of chivalry, and
the frequency of tournaments, in which knights,
in complete armour, entered the lifts on horseback
with extraordinary splendour, displaying amazing
address, and force, and valour, brought cavalry
into still greater esteem. The fondness for that
service increased to such a degree, that, during
the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, the armies

I 4 of

SECT. . of Europe were composed almost entirely of ca-

"valry. No gentleman would ppear in the field

but on horfcback. To serve in any dther manner
he would 'have deemed derogatory to his rank.
The cavalry, 'by way of drfin&ticn, was called
The battle, and on it alone depended the fate of
every ation. The infantry, colleceed from the
dregs and refute of the people, ill armed and worse
disciplined, was of no account.

Theyarein. As these circumstances rendered the operations
cfapb.gny of particular kingdoms less considerable and less
2Senra or vigorous, so they long kept the Prindes of Europe
plan of p- from giving such attention 'to the schemes and
ration.

tranfa6tions of their neighbours, as led them to
form any regular system of public security. They
prevented them from uniting in confederacy, or
from acting with concert, in order to establish such
a distribution and balance of power, as hould
hinder any state from riling to a superiority, which
might endanger the general liberty and indepen-
dence. During several centuries, the nations of
Europe appear to have confidered themselves as
separate societies, scarcely connected together by
any common interest, and little concerned in each
others affairs or operations. An extensive com-
merce did not afford them an opportunity of ob-
serving and penetrating into the schemes of every
different state. They had not ambassadors residing
constantly in every court to watch and give early
intelligence of all its motions. The expecation

of

of remote advantages, or the profpe& of distant SECT. II.
and contingent evils, were not sufficient to excite '
nations to take arms. They only, who were
within the sphere of immediate danger, and un-
avoidably exposed to injury or infut, thought
themselves interested in any contest, or bound to
take precautions for their own safety.

WHOEVER records the tranfaftions of any of They were

little con-

the more considerable European states during the nted with
two last centuries, must write the history of Eu-each other.
rope. Its various kingdoms, throughout that
period, have been formed into one great system,
so closely united, that each holding a determinate
station, the operations of one are so felt by all,
as to influence their counsels and regulate their
measures. But previous to the fifteenth century,
unless when vicinity of territory rendered the occa-
lions of discord frequent and unavoidable, or
when national emulation fomented or embittered
the spirit of hostility, the affairs of different coun-
tries are seldom interwoven. In each kingdom of
Europe great events and revolutions happened,
which the other powers beheld with almost the
fame indifference as if they had been uninterested
fpetators, to whom the effect of these transactions
could never extend.

DURING the violent firuggles between ,France A confrml-

thn of this
and England, and notwithitanding the alarming fron the

aflairs of
progress which was made towards rendering one France.

Prince

SECT. I. Prince the master of both there kingdoms, hardly

one measure which can be confidered as the result
of a sagacious and prudent policy, was formed in
order to guard against an event so fatal to Europe.
The Dukes of Burgundy and Bretagne, whom
their situation would not permit to remain neutral,
engaged, it is true, in the contest; but in taking
their part, they seem rather to have followed the
impulse of their paflions, than to have been
guided by any just discernment of the danger
which threatened themselves and the tranquillity
of Europe. The other Princes, seemingly unaf.
feted by the alternate successes of the contending
parties, left them to decide the quarrel, or inter.
posed only by feeble and ineffectual negociations.

From thore NOTWITHSTANDING the perpetual hostilities in
of Sain. which the various kingdoms of Spain were engaged

during several centuries, and the successive occur-
rences which visibly tended to unite that part of
the continent into one great monarchy, the Princes
of Europe scarcely took a single ftep, which dif-
covers that they gave any attention to that impor-
tant event. They permitted a power to arise im-
perceptibly, and to acquire strength there, which
soon became formidable to all its neighbours.

From those AMIDST the violent convulsions with which the
oCGeIM'y, spirit of domination in the See of Rome, and the

turbulent ambition of the German nobles, agitated
the Empire, neither the authority of the Popes,
seconded by all their artifices and intrigues, nor

the

the solicitations of the Emperors, could induce SECT. II.
any of the powerful monarchs in Europe to engage
in their quarrel, or to avail themselves of many
favourable opportunities of interposing with effect
and advantage.

THIS amazing inaetivity, during tranfations so This iac.

tivity occa-
interesting, is not to be imputed to any incapacity soned en-

toicaa by the

of discerning their political consequences. The 'fateofo.
power ofjudging with sagacity, and of acting with "er"n"te
vigour, is the portion of men in every age. The
Monarchs who reigned in the different kingdoms
of Europe during several centuries were not blind
to their particular interest, negligent of the pub-
lick afety, or strangers to the method of securing
both. If they did not adopt that salutary fyflem,
which teaches modern politicians to take the alarm
at the profped of distant dangers, which prompts
them to check the first encroachments of any
formidable power, and which renders each stare
the guardian, in ome degree, of the rights and
independence of all its neighbours, this was owing
entirely to such imperfections and disorders in the
civil government of each country, as made it im-
poflible for sovereigns to a suitably to those ideas
which the posture of affairs, and their own obfer-
vation, must have suggested.

BUT during the course of the fifteenth century, Events hp.

various events happened, which, by giving Princes Is,1S.lt;h
more entire command of the force in their refpec- "it'r,,
tive dominions, rendered their operations more 'rt :"'

vigorous

SECT. II. vigorous and extensive. In consequence of this,
on~re the affairs of different kingdoms becoming more
powerful frequently as well as more intimately conneted,
and extcn-
ive. they were gradually accustomed to at in concert

and confederacy, and were inlinfibly prepared for
forming a system of policy, in order to establish
or to preserve such a balance of power as was most
consistent with the general security. It was du-
ring the reign of Charles the Fifth, that the ideas,
on which this system is founded, first came to be
fully understood. It was then, that the maxims
by which it has been uniformly maintained since
that era were universally adopted. On this ac.
count, a view of the causes and events which con-
tlibuted to establish a plan of policy more salutary
and extensive than any that has taken place in the
conduct of human affairs, is not only a necessary
introdu&ion to the following work, but is a ca.
pital obje& in the history of Europe.

The sirs of THE first event, that occasioned any considerable
thedcpriv alteration in the arrangement of affairs in Europe,
ing'heEng- was the annexation of the extensive territories,
lilh of their
territories which England possessed on the continent, to the
en the con.
tinent, crown of France. While the English were masters

of several of the most fertile and opulent provinces
in France, and a great part of its most martial
inhabitants was bound to follow their standard,
an English monarch confidered himself rather as
the rival, than as the vassal of the overeign of
whom he held. The Kings of France, circum-

fcribed

ribed and thwarted in their schemes and opera- SECT. II.
ions by an adversary no less jealous than formi- tV
dable, durst not venture upon any enterprize of
importance or of difficulty. The English were
always at hand, ready to oppose them. They
Jdilputed even their right to their crown, and being
iable to penetrate, with ease, into the heart of the
kingdom, could arm againit them those very
hands which ought to have been employed in their
defence. Timid counsels, and feeble efforts were
natural to monarchs in such a situation. France,
dismembered and over-awed, could not attain its
proper ifation in the system of Europe. But the
death of Henry V. of England, happily for - rance,
and not unfortunately for his own country, deli-
vered the French from the calamity of having a
foreign master feated on their throne. The weak-
ness of a long minority, the diflenfions in the
Englilh court, together with the unsteady and
languid condu& which these occasioned, afforded
the French a favourable opportunity of recovering
the territories which they had loft. The native
valour of the French nobility heightened to an
enthufiaftick confidence, by a supposed interpo-
fition of heaven in their behalf; conducted in the
field by kilful leaders; and dire&ed in the cabinet
by a prudent monarch; was exerted with such
vigour and success, during this favourable junc.
ture, as not only wrested from the Englith their
new conquests, but stript them of their ancient
poffefions in France, and reduced them within

the

SECT. II the narrow precints of Calais, and its petty ter.

ritory.

The cffea As soon as so many considerable provinces were
es this eon
intre.ing re-united to their dominions, the Kings of France,
the power of o t
the French conscious of this acquisition of strength, began to
monarchy. form bolder schemes of interior policy, as well as

of foreign operations. They immediately became
formidable to their neighbours, who began to fix
their attention on their measures and motions, the
importance of which they fully perceived. From
this era, France, pofeffed of the advantages
which it derives from the situation and contiguity
of its territories, as well as from the number and
valour of its people, rose to new influence in Eu-
rope, and was the firtt power in a condition to
give alarm to the jealousy or fears of the states
around it.

On the ate NOR was France indebted for this increase of
of the mili .
,ary fore in mportance merely to the re-union of the provinces
the nation. which had been torn from it. A circumstance

attended the recovery of these, which, though less
considerable, and less observed, contributed not a
little to give additional vigour and decision to all
the efforts of that monarchy. During the ob-
ftinate struggles between France and England, all
the defects of the military system under the feudal
government were sensibly felt. A war of long
continuance languished, when carried on by troops
bound and accustomcd to keep the field only for

a few

ia few weeks. Armies, composed chiefly of heavy SECT. II.
[armed cavalry, were unfit either for the attack or
the defence of the many towns and castles, which
it became necessary to guard or to reduce. In or-
der to obtain such permanent and effective force,
as became requisite during thee lengthened con-
tests, the Kings of France took into their pay con-
fiderable bands of mercenary soldiers, levied some-
times among their own subje&s, and sometimes in
foreign countries. But as the feudal policy pro-
vided no sufficient fund for such extraordinary ser-
vice, these adventurers were difiniffed at the close
of every campaign, or upon any profpet of ac-
commodation; and having been little accustomed
to the restraints ofdicipline, they frequently turned
their arms against the country which they had been
hired to defend, and desolated it with no less cru-
elty than its foreign enemies.

A BODY of troops kept constantly on foot, and It occfon

1 1 * i * i * r i * * i *the intro-

regularly trained to military subordination, would dution of
have supplied what was wanting in the feudal con-armil'.
ftitution, and have furnished Princes with the
means of executing enterprizes, to which they were
then unequal. Such an establishment, however,
was so repugnant to the genius of feudal policy,
and so incompatible with the privileges and pre-
tensions of the nobility, that during several cen-
turies no monarch was either so bold, or so power-
ful, as to venture on any ftep towards introducing
it. At last, Charles VII. availing himself of the
reputation which he had acquired by his successes

against

SCTr. 11. against the Engliih, and taking advantage of the

- imprefflons of terror which such a formidable enemy

bad left upon the minds of his fubjees, executed
that which his predecessors durst not attempt.
Under pretence of keeping always on foot a force
sufficient to defend the kingdom against any fud-
A. D. 445. den invasion of the English, he, at the time when

he disbanded his other troops, retained under arms
a body of nine thousand cavalry, and of sixteen
thousand infantry. He appropriated funds for the
regular payment of there; he stationed them in
different places of the kingdom, according to his
pleasure; and appointed the officers, who com-
manded and disciplined them. The prime nobi-
lity courted this service, in which they were taught
to depend on their sovereign, to execute his orders,
and to look up to him as the judge and rewarder
of their merit. The feudal militia, composed of
the vassals whom the nobles could call out to fol-
low their standard, as it was in no degree com-
parable to a body of soldiers regularly trained to
war, funk gradually in reputation. The strength
of armies came to be estimated only by the num-
ber of disciplined men which they contained. In
less than a century, the nobles and their military
tenants, though sometimes summoned to the field,
according to ancient form, were confidered as an
incumbrance upon the troops with which they
aced and were viewed with contempt by soldiers
accudtomed to the vigorous and ftady operations
of regular service.

2 THUS

THUS the regulations of Charles the seventh, by SECT. 11.

eftablilhing the first standing army known in Eu-Th ffci
rope, occasioned an important revolution in its0othi
affairs and policy. By depriving the nobles of that
direction of the national military force of the itate,
which had raised them to such high authority and
importance, a deep wound was given to the feudal
aristocracy, in that part where its power seemed to
be most complete.

FRANCE, by forming this body of regular troops,

at a time when there was hardly a squadron or
company kept in constant pay in any other part of
Europe, acquired such advantages over its neigh-
bours, either in attack or defence, that felf-pre-
servation made it necessary for them to imitate its
example. Mercenary troops were introduced into
all the considerable kingdoms on the continent.
They gradually became the only military force that
was employed or trusted. It has long been the
chief objec of policy to increase and to support
them. It has long been the great aim of Princes
and ministers to discredit and to annihilate all other
means of national acivity or defence.

As the Kings of France got the start of other The mo-
powers in ellablifhing a military force in their do- nachs o.

France en.
minions, which enabled them to carry on foreign cougrd to

extend their

operations with more vigour, and to greater ex- preroative.
tent, so they were the first who effecually broke
the feudal aristocracy, and humbled the great vas.

VOL. I. I fals

SECT. II. fals of the crown, who by their exorbitant power

'' T had long circumscribed the royal prerogative with-

in very narrow limits, and had rendered all the
efforts of the monarchs of Europe inconsiderable.
Many things concurred to undermine, gradually,
the power of the feudal aristocracy in France. The
wealth and property of the nobility were greatly
impaired during the long wars which the kingdom
was obliged to maintain with the English. The
extraordinary zeal with which they exerted them.
selves in defence of their country against its an-
cient enemies, exhausted the fortunes of some great
families. As almost every province in the king-
dom was, in its turn, the feat of war, the lands of
others were exposed to the depredations of the
enemy, were ravaged by the mercenary troops
which their sovereigns hired occasionally, but could
not pay, or were desolated with rage still more de.
itrufive by the peasants, in their different infur-
refions. At the fame time, the necessities of go-
vernment having forced their Kings upon the del-
perate expedient of making great and sudden al-
terations in the current coin of the kingdom, the
fines, quit-rents, and other payments fixed by an-
cient custom, funk much in value, and the reve-
nues of a fief were reduced far below the fum which
it had once yielded. During their contests with
the English, in which a generous nobility courted
every station where danger appeared, or honour
could be gained, many families of note became
extinct, and their fiefs were reunited to the crown.
Other fiefs, in a long course of years, fell to female

heirs,

heirs, and were divided among'them; were dimi- SECT. 1.
nifhed by profuse donations to the church, or were
broken and split by the fuccefiion of remote colla-
teral heirs '.

ENCOURAGED by these manifest symptoms of TheprogreC'

of the royal

decline in that body which he wished to depress, powerunder
Charles VII. during the first interval of peace with ChareV"I.
England, made several efforts towards establishing
the regal prerogative on the ruins of the arifto-
cracy. But his obligations to the nobles were so
many, as well as recent, and their services in re-
covering the kingdom so splendid, as made it ne-
ceffary for him to proceed with moderation and
caution. Such, however, was the authority which
the crown had acquired by the progress of its arms
against the English, and so much was the power
of the nobility diminished, that, without any op.
position, he soon made innovations of great confe-
quence in the conRtitution. He not only efta-
blifhed that formidable body of regular troops,
which has been mentioned, but he was the first
monarch of France who, by his royal edit, with.
out the concurrence of the States-general of the AD. 1440.
kingdom, levied an extraordinary subsidy on his
people. He prevailed likewise with his subje&s,
to render several taxes perpetual, which had for-
merly been imposed occasionally, and exacted du-
ring a hort time. By means of all these, he ac-
quired such an increase of power, and extended

' Boulainvilliers Hiloire de Government dc France,
Lcttre xii.

I 2 his

SECT. II. his prerogative so far beyond its ancient limits,
L-Y~ that, from being the most dependent Prince who

had ever fat upon the throne of France, he came
to possess, during the latter years of his reign, a
degree of authority which none of his predecessors
had enjoyed for several ages'.

Under THAT plan of humbling the nobility which
LouisXI. Charles formed, his son Louis XI. carried on with

a bolder spirit, and with greater success. Louis
was formed by nature to be a tyrant; and at what-
ever period he had been called to ascend the throne,
his reign mufl have abounded with schemes to op-
press his people, and to render his own power ab.
solute. Subtle, unfeeling, cruel; a stranger to
every principle of integrity, and regardless of de.
cency, he scorned all the restraints which a sense
of honour, or the desire of fame, impose even upon
ambitious men. Sagacious, at the fame time, to
discern his true interest, and influenced by that
alone, he was capable of pursuing it with a per-
fevering industry, and of adhering to it with a sys-
tematic spirit, from which no obje& could divert,
and no danger could deter him.

His mea. THE maxims of his administration were as pro-
iires fi)r
humbling found as they were fatal to the privileges of the
lity, nobility. He filled all the departments of govern-

ment with new men, and often with persons whom

' Hiftoire de France par Velly & Villaret, tom. xv. 331,

&c. 389. tom. xvi. 34. Variations de la Monarchic Fran-
coife, tom. iii. 16z.

he

he called from the lowest as well as most despised SECT. 1.
functions in life, and raised at pleasure to flations
of great power or trust. These were his only con-
sidents, whom he consulted in forming his plans,
and to whom he committed the execution of them:
While the nobles, accustomed to be the compa-
nions, the favourites, and the ministers of their
sovereigns, were treated with such studied and
mortifying neglet, that if they would not submit
to follow a court, in which they appeared without
any hadow of their ancient power, they were
obliged to retire to their castles, where they re-
mained unemployed and forgotten. Not satisfied
with having rendered the nobles of less confider-
ation, by taking out of their hands the sole direc-
tion of affairs, Louis added insult to neglect; and
by violating their most valuable privileges, endea.
voured to degrade the order, and to reduce the
members of it to the fame level with other sub-
jets. Persons of the highest rank among them,
if so bold as to oppose his schemes, or so unfor-
tunate as to awaken the jealousy of his capricious
temper, were prosecuted with rigour, from which
all who belonged to the order of nobility had
hitherto been exempt; they were tried by judges
who had no right to take cognizance of their
a&ions; and were fubje6ted to torture, or con-
demned to an infamous death, without regard to
their birth or condition. The people, accustomed
to fee the blood of the most illustrious personages
Ihed by the hands of the common executioner, to
behold them Ihut up in dungeons, and carried

1 3 about

SECT, IT. about in cages of iron, began to view the nobility
' . with less reverence than formerly, and looked up

with terror to the royal authority, which seemed to
have humbled or annihilated every other power in
the kingdom.

And ofdi- AT the fame time, Louis, being afraid that op.
them. position might rouze the nobles, whom the rigour

of his government had intimidated, or that seif-
preservation might at last teach them to unite, dex-
teroufly scattered among them the feeds of discord;
and industriously fomented those ancient animo-
fities between the great families, which the spirit
of jealousy and emulation, natural to the feudal
government, had originally kindled and fill kept
alive. To accomplish this, all the arts of intrigue,
all the mysteries and refinements of his fraudulent
policy were employed, and with such success, that
at a junture which required the most trenuous
efforts, as well as the most perfect union, the no-
bles never ated, except during one hort sally of
resentment at the beginning of his reign, either
with vigour or with concert.

He add to As he firipped the nobility of their privileges,
the number
ofnanding he added to the power and prerogative of the
force,.

crown. In order to have at command such a body
of soldiers as might be sufficient to crush any force
that his difaffeted fubjets could draw together,
he not only kept on foot the regular troops
which his father had raised, but took into his pay
fix thousand Swiss, at hat time the best disciplined

2 and

and most formidable infantry in Europe . From SECT. I.
thejealoufy natural to tyrants, he confided in these
foreign mercenaries, as the most devoted inftru-
ments of oppreflion, and the most faithful guar-
dians of the power which he had acquired. That
they might be ready to at on the fhortefl warning,
he, during the latter years of his reign, kept a con-
fidcrable body of them encamped in one place w.

GREAT funds were requisite, not only to defray Heug

ment ihe
the expence of this additional eabliflment, but rcvues of

the Cl ow n.

to supply the fums employed in the various en-
terprizes which the restless aivity of his ge-
nius prompted him to undertake. But the prero-
gative that his father had afiumed of levying taxes
without the concurrence of the ftates-general,
which he was careful not only to retain but to ex-
tend, enabled him to provide in some measure for
the increasing charges of government.

WHAT his prerogative, enlarged as it was, could HWsaddrers

in manig-

not furnish, his address procured. He was theing the a.
first monarch in Europe who discovered the me. tblyO
thod of managing those great assemblies, in which
the feudal policy had vested the power of granting
subsidies and of imposing taxes. He firfl taught
other Princes the fatal art of beginning their
attack on publick liberty, by corrupting the
source from which it should flow. By exerting all

" Mem. de Comines, tom, i. 367. Dan. Hill. de la Milice
Francoise, tom i. i8. 18. Mem. de Com. tom. i. 381.

I 4 his

SECT.II. his power and address in influencing the ele&ion
.-v. of representatives, by bribing or overawing the

members, and by various changes which he art-
fully made in the form of their deliberations,
Louis acquired such entire direEtion of these assem.
blies, that, from being the vigilant guardians of
the privileges and property of the people, he ren.
dered them tamely subservient, in promoting the
most odious measures of his reign x. As no power
remained to set bounds to his exactions, he not
only continued all the taxes imposed by his father,
but made immense additions to them, which
amounted to a fum that appeared astonishing to
his contemporaries Y. *

He enlargs NOR was it the power alone or wealth of the
the bounds
of the crown that Louis increased; he extended its terri.

rcy.h.' tories by acquisitions of various kinds. He got

poffefion of Roufillon by purchase; Provence
was conveyed to him by the will of Charles de
Anjou; and upon the death of Charles the Bold,
he seized with a itrong hand Burgundy and Artois,
which had belonged to that Prince. Thus, du-
ring the course of a ingle reign, France was
formed into one compact kingdom, and the Rfeady
unrelenting policy of Louis XI. not only subdued

x Mem. de Comin. tom. i. 136. Chron. Scandal. ibid.
tom. ii. p. 71. 7 Mem. de Cor. ton.i. 334.

* Charles VII. levied taxes to the amount of ,800,000

francs; Louis Xl. raised 4,700,oco. The former had in pay
9000 cavalry and 16,ooo infantry. The latter augmented the
cavalry to s,ooo, and the infantry to 25,000. Mem. dc
Comines, i. 384.

the

the haughty spirit of the feudal nobles, but efta- SECT. I.
blihed a species of government, scarcely less ab-'
solute, or less terrible, than eastern despotism.

BUT fatal as his administration was to the liber- y all these

the French
ties of his fubjeats, the authority which he ac- government

rendered
quired, the resources of which he became matter, more aive

and nter-

and his freedom from restraint in concerting his pizing.
plans as well as in executing them, rendered his
reign active and enterprizing. Louis negociated
in all the courts of Europe; he observed the
motions of all his neighbours; he engaged, either
as principal, or as an auxiliary, in every great
tranladion; his resolutions were prompt; his ope-
rations vigorous; and upon every emergence he
could call forth into action the whole force of his
kingdom. From the ra of his reign, the Kings
of France, no longer fettered and circumscribed at
home by a jealous nobility, have exerted them-
selves more abroad, have formed more extensive
schemes of foreign conquests, and have carried on
war with a spirit and vigour long unknown in
Europe.

THE example which Louis set was too inviting Steps taken

not to be imitated by other Princes. Henry VII. tnding te
as soon as he was feated on the throne of England, Phowern
formed the plan of enlarging his own prerogative, EnlI"";
by breaking the power of the nobility. The cir-
cumfltances under which he undertook to execute
it, were less favourable than those which induced
Charles VII. to make the fame attempt; and

the

SECT. II. the spirit with which he conducted it, was very
L- different from that of Louis XI. Charles, by the

success of his arms against the English, by the
merit of having expelled them out of so many
provinces, had established himself so firmly in the
confidence of his people, as encouraged him to
make bold encroachments on the ancient confti.
tution. The daring genius of Louis broke through
every barrier, and endeavoured to overturn or to
remove every obstacle that stood in his way. But
Henry held the sceptre by a disputed title; a po.
pular faaion was ready every moment to take
arms against him; and after long civil wars, du-
ring which the nobility had often displayed their
power in creating and deposing Kings, he felt
that the regal authority had been so much relaxed,
and that he entered into possession of a prerogative
so much abridged, as made it necessary to carry
on his measures deliberately, and Without any vio-
lent exertion. He endeavoured to undermine that
formidable ftruture, which he durst not attack
with open force. His schemes, though cautious
and flow in their operation, were well concerted,
and produc&ive in the end of great effects. By
his laws, permitting the barons to break the en-
tails of their estates, and to expose them to sale;
by his regulations to prevent the nobility from
keeping in their service those numerous bands of
retainers, which rendered them formidable, and
turbulent; by encouraging population, agricul-
ture and commerce; by securing to hs' subje&s,
during a long reign, the enjoyment of the bleflings

which

hich flow from the arts of peace; by accuf- SECT. II.
ming them to an administration of government,
nder which the laws were executed with fteadi-
fs and vigour; he made imperceptibly such
terations in the English constitution, that he
nfmitted to his successor authority so extensive,
rendered him one of the most absolute Mo-
achs in Europe, and capable of the greatest and
of vigorous efforts.

IN Spain, the union of all its crowns by the An in
arriage of Ferdinand and Isabella; the glory that SPn.
ey acquired by the conquest of Granada, which
rought the odious dominion of the Moors to a
eriod; the command of the great armies which
had been necessary to keep long on foot, in
rder to accomplish this; the wisdom and fteadi-
ess of their administration; and the address with
hich they availed themselves of every incident
humble the nobility, and to extend their own
rerogative, conspired in raising these monarchs
such eminence and authority, as none of their
redeceffors had ever enjoyed. Though several
aufes, which (hall be explained in another place,
revented their attaining the fame extensive powers
ith the Kings of France and England, and pre.
rved the feudal constitution in Spain longer
ntire, their great abilities supplied the defects of
heir prerogative, and improved with such dex-
erity all the advantages which they possesld, that
erdinand carried on his foreign operations, which

were

SECT.II. were very extensive, with extraordinary vigour

and effect.

Event hap- WHILE thcfe Princes were thus enlarging thei
pened, p t s

hich called boundaries of prerogative, and taking such steps
hon archs t towards rendering their kingdoms capable of act.
exert the ing with union and with force, events occurred,
new powers 0
which they which called them forth to exert the new powers
had acquir-
ed. which they had acquired. These engaged them

in such a series of enterprizes and negociations,
that the affairs of all the considerable nations in
Europe came to be insensibly interwoven with
each other; and a great political system was gra.
dually formed, which grew to be an objet of
universal attention.

The fir of THE first event which merits notice, on account
there events
was the of its influence in producing this change in the
the heirels ate of Europe, was the marriage of the daughter
of the house
of B u- of Charles the Bold, the sole heiress of the house
gundy. of Burgundy. For some years before her father's

death, flie had been confidered as the apparent
successor to his territories, and Charles had made
proposals of marrying her to several different
Princes, with a view of alluring them, by that
offer, to favour the schemes which his relflefs am-
bition was continually forming.

Thelmport- THIS rendered the alliance with her an objedt
a'ce of thi of general attention; and all the advantages of
to the fate
olEurope. acquiring poffellion of her territories, the nmot

opulent at that time and best cultivated of any on

this

is fide of the Alps, were perfectly underifood. SECT. Ir.
s oon, then, as the untimely death of Charles' *
pened the succession, the. eyes of all the Princes

Europe were turned towards Mary, and they A.D. 1477.
it themselves deeply interested in the choiceJanuIry 5s
hich he was about to make of the person, on
hom she would bestow that rich inheritance.

Louis XI. from whose kingdom several of the View of
rovinces which he pofreffed had been difmem- with rcfpa
ered, and whose dominions itretched along the oit
ontier of her territories, had every inducement
o court her alliance. He had, likewise, a good
ite to expect the favourable reception of any
eafonable proposition he hould make, with refpet
o the disposal of a Princess, who was the vassal
f his crown, and descended from the royal blood
f France. There were only two propoftions,
owever, which he could make with propriety.
he one was the marriage of the Dauphin, the
ther that of the Count of Angouleme, a Prince
f the blood, with the heiress of Burgundy. By
he former, he would have annexed all her terri-
ories to his crown, and have rendered France at
once the mofi refpesable monarchy in Europe.
But the great disparity of age between the two
parties, Mary being twenty, and the Dauphin
only eight years old; the avowed resolution of the
Flemings, not to chufe a master possessed of such
power as might enable him to form schemes dan-
gerous to their liberties; together with their dread
of falling under the odious and oppressive govern-

ment

SECT. II. ment of Louis, were obstacles in the way of exe.

"-- cuting this plan, which it was vain to think of

surmounting. By the latter, the accomplishment
of which might have been attained with cafe, Mary
having discovered some inclination to a match with
the Count of Angouleme , Louis would have
prevented the dominions of the house of Burgundy
from being conveyed to a rival power, and in
return for such a splendid establishment for the .4
Count of Angouleme, he must have obtained, or
would have extorted from him concessions highly
beneficial to the crown of France. But Louis had
been accustomed so long to the intricacies of
crooked and insidious policy, that he could not be
satisfied with what was obvious and simple; and
was so fond of artifice and refinement, that he
came to confider these as his ultimate objec, not
as the means only of condu&ing affairs. From
this principle, no less than from his unwillingnes
to aggrandize any of his own fubjets, or from his
desire of oppressing the house of Burgundy, which
he hated, he negle&ed the course which a Prince
less able and artful would have taken, and fol.
lowed one more suited to his own genius.

The ingu. HE proposed to render himself, by force of arms,
,itourfe master of those provinces which Mary held of
which he
followed. the crown of France, and even to push his con-

quests into her other territories, while he amused
her with insisting continually on the impracticable
match with the Dauphin. In prosecuting this

z Mem. de Comines, i. 358lan

pln,

fan, he displayed wonderful talents and industry, SECT. II.
d exhibited such scenes of treachery, falsehood ' "
d cruelty, as are amazing even in the history
fLouis XI. Immediately upon the death of
harles, he put his troops in motion, and ad.
anced towards the Netherlands. He corrupted
e leading men in the provinces of Burgundy and
rtois, and seduced them to deferr their sovereign,
e got admission into some of the frontier towns
y bribing the governors; the gates of others were
ened to him in consequence of his intrigues
ith the inhabitants. He negociated with Mary;
d, in order to render her odious to her fubjeds,
betrayed to them her most important secrets.
e carried on a private correspondence with the
o ministers whom she chiefly trusted, and then
mmunicated the letters which he had received
om them to the States of Slanders, who, enraged
their perfidy, brought them immediately to
ial, tortured them with extreme cruelty, and,
moved by the tears and intreaties of their fove-
ign, who knew and approved of all that the
inifters had done, they beheaded them in her
refence

WHILE Louis, by this conduct, unworthy of a The effre
eat monarch, was securing the pofleffion of ma'r.l'ef
urgundy, Artois, and the towns on the Somme, wiJte l"e
e States of Slanders carried on a negociation ,',',y.f
rith the Emperor Frederick III. and concluded a A. L). 47.
yeaty of marriage between their sovereign and his
* Mem, de Comine,, liv. v. ch. . p. 309, &c.

son

SzcT. II. son Maximilian, Archduke of Austria. The il.
'4-"l luftrious birth of that Prince, as well as the high

dignity of which he had the profpe&, rendered
the alliance honourable for Mary, while, from
the distance of his hereditary territories, and the
scantiness of his revenues, his power was so incon.
fiderable as did not excite the jealousy or fear of
the Flemings.

The inrfu. THUS Louis, by the caprice of his temper, and
ence of that
on the fte the excess of his refinements, put the house of

Europe. Austria in possession of this noble inheritance.

By this acquisition, the foundation of the future
grandeur of Charles V. was laid; and he became
master of those territories, which enabled him to
carry on his mot formidable and decisive opera-
tions against France. Thus, too, the fame mo-
narch who firlf united the interior force of France,
and established it on such a footing as to render
it formidable to the reft of Europe, contributed,
far contrary to his intention, to raise up a rival
power, which, during two centuries, has thwarted
the measures, opposed the arms, and checked the
progress of his fucceflbrs.

The next TiHE next event of consequence in the fifteenth
considerable
cvent was century, was the expedition of Charles VIII. into
the invasion
ofaly by Italy. This occasioned revolutions no less me-
Charle
Vmi'L. morable; produced alterations, which were more
A.D. 1494 immediately perceived, both in the military and

political fyflem; rouzed the tates of Europe to
bolder efforts; and blended their affairs and

intertits

interests more closely together. The mild admi- SECT.Ir.
niftration of Charles, a weak but generous Prince, The motiv
seems to have revived the spirit and genius of°this.
the French nation, which the rigid defpotifin of
Louis XI. his father had depressed, and almost
extinguished. The ardour for military service,
natural to the French nobility, returned, and their
young monarch was impatient to distinguish his
reign by some splendid enterprize. While he was
uncertain towards what quarter he Ihould turn his
arms, the solicitations and intrigues of an Italian
politician, no less infamous on account of his
crimes, than eminent for his abilities, determined
his choice. Ludovico Sforza, having formed the
design of deposing his nephew the duke of Milan,
and of placing himself on the ducal throne, was
so much afraid of a combination of the Italian
powers to thwart this measure, and to support the
injured Prince, with whom most of them were
connected by blood or alliance, that he saw the
neceflity of securing the aid of some able pro-
teEtor. The King of France was the person to
whom he applied; and without dilclofing to him
his own intentions, he laboured to prevail with
him to march into Italy, at the head of a powerful
army, in order to seize the crown of Naples, to
which he had pretensions as heir of the house of
Anjou. The right to that kingdom, claimed by
the Angevin family, had been conveyed to Louis
XI. by Charles of Anjou, count of Maine and
Provence. But that sagacious monarch, though
he took immediate poffeflion of those territories of

VOL. 1. K which

SlCT. IT which Charles was really master, totally disregarded
11-- his ideal title to a kingdom, over Which another

Prince reigned in tranquillity; and uniformly de-
clined involving himself in the labyrinth of Italian
politicks. His son, more adventurous, or more
inconsiderate, embarked eagerly in this enterprize;
and contemning all the remonstrances of his most
experienced counsellors, prepared to carry it on
with the utmost vigour.

Hisrerour. THE power which Charles possesed was so
ces for this
enterprize. great, that he reckoned himself equal to this ar.

duous undertaking. sHis father had transmitted
to him such an ample prerogative, as gave him
the entire command of his kingdom. He himfdlf
had added considerably to the extent of his do-
minions, by his prudent marriage with the heiress
of Bretagne, which rendered him master of that
province, the last of the great fiefs that remained
to be annexed to the crown. He soon assembled
forces which he thought sufficient; and so impa-
tient was he to enter on his career as a conqueror,
that sacrificing what was real, for what was chime-
rical, he restored Roufillon to Ferdinand, and
gave up part of his father's acquisitions in Artois
to Maximilian, with a view of inducing thcfe
Princes not to molest France, while he was carry-
ing on his operations in Italy.

Pi- prrpara. BUT so different were the efforts of the States
tin' orit. of Europe in the fifteenth century, from those

which

which we hall behold in the course of this hiflory, SECT. If.
that the army, with which Charles undertook this '
great enterprize, did not exceed twenty thousand
men. The train of artillery, however, the am-
munition, and warlike stores of every kind pro-
vided for its use, were so considerable as to bear
some resemblance to the immense apparatus of
modern war b

WHEN the French entered Italy, they met with ts uccef.

nothing able to reift them. The Italian powers
having remained, during a long period, undif-
turbed by the invasion of any foreign enemy, had
formed a system with refpe to their affairs, both
in peace and war, peculiar to themselves. In
order to adjust the interests, and balance the power
of the different states into which Italy was divided,
they were engaged in perpetual and endless nego-
ciations with each other, which they conducted
with all the subtlety of a refining and deceitful
policy. Their contests in the field, when they
had recourse to arms, were decided in mock bat-
tles, by innocent and bloodless victories. Upon
the first appearance of the danger which now im-
pended, they had recourse to the arts which they
had tfudied, and employed their utmost Ikill in
intrigue in order to avert it. But this proving
ineffeaual, their effeminate mercenaries, the only
military force that remained in the country, being
fit only for the parade of service, were terrified

h Mezeray Hilt, tom. ii. 777.

K 2 at

SFtT. . at the aspef of real war, and hrunk at its ap

proach. The impetuosity of the French valour
appeared to them irresistible. Florence, Pisa, and
Rome opened their gates as the French army
advanced. The prospect of this dreadful invasion
struck one King of Naples with such panic terror,
that he died (if we may believe hifforians) of the
fright. Another abdicated his throne from the
fame pufilanimous spirit. A third fled out of
his dominions, as soon as the enemy appeared on
the Neapolitan frontiers. Charles, after marching
thither from the bottom of the Alps, with as
much rapidity, and almost as little opposition, as
if he had been on a progress through his on
dominions, took quiet possession of the throne of
Naples, and intimidated or gave law to every
power in Italy.

i 'stefl SUCH was the conclusion of this expedition,
p3rt c". rly
in livRg which muff be confidered as the first great exertion
life to t he
yvn, n con. of those new powers which theiPrinces of Europe
balanceof had acquired, and now began to exercifc. Its
po"er. effecs were no less considerable than its fuccels

had been aftonifling. The Italians, unable to
relift the iniprefion of the enemy which broke in
upon them, permitted him to hold on his courlc
undisturbed. They quickly perceived that no
single power, which they could route to aon,
was an equal match for a monarch, who ruled
over such extensive territories, and was at the
head of such a martial people; but that a confe-

ideracy

deracy might accomplish what the separate mem- SECT. Ir.
bers of it drft not attempt. To this expedient, -'
the only one that remained to deliver or to pre-
serve them from the yoke, they had recourse.
While Charles inconsiderately wafted his time at
Naples in festivals and triumphs on account of
his past successes, or was fondly dreaming of fu-
ture conqucfts in the East, to the empire of which
he now aspired, they formed againfl him a power-
ful combination of almot all the Italian states,
supported by the Emperor Maximilian, and Ser-
dinand King of Aragon. The union of so many
powers, who suspended or forgot all their parti-
cular animofities, that they might a with con-
cert against an enemy who had become formidable
to them all, awakened Charles from his thought-
less security. He saw now no profpet of safety
but in returning to France. An army of thirty
thousand men, aembled by the allies, was ready
to obstruct his march; and though the French,
with a daring courage, which more than counter-
balanced their inferiority in number, broke through
that great body, and gained a victory, which
opened to their monarch a safe plige into his
own territories, he was itripped of all his con-
quefis in Italy in as flort a time as it had taken
to acquire them; and the political fyflem in that
country resumed the fame appearance as before his
invasion.

THE sudden and decisive effct of this confe-
deracy, seems to have instructed the Princes and

K 3 ftatefien

AsCT. I. statesmen of Italy as much as the irruption of the
Thi, be- French had disconcerted and alarmed them. They
comes the had extended, on this occasion, to the affairs of
great obje&
of policyt Europe, the maxims of that political science which
sirs ll italv,
andthen in had hitherto been applied only to regulate the ope-

rations of the petty states in their own country.
They had discovered the method of preventing any
monarch from rising to such a degree of power, as
was inconsistent with the general liberty; and had
manifested the importance of attending to that
great secret in modern policy, the preservation of
a proper distribution of power among all the mem.
bers of the system into which the states of Europe
are formed. During all the wars of which Italy
from that time was the theatre, and amidst the
hostile operations which the imprudence of
Louis XII. and the ambition of Feidinand of Ara-
gon, carried on in that country, with little inter.
ruption, from the close of the fifteenth century
to that period at which the subsequent history
commences, the maintaining a proper balance of
power between the contending parties, became the
great object of attention to the statesmen of Italy.
Nor was the idea confined to them. Self-prefer-
vation taught other powers to adopt it. It grew
to be fahionable and universal. From this era we
can trace the progress of that intercourse between
nations, which has linked the powers of Europe so
closely together; and can discern the operations of
that provident policy, which, during peace, guards
againfi remote and contingent dangers; which

in

in war, hath prevented rapid and deftru&ive SECc.. II.
conquests.

THIS was not the only effe& of the operations Thears

Italy r eneer

which the great powers of Europe carried on in n.,n'inR.r-
Italy. They contributed to render geheral such a l i""C
change, as the French had begun to make in the
state of their troops; and obliged all the I'rinces,
who appeared on this new theatre of ation, to
establish the military frce of their kingdoms on
the fame footing with that of France. When the
feat of war came to be remote from the countries
which maintained the contest, the service of the
feudal vassals ceased to be of any use; and the ne-
ceflity of employing troops regularly trained to
arms, and kept in constant pay, came at once to
be evident. When Charles marched into Italy,
his cavalry was entirely composed of those com-
panies of Gendarmes, embodied by Charles VII.
and continued by Louis XI. his infantry consisted
partly of Swiss, hired of the Cantons, and partly
of Gascons, armed and disciplined after the Swiss
model. To these Louis XII. added a body of
Germans, well known in the wars of Italy by the
name of the Black Bands. But neither of thcle
monarchs made any account of the feudal militia,
or ever had recourse to that military force which
they might have commanded, in virtue of the an-
cient institutions in their kingdom. Maximilian
and Ferdinand, as soon as they began to at in Italy,
employed the fame instruments, and trusted the

K 4 execution

SecT. 1. execution of their plans entirely to mercenary

troops,

Teach the THIS innovation in the military system was
:uropeans
th- ruFe.ior quickly followed by another, which the custom of

ipnfantry employing Swiss in the Italian wars, was the occa-
Di war. sion of introducing. The arms and discipline of

the Swiss, were different from those of other Euro-
pean nations. During their long and violent ftrug-
gles in defence of their liberties against the houi:
of Austria, whose armies, like thole of other con-
fiderable Princes, confilted chiefly of heavy-armed
cavalry, the Swiss found that their poverty, and
the small number of gentlemen residing in their
country, at that time barren and ill cultivated, put
it out of their power to bring into the field any
body of horse capable of sicing the enemy. Ne-
ceflity compelled them to place all their confidence
in infantry; and in order to render it capable of
withllanding the shock of cavalry, they gave the
soldiers brealt-plates and helmets as defcnfive ar-
mour; together with long spears, halberts, and
heavy swords, as weapons of offence. They formed
them into large battalions, ranged in deep and
close array, to that they could present on every ide
a formidable front to the enemy . The men at
arms could make no impreflion on the solid strength
of such a body. It repulsed the Austrians in all
their attempts to conquer Swifferland. It broke
the Burgundian Gendarmerie, which was scarcely
inferior to that of France, either in nmber or re.

c Machiarcl Art of War, b. ii. chap. ii .
p. 45.

putation;

putation: And when first called to aft in Italy, it SECT. I.
bore down by its irresistible force every enemy that ">
attempted to oppose it. These repeated proofs of
the decisive effect of infantry, exhibited on such
conspicuous occasions, restored that service to re-
putation, and gradually re-established the opinion,
which had been long exploded, of its superior im-
portance in the operations of war. But the glory
which the Swiss had acquired, having inspired them
with such high ideas of their own prowess and
consequence as frequently rendered them mutinous
and insolent, the Princes who employed them be-
came weary of depending on the caprice of foreign
mercenaries, and began to turn their attention to-
wards the improvement of their national infantry.

THE German powers having the command of Ntionalin.

men, whom nature has endowed with that steady fj"Y n '
courage and persevering strength which forms them Gc"rany"
to be soldiers, soon modelled their troops in 'uch
a manner, that they vied with the Swiis both in
difcipiine and valour.

THE French monarchs, though more slowly, and In France.

with greater difficulty, accustomed the impetuous
spirit of their people to subordination and difci-
pline; and were at lich pains to render their na-
tional infantry refpetable, that as early as the
reign of Louis XII. fveral gentlemen of high
rank had so far abandoned their ancient ideas, as
to condescend to enter into that service d

Brantome, tom. x. p. 18. Mem. de Flcuranges, 143.

THE

SECT. II. THE Spaniards, whose situation made it difficult
i Spain. to employ any other than their national troops in

the southern parts of Italy, which was the chief
scene of their operations in that country, not only
adopted the Swiss discipline, but improved upon it,
by mingling a proper number of soldiers, armed
with heavy muskets, in their battalions; and thus
formed that famous body of infantry, which, during
a century and a half, was the admiration and ter-
ror of all Europe. The Italian states gradually
diminiflhed the number of their cavalry, and, in
imitation of their more powerful neighbours,
brought the strength of their armies to consist in
foot soldiers. From this period, the nations of
Europe have carried on war with forces more
adapted to every species of service, more capable
of acting in every country, and better fitted both
for making conqueffs, and for preserving them.

The Italian As their efforts in Italy led the people of Europe
on ,, in to these improvements in the art of war, they gave
publickf r them likewise the first idea of the expence which
enues in accompanies great and continued operations, and

accustomed them to the burden of those impofi-
tions, which are necessary for supporting them.
While the feudal policy subsisted in full vigour,
while armies were composed of military vassals
called forth to attack rome neighbouring power,
and to perform, in a hort campaign, the services
which they owed to their sovereign, the expence
of war was extremely moderate. A small subsidy
enaled a Prince to begin and to finilh his greatest

operations.

operations. But when Italy became the theatre on SECT. It.
which the powers of Europe contended for fupe- "
riority, the preparations requisite for such a distant
expedition, the pay of armies kept conflantly on
foot, their subsistence in a foreign country, the
sieges to be undertaken, and the towns to be de-
fended, swelled the charges of war immensely, and
by creating demands unknown in less active times,
multiplied taxes in every kingdom. The progrels
of ambition, however, was so rapid, and Princes
extended their operations so fait, that it was im-
possible at first to establish funds proportional to
the increase of expence which these occasioned.
When Charles VIII. invaded Naples, the fums re-
quifite for carrying on that enterprize so far ex-
ceeded those which France had been accustomed
to contribute, that before he reached the frontiers
of Italy, his treasury was exhausted, and the do-
meflic resources, of which his extensive preroga-
tive gave him the command, were at an end. As
he durfl not venture to lay any new imposition on
his people, oppressed already with the weight of
unusual burdens; the only expedient that remained
was, to borrow of the Genoese as much money as
might enable him to continue his march. But he
could not obtain a sufficient fum, without con-
senting to pay annually the exorbitant interest
of forty-two livres for every hundred that he
received c. We may observe the fame difpropor.
tion between the efforts and revenues of other

Mem. d Cominea, lib. vii. c. . p. 4o.

Princes,

SECT. II Princes, his contemporaries. From this period,

taxes went on increasing; and during the reign of
Charles V. such fums were levied in every state,
as would have appeared prodigious at the close of
the fifteenth century, and gradually prepared the
way for the more exorbitant exacions of modern
times.

The league THE last tranfa&ion, previous to the reign of
oCamrcythr Charles V. that merits attention on account of its
portant oc- influence upon the state of Europe, is the league
-urrence.

of Cambray. To humble the republick of Venice,
and to divide its territories, was the object of all
the powers who united in this confederacy. The
civil conltitution of Venice, eablifhed on a firm
bais, had suffered no considerable alteration for
several centuries; during which, the senate con-
ducted its affairs by maxims of policy no less pru-
dent than vigorous, and adhered to there with an
uniform confident spirit, which gave that common-
wealth great advantage over other states, whose
views and measures changed as often as the form
of their government, or the persons who admini.
ftered it. By there unintermitted exertions of wist
dom and valour, the Venetians enlarged the domi-
nions of their commonwealth, until it became tle
mod considerable power in Italy. While their ex-
tensive commerce, the useful and curious manufac-
tures which they carried on, together with their
monopoly of the precious commodities of the East,
rendered Venice the most opulent ltate in Europe.

THiEIR

THEIR power was the object of terror to their SECT. IT.

Italian neighbours. Their wealth was viewed with The-
envy by the greatest monarchs, who could not vie tivsofit.
with their private citizens in the magnificence of
their buildings, in the richness of their dress and
furniture, or in splendor and elegance of living .
Julius II. whose ambition was superior, and his abi-
lities equal, to those of any Pontiff who ever fat
on the Papal throne, formed the idea of this league
against the Venetians, and endeavoured, by apply-
ing to these passions which I have mentioned, to
persuade other Pinces to join in it. By working
upon the fears of the Italian powers, and upon the
avarice of the monarchs beyond the Alps, he in-
duced them, in concurrence with other causes,
which it is not my province to explain, to form one
of the most extensive confederacies againif those
haughty republicans, that Europe had ever beheld.

THE Emperor, the King of France, the King The rapid

progress of

of Aragon, the Pope, were principals in the league tle confe.
of Cambray, to which almost all the Princes of derat"
Italy acceded, the leafl considerable of them ho-
ping for some share in the spoils of a slate, which
they already deemed to be devoted to deftruion.
The Venetians might have diverted this storm, or
have broken its force; but with a presumptuous
ralhnefs, to which there is nothing similar in the
course of their history, they waited its approach.
The impetuous valour of the French, rendered

[ Heliani oratio apud Goldaflum in polit. Imperial. p. 980.

ineffectual

SECT. 11. ineffedual all their precautions for the safety of the
'^~^' republick; and the fatal battle of Ghiarradadda

entirely ruined the army, on which they relied for
defence. Julius seized all the towns which they
held in the ecclesiastical territories. Ferdinand re.
annexed the towns of which they had got poffeflion
on the coast of Calabria, to his Neapolitan domi-
nions. Maximilian, at the head of a powerful
army, advanced towards Venice on the one fide.
The French pushed their conquests on the other.
The Venetians, surrounded by so many enemies,
and left without one ally, funk from the height of
presumption to the depths of despair; abandoned
all their territories on the continent; and hut
themselves up in their capital, as their last refuge,
and the only place which they hoped to preserve.

Div,;ron THIS rapid success, however, proved fatal to the
,ari am confederacy. The members of it, united while
them.

they were engaged in seizing their prey, began to
feel their ancient jealousy and animofities revive,
as oon as they had a prospect of dividing it. When
the Venetians observed these symptoms of aliena-
tion and distrust, a ray of hope broke in upon
them ; the spirit natural to their councils returned;
they resumed such wisdom and firmness, as made
some atonement for their former imprudence and
dejeaion ; they recovered part of the territory
which they had loft; they appeased the Pope and
Ferdinand by well-timed concefflons in their fa-
vour; and at length dissolved the confederacy,

2 which

which had brought their commonwealth to the SECT. IL
brink of ruin. ,

JULIUs, elated with beholding the effects of a e.robjeau

league which he himself had planned, and ima- if'hae'nPo
gining that nothing was too arduous for him to ition.
undertake, conceived the idea of expelling every
foreign power out of Italy, and bent all the force
of his mind towards executing a scheme so well
suited to his vast and enterprizing genius. He
dire&ed his first attack against the French, who,
on many accounts, were more odious to the Ita-
lians, than any of the foreigners who had acquired
dominion in their country. By his aivity and
address, he prevailed on most of the powers, who
had joined in the league of Cambray, to turn
their arms against the King of France, their for-
mer ally; and engaged Henry VIII. who had
lately ascended the throne of England, to favour
their operations by invading France. Louis XII.
resifted all the efforts of this formidable and unex-
pected confederacy, with undaunted fortitude. Io-
itiliries were carried on, during several campaigns,
in Italy, on the frontiers of Spain, and in Picardy,
with alternate fuccets. Exhausted, at length, by
the variety as well as extent of his operations;
unable to withifand a confederacy which brought
against him superior force, conducted with wisdom,
and ating with perseverance; Louis found it ne-
ceffary to conclude separate treaties of peace with

his

SECT. II. his enemies and the war terminated with the loss
' r' of every thing which the French had acquired in

Italy, except the castle of Milan, and a few incon.
fiderable towns in that dutchy.

By this the THE various negociations carried on during this
intercoiirfe
among the busy period, and the different combinations formed
European
nations in. among powers hitherto little connected with each
reats"' other, greatly increased that intercourse between

the nations of Europe, which I have mentioned
as one effect of the events in the fifteenth century.
While the greatness of the objects at which they
aimed, the distant expeditions which they under-
took, as well as the length and obstinacy of the
contests in which they engaged, obliged them to
exert themselves with a vigour and perseverance
unknown in the preceding ages.

They are THOSE acive scenes which the following History
prepared for
the tranf- will exhibit, as well as the variety and importance
thefixtrnthl of those tranfacions which diftinguifl the period
entury. to which it extends, are not to be ascribed solely

to the ambition, to the abilities, or to the rival.
ship of Charles V. and of Francis I. The king-
doms of Europe had arrived at such a degree or
improvement in the internal administration of go-
vernment, and Princes had acquired such com-
mand of the national force which was to be ex-
erted in foreign wars, that they were in a condition
to enlarge the sphere of their operations, and to

increafl

increase the vigour of their efforts. Their con- SECT. Ir.
tests in Italy, which led them first to try the extent
of the power that they had acquired, gave rife to
so many opposite claims and pretensions, excited
such a spirit of discord and rivalfhip between na-
tions, and laid the foundation of so many quarrels,
as could not fail of producing extraordinary con-
vulflons in Europe. Accordingly the sixteenth
century opened with the certain profpec of its
abounding in great and interesting events.

VOL. . I, A VIEW

## SECTION III. View of the political Constitution of the principal States in Europe, at the Commencement of the sixteenth Century.

V I E W

OF THE
PROGRESS OF SOCIETY

IN
EUROPE,

FROM THE
SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,

TO THE
BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

SECTION III.
Iiew of the political Constitution of the principal

States in Europe, at the Commencement of the
sixteenth Century.

SECT. III. L A V I N G thus enumerated the principal
C -. ii. causes and events, the influence of which
A confid-r-
ablevariety extended to all the states in Europe, and contli-
in the cor-
Ditutionof buted either to improve their inernal government
th^in ont and police, or to enlarge the sphere of their ai-
E'"<>p vity, and to augment their national force; nothing

remains, in order to prepare my readers for enter-

2 ing

ing with full information upon perusing the His- SECT.IIr.
tory of the Reign of Charles V. but to give some "^"
view of the particular constitution and form of
civil government, in each of the nations which
aced any considerable part during that period.
While the institutions and occurrences, which I have
endeavoured to illustrate, formed the people of Eu-
rope to resemble each other, and conduced them
from barbarism to refinement, in the fame path, and
with almost equal steps, there were other circum-
stances which occasioned a difference in their poli-
tical establishments, and gave rife to those peculiar
modes of government, which have produced such
variety in the character and genius of nations.

rI is no less necessary to become acquainted Neceflary to

explain the

with the latter, than to have contemplated the ofeach,
former. The view which I have exhibited of the he" v
causes and events, whose influence was universal, 'bgan hi,

reign.

will enable my readers to account for the furpri-
sing resemblance among the nations of Europe in
their interior police, and foreign operations. But,
without a diftint knowledge of the peculiar form
and genius of their civil government, a great part
of their transactions must appear altogether myfle-
rious and inexplicable. The hitorians of parti-
cular States, as they seldom extended their views
farther than to the amusement or instruCtion of
their fellow-citizens, by whom they might pre-
lume that all domeftick customs and inflitutions
were perfectly understood, have often negle&ed to

L 2 dcfcend

SECT.ITT. descend into such details with refpe&t to these, as

are sufficient to convey to foreigners full light and
information concerning the occurrences which they
relate. But a history, which comprehends the
transactions of so many different countries, would
be extremely imperfect, without a previous survey
of their refpetive confitutions and political itate.
It is from his knowledge of theft, that the reader
muff draw those principles, which will enable him
to judge with discernment, and to decide with
certainty concerning the conduct of nations.

A MINUTE detail, however, of the peculiar

forms and regulations in every country, would
lead to deductions of immeasurable length. To
sketch out the great lines which diffinguifh and
characterize each government, is all that the na-
ture of my present work will admit of, and all
that is necessary to illustrate the events which
it records.

The slate AT the opening of the sixteenth century, the
of Itay. political face of Italy was extremely different from

that of any other part of Europe. Instead of
those extensive monarchies, which occupied the
reft of the continent, that delightful country was
parcelled out among many small states, each of
which possessed sovereign and independent juril-
diction. IThe only monarchy in Italy was that of
Naples. The dominion of the Popes was of
peculiar species, to which there is nothing fimil!r
either in ancient or modern times. In Venice and

Florence,

Florence, a republican form of government was SECT. IF.
established. Milan was fubjeEt to sovereigns, who
had assumed no higher title than that of Dukes.

THE Pope was the first of these powers in dig- Tie Pial

dini the

nity, and not the least considerable by the extent i,h'-,
of his territories. In the primitive church, the EurtFc.
jurifdition of bishops was equal and co-ordinate.
They derived, perhaps, some degree of conide-
ration from the dignity of the See in which they
presidcd. They poPcffed, however, no real au-
thority or pre-eminence, but what they acquired
by superior abilities, or superior fancity. As
Rome had so long been the feat of Empire, and
capital of the world, its bishops were on that Or.sn and

progrels of

account entitled to refpet; they received it; but tie Papal
during several ages they claimed and received no- powcr.
thing more. From these humble beginnings, they
advanced with such an adventurous and well-
direaed ambition, that they eftablifled a piritual
dominion over the minds and sentiments of men,
to which all Europe submitted with implicit obe-
dience. Their claim of universal jurildiicion, as
heads of the church, and their pretensions to in-
fallibility in their decisions, as fucceflors of St.
Peter, are as chimerical, as they are repugnant to
the genius of the Christian religion. But on thelie
foundations, the tiperftition and credulity of man-
kind enabled them to erec an amazing liper-
ftruaure. In all ecclesiastical controversies, their
decisions were received as the infallible oracles of
truth. Nor was the plenitude of their power con-

L 3 fined

SCT. III. fined to there alone; they dethroned monarchs;
'*T'- disposed of crowns; absolved subjes from the

obedience due to their sovereigns; and laid king-
doms under interdicts. There was not a state in
Europe which had not been disquieted by their
ambition. There was not a throne which tey
had not shaken; nor a Prince, who did not trem-
ble at their power,

The tediNo- NOTHING was wanting to render this Empire
ries of the
Popes i. absolute, and to eallifh it on the ruins of all
adcquate to
fupporttheir civil authority, but that the Popes hould have
sprit ju-
rifdiaion. possessed such a dctgce of temporal power, as

was sufficient to second and enforce their spiritual
decrees. Happily for mankind, while their fpi-
ritual jurifdilion was molt extensive, and at its
greatest height, their temporal property was ex-
tremely limited, They were powerful Pontiffs,
formidable at a distance; but they were petty
Princes, without any considerable domeftick force.
They had early endeavoured, indeed, to acquire
territory by arts, similar to those which they had
employed in extending their jurifdilion. Under
pretence of a donation from Contlantine, and of
another from Charlemagne or his father Pepin,
they attempted to take poffefnion of some towns
adjacent to Rome. But these donations were ficti-
tious, and availed them little. The benefactions,
for which they were indebted to the credulity of
the Norman adventurers, who conquered Naples,
and to the superstition of the countes Matilda,

were

were real, and added ample domains to the SECT. III.
Holy See.

BUT the power of the Popes did not increase in Their au.

thority in

proportion to the extent of territory which they heir own
had acquired. In the dominions annexed to the terrltr'e
Holy See, as well as in those subjeE to other linited.
Princes in Italy, the sovereign of a ilate was far
from having the command of the force which it
contained. During the turbulence and confusion
of the middle ages, the powerful nobility or
leaders of popular factions in Italy, had seized the
government of different towns; and after strength-
ening their fortifications, and taking a body of
mercenaries into pay, they aspired at indepen-
dence. The territory which the church had gained,
was filled with petty tyrants of this kind, who left
the Pope hardly the shadow of dominion.

As these usurpations almost annihilated the Itwacir-

Papal power in the greater part of the towns sub- by ,hem.
jet to the church, the Roman barons frequently btin(fth
disputed the authority of the Popes, even in Rome barons
itself. In the twelfth century, an opinion began
to be propagated, " That as the function ofeccle-
fiafticks was purely spiritual, they ought to possess
no property, and to claim no temporal jurifliction;
but, according to the laudable example of their
predecessors in the primitive church, should subsist
wholly upon their tithes, or upon the voluntary
oblations of the people'." This doctrine being

' Qtto Frifingcnfi de GeRis rider. Imp. lib. ii. cap. o.

L 4 addressed

SBCT. III. addressed to men, who had beheld the scandalous

manner in which the avarice and ambition of the
clergy had prompted them to contend for wealth,
and to exercise power, they listened to it with fond
attention. The Roman barons, who had felt most
sensibly the rigour of ecclesiastical oppression,
adopted these sentiments with such ardour, that
they fict themlflves instantly to shake off the yoke.
A.D. 1r43. They endeavoured to restore ome image of their

ancient liberty, by reviving the institution of the
Roman senate, in which they vested supreme au-
thority; committing the executive power some-
times to one chief senator, ometimes to two, and
sometimes to a magistrate dignified with the name
of The Patritian. The Popes exerted themselves
with vigour, in order to check this fatal encroach-
ment on their jurifdition. One of them, finding
all his endeavours ineffectual, was so much morti-
sied, that extreme grief cut hort his days. Ano-
ther, having ventured to attack the senators at the
head of ome armed men, was mortally wounded
in the fray b. During a considerable period, the
power of the Popes, before which the greatest
monarchs in Europe trembled, was circumscribed
within such narrow limits in their own capital,
that they durst hardly exert any a& of authority
without the permimflon and concurrence of the
senate.

b Otto Srising. Chron. lib. vii. cap. 27, 3. Id. deGelt.

Frid. lib . i.c. 27. Muratori Annali d'ltalia, vol. ix. 398,
404.

ENCROACH-

ENCROACHMENTS were made upon the Papal SECT. 11.

authority, not only by the usurpations of the Ro- and by e
man nobility, but by the mutinous spirit of the t.b,,.l.c,
people. During seventy years of the fourteenth mln poaP',.
century, the Popes fixed their residence in Avig- N3o, to
non. The inhabitants of Rome, accullomed to ' 377
confider themselves as the descendants of the
people who had conquered the world, and had
given laws to it, were too high-fpirited to submit
with patience to the delegated authority of thole
persons, to whom the Popes committed the go-
vernment of the city. On many occasions, they
opposed the execution of the Papal mandates, and
on the flightet appearance of innovation or op-
preflion, they were ready to take arms in defence
of their own immunities. Towards the middle of
the fourteenth century, being initigated by Nicolas
Rienzo, a man of low birth and a seditious spirit,
but of popular eloquence and an enterprizing
ambition, they drove all the nobility out of the
city, established a democratical form of govern-
ment, eleced Rienzo Tribune of the people, and
invested him with extensive authority. But though
the frantick proceedings of the Trlibune soon over-
turned this new system; thougil the government
of Rome was reinitated in it; ancient form ; yet
every fresh attack contributed to weaken the
papal jurifdiaion; and the turbulence of the peo-
ple concurred with the spirit of independence
among the nobility, to circumscribe it within very

narrow

SEcT. II. narrow bounds . Gregory VII. and other domni.

C;~3 neering pontiffs, accomplished those great things

which rendered them so formidable to the Em-
perors with whom they contended, not by the
force of their arms, or by the extent of their
power, but by the dread of their spiritual censures,
and by the effe& of their intrigues, which excited
rivals, and called forth enemies againit every Prince,
whom they wished to depress or to destroy.

Al!x-nder MANY attempts were made by the Popes, not
VI. and u-.- wh

,ug

lu,' Ai. e, only to humble those usurpers, who lorded it over
&,rthe the cities in the ecclesiastical state, but to break
Popes con.
i,!.r.,b1e the turbulent spirit of the Roman people. These
PtIAhLC.

were long unluccefsful. At last Alexander VI.
with a policy no less artful than flagitious, sub-
dued and extirpated most of the great Roman
barons, and rendered the Popes matiers of their
own dominions. The enterprising ambition of
Julius II. added conquelts of no inconsiderable
value to the patrimony of St. Peter. Thus the
Popes, by degrees, became powerful temporal
Princes. Their territories, in the age of Charles V.
were of greater extent than at present; their
country seems to have been better cultivated, and
more populous; and as they drew large contri-
butions from every part of Europe, their revenues

' Hiforie Fiorentine de Giov. Villani, lib. xii. c. 89. Io4.

ap. Murat. Script. Rcrum. Ital. vol. xiii. Vita de Cola di
Ricnzo, ap. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. iii. p. 399, &c. Hill.
de Nic. Rienzy, par M. de Boifpreaux, p. 91, &c.

far

far exceeded those of the neighbouring powers, SECT. r.
and rendered them capable of more sudden and ~
vigorous efforts.

THE genius of the papal government, however, Defas ;n

was better adapted to the exercise of spiritual t e r,,.¢'
dominion, than of temporal power. With refpet i a°~c

minion.

to he former, all its maxims were steady and in-
variable. Every new Pontiff adopted the plan of
his predectffor. By education and habit, Eccle-
fiafticks were so formed, that the character of the
individual was funk in that of the profcffion; and
the passions of the man were sacrificed to the
interest and honour of the order. The hands
which held the reins of administration might
change; but the spirit which condueted them was
always the fame. While the measures of other
governments fluctuated, and the obje6cs at which
they aimed varied, the church kept one end in
view; and to this unrelaxing constancy of purluit,
it was indebted for its success in the bolteft at-
tempts ever made by human ambition.

BUT in their civil administration, the Popes fol-

lowed no such uniform or conlilent plan. There,
as in other governments, the character, the pas-
sions, and the interests of the perlon who had the
supreme direction of affairs, occasioned a variation
both in objects and measures. As few Prelates
reached the summit of ecclesiastical dignity, until
they were far advanced in life, a change of masters

was

SEcr.III. was more frequent in the Papal dominions than

*"" rin other flates, and the political system was, of

course, less flable and permanent. Every Pope
was eager to make the most of the hort period,
during which he had the profpe& of enjoying
power, in order to aggrandize his own family, and
to attain his private ends; and it was often the
first business of his successor to undo all that he had
done, and to overturn what he had established.

As Ecclefiaflicks were trained to pacifick arts,

and early initiated in the mysteries of that policy,
by which the court of Rome extended or sup-
ported its piritual dominion, the Popes were apt
to conduc their temporal affairs with the fame
spirit; and in all their measures were more ready
to employ the refinements of intrigue, than the
force of arms. It was in the Papal court that
address and subtlety in negociation first became a
science; and during the sixteenth century, Rome
was confidered as the school in which it might be
belt acquired.

As the decorum of their ecclesiastical character

prevented the Popes from placing themselves at
the head of their armies, or taking the command,
in person, of the military force in their dominions,
they were afraid to arm their fubje6ts; and in all
their operations, whether offensive or defensive,
they trusted entirely to mercenary troops.

As

As their power and dominions could not descend SECT.IIr.

to their posterity, the Popes were less solicitous -
than other Princes to form or to encourage schemes
ofpublick utility and improvement. Their tenure
was only for a short life; present advantage was
what they chiefly studied; to squeeze and to amass,
not to meliorate, was their objet. They erected,
perhaps, some work of ostentation, to remain as a
monument of their Pontificate; they found it ne-
ceffary, at some times, to ettablifh useful inftitu-
tions, in order to sooth and silence the turbulent
populace of Rome; but plans of general benefit
to their fubjets, and framed with a view to futurity,
were rarely objects of attention in the Papal policy.
The patrimony of St. Peter was worse governed
than any part of Europe; and though a generous
Pontiff might suspend for a little, or counter-at
the effe&cs of those vices which are peculiar to the
administration of ecclefialticks; the disease not
only remained incurable, but has gone on incralf-
ing from age to age; and the decline of the itate
has kept pace with its progress.

ONE circumstance, farther, concerning the Papal Tiic rrpe,

government, is so singular, as to merit attention. 2,',:e
As the spiritual lupremacy and temporal powcer,,,, n":
were united in one peroln, and uniiormly aided cach ici. ri.i-
other in their operations, they became so blended ,,ed l;1
together, that it was difficult to Ieparate them, "
even in imagination. The potentates, who found
it necessary to oppose the meafurcs which the

Polpes

SECT. II. Popes pursued as temporal Princes, could not di.
'^ J vest themselves of the reverence which they ima-

gined to be due to them as heads of the church,
and vicars of Jesus Christ. It was with reluctance
that they could be brought to a rupture with them;
they were averse to push their operations against
them to extremity; they listened eagerly to the first
overtures cf accommodation, and were willing to
procure it almost upon any terms. Their confci-
oufnefs of this, encouraged the enterprizing Pon.
tiffs, who filled the Papal throne about the begin-
ning of the sixteenth century, to engage in schemes
seemingly the most extravagant. They trusted,
that if their temporal power was not sufficient to
carry them through with success, the refpe& paid
to their spiritual dignity would enable them to ex-
tricate themselves with facility and with honour d.

But

d The manner in which Louis XII. of France undertook and

carried on war againit Julius II. remarkably illultrates this ob-
servation. Louis solemnly consulted the clergy of France, whe-
ther it was lawful to take arms againit a Pope, who had wan-
tonly kindled war in Europe, and whom neither the faith of
treaties, nor gratitude for favours received, nor the decorum
of his character, could restrain from the moR violent acions,
to which the lufl of power prompts ambitious Princes. Though
his clergy authorised the war, yet Anne ofBretagne, his Queen,
entertained scruples with regard to the lawfulness of it. Tlhe
King himself, from some fuperitition of the fame kind, carried
it on faintly; and, upon every fresh advantage, renewed his
propositions of peace. ezeray, Hill. de France, fol. edit.
1685. tom. i. 82. I (hall produce another proof of this reve-
rence for the Papal charafter flill more flriking. Guicciar-
dinit the mod sagacious, perhaps, of all modern hillorians, and

the

But when Popes came to take part more frequently SECT. II.
in the contests among Princes, and to engage as
principals or auxiliaries in every war kindled in
Lurope, this veneration for their sacred character
began to abate; and striking instances will occur
in the following h4q~ y of its being almost totally
extin6t.

OF all the Italian powers, the republick of cfnlhttuion

of t he re-
Venice, next to the Pope, was molt conneted pick o

Venice,

with the reft of Europe. The rife of that corn- with, trife
monwealth, during the inroads of the Huns in the andP'rgr"fe
fifth century; the singular situation of its capital
in the fmiall ifes of the Adriatick gulf; and the
more singular form of its civil constitution, are ge-
nerally known. If we view the Venetian govern-
ment as calculated for the order of nobles alone, its
infsitutions may be pronounced excellent; the deli-
berative, legislative, and executive powers are so
admirably difiributed and adjutled, that it mull be
regarded as a perfict model of political wisdom.
But if we confider it as formed for a numerous body
of people subjet to its jurisdiction, it will appear
a rigid and partial aristocracy, which lodges all
power in the hands of a few members of the com-
munity, while it degrades and oppresses the reft.

the bolderf in painting the vices and ambition of the Popes,
represents the death of Migliau, a Spanish officer, who was
killed during the siege of Naples, as a puniihment inflidcd on
him by heaven, on account of his having opposed the setting
of Clement II. at liberty. Guic. HiRtoria d'Italia, (enev.
1645. vol. ii. lib. 18. p. 467.

THE

SECT. III. THI spirit of government, in a commonwealth
Defers in of this fpeciel, was, of course, timid and jealous.
its gvern- The Venetian nobles distrusted their own fubjets,
lnent, par.
ticklanly and were afraid of allowing them the ufT of arms.
with r fpet
to its mili- They encouraged among them the arts of induiry
tary opera- C I
tiont. and commerce; they employ them in manufac.

tures .d in navigation; but ncvr admitted them
into the troops which the slate kept in its pay,
The military force of the republick confitRed en-
tirely of foreign mercenaries. The command of
there was never trulled to noble Venetians, let
they should acquire such influence over the army,
as might endanger the publick liberty; or become
accustomed to the exercise of such power, as would
make them unwilling to return to the condition of
private citizens. A soldier of fortune was placed
at the head of the armies of the commonwealth;
and to obtain that honour, was the great object of
the Itlian Condottieri, or leaders of bands, who,
in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, made a
trade of war, and raised and hired out foldirrs to
different fates. But the fame suspicious policy,
which induced them to employ thele adventurers,
prevented their placing entire confidence in them.
'Two noblemen, appointed by the feiate, accom-
panied their army when it took the field, with
the appellation of Proveditori, and like the field-
deputies of the Dutch republick in latter times,
observed all the motions of the general, and
checked and controuled him in all his operations.

A COMMON'

A COMMONWEALTH, with such civil and mili-SECT. II.

tary institutions, was not formed to make conquests. '
While its fubjeds were disarmed, and its nobles ex-
cluded from military command, it carried on its
warlike enterprizes with great disadvantage. This
ought to have taught the Venetians to make self-
preservation, and the enjoyment of domeftick fecu-
rity, the objecs of their policy But republicks
are apt to be educed by the spirit of ambition, as
well as Princes. When the Venetians so far for-
got the interior defe&s in their government, as to
aim at extensive conquests, the fatal blow, which
they received in the war excited by the league of
Cambray, convinced them of the imprudence and
danger of making violent efforts, in opposition to
the genius and tendency of their confitution.

IT is not, however, by its military, but by its Excellence

naval and commercial power, that the importance Iutva
of the Venetian commonwealth must be estimated.
In the latter, the real force and nerves of the state
consisted. The jealousy of government did not
extend to this department. Nothing was appre-
hended from this quarter, that could prove formi-
dable to liberty. The senate encouraged the no-
bles to trade, and to serve on board the fleet. They
became merchants and admirals. They increased
the wealth of their country by their industry.
They added to its dominions, by the valour with
which they conducted its naval armaments.

VOL. I. M THE

SeCT. II. THE Venetian commerce was an inexhaustible
' he extent source of opulence. All the nations in Europe de.
elc"", pended upon them, not only for the commodities

of the East, but for various manufacures fabri-
cated by them alone, or finished with a dexterity
and elegance unknown in other countries. From
this extensive commerce, the state derived such im.
mense supplies as concealed these vices in its con.
flitution which I have mentioned; and enabled it
to keep on foot such armies, as were not only an
over-match for the force which any of its neigh.
bours could bring into the field, but were sufficient
to contend, for ome time, with the powerful mo.
narchs beyond the Alps. During its firuggles
with the Princes united against it by the league
of Cambray, the republick levied fums which, even
in the present age, would be deemed considerable;
and while the King of France paid the exorbitant
interest which I have mentioned for the money ad-
vanced to him, and the Emperor eager to borrow,
but destitute of credit, was known by the name of
Maximilian the Money-less, the Venetians raised
whatever furns they pleated, at the moderate pre-
mium of five in the hundred .

Thecon~fl. THE conffitution of Florence was perfectly the
Florence. reverse of the Venetian. It partook as much of

the democratical turbulence and licentiousness, as

* Hist. de la ligue faite a Cambray par M. 'Abb du Bos,

lib. v. Saudi Storia Civil Vcneziana, lib. viii . 16. p. 891,
&c.

the

the other of ariltocratical rigour. Florence, how- SBCT.III.
ever, was a commercial, not a military democracy. -'
The nature of its infitutions was favourable to
commerce, and the genius of the people was turned
towards it. The vast wealth which the family of
Medici had acquired by trade; together with the
magnificence, the generosity, and the virtue of
the first Cosmo, gave him such an ascendant over
the affections as well as the councils of his coun-
trymen, that though the forms of popular govern-
ment were preserved, though the various depart-
ments of administration were filled by magiG
trates distinguished by the ancient names, and
elected in the usual manner, he was in reality the
head of the commonwealth, and in the station of
a private citizen he possessed supreme authority.
Cosmo transmitted a considerable degree of this
power to his descendants and during the greater
part of the fifteenth century, the political state of
Florence was extremely singular. The appearance
of republican government subsisted, the people
were passionately attached to it, and on some oc.
cafions contended warmly for their privileges, and
yet they permitted a tingle family to assume the di-
reEion of their affairs, almost as absolutely as if it
had been formally invested with sovereign power.
The jealousy of the Medici concurred with the
commercial spirit of the Florentines, in putting
the military force of the republick upon the fame
footing with that of the other Italian states. The
troops, which the Florentines employed in their

M 2 wars,

SECT. III. wars, conifted almost entirely of mercenary foldierg,

furnished by the Condottieri, or leaders of bands,
whom they took into their pay.

The confli- IN the kingdom of Naples, to which the fove-
ttmitonof the
kingdom of reignty of the Island of Sicily was annexed, the

feudal government was eltablifhed in the fame
form, and with the fame defe&s, as in the other
nations of Europe. The frequent and violent re-
volutions which happened in that monarchy, had
considerably increased these defects, and rendered
them more intolerable. The succession to the
crown of Naples had been so often interrupted or
altered, and so many Princes of foreign blood had
taken possession of the throne, that the Neapolitan
nobility had loft, in a great measure, that attach.
ment to the family of their sovereigns, as well as
that reverence for their persons, which, in other
feudal kingdoms, contributed to set some bounds
to the encroachments of the barons upon the royal
prerogative and power. At the fame time, the
different pretenders to the crown, being obliged to
court the barons who adhered to them, and on
whose fipport they depended for the success of
their claims, they augmented their privileges by
liberal concefions, and connived at their boldett
usurpations. Even when feated on the throne, it
was dangerous for a Prince, who held his sceptre
by a disputed title, to venture on any ifep towards
extending his own power, or circumscribing that
of the nobles.

FROM

FROM all these causes, the kingdom of Naples SECT. 11I.

was the most turbulent of any in Europe, and the
authority of its Monarchs the least extensive.
Though Ferdinand I. who began his reign in the
year one thousand four hundred and sixty eight,
attempted to break the power of the aristocracy;
though his son Alphonfo, that he might crush it at
once by cutting off the leaders of greatest repu-
tation and influence among the Neapolitan barons,
ventured to commit one of the molt perfidious
and cruel actions recorded in history ; the order f A.D. 1457.
nobles was nevertheless more exasperated than
humbled by their measures . The resentm.ent
which these outrages excited was so violent, and
the power of the malecontent nobles was frill o
formidable, that to these may be ascribed, in a
great degree, the ease and rapidity with which
Charles VIII. conquered the kingdom of Naples g.

THE event that gave rife to the violent contefs St3e of the

concerning the succession to the crown of Naples ®'2 t'
and Sicily, which brought so many calamities , 't''c-'
upon these kingdoms, happened in the thirteenth tle ""own.
century. Upon the death of the Emperor Fre-
derick II. Manfred his natural son aspiring to the
Neapolitan throne, murdered his brother the Em- A. D. 154.
peror Conrad (if we may believe contemporary
historians) and by that crime obtained poffefion of
it . The Popes, from their implacable enmity

f Giannone, book xxviii. chap. 2. vol. ii. p. 4 Ic, &c.
t Giannone, ibid. p. 414.
h Struv. corp. hilt. Germ. . 481. Giannone, book xviii.
ch. .

M 3 to

SICT. Il. to the house of Swabia, not only refused to recog.

" rnize Manfred's title, but endeavoured to excite

against him some rival capable of wresting the
sceptre out of his hand. Charles Count of Anjou,
the brother of St. Louis King of France, under.
took this; and he received from the Popes, the
investiture of the kingdom of Naples and Sicil,
as a fief held of the Holy See. The Count of
Anjou's efforts were crowned with success; Man-
fred fell in battle; and he took poffeflion of the
vacant throne. But soon after, Charles sullied the
glory which he had acquired, by the injufiice and
cruelty with which he put to death, by the hands
of the executioner, Conradin, the lait Prince of
the house of Swabia, and the rightful heir of the
Neapolitan crown. That gallant young Prince
asserted his title, to the last, with a courage, worthy
of a better fate. On the scaffold, he declared
Peter, at that time Prince, and soon after King
of Aragon, who had married Manfred's only
daughter, his heir; and throwing his glove among
the people, he entreated that it might be carried
to Peter as the symbol by which he conveyed all
his rights to him '. The defre of avenging the
insult offered to royalty by the death of Conradin
concurred with ambition, in prompting Peter to
take arms in support of the title, which he had
acquired. From that period, during almost two
centuries, the houses of Aragon and Anjou con-
tended for the crown of Naples. Amidst a fuc-
cellion of revolutions more rapid, as well as of

* Giannone, book xix. ch. 4. 2.

crimes

crimes more atrocious, than what occur in theSECT. I.
history of almost any other kingdom, Monarchs
sometimes of the Aragonefe line, and sometimes
of the Angevin, were feated on the throne. At
length the Princes of the house of Aragon obtained A. D. 434.
such firm poffeflion of this long-difputed inherit-
ance, that they transmitted it quietly to a bastard
branch of their family k

THE race of the Angevin Kings, however, was Pretenions

of the

not extinct; nor had they relinquished their title Frnch and
to the Neapolitan crown. The Count of Maine Sich,.
and Provence, the heir of this family, conveyed
all his rights and pretensions to Louis XI. and to
his successors. Charles VIII, as I have already A. D. 49.
related, crofed the Alps at the head of a powerful
army, in order to prosecute his claim with a degree
of vigour far superior to that, which the Princes
from whom he derived it, had been capable of
exerting. The rapid progress of his arms in Italy,
as well as the short time during which he enjoyed
the fruits of his success, are well known. Frede-
rick, the heir of the illegitimate branch of the
Aragonefe family, soon recovered the throne of
which Charles had difpofeffed him. Louis XII.
and Ferdinand of Aragon united against this Prince,
whom both, though for different reasons, confi-
dered as an usurper, and agreed to divide his
dominions between them. Frederick, unable to A. D. 10.
resist the combined Monarchs, each of whom was
far his superior in power, resigned his fccptre.

k Giannone, book xxvi. ch. 2.

M 4 Louis

SEcT. ll. Louis and Ferdinand, though they had concurred

in making the conquest, differed about the division
of it; and from allies became enemies. But Gon-
salvo de Cordova, partly by the exertion of fucl
military talents as gave him a just title to the ap-
pellation of the Great Captain, which the Spaniih
historians have bestowed upon him; and partly
by such shameless and frequent violations of the
most solemn engagements, as leave an indelible
slain on his memory; stripped the French of all
that they possessed in the Neapolitan dominions,
and secured the peaceable pofeflion of them to his
master. These, together with his other kingdoms,
Ferdinand transmitted to his grandson Charles V,
whose right to possess them, if not altogether
uncontravertible, seems, at least, to be as well
founded as that, which the Kings of France set in
opposition to it',

Statrofthoa THERE is nothing in the political conflitution,
dMiln, fn or interior' government of the dutchy of Milan,
the ight o so remarkable, as to require a particular expla-
fuccefflon
to it- nation. But as the right of succession to that

fertile province was the cause or the pretext of
almost all the wars carried on in Italy during the
reign of Charles V, it is necessary to trace these
disputes to their source, and to inquire into the
pretensions of the various competitors.

X Droits de, Rois de France au Royaume de Sicile. Mem. de
Comin. Edit. de Frefnoy, tom. iv. part ii. p. 5.

DURINQ

DURING the long and fierce contests excited in SFcr. lIr.

Italy by the violence of the Guelf and Ghibelline Ri and
factions, the family of Visconti rose to great emi- Progres of

the difp ates

nence among their fellow-citizens of Milan. As ",cerning
the Visconti had adhered uniformly to the Ghibel-
line or Imperial interest, they, by way of recom- A.D. ,34.
pence, received, from one Emperor, the dignity
of perpetual vicars of the Empire in Italy ": they
were created by another, Dukes of Milan, and A. D. 39.
together with that title, the possession of the city
and its territories was bestowed upon them as an
hereditary fief". John King of France, among
other expedients for raising money, which the
calamities of his reign obliged him to employ,
condescended to give one of his daughters in mar-
riage to John Galeazzo Visconti the first Duke of
Milan, from whom he had received considerable
fums. Valentine Visconti one of the children of
this marriage married her cousin, Louis Duke of
Orleans, the only brother of Charles VI. In their
marriage contra&, which the Pope confirmed, it
was tipulated that, upon failure of heirs-male in
the family of Visconti, the dutchy of Milan should
descend to the posterity of Valentine and the
Duke of Orleans. That event took place. In
the year one thousand four hundred and forty-
seven, Philip Maria the last Prince of the ducal
family of Visconti died. Various competitors pre-
tended to the fuccefflon. Charles Duke of Orleans

Petrarch epift. ap. Struv. corp. i. 6z5.
" Lcibnit, cod. jur. gent. diplom. vol. i. 257.

pleaded

SrcT.III. pleaded his right to it, founded on the marriage-
4--^ contract of his mother Valentine Visconti. Alfonso

King of Naples claimed it in consequence of a
will made by Philip Maria in his favour. The
Emperor contended that, upon the extinction of
male issue in the family of Visconti, the fief returned
to the superior Lord, and ought to be re-annexed
to the Empire. The people of Milan, smitten with
that love of liberty which prevailed among the
Italian States, declared against the dominion of
any master, and ellablifhed a republican form of
government.

BUT during the itruggle among so many com-

petitors, the prize for which they contended was
seized by one from whom none of them appre-
hended any danger. Francis Sforza, the natural
son of Jacomuzzo Sforza, whom his courage and
abilities had elevated from the rank of a peasant to
be one of the most eminent and powerful of the
Italian Condottieri, having succeeded his father in
the command of the adventurers who followed
his standard, had married a natural daughter of
the last Duke of Milan. Upon this hadow of a
title Francis founded his pretensions to the dutchy,
which he supported with such talents and valour
as placed him at last on the ducal throne. The
virtues as well as abilities with which he governed,
inducing his fubjets to forget the defects in his
title, he transmitted his dominions quietly to his
son; from whom they descended to his grandson.
He was murdered by his grand uncle Ludovico,

2 surnamed

furpamed the Moor, who took poffeflon of theSEcT. lir.
dutchy; and his right to it was confirmed by the sr
investiture of the mperor Maximilian in the year
one thousand four hundred and ninety-four .

Louis XI. who took pleasure in deprefling the

Princes of the blood, and who admired the poli-
tical abilities of Francis Sforza, would not permit
the Duke of Orleans to take any ilep in prose-
cution of his right to the dutchy of Milan. Lu-
dovico the Moor kept up such a close connection
with Charles VII . that, during the greater part of
his reign, the claim of the family of wrltan,, con-
tinued to lie oriiant. But when the cron of
France devolved to Louis XII. Duke of Orleans,
he instantly aferted the rights of his family with
the ardour which it was natural to expect. Lu-
dovico Sforza, incapable of contending with such
a rival, was stripped of all his dominions in the
space of a few days. The King, clad in the ducal
robes, entered Milan in triumph; and loon after,
Ludovico having been betrayed by the Swils in
his pay, was ent a prisoner ito France, and fliut
up in the castle of Loches, where he lay unpitied
during the remainder of his days. In consequence
of one of the singular revolutions which occur so
frequently in the history of the Milanese, his on
Maximilian Sforza was placed on the ducal throne,
Of which he kept poffefron during the reign of

O Ripalm. hilt. Mediol. lib. vi. 654. ap. Struv. corp. i. 930.
Du Mont Corps Diplom. tai. iii. p. ii. 333. bid.

Louis

SECT.II. Louis XII. But his successor Francis I. was too
.D. 351. high-fpirited and enterprizing tamely to relinquish

his title. As soon as he was eated upon the
throne, he prepared to invade the Milanese; and
his right of succession to it, appears from this
detail, to have been more natural and morejuft
than that of any other competitor.

IT is unnecessary to enter into any detail with

refpe& to the form of government in Genoa,
Parma, Modena, and the other inferior States of
Italy. Their names, indeed, will often occur in
the following history. But the power of these
States themselves was so inconsiderable, that their
fate depended little upon their own efforts; and
the frequent revolutions which they underwent,
were brought about by the operations of the
Princes who attacked or defended them, rather than
by any thing peculiar in their internal constitution.

TeconOfli. OF the great kingdoms on this fide of the Alps,
tution and
government Spain is one of the most considerable; and as it

f nwas the hereditary domain of Charles V. as well

as the chief source of his power and wealth, a
diflint knowledge of its political constitution is
of capital importance towards understanding the
tranfaftions of his reign.

Conquered THE Vandals and Goths, who overturned the
by the
vandal, Roman power in Spain, established a form of

government in that country, and brought in cuf-
toms and laws, perfetly similar to those which

were

were introduced into the reft of Europe, by the SECT. Ill,
other victorious tribes which acquired ettlements ' '
there. For some time, society advanced, among
the new inhabitants of Spain, by the fame steps,
and seemed to hold the fame course, as in other
European nations. To this progress, a sudden A. D. 7S.
flop was put by the invasion of the Saracens or and by t

Moor".

Moors. The Goths could not withstand the efforts
of their enthufiaftick valour, which subdued Spain,
with the fame impetuous rapidity that diftin-
guifhes all the operations of their arms. The con-
querors introduced into the country in which they
fettled the Mahometan religion, the Arabick lan-
guage, the manners of the Eaff, together with
that taste for the arts, and that love of elegance
and splendour, which the Caliphs had begun to
cultivate among their fubjets.

SUCH Gothick nobles, as disdained to submit to The Chri-

the Moorish yoke, fled for refuge to the inac- a:yrco-
ceffible mountains of Aflurias. There they corn-n '
forted themselves with enjoying the exercifc of spain.
the Christian religion, and with maintaiing the
authority of their ancient laws. Being joined by
many of the boldest and most warlike among their
countrymen, they sallied out upon the adjacent
settlements of the Moors, in small parties; but
venturing only upon short excursions at first, they
were satisfied with plunder and revenge, without
thinking of conquest. By degrees, their strength
increased, their views enlarged, a regular govern-
ment was eftablifled among them, and they began

to

A4ct. I!i. to aim at extending their territories. While they

- pushed on their attacks with the unremitting

ardour excited by zeal for religion, by the desire
of vengeance, and by the hope of rescuing their
country from oppreflioh; while they conducted
their operations with the courage natural to men
who had no other occupation but war, and who
were strangers to all the arts which corrupt or
enfeeble the mind, the Moors gradually loft many
of the advantages, to which they had been in-
debted for their first success. They threw off all
dependence on the Caliphs *; they negleced to
preserve a close connection with their countrymen
in Africa; their Empire in Spain was split into
many small kingdoms; the arts which they culti-
vated, together with the luxury to which these
gave rife, relaxed, in some measure, the force of
their military institutions, and abated the vigour
of their warlike spirit. The Moors, however,
continued fRill to be a gallant people, and pof-
sessed great resources. According to the magni-
ficent stile of the Spanish historians, eight centuries
of almost uninterrupted war elapsed, and three
thousand seven hundred battles were fought before
'492. the last of the Moorish kingdoms in Spain sub-

mitted to the Chrittian arms.

Theunion As the Christians made their conquests upon
of its various
kingdom,. the Mahometans at various periods, and under

dififrent leaders, each formed the territory which
he had wrested from the common enemy, into an

Jo. Sim. Afemanni Hitor. Ital. Scriptores, %, i;i p .

independent State. Spain was divided into as SECT.Ilf.
many separate kingdoms, as it contained provinces
in each city of note, a petty Monarch established
his throne, and assumed all the ensigns of royalty.
In a series of years, however, by the usual events
of intermarriages, or legal fucceflion, or conquest,
all these inferior principalities were annexed to the
more powerful kingdoms of Castile and of Ara-
gon. At length, by the fortunate marriage of
Ferdinand and Isabella, the former the hereditary
Monarch of Aragon, and the latter raised to the
throne of Castile by the affection of her lubjeets,
all the Spanish crowns were united, and descended
in the fame line. ,145.

FROM this period, the political constitution of cThj';
Spain began to assume a regular and uniform ap- tomsand

~~~~~~~~~~~~- -

. - ~laws refrrv-
pearance; the genius of government may be de. ed amidf

all their reo

lineated, and the progress of its laws and manners volution,s;
may be traced with certainty. NotwithlRanding
the singular revolution which the invasion of the
Moors occasioned in Spain, and the peculiarity of
its fate, in being so long fubjeted to the Maho-
metan yoke, the customs introduced by the Van-
dals and Goths had taken such deep root, and
were so thoroughly incorporated with the frame of
its government, that in every province which the
Christians recovered from the Moors, we find the
condition of individuals, as well as the political
constitution, nearly the fame as in other nations
of Europe. Lands were held by the fame tenure ;
justice was dispensed in the lame form; the fame

privileges

.SECT. I1I.privileges were claimed by the nobility; and the
'hichr- fame power exercised by the Cortes, or general
dersthn'r aflembly of the kingdom. Several circumstances
degree limi. contributed to secure this permanence of the feudal
lar to that
ofother institutions in Spain, notwithstanding the conquest
nations of
Europe. of the Moors, which seemed to have overturned

them. Such of the Spaniards, as preserved their
independence, adhered to their ancient cufloms,
not only from attachment to them, but out of
antipathy to the Moors, to whose ideas concerning
property and government these customs were to-
tally repugnant. Even among the Christians, who
submitted to the Moorish conquerors, and con-
sented to become their fubjedts, ancient customs
were not entirely abolished. They were permitted
to retain their religion; their laws concerning pri-
vate property; their forms of adminifteringjuftice;
and their mode of levying taxes. The followers
of Mahomet are the only enthusiasts, who have
united the spirit of toleration with zeal for making
proselytes, and who, at the fame time that they
took arms to propagate the dotrine of their pro-
phet, permitted such as would not embrace it, to
adhere to their own tenets, and to practise their
own rites. To this peculiarity in the genius of
the Mahometan religion, as well as to the desire
which the Moors had of reconciling the Christians
to their yoke, it was owing that the ancient man-
ners and laws in Spain survived the violent hock
of a conquest, and were permitted to subsist, not-
withstanding the introducion of a new religion

and

and a new form of government into that country. SECT. II.
It is obvious from all there particulars, that the
Chriltians muff have found it extremely easy to
re-establish manners and government on their an-
cient foundations, in those provinces of Spain,
which they wrested successively from the Moors.
A considerable part of the people retained such a
fondness for the customs, and such a reverence
for the laws of their ancestors, that wishing to fee
them completely restored, they were not only will-
ing but eager to resume the former, and to recog-
nize the authority of the latter.

BUT though the feudal form of government, Cern;npe.

culirities in
with all the institutions which characterize it, was th,'ir coi-

tittion and

thus preserved entire in Castile and Aragon, as l,i,,
well as in all the kingdoms which depended on
these crowns, there were certain peculiarities in
their political conititutions which dillinguifh them
from those of any other country in Europe. The Theprern-

gative more
royal prerogative, extremely limited in every feudal limited, and

tke imili

kingdom, was circumscribed, in Spain, within nities o the
such narrow bounds, as reduced the power of the Ppl~vnmo:"
sovereign almost to nothing. The privileges of
the nobility were vast in proportion, and extended
so far, as to border on absolute independence.
The immunities of the cities were great, they potl
sessed considerable influence in the Cortes, and they
aspired at obtaining more. Such a late of fbciety,
in which the political machine was lo ill adjuled,
and the several members of the legislature lb im-

VOL. I. N properly

secT.III. properly balanced, produced interior disorders in

the kingdoms'of Spain, which rose beyond the
pitch of turbulence and anarchy, usual under the
f.-udal government. The whole tenor of the Spa-
nifh history confirms the truth of this observation;
and when the mutinous spirit, to which the genius
of their policy gave birth and vigour, was no
longer restrained and overawed by the immediate
dread of the Moorish arms, it broke out into
more frequent infurretions against the govern-
ment of their Princes, as well as more outrageous
insults on their dignity, than occur in the annals
of any other country. These were accompanied
at some times with more liberal sentiments con-
cerning the rights of the people, at other times
with more elevated notions concerning the privi-
leges of the nobles, than were common in other
nations.
Ironoes IN the principality of Catalonia, which was an-

nexed to the kingdom of Aragon, the impatience
of the people to obtain the redress of their griev-
ances having prompted them to take arms against
A. D. 45. their sovereign John II, they, by a solemn deed,

recalled the oath of allegiance which they had
sworn to him, declared him and his posterity to
he unworthy of the throne P, and endeavoured to
eftablifl a republican form of government, in
order to ficure the perpetual enjoyment of that

P Zurita Anaks de Arag. torn. iv. 113, 115, &c.

liberty,

liberty, after which they aspired q. Nearly about SECT. II.
the fame period, the indignation of the Castilian
nobility against the weak and flagitious adminiftra-
tion of Henry IV, having led them to combine
againit him, they arrogated, as one of the privi-
leges belonging to their order, the right of trying
and of pafling sentence on their sovereign. That
the exercise of this power might be as publick
and solemn, as the pretension to it was bold, they
summoned all the nobility of their party to meet A.D. 1465.
at Avila; a spacious theatre was erected in a plain
without the walls of the town, an image repre-
senting the King, was feated on a throne, clad in
royal robes, with a crown on its head, a sceptre
in its hand, and the sword of juflice by its fide.
The accusation against the King was read, and
the sentence of deposition was pronounced, in pre-
fence of a numerous assembly. At the close of
the first article of the charge, the archbishop of
Toledo advanced, and tore the crown from the
head of the image; at the close of the second, the
Conde de Placentia snatched the sword of justice
from its fide; at the close of the third, the Conde
de Benevente wrested the sceptre from its hand;
at the close of the last, Don Diego Lopes de
Stuniga tumbled it headlong from the throne. At
the fame initant, Don Alfonso, Henry's brother, was
proclaimed King of Castile and Leon in his teiad '.

q Ferreras hilt. d'Efpagne, tom. vii, p. 92. P. Orleans
revol, d'Efpagne, tom. iii. p. i55. L. Marinaus Siculus do
seb. Hifpan. apud Schotti Script. Hifpan. vol. 429.

Marian. hill, lib. xxiii. c. 9.

N 2 THE

Si:T.ITl. TE most daring leaders of faEtion would not

'y ' have ventured on these measures, nor have con-

ducted them with such publick ceremony, if the
sentiments of the people concerning the royal dig.
nity, had not been so formed by the laws and
policy, to which they were accustomed both in
Castile and Catalonia, as prepared them to approve
of such extraordinary proceedings, or to acquicsce
in them.

The cnni IN Aragon, the form of government was mo-
,t;ion and narchical, but the genius and maxims of it were
-overnlmcnt
otAigon. purely republican. The Kings, who were long

elective, retained only the shadow of power; the
real excrcife of it was in the Cortes or parliament
of the kingdom. This supreme affei-bly was corn-
posed of four different arms or members. T',he
nobility of the first rank. The Equestrian order,
or nobility of the second class. The reprefenta-
tives of the cities and towns, whose right to a place
in the Cortes, if we may give credit to the hillo-
rians of Aragon, was coeval with the constitution
The ecclesiastical order, composed of the digni-
taries of the church, together with the reprclcn-
tative4 of the inferior clergy . No law could pals
in this ambly without the afiTnt of every single
member who had a right to vote'. Without the
permission of the Cortes, no tax could be ipolcil;
no war could be declared; no peace concludtd;
no money could be coined ; nor any alteration be

e Forma de cel brar Cortes en Aragon. por cron. Martel.

M arc
f l, . . .

nil'-'

made in the current specie . The power of re- SECT. I.
viewing the proceedings of all inferior courts, the
privilege of inlpeCting every department of ad-
miniffration, and the right of redrefling all griev-
ances, belonged to the Cortes. Nor did those who
conceived themielves to be aggrieved, address the
Cortes in the humble tone of upplicants, and pc-
tition for redress; they demanded it as the birth-
right of freemen, and required the guardians of
their liberty to decide with refpet to the points
which they laid before them ". This sovereign
court was held, during ifveral centuries, every
year; but, in conflquence of a regulation intro-
duced about the beginning of the fourteenth cen-
tury, it was convoked from that period only once
in two years. After it was afl'mbled, the King
had no right to prorogue or dissolve it without its
own content; and the leffion continued forty days Y.

NOT satisfied with having eretcd such formida- Oticeand

ble barriers against the encroachments of the royal o?l l"
prerogative, nor willing to commit the guardianfilip J"tl'.
of their liberties to the vigilance and authority of
an alliebly, similar to the diets, flates-general, and
parliamen s, in which the other feudal nations
placed so much contidence, the Aragoncl: had re-
course to an inflitution peculiar to tlhemiclves, and
eleced a Jtufliza or supreme judge. This magif-

" Hier. Blanca comment. rer. Aragon. ap. Schot. Script.
llifpan. vol. iii. p. 750.

x Martel. Forma de celebr. p. 2.
i Hicr. Blanca comment. 763.

N 3 trate,

SECT.IIt. trate, whose office bore some resemblance to that
t''v' of the Ephori in ancient Sparta, acted as the pro-

tecor of the people, and the comptroller of the
Prince. The person of the Jufiiza was sacred,
his power and jurisdiction almost unbounded.
He was the supreme interpreter of the laws. Not
only inferior judges, but the Kings themselves were
bound to consult him in every doubtful cafe, and
to receive his relponfes with implicit deference *.
An appeal lay to him from the royal judges, as
well as from those appointed by the barons within
their refpecive territories. Even when no appeal
was made to him, he could interpose by his own
authority, prohibit the ordinary judge to proceed,
take immediate cognizance of the cause himself,
and remove the party accused to the Manifeftatin1
or prison of the state, to which no person had ac.
cess but by his permission. His power was exerted
with no less vigour and effect in superintending
the administration of government, than in regulat-
ing the course of justice. It was the prerogative
of the Juftiza to infpet the conduct of the King.
He had a title to review all the royal proclama-
tions and patents, and to declare whether or not
they were agreeable to law, and ought to be car-
ried into execution. He, by his sole authority,
could exclude any of the King's ministers from
the conduct of affairs, and call them to answer for

* Blanca has preserved two responses of the Jufl;za to

James II. who reigned towards the close of the thirteenth cen-
tury, Blanca 748.

their

their mal-administration. He himself was account- Sr CT. IrU.
able to the Cortes alone, for the manner in which .-.
he discharged the duties of this high office, and
performed funcions of the greatest importance that
could be committed to a fubjeEt HH] Z.

Ir is evident from a bare enumeration of the Tir rrla

p''we ciro
privileges of the Aragonefe Cortes, as well as of cm-r .MP

. , , ,

. i T n~~~~~~~~~- t~w;tiii nar-

the rights belonging to the Jutiza, that a very oi,,it.
small portion of power remained in the hands of
the King. The Aragonefe seem to have been so-
licitous that their Monarchs should know and feel
tis slate of impotence, to which they were re-
duced. Even in swearing allegiance to their ifve-
reign, an aft which ought, naturally, to be accom-
panied with profefions of submission and relpest,
they devised an oath, in such a form, as to remind
him of his dependence on his fubjests. " We,"
said the Juftiza to the King in name of his high-
spirited barons, " who are each of us as good, and
who are altogether more powerfil than you, pro-
mise obedience to your government, if you main-
tain our rights and liberties; but if nor, not."
Conformably to this oath, they eitablifhcd it as a
fundamental article in their conltitution, that if
the King should violate their rights and privileges,
it was lawful for the people to dilclaim him as
their sovereign, and to elet another, even though
a heathen, in his place a. he attachment of the

[HH] NOTE XXXI.

Hier. Blanca Comment. p. 747-755.
P cir. Blanca Comment. 7zo.

N 4 Arag^ncfe

SECT. IIT. Aragonefe to this singular constitution of govern;

ment, was extreme, and their rfpeEt for it ap.
proached to superstitious venerati n Il]. In the
preamble to one of their laws, t y declare, that
such w,.s the barrcnnefs of their country, and the
poverty of the inhabitants, that, if it were not on
account of the liberties by which they were diftin-
guifhd from other nations, the pcple would aban.
don it, and go in quell of a settlement to some more
fruitful region b.

Confitit;on IN Caltile, there were not such peculiarities in
and g vtln-
nr.t of the form of government, as to eflablif any re.

markable diltinaion between it and that of the
other European nations. The executive pait of
government was committed to the King, but wih
a prerogative extremely limited. The legifLtive
authority resided in the Corces, which was corn-
posed of the nobility, the dignified ecclefiaflicks,
and the reprclentatives of the cities. The afltmbly
of the Cortes in Castile was very ancient, and
seems to have been coeval with the confiitution.
The members of the three different orders, who had
a right of luffrage, met in one place, and delibe-
rated as one colletive body; the decisions of which
were regulated by the sentiments of the majority.
The right of imposing taxes, of enafting laws,
and of redressing grievances belonged to this as-
fcmbly; and in order to secure the afTfnt of the
King to fiuch fiatutes and regulations as were deem-

til] NOTE XXXII.
.k Hicr. Blanca Com. p. 7 5 1

ed salutary or beneficial to the kingdom, it was SECT. Ir.
usual in the Cortes, to take no ftep towards grant-
ing money, until all business relative to the pub-
lick welfare was concluded. The reprcfentatives
of cities seem to have obtained a feat very early
in the Cortes of Castile, and soon acquired such
influence and credit, as were very uncommon, at a
ptriod when the splendor and pre-eminence of the
nobility had eclipled or annihilated all other orders
of men. The number of members from cities,
bore such a proportion to that of the whole col-
letive body, as rendered them extremely refpec-
table in the Cortes [KK]. The degree of confi-
deration, which they pofeffed in the itate, may be
estimated by one event. Upon the death of John I. D, 'I9-
a council of regency was appointed to govern the
kingdom during the minority of his ion. It was
composed of an equal number of noblemen, and
of deputies chosen by the cities; the latter were
admitted to the fame rank, and inveted with the
fame powers, as prelates and grandees of the firit
order . But though the members of communi-
ties in Castile were elevated above the condition
wherein they were placed in other kingdoms of
Europe; though they had attained to such politi-
cal importance, that even the proud and jealous
spirit of the feudal aristocracy could not exclude
them from a considerable ihare in government; yet
the nobles, notwithstanding thef acquisitions of
the commons, continued to aflert the privileges of

[KK] NOTE XXXIII.
' Marian, hilt. lib. xviii. c. 15.

their

SECT.III. their order, in opposition to the crown, in a tone

extremely high. There was not any body ofnobi.
lity in Europe more distinguished for independence
of spirit, haughtiness of deportment, and bold pre.
tensions, than that of Castile. The history of that
monarchy affords the most striking examples of
the vigilance with which they observed, and of the
vigour with which they opposed every scheme of
their Kings, that tended to encroach on their ju.
rifdi&ion, to diminish their dignity, or to abridge
their power. Even in their ordinary intercourse
with their Monarchs, they preserved such a confci-
oufnefs of their rank, that the nobles of the first
order claimed it as a privilege to be covered in the
royal pretence, and approached their sovereigns ra.
ther as equals than as fubjets.

THE constitution of the subordinate monarchies,

which depended on the crowns of Castile and Ara-
gon, nearly resembled that of the kingdom to which
they were annexed. In all of them, the dignity
and independence of the nobles were great the
immunities and power of the cities were con-
fiderable.

Various AN attentive observation of the singular fitua-
theimited tion of Spain, as well as the various events which
athsodprY0f occurred there, from the invasion of the Moors to
Monarch. the union of its kingdoms under Ferdinand and

Isabella, will discover the causes, to which all the
peculiarities in its political constitution I have
pointed out, ought to be ascribed.

As

As the provinces of Spain were wrested from SECT. .

the Mahometans gradually and with difficulty, the L
nobles, who followed the fiandard of any eminent
leader in thcfe wars, conquered not for him alone,
but for themselves. They claimed a hare in the
lands which their valour had torn from the enemy,
and their prosperity and power increased, in pro-
portion as the territory of the Prince extended.

DURING their perpetual wars with the Moors,

the Monarchs of Spain depended so much on their
nobles, that it became necessary to conciliate their
good will by successive grants of new honours and
privileges. By the time that any Prince could
eftablilh his dominion in a conquered province,
the greater part of the property was parcelled out
by him among his barons, with such jurifdialion
and immunities, as railed thein almost to sovereign
power.

AT the fame time, the kingdoms erected in so

many different corners of Spain, were extremely
inconsiderable. The petty Monarch was but lit-
tle elevated above his nobles. They, feeling thcm-
selves to be almost his equals, ated as such. The
Kings of such limited domains could neither com-
mand much refpe&, nor possess great power; and
noblemen, ib nearly on the fame level, could not
look up to them with that reverence, with which
the sovereigns of the great monarchies in Europe
were viewed by their subjects [LL].

[LL] NOTE XXXIV.

THiEse

SECT.III. THESE circumstances concurred in exalting the

nobility, and in depressing the royal authority;
there were other causes which railed the cities in
Spain to consideration and power.

As the open country, during the wars with the

Moors, was perpetually exposed to the excurfionl
of the enemy, with whom no peace or truce w:s
so permanent as to prove any lasting security, self-
preservation obliged persons of all ranks to fix
their residence in places of strength. The cafties
of ti;e barons, which, in other countries, afforded
a commodious retreat fronm the depredations or
banditti, or from the transient violence of any i-
terior commotion, were unable to resist an enetn,
whlofe operations were condufted with regular anl
perlevering vigour. Cities, in which great num.
bers united for their mutual defence, were the
only places in which people could fix their reli-
lence with any profpea of safety. To this was
owing the rapid growth of thole cities in Spain
of which the Chritlians recovered poffcffion. All
who fled from the Moorish yoke resorted to them,
as to an asylum; and there, the greater part ot
those, who took the field againlt the Mahometans,
eftabliflied their families.

EACH of these cities, during a longer or shorter

course of years, was the capital of a little state,
and enjoyed all the advantages, which accelerate
the increase of inhabitants in every place that is
the feat of government.

Tunllr

THE number of cities in Spain, at the begin. SECT.IIL

ning of the fifteenth century, was considerable, 4
and they were peopled far beyond the proportion
which was common in other parts of Europe, ex-
cept in Italy and the Low-Countries. The Moors
had introduced manufactures into those cities,
while under their dominion. The Christians, who,
by intermixture with them, had learned their arts,
continued to cultivate these. The trade of several
of the Spanish towns appears to have been con-
fiderable; and the spirit of commerce continued
to preserve the number of their inhabitants, as
the sense of danger had first induced them to
crowd together.

As the Spanifl cities were populous, many of

the inhabitants were of a rank superior to those
who resided in towns in other countries of Europe.
That cause, which contributed chiefly to their
population, affected equally persons of every con-
dition, who flocked thither promiscuously, in order
to find flelter, or in hopes of making a stand
there against the enemy, with greater advantage
than in any other station. The persons elected as
their reprcfcntatives in the Cortes by the cities, or
promoted to offices of trust and dignity in the
government of the community, were often, as will
appear from tranfaftions which I lhall hereafter
relate, of such considerable rank in the kingdom,
as rcflected luifre on their constituents, and on the
fiations wherein they were placed.

2 As

SECT. III. As it was impossible to carry on a continual

war against the Moors, without some other mili-
tary force, than that which the barons were obliged
to bring into the field, in consequence or the feudal
tenures, it became necessary to have ome troops,
particularly a body of light cavalry, in constant pay.
It was one of the privileges of the nobles, that
their lands were exempt from the burden of taxes.
The charge of supporting the troops requisite for
the publick safety, fell wholly upon the cities;
and their Kings, being obliged frequently to apply
to them for aid, found it neceflary to gain their
favour by conceflions, which not onlyextended their
immunities, but added to their wealth and power.

WHEN the influence of all there circum4tances,

peculiar to Spain, is added to the general and
common causes, which contributed to aggrandize
cities in other countries of Europe, this will fully
account for the extensive privileges which they
acquired, as well as for the extraordinary confi.
deration to which they attained, in all the Spaniih
kingdoms [MM].

Meafre of. BY these exorbitant privileges of the nobility,
pincs in and this unusual power of the cities in Spain, the
otedtheir royal prerogative was hemmed in on every fide,
powe'i and reduced within very narrow bounds. Sensible

of this, and impatient of Iich restraint, different
Monarchs endeavoured, at various junctures, to
enlarge their own jurifdiition, and to circumscribe

[MM] NOTE XXXV.

that

that of their subjects. Their power, however, or SECT. III.
their abilities were so unequal to the undertaking, -
that their efforts were attended with little fuccels.
But when Ferdinand and Isabella found themselves Particularly

of Ferdi.
at the head of all the united kingdoms of Spain, nand and

Ifablla

and delivered from the danger and interruption
of domeftick wars, they were not only in a con-
dition to resume, but were able to prosecute with
advantage, the schemes of extending the preroga-
tive, which their ancestors had attempted in vain.
Ferdinand's profound sagacity in concerting his
measures, his persevering industry in conducting
them, and his uncommon address in carrying them
into execution, fitted him admirably for an under-
taking which required all these talents.

As the overgrown power, and high pretensions Fetdanand's
of the nobility were what the Monarchs of Spain fchmcs for

abridging
felt most sensibly, and bore with the greatest im- the privi-

* i * s r T' T

9 * leges and

patience, the great object of Ferdinand's policy ploerofthle
was to reduce these within more moderate bounds. nubility
Under various pretexts, sometimes by violence,
more frequently in consequence of decrees ob-
tained in the courts of law, he wrefled from the
barons a great part of the lands, which had been
granted to them by the inconsiderate bounty of
former Monarchs, particularly during the feeble
and profuse reign of his predecessor Henry IV.
He did not give the entire conduct of affairs to
persons of noble birth, who were accustomed to
occupy every department of importance in peace
or in war, as if it had been a privilege peculiar to

their

SECT. tir. their order, to be employed as the sole counsellors
'"rJ' and ministers of the crown. He often tranf{tedl

buGnefs of great consequence without their inter-
vention, and committed many offices of power
and trust to new men, devoted to his interest d.
He introduced a degree of ltate and dignity into
his court, which being unknown in Spain, while
it remained split into many small kingdoms, taught
the nobles to approach their sovereign with more
ceremony, and gradually rendered him the object
of greater deference and respect.

Partikclty THE annexing the masterships of the three miii-
by annexing
tl, .Fr:.. tary orders of St. Jago, Calatrava, and Alcantaru,
maflsiei ips Zi
o th,,' t.r to the crown, was another expedient, by wrichi
ord"rs to th Ferdinand greatly augmented the revenue a;:l
crown C)

power of the Kings of Spain. These orders were
inltituted in imitation of those of the KnigPts
Templars and of St. John of Jerufalcm, on pil:-
potl to wage perpetual war with the Mahometans,
and to protect the pilgrims who visited Com;njil:
tella, or other places of eminent fantity in Spain.
The zeal and superstition of the ages, in which
they were founded, prompted perobns of every
rank to beltow such liberal donations on those holy
warriors, that, in a short time, they engrollUd a;
conliderable share in the property and wcalth of
the kingdom. The masterships of there orders
came to be tations of the greatet power and ol)u-
lence to which a Spanish nobleman could be ad-
vanced. These high dignities were in the cl(lplil

" Zurita anales dc Arag. torn. i. p. zz.
2

V

.f the Knights of the Order, and placed the per- SECT.1I.
sons on whom they conferred them almost on a
level with their Sovereign [NN]. Ferdinand, un-
willing that the nobility, whom he confidered as
already too formidable, hould derive such addi-
tional credit and influence from pofchfing the
government of these wealthy fraternities, was soli.
citous to wrest it out of their hands, and to vest
it in the crown. His measures for accomplifling A D. 1476.
this, were wifely planned, and executed with and 193.
vigour . By address, by promises, and by threats,
he prevailed on the Knights of each Order to
place Isabella and him at the head of it. Inno-
cent VIII. and Alexander VI. gave this election
the fantion of papal authority f; and fubfcquent
Pontiffs rendered the annexation of these master-
flsips to the crown perpetual.

WHILE Ferdinand, by this measure, diminished An bc;r.

the power and influence of the nobility, and added the urifdi-
new lustre or authority to the crown, he was ton o th
taking other important steps with a view to the
fame object. The overeign jurildiction which the
feudal barons exercised within their own territories,
was the pride and diftinion of their ord.r. To
have invaded openly a privilege which they prized
lo highly, and in defence of which they would

[NN] NOTE XXXVr.
" Marian. hill. lib. xxv. c. 5.

Zurita anales, ton. v. p. 22. Alii. Anton. Nebrilnnrfis

rerum a Ferdinand & Elizabe gellarum decades. ii. apud
Schot. script. Ilifpan. i. 8Co.

VOL; I. O have

SECr. III. have run so eagerly to arms, was a measure too
'J ' daring for a Prince of Ferdinand's cautious tern.

per. He took advantage, however, of an oppor-
tunity which the state of his kingdoms and the
spirit of his people presented him, in order to
undermine what he durst not afault. The incef.
sant depredations of the Moors, the want of dif.
cipline among the troops which were employed to
oppose them, the frequent civil wars between the
crown and the nobility, as well as the undifcerning
rage with which the barons carried on their private
wars with each other, filled all the provinces of
Spain with disorder. Rapine, outrage, and mur-
der, became so common, as not only to interrupt
commerce, but in a great measure to suspend all
intercourse between one place and another. That
security and protection which men expec from
entering into civil society, ceased almost totally.
Interior order and police, while the feudal infitu-
tions remained in vigour, were so little objets of
attention, and the administration of justice was so
extremely feeble, that it would have been vain to
have expected relief from the established laws or
the ordinary judges. But the evil became so in-
tolerable, and the inhabitants of cities, who were
the chief sufferers, grew so impatient of this
anarchy, that felf-prefervation forced them to have
1260. recourse to an extraordinary remedy. About the

middle of the thirteenth century, the cities in the
kingdom of Aragon, and after their example
those in Cafile, formed themselves into an also-

ciation,

Ciation, distinguished by the name of the Ioy SBcT.l!.
Brotherhood. They exafted a certain contribution -
from each of the aflociated towns they levied a
considerable body of troops, in order to prote&
travellers, and to pursue criminals; they appointed
judges, who opened their courts in various parts
of the kingdom. Whoever was guilty of murder,
robbery, or of any aft that violated the publick
peace, and was seized by the troops of the Brother-
hood, was carried before judges of their nomination,
who, without paying any regard to the exclusive
and sovereign jurisdiction which the lord of the
place might claim, tried and condemned the crimi-
nals. By means of this, the prompt and impartial
administration of justice was restored; and together
with it, internal tranquillity and order began to
return. The nobles alone murmured at this falu-
tary institution. They complained of it as an
encroachment on one of their mroft aluable privi.
leges. They remonstrated against it in an high
tone; and, on some occasions, refused to grant
any aid to the crown, unless it were abolishedo
Ferdinand, however, was sensible not only of the
good effets of the Holy Brotherhood with refped
to the police of his kingdoms, but perceived its
tendency to abridge, and at length to annihilate
the territorial jurifdietion of the nobility. He
countenanced the institution on every occasion.
He supported it with the whole force of royal au-
thority; and beides the expedients employed by
him in common with the other monarchs of F -

0 2 rope,

SEcr. IL. rope, he availed himself of this institution, wlich

was peculiar to his kingdom, in order to limit and
abolish that independent jurifdicion of the nobi!ity,
which was no les inconsistent with the autho:ity
of the Prince, than with the order of focicty '00].

Notw;th- BUT though Ferdinand by there me cfres con-
flanming all
there, the fiderably enlarged the boundaries of prerogative,
government
of Spain fill and acquired a degree of influence and power far
tcm.y beyond what any of his predecessors had enjoyed,

yet the limitations of the royal authority, as well as
the barriers against its encroachments, continued
to be many and strong. The spirit of liberty wa,
vigorous among the people of Spain; the fpii
of independence was high among the nobility;
and though the love of glory, peculiar to the
Spaniards in every period of their history, prompted
them to support Ferdinand with zeal in 'I foreign
operations, and to afford him such aid as c::b!c'd
him not only to undertake but to execute g-cl.
enterprizes; he reigned over his iibjects with a
jurifdiLion less extensive than that of any of the
great monarchs in Europe. It will appear from
many passages in the following history, that, du-
ring a considerable part of the reign of his luc-
celbr Charles V. the prerogative of the Spanilh
crown was equally circumscribed.

Conntutinn TlH ancient government and laws in France so
aiid gove'rn-
mr,,rof nearly recmlbled those of the other feudal king-
Frjnce.

[00] NOTE XXXVII.

cloms

doms, that such a detail with refpet to them as SECT.I!I.
was nceffary, in order to cnvey some idea of the
nature and effcets of the p, c..liar inftiturions which
took lace in Spain, would be fuperiluous. In
thi view which i hve exhibited o the means by
whichi the French monarchs acquired such full
conmmand of the national force of their kingdom,
as enabled the-n to engage in extensive fchlrmes of
forc:gn operation, I have already pointed out the
great steps by which they advanced towards a
more ample pofTeffion of political power, and a
more uncontrouled exerciie of their royal prero-
gative. All that now remains is to take notice of
such particulars in the conflitution of France, as
serve either to liftinguifli it from that of other
countries, or tend to throw any light on the tranf-
aflons of that period to which the following
history extends.

UNDER the French monarchs of the first race, rP.wr O

the royal prerogative was very inconsiderable. tiGlcra^'
The General Aliinmblies of thenation,.which met "'dir thc

fill r.,c of

annually at stated eafons, extended their authority King.
to every department of government. The power
of electing Kings, of enacting laws, of redrelling
grievances, of conferring donations on the Prince,
of passing judgment in the last resort, with rpe6t
to every person and to every cause, resided in
this great convention of the nation. Under irnier tlie
the second race of Kings, notwithstanding, the ro
power and splendour which the conquests of
Charlemagne added to the crown, the general

0 3 aiffmblies

SEcT.III. assemblies of the nations continued to possess exten.
cvr< five authority. The right of determining which of

the royal family should be placed on the throne, was
vested in them. The Princes elevated to that dig.
nity by their suffrage were accustomed regularly to
call and to consult them with respect to every affair
of importance to the state, and without their consent
no law was passed, and no new tax was levied.
Vnderthc BUT, by the time that HEugh Capet, the father

of the third race of Kings, took pofteffion of the
throne of France, such changes had happened in
the political itate of the kingdom, as considerably
affeAed the power and jurifdistion of the general
assembly of the nation. The royal authority in
the hands of the degenerate poftlrity of Charle-
mnagne, had dwindled into insignificance and con-
tempt. Every considerable proprietor of land had
formed his territory into a barony, almost inde-
pendent of the sovereign. The dukes or gover-
nors of provinces, the counts or governors of towns
and small dtritls, and the great officers of the
crown, had rendered these dignities, originally
granted only during pleasure or for life, hereditary
in their families. Each of these had usurped all
the rights which hitherto had been deemed the
diftinEtions of royalty, particularly the privileges
of dispensing justice within their own domains, of
coining money, and of waging war. Every district
was governed by local customs, acknowledged a
distinct lord, and pursued a eparate interest. The
fqrmality of doing homage to their overeign, was

almost

almost the only at of fubjeaion, which haughty SECT. Il.
barons would perform, and that bound them no ~
farther than they were willing to acknowledge its
obligation [PP].

IN a kingdom broken into so many independent The Power

o£ the Gene.

baronies, hardly any common principle of union ra Afrm-
remained; and the general aflrebly in its delibe- iidrbi.,id
rations could scarcely confider the nation as forming 'xt^n"f'i
one body, or eftablilh common regulations to be of
equal force in every part. Within the immediate
domains of the crown the King might publih
laws, and they were obeyed, because there he was
acknowledged as the only lord. But if he had
aimed at rendering there general, that would have
alarmed the barons as an encroachment upon the
independence of their jurifdi&ion. The barons,
with no lets care, avoided the enating of general
laws, because the execution of them n:ult have
been vested in the King, and would have enlarged
that paramount power, which was the object of
their jealousy. Thus under the deicendants of
Hugh Capet, the States General (for that was the
name by which the supreme alfembly of the Fren h
nation came then to be diftnguifhed) loft their
legiltative authority, or at least entirely relinquiflied
the exercise of it. From that period, thejurilic-
tion of the States General extended no tarther than
to the imposition of new taxes, the determination
es questions with refpea to the right of succession

[PP] NOTE XXXVIII.

4 to

SECT. IIr. to the crown, the fettling of the regency when the

*c preceding monarch had not fixed it by his will,

and the presenting remonstrances enumerating the
grievances of which the nation wished to obtain
redrcfs.

As, during several centuries the monarchs of

Europe seldom demanded extraordinary fubidies of
their fubjeds, and the other events which required
the interposition of the Sates, rarely occurred,
their meetings in France were not frequent. They
were fuimmoned occasionally by their Kings, when
compelled by their wants or by their fears to have
recourse to their aid; but they did nor, like the
Diet in Germany, the Cortes in Spain, or the Par-
liament in Lngland, form an fe;ential member of
the constitution, the regular exertion of whose
powers was requisite to give vigour and order to
government.

The crown WVIEN the States of France ceased to exercise
b¢} nstoac- th K

l * i .-'

quire glwf- legillative authority, the Kings began to aflume it.
tlptya. They ventured at first on ads of legislation with

great reserve; and after taking every precaution
that could prevent their ulbjccts from being alarmed
at the exercise of a new power. They did not at
once illue their ordinances in a tone of authority
and command. They treated with their fubjefts
they pointed out what was best; and allured them
to comply with it. By degrees, however, as the
prerogative of the crown extended, and as the fu-
preme jrifdidion of the royal courts came to be

a2:~ e~iftabliflwd,

?'

established, the Kings of France assumed more SECT. II.
openly the file and authority of law givers; and -'
before the beginning of the fifteenth century,
the complete legislative power was vested in
them [ QQj.

HAVING secured this important acquisition, the and the

power of

Reps which led to the right of imposing taxes were levying
rendered few and easy. The people, accustomed to
fee their sovereigns, by their sole authority, iflue
ordinances which regulated points of the greatelt
consequence with respect to the property of their
fubjets, were not alarmed when they were required,
by the royal edics, to contribute certain inums to-
wards supplying the exigencies of government, and
carrying forward themeafures of the nation. When
Charles VII. and Louis XI. sirs ventured to exer-
cife this new power, in the manner which I have
already described, the gradual increase of the royal
authority had so imperceptibly prepared the minds
of the people of France for this innovation, that it
excited no commotion in the kingdom, and teems
scarcely to have given rife to any murmur or
complaint.

WHEN the Kings of France had thus engrofcd overn-

i 0~~i~ rn.

i * ~ment of

every power which can be exerted in government; France be-
when the right of making laws, of levying money, ',',"ly mo.
of keeping an army of mercenaries in contfant""chi"'
pay, of declaring war and of concluding peace

[ QQ] NOTE XXXIX.

centered

SECT. III. centered in the crown, the conltitution of the king;
^uPt dom, which, under the first race of Kings, was

nearly denocratical, which, under the ftcond race,
became an aristocracy, terminated, under the third
race, in a pure monarchy. Every thing that tended
to preserve the appearance, or revive the memory
of the ancient mixed government, seems from that
period to have been industriously avoided. During
the long and active reign of Francis I. the variety
as well as extent of whole operations obliged him
to lay many heavy impositions on his subjects, the
States General of France were not once assembled,
nor were the people once allowed to exert the
power of taxing themselves, which, according to
the original ideas of feudal government, was a right
essential to every freeman.

The extr. Two things, however, remained, which mode-
cife of pre-
rogative re- rated the exercise of the regal prerogative, and re.
- rned by
theprivi- itrained it within such bounds as preserved the
lge obili constitution of France from degenerating into mere

despotism. The rights and privileges claimed by
the nobility, must be confidered as one barrier
against the absolute dominion of the crown.
Though the nobles of France had loft that poli-
tical power which was vested in their order as a
body, they itill retained the personal rights and
pre-eminence which they derived from their rank.
They preserved a consciousness of elevation above
other classes of citizens; an exemption from bur-
dens to which they were fubje&;. a contempt of
the occupations in which they were engaged; the

privilege

privilege of assuming ensigns that indicated their SECT. ll.
dignity a right to be treated with a certain degree i
,o deference during peace; and a claim to various
ditlinCtions when in the iicld. Many of these pre-
tensions were not founded on the words of statutes,
or de-;ive from politive laws; they were defined
acid ascertained by the maxims of honour, a title
more delicate, but no less sacred; These rights,
ettablifhed and protected by a principle equally vi-
gilant in guarding, and intrepid in defending them,
arc to the oovereign himself objeds of reipcEt and
veneration. Wherever they stand in its way, the
royal prerogative is bounded. The violence of a
Despot may exterminate such an order of men;
but as long as it subsists, and its ideas of personal
diflindion remain entire, the power of the Prince
has limits g.

As in France, the body of nobility was very nu-

merous, and the individuals of which it was com-
posed retained an high fCnfe of their own pre-emi-
nence, to this we may ascribe, in a great measure,
the mode of exerciling the royal prerogative which
peculiarly diltinguifles the government of that
kingdom. An intermediate order was placed be-
tween the Monarch and his other subjects, and in
every a& of authority it became necelfary to attend
to its privileges, and not only to guard againit any
real violation of these, but to avoid any suspicion
of its being poflible that they might be violated.

De 'Esprit des Loix, liv. ii. c. 4. Dr. Ferguson's Eflay
on the Hist. of Clvil Society, part i. fee, 1o.

Thus

SEcT.I'I. Thus a species of government was etablifhed in

' France, unknown in the ancient world, that of a

monarchy, in which the power of the sovereign,
though urnconfined by any legal or conflitutional
restraint, has certain bounds let to it by the idea,.s
which one class of his fubjeds entertain concerning
their own dignity.

An, hv he THE jurifdidion of the Parliaments in France,
jurif,ii 'i-n
of the ar- particularly that of Paris, was the other barri'.
p'rTu,:rl which served to confine the exercile of the rov al
that of
Pars prerogative wikhin certain limits. The parliament

of Paris was originally the court of the Kings of
France, to which they committed the fuprerr.e ad-
ministration of jultice within their own domains,
as well as the power of deciding with refpeEt to all
caks brought before it by appeals from the courts
of the barons. When, in consequence of events
and regultions which have been mentioned for-
merly, the time and place of its meeting ere fixed,
when not only the form of its procedure, but the
principles on which it decided, were rendered re-
gular and conliitent, when every cause of impor-
tance was finally determined there, and when the
people became accustomed to resort thither as to
the supreme temple of justice, the parliament of
Paris role to high estimation in the kingdom, its
members acquired dignity, and its decrees were
submitted to with detfrence. Nor was this the
only lburce of the power and influence which the
parliament obtained. The Kings of France, when
they first began to assume the legislative power, in

order

order to reconcile the minds of their people to this SECT.III.
new exertion of prerogative, produced their edicts v"
and ordinances in the parliament of Paris, that they
might be approved of and registered there, before
they were published and declared to be of autho.
rity in the kingdom. During the intervals between
the meetings of the States General of the kingdom,
or under those reigns when the States General were
not aflembled, the Monarchs of France were ac-
customed to consult the parliament of Paris with
rcfpect to the moit arduous affairs of government,
and frequently regulated their conduct by its ad-
vice, in declaring war, in concluding peace, and in
other tranfadions of publick concern. Thus there
was erected in the kingdom a tribunal which be-
came the great depository of the laws, and by the
uniform tenor of its decrees, it ef'ablilhed princi-
ples of juflice and forms of proceeding which were
confidered as so sacred, that even the sovereign
power of the Monarch durif not venture to difre-
gard or to violate them. The members of this
illultrious body, though they neither poffcfs legis-
lative authority, nor can be confidered as the re-
presentatives of the people, have availed them-
selves of the reputation and influence which they
had acquired among their countrymen, in order to
make a stand to the utmost of their ability against
every unprecedented and exorbitant exertion of the
prerogative. In every period of the French his-
tory, they have merited the praise of being the vir-

tuous

SECT. II. tuus but feeble guardians of the rights and pri.

CLP3 vileges of the nation [RR].

Confitdtion THE kingdom of France extends to the confine
and govern-
mcntofthe of the German Empire, from which Charles V,
Empire. derived his title of highef dignity. In explaining

the political constitution of this vast and com.
plex body at the beginning of the sixteenth ctn.
tury, I hall avoid entering into such a detail as
would involve my readers in that inextricable la.
byrinth, which it formed by the multiplicity of
its tribunals, the number of its members, their
interfering rights, and by the endless discussions
or refinements of the publick lawyers of Germany
with refpeEt to all these.

Jts Rateun. THE Empire of Charlemagne was a ru&ure
der Charle
iagne and ereted in so hort a time that it could not be per.
his dea"- manent. Under his immediate successor it began
Ia ntS.

to totter, and it oon fell to pieces. The crown
of Germany was separated for ever from that of
France, and the descendants of Charlemagne efta-
blifhed two great monarchies so situated as to give
rife to a perpetual rivalflip and enmity between
them. But the Princes of the race of Charle-
magne who were placed on the Imperial throne,
were not altogether so degenerate, as those of the
fame family who reigned in France. In the hands
of the former the royal authority retained some
vigour, and the nobles of Germany, though pof-

[RR] NOTE XL.

sessed

fefled of extensive privileges as well as ample ter- SECT. If.
ritories, did not so early attain independence."* '
The great offices of the crown continued to be at
the disposal of the sovereign, and during a long
period, fiefs remained in their original state, with-
out becoming hereditary and perpetual in the
families to which they had been granted.

AT length the German branch of the family of Other fmtn-

Charlemagne became extinct and his feeble de-d, so the
fcendants who reigned in France had funk intolimper'a

dignity.

such contempt, that the Germans, without looking
towards them, exercised the right inherent in a
free people; and in a general assembly of theA. D.9,i,,
nation eleEted Conrad Count of Franconia Em-
peror. After him Henry of Saxony, and his de-
icendants the three Othos, were placed, in fuc-
cession, on the Imperial throne, by the tiffrages
of their countrymen. The extensive territories of
the Saxon Emperors, their eminent abilities and
enterprizing genius, not only added new vigour to
the Imperial dignity, but raised it to higher power
and pre-eminence. Otho the Great marched atA.D,.gs.
the head of a numerous army into Italy, and after
the example of Charlemagne, gave law to that
country. Every power there recognized his au-
thority. He created Popes and dcpofed them by
his sovereign mandate. He annexed the kingdom
of Italy to the German Empire. Elated with his
success, he assumcd the title of Cafar Auguflus .
A Prince born in the heart of Germany pretended

I Annalifia Saxo, &c. ap. Struv. Corp. vol. i p. 246.

to

SECT. Ill. to be the successor of the Emperors of ancient

t' Rome, and claimed a right to the fame power

and prerogative.

Th CGer- BUT while the Emperors, by means of there
man nobi.
lity acquire new titles, and new dominions, gradually acquired
independent
and haet. additional authority and splendour, the nobility
,^iy utho Of Germany went on at the fame time extending

their privileges and jurifdiion. The situation cf
affairs was favourable to their attempts. The
vigour which Charlemagne had given to govern-
ment quickly relaxed. The inability of ome of
his successors was such, as would have encouraged
vassals less enterprizing than the nobles of that
age, to have claimed new rights and to have
assumed new powers. The civil wars in which
other Emperors were engaged, obliged them to
pay perpetual court to their fubjefts on whose sup.
port they depended, and not only to connive at
their usurpations, but to permit and even to au-
thorize them. Fiefs gradually became hereditary.
They were transmitted not only in the dire&, but
in the collateral line. The invefliture of them
was demanded not only by male but by female
heirs. Every baron began to exercise fovercign
jurifdiion within his own domains; and the
Dukes and Counts of Germany toolk wide fleps
towards rendering their territories diflin& and in-

The Cer. dependent States '. The Saxon Emperors ob-
man ecclefi-.
aiiks raif. served their progress, and were aware of its ten-
ed to the
lame power. i Pfeffel. Abregc, p. zo, ,2. Lib. Feudor. tit. i.

dency,

denty. But as they could not hope to humble SECT. IIl
vassals already grown too potent, unless they had -'
turned their whole force as well as attention to
that enterprize, and as they were extremely intent
on their expeditions into Italy, which they could
not undertake without the concurrence of their
nobles, they were solicitous not to alarm them by
any direct attack on their privileges and jurif-
didions. They aimed, however, at undermining
their power. With this view, they inconsiderately
bestowed additional territories, and accumulated
new honours on the clergy, in hopes that this or-
der might serve as a counterpoise to that of the
nobility in any future struggle k.

THE unhappy effeAs of this fatal error in policy Th, fatal

were quickly felt. Under the Emperors of the agrd,
Franconian and Swabian lines, whom the Ger- ig the

cery.

mans by their voluntary election placed on the A.D.xo,4*
Imperial throne, a new face of things appeared,
and a scene was exhibited in Germany, which
astonished all Christendom at that time, and
in the present ae appears almost incredible. The
Popes, hitherto dependent on the Emperors, and
indebted for power as well as dignity to their
beneficence and protecion, began to claim a fu-
perior jurifdicion; and in virtue of authority
which they pretended to derive from heaven, tried,
condemned, excommunicated, and dpofed their
former matters. Nor is this to be confidered

k Pfeffel. Abreg:, p. 154.
VOL. I. P merely

SEcT. tII. merely as a frantick ally of passion in a pontiff

intoxicated with high ideas concerning the extent
of priestly domination, and the plenitude of papal
authority. Gregory VII. was able as well as daring.
His presumption and violence were accompanied
with political discernment and sagacity. He had
observed that the Princes and nobles of Germany,
had acquired such considerable territories and such
extensive jurifdition as rendered them not only
formidable to the Emperors, but disposed them to
favour any attempt to circumscribe their power.
He foresaw that the ecclefiafticks of Germany,
raised almost to a level with its Princes, were
ready to support any person who would stand forth
as the protector of their privileges and indepen-
dence. With both of there Gregory negociated,
and had secured many devoted adherents among
them, before he ventured to enter the lifts against
the head of the Empire.

The rontenl HE began his rupture with Henry IV. upon a
hb-tcn the
I'oi.s nd pretext that was popular and plausible. He corn
aEn phe'or plained of the venality and corruption with which
iteueccs of the Emperor had granted the investiture of bene-
thes.

sices to ecclefiafticks. He contended that this
right belonged to him as head of the church ; he
required Henry to confine himself within the
bounds of his civil jurifdidion, and to abstain for
the future from such sacrilegious encroachments
on the spiritual dominion. All the censures of the
church were denounced against Henry, becaue

he

he refused to relinquih those powers which his SECT.III.
predecessors had uniformly exercised. The most L"'
considerable of the German Princes and eccle-
fiafticks were excited to take arms against him.
His mother, his wife, his sons were wrought upon
to disregard all the ties of blood as well as of
duty, and to join the party of his enemies k. Such
were the successful arts with which the court of
Rome inflamed the superstitious zeal, and con-
du&ted the fatious spirit of the Germans and Ita'
lians, that an Emperor, distinguished not only for
many virtues, but possessed of considerable talents,
was at length obliged to appear as a supplicant
at the gate of the castle in which the Pope resided,
and to Rfand there, three days, bare-footed, in the
depth of winter, imploring a pardon, which at A. D.o7.
length he obtained with difficulty [SS].

THIS a of humiliation degraded the Imperial

dignity. Nor was the deprefflon only momentary.
The contest between Gregory and Henry gave
rife to the two great faftions of the Guelfs and
Ghibellines; the former of which supporting the
pretensions of the Popes, and the latter defending
the rights of the Emperor, kept Germany and
Italy in perpetual agitation during three centuries.
A regular system for humbling the Emperors and ThE Impe.

rial autho-

circumscribing their power was formed, and ad- riry gr.a,-
hered to uniformly throughout that period. The 'll d"li""
Popes, the free States in Italy, the nobility and

k Annal. German. ap. Struv. i. p. 35.
[SS] NOTE XLI.

P 2 ecclcfiaficks

SECT. II. ecclefiafticks of Germany, were all interested in

its success; and notwithstanding the return of
some short intervals of vigour, under the admi-
nittration of a few able Emperors, the Imperial
A. D i2;6. authority continued to decline. During the anar-

chy of the long interregnum fubfcquent to the
death of William of Holland, it dwindled down
A. D. 1273. to nothing. Rodulph of Hapfburgh, the founder

of the house of Austria, and who first opened the
way to its future grandeur, was at length eleted
Emperor, not that he might re-establish and ex-
tend the Imperial authority, but because his terri-
tories and influence were so inconsiderable as to
excite no jealousy in the German Princes, who
were willing to preserve the forms of a coniti
tution, the power and vigour of which they had
destroyed. Several of his successors were placed
on the Imperial throne from the fame motive; and
almost every remaining prerogative was wreflcd
out of the hands of feeble Princes unable to excr-
cife or to defend them.

A total DURING this period of turbulence and confu-
,ti Io'iticd sion the conflitution of the Germanick body uncr-
of thle Em- went a total change. The ancient names of courts
'"*e and magiftratts, together with the original Ii1ms

and appearance of policy, were prelirved; but
fiuch new privileges and jurisdiCtion were affuimned,
and so many various rights etablifhed, that the
fame species of government no longer fubfifcfd.
The Princes, the great nobility, the dignified eclde-
fiafticks, the free cities had taken advi'ntag o

the

the interregnum, which have mentioned, to eta- SFcr.ll.
blifl or to extend their ulurpations. fihey clJimd
and exerciled the right of governing their reiCc-
tive territories with full foverelgn.y. 1 hey ac.
knowledged no fuieior with repi)et to any point,
relative to the intcrior adminiltranon ad police
of their domains. Thuv enacted laws, im oled
taxes, coinIrd money, declared war, concluded
peace, a:l exerted every prerogative p culi:ir to
indepfcndnt States. The ideas of order and poli-
tical union which h.:d formed the various provinces
of Germany into one body were ei.tirelv loi ; and
the society mult have difoilv-d, if the forms of
fcudil fu bo'

lin.itio: haa no, prclerve i L.;ch an ap-

pearance of conncctiun or ..cpedence among-the
various members of the community, as t;rcefc,-vd
it rom falling to pieces.

THIS bond of union, however, was extremely Ep,;ients

, , '

* * i * i * i ^ ' r pu!dr"g
eebl-; and no principle remained in the German en i t

this IAte of

conl llcion of fufficlent forcc to maintain publick ',,,,rc.l
order, and hardly to alcertain personal security.
From the acc> flion of Rodull h cf l apburgh, to
the reign of Maximllian, the immediate prede.
cf for of Charlks V. te lEmpirc felt every calamity
which a tate nul ci;, lure wh, n the authority of
government is so much relaxed as to have loft all
vigour. The caulfs ol dillniion among that vast
number of members which compoled the Ger-
manick body, wele infinite and unavoidable.
These gave rile to perpetual private wars, carried
on with all the violence of rfentmlnt when un-

P 3 rcllraincd

SEcT.III. refrained by superior authority. Rapine, outrage,

'3 exacions, became universal. Commerce was in-

terrupted ; induitry suspended; and every part of
Germany resembled a country which an enemy
had plundered and laid desolate'. The variety of
expedients employed with a view to restore order
and tranquillity, prove that the grievances occa-
sioned by this state of anarchy had grown into-
lerable. Arbiters were appointed to terminate the
differences among the several states. The cities
united in a league, the object of which was to
check the rapine and extortions of the nobility.
The nobility formed confederacies, on purpose to
maintain tranquillity among their own order.
Germany was divided into several Circles, in each
of which a provincial and partial jurifdidion was
eftablihfed, to fpply the place of a publick and
common tribunal .

Partlcuat1ly BUT all these remedies were so fruitless, that
by the infli.
tutionofihe they frved only to demonstrate the violence of
Imperial Chamber. that anarchy which prevailed, and the inefficacy

of the means employed to corret it. At lengtih
Maximilian re-established publick order in the
Empire, by instituting the Imperial chamber, a
tribunal composed of judges named partly by the
A. . 49s. Emperor, partly by the fveral States, and veffed

with authority to decide finally concerning all dif-
ferences among the members of the Germanick

I See above, pge 53 and note xxi. Datt. de pace publica
Imper. p. 25, no. 3. p. 28, no. 2'. p. 35, no. 11.

a DAtt. paflim. Struv. Corp. HifR. i. 51o, &c.

body,

body. A few years after, by giving a new form SECT. I!I.
to the Aulick council, which takes cognizance ofA.-1511.
all feudal causes, and ifch as belong to the Em-
peror's immediate jurifdi:ion, he restored some
degree of vigour to the Imperial authority.

BUT notwithstanding the salutary effects of there At th [re-

rnnin f ns

regulations and improvements, the political con. tfxr; nh
fitution of the German Empire, at the commence- . ''. t1',e
ment of the period of which I propose to write 'tci'"
the history, was of a species so peculiar, as not to Stas
resemble perfetly any form of government known
either in the ancient or modern world. It was a
complex body, formed by the association of fiveral
States, each of which possesed sovereign and in-
dependent jurifditlon within its own territories.
Of all the members which composed this united
body, the Emperor was the head. In his name,
all decrees and regulations with refpet to points
of common concern, were issued; and to him the
power of carrying them into execution was com-
mitted. But this appearance of monarchical power
in the Emperor was more than counterbalanced
by the influence of the I'rinces and Statcs of the
Empire in every ack of aciminitration. No l.iv
extending to the whole body could pals, no refo-
lution that affected the general ntereft could be
taken, without the approbation oi the Diet of the
Empire. In this alrembly, every overeign Prince
and State of the Germanick body had a right to be
present, to deliberate, and to vote. The decrees

P 4 or

SECT.II. or ReceDes of the Diet were the laws of the Em.

r'" 'pire, which the Emperor was bound to ratify

and enforce,

Paculiariies UNDER this aspect the constitution of the Em.
in the nla.
nlre of this pire appears a regular confederacy, similar to the
*lotation.p

Achaan league in ancient Greece, or to that of
the United Provinces and of the Swiss Cantons in
modern times. But if viewed in another light,
striking peculiarities in its political htate preicnt
themselves. The Germanick body was riot formed
by the union of members altogether diltinc' and
independent. All the Princes and States joined in
this association, were originally fubjeft to the Em-
perors, and acknowledged them as sovereigns.
Besides this, they originally held their lands as
Imperial fiefs, and in conlequence of this tenure
owed the Emperors all those ervices which feudal
vassals are bound to perform to their liege lord.
But though this political fubjeaion was entirely
at an end, and the influence of the feudal relation
much diminished, the ancient forms and inflitu-
tions introduced while the Emperors governed
Germany with authority, not inferior to that which
the other monarchs of Europe possessed, still re-
mained, Thus an opposition vas elablifhed be-
tween the genius of the government, and the
forms of administration in the German Empire.
The former confidered the Emperor only as the
head of a confederacy, the members of which,
by their voluntary choice, have raised him to that
Fignity the latter seemed to imply, that he is

really

really inverted with overeign power. By this cir- SECT. Ill.
cumitance, such principles of hoflility and discord The dsea
were interwoven in the frame of the Germanick '"'th'e .-

fit,,tion of

body, as affected each of its members, rendering' th Empire.
their interior union incomplete, and their external
efforts feeble and irregular. The effeds of this
vice or disorder inherent in the constitution of the
Empire are so considerable, that, without attend-
ing to them, it is impossible to comprehend many
transactions in the reign of Charles V. or to form
just ideas concerning the genius of the German
government.

THE Emperors of Germany, at the beginning Arinng

of the sixteenth century, were distinguished by the mtid power
most pompous titles, and by such ensigns of dig- o h^."Em
nity as intimated their authority to be superior to
that of all other monarchs. The greatest Princes
of the Empire attended and served them on ome
occasions, as the officers of their houfhold. They
exercised prerogatives which no other sovereign
ever claimed. They retained pretensions to all
the extensive powers which their predecessors had
enjoyed in any former age. But at the fame time,
infead of pofrefing that ample domain which had
belonged to the ancient Emperors of Germany,
and which itretched from Basil to Cologne, along
both banks of the Rhine ", they were ttript of all
territorial property, and had not a ingle city, a
ingle caltle, a single foot of land, that pertained
to them as heads of the Empire. As their domain

Pfeffel. Abregc, &c. p. 24i,

was

SECT. III. was alienated, their stated revenues were reduced

C'' almost to nothing; and the extraordinary aids,

which on a few occasions they obtained, were
granted sparingly, and paid with reluctance. The
Princes and States of the Empire, though they
seemed to recognize the Imperial authority, were
fubjets only in name, each of them possessing a
complete municipal jurifdition within the precinds
of his own territories.

From the FROM this ill-compa&ed frame of government,

atuore (f

theirtitles effects that were unavoidable resulted. The Em.
nP.ctn perors, dazzled with the splendour of their titles,

and the exterior signs of vast authority, were apt
to imagine themselves to be the real sovereigns of
Germany, and were led to aim continually at re-
covering the exercise of those powers which the
forms of the conffitution seemed to vest in them,
and which their predecessors, Charlemagne and
the Othos, had actually enjoyed. The Princes
and States, aware of the nature as well as extent
of their pretensions, were perpetually on their
guard, in order to watch all the motions of the
Imperial court, and to circumscribe its power
within limits still more narrow. The Emperors,
in support of their claims, appealed to ancient forms
and institutions, which the States held to be obfo-
lete. The States founded their rights on recent
pra&ice and modern privileges, which the Empe-
rors confidered as usurpations.

THIS

THIS jealousy of the Imperial authority, toge- sEC r. Ir.

ther with the opposition between it and the rights Frm the
of the States, increased considerably from the time mner i,
that the Emperors were eleaed, not by the col- wertlclt-
letive body of German nobles, but by a few Princes
of chief dignity. During a long period, all the
members of the Germanick body assembled, and
made choice of the person whom they appointed to
be their head. But amidst the violence and anar-
chy which prevailed for several centuries in the
Empire, seven Princes who polffefed the most ex-
tensive territories, and who had obtained a here-
ditary title to the great offices of the State, acquired
the exclusive privilege of nominating the Emperor.
This right was confirmed to them by the Golden
Bull; the mode of exercising it was ascertained,
and they were dignified with the appellation of
Ele tors. The nobility and free cities being thus
itripped of a privilege which they had once enjoyed,
were less conne&ted with a Prince, towards whose
elevation they had not contributed by their sus-
frages, and came to be more apprehensive of his
authority. The Ele&tors, by their extensive power,
and the distinguishing privileges which they pof.
sessed, became formidable to the Emperors, with
whom they were placed almolt on a level in several
a&s of jurifdi&ion. Thus the introduction of the
Electoral college into the Empire, and the autho-
rity which it acquired, instead of diminishing, con-
tributed to strengthen the principles of hostility and
discord in the Germanick constitution.

2 THESE

SECT. Il. THESE were further augmented by the varicus
From the and repugnant forms of civil policy in the several
diHfernt States which composed the Germanick body. It
forms of
government is no easy matter to render hte union of independent
eflabl./hs d
in the S ates States perfett and entire, even when the genius and
which corn-
pofedthe forms of their refIpetive governments happen to
""manick be altogether similar. But in the German Empire,
body.

which was a confederacy of Princes, of eccledi.
afticks, and of free-cities, it was impoffithe th1l
they could incorporate thoroughly. The free.
cities were small republicks, in w!ich the maxims
and spirit peculiar to that Ipecies of govrnnient
prevailed. The Princes a;,d nobles, to whom lu-
prcme jurifdition belonged, poflefled a f rt of mo.
narchical power within their own territories, and the
forms of their interior administration nearly re.
fernbled those of the great feudal kingdoms. The
intercfts, the ideas, the objects of States so differ-
ently conitituted, cannot be the fame. Nor could
their common deliberations be carried on with the
fame spirit, while the love of liberty and attention
to commerce were the reigning principles in the
cities; while the desire of power, and ardour for
military glory, were the governing paflions of the
Princes and nbility.

From the THE secular and ecclerfiafical members of the
opposition
betwecn the Empire were as little fitted for union as the free-
secular and
erclcrAnical cities and the nobility. Valt territories had been
mem'"bes granted to several of the German bifhopricks and

abbeys, and some of the highest offices in the ' rm-
pire having been annexed to them inalienably, were

hcld

held by the ecclefiafticks raised to there dignities. SecT.ll.
The younger sons of noblemen of the fccond order,
who had devoted themselves to the church, were
commonly promoted to these stations of eminence
and power; and it was no small mortification to the
Princes and great nobility, to fee persons raised
from an inferior rank to the fame level with them-
selves, or even exalted to superior dignity. The
education of these churchmen, the genius of their
profession, and their connection with the court of
Rome, rendered their character as well as interest
different from those of the other members of the
Germanick body, with whom they were called to
a& in concert. Thus another source of jealousy
and variance was opened, which ought not to be
overlooked when we are searching into the nature
of the German confitution.

To all these caues of disTension may be added From the

one more, arising from the unequal distribution ofiributiod
power and wealth among the States of the Empire. of'd polth
The Electors, and other nobles of the highest rank, among the

'

sr sI

i r

* * * /-1 * i n cmbcrv.

not only possessed overeign jurifdlicion, but go-
verned such extensive, populous, and rich coun-
tries, as rendered them great Princes. Many of
the other members, though they enjoyed all the
rights of sovereignty, ruled over such petty do-
mains, that their real power bore no proportion to
this high prerogative. A well-compaded and vi-
gorous confederacy could not be formed of such
diflimilar states. The weaker were jealous, timid,
and unable either to afert or to defend their just

privileges.

SECT.II. privileges. The more powerful were apt to assume

r ---and to become oppressive. The Ele&ors and Em.

perors by turns endeavoured to extend their own
authority, by encroaching on the rights of those
feeble members of the Germanick body; and they,
over-awed or corrupted, tamely surrendered their
privileges, or meanly favoured the designs formed
against them [TT].

All thee AFTER contemplating all these principles of dif-
render the
cermanick union and opposition in the constitution of the Ger.
a^eionraa. nman Empire, it will be easy to account for the
iRng With want of concord and uniformity, conspicuous in its
union and
vigour. councils and proceedings. That flow, dilatory, dif-

trustful, and irresolute spirit, which characterizes
all its deliberations, will appear natural in a body,
the junction of whose members was so incompleat,
the different parts of which were held together by
such feeble ties, and set at variance by such power.
ful motives. But the Empire of Germany, never.
thelefs, comprehended countries of such vast ex-
tent, and was inhabited by such a martial and hardy
race of men, that when the abilities of an Empe-
ror, or zeal for any common cause could rouze
this unwieldy body to put forth its strength, it
aAed with irresistible force. In the following his-
tory we hall find, that as the measures on which
Charles V. was most intent, were often thwarted
or rendered abortive by the spirit of jealousy and
division peculiar to the Germanick conftitu-

[TT] NOTE XLII.

tion;

tion; so it was by the influence which he acquired SECT. III.
over the Princes of the Empire, and by engaging
them to co-operate with him, that he was enabled
to make some of the greatest efforts which diftin.
guifh his reign.

TH Turkilh history is so blended, during the v;w nfthe

reign of Charles V. with that of the great nations une'kmo
in Europe, and the Ottoman Porte interposed so
often, and with such decisive influence in the wars
and negociations of the Christian Princes, that some
previous account of the state of government in
that great Empire, is no less necessary for the in-
formation of my readers, than these views of the
constitution of other kingdoms which I have al-
ready exhibited to them.

IT has been the fate of the southern and more :s oig!n.

fertile parts of Asia, at different periods, to be con-
quered by that warlike and hardy race of men, who
inhabit the vast country known to the ancients by
the name of Scythia, and among the moderns by
that of Tartary. One tribe of these people, called
Turks or Turcomans, extended its conquests, un-
der various leaders, and during several centuries,
from the flore of the Caspian to the Streights of the
Dardanelles. Towards the middle of the fifteenth
century, there formidable conquerors took Conftan-
tinople by storm, and established the feat of their
government in that Imperial city. Greece, Mol.
davia, Walachia, and the other provinces of the
ancient kingdoms of Thrace and Macedonia, to-

gether

SEcT. II. gether with part of Hungary, were fubjeded to
'' their power.
Its Adfpotic BUT though the feat of the Turkish government

was fixed in Europe, and the Sultans obtained pof.
fefllon of such extenlive dbminions in that quarter
of the globe, the genius of their policy was purely
Afiatick; and may be properly termed a defpo-
tifm, in contradiftinaion to those monarchical and
republican forms of government which we have
been hitherto contemplating. The supreme power
was veited in Sultans of the Ottoman race, that
blood being deemed so sacred, that no other was
thought worthy of the throne. From this eleva.
tion, these sovereigns could look down and behold
all their fubjees reduced to the fame level before
them. The maxims of Turkish policy admit not any
of those institutions, which, in other countries, limit
the exercise, or moderate the rigour of monarchical
power: no great court with conifttutional and per-
manent juriidiftion to interpose both in enacting
laws, and in executing them: no body of hereditary
nobles, whose sense of their own pre-eminence,
whose consciousness of what is due to their rank
and characer, whose jealousy of their privileges
circumscribe the authority of the Prince, and serve
not only as a barrier against the excesses of his ca-
price, but lfand as an intermediate order between
him and the people. Under the Turkish govern-
ment, the political condition of every fulbjet is
equal. To be employed in the service of the Sul-
tan, is the only circumstance that confers dilsinc-

tion.

tioh. Even this diftinAion is annexed so closely SECT.Ill.
to the stations in which persons serve that it is i
scarcely communicated to those who are placed in
them. The highest dignity in the Empire does
not give any rank or pre-eminence to the family
of him who enjoys it. As every man, before he
is raised to any station of authority, must go through
the preparatory discipline of a long and servile obe-
dience , the moment he is deprived of power, he
and his posterity return to the fame condition with
other subje&s, and fink back into obscurity It is
the distinguishing and odious chara&eriftick of
Eastern despotism, that it annihilates all other ranks
of men, in order to exalt the monarch; that it
leaves nothing to the former, while it gives every
thing to the latter; that it endeavours to fit
in the minds of those who are subjet to it, the
idea of no relation between men, but that of a
matter and of a save, the former destined to com-
mand and to punish, the latter formed to tremble
and to obey [U].

BUT as there are cicumftatices which frequently power ot

obftru& or defeat the salutary effeas of the best- h s,"ht
regulated governments, there are others which con- "eiioni
tribute to mitigate the evils of the most vicioUs
forms of policy. There cans indeed, be no con-
ftitutional restraints upon the will of a Prince in a
dcfpotic government, but there may be such as

° State of the Tutkifh Empire by Rycaut, p. i.
[UU] NOTE XLIII.
VOL. . Q Are

SECT. ilI. are accidental. Absolute as the Turkish Sultans

are, they feel themselves circumscribed both by
religion, the principle on which their authority is
founded P, and by the army, the instrument which
they muf employ in order to maintain it. Where-
ever religion interposes, the will of the Sovereign
must submit to its decrees. When the Koran hath
prescribed any religious rite; hath enjoined any
moral duty; or hath confirmed, by its fantion,
any political maxim, the command of the Sultan
cannot overturn that which an higher authority
hath established. The chief reftrition, however,
on the will of the Sultans, is imposed by the mili-

and by the tary power. An armed force must surround the
military' throne of every Despot, to maintain his authority,

and to execute his commands. As the Turks ex-
tended their empire over nations, which they did
not exterminate, but reduce to fubjetion, they
found it necessary to render their military eftablifl-

ori;nof ment numerous and formidable. Amurath, their
theJani.
tarics. third Sultan, in order to form a body of devoted
A. D.136. troops, that might serve as the immediate guards

of his person and dignity, appointed his officers to
seize annually, as the Imperial property, the fifth
part of the youth taken in war. These, after be-
ing inllruaed in the Mahometan religion, inured
to obedience by evere discipline, and trained to
warlike exercises, were formed into a body diftin-
guifhed by the name of Janizaries, or new foldicrs.
Every sentiment which nthufiafm can infpirc, every
mark of dillinCtion that the favour of the Prince

r Rycaut, p. 8.

coll

could confer, were employed in order to animate SECT. Irr
this body with martial ardour, and with a con-
fcioufnefs of its own pre-eminence q. The Jani-
zaries soon became the chief strength and pride of
the Ottoman armies; and by their number as well
as reputation, were distinguished above all the
troops, whose duty it was to attend on the perion
of the Sultans [XX].

THUS, as the supreme power in every society is Thr;ivad

pofliTd by those who have arms in their hands, i'n,"ecrih
this formidable body of soldiers, destined to be the "","n-
initruments of enlarging the Sultan's authority,
acquired, at the fame time, the means of controuling
it. The Janizaries in Constantinople, like the Prae-
torian bands in ancient Rome, quickly perceived
all the advantages which they derived from being
stationed in the capital; from their union under
one standard and from being maters of the person
of the Prince. The Sultans became no less fen-
fible of their influence and importance. The
Capiculy, or soldiery of the Port, was the only
power in the Empire that a Sultan or his Vifier
had reason to dread. To preserve the fidelity and
attachment of the Janizaries, was the great art of
government, and the principal objec of attention
in the policy of the Ottoman court. Under a mo-
narch, whose abilities and vigour of mind fit hinm
for command, they are obsequious intruments;
execute whatever he enjoins; and render his power

1 Prince Cantemir's flilory of the Othman Empire, p. 7.
[XXJ NOTE XLIV.

Q 2 irresistible.

SFCT. II. irrefitible. Under feeble Princes, or such as are

unfortunate, they become turbulent and mutinous;
assume the tone of masters; degrade and exalt
Sultans at pleasure; and teach those to tremble, en
whole nod, at other times, life or death depend.

pipret(f FROM Mahomet II. who took Conflantinople,
tee Trks
toTdi.do- to Solyman, who began his reign a few months

after Charles V. was placed on the Imperial throne
of Germany, a succession of illustrious Princes ruled
over the Turkish Empire. By their great abili-
ties, they kept their fubjets of every order, mili-
tary as well as civil, submissive to government;
and had the absolute command of whatever force
their vast Empire was able to exert. Solyman, in
particular, who is known to the Chrifltians chiefly as
a conqueror, but is celebrated in the Turkilh annai3
as the great law-giver who established order and
police in their Empire, governed during his long
reign with no less authority than wifiom. He di-
vided his dominions into several diftrists; he ap-
pointed the number of soldiers which each hould
furnish he appropriated a certain proportion of the
lands in every province for their maintenance; he
regulated, with a minute accuracy, every thing re-
lative to their discipline, their arms, and the nature
of their service. He put the finances of the Em-
pire into an orderly train of administration; and
though the taxes in the Turkish dominions, as well
as in the other despotic monarchies of the East, are
far from being confiderablc, he supplied that defe&t
by an attentive and severe ceconomy.

NOR

NOR was it only under such Sultans asSolyman, SECT. IlI.

whose talents were no less adapted to preserve inte- Adataes
rior order than to conduct the operations of war, wh,,h :l"ey
that the Turkish Empire engaged with advantage ,crn;the

- -

- ~ Christian
in its contests with the Christian states. The long powrS in

the fix-

fucceflion of able Princes, which I have mentioned, teenth eu-
had given such vigour and firmness to the Otto-'"
man government, that it seems to have attained,
during the sixteenth century, the highet degree ot
perfetion of which its conititution was capable.
Whereas the great monarchies in Christendom
were ill far from that ate, which could enable
them to a with a full exertion of their force.
Besides this, the Turkish troops in that age pof-
cfied every advantage which arises from fuperio-
rity in military discipline. At the time when So-
lyman began his reign, the Janizarics had been
embodied near a century and a half, and during
that long period, the severity of their military dif-
cipline had in no degree relaxed. The soldiers
drawn from the provinces of the Empire, had been
kept almost continually under arms, in the vari-
ous wars which the Sultans had carried on with
hardly any interval of peace. Againlt troops thus
trained and accultomed to ervice, the forces of
the Christian powers took the field with great dlit
advantage. The most intelligent as well s im-
partial authors of the sixteenth century, acknow-
ledge and lament the superior attainments of the
Turks in the military art [YY]. The success
which uniformly attended their arms in all their

[YY] NOTE XLV.

Q 3 wars,

SECT. Ilr. wars, demonstrates thejultnefs of this observation.
^^" The Christian armies did not acquire that fupe.

riority over the Turks, which they now poffels,
until the long establishment of Randing forces had
improved military discipline among the former;
and until various causes and events, which it is not
my province to explain, had corrupted or abolished
their ancient warlike institutions among the latter.

PROOFS

AND
ILLUSTRATIONS.

04

# PROOFS AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

PR OOFS

AND
ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTE I. SECT. I. p. 3. [A].

!
T HE consternation of the Britons, when

invaded by the Pids and Cicloniaiis
after the Roman legions were called out

of the island, may give ome idea of the degree
'of debasement to which the human mind was re-
duced by long servitude under the Romans. In
thcir supplicatory letter to Aetius, which they call
Ithe groans of Britain, " We know not (lay rhi )
which way to turn us. The barbarians drive us
;to the sea; and the lea forces us back on the bar-
barians; between which we have only the choice
of two deaths, either to be swallowed up by the
,waves, or to be butchered by the sword." Hiftor.
Gildza. ap. Gale. Hist. Britan. Script. p. 6.-
'One can hardly believe this dastardly race to be
ithe descendants of that gallant people, who re-
pulsed Cefar, and defended their liberty so long
against the Roman arms,

NOTE

NOTE II. SECT. I. p. 4. [B].

THE barbarous nations were not only illiterate,

but regarded literature with contempt. They
found the inhabitants of all the provinces of the
Empire funk in effeminacy, and averse to war.
Such a character was the object of scorn to an
high-fpirited and gallant race of men. " When
we would brand an enemy," fays Liutprandus,
"( with the most disgraceful and contumelious ap.
pellation, we call him a Roman; hoc solo, id eft
Romani nomine, quicquid ignobilitatis, quicquid
timiditatis, quicquid avaritia, quicquid luxurie,
quicquid mendacii, immo quicquid vitiorum eft
comprehendentes." Liutprandi Legatio apud Mu-
rat. Scriptor. Italic. vol. ii. pars . p. 481. This
degeneracy of manners, illiterate barbarians im-
puted to their love of learning. Even after they
fettled in the countries which they had conquered,
they would not permit their children to be in-
ftruaed in any science " for, (said they) infiruc-
tion in the sciences tends to corrupt, enervate, and
depress the mind, and he who has been accuf-
tomed to tremble under the rod of a pedagogue,
will never look on a sword or spear with an un-
daunted eye." Procop. de bello Gothor. lib. i.
p. 4. ap. Scrip. Byz. edit. Venet. vol. i. A con-
fiderable number of years elapsed, before nations
so rude, and so unwilling to learn, could produce
historians capable of recording their tranfa&ions,
or of describing their manners and institutions.
By that time, all memory of their ancient con-

dition

dition was loft, and no monument remained to
guide their first writers to any certain knowledge
of it. If one expeits to receive any fatisfatory
account of the manners and laws of the Goths,
Lombards, or Franks, during their residence in
those countries where they were originally feated,
from Jornandes, Paulus Warnefridus, or Gregory
of Tours, the earliest and most authentick hifto-
rians of these people, he will be miserably difap-
pointed. Whatever imperfect knowledge has been
conveyed to us of their ancient slate, we owe not
to their own writers, but to the Greek and Roman
historians,

NOTE III. SECT. I. p. 6. [C].

A CIRCUMSTANCE related by Prifcus in his his-

tory of the embassy to Attila, King of the Huns,
gives a triking view of the enthufiaftick passion
for war, which prevailed among the barbarous
nations. When the entertainment to which that
fierce conqueror admitted the Roman ambassadors
was ended, two Scythians advanced towards At-
tila, and recited a poem in which they celebrated
his vitories, and military virtues. All the Iunis
fixed their eyes with attention on the bards.
Some seemed to be delighted with the verfcs;
others, remembering their own battles and exploits,
exulted with joy while such as were become
feeble through age, burst out into tears, bewail-
ing the decay of their vigour, and the state of
inativity in which they were now obliged to

remain

remain. Excerpta ex hifloria Prifci Rhetoris ap.
Byzant. Hiftor. Script. vol. i. p. 45.

NOTE IV. SECT. I. p. 12. [D].

A REMARKABLE confirmation of both parts of

this reasoning occurs in the history of England.
The Saxons carried on the conquest of that country
with the fame deffruative spirit, which diftin-
guifhed the other barbarous nations. The ancient
inhabitants of Britain were either exterminated;
or forced to take shelter among the mountains of
Wales; or reduced into servitude. The Saxon
government, laws, manners, and language were of
consequence introduced into Britain; and were o
perfeEtly established, that all memory of the in-
ftitutions previous to their conquest was abolilhed.
The very reverse of this happened in a subsequent
revolution. A single viEtory placed William the
Norman on the throne of England. The Saxon
inhabitants, though oppressed, were not exter-
minated. William employed the utmost efforts
of his power and policy to make his new fubjeds
conform in every thing to the Norman tandard;
but without success. The Saxons, though van-
quifhed, were fr more numerous than their con-
querors; when the two races began to incorporate,
the Saxon laws and manners gradually gained
ground. The Norman inffitutions were unpopu-
lar and odious; many of them fell into disuse; and
in the English constitution and language, at this
day, many essential parts are manifestly of Saxon,
rot of Norman extract.

NOTE

NOTE V. SECT. 1. . 13. [E].

PROCOPIUS, the hiltorian, declines, from a prin-

ciple of benevolence, to give any particular detail
of the cruelties of the Goths; " Left, fays he, I
should transmit a monument and example of in-
humanity to succeeding ages." Proc. de bello
Goth. lib. iii. cap. o1. ap. Byz. Script. vol. i. 126.
But as the change, which I have pointed out as a
consequence of the settlement of the barbarous
nations in the countries formerly subjec to the
Roman Empire, could not have taken place, if
the greater part of the ancient inhabitants had not
been extirpated, an event of such importance and
influence merits a more particular illufiration.
This will justify me for exhibiting ome part of
that melancholy fpetacle, over which humanity
prompted Procopius to draw a veil. I (hall not,
however, disgust my readers by a long detail;
but reft satisfied with collecing some instances of
the devastations made by two of the many nations,
which fettled in the Empire. The Vandals were
the first of the barbarians who invaded Spain. It
was one of the richest and molt populous of the
Roman Provinces; the inhabitants had been diflin-
guished for courage, and had defended their liberty
against the arms of Rome, with greater obstinacy,
and during a longer course of years, than any
nation in Europe. But so entirely were they ener-
vated by their fubjeaion to the Romans, that the
Vandals who entered the kingdom A. D. 409.
compleated the conquest of it with such rapidity,

that

that in the year 41 , these barbarians divided it
among them by casting lots. The desolation oc,
cafioned by their invasion is thus described by
Idatius an eye-witness. " The barbarians wafted
every thing with hostile cruelty. The pestilence
was no less deftrudive. A dreadful famine raged,
to fiuch a degree, that the living were constrained
to feed on the dead bodies of their fellow-citizens;
and all'thofe terrible plagues desolated at once the
unhappy kingdoms." ldatii Chron. ap. Biblioth.
Patrum. vol. vii. p. 1233. edit. Lugd. 1677. The
Goths having attacked the Vandals in their new
lfttlements, a fierce war ensued ; the country was
plundered by both parties; the cities which escaped
at firi, were laid in ashes, and the inhabitants ex-
posed to susser every thing that the wanton cruelty
of barbarians could inflict. Idatius describes
these, ibid. p. 1235. b. 2ó6. c. f. A similar
account of their devaluations is given by Ifidorus
I-tilpalenfis, and the contemporary writers. Ifid.
Chron. ap. Grot. hist. Goth. 732. From Spain
the Vandals passed over to Africa, A. D. 428.
Africa was, next to Egypt, the most fertile of the
Roman provinces. It was one of the granaries
of the Empire, and is called by an ancient writer,
the foul of the commonwealth. Though the army
with which the Vandals invaded it, did not ex.
ceed 30,000 fighting men, they became abfolutc
maters of the province in less than two years. A
contemporary author gives a dreadful account of
the havock which they made : " They found a
province well cultivated, and enjoying plenty, the

beauty

beauty of the whole earth. They carried their
destructive arms into every corner of it; they dif-
peopled it by their devastations; exterminating
every thing with fire and sword. They did not
even spare the vines, and fruit trees, that those,
to whom caves and inaccessible mountains had
afforded a retreat, might find no nourishment of
any kind. Their hostile rage could not be sati-
ated, and there was no place exempted from the
effecs of it. They tortured their prisoners with
the most exquisite cruelty, that they might force
from them a discovery of their hidden treasures.
The more they discovered, the more they ex-
pected, and the more implacable they became.
Neither the infirmities of age nor of sex; neither
the dignity of nobility, nor the lanftity of the
sacerdotal office, could mitigate their fury; but
the more illustrious their prisoners were, the more
barbarously they insulted them. The publick
buildings which refilled the violence of the flames,
they levelled with the ground. They left many
cities without an inhabitant. When they ap-
proached any fortified place, which their undif-
ciplined army could not reduce, they gathered
together a multitude of prisoners, and putting them
to the sword, left their bodies unburied, that the
flench of the carcafTes might oblige the garrison
to abandon it." Vitor Vitenfis de perfcutione
Africana ap. Bibl. Patrum. vol. vili. p. 666. St.
Augfltin, an African, and a cntemlporary author,
gives a similar defripion of their crucltics, opera
vol. x. p. 372. edit. 1616.-A bout an hundred

years

years after the settlement of the Vandals in Africa,
Belisarius attacked and difpoffeffed them. Pro-
copius, a contemporary historian, describes the
devastation which that war occasioned. "' Africa,
fays he, was so entirely difpeopled, that one
might travel several days in it without meeting
one man; and it is no exaggeration to fay, that
in the course of the war five millions of persons
perilhed." Proc. hilt. Arcana, cap. 18. ap. Byz,
Script. vol. i. 3 5.--I have dwelt longer upon
the calamities of this province, because they are
described not only by contemporary authors, but
by eyc-witneffes. The present state of Africa con-
firms their testimony. Many of the most flourilfi-
ing and populous cities with which it was filled,
were so entirely ruined, that no vestiges remain
to point out where they were situated. That ser-
tile territory which sustained the Roman Empire
lies in a great measure uncultivated; and that
province, which Vietor in his barbarous Latin
c.lled Speciofit.is totius terre florentis, is now the
retreat of pirates and banditti.

WHILE the Vandals laid waste one part of the

Empire, the Huns desolated the reft of it. Of all
the barbarous tribes they were the fiercest and
most formidable. Ammianus Marcellinus, a cona
temporary author, and one of the best of the later
historians, gives an account of their policy and
manners. They nearly iefemble thufe of the Scy-
thians describcd by iit ,.ncicnts, nd of the Tartars

a known

khown to the moderns. In some parts of their
character, and in several of their cuffoms, they
refenmble the savages in North America. Their
paflon for war and aion was extreme "t As in
poiilhed ocieties (fays Ammianus) ease and tran-
quillity are courted, they delight in war and dan-
gers. He who falls in battle is reckoned happy,
They who die of old age or of disease are deemed
infamous. They boast, with the utmoff exulta.
tion, of the number of enemies whom they have
slain, and as the most glorious of all ornaments,
they fasten the scalps of those who have fallen by
their hand to the trappings of their horses." Am-
mian. Marc. lib. xxxi. p. 477. edit. Gronov.
Lugd. 693.--Their incursions into the Empire
began in the fourth century; and the Romans,
though no strangers, by that time, to the effeets
of barbarous rage, were astonished at the cruelty
of their devastations. Thrace* Pannonia, and
Illyricum were the countries which they first laid
debolate. As they had no thoughts of fettling in
Europe, their inroads were frequent, and Proco-
pius computes that in each of these, at a medium.
two hundred thousand persons perished, or were
carried off as laves. Procop. hist. Arcan ap.
Byz. script. vol. i. 3 6. Thrace, the best culti-
vated province in that quarter of the Empire, was
converted into a deftrt, and when Prifcus accom'
panied the ambassadors sent to Attila, there were
no inhabitants in some of the cities, but a few
miserable people who had taken shelter among the
ruins of the churches; and the fields were covered

VOL. I. R with

with the bones of those who had fallen by the
sword. Prifcus ap. Byz. Script. vol. i. 34. Attila
became King of the Huns, A. D. 434. He is
one of the greatest and most enterprizing con-
querors mentioned in history. He extended his
Empire over all the vast countries, comprehended
under the general names of Scythia and Germany
in the ancient division of the world. While he
was carrying on his wars against the barbarous
nations, he kept the Roman Empire under per-
petual apprehensions, and extorted vast subsidies
from the timid and effeminate monarchs who go-
verned it. In the year 451, he entered Gaul, at
the head of an army composed of all the various
nations which he had subdued. It was more nu-
merous than any with which the barbarians had
hitherto invaded the Empire. The devastations
which he committed were horrible; not only the
open country, but the mofi flourishing cities were
desolated. The extent and cruelty of his devafta.
tions are described by Salvianus de Gubernat. Dei,
edit. Baluz. Par. 1669. p. 139, &c. and by Idatius
ubi fpra p. 1235. Aetius put a flop to his pro-
grefs in that country by the famous battle of
Chalons, in which (if we may believe the hifto-
rians of that age) three hundred thousand persons
perished. Idat. ibid. Jornandes de rebus Geticis
ap. Grot. Hist. Gothor. p. 671. Amft. 1665. But
next year he resolved to attack the center of the
Empire, and marching into Italy, wafted it with
rage, inflamed by the sense of his late disgrace.
What Italy suffered by the Huns exceeded all the

cala-

calamities which the preceding incursions of the
barbarians had brought upon it. Conringius has
colleted several paflages from the ancient hifto-
rians, which prove that the devaftatlons committed
by the Vandals and Huns in the countries situ-
ated on the banks of the Rhine, were ho left
cruel and fatal to the human race; Exercitatio
de urbibus Germanie, Opera, vol. i. 488. But
it is endless, it is flocking to follow these de-
ftroyers of mankind through so many scenes of
horror, and to contemplate the havock which they
made of the human species.

BUT the slate in which Italy appears to have

been, during several ages, after the barbarous
nations fettled in it, is the most decisive proof of
the cruelty as well as extent of their devatations.
Whenever any country is thinly inhabited, trees
and hrubs spring up in the uncultivated fields,
and spreading by degrees form large fotefts; by
the overflowing of rivers, and the stagnating of
waters, other parts of it are converted into lakes
and marshes. Ancient Italy, the feat of the Ro-
man elegance and luxury, was cultivated to the
highest pitch. But so effecually did the devafta-
tions of the barbarians destroy all the effects of
their industry and cultivation, that in the eighth
century Italy appears to have been covered with
forests and marihes of vast extent. Muratori
enters into a long detail concerning the situation
and limits of these; and proves by the most au.
thentick evidence, that great tracts of territory,
in all the different provinces of Italy, were either

R 2 over.

over-run with wood, or laid under water. Nor
did these occupy parts of the country naturally
barren or of little value, but were spread over
diftrias, which ancient writers represent as ex-
tremely fertile, and which at present are highly
cultivated. Muratori antiquitates Italica medii
aevi, dissert. xxi. v. ii. p. 149, 153, &c. A trong
proof of this occurs in a description of the city
of Modena, by an author of the tenth century.
Murat. script. Rerum Italic. vol. ii. pars ii. p. 691.
The ifate of desolation in other countries of Eu-
rope eems to have been the fame. In many of
the most early charters now extant, the lands
granted to ronafteries or to private persons, are
distinguished into such as are cultivated or inha-
bited, and such as were eremi, desolate. In many
instances, lands are granted to persons because they
had taken them from the desert, ab eremo, and had
cultivated and planted them with inhabitants. This
appears from a charter of Charlemagne, published
by Eckhart de rebus Franciae Orientalis, vol. ii.
p. 864, and from many charters of his successors
quoted by Du Cange voc. Eremus.-Wherever a
right of property in land can be thus acquired, it
is evident that the country must be extremely de-
solate, and thinly peopled. The first settlers in
America obtained poffefiion of land by such a title.
Whoever was able to clear and to cultivate a field,
was recognized as the proprietor. His industry
merited such a recompence. The grants in the
charters which I have mentioned flow from a fimi-
lar principle, and there must have been ome re-
semblance in the tate of the countries.

MURA-

MURATORI adds, thatduring the eighth and ninth

centuries, Italy was greatly infested by wolves and
other wild beasts; another mark of its being defti-
tute of inhabitants. Murat. Antiq vol. ii. p. 163.
Thus Italy, the pride of the ancient world for its
fertility and cultivation, was reduced to the state of
a country newly peopled, and rendered habitable.

I AM sensible, not only that some of these de-

scriptions of the devastations which I have quoted,
may be exaggerated, but that the barbarous tribes,
in making their settlements, did not proceed inva-
riably in the fame manner. Some of them seemed
to be bent on exterminating the aient inhabit-
ants; others were more disposed to incorporate with
them. It is not my province either to enquire
into the causes which occasioned this variety in
the conduct of the conquerors, or to describe the
state of those countries where the ancient inha-
bitants were treated most mildly. The fats which
I have produced are sufficient to prove that the
deltruCion of the human species, occasioned by
the hostile invasions of the northern nations, and
their subsequent settlements was much greater
than many authors seem to imagine.

NOTE VI. SECT. I. p. 14. [F].

I HAVE observed, Note II. that our only certain

information concerning the ancient state of the
barbarous nations must be derived from the Greek
and Roman writers. Happily an account of the
inifitutions and customs of one people, to which

R 3 those

those of all the reft seem to have been in a great
measure similar, has been transmitted to us by
two authors, the mos capable, perhaps, that ever
wrote, of observing them with profound discern-
ment, and of describing them with propriety and
force. The reader muff perceive that I have
Cafar and Tacitus in my eye. The former gives
a short account of the ancient Germans in a few
chapters of the sixth book of his commentaries:
The latter wrote a treatise expressly on that sub-
je&. These are the most precious and inftrudive
monuments of antiquity to the present inhabitants
ps Europe. From them we learn,

I. THAT the fiate of Society among the ancient

Germans was of the rudest and most simple form.
They subsisted entirely by hunting or by paftu-
rage. Caef. lib. vi. c. 21. They negleced agri.
culture, and lived chiefly on milk, cheese, and
flesh. Ibid. c. 22. Tacitus agrees with him in
mot of there points; de morib. Germ. c. 14, 15,
23. The Goths were equally negligent of agri-
culture. Prifc. Rhet. ap. Byz. Script. v. i. p. 31.
B. Society was in the fame state among the Huns,
who disdained to cultivate the earth, or to touch
a plough. Amm. Marcel. lib. xxxi. p. 475. The
fame manners took place among the Alans; ibid.
p. 477. While society remains in this simple
state, men by uniting together scarcely relinquish
any portion of their natural independence. Ac-
cordingly we are informed, . That the authority
of civil government was extremely limited among

the

the Germans. During times of peace they had
no common or fixed magistrate, but the chief men
of every diftri& dispensed jultice, and accommo-
dated differences. Caef. ibid. c. 23. Their Kings
had not absolute or unbounded power; their au-
thority consisted rather in the privilege of advising,
than in the power of commanding. Matters of
siliall consequence were determined by the chief
men; affairs of importance by the whole com-
munity. Tacit. c. 7, xl, The Huns, in like
manner, deliberated in common concerning every
business of moment to the society; and were not
subjet to the rigour of regal authority. Amm.
Marcel. lib. xxxi. p. 474. 3. Every individual
among the ancient Germans was left at liberty to
chute whether he would take part in any military
enterprize which was proposed; there seems to
have been no obligation to engage in it imposed
on him by publick authority. " When any of
the chief men proposes any expedition, such as
approve of the cause and of the leader rife up, and
declare their intention of following him; those
who do not fulfil this engagement, are confidered
as deserters and traitors, and are looked upon as
infamous." Caf. ibid. c. 23. Tacitus plainly
points at the fame custom, though in terms more
obscure. Tacit. c. . 4. As every individual
was so independent, and master in so great a de-
gree of his own actions, it became, of cpnfequencc,
the great obje& of every person among the Ger.
mans who aimed at being a loader, to gain adhe-
rents, and atach them to his pprfon and interest,

R 4 These

These adherents Caesar calls AmbaEti and Clientes,
i. e. retainers or clients Tacitus, Comites, or com-
panions. The chief diftin&ion and power of the
leaders, consisted in being attended by a numerous
band of chosen youth. This was their pride as
well as ornament during peace, and their defence
in war. The leaders gained or preserved the
favour of these retainers by presents of armour,
and of horses; or by the profule, though inele-
gant hospitality, with which they entertained them.
Tacit. c. 14, 5. 5. Another consequence of the
personal liberty and independence which the Ger-
mans retained, even after they united in society,
was their circumscribing the criminal jurisdiction
of the magistrate within very narrow limits, and
their not only claiming but exercising almost all
the rights of private resentment and revenge.
Their magistrates had not the power either of im.
prisoning, or of inflicting any corporal punishment
on a free man. Tacit. c. 7. Every person was
obliged to avenge the wrongs which his parents
or friends had sustained. Their enmities were
hereditary, but not irreconcilable. Even murder
was compensated by paying a certain number of
cattle. Tac. c. 21. A part of the fine went to
the King, or state, a part to the person who had
been injured, or to his kindred, Ibid. c. 12.

THOSE particulars concerning the inflitutions

and manners of the Germans, though well known
to every person conversant in ancient literature, I
have thought proper to arrange in this order, and

7; to

to lay before such of my readers as may be le
acquainted with these fa&s, both because they con-
firm the account which I have given of the state
of the barbarous nations, and because they tend
to illustrate all the observations I hall have oc-
cafion to make concerning the various changes in
their government and customs. The laws and
customs introduced by the barbarous nations into
their new settlements, are the best commentary on
the writings of Cafar and Tacitus; and their ob-
servations are the best key to a perfec knowledge
of these laws and customs.

ONE circumstance with refpe& to the testimonies

of Cafar and Tacitus concerning the Germans, me-
rits attention. Caesar wrote his brief account of
their manners more than an hundred years before
Tacitus composed his treatise De moribus Germa-
norum. An hundred years make a considerable pe-
riod in the progress of national manners, especially
if, during that time, those people who are rude
and unpolilhed have had much communication
with more civilized states. This was the cafe with
the Germans. Their intercourse with the Romans
began when Cafar crossed the Rhine, and increased
prodigiously during the interval between that
event and the time when Tacitus sourished. Be-
fides this, there was a considerable difference be-
tween the tate of society among the different
tribes of Germans. The Suiones were so much
improved, that they began to be corrupted. Tac.
Sap. 44, The Fenni were so barbarous, that it is

wonderful

wonderful how they were able to subsist. Ibid. cap.
46. Whoever undertakes to describe the manners
of the Germans, or to found any political theory
upon the state of society among them, ought care-
fully to attend to both these circumstances.

BEFORE I quit this subjet, it may not be im-

proper to observe, that though successive altera-
tions in their inifitutions, together with the gra-
dual progress of refinement, have made an entire
change in the manners of the various people who
conquered the Roman Empire, there is still one
race of men nearly in the fame political situation
with theirs when they first fettled in their new con-
quefls: I mean the various tribes and nations of
Savages in North America. It cannot then be
confidered either as a digreflion, or as an improper
indulgence of curiosity, to enquire, whether this
similarity in their political state has occalioned
any resemblance between their character and
manners. If the likeness turns out to be frik-
ing, it is a stronger proof that a just account
has been given of the ancient inhabitants of Eu-
rope, than the testimony even of Cafar or of
Tacitus.

I. The Americans subsist chiefly by hunting and

fihing. Some tribes neglect agriculture entirely.
Among those who cultivate ome fnmall spot near
their huts, that, together with all works of labour,
is performed by the women. P. Charlevoix Jour-
oal Hiftorique d'un Voyage de L'Amerique 4.

Par.

Par. 1744. P. 334. In such a state of society, the
common wants of men being few, and their mutual
dependence upon each other small, their union is
extremely imperfet and feeble, and they continue
to enjoy their natural liberty almost unimpaired.
It is the first idea of an American, that every man
is born free and independent, and that no power on
earth hath any right to diminifl or circumscribe
fiis natural liberty. There is hardly any appear-
ance of subordination either in civil or domestic go-
vernment. Every one does what he pleases. A father
and mother with their children, live like persons
whom chance has brought together, and whom no
common bond unites. Their manner of educat-
ing their children is suitable to this principle. They
never chastise or punish them, even during their
infancy. As they advance in years, they allow
them to be entirely masters of their own ations,
and responsible to nobody. Id. p. 272, 273.-
2. The power of their civil magistrates is extremely
limited. Among most of their tribes, the Sachem
or chief is elective. A council of old men is chosen
to assist him, without whose advice he determines
no affair of importance. The Sachems neither pof-
fess nor claim any great degree of authority. They
propose and intreat rather than command. The
obedience of their people is altogether voluntary.
Id. p. 266, a68.---3. The savages of America
engage in any military enterprize, not from con-
ftraint, but choice. When war is resolved, a chief
arises, and offers himself to be the leader. Such
as ue willing (for they compel no person) (tand

up

up one after another, and sing their war song. But
if after this, any of thefr should refuie to follow
the leader, to whom they have engaged, his life
would be in danger, and he would be confidered
as the most infamous of all men. Id. p. 217, 218.
'- 4. Such as engage to follow any leader, ex-
pct to be treated by him with great attention and
refpet ; and he is obliged to make them presents
of considerable value. Id. p. 28.-- 5. Among
the Americans, the magistrate has scarcely any cri-
minaljurifdition. Id.p.272. Upon receiving any
injury, the person or family offended, may inflict
what puniihment they please on the person who
was the author of it. ld. p. 274. Their resent-
ment and desire of vengeance are excessive and im-
placable. Time can neither extinguilh nor abate it.
It is the chief inheritance parents leave to their
children; it is transmitted from generation to ge-
neration, until an occasion be found of satisfying
ir. Id. p. 309. Sometimes, however, the offended
party is appeased. A compensation is paid for a
murder that has been committed. The relations
of the deceased receive it; and it consists most
commonly of a captive taken in war, who being
fubflituted in place of the person who was mur-
dered, assumes his name, and is adopted into his
family. Id. p. 274. The resemblance holds in
many other particulars. It is sufficient for my
purpose to have pointed out the similarity of those
great features which diltinguilh and characerize
both people. Bochart, and other philologists
of the lat century, who, with more erudition

than

than science, endeavoured to trace the migrations
of various nations, and who were apr, upon the
fighteft appearance of resemblance, to find an affi-
nity between nations far removed from each other,
and to conclude that they were descended from the
fame ancestors, would hardly have failed, on view-
ing such an amazing similarity, to pronounce with
confidence, " That the Germans and Americans
muf be the fame people." But a philosopher will
fatify himself with observing, " That the charac-
ters of nations depend on the flare of society in
which they live, and on the political inifitutions
established among them; and that the human mind,
whenever it is placed in the fame situation, will, in
ages the most distant, and in countries the most
remote, assume the fame form, and be dilfinguifled
by the fame manners."

I HAVE pushed the comparison between the

Germans and Americans no farther than was ne-
ceffary for the illustration of my subject. I do not
pretend that the slate of society in the two coun-
tries was perfecly similar. Many of the German
tribes were more civilized than the Americans.
Some of them were not unacquainted with agri-
culture; almost all of them had flocks of tame
cattle, and depended for the chief part of their
subsistence upon these. Most of the American
tribes subsist by hunting, and are in a ruder and
more simple state than the ancient Germans. The
resemblance, however, between their condition, is
greater perhaps than any that hiitory affords an

opportunity

opportunity of observing between two races of un.
civilized nations, and this has produced a furpriz-
ing similarity of manners.

NOTE VII. StcT. I. p. 14. [G].

THE booty gained by an army belonged to the

army. The King himself had no part of it but
what he acquired by lot. A remarkable inftancc
of this occurs in the history of the Franks. The
army of Clovis, the founder of the French qio-
narchy, having plundered a church, carried off,
among other sacred utensils, a vase of extraordinary
size and beauty. The bishop ent deputies to
Clovis, beseeching him to restore the vase, that it
might be again employed in the sacred services to
which it had been consecrated. Clovis desired
the deputies to follow him to Soiflons, as the
booty was to be divided in that place, and pro-
mifed, that if the lot hould give him the disposal
of the vase, he would grant what the bishop de-
lired. When he came to Soissons, and all the
booty was placed in one great heap in the mid-
dle of the army, Clovis intreated, that before
making the division, they would give him that
vase over and above his share. All appeared wil-
ling to gratify the King, and to comply with his
request, when a fierce and haughty soldier lifted
up his battle-axe, and striking the vase with the
utmost violence, cried out with a loud.voice, " You
{hall receive nothing here but that to which the lot
gives you a right." Gregor. Turon. Hiftor. Fran-
corum, lib. ii. c. 27. p. 70, Par. 161o.

NOTE

NOTE VIII. SECT. I. p. 18. [].
THE history of the establishment and progress

of the feudal system, is an interesting objea to all
the nations of Europe. In some countries, their
jurisprudence and laws are {till in a great measure
fetrdal. In others, many forms and practices efta-
blilhed by cutom, or founded on statutes, took
their rife from the feudal law, and cannot be un-
derftood without attending to the ideas peculiar to
it. Several authors of the highest reputation for
genius and erudition, have endeavoured to illus-
trate this subject, but they have left many parts
of it obscure. I shall endeavour to trace, with
precision, the progress and variation of ideas con-
cerning property in land among the barbarous na-
tions; and hall attempt to point out the causes
which introduced these changes, as well as the
effecs which followed upon them. Property in
land seems to have gone through four fuccelfive
changes among the people who fettled in the va-
rious provinces of the Roman Empire.

I. WHILE the barbarous nations remained in

their original countries, their property in land was
only temporary, and they had no certain limits to
their poffellions. After feeding their flocks in one
diltrit, they removed with them, their wives and
families, to another; and abandoned that likewils
in a short time. They were not, in consequence of
this imperfe& species of property, brought under
any positive or formal obligation to serve the com-

munity

munity; all their services were purely voluntary.
Every individual was at liberty to chufe how far
he would contribute towards carrying on any mili-
tary enterprize. If he followed a leader in any ex-
pedition, it was from attachment, not from a sent
of obligation. The clearest proof of this has been
produced in Note VI. While property continued
in this state, we can discover nothing that bears
any resemblance to a feudal tenure, or to the sub-
ordination and military service which the feudal
fyflem introduced.

II. UPON fettling in the countries which they

had subdued, the victorious troops divided the
conquered lands. Whatever portion of them fell
to a soldier, he seized as the recompence due to
his valour, as a settlement acquired by his own
sword. He took poffelfion of it as a freeman in
full property. He enjoyed it during his own life,
and could dispose of it at pleasure, or transmit it as
an inheritance to his children. Thus property in
land became fixed. It was at the fame time allo-
dial, i. e. the possessor had the entire right of
property and dominion; he held of no sovereign
or superior lord, to whom he was bound to do
lomage, and perform service. But as there new
proprietors were in some danger (as has been ob-
lerved in the text) of being disturbed by the
remainder of the ancient inhabitants, and in still
greater danger of being attacked by successive
colonies of barbarians as fierce and rapacious as
themselves, they saw the neceflity of coming under

obligations

obligations to defend the community, more ex-
plicit than thbfe to which they had been subjeE
in their original habitations. On this account,
immediately upon their fixing in their new fettle-
ments, every freeman became bound to take arms
in defence of the community, and if he refulled
or neglected so to do, was liable to a considerable
penalty. I do not mean that any contrat of this
kind was formally concluded, or mutually ratified
by any legal solemnity. It was eftablifled by
tacit content, like the other compats which hold
society together. Their mutual security and pre-
servation made it the interest of all to recog-
nize its authority, and to enforce the obfcrvation
of it. We can trace back this new obligation on
the proprietors of land, to a very early period in
the history of the Franks. Chilperic, who began
his reign A. D. 562, exa6ted a fine, bnnos juil
exigi, from certain persons who had refuted to
accompany him in an expedition. Gregor. Turon,
lib. v. c. 26. p. 211. Childlbert, Who began his
reign A. D. 576, proceeded in the fame manner
against others who had been guilty of a like crime.
Id. lib. vii. c. 42. p. 342. Such a fine could not
have been exaEed while property Continued in its
first slate, and military service was entirely volun.
tary. Charlemagne ordained, that every freeman
who possessed five manfi, i. e. sixty acres of land,
in property, hould march in person against the
enemy. Capittl. A. D. 807. Louis le Debonnaire,
A. D. 81 5, granted lands to certain Spaniards who
fled from the Saracens, and allowed them to fettle

VOL. 1.
I in

in his territories, on condition that they hould
serve in the army like other free men. Capitul. vol. i.
p. 5oo. By land possessed in property, which is
mentioned in the law of Charlemagne, we are to
understand, according to the Itile of that age, al-
lodial land; alodes and proprietas alodum and pro-
prium being words perfeEtly fynonimous. Du Cange
voce Alodis. The clearest proof of the diftinEtion
between allodial and beneficiary poffefion, is con-
tained in two charters publilhed by Muratori, by
which it appears that a person might possess one
part of his estate as allodial, which he could dispose
of at pleasure, the other as a beneficium, of which
he had only the ufufru&, the property returning
to the superior Lord on his demise. Antiq. Ital.
medii xevi, vol. i. p. 559, 565. The fame dif-
tinftion is pointed out in a Capitulare of Charle-
magne, A. D. 812. edit. Baluz. vol. i. p. 491.
Count Everard, who married a daughter of Louis
le Debonnaire, in the curious testament, by which
he disposes of his vast estate among his chil-
dren, diflinguiihes between what he pofleffed pro-
prietate, and what he held beneficio, and it appears
that the greater part was allodial. A. D. 837.
Aub. Mirai Opera Diplomatica Lovan. 1723.
Vol. p. 19.

IN the fame manner Liber homo is commonly

opposed to Vafjus or Vaffallus; the former denotes
an allodial proprietor, the latter one who held of
a superior. These free men were under an obli-
gation to serve the slate; and this duty was con-

fidered

fidered as so sacred, that free men were prohibited
from entering into holy orders unless they had
obtained the consent of the sovereign. The reason
given for this in the statute is remarkable, For
we are informed that ome do so, not so much
out of devotion, as in order to avoid that military
service which they are bound to perform. Capitul,
lib. i. § I 4. If upon being summoned into
the field, any free man refused to obey, a full
Herebannum, i. e. a fine of sixty crowns, was to
be exacted from him according to the law of the
Franks." Capit. Car. magn. ap. Leg. Longob.
lib. i. tit. 14. § 3. p 539. This expreflion,
according to the law of the Franks, seems to
imply that both the obligation to serve, and the
penalty on those who disregarded it, were coeval
with the laws made by the Franks at their first
ettlement in Gaul. This fine was levied with
such rigour, That if any person conviaed of
this crime was insolvent, he was reduced to fcr-
vitude, and continued in that state until such time
as his labour hould amount to the value of the
herebannum." Ibid. The Emperor Lotharius ren.
dered the penalty frill more severe; and if any
person possesing such an extent of property as
made it incumbent on him to take the field in
person, refused to obey the summons, all his goods
were declared to be forfeited, and he himself might
be punished with banishment. Murat. Script. Ital.
vol. i. pars ii. p. 153.

S 2 Il, PRO-

III. PROPERTY in land having thus become

fixed and fubje& to military service, another
change was introduced, though slowly, and ftep
by ftep. We learn from Tacitus, that the chief
men among the Germans endeavoured to attach
to their persons and interests certain adherents
whom he calls Comites. These fought under their
tandard, and followed them in all their enter-
prizes. The fame custom continued among them
in their new settlements, and those attached or
devoted followers were called fideles antrufliones,
homines in trufte Dominica, leudes. Tacitus informs
us, that the rank of a Comes was deemed honour-
able; De morib. Germ. c. 13. The composition,
which is the standard by which we must judge of
the rank and condition of persons in the middle
ages, paid for the murder of one in trufte Domi-
nica, was triple to that paid for the murder of a
freeman. Leg. Salicor. Tit. 44. § . & 2. While
the Germans remained in their own country they
courted the favour of these Comites by presents of
arms and horses, and by hospitality. See Note VI.
As long as they had no fixed property in land,
these were the only gifts that they could bestow,
and the only reward which their followers desired.
But upon their fettling in the countries which they
conquered, and when the value of property came
to be understood among them, instead of those
flight presents, the Kings and chieftains betowed
a more substantial recompence in land on their
adherents. These grants were called beneficia, be-

caufi;

cause they were gratuitous donations; and bonores,
because they were regarded as marks of diftinEtion.
What were the services originally exacted in return
for these beneficia cannot be determined with ab-
solute precision; because there are no records so
ancient. When allodial poffeflions were first ren-
dered feudal, they were not, at once, fubjeted to
all the feudal services. The transition here, as in
all other changes of importance, was gradual.
As the great obje& of a feudal vassal was to ob-
tain protection, when allodial proprietors first con-
lented to become vassals of any powerful leader,
they continued to retain as much of their ancient
independence as was consistent with that new rela.
tion. The homage which they did to the Iuperior
of whom they chore to hold, was called homagium
planum, and bound them to nothing more than
fidelity, but without any obligation either of mili.
tary service, or attendance in the courts of their
superior. Of this homagium planunm some traces,
though obscure, may still be discovered. Bruffil,
torn. i. p. 97. Among the ancient writs publilhed
by D. D. De Vic & Vaifette hilt. de Langued. are
a great many which they call homagia. They
seem to be an intermediate ftep between the ho-
magium planum mentioned by Bruffel, and the
engagement to perform complete feudal service.
The one party promises protetion, and grants
certain cales or lands, the other engages to defend
the person of the granter, and to aliI him like-
wife in defending his property as often as he llall

S3 be

be summoned to do so, But these engagements
are accompanied with none of the feudal formali-
ties, and no mention is made of any of the other
feudal services. They appear rather to be a mu-
tual contract between equals, than the engage-
ment of a vanfal to perform services to a superior
lord. Preuves de l'hift. de Lang. tom. ii. 73.
& pafimn. As soon as men were accustomed to
these, the other feudal services were gradually in-
troduced. M. de Montesquieu confiders there
beneficia as fiefs, which originally fubjeded those
who held them to military service. L'efpr. des
Loix, 1. xxx. c. 3. & 6. M. L'abbe de Mably
contends that such as held these were at first sub-
jeded to no other service than what was incum-
bent on every free man. Observations furl'hiftoire
de France, I. 356. But upon comparing their
proofs and reasonings and conjetures, it seems to
be evident, that as every free man, in consequence
of his allodial property, was bound to serve the
community under a fcvere penalty, no good reason
can be aftigned for conferring these beneficia, if
they did not fubje& such as received them, to
some new obligation. Why should a King have
tripped himself of his domain, if he had not ex-
pected, that, by parcelling it out, he might acquire
a right to services to which he had formerly no
title ? We may then warrantably conclude, "( That
s allodial property fubjefed those who possessed
it to serve the community, so beneficial fubje&ted
such as held them, to personal service and fidelity

to

to him from whom they received these lands.
These beneficia were granted originally only during
pleasure. No circumifance relating to the customs
of the middle ages is better acertained than this;
and innumerable proofs of it might be added to
those produced in L'efprit des Loix, . xxx. c. 16.
and by Du Cange voc. beneficium & feudum.

IV. BUT the poffeflion of benefices did not con.

tinue long in this state. A precarious tenure dur-
ing pleasure, was not sufficient to satisfy such as
held it, and by various means, they gradually
obtained the confirmation of their benefices dur-
ing life. Feudor. lib. tit. i. Du Cange produces
several quotations from ancient charters and chro-
nicles in proof of this; Gloss. voc. Beneficium.
After this it was easy to obtain or extort charters
rendering beneficia hereditary, first in the diret
line, then in the collateral, and at last in the fe-
male line. Leg. Longob. lib. iii. tit. 8. Du Cange,
voc. Beneficium.

IT is no easy matter to fix the precise time when

each of these changes took place. M. l'Ab. Mably
conjectures with tome probability, that Charles
Martel first introduced the pracice of granting be-
neficia for life: Obfervat. tom. i. p. 103, 16o; and
that Louis le Debonnaire was among the firti who
rendered them hereditary, is evident from the au-
thorities to which he refers; Id. 429. Mabillon
however has published a placitum of Louis le De-
bonnaire, A. D. 860, by which it appears, that he

S 4 still

fill continued to grant ome beneficia only during
life. De re Diplomatica, lib. vi. p. 353. In the
year 889, Odo King of France granted lands to
Ricabodo fideli suo jure beneficiario & frutuario
during his own life; and if he hould die, and a son
were born to him, that right was to continue dur.
ing the life of his son. Mabillon ut supra, p. 556.
This was an intermediate ftep between fiefs merely
during life, and fiefs hereditary to perpetuity.
While beneficia continued under their first form,
and were held only during pleasure, he who granted
them not only exercised the Dominium or preroga-
tive of superior Lord, but he retained the property,
giving his vassal only the ufufruS. But under the
latter form, when they became hereditary, although
feudal lawyers continued to define a beneficium
agreeably to its original nature, the property was
in effcEt taken out of the hands of the superior
lords, and lodged in those of the vassal. As oon
as the reciprocal advantages of the feudal mode
of tenure came to be understood by superiors as
well as vassals, that species of holding became so
agreeable to both, that not only lands, but casual
rents, such as the profits of a toll, the fare paid at
ferries, &c. the salaries or perquisites of offices,
and even pensions themselves, were granted and
held as fiefs; and military service was promised
and exaaed on account of there. Morice Mem.
pour iervir de preuves a l'hift. de Bretagne, tom. ii.
78. 69o. Bruffel, tom. i. p. 4I. How absurd so.
ever it may eem to grant or to hold such preca.

rious

rious and casual property as a fief, there are in-
flances of feudal tenures still more singular. The
profits arising from the mafles said at an altar, were
properly an ecclesiastical revenue, belonging to the
clergy of the church or monastery which performed
that duty, but these were ometimes seized by the
powerful barons. In order to ascertain their right
to them, they held them as fiefs of the church,
and parcelled them out in the fame manner as other
property to their fub-vaffals. Bouquet. recueildes
hilt. vol. x. 238. 480. The fame spirit of encroach-
ment which rendered fiefs hereditary, led the no-
bles to extort from their sovereigns hereditary
grants of offices. Many of the great offices of the
crown became hereditary in most of the kingdoms
in Europe; and so conscious were monarchs of
this spirit of uftrpation among the nobility, and
so Solicitous to guard against it, that, on some oc-
cafions, they obliged the persons whom they pro-
moted to any olfice of dignity, to grant an obliga-
tion that neither they, nor their heirs, should claim
it as belonging to them by hereditary right. A
remarkable instance of this is produced, Mem. de
l'Acad. des Infcript. tom. xxx. p. 595. Another
occurs in the Thefaur. anecdot. published by Mar-
tene & Durand, vol. i. p. 873.-This revolution in
property occasioned a change corresponding to it
in political government; the great vassals of the
crown, as they acquired such extensive poffeflions,
usurped a proportional degree of power, depressed
the jurifdi&ion of the crown, and trampled on

tlhe

the privileges of the people. It is on account
of this connetion, that it becomes an objet
of importance in history to trace the. pro-
grefs of feudal property, for, upon discovering in
what fRate property was at any particular period,
we may determine with precision what was the de-
gree of power poffeflcd by the King or by the no-
bility at that junture.

ONE circumifance more, with refpeft to the

changes which property underwent, deserves atten-
tion. I have shewn, that when the various tribes
of barbarians divided their conquests in the fifth
and sixth centuries, the property which they ac-
quired was allodial; but in several parts of Eu-
rope, property had become almost entirely feudal
by the beginning of the tenth century. The for-
mer species of property seems to be so much bet-
ter and more desirable than the latter; that such a
change appears furprizing, especially when we are
informed that allodial property was frequently
converted into feudal, by a voluntary deed of the
possessor. The motives which determined them
to a choice so repugnant to the ideas of modern
times concerning property, have been investigated
and explained by M. de Montesquieu with his usual
discernment and accuracy, lib. xxxi. c. 8. The
most considerable is that of which we have an hint
in Lambertus Ardenfis, an ancient writer quoted
by Du Cange, voce llodis. In those times of anar-
chy and disorder which became general in Europe

after

after the death of Charlemagne, when there was
scarcely any union among the different members
of the community, and individuals were exposed,
single and undefended by government, to rapine
and oppreflion, it became necessary for every man
to have a powerful protetor, under whose banner
he might range himfeif, and obtain security against
enemies whom he could not singly oppose. For
this reason he relinquiihed his allodial indepen-
dence, and fubje&ted himself to the feudal services,
that he might find safety under the patronage of
some refpetable superior. In ome parts of Eu-
rope, this change from allodial to feudal property
became so general, that he who possessed land had
no longer any liberty of choice left. He was
obliged to recognize ome liege lord, and to hold
of him. Thus Beaumanoir informs us, that in
the counties of Clermont and Beauvois, if the Lord
or Count discovered any lands within his jurifdic-
tion, for which no service was performed, and
which paid to him no tax or customs, he might
instantly seize it as his own; for, fays he, accord-
ing to our custom no man can hold allodial pro-
perty. Couft. ch. 24. p. 123. Upon the fame
principle is founded a maxim, which has at length
become general in the law of France, Nulle terre
fans Seigneur, In other provinces of France, allo-
dial property seems to have remained longer una-
lienated, and to have been more highly valued. A
vast number of charters, containing grants, or ales,
or exchanges of allodial lands in the province of
Languedoc, are publilhed Hilt. gener. de Langued.

2 par

par D. D. De Vic & Vaifette, tom. ii. During the
ninth, tenth, and great part of the eleventh cen.
tury, the property in that province seems to have
been entirely allodial; and scarcely any mention of
feudal tenures occurs in the deedsof that country.
The state of property, during these centuries, seems
to have been perfe&ly similar in Catalonia, and
the country of Roussillon, as appears from the ori-
ginal charters published in the Appendix to Petr.
de la Marca's treatise de Marca five limite Hifpa-
nico. Allodial property seems to have continued
in the Low Countries, to a period still later.
During the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth cen-
turies, this species of property appears to have
been of considerable extent. Miraei opera Diplom.
vol. i. 34, 74, 75, 83, 817, 296, 842, 847, 57g.
Some vestiges of allodial property appear there as
late as the fourteenth century. Ibid. 218. Several
fats which prove that allodial property subsisted
in different parts of Europe long after the intro-
duction of feudal tenures, and which tend to illus-
trate the diftinCion between there two different
species of poffeflion, are produced by M. Houard.
Anciennes Loix des Francois, conservees dans les
Coutumes Angloifes, vol. i. p. 192, &c. The no-
tions of men with respect to property, vary accord-
ing to the diversity of their understandings, and
the caprice of their passions. At the fame time
that some persons were fond of relinquihing allo-
dial property, in order to hold it by feudal tenure,
bthers seem to have been solicitous to convert their
fiefs into allodial property. An instance of this

occurs

occurs in a charter of Louis le Debonnaire, pub.
lifhed by Eckhard, Commentarii de rebus Franciae
Orientalis, vol. ii. p. 885. Another occurs in the
year 1299. Reliquia MSS. omnis avi, by Ludwig,
vol. i. p. 209. and even one as late as the year
1337. ibid. vol. vii. p. 40. The fame thing took
place in the Low Countries. Mirai oper. . 52.

IN tracing these various revolutions of property,

I have hitherto chiefly confined myself to what
happened in France, because the ancient monu.
ments of that nation have either been more care-
fully preserved, or have been more clearly illus-
trated than those of any people in Europe.

IN Italy, the fame revolutions happened in pro-

perty, and succeedcd each other in the fame order.
There is ome ground, however, for conje&uring
that allodial property continued longer in eftima-
tion among the Italians, than among the French.
It appears, that many of the charters granted by
the Emperors in the ninth century, conveyed an
allodial right to land. Murat. antiq. med. vi,
v. i. p. 575, &c. But in the eleventh century, we
find ome examples of persons who rcfigned their
allodial property, and received it back as a feudal
tenure. Id. p. 6o, &c. Muratori observes, that
the word feudum, which came to be fubflituted in
place of beneficium, does not occur in any authen-
tick charter previous to the eleventh century. Id.
594. A charter of King Robert of France, A. 1).
zoo8, is the earliest deed in which I have met with

the

the word feudam. Bouquet recueil des hiftoriens
de Gaule & de la France, tom. x. p. 593. b.
This word occurs indeed in an edit, A. D. 790,
published by Brufel, vol. i. p. 77. But the au
thenticity of that deed has been called in question,
and perhaps the frequent use of the word feudum
in it, is an additional reason for doing so. The
account which I have given of the nature both of
allodial and feudal poffefions receives ome con-
firmation from the etymology of the words them-
selves. Alode or allodium is compounded of the
German particle an and lot, i. e. land obtained by
lot. Wachteri Gloffar. Germanicum, voc. Allo.
dium, p. 35. It appears from the authorities pro-
duced by him and by Du Cange, voc. fors, that
the northern nations divided the lands which they
had conquered in this manner. Feodum is com.
pounded of od possession or estate, and feo wages,
pay; intimating that it was stipendiary and granted
as a recompence for service. Wachterus ibid. voc.
feodum, p. 441.

THE progress of the feudal system among the

Germans was perfealy similar to that which we
have traced in France. But as the Emperors of
Germany, especially after the Imperial crown
passed from the descendants of Charlemagne to
the house of Saxony, were far superior to the
contemporary Monarchs of France, in abilities,
the Imperial vassals did not aspire so early to in-
dependence, nor did they so soon obtain the pri-
vilege of poffefling their benefices by hereditary

right.

right. According to the compilers of the Libri
Feudorum, Conrad II. or the Salic, was the first
Emperor, who rendered fiefs hereditary. Lib. i.
tit. 1. Conrad began his reign A. D. 1024. Lu-
dovicus Pius, under whose reign, grants of here-
ditary fiefs were frequent in France, succeeded his
father, A. D. 814. Not only was this innovation
so much later in being introduced among the vas-
fals of the German Emperors, but even after
Conrad had eftabliihed it, the law continued fa-
vourable to the ancient practice, and unless the
charter of the vassal bore expressly that the fief
descended to his heirs, it was presumed to be
granted only during life. Lib. feud. ibid. Even
after the alteration made by Conrad, it was not
uncommon in Germany to grant fiefs only for life;
a charter of this kind occurs as late as the year
1376. Charta ap. Boehmer. Princip. Jur. feud.
p. 361. The tranfmifflon of fiefs to collateral and
female heirs, took place very slowly among the
Germans. There is extant a charter, A. D. 1201,
conveying the right of succession to females, but
it is granted as an extraordinary mark of favour,
and in reward of uncommon services. Boehmer.
ibid. p. 365. In Germany, as well as in France
and Italy, a considerable part of the lands con-
tinued to be allodial long after the feudal mode
of tenure was introduced. It appears from the
Codex Diplomaticus Monafterii Buch, that a great
part of the lands in the marquisate of Mifnia was
fill allodial as late as the thirteenth century.
No 31, 36, 37, 46, &c. ap. Scriptores hill. Ger-

man.

man. cura Schoctgenii & Kreyfigii. Altenb. I755x,
vol. ii. 183, &c. Allodial property seems to have
been common in another diftric of the fame pro-
vince, during the fame period. Reliquia: Diplo-
matice Sancimonial Beutiz. N° 17, 36, 58. ibid.
374, &c.

NOTE IX. SECT. I. p. 19. [I].

As I flall have occasion, in another note, to

represent the condition of that part of the people
who dwelt in cities, I will confine myself in this
to confider the state of the inhabitants of the
country. The persons employed in cultivating
the ground during the ages under review may be
divided into three classes; I. Servi or slaves. This
seems to have been the mofft numerous class, and
confifled either of captives taken in war, or of
persons the property in whom was acquired in
some one of the various methods enumerated by
Du Cange, voc. fervus, v. 6. p. 447. The
wretched condition of this numerous race of men
will appear from several circumstances. . Their
masters had absolute dominion over their persons.
They had the power of punishing their slaves ca-
pitally, without the intervention of any judge.
This dangerous right they possessed not only in
the more early periods, when their manners were
fierce, but it continued as late as the twelfth
century. Joach. Potgiefferus de flatu fervorumn.
Lemgov. 1736. 4to. lib. ii. cap. i. § 4, 1o, 13,
24. Even after this jurifdition of masters came
to be rcf-rained, the life of a slave was deemed to

be

be of so little value, that a very flight compen
fation atoned for taking it away. Idem, lib. iii.
c. 6. If maiers had power over the lives of their
slaves, it is evident that alrmoft no bounds would
be set to the rigour of the punishments which they
might inflict upon them. The Codes of ancient
laws prescribed punishments for the crimes of
slaves different from those which were inflited on
free men. The latter paid only a fine or com-
penfation, the former were fubjeted to corporal
punishments. The cruelty of these was in many
inltances excessive. Slaves might be put to the
rack on very flight occasions. The laws with
refpef to there points are to be found in Potgi-
efferus, lib. iii, cap. 7. 2, If the dominion of
matters over the lives and persons of their slaves
was thus extensive, it was no lets so over their
actions and property. They were not originally
permitted to marry. Male and female slaves were
allowed and even encouraged to cohabit together.
But this union was not confidered as a marriage,
it was called contubernium, not nuptia or matri.
mnonium. Potgief. lib. ii. c. 2. § I. This notion
was so much ettablifled, that during several cen.
turies after the barbarous nations embraced the
Christian religion, slaves who lived as husband and
wife, were not joined together by any religious
ceremony, and did not receive the nuptial bene-
ditionfrom a priest. Ibid. § o, ii. When this
conjunction between slaves came to be confidered
as a lawful marriage, they were not permitted to
marry without the content of their mailer, and

VOL. 1. T lich

such as ventured to do so without obtaining that,
were puniihed with great severity, and fometinmes
were put to death. Potgieff. ibid. § 12, &c.
Gregor. Turon. hiltor. lib. v. c. 3. When the
manners of the European nations became more
gentle, and their ideas more liberal, saves who
married without their mailer's content, were sub-
jeated only to a fine. Potgieff. ibid. § 20. Du
Cange Gloss. voc. Forifmaritagium. 3. All the
children of slaves were in the fame condition with
their parents, and became the property of the
master. Du Cange Gloss. voc.fervus, vol. vi. 450.
Murat. antiq. Ital. vol. i. 766. 4. Slaves were so
entirely the property of their mailers, that they
could fell them at pleasure. While domeflick
slavery continued, property in a slave was fold
in the fame manner with that which a person had
in any other moveable. Afterwards slaves became
adfcripti gleba, and were conveyed by sale, toge-
ther with the farm or estate to which they be-
longed. Potgiefferus has collected the laws and
charters which illuifrate this well-known circum-
fiance in the condition of aves. Lib. ii. c. 4.
5. Slaves had a title to nothing but fubfillence
and clothes from their master; all the profits of
their labour accrued to him. If a malter, from
indulgence, gave his slaves any peculium or fixed
allowance for their subsistence, they had no right
of property in what they saved out of that. All
that they accumulated belonged to their maiter.
Potgieff. lib. ii. c. o. Murat. antiq. Ital. vol. 768.
Du Cange, voc. fervus, vol. vi. p. 451. Con-

formably

formably to the fame principle, all the effects of
slaves belonged to their master at their death, and
they could not dispose of them by testament. Pot-
gieff. lib. ii. c. i. 6. Slaves were diftinguilhed
from free men by a peculiar dress. Among all
the barbarous nations, long hair was a mark of
dignity and of freedom, slaves were for that reason
obliged to shave their heads; and by this diftinc-
tion, how indifferent soever it may be in its own
nature, they were reminded every moment of the
inferiority of their condition. Potgieff. lib. iii. c. 4.
For the fame reason it was enacted in the laws of
almost all the nations of Europe, that no slave
should be admitted to give evidence against a free
rnan in a court of juilice. Du Cange, voc. fervus,
vol. vi. p. 451. Potgieff. lib. iii. c. 3.

2. Filiani. They were likewise adfcripti glebe

or villa, from which they derived their name, and
were transferable along with it. Du Cange, voc.
villanus. But in this they differed from slaves,
that they paid a fixed rent to their master for the
land which they cultivated, and after paying that,
all the fruits of their labour and industry belonged
to themselves in property. This dillincIion is
marked by Piere de Fontaine's Confcil. Vie de St.
Louis par Joinville, p. x 19. edit. de Du Cange.
Several cafes decided agreeably to this principle
are mentioned by Murat. Ibid. p. 773.

3. THE last class of persons employed in agri-
culture were free men. These are diftinguilhed

T a by

by various names among the writers of the middle
ages, Arimanni, conditionales, originarii, tributales,
&c. These seem to have been persons who pof-
sessed some small allodial property of their own,
and besides that, cultivated some farm belonging
to their more wealthy neighbours, for which they
paid a fixed rent; and bound themselves likewise
to perform several small services in prato vel in
mefe, in aratura vel in vinea, such as ploughing a
certain quantity of their landlord's ground, assist.
ing him in harvest and vintage work, &c. The
clearest proof of this may be found in Muratori,
v. i. p. 712. and in Du Cange under the refpec-
tive words abovementioned. I have not been able
to discover whether these arimanni, &c. were re-
movable at pleasure, or held their farms by lease
for a certain number of years. The former, if
we may judge from the genius and maxims of the
age, eems to be moit probable. These persons,
however, were confidered as free men in the most
honourable sense of the word; they enjoyed all
the privileges of that condition, and were even
called to serve in war; an honour to which no
slave was admitted. Murat. Antiq. vol. i. p. 743.
vol. ii. p. 446. This account of the condition of
there three different classes of persons, will enable
the reader to apprehend the full force of an argu-
ment which I hall produce in confirmation of
what I have said in the text concerning the wretched
slate of the people during the middle ages. Not-
withstanding the immense difference between the
first of there classes and the third, such was the

spirit

spirit of tyranny which prevailed among the great
proprietors of land, and so various their oppor-
tunities of oppressing those who were fettled on
their etates, and of rendering their condition in-
tolerable, that many free men, in despair, renounced
their liberty, and voluntarily surrendered them-
selves as slaves to their powerful mailers. This
they did, in order that their mailers might become
more immediately interelted to afford them pro-
tection, together with the means of fubfifing
themselves and their families. The forms of such
a surrender, or obnoxiatio, as it was then called,
arepreferved by Marculfus, lib. ii. c. 28; and by
the anonymous author published by M. Bignon,
together with the colleCtion of formula compiled
by Marculfus, c. 16. In both, the reason given
for the obnoxiatio, is the wretched and indigent
condition of the person who gives up his liberty.
It was ilill more common for free men to surrender
their liberty to bishops or abbots, that they might
partake of the security which the vassals and slaves
of churches and monasteries enjoyed, in confe-
quence of the fuperititious veneration paid to the
faint under whose immediate protection they were
supposed to be taken. Du Cange, voc, oblatus,
vol. iv. p. 1286. That condition must have been
miserable indeed, which could induce a free man
voluntarily to renounce his liberty, and to give
up himself as a slave to the disposal of another.
The number of slaves in every nation of Europe
was prodigious. The greater part of the inferior

T 3 class

class of people in France were reduced to this slate,
at the commencement of the third race of Kings.
L'efpr. des Loix, liv. xxx. c. 1i . The fame was
the cafe in England. Brady Pref. to Gen. Hist.
Many curious sacs with refpe& to the ancient
ftatc of villains or slaves in England, are published
in Observations on the fiatutes, chiefly the more
ancient, 2d edit. p. 244.

NOTE X. SECT. I. P. 22. [K].

INNUMERABLE proofs of this might be pro-

duced. Many charters granted y persons of the
highest rank are preserved, from which it appears
that they could not subscribe their name. It was
usual for persons who could not write, to make
the sign of the cross in confirmation of a charter.
Several of these remain, where Kings and persons
of great eminence affix fignum crucis manu propria
pro ignoratione literarum. Du Cange, voc. Crux,
vol. iii. p. 1191. From this is derived thephrafe
of signing inflead of subscribing a paper. In the
ninth century, Herbaud Comes Palatii, though
supreme judge of the Empire by virtue of his
office, could not subscribe his name. Nouveau
Traite de Diplomatique par deux Benediftins,
4to. tom. ii. p. 422. As late as the fourteenth
century, Du Guefclin, constable of France, the
greatet man in the state, and one of the greatest
men of his age, could neither read nor write. St.
falaye Memoires fur l'ancienne Chevalerie, t. ii

p. 82.

p. 82. Nor was this ignorance confined to lay-
men; the greater part of the clergy was not many
degrees superior to them in science. Many dig-
nified ecclefiafticks could not subscribe the canons
of those councils, in which they fat as members.
Nouv. Traite de Diplom tom. ii. p. 424. One
of the questions appointed by the canons to be
put to persons who were candidates for orders
was this, " Whether they could read the gospels
and epiies, and explain the sense of them, at
least literally ?" Regino Prumienfis ap. Bruck.
Hist. Philof. v. iii. p. 63 I. Alfred the Great com-
plained, that from the Humber to the Thames
there was not a priest who understood the liturgy
in his mother-tongue, or who could translate the
easiest piece of Latin; and that from the Thames
to the ea, the ecclefiafticks were fill more igno-
rant. Afferus de rebus geftis Alfredi, ap. Cam-
deni. Anglica, &c. p. 2. The ignorance of the
clergy is quaintly described by an author of the
dark ages. " Potius dedidi gula quam Gloffia
potius colligunt libras quam legunt libros; liben-
tius intuentur Martham quam Marcum; malunt
legere in Salmone quam in Solomone. Alanus de
art. Predicat. ap. Lebeuf. Dissert. tom. ii. p. 21.
To the obvious causes of such universal ignorance,
arising from the state of government and manners,
from the seventh to the eleventh century, we may
add the scarcity of books during that period, and
the difficulty of rendering them more common.
The Romans wrote their books either on parcb-

T 4 ment

pment or on paper made of the Egyptian papyrus.
The latter being the cheapest, was of course the
most commonly uscd. But after the Saracens
conquered Egypt in the seventh century, the com-
munication between that country and the people
fettled in Italy or in other parts of Europe, was
almost entirely broken off, and the papyrus was
no longer in use among them. They were ob-
liged, o that account, to write all their books
upon parchment, and as the price of that was high,
books became extremely rare and of great value.
We may judge of the scarcity of the materials for
writing them from one circumstance. There still
remain several manuscripts of the eighth, ninth,
and following centuries, wrote on parchment, from
which some former writing had been erased, in
order to substitute a new composition in its place.
In this manner, it is probable, that several works
of the ancients perished. A book of Livy or of
Tacitus might be erased, to make room for the
legendary tale of a faint, or the fuperflitious
prayers of a missal. Murat. Antiq. Ital. v. iii
p. 833. P. de Montfaucon affirms, that the greater
part of the manuscripts on parchment which he
has seen, those of an ancient date excepted, are
written on parchment from which some former
treatise had been erased. Mem. de l'Acad. des
infcript. tom. ix. p. 325. As the want of mate-
rials for writing, is one reason why so many of
the works of the ancients have perished, it accounts
likewise for the small number of manuscripts of

Z~ ?"Any

any kind, previous to the eleventh century, when
they began to multiply from a cause which flall be
mentioned. Hist. Liter. de France, tom. vi. p. 6.
Many circumstances prove the scarcity of books
during these ages. Private persons seldom possessed
any books whatever. Even monasteries of confider-
able note had only one missal. Murat. Antiq.
v. ix. p. 789. Lupus, abbot of Ferrieres, in a
letter to the Pope, A. D. 855, beseeches him to
lend him a copy of Cicero de Oratore & Quin-
tilian's Institutions, " for," fays he, " although
we have parts of those books, there is no complete
copy of them in all France. Murat. Ant. v. iii.
p. 835. The price of books became so high, that
persons of a moderate fortune could not afford to
purchase them. The countess of Anjou paid for
a copy of the Homilies of Haimon, bishop of
Halberftadt, two hundred iheep, five quarters of
wheat, and the fame quantity of rye and millet.
Hiftoire Literaire de France par des Religieux Be-
nedictins, tom. vii. p. 3. Even so late as the year
1471, when Louis XI, borrowed the works of
Rafis, the Arabian physician, from the faculty
of medicine in Paris, he not only depositcd in
pledge a considerable quantity of plate, but was
obliged to procure a nobleman to join with him as
surety in a deed, binding himself under a great
forfeiture to restore it. Gabr. Naudc Addit. ; l'hif.
toire de Louys XI. par Comines. edit. de Frefnoy,
tom. iv. p. 281. Many curious circumstances
with refpeet to the extravagant price of books in

the

the middle ages, are colleced by that industrious
compiler, to whom I refer such of my readers as
deem this small branch of literary history an ob-
jet of curiosity. When any person made a pre-
sent of a book to a church or a monastery, in which
were the only libraries during these ages, it was
deemed a donative of such value, that he offered
it on the altar pro remedio anime sue, in order to
obtain the forgiveness of his fins. Murat. vol. iii.
p. 836. Hist. Liter. de France, tom. vi. p. 6.
Nouv. Trait. du Diplomat. par deux Benediains,
4to. tom. i. p. 481. In the eleventh century, the
art of making paper in the manner now become
universal, was invented; by means of that not only
the number of manuscripts increased, but the study
of the sciences was wonderfully facilitated. Mu-
rat. ib. p. 871. The invention of the art of ma-
king paper, and the invention of the art of printing,
are two considerable events in literary history. It
is remarkable that the former preceded the first
dawning of letters and improvement in knowledge
towards the close of the eleventh century; the
latter ufhlered in the light which spread over Eu-
rope at the xra of the Reformation.

NOTE XI. SECT. I. p. 23. [L].
ALL the religious maxims and pracices of the

dark ages are a proof of this. I shall produce one
remarkable testimony in confirmation of it, from
an author canonized by the church of Rome, St.
Eloy or Egidius, bimhop of Noyon, in the seventh

century.

century. " He is a good Christian who comes fre- ~, .
quently to church; who presents the oblation which / Ig,
is offered to God upon the altar; who doth not .
taste of the fruits of his own industry until he has W/ e A.
consecrated a part of them to God; who, when a' no
the holy festivals approach, lives chastely even :r,:
with his own wife during several days, that with a , l 'L,
safe conscience he may draw near to the altar of ,u, .'.
God; and who, in the last place, can repeat the t,,,ji: ,
Creed and the Lord's Prayer. Redeem then your & 4;.?
fouls from deftrucion while you have the means , /,5;'
in your power; offer presents and tythes to church ,. - só.
men; come more frequently to church; humbly
implore the patronage of the faints; for if you
observe there things, you may come with security
in the day of retribution to the tribunal of the eter-
nal judge, and fay, " Give to us, O Lord, for we
have given unto thee." Dacherii Specilegium
Vet. Script. v. ii. p. 94, The learned and judi-
cious translator of Dr. Mofheim's Ecclesiastical
Hifory, from one of whose additional notes I have
borrowed this passage, subjoins a very proper re-
fletion; " We fee here a large and ample dlccrip-
tion of a good Christian, in which there is not the
least mention of the love of God, resignation to his
will, obedience to his laws, or of justice, benevo-
lence, and charity towards men." Mofh. Eccles.
Hist. v. . p. 324.

NOTE XII. SECT. I.p. 23. [M].
IT is no inconsiderable misfortune to the church
;f Rome, whose doctrine of infallibility renders all

such

f. uch infitiutions and ceremonies as have been once
universally received, immutable and everlasting,
that she must continue to observe in enlightened
, times, those rites which were introduced during

the ages ofdarknefs and credulity. What delighted
and edified the latter, must disgust and ihock the
former. Many of these rites appear manifestly to
have been introduced by a superstition of the lowest
and most illiberal species. Many of them were
borrowed, with little variation, from the religious
ceremonies eftabliihcd among the ancient Hea-
thens. Some were so ridiculous, that if every age
did not furnish instances of the fascinating influ-
ence of superstition, as well as of the whimsical
forms which it assumes, it must appear incredible
that they should ever be received or tolerated. In
several churches of France, they celebrated a felfi.
val in commemoration of the Virgin Mary's flight
into Egypt. It was called the feast of the Ass. A
young girl richly dressed, with a child in her arms,
was set upon an ass superbly caparisoned. The ass
was led to the altar in solemn procession. High
Mass was said with great pomp. The ass was
taught to kneel at proper places; a hymn no less
childish than impious was sung in his praise: And
when the ceremony was ended, the priest, instead
of the usual words with which he dismissed the
people, brayed three times like an ass; and the
people, instead of their usual response, We bless
the Lord, brayed three times in the fame manner.
Du Cange, voc. Feftumn. v. iii. p. 424. This ri-

diculous

diculous ceremony was not, like the festival of
fools, and ome other pageants of those ages, a
mere farcical entertainment exhibited in a church,
and mingled, as was then the custom, with an imi-
tation of some religious rites; it was an aft of de-
votion, performed by the ministers of religion, and
by the authority of the church. However, as this
practice did not prevail universally in the Catho-
lick church, its absurdity contributed at last to
aboliih it.

NOTE XIII. SECT. I. p. 29. [N].
As there is no event in the history of mankind

more singular than that of the Crusades, every
circumstance that tends to explain or to give any
rational account of this extraordinary frenzy of the
human mind is interesting. I have asserted in the
text, that the minds of men were prepared gra-
dually for the amazing effort which they made in
consequence of the exhortations of Peter the her-
mit, by several occurrences previous to his time.
A more particular detail of this curious and ob-
fcure part of history, may perhaps appear to some
of my readers to be of importance. That the end
of the world was expected about the close of the
tenth and beginning of the eleventh century; and
that this occasioned a general alarm, is evident from
the authors to whom I refer in the text. This be.
lief was so universal and o strong, that it mingled
itself with their civil tranfaAions. Many charters,
in the latter part of the tenth century, begin in

tlhi

this manner: " Apropinquante mundi termino,"
&c. As the end of the world is now at hand, and
by various calamities and judgments the signs of
its approach are now manifest. Hist. de Langued.
parD. D. de Vic Vaifette, tom. ii. Preuves, p. 86,
89, 90, 117, 158, &c. One effet of this opinion
was, that a great number of pilgrims retorted to
Jerusalem, with a resolution to die there, or to wait
the coming of the Lord; Kings, Earls, Marquiffes,
Bishops, and even a great number of women, be.
fides persons of inferior rank, flocked to the Holy
Land. Glaber. Rodulph. Hist. chez Bouquet Re-
cueil, tom. x. p. 50, 52. Another hiltorian men-
tions a vast cavalcade of pilgrims who accompanied
the count of Angouleme to Jerusalem in the year
1026. Chronic. Ademari, ibid. p. 162. These
pilgrims filled Europe with lamentable accounts of
the state of Christians in the Holy Land. Willerm.
Tyr. Hist. ap. Gest. Dei per Franc. vol. ii. p. 636.
Guibert. Abbat. Hist. ibid. vol. i. p. 476. Betides
this, it was usual for many of the Christian inhabi-
tants of Jerusalem, as well as of other cities in the
East, to travel as mendicants through Europe; and
by describing the wretched condition of the profef-
fors of the Christian faith under the dominion of
Infidels, to extort charity, and to excite zealous
persons to make some attempt in order to deliver
them from oppreflion. Baldrici Archiepifcopi
Hiftor. ap. Gefta Dei, &c. vol. i .

p. 86. In the

year 986, Gerbert, archbilhop of Ravenna, after-
wards Pope Silvefter II. addressed a letter to all

Christians

Christians in the name of the church of Jerusalem.
It is eloquent and pathetic, and contains a formal
exhortation to take arms against the Pagan oppref-
fors, in order to rescue the holy city from their
yoke. Gerberti Epiftola ap. Bouquet, Recueil,
tom. x. p. 426. In consequence of this spirited call,
some fubjels of the republick of Pisa equipped a
fleet, and invaded the territories of the Mahome-
tans in Syria. Murat. Script. Rer. Italic. vol. iii.
p. 400. The alarm was taken in the East, and an
opinion prevailed, A. D. Ioo1, that all the forces
of Christendom were to unite, in order to drive the
Mahometans out of Palestine. Chron. Ademari ap.
Bouquet, tom. x. p. 152. It is evident from all
these particulars, that the ideas which led the Cru-
faders to undertake their wild enterprize were gra-
dually formed; so that the universal cohcourfe to
the standard of the cross when erected by Urban II.
will appear less surprising.

IF the various circumflances which I have enu-

merated in this note, as well as in the history, are
sufficient to account for the ardour with which such
vast numbers engaged in such a dangerous undertak-
ing, the extensive privileges and immunities granted
to the persons who assumed the cross, serve to account
for the long continuance of this spirit in Europe.
1. They were exempted from prosecutions on ac-
count of debt during the time of their being engaged
in this holy service. Du Cange, voc. Crucis privi-
legium, v. ii. p. 1194.-2. They were exempted
from paying interest for the money which they hIad

borrowed.

borrowed. Ibid.-3. They were exempted either
entirely, or at least during a certain time, from the
payment of taxes. Ibid. Ordonances des Rois de
France, tom. i. p. 33.-4. They might alienate
their lands without the consent of the superior lord
of whom they held. Ib.-5. Their persons and
effecs were taken under the protetion of St. Peter,
and the anathemas of the church were denounced
against all who should molest them, or carry on any
quarrel or hostility against them, during their ab-
fence, on account of the holy war. Du Cange, Ib.
Guibertus Abbas ap. Bongarf. i. p. 480, 482.-
6. They enjoyed all the privileges of Ecclefiafticks,
and were not bound to plead in any civil court,
but were declared fubje& to the fpiritualjurifdic-
tion alone. Du Cange, Ib. Ordon. des Rois, tom. i.
p. 34, I 74.-7. They obtained a plenary remiflion
of all their fins, and the gates of heaven were set
open to them, without requiring any proof of their
penitence, but their engaging in this expedition,
and thus gratifying their favourite pailion, the
love of war. Guibert. Abbas, p. 480. When we
behold the civil and ecclesiastical powers vying with
each other, and straining their invention in order
to devise expedients for encouraging and adding
strength to the spirit of fuperfitiion, can we be fur-
prifed that it hould become o general as to ren-
der it infamous, and a mark of cowardice to de-
cline engaging in the holy war ? Willierm Tyri-
enfis ap. Bongarf. vol. ii. p. 641. The histories of
the Crusades written by modern authors, who are

apt

apt to substitute the ideas and maxims of their
own age in the place of those which influenced the
persons whose actions they attempt to relate, convey
a very imperfet notion of the spirit at that time
predominant in Europe. The original historians,
who were animated themselves with the fame pas-
sions which possessed their contemporaries, exhibit
to us a more striking picture of' the times and
manners which they describe. The enthusiastic
rapture with which they account for the effects of
the Pope's discourse in the council of Clermont;
the exultation with which they mention the num*
bers who devoted themselves to this holy warfare;
the confidence with which they rely on the divine
protection; the extafy of joy with which they de-
scribe their taking possession of the holy city, will
enable us to conceive in ome degree the extrava-
gance of that zeal which agitated the minds of
men with such violence, and will suggest as many
singular reflections to a philosopher, as any occur.
rence in the history of mankind. It is unnecessary
to fele& the particular passages in the several his-
torians which confirm this observation. But left
these authors may be fufpetcd of adorning their
narrative with any exaggerated description, I fiall
appeal to one of the leaders who conducted the
enterprize. There is extant a letter from Stephen
the earl of Chartres and Blois, to Adela his wife,
in which he gives her an account of the progress
of the Cruladers. He describes the Crusaders as
the chosen army of Christ, as the frvants and fol-

VOL. I, U tdirs

diers of God, as men who marched under the in
mediate protetion of the Almighty, being con.
ducted by his hand to victory and conqueL He
speaks of the Turks as accursed, sacrilegious, and
devoted by heaven to deftrution; and when he
mentions the soldiers in the Christian army who
had died, or were killed, he is confident that their
fouls were admitted diretly into the joys of Para-
dife. Dacherii Specilegium, vol. iv. p. 257.

THE expence of conducting numerous bodies of

men from Europe to Asia, must have been excel:
five, and the difficulty of railing the necessary
fums must have been proportionally great, during
ages when the publick revenues in every nation of
Europe were extremely small. Some account is
preserved of the expedients employed by Hum-
bert II. Dauphin of Vienne, in order to levy the
money requisite towards equipping him for the
Crusade, A. B. 1346. These I shall mention, as
they tend to hew the considerable influence which
the Crusades had, both on the state of property
and of civil government. i. He exposed to sale
part of his domains; and as the price was defiined
for such a sacred service, he obtained the content
of the French King, of whom there lands were
held, ratifying the alienation. Hist. de Dauphine,
tom. i. p. 332, 335.-2. He issued a proclamation,
in which he promied to grant new privileges to
the nobles, as well as new immunities to the cities
and towns, in his territories, in consideration of

certain

certain fums which they were instantly to pay on
that account. Ibid. tom. ii. p.512. Many of the
charters of community, which' I shall mention in
another note, were obtained in this manner.-
3. He exacted a contribution towards defraying
the charges of the expedition from all his subje&s,
whether ecclefiafticks or laymen, who did not ac-
company him in person to the East. Ibid. tom. i.
p. 335.--4. He appropriated a considerable pare
of his usual revenues for the support of the troops
to be employed in this service. Ibid. tom. ii. p.
518.-5. He exacted considerable fums not only
of the Jews fettled in his dominions, but also of
the Lombards and other bankers who had fixed
their residence there. Ibid. tom. i. p. 338tom. ii.
528. Notwithstanding the variety of there refour-
ces, theDauphin was involved in such expence by
this expedition, that on his return he was obliged
to make new demands on his subjects, and to pil-
lage the Jews by fresh exactions. Ibid. tom. i. p.
344, 347. When the count de Foix engaged in
the first Crusade, he raised the money necessary for
defraying the expences of that expedition, by alie-
nating part of his territories. Hii. de Langued.
par D. D. de Vic & Vaifette, tom. ii. p. 287. In
like manner Baldwin, count of Hainaut, mortgaged
or fold part of his dominions to the bishop of
Liege, A. D. 1o96. Du Mont Corps Diploma-
tique, tom. i. p. 59. At a later period, Baldwin,
count of Namur, told part of his estate to a mona-
fiery, when he intended to assume the cross, A. D
1239. Mirxi Oper. i. *13.

U 2 NOTE

NOTE XIV. SECT. I. p. 34. [0].

THE usual method of forming an opinion con-

cerning the comparative slate of manners in two
different nations, is by attending to the fats
which historians relate concerning each of them.
Various passages might be feleted from the By-
zantin historians, describing the splendor and
magnificence of the Greek Empire. P. de Mont-
faucon has produced from the writings of St.
Chrysostom a very full account of the elegance
and luxury of the Greeks in his age. That father
in his sermons enters into such details concerning
the manners and customs of his contemporaries,
as appea strange in discourses from the pulpit.
P. de Montfaucon has collected these descriptions,
and ranged them under different heads. The
court of the more early Greek Emperors seems to
have resembled those of Eastern monarchs, both
in magnificence and in corruption of manners.
The Emperors in the eleventh century, though in-
ferior in power, did not yield to them in oftenta-
tion and splendor. Memoires de 'Acad. des In-
script. tom. xx. p. 197.--But we may decide
concerning the comparative state of manners in
the Eastern Empire, and among the nations in
the weft of Europe, by another method, which, if
not more certain, is at least more triking. As
Constantinople was the place of rendezvous for
all the armies of the crusaders, this brought to-
gether the people of the east and weft as to one
great interview. There are extant several con-

2 temporary

temporary authors both among the Greeks and
Latins, who were witnefles of this singular con-
grefs of people, formerly frangers, in a great mea-
lure, to each other. They describe with simplicity
and candour, the impression which that new spec-
tacle made upon their own minds. This may be
confidered as the most lively and just piture of
the real charaEter and manners of each people.
When the Greeks speak of the Franks, they de-
scribe them as barbarians, fierce, illiterate, impe-
tuous, and avage. They assume a tone offupe-
riority, as a more polished people, acquainted
with the arts both of government and of elegance,
of which the other were ignorant. It is thus
Anna Comnena describes the manners of the
Latins, Alexias, p. 224. 231. 237. ap. Byz. Script.
vol. xi. She always treats them with contempt
as a rude people, the very mention of whose
names was sufficient to contaminate the beauty
and elegance of history, p. 229. Nicetas Choni-
atas inveighs against them with frill more violence,
and gives an account of their ferocity and de-
vaftations, in terms not unlike those which pre-
ceding historians had employed in describing the
incursions of the Goths and Vandals. Nicet. Chon.
ap. Byz. Script. vol. iii. p. 302, &c. But, on
the other hand, the Latin historians were lruck
with atonifhment at the magnificence, wealth,
and elegance which they discovered in the Eastern
Empire. " 0 what a vait city is Constantinople
(exclaims Fulchcrius Carnotenfis, when he first

U 3 beheld

beheld it) and how beautiful! How many mona.
fteries are there in it, and how many palaces
built with wonderful art! How many manu-
factures are there in the city amazing to behold !
It would be atonifhing to relate how it abounds
with all good things, with gold, silver, and ltuffs
of various kinds; for every hour ships arrive in
its port laden with all things necessary for the ulk
of man." Fulcher. ap. Bongars. vol. i. p. 386.
Willermus Archbilhop of Tyre, the most intel-
ligent hifforian of the crusades, takes frequent
occaCion to dfcribe the elegance and splendour of
the court of Constantinople, and adds, that what
they obfcrved there exceeded any idea which they
could have formed of it, noitrarum enim rerun
modur & dignitatem excedunt, Willerm. ' yr.
ap. Bong. vol. ii. p. 657. 664. Benjamin the
Jew, o l'udela in Navarre, who began his travels
A. D. 1173, appears to have been equally alto-
nifhed at the magnificence of that city, and gives
a description of its splendour, in terms of high
admiration. Benj. Tudel. chez les Voyages faits
en 12, 3, &c. siecles par Bergeron, p. Io, &c.
Guntherus, a French monk who wrote a history
of the conquest of Constantinople by the crusaders
in the thirteenth century, speaks of the magni-
ficence of that city in the fame tone of admiration,
" Strucuram autem iEdificiorum in corpore civi-
tatis, in ecclefiis videlicet, & turribus, & in do-
rnibus magnatorum, vix ullus vel defcribere poteft,
YCl credere defcribenti, nifi qui ea oculata fide

cognoverit"

cognoverit." Hist. ConRtantinop. ap. Canifii Lec-
tiones Antiquas, fol. Antw. 1725. vol. iv. p. 14.
Geoffrey de Villehardouin, a nobleman of high
rank, and accustomed to all the magnificence then
known in the weft, describes, in similar terms,
the aftoni(hment and admiration of such of his
fellow-foldiers who beheld Constantinople for the
firit time: " They could not have believed, fays
he, that there was a city so beautiful and rich in
the whole world. When they viewed its high
walls, its lofty towers, its rich palaces, its superb
churches, all appeared so great that they could
have formed no conception of this sovereign city,
unless they had seen it with their own eyes." His-
toire de la Conquete de Constant. p. 49. From
these undilguifed reprcfentations of their own feel-
ings, it is evident, that to the Greeks, the Latins
appeared to be a race of rude, unpolifhed bar-
barians; whereas the latter, how much soever
they might contemn the unwarlike characRer of
the former, could not help regarding them as far
superior to themlelves in elegance and arts.-That
the slate of government and manners was much
more improved in Italy than in the other countries
of Europe is evident not only from the facts re-
corded in history, but it appears that the more
intelligent leaders of the crusaders were firuck
with the difference, Jacobus de Vitriaco, a French
historian of the holy war, makes an elaborate
panegyrick on the character and manners of the
Italians. He views them as a more polifled

U 4 people,

people, and particularly celebrates them for their
love of liberty, and civil wisdom; " in confiliis cir-
cumfpedi, in re fua publica procuranda diligentes
& ftudiofi; fibi in pofterum providentes; aliis
fubjici renuentes; ante omnia libertatem fibi de-
fendentes; ub uno quem eligunt capitaneo, com-
munitati fui jura & inftituta distantes, & fimiliter
observantes." -iftor. Hierofol. ap. Gefta Dei per
Francos, vol. ii. p, o185.

NOTE XV. SECT. I. p. 38. [P].

THE different steps taken by the cities of Italy

in order to extend their power and dominion are
remarkable. As soon as their liberties were efta-
blifled, and they began to feel their own im-
portance, they endeavoured to render themselves
masters of the territory round their walls. Under
the Romans, when cities enjoyed municipal pri-
vileges and jurifdiEtion, the circunmjacent lands
belonged to each town, and were the property of
the community. But as it was not the genius of
the feudal policy to encourage cities, or to Ihew
any regard for their poffefions and immunities,
these lands had been seized, and shared among
the conquerors. The barons to whom they were
granted, ereEted their castles almost at the gates
of the city, and exercised their jurisdiction there.
Under pretence of recovering their ancient pro-
perty, many of the cities in Italy attacked these
*toublefome neighbours, and difpoffefling them,
annexe4 their territories to the communities, and

made

made thereby a considerable addition to their
power. Several instances of this occur in the
eleventh, and beginning of the twelfth centuries.
Murat. antiq. Ital. vol. iv. p. iso, &c. Their
ambition increasing together with their power, the
cities afterwards attacked several barons situated
at a greater distance from them, and obliged these
to engage that they hould become members of
their community; that they ihould take the oath
of fidelity to their magistrates; that they hould
subjet their lands to all burdens and taxes im-
posed by common content; that they should de-
fend the community against all its enemies; and
that they hould reside within the city during a
certain specified time in each year. Murat ibid.
163. This fubje&ion of the nobility to the muni-
cipal government eftablifed in cities, became
almost universal, and was often extremely grievous
to persons accustomed to confider themselves as
independent. Otto Frifingenfis thus describes the
itate of Italy under Frederick I. " The cities so
much asset liberty, and are so solicitous to avoid
the insolence of power, that almost all of them
have thrown off every other authority, and are
governed by their own magistrates. Insomuch
that all that country is now filled with free cities,
each of which have compelled their bithops to
reside within their walls, and there is scarcely any
nobleman, how great soever his power may be,
who is not subjed to the laws and government
of some city. De Geftis Frider. I. Imp. lib. ii.
'. 13. p. 453. In another place he observes of

the

the Marquis of Montserrat that he was almost
the only Italian baron, who had pfeferved his in-
dependence, and had not become subjec to the
laws of any city. See also Muratori Antichita
Eflenfi, vol. i. p. 411, 412. That state into
which some of the nobles were compelled to enter,
others embraced from choice. They observed the
high degree of security as well as of credit and
estimation which the growing wealth and dominion
of the great communities procured to all the
members of them. They were desirous to partake
of these, and to put themselves under such power-
ful proteion. With this view they voluntarily
became citizens of the towns to which their lands
were most contiguous, and abandoning their an-
cient castles, took up their residence in the cities
at leaf during part of the year. Several deeds
are ill extant, by which some of the most illus.
trious families in Italy are associated as citizens of
different cities. Murat. ib. p. 165, &c. A charter
by which Atto de Macerata is admitted as a
citizen of Ofimo, A. D. I198. in the Marcha di
Ancona is frill extant. In this he stipulates, that
he will acknowledge himself to be a burgess of
that community; that he will to the utmost of
his power promote its honour and welfare; that
he will obey its magistrates; that he will enter
into no league with its enemies; that he will reside
in the town during two months in every year, or
for a longer time if required by the magistrates.
The community on the other hand take him, his
family and friends, under their proteCtion, and

engage

engage to defend him against every enemy. Fr.
Ant. Zacharias Anecdota medii aevi. Aug. Taur.
1755. fol. p. 66. This privilege was deemed so
important, that not only laymen, but ecclefiafticks
of the highest rank, condescended to be adopted
as members of the great communities, in hopes
of enjoying the safety and dignity which that con-
ferred. Murat. ib. 179. Before the institution
of communities, persons of noble birth had no
other residence but their castles. They kept their
petty courts there; and the cities were deserted,
having hardly any inhabitants but slaves or persons
of low condition. But in consequence of the
practice which I have mentioned, cities not only
became more populous, but were filled with in-
habitants of better rank, and a custom which fill
subsists in Italy was then introduced, that all
families of diftintion reside more constantly in
the great towns, than is usual in other parts of
Europe. As cities acquired new consideration and
dignity by the accession of such citizens, they
became more solicitous to preserve their liberty
and independence. The Emperors, as sovereigns,
had anciently a palace in almost every great city
of Italy; when they visited that country they
were accustomed to reside in these, and the troops
which accompanied them were quartered in the
houses of the citizens. This the citizens deemed
both ignominious and dangerous. They could
not help confidering it as receiving a mailer and
an enemy within their walls. They laboured there-
fore to get free of this fubjeEtion. Some cities

prevailed

prevailed on the Emperors to engage that they
would never enter their gates, but take up their
residence without the walls: Chart. Hen. IV.
Murat. ib. pi 24. Others obtained the Imperial
licence to pull down the palace situated within
their liberties, on condition that they' built another
in the suburbs for the reception of the Emperor.
Chart. Hen. IV. Murat. ib. p. 25. These various
encroachments of the Italian cities alarmed the
Emperors, and put them on schemes for re efta.
blifhing the Imperial jurifdition over them on its
ancient footing. Frederick Barbarossa engaged in
this enterprize with great ardour. The free cities
of Italy joined together in a general league, and
flood on their defence; and after a long contest,
carried on with alternate success, a solemn treaty
of peace was concluded at Constance, A. D. 11 83.
by which all the privileges and immunities granted
by former Emperors to the principal cities in
Italy were confirmed and ratified. Murat. dissert.
XLVIIL This treaty of Constance was confi-
dered as such an important article in the jurif-
prudence of the middle ages, that it is ufially
published together with the Libri Feudorum at
the end of the Corpus Juris Civilis. The treaty
secured privileges of great importance to the con.
federate cities, and though it reserved a confider-
able degree of authority and jurifdi&ion to the
Empire, yet the cities persevered with such vigour
in their efforts in order to extend their immunities,
and the conjuntures in which they made themn
were so favourable, that, before the conclusion

of

of the thirteenth century, most of the great cities
in Italy had haken off all marks of subjection to
the Empire, and were become independent fove-
reign republicks. It is not requisite that I hould
trace the various teps by which they advanced to
this high degree of power so fatal to the Empire,
and so beneficial to the cause of liberty in Italy.
Muratori with his usual industry has collected
many original papers which illustrate this curious
and little known part of history. Murat. Antiq.
Ital. Dissert. L. See also Jo. Bapt. Villanova hist.
Laudis Pompeii five Lodi in Grav. Thef. Anti-
quit. Ital. vol. iii. p. 888.

NOTE XVI. SECT. I. P. 40. [Q.
LONG before the institution of communities in

France, charters of immunity or Franchise were
granted to some towns and villages by the Lords
on whom they depended. But these are very dif-
ferent from such as became common in the twelfth
and thirteenth centuries. They did not erec theie
towns into corporations; they did not establish a
municipal government; they did not grant themi
the privilege of bearing arms. They contained
nothing more than a manumiflon of the inha-
bitants from the yoke of servitude; an exemption
from certain services which were oppressive and
ignominious; and. the establishment of a fixed
tax or rent which P.iy were to pay to their Lord
in place of impositions which he could formerly
lay upon them at pleasure. Two charters of this

kind

kind to two villages in the county of Roufillon,
one A. D. 974, the other A. D. 1025, are itill
extant. Petr. de Marca Marca, five limes His-
panicus. app. p. 909. 038. Such conceflions, it
is probable, were not unknown in other parts of
Europe, and may be confidered as a ftep towards
the more extensive privileges conferred by Louis
the Gross on the towns within his domains. The
communities in France never aspired to the fame
independence with those in Italy. They acquired
new privileges and immunities, but the right of
sovereignty remained entire to the King or baron
within whose territories the refpeftive cities were
situated, and from whom they received the charter
of their freedom. A great number of there char-
ters granted both by the Kings of France, and by
their great vassals, are published by M. D'Achery
in his Specilegium, and many are found in the
collection of the Ordonnances des Rois de France.
There convey a very striking representation of the
wretched condition of cities previous to the infti-
tution of communities, when they were subje&t to
the judges appointed by the superior Lords of
whom they held, and had scarcely any other law
but their will. Each concefflon in these charters
muff be confidered as a grant of some new pri-
vilege which the people did not formerly enjoy,
and each regulation as a method of redrefling rome
grievance under which they formerly laboured.
The charters of communities contain likewise the
first expedients employed for the introduction of

equal

equal laws, and regular government. On both
there accounts they merit particular attention, and
therefore, initead of referring my readers to the
many bulky volumes in which they are scattered,
I shall give them a view of ome of the most im-
portant articles' in there charters, ranged under two
general heads. I. Such as refpeft personal safety.
II. Such as refpea the security of property.

I. DURING that slate of turbulence and dif-

order which the cornrption of the feudal govern-
ment introduced into Europe, personal safety was
the chief object of every individual; and as the
great military barons alone were able to give
sufficient protection to their vassals, this was one
great source of their power and authority. But,
by the institution of communities, effectual pro-
vision was made for the safety of individuals inde-
pendent of the nobles. For, . the fundamental
article in every charter was, that all the members
of it bound themselves by oath to afliit, defend,
and stand by each other against all aggressors, and
that they should not susser any perion to injure,
distress, or molest, any of their fellow-citizens.
D'Acher. Spicel. x. 642. xi. 341, &c.-2. Who-
ever resided in any town which was made free,
was obliged under a evere penalty to accede to
the community, and to take part in the mutual
defence of its members. D'Acher. Spic. xi. 344.
-3. The communities had the privilege of carry-
ilg arms ; of making war on their private ene-

'ics,

mies; and of executing by military force any
sentence which their magistrates pronounced.
D'Ach. Spicel. x. 643, 644. xi. 343.-4. The
pradice of making fatisfadion by a pecuniary
compensation for murder, aault, or other ads of
violence, most inconsistent with the order of so-
ciety, and the afety of individuals, was abolished;
and such as committed these crimes were punilhed
capitally, or with rigour adequate to their guilt.
D'Ach. xi. 362. Mira:i opera Diplomatica, i, 292.
-5. No member of a community was bound to
justify or defend himself by battle, or combat;
but if he was charged with any crime, he could
be convided only by the evidence of witnesses,
and the regular course of legal proceedings. Mi-
raus, ibid. D'Ach. xi. 375, 349. Ordon. tom. iii.
265.-6. If any man fufpeed himself to he in
danger from the malice or enmity of another,
upon his making oath to that effect before a ma.
giftrate, the person fufpeded was bound under a
severe penalty to give security for his peaceable
behaviour. D'Ach. xi. 346. This is the fame
species of security which is still known in Scotland
under the name of Lawburrows. In France it
was first introduced among the inhabitants of com-
munities, and having been found to contribute
considerably towards personal safety, it was extend-
ed to all the other members of the society. Efta-
blifemens de St. Louis, liv. i. cap. 8. ap. Du
Cange vie de St. Louis, p. 15.

II. THE

II. The provisions in the charters of commu-

nlities concerning the security of property, are not
less considerable than those respecting personal
safety. By the ancient law of France, no person
could be arrested or confined in prison on account
of any private debt. Ordon. des Rois de France,
tom. i. p. 72, 80. If any person was arrested up-
on any pretext, but his having been guilty of a
capital crime, it was lawful to rescue him out of
the hands of the officers who had seized him.
Ordon. iii. p. 17. Freedom from arrest on account
of debt, seems likewise to have been enjoyed in
other countries. Gudenus Sylloge Diplom. 473.
In society, while it remained in its rudest and mcft
simple form, debt seems to have been confidered
as an obligation merely personal. Men had made
some progress towards refinement, before creditors
acquired a right of seizing the property of their
debtors in order to recover payment. The expe-
dients for this purpose were all introduced originally
in communities, and we can trace the gradual pro-
grefs of them. I; The simplest and most obvious
species of security was, that the person who fold
any commodity should receive a pledge from him
who bought it, which he restored upon receiving
payment. Of this custom there are vestiges in
several charters of community, D'Ach. ix. 85,
xi. 377,-2. When no pledge was given, and the
debtor became refractory or insolvent, the creditor
was allowed to seize his effects with a ifrong hand,
and by his private authority the citizens of Paris
are warranted by the royal mandate, " ut ubicum-

VOL. 1. X que,

que, et quocumque modo poterunt, tantum cap.
ant, unde pecuniam fibi debicam integre & plenaric
habeant, & inde fibi invicem adjutores exiftant."
Ordon. &c. tom. i. p. 6. This rude pra&ice,
suitable only to the violence of a tate of nature,
was tolerated longer than one can conceive to be
possible in any society where laws and order were
at all known. The ordonance authorizing it was
issued, A. D. 34; and that which correcs the
law, and prohibits creditors from seizing the effects
of their debtors, unless by a warrant from a magif-
trate, and under his infpe&tion, was not published
until the year 351. Ordon. tom. ii. 438. It is
probable, however, that men were taught, by ob.
serving the disorders which tlie former mode of
proceeding occasioned, to correc it in praaice long
before a remedy was provided by a law to that
effect. Every discerning reader will apply this ob.
servation to many other customs and practices
which I have mentioned. New customs are not
always to be ascribed to the laws which authorize
them. These statutes only give a legal fanaion to
such things as the experience of mankind has pre-
vioufly found to be proper and beneficial.-3. As
soon as the interposition of the magistrate became
requisite, regular provision was made for attaching
or distraining the moveable effects of a debtor;
and if his moveables were not fuficient to discharge
the debt, his immoveable property, or eflate in
land, was liable to the fame distress, and was fold
for the benefit of his creditor. D'Ach. ix. p. 184,

s85-

1t5. xi. p. 348. 380. As this regulation afforded
the most cdmpleat security to the creditor, it was
cohfidered as so severe, that humanity pointed out
several limitations in the execution of it. Credi-
tors were prohibited from seizing the wearing ap-
parel of their debtors, their beds, the door of their
house, their instruments of husbandry, &c. D'Ach.
ix. 184. i. 77. Upon the fame principles, when
the power of distraining effets became more gene-
ral, the horse and arms of a gentleman could not
be seized. D'Ach. ix. 185. As hunting was the
favourite amufemeht of martial nobles, the Empe-
ror Lodovicus Pius prohibited the seizing of a
hawk on account of any composition or debt.
Capitul. lib. iv. § 2. But if the debtor had no
other moveables, even these privileged articles
might be seized.-4. In order to render the security
of property compleat within a community, every
person who as admitted a member of it, was
obliged to buy or build a house, or to purchase
lands, within its precints, or at least to bring into
the tovwn a considerable portion of his moveables
per que j1/fliciari poDit, si quid forlt in eum querelte
evencrit. D'Ach. Xi. 326. Ordon. i. 367. Liber-
tates S. Georgii de Efperanchia. Hill. de Dauphine,
tom. i p. 26.-5. That security might be as per-
fe& as possible, ih some towns, the members of
the community feenr to have been bound for each
other. D'Ach. x. 644.-6. All questions with re-
fpea to property wfee tried within the commu-
nity, by magiftratcs and judges which the citi-
zens eleted or appointed. Their decisions were

X 2 more

more equal and fixed than the sentences which de-
pended on the capricious and arbitrary will of a
baron, who thought himself superior to all laws.
D'Ach. x. 644, 646. xi. 344. & passim. Ordon. iii.
204.-7. No member of a community could be
burdened by any arbitrary tax ; for the superior
lord who granted the charter of community, ac-
cepted of a fixed census or duty in lieu of all de-
mands. Ordon. t. iii. 204. Libertates de Calma.
Hist. de Dauphine, tom. i. p. 19. Libert. St.
Georgii de Efperanchia, ibid. p. 26. Nor could
the members of a community be distressed by an
unequal imposition of the fum to be levied on the
community. Regulations are inserted in the char-
ters of ome communities concerning the method
of determining the quota of any tax to be levied
on each inhabitant. D'Ach. xi. 350, 365. St.
Louis published an ordonance concerning this mat-
ter, which extended to all the communities. Ordon.
t. i. 86. These regulations are extremely favour-
able to liberty, as they vest the power of propor-
tioning the taxes in a certain number of citizens
chosen out of each parish, who were bound by so-
lemn oath to decide according to juftice.-That
the more perfect security of property was one great
object of those who instituted communities, we
learn, not only from the nature of the thing, but
from the express words of several charters, of which
I shall only mention that granted by Alienor, Queen
of England and Dutchess of Guienne, to the com-
munity of Poitiers, "' ut fua propria melius defen-
dere poffint, & magis integre cuftodire." Du Cange

voc.

voc. Communia, v. ii. p. 863.-Such are some of the
capital regulations established in communities du-
ringthe twelfth and thirteenth centuries. These may
be confidered as the first rudiments of law and order,
and contributed greatly to introduce regular go-
vernment among all the members of society. As
soon as communities were intituted, high senti-
ments of liberty began to appear. When Hum.
bert, lord of Beaujeu, upon granting a charter of
community to the town of Belleville, exaded of
the inhabitants an oath of fidelity to himself and
successors, they stipulated, on their part, that he
hould swear to maintain their franchises and liber-
ties; and for their greater security, they obliged
him to bring twenty gentlemen to take the fame
oath, and to be bound together with him. D'Ach.
ix. 183. In the fame manner the lord of Moirens
in Dauphine produced a certain number of persons
as his sureties for the observation of the articles
contained in the charter of community to that
town. These were bound to surrender themselves
prisoners to the inhabitants of Moirens, if their
liege lord hould violate any of their franchises,
and they promised to remain in cuflody until he
should grant them redress. Hist. de Dauphine,
torn. i. p. 17. If the mayor or chief magistrate of
a town did any injury to a citizen, he was obliged
to give security for his appearance in judgment
in the fame manner as a private person; and
if cast, was liable to the fame penalty. D'Ach.
ix. 183. These are ideas of equality uncommon
in the feudal times. Communities were so favour-

X 3 able

able to freedom, that they were distinguished by
the name of Libertates. Du Cange, v. ii. p. 863.
They were at first extremely odious to the nobles,
who foresaw what a check they mut prove to their
power and doxnintion. Guibert Ab.bo, of Nogent
c.1s them execrable inventions, by which, con-
trary to law and jultice, aves withdrew them-
selves from that obedience which they owed to their
masters. pu Cange, ib. 862. The zeal with which
some of the nobles and powerful ecclefiaificks op-
poled the eftablithment of communities, and endea-
voured to circuinfcribe their privileges, was extra-
'ordinary. A striking instance of this occurs in
the contelts between the archbishop of Reims, and
the inhabitants of that community. It was the
chief bufines of every archbiliop, during a con-
fiderable time, to abridge the rights and jurifdifion
of the community; and the great objec of the ci-
tizens, especially when the fee was vacant, to main-
tain, to recover, and to extend their own jurifdic-
tion. Hiftoire civile & politique de la ville de
Reims par M. Anquetil. tom. i. p. 287, &c.

THE observations which I have made concern-

ing the state of cities, and the condition of their
i ihabitants, are confirmed by innumerable passages
in the historians and laws of the middle ages. It
is not i;i-probable, however, that some cities of the
fiift order were in a better state, and enjoyed a fu-
perior degree of liberty. Under the Roman go-
verllnmnt, the municipal government eftabliflhed
ill cities was extremely favourable to liberty. The

jurifdi&tion

jurisdiction of the senate in each corporation, and
the privileges of the citizens, were both extensive.
There is reason to believe, that some of the greater
cities which escaped the deftrutive rage of the
barbarous nations, fill retained their ancient form
of government, at least in a great measure. They
were governed by a council of citizens, and by
magistrates whom they themselves elected. Very
strong presumptions in favour of this opinion, are
produced by M. 'Abbe De Bos. Hilt. Crit. de la
Mon. Franc. tom. i. p. 18, &c. tom ii. p. 524.
edit. 1742. It appears from some of the charters
of community to cities, granted in the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries, that there only confirm the
privileges pofeffed by the inhabitants previous to
the eftabliflment of the community. D'Acher,
Spicileg. vol. xi. p. 345. Other cities claimed
their privileges as having possessed them without
interruption from the times of the Romans. Hist.
Crit. de la Mon. Franc. tom. ii. p. 333. But the
number of cities which enjoyed such immunities
was so small, as in no degree to diminilh the force
of my conclusions in the text.

NOTE XVII. SECT. 1. 40. 0. R1.
HAVING given a full account of the eftablifli-

ment as well as effects of communities in Italy and
France, it will be necessary to inquire with some
attention into the progress of cities and of muni-
cipal government in Germany. The ancient Ger-
mans had no cities. Even in their hamlets or vil-

X 4 lagcs

lages they did not build their houses contiguous to
each other. Tac. de Mor. Germ. cap. 6. They
confidered it as a badge of servitude to be obliged
to dwell in a city surrounded with walls. When
one of their tribes had haken off the Roman
yoke, their countrymen required of them, as an
evidence of their having recovered liberty, to de-
molifh the walls of a town which the Romans had
built in their country. Even the fiercest animals,
said they, lose their spirit and courage when they
are confined. Tac. Hiftor. lib. iv, c. 64. The Ro-
mans built several cities of note on the banks of
the Rhine. But in all the vast countries from that
river to the coasts of the Baltick, there was hardly
one city previous to the ninth century of the Chri-
ftian era. Cnringius ]xercitatio de Urbibus Ger-
mania, Oper. vol. i. § 25, 27, 3 , &c. Heineccius
differs from Conringius with refpe& to this, But
even after allowing to his arguments and atho-
rities their utmost force, they prove only that there
were few places in those extensive regions on
which some historians have bestowed the name of
towns. Elem. Jur. German. lib. i. § o12. Under
Charlemagne, and the Emperors of his family, as
the political state of Germany began to improve,
several cities were founded, and men became ac-
customed to associate and to live together in one
place. Charlemagne founded two archbifhopricks
and nine bilhopricks in the most considerable
towns of Germany. Aub. Mirsi Opera Diploma-
tica, vol. i. p. 16. His successors increased the
number of these; and as bishops fixed their refr-

dence

dence in these cities, and performed religious func-
tions there, that induced many people to fettle in
them. Conring. ibid. § 48. But Henry, firnamed
the Fowler, who began his reign A. D. 920, must
be confidered as the great founder of cities in Ger-
many. The Empire was at that time infested by
the incursions of the Hungarians and other bar-
barous people. In order to oppose them, Henry
encouraged his fubjets to fettle in cities which hg
surrounded with walls and towers. He enjoined
or persuaded a certain proportion of the nobility
to fix their residence in the towns, and thus ren-
dered the condition of citizens more honourable
than it had been formerly. Wittikindus Annal.
lib. i. ap. Conring. § 82. From this period the
number of cities continued to increase, and they
became more populous and more wealthy. But
cities were still destitute of municipal liberty or
jurifdiftion. Such of them as were situated in the
Imperial demesnes, were subjet to the Emperors.
Their Comites, Migi, and other judges presided in
them, and dispensed justice. Towns situated on
the estate of a baron, were part of his fief, and he
or his officers exercised a similar jurifdiion in
them. Conring. ibid. § 73, 74. Heinec. Elem.
Jur. Germ. lib. i. § 104. The Germans borrowed
the institution of communities from the Italians.
Knipfchildius Tratatus Politico Hiftor. Jurid. de
Civitatum Imperialium Juribus, vol. i lib. i. cap.
5. N°. 23. Frederick Barbarossa was the firfl
Emperor who, from the fame political confidera-

tioa

tion that influenced Lewis the Gross, multiplied
communities in order to abridge the power of the
nobles. Pfeffel Abrege de 'Hiftoire & du Droit
Publique d'Allemagne, 4to. p. 297. From the
reign of Henry the Fowler, to the time when the
German cities acquired full possession of their im-
munities, various circumftanccs contributed to
their increase. The eftabliffhment of bifhopricks
(already mentioned) and the building of cathedrals,
naturally induced many people to fettle there. It
became the cullom to hold councils and courts or
judicature of every kind, ecclesiastical as well as
civil, in cities. In the eleventh century, many
slaves were enfranchised, the greater part of which
fettled in cities. Several mines were discovered
and wrought in different provinces, which drew to-
gether such a concourse of people, as gave rife to
several cities. Conring. § 105. The cities began
in the thirteenth century to form leagues for their
mutual defence, and for repressing the disorders
occasioned by the private wars among the barons,
as well as by their exacions. This rendered the
condition of the inhabitants of cities more secure
than that of any order of men, and allured many
to become members of their communities. Con-
ring. § 94. There were inhabitants of three dif-
ferent ranks in the towns of Germany. The no-
bles, or familia, the citizens, or liberi, and the
artisans, who were slaves, or homines proprii.
Knipfchild. lib. ii. cap. 29. N°. 13. Henry V.
who began his reign A. D. 0o6, enfranchised the
nfaves who were artizans or inhabitants in several

Gowns,

towns, and gave them the rank of citizens, or
liberi. Pfeffel, p. 254. Knipfch. lib. ii. c. 29.
N°. I 3, 119. Though the cities in Germany did
not acquire liberty o early as those in France,
they extended their privileges much farther. All
the Imperial and free cities, the number of which
is coni,derable, acquired the full right of being
immediate; by which term, in the German jurif-
prudence, we are to understand, that they are
subjet to the Empire alone, and possess within
their own precincts all the rights of compleat and
independent sovereignty. The various privileges
of the Imperial cities, the great guardians of the
Germanic liberties, are enumerated by Knipfchild,
lib. ii. The mofl important articles are generally
known, and, it would be improper to enter into
any difquifitipn concerning minute particulars.

NOTE XVIII. SECT. I. p. 40. S].
THE Spanif historians are almost entirely silent

concerning the origin and progress of communities
in that kingdom; so that I cannot fix with any
degree of certainty the time and manner of their
first introduction there. It appears, however,
from Mariana, vol. ii. p. 221, fol. Hagve 1736,
that in the year 1359, eighteen cities had obtained
a feat in the Cortes of Castile. From the account
which shall be given of their contlitution and
pretensions, Set. III. of this volume, it is evident
that their privileges and form of government were
the fame with those of the other feudal corpora-
ti.ns; and this, as well as the perfect similarity

of

of political inflitutions and tranfadions in all the
feudal kingdoms, may lead us to conclude, that
communities were introduced there in the fame
manner, and probably about the fame time, as
in the other nations of Europe. In Aragon, as I
Shall have occasion to observe in a subsequent
note, cities seem early to have acquired extensive
immunities, together with a hare in the legifla-
ture. In the year 1 8, the citizens of Saragossa
had not only attained political liberty, but they
were declared to be of equal rank with the nobles
of the second class; and many other immunities,
unknown to persons in their rank of life in other
parts of Europe, were conferred upon them.
Zurita Anales de Aragon, tom. i. p. 44. In
England, the establishment of communities or
corporations was posterior to the Conquest. The
practice was borrowed from France, and the pri-
vileges granted by the crown were perfecly similar
to those which I have enumerated. But as this
part of history is well known to most of my read-
ers, I lhall, without entering into any critical or
minute difcuflion, refer them to authors who have
fully illustrated this interesting point in the Eng-
lifh history. Brady's Treatise of Boroughs. Madox
Firma Burgi, chap. i. feet. ix. Hume's Hiltory
of England, vol. i. append. i. and ii. It is not
improbable that some of the towns in England
were formed into corporations under the Saxon
Kings, and that the charters granted by the Kings
of the Norman race were not charters of enfran-
chifement from a fiate of flavcry, but a confirma-

tion

tion of privileges which they already enjoyed. See
Lord Lyttelton's History of Henry II. vol. ii.
p. 317. The English cities, however, were very
inconsiderable in the twelfth century. A clear
proof of this occurs in the history to which I lafl
referred. Fitzftephen, a contemporary author,
gives a description of the city of London in the
reign of Henry II. and the terms in which he
speaks of its trade, its wealth, and the splendour
of its inhabitants, would suggest no inadequate
idea of its state at present, when it is the greatest
and most opulent city of Europe. But all ideas
of grandeur and magnificence are merely compa-
rative. It appears from Peter of Blois, archdea-
con of London, who flourished in the fame reign,
and who had good opportunity of being well in-
formed, that this city, of which Fitzftephen gives
such a pompous account, contained no more than
forty thousand inhabitants. Ibid. 315, 3 6. The
other cities were small in proportion, and in no con-
dition to extort any extensive privileges. That the
constitution of the boroughs in Scotland, in many
circumstances, resembled that of the towns in
France and England, is manifest from the Leges
Burgorum annexed to the Regiam Majeftatem.

NOTE XIX. ST. I. p. 46. [T].

SOON after the introduction of the third estate

into the national council, the spirit of liberty
which' that excited in France began to produce
conipicuous effects. In several provinces of Frace,

,'-~ ~the

the nobility and communities frmed afbociationi
whereby they bound thetfilvts to defend their
rights and privileges agaihft the fotthidable and
arbitrary proceedings of the king. The Count
de Boulainvilliers has preserved a copy of one of
there aociations, dated in the year 314s twelve
years after the admiiflion of the deputies from
towns into tlie States General. Hift&ire de l'ancicn
gouvernetnent de la France, tom. ii. p. 94. The
vigour with which the people asserted and pre-
pared t maintain their fights, obliged their fove-
reigns to refpe them. Six years after this affo.
ciation, Philip the Lrng iffiudd writ of fuihinons
to the community of Narbdnnei in the following
terms: " Philip, by the Grace, &c. to otr well.
beloved, &c. As we desire with all otir heart, and
above all other things, to govern our kingdom
and people in peace and traniquillity, by the help
of God; and to reform our said kingdoin in so
far as it sands in need thereof, for the publick
good, and for the benefit of our fibje&s, who in
times past have been aggrieved and dpprffed in
diverse manners by the malice of sundry perfonso
as we have learned by common report, as well as
by the information of good men worthy of credit,
and we having determined in our council which
we have called to meet in our good city, &c. to
give redrefb to the utmost of otur power, by all
ways and means possible, according to reason and
julice, and willing that this should be done with
iolemnity and deliberation by the advice of the

2 prelates,

prelates, barons, and good towns of our realm,
and particularly of you, and that it should be
tranfa&ed agreeably to the will of God, and for
the good of our people, therefore we command,"
&c. Mably, Obfervat. ii. App. p. 386. I hall
allow there to be only the formal words of a pub-
lic and legal style, but the ideas are singular,
and much more liberal and enlarged than one
could expet in that age. A popular monarch of
Great Britain could hardly addreis himself to par-
liament, in terms more favourable to publick
liberty. There occurs in the History of France a
striking instance of the progress which the prin-
ciples of liberty had made in that kingdom, and
of the influence which the deputies of towns had
acquired in the States General. During the cala-
mities in which the war with England, and the
captivity of King John, had involved France, the
States General made a bold effort to extend their
own privileges and jurifdiEtion. The regulations
eftablithed by the States held A.D. I. 35 , con-
cerning the mode of levying taxes, the adminiftri-
tion of which they veiled not in the crown, but
in commiflioners appointed by the States; con-
cerning the coining of money; concerning the
redress of the grievance of purveyance; concerning
the regular administration of jutlice; are much
more suitable to the genius of a republican go-
vernment than that of a feudal monarchy. This
curious statute is publified, Ordon. t. iii. p. 19.
Such as have not an opportunity to consult that

large

large colle&ion will find an abridgment of it, in
Hist. de France par Villaret, tom. ix. p. 130. or
in Hiltoire de Boulainv. tom. ii. 213. The French
historians reprelent the bishop of Laon, and Mar-
cel Provost of the merchants of Paris, who had
the chief direction of this assembly, as seditious
tribunes, violent, interested, ambitious, and aim-
ing at innovations subversive of the constitution
and government of their country. That may have
been the cafe, but these men possessed the confi-
dence of the people; and the measures which they
proposed as the most popular and acceptable,
plainly prove that the spirit of liberty had spread
wonderfully, and that the ideas which then pre-
vailed in France concerning government were ex-
tremely liberal. The States General held at Paris
A. D. 355, conifted of about eight hundred
members, and above one half of these were de-
puties from towns. M. Secoufle Pref. a Ordon,
tom. iii. p. 48. It appears that in all the different
aflenmblies of the States, held during the reign of
John, the representatives of towns had great in-
fluence, and in every refpe& the third State was
confidered as co-ordinate and equal to either of
the other two. Ibid. paflim. These spirited efforts
were made in France long before the House of
Commons in England acquired any considerable
influence in the legislature. As the feudal system
was carried to its utmost height in France sooner
than in England, so it began to decline sooner in
the former than in the latter kingdom. In Eng-

land,

land, almost all attempts to establish or to extend
the liberty of the people have been successful; in
France they have proved unfortunate. What were
the accidental events, or political causes which
oc'caioned this difference, it is not my prelent
business td enquire.

NOTE XX. SECT. I. P. 48. [U].

IN a former Note, N° VIII. I have enquired

into the condition of that part of the people which
was employed in agriculture, and have repre-
sented the various hardships arid calamities of their
situation. When charters of liberty and manu-
mission were granted to such perfdns, they con-
tained four concelions corresponding to the four
capital grievances to which men in a tate of er-
vitude are subject. i. The right of dilpofing of
their persons by sale or grant was relinquished.
2. Power was given to them of conveying their
property and effedts by will or any other legal
deed. Or if they happened to die intestate, it
was provided that their property mhould go ta
their lawful heirs in the fame manner as the pro-
perty of other persons. 3. The services and taxes
which they owed to their superior or liege lord;
\hich were formerly arbitrary and impoied at
pleasure, are precisely ascertained. 4. They are
allowed the privilege of marrying whatever perlon
they chose, as formerly they could contra no
marriage without their Lord's permiflion, and
with no person but one of his slaves. All thel
particulars are found united in the charter granted

VOL, I. Y Habita-

Habitatoribus Montis-Britonis, A. D. 1376. Hitll
de Dauphine, tom. i. p. 81. Many circumstances
concurred with those which I have mentioned in
the text in procuring them deliverance from that
wretched state. The gentle spirit of the Chriitian
religion; the doctrines which it teaches, concern-
ing the original equality of mankind; its tenets
concerning the divine government, and the im-
partial eye with which the Almighty regards men
of every condition, and admits them to a partici.
pation of his benefits, are all inconsistent with ser-
vitude. But in this, as in many other instances,
considerations of interest, and the maxims of falle
policy led men to a conduct inconsistent with their
principles. They were so sensible, however, of
the inconsistency, that to set their fellow Christians
at liberty from fcrvitude was deemed an act of
piety highly meritorious and acceptable to heaven.
The humane spirit of the Christian religion ftrug-
gled with the maxims and manners of the world,
and contributed more than any other circum-
stance to introduce the practice of manumillion.
When Pope Gregory the Great, who flourished
toward the end of the sixth century, granted
liberty to some of his slaves, he gives this rea-
lbn for it, " Cum redemptor nofter, totius
conditor nature, ad hoc propitiatus humanam
carnem voluerit affumere, ut divinitatis fua: gra-
tia, dirempto (quo tenebamur captivi) vinculo,
priftina nos reftitueret libertati; falubriter agitur,
li homines, quos ab initio liberos natura protulit,
& jus gentium jugo fubtituit fervitutis, in ea,

qua

qui nati fuerant, manumittentis beneficio libertati
reddantur.'' Gregor. Magn. ap. Potgieff. lib. iv.
c. i. § 3. Several laws or charters founded on
reasons imilar to this, are produced by the fame
author. Accordingly a great part of the charters
of manumifflion previous to the reign of Louis X.
are granted pro amore Dei, pro remedio animal,
& pro mercede animae. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. i.
p. 849, 850. Du Cange, voc. manumijo. The
formality of manumiflion was executed in a church,
as a religious solemnity. The person to be set
free was led round the great altar with a torch in
his hand, he took hold of the horns of the altar,
and there the solemn words conferring liberty were
pronounced. Du Cange, Ib. vol. iv. p. 467. I
shall transcribe a part of a charter of manumifion
granted A. D. 1056; both as it contains a full
account of the ceremonies tifed in this form of
manumiflion, and as a specimen of the imperfec
knowledge of the Latin tongue in that barbarous
age. It is granted by Willa the widow of Hugo
the Duke and Marquis, in favour of Clariza one
of her slaves. " Et ideo nos Domine Wille indite
cometiffe-libera et abfolvo te Cleriza filia Uberto
-pro timore omnipotentis Dei, & remedio lumi-
narie anime bone memorie quondam lupra fcripto
Domini Ugo glorioffiffimo, ut quando ilumn Do-
minus de hac vita migrare, jufferit, pars iniqua
non abeat poteftatem ullam, led anguelus Domini
noftri Jesu Chrifti colocare dignitur ilium inter
fandtos diletos suos; & beatus Petrus princips
apolfolorum, qui habed poteftatem omnium ani-

Y 2 marurt

marum ligandi et abfolvendi, ut ipft abfolvt
animne ejus de peccatis fui, & aperiad illum janua
paradifi; pro eadem vero rationi, in mano mite te
Benzo prelbiter, ut vadat tecum in ecclesia fan'i
Bartholomaei apoftoli; traad te tribus vicibus circa
altare ipfius ecclelia: cum creo apprehenfum in
manibus tuis & manibus fuis; deinde exite am.
bulate in via quadrubio, ubi quatuor vie fe devi.
duntur. Statimq; pro remedio luminarie anime
bone memorie quondam supra fcripto Domini Ugo,
et ipfi prefbiter Benzo fecit omnia, & dixit, Ecce
quatuor vie, ite et anbulate in quacunq; partem
tibi placuerit, tam fie supra fcripta Cleriza, qua
nofque tui heredes, qui ab ac hora in antea nati,
vel procreati fuerit utriufq; fexus, &c." Murat.
ib. p. 853. Many other charters might have been
feleted, which, in point of grammar or flyle, are
in no wife superior to this. Manumiflon was
frequently granted on death-bed or by latter-will.
As the minds of men are at that time awakened
to sentiments of humanity and piety, these deeds
proceeded from religious motives, and are granted
pro redemptione anime, in order to obtain accept-
ance with God. Du Cange ubi supra, p. 470.
& voc. fervus, vol. vi. p. 451. Another method
of obtainin- liberty was by entering into holy
orders, or taking the vow in a monastery. Ti.is
was permitted for some time; but so many slaves
escaped, by this means, out of the hands of their
masters, that the practice was afterwards refrained,
and at lalt prohibited by the laws of almost all
the nations of Europe. Murat. ib. p. 842. Cono

2 formably

formably to the fame principles, Princes, on the
birth of a son, or upon any other agreeable event,
appointed a certain number of slaves to be en-
franchised, as a testimony of their gratitude to
God for that benefit. Marculfi Form. lib. i.
cap. 39. There are several forms of manumission
published by Marculfus, and all of them are
founded on religious considerations, in order to
procure the favour of God, or to obtain the for-
givenefs of their fins. Lib. ii. c. 23, 33, 34. edit.
jBaluz. The fame observation holds with respect
to the other colleEtions of Formula annexed to
Marculfus. As sentiments of religion induced
iome to grant liberty to their fellow-Chriflians
who groaned under the yoke of servitude; so
mistaken ideas concerning devotion led others to
relinquish their liberty. When a person conceived
an extraordinary refpe& for the faint who was
the patron of any church or monastery in*which
he was accustomed to attend religious worship,
it was not unusual among men possessed with an
excess of fuperititious reverence, to give up them-
selves and their posterity to be the slaves of the
faint. Mabillon. de re Diplomat. lib. vi. 632.
The cblaii or voluntary slaves of churches or mo-
nafteries were very numerous, and may be divided
into three different classes. The first were such
as put themselves and effects under the protection
of a particular church or monastery, binding
themfclves to defend its privileges and property
against every aggressor. These were prompted to

Y 3 do

do so not merely by devotion, but in order to
obtain that security which arose from the protec-
tion of the church. They were rather vassals than
slaves, and sometimes persons of noble birth found
it prudent to secure the prote&tion of the church
in this manner. Persons of the second class bound
themselves to pay an annual tax or quit-rent out
of their estates to a church or monastery. Besides
this, they sometimes engaged to periorm certain
services. They were called cenfuales. The last
class consisted of such as aually renounced their
liberty, and became saves in the ftri&t and proper
sense of the word. These were called minmijerias,
and enslaved their bodies, as ome of the charters
bear, that they might procure the liberty of their
fouls. Potgiefferus de ftatu fervorum, lib. i.
cap. i. § 6, 7. How zealous the clergy were to
encourage the opinions which led to this pracice
will appear from a clause in a charter by which
one gives up himself as a slave to a monaftcry,
't Cum fit omni carnali ingenuitate generofius
extremum quodcumq; Dei fervitium, scilicet quod
terrena nobilitas multos plerumq; vitiorum servos
facit, fervituis vero Chrifti nobiles virtutibus red-
dit, nemo autem fani capitis virtutibus vitia com-
paraverit, claret pro certo eum effe generofiorem,
qui fe Dei fervitio prebuerit proniorem. Quod
ego Ragnaldus intelligens, &c." Another author
fays, "Eligens magis ee fervus Dei quam libertus
faculi, firmiter credens & fciens, quod fervire
Peo, regnare eft, fummaque ingenuitas fit in qua

fervitus

fervitus comparabatur Chriiti, &c." Du Cange,
voc. oblaius, vol. iv. p. 1286, 1287. It does not
appear, that the enfranchisement of slaves was a
frequent praftice while the feudal system preserved
its vigour. On the contrary, there were laws
which set bounds to this practice as detrimental
to society. Potgieff. lib. iv. c. 2. § 6. The infe-
rior order of men owed the recovery of their
liberty to the decline of that ariftocratical policy,
which lodged the most extensive power in the
hands of a few members of the society, and de.
pressed all the reft. When Louis X. issued his
ordonance, several slaves had been so long accuf-
tomed to servitude, and their minds were so much
debased by that unhappy situation, that they re-
fused to accept of the liberty which was offered
them. D'Ach. Spicel. vol. xi. p. 387. Long after
the reign of Louis X. several of the French no-
bility continued to assert their ancient dominion
over their slaves. It appears from an ordonance
of the famous Bertrand de Guefclin Conitable of
France, that the custom of enfranchising them was
confidered as a pernicious innovation. Morice
Mem. pour fervir des preuves a l'hif. de Bret.
tom. ii. p. oo. In some instances, when the pran-
dial slaves were declared to be freemen, they were
till bound to perform' certain services to their
ancient masters; and were kept in a state different
from other fubjets, being reftrited either from
purchasing land, or becoming members of a com-
munity within the precincts of the manor to which

Y 4 they

they formerly belonged. Martene & Durand.
Thefaur. Anecdot. vol. i. p. 914. This, however,
seems not to have been common.-There is no
general law for the manumission of laves in the
Statute-book of England similar to that which
has been quoted from the Ordonances of the Kings
of France. Though the genius of the English
constitution seems early to have favoured personal
liberty, personal ervitude, nevertheless, continucd
long in England in some particular places. In
the year 1514, we find a charter of Henry VIII.
enfranchising two slaves belonging to one of his
manors. Rym. Feeder. vol. xiii p. 47o. As late
as te year 574, there is a commiflion from Queen
Elizabeth with refpec to the manumission of cer-
tain bondmen belonging to her. Rymer. in Ob-
fervat. on the fatutes, &c. p. 21.

NOTE XXI. SECT. I. p. 56. [X].

THERE is no custom in the middle ages more

singular than that of private war. It is a right of
so great importance, and prevailed so universally,
that the regulations concerning it make a confi-
derable figure in the fyfltem of laws during the
middle a&es. M. de Montesquieu, who has un-
ravelled so many intricate points in feudal juril-
prudence, and thrown light on so many customs
formerly obscure and unintelligible, was not led
by his subject to confider this. I shall therefore
give a more minute account of the customs and
regulations which directed a practice so contrary

to

to the present ideas of civilized nations concerning
government and order. i. Among the ancient
Germans, as well as other nations in a litnilar
fate of society, the right of avenging injuries was
a private and personal right, exercised by force
of arms, without any reference to an umpire, or
any appeal to a magistrate for decision. The
clearet proofs of this were produced Note VI.
2. This practice subsisted among the barbarous
nations after their settlement in the provinces of
the Empire which they conquered; and as the
causes of dissention among them multiplied, their
family feuds and private wars became more fre-
quent. Proofs of this occur in their early his-
torians. Greg. Turon. hilt. lib. vii. c. 2. lib. viii.
c. 18. lib. x. c. 27. and likewise in the codes of
their laws. It was not only allowable for the
relations to avenge the injuries of their family,
but it was incumbent on them. Thus by the laws
of the Angli and Werini, ad quemcunque here-
ditas terra: pervenerit, ad illum veltis bellica id
eft lorica & pltio proximi, & folatio leudis, dcbct
pertinere, tit. vi. § 5. ap. Lindenbr. Leg. Salic.
tit. 63. Leg. Longob. lib. ii. tit. 14. § io.--
3. None but gentlemen, or persons of nobl}birth,
had the right of private war. All ditlutes among
slaves, villani, the inhabitants of towns, and free-
men of inferior condition, were decided in the
courts ofjuftice. All disputes between gentlemen
and persons of inferior rank were terminated in
the fame manner. The right of private war fuil-
posed nobility of birth, and equality of rank in

the

the contending parties. Beaumanoir Couftumes
de Beauv. ch. lix. p. 300. Ordon. des Rois de
France, tom. ii. 395. § xvii. 508. § xv, &c. The
dignified ecclefiafticks likewise claimed and exer-
ciued the right of private war; but as it was not
altogether d(ec nt for them to prosecute quarrels
in person, advocati or vidames were chosen by the
several monasteries and biihopricks. These were
commonly men of high rank and reputation, who
became the proteCtors of the churches and con-
vents by whom they were eleted; espoused their
quarrels, and fought t':eir battles; armis omnia
qua erant ecclesia virilitcr defendebant, et vigi-
lanter protegebant. Bruffel Usage des Fiefs, tom. i.
p. 144. Du Cange, voc. advocatus. On many
occasions, the martial ideas to which ecclefiafticks
of noble birth were accustomed, made them forget
the pacifick spirit of their profession, and led them
into the field in person at the head of their vaffls,

flamma, ferro, cde, poffeftlones ecclefiarum

praelati defendebant." Guido Abbas ap. Du
Cange, Ib. p. 179.-4. It was not every injury or
trespass that gave a gentleman a title to make
war upon his adversary. Atrocious ats of vio-
lence,nfults and affronts publickly committed,
were legal and permitted motives for taking arms
against the authors of them. Such crimes as are
now punished capitally in civilized nations, at that
time juitified private hostilities. Beauman. ch. lix.
Du Cange Dissert. xxix. fur Joinville, p. 331.
But though the avenging of injuries was the only
motive that could legally authorise a private war,

yet

yet disputes concerning civil property often gave
rife to hostilities, and were terminated by the
sword. Du Cange Dissert. p. 332.-5. All per-
sons present when any quarrel arose, or any as
of violence was committed, were included in the
war which it occasioned ; for it was supposed to
be impossible for any man in such a situation to
remain neutral, without taking fide with one or
other of the contending parties. Beauman. p. 300.
-6, All the kindred of the two principals in the
war were included in it, and obliged to espouse
the quarrel of the chieftain with whom they were
connected, Du Cange, ib. 332. This was founded
on the maxim of the ancient Germans, "' ufcipere
tam inimicitias feu patris, feu propinqui, quam
amicitias, neceffe e ;" a maxim natural to all
rude and simple nations, among which the form
of society, and political union, trengthens such a
entiment. The method of ascertaining the de-
gree of affinity which obliged a prfon to take
part in the quarrel of a kinsman was curious.
While the church prohibited the marriage of per-
sons within the seventh degree of affinity, the
vengeance of private war extended as far as this
absurd prohibition, and all who had fuctl remote
connection with any of the principals were in-
volved in the calamities of war. But when the
church relaxed somewhat of its rigour, and did
not extend its prohibition of marrying beyond the
fourth degree of affinity, the fame reltriltion took
place in the conduct of private war. Beauman
30o. Du Cange Dissert. 333.-7. A private war

could

could not be carried on between two full brothers,
because both have the fame common kindred, and
consequently neither had any persons bound to
stand by him against the other, in the contest;
but two brothers of the half blood might wage
war, because each of them has a diftinft kindred.
Beauman. p. 299.-8. The vaflls of each prin-
cipal in any private war were involved in the con,
teit, because by the feudal maxims they were
bound to take arms in defence of the chieftain
of whom they held, and to assist him in every
quarrel. As oon, therefore, as the feudal tenures
were introduced, and this artificial connecion was
eflablifhed between vassals and the baron of whom
they held, vassals came to be confidered as in the
tame state with relations. Beauman. 303.-9, Pri-
vate wars were very frequent for several centuries.
Nothing contributed more to increase those dif-
orders in government, or to encourage such fero-
city of manners as reduced the nations of Europe
to that wretched tfate which distinguished the pe-
riod of history which I am reviewing. Nothing
was such an obitacle to the introduction of a regu-
lar administration ofjufRice. Nothing could more
effectually discourage industry, or retard the pro-
grefs and cultivation of the arts of peace. Private
wars were carried on with all the deftrusive rage,
which is to be dreaded from violent resentment
when armed with force, and authorised by law. It
appears from the statutes prohibiting or restraining
the exercise of private hostilities, that the invasion
of the most barbarous enemy could not be more

desolating

diefolating to a country, or more fatal to its inha-
bitants, than those intestine wars. Ordon. t. i. p.
701. tom. il. 395,408, 507, &c. The contempo-
rary historians describe the excelTes committed in
prosecution of these quarrels in such terms as ex-
cite aftonilhment and horror. I hall mention only
one passage from the history of the Holy War, by
Guibert Abbot of Nogent: " Erat eo tempore
maximis ad invicem hoftilitatibus, totius Franco-
rum regni faEta turbatio; crebra ubiq; latrocinia,
viarum obfeffio; audiebantur paflim, immo fiebant
incendia infinita; nullis prater sola & indomita
cupiditate exiftentibus caufis extruebantur praelia;
& ut brevi totum claudam, quicquid obtutibus
cupidorum fubjacebat, nufquam attendeado cujus
effet, prada: patebat." Gelta Dei per Francos,
vol. i. p. 482.

HAVING thus collected the chief regulations

which custom had established concerning the right
and exercise of private war, I hiall enumerate in
chronological order the various expedients employ-
ed to abolish or restrain this fatal cuflom. i. Tlhe
first expedient employed by the civil magiflrate in
order to set some bounds to the violence of private
revenge, was the fixing by law the fine or compo-
fition to be paid for each different crime. The
injured person was originally the sole judge con-
cerning the nature of the wrong which he had sus-
sered, the degree of vengeance which hc flould
exact, as well as the species of atoncment or re-
paration with which he flould reft fatifi.:d. I*'-

cUtnimcnc

fentment became of course as implacable as it was
fierce. It was often a point of honour not to for-
give, nor to be reconciled. This made it necef-
fary to fix those compositions which make so great
a figure in the laws of barbarous nations. The
nature of crimes and offences was estimated by the
magistrate, and the fum due to the person offended
was ascertained with a minute, and often a whim-
fical accuracy. Rotharis, the legislator of the
Lombards, who reigned about the middle of the
seventh century, discovers his intention both in as.
certaining the composition to be paid by the offen-
der, and in increasing its value; it is, fays he, that
the enmity may be extinguished, the prosecution
may cease, and peace may be restored. Leg. Lan-
gob. lib. i, tit. 7. § 1o.-2. About the beginning
of the ninth century, Charlemagne struck at the
root of the evil, and enacted, " That when any
person had been guilty of a crime, or had com-
mitted an outrage, he hould immediately submit
to the penance which the church imposed, and
offer to pay the composition which the law pre-
fcribed; and if the injured person or his kindred
should refuse to accept of this, and presume to
avenge themlilves by force of arms, their lands
and properties flould be forfeited." Capitul. A. D.
802oz. edit. Baluz. vol. i. 37.-. But in this, as
well as in other regulations, the genius of Charle-
magne.advanced before the spirit of his age. The
ideas of his contemporaries concerning regular
government were too imperfect, and their man-

nera

ners too fierce to submit to this law. Private wars,
with all the calamities which they occasioned, be-
came more frequent than ever after the death of
that great monarch. His successors were unable
to restrain them. The church found it necefary
to interpose. The most early of these interpofi-
tions now extant, is towards the end of the tenth
century. In the year 99o, several bishops in the
south of France assembled, and published various
regulations, in order to set some bounds to the
violence and frequency of private wars; if any
person within their dioceses hould venture to tranf-
grefs, they ordained that he hould be excluded
from all Christian privileges during his life, and be
denied Chriflian burial after his death. Du Mont
Corps Diplomatique, tom. i. p. 41. These, how-
ever, were only partial remedies; and therefore a
council was held at Limoges, A. D. 994. The
bodies of the faints, according to the custom of
those ages, were carried thither; and by there fa-
cred relicks men were exhorted to lay down their
arms, to extinguish their animofities, and to swear
that they would not for the future violate the pub-
lick peace by their private hostilities. Bouquet
Recueil des Hiftor. vol. x. p. 49, 147. Several
other councils ifued decrees to the fame effeCt. Du
Cange Dissert. 343.-4. But the authority of coun-
cils, how venerable soever in those ages, was not
sufficient to abolilh a custom which flattered the
pride of the nobles, and gratified their favourite
paflions. The evil grew so intolerable, that it be-

ca;ne

came necelfary to employ supernatural means sos
fupprefling it. A bishop of Aquitaine, A. D.
1032, pretended that an angel had appeared to
him, and brought him a writing from heaven, en-
joining men to cease from their hoflilities, and to
be reconciled to each other. It was during a sea-
son of public calamity that he published this reve-
lation. The minds of men were difpoled to re-
ceive pious imprefions; and willing to perform
any thing in order to avert the wrath of heaven.
A general peace and cessation from hostilities took
place, and continued for seven years; and a refolu-
tion was formed, that no man should in times to
come attack or molest his adversaries during the
seasons set apart for celebrating the great festivals
of the church, or from the evening of Thursday
in each week to the morning of Monday in the
week ensuing, the intervening days being confider-
ed as particularly holy, our Lord's Passion having
happened on one of these days, and his Refurrec-
tion on another. A change in the dispositions of
men so sudden, and which produced a resolution
so unexpected, was confidered as miraculous; and
the rcfpitc fiom hostilities which followed upon it,
was called The Truce of God. Glaber. Rodulphul
l-iflor. lib. v. ap. Bouqutt. vol. x. p. 59. This,
from being a regulation or concert in one king-
dom, became a general law in Chriltendom, and
was confirmed by the authority of the Pope, and
the violaters were fubjeted to the penalty of ex-
communication. Corpus Jur. Canon. Decretal,
lib. i. tit. 34. c. . Du Cange Gloffar. voc. Treuga.

An

An a of the council of Toulujes in Roussillon,
A. D. 1041, containing all the stipulations re-
quired by the truce of God, is publithed by Dom
de Vic &Dom Vaifette Hilt. de Languedoc, tom. ii.
Preuves, p. 206. A cessation from hoitilities du-
ring three complete days in every week, allowed
such a considerable space for the paflions of the
antagonists to cool, and for the people to enjoy a
relpite from the calamities of war, as well as to
take measures for their own security, that, if this
truce of God had been exadtly observed, it mulf
have gone far towards putting an end to private
wars. This, however, seems not to have been the
cafe; the nobles, disregarding the truce, prosecuted
their quarrels without interruption as formerly.
Qua nimirum tempeftate, univerfa provincia adeo
devaftationis continua importunitate inquietantur,
ut ne ipfa, pro obfervatione divinax pacis, profeffa
facramerta cuftodiantur. Abbas Ufpergenis apud
Datt de pace imperii publica, p. 13. N° 35. The
violent spirit of the nobility could not be restrained
by any engagements. The complaints of this were
frequent; and bishops, in order to compel them
to renew their vows and promises of ceasing from
their private wars, were obliged to enjoin their
clergy to suspend the performance of divine ser-
vice, and the exercise of any religious funEtion
within the parishes of such as were rfractory and
obstinate. Hilt. de Langued. par D. D. de Vic &
Vaifette, tom. ii. Preuves, p. 118.-,. The peo.
ple, eager to obtain relief from their suffering,
called in a second time a retended revelation to

VOL. I. Z their

their aid. Towards the end of the twelfth century,
a carpenter in Guienne gave out, that Jesus Chrilt,
together with the blessed Virgin, had appeared to
him, and having commanded him to exhort man-
kind to peace, had given him, as a ptoof of his
miflion, an image of the Virgin holding her fen
in her arms, with this inscription, Lamb of God,
who takeji away the fins of the world, gie us pcace.
'I'his low fanatick addressed himself to an ignor.r::t
age, prone to credit what was marvellous. II;
was received as an inspired messenger of God.
Many prelates and barons assembled at Puy, and
took an oath, not only to make peace with all
their own enemies, but to attack such as refuscd
to lay down their arms, and to be reconciled to
their enemies. They formed an aflociation for this
purpose, and assumed the honourable name of htt
Brolhcrhood of God. Robertus de Monte Michaelc
ap. M. de Lauriere Pref. tom. i. Ordon. p. 29.
But the influence of this fuperRitious terror or de-
votion was not of long continuance.-6. The civil
magitratc was obliged to exert his authority in
order to check a custom which threatened the dif.
solution of government. Philip Augufius, as fomen
imagine, or St. Louis, as is more probable, pub-
lifhed an ordonance, A. D. 1245, prohibiting any
person to commence hostilities against the friends
and vassals of his adversary, until forty days after
the commiflion of the crime or offence which gave
rile to the quarrel; declaring, that if any man
prelilmed to tranlgrefs this flatute, he should be
confidered as guilty of a breach of the publick

peace,

peace, and be tried and punished by the judge or-
dinary as a traitor. Ordon. tom. i. p. 56. This
was called the Royal Truce, and afforded time for
the violence of resentment to subside, as well as
leisure for the good offices of such as were willing
to compose the difference. The happy effects of
this regulation seem to have been considerable, if
we may judge from the solicitude of succeeding
monarchs to enforce it.-7. In order to restrain
the exercise of private war still farther, Philip the
Fair, towards the close of the fame century, A. D.
1296, published an ordonance commanding all
private hostilities to cease, while he was engaged
in war against the enemies of the slate. Ordon.
tomr. i. p. 328, 390. This regulation, which feeins
to be almot essential to the exiitence and prefer-
vation of society, was often renewed by his fuccef-
fors, and being enforced by the regal authority,
proved a considerable check to the dcftructive con-
telts of the nobles. Both thele regulations, intro-
duced firfl in France, were adopted by the other
nations of Europe.-8. The evil, however, was
to inveterate, that it did not yield to all tlhele re-
medies. No sooner was publick peace eftabliflcd
in any kingdom, than the barons renewed their
private hotilities. They not only fitruggled to
maintain this pernicious right, but to secure the
exercise of it without any restraint. Upon the
death of Philip the Fair, the nobles of different
provinces in France formed associations, and pre-
lentcd remonitrances to his fucceflor, demanding
the repeal of several laws, by which he had abridg-

Z 2 cd

ed the privileges of their order. Among thefc,
the right of private war is always mentioned as
one of the most valuable; and they claim, that the
restraint imposed by the truce of God, the royal
truce, as well as that arising from the ordonance of
the year 1296, hould be taken off. In some in-
stances, the two sons of Philip, who mounted the
throne successively, eluded their demands; in
others, they were obliged to make concessions.
Ordon. tor. i. p. 551, 557, 561, 573- The ordo.
nances to which I here refer, are of such length
that I cannot insert them, but they are extremely
curious, and may be peculiarly inftruEive to an
English reader, as they throw considerable light on
that period of English history, in which the at-
tempts to circumscribe the regal prerogative were
carried on, not by the people struggling for liber-
ty, but by the nobles contending for power. It
is not necessary to produce any evidence of the
continuance and frequency of private wars under
the successors of Philip the Fair.-9. A practice
somewhat similar to the royal truce was intro-
duced, in order to strengthen and extend it. Bonds
of assurance, or mutual security, were demanded
from the parties at variance, by which they obliged
themselves to abstain from all hostilities, either du-
ring a time mentioned in the bond, or for ever; and
became fubjeft to heavy penalties, if they violated
this obligation. These bonds were Sometimes
granted voluntarily, but more frequently cxated
by the authority of the civil magistrate. Upon a
petition from the party who felt himself weakest,

the

the magistrate summoned his adversary to appear
in court, and obliged him to give a bond of affl-
rance. If, after that, he committed any farther
hostilities, he became subjet to all the penalties of
treason. This restraint on private war was known
in the age of St. Louis. Eftabliffemens, liv. i. c.
28. It was frequent in Bretagne; and what is
very remarkable, such bonds of assurance were
given mutually between vassals and the lord of
whom they held. Oliver de Cliflon grants one to
the Duke of Bretagne, his sovereign. Morice Mem.
pour fervir de preuves a 'hist. de Bret. tom. i.
p. 846. ii. p. 371. Many examples of bonds of as-
furance in other provinces of France are collected
by Bruffel. tom. ii. p. 856. The nobles of Bur-
gundy remonstrated against this practice, and ob-
tained exemption from it as an encroachment on
the privileges of their order. Ordon. tom. i. p.
558. This mode of security was first introduced
in cities, and the good efFects of it having been
felt there, was extended to the nobles. See Note
XVI.-o1. The calamities occasioned by private
wars became at some times so intolerable, that the
nobles entered into voluntary aflbciations, bitidng
themselves to refer all matters in dilpute, whether
concrning civil property, or points of honour, to
the determination of the majority of the aflbciates.
Morice Mem. pour fervir de preuves a l'hift. de Bret.
tom. ii. p. 728.-1 i. But all these expedients prov-
ing ineffectual, Charles VI. A. D. 413, iucd an
ordonance expressly prohibiting private wars on
any pretext whatsoever, with power to the judge

Z 3 ordinary

ordinary to compel all persons to comply with this
injunction, and to punish such as hould prove re-
fracory or disobedient, by imprisoning their per-
sons, seizing their goods, and appointing the officers
of justice, Mangeurs & Gafteurs, to live at free
quarters on their estate. If thole who were dilb.
bedient to this edit could not be personally ar-
relecd, he appointed their friends and vassals to be
seized, and detained until they gave surety for
keeping the peace; and he abolished all laws, cut,
toms, or privileges which might be pleaded ia
opposition to this ordonance. Ordon. tonm. x
p. 13 8. How sow is the progress of reason and of
civil order! Regulations which to us appear b
equitable, obvious, and fimplc, required the efforts
of civil and ecclesiastical authority, during several
centuries, to introduce and (tablifh them. Even
pofkcrior to this period, Louis XI. was obliged to
abolish private wars in l)auphin:, by a particular
edict, A. 11.i45I. Du Cange diffrt. p. 348.

T'IIS note would swell to a disproportional bulk,

if I should attempt to inquire with the fame mi-
nute attention into the progress of this pernicious
cultom in the other countries of Europe. In Eng-
land, the ideas of the Saxons concerning personal
revenge, the right of private wars, and the corn-
position due to the party offended, seem to have
been much the fame with those which prevailec
on the Continent. The law of Ina de Pindicantilus
in the eighth century, Lamb. p. 3; those of Ed.
mund in the tenth century, de homicidio, Lamb

2 p. 72

p. 72. & de inimicitiis, p. 76; and those of Edward
the Confeflbr, in the eleventh century, de tcmpcri-
bus & diebus pacis, or Treuga Dei, Lamb. p. 26,
are perfectly limilar to the ordonances of the French
Kings their contemporaries. The laws of Edward,
de pace regis, are still more explicit than those of
the French Monarchs, and, by several provisions
in them, discover that a more perfect police was
established in England at that period. Lamnbard.
p. I28. fol. verf. Even after the conquest, private
wars, and the regulations for preventing them,
were not altogether unknown, as appears from
Madox Formulare Anglicanum, N° CXLV. and
from the extrats from Domcfday Book, published
by Gale Scriptores hilt. Britan. p. 75), 777. The
well known clause in the form of an Englifli in-
ditment, which, as an aggravation of the crimi-
nal's guilt, mentions his having assaulted a peroln,
who was in the peace of God and of the King,
seems to be borrowed from the Treuga or Pax )ci
and the Pax Regis which I have explained. But
after the conquest, the mention of private wars
among the nobility, occurs more rarely in the
Englilh lhillory, than in that of any other Euro-
pean nation, and no laws concerning them are to
be found in the body of their ftatutcs. Such a
change in their own manners, and fuich a variation
from thole of their neighbours, is remarklable. Is
it to be ascribed to the extraordinary power that
William the Norman acquired by right ofconqucet,
and transmitted to his successors, which rendered
the execution of jultice more vigorous and deci.

Z 4 five,

five, and the jurifdicion of the King's court more
extensive than under the Monarchs on the Con.
tinent ? Or, was it owing to the settlement of the
Normans in England, who having never adopted
the practice of private war in their own country,
abolished it in t e kingdom which they conquered
It is asserted in an ordonance of John King of
France, that in all times past, persons of every rank
in Normandy have been prohibited to wage private
war, and the practice has been deemed unlawful.
Ordon. tom. ii. p. 407. If this faEt were certain,
it would go far towards explaining the peculiarity
which I have mentioned. But as there are omer
English Ads of Parliament, which, according to the
remark cf the learned author of the Observations on
the Statutes, chiefly the mofe ancient, recite false-
hoods, it may be added, that this is not peculiar to
the laws of that country. Notwithstanding the
positive assertion contained in this publick law of
France, there is good reason for confidering it as a
statute which recites a falsehood. This, however,
is not the place for difcufling that point. It is an
inquiry not unworthy the curiosity of an Englith
antiquary.

IN Castile, the pernicious practice of private war

prevailed, and was authorized by the customs and
law of the kingdom. Leges Tauri tit. 76. cum
commentario Anton. Gomezii, p. 55i. As the
Calilian nobles were no less turbulent than power-
ful, their quarrels and hostilities involved their

country

country in many calamities. Innumerable proofs
of this occur in Mariana. In Aragon, the right
of private revenge was likewise authorized by law;
exercised in its full extent, and accompanied with
the fame unhappy consequences. -ieron. Blanca
Comment. de rebus Arag. ap. Schotti. Hifpan.
illuftrat. vol. iii. p. 733. Lex Jacobi I. A. D. 247.
Fueros & Obfervancias del Reyno de Aragon, lib.
ix. p. 1 82. Several confederacies between the
Kings of Aragon and their nobles, for the reflo-
ring of peace, founded on the truce of God, are
Rill extant. Petr. de Marca. Marca fivi Limes His-
panic. App. 1303, 38, 1428. As early as the
year Xi 65, we find a combination of the King and
court of Aragon, in order to abolish the right of
private war, and to punilh those who prefu;ned to
claim that privilege. Anales de Aragon por Zu-
rita, vol. i. p. 73. But the evil was so inveterate,
that as late as A. D. 1519. Charles V. was ob-
liged to publish a law enforcing all former regu-
lations tending to suppress this practice. Fueros
& Obfervanc. lib. ix. 183. b.

THE Lombards, and other northern nations who

fettled in Italy, introduced the fame maxims con-
cerning the right of revenge into that country,
and these were followed by the fame eftles. As
the progress of the evil was perfetly similar to
what happened in France, the expedients employed
to check its career, or to extirpate it finally, re-
fembled those which I have enumerated. Murat.
Ant. Ital. vol. ii. p. 306.

IN Gcrmany the disorders and calamities occa-

sioned by the right of private war were greater
and more intolerable than in any other country of
Europe. The Imperial authority was so much
flakcn and enfeebled by the violence of the civil
wars, excited by the contefis between the Popes
arld the lEn-perors of the Franconian and Suabian
lines, that not only the nobility but the citis
actquied almolt independent power, and scorned
all !ibort:ination and obedience to the laws. Th:
fre(iquncy of thfeefai, or private wars, are often

.entioned in the German Annals, and the fatal
efcfeis of them are most pathetically described,
Datt, de pace Imper. pub. lib. i. cap. v. n°. 30.
& pallin. The Germans early adopted the Treuga
Dei, which was first eftabhfhed in ,France. This,
however, proved but a temporary and ineffecual
remedy. The disorders multiplied so fast, and
grew o enormous, that they threatened the difib-
lution of Iociety, and compelled the Germans to
haIve recourse to the only remedy of the evil, viz.
an ablblute prohibition of private wars. The
l'mpleror, William, publifled his edict to this
purpol, A. D. 1255, an hundred and sixty years
previous to the ordonance of Charles VI. in
France. Datt, lib. i. cap. 4. n°. 20. But neither
he nor his fuccelfors had authority to secure the
obfervancc of it. This gave rife to a practice in
Germany, which conveys to us a triking idea
both of the intolerable calamities occasioned by
private wars, and of the fccblenels of government
luring the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. The

cities

cities and nobles entered into alliances and affo-
ciations, by which they bound themselves to main-
tain the public peace, and to make war on such
as should violate it. This was the origin of the
league of the Rhine, of Suabia, and of many
smaller confederacies distinguished by various
names. The rife, progress, and beneficial effects
of these aflbciations are traced by Datt with great
accuracy. Whatever degree of publick peace, or
of regular adminifiration was preserved in the
Empire from the beginning of the twelfth century
to the close of the fifteenth, Germany owes to
these leagues. During that period, political order,
refpet for the laws, together with the equal ad-
ministration ofjuftice, made considerable progress
in Germany. But the final and perpetual abo-
lition of the right of private war was not accom-
plifhed until A. D. 1495. The Imperial authority
was by that time more firmly established, the ideas
of men with respect to government and ilbor-
dination were become more just. That barbarous
and pernicious privilege which the nobles had so
long possessed, was declared to be incompatible
with the happiness and exigfence of society. In
order to terminate any differences which might
arise among the various members of the Germanick
body, the Imperial chamber was inltituted with
fipreme jurifdiion, to judge without appeal in
every question brought before it. That court has
fnbfifted since that period, forming a very retieetL-
able tribunal, of essential importance in the Ge'-

man

man confitution. Datt, lib. iii, iv, v, Pfeffel
Abrege de l'Hiftoire du Droit, &c. p. 556.

NOTE XXII. SECT. I. p. 67. [Y].

IT would be tedious and of little use to enu-

merate the various modes of appealing to the
justice of God, which fuperRfition introduced du-
ring the ages of ignorance. I hall mention only
one, because we have an account of it in a pla-
citum or trial in the presence of Charlemagne,
from which we may learn the imperfec manner
in which justice was administered even during his
reign. In the year 775, a contest aofe between
the bishop of Paris and the abbot of St. Denys,
concerning the property of a small abbey. Each
of them exhibited deeds and records, in order to
prove the right to be in them. Instead of trying
the authenticity, or confidering the import of
these, the point was referred to the judicium crucis.
Each produced a person, who, during the cele-
bration of mass, flood before the cross with his
arms expanded; and he whose representative first
became weary, and altered his posture, loft the
cause. The person employed by the bihop on
this occasion had less strength or less spirit than
his adversary, and the question was decided in
favour of the abbot. Mabillon de re Diplomat.
lib. vi. p. 498. If a Prince so enlightened as
Charlemagne countenanced such an absurd mode
of decision, it is no wonder that other monarchs

Should

hould tolerate it so long. M. de Montesquieu
has treated of the trial by judicial combat at con-
fiderable length. The two talents which diftin-
guifh that illustrious author, industry in tracing
all the circumifances of ancient and obscure infti-
tutions, and sagacity in penetrating into the causes
and principles which contributed to establish them,
are equally conspicuous in his observations on this
fubje&. To there I refer the reader, as they con-
tain moit of the principles by which I have endea-
voured to explain this pratice. De l'Efprit des
Loix, lib. xxviii. It seems to be probable from
the remarks of M. de Montesquieu, as well as
from the faEs produced by Muratori, tom. iii.
Diiert. xxxviii. that the appeals to the justice of
God by the experiments with fire and water, &c.
were practised by the people who fettled in the
different provinces of the Roman Empire, before
they had recourse to the judicial combat. The
judicial combat, however, was the most ancient
mode of terminating any controversy among the
barbarous nations in their original settlements.
This is evident from Vellcius Paterculus, lib. ii.
c. 118. who informs us, that all questions which
were decided among the Romans by legal trial,
were terminated among the Germans by arms.
The fame thing appears in the ancient laws and
customs of the Swedes, quoted by Jo. O. Stiern-
hook de jure Sueonum & Gothorum vetuflo, 4to.
Holmiae 1682. lib. i. c. 7. It is probable that
when the various tribes which invaded the FlIn-

pirc

pire were converted to Christianity, their ancient
custom of allowing judicial combats appeared so
glaringly repugnant to the precepts of religion,
that, for ome time, it was abolished, and by de-
grees, several circumstances which I have mention-
ed, led them to relume it.

IT seems likewise to be probable from a law

quoted by Stiernhio6k in the treatise which I have
mentioned, that the judicial combat was originally
permitted, in order to determine points refpeCing
the perlonal character, or reputation of individuals,
and was afterwards extended not only to criminal
cafes, but to questions concerning property. The
words of the law are, " if any man hall fay to
another these reproachful words, " you are, not a
" man equal to other men," or, " you have not
" the heart of a man," and the other hall reply,

I am a man as good as you." Let them meet

on the highway. If he who firit gave offence ap-
pear, and the person offended absent himself, let
the latter be deemed woriL than he was called;
let him not be admitted to give evidence in judg-
ment either for man or woman, and let him not
have the privilege of making a testament. If the
person offended appear, and he who gave the
offence be absent, let him call upon the other
thrice with a loud voice, and make a mark upon
the earth, and then let him who absented himfell
be deemed infamous, because he uttered word,
which he durst not support. If both hall appeal

propcrl)

properly armed, and the person offended shall fall
in the combat, let a half compensation be paid
for his death. But if the person who gave the
offence shall fall, let it be imputed to his own
ralhnefs. The petulance of his tongue hath been
fatal to him. Let him lie in the field without
any compensation being demanded for his death."
Lex Uplandica ap. Stiern. p. 76. Martial people
were extremely delicate with respect to every thing
that affe&ed their reputation as soldiers. By the
laws of the Salians, if any man called another a
hare, or accused him of having left his shield in
the field of battle, he was ordained to pay a large
fine. Leg. Sal. tit. xxxii. § 4. 6. By the law
of the Lombards if any one called another
arga, i.e. a good for nothing fellow, he might
immediately challenge him to combat. Leg. Lon-
gob. lib. . tit. v. § . By the law of the Sa-
lians, if one called another ccnilts, a term of
reproach equivalent to arga, he was bound to
pay a very high fine. Tit. xxxii. § . Paulus
Diaconus relates the violent impression which this
reproachful expreflion made upon one of his coun-
trymen, and the fatal effects with which it as
attended. De geftis Longobard. lib. vi. c. 24-
Thus the ideas concerning the point of honour,
which we are apt to confider as a modern refine-
ment, as well as the practice of duelling, to which
it gave rife, are derived from the notions of our
anccftors, while in a state of society very little
improved.

As

As M. de Montesquieu's view of this subjet

did not lead him to confider every circumstance
relative to judicial combats, I hall mention some
particular facds necessary for the illustration of
what I have said with refpet to them. A remark-
able instance occurs of the decision of an abftraft
point of law by combat. A question arose in the
tenth century concerning the right of representation,
which was not then fixed, though now universally
established in every part of Europe. " It was a
matter of doubt and dispute, (faith the historian)
whether the sons of a son ought to be reckoned
among the children of the family, and succeed
equally with their uncles, if their father happened
to die while their grandfather was alive. An
assembly was called to deliberate on this point,
and it was the general opinion that it ought to be
remitted to the examination and decision of judges.
But the Emperor following a better course, and
desirous of dealing honourably with his people
and nobles, appointed the matter to be decided by
battle between two champions. He who appeared
in behalf of the right of children to represent
their deceased father was vicorious; and it was
established, by a perpetual decree, that they hould
hereafter hare in the inheritance together with
their uncles." Wittickindus Corbeinfis, lib. Annal.
ap. M. de Lauriere Pref. Ordon. vol. i. p. xxxiii.
If we can suppose the caprice of folly to lead men
to any ation more extravagant than this of set-
tling a point in law by combat, it muff be that of

referring

referring the truth or falsehood of a religious opi-
nion to be decided in the fame manner. To the
disgrace of human reason, it has been capable even
of this extravagance. A question was agitated in
Spain in the eleventh century, whether the Mu-
farabic Liturgy and ritual which had been used
in the churches of Spain, or that approved of by
the See of Rome, which differed in many parti-
culars from the other, contained the form of
worship most acceptable to the Deity. The Spa-
niards contended zealouly for the ritual of their
ancestors. The Popes urged them to receive that
to which they had given their infallible anEtion.
A violent contest arose. The nobles proposed to
decide the controversy by the sword. The King
approved of this method of decision. Two
knights in compleat armour entered the lifts. John
Ruys de Matanca, the champion of the Mufarabic
Liturgy, was victorious. But the Queen and
Archbishop of Toledo, who favoured the other
form, insisted on having the matter submitted to
another trial, and had interest enough to prevail
in a request, inconfiitent with the laws of combat,
which being confidered as an appeal to God, the
decision ought to have been acquiesced in as final.
A great fire was kindled. A copy of each Liturgy
was cast into the flames. It was agreed that the
book which flood this proof, and remained un-
touched, ihould be received in all the churches
of Spain. The Mufarabic Liturgy triumphed
lkewisl in this trial, and if we may believe Rode-

VOL. I. A a rigo

rigo de Toledo, remained unhurt by the fire, when
the other was reduced to ahes. The Queen and
Archbishop had power or art sufficient to elude
this decision also, and the use of the Mufarabic
form of devotion was permitted only in certain
churches. A determination no less extraordinary
than the whole tranfadion. Rodr. de Toledo,
quoted by'P. Orleans, Hill. de Revol. d'Epagne,
tom. i. p. 2 7. Mariana, lib. i. c. 18. vol. i.
p. 378.-A remarkable proof of the general ui
of trial by combat, and of the pradiledion for
that mode of decision occurs in the laws of th
Lombards. It was a custom in the middle age,
that any person might chufe the law to which he
would be fubjeed; and by the prescriptions of
that law he was obliged to regulate his tran!.
acions, without being bound to comply with any
practice authorized by other codes of law. Per-
Ions who had fubjeded themselves to the Roman
law, and adhered to the ancient jurisprudence,
as far as any knowledge of it was retained in those
ages of ignorance, were exempted from payi'lg
any regard to the forms of proceedings eftablillic
by the laws of the Burgundians, Lombards, and
other barbarous people. But the Emperor Otho,
in direct contradition to this received maxim,
ordained, " That all perobns, under whatever law
they lived, even although it were the Roman law,
flould be bound to conform to the edics con-
cerning the trial by combat." Leg. Longob.
lib. ii. tit. 55. § 38. While the judicial combat

fubfitlted,

subsisted, proof by charters, contrads, or other
deeds, became ineffeaual; and even this species
of evidence, calculated to render the proceedings
of courts certain and decisive, was eluded. When
a charter or other initrument was produced by
one of the parties, his opponent might challenge
it, affirm that it was false and forged, and offer
to prove this by combat. Leg. Longob. ib. § 34'
It is true, that among the reasons enumerated by
3Baumanoir, on account of which judges might
refuse to permit a trial by combat, one is, " If the
point in contest can be clearly proved or afce,-
tained by other evidence." Couft. de Beauv. ch.
63. p. 323. But that regulation removed the
evil only a ingle ftep. For the party who sus-
pcted that a witneis was about to depose in a
manner unfavourable to his cause, might accuse
him of being suborned, give him the lie, and
challenge him to combat; if the witness was van-
quifhed in battle, no other evidence was admitted,
and the party by whom he was summoned to
;iappear loft his cauif. Leg. Baivar. tit. 1 6. § 2.
Leg. Burgund. tit. 45. Beauman. ch. 6i. p. 315.
The reason given for obliging a witness to accept
(f a defiance, and to defend hin:fclf by combat,
is remarkable, and contains the lame idea which
is Htill the foundation of what is called the point
of honour-; " for it is jult, that if any one affirms
that he perfetly knows the truth of any thing,
and offers to give oath upon it, that he Ihould not
heliate to maintain the veracity of his affirmation
in combat." I.eg. Burgund. tit. 45.

A.a 2 THAT

THAT the trial by judicial combat was efta-

blified in every country of Europe, is a faEt well
known, and requires no proof. That this mode
of decision was frequent, appears not only from
the codes of ancient laws which established it, but
from the earliest writers concerning the pratice of
law in the different nations of Europe. They
treat of this custom at great length; they enu-
merate the regulations concerning it with minute
accuracy; and explain them with much solicitude.
It made a capital and extcnfive article in jurif-
prudence. There is not any one subjec- in their
system of law which Beaumanoir, Defontaines, oi
the compilers of the Aflifes de Jerufa!em eem to
have confidered as of greater importance; and
none on which they have bestowed so much atten-
tion. The fame observation will hold with refpeci
to the early authors of other nations. It appears
from Madox, that trials of this kind were so fr.
quent in England, that fines, paid on thele occa-
sions, made no inconsiderable branch of the Kin's
revenue. Hist. of the Excheq. vol. i. p. 349. A
very curious account of a judicial combat betwecei
Mefire Robert de Beaumanoir, and Mefire l'icr
Tournemine, in presence of the duke of Bretagnc,
A. D. 13Ss, is publified by Morice Mem. pou
fervir de preuves a l'hift. de Bretagne, tom. il.
p. 498. All the formalities observed in such ex-
traordinary proceedings are there described mour
minutely, than in any ancient monument which 1
hlave had an opportunity of confidering. 'our-
nemine was acculied by Beaumanoir of having

nmurd Jcrc.

murdered his brother. The former was vanquilh-
ed, but was saved from being hanged upon the
Tpot, by the generous intercefflon of his antagonist.
A good account of the origin of the laws concern-
ing judicial combat, is publilhed in the history of
Pavia, by Bernardo Sacci, lib. ix. c. 8. in Grev.
Thef. Antiquit. Ital. vol. iii. 743.

THIS mode of trial was so acceptable, that ec-

clefialticks, notwithltanding the prohibitions of the
church, were constrained net only to connive at
the pracice, but to authorize it. A remarkable
instance of this is produced by Pafquier Recher-
ches, lib. iv. ch. i. p. 3so. The abbot Wittikin-
dus, whose words I have produced in this note,
confidered the determination of a point in law by
combat,ss the best and most honourable mode of
decision. In the year 978, a judicial combat was
fought in the preence of the Emperor Henry. The
archbishop Aldebert advised him to terminate a
contest which had arisen between two noblemen of
his court, by this mode of decision. The van-
quihed combatant, though a person of high rank,
was beheaded on the spot. Chronic. Ditmari Epitc.
Merfb. chez Bouquet Recueil des Hist. tom. x.
p. 121. Questions concerning the property of
churches and monasteries, were decided by com-
bat. In the year 961, a controvery concerning
the church of St. Medard, whether it belonged to
the abbey of Beaulieu, was terminated by judicial
combat. Bouquet Rccuil des Hist. tom. ix. p.
729. Ibid. p. 612, &c. The Emperor Henry 1.

A a 3 declares,

declares, that his law authorizing the pracice of
judicial combats, was ena6ted with consent and ap-
plause of many faithful bishops. Ibid. p. 23 . So
remarkably did the martial ideas of those ages pre-
vail over the genius and maxims of the canon
law, which in other instances had such credit and
authority with ecclefiafticks. A judicial combat
was appointed in Spain, by Charles V. A. D. 1522.
The combatants fought in the Emperor's pretence,
and the battle was conducted with all the rites
prescribed by the ancient laws of chivalry. The
whole transaction is described at great length by
Pontus Heuterus Rer. Auftriac. lib. viii, c. 17.
p. 205.

THE last instance which occurs in the history of

France, of a judicial combat authorizet by the
magistrate, was the famous one between M. Jarnac
and M. de la Chaiflaignerie, A. D. 1547. A trial
by combat was appointed in England, A. D. 1571,
under the infpestion of the judges in the court of
Common Pleas; and though it was not carried to
the fame extremity with the former, Quleen Eliza-
beth having interposed her authority, and enjoined
the parties to compound the matter, yet in order to
preserve their honour, the lifts were marked out,
and all the forms previous to the combat were ob-
served with much ceremony. Spelm. Gloss. voc.
Campus, p. 103. In the year 163 , a judicial com-
bat was appointed between Donald Lord Rea, and
David Ramsay, Efq; by the authority of the Lord

high

high Conitable, and Earl Marshal of England; but
that quarrel likewitf terminated without bloodshed,
being accommodated by Charles I. Another in-
fIance occurs seven years later. Rufhworth in Ob-
icrvations on the Statutes, &c. p. 266.

NOTE XXIII. SECT. I. p. 74. [Z].

'IHE text contains the great outlines which mark

the course of private and public jurifdistion in the
siveral nations of Europe. I flhall here follow
nlore minutely the various teps of this progress,
as the matter is curious and important enough to
merit this attention. The payment of a fine by
way of fatisfa&ion to the person or family injured,
was the first device of a rude people, in order to
check the career of private resentment, and to ex-
tinguifh ttioli faidc, or deadly feuds which were
prosecuted among them with the utmost violence.
This cuftor may be traced back to the ancient
Germans, Tacit. de Morib. Germ. c. 21 . and pre-
vailed among other uncivilized nations. Many ex-
amples of this are colleted by the ingenious and
learned author of Iliftorical Law-Tras, vol. i.
p. 4I. TheCl fines were acertaincd and levied in
three different manners. At first they were Icttlcd
by voluntary agreement between the parties at va-
riance. When their rage began to ifbfide, and
they felt the bad effc&s of their continuing in en-
mity, they calpe to terms of concord, and the fitif-
faction made was called a compoition, implying that
it was fixed by mutual conlent. De) '1Eirit ties

A a 4 I,'ix,

Loix, lib. xxx. c. 19. It is apparent from some of
the more ancient codes of laws, that when these
were compiled, matters still remained in that simple
state. In certain cafes, the person who had com-
mitted an offence, was left exposed to the resent-
ment of those whom he had injured, until he should
recover their favour, quoquo modo potuerit. Lex
Frifion. tit. . § . The next mode of levying
these fines was by the sentence of arbiters. An
arbiter is called in the Regiam majeftatem amica-
bilis compositor, lib. xi. c. 4. § o. He could efti-
mate the degree of offence with more impartiality
than the parties interested, and determine with
greater equity what fatisfation ought to be de-
manded. It is difficult to bring an authentic proof
of a custom previous to the records preserved in
any nation of Europe. But one of the Formule
Andegavenfes compiled in the sixth century, feeims
to allude to a tranfaaion carried on not by the au-
thority of a judge, but by the mediation of arbi-
ters. Bouquet Recueil des Hiltor. tom. iv. p. 566.
But as an arbiter wanted authority to enforce his
decisions, judges were appointed with compulsive
power to oblige both parties to acquiesce in their
decilions. Previous to this last tep, the expedient
of paying compositions was an imperfect remedy
againit the pernicious eflets of private resentment.
As loon as this important change was introduced,
the magiflrate, putting himfclf in place of the per-
son injured, ascertained the compolition with
which he ought to reft satisfied. Every poflible

injury

injury that could occur in the intercourse of human
ibciety, was confidered and estimated, and the com-
positions due to the person aggrieved were fixed
with such minute attention as discovers, in most
cafes, amazing discernment and delicacy, in some
instances, unaccountable caprice. Besides the com-
position payable to the private party, a certain fum,
called afredium, was paid to the King or fIate, as
Tacitus exprelles it, or to the filcus, in the lan-
guage of the barbarous laws. Some authors,
blending the refined ideas of modern policy with
their reasonings concerning ancient transactions,
have imagined that the fredum was a compensation
due to the community, on account of the violation
of the publick peace. But it is manifestly nothing
more than the price paid to the magistrate for the
protection which he afforded against the violence of
resentment. The enacting of this was a confider-
able ftep towards improvement in criminal jurif-
prudence. In forne of the more ancient codes of
laws, the freda are altogether omitted, or o fel-
dom mentioned, that it is evident they were but
little known. In the latter codes, the fredum is as
precisely specified as the composition. In common
cafes it was equal to the third part of the compo-
fition. Capitul. vol. i. p. 52. In some extraor-
dinary cales, where it was more difficult to protect
the person who had committed violence, the fre.
dum was augmented. Capitul. vol. i. p. 515.
These freda made a considerable branch in the re-
venues of the barons; and wherever territorial
jurisdiction was granted, the royal judges were
prohibited from levying any freda. In explaining

the

the nature of the fredum, I have followed, in a
great measure, the opinion of M. de Montesquieu,
though I know that several learned antiquaries
have taken the word in a different sense. De l'Efprit
des Loix, liv. xxx. c. 20, &c. The great obj-ct
of judges was to compel the one party to give,
and the other to accept the fatisfaEtion prescribed.
They multiplied regulations to this purpose, and
enforced them by grievous penalties. Leg. Lon-
gob. lib. i. tit. 9. § 34. Ib. tit. 7. § , 2. Capi-
tul. vol. i. p. 371. § 22. The person who received
a composition was obliged to ceale from all farther
hostility, and to confirm his reconciliation with the
adverse party by an oath. Leg. Longob. lib. i.
tit. 9. § 8. As an additional and more permanent
evidence of reconciliation, he was required to grant
a bond of security to the person from whom he
received a composition, absolving him from all
farther prosecution. Marculfus, and the other col-
lectors of ancient writs, have preserved several dif-
ferent forms of such bonds. Marc. lib. xi. § s.
Append. § 23. Form. Sirmondica, § 39. The
Letters of Slanes, known in the law of Scotland,
are perfectly similar to there bonds of security. By
the letters of Slanes, the heirs and relations of a
person who had been murdered, bound themselves,
in consideration of an Affytment or composition
paid to them, to forgive, " pass over, and for ever"
forget, and in oblivion inter all rancour, malice,
revenge, prejudice, grudge and resentment, that
they have or may conceive against the aggressor or
his posterity, for the crime which he had commit-
ted, and discharge him of all action, civil or cri-

mninal,

minal, against him or his estate, for now and ever.
System of Stiles by Dallas of St. Martin's, p. 862.
In the ancient form of letters of Slanes, the private
party not only forgives and forgets, but pardons
and grants remission of the crime. This pracice,
Dallas, reasoning according to the principles of
his own age, confiders as an encroachment on the
rights offovereignty, as none, fays he, could pardon
a criminal but the King. Ibid. But in early and
rude times, the prosecution, the punishment, and
the pardon of criminals, were all deeds of the
private person who was injured. Madox has pub-
li(hed two writs, one in the reign of Edward I. the
other in the reign of Edward III. by which private
persons grant a release or pardon of all trespasses,
felonies, robberies, and murders committed. For-
mul. Anglican. N°. 702, 705. In the last of these
instruments, ome regard seems to be paid to the
rights of the sovereign, for the pardon is granted
en quant que en nous eft. Even after the authority
of the magistrate is interposed in punishing crimes,
the punifhfient of criminals is long confidered
dhifly as a gratification to the resentment of the
Cprfons who have been injured. In Persia, a mur-
rer is itill delivered to the relations of the person

whom he has lain, who put him to death with their
own hands. If they refuse to accept of a um of
money as a compensation, the sovereign, absolute
as he is, cannot pardon the murderer. Voyages
de Chardin III. p. 417. edit. 1735. 4t0. Voyages
de Tavtrnier, liv. v. c. 5, o1. Among the Ara-
bians, though one of the first polished people in
the' East, the fame custom still subsists. Dclcrip.

tion

tion de l'Arabie par M. Nieubuhr, p. 28. By a
law in the kingdom of Aragon as late as the year
i 564, the puniflment of one condemned to death
cannot be mitigated but by content of the parties
who have been injured. Fueros & Obfervancias
del Reyno de Aragon, p. 204. 6.

IF, after all the engagements to cease from en-

mity, which I have mentioned, any person renewed
hostilities, and was guilty of any violence, either
towards the peroln from whom he had received a
conpofition, or towards his relations and heir,
this was deemed a most heinous crime, and punished
with extraordinary rigour. It was an a of direct
rebellion against the authority of the magistrate,
and was repressed by the interposition of all his
power. Leg. Longob. lib. i. tit. 9. § 8, 34. Capit.
vol. i. p. 371. § 22. Thus the avenging of in-
juries was taken out of private hands, a legal com-
position was established, and peace and amity were
refcored under the infpe&tion, and by the authority
of a judge. It is evident, that at the time when
the barbarians fettled in the provinces of the Ro-
man Empire, they had fixed judges established
among them with compulsive authority. Persons
vested with this character are mentioned by the
earliest historians. Du Cange, voc. yudices. The
right of territorial jurifdition was not altogether
an usurpation of the feudal barons. There is
good reason to believe, that the powerful leaders
who seized different diftrits of the countries which
they conquered, and kept poffellion of them as
allodial property, affumd at the fame time the

right

right of jurifdietion. and exercised it within their
own territories. This jurisdiCtion was supreme,
and extended to all causes. The clearest proofs of
this are produced by M. Bouquet. Le Droit pub-
lique de France eclairci, &c. tom. i. p. 206, &c.
The privilege of judging his own vaffais, appears
to have been originally a right inherent in cvtry
baron who held a fief. As far back as the archives
of nations can conduct us with any certainty, we
find the jurifdition and fief united. One of the
earliest charters to a layman which I hlavc met with,
is that of Ludovicus Pius, A. D. 8X1. And it
contains the right of territorial juritlitiion, in the
moit express and extensive terms. Capitul. vol. ii.
p. 1405. There are many charters to churches
and monasteries of a more early date, containing
grants of similar jurifdition, and prohibiting any
royal judge to enter the territories of those churches
or monaiteries, or to perform any a of judicial
authority there. Bouquet. Recueil des -liflt. torn.
iv. p.628, 631, 633. tom.v. p. 703, 710, 72,
762. Muratori has publilhed many very ancient
charters containing the fame immunities. Antiq.
Ital. Diflirt. Ixx. In most of thele deeds, the royal
judge is prohibited from exating the Freda due to
the poffielor of territorial jurifidition, which fliews
that they conflituted a valuable part of the pub-
lick revenue at that juncture. The xpence ot
obtaining a ntence in a court of juflice during
the middle ages was so considerable, that this cir-
cumllfance alone was fufficicnt to rcnd r men un-
willing to decide any contelt in judicial lrmn. It
appears from a charter in the hllllt(i'ntl century,

3 that

that the baron who had the right of juffice, re-
ceived the fifth part of the value of every fib.
je&c, the property of which was tried and deter-
mined in his court. If, after the commencement
of a law-suit, the parties terminated the contest
in an amicable manner, or by arbitration, they-
were nevertheless bound to pay the fifth part ot
the subject contetted to the court before wli:ch
the suit had been brought. Hilt. de Dauphinl,
Geneve, I722. tom. i. p. 22. Similar to this i,
a regulation in the charter of liberty granted to
the town of Friburg, A. D. 12o. If two of the
citizens fliall quarrel, and if one of them flall
complain to the superior Lord or to his judge,
and after commencing the suit, hall be privately
reconciled to his adversary; the judge, if he does
not approve of this reconciliation, may compel
him to insist in his law-suit; and all who were
present at the reconciliation shall forfeit the favour
of the superior Lord. Hifftoria Zaringo Badenfis.
Auctor. Jo. Dan. Schoepflinus. Carolir. 1765. 4t0.
vol .
v. p. 55.

WHAT was the extent of that jurifdidion which

those who held fiefs possesed originally, we can-
not now determine with certainty. It is evident
that, during the disorders which prevailed in every
kingdom of Europe, the great vassals took ad-
vantage of the feebleness of their Monarchs, and
enlarged their jurifdidtions to the utmost. As
early as the tenth century; the more powerful
barons had usurped the right of deciding all

c.iule',

causes, whether civil or criminal. They had ac-
quired the Iigh Justice as well as the Low.
Eftabl. de St. Louis, lib. i. c. 24, 25. Their
lentences were final, and there lay no appeal from
them to any superior court. Several striking in-
stances of this are colleded by Bruffel. Trait6
des Fiefs, liv. iii. c. 11, 12, 13. Not satisfied
with this, the more potent barons got their terri-
tories erected into Regalities, with almost every
royal prerogative and jurifdicion. Instances of
these were frequent in France. Bruff. ib. In Scot-
land, where the power of the feudal nobles became
exorbitant, they were very numerous. Historical
Law Tracts, vol. i. trat vi. Even in England,
though the authority of the Norman Kings cir-
cumfcribed the jurisdiction of the barons more
than in any feudal kingdom, several counties
palatine were erected, into which the King's judges
could not enter, and no writ could come in the
King's name, until it received the eal of the
cunty palatine. Spelman. Gloss. voc. Comites
Palatini; Blackflone's Commentaries on the Laws
of England, vol. iii. p. 78. These lords of rega-
lities had a right to claim or rescue their vassals
from the King's judges, if they assumed anyjurif-
diltion over them. Bruffel, ubi supra. In the
law of Scotland this privilege was termed the
right of repledging; and the frequency of it not
only interrupted the course of justice, but gave
rile to great disorders in the exercise of it. Hist.
Law Tracts, ib. Tliejurildidtion of the counties

palatine

palatine was producive of like inconveniencies in
England.

THE remedies provided by Princes against the

bad effects of these usurpations were various, and
gradually applied. Under Charlemagne and his
immediate descendants, the regal prerogative still
retained great vigour, and the Duces, Comites, and
Mifi Domninici, the former of whom were ordinary
and fixed judges, the latter extraordinary and
itinerant judges, in the different provinces of their
extensive dominions, exercised a jurifdiLtion co-
ordinate with the barons in some cafes, and fu-
perior to them in others. Du Cange, voc. Dur,
Comites & Mifi. Murat. Antiq. Dissert. viii. & ix.
But under the feeble race of Monarchs who fuc-
ceeded them, the authority of the royal judges
declined, and the barons usurped that unlimited
jurifdicion which has been described. Louis VI.
of France attempted to revive the function of the
Mii Dominici under the title of 7uges des Exempts,
but the barons were become too powerful to be:l
such an encroachment on their jurifdiAion, ani
he was obliged to defit from employing them
Henaut. Abrege Chron. tom. ii. p. 730. His
successors (as has been observed) had recourse to
expedients less alarming. The appeal de defaute
de Droit, or on account of the refusal of juflicc,
was the first which was attended with any confi-
derable effet. According to the maxims of feudal
law, if a baron had not as many vassals as enablel

hii '

him to try by their peers, the parties who offered
to plead in his court, or if he delayed or refused
to proceed in the trial, the cause might be carried,
by appeal, to the court of the superior lord of
whom the baron held, and tried there. De 1'Es-
prit des Loix, liv. xxviii. c. 28. Du Cange, voc.
defeftus 7Jtiti. The number of Peers or assessors
in the courts of Barons was frequently very con-
fiderable. It appears from a criminal trial in the
court of the viscount de Lautrec, A. D. 290,
that upwards of two hundred persons were pre-
sent, and aflifted in the trial, and voted in passing
judgment. Hist. de Langued. par D. D. De Vic
& Vaifette, tom. iv. Preuves, p. 114. But as the
right of jurifdition had been usurped by many
inconsiderable barons, they were often unable to
hold courts. This gave frequent occasion to such
appeals, and rendered the practice familiar. By
degrees, such appeals began to be taken from
the courts of the more powerful barons, and it
is evident, from a decision recorded by Bruffel,
that the royal judges were willing to give coun-
tenance to any pretext for them. Trait dtes Fiefs,
tom. i. p. 235, 261. This species of appeal had
less effect in abridging the juriliiction of the no-
bles, than the appeal on account of the injustice
of the sentence. When the feudal monarchs were
powerful, and their judges possessd extensive al-
thority, such appeals seem to have been frequent,
Capitul. vol. i.. 175, 180o; and they were made
in a manner suitable to the rudeness of a finple
age. The persons aggrieved resorted to the palace
of their fovcreign, and with outcries and loud

VOL. I. B b noifc

noise called to him for redress. Capitul. lib. iii.
c. 59. Chronic. Lawterbergienfe ap. Mencken.
Script. German. vol. ii. p. 84. b. In the king-
dom of Aragon, the appeals to the Jujfiza or
supreme judge were taken in such a form as sup.
poled the appellant to be in immediate danger of
death, or of obme violent outrage; he rushed into
the presence of the judge crying with a loud voice,
AJi, Avi, IFuerza, Fuerza, thus imploring (as it
were) the instant interposition of that supreme
judge in order to save him. Hier. Blanca Conm
ment. de rebus Aragon. ap. Script. Hispanic.
Piltorii, vol. iii. p. 753. The abolition of the
trial by combat facilitated the revival of appeals
of this kind. The effi&ts of this lubordination
which appeals eltabliflled, in introducing attention,
equity, and consistency of decision into courts or
judicature, were oon conspicuous; and almost all
causes of importance were carried to be finally
determined in the King's courts. Bruffel, torn. i.
252. Various circumftanccs which contributed
towards the introduction and frequency of fucl
appeals are enumerated De l'Efiprit de Loix, liv.
xxviii. c. 27. Nothing, however, was of such
effiet as the attention which monarchs gave to the
conffitution and dignity of their courts of juaice.
It was the ancient cuflom for the feudal monarchs
to preside themselves in their courts, and to a-
minister jusice in person. Marculf. lib. i. § 25.
Murat. Dissert. xxxi. Charlemagne, whilst he was
drefling, used to call parties into his pretence,
and having heard and confidered the fbje of
litigation, gave judgment concerning it. Egin-

3 hartus

hartus vita Caroli magni cited by Madox Hist. of
Exchequer, vol. i. p. 91. This could not fail
of rendering their courts refpetable. St. Louis,
who encouraged to the utmost the practice of
appeals, revived this ancient custom, and admi-
niffered justice in person with all the ancient fim-
plicity. " I have often seen the faint," fays
Joinville, " fit under the shade of an oak in the
wood of Vincennes, when all who had any com-
plaint, freely approached him. At other times he
gave orders to spread a carpet in a garden, and
leating himself upon it, heard the causes that
were brought before him." Hist. de St. Louis,
p. 13. edit. 1761. Princes of inferior rank, who
possessed the right of juflice, ometimes dispensed
it in person, andprefided in their tribunals. Two
instances of this occur with refpet to the Dau-
phines of Vienne. Hist. de Dauphine, tom. i.
p. 18. tom. ii. p. 257. But as Kings and Princes
could not decide every cause in person, nor bring
them all to be determined in the fame court;
they appointed Baillis, with a right ofjurifdition,
in different diftri&s of their kingdom. These
possessed powers sbmewhat similar to those of the
ancient Comites. It was towards the end of the
twelfth century, and beginning of the thirteenth,
that this office was firit instituted in France.
Bruffel, liv. ii. c. 35. When the King had a court
established in different quarters of his dominions,
this invited his fubjets to have recourse to it.
It was the private interest of the Baillis, as well as
an object of publick policy, to extend their jurif-
di&tion. They took advantage of every defe in

Bb the

the rights of the barons, and of every error in
their proceedings, to remove causes out of their
courts, and to bring them under their own cog.
nizance. There was a diftinEtion in the feudal
law, and an extremely ancient one, between the
highjuflice and the low. Capitul. 3. A. D. 812.
§ 4. A. D. 815. § 3. Eftabl. de St. Louis, liv. i.
c. 40. Many barons possessed the latter jurif-
diaEion who had no title to the former. The for-
mer included the right of trying crimes of every
kind, even the highest; the latter was confined to
petty trespasses. This furnished endless pretexts
for obftruaing, restraining, and reviewing the pro-
ceedings in the baron courts. Ordon. ii. 457.
§ 25. 458. § 29.- A regulation of greater im-
portance ucceeded the institution of Baillis. The
King's fpreme court or parliament was rendered
fixed as to the place, and constant as to the time
of its meetings. In France, as well as in the other
feudal kingdoms, the King's court of justice was
originally ambulatory, followed the person of the
monarch, and was held only during ome of the
great fcftivals. Philip Augustus, A. D. 1305,
rendered it edentary at Paris, and continued its
terms during the greater part of the year. Pas-
quier Recherches, liv. ii. c. 2 and 3, &c. Ordon.
tom. i p. 366. § 62. He and his successors vested
cxtcnfivc powers in that court; they granted the
members of it several privileges and diftindions
which it would be tedious to enumerate. Pas-
quier, ib. Velly hil. de France, tom. vii. p. 307.
Persons eminent for integrity and skill in law were
appointed judges there. lb. By degrees the final

2 decision

decision of all causes of importance was brought
into the parliament of Paris, and the other par.
liaments which administered junlice in the King's
name, in different provinces of the kingdom.
This jurifdlition, however, the parliament of Paris
acquired very slowly, and the great vassals of the
crown made violent efforts in order to obstruct
the attempts of this parliament to extend its au-
thority. Towards the close of the thirteenth cen-
tury, 1Philip the Fair was obliged to prohlibit his
parliament from taking cognizance of certain
appeals brought into it from the courts of the
Count of Bretagne, and to recogniz: his right of
supreme and final jurifdiAion. Memoires pour
fervir de Prcuves 'a l'-ifoire de rctagne par
Morice, tom. i. p. 1037. 1074. Charles VI. at
the end of the following century was obliged to
confirm the rights of the Dukes of Bretagne in
more ample form. Ibid. torn. ii. p. 5So, 581.
So violent was the opposition of the barons to
this right of appeal which they confidered as fatal
to their privileges and power, that the authors of
the Encyclopedie have mentioned ceveral instances
in which barons put to death, or mutilated such
persons as ventured to appeal from the sentences
pronounced in their courts, to the parliament of
Paris, tom. xii. Art. Parlement, p. 25.

THE progress of jurifdicion in the other feudal

kingdoms was in a great measure imilar to that
which we have traced in France. In England,
the territoril jurisdiction of the barons was both
ancient and extensive. Leg. Edw. Cons. N°. 5

B b 3 .and

and 9. After the Norman conqueit it became
more ftritly feudal; and it is evident from faLfs re-
corded in the Englih history, as well as from the
institution of Counties Palatine, which I have al-
ready mentioned, that the usurpations of the nobles
in England were not inferior to those of their con-
temporaries on the continent. The fame expedi-
ents were employed to circumscribe or abolish thole
dangerous jurifdiftions. Wiiliam the Conqueror
established a constant court in the hall of his pa-
lace; from which the four courts now entrufled
with the administration ofjuftice in England took
their rife. Henry II. divided his kingdom into
fix circuits, and sent itinerant judges to hold their
courts in them at fiated seasons. Blackstone's Com-
mentaries on the Laws of England, vol. iii. 57.
Justices of peace were appointed in every county
by subsequent monarchs; to whose jurifdidion the
people gradually had recourse in many civil causes.
The privileges of the Counties Palatine were gra-
dually limited; with respect to some points they
were abolished; and the administration of justice
was brought into the King's courts, or before
judges of his appointment. The several steps
taken for this purpose are enumerated in Dalrym.
pie's History of Feudal Property, chap. vii.

IN Scotland the usurpations of the nobility were

more exorbitant than in any other feudal king-
dom. The progress of their encroachments, and
the methods taken by the crown to limit or abolilh
their territorial and independent jurifdidions, both
which I had occasion to confider and explain in

a former

a former work, differed very little from those of
which I have now given the detail. History of
Scotland, vol. i. p. 45.

I SHOULD perplex myself and my readers in the

labyrinth of German jurisprudence, were I to
attempt to delineate the progress of jurifdiaion in
the Empire, with a minute accuracy. It is fuffi.
cient to observe, that the authority which the
Aulick council and Imperial chamber now possess,
took its rife from the fame abuse of territorial
jurifdicion, and was acquired in the fame manner
that the royal courts attained influence in other
countries. All the important faas with refped
to both these particulars, may be found in Phil.
Datt, de pace publica Imperil, lib. iv. The ca-
pital articles are pointed out in Pfeffel Abrege
de l'Hiftoire & Droit publique d'Allemagne,
p. 556, 581; and in Traite du Droit publique
de 'Empire par M. le Coq. de Villeray. The two
last treatises are of great authority, having been
composed under the eye of M. Schoepflin of
Strafburg, one of the ablest publick lawyers in
Germany.

NOTE XXIV. SECT. I. p. 78. [AA].

IT is not easy to fix with precision the period at

which Ecclefiafticks firt began to claim exemp-
tion from the civil jurisdiction. It is certain, that
during the early and purest ages of the church,
they pretended to no such immunity. The au-

B b 4 thority

thority of the civil magistrate extended to all per-
fens, and to all causes. This fad has not only
been clearly established by Protestant authors, but
is admitted by many Roman Catholicks of emi.
nence, and particularly by the writers in defence
of the liberties of the Gallican church. There
are several original papers published by Miratori,
which flew that, in the ninth and tenth centuries,
causes of the greatest importance relating to eccle-
fiafticks were still determined by civil judges.
Antiq. Ital. vol. v. diffcrt. lxx. Proofs of this
are produced likewise by M. Houard, Anciennes
Loix des Francois, &c. vol. i. p. 209. Eccle.
iiafticks did not flake off all at once their sub-
jection to civil courts. This privilege, like their
other usurpations, was gained slowly, and ftep by
flcp. This exemption seems at firfi to have been
merely an at of complaisance, flowing from vene-
ration for their character. Thus from a charter
of Charlemagne in favour of the church of Mans,
A. D. 796, to which M. l'Abbe de Soy refers in
his Notice de Diplomes, tom. i. p. 201, that
monarch dircs his judges, if any difference hould
aric betwccn the adminilrators of the revenues
of that church and any person whatever, not to
uiimmoii the adninintators to appear in mallo
publico; but firll of all to meet with them, and
to endeavour to accommodate the difference in an
amicable manner. This indulgence was in pro,
cess of time improved into a legal exemption;
which was founded on the fame superstitious refpe&
of the laity for the clerical clhara:ter and function.

A rq

A remarkable initance of this occurs in a charter
of Frederick Barbarossa, A. D. 1 72, to the mo-
naftery of Altenburg. He grants them judicium
non tantum fanguinolentis plage, fed vite &
mortis; he prohibits any of the royal judges from
dilturbing their jurifdition; and the reason which
he gives for this ample concession is, nam quorum,
ex Dci gratia, ratione divini minifterii onus leve
eif, & jugum suave; nos penitus nolumus illius
oppreffionis contumelia, vel manu Laica fatigari.
Mencken. Script. rer. Germ. vol. iii. p. 1067.

IT is not necessary for illustrating what is con-

tained in the text, that I flould describe the manner
in which the code of the canon law was compiled,
and shew that the doEtrines in it most favourable
to the power of the clergy, are founded on igno-
rance, or supported by fraud and forgery. The
reader will find a full account of these in Gerard.
Van Maftricht, Hiftoria Juris Ecclefiaftici, & in
Science de Government par M. Real, tom. vii.
c. 1. & 3. § 2, 3, &c. The history of the pro-
grefs and extent of ecclesiastical jurifdiion, with
an account of the arts which the clergy employed
in order to draw causes of every kind into the
spiritual courts, is no less curious, and would
throw great light upon many of the customs and
institutions of the dark ages; but it is likewise
foreign from the present iubje&. Du Cange in
his Glossary, voc. Curia Chrijfianitalis, has col-
leted most of the causes with refpet to which
the clergy arrogated an exclusive jurifdition, and

refers

refers to the authors, or original papers, which
confirm his observations. Giannone in his Civil
History of Naples, lib. xix. § 3. has ranged these
under proper heads, and scrutinizes the preten-
sions of the church with his usual bolnefs and
discernment. M. Fleury observes, that the clergy
multiplied the pretexts for extending the authority
of the spiritual courts, at such a rate, that it was
in their power to withdraw every person and every
cause from the jurifdi&ion of the civil magistrate.
Hist. Eccles. tom. xix. Disc. Prelim. 16. But
how ill founded soever the jurifdiition of the
clergy may be, or whatever might be the abuses
to which their manner of exercising it gave rife,
the principles and forms of their jurisprudence
were far more perfect than that which was known
in the civil courts. It is probable that ecclefi-
afticks never submitted, during any period of the
middle ages, to the laws contained in the codes
of the barbarous nations, but were governed
entirely by the Roman law. They regulated all
their transactions by such of its maxims as were
preserved by tradition, or were contained in the
Theodosian code, and other books extant among
them. This we learn from a cuflom which pre-
vailed universally in those ages. Every person was
permitted to chufe among the various codes of
laws then in force, that to which he was willing
to conform. In any transaction of importance, it
was usual for the persons contracting to mention
the law to which they submitted, that it might be
known how any controversy that ihould arise be-

tweCCI

tween them was to be decided. Innumerable
proofs of this occur in the charters of the middle
ages. But the clergy confidered it as such a valu-
able privilege of their order to be governed by
the Roman law, that when any person entered into
holy orders, it was usual for him to renounce the
laws to which he had been formerly subjet, and
to declare that he now submitted to the Roman
law. Conftat me Johannem clericum, filium quon-
dam Verandi, qui profeffus fum, ex natione mea,
lege vivere Langobardorum, fed tamen, pro ho-
nore ecclefiaftico, lege nunc videor vivere Romana.
Charta, A. D. 1072. Farulfus presbyter qui pro-
feffus fum, more facerdotii mei, lege vivere Ro-
mana. Charta, A. D. 1075. Muratori Antichita
Eftenfi. vol. i. p. 78. See likewise Houard Anci.
ennes Loix des Franiois, &c. vol. i. p. 203.

THE code of the canon law began to be com-

piled early in the ninth century. Mem. de l'Acad.
des Infcript. tom. xviii. p. 346, &c. It was above
two centuries after that before any collecion was
made of those customs, which were the rule of
judgment in the courts of the barons. Spiritual
judges decided, of course, according to written and
known laws; Lay judges, left without any fixed
guide, were directed by loose traditionary cultoms.
But betides this general advantage of the canon
law, its forms and principles were more consonant
to realbn, and more favourable to the equitable
decision of every point in controversy, than those
which prevailed in lay courts. It appears from Notes

XXI.

XXI. and XXII. concerning private wars, and the
trial by combat, that the whole spirit of ecclefi-
afticaljurifprudence was adverse to these fangui-
nary cutoms which were deftruCive of justice;
and the whole force of ecclefialiical authority was
exerted to abolish tem, and to substitute trials by
law and evidence in their room. Almost all the
forms in lay courts which contribute to establish,
and continue to preserve order in judicial proceed-
ings, are borrowtd from the canon law. Fleury
Intit. du droit canon. part iii. c. 6. p. 52. St.
Louis in his Eilablifemens confirms many of his
new regulations concerning property, and the ad-
ministration of jutfice, by the authority of the
canon law, frun wh.ich he borrowed them. Thus,
for instance, the first hint of attaching moveables
for the recovery of a debt, was taken from the
canon law. iLlibl. liv. ii. c. 21. and 40. And
likewile the cellto bonorum, by a person who was
insolvent. Ibid. In the fame manner, he efta-
blifhed new regulations with refpeat to the effets
of persons dying intestate, liv. i. c. 89. These
and many other salutary regulations, the Cano-
nifts borrowed from the Roman law. Many other
examples might be produced of more perfect ju-
rifprudence in the canon law than was known in
lay courts. For that reason it was deemed an high
privilege to be fubje& to ecclesiastical jurisdiction.
Among the many immunities, by which men were
allured to engage in the dangerous expeditions for
the recovery of the Holy Land, one of the mofl:
considerable was the declaring such as took the

Crofa

Cross to be subjet only to the spiritual courts. See
Note XIII. and Du Cange, voc. crucis privilegia.

NOTE XXV. SECT.I. p. 80. [BB].
THE rapidity with which the knowledge and
tudy of the Roman law spread over Europe, is
amazing. The copy of the Panders was found
at Amalphi, A. D. 3 7. Irnerius opened a col-
lege of civil law at Bologna a few years after.
Giann. Hist. book xi. c. 2. It began to be taught
as a part of academical learning in different parts
of France before the middle of the century. Vac-
carius gave lectures on the civil law at Oxford, as
early as the year I147. A regular system of feu-
dal law, formed plainly in imitation of the Ro-
man code, was composed by two Milanese law-
yers about the year 50. Gratian publithed the
code of canon law, with large additions and emen-
dations, about the fame time. The earliest col-
leEtion of those customs, which served as the rules
of decision in the courts of justice, is the /jlffi s de
Jerusalem. They were compiled, as the preamble
informs us, in the year 1099, and are called Jus
Confuetudinarium quo regebatur rgnum orientale.
Willerm. Tyr. lib. xix. c. 2. But peculiar circum-
stances gave occasion to this early compilation.
The victorious Crusaders fi:ttled as a colony in a
foreign country, and adventurers from all the dif-
ferent nations of Europe composed this new Lfo
ciety. It was necessary on that account to accr-
tain the laws and cuftonvs which were to regulate
the tranfaaions ofbufinefs, and the adminillration
pfjuitice among them. But in no country of Eu-

1*t)C

rope was there, at that time, any colle&ion of
customs, nor had any attempt been made to render
law fixed. The first undertaking of that kind was
by Glanville, Lord Chief Justice of England, in
his Tra&atus de Legibus & Confuetudinibus An-
gliae, composed about the year 181. The Re-
giam Majeftatem in Scotland, ascribed to David I.
seems to be an imitation, and a servile one of
Glanville. Several Scottish Antiquaries, under
the influence of that pious credulity, which dif-
poses men to assent, without hesitation, to what-
ever they deem for the honour of their native
country, contend zealously that the Regiam Maje-
ftatem is a producion prior to the treatise of Glan-
ville; and have brought themselves to believe
that a nation in a superior state of improvement
borrowed its laws and institutions, from one con-
fiderably less advanced in its political progress.
The internal evidence (were it my province to ex-
amine it) by which this theory might be refuted,
is, in my opinion, decisive. The external circum-
flances which have leduced Scottifhi authors into
this mistake, have ben explained with so much
precision and candour by Sir David Dalrymple, in
his Examination of fonie of the arguments for the
high antiquity of Regia m Majeftatem, Edin. 1769,
4to, that it is to be h oped the controversy will
not be again revived. Pierre de Fontaines, who
tells us that he was thtl first who had attempted
such a work in France, composed his Confeil,
which contains an accin nt of the customs of
the country of Verman lois, in the reign of

St.

St. Louis, which began A. D. 1226. Beauma-
noir, the author of the Couftumes de Beauvoifis,
lived about the fame time. The Eftabliffemens
of St. Louis, containing a large collection of
the customs which prevailed within the royal do-
mains, were published by the authority of that
monarch. As soon as men became acquainted
with the advantages of having written customs and
laws to which they could have recourse on every
occasion, the method of collecting them became
common. Charles VII. of France, by an ordo-
nance, A. D. 14;3, appointed the customary laws
in every province of France to be colleed and
arranged. Velley and Villaret. Hiftoire, tom. xvi.
p. x 13. His successor, Louis XI. renewed the
injunction. But this salutary undertaking hath
never been fully executed, and the French jurif-
prudence remains more obscure and uncertain than
if these prudent regulations of their monarchs had
taken effet. A practice was established in the
middle ages, which affords the clearest proof that
judges, while they had no other rule to dire&
their decrees but unwritten and traditionary cuf-
toms, were often at a loss how to find out the faEts
and principles, according to which they were bound
to decide. They were obliged in dubious cafes
to call a certain number of old men, and to lay'
the cafe before them, that they might inform them
what was the practice or custom with regard to the
point. This was called Enquejie par tourbe. Du
Cange, voc. Turba. The effects of the revival of
the Roman jurisprudence have been explained by
M. de Montcfquieu, liv. xxviii. c. 42, and by Mr.

Humer

Hume, H-lit. of England, vol. ii. p. 441. I hayd
adopted many of their ideas. Who can pretend to
review any subjea which such writers have confider.
ed, without receiving from them light and informa-
tion ? At the fame time I am convinced that the
knowledge of the Roman law was not so entirely
loft in Europe during the middle ages, as is com-
monly believed. My fubjeEt does not require me
to examine this point. Many striking facts with
regard to it are collected by Donato Antonio
d'Afti Dall' Ufo e autorita della ragione civile
nelle provincie dell' Imperio Occidentale. Nap,
1751. 2 vol. 8vo.

THAT the civil law is intimately cohneced with

the municipal jurisprudence in several countries of
Europe, is a fat so well known, that it needs no
illustration. Even in England, where the common
law is supposed to form a system perfectly diftinft
from the Roman code, and although such as ap-
ply in that country to the fludy of the common law
boast of this diftintion with ome degree of affeta-
tion, it is evident that many of the ideas and maxims
of the civil law are incorporated into the Englilh ju-
rifprudence. This is well illustrated by the inge-
nious and learned author of Observations on the
Statutes, chiefly the more ancient. 2d edit. p. 66.

NOTE XXVI. SECT. I. p. 82. [CC],

TIIE whole history of the middle ages makes

it evident, that war was the sole profeflion of gen-
tlemen, and the only objct attended to in their

education,

education. Even after some change in manners
began to take place, and the civil arts of licf had
acquired some reputation, the ancient idca;s with
refpe to the accompliihments neceli'.r; for a per-
son of noble birth, continued long; in force. In
the Memoires de Fleuranges, p. 9, &c. we have an
account of the youthful exercises a:d ocupatons
of Francis I. and they are altogether maril 1 and
athletic. That father of letters owed his relilh for
them, not to education, but to his own good fernfe,
and good taste. The manners of the fupcrior order
of ecclesiastics during the mililc agts, furnifl the
fironge'f proof that the dillintion of profeflions
was hardly known in Europe. The functions and
character of the clergy are obviously very diflier-
ent from those of laymen ; and among the inferior
orders of churchmen, this conllituted a difina
character separate from that of other citizens. ut
the dignified ecclesiastics, who were frequently of
noble birth, were above such a diltint:(:e ; they
retained the idea of what belonged to them as gen-
tlemen, and in spite of the decrees of Popes, or
the canons of councils, they bore arms, led their
vafials to the field, and fought at their head in
battle. Among them the prieflhood was Icarcely
a separate profefTion; the military accomplifl-
ments which they thought cilntial to tlhem as
gentlemen, were cultivated; the theological ci-
ence, and pacific virtues suitable to their spiritual
function, were negleted and dcfliilfed.

As soon as the science of law became a labo-
rious study, and the pra.lice of it a epauate pro-

VOL. I. C c fclliuIn,

feflion, such as rose to eminence in it obtained
honours formerly appropriated to soldiers. Knight-
hood was the molt illustrious mark of diftinaion
during several ages, and conferred privileges towhich
rank or birth alone were not entitled. To this
high dignity perlons eminent for their knowledge
of law were advanced, and by that, were placed
on a level with those whom their military talents
had rendered conspicuous. Miles Jn/uti:', Mi/es
Literatus became common titles. Matthew Paris
mentions such knights as early as A. D. 1251. If
a judge attained a certain rank in the courts f
jutice, that alone gave him a right to the honour
of knighthood. I'afquier Recherches, liv. xi. c.
I 6. p. o. Dissertations hifloriques fur la Che-
valerie par Honorc dcl Sainte Marie, p. 164, &c.
A profellion that led to offices, which ennobled
fulch as held them, grew into credit, and the peo-
ple of Europe became accultomed to fee men rifie
tu eminence by civil as well as military talents.

NOTE XXVII. SECT. I. p. 86. [DD].
TIIE chief intention of these notes, was to bring

at once under the view of my readers, filch fatsi
and circumstances as tend to illufirate or conlirm
what is contained in that part of the history to
which they refer. When these lay scattercd ini
many different authors, and were taken from bIookl.
not generally known, or which it would be dlil-
agreeable to consult, I thought it would be of ad-
vantage to colle' them together. But whlin every
thing necefiary for the proof or illuitration of my
narrative or rcalonings may be found in any one

book

book which is generally known, or deserves to be
lo, I hall satisfy myself with referring to it. This
is the cafe with rfpet to Chivalry. Almost every
fact which I have mentioned in the text, together
with many other curious and inftruEtive particu-
lars concerning this singular inilitution, may be
found in Memoires fur l'ancienne Chevalerie con-
fideree comme un eftabliffcment politique & mili.
taire, par M. de la Curne de St. Palaye.

NOTE XXVIII. SECT. III. p. 91. [EE].

THE subject of my enquiries dos not call me

to write a history of the progress of science. The
facts and observations which I have produced, are
sufficient to illustrate the effeccts of its progress
upon manners and the irate of society. While
science was altogether extinat in the weilern parts
of Europe, it was cultivated in Conitantinople and
other parts of the Grecian Empire. But the sub-
tile genius of the Greeks turned almost entirely to
theological disputation. The Latins borrowed
that spirit from them, and many of the controvcr-
fies which still occupy, and divide theologians,
took their rile among the Greeks, from whom the
other Europeans derived a considerable part of
their knowledge. See the testimony of Eneas
Sylvius ap. Conringium de antiq. academicis, p. 43.
lifioire literaire de France, tom. vii. p. 113, &c.
tom. i. p. I51, &c. Soon after the Empire of
the Caliphs was cftablithed in the East, some
illufirious princes aroce among them, who encou-
raged science. But when the Arabians turned their

C c 2 attention

attention to the literature cultivated by the ancient
Greeks and Romans, the chaste and correct taste of
their works of genius appeared frigid and unani.
mared to a people of a more warm imagination.
It was impossible for them to admire the poets and
historians of Athens, or of Rome. But they were
fcnfible of the merit of their philosophers. The
operations of the intellect are more fixed and uni-
form than those of the fancy or taste. Truth
makes an imprefflon nearly the fame in every
place; the ideas of what is beautiful, elegant, or
sublime, vary in different climates. The Arabi.
ans, though they negle&ted Homer, translated the
most eminent of the Greek philosophers into their
own language; and, guided by their precepts and
ditcoveries, applied themselves with great ardour
to the itudy of geometry, atronomy, medicine,
dialectics, and metaphysics. In the three former
they made considerable and useful improvements,
which have contributed not a little to advance
th:fet sciences to that high degree of perfection
which they have attained. In the two latter, they
cholf Arillotle for their guide, and refining on the
Ifubltle and diltinguifhing spirit which characterizes
his philolophy, they rendered it altogether frivo-
lous or unintelligible. The schools eftabliflied
in the allt for teaching and cultivating thef fci-
cnces, were in high reputation. They commnuni-
cated their love of science to their countrymen,
who conquered Asia and Spain; and the schools
inltituted there were little inferior in fame to thoe
in the E;ita. Many of the perolns who diflin-
guifl;ed thcmenlvcs by their proficiency i4 cicnce

in

in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, were edu-
cated among the Arabians. Bruckerus collects
many instances of this, Hiftor. Philof. v. iii. p 68 ,
&c. Almost all the men eminent for science du-
ring several centuries, were infltruced in the philo-
sophy of the Arabians. The firRf knowledge of
the Arif;otelian philolbphy in the middle aes,
was acquired by tranflatio;s of his works out of
the Arabick. The Arabian commentators were
deemed the moit filful and authentic guides in
the study of his system. Conring. antiq. acad.
Diff. iii. p. 95, &c. Supplem. p. 241, &c. Mlurat.
antiquit. tal. vol. iii. p. 932, &c. From them
the Schoolmen derived the genius and principles
of tleir philolbphy, which contributed ol much
to retard the progress of true iciencc.

THE etablifhment of Colleges or Universities

is a remarkable x"ra in literary hifiory. The
schools in cathedrals and monasteries confined
themselves chiefly to the teaching of grammar.
There were only one r two nmaiers empiioyed in
that office. But in colleges, protcllors were ap-
pointed to teach all the different parts of lcicnce.
The course or order of education was fixed. lhe
time that ought to be allotted to the tudy of each
science was aicertained. A regular form of trying
the proficiency of lludents was prescribed; and
academical titles and honours were conferred on
ifch as acquitted themfelvcs witl approbation.
A good account of the origin and nature of tliele
is given by Seb. Bacmeilterus Antiquitates Rollo.
chienfes, live, Hiltoria Urbis & Academix Roftoch.

C c 3 a).

ap. Monumenta inedita Rer. Germ. per E. J. de
'Weftphalen, vol. iii. p. 78i. Lips. 1743. The
first obscure mention of these academical degrees
in the University of Paris (from which the other
universities in Europe have borrowed most of their
cufoms and inftirutions) occurs A. D. 1215.
Crevier hist. de l'univ. de Paris, tom. i. p. 296,
&c. They were completely established A. D. 123 1.
lb. 248. It is unnecessary to enumerate the several
privileges to which batchelors, maffers, and doc-
tors were entitled. One circumflance is sufficient
to demontrate the high degree of estimation in
which they were held. Dotors in the ditlerent
faculties contended with knights for precedence,
and the dispute was terminated in many inflances
by advancing the former to the dignity of knight-
hood, the high prerogatives of which I have
mentioned. It was even aerted, that a docor
had a right to that title without creation. Bar-
tolus taught- dodorem aulircr regcntem in
jure civili per decennium effici militem ipso faco,
Honore de St. Marie Difiert. p. 165. This was
called Chevalerie de lectures, and the perbons ad-
vanced to that dignity, milites Clerici. These new
establishments for education, together with the
extraordinary honours conferred on learned men,
greatly encreafed the number of scholars. In the
year 1262, there were ten thousand fcldents in
the university of Bologna; and it appears from
the hifory of that university, that law was the
only science taught in it at that time. In the year
1340, there were thirty thousand in the university

of

of Oxford. Speed's Chron. ap. Anderson's Chro.
nol. Dedusion of Commerce,'vol. i p. 72. In
the fame century, ten thousand persons voted in
a queltion agitated in the university of Paris; and
as graduates alone were admitted to that privilege,
the number of fl-udcnts mult have been vastly
great. Velly HIift. dc France, tom. xi. p. 147.
There were indeed ew universities in Europe at
that time; but such a number of iludents may
nevertheless be produced as a proof of the extra-
ordinary ardour with wlich men turned to the
study of science in thole ages; it shows likewise
that they al;cadiy be.gan to confider other proief-
sions than that cf a fuldier as honourable and useful.

NOTE XXIX. SECT. I. p. 93. [FS].

THEE great variety of fubjets which I have

endeavoured to illustrate, and the extent of this
upon which I now enter, will jultify my adopting
the words of IM. de Montcf uieu, when he begins
to treat of comnmerce. " T'he fubijct which fol-

lows would require to be difcufltd more at

" large; but the nature of this work does not
"permit it. I winP to glide on a tranquil fiream;
" but I am hurried along by a torrent."

MANY proofs occur in history of the little inter-

courle between nations during the middle ages.
Towards the clofl of the tcnth century, Count
Bouchard intending to found a monastery at St.
Maur tlds FoTffs, near Paris, applied to an abbot

Cc 4 of

of Clugny in Burgundy, famous for his fan'tity,
intreating hlim to ccnduct the monks thither. The
language in which he addrcffed that holy man is
singular: He tells him, that he had undertaken
the labour of such a great journey; that he was
fatigued with the length of it, therefore hoped to
obtain his request, and that his journey into ifc!h
a distant country should not be in vain. The an-
fwer of the abbot is still more extraordinary: -I"
rcefiifed to comply with his desire, as it would e
extrenmey fatiguing to go along with him into :
strange anJl unknown region. Vita Burcharii
venerabilis Comitis ap. Bouquet lec. des Hil.
vol. x. p. 351. Even so late as the beginning or
the twelfth century, the monks of Ferricres in the
diocese of Sens did not know that there was such
a city as Tournay in Slanders; and the monks
of St. Martin of Tournay were equally unac-
quainted with the situation of Ferrieres. A tranf-
action in which they were both concerned, made
it necessary fr them to have some intercourse.
The mutual interefl: of both monafieries prompted
each to find out the ituation of the other. After
a long liarch, which is particularly described, tile
dil:covery was made by accident. Herimannus
Abbas de Rettauratione St. Martini Tornaceniis
ap. Dacher. Spicel. vol. xii. p. 400. The igno-
rance of the middle ages with rp'ct to the itua-
tion and gography of remote countries was fiill
more remarkable. The most ancient geographical
chart which now remains as a monument of the
tate of that science in Europe during the middle

ages,

ages, is found in a manuscript of the Chronique
de St. Denys. Ti.ere the three parts of the earth
then known are so represented, that Jerulalem is
placed in the middle of the globe, and Alexandria
appears to be as near to it as Nazareth erem. de
I'Acad. des Belles Lertres, tom. xvi. p. 185.
There fcem to have been no inns or houses of
entertainment for the reception of travellers during
the middle ages. Murat. Antiq. Iral. vl iii.
p. 581, &c. This is a proof of the liitle inter-
course which took place between different nations.
Amonng people whofc manners are limplc, and
who are seldom visited by firangers, holpitality is
a virtue of the first rank This duty of hospitality
was so nec iffary in that ifate of society wh:ll took
place during the middle ages, rat it was not
confidered as one of tho!e virtues which men may
praCtise or not, according to the temper of their
minds, and the generosity of their hearts. Hof-
pitality was enforced by itatutcs, and fiich as
neglcaed this duty were liable to puniflmcnt.
Quicunque hofpiti venienti lecum, aut tcuin
negaverit, trium lolidorum inlatione multetur,
Leg. Burgund. tit. xxxviii. § i. Si uis homini
aliquo prgcnti in itinere manuic'iem vctavcrit
fexaginta folidos componat in publico Capitul.
lib. vi. § 82. This increali of the penalty, at a
period lo long after that in which the laws of the
Burgundians were published, and when the state
of society was much improved, is very remark-
able. Other laws of the fame purport are col.
leated by Jo. Fred. Polac. Syllema J urilprud. ( er-

imanica;,

manicas, Lips. 1733. p. 75. The laws of the
Slavi were more rigorous than any that he men-
tions; they ordained, " that the movables of an
inhospitable person should be confiscated, and his
house burnt. They were even lb solicitous for
the entertainment of firangers, that they permitted
the landlord to steal for the support of his guest."
Quod noEtu furatus fueris, cras appone, hofpiti-
bus. Rerum Mecleburgicar. lib. viii. a Mat. Jo.
Bechr. Lips. 1751. p. 50. In consequence of
these laws, or of that state of society which made
it proper to enact them, hospitality abounded
while the intercourse among men was inconfider-
able, and secured the firanger a kind reception
under every roof where he chose to take shelter.
This, too, proves clearly, that the intcrcourfe
among men was rare, for as soon as this increased,
what was a pleasure became a burden, and the
entertaining of travellers was converted into a
branch of commerce.

BUT the laws of the middle ages afford a proof

still more convincing of the small intercourse be-
tween diffierent nations. The genius of the Feudal
system, as well as the spirit of jealousy which
always accompanies ignorance, concurred in dii-
couraging strangers from fettling in any country.
If a person removed from one province in a king-
dom to another, he was bound within a year and
day to acknowledge himself the vasal of the
baron in whose estate he fettled if he negleced

to

to do so, he became liable to a penalty; and if
at his death he neglected to leave a certain legacy
to the baron within whose territories he resided,
all his goods were conficfated. The hardships
impoied on foreigners fettling in a strange country,
were still more intolerable. In more early times,
the superior lord of any territory in which a so-
reigner fettled, might seize his pcrfon, and reduce
him to servitude. Very flriking instances of this
occur in the history of the middle ages. The
cruel depredations of the Normans in the ninth
century, obliged many inhabitants of the maritime
provinces of France to fly into the interior parts
of the kingdom. But instead of being received
with that humanity to which their wretched con-
dition entitled them, they were reduced to a fate
of ervitude. Both the civil and ecclefiaflical
powers found it necessary to interpose, in order to
put a flop to this barbarous practice. Potgiefser.
dc Statu Servor. lib. i. c. i. § 6. In other coun-
tries, the laws permitted the inhabitants of the
maritime provinces to reduce such as were hip-
wrecked on their coast to servitude. Ibid. § 17.
This barbarous custom prevailed in many countries
of Europe. The practice of leizing the goods of'
persons who had been shipwrecked, and of con-
fifcating them as the property of the lord on whose
manor they were thrown, seems to have been
univcrfal. De Wcllphalen Monum. inedita Rer.
Germ. vol. iv. p. 907, &c. et Du Cange, voc.
Laganum, Beehr. Rer. Mecleb. lib. p. 512. Among
the ;lacilet Weclsl, three forts of persons, a mad-

man,

man, a ranger, and a leper, might be killed with
impunity. Leges Hoel Dda, quoted in Obfervat.
on the Statutes, chiefly the more ancient, p. 22.
M. de Lauriere produces several ancient deeds
which prove that in different provinces of France,
itrangers became the ilaves of the lord on whose
lands they fettled. Gloffaire du Droit FranCois,
Art. ubaine, p. 92. Beaumanoir fays, " that
there are several places in France, in which if a
stranger fixes his residence for a year and day, he
becomes the slave of the lord of the manor." Couf.
de Beauv. ch. 45. p. 254. As a practice so con-
trary to humanity could not subsist, the superior
lords found it necessary to reft satisfied with levy-
ing certain annual taxes from aliens, or imposing
upon them some extraordinary duties or services.
But when any tranger died, he could not convey
his effects by will; and all his real as well as
personal etate fell to the King, or to the lord of
the barony, to the exclusion of his natural heirs.
This is termed in France Droit d'Aubaine. Pref.
de Laurier. Ordon. tom. i. p. 15. Bruffel. tom. ii.
p. 944. Du Cange, voc. Albani. Pafquier Recher-
ches, p. 367. This pracice of confiscating the
effects of 1trangers upon their death was very an-
cient. It is mentioned, though very obscurely,
in a law of Charlemagne, A. D. 813. Capitul.
Baluz. p. 507. § 5. Not only persons who were
born in a foreign country were fubjeft to the
Droit d'Aubaine, but in some countries such as
removed from one diocese to another, or from the
lands of one baron to another. Bruffel. vol. ii.

P. 947,

p. 97, 949. It is hardly possible to conceive
any law more unfavourable to the intercourse be-
tween nations. Something similar to it, however,
may be found in the ancient laws of every king-
dom in Europe. With respect to Italy, fee Murat.
Ant. vol. ii. p. 14. It is no finall disgrace to the
French jurisprudence, that this barbarous, inhof-
pitable cuflom, should still remain in a nation so
highly civilized.

THE confusion and outrage which abounded

under a feeble form of government, incapable of
framing or execu:ing salutary laws, rendered the
communication between the different provinces
of the fame kingdom extremely dangerous. It
appears from a letter of Lupus, abbot of Ser-
rieres, in the ninth century, that the highways
were so much infeRed by banditti, that it was
necessary for travellers to form themselves into
companies or caravans, that they might be safe
from the assaults of robbers. Bouquet Recueil
des Hist. vol. vii. p. 55. The numerous regula-
tions published by Charles the Bald in the fame
century, discover the frequency of thelie dilbrders;
and such as of violence were become to con-
mon, that by many they were hardly confidercd
as criminal. For this reason the inferior jLidges
called Centenarii were required to take an octh,
that they would neither commit any robbery them-
selves, nor protect such as were guilty of that
crime. Capitil. edit. Baklz. vol. ii. p. 63, 68.
The historians of the inth and tenth centuries

2 give

give pathetic descriptions of these disorders. Some
remarkable passages to this purpose are collcaeed
by Mat. Jo. Beerh. Rer. Mecleb. lib. viii. p. 603.
They became so frequent and audacious, that the
authority of the civil magistrate was unable to
repress them. The ecclesiastical jurisdiction was
called in to aid it. Councils were held with great
solemnity, the bodies of the faints were brought
thither, and in presence of their licred reliqucs,
anathemas were denounced against robbers, andl
other violators of the publick peace. Bouquet
Recueil des Hist. tom. x. p. 360, 431, 536. One
of these forms of excommunication iued A. D.
988, is still preserved, and is so singular, and
compoed with eloquence of ibch a peculiar kind,
that it will not perhaps be deemed unworthy of a
place here. After the usual introducion, and
mentioning the outrage which gave occasion to
the anathema, it runs thus; " Obtenebrefcant oculi
veflri, qui concupiverunt; arefcant manus, que
rapuerunt; debilitentur omnia membra, quxm ad
juverunt. Semper laboretis, nec requiem invc-
niatis, fructuque veftri laboris privemini. Formi-
detis, & paveatis, facie perfequentis, & non
perfequentis hoftis, ut tabefcendo deficiatis. Sit
portio veftra cum Juda traditore Pomini, in terra
mortis et tenebrarum; donec corda veftra ad lia-
tisfationem plenam convertantur.- Ne celicnt
a vobis haE maledidiones, fcelerum veftrorum per-
fecutrices, quamdiu permanebitis in peccato per-
vafionis. Amen, Fiat, Fiat." Bouquet. Ib. p. 5 7.

3 NOTE

NOTE XXX. SECT. I. p. 98. [GG].
WITH refpet to the progress of commerce

which I have described, p. 93, &c. it may be ob-
served that the Italian states carried on fomne com-
merce with the cities of the Greek empire, as
early as the age of Charlemagne, and imported
into their own country the rich commodities of
the east. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. ii. p. ,' 2. In
the tenth century, the Venetians had opened a
trade with Alexandria in Egypt. Ibid. The in-
habitants of Amalphi and Pila had likewile ex-
tended their trade to the fame ports. Murat. Ib.
p. 84, 85. The effeEts of the Cruiddcs in
increasing the wealth and commerce of the Italian
states, and particularly that which they carried
on with the Eait, Tiave explained page 34th of
this volume. They not only imported the Indian
commodities from the East, but elablfhcd manu-
factures of curious fabric in their own country.
Several of these are enumerated by Muratori in his
Difertations concerning the arts and the weaving
of the middle ages. Antiq. Ital. vol. ii. p. 349,
399. They made great progres, particularly in
the manufacture of silk, which had long been
peculiar to the ealtern provinces of Aria. Silk
ituffs were of such high price in ancient Rome,
that only a few persons of the first rank were able
to purchase them. Under Aurelian, A. D. 270,
a pound of silk was equal in value to a pound of
gold. Abfit ut auro fila penfentur. Libra enim
auri tune libra lerici suit. Vopifcus in Aureliano.

Juitinian,

Juttinian, in the sixth century, introduced the art
of rearing silk-worms into Greece, which rendered
the commodity somewhat more plentiful, though
still it was of such great value, as to remain.an
article of luxury or magnificence, reserved only
for persons of the sirs order, or for publick so-
lemnities. Roger I. King of Sicily, about the
year i130, carried off a number of artificers in
the silk trade from Athens, and fettling them in
Palermo, introduced the culture of silk into his
kingdom, from which it was communicated to
other parts of Italy. Gianon. His. of Naples,
b. xi. c. 7. This seems to have rendered silk so
common, that about the middle of the fourteenth
century, a thousand citizens of Genoa appeared in
one procession clad in silk robes. Sugar is like-
wife a production of the East. Some plants of
the sugar-cane were brought from Asia; and the
first attempt to cultivate them in Sicily was made
about the middle of the twelfth century. From
thence they were transplanted into the southern
provinces of Spain. From Spain they were car-
ried to the Canary and Madeira ides, and at
length into the new world. Ludovico Guicciar-
dini, in enumerating the goods imported into
Antwerp, about the year 1560, mentions the sugar
which they received from Spain and Portugal as
a considerable article. He describes that as -the
product of the Madeira and Canary islands. Def-
critt. de Paefi Bafli, p. 18o, 81. The fu-
gar-cane was introduced into the Weft-Indies
before that time, but the cultivation of it was

not

not so considerable as to furnish an article in com-
merce. In the middle ages, though sugar was not
raised in such quantities, or employed for so many
purposes, as to become one of the common necef-
saries of life, it appears to have been a considerable
article in the commerce of the Italian states.

THESE various commodities with which the Ita-

lians furnilhed the other nations of Europe, pro-
cured them a favourable reception in every king-
dom. They were cftablifhed in France in the thir-
teenth century with most extensive immunities.
They not only obtained every indulgence favour-
able to their commerce, but personal rights and
privileges were granted to them, which the natives
of the kingdom did not enjoy. Ordon. tom. iv.
p. 668. By a special proviso, they were exempted
from the droit d'aubaine. Ibid. p. 670. As the
Lombards engrossed the trade of every kingdom
in which they fettled, they became masters of its
calh. Money of course was in their hands not
only a sign of the value of their commodities, but
became an objet of commerce itself. They dealt
largely as bankers. In an ordonance, A. D. 1295,
we find them ftiled mercatores and camp/ores. They
carried on this gs well as other branches of their
commerce with somewhat of that rapacious spirit
which is natural to monopolizers, who are not re-
itrained by the concurrence of rivals. An absurd
opinion, which prevailed in the middle ages, was,
however, in some measure, the cause of their ex-
orbitant demands, and may be pleaded in apology

VOL. I. D d for

for them. Commerce cannot be carried on with
advantage, unless the persons who lend a fum are
allowed a certain premium for the use of their
money, as a comlpenfation for the risk which
they run in permitting another to traffick with
their flock. This premium is fixed by law in all
commercial countries, and is called the legal in-
terest of money. But the Fathers of the church
prepofteroufy applied the prohibitions of usury in
scripture to the payment of legal interest, and con-
demned it as a fin. The fchoolmen, misled by
Aristotle, whose sentiments they followed impli-
citly, and without examination, adopted the fame
error, and enforced it. Blackstone's Commenta-
ries on the laws of England, vol. ii. p. 455. Thus
the Lombards found themfclves engaged in a traf-
sick which was deemed criminal and odious. They
were liable to punishment if deteted. They were
not satisfied, therefore, with that moderate pre-
miurn, which they might have claimed if their
trade had been open and authorized by law.
They exa&ed a fum proportional to the danger
and infamy of a discovery. Accordingly, we find
that it was usual for them to demand twenty per
cent. for the use of money in the thirteenth cen-
tury. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. i. p. 893. About
the beginning of that century, the Countess of
Slanders was obliged to borrow money in order
to pay her husband's ransom. She procured the
fum requisite, either from Italian merchants or
from Jews. The lowest interest which she paid
to them was above twenty per cent. and ome of

them

them exafted near thirty. Martene and Durand.
Thefaur. Anecdotorum, vol. i. p. 886. In the
fourteenth century, A. D. 1311, Philip IV. fixed
the interest which might be legally exa&ed in the
fairs of Champagne at twenty per cent. Ordonan.
torn. i. p. 484. The interest of money in Aragon
was somewhat lower. James I. A. D. 1242, fixed
it by law at eighteen per cent. Petr. de Marca.
Marca five Limes Hifpan. app. 1433. As late as
the year 1490, it appears that the interest of money
in Placentia, was at the rate of forty per cent.
This is the more extraordinary, because at that
time the commerce of the Italian States was be-
come considerable. Memorie Storiche de Piacenza,
tom. viii. p. 104. Piac. 1760. It appears from
Lud. Guicciardini, that Charles V. had fixed the
rate of interest in his dominions in the Low.
Countries at twelve per cent. and at the time when
he wrote about the year 1560, it was not uncom-
mon to exa& more than that fum. He complains
of this as exorbitant, and points out its bad effects
both on agriculture and commerce. Defcritt. di
Paefi Bassi, p. 172. This high interest of money,
is alone a proof that the profits on commerce were
exorbitant.-The Lombards were likewise efta-
blifhed in England in the thirteenth century, and
a considerable street in the city of London ill
bears their name. They enjoyed great privileges,
and carried on an extensive commerce, particularly
as bankers, See Anderson's Chronol. DeduCtion,
vol. i. p. 137, 16o, 204, 231, where the statutes
or other authorities which confirm this are quoted.

Dd 2 But

But the chief mart for Italian commodities was at
Bruges. Navigation was then so imperfe&, that a
voyage between the Baltick and Mediterranean
could not be performed in one summer. For that
reason, a magazine or storehouse halfway between
the commercial cities in the north, and those in
Italy, became necessary. Bruges was pitched upon
as the most convenient station. That choice in-
troduced vast wealth into the Low-Countries.
Bruges was at once the staple for Englilh wool;
for the woollen and linen manufactures of the Ne-
therlands; for the naval stores, and other bulky
commodities of the North; and for the Indian
commodities, as well as domeftick productions
imported by the Italian States. The extent of its
commerce in Indian goods with Venice alone, ap-
pears from one fat. In the year 1318, five Ve-
netian galeaffes laden with Indian commodities
arrived at Bruges, in order to dispose of their car-
goes at the fair. These galeaffes were vessels of
very considerable burden. L. Guic. Defcritt. di
Paefi Bassi, p. 174. Bruges was the greatest em-
porium in all Europe. Many proofs of this oc-
cur in the historians and records of the thirteenth
and fourteenth centuries. But instead of multi-
plying quotations, I hall refer my readers to An-
derbon, vol. i. p. 12, 137, 213, 246, &c. The
nature of this work prevents me from entering into
any long details,, but there are some detached flitts,
which give an high idea of the wealth both of the
Flemih and Italian commercial states. The Duke
of Brabant contraced his daughter to the Blaclk

Princ
/

Prince, son of Edward III. of England, A. D.
1339, and gave her a portion which would amount
to three hundred thousand pounds of our present
money. Rymer's Foedera, vol. v. p. r13. John
Galeazzo Visconti Duke of Milan concluded a
treaty of marriage between his daughter and Lionel
Duke of Clarence, Edward's third son, A. D. I1367,
and granted her a portion equal to two hundred
thousand pounds of our present money. Rymer
Feeder. vol. vi. p. 547. These exorbitant fums
so far exceeding what was then granted by the
mot powerful monarchs, and which appear extra-
ordinary even in the present age, when the wealth
of Europe is so much increased, must have arisen
from the riches which flowed into these countries
from their extensive and lucrat.ve commerce. The
first source of wealth to the towns situated on the
Baltick sea, seems to have been the herring-fiflery;
the hoals of herring frequenting at that time the
coasts of Sweden and Denmark, in the fame man-
ner as they now resort to the British coalts. The
effects of this fiflery are thus delcribed by an au-
thor of the thirteenth century. The Danes, fays
he, who were formerly clad in the poor garb of
sailors, are now clothed in fcarler, purple, and
fine linen. For they abound with wealth flowing
from their annual fishery on the coall of Schonen;
so that all nations retort to them, bringing their
gold, silver, and precious commodities, that they
may purchase herrings, which the divine bounty be-
stows upon them. Arnoldus Lubecenfis ap. Con-
ring. de Urbib. German. § 87,

Dd 3 THE

But the chief mart for Italian commodities was at
Bruges. Navigation was then so imperfect, that a
voyage between the Baltick and Mediterranean
could not be performed in one summer. For that
reason, a magazine or storehouse half way between
the commercial cities in the north, and those in
Italy, became necessary. Bruges was pitched upon
as the most convenient ltation. That choice in-
troduced vait wealth into the Low-Countries.
Bruges was at once the staple for Englilh wool;
for the woollen and linen manufa&ures of the Ne-
therlands; for the naval stores, and other bulky
commodities of the North; and for the Indian
commodities, as well as domeftick productions
imported by the Italian States. The extent of its
commerce in Indian goods with Venice alone, ap-
pears from one fat. In the year 1318, five Ve-
netian galeaffes laden with Indian commodities
arrived at Bruges, in order to dispose of their car-
goes at the fair. These galeaffes were vefiels of
very considerable burden. L. Guic. Defcritt. di
Paefl Bassi, p. 74. Bruges was the greatest em-
porium in all Europe. Many proofs of this oc-
cur in the historians and records of the thirteenth
and fourteenth centuries. But instead of multi-
plying quotations, I hall refer my readers to An-
derfon, vol. i. p. 12, 137, 213, 246, &c. The
nature of this work prevents me from entering into
any long details, but there are ome detached ftidls,
which give an high idea of the wealth both of the
Flemish and Italian commercial fiates. The Dluk
of Brabant contraAed his daughter to the Blackl

P 'inl',

Prince, son of Edward II. of England, A. D.
1339, and gave her a portion which would amount
to three hundred thousand pounds of our present
money. Rymer's Federa, vol. v. p. 113. John
Galeazzo Visconti Duke of Milan concluded a
treaty of marriage between his daughter and Lionel
Duke of Clarence, Edward's third son, A. D. 1367,
and granted her a portion equal to two hundred
thousand pounds of our present money. Rymer
Feeder. vol. vi. p. 547. These exorbitant fums
so far exceeding what was then granted by the
most powerful monarchs, and which appear extra-
ordinary even in the present age, when the wealth
of Europe is so much increased, must have arisen
from the riches which flowed into there countries
from their extensive and lucrat.ve commerce. The
first source of wealth to the towns situated on the
Baltick Tea, seems to have been the herring-fifhery;
the shoals of herring frequenting at that time the
coasts of Sweden and Denmark, in the fame man-
ner as they now retort to the Britilh coasts. The
effects of this fishery are thus described by an au-
thor of the thirteenth century. The Danes, fays
he, who were formerly clad in the poor garb of
sailors, are now clothed in fcarler, purple, and
fine linen. For they abound with wealth flowing
from their annual fihery on the coafl of Schonen;
so that all nations retort to them, bringing their
gold, silver, and precious commodities, that they
may purchase herrings, which the divine bounty be-
stows upon them. Arnoldus Lubecenfis ap. Con-
ring. de Urbib. German. § 8 7.

D d 3 THE

THE Hanfeatick league is the most powerful

commercial confederacy known in history. Its
origin towards the close of the twelfth century,
and the objecs of its union, are described by Knip-
fcildt Trafatus Hiftorico-Politico Juridicus de Ju-
ribus Civitat. Imper. lib. i. cap. 4. Anderson has
mentioned the chief fads with refpet to their com-
mercial progress, the extent of the privileges which
they obtained in different countries, their success-
ful wars with several monarchs, as well as the spirit
and zeal with which they contended for those liber-
ties and rights without which it is impoflible to
carry on commerce to advantage. The vigorous
efforts of a society of merchants attentive only to
commercial objects, could not fail of diffusing new
and more liberal ideas concerning jutice and order
in every country of Europe where they fettled.

IN England, the progress of commerce was ex-

tremely flow; and the causes of this are obvious.
During the Saxon heptarchy, England, split into
many petty kingdoms, which were perpetually at
variance with each other, exposed to the fierce in-
curfions of the Danes, and other northern pirates,
and funk in barbarity and ignorance, was in no
condition to cultivate commerce, or to pursue any
system of useful and salutary policy. When a
better profpec began to open by the union of the
kingdom under one monarch, the Norman conquest
took place. This occafloned such a violent shock,
as well as such a sudden and total revolution of
property, that the nation did not recover from it

during

during several reigns. By the time that the con-
ftitution began to acquire some stability, and the
English had so incorporated with their conquerors
as to become one people, the nation engaged with
no less ardour than imprudence in support of their
monarch's pretensions to the crown of France, and
long wafted its vigour and genius in its wild es-
forts to conquer that kingdom. When by ill fuc-
cess, and repeated disappointments, a period was
at last put to this fatal frenzy, and the nation be-
ginning to enjoy some repose, had leisure to breathe
and to gather new strength, the deftruftive wars
between the houses of York and Lancaster broke
out, and involved the kingdom in the worst of all
calamities. Thus, beides the common obftruc-
tions of commerce occasioned by the nature of the
feudal government, and the state of manners du-
ring the middle ages, its progress in England was
retarded by peculiar causes. Such a succession of
events adverse to the commercial spirit was fufficicnt
to have checked its growth, although every other
circumstance had favoured it. The English were
accordingly one of the last nations in Europe who
availed themselves of their natural commercial ad-
vantages. Before the reign of Edward III. all the
wool of England, except a small quantity wrought
into coarse cloths for honle consumption, was fold
to the Flemings or Lombards, and manufacured
by them, Though Edward, A. D. 1326, began
to allure ome of the Flemish weavers to ettle in
England, it was long before the Engliff were ca-

D d 4 pable

pable of fabricating cloth for foreign markets, and
the export of unwrought wool still continued to
be the chief article of their commerce. Anderson
pafllm.-All foreign commodities were brought
into England by the Lombard or Hanfeatick mer-
chants. The English ports were frequented by
ships both from the north and south of Europe.
and they tamely allowed foreigners to reap all the
profits arising from the supply of their wants. The
firfl commercial treaty of England on record, is
that with Haquin King of Norway, A. D. I 217.
Anders. vol. i. p. 108. But they did not venture
to trade in their own ships to the Baltick until the
beginning of the fourteenth century. lb. 151. It
was after the middle of the fifteenth, before they
sent any hip into the Mediterranean. Ib. p. 77.
Nor was it long before this period that their vessels
visited the ports of Spain or Portugal. But though
I have pointed out the sow progress of the Fnglifh
commerce as a fadt little attended to, and yet
meriting consideration; the concourse of foreign-
ers to the ports of England, together with the com-
munication among all the different countries in
Europe, which went on increasing from the be-
ginning of the twelfth century, is sufficient tojultify
all the obefrvations and reasonings in the text con-
cerning the influence of commerce on the ftace of
manners, and of society.
NOTE XXXI. SECT. III. p. 183. [HIJ.

I HAVE not been able to discover the precise
manner in which the Jultiza was appointed. Among

3 the

the claims of the junta or union formed against
James I. A. D. I 264, this was one; that the King
should not nominate any perbon to be Juftiza,
without the consent or approbation of the ricos-
hombres or nobles. Zurita Anales de Aragon,
vol. i. p. 80. But the King in his answer to their
remonstrance asserts, " that it was established by
immemorial practice, and was conformable to the
laws of the kingdom, that the King, in virtue of
his royal prerogative, hould name the Juftiza."
Zurita, Ibid. IS . Blanca, 656. From another
passage in Zurita, it appears, that while the Ara-
gonefe enjoyed the privilege of the union, i. e. the
power of confederating againit their sovereign as
often as they conceived that he had violated any
of their rights and immunities, the Juftiza was not
only nominated by the King, but held his office
during the King's pleasure. Nor was this pra&ice
attended with any bad effecs, as the privilege of
the union was a sufficient and effetual check to
any abuse of the royal prerogative. But when the
privilege of the union was abolished as dangerous
to the order and peace of society, it was agreed
that the Juftiza should continue in office during
life. Several Kings, however, attempted to re-
move the Juftizas who were obnoxious to them,
and they ometimes succeeded in the attempt. In
order to guard against this encroachment, which
would have destroyed the intention of the infti-
tution, and have rendered the Juftiza the depen-
dant and tool of the crown, instead of the guar-

dian

dian of the people, a law was enacted in the Cortes,
A. D. 1442, ordaining that the Juftiza hould con-
tinue in office during life, and hould not be re-
moved from it unless by the authority of the Cortes.
Fueros & Obfervancias del Reyno de Arag. lib. i.
p. 22. By former laws the person of the Juftiza
had been declared sacred, and he was responsible
only to the Cortes. Ibid. p. 15. b. Zurita and
Blanca, who both published their histories while
the Julfiza of Aragon retained the full exercise of
his privileges and jurifidiion, have neglected to
explain several circumstances with regard to the
office of that refpetable magistrate, because they
addressed their works to their countrymen, who
were well acquainted with every particular con-
cerning the funtions of a judge, to whom they
looked up as to the guardian of their liberties. It
is vain to consult the later historians of Spain,
about any point, with refpet to which the excel-
lent historians whom I have named are silent. The
ancient constitution of their country was overturned,
and despotism established on the ruin of its liber-
ties, when the writers of this and the preceding
century composed their histories, and on that ac-
count they had little curiosity to know the nature
of those institutions to which their ancestors owed
the enjoyment of freedom, or they were afraid to
describe them with much accuracy. The spirit with
which Mariana, his continuator Miniana, and Ser-
reras, write their histories, is very different from
that of the two historians of Aragon, from whom

I have

I have taken my account of the constitution of
that kingdom.

Two circumitances concerning the Juftiza, be-

fides those which I have mentioned in the text,
are worthy of observation, i. None of the ricos-
hombres, or noblemen of the first order, could
be appointed Juftiza. He was taken out of the
second class or cavalleros, who answer nearly to
gentlemen or commoners in Great Britain. Fueros
& Obfervanc. del Reyno, &c. lib. i. p. 21. b. The
reason was, By the laws of Aragon, the ricos-
hombres were not subjea to capital punishment;
but as it was necessary for the security of liberty,
that the Juftiza hould be accountable for the
manner in which he executed the high trust re-
posed in him, it was a powerful restraint upon him
to know that he was liable to be punishcd with
the utmost rigour. Blanca, p. 657, 756. Zurita,
tom. ii. 229. Fueros & Obfervanc. lib. ix. p.
182. b. 83. It appears too from many passages
in Zurita, that the Juftiza was appointed to check
the domineering and oppressive spirit of the no-
bles, as well as to let bounds to the power of the
monarch, and therefore he was chosen from an
order of citizens equally interested in opposing
both.

2. A MAOISTRATE possessed of such vast powers

as the Juftiza, might have exercised them in a
manner pernicious to the state, if he himself had
been fubje& to no controul. A constitutional

2 remedy,

remedy, however, was provided against this dan-
.ger. Seventeen persons were chosen by lot in each
meeting of the Cortes. These formed a tribunal
called the court 'of inquisition into the office of
Juftiza. This court met at three stated terms in
each year. Every person had liberty of com-
plaining to it of any iniquity or neglect of duty
in the Juftiza, or in the inferior judges, who acted
in his name. The Jufliza and his deputies were
called to answer for their conduct. The members
of the court passed sentence by ballot. They
might punish by degradation, confiscation of
goods, or even with death. The law which erected
this court, and regulated the forms of its proce-
dure, was enacted A. D. 1461. Zurita Anales,
iv. 102. Blanca Comment. Rer. Aragon. 770.
Previous to this period, inquiry was made into
the conduct of the Juftiza though not with the
fame formality. He was from the first inifiturion
of the office subject to the review of the Cortes
The conifant dread of such an impartial and
severe inquiry into his behaviour, was a powerful
motive to the vigilant and faithful discharge of
his duty. A remarkable instance of the authority
of the Juftiza when opposed to that of the King,
occurs in the year 1386. By the confitution of
Aragon, the eldest son or heir apparent of the
crown poffefled considerable power and jurifdidion
in the kingdom. Fueros & Obfervan. del Reyno
de Arag. lib. i. p. 6. Peter V. infligated by a
second wife, attempted to deprive his son of this,
and enjoined his fubjeas to yield him no obe-

dience,

dience. The Prince immediately applied to the
Jufliza; the safe guard and defence, fays Zu-
rita, against all violence and oppression." The
Jultiza granted him thefirmo de derecho, the effet
of which was, that upon his giving surety to ap-
pear in judgment, he could not be deprived of
any immunity or privilege, which he possessed,
but in consequence of a legal trial before the
Juftiza, and of a sentence pronounced by him.
This was published throughout the kingdom, and
notwithstanding the proclamation in contradi&tion
to this which had been issued by the King, the
Prince continued in the exercise of all his rights,
and his authority was universally recognized.
Zurita Anales de Aragon, tom. ii. 385.

NOTE XXXII. SECT. III. p. 184. [II].

I HAVE been induced, by the concurring tefti-

mony of many respectable authors, to mention
this as the constitutional form of the oath of alle-
giance, which the Aragonefe swore to their Sove-
reigns. I must acknowledge, however, that I
have not found this singular oath in any Spanish
author whom I have had an opportunity to con-
fult. It is mentioned neither by Zurita, nor
Blanca, nor Argenfola, nor Sayas, who were all
historiographers appointed by the Cortes ps Ara-
gon to record the tranlations of the kingdom.
All these writers pofcfs a merit, which is very rare
among hifltorians. They are extremely accurate
in trucing tie progreis of the laws and conftitu-

tion

tion of their country. Their silence with refpe&
to this, creates some suspicion concerning the ge-
nuinenefs of the oath. But as it is mentioned by
so many authors, who produce the ancient Spanish
words in which it is expressed, it is probable that
they have taken it from some writer of credit,
whose works have not fallen into my hands. The
spirit of the oath is perfectly agreeable to the
genius of the Aragonefe conflitution. Since the
publication of the first edition, the learned M.
Totze, Professor of History at Batzow in the
Dutchy of Mecklenburgh, has been so good as to
point out to me a Spanish author of great autho-
rity, who has published the words of this oath.
It is Antonio Perez, a native of Aragon, secretary
to Philip II. The words of the oath are, " Nos,
que valemos tanto como vos, os hazemos mueftro
Rey y Senor, con tal que nos guardeys nueftros
fueros, y libertades, y si No, No. Las Obras y
Relaciones de Ant. Perez. 8vo. par Juan de la
Planche 1631. p. 43."

THE privilege of Union, which I have men-

tioned in the preceding note, and alluded to in
the next, is indeed one of the most singular which
could take place in a regular government, and
the oath that I have mentioned expresses nothing
more than this constitutional privilege entitled the
Aragonefe to perform. If the King or his mi-
nifters violated any of the laws or immunities of
the Aragonefe, and did not grant immediate re-
dress in consequence of their representations and

remonstrances,

remonitrances, the nobles of the first rank, or
Ricos-bombres de naitra, & de mefada, the equef-
trian order, or the nobility of the second class,
called Hidalgos & Infanciones, together with the ma-
giftrates of cities, might, either in the Cortes, or in
a voluntary assembly, join in union, and binding
themselves by mutual oaths and the exchange of
hostages to be faithful to each other, they might
require the King, in the name and by the autho-
rity of his body corporate, to grant them redress.
If the King refused to comply with their request,
or took arms in order to oppose them, they might,
in virtue of the privilege of union, instantly with-
draw their allegiance from the King, refute to
acknowledge him as their Sovereign, and proceed
to elec another Monarch; nor did they incur any
guilt, or become liable to any prosecution on that
account. Blanca Corn. Rer. Arag. 661, 669.
This union did not resemble the confederacies in
other feudal kingdoms. It was a constitutional
association, which pretended to legal privileges,
which issued its mandates under a common feal,
and proceeded in all its operations by regular and
ascertained forms. This dangerous right was not
only claimed, but exercised. In the year 1287,
the Aragonefe formed an union in opposition to
Alfonso III. and obliged that King not only to
comply with their demands, but to ratify a privi-
lege so fatal to the power of the crown. Zurita
Anales, tom. i. p. 322. In the year 1347, an
union was formed aginft Peter IV. with equal

success,

success, and a new ratification of the privilege
was extorted. Zurita, tom. ii. p. 202. But soon
after, the King having defeated the leaders of the
union in battle, the privilege of union was finally
abrogated in theCortes, and all the laws or re-
cords which contained any confirmation of it,
were cancelled or destroyed. The King, in pre-
fence of the Cortes, called for the at whereby he
had ratified the union, and having wounded his
hand with his poniard, he held it above the
record, "' That privilege, fays he, which has been
" so fatal to the kingdom, and so injurious to
" royalty, hould be effaced with the blood of a

King." Zurita, tom. ii. p. 229. The law abo-

lilhing the union is published. Fueros & Obfer-
vanc. lib. ix. p. 178. From that period the Jutiza
became the constitutional guardian of publick
liberty, and his power and jurifdition occasioned
none of those violent convulsions which the tu-
multuary privilege of the union was apt to pro-
duce. The constitution of Aragon, however, still
remained extremely free. One source of this
liberty was from the early admilfion of the repre-
fentatives of cities into the Cortes. It seems pro-
bable, from Zurita, that burgesses were constituent
members of the Cortes from its first institution.
He mentions a meeting of Cortes, A. D. 1133, in
which the procuradores de las ciudades y villas were
present. Tom. i. p. 51. This is the conftitu-
tional language in which their presence is declared
in the Cortes, after the journals of that court

were

were regularly kept. It is probable, that an his-
torian so accurate as Zurita, would not have used
these words, if he had not taken then from some
authentick record. It was more than a century
after this period before the representatives of cities
formed a constituent part in the supreme aflem-
blies of the other European nations. The free
spirit of the Aragonefe government is conspicuous
in many particulars. The Cortes not only op-
posed the attempts of their Kings to increase theit
revenue, or to extend their prerogative, but they
claimed rights ard exercised powers which will
appear extraordinary even in a country accustomed
to the enjoyment of liberty. In the year 1286
the Cortes claimed the privilege of naming the
members of the King's council and the officers of
his household, and they seem to have obtained it
for ome time. Zurita, tom. i. p. 303, 307. It
was the privilege of the Cortes to name the officers
who commanded the troops raised by their au-
thority. This seems to be evident from a pafrage
in Zurita. When the Cortes, in the year 1503i
raised a body of troops to be employed in Italy,
it passed an at empowering the King to name
the officers who hould command them. Zuritaj
tom. v. p, 274 which plainly implies that without
this warrant, it did not belong to him in virtue
of his prerogative. In the Fueros & Obfervancias
del Reyno de Aragono two general declarations of
the rights and privileges of the Aragonee are
published the one in the reign of Pedro I. A. D.
1283, the other in that of James II. A. D. 325.

VOL. I. E c They

They are of such length, that I cannot insert them,
but it is evident from these, that not only the
privileges of the nobility, but the rights of the
people, personal as well as political, were, at that
period, more extensive, and better understood than
in any kingdom in Europe. Lib. i. p. 7, 9. The
oath by which the King bound himself to observe
those rights and liberties of the people, was very
solemn. Ibid. p. 14. b. & p. 5. The Cortes
of Aragon discovered not only the jealousy and
vigilance, which are peculiar to free flates, in
guarding the essential parts of the constitution,
but they were scrupulously attentive to observe
the most minute forms and ceremonies to which
they were accustomed. According to the efta-
blilhed laws and customs of Aragon, no foreigner
had liberty to enter the hall in which the Cortes
afiembled. Ferdinand, in the year 1481, ap-
pointed his Queen, Isabella, regent of the king-
dom, while he was absent during the course of the
campaign. The law required that a regent hould
take the oath of fidelity in presence of the Cortes;
but as Isabella was a foreigner, before she could
be admitted, the Cortes thought it necessary to
pass an at authorizing the ferjeant-porter to open
the door of the hall, and to allow her to enter;
" so attentive were they, fays Zurita, to oblerve
" their laws and forms, even such as may seem
" most minute." Tom. iv. p. 313.

THE Aragonefe were no less solicitous to secure
the personal rights of individuals, than to main-

a~~~~~2 ~tain

tain the freedom of the constitution; and the
spirit of their itatutes with refpeft to both was
equally liberal. Two fasts relative to this matter
merit observation. By an express flatute in the
year 13 '5, it was declared to be unlawful to put
any native Aragonefe to the torture. If he could
not be convicted by the testimony of witnefles, he
was instantly absolved. Zurita, tom. ii. p. 66.
Zurita records the regulation with the 1'atisfacdion
natural to an historian, when he contemplates the
humanity of his countrymen. He compares the
laws of Aragon to those of Rome, as both ex-
empted citizens and freemen from such igno-
minious and cruel treatment, and had recourse to
it only in the trial of slaves. Zurita had reason
to bestow such an encomium on the laws of his
country. Torture was at that time permitted by
the laws of every other nation in Europe. Even
in England, from which the mild spirit of legifla-
tion has long banished it, torture was not, at that
time, unknown. Observations on the Statutess
chiefly the more ancient, &c. p. 66.

THE other fat shows, that the fame spirit which

influenced the legislature prevailed among the
people. In the year 1485, the religious zeal of
Ferdinand and Isabella prompted them to intro-
duce the inquisition into Aragon. Though the
Aragonefe were no less superstitiously attached
than the other Spaniards to the Roman Catholick
faith, and no less desirous to root out the feeds

Ec 2 of

of error and of heresy which the Jews and Moors
had scattered, yet they took arms against the in-
quifitors, murdered the chief inquisitor, and long
opposed the establishment of that tribunal. The
reason which they gave for their conduct was,
That the mode of trial in the inquisition was in-
consistent with liberty. The criminal was not
confronted with the witnesses, he was not ac.
quainted with what they deposed against him, he
was fubje&ed to torture, and the goods of persons
condemned were confiscated. Zurita Anales, tom.
iv. p. 341.

THE form of government in the kingdom of

Valencia, and principality of Catalonia, which
were annexed to the crown of Aragon, was like-
wife extremely favourable to liberty. The Valen-
cians enjoyed the privilege of union in the fame
manner with the Aragonefe. But they had no
Miagiftrate resembling the Juftiza. The Catalo-
nians were no less jealous of their liberties than
the two other nations, and no less bold in aerting
them. But it is not necessary for illustrating the
following history to enter into any farther detail
concerning the peculiarities in the constitution of
there kingdoms.
NOTE XXXIII. SCT. III. p. 185. [KK].

I HAVE searched in vain among the historians

of Castile for such information as might enable
me to trace the progress of laws and government

in

in Castile, or to explain the nature of the confti-
tution with the fame degree of accuracy wherewith
I have described the political slate of Aragon. It
is manifest not only from the historians of Castile,
but from its ancient laws, particularly the Fuero
Juzgo, that its monarchs were originally elecive.
Ley 2, 5, 8. They were chosen by the bilhops,
the nobility, and the people, ibid. It appears
from the fame venerable code of laws, that the
prerogative of the Castilian monarchs was ex-
tremely limited. Villaldiego, in his commentary
on these laws, produces many saCs and authorities
in confirmation of both these particulars. Dr.
Geddes, who was well acquainted with Spanish
literature, complains that he could find no author,
who gave a diftinc account of the Cortes or fu-
preme assembly of the nation, or who described
the manner in which it was held, or mentioned
the precise number of members who had a right
to fit in it. He produces, however, from Gil
Gonzales d'Avila, who published a history of
Henry II. the writ of summons to the town of
Abula, requiring it to chufe representatives to ap-
pear in the Cortes which he called to meet A. D.
1390. From this we learn, that Prelates, Dukes,
Marquifles, the masters of the three military
orders, Condes and Riccos-hombres were required
to attend. These composed the bodies of eccle-
fiafticks and nobles, which formed two members
of the legislature. The cities which sent members
to that meeting of the Cortes were forty-eight.
The number of representatives, (for the cities had

E e right

right to chufe more or fewer according to their
refpe&ive dignity) amounted to an hundred and
twenty-five. Geddes' Miscellaneous Traas, vol. i.
331. Zurita having occasion to mention the
Cortes which Ferdinand held at Toro A. D. 1505,
in order to secure to himself the government of
Castile after the death of Isabella, records, with
his usual accuracy, the names of the members
present, and of the cities which they represented.
From that lift it appears, that only eighteen cities
had deputies in this assembly, Anales de Aragon,
tom. vi. p, 3. What was the occasion of this
great difference in the number of cities represented
in these two meetings of the Cortes, I am unable
to explain,
NOTE XXXIV. SECT. III. p. 187. [LL],

A oGEAT part of the territory in Spain was

engrossed by the nobility. L. Marinaus Siculus,
who composed his treatise De Rebus Hispania du-
ring the reign of Charles V. gives a catalogue of
the Spanish nobility, together with the yearly rent
of their estates. According to his account, which
he affirms was as accurate as the nature of the
subjet would admit, the fum total of the annual
revenue of their lands amounted to one million
four hundred and eighty-two thousand ducats. If
we make allowance for the vast difference in the
value of money in the fifteenth century from that
which it now bears, and confider that the cata-
logue of Marinpus includes orly the Titulados, or

nobility

nobility whose families were distinguished by ome
honorary title, their wealth must appear very
great. L. Marinaeus ap. Schotti Scriptores Hifpan.
vol. i. p. 323. The Commons of Castile, in their
contests with the crown, which I shall hereafter
relate, complain of the extensive property of the
nobility as extremely pernicious to the kingdom.
In one of their manifesto's they assert that from
Valladolid to St. Jago in Galicia, which was an
hundred leagues, the crown did not possess more
than three villages. All the reft belonged to the
nobility, and could be subjected to no publick
burden. Sandov. Vida del Emperor. Carl. V.
vol. i. p. 422. It appears from the testimony of
authors quoted by Bovadilla, that these vast pof-
feflions were bestowed upon the Ricos-hcmbres,
bidalgos, and cavalleros by the Kings of Castile,
in reward for the assistance which they had receiv-
ed from them in expelling the Moors. They like-
wife obtained by the fame means a considerable
influence in the cities, many of which anciently
depended upon the nobility. Politica para Cor-
regidores. Amb. 1750. fol. vol. i. 440, 442.
NOTE XXXV. SECT. III. p. 190. [M].

I HAVE been able to discover nothing certain,

as I observed Note XVIII. with refpe& to the origin
of communities or free cities in Spain. It is pro-
bable, that as soon as the considerable towns were
recovered from the Moors, the inhabitants who
fixed their residence in them, being persons of dif-

E e 4 tinaion

tin&ion and credit, had all the privileges of muni.
cipal government and jurifdi&ion conferred upon
them.. Many striking proofs occur of the fplen.
dour, wealth and power of the Spaniih cities. Hie-
ronymus Paulus wrote a description of Barcelona in
the year 149 , and compares the dimensions of the
/own to that of Naples, and the elegance of its

buildings, the variety of its manufactures, and the
/ extent of its commerce, to Florence. Hieron. Paulus

ap. Schottum Script, Hifp. ii, 844. MarinaTus de-
scribes Toledo as a large and populous city. A
great number of its inhabitants were persons of
quality and of illustrious rank. Its commerce was
great. It applied particularly to the manufa6tures of
silk and wool and the number of inhabitants em-
ployed in there two branches of trade, amounted
nearly to tep thousand. Marin. ubi supr. p. 308.
I know no city, fays he, that I would prefer to
Valladolid for elegance and splendour. Ibid. p.
312. We may form ome estimate of its popu-
loufnefs from the following circumstances. The
citizens having taken arms in the year I516, in
order to oppose a measure concerted by cardinal
Ximenes, they mustered in the city, and in the
territory which belonged to it, thirty thousand
fighting men. Sandov. Vida del Emper. Carl. V.
tom. i, p. 8. The manufa&Eures carried on in
the towns of Spain were not intended merely for
home consumption, they were exported to foreign
countries, and that commerce was a considerable
source of wealth to the inhabitants. The maritime
laws of Barcelona are the foundation of mercantile

jurisprudence

jurisprudence in modern times, as the Leges Rho.
dia were among the ancients. All the commercial
tates in Italy adopted thee laws, and regulated
their trade according to them. Sandi Storia
Civile Veneziana, vol. ii. 865. It appears from
several ordonnances of the Kings of France, that
the merchants of Aragon and Castile were received
on the fame footing, and admitted to the lame
privileges with those of Italy. Ordonances des
Roys, &c. tom. ii. p. 35, iii. 66, 504, 635.
Cities in such a flourishing .state became a relpect-
able part of the society, and were entitled to a
considerable share in the legislature. The magif-
trates of Barcelona aspired to tle highest honour a
Spanish subjet can enjoy, that of being covered
in the presence of their sovereign, and of being
treated as grandees of the kingdom. Origin de
la dignidad de Grande de Castilla por don Alonfo
Carillo, Madr. 1657. p. 18.
NOTE XXXVI. SECT. III. p, 193. [NN].

THE military order of St. Jago, the most ho-

nourable and opulent of the three Spanish orders,
was instituted about the year I 170. The bull of
confirmation by Alexander Ill. is dated A. D.
1176. At that time a considerable part of Spain
was fubje& to the Moors, and the whole country
much exposed to the depredations not only of the
enemy, but of banditti. It is no wonder, then,
that an infitution, the objeft of which was to
oppofi the enemies of the Christian faith, and to

restrain

fetiraih and puniih those' who disturbed the pub-
lick peace, should be extremely popular, and meet
with general encouragement. The wealth and
power of the orderbecame so great, that one his-
torian fays, that the Grand Master of St. Jago was
the person in Spain of greatest power and dignity
next to the King. El. Anton. Nebriffenfis, ap.
Schott. Scrip. Hifp. i. 812. Another observes,
that the order possessed every thing in Castile that
a King would mbft desire to obtain. Zurita
Anales, v. 22. The knights took the vows of
obedience, of poverty, and of conjugal chastity.
By the former they were bound implicitly to obey
the commands of their grand master. The order
could bring into the field a thousand men at arms.
El. Ant. Nebref. p. 813. If there men at arms
were accompanied, as was usual in that age, this
was a formidable body of cavalry. There be-
longed to this order eighty-four commanderies,
and two hundred priories and other benefices.
Diflertations fur la Chevalerie par Hon. de St.
Marie, p. 262. It is easy to fee how formidable
to his sovereign the command of there troops, the
administration of such revenues, and the disposal
of so many offices, must have rendered a subjet.
The other two orders, though inferior to thatof
St. Jago in power and wealth, were nevertheless
very considerable. When the conquest of Gra-
nada deprived the knights of St. Jago of those
enemies against whom their zeal was originally
direced, superstition found out a new obje&, in

defence

defence of which they engaged to employ their
courage. To their usual oath, they added the
following clause: "We do swear to believe, to
maintain, and to contend in publick and in pri-
vate, that the Virgin Mary, the mother of God,
our Lady, was conceived without the stain of ori-
ginal fin." This singular addition was made
about the middle of the seventeenth century. Ho-
nore de St. Marie Dissertations, &c. p. 263.-This
singular engagement is not peculiar to the order of
St. Jago. The members of the second military
order in Spain, that of Calatrava, equally zeal-
ous to employ their prowess in defence of the ho-
nours of the Blessed Virgin, have likewise pro-
sessed themselves her true knights. Their vow,
conceived in terms more theologically accurate
than that of St. Jago, may afford ome amuse-
ment to an English reader. " I vow to God, to
the Grand Master, and to you who here represent
his person, that now, and for ever, I will main-
tain and contend, that the Virgin Mary, Mother of
God, our Lady, was conceived without original
fin, and never incurred the pollution of it; but
that in the moment of her happy conception, and
of the union of her foul with her body, the Di-
vine Grace prevented and preserved her from ori-
ginal guilt, by the merits of the passion and death
of Christ our Redeemer, her future son, foreseen
in the Divine Council, by which he was truly
redeemed, and by a more noble kind of redemp-
tion than any of the children of Adam. In the

X,1~~~~~ ~belief

beclif of this truth, and in maintaining the ho-
nour of the most Holy Virgin, through the
strength of Almighty God, I will live and die."
Definiciopes de la Orden de Calatrava, conforme
al Capitulo General en 652, fol. Madr. 1748.
p. 153. Though the church of Rome hath pru-
dently avoided to give its fan&tion to the doc-
trine of the immaculate conception, and the two
great monaftick orders of St. Dominic and St.
Francis have espoused opposite opinions concern-
ing it, the Spaniards are such ardent champions
for the honour of the Virgin, that when the pre-
sent King of Spain instituted a new military order
in the year 1771, in commemoration of the birth
of his grandson, he put it under the immediate
protecion of the most Holy Mary in the mystery
of her immaculate conception. Constitutiones de
la Real y diftinguida Orden. Efpanola de Carlos
III. p. 7. As this zeal for the honour of the
Virgin has ome resemblance to that species of re-
fined gallantry, which was the original obje&
of chivalry, one fees a reason for its being
adopted by the military orders, while the spirit of
chivalry retained some vigour. But in the present
age, it must excite some furprize to fee the inltitu.
tion of an illustrious order conneced with a doc-
trine so extravagant and destitute of foundation.
NOTE XXXVII. SECT. III. p. 196. [00].

I HAVE frequently had occasion to take notice

of the defe&s in police during the middle ages,
occasioned by the feebleness of government, and

the

the want of proper subordination among the dif-
ferent ranks of men. I have observed in a former
Note, that this greatly interrupted the intercourie
between nations, and even between different places
in the fame kingdom. The description which the
Spanish historians give of the frequency of rapine,
murder, and every a& of violence, in all the pro-
vinces of Spain, are amazing, and present to us the
idea of a society but little removed from the dif-
order and turbulence of that which has been called
a state of nature. Zurita Anales de Arag. i. 175.
El. Ant. Nebriflenfis rer. a Ferdin. geftar. Hist.
ap. Schottum, II. 849. Though the excess of these
disorders rendered the institution of the Santa Her-
mandad necessary, great care was taken at firit to
avoid giving any offence or alarm to the nobility.
The jurifdi&ion of the judges of the Hermandad
was expressly confined to crimes which violated the
publick peace, All other offences were left to the
cognizance of the ordinary judges. If a person
was guilty of the most notorious perjury, in any
trial before a judge of the Hermandad, he could
not punish him, but was obliged to remit the cafe
to the ordinary judge of the place. Commentaria
inRegias Hifpan. Conftitut, per Alph. de Azevedo,
pars v. p. 22o, &c. fol. Duaci, 612. Notwith-
standing there reftri&ions, the barons were sensible
how much the Hermandad would encroach on their
jurifdition. In Castile, some opposition was made
to the institution; but Ferdinand had the address
to obtain the content of the Constable to the intro-

duction

duilion of the. Hermandad into that part of the
kingdom where his effate lay; and by that means,.
as well as the popularity of the institution, he fur-
rounted every obstacle that flood in its way. .iI.
Ant. Nebrifsen. 851. In Aragon, the nobles com-
bined against it with greater spirit; and Ferdinand,
though he fuppqrted it with vigour, was obliged
to make fbme concessions in order to reconcile
them. Zurita Anales de Arag. iv. 356. The
power and revenue of the Hermandad in Castile
seems to have been very great. Ferdinand, when
preparing for the war against the Moors of Gra-
nada, required of the Hermandad to furnish him
sixteen thousand beafts.of burden, together with
eight thousand men to conduct them, and he ob-
tained what he demanded. El. Ant. Nebriff. 88 .
The Hermandad has been found to be of so much
use in preserving peace, and restraining or detet-
ing crimes, that it is fill continued in Spain; but
as it is. no longer necessary either for moderating
the power of the nobility, or extending that of
the crown, the vigour and authority of the infli-
tution diminilhes gradually.
NOTE XXXVIII. SET. III. 199. [PP].

NoTHINo more common among Antiquaries,

and there is not more copious source of error,
than to decide concerning the inffitutions and man-
ners of pafc ages, by the forms and ideas which
prevail in their own times. The French lawyers

in

in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, having
found their sovereigns in pofleffion of absolute
power, seem to think it a duty incumbent on them,
to maintain that such unbounded authority be-
longed to the crown in every period of their mo-
narchy. " The government of France," fays M.
de Real very gravely, " is purely monarchical at
this day, as it was from the beginning. Our Kings
were absolute originally as they are at prefint."
Science du Governement, tom. ii. p. 31. It is
impoflible, however, to conceive two states of civil
society more unlike to each other, than that of the
French nation under Clovis, and that under Louis
XV. It is evident from the codes of laws of the
various tribes which fettled in Gaul and the coun-
tries adjacent to it, as well as from the history of
Gregory of Tours, and other early annalists, that
among all these people the form of government
was extremely rude and simple, and that they had
scarcely begun to acquire the first rudiments of
that order and police which are necessary in ex-
tensive Societies. The King or leader had the com-
mand of soldiers or companions, who followed his
standard from choice, not by constraint. I have
produced the clearest evidence of this, Note VI.
An event related by Gregory of Tours, lib. iv.
c. 14. affords the most striking proof of the de-
pendence of the early French Kings on the senti-
ments and inclination of their people. Clotaire I.
having marched at the head of his army, in the
year 553, against the Saxons, that people, intimi-

dated

dated at his approach, sued for peace, and offered
to pay a large' um to the offended monarch. Clo-
taire was willing to close with what they proposed.
But his army insisted to be led forth to battle. The
King employed all his eloquence to persuade them
to accept of what the Saxons were ready to pay.
The Saxons, in order to fbothe them, increased their
original offer. The King renewed his folicita.
tions: But the army enraged, rulhed upon the
King, tore his tent in pieces, dragged him out of
it, and would have slain him on the pot, if he
had not consented to lead them inRtantly against
the enemy.

IF the early monarchs of France pofleffed such

limited authority, even while at the head of their
army, their prerogative during peace will be found
to be still more confined. They ascended the throne
not by any hereditary right, but in consequence of
the election of their fubjeas. In order to avoid
an unnecessary number of quotations, I refer my
readers to Hottomanni Franco-gallia, cap. vi. p. 47.
edit. 573, where they will find the fullest proof
of this from Gregory of Tours, Amoinus, and the
most authentick historians of the Merovingian
Kings. The effe& of this election was not to in-
vest them with absolute power. Whatever related
to the general welfare of the nation, was submitted
to publick deliberation, and determined by the
suffrage of the people, in the annual assemblies
clled Le Champs de Mars and Lcs Champs de

Mai.

Mai. These assemblies were called Champs, be-
cause, according to the custom of all the barbarous
nations, they were held in the open air, in ome
plain capable of containing the vast number of
persons who had a right to be present. Jo. Jac.
Sorberus de Comitiis veterum Germanorum, vol. i.
§ 19, &c. They were denominated Champs de
Mars and de Mai, from the months in which they
were held. Every free-man stems to have had a
right to be present in these assemblies. Sorberus,
ibid. § 133, &c. The ancient annals of the Franks
describe the persons who were present in the as-
fembly held A. D. 788, in these words: In placito
Ingelheimenfi conveniunt pontifices, majores, mi-
nores, facerdotes, reguli, duces, comites, prafeti,
cives, oppidani, Apud Sorber. §304. There every
thing that concerned the happiness of their coun-
try, fays an ancient historian, every thing that could
be of benefit to the Franks, was confidered and
enjoined. Fredegarius ap. Du Cange Gloflar. voc.
Campus Martii. Chlotharius II. describes the bufi-
ness, and acknowledges the authority of these as-
femblies. They are called, fays he, that whatever
elates to the common safety may be confidered
and resolved by common deliberation; and what-
ever they determine, to that I will conform. Amoi-
nus de Gest. Franc. lib. iv. c. i. ap. Bouquet Re-
cucil, iii. 6. The statutory clauses, or words of
legislative authority in the decrees issued in these
affcmblies, run not in the name of the King alone.
" We have treated, fays Childebert, in a decree,

VOL. I F f A.D.

A. D. 52, in the afflembly of March, together
with our Nobles, concerning some affairs, and we
now publilh the conclusion, that it may come to
the knowledge of all." Childeb. Decret. ap. Bou-
quet Recueil des Hifor. tom. iv. p. 3. We have
agreed together with our vassals. Ibid. § 2. It
is agreed in the assembly in which we were all
united. Ibid. § 4. The Salic laws, the most ve-
nerable monument of French jurisprudence, were
enacted in the fame manner. Ditaverunt Salicam
legem proceres ipfius gentis, qui tunc temporis
apud eam erant Refores. Sunt autem elefti de
pluribus viri quatuor-qui per tres Mallos conve-
nientes, omnes caufarum origines follicite difcur-
rendo, tratantes de fingulis judicium decreverunt
hoc modo. Praef. Leg. Salic. ap. Bouquet. Ibid.
p. 122. Hoc decretum eft apud regem & prin-
cipes ejus, & apud cunstum populum chriltianum,
qui infra regnum Merwingorum confiftunt. Ibid.
p. 124. Nay, even in their charters, the Kings
of the first race are careful to specify that they
were granted with the content of their vassals. Ego
Childebertus Rex uni cum confenfu & voluntate
Francorum, &c. A. D. 558. Bouquet, ibid. 622.
Chlotharius III. una cum patribus noftris epifcopis,
optimacibus, caterifque palatii noftri miniftris,
A. D. 664. Ibid. 648. De confenfu fidelium nof-
trorum, Mably Obferv. ton. i. p. 239. The his-
torians likewise describe the functions of the King
in the national assemblies in such terms, as imply
that his authority there was extremely small, and

that

that every thing depended on the court itself. Ipfe
Rex (fays the authors of Annales Francorum,
speaking of the Field of March) fedebat in fella
regia, circumRfante exercitu, precipiebatque is, die
illo, quicquid a Francis decretum erat, Bouquet
Recueil, tom. ii. p. 647.

THAT the general assemblies exercised supreme

jurifdition over all persons, and with respect to all
causes, is so evident as to stand in need of no proof,
The trial of Brunehaut, A. D. 613, how unjust
soever the sentence against her may be, as related
by Fredegarius, Chron. cap. 42. Bouquet, ibid.
430. is in itself sufficient proof of this. The no.
torious violence and iniquity of the sentence serve
to demonfirate the extent of jurifdiaion which
this assembly possessed, as a Prince so sanguinary
as Clothaire II. thought the fantion of its autho-
rity would be sufficient tojuftify his rigorous treat-
ment of the mother and grandmother of so many
Kings.

WITH refpet to conferring donatives on the

Prince, we may observe, that among nations whose
manners and political inltitutions are simple, the
publick, as well as individuals, having few wants,
they are unacquainted with taxes, and free un-
civilized tribes disdain to submit to any stated
imposition. This was remarkably the cafe of the
Germans, and of all the various people that iued
from that country. Tacitus pronounces two tribes
not to be of German origin, because they fbmit-

F f ted

ted to pay taxes. De Morib. Germ. c. 43. And
speaking of another tribe according to the ideas
prevalent in Germany, he fays, " they were not
degraded by the imposition of taxes." Ibid. c. 29.
Upon their settlement in Gaul, we may conclude,
that while elated with the consciousness of vi&ory,
they would not renounce the high-fpirited ideas
of their ancestors, or voluntarily submit to a bur-
den which they regarded as a badge of servitude.
The evidence of the earliest records and historians
justify this conclusion. M. de Montesquieu, in
the twelfth and subsequent chapters of the thir-
teenth book of 'Esprit des Loix, and M. de Mably
Obfervat. fur 'Hist. de France, tom. i. p. 247.
have investigated this fa& with great attention,
and have proved clearly that the property of free-
men among the Franks was not subjet to any
stated tax. That the state required nothing from
persons of this rank but military service at their
own expence, and that they should entertain the
King in their houses when he was upon any pro-
grefs through his dominions, or his officers when
lent on any publick employment, furnihfing them
with carriages and horses. Monarchs subsisted al-
most entirely upon the revenues of their own do-
mains, and upon the perquisites arising from the
administration ofjuftice, together with a few small
fines and forfeitures exacted from such as had been
guilty of certain trespasses. It is foreign from my
subjea to enumerate there. The reader may find
them in Obfervat, de M. do Mably, vol. i. p. 67.

^ ~ WHBN

WHEN any extraordinary aid was granted by

free-men to their sovereign, it was purely volun-
tary. In the annual assembly of March or May,
it was the custom to make the King a present of
money, of horses or arms, or of ome other thing
of value. This was an ancient custom, and derived
from their anceltors the Germans. Mos eft civi-
tatibus, ultro ac viritim conferri principibus vel
armentorum vel frugum, quod pro honore accep-
tum, etiam neceffltatibus fubvenit. Tacit. de Mor.
Germ. c. 15. These gifts, if we may form a judg-
ment concerning them from the general terms in
which they are mentioned by the ancient hifto-
rians, were considerable, and made no small part
of the royal revenue. Many passages to this pur-
pose are produced by M. du Cange, Dissert. iv. fur
Joinville, 153. Sometimes a conquered people
specified the gift which they bound themselves to
pay annually, and it was exaced as a debt if they
failed. Annales Metenfes, ap. Du Cange, ibid.
p. 55. It is probable that the first ftcp towards
taxation was to ascertain the value of these gifts
which were originally gratuitous, and to compel
the people to pay the fum at which they were rated.
Still, however, some memory of their original was
preserved, and the aids granted to monarchs in all
the kingdoms of Europe were termed benevolences
or free-gifts.

THE Kings of the second race in France were

raised to the throne by the eleRion of the people.
Pepinus Rex pius, fays an author who wrote a few

F f 3 years

years after the tranfation which he records, per
authoritatem Papa, & undtionem fanti chrifmatis,
& elefionem omnium Francorum in regni folio
fublimatus eft. Claufula de Pepini confecratione
ap. Bouq. Recueil des Hiftor. tom. v. p. 9. At
the fame time, as the chief men of the nation had
transferred the crown from one family to another,
an oath was exated of them, that they ihould
maintain on the throne the family which they had
now promoted ut nunquam de alterius lumbis
regem in aevo praefumant eligere. Ibid. p. io.
This oath the nation faithfully observed during a
considerable space of time. The posterity of Pepin
kept poffcflion of the throne but with refpet to
the manner of dividing their dominions among their
children, Princes were obliged to confilt the gene-
ral assembly of the nation. Thus Pepin himself,
AD. 768, appointed his two sons, Charles and
Carlomannus, to reign as joint sovereigns bt he
did this, una cum confenfu Francorum & proce-
rum fuorum feu & epifcoporum, before whom he
laid the matter in their general assembly. Conven-
tus apud fan&um Dionyfium, Capitular. vol. i.
p. 187. This deflination the French confirmed in
a subsequent assembly, which was called upon the
death of Pepin for, as Eginhart relates, they not
only appointed them Kings, but by their authority
they regulated the limits of their refpetive terri-
tories. Vita Car. Magni ap. Bouquet Recueil,
tom. v. p. go. In the fame manner, it was by
the authority of the supreme assemblies that any
dispute which arose among the defccndants of the

royal

royal family was determined. Charlemngne re-
cognizes this important part of their jurildiLion,
and confirms it in his charter concerning the par-
tition of his dominions; for he appoints, that, in
cafe of any uncertainty with refpecl to the right
of the several competitors, he whom the people
shall chute, hall succeed to the crown. Capitular.
vol. i. 442.

UNDER the second race of Kings, the aflembly

of the nation, distinguished by the name of Con-
ventus, Malli, Placita, were regularly assembled
once a year at least, and frequently twice in the
year. One of the molt valuable monuments of
the history of France is the treatise of Hincmarus,
archbishop of Rheims, de ordine Palatii. He died
A. D. 882. only sixty eight years after Charle-
magne, and he relates in that hort discourse the
fats which were communicated to him by Adal-
hardus, a minitier and confident of Charlemagne.
From him we learn that this great monarch never
failed to hold the general assembly of his fubjedts
every year. In quo placito generalitas univer-
forum majorum tam clericorum quam laicorum
conveniebat. Hincm. oper. edit. Sirmondi, vol. ii.
C. 29. 21 . In thele aflemblies, matters which
related to the general safety and state of the king-
dom were always discussed, before they entered
upon any private or less important business. Ibid.
c. 33. p. 2 13. His immediate successors imitated
his example, and tranlacted no affair of import-
ance without the advice of their great council.

F f 4 UNDER

UNDER the second race of Kings, the genius of

the French government continued to be in a good
measure democratical. The nobles, the dignified
ecclefiafticks, and the great officers of the crown,
were not the only members of the national coun-
cil; the people, or the whole body of free men,
either in person or by their representatives, had
a right to be present in it. Hincmarus, in de-
scribing the manner of holding the general assem-
blies, fays, that if the weather was favourable,
they met in the open air, but, if otherwise, they
had different apartments allotted to them, so that
the dignified clergy were eparated from the laity,
and the comites vel hujufmodi principes fibimet
honorificabiliter a cetera multitudine fegregarentur.
Ibid. c. 35. p. 14. Agobardus, archbilhop of
Lyons, thus describes a national council in the
year 833, wherein he was present. Qui ubique
conventus extitit ex reverendifflimis epifcopis, &
magnificentifimis viris inluftribus, collegio quoque
abbatum & conitum, promilcuaeque tatis &
dignitatis populo. The cetera multitudo of Hinc-
marus is the fame with thepopulus of Agobardus,
and both describe the inferior order of freemen,
the fame who were afterwards known in France
by the name of the third etate, and in England
by the name of commons. The people, as well
as the members of higher dignity, were admitted
to a hare of the legislative power. Thus, by a
law, A. D. 803, it is ordained, " that the question
lhall be put to the people with refpe& to every
new law, and if they hall agree to it, they mhall

2 confirm

confirm it by their signature." Capit. vol. i. 394.
There are two capitularia which convey to us a
full idea of the part which the people had in the
adminiltration of government. When they felt
the weight of any grievance, they had a right to
petition the sovereign for redress. One of thele
petitions, in which they desire that ecclefiafticks
might be exempted from bearing arms, and from
serving in person again[t the enemy, is still extant.
It is addressed to Charlemagne, A. D. 80o, and
expressed in such terms as could have been used
only by men conscious of liberty, and of the ex-
tensive privileges which they possessed. They con-
clude with requiring him to grant their demand,
if he wished that they should any longer continue
faithful fubje&ts to him. That great monarch,
instead of being offended or surprised at the bold-
ness of their petition, received it in a mot gracious
manner, and signified his willingness to comply
with it. But sensible that he himself did not
possess legislative authority, he promifcs to lay the
matter before the next general assembly, that such
things as were of common concern to all might
be there confidered and etabliflied by common
consent. Capitul. tom. i. p. 405.-409. As the
people by their petitions brought matters to be
proposed in the general assembly, we learn from
another capitulare the form in which they were
approved there, and enacted as laws. The pro-
positions were read aloud, and then the people
were required to declare whether they aflinted to
them or not. They signified their assent by crying

three

three times, " We are satisfied," and then the
capitulare was confirmed by the subscription of
the monarch, the clergy and the chief men of the
laity. Capitul. tom. i. p. 627. A. D. 822. It
seems probable from a capitulare of Carolus
Calvus, A. D. 851, that the sovereign could not
refuse his assent to what was proposed and efta-
blifhed by his fubjeas in the general assembly.
Tit. ix. § 6. Capitul. vol. ii. p. 47. It is un-
neceflary to multiply quotations concerning the
legislative power of the national assembly of France
under the second race, or concerning its right to
determine with regard to peace and war. The
uniform style of the Capitularia is an abundant
confirmation of the former. The reader who de-
fires any farther information with respect to the
latter, may consult Les Origines ou l'Ancien Gou-
vernement de la France, &c. tom. iii. p. 87, &c.
'What has been said with refpe6t to the admiflion
of the people or their representatives into the fu-
preme assembly merits attention, not only in tracing
the progress of the French government, but on
account of the light which it throws upon a imilar
question agitated in England, concerning the time
when the commons became part of the legislative
body in that kingdom.
NOTE XXXIX. SECT. III. p. 201. [QQJ.

THAT important change which the constitution

of France underwent, when the legislative power
was transferred from the great council of the

nation

nation to the King, has been explained by the
French antiquaries with less care, than they
bestow in illustrating other events in their history.
For that reason I have endeavoured with greater
attention to trace the steps which led to this me-
morable revolution. I hall here add some parti-
culars which tend further to illustrate it. The
Leges Salicz, the Leges Burgundionum, and other
codes published by the several tribes which fettled
in Gaul, were general laws extending to every
person, to every province and diftri& where their
authority was acknowledged. But they seem to
have become obsolete; and the reason of their
falling into disuse is very obvious. Almost the
whole property of the nation was allodial when
these laws were framed. But when the feudal in-
ftitutions became general, and gave rife to an
infinite variety of questions peculiar to that species
of tenure, the ancient codes were of no use in
deciding with regard to these, because they could
not contain regulations applicable to cafes which
did not exilt at the time when they were compiled.
This considerable change in the nature of property
made it necessary to publilh the new regulations
contained in the Capitularia. Many of these, as
is evident from the perusal of them, were publick
laws extending to the whole French nation, in
the general assembly of which they were enadted.
The weakness of the greater part of the monarchls
of the second race, and the disorder into which
the nation was thrown by the depredations of the
Normans, encouraged the barons to usurp an in-

dependent

dependent power formerly unknown in France.
The nature and extent of that jurifdiciion which
they assumed, I have formerly confidered. The
political union of the kingdom was at an end, its
ancient constitution was diflolved, and only a
feudal relation subsisted between the King and his
vafials. The regal jurifdition extended no fur-
ther than the domains of the crown. Under the
last Kings of the second race, these were reduced
almost to nothing. Under the first Kings of the
third race, they comprehended little more than
the patrimonial estate of Hugh Capet, which he
annexed to the crown. Even with this acceflion,
they continued to be very narrow. Velly, Hit. de
France, tom. iii. p. 32. Many of the most confi-
derable provinces in France did not at first ac-
knowledge Hugh Capet as a lawful Monarch.
There are fRill extant several charters, granted
during the first years of his reign, with this re-
markable clause in the form of dating the charter;
" Deo regnante, rege expefante," regnante do-
mino noftro Jesu Chrifto, Francis autem contra
jus regnum ufurpante Ugone rege. Bouquet Re-
cueil, tom. x. p. 544. A Monarch whose title
was thus openly disputed, was not in a condition
to alert the royal jurifdition, or to limit that of
the barons.

ALL there circumstances rendered it easy for

the barons to usurp the rights of royalty within
their own territories. The capitularia became no
less obsolete than the ancient laws; local customs

were

were every where introduced, and became the sole
rule by which all civil tranfaftions were conducted,
and all causes were tried. The wonderful igno-
rance, which became general in France during
the ninth and tenth centuries, contributed to the
introduction of customary law. Few persons, ex-
cept ecclefiafticks, could read; and as it was not
in the power of such illiterate persons to have re-
course to written laws, either as their guide in bu-
finess, or their rule in administering justice, the
customary law universally prevailed.

DURING this period, the general assembly of

the nation seems not to have been called, nor to
have once exerted its legislative authority. Local
customs regulated and decided every thing. A
striking proof of this occurs in tracing the pro-
grefs of the French jurisprudence. The last of
the Capitularia collected by M. Baluze, was issued
in the year 92r, by Charles the Simple. An
hundred and thirty years elapsed from that period
to the publication of the first ordonance of the
Kings of the third race, contained in the great
collecion of M. Lauriere, and the first ordonance
which appears to be an as of legislation extend-
ing to the whole kingdom, is that of Philip Au-
guftus, A. D. z 190. Ordon. tom. i. p. , 8.
During that long period of one hundred and sixty-
nine years, all tranfations were direced by local
customs, and no addition was made to the ftatu-
tory law of France. The ordonances, previous to
the reign of Philip Augustus, contain regulations,

the

the authority of which did not extend beyond the
King's domains.

VARIOUS instances occur of the caution with

which the. Kings of France ventured at first to
exercise legislative authority. M. l'Ab. de Mably
produces an ordonance of Philip Augustus, A. D.
12o6, concerning the Jews, who, in that age,
were in ome measure the property of the lord in
whose territories they resided. ut it is not so
much an at of royal power, as a treaty of the
King with the countess of Champagne, and the
comte de Dampierre; and the regulations in it
seem to be eftabliihed not by his authority, but
by their content. Obfervat. fur l'hift. de France,
ii. p. 355. In the fame manner an ordonance of
Louis VIII. concerning the Jews, A. D. 1223,
is a contract between the King and his nobles,
with refpet to their manner of treating that un-
happy race of men. Ordon. tom. i. p. 47. The
Eftabliffemens of St. Louis, though well adapted
to serve as general laws to the whole kingdom,
were not published as such, but only as a complete
code of customary law, to be of authority within
the King's domains. The wisdom, the equity and
the order conspicuous in that code of St. Louis,
procured it a favourable reception throughout the
kingdom. The veneration due to the virtues and
good intentions of its author, contributed nor a
little to reconcile the nation to that legiflat ve
authority, which he King began to afume. Soon
after his time, the idea of the King's pofrhelng

frpremo

supreme legislative power became common. If,
fays Beaumanoir, the King makes any eflablifh-
ment specially for his own domain, the barons
may nevertheless adhere to their ancient customs;
but if the establishment be general, it hall be
current throughout the whole kingdom, and we
ought to believe that such eftablilhments are made
with mature deliberation, and for the general
good. Cout. de Beauvoifis, c. 48. p. 265.
Though the Kings of the third race did not call
the general assembly of the nation, during the
long period from Hugh Capet to Philip the Fair,
yet they seem to have consulted the bilhops and
barons who happened to be present in their court,
with refpet to any new law which they published.
Examples of this occur Ordon. tom. i. p. & 5.
The practice seems to have continued as late as
the reign of St. Louis, when the legislative au-
thority of the crown was well eftablihed. Ordon.
tom. i. p. 58. A. D. 1246. This attention paid
to the barons facilitated the King's acquiring such
full pofleflon of the legislative power, as enabled
them afterwards to exercise it without observing
that formality.

THE assemblies, distinguished by the name of

the States General, were first called A. D. 1302,
and were held occasionally from that period to
the year 1614, since which time they have not
been summoned. These were very different from
the ancient assemblies of the French nation under
the Kings of the first and second race. There is

1no

no point with refpes& to which the French anti-
quaries are more generally agreed, than in main-
taining that the States General had no suffrage in
the palling of laws, and possesed no proper legis-
lative jurifdi&ion. The whole tenor of the French
history confirms this opinion. The form of pro-
ceeding in the States General was this. The King
addressed himself to the whole body aembled in
one place, and laid before them the affairs on
account of which he had summoned them. The
deputies of each of the three orders, of nobles, of
clergy, and of the third estate, met apart, and
prepared their cahier or memorial, containing their
answer to the propositions which had been made
to them, together with the representations which
they thought proper to lay before the King. These
answers and representations were confidered by the
King in his council, and generally gave rife to an
ordonance. These ordonances were not addrefed
to the three estates in common. Sometimes the
King addressed an ordonance to each of the estates
in particular. Sometimes he mentioned the afiem.
bly of the three estates. Sometimes mention is
made only of the assembly of that estate to which
the ordonance is addressed. Sometimes no men-
tion at all is made of the assembly of estates,
which suggested the propriety of enacting the law.
Preface au torn. iii. des Ordon. p, xx. Thus the
States General had only the privilege of advising
and remonftratingl the legislative authority resided
in the King alone.

NOTE

NOTE XL. SECT. III. . 206. [RR].

IF the parliament of Paris be confidered only

as the supreme court of justice, every thing rela.
tive to its origin and jurifdi&ion is clear and ob-
vious. It is the ancient court of the King's palace,
new-modelled, rendered sedentary, and invested
with an extensive and afcertainedjurifdiction. The
power of this court, while employed in this part
of its functions, is not the object of present confi-
deration. The pretensions of the parliament to
controul the exercise of the legislative authority,
and its claim of a right to interpose with refpeót
to publick affairs and the political administration
of the kingdom, lead to inquiries attended with
greater difficulty. As the officers and members
of the parliament of Paris were anciently nominated
by the King, were paid by him, and on several
occasions were removed by him at pleasure,
(Chroniq. Scandaleufe de Louis XI. chez les
Mem. de Comines, tom. ii. p. 51. Edit. de M.
Lenglet de Frelnoy) they cannot be confidered
as representatives of the people, nor could they
claim any hare in the legislative power as ating
in their name. We must search for borne other
source of this high privilege, The parliament was
originally composed of the most eminent persons
in the kingdom. The peers of France, eccle-
fiafticks of the highest order, and noblemen of
illustrious birth were members of it, to whom
were added some clerks and counsellors learned in

VOL. I. G g the

the laws. Pafquier Recherches, p. 44, &c. Ency-
clopedie, tom. xii. Art. Parlement, p. 3, 5. A
court thus constituted was properly a committee
of the States General of the kingdom, and was
composed of those barons and fideles, whom the
Kings of France were accustomed to consult with
regard to every a of jurifdi&ion or legislative
authority. It was natural therefore, during the
intervals between the meetings of the States Gene-
ral, or during those periods when that assembly
was not called, to consult the parliament, to lay
matters of publick concern before it, and to ob-
tain its approbation and concurrence, before any
ordonance was published, to which the people
were required to conform. 2. Under the second
race of Kings, every new law was reduced into
proper form by the Chancellor of the kingdom,
was proposed by him to the people, and when
ena&ed, was committed to him to be kept among
the publick records, that he might give authen-
tick copies of it to all who hould demand them.
Hincm. de ord. palat. c. 6. Capitul. Car. Calv.
tit. xiv. § 1 i. tit. xxxiii. The chancellor presided
in the parliament of Paris at its first institution.
Encyclopedie, tom. iii. art. Chancelier, p. 88. It
was therefore natural for the King to continue to
employ him in his ancient functions of framing,
taking into his custody, and publishing the ordo-
nances which were issued. To an ancient copy
of the Capitularia of Charlemagne, the following
words are subjoined. Anno tertio Clementiflimi
domini noftri Caroli Augufti, sub ipso anno, haec

faca

fa&a Capitula funt, & confignata Stephano comiti,
ut hac manifefta faceret Parifiis mallo publico, &
illa legere faceret coram Scabineis, quod ita &
fecit, & omnes in uno confenferunt, quod ipfi
voluiffent obfervare ufque in pofterum, etiarn om-
nes Scabinei, Epifcopi, Abbates, Comites, manu
propria fubter fignaverunt. Bouquet Recueil,
tom. v. p. 663. Mallus signifies not only the ub-
lick assembly of the nation, but the court ofjuftice
held by the comes, or mifus dominicus. Scabini
were the judges, or the assessors of the judges in
that court. Here then seems to be a very early
instance, not only of laws being published in a
court of jutice, but of their being verified or
confirmed by the lilbfcription of the judges. If
this was the common pracice, it naturally intro-
duced the verifying of edias in the parliament of
Paris. But this conjecture I propose with that
diffidence, which I have felt in all my reasonings
concerning the laws and institutions of foreign
nations. 3. This supreme court of justice in
France was dignified with the appellation of par-
liament, the name by which the general assembly
of the nation was distinguished towards the close
of the second race of Kings; and men, both irt
reasoning and in conduc, are wonderfully influ-
enced by the similarity of names. The preserving
the ancient names of the magistrates established
while republican government subsisted in Rome,
enabled Augustus and his successors to affurne new
powers, with less observation, and greater cafe.
The bestowing the fame name in France upon two

G g 2 courts,

courts, which were extremely different, contri-
buted not a little to confound their jurifdition
and functions.

ALL these circumfiances concurred in leading

the Kings of France to avail themselves of the
parliament of Paris, as the instrument of reconcil-
ing the people to their exercii of legislative autho-
rity. The French, accustomed to fee all new laws
examined and authorised before they were pub-
lifhed, did not sufficiently distinguish between the
effect of performing this in the national assembly,
or in a court appointed by the King. But as that
court was composed of refpetable members, and
well skilled in the laws of their country, when any
new edit received its fanaion, that was fifficient
to dispose the people to implicit submission.

WHEN the practice of verifying and regijlering

the royal edias in the parliament of Paris became
common, the parliament contended that this was
necessary in order to give them legal authority. It
was eftabliihed as a fundamental maxim in French
jurisprudence, that no law could be published in
any other manner; that, without this formality, no
edict or ordonance could have any effect; that the
people were not bound to obey it, and ought not
to confider it as an edi& or ordonance until it was
verified in the supreme court, after free delibera-
tion. Roche-flavin des Parlemens de France, 4to.
Gen. 162 . p. 921. The parliament, at different
times, hath with great fortitude and integrity op-

3 posed

posed the will of their sovereigns; and notwith-
ltanding their repeated and peremptory requisitions
and commands, hath refused to verify and publish
such edits as it conceived to be oppreflive to the
people, or subversive of the conflitution of the
kingdom. Roche-flavin reckons, that between the
year 1562, and the year 1589, the parliament re-
fused to verify more than a hundred edits of the
Kings. Ibid. 925. Many instances of the spirit
and constancy with which the parliaments of France
opposed pernicious laws, and asserted their own
privileges, are enumerated by Limnaus Notitiae
Regni Francia, lib. i. c. 9. p. 224.

BUT the power of the parliament to maintain

and defend this privilege, bore no proportion to its
importance, or to the courage with which the mem-
bers aflerted it. When any monarch was deter-
mined that an edi& ihould be carried into execu-
tion, and found the parliament inflexibly resolved
not to verify or publish it, he could easily supply
this defect by the plenitude of his regal power.
He repaired to the parliament in pcrfon, he took
poffeflion of his feat of justice, and commanded
the edia to be read, verified, registered, and pub-
lifled in his pretence. Then, according to ano-
ther maxim of French law, the King himself being
present, neither the parliament, nor any magistrate
whatever, can exercise any authority, or perform
any funtion. Adveniente Principe, ceffat magif-
tratus. Roche-flavin, ibid. p. 928, 929. Ency-
clopedie, tom. ix. Art. Lit de uftice, p. 581.

* G g 3 Roche-

Roche-flavin mentions several inftancs of Kinga
who actually exerted this prerogative, so fatal to
the residue of the rights and liberties transmitted
to the French by their ancestors. Pafquier pro.
duces some instances of the fame kind. Rech.
p. 61. Limnaus enumerates many others, which
the length to which this note has swelled, prevents
me from inserting at length, though they tend greatly
to illustrate this important article in the French
history, p. 245. Thus by an exertion of prero-
gative, which, though violent, seems to be confti,
tutional, and isjuftified by innumerable precedents,
all the efforts of the parliament to limit and con-
troul the King's legifative authority, are rendered
ineffetual.

I HAVE not attempted to explain the conftitu-

sion or jurifdi&ion of any parliament in France,
but that of Paris. All of them are formed upon
the model of that most ancient and refpee6able tri-
bunal, and all my observations concerning it will
apply with full force to them.

NOTE XLI. SCT. III. p. 211. [SS].

THE humiliating posture, in which a great Enm

peror implored absolution, is an event so singular,
that the words in which Gregory himself describes
it, merit a place here, and convey a striking pic-
ture of the arrogance of that Pontiff. Per triduum,
ante portam caftri, dopofito omni regio cultu, mise-
rabliter, utpote difcalceatus, & laneis indutus,

pcrfitens

perfiftens, non prius cum multo fletu apoftolicz
miferationis auxilium, & consolationem implorari
deftitit, quam omnes qui ibi aderant, & ad quos
rumor ille pervenit, ad tantam pietatem, & com-
paffionis mifericordiam movit, ut pro eo multis
precibus & lacrimis intercedentes, omnes quidem
infolitam noftra mentis duritiem mirarentur; no-
nulli vero in nobis non apoftolicae fedis gravitatem,
fed quasi tyrannica feritatis crudelitatem efe cla-
marunt. Epift. Gregor. ap. Memorie della Con-
tefra Matilda da Fran. Mar. Fiorentini. Lucca,
1756. vol. i. p. 174.

NOTE XLII. SECT. III. p. 222. [TT].

As I have endeavoured in the history to trace

the various steps in the progress of the conllitu-
tion of the Empire, and to explain the peculiarities
in its policy very fully, it is not necessary to add
much by way of illustration. What appears to
be of any importance, I hall range under diftinat
heads.

1. WITH refpec to the power, jurifdiftion and

revenue of the Emperors. A very just idea of
these may be formed by attending to the view
which Pfeffel gives of the rights of the Emperors
at two different periods. The first at the close of
the Saxon race, A. D. 1024. These, according to
his enumeration, were the right of conferring all
the great ecclesiastical benefices in Germany; of
receiving the revenues of them during a vacancy;

Gg4 of

of Mort-main, or of succeeding to the effets of ec-
clefiafticks who died intestate. The right of con-
firming or of annulling the eletions of the Popes.
The right of assembling councils, and of appoint-
ing them to decide concerning thexaffairs of the
church. The right of conferring the'title of King
upon their vassals. The right of granting vacant
fiefs. The right of receiving the revenues of the
Empire, whether arising from the Imperial do-
mains, from imposts and tolls, from gold or silver
mines, from the taxes paid by the Jews, or from
forfeitures. The right of governing Italy as its
proper sovereigns. The right of erecing free
cities, and of establishing fairs in them. The right
of assembling the diets of the Empire, and of fix.
ing the time of their duration. The right of coin-
ing money, and of conferring that privilege on the
states of the Empire. The right of administering
both high and low justice within the territories of
the different tfates. Abregc, p. 60. The other
period is at the extinction of the Emperors of the
families of Luxemburg and Bavaria, A. D. 1437.
According to the fame author, the Imperial pre-
rogatives at that time were the right of conferring
all dignities and titles, except the privilege of
being a ifate of the Empire. The right of Preces
primarie, or of appointing once during their reign
a dignitary in each chapter or religious house.
The right of granting dispensations with refpec
to the age of majority. The right of ere&ing
cities, and of conferring the privilege of coining
money. The right of calling the meetings of the

diet,

diet, and of presiding in them. Abrege, &c. p.
507. It were easy to Ihow that M. Pfeffel is well
founded in all these aertions, and to confirm them
by the testimony of the most respectable authors.
In the one period, the Emperors appear as mighty
sovereigns with extensive prerogatives; in the
other, as the heads of a confederacy with very
limited powers.

THE revenues of the Emperors decreased till

more than their authority. The early Emperors,
and particularly those of the Saxon line, betides
their vail patrimonial or hereditary territories, pof-
sessed an extensive domain both in Italy and Ger-
many which belonged to them as Emperors. Italy
belonged to the Emperors s their proper king-
dom, and the revenues which they drew from it
were very considerable. The first alienations of
the Imperial revenue were made in this country.
The Italian cities having acquired wealth, and
aspiring at independence, purchased their liberty
from different Emperors, as I have observed Note
XV. The fums which they paid, and the Em-
perors with whom they concluded there bargains,
are mentioned by Cafp. Klockius de Erario No-
rimb. 671. p. 85, &c. Charles IV. and his son
Wenceslaus, dissipated all that remained of the
Italian branch of the domain. The German do-
main lay chiefly upon the banks of the Rhine, and
was under the government of the Counts Palatine.
It is not easy to mark out the boundaries, or to
etimate the value of this ancient domain, which

has

has been so long incorporated with the territories
of different Princes. Some hints with refpe to
it may be found in the glossary of Speidelius, which
he has intitled Speculum Juridico-Philologico-
politico-Hiftoricum Obfervationum, &c. Norimb.
1673. vol. i. 679. 1045. a more full account of it
is given by Klockius de IErario, p. 84. Besides
this, the Emperors poflefled considerable districts
of land lying intermixed with the estates of the
Dukes and barons. They were accustomed to visit
these frequently, and drew from them what was
sufficient to support their court during the time of
their residence. Annalifta, ap. Struv. tom. i. 6z I.
A great part of there were seized by the nobles
during the long interregnum, or during the wars
occasioned by the contests between the Emperors
and the court of Rome. At the fame time that
such encroachments were made on the fixed or ter-
ritorial property of the Emperors, they were rob-
bed almost entirely of their casual revenues. The
Princes and barons appropriating to themselves
taxes and duties of every kind, which had usually
been paid to them. Pfeffel Abrege, p. 374. The
profuse and inconsiderate ambition of Charles IV.
squandered whatever remained of the Imperial re-
venues after so many defalcations. He, in the
year 13 76, in order to prevail with the Ele&tors to
chute his on Wenceslaus King of the Romans,
promised each of them a hundred thousand crowns.
But being unable to pay so large a fum, and eager
to secure the eletion to his son, he alienated to
the three ecclesiastical Electors, and to the Count

Palatine,

Palatine, such countries as till belonged to the
Imperial domain on the banks of the Rhine, and
likewise made over to them all the taxes and tolls
then levied by the Emperors in that difri&. Tri-
themius, and the author of the Chronicle of Mag-
deburgh, enumerate the territories and taxes which
were thus alienated, and represent this as the last
and fatal blow to the Imperial authority. Struv.
Corp. vol. i. p. 437. From that period, the hreds
of the ancient revenues possessed by the Emperors
have been so inconsiderable, that, in the opinion
of Speidelius, all that they yield would be so far
from defraying the expence of supporting their
household, that they would not pay the charge of
maintaining the posts established in the Empire.
Speidelii Speculum, &c. vol. i. p. 680. These
funds, inconsiderable as they were, continued to
decrease. Granvelle, the minister of Charles V.
asserted in the year 1546, in pretence of several
of the German Princes, that his master drew no
money at all from the Empire. Sleid. History of
the Reformation, Lond. 689. p. 372. The fame
is the cafe at present. Traits de droit Publique de
l'Empire par M. le Coq de Villeray, p. 55. From
the reign of Charles IV. whom Maximilian called
the pest of the Empire, the Emperors have de-
pended entirely on their hereditary dominions, as
the only source of their power, and even of their
subsistence.

2. THE ancient mode of elecing the Empe-
ors, and the various changes which it underwent,

require

require some illustration. The Imperial crown
was originally attained by eletion, as well as
those of most monarchies in Europe. An opinion
long prevailed among the antiquaries and publick
lawyers of Germany, that the right of chufing the
Emperors was vested in the archbiflops of Mentz,
Cologne, and Treves, the King of Bohemia, the
Duke of Saxony, the Marquis of Brandenburgh,
and the Count Palatine of the Rhine, by an edid
of Otho III. confirmed by Gregory V. about the
year 996. But the whole tenor of hifiory contra-
dits this opinion. It appears, that from the ear-
lieft period in the history of Germany, the person
who was to reign over all, was eleced by the sus-
frage of all. Thus Conrad I. was eleded by all
the people of the Franks, fay some annalists; by
all the princes and chief men, fay others; by all
the nation, fay others. See their words, Struv.
Corp. 211. Conringius de German. Imper. Repub.
Acroamata Sex. Ebroduni 1654. p. 103. In the
year 1024, posterior to the supposed regulations
of Otho III. Conrad Ii. was elected by all the
chief men, and his election was approved and con-
firmed by the people, Struv. Corp. 284. At the
election of Lotharius II. A. D. 1125, sixty thou-
sand persons of all ranks were present. He was
named by the chief men, and their nomination was
approved by the people. Struv. ibid. p. 357. The
first author who mentions the seven Eletors is
Martinus Polonus, who flourilhed in the reign of
Frederick II. which ended A. D. 1250. We find,
that in all the ancient elections to which I have

referred,

referred, the Princes of the grcateft power and
authority were allowed by their countrymen to
name the person whom they wished to appoint
Emperor, and the people approved or disapproved
of their nomination. This privilege of voting first
is called by the German lawyers the right of Pre-
taxation. Pfeffcl Abrege, p. 316. This was the
first origin of the exclusive right which the Elec-
tors acquired. The Elecors possessed the most
extensive territories of any Princes in the Empire;
all the great offices of the state were in their hands
by hereditary right; as loon as they obtained or en-
grossed so much influence in the election as to be
allowed the right of pra:taxation, it became un-
necessary for the inferior ecclefiafticks and barons
to attend, when they had no other function but
that of confirming the deed of there more powerful
Princes by their assent. During times of turbu-
lence, they could not resort to the place of election
without a numerous retinue of armed vassals, the
expence of which they were obliged to defray out
of their own revenues. The rights of the seven
Eleaors were supported by all the descendants and
allies of their powerful families, who flared in the
splendor and influence which they enjoyed by this
distinguishing privilege. Pfeffel Abrege, p. 376.
The seven Electors were confidered as the repre-
fentatives of all the orders which composed the
highest class of German nobility. There were three
archbishops, chancellors of the three great diftrits
into which the Empire was anciently divided; one
King; one Duke one Marquis; and one Count.

All

All these circumfrances contributed to render the
introdution of this considerable innovation into
the conRitution of the Germanick body extremely
easy. Every thing of importance, relating to this
branch of the political state of the Empire, is well
illustrated by Onuphrius Panvinius, an Augufti-
nian Monk of Verona, who lived in the reign of
Charles V. His treatise, if we make some allow-
ance for that partiality which he expresses in favour
of the powers which the Popes claimed in the
Empire, has the merit of being one of the first
works in which a contraverted point in history is
examined witk critical precision, and with a pro-
per attention to that evidence which is derived
from records, or the testimony of contemporary
historians. It is inserted by Goldaftus in his Poli-
tica Imperialia, p. 2.

As the Eletors have engrossed the sole right

of chuflng the Emperors, they have assumed like-
wife that of deposing them. This high power the
Eletors have not only presumed to claim, but
have ventured, in more than one instance, to exer-
cife. In the year 1298, a part of the Eletors
deposed Adolphus of Nassau and substituted Albert
of Austria in his place. The reasons on which
they found their sentence, how that this deed
flowed from factious, not from publick-fpirited
motives. Struv. Corp. vol. i. 540. In the sirs
year of the fifteenth century, the Electors deposed
Wenceslaus, and placed the Imperial crown on
the head of Rupert Eletor Palatine. The at of

depofitioa

deposition is itill extant. Goldafti Conitit. vol. i.
379. It is pronounced in the name and by the
authority of the Elecors, and confirmed by several
prelates and barons of the Empire, who were
present. These exertions of the electoral power
demonstrate that the Imperial authority was unk
very low.

THE other privileges of the Elecors, and the

rights of the electoral college are explained by the
writers on the publick law in Germany.

3. WITH refpe& to the diets or general aflem-

blies of the Empire, it would be necessary, if my
objec6 were to write a particular history of Ger-
many, to enter into a minute detail, concerning
the forms of assembling it, the persons who have
right to be present, their division into several Col-
leges or Benches, the objects of their deliberation,
the mode in which they carry on their debates or
give their suffrages, and the authority of their
decrees or recesses. But in a general history it is
sufficient to observe, that, originally, the diets of
the Empire were exactly the fame with the
afemblies of March and of May, held by the
Kings of France. They met, at leall, once a year.
Every freeman had a right to be present. They
were aemblies, in which a monarch deliberated
with his fubjeds, concerning their common in-
terest. Arummus de comitiis Rom. German. Im-
perii, 4to, Jenae, 1660, cap. 7. N°. 20, &c. But
when the Princes, dignified ecclefiafticks, and ba.

rons,

tons, acquired territorial and independent jurif-
di&ion, the diet became an assembly of the separate
states, which formed the confederacy of which
the Emperor was head. While the constitution
of the Empire remained in its primitive form,
attendance on the diets was a duty, like the other
services due from feudal subje&s to their fove-
reign, which the members were bound to perform
in person; and if any member who had a right
to be present in the diet neglected to attend in
person, he not only loft his vote, but was liable
to an heavy penalty. Arumaus de Comit. c. 5.
N° 40. Whereas, from the time that the mem-
bers of the diet became independent states, the
right of suffrage was annexed to the territory or
dignity, not to the person. The members, if they
could not, or would not attend in person, might
fend their deputies, as Princes fend ambassadors,
and they were entitled to exercise all the rights
belonging to their constituents. Ibid. N°. 42, 46,
49. By degrees, and upon the fame principle of
confidering the diet as an assembly of independent
states, in which each confederate had the right of
suffrage, if any member possessed more than one
of those states or characters which entitle to a feat
rn the diet, he was allowed a proportional number
of suffrages. Pfeffel Abrege, 622. From the
fame cause the Imperial cities, as oon as they
became free, and acquired supreme and indepen-
dent jurifdiaion within their own territories, were
received as members of the diet. The powers of
the diet extend to every thing relative to the com-

mon

mon concern of the Germanick body, or that can
interest or affect it as a confederacy. The diet
takes no cognizance of the interior adminiRration
in the different States, unless that happens to
disturb or threaten the general safety,

4. WITH refpe& to the Imperial chamber, the

jurifdition of which has been the great source of
order and tranquillity in Germany, it is neceiffry
to observe, that this court was instituted in order
to put an end to the calamities occasioned by
private wars in Germany. I have already traced
the rife and progress of this pra&ice, and pointed
out its pernicious effecs as fully as their extensive
influence during the middle ages merited. In
Germany, private wars seem to have been more
frequent and producive of worse consequences
than in the other countries of Europe. There are
obvious reasons for this. The nobility of Ger-
many were extremely numerous, and the causes
of their dissention multiplied in proportion. The
territorial jurifdition which the German nobles
acquired, was more complete than that possessed
by their order in other nations. They became, in
reality, independent powers, and they claimed all
the privileges of that chara6Rer. The long iter-
regnum from A. D. 1155 to A. D. 1273, accur-
tomed them to an uncontrouled licence, and led
them to forget that fbordination which is net
celfary in order to laintain publick tranquillity,
At the time when the other monarchs of Europe

VOL. I. H h began

began to acquire such an increase of power and
revenues, as added new force to their government,
the authority and revenues of the Emperors con-
tinued gradually to decline. The diets of the
Empire, which alone had authority to judge be-
tween such mighty barons, and power to enforce
its decisions, met very seldom. Conring. Acroa-
mata, p. 234. The diets when they did assemble
were often composed of several thousand members,
Chronic. Conitant. ap. Struv. Corp. i. p. 546,
and were mere tumultuary alemblies, ill-qualified
to decide concerning any question of right. The
iefion of the diets continued only two or three
days; Pfeffel Abrege, p. 244, so that they had
no time to hear or discuss any cause that was in the
smallest degree intricate. Thus Germany was
left, in some measure, without any court of judica-
ture, capable of reprelling the evils of private war.

ALL the expedients which were employed in

other countries of Europe in order to restrain this
practice, and which I have described Note XXI.
were tried in Germany with little effet. The
confederacies of the nobles and of the cities, and
the division of Germany into various circles, which
I mentioned in that Note, were found likewise
insufficient. As a last remedy, the Germans had
recourse to arbiters whom'they caned ufjrega.
The barons and states indifferent parts of Ger-
many joined in conventions, by which they bound
themselves to refer all coritroverfies; that might

*., . 'Arise

»nsci

arise between them, to the determination of Auft-
regt, and to submit to their sentences as final.
These arbiters are named sometimes in the treaty
of convention, an instance of which occurs in
Ludewig Reliquia Manufcr. omnis aevi, vol. ii.
212.; sometimes they were chosen by mutual con-
sent; sometimes they were appointed by neutral
persons; and sometimes the choice was left to be
decided by lot. Datt. de Pace publica Imperii,
lib. i. cap. 27. N° 60, &c. Speidelius Speculum,
&c. voc. Auflrag. p. 95. Upon the introduction
of this practice, the publick tribunals of justice
became, in a great measure, useless, and were
almost entirely deserted.

IN order to re-eftablih the authority of govern-

ment, Maximilian instituted the Imperial chamber,
at the period which I have mentioned. This tri-
bunal confidfed originally of a president, who was
always a nobleman of the first order, and of sixteen
judges. The president was appointed by the Em-
peror, and the judges, partly by him, and partly
by the States, according to forms which it is un-
necessary to describe. A fum was imposed, with
their own content, on the States of the Empire,
for paying the salaries of the judges, and officers
in this court. The Imperial chamber was efta-
blifhed first at Francfort on the Maine. During
the reign of Charles V. it was removed to Spires,
and continued in that city above a century and a
half. It is now fixed at Wetzlar. This court

Hh takes

takes cognizance of all questions concerning civil
right between the States of the Empire, and pases
judgment in the laft-refort, and without appeal.
To it belongs, likewise, the privilege of judging
in criminal causes, which may be confidered as
connected with the preservation of the publick
peace. Pfeffel Abreg6, 560.

ALL causes relating to points of feudal right or

jurifdidtion, together with such as refpe& the terri-
tories which hold of the Empire in Italy, belong
properly to the jurifdi&ion of the Aulick council.
This tribunal was formed upon the model of the
ancient court of the palace infiituted by the Em-
perors of Germany. It depended not upon the
States of the Empire, but upon the Emperor; he
having the right of appointing at pleasure all the
judges of whom it is composed. Maximilian, in
order to procure some compensation for the dimi-
nution of his authority, by the powers vetied in
the Imperial chamber, prevailed on the diet A. D.
1512, to give its content to the establishment of
the Aulick council. Since that time, it has been
a great obje&t of policy in the court of Vienna to
extend the jurifdition, and support the authority
of the Aulick council, and to circumscribe and
weaken those of the Imperial chamber. The
tedious forms and dilatory proceedings of the Im-
perial chamber have furnished the Emperors with
pretexts for doing so. Lites Spira, according to
the witticiim of a German lawyer, spirant, fed

nunquam

nunquam exfpirant. Such delays are unavoidable
in a court composed of members named by States,
jealous of each other. Whereas the judges of the
Aulick council, depending on one master, and
being responsible to him alone, are more vigorous
and decisive. Puffendorf. de Statu Imper. Ger-
man. cap. v. § 20. Pfeffel Abrege, p. 581.

NOTE XLIII. SECT. III. p. 225. [UU].

THE description which I have given of the

Turkish government is conformable to the ac-
counts of the most intelligent travellers who have
visited that Empire. The count de Marfigli, in
his treatise concerning the military slate of the
Turkish Empire, ch. vi. and the Author of Obfer-
vations on the religion, laws, government and
manners of the Turks, published at London 1768,
vol. i. p. 8 . differ from other writers who have
described the political constitution of that powerful
monarchy. As they had opportunity, during their
long residence in Turkey, to observe the order
and justice conspicuous in several departments of
adminifiration, they seem unwilling to admit that
it hould be denominated a despotism. But when
the form of government in any country is repre-
sented to be defpotick, this does not suppose that
the power of the monarch is continually exerted
in as of violence, injustice, and cruelty. Under
governments of every species, unless when ome
frantick tyrant happens to hold the scepter, the

H h 3 ordinary

ordinary administration must be conformable to
the principles of justice, and if not aive in pro-
moting the welfare of the people, cannot certainly
have their deftrudion for its objet. A tate, in
which the sovereign poffcffes the absolute com-
mand of a vast military force, together with the
disposal of an extensive revenue; in which the
people have no privileges, and no part either im-
mediate or remote in legislation; in which there
is no body of hereditary nobility, jealous of their
own rights and diftin6tions, to stand as an inter-
mediate order between the Prince and the people,
cannot be distinguished by any name but that of
a despotism. The restraints, however, which I
have mentioned, arising from the Capiculy, and
from religion, are powerful. But they are not
such as change the nature or denomination of the
government. When a defpotick Prince employs
an armed force to support his authority, he com-
mits the supreme power to their hands. The
Pratorian bands in Rome dethroned, murdered,
and exalted Princes, in the fame wanton manner
with the soldiery of the Porte at Constantinople.
But notwithstanding this, the Roman Emperors
have been confidered by all political writers as
possessing defpotick power.

THE Author of Observations on the religion,

law, government, and manners of the Turks, in
a preface to the second edition of his work, hath
made some remarks on what is contained in this

Note,
3

Note, and that part of the text to which it re-
sers. It is with diffidence I set my opinion in
opposition to that of a person, who has observed
the government of the Turks with attention,
and has described it with abilities. But after
a careful review of the fubjeEt, to me the Turk-
ilh government still appears of such a species,
as can be ranged in no class, but that to which
political writers have given the name of defpo-
tim. There is not in Turkey any confritutional
restraint upon the will of the sovereign, or any
barrier to circumscribe the exercise of hi. power,
but the two which have mentioned; one as-
forded by religion, the principle upon which the
authority of the Sultan is founded; the other
by the army, the instrument which he mutt em-
ploy to maintain his power. The Author re-
presents the Ulcma, or body of the law, as an in-
termediate order between the monarch and the
people. Pref. p. o. But whatever restraint the
authority of the Ulcma may impose upon the so-
vereign, is derived from religion. The Mol!ahs,
out of whom the Mufti and other chief officers
of the law mult be chosen, are eccleflarlicks.
It is as interpreters of the Koran or Divine. Will
that they are objects of veneration. The check,
then, which they give to the exercise of arbi-
trary power is not different from one of those
of which I took notice. Indeed, this restraint
cannot be very considerable. The Mufti, who
is the head of the order, as well as every inferior,

H- h 4 officer

officer of law, is named by the Sultan, and re-
movable at pleasure. The strange means em-
ployed by the Ulcma in 1746, to obtain the
difmiflion of a minister whom they hated, is a
manifest proof that they possess but little confti-
tutional authority which can serve as a restraint
upon the will of the sovereign. Obfervat. p. 92.
of d edit. If the author's idea be just, it is
astonishing that the bdy of the aw mhould have
no method of remonstrating against the errors
of administration, but by setting fire to the ca-
pital.

THE Author seems to confider the Capicub,,

or soldiery of the Porte, neither as formidable
intruments of the Sultan's power, nor as any re-
Itraint upon the exercise of it. His reasons for
this opinion are, that the number of the Capit
culy is small in proportion to the other troops
which compose the Turkish armies, and that in
time of peace they are undisciplined. Pref. 2d.
edit. p. 23, &c. But the troops stationed in a
capital, though their number be not great, are
always masters of the sovereign's person and
power. The praetorian bands bore no proportion
to the legionary troops in the frontier provinces.
The soldiery of the Porte are more numerous,
and must possess the fame power, and be equally
formidable, sometimes to the sovereign, and oftener
to the people. However much the difciplite of
she Janizaries may be neglectd t present, it cer-

a '
, W"^

tainly was not so, in. that age to which alone my
description of the Turkish government applies.
The Author observes, Pref. p. 29. that the Jani-
zaries never deposed any Sultan of themselves,
but that some form of law, true or false, has been
observed, and that either the Mufti, or some other
minister of religion, has announced to the un-
happy prince the law which renders him unwor-
thy of the throne. Obferv. p. 102. This will
always happen, In every revolution brought
about by military power, the deeds of the soldiery
must be confirmed and carried into execution with
the civil and religious formalities peculiar to the
constitution.

THIS addition to the Note may serve as a further

illustration of my own sentiments, but is not made
with any intention of entering into any contro-
verfy with the Author of Observations, &c. to
whom I am indebted for the obliging terms in
which he has exprefled his remarks upon what he
had advanced. Happy were it for such as ven-
ture to communicate their opinions to the world,
if every animadversion upon them were conveyed
with the fame candid and liberal fpiritl In one
particular, however, he eems to have mifappre-
hended what I meant. Pref. p. 17. I certainly
did not mention his or count Marfigli's long refi-
dence in Turkey as a circumstance, which should
detrat from the weight of their authority. I
took notice of it, in juitice to my readers, that

they

they might receive my opinion with distrust, as it
differed from that of perfQIns whose means of in-
formation were so far superior to mine.

NOTE XLIV. SECT. III. p. 227. [XX].

THEi infitution, the discipline, and privileges

of the Janizaries are described by all the authors
who give any account of the Turkith government.
The manner in which enthusiasm was employed
in order to inspire them with courage is thus
related by Prince Cantemir: " When Amurath I.
had formed them into a body, he sent them to
Haji Bektafh a Turkish Saint, famous for his mi.
racles and prophecies, desiring him to bestow on
them a banner, to pray to God for their success, and
to give them a name. The Saint, when they ap-
peared in his pretence, put the sleeve of his gown
upon one of their heads, and fays, Let them be
called 2engicberi. Let their countenance be ever
bright, their hands victorious, their (word keen;
let their spear always hang over the heads.of their
enemies, and wherever they go, may they return
with a hining face." Hitory of the Ottoman
Empire, p. 38. The number of Janizarics, at
the first institution of the body, was not confider-
able. Under Solymap, in the year 1521, they
amounted to twelve thousand. Since that time
their number has greatly icreed, Marfigli, Etat.
&c. ch. 16. p. 6,8. Thlugh Solyman pfeCied
such abilities and authorjty as to reitrain this fr-

midable

midable body within the bounds of obedience, yet
its tendency to limit the power of the Sultans
was, even in that age, foreseen by sagacious ob-
servers. Nicolas Daulphinois, who accompanied
M. D'Aramon ambassador from Henry II. of
France to Solyman, published an account of his
travels, in which he describes and celebrates the
discipline of the Janizaries, but at the fame time
predits that they would, one day, become formi-
dable to their masters, and a the fame part at
Constantinople, as the Praetorian bands had done
at Rome. Collection of Voyages from the Earl
of Oxford's Library, vol. i. p. 599.

N O T E XLV. SECT. III. p. 229. [YY].

SOLYMAN the Magnificent, to whom the Turkish

historians have given the firname of Canuni, or
instituter of rules, first. brought the finances and
military eftablilhment of the Turkish Empire into
a regular form. He divided the military force
into the Capiculy or soldiery of the Porte, which
was properly the anding army, and Serrataculy
or soldiers appointed o guard the frontiers. The
chief strength of the latter consisted of those who
held Timariots and Ziams. These were portions
of land granted to certain persons for life, in
much the fame manner as the military fiefs among
the nations of Europe, in return for which mili-
tary service was performed. Solyman, in his
Cawn-Nme or book of regulations, fixed with

great

great accuracy the extent of these lands in each
province of his Empire, appointed the precise
number of soldiers each person who held a Tima-
riot or a Ziam should bring into the field, and
established the pay which they should receive while
engaged in service. Count Marfigli and Sir Paul
Rycaut have given extracs from this book of re-
gulations, and it appears, that the ordinary efta-
blifhment of the Turkish army exceeded an hun-
dred and fifty thousand men. When these were
added to the soldiery of the Porte, they formed a
military power greatly superior to what any
Christian state could command. Marfigli Etat
Militaire, &c. p. 136. Rycaut's state of the Ot-
toman Empire, book iii. ch. 2. As Solyman, dur-
ing his active reign, was engaged so constantly in
war, that his troops were always in the field, the
Serrataculy became almof equal to the Janizaries
themselves in discipline and valour.

IT is not surprising, then, that the authors of

the sixteenth century hould represent the Turks
as far superior to the Chritians, both in the know-
ledge and in the pra&ice of the art of war. Guic-
ciardini informs us, that the Italians learned the
art of fortifying towns from the Turks. Hiftor.
lib. xv. p. 266. Buibequius, who was ambaflador
from Ferdinand to Solyman, and who had oppor-
tunity to observe the state both of the Chri-
ftian and Turkilh armies, published a discourse
concerning the best manner of carrying on war

againf

against the Turks, in which he points out at great
length the. immense advantages which the Infidels
possessed with refpe& to discipline, and military
improvements of every kind. Bufbequii opera, edit.
Elzevir. p. 393, &c. The testimony of other au-
thors might be added, if the matter were, in any
degree, doubtful.

BEFORE I conclude these Proofs and Illuftra-

tions, I ought to explain the reason of two omif-
sions in them; one of which it is necessary to men-
tion on my own account, the other to obviate an
objeAion to this part of the work.

IN all my inquiries and disquisitions concerning

the progress of government, manners, literature
and commerce during the middle ages, as well as
in my delineations of the political constitution of
the different States of Europe at the opening of
the sixteenth century, I have not once mentioned
M. de Voltaire, who, in his Eay fur l'hiftire
generale, has reviewed the fame period, and has
treated of all these fubje&ts. This does not pro-
ceed from inattention to the works of that extra-
ordinary man, whose genius, no less enterprizing
than universal, has attempted almost every different
species of literary composition. In many of there
he excels. In all, if he had left religion untouched,
he is inftrufive and agreeable. But as he seldom
imitates the example of modern historians in citing
the authors from whom they derived their infor-

mation,

mation, I could not, with propriety, appeal to his
authority in confirmation of any doubtful or un-
known fadt. I have often, however, followed him
as my guide in these researches; and he has not
only pointed out the fa&ts with refpeft to which it
was of importance to inquire, but the conclusions
which it was proper to draw from them. If he
had, at the fame time, mentioned the books which
relate these particulars, a great part of my la-
bour would have been unnecessary, and many of
his readers who now confider him only as an en-
tertaining and lively writer, would find that he is
a learned and well-informed historian.

As to the other omifion; every intelligent

reader must have observed, that I have not entered,
either in the hiltorical part of this volume, or in
the Proofs and Illustrations, into the fame detail
with refpe& to the ancient laws and cuftbms of the
Britiih kingdoms, as concerning those of the other
European nations. As the capital faas with re-
gard to the progress of government and manners
in their own country are known to most of my
readers, such a detail appeared to me to be less
essential. Such fa&s and observations, however,
as were necessary towards completing my design in
this part of the work, I have mentioned under the
different articles which are the fubjests of my dif-
quifitions. The Rate of government, in all the
nations of Europe, having been nearly the fame
during several ages, nothing can tend more to illus-

trate

trate the progress of the English constitution, than
a careful inquiry into the laws and customs of the
kingdoms on the Continent. This source of in-
formation has been too much negleted by the
English antiquaries and lawyers. Filled with ad-
miration of that happy constitution now established
in Great Britain, they have been more attentive to
its forms and principles, than to the condition
and ideas of remote times, which, in almost every
particular, differ from the present. While engaged
in perusing the lws, charters, and early historians
of the continental kingdoms, I have often been led
to think that an attempt to illustrate the progress
of the English jurisprudence and policy, by a com-
parison with those of other kingdoms in a similar
situation, would be of great utility, and might
throw much light on some points which are now
obscure, and decide others, which have been long
controverted.

INDEX

# INDEX TO THE FIRST VOLUME.

I N D E X

TO THE
FIRST VO L U M E.

A
A FRICA, the shocking devastations made there by the

Vandals, 238.

Alanus, his character of the clergy in his time, 279.
Alfred the Great, his complaint of the ignorance of the clergy,

279.
.llodial pofellion of land, explained, 256. How fach pofleffion

became fubje& to military service, ib. Diftinguihed from be-
neficiary tenures, 257. How converted into feudal tenures,
265.

Allodium, the etymology of that word, 270.
Ammianus, his character of the Huns, 241, 247.
Amrath, Sultan, the body of Janizaries formed'by him, 226.
.isthema, form of that denounced against robbers during the mid

die ages, 398.
Arabia, the ancient Greek philosophy cultivated there, while loft

in Europe, 387, Note xxviii. The progress of philosophy from
thence to Europe, 388.
ragon, rife of he kingdom of, 17S. Its upion with Caltife,i&.
The conltitution and form of its government, 180. The pri-
vilegesof its Cortes, ib. Office and jurifdicion of the Juliza,
18z. The regal power very confined, 183. Form of the alle-
giance (wore to the Kings of, ib. The power of the nobility
to controul the regal power, 416. Their privilege of union ta-
ken away by Peter IV. ib. The eRablilhment of the Inquisition
opposed there, 420.
Armies, itanding, the rife of, traced, i . By what means they

became more general in Europe, 134.
Arms, the profeflion of, the mot honourable in uncivilized nations,

80.

Afi, an account of the ancient Romish feast of, 284.
A4imblits, legilative, how formed, 43.
-----! general, of France, their power under the sirs race of

Kings, 197. Under the second and third, 198. At what pe.
riod they loft their legislative authority, g99.
JAtila, King of the Huns, account of his reception of the Roman

,VOL. 1. 1 i amrba-

ambassadors, 3;, Ntd iii. Some account of his conqueis,
242.
Arila, an alembly of Castilian nobtes there, solemnly try and de-

pose Henry IV. their King, 179.
Aufria, the house of, by whom founded, zi2.

B

Raillis, in the old French law, their office explained, 71.
Balant of power, the irt rifof, in Europe, i33. The ptogrefa

of, 134.
Baltic, the firRf source of wealth, to the towns situated on that

sea, 405.
Bareelnd, its trade, riches, and privileges it the close of the sis-

teenth century. 424.
Barone, their independence, and mutual hoftilties4 under the feu-

dal fyflem, 19. How afected by the infranihifement ofcities,
41. Acquire a participation in legislative government, 43.
Their private wars for rediefs of peronal injuries, a. Methods
employed to abolih these contentions, 54. Origin oftheir fu-
preme and independent jarifdidion, 68. The bad effete& result-
ing from these privileges, 69. The steps taken by Princes to
reduce their courts, 7t. How obliged to rclinquifh their judi-
cial prerogatives, 8. Of Italy, fubjeted to municipal laws,
396, Note xv. Their right of territorial jurifdietion explained,
364. Their emolumenu from canses decided in their cdurts,
366.
lteafces, under the feudal fyfte, a hiilory of, 6o. When they

became hereditary, 263.
Aooks, an inquiry into the materials ofthe ancient ione, 280. The

lots of old mjlnufcripts accounted for, ib. The great prices they
fold for in ahtient times, 28.1
Airoughs, representatives of, how introduced into national cOun-

cila, 4.
Britoe, antient, their diftrefi and dejetion when deserted by the

Romans, and harafed by' the Pidt and Caledomians, 33,
Not i.
Rretbr hood of God, an account of that aflociation for extinguiih-

ing private ware, 338.
Bru grs, how it became the chief mart for Italian commodities

during the middle ages, 404.
Burgundy, Mary, heiress of, the importance with which her choice

in a hulband was conadered by ill Europe, 124. The treache-
rous views of Lewis XI. of Franc toward her, 127. Is married
to the Archduke Maximilian, i8. The influence of this match
on the tate of Europe, i.

Ce'·*.

itftr, hi account of the ancient Germans, compared with that

of Tacitis, 247.
Ca4larava, military order of, in Spain, zealous to employ their

prowess in defence of the honours of the Virgin Mary, 427.
The vow used by these knights, ib.
Cam6ray, trcaty of, its objet) 140. The confederacy difolvedi

142.
Cmen Law, an inquiry into, 74. Progress of ecclesiastical ufur-

pations, 7;. The maxima of, more equitable than the civil
courts of the middle ages, 76.
Cafile, rife of the kingdom of, 17. Its union with Aragon, ib.

Its King Henry IV. solemnly tried and deposed in an aembly
of the nobles, 179. The conltitution and government of that
kingdom, 184. A history of the Cortes of, and is privileges,
ib. The kingdom originally eleeive, 4 21, Nctt xxxiii.
Catalonia, the spirited behaviour of the people there in defence of

their rights, againfl their King John II. of Aragon, 178.
Ce/nfales, a species of the Oblati, or voluntary slaves, the obliga-

tions they entered into described, 26.
Centirarii, or inferiorjudges in themiddle ages, the extraordinary

oath required from them, 398.
Champs de Mars, and de Mai, account of those assemblies of the

antient Gauls, 433.
Charltmagc, his law to prevent private wars for redress of periohal

injuries, 54, 334. State of Germany under his defsendants,
207.

Carti IV. Emperor, dillipates the Imperia domains, 456,
.- **V. Emperor, an emulator of the heroick condut of his ri-

val, Francis I. 86. His future grandeur founded on the mar-
riage of the Archduke Maximilian with the heiress of Burgundy,
1i8.

~-- VII. of France, the firR who introduced flanding armjes

in Europe, I x. His successful extension of the regal preroga-
tive, 115.
«.- VIII. of France, his characer, 1s9. How induced to in

vade Italy, , His resources and preparations for this enter-
rize, 130. His rapid success, 13t. A combination of the
talian hates formed againf him, 133. Is forced to return back
to France, £6. The diltreffed fate of his revenues by this expe-
dition, 19.
Ckar*m/t, is account of the North American ndinnsl made use

of in a comparison between them and the ancient Germans, 256.
Carttr, of immunity or franchise, an inquiry Into the nature of

those granted by the barons of France to the towns under their
jurifdltione, 301, Nertsxvi. Of communities, granted by the
Kings of France, how they teaded to oftablilh regular govern-
.ent, 39, 302.

rHa Ci /,,r_

Cbivalry, the origin of, 8z. Its beneficial effeAs on human man-

ners, 83. The enthusiasm of, diftinguilhed from its salutary
consequences, 85.
Chriia'ity, corrupted when firit brought into Europe, 88. Its

influence in freeing mankind from the bondage of the feudal
policy, 2 1, Note xx.

Circles of Germany, the occasion of their being formed, 214.
Cities, the antient state of, under the feudal policy, 36. The

freedom of, where first eablifhed, 37. Charters of communi-
ty, why granted in France by Louis le Gross, 39. Obtain the
like all over Europe, 40. Acquire political consideration, 43.
Clergy, the progress of their usurpations, 7. Their plan ofjurif-

prudence more perfcet than that of the civil courts in the middle
ages, 76. The great ignorance of, in the early feudal times of
Europe, 279.
Cleriza, ave to Willa, widow of Duke Hugo, extract from the

charter of manumiflion, granted to her, 323.
Clermont, council of, resolves on the holy war, 28. See Peter

the hermit, and Crusades.
Clotaire 1. instance of the small authority he had over his army,

431.
Clotharius 1I. his account of the popular aflemblies among the an-

cient Gauls, 433.
Clovis, the founder of the French monarchy, unable to retain a

sacred vase taken by his army, from being difributed by lot
among the reft of the plunder, 254, Nate vii.

(olleges, the first eftablilhment of, in Europe, 389.
Combat, judicial, the prohibition of, an improvement in the ad-

ministration of jutice, 56. The foundation and universality of
this mode of trial, 62. 'he pernicious effets of, 64. Various
expedients for abolishing this practice, 6;. The ancient SwediSh
law of, for words of reproach, 350. Positive evidence, or points
of proof, rendered ineffecual by it, 35;. This mode of trial
authorized by the ecclefiaticks, 357. The last inflances of, in
the hiflories of France and England, 58.
Commirrt, the spirit ofcrufading how far favourable to, at that ear-

ly period, 34. 'The first eftablihment of free corporations, 38.
Chartersof community why granted by Louis Ic Gross, 39. The
like praatice obtains all over Europe, o4. The salutary effets
of these institutions, i. The low fate of, during the middle
ages, 92. Causes contributing to its revival, c3. Promoted by
the H.nfeatick league, 95. Is cultivated in the Netherlands, 96.
Isintroduced into England by Edward III. Q7, The beneficial
consequences refulting.from the revival of, ib. The early culti-
vation of, in Italy, 399.
Common Law, the first compilation of, made in England by Lord

Chief Justice Glanville, 382.
Cemmnsities, fee Charrtrs, Citie, Commere, and Crororatiolnr

w *' ComMenaa

Cmnneta, Anne, her character of the Crusaders, 293.
Compaf., mariner's, when invented, and its influence on the exten

sion of commerce, 94.
Competjiion for personal injuries, the motive for eitablilhing, g 4.

The cullom of, deduced from the practice of the ancient Ger-
mans, 359.
Compurgators, introduced as evidence in thejurifprudence of the

middle ages, 8.

Coadottieri, in the Italian policy, what, o.
Conrad, count of Franconia, how he obtained election to the Em-

pire, 207.
Conradin, the last rightful heir to the crown of Naples of the house

of Swabia, his unhappy fate, 166.
Con/lance, treaty of, between the Emperor Frederick Barbarota,

and the free cities of Italy, 300.
Coftqantinople, its flouri(hing state at the time of the Crusades, 30.

When firt taken by the Turks, 2zz. The Crusaders how look.
ed upon there, 293. The account given of this city by the
Latin Writers, 94,

Confitutions, popular, how formed, 42.
Cordova, Gonfalvo de, secures the crown of Naples to Ferdinand

of Aragon, 168.
Corporations, and bodies politick, the establishments of, how far fa-

vourable to the improvement of manners, 3). The privileges
of, where first claimed, 38. Charters of community, why
granted by Louis le Gross in France, 39. The inititution of,
obtains all over Europe, 40. Their effefts, ib.

Cortte of Aragon, its conflitution and privileges, 180, 417.
c-- ofCafile, a hiRory of, and an account of its conflitution and
privileges, 184. The vigilance with which it guarded its pri-
vileges against the encroachments of the regal power, 8;.
Crusades, the sirs motives of undertaking, z2. The cnthufiafitk

zeal with which they were undertaken, 27. First promoted by
Peter the hermit, 28. The success of them, 29. The confc-
quences resulting from them, 30. Theireffefs on manners, ib.
On property, 3 i. How advantageous to the enlargement of the
regal power of the European princes, 32. The commercial es-
sects of, 34, 91. The universal frenzy forengaging in there ex-
peditions accounted for, 285, Noet xiii. 1 he privileges grant-
ed to those who engaged in them, 287. Stephen earl of Chartres
and Blois, his account of them, 289. The expence. ofcondu -
ing.them, how raised, 290. Charater given of the rufaders
by the Greek writers, 293.

D

Debt, the firlR hint ofattaching moveables for the recovery of, de-
rived from the canon law, 380.

I i 3 Dllton,

Ditors, how confidered in the rode and fmple gate of -ooie.,

30;.

Dias of Germany, some account of, 463.
PoJ r in the diilerent faculties, dispute prccdnce with knights,

390.

E

.cl/ la/fialjurifprudenc, more perse& in its plan than the civil
courts of the middle ages, 76.
EtccltaftiJiA, when, andby what degrees they claimed exemption

from civiljurifdiCion, 76. Military talents cultivated and ex-
ercifed by thofiof the middle ages, 384.
Zdward III. of England, his endeavours to introduce commerce

into his kingdom, 96.

.:leaors of Germany, the rife of their privileges, z29.

loy, St. his definition or description of a good Chriflian, z83,
Not# xi.
EmprerJo of Germany, an inquiry into their power, juri;dlilion,

and revenue, 455, Note xlii. The ancient mode of leaing
them, 459.
gagland, a summary view of the contefis between, and France,

o15. The consequences of its losing its continental polfefilons,
o08. The power of the crown, how extended, a zz. Sec Henry
VII. Why so many marks of Saxon usages and language, in
comparison with those of the Normans, to be found in, s36,
Fott iv. When corporations began to be eRabli(hed in, 3s6.
Inftancesof the long continuance of perfbnalfervitudethere, 3 7.
Inquiry into the Saxon laws for putting an end to private wars,
340, The causes of the speedy decline of private wars there,
proposed to the researches of Antiquarians, 34. The las in-
itances ofjudicial combat recorded in the hilforyof, 358. The
territorial jurifdition of the barons how abotilhed, 374. Cause
of the flow progress of commerce there, 406. The firrt com-
mercial treaty entered into by, 408.
vtf4tsaC, the imperfet nature of that admitted.in law-proceediags
during the middleages, 57 Rendered irajdual by the judi-
cial combat, 35 .
ugropt, the alterations in, by the conquets of the Romans, a.
The improvements the nations of, received in exchange for their
liberties, ib. Its disadvantages under this change of circom-
fiances, 3. Inquiry intothe fuppofedpopuloufnefs ofthe ancient
northern nations, 5. The savage desolations exercised )by the
Goths, Vandals, and Huns, is. Thp univerfalchangeocca-
sioned by their irruptions and conquells, 2. The firt rudiments
of the present policy of, to be deduced from this period, 13*
Qrigin of the feudal system, 14. See Fudl Syfm. The ge.
nera barbartli introduced with this policy, sl. At what time

govcrnmc,,

goytrnment and ansrs heganso imaprovy, 25. Thecaufcs and
evypts which.contributed to this 4mirovement, z6. See Cr-
fak.s, Cerporpo ioT, PCtPe. The miseries occasioned by privaite
wars in, 53. Methods taken to suppress them, 54. Judicial
combat prohibited, 556. The defe&ts of judicial proceedings in
the middle ages, 7. The influence of fuperfition in thcfe
proceedings, 59. The origin of the independent territorial ju-
rifdi&ions of the barons, 67. The bad consequences of their ju-
dicial power, 68. The steps taken by princes to abolilh their
courts, 71. An inquiry into thecanon law, 74. Revival of the
Romanlaw, 79. Effets of the spirit of chivalry, 8z. How
improved by the progress of science and cultivation of literature,
86. Chrifianity corrupted when firLi received in, 88. Scho-
laftick theology the sirs object of learning in, 89. Low fate of
commerce in, during the middle ages, g9. Commerce revives
in Italy, 94. Is promoted by the Hanfeatick league, 9;. Is cul-
tivated in the Netherlands, 96. The effecs of the progress of
commerce, on the polishing of manners, 97. The effe's of the
marriage of the heiress of Burgundy with the archduke Maximi-
lian, on the fate of, i28. By what means sanding forces be-
came general in, 134. Consequences of the league of Cambray
to, 140. A view of the political constitution of the fcvcral fates
of, at the commencement of the sixteenth century, 146. 'Italy,
148. The papacy, 149. Venice, 159. Florence, 163. Naples,
164. Milan, 168. Spain, 172. France, 197. Germany,
206. Turkey, 223. Instances of the fmallintercourfe among
nationsin the middle ages, 392.

F

Fodum, the etymology of that word, 27 .
Ferdinand, King of Aragon, unites the Spanifl monarchy, by his

marriage with Isabella of Caftie, 1 7 . His schemes to exalt the
regal power, 190. Resumes former grants of land from his ba-
rons, Igi. Unites to the crown the grand mallerlhipt of the
three militar~ ers, 92. Why he patronized the allociation
called the Heo Brethbrhood, against the barons, 195.
Feudal sysem, the origin of, deduced, 15. Ihe primary objet of

this policy, 6. Its deficiencies for interior government, 17.
Tenures of land, how etablifhed under, ib. 'he rife ofii teltine
discords among the barons under, 18. he furvile ltate of the
people, 19. The weak authority of the King, ib. It3 influence
on the external operations of war, o. The general extintion
of all arts and sciences effeted by, 21 . Its operation on reli-
gion, 22. Its influence on the charater of the human mind,
23. At what time government and manners began to be im-
proved, 24. The causes and events which contributed to this
improvement, z5. See Cru/adet. The ancient tate of cities

I i 4 under,

under, 36. The frame of national councils under this policy,
43. How altered by the progrtef of civil liberty, 44. An in-
quiry into the administration of juRfice under, 49. Private war,
51. Judicialcombat, 7. The independent jurifditions of the
barons, 68. The diftinaion between free men and vaflals un-
der, 258. How frangers were confidered and treated under,
395S
Firts, under the feudal syRem, a history of, 260. When they be-

came hereditary, 263.
Fil/tspblet, observations on his account of the fate of London, at

the time of Henry ri. 317.

Slanders. See Netherlandr.
Florenre, a view of the constitution of, at the commencement of

the fixtcenth century, 163. The influence acquired by Cosmo
di Medici in, ib.
France, by what means the towns in, first obtained charters of com-

munity, 39. Ordinances of Louis X and his brother Philip in
favour of civil liberty, 48. Methods employed to suppress pri-
vate wars, 54. St. Louis attempts to difcountcnance judicial
combat, 65. A view of the contests between, and England,
ox6. The consequences of its recovering its provinces from
England, o18. The monarchy of, how strengthened by this
event, o. The rife of anding forces in, i1l. Te regal
prerogative Rfrengthened by this measure. 13. The extension of
the regal prerogative vigorously pursued by Iouis XI. i 16. See
Louis XI. he effels of the invafi n of Italy by Charles VI i.
z9g. See Charl/sVI[I. National infantry efablifhed in, 8.
League ofCambray formed againt the Venetians, 141. Battle of
Ghiarradadda, 142 Aninqulry into its ancientgovernment and
laws, 197. The power of the general affembhes under the first
race of Kings, ib. Under the second and third, 198. 1 he
regal power confined to the King's own domains, 199. When
the general assembly or flates general loft their legislative au-
thority, ib. When' the Kings began to assert their Icgillative
power, 201. When the government of, belime purely monar-
chical, 202. The regal power nevertheless restrained by the
privileges of the nobility, ib. An inquiry into the jurifdiionn
of its parliaments, particularly that of Paris, 204. How the
allodial property of land there was altered into feudal, z6-.
The progress of liberty in that kingdom traced, 318. Note xix.
The attempts to efablifh liberty there unsuccessful, 320. The
laR instance of judicial combat recorded in the hifory of, 3 8.
The present government of, compared with that of antient
Gaul. 430. Not# xxxviii. The atcs-general, when first as-
fembled, 447.
Fr4rcis I, of France, his charadter influenced by the spirit of chi-

valry, 85. Is emulated by the Emperor Charles V. 86.
/ .. r, Fri k '

Frtderick Barbarofla, Emperor, the free cities of Italy unite against

him, 3co. Treaty of ConfRance with them, ib. Was the firi
who granted privileges to the cities in Germany, 31 3.

Frduam, in the antient German usages explained, 361.
Freemen, hwdiftinguihed from vassals, under thefeudal policy,

2t 8, 275. Why often induced to surrender their freedom, and
become slaves, 277.
Fuchberius Carnotenfis, his charaaer of the city of Contantinople,

294.

G
Gaul, how allodial property of land was changed into feudal

there, i67. The government of, compared with that of mo-
dern France, 430, Note xxxviii. The small authority the
Kings of, enjoyed over their armies illustrated in an anecdote
ofClotaire I 431. Account of the popular assemblies of, 4 3 .
'The faliclaws how enated, 434. Were not subjed to taxation,
43i. SeeFrance.
Gesrey at Villhardouin, his account of the magnifcence o Con-

llantinople at the time when taken by the - ruladers, 2,.
Germans, ancient, an account of their usage, and way of life, 2 7.

'1 heir method of engaging in war, ib. A comparison between
them and the North American Indians, 25c. Why they had no
cities, 312, Note xvii. The practice of comp unding for per-
fonal injuries by fines, deduced from their usages. ;bo.
Germany, little interested in foreign concerns at the beginningof the

fifteenth century, 107. National infantry eftablilhed in, 137.
State of under C harlemagne and his descendants, 20o6. Conrad,
count ofFranconia, chosen Emperor, 207. His successors in the
Imperial dignity, ib. How the nobility of, acquired independ-
ent sovereign authority, zoS. The fatal effects of aggrandizing
the clergy in, 2 9. The contests between the Emperor Henry
IV. and Pope Gregory VII. 210. ife of the factions of Guelfs
and Ghibelines, 2 i . Decline of the Imperial authority, ib.
The house of Aufria, by whom founded, 212. A total change
in the political constitution of the Empire, ib. The state of
anarchy in which it continued to the time of Maximilian the im-
mediate predecessor of Charles V. 213. Divided into circles,
214. The Imperialchamber intfituted, ib. The Aulic coun-
cil reformed, ziS. A view of its political conltitution at the
commencementof the ensuing hittory, ib. Its detects pointed
out, 216. 1 he Imperial dignity and power compared, 217.
EleCtion of the Emperors, 219. The repugnant forms of civil
policy in the several States of, 220. The opposition between
the leular and ecclesiastical members of, 221. T'he united body
hence incapable of ating with vigour, 222. When cities firlt
began to be built in, 3 I1 Note xvii, When the cities ot, firll

iacuired

Uacid.nmunicIprvileg 3 , Theartas of, when in-
ranchifed, 314. ,W/ itltW es -theGerqnju jqprirdecec
what, 31c. The ret calaiis eccfionedthere by priyate
wars, 346. Origr ofthe league 9of he Rhine, 347. When
private wars were fially.abolied there, i. nquiry into the
power, jurifdiaion, and revenue of its Emperors, 4.53, NOti
xlii. The ancient mode ofelecing the Emperors, 459. Ac-
count of the diets, 463.

Gbibtlines. See Gulfr.
Ghiarradadda, the battle of, fatal to the Venetians, 142.
Glaville, Lord Chief Justice, the sirs who compiled a body of

common law, in all tsurope, 382.
GCbr, Vandals, and Huns, over-run the Roman empire, and pre-

cipitate it downfal, 4. The fate ofthe countries from whence
they ifued, 5. The motives of their firt excursions, 6. How
they came to fettle in th countries they conquered, 7. A com-
parison drawn between them and the Romans, at the period of
their irruptions, 8. &t/f. Compared with the native Ameri-
cans, io. The desolations theyoccafioned in Europe, i . The
universal change made by them in the fate of Europe, 12. The
principles on which they made their fettlemens, 14. Origin of
the feudal system, . See Feual Syjl. An inquiry into the
administration ofjulfice among, 5o. Their private wS , 51.
Defroy the monuments of the Rpman arts, 87. Their p n-
tempt of the Romans, and hatred of their arts, 234, NOi ii.
Their aversion to literatte, i. No authentic account oftheir
origin, or ancient hiRory exifing, 235.
Govner~mu, how limited by the feudal policy, 8. The effcts of

the Crusades on, 3. How affeCted by the infranchifement of
cities, 41. Legihative ieabnblies how formsd, 43. Private
wars detrucive to the authority of, 5. Methods employed to
abolish this hostile mode ofredrefing injuries, 55. How asseted
by the supreme ippendentjurifdiions of the barons, 68. The
Jleps toward abolishing thlem 7 . The origin and growth of
royal courts ofjoftice, 73. How influenced by the revival of
science and literature, 91. A view of, at the beginning of the
fifteenth century, too. The power of Monarchs then very li-
mited, ol. Their revenues small, ib. Their armies unfit for
conquest, oz. The Princes hence incapabe of extnfiveplans
ofoperation, 104. The kingdoms very little conn ed with
each other, o05 How the eforts of from this period became
more powerful and extensive, lo8. The confequencs of g-
land loing its province in France, lo0. The schemes of Lous
XI. of France to extend the regal power, 1 6. See t4eui XI.
The power of the English crown enlarged, 122. See Hes VII.
As aIso that of Spain, 123. How the use of sanding armies be-
came genral, j34. A view of the political cptituipn of the

fevel

several dates of Europe, at the commencement of the sixteenth
~snuy, 148. In what efpeas the harters .of commruaites
grPted by ,the lings of Fxamc, ndd o.intodnu a mgolar
form of, 33.

Gruc4, the bi~eding ofi 6l-worms, whenitauodced there, 400,
Greek Emperors, their magnificenceat Copaotiople, 293.
Grfgry of Tours, remarks onte t of Europe during the eriod

of which he wrote the history, 24.
_--- the Great, Pope, his reason for granting liberty to i

slaves, 322.

- VII. Pope, the foua~ ion of his contes with Henry V.
Emperorof Germany, z2o. The mean fubmidion heextorted
from Henry, 21 i. His own accouit of-this affair, 454.

Gudlfi, and Ghibelines, rife ofthofe faftions in Germany, 21 1.
Gscciardiui, the historian, indawe of his fiuprilitios reverence

for Pope Clement VII. 159. Note.
Guntherus, a Monk, his charaater of Contantinople, at the time

when taken by the CCufaders, 394.
Hawfiatiik league, when formed, andits infulenee.on the extenaion

of compmerce, 95, 406.
Heary IV. ofCagire, solemnly tried and deposed by an affenbly of

Cafliian nobles, 179.
= -, . Emperor of Gemnany, the humiliating Rate to which
he was reduced by Pope Gregory VI. 2 Lo, 454, Yot xi.

--- VII. of England, his fituaion at his accession to the crown,
z12. Enables his barons to break their entails and fell their
state, ib. Prohibits his barons keeping retainers, iS. Encou-
rages agricultwe and.oommerce, ii.
IlarIrlua~ , the nature of this fine under the feudal policy, ex.

plained, 259.

Herauadi, Santa, acount ofthat infiitutia, 430.

itory, the most calaitous period of, pointed out, it.
Holy Brotherhood, an affoiation in Spain under that name, on

what occaioi formed, 19g.
- Land, the original iducements of the Chriftians.to rekuo
it from the hapds of the Infidels, z6. See Cru/ade, and Pntr
th Hermit.

Hoseur, points of the ancient Swedib law for determining, 3 5.
Hiofpitalily, enforced by ftaattes during the middle ages, 93.
Hgw, inftanoe of. their ,ethufiaftick paaion for war, 235, Note iii.

Some account of their policy and manners, 240, 247. Seo

:lauiuri,

I

J7izarir, origin, and formidable nature of those troops, 226.
,Ip"rial chamber of Germany, inflituted, 214. The occasion of

its inflitution, 425.
Jndin:, North American, a comparison drawn between them and

the ancient Germans, 250o.
1Ifdtry, the fpiiit of, how excited by the infranchifements of ci-

ties, 4 .
Infratry, the advantages of, beyond cavalry, taught to the reft of

Europe by the Swiss, 137. National bodies of, established in
Germany, ib. In France and Spain, 137.
Inberitance, and right of representation, between orphan grand-

sons and their uncles, how decided in the tenth century, 352.
IJtere/i of money, the neceflity of admitting, in a commercial view,

402. PrepoReroufly condemned by the churchmen of the middle
ages, i. The cause hence, of the exorbitant exaaions of the
Lombard bankers, ib.
Italy, when the cities of, began to form themselves into bodies poli-

tick, 38. Commerce firt improved there, and the reasons of it,
93. The revolutions in Europe occasioned by the invasion of,
by Charles VIII. of France, 129. The fiate of, at the time of
this invasion, 13c. The rapid success of Charles, 132. A
combination of the States of, drives Charles out of, and gives
birth to the balance of power in Europe, 133. The political
situation of, at the commencement ofthe sixteenth century, 148.
The papacy, 149. Venice, 159. Florence, 63. Naples,
164. Milan, 168. Evidences of the desolation made there by
the northern invaders of the Roman Empire, 242z. How the
cities of, obtained their municipal privileges, 296, Neot xv.
State of, under Frederick 1. 97. Treaty of Constance be-
tween the free cities of, and the Emperor Frederick Barbarofa,
3oo;
Judgmet of God, modes of acquittal by, in the law proceedings

during the middle ages, 59, 348, Note xxii.
i¶,ditium Cruen, method of trial by, 348.
7uwtu II. Pope, forms a confederacy against the Venetians at Cam-

bray, 141. Seizes part of the Venetian territories, 14z. The
confederacy dissolved, ib. Turns his chemes againf France,
143. .7rijrudlntt, ecclesiastical, more perfec in its plan than the civil

courts of the middle ages, 55. See Law.
Jujiice, an inquiry into the adminiltration of, under the feudal

policy, 5o. The steps toward the improvement of, as civil li-
berty advanced, 5. Redrcfs chiefly pursued by private wars,
$z. Methods taken to suppress private wars, 54. judicial
combats prohibited, 56. 'The defets of judicial proceed-
ings in the middle ages, ib. Compurgators, the nature of

~3 ~ that

that kind of evidence, 58. Methods of trial by ordeal, or ac
quittal by Judgmentof God, 59. Origin of the supreme inde-
pendent jurifdieions of the feudal barons, 68. The extent and
bad effets of their privileges, 69. The fleps taken by monarchs
to reduce the barons courts, 71. The growth of royal courts of
jufiice, 72. Inquiry into the canon law, 74. How improved
by the revival of the Roman law, 78. When the adminiftratioa
of, became a diftin& profeflion, 8.
Ju//iza, or supreme judge of Aragon, his office and privileges,

181. An inquiry by whom this officer was eleted, 409. Who
was eligible to this office, 410. Nature of the tribunal appoint-
ed to controul his administration, 412. Inilance of his extensive
power, i.

K
King, his power how circumscribed by the barons, under the feu-

dal fyfiem, 19. By what means the Crusades tended to enlarge
the regal authority, 33.

Koran, its influence in checking the Sultans of the Ottoman em-
, pire, zz6.

L
Land, how held at the establishment of the feudalfyftem, 17. See

Feudaly/tem.
. - the property of, how confidered by the ancient barbarous
nations, z; 5, Nore viii. Allodial pofeflion of, explained, 256.
'1 he proprietors how fubjettd to military service, 2z7. Allodial
and beneficiary poffeflion dillinguilhed, 258. Allodial property
why generally converted into feudal, 266.

Law, when the fudy of it became a diftinEt employment, 81.
- Canon, an inquiry into, 74. The maxims of, more equi-

table than the civil courts of the middle ages, 76. When firlt
compiled, 379.
-- Roman, how it funk into oblivion, 78. Circumstances

which favoured the revival of it, 79. Its effefls in improving
the adminilfration of justice, ib. Its rapid progrcfs over Eu-
rope, 381, Note xxv.

Lawburrowvl, in the Scottish law, explained, 304.
Liberty, civil, the rife and progress of, traced, 38. How favoured

by the ordinances of Louis X. of France, and his brother Philip,
48. The spirit of, how excited in France, 317, Note xix.
The particulars included in the charters of, granted to hulband-
men, 3 i, Note xx. The influence of the Chriltian religion in
extending, 322. The several opportunities of obtaining, 336.
Lioger, council of, its endeavours to cxtinguilh private wars,

23 5. ;,,a,,

Literature

-*'*d^

tlarty ttcutivtion of gtedaty idRfrumental in oivilizig te

nations of Europe, 86, Why the fir efforts of4 ill diretiod,
87. 1 he good eAEits evetthelaf of the spirit of inquiry exett
eid 89. How checked in its progress, 90. Its inHuence on
manners aodgovernment, 91.
Litwrgj, the preference bdtween the ufuarabic, and Romiih, how

certtained in Spain, 353.
Lobard:, the firfl bankers in Europe, 40o. The motive f their

exacting exorbitant interest, 4.2.

teiaur, its flburishing tae at the time of Henry I. 317.
Lomir le GroSs, of France, his inducement to grant privileges o

towns within his own domains, 39. See Cbartsr.

- St. the great attention he paid to the admiaiRration of
jufRice, in appeals which came before him, 371.
-_ 7 X. of France, his ordinances in favour of civil liberty,

48.
--- Xl. ofFrance, his charater, 116. His schemes for de.

prefling the nobility, ib. Sows divisions among them, 8.
Increases the sanding forces, ib. Enlarges the revenues of the
crown, i 9. His address in over-ruling the assembly of Rates,
ib. Extends the bounds of the French monarchy, z12. The
aaivity of his external operations, 12 . His treacherous base-
ness toward the heiress of Burgundy, 1z6, it7. 'The efieds of
his conduct, 128,
-"*- XII. his hesitation in carrying on war againRf the Pope,

159, Nott. Afierts his right to the dutchy of Milan, and retains
Ludovico Sforza in prison, 171.

M

Manafttd, his struggles for the crown ofNaples, 16;.
Makinis, the mou calamitous period in the hiltory of, pointed

out, II.
Manters, the barbarity of, under the feudal eRfablihmnents, after

the overthrow of the Roman empire, 21. When they began to
improve, 4. Effests of the Crusades on, 30. How improved
by the infranchilfment of cities, 42. How improved by the
erection of royal courts of jultice, in opposition to the barons
courts, 73. Effect* of the revival of the Roman law on, 78.
The beneficial tendency of the spirit of chivalry on, 8. How
influenced by the progress of sciences 86, 9. ow poliled
by the revival of commerce, 97.
Maaw.ie, particulars included in the charters of, granted to

hulbandmen or aves,'3z1. Nt# xx. The fotm of 323.
MaxiiliM, archduke of Auftri, married to Mary heiress of Bor-

gundy, 1a8. The influence of this match on the fate of Eu-
rope, i.

2 Maxia/ia

Marxiiikas, Emperor, institutes the Imperial chamber, 214. Re

forms the Aulick council, ib.
Mdii, Cosmo di, the firA of the name, the influence he acqui~re

in Florence, 63;
Mtilan the Rate of the dutchy of, at the commencement of the Afi

teenth century, 168. Rife and progress of the dilputes con-
cerning the futceflion toy 169.
Mind, the human, a view of, under the frAt esablibnment ot the

feudal policy in Europe, 24. The ara of its ultimate depref*
sion, and commencement of its improvement, i. The pro-
grefs of its operations, before the full exertion of it, 87.
Miniriabsi a class of the Oblati, or voluntary saves, the pious

motives of the obligations they entered into, 326.
Moors, make a conqeft of Spain, 173. By what means weakened

during their efablilhment there, 174. Remarks on their con-
dut in.Spain, 176.
Municipal privileges, how obtained by the cities of Italy, 296,

Nort xv. Secured to them by the treaty of Contance, 302.
The favourite Rtate of, under the Roman government, 311.

N
Napiti, a view of the constitution of that kingdom, at the com-

mencement of the sixteenth century, 164. The turbulent un-
fettled Rate of that kingdom, 169. State of the disputes con-
cerning the fuccefionr of the crown of, ib. The pretensions of
the French and 8panifh monarchs to the crown of, 167.
Nnrbo*n, community of, preamble to the writ of ummons of

Philip the Long, to, 3 8, NVte xix.
Navigatio*o proof of the imperfect fate of, daring the middle

ages, 404.
Nitrtraiand, vigorous prosecution of the manufatures of hemp

and flax there, on the revival of commerce in Europe, 96.
vrAmm~u why so few traces of their usages and language, to be

found in England, in comparison with those of the Saxons, 236,
Noti iv.

0

Oblati, or voluntary saves, the claflie of, pecified, 325.
Ord#al, methods of trial by, during the middle ages, 59. The

influence of superstition in ditating there means, 60.
Otto, Frifingenfis, his account of the Rate of Italy under Frede.

rick I. 297.
Ottmas empire, the origin, and defpotick nature of, 223. Be-

come# formidable to the Chrilian powers, 229.

Paacy.

P

iapat. SeeP edm. .

..'

Paper, when fitit made of the prefnt materials, 2a2.
Paris, an inquiry into the pre-eminent jurifdition of its parlia.

ment over the other parliaments of France, -204. Its origin
traced, 449. Nto xl. The royal edids registered by, before
admitted to be laws, 452.
Parliaments, or legislative assemblies, how formed under the feu-

dal policy, 43. How altered by the progress of civil liberty,
44.
People, their wretched servile Rate under the feudal fyflem, 19, 46.

Released from their flavih iRate bythe infn.sichifenent of cities,
40. How they obtained a representation in national councils,
45. Those who lived in the country and cultivated the ground,
an inquiry into their condition under the feudal policy, 27z,
Note ix.

Persia, murder in, how punished there, 363.
Peter the Hermit, excites the European Princes to undertake the

Holy War, 24.
--- IV. King of Aragon, defeats the leaders of the Aragonefe

union, and destroys the privilege of there associations, 416.
Philip the Long, preamble to his writ of summons to the commu-

nity of Narbonne, 1 6, Note xix.
Philo/ophy, cultivated by the Arabians, when loft in Europe, 387,

Note xxviii. Its progress from them into Europe, 388.
Pilgrimages to the Holy Land, when firlt undertaken, 26. See

CrufadeJ, and Peter the Hermit.
Placentia, council of, the Holy war resolved on by, a3. See Pe-

ter the Hermit, and Crusades.
Plunder, how divided among the ancient northern nations, 1;.

Illustrated in an anecdote of Clovis, 254, Note vii.
Poepedm, the highest dignity in Europe at the commencement of

the ixteenth century, 148. Origin and progress of the papal
power, 149. The territories of the Popes unequal to the sup-
port of their spiritual jurifdition, 150. Their authority in their
own territories extremely limited, 1 5 . The check they received
from the Roman barons, 15 2. Nicolas Rienzo attetnpts to efla-
blifl a democratical government in Rome, and to dellroy the
papal jurifdidion, iR3. The papal authority considerably
lrengthened by the Popes Alexander VI. and Julius II. 154.
See Jiulius II. The permanent nature ofecclefiaftical dominion,

5 5. The civil admiiftration of, not uniform or confident, i$.
Rome the fchnol of political intrigue during the sixteenth cen-
tury, 5 (. The advantages derived from the union of fiii-
tual and temporal authority, 157. A view of the contells
between the opec and the Emperors of Gcrnl.ny, 2io.

Popji1(fato of the ancient northern nation,, an inquiry into, .
Pri/ct, extrac from his account of the Roman embafly to Attila

King of the Hunt, 235, Note iii.
Procopius, his account of the cruel devafations made by the irrup.

tion of the northern nations, 236, Note v. 240, 241.
Property, the pofieffion of, how secured by the French charters of

communities, 305.
Prorvditori, in the Venetian policy, their office, 16o.

R
Religion, how corrupted by the northern nations established in Eu-

rope under the feudal policy, 22. Its influence in freeing man.
kind from the feudal servitude, 322.

Rep/edging, the right of, in the law of Scotland, explained, 267.
Reproach, words of, the ancient Swedish law offatisfation for, 3 0.
Revenuts, royal, very small under the feudal policy, 102. By

what means increased, 138.

Rhine, origin and intention of the league of, 347.
Rienzo, Nicholas, endeavours to rescue Rome from the Papal au-

thority, and eRablifh a democratical form of government there,

3.
Robers, the anathema pronounced against them during the middle

ages, 398.
Rodulph of Haplburgh, how he attained election to the Empire of

Germany, 212.
RomanJ, an inquiry into those advantages which enabled them to

conquer the reft of Europe, z. The improvements they com-
municated in return for their conquests, i. The disadvantages
the provinces laboured under, from their dominion, 3. Their
Empire overturned by the irruption of the barbarous nations, 4.
The concurrent causes of their ruin, 6. A comparison drawn be-
tween them and the northern nations, 9. All the civil arts ea-
blifhed by them obliterated, a1. The monuments of their arts
industriously destroyed by their barbarous invaders, 86.

Rome, papal. See Popedom.
Aoyal truce, an account of, 339.

S

Sdlic laws, the manner in which they were enacted, 432.
taxoni, why so many traces of their laws, language and cufloms to

be found in England, 6, Note iv. Inquiry into their laws
for putting an end to private wars, 342.
Science, the revival and progress of, how far inftru mental in civi-

lizing the nations of Europe, 87. A summary view of the re-
vival and progress of, in Europe, 387, Note xxviii.
S/orza, Francis, the foundation of his pretenrions to the dutchy

of Milan, a 7o. Is murdered by his uncle Ludovico, i.

VOL. 1. K k Sfor/a,

Sf/rza. Ludovico, his private views in engaging ,CharlesVibl

of France to invade Italy, 129. See Carilt VllI. Miires
his pephew Francis, and seizes Milan, 170. Is stripp'd of his
,dormiulnas by l.ouis XII. of France, and dies in prison, 17 '"
.*$flwrihj, the riglu, lords of manors claim to, whence derived,

395.
Sili, the rarity of, and the high price it bore in ancient Rome, re-

marked, 399. The breeding of silk worms, when introduced
into Greece, 400.

Slanes, letters of, in the law of Scotland, what, 362.

1ave under the feudal policy, their Wretched fate, 270. Oblati,
or voluntary slaves, the several clades of, 3 2 5.
Soietf, civil, the rude Rate of, under the feudal eflablithments as-

ter the downfal of the Roman Empire, z 1. The influence of the
Crusades on, 30. How improved by the eftablilbment of muni-
cipal communities, 3;. The effeats the infranchifements of the
people had on. 49. Private wars how deftrnCtive to, 3. Tfhefe
intelline hostilities, how fupprefed, 54. 1 he administration of
juiice improved by the prohibition ofjudicial combats, 56. The
growth of royal courts of justice, in opposition to the barons
courts, 71. How advanced by the revival of the Roman law,
78. The effe&sof the spirit of chivalry in improving, 82. The
revival of commerce and its influences, 93.

Scoman, Sultan, his chara&er,. 28,
Spain, a summary view of its situation, at the commencement of

the fifteenth century, 86. The power of the crown of, how ex-
tendcd by Ferdinand, 121. Nationalinfantry ctablifhed in,
j 8.Is conquered by the Vandals, 172. and after by the Moors,
173. The empire of the Moors in, how weakened, 174. !life
of the kingdoms of Caflile and Aragon, 17 5. Their union into
the Spaniih monarchy, i. The ancient cufloms fill retained
atnidft all its revolutions, ib. Peculiarities in its constitution
and laws remarked, 177. See Aragon and CaJlilt. Various
causes which contributed to limit the regal power in, 186. The
cities of, how they attained theirconfideration and power, 188.
'Ihe schemes of Ferdinand and Isabella, toexalt the regal power,
19. '1 he grand malerlhips of the three orders, annexed to the
crown, 192. The aflciation of the Holy Brctherhood, on what
occasion formed, 9;. The tendency of this association to
abridge the territorial jurifditlons of the barons, ib. 'Ihe cruel
devatlations made by the Vandals, in the invasion of that pro.
vincc, 237. When the cities of, acquired municipal privi.
leges, 315, Notexviii. The long continuance of the practice
of private wars there, 344. The total annual revenue of the
nobility, in the time of Charles V. 422. An inquiry into the
origin of communities or free cities in, 423,

St. 7<a,

3S., ago, the military order of, when and on what occasion inRi.

tWfed 4z2,; o, xxxvi.

StaMdig armies. See Atmies.
States general of France, causes which rendered their authority

imperfet, 199. When they loft their legifative authority, i6.
When firi aembled, 447, The form of proceeding in the,
ib. 0
Sttphen earl of Chartres and Blois, his account of the progrefi of

the Crusaders, 289.
Stiernhbook, his account of the ancient Swediih law of fatisfa&iom

for words of reproach, 3o.
Strangers, in what light confidered, and how treated during the

middle ages, and under the feudal policy, 394.
Sugar canes, when sirs broughtfrom Asia into Europe, and thence

carried to America, 400.
Sultans, Turkish, their defpotick power, 225. How nevertheless

limited, 226.
SuperJliticn, its influence in the legal proceedings during the middle

ages, 60.
Swis/, the superior discipline of their troops, in the fifteenth cen.

tury, 13.6. Teach other nations the advantages of infantry
over cavalry, ib.

T

'acitus, his account of the ancient Germans compared with that

of Cafar, 246.
T'enres, feudal, the origin of, 17. See Feudal Syf/cm, and.

Land.
ftbology, fcholaftick, the first literary pursuits at the revival of

learning in Europc, 8S.

'ruce of God, an account of, 336.

urtey, origin of, its government, 223. The defpotick genius of
this government, 224. No hereditary nobility in, ib. The
authority of the Sultans, how checked, 226. Origin of the
Janizaries, i. Becomes formidable to the Chrillian Princes,
229.

V
Vandals, their cruel devaltations in the invasion of Spain, 238.

The havock made by them in Africa, 239. See Goths.
Vassal under the feudal fyflem, a view of their flavilh condition,

19, 46. How they obtained infranchifemcnt, 4. low ;ii-
ciently diltinguilhed from freemen, z28. Their wretched hiate
under their feudal mailers, 270, Note ix.
I'tnice, the long duration of its civil conltitution, and its flourishing

fate at the time of the league of Cambray, 14o. Its poflell;oris
dismembercd by the confederates, 141. Dissolves the confede-

a racy,

tuticn, 6c. The excellency of its naval inflituticns, 161.
.Its extenfivecommerce, 162.
K Vifonti, rife of the family of, in Milan, 169.
VUnia of the ragonefe nobles to contrr- lthe undue exercifc of

IFal pwer, explained, 414. This privilege abrogated by Pe-
ter V. 416.
Uniiverjities, the sirs eablifhmerit of, in Europe, 389.

W
War, a comparison between the manner of carrying on, by barba-

rous and by civilized nations, zo. How rendered feeble in its
operations by the feudal policy, 19. The profeflion of arms,
the mofi honourable in uncivilized nations, 80. The rife of
hianding armies traced, io. By what means flanding forces
became general, 134. The superiority of infantry in, how
taught, 135.
Wars, p:ivate, for the redreffirg personal injuries, under the feu-

dal policy, an inquiry into. 5t. Methods taken to abolifli this
hofile prasticv, :c. Judicial combat prohibited, 6 Inquiry
into the sources of these cutoms, 38, Note xxi. Who entitled
to the privileges ofexerciting, 329. On what occasions under-
taken, 30. Who includcd, or bound to engage in there dif-
pules, 31. Who excluded from underta!:ing, 332. The cruel
maniic'r of prosecuting them, i. A chronological account of
the expediens made use of, to fopprefs them, 333. ruce of God,
an atcount of, 36. Brotberhood of God, an account of, 330.
Rraltruce, v.hat, 339. Saxon laws of England, for putting an
end to them, 34Z. The oblitnatc attachment of the Spaniards
to this pradic, 344. The calamities occasioned in Germany
by, ,4(.
?ij/, ancicnt frangers killed with impunity by them, 356.
liila2. viic'. ,f duke Hugo, cxtrat trom her clarter of manu-

inllo',, ;t'r.ntcdi to ClIc:iza, one of her slave,. 3 3.
!';j;i//r!,. .. il.i l,op ot Ivrc,his account ofContx:ntinople, 293.
Hi"i;/:.,ti.us, abbot, hi., tlliioiiy in favour of thc(judicial cumbat,

3: 7

END OF TII ' FIRST VOLUME
