.:·i· II'*

i:I:··
?'?;

i,
jaM II anaa a·rr B QW,

J.ID, o

THE

H I S T O'R Y
HISTORY

O F
S C O T L A N D,

DURING THE REIGNS OF
QUEEN MARY, and of KING JAMES VI.

TILL
His ACCESSION to the Crown of ENGLAND.

WITH A
REVIEW of the SCOTTISH HISTORY previous to that Period',.

And an A.PPENDIX containing ORIGINAL PAPERS.

BY WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.
PRINCIPAL OF TIE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH, AND HISTORIOGRAPHER TO

HIS MAJESTY FOR SCOTLAND.

TO WHICH IS NOW ADDED,
A concise State of the Controversy refpeaing Q MARY,

Not in any former Edition of tbis TWVrk.

VOLUME I.

. D INB URGH:
Printed for G.MunIE, J. ELDEn, A. GUTIIIE,. J. II-UNTr.n, J. & J. 1FAInRAIRn,

T. BRowN, J. RonERTSON, and LAWRIUE & SYXlNGoI'ON, Edinburgh;

W. COKE, Lcith; and W. ANDEnRsON, Stirlirg.

MDCCXCI.

# TO THE PUBLIC.

'0O THE PUBLIC.

DR. ROBERTSON'S History of Scotland has, for a considerable time,
been one of the molt popular books in the Englifll Language. It
is almofi the only classical work upon the Scottifli History. It
has now passed through a ferics of editions, the profits of which
mufl have amply rewarded the Author and his Bookflllcrs.

The original proprietors of this Work therefore, cannot be fur-

prifed, now, when their copy-right is fully expired, to fee a cheap
Edition of it proceed from a different quarter. Ifno piracy has
prcfumcd, in defiance of the legislature to violate so valuable
a property; it cannot seem firange that so saleable a hook should
invite other publificrs, as soon as it can be publishcd by others
without injuflicc. The public will receive the chief advantage,
in a diminution of the price.

The present Edition does not indeed exhibit the alterations

and additions, which diftinguifli the eleventh aldl fubfequenlt Lon-
dIon editions. But these are not si important to the reader as to
the author. To give new delicacy to a phralc, to correct a figure,
to deepen or soften slightly the liades of an opinion, to whet
the point of an argument, and to add one to a body of facis tliat
already convince with demonlirative evidence-are clhange;,
which, however necefary they may often appear to an author, to,
bring his work nearer to that ideal pcrfecqlion to which he afjiircs,
tfldom produce any considerable difference in the eye ,of the or-
dinary reader. It is not always, indeed, that the alteration,;s icl
an author makes upon his works are rcceived as improverncn:.:.
WeT prefer lwhat was firuck ont in tih firil ardour of thouht. lThe
alterations made in the filccffivc edition(l of cclel)ratecd worl.s,
I ecC ol'ten to dellroy their unity of chiarl:lcr, and, by dtc(rcc;, to
change tihe'ir Iaturc, ;1. otilly, ;is if the proprietor ofa hliuOi fliouild
this year put a new iroU u 11pon it, ;ind the IInc:: pull dlon :a1id
rebuild a pa't of the walls, in a'thild cl:;it:ge tlhe pii;'iing :i;.t

%eiling of his apartments, and thus proceed with awkward and in-
convenient reparations, till not a fragment of the old dwelling
remain. Dr. Johnson mentions of the Seasons of Thomson, that
the alterations made upon them in fucceflive editions by the au-
thor and his friends, had rendered them less pleasing to his taste,
by depriving them of what the critic, by a happy allusion to the
produts of the vintage, calls the Race.

The present publishers have ventured to annex, by way of Ap-

pendix, (as will appear in the end of the second volume) a short
View of the Controversy concerning the condut of Queen Mary
and the Murder of Darnly, in which the opinions and reasonings,
first, of the accusers of Mary, and secondly, of her advocates are
candidly ifated; so that the reader may form some idea concern-
ing a controversy which has been so long and so ably agitated, and
may distinguish in this instance between hiflorical truth and plau-
fible conjecture, without labouring through all that variety of pub-
lications to which the suspicious condut, and unfortunate fate of
Mary, have given rife.

# THE AUTHOR's PREFACE.

THE AUTHOR's

PRE F A C E.

I DELIVER this book to the world with all the diffi.
dence and anxiety natural to an Author on publish-
ing his first performance. The time I have employ-
ed, and the pains I have taken, in order to render it
worthy of the public approbation, it is, perhaps, pru-
dent to conceal, till. it be known whether that appro-
bation shall ever be bestowed upon it,

BUT as I have departed, in many instances, from

former Historians, as I have placed facts in a differ-
ent light, and have drawn characters with new co-
lours, I ought to account for this conduct to my
readers; and to produce the evidence, on which, at
the diflance of two centuries, I presume to contradic
the testimony of cotemporary, or of less remote His-
torians.

THE tranfadions in Mary's reign gave rife to two

parties, which were animated againll each other.with
the fiercest political hatred, embittcred by religious
zeal. Each of these producedl Hiiforians of conlider-
able merit, who adopted all their sentiments, and
defended all their adions. Truth, however, was not
the sole object of tlhics Authors. Blinded by preju-
dices, and heated by the part which they themfelvcs
had aecd in the scenes they ccficribe, they wrote a

a ij

-apology for a facion rather than the hiffory of their
country. Succeeding Historians have followed these
guides almost implicitly, and have repeated their er,
rors and misrepresentations. But as the fame passions
which inflamed parties in that age have descended
to their posterity; as almost every event in Mary's
reign has become the objeeC of doubt or of dispute;
the eager spirit of colitroverfy soon diicovered that
without some evidence more authentic and more im-
partial than that of Historians, none of the points in
quellion could be decided with certainty. Records
have therefore been searched, original papers have
been produced, and public archives, as well as the
repositories of private men, have been ransacked by
the zeal and curiosity of writers of different parties.
The attention of Cecil to collect whatever related to
that period, in which he acted so conspicuous a part,
hath provided such an immense store of original pa-
pers for illufrrating this part of the English and Scottish
history, as are almost sufficient to satisfy the utmost
avidity of an Antiquarian. Sir Robert Cotton (whose
library is now the property of the public) made great
and valuable additions to Cecil's collection; and from
this magazine, Digges, the compilers of the Cabbala,
Anderson, Keith, Haynes, Sorbes, have drawn moit
of the papers which they have printed. No Hitory
of Scotland, that merits any degree of attention, has
appeared since these collections were publiflhed. By
consulting them, I have been enabled, in many in-
flances, to correct the inaccuracies of former I-lifori-
ans, to avoid their miflakes, and to deted their mirf
rrcrfcintations.

BUT many important papers have ercaped the no-
tice of those induflrious Coll.cCtors, and after all they

have produced to light, much still remained in dark-
ness, unobserved or unpublished. It was my duty to
search for these, and I found this unpleasant talk at-
tended with considerable utility.

THE library of the honourable Faculty of Advocates

at Edinburgh, contains not only a large collection of
original papers relating to the affairs of Scotland, but
copies of others no less curious, which have been pre-
served by Sir Robert Cotton, or are extant in the pu-
blic offices in England. Of all there, the Curators of
that library were pleased to allow me the perusal.

ThOUGH the British Mufae4m be not yet open to

the public, Dr. Birch, whose obliging disposition is
well known, procured me access to that Noble Col-
lecion, which is worthy the magnificence of a great
and polished nation.

THAT vast and curious collection of papers relating

to the reign of Elizabeth which was made by Dr. For-
bes, and of which he publiflhed only two volumes,
having been purchased, since his death, by the Lord
Viscount Royflon, his Lordship was so good as to a]-
low me the use of fourteen volumes in quarto, con-
taining that part of them which is connected with
my fubjedt.

SIR Alexander Dick communicated to me a very

valuable colleelion of original papers in two large vo-
lumes. They relate chiefly to the reign (rs James.
Many of them are marked with A.rchbiflhop Spots-
wood's hand; and it appears from fevcral pafliges in
his hiflory that he had peruscd them witl great at-
tention.

MR. Calderwood, an eminent Preibyterian Clergy-

man of the last century, compiled an history of Scot-
land from the beginning of the reign of James V. to
the death of James VI. in fix large volumes; where-
in he has inserted many papers of consequence which
are no where else to be found. A copy of this history,
which frill remains in manuscript, in the possession of
the Church of Scotland, was put into my hands by
my worthy friend, the Reverend Mr. George Wifhart,
principal Clerk of the Church.

SIR David Dalrymple not only communicated to

mre the papers which he has collected relating to Gow-
rie's conspiracy; but by explaining to me his senti-
ments with regard to that problematical paIfage in
the Seottifhl hiftory,has enabled me to place that tranf-
acttion in a light which difpells much of the darkIiefs
and confusion in which it has been hitherto involved,

Ma Goodall, thiough he knew my sentiments with

regard to the conduct and charater of Queen Mary
to be extremely different from his own, communi-
cated to me a volume of manuscripts in his pofeibon,
v',ich contains a great number of valuable papers
coplit1 friom the originals in the Cottonlan Library
wuLd laper Office, by the late Reverend Mr Craw-
.;.:({.1, Rcgius P]rofeflor of Church Hillory in the uni-
*;cr ll ty o L'.Edirnburh. I likewise received from him
the orioill Rlcgiller of letters kept by the Regent
L._ennox cluring his adliinilllration.

TI .\tVE conlulledl all lhefe papers as fr as I thought

1iey coulil ibe ol' any ule towards illufllrating that pe-
r1}).'1 of v'licl I write t1lc ulitlorv. With what lfccefs
I !::i 'e elipl,)'vc t1!.,n1 to confirm what l'as alrteady

known, to ascertain what was dubious, or to deters--
mine what was controverted, the public muit judge.

I MIGHT easily have drawn from the different repo-

fitories to which I had access, as many papers as would
have rendered my Appendix equal in size to the moit
bulky collection of my predecessors. But I have fa-
tisfied myself with publishing a few of the molt curi-
ous among them, to which I found it necessary to ap-
peal as vouchers for my own veracity. None of these
as far as I can recolleC, ever appeared in any former
collection.

I HAVE added to the Appendix a Critical DiOerta-

tion concerning the murder of King Henry, and the ge-
nuinenefs of the Sueen's letters to Bothwell. The fats
and observations which relate to Mary's letters, I owe
to my friend Mr. John Davidson, one of the Clerks to
the Signet, who hath examined this point with his
usual acuteness and industry.

# BOOK FIRST. CONTENTS. THE origin of the Scots. The peculiar obscurity of their history. Four remarkable æras. A review of the national history from the death of Alexander III. to the accession of ...

TrHE
HISTORY

O F
SCOTLAND.

BOOI FIRST.

CONTENTS.
Tire origin of the Scots. The peculiar oblicurity of their history. Four remark-

able aras. A review of the national history from the death of Alexander I II.
to the acceflion of Mary. General caures which limited the power of a feu-
dal monarch. Peculiar force of the Scottish aristocracy. -its causes. Efforts
to extend the royal authority. James I. James II. James III. James IV.
James V. His death. Extraordinary influence of the Scottifl Kings in par-
liament. Extreme insignificancy of public flatutes. State of Europe at the
beginning of the l6th century. Francis I. Charles V. Their charalcers.
Henry VIII. his plan of conduca in the aflairs of Scotland.

T HE first ages of the Scottifi history are dark and fabulous. Boor r.
Nations, as well as men, arrive at maturity by degrees, and the T oii

The origin

events, which happened during their infancy or early youth, can- of nations
not be recolle6ced, and deserve not to be remembered. The gross fabulous
ignorance which anciently covered all the North of Europe, the
continual migrations of its inhabitants, and the frequent and de-
flru&ive revolutions which these occasioned, render it impoflible
to give any authentic account of the origin of the different king-
doms now cftablifled there. Every thing beyond that short pe-
riod to which well attested annals reach, is obscure; an immenre
lipace is left for invention to occupy; each nation, with a vanity
inseparable from human nature, hath filled that void with events
calculated to display its own antiquity and lustre. An History,
which ought to record truth and to teach wisdom, often sets out
with retailing fictions and absurdities.

TnE Scots carry their pretensions to antiquity as high as any Origin of

of their neighbours. Relying upon uncertain legends, and the the tScots.
tradition; of their bards, flill more uncertain, they reckon up a
feiles of kings fc vcril ages before the birth of Christ ; and give a

A

BooK T. particular detail of the occurrences which happened in their reigns,
' ---
" But with regard to the Scots, as well as the other northern na-

tions, we receive the earliefi accounts on which we can depend,
A. D. 8r. not from their own, but from the Roman authors. When the

Romans under Agricola, firit carried their arms into the no.chern
parts of Britain, they found it pofleffed by the Caledonians, a fierce
and warlike people; and having repulsed, rather than conquered
them, they ereaed a firong wall between the firths of Forth and
Clyde, and there fixed the boundaries of their empire. Adrian,
on account of the difficulty of defending such a distant frontier,
contracted the limits of the Roman province in Britain, by build-
A. D. 121. ing a second wall, which ran between Newcastle and Carlife. The

ambition of succeeding Emperors endeavoured to recover what
Adrian had abandoned; and the country between the two walls
was alternately under the dominion of the Romans, and the Ca-
ledonians. About the beginning of the fifth century, the inroads
of the Goths pnd other Barbarians obliged the Romans, in order
to defend the centre of their empire, to recal those legions which
guarded the frontier provinces and at that time they quitted all
their conquefls in Britain.
A. D. 42 Their long residence in the island had polished, in some degree,

the rude inhabitants, and the Britons were indebted to their in-
tercourfe with the Romans, for the art of writing, and the use of
numbers, without which it is impossible long to preserve the me-
mory of past events.

North Britain was, by their retreat, left under the dominion

of the Scots and Picts. The former, who are not mentioned by
any Roman author, before the end of the fourth century, were
probably a colony of the Celtas or Gauls; their affinity to whom
appears from their language, their manners, and religious rites;
circumtfances more decisive, with regard to the origin of na-
tions, than either fabulous traditions, or the tales of ill-inform-
ed, and credulous Annalifls. The Scots, if we may believe the
common accounts, fettled at first in Ireland; and, extending-
thcmselves by degrees, landed at last on the coafls opposite to
that illand, and fixed their habitations there. Fierce and bloody
wars were, during several ages, carried on between them and the
A.D. .83. Pits. At length, Kenneth II. the fixty-ninth king of the Scots

(according to their own fabulous authors) obtained a complete
victory ov.r the Piets, and united under one monarchy, the whole
country, from the wall of Adrian, to the northern ocean. Anld
his kingdom became known by its prcfcnt name, which it derived

from a people at first fettled there as firangers, and remained long BOOK I.
obscure and inconsiderable. -

From this period, the history of Scotland would merit some at- History of

Scotlandpe-

tention, were it accompanied with any certainty. But as our re- culiarly db-
mote antiquities are involved in the fame darkness with those of fcure.
other nations, a calamity peculiar to ourselves has thrown almost
an equal obscurity over our more recent transactions. This was
occasioned by the malicious policy of Edward I. of England.
Towards the end of the thirteenth century, this monarch called
in question the independency of Scotland ; pretending that that
kingdom was held as a fief of the crown of England, and subject-
ed to all the conditions of a feudal tenure. In order to eflabliih
his claim, he seized the public archives, he ransacked churches
and monasteries, and getting possession, by force or fraud, of ma-
ny hiflorical monuments, that tended to prove the antiquity or
freedom of the kingdom, he carried some of them into England,
and commanded the reft to be burned*. An universal oblivion
of pall transactions might have been the effec of this fatal event,
but some imperfec Chronicles had escaped the rage of Edward;
foreign writers had recorded some important fats relating to
Scotland; and the traditions concerning recent occurrences were
fresh and worthy of credit. These broken fragments, John de
Fordun, who lived in the fourteenth century, collected with a
pious industry, and from' them picked out materials, which he
formed into a regular history. His work was received by his
countrymen with applause ; and, as no recourse could be had to
more ancient records, it supplied the place of the authentic an-
nals of the kingdom. It was copied in many monasteries, and
the thread of the narrative was, by different monks, continued
through the subsequent reigns. In the beginning of the fixtcentll
century, John Major and Hector Boethius publifled their hiflo-
ries of Scotland, the former a fuccint and dry writer, the latter
a copious and florid one, and both equally credulous. Not many
years after, Iuchanan undertook the fame work ; and if his ac-
curacy and impartiality had been, in any degree, equal to the
clegance of his tafle, and to the purity and vigour of his itylc,
his hiltory might be placed on a level with the molt admired
compositions of the ancients. But, inflcad of rejecRing the inm-
probable tales of Chronicle writers, he was at the utmnot pains to
adorn them ; and hath clothed with all the beauties and graces

* I lnes, EffiSy ,5:.

A ij

BooK I. of fiction, those legends, which formerly had only its wildnzfs and

extravagance.

Four l The history of Scotland may properly be divided into four pe-
;cras in the riods. The firit reaches from the origin of the monarchy, to the
Scots hiilo. reign of Kenneth II. The second, from Kenneth's conquest of

the Pifts, to the death of Alexander III. The third extends to
the death of James V. The last, from thence to the accefflon of
James VI. to the crown of England.

The firit period is the region of pure fable and conjecture, and

ought to be totally negleced, or be abandoned to the industry
and credulity of antiquaries. Truth begins to dawn in the fe-
cond period, with a light, feeble at first, but gradually increaf-
ing; and the events which then happened, may be slightly touch-
ed, but merit no particular or laborious inquiry. In the third
period, the history of Scotland, chiefly by means of records pre-
served in England, becomes more authentic: not only are events
related, but their\caufes and effecs explained; the characaers of
the acors are displayed ; the manners of the age described i the
revolutions in the conflitution pointed out: and here every Scots-
man should begin, not only to read, but to ifudy the hiitory of
his country. During the fourth period, the affairs of Scotland
were so mingled with those of other nations, its situation in the
political slate of Europe was so important, its influence on the
operations of the neighbouring kingdoms was so visible, that its
history becomes an object of attention to Foreigners, and with-
out some knowledge of the various and extraordinary revolutions
which happened there, they cannot form a just notion either of
the most illustrious events, or of the charastcr of the molt diftin-
guinled personages in the sixteenth century.

Arevievwof The following history is confined to the last of these periods.
the third
t,.1a. To give a view of the political slate of the kingdom; during that

which immediately preceded it, is the design of this preliminary
Book. The imperfca knowledge which strangers have of the
affairs of Scotland, and the prejudices Scotfren themfclvcs have
imbibed with regard to the various revolutions in the govern-
ncnt of their country, rendered such an introduftion equally ne-
ccflary to both.

The period, from the death of Alexander III. to the death of

James V. contains upwards of two centuries and an half, fromn
the year 1286, to the year 15 2.

Rife of the It opens with the famous controverry concerning the indepcn-
coalcr'icn dency of Scotluad, belore tlle union of the two kingdons, this

was a queftlon of much importance. .If the one Crown had been Boo;, I.
confidered not as imperial and independent, but as feudatory to . -
the other, a treaty of union could not have been concluded on pendencyof
equal terms, and every advantage which the dependent kingdom Scotland.
procured, mufl have been eiteemed the concefflon of a Sovereign
to his vassal. Accordingly, about the beginning of the prefcnt
century, and while a treaty of union between the two kingdoms
was on foot, this controversy. was agitated with all the heat, which
national animofities naturally inspire. What was then a fubjc&
of serious concern, the union of the two kingdoms hath rendered
a matter of mere curiosity. But though the obje&s, which at
that time warmed and interested both nations exifi no longer, a
queflion which appeared so momentous to our anceffors, cannot
be altogether indifferent or uninftruEtive to us.

Some of the northern counties of England were early in the

hands of the Scottifli Kings, who, as far back as the feudal cuf-
toms can be traced, held these possessions of the Kings of Eng-
land, and did homage to them on that account. This homage,
due only for the territories which they held in England, was in
no wife derogatory from the royal dignity. Nothing is more
suitable to feudal ideas, than that the fame person fliould be both a
Lord and a Vassal, independent in one capacity, and dependent
in another *. The Crown of England was without doubt impe-
rial and independent, though the Princes who wore it were, for
many ages, the vassals of the Kings of France; and, in confe-
quence of their possessions in that kingdom, bound to perform all
the services, which a feudal Sovereign has a title to exa&. The
fame was the condition of the Monarchs of Scotland, free and in-
dependent as Kings, but, as possessing Englifl territories, vassals
to the King of England. The English Monarchs, content with
their legal and uncontroverted rights, were neither capable, nor
had any thoughts of usurping more. England, when conquered
by the Saxons, being divided by them into many finall kingdoms,

A very singular proof of this occurs in the French hilory. Arpin fold the

vicomptd of the city of lIoulges to ;hlilip I. who did homnge to the Court of
Sancerre for a part of tilere lands, which held of that Noblcman, A. D. ; I -. I
believe that no c:;amllc, of a King's doing honiag to one of 1his o'.vn sI:!-

w :.

is to be mnet witlin n the hiitcries either of Inglaid or Scoilati,. Fhilii; l Liel
aholified this pralaice in Flranc, A. T). It2. lienaut. Abreg Clhronol. S r.e-

.lwhat liniilar to this, is a ch;l:r;r of the Al,\b. t of Melro:., A. I). it -, cotni.
tutill Janlmc: V\. the Bailifi or S:ew:Ird of ijat .ail'bei. veilinig in hrim all tihe
p\wIr:; wliilh pc rtaiied to that ilice a:id rc iri:;;:.
: . b: ;::;'-ci;.bc : t

bx.lbolt b" hi; ¢rs c.1r i of ts ,i;tlhnc. -.A-Ahv. l 'l'. JEin.

BooK I. was in no condition to extend its dominion over Scotland, united

V--- at that time under one Monarch. And though these petty princi-

palities were gradually formed into one kingdom, the reigning
Princes exposed to continual invasions of the Danes, and often
subjected to the yoke of these formidable pirates, seldom turned
their arms towards Scotland, and were utterly incapable of eita-
blifhing new rights in that country. The firit Kings of the Nor-
man race, busied with introducing their own laws and manners
into the kingdom which they had conquered, or with maintain-
ing themselves on the throne which some of them possessed by a
very dubious title, were as little anxious to acquire new authori-
ty, or to form new pretensions in Scotland. An unexpe&ed ca-
lamity that besel one of the Scottish Kings first encouraged the
English to think of bringing his kingdom under dependence.
William * King of Scotland being taken prisoner at Alnwick, Hen-
ry II. as the price of his liberty, not only extorted from him an
exorbitant ransom, and a promise to surrender the places of great-
eft strength in his dominions, but compelled him to do homage
for his whole kingdom. Richard I. a generous Prince, solemnly
renounced this claim of homage, and absolved William from the
hard conditions which Henry had imposed. Upon the death of
Alexander III. near a century after, Edward I. availing himself
of the situation of affairs in Scotland, acquired an influence in
that kindom, which no Englifli Monarch before him ever posses-
fed, and imitating the intereflcd policy of Henry, rather than
the magnanimity of Richard, revived the claim of sovereignty to
which the former had pretended.

'Pretensions Margaret of Norway, grand-daughter of Alexander, and heir
oflBruccland to his Crown, did not long survive him. The right of fuc-
Blsiol exa-
mmined1. cefilon belonged to the descendents of David Earl of Hunting-

ton, third son of David I. Among these, Robert Brucc, and
John Baliol, two illustrious competitors for the Crown, appeared.
Bruce was the son of Isabel Earl David's fccond daughter; ]Ba-
liol, the grandson of Margaret the eldest daughlter. According
to the rules of succession which arc now cflablifled, the right of
Baliol was preferable, and notwithifanding Bruce's plea of being
nearer in blood to Earl David, Baliol's claim, as the rcprefenta-
livc of his mother and grandmother would be deemed incontcll-
ihlc. But, in that age, the order of fucce(lon was not al'cr-
taincd with the fame prrccifion. T'he quellioln al)pard to be no
less intricate, than it was important. And though the prejudi-
ces of the people, and perhaps the laws of the kingdom, faivour.

",illnamed ithe Lion.

ed Bruce, each of the rivals were supported by a powerful sac- Boor I.
tion. Arms alone, it was feared, must terminate a dispute too
weighty for the laws to decide. But, in order to avoid the mi-
series of a civil war, Edward was chosen Umpire, and both par-
ties agreed to acquiesce in his decree. This had well nigh prov-
ed fatal to the independence of Scotland; and the nation, by its
cagernefs to guard against a civil war, was not only exposed to
that calamity, but almost fubjeeed to a foreign yoke. Edward
was artful, brave, enterprising, and commanded a powerful and
martial people, at peace with the whole world. Tie anarchy
which prevailed in Scotland, and the ambition of competitors
ready to sacrifice their country in order to obtain even a depen-
dent Crown, invited him firfl to seize, and then to subjec the
kingdom. The authority of an umpire, which had been unwa-
rily bestowed upon him, and from which the Scots dreaded no
dangerous consequences, enabled him to execute his schemes
with the greater facility. Under pretext of examining the que-
flion with the utmost solemnity, he summoned all the Scottish Ba-
rons to Norham, and having gained tome, and intimidated others,
he prevailed on all who were present, not excepting Bruce and
Baliol, the competitors, to acknowledge Scotland a fief of the
Englilf Crown, and to swear fealty to him as their Sovereign or
Liege Lord. This ftcp led to another fiill more important. As
it was vain to pronounce a sentence which he had not power to
execute, Edward demanded poffeflion of the kingdom, that he
might be able to deliver it to him whose right should be found
preferable. And such was the pusillanimity of the nobles, and
the impatient ambition of the competitors, that both affcnted to
this slrange demand, and Gilbert de Umfraville, Earl of Angus,
was the only man, who refused to surrender the castles in his
cuRody to the enemy of his country. Edward finding Baliol
tile molt obsequious and the least formidable of the two competi-
tors, soon after gave judgment in his favour. Baliol once more
profeicd himself the vassal of England, and submitted to every
condition, which the Sovereign whom he had now acknowledged
was pleased to prescribe.

Edward, having tlhus placed a creature of his own upon the

throne of Scotland, and compelled the nobles to renounce the an-
cient liberties and independence of their country, had reason to
conclude that his dominion was now fully eflablified. But 1>:.
began too toon to afl'ume the master ; -his new vaflals, fierce and
ililepcndcnlt, bore with impatience a yoke, to which they were

BooK i. not accustomed. Provoked by his haughtiness, even the paflrve

v- s£pirit of Baliol began to mutiny. But Edward, who had no long-

er use for such a pageant King, forced him to resign the Crown,
and openly attempted to seize it as fallen to himself, by the re-
bellion of his vassal. At that critical period, arose Sir William
Wallace, a hero, to whom the fond admiration of his country-
men hath acfribed many fabulous ats of prowess, though his real
valour, as well as integrity and wisdom, is such as needs not the
heightenings of ficion. H-e, almost single, ventured to take arms
in defence of the kingdom, and his boldness revived the spirit of his
countrymen. At last, Robert Bruce, the grandson of himwho food
in competition with Baliol, appeared to assert his own rights, and
to vindicate the honour of his country. The nobles, ashamed
of their former baseness, and enraged at the many indignities of-
sered to the nation, crowded to his itandard. In order to crufl
him at once, the English Monarch entered Scotland, at the head
of a mighty army. Many battles were fought, and the Scots,
though often vanquished, were not subdued. The ardent zeal
with which the nobles contended for the independency of the
kingdom, the prudent valour of Bruce, and above all a national
enthusiasm inspired by such a cause, baffled the repeated efforts
of Edward, and counterbalanced all the advantages which he
derived from the number, and wealth of his fubjecs. And
though the war continued with little intermission upwards of
seventy years, Bruce and his posterity kept possession of the throne
of Scotland, and ruled with an authority not inferior to that of
its former Monarchs.

But while the sword, the ultimate judge of all disputes be-

tween contending nations, was employed to terminate this con-
troverfy, neither Edward nor the Scots seemed to diftrufl the
jultice of their cause; and both appealed to hiflory and records,
and from these produced, in their own favour, such evidence, as
they pretended to be unanfvwrable. The letters and memorials
addrcffed by each party to the Pope, who was then reverenced as
the common father, and often appealed to as the common judge
of all Chriflian Princes, arc ifill extant. The fabulous tales of
the early Britill hiflory ; the partial tefimony of ignorant Chro-
niclers; fuppofiititous treaties and charters ; arc the proofs, on
which Eldward founded his title to the sovereignty of Scotland;
and the homage done by the Scottish Monarchs for their lands in
L:ngland, i,; prcpofleroufly fippofed to imply the fubjcaion of their

whole kingdom*. Ill founded, however, as their right was, the BOOK I.
English did not fail to revive it, in all the subsequent quarrels
between the two kingdoms; while the Scots disclaimed it with
the utmost indignation. To this we mufl impute the fierce and
implacable hatred to each other, which long inflamed both. Their
national antipathies were excited, not only by the usual circum-
stances of frequent hostilities, and reciprocal injuries; but the
English confidered the Scots as vassals who had presumed to re-
bel, and the Scots, in their turn, regarded the English, as usurp-
ers who aimed at enslaving their country.

At the time when Robert Bruce began his reign in Scotland, 13o6.

Startn of' the

the fame form of goverment was established in all the kingdoms i;l;g'ltllo
of Europe. And the surprising similarity, in their contfitution .vh.li! Iruce
and laws, demonstrates that the nations which overturned the Ro- rei'g. his

reign.

man empire, and ereced these kingdoms, though divided into
different tribes, and distinguished by different names, were origi-
nally the fame people. Whlen we take a view of the feudal fyltcni
of laws and policy, that flupendous and singular fabric erected
by them; the first objea that strikes us is the King. And
when we are told that he is the sole proprietor of all the lands
within his dominions, that all his fubjecs derive their possessions
from him, and in return consecrate their lives to his service;
when we hear that all marks of diftincion, and titles of dignity,
flow from him as the only fountain of honour ; when we behold the
most potent Peers, on their bended knees, and with folded hands,
swearing fealty at his feet, and acknowledging him to be their
Sovere2gn, and their Liege Lord; we are apt to pronounce him
a powerful, nay an absolute Monarch. No conclusion, however,
would be more rash, or worse founded. The genius of the feudal
government was purely ariftocratical. With all the cnfigns of
royalty, and with many appearances of despotic power, a feudal
King was the most limited of all Princes.

Before they sallied out of their own habitations to con- Originipftlie

quer the world, many of the northern nations seem not to have FelI'ticl Go-
been fubjecQ to the goverment of kings-; and even where mo- ,dl its tris'-
narchical government was established, the prince poffiffed but tocratical
little authority. A general rather than a king, his military corn- gclius.
mand was cxtenfivc, his civiljurifdidion almost nothing:t. The
army which he led was not composed of soldiers, who could be
compelled to fervc, but of such as voluntarily followed his tland-

Anderson's Historical ElLiay concerning hie Independency, &c,
t Caxl lib, vi. c. 23. Tacit, de Mor. Germ. c. 7.1 .

B

Boox T. ard *. These conquered not for their leader, but for them-

selves; and being free in their own country, rcnounced not
their liberty when they acquired new fettlemcnts. They did
not exterminate the ancient inhabitants of the countries which
they subdued, but seizing the greater part of their lands, they
took their persons under protection. And the difficulty of main-
taining a new conqueff, as well as the danger of being attacked
by new invaders, rendering it necessary to be always in a poilure
of defence, the form of government which they eftabliflcd, was
altogether military, and nearly resembled that to which they had
been accustomed in their native country. Their general fill
continuingto be the head of the colony, part of the conquered lands
were allotted to him ; the remainder, under the name of beneficia
or fef,r, was divided amongfl his principal officers. As the com-
mon fafetyrequired that thcfe officers should, upon all occasions, be
ready to appear in arms, for the common defence, and flould con-
tinue obedient to their general, they bound themfelyes to take the
field, when called, and to serve him with a number of men, in
proportion to the extent of their territory. These great officers,
again, parcelled out their lands among their followers, and annex-
ed the fame condition to the grant. A feudal kingdom was pro-
perly the encampment of a great army; military ideas predominat-
ed, military subordination was eitablifhcd, and the poffefflon of land
was the pay which soldiers received for their personal service. In
consequence of these notions, the pofTeffion of land was granted
during pleasure only, and kings were clective. In other words,
an officer disagreeable to his general was deprived of his pay, and
the person who was most capable of conducing an army, was
chosen to command it. Such were the sirs rudiments, or infancy
of feudal govcrment.

But long before the beginning of the fourteenth century, the

feudal system had undergone many changes, of which the follow-
ing were the molt considerable. Kings formerly elcctive, were
then hereditary ; and fiefs granted at firR during pleaflre, de-
lended from father to son, and were become perpetual. These
changes, not less advantageous to the nobles, than to the prince.

Gener:lcau- made no alteration in the ariflocratical Ipirit of the feudal conlli-
ses which i1- tution. The king, who at a difllncc, seemed to be invefled with
mitcd thll
plowtllrth majefly and power, appears, on a nearer view, to pouff-fs none of
ti.l-ml lo- thece advantages, which bellow on monarchs their fralndcur and
llil'.CX i. C

*.c1r.lb. vi. c. 23.

authority. His revenues were scanty; he had not a landing army, BooK I.
and he enjoyed no properjurifdi&ion. ~

At a time when pomp and splendor were unknown, even in Their tcve-

the palaces of kings; when the officers of the crown received nlues ere
little salary besides the fees and perquisites of their office; when
embassies to foreign courts were rare; when armies were com-
posed of soldiers who served without pay; it was not neceffarythat
a king should possess a great revenue; nor did the condition of
Europe, in those ages, allow its princes to be opulent. Commerce
made little progress in the kingdoms, where the feudal govern-
ment was eflablifhed. Institutions, which had no other objcc'
but to inspire a martial spirit, to train men up to be foldicrs, and to
make arms the only honourable profeflion, naturally discouragcd the
commercial arts. The revenues, arifingfrom the taxes imposed on
the different branches of commerce, were by consequence inconfi-
derable, and the prince's treasury received little supply from a
source, which, among a trading people, flows with such abun-
dance, and is almolt inexhaultible. A fixed tax was not levied
even on land; such a burthen would have appeared intolerable
to men who received their ellates, as the reward of their valour,
and who confidered their service in the field, as a full retribution
for what they possessed. The king's demnefres, or the porticn of
land which he itill retained in his own hands unalienated, fur-
nifhld fubfiflence to his court, and defrayed the ordinary ex-
pence of government*. The only flated taxes which the feu-
dal law obliged vafials to pay to the king, or to those of whom
they held their lands, were three; one when his eldest son was
made a knight; another when his eldest daughter was married;
and a third in order to ranfomi him if he should happen to be
taken prifoncr. Besides thelc, the king received the feudal cafiual-
ties of the ward, marriage, (&'c. of his ovWh vaffils. And, on
some extraordinary occasions, his fubjcets granted him an aid,
which they dillinguilled by the name of a benevo/ence, in order
to declare that he received it not in conferjucncc of any right,
but as a voluntary gift, flowing from their good-will (. All thelf
:.dded together, produced a revenue, scanty ;and precarious, which
f1.r from enabling the king to attempt any tiing that could cxcice
the jealousy or fear of tlle nobles, kept him in cS:tinual iini-
gc:nce, anxiety, and dependence.

' (CraiK. de Feuld. libl. i. Dieg. 14. Du Canige ( Coll. voc. Dominiiicui .
I- Dlu Cange voc. Auxiliiiin.

R :;

BOOK I. Nor could the king supply the defec of his revenues, by the

v -d terror of his arms. Mercenary troops and ltanding armies were

They had no
jtanding ar- unknown as long as the feudal goverment subsisted in vigour.
nules. Europe was peopled with soldiers. The vassals of the king, and

the fub-vaffals of the barons were all obliged to carry arms. And.
while the poverty of princes prevented them from fortifying their
frontier towns, while a campaign continued but a few weeks, and
while a fierce and impetuous courage was impatient to bring every
quarrel to the decision of a battle, an army, without pay, and with
little discipline, was sufficient for all the purposes both of the fe-
curity and of the glory of a nation. Such an army, however,
far from being an engine at the king's disposal, was often no less
formidable to him, than to his enemies. The more warlike any
people were, the more independent they became ; and the fame
persons being both soldiers and fubjets, civil privileges and immu-
nities were the consequence of their viaories, and .the reward of
their martial exploits. Conquerors, whom mercenary armies, un-
der our present forms of goverment, often render the tyrants of
their own people, as well as the scourges of mankind were commonly,
under the feudal constitution, the most indulgent of all princes
to their fubjeas, because they flood moll in need of their assist-
ance. A prince, whom even war and viaories did not render the
master of his own army, possessed no shadow of military power du-
ring times of peace. His disbanded soldiers mingled with his
other fubjctas; not a single man received pay from him; ma-
ny ages elapsed before a guard was appointed to defend his per-
son; and destitute of that great instrument of dominion a stand-
ing army, the authority of the king continued always feeble, and
was often contemptible.

T'iheir jrif- Nor were there the only circumflances which contributed to-
diflowas wards dcpreffing the regal power. By the feudal fyllem, the king's

judicial authority was extremely circumscribed. At firfi, princes
fzem to have been the supreme judges of their people, and in per-
son, heard and determined all controvcrfies among them. The
multiplicity of causes soon made it neceflary to appoint judges,
who, in the king's name, decided matters that belonged to the
royal jurifdlicion. But tle Barbarians, who over-ran Europe, hav-
ing dellroyed iofl of the great cities, and the countries which
tl'y feizctd beilin cantoned out among powerful barons, who were
blindly followed hy numerous vaftals, whom in return, they were
bound to protect from every injury; the adminillration ofjuflice
was greatly intcrruptcd, and the execution of any legal sentence

became almost impracticable. .Theft, rapine, murder, and difor- BOOK I.
der of all kinds prevailed in every kingdom of Europe, to a de- *
gree almost incredible, and scarce compatible with the subsistence
of civil society. Every offender sheltered himself under the pro-
tecion of some powerful chieftain, who screened him from the
pursuits ofjuftice. To apprehend, and to punifl a criminal, of-
ten required the union and effort of half a kingdom *. In order
to remedy these evils, many persons of diftinaion were intrusted
with the administration of justice within their own territories.
But what we may presume was, at firfi, only a temporary grant,
or a personal privilege, the incroaching spirit of the nobles soon
converted into a right, and rendered hereditary. The lands of
some were ereced into Baronies, those of others into Regalities.
The jurifdi&ion of the former was extensive, that of the latter, as
the name implies, royal and almofi unbounded. All causes, whe-
ther civil or criminal, were tried by judges, whom the lord of the
regality appointed; and if the king's court called any person with-
in his territory before them, the lord of regality might put a flop
to their proceedings, and by the privilege of rep/edging, remove
the cause to his own court, and even punish his vassal, if he sub-
mitted to a foreign jurifdicion -. Thus almost every queflion in
which any person, who resided on the lands of the nobles, was in-
terested, being determined by judges appointed by the nobles
themselves, their vaflals were scarce sensible of being, in any de-
gree, fubje& to the crown. A feudal kingdom was split into ma-

* A remarkable instance of this occurs in the following history, so late as the

year 156i. lary, having appointed a court ofjultice to be held on the borders,
the inhabitants of no less than eleven counties were summoned to guard the per-
son, who was to aft as judge, and to enable him to enforce his decisions. The
words of a proclamation, which afford such a convci ning proof of the feebleness of
the feudal government, dceferve our notice.-" And because it is necenfary for the
execution of her Highness' commandments, and service, that her justice be well
accompanied, and her authority sufficiently fortified, by the concurrence of a
good power of her faithful fubjels-Therefore commands and charges all and
sundry Earls, Lords, Barons, Freeholders, Landed-men, and other Gentlemen,
dwelling within the said counties, that they, and every one of them, xvith their
kin, fiiends, servants, and houlliold.menl, well bodin in the feir of war in the
most fbfillntious manner, (i. c. completely armed and proiided,) and with twen-
ty days viiuals, to meet alnd to pti:fs toward him to the borough of Jedburgll,
and there to remain during thl iutid space of twenty days, and to receive filch
dlirctiion and comma:nds, as fl'all be given by him to them in our Snverleign La-
dy's name for quietmela of the country; and to put the fame in execution, under
the pain of losing their life, lands, and goods." Keith's I-lift. of Scotland, I98.

t Craig, lib, iii. Dieg. 7.

BOoK I. ny small principalities, almost independent, and held together by

. . a feeble, and commonly an imperceptible bond of union. And

the king was. not only stripped of the authority annexed to the
person of a supreme judge, but his revenue suffered no small di-
munition, by the loss of those pecuniary emoluments, which were,
in that age, due to the person who adminiltered justice.

In the fame proportion that the king funk in power, the nobles

rose towards independence. Not satisfied with having obtained a
hereditary right to theirfiefs, which they formerly held during plea-
sure, their ambition aimed at something bolder, and by introducing
entails, endeavoured, as far as human ingenuity and invention can
reach that end, to render their possessions unalienable and ever-
lafling. As they had full power to add to theinheritance transmit-
ted to them from their ancestors, but none to diminish it; time
alone, by means of marriages, legacies, and other accidents, brought
continual acceflionsof wealth, and of dignity; a great family, like
a river, became considerable from the length of its course, and as
it rolled on, new honours and new property flowed successively-
into it. Whatever influence is derived from titles of honour, the
feudal nobles, likervifc, possessed in an ample manner. These
marks of diflin&ion are, in their own nature, either official or per-
fonal, and being annexed to a particular charge, or bellowed by
the admiration of mankind upon illufirious characters, ought to be
appropriated to these. But the son, however unworthy, could not
bear to be itripped of that appellation, by which his father had
been diflinguifled. His presumption claimed, what his virtue did
not merit; titles of honour became hereditary, and added new
lustre to nobles already in possession of too much power. Some-
thing more audacious and more extravagant fill remained. The Iu-
preme dire&ion ofall affairs, both civil and military, being committed
to the great officers of the crown, the fame and fafcty of princes,
as well as of their people, depended upon the fidelity and abilities
of these officers. But such was the prepoferous ambition of the
nobles, and so ficcefsful even their wildell attempts to aggrandize
tlhemfelvcs, that in all the kingdoms where the feudal inltitutions
prevailed, most of there ollices were annexed to great families,
:and held, like fiefs, by hereditary right. A person, whose undu-
tiflul behaviour rcnlcred lhiin odious to li l' rince, or wliofc
incapacity exposed him to the contempt of the people, often held
a place of power and trust, of the grcatcll importance to 1)oth.
In Scotland, the ofllices of Lord Jullice Gencral, Great Chanm-
berlain, -ligh Steward, High Conlllable, aErlMirlhal, and High

Admiral, were all hereditary; and in many counties, ,tlic office of Bool I.
Sherilr was held in the fame manner.

Nobles, whose property was so extensive, and whose power so

great, could not fail of being turbulent and formidable. Nor did
they want inllruments for executing their boldest designs. That
portion of their lands, which they parcelled out among their fol-
lowers, supplied them with a numerous band of faithful and de-
termined vaflals ; while that, which they retained in their own
hands, enabled them to live with a princely splendor. The great
hall of an ambitious Baron was often more crowded than the court
of his Sovereign. The flrong caflles, in which they resided, as-
forded a secure retreat to the difcontcnted and seditious. A great
part of their revenue was spent upon multitudes of indigent, but
bold retainers. And if at any time they left their retreat, to ap-
pear in the court of their Sovereign, they were accompanied, even
in times of peace, with a vast train of armed followers. The usual
retinue of William the sixth Earl of Douglas consisted of two thou-
sand horse. Those of the other nobles were magnificient and formi-
dable in proportion. Impatient of subordination, and forgetting
their proper rank, these potent and haughty Barons were the ri-
vals, rather than the fubjets of their Prince. They often de-
spifed his orders, insulted I:.s person, and wrested from him his
crown. And the history of Europe, during several ages, con-
tains little else, but the account of the war and revolutions, oc-
cafioned by their exorbitant ambition.

But, if the authority of the Barons far exceeded its proper Tn,;rpowver

Lounds in the other nations of Europe, we may affirm that the grcater inl
balance which ought to be preserved between a King and his 'th'''i ny
nobles was entirely lofl in Scotland. The Scottifl nobles enjoy- othr1 kin"g-
ed, in common with those of other nations, all the means for ex- di
tending their authority which arise from the ariffocratical genius
of the feudal government. Besides these, they poffcll'cd advan-
tages peculiar to themfelvcs; the accidental sources of their
power wvere considerable ; and singular circufltances concurred
wsith the spirit of the confltitution to aggrandize them. To cnu- Tlc parti-
Incrate the moR remarkable of there, will Ic;rve both to explain ctl:r ':atllt'
the political slate of thl kingdom, and to illuitiate many import-
ant occurrences, in the period now under our review.

1. 'Tle lat.tre of their country was one cause of the power The ilunlie

and iindepe;tdlcnce of the Scottish nobles. Level aniu open couni- of tlh cGtun-
tries are ' forced for fcrvitudc. The authority of the fliprermc
millgilJ:atc reaclhes with cafe to the niolt dillunt corners, and

BooK I. when nature has ereaed no barrier, and affords no retreat, the

guilty or obnoxious are soon deteced, and punished. Mountains,
and fens, and rivers, let bounds to despotic power, and amidst
these, is the natural feat of freedom and independence. In such
places, did the Scottish nobles usually fix their residence. By re-
tiring to his own castle, a mutinous Baron could defy the power
of his Sovereign; it being impracicable to lead an army through
a barren country, to places, almost inaccessible to a single man.
The fame causes, which checked the progress of the Roman arms,
and rendered all the efforts of Edward I. abortive, often protect-
ed the Sco-,'lh nobles from the vengeance of their Prince; and
they owed their personal independence, to those very mountains
and marflhes, which saved their country from being conquered.

The fnall II. The want of great cities in Scotland contributed not a
number of
great cities. little to increase the power of the nobles, and to weaken that of

the Prince. Wherever numbers of men assemble together, or-
der muff be eftabliflied, and a regular form of government infti-
tuted, the authority of the magillrate must be recognized, and
his decisions meet with prompt and full obedience. Laws and
subordination take rife in cities ; and where there are few cities
as in Poland, or none as in Tartary, there are few or no traces of
any fort of police. But under the feudal governments, com-
merce, the chief means of assembling mankind, was negleted;
the nobles, in order to strengthen their influence over their vas-
fals, resided among them, and seldom appeared at court, where
they found a superior, or dwelt in cities, where they met with
equals. In Scotland, the rich counties in the south lying open
to the English, no town situated there could rife to be great or
populous amidit continual inroads and alarms ; the residence of
our monarchs was not fixed to any particular place ; many parts
of the country were barren and uncultivated; and in consequence
of these peculiar circumstances, added to the general causes flow-
ing from the nature of the feudal institutions, the towns in Scot-
land were extremely few, and very inconsiderable. The vassals
of every Baron occupied a diftinc portion of the kingdom, and
unmingled with others, formed a separate and almost independent
society. Intcead of giving aid towards reducing to obedience
their seditious Chieftain, or any whom he took under his protec-
tion, they were all in arms for his defence, and oblfruEted the
operations of justice to the utmost. The prince was obliged to
connive at criminals, whom he could not reach ; the ivbles, con-

cious of this advantage, were not afraid to offend ; and the dif- B0oK I.
ficulty of punithing almoit insured them of impunity.

III. The division of the country into clans had no small effeCt The infitu-

in rendering the noblks considerable. The nations, which over- tionofclanls.
ran Europe, were originally divided into many small tribes; and
when they came to parcel out the lands which they had conquer-
ed, it was natural for every Chieftain to bellow a portion, in the
first place, upon those of his own tribe or family. These all held
their lands of him; and as the safety of each individual depend-
ed on the general union, these finall societies clung together, and
were diftinguifted by some common appellation, either patrony-
rical, or local, long before the introduction of firnames, or en-
Jgns armorial. But when these became common, the deeccn-
dents and relations of every Chieftain assumed the fame name and
arms with.him; other vaflals were proud to imitate their example,
and by degrees they were communicated to all those who held of
the fame superior. Thus clanflhips were formed ; and in a gene-
ration or two, that consanguinity which was, at firfi, in a great
meafurc, imaginary, was believed to be real. An artificial union
wvas converted into a natural one; men willingly followed a lead-
er, whom they regarded both as the superior of their lands,
and the chief of their blood, and served him not only with the
fidelity of vassals, but with the affetion of friends. In the other
feudal kingdoms, we may observe such unions as we have de-
fcribed, imperfectly formed; but in Scotland, whether they were
the production of chance, or the effec of policy, or introduced
by the Irish colony above mentioned, and ftrcngthened by care-
fully preserving their genealogies both genuine and fabulous,
clanfhips were univcrfal. Such a confederacy might be over-
come, it could not be broken; and no change of manners, or of
government, has been able, in some parts of the kingdom, to dif-
solve afrociations which are founded upon prejudices so natural to
the human mind. How formidable were nobles at the head of
followers, who, counting that cause jutf and honourable which
their Chief approved, were ever ready to take the field at his
command, and to sacrifice their lives in defence of his person, or
of his fame ? Against such men, a king contended with great
disadvantage, and that cold service, which money purchafss, or
authority extorts, was not an equal match for their ardor and
zeal.

IV. The finallnefs of their number may be mentioned among The finall
the caures of the grandeur of the Scottiih nobles. Our annals "ll"rliber of

c thlu nublc:.

BooK I. ' reach hot back to the first division of property in the k!ingdor:

but so far as we can, trace the matter, the original polefinons of
the nobles seem to have been cxtenfive. The ancient Thanes
were the equals and the rivals of their prince. Mlany of the Earls
and Barons, who succeeded them, were maftcrs of territories no
lets ample. France and England, countries wide and fertile, as-
forded settlements to a numerous and powerful nobility. Scot-
land, a kingdom neither extensive nor rich, could not contain
many such overgrown proprietors. But the power of an arifto-
cracy always diminishes, in proportion to the incrcafc of its num-
bers ; feeble if divided among a multitude; irreffifible if center-
ed in a few. When nobles are numerous, their operations near-
ly resemble those of the people, they are routed by what they
feel only, not by what they apprehend ; and submit to many ar-
bitrary and oppressive ass, before they take arms againfi their
Sovereign. A small body, on the contrary, is more sensible,
and more impatient ; quick in discerning, and prompt in repel-
ling danger; all its motions are as sudden, as those of the other
are flow. Hence proceeded the extreme jealousy, with which
the, Scottish nobles observed their monarchs, and the fierceness
with which they opposed their encroachments. Even the virtue
of a Prince did not render them less vigilant, or less eager to de-
fend their rights; and Robert Bruce, notwithstanding the fplcn-
dor of his victories, and the glory of his name, was upon the
point of experiencing the vigour of their resistance, no less than
his unpopular descendent James III. Besides this, the near alli-
ance of the great families, by frequent intermarriages, was the
natural confcquence of their small number. And as confangui-
nity was, in those ages, a powerful bond of union, all the kind-
red of a nobleman interested themselves in his quarrel, as a com-
mon cause, and every contest the king had, though with a single
baron, soon drew upon him the arms of a whole confederacy.

'Their V. Those natural connexions both with their equals, and witl
olbaisand their inferiors, the Scottilll nobles llrengthened by a device, which
tions, if not peculiar to themselves, was at least more frequent among

them, than in any other nation. Even in times of profound
peace, they formrll aflociations, which when made with their
equals, were called /earue.r of mutulal dfndcc e; and when with
their inferiors, /ondl of manicnt. By the former, the contratl-
ing parties bound tllcifelves mutually to aflili each other, in all
causes, and against all pcrfons. By the latter, protection was
llipulated on the one hand, and fidelity and pcrinall service

promiscd on the other *. Self-prefervation, it is probable, forced BooK I.
men at first into thcfe confederacies, and while disorder and ra-
pine were universal, while government was unsettled, and the
authority of laws little known or regarded, near neighbours
found it necessary to unite in this manner for their security, and
the weak were obliged to court the patronage of the strong. By
degrees, there affociaticKs became so many alliances offensive and
dcfenfive against the throne and as their obligation was held to
be more sacred than any tie whatever, they gave much umbrage
to.our Kings, and contributed not a little to the power and inde-
pendence of the nobility. In the reign of James II. William the
eighth Earl of Douglas entered into a league of this kind with
the Earls of Crawfurd, Ross, Murray, Ormond, the Lords Ha-
milton, Balveny, &c. and so formidable was this combination to
the King, that he flabbed Douglas with his own hand in order to
dissolve it.

VI. The frequent wars between England and Scotland proved The fre-

another cause of augmenting the power of the nobles. Nature wCith Ell.
has placed no barrier between the two kingdoms; a river, almost land.
every where fordable, divides them towards the east ; on the
weft they are separated by an imaginary line. The small reve-
nues of our Kings prevented them from fortifying, or placing
garrisons in the towns on the frontier; nor would the jealousy of
their subjects have permitted such a method of defence. The
Barons, whose estates lay near the borders, confidered themfelvcs
as bound in honour and interest to repel the enemy. The cwar-
de/zt'ps. of the different marche.r, offices of great trust and digni-
ty, were always bellowed on them. This gained them the lead-
ing of the warlike counties in the south ; and their vailals, living
in a IHate of perpetual hollility, or enjoying at belt an insecure
peace, became more inured to war than even the reft of their
countrymen, and more willing to accompany their Chieftain in
his moil hardy and dangerous enterprises. It was the valour, no
less than the number of their followers, that rendered the Dou-
glasses great. The nobles in the northern and midland counties
were often' dutiful and obf'quious to the crown, but our monarchs
always found it impraaticable to fubduc the mutinous and ungo-
vernable spirit of the borderers. In all our domlltic quarrels,
tlolc, wlo could draw to their fide the inhabitants of the louth-
crn counties, were lure of vidory ; and conscious of this advnlt-
age, the Lords who pofi:lie4d authority there, were apt to forgct

* AC. . Parl, 1.124 a. Aft. I3. l.'lrl. ij-.1

C ij

BooK I. the duty which they owed their Sovereign, and to aspire beyond

the rank of fubjets.

The fre- VII. The calamities which besel our Kings contributed more
quent mio- than any other cause to diminish the royal authority. Never was
nriles which
happenedin any race of monarchs so unfortunate as the Sdottifh. Of fix fuc-
Scotland. ceffive Princes, from Robert III. to James VI. no one died a

natural death; and the minorities, during that time, were long-
er, and more frequent, than ever happened in any other king-
dom. From Robert Bruce to James VI. we reckon ten princes;
and seven of these were called to the throne, while they were
minors, and almost infants. Even the most regular and best efta-
blifhed governments feel sensibly the pernicious effecs of a mino-
rity, and either become languid and inative, or are thrown into
violent and unnatural convulsions. But, under the imperfect and
ill adjusted system of government in Scotland, these effects were
flill more fatal; and the fierce and mutinous spirit of the nobles,
unrefirained by the authority of a King, scorned all fubjecion to
the delegated jurifdidion of a regent, or to the feeble commands
of a minor. The royal authority was circumscribed within nar-
rower limits than ever; the prerogatives of the crown, naturally
inconsiderable, were reduced almost to nothing; and the arifto.
cratical power gradually rose upon the ruins of the monarchical,
Left the personal power of a regent flould enable him to a& with
too much vigour, the authority, annexed to that office, was
sometimes rendered inconsiderable, by being divided ; or if a
single regent was chosen, the greater nobles, and the heads of
the more illustrious families, were seldom raised to that dignity,
It was often conferred upon men, who pofefled little influence,
and excited no jcaloufy. They, conscious of their own weak-
ness, were obliged to overlook some irregularities, and to perl
mit others; and in order to filpport their authority, -which was
deflitute of real strength, they endeavoured to gain the mofi
powerful and active Barons, by granting them poffeflions and im-
munities, which raised them to Rill greater power. WVhen the
King himself came to assume the reins of government, he found
his revenues wafled or alienated, the crown lands seized or given
away, and the nobles so accuflomed to independence, that after
the ilrtigglcs of a whole reign, he was Ifldom able to reduce

Review or them to the fline latc, in which they lhad been at the beginning
cvfllta n1- of hiis minority, or to weltt from them what they had ufulped
vul,,ihle 1to
tht ;,b)lcs during that time. If we take a view of what happened to each
duriii gelach of our Kings, wlio was lb unfouiunate as to be placed in this situ..
minority.

,.r.ation, the truth and importance of this obfcrvation will fully BooK I.

'appear.

The minority of David II. the son of Robert Bruce, was dif- I3^9.

turbed by the pretensions of Edward Baliol, who, 'relying on the D
aid 'of England, and on the support of some diffaffeded nobles
among the Scots, invaded the kingdom. The success which at
first attended his arms, obliged the young King to retire to
France; and Baliol took poffcffion of the throne. A small body
of the nobles, however, continuing faithful to their exiled Prince,
drove Baliol out of Scotland; and after an absence of nine years,
David returned from France, and took the government of the
kingdom into his own hands. But nobles, who were thus walt-
ing their blood and treasure in defence of the crown, had a right
to the undisturbed poffcffion of their ancient privileges, and even
some title to arrogate new ones. It seems to have been a maxim,
in that age, that every leader might claim as his own, the terri-
tory which his sword had won from the enemy, Great acquifi-
tions were gained by the nobles in that way; and to there the
gratitude and liberality of David added, by distributing, among
such as adhered to him, the vail poffeflions which fell to the
crown by the' forfeiture of his enemies. The family of Douglas,
which began to rife above the other nobles, in the reign of his
father, augmented both its power and its property, during his
minority.

James I. was seized by the Englifl, during the continuance of r4o.-.

a truce, and ungenerously. detained a prisoner, almost nineteen James 1-
years. During that period, the kingdom was governed, first by
his uncle Robert Duke of Albany, and then, by Murdo his son.
Both there noblemen aspired to the crown, and their unnatural
ambition, if we may believe moll of our hiforians, not only cut
fiort the days of Prince David, the King's elder brother, but
prolonged the captivity of James. They flattered themselves,
thai they might flep with less opposition into a throne, when al-
moil vacant; and dreading the King's return, as the extinction
of their authority, and the end of their hopes,' they carried on the
negociations for obtaining his liberty, with extreme remiffines.
At the fame time, they neglected nothing that could either fboth
or bribe the nobles to approve their scheme. They nflckened
the reins of government; they allowed the prerogative to lb en-
croached upon ; ltey fillcred the moll irregular aCts of po.ver,
and even wanton inllances of oppreflion, to pal' with impunity
they dealt out the patrimony of the crown among thole whuofc;

BooK I. enmity they dreaded, or whose favour they had gained; and re-

duced the royal authority, to a slate of imbecillity, from which
fuccceding monarchs laboured in vain to raise it.

r437. During the minority of James II. the administration of affairs,
James I. and the custody of the King's person were committed to Sir Wil-

liam Crighton, and Sir Alexander Livingston. Jealousy and dif-
cord were the effeets of their conjuna authority, and each of
them, in order to strengthen himself, bestowed new powers and
privileges upon the great men, whose aid he courted. While
the young Earl of Douglas, encouraged by their divisions, erect-
ed a fort of independent principality within the kingdom i and
forbidding his vasals to acknowledge any authority but his own,
he created Knights, appointed a privy council, named officers
civil and military, afliumed every enlign of royalty, but the title
of King, and appeared in public with a magnificence more than
royal.

1460. Eight persons were chosen to govern the kingdom, during the
James III. minority of James III. Lord Boyd, however, by seizing the

person of the young King, and by the ascendant which he ac-
quired over him, soon engrossed the whole authority. He form-
ed the ambitious profpe&t of raising his family to the fame pitch
of power and grandeur with those of the prime nobility; and he
effeced it. While intent on this, he relaxed the vigour of go-
vernment, and the nobles becalme accultomed, once more, to
anarchy and independence. The power, which Eoyd had been
at so much pains to acquire, was .'f no long continuance, and the
fall of his family, according to the fate of favourites, was sudden
and deltructivc; but upon its ruins, the family of I-anmilton rose,
which soon attained the highefl rank in the kingdom.
james V. As the minority of James V. was longer, it was likcwife more

turbulent than those of the preceding Kings. And the contend-
ing nobles, encouraged or proteEced either by the King of France,
or of England, formed themselves into more regular factions, and
diiregarded more than ever tie reflrints of order and authority.
T'he French had the advantage of fieing one, devoted to their
intcrcet, raised to be regent. This was the Duke of Albany, a
native of France, and grandson of James II. But Alexander
L ord I'Iome, the niol eminent of all the ScottiIi peers, who fur-
vived the fatal battle of Flowden, thwarted all his mcafires, du-
ring the first years of his adminiitrnlion; and the intrigues of the
(Qt.ec .n)owVager, filler of Henry VIII. rcud:ced the latter part
of it uo lets feeble. Though supportcd by :r1rctl: auixiliarie;, the

nobles dcfrifed his authority, and regardless either of his threats, Boor. L
or his entreaties, peremptorily reftufed, two several times, to en-
tcr England, to the borders of which kingdom lie had led them.
Provoked by these repeated instances of contempt, the regent a-
bandoncd his troubllcfore station, and retiring to France, prefer-
red tile tranquillity of a private life, to an office destitute of real
authority. Upon his retreat, Douglas Earl of Angus became
master of the King's perron, and governed the kingdom in his
name. MIiany efforts were made to deprive him of his usurp-
ed authority. But the numerous vassals and friends of his fami-
ly adhered to him, becau. hle divided with them the power and
emoluments of his office ; the people reverenced and loved the
name of Douglas ; without the title of regent, he exercised a
fuller and more absolute authority than any who had enjoyed that
dignity ; and the ancient, hut dangerous pre-eminence of the
Douglafics, seened to be reflored.

To these, and to many other causes, omitted or unobrcrved by

us, did the Scottifl nobility owe that exorbitant and uncommon.
power, of which inflances occur, lt frequently, in our hillorv.
Nothing, however, demonitrates so fully the extent of' their
power, as the length of its duration. MIany years after the de-
clenfion of the feudal fyflem in the other kingdoms of Europe,
and when the arms or policy of princes had, every where, flla-
ken, or laid it in ruins, the fo4ndations of that ancient fabric re-
mained firm and untouched in Scotland.

The powers, which the feudal inflitutions veiled in the nobles, rThe pc.-;.r
f-jon became intolerable to all the Princes of Europe, who longed Io th'' 1si-

da:1l nohlu

to poflefs something more than a nominal-and precarious authori- b.l-:m in-
ty. Their impatience to obtain this, precipitated Henry III. of t,)l'r 1'c: 1'J
]England, Edward II. and ifme other weak Princes, into rall
and premature attempts againfl the privileges of the Barons, in
which they were disappointed, or perillhed. Princes, of great-
er abilities, were content to mitigate evils which they could nut
cure ; they fought occupation for the turbulent 'i)irit of their
nobles, in frequent wars ; and allowedl their fierce courage to
evaporate in foreign expeditions, which, if they brought no other
advantage, fccur:dl at lac;l domuellic tranquillity. But, timn and
accidenlts ripelled the feudal governments for delirulion. 'T- T'
wards the end of the fiftccllt cclltuly, andl bLginning of thle *:m'.l':l' !l'

'' ' *h

*t' liti ill}) .,' i .'

fixtccntll, all tle Princes of liEurope cattacklcl, as if by concert, nli! (1,'.--
the power of tllcir nobles. \'Mnc of gceniius thetn tndertook with ct'l:l 't

iicccss, hvllat tei-r unlllklltful jlrclccdslbrs ha.l at:tcnl~lltcd iln taim. i'll;lI'.'

: il
luccic£s, whait thtcir unlklcllfil lprcdccell'ois hlad alleniplod in vain. in E a;'u.

Boos I. Lewis XI. of France, the most profound and the most adventrouii

genius of that age, began, and in a single reign, almost com-
pleted the scheme of their deftrudion. The sure, but concealed
policy of Henry VII. of England produced the fame effe&. The
means, indeed, employed by these monarchs were very different.
The blow which Lewis struck, was sudden and fatal. The arti-
sices of Henry resembled those flow poisons, which waste the
constitution, but become not mortal till some distant period. Nor
did they produce consequences less opposite. Lewis boldly add-
ed to the crown whatever he wrested from the nobles. Henry
undermined his Barons by encouraging them to fell their lands,
which enriched the commons, and gave them a weight in the

But legislature unknown to their predecessors. But while these great
the nobles revolutions were carrying on in two kingdoms, with which Scot-
continue to
gather land was intimately connected, no alteration happened there; the
itlength in King neither extended his own prerogative, nor enabled the com-
Scotland.

mons to encroach upon the aritlocracy; the nobles not only re-
tained their ancient privileges and possessions, but daily made
new acquisitions.

Our Kings This was not owing to the inattention of our Princes, or to
endeavour- their want of ambition. They were abundantly sensible of the
cdltoc-xtend
the royal au- exorbitant power of the nobles, and extremely solicitous to hum-
thorty. ble them. They did not however possess means, sufficient for ac-

complilhing that end. The resources of our monarchs were few,

General and the progress which they made inconsiderable. But as the
wards ths number of their followers, and the extent of their jurifdicion,
cud. were the two chief circumlfances which rendered the nobles for-

midable; in order to counterbalance the one, and to restrain the
other, all our Kings had recourse to the fame expedients.,

Encourage I. Among nobles of a fierce courage, and of unpolilhed man-
(lifeord a-
molil the iners, surrounded with vanals bold and licentious, whom they were
nobles, bound by interest and honour to prote&t, the causes of discord

were many and unavoidable. And as the contending parties could
seldom agree in acknowledging the authority of any common fupe-
rior or judge, and their impatient spirit would seldom wait the
flow decisions of jutlice, their quarrels were usually terminated
by the sword. The offended Baron alrcmbled his vallals, and waft-
ed the lands, or flied the blood of his enemy. To forgive an in-
jury was mcan, to forbear revenge infamous or cowardly*. Hence

* The fliriit of revenge was encouraged not only by the manners, but what is

more rcmtarkable, by the l:v:.s of tholL ages. If any person thought the prolfcu-
tion of an injury oflfred to his fuamily, too troublcronic, or too dangerous, tho

.lnarrels were tranfnitted from father to son, and under the namte BooK I.
of dead.y feuds, fubfited for many generations, with unmitigated --
rancour. It was the intereil of the crown to foment rather than
to extinguith these, and by scattering or cherilling the feeds of
discord among the nobles, that union which would have rendered
the ariflocracy invincible, and which mull at once have annihi-
lated the prerogative, was effectually prevented. To the fame
cause, our Kings were indebted for the success, with which they
sometimes attacked the molt powerful chieftains. They employed
private revenge to aid the impotence of public laws, and arming
againff the person who had incurred their displeasure, those rival
families, which willied his fall, they rewarded their service, by
fliaring among them tle spoils of the vanquifihed. But this ex-
pedicnt, though it served to humble individuals, did not weaken
the body of the nobles. Those, who were now the inlfrumients
of their Prince's vengeance, became, in a fiort time, the objects
of his fear. Having acquired power and wealth by fcrving the
crown, they, in their turn, set up for independence; and though
there might be a fluluation of power, and of property, though
old families fell, and new ones rose upon their ruins, the rights of
the aristocracy remained intire, and its vigour unbrok.en.

II. As tlhe administration of jullice is one of the moit power- Extend the

ful ties between a King and his fubjeds, all our monarchs were at joftlriFliAio
the utmost pains to circumscribe the jurifdition of the Barons, and King's
to extend that of the crown. The external forms of ftbordina- courts.
tion, natural to the feudal fyllem, favoured this attempt. An ap-
peal lay from the judges and courts of the Barons, to those of the
King. T'he right, however, of judging in the firfl inltance, be-
longed to the nobles, and they easily found means to defeat the
clfct of appeals, as well as of many other feurl-ll regulations. The
royal juriflilion was almofl conlined within the narrow limits of

Sallitue law;v permiitted hlim publicly to dclif from Idemandingll vengeance; but
thle lm l:aws, in order to punlifl his cowardice, and wanlt of0 a flnCion to lis Fa-
mllily, deprived l lim of the right of ltccellioni. IlAaut. l Abrc: ' Clitroiol. p. 8r.
Aiminog the Ainglo-SaLxonis, we sild a litigular ijlliti;tion diliinguilltld by t.:
lame of soDI\x.lrlvrT; a volunlt;lary allbciatiol, tlhe ol!c) \herLeol was the per-
lon:al lcuirity ol 'tlolf whlo joinied i it, and which tlhe blecl e i' so 'I( goernmilnt
ait lihat time' reltdered icceitllry. Allmoi; oother r;Il:tiois, wlicli arc conitain-
ccl inl one oftllole Itill extalnt, thle firlloh ing tLel.

d l'. .i ln licc. " Il aity alli)ciate

f.lhll cithe ll at 1or drtink witli a perlbnI whio li:r; kilihd lay oilhliel.r of tlle oso).\-
I.t'Iv I'M, unillf's inl tile prefcti ce of thle Kilig', tli Bllifliho , or tihe Coillt, and 1111.
li.; lie can prove that lie did not kllow thei 1L. [i)l, 1.t htim p'ly a gireat l it.''
likl1 J)illnft. l:lil!..:lr. :Ipud IThl sI ut'. l.iog'. Uep:c.itt'. vol. i. p. 21.

D

B1oK I. the King's demesnes, beyond which, his judges claimed indeed

much authority, but possessed next to none. Our Kings were fen-
fible of these limitations, and bore them with impatience. But
it was impossible to overturn, in a moment, what was so deeply
rooted; or to strip the nobles, at once, of privileges which they
had held so long, and which were wrought almost into the frame
of the feudal constitution. To accomplifll this, however, was an
objet of uniform and anxious attention to all our princes. James I.
led the way, here, as well as in other inflanccs, towards a more
regular and perfec& police. He made choice, among the eitates
of parliament, of a certain number of persons, whom he dillin-
guifhed by the name of Lords of Sefion, and appointed them to
hold courts for determining civil causes, three times in the year
and forty days at a time, in whatever place he pleased to name.
Their jurifdiation extended to all matters, which formerly came
under the cognizance of the King's council, and being a commit-
tee of parliament, their decisions were final. James. II. obtain-
ed a law, annexing all regalities, which should be forfeited, to the
crown, and declaring the right of jurifdilion, to be unalienable
for the future. James III. imposed severe penalties upon those
judges appointed by the Barons, whose decisions should be found
on a review to be unjust; and by many other regulations, endea-
voured to extend the authority of his own court *. James IV.
on pretence of remedying the inconveniences arising from the fliort
terms of the court of Session, appointed other judges called Lords
of Daily Council. The S'effon was an ambulatory court, and met
seldom; the Daily Council was fixed, and fat constantly at Edin-
burgh; and though not composed of members of parliament, the
fame powers, which the Lords of Seflion enjoyed, were veiled in
it. At last James V. ereted a new court, which still fubfiits,
and which he named the College ofy iflice, the judges or Senators
of which were called Lords of Councid and Sfon. This court,
not only exercised the fame jurifdi&fion which formerly belonged
to the Seflion and Daily Council, but new rights were added.
Privileges of great importance were granted to its members, its
forms were prcfcribed, its terms fixed, and regularity, power and
splendor conferred upon it. The persons conllitutcd judges in all
there different courts, had, in many refpec:s, the advantage of those
who presided in the courts of the Barons; they were more emi-
nent for their skill in law, their rules of proceeding were more uni-

* . :6A.P. P6. .

91P .

6. A 493.
. 193 A P. 99. 1,87.

form, and their decisions more consistent. Such judicatorics be- BooK I.
came the objects of confidence, and of veneration. Men willing- -
ly submitted their property to their determination, and their en-
croachments on the jurifditions of the nobles were popular, and
for that reason successful. By devices of a similar nature, the
jurifdicion of the nobles in criminal causes was restrained, and the
authority of the court of z.t/iciatly extended. The crown, in this
particular, gaining insensibly upon the nobles, recovered more
ample authority; and-tlhKing, whose jurifdition once resembled
that of a Baron, rather than that of a Sovereign *, came more and
more to be confidered as the head of the community, and the fu-
preme dispenser of jullice to his people. These acquifltions of our
Kings, however, though comparatively great, were in reality in-
considerable; and notwithfianding all their efforts, the feparateju-
rifdicions of the nobles remained, many of them, in great vigour;

" The most perfet idea of the feudal fyflem of government may be attained

by attending to the Rtate of Germany, and to the history of France. In the for-
mer, the feudal institutions still fibfilt with great vigour; and though altogether
aboliflied in the latter, the public records have been so carefully preferred, that
the French lawyers and antiquaries have been enabled, with more certainty andt
precision, than those of any other country in Europe, to trace its rife, its progref;,
and revolutions. In Germany, every principality may be conlidered as a fief, antl
all its great Princes as vaftals, holding of the emperor. They possess all the feudal
privileges; their fiefs are perpetual; their jurifdilRion, within their own terri-
tories, fqeprate and extensive; and the great oflices of the empire are all heredi-
tary, antl annexed to particular families. At the fame time the Emperor retains
many of the prerogatives of the feudal monarchs. Like them, his claims ani
pretensions are innumerable, and his power finall; his jurifdlicion witllinl his
own demesnes or hereditary countries, is complete; beyond the bounds of theflc
it is almost nothing. And lb permanent are feudal principles, that although the
feudal fylenm be overturned in almolt every particular nate in Germany, and al-
though its Princes have all become ablilute, the original feudal constitution of
the e tpire rill remains, and ideas peculiar to that form of government, tireal
aill its operations and determine the rights of all its Princes. Our oble'rvations,
Xvith regard to the limited j turifdiaion of the King tlnder the feudal gove rnments,
are greatly illufirated by what happened in France. lThe feeblenels and dot;lf
of tile ldefccndents of Charlemaignlc cncouraged the Peers to ulilrp an inldepend-
enlt jurifdiallon. Nuothing remained in the hands of the crown; all was seiz,'ed
by them. 'When Hugh Capet afelclelc(l te thronle, A1. ). 987, he kept polliTinll

f hlis private patriumony the Comtc o l''aris, and all the juriftliction, whlill the
E':ing:; Iis lilceliors exeriltld lor Iolle time, was withiin its territories. Tlellc
Ve're only four townts ill lFrance, iwhere

I could eltabllifi GiA.N:); o lAII.I.It;, or

loyall juidgus; all tile other lalnds, towr\, and haillag:cs belonged to the niollcs.
T'I. n mtholds to whlich the Fr'eilc nlonarclis had recourfel fr extendinKg tliir . iu-
ri .li iion we re exafsly inil Ir to those eml lobytd hty our P'rinces. 11 itallllst' A-
i ,' !?, 1p 617. &c. De L'E:ilrit (des oix, Liv. 30. cll. o., &c.

Dij

BooK I. and their final abolition was reserved to a distant and more happy

'period.

Each of our But besides thee metllods of defending their prerogative, and
tll, i l'e humbling the arillocracy, which may be confidered as common to
Tllan of all our Princes, we flall find, by taling a review of their reigns,
tile noubles that almolt every one of our Kings, from Robert Bruce to James

V. had formed some particular fyttem for dcprefling the authority
of the nobles, which was the obje& both of their jealousy and
terror. The conduct of our monarchs, if we refl satisfied with
the accounts of their hiltorians, mull be confidered as flowing en-
tirely from the rcfcntment againfl particular noblemen; and all
their attempts to humble them, mull be viewed as the sallies of
private panion, not as the confequcnces of any general plan of
policy. B1ut, though Iomc of their aClions may be imputed to those
passions, though the different genius of the men, the temper of
the times, and the Rate of the nation ncceffarily occasioned great
variety in their schemes, yet, without being chargeable with ex-
ceflive refinement, we may affirm that their end was uniformly

Thisproved tie fame. And the projecc of reducing the power of the ariRfo-
bv areview cracy, fomcetimes avowed, and pursued with vigour; fometimcs
-vents in concealed, or seemingly suspended; was never altogether aban-
theirreigas. doned.
Robert No Prince was ever more indebted to his nobles than Robert

It3ruCc. Bruce. Their valour conquered the kingdom, and placed him

on the throne. Iis gratitude and generosity bellowed on them
the lands of the vanquifihed. Property has feldoml undergone
greater or more sudden revolutions, tlhan thole to which it was
iizbjel, at that time. in Scotland. Edward I. having forfeited
the ellatcs of mors of the ancient Scottish nobles, granted them to
his Englilil iubjecs. Tliefe were expelled by the Scots, and their
lands seized by new mailers. Amidil fulch rapid changes, con-
fullon was unavoidable; and many pofellfed their lands by titles
extremely lame. During one of tlihfe truces between the two na-
tions, occasioned rather by their being weary of war, than lefirous
of peace, Robert formed a felietne for checking the growing power
and( wealth of the nobles. He lllmnnoned them to appear, and to
iliew by what rights they held their lands. They affenibled ac-
cordingly, and the qucllion being put, they tiarted up, at once,
;ned drew tleir \vords, " ly thelli, siid they, we acquired our
lands, and with these we will defend tlhem.'" The King inti-
midalted by their boldnel's, prudently dropt the project. But fcl
deeply did the nobles reclnt this attack upon their order, tlia;

notwithflanding Robert's popular and splendid virtues, it occasion- BooK I.
ed a dangerous conlpiracy against his life.

David his son, at first an exile in France, afterwards a prifoncr David II.

in England, and involved in a continual war with Edward III.
had not lcifure to attend to the internal police of his kingdom, or
to think of retrenching the privileges of the nobility.

Our hiltorians have been more careful to relate the military, RoberltIT.

than the civil tranfaations of the reign of Robert 1I. Skirmifles
and inroads of little consequence, they describe minutely, but
with regard to every thing that happened, during fevcral years of
tranquillity, they are altogether silent.

The feeble administration of Robert III. mull likewise be pas- Robert IIL

fed over slightly. A Prince, of a mean genius, and of a frail and
sickly conllitution, was no fit person to enter the lilts with aecive
and' martial nobles, or to attempt wrelting from them any of their
lights.

Tlle civil tranfacRions in Scotland arc better known since the James I.

beginning of James I's reign, and a complete fcries of our laws
lupplies the defeEts of our hillorians. The Englifl made some a-
mends for their injustice in detaining that Prince a prisoner, by
their generous care of his education. During his long residence
in England, lie had an opportunity of oblcrving the feudal fyltem
in a more advanced itate, and refined from many of the imperfec-
tions which flill adhered to it, in his own kingdom. He saw
there nobles great, but not independent a King powerful, though
far from abfolutc; he saw a regular administration of government
wife laws enacted; and a nation flourifliing and happy, because
all ranks of men were accufomed to obey them. Full of these
ideas, he returned into his native country, which prelfnted to him
a very different scene. The royal authority, never great, was now
contemptible, by being lo long delegated to regents. The ancient.
patrimony, and revenues of the crown, were almnoft totally alien-
ated. During his long abfncce, the name of a King was little
known, and less regarded. The licence of many years had render-
ed the nobles independent. Universal anarchy prevailed. The
weak were exposed to the rapine and oppreflion of the llrong. In
every corner some barbarous chieftain ruled at pleaurc, and ne i-
thcr feared the King, nor pitied tlhe pClI'I1.

A Colwmporary Mokifli x\ riter tirilbc thllle cal:linitic', vexry fclil ',

in Ilii rude Latin. In clicbua illis;, n - at;l *1.ex in Sectia, I(.l qiil
ib.:[ t p titlI ;.

BOOK I. James was too wife a Prince to employ open force to correft

-^ such inveterate evils. Neither the men, nor the times would have

borne it. He applied the gentler, and less offensive remedy of laws
and flatutes. In a parliament held immediately after his return, he
gained the confidence of his people, by many wife laws, tending
visibly to re-eftablifl order, tranquillity, and jullice in the king-
dom. But, at the fame time that he endeavoured to secure there
bleflings to his fubjeas, he discovered his intention to recover those
possessions, of which tile crown had been unjuflly bereaved; and
for that purpose obtained an aA by which he was empowered to
summon those, who had obtained crown lands during the three
iaft reigns, to produce the rights by which they held them *. As
this statute threatened the property of the nobles, another which
passed in a subsequent parliament, aimed a dreadful blow at their
power. By it, the leagues and combinations, which we have al-
ready described, and which rendered the nobles so formidable to
the crown were declared unlawful t. Encouraged by this success
in the beginning of his enterprize, James's next flep was still bold-
er and more decisive. During the fitting of parliament, he seized,
at once, his cousin Murdo Duke of Albany, and his sons; the
Earls of Douglas, Lennox, Angus, March, and above twenty
other Peers and Barons of prime rank. To all of them, however,
he was immediately /rcconciled, except to Albany, and his sons,
and Lennox. These were tried by their Peers, and condemned;
fi,r what crime is now unknown. Their execution firuck the no-
ties with terror, and their forfeiture added vail pofllefions to the
crown. lie seized, likewise, the earldoms of Buchan and Stralh-
Cirn, upon different pretexts; and that of Mar fell to him by in-

erit;ance. 'T'he patience and inaftivity of the nobles, while the
King was proceeding so rapidly towards aggrandizing the crown,
iare amnazing. The only obftrution he met with was from a flight
in rurreclion headed by the Duke of Albany's youngest fol, and that
was cafily suppressed. T'1i splendor and presence of a King, to

h\ hich the nobles had been long unaccultomcd, inspired reverence:
.[ nes was a Prince of great abilities, and conducted his operations
.ith imuci plrudenlce. He was in fricndfhip with England, and
i,,illy allied with the French King : He was adored by the people,

.::. i:ir .;l Ol'Cpr'I f ; Cel t1ttin lreg'Cg ll

l ltlt IllI l:II '-OI iii l; ]ioin l iciidia,
,' t.ircL.i oi s3, iilcillli:a, ct c.at ' ialcficia rc nlilirl11 isl|.liiitaL; et julticlli

I,. ,',.ta c;:i.i tcr iio:; rigili c. l:at \il. Chtarttl;>r. 51,.,v. {l.Udl In cs Ell-y,

A.\'. y,. P. .2.l. 'J Aa. 'o. I. I1424.

who enjoyed unusual security and hnppiners under his adminlitra- PooK 1.
tion: And all his acquisitions, however fatal to the body of the - -
nobles, had been gained by attacks upon individuals; were ob-
tained by decisions of law; and being founded on circumflances
peculiar to the persons who suffered, might excite murmurs and
apprehensions, but afforded no colourable pretext for a general re-
bellion. It was not so with the next attempt which the King made.
Encouraged by the facility with which he had hitherto advanced,
he ventured upon a measure that irritated the whole nobles, and
which the event fleiws either to have been entered into with too
much precipitancy, or to have been carried on with too much vio-
lence. Thc father of George Dunbar Earl of March had taken
arms againit Robert III. the King's father; but that crime had
been pardoned, and his lands restored by Robert Duke of Albany.
James, on pretext that the regent had exceeded his power, and
that it was not competent to any but the King himself to pardon
treason, or to alienate lands annexed to the crown, obtained a fen-
tencc declarin- the pardon to be void, and depriving Dunbar of
the earldom. Many of the nobles held lands by no other right than
what they derived from grants of the two Dukes of Albany. Such
a decision, though they had reason to expec it in con'cquencc of
the statute which the King had obtained, occasioned a general a-
larm. Though Dunbar was, at present, the only sufferer, the pre-
cedent might be extended, and their titles to pofefTions, which
they confidercd as the rewards of their valour, might be fulbject-
ed to the review of courts of law, whose forms of proceeding, and
jurildiclion, were in a martial age little known, and extremely ocli-
ous. Terror and discontent spread fall upon this discovery of the
King's intentions; the common danger called on the whole order
to unite, and to make one bold fland, before they were stripped
piecemeal, and reduced to a state of poverty and insignificance.
The prevalence of thele sentiments among the nobles encouraged
a few deliperate men, the friends or followers of thore who had
been the chief sufferers under the King's adminiltration, to form
a conspiracy againlt his life. The firfl uncertain intelligence of
this was brought him, while lie lay in his camp before Roxbsmurlt
caflle. I-e (lurlt not confide in nobles, to whom lie hlad givcn 1(i
many caulcs of cifgult, but inllantly difinifdl them and their v:fll']s,
and retiring to a monaflery near Perth, was soon after nliirdcrcl
there, in the 1mot cruel manner. All our hiltorians mention, witll
aflonllillment, this circumflance of the King's dillfanding ]i; ar:yv,
:at a time, when it was so neccfnTl'y for his lpre:lervaltiou. A King,

Book I. fay they, surrounded with his Barons, is secure from fecrct trean

v_ sion, and may defy open rebellion. But those very nobles were

the persons whom he chiefly dreaded; and it is evident, from
this review of his administration, that he had greater reason to
apprehend danger, than to expec defence, from their hands. It
was the misfortune of James, that his maxims and manners were
too refined for the age in which he lived. Happy! had he reign-
ed in a kingdom more civilized; his love of peace, of jufticc, and
of elegance, would have rendered his schemes successful; and in-
fiead of his perishing because he had attempted too much, a grate-
ful people would have applauded and seconded his efforts to reform
and to improve them.
James II. Crichton, the molt able man of thofc, who had the direcion of

afflirs during the minority of James II. had been the minister of
James I. and well acquainted with his resolution of humbling the
nobles. i-e did not rclinquish the dcfign, and he endeavoured to
infpirc his pupil with the fame sentiments. But what James had
attempted to cffct slowly, and by legal means, his son and Crich-
ton pursued with the impetuosity natural to Scotsmen, and with
the fierceness peculiar to that age. William the sixth Earl of
Douglas was the firll vicim to their barbarous policy. That
young nobleman (as we have already observed) contemning the
authority of an infant Prince, almoll openly renounced his alle-
giance, and aspired to independency. Crichton, too high-lpirited
to bear such an insult, but too weak to curb or to bring to juilice
si powerful an offender, decoyed him by many promises to an in-
terview in the callle of Edinburgh, and, notwithflanding there,
murdered both him and his brother. Crichten, however, gain-
ed little by this act of treachery, which rendered him universally
odious. William the eighth Earl of Douglas was no less powerful
and no less formidable to the crown. By forming the league which
we already mentioned with the Earl of Crawfurd and other Ba-
rons, lie had united against his Sovereign almofl one half of his
kingdom. But his credulity led him into the fame snare, which
had been fatal to the former Earl. Relying on the King's pro-
miscs, who had now attained to the years of mnnhood, and having
obtained a f;ife conduc't under the great flal, lie ventured to meet
him in Stirling callle. James urged him to abandon that danger-
ous confcderacy into which le had entered; the Earl olllinatcly
rcfuLfi: d " If you will not, (Tlic the cnraged monarch drawiig-
Lhs i.i:;,.;cr) this fliall;" aandl flabbcd him to the heart. Aln ;Ictioll
lo 1:,\u'.aulsl of a King lillccl tihe nation with afloniinnclnt and with

horror. The Earl's vaTals ran to arms with the utmofl fury, and B3oo I.
dragging the safe conduc, which the King had granted and vio-
lated, at a horse's tail, they marched towards Stirling, burnt tle
town, and threatened to besiege the cafile. An accommodation
cnfued, on what terms is not known. But the King's jealousy,
and the Earl's power and rcfcntmcnt, prevented it from being of
long continuance. Both took the field, at the head of their ar-
mies, and met near Abercorn. That of the Earl, coripofed chief-
ly of borderers, was far flperior to the King's both in number, and
in valour; and a single battle mill, in all probability, have decid-
ed whether the house of Stcwart or of Douglas was henceforth to
poflefs the throne of Scotland. But, while his troops imnpatient-
ly expected the signal to engage, the Earl ordered thecm to retire
to their camp, and Sir James Hamilton of Cadyow, the perft n in
whom he placed the grcatell confidence, convinced of his want
of genius to improve an opportunity, or of his wvant of courage to
size a crown, deserted him that very night. This example was
followed by many; and the Earl, defpiled, or forsaken by all, was
ifon driven out of the kingdom, and obliged to depend for lis sub-
lift cnce, on the friendihip of the King of England. The ruin of
this great family, which had so long rivalled and overawed the
crown, and the terror with which such an example of unlucce!sful
amnbition filled the nobles, secured the King, for some time, from
oppolition; and the royal authority remained uncontrolled and
almost abfolutc. James did not susser this favourable interval to
pals unimproved; he procured the consent of parliament to laws
more advantageous to the prerogative, and more fubvcrlive of the
privileges of the ariflocracy, than were ever obtained by any for-
ner or subsequent monarch of Scotland.

By one of there, not only all the vast ponfeffions of the Earl of

Douglas were annexed to the crown, but all prior and future a-
lienations of crown lands were declared to be void, and the King
was empowered to seize them at pleasure, without any process or
form of law, and oblige the poffcflors to refund whatever they
Lad received from them ". A dreadful inflrument of opprcflion ill
the hands of a Prince.

Another law prohibited the wardcnifip of the marches to be

granted hereditarily; restrained, in fcvcral inllanccs, the jurifdlic-
tion of that ollice ; and extended the autlority of the King's courts
i-.

BooK 1. By a third, it was ordained that no Regality, or exclulive right

of adminifiring justice within a man's own lands, should be grant-
ed in time to come, without the content of parliament ", a con-
dition, which implied almost an express prohibition. Those nobles
who already possessed that great privilege, would naturally be so-
licitous to prevent it from becoming common, by being bestowed
on many. Those, who had not themselves attained it, would en-
vy others the acquisition of such a flattering ditlincion ; and both
would concur in rejecting the claims of new pretenders.

By a fourth ad, all new grants of hereditary offices were pro-

hibited, and those obtained since the death of the last King were
revoked -f.

Each of there statutes undermined some of the great pillars on

which the power of the ariltocracy refted. During the remain-
der of his reign, this Prince pursued the plan which he had be-
gun, with the utmost vigour; and had not a sudden death, occa-
sioned by the splinter of a cannon which burst near him at the
siege of Roxburgh, prevented his progress, he wanted neither ge-
nius nor courage to perfec it : and Scotland might, in all pro-
bability, have been the first kingdom in Europe, which would
have seen the subversion of the feudal fyllem.
Jamens Ill. James III. discovered no less eagerness than his father or grand-

father to humble the nobles; but far inferior to either of them in
abilities and address, he adopted a plan extremely impolitic, and
his reign was disastrous, as well as his end tragical. Under the feu-
dal governments, the nobles were not only the King's ministers,
and possessed of all the great offices of power or of trust; they were
likewise, his companions and favourites, and scarce any but them
approached his person, or were entitled to his regard. But James,
who both feared and hated his nobles, kept them at an unusual
diilance, and bellowed every mark of confidence and affection
upon a few mean persons, of professions so dillonourable, as ought
to have rendered them unworthy of his presence. Shut up with
there, in his castle of Stirling, he seldom appeared in public, and
- amuscd himself with architecture, mulic, and other arts, which
were then little cnleemed. The nobles beheld the power and fa-
vour of there minions with indignation. Even' the ianguinary
measures of his father provoked them Icfs than his neglecLt. Indivi-
duals alone fufl'crd by the former; by the latter, eve ry man tllouglit
hinfclf injured, becaufc all were contemned. Their discontent was

' Ibil. Aa. 43. - A0. 41.1.

i much heightened by the King's recalling all rights of crown lands, BooK I.
hercditary offices, regalities, and every other concession, which was
i detrimental to his prerogative, and which had been extorted during
his minority. Combinations among themselves, secret intrigues
with England, and all the usual preparatives for civil war were the
cffeEts of their resentment. Alexander Duke of Albany, and John
Earl of Mar, the King's brothers, two young men of turbulent and
ambitious spirits, and incensed against James, who treated them
with the fame coldness as he did the other nobles, entered deeply
into all their cabals. The King detected their designs, before they
were ripe for execution,-and seizing his two brothers, committed
the Duke of Albany to Edinburgh cafle. The Earl of Mar, hav-
ing remonstrated with too much boldness againfi the King's con-
duct, was murdered, if we may believe our hiflorians, by his com-
mand. Albany, apprehensive of the fame fate, made his escape
out of the caffle, and fled into France. Concern for the
King's honour, or indignation at his measures, were perhaps the
motives, which first induced him to join the malecontents. But
James's attachment to favourites rendering him every day more
odious to the nobles, the profped of the advantages which might
be derived from their general diffaffeetion, added to the resent-
ment which he felt on account of his brother's death, and his
own injuries, soon inspired Albany with more ambitious and cri-
minal thoughts. He concluded a treaty with Edward IV. of
England, in which he assumed the name of Alexander King of
Scots, and in return for the affiflance which was promised him
towards dethroning his brother, he bound himself, so soon as lie
was put in poffeflion of the kingdom, to swear fealty and to do
homage to the English monarch, to renounce the ancient alli-
ance with France, to contract a new one with England, and to
surrender some of the ftrongefi castles, and most valuable counties
in Scotland *. That aid, which the Duke so basely purchased at
the price of his own, honour, and the independency of his country,
was punctually granted him, and the Duke of Gloucester with a
powerful army conducted him towards Scotland. The danger of._
a foreign invasion obliged James to implore the affflance of those
nohlcs whom he had so long treated with contempt. Some of thecm
were in clofc confederacy with the Duke of Albany, and approved
of nll his pretcnfions. Others were impatient for any event, which
would rcllore their order to its ancient pre-cminence. They took

Abcrcr. MartA. Atch. v. ii, 44·3.

E ij

BooK T. the field, however, at the head of a powerful army of their fol-

lowers, hut with a flronger disposition to redress their own gricv-
ances, than to annoy the enemy; and with a fixed resolution of
punishing thofc minions, whose inlolcnce they could no longer to-
lerate. This resolution they executed, in the camp near Lawder,
with a military dispatch and rigour. Having previously concerted
their plan, the Earls of Angus, Huntly, Lennox, followed by al-
mofl the whole Barons of chief note in the army, forcibly entered
the apartment of their Sovereign, seized all his favourites except
one Ramsay, whom they could not tear from the King, in whose
arms he took shelter, and without any form of trial hanged them in-
flantly over a bridge. Among the mofl remarkable of thole
vwho had engrossid the King's affection, were Cochran a mason,
Hommil a taylor, Leonard a smith, Rogers a muiician, and Tor-
fifan a fencing mafler. So despicable a retinue discovers the ca-
priciournefs of Jamcs's charaser, and accounts for the indigna-
tion of the nobles when they beheld the favour, due to them, be-
flowed on such unworthy objects.

James had no rcafon to confide in an army so little under his

command, and difiniffing it, lhut himself up in the callle of Edin-
burgh. After various intrigues, Albany's lands and honours were
at length reflored to him, and he seemed even to have regained Iis
brother's favour, by some important services. But their friendflhip
was not of long duration. James, once more, abandoned hinmflf
to the guidance of favourites; and the fate of those who had sus-
sered at Lawder, did not deter others, from courting that dangcr-
ous pre-eminence. Albany, on pretext that an attempt had been
made to take away his life by poison, fled from court, and retiring
to lis callle of Dunbar, drew thither a greater multitude of no-
bles than attended on the King himself. At the fame time, he rc-
neecd his former confederacy with lEdward ; the Earl of Anig's
openly negociated that infamous treaty; other Barons were ready
to concur wvith it; and if the fu dden dcath of Edward had not
prevented Albany's receiving any aid from EngLand, the Crown cf
Scotland would, probably, have been the reward of this unworthy
combination with the enemies of his country. But, inflcad ofany
hopes of reigningl in Scotlandl, he found, upon the death of Ed-
ward, tllat he could not rcfidc tllere in safety, and tlying firll to
].n!,lalnd, and thctl to France, he Itclcms fiom tihat time to have
taken no part il the aftInirs of hi'l; nalive country. Emboldened
bly his retreat, tile iing, anicl his \lniitficrs, milltiliedc the inftu!ts

xwhich they offered to the nobles. A standing guard, a thing un- Booi 1.
known under the feudal governments, and inconfiltcnt wvith the fa- \'V
miliarity and confidence with which monarchs then lived amidll
their nobles, was railed for the King's defence, and the command
of it given to Ramsay, lately created Earl of Bothwell, the lame
person who lo narrowly escaped when his companions were put to
death at Lawder. And, as if this precaution had not been fuffi-
cient, a proclamation was ifnfed forbidding any person to appear
in arms within the precincls of the court *; which, at the time,
when no man of rank left his own house without a numerous re-
tinue of armed followers, wa;, in cffetc, debarring the nobles from
all access to the King. James, at the fame time became fonder
of retirement than ever; and funk in indolence, or fuperilition,
or attentive only to amusements, devolved his rwhole authority
upon lis favourites. So many injuries provoked the mnul con-
fiderable nobles to take arms, and having pcrfuaded or obliged
the Duke of Rotlifay, the King's eldef tlon, a youth of fifteen, to
set himself at their head, they openly declared their intention of
depriving James of a crown, of which lie had dilcovered linll:lf
to be so unworthy. Roulfed by tlis danger, the IKingquittcd his
retirement, took the field, and encountcrcd them near lBannock-
burn; but the valour of the Borderers, of whom tlhe army of thle
malecontents was chiefly comnpofed, soon put his troops to tliglit,
and he himself was slain in the purflit. Snlificion, indolence,
immoderate attachment to favourites, andc all the vices of it fee'bl
mind, are visible in his whole conduct; but the character of a cruel
and unrelenting tyrant fecems to be unjustly aflixed to him by our
hiflorians. IHis ncglc& of the nobles irritated, but did not weak-
en them; and their discontent, the immoderate ambition of his
two brothers, and their unnatural conf:dcracics ith Eingland,
were ffflicient to have cliflurbecl a more vigorous admilliillation,
and to have rendered unhappy a Prince of ilperior talents.

The indignation, which many of the nobles exprcnfcd againlt

the condluc of the conlpirnors, together will the ternor of the Iekn-
tncceofcxco.mmunli: aionll wh-icll the IPcproouiiccl d ;gaiinll tllhem,
oblli-ged them to lti' thleiL vi&lory wVilltl g'reIt nldertion aind ]lu-
inanity. Anld being conifionls llow dctclitL.. the climl of iii-
blruing thleir hand:i in the l,lool of tliLr SA,,vn ign ;i]>'irld, thlley
cndcalivourctl to rglilln tlie good ojl;)l (if tlhi:r (c.llltlllllrI ,
nLld to attolle for thelir trc:itnc.t es tle il1,tl.r, 1b'. 'i ir
lo:i,';

.'cr'l'erit', 3 ,,1.

RooK I. and duty towards the son. Tley placed him inflantly on the
t r'-'" throne, and the whole kingdom soon united in acknowledging his
JaImez IV.

authority.

James IV. was naturally generous and brave 5 he felt, in an high

degree, all the paflions which animate a young and noble mind.
He loved magnificence, he delighted in war, and was eager to ob-
tain fame. During his reign, the ancient and hereditary enmity
between the King and nobles seems almolt entirely to have ceascd.
lHe envied not their splendor, because it contributed to the orna-
ir.ent of his court; nor did lie dread their power, which he con-
fidered as the security of his kingdom, not as an object of terror
to himfclf. This confidence, on his part, met with the proper
ietLrn of duty and af'cclion on theirs; and, in his war with Eng-
l.nd, lhe experienced how much a King beloved by his nobles is
.ble to perform. Though the ardour of his courage, and the
!lirit of chivalry, rather than the profpcFt of any national
:adiantagc, were the motives of that expedition ; such was the
7e:il of his fubjccts for the King's glory, that he was follow-
ed by as gallant an army, as ever any of his anceflors had led
ulpon English ground. But though James himrfelf formed no
;ll cme dangerous or detrimental to the nobles, his reign was dif-
:ing;:ilhed by an event, extremely fatal to them; and one acci-
;dental blow lumnbled them more than all the premeditated at-
tacks of preceding Kings. In the rafli and unfortunate battle
,-£ Flowden, a brave nobility close rather to die, than to
dcicfrt their Sovereign. Twelve Earls, thirteen Lords, five eldefl
iLns of noblemen, and an incredible number of Barons fell with
le King ". The whole bodyof the nobles, long and fenfiblv felt
zilS dii.ller ; and if a Prince of full age had then arcended the
:lrelne, their conflernation and feeblencfi would have afforded
iim advantages, which no former monarch ever possessed.
Ti:::.s V. Eut .James V. who succeeded his father, was an infant of a year

old ; and though the oflice of regent was conferred on the Duke of
Albany, a man of genius and cntcrprifc, a native of France, and
a:ccuflomed to a government wlere the power of the King was al-
c: icy f. rcnt ; though lie made many bold attcmpts to cxtendl the
:'v:l auil;ority; thiough lie put to death Lord Home, and banilhcd
:;ce IJarl of Angus, the two noblemen of gr:;;t:. 11 inlhiclnce in the
i i.;clho, the arilfocr.cv loft no ground ntlcer his admillillration.
.A ';ral',i:r to the manners, the la\ s, and the languiagc of tlle

2. ~~

people whom he was called to rule, be ased, on some occasions, BooK I.
rathcr like a Viceroy of the French King, than the governor of v
Scotland; but the nobles aflerted their own privileges, and contend-
ed for the interest of their country, with a boldness, which convin-
ced him of their indlependency, and of the impotence of his own
authority. After several iufuccefsful tlruggles, he voluntarily re-
tired to France, and the King, being then in his thirteenth year,
the nobles agreed that lie fliould afl'uic the government, and that
eight persons Ihould be appointed to attend him by turns, and to
advise and aflifl him in the adininillration of public affairs. The
Eail of Angus, who was one of that number, did not long remain
satisfied with such divided power. ie gained some of his col-
leagues, removed others, and intimidated the reft. When the term
of his attendance expired, he fill retained authority, to which all
were obliged to submit, becaule none of them was in a condition
to dispute it. The affeciondf.the young King was the only thing
wanting, to fix and perpetuate lhis power. But an active and high-
spirited Prince submitted to the reltraint, in which he was kept,
with great impatience. It ill suited his years, or disposition, to be
confined as a prisoner, within his own palace; to be treated with
no refpecc; and to be deprived of all power. He could not, on fumei
occasions, conceal his indignation and refentmcnt. Angus fore-
i.iw that he had much to dread from these, and as lie could not
gain the King's heart, he resolved to make sure of his person. James
was continually surrounded by the Earl's spies and confidents; ma-
ny eyes watched all his motions, and observed every ftep he took.
But the King's cagernefs to obtain liberty eluded all their vi-
gilance. He escaped from Falkland, and fled to the caltle of
Stirling, the residence of the Qieen his mother, and the only
place of firength in the kingdom which was not in the hands of
the Douglasses. The nobles, of whom some were influenced by
their hatred to Angus, and others by their rcfpe& for the King,
crowded to Stirling, and his court was soon filled with persons of
the grcateft diftinclion. The Earl, though afioniflied at this un-
expected revolution, resolvcd, at firit, to make one bold pulh for
recovering his authority, by marching to Stirling at the iead of
lis followers; but he wanted either courage, or flrength to exe-
cute this resolution. In a parliament held ibon after, lie and Ii,;
adherents were attainted, and after cfcaping fron many dllglcri,
a:nd enduring much mifcry, hce was at length oblig d to fly iit.>
1.liiglilnd for refuge.

BooK T. James had now not only the name, but, though extremely young,

vY- the full authority of a King. He was inferior to no Prince of that

age in gracefulness of person, or in vigour of mind. His under-
flanding was good, and his heart warm; the former capable of
great improvement, and the latter fufccptible of the belt impref-
sions. But according to the usual fate of Princes who are called
to the throne in their infancy, his education had been neglecAed.
IHis private preceptors were more ready to flatter, than to infiruct
him. It was the interest of those who governed the kingdom,
to prevent him from knowing too much. And the Earl of An-
gus, in order to divert him from business, gave him an early tate
for such pleasures, as afterwards occupied and engrofled him more
than became a King. Accordingly, we discover in James all the
features of a great but uncultivated spirit. On the one hand,
violent passions, implacable refentmeplt,- an immoderate desire of
power, and the utmost rage at dtftspointment. On the other,
love to his people, zeal for the punifhinent of private oppressors,
confidence in his favourites, and the most engaging openness and
affability of behaviour.

What he himself had suffered from the exorbitant power of the

nobles led him early to imitate his predecessors, in their attempts
to humble them. The plan he formed for that purpose was more
profound, more fvftematic, and pursued with greater contfancy and
ficadinefs, than that of any of his ancefors. And the influence
of the events in his reign upon those of the subsequent period,
render it ncccflary to explain his condut, at greater length, and
to enter into a more minute detail of his acions. He had pene-
tration enough to discover those defects in the schemes adopted
by former kings, which occafloned their miscarriage. The ex-
anlple of James I. had taught him, that wife laws operate slowly
on a rude people, and that the fierce spirit of the feudal nobles
was not to be fibbduedl by these alone. The effects of the violent
measures of James II. convinced him, that the opprcflion of one
great family is apt either to excite the suspicion and resentment
of the other nobles, or to enrich with its spoils Tome new family,
which would soon adopt the fame sentiments, and become equally
fOrmidable to the crown. Iec saw, from the fatal end of James
111. that netlet was flill more intolerable to the nobles than op-
]prIefion, and that the minillry of new men and favouritcs was
lioth dillonoirable, and dangerous to a Prince. At the fame time, he
fclt tlhat the authority of the crown was not fuflicicnt to counter-
l':.lancc the power of the nublcs, and that without formc new ac-

cefion of trength, he could expea no better fucccfs in the firuggle Boo; I.
than his anceltors. In this extremity, he applied himself to the
clergy, hoping that they would both relish his plan, and concur,
with all their influence, in enabling him to put it in execution,
Under the feudal government, the church being esteemed a third
enlate, had its reprelentatives in parliament; the number of these
was considerable, and they possessed great influence in that as-
fembly. The fuperllition of former kings, and the zeal of an ig-
norant age, had bellowed upon ecclefaftics, a great proportion of
the national wealth, and the authority which they acquired by
the reverence of the people, was superior even to that which they
derived from their riches. This powerful body, however, de-
pended entirely on the crown. The Popes, notwithfianding their
attention to extend their ufarpations, had negleced Scotland as a
diflant and poor kingdom, and permitted its kings to exercise
powers, which they disputed with more considerable princes. The
Scottifli monarchs had the sole right of nomination to vacant
bilhoprics and abbeys " ; and James naturally concluded, that
men who expeEted preferment from his favour, would be willing
to merit it, by promoting his designs. Happily for him, the
nobles had not yet recovered the blow given them at Flowden,
and if we may judge, either from their conduC, or from the cha-
rader given of them by Sir Ralph Sadler the English envoy in
Scotland, they were men of little genius, of no experience in bu-
liness, and incapable of aaing either with unanimity, or with vi-
gour. Many of the clergy, on the other hand, were distinguish-
ed by their great abilities, and no less by their ambition. Vari-
ous causes of dilguft had arisen between them and the nobles,
who despised their characer, and envied their power, or their
wealth. By ating in concert with the King, they not only gra-
tified him, but avenged themselves, and hoped to aggrandize their
own order, by deprefling those, who were their sole rivals. Secure
of so powerful a concurrence, James ventured to proceed with
greater boldness. In the firfl heat of resentment, he had driven the
Earl of Angus out of the kingdom ; and sensible that a person,
so far superior to the other nobles in abilities, might create many
obstacles, which would retard, or render ineffetual all his fchemcs,
he solemnly iforc, that he would never permit him to return in-
to Scoland, and, notwithflanding the repeated solicitations of the
King of England, he adhered to his vow with unrelenting obfli-
nacy. le then proceeded to repair the fortifications of Edlin-

S:pill. Rlft . S-ot. r. 9p7, &c. Aat. 125 . R. Ti.0.

rit

BooK I. burgh, Stirling, and other castles, and to fill his magazines with

v/L arms and ammunition. Having taken these precautions by way

of defence, he began to treat the nobles with the utmost coldness
and reserve. Those offices, which they were apt, from long pof-
session, to confider as appropriated to their order, were now be-
flowed on ecclesiastics, who alone possessed the King's ear, and
together with a few gentlemen of inferior rank, to whom he had
communicated his schemes, were intruited with the management
of all public affairs. These ministers were chosen with judgment;
and Cardinal Beatoun, who soon became the most eminent among
them, was a man of superior genius. They served the King
with fidelity, they carried on his measures with vigour, with re-
putation, and with success. James no longer concealed his con-
tempt of the nobles, and suffered no opportunity of mortifying
them to escape. Slight offences were aggravated into real crimes,
and punished with severity. Every accusation againfi persons of
rank was heard with pleasure, every appearance of guilt was ex-
amined with rigour, and every trial proved fatal to the person ac-
cufed: the banishing Hepburn Earl of Bothwell, for reasons ex-
tremely frivolous, the beheading the Master of Sorbes without
sufficient evidence of his guilt, and the condemning Lady Glamis,
a fiRer of the Earl of Angus, to be burnt for the crime of witch-
craft, of which even that credulous age believed her innocent,
are monuments both of the King's hatred of the nobles, of the
severity of his government, and of the itretches he made towards
absolute power. By these ads of authority, he tried the spirit of
the nobles, and how much they were willing to bear. Their pa-
tience increased his contempt for them, and added to the ardour
and boldness with which he pursued his plan. The nobles ob-
served the tendency of his schemes with concern, and with rc-
fentment ; but the King's sagacity, the vigilance of his ministers,
and the want of a proper leader, made it dangerous to concert
any measures for their defence, and impoflible to ad with becom-
ing vigour. James and his counsellors, by a false siep which
they took, prcfcnted to them, at length, an advantage which
they did not fail to improve.

Motives, which are well known, had prompted Henry VIII.

to disclaim the Pope's authority, and to seize the revenues of the
regular clergy. His fyltem of Reformation satisfied none of his
fubjets. Some were enraged becaufc he had proceeded so fa'r,
.others murmured because he proceeded no farther ; and by hi.
imperious temper, and alternate persecutions of the zealots for

Popery, and the converts to the Protestant opinions, he was Booc I.
equally formidable to both. Henry was afraid that this general
diffatisfation of his people might encourage his enemies on the
Continent to invade his kingdom. He knew that both the Pope
and Emperor courted the friendship of the King of Scots, and
endeavoured to engage him in an alliance against England.
He resolved, therefore, to disappoint the effecs of their negocia-
tions, by entering into a closer union with his nephew, and for
that purpose sent ambafladors into Scotland, to propose a personal
interview with him at York. It was plainly James's interest to
accept of this invitation; the assistance of so powerful an ally,
the high honours which were promised him, and the liberal sub-
sidies he might have obtained, would have added no little digni-
ty to his domeitic government, and must have greatly facilitated
the execution of his favourite plan. On the other hand, a war
with England, which he had reason to apprehend, if he rejeded
Henry's offers of friendship, was inconsistent with all his views.
This would bring him to depend on his nobles; an army could
not be raised without their assistance: to call nobles incensed a-
gainft their Prince into the field, was to unite his enemies, to
make them sensible of their own strength, and to afford them an
opportunity of revenging their wrongs. James, who was not ig-
norant that all these consequences might follow a breach with
England, liflened at firIt to Henry's proposal, and consented to
the interview at York. But the clergy dreaded an union, which
nulf have been eflablifled on the ruins of the church. Henry
had taken great pains to infuse into his nephew his own senti-
nents concerning religion, and had frequently solicited him, by
ambassadors, to renounce the usurped dominion of the Pope,
which was no less dishonourable to Princes, than grievous to
their fubjets. The clergy had hitherto, with great address, di-
verted the King from regarding these solicitations. But, in an
amicable conference, Henry expected, and they feared that
James would yield to his cntrcaties, or be convinced by his ar-
guments. They knew that the revenues of the church were an
alluring object to a Prince, who wanted money, and who loved
it ; that their pride and ambition raised the indignation of the
nobles; that their indecent lives gave ol'cnce to the people;
that the Proteflant opinions were spreading fail throughout the
nation; and that an univcrfll defacion from the eflabliflled church,
would be the confcqucnce of giving the finallel degree of encou.
ragement to tlhee principles. For thele rcafons, they employed

1 ij

BooK I. all their credit with the King, and had recourse to every artifice

and insinuation, in order to divert him from a journey, which
mull have been so fatal to their interest. They endeavoured to
inspire him with fear, by magnifying the danger to which he
would expofc his person, by venturing so far into England, with-
out any security but the word of a Prince, who having violated
every thing venerable and sacred in religion, was no longer to be
trulted; and by way of compcnfation for the uhms which he might
have received from Henry, they offered an annual donative of
fifty thousand crowns; they promised to contribute liberally to-
wards carrying on a war with England, and flattered him with
the profpea of immcnfe riches, arising from the forfeiture of per-
sons, who were to be tried and condemned as heretics. Influ-
enced by there considerations, James broke his agreement with
Henry, who, iln expecation of meeting him, had already come
to York ; and that hauglty and impatient monarch, resented the
afi-rnt, by declaring war againit Scotland. His army was soon
ready to invade the kingdom. James was obliged to have re-
course to the nobles, for the defence of his dominions. At his
command, they assembled their followers ; but with the fame dif.
positions, which animated their anceflors in the reign of James
III. and with a full rcfolution of imitating their example, by pu-
nilfing those to whom they imputed the grievances, of whicl
they had reason to complain > and if the King's minilters had not
been men of abilities, supcrior to those of James III. and of con-
liderable interefl even with their enemies, who could not agree
among thcmfelvcs what viaims to sacrifice, the camp of Fala
would have been as rcnarkable as that of Lawder, for the daring
encroachments of the nobles on the prerogative of the Prince.
But though his minillers were fhved by this accident, the nobles
had loon another opportunity of dilcovering to the King, their
d iil.tisfadOion with his government, and their contempt of his au-
thority. Scarcity of provisions, and the rigour of the season hav-
ing obliged the lEnglilh army which had invaded Scotland, to
retire, Janis imagined that lie could attack them, with great ad-
vantage, in their re'rcat; but the nobles, with an obflin;cy and
diflain, which greatly a;igravattcl their difobcdience, refllfed to
advance a llcp beyond the limits of their own country. Provolk-
ed by this inl;ilt to li finllf, and tlujicious of a new consp]iracy a-
gainll his minitiers, the King iniilntly dilnhanded an army, which
paid so little regard to Iis orders, and lie returned abruptly into
the hc:ait of the lingdolm.

An ambitions and high spirited Prince could not brook such a Bor: I.

mortifying affront. His hopes of success had been rall, and his v
despair upon a disappointment was excessive. He felt himfclf cn-
gaged in an unncceffary war with England, which, inltead of
yielding him the laurels and triumphs that he expected, had be-
gun with such circumftanccs, as encouraged the insolence of his
subje&s, and exposcd him to the scorn of his enemies. Hc fiaw
how vain and incffectual all his projects to humble the nobles had
been, and that, though in times of peace, a Prince may endea-
vour to depress them, they will rife, (luring war, to their former
importance and dignity. Impatience, resentment, indignation
filled his bosom by turns. The violence of these passions altered
his temper, and, perhaps, impaired his reason. He became pen-
five, fullcn, and retired. le seemed, through the day, to be
ivallowed up in profound meditatibn, and through the night, he
was diflurbed with those visionary terrors, which make impref-
sion upon a weak underflanding only, or a disordered fancy. In
order to revive the King's spirits, an inroad on the weflern bor-
ders was concerted by his minitlers, who prevailed upon the Ba-
rons in the neighbouring provinces, to raise as many troops as
were thought necessary, and to enter the enemy's country. But
nothing could remove the King's aversion for his nobility, or di-
minifhl his jealousy of their power. He would not even intrull
them with the command of the forces which they had assembled;
that was reserved for Oliver Sinclair his favourite, who no sooner
appeared to take poffeflion of the dignity conferred upon him,
than rage and indignation occasioned an universal mutiny in the
army. Five hundred English, who. happened to be drawn up in
fight, attacked the Scots in this disorder. Hatred to the King,
and contempt of their General produced an effeRt, to which,
there is no parallel in hiflory. They overcame the fear of death,
and the love of liberty ; and ten thousand men surrendered to a
number so far inferior, without flriking a single blow. No man
was desirous of a victory, which would have been acceptable to
the King, and to his favourite ; few endeavoured to save them-
selves by flight ; the Englilh had the cloice of what prifoncrs
ihiey pleaited to take ; and almoti every perlon of diftincLion, who
was englagicd in the expedition, remained in their hands. 'liiis
allonilling event was a new proof to the King of the general di!-
Aficcotion of the nobles, and a new dilcovcry of his own wclkncl;s,
a;nd want of authority. Inr:apablc of bearing tllhcI repeated in-
silts, and unable to revenge thell, his fpi rit fklli ;IltogeIhclr.

BooK I. The deepeR melancholy and despair succeeded to the fuiious

L""^ ~" transports of rage and indignation, which the firfi account of the

rout of his army occasioned. All the violent passions, which are
the enemies of life, preyed upon his mind, and watled and con-
fumed a youthful and vigorous conflitution. Some authors of
that age impute his untimely death to poison; but the diseases of
the mind, when they rife to an height, are often mortal ; and
the known effedcs of disappointment, rage, and indignation upon
a sanguine and impetuous temper, fufliciently account for his un-
happy fate. " His death (fays Drummond) proveth his mind to
have been raised to an high firain, and above mediocrity; he
could die, but could not digest a disaster." Had James survived
this misfortune, one of two things muff have happened: either
the violence of his temper would have engaged him openly to
attack the nobles, who would have found in Henry a willing and
powerful protetor, and have derived the fame assistance from
him, which the malecontents, in the succeeding reign, did from
his daughter Elizabeth in that cafe, a dangerous civl war would
have been the certain consequence. Or, perhaps, neceflfity might
have obliged him to accept of Henry's offers, and be reconciled
to his nobles. In that event, the church would have fallen a
sacrifice to their union, a Reformation, upon Henry's plan, would
have been established by law, a great part of the temporalities of
the church would have been seized, and the friendflhip of the
King and nobles cemented by dividing its spoils.

Such were the efforts of our Kings, towards reducing the ex-

orbitant power of the nobles. If they were not attended with
ficcefs, we must not, for that reason, conclude that they were
not conducted with prudence. Every circumfiance seems to have
combined againit the crown. Accidental events concurred with
political causes, in rendering the best concerted mcafurcs abor-
tive. The assassination of one King, the sudden death of alother,
and the fatal despair of a third, contributed no lets than its own
natural flrength, to preserve the lariiocracy fiom ruin.

Amidst tlefe ftrugglcs, the influence which our Kings posses-

fetl in their Parliaments, is a circLurlinnacc ftcmringly inexplicable,
and lwhich merits pairticular attention. As tlhei aflk'inblics were
coinpofcd chiefly of thle nobles, they, we are apt to inmlginc,
T'Ill: ( cxt:. lmuiii have dicated all their decisions; but, inflctcd of this, cvery

'',,,,::;,t' i- King found them obfcquious to his will, and olbt.;ilctl fuchl lawvs,
:- SLilttii as ]he clecnmed nece'try for extenlding his authority. All things
l' .1llt:::'l:. \'were condlutced there with diftPtch .Ad :l::!:I:'ul'y j a:Ild in none

Cf our hiflorians, do we find an inftancc of any opposition formed Bool; T.
against the court in Parliament, or mention of any difficulty in '
carrying through the measures which were agreeable to the
King. In order to account for this singular sac, it is neccffary
to inquire into the origin and conltitution of Parliament.

The genius of the feudal government, uniform in all its ope- The rcafon5

rations, produced the fame effects in small, as in great societies; of it
and the territory of a Baron; was, in miniature, the model of a
kingdom. He pofeffed the right of jurildition, but those, who
depended on him, being free men, and not slaves, could be tried
by their Peers only ; and, therefore, his vafials were bound to
attend his courts, and to alfitl both in palling and executing his
fcntences. When afl'embled, on thefc occalions, they eflabliflcd,
by mutual consent, fucl regulations, as tended to the welfare of
their small focicty; and of:en granted, voluntarily, such supplics
to their S/uperiOr, as lis ncceffitics required. Change now a
single name: in place ol' Biaron, fubfiitute King, and we behold
a Parliament in its first rudiincits, and oblerve tlhe firt exertions
of those powers, which its members now poflrcfs as Judges, aq
Legislators, and as dilienicrs of the public revenues. Suitable
to this idea, are the appellations of the Kig's CoLurt*, and of the
King,'s Great Council, by which, Parliaments were anciently dif-
tingucd; and suitable to this, likewifl, were the conflitucnt
members of which it was composed. In all the feudal kingdoms,
those who held of the King in chiLf were bound, by the condition
of their tenure, to attend and to aflift in his courts. Nor was
this elteemed a privilege, but a service. It was exacled likewise
of Bifliops, Abbots, and the greater ecclefiaflics, who holding
vast pofieffions of the Crown, were deemed fubje& to the fame
burden. Parliaments did not continue long in this itate. Cities
gradually acquired wealth, a considerable iliare of the public
taxes were levied on them, the inhabitants grew into cflimation,
and being enfranchised by the Sovereign, a place in Parliament
was the confcquence of their liberty, and of their importance.
But as it would have been absurd to confer such a pri:ilege, or
to impose such a burden on a whole community, every borough
was permitted to chufe one or two of its citizens to aplpear in thl
name of the corporation ; and the idea of reri)jl'nila/ti was sli lt
introduced in this manner. An innovation, llill more import in(,
naturally followed. T'lhe vafllds of the Crown were originally
few in number, .and extremely powerful L. but as it is inmpllli!:l:

' Dl Canlge, Voc. Cili;l.

BOOK I. to rcnder property fixed and permanent, many of their pofleflcon,

came, gradually, and by various methods of alienation, to be
split and parcelled out into different hands. Hence arose the dif-
tincion between the Greater and the Leser Barons. The form-
er were those who retained their original fiefs undivided, the lat-
ter were the new and less potent vassals of the Crown. Both
were bound, however, to perform all feudal services, and, of
consequence, to give attendance in Parliament. To the lefler
Baron:s, who formed no inconsiderable body, this was an intoler-
.ble grievance. Barons fomctimes denied their tenure, boroughs
renounced their right of elecing, charters were obtained, con-
taining an exemption from attendance ; and the anxiety, with
which our anccllors endcavourcd to get free from the obligation
of fitting in 'Parliamlnt, is surpassed by that only, with which
their poltcrity solicit to be admitted there. In order to accom-
modatc both parties, and, at once, to fccure to the King a fuffi-
cient number of members in his great council, and to save llis
va:als from an unnecessary burden, an easy expedient was found
out. Tlhe obligation to personal attendance was continued upon
the Greater Barons, from which the Lesser Barons were exempt-
ed, en condition of their elecing, in each county, a certain
nulier of Reprefi'nla/ives, to appear in their name. Thus a Par-
liaiment became complete in all its members, and was composed
of Lords Spiritual and Temporal, of Knights of the fiires, and
of Burgeflcs. As many causes contributed to bring government
carlier to perfcclion in England, than in Scotland; as the rigour
of the feudal inltitutions abated sooner; and its defecrs were sup-
plied w-ith greater facility in the one kingdom, than in the other;
England, led the way in all there changes, and Burgesses, and
Knights of the shire appeared in the Parliaments of that nation,
before they were heard of in ours. Burgcffcs were firfI admitted
A D. T :6. into the Scottifl Parliaments by Robert Brucc* ; and in the

prciamble to the law\s of Robert III. they are ranked among the
cofllituent members of tlat aflcmbly. The Lefler Barons were
2 indebl)ed to ja.mes 1. for a flatute exempting them from personal

attllidallncC, alnd permitting them to elect representatives ; the ex-
c.piltion was cagerly laid hold on, but the privilege was so little
v:iltccd, tha!', except one or two inilances, it lay negleced during
oi;e hundlti d andl nfixty years ; and James VI. firll obliged them
tu iClnd i Ci)li.ii'iit.t ivcS, rgularly to Parliament l.

' ,; .'ii,, .rc n All i, i . i.
'l' 1.:!!, :: ..: 1;,:. Ailsi.i. £:T. 11. D.ril)iml. Ililt. ol' Fc;ul. I'rop. dh. e,

A Scottili Parliament, then, confifled anciently of Great Ba- BOOK I.

rons, of Ecclefiaflics, and asew reprefentativesof boroughs. Nor .-
wvere these divided, as in England, into two houses, but composed
one assembly, in which the Lord Chancellor presided *. And in
rude ages, when the science of government was extremely imper-
se&t, among a martial people, unacquainted with the arts of peace,
firangers to the talents which make a figure in debate, and de-
spifing them, Parliaments were not held in the fame estimation as
at present; nor did haughty Barons love those courts, in which
they appeared, with such evident marks of inferiority. Parlia-
ments were often haflily assembled, and it was, probably, in the
King's power, by the manner in which he issued his writs for that
purpose, to exclude those who were avcrfe from his measures. At
a time when deeds of violence were common, and the rclraints
of law and decency were little regarded, no man could venture
with safety to oppose the King in his own court. The Great Ba-
rons, or Lords of Parliament, were extremely few; even so late
as the beginning of James VI. reign --, they amounted only to fifty-
three. The .Ecclefiaflics equalled them in number, and being de-
voted implicitly to the Crown, for reasons which have been al-
ready explained, rendered all hopes of victory in any Rruggle def-
perate. Nor were the nobles themselves so anxious, as might be
imagined, to prevent aSs of Parliament favourable to the royal
prerogative; conscious of their own strength, and of the King's
inability to carry these a&s into execution without their concur-
rence, they trufled either to elude, or to contemn them; and the
flatute revoking the King's property, and annexing alienated ju-
rifditions to the Crown, repeated in every reign, and violated and
deifpifed as often, is a flanding proof of the impotence of laws,
when opposed to power. So many concurring causes are fuflicient,
perhaps, to account for the ascendant, which our Kings acquired
in Parliament. But without having recourse to any of these, a

* In England, the Peers and Commons reem early to have met in fcparate

hourcs; and James I. who was fond of imitating the English in all their cultoms,
had probably an intention of introducing some considerable diltninioll between
the Greater and Lellier Barons in Scotland; at lcaft he determined that theircon-
1hiltatiols Ilhould not be carried on under the diredion of the fame President; for
by his law, A. I. 1427, it is provided, that out of the Commifioners of all
thlc shires fliall be cholen a wilfe and expert man, called the Common Speaker of
tlhe Parli:ament, 1wo lhall lpropofll all and filndlry needs alndl c:aulfs, )prtailimn;
to the Commons in tile Parliament or general council." No filch Speaker, it
woild feemn, was ever chosen; and by a lill)fc(ucnlt l; thi C1hancchllor wia; de-
laried perpetual 'relfident of Parliamnclt.

'' And. (C'll. v. i. prer. lo.

G.

BooK L. to render property fixed and permanent, many of their poffncflons

came, gradually, and by various methods of alienation, to be
split and parcelled out into different hands. I-ence arose the dif-
tintion between the Greater and the Leser Barons. The form-
er were those who retained their original fiefs undivided, the lat-
ter were the new and less potent vassals of the Crown. Both
were bound, however, to perform all feudal services, and, of
consequence, to give attendance in Parliament. - To the lefler
Barons, who formed no inconsiderable body, this was an intoler-
able grievance. Barons fomctimes denied their tenure, boroughs
renounced their right of electing, charters were obtained, con-
taining an exemption from attendance ; and the anxiety, with
which our anccllors endeavoured to get free from the obligation
of fitting in 'Parliamcnt, is surpassed by that only, with which
their poltcrity solicit to be admitted there. In order to accom-
modate both parties, and, at once, to fccure to the King a fuffi-
cient number of members in his great council, and to save his
vaflals from an unnecessary burden, an easy expedient was found
out. The obligation to personal attendance was continued upon
the Greater Barons, from which the Lesser Barons were exempt-
ed, on condition of their electing, in each county, a certain
nulmber of Re7rcf'nta/ives, to appear in their name. Thus a Par-
liiament became complete in all its members, and was composed
t,f Lords Spiritual and Temporal, of Knights of the shires, and
of Burgefles. As many causes contributed to bring government
earlier to perfection in England, than in Scotland; as the rigour
of the feudal institutions abated sooner; and its defcs were sup-
plied with greater facility in the one kingdom, than in the other;
England, led the way in all there changes, and Burgefles, and
Knights of the shire appeared in the Parliaments of that nation,
before they were heard of in ours. Burgesses were firfl admitted
A D. 1326. into the Scottifl Parliaments by Robert Bruce * ; and in the

preamlble to the laws of Robert III. they are ranked among the
conilituent members of that affcmbly. 'The Lefler Barons were
indebted to James 1. for a flatute exempting them from personal
attendance, and permitting them to ele&E representatives ; the ex-
cmption was eagerly laid hold on, but the privilege was so little
valucd, tlhai, cxcept one or two inltances, it lay neglefted during
one huiitml cd and sixty years; and James VI. sirs obliged them
tu Ilend J cplu':nt:liivcs regularly to Parliament -.

i i'i 1 iq.EO I lil. ofr .

prop.l, c.

6 38.
l] i::ll ;:: ..::1 L11:. Aniii.I. g 1: II. D;tlr~yml. Ilil'. o£ Scud. Prop. di. 8.

A Scottfil Parliament, then, confifed anciently of Great Ba- BOOK I.

rons, of Ecclefiaflics, and a few representatives of boroughs. Nor
were these divided, as in England, into two houses, but composed
one assembly, in which the Lord Chancellor presided *. And in
rude ages, when the science of government was extremely imper-
fe&, among a martial people, unacquainted with the arts of peace,
strangers to the talents which make a figure in debate, and de-
spifing them, Parliaments were not held in the fame eltimation as
at present; nor did haughty Barons love those courts, in which
they appeared, with such evident marks of inferiority. Parlia-
ments were often hastily affenbled, and it was, probably, in the
King's power, by the manner in which he issued his writs for that
purpose, to exclude those who were avcrfe from his measures. At
a time when deeds of violence were common, and the reltraints
of law and decency were little 'regarded, no man could venture
with safety to oppose the King in his own court. The Great Ba-
rons, or Lords of Parliament, were extremely few; even so late
as the beginning of James VI. reign f, they amounted only to fifty-
three. The Ecclefiafics equalled them in number, and being de-
voted implicitly to the Crown, for reasons which have been al-
ready explained, rendered all hopes of victory in any Rfruggle def-
perate. Nor were the nobles themselves so anxious, as might be
imagined, to prevent acds of Parliament favourable to the royal
prerogative; conscious of their own strength, and of the King's
inability to carry these ats into execution without their concur-
rence, they trufed either to elude, or to contemn them; and the
flatute revoking the King's property, and annexing alienated ju-
rifdidions to the Crown, repeated in every reign, and violated and
despised as often, is a flanding proof of the impotence of laws,
when opposed to power. So many concurring causes are fuflicient,
perhaps, to account for the ascendant, which our Kings acquired
in Parliament. But without having recourse to any of these, a

* In England, the Peers and Commnons seem early to have met in fcparate

houses; and James I. who was fond of imitating the English in all their cuiloms,
had probably an intention of introducing Ibme considerable diftinaion between
the Greater and Lefter Barons in Scotland; at least he determined that their con-
illatiolls fliould not be carried on uinder the direaion of the fame Prcfilent; for
by his law, A. D. 1427, it is provided, " that out of the ComimiflToners of all
the fh ires fliall be cliolfe a wile and expert ma-n, called the Common Sipeaker of
the Parliament, who fliall propose all anld undry needs and cailfcs, pertaininll
to the Commons in the Parliament or general council." No such Speaker, it
wo>ld 1fem, vwas ever chofenc; and by a lilbflcqulnt law the C1hancellor was de-
clalrel erpelpetll Prefldent of Par'lliamet.

- And1(. Coll. v. i. pref. 4o.

G

Booic I. single circumstance, peculiar to the conltitution of the Scottifir
'-v' Parliament, the mentioning of which we have hitherto avoided

will abundantly explain this fait, seemingly so repugnant to all
our reasonings concerning the weaklnefs of tie King, and the
power of the nobles.

As far back, as our records enable us to trace the constitution

of our Parliaments, we find a committee, diflinguiflied by the name
of Lords of Arlicles. It was their business to prepare, and to
digest all matters which were to be laid before the Parliament;
every motion for a new law was firNt made there, and approved or
reje&ed by them at pleasure; what they approved was formed into
a bill, and presented to Parliament; what they rejeced could not
be introduced into the house. This committee owed the extra-
ordinary powers vefled in it, to the military genius of the ancient
nobles; too impatient to submit to the drudgery of civil business,
too impetuous to observe the forms, or to enter into the details ne-
celltry in condu&ting it, they were glad to lay that burden upon
a small number, while they themselves had no other labour than
limply to give, or to refuse their fan&ion to the bills, which were
presented to them. The Lords of Articles, then, not only dire&-
cd the whole proceedings of Parliament, but possessed a negative
before debate. That committee was chosen and conflituted in such
a manner, as put this valuable privilege entirely in the King's
hands. It is extremely probable, that the King once had the sole
right of nominating the Lords of Articles*. They came after-
wards to be elected by the Parliament, and consisted of an equal

* It appeals from authentic records, that a Parliament was appointed to be

held March 12, s166, and that the Lords of Articles wvere chosen and met on the
7th, five days before the assembling of Parliament, if they could be regularly
clecaed so long before the meeting of Parliament, it is natural to conclude
that the Prince alone possessed the right of elcaing them. There are two diff r-
ent accounts of the manner of their elecaion at that time, one by Mary herfell,
in a letter to the Archbifliop of Glargow, " We, accompanied with our nobility
bor the time, part to the Tolbuith of Edinburgh, for holding of our Parliament
on the 7th day of this inilant, and elecedl lle Lords Articllars." If we cx-
plain there words, according to ftriR Grammar, we Inull conclude that the Qleen
herfell' eleeted them. It is, however, more probable that MBary meant to lity,
that the nobles then prefcnt with her, viz. her privy coullfcllors, and others,
clefled the Lords of Articles. 1Kcith's Ilil. of Scotland, p. 331. The other ac-
coitilt is Lord RItiilven's, who ex)reltily ;llmlns that tihe Qelt'e lie l-l;1Tf clca
iliem. Kciil's Append. z6. 1. lither wll e cmblace tle one or the o ilcr of tlicfl
opinions, is of no conliequrnce. If the pliivy cotunitiellos and iol lic; :ttesltilin;
tle colurt :lad a right to elect tle Lords of Articlcs, it was equally ;ialvitltai'e(.ti
ibr thl C(row-ii, aa if the Prince hlil lihad the ll, iicoil nination of tihclm.

number out of each etlate, and most commonly of eight Temporal BooK I.
and eight Spiritual Lords, of eight representatives of boroughs, - -
and of the eight great officers of the Crown. Of this body, the
eight ecclefiallics, together with the officers of the Crown, were
entirely at the King's devotion, and it was scarce possible that the
choice could fall on such Temporal Lords and Burgefles as would
unite in opposition to his measures. Capable either of influencing
their elecion, or of gaining them when eleted, the King com-
monly found the Lords of Articles no less obsequious to his will,
than his own privy council, and by means of his authority with
them, he could put a negative upon his Parliament before debate,
as well as after it and what may seem altogether incredible, the
most limited Prince in Europe adtually possessed, in one inflance,
a prerogative which the most absolute could never attain *.

To this account of the internal conltitution of Scotland, it will State of F.u-

not be improper to add a view of the political lfate of Europe at io'Cgat t
that period, where the following hillory commences. A thorough of the 16th
knowledge of that general system, of which every kingdom in Eu- century.t
rope forms a part, is not less requisite towards underflanding the
history of a nation, than an acquaintance with its peculiar govern-
ment and laws. The latter may enable us to comprehend do-

' Having deduced the hiltomy of the committee of Lords of Aricles, as low as

the fubjeft of tllis preliminary book required, it may be agreeable, perhaps, to
some readers, to know the filbl)equent variations in this figular inilitution, andi
the political use xvlich our Kings made of thele. VWhen Parliamlents became
more nunierous, and more considerable by the admifllon cf the rcpreicntatives
of the Lefier Barons, the prefervilng their influence over the Lords of Articles
became, likewilc, an objec of greater importance to our Kings. James VI. on
pretence, tliat the Lords of Articles could not find leilure to conlider the great
multitude of aflhirs laid before them, obtained an adl, appointing four perlns to
be named out of each E STATE, vwho fluuld meet twenty days before the com-
mencement of Parliament t, to receive all fipllications, &c. and rcjeiing what
they thought frivolous, flould engross in a book iwhat they thoaught worthy the
attention of the Lords of Articles. No provilion is made in the a& for the choice
of this felec body, and the King would, of coturlie, have claimed that privilege.
In 1633, when Charles I. was beginining to introduce tholf ilnovations wliicli
gave so much offlnce to the nation, he dreaded the opposition of his I'arlijanient,
and in ordter to prevent thai, all artifice was made ulfe of to rccure the l.ords
of Articles for the Crown. ''hle Temlporal I'eers were appointed to chluf eiglht
l;iihops, and tile 1lfihopls ci lght Peers; tllie fixteeln met toge.llier, and eleckcd
eight lKniglhts otl'he (llilr, and ci ght liilrgcflrs, andl to theli' the tile crown ol'-
ficers were added as ufiul;l. 11 we can oily flppole eight perliOs of' sb i11111'r-
ou.; a lndy, as the Peers of Scotlanld were becomei by tlhat tilm, atcl:cled to tIle
(cluI', ltele, it is obvioius, would lie the menll whom.l tile Hillop)s would chulil.
anl of conliqiicncc, tlhe whole Lords of Articles were the tools and c'atuil.es of

·- A't. '2p. p. 1 594

G iij

BOOK I. meftic occurrences and revolutions, but without the former, so-

reign tranfacions mull be altogether mysterious and unintelligible.
By attending to this, many dark passages in our hiiory may be
placed in a clear light; and where the bulk of hiflorians have
seen only the effect, we may be able to discover the cause.

The fubverflon of the feudal government in France, and its de-

clcnfion in the neighbouring kingdoms, occasioned a remarkable
alteration in the political itate of Europe. Kingdoms, which were
inconsiderable when broken, and parcelled out among nobles, ac-
quired firmness and flrength, by being united into a regular mo-
narchy. Kings became conscious of their own power and impor-
tance. They meditated fchlemes of conquefl, and engaged in wars
at a diflance. Numerous armies were raised, and great taxes im-
posed for their fubfifence. Confidcrable bodies of infantry were
kept in conflant pay; that service grew to be honourable; and ca-
valry, in which the flrength of European armies had hitherto con-
filled, though proper enough for the flort and voluntary excur-
sions of nobles who served at their own expence, were found to
be unfit either for making, or defending any important conquefl.

It was in Italy, that the powerful monarchs of France and Spain

and Germany firfl appeared to make a trial of their new firength.
The division of that country into so many finall tfates, the luxury
of the people, and their effeminate aversion for war, invited their
more martialneighbours to an easy prey. The Italians, who had
been accultomed to mock battles only, and to decide their quarrels
by innocent and bloodlcfs victories, were aflonificd at the fight of
real war; and as they could not refilt the torrent, they fuflered it
to take its course, and to liend its rage. Intrigue and policy sup-
plied the want of frength ; and neccfli-y and felf-precervation taught
that ingenious people the great fccret of modern politics, and flew-
ed them how to balance the power of one Prince, by throwing
that of another into the opposite Icale. By this happy device, the

tlhe King. This practice, so illcolfilfcnt witll liberty, was abolifled during the
civil war; and the flatute of James VI. was repealed. After the Rellolation,
Parliaments became more lfetile than ever. What was only a temporary device,
il the reign of Charles I. was, thel, converted into a fianding law. " For my

part," fays the author floom whom I have borrowed many of these particulars,

" I Ihould have thoughlt it leCl crinmil:al i our I Relloration Parliament, to have
"openly bestowed ulpol the Killn a negative before debate, thaln, ill fucl an
"' Iderilllhndl artificial manner, to betray their conllitients, and the nation."
EflTys on Brit. Antiq 5. .. It is probable, however, fiom a letter of Randolph's
to Cecil, lo. Aug. 13.6o, that thii; I'Parli.lcent lhad bome appearance of alciclnt
lpreccedet tojultliy their unworthly codlut.

liberty of Italy was preserved. The scales were poised by very Booc 1.
ikilful hands; the fmnalleft variations were attended to, and no r- '
Prince was allowed long to retain any superiority, that could be
dangerous.

A fyflcm of condut, pursued with so much success in Italy

was not long confined to that country of political refinement. The
maxim of preserving a balance of power is founded so much upon
obvious reasoning, and the situation of Europe rendered it so ne-
ceflary, that it loon became a matter of chief attention to all wife
politicians. Every ftep any Prince took was observed by all his
neighbours. Ambassadors, a kind of honourable spies, authorized
by the mutual jealousy of Kings, resided almost conitantly at every
different court, and had it in charge to watch all its motions. Dan-
gers were foreseen at a greater distance, and prevented with more
eafc. Confederacies wereformed to humble any power which rose
above its due proportion. Revenge or felf-defence were no longer
the only causes of holtility, it became common to take arms out
of policy; and war, both in its commencement, and in its opera-
tions, was more an exercise of the judgment, than of the pafions
of men. Almost every war in Europe became general, and the
most inconsiderable states acquired importance, because they could
add weight to either scale.

Francis I. who mounted the throne of France in the year i i 5,

and CharlesV. who obtained the Imperial Crown in the year i519,
divided between them the strength and affeflions of all Europe.
Their perpetual enmity was not owing either to personal jealousy,
or to the caprice of private passion, but was founded so much in
nature and true policy, that it subsisted between their posterity for
several ages; and, notwithstanding their present accidental and un-
natural union, mull again revive. Charles succeeded to all the do-
minions of the house of Aultria. No family had ever gained so
much by wife and fortunate marriages. By acquifitionsofthis kind
the Aufirian Princes rose, in a short time, from obscure Counts of
I-Iapfbourg, to be Archdukes of Austria, and Kings of Bohemia,
and were in poffeflion of the Imperial dignity by a fort of heredi-
tary right. 3efides these territories in G ermeny, Charles was heir
to the Crown of Spain, and to all the dominions which belonged to
the houlf of Burgundy. 'Ihe Burgundian provinces engrossed, at
that time, the riches and commerce of one half of Europe ; and he
drew from them, on mally occalions, those immnelll films, which
no people without trade and liberty are able to contribute. Spain
furnifled him a gallant ;and hardy infantry, to whole discipline lie

BoocK . was indebted for all his conquests. And at the fame time, by the
t' -v discovery of the new world, a vein of wealth was opened to him,

which all the extravagance of ambition could not exhaufl. These
advantages rendered Charles the firfl Prince in Europe ; but he
wished to be more, and openly aspired to universal monarchy. His
genius was of that kind which ripens ilowly, and lies long conceal-
ed ; but it grew up without observation, to an unexpecEed height
and vigour. He possessed, in an eminent degree, the characteristic
virtues of all the different races of Princes to whom he was allied.
In forming his schemes, he discovered all the subtlety and pene-
tration of Ferdinand his grand-father;, hle pursued them with that
obflinate and inflexible perfeverancc which has ever since been pe-
culiar to the Auflrian blood; and in executing them, he could em-
ploy the magnanimity and boldness of his Burgundian Anceltors.
His abilities were equal to his power, and neither of them would
have been inferior to his designs, had not Providence, in pity to man-
kind, and in order to preserve them from the worst of all evils,
Universal Mlonarchy, raised up Francis I. to defend the liberty of
Europe. His dominions were less extensive, but more united than
the Emperor's. His subjects were numerous, active, and warlike,
lovers of glory, and lovers of their King. To Charles power was
the only object of desire, and he pursued it with an unwearied and
joyless indufiry. Francis could mingle plcafure and elegance with
his ambition, and though he negleced some advantages, which a
more flegmatic or more frugal Prince would have improved, an
active and intrepid courage supplied all his defecs, and checked
or defeated many of the Emperor's designs.

The reft of Europe obfcrvcd all the motions of these mighty

rivals, with a jealous attention. On the one fide, the Italians saw
the danger which threatened Chrillendom, and in order to avert
it, had rccourfe to the expedicnt, which they had often employed
with fucccfs. They endeavoured to divide the power of tihe two
contending Monarchs into equal Icales, and by the union of ifvceral
Imall Itates, to countcrpoile him, whose power became too grcat.
But, w'hat they concerted with much wifdoim, they were able to
execute with little vigour; and intrigue and refincment were feeble
fences againll the encroachments of military power.

On the other lidc, Henry VIII. of England hl ld the ha)lnce

with lecs delicacy, but with a Itronger hland. lie was the third
Prince of the age in dignity and in po ler; :land the advantagcous
situation of his dominions, his cldomctiic tranquillity, his imcmenfi:
wcaltlh, and abfolutc authority rendered Ilinl the n;atural gulardian

of the liberty of Europe. Each of the rivals courted him with Boox I.
emulation ; he knew it to be his interest to keep tlhe balance even,
and to restrain both, by not joining entirely with either of them.
But he was seldom able to reduce his ideas to practicc; he was
governed by caprice more than by principle; and the paflions of
the man were an overmatch for the maxims of the King. Vanity
and resentment were the great springs of all his undertakings,
and his neighbours easily found the way, by touching these, to
force him upon many rafli and inconfiltent enterprises. His reign
was a perpetual series of blunders in politics, and while he elteem-
ed himself the wifell Prince in Europe, he was a constant dupe to
those, who found it neceflary, and could submit to flatter him.

In this situation of Europe, Scotland, which had hitherto wafted

her strength in the quarrels between France and England emerged
from her obscurity, took her fiation in the system, and began to
have some influence upon the fate of distant nations. Her afliftance
was, frequently, of consequence to the contending parties, and the
balance was often so nicely adjufled, that it was in her power to
make it lean to either fide. The part afnigned her was to divert
Henry from carrying his arms into the Continent. That Prince,
having routed the French at Guinegat, and invcfted Terouiinne,
France attempted to divide his forces, by engaging James IV. in
that unhappy expedition which ended with his life. For the fame
rcafon, Francis encouraged and aflilted the Duke of Albany to
ruin the families of Angus and Home, which were in the interest
of England, and would willingly have persuaded the Scots to
revenge the death of their King, and to enter into a new war
with that kingdom. Henry and Francis having united not long
after against the Emperor, it was the interest of both Kings, that
the Scots flould continue inactive; and a long tranquillity was the
cffect of their union. Charles endeavoured to break this, and to
embarafs Henry by another inroad of the Scots. For this end, he
made great advances to James V. flattering the vanity of the young
Monarch, by electing him a Knight of the Golden Fleece, and by
offering him a match in the Imperial family ; and in return for thele
empty honours, he demanded of him to renounce his alliance with
France, and to declare war against England. But Jamcs, who
had much to lofl, and who could gain little by cmbracing the
.Emperor's propolals, rcjctcd them with decency, and keeping
firm to his ancient allies, left Ienry at full liberty to ait upon
the Continent with his whole Itrcngth.

Boore I. Henry himself began his reign, by imitating the example of

his anceflors with regard to Scotland. He held its power in such
extreme contempt, that he was at no pains to gain its friendfllip;
but on the contrary, he irritated the whole nation, by reviving
the antiquated pretensions of the Crown of England to the fove-
reignty over Scotland. But his own experience, and the ex-
ample of his enemies, gave him an higher idea of its importance.
It was impossible to defend an open and extensive frontier, againit
the incursions of an acive and martial people. During any war
on the Continent, this obliged him to divide the firength of his
kingdom. It was necessary to maintain a kind of army of ob-
servation in the north of England; and after all precautions, the
Scottiflh borderers, who were superior to all mankind in the prac-
tice of irregular war, often made successful inroads, and spread
terror and desolation over many counties. He fell, at last, upon
the true secret of policy, with refpea to Scotland, which his
predecessors had too little penetration to discover, or too much'
pride to employ. The Situation of the country, and the bravery
of the people made the conqucit of Scotland impossible; but the
national poverty, and the violence of faction rendered it an easy
matter to divide, and to govern it. He abandoned, therefore,
the former design, and resolved to employ the utmofi address in
executing the latter. It had not yet become honourable for one
Pince to receive pay from another, under the more decent name
of a subsidy. But, in all ages, the fame arguments have been good.
in courts, and of weight with ministers, facious leaders, and
favourites. What were the arguments, by which Henry brought
over so many to his interest during the minority of James V. we
know by the original warrants for remitting considerable fums
into Scotland, which are still extant *. By a proper distribution
of these, many persons of note were gained to his party, and a
faicion which held secret correspondence with England, and re-
ccived all its direcions from thence, appears henceforward in all
our domestic contests. In the fcquel of the hiflory, we lhall
find I-Ienry labouring to extend his influence in Scotland. His
fucccflors adopted the fame plan, and improved upon it. The
afl'airs of the two kingdoms became interwoven, and their intc-
relts were often the fame. Elizabeth divided her attention al-
most equally between them, and the authority, which nie inhe-
rited in the one, was not greater than that, which lhc acquired
it ile tihcr.

l~iii .I ljl, c. i p. .

# BOOK SECOND. CONTENTS. BIRTH of Queen Mary. State of Scotland. Earl of Arran regent. Schemes of Henry VIII. State of Parties. Persecution of the reformers. Invasion of Scotland. A peace. The murder of ...

THE
H I S T 0 R Y

O F
SCOTLAND.

BOOK SECOND.

CONTENTS.
Brr.nr of Queen Mary. State of Scotland. Earl of Arran regent. Schemes of

I-ienry VIII. State of Parties. Persecution of the reformers. Invasion of
Scotland. A peace. The murder of Beatoun. New breach with England.
Battle of Pinkey. Treaty with France. Peace concluded. Queen Dowager
regent. Progress of the Reformation. Its causes. Marriage of Queen Mary
xvith the Dauphin. Elizabeth. Persecution of the reformed. CondcluLi of thl
Queen Regent. Her fraud. Infurredion at Perth. A treaty concluded. A
second rupture. A second treaty made and violated. Succecs of the Protef-
tants. A third treaty. Acceflion of Francis II. Troops arrive from France.
Protellants take arms. Deprive the Queen Regent of authority.

MlARY Queen of Scots was born a few days before the death of Boo, II.
her father James V. The situation in which he left the king-
dom alarmed all ranks of men, with the profpec of a turbulent Dc14'
and disastrous reign. A war againll England had been undertaken BirtliofMa-
without necessity. and carried on without success. Many persons o';the ki

ngl

of the firll rank had fallen into the hands of the Englifl, in the dom.
unfortunate rout near the firth of Solway, and were fill prisoners
at London. Among the relt of the nobles there was little union,
either in their views, or in their affecions ; and the religious dif-
putes, occasioned by the opinions of the reformers, growing eve-
ry day more violent, added to the rage of those faclions which
are natural to a form of government nearly ariflocratical.

The government of a Queen was unknown in Scotland, and

did not imprint much reverence in the minds of a martikal
people. The government of an infant Qceen was fill more del-
titute of real authority; and the profpefR of .a long and feeble
minority invited to fiitiol, by the hope of impunity. Jamles had
not even provided the commnon rcmcdy against the dilorders of a

I-l

BooK I1. minority, by committing to proper persons the care of his daugh.

ter's education, and the adminiliration of affairs in her name.
Though he saw the clouds gathering, and foretold that they
would quickly burfl into a ltorm, he was so little able to difperfi
them, or to defend his daughter and kingdom against the immi-
nent calamities, that, in mere despair, he abandoned them both
to the mercy of fortune, and left open to every pretender, the
office of regent, which he could not fix to his own fatisfation.

Pretensions Cardinal Beatoun, who had for many years been confidered as
of Cardlinal prime minilier, was the firl who claimed that high dignity; and
Bcatoutl to
theregency. in flpport of his pretensions, he produced a teflament , which

he himself had forgcd in the name of the late King ; and with-
out any other right, inflantly assumed the title of Regent. He
hopcd, by the affiflance of the clergy, the countenance of France,
the connivance of the Queen Dowager, and the support of the
whole Popish faction, to hold by force, what he had seized on
by fraud. But Beatoun had enjoyed power too long to be a fa-
vourite of the nation. Those among the nobles who wished for
a Reformation in religion dreaded his severity, and others confi-
dered the elevation of a churchman to the highest office of the
kingdom as a depression of themselves. At their infligation,
James Hamilton 'Earl of Arran, and next heir to the Queen,
roused himself from his inadivity, and was prevailed on to a-
spire to that flation, to which proximity of blood, and the prac-

arl of Ar- tice of the kingdom gave him an undoubted title. The nobles,
ran choien who were aflembled for that purpose, unanimously conferred on
regCent. himn the office of regent ; and the public voice applauded their

choice.

Characlcrof No two men ever differed more widely in disposition and cha-
.Scatoul. raclr, than the Earl of Arran and Cardinal leatoun. The Car..

dinal was by nature of immoderate ambition; by long experi-
ence he had acquired address and refinement; and iniblence grew
upon him from continual success. I-lis high flation in the church
placed him in the way of great employments; his abilities were
equal to the greatefc of thlcl ; nor did he reckon any of them to
be above his moiit. As his own eminence was founded upon the
power of the church of Rome, he was a zealous defender of that
fiLperltition, and for the lame rcna an avowed enlmy to the doc-
trine of the Reflormers. Political motives alone determined hiim
to hupport the one, or to oppole the other. His early application
to public (illcncfs kept hiln tun:lccquainted wtith the lc;rning and

* Sadler's Lctt. 161.

controversies of the age; he gave judgment, however, upon all BooiK II.
the points in dispute, with a precipitancy, violence, and rigour, -'
which cotemporary historians mention with indignation.

The character of the Earl ofArran was, in almost every thing, OfArran.

the reverse of the other's. H-e was neither infeced with ambi-
tion, nor inclined to cruelty: The love of ease extinguiflcd the
former, the softness of his temper preserveld him from the latter.
Timidity and irresolution were his predominant failings, the one
occasioned by his natural conffitution, and the other arising from
a confcioufiefs that his abilities were not equal to his flation.
With these dispositions, he might have cnjoyed and adorned pri-
vate life ; but his public condus was without courage, or digni-
ty, or consistence. The perpetual slave of his own fears, and,
by confequencc, the perpetual tool of those, who found their ad-
vantage in practising upon them. But as no other person could
be set in opposition to the Cardinal, with any probability of flc-
cess, the nation declared in his favour with so general a con-
sent, that the artifices of his rival could not withiltand its united
flrength.

The Earl of Arran had scarce taken possession of his new dig- Scllemns n

I\!eilr\V/!i.

nity, when a negociation was opened with IEngland, wlich gave :.:tl rc;l'ald
birth to events of the moss fatal consequence to himself, and to tu Sc;.t.:l.
the kingdom. After the death of Jumes, I-enry VIII. was no
longer afraid of any intcrruption from Scotland to his dcfigns a-
gainft France ; and immediately conceived hopes of rendering
this security perpetual, by the marriage of Edward his only son
with the young Qeen of Scots. HIe communicated his inten-
tion to the prisoners taken at Solway, and prevailcd on them to
favour it, by tle promitc of lilbery, as the reward of their fLc-
cess. In the mean time, he pernittcd them to return into Scot-
land, that, by their prieflnce in the Parliament which the Recent
hadl called, they migiht be the better able to persuade their coun-
trymen to fa;]l in with his prop1olo s. A cau!fi, intrufled to f{ch
able and zealous advocatcs, could not well miif of coming to an
happy iflue. All tholce \ho feared the Cardinal, or who dleired
a change in rcligion, were fond of an allian ce,,whiclh an'ored
protcOlion to the doclrine which they had eClbraccd, as well as
to their own perlbns: ag;iiiilt the rage of that poveiral and haugh:-
ty Prelate.

BIut Henry's roug'l nnd impatient temnper w'v: iic:;:all:,! of iin- Il r-nii,-u-

proving this favourablel conljuin'lrc. Addlrcl; :il (ilic'acy in ,,li
managing the fears, and follies, and interelts (-1' mi-, were aits

l- ij

BOOK II. with which he was utterly unacquainted. The designs he had
' V' formed upon Scotland were obvious from the marriage which he

had proposed, and he had not dexterity enough to disguise, or to
conceal them. Inilead of yielding to the fear or jealousy of the
Scots, what time and accidents would soon have 'enabled him to
recover, he, at once, alarmed and irritated the whole nation, by
demanding that the Queen's person ihould be immediately com-
mitted to his custody, and that the government of the kingdom
should be put in his hands during her minority.

Odious to Henry could not have prescribed more ignominious conditions
though l; to a conquered people, and it is no wonder they were rejected,
part ;cccpt- with indignation, by men who scorned to purchase an alliance
ed by theni. with England, at the price of their own liberty. The Parlia-

ment of Scotland, however, influenced by the nobles who re-
March 12, turned from England, desirous of peace with that kingdom, and

I'43* delivered, by the Regent's confining the Cardinal as a prisoner,

from any opposition to wllich he might have given rife; consent-
ed to a treaty of marriage and of union, but upon somewhat of a
more equal fooling. And after some dark and unsuccessful in-
trigues, by which his ambassador endeavoured to carry off the
young Qleen and Cardinal Beatoun into England, Henry was
obliged to give up his own proposals, and to accept of theirs. On
his fide, he contented that the Qeeen should continue to reside
in Scotland, and himfclf remain excluded from any ihare in the
government of the kingdom. On the other hand, the Scots a-
greed to fend their Sovereign into England so soon as she attain-
ed the full age of ten years, and instantly to deliver fix persons,
of the first rank, to be kept as hoflages by Henry till the OQeen's
arrival at his court.

1Favourehy The treaty was fill so manifcitly of advantage to England,
the regent. that the Regent loft much of the public confidence by consenting

to it. The Cardinal, who had now recovered liberty, watched
for fimch an opportunity of regaining credit, and he did not fail

Opprl'ld by to cultivate and improve this to the utmolt. He complained
til; C;i- loudly, that the Regent had betrayed the kingdom to its moet

inveterate enemies, and fticrificed its honour to his own ambi-
tion. He foretold the cxtinclion of true catholic religion, un-
der the tyranny of an excomimunicated hcretic ; but above all, lie
lamented to tIe :nl :ncient king'dom conllcntiln to its own slave-
ry, delcelndinlg into the ignominious tation of a dependent pro-
vince; and, in one hour, tie wcaknleft or treachery of a tingle
mIan llirrcllndring every thing;, for which the Scottilh nation had,

strugglcd and fought, during so many ages. There remonfiran. BooK IT.
ces of the Cardinal were not without effect. They were ad-
drelfed to prejudices and passions which are deeply rooted in the
human heart. The fame hatred to the ancient enemies of their
country, the fame jealousy of national honour, and pride of in-
dependency, which, at the beginning of the present century,
went near to prevent the Scots from consenting to an union with
England, upon terms of great advantage, did, at that time, in-
duce the whole nation to declare againfl the alliance which had
been concluded. In the one period, an hundred and fifty years
of peace between the two nations, the habit of being fubjeted to
the fame King, and governed by the fame maxims, had confider-
ably abated old animofities, and prepared both people for incor-
porating. In the other, injuries were still frefl, and the wounds
on both,fides open; and, in the warmth of resentment, it was
natural to seek revenge, and to be averse from reconcilement.
At the Union in 1707, the wisdom of Parliament despised the
groundless murmurs occasioned by antiquated prejudices; but in
1S43, the complaints of the nation were better founded, and
urged with a zeal and unanimity, which it is neither just, nor safe
to disregard. The rage of the people rose to such an height, that
the Englilh ambassador could hardly be protected from their in-
fults. The clergy contributed a great fum towards preserving the
church from the dominion of a Prince whose fyflem of Reforma-
tion was so fatal to their power. The nobles, after having mor-
tified the Cardinal, so lately, in such a cruel manner, were, now,
ready to applaud and to second him, as the defender of tlhe ho-
nour and liberty of his country.

Argyle, Huntly, Bothwell, and other powerful Barons openly Hre excite.
declared against the alliance with England. By their aflitance, almoit the

]hole na-

the Cardinal seized on the persons of the young Queen and her tion ag:liniii
mother, and added to his party the splendor and authority of the llci Eglifll.
royal name *. He received, at the fanme time, a more real Ic-
cefflon to his flrenglh, by the arrival of Matthew Stewart Earl of
Lennox, whore return from France he had earncflly solicited.
This young nobleman was the hereditary enemy of the house of
Hamilton. I-Ic had many clhiims upon the Regent, and pretend-
ed a right to exclude him, not only from itccecling to the
Crown, but to deplrivc Lim of the pollclijon of hiis lprivate for-
tune. Thel Cardinal llattcrcd his vanity with tile profpca: of
n:arrying the Qucen 1)ow;agCir, and alIclcd to treat him witll so

* Kcitlh's Ilf ofS.ot. 3,,.

Boosx I. much fludied refpecl, that the Regent became jealous of'him as

a rival in power.

This suspicion was artfully heightened by the Abbot of Paisley,

who returned into Scotland some time before the Earl of Len-
nox, and aded in concert with the Cardinal. He was a natural
brother of the Regent, with whom he had great credit; a warm
partizan of France, and a zealous defender of the'eftablifhed re-
ligion. He took hold of the Regent by the proper handle, and
endeavoured to bring about a change in his sentiments, by work-
ing upon his fears. The diffcrticn of the nobility, the difaffec-
tion of the clergy, and the rage of the people ; the resentment of
France, the power of the Cardinal, and the pretensions of Len-
nox, were all represented with aggravation, and with their most
threatening aspe&t.

Meanwhile, the day appointed for the ratification of the treaty

with England, and the delivery of the hloftages approached, and
the Regent was fill undetermined in his own mind. He acted
to the last, with that irresolution and inconfiltency, which is pe-
culiar to weak men, when they are so unfortunate as to have the
chief part in the condurt of difficult affairs. On the 25th of
August, he ratified the treaty with Henry, and proclaimed the
Cardinal who fiill continued to oppose it, an enemy to his coun-

Obliges tile try. On tie 3d of September, he secretly withdrew from Edin-
regeinc the burtSoI, met with the Cardinal at Callendar, renounced the friend-
'1iicndlip ship of England, and declared for the interests of France *.
-with Eng-

^d n IJ Henry, in order to gain the Riegent, had not spared the most

magnificent promises. IHe had offered to give the Princess Eli-
zabeth in marriage to his eldect son, and to constitute him King
of that part of Scotland, which lies beyond the river Forth. But
upon finding his intcrcel in the kingdom to be less coniderable
than he had imagined, the English monarch began to treat him
with little refpec. The young Qicen was now in the cuflody
of his enemies, who grew every day more numerous and more
popular. They formed a separate court at Stirling, and threat-
ened to clec another Regent. Thee French King was ready to
afibrd them his proteclion, and the nation, out of hatred to the
.l'inililh, would have united in their defence. In this situation,
tle Regentl could t rot rctai; his authority, without a Ihudden
change of his nlii;atircs; and though he cndeavoured, by ratify-
ing the treaty, to prleirvc the appearalces of good s;ith with

' Sanllr, ,39, 3.6.

England, he was obliged to throw himself into tlle arms of the Booic I.
party, which adlhred to France. .

Soon after tllis flrpriilng revolution in his political principles, And to per-

fectic the

the Regent changed his fentilnents concerning religion. The lj)irit fcctrfor-e
of controverry was then new and warm; book's of that kind were
eagerly read by men of ev ery ralnk the love of novelty, or the
conviction of truth, had led the Regent to exprefl great ettecm for
the writings of the Reformers; and having been powerfully sup-
ported by those who had embraced their opinions, he, in order to
gratify them, entertained, in his own family, two of the molt noted
preachers of the Proteflant doctrine, and, in his firlt Parliament,
conlented to an ac, by which the laity were permitted to read
the scriptures in a languagce vhich they undcrflood. Truth need-
ed only a fair hearinlo to be an over-matcl for error. Abfurdi-
ties, which hadl long impoicdl on the ignuorance and credulity of
mankind, were detected and exposed to public ridicule; and unler
the countenance of the Reg-nt, the Rcformation made great ad-
vances. ?The Cardinal obfervcc its progrlis with concern, and
was at the utmurf pains to obiiruc't it. He reprelcntcd to tlic
Regent his great imprudence in giving encourtagement to opinions
so hfvourabie to Lemiiox's pretcniions; that his own legitimacy
depended upon the validity of a sentence of divorce founded on
the Pope's authority; and that by fitfering it to be called in quef-
tion, lie weakened his own title to the fucceflion, and furnifilei
his rival with the only argument, by which it could be rendered
doubtful . These insinuations made a deep impression on the
Regent's timorous spirit, who, at the profplec6 of such imaginary
dangers, was as much Itartled as the Cardinal could have willled;
and his zeal for the Proteflant religion was not long proof againll
his fear. He publicly abjured the doctrine of the Reformers
in the Franciscan church at Stirling, and declared not only for
the political, but tlie religious opinions of his new confidents.

The Proteflant duocrine did not fulle:r much by his apoltacy.
It had already taken so deep root in the kingdom, that no dilcou-

* The pretentiots of the Earl ofI L.cnnox t.o tlie fcccfnin l were tilih frtiliilcl.

M;ary, thile' d:Ihter (of Jaiies II. wa.s married to Jlames Iordl I !:i ilt]. JElizbl)cth,
a (latJlhtcer of that

l il nazrii;lIC,\\a s ithe wile osl' Martt2lh'cw l\ ]''ll of l.cIemox, aLill thll

present E:url wsx; ier glrand ci . 'Te I'l c t \v:: li):t'wil;' oli ;rLtl;)lln oI' tlihe
]'rillccl's Mi\ ry. JBut his fittller, Iblin ( divor-ctd from his; fi'ccond \ irf : liz.a-
bethl lolme, mrit;ll Janet Ptatoltu, tlie 1!;il' ; It's molher. Lc tilox tretClitcll,
that thei liliceI of (ivorce was ulljlllt, d t t t

, bll .iii tli , l 01

ii u wO il i

izl;a etilh IoL e: wva;s fill alive, outgllt to be contlid cd a' illitinti ilae.
Crawlvi. P'eer. J 92.

Book II. ragement or severity could extirpate it. The Regent indeed con-

sented to every thing, that the zeal of the Cardinal thought necef-
fary for the preservation of the eftabliihed religion. The Reform-
ers were persecuted with all the cruelty, which superstition inspires
into a barbarous people. Many were condemned to that dreadful
death, which the church has appointed for the punifliment of its
enemies; but they suffered with a spirit so nearly resembling the
patience and fortitude of the primitive martyrs, that more were
converted, than terrified by there fpedacles.

Beatoun en- The Cardinal, however, was now in poffeflion of every thing his
gros esthe ambition could desire; and exercised all the authority of a Re-
chief direc-
tion of gent without the envy of the name. He had nothing to fear from
affairs. the Earl of Arran, who having by his inconflancy forfeited the

public elteem, was contemned by one half of the nation, and little
trusted by the other. The pretensions of the Earl of Lennox were
the only thing which remained to embarafs him. He had made
ufc of that nobleman very fucccfsfully to work upon the Regent's
jcaloufy and fear, but as he no longer flood in need of such an
infirument, he was willing to be rid of him with decency. Len-
nox soon began to fufpet his intention; promises, flattery, and
refpes& were the only returns he had hitherto received for fubftan-
tial services; but at lait the Cardinal's artifices could no longer be
concealed, and Lennox, inflead of' attaining power and dignity
himself, favt that he had been employed only to procure these for
another. Resentment and disappointed ambition pufied him on
to seek to be revenged on that cunning prelate, who, by facri-
sicing his interest, had so ungenerously purchased the Earl of Ar-
ran's friendflip. He withdrew, for that reason, from court, and
declared for the party at enmity with the Cardinal, which, with
open arms, received a convert, who added so much luitre to their
cause.

The two fafions which divided the kingdom were still the fame,

without any alteration in their views or principles; but, by one
of thofc itrange revolutions, which were frequent in that age,
they had, in the course of a few weeks, changed their leaders.
The Regent was at the head of the partizans of France and the
defenders of Popery, and Lennox in the fame flation with the
advocates for the Englilh alliance, and a reformation in religion.
The one laboured to pull down his own work, which the other
upheld with the fane hand, that had hitherto cndeavoured to de-
firoy it,

Lennox's impatience for revenge got the flart of the Cardinal's BooK II.

ac&ivity. He furprilcd both him and the Regent by a iudden mlarclh -
to Edinburgh with a numerous army; and mi;ht cafily have
crufled them before they could prepare for their defence. But
he was weak enough to liflen to propoilis for an accommodaiioln;
and the Cardinal anmuld him so aitfully, and ilun out the treaty
to such a length, that the greater part of the EIarl's troops, xwho
served, as is ulual wherever the feudal inflitutions prevail, at their
own expencc, desertcd hlimn and in concluding a peace, inllead
of giving the law, he was obliged to receive it. A second at-
tempt to retrieve his affairs ended yet more unfortunntcly. Onc
body of his troops was cut in pieces, and the refc dilipcrld ; and
with the poor remains of a ruined party, he mull cither have
submittcd to the conqueror, or have fled out of the kingdom,
if the approach of an Englifll army had not brought him a fiort
relief.

EIenry wxas not of a temper to bear tamely the indignity, witl, 1lnry in-
which he had been treated, both by the Rcgrent and Parliament of a3'' Scot-

laid.

Scotland, who at the time when they renounced tlicir alliance
with him, had entered into a new and lnriier confederacy with
France. The rigour of the season retarded for fomc time the exe-
cution of his vengeance. But in the spring a conficlerable body
of infantry whlich was declined for France, received orders to fil
for Scotland, and a proper number of cavalry was appointed to
join it by land. The Regent and Cardinal little cxpcted fuclh a
viliit. They had trufled tlat the French war would find employ-
ment for all Henry's forces; and, from an unaccountable security,
were wholly unprovided for the defence of the kingdom. 'he
iarl of Hartford, a name fatal to the Scots in that age, command-
ed this army, and landed it, without opposition, a few; miles above
Lcith. l-le was quickly malier of that place; and marching di-
relcly to Edinburgh, entered it with the fame ceac. After plun-
dering the adjacent country, the richeRi, and molt open in Scot-
land, he fct on fire both thecf towns; and upon the approach of
some troops gathered together by the Regent, put his booty on
Ioard the llcet, and with his land forces retired fitfely to the Eng-
lilh borders, delivering tihe kingdom, in a few days, from the
terror of ;n invaiion, concerted with little policy, carried oil at
great cxpence, and attended i itll no advantage. If Henry ain-mle
at the conquell of Scotland, lie g :ined nothingl by this expedition;
if the marriagCe ie had piirop:Iof, was 1till in his view, lii loll :i great
d(til, Suchl a rough courltllp, as tile Earl of I;-lontly hmillill.ul

j-

BooK II. called it, difguflcd tile vhiole nation; their avcrfion for the match

grew into abhorrence; and e.afperated by so many indignities,
the Scots were never, at any period, more attached to France, or
more alicnated from England.

Tlie Earl of Lennox alone, in spite to the Regent and French

King, cuntinued a correspondence with England, which ruined his
own intereflt, without promoting Henry's. Iany of his own vas-
fals preferring their duty to their country before their affeaion to
him, refuscd to concur in any design to favour the public enemy.
And after a few feel)le and unsuccessful attempts to dillurb the Rc-
gent's admiriillration, he was obliged to fly for safety to the court
of England, where I-enry rewarded services which he had the in-
clination, but not the pover to perform, by giving him in mar-
riage his niece the Lady Margaret Douglas. This unhappy exile,
however, was dc fined to be the father of a race of kings. lie
fhwv his son Lord clarnley mount the thrope of Scotland, to the
perpetual exclusion of that rival who now triumphed in his ruin.
And from that time, his pollerity have held the sceptre in two
kingdoms, by one of which he was call out as a criminal, and by
the other received as a fugitive.

A peace IVIeanwhll ile houilitics were continued by both nations, but
conicl Ied. with little vigour on either lide. The hiflorians of that age re-

late minutely the circunflances of several lkirmifles and inroads,
but they were without any considerable eset&, and at this dill
tance of time defcrve no remembrance *. At latl an end was

' Thocull this wa.r vwas liftigliiilidecd by no important or dccifivc atciion, it

\va:i, Ilo.- c xc r el, e.xtrmcly ruiiious o

illdijviclu ;ils. 'Thlcre fill reCili t\.o s.i;

,:11 pr:apls, wh'icil gi\ use i',oli i.li of

t ile iirlir stbi.s, to I.ivhiL t1 e11 nmolt I'ftil:

cottnltis5 in thl. kiligI j:n W'le Xcp| i)); I, by thle lilltlcil auld dileltqilivc ilncurinni s
of tilhe I. lr.c:' :;. '1' I'l lt il is to Ib- the! relport nmaeic to Ilctii yb by l1it l'
lt lil

\wardens ol ti marchl s, , ey,.l ocoltlainlls

Itheir-' *cpliLs Firoil ti.:

2ti of jtly, to the i; ih of 'Nov ember. T'Ile accillL it ;i\<'s iK' o !ifl'reii ii:-
roa.Is, .r 'oI:AV. , a:; the)-y re ca.lli- , iS; very nlinlitec; ;uIiil in clticlii tinl, the
1slin total of mi!:fbclel lis'y (li i thlius comliiltc :
'ro\\-,;S, toi ',s', (t'lc.;, JI;ll'n.'l; !;, la.'ir fllc-cl iarciles, l>,lh'l Ihtii;.'s

c:ill tlo\ ,l olr )Irti , -

-. 192

Scots tlaim, - - - . - 1

4

Aol:, i. C. blaicIk cattle, t.lkell, - - -,%q
.a. \ '
, il'cl's;:, - .....- - - - ,'.,,,

ii i " l ;1, ,

.

-
jiuigl s ,il, i.- -: -o

ii \; \:. lat i:l 1,;' , 1,

,ut to this languishing and inaclive war, by a peace, in which Bnoo II.
j ngland, France, and Scotland were comprehended. I-lenry la-

Julne i146.

boured to exclude the Scots from the benefit of this treaty, and
to refcrve them for that vengcance, rwhich his attention to the
affairs of the continent had hitherto dclayed. But although a
peace with England was of the laLl confe(lquence to Francis I.
whom the Emperor was preparing to attack with all his forces,
he was too generous to alibndon allies, lvho had eIrved him with
fidelity, and chose rather to purchale Henry's friendlfllip with dil-
advantage to himcife, than to leave them cxpofcd to dlangel. By
yielding some things to the interell, and more to the vanity of
that haughty Prince; by fubmiilion, flatterv, and addrefl, he, in
the end, prevailed to have the Scots included in the peace agreed
11llO11.

The conflernati)n occasioned by an event, which happened a Thcmurdr

flort timen before the conclusion of tils peace, rendered it more
acceptable to the whole nation. Cardinal Beatoun had not ufced
his power with moderation, equal to the prudence by which he
attained it. Notwithltanding his great abilities, he had too
many of the pafionls and prejudices of an angry leader of a sac..
tion, to govern a divided people with temper. His refentinent
against one party of the nobility, his insolence towards the rIeft,
his severity to the Reformers, and, abovc all, the barlbarous and
illegal execution of the famous George \Viilhart, a man of ho-
nourable birth, and of primitive iln6tity, wore out the patience
of a fierce age; and nothing ibuit a bol(d lhand was wanting to gra-
tify the public witih by his dcfi ration. Private revenge, inflilm-
cd and linEtified by a false zeal for religion, quickly lipplicd this
want. Norman Lefly, the ekiell (ln of the Earl of Rothes, had

Tile other contlini:; all accoillu t of. :, ill1iolid bv the i":'Ill of I b:1rl Ifrl, bIcltw Le

lli 8hll an1j 231! o l'S-p, nii!r, , ].I d

i; i it, I .'l';ivu is Ill11'' g't-'l'1', but it a;p-

p 'i:11s tli:l li ]i: ,,d biinit, '.;.-'l, ;itit[ i Ilr'l ilI l

in lhc l illiLit' o1' iel'Wi.BIk ;iil(d

its.X)III'r;gh' olnly,

iMInlllcriis anlitl I'ri:Ir-houlbs, - - - - 7

C'(i.s, ti\owers, :Htd Iild , - - - -

.1

),:uh'ilc't [OVlt,, - - j. -

A!i f l;' w\er'o c~li. h i *)1' iI,,, It 11*Y':I:'i, 2. Ai I!u S.-l i xvc i, li i .

wlli I, lll ini irh l la.''i of

llc l iir

'. 1.i il.l .

,l'. i }:ll '

: ;

l tl l lcil itl, i

, I.\I l iS \ g'll .

i. did

Ii i, rl;d th:,,t tikc

i,:ilr

'x .1

! re1
o dl.; x i e hl'll, lh:1 ll L,; ii' :::x'. s o!t!ic l' ii !i li.

I ij -

Bn^K IT. been treated by the Cardinal with injuflice and contempt. It

was not the temperof the man, or.the spirit of the times, quietly
to digest an affront. And as the profefion of his adversary
fcreccned him from the cffc&ts of what is called an honourable re-
fcntment, lie resolved to take that satisfaction, which he could
not demlland. This resolution deserves as much censure, as the
singular courage and condulc with which he put it in .execution
excite wonder. The Cardinal, at that time, resided in the caflle
of Saint Andrew's, which lie had fortified at great expence, and
in the opinion of the age had rendered it impregnable. His re-
tinue was numerous, the town at his devotion, and the neigh-
bouring country full of his dependcnts. In this situation, ix-
tccn persons undertook to fliuprife his cafllc, and to, affafinate
liinflf; and their success VIas eqpual to tlhe Loldncfs of the at-
i\Tly 29, tempt. Early in the morning they fcized on the gate of the

caile, which was set open to the workmen who were employed"
in finiiliing the fortifications ; and having placed sentries at the
door of the Cardinal's apartment, they awakened his numerous
domeflics one by one, and turning them out of the catle, they
without aoife, or tumult, or violence to any other person, deli-
vered tlleir country, though by a moll unjuilifiable affion, from
an ambitious man, whose pride was insupportable to the nobles,
as his cruelty and cunni;g w.ere the great checks to the Refor-
mation.

The Recetet His death was fatal to the catholic religion, and to the French
attm!Pt;i interest in Scotland. The fame zeal for both continued among a
tilhe nlulrcr- great party in the nation, but when deprived of the genius and
ers' authority of so lkilful a leader, was of finall consequence. No-

thing can equal the con!l.rnation which a blow so unlexpected
occaiolled among his aidlicre.nts ; while the Regcnt fccretly en-
joved an event, which rid him of a rival, who hiad not only e-
cliipljd his greatness, but alimolt extinguilied his power. De-
cency, however, the honour of tihe church, the importunity of
the Quecn Dlowager, andl lher faiflion, his engagements wAith
France, and :bo;c ;1ll tlhef-, tlc dclc-ire of recoveringl his eldelc
fun, vwhom tle Cardinal 11;:; (dctliincd for lbme time at St. An-
drew's in pledge of his liclhlilv, anid whlo, together with the
canile, hdil fallen into thI l:

i(le s of l1thc onllirators, indiuced hiii
to i:,h. arins iln order to rcvcil:'e t1hc d'atll of a man lie hlated.

Ife t'lllc.::tcndcll \cn o;lcc

, Ibilt :ws ulIIable to execute it. One

palrt. (Js iliii:ay liienc, tlhe art of :lttacl'ing foltifiCd places, wa;i
thelln iiuninovn in Scot!:lial. 'I':L vc:lpons, tihe dircipline, and

ilnpctuofity of the Scots, rendered their armies as unfit for sieges, BOOK II.
as they were aitive in the field. An hundred and fifty men,
which was the greatest number the conspirators ever assemblcd,
refilled all the efforts of the Regent for five months *, in a place,
which a single battalion, with a few battering cannon, would
now reduce in as many days. This tedious liege was concluded
by a truce. The Regent undertook to procure for the confpira-
tors an absolution from the Pope, and a pardon in Parliament;
and upon obtaining these, they engaged to surrender the caftlc,
and to set his son at liberty.

It is probable, that neither of them were sincere in this treaty.

On both fides, thcw fought only to amufc, and to gain time.
The Regent had applied to France for affilfance, and cxpccEed
soon to lhave the consiirators at mercy. On the other hand, if
Leily and his aflociates were not at firlt incited to nurder the
Cardinal by I-enry, they were, in the sequel, powerfully sup-
ported by him. Notwithflanding the filcnce of cotemporary his-
torians, there arc violent presumptions of the former ; of the
latter there is undoubted certainty -f. During the licge, the
conspirators had received from England supplies both of money
and provisions ; and as Henry was preparing to renew his propo-
litions concerning the marriage and tile union he had projected,
and to fccond his negociations with a numerous army, they hop-
ed, by concurring with him, to be in a situation, in which they
would no longer need a pardon, but might claim a reward.

The death of Henry blafled all tbcle hopes. It happened in

the beginning of next year, after a reign of greater fplcndor than J:alniy 2s,
true glory; bustling, though not active ; opprefnive in domcltic 17
government, and in foreign'politics wild and irregular. But the
vices of this Prince were more beneficial to mankind, than the
virtues of others. His rapacioluflncl, his profuflion, and even his
tyranny, by dcprefling the ancient nobility, and by adding Inew
property and power to the Commons, laid the foundations of the
Britifi liberty. -lis other paflions contributed no ]cls towards
the downfe l of Popery, and the ellablilllncnt of rcliglious freedom
in the nation. His refclntlment led him to abolifll the power, and
his covetoufncfs; to fcize the wcalth of the church ; and by with-
drawing tihcf r fipports, ln;ide it caly, in the following reign, to
overturn the whole fiij ic of luperllition.

Francis I. did not loin,,' irvive :a Prince, who had been alter-
natily his rival ;ntd Ilis fliiend ; but hi;s Itc'ccibr Henry 11. was

q 'llil. Ertg. *,.t -, .. '| KliCil, 60.

BoOK IT. not neglciEful of the French intcrcft in Scotland. He sent a

considerable body of men, under the command of Leon Strozzi,
rive 'rom to the Regent's fiftlancc. ly their long experience in the Ita-

lian and German wars, the Frcnch had become as dextrous in
the conduct of sieges, as the Scots were ignorant; and as the
boldness and despair of the conspirators could not defend them

Force the againll their superior art, they surrendered to Strozzi, after a
calffle ofSt .
Andrew'sto flort refitance, who engaged, in the name of the King his mal-
surrender. tcr, for the security of their lives; and as his prisoners transport-

ed them in':o France. 'J'he catle itself, the monument of Jca-
touln's power and vanity, was demolished, in obediencet o the ca-
non law, which, with admirabl.e policy, denounces its anathemas
even againfl the houfcs iln which the iacred blood of a Cardinal
happens to he flied, and ordains them to be laid in ruins*.

The archbilliopric of St. Andrew's was beflowed by the Re-

gent upon his natural brother, John I-Hamilton Abbot of Paisley.

-'cvr iachll T'lc delay of a few wccls would have saved the conspirators.
vwhh Elng- Those ministers of Henry VIII. who had the chief direcion of

a-}tirs during the minority of his son IEdward VI. conduted
themnfelves, with regard to Scotland, by the maxims of their late
mailer, and resolved to frighten tie Scots into a treaty, which
they had not abilities or addrcfs to bring about by any other
Inethod.

But before we proceed to rclate the events which their inva-

lion of Scotland occalionecd, wle fall flop to take notice of a cir-
cuminfance unoblferved by cotcllpiorary hillorians, but extremely re-
I?'nrkable for the dlifcovery it nmakes of the sentiments and spirit,
whvlich then prevailcd among the Scots. 'The confrirators agilnit
Cardinal Beatoun found the Regent's cldel foil in the caflll of St.
-Anlldrew'ss; and as they needed the proteclion of the Englinh, it was
to be scared that they might endeavour to ptrrchafe it, by deliverinng
to them this iinportanit prize. Tlhe prcfumptive heir to the Crown,
il the hanllls of the avowed enemies of the kilnglidom, was a dread-
I'Li proliec. And, iin order to avoid it, tlie Pa)rlialmenlt fell upon
a very extral:mrdin:l y expciicnt. J') an ac11 made on ptul-pofL, they
(.\cllded lte Rc

1 en(t's elidel Ibn fromi all right of lhcccflion,

" public or p11ri;:tc, li) long as lie Iliould be (Icl;tlincd a priOner,
" :!anl I'lbfitutcdl ill his place, his otlict' brothers, according to tliir
*' f.liiority, and ill faillre of ilhem, thlui b vwho w\ere l:t heirs to
"t ill l egnt --.'' SLIccciiOnI by hlCerilta.lry ri-lgt is all idea so ol-

' r.uln. Ililt. Rcl . .,,.8.

vious and so popular, that a nation fcldom ventures to make a ?"co: L.
Ibreach in it, but in cafes of extreme ncccflity. Suchi a neccfity '
did the Parliament discover in the prclent lituation. IIatrcd to
England, founded on the memory of/ pal hIollilitics, and heighten-
.cd by the finart of recent injuries, was the nation:al pfllion. This
dictated that uncommon latutc, ly which the order of lineal fuc-
cefli)n was so remarkably )rokeln. T'Ile modernl theories, which
reprefcnt this rigiht as divine and inn!liLn:!-! e, and that ought not
to be violated upon any confider'tioon srhatb

evcr, fen to have
becn then altogether unkniown.

In the beginiing of September, the Eln:l of Irartford, now Scl;,lnl ;l-

Dulke of Soineifet, and Protector of Ing'landl, cntered Scotland !l .i',,n;,i;
ntthei ead of eighteen thoul;nld mnen ; a;nd, at tI),: lIie tiln, a ;le-t
of sixty flips appeared on the coali, to fecondl llis iorces by l]:nd.
Tle Scots had for some time obltrved tllis; Ilorm i' lie ring!; anll wverc
prepared for it. 'Their army nwas aimol! (dU)ble that of the c nc-
my, and polled to the greatfil n lv;lntiag on a; rifillg groundl, al)ove
Muffelburgh, not far fromi the ,banks of the river El!ke. lot,
these circumilanccs alarmed the )olke o; Somcrf.t, wlio flw 1I
danger, and would wilingly lhaIve extricatil( liinlli'I o ft of it, Ly
a new overture of peace on condition: c.:trnecly rca.ina:lle. ult:
this moderation was imputed to .;ar ; and his prolpoi,;. rij q ed
with that scorn, whliicl the coliildellce of lucce!s inljircs. And
had the conduct of the Regent, vwho comrnnnded tlh Scots army,
been in aly degree equal to his. confidene, the dlelrutioun of tIhe
Englilh muff have been inevitalle. 'Iey were in a lituatioln,
preci!ely similar to that of their countrymen under Oii:'er Cl .m-
ivwell, ill tie following ccntury. 'The ScO;s 1ail clhon il their glrou;
so well, thlat it was i oiolibLlc to foice th!cin to g i\ c l);ail . a fcew
fldiys hadl cxI: ffled the foriage and iirovi(ion of : narrow coit:'y;
the llect could only filrnifld

a fc;lty ::nd prcc:rious fub!;llence; a

retreit thereoie was nlcllhay; )lit in

ilriece, and perlhaps ruin,
vcre the cunfcq(Lenccs (cf retrea:ting.

C)n Iboti thlei occationis, the altion:dl

, lt and impetiiofity of

tlie Scots 1iiveti tile ]nli']illI, 1and 1)r'Cip.itlted ltir OVIw coLuntry
into th1e utmolloi l: in:'. 'The tdiiliiplici 'tJii(;i'ae of the Irn'irlte 1l1!.
mc:l I:c::i,;n imnl1)iticii at the (if;ht of :1i cllcniy. 'lie (.jn l

;,is afrid of lIltilil1'y, u1t tliat tile l'l<;]ifl tivoiltld c.ilapc 'o llihn1il

by flight ; ilndl leavini l is

;i :tlll:;t;'' s fitilatioln, hle attackcd tlie

IDuke ot Soelicrl t nea:ll Pinkey, w\ith no betler luccels tlhan li is :';':'

ralllnfls dclervcdi. 'I'he I'irteclor lia:d l 'v.lf utp hlis tl.oop)s oil :a
.iela.!e canmililniclf , and hl:(d ino'w thie aI dv;i :;l : ,of' ',roiiund oni his

BoolJ I. fide. The Scottilh army confi'ed almofr entirely of infantry, whofd

chief weapon was a long spear, and for that reabfn their files were
very deep, and their ranks close. They advanced towards the
enemyin threegreat bodies, and as they passed the river, were con2
fiderably exposed to the fire of the English fleet, which lay in the
bay of Muitc!brgh, and had drawn near the fllore. The Engliflh
cavalry, flulhed with an advantage which they had gained in a ikir-
milh some days before, began the attack with more impetuosity,
than good conldul. A body so firm atnd compat as the Scots,
cafily refitted the impression of cavalry, broke them, and drove
tlhem off the field. The Enghlih infantry, however, advanced,
and the Scots were at once expoled to a ilight of arrows, to a fire
ia i1ank from four hundred foreign Fusiliers who served the enemy,
and to their cannon which were planted behind the infantry, on
the Ihighelt part of the eminence. The depth and closeness of their
order made it impoflible for the Scots to tfand long in this situ-
ation. The Earl of Angus, who commanded the vanguard, en-
deavoured to change his ground, and to retire towards the main
body. But his friends nnh:ppily miscook this motion for a flight,
and fell into confusion. At that very inflant, the broken cavalry
laving rallied, returned to the charge; the foot pursued the ad-
vantage they had gained ; the profpea of victory redoubled the
nrdor of both ; and, in a moment, the rout of the Scottish army
became universal, and irretrievable. The encounter in the field
swas not long, or bloody; but, in the pursuit, the IEnglifh discover-
ed all the rage and fierceness, which national antipathy, kindled
by long emulation, and inflamed by reciprocal injuries, is apt to
inspire. The pursuit was continued for five hours, and to a great
dillance. All the three roads, by awhich the Scots fled, were strew-
ed with spears and swords, and targets, and covered with the bodies
ofthe slain. Above ten thousand men fell on this day, one of the mofl
fatal Scotland had ever seen. A few were taken prisoners, and
among these fine persons of diflincion. And the Protector had
it now in his power to become mafler of a kingdom, out of whiclh,
not many hours before, he was almolt obliged to retire with in-
famy ''.

' The foilowing pafhge in a curious and tare joun.lal or tie Protlcelo's expedi..

tion into Scotlaild, \vrittetn by \V. P'atten, sho wans jt,iled il comilliiiioi w\iti
Cecil, as Jtlud( e i rnlrilnl ofthe armyi , :all p.rilted iln 1 ,l8, dIcll-rc:i ollr noLicc:
as it givt' a. uli l ila;le of lle militalry difiiplille ol the Scots at tliatt time. " int
vlula: after I Iranltel, tijeci ll touclillg th ei order, lheil:ilr a rln. , annd theilr Ii;n-
nelr ;ls \wl. of( go,)i to ollnitl, as; of; alniding to derfend, 1 lavc tllholght nccTllhry
lhre to lttil. Iiackbullcrs have they few or none, an u appoint thcir ligllt nolt

But this vicory,. however great, was of no real utility; for want BOOK II.

of kill, or of leisure to improve it. Every new injury rendered Their vic-
the Scots more averse from an union with England; and the Pro- toryoflittle

beIllefit to

tedor neleced the only measure, whicll would have made it ne- tllelEngliil.
ceffary for them to have given their consent to it. He anmufed
himself in wafting the open country, and in taking or building
petty castles; whereas by fortifying a few places which were ac-
ceflible by sea, he would have laid the kingdom open to the Eng-
lifli, and, in a /hort time, the Scots must either have accepted of
his terms, or have submitted to his power. By such an improve-
ment of it, his victory at Dunbar gave Cromwell the command of
Scotland. The battle of Pinkey had no other cffea but to preci-
pitate the Scots into new engagements with France. The situ-
ation of the Englifl court may, indeed, be pleaded in excuse for
the Duke of Somerset's condu&. That cabal of his enemies,
which occasioned his tragical end, was already formed; and while
he triumphed in Scotland, they secretly undermined his power and
credit at home. Self-prefervation, therefore, obliged him to pre-
ser his safety before his fame, and to return without reaping the
fruits of his victory. At this time, however, the cloud blew over;
the conspiracy by which he fell was not yet ripe for execution;
and his presence suspended, for some time, its effec. The fu-
preme power flill remained in his hands, and he employed it to re-

commonly always a-foot. They come to the field well furnifled all with jack
and skull, dagger and buckler, and swords all broad and thin, of exceeding good
temper, and universally so made to slice, that as I nleverfayw none so good, lb think
I it hard to devise the better. Hereto every man his pike, and a great kercher
wrapped twice or thrice about his neck, not for cold, but for cultting. In their
array towards joining with the enemy, they cling and thruit lb near in the fore
rank, floulder and ihoulder together with their pikes in both their hands Qlraight
afore themi, and their followers in that order so hard at their backs, laying their
jiikes over their foregoers floulders, that, if they do aflliil tidiFcovcred, no force
can well withltand them. Standing at defence they thrust flouldcrs likewilf so
nigh together, the fore ranks well nigh to kneeling, itoop low before, their fel-
lows behind holding their pikes with both hands, and therewith in their left their
bucklers, the one end of the pike against their right foot, and the other againlll
the enemy breaft-hligb; their followers crolfing their pike points with them for-
ward; and thlus each with other so nigh as space and place will filnr, through
the whole ward, so thick, that as ealily flall a bare fiiger pierce through the
1kin of an angry hedge hog, as any encounter the fiont of their pikes." Other
curious particulars are found in this journ'al, frion which Sir Jolllln -lyward has
borro.ved his accolunt of this expedition.

Life of Edward VI. 279, &c.

The lenglth of the Scots pike or fpcar was ippointed by ACt. .4, P. 1.17 1. to
bc lix ells; i. , ceighteen feet lix inclles.

1(

Boo3c Ir.
i_ . 'cover the opportunity, which he had loft. A body of troops,' by
April, 1548. his command, seized and fortified H-addingtoun, a place, which,

on account of its distance from the sea, and from any English gar-
rifon, could not be defended without great expence and danger.

Scos into a liMeanwhile the French gained more by the defeat of their al-
clfertullioll lies, than the Englilll did by their viAory. After the death of
Il'imcc. Cardinal Beatoun, Mary of Guise, the Queen Dowager, took a

considerable mlare in the direcion of affairs. She was warmly at-
tached by blood, and by inclination, to the French intcreft; and,
in order to promote it, improved with great dexterity every event
which occurred. The spirit and strength of the Scots were broken
at Pinkey ; and in an aflembly of nobles which met at Stirling to
consult upon the situation of the kingdom, all eyes were turned
towards France, and no profpeft of safety appeared but in afflif-
ance from thence. But Henry II. being then at peace with Eng-
land, the Queen represented that they could not expea him to
take part in their quarrel, but upon views of personal advantage;
and that without extraordinary concessions in his favour, no affil-
ance in proportion to their present exigencies could be obtained.
The prejudices of the nation powerfully seconded these reprefenta-
tions of the Queen. What often happens to individuals took place
among the nobles in this convention; they were swayed entirely
by their pafions, and in order to gratify them, they deserted thcir
former principles, and disregardcd their true interfct. In the vio-
lence of reientment, they forgot that zeal for the independency of
Scotland, which had prompted them to rejec the propositions of

Ald to oflr Ilcnry VIII. and by offering voluntarily, their young Cueen ill
their Queen
in imn;iri:lge marriage to the Dauphin eldest son of Henry II. and which was
to Dliaj 1- llill more, by proposing to fend her immediately into France to be

educated at his court, they granted, out of a thirlt of vengeance.
what formerly they would not yield upon any consideration of their
own safety. To gain at once tIch a kingdom as Scotland, was a
matter of no finall confcquence to France. HIenry, without he-
litation, accepted the offers of the Scottifli ambafiadors, and pre-
pared for the vigorous defence of his new iacqtiltion. Six thou-
land veteran fuidiers, under the coniinand of i\,ion fieur IDefl', as
fillec by some of the belt ollicers, who were forlled in the lonl'
wars of Francis I. arrived at Licth. They lcrvcl two campignlls
in Scotland, with a spirit cqual to thcir formner fame. Ilut their
exploits were not considerable. 'The Scots lbon bLccanc jealouw;
of their dcefigns, anld negletlecd to fippoi t theil witlh liprJ cr vigour;
and the caution of the Englillh, in afl i -i wholly uiLon the dtclfn-

five, prevented them from attempting any cnterprife of confe- ronir II.
quence; and obliged them to exhault their flrength, in tedious
sieges, undertaken under many disadvantages. Their efforts, how-
ever, were not without some benefit to the Scots, by compelling
the English to evacuate Haddingtoun, and to furrcndcr several
finall forts, which they poflefled in differcnt parts of the kingdom.

But the consequences of these operations of his troops were still

of greater importance to the French King. The divcrfion which
they occasioned enabled him to wrcet Boulogne out of the hands
of the Englifl; and the inlluence of his army in Scotland obtain-
ed the concurrence of Parliament with the overtures made to him,
by the aifembly of nobles at Stirling, concerning the Q en's mar-
riage with the Dauphin, and her education at the court of France.
In vain did a few patriots remonstrate against such extravagant
conceflions, by which Scotland was reduced to be a province of The treaiY-
Irance ; and Henry, from an ally, raised to be master of the king- forit hl., :
dom ; by which, the friendllliip of France became more fatal than cluilel.
the enmity of England; and every thing was fondly given up to
the one, that had been bravely defended againfl the other. A
point of so much confcqtuence was haflily decided, in a Parliament, J.ul ',
afiembled in the camp before Haddingtoun ; the intrigues of the 15'8-
Q:een Dowager, the zeal of the clergy; and refcntment against
England had prepared a great party in the nation for such a flep;
the French General and Ambahflidor, by their liberality and pro-
miscs, gained over many more. The Regent himself was weak
enough to itoop to the offer of a pcnfion from France, togethcr
with the title of Duke of Chatelherault in that kingdom. A con-
fidcrable majority declared for the treaty, and the intcreft of a
faction was preferred before the honour of the nation.

Having hurried the Scots into this rafli and fatal rcfolution, thle tll. (.,,nt
source of many calamities to thecmfelves, and to their Sovereign, t t be .(hi-

tc:tcd il

the French allowed them no time for rellcflion or repentance. I'janic.
The fleet, which had brought over their forces, was flill in Scot-
land, and without delay, convoyed the O(ccn into France. Mary
was thea fix years old, and by her education in that court, tile
politest, but moll corrupted in iEurope, nlc acquired every accom-
pliiinient that could add lo her ch:rms as a woman, and contraClt-
ed many of thole prejudices, wlhich occasioned her misfortunes as
a QICc11.

Froinn the time tlha:t Arary was put into their hands, it was the

inttrcel of the French to fll'err the war in Scotland to langllili.
'I'li recovering of the Bloulonnois was the olbjccl I-lcnry had nlol'

l; ij

BooK II. at heart; and a flight diversion in Britain was fufficicnt to divide
- the attention and firength of the Engliflh, whose domeltic faaions

deprived both their arms and councils of their accustomed vigour.
The government of England had undergone a great revolution.
The Duke of Somerset's power was acquired with too much vio-
lence, and exercised with too little moderation, to be of long con-
tinuance. Mlany good qualities, added to the great love of his coun-
try, could not attone for his ambition in usurping the sole direc-
tion of affairs. Almon the whole nobles combined againit him; and
the Earl of Warwick, no less ambitious, but more artful, conduc-
ted his measures with so much dexterity, as to raise himself upon
the ruins of his rival. WYithout the invidious name of Protector,
he succeeded to all the power and influence, of which Somerset
was deprived, and he quickly found peace to be necessary for the
eftabliflment of his new authority, and the execution of the vall
designs he had conceived.

Peace con- Henry was no firanger to Warwick's situation, and improved
eluded.

ded. his knowledge of it, to good purpose, in conducting the nogocia-

tions for a general peace. He prescribed what terms he pleated to
the English Minilter, who scrupled at nothing, however advanta-
March 24, geous to that Monarch and his allies. England contented to re-

tore Boulogne and its dependencies to France, and gave up all
pretensions to a treaty of marriage with the Queen of Scots, or to
the conquert of her country. A few small forts, of which the
English troops had hitherto kept poffeflion, were razed ; and peace
between the two kingdoms was eftablified on its ancient foun-
dation.

Both the British nations loft power, as well asreputation, by

this unhappy quarrel. It was on both fides a war of emulation and
rcfentment, rather than of interest; and was carried on, under the
influence of national animositics, which were blind to all advan-
tages. The French, who entered into it with greater coolness,
conduced it with more lkill; and by dexterously availing them-
selves of every circumstance which occurred, recovered posses-
sion of an important territory which they had loll, and added to
their monarchy a new kingdom. The ambition of the EEnglifi
MVinifler betrayed to them the former; the inconsiderate rage
of the Scots againfl their ancient enemies bellowed on them the
latter; their own address and good policy merited both.

The Scots Immediately after the conclusion of the peace, the French forces
jealous of left Scotland, as much to their own fatisfadion, as to that of the
the Frenlc . nation, The Scots ioon found, that the calling to their aflit-

ance a people more powerful than themselves, was a dangerous BooK II.'
expedient. They beheld, with the utmost impatience, those who '
had come over to profl the kn the gdom taking upon them to com-
mand in it; and on many occasions they repented the rash invita-
tion they had given. The peculiar genius of the French nation
heightened this disgust, and prepared the Scots to throw off the
yoke, before they had well begun to feel it. The French were,
in that age, what they are in the present, one of the most polinled
nations in Europe. But it is to be observed, in all their expedi-
tions into foreign countries, whether towards the south or north,
that their manners have been remarkably incompatible with the
manners of every other people. Barbarians are tenacious of their
own customs, because they want knowledge and taftc to discover
the reasonableness and propriety of cufloms which differ from
them. Nations, which hold the first rank in politeness, are fre-
quently no less tenacious out of pride. The Greeks were so
in the ancient world; and the French are the fame in the
modern. Full of themselves, and accufiomed, by the imitation
of their neighbours, to confider their own modes as the flandards
of elegance, they scorn to disguise, or to lay aside the diltinguifl-
ing manners of their own nation, or to make any allowance for
what may differ from them among others. For this reason, the
behaviour of their armies has, on every occasion, been infupport-
able to firangers, and has always exposed them to hatred, and
often to deftrucsion. In that age, they over-ran Italy four feve-
ral times, by their valour, and loft it, as often, by their insolence.
The Scots, naturally an irascible and high-fpiritcd people, and
who, of all nations, can least bear the most diflant insinuation of
contempt, were not of a temper to admit all the pretcnfions of
such assuming guests. The symptoms of alienation were soon vi-
fible; they seconded the French in their military operations with
the utmost coldness, and this secret disgust grew insensibly to a
degree of indignation that could hardly be reflrained; and on oc-
cafion of a very flight accident, broke out with fatal violence. A
private French foldicr had an idle quarrel with a citizen of Edin-
burgh: both nations took arms, with equal rage, in defence of
their countrymen. lThe Provof of Edinburgh, his obn, and fe-
vcral citizens of diflincLion were killed in the fray; and the French
were obliged to avoid the fury of the inabitants, by retiring out
of the city. Notwithfianding the ancient alliance of France and
Scotland, and tle long intercourfc of good offices between the
two nations, an avcrlion to the French took its rife, at this time,

BooTK TI. among the Scots; tLc effects wlhereof were deeply felt, and opc-
- - rated powerfully through the fubfcquent period.
rrcFrc? rr lFrom the deatl of Cardinal ]Beatoun, nothing has been said of
the Rheflr-
ation R - the llate of religion. rWhile the war with England continued,

the clergy had no leiiureto molest the Protestants; and they were
not yet considerable enough to expect any thing more than con-
nivance and impunity. The new doctrines were itill in their in-
fancy; but, during this fliort interval of tranquillity, they acquir-
ed tr-ength, and advanced, by large and firm flcps, towards a full
eftabliahment in the kingdom. The first preachers againIt Popery
in Scotland, of whom several had appeared during the reign of
James V. were more eminent for zeal and piety, than for learn-
ing. Their acquaintance with the principles of Reformation
was rartial, and at second hand; forne of them had been educated
in England; all of them had borroved their notions from the
books publifled there; and, in the first dawn of the new light,
tlhey did not venture many tceps before their leaders. But in a
Ihort time, the doctrines and writings of the foreign Reformers
became generally known; the inquisitive genius of tle age pressed
forward in quell of truth ; the discovery of one error opened the
way to others; the downfal of one inpollure drew many after it;
the whole fabric, which ignorance and fuperltition had ereced
in times of darkners, began to tetter; and nothing was wanting
to complete its ruin, but a daring and active leader to diret the
ittack. Such was the famous John Knox, who, with better
qualifications of learning, and more extensive views thani any of
his prcleceffors in Scotland, pofie'cd a natural intrepidity of mind,
wSihich let him above fear. lie began his public miniii-y at St
Andrew's in the year 1547, witl tliat fucccls, which always ac-
companies a bold and popular cloquence. Inleand of amusing
lilnili'lf with lopping the branches, he firuck directly at the root
of Popery, and attacked both the ldodrine and dilfipline of the
cltablihced church, with a vehemence pecculiar to hinifelf, but ad-

inirably 'uitcd to the tmller and wililcs of the age.
An adverlfry to fornmifable as Kniox, would not have ea;!ly

cfcapcd the rage of the clergy, xwho ubflrved the tendency and
progress of his opinions, with the utmost concern. ]Hut, at firfl-,
lie relired for fllfcty into the callle of St Andrlew's, and while the
conspirators kept 1)oifl'tlion of it, preached( publicly under their
prOteCion. ''he great IRevolutionl in England, which folloVwd
p11)0n the death of lienry V11I. contli butcd no cl;e thll; tlie zeal
0,' Knox, toward\ s cllmolilhiing thlic 'pilii clhurch in Scotland.

.Hlenry liad loosened the chains, and lightened the yoke of Popc- BooKc II.
ry. The minilters of his Ion Edward VI. calt them off altogether,
and efiablinhecl the Protellaut religion upon alinoll the fime footing,
whereon it now Hiands in that lkingdom. The influencc of this ex-
ample reached Scotland, and the happy cffects of ecclcfiailieal li-
berty, in the one nation, iunrircd the other with an equal deiire of
recovering it. The Reformers had1, hitherto, Leen obliged to con-
duc thcnilvcs with th;: utmllol caution, and ficldom ventured to
preachl, but in private ihoLi1s, and at a difiance from court; they
gained credit, as happens oll the iirlt publication of every new re-
ligion, chielly among pIcrTons in ite lower and mniddil rank of
life. But fcveral noblenicu of greatelc diliniioin, having, a-
bout tills tinie, openly ef*loucfd their piciples, tlicy wccre no
longer under the neceflity of acinlg wvith the 1inne reierve; and
with more security Iad encouragement, they hlad liklwi; greatcr
success. The means of; ecquiring a:nd spreading knowledge be-
came more common, and the J'pirit of innovvation, peculiar to ihiit
period, grew every day bolder and more univerlhl.

H-Iappily for the Reformation, this firiit vwas 1ill undc! r fam

rectraint. It hlad not yet attained fiirmnelL and igour, liai;icicnt ta
overturn a Iyl'em, foundedl on the deepelt policy, and lfupouitd
l)y the mnoll formidable powver. Under the present circtiuillsncce.;,
any attempt towards ac'ion niult have been fatal to the Prote -
t:rnt dotrines; ad.it is no 1inall proof of tlCe authority, as well as
penetration of the heads of tile party, tlat tihy were able to re-
lrailn the zeal of a iicry and impetuous people, till that critical and
imature jLilnLl.re, when every lHep they took was decilive and liec-
cefsfil.

[AIeanwhile, tlheir cause received reinforcement fromn two dil-

ferent q:LrtCrs, whence tllhey never could have expected it. 1he
nnilbition of the liouif of ;Guise, and til bigotry of M\;ary oI Eng-
land l:llened thlle f l)verlion of thlle Pap;l throne in Scotlli.l ; anti
by a1 finguilar dliliolition of Providence, tile pcerlons who oppoli(l
thle Reformation il every olther pa:.r of i'L.urope wiC \\ll t liC rceCL
zeal, uxerc made iilli rucnts for advancing it in t}:at lsididium.

MIary of (Gttifi pofll'lsed theliIsne bold and ililiring I'il it, Xlie-li 'I!,. 1, ,,

dilliunguillCed her family. lint in her, it was lI;iLctcd by the ij- L3;,i', 't,,
111.le learailcr, and aceoIpaiiiedl wigith eIrItilt teinper and ad- |i .r 1i,.

,s

ldrC'l. 1lcr brotlCers, in order to attain lle lIli,;hl ,ljccls at Vwhich i "*:"
rtley aimelt, ventured upon LIlch darilng lnicalires, l s iuited thcir
greC;t coura:f'te. lcer deiig'niS Lponl the ialprei'e pow er were CoIl-
CC.aled \w. Vi' t utioll c:tre, and advanced by atilrcsls and rlli:!c-

BooI TI. among the Scots; the effccts whereof were deeply felt, and occ-

rated powerfully through the fubfcquent period.

rrc rcs; o I From the death of Cardinal Beatoun, nothing has been said of
the R1ior the Rate of religion. UWhile the war with England continued,

the clergy had no leifureto moleit the Protestants; and they were
not yet considerable enough to expet any thing more than con-
nivance and impunity. The new doctrines were fiill in their in-
fancy; but, during this short interval of tranquillity, they acquir-
ed firengtll, and advanced, by large and firm steps, towards a full
eflablifhment in the kingdom. The first preachers against Popery
in Scotland, of whom several had appeared during the reign of
James V. were more eminent for zeal and piety, than for learn-
ing. Their acquaintance with the principles of Reformation
was partial, and at fccond hand; some of them had been educated
in England; all of them had borrowed their notions from the
books publifled there; and, in the firfl dawn of the new light,
they did not venture many Itcps before their leaders. But in a
ihort time, the doEtrines and writings of the foreign Reformers
became generally known; the inquisitive genius of the age pressed
forward in quell of truth ; the discovery of one error opened the
way to others; the downfal of one impollure drew many after it;
the whole fabric, which ignorance and fuperflition had erected
in times of darkness, began to tettcr ; and nothing was wanting
to complete its ruin, but a daring and aliive leader to direc the
attack. Such was the famous John Knox, who, with better
qualifications of learning, and more cxtcnfive views than any of
llis predecefrors in Scotland, pos'esed a natural intrepidity of mind, '
whiich set him above fear. He began his public miniiiry at St
Andrew's in the year 1547, with that fucccls, whichl always ac-
companics a bold and popular eloquence. Inflead of amusing
himifelf with lopping the branches, he firuck direcfly at the root
ol Popery, and attacked both the ldoclrine and difriplile of the
cflablilicd church, with a vehemence peculiar to llini'flf, but ad-
miniably suited to the temper and willies of the age.

An aldverfhry ft fiormid.b1le as Knox, would not have eanfily

cfcnped the rage of the clergy, lwho ubflrved the tendency aind
progrcfs of his opinions, with thec utmost concern. But, at sirs',
lie rctired for falfty into the calle of St Andrew's, and while tli
conrCpirators kept pofl'Tfion of it, prelached publicly under their
proteclion. 'I'lhe great Revolution in England, which followed
ul)onl the death of lHenry VIII. contlib uted no lc'; than the zeal
o: `lKnox, towards dcicmolifliiii the Popifi church in Scotland.

.Henry had loufened the chain:s, and lightened the yoke of Pope- BooK 11.
ry. The minitetrs of his o!n Edward V1. call them off altogether, '
and eltablifhed the Protellant religLion upon aimoli the fame footing,
whereon it now nlands in that kingdom. The influence of this cx-
ample reached Scotland, and the happy ecitds of ccclefiaftical li-
berty, in the one nation, inflAl'd the other with an equal desire of
recovering it. 'Ihe Reformers llad, hitherto, been obliged to con-
dul thlemlelvcs with th;e ut;lmoi caution, and fIldom ventured to
preach, but in private houlfcs, and at a dilance from court; thcy
gained credit, as happens on the firll publication of every new re-
ligion, chiefly almong perl'ons in the lower and middle rank. of
life. But several noblnemen of greatelt diliinlcion, having, a-
OLiot tilis time, openly clleoufcd their prillciples, they were no
longer under the nccefiity of ac'!ing wvith the i:lcme rcfcrve; and
with more security and encouragement, they had likcwvif greater
ficcefs. The nmeans of ;cituiring and spreading- knowledge be-
came more common, and the ifirit of innovation, peculiar to thit
period, grew every day bolder and more univerfll.

Happily for the Reformation, this spirit was fill under Iumei

refraint. It had not yet attaineld firmneS and vigour, Itilicient to
overturn a lyl[cm, founded onl tile deepgit policy, and fulppoitJ.i
by tlhe molt formidable power. Under the prelent circunlla:nccs;,
ally lttClept towards alion lmull have bcen liatal to tile Prolc'.
t:;t duocrines ; and.it is no finall proof of tle authority, as well a;-
penetration of the heads of the party, that they were able to re-
llrain the zeal of a fiery and impetuous people, till that critical andi
mature juicL6ur-e when every Ilep they tool was decilivc and Iic-
cecsfLal.

IMeanwhile, their cause received reinforcement from two dil-

ferent quarters, whence they never could have expelced it. The
ambition of tihe louic of Guise, and the bigotry of MaLry or Lug-
land
1 alleied the l.lbverlioni of the IPapal throne in Scotlailnl ; anil
by a singular diliolition of Providence,C e

tile Iprlton.q illio op)poli

the Rcfrmnation ill every otiher pal-t of lEurope \wviL tllc lierce:L
zcil, \ere made inilulllCntls ;fr advan1'cing it inl t!at lin;;duoimn.

Mary of Guief pollfli'ed the lhlcne bold and alii,

'iii' lfpirit, svlicli 't'h (

'ai

dillingui.ied her famnily. lint ill her, it: was li'tcelene by the 1j- ,ipi,.; t,,
lh.tlc chIrat1er, and acclmpalliet with gircater t:niaper ;nldl adl- t1 i,,! ,i. ,1.'
ch'efl. lIcr brothiers, in order to aitainll tlie lii!;l bjLceis at vwhiich i
they ailned, ventured u11)on llcll darill Illcillilics, as i'lited their
great colra';c. Ilcr delignLs upon tlie lulprll) c po\vcr were con-
ce.lcld \wilt t11h utlo111 C:Lre, anVd bad lIy addrel;j and rcfiulc-

BooK II. ments more natural to her sex. By a dexterous application of
- those talents, lhe had acquired a considerable influence on the

councils of a nation, hitherto unacquainted with the government
of women ; and without the smallest right to any flare in the ad-
ministration of affairs, had engrossed the chief direction of them
into her own hands. But file did not long reft satisfied with the
enjoyment of this precarious power, which the fickleness of the
Regent, or the ambition of those who governed him, might so
easily diflurb ; and began to set on foot new intrigues, with a de-
sign of undermining him, and of opening to herself a way to fuc-
ceed him in that high dignity. Her brothers entered warmly in-
to this scheme, and supported it with all their credit at the court
of France. The French King willingly concurred in a measure,
by which he hoped to bring Scotland entirely under manage-
ment,'and in any future broil with England, to turn its whole
force upon that kingdom.

In order to arrive at the desired elevation, the Queen Dowager

had only one of two ways to chufe ; either violently to wrelt
the power out of the hands of the Regent, or to obtain it by his
content. Under a minority, and among a warlike and facious
people, the former was an uncertain and dangerous experiment.
The latter appeared to be no less impracticable. To persuade a
man voluntarily to abdicate the supreme power; to descend to a
level with those, above whom he was raised ; and to be content
with the second place, where he hath held the firit, may well
pass for a wild and chimerical project. This, however, the
Queen attempted; and the prudence of the attempt was fuffici-
ently juitified by its success.

The Regent's inconstancy and irresolution, together with the

calamities which had befallen the kingdom under his adminifira-
tion, railed the prejudices both of the nobles and of the people
againit him, to a great height; and the Queen secretly fomented
tlefe with much industry. All who wilhed for a change met
with a gracious reception in her court, and their spirit of difaf-
fedion was nouriflied by such hopes and promises, as, in every

Courts the age, impose on the credulity of the faclious. The favourers of
Rtformers. the Reformation being the moll numerous and spreading body of

the Regent's enemies, lhe applied to them, with a particular at-
tention ; and the gentleners of her difpoliitions, and seeming in-
difference to the religious points in difputc, made all her promifcs
O. ISjC. of proteclion and indulgence pass upon them for fincerc. Find-

ing so great a part of the nation willing to fall in with her inmc-

fures, the Queen set out for France, under pretence of visiting BooK Il.
her daughter, and took along with her those noblemen, who pof- -J
sessed the greatelt power and credit among their countrymen.
Softened by the pleasures of an elegant court, flattered by the
civilities of the French King, and the carefles of the house of
Guise, and influenced by the seasonable dilsribution of a few fa-
vours, and the liberal promise of many more, they were brought
to approve of all the (Qecn's pretensions.

While fle advanced by these flow but important steps, the Re-

gent either did not soresec the danger which threatened him, or
negleced to provide againlt it. The firfl discovery of the train
which was laid, came from two of his own confidents, Panter
Bifnop of Ross, and Carnegie of Kinnaird, whom the Queen had
gained over to her interefl, and then employed as the molt pro-
per instruments for obtaining his confcnt. The overture was
made to him in the name of the French King, enforced by pro-
per threatenings in order to work upon his natural timidity, and
sweetened by every promise that could reconcile him to a pro-
pofal so disagreeable. On the one hand, the confirmation of his
French title, together with a considerable pension, the parlia-
mentary acknowledgment of his right of succession to the Crown,
and a public ratification of his conduc during his Regency, were
offered him. On the other hand, the displeasure of the French
King, the power and popularity of the Queen Dowager, the dif-
affestion of the nobles; with the danger of an after-reckoning,
were represented in the itrongeft colours.

It was not poflible to agree to a proposal so extraordinary and

unexpected without tome previous llrugglc ; and had the Arch-
bifllop of St. Andrew's been prefcnt to fortify the irresolute and
passive spirit of the Regent, he would, in all probability, have
rejected it with disdain. Happily for the tQuen, the lagacity
and ambition of that Prelate could, at this time, be no obltruc-
tion to her views. I-ce was lying at the point of death, ar.d in
his absence, the infucnce of the Queen's agents on a flexible
temper counterbalanced fcvcral of the firongeft paflions in the
human mind, and obtained his consent to a voluntary furrcnder
of the supreme power.

After gaining a point of filch dilliculty with so much c:aic, Dec. rTjr

the Qccen returned into Scotland, in full expectation of taking
immediate pofl'flion of her new dignity. But, by this time, the
Arclbifliop of St. Andrew's had recovered of that dillelipcr,
;wlich the ignorance of the Scottifi physicians had pronounced

L

BOOK IT. to be incurable. This he owed to the affiflance of the famous
-' -' Cardan, one of those irregular adventurers in philosophy, of whom

Italy produced so many about this period. A bold genius led
him to some useful discoveries, which merit the elteem of a
more difccrning age ; a wild imagination engaged him in those
chimerical sciences, which drew the admiration of his cotempo-
raries. As a pretender to afirology and magic, he was revered
and consultcd by all Europe; as a proficient in natural philosophy,
lie was but little known. The Archbishop, it is probable, con-
fidered him as a powerful magician, when he applied to him for
relief; but it was his knowledge as a plilosopher, which enabled
him to cure his disease *.

Together with his health, the Archbishop recovered the entire

government of the Regent, and quickly determined him to recal
that dinfonourable promise, which he had been seduced by the
artifices of the Queen to grant. I-However great her surprise and
indignation were, at this fiefhl inflance of his inconflancy, she
was obliged to dissemble, that flie might have leisure to renew
her intrigucs with the Proteflants, whom file favoured and court-
ed more than ever; with the nobles, to whom ile rendered her-
self agreeable by various arts; and with the Regent hirnfelf, in
order to gain whom tle employed every argument. 13ut what-
ever impression her emissaries might have made on the Regent,
it was no easy matter to over-reach or to intimidate the Archbi-
flop. Under his management, the ncgociations were spun out to
a great length, and his brother maintained his flation with that
address and firmness, which its importance so well merited. The
univcrfal defeclion of the nobles, the growing power of the Pro-
teflants, who all adhered to the Queen Dowager, the reiterated
solicitations of the French King, and, above all, the interpofi-
tion of the young Queen, who was now entering the twelfth year
of her age, and claimed a right of nominating whom the pleased

,'rceVailson to be Regent, obliged him, at lait, to rcfign that high offcc,
.lie Regent which ih hlad held many years. lie obtained for himself the
to religil is
office. fame terms of advantage, which had been formerly flilulatecl.
Shec ohlains It was in the Parliament which met on the Joth of April,
tllciegcllcy. 1554, that the Earl of A2rran executed this extraordinary refig-

* Cardlanl hillrmIf was more dlcfions of eing' confilcreil as an Aflrologcr

th an

i 1 } ilulilhr; inl his. bnok 1) .r Nrvxl 'rtl, wc tf(il a crlculatioil of tihe

.Archill.o's nal. ilvty, ifrom \li-lch hi' prtellnds both to have pircliaed hiis (lit-
cal;. :l, amll ha:ve citqcl Ild hi cilre. 11e rIccivcl, frolm lle Ardlliiliolp, a rc-
wardl of eighteel linlldlred crox ns. A grlat fium in that age. De Vit;a li, p. 3:.

lation; and at the fame time, Mary of Guise was raised to that CooK If.
dignity, which had been so long the object of her withes. Thus,
with their own approbation, a woman, and a firanger was advanced
to the supreme authority over a fierce and turbulent people, who,
seldom submitted, without reluclance, to the legal and ancient
government of their native monarchs.

While the Otucen Dowager of Scotland contributed so much R'froln.-

towards the progrcfs of the Reformation, by the protection which tu,., ct
she afforded it, from motives of ambition ; the Englilh O(uecn, m:llkc trat
by her indiscreet zeal, filled the kingdom witli perlons active in IPrl'rl-;
promoting that cause. Mary afeended the throne of Efigland, july6,ir,3.
on the death of her brother Edward, acld soon after married Phi-
lip II. of Spain. To tile persecuting 1pirit of the Romiih super-
itition, and the fierceness of that age, file added the private rc-
fentment of her own, and of her mother's sufferings, with which
she loaded the Reformed religion ; and the peeviflnefs and feve-
rity of her natural temper carried the acrimony of all these
pafions to the utmost extreme. The cruelty of her persecution
equalled the deeds of those tyrants, who have been the greatell
reproach to human nature. The bigotry of her clergy could
scarce keep pace with the impetuosity of her zeal. Even the
unrelenting Philip was obliged, on rome occasions, to mitigate
the rigour of her proceedings. Many among the moll eminent
Reformers fufiered for the doLcrines which they had taught i o-
thers fled from the storm. To the greater part of these, Swit-
zerland and Germany opened a fccure asylum ; and not a few,
out of choice or neceflity, lied into Scotland. What they had
seen and felt in England, did not abate the warmth and zeal of
their indignation againlt Popery. Their attacks were bolder and
more successful than ever; and their do&rines made a rapid
progress among all ranks of men.

These doctrines, calculated to rctify the opinions, and to re-

form the manners of mankind, had hitherto produced no other
ffects ; but they soon began to operate with greater violence,
and proved the occalion, not only of subverting the elatblilled
religion, but of fliaking the throne, and endangering the king-
dom. The causes which facilitated the introduclion of these new A view of
opinions into Scotland, ;and which dillcnlinated them Ib fast lca lolimtic
through the nation, merit, on that account, a particular and care- wliii con-

tributcd to

ful inquiry. 'lhe IReormation is one of the greatclm events in wards that.
the hillory of mankilnd, and in whatever point of light we view
it, is infiruilivc aund intercliling.

L ij

Boore IT. 'he revival of learning in the iSth and i6th centuries roused

v the world from that lethargy, in which it had been funk for ma-

ny ages. The human mind felt its own strength, broke the set-
ters of authority by which it had been so long refrained, and
venturing to move in a larger sphere, pushed its inquiries into
every fubjc&, with great boldness, and surprising success.

No sooner did mankind recover the capacity of exercising their

reason, than religion was one of the firll objects which drew their
attention. Long before Luther publiffed his famous Theses,
which flook the Papal throne, science and philosophy had laid
open, to many of the Italians, the imposture and absurdity of the
eflablifhed fuperllition. That subtle and refining people, fatisfi-
ed with enjoying those discoveries in secret, were little disposed
to afflme the dangerous character of Reformers, and concluded
the knowledge of truth to be the prerogative of the wife, while
vulgar minds muit be overawed and governed by popular errors.
But, animated with a more noble and difinterefled zeal, the Ger-
man Theologian boldly ereEted the standard of truth, and up-
held it vwith an unconquerable intrepidity, which merits the ad-
miration and gratitude of all fuccceding ages.

The occasion of Luther's being first disgusted with the tenets

of the Romifl church, and how from a small rupture, the quar-
rel widened into an irreparable breach, is known to every one
who has been the least conversant in hiflory. From the heart of
Germany, Ilis opinions spread, with astonishing rapidity, all over
Europe; and wherever they came, endangered or overturned
the ancient, but ill-founded fyfem.n The vigilance and address
of the court of Rome, and the power and bigotry of the Auitrian
family, fupprefled these notions on their first appearance, in the
southern kingdoms of Europe. But the fierce spirit of the north,
irritated by multiplied ilnpofitions, could neither be mollified by
the fame arts, nor subdued by the fame force ; and encouraged
by some Princes from piety, and by others out of avarice, it cafi-
ly bore down the feeble opposition of an illiterate and immoral
clergy.

The fuperflition of Popery seems to have grown to the mofl

extravagant height, in thole countries which are situated towards
the different extremities of Europe. The vigour of imagination,
and sensibility of frame, peculiar to the inhabitants of southern
climates, rendered them susceptible of the decpcef impreflions of
fuperilitious terror and credulity. Ignorance and barbarity were
no lcfs favourable to the progress of the fume fliirit, among the

northern nations. They knew little, and were disposed to be- Booe II.
lieve every thing. The molt glaring absurdities did not shock c
their gross undcrltandings, and the molt improbable fictions were
rcccived with implicit aflcnt and admiration.

Accordingly, that form of Popery, which prevailed in Scot-

land, was of the molt bigotted and illiberal kind. Those doc-
trines which arc nmoft apt to fliock the human underlfanding, and
those legends whlich farthell exceed belief, were proposcd to the
people without any attcmplt to palliate or disguise them; nor did
they ever call in queflion the realonablenefs of the one, or the
truth of the other.

The power and wealth of the church kept pace with the pro-

grefs of fuperflition ; for it is the nature of that spirit to oblhrve
no bounds, in its rcfpccl a:nd liberality towards those, wlhoe cha-
racter it eftcemrs sacred. ''lhe Scottihl Kings early demonstrated
how much they were under its influence, by their vafil additions
to the immunities and riches of the clergy. The profure piety
of David I. who acquired on that account the name of Saint,
transferred almofl the whole crown lands, which were at that
time of great extent, into the hands of ecclesiastics. The ex-
ample of that virtuous Prince was imitated by his fucccflors.
The spirit spread among all orders of men, who daily loaded tlhe
priesthood with new poffcflions. ''hle riches of the church all
over Europe were exorbitant ; but Scotland was one of those
countries, wherein they had farthest exceeded the jult propor-
tion. The Scottili clergy paid one half of every tax imposed on
land; and as there is no reason to think that, in that age, they
would be loaded with any unequal share of the burden, we may
conclude, that, by the time of the Reformation, little less than
one half of the property in the nation had fallen into the hands
of a society, which is always acquiring, and can never lose.

The nature, too, of a considerable part of their property ex-

tended their influencc. Many estates, throughout the kingdom,
held of the church ; church lands were let in lease at an easy
rent, and were poflfecd by the younger sons, and defcendcnts of
the best families '. The connexion between fi/erz'or and vq//fi/,
between the landlord and tenant, created dependencies, and gave
rilf to an union of great advantage to the church ; and in efli-
inating the influcnce of the Popilli ecclclialtics over the nation,
these, as vwell as the real amount of their revenues, muil be at-
icndcd to, and taken into the account.

Keith, 521. Not. (1).)

Boor It. This extraordinary hare in the national property was accom.

panied with proportionable weight in the supreme council of the
kingdom. At a time, when the number of temporal Peers was
extremely frnall, and when the Lesser Barons and representatives
of boroughs seldom attended Parliaments, the Ecclefialtics form-
ed a considerable body there. And it appears from the ancient
rolls of Parliament, and from the manner of chufing the Lords
of Articles, that the proceedings of that high court muff have
been, in a great mealure, under their direction -.

The reverence due to their sacred charaler, which was often

carried incredibly far, contributed not a little towards the growth
of their power. The dignity, the titles, and precedence of the
Popish clergy are remarkable, both as caufis and effeets of that
dominion, which they had acquired over the reft of mankind.
They were regarded by the credulous laity as beings of a fuperi-
or fpccies ; they were neither subjet to the fame laws, nor tried
by the fame judges. Every guard, that religion could supply,
was placed around their power, their pofi'fions, and their per-
sons; and endeavours were used, not without success, to repre-
sent them all as equally sacred.

The reputation for learning, which, however inconsiderable,

was wholly engrosscd by the clergy, added to the reverence which
they derived from religion. The principles of found philosophy,
and of a juit taste, were altogether unknown ; in place of these,
were fubflituted studies, barbarous and uninitrutive ; but as the
ecclefiallics alone were converfhnt in them, this procured them
esteem and a very little knowledge drew the admiration of rude
ages, which knew nothing. War was the sole profeflion of the
nobles, and hunting their chief amusement; they divided their
time between these ; and unacquainted with the arts, or unim-
proved by fcicnce, they disdained any employment foreign from
military affairs, or which required rather penetration and address,
than bodily vigour. Wherever the former were ncceffary, the
clergy were intrufled because they alone were properly qualifi-
ed for the truLl. Almoll all the high officcs in civil government
devolved, on this account, into their hands. The Lord Chan-
cellor was the firlt flubjet in the kingdom, both in dignity and
in power. From the c:,rliell ages of the monarchy, to the death
of Cardinal Bcatoun, fifiy-four perlbns had held that high office

-I Spots Ilift. of the Ch.1 of Scot. 419.

and of these, forty-three had been ecclesiastics -. The Lords of BooK II.
Session were supreme Judges in all matters of civil right; and by V-
the original conflitution, the President and one half of the Sena-
tors in this court were churchmen.

-To all this we may add, that the clergy being fcparated from
the reft of mankind by the law of celibacy ; and undiflraded by
those cares, and unincumbered with those burdens which occupy
and oppress other men, the interest of their order became their
only object, and they were at full leisure to pursue it.

The nature of their function gave them access to all persons,

and at all seasons. They could'employ all the motives of fear and
of hope, of terror and of consolation, which operate most power-
fully on the human mind. They haunted the weak and the cre-
dulous; they besieged the beds of the tick and of the dying.
They suffered few to go out of the world without leaving marks
of their liberality to the church ; and taught them to compound
with the Almighty for their fins, by beltowing riches upon those,
who called themselves his fcrvants.

When their own industry, or the fuperflition of mankind fail-

ed of producing this effec, they had influence enough to call in
the aid of law. Whoever died zinefl/az, was presumed to have
destined his moveables to pious uses. The church took posses-
sion of them. The children, the wife, the creditors of the per-
son deceased were often excluded from any lhare in what was
elteemed a sacred property+. As men are apt to trufi to the
continuance of life with foolifl confidence, and childifily shun
every thing, that forces them to think of their mortality, many
die without fettling their affairs by will ; and the bold usurpation
of ecclesiastics in this cafe, of which there are frequent veltiges
in our laws, though none in our hiflorians, may be reckoned a-
mong the moll plentiful sources of the wealth of the church.

At the fame time, all matrimonial and teflamentary causes

could be tried only in the fpilitual courts, and by laws which
the clergy themselves had framed. The penalty too, by which
the decisions of thefc courts were enforced, added to their autho-
rity. A.fcntence of excommunication was no leds formid;able,
than a fcntence of olt-l;lwry. It was pronounced on many oc-
cafions, and againfl various crimes: and besides excluding thoie,
up1on whom it fell, froni Clirillian privile.s, it deprived them of
all their rights as menl, or as citizcns. And the aidL of the Iccu-

* Ci:ra\ . Onli. of St.te.
'j El.Firys oln lit. A lntiq. 17.1.

Booi II. lar power concurred with the superstition of mankind, in render-

aing the thunders of the church no less deflru&ive than terrible.

To these general causes, may be attributed the immense growth

both of the wealth, and power of the Popifl church; and without
entering into any more minute detail, this may serve to discover
the foundations, on which a ftruaure so stupendous was ereced.

But though the laity had contributed, by their own fuperfti-

tion and profuseness, to raise the clergy from poverty and con-
tempt to riches and dignity, they began, by degrees, to feel and
to murmur at their encroachments. No wonder haughty and
martial nobles fllould view the power and pofleflions of the church
with envy; and regard the lazy and inactive character of church-
men with the utmost contempt. WVhile, at the fame time, the
indecent and licentious lives of the clergy gave great and jult
offence to the people, and confidcrably abated the veneration,
which they were accuflomed to yield to that order of men.

Immense wealth, extreme indolence, gross ignorance, and, above

all, the severe injunction of celibacy, had concurred to introduce
this corruption of morals among the clergy; who presuming too
much upon the fubmiflion of the people, were at no pains ei-
ther to conceal, or to disguise their own vices. According to
the accounts of the Reformers, confirmed by several Popilh writ-
ers, the most open and scandalous dissolution of manners prevail-
ed among the Scottish clergy *. Cardinal Beatoun, with the fame
public pomp, which is due to a legitimate child, celebrated the
marriage of his natural daughter with the Earl of Crawfurd's fofi -+f;
and, if we may believe Knox, he publicly continued to tle end
of his days a criminal correspondence with her mother, -who was
a woman of rank. The other prelates ciem not to have been more
regular and exemplary than their Primate $.

* inzet. np. Keith Append. 2C2, ec;. Lefl. de Reb. Cell. Scot. 2,32.
'' Tlic marriage articles ftlbfcribcd with his own hand, in which lie calls her

i DAUicTiliTis1i, are till extant. Keith, p. :2.

1 A remiark:ble prool of the dillihlutc In:Iel;arl-s or the clergy is fiunld in the

public COS. records. A ater nllini)r oflcttcr. of .LEITIrMArTIN was F;ra;ttl du-
rilng the firllt llirty years after the Refrlnblatrion, tlh;n duirinlg thle whol e rIriodl,
thtlll has etpiitl fliucc that timec. 'IThe'; l. w'tere obtained by tlhe Ibus of thel' I'opilli
'.1cr;'. T'rle cccl af:illics, who we irc allowed to rneltaii thliLir el-.ufice:e, alleniat-
id t1he1n to their chilldren ; w\l ho, w\Ihen tlhey :IC(ILiled :\\t : t, \W re di lilrt ; tlilt
lthe fiull of illc gitin:cy

la ight nl o l .

u ' ri:mllin l)ii n

i llthir l inili.es. lIn 1Ki:rin'1.

(.'\'t'AI.O II: 01 '

O 'IclE ' ;icn TlcoT'iitl .'1.lloos, w..e tinl Ilvs.ral it(l:,i:.:i; on 1iKch li,:-
ntiliuns of chIurchl lands, by tllh Popili iinctililib st, to their nI.ItII:l ehildrcn.

Men of such characers ought, in reason, to have been alarmed BooK II.

at the first clamours raised againfl their own morals, and the doc- ;v
trines of the church, by the Protellant preachers; but the Popilh
ecclefiiftics, either out of pride or ignorance, neglected the pro-
per methods for fllencing them. Instead of reforming their lives,
or difguiling their vices, they afl'ctedd to deipife the ccnfures of
the people. And while the Reformers, by their mortifications and
aufterities, endeavoured to rceemble the firil propagators of Chris-
tianity, the Popifl clergy were compared to all thole pcrfons, who
are most infamous, in hifLory, for the enormity and scandal of
their crimes.

On the other hand, initead of mitigating the rigour, or colour-

ing over the ablfrdity of the cflablifhcd doctrines ; inilead of at-
tempting to found them upon fcripturc, or to reconcile them to
reason ; they left them witlout any other support or reconmenda-
tion, but the authority of the church, and the decrees of councils.
The fables concerning purgatory, the virtues of pilgrimage, and
the merits of the faints, were the topics, on which they infilted
in their discourses to the people; and the duty of preaching being
left wholly to Monks of the lowell and moll illiterate orders, their
compositions were ilill more wretched anl contemptible, than the
fubjeAs on wlhich they infilled. WVhile the Reformers were at-
tended by crowded and admiring audiences, the Popill preach-
ers were either universally deserted, or lillened to with scorn.

The only device which they employed in order to recover their

declining reputation, or to confirm the wavering faith of the peo-
ple, was equally imprudent, and unsuccessful. As many docrines
of their church had derived their credit, at first, from the autho-
rity of falle miracles, they nowv endeavoured to call in tlhee to
their aid *. But thole lying wonders, which were beheld with
unlfflicious admiration, or heard witl implicit faith, in times of
darknel s and of ignorance, met with a very different reception, in
a more enlightened period. The vigilance of the Reformers de-
te&ed thele impollures, and exposed not only them, but the caule
which needed the aid of such artifices, to ridicule.

As the Popill eccleiaflics became more and more the objects

of hatred and of contempt, the difourles of the Reformers were
liflened to, as so many calls for liberty; and besides the pious in-.
dignation which they excited againlli tliole corrupt closrines, which
had perverted tile nature of true Chrillianity; belides the zeal,
which they inli)ired for the knowledge of truth, and the purity of

* Spll tl\ ool, 69.

1VTl

Boic IL. religion; they gave rife also, among the Scottills nobles, to otheY

views and paflions. They hoped to fllake off the yoke of eccle-
fiaflical dominion, which they had long felt to be oppreflive, and
which they now discovered to be unchriflian. They expeted to
recover possession of the church revenues, which they were now
taught to conlider as alienations made by their anceflors, with a
profusion no less undifcerning, than unbounded. They flattered
themselves that a check would be given to the pride and luxury
of the clergy, who would be obliged, henceforward, to confine
themselves within the fphlere, peculiar to their sacred characer.
An averion for the cllablifhed church, which flowed from so many
concurring causes, which was raised by considerations of religion,
and heightened by motives of policy, spread faR through the nation,
and excited a spirit, that burit out, at last, with irrefifible vio-
lence.

Religious considerations, alone, were lufficient to have roused

this spirit. The points in controversy with the church of Rome
were of so much importance to the happiness of mankind, and so
eflential to the nature of true Christianity, that they merited all
the zeal with which the Reformers contended in order to establish
them. But the Reformation having been represented as the eflec&
of some wild and enthufaltlic frenzy in the human mind, this at-
tempt to account for the eagerness and zeal, with which our an-
cellors embraced and propagated the Protestant doctrines, by taking
a view of the political motives, alone, which inluenced them, and
by shewing how naturally these prompted them to act with i;i
much ardour, will not, perhaps, be esteemed an umneceflary di-
grefilon. We now return to the course of the history.
r The Q.ecn's elevation to the oflice of Regent fccms to have

tranflorted her, at firll, beyond the known prudence, and modc-

Tle Queen ration of her characer. She began her administration, by con.
Regent be- ferring upon foreigners several ollices of trult and of dignity ; a
gins her ad-
miniflr.tion fcp, which both from the inability of itrangers to discharge thele
wpitli lone ofliccsith th vigour, and from the envy which thcir lrcfcrimnci.
unpopular
mneafures. excites among the natives, is never attenclded with good confi-.

quences. Vilmort was made Comptroller, and intrulted lwit the
management of the public revenucs; Bonot was appointed (Go-
vcrnor of Orkney ; and Rubay honoured with the cullody of the
Great Seal, and the title of Vice Chaneccllor'. It was with tih
utmoll indignation, that the Scots beheld ofliccs of tle gralctll
eminence and authority, cldealt out nou101,g ffr:angcs. '1, tllh!' p1rn

' Lely, dc R Lb, Gen. Scot 8 P.,

mnotions they conceived the QEeen to have offered an insult both BooK II.
to their understandings, and to their courage ; to the former, by s~
supposing them unfit for those llations, which their anceflors had
filled with so much dignity ; to the latter, by imagining that they
were tame enough not .to complain of an affront, which, in no
former age would have been tolerated with impunity.

While their minds were in this difpiofition, an incident happen-

ed which inflamed their averlion for French councils to the lligh-
eft degree. Ever since the famous contefl between the houses of
Valois and Plantagenet, the French had been accustomed to em-
barafs the Englifi, and to divide their Ilrcngth by the sudden and
formidable incursions of their allies, the Scots. But, as these in-
roads were seldom attended with any real advantage to Scotland,
and exposed it to the dangerous resentment of a powerful neigh-
bour, the Scots began to grow less traitable than formerly, and
scrupled, any longer, to fcrve an ambitious ally at the price of
their own quiet and security. The change, too, which was daily
introducing into- the art of war, rendered the affil.ance of the
Scottifl forces of less importance to the French Monarch. For
these reasons, Henry having resolved upon a war with Philip II.
and foreseeing that the Qcueen of E'ngland would take part in her
husband's quarrel, was extremely solicitous to lecure, in Scotland,
the affifance of forne troops, which would be more at his com-
mand than an undilcipiined army, led by nobles who were almost
independent. In prosecution of this dclign, but under pretence
of relieving the nobles from the expcnce and danger of defending
the borders, the QOeen Regent proposed, in Parliament, to rcgil- j55j.
ter the value of lands throughout the kingdom,'to impofc on them
a fimall tax, and to apply that revenue towards maintaining a
body of regular troops, in conltant pay. A fixed tax upon land,
which the growing expence of government hatl introduced into
almoil every part of Europe, was unknown, at that time, and
seemed altogether inconfillent with the free and independent spirit
of the feudal government. Nothing could be more lhocking to
a generous and brave noblility, lhan tie intrufling, to mercenary
hands, the defence of thofi territories which had been acquired, or
preservcd by the blood of their anceitors. They received this pro-
pofhl with the utmoll indignation. About three hundred of the
LefJ'cr IBarons repaired in a body to the QeccnI Regent, and rcpre-
sented their fcnfie of the intended innovation, with that manly :aid
determined boldneifs, xwhlich is natural to a free people, ill a martial
agc. Alarmed -at a rcinolllrance dclivcriel in lo firi a tlle,

M ij

BoOK IT. and supported by fucl formidable numbers, the Queen prudently

abandoned a fchcmc, which fle found to be universally odious.
As the QOeen herself was known perfeAly to underiland the cir-
cumflances and temper of the nation, this measure was imputed
wholly to the suggestions of her foreign couifellors ; and the
Scots were ready to proceed to the molt violent extremities againfl
them.

Attemlptsto The French, inflead of extinguishing, added fuel to the flame.
engage the
kingdom in They had now commenced hostilities againfl Spain, and Philip
nlwr with had prevailed on the OQeen of England, to reinforce his army
England.

with a considerable body of her troops. In order to deprive him
of this aid, Henry had recourse, as he projcted, to the Scots; and
attempted to excite them to invade England. But, as Scotland had
nothing to dread from a Princess of Mary's character, who, far
from any ambitious scheme of dilurhinig her neighbours, was whol-
ly occupied in endeavouring to reclaim her heretical fulhjcs s; the
nobles, who were aflembled by the Queen Regent at Newbottle,
listened to the solicitations of the French Ilonarch with extreme
coldness, and prudently declined engaging the kingdom in an en-
terprife so dangerous and unnecessary. VWhat fle could not obtain
by persuasion, the Queen Regent brought about by a firatagem.
Notwithstanding the fubfiiecnce of peace between the two king-
doms, fle commanded her French soldiers to rebuild a small fort
near Berwick, which was appointed, by the lall treaty, to be razed.
The garrison of jerwick sallied out; interrupted the work; and
ravaged the adjacent country. This insult roused the fiery spirit
of the Scots, and their promptnces to revenge the leall appearance
of national injury dillipaled, in a moment, the wife andl pacific
resolutions which they had so lately formed. War was determined,
and orders inltantly given for railing a numerous army. But be-
fore their forces could atlcmble, the ardour of their inclignation
had time to cool, and the En'lifli having difcovcred no intention
to pufli the war with vigour, the nobles resumed their pacific sys-
S tern, and resolved to land altogether upon the dcfcnfivc. T'hey

marched to the banks of the Tweed, they prevented the incursions
of the enemy, and having done vwhat they thought flflicient for
the lfafety and honour of their country, the Qceen could not in-
dluce them, either by her entreaties, or her artifices, to advance
another fl ep.

While the Scots perfifled in theirl inacOivity, D'Oyfel, the Coin-

mander of the French troops, who i)ollslc(d entirely the confidence
of the Queen Regent, cndeavoured, with her connivance, to en-.

ngge the two nations in hofilities. Contrary to the orders of the Booi II.
Scottifli Gencral, he marched over the Tweed with his own fol- v
diers, and invcfild Werk, a garrilon of the Englilh. The Scots,
inflead of seconding his attempt, were enraged at his presumption.
The Qeen's partiality towards France had long been futliecacd,
but it was now visible that lhe wantonly sacrificed the peace and
safety of Scotland, to the interell of that ambitious and afl'uming
ally. Under the feudal governments, it was in camps, that sub-
jets were accullomed to addrcls the boldell remonltrances to
their Sovereigns. While arms wcre in their hands, they felt
their own itrcngth; and at that time all tleir representations of
grievances carried the authority of comm:ands. On this occasion,
the indignation of the nobles broke out with 1uc1h violence, that
the (Qicen perceiving all attempts to engage them in action to be
vain, abruptly di'mnifitltd her army, and retired witll the ttmolt
fliame and di!gull ; having di{covercd the impotence of iher ownv
authority, without effceling any thing which could be of advan-
tage to France.

It is obfcrvable, that this firfl inflance of contempt fur tile Re-

gent's authority can, in no degree, be imputed to the inliuence of
tile new opinions in religion. As the Q(een's pretcnlions to tle
Regency had been principally supported by thoif who favoured
the Reformation, and as tlle trill needed them for a counterpoilc to
the Archbiliop of St. Andrew's, and the partizans of tile hmoule
of Hamilton ; they were now treated by her with great rcficct,
and even admitted to no inconfidcrable lhare in her favour and
confidence. Kirkaldy of Grange, and the other surviving con-
fpirators againil Cardinal Beatoun were, about this time, rec:illcd
by her from banifliment and, through licr connivance, the Pro-
tcllant preachers enjoyed an interval of tranquillity, w*vlich was
of great advantage to their cause. Soothed by thclle inlltnces of
the Qeen's moderation and humanity, the Protellants abandon-
ed the ofice of remonstrating to others; and tie leaders of tihe
opposite failion set them the firfl cxarliple of dliiuting the w ill of
their Sovereign.

As the Queen Regent felt how limited and precarious lier au- The'l

thority w.;s, wlile it dtlc]lndedl (n tile poili' of t;lr'lc contrllry fl'c- (")':',c'1l
tions, lie endeav oulred to cllitbllill it on a 1)io:(dcr ;anid I mI jre

i l( ctlire '\i:l >li:t

foundation, by :11lilcllitig the conllulo1l ofl ler dl;lI:gl: .,': l:!rri;l;c )uLil.

ithl thle D):alhin. Ailni;tlllc as the QC(cci of Scotl, .'li1n .aIs, ill

tle bloom, ol' outhl ; :li( collf crtl lale ;is the tcrritloiis \cre,
v'Ilich flie would lia'e aiided to hle l Cem't'l MIona;clity; there did

Boo;c I. not want reasons to persuade -Ienry to depart from his firlt plan

of marrying her to his fbn. The Conllable Montmorency em-
ployed all his intcrelt to defeat an alliance, which reflected so
much luflre on the Princes of Lorrain. He represented the im-
polibility of maintaining order and tranquillity among a turbu-
lent people, during the absence of their Sovereign; and for that
reason, advised Henry to bellow the young OQueen upon one of the
Princes of the blood, who, by residing in Scotland, might pre-
fervc that kingdom an useful ally to France, which, by a nearer
union to the Crown, would become a mutinous and ungovernable
province* But, at this time, the Conflable was a prisoner in the
hands of the Spalniards, and the Princes of Lorrain at the height
of their glory ; and their inmluence, secondcd by the charms of
the young Qeccn, triumphed over the prudent, but envious re-
monflrances of their rival.
Dec. T4, The Frcnch King accordingly applied to the Parliament of

xi57' Scotland, which appointed eight of its members s-j to represent the

whole body of the nation, at the mnrriage of the Queen. Among
the persons on whlom tle public choice conferred this lonourable
character, were tome of the molt avowed and zealous advocates
for the Reformation ; by which, may be eflimated the degree of
refpec and popularity, which that party had now attained in the
kingdom. The inltrucions of the Parliament to those Commis-
lloners itill remain II, and do honour to the vwidonm and integrity
of that aflfcmbly. At the flme time that they manifelted a laud-
able concern for the dignity and interei of their Sovereign, with
rcplecd to the articles of marriage, they employed every precau-
tion which prudence could didtate, for prcrfrving the liberty
and independence of the nation, and for securing the fliccefilon of
the Crown in the houte of Hamilton.

.rtifices *, \oVith regard to each of thefc, the Scots obtained whatever fa-
the I'l'cdll tisti'tlion their fear or jcalouyf could dem1and. lThe you1ng ()Cuecn,
i:' ":l't!re-. the I)auphin, and the King of France ratified every article, with

the moll fblceml oaths, and conljrmied them by de eds in form, un-
der thllir lands and feals. B3ut on tl:c part

: f Fr.mice, all this was

(i91 coitliiited Iccne of lludied andil i;toralte ecceit. Previous to
tihefe public trani'Ctdions with the Scuttiil dlputiCs, AIiary hlad bLeei

c

. . t'].lm. ,I,.

- \ i/. ''l'1, Ai\lliilllll>) of ( l \\', 1

t I' ii'liop) oF'R,, , flit );ifh p

fl ) Ork-

,.. th,, 1 .:al Is ol I{i,lu :; ( (a.d llils, I oi., 1I'lictiiisog, Lord Scltui, the I'riur of'
,St1 .'\!hlrm'. 's, and j.1'1: ErlI .jille of Dul.

| K:ilth, Appendi . Jj.

persuadcd to fubrcric privately three deeds, equally unjust, and BooK IL.
invalid; by which, fle, failing the heirs of her own body, con- -
ferred the kingdom of Scotland, mith whatever inheritance or
fuccelTion might accrue to it, in free gift upon the Crown of France,
declaring all proini!es to tilc contrary, which the necefllty of ller
affairs, and the Iolicitations of her tlbjc a lhad extorted, or might
extort from lier, to be void talld of no obligation '. As it gives us
a proper idea of the clh.racLcr of the French court under Henry
II. we may oblerve that the King lliinlelf, the Keeper of the
Great Seals, the Dtke of Gu Cist, and the Cardinal of Lorrain,
were the perlons cng:Iaed in condLucting this perfidious and dif-
honourable prujccl. The Q(ecn of Scots was the only innocent
acaor in that fLene of iniquity. 1-Icr youth, her inexperience, her
education in a foreign country, and her deference to her uncle's
will, with every i.pi:lrti.,l pertlf, vindicate her from any impu-
tation of blame on that account.

This infamous grant, by swhich TvIary bellowed the inheritance

of her kingdom upon liangcrs, was concealed with the utmoll care
from her fubjesls. They Ilem, however, not to have been unac-
quainted with the intention of the French to overturn the fettle-
ment of the fucceflion in favour of the Duke of Chatclhlerault.
The zeal, with which the Archlbiihop of St. Andrew's opposed all
the measures of the Q2ueen Regent, cvidently proceeded from the
icars and fliuficions of that prudent prelate, on this head-l-.

The marriage, lowever, was celebrated with great pomp; and April r4,

the French, who had hitherto alFecdcd to draw a veil over their l
designs upon Scotland, began now to unfold their intentions with-
out any dilkuife. IIn the trea:ty of ma rriage, the deputies had a-
greed thaL tlic Dauphin fliould aflutne the name of King of Scot-
land. Tlils they confilercd only as an honorary title; but tile
French laboured to annex to it Ibme solid privileges and power.
They infilled that the Dauphin's title fliould be publicly recog-
nizcd ; that the Ci-own Iatrimomnl Ilhould be conferred upon him;
and that all tlie rights pertaining to the huiband of a Qcecn llhould
le velled in his person. By the laws of Scotland, a pcrlobl who
marriled an hcircli kept poffcllion of her efacte duriLng his own
life, if lle happened to die without children ' . This was called

CoJrpr il',1l;i(, . tol .

v. 1Z .

r Kihlil, 7.3.

| b Alouit alli, l timl , tle I'lr]n(.ll i.'c t, l,:tvc li:ve l t lime dc in or rtviv\il; 11i -

,.irl of (I' I..llll(a.' l)r'ctellliolls to til liicc.flioIl, in orde to ilti;li(llte a;nd al1It ln
;I. le Dli; ol CIatcllcraill. Iltan,.es, %
., 219. I'ilc;:i Coll. vol. i. r13y.

'I 1leg. \aIj. li'). ii 5'3

BooK IT. the CoirlcfJy of Scotland. The French aimed at applying this rule,

which takes place in private inheritances, to the fucceflion of the
kingdom; and that seems to be implied in their demand of the
crown Ialrlinnoia/ , a phrase peculiar to the Scottifli historians,
and which they have negledted to explain. As the French had
reason to e:pect dilliculties in carrying through this measure, they
began with iounding the deputies who were then at Paris. The
Englifl, in the marriage articles between their Queen and Philip
of Spain, had set an example to the age, of that prudent jealousy
and refervc, with lwhich a foreigner should be admitted so
near t!he throne. Full of the lame ideas, the Scottish deputies
had, in their oath of allegiance to the, Dauphin, exprefled thcm-
felvcs with remarkable caution *. Their anfwier was in the fame
fiirit, refpel-ful, but firm ; and discovercd a fixed resolution of
conlentingr to nothing, that tended to introduce any alteration in
the order of fucceflion to tle Crown.

Four of the deputies -- happening to die before they returned

into Scotland, this accident was universally imputed to the elfcas
of poifbn, which was Lfppofed to have been given them by tlhe
emissaries of the house of Guise. ''he hiflorians of all nations dif-
cover an amazing credulity with refpeA to stories of, this kind,
wlich are so well calculated to please the malignity of some men,
and to gratify the love of the marvellous which is natural to all,
tlht, in every age, they have been swallowed without examina-
tion, and believed contrary to rcafon. No wonder the Scots
should easily give credit to a fufiiicion, which received such strong
colours ;of probability, both from their own resentment, and from
the known clia-radtcr of the Princes of Lorrain, so little fcrupu-
lous about tle jullice of the ends which they pursued, or of the
means which they employed. For the honour of human nature,
it mull, lhowvcr, be cblhcrved, that as we can dis'cover no motive,
which could induce any man to perpetrate iLch a crime, so there
appears no evidence to prove that it was committed. But the
Scats of that age, influenced by national animositics and preju-
dices, were incapable of examining the circumflances of the cale
with calmness, or of judging concerning them with candour.
All p:trties agreed in believing the French to have been guilty
of this detclhible ad'ion ; and it is obvious how much this tended
to increafc the aversion for them, which was growing among all
ranks of men.

Keith, Append. 2o.

-'I The Billop of Ollley), tilh E;cl of Rothes, tlie Earl of CaFils, and Lore
Fleelljlg.

kTotwithftanding the cold rcccption which their proposal con- BooK II.
terning the Crown Matr-imonial met with from the Scottill dc-

The Regent

puties, the French ventured to move it in Parliament. The par- prlvails on
tizans of the house of Hamilton, flli;icious of their designs upon t1' i:"rlia-

melit to

the fucceflion, opposed it with great zeal. But a party, which the grant it.
feeble and unfleady conducl of their leader had brought under Nov. 29
much difreputation, was little able to withfland the influence of
France, and the address of the Queen Regent, seconded, on this
occasion, by all the numerous adherents of the Reformation. Be-
fides, that artful Princess dresscd out the French demands in a less
offcnfive garb, and threw in so many limitations, as seemcd to ren-
der them of finall consequence. These either deceived the Scots,
or removed their scruples ; and in compliance to the Qucen, they
pafled an adl, conferring the Crown ASIatrimnonialon the Dauphin;
and, with the fondest credulity, trufied to the frail It curity
of words and flatutes, against the dangerous encroachments of
power *.

The concurrence of the Proteflants, with the Queen Regent, Continues

to court the

in promoting a measure so acceptable to France, while the Popitf I rotellants.
clergy, under the influence of the Archbiflop of St. Andrew's, op-
posed it with so much violence-, is one of those singular circum-
llances, in the conduct of parties, for which this period is so re-
markable. It may be ascribed, in some degree, to the dcxtcrous
management of the Queen, but chiefly to the moderation of those
who favoured the Reformation. The Protestants were, by this
time, almost equal to the. Catholics both in power, and in num-
ber; and, conscious of their own firength, they submitted with
impatience to that tyrannical authority, with which the ancient
laws armed the ecclefiaitics against them. They longed to be ex-
empted from this opprefllve jurifdiAion, and publicly to enjoy the
liberty of profefing those opinions, and of exercising that worflip,
which so great a part of the nation deemed to be founded in truth,
and to be acceptable to the Deity. 'l'his indulgence, to which the
whole weight of pricltly authority was opposed, there were only
two ways of obtaining. Either violence mull extort it from the

" The act or P;arliament is worded with the utmost care, with a view to guard

aganilll any brLich of thle order of' li'ccefTiol. B]t tle )Duke, not relying on
this a lone, entered a lblelni plroteltaitioll to liecure Ilis olwn l'igit. Keith, 76. It
is plain tha:t lie filjilcted the French ol' haviig l;, nln intention to fIt't alile his
light of' llccellioll; :aitid, ilndeedl, ifl Liy ltad l nIo ti(ll;n ol' that kindl, die a;ger-
ncers withl whlich they Llul tie ldir dsmllnd, was cldilh.li.

' NIMclv. 47,

N

BOOK II. reluctant hand of the Sovereign, or by prudent compliances, they

might expeA it from her favour, or her gratitude. The former
is an expedient for the redress of grievances, to which no nation
has recoirfe suddenly; and subje&s ieldom venture upon resistance,
which is their laif remedy, but in cafes of extreme necessity. On
this occasion, the Reformers wifely held the opposite course, and
by their zeal in forwarding the Queen's designs, they hoped to
merit her prote&ion. This disposition the Queen encouraged to
the utmolt, and amused them so artfully with many promires,
and some concessions, that, by their assistance, she surmounted in
Parliament the force of a national, and perhaps a laudable jea-
lousy, which would, otherwise, have swayed with the greater
number.

Another circumflance contributed somewhat to acquire the Re-

gent such considerable influence in this Parliament. In Scotland,
all the bishoprics, and those abbeys which conferred a title to a
feat in Parliament, were in the gift of the Crown *. From the
time of her accession to the regency, the Queen had kept in her
own hands almost all those which became vacant, except such as
were, to the great difgufl of the nation, bestowed upon foreigners.
Amongtf there, her brother the Cardinal of Lorrain had obtained
the abbeys of Kelfo and Melrofs, two of the most wealthy founda-
tions in the kingdom -. By this condut, fle thinned the eccle-
fiaflical bench §, which was entirely under the influence of tlhe
Archbifllop of St. Andrew's, and by its numbers and authority
had great-weight in the house, so as to render any opposition it
could give of little consequence.

The Earl of Argyle, and James Stewart Prior of St. Andrew's,

one the molt powerful, and the other the most popular leader of
the Proteflants, were appointed to carry the Crown and other
ensigns of royalty to the Dauphin. But from this they were di-
verted by the part they were called to at, in a more intcreling
scene, which now begins to open.

Elizabeth Before we turn towards this, it is necessary to obfcrve, that, on
tileeCdsto the i7th of November, Mary of England finifled her flort, an:l
of'Englandl. inglorious reign. Her finer Elizabeth took pofl'flion of the

throne without opposition ; and the Proteflant religion was, once
more, eftabliflled by law in England. The acceflion of a Queen,
who, under very difficult circumllances, had given ltrong indi.

Sec Boolk . + Lefly, 202.

§ It apprlrs from the rolls of this Parliamnclt, which Lcfly calls a ve)ry fril
one, that only fleveii iliops anti .ixteen Abbots were preit'it.

.cations of those eminent qualities, which, in the sequel, rendered BoOK II.
her reign so illustrious, attra&ed the eyes of all Europe. Among i
the Scots, both parties observed her firit motions with the utmost
concern, as they easily foresaw that she would not remain long an
indifferent spectator of their tranfations.

Under many discouragements, and much oppression, the Re-

formation advanced towards a full eftabliflment in Scotland. All
the low country, the most populous, and, at that time, the most
warlike part of the kingdom, was deeply tinctured with the Pro-
teftant opinions ; and if the fame imprefflons were not made in
the more distant counties, it was owing to no want of the fame
dispositions among the people, but to the scarcity of preachers,
vhofe most indefatigable zeal could not satisfy the avidity of those
who desired their inftruAions. Among a people bred to arms,
and so prone to mutiny as the Scots j and in an age, when religi-
ous pafions had taken such 1trong possession of the human mind,
and moved and agitated it with so much violence ; the peaceable
and regular demeanor of so numerous a party is truly altonilhing.
From the death of Mr Patrick Hamilto the the fir who suffered in
Scotland for the Proteflant religion, thirty years had clapsed, and
during so long a period, no violation of public order or tranquilli-
ty had proceeded from that set * ; and though routed and irritat-
ed by the most cruel excesses of ecclesiastical tyranny, they did,
in no infiance, transgress those bounds of duty which the law prc-
scribes to fubjeds. Besides the prudence of their own leaders,
and the protection which the Qieen Regent, from political mo-
tives, afforded them, the moderation of the Archbishop of St.
Andrew's encouraged this pacific disposition. That prelate,
whose private life cotemporary writers tax with great irregulari-
ties --, governed the church, for some years, with a temper and
prudence, of which there are few examples in that age. But
obme time before the meeting of last Parliament, the Archbiflop
departed from those humane maxims, by which he had hitherto
regulated his conduct ; and whether in spite to the Queen, who
had entered into so close an union with the Protestants, or in com-
pliance with the importunities of his clergy, he let loofl all the
rage of persecution againit the Reformed ; lentenced to the flames
an aged pricfl, who had been convicted of cnmbiacing the l'rotef

'lle murlder or Cardin:l c;leatoun was occasioned by )private revenllc, andl. be.

ing contrived annd executeld by sixteen pcrfonls, cannot, witll jullice, be imputedl
to the whole Protcllant party.

I-l Knox. luichalian. Keitih, 208.

N ij

BooK II. tant opinions; and summoned several others, fufpeaced of the

'' fame crime, to appear before a iynod of tlie clergy, which was

soon to convene at Edinburgh.

Nothing could equal the horror of the Protestants at this un-

cxpc&ed and barbarous execution, but the zeal, with which they
espoused the defence of a cause, that now seemed devoted to de-
Jtruetion. They had immediate recourse to the Qjeen Regent;
and as her success in the Parliament, which was then about to
meet, depended on their concurrence, fie not only fleltered them
from tle impending florn, but permitted them the exercise of
their religion, with more fieedom than they had hitherto enjoyed.
Unsatisfied with this precarious tenure, by which they held their
religious liberty, the Proteflants laboured to rendcr their posses-
sion of it more secure and independent. With this view, they
determined to pctition the Parliament for Iome legal protection,
againll the exorbitant and opprcffivc jurisdiCtion of the eccle-
fiallical courts, which, by their arbitrary method of proceeding,
founded in the canon law, were led to sentences the most shock-
ing to humanity, by maxims the moit repugnant to juflice. But
the Queen, who dreaded the effecs of a debate on this delicate
subjec, which could not fail of exciting high and dangerous pas-
lions, prevailed on the leaders of the party, by new and more so-
lemn promises of her protection, to defilt from any application to
Parliament, where their numbers and influence would, in all pro-
bability, have procured them, if not the entire redress, at leal,
some mitigation of their grievances.
2559 They applied to another assembly, to a convocation of the Po-

pifl clergy, but with the fame ill success, which hath always at-
tended every proposal for Reformation, addrcflcd to that order of
men. To abandon usurped power, to renounce lucrative error, is
a sacrifice, which the virtue of individuals has, on some occasions,
offered to truth ; but from any focicty of men, no such effort can
be expected. The corruptions of a society, recommended by
common utility, and jultified by universal pra&tice, are viewed,
by its members, without Ihame, or horror; and Reformation
never proceeds from tlicmfilves, but is always forced upon them
by some foreign hand. Suitable to this unfeeling and inflexible
spirit, was the lbhaviour of the convocation in the preclnt con-
junclure. All the demandl s of the Proteltants were rcjetled with
contempt ; and the Popifli clergy f'ir from cndeavouring, by any
prtdent concctions, to sooth and to reconcile such a numelrous
body, aflerted the tlduoincs cf their church, witll rclicf to foulb

of the molt exceptionable articles, with an ill-timed rigour, hllich BooK IT.
gave new offence *.

During the fitting of the convocation, the Proteflants first be- 559.

gan to suspect some change in the Regent's disposition towards
them. Though joined with them for many years by interest, and
united, as they conceived, by the ftrongell ties of affecion and of
gratitude, fie discovered, on this occasion, evident symptoms, not
only of coldners, but of a growing disgust and averlion. In order
to account for this, our hiltorians do little more than produce the
trite observations concerning the influence of prosperity to alter
the character, and to corrupt the heart. The Queen, fay they,
having reached the utmost point to which her ambition aspired,
no longer preserved her accuilomed moderation, but, with an in-
folence usual to the fortunate, looked down upon those, by whose
affiitance flhe had been enabled to rife so high. But it is neither
in the depravity of the human heart, nor in the ingratitude of the
Queen's disposition, that we must search for the motives of her pre-
sent conduct. These were derived from another, and a more re-
mote source, which, in order to clear the subsequent tranfalions,
we (hall endeavour to open with some care.

The ambition of the Princes of Lorrain had been no less fuc- Ambitious

cefsful, than daring; but all their fcllemes were diltinguifhed by vtisos a
being vait and unbounded. Strangers at the court of France, their Lorrain.
eminent qualities had raised them, in a flhort time, to an height of
power, fiperior to that of all other fubjeds, and had placed them
on a level even with the Princes of the blood themselves. The
church, the army, the revenue, were under their direcion. No-
thing but the royal dignity remained unattained; and to a near al-
liance with it, they were elevated by the marriage of the Queen
of Scots to the Dauphin. In order to gratify their own vanity,
and to render their niece more worthy the heir of Francc, they
set on foot her claim to the Crown of Elngland, which was founds
ed on pretences not unplaufible.

The tragical amours and marriages of Henry VIII. are known

to all the world. Moved by the caprices of his love, or of his re-
fentlment, that impatient and arbitrary Monarch had divorced or
beheaded four of the fix (Ceens, whom he married. In order to
gratify him, both his daugihers had been declared illegitimate by
Act of Parliament ; and yet, with tha;t faintaflic inconfi flency which
dillinr'uiflhs his cliacralr, lie, illn his l;afl ill, whereby he was em-
powered to Icttle the order us 'iccifllon called both of them to

1300K Ir. the throne, upon the death of their brother Edward ; and, at the

v fame time, pafling by the poflerity of his eldest fifler Margaret

Queen of Scotland, he appointed the line of fuccefflon to continue
in the defcendcnts of his younger fifler the Dutchess of Suffolk.

In consequence of this deflination, the validity whereof was ad-

mitted by the Englifi, but never recognized by foreigners, Mary
had reigned in England, without the least complaint of neighbour-
ing Princes. But the fame causes, which facilitated her accession
to the throne, were obstacles to the elevation of her sifter Eliza-
beth, and rendered her pofleffion of it precarious and insecure.
Rome trembled for the Catholic faith, under a Protestant Queen
of such eminent abilities. The fame fuperilitious fears alarmed
the Court of Spain. And France beheld, with indignation, a
throne, to which the Q(een of Scots could form so many preten-
sions, occupied by a rival, whole birth, in the opinion of all good
Catholics, excluded her from any legal right of succession. The
impotent hatred of the Roman Pontiff, or the flow councils of
Philip II. would have produced no sudden or formidable effect.
The ardent and impetuous ambition of the Princes of Lorrain,
who, at that time, governed the court of France, was more de,

They per- cifive, and more to be dreaded. Infligatcd by them, Henry,
fualceMary soon after the death of Mary, persuaded his daughter-in-law and
to affiume
the title of her husband, to assume the title of King and Quecn of England.
Queen of They affected to publilh this to all Europe. They used that
LnSland.

flvle and appellation in public papers, lome of which flill re-,
main *. The arms of England were engraved on their coin and
plate, and borne by them on all occasions. No preparations,
however, were made to support this premature and impolitic claim.
Elizabeth was already feated on her throne ; fie pollefled all'the
intrepidity of spirit, and all the arts of policy, which were necef-
fary for maintaining that flation. England was growing into re-
putation for naval power. The marine of France had been utter-
ly ncglecled ; and Scotland remained the only avenue, by which

Rcr,,hl to the territories of Elizabeth could be approached. It was on that
itI.I:Ichl.ig- fide, therefore, that the Princes of Lorrain determined to make

thlir attack -l ; anld, by using the name and pretensions of the
Scottilh (QICeen, they hoped to rouse the Elnglifh Catholics, for-
mid;lldlc at that time for their zcal and: numlbers, and e.alficrated
to the utmoll againi il liz.iabet, on accou!it of the change \ hic'ch
lic Iadl mnade in the national religion.

" A1Jl.r. D nip~nil. Scot. NO. 6, lt liJI.
*[- icl''(rb, CulleC, i. ; -, ;77.

It was vain to expec the afliflance of the Scottifli Protef- 13oK II.

tants to dethrone a Queen, whom all Europe eftcemcd the guar-
dian and defender of the reformed faith. To break the power In order to
and reputation of that party in Scotland, became, for this rea- this, necef-

fitrvtocheck

son, a necessary 1ep towards the invasion of England. WvVith theRetform-
this the Princes of Lorrain rcfolved to open their scheme. And ation in

Scotland.

as persecution was the only method for suppressing religious opi-
nions, known in that age, or dia'ated by the despotic and fangui-
nary spirit of the Romilli fuperflition, this, in its utmoil violence,
they determined to employ. The Earl of Argyle, the Prior of
St. Andrew's, and other leaders of the party, were marked out
by them for immediate dcftrucilon ''; and they hoped, by punilh-
ing them, to intimidate their followers. Inflrudions for this
purpoSe were sent from France to the Qeen Regent. That hu-
mane and sagacious Princess condemned a mcalure, which was
equally violent and impolitic. By long residence in Scotland,
she had become acquainted with the eager and impatient temper
of the nation ; nie well knew the power, the number, and popu-
larity of the Proteflant leaders ; and had been a witness to the
intrepid and unconquerable relolution wlich religious fervour
could inspire. Vha:t, then, could be gained by routing this dan-
gerous spirit, which, hitherto, all the arts of policy had scarce
been able to reflrain ? If it once broke loose, the authority of a
Regent would be little capable to subdue, or even to mode-
rate its rage. And if, in order to quell it, foreign forces were
called in, this would give the alarm to the whole nation, irritat-
ed already at the excelfive power which the French poflrfi'ed in
the kingdom, and flipicious of all their designs. Amidll the
fiock which this might occasion, far from Ioping to extcrminate
the Protcllant doctrine, it would be well if the whlole fabric of
the eilablinled church were not Ihaken, and perhaps overturned
from the foundation. Thele prudent remolltrances made no im-
prefiion on her brothers ; precipitant, but inllcxible in all their
relblutions, they infilled on the full and rigorous execution of
their plan. Mary, paflionately devoted to the interclls of France,
and ready, on all occasions, to fiterilice her own opinions to the
inclinations of her brothers, prepared to execute their commands,
witl i mplicit lfubmilion 'l ; and, contrary to her own juidgnment,
andl to all the rules of found policy, Illc becac me the illirumncit
of exciting civil commotions in Scotlalind, whichl cdlcdl \\;tll tl,-

* Sorbes, i. 1,2.

MC v.
I .1. 1R cm.. , de C;aflllla. :ip. Jl.ul'. vol. ii. .I1.

Boo If. ruin of the French power, and of the Popifl religion in that

55 kingdom.

The Regent From the time of the Queen's competition for the Regency
alters her with the Duke of Chatelherault, the Popish clergy, under the
condue:
with regard direction of the Archbiflop of St. Andrew's, had set themselves
to thePro- in opposition to all her measures. Her firfl ftep towards the ex-
teltants.

ecution of her new scheme, was to regain their favour. Nor
was this reconcilement a matter of difficulty. The Popish ec-
clefiaflics, separated fro:n the reft of mankind by the law of celi-
bacy, the boldest and mofl successful invention of human policy 3
and combined among themselves in the clofell and moil sacred
union; have been accufomned, in every age, to sacrifice all pri-
vate and particular paflions to the dignity and interest of their or-
der. Delighted, on this occasion, with the profpe& of triumph-
ing over a facsion, whose encroachments they had long dreaded 3
and animated with the hopes of re-cffablilhing their declining
grandeur on a firmer basis; they, at once, cancelled the memo-
ry of pafl injuries, and engaged to second the Queen in all her
attempts to check the progress of the Reformation. The Queen,
being secure of their afltance, openly approved of the decrees of
the convocation, by which the principles of the Reformers were
condemned ; and at the fame time, fie issued a proclamation, en-
joining all pcrfons to observe the approaching feflival of Easter,
according to the llomifh ritual.

As it was no longer possible to miflake the OQeen's intentions,

the Protcftants, who saw the danger approach, in order to avert
it, employed the Earl of Glencairn, and Sir Hugh Campbell of
Loudon, to cxpofrulate with her, concerning this change towards
fcvcrity, which their former services had so little merited, and
which her reiterated promises gave them no reason to expet. She,
without disguise or apology, avowed to them her resolution of ex-
tirpating the Reformed religion out of the kingdom. And, up-
on their urging her former engagements, with an uncourtly, but
hloneil boldness, fie so far forgot her usual moderation, as to ut-
ter a sentiment, which, however apt those of royal condition
may be to entertain it, prudence flould teach them to conceal
with the utmolt care. The promises of Princes, fays fle, ought
not to be too carefully remembered, nor the performance of them
exadedI, unlcfs it suits their own convenicncy.

;Lnll-Ons 1The indignation which betrayed the Olecn into this rnnfl ex-.
Itciriu.Ck'hI' prLefilon, was nothing in comparison of that, with which flie was

..I
, ... ......l ,:;n.:f,;.c un helrinl,' that the public cecrcifc of the Reformed

Weligion had been introduced into the town of Perth. At once, BooK II.
she threw off the mafl, and commanded all the Protestant preach- -
ers in the kingdom to be summoned to a court of justice, which ISS9,
v;as to be held at Stirling on the Ioth of May. The Protestants,
who, from their union, began about this time, to be diftinguifli-
ed by the name of the CONGREGATION, were alarmed, but not in-
timidated by this danger; and inflantly resolved not to abandon
the men, to whom they were indebted for the most valuable of
all blessings, the knowledge of truth. At that time, there pre-
vailed in Scotland, with respect to criminal trials, a custom, in-
troduced, at first, by the inltitutions of vassalage and clanfhip,
and tolerated, afterwards, under a feeble government ; any per-
son accused of a crime was accompanied to the place of trial, by
a retinue of his friends and adherents, assemblcd for that purpose,
from every corner of the kingdom. Authorized by this ancient
practice, the Reformed convened, in great numbers, to attend
their pafPors to Stirling. The Queen dreaded their approach with
a train so numerous, though unarmed, and in order to prevent
them from advancing, ile empowered John Erskine of Dun, a
person of eminent authority with the party, to promise, in her
name, that fle would put a flop to the intended trial, on condi-
tion, the preachers and their retinue advanced no nearer to Stir-
ling. Erskine, being convinced himiflf of the Queen's finccri-
ty, served her with the utmoit zeal. And the Protestants,
averse from proceeding to any aa of violence, lillened with plea-
sure to to pacific a proposition. The preachers, with a few lead-
ers of the party, remained at Perth; the multitude, which had
gathered from different parts of the kingdom, dispersed, and re-
tired to their own habitations.

But, notwithllanding this solemn promise, the Qceen, on the Breaks a
loth of May, proceeded to call to trial the persons who had been I"'omi"i' o"

v hicll they.

furnmoned, and upon their non-appearance, the rigour of junice had reliel.
took place, and they were pronounced outlaws. By this ignoble
artifice, so incompatible with regal dignity, and so inconsistent
with that integrity which nliould prevail in all tranlitlfions be-
tween a Sovereign and his people, the Queen forfeited the liteem
and confidence of the whole nation. Tlie Proteilants, fliocked
no less at the indecency, with which lhe violated the public faith,
than at the danger which threatened themfclvcs, prepared boldly
for their own defence. Erikine, enraged at having been m:ldc
the inltrumcnit for deceiving his party, inflantly abandoned Stir-
ling, and repairing to 'crth, added to the zeal of his aflociatc,

0

Booc II. by his representations of the Queen's inflexible refolutioi .to sup-
Lv -- press their religion.
ThisC . The popular rhetoric of Knox powerfully seconded his repre-
This occa-
sions an in- fentations. Knox, having been carried a prisoner into France,.
lr-J-aionat together with the other persons taken in the castle of St. An-

drew's, soon made his escape out of that country ; and residing
sometimes in England, sometimes in Scotland, had, at last, been
driven out of both kingdoms by the rage of the Popifli clergy,
and was obliged to retire to Geneva. Thence he was called by
the leaders of the Protcllants in Scotland ; and, in compliance
with their solicitations, he set out for his native country, where
he arrived a few days before the trial appointed at Stirling. He
hurried inltantly to Perth, to share with his brethren in the com-
mon danger, or to aflifl them in promoting the common cause.
WA71ile their minds were in that ferment, which the Queen's per-
fidioufilefs and their own danger occasioned, he mounted the pul-
pit, and by a vehement harangue against idolatry, inflamed the
multitude with the utmost rage. The indiscretion of a priest,
who, immediately after Knox's sermon, was preparing to cele-
brate mass, and began to decorate the altar for that purpose, pre-
cipitated them into immediate adlion. With tumultuary, but ir-
reliflible violence, they fell upon the churches in that city, over-
turned the altars, defaced the pictures, broke in pieces the
images ; and proceeding next to the monasteries, they, in a few
hours, laid those sumptuous fabrics almost level with the ground.
This riotous infurredtion was not the effect of any concert, or pre-
vious deliberation censurcd by the reformed preachers, and pub-
licly condemned by the persons of moit power and credit with
the party, it must be regarcldd lmerely as an accidcntal eruption
of popular rage *.

TllcRe. cnt But to the Qcen herfclf, there proceedings appeared in a very
mnallrcls different light. Befidcs their aniilfcfl contempt for her authority,
them. the Protefcants had violated every thing in religion, which Ilhe

elcemed venerable or holy; and, on both there accounts, fle
determined to infli& the feverclt vengeance on the whold party.
She liad already drawn thle troops in French pay to Stirling;
vwit.h thefc, and what Scottill forces lile could levy of a lidden,
flte marched dired'lly to Perth, in hopes of u-rprifing the Protcf-
tant leaders, before they could afYiamble their followers, whom
out of confidence in her dilingcnuous promircs they had rallhly
been induced to dlilinili. Intcllipcncc of tlheir p'reparations and

"IInox, Ilift. J2, 128.

mnenaces was soon conveyed to Perth. The Protestants would, BooKi II.
gladly, have soothed the OQeen, by addresses both to herself, and
to the persons of greatest credit in her court ; but finding her in-
exorable, they, with great vigour, took measures for their own
defence. Their adherents, animated with zeal for religion, and
eager to expose thcmfelves in so good a cause, flocked, in such
numbers, to Perth, that they not only secured the town from dan-
ger, but were, within a few days, in a condition to take the field,
and to face the Q.een, who advanced with an army secen thou-
sand firong.

Neither party, however, was impatient to engage. The OQcen

dreaded the event of a battle with men, whom the fervour of re-
ligion raised above the sense of fear, or of danger. 'Ihe Protcf-
tants beheld, with regret, the Earl of Argyle, and Prior of St.
Andrew's, and tome other eminent pcrfuns of their party, frill ad-
hering to the Queen ; and deflitute of their aid and council, de-
clined hazarding an action, the ill success of which might have
proved the ruin of their cause. The profpecl of an accommoda-
tion was for these reasons highly acceptable to both fides, Argyle
and the Prior, who were the Queen's commilffoners for conduct-
ing the negociation, seem to have been finccrely desirous of recon-
ciling the contending fa&ions ; and the Earl of Glencairn arriv-
ing unexpcqcedly with a powerful reinforcement to the Congrega-
tion, augmented the Queen's eagerness for peace. A treaty was A treaty
accordingly concluded, in which it was ftipulated,that both armies concluded.
should be dilbanded, and the gates of Perth set open to the Queen;
that indemnity ihould be granted to the inhabitants of that city,
and to all others concerned in the late infurrecion ; that no
French garrifbn should be left in Perth, and no French foldicrg
should approach within three miles of that place ; and that a
Parliament flould immediately be held, in order to compose what.
ever differences might still remain *.

The leaders of the Congregation, diftruflful of the Qeen's

finccrity, and sensible that conceflions, flowing not from inclina-
tion, but extorted by the neceflity of her affairs, could not long
remain in force, entered into a new association, by which they Ma) 9.
bound themselves, on the first infringement of the present treaty,
or on the least appearance of danger to their religion, to rc-afl
femlel their followers, and to take arms in defence of what they
elleinced the cultfC of God, and of their country ' .

"1;sitilt, 89. ' Knox, 138 .

o ;i

_BOOK .I. The Queen, by her conduct, demonflrated these precautions tó'

be the result of no groundless or unnecessary fear. No sooner

'559.

Broken by vwere the Protestant forces difmifled, than flhe broke every article
the Regent. in the treaty. She introduced French troops into Perth, fined

some of the inhabitants, banifled others, removed the Magifirates
out of office, and, on her retiring to Stirling, she left behind her
a garrison of fix hundred men, with orders to allow the exercise
of no other religion than the Roman Catholic. The situation of
Perth, a place at that time of some flrength, and a town the mofi
proper of any in the kingdom for the station of a garrison, seems to
have allured the Queen to this unjustifiable, and ill-judged breach
of public faith ; which lhe endeavoured to colour, by alleging
that the body of men left at Perth was entirely composed of na-
tive Scots, though kept in pay by the King of France.

The Q ucen's scheme began gradually to unfold; it was now

apparent, that not only the religion, but the liberties of the king-
dom were threatened; and that the French troops were to be em-
ployed as instruments for subduing the Scots, and wreathing the
yoke about their necks. Martial as the genius of the Scots then
uwas, the poverty of their country made it impoflible to keep their
armies long assembled; and even a very small body of regular
troops might have proved formidable to the nation, though con-
filling wholly of soldiers. But, what number of French forces
were then in Scotland, at .what time, and under what prctexts they
returned, after having left the kingdom in the year I55O, we can-
not, with any certainty, determine. Cotemporary hillorians of-
ten fele&t, with little judgment, the circumflances which they
tranfinit to posterity; and, with refpe& to matters of the greatlft
curiosity and importance, leave succeeding ages altogether in the
dark. We may conjecure however, fiom some paffagcs in Bu-
chanan, that the French and Scots in French pay, amounted at
leafi to three thousand men, under the command of Mon: D)'Oy-
fel, a creature of the house of Guise; and they were soon aug-
mented to a much more formidable number.

The Queen, encouraged by having so confideiable a body of

well disciplined troops at her command, and inlfigated by the
violent councils of D'Oyfel, had ventured, as we have oblerved,
to violate the treaty of Perth, and, by liat rmll alioni, once more

The protefl threw the nation into the moll ldaingerous convnlllions. '1' le Earl
ilt.kc ,r:l; of Argylc and Prior of St. Aindrcw's inl;nllly dclrtcd ai court

where faith andl honour fcClmed to be no longer regarded. T'll
Barons froni tl.c n ci,:.;lbourin. ; counlties repCl'aird to tihcm, ti:

pteachers rouled the people to arms, and wherever they came, iooK II.
the fame violent operations, which accident had occasioned at Lr
Perth, were now encouraged out of policy. The enraged mul- 1 55>'
titude was let loose, and churches and monafceries, the monu-
ments of ecclefiaflic pride and luxury, were sacrificed to their
zeal.

In order to check their career, the QOeen, without losing a

moment, put her troops in motion; but the zeal of the Congre-
gation got the start, once more, of her vigilance and activity.
In that warlike age, when all men were accuflomed to arms, and
on the least profpet of cdanger were ready to run to them, the
leaders of the Protestants found no difficulty to raise an ;armiy.
Though they set out from St. Andrew's witll a fiender train of
an hundred horfc, crowds flocked to their flandardis from cverv
rorner of the country through which they marched, and before
they reached Falkland, a village only ten miles dillant, they wvcre
able to meet the Quecn with superior force *.

The Qteen, surprised at the approach of so formidable a body,

which was drawn up hy its leaders in such a manner, as added
greatly in appearance to its numlbers, had again recourse to nc-
gociation. She found, however, th:t the prefcrvatien of the Pro-
teflant religion, their zeal for which had at firlt routed the lead-
ers of the Congregation to take arms, was not the only object they ' lv *:, .,
had now in view. They were animated with the warme/l love rtlI,''(in,;
of civil liberty, whicli they conceived to be in imminent danger, s r l;;ii,
from the attempts of the French forces; and thlfe two pailions ,"'.'-"'-
mingling, added reciprocally to each otler's firengthl. Together
with mnore enlarged notions in religion, the Reformation filled
the luman mind with more liberal and generous sentiments con-
cerning civil government. 'Ihe genius of Popery is extremcly
favourable to the power of Princes. The implicit fubmilfion to
all her decrees, which the Romiill Church exacts, prepares and
breaks the mind for political fervitudet and the doctrines of the
Rcformers, by overturning tle elabllilled Iyllem of fupcfrition,
wvcakened the firmelt foundations of civil tyranny. Tlhat bold
spirit of inrqiry, which led men to rejcc: tlhcolo,,ical errors, ac-
conipanied them into other sciences, and ldif;overed every where
the fame manlly zeal for truth. A new fiudy introduced at tlle
faime timec, alded greater force to the fpiri: of liberty. Plce
becalme acquainted with the Greek and Rlloman authors, V 0o dc-

l Kiox, .41r.

BOOK II. fcribed exquisite models of free governmcnt, far superior to the

V inaccurate and oppressive fyfttcm cftablifhed by the feudal law; and
59 produced such illultiious examples of public virtue, as wonderful-

ly suitcd both the circumfiances, and spirit of that age. MAany,
among the moil eminent Reformers, were thcmfelves confidernble
maflers in ancient learning; and all of them eagerly adopted the
maxims and spirit of the ancients, with regard to government *.
The noll ardent love of liberty accompanied the Proteflant re-
ligion, throughout all its progress; and wherever it was embra-
ced, it roused an independent spirit, which rendered men atten-
tive to their pivil!cgs as fubjecs, and jealous of the encroach-
ments of their Sovereigns. Knox, and the other preachers of the
Rcformation, infused generous sentiments concerning government
into the minds of their hearers, and the Scottish Barons, natu-
rally free and bold, were prompted to aflert their rights with more
freedom and holdnels than ever. Injiead of obeying the Queen
Regent, who had enjoined them to lay down their arms, they de-
manded not only the redress of their religious grievances, but as
a preliminary toward fettling the nation, and securing its liberties,
required the immcdiate expulsion of the French troops out of
Scotland. It was not in the Queen's power to make so impor-
tant a concefimon, without the concurrence of the French Mo-
narch; and as some time was requisite in order to obtain that, Ihe
hoped, during this interval, to receive such reinforcements from
France, as would insure the accomplifitment of that design, which
fihe had twice attempted with unequal flrength. Meanwhile,
J.ne 13. flie agreed to a ceflation of arms for eight days, and, before the

expiration of these, engaged to transport the French troops to the
other fide of the Forth ; and to fend comminiloners to St. Andrew's,
who lhould labour to bring all differences to accommodation. As
hile hoped, by means of the French troops, to overawe the Protes-
tants in the southern counties, the former article in the treaty
was puncually executed; the latter, having been inserted merely
to amTufe the Congr,:gation, was lno longer remembered.

' The excelJ've atlllir:tinn ofancicntil policy was the occ.afon or Inox's s;i-

)!lu15 ho)l(', ('Ok C('I'II ilig G, ; v :.' .:,iE 'T' or 'oI,,,,

IV.Gwhc'Uin, conformable Ito

il maixiIis of Cll- ancient egill r' i.s, iicll moderni experience 1has proved to

i, ill-lbir:,!i ! l, h lcrnou nu ,ilc'i ib l-evtiol of wml en t hilo iefillcprm nuitllolily,

:a1e,: '. 'ih r,;.,-;l to Bitc1}:'i:n',; )ill,;'.]m. , !). JtuiTr. jtiic :'X AIL'D SCOTOs.
,i '. .,:1 . ,.lJ ::.lCt i tlo : m;ll ;i.xilllj, uLo'J tldi, blut of aICii. lt gouernmLent.

By these reiterated and wanton instances of perfidy, the Ouccn BooK I1.

loft all credit with her adversaries; and no fafcty appearing in any
other course, they again took arms with more inflamed resentment, A c559
and with bolder and more extensive views. The removing of the traty vio-
French forces had laid open to them all the country situated be- liLted.
tween Forth and Tay. Perth alone remained fubjcced to the in-
folcnce and exactions of the garrison, which the Queen had left
there, and implored the assistance of the Congregation for their
relief. Thither they marched, and having, without effec, re-
quired the Queen to evacuate the town in terms of the former
treaty, they prepared to besiege it in form. The tQeen employ-
ed the Earl of -untly and Lord Erfzine to divert them from
this cnterprife. But her wonted artifices were of no avail; re-
peated so often, they could deceive no longer ; and without lif-
tening to them, the Protcflants continued the siege, and soon
obliged the garrison to capitulate.

After the loss of Perth, the Queen endeavoured to seize Stir- Rapid

ling, a place of some strength, and, from its command of the only rlccl an',
bridge over the Forth, of great importance. But the leaders of the I'rotcie
the Congregation, having intelligence of her dclign, prevented the tants.
execution of it, by an hasty march thither, with part of their forces.
The inhabitants, heartily attached to the caucf, set open to them
the gates of their town. Thence they advanced, with the fame
rapidity, towards Edinburgh, which the Queen, on their approach,
abandoned with precipitation, and retired to lDunbar.

The Protefiant army, wherever it came, kindled, or spread the

ardour of Reformation, and the utmost excesses of violence were
committed upon churches and monallerics. The former were
spoiled of every decoration, which was then elteemed sacred, the
latter were laid in ruins. Ve are apt, at this diltance of time,
to condemn the furious zeal of the Reformers, and to regret the
overthrow of so many ifately fabrics, the monuments of our anccllors
magnificcnce, and among the noblest ornaments of the kiingdom.
But, amildf the violence of a Reformation, carried on in oppofi-
tion to legal authority, f1me irregularities were unavoiudaliIlc and
perhaps no one could h:ve been perniitted more proper to allure
and intcrcn the multitude, or more fat::l to the grandeur of the efla-
hlillhc church. However abliird and ill-founded the fi)cculalive
errors of Popery may I c, luinml iiiuiiiry atil atctntion :Ire rceqLiiflte
towards clifeovclri; tllciii. IThe abufcs and corruptionls, vhich
had crept inlto tlh public worllipl of tlht chlurch, lay mnore (]ope
to cbf rrvaion, ;and I'y fl1iki, tllh IeCfn;'*, excited inuore uuivc'il

BoOK II. disgust. Under the long reign of Heathenifin, fupcrflition feeni

to have exhaulted its talent of invention, lo that when a fuperlti,
'59. ttious spirit feizcl Chrillians, they were obliged to imitate the

Heathens in the pomp and magnificence of their ceremonies, and
to borrow from them the ornaments and decorations of their tem-
ples. To the pure and simple worship of the primitive Chrillians,
there succeeded a species of splendid idolatry, nearly refemblilng
those Pagan originals, whence it had been copied. The contrariety
of such observances, to the spirit of Chriflianity, was almoil the
firif thing, in the Romish fyflem, which awakened the indignation
of the Reformers, lwho applying, to these, the denunciations in
the Old Teflament against idolatry, imagined that they could not
endcavour at fuLpprefling them, villh too much zeal. No talk
could be more acceptable to the multitude, than to overturn therf
feats of fuperflition ; they ran witl emulation to perform it, and
happy was the man whose hand was mofl.adventrous and success-
ful in executing a work esteemcd ol pious. Nor did their leaders
labour to restrain this impetuous spirit of Reformation. Irregular
and violent as its flllies were, they tended diredly to that end
which they had in view; for by dcmolidiing the monasteries
throughout the kingdom, and retting at liberty their wretched
inhabitants, they hoped to render it impofljble ever to re-edify the
c:.e, or to re-aflemble the otlhcr.

But amidil thele irregular proceedings, a circumstance, whiclh

(does honour to the condudl and humanity of the leaders of the
Congregation, deferres notice. Tlhey so far rellrained the rage
of their followers, and we-rc able so to temper tleir heat and zeal,
that few of the Roman Catholics were cxpofcd to any pcrfonal in-
fult, and not a lingle plan suffered death .

At the faine time, we dilcover, by the facility with which these

great revolutions were effelectl, how violently the current of na-
tional favour ran towards the R cformation. No more than three
hundred mel marched out of Perth under the Earl of Argyle and
Prior of St. Andrew's f- with this inconsiderable force they ad-
vanced. liut wherever they came, the people joined them in a
Lody their army was feldoin less n:.ncrous than five thouland
1l:C ; the gates of every town were thrown open to receive them;
ju.c: :),. n!d, without llriking a iiingle blow, they took pcflefion of the ca-

pital of the kingdom.

T'lii rapid and altonifliing ficcefs fcnms to have encouraged the
.efuormers to extend their views, and to ril'e in their demands.

:* LJ.tn , 231. 'j Iei1i, 94.

Not satisfied with their firit claim of toleration for their religion,
they now, openly, aimed at eftablifling the Protellant doctrine on I S59
the ruins of Popery. For this reason, they determined to fix their
refidence'at Edinburgh ; and, by theirappointment, Knox and onme
other preachers taking poflefsion of the pulpits, which had been
abandoned bythe afi-ightened clergy, declaimed against the errors
of Popery, with litch fervent zeal, as could not fail of gaining
many proselytes.

In the mean time, the Qi.ecn, who had prudently given way

to a torrent which ihe could not refilt, obfcrved, with pleafurc,
that it now began to lubfide. The leaders of the Congregation had
been above two months in arms, and by the expences of a canm-
paign protracted so long beyond the usual time of ferivce in that
age, had exhaufled all the money, which a country, where riches
did not abound, had been able to supply. The multitude, dazzled
with their success, and concluding the work to be already done, re-
tired to their own habitations. A few, only, of the more zealous
or wealthy Barons remained with their preachers at Edinburgh.
As intelligence is procured in civil wars with little dificulty,
whatever was tranfalced at Edinburgh, was soon known at Dunbar.
And the Queen, regulating her own conduct by the situation of
her adversaries, artfully amused them with the profpec& of an im-
mediate accommodation; while, at the fame time, lie, by fludied
delays, spun out the negociations for that purpose to such a length,
that, in the end, the party dwindled to an inconsiderable number,
and, as if peace had been already rc-eitablifhed, became carclefs
of military discipline. The Qecn, who watched for such an op.
portunity, advanced, unexpecedly, by a sudden march in the
night with all her forces, and appearing before Edinburgh, filled
that city with the utmoit conflernation. The Proteltants, weak-
ened by the imprudent dispersion of their followers, durlt not en-
counter the French troops in the open field; and were even unable
to defend an ill-fortified town, againlt their assaults. Unwilling,
however, to abandon the citizens to the Queen's mercy, they
endeavoured, by facing the enemies army, to gain time for col-
lecting their own associates. But the Queen, in iifite of all thcir rc-
fillance, would have easily forced her way into the town, if the
fcafonable conclusion of a truce had not procured her admiflion,
without the effusion of blood.

Their dangerous situation easily induced the Congregation to A ilird
lillen to any overtures of peace3 and as tle Qecen was looking trC:

P

BooK II. daily for the arrival of a ifrong reinforcement from France, and

cxpeted great advantages from a cessation of arms, fle also agreed
ISS9.

to it upon no unequal conditions. Together with a suspension of hof-
tilities, from the 24th of July to the ioth of January, it was fli-
pulated, in this treaty, that, on the one hand, the Protestants
ihould abandon Edinburgh next morning; remain in dutiful sub-
jedion to the government of the Queen Regent; abflain from all
future violation of religious houses; and give no interruption to
the effablifhed clergy, either in the discharge of their funcions,
or in the enjoyment of their benefices. On the other hand, the
Queen agreed to give no molellatibn to the preachers or profef.
fors of the Protestant religion; to allow no other form of worship
in Edinburgh but the Reformed; and to permit the free and
public exercise of it all over the kingdom. The Queen hoped to
sooth the Proteflants, by these liberal concessions in behalf of their
religion, and expeded, from indulging their favourite pafion, to
render them more compliant with refpet to other articles, parti-
cularly the expulsion of the French troops out of Scotland. The
anxiety which the Queen expressed for retaining this body of
men, rendered them, more and more the objeas of national jea-
lousy and aversion. The immediate expulsion of them was there-
forc demanded a-new, and with greater warmth; but the Queen,
taking advantage of the diflrefs of the adverse party, eluded the
,equeft, and would consent to nothing more, than that a French
garrioln fliould not be introduced into Edinburgh.

The desperate slate of their affairs imposed on the Congrega-

tion the necelfity of agreeing to this article, which, however, was
very far from giving them fatisfadtion. Whatever apprehensions
the Scots had conceived, from retaining the French forces in the
kingdom, were abundantly juflified during the late commotions.
A finall body of those troops, maintained in conflant pay, and ren-
dered formidable by regular discipline, had checked the progress
of a martial people, though animated with zeal both for religion
and liberty. The fmallefl addition to their number, and a confi-
derable one was daily cxpeccd, might prove fatal to public liber-
ty, and Scotland might be exposed to the danger of being re-
duced, from an independent kingdom, to the mean condition of
a province, annexed to the empire of its powerful ally.

In order to provide against this imminent calamity, the Dukl;

of Chatelherault, and Earl of IIuntly, immediately after conclud-
ing the truce, dcfired an interview with the chiefs of the Conigrl-.

gation. These two noblemen, the most potent at that time in BOOE II.
Scotland, were the leaders of the party, which adhered to the v-
ftlabliflied church. They had followed the Queen, during the I559-
late commotions, and having access to observe more narrowly the
dangerous tendency of her councils, their abhorrence of the yoke
which was preparing for their country, surmounted all other con-
fiderations, and determined them rather to endanger the religion
which they professed, than to give their aid towards the execution
of her pernicious designs. They proceeded farther, and promised
to Argyle, Glencairn, and the Prior of St. Andrew's, who were
appointed to meet with them, that if the Queen slould, with her
usual insincerity, violate any article in the treaty of truce, or re-
fuse to gratify the wishes of the whole nation, by difinifing her
French troops, they would, then, inflantly join with their coun-
trymen, in compelling her to a measure, which the public safety,
and the preservation of their liberties rendered neceflary '.

About this time, died Henry II. of France; just when he had July e.

adopted a system, with regard to the affairs of Scotland, which
would, in all probability, have restored union and tranquillity to
that kingdom -f. Towards the close of his reign, the Princes of
Lorrain began, visibly, to decline in favour, and the Conllable
IMontmorency, by the affilfance of the Dutchcfs of Valentinois,
recovered that ascendant over the spirit of his mafler, which his
great experience, and his faithful, though often unfortunate ser-
vices, seemed justly to merit. That prudent Minister imputed
the infurreEtions in Scotland, wholly to the Duke of Guilf and
Cardinal of Lorrain, whose violent and precipitant councils could
not fail of transporting, beyond all bounds of moderation, men,
whose minds were poffeflcd with that jealousy, which is inlipa-
rable from the love of civil liberty, or inflamed with that ardour
which accompanies religious zeal. And, in order to convince
Henry, that he did not load his rivals with any groundlels accu-
fation, he prevailed to have rMclvil:, a Scottilli gentleman of
his retinuc, dispatched into his native country, with inllructions
to observe the motions both of the Regent, and of her advcrlh-
ries; and the King agreed to regulate his future proceedings, il
that kingdom, by Mclvil's report.

Did hillory indulge hcrfclf in such fpcculations, it would be
amuling to inquire what a differcnt direction might have beenl

' Knox, 1r [. j Icl. 4 9.
'I'lic Author of the M1cmoris.

P ij

BooK II. given by this resolution, to the national spirit; and to what a dif-

ferent issue, Melvil's report, which would have set the conduct
1559. of the malecontents in the most favourable light, might have

conduAed the public disorders. Perhaps, by gentle treatment,
and artful policy, the progress of the Reformation might have
been checked, and Scotland brought to depend upon France.
Perhaps, by gaining pofleffion of this avenue, the French might
have made their way into England, and, under colour of sup-
porting Mary's title to the Crown, they might have re-establish-
the Roman Catholic religion, and destroyed the liberties of that
kingdom. But, into this boundless field of fancy and conjeflure,
the hiflorian must make no excursions; to relate real occurrences,
and to explain their real caufcs and effcts, is his peculiar and
only province.

The tragical and untimely death of the French Monarch put

an end to all moderate and pacific mcafures, with regard to Scot-
Acceflion of land. The Duke of Guise, and the Cardinal his brother, upon

ncis
te the accession of Francis II. a Prince void of genius, and without

Crown of experience, aflumed the chief direcion of French affairs. Allied
France. so nearly to the throne, by the marriage of their niece the Qpeen

of Scots with the young King, they now wanted but little of re-
gal dignity, and nothing of regal power. This power did not
long remain inaftive in their hands. The fame vast schemes of
ambition, which they had planned out under the former reign,
were again resumed; and they were enabled, by poffcffing such
ample authority, to purlue them with more vigour, and greater
probability of success. They beheld with infinite regret, the
progress of the Protestant religion in Scotland ; and flenfible
what an unsurmountable obtlaclc it would prove to their designs,
they bent all their irhength to check its growth, before it rouc to
any greater height. For this purpose, they carried on their pre-
parations, with all possible expedition, and encouraged the Qecle
their fifler, to expet, in a flort time, the arrival of an army, so
powerful, as the zeal of their advcrfaries, however desperate,
would not venture to oppofc.

Nor were the Lords of the Congregation either ignorant of

there violent counfcls, which prevailed in the court of France,
since the death of Henry, or careless of providing againlt the
danger, which threatened tlhem from that quarter. The fucccfl
of their cause, as well as their pcrional faifety, depending entirely
on the unanimity and vigour of their own rclblutions, they en-

dcavoured to guard against division, and to cement together more BOOK II.
closely, by entering into a firicer bond of confederacy and mu- t'
tual defence. Two persons concurred in this new aflociation, 1559-
who brought a great accession both of reputation and of power to
the party. These were the Duke of Chatelherault, and his eld-
elt son the Earl of Arran. This young nobleman, having re-
fided some years in France, where he commanded the Scots
Guards, had imbibed the Protestant opinions concerning religion.
Hurried along by the heat of youth, and the zeal of a proselyte,
he had uttered itntiments, with relf)ect to the points in contro-
verfy, which did not suit the temper of a bigotted court, intent,
at that juncture, on the extinction of the Protefiant religion; in
order to accomplish which, the utmoll exccfles of violence were
committed. 'he church was fuft'red to wreak its utmollt fury
upon all who were fuifpcccd of heresy. Courts were erccted, in
different parts of France, to take cognizance of this crime, and by
their sentences, fevcral persons of diltinclion were condemned to
the flames.

But; in order to inspire more universal terror, the Princes of

Lorrain resolved to feleft, for a sacrifice, some person, whole fall
might convince all ranks of men, that neither splendor of birth,
nor eminence in station, would exempt from punifhmcnt, thole who
should be guilty of this unpardonable transgression. The Earlof Ar-
ran was the person deflined to be the unhappy vitim *. As he was
allied to one throne, and the presumptive heir to another; as lie pof-
feffedthe firlt rank in his own country, and enjoyed an honourable
flation in France ; his condemnation could not fail of making thl
dcfired impreflion on the whole kingdom. But the Cardinal of Lor-
rain, having let fall some expreflons, which raited the Earl of Arran's
suspicions of the design, he escaped the intended blow, by a timely
flight. Indignation, zeal, rclentment, all prompted him to seek
revenge upon theie persecutors of himlelf and of the religion which
lie profefle:d ; and as he pafled through lEngland, on his return to
his native country, Elizabeth, by ho'pcs and promises, inflamed
thole paillons, and sent hiil back into Scotland, animated with the
fime implacable averlion for F'Ialce, whichi pollenicl a great part
of his countrymen. I-I quickly coinmunciated thlice icntiments "arl of
to his father the 1)uke of Ch:itclllcrault, who was alrc:ady extrellnly rr j:in;.
difgufled with tle nccallttrcs carrying' on in Scotl;llnd; and as it ,1t. l ot l
was the fate of that noblcman: to be gov'rnled, in every ifsillnce,
by thole about limn, lie now ilulicrcd hiiil'clf to Le drawls froIu

' li' an, ll. ixxlv. p. .:i.. Edit. I:'r:icot.

BooK Ir. the Queen Regent; and having joined tlhe Congregation, was
IvS confidered, from that time, as the head of the party.

S59- But with respect to him, this diflinaion was merely nominal.

James Stewart, Prior of St. Andrew's, was the person who moved
and actuated the whole body of the Proteflants, among whom, he
possessed that unbounded confidence, which his itrenuous adhe-
rencc to their interell, and his eminent abilities, so juffly merited.
IIe was the natural son of James V. by a daughter of Lord
Erskine ; and as that amorous Monarch had left several others, a
burden upon the Crown, they were all delfined for the church,
where they could be placed in Itations of dignity and affluence.
Ill consequence of this resolution, the priory of St. Andrew's
had been conferred upon James: but, during so busy a period, lhe
soon became difgufled with the indolence and retirement of a
monastic life; and his enterpriling genius called him forth, to at
a principal part on a more public and conspicuous theatre. The
fccne, in which he appeared, required talents of different kinds;
and military virtue, and political discernment, were equally ne-
ceffary, in order to render him illulfrious. These he possessed in
an eminent degree. To the monl unquetfionable personal bravely,
he added great 1kill in the art of war, and in every enterprise his
arms were crowned with success. His sagacity and penetration in
civil affairs enabled him, amidfl the reeling and turbulance of
faclions, to hold a prosperous course. While his boldnels in de-
fence of the Reformation, together with the decency, and even
cfverity of his manners, secured him the reputation of being
sincerely attached to religion, without which, it was impoflible,
in that age, to gain an afccndant over mankind.

It was not without rcafon, that the Quceen dreaded the enmity

of a man, so capable to obttruil her designs. And as f:e could
not, with her utmolf addrcls, make the Icaft impreflion on his
fidelity to his afliociates, ihe endeavoured to Icfl'cn his influence,
and to fcattcr among them the feeds of jcaloul' and dillrufl, by
inlinuating that the ambition of the Prior aljlirdl beyond tile con-
dition of a llbjelt, and aimed at nothing leil tlhan the Crown it-

'An accusation so improbable, gained but little credit. And

wvhatcvcr thoughlts of this kind, the prciilin)tplion of unexpected
lI'cccfl, and his (:levation to the hig'hcst digiiity in the kingdom,
may l)e alleged to have infplircl, at any lilflcq(ucnt period, it is
cc:lt.iin tllht, at this junclurc, hie could form nv Ilchl vail design.

To dethrone a Queen, who was lineal heir to an ancient race of Boole II.
Monarchs ; who had been guilty of no acion, by which she '-
could forfeit the elteem and affection of her fubjets ; who could 559
employ, in defence of her rights, the forces of a kingdom, much
more powerful thani her own ; and to fubititute, in her place, a
person, whom the illegitimnacy of his birth, by the practice of all
civilized nations, rendered incapable of any inheritance, either
public or private ; was a proje&c, so chimerical, as the mofl ex-
travagant ambition would scarce entertain, and could never con-
ceive to be practicable. The promifc, too, which the Prior made
to Melvil, of residing conllantly in France, on condition the pub-
lic grievances were redlefed *; the confidence reposed in him
by the Duke of Chatelllerault and his son, the presumptive heirs
to the Crown; and the concurrence of almoll the whole Scottifi
nobles, in promoting those measures, by which he gave offence
to the French court, go far towards his vindication from those
illegal and criminal dcfigns, with the imputation of which, the
Queen endeavoured, at that time, to load him.

The arrival of a thousand French soldiers compensated, in some Troops
degree, for the loss which the' Queen iillnincd by the defection of arr'i't fiom

t°, ~ ~ ~

~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ " ' C(

'rtn ;iia ,

the Duke of Chatclherault. 'Ilhcle were, immediately, commanded lortCty
to fortify Leith, in which place, on account of its commodious -L'h.
harbour, and its situation in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh,
and in the heart of a plentiful country, the QOeen resolved to
fix the head quarters of her foreign forces. This unpopular
meafare, by the manner of cxecuting it, was rendered Itill more
unpopular. In order to bring the town entirely under their
command, the French turned out a great part of the ancient inha-
bitants, and taking poffellion of the houses, which they had obli-
ged them to abandon, presented, to the view of the Scots, two
objects equally irritating and offenfivc; on the one hand, a num-
ber of their countrymen expelled their habitations by violence,
and wandering without any certain abode; on the other, a colony
of foreigners, ifttling, with their wives and children, in the heart
of Scotland, growing into ftrcngth by daily reinforcements, and
openly preparing a yoke, to which, without fime timely exertion
of national spirit, the whole kingdom must, of necelfity, fubnllit.

It was with the utmost concern, that tile Lords of the Congre- 'Tle Irote-

gation beleld this bold and decilive 1lep, taken by the Qcen llI:nl:ti; I-
tcegcnt; nor did they hcfitate, a moment, lvwhether they lfhould : ,l;,It tis.

* M rl-.-:il , th1i

BobK II. employ their whole stren'gth, in one generous effort, to rescue

their religion and liberty from impending deflrution. But, in
1559.

order to juPtify their own conduct, and to throw the blame en-
tirely on their adverlaries, they resolved to preserve the appear-
ances of decency and refpe& towards their superiors, and to have
no recourle to arms, without the most urgent apparent necessity.
Sept. 29. They joined, with this view, in an address to the Regent, repre-

senting, in the firongell terms, their diffatisfation with the mea-
furcs (lhe was pursuing, and befecching her to quiet the fears and
jealousies of the nation, by desisting from fortifying Leith. Thle
Qneen, conscious of her.prefent advantageous situation, and elat-
ed with the hopes of frelh succours, was in no disposition for lif-
tening to demands, utterly inconfiltent with her views, and urged
with that bold importunity, which is so little acceptable to
Princes.

The Regent The fuggeflions of her French Counsellors contributed, with-
their re-gaS out doubt, to alienate her frill farther from any scheme of accom-
in:onllran- modation. As the Queen was ready. on all occasions, to dif-

cover an extraordinary deference for the opinions of her country-
men, her brothers, who knew her secret disapprobation of the vio-
lent measures they were driving on, took care to place near her
such persons, as betrayed her, by their iniinuations, into many
actions, which her own unbiaffed judgment would have highly
condemned. And as their success in the present junEture, lhcn
all things were haflening towards a crisis, depended entirely on
the Queen's firmncfs, the Princes of Lorrain did not trust wholly
to the influence of their ordinary agents; but, in order to add the
greater weight to their counlels, they called in aid the Miniflcrs
of religion; and, by the authority of their sacred character, they
hoped effectually to recommend to their filler, that system of fe-
verity which they had espoused * With this view, but under the
pretext of confounding the Protellants by the skill of fuclh able
mailers in controversy, they appointed several French divines to
reside in Scotland. At the head of these, and with the charac-
ter of Legate from the Pope, was Pelleve Bishop of Amens, and
afterwards Archbilhop and Cardinal of Sens, a furious bigot, ser-
vilely devoted to the house of Guise, and a proper inllrument
for recommending or executing the moll outrageous measures.

Ainidl the noise and danger of civil arms, these Doclors had
little opportunity to dilplay their address in the use of their theo-

* Lefly, 21 . Cafclllau. ap. JULb. vol. lii .m6. 473.

logical weapons. But they gave no small offence to the nation BOOK IT.
by one of their actions. They persuaded the Queen to seize the k
church of St. Giles in Edinburgh, which had remained, ever since 1559-
the late truce, in the hands of tlh Proteltants; and having, by a
new and solemn consecration, purified tlec fabric from the pollution,
with which they supposed the profane minniltrations of the Protef-
tants to have defiled it, they, in dirct contradition to one ar-
ticle in the late treaty, rc-cltablilhcd there the rites of the Romish
church. This, added to the indilterence, and even contempt,
with which the Quecn received their rcmonllrances, convinced
the Lords of the Congregation, that it was not only vain to expeEt
any redress of their grievances at her hands, but ablblutely necef-
fary to take arms in their own defence.

The eager and impetuous spirit of the nation, as well as every They take
consideration of good policy, prompted them to take this bold arm' in

their own

ftep without delay. It was but a final] part of the French auxi- dtrFncl'.
liaries which had as yet arrived. The fortifications of Lieth,
though advancing fall, were still far from being complete. Under
these circumflances of disadvantage, they conceived it possible to
surprise the Queen's party, and, by one fucdden and decisive blow,
to prevent all future bloodshed and contention. Full of these ex-
petations, they advanced rapidly towards Edinburgh with a nu-
mnerous army. But it was no easy matter to deceive an advarfary, Olober IG.
so vigilant and attentive as the Qceen Regent. Waith her ufutal
sagacity, she both foresaw the danger, and took the only proper
course to avoid it. Instead of keeping the field againll enemies,
superior in number, and formidable on a day of battle, by the ar-
dour of their courage, she retired into Leith, and determined pa-
tiently to wait the arrival of new reinforcements. Slight and
unfinilhed as the fortifications of that town then were, she did not
dread the elflrts of an army, provided neither with heavy cannon
nor with military ifores, and utterly ignorant of the method of
attacking any place, fortified with more art than those ancient
towers, creced all over the kingdom, in defence of private pro-
perty againfl the incursions of banditti.

Nor did the Queen, meanwhile, negle&t to have recourse to

those arts, which fhie had often employed, to weaken or divide
her adverlhrics. By priv:lte bolicitationk and promnifes, fle shook
the fidelity, or abatcd the ardour of Ionmc. By open reproach and
accusation, fihe blaltcd the reputation, and diminishcd the authori-
ty of others. Her emillaries were every where at work, and, not-
vvithlll:itlaing the z:al for religion adll liberty, which theln allital-

Q.

BooK 11. ed the nation, they seem to have laboured not without facdefsi

5 We find Knox, about this period, abounding in complaints of

the lukewarm and languid spirit, which had begun to spread
among his party *. But, if their zeal slackened a little, and
suffered a momentary intermission, it soon blazed up with frelh vi-
gour, and rose to a greater height than ever.

Renew Thle Qieen herfclf gave occasion to this, by the reply which
thcir re- fle made to a new remonltrance from the Lords of the Congrega-
nionfiran-.
(cers. tion. Upon their arrival at Edinburgh, they once more repre-

sented to her the dangers arising from the increase of the French
troops, the fortifying of Leith, and her other measures, which they
conceived to be deftrulive to the peace and liberty of the king-
dom; and in this address, they spoke in a firmer tone, and avow-
ed, more openly than ever, their resolution of proceeding to the
utmost extremities, in order to put a flop to such dangerous en-
croachments. To a remonstrance of this nature, and urged with
so much bolunefs, the Queen replied in terms no less vigorous
and explicit. She pretended that fle was not accountable to the
confederate nobles for any part of her conduct. And upon no
representation of theirs, would file either abandon measures, which
flic deemed necessary; or dismiss forces, which she found useful .
or demolilh a fortification, which might prove of advantage. At

tut \with- the fame time, ihc required them, on pain of treason, to disband
out filccels.

thle forces which they had assembled.

This haughty and imperious flyle founded harfily to Scottibt

nobles, impatient, from their national character, of the flightell
appearance of injury; accuflomed, even from their own Monarchs,
to the mofl refpecdful treatment; and poflfeling, under an arillo-
cratical form of government, such a flare of power as equalled,
at all times, and often controlled that of the Sovereign. They
vwere fcnfible, at once, of the indignity offered to tllcmiclves, and
alarmed with this plain declaration of the OQecn's intentions
and as there now remained but one flcp to take, they wanted nei-
ther public spirit nor resolution to take it.

Del'\iberate But that they might not feein to dcpart from the cfablillicd
cOIc(IIst11i llb
the courltc forms of the conllitution, for which, even anmidil their moil vio-
which toh' lent operations, men always retain the grcatell reverence, they as-
ialke. feIblcd the whole Peers, Barons, and leprcfentatives of boroughs
Otler :i. yvho adhered to their party. '].'l'c: formed a convention, vwhich

exceeded in number, and equalled in dignity, the luflal nIcctings
of Parliament. 'I'he cledrs of the Coidgrcg;:ttiion laitl before tlicihe

*.1, IMUX, i 'll.),

the declaration which the Qieen had given in answer to their re- Booi; II.
monfirance; represented the unavoidable ruin, which the measures
file therein avowed and justified, would bring upon the kingdom; 15S9.
and requiring their diretion with regard to the obedience due
to an adminifiration so unjust and oppreflive, they submitted to
their decision; a question, one of the most delicate and interefling
that can possibly fall under the consideration of subje&s.

This assembly proceeded to decide, with no less dispatch, than

unanimity. Strangers to those forms, which protra& business; un-
acquainted with the arts, which make a figure in debate; and
much more fitted for acion, than discoursee;'a warlike people al-
ways haftcn to a conclusion, and bring their deliberations to the
fiorteff issue. It was the work but of one day, to examine and
to resolve this nice problem, concerning the behaviour of fubjets
towards a ruler who abuses his power. But, however abrupt their
proceedings may appear, they were not dcltitute of solemnity. As
the determination of the point in doubt, was conceived to be no
less the office of divines, than of laymen, the former were called
to aflift with their opinion. Knox and Willox appeared for the
whole order, and pronounced, without hesitation, both from the
precepts and examples in scripture, that it was lawful for fubjets
not only to refiff tyrannical princes, but to deprive them of that
authority, which, in their handts, becomes an infirument for de-
stroying those, whom the Almighty ordained them to protect.
The decision of persons,' revered to highly fdr their sacred cha-
racter, but more for their zeal and their piety, had great weight
with the whole assembly. Not satisfied with the common indif-
criminate manner of signifying content, every person present was
called in his turn to declare his sentiments, and rising up in or- They e-
der, all gave their suffrages, without one diffentiing voice, for de- privc tle

0)icen of

priving the Queen of the office of Regent, which le had exer- tie office of
cifed so much to the detriment of the kingdom *. Regeit.

This extraordinary sentence was owing no lets to the love of rhe rights

,f their con-

liberty, than zeal for religion. In the a& of deprivation, reli- (, l,
gious grievances are nightly mentioned ; and the dangerous en-
croachments of the Queen upon the civil conflitution arc produced,
by the Lords of the Congrcgation, in order to prove their conduct
to have been not only jufa, but neccffary. The introducing foreign
troops into a kingdom, at peace with all the world; the fcizing and
fortifying towns in different parts of the country; the pronioting
grangers to ollices of great power and dignity; the debating tih

I 10nox, 184.

CO..;i

BoOK II. current coin *; -the subverting the ancient laws; the iinpofing of

new and burdensome taxes; and the attempting to subdue the king-
dom, and to oppress its liberties, by open and repeated afts of vio-
lence are enumerated at great length, and placed in the strongest
light. On all these accounts, the-Congregation maintained that the '
nobles, as counsellors to their monarchs, and the guardians and de-
fenders of the conflitution, had a right to interpose, and there-
fore, by virtue of this right, in the name of the.King and Queen,
and with many exprefilons of duty and fubmiflion towards them,
they deprived the Queen Regent of her office, and ordained, that,
for the future, no obedience flould be given to her commands -.

Violent as this ation may appear, there wanted not principles

in the conflitution, nor precedents in the hiifory of Scotland, to
justify and to authorize it. Under the arillocratical form of go-
vernment eflablilhed among the Scots, the power of the Sovereign
was extremely limited. The more considerable nobles were them-
selves petty Princes, pofl'efing extensive jurifdi&ions, almost in-
dependent of the crown, and followed by numerous vassals, who,
in every contest, erpoufed their chieftain's quarrel, in opposition to
the King. Hence the many instances of the impotence of regal
authority, which are to be found in the Scottifl hiflory. In every
age, the nobles not only claimed, but exercised the right of con-
trolling the King. Jealous of their privileges, and eager to take
the field in defence of them, every error in administration was
observcd, every encroachment upon the rights of the arifiocracy
excited indignation, and no Prince ever ventured to transgress
the boundaries, which the law had prescribed to prerogative, with-
out meeting reftrlance, which shook, or overturned his throne.
Encouraged by the spirit of the conflitution, and countenanced

The flandard of money in Scotland was continually varying. In the i6th of

James V. A.D. IS29, a pom1u weeight of gold, when coined, produced one hun-
dred and eight pounds of clurrent money. But under the Queen Regent's ad-
minitl-ation, A.D. i. Sr6, a pound weight of gold, although the quantity of al-
loy was conflderably incrcalcd, produced one liii.nnred and foiLy-four pounds
current money. In a.

5;, a pound weiglt of silver, when coinedl, produced nine

pounds two thliling;; bul in 1. i., t protduced llilrteen pounds current money.
Ruddim. I'r.-cft. ad Anders. DiloiaL. Scotia, p. 1, 81 8. frolm which it appears
that this complaint, which the malccoltents often repeated, was not altogether
deflttite ofr tfundation.

'1 MTI.Caflc.lll:, after conlr:mnling the d<laugeromls councils of the Princes of

Lorraln witl regard to the a{llii ir of i uotl:lnl,

;ick iowlledg'cs, withllis Illia;l can-

doutr, that the Scots dcclared w\lar ag:infl tile Qtlee Regcmlt, rathelr fiom a dec-
fire of vindicating their civil liberlic, thall from illy motive of rCligio:.:
lcmn. 41)6.

by the example of their anceflors, the Lords of the Congregation BooK T.
thought it incumbent on them, at this juncture, to inquire into -Y
the mal-administration of the Q eueen Regent, and to preserve their S59
country from being enslaved or conquered, by depriving her of
< the power to execute such a pernicious fchemc *.

* The a&t of deprivatinn, and a letter from the Lords of the Congregation to

the Queen Regent are still extant, Knox, 184. They discover not only, that maf-
culinc and undaunted piirit, natural to men calable of so bold a reflolution; but
are remarkable for a precision, and vigour of expreflion, which we are fur-
prifed to meet with i n an age so unpolinfcd. The lame cbicirvation may be made
with Irepea to the other public papers of that period. The ignorance or bad rafte
of an age may render the compositions of authors by profcflion obscure, orafictq-
ed, or absurd; but the language of business is nearly the fame at all times; and
wherever men think clearly, and are thoroug:-ly inrerefted, they express them-
fclves wvitl perspicuity and force.

al

# BOOK THIRD. CONTENTS. SITUATION of the Reformed. Their repulse at Leith. Apply to Elizabeth. Arrival of an English fleet. Siege of Leith. Death of the Queen Dowager. A treaty of peace. A parliament. ...

T II E
-I I S T O R Y

0 F
SCOT L A N D.

BOOK THIRD.

CONTENTS.

SIT^TATION of the Irfon-med. Their repuiFe at Leith. Apply to Elizabeth. Ar-

rival of an Englillh leet. Siege of Leith. Death of the Queen Dowager.
A treaty of peace. A parliament. Successful attacks on Popery. Death of
Francis II. Eflablilihment of Presbyterian government. Causes of discontent
between Elizabeth and BMary. The arrival of Mary in Scotland. State of
the kingdom. Extraordinary progrcfs of a coUrt of jultice. Poverty of the
Protestant clergy. Diffenlions among the nobles. Rebellion ofI lntly.
Battle of Corrichie. I'ropolals for the Queen's marriage. Darnly. Rizzio.
Convention of nobles. 'Two confi)iracies. The Qleen's marriage with Darnly.
F'light of Iurray antd his afbciatcs. l'crfidious conduAt of Elizabeth. Church
airl'l s.

Tulle Lords of the Congregation soon found, that their zeal had BOOK II.
engaged them in an undertaking, which it was beyond their ut-

1559.

molt ability to accompli(fi. The French garrison, dcfpifing their The Coil
nutmerous, but irregular forces, rcfufed to surrender Leith, and to lrcg'atiion
depart out of the kingdom ; nor were they iflliciently flcilful in linvl.v'i'
the art of w;ar to reduce the place by force, or poifcfcd of the artil-
lery, or magazines, rcquifite for that purpose; and their followers,
though of undaunted courage, yet being accustomcd to decide
every quarrel by a battle, were 1rangcrs to the fatigues of a long
campaign, and soon became impatient of the fcvere and conllant
duty which a fiegc requircs. The Qucien's emiilaries, who found
it cafy to ming le with their countrymen, were at the utnioft pains
to heightcn their dcilf;uIl, which dlifcovered itself at firll in mur-
murs and compl:kints, but on occasion of the want of money for
paying the armly, broke out into open mutiny. The moll cmi-
nent leaders were fecarcc l.curc from the unbridlcc infolcnce of
the loldicrs ; while Ibnte of inferior ruil, intcrpofing too raflly

Bool ITr. in order to quell them, were torn in pieces by their rage. Dif:

cord, conflernation, and perplexity reigned in the camp of the-
-559 l Reformers. The Duke, their General, funk, with his usual ti-

midity, under the terror of approaching danger, and discovered
manifell symptoms of repentance for his raihnefs, in elpoufing such
a desperate caufc.

Apply to In this situation of their affairs, the Congregation had recourse
Eliz:abth to Elizabeth, from whole protection they could derive the only
for afllilt-
auce. reasonable hopes of their success. Some of their more sagacious

leaders, having forcfeen that the party might probably be involv-
ed in great dilficulties, had endeavoured to secure a resource in
any such exigency, by entering into a secret correspondence with
the court of England *. Elizabeth, aware of the dangerous
dcfigns which the Princes of Lorrain had formed against her Crown,
was early ienfible of how much importance it would be, not only
to check the progrcfs of the French in Scotland, but to extend
her own influence in that kingdom -; and perceiving how
effc&ually the present infurrcctions would contribute to retard or
defeat the schemes formed against England, flhe liltened with
pleasure to these applications of the malecontents, and gave them
private afiurances of powerful support to their cause. Randolph II,
an agent, extremely proper for conducing any dark intrigue, was
dispatched into Scotland, and residing secretly among the Lords
of the Congregation, observed and quickened their motions.

_Money seemed to be the only thing they wanted at that time ;
and it was owing to a seasonable remittance from England §, that
the Scottilh nobles had been enabled to take the field, and to ad-
vance towards Leith. But as Elizabeth was difiruftful of the
Scots, and studious to preserve appearances with France, her sub-
sidies were bellowed at firtf with extreme frugality. The sub-
fiftcnce of an army, and the expences of a siege soon exhautfcd
this penurious supply, to which the Lords of the Congregation
could make little addition from their own funds; and the ruin
and dispersion of the party mull have inltantly followed.

.hle 1fL1lis In order to prevent this, Cockburn of OrmiRlon was sent with
th,'1lm a
Jli.ill filn of the utmost expedition, to the governors of the town and cafile of
In!ony, Berwick. As Berwick was, at that time, the town of grcatcet

imlortance on the Scottili frontier, Sir Ralph Sadler and Sir

, lurn. Ilill. RI(ef. 3. :\)pend. 278. Keitl, Append. 21.
S c Append. 1. KI Kih., A\pl[end. :9.
L' n. x, i -1. K .
. . 4.

James Crofts, pcrfons of confid;crable tfiure, were employed to BooK II1.
comm;and there, and wvere intrulled itlh a diftretionary power of --
Ilpplying t cott)i nts, c dig to

the exigency of 559

their atfairs. From them Cockbarn recived four thouland crowns,
but little to tle adv::lntage of his party. 'Tle Earl of Botliwell, \Kliis iln-
by tile Qucen's intic jatian, lay in wa;it for him on his return, dif- tcr''ptc'd.
pieri cll is followers, wounded himi, and carried off the nmoley.

This unexpeded difiplpointment proved fatal to theI party. In

mere dclpair, fomei o; the more zealous :ttempttd to afliault Leith,
but the French beat them back vwith ditflrace, seized their can-
non, andl purluing thim to the gaites of Edinburghl, were on the
point of enterinlg allonl, with them. All the terror and confusion,
which the profIcc:' of pill::g: or of manIfi:ce can excite in a plC:e
taken by fuorin, filled the city on this occasion. The inhabitants
rled from tile enemy by the oppofte gate ; the forces of the Con-
gregation were irrcllute aud diflhayed and the Queen's partizans
in the town openly insulted both. At lall, a few of the nobles
ventured to face the enemy, who, after plundering oime hotfes
ini the luburbs, retired with their booty, and delivered the city
iromn this dreadful alarm.

A Iccond ikirmilh, which happened a few days after, was no

lets ui!lortun:te. The Irench lent out a detacliment to interccpt
a convoy of provifiouns which wa;s dellgned for I:linblurglh. 'ihe
Lords of the Cong'reation, having intelligence of this, n'-trheled
in all halle with a cuniidcrabl e body of their troops, and falling
up1o the enemny bletsecI'c1iii i; and Ieitli, with more gallantry
tl.an good colidlt ', were almoll lOrrounlded ly a leeond parly of
l'rcnchl, \Vio :td\vancedl il order to itpport tlleir own men. In
this iiu:ttioln, ;l retreat vwls tile oniy thing wIlicl could flve the
S-eots ; but retreat over mar lly gro tld, and ill the

l e fcof lan

cnrclly ;fupci 1r ill n nirber, could not long be condutied with

rcder. A1 In;all lbody of the enem y litIng 11 pon their rear, horle 'i'lley re Ce
;ind so6t fell into tlhe utmioll confulion, and it was entirelv owin"g .slrl T1,LIt

- il) (ol0ii -

to the caution of tIle Irellnch, that anly of the p :arty efciaped being liol.
cut ill pieces.

On this lecond blow, tile hopes and spirits of the Congregation

funk alTtogetleer. 'hey did not tllink thlifIClves licure, cveil
witllin tile walls of .Edinluorgll, Ibut inllantly determined to re-
tire to lobme place at ; gratter dill;ance froml tile ¢ncmiy. Il vainl
clid tlie Prior of St An(lrcw's 11cad a fe othlierChs Ipo!i tliis cowar d-
ly anid ig nominious lli gl1. I llh diread of tlle

s prell't di lger pre-
vailed u(lr botllil tile of' O liouillOlr; t11l( zgerl for tlhe cautl. Alt

R.

Booc III. midnight, they set out from Edinburgh, in great confusion, and

marched without halting till they arrived at Stirling.

1559. During this lalf insurrection, the great body of the Scottish
Nov. 6.

nobles joined the Congregation. The Lords Seton and Borth-
wick were the only persons of rank who took arms for the Queen,
and assisted her in defending Leith *. Bothwell openly favoured
her cause, but resided at his own house. The Earl of Huntly,
coilformable to the crafty policy which diltinguilhes his charac-
ter, amused the leaders of the Congregation, whom he had en-
gaged to assist, with many fair promises, but never joined them
with a tingle man --. The Earl of Morton, a member of the
Congregation, fluctuated in a state of irresolution, and did not ad
heartily for the common cause. Lord Erikine, Governor of
Edinburgh cattle, though a Protellant, maintained a neutrality,
which he efleemed becoming the dignity of his office; and having
been intrusted by Parliament with the command of the principal
fortress in the kingdom, he resolved that neither faEion should
get it into their hands.

MIaitland A few days before the retreat of the Congregation, the Queen
revolts suffered an irreparable lots by the defetion of her principal Se-
from the
Queen cretary, William MIaitland of Lethington. His zeal for the Re-
Dowager. formed religion, together with his warm remonstrances againfl the

violent measures which the Queen was carrying on, exposed hin
so much to her resentment, and to that of her French Counfeilors,
that he, ful].ecting his life to be in danger, withdrew secretly
from Leith, and fled to the Lords of the Congregation 1l ; and
they, with open arms, received a convert, whose abilitics added
both fircngth and reputation to their cause. Maitland had early
applied to public business admirable natural talents, improved by
an acquaintance with the liberal arts ; and, at a time of lift,
when his countrymen of the fame quality were following the
pleafuircs of the chafe, or serving as adventurers in foreign armies,
he was admitted into all the fccrets of the cabinet, and put upon
a level with persons of the molt confunlmate experience in the
management of alftirs. He pofelffcd, in an eminent degree, tlht
intrepid spirit, which delights in parfuing bold defi!ns, and wtis
no less maller of that political art and dexterity which is nccel'
fary for carrying them on with success. ]3ut tbcle lqua;lities wcre
deeply tinCired with the neighbouring vic s. .Hi- ;adlrel fomc-
times degcncrated into cunning'; hii acutcnc'; I: ldc,'cd upon

Keith, Appeln .

d. 3 A'. I3I.

JlA', 2;..
II Knox, 192.

excess of subtlety and refinement; his invention, over fertile, BooK il.
filggeeled to him, on some occasions, chimerical fyflems of policy,
little suitable to the genius of the age; and his enterprising spirit
engaged him in projects vail and splendid, but beyond his utmofl
power to execute. All the cotemporary writers, to whatever
faction they belong, mention him with an admiration,-which no-
thing could have excited but the greatcft superiority of penetra-
tion and abilities.

The.precipitate retreat of the Congregation increased, to such

a degree, the terror and confusion which had seized them at Edin-
burgh, that before they reached Stirling, their army dwindled to
an inconsiderable number. The spirit of Knox, however, still re-
mained undaunted and cree&, and having mounted the pulpit, he
addressed to his desponding hearers, an exhortation which wonder-
fully animated and revived them. The heads of this discourse
are inserted in his history ", and afford a flriking example of the
boldness and freedom of reproof assumed by the firfl Reformers,
as well as a specimen of his own fiill in chufing the topics most
fitted to influence and route his audience.

A meeting of the leaders being called, to confider what The Le;l:;

course they should hold, now that their own rcfources were all le atie (0-
exhautled, and their deftruftion appeared to be unavoidable, with- an'prly igTinl
out foreign aid; they turned their eyes once more to England, ltliz.~
and resolved to implore the assistance of Elizabeth towards finish-
ing an enterprise, in which they had so fatally experienced their
own weakness, and the strength of their adversaries. Maitland,
as the most able ncgociator of the party, was employed in this
embassy. In his absence, and during the innacive season of the
year, it was agreed to difinifs their followers, worn out by the
fatigues of a campaign, which had so far exceeded the time of
service usual in that age. But, in order to preserve the counties
most devoted to their interest, the Prior of St. Andrew's, with
part of the leaders, retired into Fife. The Duke of Chatclhc-
rault, with the relt, fixed his relidence at Hamilton. There was
little need of IMaitland's addrcfs; or eloquence to induce Elizabeth
to take his country under her protection. She obfcrvcd the pre-
valence of the French councils, and the progress of their arms in
Scotland, with great concern; and as hlie well foresaw the dan-
gerous tendency of their i'licmes in thl:t kingdom, lhe had :l-

;* Kox, r n.

R ij

BoK III. ready come to a resolution with regard to the part siei herself

would adc, if their powcr there fliould grow till more formidable.

I oti'cs Ill order to give the Qecen and her Privy Council a full and
whici Cde- dirlinC view of any important matter which might come before
her to affif them, it seems to have been the praelice of Elizabeth's Miniflers
tlhLm. to prepare memorials, in which they clearly Rated the point aunder

deliberation, laid down the grounds of the conduel, which they
held to be moil reasonable, and proposcd a method for carrying
their plan into execution. Two papers of this kind, written by
Sir William Cecil with his own hand, flill remain t; they are in-
titled, " A filort dilfcunion of the weigh-ty matter of Scotland,"
and do honour to the ilndli ry and p':nctlration of that great Mi-
nifter. The motives, which determined the Q--en to cfpoule so
warmly the defence of the Congreg;ation, are reprcfented with
perspicuity and force; and the confequcnces of fufi'ring the lrench
to eftablifl themniclves in Scotland, are prediA'tcd with great ac-
curacy and discernment.

He lays it down as a principle, ar;rcablle to the Iaws Loth of

God and of nature, that every lociety h!ath a right to defend itself,
not only from prefcnt dangers, but from fuich as may probably
nrfe c; to which, he adcls, that nature and reafun teach every
Prince to defend hinfelf by tie fUme means, which his advcr.ia-
lies employ to dillrcfs him. Upon these grounds, he eflabliilhcs
the right of iEngland to iinterpofe in the affltirs of Scotland, and
to prevent the conquel of that kingdcom, at which the Ficench
openly aimed. The French, he obfcrves, arc the ancient and ian-
plac;ablle enemies of England. Ioflilities had fubfilled between
the two nations for lpany centuries. .No treaty of peace, into
'which they entered, had ever been cordial or sincere. No good
efl'ec was therefore to l:e expcfcdd from the peace lately ag'reed
upon, whic lbeing extorted by present neccCitty, would be nc-
gligently obfirvcd, alin broken on0 the tliglitct prtCences. In a
very fliort time, France would recover its former opulncc, and
thlout;li now drained of men and money Iy a tedious and unrfluc-
cCesfutl war, it would q(uiclly Ile in a condition for al ing, and
lil; rIclllef and niartial g enius of lie people would render adlion
niccelliry. 'l lie Princes of Loirraill, \lwho at lh;it time :had the en-
tirc dlircti ul of lFrnch ai iis, were :iiml2;teTd w.itllh the moll vi-
rulc itl lh:;t!''d ag:iinll the En'ng !if nation. '' IIhy openly callced in
qucirtin tl lic Iinimacy o tliec (.cecn's birth, :Illd b)y advalncin'

the title and pretensions of their niece the Qeen of Scotland, fin- i.o7< li.
died to deprive Elizabeth of her Crown. With this view, they 9'
had laboured to exclude the Englifli from the treaty of Chateau
Cn Cambrefis, and endeavoured to conclude a fcparatc peace wvith
Spain. They had parfuadcd Hlenry II. to permit his (daughter-in-
law to alfline the title and arms of Queen of England; and even
since the conclusion of the peace, they had solicited at Rome, and
obtained a bull, declaring Elizabeth's birth to be illegitimate.
And though the wifldom and moderation of the Conflable Mont-
morency had, for some time, checked their career, yet these re-
ftraints being now removed by the death of Henry II. and the
disgrace of his Minifler, the utmost exceifes of violence were to
be dreaded from their furious ambition, armed with fovcreign
power. Scotland is the quarter, whence they c':n attack Eng-
land wsith moil advantage. A war on the borders of that country
exposes France to no danger, hut one unifuccefsful ai'lion there
may hazard the Crown, and overturn the government of Lngl:1nd.
In political conduct, it is childili to wait till the designs of an
enemy be ripe for execution. The Scottish nobles, lfter tihecir
utmost efforts, have been obliged to quit the field ; and far from
expelling the invaders of their liberties, they behold tlihe French
power daily increasing, and mutll at lalt ccalc from f lruggling any
longer in a contel so unequal. Ille invadilng of El.ngl:ind will
immediately follow the rcdutEioun of the Scottifli malccon-ents,
by the abandoning of whom to the mercy of tile French, ]iiza-
beth will open a way for her enemies into the heart of lier own
kingdom, and cxpofe it to the cal:inities of war, and the (dingcr
of conquelt. Nothing therefore remained but to meet the mcmvoy
whil.c yet at a dliilance from England, and by supporting tlhe
Congregation with a powerful army, to render Scotland the thatre
of the war, to cruill tle dcfigns of the Princes of Lorrain il thli ir
infancy, and, by ficll an carly ancl unexpelced etlort, to) c:ip'l
the French out of Britain, before their power had time to t:ikc
root, and grow up to any formidable lheiglit. lBut as thle Z::attlr
was of as much importance, as any \\hlicll could iC.i1l undeC til
conlideration of an inglli ii MonIl:rch, wiltdom and

i irl.ute ('dt, lil1l

were nieccilTary in tlhe fir'l[ pl::c, and afterlwards v'g',r anIldl Cx -
pedition in condlu(l ; the (Ianger was urget, alnd, i)y lonil; a
lingle moment, I ciglht bLecomi Utna:void:!)lc :.

I' IThe ariimlnelita; x!;ch 1l:.

. ;c( t:;( i,,)I!'(l, iln order t, ll:,;n l'.i/'l, i's

NO.fl; n ', ;re

, II'.'.! \'i,! ! :I !'t.:.:, i l,.li: ! ''.i!;/ ,l . [3 ,

/i|"-n iix,
.No. II.

BooK III. These arguments produced their full effecl upon Elizabetl,

''- - who was jealous, in an extreme degree, of every pretender to her

9 Crown, and no less anxious to preserve the tranquillity and hap-

piness of her fubjels. From these motives ihe had ac&ed, in grant-
ing the Congregation an early supply of money; and from the
fame principles fle detcrmin d, in their present exigency, to afford
tlem more elffc&ual aid. One of Maitland's attendants was in-
itantly dispatched into Scotland with the firongeft assurances of
her protection, and the Lords of the Congregation were desired
to fend commiflioners into England, to conclude a treaty, and to
fettle the operations of the campaign, with the Duke of Norfolk *.

The Queen iMean-while, the Queen Regent, from whom no motion of the
Dowager mean-vliilc Congregation could long be concealed, dreaded the success of
fends her this negociati-n with the court of England, and foresaw how lit-
French
troois a- tie flle would be able to refif the united efforts of the two king-
gaiullthlem. doins. For this reason lie determined, if poflible, to get tle

flart of Elizabeth ; and by venturing, notwithllanding the in-
clemency of the winter fenfon, to attack the malecontents in their
preelnt disperscd and helpless situation, fle hoped to put an encr
to the war, before the arrival of their English allics.

A confidcrable body of her French forces, who were aug-

mlented, about this time, by the arrival of the Count de
Iartigues, with a thousnd veteran foot, and tome cavalry, were
commanded to march to Stirling. Having there crossed the
lorth, they proceeded along the coall of Fife, deftrcying and
riaii;'icring, with exceflive outrage, the houses and lands of thoce
w:ihoml they clteemcd their enemies. Fife was the moll populous
.ind powerful county in the kingdom, and mofl devoted to the
Congregation, who had hitherto drawn from thence their mo't
confidcrable flipplies, both of men and proviilons; and therefore,
ecfides punishing the dilaffetion cf the inhabitants, by pillaging
llic country, the French proposed to fcize and fortify St. An-
<;rew'', and to leave there a garrison fiflicient to Ibridie the mu-
linous ifpirit of the province, and to keep poffclflon of a port situ-

OI;Cd on the main ocean.

I.ut on this occasion, the Prior of St. Andrew's, Lord Ruth-

v:'n, Kirkaltly of Grange, and a few of the moil aiivc leaders of
;'e Co:n;regation, performed, by their bravery ;and good conduct,
t iervicc of the utinofl importance to their party. IIaving a;l
f :imblcil fix hundred hiorlI-, thely il:;f> 'di the French wilth conti-

* KCit';, 1 4,

;iu'l incurfons, beat up their quarters, intercepted their convoys Boox IIL
*:f proviiions, cut off their firaggling parties, and so harassed
them with perpetual alarms, that they prevented them for more 1559.
than three weeks from advancin, *.

At last the Prior, with his feeble party, was conflrained to re- is6o.

tire, and the French let out from Kirkaldy, and began to move
along the coast towards St. Andrew's. They had advanced but
;i few miles, when from an eminence they descried a powerful Jan. -2.
fleet fleering its course lip the Firth of Forth. As they knew
that the Marquis D'Elbcuf was, at that time, preparing to fail
for Scotland with a numerous army, they haflily concluded that
these fllips belonged to him, and gave way to the molt immode-
rate tranrports of joy, on the profpet of tilis long-expcdted succour.
Their great guns were already fired to welcome their friends,
and to ipread the tidings and terror of their arrival among their
enemies, when a small boat from the opposite coast landed, and
blasted their premature and fihort-livcd triumph, by informilng
them, thlt it was the fleet of England which was in light, in- T}:el:t-i
tended for the aid of the Congregation, and was soon to be fol- li:11 'l:t ar-
lowed by a formidable land army s. alilihDc;.

Throughout her whole reign, Eliz:abeth was cautious, but de-

cifive ; and by her promptitude in executing her resolutions, join-
ed to the deliberation with which flie formed them, her admini-
flratioil became remarkable, no less for its vigour, than for its
wifduom. No sooner did lle determine to afford her protcction
to the Lords of the Congregation, than they expericnced the
activity, as well as the extent of her power. The season of the
year would not permit her land army to take the field ; but left
the French lhould, in the mean time, receive new reinforce-
niellts, file inltantly ordered a itrong filuadron to cruize in the
Firth of Forth. She feemnl, by her inllrulions to Winter her A-
dllniral, to have been desirous of prefcrving the appearances of
friendihip towards the French 1:. But these were only appear-
ances ; if any French fleet sho.uld attempt to land, he was com-
manded to prevent it, by every ad of hollility and violncie. It
was tle fight of this lf;uadron, which occafioncll at firil ti) much
joy among the French, but which loon inlpircd them with fucll
terror, :s si ved Fife from the effclts of their vengeance. Ap-
prellen five of being cut oil' from their companliols on tlhe oprn-

Knox, o2. '- Kllox,O 2.
''ilhh, Al,?'txn ix -.

C)OKr III. site shore, they r.reatled towards Stirling with the utmost preei-

pitation, and, il a dre:;dfil season, and through roads almost im-
pafliable, arrived ;t Leitil, Il;i.1a{ed and exhaulted with fatigue :.

The TEnr;liih slcet ca;: anclhor in the road of Leith, and conti-

nuing in that iiliaon till the conc!uli'' of peace, both prevented
tihe garrilfn of LLcith froml r icciving succours of any kind, and
confidcrab.y facilitated the opc:rations of their own forces by l:.nd.
They con- Soon aiter the arrival f thle El:glith fljuadron, the ComniiTffion-

c L , ers of tle Congr.a.-ation rcpaired to Berwick, and concluded witl
F.!lm.. thle duke of Norfolk, a trc::;y, lhe bond of that union with Eliza-

' beth, -whiclh w.as of lo great advantage to the caulf. To give a

check to the dangerous and rapid p,:ogrcfs of the French arms in
Scotl:l;nd, w:s the proflced design of the contrasting parties. In
order to this, tle Scots cngaged never to susser any closer union
of their country witl France ; and to defend themselves to the
utterrosll. againli all attempts of conquei ; and for their aftllance,
Elizabeth pronli;icd to employ, in Scotland, a powerful army,
vwhIeih the Scots undertook to join with all their forces ; no place
in Scotland was to remain in the hands of the Englilh ; whatever
lhould be take;. from the enemy was either to be razed, or lept
by the Scots, at their choice; if any invasion fliould be made
upon lEngland, the Scots were ollig.d to aflill Elizabeth with
pa:rt of their forces; a!nd to afeertain their faithful observance of
the treaty, they bound themselves to deliver hostages to Eliza-
beth, b)eiore tlle iarch of her army into Scotland ; in conclusion,
tlle Scots im:dc many proteitations of obedience and loyalty to-
wardsl their c wn (l Icen, in every thinag not inconfillent with their
religion, anl the lilbrcies of their country --.

'Tlie I:'.t- IIC EIn'lilliT inl', confillin.' oi iix llthoullind foot, and two
il!] i ,ny tliou :lid hlorle. undir ii.e coninmaind of Lord Crey of Wilton,
i. iii. Centee Slil eli ill i)r:;'g. 1The meIClbers of the Con-
pril 2'. grc'.rt:lion ;l'j':InlelCd frin ::li p):rts of the kigndomn to meet their

nIvC' :;l.;:; and, havi;'in:' ;.;:,i tlhcni itl l Creat multitudes of
tii: ir llh'wc,, titcy ltv.iiincid to'"; iicr to\ard;is Leith. 'l'h:
i' ltc ii;!, crc little .ieIC to !L.c the( Hiceld alainll 11 CIellne y l;)
lnilach i;ii. L.n' ill 1aII;iJCIer. zA itl Oi;I ; b0dy of troops, dfelin d f1lr
tllh ir reli, li: h d ilately i .e 't i :tllcred })y a; violent florin, and had

( ;tli'x po

iil,: o ] .i ., i

I' i-'rancc', or witli diiliculty hl;id re-
t '.'ercd l'!i'' j ,a !:; 1 ',: '.. iil;.~;(n;i,'). BiLt they 1ho1 ed to 1be a:)le

.. i: .
" I... ' i.cs ' Lo.i il lull m, a l.C goodl

the magnificent promises of asitance, with which they daily fed Boo'l III.
them ; or till scarcity of provisions ]hould conflrain the Englifnl '
to retire into their own country. In order to halten this latter 560
event, they did not negled the usual, though barbarous precaution
for difirefing an invading enemy, by burning and laying wafle all
the adjacent country *. The zeal, however, of the nation fruflra-
ted their intentions; eager to contribute towards removing their
opprcffors, the people produced their hidden llorcs to support
their friends; the neighbouring counties supplied every thing
necessary5 and far from wanting fubliftence, the English found, in
their camp, all forts of provisions, at a cheaper rate, than had for
some time been known in that part of the kingdom -.

On the approach of the English army, the (Oeen Regcnt re-

tired into the cafllc of Edinburgh. Her health was now in a de-
clining llatc, and her mind broken and deprefcd by the misfor-
tunes of her adminiitration. .To avoid the danger and fatigue
of a siege, she committed herself to the protcction of Lord Er-
fkine. This nobleman still preserved his neutrality and by his
integrity and love of his country, merited equally the eflcm of
both parties. He received the Qeen herself with the utmost
honour and refpea, but took care to admit no filch retinue, as
might endanger his command of the caflle |l.

A few days after they arrived in Scotland, the Englifl invefled Apiil 6.

Leith. The garrison, hlut up within the town, was almoll half
as numerous as the army which fat down before it, and by an ob-
fcinatc defence protracted the siege to a great length. The cir-
cumflances of this fiegc, related by cotemporary hillorians, men
without knowledge and experience in the art of war, are often
ohfcure and imperfe&, and at this dillance of time are not confi-
derable enough to be entertaining.

At first the French endeavoured to keep poffellion of the

-awk Hill, a rising ground not far dillant from the town, but were
beat from it with great slaughter, chiefly by the furious attack of April L.5.
the Scottifi cavalry. Within a few days, the French had their
full revenge ; having sallied out with a lirong body, they entered
the Englinf trenches, broke their troops, nailed part of their can-
non, and killed at learf double the number thelllclves had loll in
the former fkirmilh. Nor were the Englillt inore fortunate in
an attempt which they nmade to take the pl;ce by afilllt ; they Maly 7
were met with equal couragc, and repullfcd with collilderable lols.

* KIlo:, 22. Knox, ilid.
Hi I';lrbjcs Collcl. vol. i. 50j., K.iull, I '.

,

BooiK IIT. From the detail of these circumstances by the writers of that age,

it is easy to observe the different charaters of the French and
. English troops. The former, trained to war, under the acive

reigns of Francis I. and Henry II. defended themselves not only
with the bravery, but with the skill of veterans. The latter,
who had been more accuflomed to peace, frill preserved the in-
trepid and desperate valour peculiar to the nation, but discovered
few marks of military genius, or of experience in the pracice of
war. Every misfortune or disappointment during the siege muff
be imputed to manifest errors in conduct. The success of the be-
fieged in their rally was owing intirely to the security and negli-
gence of the Englifli : many of their officers were absent ; their
soldiers had left their Riations ; and the trenches were almoR
without a guard. The ladders, which had been provided for
the assault, wanted a great deal of the neceflary length ; and the
troops employed in that service were ill supported. The trenches
were opened, at first, in an improper place; and as it was found
expedient to change the ground, both time and labour were loft.
The weakness of their own Generals, no less than the strength of
the French garrison, rendered the progress of the Englifl wonder-
fully flow. The length, however, of the siege, and the loss of part
of their magazines by an accidental fire, reduced the French to
extreme distress, which the prospect of relief made them bear
with admirable fortitude.

While the hopes and courage of the French protra&cd the flege

so far beyond expectation, the Scottish malecontents were not idle.
By new associations and confederacies, they laboured more per-
fectly to unite their party. By publicly ratifying the treaty con-
cluded at Berwick, they endeavoured to render the alliance with
England firm and indissoluble. Among the subscribers of these
papers, we find the Earl of IHuntly, and some others who had not
hitherto concurred with the Congregation in any of their mea-
furcs %. Several of there Lords, particularly the Earl of HI-untly,
ilill adhered to the Popifi church ; but on this occasion, neither
their religous sentiments, nor their former, cautious maxims,
were regarded; the torrent of national refentmennt and indigna-
tion againit the French hurried them on-.

* 11urn. vi. i. ii 287. Knox, 22r.

''T' TI dread of' the Frenclh lower did, on many occa;ioii, fillinurillt thle zeal,

wlhich the Catholic nolles had for their religioll. Bclidesi tile' pirliillptive cvi-
dence fIbl this, arising froio the elimllorial] menillimled by R huelct, I il. of tlih Re..
;,.im.i'tio,, vul. ii. :z8r. aud publfilcedl)y him, p. 278; the ill'ut:.&ouf Eli:e'.-

The Quecn Regent, the instrument, rather than the caufc of BooKlIII.

involving Scotland in these calamities, under which it groaned I60
at that time, died during the heat of the siege. No Princess ever Death and
possessed qualities more capable of rendering her administration il- clhaae, r of

the Qutecei

luilrious, or her people happy. Of much discernment, and no Dowager.
less address; of great intrepidity, and equal prudence; gentle June Io.
and humane, without weak ness zealous for her religion, without
bigotry; a lover of jullice, without rigour. One circumstance,
however, and that, too, the excess of a virtue, rather than any
vice, poisoned all thcfe great qualities, and rendered her govern-
ment unfortunate, and her name odious. Devoted to the intcr-
clt of France, her native country, and attached to the Princes of
Lorrain her brothers, with most paflionate fondness; lie depart-
ed, in order to gratify them, from every maxim, which her own
wisdom or humanity would have approved. She outlived, in a
great measure, that reputation and popularity, which had finooth-
ed her way to the highelc flation in the kingdom; and many ex-
amples of fallhood, and some of severity, in the latter part of her
administration, totally alienated from her the affecions of a peo-
ple, who had once placed in her an unbounded confidence. But,
even by her enemies, these unjuilifiable aCtions were imputed to
the facility, not to the malignity of her nature; and while they
taxed her brothers, and French counfcllors, with rashness and
cruelty; they itill allowed her the praise of prudence and of le-
nity*. A few days before her death, flie desired an interview
with the Prior of St. Andrew's, the Earl of Argyle, and other
chiefs of the Congregation. 'o them ile lamented the fatal if-
sue of those violent counsels, which flie had been obliged to fol-
low; and, with the c:andour natural to a generous mind, confelled
the errors of her own adminiltration, and begged forgiveness of
those, to whom they had been hurtful; but, at the fame time,
ihc warned them, amidlt their firugglcs for liberty, and the {hock
of arms, not to lofb fight of the loyalty and fubjeion, which was
due to their Sovcreign 1 . The remainder of her time, lie em-
ployed in religious meditations and exercilfs. She even invited
the attendance of Willox, one of the most eminent among the

bl)t to Randolph lhelr a: 'll, piut it lb:'yOlnd all dtlubt, that many zc'alots Papills
thotigl lt the allislie with l'.nglain.l to be iLccl;iry for riln'urvi the lilberty :ani[
indie(lpeiinlcc'( of the kingdomi. Kiilil, 1,8. 1ltilhtly imlilllegani a Lorrictlnn-
ce wilt \ i:lit h lill) i's iMiilille r, libre the m;llarch ol the nI'':glill lilrmy ilto Scot-
lail(l. 1!aync. State Plapers, z61, ,63. See A))penil. No III.

l'ici:li. 3 .-1, -It Iflly, dec RI:b:;. Gcil. SLOu .

s ij

BOOK III. Reformed preachers, listened to his initrutions with reverence

V'' and attention*, and prepared for the approach of death with a
x56O. pp

56 decent fortitude.

Motives of Nothing could now save the French troops, shut up in Leith,
the F'renclh,
to conclude but the immediate conclusion of a peace, or the arrival of a power-
a peace. ful army from the continent. The Princes of Lorrain amused

their party in Scotland, with continual expectations of the latter,
and had thereby kept alive their hopes and their courage. But
at last, the situation of France, rather than the terror of the Eng-
lifli arms, or the remonfrlances of the Scottish malecontents, con-
strained them, though with reluctance, to turn their thoughts to-
wards pacific councils. The Protellants in France were, at that
·;. '.': ,' time, a party formidable by their number, and more by the val-

our and cnterprifing genius of their leaders. Francis'lI. had treat-

/;' ed them with extreme rigour, and discovered, by every flep he
-I' took, a fettled resolution to extirpate their religion, and to ruin

those who profefled it. At the profped of this danger to them-
selves, and to their caufc, the Protcftants were alarmed, but not
terrified. Animated with zeal, and inflamed with resentment,
they not only prepared for their own defence, but resolved, by
some bold action, to anticipate the schemes of their enemies. And
as the Princes of Lorrain were eReemed the authors of all the
King's violent measures, they marled them out, to be the first
vitims of their indignation. Hence, and not from any difloy-
March r5. alty to the King, proceeded the famous conspiracy of Amboise;

and though the vigilance and good fortune of the Princes of Lor-
rain discovered and disappointed that design, it was easy to ob-
serve new fiorms gathering in every province of the kingdom,
and ready to burtf out with all the fury and outrage of civil war.
In this situation, the ambition of the house of Lorrain was called
off from the thoughts of foreign conqucfls, to defend the honour
and dignity of the French crown; and inflead of fending- new
rcinforcements into Scotland, it became neceifary to withdraw
the veteran troops already employed in that kingdom-l-.

'Tle nego- In order to conduc an affair of so much importance and deli-
Clations lr cacy, the Princes of Lorrain made choice of Monluc Bilhop of
.tlhat pulr-
pose. Valence and of the Sicur do Randan. 'As both tlefe, cliecially

the former, were re ckoned inferior to no perions of that age, il
address and political refinement ; Elizabeth oppoled to them tAm-
bafradors of equal abilities; Cecil her Prime Miniller, a man pcr-

Knox, 228. *|1 I-'y,
22/,.

hnps of the greatef capacity who had ever held that office; and Boo III.
\otton Dean of Canterbury, grown old in the art of negociating -v
- under three fuccelTive Monarchs. The interests of the French and 5
Engli.h courts were soon adjufled by men of so great dexterity in
bufincfs; and as France cafily consented to withdraw those forces,
which had been the chief occasion of the war; the other points
in dispute, between that kingdom and England, were not matters
of tedious, or of dillicult dilcuffion.

The grievances of the Congregation, and their demands upon

their own Sovercigns for rcdrefs, employed longer time, and re-
quired to be treated with a more delicate hand. After so many
oeen attempts, carried cn by command of the King and Q een,
in order to overturn the ancient constitution, and to fupprecl the
religion which they had embraced, the Scottilh nobles could not
think themselves secure, v.i-lhout fixing fume new barricr againllt
the future encroachments of regal powcr. But the legal ileps to-
-wards accomplilliing this were not lo obvious. 'I'he French am-
baffadors confidered the entering into any treaty wilth tiubjeis, and
vvith rebels, as a cond.:fccnfion, unworthy the dignity of a Sove-
reign; and their scruples on this head might have put an end to
the treaty, if the impatience of both parties for peace had not
fuggefled an expedient, which seemed to provide for the security
of the fubje&, without derogating from the honour of the Prince.
The Scottish nobles agreed, on this occasion, tc pals from the Articles ns
point of right and privilege, and to accept the redress of their L1t treaty.
grievances, as a matter of favour. WVhatever additional security
their anxiety for perlonal safety, or their zeal for public liberty,
prompted them to demand, was granted in the name of Francis
and Mary, as acls of their royal favour and indulgence. And
lell concellions of this kind (fiould seem precarious, and liable to
he retraced by the fame power which had made them, the French
Amlbaflador agreed to insert them in the treaty with Elizabetlh, and
thereby to bind the King and Queen inviolably to observe them :'.

In relating this trantacion, cotemnporary hillorials have con-

founded the conccions of Francis :and Mary to their Scottili llih-
jels, witl the treaty between l'rance and Einglalnd; the ittler,
hclides tile raification of Iforer treatics between tlhe two kinlg-
dolns, and ltipulltionl v.itll regard to the time iland manner of re-
moving botih aimies out of SCtculand, contailud an irl;cle, to vhiici,
as the lource of nlimny importanl t evnts, we fliall often llaivc oc-
calion to refelr. 'lI e lig',. of Ei;'.':!.)ctj to her rc tlevn i;:i tlle:-

, c I... by, acknowledged in the flrongeft terms; and Francis and Mary
i56o. solemnly engage, neither to afflime the title, nor to bear the arms

of King and QOcen of England, in any time to come.

Honourable as this article was for Elizabeth herself, the con-

ditions she obtained for her allies the Scots, were no less advanta-
July 6. geous to them. Monluc and Randan consented, in the name of

Francis and Mary, that the French forces in Scotland should in-
ftantly be sent back into their own country, and no foreign troops
be hereafter introduced into the kingdom, without the knowledge
and consent of Parliament; that the fortifications of Leith and
Dunbar flould immediately be razed, and no new fort be erected
without the perminfion of Parliament; that a Parliament should be
held on the first day of August, and that assembly be deemed as
valid, in all refpe&s, as if it had been called by tle cxprefs com-
mandment of the King and Queen; that, conformable to the an-
cient laws and cufloms of the country, the King and Q_2een liould
not declare war, or conclude peace, without the concurrence of
Parliament ; that, during the QOcen's absence, the adminiftratior
of government flould be vlcled in a council of twelve perions, to
be chosen out of twenty-four named by Parliament, seven of which
council to be elected by the Qeen, and five by the Parliament;
that hereafter, the King and Queen fiould not advance foreigners
to places of trufi or dignity in the kingdom, nor confer the olfices
of Treasurer or Comptroller of the rcvenues upon any ccclcfiaf-
tic; that an a& of oblivion, abolifhiing the guilt and memory of
all offences committed since the sixth of March, 1558, flould lbe
passed in the ensuing Parliament, and ratified by the King and
Qecen; that the King and Qeen flould not, under colour of
punifling any violation of their authority during that period, seek
to deprive any of their subjects of the oflices, benefices, or eflates

Iwhich they now held ; that the redress due to churchmen, for the
injuries which they had fuitained during the Ilte infurrcctions,
flhould be left entirely to the cognizance of Parliament W\ith
regard to religious controversies, the Anmbaflidors declared thal
they would not prelfume to decide, but pcrmittcd the Par-
liamcnt, at their firl meceting, to examine the points in differ-
c;cc, and to rcprcicnt their sense of them to the King land Quecn*.
'1i ict.rs To lilch a minuoralvle period, clid the Lords of the Conlgrlega-

1 tion, by their couttrage and perif'verlncc, conduc&L an cnterprize,

which, at firll, promiscd a very dif`crent ill'lci. From beginnings
extremelly feeble, andc even contecmlptiblc, the p:trlv g'rew byv dc-

·' .rii
137 ,c

trees to great power; amnd being favoured by many fortunate in- Book IIr.
cidents, baffled all the efforts of their own Qteen, aided by the I56o.
forces of a more considerable kingdom. The whole sovereign au-
thority was transferred, by this treaty, into the hands of the Con-
gregation ; that limited prerogative, which the crown had hitherto
pofTfciTd, was alnoll entirely annihil;ted, and the ariflocratical
power, which always prcdominated in the Scottifi government, be-
came supreme and incontroulablc. By this treaty, .too, the influ-
ence of France, vlich had long been of much weight in the as-
fairs of Scotland, was greatly diminifiled, and not only were the
present cncroach:ncnts cf that ambitious ally rcltrained, but, by
confederating with lingland, protection was provided againfl any
future attempt from the fame quarter. At the frame time, the con-
troverfies in religion being left to the consideration of Parliament,
the Protellapts might reckon upon obtaining whatever decision
was most favourable to the opinions which they profefled.

A few days after the conclusion of the treaty, both the French
and Englilh armies quitted Scotland.

The eyes of every man in that kingdom were tur6fed towards nlt'eld.

the approaching Parliam:ent. A meeting, summoned in a manner
so extraordinary, at such a critical jun&-ure, and to delilerate up-
on matters of so much confculucnce, was expected with the utmoll
anxiety.

A Scottili Parliament, fultable to the arifRocratical genius of the

government, was properly an assembly of the nobles. It was com-
poled of Billops, Abbots, Barons, and a few commillioners of bo-
roughs, who met altogether in one houle. The Lesser Barons,
though pofienied of a right to be present, either in person, or by
their representatives, seldom cxerciled it. The cxpcncc of at-
tending, according to the f.iltion of the times, with a numerous
train of vaiTals and dependents; the inattention of the age to any
legal or regular fylencm of government: but, above all, the exor-
Iitant authority of the greater nobles, who had drawn the whole
power into their own hands, made this privilege of lo little value,
as to be almloll neglcEted. It appears from the ancient rolls, that
during times of tranqluillity, few commifiloners of boroughs, and
allioli nlone of the hlcilr Barons appeared in Parliament. lhe
ordinary adminilllation of goverment was abandoned witlhoit
scruple or je:llouiy, to thie King and to the nobles. But in extra-
ordinary conjuncEures, ,when the ll'r.ggle ('or liberty was violent,
and the Ifpirit of opposition to the Crown rolf to an height, the
Bl, i'el;veIes and loi'er Baions *.';cere rulLed frmn their inaRivi'l,

BooK Ill. and tsood forth to vindicate the rights of their country. The

-i6o. turbulent reign of James III. afiords examples in proof of this ob-

* servation *. The public indignation against the raifl designs of

that weak and ill-advifed Prince, brought into Parliament, be-
fides the nobles and prelates, a conliderable number of the lesser
Barons.

The fame caufcs occasioned the unusual confluence of all orders

of men to the Parliament, which met on the firil of August. The
univerfil paflion for liberty, civil and religious, which had seized
the nation, suffercd few persons to remain unconcerned spectators
of an aflEmibly, whose alIs were likely to prove decisive with re-

'pe& to both. From all corners of the kingdom, flocked in men,

cager and determined to :id, with their voices in the senate, the
fame cause, which they had defended with their swords in the
field. Besides a full convention of Peers, Temporal and Spirittr-
al, there appeared the rcprefentativcs of almoll the whole boroughs,
and above an hundred Barons, who, though of the lcffer order,
were Gentlemen of the firll rank and fortune in the nation -.

The Parliament was ready to enter on bufincefs with the utmost

zeal, when a difficulty was flarted concerning the lawfulness of the
meeting. No Comrnmifioner appeared in the name of the King
and Queen, and no signification of their consent and approbation
was yet received. These were deemed, by many, elfential to the
very becing of a Parliament. -But, in opposition to this sentiment,
the exprcf wvords of the treaty of Edinburgh were urged, by which
tllis aiflLmbly was declared to be as valid, in all reflpets, as if it had
been called and appointed by the expreis command of the King
.nd Qeen. As the adherents of the Congregation greatly out-
numbered their adversarics, the latter opinion prevailed. Their
boldeit leaders, and thofl of mol approved zeal, were chosen to be
Lords of the Articles, whlo formed a committee of ancient use,
and of great importance in the Scottifl Parliament. The delibe-
rations of the Lords of the Articles were carried on with the mofl
unanimnous and ative zeal. The ad of oblivion ; the nomination
of t\enty-four persons, out of whom the council, cntrulled with
1lprcmrne aulthority, was to be elected and every other thing pre-
fcrilbcd by the ];tti treaty, or which seemed necefilry to render it

Its liocrcd- en'cciiual, Ip:tf!d \ithlloLt dil; ute or delaiy. '-'lie article of religion
'lggi';iitl cmplloycd l.unge:r lime, lnd wvas attended w ilh greater dilliculty. It
'rcigion. iwas brought into :'rlilimicntl, by a petition from tholw who hlad

adopted tlie lprin-cillce oJ' 1: i- it'Re 'nLation. Many doFtrincs of the

Popifhl church were a contradiacion to reason, and a dilgrace to BOK IIT.
religion; its discipline had become corrupt and opprellive; and "G
its revenues were both exorbitant and ill applied. Againll all thcfc,
the Protetlants remonfirated wxith the utmost lieverity of flyle,
which indignation at their absurdity, or experience of their per-
nicious tendency, could iiijire; and encouragted, by the number
and zeal of their friends, to improve fulch a favourable juncture,
they aimed the blow at the whole fabric of Popery -and besought
the Parliament to interpose their authority for rcaifying these
multiplied albufes "*

Several prelates, zealouPfy attached to the ancient fuperflition,
cere prelent in this Parliament. But during thcle vigorous pro-
cecdings of the Protellants, they flood conifounded, and at a ga:c,
and perlevered in a silence which was fatal to their cause. 'IThey
cfteemled it impossible to relilr or divert that torrent of religious
zeal, which was still in its full ltrength ; they dreaded that their
opposition would irritate their adversaries, and excite them to new
aLcts of violence; they hoped that the King and Queen would
fool be at ieifure to put a flop to the career of their inlblent sub-
jets, and that after the rage and havock of the pretent llorm, the
former tranquillity and order would be rellored to the church
and kingdom. 'I hey were willing, perhaps, to fiecrifice the doc-
trine, and even the power of the church, in order to ensure the
safety of their own persons, and to prcfcrve the poffeliion of tlofe
revenues, which were Hill in their hands. From whatever nio-
lives they acled, their silence, which was imputed to the confci-
oufnlefs of a bad cause, afforded matter of great triumph to the
Proterants, and encouraged them to proceed with more boldnets
and alacrity-+.

The Parliament did not think it enough to condemn those doc-

trines mentioned in the petition of the Protefl:uts; thcy, more-
over, gave tile {inCtion of their approbation to a Confession of
Faith preCented to them by the Reformed teachers l, and conm-
poued, as might be expecced from fucli a peirormance in that age,
on purpore to expolf the abfhlrd tenets and practices of the Romiilt
church. By another a&, the julilrliiton of the ecclefiaftliei.
courts was aholillecd, and tlle caul'es, which formerly caiiic under
their cognilfince, transftrrecl to the decisions of civil judges|l.
Bly a third latute, the exercise of religious worhlip, according to
ihe rites of the Romill chlurcli, was prolibited. 'I'e mllaIlner ill

Jinox, : I37 bid. 53 Iid. d. i KciLI, 1
i .

'j.1

Boon II. which the Parliament inforced the observation of this law disco-

vers the zeal of that ,assembly; the firIt tranfgreffionfubje&ted the
offender to the forfeiture of his goods, and to a corporal punifll-
ment, at the discretion of the judge; baninlment was the penalty
of a second violation of the law; and a third at of disobedience
was declared to be capital *. Such strangers were men, at that
time, to the spirit of toleration, and to the laws of humanity; and
with such indecent ha:le did the very persons, who had juit es-
caped the rigour of ecclefiaflical tyranny, proceed to imitate tlofe
examples of severity, of which they themselves had so juflly com-
plained.

\itih re- The vigorous zeal of the Parliament overturned, in a few days,
":rtl to th: the ancient fyltcm of religion, which had been eftablifled so many
r'">i ie of
i_ cihurch. ages. In reforming the doatrine and discipline of the church,

the nobles kept pace with the ardour and expectations even of Knox
himself. But their proccedings, with refpeA to these, were not
more rapid and impetuous, than they were flow and dilatory w-hen
they entered on the consideration of ecclefiaflical revenues. A-
nmong the lay-members, some were already enriched with the spoils
of the church, and others devoured in expectation the wealthy
benefices which llill remained untouched. The alteration in re-
ligion had afforded many of the dignified ecclesiastics themselves,
an opportunity of gratifying their avarice or ambition. The de-
molition of the monafleries, having set the l¥Monks at liberty front
their confinement, they inltantly dispersed all over the kingdom,
and commonly betook themrfelves to some secular employment.
The Abbot, if he had been so fortunate as to embrace the prin-
cinles of the Reformation from conviction, or so cunning as to cf-
potfe them out of policy, seized the whole revenues of tlc frater-
nity, and, except what he allowed for the fubifilence of a few
huperannuated Monks-s-, applied them entirely to his own use.
The propos;al, made by the Reformed teachers, for applying these
revenues towards the maintenance of Minifers, the education of
youth, and the support of the poor, was equally dreaded by all
these orders of men. They opposed it with tlhe utnofl warmth,
:and by tliir numbers and authority, easily prevailed on the Par-
li:nient to give no car to tlch a dill'greceible (cm:uad: '. Zealous
as the flill tleformnis wer e, and aniinaitcd with a spirit superior
to the lowv conlfideraltions of intcrelt, they beheld these early
tIiltonnis of it'c illhiclis ild avarice auon(i,; their ;dhllcrcilts with

.' l .n 1

, '!4, . Cl.

A-id

Cl, o 19.
.,'I, 9 . c; Ap Nd o IV.

indignation 3 and we find Knox expressing the utmofl fcnfibility BooK III.
of that contempt, with which they were treated by many, from ~-
xwhom he expected a more gencrous concern for the fucceis of re- 1560.
ligion, and the honour of its Minillers *.

A difficulty hath been llarted with regard to the ads of this Tlhc vlidi-

ty of' t hi..

Parliament, concerning religion. This dilliculty, frivolous in it- Ii'ali:,lei,,
self, and at this difllance of time of no importance, is founded on called in
the words of the treaty of Edinburgh. By that, thle Parliament 'ltl.
was permitted to take into conllideration the state of rcligion, and
to signify their fentinments of it to the King and Qceen. But in-
tfead of prcfenting their desires to their Sovereigns, in the hum-
ble form of a supplication or addrets, the Parliament converted
them into so many acts which, although they never received the
royal assent, obtained, all over the kingdom, the wcigh:t andl au-
thority of laws In compliance with their injunCtions, the ella-
blilhed fyflem of religion was ceery where overthrow::, and that
recommended by the Reformers introduced in its place. The par-
tiality and zeal of the people overlooked or fupllied any d(fc'ct
in the form of these aEts of Parliament, and rendercd tlhe oiler-
vance of them more universal than ever had been yielded to the
ilatutes of the mon regular or conflitutional affcnibly. By tihefe
proceedings, it m.ul, lowevcr, be conflffed, that the Parliament,
or rather the nation, violated the Lifl article in the treaty of :Edin-
burgh, and even exceeded the powers competent to (ubljcts.
But when once men have been accullon'ied to break through the
common boundaries of ft;ubjccion, and their minds are intlamcd
with the paflions, which civil war inspire, it is mere pedantry or
ignorance to mealiure their conducl by those rules, whicli can be
applied, only where g-overnment is in a slate of order ancd tran-
quillity. A nation, when obliged to employ fuchi extraordinary
elforts in defence of its liberties, avails itself of every thing wlich
can promote tils great end ; and the neccefity of the cafl, and
the importance of the onljccq, jullify any departure from the com-
mon and ellabllilh<ed forms of the conititution.

In conrl-i'clece of the trc;tty of ]Edinburgh, as well as by tile A\il,:it;.

ordinary forms of ,bufilles, it became ncccl'ary to lay the proceed- clrs li,;1 by
ing;; of Parliament 1before the King and Qc len. For tilis pir- ii,,t t
polc, Sir James S;llil:ands of Calder l.ord St. Jo11hn, was ;aljl;iilt- I',ll:c
cd to repair to the court ,f Fralnce. After holding a coullL' lu
;rrc;guliar, tle no;lils . htlad no r r to llttlcr themlclves ithat
lrancis alind Mlary wvould( ever approve their conduict, or confirm

;llox, 239, G56.

'IT ij

TIIE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND.

BooKc 11I.
- v-" it, by their royal assent. The reception of their Ambaflador was
I56o. no other than they might have expected. He was treated by the

King and Queen with the utmofi coldness, and difniffed with-
out obtaining the ratiication of the Parliament's proceedings.
From the Princes of Lorrain and their partizans, he endured all
the scorn and insult, which it was natural for them to pour upon

Aid to Eli- the party he representcd ''.
zabeth. 'Though the IEarls of IIorton, Glcncairn, and Maitland of Le-

thington, the Ambafl.ldors of the Parliament to Elizabeth their
Protectress, met with a very diTferent reception; they were not
more fuiccefsfil in one part of the negociation intrulled to their
care. The Scots, fcnllile of the fecurily which they derived
from their union with IEgland, v:ere dcfirous of rendering it in-
difloluble. With this view, thecy empowvered the1e eminent leaders
of their party, to tcilify to Elizabeth their gratitude for that sea-
fonable and efi'ecual aid whlich file had afforded them, and at the
fame time, to befecch her to render the friendflllp between the
nations prepctual, by condelcending to marry the Earl of Arran,
who, though a fuljcct, was nearly allied to the royal family of
Scotland, and after IMary, llhe undoubted heir to the Crown.

To the former part of this coininifiioni Elizabeth liflcned with

the utmofil atisfadlion, and encouraged the Scots, in any future
exigency, to hope for the continuance of her good offices ; with
regard to the latter, lhe discovercd those sentiments to -which fle
adhered throughout her whole reign. Averse from marriage, as
some pretend throughl choice, but more probably out of policy,
that ambitious Princets would never adcmit any paurtiner to the
throne; but delighted with the entire and uncontrolled excrcire
of power, the sacrificed to the enjo)lyment of that, the hopes of
tranfinitting her Crown to her own pollerity. 'The marriage
with the Earl of Arran could not be attended with any tich ex-
traordinary advantage, as to fliake this resolution ; lie declined
it, therefore, but with m:any cxprefionis of good-will towards the

'T'he lcnth Scottilh nlation, aLnd of .rcfpcti; for Arran hiifclff-1.
of)'la:urcis. l'Towards the conclulioni of tlis year, clillinguifhed by fio many

remarkable events, there 1ajlpcllnctl one of great ilmportance. (On
the 4th of December, dicd Francis II. a Prince of a fccble con-
ilitution, anil of a mean utindiilAandli t;. As lie did not leave any
iff'ie by the QEccn, no incidlent could have been mtc ore fortuntl:t ta
thole, who, (luring tlhe lalte conulnouiois in Scotland, lhad t:ilkc

U Knox, 3^5. 1,.li.. 3:7. .I' 1iil. . Apl)pen.ll 308. IKcitll !, *&(.

sart with the Congregation. IMIary, by the charms of ler beauty, BOOK IT.
ha;;d acquired an tire afcenidant over her hufbiand ; and as fle 1

c 5

transferred all her intlucnce to her uncles the Princes of Lorrain,
Francis followed them implicitly in vliatever tract they were
pilcalel to lead him. The power of France, under such directlion,
alarmed tlle Scottilil ma!ecolltents, wilth apprelllcnionss of clanger,
no ]lcs forminldable, than well founded. The inteitine ditordclrs
which raged ill France, and the (ea[lulnbll iiiterpo!ition of Eng-
land in lehal:f f the Congregation, had hitherto prevented the
Princcs of Lorrain from carrying their decigns upon'Scotlaind in-
to xecutioll. But under their vigorous and dccilivc atinini-
firation, it was impoflible that the commotions in France could
be of loni, contilnuance, a;i many things Irsight fall in to divert
..liz.;il)ti's attention, for the future, from tlc ull'airs of Scotland.
In cither of tlile events, the Scots vwoud lland c:.polcd to all tle
vcngealnce, which the resentment of the French court could in-
flict. h1le blo(w, however long ifufpnded, was unavoidable, and
must fall at lalt with redoubled weight. From this prolipe and
expcetation of danger, the Scots were deliveredl by tlic ldeatl of
Francis ; the ancient confederacy of the two kingdoms had al-
ready been broken, and by this event, the only bond of union
which remained. was dilhlvicd. Catherine of \lMedicis, who dur-
ing the minority of Charles IX. her feecond on, engrolled tie
entire direction of tie L.rencilh councils, was far from any thoughts
of vindicatiln the Scottiufl Ql ci's authlority. Catherine atnd
IMary had been rivals in po1vr duri:ng the reign of Francis II.
and had contended for the government (A tha1:it weak and un1ex-
perienced Prince but as the cliarmis of the vi fe ealily tiulllmliced
over the authority of the mother, Catherine could never forg/ive
lfch a .1ilplppoilnmcnt in her fatvourite paflion, and beheld ii.nov,
witl a secret pleasure, the dill;ieult anld perplexing scene, 0on
which lier ldaughter-in-law was about to enter. Mary, over- Mavry rires

1itom theI

whelmned with all tihe obrrowv which so fl:d a rcverfe of fortune co

1,, ,t

could occalon l ; l li'lletld by tlie Q.uen imothler ' ; and forl.lken Frat"e.
by tlle tribe of courtiers, who Ilapear only inll te nLfliine of

-proliperity, retired to llhciims, :and tllere, in iLlitudc, indulged

ler igrief, or lhid lier i(lignatlill. .I vell the Plinces of L'.r:Lill
welc oblli, ed tI, <olntracl llieir vi-ews; to ttrn them fromn loretigi
lo doinrllic olijt:ls; ; Ind inlli'Ld ol forminll vail p 'oject with re-
gard to Britlin, {o-mid it ii <efl'v yto think of ;(l.'iringi, aimd
.:latl)hlliihin;g an i.nt re!t x i'.il t'I .'", :t) !i, iLrailt,,:l.

'; Il nll(lt, ,. Io. (;.l'.-x;,. .;..i

BoocK II. It is impofrible to defcribc the emotions of joy, which, on all

6 V^ these accounts, the death of the French Monarch excited among
1 56o. the Scots. They regarded it as the only event, which could give

firnnels and {lability to that iylleni of religion and government,
which was now introduced; and it is no wonder cotemporary
historians fiould ascribe it to the immediate care of Providence,
which, by unforeseen expedients, can secure the peace and hap-
pincs of kingdoms, in thole situations, where human prudence
and invention would utterly dclfpair .

Efiaidlifli- About this time, the Proteflant church in Scotland began to
mrcnet of
I'rcEfvri-' aflume a regular form. Its principles hlad obtained the fanAlion
an church- of public authority, and foinc fixed external policy became necef-
gmc~nt. fary for the government and prclervation of the infant lociety.

The model introduced by the Reformers, difscred extremely from
that, which had been so long ellabliiled. T he motives, whicl
induced them to depart lo far from the ancient fyflcn, dcfervc to
be explained.

As the vices of the clergy :lidl, at firfr, excited the indignation

of mnankind, and rouled that spirit of inquiry, which proved so
fatal to the whole Popillih flcm: as this dilfguil at the vices of
ccclefiaftics was soon transferred to their persons, and fliiiftng
from them, by no violent tr:nfition, fettled at iaf! on the oflices
which they enjoyed; the efi-cEs of the Keformation would 1nt-
turally have extended not only to the doclrine, hut to the govern-
ment of tile Popifl church ; and the ifane spirit which aboliiied the
former, would have overturned the latter. Lut, in Cernmany,
lEngland, and tle northern kingtioms, its operations were check-
cd by the power and policy of their Princes ; and tIle ancient
Epilcopal jurifdiclion, under a few limitations, -was llillcontinued
in thole churches. The l. picolp:l licrarchy appear s to be more
conformable to the prafiice of the clhurchl, fijce C]-ritlinity b]e-
came the cllallillecd rcligionl of tlh Rolio:man elmpire. '.he cc.lc-
fiallical govcrnment was, ;it thalt time, llpaiily copicd from the
civil; tile firflt not only borro\wd its fi,,ir, I)t lderived its
authority from the Litter ; aind the dioceli's an:d1 juriliiic ions of
l'at:'iarchs, Archleliilops, and lloops, col'i'rrpidcd )ll th tille Cli-
vilinit and conllitutioll of the cmpirc. In S',it /.c;lind, ald lihe
I.ow'-countrics, tlic 1l;:rlir of tli !oi crninl:. t :lloS\inlg fll liope
I, tlhei genius of0 tlle l{cl'orn .iiti , a:ll pre-tiii.' c'C It orde!r inl
lie clhurchli wais (Id llc 'yvdel, ;1id ;ill 'llity 'lt;:liilied moire lita-

'*' k ''"*i

Lie to the f oirit of republican policy. The situation of the pri- BooillT.
mitive church lLigr.cilced the idea, ndl furlnil;led the model of the Vr
latter Iylte:n, which h:!s li.ce been c:illed Pr-Ljl'ier/c,.; . Tlie i'
STril Chrili:ins, opprcfil:d by continu:l pcrtecttionis, and lobliged
to hold their religilos al'e

ll lies b)y teCalth, and in corners, were

contented with :t form of government extremely simple. 'I'he
influcnei of religion conlCtrrc(d, witli tile feni of danger, in ex-
tinguiniinl :amion ll llihn, tle lli i;it of :mblition, and' in preserving
a parity of rank, the ceilccd. of tiheir lfuflrings? and the cause of
many of their virtucs. Calvin, wlolie dlcilicnis were received,
among the l'rote:iiilts of tll::t ane, with incrdciible lflillhillion
was the patron a:'d rleturer of this ich!n- of ecclefuillicl policy.
rThe church of Gnciva, f.irnMAd lendlr his eye. ;iild by his direc-
tion, was etleemed the moil iel'.rc illti l of tiis govcrnnilt t
and Kno:x, who, d ring hiis relidence in that city, had fludied
and admired it, warnmly recommended it to the imitation of his
countrymcen.

Aimong the Scottilh nobles, some hatcd the persons, and otllhers

coveted the wealth of the dig/ni:i:l cla.e-' ; and l)y ;Ioliitiing t!:t
order of men, the former indulged their relidntilcnt, and tlie hlt-
ter hoped to gratify their avarice. I 'li people, inflamed with
the mol violent avcrfion to Popery, and approving of every fcliemne
thlat departed farthell from tl:e praetice of the Romill cehurcl
vwere delighted with a fy'llc, lo adlnirally ilitcd to.their predo-
nliiant plaiTnn. V hllilc the friends of civil liberty beheld, with
,iAleafre, the Protellint clergy pulli:gi down, w ith their own
liands, that falbric of cclelialtical power, which their prctlcceilors
liad reared witli so much art alnd inll :irv ; and hllttctld tlemi-
fclves, thlat by lending their aid to 1irip cihurchmen of their dlig-
nity and wealth, they miight entirely deliver the nation from their
exorbitant :nd oppr'clive julrilieliioll. The new mode of goverl-
mnent ealily macdel its way amon;l men, thus prepared, by tleir
various interells land paIfions, for its reception.

But, o; the lirfl introdui-tion of his fy liem, Knox did not deem

it expedient to depart altocthler fronl thle ancicnt form' . In-
ltead of .lillops, lie ]prol)ollc( to clt:lli li ten or twelve Superin-
lendi:nts in dlilferent parts of the kingdumn. '1 llel, as the naile
impllics, X\Cre iiipiowercd to inldfjCl the life :1and (loctiine of thile
otlher clerj;y. '1'liy lirefidle(l iln tle intierir jildicatlrics of the
cihurch, and lerformed ftver':l! otheir lpart{s of' the ':l'pi(uopal fune-
ioll. ThI!cir jturilicli io l, Il!(, ve\;r,. _.:-telilrl d to Ilcred tl ;i::i '.

[',~i['t l . -;

Booi; II-. only; they claimed no scat in Parliament, and pretended no rigit

5 6o. to the dignity, or revenues, of the former Biflops.

The number of inferior clergy, to whom the care of parochiat

duty could be colmmitted, was fill extremely small; they had
embraced the principles of the Reformation at different timcs,
and from various motives ; during the public commotions, they
were fcattcred, merely by chance, over the different provinces of
the linpg;dom; and, in a few places only, were formed into regu-
Dc. zo. lar clafics or focicties. The firil General Aflcitmbly of the churcli,

wh-ich wais hc'el this yv:' , bears nil the marks of an infant and
uniformcd foci t.;. 'ihe mncmbers were I.hut few in number, and
of no coioitdle r aal,l k no ui;iornl or con illent rule leems to
hlave been oifervcd in clecting theim. l"rom a great part of the
kingdom no rcprclcztatives appcarcd. In the nae of me entire
countcis, but one pcrlbn wvas prcfent; inllile, in other places, a
!iiigle town or church fcnt fevcral membltrs. A convention, so
feeble and irregular, could pofi; f no great authority ; and confci-
ous of their ov;n wcknicfs, the members put an end to their de-
bates, without venturing upon any d'tcilion of much importanc e .
56,. In order to give greater flrenlthi and coufiftency to the Pre-

(1 vtcrian plan, Knox, wvith the aflillance of his brethren, compoled
the firltl oolk of discipline, which contains the model or platform
of the intended policy -l-. They presented it to a convention of
3Jallnar 15.' ei.iats, which was held in the begiinni; of this year. Vhatever

rcgulaatiolns were prolpofcd with regard to ceclef!iafiic discipline
and jurildiccion, w'ould have eafly ol)taincd the iah'lflon of that
afimbly ; Ibut a deflign to recover the patrimony of tle church,
wvlich is there inllinuated, met with a very diflerent reception.

In vain did the clergy difiplay the advantages which woould

accrue to the public, by a proper application of ccclcfiaftical re-
venues. In vain did they proposS, by an imparlial diflributiol
of this funtl, to promote true religion, to encourage learning, and
to (pport the poor. In vain did they evcn intermingle thrcat-
ilng's of the divine dileilcafure, againll the unjult detainers of
wvhat was appropriated to a licredtl use. ''he nobles held salt tle
prey, which they had Icized ; and bIellowing upoul the propolll,
t1.h n;1(iam. ' a twiot/>to;ff'ithla/'n, they afil'r:ted to confider it, as '.
iprojct :lt,'itll'cr litil:lr l, atl t'e:;itted it witlithe utliroll {corn S.

'T'li he),'"i ''li'. cOl ,-litis' :il',iiot-d thle 'Prior of St. Andrew's to repail:

101 ilriAl 10 , , ..
rctlii ii; '

, 1 tO till-' Q. , <1l, i li, l t) illvitt: lle r tl reltCtil into her native cou nt',,,
;''iioll:ll,(..

'* li lI ,, I;", ' l* :.,,Ut ,
1 -. ~, , l ;. IKl( x, *':.56,

:nd to assume the reigns of government, which had been too BOOK III.
long committed to other hands. And though (ome of her sub-

156i.

jects dreaded her return, and others foresaw dangerous conle-
quences with uwhich it might be attended t", the bulk of them de-
fired it with. so much ardour, that tile invitation was given with
the greatest appearance ot unanimity. But the zeal of the Roman
Catholics got the 11art of the Prior in paying court to Ilary; and
Lelly, afterwards Bilhop of Ross, who was commiifioned by them,
arrived before hlim, at the place of her refidencet-. Lclly cndcav-
oured to infuft into the Queenn's mind futpicions of her Proteliant
fubjcts, and to perluade her to throw herself entirely into the arms
of those who adhered to her own religion. For this purpose, lie
infifled that she lliould land at Aberdeen; and as the ProtefLant
doclrincs had made no considerable progrcfs in that part of the
kingdom, he gave her afliurance of being joined, in a few days,
by twenty thousand men ; and flattered her, that with such an
army, encouraged by her presence and authority, fle might easily
overturn the leformed Church, before it was firmly fettled on
its foundations.

But at this juncture, the Princes of Lorrain were not dirpofed

to lilten to this extravagant and dangerous proposal. Intent on
defending themselves againll Catherine of Medicis, whole infidi-
ous policy was employed in undermining their exorbitant power,
tlhey had no leisure to attend to the affairs of Scotland, and wifl-
ed their niece to take poffeflion of her kingdom, with as little dif-
turbance as poflible. T'lhe French officers, too, who had served
in Scotland, diflaladed Mary from all violent leasures; :r.d, by

prprcfenting the power and number of the Proteflants to be irre-

.fltible, determined her to court them by every art; and rather
to employ the leading men of that party as her Minfilers, than
to provoke them, by a fruitless opposition, to become her cnc-
milcs .. Iecncc proceeded the confiidence and aflrclion, with
wliich the Prior of St. Andrew's was received by the Qeen.
I-is rcprcfentation of the ilate of the kingdom gained grcat cre-
dit; and Leily beheld, with regret, the new channel in wlicl
court fa;vour was likely to run.

Another Convention of the estates was lheld in May. The

arrival of an Anl)bafl.ador fromi France, fctems to have bccn the oc-
cafion of this mccting. LI[ was iinllruited to follicit the Scots to
;cnew their ancient alliance with France, to break their new con-

' S.c Apcnd l, o. \'. t Ltlly, :,. I Mc!v. 6L.

IJ

Bool Ill. federacy with England, and to restore the Popifil ecclefiaitcs ta

- the poffeflion of their revenues, and the exercise of their functions,

It is no easy matter to form any conjecture concerning the inten-
tions of the French court, in making these extraordinary and ill-
timed propositions. They were rcjected with that scorn, which
might well have been expeted from the temper of the nation *.

In this Convention, the Proteflant clergy did not obtain a more

favourable audience than formerly, and their prospeCt of recover-
ing the patrimony of the church frill remained as diflant and un-
certain as ever. But with regard to another point, they found
the zeal of the nobles in no degree abated. The book of difci-
pline seemed to require, that the monuments of Popery, which
fill remained in the kingdom, fliould be demoliflicd -. And,
though neither the lame pretence of policy, nor the fame ungo-
vernable rage of the people, remained to juitify or excuse this
barbarous havock, the Convention, confidering every religious fa-
bric as a relic of idolatry, passed sentence upon them by an ac.
in form; and persons, the mort remarkable for the activity of
their zeal, were appointed to put it in execution. Abbics, cathe-
drals, churches, libraries, records, and even the fepulcllres of the
dead, perifled in one common ruin. ThIe first form of popular
infurreclion, though impetuous and irrefiffible, had extended only
to a few counties, and soon spent its rage; but now a deliberate
and universal rapine completed the devaflation of every thing, ve-
nerable and magnificent, which had escaped its violence ..

Mary be- In the mean time, Mary was in no haste to return into Scot-
,t;, sore-it' land. Accuflomfen to the elegance, splendor, and gaiety of a po.

lite court, flie till fondly lingered in France, the scene of all there
enjoyments, and contemplated, with horror, the barbarism of lies
own country, and the turbulence of her fiibjecs, which presented
her with a very different face of things. The impatience, how-
ever, of her people, the perfuations of her uncles, but above all,
the fludied and mortifying ncglect, with which fl e was treated by
the Queen Mlother, forced her to think of beginning this difa-
greeable voyage H. But while ihe was preparing for it, there
were sown between her and Elizabeth, the feeds of that personal
jealouly and discord, which imbittered the lif, and fliortened the
clays of the Scottilli (tuecln.

Ozigin of The ratification of the late treaty of Eldinburgh was the im-
ilt dilloral
bLwLiue n her mediate occasion of this fatal animosity; the true caulcs of it
andl Lliza-

th * ll Knox, 269, 273. s'1 Spotfwood, 153. 1 lbii. 17.

I BraUnome, Jcbb. vol. ii. 482.

lay much deeper. Almof every article, in that treaty, had been ROOK 1Ir.
executed by both parties, with a scrupulous exa&nefs. The for-
tifications of Leith were demolifiled, and the armies of Francc 56.
and England withdrawn within the appointed time. The griev-
ances of the Scottilh malecontents were redressed, and they had
obtained whatever they could demand for their future security.
With regard to all there, Mary could have little reason to decline,
or Elizabeth to urge the ratification of the treaty.

The sixth article remained the only source of contelt and diffi-

culty. No miniltcr ever entered more deeply into the schemes of
his Sovereign, or pursued them with more dexterity and fucccis
than Cecil. In the condut of the negociation at Edinburgh, the
found undcrllanding of this able politician proved greatly an over-
match for Monluc's refinements in intrigue, and artfully induced
the French Ambaffldors, not only to acknowledge that the Crowns
of England and Ireland did of right belong to Elizabeth alone, but
also to promifc, that in all times to come, lIary flould abflail
from using the titles, or bearing tlhe arms of tholc kingdoms.

The ratification of this article would have been of the mofl fa-

tal confcquence to Mlary. The Crown of England was an object
worthy of her ambition. Her pretensions to it gave her great dig-
nity and importance in the eyes of all Europe. By many, her
title was elleemed preferable to that of Elizabeth. Among the
Englifli thecmfclvcs, the Roman Catholics, who formed, at tlat
time, a numerous and aceive party, openly cfpoufed this opinion;
and even the Protestants who liupported Elizab)eth's throne, could
not deny the Queen of Scots to be her immediate heir. A proper
opportunity to avail hcrlelf of all these advantages, could not in
tle course of things, be far diflant, and many incidents might f1ll
in, to bring this opportunity nearer than was expeclctd. In theft
circumstances, Mary, by ratifying the article in dilpute, would
have loll that rank which fie had hitherto held among neighbour-
ing Princes; the zeal of her adllerents mull have gradually cool-
ed and lihe miglit have renoiunced, from that moment, all hopes
of ever wearing the E.nglihll Crown.

None of thcle beneficial confcrqunces efcaicl the lpcnetrating

eye of Elizabeth, who, for this realon, had recourli to every tllinl.,
by whichl lih could hopel cither to 1,ooth or frighten thc Scotlilii
Queen into ;1 colmpliance with her demands. And if that Prii-
cels liad beeCn ft unadvifid asI to rlitfy til ral1i concfnioi!; of her
Anmllaldllorlc, E.lizabeith, by that dcedl, swold have vacqired an ad-
vantagi-, hliich, under her ni:mligcilunt, lnilt have turned to grcat

U ij

BOOKIfT. account. By such a renunciation, the queflion, with regard to

i<56. the right of fucccfl;on, would have been left altogether open and

undecided; and, by means of that, Elizabeth might either have
kept her rival in perpetual anxiety and dependence, or, by the
authority of her Parliament, fle might have broken in upon the
order of lineal fucceflon, and transferred the Crown to some o-
ther descendant of the royal blood. The former conduct (le ob-
served towards James VI. whom, during his whole reign, fli
held in perpetual fear and fubjcaion. The latter and more ri-
gorous method of proceeding, would, in all probability, have been
employed against Mary, whom, for many reasons, flie both envied
and hated.

Nor was this fRep beyond her power, unprecedented in the hiflo.

ry, or inconfiflent with the conllitution of England. Though fuc-
ceflion by hereditary right be an idea so natural and so popular,
that it has been eflablilhed almofl in every civilized nation, yet
England affords many memorable infi ances of deviations fiom that
rule. 'I'he Crown ofthat kingdom having once been seized by
the hand of a conqueror, this invited the bold and cnterprifing in
every age to imitate such an illuflrious example of fortunate am-
bition. From the timle of Villiam I. tle regular course of de-
feent had seldom continued through three fucceflive reigns. Those
Princes, vwhofe intrigues or valour opened them a way to the
throne, called in the authority of tle great council of the nation
to confirm their dubious titles. Hence, parliamentary and here-
ditary right became in England of equal confidcration. That great
aflcmbly claimed and actually pofl'efled a power of altering tle
order of regal fuccfion ; and even it late as Henry V llI. an act.
of Parliament had authorized that capricious Monarch to fle tie tlhe
order of fucceflion at his plcafure. The Englilli jealous of their
religious liberty, and averli from the dominion of ilrangers, would
have eagerly adopted the paflions of their Sovereign, andt might
have been anfilv induced to exclude the Scottilli line from the
Tight of succeeding to tile Crown. Thllle feeml to have been tile
views of both Queens, and thue were tile difliculties which re-
iatarded the ratification of the treaty of Edinburgh.

But, if the sources of their discord were to be traced no higher

than this trcaty, an inccnfiderablc alter:ltiol) in thle words of it,
might lhave brought tile prlnllt qnclluion to an amicable iflle. ''he
indeclinite and aImlfigluous exlpfllion, vwlich Cc( il had inlcrtcd in-
to the treaty, might have Lbcin chlangc(l into one more limited,

but more precise. And iMary, irllcad of promising to abstain from BooK IIT.
bearing the title of Q(teen of lEngland in all times to come, might
have engaged not to aflFime that title, during the life of Eliza- 15''I
beth, or the lives of her lawful poflerity,

This amendment, however, (lid not suit the views of eithlcr

Qucen. Though Ilary had been obligcd to fufpcnd, for some tilme,
the prosecution of her title to the lnglitll Crown, Ilie had not,
however, relinquillhccl it. She determined to revive her claim
on the firlt profl)pc of success, and was unxilling to Lind lhrfelf,
by a positive engagement, not to take advantage of any such for-
tunate occurrence. Nor would the alteration have been more ac-
ceptable to Elizablcth, who, by agrecing to it, would have tacitly
reco-niizcd the right of her rival to alccndt the throne after her
deccaie. But neither the Scots nor JElglil (hQ.eel cduril avvuw
thele fecrct ftirinments of their hearts. Any open dilcovery of
an inclination to cdiilurl tlle trallqnuillitv of E ngland, o0 to wvrell
the sceptre out of Elizabctil' hands, might have proved fltal to
Mary. Any ti!'picion of a ldeign to alter the order of ffccefl oil,
and to set aside the claim of the Scottili Qlueen, would have cx-
posed Elizabeth to much and clcfrved ccnll'rc, and have raifedc
up againllt her many and dangerous enemics. ''hefe, howvcver
carefully concealed, or artfully diluildcl, .were, in all pruloaiility,
the real motives which determined the one Queen to follicit, and
the other to refuse the ratification of the treaty, in its original
form ; while neither had rccourfe to that explication of it, wvhicll
to nn heart unwarped by politicul intercit, and finccrely dciir-
ous of union and concord, would I:lve ;al:cared si oLtiu!s ald
patural.

But though considerations of intcrcit frnl occ:,fioned thlis nrp'-

ture between the Britillih Quc, s, rival!lhip of :anotller Iind con-
tributed to videnll the lreach, andl fenale

l jc:luunf incrcalc(d l 1

the violence of their politic:l hatred. i.lizabcti, wit ll itolc
extraordinary qualitics, by whliclh llic c(iualled or flipaited tlolc:
of her {.x, whio have lmerited the g}reltell rel(lo:l, ldiici)Ci're(i ;al
admiration of her own lperfoii, to a :degree, which li onllicii of ordi-
nary unldcrlilttlinigs eilb r (1do nt clit( i:i;, 1or ridelltly 'el-
deavour to conceal. i icr :attcltion to clr d l, lier lblicilllic to dil-
play ler clhrmnl, lr lov\c of

) lttcry, were ail ..ccis;.'e. Nur

xvere tliele wecilV.lkie s cl)iln.ld to tlit IlCilud i'l 1i1f, \,';L I ;hcy
arc more p):adolabl-. . 1ve n in c very ;i'.,' a. il .'t ., tlhe x\i ill
w\Olloanl of llat, or 1,eihlaps of an' (,.lcct rag , ,;s,( l!. ; :, :nd

BooKc III. affc&ed the manners of a girl *. Though Elizabeth was as much

L"-V- inferior to Mary, in beauty, and graccfulnefs of person, as (he
6x excelled her in political abilities, and in the arts of govcrnment,

Ihe was weak enough to compare herself with the Scottilli QO en-;
and as it was impoTible flie could be altogether ignorant how
much Mlary gained by the comparison; she envied and hated her
as a rival, by whom sic was eclipscd. In judging of the conduA
of Princes, we are apt to ascribe too much to political motives,
and too little to the passions which they feel in common with the
rell of mankind. In order to account for Elizabeth's present, as
well as her ifu)lequent conduct towards Mary, we mull not al-
ways confider ler as a Queen, we mufl sometimes regard her as
a woman.

Elizabeth, though no llranger to Mary's diflliculties with re-

fpcet to the treaty, continued to urge her, by repeated applica-
tions, to ratify it $. Mary, under various pretences, flill contri-
ved to gain time, and to elude tile rcquefl. But while the one
Queen follicited with pericvering importunity, and the other evad-
cd with artful delay, they both iludicd an extreme politenels of
behaviour, and loaded each other with profcui;ons of filerly love,
with reciprocal declarations of unchangeable elleem and amity.

ri .zl'i.th It was not long before I.Mary was convinced, that, among
relu't <5s Princes, tlefe expressions of friendfliip are coimonnnly far dillant
NMav a faile:
c, nidu&. from the heart. In failing from France to Scotlnnd, the course

lies along the Englilll coall. In order to he life from the insults
of the IEnglifl fleet, or in calf of tempcluouls weather, to secure
a retreat in the harbours of that kingdlom, 1Mary fcnt liI. 1)'y-
fel to demand of Elizabeth a fife condui during her voyage.
'This rcqueft, which decency alone obliged one Prince to grant
to another, E'lizallcth re;ccld, iln fich a m:innrer, as gave rile to
no flight suspicion of a dlefign, cither to ,,bfrucCl the ptafflgc, r
to intercept the person of the Scottifll QLeen !j.

,n - '[,. i This ungenerotus lbehaviour of '!'! bl.ct! filled Mary with iln-

'.i di2.nation, but did not retard
i l ir dleia ture from Iranclc. She

w ;a a ccominliaiied to C(:lais, tllic II:cC v.hl're C il cinl):lci('d, in a
alrancer tfit;iblc to her dignity, as ll l QI Oiccn of tl\o powenfiul
.inlidonms. Six Princts of JL.or:iiii 1 :Ir llcl:lC', v." .lth mi;:y of the
loltl cminc.lt amllong the rct'ucli( i;i !;ls, wcril in l;r- reltilue.

; Jlmi,,i, 1lis. I;i , . 1

. '. itan; .

. ~ i,, 3- C ::u', .,\l1. iii. 6,y. C'.tic.ilg( ; r.S'
R.wvy:: ;I.id N.b.leil Arab!ions. A lr oh. J1: , s:.

- . ;'lxil, y9S. I l.

V,'i t, ,,;, ;t ', ,Cc.
1! IP.li. i'7i. L'a,; lc.;i. SZ ;.'p:l)U.ii.. 'X.. .I.

Catherine, who secretly rejoiced at her departure, graced it witlh 2oo: III.
every circumtilanee of mlagnificence and ref.jp l. After bidding ,6
adieu to her mourning attendlants, with a fad heart, and eyes batth-
ed in tears, lMary left that ki:lgdom, the Iliort, but only fccne of
her life, il which fortunet fiiled uponll er.

C \hile tlhe French

coalt continued in figlt, fli intellly gazed upon it, and muling,
in a thoughtful pollurc, on th.lt Iight of fortune whence fie had
Ifllen, and preitLging, perli:s, tihe difrllcrs and calamities which
imbittered the remainder of her hdays, lhe sighed often, and cried
out " Farewel 3ralce! IFarewbel beloved country, whiich I lall
" never more behiold !" Even when the darkneis of the night
]lad hid the land from her view, file would neither retire to the
cabin, nor talle luod, but comunandin g a cauch to lec placed on
the deck, lic there wiai:cd tlhe return of day, with the utmofi im-
patience. Fortune footlcd her on thiis cccfion ; the gallcy made
little way duiring the nighlt. In thel morning, the coafl of Francc
was Itill within light, and lie continued to feed her mclancholly
with the prof)pecA and as long as her eyes could dillinguilli it,
to utter the Lame tender cxprcleioils of rLigrct '. At lall a brin;
gale arose, by the avr of wicil for Ifot days, and afterward
under the covert of a thick so;., M/ary clfaped the Eng'lill e Ilct,
wvhich lay in wait to intcrccpt her-+; and on tlhe 19th of AS.guln,
aifter an absence of near thirteen years, landed safely at Lcith in Arri-es iln
lier native kingdom. SL:

lMary was received by her fubjeas with shouts and acclama-

tions of joy, and with every dcmronltration of welcome and re-
gard. J3ut as her arrival was unexpected, and no faitabll prc-
paration bad been made for it, they could not, with their utinufi
cfforts, hlide from her the poverty of thie country, and \cere o-
bliged to conduct hler to the palace of Ilolyrood-lhouIe with little
pomp. 'The Qeen, accufloined from her infancy to the utmloli
fplcndor and magnificence, and fond of them, as was natural at
her age, couldl not help observing the clhange in her situation, and
ccemed to be deeply afflcited withi it :.

Never did any Prince alcend the throne at a junCture, wichi .ae o,, ,t!,,
called for more wxifdnom in council, or more courage and lIcddi- -bi.l"'il '

t}:at

ti:a...

isels in alion. 'I'he rage of religious controverly was flill tunalbat-
cd. 'Ihe memiory of pall opprellion exasperated tle Protellants;
the fmnart of recent injulies rcenderedl tlle Papists del}erate ; blotl
were zealous, fierce, and irreconcilaile. 'Th1 aL!fnce of ihcir
Sovcreign had acculloined the inollc:; to.inldeCpeL' cncy ; and, dl.

i' Brn .toinc, -JR. . Ile iinli. lr;'iT is in the fllie galle y with the Q Lccell.
1 c( do, .i!. vol,. i. &-j, C ilc'l'' .1 I Itrilt. I.|

OOKn I. rrigS the late commotions, they hlad acquired such an increaSe of
5j6. wvealth, as threw great weight into the fcalc of ariflocracy, which

flood not in need of any accefion of power. The kingdom had
long been under the government of Regents, who exercised a lce-
legated juriidition, attended with little authority, and which in-
spired no reverence. A slate of pure anarchy had prevailed for
the two lalt years, without a Regent, without a fipreme council,
without the power, or even the form of a regular government .
A licentious spirit, unacquainted with fibordination, and dilflain-
ing the rcllraints of law and juilice, had filread among all ranks
of men. The influence of France, the ancient ally of the king-
dom, was withdravwn or deli,iicd. The Elnglil, of enemies be-
come confederates, had grown into conficlnce -with the nation,
and gained an anfcendant over all its councils. The Scottilh MAo-
narchs did not derive more splendor or power from the friencdflip
of the former, than the!c had rte:aon to dread injury and dim:i-
nution from the intcrpGfition of the latter. Every confidera-
tion, dwhether of intereill, or of f.lf-prelcrvation, obliged Eliza-
beth to dcprefs the royal authority in Scotland, and to create the
Prince perpetual diil;culties. by fomenting the spirit of difaffec-
tion among the people.

In this pofiure were the af.iirs of Scotland, when the admini.

firation fell into the handls of a voung

( Oncen, not nineteen years

of age, un:acuainitcd with the lmanncers and laws of her country,
a liranger to her fulbj 'cts, without e.perience, without allies, and
almoll witlout a friend.

On the other hand, in M\ary's fitlation ve find some circum-

itances, which, thalugh they did not balance these difdvantages,
contributed, however, to alleviate them ; and, with flillful ma-
nagement, might have produced great efl'cs. Her fubjedts,
unaccuflomed bs long to the rcfidence of their Prince, were not
only dazzled by the novelty and lliendor of the royal presence,
but inspired with awe and reverence. Besides the places of power
and profit bellowed by the favour of a Prince, his protecion, his
familiarity, and even his finiles, confer honour and win the hearts
of men. From all corners of the kingdom, the nobles crowded
to tefllify their duty and afTeclioln to their Sovereign, and fnldied,
by every art, to wipe out the memory of pall mifcondiil, and to
lay in a flock of future melrit. The :"ainucmlnts und gaiety of
her court, which was filled with the moll acconipliflcd of the
French nobility who had attended her, began to ibftcn anld to

i.:'.l, A; '(il. 92

pcinfh the rude manners of the nmation. Mary hcrfclf poffe'led nBoK Ill.
many of tlefe qualifications, which r.lil t atlcoion, and procure 1-6
eltccm. The bcauty and graccfulnelcs of lier pcrfon drew univer-
fal admiration, tlh elegance and poli tcncs of lher malnncrs com-
mianded general relpect. To all the charm s of her own fcx, she
added many of the acctminlliliinents of the other. The progrcls
file had made in all the arts and fcicnces, wliich were then
c cftemedl neccefTry or olna:lental, was far beyond what is coll-
monlv attained Ly Priiices. And all her other qualitics were
rendered more agreeable by a courteous afirtbility, which, without
leffeniilg the dignity of a Prince, Itcals on the hcarts of lilbjects
with a .bewitching i;ilinuation.

From tl)cTf circtniltanccs, notwithflanding the threatening

nficcft of afi:tirs at il.ary's return into Scotland, notwithll:inding
li!I clouds vl;ich ga:ihcrcd on every hland, a political ol)ihrvcr
wVOilUtd I:ave prce!ieled :i very difTcrent ifliU of her rcigll anti
whatever ilidden gulls of f.clioll lie might have cxpcced, hle would
never have dreaded the dclerutive violence of tihat norm which
followed.

TWhile all parlies were contending who llhoulcl difcovcr the

moil dutiful att:ahment to the Q(ieen, tlhe zealous and imllpaticlt
spirit of thle age broke out in a rcniarlkable inllancee. On the
Sunday after :er arrival, the Qccn commanded mass to be ce-
lebrated in tLe chllael of her pa:lace. The firll rumour of this
occasioncd a lecret niurmuring among the Protelhants who at-
tendcd the court ; complaints and threatcnings soon followed.
T'he frvants belonging to tile chapel were insulted anl albufcd;
and, if the Prior of St. Andrew's liad not fcalbnably interpolfd,
thei rioters mih lt have proceeded to the utmoll ecxccflc:i .

It is imnponlhlc, at tilis ditlance of time, and under circum-

flIanecs so very different, to conceive the violence of that zeal
agailnf Polpery, which t1hen pofle'cld the nation. ?.vcry inltance
of condlefccjnF.i to the Papills vas cllecmed an aCl of apoltacy,
and t!le tolcration of a lin4gle nmts pronounced to be more formid-
able to the natln tha tle invallon of ten thoulflnd armcd men-c-.
Under tlle inllucncc of tlicl: opinions, many Protcltants would
have ventured to go da:ngcrous lengths ; and, without attempting
to convince their Sovercign by :lrgumcnt, or to rcclaimi her by
indulgencc, wvuld Iihve abruptly denlied her tlle liberty of
Wvolflilpping God in thai manner, whiich alone llie tltougihl aCCel)t-
able to ]im. liut the Prlior of St. Andlrew's, :lnd otihc/claders

"l\jiox, :8t. |
t io , I3

x

Boor IIT. of the party, not only reflrained this impetuous spirt ; bui, iR

V-6-- spite of the murmurs of the people, and the exclamations of the

preachers, obtained for the Queen and her domestics the undif-
turbed exercise of the Catholic religion. Near an hundred years
after this period, when the violence of religious animofities had
begun to subside, when time, and the progrcfs of learning had en-
larged the views of the human mind, an Englifli house of Com-
mons refused to indulge the wife of their Sovereign in the private
tfe of the mars. The ProtefLant leaders deserve, on this occasion,
the praise both of wisdom and of moderation for condu& so dif-
ferent. But, at the fame time, whoever reflecEs upon the en-
croaching and sanguinary spirit of Popery, will be far from treat-
ing the fears and caution of the more zealous Reformers as alto-
gether imaginary, and destitute of any real foundation.

The Proteitants, however, by this compliance with the Queen's

prejudices, obtained a proclamation highly favourable to their re-
ligion. The Reformed docrine, though eflablifhed all over the
kingdom, had never received the countenance or fancrion of roy-
AgUatliL . al authority. On this occasion, the Queen declared any attempt

towards an alteration or fabverfion of it,.to ie a capital crime *.

:hllfmploys' The CQueen, conformable to the plan which had been concert-
only Protlf- ed in France, committed the adminiltration of affairs entirely to
tants in the
:idliniiira- Protestants. Her council was filled with the most eminent per-
tiona sons of that party ; not a single Papifl was admitted into any

degree of confidence f-. The Prior of St. Andrew's and Aiait-
land of Lethington seemed to hold the firll place in the Queen'a
affecCtion, and possessed all the power and reputation of favourite
lMinillers. Her choice could not have fallen upon persons more
acceptable to her people. And, by their prudent advice, the
Qeeen conducted hcrfelf with so much moderation, and deference
to the fcntiments of the nation, as could not fail of gaining the
affection of her fubje&ts , the firmef foundation of a Prince's
power, and the only genuine source of his happiness and glory.

Attnlmptsto A cordial reconcilement with Elizabeth was another object of
',1''I FIiza- great importance to Mary; and though she seems to have Lad it
vour. much at heart, in the beginning of her adminifiration, to accom-

plifh tuch a dcfirable conjuncflion, yet many events occurred to
widen, rather than to close the breach. The formal offlices of
friendfilip, however, are felclon ncgleccld anong Princes, and
Elizabeth, who hlad attempted ob openly to obllru& the Q(eenC q

* lciil ,
54 .. .1 Llyx, v , 3.

royage into Scotland, did not fail, a few days after her arrival BUOo Ilt
to command Randolph to congratulate her safe return. Mary, ;
thlat she might be on equal terms with her, sent Maitland to the
Englilh court, with many ceremonious expressions of regard for
Elizabeth '. Both the Ambassadors were recived with the utmolt
civility; and, on each fide, the profeflions of kindnels, as they
were made with little fiicerity, were liflened to with. proportional
credit.

Both were intrufled, however, with something more than mcre

matter of ceremony. Randolph urged Mary, witl freih importu-
nity, to ratify the treaty of Edinburgh. Miaitland endeavoured
to amuse Elizabeth, by apologizing for the dilatory conduc of
his Mistress with regard to that point. The multiplicity of pub-
lic affairs iince her arrival in Scotland, the importance of tile
quellion in dispute, and the absence of many noblemen, with
whom flie was obliged in decency to consult, were the pretences
offered in excuse for her condutl ; the real causes of it were
those, which have already been mentioned. In order to extricate
herself out of these dilliculties, into which the treaty of Edinburgh
had led her, Mary was brought to yield a point, which formerly
fie seemed determined never to give up. She infructced Ilait-
land to signify her willingncfs to disclaim any right to the Crown
of England, during the life of Elizabeth, and the lives of her
poflerity ; if, in failure of thef, flie were declared next heir by
acd of Parliament --.

Rcafonable as this proposal mighlt appear to lMary, who there-

by precluded herself from diEiurbing Elizabeth's poefellion of the
throne, nothing could be more inconlillent with Elizabeth's in-
terell, or more contradidcory to a paflion, which predominated in
the character of that Princess. Nothwitlitanding all the great
qualities, which threw such lultre on her reign, we may oblerve,
that file was tindlured with a jealouly of her right to the Crown,
which often betrayed her into mean and ungenerous actions. 'The
peculiarity of her fitu;ition heightened, no doubt, and incrcaeld,
but did not infuse this palrion. It delceended to her from IHenry
VII. hergrand-father, whon, in fevcral features of his charatdcr,
lhc nearly refenbled. Lilkc hinm, Ile lirctlered the title by which
lhe held the Crown to rcnlain anmbliguous aind controvrted, ra-
ther than flbinit it to parliamentatry dileutiion, or derinve any ad-
dition to her right, fro in fiJh autlmority. Like himi, lih obli:rvect

l. '

cith. C.
S1, &Ec. '] C;,nld v ib 3 87 '1. 3B 9.

X ii

BooK III every pretender to the fuccefflon, not only with that attention,

56i. which prudence prescribes ; but with that aversion which suspicion

inspires. The prcfent uncertainty with regard to the right of fuc-
cession, operated for Elizabeth's advantage, both on her fubjces,
and on her rivals. Among the former, every lover of his country
regarded her life as the great fccurity of the national tranquillity;
and chose rather to acknowledge a title which was dubious, than
search for one that was unknown. The latter, while nothing was
decided, were held in dependence, and obliged to court her.
The manner in which flic received this ill-termed proposal of the
Scottish Q(ecn, was no other than might have been expcaed.
She rejecRed it in a peremptory tone, with many exprelitons of a
resolution never to permit a point of ol much delicacy to be
touched.
Sept. x. About this time, tile QCeen made her puLblic entry into Edin-

bur1gh w'ith great pomp. Niotllh;g was nllecclcd, vwhich could
express the duty and afnction of tle citizens towards their Sove-
reign. But anmicll there de monfrations of regard, the genius
and sentiments of the nation discovered themlfelves, in a circutm-
fiance, which, though inconsiderable, ought not to be overlooked.
As it was the mode of the times to exhibit many pageants at
every public solemnity ; on this occasion, most of these w;-re col-
trived to be representations of the vengeance which the Almiighty
hath infli&ed upon idolaters E

. Even lwhile they fludied to amunfe

and to flatter the Oueen, her fulhjecs could not refrain flor tef-
tifving their abhorrence of that religion which (lie profeiled.

Restrains To rcftore the regular adminifi:ration ofjuflicc, and to reform
ofthe lbo-c the internal police of the country, became tlh next objc& of tlic
derers. QOecn's care. The laws enacted for preservation of public order,

and the fccurity of private property, were nearly the faime in
Scotland, as in ev'ry olt'er civilized country. But the nature
of the Scottifl conltituti;,n, the impotence of regal authority, the
exorbitant power of the nobles, the violence of fa&fion, a:d the
fierce manlners of the people, rendered the execution of tliefc la:ws
feeble, dlilbrderly, andl partial. In the counties whlich border on
Einlland(l, this defect was nioll aplprent ; and the conlcrqlunces of
it moll sensibly felt. ''he inlhabitants, flralnlcrs to illulllly, avcrll
from labour, and uinacqu:nilited witill the arts of peace, febsillcd
intirely by li'oil and lpillage, 1nd lcilng confetlerated in llpts or
clans, committed therfe excclsks nut only wvithl inipuniily, btt

'h citl, 189.

even with honour. !During the unsettlcd slate of the kingldom rIloK III.
from the death of James V. this dangerous licence had grown to
an unusual height; and the inroads and rapine of there freebooters - 51'
were become no less intolerable to their own countrymen, tl:ha
to the English. I'o rcftrain and puntlll thele outrages, was an
acion equally popular in lbth kingdoms. The Prior of St.
Andrew's was the person chofcn for this important fervicc, and
extraordinary powers, together with the title of the QCeen's Lieu-
tenant, were velt rd in him for this purpose.

Nothing can be more surprising to men, accustomcd to regular

government, than the preparations made on this occasion. IThey
were such as might ibe expccted in the rudelt and moil inlmprfect
ftatc of society. The frehollders of eleven fecvral counties,
wvith all their followers completely arme(l, were flmiionll to
aflil their Lieutenant in the dlfclha rge of his oilice. iecry
thing rercrlmbled a military cxpediton, ratlicr than thei ro;;rcl;
of a court of juflice'*. The Prior executed his commiiIonl 'vitll
fulch vigour and prudence, as acquired him a great incrcaitc of re-
putation and popularity amiog- llis c'.ltrymne. Numbers of
the banditti fiffered the punifl l cn t dei to their c:ri::cs , :;:d, Iby
the impartial and rigorous adinillIatl)li of jullice, :'derand
tranquillity were reflored to that part o. t1' ,lc I:igdo!.

During the abencce of the Prior of St. Anldrcw's, thie I-c;:'r3 'Th'1! -'l";;

of the Popilh faction fcem to have take;ll focne l:1ps towai,. illi-

K l: ,jl, ;,,

nuating themselves into the CQeen'ls favour an( d conUidfnc'e-{-. it 't;i'.' - '
But the Archbifllop of St. Andrew's, the niolt renilrkL..le pcr-
son in the party for abilities and polilical addrel1, \v;ws r :L'.' 'cI
with little favour at court; and whatever fccret p:r ti;l;tv ).c
Quecn might have towards thole who pro:'ssed the fiul riLlic.i.n
with lierfelf, nfie discovered no inclination, at that time, to takl
ihe adminilration of aflairs out of those hands, to which Ilic had
already conllintted it.

Tlhe cold reccption of the Arclhbillop of St. Andrew's w:,

owving to h is coiincitionl witll the louleb of ilamilton,; from wisichl
tlhe Qccn \was much alicna!tied. 'lTe I)ulke of Guiie :and thl:
Cardinal] coild never forgive the 7c:.1, v:ill wllich tlhe Duke of
Chlatellhera Lil anl iis i)ii the 1a:trl] of' A ;ran hl:d elipoucit tile c:ai:
of the Cou regati,,;o . i'liiiccls ibldoin , :'.: tl: i:-' fiLccclTurs with-

oilt jaloutli a d dill i 'il';i . '1'.( I, o i . .L'O i '-\v'., ., ei,l.a s,

drCeaidc'.l tile D.)uke :. s
a lrival ini ]'j. Ce'. s-i! !!!"! !: '.:!Li( u c(in'!'-

BooK 11l. red in infusing into the QLecn's mind an avcrfion for that family.
ó- ?lThe Duke, indulging his love of rctirement, lived at a distance
56 ' from court, without taking pains to insinuate liiifelfinto favour.

And though the Earl of Arran openly aspired to marry the Quecn,
he, by a inoft unpardonable a& of imprudence, was the onily no-
bleman of diftinRcion \who opposed 1Mary's enjoying the exercile
of her religion ; and by rathly entering a public protefiation a-
gaiint it, entirely forfeited her favour *. At the fame time, the
fordid parsimony of his father obliged him either to hide himlclf
in fnime retirement, or to appear in a manner unbecoming his dig-
nity as fir!l Prince of the blood, or his high prctcnfions as suitor to
the Qeen -. His love, iillialed by clilTapointment, and his im-
patience, exasperated by neglcpt, preyed gradually on his rcafon;
and, after many extravagalncies, brokc Jut at lall in ungovernable
frenzy.
Dec. o20 'Towards the end of the ycar. a Convention of Eltates was held

chiefly on account of ecclefiailical afflirs. The aficni)ly of the
church, which lat at the ilnce time, prfented a petition, contain-
ing many dmlands w\ith reii)ccd to tllc ;fupi'prc;l of Popery, the
encouraging the lProtell:int rcli.ion, an! the iprovid.ing so r the
maintcnance of the clergy .

T 'hec lil vwas a intter of grcat im-

portance, and the Ileps tiaken towards it dcI. rvc to be tr.ced.

A r- T'I'hough the number of Prottilant preachers was now confidcr-

glul.uio, :aily incrcatfed, many i-ore wcCre i1ill needed, in every corner o£
t1 relell', s the kingdom. No legal provision having beccn imadiie for them,
of! tIheL they had hitherto drawn :ia scanty and precarious fubfillence froru

tlhe bcencvolence of their peopl'. 'I'o IILer thle Minillers of al
clltblillcd church to continue in this dlatc (of i:cii,.ccy and de-
pcndence, was an indecency equally rcpulginalt to the principles
cf rc!igion, and to the maxims of oun id poiicy ; ;ndl would ha;ve
jutiified all the imputations of a;varice, with which the Reforma-
tion iwas then loa.dcd by its enlcllc. The Cireven lles of tlle Po-
pilli clurch wc.re thi only fiund, whicl coauld LL: cmi)loyed for
,icl'r rclic s; but durinll tlie tll ' l.i yC.ll.s,

e ie l:lte o tllClc w;;;

.;:c ..iy aliced. A .rc(at Ir;.jori'y s, Prir, and other
I._.I'.. of rcligious loul, d, c:., r lr(;;l a i:i:e, f cduty, or
11.rni Xic\ws ot interitel rcnouincd tlie error, oft ojiCly ;tIra, not-
x itllll iuding tlis c!irl;g'c inl tl;ir i 'lti. i n':t ., tll' V rt;ined thitiL
..iiic nt revellits. Allmolt tle \l;.ic ;)ICrlel. of tle 1lifloL :;, anti
l,:vr.l uOi thec otiher diginitarit, P.ill .lIiCrd to the iomilli1l si-

'1 "k lhi, :-e.;. 1l.: :,

*i.
I , 1..I.;,, is/,. , Ibkl. -10

crsniltlon; and though debarred from every spiritual funtion,, , oo
Contlillnued to cnjoy hec temporalities of their ,benefices. Somc
liymen, efpccially thole whvio had been active in promoting the
Reformation, had, under ;various pretences, n an miclt the li-
eene of civil w:ars. got into tlecir hands p1ollciions, wlwicl belonged
to the ichurch. Andt thus, be'ore nny p:irt of tilc ancient ecclelia'-
tical revenues could be nppliedl towvards the maiintclinanc of the
Protcflant lXlilliilers, many d illlrent interelis were to be adj ufled
many claims to be ex:amlined ; and the prejudices and paln;ons of
the two colntendin2l parties rejuired tile :LI)liiatioll of ;a (elicate
Lind. After mtuchl contention, the f;llowin pilan vas approv-
cd by a maijority of voices, and acquicccd ill even by tlhe I'o-
pifl clergy thienrilves. An exaict iccoulnt of thc value of cr-
cleliallical bcneliccs througlieuiti tle kingdom n was appointed to be
taken. The present inictileni its, to \\wlltevcr prlty they adhered
were allowed to kee ploiiclfion ; two thircis of their whole reve-
nue were refervct for tlihir owni uik', thel remainici er was aniiscxd
to the Crown ; and out of tliat, the Qeen undertook to ai!ign a
uflicicint maintenance l or lthe Protellant clergy *.

As molt of the IEiliolps and tver:il of the otier "(iini:'!c

were still firmly att acicd to th! Popilh religion, tle cxtirpil:iio
of tle wviole order, rather than an a; l of fielh extraordinary in-
duilgence, might have beei n expeced froml the zcell of the preach-
crs, alnd fromi tlhe iirit wxlich! had hitherto animated the nation.
j]ut, on this oceafion, otielr priiil) is ol)flructecl the operation
of those whlich were purely religious. Zeal for liberty, and the
live of xwe;lth, two paflions cetrcnmly opposite, coincurred in dc-
tel-iriin'. the Protellint leaders to 1fll in with tis plan, w hiciI
ldeviated lo manirflcilly from tle maxims, by whichie tiey 1iad hlitheir-
to regulatecd their conduc.

If the lcforiners Ilhad been ;llowed to act without controul, and

to level all dillinlioins in tile chltrch, the immicnll reveniues :1-
nce:.cd to ecclefiallical dligniities could not, with anly colour o[
julliec, have bleeln retainled by tihofie in whole h:ids they 1now
were ; but Inmll ciietr chave been cdillrilb)tcd :ntamonI the lrotellant
clcrp;y, viwho plerfortlmed all religiols o;liccs, ol lm1il 1liave fallen
to the Q-celn, it'oni th1e loLoulty of Xihole ;IIIllors, llte grreatrr-
part of tliem vi as originally derived. The former, lhowever hilt-
:il]e to tle religious liir'it of tni:;y :ilon ll tie people, w;xl atteCid-
ed wvitli iitiiiflil (1 an .

e 'i'1c Iie Popil eccieliallits hiad actlitited
* filarc in tle national lpropicty, l iih f ar e(cetxc, tie pi""-'.

Iu'i: i,
tl [i~i'dl. I7.;' l<. !x. n5'i.

,'i lir. Li;.lon, tlhat was confifrent with the happiness of the kingdom; and

thi e nobles were determined to guard againfl this evil, by pre-
vcnting those vall poneflions from ever returning into the hands
of the church. Nor was the latter, which exposed the conflitu-
tion to more immincnt hazard, to be avoided with less care.
Even that circumfi'ribed prerogative, which the Scottifi Kings
pofiefled, was the objec of jealoufv to the nobles. If they had
allowed the Crown to fcize tlhe spoils of the church, such an in-
c.'ease of power muil have followed that acceflion of property, as
v. ould have raised the royal authority above controul, and have
1endcered the moll limited Pri:ce in Europe the most absolute and
i!dependent. The reign of Ihenry VIII. presentcd a recent and
:;l;irn.li , example of tlhis nature. The wealth, which flowed in
upon that Prince, from ili fupprcfl.on of the monalleries, not only
changied the maxims of his goveriment, but the temper of his
miinid; and he who had formerly fubmittel to his Parlialments,
and couired his peop)le, d,

taed, rom that time, to the former,

vwitih intolerable infiolnce; and tyranniized over the latter wvith
u: precedcntied severity. Aknd if lis policy hdl not 'been ex-
trcne;ly nfort-Gfghltd. if he libd not fquandcred what he acquired,
with a p:-ofuion cqual to his rapacioufines, and whic defeated
' ;is a:n;ilitionl, lie migt lave eiilh ii.lci! deipjot'ffm in England, on

l>;rfis so broad lland itren?;, as all the clbilts of the fubjecls vould

nCever hlavC'e nc: able to ilia;e. In Scotland, where the riches of
the CLc:a-y Ibore as ;grceat ,a roportion to the .ealth of the king-
(domn, tl';c aeqni tio of ch:'rch-lia;!s \would have been of no leTs
importance to tLe Crow;l;, and no lcis fatal to the ariflocracy.
'i'!e u:bles, ii';r L1.: rr::fin. ;:ir:irdcd aq:ahilt fich an increase of
the r0val p)ov Cr, aii Li;:-liy ici.cured in their own independence.

i-Avarlice ming:led ili' vi ih tllheir conccrn for the intcreft of

thcir order. The rc-uaitiln; thli pofcifiions of the church to the
C'rovn, or the bellovi thi:; !:cin on the ProtclLant clergy, would
liha;e been a fatal blow lbotli to tlo': nobles, who h:ad, by fraud or
iolcncc, ILizcel part of tlhle r\cvnucs, and to tlhofe Abots and
Pliors whlo lhd totally renclunced their cccefifilical character.
R.ut as the plaln, w.hicll :vs

; .rolvd, cg,-ave onme fi'.ntion to their

liill-Urations, they proi'l edl it with theilr utmoll iniluence. The
Popisi eccleiiullies, tul]>i,.l tlle lplpin,"; g ,' a tlhird of their reve-
nues \was 1,y lo mnlcaus ::ir Icc:!il to thellm, con!lleted, unldcr tlier-
1prelent cilrcuiill:tnccrs, to lIacrilicc a part of thieir pof'nlils, in or-
der to purcha! ' llie IcCiiu eClnjo\ I1eit of Lile remainder ; and afite
dceunliing tilc \holc i ;rcover:tblly lull, tllchy conllicred wAilate'.i

they could retrYe as fr much gain. Many of the ancient digni- BooK III.
taries were men of noble birth andl as they no longer entertain-
ed hopes of restoring the Popili religion, they wiihcd tleir own 1 /
relations, rather than tice Crown, or the Proteflant clergy, to be
enriched with the spoils of the church. They connived, for this
reason, at the encroachments of the nobles ; they even aided their
avarice and violence ; they dealt out the patrimony of the
church among their own relations, and by granting feus and
perpetual leafes of lands and tithes, gave, to the utmost of their
power, some colour of legal poffeflion, to what was formerly mere
usurpation. Many vefliges of such alienations still remain ". The
nobles, with the concurrence of the incumbents, daily extended
their encroachments, and gradually (tripped the ecclefiaflics
of their richest and molt valuable pofefilmous. Even that third
part, which wa;s given up in order to silence the clamours of the
Protestant clergy, and to be some equivalent to the Crown for its
claims, amounted to no considerable fum. The thirds due by the
more powerful nobles, especially by thole who had embraced the
Reformation, were anioft universally remitted. Others, ty pro-
ducing fraudulent rentals; by eflimating the corn, and other pay-
ments in kind, at an under value ; and by the connivance of col-
lestors ; greatly dimninilhed the charge againll themselves - ; and
the nobles had much rcafon to be satisfied with a device, which,
at so finall expencc, f[cured to them such vail pofI'cnions.

Nor were the Protellant clergy considerable gainers by this new TheProteft-
regulation ; they found it to be a more easy matter to kindle zeal, ant cler-gy

.than~~

.to~~ .

, , .  "ruio .~ainei

than to extisnguilhi avarice. Thole very men, whoin formerly they by it.
had swayed wvith :ljlolute authority, were now deaf to all their
rcmonltr:nnlccs.. Tlie Prior of St. Andrewv's, the Earl of Argyle,
tile Earl of Morton, and Maitland, all the molt zealous leaders of
the Congregation, were appointed to afign, or, as it was called,
to rn'1/f)y their ilipends. Aln hlundred merks Scots was the al-
lowance which their liberality afforded to the generality of IMi-
nifllrs. To a few three hlundred nierks were granted t. About
twenty-i;ur thoulandl pounds Scots appears to have been the xwhole
fumn ailoted for the maintenance of : national church eltaljliilhc
by law, and ellecimed, throughout the kingdon, the true churIch
of God |1. Even this fum was paid with little exacnlefs anil the
iinillers were kept in the iinac poverty and dependence as for-
merly.

K eithl, >7. Spol£. i7; T -liilil, A|,i;:d . l8S. Sl,,ti. 18 .
tKli.xU , 3-i. i Kitii, Ai ipen . S.

y

Boo:x IT. The gentlcncfs of the Oeen's adininiflration, and the elegance

V--i 0 C.

of her court, had mitigated, in fiti.e degree, the fcrocity of the

Dit.rions nobles, and accul.omled tlicn to greatcr mildners and humanity ;
:mnollg ih: whilc, at the fame time, her presence and authority were a check

to their factious and tumultuary iEpirit. But, as a slate of order
and tranquillity was not natural to the feudal aristocracy, it could
not be of long continuance ; and this year became remarkable-for
the nioft violent eruptions of intellinne lifcord and animofty.

iAmong the great and independent nobles of Scotland, a Mo-

narch could lolleis little authority, and exercise no extensive or
rigorous juri!dici. ;n. The interfering of interell, the unsettled
flatt of property, the frciqcncy of pubhlic commotions, and the
fiercelncll of their own manners, sowed , among the great families
the fecds of many quarrels and contentions. These, as we have
already obitrved, were deciled nit by law, but hy violence. The
offenled Baron, without :having recourse to the Mlonarch, or ac-
knowledging his superior authority, aflrmbled his own followers,
and invaded tile lands of his rival in an hostile manner. T1oge-
ther with his ellate and honours, every noblemantranlinittcd foime
lhereditary feud to his po.lcrity, who were bound in honour to a-
dopt and to prosecute it with the fime inveterate rancour.

Such a diflention had fubililed between the hou!c of Hamilton

and the Earl of Bothwell, and was heightened by mutual injuries
during the late commotions *. Both the Earl of Arran and
Bothwell happening to be in waiting at the i;;m time, their fol-
lowers quarrelled frequently in the ilrects of iEdinburgh, and ex-
cited dangerous tumults in ltht city. At lilt, the mediationt of
WIbruarv. their friends. particula.ry of Knox, brought :bout a reconcilement,

but an unfortunate uone to bothi thcfc nollcm;nd n --.

A. few ldays after, -Arran canme to iKnox, and witll the utmnoll:

terror and confulion, confcfied irlt to h1im, and then to the Prior
of St. Andrew's, that, in order to obtain tle lol dire6tion of as-
fairs, Bothwell :a!d 111i- li;nillell the Hamillons, Ihad ciuipiredt to
murder the Prior, Maitlandl, andi tac :tlher favourits of the Q(ucen.
The Duke of Chlatellicrault regalded the Plior as a lival, xv wo hiad
fuppl.anltecd him in the C( ie n's si'. ou. :lntl vho fillced that place at
the helm, \\;wic;h lie iin.;lincle to I.: due to hiniflf, ::,, firli Ptrince
of the blood. J',t'weNtll, oln ;t:ctlt of, thle plrlti:,;-al injiri' ;i c iiCh
l:e ha:d received fronl thle Prior drig, the' lte ctniii , w
nio ltl'; c ..ilpcirated igailni'l lii. IBut vL c\thllr h and the Ha;iltons

' 1.._ith, 213. i1 Knx, 3r.

had agreed to cement their new alliance, with the blood of their BooK I11.
common enemy, or whether the conspiracy existed only in the '
frantic and disordered imagination of the Earl of Arran, it is im- 'SV-
possible, amidst the contradicion of hiflorians, andl the defcctive-
ness of records, positively to dctermine. Among men inflamed
with resentment, and impatient for revenge, rafi cxpreffions might
be uttered, and violent and criminail expedients proposed ; and on
that foundation, Arran's diflempered fancy might rear the whole
fuperifruceure of a'confpiracy. All the persons accuscd, denied
their guilt with the utioll confidence. But the known charc-
tcrs of the men, and the violent spirit of the age, added greatly
to the probability of the acculation, and abundantly juflified the
conducq of the Queen's Mlinifters, who confined Bothwell, Ar-
ran, and a few of the ringleaders, in separate prisons, and obliged
the Duke to surrender the flrong cafile of Dunbarton, which he
had held ever since the time of his rcfigning the office of Re-
gent '*

The designs of the Earl of Huntly againFl the Prior of St. An- Tlie i. arl o,
drew's were deeper laid, and produced more memorable and more l-ht""I)'i'"-

mirty t, the

tragical events. George Gordon Etarl of I-luntly, having been one Oucln's rIl-
of the nobles who conspircd againfl James III. and who raised his nillers.
son James IV. to the throne, enjoyed a great (lare in the confi-
dence of that generous Prince -1-. By his bounty, great accessions of
~wealth and power were added to a family, already opulent and
powerful. On the death of that iVonarch, Alexander the next
Earl, being appointed Lord Lieutenant of all the counties be-
yond Forth, left the other nobles to contend for offices at
court; and retiring to the north, where his eltate and influence
lay, refldcd there, in a kind of princely independence. The no-
bles in that part of the kingdom dreaded the growing dominion of
such a dangerous neighbour, but vwere unable to prevent his en-
croachments. Some of his rivals he fccretly undermined, others
he subdued by open force. -lis estate far exceeded that of any
other fubije&, and his fitperiurz.ies and jurifdicions extended over
many of the northern counties. With power and poffeflions Co
immense; under two long- and feeble minorities, and amidit the
flock of civil commotions, the Earls of Huntly might have in-
dulged the most elevated hopes. 13ut happily for the Crown, am
acive and cntcrprifing spirit was not the characleriflic of that fa-
mnily, and whatever object tleir ambition might have in view,

* Knox1, 307, 308. KIith, o2e. ;' Cra:wf. Officers of State, .5^

Y j

BoolK II. they chose rather to acquire it by political address, than to seize

562. it openly and by force of arms.

The conduc of George the present Earl, during the late com-

motions, had been perfectly suitable to the character of the fa-
mily, in that age, dubious, variable, and crafty. While the fuc-
cess of the Lords of the Congregation was uncertain, he afilled
the Queen Regent in her attempts to crulh them. \hen their
affairs put on a better aspet, lie pretended to join them, but ne-
ver heartily favoured their cause. He was courted and feared
by each of the contending parties ; both connived at lis en-
croachments in the north ; and, by artifice and force, which le
well knew how to employ alternately, :nd in their proper places,
he added every day to the exorbitant power and wealth which he
poffefled.

He observed the growing reputation and authority of the Prior

of St. Andrew's, with the utmoll jealousy and concern, aind con-
fidered him as a rival, who had cngrofled that Ihare in the Quecn's
confidence, to which his own zeal for the Popifhi religion leemcd
to give him a preferable title. Personal injuries soon increascd
the misunderstanding occasioned by rivallhip in power. The
Queen having determined to reward the services of the Prior of
St. Andrew's by creating him an Earl, flie made choice of Mar,
as the place whence he liould take his title ; and, that he might
be better able to support his new honour, bellowed upon him, at
Feb. o1. the fame time, the lands of that name. These were part of the

royal demefies *, but the Earls of Huntly had been pcrmitted,
for several years, to keep poffeflion of themt-. On this occasion,
the Earl not only complained, with some rcafon, of the lols
which he fullained, but had real cause to be alarmed at the in-
trufion of a formidable neighbour into the heart of his territories,
who might be able to rival his power, and excite his oppressed
vaflals to flhake off his yoke.
June 27. An incident, which happened loon after, encreafed and con-

firmed Huntly's llfpicions. Sir John Gordon, his third son, and
Lord Ogilvie had a dispute about the property of an cflatc.
This difputc became a deadly quarme:l. They happened, unfortu-
natcly, to meet in the ilreets of Edinburgh, and being both at-
tendled with armed followers, a fculile ensucd, in wvhich Lord
Ogilvie was langeroufly woundeld y Sir John. The Magilratcs
seized both the oll'cndcrs, and the Quccn commanded them to be

"Crawf e I'ccr. 2'7. 1t i,
r . 331 ]

itrifly confined. Under any regular government, such a breach Booic IT.
of public peace and order would expose the person offending, to
certain puniflment. At this time, fomc severity was nccecliry, 1562.
in order to vindicate the Queen's authority from an inlult, the
molt heinous which had been offered to it, since her return into
Scotland. But in an age accultomed to licence and anarchy,
even this moderate exertion of her power in ordering them to be
kept in custody, was deemed an aA of intolerable rigour; and
the friends of each party began to convene their vaflals and de-
pendants, in order to overawe, or to fruitrate the decisions of
justice *. Mean while, Gordon made his escape out of prison,
and flying into Aberdcenfnire, complained loudly of the indignity
with which he had been treated. And as all the Queen's actions
were, at this juncture, imputed to the Earl of Mar, this added
not a little to the rcfentment, which I-Iuntly had conceived
againlt that nobleman.

At the very time when thfee pafions fermented, with the ut- Aiugultil3.

most violence, in the minds of the Earl of Huntly and his family
the Queen happened to fct out on a progress into the northern
parts of the kingdom. She was attended by tile Earls of Mar
and Morton, Maitland, and other leaders of that party. The
presence of the Queen, in a country where no name greater than
the Earl of Huntly's had been heard of, and no power fupcrior
to his had been exercised, for many years, was an event, of it-
self, abundantly mortifying to that haughty nobleman. But
vlile the Queen was interely under the dirction of Mar, all her
ac6tions were more apt to be misrepresentcd, and conltrued into in-
juries; and a thousand circumltances could not but occur to
awaken Huntly's jealousy, to offend his pride, and to inflame his
resentment. Amidfl the agitations of so many violent pailrons,
some eruption was unavoidable.

On Mary's arrival in the north, I-Iuntly employed his wife, a

woman capable of executing the conmniltionii with abundancel of
dexterity, to sooth tlhe Queen, and to intercede for pardon to
their son. But the OQeCen permptorily required, that ihe lliould
again deliver hinfelf into tlle hands of jullicc, and rely on hcr
clemency. Gordon was perliaded to dto lo ; and Icbing ciijoiln-d
by the Q!een to enter llilllClf prilbone in tlle calllc of Stirlill.r
he promifld likcwile to obey that cormmantd. Lord I.rlkin,
Mar's uncle, was, at that time, Governor of tils fort. ' lie
Queen's (Cveity, ;and tlhe place ill vwhich fihc a;lpl)iinted Gordlon

:' Kcitl, '23.

ioo:; IIl. to be confined, were interpreted to be new marks of Mar's ran-

cour, and augmiented the hatred of tle Gordons againfl him.

S :Y.'i I Mc;an time, Sir John Gordon set out towards Stirling; but in-
$cntt. I.

flead of performing his promifi to the Qucen, made his escape
fronl his guards, and returned to take the command of his fol-
lowers, who were riling in arms, all over the north. These were
dcilincd to fccond and improve the blow, by which his father pro,
poled, iecretly, and at once, to cut off Mar, Morton, and Mait-
la::d, his principal advcrflrics. The time and place for perpetrat-
ing this horrid Iced were frequently appointed ; but the cxecut-
ing of it was wonderfully prevented, by Tome of those unforefecn
accidents, which Io often occur to disconcert the fchemcs, and to
intimidatc the hearts of afiiflins*. His own house at Strathbogie
was the nill and mofl culvcnic;nt fccne, appointed for committing
the intended violence. But, on her journey thither, the Qecen
heard of young Gordon's fli;glht and rclellion, and refusing, in
the firlt traniiorts of her indignation, to enter under the fathcr's
roof, by that fortunate expreflion of her resentment, savcd her
MTinitllrs from unavoidablc deltrulicion--.

T.Ie s anns T'he ill ficcefs of thef efforts of private revenge prccipitated
QUe'o.. l- Huntiv into open rebelliun. As the Queen was intirely under

the dircetion of his rivils, it was imnpollblc to work their rui:i
without violating the allegiance which he owed his Sovereign.
On her arrival at Inverncfs, the commanding officer in the cattlc,
by lluiitly's order, llut the gates againfl her. Alary was obli-
ged to lodge in the town, xwhichi w:s open and defenceless ; but
this, too, was quickly lfurrounded by a multitude of the Earl's
follow ers t. The utmoll conliernation seized the Queen, whQ
was attended by a very lender train. She every moment ex-
pected the approach of the rebels, and folne fipis were already
ordered into the river to fcctre her cfcapc. The loyalty of the
lNonrocs, .Frazers. MIacliintofiihe, and lome neigllbouring clans,
who touk arms in her defence, Iltved her from this danger. By
their al;ili.micc, hec ev\en forced the cale to !lkrren'ldr, and in
rlict'd on: t!ic (;overnor the puiliiili'lct which his infolencc de-

'crv'.l.

'i ti;i open i. cr) dledicnce w:e

iis ccanon of a InIalurc.

plor ghllhi;o' to If ntlv thiian an 1 ell (h en llad lihithrto tak!cln.
i[.ord Elrfil-inc, hI:v'ing' pretenlldedi a lihit lto tie e:lirldoni of AJar,
.'te,.vart i'. 'ilncd it in lhis filvuur ; mld atlic lhe lile timec lIary
. :i.:r.; d :i.ll liin tlhe l;;le olf L:tiil of J urr: y, t
ill tel ellate

** i-,;.', :^
. *i ~ r^,3 c. [C-ia-A,. r ..,<[;; it ,R; ?, .

a::nec:cd to tlat dignity, wh!iclh had been in the pofflrrfion of tl r. nr: Il.
Earl of Huintly since tlh ve::r 1543 " . From this lie concluded -'
that his ';amily wasI devoted to dclclruciion ; and dreadini; to bce
flripled, piecemc:al, of thele poeflnclons, which in reward of their
fcrvices, the gratiude of the Crown had bcflowed on hinifelf, or
his anc1ciiors, he no longer dilguilcd his iitntntions, but, in defi-
ance of the Queen's proclamation, openly took arms. Inflead of
yieldingl tliolc places of Itrcngth, which Mary required iim to
surrender, his followers difl)erfed or cut in pieces the parties whicli
tlie difijatchcd to take lpofiRfon of them --n; and he himself, ad-
vancing witih cOnfidecral)l'- ldy of men towards Aberdeen, to
which place the Qlccn v.as now returned, filled her !nna!! c(u;rt
witi the utinol collelernatlon: Mliurray had only a handful of men
in whom he could confide [. In order to form the ap;e:;r::::ec *i
an army, he was obliged to call in the aflillaice of the nei.:-
houring nobles ; but as nofl of tihee either favoured Hiultlvys
designs, or flood in awe of his power, from them no co:!dial or
cffcctual service could be exp)cced.

With thfer troops. lMurray, who coulid a.in notliing by d tey,

marchecd rifkly tovards the enemry. ie fo'ind then: at Cr.rri'. ,
posted to great advantage; he commanded his northern :-ic'ci.tes r.'.-,r :r
inl!antly to begin the attack ; but on the firit motion cf .he ene-
my, they treacherously turned their backs; and Huntly'. ''.--
crs , throwing aide their spears, and breaking their ranks, drew
their fvvords, and rulhed forward to the pursuit. It wes then. '
that Murray gave proof both of lteady courage, and of prudet , '
conduc.. lie ftocd iramoveablec, on a riling ground, with 'he ':.!rr:
frmall but trully lody of llis adherents. who r e!c;;tin; their iLc.ar
to tlle elncmy, received them \v.i:l a dettrmined refuoltion:. c' ic!
tliey little expceLed. The 1 ligland broad f-..'crd is nut a w.ca:)on
fit to encoui h

Scounte ttlilh t)ei 'r. In eversy ci il comnoin;::, ;

the luiceriority of the ia ter has been evident. ::::d }.;:..

: .la's de-

cided . the conlt-ii. On this occ.;lfon. tile irr ': lar :.tt;ack
HuIntly's troops was e:a'1, :-e; uiltd y v

Irr. .' m

' :l:l'n.

ultito re l t .ej''!:rntu e. c t- 13 . ' i i ;.

. -.. ; . ..:t .;-

lin.; t) t r . i in l.i.

tcr it e' i

cc

c . i

rl

, - 1 i ,:;- ':

them. iti co plcttcll.

;c lrtti

* IctU'. Ii ,.;,: !.::

,.; ...

v....
a'-.

trmel;. ' i.^ |'ul,'l t, ':.s tr*tc to' i tl. :
1. . i. 1 . L . 1. .i..:. i : ::',

* C" ,

' . I'ec r i : -:,

S

; i;' :-'

a
u ( '

noor; IIT. Sir John and Adam, were taken, and Murray returned in triumph

to Aberdeen with his prisoners.

The trial of men taken in acual rebellion against their Sove-

reign was extremely flort. Three days after the battle, Sir John
Gordon was beheaded at Aberdeen. His brother Adam was par-
doned on account of his youth. Lord Gordon, who had been
privy to his father's designs, was seized in the south, and upon
trial found guilty of treason ; but, through the Queen's clemency,
the puniflhment was remitted. The firlt Parliament proceeded
against this great family, with the utmolt rigour of law, and re-
duced their power and fortune to the lowetl ebb *.

' TIis conspiracy of the Earl of -Tuntly is one of the most intricate and

mysterious paflihges in the Scotti:i hiltory. As it was a transaction purely domes-
tic, and in xlhich the Elinglifli were little interested, few original papers con-
cerming it have been found in Cecil's Collctiion, the great florchoufe of evi-
dence and inforlmation with regard to the affairs of this period.

Buchanan filppofls Mary to have formed a decFgn, about this time, of def-

troying Mur:ray, ;nd of employing tie pov.er es the Earl of I-luntly for this
'.rpo li. Bult lis account of this whole tranfitlpion appears to be so void of truth,
and even of probaililty, as to delerve no lerious exanination. At that time,
Mvary wantted power, and seems to have h:ad no inclination to commit any act
of violence upon her brother.

Tw'o other hypotihefes have bhecn advanced, in order to explain this matter;
but they appear to be equally removed from truth.

I. It cannot well be colceixved, that the QOeen's journey to the north was a

lchemie conferted by Muirray, in order to ruin tie Earl of Huntly. i. I-Iuntly
had resiled at court altnoft ever since the Queen's return. Keith, 198. Append.
175, &c. This was the proper place iln which to h:ave seized him. To attack
him in Aberdeenlfiire, the ilat of his power, and in the milft of his vaifals,
was a proje& equally abIlitrd and hazardous. 2. The Qieen was not accompa-
nied with a bodIy of troops, capable of attempting any tlling againit Huntly by
violence; her tr.ain twas not more nulmerous, than was ufilal iln times of greatel'
tralilnillity. Keith, :30. 3. There remain two original letters with regard to
this conlrfiracy, one ftini. RaLndIlilp the 1K ngli il Resident, and an otlier from Mait-
land, both dcireCed to Cecil. They talk ofl Ituntly's mealllres as notoriously trea-
onllable. RIandollphtl meitions his repeated attemlpts to azlflinlnate Murray, Sec.
No hint is given of ally previous relolutionl, foilred by Mary's Miiltlers, to
ruin Iuntly a

y and his imCilly. Iiad ay llt design v eve xicl ed,iit was R:;nidolph's

duity to have diliovelred it; nor would 1Maitland have laboured to conceal it from
the 1liiglilli Secret:ary. Keith, 229, ',;-.

II. To lilppolt tha: tlle Iarl of

l lu intly had laid any plant fro' cizing the Qneln,

and Iler Miilitters;, ticerms to )', no lei' improbal)le. s. On the Q11Ceen's arrival
il th:e north, l' lalbou:'dl, in godl carteIll, to gain her ifavouir, and to (obtai a.
p:trdit for hlis lhn. Knox. t il. 2. 1 Itc et ltit Que(lCn, firtl at Aberdeen, and
thei n at Roltclil'av, \\lihlt cr lir wouldl inot :l et' vet llrti le to COili', hl:ltl lie
Ihrblioticil a:"i ' hlid tr..::at' l ::!,t

rl] luti. i] ntox, 318. . I-lis colltlUJi \Was
;ru.sli:litl ai;l '..:\'v,:r:i,5;, Iit.' t:hit ii)' *t 11b11 ili[t ;i.l , 'red :lnny ituolbrlefcnll dtanl

As the fall of the Earl of Huntly is the most important event Booic III.

of this year, it would have been improper to interrupt the narra-
tive, by taking notice of lesser tranfadions, which may now be I562.
related with equal propriety.

In the beginning of summer, Mary, who was desirous of enter- An inter-

view be-

ing into more intimate correfponlcnce and familiarity with Eliza- twveeun leli-
beth, employed Maitland to desire a personal intervie.w with her, z:I')th and

Mary pro-

somewhere in the north of England. As this proposal could not pored.
be rejected with decency, the time, the place, and the circum-
stances of the meeting were inflantly agreed upon. But Eliza-
beth was prudent enough not to admit into her kingdom, a rival,
who outfllone herself, io far, in beauty, and gracefulnef of per-
son; and who excelled, so eminently, in all the arts of ,nfinuia-
tion and address. Under pretence of being confined to London,
by the attention which she was obliged to give to the civil wars
jn France, ihe put off the interview for that season ", and prevent-
ed her fubjets from feeing the Scottilh Queen, the charms ot
whose appearance, and behaviour, flte envied, and had some rea-
son to dread.

During this year, the Assembly of the church met twice. In June 2.

both there meetings, were exhibited many complaints of the po- Dec. 25.
verty and dependence of the church; and many murmurs againfl
the negligence or avarice of thote, who had been appointed to
collect, and to distribute the small fund, appropriated for the main-
tenance of preachers-s. A petition craving redress of their griev-
ances, was presented to the Queen ; but without any effiec. There
was no reason to expe& that Mary would discover any forward-
ness to grant the requests of such ifpplicants. And as her Mini-
flers, though all mott zealous Proteltants, were themselves grow-
ing rich on the inheritance of the church, they were equally re-
gardlefs of the indigence and demands of their biethren.

ger, nor like one excctin:P a concfrtc(d plan. 4. The mniof collcfid:lerable per-
lbons of his clan libmllitted to tihe !Quc'1, 1and foiund filrty to obey Iler coin-
malnds, Keith, 226. l la the lia.l bcieein previoully determined to rill in arms
;g;iinit the (Qiccn, or to liize ler lililillC.s, it is probable lie wout l have im-
p)iarted it, to IliS prlillcilal l'llO\\.l rs, nor wo tlid tilhy l. ve (cle.'ted lin ill this
maine I.

'or tliefL real.'(is5, we h:lavr, onl the one himl, vilidcicated thle I':arl of Mirl'ray

rf'nll any (d lil)'rtC intllt ioii ofl rtiniig. the fmliily of (lordoI l; and, on lthe
othellr liand, we have. impilld lle violcill coildlt oflh'lle ]:karl of' l untly, to a Ihld-
dcn ll.tL of lelelitientc, wiilout chiar'gig liiii withi aiy prmicditatid pirp)ok.
a Irotisll ior.

1 iitli, 216. l.lnox , 311, -2.3.

z

BOOK III. Mary had now continued above two years in a slate of widow-

hood. Her gentle adminiflration had secured the hearts of her

Negocia- subjes, who were impatient for her marriage, and wifled the
tions with Crown to descend in the right line from their ancient Monarchs.
uregardt'th She hcrfelf was the moss amiable woman of the age, and the fame
riage. of her accompliflments, together with the favourable circumstance

of her having one kingdom already in her possession, and the pro-
spec of mounting the thrdne of another, prompted many differ-
ent Princes to solicit an alliance so illuflrious. Scotland, by its
situation, threw so much weight and power into whatever scale it
fell, that all Europe waited with solicitude for Mary's determina-
tion. And no event in that age excited llrongcr political fears
and jenloufies; none interefled more deeply the passions of fever-
al Princes, or gave rife to more contradicory intrigues, than the
marriage of the Scottifl Queen.

She is feli- The Princes of the house of Aufiria remembered what vast pro-
cited by dif-
fcrent Prin- je&s the French had founded on their former alliance with the
c's. Queen of Scots; and though the unexpeted death, first of Hen-

ry and then of Francis, had hindered these from taking effect, yet
if Mary should again make choice of a husband among the French
Princes,, the fame designs might be revived and prosecuted with
better success.

By the In order to prevent this, the Emperor entered into a negocia-
Archduke
Charles. tion with the Cardinal of Lorrain, who had proposed to marry

the Scottifl Queen to the Archduke Charles Ferdinand's third
son. The matter was communicated to Mary; and Melvil, who,
atrthat time, attended the elccor Palatine, was commanded to.
inquire into the charater and situation of the Archduke *.

ByDon Car- Philip II. though no less apprchenfive of Mary's falling once
losof Spain. more into the hands of France, envied his uncle Ferdinand the

acquisition of so important a prize; and as his own insatiable am-
bition grasped at all the kingdoms of Europe, he employed his
ambassador at the French court, to solicit the Princes of Lorrain
in behalf of his son Don Carlos, at that time, the heir of all the
cxtenfive dominions, which belonged to the Spanifi monarchy l.

BYtlheDuke Catherine of Medicis, on the other hand, dreaded the marri-
ofAnjou. age of the Scottifih Oeen to any of the Austrian Princes, which

would have added so much to the power and pretcnfions of that
ambitious race. I-Icr jealousy of the Princes of Lorrain render-
ed her no less averse from an alliance, which, by securing them

Mlv,. 63, 65. leilh, 2.39. See Append. No. VII,
Cafleln. 461. Addit. de Libor. o51, 503.

the proteAion of the Emperor or King of Spain, would give new BooK III.
boldness to their entcrprifing spirit, and enable them to set the
power of the Crown, which they already rivalled, at open defi- 563.
ance. And as flie was afraid that these splendid proposals of the
Austrian family would dazzle the young Queen, Ihe inflantly dif-
patched Caftelnau into Scotland, to offer her in marriage the
Duke of Anjou, the brother of her former husband, who soon
after mounted the throne of France *.

Mary attentively weighed the pretensions of so many rivals. Mary'sdleli-

berations

The Archduke had little to recommend him, but his high birth. concering
The example of Henry VIII. was a warning against contracting it
a marriage with the brother of her former hufland nor could
flie bear the thoughts of appearing in France, in a rank inferior
to that, which (he had formerly held in that kingdom. She lif-
tened therefore, with partiality, to the Spanifl propositions, and
the profpea of such vast power and dominions flattered the ambi-
tion of a young and aspiring Princess.

Three several circumlsances, however, concurred to divert
Mary from any thoughts of a foreign alliance.

The firit of these was the murder of her uncle the Duke of

Guise. The violence and ambition of that nobleman had in.volv-
ed his country in a civil war; which was conduced with furi-
ous animosity, and various success. At last the Duke laid siege
to Orleans, the bulwark of the Protestant cause; and he had redu-
ced that city to the last extremity, when he was affaflinated by the
frantic zeal of Poltrot. This blow proved fatal to the Queen of
Scots. The young Duke was a minor. And the Cardinal,
though subtile and intriguing, wanted that undaunted and cnter-
prifing courage, which rendered the ambition of his brother so
formidable. Catherine, instead of encouraging the ambition, or
furthering the pretensions of her daughter-in-law, took pleasure
in mortifying the one, and in dillappointing the other. In this
situation, and without such a protecor, it became necessary for
Mary to contraa her views, and to proceed with caution; and
whatever profped of advantage might allure her, she could ven-
ture upon no dangerous or doubtful measure.

The fccond circunmfance, which weighed with Mary, was the ThevieWs
opinion of the Qucen of England. 'he marriage of the Scottiflh oft iza.

beth.

Queen interelled Elizabeth more deeply than any other Prince;
and file observed all her deliberations concerning it with the moll
Y Callclhlmu, ,16l.

z [i

BOOK IIl. anxious attention. She herself fecms early to have formed a re,
.1363£ solution of living unmarried, and she discovered no small inclina'

tion to impose the fame law on the Qeen of Scots. She had aT-
ready experienced what use might be made of Mary's power and
pretensions, to invade her dominions, and to disturb her possession
of the Crown. The death of Francis II. had happily delivered
her from this danger, which file determined to guard against for
the future, with the utmost care. And as the restless ambition
of the Austrian Princes, the avowed and bigotted patrons of the
Catholic superstition, made her, in a particular manner, dread
their neighbourhood, file inflruled Randolph, to remonstrate, in
the itrongeft terms, against any alliance with them; and to ac-
quaint Mary, that as she herself would confider such a match to
be a breach of the pcrfonal friendlhip, in which they were so hap-
pily united, so the Englilh nation would regard it as the diflo-
lution of that confederacy which now fiibfited between the two
kingdoms. That, in order to preserve their own religion and li-
berties, they would, in all probability, take some ftep prejudicial
to her right of succession, which, as Ihe well knew, they neither
wanted power nor pretences to invalidate, and set aside. This
threatening was accompanied with a promise, but exprcffed in
very ambiguous terms, that if Mary's choice of a husband flould
prove agreeable to the Englifli nation, Elizabeth would appoint
proper persons to examine her title to the fucceflion, and, if well
founded, command it to be publicly recognised. lhe observed,
however, a mysterious silence concerning the person, on whom
fle wilhed the choice of the Scottith Queen to fall. The reveal-
ing of this secret was reserved for some future negociation. Mean
while (he threw out some obscure hints, that a native of Britain,
or one not of Princely rank, would be her safest and moil inol-
fenfive choice *. An advice, offered with such an air of fuperi-
ority and command, mortified, no doubt, the pride of the Scot-
tilh Qucen. But, under her prefcnt circumflances, she was o-
bliged to bear this indignity. D)cfLitute of all foreign allillance,
and intent upon the Englilh fucccfflon, the great objct of her
wiflis and ambition, it became neceflilry to court a rival, whom,
without manifetl imprudence, the could not venture to offcnd.
'IheF rnti- The inclination of her own ilbjecqls was another, and not tic

olstni \Iclaft considerable circumlflncc, which called for Mary's attention

hel owm,1 *
iiibjcds. at this conjuncaure. They lhad been taught, by the fital ex;peri-

Kelcitll, 24, 245.

ftent of her former marriage, to dread an union with any great BOOK III.
Prince, whose power might be employcd to oppress tileir relig-ion '
and libertics. They trembled at the thoughts of a match with a
foreigner; and if tile Crown fliould be ftrengthcned by new do-
minions, or alliances, they forelliw that the royal prerogative
would Ibon be firetched beyond its ancient and legal limits. Their
eagerness to prevent this could scarce fail of throwing them into
the arms of E.ngland. llizabeth would be ready to afford thens
her aid, towards obltruacing a measure so dilfagree:ble to herself.
'Twas caly for them to seize the person of their Sovereign. By
the afTiflance of the Elii lili .fleet, they could render it difficult
for any foreign Prince to land in Scotland. The Romlan Catho-
lics, now an inconliderable party in the kingdom, and difirited
by the loss of the Earl of luntl y, could give no olit ruetion to
their deligns. To what violentFextremes, the ;aation.l abhor-
rence of a foreign yoke might have been carried, is manifefl from
tile tranlflcdions both previous, and subsequent to the prlcent period.

For these reasons, l'vIiry laid afidc, at that time, all thoughtts or

a foreign alliance, and Iemccld willing; to facrilice her own ::mbi-
tion, in order to remove the jcaldtfies of Ellizabeth, and o otuit
the fears of her o.vnw fuijecas.

The Parliament met this year, 'for the firfl time, since the 'A ':"'i

Qneen's return into Scotland. JV.ary's adminiltration l;ad hillite- -i. ,
to been extremely popular. 'Alde Ministers poflf'elcld the confi-
dence of the nation. And, by consequence, the proceedings of
that assembly were condutced with perse& unanimity. Thie
grant of the earldom of Murlray to the Prior of St. Andrewv'
wals confirmed: the Elarl of I-untly, and several of his vafnals
and dependants were attainted : the attainder againlt i rkaldyv oF
Grange, and fime of his accomplices in thei murder of Cardinal
13catoun, was reverced : the ató of oblivion, mentioned in til
treaty of Edinburgh, received the roynl fiancltion. But I\lary,
who had determined never to ratily tliat treaty, took care thant
tlis lilnCion Illould not be deemed any acknlowle dgmenit of iti
validity; (ie granted hicr conlifnt nirely in condlc icniiion to 11:c
Lords in Parliament, lvho, on their knees, belbught her to all:!y
tlhe jealousics and apprlelenlions of lier tIbbjecis, by lilch a g;r;ci-
oiis l;aw '(.

No at.teml)t was im;de, in this Parliainient, to procure tillle Nlotr th-
'c.tll's aftnllnt to the laws ellablilhiing tlle Protrlttit rcl'io;. witii r.!

"i Ku»:\

j^ *Spotli .

11 8
A

BooK III. Her MilrAfers, though zealous Protestants themfclvcs, were aware

that this could not be urged without manifcft danger and impru-
S 6 dence. She had consented, through their influence, to tolerate

and prote .the reformed docrine. They had even prevailed on
her to imprison and profecutc the Archbilhop of St. Andrew's, and
Prior of Whithorn, for celebrating mass contrary to her procla-
mation *. Mary, however, was flill paffionatcly devoted to the
Rominf fupcrflition. Though, from political motives, flie had
granted a temporary indulgence to opinions, which flie difapprov-
ed, there were no grounds to hope that hce would agree to efta-
blifli them for perpetuity. The moderation of those who profcffed
it, was the befl method for reconciling the Queen to the Protest-
ant religion. Time might abate her bigotry. Her prejudices
might wear off gradually, and at last she might yield to the wifcs
of her people, what their importunity or their violence could ne-
-ver have extorted. Many laws of importance were to be propo-
fed in Parliament; and to defeat all there, by fitch a fruitless and
ill-timed application to the Qu(en, would have been equally in-
jurious to individuals, and detrimental to the public.

Whicih of- '. he zeal of the Protcelant clergy was deaf to all these confi-
felds the dcrations of policy. Eager and impatient, it brooked no delay.
clerg- y,

Severe and inflexible, it would condefccnd to no compliances.
The leading men of that order infifled, that this opportunity of
cflablilhing religion by law, was not to be ncgleted. They pro-
'nounced the moderation of the courtiers, apoflacy ; and their en-
deavours to gain the Queen, they reckoned criminal and servile.
Knox iflemnly renounced the friendflip of the Earl of Murray,
:s a man devoted to Mary, and so blindly zealous for her service,
as to become regardless of those objccls which he had hitherto
clIcemcd moll sacred. 'This rupture, which is a strong proof of
Murray's sincere attachment to the Q4een at that period, conti-
nued above a year and an half--.

Tlhe preachers being dilappointcd by the men in whom they

placed the greatefl confidence, gave vent to their indignation in
their pulpits. These ecchoed more loudly than ever, with decla-
rations againit idolatry; with dlfinal prcfages concerning the
Queen's marriage with a foreigner; and with bitter reproaches

And occa- againfl thole, who, from intercflcd motives, had deserted that
sionlsatu- caurf, which they once reckoned it their honour to support. The
tile pc.pif s people, inflamed Iy these vehement decla;mations, which were

' Kcith, 'l',[. -' Knox, 33t.

dictated by a zeal more finceere than prudent, proceeded to rafl and BooK III.
unjuflifiable ads of violence. During the Q3een's abrence, on a
progrcfs into the well, mass continued to be celebrated in her 1563.
chapel at Holy-rood-houfe. The multitude of those, who openly Augtlt.
resorted thither, gave great offence to the citizens of Edinburgh,
who, being free from the restraint, which the royal preftnce im-
poscd, assembled in a riotous manner, interrupted tlhe service, and
filled those who were present, with the utmoll conflernation.
Two of the ringleaders in this tumult were seized, and a day ap-
pointed for their trial .

Knox, who esteemcd the zeal of these pcrfons laudable, and Knox triEd
their conduc meritorious, confidered them as sufferers in a good O"i that ac-

Colllult but

cause; and in order to screen them from danger, he issued circu- acquitted.
lar letters, requiring all who professed the true religion, or were Otober '.
concerned for the prelfrvation of it, to assemble at Edinburgh
on the day of trial, and by their presence, to comfort and affilt
their distressed brethrent-. One of these letters fell into the
Queen's hands. To affcmble the fubjets without the authority
of the Sovereign, was construed to be treason, and a resolution
was taken to prosecute Knox for that crime, before the Privy
Council. Happily for him, his judges were not only zealous Dec. ;J.
Proteflants, but the very men, who, during the late commotions,
had openly refilled, and set at defiance the Queen's authority.
It was under precedents, drawn from their own conduet, that
Knox endeavoured to shelter himself. Nor would it have been an
easy matter for these Counsellors to have found out a diflinciion,
by which they could censure him, without condemning theni-
selves. After a long hearing, he was unanimously acquitted.
Sinclair Bishop of Ross, and President of the Court of Session,
a zealous Papill, heartily concurred with the other Counsellors
in this decision .t; a remarkable siad, which shows the unsettled
slate of government in that age; the low condition to which re-
gal authority was then funk ; and the impunity with which sub-
jets might invade those rights of the Crown, which are now held
sacred.

The marriage of the Scottifl Queen continued flill to be the 564.

objeEt of attention and intrigue. Though Elizabeth, even while Srocia
fle wilhed to diredt Mary, treated her with a difi;uflful rfcrve ; tions with
though Ihe kept hler, without neceflity, in a slate of flufilece the, ( 1t ,
and hinted often at the person, vwhom lle d cl lti:cd to h!:s hus-
!-.:a:'r: :-c.

J' Knox, 33S. - Iiycx, ,' 3

BoOK III. band, without dircqly mentioning his name; yet Miaryy framed

- all her adlions to exprelfs such a prudent refpct for tle Englilh
4. een, that foreign Princes began to imagine flec had given her-

self up implicitly to her dirction *. The profpet of this union
alarmed Catherine of l\Iedicis. Though Catherine had takcn
pleasure, all along, in doing ill oflices.to the Qlueen of Scots;
though, soon after tlhe Duke of Guise's death, ihe had put upon
her a moll mortifying indignity, by flopping the payment of her
dowry, by depriving her fulject the Duke of Chatelherault of his
pcnfion, and by bestowing the command of the Scottidl Guards
on a Frenchman J-; file rclblvcd, however, to prevent this danger-
ous conjuntlion of the Britifl Queens. For this purpose, fle
now employed all her art to appeaie Mary t, to whom she had
given so many caufcs of offence. The arrears of her dowry were
inflantly paid ; more punctual remittances were pronmifed for the
future; and offers made, not only to restore, but to extend the
·privleges of the Scottinl nation in France. It was cafy for Mary
to penetrate into the motives of this sudden change ; fiie well knew
the character of her mother-ini-law, and laid little stress upon
profeflions of friendlhip, which came from a Princcfs of such a
falle and unfeeling heart.

The ncgociation with England, relative to the marriagc; susser-

cdl no interruption, fromthis application of the French Queen. A-s
l\Ia:;. in compliance to her filbjecs, and prcffcd by the firongctl
motives of interet, determined fpecdily to marry, -lizabeth was
obligdcl to break that unaccountable silence, v.hich lhe had hither-
to ailTccd. The lccrct w is dili-loucl, and her farourite Lord

il. Rolbrt Dudley, afterwards La:l of Lcicefler, was declared to be

rix'nm- the hiappy man, whom file had chosen to be the hulbnmd of a
olet't,,l. - QIc'eni, courted by lb miany Princes j|.
fr .. !iui- Elizabeth's wisdom and penetration were remnaulble in the

choice of ler Miniflers; in diil.:guitling her favourites, tlofe
grea.t qualities were lcis cnnfpicuous. She was influenced in two,
ci:f's so olpolitc, by nlerit of very diPz'.:rcnt kinds. Their capa-
ci:v fior bufinfis, their inowlcdge, thlir pruiicnce, were the ta-
leln;s to which alone fle attended, in chufing her le iiillelrs
v.lelcuas ibeauty aind g;.acefulnelis of peron, polixllcd manners, and
r.. !:rlv 2.(lreis, vwerel tlie accomplilll-me i;t- n \hich (le: bello)\v-
td ie f: ou:r. Sic acled in tile one ca[e' \ith tlie v'ilo:n of a
On'cn, in tle other, hlc difcovcrcd - c.'ev; l of a woranl

Keilih, :

;. ' i' id. 2-14. t S.-2 A' .:.iix, -'. \ IiI.
Ii Ziylih, zS1.

To this Liecefter owed his grandeur. Though remarkable nei- Boor III.
ther for eminence in virtue, nor superiority of abilities, the r
Queen's partiality diftinguifled him on every occasion. She 564
raised him to the highell honours, she bestowed on him the most
important employments, and manifested an affedion so difpropor-
tionate to his merit, that, in the opinion of that age, it could be
accounted for only by the power of planetary influence *.

The high spirit of the Scottish Queen could not well bear the Mary of-

first overture of a match with a fubje&. Her own rank, the fplen- iend at
dor of her former marriage, and the solicitations, at this time of
so many powerful Princes, crowded into her thoughts, and made
her lenfibly feel how humbling and difrefpeaful Elizabeth's pro-
pofal was. She dissembled, however, with the Englilh Resident;
and though (he declared, in firong terms, what a degradation (he
would deem this alliance, which brought along with it no adval-
tage that could juitify such neglec of her own dignity, Ihe men-
tioned the Earl of Leicester, notwithstanding, in terms full of re-
fpeEt +.

Elizabeth, we may presume, did not wifl that the proposal Elizabeth's

views in re-

flould be received in any other manner. After the extraordinary commend-
marks she had given of her own attachment to ,Leicester, and illglli'.
while he was itill in the very height of favour, it is not probable
hle could think ferioully of bestowing him upon another. 'Twas
not her aim to persuade, but only to amuie Mary *. Almost three
years were elapsed since her return into Scotland; and though
Solicited by her fubjedls, and courted by the greatest Princes in
Europe, fie had hitherto been prevented from marrying, chiefly
by the artifices of Elizabeth. And if, at this time, the Englifi
Queen could have engaged Mlary to liften to her proposal in fa-
vour of Leicester, her power over this creature of her own would
have enabled her to protraat the negociation at pleasure ; and by
keeping her rival unmarried, flc would have rendered the pro-
fpet of her succession less acceptable to the Englilh.

Leicelter's own situation was extremely delicate, and cmbarraf-

sing. To gain poffeflion of the most amiable woman of the age,
to carry away this prize from so many contending Princes, to
'mount the throne of an ancient kingdom, might have flattered the
ambition of a fubjcEI much more confidcracle than him. 1-e filw
all there advantages, no doubt; and, in fecrct, they made their
full impression on him. But, without offending IElizabith, he

' Ciamdenl, 5 49 - lKith, 2. Ml. Mclv , Ilo

Aui

BooK TIT. durfR not venture on the most diflant discovery of his sentiments,

ó- --or take any flep towards facilitating his acquisition of objects fa

worthy of desire.

On the other hanm., Elizabeth's partiality tow rds him, which

file was at no pains to conce ti *, might inspire him with hopes of
attaining the supreme rank in a kingdom, more illustrious than
Scotland. Elizabeth had often deciaied, that nothing but her
resolution to lead a tingle lUfe, and his being born her own sub-
jeEt, would have hindered her from chufing the Earl of Leicester
for a husband. Such confider tions of prudence are, however, of.
ten surmounted by love ; and Leicester might flatter himself, that
the violence of her affecion would at length triumph both over the
maxims of policy, and the scruples of pri'e. These hopes induced
him, now and then, to conclude the proposal of his marriage with
the Scottifi Queen to be a projeca for his deftrucion; and he im-
puted it to the malice of Cecil, who, under the specious pretence
of doing him honour, intended to ruin him in the good opinion
both of Elizabeth and Mary t-.

A treaty of marriage, proposed by one Queen, who dreaded its

success; listened to by another, who was secretly determined a-
gainft it; and scarce desired by the man himself, whose interef!
and reputation it was calculated, in appearance, to promote; could
not, under so many unfavourable circumltances, be brought to a for-
tunate issue. Both Elizabeth and Mary continued, however, to
at with equal diflimulation. The former, notwithstanding her
fears of losing Leicefler, solicited warmly in his behalf. 'The
latter, though she began about this time to cast her eyes upon an-
other subject of England, did not, at once, venture finally t re.
ject Elizabeth's favourite.

Ma.rv cn- 'I'he person towards whom Mary began to turn her thoughts,
tI '

hs of was Henry Stewart Lord Darnly, eldelt son of the Earl of Lennox.

mnTin'v'l That nobleman, having been driven out of Scotland under the re-
ly-, ln. gency of the Duke of Chatelherault, had lived in banilhment for

twenty years. His wife, Lady Margaret Douglas, was l'Iary's most
dangerous rival in her claim upon the Englilh fucccllon. She was
the daughter of Margaret. the eldest filler of Henry VIII. by the
Earl of Anmius, whom that Queen married after the death of her
hulband James IV. In that age, the right and order of licccftionl
was not fettled with the fame accuracy, as at present. Time, and
the decision of almoll every cafe that can pollibly happen, have

' Melv. y3, - Ibid. 1o:.

at last introduced certainty into a matter, which, naturally, is BOOK II1.
subject to all the variety, arising from the caprice of lawyers, v-
guided by obfcurc and often imaginary analogies. Lady Lennox, 564
though born of a second marriage, was one degrcce nearer the royal
blood of England, than Mary. She was the daughter, Mary
only thegrand-daughter of Margaret. 'Ihis was not the only advan-
tage over Mary which Lady'Lennox enjoyed. She was born in
England, and by a maxim of law in that country, with regard to
private inheritances, " whoever is not born in England, or at least
of parents, who, at the time of his birth, were in the obedience
of the King of England, cannot enjoy any inheritance in that
kingdom*." This maxim, Hales, an Englilh lawyer, produced
in a treatise, which he publiflced at this time, and endeavoured
to apply it to the right of succession to the Crown. In a private
cause, there pretexts might have given rife to a long and doubt-
ful litigation; where a Crown was at flake, such nice disputes and
fibtleties were to be avoided with the utmotf care. If Darnly
flould happen to contra& an alliance with any of the powerful fa-
milies in England, or should publicly profess the Proteflant reli-
gion, these plausible and popular topics might be so urged, as to
prove fatal to the pretensions of a foreigner, and of a Papist.

Mary was aware of all this; and in order to prevent any dan-

ger from that quarter, had early endeavoured to cultivate a friend-
ly correspondence with the family of Lennox. In the year i562 f,
both the Earl and the Lady Margaret were taken into cultody
by Elizabeth's orders, on account of their holding a secret corre-
fpondence with the Scottilh Oueen.

From the time that Mary became sensible of the difficulties,

which would attend her marrying a foreign Prince, fie entered
into a lill clofcr connexion with the Earl of Lennox t, and invit-
ed him to return into Scotland. This (he endeavoured to conceal Kliz.ibetl
from Elizabeth; but a transaCtion of to much importance did not placrcwith
escape the notice of that discerning Princess. She oblerved, but this.
did not interrupt it. Nothing could fall in more perfetly with
her views, concerning Scottilh affairs. She was pleated to lee the
pride of the Scottish uecen stoop, at last, to the thoughts of tak-
ing a luLbjec to her bed. Darnly was in no situation to excite
her jealouly, or her fears. HIis father's eflate lay in Elngland. alnd
by means of this pledge, nie hoped to keep the negociation enr-
tircly in her own hands, and to play the fame game of artifice aund

Carte, 11il., of En s, vol. iii. 12, *[ Caiil. . 89.

A a iJ

Boo. Ir. delay, which (he had planned out, if her recommendation of tel-

v cefter had been more favourably received.
64'. As before the union of the two Crowns, no subjet of one king-

dom could pass into the other without the permifiion of both So-
vereigns; no sooner did Lennox, under pretence of prosecuting
his wife's claim upon the earldom of Angus, apply to Elizabeth
for her licence to go into Scotland, than he obtained it. Together
with it, flie gave him letters, warmly recommending his person and
cause to Mary's friendship and protetion *. But, at the fame time,
as it was her manner to involve all her tranfaftions with regard
to Scptland, in some degree of perplexity and contradiction; she
warned Mary, that this indulgence to Lennox might prove fatal
to herself, as his return could-not fail of reviving the ancient ani-
mofity between him and the house of Hamilton.

This admonition gave umbrage to Mary, and drew from her an

angry reply, which occasioned, for some time, a total interruption
of all correspondence between the two Queens -. Mary was not a
little alarmed at this; Ihe both dreaded the effects of Elizabeth's
refentmcnt, and suffered, by being deprived of a free intercourse
with England, where her Ambafladors had, all along, carried on.
with iome success, secret negociations, which increased the number
of her partizans, and paved her way towards the throne. In or-
der to remove the causes of the present difficulty, Melvil was sent
express to the court of England. He found it no difficult matter
to bring about a reconcilement; and toon re-eflablifhed the ap-
pearance, but not the confidence of fricndiip, which was all that
had fubfilled, for some time, between the two OQeens.

During this ncgociation, Elizabeth's profetlions of love to Ma-

ry, and Mlelvil's replies in name of his Iiiltrefs, were made in
the language of the warmest and moll cordial friendflip. But
what hIelvil truly obfcrves, with respect to Elizabeth, may be
extended without injustice to both Queen's. " There was neither
plain dealing, nor upright meaning, but great diflimulation, envy
and fear t."

I.ennox ?.r- Lennox, however, in conf-quence of the licence which he haid
iieesinSco:- obtained, set out for Scotland, and was received by the Queen,

not only with the refpet due to a nobleman, so nearly allied to
the royal family, but treated with a dilinguilicd familiarity,
which could not fail of inspiring him with more clevated hopes.
The rumour of his son's marriage to the Queen began to iprcead

Keith, 55j, 526. t Ibid. ; 3. 3Iciv, 83. t 'Mlvil, ict.

ever the kingdom; and the eyes of all Scotland were turned up- BooK iI.
en him, as the father of their future MIaltcr. The Duke of Clla-
telherault t-as the firil to take the alarm. He confidered Len- 64.
nox, as the ancient and hefeditary enemy of the house of Hamil-
ton; and, in his grandeur, saw the ruin of himself and his friends.
But the Qeen interpoifed her authority to prevent any violent
rupture, and employed all her influence to bring about an accomr
modation of their diflerences *.

The powerful family of Douglas no less dreaded Lennox's re-

turn, from an apprehenrion, that he would wrcft the earldom of
Angus out of their hands. But the Q(ecn, who well knew how
dangerous it would be to irritate M'Iorton, and other great men of
that name, prevailed on Lennox to purchale their friendlhip, by
allowing his Lady's claim upon the earldom of Angus to drop +.

After these preliminary iteps, Mary ventured to call a meeting Deccinber.

of Parliament. The act of forfeiture pafled against Lcnnox in
the year I545, was repealed, and he was publicly reflored to the
honours and ellate of his ancellors ..

The ccclefiaftical tranfatiions of this year were not confider- Junc -5.

able. In the Assemblies of the church, the famle complaints of the D-c -.
increase of idolatry, the fame reprelentations concerning the po- Trlh cikgy
verty of the clergy, wvere rcnewed. The reply which the Queen idjl "i"''!
made to these, and her promises of redress, were more satisfying oien..'s
to the Protestants, than any they had hitherto obtained 11. But, z';1 far' Po-
notwithstanding these declarations in their favour, they could not
help harbouring many suspicions concerning Mary's deligns againl}
their religion. She had never once contented to hear any preacll-
er of the reformed dotrine. She had abated nothing of her bi-
gotted attachment to the Romish faith. The genius of that {uper-
flition, averfc, at all times, from toleration, was, in that age,
fierce and unrelenting. Mary had given her friends on the Con-
tinent repeated aflurances of her resolution to rc-ellablifi tie Ca-
tholic church §. She had induftrioufy avoided every opportuni-
ty of ratifying the ads of Parliament I56o, in favour of the Rle-
formation. Even the protctlion, which ever lince her rcturn,
flhe had afforded the Proteliant religion, was nlerely temporary,
and declared by her own proclamation to be of force, only, " till
flic fliould take some final order in the matter of religion 'i*."
IThe vigilant zeal of the preachers was inattentive to none of
theef circunillances. The coldness of their principal leaders,

' K ithl, '5. j9 . Idl. 268. Not. (i). S. See Applcnli.:, No. IX.
II . 5J33, 539. § Carte, vol. iii. 4.- 5. ' Keith! 50, 5.4

BOOK Ill. who were, at this time, entirely devoted to the court, added to

their jealousies and fears. These they uttered to the people, in
' 64, language which they esteemed suitable to the necessity of the

times, and which the Queen reckoned difrefpeaful, and insolent;
In a rieeting of the 'General Assembly, Maitland publicly at-
cured Knox of teaching fe itious dotrine, concerning the rights
of fubjess to refill ti.o.e Sovereigns, who trespass againtf the
duty which they owe to the people. Knox was not backward to
juflify what h: -ad :aug': Ahd upon this general doctrine of
refi!tance, so just in its own nature, but so delicate in its applica-
tion to particular cafes, there ensued a debate, which admirably
displays the talents and character of both the disputants; the a-
cuteness of the formiler, embellithed with learning, but prone to
subtlety; the vigorous understanding of the latter, delighting in
bold sentiments, and superior to all fear .

l <65 Two years had already been consumed, in fruitless negociations

DiIlinula- concerning the marriage of the Scottish Queen. Mary had full
tion btlh of leisure and opportunity to discern the fallacy and deceit of all
Elizabeth anltMary, Elizabeth's proceedings, with refpea to that affair. But, in or-
with regard der to set the real intentions of the Englifi Queen in a clear
to Iler mar.
riage. light, and to bring her to some explicit declaration of her senti-
Feb. S. ments, Mary, at last, intimated to Randolph, that, on condition

her right of fuccefiion to the Crown of England were publicly
acknowledged, she was ready to yield to the solicitations of his
Mlillrefs in behalf of Leicefier -. Nothing could be farther than
this from the mind and intention of Elizabeth. The right of
fucceflion was a myflery, which, during her whole reign, her jea-
lousy prefcrved untouched, and unexplained. She had promised,
however, when fle firRt began to interest herself in the marriage
of the Scottish Queen. all that was now demanded. How to
retreat with decency, how to elude her former offer, was, on that
account, not a little perplexing.

The facility with which Lord Darnly obtained permifflion to

visit the court or Scotland, was owing, in all probability, to that
embarraffinent. From the time of Mclvil's erbaliv, Lady Len-.
nox had warmly solicited this liberty for her fun. Elizabeth was
no stranger to the ambitious hopes, with which that young noble-
man flattered himifelf. She had received repeated advices, from
her Minilters, of the sentiments, which Mary began to entertain
in his favour t. It was entirely in her power, to prevent his stir-

* Knox, 349. t Kelih, 26s.. t Id. J59, a.6, z66.

ring out of London. In the present conjuncture, however, no- booK III.
thing could be of more advantage toher, than Darnly's journey '
into Scotland. She had already _rought one ador upon the Rtage, 156
who, under her management, iiad, for a long time, airnufed the
Scottish Queen. She hope,, no less absolutely, to direc the
motions of Darnly, who was likewise her subjet ; and again to
involve Mary in all the tedious intricacies of negociation. These
motives determined Elizabeth and her Miniffers to yield to the
solicitations of Lady Lennox.

But this deep laid scheme was in a moment disconcerted. Darnly a..

rives inI

Such unexpected events, as the fancy of poets ascribes to love, Scotland.
are, at some times, really produced by that passion. An affair,
which had been the obi,.ft of so many political intrigues,
and had moved and interefled so many Princes, was at last de-
cided by the sudden liking of two young persons. Lord Darnly
was, at this time, in the firfi bloom and vigour of youth. In beau-
ty, and'gracefulnefs of person, he surpassed all his cotemporaries;
lie excelled, eminently, in those arts, which add ease and ele-
gance to external form, and which enable it not only to dazzle,
but to please. Mary was of an age, and of a temper, to feel the Gains the
full power of there accompliihments. The impreflioln which Qcc''"s
Lord Darnly made upon her, was visible, from the time of their
first interview. The whole business of the court was to amuse, Feb. l;.
and entertain this illufirious guelt *; and in all these scenes of
gaiety, Darnly, whose qualifications were altogether superficial
and flowy, appeared to great advantage. His conqueR of the
Queen's heart became complete. And inclination now prompted
her to conclude a marriage, the firIt thoughts of which had been
fuggelled by considerations merely political.

Elizabeth contributed, and perhaps not without design, to increase

the violence of this pafion. Soon after Darnly's arrival in Scot-
land, ile, in return to that meeffge, whereby Mary had signified
her willingness to accept of Leiccfler, gave an anfwcr, in fucli
terms, as plainly unravelled her original intention in that intrigue -1-.
She promised, if the Scottilh Queen's marriage with Leiccller
ihould take place, to advance him to great honours ; but with re-
gard to her title to the Englinl fucceflion, (lie would neither 'us-
fcr any legal inquiry to be made concerning it, nor permit it to
be publicly recognilcld, till hle licrlclf flould declare her rclolu-
tion never to marry. Mlary, notwitlllantling Elizabeth's loincr

' Knox, 369. t kcil, 27. Apllitld 1j8.

SBooK IT. proinifes, had rcafon to expct every thing contained in this reply ,

'--v"" her high spirit, however, could not bear, withl patience, ifch ll

-5 cruel discovery of the contempt, the artifice, and mockery, with

which, under the veil of friendship, (he had been so long abused.
She burtf into tears of indignation, and exprcffed, with the ut-
molt bitterness, her sense of that disingenuous craft, which had
been employed to deceive her *.

The natural effect of this indignation was to add to the impe-

tuofity with which fihe pursued her own scheme. Blinded by re-
fentment, as well as by love, she observed no defects in the man,
whom she had chosen ; and began to take the necessary fleps to-
wards accoinplilhing her design, with all the impatience, natural
to those paflions.

As Darnly was so nearly related to the Qeen, the canon law

made it necessary to obtain the Pope's dispensation, before the
celebration of the marriage. For this purpose, Ihe early set on
foot a negociation with the court of Rome f-.

The French She Was busy, at the fame time, in procuring the consent of
court ap- the French King and his mother. Having communicated her
prove of the
match. design, and the motives which determined her choice, to Caftelnau

the French Ambassador, {he employed hiim, as the mollt proper
person) to bring his court to fall in with her views. Among o-
ther arguments to this purpose, Calflelnau mentioned Mary's at-
tachment to Darnly, xlwhich he represented to be so violent and
deep-rooted, that it was no longer in her own powver to break off
the match $. Nqr were the French Mlinilters backward in en-
couraging Mary's paflion. lier pride would never tloop to an
alliance with a fubjeEt of France. By this choice, they were de-
livered from the apprehension of a match with any of the Au-
llrian Princes, as well as the danger of too close an union with
Elizabeth. And as DI)arnly proefl'ced the Rornan Catholic reli-
gion, this suited the bigotted schemes which that court had a-
dopted.

nDarnlydi- WVhile Mary was endleavouring to reconcile foreign courts to a
ral 'tlle- msenure which flie had so much at heart ; Darnly, and his father,
obLcs. )b},y their behaviour, were raifiingt up enemies at home, to obftruit

it. Lennox had, during the former part of his life, discovered
nu great comp:tfs of abilities, or political wifdorn; and appears to
have been a man of weak underllanding, and violent pallions.
Da'rn~ly was not superior to his father in undeClannding, and all

*' eti'l, Append. 59, *f Caned. 396. { Cateln. 4163.

hiis passions were till more inpetuous *. To these, he added that BOOK 11.
infolencc, which the advantage of external form, when accom- L--.
panied with no quality more valuable, is apt to inspire. In- 65
toxicated with the Queen's favour, he began already to alume
the haughtiness of a Kihg, and to put on that imperious air, which
majesty itfclf can scarce render tolerable.

It was by the advice, or at leiaf with the consent of Murrny, r"'tiil'tily

and his party, that Lennox had been invited into Scotland 1-; and
yet, no sooner did he acquire a firm footing in that kingdom, than
he begtn to enter into secret cabals with those noblemen, who
Were known to be avowed enemies to Murray, and with regard
to religion, to be either neutrals, or favourers of Popcry ::.
)arnly, itill more imprudent, allowed bome rafli cxprcflions con-
cerning these favours, which the Queen's bounty had conferred
upon Murray, to cfcapehim§.

But, above all there, the familiarity which Darnly cultivated

with David Rizio the Italian, contributed to increase the suspicion
and difgut of the nobles.

The low birth, and indigent condition of this man, placed him 'ri rife of

in a station, in which he ought naturally to have remained un- RIizi's fa-
known to posterity. But what fortune called him to at, and to
susser in Scotland, obliges history to descend from its dignity,
and to record his adventures. He was the son of a musician in
Turin, and having accompanied the Piedmontefe Ambassador in-
to Scotland, gained admission into the Queen's family, by his Ikill
in music. His servile condition had taught him suppleness of
spirit, and infiuating manners. HIe quickly crept into the Queen's
favour, and her French Secretary, happening to return at that
time into his own country, was preferred by her to that office.
IHe now began to make a figure in court, and to appear as a man
of weight and consequence. The whole train of suitors and ex-
pedants, who have an extreme sagacity in discovering the paths
which lead most direAly to success, applied to him. His recom-
mendations were observed to have great influence over the Queen,
and he grew to be confidered, not only as a favourite, hut as a
Minisler. Nor was Rizio careful to abate that envy, which al-
ways attends such an extraordinary and rapid change of fortune.
lie fludied, on the contrary, to display the whole extent of his
favour. I-lc afilccld to talk often, and familiarly, with the (tuee
in public. H-e equalled the greatcll and moll opulent liijcls;,

K elith, 27:, 17^ . ' j Klo.x, 3, 7. Ii.ilit, 7. 1I.

ji 2(7l.,:.
,' iKcilti -'7..

B b

BOOK Il. in richness 6f dress, and in the number of his attendants. He

discovered in all his behaviour, that affuning insolence, with
which unmerited prosperity inspires an ignoble mind. It was
with the utmost indignation that the nobles beheld the power;
it was with the utmost difficulty, that they tolerated the arro-
gance of this unworthy minion. Even in the Queen's preence
they could not forbear treating him with marks of contempt.
Nor was it his exorbitant power alone, which exasperated the
Scots. They confidered him, and not without reason, as a dan-
gerous enemy to the Protefiant religion, and fufpecled that he
held, for this purpose, a secret correspondence with the court of
Rome *.

Darnly's It was Darnly's misfortune to fall under the management of
onnhlai'on this man, who, by flattery and afliduity, easily gained on his

vanity, and inexperience. Rizio's whole influence on the Queern
was employed in his behalf, and contributed, without doubt, to-
wards eflablifhing him more firmly in her affecions +. But whatever
benefit he might reap from his patronage, it did not counterba-
lance the contempt, and even the infamy, to which he was ex-
posed, on account of his familiarity with iuch an upstart.

Though Darnly daily made progress in the Queen's affections,

she conducted herself, however, with such prudent reserve, as to'
impose on Randolph the English Resident, a man otherwise
shrewd and penetrating. It appears from his letters at this pe-
riod, that he entertained not the leall suspicion of the intrigue
which was carrying on; and gave his court repeated assurances,
that the Scottifli QEeen had no defigni of marrying Darnly :. In
the midst of his security, Mary dispatched Maitland to signify
her intention to Elizabeth, and to solicit her consent to the mar-
riage with Darnly. This cinbaily was the firit thing, which
opened the eyes of Randolph.

April 18. Elizabeth affected the greatcfl furprifc at this fadden refoln-
Elizabethl tion of the Scottifil Queen, but without rcafon. The train was
gainft the laid by herself, and fine had no cause to wonder when it took es-
Quecn's se&t. She expressed, at the fame time, her dirapprobation of the
marriage withDanily. match, in the ltrongefl terms ; and pretended to foresee many

dangers and inconveniencics arising from it, to both kingdoms.
But this, too, was mere afienation. M;ary had or.ftn and plainly
declared her resolution to marry. It was imnpofliblle lle could

hudialn. 3.1o. 1lMcl. o07. hl. tin.
1 Kcithl , 273. anll Appcndtl. 1 9.

make any choice more inoffensive. The danger of introducing BOOK II.
a foreign interell into Britain, which Elizabeth had so jullly v
dreaded, was entirely avoided. Darnly, though allied to both
Crowns, and possessed of lands in both kingdoms, could be for-
midable to neither. It is evident, from all these circumltances,
that Elizabeth's apprehensions of danger could not possibly be
serious ; and that, in all her violent declarations againll Darnly,
there was much more of grimace than of reality .

There were not wanting, however, political motives of much

weight, to induce that wife Princess to put on the appearance of
great displeasure. Mary, intimidated by this, might perhaps de-
lay her marriage; which Elizabeth desired to obftrua with a
wcaknefs, that little suited the dignity of her mind, and the ele-
vation of her charaAer. Besides the tranquillity of her own king-
dom was the great objeEt of Elizabeth's policy; and by declaring
her diffatisfailon with Mary's condue, lie hoped to alarm that
party in Scotland, which was attatched to the English interest,
and to encourage such of the nobles, as secretly disapproved the
match, openly to oppose it. The feeds of discord would, by this
means, be scattered through that kingdom. Intcfline commo-
tions might arise. Amidit thefc, Mary could form none of those
dangerous schemes, to which the unicn of her people might have
prompted her. She herrelf would become the umpire between
her, and her contending fubjeds. And England might look on,
with security, wihle a storm, vhich she had raised, waRled the
only kingdom, which could polfbly diflurb its peace.

In prosecution of this fchemc, lhe laid before her Privy Nay r.

Council the message from the Scottish Quecn, and consulted them
with regard to the answer fle flould return. Their determina-
tion, it is easy to conceive, was perfectly conformable to her fe-
cret views. They drew up a remonfirance against the intended
match, full of the imaginary dangers, with which that event
threatened the kingdom -. Nor did fie think it enough, to figni-
fy her disapprobation of the meafurc, citller by Maitland, IMary's

"Even thl I lifiorians of that age acknowledgc, that the mal iagce of ther Scot.

tilhslleen with ;a fbje&l was Ihrr iom being tlif:ilrecablc to Ellizabeth. Kniox,
369, 373. 1lucli;l. 339. C;:illn:l, who, at tha:t time, was well acquainited wiith
the intriguiis of bot th lle l)r'iifl courts, ;:ifel'ts, andl upon groilIuds of great prola-
bility, that :he matlcl wa:I wholly Elizabetli's own work; aint that lic rejoiccd at
the ac(:conmpliflimclt ol it, Cailtcli. 4i62. applears from.tlhle cttcrs of li r own An\.,
ba!lilors. .Keith, 380, :88.

tf litlh, 274. Se Api'pcnl. N.
N '..

B b ij

BooKI1T Ambassador, or by Randolph, her own Resident in Scotland; irt

- order to add more dignity to the farce which fie chose to as,

Srr ns flie appointed Sir Nicholas Throgmorton her Ambassador Ex-
'rlr ,r- traordinary. She commanded him to declare, in the itrongeft
obli'u it. terms, her diffatisfaEtion with the Rtep which Mary proposed to.

take; and, at the fame time, to produce the determination of
the Privy Council, as an evidence that the sentiments of the na-
tion were not different from her own. Not long after, she con-
fined Lady Lennox as a prisoner, firt in her o.wn house, and then
sent her to the Tower *.

Intelligence of all this reached Scotland, before the arrival of

the Englifi Ambassador. In the firfi transports of her indignation,
Mary resolved, no longer, to keep any measures with Elizabeth
and sent orders to Maitland, who accompanied Throgmorton, to
return instantly to the Englilh court, and, in her name, to declare
to Elizabeth, that after being amused so long to so little purpofc;
after being fooled, and imposed on so grossly by her cvafive arti-
sices; ile was now resolved to gratify her own inclination, and \
to ask no other consent, but that of her ownr fubjets, in the
choice of an husband. Maitland, with his usual sagacity, fore-
saw all the effets of such a rafli and angry message, and ventured
rather to incur the displeasure of his Millrefs, by disobeying her
commands, than to be made the initrument of tearing asunder, ;f
violently, the few remaining ties, which still linked together the
two Queens t.

Mary herself soon became feifible of her error. She received

the Englifll Ambassador with rcfpet ; juflified 'her own conduc
with decency and though unalterable in her resolution, flie as.
sected a wonderful solicitude to reconcile Elizabeth to the mcn-
sure; and even pretended, out of complaisance, towards her, to
put off the consummation of the marriage for some monthst.
It is probable, however, that the want of the Pope's dispensation,
and the proflpeEt of gaining the consent of her own subjects, were
the real motives of this delay.

Th rirray's This consent Mary laboured with the utmotf industry to obtain.
,;,ily'. The Earl of Mliray was the person in the kingdom, whose con-

currence was of the greatell importance; but flh had reason to
fear that it would not be procurcdl without extreme difficulty.
From the time of Lcnnox's return into Scotland, Murray per-
ceived that the Qiccln's affccaions began gradually tobe elcranged

K lcith, Append. i6i. . Id. 16o. Id. 278.

from him. Darnly, Athole, Rizio, all the court favourites, cor- BooK ll.
Lined against him. His ambitious spirit could not brook this di-
nilnution of his power, which his former services had so little 5
merited. He retired into the country, and gave way to rivals,
with whom he was unable to contend *. The return of the Earl
of Bothwell, his avowed enemy, who had been accused of a design
upon his life, and who had resided for some time in foreign coun-
tries, obliged him to attend to his own safety. No entreaty of
the Queen could persuade him to a reconcilement with that noble-
man. He infirfed on having him brought to a public trial, and
prevailed, by his importunity, to have a day fixed for it. Both-
well durst not appear in opposition to a man, who came to the
place of trial, attended by five thousand of his followers on horse-
lack. Hle was once more conflrained to leave the kingdom
but, by the Queen's command, the fcntence of outlawry, which
is incurred by non-appearance, was not pronounced againfthimt.

But Mary, sensible of how much importance it was, to gain a May 8.

subjeE so powerful and so popular as the Earl of Murray, invited
him back to court, and received him with many demonitrations
of refpec and confidence. At last flie desired him to set an ex-
ample to her other fubjeE&s by subscribing a paper, containing a
formal approbation of her marriage with Darnly. Murray had
many reasons to hesitate, and even to withhold his assent. Darnly
had not only undermined his credit with the Queen, but dif-
covered, on every occasion, a rooted aversion to his person. By
consenting to his elevation to the throne, he would give him fucll
an accession of dignity and power, as no man willingly bestows on
an enemy. The unhappy consequences which might follow up-
on a breach with England xere, likewifc, of considerable weight
with Murray. lHe had always openly preferred a confederacy
with England, before the ancient alliance with France. By his
means chiefly, this change in the system of national politics had
been brought about. A league with England had been eflablifll-
ed; and he could not think of sacrificing, to a rash and youthful
paflion, an alliance of so much utility to the kingdom; and
which, he and the other nobles were bound, by every obligation,
lo maintain .t. Nor was the intcrcft of religion. forgotten on
this occasion. Mary, though surrounded by Protellant Coun-
fcllors, had found means to hold a dangerous corrcl'iion(lncc with
foreign Catholics. She hlad even courted the Pope's protection,

' citll, 27 4
, 27-1 Appenld. t1 9 i' ld. ibil. 6 . lcith, 169.

BOO" TI. Ambafiador, or by Randolph, her own Rcfident in Scotland; ir

order to add more dignity to the farce which flie chose to ac,

sh.' n appointed Sir Niclolas Throgmorton her Ambafl'ador Ex-

'Thr .- traordinary. She commanded him to declare, in the ftrongeit
111"nIV. r,1l to
o:trl'ua i. terms, her diffatisfation with the flep which Mary propored to

take ; and, at the fame time, to produce the determination of
the Privy Council, as an evidence that the fcntiments of the na-
tion were not different from her own. Not long after, flie con-
fined Lady Lennos as a prisoner, firit in her o.wn house, and then
sent her to the Tower *.

Intelligence of all this reached Scotland, before the arrival of

the Englifl Amblffador. In the first tran'ports of her indignation,
Mary resolved, no longer, to keep any measures with Elizabeth
and sent orders to Maitland, who accompanied Throgmorton, to
return inflantly tothe Englilt court, and, in her name, to declare
to Elizabeth, that after being amused so long to so little purpose;
after being fooled, and imposed on so grossly by her evasive arti-
sices; ille was now resolvcd to gratify her own inclination, and \
to ask no other content, but that of her own fubjeEts, in tlh
choice of an husband. AIaitland, with his usual sagacity, fore-
saw all the eftfecs of such a rath and angry message, and ventured
rather to incur the displeasure of his Miltrefs, by disobeying her
commands, than to be made the instrument of tearing asunder, so
-violently, the few remaining ties, which fill linked together the
two Queens '.

Mary herself soon became sensible of her error. She received

the Englifll Ambassador with refpeft ; jufified her own conduEt
'with decency; and though unalterable in her resolution, she as,
seaed a wonderful solicitude to reconcile Elizabeth to the mca-
sure; and even pretended, out of complaisance, towards her, to
put cff the consummation of the marriage for some months..
It is probable, however, that the want of the Pope's dispensation,
and thl profpe& of gaining the content of her own fubjecs, were
the real motives of this delay.

This consent Mary laboured with the utmost indufiry to obtain.
nD .niv. The Earl of M'irlay was the person in the kingdom, whose con-

currence was of the greatell importance; but file had reason to
fear tliat it would not be procured without extreme difliculty.
rrom the time of Lennox's return into Scotland, Murray pcr-
ceived that the Qen's affcctions began gradually to be eiranged

' Keith, Append. 16i. 1F d. l. 1 I. .278

isromi him. Darnly, Atholc, Rizio, all the court favourites, corn- BooKc 1I.
bined against him. His ambitious spirit could not brook this di-

ilnution of his power, which his former services had so little 565.
merited. He retired into the country, and gave way to rivals,
with whom he was unable to contend *. The return of the Earl
of Bothwell, his avowed eney, who had been accused of a design
upon Ills life, and who had resided for some time in foreign coun-
tries, obliged him to attend to his own safety. No entreaty of
the Quecn could persuade him to a reconcilement with that noble-
man. He infifLed on having him brought to a public trial, and
prevailed, by his importunity, to have a day fixed for it. Both-
well durst not appear in opposition to a man, who came to the
place of trial, attended by five thousand of his followers on horse-
Lack. Ile was once more conflrained to leave tie kingdom;
but, by the Qeeen's command, the fcntence of outlawry, which
is incurred by non-appearance, was not pronounced againfl him 1-.

But Mary, sensible of how much importance it was, to gain a May 8.

fibject so powerful and so popular as the Earl of Murray, invited
lim back to court, and received him with many demonstrations
of refpe& and confidence. At last flie desired him to set an ex-
ample to her other fubjets by subscribing a paper, containing a
formal approbation of her marriage with Darnly. Murray had
many reasons to hesitate, and even to withhold his aflent. Darnly
had not only undermined his credit with the Queen, but dif-
covered, on every occasion, a rooted avcrfion to his person. By
consenting to his elevation to the throne, he would give him fucl
an ,cceflion of dignity and power, as no man willingly bestows on
an enemy. The unhappy consequences which might follow up-
on a breach with England wqere, likewise, of considerable weight
witlh M\urray. He had always openly preferred a confederacy
with Elngland, before the ancient alliance with France. By his
means chiefly, this change in the system of national politics had
been brought about. A league with England had been eftablifil-
ed and he could not think of sacrificing, to a rafli and youthful
paflion, an alliance of so much utility to the kingdom; and
which, lie and the other nobles were bound, by every obligation,
to maintain .. Nor was the interet of religion. forgotten on
this occasion. Mary, though surrounded by Proteflant Coun-
fbllors, had found me:ns to hold a ldangerous corrctpondlcncc witl
forcign Catholics. She had even courted the Pope's protcftion,

iCetll,, 272, 274. Appcnd1. T. '
j I 1. iid. 16( . 1 lciltl', 169.

Boole III. who had sent her a subsidy of eight thousand crowns*. Though

V Murray had hitherto endeavoured to bridle the zeal of the re-
formed clergy, and to set the Queen's condu& in the most fa-
vourable light, yet her obitinate adherence to her own religion,
could not fail of alarming him, and by her resolution to marry a
Papist, the only hope of reclaiming her, which remained, was
for ever cut off. Each of these conliderations had its influence
on Murray, and all of them determined him to decline comply-
ing, at that time, with the Queen's request.

May 14. The Convention of nobles, which was assembled a few days
Aconven- after, discovered a greater disposition to gratify the Queen.
tion of the
nobles ap- Many of them, without hesitation, expressed their approbation of
proves of the intended match ; but as others were flartled at the fame
the mar-
riage. dangers which had alarmed Murray, or were influenced by his

example, to refute their content, another Convention was appoint-
ed at Perth, in order to deliberate more fully concerning this
matters.

Mean while, Mary gave a public evidence of her own inclina-

tion, by conferring upon Darnly titles of honour peculiar to the
royal family. The opposition she had hitherto met with, and the
many contrivances employed to thwart and disappoint her inclina-
tion, produced their usual effea on her heart, they confirmed her
passion, and incrcafed its violence. The simplicity of that age
imputed an affection, so exceflivc, to the influence of witchcraft 6.
It was owing, however, to no other charm, than the irresistible
power of youth and beauty, over a young and tender heart.
Darnly grew giddy with his prosperity. Flattcred by the love
of a Queen, and the applause of many among her fubjecls, his na-
tural haughtiness and infolencc became infupportanlc, and he
could no longer bear advice, far less contradiction. Lord Ruth-
ven, happening to be the first person who informed him that .TMary,
in order to sooth Elizabeth, had delayed, for rome time, creating
himn Duke of Albany, he, in a frenzy of rage, drew his dagger
and attempted to flab himll. It required all Mary's attention,
to prevent his falling under that contempt, to which such beha-
viour deservedly exposed hiim.

'I:r.s ad_- In no fecnc of her life was ever Mary's own Icddrefs more re-
Itcis in markably displaycd. Love flarpened her invention, and made
g;'-iging lger
ubl j.i.. her fludy every method of gaining her lubjecQs. Many of the

nobles flih won by her caercfes, and more by her promiles. On

K Kcitlh. 2qs. Mclv. Ii .1. *1' I;illl, 23. K1nox, 373.
5 Keith, 283. 1| i~l. i 60

bime fie bcfiowed lands, to others lhe gave new titles of honour *. BooK IIT.
She even condescended to court the Protestant clergy. And hav- - -
ing invited three of their fuperintendants to Stirling, fie de- 5
clared, in Itrong terms, her resolution to prote& their religion,
expresscd her willingners to be present at a conference upon the
points in doctrine which were disputed between the Proteflants
and Papilts, and went so far as to Ihow some desire to. hear fucrh
of their preachers, as were moll remarkable for moderation f-. By
there arts, the Queen gained wonderfully upon the people, who,
unless their jealousy be raised by repeated injuries, are always
ready to view the actions of their Sovereign with an indulgent
eye.

On the other hand, Murray and his associates were plainly the

dupes of Elizabeth's policy. She talked in so high a itrain, of
her displeasure at the intended match; she treated Lady Lennox
with so much rigour; f(e wrote to the Scottifl Queen in such
llrong terms; Ihe recalled the Earl of Lennox and his son in such
a peremptory manner, and with such revere denunciations of her
vengeance, if they presumed to disobey t; that all there expref-
sions of aversion fully persuaded them of her sincerity. This be-
lief fortified their scruples with refpe to the match, and encou-
raged them to oppose it. They began with forming among them-
selves bonds of confederacy and mutual defence; they entered in-
to a secret correspondence with the Engliflh Resident, in order
to secure Elizabeth's affiftancc, when it should become needful 1 ;
they endeavoured to fill the nation with filch apprehensions of dan-
ger, as might counterbalance the influence of those arts, which
the Queen had employed.

Besides these intrigues, there were secretly carried on, by both s. hlcmes or
parties, dark designs of a more criminal nature, and more suit- D111"1yY all

lMurray a-

able to the spirit of the age. Darnly, impatient of that oppofi- gainfi each
tion, which he imputed wholly to Mlurray, and relflving at ol
any rate to get rid of such a powerful enemy, formed a plot to as-
faflinate him, during the nlecting of the Convention at Perth.
Murray, on his part, defipairing of preventing the marriage by
any other means, had, togetler with the Duke of Chatclhcrault,
and the Earl of Argylc, concerted meaflurcs for seizing Darnly,
and carrying him a prifoncr into England.

If either of thele conrpiracies had taken cffe&, this Convention
might have been attended with conflquences extremely tragical;

* Kcilh, 283. I l.nox, 373. t Kcith,8, z86.
1 Keitlh, 289, 292, y28.

B6ooKII. but both were rendered abortive, by the vigilance or good for-

- tune of those against wh6m they were formed. Murray, being

warned of his danger by some retainers to the court, who fill
favoured his interest, avdided the blow, by not going to Perth.
Mary, receiving intelligence of Murray's enterprise, retired with
the utnioft expeditior, along with Darnly, to the other fide of
Forth. Conscious, on both fides, of guilt, and inflamed with
resentment, it was impossible they could either forget the vio-
lence, which themselves had meditated, or forgive the injuries,
ittended against them. All hope of reconcilement was at an end
from that moment, and their mutual enmity burf out with every
symptom of implacable hatred *

' The reality of these two opposite coufpiracies has given occasion to many

disputes, and much contradilion. Some deny that any design was formed a-
gainft the life of Murray; others call in question the truth of the conspiracy a-
gainit Darnly. There seem, however, to be good reasons for believing both;
though the zeal and credulity of party-writers have added to each, many exag-
gerated circumstances. The following arguments render it probable, that some
violence was intended against Murray.

I. This ispofitively asserted, i. By Buchanain, 341. 2. The Englilh 1efident

writes to Cecil, that Murray was aftliredly informed that a design was laid to
murder him at Perth, and describes the manner in wllih this plot was to have
been executed. Keith, 287. 3. Murray himself coh'tantly and publicly affirm-
ed, that such a design was formed againfl his life. Keith, Ap. 1o8. And though
he was called upon by the Queen to bring legal evidence of his assertion, and a
safe conduc offered him, while he came to court for that purpose. Ibid. Yet
whoever confiders Murray's situation, and the spirit of those who ruled in court
at that time, will scarce deem it any proof of his guilt, that lie did not chufe to
riik his person on such security. 4. ThIe furious pafions of Darnly, the ficrce-
refss of his resentment, which ticrupled at no violence, and the manners of the
age, render the imputation of fich a crime less improbable.

II. That Murray and his aTlciates had resolved to seize Darnly's perron ap-

pears, i. Frolm the express tellimony ofMelvil, 112. Buchanan, p. 341, and
Knox, p. 377, ailsed, but without reason, to reprelent this as an idle rumour.
2. The question was put to Randolph, whether the Governor of Berwick would re-
ceive Lennox and his son, if they were carried prisoners to that place. This plain-
ly fllew;v, thi:t tome filch design was in hand, and Randolph did not discourage
iL, by the answer which he gave. Keith, 290. 3. The precipitation, with
which the Qpeen retired, and the reason file gave for this futden flight, are men-
tioned by Raldolph, 29!. 4. A great part of the Scottillh noblec, and among
thele thl e Earls ol'Argyle and ltothes, who were tllcimfelves privy to the diefigr
all'fert the reality of lle crllliirllcy. Good. vol. ii. 358.

All thelt: cirlmsli :in!lc.s leave little room to doubt of the truth of blotlh cotliil;r:t.

cies. But lw mlay obl'lrve low tfr this proof, tholugh drawn from

lo lpblic records,

1'.11i; rl:lrt, onllith llides, of' legal ;and fitrmal evidence. IBuchllana;n and Randolph
in their accomuts of tlle conliiMiracy agaiullt lurray, ldilfr widely in almoll. cvery
cilcumllI:lle. ''lie ;:.countjo of tht; itcimpt upon Diltruly, a;t not mn0rc coillill

On Mary's return to Edinburgh, fle summoned her vassals by BooK IL.

proclamation, and solicited them by her letters, to repair thither - '-
in arms, for the protection of her person againfl her foreign and
domestic enemies *. She was obeyed with all the promptneis and mon; her
alacrity, with which fubjets run to defend a mild and popular vlfits to

take arms

administration. This popularity, however, she owed in a great against
measure to Murray, iwh had direfLed her adminiafration withl Muray.
great prudence. But the crime of opposing her marriage, obli-
terated the memory of his former services; and Mary, impatient
of contradiclion, and apt to confider those who disputed her will,
as enemies to her person, determined to let him feel the whole
weight of her vengeance. lor this purpose, flie summoned him July 19.
to appear before her upon a fliort warning, to answer to fuchl things
as mhould be laid to his charge t-. At this very time, I\urray,
and the Lords who adhered to him, were aflemlled at Stirling,
to deliberate what course they should hold, in Ifch a dilsicult con-
junaure. But the current of popular favour ran so strongly a-
gainfi them; and, notwithltanding tome fears and jealousies, there
prevailed in the nation, such a general dilpofition to gratify the
Queen in a matter which so nearly concerned her, that, without
coming to any other conclusion, than to implore the Queen of
England's protecion, they put an end to their ineffetual consul-
tations, and returned every man to his own house.

Together with this discovery of her enemies weakness, the

confluence of her fubjets from all corners of the kingdom, as-

ent. Melvil alleges, that the design of the conspirators was to carry Darnly a
prisoner into England; the proposal made to Randolph agrees with this. Ran-
dolph fays, that they intended to carry the Queen to St. Andrew's, and Darnly
to Calle Campbell. The Lords, in their declaration, affirm the design of the
conipirators to have been to murder Darnly and his father, to confine the Qteen
in Lochleven during life, and to usurp the government. To believe, implicitly
whatever they find in an ancient paper, is a folly to which Antiquaries are liable,
But ancient papers often contain nothing more than the slanders of a party, and
the lie of the day. The declaration of die nobles referred to, is of this kind; it
is plainly rancorous, and written in the very heat of fation. Many things are
afscrted in it, evidently falle, or exaggerated. Let Murray and his confede-
rates be as ambitious as we can suppose, they must have iad some pretences,
and plausible ones too, before they could venture to imprison their Sovereign for
life, and to seize the reins of government; but, at that time, the QlecQn's con-
duel had afiorded no colourable exculi: for proceeding to Ihchl extremitics. It
is, lilcewite, remarl:ablc, that in all the proclamatiols agail lt Murray, of swlicl
so many are publilhed in Keith, Appendix o18, &c. neither the violent attempt
upon Darnly, nor that which lie is alleged to have formed againli thel Qlcu her-
ti ls, are ever once mentioned.

:' Keitlh, 2p8. '' 1,1. Aplpe.nd. lo8.

Cc

B6o III. but both were rendered abortive, by the vigilance or good for-

tune of those against whom tleyi were formed. Murray, being
warned of his danger by some retainers to the court, who flill
favoured his interest, avoided the blow, by not goiig to Pcrth.
Mary, receiving intelligence of Murray's enterprise, retired with
the utnmof expeditiori, along with Darnly, to the other fide of
Forth. Confeious, on both fides, of guilt, and inflamed with
resentment, it was impossible they could either forget the vio-
lence, which thetnfelves had meditated, or forgive the injuries,
illtended againfi them. All hope of reconcilement was at an end
from that moment, and their mutual enmity burfi out with every
symptom of implacable hatred *.

' The reality of these two opposite coinfiiracies has given occasion to many

diliputes, and much contradidlionl Some deny that any design was formcd a-
gaiuft the life of Murray; others call in question the truth of the conspiracy a-
gainfit Darnly. There seem, however, to be good reasons for believing both;
though the zeal and credulity of party-writers have aidded to each, many exag-
gerated circumstances. The following arguments render it probable, that fomn1
violence was intended againfi Murray.

I. This is positively aflerted, i. By Buchanan, 341. 2. The Englifi Refidcnt

writes to Cecil, that BMurray was allredly informed thit a design was laid to
murder him at Perth, and describes the manner in which this plot was to have
been executed. Keith, 287. 3. Murray himnelf coilfantly and publicly affirm-
ed, that such a design was formed against his life. Keith, Ap. lo8. And though
he was called upon by the Queen to bring legal evidence of his assertion, and a
safe condu& offered him, wliile he came to court for that purpose. Ibid. Yet
whoever confiders Murray's situation, and the spirit of those who ruled in court
at that time, will scarce deem it any proof of his guilt, that he did not chufe to
riik his person on such security. 4. The furious paflions of Darnly, the fierce-
riefg of his resentment, which iLrupled at no violence, and the manners of the
age, render the imputation offuch a crime less improbable.

II. That tMurray andu his arbciates had resolved to feizeDarnly's person ap-

pears, i. From the express testimony of Melvil, 1 2. Buchanan, p. 341, and
Knox, p. 377, afect, but without reason, to reprefcnt this as an idle rumour.
:.The queltion was put to Randolph, wheether the Governor of Berwvick would re-
ceive Lennox and his son, if they were carried prisoners to that place. This plain-
Isy fliews, th.Itt some such design was in lhand, and Randolph did not discourage
ib, by the answer which lie gave. Keith, 290. 3. The prcilpitation, witll
which the Queen retired, and the eafon file gave for this fildi.den flight, are mcn-
tioned by Randolph, t9i. 4. A great t

part of the Scottilli nobles, andt among

these the Earls of Argyle and Roi.hes, who were lthemclflves privy to tlle dcfign
aT'ert the reality of ihe cnliil;icy. Good. vol. ii. 358.

All tlieti. cil'm:ol:uf;lces leave little room to doubt of the truth of lotll coillti:t-
ies. But w nay oblscrvc lhow far this proof, though drawn from public records,
fills ':,rt, on bith lides, of Iegal and foirmal evidence. Bucllianan and Randollph
in iteir accIunita of tle conlrl:i. cy againll Murray, difier widelly in almloll very
cr: ui ':t;,ee. h'l':l- ;:icounts of tll ;tttcmpt upon Darnly, ;ui not more coilill-

0n Mary's return to Edinburgh, flie fummonned her vafiTls by BOOK III.

proclamation, and solicited them by her letters, to repair thither "
in arms, for the proteeion of her person againfl iher foreign and t 6
domeflic enemies*. She was obeyed with all the lpromptncs and ,lO; h lcr
alacrity, with which fubjets run to defend a mild and popular val'lls to

t tk,. arms

administration. 'This popularity, however, she owed in a great agaiilf
measure to Murray, who had diredted her adminiilration with Ml'"ray.
great prudence. But the crime of opposing her marriage, obli-
terated the memory of his former fcrvices; and Mary, impatient
of contradicAion, and apt to conlidcr those who disputed her will,
as enemies to her person, determined to let him feel the whole
weight of her vengeance. For this purpose, nle fulmmoned him July 19.
to appear before her upon a flort warning, to answer to fucl things
as should be laid to his charge -. At this very time, Murray,
and the Lords who adhered to him, were aflembled at Stirling,
to deliberate what course they flould hold, in fucl a didlicult con-
juncture. But the current of popular favour ran so ilrongly a-
gainfi them; and, notwithflanding fonme fears and jealousies, there
prevailed in the nation, fueh a general disposition to gratify the
QEeen in a matter which so nearly concerned her, that, without
coming to any other conclusion, than to implore the Queen of
England's protecion, they put an end to their ineffectual consul-
tations, and returned every man to his own house.

Together with this discovery of her enemies weakness, the

confluence of her subjects from all corners of the kingdom, as-

ent. Melvil alleges, that the design of the conspirators was to carry Darnly a
priloner into England; the proposal made to Randolph agrees with this. Ran-
dolph fays, that they intended to carry the Qpeen to St. Andrew's, and Darnly
to Callle Campbell. The Lords, in their declaration, affirm the design of the
confpir.tors to have been to murder Darnly and his father, to confine the Queen
in Lochleven during life, and to usurp the government. Tobelieve, implicitly
whatever they find in an ancient paper, is a folly to which Antiquaries are liable,
But ancient papers often contain nothing more than the flandcrs of a party, and
the lie of the day. The declaration of the nobles referred to, is of this kind; it
is plainly rancorous, and written in the very heat of fialion. Many things are
asserted in it, evidently false, or exaggerated. Let Mlurray and his confede-
rates be as ambitious as we can suppose, they mull have had foine pretences,
and plausible ones too, before they could venture to imprifbn their Sovereign for
life, and to seize the reins of government; but, at that time, the Qnenl's con-
dla had afforded no colourable excule for proceeding to filch extremities. It
is, likewilf, remarkable, that in all the proclamations agai lil Miurry, of wlicL
so many are publillhed in Keith, Appendix 1o8, &c. neither tihe violent attempt
upon Darnly, nor that which he is alleged to have formed againllt the Queen lher-
;Llfr, are ever once mentioned.

Keitlh, '298 . Append. e 18.

Cc

Boo;: III forded \Mary an agreeliblc proof of her own flrength. 'While tnid

'* 6 Qteen a.s in this prosperous situation, lie determined to bring

to a period, an aftair, which had so long engrosscd her heart, and
Celbrates occupied her attention. On the 29th July, file married Henry

o1ar":ljl Stewart Lord Darnly. Thle ceremony was performed in the QOeen's

ID;rnly. chapel, according to the rites of the Rominl church; the Pope's
.' - bull, e'l, ii~Dvb.h their marriage, having been previously ob-

:"taincd *. She ifllcd, at the fammetime, proclamations, conferring
' the title of King of Scots upon her husband. and commanding that

henceforth all writs at law Iliould run in the joint names of King
and Queen +. Nothing can be a stronger proof of the violence of
MIary's love, or the weakness of her councils, than this laRs fep.
WThcther fle had any right to chufe a husband, without consent
of Parliament, was, in that age, a matter of some dispute ; that
ihe had no right to confer upon him, by her private authority, the
title and dignity of King; or, by a simple proclamation, to raise
her hufland to be the maRter of her people, seems to be beyond
all doubt. Francis II. indeed, bore the fame title. It was not,
however, the gift of the _Queen, but of the nation; and the con-
sent of Parliament was obtained, before he ventured to aflume it.
Dlarnlv's condition, as a subjet, rendered it still more necessary to
have the concurrence of the supreme Council in his favour. Suclh
a violent and unprecedented stretch of prerogative, as the fubtti-
tutina' a p:oclamation in place of an aft of Parliament, might
hav-c iuitly alarmed the nation. But the Queen poifeffed so en-
tirely tlhe confidence of her fubjeds, that, notwithllanding all the
clann-T:rs of the malecontents, no symptoms of general dilcontent
appc-red on that account.

Even amidlt that scene of joy, which always accompanies fuc-

cefsful love, Mary did not fuffTr the course of her vengeance a-
gainfi the malecontent nobles to be interrupted. Three days after
the marriage, iMurray was again summoned to court, under the
fcverell penalties, anid upon his non-appearance, the rigour ofjuf-
tice took place, and he x. as declared an outlaw ||. At the aime
tilne, the Qceen lset at liberty Lord Gordon, who ever since his
father's i:;lu'retion in the year I 562, had been detained a prion..-
(er lihe rccallecl the lEarl of Sutherland, who, on account of his
concern in tli:,t conlf3ir:icy, ha;!dl lced into Slanders; and (le per-
mitted iothwell to return againn into Scotland. 'The firil, and last
c-, tlhefe, vcere among the moil powerful futijecls in thlc lingdomn,
amdc all of tlimin animated v;ilit implacable hatred to l urray,

'" !'.:til, A;' d. Ic-.- 1' A \n,lerloim, 1.33, See Aplpend. ,a. XI.
} i ; .:'. 3.i . ];! '.i:,., 3°;,'t

whom they cftccmed the enemy of their families, and the author oo IIT,
.of their own sufferings. This common hatred became the foun- 1 65
dation of the flriitelf union with the Quecn, and gained them an
ascendent over all her councils. Murray himself confidercd this
confederacy with his avowcd enemies, as a more certain indication
than any measure file had yet.taken, of her inexorable resentment.

T'he malecontents had not yet openly taken up arms *. But the Marcdes :.

Qceen having ordered her fubjcfs to march againll them, they I,.';.,] ) ,,.
were driven to the lair extremity. Thcy found themselves unable, all[oci.aei.
however, to make head againit the numerous forces, which VIary
had aflcmblcd ; and lled into Argyleflirc, in expectation of aid
from Elizabeth, to whom they had fccretly dilpatchcd a niffctn-
ger, in order to implore her immediate affilance -t.

Meanwhile, Elizabeth endeavourecl to embarafs Ia:,ry, by a E.liz::l.th

pew declaration of her disgust at her conduct. She blamced both t;i','rLv,t;:
her choice of Lord Darnly, and the precipitation with which (l!.
had concluded the marriage. She required Lennox and Darnly,
whom fle fill called her fubjecs, to return into England. And
at the fame time, fle warmly interceded in behalf of MVurray,
whose behaviour file represented to be not only innocent, but
laudable. This metltgc, so mortifying to the pride of tlhe Queer.,
and so full of contempt for her halband, was rendered 1till more
insupportable, by the petulant and saucy demeanour of 'Tanlworth,
the perion who delivered it :. vlary vindicated her own con-
du&t with warmth, but with great strength of re;ason, and rejec-
ed the interceflon in behalf of i'iurray, not without signs of re-
fentmcnt at Elizabeth's pretend lin to intermeddle in the inter-
nal government of her kingdom j|.

Slc did not, on that accotint, intcrmit in the leafi the ardour,

with which [he pursued Mlurray and hlis adherents ' '. 'Ihey now
appeared openly in arms; and having received a finall liupply i;

Y Afictr tihi fruitlecs cnnfilll"tion at Sth'illingI, the I.ir;s r.'tihe to their owni

houFre, KrCit, .3041 Murray was flill aIt Si. Andrew's on Jlly 2-. Keith, 3,6.
IB the places of rendetzvoIs, appoinited filr Ihi i :II;:btats o ) _l' diii tl rent CtII-
tics, Augult.1. it ap)pcars tih:t ithe Qucn'Is inlitetio n

was to n:tri i l,

i ii e

I :

cuilty il which Murnli , ll tlh's,

liJk;;lily, ;til (,ha oilier clii illc mnill t m itllIs

rLfi;It:. KeiLi, 310. '1'liir flih into h1 wes t I,

]cIhi, . 12. i'ci.'ttcil lsiii
c'l:fplili (o , ail thll. ,rni.r ndilezvoiiu; w\slilc hcl. I.. ilh, 10.

- ''ith, 312. Knox, 39. C:tmd 21. K

8.hhi.,\ , ,

id. ).

.

* 'I'le molt conlisild ;ih lle l'lt iil)11 \llo jrin,;, d l\n'T'i:y, \\'ICr tlh1' Di- . i ' ( (iS.

telihc Irau , thli r l:i (Ii

A l' ill, (;:l t cai: i , l;.l Ollsit

l i r. l'ii c

i l

t, ! (i. l ti. l:tI ';

lhe l.cirds of ;iatig,', (Cu' ,i.ii :inihiik;ij, ltiliomiiic, ('a;rT ' li,' , [.. Vc I i, l/:lt,
.l-cgliorn, Pi';t'rw;w, (C.l3ilulkll.r, and tlheC'lltOI of l'iittr. il'\, '.°'

C r j

Booxc 11. money from Elizabeth *, were endeavouring to raise their follow-

ers in the weffern counties. But Mary's vigilance hindered them
from assembling in any considerable body. All her military ope-
rations, at that time, were concerted with wisdom, executed with
vigour, and attended with success. In order to encourage her
troops, she herself marched along with them, rode with loaded
piflols--, and endured all the fatigues of war with admirable for-
titude. Her alacrity inspired her forces with an invincible re-
solution, which, together with their superiority in number, de-
terred the malecontents from facing them in the field; but hav-
ing artfully passed the Qieen's army, they marched with the ut-
mofil precipitation to Edinburgh, and endeavoured to route the
Auglft 3i. inhabitants of that city to arms. The Queen did not susser them

to remain long unmolested; and, on her approach, they were
forced to abandon that place, and retire in confusion towards the
weflern borders :.

They are o- As it was uncertain, for some time, what rout they had taken,
tbligeito re Mary employed that interval in providing for the security of the
England. counties in the heart of the kingdom. She seized the places of

fircngth, which belonged to the rebels; and obliged the confider-
able Barons in those shires, which fih mofi suspected, to join in
associations for her defence ||. Having thus left all the country
behind her in tranquillity, (he, with an army eighteen thou-
sand firong, marched towards Dumfries, where the rebels then
were. During their retreat, they had sent letters to the Queen,
from almost every place where they halted, full of fubmiflion,
and containing various overtures towards an accommodation. But
Mary, who determined not to let flip such a favourable opportuni-
ty of crushing the mutinous spirit of her fubjecs, rejected them
with difilain. As file advanced, the malecontents retired; and,
having received no effe&ual aid from Elizabeth §, they despaired
Oa'obcr 20. f any other means of fafcty, fled into England, and put them-

selves under the protction of the Earl of Bedford, Warden of
the marches.

They ment
withun~ Nothing, which Bedford's pcrfonal friendflip for Murray could
peael ill supply, was wanting to render their retreat agreeable. But Eli-
fi.omT Eliza- za"bcth hcrl'clf treated them with extreme neglecl. Sll had fully

bl gained her end, and, by their means, had excited such discord

and jcaloufies among the Scots, as would, in all probability, long
* Knox;, 380. 1 Kcitll, Api-enl. 16.I. Id. 35

| Id. Append. lj. See .A1'lpenlix, 1;o. XII, XIII,

diltraEt and weaken Mary's councils. Her business now, was to BooK III
save appearances, and to justify herself to the Miniflers of France t
and Spain, who accused her of fomenting the troubles in Scotland 5*
by her intrigues. The expedient she contrived for her vindica-
tion, firongly displays her own characer, and the wretched con-
dition of exiles, who are obliged to depend on a foreign Prince.
Murray, and Hamilton Abbot of Kilwinning, being appointed
by the other fugitives to wait on Elizabeth, inflead of meeting
with that welcome reception which was due to men, who, out of
confidence in her promises, had hazarded their lives and fortunes,
could not even obtain the favour of an audience, until they had
meanly consented to acknowledge, in the presence of the French
and Spanifil Ambafladors, that Elizabeth had given them no en-
couragement to take arms. No sooner did they make this de-
claration, than she astonished them with this reply, " You have
declared the truth; I am far from setting an example of rebellion
to my own fubjeds, by countenancing those who rebel againfi
their lawful Prince. ' The trcafon, of which you have been guil-
ty, is detestable; and as traitors I banish you from my pre-
fence *." Notwithflanding this scene of farce and of falsehood,
so dishonourable to all the persons who aded a part in it, Eliza-
beth permitted the malecontents peaceably to reside in her Jomi-
nions, supplied them secretly with money, and renewed her soli-
citations with the Scottish Qieen in their favour-.

The advantage (he had gained over them did not satisfy Mary;

fle resolved to follow the blow, and to prevent a party, which
fl(e dreaded, from ever recovering any footing in the nation. \Vith
this view, (ie called a meeting of Parliament; and in order that
a fcntence of forfeiture might be legally pronounced againlt the
banished Lords, she summoned them, by public proclamation, to
appear before it . - Dec. i.

The Duke of Chatelherault, on his humble application, ob-

tained a fcparate pardon ; but not without dilliculty, as the King
violently opposed it. He was obliged, however, to leave the
kingdom, and to reside for fore time in France |[.

The numerous forces which Mary brought into the field, the

vigour with which hle adcd, and the length of time hle kept
theni in aris, reftlcble the eflorts of a Prince with revcnucs
much more confidcrable than t!ofe which she poffcfled. But
armies were then levied and maintained by a Prince, at fn:11l

* nclv. i12. -[ Knl , 8 K , 3

,.
II Knox, Ry.

BooKII. charge. The vassal followed his superior, and the superior at.

tended the lMonarch,at his own expencc. Six hundred horsemen,
5 however, and three companies of foot, besides her guards, receiv-
ed regular pay from the OQeen. This extraordinary charge, to-
gether with the diflburfcments occasioned by her marriage, ex-
haufted a treasury, which was far from being rich. In this exi-
gency, many deviccs were fallen upon for raising money. Fines
were levied on the towns of St. Andre;'s, Perth, and Dundee,
which were fufpeaed of favouring the malecontents. An unusual
tax was imposed on the boroughs throughout the kingdom ; and
a great fum was demanded of the citizens of Edinburgh, by way
of loan. This unprecedented cxasion alarmed the citizens.
They had recourse to delays, and ilarted difficulties, in order
to avoid it. 'lhefe Mary conllrued to be alts of avowed difobe-
diencc, and innlantly committed feveral.of them to prison. But
this severity did not subdue the undaunted spirit of liberty, which
prevailed among the inhabitants. The Queen was obliged 1o
beflow upon the city, the J/itersority of the town of Leith, in
return for whiclh he obtained a considerable fum of money *
The thirds of ecclefialical belefices proved another fourcc,
v;hcnce the Qteen derived ibme supply. About this time, we
find the Protcliant clergy complaining more bitterly than ever of
their poverty. The army, it is probable, cxhaufled a great part
of that fund, which was appropriated for their maintenance+.
r. h a- The Afle'mblics of the church were not unconcerned fpe&tators

of the commotions of this turbulent year. In the meeting June
24. fcvcral of the malccoutent nobles were prefcnt, and ieem to
have had grea! intluence on their decisions. The high itrain, in
which the An'Clmbly addrellcd the Qucen, can be imputcd only to
those fears and jcaloufies, with regard to religion, which they en-
dcavoured to infuse into the nation. The assembly complained,
with linme bittcrnefs, of the flop which had been put to the pro-
grcls of the Rleformation by the Queen's arrival in Scotland;
they required not only the total fupprcfilon of the Popifl worilip
throughout the kingdom, but even in the Queen's own chapel;
and bclides the legal cllablitlimcnt of the Protcftant religion,
they demanlded that Marry herilll' lhould publicly embrace it.
'1 lhe Queen, after lone deliberation, replied, that ncither her
con'fcincc, nor her intcrcel, would permit her to take Slhch a flep.
Tlhe forncr would for ever reproach her forl clinge, lwhichi pr'-.

' ,

! -9. , ,',86. -' - Mait. I ins. of l..! h !rinurl,
n 2.

ceeded from no inward convicRion ; the latter would fuflcr by nooK IIL
the of1encc, which her apollacy mull give to the King of France, '-
and her other allies on the continent :'.

It is remarkable, thl:t the profpcrous situation of the Qmcen's

affairs, during this year, began to work ibme change in f.avour of
her religion. The Eurls of Lennox, Athol, and Caflils, openly
attended mass: Ilhe hclrfef ;:afrded the Ciatholics a more avowed
protecRion than formerly; and, by her perminion, some of the al-
cient Monks ventured to preach publicly to the people -.

k '.[1 o';, -;-. F. '1 ! 3. o

# BOOK FOURTH. CONTENTS. THE conduct of Queen Mary to the exiled nobles. To Darnly. Rizio. His murder. The Queen's confinement. Her escape. The flight of the conspirators. Imprudence of Darnly. ...

THE
HI STORY

F
SCOTLAND.

BOOK FOURTH.

CONTENTS.
TIrE condua of Queen Mary to the exiled nobles. To Darnly. Rizio. I-is

murder. The Queen's confinement. Iler escape. The flight of the confpira-
tors. Imprudence of Darnly. Bothwell. Birth of James VI. Attachment
of the Englifll Parliament to Mary's title. Perplexity and address of Eliza-
beth. Aversion of the Queen of Scotland to Darnly. Church afiairs.
Darnly'sficktlefs. His murder. His charaaer. Bothwell accused of his death.
Trial and acquittal of Bothwell. A Parliament. The Queen carried to Dun-
bar. Her marriage to Bothwcll Public disgust. Combination of the nobles.
An accommodation. Flight of Bothwvell. Mary's surrender to the rebels.

A s the day appointed for the meeting of Parliament approached, BooK VT.
Mary and her Ministers were employed in deliberating concern- '-v
ing the course which it was most proper to hold with regard to x566
the exiled nobles. Many motives prompted her to fct no bounds iary's cle-

liberations

to the rigour of juflice. The malecontents had laboured to de- concernilg
feat a scheme, which her interest conspired with her passions in tho exiled
rendering dear to her ; they were the leaders of a party, whose
friendflip Ihe hIad been obliged to court, while flie held their prin-
ciples in abhorrence; and they were firmly attached to a rival,
whom ihe had good reason both to fear and to hate.

But, on the other hand, fevcral weighty conliderations might

be urged. The noblemen, whose fate was in fufpcncc, were
among the most powerful fubjets in the kingdom t their wealth
great, their conneacions extensive; and their adherents numer-
ous. They were now at mercy, the objcts of companion, and
suing for pardon with the moll humble submission.

In those circumflances, an at of clemency would exalt the
Q2lcen's charactcr, and appear no lets fplecndid among foreign-

D t

BooK IV. ers, than acceptable to her own fubjeas. Mary herself, though,

i-66. highly incen fed, was not inexorable; but the King's rage was iinr

placable and unrelenting. They were solicited in behalf of the
fugitives, from various quarters. Morton, RIuthven, Maitland,
and all who had been members of the Congregation, were not
forgetful of their ancient union with Murray, and his fellow-fuf-
ferers; nor neglectful of their safety, which they esteemed of
great importance to the kingdom. Melvil, who at that time pof-
fefled the Queen's confidence, seconded their solicitations. And
Mlurray, having ltooped so low as to court Rizio, that favourite,
who was desirous of securing his protecion against the King,
whose displeasure he had lately incurred, seconded the intercef-
sions of his other friends, with the whole of his influence-*.
The interposition of Sir Nicholas Thiogmorton, who had lately
been Elizabeth's Ambassador in Scotland, in behalf of the exiles,
was'of more weight tlan all thcfe, and attended with more fuc-
cess. Throgmorton, out of enmity to Cecil, had deeply embarked
in all the intrigues which were carried on at the Englifli court,
in order to undermine the power and credit of that Miniller.
He cfpoufed, for this reason, the cause of the Scottish QOeen, to-
wards whose title and pretensions the other was known to bear
little favour; and ventured in the present critical juncture, to
write a letter to MIary, containing the mofl salutary advices with
regard t6 her conduct. He recommended the pardoning of the
Earl of Mlurrhy and his associates, as a measure no less prudent,
than popular. An altion of this nature, fays he, the pure eftfct
of your Majesty's generosity, will spread the fame of your lenity
and moderation, and engage the Englifl to look towards your
accession to their throne, not only without prejudice, but with
dcefrc. By the fame ncans, a pcrfec harmony will be reflorcd
among your own fuhjeAs, who, if any rupture Ihould happen with
England, will serve you with that grateful zeal, which your cle-
mency cannot fail of inspiring -.

She refolvcs These prudent rcmonflrances of Throgmorton, to which hi!
ilc v';;;i reputation for wilflom, and known attachment to the Qucen, ad-
clici.icy. ded great authority, made a deep impreflioli un her flpirit. icr

courtiers cultivated this happy disposition, andl prevailed on her,
notwvithllanding the King's inllcxible temper, to lacrifrce lcer own
private refentmcnt to the intcrccli';n of her fa)i(cjs ;,id the
mwiihes of her friends $. Wiih ihis view, thle Pl;lrliamnt, which

* Melvil, 1i25. * 11. 1 1. 1 Id. 121..

7a.d been called to meet on the 4th of February, was prorogued Bool IV.
to the 7th of April*. And in the mean time, file was busy in 'a
confidering the manner and form in which flie fiould extend her 1566
favour to the Lords who were under disgrace.

Though Mary discovered, on this occasion, a mind naturally Is diverted
prone to humanity, and capable of forgiving, nle wanted, how- 1rom'.:h. .rc

Iclutwni by

ever, firmness to refif the influence, which was fatally. employed the folicita-
to disappoint the effe&s of this amiable disposition. About this tions of
time, and at no great difance from each other, two envoys arriv- herzeal for
ed from the French King. The, former was intrufled with mat- Popery.
ters of mere ceremony alone; he congratulated the Queen on Fb.
her marriage, and invelRed the King with the ensigns of the order
of St. Michael. The inilruCtions of the latter related to matters
of more importance, and produced greater effe&s -1-.

An interview between Charles IX. and his ilter thel Qteen

of Spain had been often propofedl; and after many obia.cles arif
ing from the interference of political interest, was at lall appoint-
ed at Bayonne. Catherine of i'ledicis accompanied her fIn ;
the Duke of Alva attended his mistress. Amidfl the scenes of
public pomp and pleasure, which seemed to be the role occupa-
tion of both courts, a scheme was formed and measures concert-
ed, for exterminating thle Hugonots in France, the Protestants
in the Low Countries, and for iupprefling the Reformation through-
out all Europe t. The acive policy of Pope Pius IV. and the
z-eal of the Cardinal of Lorrain, confirmed and encouraged dif-
positions, so suitable to the genius of the Romish religion, and
so beneficial to their own order.

It was an account of this holy league which the French en-

voy brought to Mary, conjuring her, at the fame time, in the
name of the King of France, and the Cardinal of Lorrain, not to
restore the leaders of the Protcltants in her kingdom to power
and favour, at the very time when the Catholic Princes were
combined to deflroy that fel, in all the countries of Europe l.

Popery is a fpccies of false religion, remarkable for the ltrung

possession it takes of the heart. Contrived by men of deep in-
fight into the human charaelcr, and improved by the experience
and observation of many lucceflive ages ; it arrived at lall to a
cegree of perfcdion, which no former )lyllm of fupcrflition had
ever attained. There is no power in the urdlerflanding, and no
palion in tile heart, to which it does not present oljcdls, adapted

* Good, vol. i. 224. 1\ KIci l, 325 Ap cnd. 167iI. 7 i
' man. lib. 37.

[l Mclv. 126.

D d ij

BooK IV. to rouse, and to interest them. Neither the love of plcafure,
r'"-w'" which, at that time, prevailed in the court of France, nor the
x566.

purfuitsofambition whichoccupied the court of Spain, had secured
them from the dominion of bigotry. Laymen, and courtiers,
were agitated with that furious and unmerciful zeal, which is
commonly confidered as peculiar to ecclesiastics; and Kings and
Ministers thought themselves bound, in conscience, to extirpate
the Proteftant-docrine. Mary herself was deeply tintured with
all the prejudices of Popery; a passionate attachment to thlat super-
flition is visible in every part of her charater, and runs through
all the scenes of her life: Ihe was devoted, too, with the utmost
fubmiiflon to the princes of Lorrain, her uncles ; and had been ac-
customed, from her infancy, to liften to all their advices, with a
filial refpeca. The profped of reitoring the public exercise of
her own religion, the pleasure of complying with her uncles, and
the hopes of gratifying the French Monarch, whom the present
situation of her affairs in England made it necessary to court,
counterbalanced all the prudent considerations which had former-
ly weighed with her. She instantly joined the confederacy,
which had been formed for the deflrusion of the Protestants,
and altered the whole plan of her condut, with regard to Murray
and his adherents *.

To this fatal resolution may be imputed all the subsequent ca-

lamities of Mary's life. Ever since her return into Scotland,
fortune may be said to have been propitious to her, rather than
adverse ; and if her prosperity did not rife to any great height,
it had, however, suffered no considerable interruption. A thick
and fettled cloud of adversity, with few gleams of hope, and
none of real enjoyment, covers the remainder of her days.

A Parlia. The effects of the new system, which Mary had adopted, were
ntcil called soon visible. The time of the prorogation of Parliament was
to atta; lt
the exiled fhortciied and by a new proclamation, the i2tlh of March was
nobles. fixed for its meeting --. Mary resolved, without any further de-

lay, to proceed to the attainder of the rebel Lords, and, at the
fane time, determined to take frome ftps towards the re-efabliih-
ment of the Romilh religion in Scotland .. The Lords of the

See Appendix, No XIV ' f Keith, ,36.
It is not on the anthority of Inox alone, that we charge the Queen with

the design of re-clt;blilhinglhe tlomai Catholic religion. lIc, indeed, assert.
that the altars, which llhoullI have beecn ercctle in the Chnrch of St. Giles were
already provided, 394. . 1. Mary herlilf, in a letter to the Archbifliop of Gl:af
gow her Amnbaflador in France acknowledges, " that in that Parliament, flic in-
tended to have done some good, with rcfpca to restoring the old religion,"

Articles were chosen, as usual, to prepare the business which .was BOK IV.
to come before the Parliament. They were all persons in whom -
the Queen could confide, and bent to promote her designs. The
ruin of Murary and his party seemed now inevitable, and the
danger of the Reformed Church imminent, when an event unex-
petedly happened, which saved both. If we regard either the And pre.
barbarity of that age, when such ats of violence were common, the conl1pi
or the mean condition of the unhappy person mho suffercd, the racyagain.f
event is little remarkable; but if we reflet upon the circum- Rizio.
fiances with which it was attended, or upon the consequences
which followed it, it appears extremely memorable; and the rife
and progress of it deserve to be traced with great care.

Darnly's external accomplifhlrents had excited that sudden and Darnly

loles tile

violent paflion which raised him to the throne. But the qualities oiaet'h 'r-
of his mind corresponded ill with the beauty of his person. Of fcaioa.
a weak understanding, and without experience, conceited at the
fame time of his own abilities, and ascribing his extraordinary
success entirely to his diflinguifhed merit. All the Queen's favour
made no impreflion on such a temper. All her gentleness could
not bridle his imperious and'ungovernable spirit. All her atten-
tion to place about him persons capable of direcaing his conduct,
could not preserve him from rahf and imprudent ations *. Fond
of all the amusements, and even prone to all the vices of youth, he
became, by degrees, careless of her person, and a firanger to her
company. To a woman, and a Oueen, such behaviour was in-
tolerable. The lower she had stooped to raise him, his behaviour
appeared the more ungenerous and criminal. And in proportion
to the strength of her firlt affeAion, was the violence with which
her disappointed paflion now operated. A few months after the
marriage, their domestic quarrels began to be observed. The ex-
travagance of Darnly's ambition gave rife to tlefe. Innlead of
being satisfied with that itretch of power, by which Mary had
conferred on him the title of King, and admitted him to a share

Keith, 331. 2. The Spiritual Lords, i.e. the Popinh ecclc.iatics, ha;l, by her
autllority, refumred their ancient place in that aflcnlmly, ibid. 3. She had join-
ed the confederacy at I:lyonnc, Keith, Append. 167. 4. She allowed mats to
he cclebrated in dillftercIt parts of the Iingdom, ibid. and detclared tilat si!
xould have malls ftie for all men who \would hear it, Good. vol. i. ;7.1.
5. Blackevwood, wi wa:s frllnii.ed by the Arcllilllol, of Glali(w witl n;tceill;
for writing his .\li t- lt\ ' Iti n l . I.AI'IE, asirmums that the: ( c cll iontcnil t 1 h:l.':
procured, in this larliasilament, it' not ie, r.ee-hll.ililhmlcnt of li, t;ith.i';l' c rell-
Wioll, at leIi foioi ttellilng for tie ( l:e of C;ttlloli s, Jcl,). vol ii. . .

: Good vol i. l2.;.

BooK IV. in the adminiflration, he denanded the Crown Matrimonial witlL
t-' moll infolcnt importunity *. And though Mary alleged that
1566. this gift was beyond her power, and that the authority of Parlia-

ment must be intcrpofed to bellow it, he wanted either under-
flanding to comprehend, or temper to admit so just a defence
and often renewed and urged his request.

Sur'eas Ri- Rizio, whom the King had at si-rs taken into great confidence,
zio to be tilhe
c3;; of it. did not humour him in these follies. By this, he incurred Henry's

difpleafurc; and as it was impossible for Mary to behave towards
her hulband witl) the ftme affection, which diflinguilhed the firll
and lhappy days of their union, he imputed this coldness, not to
his own behaviour, \vhich had so well merited it, but to the infi-
nuations of Rizio. Mary's ownV conduct confirmed and ltrengthen-
cd these iifpicions. She treated this stranger with a familiarity,
and admitted him to a ilare in her confidence, to which neither
his firl condition, nor the office he had lately bellowed upon him,
gave him any title. He was perpetually in her presence, inter-
meddled in every bufi ness, and, together with a few favourites,
was the companion of all her private amusements. The haughty
lpirit of Darnly could not Lear the interference of such an upstart.
And impatient of any delay, and unreltrained by any scruple, he
inilantly resolved to get rid of him by violence.

Riziolihtcd At the fame time, another design, which took its rife from very

-'-;e'l p different motives, was carrying on againfl the life of Rizio. Mor-
h-. cxiled ton, Ruthvlen. Lindsay, and MIaitland, were the contrivers of it.

nc.es In all former commotions they had been itrictly united with Mur-

ray, though in the late insurrection they had deserted him, for va-
rious reasons. MIorton was nearly allied to the family of Angus,
and during the minority of the present Earl, aCed as Chief of tlhe
name of Douglas. Ruthven was married to the King's aunt.
Lindsay's wife was cf the fame blood. All thcfe had warmly con-
curred with the Queen in promoting a marriage, which did so much
honour to the hloufe of D)uglas, and naturally expected, that under
a King of their own blood, the chief management of affairs would
lIe committed to them. Maitland, with his uuial l'gacity, fore-
f'awX that i\Iurray's opposition to the match would prove dangerous
::'d incffectual; but whoever ruled at court, lie loped, by his dcx-
tciitv and t-lclts, to render hlinmclf ncceflary and of importance.
'iiey were all equally dilippointed in their expclations. Tlie
King's lceadllrong temper rendered hin incapable of advice. lThe

C-iclln could not help diltrufling miii \\lio h;'d been so long alnd

'o intimately conneced wiith Murray, and gave herself up entirely Booi; IV.
to those Counsellors who complied with all her inclinations. TIhe.
return of that nobleman and his followcrs was therefore the only i566.
event which could reltore Morton, Maitland, and their aflociates
to their former afcendcnt over the Q(een's councils. For this
reason, nothing could be more mortifying to them, than the refo-
lution which Mary had taken to treat the exiles with rigour.
This they imputed to Rizio, who, after he had engaged to aid
Miurray with all his interell, was now the molt aAive inlfrument
in promoting the mcafi'rcs which were concerted for the ruin of
that nobleman. This oflicious zeal completed the diiguit which
the nobles had conceived againit him, and inspired them with
thoughts of vengeance, in no wife suitable to jullice, to humanity,
or to their own dignity.

Vhlile they were ruminating upon their cllchmc, the King corn- 'llrycom-

municated his resolution to be avcnged of Rizio to Lord Ruthvcn, h:ie i,'it-ll
and implored his affiflance, and that of his .icnds, towards the der hiim.
execution of this dciigl. Nothing could be more acceptable to
them than this overture. They filw at once all the advantages
they would reap, by the concurrence of iuch an aflbciatc. Their
own private revenge upon Rizio would pats, they hoped, for an
act of obedience to the King; and they did not despair of obtailini-
the refloration of their banilhed friends, and security for the Pro-
tellant religion, as the price of their compliance witl his will.

But as Henry was no less fickle, than rall, they hesitated fur

tome time, and determined to advance no farther, ; ithout takinri
every poflible precaution for their owln !fcety. Tllcy did lot, in
the mcan time, susser the King's resentment to abate. Morton,
who was inferior to no man in that intriguing age, in all the arts
of insinuation and address, took the young Prince uinder lis
management. HIe wrought upon his ruling paflion, ambition, to
obtain the Matrimonial Crown. -le rep-reented Rizio's credit
with the Queen to be the chief and only oblaicle to his flcccls ii
that demand. 'hlis minion, alone, le field, pofleilcd her confi-
dence ; and out of colnllailitnce to himi, her lilljcCts, lier nobility,
and even her husband, were excluded from any pl)rtciipation )o
her secret councils. Under the appearance of a confidence merely
political, he insinuatecd, and the King perhaps believed, thlat u
familiarity of anothlier and mor'e criminal nature miigbt ble c.nccal -
cd *. Such various and complicated ions ragc in the lKing's

* (l f a'll oI Ili ilori:tLI;, Bluci Ian ;l ILm :tvr n'wely aCt lil ; iry

, l, ' a crimiI Iil
lovei ibr lIizio, 340, ,;. lt. i llij}ltljy i:iillltl:cs thlit lih ll it lhliicioln w, L ii

Bool IV. bosom, with the utmost fury. He became more impatient thari

- ever of any delay, and even threatened to ilrike the intended
. blow with his own hand. At lait, preliminaries were fettled or

both fides, and articles for their mutual security agreed upon. The
King engaged to prevent the attainder of the banished Lords,
to consent to their return into Scotland, to obtain for them an
ample remifflon of all their crimes, and to fapport, to the ut-
most of his power, the religion which was now established in the
kingdom. On their parts, they undertook to procure the Matri-
monial Crown for Henry, to secure his right of flcceflion, if
the Queen flould die before him, and to defend that right to the
uttermost, against whatever person mhould presume to dispute it;
and if either Rizio, or any other person, should happen to be kill-
ed in prosecuting of the defGgn, the King promised to acknowledge
himself to be the author of the enterprise, and to. protect those
who were embarked in it *.

Perpetrate Nothing now remained but to concert the plan of operation, to
that cinme chufe the a&ors, and to assign them their parts in perpetrating
i n the
Queen'sPa- this detestable crime. Every circunftance here paints and cha-
lace. ra&erizes the manners and men of that age, and fills us with hor-

ror at both. The place, chosen for committing such a deed, was
the Queen's bed-chamber. Though Mary was now in the sixth
month of her pregnancy, and though Rizio might have been
seized clfewhere, without any difficulty, the King pitchedupon

tertained, 391. Melivil, in a converfationxvith the Queen, intimatesthat he was
afraid her familiarity wvith Rizio might be liable to mifconftruClion, I so. The
King hi msel f seens, both by Melvil's account, and by his expoflulation with the
Queen, which Rutliven mentions, to have given credit to these suspicions, Melv.
127. Keith, Append. 123, 124. But, in oppofilion to these suspicions, and they
are nothing more, we may observe that Raulctthe Queen's French Secretary was
,lifiniTcd from her service, and Rizio advanced to that office in December 1564.
Keith, 263. It was in c6nfequence of this preferment, that he acquired his great
credit with the Queen, Melv. lo7. Darnly arrived in Scotland about two months
aiscr, Kcith, 6 9. The Queen immediately conceived for him a pallion, vwhich
hadl all the fymTloms of genui ne and violent love. Rizio aided this paiion, ahd
l.rio:.cd :hle mar!iage with all his interell, Mclv. ilI. During folne months
a!~: r the mam r'iao.s, tllh Queel's fondnel:s for Darnly continued; She soon proved
Vwith childt. From this enuCmration of circimrllanccs, it appears almost impof-
iibl, tlhatil thle C¢llcll, nllc.{ s\e tlipi:rc her to ilve been a woman utterly alandon-
CL. Collid c l'rry nn alny cr;minil:l intrigue witih Riz.io. But the filcnce of Ran-
dcoli l t.h; li-,t!il ]eflilein, :iman ;I1 ul)lnd ly readyto mention, and to ggra-
:'- ,l ary': fill, '. nl,\wllo dIt:s n1ot once illl;uate that lelr confidence in Rizio
c ..::,.!J. 'zny) tliiig criminal, is in iiclT a flifficlent vindication of her inno-

'C Gooi. vsl, i. l(/>.

this place, that he might enjoy the malicious pleasure of reproach- BOOK IV;
ing Rizio with his crimes before the Queen's face. The Earl '-
of Morton, the Lord High Chancellor of the kingdom, under- 5
took to diret an enterprise, carried on iri defiance of all the laws
of which he was bound to be the guardian. The Lord Ruthven,
who had been confined to his bed for three months, by a very
dangerous distemper, and who was flill so feeble that he could
scarce walk, or bear the weight of his own armour, [was intrust-
ed with the executive part; and while he himself needed to be
supported by two men, he came abroad to commit a murder in
the presence of his Sovereign.

On the 9th of March, Morton entered the court of the palace

with an hundred and sixty men; and without noise, or meeting
with any resistance, seized all the gates. While the Qucen was
at supper with the Countess of Argyle, Rizio, and a few donmelics,
the King suddenly entered the apartment, by a private passage.
At his back, was Ruthven, clad in complete armour, and with
that ghastly and horrid look which long fickiefs had given him.
Three or four of his most trusty accomplices followed him. Such
an unusual appearance alarmed those who were present. Rizio
inftanly apprehended that he was the vicim at whom the blow
was aimed; and in the utmost consternation retired behind the
Queen, of whom he laid hold, hoping that the reverence due to
her person might prove some protection to him. The conspirators
had proceeded too far to be restrained by any consideration of
that kind. Numbers of armed men ruflied into the chamber.
Ruthven drew his dagger, and with a furious mien and voice, com-
manded Rizio to leave a place of which he was unworthy, and
which he had occupied too long; Mary employed tears, and entrea-
ties, and threatenings, to save her favourite. But, notwithstanding
all these, he was torn from her by violence, and before he could be
dragged through the next apartment, the rage of his enemies put
an end to his life, piercing his body with fifty-fix wounds *.
. Athol, Huntly, Bothwell, and other confidents of the Queen,
who lodged in the palace, were alarmed at the uproar, and filled
with the utmofl terror on their own account ; but either no vio-
lence was intended against them, or the conspirators durfi not flied
the noblest blood in the kingdom, in the fame illegal manner with
which they had ventured to take the life of a (lranger. Some
of them were difmiltcd, and others made their escape.

Sec Appclndix1 No XV.

Ec

1OOKI IV. The conlpirators, in the mean time, kept poffeflion of the par

----, lace, and guarded the Queen with the uttnoft care. A proclama-

Trh cn- tion was published by theKing, prohibiting the Parliament to
fine the meet on the day appointed; and measures were taken by him for
Qieen her- preventing any tumult in the city*. Murray, Rothes, and their

followers, being informed of every ftep taken against Rizio, arriv-
ed at Edinburgh next evening. Murray was graciously received
both by King and Q-en. By the former, on account of the
Articles which had been agreed upon between them; by the
the latter. because she hoped to prevail on him, by gentle treat-
ment, not to take part with the murderers of Rizio. Their
power she still felt, and dreaded ; and the insult which they had
offered to her authority, and even to her person, so far exceeded
any crime flhe could impute to Murray, that in hopes of wreaking
her vengeance on them, she became extremely willing to be re-
conciled to him. The obligations, however, which Murray lay
under to men, who had hazarded their lives on his account, en-
gaged him to labour for their safety. The Queen, who scarce
had the liberty of choice left, was persuaded to admit Morton and
Ruthven into her presence, and to grant them the promise of
pardon in whatsoever terms they should deem necessary for their
own security.

The King, meanwhile, flood a/toniihed at the boldness and

success of his own enterprise, and uncertain what course to hold,

Bnt site The COeen observed his irresolution, and availed herself of it.
gaia the
kin*-, and She employed all her art to'difengage him from his new aflbci-
niakes her ates. His consciousness of the insult which he had offered to so
elcape.

illustrious a benefadcrefs, inspired him with uncommon facility
and complifaince. In spite of all the warnings he received to
dirtrufl the Queen's artifices, she prevailed on him to dismiss the
guards which the conspirators had placed on her person.. And
that fame night he made his escape along with her, attended by
three perrons only, and retired to Dunbar. The scheme of their
flight had been communicated to Huntly and Bothwell, and they
wvere quickly joined by them, and several other of the nobles.
Bothwell's e(late lay in that corner of the kingdom, and his fol-
lowers crowded to their Chief, in such numbers, as soon enabled
the Qeen to set the power of the conspirators at defiance.

This ifdden flight filled them with inexprefible coniternation.

rsreconcil- They had obtained a promise of pardon; and it now appeared,
cld i'ibl x. from the Q ens condu&, th

cat nothing more was intended by
Lied noblecil .

"Keiltb, Aplpend. ia6,

this promise, than to amuse them, and to gain time. They ven- BooK IV.
tured, however, to demand the accompliliment of it; but their -

5J66.

messenger was detained a prisoner, and the Queen advancing to-
wards Edinburgh, at the head of eight thousand men, talked in
the highest strain of resentment and revenge. She had the ad-
dress, at the fame time, to separate Murray and his associates
from the conspirators against Rizio. Sensible that the union of
these parties would form a confederacy, which might prove for-
midable to the Crown, flle expressed great willingness to receive
the former into favour; towards the latter, flic declared her-
self inexorable. Murray and his followers were no less willing
to accept of pardon, on her own terms. The conspirators againll
Rizio, deprived of every resource, and incapable of refillance,
fled precipitately to Newcaflle, having thus changed situations ?March ra.
with Murray and his party, who left that place a few days before.

No man so remarkable for wisdom, and even for cunning, as The L,,,:fi.i
the Earl of Morton, ever engaged in a more unfortunate enter- raters a-

gaint ll izio

prise. Deserted basely by the King, who now denied his know- tfy ,ito
ledge of the conspiracy, by public proclamations; and abandoned EFl1and-
ungenerously by Murray and his party*, lie was obliged to fly
from his native country, to resign the highcft office, and to part
with one of the moD opulent fortunes in the kingdom.

On her return to Edihburgh, Mary began to proceed against

those concerned in the murder of Rizio. with the utmolt rigour
of law. But, in praise of her cleniency, it mull be oblerved,
that only two pcrfons, and these of no considerable rank, suffered
for this crime -,

In this conspiracy there is one circumstance, which, though

somewhat detached, deserves not to be forgotten. In the confe-
deracy between the King and the conspirators, the real intention
of which was assassination, the preserving of the Reformed church
is, nevertheless, one of the most conliderable articles; and the
fame men who were preparing to violate one of the firll duties of
morality, affeLted the highelt regard for religion. iliory re-
lates these extravagancies of the human mind, without pretend-
ing to justify, or even to account for thenm and regulating her
own opinions by the eternal and immut:lble laws ofjuliice and of
virtue, points out such inconlifltncics, as features of the Ige
which fle dcfcribes, and records tllhell fr the inllru&ion of agel
to come.

lMelv. 130. 1 Keith, Appendix l3'", 3,4.

E c ij

Bool IV. As this is the second instance of deliberate assassination which

has occurred, and as we lhall hereafter meet with many other

x 566.

An account intfances of the fame crime, the causes which give rife to a prac-
ofthe fre- tice so shocking to humanity, deserve our particular attention.
tafallfl- Resentment is, for obvious and wife reasons, one of the strongest
tionsin that passions in the human mind. The natural demand of this pafllon
age. is, that the person who feels the injury fliould himself inflic

the vengeance due on that account. The permitting this, how-
ever, would have been deftrudive to society; and puniliment
would have known no bounds, either in severity, or in duration.
For this reason, in the very infancy of the social tfate, the sword
was taken out of private hands, and committed to the magif-
trate. But, at first, while laws aimed at restraining, they really
strengthened the principle of revenge. The earliest and most
simple puniflment for crimes was retaliation; the offender forfeit-
ed limb for limb, and life for life. The payment of a compen-
fation to the person injured, succeeded to the rigour of the former
institution. In both there, the gratification of private revenge
was the obje& of law; and he who suffered the wrong, was the
only person who had a right to pursue, to exact, or to remit the
puniihment. While laws allowed such full scope to the revenge
of one party, the interests of the other were not negleced. If
the evidence of his guilt did not amount to a full proof, or if he
reckoned himself to be unjultly accused, the person to whom a
crime was imputed had a right to challenge his adversary to
single combat, and on obtaining the vitory, vindicated his own
honour. In almost every considerable cause, whether civil or cri-
minal, arms were appealed to, in defence, either of the innocence,
or the property of the parties. Justice had geldom occasion to
use her balance ; the sword alone decided every contest. The
passion of revenge was nourished by all these means, and grew,
by daily indulgence, to be incredibly firong. Mankind became
habituated to blood, not only in times of war, but of peace;
and from this, as well as other causes, contraced an amazing
ferocity of temper, and of manners. This ferocity, however,
made it necessary to difcournge the trial by combat; to abolinl
the payment of compcnrttions in criminal cafes ; and to think of
some milder method of terminating difputcs concerning civil
rights. The punilhmnints for crimes became more fcvere, and
the regulations concerning property more fixed ; but the Princes,
whose province it was to inllitl the one, and to enforce the other,
pofl'ficd little power. Great offenders (dcijifcd their authority;

mlaller ones sheltered themselves under the jurifdi&ion of thofc, BOOK IV.
from whose protetion they expeAed impunity. The adminiftra-

566.

tion of justice was extremely feeble and dilatory. An attempt
to pnnifh the crimes of a Chieftain, or even of his vassals, often
excited rebellions, and civil wars. To nobles, haughty and in-
dependent, among whom the causes of discord were many and
unavoidable, who were quick in discerning an injury, and impa-
tient to revenge it; who esteemed it infamous to submit to an
enemy, and cowardly to forgive him; who confidered the right of
punishing those who had injured them, as a privilege of their order,
and a mark of independency; such flow proceedings were ex-
tremely unfatisfa&ory. The blood of their adversary was, in
their opinion, the only thing which could wafll away an affront;
where that was not flied, their revenge was disappointed, their
courage became fufpeded, and a slain was left on their honour.
That vengeance, which the impotent hand of the Magistrate could
not inflict, their own could easily execute; under governments
so feeble, men aflumed, as in a state of nature, the right of judg-
ing, and redrefling their own wrongs. And thus assassination, a
crime of all others the most deftru&ive to society, came not only
to be allowed, but to be deemed honourable.

The history of Europe, during the 14th and I 5th centuries,

abounds with detestable instances of this crime. It prevailed chief-
ly among the French and Scots, between whom there was a close
intercourse at that time, and a surprising resemblance in their na-
tional charaters. In I407, the only brother of the King of France
was murdered publicly in the fireets of Paris, and inltead of pu-
nifling this horrible acion, an eminent lawyer was allowed to
plead in defence of it before the Peers of France, and avowedly to
maintain the lawfulness of assassination. In 1417, it required all
the eloquence and authority of the famous Gerfon, to prevail on
the Council of Conflance to condemn this proposition, " That there
are some cafes in which affafination is a virtue more meritorous
in a Knight than in a Squire, and more meritorious in a King
than in a Knight *." The number of eminent persons who were mur-
dered in France and Scotland, on account either of private, or po-
litical, or religious quarrels, during the I 5th and x6th centuries, is
almofi incredible: Even after thoee causes, which first gave rife
to this barbarous pracice were removed; after the juriftliflion of
Magiflrates, and the authority of laws were better cflabliflied, and

L'E\vallt. Ililt. Conc, de Confl.

BOOK IV. become more universal; after the progress of learning and philo-

ó---- sophy had polished the manners, and humanized the minds of men,
566. this crime continued in some degree. It was towards the close

of the I7th century before it disappeared in France. The addi-
tional vigour, which the royal authority acquired by the acceflion
of James VI. to throne of England, seems to have put a flop to it
in Scotland.

The influence, however, of any national custom, both on the

understanding and on the heart, and how far it may go towards
perverting or extinguifliing moral principles of the greatelt import.
ance, is remarkable. The authors of. tbofe ages have perfedly im-
bibed the sentiments of their cotemporaries, with regard to affafi-
nation; and they, who had leisure to reflet, and to judge, appear
to be no more lhocked at this crime, than the persons cwho com-
mitted it during the heat and impetuosity of paflion. Buchanan
relates the murder of Cardinal Beatoun, and of Rizio, without
expressing those feelings which are natural to a man, or that in-
dignation which became an historian *. Knox, whose mind was
fiercer and more unpolifhed, talks of the death of Bcatoun and of
the Duke of Guise, not only without cenfurc, but with the utmost
exultation t. On the other hand, the Bilhop of Ross mentions the
assassination of the Earl of Murray, with some degree of applause :..
Blackwood dwells upon it with the mofi indecent triumph, and
ascribes it direAly to the hand of God 1|. Lord Ruthven, the prin-
cipal ator in the conspiracy against Rizio, wrote an account of it
some flort time before his own death, and in all his long narra-
tive there is not one expreflion of regret, or one symptom of com-
puntion for a crime no less dishonourable, than barbarous **'. Mor-
ton, equally guilty of the fame crime, entertained the fame senti-
ments concerning it; and in his last moments, neither he himself,
nor the miniflcrs who attended him, seem to have confidered it as
an adtion which called for repentance; even then he talks of Da-
vid'sf lanuglter as coolly, as if it had been an innocent or commend-
able deed -f-. The vices of another age allonifh and fllock us;
the vices of our own become familiar, and excite little horror.
We return from this digrcffion to the course of the hiflory.

.0 rl The charm, which had at first attached the Queen to Darnly,

Qticen's hla- and held them for tonic time in an happy union, was now entire-
llred to
tDrnly in- ly dissolved ; and love no longer covering his follies and vices swith
creali;cs.

* Buchan. 29.q, 345- t Knox, 334 .; Andcrr, 3. 8. Jcb. 2. 2. i6
** iuitlh, Appendc . 19. I' t Cravf. Mcm. Append.

its friendly veil, they appeared to Mary in their full dimension and BooKI.V.
deformity *. Though Henry publified a proclamation, disclaim-
ing any knowledge of the conspiracy against Rizio, the Queen I66
was fully convinced, that he was not only accessory to the con-
trivance, but to the commission of that odious crime t. That very
power, which, with liberal and unfufpicious fondness, mfe had
conferred upon him, he had employed to insult her authority, to
limit her prerogative, and to endanger her person. Such an out-
rage, it was impossible any woman could bear, or forgive. Cold
civilities, secret dilfruft, frequent quarrels, succeeded to their for-
mer transports of affection and confidence. The Queen's favours
were no longer conveyed through his hands. The crowd of ex-
peAants ceased to court his patronage, which they found to avail
so little. Among the nobles, some dreaded his furious temper,
others complained of his perfidioufiefs ; and all of them despised
the weakness of his understanding, and the inconflancy of his
heart. The people thcrnfclves observed some parts of his conduct,
which little suited the dignity of a king. Addi&ed to drunken-
ness, beyond what the manners of that age could bear, and indulg-
ing irregular passions, which even the licentioufinefs of youth could
not excuse, he, by his indecent behaviour, provoked the Queen
to the utmost; and the passions which it occasioned, often forced
tears from her eyes both in public and in private 1. Her aversion
for him incrcafed every day, and could be no longer concealed.
IHe was often ablent from court, appeared there with little splendor,
and was trufled with no power. Avoided equally by those who
endeavoured to please the QOeen, who favoured Morton and his as-
fociates, or who adhered to the house of Hamilton; he was left
almolt alone in a negleced and unpitied solitude ~.

About this time a new favourite grew into great credit with The rife or
the Queen, and soon gained an ascendent over her heart, which Bothwell's

favour.

encouraged his enterpriling genius to- form designs that proved
fatal to himself, and the occasion of all Mary's fublequent misfor-
tunes. This was James Hepburn Earl of Bothwell, the head of
an ancient family, and by his extensive poffcllions and numerous
vassals, one of the most powciful noblemen in the kingdom. Even
in that turbulent age, when lb many vail projecs were laid open
to an aspiring mind, and invited it to aStion, no man's ambition
was more daring than B3othwell's, or had recourse to bolder or

Sec Appendix, No. YVI. tl Keii, 356. t Ibid. 329.
§ M51d. 131, &C.

BooK V. more singular expedients for obtaining power. When almost eve-
i66. ry person of ditinclion in the kingdom, whether Papist or Prd.

teftant, had joined the Congregation in opposing the dangerous
encroachments of the French upon the liberties of the nation, he,
though an avowed Protestant, adhered to the Queen Regent, and
a&ed with vigour on her fide. The success which attended the
arms of the Congregation having obliged him to retire into France,
he was taken into the Queen's service, and continued with her
till the time of her return into Scotland *. From that period,
every ftep of his conduct towards Mary was remarkably dutiful;
and amidst all the shiftings of faction, we scarcely ever find him
holding any course which could be offensive to her. When Mur-
ray's proceedings with regard to her marriage gave umbrage to
the Queen, (he recalled Bothwell from that banishment into
which (he had with relu6tance driven him, and confidered his
zeal and abilities as the most powerful supports of her authority.
When the conspirators against Rizio seized her person, he be-
came the chiefinftrument of recovering her liberty, and served
her, on that occalion, with so much fidelity and success, as made
the deepest impreflion on her mind, and greatly increased the
confidence which ihe had hitherto placed in him f. Her grati-
tude loaded him with marks of her bounty; flie raised him to of-
sices of profit and of trust, and tranfa&ted no matter of importance
without his advice :t. By complaisance and assiduity, he confirm-
ed and fortified these dispositions of the QOeen in his favour, and
insensibly paved the way towards that vast project, which his im-
moderate ambition had perhaps already conceived, and which, iri
.spite of many difficulties, and at the expence of many crimes, he
at last accompli/hed.

The hour of the Queen's delivery liow approached. As her

palace was defended only by a slender guard, it seemed impru-
dent to expose her person, at that time, to the insults she might
susser in a kingdom torn by factions, and prone to mutiny. For
this reason, the Privy Council advised the Queen to fix her rcfi-
dence in the castle of Edinburgh, the strongest fortress in the
kingdom, and the molt proper place for the security of her per-
lonll. In order to render this security more perseEt, Mary la-
bourecl to cxtinguihf the domellic feuds which divided some of
the principal nobles. Murray and Argyle were exasperated a-
gailut lIuntly and lotllhwll, by reciprocal and repeated injuries.

Anderlr. r. 9. *- Ibid, 1. p, 93. t Mclv. 133. Knox ,396.
liKeilth, ,

The Queen, by her authority and entreaties, effeted a recon- Booi 1V.
cilement among them, and drew from them a promise to bury L
their discords in everlalting oblivion. This reconcilement Mary 66
had so much at heart, that flic made it the condition on which
she again received Murray into favour *.

On the ipth of June, Mary was delivered of her only son nBrth oF

James, a Prince whofc birth was happy for the whole island, and James V l
unfortunate to her alone. His acce(flon to the throne of Eng-
land united the two divided kingdoms in one mighty monarchy,
and eflablifled the power of Great Britain on a firm foundation.
While fire, torn early from her son by the cruelty of her fate,
was never allowed to indulge those tender paflions, nor to tarfe
those joys which fill the heart of a mother.

Melvil was inflantly dispatched to London with an account of

this event. It struck iElizabeth, at sirs, in a sensible manner;
and the advantage and superiority which her rival had acquired
by the birth of a son, forced tears from her eyes. But before
Melvil was admitted to audience, fie had so far recovered the
command of herself, as to receive him not only with decency, but
with excessive cheerfulnels; and willingly accepted the invitation
which Mary gave her, to stand godmother to her son--.

As Mary loved splendor and magnificence, flhe resolved to ce-

lebrate the baptism of the young Prince with great pomp ; and
for that purpose sent invitations of the fame kind to the French
King, and to the Duke of Savoy, the uncle of her former hus-
band.

'The Qeen, on her recovery, discovered no change in her fen- Tlhe Queen
timents with refpeca to the King1:. The death of Rizio, and the c'tiuC'es
countenance he had given to an action so insolent and unjultifi- Darjilywiti

indiffrltier cc

able, were still frefll in her memory. She was frequently pen- andneglea'.
five and deje&ed 11. And though Henry sometimes attended at
Court, and accompanied her in her progrefles through different
parts of the kingdom, he met with little reverence from the no-
bles, while Mary treated him with the utmost refervc, and did
not susser him to poflefs any authority §. The breach between
them became every day more apparent* . Attempts were made
toward a reconcilement, particularly by Caflelnau the French Am-
baffador; but after such a violent rupture, it was found no cnafy
matter to bind tbe nuptial knot a-new; and though lie prevailed
on the King and Q ccn to palus two nights togetllchr l--, we may,

* Keithil,, 336. Aple. 19. 'o. *M lv1. 139. Sec Append. No. ZXVr.
! IbIdl. eim.. § Kii;,l3"'. MIl .'.
. - l cith, Append. 169. Ibid.

1. 1.

BOOtK IV. with great probability, pronounce this appearance of unio'ii, to
IS c66 which Caflelnau trulled, not to have been iincere; we know

with certainty that it was not lasing.

ler attach- Bothwell, all the vwhile, was the Q.een's prime confident.
111clt to
Bothwclll Without his participation no bufinel; was conciu ted, and no fa-
illcreacs. your betlowed. ''ogether with this afcelTdent over her councils,

Bothwell, if we may believe the cotelnporary hillorians, acquired
no less sway over her Ircart. But at what precise time, this am-
bitious Lord first allowed the fentimcnts of a lover to occupy the
place of that duty and rclec)e which a fubje owes his Sovereign
or when Mary, inltead of gratitude for his faithful services, felt
a paftion of another nature rilitlg in her bosom, it is no easy mat-
tcr to determine. Such delicate transitions of pafllon can be dif-
cerned only by those, who are adminted near the persons of the
parties, and who can view the secret orins of the heart with
calm and acute obfcrvation. Neither Knox nor Buchanan en-
joyed these advantages. Their hurhble station allowed them on-
ly a cdifant access to the Qieen and hee favourite. And the ar-
dour of their zeal, and tre violence of their prejudices, render
their opinions rafl, precipitate, and inaccurate. it is by the es-
f£cts of this reciprocal paflfion, rather than by their accounts of
it, that subsequent hillorians can judge of its reality.

Adventurous as Bothwell's project to gain thle Qeen' may ap-

pear, it vwas formed and carried on under very favourable cir-
cumlnances. MIary was youn;, gay, and affable. She po(ffcned
great sensibility of tem!-er, nd was capable of the utmost tcnder-
ness of affieRion. She had ;,aced her love on a very unworthy
objec, who requited it with ingratitude, and treated her witlr
ncglcet, with iniolcnce, and with brutality A11 these. lhe felt,.
and reiented. In this situation, the attention and complail:ancc
of a man, who had vindicated her authority, and protccld her
person ; -who entered into all her views, who fioothed all her pas-
lions, who watched and imnproved every opportunity of inlinuat..
ing his cdefign, and recommending his p:llion *, could scarce fai}
of making an inipreflion on a lieart of such a £ra.me as lk\ary's.

rTh. 1Vl'; 'The hnuglhty li)irit of Darnly, nulf 'd lup in llattery, anld tc-
r;1.'is t.; cEiiftonmed to coir.nidd. coul.. not bear tih contempt under whilcl;
1,.:'.'e a;.ot-
l.ild. lie lad-l. now r;il'lcn. nil ti,, it:te o' inl!lnilcancy to which h1 a

fia\w hiimflf reduced. Iut in ;l counltiv, w'icrt e was unliverl;il-
ly '..:tc.i ur '

clh;jiiCl, Ie: couIll n.l\ cr hope to t'rmi a party, whic!>

wol1id Icco:nd al;l :Itc:'npit le trighlt
mnql!c to rcov r po'vcr. I le

*

.X'nF. i.

i ;.
r'

add-ressed himself, thcrefore, to the Pope, and to the Kings of BooK IV.
France and Spain, with many profef[ions of his own zeal for the 6
Catholic religion, and with bitter complaints against the Qceen,
for neglecing to promote that interest *. And loon after, he
took a resolution, equally wild and desperate, of embarking on
board a flip, which he had provided, and of flying into foreign
parts. It is almolt inpoffible to form any satisfactory conjecture
concerning the motives which influence a capricious and irregu-
lar mind. He hoped, perhaps, to recommend himself to the Ca-
tholic Princes on the copItient, by his zeal for religion, and that
they would employ t!leir interest towards reinflating him in the
pofleflion of that power which he had lolt. Perhaps, he expct-
ed nothing more than the comfort of hiding the disgrace under
.which he was now fallen, among ftranlgcrs, lwho had never bee.n
witncffes of his former prosperity.

H-e communicated his delign to the French Ambassador Le lis cnpr;ci-

Croc, and to his falther the Earl of Lcnnox. 'They both cndea- out.
voured to diffunde him from it, but without fucccfs. Lennox,
who seems, as well as his ton, to have lofl the COeen's confi-
dence, and who, about this time, was seldom at court, inflantly
commlunicated the matter to her by a letter.' Henry, who had
rcfufed to accompany the Qicen from Stirling to -Edinburgh, was
likewise absent from court. Hle arrived there, however, on the
fame day flle received the account of his intended flight. IHe
was more than usually wayward and pcevill. He scruplcd to en-
ter the palace, unless certain Lord'; who attended the Q.een vwere
difmriffed. MAary was obliged to meet him without the gates. At
lall he fuflered her to conduct him into her own apartment. She
endeavoured to draw from him the reasons of the firange refolu-
tion vwhich he had taken, and to divert him from it. .But in spite
of all her arguments and entreaties, he remained silent and in-
flexible. Next day the Privy Council, by her *dirction, ex-
poiltited with him on the fIame head. He perlilted, however,
in his fullennces and obllinnacy ; and neither deigned to explain
ihe motives of his conduct, nor significd any intention of altering
it. As he left the apartment, lie tuined towards the Qtuen, and
told her, that l!he Ihould not fee his face again, for a long time.
A few days after, lie wrote to Ma:ry, and mentionted two thineis
as grounds of his dilull. She herself, he said, no longer admit-
ted himi into any confidence, and had deprived him of all powver;
and the nobles, after her example, trcated hilm withi open ni'glc.,

n IoIX, ,399.

F f ;j

BooK IV. so that he appeared in every place without the dignity and fplen-

dor of a King.

Mar5 en. Nothing could be more mortifying to Mary, than this intend-
Maiy en-
deavoursto ed flight of the King's, which would have spread the infamy of
intelded their domeflic quarrel all over Europe. Compassion for a Mo-
flight. narch who would then appear to be forced into exile by her ne-

glct and ill usage, might have disposed mankind to entertain fen-
timents concerning the caufcs of their difeord, little to her ad-
vantage. In order, therefore, to prepossess the minds of her al-
lies, and to screen her reputation from any censure with which
Darnly might endeavour to load it, the Privy Council transmit-
ted a narrative of this whole tranfaation, both to the King, and
to the Qecn Mother of France. It is drawn 'with great art, and
sets Mary's condu& in the mofl favourable point of light *

About this time, the licence of the borderers called for rcdrefs.

And Mary resolving to hold a court of justice at Jedburgh, the
inhabitants of several adjacent counties were summoned to attend
their Sovereign in arms, according to custom--. 1Bothwell was,
at that time, Lieutenant or Warden of all the marches, an office
among the most important in the kingdom; and though usually
divided into three diftin& governments, beflowed by the Queen's
favour upon him alone. In order to diiplay his own valour an.d
activity in the discharge of this trufi, lhe attempted to seize a gang
of banditti, vho, lurking among the marfles of Liddefdale, in-
fested the reft of the country. But while he was laying hold of
one of these desperados, he was wounded by him in several places,
so that his followers were obliged to carry him to Hermitage
Oaoberx6. cafllc. Mary instantly flew thither, with an impatience which

itrongly marks the anxiety of a lover, but little suited the digni-
ty of a Queen T. Finding that Bothwell was threatened witl
no dangerous fymptonu, she returne4 that fame day to Jedburgh.

"* Iith, 345, 347.- Ibid. 353. Good. vol. i. 301.

'The lillance between Jedburgh and Herinita;e is cighteen Scots miles,

tlhrough a country almolt impallble. ' The fearron of the year was far advanced.
Botllhcll Ltcms to have beel wounded in a scuffle, occasioned by the dcfrailr of
a tingle n, rathe tlhan in any open infllrlcaion of the borderers. It docs not
anpe.ir that thc 'tiecIIn v;. iittended tlilth.r by any considerable tr:in. Ihad any
miliitary opel1Lion becl nccl.a,!, as is pillol'itl, Good. vol. i. 30o. it wouldl
;ha:'. becln Ceixt.Z ly ilillprlir to ri.l; tlhe Qucll's pcrlbni in an expedition agiufl:
tlicii\-;. So luoU as LiLe ic .tecn found IotlhwcI.ll to be in no danger, lie illtilltly
rlftirilvl ; a;,ld aftcr this we llhei r nlo mere of dll illfi lrretio ll, norl have w' ally
procY thatl the riot. rs look rcl lgc in li .it sid. No other rcaroil blut ll;a v!ich
we l:ave oi1pr0uccdt, 1'.1ms luflicinlt to to;c:.It l'cr th.; Qicen'" condIti'.

The fatigue of such a journey, added to the anguish of mind fht Boox IV.
had suffered on Bothwell's account, threw her next morning into
a violent fever*. Her life was despaired of; but her youth, and -566-
the vigour of her constitution refitled the malignity of her disease.
During the continuance of the Queen's illness, the King, who
resided at Stirling, never came near Jedburgh t. And when he
afterwards thought fit to make his appearance there, he met with Nov. 5.
such a cold reception, as did not encourage him to make any long
flay :. Mary soon recovered strength enough to return along the
eastern borders to Dunbar.

While flie resided in this place, her attention was turned to-

wards England. Elizabeth, notwithllanding her promise, and
cvecn proclamations to the contrary, not only al!owed, but encou-
raged Morton and his associates to remain in England I1. Mary,
on the other hand, afforded her prote6tion to several lEnglifl fu-
gitives. Each QOeen watched the motions of the other with a
jealous attention, and secretly countenanced the practiccs, w;hich
were carrying on, to dillurb the adminiltration of her rival.

For this purpore, Mary's Ambanfador, Robert Mclvil, and her

other erniffaries, were extremely a&ive and successful. We may Thrie .n-
impute, in a good degree, to their intrigues, that spirit which ap- lifh Parlia-

nment fahv

peared in the Parliament of England, and which railed a florm o-:1,s il:ry's
th-t threatened Elizabeth's domeflic tranquillity, more than any p.1'r.c tfi
other event of her reign, and required all her art and dexterity ces-ion.
to allay it.

Elizabeth had now reigned eight years, without difcoverirng the

leafr intention to marry. A violent diftempcr, with which fle
had. lately been seized, having endangered her life, and alarmed
the nation with the profpe&t of all those calamities which are oc-
carloned by a disputed and dubious fucceflion; a motion was made
and eagerly liflened to in both houfcs, for addrelling the Queen,
to provide againfl any ifch danger in times to come, either by
lignifying her own rcfolution to marry, or by consenting to an
a ceflablifling the order of fuccellon to the Crown §. -Her love
to her fubjcqls, her duty to the public, her concern for poflcrity,
it vas pretended, not only called upon, lut obliged her to take
one ofl thee .leps. The insuperable aversion which file had all a-
llng clifcoverled or marri:ae, made it iiaiproi)b)lle that (lie would
helitlf the former; and if nie complied with the l:itlcr rc(luefll, no
;itle to the Crown could, witl any colour of juli:cc, he 1 L il op-

' Kcuih,.l 3 t, .3,. '1 Ibid. Aipcplld. , ..

1 : | ] 'Jx, .Zc,.

1;
2 '.i.I. v'-!. l!. i $. § D'" wx" JsrIm,'. (;;' .:Url. j-".

Bool IV. pcfition to that of the Scottish OQeen. Elizabeth was ifgaciou;
--- enough to fee the remotell consequences of this motion, and ob-
I56t. servcd tchem with the utmoil anxiety. Mary, by refusing so of-

ten to ratify the treaty of Edinburgh, had plainly intimated a
dcfign of eribracing the firfl promising opportunity for profccuting
her right to the Englifl Crown ; and by her secret negociations,
fle had gained many to favour her title *. All the Roman Ca-
tholics ardently wished for her acceflion. Her gentleness and hu-
manity had removed many of those apprehenfipns which the Pro-
tellants entertained on account of her religion. The court sac-
tion, which envied the power of Cecil, and endeavoured to wrefi
'the adminiiration out of his hanis, advanced the pretensions of
thle ScottifhI Queen in opposition to hilm. Tlhe union of the two
kingdoms was a dcfirable objec to all wife men in both nations;
an': the birth of the young Priince was a feclurity for the continu-
ance of this blefflig, acnd gave hopes of its perpetuity.

l; :ts a TUnder these circumrlanccs, and vwhile the nation was in fich

pr;,l.xxit. a temper, a parliamentary declaration of Mary's title would have
".'.tht "' beecn highly detrimental to Elizabeth. The present unsettled

fate of the fucceflion left much in her power. Her refcntmen:
alone miglit have gone far towards excluding any of the colmpCti-
tors from tle Crown ; and the dread of this had hitherto restrain-
cd, and overa;wced the ambition of the Scottish QOeen. But if
tlis check flould be removed, Ly t]he legal aclknowledgment of
her title, Mary wouldl be at full liberty to purfuc her dangerous
designs, and to ad without fear or refrrve. Her purtizans were
already meditating fcl-iemes f.r infuFrit, ons in different parts or
the kingdom --; and an ac of PaTrlianment, recognizing tne rights
of that Princess, whose pretenflons they favoured, would -have

ccen nothing less than a fit;n;l to arms; and, notwithflanding
.lizaebeth's jult title to the affetions of her subje&s, might have
fialkcn and endangered her throne.

lr \- \:While this matter remained in fiifp.nce in botll louses, an ac-

,(; s

[i conCit Oir it w

i s traniiritted to rvary by lMelvil her Ambafiador.

'i-l'"';'' rAs ile clidl not wanlt advocates for lher right, even among those
LI:,')'. v.ho . s'rc near Eliza!et!l's perCon, tie endeavoured to cultivate.

til dl'jjipoftion which a)lpcart'd towards i:cttling

tlhe right of fuc-

cco.iit ill lier Itvour, by a letter t,, the Privy CounFrllors of E ng-
]' id . Slic (cxprciled in it a grateful liielc of ]'.li.zeth's fricnld-
liip, sl:icli (lle cliclly afcribcs to the ir good oiliccs, with tliri
Y',crc(.in, in ler behalf. Sh'c elclarcld licr rc!Oultiion to live in

*NIclv. 13ó.· -I-Ullid. 1.17.

perpetuil anity with England, without urging or pursuing lier B.)O IV.
claim upon the Crown, any farther than fliould be agreeable to the '- --
Queen. Bult,, at the fame time, as her right of-fuccefflon was un- 15'-(
doubted, fie hoped it would be examined with candour, and judged
of witli impartiality. The nobles who attended her wrote to the
Engliffi Privy Council in the fkme strain *. Mary artfully gave
these letters the air of being rothiing more than a declaration of
her own, and of her fliljcds gratiti.de towards Elizabeth. But
as fle could not be ignorant of the jeaPoufy and fear with which
Elizabeth obf5:r:ecd the proceedings of Parliament, a letp so un-
common as this, of one Prince's entering into public correfpon-
dence with the Privy Counfl-ellors of another, could not be other-
wife construed than as taken with an intention to encourage til'
spirit which had already been raiid am:ong the E]ng'lili. In this
light it seems to have a!ppered to E'lizabeth hcrrelf-t-. But the
disposition of her people reindering it necefln;ry to treat IIary's
person with great decency, and her title with much regard, ftiL
mentioned it to her only in the fifteit language.

Nothing, however, could be a more cruel lmortification to a

Princess of Elizabetb's charaeier, than the temper which both
hotufes of Parliament discovered on this occasion. She bcrnt ai!
her policy to defeat, or el!hde the motion. After ailou'i:In the
firil fumes and lheat of their ze:l to evaporate, flie called into her
pref'nce a certain number of each ioufe. She !ob:hf d and caret- i..i.l, :.
Fed them; lhe threatened and promised; fli remitted uiies ltfid :e,.
wliich were due; and refuiled thoue wliich w re ofi'red ; and, in i'l'j:li ,,.
the end, prevailed to have this formidable motion put ut'F for tilat
l i lon. IHappily for her, the colduc't of the Scotti:h Q.,cecn, and
th mllisfortities which cbfel her, prevented the reviv;l oft' 1ll a
itiotlon in any future Parliam nt :t.

AMc:'n time, in order to pre!crve the reputation o inmpartiality,

and lthltt llie might not drive l.lary into any dei erate mniaic'ur, n--
conmriitted to the Tower one Thornton. who had lpuliismed Ibre-
tlhing derogatory to the right of the Scottiill line[ ; and ligiiiict
her clilp)leafure a::aiiti a member es t!:e f' of (oirmmins, \\i,
i:iezed, by Ilone words in a lflcech, to ,l..ac- at JVi'ry r.

A nidlil all her otiher cares, PlM;ry was ever Illicit,.us to p)-oniot-

tle .intcrcl i of that rcliiiun whlicl il!e I'rof'fecd. ''lie re-cliablithli
ni·ent of tlle lomimilh dotir e feenis to have h'ci;i her Vf.v:m;i

' I'cilt. -.q";. AXi'!ncl¢l. 1,.,. I' ,';'. , 3,.'.
4 I)'!'KLw .; Joe':!:. : l,.--I ". (]n,'>.J. * ! d,1. :iA . :1 ;-: ;, ; ./,
1 Car:.!. d-' ~ - 5 ~
:- ,',- ,.

BooK IV. paflion; and though the design was concealed with care, and con-
'- ' duEted with caution, fle pursued it with a persevering zeal. At
An crraor- this time, she ventured to lay aside somewhat of her usual reserve;
dinaIlltep and the aid which fl(e expeced from the Popifhi Princes, who
of Mary-'s in
fivour of had engaged in the league of Bayonne, encouraged her to take a
Popery. flep, which, if we confider the temper of the nation, appears to be

extremely bold. Having formerly held a secret coriefpondence
with the court of Rome, flhe now resolved to allow a Nuncio from
the Pope publicly to enter her dominions. Cardinal Laurca, at
that time Bishop of MIondovi, was the person on whom Pius V.
conferred this office, and along with him he lent the QOecn a pre-
sent of twenty thousand crowns *. It is not the character of the
Papal court to open its treasury upon diltant oi imaginary hopes.
The buflnefs of the Nuncio in Scotland, could be no other than
to attempt a reconciliation of the kingdom to the Romish fee.
Thus Mary herself underltood it. Arid in her answer to a letter
v;hich (he received from the Pope, after exprefling her grateful sense
of his paternal care and liberality, mhe proinifes that fie would bend
her whole iirength towards the re-efiablifhment and propagation
of the Catholic faith; that she would receive the Nuncio with
every pofible dembonltration of respect, and concur, with the ut-
most vigour, in all his designs towards promoting the honour of
God, and restoring peace to'the kingdom;' that she would cele-
brate the baptifin of the Prince, according to the ceremonies which
the Romish ritual prescribes, and hoped that her fubjeas would
be taught, by this example, again to reverence the facramcnts of
the church, which they had so long treated with contempt; and
that she would be careful to instil, early, into her son the principles
of a finccre love and attachment to the Catholic faiih +. But
though the Niuncio was already arrived at Paris, and had sent over
one of his attendants witlI part of the money, the Queen did not
think the juncaure proper for his reception. Elizabeth was pre-
paring to fend a magnificent cmbaffy into Scotland, against the
time of the Prince's baptifin, and as it would have been improper
to offend her, ihe wifely contrived, under various pretences, to
detain Laurca at Paris .. The convulsions into which the king-
:Jom was thlrown soon after, made it impoflible for him to pursue
his journey any fiarthcr.

At the very time that Mary was fecrctly carrying on thcfe nego-
ci.ations for I'lilvcrting the Reformed Church, flie did not scruple

Vita Canl. I:lar a,). i Burn. vol. iii. 3-5.
l t '.:.::i Vit:t larin', :;>. J i,;,. vol. ii. 5r. j Keith, Arpend. T .;S

publicly to employ her authority towards obtaining for its Mini- BooK IV.
fters a more certain and comfortable fubfiflence *. During this v '
year, she issued several proclamations and adts of council for that I566.
purpose, and readily approved of every scheme which was proposed
for the more eftecAual payment of their stipends. This part of her
condu& does little honour to Mary's integrity; and thoughjuftified
by the example of Princes, who often reckon falsehood and de-
ceit among the necessary arts of government, and even authorised
by the pernicious casuistry of the Romifih Church, which transfers
breach of faith to heretics, from the lift of crimes, to that of du-
ties, must, however, be numbered among those blemilhes which
never iRain a truly great and generous chara&er.

As neither the French nor Piedmontefe Ambassadors were yet December.

arrived, the baptism of the Prince was put off from time to time.
Meanwhile Mary fixed her residence at Craigmillar-. Such a re-
tirement, perhaps, suited the present temper of her mind, and in-
duced her to prefer it before her own palace of Holyroodhoufe.
Her averlion for the King grew every day more confirmed, and iHer aver-
was become altogether incurable. A deep melancholy succeed- sion for the

iKing excef-

ed to that gaiety of spirit, which was natural to her. The rash- jive.
ness and levity of her own choice, and the King's ingratitude and
obltinacy, filled her with fliame and with despair. A variety of
paltfons preyed at once on a mind, all whose sensations were ex-
quifite, and all its emotions itrong, and often extorted from her,
the last wifn of the unfortunate, that life itself would come to an
end :.

Murray and Maitland observed all those workings of passion in A divorce
the breast of the Queen, and conceived hopes of turning them to bCtnvCcii

them ripropo.

the advantage of their ancient associates, Morton, and the other fed.
conspirators against Rizio. They were flill in banishment, and the
Queen's resentment against them continued unabated. Murray and
the Secretary flattered themselves, however, that her inclination to
be separated from Darnly, would surmount this deep-rooted aver-
lion, and that the hopes of an event so desirable might induce
her to be reconciled to the conspirators. It was easy to find rea-
sons, in the King's behaviour, on which to found a sentence of di-
vorce. This fentencc they had interest enough to obtain, and to
procure the ratification of it in Parliament. In return for this fcr-
vice, they proposed to tlipulate with the Qeen to grant a pardon
lo Morton and his followers. The design was firll of all commu-

Kicilth, j6T, 56i. KlIno, 401. t Kti il, Ibid. Pref vii.

Gg

.Book IV. lidcted to Argyle, who, as well as Murray, owed his returr into
I 66 Scotland to the conspiracy againit Rizio. Huntly and Bothwell,

who at that time directed all Mary's councils, were likewise ad-
mitted into the concert. They all joined together in making the
overture to the Queen, and enforced it with all Maitland's elo-
quence *. But Mary, however desirous of obtaining that deliver-
ance from. Datnly's caprices, with which they endeavoured to al-
lure her, had nevertheless good reasons for rejeEting the method,
by which they proposed to accomplish it. The birth of her son
had greatly strengthened her claim upon the English succession,
and encouraged the abettors of it to appear with greater boldness,
and to aft with more vigour. She could scarce hope to be di-
vorced from her husband, without throwing some imputation on
her son. This might open a new-difpute with regard to the fuc-
cession, and put it the power of Elizabeth and her Ministers to
call in question the Prince's legitimacy, or at least to fubje& it to
all the delays and cavils of a judicial inquiry. The fear of these
inconveniencies weighed with Mary, and determined her rather
to endure her hard fate, than to seek relief, by venturing on such
a dangerous experiment.

The Earl of Bedford, and the Count de Brienne, the English

and French Ambassadors, being arrived, Mary set out for Stir-
ling, to celebrate the baptism of her son; Bedford was attended
by a numerous and splendid train, and brought presents from Eli-
zabeth, suitable to her own dignity, and the relpe& with which
she affccted, at that time, to treat the Queen of Scots. Great
preparations had been made by Mary, and the magnificence ditl
played by her on this occasion, exceeded v;'hatever had 1?een
Dec. r7 formerly known in Scotland. The ceremony itfeIi was perform-

ed according to the rites of the Romiflh Church. But neither
Bedford, nor any of the Scottilh nobles who profefdcc the Protef-
tant religion, entered within the gates of the chapel -1-. The si-
rit of that age, firm and uncomplying, would not, upon any in-
ducement, condescend to witness an action, which it cllcemed
idolatrous.

canl ,ici s I-Tenry's behaviour at this juncturc, pcrf.-ily discovers the cx-
Ibhavilour . ess of his caprice, as wi11l as of his folly. IHe clhoe to rcfide
lift rl, F in t Stirling, but confined himlclf to his own npartmcnt. And as
I'r'ilce, the Queen diltrulted every noLlemlan tl ho vc-tured to convciel

witllh im, lic .vs left in iabolute folit(lc. Nothing could be
mnore fingul.
! . or was lels cxpcclcld. than his chlfing to appear in

" Andlcr: vol. isv. Part. ii, 1E8. t lkcill, 5h o

a manner, that both publified the contempt under which he had BooK IV.
fallen, and, by exposing the Queen's domeflic unhappiness to the '
observation of so many foreigners, looked like a ftep taken on pur-
pose to mortify and to offend her. Mary felt this insult sensibly; and
notwithstanding all her efforts to afiume the gaiety which suited
the occasion, and which was necessary for the polite reception of her
guests, she was sometimes obliged to retire, in order to be at liberty
to indulge her sorrow, and give vent to her tears *. The King still
persisted in his design of retiring into foreign parts, and daily
threatened to put it in execution -.

The ceremony of witnessing the Prince's baptism was not the Elizabetj.

sole business of Bedford's embassy. His inftrucions contained an teiacour-
overture, which ought to have gone far towards extinguishing modate her
those jealousies which had so long subsisted between the two ivith Iar7-
Queens. The treaty of Edinburgh,. which has been so ofte i
mentioned, was the principal occasion of there, The spirit, how-
ever, which had risen to such an height in the late Parliment, the
power of the party which abetted the Scottijh Queen's title, the
number and aativity of her agents in different parts of the king-
dom, alarmed Elizabeth, and induced her to forego any advan-
tage, which the ambiguous and artful expressions in that treaty

Keith, Pref. vii.
- Camden aflirms, 401. that Bedford was commanded by Elizabeth not to gi-ve

Darnly the title of King. As this was an indignity, not tobee borne, eithLr by
MIary or her husband, it hath been asserted to be the cauife of the King's absence
from the ceremony of his ibn's baptifin. Keith, 360. Good. 319. But, i. No
filch thing is to be found among Bedford's instructions, the original of which flill
remains. Keith, 356. :. Bedford's advice to the (leen by Melvil is utterly in-
confilfent with Camden's aflertion. Mclv. 153. celvil's acccunt is confirmed
by Elizabeth's inftnmicons to Sir Henry Norris, where flie affirms that she com-
manded Bedford to employ his befl offices towards reconcilinlg ary to her huT-
band, which lie had attempted to no lurFo!c. Digges's Compl. Ambaff. p. 13.
A paper publiiled Appen No. YVIll. agrees in the fame thing 3. La Croc
tie French Resident mentions the King's abfcnce, but without giving that rca-
bfn for it, which has been founded on Camden's words, though if that had
been the real one, he would scarce have failed to mention it. Ilis account of
this matter is that which we haYe followed, Keitil, Pref. vii. 4. He informs his
court, that on account of the ilil'erell.e betwixt the King and the Queen, h-
lad refuted to hold any further corref!oldciicc with the former, though lie ap-
pears, i

ma inltaces, to have Itern his great confident. ibid. s. As Lie

King was not prcielnt at the lI;i:ti!m, he fecnms to have been excluded from ;i,:r
)fl:ire iln tlhe ordiilnary ;:dm( lil'.iiatinon of bullneCs. sTwo als of Pri '.y Couti:.il,
(lel on the :cthl, and thl other on ic :i ft of

l Iccnibcr, are fcund in K;i h, $>~:

They bnutl run in tile (cen'u;; :l.il. :atle. 'I'l' Kil;i veenx no

: o : i;v L.'c'
?'ueineit. Tlis could not b: owiutg to Eliztbeh''.. i::!;li.;io':s to lEcdfer, .

( g ij

BooKt IV. might afford her. All she now demanded of Mary was to renounce
---6- any title to the Crown of England during her life, and the lives
x566.-

of her. posterity; and on the other hand, she engaged to take no
siep, which might prove injurious to Mary's claim uppn the fuc-
celfion *.

Mary could not, with decency, reje&aa proposition so equit-

able; ihe insisted, however, that Elizabeth should order the right
upon which fle claimed to be legally examined, and publicly recog-
nifed, and particularly that the testament of Henry VIII. where.
by he had excluded the descendents of his eldest filler the Queen
of Scotland, from the place due to them in the order of fuccef-
sion, might be produced, and confidered by the English nobility.
Mary's Iiniflers had credulously embraced an opinion, that this
testament, which they so justly conceived to be injurious to their
/liRfrefs, was a mere forgery ; and on different, occasions had ur-
ged Elizabeth to produce it. Mary would have suffered confider-
ably by gaining this point. The original tetlament is Rill ex-
tant, and not the leaf doubt can be entertained of its genuine-
ness and authenticity. But it was not Elizabeth's intention to
weaken or to set aside the title of the house of Stewart. She
aimed at nothing more, than to keep the question concerning the
succession perplexed and undecided, and by indufirioufly eluding
this request, file did real service to Mary's-caufe -.

A few days after the baptism of the Prince, Morton and all

the other conspirators against Rizio obtained their pardon, and
leave to return into Scotland. Mary, who had hitherto conti-
nued incxorable to every entreaty in their behalf, yielded at last
to the solicitations of Bothwell t. He could hope for no success
in those bold designs on which his ambition resolved to venture,
without drawing aid from every quarter. By procuring a favour
for Morton and his associates, of which they had good reason to
despair, he expected to secure a band of faithful and determined
adherents.

The King fill remained at Stirling, in folltude, and under con-

tempt. His impatience in this situation, together with the alarm
given him, by the rumour of a design to Ieize his person, and
confine him to prison 11, was the occasion of his leaving Stirling
in nu abrupt manner, and retiring to his father at Glasgow.

IJne 2<. Two Affcmbiics of the Church were held during this year.
;i e:ll *. f New complh;nts were made, and upon good grounds, of the To-
.:lirs. l Keth, 356. j Ibid. 36l, 3.;8. Note (c.)

, i Good vol. i. 1,o0. MIe!. zI$,. l Keilth, Prelf viii.

verty and contempt under which the Protestant clergy were sus- BooK IV.
sered to languish. Penurious as the allotment for their subsistence -
was, they had not received the least part of what was due for the
preceding year *. Nothing less than a zeal, ready to endure
and to susser every thing for a good cause, could have persuaded
men to adhere to a church, so indigent and so neglected. The
extraordinary expcnces, occasioned by the Prince's baptism, had
exhaufled the Queen's treasury, and the fums appropriated for the
fubfiftencc of the clergy were diverted into other channels. The
Queen was therefore obliged to prevent the just remonstrances of
the assembly, by falling on some new method for the relief of thq
church., Some symptoms of liberality, some itretch towards muni-
ficence might have been expected in an afilgnment which was made
with an intention of soothing and silencing the clergy. But both
the Queen and the nobles held fait the riches of the church which
they had seized. A Tum, which, at the higlhef computation,
can scarce be reckoned equal to nine thousand pounds fter-
lingt, was deemed fuflicient for the maintenance of a whole
national church, by men who had lately seen single monafleries
possesed of revenues far superior in value.

The ecclesiastics in that age bore the grievances which affected

themselves alone, with aftonihning patience; but wherever the
Reformed religion was threatened, they were extremely apt to
be alarmed, and to proclaim, in the loudest manner, their appre-
henfions of danger. A just occasion of this kind was given them,
a ihort time before the meeting of the Affcmbly. The usurped
and oppreflive jurifdiaion of the spiritual courts had been abolill-
ed by the Parliament i560, and commiffaries were appointed to
hear and determine the causes which formerly came under their
cognifancet.. Among the few acs of that Parliament, to which
Mary had paid any regard, this was one. She had confirmed the
authority of the commissarics, and had given them ilnfruflions for
directing their proceedings II, which are Hill of great authority in
that court. From that time these judges had continued in the
uninterrupted exercise of their funEtion, when of a sudden the
Queen issucd a proclamation, rfcoring the Archbifllop of St. An.
drew's to his ancicnt jurifdilion, and depriving the Commiffairics
of all authority *"*.

A motive, which cannot be juflified, rendered the Qucni not un-

willing to venture upon this rafll alion. She l:Ind been contriv-
ing, for some time, how to rc-cfallilll the P1oplin rcliion; and

a"Keitlh, ,62. . jG'
I. ,5<1. Id . l} Id. :ji. *' l-'iox, ;' 3

Boor IV. the refloring the ancient ecclefiaflics to their former jurifdiceion,

seemed to be a considerable Itep towards that end. The motive
x$66.

which prompted Bothwell, to whose influence over the Queen
this action must' be chiefly imputed*, was still more criminal.
His enterprising ambition had already formed that bold design,
which soon after he put in execution, and the use which we shall
hereafter find him making of that authority, which the Popish ec-
clefiaffics regained, discovers the reasons of his present conduct,
in contributing to revive their power. The Proteflant clergy
were not unconcerned fpeaators of an event, which threatened
their religion with unavoidable deftrucion; but as they despair-
ed of obtaining the proper remedy from the' Queen herself, they
addressed a remonstrance to the whole body of'the Protestant no-
bility, full of that ardent zeal for religion, which the danger to
which it was exposed at that time, seemed to require t. What
effects this vehement exhortation might have produced, we have
no opportunity of judging, the attention of the nation being quick-
ly turned towards events of another, and more tragical nature.

The King Immediately upon the King's leaving Stirling, and before he
ihlls tick at
Gagoiw.at could Teach Glasgow, he was seized with a dangerous diilemper.

The symptoms which attended it were violent and unusual, and
in that age it was commonly imputed to the effecs of poison t.
It is impoflible, amidfl the contradictions of historians, to decide
with certainty concerning its nature, or its calufe [j. His life was
in the utmost danger; but after languifliing for some weeks, the
vigour of his coiifitution furinounted the malignity of the disease,

' Knox, ibid. f Keith, 567. t Melv. I54. Knox, 401.
|II tlichanan axnd, rKox are positive that the King had been poisoned. TI:ey

,mletiun the black and putrid pultulcs which broke out all over Iris bodly. Cu-
cai:all adds, that Abernethy his p1hysician plainly declared that poison lwas the
caaul of thelie fymptons, and that the Qleen resilerd to allow her'owiln hyfician
toattrend him. such. 349. Knox, 40o. 2. Bllazkwood Caufin. &c. Jebb. vol. ii.
24. 59. aflrt, that the finall pox was the difeiae with which the King was seized.
1ie is dlled a pockiih man in the Queen's letter. Good. vol. ii. iS. The reafoil
givenl by F;.:xcii 1'axits for ltllgini the King at the Kirk of Field, viz. left the

.liitl 'lrnce Ihould catch the insl'lion ifhe staid in the palace, fcems to favou:'
tii.s op'ilniOn, Ande:s. vol. ii. 193. Carte meltions it as a proof of Mlary's tcnder-
rei. to ler huiliand, that thougih Ihe never had the iinall pox herfell;, fne ventu-
r-d toatteld hiill. vol. iii;. 'Ihis, if it :hadL been true, woulld have afliordld a,
v;uod Ioi.i.i c t2)r not vifitilngllimr sooner; blit Mary had the finall pox in her il.-
:aniy, y.:aler'c's I .ttr's. . 3 li(l1ol)p 1 .1 y

a nirms. , il:lt the l King's dil.af/i was !1,t
)"r.'I,,i l:'x, I;cill, 36.1. Not,' ('.) In th:t :I tli, ti l ditall \v:w s clltcmed ro

t l.';ic:'l., th:; i' ir!i:crl inflrtcdi with it were ren'.cvud without tle walls of Liiic-

Mlary's neglcE of the King, on this occasion, wis equal to ;hat Eoo 1.

twith which he had treated her during her illness at Jedburgh. T56.
She no longer felt that warmth of conjugal affection which prompts Nep1flied
to sympathy, and delights in all thoie tender offices which sooth by Ma-y.
and alleviate sickness and pain. At this juncure, file did not
even put on the appearance of this passion. Notwithstanding the
King's danger, flie amuied hcrfelf wvith excursions to differcnt parts
of the country, and fullered near a month to elaple before flie vi-
fited him at Glasgow. By that time, the violence of the dillcm-
per was over, and the King, though weak and languithing, was
out of all danger.

The breach between Mary and her husband Wtas not occasioncd Th:e Lreach

by any bs those flight dilgulfs, which interrupt the domeflic union thenm irre-
vwithout altogether disSolving it. Almotl all the pallions, hllich I1ar''1'
operate with greatelt violence on a female mind, and diive it to
the molt dangerous extremes, concurred in raising and fomenting
this unhappy quarrel. Ingratitude for the favours flce had be-
flowed, contempt of her person, violations of tle marriage-vow,
encroachments on her power, conspiracies againil her favourities,
jealousy, insolence, and obllinacy, were the injuries of which
M'ary had great reason to complain. She felt them with the ut-
molt sensibility; and added to the anguilh of disappointed lovc,
they produced thole fyml)ptms of delpair vwhiclh we have already
dcfcribed. Her resentment againif the King feemns not to have
abated from the time of his leaving Stirling. In a letter written
-with her own hand, to her ambaflador in France, just before lie JI-anury =a
set out for Glasgow, no tokens of sudden reconcilement appear.
On the contrary, lie mentions, with some Litternefs, the King's
ingratitude, the jea!ouify with m hich he obfcrved her actions, and
the inclination he discovered to ditlurb her govenment, and at the
tame time talks of all his attempts with the lttnmouC. torn .

Aftcr this discovery of i\'ary's lentiments, it wals fcircc to le 1ii't t!Le

expecled that lhe would visit the King, or that any thing but (cG.:'L.jw.
marks of jealousy and dilrull fhlould appear in ltch an interview'.
This, hpwcver, w:as far from being tle ca.e; Ilie not only vilited
Darnly, but, by all hier words and actions, cndca.voUred to expreis
anl uncommnon affctlion for him: And- though tlis m:.ldc i!npret-
sion on the credulous spirit of her hIulband, no less i!c.xiLic, on
I{ine occalions, than obilinate on otllers; vet, t)t ti'i;e \, lit are
acquainted with the Ihun::n l.cart, and \\lio know V l.,. !'c :':li,::r :i'l
ho v llowlv filch wounds in duitic i u::,!:aPC :. .
-.l. !;c,

BOOr IkV. sudden transition will appear with a very suspicious air, and will

be confidered by them as the effe& of artifice.

-ier dii But i is not on suspicion alone, that Mary is charged with
mnulation. diflimulation in this part of her condu&. Two of her famous let-

tcrs to Bothwell were written during her flay at Glasgow, and
fully lay open this scene of iniquity. He had so far fucceded
in his ambitious and criminal design, as to gain an absolute afcen-
dent over the Queen. And, in a situation such as Mary's, merit,
not so confpicious i fersices, of far inferior importance; and address
much less insinuating than Bothwell's, may be fippofed to fleal,
imperceptibly, on a female heart, and entirely to overcome it.
Among those in the higher ranks of life, scruples with regard to
conjugal fidelity are, unhappily, neither many nor strong. Nor
did the manners of that court, in which Mary had been educated,
contribute to increase or to fortify them. The amourous turn of
Francis I. and Henry II. the wildness of the military charac-
ter in that age, and the liberty of appearing in all companies,
which began to be allowed to women, who had riot yet acquired
that delicacy of sentiment, and those polished manners, which a-
lone can render this liberty innocent, had introduced, among the
French, a licentiousness of morals that rose to an aftonifliing height.
Such examples, which were familiar to Mary from her. infancy,
could hardly fail of diminishing that horror of vice which is na-
tural to a virtuous mind. The King's behaviour would render
the first approach of forbidden sentiments less flocking; resent-
ment, and disappointed love, would be apt to represent whatever
toothed her revenge, as justifiable on that account; and so many
concurring causes might, almost imperceptibly, kindle a new pa-.
lion in her heart.
il- mi- But whatever opinion we may form with regard to the rife and

progress of this paflion, the letters themselves breathe all the ar-
dour and renderncfs of love. The aitccion which Mary there
exprcfes for Bothwell, fully accounts for every subsequent part
of her condul ; which, without admittiifg this circumstance, ap-
pears altogether myflerious, inconfilent, and inexplicable. That
reconcilement With her husband, of which, if we allow it to be
genuine, it is; impuflible to give any plausible account, is diico-
vered, by the Qilccn's own confession, to have been mere artifice

i.t .1'
"J lland( deceit. As her aversion cb her hufland, and the fufljicioui

attention with which tlc obfirved his conducl , became universal-
ly lknwn, her ears were olicioufly filled, as is uulal in ftch cafes-
vi!i groundlcls or agsraivatcl accot:its of his a&ions. ,By ftm,

[he was told, that the King intended to seize tie person of the BOOK IV.
Prince his son, and in his name to usurp the government; by
others she was aflired, that he rclblved inklantly to leave the king- 66
dom; that a vessel was hired for this purpocf, and lay in the river
Clyde ready to receive him*. The lall was what Mary chiefly
dreaded. Henry's retiring into a foreign country mutt have been
highly dis(honourable to the Queen, and would have entirely dif-
cpncerted Bothwell's mealures. While lie resided in Glasgow,
at a distance from her, and in that part of the kingdom where the
interell of his family was greatcfl, he might, with more facility,
accomplifl his dcfigns. In order, therefore, to prevent his exe-
cuting any such wild scheme, it was necessary to bring him to
some place, where he would be more immediately under her own
eye. For this purpole, Ille firlt employed all her art to regain Irevails o
his confidence, and then prouolcd to remove him to the ncirgh- Il'"

· -'' c'-n'c \ri

bourhood of Edinburgh, under pretence, that there he would have iEdi;burgl: .
eaier access to the advice of physicians, and that nlie herself
could attend him without being absent from her sons-. 'I'he King
was weak enough -to susser hirmelf to be perfauded ; and being
frill feeble and incapable of bearing fatigue, was carried in a lit-
ter to Edinburgh.

The place prepared for his reception was a house, belonging

to the Provost of a collegiate church, called Kirk of Field. It
flood almoll upon the famle lpot where the house belonging to the
Principal of the University now s£ands. Such a situation, on a
rising ground, and at that time in an open field, had a11 the ad-
vantages of healthful air to recommend it; but on the other hand,
the solitude of the place rendered it extremely proper for the com-
mnilion of that crime, with a view to which, it icems manifcitly
to have been chosen.

Mary continued to attend the King with the molt assiduous Ire is nil,-

care. She seldom was abient from him through the day; ihe llept dcrcd tlhrc.
fcveral nights in the chamber under his apartment. She heaped on
lim so many marks of tcnderncds and confidence, as, in a great
mne.:llre, quieted those ihjuiiciuns which had so long dillurbed lIinm.
But while he was fondly indulging in dre:ams of the return of his
former lhappilnefs, he ltood on the very ,rilnk of dcllrudtion. On
Sulnday the 9th of Februn r. about eleven at nigl't, the Qt.cen
left the Kirk of Field, in o!der tol be prelcnt at a i:dn;l': in ithe
.:l.lce. At two lnext laorningg, thle hlouti in which the Kilng lay

Kcl tbi, r viiih,
Ir c:!. t Gco l. \( il. t.

H I

BooK IV. was blown up with gunpowder. The noise and flock, whlch

'V ~ this sudden cxplofion occasioned, alarmed the whole city. The in-

habitants ran to the place whence it came. The dead body of
the King, with that of a servant who slept in the fame room, were
found lying in an adjacent garden, without the city wall, untouch-
ed by fire, and with no bruise or mark of violence.

His charac. Such was the unhappy fate of Henry Stewart, Lord Darnly,
ter.

in the twenty-firft year of his age. The indulgence of fortune, and
his own external accomplishments, without any other merit, had
raised him to an height of dignity, of which he was altogether
unworthy. By his folly and ingratitude, he loft the heart of a
woman who doated on him to dillraction. His insolence and in-
conflancy alienated from him thole nobles who had contributed
moil zealously towards his elevation. His levity and caprice ex-
posed him to the scorn of the people, who once revered him as the
descendent of their ancient kings and heroes. Had he died a na-
tural death, his end would have been unlamented, and his me-
mory have been soon forgotten ; but the cruel circumfincces of
his murder, and the slackness with which it was afterwards aven-
ged, have made his name to be remembered with regret, and have
rendered him the oljcEt of pity to which he had otherwise no
title.

Every one's imagination was at work to guess who had con-

trived and executed this execrable deed. The suspicion fell, with

l3nthwell almost a general confent,-on Bothwell*; and some retlcctions were
aind the thrown out, as if the Queen lierfelf were no firanger to the crime.
Queen fur-
peaed of Of Bothwell's guilt there remains the fulleif evidence, that the
the ir- nature of the acion will admit. The Qucen's known sentiments
dler.

with regard to her hufl)ad, gave a great appearance of probabi-
lity to the imputation with lwhich ihe was loaded t.

Two days after the murder, a proclamation was issued by the

Qteen, offering a considerable reward to any person who fliould
dilcover those who had been guilty of fucli a horrid and detest-
able crime 1:. And though IBothwell was now one of the great-
eft fulje&s in the kingdom, formidable on account of his own
power, and proteced by the cQucen's favour, it was impofiTble to
suppress the fentimcnts and indignation of the people. Papers
were allixed to the moil pullic places of the city, accusing him

] Melv. Andq. Alle ll. vol. i. 1s6.

*i S.e D)ifli-t;tion cl nccl ing 1h ',l

(,i r of lrlnry Darily, and t'i gc i i:

lnes of Mary's letters oo Bethwcll. Appendix.
j Anderl vol. v 1. 36. i.

of the murder, and naming his accomplices; piEtures appeared to Boot _ V.
the fame purpose, and voices were heard, in the middle of the 5G66'
night, charging him with that barbarous action. But the au-
thors of these rumours did not confine their accusations to Both-
well alone, they insinuated that the Qien herself was accelfory
to the crime*. This bold accusation, which so directly attacked
Mary's reputation, drew the attention of her council; and by
engaging them in an inquiry after the authors of there libels, di-
verted them from searching after the murderers of the King--.
It could scarce be expe&ted that Mary herself would be extreme-
ly solicitous to discover those who had rid her of an husband,
vwhom Ihe had so violently hated. It was Bothwell's interest,
who had the supreme diretion of this, as well as of all other as-
fairs, to stile and suppress whatever evidence flould be ofcfred,
and to cover, if possible, the whole tranlaflion urlder the veil of
darkness and of silence. Some inquiry, however, was made, and
some persons called before the council; but the examination was
conducted with the most indecent rcmifl'nefs, and in such a man-
ner, as to let in no light upon that fccne of guilt s.

It was not her own fubjetAs alone who fufpeAed Mlary of being

acCessory to this unnatural crime; nor did an opinion, so dil-
honourable to her character, owe its rife and progrel' to the jea-
lousy and malice of lier fa&tious nobles. The report of the man-
ner and circumitances of the King's murder fprcad quickly over
all Europe, and, even in that age, which was accullomcd to
deeds of violence, it excited universal horror. And as her un-
happy breach with her husband had long been matter of public
dilfourfe, the firfi conjectures which were formed with regard to
his death, were extremely to her disadvantage. Her friends, at
a loss what apology to on'er for her conduct, called on her to pro-
fecute the murderers with the utmofl diligence, and expected that
the rigour of her proceedings would prove the best and fullelt
vindication of her innocence I.1

Lennox, at the tfame time, incited Mary to vengeance witll L.nI, O c-

inccl'ant importunity. This nobleman had lhared in his son's wcll of thli
clilgracc, and being treated by Mary with negled, Iullially relidcd li"i'.'

murllrcl'.

at a diflance from court. RouLted, however, by an event no less
Ihocking to the heart of a father, than fatal to all his flclenies of
ambition, lie ventured to write to the OQeen, ;and to oflcr his I'cb. r.
adlvice with rel)cclt to tle nlolt cITecLual niethod for dilcovciing

A' \nilcrl'. vol. ii. i ;6. j' hi. vol. i..q.
IId. vo.1. iv. 1, 16(., t
P<rs. 1 ;:l , P ,: .

I1 h ij

BooOK IV and convicting those who had so cruelly deprived him of a foi,

- and her of a hulband. He urged her to proiecute thole who were
x566. guilty, with vigour, and to bring them to a speedy trial; he de-

clared his own suspicion of Bothwell, and of those who were
named as his accomplices; he required that, out of regard to de-
cency, and in order to encourage evidence to appear againf them,
the persons accused of fich an atrocious crime ihould be com-
mitted to custody, or at leait excluded from her court and pre-
fence *.

Mary was then at Seaton, whither flhe had retired after the

burial of the King, whose body vias deposited among the Mo-
narchs of Scotland, in a privates but decent manner -. The
former part of the Earl's demand, could not, on any pretence,
be eluded; and it was resolved to bring Bothwell immediately

M3ary con- to trial. But, inflead of confining him to any prison, Mary ad-
ti lilies to
f;vour him. mitted him into all her councils, and allowed a person, universal-

ly reputed the murderer of her husband, to enjoy all the security,
the dignity, and the power of a favourite .. The offices which
lothwell already possessed, gave him the command of all the south
of Scotland. The castle of Edinburgh, however, was a place of
too much consequence, not to wifll it in his own power. The
QOeen, in order to prevail on the Earl of BMar to surrender its
consented to put the person of the young Prince in his hands,
Mlarch 19. and immediately bellowed the government of that important for-

trcfs upon Bothwell 11. So many fleps in her conduct, inconfift-
ent with all the rules of prudence, and of decency, must be im-
puted to an excess either of folly or of love. Mary's known cha-
rater fully vindicates her from the former; of the latter, many
and flriking proofs boon appeared.
lMarch. 19. No direct evidence had yet appeared againfl Bothwell; but :as

time might bring to light the circumtnances of a crime, in which
so many accomplices were concerned, it was of great importance

tlaftltrls n to haltcn on the trial, while nothing more than general ftfpicic)ns,
his trial.

and uncertain surmises could be produced by his acculiers. i'or
this rcafon, in a meeting of Privy Council held on the 28th of
March, the i 2th of April was appointed for the day of trial.
.And though the law allowed, and the nianner in which crlinliali
caltes wci-e carried on in that age required a much longer inter-
val, it appea:'s, fronm fcveral circumllanccs, that this Illort inalce

E* ]c ll, .i', 9. ' l' Aiicltlr vol.. i, 2. J l.

il l. 10, '-

1 lt. iil. P'c. (. . K
itl[ 379.

vais considerably contraeed, and that Lennox had only eleven rooK 1V.
days warning to prepare for accusing a person, so far superior to ó-
himfeif, both in power and in favour *. No man could be less
in a condition to contend with an antagonilt who was thus sup-
ported. Though Lennox's paternal efiate had been reftared to
him, weheri e was recalled into Scotland, it ceems to have been
considerably impaired during his banifliment. H-is vaflals, while
he resided in England, had been accutlomed to some degree of
independence, and lie had not recovered that abollute ascendent
over them, which a feudal chief usually posi'Tsed. He had no
realon to e(xpe the concurrence of any of tliofe fa;lions into
which the nobles were divided. During the (lort period of his
son's prosperity, lie hatd taken lich steps as gave rife to an open
breach with Murray and a:ll his adherents. The partizais of the
house of Hamilton were his hercditary and mortal enemies. IIlunt-
ly was linked in the close' t confederacy with Eotlhvell ; and thus,
to the dilgrace of the nalion, Lenno:x lood alone in a cauft, where
both honour and lhumanity called tl loudly on Ili countrymen to
second him.

It is remarkable too, that nBthwell himflelf was present, and

fat as a member in that meeting of Privy Council, which .gave
directions ith regard to the time and manner of his trial. And
he (till enjoyed not only full liberty, but was received into the
Queen's prelence with the fuime dillinguilhedl familiarity as for-
merly I-.

Notthing could be a more cruel disappointment to the wiflies I.ciirnx
and rels:ntment of a father, than such a premature trial; every C:t.ri; a dle-

T'"he aliR of i' rivy Collncil, apllx iiiln the (d:i of Borlhwell's trial, 1:irs

date I\lrcllh the a8th, \liich li;Iplpic i ld o il 'Tih rl^ ;l!v. AI. rl'.: t(,. . i. c. '1 lie
Qiietin's V'o:rrait to theilo ;i'e/',irrs, imonwlrnilig lltci t- lo Ilu on I .'nmii,x 111 i-
)l'pta i lit, i:, dI:ted onl th ile 2 l. A Iileri. V(1. ii. 97. Ic ;iLs l'iininikci )yv 1 ul)-
lic prreiillmnii n at the crort; of l]'tlinbur,,l on tlhe I1n111' :l:i. IIbli. 1oc. 11' \as
frulmnecl tl hlisi dw ll litl. lua.l-s in l;1,l'l? v aiil 1iinil)ion lrt the .':tl o M.\:ilich,
thle 11t an:11 -' id lay' oif Apiil. I)bid. lol. li ' w'.l I: lillcllltl :ilt !lt.'ili, A:\.'ri'l ' I[

blid. Ic .. 'Illutighl Ltinx ,''lli:il ;ilta t that tinm iicly miles tromi l1.: lill)l.,,ll,
th' cil.-it i miilit hi:xe

b)e n

b i.',', hint lii cr. Sitil :ill IIi ii 'crtF.y d. ! .l:ay :il'-

s,,,I; liiiie :a il' oF fiij.ii',iii "r'i; trti, lary, ill hl r Iittvr, .M:ui i :.ill, ill-
vitl lilin m )x O

t o leio l:li]ll'lll I tlt' (nll.ilil;' \'t'kli; ttli:i

c l:t\v ltion

t\.': n.Ii r ';

iline days si) lleer, tliit !;. illtitln cd to, bi:l; o, il l trial i;llth ut (Id ay. liut
the prel titac lin.. coil.l nl, bb l..'a!ly, or .':r:iaily kiiwn tlo l.nin x, lroiir
1li h::l C-lc\';lW lr

t:'ulv. 1: 1

!:,,r , hs , i

(;, l (1

ilil 1:1, l,,i , to ll,.ll...

3 i)' l :i.

l ' ii: l :! a'l. oi ) l'

SO tlinl, at tl:t tili. ct : ', ''c 'n :I l-',

':

rc: is ,i' t i'i , i'ii l'tl) l i ': ',
l irc,,i us to lhe tlii.,

; A:.>r .o. ... . ., *i.

3oolz; TI. fep towards which feeined to be taken by directions from the
-xg o. pcrfon who was himlielf accuted of the crime, and calculated on

purpose to conceal, rather than to dctect his guilt. Lennox fore-
liw what would he the iflue of tils mock inquiry, and with how
little safety to hinmi ls, or lfccefs to his cause, he could venture
to appear on the day prefixed. In his former letters, though un-
der exprellions the molit refpetlful, some symptoms of his diltruft-
ing the Queen may be dilcovered. He spoke out now, in plain
language. He complained of the injury done him, by hurrying
on the trial with lich illegal precipitation. He rcprefilnted once
nl re, the indecency of allowing Bothwell, not only to enjoy
perOlnal liberty, but to retain his former intluence over her coun-
cils. He again required her, as fi[e regarded her own honour,
to give fonie cvidence of her lincerity in prosecuting the murder,
by confining the pcr son who was fuliected, oi good grounds, to
be the author of it; and, till that were done, he lignilied his own
reiolution not to be prelcnt at a trial, the manner and circum-
11aices of 'hi1ch were so irregular, and unLftisfactory .

Applies f;r He fcctus, however, to have cxpcitled little fuccels from this
his Irltl~"2" application to llary i and theceforc, at the iame time, belbught
bc.h. Ellizabeth to interpose, in order to obtain such a delay as lie dc-

mainded -. Nothing can be a ilroDgcr proof, hlow violently he
fuipecled thle one Qceen, than his fubmittiing to implore the aid
of the other, who had treated his son will the utnmoft contempt,
and himfi:el and faiily with the greatelt rigour. Elizabeth, who
w;:s never unwilling to interpose in the aftairs of Scotland, wrote.
inllantly to 7Mary, adviied her to delay the trial for some time,
an u'rged. in iluch lr'ong terms, the alime arguments which Len-
nox had ultd, as ilniglit have convinced her to what an unfavour-
able conitruclion her conduc would be liable, if lihe perfited in
her present method of proceeding $.
The tnil Neither her entreaties, however, nor those of Lennox, could

p S. prevail to have the trial put off. O(n the day appointed, Both-

wcll appeared, but with such a formidable retinue, that it would
have been dangerous to condemn, and imlSiofllle to pun ifl him.
Befldes a rnlm;rous body of his friends and I vasals allcmbled, ac-
corlding to cu.;oml. from different parts of the kiingdom, lie w\as
a:ttndcd L-v a b:and of liirled fldiers, \ho marched \vith llying'
colours along the lrccts of ILdinlu:rghi . A court ofjullice w.iS

.* A.':cr£. vol

i. ;: ' 'r Gxt.,. vol. ii. ,5 .

. \' .:.: .:.1:. '_5. 5_e Ap\' ¢'a'.ix - Nv . I,
*3 .'i. i l' vol. i :' .

held, with Llie accuflomed formalities. An indiclment was pre- FooiclV.
fcnted againflt Botliwell, and Lennox was called upon to make r-
good his accusation. In his n:ame appeared R.obert Cunniniigiam,
one of his dependents. lIe cxculfd liis malter's absence, on ac-
count of tlhe llortnels of the time, which prevented lis anfeml)-
l;ng lis friends and vafials, without wholc afliliance lie could
not, with iafety, venture to Ift himfclf in oppolition to such a
powerful anntagonilt. For this rcafon, lie cicired the court to
itop proceeding. and protelled, that any i'lntcncc which fliould
be pafltd at that time, ought to be deemed illegal ;Ind void.
Bothwell, on the other hand, infilled, that the court Ihoulld in-
flantly proceed to trial. One of Lennox's own letters, in which
he craved of the Queen to profccute the murderers without cllay,
was produced. Cunninilhalm's objcctions were over-ruled; and
the jury, conlitling of Peers and Barons of the firll rank, found
Bothwcll not guilty of the crime.

No person pipcared as an accuser, not a single witnces was cx- r.I;l-.:'cl! is

amined, nor any evidence produced againift im. 'llhe jury, un-

al(ltlad.

dcr there circuiinances, could do nothing elle lbut acquit him.
Their verdict, howcver, was fiar from gratifying the wiflies, or
silencing the murmurs of the people. lvery circumfiance in the
trial gave grounds for suspicion, and cxcited indignation ; and
the judgment pronounced, instead of being a proof of Botlwell's
innocence, was elicermed an argument of hlis guilt. Pafquiiunacs
and libels were aifixed to different places, exprefling the senti-
rnents of the public, with the utmoll virulence of language.

The jury themiclves ifem to have been aware of the cconfile,

to which their proceedings would be cxpo(I'c ; and, at the filoc
time, that they returned their verdicd acquitting IlotlhviJ, tle
Larl of Caithnels protllted, in tllcir name, that no crine (liould
be imputed to them on that account, lccanfu no accul;'r liad ap-
peared, and no proof was brought of the indicinent. lIe touk
notice, lilkwife, that the ninth intllcad of the tenth of lcel;rua-y
was menctioned in the indidimcnt, as the day on whliicl tl;e mur-
der had been committed. A circmnilaince wlich cdifovers tlhe
extreme inaccuracy of tliofe who prepared the indi!l'.T: llnt; :iId
at a time nlwhe n rmn were cliltoldl, and not 'vitllhot realC:f, t') I:c
f.lip)icious of every t ling, tliis li;ill maitter culili iIttcd tdo cc Ll Ili
aInd to incrcsIc their uiji.cios :,

.Even Bohl iwell lhi'i( did lnot rely on the j.idsnmcnt wil.'
jili: hdl ol)taiincd in his ';vour, as a f1l}' v'idiK'atio of hi'; inu,-

* J.Lll:\. : ,i.il. .^ : I ' D,! . i. s'-, Y.1.

Boor IV. ccncc. Immediately after his acquittal, he, in compliance with

6 a culloin which was not then obillete, publilhed a writing, in
I$66.

which he offered to fight, in single combat, any Gentleman of
good fame, who should prefunme to accuse him of being accefbory
to the murder of the King.

Mary, however, continued to treat him as if lhe had been clear-

ed by the mofl unexceptionable and fatisfcadory evidence. The
aCcendent he had gained over her heart, as swll as over her coun-
cils. was more visible than ever ; and Lennox, who could not cx-
pedt that his own person would be faTe in a country where the
murderer of his suo had been absolvcd, writhout regard to jutlicc,
and loaded with honours, in contempt of decency, fled with pre-
cipitation towards Enlgland '*.

A P.r-iri-r- Two days after the trial, a Parliament was held, at the open-
.nt
. d. - -ing of whiclh the Qecn ditlinguifhed Bothwell, by apponining

him to carry the sceptre before her -. MIoLt of the Aets pai;ed
in this Aflemhly, were calculated on rtrpofe to i.rengthen liis
party, and to promote his designs. He obtained the ratification
of all the joflt{elions and henours which thei: .axiality of the
Quieen had conferred upon lim and tle a' to that eftiec con-
tained the ftrongeil declarations of his faithful fcrvices to the
Crown. in all times pasl. The furrc!der of the caitle of Edin-
burgh by rIanr was confirmed. ]'he law of att r ainder a gaint t-
iv was repcaild, 3and he, and his adherents, were retiorcd to tiic
,las.cs and honours of their ancct.ors. Several of thoh: who had
hi-en oin the jury which acquittcd him. obtained the r!tifications
of ;te grants made in their favour. And as pa'ibuinadcs daily mrul-
tipl;_'d, a law p.l:td, ;wherciy tilofe, inou whoee hands any paper
oi that kind feli, were comlmanded ir.fi.n-tly to de(troy it; ancd
ir. throighi their negleic, it should be allowed to ftrcad, they
were ftujeced to a capital -unilhnme::t) in tihe fme manner as if
thvy had been the original :nutllors .

, --<r:r:- But the ab!iolure dominion. xhich' Botlhwcii had ac-i irc over
'- .,,;. i'' v.y's mind, appeiiredl iT! the clearcei nn;!ner. by an :1t ir s'i-
ti': 1 .-..:- vour of the I-rotl, ; ilt lcliglor, to whlch, at tll's tiit, (I:e a.e

h

! lcr assiaelnt. ar)iI "s attaclimunt to tile R.ornihh sith was uniiorrn
,:1i';.. 1": r ;;!iiL:.; lhe had never Iv id ai.c tzt; dicli;no, nor loft the.

:-<-,c ,ic m

( . f ar,.:i'o t, it. 5tlic liad. of l.te. comte under newc eCi,.iagt-
r-cl :t t ' ; .. : ;i :rlt;:. ;:i' irn (:rl;.( ii. <;([ t :il'.c, i ., d vcintur-.

i

.. : 2. I- rn.: p

l cp:. ui: c !iL'-Lic .'.'._* li,;(irolus tl'.. a1 ny' llte had

iaoi : -.
:' z..i. -, *.Now (.) t lbid. ';P. \ -\: (',.) Ibidt. -2%-

incrly taken. But, Bothwell was prompted, by powerful motives PoOK IV/
to promote this law. He liad been guilty of crimes, which ren- I 6i6.
dered him the objcd of just and univeri'l dctellation. I-le was
meditating others, which lie easily foresaw would heightcen
the public indignation againfl him. By tlhis popular law, he
miglt hope to divert, or to delay the refcntmcnt of the n'iti(cr,
and flattered liimficf, that the obtaining this unexpecicd and legal
security for the Protcflnnt religion, would atone for much guilt,
silence the clamours of the clergy, and induce the people to con-
nive at, or to tolerate his crimes. The an itl'elf vws so favour-
able to the dot-rine of the Reformers, that the Parliament, whicl
met next year, under very diffcrent leaders, could fubllitutc no-
thing fironger or more explicit in its place; and thought it fufli-
cient to ratify it word for word *. To pats fulch an nR, was ut-
terly inconfiflent with all the maxims which Mary followed in
every other period of her life; but what could never be extort-
ed from her by the solicitations of the Assemblies of the church,
or by the entrc -ies of her people, the more powerful influence of
Bothwell now obtained f-.

Every Iiep taken by Bothwell had hitherto been attended with Bnoliwell

all the fucccfs which his molt sanguine willies could expec. lie iel;als o'
had entirely gained the Queen's heart ; the murder of the KIng t, rccom-

- mnend hiini

had excited no public commnotion; he had been acquitted by his .,;t hul-
peers of any ihare in that crime ; and their decision had been, in lI:lnd to the
some fort, ratified in Parliament. But in a kingdom, where the -4 W ^
regal authority was fb extremely limited, and the power of the
nobles so formidable, he durfl not venture on the last action, to-
wards which all his ambitious projecds tended, without their ap-
probation. In order to fccure tlis, lie, immediately after the April 9.
diflolution of Parliament, invited all the nobles who were present
to an entertainment. Having filled the house with his friends

Parl. I. Jac. VI. c. 3r.
'I Blucllannn, Hist. 355, not only omits talcingany notice of this law, but as-

ferts, that the Queen, thlough Ihe lhad given promiifes in fllvour of the refbornmd
religion, refufilcL to plerilit aly an. to p:all il furpport of it, andl eveln dlillilldec
thce deputies ofr the culrcli witlt contempt. SpotlW\ood, 202. anil CaldJcrwold,
vol. iii. 4. lioth affrni the <tine thing'. It wvonll lnt ha:ve C lben iecell.iry to
olleivc llli; ilifance of ll.l)h:ilall':; illcciliiacy; l1it tlit an a: itl lol b co) vcrla t
in our ;law; as :potr\wood, and onte lb iildtillriitl; a;; C:aldcrwsd, Illulld colm-
mit filcl al n error, welln a li intcd :at of' ]'arli;anient to thle contr.lly was hclbre

thcilr eye;C , is 'reillall;..l'lc. ] c- n ll n:

h l i; i lt ls has talille ntie of this at.
l)ctt.qijo, p. e.

Ii

BoOoKIV. and dependents, and surrounded it with armed men h, he opened
X566. to the company his intention of marrying the QOeen, whose con-

sent, he told them, he had already obtained; and demanded their
approbation of this match, which, he said, was no less acceptable
to their Sovereign, than honourable to himfelfj-. H-untly and
Seaton, who were privy to all Bothwell's schemes, and promoted
them with the utmolt zeal; the Popifi ecclefiaflics, who were
abfolutelv devoted to the Queen, and ready to tooth all her pas-
sions, instantly declared their fatisfac&ion with what he had pro-
posed. The reft, who dreaded the exorbitant power which Both-
well had acquired, and observed the Queen's growing affeftion
towards him in all her acions, were willing to make a merit of
yielding to a measure, which they could neither oppose, nor de-
feat. Some few were confounded and enraged. But, in the end,
J3oLhwell, partly by promiles and flattery, partly by terror and
force, prevailed on all who were present to subscribe a paper,
which leaves a deeper slain than any occurrence in that age, on
the honour and character of the nation.

This paper contained the strongest declarations of Bothwell's

innocence, and the most ample acknowledgment of his good ser-
vices to the kingdom. If any future accusation should be brought
againll him, on account of the King's murder, the subscribers
promiscd to tland by him as one man, and to hazard their lives
and fortunes in his defence. They recommended him to the
Queen, as the moif proper person she could chufe for a husband;
and if fle Should condefccnd to belfow on him that mark of her
regard, they undertook to promote the marriage, and to join him
with all their forces, in opposing any person who endeavoured to
obftru& it t. Among the subscribers of this paper, we find some
who were the Quecn's chief confidents, others who were firnn-
gers to her counsels, and obnoxious to her difplcafure; some who
faithfully adhered to her, through all the vicifitudes of her for-
tune, and others who became the principal authors of her ffiffr-
ings ; some pallionately attached to the Romihil lpcrflition, and
others zealous advocates for the Protcflant faith §. No common
interest can be supposcd to have united men of such opposite prin-
ciples and paities, in recommending to their Sovereign a Ilep so
injurious to her honour, and so fatal to her peace. TIhis tfrange
coalition was the cllfe' of much artifice, and mull be conlidered
as the boldlell and mofl maflerly firoke of Bothwell's address. It

(n l. ii. . Andc rs. vol . ii.

*h, t

AAcr£r. vol. i. i7.
§ lKeith, :.o;.

is obfcrvable, that amidst all the altercations, and mutual re- looK IV.
proaches of the two parties which arose in the kingdom, this un- - v
worthy tranfadion is seldom mentioned. Conscious, on both fides,
that in this particular, their conduc could ill bear examination,
and would redound little to their fame, they always touch upon
it unwillingly, and seem desirous that it should remain in darkness,
or be buried in oblivion. But as so many persons, who, both at
that time, and ever after, possessed the Queen's favour, subscribcd
this paper, the suspicion becomes firong, that Bothwcll's ambi-
tious hopes were neither unknown to Mary, nor disapproved by
her*.

These suspicions are confirmed by the most dire& proof. Miel-

vil, at that time, enjoyed a considerable snare in her f:avour.
He, as well as his brother, kept a secret correspondence in Eng-
land, with those who favoured her pretensions to that Crown.
The rumour of her intended marriage with Bothwell having ear-
ly spread in that kingdom, excited the utmoll indignation; and
he received a letter from thence, which represented, in the llrong-
eft terms, what would be the fatal effedts of such an imprudent
ftep. Melvil put this letter into the Queen's'hands, and ensor-.

*Of all the different fyfiems with regard to this tranfaetion, that of Camden

ceems to be the least accurate, and the worfl founded. -le fuppolfs tihat Bothl-
\lell was hated by urray, iMorton, &c. xllo ha:l been his affociatcs in the nmur-
ter of the King, and that they now wanted to ruin him. He aElirns, at the
l'ame time, that the fibl'criptions to this paper were obtained by them, out of fear
thatBothwell might fink in his hopes, and betray the whole bloody secret. 40-4. But
blefides the abflrrdity of supposing, that any man's enemies would contribute to-
wards raising him to such high dignity, on the uncertain hopes ofatftetarls de-
ipriving him of it; besides the impolfibility of accolnplifhing filch a marriage,
if it had been either unknown to the Qucen or diflgrecable to her; we may
obfrcve that this supposition is destroyed by the diret testimony of the Queen
herself, who alcribes the confelnt of the nobles to Bothwell's artifices, uwho p r-
chafne it by givitng tlhez to 1tdcrljland ti.t 'we were content tIhreuith. An,
lierl] vol. i. 94. It would have been no finall advantage to Mary, if (lhe could
have represented the consent of the nobles to have been their own voluntary dectl.
It is dtill more furpri'ing to find L.elly arctililig this paper to M!ui'ray and his
faalion. Anders. vol. i. 26. ''lhe Biilholp lismf,:lf was one of the perflns wolt
fulblcribed it. Keith, 383. Thle King's comonniiionllrs, at the conference held at
York 1568, pretended that none of thl nlobles, except tie Earl (cf 1lultly, wouldl
fllbicr lbc this )pa)cr till a warranlt from the Q)lleenl vas lrodcced, Iy \\ llich tllcy
were allowed to do 1J; this warrlnt they had in thcir cuiltody, piin c-Al hbicdi.
Anderfl vol. iv. Part ii. 59. 'I'Tis dilers from Iluclhanali's Iaccount, vhio tilp.
ptlfes tlilt all the noblehs prenfelt tif3ribrcl tle paper tn thle 1tll, ;and thlat, next
,l:iy, they obltained the appr;b:tion os ' what thli'y hlad. donet, li w',ity o)l'csri'.y
to thilcll'.'c;: , 35.5-

1 i ij

BooK IV ced it with the utmoi warmth. She not only disregarded these

,-66 remonstrances, but communicated the matter to Bothwell. Mel-

vil, in order to save his life, was obliged to fly from court, whi-
ther he durst not return, till the Earl's rage began to abate *. At
the fame time, Elizabeth warned Mary of the danger and infa-
my to which the would expose herself, by such an indecent choice;
but an advice from her met with flill lecs regard(.

oticshell Three days after the rising of Parliamcnt, Mary went from
carries the
Queen by Edinburgh to Stirling, in order to visit the Prince her son. Both-

11cC to0 well had now brought his schemes to full maturity, and every
DuabCr. .

precaution being taken, which could render it safe to venture on
the lait and decisive tlep, the natural impetuosity of his spirit did
not iuffer him to deliberate any longer. ' Under pretence-of itl
expedition againfr the free-booters on the borders, he af`lmblcd
April 24. his followers; and marching out of Edinburgh with a thoulhnd

lorfe, turned suddenly towards Linlitbgow, met the Qiecn on
her return near that place, dispersed her llender-train without re-
fiflancc, seized on her person, and conducted her, together with
a few of her courtiers, as a prisoner to his cattle of Dunbar. She
expressed neither surprise, nor. terror, nor indignation, at such an
outragc committed on her pcrfon, and such an insult offered to her
authority, but seemed to'yield without struggle or regret .. Mel-
vil was, at that time, one of her attendants ; and the officer by
whom he was seized informed him, that nothing was done with-
out the (Qeen's own consent t. If we may rely on the letters pu,
blifhed in Mriary's name, the fheme had been communicated to her,

M* chlv. 1s6. According to Melvil, Lord IHerreis lilckvife rcmonflrated a-

gainft the marriage, and conjured the Qnecn, on his knees, to lay alide all
thoughts of fuicl a dlifonourable alliancc. I56. But it hls been oblefrved, that
lHerlcis is one of the nobles who tiibfclrild the bond, April 19. Keith, 38e.
3. 'Ihat he is one of the witnciffr to the marriage articles between the Queen and
Bothwell, May ii. Good. vol. ii. 6I. 3. That he fat in couilcil whithl Botlhwll,
.Mlay 17. Keith, 386. lutt this rcimoilfirance of Lord H-ericis aganlt tlie m:irri-
age lihapcncd before thece, made by Melvil hinifel; 157. BIllvil's rcmiel-
flralnce muni have happened itme time befbre the meeting of Parliament; si' a:l-
tcr oficnding nBothwell, he retired from court; le allotwed his raile time to filb-
filc, and 1iad again joincd the Q eenl, w'heln sic \ws leizcd, April 24.. I58.
The time wlhicli mul llt :lvc ela:iplcd, hy hll; account ls the matter, was pclla,'i
ifrriticiei to have gaincd I-elircis, from bcilig an olpo[cr, to becomle a iromotr
ol the lm:lllia-: . ]'crhaps Bel\il mnay hl;;e commllttcd fitme milaklc 'ith it..
gard to this fiJl, tb far as rclatcs to Lord IHerreis, Ie ct:culdl not well be nil..
ta lkeln wivthi ,';:ard lto what himl' :ls (did.

{ Anders. vol, i. 1s6. t Kcith, 38,3. § Mclv. Ij8.

mnd every flep towards it was taken with her participation and Boos IV.
advice ''

Both the Queen and Bothwell thought it of advantage to em- i66

ploy this appearance of violence. It afforded her a decent excuse
for her conduct; and while fle could plead that it was owing to
force rather than choice, file hoped that her reputation, among
foreigners at least, would escape without censure, or be exposed to
less reproach. Bothwell could not help distrusting all the me-
thods which had hitherto been used, for vindicating him from any
concern in the murder of the King. Something was uill want-
ing for his security, and for quieting his guilty fears. This was
a pardon under the Great Seal. By the laws of Scotland, the
molt henious crime muif be mentioned by name in a pardon, and
then all lesser offences are deemed to be included under the ge-
neral clause, ani/z al olher cr imes wh7atoever --. To seize the pcr-
son of the Prince, is high treason ; and Bothwell hoped, that a
pardon obtained for this, would extend to every thing of which
he had been accused $.
, Bothwell, having now got the Queen's person into his hands, Is di-orceda
it would have been unbecoming either a politician or a man of gal- ftrom'

own \ife-

lantry to have delayed confuimmating his schemes. For this pur-
pose, he inflantly commenced a suit, in order to obtain sentence
of divorce from his wife Lady Jean Gordon, the Earl of Hunt-
ly's filter. This process was carried on, at the fame time, both April 29.
before Proteflant and Popish judges; before the former, in the
court of CommifLaries; and before the latter, in the spiritual court
of the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, whose jurifdiclion tle Qucen
had lately rcftored. The pretexts which he pleaded were trivial
or scandalous. But his authority had greater weight than the
justice of his caiufe; and in both courts, f-ntcnce of divorce was
pronounced, with the lame indecent and fiLfpicious precipitancy .

While this infamous tranfcloion was carrying on, the Quccn

resided at Dunbar; detained as a prifbner, but trcated with the
utmioft rcfpetl. Soon after Bothwell, wtith a numerous train of Mlay .i
his dependants, conducted her to Edinburgh ; but inflead of loldg-
ing her in the palace of H-olyroodhouil, he conveyed her to the
caille, of which lie was govelnor. 'Ilie difcontcnt of tile nl;tion
rcndered this precaution nccfl'iry. In an lhounl unforllifile, and
of ealy accels, the Quccn ni!iht have been rclcued(i i.ihout dill:-

" Good vol. ii. .7 l. 6. J21c 1\. c 6-.
, Andcril vol. iv. I'.at, ii (6 . j ll1 il L . i :.

BooK IV. culty out of his hands. In a place of fircngth, flie was secured

from all the attempts of his enemies.

One small difficulty still remained to be surmounted. As tlhe

QOcen was kept in a fort of captivity by Bothwell, a marriage
concluded in that condition might be imputed to force, and be
May i2. held invalid. In order to obviate this, Mary appeared in the

court of fflfion, and in pretence of the Chancellor, the other
judges, and several of the nobility, declared that fle was now at
full liberty; and though Bothwcll's violence in seizing her per-
son had, at first, excited her indignation, yet his refpeAtful beha-
viour since that time had not only appeased her resentment, but
determined her to raise him to higher honours *.

Is married VWhat these were, soon became public. The title of Duke of
toten Orkney was conferred upon Bothwell; and on the Isth of May

his marriage with the Queen, which had so long been the objet
of his wiihes, and the motive of his crimes, was solemnized.
The ceremony was performed, in public, according to the rites
of the Proteflant Church, by Adam Bothwell bishop of Orkney,
one of the few prelates who had embraced the Reformation, and
on the fame day, was celebrated in private, according to the
forms prescribed by the Popilh religion-j. The boldness writh
which Craig, the Minister who was commanded to publifl the
banns, testified againfl the design ; the small number of the nobles,
who were present at the marriage and the fullen and difrefpe&-
ful silence of the people, when the Queen appeared in public;
were manifest symptoms of the violent and general diffatisfacion
of her own fubjeAs. The refusal of Du Croc the French ambaf-
fador to be prcfent at the nuptial ceremony or entertainment dill
covers the fcntiments of her allies, with regard to this part of her
conduct. And although every other action in Mary's life could
be jultified by the rules of prudence, or reconciled to the princi-
ples of virtue, this fatal marriage would remain an incontcefible
lroof of her ralhnefs, if not of her guilt.

IIary's firfl care was to offer fomc apology for her conduct, to

thc courts of F'rance and England. The inflru<ions to her am-
Ibafl';dors flill remain, and arc drawn by a mallerly hand. Bjut
lvndcr all the artificial and false colouring flic employs, it is c;fy
to dilcover'not only that many of the flcps flie had taken were un-
jilltifiabll, Iut that Ilc herlill' was coniicious that they could not
lt' junlified ..

t Andcrr. i. 87 . 4 I 1. 13 76. Il. t. R9.

The title of King was the only thing, which was not bellowed BoolK IV.
hpon Botlwell. Notwithstanding her attachment to him, Mary 

I$66.

remembered the inconveniencies, which had arisen from the rafli
advancement of her former husband to that honour. She agreed,
however, that he should sign, in token of consent, all the public
writs issued in her name*. This was nothing more than mere
form, but, together with it, he possessed all the reality of power.
The Queen's person was in his hands; Ihe was surrounded more
closely than ever by his creatures; none of her fubjeAs could ob-
tain audience without his permission; and, unless in his own pre-
fence, none but his confidents were permitted to converse with
her-s. The Scottifi Monarchs were accustomed to live among
their fubjels as fathers or as equals, without difiruft, and with
little slate; armed guards (landing at the doors of the royal apart-
ment, difficulty of access, diltance and retirement, were things
unknown and unpopular.

These precautions were necessary for fecuHing to Bothwell the Endcavours

to [ecornl

power, which he had acquired. But, without being mafler of mPter of
the person of the young Prince, he efleemcd all that he had gain- the Prince's
ed to be precarious and uncertain. The Queen had committed perot
her son to the care of the Earl of Mar. The fidelity and loyalty
of that nobleman were too well known to expe& that he would
be willing to put the Prince into the hands of the man, who was
so violently fufpccled of having murdered his father. Bothwell,
however, laboured to get the Prince into his power, with an
anxiety, which gave rife to the blackest suspicions. All his ad-
dress as well as authority were employed to persuade, or to force
Mar, into a compliance with his demands $. And it is no flight
proof both of the firmness and dexterity of that nobleman, that he
preserved a life of li much importance to the nation, from lying
at the mercy of a man, whom fear or ambition might have
prompted to violent attempts against it.

lThe eyes of neighbouring nations were fixed, at that time, (i'll: ,n'

upon the great events, which had happened in Scotland, during whidc tilh
three months. A King murdered, with the utmost cruelty, in QtiltinL-
the prime of his days, and in his capital city ; the person fiulpect- cit.d
ed of that,odious crime ifflfered not only to appear publicly in
every place, but admitted into the presence of the QLecn, dfliin-
ginilled by her favour, and intrufled with the chief direstion of
her af'fir.s; fubjcdcd to a trial, which was carried on with molt

' Coo.l. 2 60. ' t And. i 136. i Me:-. 6c- . . u.ll r6:.

Bool lV. lhamelefs partiality, and acquittod by a sentence, which served

only to confirm the suspicions of his guilt; divorced from his
wife, on pretences frivolous, or indecent; and after all this, inr
stead of meeting with the ignominy duc to his actions, or the pu-
nifhment merited by his crimes, permitted openly, and without
oppofitioli, to marry a Queen, the wife of the Prilice -whom he
had affaltinated, and tle guardian of those laws which lie had
been guilty of violating. Such a quick fuccefflon of incidents,
so singular, and so detestable, is not to be found in any other his-
tory. They left, in the opinion of foreigners, a mark of infamy
on the charater of the nation. The Scots were held in abher-
rence all over Europe; they durst scarce appear any where in
public;. and after suffering so many atrocious deeds to pars witl
impunity, they were universally reproached as men void of cou-
rage, or of humanity, as equally regardless of the reputation of
their Queen, and the lonour of their country *.

The nobles Tliefe reproaches routed tlie nobles, who had been hitherto
combinn e a- mnufed by Botlhwell's artifices, or intimidated by his power. The
andl Bolh- manner in which he exerciscd the authority which he had acqui-
wvcl!. red, his repeated attempts to become mafier of the Piince's per-

son, together with some rafl threatenings against him, which he
let fallt, added to the violence and promptness of their refo-
lutions. A considerable body of them assembled at Stirling, and
entcred into an allociation for the defence of the Prince's person.
Argyle, Athol, Mar, Morton, Glencairn, Home, Lindsay, Boyd,
Murray of Tu]libardin, Kirkaldy of Grange, and Maitland the
Secretary, were the heads of this confederacy i. Stewart Earl
of Athol was remarkable for an uniform and bigotted attachment
to Popery, but his indignation on account of the murder of the
King, to whom lie was nearly allied, and his zeal for the safety
of the Prince, overcame, on this occasion, all considerations of
religion, and united him with the molt zealous Proteltants. Se-
veral of the other nobles aed, without queition, from a laudable
concern for the lhfety of the Prince, and the honour of their
country. But tlhe ipirit which tome of them dilcovered, during
the fuiblequent revolutions, leaves little room to doubt, that am-
bition or refintment were tlie real motives of their conduce: and
that, on many occasions, vhile they \xcrc purruing ends jull and
nicceffary they were :aluatcld by principlcs and pailions altogc-
ihelr tunjuilifiable.

lc\,lel vl. i. :, 1, l. v. ;l. ,. S.t: Appncilx, No. 7X.
'] lbid G . ii.} l:tiith .j\

The first accounts of this league filled the Qcen and Bothwell BZooK IV.

with great conflernation. lThey were no firangers to the senti-
ments of the nation, with refpe& to their conduct ; and though
their marriage had not met with public opposition, they knew
that it had not been carried on without the secret disgust and
murmurings of all ranks of men. They forceaw the violence with
whliich this indignation would burlf out, after being lb long sup-
pressed. And in order to prepare for the florm, Mary iflfued a
proclamation, requiring her subjects to take arms, and to attend May 28.
her husband by a day appointed. At the fame time, lic publinl-
ed a fort of manifesto, in which lile laboured to vindicate her go-
vernment from those imputations with which it had been loaded,
and employed the firongell terms to exprels her concern for the
safety and welfare of the Prince her son. Neither of these pro-
duced any considerable effcl. Her proclamation was ill obeyed,
and her manifflo met with little credit*.

The confederate ILords carried on their preparations with no The Queen
less aRcivity, and with nmuch more success. Among a warlike Iad Both-

w 'll r.' ;re

people, men of fb much power and popularity found it an easy to Dulb:lar.
matter to raise an army. They were ready to march before the
Queen and Bothwell were in a condition to refill them. The
castle of Edinburgh was the place whither the Queen ought na-
turally to have retired, and there her person might have been per-
fetly safe. But the confederates had fallen on means to lhake,
or corrupt the fidelity of Sir James Balfour the deputy govi nor,
and Bothwell durst not comrnmit to him luich an important trull.
He condu&tcd the'Qeen to the callle of Borthwick, and on the June 6,
appearance of Lord Home, with a body of his followers, before
tlat place, he lied with precipitation to Dunbar, and was follow-
ed by the Queen, difguiled in men's clothes. The confederates
advanced towards Edinburgh, where Huntly'endeavoured, in vain,
to animate the inhalitants to defend the town againll them. They
entered without opposition, and were inflantly joined by many of
the citizens, whose zeal became the firmell lupport of their caufe-l-.

In order to set their own condluct in the moll favourable light,

and to rouse the public indignation againfl Bothwell, the nobles
publiled a declaration of the moutives wh!ich had induced them to
take arn;. All Botlhwell's p:Ii crimes were enumerated, all Ii:.
wicked intentions displa;ycd ;nd aggravated, ;and every true St ,tf-
m;nl was called ulpoll to jo(in thi in ivengig the one, and in
preventitng tlhe otlher :.

"zitl',38,3,30 *; lbi.l,

2,38. Z Al:lth
298r. l. i

K 1:

Book; V. Meanwhile, Bothwell assembled his forces at Dunbar, and as

,r - he had many dependents in that corner, he soon gathered such
5 t. rength that he ventured to advance towards the confederates.

Their troops were not numerous; the fuddenefs and secrecy of
their enterprise gave their friends at a dilance no time to join
them; and as it does not appear that they were supported either
xvith money, or fed with hopes by the Queen of England, they
could not have kept long in a body. But on the other hand,
30othwell durst not rifque a delay *. I-is army followed him with
reluctance in this quarrel, and served him with no cordial assec-
tion; so that his only hopes of success was in surprising the enemy,
or in fIriking the blow before his own troops had leisure to recol-
leE themselves, or to imbibe the fame unfavourable opinion of his
adions, which had spread over the reft of the nation. These mo-
tives determined the Oueen to march forward, with an incon-
fiderate and fatal speed.

The nobles On the first intelligence of her approach, the confederates ad-

,ir etlla- vanced to meet her. They found her forces dra.wn up on the

gainil theni.
Julle 15. fame ground which the Englifli had poffelTed at the battle of

Pinky. The numbers on both fides were nearly equal; but there
was no equality in point of discipline. The Queen's army confilt-
ed chiefly of a multitude, hailily assembled, without courage or
experience in war. The troops of the confederates were compos-
ed of gentlemen of rank and reputation, followed by their most
trusty dependents, who were no less brave than zealoust.

An accom- Du Croc the French Ambassador, who was in the field, la..
ntlo"atl. boured, by negociating both with the Qeen and the nobles, to

put an end to the quarrel without the effusion of blood. He re-
presented to the confederates the Qceen'a inclinations towards
peace, and her willingness to pardon the offences which they had
committed. MIorton replied, with warmth, that they had taken
arms not against the Queen, but against the murderer of her hus-
band, and if he were given up to juflice, or banished from her
prelence, lte lhould find them ready to yield the obedience which
is due from fubjeas to their Sovereign. Glencairn added, that
they did not come to alk ipardon for any offence, but to punifli
thole who had offended. These haughty answers convinced the
Ambba.fiador, that his mediation would he incffecual, and that
their pallions were too high to allow them to lillen to any pacific
propositions, or to think of retreating after having proceeded fl
sari ':.

'ile OQeen's army was polled to advantage, on a rifng ground. BooK IV.

The confederates advanced to the attack resolutely, but slowly, 6
and with the caution which was natural on that unhappy field. I
Her troops were alarmed at their approach, and discovered no in-
clination to fight. Mary endeavoured to animate them; (he wept,
flie threatened, (he reproached them with cowardice; but all in
vain. A few of Bothwell's immediate attendants were eager for
the encounter; the reft flood wavering and irresolute, and some
began to fleal out of the field. Bothwell attempted to in-
spirit them, by offering to decide the quarrel, and to vindicate
his own innocence in single combat with any of his adversaries.
Kirkaldy of Grange, Murray of Tullibardin, and Lord Lindsay
contended for the honour of entering the lifts againll him. But
this challenge proved to be a mere bravade. Either the confci-
oufnefs of guilt deprived Bothwell of his wonted courage, or the
(Qieen, by her authority, forbade the combat*.

After the symptoms of fear discovered by her followers, Mary

would have been inexcusable, had she hazarded a battle. To have
retreated in the face of an enemy, who had already surrounded
the hill on which (he flood, with part of their cavalry, was utter-
ly impracicable. In this situation, file was under the cruel ne-
ccflity of putting herself into the hands of those fubjests who had
taken arms againfl her. She demanded an interview with Kirk-
aldy, a brave and generous man, who commanded an advanced
body of the enemy. He, with the conlent and in name of the
leaders of the party, promised that, on condition {le would dif-
ilifs Bothwell from her presence, and govern the kingdom by the
tdvice of her nobles, they would honour and obey her as their
Sovereign t-.

During this parley, Bothwell took his last farewell of the Qceen, notliwvll
and rode off the field with a few followers. Tlhis dilnal reverse oblged to

fly.

happened exacly one month after that marriage, which had colt
him so many crimes to accomplish, and which leaves so foul a
slain on Mary's memory.

As soon as Bothwell retired, MlIary surrendered to Kirkaldy, Mary fulr.
who conduced her toward the confederate army, the leaders of rendcr'' '

the nobllc.'

which received her with much respect; and Morton, in their name,
made ample professions of their future loyalty and obedience -:.
lBut fle was treated by hlle common soldiers with the utmofi in-
folence and indignity. As (lie marched along, they poure(l ulpo

C:ald. vol. ii. ,o. t Good. \ol. ii. i6.G ' IMIclv. i6,.
* Good. vol. ii. i65.

{ k ; j

BooKIV. her all the opprobrious names, which are beltowcd only on the

-

r lowefl and moil infamous criminals. Wherever flie turned her
566' eyes, they held up before her a itandard, on which was painted

the dead body of the late King, firetched on the ground, and the
young Prince kneeling before it, and uttering these words; " Judge
and revenge my cause, O Lord !" Mary turned with horror from
such a flocking fight. She began already to feel the wretched
condition to which a captive Prince is reduced. She uttered the
inoft bitter complaints, she melted into tears, and could scarce be
kept from finking to the ground. The confederates carried her
towards Edinburgh, and, in spite of many delays, and after look-
ing with the fondness and credulity natural to the unfortunate for
some unexpeted relief, fhc arrived there. The firects were co-
vered with multitudes, whom zeal or curiosity had drawn together,
to behold such an unusual scene. The Queen, worn out with fa-
tigue, covered with duff, and bedewed with tears, was exposed
as a fpedacle to her own fubjeds, and led to the Provost's houfc.
Notwithflanding all her arguments and entreaties, the fame fIan-
dard was carried before her, and the fame insults and reproaches
repeated. A woman, ycung, beautiful, and in difrefs, is natu-
xrlly the object of compassion. The comparison of their present
mnifery with their former splendour, usually softens us in favour of
illustrious sufferers. But the people beheld the deplorable fitua-
tion of their Sovereign with insensibility; and so fsrong was their
persuasion of her guilt, and so great the violence of their indig-
nation, that the sufferings of their Queen did not, in any degree
mitigate their resentment, or procure her that sympathy, which i:
seldom denied to unfortunate Princes*

'/ Melvil, ]66. Euch.,164.

1 ·1

-Mall- i cmoon l~n\W;~~n el i-g~ne~i!W 10([DtU-Ci&D
0 ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-7,),~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~,

# BOOK FIFTH. CONTENTS. DELIBERATIONS of the Scottish Nobles. Imprisonment of the Queen. Interposition of Elizabeth. The resignation of the Queen of Scotland. James VI. crowned. Murray Regent. Fate of ...

THE
HI S TO R Y

OF
SCO T L AND

BOOK FIFTH.

CONTENTS.
IDELIBERATION'S of the Scottlih Nobles. Imprifonmnent of the Q0een. Inter-

position of Elizabeth. The resignation of the Queen of Scotland. James VI.
crowned. Murray Regent. Fate of Bothwell. A parliament. Efcapc of
Queen Mary. Battle of Langfide. The Queen's flight into England. Art
and perfidy of Elizabeth. Mary carried to Bolton. ci-e conduLt. A parlia-
ment. The conference at York. Its removal to lVellminetcr. Mary de-
mands an audience of Elizabeth. The accusation by Murray. nlarfh treat-
ment of Mary. 'Difrimulation ofElizabeth. Disturbances in Scotland. Scheme
of Norfolk. DICcovcred by Elizabeth. Secretary Maitland imprisoned by
Murray. Rebellion in the north of England. Coliijiracy to deliver up the
Queen of Scotland to Murray. · His death, and character.

T HE confederate Lords had proceeded to fucl extremities againflt l:OK V.
their Sovereign, that it now became almost impofflble for them n
either to flop fliort, or to purfte a course less violent. Many of ;5

.

the nobles had refused to concur with them in their cnterprife; tiols ofttiv
others openly condemned it. A small ch'cumflance might abate 1oblcs con-

ccring lie

that indignation with which the multitude were, at present, ani- Qiccn.
mated againfi the Queen, and deprive them of that popular ap-
plause which was the chief foundation of their power. Tlic 1
considerations inclined some of them to treat the Qecn with
great lenity.

But, on the other hand, Mary's affe&ion for Bothwecll conti-

nued as violent as ever; fle obflinatcly refiufed to hearken to alny
proposal for diltolving their marriage, and dctcimlined not to ;a-
bandon a man, for wvholi love llie had alrcady sacrificeld so nlucl i .
If they fliould allow her to recover the fulprme n pcower, tlie iirl.
exertiun of it would be to recall Bothwlcll ; and tlcy hiatl rcaLon,

K cilthl 419, 44;6, 319. Mllv. 167. Sec Append. LNo. .l.

noo: V'. both from his resentment, from her conduct, and from their oi',

to expect the severest effects of her vengeance. These confidera-
7 tions surmounted every other motive; and reckoning themselves

absolvcd, by Mary's incurable attachment to Bothwell, from the
engagements which they had come under when she yielded her-
self a prifoncr, they, without regarding the duty which they owed
her as their Queen, and without consulting the reft of the nobles,

'rT.y ;m- carried her next evening, under a itrong guard, to the castle of
pi;ibn her
L llodh- Lochlevin, and signed a warrant to William Douglas the owner
levin. of it, to detain her as a prisoner. This castle is situated in a

.frall island, in the middle of a lake. Douglas, to whom it be-
longed, was a near relation of Morton's, and had married the
Earl of Murray's mother. In this place, under firi& custody,
with a few attendants, and subjectcd to the insults of a haughty
woman, who boafled daily of being the lawful wife of James V.
Mary suffered all the rigour and miseries of captivity *.

Immediately after the (Qeen's inmprifonment, the confederates

were at the utmost pains to ftrongthen -their party; they entered
into new bonds of association ; they afumred the title of Lords of
the Secret Council, and without any other right, arrogated to them-
selves the whole regal authority. One of their first ads of power
vas to search the city of Edinburgh for those who were concern-
ed in the murder of the King. This (hew of zeal gained reputa-
tion io themselves, and thiew an oblique refleaion on the Queen
for her remissness. Several fufpeced persons were seized. Cap-
tain Blackadder and three others were condemned and executed.
IBlt no discovery of importance was made. If we believe fdme
Iiflorians, they were convicted by fuflccient evidence. If we
give credit to others, their sentence was unjust, and they denied,
wvith their last breath, any knowledge of the prime, for which
they fufiered--.

An unexpctAcd accident, however, put into the hands of Ma-

; et;s c.emlies what they deemed the fullert evidence of her guilt.
I, ,tlhw\vll:1 having left, in the caflle of Edinburgh, a calket, con-
t;ining several iolincts and letters written witl the Queen's own
hanid ; lie now font one of his confidents to bring to him tlis
,rcciouc d cpofitc. But as his mcflnger returned, lic was inter-
ceplted, and the caflkct fcizcd by Morton 1:. And the contents of
it vc:c al\ays produced by the party, as the moll ample julifica.

" l:id, 1o. Nte (L). '. C.al,. vol. ii.3. Cra'rwfT.

io. 935.
t .\l,,.Ic l. \vol. ii . ' ood. ' o l. ii. 90.

lion of their own conduc, and the molt unanswerable proof of BooicV.
their not having loaded their Sovereign with the imputation of

t* 1567.
imaginary crimes.*

But the confederates, notwithstanding their extraordinary fuc- Somcofthe

nobh'b fh-

cefs,-were still far from being perfectly at ease. That so small a ,,yoth1r
part of the nobles should pretend to dispose of the person of their Quee.
Sovereign, or to assume the authority which belonged to her,
without the concurrence of the reft, appeared to many of that
body to be unprecedented, and presumptuous. Several of thefc
were now afemnbled at Hamilton, in order to deliberate what
course they filould hold, in this difficult conjuncture. The con-
federates made some attempts towards a coalition with them, but
without effect. They employed the mediation of the Assembly
of the Church, to draw them to a personal interview at Edin-
burgh, but with no better success. That party, however, though
its numbers were formidable, and the power of its leaders great,
ibon loft reputation by the want of unanimity and vigour ; all its
consultations evaporated in murmurs and complaints, and no fchcme
was concerted for obfiruding the progress of the confederates -.

There appeared some prospect of danger from another quarter. Eliza,1)tl,

This great revolution in Scotland had been carried on without "li'tc,"ij:s
any aid from Elizabeth, and even without her knowledge t. And hall
though she was far from being difpleafel to fee the affairs of that
kingdom embroiled, or a rival, whom lfie hated, reduced to dif-
trefs, flhe neither villed that it flould be in the power of the one
faciojn entirely to suppress the other, nor could llec view the Itcls
taken by the confederates without great offence. INTotwiithllinl-
ing the popular maxims by which fle governed her ownn fubjcls,
her notions of royal prerogative were very exalted. hlle confe-
derates had, in her opinion, encroached on the authority of tlicir
Sovereign, which they had no right to controul, and had offered
violence to her person, which it was their duty to elccll sacred.
They had set a dangerous example to other flubjccls, and lIary's
cause became the common cause of Princes 1J. If ever Eliz:abetb
was influenced witl regard to the aflairs of Scotland, by the fc:l--
ings of her heart, rather than by considerations of intercll, it wvas
on this occasion. Slhe inllaltly dilipntched Thrloginorton into June j..
Scotland, with powers to negociate both with the (Quen, alnd
Ivith tlhe confederates. In Iis inilluinlions there appears i renark-
able solicitude for l;llry': liberty, and VCei for lier reputation 'S.

Si'e Difl; itatioi at e(' ml of thl Appei clix. [ Keill, ,107.
1d.
h rs-.
. - § l. .i .

Booi V. both from his resentment, from her condua, and from their ostli,

to expect the fevereit effects of her vengeance. These confidera-
I6 tions surmounted every other motive; and reckoning themselves

absolved, by Mary's incurable attachment to Bothwell, from the
engagements which they had come under when she yielded her-
self a prifoncr, they, without regarding the duty which they owed
ler as their Queen, and without consulting the reft of the nobles,

'tcv irn- carried her next evening, under a itrong guard, to the castle of
priib¥ here
i,,I'oKh Lochlevitl, and signed a warrant to William Douglas the owner
!cvin. of it, to detain her as a prisoner. This castle is situated in ;

small island, in the middle of a lake. Douglas, to whom it be-
longed, was a near relation of Morton's, and had married the
Earl of Murray's mother. In this place, under itria custody,
with a few attendants, and fubje&rcd to the insults bs a haughty
woman, who boafled daily of being the lawful wife of James V.
Mary fuflered all the rigour and miseries of captivity *.

Immediately after the Queen's iriprifonment, the confederates

were at the uttlioft pains to ftrongthen -their party they entered
into new bonds of association ; they assumed the title of Lords of
the Secr-e! Concil, and without any other right, arrogated to them-
selves the whole regal authority. One of their first aas of power
vwas to search the city of Edinburgh for those who were concern-
ed in the murder of the King. This fliew of zeal gained reputa-
tion to themselves, and threw an oblique refleaion on the Queen
for her remifl'nefs. Several fufpeated persons were seized. Cap-
tain Blackadder and three others were condemned and executed.
But no discovery of importance was made. If we believe some
hiiforians, they vere convicted by fuflicient evidence. If we
give credit to others, their sentence was unjuff, and they denied,
vdith their lafl breath, any knowledge of the prime, for which
they suffercd-.

An unexpected accident, howevei, put into the hands of Ma-

r:''s c eemics what they deemed the fullest evidence of her guilt.
L',.:hi;vcll having left, in the caflle of Edinburgh, a caiket, con-
taining flcveral ionnets and letters written with the Queen's own
hand ; lhe now fcnt one of hi-s confidents to bring to him this
irccioui depofitc. But as Ihis nmefincger returned, he was intcr-
c.ptc.l, and the cf;kect lfizcd by IMorton :-. And the contents of
i; v.:c:'e aloays pirduced by the party, as the molt ample junific;l.

" I-:iih, *.193. N t,.t (L). 'l' Cal.l. vol . i 53. Cr s.avs c. l 35.

i..., r . vol. ii. 9'. Good. vol. ii. 9c.

tion of their own condut, and the most unanswerable proof of BooieV.
their not having loaded their Sovereign with the imputation of
,imaginary crimes."

But the confederates, notwithstanding their extraordinary fuc- Some of the

iobles ta-

cefs,-were flill far from being perfectly at ease. That so small a li,'thie
part of the nobles should pretend to dispose of the person of their (Quetu
Sovereign, or to assume the authority which belonged to her,
without the concurrence of the reft, appeared to many of that
body to be unprecedented, and presumptuous. Several of thefc
were now assemblcd at Hamilton, in order to deliberate what
course they (fould hold, in this difficult conjuncture. The con-
federates made some attempts towards a coalition with them, but
without effec&. They employed the mediation of the Assembly
of the Church, to draw them to a personal interview at Edin-
·burgh, but with no better success. Tllat party, however, though
its numbers were formidable, and the power of its leaders great,
lbon loft reputation by the want of unanimity and vigour; all its
consultations evaporated in murmurs and complaints, and no fchcme
was concerted for obftruding the progress of the confederates-s-.

There appeared some profpet of danger from another quarter. Elizal),tl,

This great revolution in Scotland had been carried on without irLtli'jcs
any aid from Elizabeth, and even without her knowledge -t. And hall
though flie was far from being displeased to fee the affiirs of that
kingdom embroiled, or a rival, whom file hated, reduced to dif-
trefs, she neither wiflied that it ffiould be in the power of the one
fa&ioqn entirely to suppress the other, nor could lhe view the Itclls
taken by the confederates without great offence. Notwithfllnld-
ing the popular maxims by which ihe governed her own fubjec.s,
her notions of royal prerogative were very exalted. 'h'lc confe-
derates had, in her opinion, encroached on the authoilty of their
Sovereign, which they had no right to controul, and had oflercdl
violence to her person, which it was their duty to eflecin sacred.
They had set a dangerous example to other fubjecis, and Mary's
cause became the common cause of Princes |l. If ever Elizabeth
was influenced with regard to the afl'airs of Scotland, by the fccl--
ings of her heart, rather than by conliderations of interest, it vas
on this occasion. Slh inflantly dlifaintched 'Ihoginorton into June 3-
Scotland, with powers to ntegociate both witl the Oueen, and
wvith the confederates. In Iii inlliutflions there appears :t remnrlk-
able solicitude for ]\l'aIy':; liberty, and even for lier rcputation t .

S ec Dil;:rltatlion .at rtli: eml of tih Alpplndix. I' Keili,, 107.

JI .I I. d
I . ,11 . .. .. I .111.

. oon V. And the choice of an Ambassador, so devoted to the interest of
"--V the Scottill Queen, proves this solicitude to have been finccre.

7 But neither Elizabeth's friendfliip, nor Throgmorton's zeal,

were of much avail to Mary. The confederates foresaw what
would be the effects of these good offices; and that the Queen,
elated by the profpe of protection, would reject with scorn the
overtures which they were about to make her. They, for that rca-
son, peremptorily denied Throgmorton access to their prisoner.
And what propositions he made to them in her behalf, they ei-
ther refuted, or eluded *.

SA"mes of Meanwhile they deliberated with the utmost anxiety, con-
aten^oes. cerning the fettleimeut of the nation, and the future disposal of

the Qeen's person. Elizabeth, observing that Throgmorton
miade no progress in his negociations with them, and that they
would lillen to none of his demands in Mary's favour, turned to-
wards that party of the nobles vwho were affemnbled at Hamilton,
incited them to take arms in order to reltore their Queen to liber-
ty, and promised to aflih them in fucl an attempt, to the utmofl
of her power-. But they discovered no greater union or viguor
than formerly, and behaving like men who had given up all con-
cern either for their QOeen or their country, tamely allowed an
inconsiderable part of their body, whether we confider it with
refpeit to numbers, or to power, to fettle the government of the
kingdom, and to dilpofc of the Queen's perlbn at pleaiure. Ma-
ny conlIultations were held, and various opinions arose with regard
to each of these. Some seemed desirous of adhering to the plan
on v'hichl the confederacy was at firlt formed ; and after punifl-
ing the murderers of the King, and dissolving tlhe marriage with
Scthnwell; after providing for the safety of the young Prince, and
the security of the Prctcllant religion ; they proposed to re-cfla-
Lliihl the (Qeen in tie poit'efion of her legal authority. The
f:cccli with xhich their arms had been accompanied, inspired
itlIcrs with bolder and more dciperate thoughts, and nothing less
c'·.: i ittist V them than the trial, the condelmnation and punili-
Il'nC: of t-el Qucen herlfelf, as the principal conspirator againfl the
!ii'c of her hulbrnd and the fafcty of her fobn thli former was
...: ....'s !. ema, and breathed too much of a p'icific anti modcrlat
I';in'i, to be agreeable to the temper or vi(llJ e of tle party. 'The.
:::: \;.as recommended by t:e clergy, and airnily adlopled by

KI; Zh, . , *4:7. -. Sec e AI 'cni,:,

-:. Si [I.

K.
K ;i, .lz:, , ..

llany laics; but the nobles durff not, or would not venture on fuclh BooK V.
an unprecedented and audacious deed *. ró

1567'

Both parties ngreed at last upon a fchemc, neither so moderate T1, oblige

as the-one, nor-fo daring as the other. Mary was to be perfuad- thie letll
cd or forced to resign the Crown ;. the young Prince was to be t' ileogvn
proclaimed King, and the Earl of Mlurray was to be appointed to mcllt.
govern the kingdom during his minority, with the name and au-
thority of Regent. With regard to the Queen's own person, no-
thing was determined. It seems to have been the intention of
the confederatcs, to keep her in perpetual imprifonnent ; but in
order to intimidate herself, and to overawe her partizans, they
Itill reserved to themselves the power of proceeding to more vio-
lent extremes.

It was obvious to foresee difficulties in the execution of this

plan. Mary was young, ambitious, high-fpirited, and accustom-
ed to command. To induce her to acknowledge her own inca-
pacity for governing, to renounce the dignity and power which
hle was born to enjoy, to become dependent on her own fubjecs,
to consent to her own bondage, and to invest those persons, whom
flle confidided as the authors of all her calamities, with that ho-
nour and authority of which file herself was firipped, were points,
hard to be gained. These, however, the confederates attempted,
and they did not want means to insure success. Mary had endu-
red, for several weeks, all tlhe hardfuips and terror of a prison; no
prospect of liberty appeared; none of her fubjeats had cither taken
arms, or so much as solicited her relief --; no person in whom flle
could confide was admitted into her presence ; even the Ambaffa-
dors of the French King and Queen of England were refused acccs
to her. In this solitary slate, without a counsellor or a friend,
under the pressure of distress, and the apprehension of danger, it
was natural for a woman to hearken almoR to any overtures.
The confederates took advantage of her condition, and of her
fears. They employed Lord Lindlay, the fiercell zealot in the
party, to communicate their scheme to the Qceen, and to obtain
her subscription to those papers which were necessary for render-
ing it effeltu:l. I-Ic executed his comminioln with harlllnefs antd
brutality. Certain death was before Mary's eyes, if lhe refuscd
to comply with his demands. At the fame time, (he was informl-

* Thie intention of puitting the Qlcen to detlc il Rems to have beentr Laericd ol

by rome of helr rubljcts: at this time we often find Eliza:beth bolaftingl tllat ITa-
ry owed hel life to her iutcrplofition. Dig,;cs's Conill. Amib. x.i, &c. See Arl.pel-
(lix, No. XVIII.

J K ith, 4!j.

I;

* O.K er ed by Sir Robert Melvil, in name of Athol, Maitland, and Kirks
1567. aldy, the persons among the confederates'who were most' atten-

tive to her interest, that a resignation extorted by fear, and grant-
ed during her imprisonment, was void in law, and might be re-
voked so soon as she recovered liberty. Thr'bgmorton, by a
note which he found means to convey to her, suggested the fame
tiling*. Deference to their opinion, as wellas concern for her own
safety, obliged her to yield to every thing which was required,
and to sign all the papers which Lindsay presented to her. By
July 24. one of these, l(he resigned the Crown, renounced all hlare in the

government of the kingdom, and consented to the coronation of
the young King. By another, she appointed the Earl of Mur-
ray Regent, and conferred upon him all the powers and privileges
of that high office. By a third, she substituted some other noble-
man in Murray's place, if he should refute the honour which was
designed for him. Mary, when flei subscribed these deeds, was
bathed in tears ; and while (he gave away, as it were with her
own hands, the sceptre which- she had swayed so long, she felt a
pang of grief and indignation, one of the severest, perhaps, which
can touch the human heart -.
James VI. The confederates endeavoured to give this resignation all the

cr j, weight and validity in their power, by proceeding, without delays

anii 1Mur-
ray chosen to crown the young Prince. The ceremony was performed at
Regent. Stirling, on the 29th of July, with much solemnity, in presence

of all the nobles of the party, a considerable number of lefler Barons,
and a great assembly of the people. From that time, all public
writs were issued, and the government carried on, in name of
James VI :.

No revolution so great was ever effeted with more ease, or by

means so unequal to the end. In a warlike age, and in less time
than two months, a part of the nobles, who neither possessed the
chief power, nor the greatest wealth in the nation, and who ne-
ver brought three thousand men into the field, seized, imprisoned,
and dethroned their Queen, and without shedding a single drop of
blood, set her son, an infant of a year old, on the throne.

RearnTlins During this rapid progress of the confederates, the eyes of all
of both par. the nation were turned on them, with allonilhmnt ; and various
ties and contradictory opinions were formed, concerning the extraor-

dinary steps which they had taken.

Even under the arillocratical form of govcrnment, which pre-.
vails in Scotland, said the favourers of the Qccn, and notwith-

' lK.ih, ·."5. Note (x)). MclY. 169. ' Ibid. 43J. Cra;w. Mein. 358.
...IL, ..137.

%landing the exorbitant privileges of the nobles, the Prince pof- BOOK v.
fesses considerable power, and his person is treated with great venera.
tion. No encroachments lhould be made on the former, and no 67'
injury offered to the latter, but in cafes where the liberty and
happiness of the nation cannot be secured by any other means.
Such cafes seldom exist, and it belongs not to any part, but to the
whole, or at least to a majority of the society, to judge of their
existence. By what aftion could it be pretended, that Mary had
invaded the rights or property of her subje&s, or what fchemr
had Ihe formed againlt the liberty and constitution of the king-
dom ? Were fears, and suspicions, and surmises, enough to jufti-
fy the imprisoning, and the deposing a Queen, to whom the Crown
descended from so long a race of Monarchs ? The principal au.
thor of whatever was reckoned culpable in her conduEt, was now
driven from her presence. The murderers of the King might
have been brought to condign punilhmcnt, the safety of the Prince
have been secured, and the Protestant religion have been cflablifh-
ed, without wresting the sceptre out of her hands, or condemning
her to perpetual imprisonment. Whatever right a free Parlia-
ment might have had to proceed to such a rik rous con 'ufion, or
whati-r name its determinations might have merited, a sentence
of this nature, passed by a few nobles, without acknowledging
or consulting the reft of the nation, mull be deemed a rebellion
against the government, and a conlpiracy againlt the person of
their Sovereign.

The partizans of the confederates reasoned very differently.

'Tis evident, said they, that Maiy either previously gave consent
to the King's murder, or did aftcrwards approve of that horrid
acion. Her attachment to Botllwell, the power and honours
with which flie loaded him, the manner in which lhe lufflred his
trial to be carried on, and the indecent speed with which fIe mar-
ried a man, lained with so many crimes, raise ltrong fuliicions
of the forme\-, and put the latter beyond all doubt. To have tuf-
sered the supreme power to continue in the hands of an ambitious
man, capable of the most attrocious and desperate ascions, would
have been disgraceful to the nation, dilhonourable to the Queen,
and dangerous to the Prince. Recourlf was, therefore, had to
arms. The Queen had been compelled to abandon a husband, so
unworthy of hcrfelf. But her aficdlion toward him Itill continu-
ing unabated; her indignation againlt the authors of this liepcra-
tion being visible, and often expressed intlhe llrongell terms ; they,
by rclloring her to her ancient authority, would h:ve armed ecr

Ll ij

BOOK V. with power to defiroy themselves, have enabled her to recall Both.

well, and have afforded her an opportunity of pursuing schemes
xs67. fatal to the nation, with greater eagerness, and with more success.

Nothing, therefore, remained, but by one bold a&ion to deliver
themfeves and their country from all future fears. The expedi-
ent they had chosen was no less refpe&ful to the royal blood, than
necessary for the public safety. While one Prince was set aside
as incapable of governing, the Crowil was placed on his head,
who was the undoubted representative of their ancient Kings.

Whatever opinion pofierity may form on comparing the argu-

-meats of the two contending parties, whatever sentiments we may
entertain concerning the justice or necessity of that course which
the confederates held, it cannot be denied that their conduct, so
far as regarded themselves, was extremely prudent. Other ex-
pedients, less rigorous towards Mary, might have been found for
fettling the nation; but, after the injuries they had already offer-
-ed the Queen, there was none so effecual for securing their own
safety, or perpetuating their own power.

To a great part of the nation, the conduct of the confederates

appeared not only wife, but just. The King's acceflion to the
throne was every where proclaimed, and his authority uii mitted
to, without opposition. And though several of the nobles were
still assembled at Hamilton, and seemed to be entering into rome
combination againit his government, an association for supporting
it was formed, and signcd by so many persons of power and influ-
ence throughout the nation, as entirely discouraged the attempt '.

Murray as- The return of the Earl of Murray, .bout this time, added
tlmcs tlh strength to the party, and gave it a regular and finifled form.
mcnt. Soon after the murder of the King, this nobleman had retired in-

to France, upon what pretence hillorions do not mention.' Du-
ring his residence there, he had held a clofc correspondence with
the chiefs of the confederacy, and, at their dciire, he now re-
turned. He seemed, at firfl, unwilling to accept the office of Re-
gent. This hesitation cannot be ascribed to the scruples either of
diffidence, or of duty. MIurray wanted neither abilities to en-
title him, nor ambition to a'pirc to this high dignity. He had rec
ceived the firfl accounts of his promotion with the utmolt fatisfac-
tion; but by appearing to continue for some days in fufpence, lhe
gained time to view with attention the ground on which he was
to aft; to balance the firength and rcfources of the two contcnd-

AnIdcrl; vol. ii. bji.

ing factions, and to examine whether the foundation on which his TooK V.
future fame and success mufl reft, were found and firm.

Before he declared his final resolution, he waited on Mary at I567'

Lochlevin. This visit, to a filter, and a OQeen, in a prison, from
which he had neither any intention to relieve her, nor to miti-
gate the rigour of her confinement, may be mentioned among the
circumstances, which discover the great want of delicacy and re-
finement in that age. Murray, who was naturally rough and un-
courtly in his manner *, expoftulated so warmly with the Queen
concerning her pall conduct, and charged her faults so home upoa
her, that Mary, who had flattered herself with more gentle and
brotherly treatment from him, melted into tears, and abandoned
herself entirely to defpai-'~. This interview, from which Mur-
ray could reap no political advantage, and wherein he discovered
a spirit so severe and unrelenting, may be reckoned among the
molt bitter circumstances in Mary's life, and is ccrtainly one of
the moll unjultifiablc in his condut.

Soon after his return from Lochlevin, Murray accepted the of-

fice of Regent, and began to ac in that charater without oppofi- AuguRt =.
tion.

Amidst so many great and unexpected events, the fate of Both- Fate of

well, the chief cause of them all, hath been almost forgotten. As- 1Boa:'c-lL
ter his flight from the confederates, he lurked for some time a-
mong his vassals in the neighbourhood of Dunbar. But finding
it impoflible for him to make head, in that country, againfl his
enemies, or even to secure himrfelf from their pursuit, he fled for
fiheltcr to his linfman the bishop of Murray; and when he, over-
awed by the confederates, was obliged to abandon him, he reti-
red to the Orkney illes. Hunted from place to place, deflrtcd by
his friends, and accompanied by a few retainers, as defpcrate as
himself, he suffered at once the miseries of infamy, and of want.
His indigence forced him upon a course which added to his infa-
my. Ie armed a few small ships, which had accompanied hlim
from Dunbar, and attacking every vcl;fl which fell in his way,
endeavoured to procure subsistence for hirmrelf and follower.; by
piracy. Kirka:ldy and Murray of l'ullihardin were clnt out a-
aninil liini by the confederates; and s'urprising him vwlie lie rode
at anchor, fcattcrle his linall fleet, took a ;part of it, and obliged
him to fly witl a (ingle ll;ip to\ards Norway. On h.tit coalt lie
ell in with a vteffl rilcly laden, and iimmnni;t!cly attacked its

' I;.Klhh, 16. r II. .I
. j, 1;6.

BOOK V. the Norwegians failed with armed boats to its affillance, and as-

' ter a desperate fight, Bothwell and all his crew were taken pri,
56 7. foncrs. His name and quality were both unknown, and he was

treated at first with all the indignity and rigour, which the odi-
ous crime of piracy merited. His real characer was soon disco-
vered; and though it saved him from the infamous death to which
his associates were condemned, it could neither procure him li-
berty, nor mitigate the hardships of his imprisonment. He lan-
guifled ten years in this unhappy condition; melancholy and de-
fpair deprived him of reason, and at last he ended his days, unpiti-
ed by his countrymen, and unaflifted by firangers*. Few men
ever accomplifled their ambitious projecs by worse means, or
reaped from them less fatisfation. The early part of his life was
refilefs and enterprising, full of danger and of vicissitudes. His
enjoyment of the grandeur, to which he attained by so many crimes,
was extremely short; imbittered by much anxiety, and difluicted
by many fears. In his latter years, he suffered the mofl intoler-
able calamities, to which the wretched are subjet, and fromn
which persons who have moved in so high a sphere are common-
ly exempted.

Succers of The good effecs of Murray's accefllon to the regency were
the Regenit's
adminiltra- quickly felt. T he party forming for the Queen was weak, irre-
tion. folutc, and disunited; and no sooner was the government of the

kingdom in the hands of a man, so remarkable both for his abili-
ties and popularity, than the nobles of whom it was compoletd
loll all hopes of gaining ground, and began to treat separately with
the Regent. So many of them were brought to acknowledge
the King's authority, that scarce any appearance of opposition
to the eflablifed government was left in the kingdom. Had they
adhered to the Queen with any firmness, it is probable, from Eli-
zabeth's disposition at that time, that sic would have afforded.
them such aflfilance as might have enabled them to face their ene-
-mies in the field. But there appeared so little vigour or harmo-
ny in their councils, that file was dilcouraged from espousing their
caufc; and the Regent taking advantage of their situation, obli-
ged them to filbmit to his government, without granting apy
terms, either to themselves, or to the Queen -.

lThe Regent was no lcs successful in his attempt, to get into

his hands the places of frcength in the kingdoml. Balfour the
deputy-govcrnor, surrendered the cafle of Edinburghl; and as tl\

Nc!v. 68.& t Kliith, 447, 4.50, 463.

'fAward of his treachery, in deserting Bothwell his patron, obtain- BooK V.
ed terms of great advantage to himfclf. The Governor of Dun-
bar, who discovered more fidelity, was soon forced to capitulate; r567
some other small forts surrendered without resistance.

This face of tranquillity in the nation encouraged the Regent A Parlia.

to call a meeting of Parliament. Nothiing was wanting to con- Decem. 5.
firm the King's authority. and the proceedings of the confede-
rates, except the approbation of this supreme court; and after the
fucccfs which had attended all their measures, there could be little
doubt of obtaining it. The numbers that resorted to an Assembly,
which was called to deliberate on matters of so much importance
were great. The meeting was opened with the utmolt solemnity,
and all its acts pafled with much unanimity. Many, however,
of the Lords who had discovered the warnleft attachment to the
Queen, were present. But they had made their peace with the
Regent. Argyle, Huntly, and HIerreis acknowledged, openly,
in Parliment, that their behaviour towards the King had been un-
dutiful and criminal*. Their compliance, in this manner, with
the measures of the Regent's party, was either the condition on
which they were admitted into favour, or intended as a proof of
the sincerity of their reconcilement.

The Parliament granted every thing the confederates could de- C"ofirms

the pro-

mand, either for the safety of their own persons, or the security CtCelin,s of
of that form of government which they had established in the the crllfc-

deramts.

kingdom. Mary's resignation of the Crown was accepted, anti
declared to be valid. The King's authority, and Murray's elec-
tion, were recognized, and confirmed. The imprisoning the
QOecn, and all the other proceedings of the confederates, were
pronounced lawful. The letters which Mary had written to
Bothwell were produced, and ihe was declared to be accessory to
the murder of the King--. At the fame time, all the ats of
Parliament 156o, in favour of the Proteltant religion were pub-
licly ratified ; new flatutes to the fame pt-polC were cnacld.
And nothing that could contribute to root out the remains of
Popery, or to encourage the growth of the Rcformation, wusa
ne glected.

It is obfcrvable, however, that the fame parlfmolious spirit

prevailed in this Parliament, as in that of r 6o. The Prontelant
clergy, notwithflanding many lifcoulragcmcnts, and their ex-
treme poverty, had, for lfeten years, performed all religious of-

* Andelc vol. iv Sr.e. See Append. No. ;':XlI,
3'] Good. vol. ii 6G. A\nild. r ' vol. il. c6.c

BooKV. sices in the kingdom. The expedients fallen upon for their fuht

silence had hitherto proved ineffedtual, or were intended to be
5 so. But, notwithRanding their known indigence, and the warm

rcmonflrances of the Assembly of the church, which met this
year, the Parliament did nothing more for their relief, than pre-
scribe ofme new regulations concerning the payment of the thirds
of benefices, lwhich did not produce any considerable change in
the situation of the clergy.

tC(,8. A few days after the dif'olution of Parliament, four of Both-
JILuary 3. well's dependents were convicted of being guilty of the King's

murder, and fuffcred death as traitors. Their confessions brought
to light many circumrlances relative to the manner of committing
that barbarous crime ; but they were peifons of a low rank, and
fcem not to have been admitted into the fecrcts of the confpi-
tacy *.

INotwvithflanding the univcrfal fubmilfion to the Regent's au-

thoritv, there flill abounded in the kingdom many secret mur-
murs and cabals. The partizans of.the houre of Hamilton rec-
koned Murray's promotion an injury to the Duke of Chatelle-
rault, who, as first Prince of the blood, liad, in their opinion,
an undoubted right to be Regent. The length and rigour of
Mary's fuffirings began to move many to commiserate her cafe.
All vwho leaned to the ancient opinions in religion dreaded the
effects of Murray's zeal. And he, though his abilities were
gre;at, did not possess the talents requisite for soothing the rage
or removing the jealousles of these different factions. By infinu-
rtion, or address, he might have gained or softened many, who
had olpofcd him; but hle was a firanger to there gentle aits. His
virtues were fevcre; and his deportment towards his equals, c-
fplccially after his elevation to the regency, dillant and haughty.
This behaviour offcnded forme of the nobles, and alarmed others.
The Queen's faflion, which had been so cafily difpercd, began
.again to gather, and to unite, and was fecrctly favoured by sonic
who had hi ilheito zcaloufly concurred witl the confederatesl-.

>rnry er- Stuclh was the favourable dilijofition of the nation towards the
Luochlv;',. cnri, n, lien flic recovered lher liberty, in a manner no less fur-

priling to her friends, than unexpecqed by her enemies. Several
:Lttcmpts hadl been made to procutre her an opportunity of efcap-
irg, wlicll forac ullfoirclein accidcnt, or the vigilance of her
leeCprCs, lbad hitiIerto dilf.lloiiited. At lias, M'ary employed all

' : s.i,;l' vAJ. ii. J65. J. M\clv. 179.

her art to gain George Douglas her keeper's brother, a youth of BooK V.
eighteen. As her manners were naturally affable and infinuat-
ing, fie treated him with the most flattering diftinfion ; she i
even allowed him to entertain the most ambitious hopes, by let-
ling fall some expressions, as if she would cliufe him for her
husband *. At his age, and in such circumflances, it was im-
pollfible to resist such a temptation. He yielded, and drew others
into the plot. On Sunday the 2d of May, wlhile his brother fat
at supper, and the reft of the family were retired to their devo-
tions, one of his accomplices found means to tleal the keys out
of his brother's chamber, and opening the gates to the Qccen
and one of her maids, locked them behind her, and then threw
the keys into the lake. Mary ran with precipitation to the boat
which was prepared for her, and on reaching the fiore, was re-
ceived with the utmost joy, by Douglas, Lord Scaton, and Sir
James Hamilton, 'who, with a few attendants, waited for her.
She inftantiy mounted on horseback, and rode full speed towards
Niddric, Lord Seaton's feat in Well Lothian. She arrived there
that night, without being pursued, or interrupted. After halt-
ing three hours, nle set out for Hamilton ; and travelling at the
fame pace, fle reached it next morning.

On the firfi nc.vs of Mary's escape, her friends, whom, in their Arrives at

present disposition, a much finaller accident would have routed, H.tr tio',
ran to arms. In a few days, her court was filled with a great numerous
and splendid train of nobles, accompanied by such numbers of army.
followers, as formed an army above fix tlioufand llrong. In their
pretence, file declared that the resignation of the Crown, and the
other deedswhich she had signed during her imprisonment, were ex-
torted from her by fear. Sir Robert Melvil confirmed her de-
claration ; and on that, as well as on other accounts, a council
of the nobles and chief men of her party pronounced all there
tranfaciions void and illegal. At the fame time, an association May .
was formed for the defence of her person and authority, and sub-
ecribed by nine Earls, nine bishops, eighteen Lords, and many
gentlemen of diltinction --. Among them, we find several who
had been preflnt in the lail Parliament, and wlho had signed the
counter-allluci-ttion in defence of the King's government ; but fiuch
sudden changes were then lb common, as to be no matter of re-
proach.

* !.riti: .169: 1 1. l
.I. ; ;.

M lu

BoIoK V. At tie time lhen tilc Queen made her cfcapc, thlo Regent

-;6 -as at Glafo.ow, holding a court of juflice. An event fl con-

Coinl'rnal- trary to their cxpecations, anld so fatal to their fchcins, gave a
iori f the rct lhock to his adherents. IlTany of them appeared wvavcr-
Rcgrcrs '.
h.llrentLS. in: and irreltutc; others began to carry on private ncgociations

with the Queen ; and folic oenly revolted to her fide. In so
difficult a junllure, where his own fame, and the being of the
party depended on his choice, the Regent's mofl faithful affo-
ciatcs were divided in opinion. Some advilld hin to retire,
witiout loss of time, to Stirling. The Q.een's army was already
f3rling, and only eiglht miles difl:nt; tlhe adjacent cotuntry was
full of the friends and dependents of the house of I-amilton, and
other Lords of the Queen's faacion ; Glasgow was a large :.nd
unfcrtified town ; his own train consisted of no greater number
than was ui;al in times of peace ; all theef rcalonis pleaded for a
retreat. But on the other liand argulments were urged of no
inconfidcrabll c weight. The citizens of Glasgow were well as-
feCled to the cause; the vaflals of Glencairn, Lennox, and Scmple
lay near at hIand, and were both numerous, and full of zeal !lc-
cour-s might ar:ive from other parts of the kingdom in a few
days- in wvar. ifcccfs depends upon reputation, as much as upon
numbers; reputation is gained, or loft, by the firil flep one
takcs ; in his circumflances, a retreat would be attended with all

iislpidcn: t'he ignominy of a fight, and would at once difplrit his friends,
CeoUti. . and infplie isi enemies with boldness. In such dangerous exi-

genci.s as this. the superiority of MIurray's genius appeared. and
enabled him both to chufe with wisdom, and to ae with viour.
He declared againtl retreating, and fixed his head quarters at
Gla4fow. And whil e e amused the QOeen for some d;lav. by
pretending to hearken to some overtures, which i(he maide foi ac-
commodnaing their di.ffrences, he was employed, with th: ut-
molf induflrv, in drawing together his adherents, from dili:rcint
prts of the kingdom. He was soon in a condition to take the
sild ; and though far inferior to the enemy in number, he con-
fided so much in the valour of his troopl, 'and the experietncc of
lis o:.'-ers, tlat li oe eoss the ngocilation, and dtctluiined to
Ilazard a battle ".
::; 13 At the fIme time, the Q(_een's gtincals ihad commnande(d her

arnyv to ior(c. '1 lhir- in' i'tion I as, to condiicl licr to l)rirmlu:r-
tun carill, a ';,ace of ;rcait ll'engtll, v,-hli the lRegent hiad not

12 2: e:e. .. ,'' .

Sceen able to wrflt out of the lihnids (f Lord Flcming the govcr- B0ro, V.
; bor; but if the cenemciy (hould enldeavour to interrupt tiheir mnrch, -"v~
thy relblved not to decline an eng:agement. In Mary's fitua-
tion, no rcfolution could be more imprludent. A part only of
her forces Was aflclinled. Iluntly, )gilvic, and the northern
clans were soon cexAeccd ; her liufferings had removed, or di-
minilhed the prejudices of many among herI fbjccts ; the addrefc
with which lhe furnmounted the dangers that o!lfructd her escape,
dazzled, and intereflcd the people ; the uidden coniluence of if
many nobles added lunre to her caule ; lihe miilt atfuredly de-
pend on the friendfliip land ountenanel of 'FranceC; (iCe liad rca-
bon to cxpet the protcaion of England; lier enemies cold not
pofllbly look for filpport fiom that quarter. She lhad mucli to
hope from purlbing (low and cautious nmea!ures ; they had every
thing to feanr.

But Mary, whloe hopes were naturally lfinguine, and her p.:s-

sions impetious, was so elevated by her fiodden tranlition, f'!rt
the depth of diflreis. to lich an unusual appearance of proileri y,
tihat lile never doubted of fiucccfs. Her army was almofi double
to the enemy in number, and conrifled chielly ol the -1annliltons,
and their dependents. 'I'he Arclilbihop of St. Andrew's hiad the
chief direl-ion of these, and hoped, by a vicory, not only to
crush Mhurray, the ancient enemy of his house, but to get the
perlbn of the Queen into his hands, and to oblige her, eIthe'e to
marry one of the D1uke's Ions, or at leanl to commit the ch;i:f di-
rection of her affairs to himfl1t: His ambition proved fatial to
the Q leen, to hiniltlf, a.nd to his family *.

IVMary's imprudence, in refolvinf to fight, was not greater t!lan r,:L:ti ..-

thc ill condu& of her generals in the battle. Between 'ie two l't;li;iL.'
armies, and on the road towards I)umnliiton, there was an emi-
nence called Langfide-Hill. This the Regent had the precau-
tion to seize, and potted his troops in a fnmall village, and nmong
obme gardens and inclofures adjacent. In this advant:geous iit::-
ation he waited the approach of the c nemy, whose liiperiori:v in
cavalry could le of no benefit to them, on fucli broken ground.
'I'he 1-lamiltolns, who coilplolfd the vaniguard, ran so eancl'ly to
tlei attack, that they put theinfclves out of breath, and !cft the
main battle far behind. '1 he encouitelr of tlh e lc.rllncn \v:is
fitree and dclilerate ; [lit as tle forces of the l-hiiniltons s're
c.\poeed, on the one I:l;nk, to a continued fire from a bo:l)y if i::l!:

' A:!.!c! vol. iv. 32. M3ely. 181.

M in ij

BootK V. queteers, attacked on the other by the Regent's most choice

" troops, and not supported by the reft of the Queen's army," they

Theiueen's were soon obliged to give ground, and the rout immediately be-
army dc- came universal. Few'vitories, in a civil war, and among a bar-

ed. barons people, have been pursued with less violence, or attended

with less bloodshed. Three hundred fell in the field; in the
flight scarce any vvere killed. The Regent and his principal of-
ficers rode about, beseeching the soldiers to spare their country-
- men. The number of prisoners was great, and among them ma-
ny persons of diflincion. The Regent marched back to Glaf-
gow, and returned public thanks to God for this great, and, on
his fide, almost bloodless vicEory *.

During the engagement, Mary flood on a hill, at no great dif-

tance, and beheld all that passed in the field, with Iluch emotions
of mind as arc not ealily describcd. When fIhe saw the army,
which was her last hope, thrown into irretrievable confusion, her
spirit, which all her pait misfortunes had not been able entirely
to subdue, funk altogether. In the utmost conflernation, the be-
Ier flight. gan her ilight, and so lively were her imprcfllons of fear, that flhe

never closed her eyes till flie reached the abbey of Dundrenan in
Galloway, full sixty Scots miles from the place of battle 1-.

These revolutions in Mary's fortune had been no less rapid,

than singular. In the foirt fpace'of eleven days,' ile had been a
prisoner at the mercy of her molt inveterate enemies; lihe had
seen a powerful army under her command, and a numerous train
of nobles at her devotion; and now she was obliged to fly, in the
utmost danger of her life, and to lurk, with a few attendants, in
a corner of her kingdom. She did not think herself safe, even
in that retreat; and her fears impelled her to an acion, the molt
unadvised, as well as the most unfortunate in her whole life.
This was her retiring into England, a flep, which, on many ac-
counts, ought to have appeared to her rafl and dangerous.

Rtefn-les on Before Mary's arrival in Scotland, mutual difirufi and jcalou-
retiringinto ties lad arisen between her and Elizabeth. All their fubfeqeunt

tranladions had contributed to cxafperate and inflame there pal-
sions. She had endeavoured, by secret negociations and intrigucs,
to lillurb the tranquillity of Elizabeth's government, and to ad-
vance her own pretensions to the Englith Crown. ]lizabcli,
whio polltffcd greater power, and ncld with lel's rleervc, lih:
openly supportcd Mary's rebellious fubjeAs, and fomentcd all tly

* Kciih, s77 *I- U1 icl. .,

difnfions and troubles in which her reign had been involved. Boocr V.
The maxims of policy still authorised that Qeen to pursue the L--ó
fame cour'c ; as by keeping Scotland in confusion, she effectually
secured the peace of her own kingdom. The Regent, after his
vi&ory, had marched to Edinburgh, and not knowing what course
the Qeen had taken, it was several days before he thought of
purluing'her*. She might have been concealed 'in that retired
corner, among fubjeas devoted to her interest, till her party,
which was dispersed rather than broken by the late defeat, Illould
gather such flrcngth, that lhe could again appear with safety at
their head. There was not any danger, which lhe ought not to
have run, rather than throw herself into the hands of an enemly,
from wholm fle had already suffered so many injuries, and who
was prolmpted both by inclination, and by interelt, to renew
them.

But, on the other land, during IAlary's confinement, Eliza-

beth had declared againit the proceedings of her fulbjeAs, and lo-
licited for her liberty, with a warmth which had all the appear-
ance of sincerity. She had invited her to take refuge in Eng-
land, and had promifced to meet her in person, and to give her
such a recention as was due to a Queen, and an ally-+. What-
ever appr!henfion Elizabeth might entertain of MIlary's dcligns,
while file had power in her hands, the was at present, the olbjcct,
not of fear, hut of pity and to take advantage of her fittuation
would be both ungenerous and inhuman. 'The horrors of a pri-
son were frelh in Mary's memory, and if Ilce flould fall a fccond
time into the hands of her fubjeccs, there was no injury to s wich
the presumption of. Ilccefs migli not embolden themn to proceed.
To attempt escaping into France, was dangerous ; and in her si-
tuation, almofl impoflible; nor could (lie bear the thoughts of ap-
pearing as an exile, and a fugitive, in that kingdom, whelre Ile
had once enjoyed all the splendor of a Qucen. lEngnd remain-
ed her only alflum ; and, in fplte of all the entreaties of Lord
I-lerries, laemlnig, and her other attendants, who conjured her,
even on their knees, not to confide in E]lizabeth's promnile, or
generosity, her infatlation was invincible, and Ilic rcfolved to
fly thitleir. I erries, by her command, 'wrote to .owthlr the
deputy governor of Carlillc, to know bhilat rcceptioon lie hwoull ;: :.ec',i.
give her; and, before hi nl\lcr could return, her' {c:ir ;ian im- ';" (.
patience Vwer Ib g'reat, tltat (lihe got into at filler-l):at, :and witl
about twenty ;altt ::n; :, l;tdt'd ;t 'Vv'irkinl'ito: in (5't ilcrl.,il, ..y t5

4 Cr':iwr{ M .1: ) . Ca: ;i..1.8; . ,Andifl' vol. iv. 9P, lz:.

BooK V. and thence file was conducted with many marks of refped to

' Carlisle *.

1568.

Elizabetha- So soon as Mary arrived in England, fihe wrote a long letter to
delibcrac'-. the Queen, representing, in the firongeit terms, the injuries which
the nlantllr the had suffered from her own fuhjecds, and imploring that pity
Of treating- and afiltance which her present situation demanded--. An event

so extraordinary, and the conduct which might be proper in con-
sequence of it, drew the attention, and employed the thoughts of
Elizabeth and her council. If their deliberations had been influ-
enced by considerations ofjuftice or generosity alone, they would
not have found them long or intricate. A Queen, vanquilied by
her own fubjecs, and threatened by them with the loss of her li-
bery, or of her life, had fled from their violence, and thrown her-
self into the arms of her neareli neighbour and ally, from whom
lhc had received repeated assurances of fri-ndllip and protcclionl
These circumfiances entitled her to refped and to compallion, and
required that flie should either be restored to her own kingdom,
or at leait be left at full liberty to feck aid from any other quar-
ier. But with Elizabeth and her counsellors, the quellion was
not, what was moll just or generous, but what was mofl benefici-
al to herCelf, and to the Englilh nation. Three different refolu-
tions might have been taken, with regard to the Q/eLn of Scots.
To rc-inllate her in her throne, was one; to allow her to retire
into France, was another; to detain her in England, was a third.

.Each of these drew conre(uuences after it, of the utmolt import-
ance, which were examined, as appears from papers flill extant ',
with that min.ute accuracy, which Elizabeth's Miniliers employ-
cd in all their consultations upon affair' of moment.

''o reltore MIary to the full cxercife of the royal authority in

Scotland, they observed, would render her more powerful than
ever. The nobles who were rpoll firmly attached to the Englith
interefi, would quicklly feel the utmofti weight of her rcfentinent.
An d as the gratitude of Princes is feldcm tfrong or lalting, regard
to her own intercll might soon efface the memory of h er oblig;a
tions to Elizabeth, and prompt her to renew the alliance of the
Scottilh nation with France, and revive her own pretensions to
!the- lnglilh Crown. Nor was it .poflihle to fetter mad circumscribe
tlb: Scoltifh ticcn, by any conditions that would prevent tlhee.
dangers. i-lcr party in Scot!and was numerous and powerful.

eI-.r: return, even without any support from LEngl;land, would itL-

l it.il, 8.;. Amlk:r vol. iv

.
i . 1 . 29.
[ Audc.ts: veo iv. 3;, 9., LO9 .

spire her friends with new zeal and courage; a single victory BooK V.
might give them the superiority, which they had lofi by a single
defeat, and render Mary a more formidable rivaal than ever to 1- frt I
Elizabeth. '.,,.

The dangers arising from fufiiering AMary to retire into France,

were no less obvious. T'he French King could not rcfufe his as-
filtance towards refroring his filter and ally to her -throne. Eli-
zabeth would, once more, fee a foreign army in the island, over-
awing the Scots, and ready to enter her kingdom; and if the com-
motions in Fran:c, on account of religion, were fettled, the Prin-
ces of Lorrain might rclume their anbitions projects, and tile u-
nited forces of France and Scotland might invade England, where
it is weakest and mott dcfncclefs.

Nothing therefirc remainucd but to detain ler in Enagland; and pIr rl-.:t

to permit her either to live at lilerty tlere, or to confine her in '',"!'. '''
a prison. The fornmer was a danllrous experiment. Ier court
would become a place of resort to all the Roman Catlolics, to the
lifiaffcted, and to the lovers of innovation. Though Elizabeth
·affeetcd to represent MVary's pretensions to the Englifl Crown as
altogether extravagant and ill-founded, flic was not ignorant that
they did not appear in that light to the nation, and that m:,ny
thought them preferlale even to her own title. If the aAcivity
of lhe emiif'irics had gained her so many abettors, her own per-
linal influence was niucil more to be dreaded her beauty, her
address, iher sufferings, by the admiration and pity which they
would excite, could not fail of making many converts to her
party *.

''l'vws indeed to be apprehended, that the treating Mary as a

priiuner would excite univerfld indignation againfl Elizabeth, and
tlhat by this unexampled severity towards a Qiecn, v.1ho implored,
andl to whom ilie had promised her prti ccion, fie would forfeit
the praifc ofjuflice nnd humanity, which was hitherto due to her
adiniiiiflratiul. But tle l.glifil iionarchls wele ofte:n so fulici-
to's to fi-cuir their kingdoi m aginfl the Scots, as to be little fclu-
pulous about tlle means which they employed for that purpof.
Ur nrv JV. 1;a.l i.cil

ze the heir of the Crown of Scotland, who

w'- forced, by the violence of a florm to take refage in one of
tlh p;:rts ors his kin iijoin; incd, in contempt of the rights of ho-
()jitalitv, wvitllout rcgar:cliug lis t'ilih r age, oc tieC tears and cntre:l-
ies of his jl'tlhcr, det;lincid liim a priloner for many years. This :
* .^iijc.-r. vol. i;... 51, 6s,.

BooKV. action, though detested by posterity, Elizabeth resolved now to
V ' imitate. IHer virtue was no more proof than H-enry's had been,
I5ó'ó againfl the temptations of interest; and the pofleflion of a present

advantage was preferred to the profpe& of future fame. The fa-
tisfaceion which file felt in mortifying a rival, whose beauty and
accompliqimrents lle envied, had, perhaps, no less influence thani
political conliderations, in bringing her to this resolution. But,
at the fame time, in order to fereen herself from the censure which
this conduct merited, and to make her treatment of the Scottish
Queen look like the effeAt oftneceity, rather than of choice, lhe
determined to put on the appearance of concern for her interest,
and of deep sympathy with ler sufferings.
.I0;y o2. With this view, nle inflantly dispatched Lord Scroope warden

of the weft marches, and Sir Francis Knollys her Vice-chamber-
lain, to the Queen of Scots, with letters full of expressions of kind-
ness and condolence. But, at the fame time, they had private in-
ftruclions to watch all her motions, and to take care that fie fliould

:.'f.lar!e- not cfcape into her own kingdom . On their arrival, AMary de-
manls .l l .mnandcd a personal interview wvith the Queen, that (he mighlt lay
t, i'iiZa- before her the injuries which lihe had suffered, and receive frol'
ti: pc P- her those friendly ollices which flie had been encouraged to cx.

pe. 'IThey answered, that it was with reluctance this honour
was at present denied hlcr; that wlile (ie lay under the imputa-
tion of a crime so horrid, as the murder of her hufiand, their Mrif-
trefs, to whom he was so nearly allied, could not, without bring-
ing a (lain upon her own reputation, admit her into her presence;
but as soon as nle hlad cleared herlelf from that aspersion, they
promised lier a reception suitable to her dignity, and aid propor-
tioned to her dillrefs -.

.S;rnT.-rto Nothing could be more frivolous than this prctence. It was
i' lli ::la the occasion, however, c' leading the Queen of Scots into the

tnlare, in which Elizabeth and her Ministers willicd to entangle
her. IMary expvefted the utmolt furpril;c at this unexpc&ced man.
ner of evading her requefl; but as Ilie could not believe so many
prolfelions of fricndfliip to be void of lincerity, f:e frankly offlred

T''i. ,t .' to 'ubminit her caul' to the cognizance of .lizal)ctlh, and undertook.
r'!. .s..:\ - to produce such proofs of her own innocence, and of tlhe falflcood

l,1.r. of the ancul'.tion. Ibroughlt againll i her, as liould fully remove the

fcruii)lcs', and ftiisfy the delicacy of the Engliili Qlcn. 'I'llis
'vais tlhe very point to wvlich .liiza:bctll labloured to bring the mat-

"!* Ib~iJ. vol. iv. 8. ,5.

tcr. By this appeal of the Scottifli Qccen, file became the urn- BooK V.
pire between her and her fubjecAs, and had it entirely in her own
power to protraca the inquiry to any length, and to perplex and
involve it in cndlefs diffliculties. In the mean time, (he was fur-
niihed with a plausible pretence for keeping her at a distance from
court, and for refusing to contribute towards replacing her on
her throne. As Mary's conduct had been extremely incautious,
and the prelumptions of her guilt were many and strong, it was
possible her fubijecs might make good their charge againfl her;
and if this ihould be tlle result of the inquiry, she would, thence-
forth, cealf to be the objet of regard, or of compassion, and the
treating her with coldnels and negledt would merit little cenfire.
In a matter so dark and mylrerious. there was no probability that
ILMary could bring proofs (if her innocence, so inconteited, as to
render the conduct of the Einglilhl Qleen altogether culpable.
And perhaps, her impatience under rcllraiit, her lufpicion of Eli-
zabthi's partiality, or her dilcovc!y of her artifices, might engage
her in such cabals, as would jullify the using her .vith greater ri-
goulr.

Elizabeth early foresaw all those advantagcs. whicl would a-

rife from an inquiry into the conduct of the Scottilli Qceen, car-
ried on under her dire'tion. 'Ihere was ibme danger, ho;wver,
that Mary might dilcovcr her lecret intentions too lbon, and by
receding from the offer which file had made, endeavour to dif-
appoint theml. But even in that event, Ihe determined not to
drop the inquiry, and had thought of several different expedients
for carrying it on. The Counters of Lennox, convinced that
Mary was accessory to the murder of her son, and thirlling for
that vengeance which it was natural for a mother to demand, had
implored Elizabeth's juilice, and Iblicitcd her, with many tears,
in her own name, and in her lluband's, to bring the Scottilli
Q2een to a trial for that crime *. The parents of the unhappy
Prince had a juif right to prefer this acculiltion , nor could flie,
vwho vwa their ncarclt 1l.inlwvonan, be condeinicd for littenilng to
Ji equitable a demand, Bclides, as the Scottilli nobles openly
iccufiifd lMary of the liine crime, and pretenlded to be able to
confirm their charge by IlTlfiicIlt proof; it would be no ditlicult
n:iltter to prevail on tlhen, to petition thle Qteen of Englilnd to
ta:ik coiniz;:Lce of thlir proccedings atgainllt tleir Sovercign; and
;t was the opinionl of tile luglilil council, that it would be rea-

C' aCt.ubL. -. . IaI.;yu,, .'i.

Nn .

BOOK V. fonable to comply with the request .. At the fame time, the
"S\,0 obsolete claim of the superiority of England over Scotland began

to be talked of; and, on that account, it was pretended that the
decision of the contest between Mary and.her fubjecs belonged
of right to Elizabeth. But though Elizabeth revolved all these
expedients in her mind, and kept them in rcferve, to make ufc
of as occasion might roquire, flhe wified that the inquiry into
AMary's conduct should appear to be undertaken purely in compli-
ance with her own demand, and in order to vindicate her inno-
cence ; and so long as that appearance could be preservcd, none
of the other expedients were to be employed.

When Mary consented to submit her caufc to Elizabeth, she

was far from fufipeaing that any bad confcqucnces could follow,
or that any dangerous pretensions could be founded on her offr-.
She expected that Elizabeth herself woould receive, and examine
her defcnces--;. sic meant to confider her as an equal, for whofle
tl:.isfaction.flie was .villirrg to explain any part of her conduci,
that was liable to censure ; not to acknowledge her as a fuperi-
or, before whom flie .was bound to plead her caufc. But Eliza-
beth put a very different sense on Mary's offer. She confidered
herfclf as chosen to be judge in the controversy between the Scot-
tifll Queen and her fubjeds, and began to at in that capacity.
She proposed to appoint commissioners to hear the pleadings of
both parties, and wrote to the Regent of Scotland, to empower
proper persons to appear before them, in his name, and to pro-
duce what lie could allege in vindication of his proceedings a-
gainll his Sovereign.

Mn[arv grca.l- ary had, hitherto, rclied with unaccountable credulity on
lv ol)~nded
nt ylizo - Elizabeth's professions of regard, and e:ipcced that so mnaiy kind
eth's con- fpceches would, at lafi, be accompanied with tonic lilittble ac-

tions. But this proposal entirely undecceived her. She plainly
perceived the artifice of Elizabeth's conclut, and saw what a di-
minntion it would be to her own honour, to appear on a level
with her rebellious lhbjecs, and to fIand together with them at
the bar of a lupcrior and ;a judge. She retrtil.ed the ofler whlich
fle h;ad made, and whlich hlald bel perverted to a purlpole: I con-
trary to her intelltion. She dcl:rtiundtcl, withi Io:; carnefn'lnis
tluin ever, to be admitted into ]?Elizabclth's prelence ; and wrote
June T3.' to her, in a flrain very dillcrent finm wlhat he hlad f1ori'rllv ulecd,

and which fully dilcovcrs the grici 'uId indignation tll;'t r't 'c.!

' Aidcrl' vol. ix. j, ! + Ibid. vol iv. -1:,

:on her heart. " In my prcfeint situation," fays fie, " I ncither l;ooK V.
¢' will, nor can reply to the accul.itions of my lubjc'ls. I am
" ready, of my own accord, and out of friendflip to you, to fa 56
" tisfy your fcruplcs, and .to vindicate my own conduc. My
" ihbjeEts are not my equals; nor will I, by submitting my caulf
" to a judicial trial, acknowledge them to be lo. I led into
" your arms, as into tliofc of my nearefl relation,- and molt per-
" fed friend. 1 did you honour, as I imagined, in chuifing you

preferably to .any other Prince, to be the rctllor:r of an injured

" Qeen. Was it cver la;ouiw that a Prince was blamedl for
" hearing, in peirfn, the compllintts of thlofe who appealed to
" is jullicc, atriinil the false accusations of their enemies? You
.' admitted into your presence my baliard-brotlhr, who had been
" guilty of rebellion ; and you deny me tlitt honour ! God for-
" bid that I flould be the occasion of bringing ally fain upon

your reputation. I expeccld t.ii.t your manner of treating me

" would have added lufre to it. Suffer me either to implo:e the
" aid of other P:inces, 'whole delicacy, on this head, will be lcfi,
" and their refcntment of my wrongs greater; or let me receive
" from your hands that alifiance, which it becomes you, more
"than any oteicr Prince, to grant; and by that benefit, bind me
' to yourself in the indiflbluble ties of gratitude *."
This letter fumewliat disconcerted Elizabeth's plan, but did Jlne :o.

I.liz;lbcth'

not divert her from tie prosecution of it. She laid the matter prlcabiions
before the Privy Council, and it was there determined, notwith- .g:ilni her.
lHanding the entreatics and remonitrances of the Scottifli Qlecn,
to go on with the inquiry into her conduci, and till that were
finiiied, it was agreed that Elizabeth could not, confiflently
wvitli her own honour, or witil the safety of her government, ei-
ther give her the afliftance which flle demanded, or permit her
to retire out of the kingdom. And left hli fliould have an op-
portuliity of escaping, while fle resided so near Scotland, it was
thought advifecable to remove her to some placc, at a greater dif-
tance from the borders l-.

While the ]nglilh court was occupied in there deliberations, Proceed-

the Recent did not negIcet to improve the victory at Langlide. i".' t'1h-
'I'llt event w.ls of the iutmofl imiorltaince to him. It not only gp;,illl lche
drove the (Qeen hlerfclf out of the kliingdoin, ibut left lier ad- hI.r'C't.
hercents diijicrl .l, and witllout a leader, at lis -mercy. Hre frilm-
s'd resolved, at firll, to prucecd algiainll tliei wilh lile u:limul ri-

'* Anidcl'] vil iv p.. 1 JId. ibid. 1i.

N n ij

Boox V. gour. Six persons of Come diRinflion, who had been taken. pri;

oners in the battle, were tried, and condemned to death as re-
bels against the King's government. They were led to the place
of execution, but by the powerful interceflion of Knox they ob-
tained a pardon- Hamilton of Bothwellhaugh was one of the
number, who lived to give both the Regent and Knox reafon.to
repent of this conmmendable a&c of lenity *.

Soori after, the Regent marched with an army, confifling of

four thousand horse and one thousand foot, towards the weft bor-
ders. The nobles in this part of the kingdom were all of the
Q.een's faction ; but as they had not force sufficient to obflrut
his progress, he muLf either have obliged them to submit to the
King, or would have laid waste their lands with fire and sword.
3ut Elizabeth, whose interest it was to keep Scotland in confu-
sion, by preserving the balance between the two parties, and
who was endeavouring to sooth the Scottish (Qeen by gentle
treatment, interposed at her desire. After keeping the field two
weeks, the Regent, in compliance to the English Amnbaffador,
dismissed his forces, and an expedition, which might have proved
fatal to his opponents, ended with a few ats of severity-.

r\arycarri- The resolution of the English Privy Council with regard to
ed ti'lton. iary's person, was soon carried into execution; and, without

regarding her rernonltrances or complaints, she was conducted to
July 3 Bolton, a caffle of Lord Scroop's, on the borders of Ycrkflire .

In this place, her correspondence with her friends in Scotland
became more difficult, and any prospect of making her cfcape was
entirely cut off. She now/ felt herself to be entirely in Eliza-
beth's power, and though treated as yet with the respect due to
a 0Queen, her real condition was that of a prisoner. Mary knew
what it was to be deprived of liberty, and dreaded it as the worlt
of all evils. While the remembrance of her late imprifonnient
was still lively, and the terror of a new one filled her mind, Eli-
zabeth thought it a proper junciure to renew her former propofi-
July28. tion, that ihe would faufer the Regent and his adherents to be

called into England, and conlfnt to their being heard in defence
of their own condut. And on ler part, fle promised, whatevei-
lhould be the iflle of this inquiry, to employ all her power and
Agtces that influence towards replacing Mary on her throne, under a few li-

ae
l inuiry mitations, which were far fromi being unrcafonablc. Fear, im-
to her col- patience, dclpair, as well as this toothing prornili, with vwhich

Cald. vol. ii. 99. t- Id, ibid . 99A. derC vol. iv. .1..

?le prbpofition was accompanied, induced the Scottilil Qiecn to Ir, o V.
comply '.

In order to persuade Elizabeth that fle desired nothing so much I, -rim6 -

as to render the union between them as close as pofiible, she flew- lation xvith
ed a disposition to relax somewhat in one point, with regard to '""lgrto re
which, during all her past and subsequent misfortunes, fle was
uniformly inflexible. She exprefled a great venefation for the
liturgy of the church of England ; fie was often prcfcnt at reli-
gious worfhrip, according to the rites of the reformed church ;
made choice of a Proteflant clergyman to be her chaplain; heard
lim preach agains't the errors of Popery with attention and seem-
ing pleasure ; and discovered all the lymptoms of.an approaching'
conversion --. Such was Mary's known and bigotted attachment
to the Popifil religion, that it is impofliblc to believe her finceic
in this part of her conduct ; nor can any thiing mark more firong-
ly the wretchednci's of cer condition, and the cxcefs of her ifear,
than that they betrayed her itto dilTimulation in a matter, cou-
cerning which her cuntimcnts were scrupulously delicate.

At this time the Regent called a Parliament, in order to pro- .At: .iP 1'.

cecd to the forfeiture of thlo.r who refuced to acknowledlge thel 1,:,'l,:'i
King's authorily. l'Te Qccen's fdilion was alarined, and Alrgylic Scotu!a
and lluntly, whom >l.:ry had. ai pintcd lher lieutenants, the one
in tl , south, and the other in the north of Scotland, -began to al-
filmbl forces to obllruct this mecting. Conmpaflon for the Qleen,
and envy at those who governed in the King's name, had added
fin much ,frength to the party, that the Regent would have fuund
it dilficult to witllfand its efforts. But as Ni:ry had fublmil cdl
her cault to Elizabeth, ihe could not rcfufc, at lier desire, to coim-
mand lier friends to lay dow n their arms, and to wait patiently
till matters were brought to a decision in England. By proc u-
ring this cessation of arms, Elizabeth afforded as fcalon:able re-
lief to the Rcgent's faction, as ilie had formerly given to the
(Q icen's :;:.

The Rcgent, however, would not conent, even at 1tlizablthL:

rcqucll, to put off the meeting 0f Plarlialmnet. But we may a-
fcribc to her influence, ias well as to the elor;uence of IV\litland,
who laboured to prevent tlle (nll h1:as olf Iiis countrymen
frolm extermCinatl g te otlher, any appcar.''Ces of m1odera:tion

hvlicli th!i. Parliamlenlt cliicovcrc(l in its proc'ccldings. The ioll

' \A'11' I r. Iol1

iv . Ioay,.

l ayles, .l68 .

i i I . i 13. IIay c'S, ,:9.
Am .\,iel]. \ol. iv. ;.

BOOK V. violent opponents of the King's government were forfeited; tl16

reft were allowed flill to hope for favour '.

E lzabetl No sooner did the Queen of Scots submit her cause to her ri-
requires thi val, than Elizabeth required thle Regent to fend to York, dcpu-
.egent hto ties properly inflrucAcd for vindicating his conduc, in prefencc
ronduc. of licr commiflioncrs. It was not without hcfitation and anxie-

ty, that the Regent consented to this measure. His authority
was already cltablifhed in Scotland, and confirmied by Parlia-
mnent. To fuffcr its validity now to be called in queflion, and
fuLjefted to a foreign juril'diciion, was extremely mortifying.
To accufc his Sovereign before firangers, the ancient enemies of
the Scottish name,.was an odious talk. To fail in this accufiltion
was dangerous; to fucced in it was disgraceful. But the
Jlrength of the adverse faction daily incrcafed. I-e dreaded the
intcrpofition of the French King in its behalf. In his situation,
and in a matter which Elizabeth had so much at heart, her com-
nlnds were neither to be disputed, nor disobeycd -1-.

Poth the The h neceflity of repairing in person to York added to the ig..
Queen and nominy of'the flep which he was obliged to take. All his aflo-
ihe appoilnt ,
co;nnlilfion- ciates declined the office ; they were unwilling, it would esem,

s to expose tllemfelvcs to tle odium and danger with which it was

easy to forsee that the discharge of it would be attended, unless
2eptem. :P. he himlelf contented to nlare tlefe in common with them. The

Earl of lAorton, Bothwell Billhop of Orkney, Pitcairn, Com-
mendator of Dumfermlinc, and .Lord Lindsay were joined with
,irm in commission. I\Tacgill of Rankeilor, and Balnaves of Ial-
iiull, two eminent Civilians, George Buchanan his faithful adhie-
rent, a man vllhoft genius did honour to the age, Maitland, and
ieveral others, were appointed to attend them as assistants. Mait-
land ow.ed this difinltion to the Regent's fear, rather than to his
afi'ecion. He had warmly remonflated againll this meafurec. I-e
wiflied his country to continue in fricndlhip with England, but
not to become dcpendent on that nation. J-e was defirou; of re-
rtlablilhinl tile Qeen in some degree of power, not inconfiflent:
with tihat which the King poeficcd ; and the Regent could not
wvitlh l.:il'c, leave behlind im a man, whore views were so con-
ra'o to his o;vn, a! v.ho, hy h is fdperior abilities, had acqui-
red an influence in the nation, cequal to that, whlih others dcriv..
,:!d from the antiquity and poer of their fanmilies t:.

'! ' .

'A; !. , - '

Id!. 3" . ;.e Al7pciml; No. i:.V.
·.'..' ibid. A:~!U ri. v.,l. ix' ,"5'. -,It . v. 1 '%4, 1 .'.

MIary empowered Lefly Einiop of Ross, Lord Livingston, Lord Borl- V.
3oyd, Lord -lerreis, Gavin Hamlilton Commcndator of Kilwin- ,ó
I-ing, Sir John Gordon of Lochinvar, and Sir James Cockburn
of Skirling, to appear in lcer name '

E]lizabeth nominatcd 'IThomas Howard Duke of NPorfolk, Tho-

mas latcliff Earl of Snffcx, and Sir Ralph Sadler, her Commis-
fioners to hear both parties.

The tourth of Odcober was the day fixed for opening the Cou- The c^ncrl-

J/'eri'cr. 'he great abilities of the deputies on both fidcs, the Yor;a
dignity of the judges before whom they were to appear, the high
ralnk of the perfpns whole cause was to be heard, and tll import-
ance of the points in dispute, rendered the whole tranlaction no
less i!luiltious, than it was singular. Tlhe lituation in which Eli-
zabctli appeared, oil this occasion, tfrikes us witll an air of mag-
nificence. I-er rival, an independent Qucen, and the heir of an
ancicnt race of AMonarchs, was a priloner in hcl - hands, and ap-
peared, by her amblafadors, before her tribunal. The Regent
of Scotland, who represented the majclly, and pofleffed the au-
thority of a King, ltood in pcrtbn at her bar. And the fate of
a kingdom, whosei power her ancellors had often dreaded, but
could never subdue, was now abfolutcly at her disposal.

The views, however, with which the several parties consented ViT-.v ,f
to this conference, and the issue to which they expeced to bring thl diff'r-

ent partici
it, were cxtremely different.

MlIary's chief objec was the recovering her former authority.

This induced her to confcnt to a ineafuire, againfl which flie had
long flruggled. Elizabeth's promiles gave her ground for enter-
tallinig hopes of being rellored to her kingdoml; in order to which
flue would have, willingly, made many concefions to the King's
party; and the influience of the Englilh (ceen, and her own im-
patience under her prelent situation, might have led her to many
more :. The Regent aimed at nothing but lecuring Elizabeth's
protection to his party, and seems not to have had the molt dit-
tant thoughts of cominig to any compoliion with Mary. Eliza-
beth's views were miore various, and her fticinmes more intricate.
She seemed to be full of concern for Mary's honour, and lolici-
tolls that lilc nlouldl wipe olt the afhperiol:; whii1 btiihifCied lher
chiraCder. IThis (lie lprctended to be tlhe intention of the confe-
rencI; anmullng lVMary, andd cluding; the Illi.ilations of the French
and Spailili amb:i.lidors iii her behalf by rcieatl:ed prumliles of as.

' Alndelclt v,1 iv . ';. 7'.

BoOKV. sifting her, as soon as she could venture to do so, without bring,

- intg ditgrace on herself. But, under this veil of friend(hip and
4568. "

generosity, Elizabeth concealed sentiments of a different nature.
She expelted that the Regent would accuse Mary of being accefl
fory to the murder of her hulband. She encouraged him, as far
as decency would permit, to take this desperate tfep *. And as
this accusation might terminate two dilferent ways, flie had con-
certed meafurcs for her future conduct suitable to each of these.
if the charge againlt Mary ihould appear to. be well founded, flle
resolved to pronounce her unworthy of wearing a Crown, and to
declare that ihe would never burthen her own conscience with the
guilt of an action so deteflable, as the restoring her to her king-
dom-f. If it should happen, that what her accusers alleged, did
not amount to a proof of guilt, hut only of mal-adminiiiltration,
/he determined to let on foot a treaty for reitoring her, but-on
iucLi conditions, as would render her fcr ever dependent on Eng,-
land, and the llave of her own lubjcdltsj. And as every rsep in
the progreftl of the confi:rence, as well as the final rcfilt of it, wnas
in her own power, fle would fiill be at liberty to chufe which of
'thee couries flhe wouid hold; or if there appeared to be any da7;-
ger or inc.anveniency in puarf.ing eitiher of tlheim, T e might proti-a.t
the whole catfe by endless delays, and involve it in inextricable
perpleit sy.

-,rti~' :.
'r The conference, however, was opened with rarch fjoemnni'y.

,'-, Bat the ve-ry firllt ep di!coveretd it to be E.lizabeth's intertion to
c;noinmniTf - i/itlame, rather than to extingi-ttf the difi.nfriors and animolities

r':e^llnt. amonlg the Scots. No. etrcavotrs ,were ured to reconcile tlhe con-

teuding plmrties, or to mollify the fierccneif of their hatred, by
brinrging tile ( oLeen to glktr p;rdonl for w.hat was paii, or her l'b..
.iU..oilB -8'. jetls to i:rormitil mlore (iutifui ol-ldience for the tfutre. (n the

contra:', MIary's conlurailioners weve perrmitted to prefer a com-
plaint ag;inft tlie Regent and his party, conrtaining anl ecluaerna-
tion of their treaf n;absre aieiorLs, of their seizing her »perfor ,t y
:rrce of armus, coi.mlittiPn lher to prnil, conpelinrg lihe to refcgtt
t!:. Cro',.'I:, and maki:ag ilc of iker li:;'x nameL to rolour their tl-
i;ut'paDt.ion o:' the whi>t.- royal it'.lt hoit, . Ain of all thcfe enrtrni.-
tc; , tliey c c .y and cfLcttitulI relrel', as If- ih j yi-
Jict: 'f L nt l( ,ii.'iltin.: de.anid.c.d: tvirr thl Jistiar .':
:.' i;.ntl, ':r .

it iv;:,.; :ic:lf e \.l':L:d t-hat the e<.cfi-:;.t < vouid ha:'t .: dil:'c.h id th.'

s'},Io:.: cIciuiTIlnai''cei. of theit: un.,';:t.tural CT'ii::, to '.,

o iich he p::,

' . I.'tl t .(i. R-'. '

)., ,. . .(li'a? 1 S. 4-.5;. t y.qm [.;:'q ';.ii. ;,'. .1
*. . '"!,'rs -,o'.\. ^ . (, . ,, (1. ii.::- . .;'.

tended the Qieen had been accessory, and would have produced BOOK V.
evidence in support of his charge. But far from accusing Mary,
the Regent did not even answer the complaints brought againfr
himself. He discovered a reluctance at undertaking that office,
and flarted many doubts and scruples, with regard to which he de-
manded to be resolved by Elizabeth herself*. His reserve and
hesitation were no less surprising to the greater part of the Eng-
lifh commifloners than to his own aflociates. They knew that
he could not vindicate his own condud without charging the mur-
der upon the Queen, and lie had not hitherto (hown any extraordi-
nary delicacy on that head. An intrigue, however, had been fe-
cretly carried on, since his arrival at York, which explains this
mystery.

The Duke of Norfolk was, at that time, the mos. powerful and Intrilues

*'orfolk

rnofl popular man in England. His wife was lately dead ; and with the
he began already to form a projec, which he afterwards more '6egnt.
openly avowed, of mounting the throne of Scotland, by a marri-
age with the Qecen of Scots. He saw the infamy which would
be the consequence of a public accusation againfl Mary, and how
prejudicial it might be to her prctenfions to the English succession.
In order to save her from this cruel mortification, he applied to
Maitland, and e.preffcd his aftonifliment at feeing a man of so much
reputation for wisdom, concurring with the Regent in a measure
so diflionourable to themselves, to their OQeen, and to their coun-
try; submitting the public tranfadions of the nation to the judg-
ment of foreigners; and publishing the ignominy, and exposing
the faults of their Sovereign, which they were bound, in good po-
licy, as well as in duty, to conceal and to cover. It was easy
for Maitland, whose fentimcnts were-the fame with the Duke's,
to vindicate his own conducA. He aflured him, that he had em-
ployed all his credit, to dif'uade his countrymen from this mea-
sure; and would fill contribute, to the utiiloft of his povwer, to
divert them from it. This encouraged Norfolk to communicate
the matter to the Regent. eI-e repeated and enforced the fame
ariguments which he had used with Maitland. I-le warned him
of the danger to which lie mul cexpofe hirirfelf, by such a violent
nalion, as the public accusation of his Sovereign. Mary would
never forgive a man, who had cndcavoured to fix lfch a brand of
infamy on her chnracler. If flie ever recovered any degree of
power, his dcltnuef ion would be inevitable, and he would jnufly
nerlit it at her hands. Nor would Elizabeth fcrccn him from

* I!ayanlc;, .178.

o

BooK V. this, by a public approbation of his condut. For whatever cvi-
iS8. ddence of Mary's guilt he might produce, lie was resolved to give

no definitive sentence in the cause. Let him only demand that
the matter flould be brought to a decision, immediately after hear-
ing the proof, and he would be fully convinced how false and in-
fidious her intentions were, and, by consequence, how improper
it would be for him to appear as the accuser of his own Sove-
reign' . ''he candour which Norfolk seemed to discover in thefo
remonstrances, as well as the truth which they contained, made
a deep impreclion on the Regent. He daily received the llrong-
eli assurances of MVary's willingncfs to be reconciled to him, if he
abRlaincd from accuufing her of such an odious crime, together
with tlh denunciations of her irreconcilcable hatred, if he acred a
contrary pact- -. Al. tllhefe considerations concurred in determin--
ing him to alter his purpo(le, and to make trial of the e:pedient
which the Duke had fuggeled.

He demanded, therefore, to be informed, before he proceeded
Oaober 9. farther, whether the Englifli comnniflioncrs were impowered to de-

clare the Q(ecn guilty, by a jucldicial ad; whether tlhy weou''
promise to pass fentencc, without delay; whether the Queen flould
be kept under such rcllraint, as to prevent her from difurbing
the govcrnment now eftabliflied in Scotland; and whether Eliza-
beth, if fhc approved of the proceedings of the King's party,
would engage to prote& it for the future :f. The paper contain-
ing these demands was signed by himself alone, without commu-
nicating it to any of his attendants, except Maitland and Melvil §.
Nothing could appear more natural than the Regent's solicitude,
to know on what footing he flood. To have ventured on a siep
bs uncommon and dangerous, as the accusing his Sovereign, with-
out previously affertaining that he might take it with safety, would
have been unpardonable imprudence. But Elizabeth, who did
not cxpect that he would have moved any fiich difficulty, had not
impowered her commillioners to give him that fatisfaQion vwhich
he demnnided. It became ncccfl'ry to tranfiit the articles to hcr-
self, and by the lighlt in which Norfolk placed them, it is eaiy
to fee that he wiflecd that they fliould ml;ke no flight imlpreflion
on E lizabthi aild her lVniilLirs. " 'Think not the Scots, siid

l: ie, ov cr-lcrul)uous or lnccilc. Ilet us view their conclucl, :a;

c we wonld vilhl our own to be vic\il, in a like fitallion. 'he
" gnmac llhey play is (dcc ; tllc;r cfllats, tlicir lives, their honour

* Melv. i°7. H1aynes, .7.3.
1 Alndcrl vol. i'. 1i7. Good. vol. ii. t;7. Sce ppnclr x, >.XVI

Andlvrf, vol. iv. d. 5 6. i Mclv. 190.

at are at flake. It is now in their own power to be reconciled to rooK V.

" their Queen, or to offend her irrccoverably, and in a matter of
C' so much importance, the utmost degree of caution is not excel 68.
" five *."

While the Englifl commiflioizers waited for fuller inftruftions

with regard to the Regent's demands, he gave in an answer to the
complaint, which had been offered in name of the Scottifli Queen.
It was expressed in terms perfectly conformable to the fvllem
which he had at that time adopted. It contained no infinua.
tion of the QCcen's being acccflory to the murder of her husband;
the bittcrneli of stile peculiar to the age was considerably abat-
cd; and though he pleaded, that the infamy of the marriage witl
Bothwell, made it neceflary to take arms in order to difiolve it;
though Mary's attachment to a man so odious jultified the keep-
ing her for some time under rcltraint; yet nothing more was said
on these Ilbjecls than was barely requisite in his own defence.
The Qten's commifTnioners did not fail to reply f. But while the Oalobr 17.
article with regard to the murder remained untouched, these
were only ikirmifhes at a diflance, of no consequence towards end-
ing the contest, and were little regarded by Elizabeth or her com-
miflioners.

The conference had, hitherto, been conducted in a manner The confer-

which disappointed Elizabeth's views, and produced none of these cdtcermoW-
discoverics which flhe had expected. The diflance between York minller.
and London, and the necessity of consulting her upon every dif-
ficulty which occured, consumed much time. Norfolk's negocia-
tion with the Scottifli Regent, however secretly carried on, was
not, in all probability, unknown to a Princess ib remarkable for
her sagacity in penetrating the designs of her enemies, and feeing
through their deepest fchlemes t. Inllead, therefore, of returning
any aiifwer to the Regent's demands, flie rcfolved to remove the
conference to Wellminfter, and to appoint new comminioners, in
whom nie could more absolutely confide. Both the Scottilh
Queen and the Regent were brought, without difficulty, to ap-
prove of this resolution I|.

We often find Mlary boasting of the fupcriority of her conimif-

lioncrs duringl the conference at York, and how, by the lI c(ngth
of their argumcnts, they confounded her advcrfllric, and il encced
:dl their cavils . T'he difputc food, atj tliat tine, on a tbotinjg

* Andelrl. vol iv. 77. *- Ibil'vl. iv. ,6.,

t8 3.

(;ol(o. vol. ii. 16o. Andltc'' \vol. iii. :.1.
j!i l!ync', .'.1. Antlcrl' y4 . : .l.
i.. G ol i. Wi',ó, :9., '.

0 o ij

BooK Vs which rendered her vi&ory not only apparent, but easy. Hec

I68. participation of the guilt of the King's murder was the only cir-

cumftance, which could justify the violent proceedings of her,
subjects. And while they indufirioufly avoided mentioning that,
her cause gained as much as that of her adversaries by suppressing
this capital argument.

Elizabeth resolved that Mary should not enjoy the fame advan-

tage in the conference to be held at Weftminlter. She deliberat-
ed with the utmost anxiety, how she might overcome the Regent's
feruples, and persuade him to accuse the Qeen. She confider-
ed of the most proper method for bringing Mary's commissioners
to answer such an accusation; and as /he foresaw that the promises
with which it was necessary to allure the Regent, and which it
was impossible to conceal from the Scottish Queen, would natu-
rally exasperate her to a great degree, ihe determined to guard
her more narrowly than ever; and though Lord Scroop had given
her no reason to distrust his vigilance or fidelity, yet bccaufe he
was the Duke of Norfolk's brother-in-law, flie thought it proper
to remove the Queen as soon as possible to Tuthbury in Stafford-
ihire, and commit her to the keeping of the Earl of Shrewsbury~
to whom that castle belonged *.

Mary's luf- Mary began to fufpeca the design of this second conference;
P"i0b,'O1i, and notwithllanding the fatisfaaion she exprefled at feeing her
Elizabeth's
intentions cause taken more immediately under the Qteen's own eye+, ihe
Oober 2r. framed her infirucions to her commiflioners, in such a manner,

as to avoid being brought under the neceflity of answering the
accusation of her subjects, if they should be so desperate as to ex-
hibit one against lierS. These suspicions were soon confirmed
by a circumltance extremely mortifying. The Regent having
arrived at London, in order to be present at the conference, was
immediately admitted into Elizabeth's presence, and received
by her, not only with refpec&, but with affecAion. This Mary
jultly confidered as an open declaration of that Qucen's partiality
towards her adversaries. In the firfl emotions of her rleint-
Novcm. 22. mnent, lhe wrote to her commissioners~ and commanded them to

complain, in the presence of the Englifli nobles, and before thl
ambafflclors of foreign Princes, of the usage llhe had hitherto met
with, and the additional injuries which ihe had rcafon to appre-
hend. Her rebellious fubjests were allowed access to the (Qeun,

* llaynei, 487 . Andrl. vol. iv. 95.
i Good. vol. ii. 349,.

file was excluded from her presence; they enjoyed full liberty, BOOK V.
ihe languified under a long imprilbnment; they were encouraged to
accuse her, in defending herself she laboured under every dilad-
vantage. For there reasons she once more renewed her demand, Claims a

perlonal ai-

of being admitted into the Queen's presence; and if that were dieicero-
denied, flle inilrusted them to declare, that she recalled the con- lizabettr.
lent Ihe had given to tle conference at \Veftminfter, and protest-
ed, that whatever was done there, fmould be held to be null and
invalid *.

This, perhaps, was the moit prudent resolution Mary could

have taken. The pretenccs on which sic declined the conference
were plausible, and the juncture for offering them well chosen.
But either the QOecn's letter did not reach her commissioners in
due time, or they iuflired thcmfelves to be deceived by Eliza-
beth's professions of regard for their MIiltrcs, and conflentcd to the
opening of the conference -..

To the comminioncrs who had appeared in her name at York, Novcm. 25.

Elizabeth now added Sir Nicholas Bacon keeper of the Great
Seal, the Earls of Arundel and Leiceiter, Lord Clinton, and Sir
William Cecil . The difficulties which obllrucled the proceed-
ings at York were quickly removed. A satisfying answer was
given to the Regent's demands; nor was lie so much disposed to
hesitate, and raise objecions as formerly. His negociation with
Norfolk had been diScovered to Morton by some of Mary's at-
tendants, and he had communicated it to Cecil |. His perobnal
iafety, as well as the continuance of his power, depended on E-
lizabcth. By favouring Mary, flme might, at any time ruin him.
And by a quellioll ;lliclh lie artfully Itarted, concerning the per.
son who had a right, by the law of Scotland, to govern the king-
dom during a minority, Ihe let him fee, that even without reltor-
ing the QOeen, it was an easy matter for her to deprive himn of
the supreme diretion of affairs §. 'l'hclc conliderations, vxhiclh
were powerfully seconded by molt of his attendants, at length
determined the Regent to produce his accuIlitionl againtll the
Q!een.

I-I enleavoured to ICefIn the infamy, with which he was Ifn- 'i Rl,',t

fible this adioIn would be attended, by protecling, that it was )''.'1 ,,'
with the ultnioll reludlance he undertook this difilgreeable tall; l,,ig a;, cl-
that his party had long lillthered their conducll to be minifcoillr'ued, i 1,:,il'
and haid borne the worl[ imputations in lilence, rather thln cxpolc 11IIi'I.!.

* Goodl. vol. ii. 1.1·. V Atielei . \Iol. iii. ;jI Iil. vol. iv. 2!j.
li'M Clv. .i .I I n ."i, .18.; .

Booi V. the crimes of their Sovereign to the eyes of firangers ; but that
....OW now the insolence and importunity of the adverse faction forced
68-. them to publinl, what they had hitherto, though with loss to

themselves, endeavoured to conceal *. These pretexts are de:
cent; and had the party discovered any delicacy or reserve, with
regard to the Quecn's aCtions, in the rctl of their condu&, might
have pafedl for the real principles by which they were influen-
ced. But their former treatment of the Queen renders it impof-
lible to give any credit to these profcffions. And the Regent, it
is plain, was drawn by the neceflity of his affairs, and Elizabeth's
:rtifices, into a iituation, where no liberty of choice was left
him ; and was obliged either to acknowledge himself to be
guilty of rebellion, or to charge Mary with ;aving committed
murder.

The accusation itself was conccived in the firongeft terms,

Mlary was charged, not only with having colfented to the mur-
der, but with being acccffory to the contrivance and execution
cf it. JBothwell, it was pretended, had been lcreened from the
pursuits ofjultice by her favour; and Ihe had formed designs no
]e's dangerous to the life of the young Irince, than subversive of
the liberties and conflitution of the kingdom. If any of these
crimes fliould be denied, an offer was made, to produce the morl
ample and undoubted evidence in colrfirmation of the charge --.
a;enmi. 29. At the next meeting of the commiflioners, the Earl of Len-

nox appeared before them ; and after bewailing the tragical and
unnatural murder of his son, lie implored Elizabeth's justice a-
'gainfl the Queen of Scots, whom he accused, upon oath, of be-
ing the author of that crime, and produced papers, which, as he
pretended, would make good what he alleged. 'Ihe entrance
of a new ator on the Itage, Io opportunely, and at a juncture so
critical, can scarce be imputed to chance. 'Ihis contrivance was
inanifelly Elizabeth's, in order to encrcafe, by this additional
accusation, the infamy of the Scottili Qleen 4:.

I!cr ,con- VIMary's commillioners expressed the utmnoll surprise and indig-
wiiioiir, nation at the Regent's presumption, in loading the Queen with
:,nI\vecr. calumnies, which, as they alfirmed, Ihe had fb little merited. But,
DI)ccl. ' inllearl of attempting to vindicate her honour, by a reply to tle

charge, they had rccourfc to an article in their ilnflructions, which
they had fornmerly neglected to mention in its proper place. They
demandlcd al audience of Elizabeth ; aund 1ving renewed thllir

*A d!etri'. vyl i,.. ll..;. ' [ I. iLi2!. zly. 1 d. ibid. 12:.

Miflrefs's requcft, of a pcrfonal intcrveiw, they protcfled, if that IooiK V.
were denied her, againll all the future proceedings of the corn-
missioners *. A protcflation of this nature, offered jufi at the 5368
critical time, when such a bold accfulation had been prcefercd a-
gainft Mlary, and when the proofs in filpport of it were reticy to
be examlined, gave reason to fufpec' that fle dreaded the event
of that examination. This fulpicion received the lfrongelR con-
firmation from anothcr circumitance; Ross and Herreis, before
they were introduced to Elizabeth, in order to make this protcl-
tation, privo.tely acquainted Lcicefler and Cecil, that as their Mil-
trefs had, from the beginning, discovered an inclination towards
bringing the diiflrences between herself and her fubjeds to an
amicable accommodation, so file was frill desirous, notwithlland-
ing the Regent's audacious accusation, tlat ticy flould be ter-
minated in that manner --.

Such moderation is fcarcc compatible vsith the firong resent-

ment, which calumniated innocence naturally feels ; or with
that eageiness to vindicate itl-lf, which it alwaays discovers. In
MVary's situation, an offer so ill-tinmd Inufll be confidercd as a con-
felfion of the weakneRs of her caulik. 'I'c known charadler of her
commifioners exempts them from the imputation of folly, or the
suspicion of treachery. Some fecrct conviclion, tihat the condtCt
of their Mifirefs could not bear so firiA a scrutiny, seems to be the
most probable motive of this imprudent proposal, by lhiich they
endeavoured to avoid it.

It appeared in this light to Elizabeth, and afforded her a pre- Dr^:'. 4.

tence for rejc'.inig it. She told Mary's commifioners, thlit, in
the present juncture, nothing could be lo dishonourable to tllci:
Miflrefs, as an accommodation ; and that the matter would fcci
to be huddled up in this manner, merely to Lfupprelf diiiov'cric,
and to hide her shame ; nor was it possible that lie could 1e ad-
mitted, with any decency, into her prefeince, while lI:e l;y tul-
der the infamy of fulch a public :iccutltion.

Upon this rcpulfic, lMary's conlllillioners witl(drewv; anl ::!

they had declined anfelwcirin, there cfeclilc no to be Ino furthiler
real;n for the Rcg'ent's producing tihe proofs in flpllolt of Iii
charge. But without gettilg' thleli into her hanlds, J.li;'t;,ctli's
!cheines were incomplcete. And her artilice for this p)rl.jof'c I \;:.
as mean, lbut as lilcccfl'till as any (nc hiad hithcrto cmiplu, .1.
:Sic comnianIddtl her coG:iil.iOCers to tellit li'er id(ligi:;ttion .a I[

A.A llderr ;.'('1. is,. 13J, i* . ibid

BooicV. the crimes of their Sovereign to the eyes of firangers; but that

%

now the insolence and importunity of the adverse faaion forced
S68. them to publifhl, what they had hitherto, though with loss to

thlemfelves, endeavoured to conceal *. These pretexts are de-'
cent; and had the party discovered any delicacy or reserve, with
regard to the Queen's actions, in the reft of their conduct, might
have passed for the real principles by which they were influen-
ced. But their former treatment of the Queen renders it impof-
iible to give any credit to these profcflions. And the Regent, it
is plain, was drawn by the neceflity of his affairs, and E izabcth's
artifices, into a Iituation, where no liberty of choice was left
him; and was obliged either to acknowledge himself to be
guilty of rebellion, or to charge Mary with having committed
nlurder.

The accusation itself was conceived in the firongefi terms-

MIIary was charged, not only with having consented to the mur-
der, but with being acccffory to the contrivance and execution
es it. Bothwell, it was pretended, had been screened from the
lurfuits ofjullice by her favour ; and hle had formed designs no
less dangerous to the life of the young Prince, than subversive of
the liberties and conflitution of the kingdom. If any of these
crimes should be denied, an offer was made, to produce the most
ample and undoubted eridence in confirmation of the charge --.
Niovem. 29. At the next meeting of the commiffloners, the Earl of Len-

nox appeared before them; and after bewailing the tragical and
unnatural murder of his son, he implored Elizabeth's justice a-
gainit the Queen of Scots, whom lie accused, upon oath, of be-
ing the author of that crime, and produced papers, which, as he
pretended, would make good what he alleged. The entrance
of a new acor on the Itage, so opportunely, and at ajunture so
critical, can scarce be imputed to chance. This contrivance was
manifcRly Elizabeth's, in order to encrcafe, by this additional
accusation, the infamy of the Scottilf Q.lcn t.

!er corn.- Mary's commiflioners ex<pressed the utmol flurprife and indig-
illiifioncls nation at the Regent's prcfumntion, in loading tlie QCeen witl
:tnlt\er. calumnies, which, as they affirmed, the had so little merited. But,
Jcnccm. 4. inllead of attempting to vindicate her honour, by a reply to the

charge, they llad rccourfc to an article in their infiruciions, which
they had lfrmerly neglcced to mention in its proper place. They
demalnded l a udience of Elizabeth ; and having renewed their

A* Ailclr v;t i ix',
. 1T Id. Ml,!. my9. .1. ibil. i:,.

Mistress's request, of a pcrfonal interveiw, they proteflcd, if that I;ooic V.
were denied her, against all the future proceedings of the com-
missioners . A protcitation of this nature, offered just at the 568"
critical time, when such a bold accusation had been preferred a-
gainft Mary, and when the proofs in support of it were re;ady to
be examined, gave reason to fufpec that fie dreaded the event
of that examination. This suspicion received thie Itrongefi con-
firmation from another circumltance ; Ross and Herreis, before
they were introduced to Elizabeth, in order to make this protef-
tation, privately acquainted Leicefler and Cecil, that as their Mil-
trcfs had, from the beginning, discovered an inclination towards
bringing the differenccs between herself and her fubjels to an
amicable accommodation, so ihe was fill dcfirous, notwithliand-
ing the Regent's audacious accusation, that they lhould be ter-
minated in that manner--.

Such moderation is scarce compatible with the nrong refcnt-

ment, which calumniated innocence naturally feels ; or with
that eagei:nefs to vindicate itself, which it always discovers. In
Mary's situation, an offer so ill-timed mult be confidered as a con-
feflion of the weakness of her caulc. 'I'lle known characler of her
commifioners exempts them from the imputation of folly, or the
suspicion of treachery. Some fecrct convicion, thlt the conduc
of their Mistress could not bear so flrice a scrutiny, seems to be the
most probable motive of this imprudent proposal, by which they
endeavoured to avoid it.

It appeared in this light to Elizabeth, and afforded her a prc- D:cmn. 4-

tence for rjcjling it. She told Mary's commilioners, that, in
the present juncture, notling could be io dilfonourable to tllhei
Miflrefs, as an accommodation ; and that the matter would fcein
to be huddled up in this manner, merely to filpprelf discoveries,
and to hide her ihame ; nor was it pofllble that Ilie could be ad-
mitted, with any decency, into her prelecc, while llie lay un-
der the infamy of such a public accuiation.

Upon this repulfl e, Mary's conmmiioncrs withdrew; and as

they had declined anftvering;, there fccmed now to be no further
reason for the Rgecnt's producing the proors in support of his
charge. But without getting tlhcl into her hands, Eliz;al,etlh's
ichemes were incomplete. And her artilice fir tllis pinlioe wa;i
as mean, but as ltccetlS I as any (he ;haid iilierto enplouycd.
She commabnded lecr coi:mil'ioners to tcllify, her idiglltioll anil

".A cltderl: vol. iv. 1i 3, i,8 *
. i) tl ( l

BooKV. displeasure at the Regent's presumption, in forgetting so far the
8 ,' duty of a subjec, as to accuse his Sovercign of such atrocious

crimes. He, in order to regain the good opinion of such a
powerful protetrefs, offered to shew that his accusations were not
malicious, nor ill-grounded. Then were produced, and deliver-
ed to the English commissioners, the aas of the Scbttifh Parlia-
ment in confirmation of the Regent's authority, and of the
Queen's resignation; the confessions of the persons executed for
the King's 'murder; arid the fatal cafiet which contained the
letters, sonnets, and contratls, that have been alreadymentioned.

R.liza.F'th Elizabeth having got these into her poffeflion, began to lay a-
w^:it great fide the expreflions of friendship and respect which fle had hi-
errigour. therto uscd in all her letters to the Scottiflh Queen. She now
Decemn. 14. wrote to her in such terms, as if the presumptions of her guilt had

amounted ailmoft to certainty ; lhe blamed her for refuting to
vindicate herself from an accusation which could not be left un-
anlfwered, without a manifeil injury to her character; and plain-
ly intimated, that unlcfs that were done, no change would be
made in her present situation *. .She hoped that such a discovery
of her sentiments would intimidate Mary, who was scarec reco-
vered from the lhock of the Regent's attack on,her reputation,
and force her to confirm her resignation of the Crown, to ratify
Mu urray's authority as Regent, and to consent that both herfelE
and her son should reside in Englapd under her protefion. This
fchcme Elizabeth had much at heart; he propoled it both to,
MIary and to her commissioners, and negleced no argument, nor
artifice, that could poflibly recommend it. la;:y law how fatal
this would prove to her reputation, to her pretensions, and even
tolherpcrfonal safety. She rejected it without hesitation. "Death,"
sild flie, " is less dreadful than fucl an ignominious flep. Ra-
" thcr than give away, with mry own hands, the Crown which
" descended to me from my anceflors, I will part with life;
." but the lall words I utter, shall be those of a Q.lecn of Scot-
" lnd- -."

At the fame time fle feeirms to have becn sensible how open

licr reputation lay to censure, while lc fuIfered fulch a plblic ac-
ctif.tion to remain unnrvsered ; and tihogh the conference w.cs;
now difibl·vcd, IlIe irnpowcrecd her conmmil;o:nrs to present a re-
ply t ho tli allerations of her cnemies, ill which ll(e denied, ilt
D .:n - !. il:c cironceft termls, the crimes imputed to her; and recrirnina'-

: A ('c rl v i. iv. 'f7,, ,. G(ood. s!. ii. ci .

'i l'.,;:c', .197. S:t; A;'.'nd., c.
A. ..' . Gcod. vol. ii. :7-., 3ux.

ed upon the Regent and his party, by accusing them of having Booc V.
deviled and executed the murtt,er:of the King. . she Regent -
and. his associates aflerted their innocenc witli great warmth. 568
Mary continued to infilt on a; perional interview, a condition
which she knew would never be grantcdl-.' 'Elizabeth ured
her to' vindicate her own honour. But it is evident from':-he
delays, the cvafions, and fibterfuges, to which both Queens had
recourse by turns, that Mary'av6ided, and Elizabeth did not de-
fire to make any further progress in the inquiry.

The Regent was now impatientlt64-return into Scotland, where 569.

his adversaries were endeavouring, in.his absence, to raile some Feb. 2.
commotions. Before he :set out, he was called into the Privy Difinifles

thlC Rteent

Council, to. receive a final declaration of Elizabethls sentiments; wlthlut ti-
Cecil acquainted him, in her name, that on one hand nothing had thcr approv-
been objected to his conduct, which file-could reckon detrimental d-inn hii
to his honour, or inconfiilent with his duty; nor had he, on the conuet.
other hand, produced any thing against his Sovereign, on which
file could found an unfavourable opinion of her :actions; and for
this reason, file resolved to leave all the affairs of Scotland, precilely
in the fame situation, in which Ihe had found them, at the be-
ginning of the conference. Thl: Q.een's commiflioners were dil:
miffed much in the fame manner I'.

After the attention of both nations had been fixed so carneffly

on this conference, upwards of four months, such a conclusion of
the whole appears, at first fight, trilling and ridiculous. Nothing
however, could be more conformable to Elizabeth's original
views, or more subservient to her future fchcmes. Notwithfland- Hut fecrc.t

·y
1 L3' 5puorts

ing her seeming partiality, Ihe had no thoughts of continuing neu- his pil''
ter; nor was fhle at any loss on whom to bellow her protection.
Before the Regent left London, she supplied him with a confider-
able film of money, and engaged. to iupport the King's autho-
rity, to the utmolt of her power |(. Mary, by her own condut,
fortified this refblution. Enraged at the repeated inltances of Eli-
zabeth's artifice and deceit, which ihe had dilcovered during the
.progress of the conference, and despairing of ever obtaining alny
succour from her, Ilie endeavoured to rouse her own adherents in
.Scotland to arms, by imputing such designs to Elizabeth and
Allurray, as-could not fail to inspire every Scotlinan with indigna-
tion. Murray, Ihe pretended, had agreed to convey the Prince her
lon into England ; to surrender to Elizabeth the places of grcatelt

* cGonl . 28.

8s. -I Ilid. 283. C;bi; , i

a I$. J .

Z rJ.

3 r '.
! 1.1. 21-; Carte, 3. -178.

1 p1

BOOK .. firength in the.kingdom; and to eaknowvledge the dcpendence of

thle Scots upon.the English nation. In return for this,.he.was to
he declared-thc lawful heir of tlle Crown of Scotland; anld;, t the
fame time, the quetion with regard.to the Englifl fucccflion was
to be decided':in- favour of the Earl of Hartford, who had: promif-
ed to marry one of.Cecil's daughters. An account of these wild
and chimerical projeAcs was spread induflrioully among the Scots.
Elizabeth, perceiving it was calculated of purpose to- bring her
government into. difreputation,. laboured to dcflroy its effecls, by
a counter-proclamation, and became more difguflcd than cver
with the Soottilh Qlecn *.. .....

F. torts of The. Regent, on. his. return, .found tlhe kingdom ini the utmolt
IXNary's ad-
hercr.nts - tranquillity. 'lit :the rage of the QueEn's adhercnts,, vhich had
gt.illl hi:'i been suspended .in. expcntation that. the.conference in England

would .terminate- to her advantage,- was. now rcady to break out
with.all the. vdiolence of civil v;ar. ''lley wcre encouraged, too,
by the appearance of a leader, w!ofe lhigh..quality anld.pretlcnions
intitled him to great authority itl lhe nation. .'This was the Duke
of Chatelherault, who .had rcfidcd for. fomc years:innlCriance, and
was now sent over by that court, with a finall lapplyv of moltcy,
.in hopes that the presence of tlhe firll nobleman. in he kingdloln
would flrengthen tlc Qucen's faition. Elizabeth lhad detained
him in EingLnd; for some ri ionrhs, -under various prctinces, but
was obliged at lall to fuffcr him to proceed oil his.journey.: Be-
fore his departure,. Mary invelled him with the high dignity of
Feb. -;. her Lieutcnant;:G:cneral in Scotland, togetler with the fantaf-

tic title of her adopted father.

His vigour- The Regent did.not give him time to form his party into any
oilS COid(Uó
breks her regular body. . He aflimbled an army, .with his ulial expedition
party. and marched to Glasgow. I The followers of Argylc and Huntly,

who composed the chief part of the Qceen's faction, lying in
very dillant corners of the kingdom, and many of the Duke's de-
pendents having fallen, or having been taken in the battle of
Langfide, the spirit and flrength of his adherents was totally bro-
ken, and an accommodation with the Regent was the only .thing,
whicl could prevent tle delfru&ion of his eflate and vassals. This
was eficltedl without difficulty; and on no unreasonable terms.
The Duke promired to acknowledge the authority both of the
ling and of the Regent ; and to claim no jurifdiLCtion in confe-
quence of the coinmiflion, which he had received from.the QeeCn.
Thec ecgcnt bound iimfclf to repeal the act, which had pasl'd

l:.'.l.c, 5:o, <o. Sec Append. iN. XV\'II.

for attainting .seve-ral of tile (ueen's adhlerents ; to reflore all, Boot V.
who would flubmit to the King's government, to. tile poleflion of
their eftates.and honours ; and to hold a Conventioli, wherein all1569
the differences. bt.woeen the two parties flould be'fettled"by mu-
tual consent. The Duke gave holtages for his faitliful perform-
ance of the..treaty;, and, in toklil of their sinceri.ty, he and Lord
Herreis accompanied the Regent to Stirling, and visited the
young Kiing.: The Regent set at liberty the prisoners taken at
Langfidc '..

Argyle : nd lluntly refused to be included in this treaty. A fc-

cret negociation was carrying on, in England, .in favour of the
captive Queen, with so much fhuccecs, that her affairs began to wear
a: bettei- aljpet, and her return into her own kingcdom feemcrd to he
an event not very dillant. The French King had lately obtained
iuch advantages over the H-ugonots, that the extincion of that
party appeared to be inevitable, and France, :byiirccovering do-
meftic tranquillity, would be no longer preventel fi-omn protecting
lier friends.in Britain. Tlefe circunillances not only influenced
Argyle and. iluntly, but Imade ls deep an impreflion on the Duke,
hlat he appeared to be wn'avering and irrelolute, and plainly disco-
vered that lie wilfied to evade the accompliflimeint of the treaty.
The Regent saw the dalnger of allowingl tile Duke.to flake him-
fclf loose, in this manner, fromn his lengagemelnts ; and inflantly
formed a relolution cqually bold and politic. HIe c6dnmanded his
guards to 'seize Chatelherault in lis own house in Edinburgh,
whither he had come, in order to attend tlhe Convention agreed
upon ; and, regardlcfs either of his dignity as thle lirll nobleman
in tle kingdom, and next heir to the Crown, or of the promifies
of personal lccurity, on which he had relied, committed him and
Lord Herreis, priboners to tlhe callle of Edinburglh l. A blow April i/,.
ib fatal and unexpetled dispirited the party. Argyle fulbmitted
to tile King's goverment, and made his peace with the Regent,
on very ec:l tCerls ; and I-untly, being left alone, was at lafR
obliged to lay down his arms.

Soon after, Lord Boyd returned into Scotland, anid brought let- Jul :.

ters to the Regent both from the Englillh and ScottillS Qieens. . l opo!:l!
A Convention was held at Perth, in order to conlider them. Eli- i iuV) o'
zabeth's letter contained three different propolils with rc'g:ird to edl.
MVary; that the Ihould either be rellortd to the full pollcllioii of
her former authority or be admitted to rCigl jointly with the
Kiig' her lon; or at leall lbe allowed to relide in Scotland, in

" :ll'ail'ail, *6J. (_:, l.wl'1. t.- : ["6. -1' C'rvt;1. M,' I1 i . i\:Iv. :2.

1' I' ij

Booer V. Tome decent retirement, without any flare!in the adminiiflration ds

government. These: overtures were extorted by the importunity
o69 f Fenelon the Frencli ambassador, and have som'e appearance of
being favourable. to the captive. Qeen. They were, .however,
perfeEtly'fuitable-to Elizabeth's' general system with regard tb
Scottish affairs.: Among propositions so inequal and difpropor,
tionate; fhe'eafily saw where the choice would fall. .The, tvo
former were rejeted; and long delays must necessarily have in-
tervened, and many ditliculties have arisen, before every circum-
stance relativeto the lair could be finally adjulled *.

Mary, in her letter, demanded that her marriage with Both-

well should be reviewed by the proper judges, and if found inva-
lid, should be dissolved by a legal sentence of divorce.. This fa-
tal marriage was the principal source of all the calamities fle had
endured for twio years; a divorce was the only thing which could
repair the injtirie, her reputation had suffered by that ftep. It

NTr-frlk's was her intereff' to have proposed it early; and it is not cafy to
fchm-le for
cmarryvn account for her long silence with refpet to this point. Her par-
the Queen ticular motive for proposing it, at this time, began to be so well

of ots known,.that the demand was rejected by the Convention of estates.

They imputed it not so much to any abhorrence of Bothwell. as
to her cagernefs to' conclude a marriage with the Duke of Nor-
folk.

This marriage Was the object of that secret negociation iin Eng-

land, which we have already mentioned; but, like all those con-
certed for the relief of the Queen of Scots, it ended tragically.
The fertile and projecting genius of Maitland firlI conceived
this fchere, During the conference at York, he communliat-
ed it to the Duke himself, and to the Bihop of Ross. The for-
mer readily closed with a scheme, so flattering to his ambition.
The latter confidered it as a probable device for relloring his
MVliflrefs to liberty, and replacing her on her throne. Nor was
Mary, with whom Norfolk held a correspondence, by means of
his fiftcr Lady Scroop, averfc from a meafilre, whiich would have
rcllored her to her kingdom, with so much Iplendorf-. The ftid-
den removal of the conference from York to Weflminnler ui(f.
pendcd, but did not break off this intrigue. Maitland and Rolf
were flill the Duke's prompters, and his agents; and many let-
ters and love-tokens were exchanged between hiin and the Queen
of SLOtS.

3ut as he could not hope, that under an admilniflration so i-
' Spot., 230. i'C;nItl u 41 ll.;lanes, 73 Statc rials, . 73.

4-iiait ais Elizabetlh's;-fuch an intrigue could be kept long coni- hOOK V.
cedlcd, he attierpted- to deceive her by the appearance of open- 6
iefs and-candor, an artifice which fel'doiri fails -f fucceGi He Conceals it
±meileiotied to' her the rumour, which was spread of his marriagec fron Eliza..
-with the Scottish Queen; he complained of it as a groundless ca- be
lumny; and disclaimed all thoughts of that kind, -with many cx-
pressions full of contermpt, both for Mary'scharater, and domi-
nions. Jealous as, Elizabeth was of every thing relative to the
(Oeen of Scots, ihe- ieems to have credited these profeflions'*.
But, inflead of discontinuing the negociation, he renewed it with
greater vigour, and admitted into it new associates. Among
these was the Regent of Scotland. He-had. giivei great offence
to-Norfolk, by his public accusation of the Queen, in breach of
the concert into which he had entered at York. He was then
ready to return into Scotland. The influence of the Duke, in
the North of England, was great. The Earls of Northumberland
and Wefmorland, -the moll powerful noblemen in that part of
the kingdom, threatened -to revenge upon the Regent, the inju-
ries which he had done his Sovereign. In order to secure his safe
retreat, he addrcfled himself to Norfolk, andj after some apology
for his pail condut, he insinuated that the Duke's fchemc of
mariying the Queen, his filler was no less acceptable to him,
than beneficial to both kingdoms; and that he would concur,
with tlhe utmost ardour, in promoting so defireable an event --. Nor-
folk heard him with the credulity, natural to'thofe, who are pas-
fionatcly bent upon any design. He wrote to the two Earls to
delill from any hoft.le attempt againll Murray, and to that he
owed his passage through tlhe Northern Counties, without disturb-

Encouragcd by his fuccees in gaining the Regent, he next at- Ca;,s tl,
ternlted to draw the Englilh nobles to approve his design. The '"coi." "tt

the
l ,;nlightlh

ni.tiou began to despair of E lizabeth's marrying. I-Icr jcaloufy nobles.
kept the queition with regard to the right of luccefllon undecided.
'ITh memory of the civil wars, whicl had debflated England
for more than a century, on account of the difintcd titles of t11'
houses of York and Lancaster, was flill recent. Alnoll the hliolc
ancient nobility had periflicd, and the nation itlilf had been brouight
to tlhe brink of dellruslion, in that unhappy contelt. The Scot-
till1 Qecn, though her riglit of liiccellio1i was generally held to
he :ndoubted, mighn t meet with forlnidlble comlpetitors. She
nsigi:t :n;irry a foreign and a Poplili Prince, anid bling both liber-

" IJnalyns, 5;7'. State 'ri; lj, 1.79, 80. *' A':Ilc.L 3- 34.

BooV. ..ty and religion into danger. , But, .by. marryipg heir to-an; -Epg-

.liifman, a zealous Protentant, the moit ,powerful and most. uni-
' 569' verfally beloved of. all tlhe nobles, an.effectual;remedy feemed.to

be provided against all these evils. .The greater pgrt of the. Peers,
either directly or tacitly,. -approved of, it,- as afalutary project.
The Earls of-Arundel, PIembroke, Leiceiler, and Lord Lumley
subscribed a letter, to the Scottifl ,Queen, written with Leiceler.'s
hand, in which they warmly recommended. the match, but in-
sifted, by way of preliminary, .on Mavy?s promise, that Ihe llould
attempt nothing, in :consequence of.her.prIetenfions to the Eng-
lifl Crown, prejudicial ,to Elizabeth dr to her porterity; that ile
should confcnt; to. a' league olTenfive and defensive between the
two -kingdoms; that. hle fllould confirm the present eftablifli-
meut of religion in scotland; and receive into favour such of her
ftljes as had appeared in arms againRf her. Upon her agreeing
to the marriage, 'and:;,.atifying there articles, they engaged. that
the Englifl nobles would not only concur, in restoring .her, im-
mediately, to her own throne, but in ficuring to her that of Eng-
laid, in revcrlion. . Iary readily consented to all these proposals,
except the second, with regard to which, lie demanded. orme
time for consu'lting her ancient ally the French :King %.

The whole of this ncgpciation was indUflrioufly concealed from

Elizabeth. I-Ier'jealo.ufy of the Scottiih Queen was well known,
nor could it be expdetcd, that (le would willingly come into:
-neaifure, which tended to visibly to save the reputation, and to
increase the power of her rival. But, in a matter of so much con-
lequence to the nation, th.e taking a few steps without her know-
ledge, could Icarce be reckoned crimin;l; and while every per-
ion concerned, even Mary and Norfolk thcmfelves, declared that
nothing hlould be concluded without obtaining her content, the
duty and allegiance of fubjets seemed to be fully preserved. The
greater part of the nobles regarded the matter inthis.light. Those
.who conduted the intrigue, liad farther and more dangerous views.
They saw the advantages which Mary procured by this treaty,
to be prefntt and certain ; and the execution of the promiics
whiclh lie came under, to be dillanL and uncertain. They had
early communicated their fchcme to the Kings of France and
Spain, and obtained their approlation-l. A tr'eaty, concerning
whlich they confilted f oreign Princes, 'whilc thly concealed it
from their own Sovereign, could not be deemed innocent. 'l'hey
hoped, however, that the union of lbo many noblesv would rendel
i: neccfli'y for lElizablct tu comply ly ll attcrd .thia lienilvlc

* ,] 'i.:r vol. iii. (.'atiie l
, !2. -! !1. ib .id. iii, 63'.

that h combination. fo'trong' would be altoget.her irrefiflirble ;:'H d Boon V.
fuc'h'wastheir confidence'of fucccfs, that"when a plan w'as con- L-
certed:'in- the North 'of England, fd!'re'fouing Mary otit of the 1569
handso'6fiher keepers, Norflk., who was afraid that if llie recover-
ed liberty, -her fentiirthts in. his favour might change, used aill
his interest to diffuadC-rtlve conspirators from attempting it *'.
' In this!fituation did the'affair remain, when Lord Boyd arriv-
d 'from--England ;'-aid; 'lbefides the letters-which he: produced
publi'cly; brought botlieisin cyplhes from Norfolk and Throgmor-
tdii''to'the' Regent', 'ild 'to Maitland. ' TI'hefe welce full of tile
rnot sanguine hopes. ': The whole nobles of England condurred,
said they, in favouring Ithe'defign. Every prclimihary was:.ad-
jufled; nor was it pofible that a scheme fci deep laid, conducted
wvith fo'much art, and fulpported both hy power and by numbers,
couild miscarry, or be defeated in the execution. Nothing now
was wanrting, but the': oncluding ceremony. It depended on
tlie'Reg'erit to haften that, by procuring a intencc of divorce,
.which':would remove the only obltacle that flood in the way.
This.was-expeced of him, in confcqlencc of his promise to Nor-
folk; and if he regarded either his ilnteretl or his fame, or even
his safety, he would not fail to fulfil -these engagements- -.

'But the Regent was now in very different circumllances, from

those which liad forneirly induced him to affect an approbation of
Norfolk's schemes. He faw.that the downfal of his own power
must be the first consequence of the Duke's success. And if the
Q2een, who confidered him as the chief author of all her misfor-
tunes, should recover lier ancient authority, lie could never ex-
pect favour, nor scarce liope for impunity. No wonder he declin-
ed a ftep so fatal to himself, and which would' have ellabilifned
'the grandeur of another on the ruins of his own. This refusal
'occasioned a delay. But, as every other circumit:lnce was fcttled,
the Biflop of Roli, in name of his Millrefs, and the Duke, in per-
son, declared, in pref'eicc of the I'rcnch amibafi(ador, their mutual
consent to the marriage, and a contract to this purpose was sign-
ed, and intrulled to the keeping of the Amballhdort.

'The intrigue was now in so many hands, tllat it could not long Augufl r3.

remain a fccret. It began to be wlliijcrcl at court; :and Elizabeth Elizabethl
calling the Duke into her prelencc, cxlicll.dl the utmioft ilJigll:i- tII l)le'S
tion at his conduiii, and charged him to lay ali(le :1ll thoughlts of dt(lisn, and
irol'ecutiiig such a c dangcrous dcfign. Soon after, Leicelcer, 'lho

C:anll . 420. 1 I:ir.., '- . SpotI' 2,o. S'- ApL'nli, N'. Z7./ ".
C irte, vOl. iii. 86.

BooK V. pe.ihaps had cotntenanced-the ;projea wjvthno other intentioil, ro-
'--9- vealed the whole circumftancesof it to.the,Qeen. Pembroke,;A-
?569t rund'el, Lumley, and'Throgmorton were confined, and. exariined.

lVary was watched !more narrowly than ever; and,Haltings.. -lrl
ps Huntington, who pretended to dispute with the Scottiflh.Q:e1n,
her right to the succession, being joined in commission with Shrews-
bury,. rendered her imprisonment more intolerable,. by:thce.xqcfs
of his vigilanceand.rigour *. The Scottjfh .Regent, threatcied
with Elizabeth's difpleafuire, meanly betraye.dthe Dukeli .put his
letters,in her hands; and fu.rnifled all the lin:elligence in::liS,.pqw-
er -f-:The Duke himpfelf retired first: to Hqward-houfe, and. then,( in
contempt of a summons to appearbefore, f-hcPrivy Council, fled to
his feat in Norfolk. Intimidated by the rimprifonment of his affo-
ciates coldly received byhis friends in that county ; unprepared for
a rebellion; and unwilling perhaps to rebel; he hesitated for:fome
Oaober 3. days, and at last obeyed a second call, and repaired toqWidrfpr.

IHe was fircf kept as a priioner in a private ho.ule, and then.,fent,to
the Tower. After being confined there upwards of nine..mg.ths,
he..was released upon his humble fubmiltion to Elizabeth, .,gyipg
her a promise, on his allegiance, to hold no farther correspondence
with the Scottish Queen :. During the.progrefs of Norfoll's neg.q,
ciations, the Queen's partizans ip Scptland, who made.rodoubt
of their issuing in her refloration to the throne, withlan increase of

Maiirand authority,. were wonderfully elevated. Maitland was the foul-of tlat
i tni llied party, and the person, whose adivity and abilities the Regent chief-
en t. ly dreaded. Hee had laid the plan of that. intrigue, which lhad

kindled such combustion in England, . He. continued to foment
the spirit of disaffection ip Scotland, and had fcduced, from the Re-
gent Lord Home, Kirkaldy, and several of .his former aflociates.
While he enjoyed liberty, the Regent could not reckon: i.s own
power secure. For this reason, he employed Captain Crayfturd, one
of his creatures, to accuse him of beipg accerory to the:murder
of the King; and under that pretence carried him a prisoner to
Edinburgh. He would soon have been brought to trial, but was
saved by the friendlhip of Kirkaldy, governor of the cafile, whq,
by pretending a warrant for that purpose from the Regent,. got
him out of the hands of the person, to whose care he was com-
mitted, and conducled him into the castle, which, from tlat time,
was entirely under Mlaitland's command. ''lhe loss of a place of
to much importance, and the ldefedion of a man so eminent for
military Ikill as Kirk;tldy, brought the Regent into Ibmc dilrc-
*%., I-anylleS, Sz 5^6, 530, 532. 'I See Append' No. Y.ZZ. 11aynlls,'5', 59:

pttation, for which, however, the success of his ally Elizabetlh Ion- V-
abundantly compensated. V--

1569.

The intrigue carried on for reItoring tle Scottifl Queen to li- A I'll I

berty having been dilovered, and diiippointcd, an attempt was :i:,;,,ll I'li.
made, to the faine purpose, by force of. arms ; but with no bet- ?,;!, .i, ,
ter success. Tlhe Earls of Northumberland and WVellmorland, liclcn;,.
though little dislinguihecd by their personal merit, were two of
the moll ancient and powerful of the Englil peers. Their estate;
in the northern counties were great, and they poflefecd that in-
fluence over the inhabitants, lwhich was hereditary in the popu-
lar and martial families of Percy and of Nevil. They were both at-
tached to the Popilli religion, and discontented with the court,
vwhere new men, and a ncwv yl/tem prevailed. Ever since MIa-
ry's arrival in England, they had warmly espoused her interlct,
and zeal for Popery, opposition to the court, and conrmileration
of her sufferings, had engaged theni in different plots for her re-
lief. Notwithllandiilg the vigilance of her keepers, they held
a clole correrfjondeicc with her, and comniunicated to her all
their cefigns T. 'hecy were privy to Norfolk's schemes ; but tile
caution with which he proceeded did not luit their ardour and
inipetuolity. 'ihe liberty of tle Scottilli (ueen was not their
sole object. I'lTey aimed at bringing about a chaniie in the re-
ligion, and a revolution in the government of the kingdom. For
tllis rcalbn, they lolicitcd the aid of the King of Spain, the a-
vowed and zealous patron of Popery in that age. Nothing
could be more deliglitful to the relllcls fiirit of Philip, or more
necefiary towards facilitating his schemes in the Netherlands,
than the involving England in the confulion and mifcrics of a ci-
vil war. The l)uke of Alva, by his direcion, encouraged tihe
two Earls, and promiled, so lbon as they either took the field
with their forces, or furpriled any place of ilrength, or reflced
the Q1een of Scots, that lie would f1ipply them both with money,
and a lliong- body of troops. 1:t Al'othe, the governor of Duin-
kirk, in the diliuil' of a lhilor, founded the ports where it would
be molt proper to land. And Chiapini Vitelli, one of Alva's a-
bleil ofliccrs, was dilpartclied into lEngland, on lpretence of l't-
tling ilnme commneriall differences Cbetween thlC two 1nationls ; 1lt,
in reality, that the rebels niight be flre of a Iadllr of e.xperiice,
lo Icon as they ventured to take arlls *-.

'Ilie conilitl: of this neC;ocialtion occafionlL mainy mcctin.i's 31and liD:;

; ld.
incliages bctw'cn tlle two Earls. l£iz:l.!ith v:i iiimonicd il

, l yll ,'51, J? . ''s .*\' ( :;'

t,; .l :.' iii. 4 ;1'»,

) ' ( C :11, !. .1

.
'

p,' 0. (
. .l

BooK V. these'; and though she fufpeaed nothing of their real design, fiie.

--- concluded that they were among the number of Norfolk's confi-
1569. dents. They were summoned, for this reason, to repair to Court.

Conscious of guilt, and afraid of discovery, they delayed giving
obedience. A second, and more peremptory order was issued.
This they could not decline, without lhaking off their allegiance.
And, as no time was left for deliberation, they instantly ereceed
No'em. 9. their tfandard against their Sovereign. The re-establishing the

catholic religion; the fettling the order of succession to the Crown;
the defence of the ancient nobility ; were the motives they alledg-
ed to justify their rebellion *. Many of the lower people flock-
ed to them, with such arms as they cduld procure; and had the ca-
pacity of the leaders been, in any degree, equal to the enter-
prise, it must have soon grown to be extremely formidable. Eli-
zabeth aAed with prudence and vigour ; and was served by her
fubjeds with fidelity and ardour., On the firit rumour of an in-
furredoion, Mary was removed to Coventry, a place of strength,
which. could not be taken without a regular siege 3 a detachment
of the rebels, vhich was sent to rescue her, returned without fuc-
cess. Troops were assembled in different parts of the kingdom;.
as they advanced, the malecontents retired. In their retreat
their numbers dwindled away, and their spirits funk. Despair
and uncertainty whither to dire& their flight, kept together, for
some time, a small body of them among the mountains of Nor-
Decem. 21. thumberland. But they were at length obliged to disperse, and

the chiefs took refuge among the Scottifih borderers. The two.
Earls, together with the Countess of Northumberland, wandering
for some days in the wafles of Liddifdale, were plundered by the
banditti, exposed to the rigours of the season, and left detlitute
of the necessaries of life.. Wellnorland was concealed by Scot
of Buccleugh and Kerr of Ferniherlt, and afterwards conveyed
into the Netherlands. Northumberland was seized by the Re-
gent, who had marched with foine troops towards the borders,
to prevent any imprefion the rebels might make on those muti-
nous provinces --.

(hiiich as-. Amidlt it many surprising events, the affairs of the church,
air-s,' for two years, have alimoff el'aped our notice. Its Gcneral As-

femblics were held rcgularly; but no bulincls of much importance
employed their attention. As the number of the Protellant clergy
daily incrcafl d, the deficiency of the funds, fit apart for their uLb.

" Stlryp, vol . i. 17. '1 Cabbal;, 171. Carnl. 4'I .

fiftence, became greater. Many efforts were made towards re- BoocV.
covering the ancient patrimony of the church, or at leait so much
of it, as was poffefl'ed by the Popish incumbents, a race of men, I569
who were now, not onlyufelefs, but burdensome to the nation. But
though the manner in which the Regent received their addresses
and complaints, was very different from that to which they had
been accustomed, no effectual remedy was provided; and while
they suffered intolerable opprefllion, and groaned under the most
extreme poverty, fair words, and liberal promises, were all they
were able to obtain *.

Elizabeth began now to be weary of keeping such a danger- 1570.

ous prisoner as the Scottish QOeen. During the former year, the Elizabeth
tranquillity of her government had been dillurbed, first by afecret rie euSpto
combination of some of her nobles, then by the rebellion of others; ry to the
and she often declared, not without reason, that Mary was the Rcgent.
hidden carufe of both. Many of her own fubje6ts favoured, or pi-
tied the captive Queen; the Roman Catholic Princes on the con-
tinent were warmly intereited in her cause. The detaining her
any longer in England, file foresaw, would be made the pretext or
occasion of perpetual cabals and infurreftions among the former,
and might expose her to the holtile attempts of the latter. She
resolved, therefore, to give up Mary into the hands of the Regent,
whose security, no less than her own, depended on preventing her
from re-afcending the throne. The negociation for this purpose
was carried some length, when it was discovered by the vigilance
of the Biflop of Ross, who, together with the French and Spanilh
Ambassadors, remonstrated against the infamy of such an ation,
and represented the surrendering the Queen to her rebellious sub-
Jc&s, to be the fame thing, as if Elizabeth Ihould, by her own
authority, condemn her to inflant death. This procured a de-
lay; and the murder of the Regent prevented the revival of that
design -.

Hamilton of Bothwcllhaugh was the person who committed But ihe 1

this barbarous action. He had been condemned to death boon ,f- murdleld.
ter the battle of Langfide, as we have already related, and owed
his life to the Regent's clemency. But part of his estate had been
bellowed upon one of the Regent's favourites, who seized his
house, and turned out his wife naked, in a cold night, into the
open fields, where, before next morning, she became furiously mnad.
This injury made a deeper inpreflion on him, than the benefit he

* Cald. vol. ii. 8s, &c, f Carte, vol. iii, 39r. Anderl. vol. iii. 81.

QcL ii

Boo-L V- had received, and from that moment he vowed to be revenged

upon the Regent. Party-rage ilrengthened and inflamed his pri-
vate refentmcnt. His kinfenc tlle Hamiltons applauded the cn-
terprife. The maxins of that age jullified the moll desperate
courfc he could take to obtain vengeance. He followed the Rc-
gent for some time, and watched for an opportunity to firike the
blow:. He resolved at last to wait till his enemy flhould arrive at
Linlithgow, through which he was to pass in his way from Stir-
ling to Edinburgh. H-e took his fRand in a wooden gallery, which
had a window towards the flrcet; spread a feather-bed on the
floor, to hinder the noise of his feet from Lking heard ; hung up
a black cloth behind him, that his fladow might not be obLerved
from without; and after all this preparation, calmly expeced the
Regent's approach, who had lodged during the night in a house
not far dillant. Some indillint information of tile danger which
threatened him, had been conveyed to the Regent, and lie paid
so much regard to it, that lie rciblvcd to return by the fame gate
through which he had entered, and to fetch a compass round the
town. Butasthe crowd about tle gate xasgreat, andlie himself un-
acquainted with fear, lie proceeded direcly along the itreet; and
the throng of the people obliging lim to move very llowly, gave
the alTlafin time to take lb trute .a aim, that le ihot him with a
single bullet, through the lower part of his belly, and killed the
horse of a gentleman who rode on his other fide. His followels
instantly endeavoured to break into the house whence the blow had
come, but they found the door strongly barricaded; and before it
could be forced open, Hamilton had mounted a fleet horse, which
flood ready for him at a back passage, and was got far beyond their
reach. The Regent died the fame night of his wound *.
lis .charac. There is no person, in that age, about whom hiflorians have

been more divided, or whose charadclr has been drawn with fucl
oppofitc colours. Pcrfonal intrepidity, military lkill, sagacity and
vigour in the adminifiration of civil affairs, arc virtues, whicll even
his enemies allow him to have pofl'cffd, in an eminent degree. His
moral qualities arc more dubious, and ought neither to be praiscd,
nor censured, without great rclerve, and many dillincions. In a
fierce age, he was capable of using- vitlory witll humanity, and of
trcating the vanquiflcid witii modcration. A patron of learnilg,
xwhich, among martial nobles w\aa eitllr unknown, or iclpiiflcd.
Zealous for religion, to a degree, iwhich diinuiguilhed him, cvrcn

lucJi.. ^F. Crawf. .\cm. 1:4.

at a time, when profcflions of that kind were not uncomlmon. I-is BOOKI V.
confidence in his friends was extreme, and inferior only to his libc-
rality towards them, which knew no bounds. A difinterefled pal- 570'
lion for the liberty of his country, prompted him to oppose the per-
nicious fyflcm, which the Princes of Lorrain had obligcd the Q(ccn-
mother to purfie. On IMary's return into Scotland, he served her
with a zeal and afietion, to which he sacrificed the fricndlliip of
those who wcre moll attached to his person. But, on the other
hand, his ambition was immoderate ; and events happened, that
opened to him valf profpeas, which allured his cnterprifing genius,
and led him to actions, inconsistent with the duty of a fubjecL. -is
treatment of the Qcen, to wlofe bounty lie was so much indebted,
was unbrotherly and ungrateful. The dependence on Elizabeth,
under which he brought Scotland, was lilgracefli to the natiol.
I-Ie deceived and be,trayed Norfolk, with a laf'nefs unwlorthy of a
man of honour. His elevation to lichl uncxpetced dignity, in-
liired him with new paflons, with haughtiness and refcrv ; and
inltead of his natural manner, which was blunt and open, he as-
fcc&ced the arts of diflimulation and refinement. Fond, towards
the end of hi.i life, of flattery, and impatient of advice, his crea-
turcs, br soothing his vanity, led him afiray, while his ancient
friend, stood at a dillance, and predicted his approaching fall.
Bus, amidst the turbulence and confusion of that fiLlious period,
he dispensed jullice with so much imparti:lity, hle reprcfled the
licentious borderers with ib much courage, and eftabliflced such
uncommon order and tranquillity in the country, that his admi-
niftration was extremely popular, and he was lo:lg and affecCiion.-
ately remembered among the commons, by the name of the G('od
h',-,tlt.

# BOOK SIXTH. CONTENTS. CONSEQUENCES of Murray's death. Lennox elected Regent. Artifices of Elizabeth. Dunbarton castle surprised by the Regent. Archbishop of St. Andrew's executed. Two Parliaments. ...

r HE
HISTORY

o F
SCOTLAND.

BOOK SIXTH.

CONTENTS.

CoNSEQUENCES of Murray's death. Lennox elened Regent. Artifices of Eli-

zabeth. Dunbarton caltle filrprifed by the Regent. Archbiflop of St. An-
drew's executed. Two Parliaments. State of faCions. Regent surprised ana
killed at Stirling. Mar fiucceeds him. Proceedings in England againhf Queel
Mary. Norfolk's conspiracy. Dircovered by Elizabeth. League between
England and France. 1Malfacre at Paris. Dcati of the Regent Mar. Mor-
ton Regent. Aflairs of the Church. Death and charaaer of Knox. A trea-
ty between the factions. Siege and surrender of Edinburgh castle. Execution
6f Kirkaldy the Governor. Odious tyranny of Morton. James. A plot a-
gainfl the Regent. His resignation. Farther commotions. Fall of Morton.
His trial and execution. Conspiracy of the nobles. James seized. His escape.
The Clergy favour the Conspirators. A Parliament. Severe laws againlt
the ChIurclh.

T H unexpected blow, by which the Regent fell, firuck the BooK VW.
King's party with the utmofl coniternation. Elizabeth bewailed lv
his death as the molt fatal difafler, which could have befallen her J570°

Difordtlers

kingdom; and was inconsolable to a degree that little suited her occasioned
dignity. Mary's adherents exulted, as if, now, her refldration were by the Re-

gCnt's

not only certain, but near at hand. The infamy of the crime na- d1eal.
turally fell on tlofe, who exprelled such indecent joy at the com-
minflon of it. And as the aftlafin made his escape on a horse,
which belonged to Lord Claud Hamilton, and fled direcAly to
Hamilton, where he was received in triumph, it was concluded
that the Regent had fallen a sacrifice to the relentmcnt of the
Qtccn's party, rather than to the revenge of a private man. On
the clay after the murder, Scot of Buccleugh, and Kerr of Fcr-
nilhcrl, both zealous abettors of tile Quccn's cause, entered Eng-
land in an hollile manner, and plundered and burnt the countryt

BooK r. the inhabitants of which expeaed no such outrage. If the Rc.-

gent had beien alive, they would scarce have ventured on such an
$S70°

irregular incursion, nor could it well have happened so soon after
his death, unless they had been privy to the crime.

'This was not the only irregularity, to which the anarchy that

followed the Regent's deatl gave occasion. During such genera)
confusion, men hoped for universal impunity, and broke out into
Steps talien exceelcs of every kinds As it was imponlble to reltrain thefc,

ela;gI without a fettled-form'of-government, a Convention of the ndbles
itmothelrRe- vwas held, in order to deliberate concerning the elesion of a Re-

en.t. gent. The Q-cen's adherents refuted to be. present at the meet-

ing and proteLled againfi its proceedings. The King's own party
was irresolute, and divided in opinion. VMaitland, whom Kir-
kally had set at liberty, and who obt:ained from the nobles then
aftlcibled a declaration acquitting him of the crime which had
been laid to his charge, endeavoured to bring about a coalition
of the two parties, by proposing to admit the Q(een to the joint
adminiflration of government with her son. Elizabeth adhered
to her old fyflem with regard to Scottifi afairs, and notwithfland-
ing the solicitations of Mlary's adherents", laboured to multiply,
and to perpetuate the factions, which tore in pieces the kingdom.
Randclelph, whom she dispatchcd into Scotland on the firll news
of tle Regent's death, and who was her ulual agent for such ser-
vices, found all parties so exasperated by mutual injuries, and so full
ct irreconcileabie rancour, that it coll him little trouble to inflame
their lilcord. 'Ihe Convention broke up without cominig to any
agreemncit; and a new meeting, to which the nobles of all parties
were invited, was appointed on the firll of AMay -.

A ca., ;, I Meiantime, MP.aitland and Kirkaldy, wlo liill continued to ac-
ls' p:l I'tit's

, k(nowledge the King's authority, were at the utlmof pains to re-
i1 \iin. ilorc ;)fme degree of harmony among their countrymen. They

IFrocrret for this purpose, an amicable conference among. the lead-
-r:; of the tw\' i'.ltions. But while the one demanded the relto-
ratil iof the ()ut ei, as the only tlling which could re-cllablhilh
ihe public tranlquillityv hlile the other cileccmed the King's au-
lrit;v to le Io iacred, thalt it was, on no account, to be called
ill qlClion or i iip,:ired ; and licitlier of thllem would recede in the
I:il plint from the:i opinlionls, they Ikcpl:mItcd withoutit ;any pro-
,p1t:.' (, conlio. .olh I'lurcr rnded more avcrl.: flrom rl ecill-
i li;L.cIt, ,,y tile lhipc f forci,; aid. A.in Cllnoy arrived f1ro1(1
'. ,".:c L itl i );)ronil t's of po:.'erfill luLccour to theo QCecI's ud11C.-

::. .^ *: :: .'\ 1, ! ' 1 .

-

. c
.^ ll . cj d2 C.il;:lr. a. i7-

rents; and as the civil wars in that kingdqm seemed to be on the BOOic VI.
point of terminating in a peace, it was expeectl that Charles would
soon be at liberty to fulfil what he promised. On the other Il.nid, I 570
the Earl of Sulffx wias assembling a powerful army on the borders,
and its operations could not fail of adding pirit 'and lLrength to the
King's party .

Though the attempt towards a coalition of the factions proved Qulee,'s

ineffecual, it contributed somewhat to moderate, or fufpcnd their 1i tI,. "of
rage 5 but they soon began to act with their usual animosity. Mor- E diilburgh.
ton, the most vigilant and able leader on the King's lide, solicit-
ed Elizabeth to intcrpole, without delay, for the lafety of a party
so devoted to her interell, and which flood in such need of her as-
filtance. The Chiefs of the Queen's fadcion, aflimbling at Lin- April .
lithgow, marched thence to Edinburgh; and Kirkaldy, who was
both Governor of the castle, and Provotf of the town, prevailed
on the citizens, though with some difficulty, to admit them with-
in the gates. Together with Kirkaldy, the Earl of Athole, and
Maitland, acceded almolt openly to their party; and the Duke,
and Lord Herreis, having recovered their liberty by Kirkaldy's
favour, refurned the places, which they had formerly held in their
councils. Encouraged by the acquisition of persons, so illullrious
by their birth, or bo eminent for their abilities, they publifled a
proclatmation, declaring their intention to support the Qtccn's au-
thority, and seemed resolved not to leave the city before the meet-
ing of the approaching Convention, in which, by their numbers
and influence they did not doubt of lecuring a majority of voices
on their fide -.

At the fame time, they had formed a delign of kindling a war E.ndlcavxour

between the two kingdoms. And if they could engage them in 1"the natlio
Imolilitics, and revive their ancient emulation and antipathy, they in a wiar
hloped, not only to dissolve a confederacy of great advantage to ltl E'g-
the King's cause, but to reconcile their countymen to their own
Sovereign, Elizabeth's natural and moll dangerous rival. With
this view, they had, immediately after the murder of the Regent,
prompted Scot and Ker to commence hofililties, and had lince
infligated them to continue and extend their depredations. As
Elizabeth forelhw, on the one hand, the dangerous coniifqucnccs
of rendering this a national qt;llircl; and relblvcd, on tlhe other,
not to fufllr ilclh an inlult on lier goverlnment to pals with impltu-
nity; Ille illted a proclamation, declarilng thi:at lic imputed tll;
outriages which b;ad beeC commitCtd, not to tel Scottilll n:ttioll, but

CrIaws..'M
1. . I Id. ibi. 17. (.:ilJI. iw. I. ,7.

1. r

ItorVT.L to a few dcfperatc and ill-dcligning- persons; that, with the fosj

mer, lihe was rclolved to malintain an inviolable fiicndlhip, wherc-
SS7CX as the duty, which lhe owed to her own slhbjcOis, obliged her to

chlafife the licclntioufilels of the latter*. Sulffx and Scroop, ac-
cordingly, entered Scotland, the onl on the ealt, the other on
thc well bordcrs, and laid watle the adjacent countries with fire
.nd. sword t. Fame magnified the number and progress of their
armies, and Mary's adherents not.thinking thcmlelvcs l'fc in Edin-
burgh, the inhabitants whereof were ill aiFcded to tlieir cnure, rc-
Ayrrl :8. tired to Linlithgow. There they openly proclaimed the Qucen's

authority, and sorbad giving obedience to any, but the Duke, or
the Earls of Argyle and HI-untly, whom ilhc had conllitutcd her
Li'cutcnants in the kingdom.

l;inl'sp'rr The nobles lwho adhered to the King, though considerably
,it-l't- -in- ecakened bv the dcfction of so malny of their friends, ;fi'cnmbled
bur.,h.

is- ;. at Edinburgh on the day appointed. They ifli:cd a counter-pro-

claniation. declaring thole lwho appeared for the Queen, enemies
of their country; an;d charging thlem with the murder both of the
late King. and of the Regent. 'hey could not, however, pre-
funle si much on their own frcengtl as to venture either to eleft
a Regent, or to take the field ag-ainlt the Queen's party ; but the
afniltance, which they received f-rom Elizabeth, enabled them to
do bothl. BY her order, Sir W\illiam Drury marched into Scot-
land, with a thousand foot, and three hundred horse; the King's
adherents joined him with a considerable body of troops, and ad-
vancing towards Glasgow, where the adverse party had already
begun hostilities by attacking the cafile, they forced them to re-
tire. plundered the neighbouring country, which belonged to the
Hamiitons, and, after seizing some of their caflles, and razing
others, returned to Edinburgh.
Mrtiv-es of Under Drury's protction, the Earl of Lennox returned into

E ' Scotland. It was natural'to commit the government of the kiing-
wxt. re- dom to him, daring the minority of his grandoin. His illufiripus

r0 birth, and alliance with the royal family of England, as wcll as

of Scotland. rendcred him worthy of that honour. And as hiN
refnt;nicnt ag-.inll 'Mary was implacable, as his eflate lay in Eng-
land- and his family rcided there, Elizabeth confidered him as a
man, who, both from inclination, and from interelt, would a6t in
concert -vith her. and ardently wilhcd that he might fliccccd Mur-
ray in the oiitce of Regent. But, on many accounts, lhc did not
thir.nl it prudent to difco;cr her own icntimeints, or to favour hig,

Cld. ;ld . T Cnbt;a, 17..

Tretenfions too openly. The civil wars iu France, which had BooK VI.
Lbeen excited by a pretended zeal for religion, and carried on

1570.

with a ficrccnelf that did it real dishonour, appcarcd now to be on
the point of cominp; to an ilfuc and after lieddling the bell blood,
and waiting the richelt provinces in the kingdom, both parties
delired peace with lan ardour, that facilitated the negociations,
which were carrying on for that purpole. Charles IX. was known
to be a pallionate admircr of lMary's beauty. Nor could le, in
honour, luffcr a Quecn of Franlce, and the mollt ancient ally of
his crown, to languinf in such a cruel lituation, without attempt-
ing to procure her relief. lie had, hitherto, been obliged to con-
tent hi inllf vwith remcnrltrating, by his ambassadors, againfl tle
indiignity, with which file had been treated. But if lie were
oI e It full liberty to pursue his inclinations, Elizabeth would
have every thing to dread from the impetuolity of hiis temper, and
the powecr of his arms. It therefore became necefl:ary for her to
at willt ionic relfrve, and not to appear, avowedly, to counte-
nance the choice of a Regent, in contempt of ilary's authority.
Tlhe jealousy and prejudices of the Scots required no les mnanape-
mint. Had {lie openly supported Lennox's clainm 'had (lie recom-
mended him to the Convention, as the candidate, whom Ilie ap-
proved; this might have rouled the independent spirit of lie
nobles, and by too plain a discovery of her intention, (le might have
defeated its fuccels. For thefi realons, lie hesitated long, and
returned ambiguous answers to all the mcflages, which fle receiv-
ed from the King's party. A more explicit declaration of her
fentimcnts was at last obtained, and an event of an extraordinary
nature seems to have been the occasion of it. Pope Pius V.
having iflued a bull, whereby he excommunicated Elizabeth, de-
prived her of her kingdom, and ablolved her ulljecAt from their
oath of allegiance, Felton, an iuglilliman, had the boldneis to
fix it on the gates of the Bilhop of London's palace. In former
ages, a Pope, moved by his own ambition, or pride, or bigotry,
denounced this fatal sentence against the moll powerful monarchs;
but as the authority of the court of Rome was now leis regarded,
its proceedings icre more cautious; and, it was only when they
were routed by some powelful Prince, that the thunders of the
church were ever heard. l.lizabeth, therefore;, imputed this flop,
which the Pope had taken, to a combination of tle Rlonan Ca-
tholic Princes againll. her, and lilfpecqed that lnilc plot was n
foot in fatvour of the Scottilh ()i en. In tli;t tevlet, ll(c knew
&that the flEalty of her own kingdom dctpendctd on prelCving hli

ij

BooKVI. influence in Scotland; and in order to firengthen this, she renev-

ed her promises of protecting the King's adherents, encouraged
17 them to proceed to the eletion of a Regent, and even ventured

to point out the Earl of Lennox, as the person who had the bcef
title. That honour was accordingly conferred upon him, in a
Convention of the whole party, held on the 2th of July *.

Iffl^led Re- The Regent's first care was to prevent the meeting of the Par-
gent. liament which the Queen's party had summoned to convene at

Linlithgow. Having effected that, he marched againfl the Earl
ofHuntly, Mary's lieutenant in the North, and forced the garri-
son, which he had placed in Erechin, to surrender at discretion.
Soon after, he made himself master of some other caflles. Em-
boldened by this successful beginning of his adminiflration, as
well as by the appearance of a considerable army, with which the
Earl of Suffex hovered on the borders, he deprived Mlaitland of
his office of secretary, and proclaimed him, the Duke, Iluntly,
and other leaders of the (Qeen's party, traitors and enemies of
their country-+-.

Mary's ad- In this defierate ituation of their affairs, the Queen's adhe-
prcnls atexl rents lad recourse to the King of Spain s, with whom Mary had
Spain. held a close correspondence ever since her confinement in Eng-

land. They prevailed on the Duke of Alva, to fend two of his
officers to take a view of the country, and to examine its coafis,
and harbours; and obtained from him a finall sIipply of money
and arms, which were sent to the Earl of Huntly §. B3ut this
nid, so disproportionate to their exigencies, would have availed

].lizabeth them little. They were indebted for their safety to a treaty,
rrololcs a which Elizabeth was carrying on, under colour of rclloring the
treaty ofac-
commloda- captive Queen to her throne. The firll fleps in this negociation
twee , ciry were taken in the month of May; but hitherto little progress
mid ler fib- lhad been made in it. The peace concluded between the Roman
j cis. Catholics and I-ugonots in France, and her apprehensions that

Charles would interpose with vigour in behalf of his fiflcr-in law,
(1uickened Elizabeth's motions. She aff'cced to treat her prilbn-
cr with more indulgence, flic liflened more graciously to the so-
licitations of foreign anmbal:llldlors in her favour, and seemed fully
lcetermined to replace her on the throne of her ancelors. As a
proof of Iher finccriy, flie lalhoured to procure a cefflltion of arms
b1ctl.ccn te two colctndiing ifadlions in Scotlnnd. Lecnnox, clat-

*Spnrw :

,Ix . Cnla. d .

. i6. Ste AplpO i N i. I.

t' Caw m.

]\Tcn .

ti ' a.

C'; l. ?. 19. See A Nll'pLnd. .c III.
A5 And'crI. 3. ; Craw. 1\ls. tnI. T 3.

ed with the good fortune, which had hitherto attended his adini- Bool VI.
nilfration, and flattering himfclf with an easy triumph over ene- --
inies, wllofe cltates were wafted, and their forces dijpiritcd, re- i7
sosed, for some time, to come into -this measure. It was not safe
for him, however, to dispute the will of his protefrefs. A ceffa-
tion of hostilities during two months, to commence on the third
of September, was agreed upon ; and being renewed from time
to time, it continued till the firlt of April next year *.

Soon after, Elizabeth dispatched Cecil and Sir Walter Mild-

may to the Qccen of Scots. The dignity of therfe ambaffclors,
the former her Prime Miniftcr, the latter Chancellor of the Exche-
quer, and one of her ablest counsellors, convinced all parties that
the negociation was serious, and that the hour of Mary's liberty
was now approaching. The propositions, which they made to her,
were advantageous to Elizabeth, but fuich as a Prince, in Mary's
situation, had reason to expccL. The ratification of tlc treaty of
Edinburgh; the renouncing any pretensions to the ]English Crowvn,
during Elizabeth's own life, or that of ler poferity ; the adher-
ing to the alliance between the two kingdoms; the pardoning
lier fubLje&s lwho had taken arms againlt her ; and lier promising
to hold no correspondence, and to countenance no cnterprife, that
might diflurb Elizabeth's government; swere among tile chief ar-
ticles. Ey way of security for the accomplilhmcnt of these, they
demanded that some persons of rank should be given as loftages,
that the Prince her fun should reside in England, and that a few
caflles on the border flould be put into Elizabeth's handls. To
some of tlhee propositions Mary consented; some fle endea-
voured to mitigate; and others flic attempted to evadc. In
the mean time, (ie tranfinitted copies of them to the Pope, to
the KIings of France and Spain, and to the Duke of Alva. She
insinuated, that without some timely and vigorous cfibrt in her
behalf, file would be obliged to accept of these hard conditions,
and to purchase liberty at any price. ]ut the Pope was a difl
tant and feeble ally, and by his efforts 'gailll the TIurks, his
treasury was entirely exhausted. Charles libd already begun to
meditate that conspiracy againll the Hugonllts, which mail.s li.i
reign with flcli infailmyi ; an it required i11muc leliiurc, and pcrfcct
r:inquillity, to bring that execrable plan to maturity. 1'llilil was
cmnpluoyed in fitting out tl:at lcect, \which acq(lircl bs great rclvnow
.o the Chrillian arms, i' the i'iclor overt lhe Inlfidell. :t Le1antto;

' Spotl(\v. 2.1.^

.BoocVI. th;e Moors in Spain threatened an infurrecion; and his fubjeEt

in the Netherlands, provoked by much oppression, and many in-
dignities, were breaking out into open rebellion. All of them, for
these different reasons, advised Mary, without depending on
their aid, to conclude the treaty on the best terms fhe'could pro-

cure

Elizabeth's Mary, accordingly, consented to many of Elizabeth's demands,
artifices in
the conduc and discovered a facility of disposition, which prornifed still fur-
ofirt ther concessions. But no concefflon she could have made, would

have satisfied Elizabeth, who, in spite of her repeated professions
of sincerity to foreign ambassadors, and notwithflanding the folem-
nity with which file carried on the treaty, had no other obje& in
it, than to amuse Mary's allies, and to gain time +. After hav-
ing so long treated a Queen, who fled to her for refuge, in so un-
generous a manner, (he could not now dismiss her with safety.
Under all the disadvantages of a rigorous confinement, Mary had
found means to excite commotions in England, which were ex-
tremely formidable. What desperate effe&s of her just resent-
mrent might be expe&ed, if she were set at liberty, and recovered
her former power? What engagements couldbind her, not to re-
venge the wrongs she had suffered, nor to take advantage of the
favourable conjunctures, that might present themselves? Was it
possible for her to give such security for her behaviour, in times
to come, as might remove all suspicions and fears? And was there
not good cause to conclude, that no future benefits could ever ob-
licerate the memory of pall injuries ? It was thus Elizabeth rea-
soned; though she continued to act as if her views had been en-
tirely different. She appointed seven of her privy counfcllors to
be commillioners for fettling the articles of the treaty; and as
Mary had already named the Biffhops of Ross, and Galloway, and
Lord Lcvingfton, for her ambassadors, (he required the Regent
to impower proper persons to appear in behalf of the King. The
Earl of Morton, Pitcarn abbot of Dunferrnling, and Sir James
x17r. Macgill were the persons chosen by the Regent. They prepared

for their journey, as slowly as Elizabeth herself ccld have wish-
S',. 9. ed. At lcngth they arrived at London, and met the commiflion-

ers of the two Qcens. Mary's aib;il'dahors dilcovered the strong-
eit inclination to comrply with every tling, that would remove
the obflac!es, which flood in the way of their millrcfs's liberty.
But when Mlorton and his associates were called upon to vindicate

Anlder. vol. iii tc9, xo2. ' Di;sgc, Compl. Amb: 78.

ltheir conduct, and to explain the sentiments of their party, they BooK VI.
began, in juflification of their treatment of the Queen, to advance -
such maxims concerning the limited powers of Princes, and the I571c
natural rights of fubjecis, as were extremely (hocking to Eliza-
beth, whose notions of regal prerogative were very exalted. With
regard to the authority which the King now pofl'ffled, they de-
clared that they neither had, nor could possibly receive inllruc-
tions, to consent to any treaty, that tended to subvert, or even
to impair it, in the least degree *. Nothing could be more tris-
ling and ridiculous, than such a reply from the commiflioners of
the King of Scots, to the Queen of England. His party depend-
ed absolutely on 1'.r protction, her hand had feated him on the
throne, and to her power he owed the continuance of his reign.
With the utmost ease, flie could have brought them to talk in a
very different manner; and whatever conditions fie might have
thought fit to pre'cribe, they v;ould have had no other choice but
to lubmit. This declaration, however, fle affeEted to conGder
as an inftxperable difficulty. And finding that there was no rca- T: prl-.:;
son to dread any danger from the French King, who had not disco-
vered that:eagernefs in support of Mary, which was expeletd ; the
reply made by Morton furnished her with a pretence for putting
a flop to the negociation,' till the Regent flould fend ambailTdors M1arch l24
with more ample po'crk.. And after being amused for ten months
wvith-the hopes of liberty, the unhappy Queen of Scots remained
under ftricrer cultody'rtlian ever, and without any profpe& of e-
scaping from it; while tlofe fubjets, who t iill adhered to her,
were expoifd, without ally or protector, to the rage of enemies,
whom their success in this negociation rendered fii!l more inlb-
lent 1-.

On the day after the expiration of the truce, which had been Danbnrton

observed with little exatlnefs on either fide, Captain Crawford of ' [,-
Jordan-hill, a gallant and cnterpriling ofliccr, performed a fcrvice tiiL tricn.
of great importance to the Regent, by furprifinng the caflle of Dun-
barton. This was the only fortified place in the kingdom, of which
the Queen had kept poffeflion, ever t1nce the commencement of
the civil wars. Its fitu;tion on the top of :nm Iiilh and almost in:tc-
cellible rock, which riles in the middle of a plain, lendered it ex-
tremely llrong, and in the opinion of thut algc imiprag:ablc; as it
c:mnimanilcd the river Clyde, it was of grcat conftcclcncc, anti c-
flc:lneed tlc mioll proper place ill the kindlomn for landinl any f,-
tcigtli troops, that might colme to Mlary's aid. The ilrllgtll of tile

''C.LgJ. . 234. Digcs, 5. liaynes, j23, 24. l lrl' 3. r, -

Boor VI. place rendered Lord Fleming, the governor, more secure thatii:e

-"v ought to have been,.confidering its importance. A soldier, who had
'S7I' served in the garrison, and had, been diigufled by some ill usage,

proposed the scheme to the. Regent, endeavoured to demohifirate
that it was practicable, and offered himelf to go the foremoi mania
on the enterprii'e.; It was thought prudent to rifque any danger,
for so great a prize...: Scaling-ladders, and whatever elle.was ne-
ceffary, were prepared with the utmoit secrecy and dispatch. All
the avenues to the caltle were seized, that no intelligence oftbec
design might reach the governor. Towards the evening, Crawfordt
marched from Glasgow, with a small but determined band. By,
midnight, they arrived at the bottom of the rock. The moon was
itt, and the iky, which hitherto had been extremely clcar, was
co. vered with a thick fog. It was. where the rock was high-
ctl, that the affailhnts made their attempt, because, in that.place
there were few sentinels, and the hoped to find thcm least alert.
:'he first ladder was scarce fixed, when the weight and .eage!nei.s
of those who mounted it, brought it to the ground. Noope of the
alfailants were hurt by the fall, and none of the garrison alarmed:
by the noise. Their guide and Crawford scrambled up the rock,
and fastened the ladder to the roots;of a tree, which grew in a
cleft. This place they all reached with the utmost difficulty, but
wvere flill at a great diflance from the foqt-:of the wall.. Their
ladders were made fail a second time ; brut.in the middle of the
ascent, they me: with an, unforeseen diffic.4lty. One of their com-
panions was seized with forme sudden fit, and clung, .seemingly
without life, to the ladder. All were at-a hland. It was impof-
fible to paas him. To tumble him headlong,was cruel; and might
occalion a discovery. But Crawford's presence of mind did not
forsake him. He ordered the soldier. to.be bound fall to the.lad-
der, that he might not.fall when the fit was over; ant turning the
other iide of the ladder, they mounted, witjl ease, over his belly.
LDay now began to break, and .t!ere.

fill remained an high wall tu

scale; but after surmounting ui many greater ditficulties, this was
soon accomplishcd. ,A. felntry observed the firfn maln who appear-
ed on the parapet, and had jull time to gi e the alarm, before he
was knocked on the head. '['le oflicers and 'bfldicrs of the gar-
rifon ran out niak!ei, unlarmed, and i.ore an::ious fur their own
fifcty, tllan ca-ible of making rerliallnc. The ahFailait: s rulhed
for\vwards, with repecated fiouls, and with the utn.oll fury ; took
po'kfi;ionl of lte mnagazilc; fcized tile cailln ; a(nd. turned thell
ag:il tl: ir c.i.ni's. J,Irdl l..;.ii; ',t inuto a finill boat, and

*fled all alone into Argyleflire. Crawford, in reward of his val- Boors VI.
our and good condu&, remained mailer of the carfle; and as he did
·not'lofe a single man in the enterprise, he enjoyed his success with un-
rnixed pleasure. Lady Fleming, Verac the French Enyoy, and
Hamilton archbishop of St. Andrew's, were the prisoners of great-

Rft diftintion *.
Verac's chara&er protected him from the usage, which he me- Archbishop
rited by his altivity in stirring up enemics againfl the King. The of St. An-

drew's put

Regent treated the lady with great politeness, and humanity. But to death by
a very different fate awaited the archbishop ; he was carried under hi :
a strong guard to Stirling; and as he had formerly been attainted by
a&t of Parliament, he was, without any formal trial, condemned
to be hanged; and on the fourth day after he wvas taken, the tcn-
tence was executed. An attempt was made to bring him in as ac-
ceffory to the murder both of the King and Regent, but thefre ac-
cufations were supported by no proof. Our historians observe that
he was the firfl biflhop in Scotland who died by the hands of the
executioner. The high offices he had enjoyed, both in church and
slate, ought to have exempted him from a punishment, inflidted
*only on the lowers criminals. But his zeal for the QOeen, his a'
bilities, and his profession, rendered him odious and formidable to
the King's adherents. Lennox hated him as the person, by whose
counsels the reputation and power of the house of Hamilton were
supported. And party rage, and personal enmity, di&ated that in-
decent sentence, for which some colour was fought, by imputing
to him such odious crimes A-.

The loss of Dumbarton, and the revere treatment of the arch- Kirkaldy

bishop, perplexed and enraged the Queen's party ; and hoflilities caltl' of
were renewed with all the ficrcenefs, which disappointment and Edinburgh

in tile

indignation can inspire. Kirkaldy, who, during the truce, had Queen's
taken care to increase the number of his garrison, and to provide name.
every necessary for a siege, iflued a proclamation declaring Len-
nox's authority to be unlawful, and utihrped; and commanded all
who favoured his cause to leave the town within fix hours; seized
the arms, belonging to the citizens; planted a battery on the ficeple
of St. Giles; repaired the walls; and fortified the gates of the
city; and, though the affections of the inhabitants leaned a diffe-
rent way, held out the'metropolis againfl the Regent. The Duke,
Huntly, Home, H-erries, and other chiefs of that faclion, repaired
to Edinburgh with their followers; andn having received a small
frnm of money,, and some ammunition from France, formed no con..

Buch, 394. spotfw. 2,52.

,, qp~S

BooK VI. temptible army within the walls. On the other fide, Mbrton feiz

ed Leith, and fortified it; and the Regent joined him with a con-
.fiderable body of men. While the armies lay so near each other,
·daily skirmishes happened, -and with various success. The Queen's
-party was not firong enough to take the field againfl the Regent,
nor was his superiority so great as to undertake the siege of the
castle; or of the town *

Eothlparties Some time before Edinburgh. fell into the hands of his enemies,
hold parlia- the Regent had summoned a Parliament to meet in that place. In
mcnts.
May 14. order to prevent any objection against thelawfulnefs of the meet-

ing, the members obeyed the proclamation as exactly as poflible;
and aflembled in a house at the head of the Canongate, which
though without the walls, lies within the liberties of the city.
Kirkaldy exerted himself to tile utmos to interrupt their meeting;
but they were so flrongly guarded, that all his efforts were vain.
They passed an ade attainting Maitland, and a few others, and
then adjourned to the 2Sth of Augufi -.

The other party, in order that their proceedings might be coun-

.tenanced by the f;ame lhew of legal authority, held a meeting of
parliament soon after. There was produced in this afnembly, a de-
claration by the QCeen, of the invalidity of that deed, whereby
llie had resigned the crown, and consented to the coronation of her
son. Conformable to this declaration, an at was pafl, pronoun-
.cing the resignation to have been extorted by fear; to be null in
itself, and in all its. consequences; and enjoining all good fubjecls
to acknowledge the Qeen alone to be their lawful sovereign, and
* o fuppbrt those who adted in her name. The present cllablinls-
rnent of the Proteflant religion was confirmed by another flatute;
and, in imitation of the adverse paity, a new meeting was appointed
on the 26th of Auguf l$.

Iirferal)lc Meanwhile, all the miseries of civil war desolated the kingdom.
condition of
the king. Fellow citizenls, friends, brothers, took different fides, and ranged
dlom. tlhemfelves under the flandards of the contending factions. In

every county, and almost in every town and village, I,/l'.r.-me'i
and . w!een'J-mrn were names of diflincdion. Political latred dil-
Iblved all natural ties, and extinguifled the reciprocal good will
and confidence, which hold mankind together in society. Reli-
gious zeal mingled itclf with tlefe civil dillinclions, anrd contri-
buted not a little to heighten, and to inflamne them.
StAitcof.f;-. The f;laions which divided tle kingdom were, in appealance,

only two. But in both tllc'c, tlicre were perfbns, witl view',

9 Cal.l. 2. 213, & . Craw . M . 17. di. lidl. 177.

aiid princples, so different from each other, that they ought to be' Book VI.
diftinguilhed. With fomc, considerations of religion were predo-
minant, and they either adhered to the Queen, because they hop- 7
ed, by her means, to re-eltablifh Popery, or they defended the
King's authority, as the belt support of the Protestant faith. A-
mong thele the opposition was violent and irreconcileable. Others
were influenced by political motives only, or allured by views of
interest; the Regent aimed at uniting these, and did not detpair
of gaining, by gentle arts, many of Mary's adherents to acknow-
ledge:the King's authority. Maitland and Kirkaldy had form-
ed the fame design of a coalition, but on fich terms, that the
Qtueen might be restored to omne share in the government, and
the kingdom flake off its dependence on England. Morton,
the ablelt, the molt ambitious, and the moll powerful man of the
King's party, held a particular course ; and moving only as he was
prompted by the court of England, thwarted every mcafure, tlat
tended towards a reconcilement of the faations ; and as he served
I-lizabeth with much fidelity, he derived both powerand credit
from her avowed protetion.

The time appointed by both parties, for the meeting of their

parliaments, now approached. Only three peers and two bilhops
appeared in that, which was held in the Queen's name at Edin-
burg'h. But contemptible as their numbers were, they pafled an
ac& for attainting upwards of two hundered of the adverse faction.
The meeting at Stirling was numerous and fplcndid. The Regent
had prevailed on the Earls of Argyle, Eglinton, Caflils, and Lord
Boyd, to acknowledge the King's authority. The three Earls.
were among the molt powerful noblemen in the kingdom, and had
hitherto been zealous in the Queen's caulf. Lord Boyd had been
one of Mary's commissioners at York and Welfminlter, and, since
that time, had been admitted into all her most fecrct councils.
But, during that turbulent period, the condu& of individuals, as
well as the principles of factions, varied so often, that the fcnfe
of honour, the chief preservative of confiflency in characler, was
entircly loll ; and witihout any regard to decorum, nien suddenly
abandoedoned one party, and adopted all the violent pallions of the
other. The defection, however, of so many persons of tlifiniLionl
not only weakened the Q(cen's party, but added reputatiol to
lier adverllhrics.

After the example of the Parliamrcnt at IElinburgh, that at The'l'King'i

S: irling began with firaming acts againll tlle oppolitc faclion. 1ut plilt.' inl
in thL: Illiil of :all tlie fccturnit , hlich coiifidence in tlihir own x iutn- *'titllill.

.5 'Jj

Boor VT. bers, or distance from danger could inspire, they were awakened,

early one morning, by the flouts of the enemy in the heart of the
LS57< town. In a Imoment, the houses of every person of dillinclion

were surrounded, and before they knew what to think of so strange
an event, the Regent, the Earls of Argyle, Morton, Glencairn.
Cafrils, Eglinton, Montrose, Buchan,. the Lords Sempil, Cathcart,
Oglive, were all made prisoners, and mounted behind troopers,
who were ready to cary them to Edinburgh. Kirkaldy was the
author of this daring enterprise; and if he had: not been induced,
by the ill-timed anxiety of his friends about his safety, not to
hazard his own person in conduEing it, that day would have ter-
minated the contest between the two fations. and have reflored
peace to his country. By his direction, four hundred men, un-
der the command of Huntly, Lord Claud Hamilton, and Scot
of Buccleugh, set out from- Edinburgh, and the better to con-
ceal their design, marched towards the south. But they soon
wheeled to the right, and horses having been provided for the in-
fantry, rode fireight to Stirling. By four in the morning, they
arrived there; not one sentry was ported on the walls, nor a single
man was awake about the place. They met with no resistance
from any person they had seized. except Morton. He defending
his house with obflinate valour, they were obliged to set it on fire,
and he did not surrender till forced out of it by the flames. In
performing this, some time was consumed; and the private men,
unaccustomed to regular discipline, left their colours, and began to-
rifle the houses, and fhops-of the citizens. The noise and uproar
*in the town reached the castle. The Earl of Mar sallied out with
thirty soldiers; fired briskly upon the enemy, of whom almost
none but the officers kept together in a body. The townsmen
took arms to assist their governor; a sudden panic struck the assail-
ants; some fled, some furrendred themselves to their own prison-
ers; and had not the borderers, who followed Scot, prevented a
pursuit, by carrying off all the horses within the place, not a man
would have cfcapcd. If the Regent liad not unfortunately been
killed, the loss on the King's fide would have been as inconfidcr-
able, as the alarm was great. Think on the archbi/jhop of SI. -n-
drew's, was the word among the Quen's soldiers; and Lennox

The Regent fell a sacrifice to his memory. The officcr, to wvhom he furren-
killed. dercd, endeavouring to protcct him, loft his own life in his de-

fence. He was Ilain, according to the general opinion, by com-
mand of Lord Claud H-amilton. Kirkaldy had the glory of cou-
crting this plan with great fccrecy, and prudence; but MIorton's

fortunate obstinacy, and the want of discipline among his own BooK VI.
troops, deprived him of success, the only thing wanting to render *'
this equal to the most applauded military enterprises of the kind *. 157I'

As so many of the nobles were assembled, they proceeded, Mar chofea
without delay, to the eletion of a Regent. Argyle, Morton, Regent.

Sept. 6.

and Mar, were candidates for the office. Mar was chosen by a
majority of voices. Amidst all the fierce dissentions, which had
prevailed so long in Scotland, he had diftinguified himself by his
moderation, his humanity, and his disinterestedness. And as his
power was far inferior to Argyle's, and his abilities not so great
as Morton's, he was, for these reasons, less formidable to the
other nobles. His merit, too, in having so lately rescued the Lead-
ers of the party from imminent deftru&ion, contributed not a
little to his preferment.

While these things were carrying on in Scotland, the tranfac- Proceed-

ingsin Eng-

tions in England were no less interesting to Mary, and fRill more lan again:
fatal to her cause. The parliament of that kingdom, which met --/.
in April, patsed an a&, by which, it was declared to be high trea-
son to claim any right to the Crown during the life of the Queen;
to affirm that the title of any other person was better than hers or
to maintain that the parliament had not power to fettle, and to
limit the order of succession. This remarkable flatute was intend-
ed not only for the fecurity.of their own sovereign, but to curb
the restless and intriguing fpiri of the ScottiLh Queen, and her
adherents f.

At this time, a treaty of marriage between Elizabeth and the rarri'ge
Duke of Anjou, the French King's brother, was well advanced. negoiate-

between

Both courts seemed to desire it with equal ardour, and gave out, llizab-'th
with the utmost confidence, that it could not fail of taking place. an .l the

1).°Duke cf

Neither of them, however, wilhcd its success; and they encou- Arjou.
raged it for no other end, but because it served to cover or to pro-
mote their particular designs. The whole policy of Catherine of
Medicis was bent towards the accomplishment of her detestable
projet for the deftrufcion of the Hugonot chiefs; and by carry-
ing on a negociation for the marriage of her son with a Princel',
who was juitly eileenied the protetrefs of that party, by yielding
some things in point of religion, and by discovering an indifference
with regard to others, lhe hoped to amuse all the Proteitants in
Europe, and to lull alleep the jealoutf even of the Hugonots them-
selves. Elizabeth tiattercd hcrfeli with reaping adv:lltagcs oi

°AIeIv. 216. Crawf. Icm. 2e Can;e. 436.

BooK VT. another kind. During the dependence of the negociation, thd

v French could not with decency give any open afiilance to the
X57*. Scottill Qucen; if they conceived any hopes of success in the

treaty of marriage,' they would, of cour'e, interelt themselves but
coldly in her concerns; lMary herself mull be dejeced with lol-
ing an ally, whom fle had hitherto reckoned her molt powerful
protecEor; and by interrupting her correlpondence with France,
one source, at least, of the cabals and intrigues which dillurbed
tlhe kingdom, would be flopt. Both 0Qcens succeedcd in their
i'chemes. Catherine's artilices impoleid on Elizabeth, and blinded
the Hugonots. The French discovered the utmolt indifference
about the intcreit of the Scottiih Q(een ; and Mary, confidering
that court as already united with her rival, turned herself, for

orfoilk's proteelion, towards the King of Spain *. Philip, whose dark and
c,- ulir:La thoughtful mind, deligihted in the myttery of intrigue, had held
in tavour otf
ilalr-. a secret correipondence witll Mary, for some time, by mehns of

the lildhop of Riofs, and had iupplied both herself, and her adhe-
rents in Scotland, with linall lumns of money. Ridolphi, a Flo-
rentine gentleman, who relided at London under the character of
a banker, and who acted privately as an agent for the Pope, was
the person whom the Biihop intrusted w'ith! this negociation. Mary
thought it neceflary, likewise, to communicate the secret to the
Duke of Norfolk, whom Elizabeth had lately restored to liberty,
upon his solemn promile to have no further intercourse with the
Qucen of Scots; which, however, he regarded so little, that flle
took no Rtep in any matter of moment, without his advice. She
complained in a long letter, which flle wrote to him in cyphers, of
the baseness, with which the French court had abandoned her intc-
rei ; flhe declared her resolution of imploring the afliltance of the
Spanilh IMonarch, which was now her only reoburce; and recom-
mended Ridolphi to his confidence, as a person, capable both of
explaninig, and of advancing the scheme. The Duke command-
ed Iiicktord, his secretary, to decypher, and then to burn this
letter; but whither lie had been already gained by the court, or
rcfolved at that time to betray his mafier, he disobeyed the latter
part of ihe order, and hid the latter, together with other trcafon-
able papers. under the Duke's own bed.

idollplii, in a confercnce with Norfolk, omitted none of those

artq'unicl! , aiind spared none of those promii's, whlicll are the ufu;l
i:cillnics s to rebellion. The Pope, lhe told linl: hal a; great ulin

> ; ^ - 4., 'i.;. C.n . 43-1- .

.ii rcadines'to beflow in so good a cause. The Dulke of Alva ',ooKVI.
had undertaken to land ten thousand men, not far from London.

.t57I·

''The Catholics to a man would rife in arms. Many of the nobles 5
were ripe for a revolt, and wanted only a leader. H-alf the na-
tion had turned their eyes on him, and expe&ed him to revenge
the unmerited injuries, which he himself had fuffcred; and to re-
.fcue an unfortunate Queen, wvho offered him ler person, and her
- crown, as the reward of his success. Norfolk approved of the dc-

sign, and though he refuscd to give Ridolphi any letter of credit,
allowed him to use his name, in negociating vith the Pope, and
*Alva *. The Biflhop of Ross, who, from the violence of hi3
temper, and impatience to procure relief for his miftrcfs, was apt
to run into rafli and defperatc designs, advilcd the Duke to as-
-fembic secretly a few of his followers, and at once to fcizc Eli-
'zuleth's person. But this the Duke rcjectcl, as a fclienie eqlual-
ly wild and hazardous. t'Ieannhlile, the E'ng/lih court had re- J)i:-oxered

b': IEliza.

ceived some imperfcct ifforination of the plot, by intercepting one i, ;',,
of Ridolphi's agents; and an accident happened, which brought p.Agufl.
to ligFt all the circumPianccs of it. 'le Iuuke liad employed
I-lickfodl to tranfinit to Lord Herreis, some moncy, which was
to be difiributed among Mary's adherents in Scotland. A per-
son not in the secret was intrulled with conveying it to the bor-
ders; and he suspecting it from the weight to be gold, whereas
he had been told that it was silver, carried it direaly to the pri-
vy council. The Duke, his domefics, and all who were privy,
or could be fufpe&ted of being privy to the design, were taken in- Sept. 7.
to cuflody. Never did the accomplices in a conspiracy discover
less firmness; or servants betray an indulgent maflcr, with greater
bafcnef.. Every one confefecl the whole of what he knew. Hick-
ford gave directions how to find the papers, which lie had hid.
The Duke himself, relying at firfl on the fidelity of his associates,
and believing all dangerous papers to have been deflroyed, con-
fidently af'crted his own innocence; but when their depositions,
aind the papers themselves were produced, aflonilied at their
trcachery, he acknowledged his guilt, and implored the leen's
mercy. IIs offence was too heinous, and too often repeated, to
bltain pardon; anl l':liztbclth thought it ncccnlhry to deter her
lubl)jcCs by hisl punilihnlcnt, from holdingii a cot icl'iolnd'ncce with
the Qccen of Scots, or her cniill'irics. Bein2' tried by his Peers,
lie was found guily of high treason, and, after dlvcr:il delays, luf-
i'rc(l' dcath for the criunc-lf.

, 1. ,1'.ii 161. ' Ibil .

i' 49. Saitc 'I'i;l;, i.S .
8.

Boor: VT. The discovery of this conspiracy produced many effeas extreme.
'*-~' ly detrimental to Mary's interest. The Bishop of Ross, who ap.
£571. peared by the confeflion of all concerned, to be the prime mover in

every cabal against Elizabeth, was taken into custody, his papers
searched, himself committed to the Tower, treated with the utmost
rigour, threatened with capital punishment, and after a long con-
finement, set at liberty, on condition that he should leave the
kingdom. Mary was not only deprived of a servant, equally emi-
nent for his zeal, and his abilities, but was denied, from that time,
the privilege of having an ambassador at the English court. The
Spanish ambassador, whom, the power and dignity of the Prince
he represented, exempted from such insults, as Ross had suffered,
was commaded to leave England *. Mary herself was kept under
a ftri&errguard than formerly. the number of her domestics abridg-
ed, and no person permitted to fee her, but in presence of her
keepers- .

Elizabeth At the fame time, Elizabeth, foreseeing the storm which was
declares gathering, on the continent, againit her kingdom, began to wish
openly a-
gainft the that tranquillity were restored in Scotlond; and irritated by Ma-
lueen's ry's late attempt against her government, she determined to at,

without disguise or ambiguity, in favour of the King's party. This
O 23. resolution the intimated to the leaders of both facions. Mary, flhe

told them, had held such a criminal correspondence with her a-
vowed enemies, and had excited such dangerous conspiracies both
against her crown and life, that flie would henceforth confider her
as unworthy of protetion, and would never content to reltore her
to liberty, far less to replace heron er throne. She exhorted them,
therefore, to unite in acknowledging the King's authority. She
promised to procure by her mediation equitable terms for those,
who had hitherto opposed it. But if they fill continued refracto-
ry, she threatened to employ her utmost power to compel them to,
submit :. Though this declaration did not produce an immediate
effect; though hoflilitics continued in the neighbourhood of Edin-
burgh; though Huntly's brother, Sir Adam Gordon, by his bravery,
and good conduct, routed the King's adherents in the North, in
many encounters; yet such an explicit discovery of Elizabeth's
sentiments contributed not a little to animate one party, and to
depress the spirit and hopes of the other§.
572'. As Morton who commanded the Regcnt's forces, lay at Leith,

and Kirkaldy fill held out the town and callle of Edinburgh, fcarco

Dig-ges, 163. -j Strype, Am. 2. 50,. See Append. No. IV.
§ Cald. 2. 289, 294. Strype, 2. 76.

c day paTied without a fkirmilh. And while both avoided any de- BOOK VI.
cifive acion, they harassed each other by attacking small parties,
beating up quarters, and intercepting convoys. These operations, i-oitii2ties
though little memorable in themlelves, kept the passions of both carried on

betw een

factions in perpetual exercise and agitation, and wrought them up, thiem.
at last, to a degree of fury, which rendered them regardless not
only of the laws of war, but of the principles of humanity. Nor
was it in the field alone, and during the heat of combat, that
this implacable rage appeared ; both parties hanged the prisoners
they took, of whatever rank or quality, without mercy, and with-
out trial. Great numbers suffered in this Illocking manner; the
unhappy viCims were led, by fifties at a time, to execution; and
it was not till both fides had smarted severely, that they difcon-
tinued this barbarous practice, so reproachful to the charatcr of
the nation*. Meanwhile, those in the town and caftlc, though
they had received a supply of money from the Duke of Alvas-, be-
gan to susser for want of provisions. As Morton had deltroyed all
the mills in the neighbourhood of the city, and had planted finall
garrisons in all the houses of strength around it, scarcity daily in-
creased. At lafR all the miseries of famine were felt, and they
muff have been soon reduced to such extremitics, as would have for-
ced them to capitulate, if the Englilh and French ambassadors had
not procured a flfpenfion of hostilities, between the two parties 4:.

Though the negociation for a marriage, between Elizabeth and Lcag e bh.
the Duke of Anjou, had been fruitless, both Charles and flie were twelln Eng

an d alld

desirous of concluding a defensive alliance between the two crowns. France.
He confidered such a treaty, not only as the best device for blind-
ing the Proteltants, the conspiracy againfl whom was now almolft
ripe for execution; but as a good precaution, likewise, against the
dangerous consequences, to which that atrocious mcafure might
expose him. Elizabeth, who had hitherto reigned vvitlhouti ingle
ally, saw her kingdom now so threatened with intcftine commo-
tions, or exposed to invasions from abroad, that hie was extreme-
ly solicitous to fccure the affiflance of so powerful a neighbour.
The difficulties, arising from the situation of the Scottih Qceen,
were the chief occasions of any delay. Charles demanlded some terms
of advantage for MVary, and her adherents. Elizabeth refuted to
lilten to any proposition of that kind. Her obfli. :cy overcalme
the faint cforts of the frcench Monarch. VIary's name vwas not
so much as mentioned in the treaty, antd witli regard to Scottilh A11;l i.

* Cr;.wf. lem, 2181, 220. '0 Clll. 2. 345. - lN. 36.

'IT t

Boor VT. affairs, a short article was inserted, in general and ambiguous termh

to this purpose, " that the parties contracting shall make no in.
7 novations in Scotland; nor susser any firanger to enter, and.to so-

nent the factions there; but it ihall be lawful for the Queen of
England to chafife, by force of arms, those Scots who fiall con-
tinue to harbour the English rebels now in Scotland *." In con-
sequence of this treaty, France and England affected to at6 in con-
cert with regard to Scotland, and Du Croc, and Sir William Dru-
ry, appeared there, in name of-their respective sovereigns. By
their mediation, a truce, for two months, was agreed upon, and
during that time, conferences were to be held between the leaders
of the opposite factions, in order to accommodate their differences,
and restore peace to the kingdom. This truce afforded a season-
able interval of tranquillity to the Queen's adherents in the South;
but in the North, it proved fatal to her interest. Sir Adam Gor-
don had fill maintained his reputation and iuperiority there. Sever-
al parties, under different officers, were sent againit him. Some
of them le attacked in the field; againit others he employed ftra-
tagem; and as his courage and conduA were equal, none of his
enterprises failed of fuccels. He made war, too, with the hu-
inanity, which became so gallant a man, and gained ground by
that, no less than by the terror of his arms. If he had not been
obliged, by the truce, to suspend his operations, he would, in all
probability, have brought that part of the kingdom to submit en-
tirely to the Queen's authority--.

proceed. Notwithitanding Gordon's bravery and success, Mary's interest
ngsinllEng- .as on the decline, not only in her own kingdom, but among the
3and against
lary.. English. Nothing could be more offensive to that nation, jealous

of foreigners, and terrified at the profpea of the Spanilh yoke,
than her negociations with the Duke of Alva. The Parliament,
which nlet in May, proceeded againit her as the moil dangerous
enemy of the kingdom; and after a solemn conference between-
the Lords and Commons, both houfcs agreed in bringing in a bill
to declare her guilty of high treason, and to deprive lier of all
right of iflccellion to the crown. This great cans', as it was then
called, occupied them during the whole feflion, and was carried
on with mucli unanimity. Elizabeth, though flhe applauded their
7cal, and app .cd much of the course they were taking, was fit-
tislied with llcvinrg Mary what llce might expect from the rc-
ilntment of the nation ; but as fle did not yet thllik it time to

* Digge i, 1c, il. Camrdl, 'F Cravf. tIcm.

proceed to the most violent extremity againfl her, she prorogued BooK VI.
the parliament *.

These revere proceedings of the Englifl Parliament were not 572e

The French

more mortifying to Mary, than the coldness and neglect of her al- negleI her
lies the French. The Duke of Montmorency, who came over to interelt.
ratify the league with Elizabeth, made a fhewof interefcing him-
self in her favour, but instead of soliciting for her liberty, or her
restoration to her throne, all that he demanded was a flight miti-
gation of the rigours of her imprilbnment. And even this small
requelt he urged with so little warmth or importunity, that no re-
gard was paid to itt.

The alliance with France afforded Elizabeth much fatisfation, The manfa-

and flie expeted from it a great increase of security. She now rcol Paris,
turned her whole attention towards Scotland, where the animofities
of the two factions were trill lb high, and ib many interfering inte-
refts to be adjusted, that a general pacification seemed to be at a
great distance. But while Ihe laboured to bring them to some
agreement, an event happened which filled a great part of Eu-
rope, with aftonifllment, and with horror. This was the massacre
of Paris; an attempt, to which there is no parallel in the history
of mankind, either for the difiimulation which led to it, or for the
,cruelty and barbarity, with which it was put in execution. By
the mot solemn promises of safety and of favour, the leaders of
the Proteltants were drawn to court; and though doomed to de-
itrucion, they were received with carefles, loaded with honours,
and treated, for seven months, with every poflible mark of fami-
liarity, and of confidence. In the midlt of their security, the war- August 24.
rant for their detfruAion was ilfued by their sovereign, on whose
word they had relied ; and, in obedience to it, their countrymen,
.their fellow citizens, and companions, imbrued their hands in
their blood. Ten thousand Protcltants, without diltintion of
age, or fcx, or condition, were murdered in Paris alone. The
fame barbarous orders were sent to other parts of the kingdom, and a
like carnage cnfued. This deed, which no Popith writer, in the
present age, mentions without deteflation, was, at that time, ap-
plauded in Spain; and at Rome, solemn thanklfgivings were of.
sered to God, for its fucccfs. But among the Protellants it ex-
cited incredible horror; a firiking pidure of which is drawn by
the French ambaflaldor at the court of England, in his account
of his firit audience after the nmaflacre. A gloomy sorrow-

D'ewes Journ. 2 o6, &c. t JeLbb. 1 .

''t ij

BOOK VI. fays he, fat on every face; silence, as in the dead of night, reign-
-- 'v- ed through all the chambers of the royal apartment; the ladies
1572.

and courtiers were ranged on each fide, all clad in deep mourn-
ing, and as I passed through them, not one bestowed on me a ci-
vil look, or made the least return to my salutes *."

Detriment- But horror was not the only pafion, with which this event in-
al to Ma'y's
intcreft. spired the Protestants; it filled them with fear. They confidered

it as the prelude to some greater blow, and believed, not without
great probability, that all the Popish Princes had conspired the
deftruEtion of their fed. This opinion did no small diflervice to
Mary's affairs in Scotland. Many of her adherents were Protef-
tants; and though they wished her restoration, were not willing,
however, on that account, to sacrifice the faith which they pro-
fefled. They dreaded her attachment to a religion, which al-
lowed its votaries to violate the most folerni engagements, and
prompted them to perpetrate the most barbarous crimes. A ge-
neral confederacy of the Protestants seemed to them, the only
thing that could uphold the Reformation against the league, which
was formed to overturn it. Nor could the present eflablifhment
of religion be long maintained in Britain, but by a ftrit union
with Elizabeth, and by the concurrence of both nations, in es-
poufing the defence of it, as a common cause -.

The Regent The Regent took hold of this favourable conjuncture for ne-
endeavours
to lnite gociating a general peace. And as he laboured for this purpose,
bothparties with the utmost zeal, and the adverse facion placed entire confi-

dence in his integrity, his endeavours could scarce have failed of
being successful. Maitland and Kirkaldy came so near to an a-
greement with him, that scarce any thing remained, except the
formality of signing the treaty. But Morton had not forgotten
the disappointment he met with in his pretensions to the Regen-
cy; his abilities, his wealth, and the patronage of the court of
England, gave him greater sway with the party, than even the
Regent himself; and he took pleasure in thwarting every measure
pursued by him. He was afraid that if Maitland and his aflo-
ciates recovered any (hare in the adminiRration, his own influ-
ence would be considerably diminilhcd; and the Regent, by their
means, regain that afccndant, which belonged to his flation.
With him, concurred all those, who were in pofiefrion of the lands,
which belonged to any of the Q(cen's party. And his ambition,
and their avarice, fruitratcd the Regent's pious intentions, and rc-

Carte, 3. 322. t Digges , 26-

tarded a blessing so necessary to the kingdom, as the eflablilh- BooK Vt.
inent of peace *.

Such a discovery of the felfiflnefs and ambition, which reigned 11s death.

among his party, made a deep impreflion on the Regent, who lov-
ed his country, and wished for peace with much ardour. This in-
ward grief broke his spirit, and by degrees, brought on a fettled
melancholy, that ended in a distemper, of which he died on the
29th of O&ober. He was, perhaps, the only person inthekingdom,
who could have enjoyed the office of Regent, without envy, and
have left it, without loss of reputation. Notwithstanding their
mutual animofities, both factions acknowledged his views to be
honourable, and his integrity to be uncorruptedt.

No competitor now appeared against Morton. The Oceen of Mortonch:s

-en Rcent.

England powerfully supported his claim, and notwithstanding the Reo'. 2;.
fears of the people, and the jealousy of the nobles, he was cle-
ed Regent; the fourth, who in the space of five years, had held
that dangerous office.

As the truce had been prolonged to the firit of January, this

gave him an opportunity of continuing the negociations with the
opposite party, which had been set on foot by his predcccflor.
They produced no effeEs, however, till the beginning of the next
year.

Before we proceed to these, fame events, hitherto untouched,
deserve our notice.

The Earl of Northumberland, who had been kept prisoner in

Lochleven, ever since his flight into Scotland in the year IS69,
was given up to Lord Hunfdane Governor of Berwick ; and be-
ing carried to York, suffered there the punishment of his rebel-
lion. The King's party depended so entirely on Elizabeth's pro-
teetion, that it was scarce poflible for them to.refult putting into
her hands a person who had taken up arms againit her. But as a
fum of money was paid, on that account; and flhared between
Morton and Douglas of Lochleven, the former of whom, during
his exile in England, had been much indebted to Northumber-
land's friendfliip, the abandoning this unhappy nobleman, in lich
a manner, to certain dellruction, was deemed an ungrateful and
mercenary action 4.

This year was remarkable for a confidcrable innovation in the A.Pf:r oF
government of the Church. Soon after the Reformation, the P'o- t11l CLhurch.

*Mclv. 2,3.. Crawf. Menm. ,37. I . 241.
^ Crawl", iom. .55, 2 . Caiiulmd. 14.

BooKVI. piflh ifhops being confirmed by law in possession of part of their

'--v benefices, the spiritual jurifdiclion, which belonged to their order
. 72. wvas exercised by fuperintendants, but with more moderate autho-

rity. On the death of the Arciibilhop of St. Andrew's, Morton
obtained from the Crown-a grant of the temporalities of that fee.
But as it was thought indecent for a layman to hold a benefice,
to which the cure of fouls was annexed, he procured Douglas,
recor of the university of St. Andrew's, to be chosen archbishop
and allotting him a small pension out of the revenues of the fee,
retained the remainder in.his own hands. The nobles, who saw
the advantages they might reap from such a practice, supported:
him in the execution of his plan. It gave great offence, however,
to the Clergy, who, instead of perpetuating an order, whose name
and power was odious to them, wished that the revenues which
had belonged to it, might be employed in supplying such parishes,
as were fill unprovided .vith fettled pastors. But on the one
hand, it would have been rash in the Clergy to have irritated, too
much, noblemen, on whom the very exiftcnce of the Protestant
Church in Scotland depended; and Morton, on the other, con-
duced his scheme with such dexterity, and managed them with
o much art, that it was, at last, agreed, in a Convention com-
pifed of the leading men among the Clergy, together with a com-
mittee of privy council, " that the name and office of archbi-
llop, and bifsop, should be continued during the King's minority,
and these dignities be conferred upon the belt qualified among
the Proteflant Miniflers ; but that with regard to their spiritual
jurifdlitiolos, they should be fubjcc- to the general assembly of the
Church." The rules to be obierved in their election; and the
i-fcrfons who were to fitpply the place, and enjoy the privileges,
which belonged to the Dean and Chapter in times of Popery,
vcrc likewise particulary specificd *. And the whole being laid
beforc the General Afrembly, after tome exceptions to the name
of 'c/Zb, bop, Dean, Chapter, &c. and a protestation that it should
be confidered only as a temporary constitution, till one more
perfcl could be introduced, it obtained the approbation of that
court-. Eveii Knox, who was prevented from attending the Al-
Iilnbly by the ill state of his health, though lie declaimed loudly
againlt the Simoniacal paction, to which Douglas owed his pre-
fermentc, and blamied the nomination of a person, worn out with
au, and inGirmitics, to an oilice, which required unimpaired vi-

Cald. 2. 30. +I Id. 3j4

-gour both of body and mind, seems not to have condemned the BooK VI.
*proceedings of the Convention; and in a letter to the Assembly, '
recommended some of their regulations with refpet to the clec- 572
tion of Biflops, as worthy of being carefully observed *. In con-
sequence of the Aflembly's consent to the plan agreed upon in the
Convention, Douglas was inflalled in his office; and at the fame
time, an archbifllop of Glasgow, and a bithop of Dunkeld were
chosen from among the Proteflant Clergy. They were all admit-
ted to the place in parliament, which belonged to the ecclefiafti-
cal order. But in imitation of the example set by Morton, such
pa&ions were made with them by different noblemen, as gave
them possession only of a very small part of the revenues, belong-
ing to their fees -.

Soon after the breaking up of this alteribly, Knox, the prime Novem. -7

infirument of spreading and cllabliihing the Reformed religion in I),.;:h a: ,!
Scotland, ended his life, in the 67th year of his age. Zeal, in- 1aJ.r f
trepidity, difinterefnednefs, were virtues which he poeffcffd, in an
eminent degree. He was acquainted, too, with the learning,
cultivated in that age; and excelled in that ipecies of eloquence,
which is calculated to roust, and to inflame. h]is imaximns, how-
ever, were often too severe, and the impetuosity of his temper
exceflive. Rigid and uncompliying himself, lic ihewed no indul-
gence to the infirmities of others. Regardless of the diltincions
of rank and character, he uttered his admonitions with an acri-
mony and vehemence, more apt to irritate, than to reclaim. 'his
often betrayed him into indecent and undutiful cxprclTions, with
respect to the Queen's person and condu&c. Those very qualities,
howvever, which now render his character less amiable, fitted bin
to be the instrument of Providence for advancing the Rcforn, a
tion, among a fierce people, and enabled hirm to facc d::.gclrs, andI
to lurinount opposition, from which, a perfen of a more gentle Ijii-
rit would have been apt to thrink back. By an unwearied aIpl!ica-
tion to fludy, and to bufflncfs. as l as by tle frequ'ency and
fcrvour of Ilis public diicoturfcs, lie had %w.orn out a conllitution,
naturally Ithong. During a lingering illlncs. he difcovcrcd tl;c
nitinol fiorLitude ; and met-the approachcs of death, . ithl a i::g-
nanlinity inlcparablc from lis cliu-iacler. Ie vas coiilltnitly c111-
ployed in acts of ldvotiun!, and conlorted i':iinl:lf l lith lit)lc pro-
piscds of imnllortality, whiich net only prelcrvr !'otd In LI fu:;
dclIefpoding, but iill them it'i .eixultation i t t!!ir lal I:nln'.i::'.

S~e Ai'p.:ni. ^o. V,

BOOK VI. The Earl of Morton, who was present at his funeral, prondunced

his eulogium in a few words, the more honourable for Knox, as
57 they came from one, whom he had often censured with peculiar

severity, " There lies He, who never feared the face of man *."

1573. Though Morton did not desire peace from such generous

'he Regent motives as the former Regent, he laboured, however, in good
treats ith earnest, to eftatSlifh it. The public confusions and calamities, to
the Q(lcen's
party. which he owed his power and importance when he was only the

second person in the nation, were extremely detrimental to hinm,
now that he was raised to be the first. While so many of the
nobles continued in arms against him, his authority, as Regent,
was partial, feeble, and precarious. Elizabeth was no less de-
firous of extinguishing the flame, which fie had kindled, and
kept so long alive in Scotland-s. She had discovered the alliance
with France, from which she had expeced such advantages, to
be no foundation of security. And though the appearances of
friendship Hill subsisted between her and that court, and Charles
daily renewed his proteflations of inviolable adherence to the
treaty, the was convinced, by a fatal example, how little flie
ought to rely on the promises or oaths of that perfidious Monarch.
IHer ambassador warned her that the French held a secret corre-
i}pondence with Mary's adherents in Scotland, and encouraged
them in their obstinacy $. The Duke of Alva carried on his in-
trigues in that kingdlom, with less disguise. She was persuaded
that they would embrace the first serene interval, which the com-
motions in France and in the Netherlands would allow them, and
openly attempt to land in Scotland. She resolved, therefore, to
prevent their getting any footing in the island, and to cut off all
their hopes of finding any aflifance there, by uniting the two par-
ties.

I{is o.'er- The situation of Mary's adherents gave the Regent great ad-
tuires tjcc- vantage in his negociations. They were now divided into two
3\1aii;lnd fa6lions. At the head of the one, were Chatclherault and Hunt-
i l. l;y.- . Maitland and Kirkaldy were the leaders of

t he
o ther. Their

high rank, their extensive property, and the numbers of their fol-
lowers, rendered the former ctnlidertable. The latter were in-

clbted for their importance, to their perlonal abilities, and to the
l!rcngtlh of the caflle of Edinburghl, i hich was in their pofl'eTfion.
'.'lic Rcgent had no intention to comprehend both in the f.me

* !:p,;.v. 266. C;tIJ. 3. 273. DIges, 299.
I,! Z: , ;>a.

treaty; but as he dreaded that the Queen's party, if it remained BooK VL.
-ntirc, would be able to thwart and embarafs his administration, v
he resolved to divide and to weaken it by a separate negociation. 1'73
He made the firfl overture to Kirkaldy and his associates, and en-
deavoured to renew the negociation with them, which, during
the life of his predecessor, had been broken off by his own arti-
sices. But Kirkaldy knew Morton's views, and system of govern-
merit, to be very different from those of the former Regent. Mait-
land conlidered him, as a personal and implacable enemy. They
received repeated assurances of protection from France. And
though the siege of Kochelle employed the French arms at that
time, the fame hopes, which had so often deceived the party, still
amused them, and they expcdted that the obflinacy of the Hugo-
nots, would soon be subdued, and that Charles would then. be at
liberty to as with vigour in Scotland. Meanwhile, a supply of
money was sent, and if the castle could be held out till Whitiun-
dlay, effedual aid was promiLrd *. Maitland's genius delighted
in forming schemes, that were enterprising and dangerous; and
Kirkaldy poffffed the intrepidity, necessary for putting them in
execution. The caltle, they knew, was so situated that it might
defy all the Regent's power. Elizabeth, they hoped, would not
violate the treaty with France, by fending forces to his aiiftance.
And if the French Ihould be able to land any considerable body
of men, it might be pofible to deliver the Queen from captivity,
or at least to balance the influence of France and England in such
a manner, as to rcfcue Scotland from the diihonourable depend-
ence on the latter, under which if had fallen. This splendid,
but chimerical projet, they preferred to the friendfllip of Morton.
They encouraged the negociation, however, because it served to
gain tilm; they proposed, for the fame purpose, that the whole
of the OQeen's party should be comprehended in it, and that Kir-
kaldy should retain the command of the caflle, fix months after
the treaty was signed. His interell prompted the Regent to re-
jec the former; his penetration fuggelled the danger of comply-
ing with the latter; and all hopes of accommodation vanished+.

As soon as the truce expired, Kirkaldy began to fire on the

city of Edinburgh, which, by the return of the inhabitants whom
he had expelled, was devoted as zealoully, as ever, to the King's
cause. But as the Regent had now set on foot a treaty with

* Cp1cs, 314. - OMtthi. ;35, &c.

Booc VI. Chatelherault and Huntly, the cessation of. arms still continued
,1- .with them.
Arties73s They were less scrupulous than the other party, and liltened
the teaty. eagerly to his overtures. The Duke was naturally unrfeady, and
Feb. 23. the approach of old age increased his irresolution, and aversion to

ation. The miseries of civil discord had affliced Scotland, al-
most five years, a length of time far beyond the duration of any
former contell. The war, instead of doing service, had been de-
trimental to the Queen; and more ruinous than any foreign in-
vafion, to the kingdom. In prosecuting it, neither party had
gained much honour both had suffered great losses; and had ex-
haufted their own estates, in wafling those of their adversaries.
The commons were in the utmoIt misery, and longed ardently
for a peace, which might terminate this fruitless, but deltruflive
quarrel.

Accepted A great flep was taken towards tllis desirable event, by the
yChatel-nd treaty concluded at Perth, between the Regent on one hand, and
Huntly. Chatelherault and Huntly on the other, under the mediation of

Killegrew, Elizabeth's ambassador *. The chief articles in it
were there; that all the parties comprehended in the treaty fiould
declare their approbation of the Reformed religion, now eftablilh-
ed in the kingdom; that they flould submit to the King's govern-
mnent, and own Morton's authority as Regent; that tley should
acknowledge every thing done in opposition to the King, fincc
his coronation, to be illegal that on both fides, the prisoners
who had been. taken should be set at liberty, and the lands reltor-
ed to their proper owners; that the aA of attainder passed againil
the Queen's adherents should be repealed, and indemnity granted
for all the crimes, of which they had been guilty since the ISth
of June 567; that the treaty flould be ratified, by the commoil
consent of both parties, in parliament--,

Siege of the Kirkaldy, though abandoned by his associates, who neither dif-
Ciaslbuel. covered solicitude nor made provision for his safety, did not lose

courage, nor entertain any thoughts of accommodation .. And
tlough all Scotland had now submittcd to the King, lie lill re-

Sec Append. No. Vt. *I Crawr. Mem. 25T.

t Mclvil, w!hole brother Sir Iolbcrt wass olne of those who joined with Kir-

kaldy in llie defrelce of the callc, and who wast hinllelf itrongly attached to
their party, anibrts that Kirkaldy offered to accept of any reafolbable terms oL'
compolition, but th:t all Iis ofrers were rejelcd hy the Rlegent. lolv. 40c. But
as Elizabeth was, at that lime, extr'mely tdcliros of rcltoring peace in Scot.
land, and her ani;ba;lador Kill ,grew, ::s w!l a:s the Earl of Kothes, ured thllir

solved to defend the cartle, in the Queen's name; and to'wait BooK VI.
the arrival of the promised succours. The Regent was in want .
of every thing necessary for carrying on a siege. But Elizabeth, 1573.
who determined, at any rate, to bring the dissentions in Scotland
to a period, before the French could find leisure to take part in
the quarrel, soon afforded him sufficient supplies. Sir William
Drury marched into Scotland, with fifteen hundred foot, and a
considerable train of artillery. The Regent joined him, with all
his forces; and trenches were opened, and approaches regularly April 25.
carried on, against the cafile. Kirkildy, though discouraged by
the loss of a great fam of money, remitted to him from France,
and which fell into the Regent's hands, through the treachery of
Sir James Balfour, the moR corrupt man of that age, defended
himself with bravery, augmented by despair. Three and thirty
days he refilled all the efforts of the Scots and Englilih, who pufl-
ed on their attacks, with courage, and with emulation. Nor did
lie demand a parly, till the fortifications were battered down, and
one of the wells in the cafile dried up, and the other choaked
with rubbifi. Even then, his spirit was unfubdued, and he de-
termined rather to fall gloriously behind the last intrenchment,
than to yield to his inveterate enemies. But his gairifon was not
animated with the fame heroic and desperate resolution, and rif-
ing in a mutiny, forced him to capitulate. He surrendered him- May :9.
self to Drury, who promiscd, in the name of his mistress, that he
flould be favourably treated. Together with him, James Kir-
kaldy his brother, Lord Home, Maitland, Sir Robert Melvil, a
few citizens of Edinburgh, and about one hundred and sixty fol-
diers were made prisoners *.

Several of the officers, who had been kept in pay during the

war, prevailed on their men to accompany them into the Low-
countries, and entering into the service of the flates, added, by
their gallant behaviour, to the reputation for military virtue,
which has always been the charaEteriftic of the Scottifl nation.

Thus by the treaty with Chatelberault and Huntly, and the Review of

the chnrac-
farrender of the catlle, the civil wars in Scotland were brought ter of btll

patics

ulmoft endeavours to pcriiade Kirkaldly to accede to the treaty of Pel th, it stems
more credible to impute the continuance of hostilities to Kirkaldy's obflinncy,
his diltrult of Morton, or his hope of foreign aid, than to any other caife.

'Ihat this wytas really the cal':, is evident fron the politive tellimony of Spo1lv.w

269, 70o. Camrd. 4.18. Jolni. Illifl. 3, 4. 'Digges, 334. Crawfur3'. ccrcount
;igroes, in thel main, %wi:ll their%, Merm. =63.

C:'ld 2... . l. I.v. .1. :(.1o . r\wl Dlcm s6.

IJu ij

BoK VI. to a period. When we review the ifate of the nation, and co.lmr*

pare the strength of the two facions, Mary's partizans among the
S573. nobles appear, manifefily, to have been superior both in numbers,

and in power. But these advantages were more than counterba.
lanced by others, which their antagonills enjoyed. Political abi-
lities, military skill, and all the talents, which times of acion
form, or call forth, appeared chiefly on the King's fide. Nor
could their enemies boast of any man, who equalled the intrepi-
dity of Murray, tempered with wisdom; the profound sagacity of
Morton; the subtle genius, and insinuating address of Maitland;
or the successful valour of Kirkaldy; all which were, at firfl, em-
ployed in laying the foundations of the King's authority. On the
one fide, measures were concerted with prudence, and executed
with vigour; on the other, their ref61utions were rash, and their
conduc feeble. The people, animated with zeal for religion, and
prompted by indignation against the Queen, warmly supported
the King's cause. The Clergy threw the whole weight of their
popularity into the fame scale. By means of these, as well as by
the powerful interposition of England, the King's government
was finally eftablifled. Mary loIt even that fliadow of sovereignty
which, amidtl all her fuffcrings, she had hitherto retained among;
her own fubjefls. And as she was no longer permitted to have
an ambassador at the court of England, the only mark of dignity
which she had, for some time, enjoyed there, ihe mull henceforth
be confidered as an exile stripped of all the ensigns of royalty;
guarded with anxiety in the one kingdom; and totally desErted'
or forgotten in the other.

Kirkaldy Kirkaldy and his associates remained in Drury's cuflody, and
put to were treated by him with great humanity, till the Queen of Eng-

land, whose prisoners they -were, flould determine their fate,
Morton insisted that they should susser the p.uniflhment, due to their
rebellion and obstinacy; and declared that so long as they were
allowed to live, lie did not reckon his own person or authority
fccurc; and Elizabeth, without regarding Drury's honour, or his
promises in her name, abandonld them to the Regcnt's disposal'
gulft 3. He firil confined them to separate prisons; and, soon after,. with

Elizabeth's consent, condemned Kirkaldy, and his brother, to be
hanged at the crols of Edinburgh. \Maitland, who did not cx-
pe& to be treated more favourably, prevented the ignominy of a
public execution, by a voluntary dcath, and " cended his days/
fays Mclvil, after the old Romaul faflio * "

Mnclv. 24?.

'While tlhe Regent was wreaking his vengeance on the remains BooK VI.

ktf her party in Scotland, Mary, incapable of affording them any
relief, bewailed their. misfortunes in the solitude of her prison. $573'
At the fame time, her health began to be much impaired by con.
finemcnt, and want of exercise. At the entreaty of the French
ambassador, Lord Shrewsbury her keeper was permitted to carry
her to Buxton-wells, not far from Tuthbury, the place of her im-
prifonment. Cecil, who had lately been created Baron of Bur-
leigh, and Lord High Treasurer of England, happened to be there
at the fame time. And though no Mlinifter ever entered more
warmly into the views of a fovercign, or gave fironger proofs of
his fidelity and attachment, than this great man, yet such was Eli-
zabeth's distrust of every person, who approached the Queen of
Scots, that her suspicions even extended to him; and while Mary
justly reckoned him her most dangerous enemy, he found some
difficulty in persuading his own miflrefs, that he was not partial
to that uihappy Queen *.

The Duke of Alva was this year recalled from the government

of the Netherlands, where his haughty and oppreflive adminiftra-
tion roused a spirit, in attempting to subdue which, Spain exhaufi-
ed its treasures, ruined its armies, and loft its glory. Requefens,
who succeeded him, was of a milder temper, and of a less enter-
prifing genius. This event delivered Elizabeth from the perpe-
tual disq(uietude, occasioned by Alva's negociations with the Scot-
tiah Queen, and his zeal for her interest.

Though the kingdom was now fettled in profound peace, many r i74

of the evils, which accompany civil war, were still felt. The re- 'Ihe Re.
flraints of law, which, in times of public confusion, are little re- n'i/t-ali,"
garded even by civilized nations, were totally despiscd by a fierce becumllc, u-
people, unaccutfomed to the regular adminitfration ofjuftice. 'I'he 'i";
disorders in every corner of the kingdom were become intolerable;
and under the protecion of the one, or the other faidion, crimes
of every kind were committed, with impunity. The Regent sei.
himnelf to redress there, and by his induliry and vigour, order and
feturity were re-eflablinfied in the kingdom. But he loft the re-
putation, due to this important fervicc, by the avarice, which he
discovered, in performing it; and his own exaceions became more
pernicious to the nation, than all the irrcgularitics, which he re.
Itrained 4.. Spies and informers were every where employed ; the
remenibrance of old offences was revived; imaginary crimes wcr:

: Strype, 2, 29, 288. 1- Sec Appll. No. VIJ.

BooKVI. invented; petty trcfpaffes were aggravated; and deliiquents Were

forced to compound for their lives, by the payment of exorbitant
1'74 fines. At the fame time, tle current coin was debarcd *; licences

were fold for carrying on prohibited branches of commerce, un-
usual taxes vwre imposed on commodities; and all the refinements
in oppreflion, from which, nations so imperfe&ly polished as the
Scots are usually exempted, were put in pradice. None of these

rere complained of more loudly, or with greater reason, than his

injuflice towards the Church. The thirds of benefices, out of
which the Clergy received their fubfiflence, had been slowly and
irregularly paid to colleAors, appointed by the General Assembly;
and during the civil wars, no payment could be obtained in feve-
Tal parts of the kingdom. Under colour of redressing this griev-
ance, and upon a promise of afnigning every Minister a Ilipend
within his own parilh, the Regent extorted from the Church the
thirds to which they had right by law. But the Clergy, instead
ns reaping.any advantage from this alteration, found that payments
became more irregular and dilatory than ever. One Minilfer,
vith a pitiful salary, was commonly burdened with the care of four
or five parilhes, and the Regent's insatiable avarice seized on the
refl of the fund -.

The death of Charles IX. which happened this year, was a new

tmisfortune to Mary. HIenry IIl. who succeeded him, had not
the fame attachment to her person, and his jealousy of the house
of Guise, and obfequioufncfs to the Queen Mother, greatly alie-
nated him from her interest.

.575. The death of the Duke of Cliatelherault mufi likewise be con-
!.nluary 22. fidered as some loss to Mary. As the parliament had frequently

declared him next heir to the Crown, this entitled him to great
refpe&t among his countrymen,' and enabled him, more than any
other person in the kingdom, to counterbalance the Regent's power.

Soon after, at one of the uflal interviews between the wardens
of the Scots and Englilh marches, a fcuffic happened, in which

The corruption of the coin, duringMorton's almininlrationans very great.

Although the quantity of current money coined out of a pound of Bullion, was
gradually increased by former princes; the standard or fineness fueflrcd little
llterat.iol, and the mixture of alloy was nearly the fame, with whatisnow used.
But Morton mixed a fourth.part of alloy, with every pound of filvcr, and funl;,
by conlqucence, the value of coin, in proportion. In the year rS8i, all the mo-
ney coined by him was called in, and appointed to be recoinedt. The flaltlarl
was rellored to the fame purity.as formerly. dltdilim. l'r.:f to Anders. Diplom.

Ct (rwf£. iNncm,. ;7:. SpotlW\v, .
7 Cald. a 42^o, 4,

the Englifl were wornted; a few killed on the spot; and Sir James BooK VI.
Forester the warden, with several gentlemen who attended him,
taken prisoners. But both Elizabeth and the Regent were too 57
sensible of the advantage, which resulted from the good under-
flanding that fubfilled between the two kingdoms, to allow this
flight accident to interrupt it.

'The domestic tranquillity of the kingdom was in forne danger Attempts of

of being disturbed by another cause. Though the persons, railed thle Clerg
to the dignity of bishops, pofrcffed very small revenues, and a very Epifrorz
moderate degree of power, the Clergy, to whom the Regent and order
all his measures were become extremely odious, began to be jealous
of that order. Knowing that corruptions lteal into the Church,
gradually, under honourable names, and upon decent pretences,
they were afraid that, from such finall beginnings, the hierarchy
might growy, in time, to be as powerful and oppressive as ever. The
chief author of these suspicions was Mr. Andrew Melvil, a man,
dillinguiflied by his uncommon erudition, by the severity of his
manners, and the intrepidity of his mind. But, bred up in the
retirement of an academy, he was unacquainted with the arts of
life; and being more attentive to the ends which he pursued, than
to the means which he employed for promoting them, he often
defeated laudable designs, by the impetuosity and imprudence with
which he carried them on. A queflion was moved by him in the
assembly, " whether the office of biflsop, as now excrcifed in the
kingdom, were agreeable to the word of God?" In the ecclesias-
tical judicatories, continual complaints were made of the bishops,
for neglect of duty, many of which, their known reinlifnefs too
well juflfied. The bishop of Dunkeld, being accused of delapi-
dating his benefice, was found guilty by the assembly. And the
Regent, inltcad of checking, connived at there disputes about Ec-
clefialtical government, as they diverted the zeal of the Clergy
from attending to his daily encroachments on the patrimony of
the Church *.

The weight of the Regent's opprcflive adminiltration, had, hi- 1576.
therto, fallen chiefly on tholi: in the lower, and middle rank; but I e riltat

lIone of the

lie began now to take fLch fleps, as convinced the nobles, that nobles.
their dignity would not long exempt them from feeling the effcels
of his power. An accident, which was a frequent caul[e of difren-
tion among the Scottifll nobles, occalioncd a difflrence between
the Earls of Argyle and Atlhoic. 2A vaflal of tlhe former haid made

" CalJ. Afl.'lblics, rj571, &.c. J tlins. ilill. 1$.

BBOor VI. some deprcdations on the lands of the latter. Athole took army

to punish the offender; Argyle, to protect him; and this ignoble
quarrel they were ready to decide in the field, when the Regent,
by interposing his authority, obliged them to disband their forces.
Both of them had been guilty of irregularities, which, though
common, were contrary to the letter of the law. Of these the
Regent took advantage, and resolved to found on them a charge
of treason. This design was revealed to the two Earls by one of
Morton's retainers. The common danger, to which they were
exposed, compelled them to forget old quarrels, and to unite in a
close confederacy, for their mutual defence. Their juntion ren-
dered them formidable; they despised the summons which the
Regent gave them to appear before a court of justice; and he was
obliged to desist from any further prosecution. But the injury
he intended made a deep impression, and drew on him revere
vengeance *.
r577. Nor was he more successful in an attempt, which he made, to

load Lord Claud Hamilton with the guilt of having formed a con-
fpiracy against his life. Though those, who were supposed to be
his accomplices were seized, and tortured, no evidence of any
thing criminal appeared; but, on the contrary, many circum-
flances discovered his innocence, as well as the Regent's secret
views, in imputing to him such an odious designs-.

Tiley turn The Scottiih Nobles, who were almost equal to their Monarchs
towards the in power, and treated by them with much diftin&ion, observed
zin'g. these arbitrary proceedings of a Regent, with the utmost indig-

nation. The people, who under a form of government extreme-
ly simple, had been little accustomed to the burden cf taxes, com-
plained loudly of the Regent's rapacity. And all began to turn
their eyes towards the young King, from whom they expected the
redress of all their grievances, and the return of a more gentle,
and more equal administration.

rales's e- James was now in the twelfth year of his age. The Queer
:til'ldi'loli- soon after his birth, had committed him to the care of the Earl of
tions. Mar, and during the civil Wars, he had resided securely in the

castle of Stirling. Alexander Erikine, that nobleman's brother,
had the chief direetion of his education. Under him, was the fa-
mous Buchanan, together with three other preceptors, the molt
eminent, the nation afforded, for skill in those sciences, which were
decmcd ncccffary for a Prince. The young King shewed an un-

' Crawf. Memr, s85 t Hid. e87.
29*·--

common passion for learning, and made great progress in it. And BOOK VI.
the Scots fancied that they already diicovered in 'him, all those vir- v"
tues, which the fondness or credulity of fubjecds usually ascribe to 577.
princes during their minority. But as James was flill far from that
age, at which, he was permitted, by law, to assume the reins of
government, the Regent did not sufficiently attend to the senti-
mcnts of the people, nor refle&, how naturally there prejudices
in his favour might encourage the King to anticipate that period.
He not only neglected to secure the friendship of those, who were
about the King's person, and who poffcfled his ear, but had even
exasperated ofme of them, by personal injuries. Their resentment I-e is finpi-
concurred with the ambition of others, in infusing into the King cious of the
early suspicions of Morton's power and designs. A King, they. Regeit's
told him, had often reason to fear, seldom to love a Regent.
Prompted by ambition, and by interefl, he would endeavour to keep
the prince in perpetual infancy, at a diflance from his fubjcfts, and
unacquainted with business, A small degree of vigour, however,
was sufficient to break the yoke. Subjeas naturally reverence
their Sovereign, and become impatient of the temporary and de-
legated jurifdicqion of a Regent. Morton had governed with a ri-
gour, unknown to the ancient Monarchs of Scotland. The na-
tion groaned under his oppressions; and would welcome the firit
prospect of a milder adminifiration. At present, the King's name
was scarce mentioned in Scotland, his friends were without in-
fluence, and his favourites without honour. But one effort would
difeover Morton's power to be as feeble, as itwas arbitrary. The
fame attempt would put himself in potieffion of his jult authority,
ind refcuc the nation from intolerable tyranny. If he did not re-
gard his own rights as a King, let him lillen, at lcait, to the cries
of his people *.

These fuggefltions made a deep impreflion on the young King, Aplotfornm.

who was trained up in an opinion that he was born to command. "aai"lt tlh
His approbation of the design, however, was of fnall consequence, egt.
without the concurrence of the nobles. The Earls of Argyle and
Athole, two of the most powerful of that body, were animated
with implacable refientment againlt the Regent. To them the Ca-
hal in Stirling-caftlc communicated the plot, which was on foot;
and they entering warmly into it, Alexander Erlkine, vho, since
the death of his brother, and during the minority of his nephew,
had the conmmand of that fort, and the cullody of the King's per-
son, adlmitted them secretly into the King's prciince. They gave

' Mlich-. :49.

Xx

BooK VI. him the fame account of the misery of his fubjeAs, under the Re.

v ' gent's arbitrary administration; they complained loudly of the in-
1577* justice, with which themselves had been treated; and besought

the King, as the only means for redressing the grievances of the
nation, to call a council of the whole nobles. James consented,
and letters Were issued, in his name, for that purrpofe; but the
two Earls took care that they should be sent only to those, who
were known to bear no good will to Morton *.

IX78. The number of these was, however, so considerable, that, on
Mtarch 4. the day appointed, far the greater part of the nobles assembled at

Stirling; and so highly were they ineenfed against Morton, that
although, on receiving intelligence of Argyle and Athole's inter-
view with the King, he had made a feint as if he would resign
the Regency, they advised the King, without regarding this of-
ser, to deprive him of his office, and to take the administration of
government into his own hands. Lord Glamis the Chancellor,
and Herreis, were appointed to signify this resolution to Morton,
who was, at that time, in Dalkeith, his usual place of residence.
Nothing could equal the joy, with which this unexpeced refolu-

l-Terefigns tion filled the nation, but the surprise occasioned by the teeming
his office alacrity, with which the Regent descended from so high a flation.
and retires. w

He neither wanted sagacity to foresee the danger of resigning,
nor inclination to keep possession of an office, for the expiration
of which, the law had fixed so diflant a term. But all the sources,
whence the faaion, of which he was head, had derived their
firength, were either failed, or now supplied his adversaries with
the means of humbling him. The Commons, the city of Edin-
burgh, the Clergy, were all totally alienated from him, by his
multiplied opprelffons. Elizabeth, having lately bound herself,
by treaty, to fend a considerable body of troops to the afillance
of the inhabitants of the Netherlands, who were firuggling for
liberty, had little leisure to attend to the affairs of Scotland; and
as fle had nothing to dread from France, in whose councils the
princes of Lorrain had not, at that time, much influence, fiie
was not difplenfcd, perhaps, at the birth of new faltions in the
kingdom. Even those nobles, who had long been joined with
Morton in faction, or whom he had attached to his person by be-
nefits, Glamis, Lindfiy, Ruthven, Pitcairn the Secretary, Mur-
ray of Tillibardin Comptroller, all deferred his falling furtunes,
and appeared in the council at Stirling. So ani)) COiAC i . cir-
cumflances, convinced Morton of his own wvcakncs, and dctcr..

SpOtfw. ;78.

mined him to give way to a torrent, which was too impetuous to BOOK VI.
be reiuted. He attended the Chancellor and Herreis to Edin-
burgh; was present when the King's acceptance of the govern- 5r '.
ment was proclaimed; and, in the prefencc of the people, furren-
dered to the King, all the authority, to which he had any claim
in virtue of his office. This ceremony was accompanied with
such exceflive joy and acolamations of the multitude, as added no
doubt, to the anguish, which an ambitious spirit must feel, when
compelled to renounce supreme power; and convinced Morton
how entirely he had lolt the affetions of his countrymen. He
obtained, however, from the King an ac containing the approba-
tion of every thing done by him in the exercise of his office, and
a pardon, in the molt ample form, that his fear or caution could
devise, of all past offences, crimes, and treasons.. The nobles,
who adhered to the King, bound themfelvcs, under a great pe-
nalty, to procure the ratification of this at, in the first parlia.
ment *.

A council of twelve nobles was appointed to afflit the King, in Continues

the adminiltration of affairs. And Morton, deserted by his own tO^tions of
party, and unable to firuggle with the facion, which governed the adveric
ablolutely at court, retired to one of his feats, and seemed to en- plt'
joy the tranquillity, and to be occupied only in the armuicments,
of a country life. His mind, however, was deeply disquieted with
all the uneasy reflections, which accompany disappointed ambition,
and intent on schemes for recovering his former grandeur. Even
in this retreat, which the people called the Iion's-den, his wealth
and abilities rendered him formidable. And the new Counsellors
were so imprudent as to rouse him, by the precipitancy with which
they haltened to 1trip him of all remains of power. They requir-
ed him to surrender the callle of Edinburgh, which was fill in
his poffeihon. He refuted at first to do so, and began to prepare
for its defence; but the citizens of Edinburgh having taken arms,
and repulscd a part of the garrison, which was 'ent out to
guard a convoy of provisions, he was obliged to give up that im-
portant fortreis, without refiltance. /'This encouraged his adver-
saries to call a parliament to meet at Edinburgh, and to multiply
their demands upon him, in fich a mannner, as convinced him
that nothing less than his utter ruin would satisfy their inveterate
hatred.

Their power and popularity, however, began already to dq-
cline. The Chancellor, the ableff and molf moderate man in the

Spotfw. -79. Crawf. cf. m.89. Cald 2. A5.

Xx xi

BOOK VI. party, having been killed at Stirling, in an accidental rencountei

between his followers, and those of the Earl of Crawford; Athole
578 w'ho was appointed his successor in that high office, the Earls of

Eglinton, Cathnefs, and Lord Ogilvie, all the prime favourites
at court, were either avowed papifls, or fufpeted of leaning to
the opinions of that fe&. In an age, when the return of Popery
was, so nuch, and so justly, dreaded, this gave universal alarm.
-And as Morton had always treated the palpifts with rigour, this
unseasonable indulgence made all zealous Protestants remember
that circumffance in his adminiltration, with great praie *.

Refumeshis Morton, to whom none of these particulars were unknown,
forir au- thought this the proper junture for setting to work the inftru-

ments, which h'e had been preparing. Having gained the confi-
dence of the Earl of Mar, and of the Countels his mother, he in-
iinuated to them that Alexander Erfine had formed a plot to de-
piive his nephew of the government of Stirling castle, and the
cuflody of the King's person; and easily induced an ambitious wo-
man, and a youth of twenty, to employ force to prevent this sup-
posed injury. The Earl repairing, suddenly, to Stirling, and be-
ing admitted, as usual, into the castle with his attendants, seized
April-26. the gates early in the morning, and turned out his uncle, who

dreaded no danger from his hands. The soldiers of the garrison
-ubmitted to him as their- governor, and, with little danger, and
no effusion of blood, lie became mafler both of the King's person,
and the fortress-.

An event so unexpecred occasioned great consternation. And

though Morton's hand did not appear in the execution, he was
-universally believed to be the author of the attempt. The new
Counsellors saw it to be necessary, for their own safety, to change
their measures, and instead of pursuing him with such implacable
Tefentment, to enter into terms of accommodation with an adver-
fary, itill so capable of creating them trouble. Four were named,
on each fide, to adjust their differences. They met not far from
Dalkeith. And when they had brought matters near a conclusion,
Morton, who was too sagacious not to improve the advantage,
May 24 4 which tlleirfccurity and their attention to the treaty afforded him,

set out in the night-time for Stirling, and having gained Murray
of Tillibardin, Mar's uncle, was admitted by him into the castle;
and managing matters there witli his usual dexterity, he had soon
more the command of the fort, than the Earl himfclf. He wy,

Sotrw 28. 28. Cald. 2. s54.

likewise admitted to a feat in the privy council, and acquired the BooxVI.
fame ascendant in it *.

As the time appointed for the meeting of parliament at Edin- 1578

burgh now apprbached, this gave him some anxiety. He was
afraid of carrying the young King to a city, whose inhabitants were
so much at the devotion of the adverse faaion. He was no less
unwilling toleave James behind at Stirling. In order to avoid this
dilemma, he issued a proclamation, in the King's name, changing
the place of meeting from Edinburgh to Stirling castle. This,
Athole and his party represented as a Rep altogether unconftitu-
tional. The King, said they, is Morton's prisoner; the pretend-
ed Councellors are his slaves; a parliament, to which all the no-
bles may repair withont fear, and where they may deliberate with
freedom, is absolutely necessary for fettling the nation, after dif-
orders of lfch long continuance. But in an assembly, called con-
trary to all form, held within the walls of a garrison, and over-
awed by armed men, what safety could members expet? what
liberty could prevail in debate ? or what benefit result to the pu-
blic ? The Parliament met, however, on the day appointed, and July 5.
notwithflanding the protestation of the Earl of Montrose and Lord
Lindsay, in name of their party, proceeded to business. The
King's acceptance of the government was confirmed; the a&
granted to Morton, for his security, ratified ; some regulations,
with regard to the numbers and authority of the privy council, were
agreed upon; and a pension for life granted to the Countess of
Mar, who had been so infirumental in bringing about the late re-
volution 1-.

Meanwhile, Argyle, Athole, and their followers, took arms, Argyle and

upon the specious pretence of rescuing the King from captivity, Athole takI
and the kingdom from oppreflion. James himself, impatient of him.
the servitude in which he was held, by a man whom he had long
been taught to hate, secretly encouraged their enterprifc; though,
at the fame time, he was obliged not only to disavow them in pu-
lbic, but to levy forces againll them, and even to declare, by pro-
clamation, that he was perfcflly free from any confiraint, either
upon his person, or his will. Both fides quickly took the field.
Argyle and Athole were at the head of Leven thousand men;
the Earl of Angus, Morton's nephew, met them with an army
five thousand firong; neither party, however, was eager to engage. Atgiift r.
Morton difirulled the fidelity of his own troops. The two Earls

t Cald. 3. 536. ] Ibid. 2. 547, Iarl. V.Jac.\ I.

BooK VI. were sensible that a single viaory, however complete, would not

be decisive; and as they were in no condition to undertake the
578- siege of Stirling castle, where the king was kept, their firength

would soon be exhausted, while Morton's own wealth, and the pa-
tronage of the Qeeen of England, might furnish him with endless
resources. By the mediation of Bowes, whom Elizabeth had sent
into Scotland to negociate an accommodation between the two

Elizabeth factions, a treaty was concluded, in consequence of which, Argyle
lnegoclaes and Athole were admitted into the King's presence; some of
jnodtation their party were added to the privy council; and a Convention
ren*een of nobles called, in order to bring all remaining differences to

an amicable issue *.

So soon as James assumed the government into his own hands,

he dispatched the abbot of Dunfermling to inform Elizabeth of
that event; to offer to renew the alliance between the two king-
doms ; and to demand possession of the estate, which had lately
fallen to him, by the death of his grand mother, the Countess of
Lennox. That Lady's second son had left one daughter, Arabella
Stewart, who was born in England. And as the chief objecioR
against the pretensions of the Scottiih line to the crown of Eng-
land, was that maxim of Englilh law, vhich excludes aliens
from any right of inheritance within the kingdom, Elizabeth, by
granting this demand, would have eflablifhed a precedent irn
James's favour, that might have been etlcemed decilive, with re-
gard to a point, which it had been her constant care to keep unde-
decided. Without fufferiplg this delicate queflion to he tried, or
allowing any new light to be thrown on that, which lie confL-
dered as the great myfiery of her reign, file commanded the rents
of the estate to be fequeflered by Lord Burleigh, mafler of the
wards; and by this method of proceeding, gave the Scottish King
early warning how necessary it would be to court her favour, if
ever he hoped for success in claims of greater importance, but
equally liable to be controverted -.
. 579. After many delays, and with much difficulty, the contending

nobles were at'lafl brought to some agreement. But it was follow-
April 24. ed by a tragical event. Morton, in token of reconcilement, having

invited the leaders of the opposite party to a great entertainment,
Athole the Chancellor was, soon after, taken ill, and died within
a few days. The symptoms and violence of the difeale gave rile
to Prong suspicions of his being poisoned. And though the phy-

Crawf, Mcm. 3Q7. - Caitl. t61.

iccians, who opened his body, differed in opinion as to the cause BooK VI.
of the distemper, the Chancellor's relations publicly accused Mor-
ton of that odious crime. And the advantage which visibly ac- 79
crued to him, by the removal of a man of great abilities, and a-
verse from all his measures, was sufficient proof of his guilt to the
people, who are ever fond of imputing the death of eminent per-
Cons to extraordinary causes *.

The office of Chancellor was bestowed upon Argyle, whom this 'lorton's il-

preferment reconciled, in a great measure, to Morton's admini- "g-l. pro-
ftration. He had now recovered all the authority he possessed gaint the
during his Regency, and had entirely broken, or baffled, the power flamiton
and cabals of his enemies. None of the great families remained to
be the ohjects of his jealousy, or to obftruc his designs, but that
of Hamilton. The Earl of Arran, the eldest brother, had never
recovered the fliock, which lie received from the ill fucccfs
of his passion for tle Queen, and had now altogether loft his rca-
son. Lord John, the itcond brother, was in poflcflion of the fa-
mily eflate. Lord Claud was Commendator of Paiflcy; both of
them young men, ambitious and enterpriling. Morton dreaded
their influence in the kingdom; the courtiers hoped to flarc their
spoils among them; and as all Princes naturally view their fucccf-
fors with jealousy and hatred, it was cafv to infuse these pri'ons
into the mind of the young King. A pretence was at hand to'
juflify the most violent proceedings. The pardon, flipulatcd in
the treaty of Perth, did not extend to those, who were acceflT)r-
to the murder of the Regents 'Iurray, or Lennox. Lord John
ancd his brother were suspected of being the autlhors of both there
crimes, and. had been included in a general act of attainder on
that account. \Vithout summoning them to trial, or examining
a single witness to prove the charge, this attainder was now thought
fflicient to subjec them to all the penalties, which they would
have incurred by being formally convicted. lThe Earls cf Mor-
ton, Mar, and Eglinton, together with the Lords Ruthven, BoyI!,
and Cathcart, received a commilfion to seize their persons and
ellates. On a few hours warning, a conliderahle bcdy of troops
was ready, and marched towards Hamilton, in hollile array.
Happily, the two brothers made their escape, though w i:! great
ditflculy. But their lands were confitcated. The cailles of I;a-
milton and Draftan Lefieged ; those who defended tlemr punithicd.
The Earl of Arran, though incapable, from his situation, of con-
nmitting any crime, was involved, by a f!amcful abu!o of I:.v, i:-

^ Spotss\. 306.

BooK VI. the common ruin of-his family; and as if he, too, could have been

guilty of rebellion, confined a close prisoner. These proceedings,
so contrary to the fundamental principles of juflice, were allratified
in the subsequent parliament *.

About this time, Mary sent by Naue her secretary, a letter to

her son, together with some jewels of Value, and a velt embroider-
ed with her own hands. But as she gave him only the title of
Prince of Scotland, the messenger was dismissed, without being
admitted into his presences.

Negocia- Though Elizabeth had, at this time, no particular reason to fear
tions for a
marriage any attempt of the Popish Princes, in Mary's favour, Ihe still con-
between E- tinued to guard her with the fame anxious care. The acquisition
lizabeth and
the Duke of of Portugal, on the one hand, and the defence of the Netherlands,
Alencon. on the other, fully employed the councils and arms of Spain.

France, torn in pieces by intefline commotions, and under a weak
and capricious prince, despised and difirufled by his own fubjeds,
vas in no condition to diflurb its neighbours. Elizabeth had long
amused that court by carrying on a treaty of marriage with the
Duke of Alencon, the King's brother. But whether, at the age
of forty-five, flie really intended to marry a Prince of twenty ?
whether the pleasure of being flattered and courted, made her lif-
ten to the addresses of so young a lover, whom file allowed to vi-
fit her at two different times, and treated with the moss dillin-
guifiing refpcEt? or whether considerations of interest, predomi-
nated in this, as well as in every other tranfa&ion of her reign,
are problems in history, which we are not concerned to resolve ?
During the progress of this negociation, which was drawn out to
an extraordinary length, Mary could expea no afliftance from the
French court, and feemns to have held little correspondence with
it. And there was no period in her reign, wherein Elizabeth
enjoyed more perfec security.

TIwofavour- Morton seems, at this time, to have been equally secure ; but
itesgain an his security was not so well founded. He had weathered out
acendant o-
ver James. one fiorm, had crufled his adversaries, and was again in poflc.f-

sion of the sole diretion of affairs. But as the King was now of
an age, when the characer and dispositions of the mind begin to
unfold themselves, and to become visible, the fialleft attention to
these might have convinced him, that there was reason to expe&t
new and more dangerous attacks on his power. James early dif-
covered that excessive attachment to f\ourllts, which accompa-

C Crawf. 4en.31. Spotfw. 36
O ' CraI MIcm. 314.

nied him through his whole life. This paflion, which naturally BooK VI.
arises from inexperience, and youthful warmth of heart, was, at
his age, far from being culpable; nor could it well be expected -579
that the choice of the objects, on whom he placed his affections,
should be made with great skill. The most confidcrable of them,
was Efme Stewart, a native of France, and son of a second bro-
ther of the Earl of Lennox. I-Ie was dillinguilhed by the title of
Lord D'Aubigne, an estate in France, which descendcd to him
from his ancellors, on whom it had been conferred, in reward of
their valour, and services to the French crown. HIc arrived in
Scotland, about this time, on purpose to demand the eflate and Sept. ..
title of Lennox, to which he pretended a legal right. He was
received, at firlt by the King, with the refpct due to so near a
relation. The gracefulness of his person, the elegance of his dress,
and his courtly behaviour, made a great impreflion on Jamnes,
who, even in his more mature years, was little able to resist these
frivolous charms ; and his affection flowed with its usual rapidity,
and profusion. Within a few days after Stewart's appearance at
court, he was created Lord Aberbrothock, soon after Earl, and then
Duke of Lennox, Governor of Dumbarton cafilc, Captain of the
guard, first Lord of the bedchamber, and Lord High Chamberlaii.
At the fame time, and without any of the envy, or interference,
which is usual among candidates for favour, Captain James Stewart,
the second son of Lord Ochiltree, grew into great confidence. But
notwithflanding this union, Lennox and Captain Stewart were
persons of very opposite characters. The former was naturally
gentle, humane, candid; but unacquainted with the slate of the
country, and milled, or misinformed by those, whom he trulted;
not unworthy to be the companion of the young King in his amuse-
ments, but utterly difqiutlified for acting as a Minilter, in directing:
his affairs. The latter was remarkable for all the vices, which
render a man formidable to his country, and a pernicious counfcl.
lor to his Prince; nor did he possess any one virtue, to counter-
balance tlhcle vices, unless dexterity in condudcing his own de-
signs, and an enterprising courage, hiperior to the fcnle of danger,
may pals by that name. Unrellrained by religion, regardlefls of
decency, and undilinayed by opposition, he aimed at objelts, fccin-
ingly unattainable; but under a Prince, void of experience, and
blind to all the dlcfecs of tliofe, wlho had gained hc s favour, his
audacity was fiiccce;ful; and honours, wealth, and power, wevrr
tllc rcward of his crimes.

Yy

BOOK VI. Both the favourites concurred in employing their whole address

to undermine Morton's credit, which alone obitruaed their full

'579.

They labour po,'eflion of power. And as James had been bred up with an a-
to ulder- version for that nobleman, who endeavoured rather to maintain
tmn's autho- the authority of a Tutor, than to aft with the obsequiousness of
rity. a Minifler, they found it no difficult matter to accompliflh their

dcfign. Morton, who could no longer keep the King (hlut up
within the walls of Stirling castle, having called a parliament to
Olober i7. meet at Edinburgh, brought him thither. James made his entry

into the capital, with great solemnity; the citizens received him
with the loudest acclamations of joy, and with many cxpenfive
pageants, according to the mode of that age. After a long pe-
riod of thirty-feven years, during which, Scotland had been sub-
jeted to the delegated power of Regents, or to the feeble govern-
ment of a woman, and had fulfcred all the miseries of civil war, and felt
the insolence of foreign armies, the nation rejoiced to fee thefceptre
once more in the hands of a King; and fond even of that shadow
of authority which a Prince of fifteen could poflefs, they flatter-
ed themselves, that union, order, and tranquillity would now be
restored to the kingdom. James opened the parliament with ex-
traordinary pomp, hut nothing remaykable palled in it.

These demonstrations, however, of the people's love and attach-

ment to their Sovereign, encouraged the favourites to continue
their infinualions againfl A olon ; and as the King now resided
in the palace of Ialy-rood-houfe, to which all his fubjccs had
access, the cabal againIt the Earl grew daily ilronger, and the
intrigue, which occasioned his fall, ripened gradually.

580o. Morton began to be sensible of his danger, and endeavoured to

mlorton en- put a tfop to the career of Lennox's preferment, by representing
deavours to him as a formidable enemy to the Reformed Religon, a secret
prevent
them. agent in favour of Popery, and a known erniflary of the house of

Guise. The Clergy, apt to believe every rumour of this kind,
fprcad the alarm among the people. But Lennox, either out of
complaifince to his mailer, or convinced by the arguments of tome
learned Divines, whom the King appointed to inflrucl him in the
principles of the Protellnnt Religion, publicly renounced the er-
rors of Popery, in the Church of St. Ciles, and declared himself
a member of the Church of Scotland, by signing her Conicnfon ot
Faith. This, though it did not remove all futilicions, nor filenco
some zealous preachers, abated, in a great dcgrcc, the force of the
accuatioln '.

' Cr.v: . Ic lm. 3T9. Srotf.v. 3'3.

On the other hand, a rumour prevailed that Morton was pre- Bool VI.

paring to seize the King's person, and to carry him into England.
Whether despair of maintaing his power, by any other means, had
driven him to make any overture of that kind to the Engliil court,
or whether it was a calumny, invented by his adversaries to ren-
der him odious, cannot now be determined with certainty. As
he declared at his death, that such a dcfign had never entered in-
to his thoughts, the latter seems to be molt probable. It afford-
ed a pretence, however, for reviving the office of Lord Chamber-
lain, which had been, for some time, disused. That honour was
conferred on Lennox. Alexander Erskine, IVorton's capita! enc-
my, was his deputy; they had under them a band of Gentlemen,
1who were appointed conflantly to attend the King, and to guard
his person *

Morton was not ignorant of what his enemies intended to infi- Elizabl)It

nuate, by such unusual precautions for the King's safety. And as 'ierlhl)at.sin
his last resource, applied to Elizabeth, whose protection had often
flood him in lead, in his greatest difficulties. In consequence of
this application, Bowes her Envoy accused Lennox of pracices
against the peace of the two kingdoms, and infilted, in her name,
that he fliould inflantly be removed from the privy council.
Such an unprecedented demand was confidered, by the Counsellors,
as an affront to the King, and an enroachment on the independen-
cy of the kingdom. They affected to call in queflicn the Envoy's
powers, and upon that pretence, refused him farther audience.
He retired in disgust, and without taking leave; Sir Alexander
Home was sent to expoflulate witl Elizabeth on the subjet. As-
ter the treatment, which her Envoy had received, Elizabeth
thought it below her dignity to admit Home into her pretence.
Burleigh, to whom he was commanded to impart his commiflion,
reproached him with his malter's ingratitude towards a benefac-
tres, who had placed the crown on his head, and required hin
to advise the King to beware of sacrificing the friendflip of so nc-
ceffary an ally, to the giddy humours of a young man, without
experience, and flrongly fuliected of principles, and attachments,
incompatible with tle happiness of the Scottish nation.

This accusation of Lennox hlaflened, in all probability, Mlorton's Morlton ac.

fall. 'The an of indemnity, which he had obtained llen hlc re-

e 1l l rr.'

ligncd the Regency, was worded with litch scrupulous cxacqanefs, the late
;is alnolt screened lini from ;ny leg:1. prolfcution. 'T'llcmulrdel' 1iC'g.

' C(rawf. :.Iem. e. '

y v ij

BooK VI. of the late King was the only crime, which could not, with de.

cency, be inrertcd in a pardon, granted by his son. Here Morton
S°o.- clill lay open to the penalties of the law. And Captain Stewart,

who shunned no ation, however desperate, if it led to power, or
to favour, entered the council-chamber, while the King and no-
Dec. 30. bIls were assembled, and falling on his knees, accused Morton of

being accessory, or according to the language of the Scottish law,
art andpart, in the conspiracy againfl the life of his IVIajefty's fa-
ther, and offered, under the usual penalties, to verify this charge by
legal evidence. Morton, who was present, beard this accusation
with firmness; and replied with a disdainful finile, proceeding
either from contempt of the infamous character of his accuser, or
from consciousness of his own innocence, " that his known zeal,
in punilhing those rwho were fufpeced of th.'. deteRable crime,
might well exempt himself from any suspicion of being accessary
to it, nevcrthelefs, lie would cheerfully submit to a trial, either
in that place, or in any other court, and doubted not but his own
innocence, and the malice of his cnemies, would then appear in
the clearest light. Stewart, who was itill on his knccs, be-
gan to inquire how he would reconcile his bellowing so many
lonours on Archibald Douglas, whom he certainly knew to be
one of the Inurtherers, with his pretended zeal againlt that crime.
Mortun vSas ready to answer. But the King commanlded both of

1581. them to be removed. The Earl was confined, firlt of all,
Janumav- . to llis onn house, and then committed to the caRtle of Edin-

burgh, of whiclh Alexander Eri£kine was Governor; and as if it
had not been a fitlicient indignity to subje&t him to the power of
January 18. one of his enemies, he was, soon after, carried to D)umbarton, of

which Lcnnox had the command. A warrant was, likewifc, if-
sued for apprehending Archibald Douglas, but lie, having re-
ceived timely intelligence of the approaching danger, fled into
England '

The EFarl of Angus, who imputed there violent lprocceding,;

not to hatred againll Morton alone, but to tile ancient enmity bc-
tween the louses of Stewart and of Douglas, and who believed
that a conljiracy was now formed for the dcltruciion of the whole
name, was rcatly to take arms in order to rcfecuc his kinlinan.
But Miorton ablbllutcly forbade any such attempt, ant declared
Illat lhe would rather lfffcr ten thoulhnd deaths, than bring an iim.
putation on iis own characer by fecming to decline a trial (.

'* ''r.\.w[. 1M sn.j, 3;j. J0lmlll. 64. Spodr. jin.

Elizabeth did not fail to interpose, with warmth, in behalf of a BooK VI.

man who had contributed so much to prcferve her influence over ' -
Scotland. The late tranfaaions in that kingdom had given her Elizabeth's
great uneasiness. The power which Lennox had acquired inde- mcafilresin

ordIertoslave

.pendent of her was dangerous; the treatment her ambassadors had him.
met with, differed greatly from the rcfpec, with which the Scots
were in use to receive her Miniflers; and the attack now made on
Morton fully convinced her, that there was an intention to sow
the feeds of discord betweccn the two nations, and to seduce James
into a new alliance with France, or into a marriage with some
Popilhl Princess. Full of thece apprehensions, fhc ordered a con-
fiderable body of troops to be assembled on the borders of Scot-
land, and difpatchd Randolph as her ambassador into that king-
dom. He addressed Ihimfelf not only to James, and to his coun-
cil, but to a convention of efltates met at that time. lHe began
with enumerating the extraordinary benefits which Elizabeth had
conferred on tihe Scottilh nation: That without demanding a fin-
gle foot of land for licrfelf, without encroaching on the liberties
of the kingdom in the finallefl article, flie had, at the cxpcnce of
the blood of her fubjeds, and the trcalures of her Crown, rcfcued
the Scots from the dominion of France, eflabliflied among tllhen
true Religion, and put them in poffeflion of their ancient rights:
'That from the beginning she had protelced those, whlo espoused
the King's caule, and by her afliltance alone, the Crown was prc-
served on Ihis head, and all the the attempts of the adverse faction
baffled: 'That an union, unknown to their anceflors, but equally be-
neficial to both kingdoms, had fubfiflcd for a long period of years,
iand though so many Popish Princes had combined to diflurb this
happy slate of things, her care, and their conilancy, had hitherto
defeated all there efforts: 'That she had observed, of late, an tin-
usual coldnels, difiruft, and cltrangemcnt, in the Scottifli Council,
which ihc could impute to none but to Lennox, a subj c of France,
a retainer to the house of Guise, bred up in the errors of Popery,
and llill ifuliciledt of favouring tliat fuperlition. Not latisfied
wyith having mounted bl fAll to fuchl an uncommon height of power,
which he cxerciled with all the ralllllii of youth, and all the ig-
lorance of a flranger; nor thinking it enough to have deprived
the Earl of Morton of the authority, dlue to his abilities, and cx-
perience,, lit had conlliired the ruin of thatl nobleman, who had of-
ten expolfd :is life in thie King's caultC, w\i o had contribute d nore
than any other subjel tlo' Ilace lihi onl tlle throne, to rcfill the cn-
croaclihmnt:; of Popery, and to pr'elcrvc tlhe unlilon l.etvc''n te t;'. o

BooK V.' kingdoms. If any zeal for religion remained among the nobles of
--' ' Scotland, if they wished for the continuance of amity with Eng-

' land, if they valued the privileges of their own order, he called

upon them, in the name of his Millrefs, to remove such a perni-
cious counsellor as Lennox from the presence of the young King,
to rescue Morton out of the hands of his avowed enemy, and fe-
cure to him the benefit of a fair and impartial trial. And if force
were necessary towards accomplilhing a design, so salutary to the
King and kingdom, he promised them the prote&tion of his Mif-
trefs in the enterprise, and whatever afliflance they flould demand
either of men or money *.

But these extraordinary remonstrances, accompanied with such

an unusual appeal from the King to his fubjeds, were not the only
means employed by Elizabeth, in favour of Morton, and againlt
Lennox. She persuaded the Prince of Orange to fend an agent
into Scotland, and under colour of complimenting James on ac-
count of the valour, which many of his fubjefts had displayed in
the fcrvice of the States, to enter into a long detail of the relflefs
enterprises of the Popish Princes againfl the Protestant Religion
to beseech him to adhere inviolably to the alliance with England,
the only barrier which secured his kingdom against their danger-
ous cabals; and above all things, to dirtruft the insinuations of
those, who endeavoured to weaken or to dissolve that union between
the Britifl nations, which all the' Protestants in Europe beheld
with so much pleasure -.

Tames deter- James's Counsellors were too intent upon tle destruction of
mines to pr,- teir enemy to liften to tlhee remonfirances. The officious inter-
ceed againfi
him. position of the Prince of Orange, the haughty tone of Elizabeth's

message, and so avowed an attempt to excite fubjets to rebel a-
gainft their Sovereign, were confidered as unexampled insults on
the Majesty and independence of a crowned head. A general and
evasive aufwer was given to Randolph. James prepared to affcrt
his own dignity with spirit. All those fufpeaed of favouring
Mlorton were turned out of office, tome of them were required to
surrender themcflves prisoners ; the fencible men throughout the
kingdom were commanded to take arms; and troops were levied
and pofled on the borders. The Englifl ambassador, finding that
neither the public manifcflo which he had delivered to the Con-
vention, nor his private cabals witl the nobles, could excite them
to armns, fled in the night-time out of Scotland, vrllire libels a-
g;linll him had been daily publiflid, and even attenpts madpIe up n

Catld, . . 6 StLrpc, i, 6GI. 1 Cald. . ?.

his life. In both kingdoms every thing wore an hostile aspec. BooK VI.
But Elizabeth, though ile wilhed to have intimidated the Scottilll "
King by her preparations, had no inclination to enter into a war
with him, and the troops on the borders, which had given such
umbrage, were soon difperred *.

The greater solicitude Elizabeth discovered for Morton's fafcty,

the more eagerly did his enemies drive on their schemes for his
defiruction. Captain Stewart his accuser was firit appointed tutor
to the 'Earl of Arran, and soon after both the title and estate of
his unhappy ward, to which he advanced some frivolous claim,
were conferred upon him. The new made Peer was commanded
to conduft Morton from Dumbarton to Edinburgh, and, by that
choice, the Earl was not only warned what fate he might expect,
but had the cruel mortification of feeing his mortal enemy alrea-
dy loaded with honours, in reward of the malice with whicl he
had contributed to his ruin.

The records of the court ofju./icialy at this period are loft. The IHe is tried

account which our hiflorians give of Morton's trial is inaccurate d' cmnel
and unsatisfaCtory. The whole proceedings seem to have been
violent, irregular, and oppressive. Arran, in order to extort evi-
dence, tortured feveralof the Earl's domeflicswith unusual cruelty.
During the trial, great bodies of armed men were drawn up in
different parts of the city. The jury was composed of the Earl's
known enemies; and though he challenged several of them, his
objecions were overruled. After a flort consultation, his peers
found him guilty of concealing, and of being art andpart in, the
conlpiracy againfl the life of the late King. The firit part of the
verdit did not surprise him, but he twice repeated the words art
andpart with some vehemence, and added, God knows it is not
so. The doom, which the law decrees againfl a Traitor, was pro-
nounced. T'he King, however, remitted the cruel and ignomi-
nious part of the fentencc, and appointed that he Ihould fuflcr
death next day, by being beheaded +.

During that awful interval, Morton poflifled the utmost comr- Iij deratl.

pofure of mind. He flpped cheerfully; lept a part of the night,
in his uflal m:llnner; and employed the reft of his time in religi-
ous conferences, and in ais of devotion, with some Minillcrs of
(lie city. 'he Clergymen who attended him, dealt freely with
his conlciencc, and prrcnlcd his crimes home upon him. WVhut lhe
confesscd with regard to the crime for vwhich lie lil'Cercd is rc-

* Criawl: Ilm. 32,'. .Slrlyp, 2. App. 1

P 8.

S'ivtr.v. 31,s Ju,hnfll... Cil;'w . MXni., 331. C uld, 3
. .

.BooK VI. markable, and supplies, in some measure, the imperfecion of our

records. He acknowledged, that on his return from England as-
* ter the death of Rizio, Bothwell had informed him of the con-

fpiracy against the King, which the Queen, as he told him, knew
of and approved ; that he solicited him to concur in the execution
of it, which, at that time, he absolutely declined; that, soon as-
ter, Bothwell himself, and Archibald Douglas, in his name, re-
newing their solicitations to the fame ptirpofe, he had required a
warrant, under the Queen's hand, authorising the attempt, and as
that had never been produced, he had refused to be any farther
concerned in the matter. " But, continued he, as I neither con-
" sented to this treatonable act, nor assisted in the committing of
" it, so it was impossible for me to reveal, or to prevent it. To
" whom could I make the discovery ? The Queen was the author
" of the enterprise. Darnly was such a changeling, that no secret
c: could be safely communicated to him. Huntly and Bothwell,

who bore the chief sway in the kingdom, were themselves the
perpetrators the crime." The'e circumflances, it must be con-

feflcd, go some length towards extenuating Alorton's guilt ; and
though his apology for the favour he had flhewn to Archibald
Douglas, whom he knew to be one of the conspirators, be far less
satisfactory, no uneasy reflelions seem to have disquieted his own
mind on that account *. When his keepers told him that the
guards wer. attending, and all things in readiness, " I praiie my
" Gcd, said he, I am ready likewise." Arran commanded these
guards; and even in those moments, when the molt implacable
hatrcd is apt to relent, the malice of his enemies could not for-
bear this intult. On the feaftold his behaviour was calm; his
countenance and voice unaltered ; and after some time fpcnt in
devotion, he fuflered death with the intrepidity, which became
the name of, Douglas. His head wvas placed on the public jail of
Ediniburghl; and his body, after lying till fun-fct on the Icaffold,
covered with a beggarly cloak, was carried by common porters to
the uifual burial-place of criminals. None of his friei:nds duril ac-
company it to the grave, or difcovcr their gratitude and rcfpeca
by any fyrnptoms of sorrow 4?-.

t~lic; u.;i,- Arran, no leIf profligate in private life, than audacious in his
di of Ar- pubJlic c ou, on after drew the attention of his couLntymen,

by his infamous marriage with the Countcfs of March. Before
he grew into favour at court, he liad been often entertained in
her huila):ncl's houle, and without regarding the laws of hospitality

' Crawf. Meni. Anp. j. t iCra.vfr. Mcm. 33-.. Spoti\v. 313

br of gratitude, carried on a criminal intrigue with tlh wife of nooK; VI.
lis benefactor, a woman young and beautiful, but, according to
ihe description of a cotemporary I-liflorian, " intolerable in all the
imperfccions, incident to her sex." Impatient of any reitraint
upon their mutual desires, they, with equalardour, wished to avow
their union publicly, and to legitimate, by a marriage, the off-
spring of their uhlawful padion. The Cduntefs petitioned to be
divorced from her husband, for a reason, which no modest woman
twill ever plead. The judges, overawed by Arran, passed sentence
iwithout delay. And this infamous scene was concluded by a mar- July 6.
riage, solemnized with great pomp, and beheld by all ranks of
men with the utmost lorror *.

A Parliament was held this year, at the opening of which some Oacber 24,

disputes arose between Atran and the Earl now created Duke of
Lennox. Arran, haughty by nature, and puflied on by his wife's
ambition, began to affetA an equality with the Duke, under whole
protection he 'had hitherto been contented to place himself. After
various attempts to form a party in the council against Lennox, he
found him fixed so firmly in the King's affections, that it was im-
poflible to flake him, and rather than lose all interest at court,
from which he was banifllcd, he made the most humble fubmifilons
to the favourite, and again recovered his former credit. This
rupture contributed, however, to render the Dtke still more odi-
bus to the nation. During the continuance of it, Arran affcted
to court the Clergy, pretended ah extraordinary zeal for the Pro-
teflant Religion, and laboured to confirm the suspicions, which
were entertained of his rival, as an emissary of the house of Guise,
and a favourer of Popery. As lie was supposed to be acquainted
With the Duke's molt secret designs, his calumnies vere listened
to with more credit, than was due to lis character. To the fame
cause, we must ascribe several acts of Parliament uncommonly fa-
vourable to the Church, particularly one, which abolilhed the
praclice, introduced by Morton, of appointing but one miniftcr
to several parilhes.

No notice hath been taken for Tome years ofEcclefiaflical as- Ecclefilli-

fairs. \VWile the civil government underwent so many cxtraord:- cal ail-i!..
nary revolutiohs, the Church was not free from convulsions. Two
objects, chiefly, ingroffed the attention of the clergy. 'l'he one
was the forming a fvflmc of difciplinc, or 1Ecclefialtical polity. As-
ter long labour, : .tie nmniv (difnicilties: tllis vwas at la:l brou;ghlt ti

" Spotfw 31t.

',7....

BooC VI. some degree of perfection. The aifembly fulemnly approved of it;

and.appointed it to be laid before the privy council, in order to
obtain the ratification of it in parliament. But Morton, during
his administration, and those who, after his fall, governed the
King, were equally unwilling to fee it carried into execution
and by flarting difficulties, and throwing in objections, prevented
it from receiving a legal fancion. The other point in view was
the abolition of the Episcopal order. The bishops were so de-
voted to the King, to whom they owed their promotion, that the
funtion itself was by some reckoned dangerous to civil liberty.
Being allowed a feat in parliament, and diftinguithed by titles
of honour, these not only occasioned many avocations from their
spiritual employments, but soon rendered their character and man-
ners extremely different from those of the Clergy in that age.
The nobles viewed their power with jealousy, the populace con-
lidered their lives as profane, and wiflhed their downfal with e-
qual ardour. The personal emulation between Melvil and Adam-
ton, a man of learning, and eminent for his popular eloquence,
who was'promoted, on the death of Douglas, to be Archbishop
of St. Andrew's, mingled itself with the passions on each fide, and
heightened them. Attacks were made, in every assembly, on
the order of bishops; their privileges were gradually circumfcrib-
cd; and at lafl an aa was passed, declaring the office of bishop,
as it was then exercised within the realm, to have neither foun-
dation nor warrant in the word of God; and requiring, under pain
of excommunication, all who now possessed that oflice, inflant-
ly to resign it, and to abstain from preaching or adminiftcring the
sacraments, till they Ihould receive permiflion from the aflenmbly.
The court did not acquiesce in this decree. A. vacancy happen-
ing, soon after, in the fee of Glasgow, Montgomery Miniller at
Stirling, a man vain, fickle, presumptuous, and more apt, by the
blemilhes in his character, to have alienated the people from an
order already beloved, than to reconcile them to one which was the
objet of their hatred, l'ruck up an infamous bargain with Len-
nox, and on his recommendation was cholcn Archbiflop. The
Prefbytcry of Stirling of which he was a member, the Presbytery
of Glafgovw whither he was to be tranllated, the General Aflemibly,
15j82. vied with each other in prosecuting him on that account. In order

to screen Montgomcry, James made trial both of gentle and of
rigorous mceallrcs, and both were equally incflilu.ual. The Gene-
ral iAflembly was jult ready to pronounce ,gainlt him the sentence
of cxcommunicatioo n when an Herald entered and colntuanded

tllem, in the King's name, and under pain of rebellion, to flop BooK VI.
further proceedings. Even this injunftion tley despised. And 1V
though Montgomery, by his tears, and seeming penitence, pro- -58
cured a flhort respite, the sentence was at last issued by their ap-
pointment, and published in all the churches throughoutthe king-
dom.

The firmefs of the Clergy in acollective body, was not greater

than the boldness of some individuals, particularly of the Mlinifters
of Edinburgh. They inveighed daily against the corruptions in
the administration, and, with the freedom of speech admitted in-
to the pulpit in that age, named Lennox and Arran as the chief
authors of the grievances; under which the church and kingdom
groaned. The courtiers, in their turn, complained to the King
of the insolent and seditious spirit of the Clergy. In order to
check the boldness of their discourses, James iflued a proclama-
tion, commanding Dury one of the most popular Minilters, not
only to leave the town, but to abstain from preaching in any other
place. Dury complained, to the judicatories of the Church, of
this encroachment upon the immunities of his office. They ap-
proved of the doftrine which he delivered; and he determined to
disregard the royal proclamation. But the magistrates being de-
termined to compel him to leave the city, according to the King'c
orders, he was obliged to abandon his charge, after protesting
publicly, at the cross of Edinburgh, ngainlt the violence, which
was put upon him. The people accompanied him to the gates,
with tears and lamentations; and the Clergy denounced the ven-
geance of heaven against the huthors of this outrage *.

In this perilous situation flood the Church; the authority of

itsjudicatories called in question, and the liberty of the pulpit
restrained, when a fidden revolution in the civil government pro-
cured them unexpeAed relief.

The'two favourites, by their afccndant over the King, poflef- -ri: f.iv,-
fed uncontrouled power in the kingdom, and exercised it with the ites''""gag

thie King in

utmofl wsantonnc's. Jamesufually refldcd at Dalkeith or Kinneil, unpolpular
the feats of Lennox, and of Arran, and was attended by such corn- mCtu""rs,
pany, and employed in such arufements, as did not suit his dig-
nity. 'The fcrvices of tllofe, who had contributed most to place
the Crown on his head, were but little remembered. lMany who
had opposed him with the greatel virulence, enjoyed the rewards
ind honours, to which the others were entitled. Exalted notions

: Cakld .n.

A 5I-.

-8b .
T76-- Sz, Spol: 277, &c.

z ij

BooKcVI. of regal prerogative, utterly inconfiflent with the conflituticn of

8 ' Scotland, being infltilled by them into the mind of the young Mo-

narch, unfortunately made, at that early age, a deep impreflion
there, and became the source of almost all his future errors in the
government of both kingdoms*. Courts ofjuftice were held in al-
mofi every county, the proprietors of land were called before
them, and.upon the flightell negle& of any of the numerous forms
which are peculiar to feudal holdings, they were fined with un-
usual and intolerable rigour. The Lord Chamberlain revived the
absolute jurifdicion of his office over the Boroughs, and they
were fubjeaed to exacrions no less grievous. A design seemed,
likewise, to have been formed to exasperate Elizabeth, and to
diflolve the alliance with her, which all good Proteltante cfleem-
ed the chief fccurity of their teligion in Scotland. A close cor-
rcfpondence was set oi foot between the King and his mother,
and considerable progress made towards uniting their titles to the
Crown, by such a treaty of association, as Maitland had projedt-
ed;' which could not fail of endangering or diminiliing his au-
thority, and muff have proved fatal to thqfe, who had aded again4i
her with grcatet .vigour -.

The nobles All these circumitances irritated the impatient spirit of the
coTnfpire a- Scottish nobles, who resolved to tolerate no longer the insolence
g~inttthem.·

...'. of the two minions, or to stand by, while their presumption and

inexperience ruined bojh the King and kingdom. Elizabeth,
who, during the administration of the four Regents, had the en-
tire direction of the affairs of Scotland, felt herself deprived of all
influence in that kingdom ever since the death of Mlorton, and
)was ready to countenance any attempt to rescue the King out of
the hands of favourites, who were leading hirp into mealures, so
repugnant to all her views. The Earls of Mar and Glencairn,
Lord Ruthven, lately created Earl of Gowrie, Lord Linfday,
Lord Boyd, the Tutor of Glamis, the Mafler of Olipliant, with
several Barons and gentlemen of dillindion, entered into a conm-
bination for that purpofc. And as changes in adminitiration,
which among polilhlid nnaions', are brought about l1owly and
silently, by artifice and intrigue, were in that rude age cffclced
suddenly and by violence, tlh King's fitultion, and the security
of the favouritcs, encouraged the conifirators to have immediate
rccourlf to force.

Seize the James, after having residcd for foinc time in Athole, whelre
King's per-
ol at ltuth l he enjoyed his favourite amufimcnt of hunting, was now rcturln;

Y Cull. 3. rji. + Ibicl. 3. I 7.

ing towards Edinburgh, with a finall train.- He was invited to BooKVI.
Ruthven castle, which lay in his way; and as lie fufpeted no

1582.

danger, he went thither in hopes of farther sport. The multitude Augut 22.
of strangers whom he found.there gave him some uneasiness ; and
as those who were in the secret arrived every moment from dif-
ferent parts, the appearence of so many new faces increased his
fears. He dissembled, however, and next morning made ready
for the field, expesting to find there some opportunity of making
his escape. But the nobles entering his bed-chamber, presented
a memorial againf the illegal and oppressive actions of his two
favourites, whom they represented as most dangerous enemies
to the religion and -liberties of the nation. James, though he
received this remonstrance with the complaisance which was nc-
ceffary in his present situation, was extremcly impatient to be gone;
but as he approached the door of the apartment, the Tutor of Gla-
mis rudely flopped him. The King complained, expoftulated,
threatened, and finding all these without effeft, bur. into tears,
"No matter, said Glamis fiercely, better children weep than beard-
ed men." These words made a deep imprefion on the King's
mind,, and were never forgotten. The conspirators, without re-
garding his tears or indignation, dismissed such of his followers
as they fufpeEed; allowed none but their own party to have ac-
cess to him; and though they treated him with great refpe&,
guarded his person with the utmolt care. This enterprise is usually
called, by our historians, The raid of Ruthven *.

Lennox and Arran were astonished to the last degree at an Commit As,

event so unexpected, and so fatal to their power. The former rantoprifo
endeavoured, but without success, to excite the inhabitants of Edin-
burgh to take arms, in order to rescue their Sovereign from cap-
tivity. The latter, with his usual impetuosity, mounted on horse-
back the moment he heard what had befallen the King, and with
a few followers, rode towards Ruthven castle; and as a confider-
able body of the conspirators, under the command of the Earl of
M/ar, lay in his way ready to oppose him, lie separated himself
from his companions, and with two attendants arrived at the gate
of the caltle. At the fight of a man so odious to his country,
the indignation of the conl)iratdrs rose, and inltant death mufl
have been the puniihment of his rafntefs, if the fricndfhip of
Gowrie, or fume other cause not explained by our hiflorians, had
pot saved a life, so pernicious to the kingdom. IIe was confincd,

Cald. 3. 34.t Spoil. 30. IMelv. 357.

BooK VL however, to the castle of Stirling, without being admitted into

v the King's presence-

r582

Command The King, though really the prisoner of his own subje&s, with
Lennox to whose conduc he could not help discovering many symptoms
leave the
Lgdorn. '°of difgufl, was obliged to publilh a proclamation, signifying

his approbation of their enterprise, declaring that he himself
was at full liberty, without any reflraint or violence offered to
his person; and forbidding any attempt against those concerned
in the Raid of Ruthven, under pretence of rescuing him out of
Augnuf 28. their hands. At the fame time, he pommandedLennox to leave

Scotland before the 20th of September*.

''hc Confii- Soon after, Sir George Carey, and Bowes, arrived as ambassadors
rators coul- from Elizabeth. The pretext of their embafl'y was to inquire after
tenanced by
Elizabeth. the King's safety; to encourage and countenance the conspirators

was the real motive of It. By their interceflion, the Earl of An-
gus, who, ever since thedeath of his uncle Morton, had lived in
exile, obtained leave to return. And the acceflion of a noble-
man so powerful and so popular ftrenthened the faction--.

Lennox, whose amiable and gentle qualities had procured him

many friends, and who received private afflrances that the King's
favour towards him was in no degree abated, seemed resolved, at
first, to pay no regard to a command, extorted by violence, and
no less disagreeable to James, than it was rigorous with regard to
himself. But the power of his enemies, who were maRers of the
King's person, who were secretly supported by Elizabeth, and
openly applauded by the Clergy, deterred him from an enterprise,
the success of which was dubious, and the danger certain both to
himself, and to his Sovereign. He put off the time of his depar-
ture by various artifices, in expectation either that James might
maike his escape from the conspirators, or that fortune might pre-
sent some more favourable opportunity of taking arms for his re-
lief.

Thlei con- On the other hand, the conspirators were extremely solicitous not
dul apmrov- only to secure the approbation of their countrymen, but to obtain
femblyand some legal faneion of their enterprise. For this purpose, they pu-
a Conven- blifled a long declaration, contaning the motives, which had in-
tinn of e-

"atcs. c"dueed them to venture on such an irregular flep, and endcavoured

to heighten the public indignation againtf the favourites, by repre-
ii nting, in the ftrongclt colours, their inexperience and infolenco,
their contempt of the nobles, their violation of the privileges oi

o Caldl 3. 135. 138. ]bid, 3. 52.

Ae Church, and their oppression of the people. They obliged BooK VI.
the King, who could not with safety refuse any of their demands, 2
to grant them a remiflion in the most ample form; and not satis- 2
fled with that, they applied to the Assembly of the Church, and Otober 13.
cafily procured an at, declaring " that they had done good and
acceptable service to God, to their Sovereign, and to their native
country;" and requiring all sincere Proteflants to concur with them
in carrying forward such alaudable enterprise. And in order to add
the greater weight to this at, every Minifler was enjoined to
read it, in hisown pulpit, and to inflit the censures of the Church
on thole who set theml'elves in opposition to so good a cause. A
Convention of ellates, afrembled a few days after, paffedana& to
the fame effect, and granted full indemnity to the conspirators for
every thing they had done*.

James was conducted by them, first to Stirling, and afterwards Lennox's

to the palace of Hlaly-rood-houfe; and though he was received fro, Scmt.
every where with the external marks of rcfpet due to his dig- land.
nity, his motions were carefully observed, and he was under a rc-
tfraint no less iricd, than at the first moment when he was seized
by the conspirators. Lennox, after eluding many commands to
depart out of the kingdom, Was at last obliged to begin his jour-
ney. He lingered, however, for rome time in the neighbourhood
of Edinburgh, as if he had fill intended to make one effort to-
wards restoring the King to liberty. But either from the gen-
tlenefs of his own disposition, averse to blood-fied and the disorders
of civil war, or from some other cause, unknown to us, he aban-
doned the design, and let out for France, by the way of England. Decem no
The King issued the order for his departure, with no less reluc-
tance, than the Duke obeyed it. And both mourned a separation,
which neither of them had power to prevent. Soon after his ar-
rival in France, the fatigue of the journey, or the anguilh of his
mind, threw him into a fever. In his last moments, he discovered
such a firm adherence to the Protcfiant faith, as fully vindicates
his memory from the imputation of an attachment to Popery, with
which he had been uncharitably loaded in Scotlandt. As lie
was the earliest, and belt beloved, lie was perhaps, the molt dclcrv-
ing, though not the molt able of all James's favourites. The
warmth and tenderiicls of his Master's iafetlion for him was not
abated by death itfclf. By many ads of kindnels andgenerolity to-
wards his poftcrity, the King not only did great honour to the

Cald. 3. 177, 187, o00 . Spots' 322. t S):tr. 3:4.

BoocKVI. memory of Lennox, but set his own characer in one of the mobs

8 favourable points of view.

Mary'sa -xi. The success of the conspiracy, which deprived James of liberty,
sty about made great noise over all Europe ; and at last reached the ears of

er io. Mary in the prison to which the was confined. As her own ex-

perience had taught her what injuries a captive prince is exposed
to susser; and as many of those who wrere now concerned in the
enterprise against her son, were tle fame persons whom lie confi-
dered as the chief authors of her own misfortunes, it was natural
for the tenderness of a mother to apprehend that the fame cala-
mities were ready to fall on his'head; and such a profpeEt did
not fail of adding to the distress and horror of her owvn situation.
In the anguish of her heart, she wrote to Elizabeth, complaining
in the bitterest terms of the unprecedented rigour, with which she
herself had -been treated, and befecching her not to abandon
her son to the mercy of his rebellious fibjets; nor permit him
to be involved in the fame misfortunes, under which fie had so
long groaned. The peculiar vigour and acrimony of flile, for
which this letter is remarkable, discover both the high spirit of
the Scottish Queen, unfubdued by her sufferings, and the vio-
lence of her indignation at Elizabeth's artifices and severity;
But it was ill adapted to gain the end she had in view, and ac-
cordingly it neither procured any mitigation of the rigour of her
own confinement, nor any interposition in favour of the King.

1583. Henry III. Who, though he feared and hated the Princes of

Ambassadors Guise, was often obliged to court their favour; interposed with
arrive fromi
France and warmtl, in order to extricate James out of the hands of a party
k:ngland. so entirely devoted to the Englith interelt. He commanded M.

de la Motte Fenelon, his ambassador at the court of England, to
repair to Edinburgh, and to contribute his utmofl endeavours to-
wards placing James in a situation, more suitable to his dignity.
As Elizabeth could not, with deceny, refuse him liberty to exe-
cute this commission, lile appointed Davison to attend him into
Scotland as her Envoy, under colour of concurring with him in
the negociation, but in reality, to be a spy upon his motions, and
to obflrut his success. James, whose title to the Crbwn had not
hitherto been recognized by any of the princes on the continent,
was extremely fond of fuich an honourable cmbally from'the French
Monarch, and, on that account, as well as for the fake of the er-
aInuary 7. rand on which he came, received Fenclon with great rcfpct. The

nobles, under wvhoef power the King xwis, did not rclill this in-
terpofitidn of the Frelnch coutrt, which lh:d long loll its ancient

influence over the affairs of Scotland. The Clergy were alarmed BOOK VI;
at the danger to which religion would be exposed, f the Princes *'
of Guise should recover any ascendant over the public councils.
And though the King tried every method for restraining them
within the bounds of decency, they declaimed against the court
of France, against the Princes of Guise, against the ambassador,
against entering into any alliance with such notorious persecutors
of the Church of God, with a vehemence, which no regular go-
vernment would now tolerate, but which was then extremely com-
mon. The ambassador, watched bye Davison, distrusted by the
nobles, and exposed to the insults of the Clergy, and of the peo-
ple, returned into England without procuring any change in the
King's situation, or receiving any answer to a proposal which he
made, that the government fllould be carried on in the joint names
of James, and the Queen his mother*.

.Meanwhile, James, though he dissembled with great art, be- James e-

came every day more uneasy under his confinement; his uneasiness capes our of
rendered him continually attentive to find out a proper oppor-. the confpi.
tunity for making his escape; and to this attention, he at last rators
owed his liberty, which the King of France was not able, nor the
Queen of England willing to procure for him. As the confpira-
tors had forced Lennox out of the kingdom, and kept Arran at a
diftance.from court, they grew secure; and imagining that time
had reconciled the King to them, and to his situation, they watch-
ed him with little care. Some occasions of discord had arisen
among themselves; and the French ambassador, by fomenting
these during the time of his residence in Scotland, had weakened
the union, in which alone their safety consisted-. Colonel Wil-
liam Stewart, the commander of the band of gentlemen, who
guarded the King's person, being gained by James, had the prin-
cipal merit in the scheme for restoring his master to liberty. Un-
der pretence of paying a visit to the Earl of March his grandun-
cle, James was permitted to go from Falkland to St. Andrew's. June =7.
That he might not create any suspicion, he lodged, at first, in an
open defencelcfs house in the town, but pretending a curiosity to
fee the cafle, no sooner was he entered with rome of his attend-
ants whom he could trust, than Colonel Stewart commanded
the gates to be fllut, ahd excluded all the reft of his train. Next
morning the Earls of Argyle, Huntly, Crawford, Montrose, Ro.
thcs, with others to whom the secret had been communicated, en-

Cald. 3. 27. Spots. 3.1.. Sec Append. No. VIII. * Camd. 482.

3A

BooK VI. tered the town with their followers; and though Mar, with ie-
.,* veral of the leaders of the faction, appeared in arms, they found

themselves so far out-numbered, that it was in vain to think of
recovering poffeflion of the King's person, which had been in their
power somewhat longer than ten months. James was naturally of
so soft and dutile a temper, that those who were near his person,
commonly made a deep impreflion on his heart, which was form-
ed to be under the sway of favourites. And as he remained,.du-
ring so long a time, and at a period of life when resentments are
rather violent than lasting. implacable and unreconciled to the
conspirators, they must either have improved the opportunities of
insinuating thlemfelves into favour with little dexterity, or the in-
dignation, with which this first insult to his person and authority
filled him, must have been very great.

Resolves, His joy at his escape was youthful and excessive. He resolved,
treat them however, by the advice of Sir James Melvil, and his wifefi coun-
with mode- fellors, to act with the utmost moderation. Having called, into
ration.

ion his presence, the leaders of both faaions, the neighbouring gentry,

the deputies of the adjacent boroughs, and the Ministers and the
heads of colleges, he declared, that although he had been held
under refiraint for some time by violence, he would not impute
that as a crime to any man, but without remembering the irregu-
larities, which had been so frequent during his minority, would
pass a general at of oblivion, and govern all his fubjefs with un-
distinguishing and equal affeAion. And as an evidence of his fin-
cerity, he sifited the Earl of Gowrie at Ruthyen callle, and
granted him a full pardon of any guilt he had contraded, by the
crime committed in that very place *,

But Arran But James did not adhere long to this prudent and moderate
aigendanti plan His former favovourite, the Earl of Arran, had been per-
overhim. mitted for some time to reside at Kenneil, one of his country feats,

As Coon as the King felt himself at liberty, his love for him began
to revive, and he expressed a Itrong desire to fee him, The cour-
tiers violently opposed the return of a minion, whose insolent and
overbearing temper they dreaded, as much as the nation detested
his crimes. James, however, continued his importunity, and pro-
mifing that he llould continue with him no longer than one day,
they were obliged to yield. This interview rekindled ancient as-
fe&ion; the King forgot his promise; Arran regained his afcen-
dant over him; and within a few days resumed the exercise of
power, with all the arrogance of an undcfcrving favourite, and all
the raflhnefs peculiar to himfelfl..

McIlv. 2-7. t Ibid. 274,

the first effec of his influence was a proclamation with regard BooKVI.

to those concerned in the Raid ofRuthven. They were required V
to acknowledge their crime in the humblest manner; and the Andt83

And the

King promised to grant them a full pardon, provided their future King pur-
conduc were such, as did not oblige him to remember pas mif- fuesanother

plan.

carriages. The tenor of this proclamation was extremely dif:
ferent from the aft of oblivion,--which the conspirators had been
encouraged to expec. Nor did any of them reckon it safe to rely
on a promise, clogged with such an equivocal condition, and grant-
ed by a young Prince, under the influence of a Minister, void of
faith, regardless of decency, and transported, by the desire of re-
venge, even beyond the usual ferocity of his temper. Many of
the leaders, who had at first appeared openly at court, retired to
their own houses; and foreseeing the dangerous storm which was
gathering, began to look out for a retreat in foreign countries *.

Elizabeth, who had all along proteced the conspirators, was Elizabeth's

extremely difguiled with measures which tended so vifibily to iolifoT-
their deftruEtion, and wrote to the King a harsh and haughty let- the confpi-
'ter, reproaching him in a ftil%, very uncommon among Princes, rAuguf 7.
with breach of faith in recalling Arran to court, and with impru-
dence in proceeding so rigorously against his best and most faith-
ful fubjets. James, with a becoming dignity, replied, that pro-
mises extorted by violence, and conditions yielded out of fear,
were no longer binding, when these were removed; that it belong-
ed to him alone to chufe what Ministers he would employ in his
service; and that though he resolved to treat the conspirators at
Ruthven with the utmoit clemency, it was necessary, for the sup-
port of his authority, that such an insult on his person should not
pass altogether uncenfured -.

Elizabeth's letter was quickly followed by Walsingham her fe- Sept. r.

cretary, whom fie appointed her ambassador to James, and who ham'siei.
appeared in the Scottish court, with a splendor and magnificence, b^fy into

Scotland.

well calculated to please and dazzle a young Prince. Walfing-
ham was admitted to several conferences with James himself, in
which he infiled on the fame topics contained in the letter, and
the King repeated his former answers.

After suffering several indignities, from the arrogance of Arran,

and his creatures, he returned to England, without concluding any
new treaty with the King. \Valfinghain was, next to Burleigh,
the Minilter on whom the chief weight of the Englifli admiiitra-

- Mcv, 378. Spolf.326. Cald, 3 330. t Mclv. 279,

3 Aij

BOoQ VL tion refted; and when a person of his rank, slept so far out of the
t.-" ordinary road of business, as to undertake a long journey, in his.

old age, and under a declining state of health, some affair of con-.
sequence was supposed to be the cause, or some important event
was expeted to be the effeA of this measure. But as nothing con-
fpicuous either occasioned, or followed this embassy, it is probable
tiat Elizabeth had no other intention in employing this sagacious
MIinifter, than to discover, with exatnefs, the capacity and dif-
position of the Scottifi King, who was now arrived at a time of
life, when, with some degree of certainty, conjectures might be
formed concerning his characer, and future conduc. As James
possessed talents of that kind, which make a greater figure in con-
verfation, than in aftion, he gained a great deal by this interview
with the English secretary, who, notwithstanding the cold recep-
tion he met with, gave such an advantageous representation of hie
abilities, as determined Elizabeth to treat him, henceforward,
with more decency and refpet *.

Elizabeth's eagerness to prote& the conspirators rendered James

more violent in his proceedings against them. As they had all
refused to accept of pardon, upon the terms which he had of-
sered, they were required, by a new proclamation, to furiender
theifelves prisoners. The Earl of Angus, dlone complied; the
reit either fled into England, or obtained the King's licence to
Decem. ,7. retire into foreign parts. A Convention of estates was held, the

members of which, deceived by an unworthy artifice of Arran's,
declared those concerned in the Raid of Ruthven to have been
guilty of high treason; appointed the ad passed last year approving
of their conduct to be expunged out of the records; and engaged
to support the King in prosecuting the fugitives with the utmost
rigour of lawy.

The conspirators, though far from having done any thing that

was uncommon in a barbarous, age, among mutinous nobles, and
under an unsettled fiate of government, must be acknowledged to
have been guilty of an a& of treason against their sovereign; and
James, who confidered their conduct in this light, had good rea-
son to boast of his cleniency, when he offered to pardon them,
upon their confefling their crime. But, on the other hand, it
must be allowed that, after the King's voluntary promise of a ge-
neral oblivion, they had some rcafon to complain of breach of
faith, and could not, without the most unpardonable imprudence...
have put their lives in Arran's power.

* Mclv. 293. Cald. 3. ;58. Jcbh. 2. 536.

The interefi of the Church was considerably affeEted by there BboKVI.
contrary Revolutions. While the conspirators kept poffcfllon of i

T584.

power, the Clergy aot only recovered, butextended their privileges. The 5Cerg
As they had formerly declared the hierarchy to be unlawful, they favour the
took forhe bold measures towards exterminating the Episcopal or. confplrators
der out of the Church; and it was owing more to Adamson's dex- the King.
terity in perplexing and lengthening out the process for that pur-
pose, than to their own want of zeal, that they did not deprive,
and perhaps excommunicate all the Bishops in Scotland. When the
King recovered his liberty, things put on a very different afpeCl.
The favourbellowed upon Arran, the enemy of every thing decent
and sacred, and the rigorous prosecution of those nobles, who had
been the most zealous defenders of the Proteflant cause, were con-
fidered as sure presages of the approaching ruin of the Church.
The Clergy could not conceal their apprehensions, nor view this
impending danger in filencc. Dury, who had been reltored to his
office as one of the MiniRcrs of Edinburgh, openly applauded the
Raid of Ruthven in the pulpit, at which the King was so enraged,
that, notwithstanding some symptoms of his fubmifflon, he com-
manded him to resign his charge in the city. Mr. Andrew Mcl-
vil, being summoned before the privy council to answer for the
do&rine he had uttered in a sermon at St. Andrew's, and accused
of comparing the present grievances of the nation with those under
James IlI. and of intimating obliquely that they ought to be re-
dressed in the fame manner, thought it incumbent on him to be-
have with greater firmness. He declined the jurifdi&cion of a Civil
court, in a cause purely Ecclesiastical; the Presbytery of which he
was a member had, as he contended, the sole right to call him to
account for words spoken in the pulpit; and neither the King nor
council could judge, in the firfl initance, of the doctrine delivered
by Preachers without violatingthe immunities of the Church. This
exemption from civil jurifdition was a privilege, which the Po-
pinl Ecclesiastics, admirable judges of whatever contributed to in-
crease the lultre or power of their body, had long firuggled for,
and had at lalt obtained. If the fame plea had now been admitted,
the Protestant Clergy would have become independent on the ci-
vil magiltrate, and an order of men, extremely useful to society
while they inculcate those duties which tend to promote its hap-
piness and tranquillity, might have become no less pernicious by
teaching, without fear or controul, the most dangerous principles,
or by exciting their hearers to the molt desperate and lawless ac-
tions. James, jealous to cxccfs of his prerogative, was alarmed at

nlooK Vt. this daring encroachment on it. And as Melvil, by his learning

and zeal, had acquired the reputation and authority of head of
the party, he resolved to punish him with the rigour, which that
pre-eminence rendered necessary, arid to discourage, by a timely
severity, the revival of such a dangerous claim. Melvil, however,
avoided his rage by flying into England; and the pulpits resound-
ed with complaints that the King had extinguished the light, of
learning in the kingdom, and deprived the Church of the abler
and most faithful guardian of its liberties and discipline *.

These violent declamations of the Clergy, against the measures

of the court, were extremely acceptable to the people. The con-
fpiratorsj though driven out of the kingdom, fill possessed great
influence there. And as they had every thing to fear from the re-
fentment of a young prince, irritated by the furious counsels of
Arran, they never ceased soliciting their adherents to take arms in
their defence. Gowrie, the only person among them who had
submitted to the King, and accepted of a pardon, soon repented of
a ftep, which loft him the esteem of one party, without gaining
the confidence of the other. And, after suffering many mortifica-
tions from the King's neglec, and the haughtiness of Arran, he
was at last commanded to leave Scotland, and to reside in France,
VWhile he waited at Dundee for an opportunity to embark, he was
informed that the Earls of Angus, Mar, and the Tutor of Gla-
mis, had concerted a scheme for surprising the castle of Stirling.
In his situation, little persuasion was necessary to draw him to en-
gage in it. Under various pretexts, he put off his voyage, and lay
ready to take arms on the day fixed, by the conspirators, for the ex.
ecution of their enterprise. His lingering so long at Dundee,
without any apparent reason, awakened the suspicion of the court,
proved fatal to himself, and disappointed the success of the confpi-
racy. Colonel William Stewart surrounded the house where he
lodged with a body of soldiers, and in spite of his refinance, took
him prisoner. Two days after, Angus, Mar, and Glamis, seized'
the calle of Stirling, and erecting their standard there, published
a manifetlo declaring that they took arms for no other reason, but
to remove from the King's presence, a minion who had acquired
power by the molt unworthy actions, and who exercised it with
the moif intolerable insolence. The account of Gowrie's impri-
fonment firuck a damp upon their spirits. They imputed it to his
own treachery, and fufpeefed that as he had formerly deserted, he

Spo[lr 330. Cld. 3.304

had now betrayed them. At the fame time, a fum of money, with BooK VI.
which Elizabeth had promised to supply them, not being duly
--paid, and their friends and vassals coming in slowly, they appeared I584
irresolute and diflheartened ; and as the King, who ated with
great vigour, advanced towards them at the head of twenty thou-
sand men, they fled precipitately towards England, and with dif-
ficulty made their escape *. This rash and feeble attempt pro-
duced such effecAs, as usually follow disappointed conspiracies. It
not only hurt the cause, for which it was undertaken, but added
strength and reputation to the King; confirmed Arran's power;
and enabled them to pursue their Tneafures with more boldness,
and greater success. Gowrie was the first victim of their resent-
ment. After a very informal trial, a jury of peers found him
guilty of treason, and he was publicly beheaded at Stirling.

To humble the Church was the King's next ftep. But as it be- May 2:.
came necessary, for this purpose, to call in the aid of the legifia- A parlia-

ment held.

tive authority, a parliament was hastily summoned. And while
so many of the nobles were banifled out of the kingdom, or for-
bidden to appear in the King's presence; while Arran's haughti-
ness kept some at a distance, and intimidated others; the meeting
consisted only of those, whlo were absolutely at the devotion of the
court. In order to conceal the laws which were framing from Severelaws
the knowledge of the Clergy, the Lords of the Articles were fvorn aC,'ailt the
to secrecy. And when some of the Mliniflers, who either fufpea-
ed, or rvere informed of the danger, deputed one of their num-
ber to declare their apprchenfions to the King, he was seized at
the palace-gate, and carried to a dillant prison. Others, attempt-
ing to enter the parliament house, were refused admittancet.
And such laws were passed, as totally overturned the conltitution
and discipline of the Church. The refusing to acknowledge theju-
rifdition of the privy council ; the pretending an exemption May 22.
from the authority of the civil courts ; the attempting to diminifhl
the rights and privileges of any of the three cflates in parliament,
were declared to be high treason. The holding Assemblies, whe-
ther Civil, or Ecclcfiaflical, without the King's permillion or ap-
pointment; the uttering, either privately, or publicly, in sermons,
or in declamations, any false and scandalous reports againil the
King, his anceflors, or niiiiflers, were pronounced capital crimes 4.

VWhen thele laws were publitllld at the cross of IEdinburglh
according to the ancient cuntom, Mr. Robert Pont, Minillcr of St.

' Ionl e's lift. of l!Holf of(,Ir,,ll . 379. Spots. 33).
j C(:ld. .3 3(5, t P;u. 8 Jac. -I,

Boo- VI. Cuthberts, and one of the Lords of Seflion, solemnly protested

againlt them, in the name of his brethren, because they had heen
passed without the knowledge or consent of the Church. Ever
since the Reformation, the pulpits and eclefialtical judicatories
had both been eileemed sacred. In the former, the Clergy had
been accustomed to censure, and admonish, with unbounded liber-
ty. In the latter, they exercised an uncountrouled and indepen-
dent jurifdi&ion. The blow was now aimed at both these privi-
leges. These new statutes would have rendered church men as
inconsiderable, as they were indigent; and as the avarice of the
nobles had firipped them of the wealth, the King's ambition was
about to deprive them of the power which once belonged to their
order. No wonder the alarm was universal, and the complaints
loud. All the Ministers of Edinburgh forsook their charge, and
fled into England, The mofl eminent Clergymen, throughout
the kingdom, imitated their example. Desolation and aftonith-
ment appeared in every part of the Scottish Church; the people
bewailed the loss of Paflors, whom they esteemed; and full of
conilernation, at an event so unexpe&ed, openly exprefied their
rage againit Arran, and began to iufpea the King himself to be
an enemy to the Reformed Religion *.

z ND OF VOLtUE FIRST.
