'I~~~~~~~·~
-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~uL~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ IIl

Puó~hai~rb j 4ss~S'a~~~~o;s
~U md

THE
HISTORY

OF
AMERICA.

k

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.
PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH,

HISTORIOGRAPHER TO 1HS MAJESTY

FOR SCOTLAND,
AND MEMBER OF THE ROYAL ACADEMY OP

HISTORY AT MADRID.

THE EIGHTH EDITION,
In which ir included the Poflhumous Volumt,

CONTAINING

THE HISTORY OF VIRGINIA, TO THE YEAR 1688;
AND OF NEW ENGLAND, TO THE YEAR 1652.

IN THREE VOLUMES.

VOL. I.

LO N DO N:

Printed by .4 Stralan, Printers-S:reet,
FOR T. CADEI.L JUN. AND W. DAV1ES, SBTAND,

AND E. BALFOUR, EDINBUKGH.

'SoO.

# PREFACE.

PREFACE.
Is fulfilling the engagement which I had come

under to the Public with refpec to the His-

tory of America, it was my intention not to have
published any part of the work until the whole
was completed. The present state of the British
colonies has induced me to alter that resolution.
\While they are engaged in civil war with Great
Britain, inquiries and speculations concerning
their ancient forms of policy and laws, which
exist no longer, cannot be-interefting. The at-
tention and expeacation of mankind are now
turned towards their future condition. In what-
ever manner this unhappy contest may terminate,
a new order of things must arise in North Ame-
rica, and its affairs will assume another aspet. I
wait, with the solicitude of a good citizen, until
the ferment subside, and regular government be
re-established, and then I flall return to this part
of my work, in which I had made some progress.
That, together with the history of Portuguese
America, and of the settlements made by the fe-
veral nations of Europe in the Weft India islands,
will complete my plan.

The three volumes which I now publish, con.
tain an account of the discovery of the New
World. and of the progress of the Spanish arms
and colonies there. This is not only the molt
splendid portion of the American story, but so
much detached, as, by itself, to form a perfea
whole, remarkable for the unity of the subjet.
As the principles and maxims of the Spaniards

A3 in

in planting colonies, which have been adopted in
some measure by every nation, are unfolded in
this part of my work; it will serve as a proper
introduction to the history of all the European
eftablifhmrents in America, and convey such in-
formation concerning this important article of
policy, as may be deemed no less interesting than
curious.

In defcibing the atchievements and inftitu.

tions of the Spaniards in the New World, I have
departed in many instances from the accounts of
preceding hifsorians, and have often related faas
which seem to have been unknown to them. It
is a duty I owe the Public to mention the sources
from which I have derived such intelligence, as
justifies me either in placing tranfafions in a new
light, or in forming any new opinion with refpe&
to their causes and effecs. This duty I perform
with greater fatisfation, as it will afford an op.
porturity of expressing my gratitude to those be.
nefzcors, who have honoured me with their
countenance and aid in my researches.

As it was from Spain that I had to expet the

mot irrpcrtant infi.rmation, with regard to this
part of my work, I confidered it as a very for.
tunate circumflance for me, when lord Gran.
tham, to whom I had the honour of being per.
ionallv known, and with whose liberality of fen.
timent, and disposition to oblige, 1 was well ac
quainted, was appointed ambassador to the court
of Madrid. Upon applying to him, I met witE
such a reception as satisfied me that his endea.
vours would be employed in the most propel
iranner, in order to obtain the gratification o
my wishes; and I am perfecly infible, thal

what

what progress I have made in my inquiries among
the Spaniards, ought to be ascribed chiefly to
their knowing how much his lordship interested
himself in my success.

But did I owe nothing more to lord Gran-

tham, than the advantages which I have derived
from his attention in engaging Mr. Waddilove,
the chaplain of his embassy, to take the conduEt
of my literary inquiries in Spain, the obligations
I lie under to him would be very great. During
five years, that gentleman has carried on re-
searches for my behoof, with such activity, per-
severance, and knowledge of the subjed, to which
his attention was turned, as have filled me with
no less astonishment than fatisfaEion. He pro-
cured for me the greater part of the Spanish
books, which I have consulted; and as many of
them were printed early in the sixteenth century,
and are become extremely rare, the collecing of
these was such an occupation, as, alone, required
much time and assiduity. To his friendly atten-
tion I am indebted for copies of several valuable
manuscripts, containing fats and details which I
might have searched for in vain, in works that have
been made public. Encouraged by the inviting
good-will with which Mr. Waddilove conferred
his favours, I transmitted to him a set of queries,
with refpeEt both to the customs and policy of
the native Americans, and the nature of several
institutions in the Spanish settlements, framed in
such a manner, that a Spaniard might answer
them, without disclosing any thing that was im-
proper to be communicated to a foreigner. He
translated these into Spanish, and obtained from
various persons who had resided in molt of the

Spanish

Spaniih colonies, such replies as have afforded
me much infsrudion.

Notwithstanding those peculiar advantages

with which my inquiries were carried on in
Spain, it is with regret I am obliged to add,
that their success must be ascribed to the benefi-
cence of individuals, not to any communication
by public authority. By a single arrangement
of Philip II. the records of the Spanish monarchy
are deposited in the Archivo of Simancas, near
Valladolid, at the distance of a hundred and
twenty miles from the feat of government, and
the supreme courts of jultice. The papers re-
lative to America, and chiefly to that early pe-
riod of its history, towards which my attention
was directed, are so numerous, that they alone,
according to one account, fill the largest apart-
ment in the Archivo; and according to another,
they compose eight hundred and feventy-three
large bundles. Conscious of pofeffing, in some
degree, the industry which belongs to an hibto-
rian, the profpeEt of such a treasure excited my
most ardent curiosity. But the profpet of it, is
all that I have enjoyed. Spain, with an excess
of caution, has uniformly thrown a veil over her
tranfaaions in America From strangers they
are concealed with peculiar solicitude. Even
to her own fubjees the Archivo of Simancas is
not opened ithout a particular order from the
crown; and after obtaining that, papers cannot
be copied, without paying fees of office so ex-
orbitant, that the expence exceeds what it would
be proper to bestow, when the gratification of
literary curiosity is the only objec. It is to be
hoped, that the Spaniards will at lait discover

this

his system of concealment to be no less impolitic
han illiberal. From what I have experienced
n the course of my inquiries, I am satisfied, that
ipon a more minute scrutiny into their early ope-
ations in the New World, however reprehensible
he actions of individuals may appear, the con-
luct of the nation will be placed in a more fa-
rourable light.

In other parts of Europe very different fen-
iments prevail. Having searched, without fuc-
ess, in Spain, for a letter of Cortes to Charles V.
ivritten soon after he landed in the Mexican em-
pire, which has not hitherto been published; it
occurred to me, that as the emperor was setting
out for Germany at the time when the messen-
gers from Cortes arrived in Europe, the letter
with which they were intruded might poflibly be
preserved in the Imperial library of Vienna. I
communicated this idea to fir Robert Murray
Keith, with whom I have long had the honour
to live in friendship, and I had soon the pleasure
to learn that upon his application, her Imperial
maiefty had been graciously pleased to issue an
order, that not only a copy of that letter, (if it
were found,) but of any other papers in the li-
bran, which could throw light upon the History
of America, should be transmitted to me. The
etter from Cortes is not in the Imperial library,
but an authentic copy, attested by a notary, of
the letter written by the magistrates of the co-
ony planted by him at Vera Cruz, which I have
mentioned, vol ii. p. 141, having been found,
it was transcribed and sent to me. As this letter
is no less curious, and as little known as that
which was the objet of my inquiries, I have

given

given some account, in its proper place, of wh,.
is most worthy of notice in it. Together witi
it, I received a copy of a letter from Corti,
containing a long account of his expedition to
Honduras, with refpet to which, I did no
think it necessary to enter into any particula
detail; and likewise those curious Mexican paint
ings, which I have defcnbed, vol. iii. p. 23.

My inquiries at St. Petersburg were carried oa

with equal facility and success. In examining
into the nearest communication between our con.
tinent and that of America, it became of confe
quence to obtain authentic information concert,
ing the discoveries of the Ruffians in their navi
gation from Kamchatka towards the coast o
America. Accurate relations of their first voy
age, in 1741, have been published by Mull
and Gmelin. Several foreign authors have enter
tained an opinion, that the court of Russia ftudi
oufly conceals the progress which has been mad.
by more recent navigators, and suffers the Publil
to be amused with false accounts of their route
Such conduc appeared to me unsuitable to thofi
liberal sentiments, and that patronage of science
for which the present sovereign of Russia is emi
nent; nor could I discern any political reason
that might render it improper to apply for in
formation concerning the late attempts of th,
Ruffians to open a communication between Afi;
and America. My ingenious countryman, Dr
Rogerfon, first physician to the empress, pre
sented my request to her Imperial majesty, whb
not only disclaimed any idea of concealment, bu
instantly ordered the journal of captain Krenit
zin, who condueted the only voyage of discover

ma.'

made by public authority since the year 1741, to
be translated, and his original chart to be copied
for my use. By consulting them, I have been
enabled to give a more accurate view of the pro-
grefs and extent of the Ruffian discoveries, than
ha; hitherto been communicated to the Public.

From other quarters I have received inform-

ation of great utility and importance. M. le
chevalier de Pinto, the minister from Portugal
to the court of Great Britain, who commanded
for several years at Matagroffo, a settlement of
the Portuguese in the interior part of Brazil,
where the Indians are numerous, and their ori-
ginal manners little altered by intercourse with
Europeans, was pleased to fend me very full an-
fwers to some queries concerning the character
and institutions of the natives of America, which
Lis polite reception of an application made to
him in my name, encouraged me to piopofe.
Tllefc fatificd me, that he had contemplated
ivith a discerning attention the curious objects
,hiclh his situation presented to his view, and I
have often followed him as one of my beft-in-
flructed guides.

M . Suard, to whose elegant translation of the

History of the Reign of Charles V. I owe the
favourable reception of that work on the conti-
rent, procured me answers to the fame queries
from M. de Bougainville, who had opportunities
cf observing the Indians both of North and South
America, and from M. Godin le Jeune, who re-
fided fifteen years among the Indians in Quito,
and twenty years in Cayenne. The latter are
more valuable from having been examined by
Ml. de la Condamine, who, a few weeks before

his

his death, made some Short additions to them
which may be coufidered as the last effort of that
attention to science which occupied a long life.

My inquiries were not confined to one region

in America. Governor Hutchinson took the
trouble of recommending the consideration of
my queries to Mr. Hawley and Mr. Brainerd,
two protestant missionaries, employed among tht
Indians of the Five Nations, who favoured mc
with answers, which discover a considerable
knowledge of the people whose customs the,
describe. From William Smith, efq. the inge.
nious hiflorian of New York, I received some
useful information. When I enter upon the Hi.
tory of our Colonie3 in North America, I fhal
have occasion to acknowledge how much I har
been indebted to many other gentlemen of that
country.

From the valuable Colletion of Voyages made

by Alexander Dalrymple, efq. with whose at.
tention to the History of Navigation and Disco
very the Public is well acquainted, I have re.
ceived some very rare books, particularly two
large volumes of Memorials, partly manuscript,
and partly in print, which were presented to the
court of Spain during the reigns of Philip IlI.
and Philip IV. From these I have learned many
curious particulars with refpet to the interior
state of the Spanish colonies, and the various
schemes formed for their improvement. As thi
Colle&ion of Memorials formerly belonged to
the Colbert library, I have quoted them by
that title.

All those books and manuscripts I have con.
fulted with that attention which the refpe& du;

froE

from an author to the Public required; and by
minute references to them, I have endeavoured
to authenticate whatever I relate. The longer
I reflect on the nature of historical composition,
the more I am convinced that this scrupulous ac-
curacy is necessary. The historian who records
the events of his own time, is credited in pro-
portion to the opinion which the Public enter-
tains with refpea to his means of information
and his veracity. He who delineates the tranf-
afions of a remote period, has no title to claim
aflent, unless he produces evidence in proof of
his assertions. Without this, he may write an
amusing tale, but cannot be said to have com-
posed an authentic history. In those sentiments
I have been confirmed by the opinion of an
author , whom his industry, erudition, and dif-
cernment have deservedly placed in high rank
among the most eminent historians of the age.
Emboldened by a hint from him, I have pub-
lifhed a catalogue of the Spanish books which I
have consulted. This praEice was frequent in
the lalt century, and was confidered as an evi-
dence of laudable industry in an author; in the
present, it may, perhaps, be deemed the effe&
of ostentation; but as many of these books are
unknown in Great Britain, I could not other-
wife have referred to them as authorities, with-
out encumbering the page with an insertion of
their full titles. To any person who may choose
to follow me in this path of inquiry, the cata-
logue must be very useful.

bMy readers will observe, that in mentioning
furns of money, I have uniformly followed the

6 Mr. Gibbon.
VOL. 1. B Spaniih

Spaniih method of computing by pesos. In
America, the peso fuerte, or duro, is the only
one known, and that is always meant when any
fum imported from America is mentioned The
peso fuerte, as well as other coins, has varied in
its numerarv value; but I have been advised,
without attending to such minute variations, to
confider it as equal to four ihillings and sixpence
of ou. money. It is to be remembered, how-
ever, that in the sixteenth centurv, the effe&ive
value of a peso, i. c. the quantity of labour which
it represented, or of goods which it would pur-
chafe, was five or fix times as much as at present.

N. B. Since thi. edition was put into the press,

a Hil1orv of Mexi'o, in two volumes in quarto,
trrnfiated from the Italian of the Abb6 D. Fran-
cef-o Saverio Clavigcro, has been published.
From a pcrfon, who is a native of New Spain,
who has resided forty years in that country, and
who is acquainted with the Mexican language,
it was natural to expet much new information.
Upon perusing his work, however, I find that
it contains hardly ~nv addition to the ancient
Hiflory of the Mexican empire, as related by
Acofta and Herrera, but what is derived from
the improbable narratives and fanciful coujec-
tures of Torquemada and Boturini. Having
copied their splendid descriptions of the high
slate of civilization in the blexican empire, M.
Clavigero, in the abundance of his zeal for the
honour of his native country, charges me with
having mistaken some points, and with having
misrepresentcd others, in the Hitfory of it.

X51hc'R

When an author is conscious of having exerted
tnduftry in research and impartiality in decision,
he may, without presumption, claim what praise
is due to these qualities, and he cannot be in-
sensible to any accusation that tends to weaken
the force of his claim. A feeling of this kind
has induced me to examine such ftri&ures of
M. Clavigero on my History of America as me-
rited any attention, especially as these are made
by one, who seemed to possess the means of ob-
taining accurate information; and to shew that
the greater part of them is destitute of any just
foundation. This I have done in notes upon
the passages in my History, which gave rife to
his criticisms.
COLLZGZ of EoDISBUGR,

Alarch Ift, 1x8.

B 2

# CONTENTS. VOLUME THE FIRST.

CONTENTS.
VOLUME THE FIRST.

BOOK I.

p»OGEESs of navigation among the ancients.-View of

their discoveries as preparatory to those of the moderns--
Imperfe&ion of ancient navigation and geography-Doc-
trine of the zones-Farther discoveries checked by the
irruption of barbarous nations-Geographical knowledge
still preserved in the East, and among the Arabians-Re-
vival of commerce and navigation in Europe-favoured by
the Croifades-extended by travellers into the Eaft-pro-
moted by the invention of the mariner's compafs-Firit
regular plan of discovery formed by Portugal-State of
that kingdom-Schemes of prince Henry-Early attempts
feeble-Progrefs along the western coast of Africa-Hopes
of discovering a new route to the East Indies-Attempts
to accompiili this-Profpeas of success. Pae z

BOOK II.

Birth and education of Columbus-acquires naval fiill in the

service of Portugal-conceives hopes of reaching the Eait
Indies by holding a westerly courfe-his fyitem founded on
the ideas of the ancients, and knowledge of their naviga-
tion-and on the discoveries of the Portuguefe-His nego-
tiations with different courts-Obftacles which he had to
surmount in Spain-Voyage of difcovery-difficulties-
fuccefs-return to Spain-Aftonirihment of mankind on
this discovery of a new world-Papal grant of it-Second
ooyage-Colony fettled-Farther difccveries-War with
the Indians-Firft tax imposed on them-Third voyage-
He discovers the continent-State of the Spanifl colony-
F.rors in the first system of colonizing-Voyage of the
Portuguese to the East Indies by the Cape of Good Hope
-I-Ltlts of this--Difcoveries made by private adven-

B 3 twern

# VOLUME THE SECOND.

tarerT in the new world-Name of America given to it-
Machinations against Columbus-Difgraced and sent in
chains to Europe-Fourth voyage of Columbus-His dif.
coveries-difatlers-death. Page 65

BOOK III.
State of the colony in Hifoaniola-New war with the Indian5

-Cruelty of the Spaniards-Fatal regulations concerning
the condition of the Indians-Diminution of that people-
Discoveries and fettlenents-Firft colony planted on the
conrinent-Conque. of Cuba-Difcovery of Florida-of
the South Sea-Great expectations raised by this-Caufes
of disappointment with refpe& to there for some time-
Controversy concerning the treatment of the Indians-
Contrary decfions-Zeal of the ecclefiatics, particularly
of Las Cafas-Singular proceedings of Ximenes-Negroes
imported into America-Las Casas' idea of a new colony
-?ermitted to attempt it-unfliccefsful-Difcoveries to-
wards the Weft-Yucatan-Campeachy-New Spain-
Preparations for invading it. '94

BOOK IV.
View of America when first discovered, and of the manners

and policy of itl mot uncivilized inhabitants-Vaft er-
tent of America-Grandeur of the objects it presents to
view-Its mountain-river;-lakslts form favourable
to commerc--Temperature-predominance of cold-
Cause of this-uncultivated-unwholefome-irs animals
-foil-Inquiry how America was peopled-various theo-
ries-what appeirs moR probable-Condition and charac-
ter of the Ame icans-All, the Mexicans and Peruvians
excepted, in the state of favages-Inquiry confined to the
uncivilized tribes-Difficulty of obtaining information-
various causes of this--Methd observed in the inquiry-
I The bodily constitution of the Americans confidered-
IL The qualities of their mindr-III. Their domneftic Ifate.

271
VOLUME THE SECOND.

B 0 OK IV. concluded.
IV. Their political fiate and inflitudosns-V. The;r fyflem

of war and public fecurity-Vl. The arts with which

they

# VOLUME THE THIRD.

they were acquainted-VII. Their religious ideas and
inftitutions-V11I. Such singular and detached cuf-
toms as are not reducible to any of the former heads-
-IX. General review and estimate of their virtues and
defects. Page

BOOK V.
HifRory of the conquest of New Spain, by Cortes. 107

BOOK VI.

History of the conquest of Peru, by Pizarro-and of the dif.

fenfions and civil wars of the Spaniards in that country-
origin-progrefs---and efects of these. 271

VOLUME THE THIRD.

BOOK VII.

V'ew of the intitutions and manners of the Mexicans and

Peruvians-C-iviled stares in comp3rifon of other Ameri-
cans-Recent otigin of the Mexicans-Facts which prove
their prog-efs in civilization-View of their policy in its
ailious branches-of their arts-Fats which indicate a
small prcgrefs in civilization-What opinicn Ihould be
formed ai i comparing those contradicory fats-Genius of
their religion -Peruvian monarchy more ancient-Its po-
licy founded on re!igion-Singular effects of this-Pecu-
liar f'ate of property among the Peruvians-Their public
works and arts-roads-bridges-buildings--Their un-
warlike f;irit-View of other dominions of Spain in Ame-
rica-Cinaloa and Sonora-California-Yucataa and Hon.
dura:-Ch li-T'ucurnan-Kingdom of Tierra Firme-
New Kingdm of Granada.

BOOK VIII.

View of the ireerior government, commerce, &c. of the

Spani(h colnier-Depopu'ation of America--firs effect
er Lhcir fettir.ments--noi the consequence of any fyflem of

policy

pollicv-nor to be imputed to religion-Number of Indians
still rem-ining-Fundamental maxims on which the
Soanifh fftern of colonization is founded-Condi-
tion of d;fferent orders of men in their colonies-Cba-
retones-Creoles-Negroea- ndians--Ecc lefiaical slate
and poiicy-Characer of secular and regular clergy-
Small prngrefs of Chritlianity among the natives-Mines
chief object of their attention-Mode of working these
-their produce-Effecs of eocouraging this species of
induftry-Other com-nm itis of Spaniih America-Firft
effets of th s new commerce with America on Spain-
Why the Spanilh colonies have not been as beneficial to
the parent-ftate as thole of other natipns-Errors in the
Spanish system of regulating this commerce-confined to
one port-carried on by annual fleets-Contraband trade
-Decline of Spain bth in population and wealth-Re-
med:es propofed-View of the wife regulati-ns of the
B urbon princes-A new and more liberal fvftem intro.
duced-Beneficial effecs of this-Probable confequencea
-Trade betveen New Spain and the Philippines-Re.
venur of Spain fron America-whence it arifes-to what
it amount. Page Sg

BOOK IX.

The History of Virginia to the year i688.
Spirit of adventure awakened in England by Co:,imbus's

difcoveries-Checked by unlkilfulnefs in navigation-
Expedition from Brifiol under the command of Cabot-
who discovers Newfoundland, and fails .long the coast
to Virginia-Expedition to South America under the
command of Sebattian Cabot-Unfuccefsful attempts to
discover a north-west passage to India-Sir Hugh Wil-
loughby fails in search of a north-eatl paffage-Wil-
loughby parifhes-One of his ffips anchor at Archangel
-The captain visits Mofcow-Trade opened with Ruflia
.-Commtanication with India by land-Expedition to the
coast of Africa-Frobi&fer makes three attempts to dif-
cover the north-west paffage-Sir Francis Drake £fils
round the world-Enthufiafm of difcovery-Firft project
of a colony in North America--Chater granted by queen

Elizabeth-

Elizabeth-Firft expedition fails-The plan resumed by
Ralegh-Difcovery of Virginia-Colony eftabliihed there
by fir Richard Greenville-In danger of periihing by
famine, returns to Eng:and-Ufe of tobacco introduced in
England-Ralegh's second attempt to fettle a colony in
Virginia-Colony periLhes by faminee-Ralegh abandons
the design of fettlig a colony in Virginia-Dire& course
from England to North America first attempted by Gof-
nold-Confequences of Gofnold's voyage-Hakluyt im-
proves the commerciai and naval skill of the age-James
divides the coast of America into two parts-and grants
charters to two companies-Colonies of Virginia and
New England-Newport fails for Virginia-Difcovers
the Chefareak-Sails up James river-Founds James
Town-Suffers from scarcity and the unhealthiness of
the climate-Smith called to the command-He is taken
prisoner by the Indians-Smith urndertaKes a survey of
the country-A new charter granted-Lord Delawase
appointed governor-Gates and Summer appointed to
command till lord Delaware's arrival-Their ship strand-
ed on the coast of B-rmuda-The colony reduced by
famn ne-Lord Delaware arrives-His wife adminifiration
-His health obliges him to return to England-Sir
'I bomas Dale appointed governor-New charter issued-
I reaty with the natives-Rolfe marries the daughter of
an Iroian chief-Land in Virg:nia firif becomes property
--Culture of t bacro introduced--Y'ung women emi-
g-ate from Ergl.nd to Virginia-Firft general assembly
of reprefentatves-General mafacre of the English
p'ar.ned by the Indians-Blcody war with the Indian--
Comcany at bome sivided by faaions-Company required
to surrender its charter, and refufes-Diffolution of the
comFany -Tempo:ary courcil appointed for the govern-
ment of Virginia-Acceffion of Charles I.-His arbi-
trary gnvernment of the colony-Colonilts seize on
Harvev tr eir governor, apd fend him prisoner to England
~Pe :s relcafed by the king, and reinstated in his
goverr.men:-Sir W. l-erkeley appointed governor-
Virrinia fl-urifies under the new government-Parlia-
rr.ent rrakes war on Virginia, vhich is forced toacknow-
ledge the commonsealth-Refiraints on the colony-
The colonists diflatisfied-Are the firlt to acknow;edge
Charles 11.-Infurrecfion in Virginia headec by N. Baton

-who

--who forces Sir W. Berkeley and the council to fly-
Death of Bacon terminates the rebellion-State of tnr
colony at the revolution in 168S. Page 595

BOOK X.

The H;Rory of New England to the year 1652.
First attempts to fettleon the northern coaft-Smith furveyr

that coaff, and calls it New England-Religious disputes
give rife to the New England colony-R-iigious perfecutido
by Mary-Queen Elizabeth-Puritans-- ntokrant spirit of
the church-Entirc reparation of the Puritans from the
chorch-Brownifts--rake refuge in Holland-Rernev
from thence to America-Firfi attempt to fettlein Mafia.
chufets Bay--Sttle at New Plymouth-- Plan ofgovernment
-Grand council of Plymouth appointed-Proje& of a new
colony-Charter to the new colony of Massachusets Bay-
Settlement in consequence of this charter-Begin with efta
biiing a church-Intolerance of the new church-Emi
gra:ions from Eng'and increased by the intolerance of
Laud-Charter of the company transferred to the coloni:ts
-Colony extended-None but members of the church
acmitted as fremen--lndian territories depopulated by
the fmall-pox-Settlements of the colonists extenced-
Freemen meet by reprefentativcs-Extent of political
libeny assumed by the affembl)-New fettlers-Antino-
mian fec-Their dofrunme condemned by a genezal
yvnod-The [feares fettle in Providence and Rhode
flland-Colony of Conneaicut-of New Hampflire and
Main-War with the Pequ, d tribes-Defeat of the
lodians--Cruecties exercifid against the Indians-Eni-
gr2tiors from England-Prohibited by royal proclamatioa
-Colony of Maffichufets Bay lued at law, and found to
have forfdited its r ghts-Exemption from certain duties
granted to the colonies-Corfederacy of the New Eng-
land fta'e--Right of coining aflumed by the colonifis-
Cromwcll parronifcs the New England colonies-Propofes
to transport the colonifls to Jamaica-Colonifts decline
accepting this offer. 288

# A CATALOGUE OF Spanish Books and Manuscripts.

A
CATALOGUE

O F
Spanish Books and Manuscripts.

A
ACA z ET de Biscay, Relation des Voyages dans la Riviere

de ia Pl-,a, & de la par Terre au Perou. Exft. Recueif

de Thevcnor, Part IV.

- - A Voyage up the River de la Plata, and thence

by Land to Peru, Svo. London, 1698.

Acofta (P. jos. de) Hiftoria Natural y Moral de las Indias,
4to. lMarid, 159c.

--- (Joseph de) Hi(toire Naturelle & Moral des Indes,
tant Orientales qu' Occidentales, Svo. Paris, 16oo.

- Novi Orbis Hiltoria Naturalis & Moralis.
Ext. in Collet. Theod. de Bry, Pars IX.

-- De Natura Novi Orbis, Libri duo, & de pro-
curanda Indorum Salute, Libri sex, Salmant. 8vo. 589.

-- --- (Chriflov.) Tratado da las Drogas y Mede-

cinas de las Ind.,s Occidentales, con sus Plantas Dibuxadas al
vive, 40o. Burgos, 1578.

Acugna (P. Chrilttph.) Relation de la Riviere des Ama-

zones, inmo. Tur. ii. Paris, 1682.

Acugna's Relation of the gTear River of the Amazons in
South America, Svo. Lond. 1698.

Alarchon (Fern.) Navi:atione aScoprere ilRegno di fetta
Citta. Ramufio, 111. 363.

Albuquerque Coello (Duarte de) Memorial de Artes de

la Guerra del Brasil, 4to. Mad. 1634.

Alc farado (Franc.) An Hltorical Relation of the Dif-
covery of the Ille of Madeira, 4to. Lond. 1675.

Aledo

Aliced y Herrera (D. Dionyfio de) Avifo Hiforico-Pn

litico-Geografico, con las Noticis mas particulares, del Pert
Tierra Firm-, Chi.i, y neuvo Reyno de Granada, 4to. Mad
1740.

- Compendi Hitcr'co de la Provincia y Puerto d(
Gua)aquil, 4to. Mad. 1741

Mem-rial fobre difcrenres Puntos tocantes al eftad
de la Real haziend3, y del Co,-ne.cio, &c- en s35 Indias, fol

Ald3may Guevara (D. Jos. Auguftin de) Arde dela Lea.
gua M.leicl3n, Izmo. M:exico, 1754.

Alvatl3di (Pedro ade Dos Relacio..es a Hern. Core

Refer-ndole (us Expediciones y Conquiftas en varias Pro.
v nias de N. Efparna. Exit. Barcia Hiltoriad. Primit.
tom. i.

- Letere due, &c. Exi. Rarnuf. III. zr6.

Apar:cio y Leon ;D. Lorenzo de) D;fcurfo Hiftorico.

Polit'.o del Hjfpital San Lazaro de Lin;a, Svo. Lim.
1761.
' Aranzels Reales de los Minilroi de la Real Audienciade
N. Efpagna, fol. Mexica, 1727.

Argenfola (Bartolome Leonardo de) Conquifta de las Iflas
Maltcs, s-i. Mad. i609.

Anales .c Arjgon, f.l. Saragoca, 1630.

Arguello (Eman.) Sectum Confeliuonis, iszm. Mer.

1703.

Arriago (P. Pabli Jos. de) Extirpacion de la Idolatria de
Peru, 4o. Lima, r6zr.

Avendagno (Did.c-) Thesaurus Indicus, ceu generalis

Infirucuor pro Reginine ('onfcientiie, in ijs quae ad Indiaz
fpeAanr, fol. 2 vol . Antwerp, lt6o.

Aznar (De Bern. Frin.) Difcurfo rocante a la real hazi.
enda y adminiflracion de elLa, 4to.

B

Bandini (Angelo Maria) Via e Lettere di Armergo Vef-
pucci, ato.- l-i'nze, £745.

Bare a (D And. Gonzal.) Hi.iribd')res Primitivos de las
Inlias Occirientales, flI. 3 vois. Mad. 1749.

Barco-Ccjitinera (D. Mariln de) Argentina y Conqu;ita

dei Rio de laP Pla Pocma. ExL. Barcia Hiitoriad. Pri-
mit. 111.

Barros

Barros (Joo de) Decadas de Asia, foL . vols. Lilboa,

Belleflro5 (D. Thomas de) Ordenanzas del Peru, fol. a
rols. Lima, 1685.

Beltan (P- F. Pedro) Arte de el Idioma Maya reducido
iucintas reglas, y Semilexicon, 4r0. Mex. 1746.
Benzo (Hieron.) Novi Orbis Hiftorxe-De Bry America,
Part IV. V. VI.

Betancurt y Figueroa (Don Luis) Derecho de las Iglefias
Metropolitanas de las Indias, 4ro. Mad 1637.

Blanco (F. Matias Ruiz) Conversion de Piritu de Indios

Cumanago'os y otros, izmo. Mad. 1690.

Boturini Benaduci (Lorenzo) Idea de una noeva Hiftoria

general de la America Septentrional, fundada fobre material
cpiofa de Figuras, Symbolas CaraCeres, Cantarcs y Manu-
(critos de Autores Indios, 4to. Mad. 1746.

Eotello de Moraes y Varconcellos (D. Francisco de) El

Nuevo Mundo Poema Heroyco, 4to. Barcelona, 1701.

Botero Benes (Juan) Description de Todas las Provincias,

Reynus, y Ciudadesdel Mundo, 4to. Girona, 1748.

Brietius (Phil.) Paralela Geographiae Veteris & Nove,
4to. Paris, 1648.

C

Cabeza de Baca (Alvar. Nugnez) Relacion de los Nau-
fragios. Exft. Barcia Hist Prim. tom. i.

- Examen Apologetico dela Hifrorica

Narration de los Naufrajios. Exft. Barcia Hist. Prim.
tom i.

- Commentarios de lo fuccedido duarante

fu gubierno del Rio de la Plata. Exft. ibid.

Cabo de Vacca Relatione de. Exft. Ramus III. 310o.
Cabota (Sebaft.) Navigaziotle de. Exft. Ramus. II.

211.

Cadamuftus (Aloyfius) Navigatio ad Terras incognitas.

Eft. Nov. Orb. Grynei, p. 1.

Calancha (F. Anton. de la) Cronica moralizada del Orden

de San Auguftin en el Peru, fol. Barcelona, 1638.

California-Diario Hiftorico de los Viages de Mar y Ticrra

hechos en 1768, al Norte de California di orden del Marques
ce Croix Vi-rev de Nueva Elpagna, &c. MS.
VOL. , c Calle

Calle (Juan Diaz de h) Memorial Informatorio de lo p.

a fu Mageflad Provien de la Nueva Efpagna y Peru, 4q,
1645.

Campomanes (D. Pedro Rodrig.) Antiguedad Maritima d

la Republica de Cartago, con el Periplo de fu general Hanns-
traducido e illuftrao, 4to. Mad. 1756.

-- Difcurfo fobre el fomento de la IndufRria p-.
pular, Svo. Mad 1774.

-Difcrfo fobre la Educacion popular de 1a

Artefanos, Svo. 5 vol. Mad 1775, &c.

Caracas-Real Cedula de Fundacion de la real Compagn:a
Guipufcoana de Caracas, lzmo. Mad. 1765.

Caravantes (Fr. Lopez de) Relacion de las Provincias quc

ticne cl Govierno del Peru, los Officios que en el fe Provien,
y la Hacienda que alli tiene fu Mageftad, lo que fe Gafta cc
ella y le queda Libre, &c. &c. Decicado al Marques ce
Santos Claros, Agno, de x611. MS.

Cardenas y Cano (Gabr.) Enfayo Cronologico para la His.

toria general de la Florida, fol. Mad. 1733.

Carranzana (D. GonSales) A Geographical Description of

the Coafls, &c. of the Spanil Weft Indies, 8vo. Lond.
1740-

Casas (Bart. de las) Breviffima Relacion de la Deftruycini

de las Indias, 4to. 1 52.

- (Bart. de las) Narratio Iconibus illuf'rata per Theod.
de Bry. 4to. Oppent. 1614.

- (Bart. de las) An Account of the first Voyages and

Discoverics of the Spaniards in America, 8vo. Lond.

1693. Caffani (P. Joseph) Hiftoria de la Provincia de Compagnis
de Jesus del Nuevo Reyno de Granada, fol. Mad. 1741.

Caftanheda (Fern. Lop. de) Hiftoria do Defcobrimento &

Conquifta de India pelos Portugueses, fol. z vol. Lifbor,
1552.

Caftellanos (Juan de) Primera y Secunda de las Elegial
de Varones Illufires de Indias, 4to. 2 vol. Mad. i589.

Castillo (Bernal Dias del) Hiftoria Verdadera de la .Co.
quifta de Nueva Efpagna, fol. Mad. 1632.

Castro, Figueroa y Salazar (D. Pedro de) Relacion di fc

ancimiento y fervicios, Izmo.

Cavallero (D. Jos. Garcia) Brieve Cotejo y Valance de las

pefas y Med:das di varias Nacioncs, reducidas a las que Corren
ea Caltijl, 4to. Mad. 1731.

Cepeda

Cepeda (D. Fern.) Relacion Universal del Sitio en que
:fti fundada la Ciudad de Mexico, fol. 1637.
Cieca de Leon (Pedro de) Chronica del Peru, fol. Sevill.

1533- Cineros (Diego) Sido, Naturaleza y Propriedades de la
Ciu-ad de Mexico, 4to. Mexico, 161S.

Clemente (P. Claudio) Tablas Chronologicas, en que

ccntienen los Sucefos Ecclefiafticos y Seculares de Indias,
zo. VaL 1689.
Cogullado (P. Fr. Diego Lopez) Hiftoria de Yucatan, fol.

t, ad. 1688.

Collecaa dos Brives Pontficos e Leyes Regias que forao

Expedidos y Publicadas defde o Anno 1741, fobre a la Li-
berdada des Peffoas bene e Commercio dos Indos de Brefil.

Colleccion General de las Providencias halla aqui tomadas

par el Gobierno fobre el Eftragnimento, y Occupacion de
Temporalidades de los Regulaies de la Compagnia, de Es-
pgna, Indias, &c. Partes IV. 4t0. Mad. 1767.

Colon (D. Fernando) La Hiftoria del Almirante, D.

Chrflloval Colon. Exft. Barcia Hist. Prim. 1. i.

Columbus (Christ.) Navigatio qua multas Regiones

lacaenus incognitas invenit. Exft. Nov. Orb. Grynaei,
p. 90.

--- (Ferd.) Life and Ations of his Father Ad-

niral Christoph. Columbus. Exft. Churchill's Voyages,

ll. 479. Compagnia Real de Comercio para las Iflas de Sto. Do-
mingo, Puerto-rico y la Margarita, Izmo.

Compendio General de las Contribuciones y gattos que

occafionan todos los effetos, frutos, caudales, &c. que tra-
fican entre los reynos de Castilla y America, 4to.

Concilios Provinciales Primero y Segundo celebrados en

la muy Noble y muy leal Ciudad de Mexico en los Agnos
de 1555 & I565, fol. Mexico, 1769.

Concilium Mexicanum Provinciale tertium celebratum
Mcexci, Anno 1585, fol. Mexici, 1770.

Continente c mer;cano, Argonauta de las costas de Nueva

Efpagna y Tierra Firme. izmo.

Cordeyro (Antonio) Hifioria Infulana das ilhas a Portugas

fueytas no Oceano Occidental. fol. Lifb. 1717.

Corit (Dr. Alonzo) Breve y fumaria Relacion de los Seg-

noers, manera y Differencia de ellos, que bavia en la Nueva
lpfagna, y otras Provincias sus Comarcanas, y de sus Leyes,

c z Ufos

Ufos y Coftumbres, y de la Forma que tenian en Tribut
suo Vafallos en Tiempo de fu Gentilidad, &c. MS. 4t0,
pp. 307-

Coronada (Fr. Vafq. de) Sommario di due sue Letter

del Viaggio fatto del Fra. Marco da Nizza al fette Cit.a at
Cevola. Exft. Ramufio III. 354.

Relacion Viaggio alle fette Citta. Ramufio II!.
359-

Corres (Hern.) Quattro Cartas dirigidas al Emperadie

Carlos V. en que ha Relacion de sus Conquiftas en la Nuena
Efpagna. Exft. Barcia Hist. Prim. tom. i.

Corteffii (Ferd.) De infulis noper inventis Narrationes a
Carolum V. fol. 1532.

Corte'e (Fern.) Relacioni, &c. Exft Ramufio III. 225
Cubero (D. Pedro) Peregrinacion del Mayor Parte d,
Mund,, Zaragoff. 4to. 1688.

Cumana-Guvierno y Noticia de, fol. MS.

D

Davila Padilla (F. Aug.) Hifloria de la Fundacion y D;i
curfo de Provincia de St. Jago de Mexico, fol. Bruff. 16z.

- Gil Gonzzlez) Tea:ro Ecclefiafiico de la Primi
tiva Ig'efia cc los Indias Occidentales, fol. 2 vols. 1649.

Documen-os tocantes a la Perfecucion, que los Regular

de la Compagnia fufcitaron contra Don B. de Cardenas Obif;
de Paraguay, 4to. Mad. 176S.

E

Echaveri (D. Bernardo Ibagnez de) El Reyno JefuriT

del Paraguay. Exft. tom. iv. Colleccion de Documentr
4to. Mad. 177C.

Echave y Affu (D. Francisco de) La Efrellade Lima co
verlida en Sol fobre fur trea Coronas, fol. Amberes, 16S8.

Eguiara El Egueren (D. Jo. Jos.) Bibliotheca Mexicar

fve Erucirorum Hifloria Virorum in America Boreali nat
rum,&c. tom. prim. fol Mex. 1775. N. B. Nomoreth
one volume of this work has been publified.

Erciiia y Zuniga (D. Alonzo ae) La Araucana, Poi:
Ero!co, fol. hlad. 1733.

- z vols. Svo. Mad. 1777.

Efc£i

Efcalona (D. Gaspar de) Gazophylacium Regium Peruvi-
cur, fol. Mad. I775.

F

Faria y Sousa (Manuel de) Hilloria del Reyno de Portugal,

fol. Amber. 1730.

Faria y Sousa, History of Portugal from the firil Ages to

the Revolution under John IV. 8vo. Lond. 1698.

Fernandez (Diego) Prima y fecunda Parte de la Hiftorib

dci Perl, fol. Seviil. 1571.

- - (P. Juan Patr ) Re'acion Hilforial de las

Miffones de los Indias que claman Chiquitos, 4to. Mad.
1726.

Feyjoo (Benit. Geron) Espagnoles Americanos-Difcurfo
VI. del ton. iv. del Teatro Critico. Mad. 1769.

--- -- Solucion del gran Problema Hiftorico

fbre la Poblacion de la America-Difcurfo XV. del torn. v.
de Teatro Critic).

---- (D. Miguel) Relacion Defcriptiva de la Ciudad y

Prwvincia Truxillo del Peru, fol. Mad. 1763.

Freyre (Ant.) Piratas de la America, 4to.
Fraifo (D. Petro) De Regio Pa:ronatu Indiarum, fol.
2 vols. Matriu, i775.

G

Galva6 (Antonio) Tratado dos Defcobrimentos Antigos y

Modernos, fol. Liboa, 1731.

Galvano (Ant.) The Discoveries of the World from the

firt Original unto the Year 1555. Osborne's Colled. II.
;4.
Gamboa (D. Fran. Xavier de) Comentarios a los ordi-

ninzas de Minas, fol. Mad. 1761.

Garcia (Gregorio) Hiftoria Ecclefiaflica y Seglar de la

India Oriental y Occidental, y Predicacion de la Santa Evan-
gelia en ella, izmo. Baeca, 1626.

- (Fr. Gregorio) Origen de los Indios del Nuevo

Mundo, fol. Mad. 1729.

Gaftelu (Anton. Valefquez) Arte de Lengua Mcxicana,

4to. Puibla de los Angeles. x7x6.
Cazeta de Mexico pos los Anno3 1712, 1729, 1730, 4to.

c 3 Cirava

Girava (Hieronymo) Dos Libros de Cofmographia. Milan,

15 6.

Godoy 'Diego de) Relacion al H. Cortes, que trata del

Defcubriniento de diverfas Ciudades, y Provincias, y Guer.
ras que tuio con los Indios. Exft. Barcia Hist. Prim.
tom. i.

Gc-doy Lenera a Cortefe, &c. ExRf. Ramuflo III. 300o.
Gomara (Fr. Lopez de) La Hiftoria general de las Indias,
xzmo. Any. 1554.

fHiltoria general de las Indias. Exit. BardaHif.
Prim. tom. ii.

- Chronica de la Nueva Efpagna 8 Conquifta de
Mexico. Exit. Barcia Hist. Prim. tom. ii.

Guatemala-Razon puntual de los fucceffos mas memora.

biles, y de los eftragos y dannos quc ha padecido la rindad
de Guatema;a, fol. 1774.

Gumilla (P. Jos.) El Orinoco illuftrado y defendido;

Hifloria Natural, Civil, y Geographica de este Gran Rio,
&c. 4t0. 2 tom. Mad. 1-45.

Hifto:re Naturelle, Civile, & Geogra-

phique de l'Orenoque. Traduire par M. Eidous, rzmo.
ton. iii. Avig. 1758.

Gufman (Nugno de) Relacion fcritta in Omitlan Pro-

vincia de Mechuacan della maggior Spagna nell 1530. Elxi.
Ramufio 111. 331.

H

Henis (P. Thadeus) Ephemerideq Belli Guiaranici, ab
Anno 1754. Exft. Colleccion general de Docum. tom. iv.

Hernandes (Fran.) Plantarum, Animalium & Mineralium
Mexicanorum Hiftoria, fol. Rom. 165r.

Herera (Anton. de) Hifroria general de los Hechos de los

CatelLanos en las Ilfas y Tierra Firma de Mar Oceano, fol.
4 v-ls. Sad. 16o1.

- Hiftori General, &c. 4 vols. Mad. 1730.
- General History, &c. Tranfated by Stephens,
Svo. 6 vols. Lond. 140o.

- Defcrip-io Indi2 Occidenta'is, fol. Amft. T6ZZ.

Huemez y Horcafitas (D. Juan Francisco de) Extraso de

los Autos de Diiigencias y reconocimientos de los rios, Ilg'-
nas, vertientes, y defaguas de Mexico y fu valle, &c. ful.
Mex. 54S.

Jefui:la

I

Jefuitas-Colleccion de las applicaciones que fe van hacien-

do de los Cienes, casas y Coligios que fueron de la Compagnia
de Jesus, expatriados de eftos Reales dominios, 4to. z vols.
Lima, 1772 y 1773.

---- Colleccion General de Providencias hafta aqui

tonadas por el Gobierno fobre el Eftrannamiento y Occupa-
c'on de temporalidades, de los Regulares de la Compagnia de
Efpagna, Indias, e Iflas Filipinas, 4to. Mad. 1767.

-- - Retrato de los Jefuitas formado al natural, 4to.
2 voL. Mad. 1768.

Relacion Abbreviada da Republica que os Re-

l'giofos Jefuitas eftabeleceraon, Izmo.

--- Idea del Origen, Gobierno, &c. de 4 Com-
pagnia de Jesus, Svo. Mad. 1768.

L

Lvvinius (Apollonius) Libri V. de Peruvia Invention. &

retus in eadem gelis, izmo. Ant. i567.

Leon (Fr. Ruiz. de) Hernandia, Poema rIeroyco de Con-
uifta de Mexico, 4to. Mad. 1755.

(Ant. de) Epitome de la Bibliotheca Oriental

y Occidental, Nautica y Geografica, fol. Mad. 1737.

Lima, A true Account of the Earthquake which happened

there, z8th October 1-46. Translated from the Spanifl,
Svo. Lond. 1748.

Lirna Gozofa, Description de las feftibas Demontlraciones,
on que efta ciudad Celebro la real Proclamation de el Nom-
bre Augufto del Catolico Monarcho D. Carlos III. Lima,
4to. 1760.

Llano Zapata (D. Jos. Eufeb.) Preliminar al Tomo I. de

las Memorias Hiftorico-Phyficas, Critico-Apologeticas de la
America Meridional, Svo. Cadiz, 1759.

Lopez (D. Juan Luis) Difeurfo Hiftorico Politico en de

fenfo de la Jurifdicion Real, fol. 16S5.

------ \Thom.) Atlas Geographico de la America Sep.

tenrional y Meridional, lzmo. Par. 1758.

Lorenzana (D. Fr. Ant.) Arzobifpo de Mexico, ahora,
de Tuledo, Hitoria de Nueva Efpagna, efrita por fu Efela-

re.ido

recido Conquistador Hernan Cortes, Aumentada con otroi
Documentos y Notas, fol. Mex. 1770.

Lozano (P. Pedro) Decfription Corographica, del Ter.

retorios, Arboles, Animales, del Gran Chaco, y de los Ri
tos y Coflumbres, de las inonmerabiie Naciones que la a.
bitan 4to. Cordov. 1733.

- --- Hiftoria de la Compagnia de Jesus en la Pro.
vincia dl Paraguay, foL z vols. Mad. 1753.

M

Madriga (Pedro de) Defcript on de !a Gouvernement dt

Perou. Exft. Voyages qui ont fervi i l'etabliffement de l
comp. des Indes, tom. ix. 105.

Mariana (P. Juan de) Difcurfo de las Enfermedades de Ih
Cormpagnia de Jesus, 4to. Mad. 1768.

Martinez de la Puente (D. Jos.) Compendio de las His.

torias de Its Defcubrimieotos, Conquiftas, y Guerras de ii
India Oricnal, y sus Iflas, defde los Tiempos del Infantt
Don Enriqeu de Portugal fu inventor. 4to. Mad. 1681.

Martyr ab Angleria (Petr.) De Rebus Oceanicis & Novo
Orbe Decades trcs, izmo. Colon. 1574.

Marryr ab Angleria (Perr.) De Infulis nuper inventis, &
de Mosibus Incolarum. Ibid. p. 3z9.

-- --- Opus Epiftolarum, fol. Amss. 1670.

II Sommario cavato della fua Hiftoria di
Nuevo Mundo. Ramufio 111. i.

Mara (D. Geron. Fern. de) Ideas politicas y morales,

l,2no. Toledo, 1640.

Mechuacan-Relacion de las Ceremonias, Ritos, y Po.

blacion de los Indios de Mcchacan hecha al I. S. D. Ant. de
Mendoza Virrey de Nueva Efpagna, fol. MS.

lMelendez (Fr. Juan) Teforos Vcrdaderos de las India

Hiftoria de la Provincia de S. Juan Baptifta del Peru, de
Orden de Pred;cadores, fol. 3 vols. Rom. 168I.

Memorial Ajuftado por D. A. Fern. de Heredia Gobcr
nador de Nicaragua y Honduras, fol. 1753.

Memorial Adjuftado contra los Officiales de Casa de Mo-
neda a Mexic de el anno 17z9, fol.

Mendoza (C. Ant- de) L.ttera al Imperatore del Difcopri.

mcnto della Terra Firma della N. Spagna vrfo Tramontano
Exlt Ramufio I1. 355.

Mendo.

Mendoza (Juan Gonz. de) Hiltoria del gran Reyno de

China, con un Idnerario del Nuevo Mundo, Svo. Rom.

135. Miguel (Vic. Jos.) Tablas de los Sucefos Ecclefialticos en
Africa, Indias Orientales y Occidentales, 4o. Val. 1689.

Mifcelanea Economico-Polidco, &c. fol. Pampl. 1749.
Mol na (P. F. Anton.) Vocabulario CaRellano y Mexi-

cano, fAl. S17x.

M .nardes (El Dottor) Primera y Segunda y Tercera Parte

de la Hilloria Medicinal, de las Cosas que fe traen de nueftras
Indias Occidentales, que firven en Medicina, 4to. Sevilla,

1754- Mloncada (Sancho de) Reflauracion Politica de Efpagna y
defeos Publicos, 4to. Mad. 174.6.

Morales (Ambrofio de) Coronica General de Efpagnia, fol

4 vols. Alcala 1574.

Moreno y Efcaudon (D. Fran. Ant.) Defcripcion y Es-

tado del Virreynato de Santa Fee, Nuevo Reyno de Granada,
&c. fol. MS.

Munoz (D. Antonio) Difcnrfo fobre econonia politica,
8vo. Mad. 1769.

N

Nizza (F. Marco) Relatione del Vlaggio fatta per Terra

al Cevole, Regno di cette Citti. Exf. Ramus. 111. 356.

Nodal-Relacion del Viage que hicieron los Capitanes

Barth. y Gonz. de Nodal al defcubrimiento del Erfecho que
h,y es nombrado de Maire, y reconocimiento del de Magel-
Inesr, 4to. Mad.

.Noticia Individual de los derechos fegun lo reglado en ulti.
mo proy)eto de 1720, 4to. Barcelona, 1732.

Nueva Efpagna-Hiftoria de los Indios de Nueva Efpagna

dibidida en tres Partes En la primera trata de los Ritos,
Sacrificios y Idolatrias del Tiempo de fu Gentilidad. En la
fegunda de fu maravillofa Conversion a la Fe, y modo de
celebrar las Fieflas de Nueflra Santa Iglefia. En la tercera
del Genio y Caracer de aquella Gente y Figuras con que
notaban sus Aconrecimientos, con otras particularidades i y
Notcias de las principales Ciudades en aquel Reyno. Efcrita
en el Agno 1541 por uno de los doce Religiofos Franciscos
que primero Paffaron a entender en fu Conversion. MS. fol.
pp. 618.

Opa

0

Ogna (Pedro de) Arauco Domado. Poema, Izmo. Mad.
1605.

Orderanzas del Confejo real de las Indias, fol. Mad. i6Si.
Ortcga (D. Cafimiro de) Refumen Hiftorico del primer
Viage becho al rededor del Mundo, 4to. Mad. 1769.

Ofi;rio (Jerome) History of the Porruguefe, during the
Reign of Emmanuel, Svo. 2 vols. Lond. 1752.

Offor.us (Hieron.) De rebus Emmanuelis Lufitani2 Re-
gis, STo Col. Agr. 175:.

Ovalie (Alonfo) Hifturica Relacion del Reyno de Chili,
fol. Rom. I646.

-_- An Historical Relation of the Kingdom of Chili.

Exft. Churchill Collet. III. I.

Oviedo y Bagnos (D. Jos) Hiftoria la Conquilta y Pub.
licacon ce Venezuela, fol. Mad. 1723.

Ov;edo Sommaria, &c. Exft. Ramufio III. 44.
Oviedo (Gonz. Fern. de) Relacion Sommaria de la His-
toria Natural de los Indias. Exft. Barcia Hist. Prim. tom i,

Oviedo Hiftoria Generale & Naturale dell Indie Occiden-
tale. Ext. Ramufio 111. 74.

Relatione della Navigatione per la Grandiffima
Fiume Maragnon. xEr. Ramus. 111. 415.

P

Palaco (D. Raim. Mig.) Difcurfo Economico Politico,
4to. Mad. 1778.

Palafox y Mendoza (D. Juan) Virtudes del Indios o Na-
turaliza y Coflumbres de los Indios de N. Efpagna, 40o.

- Vie de Venerable Dom. Jean Palafox Eveque de
l'Angelopolis, Izmo. Cologne, 1772.

Pegna (Juan Nugnez de la) Conquifta y Antiguedades de
las Iflas de Gran Cana:ia, 4to. Mad. 1676.

Pegna Montenegro (D. Alonfo de la) Itinerario para Pa-

rochos de Indios, en que tratan les materias mas particulares,
tocan es a ellos para fu buen adminiftracion, 4to. Amberes,
3754-

Penalofa y Mondragon (Fr. Benito de) CineoExcellencias
del Espagnol que des peublan a Efpagna, 4to. Pampl. I 29.

Perala Barnuevo (D. Pedrode) Lima fundada o Conquift
dd Peru Poema Eroyco, 4to. Lima, 1732.

Peralta

Peralta Calderon (D. Mathias de) El Apoftol de las Indias

y nueves gentes San Francisco Xavier de la Compagnia de
Jesus Epitome de sus Apoftolicos hechos, 4to. PampL x665.r

Pereira de Berrido (Bernard.) Annaes Hiforicos do eftado

do Maranchao, fol. Lilboa, 1749.

Peru-Relatione d'un Capitano Spagnuolo del Defcopri-

mento y Conquifta del Peru. Eift. Ramus. II1. 371.

Peru-Relatione d'un Secretario de Franc. Pizzarro dtlla

Conquefta del Peru. Exft. Ramufio III. 371.

- Relacion del Peru, MS.
Pefquifa de los Oydores de Panama contra D. Jayme Mug-

nos, &c. por haverlos Commerciado illicitamente en tiempo
de Guerro, fol. I755.

Philipinas-Cdrtr que escribe un Religiofo antiguo de Phi-

:ipinas, a un Amigo fuyo en Efpagna, que le pregunta el
Naturel y Genio de los Indios Naturales de Eftas Iflas. MS.
410.

Piedrahita (Luc. Fern.) Hiftoria general de las Conquiltas

de; Nuevo Reyno de Granada, fol. Ambres.

Pinelo (Ant de Leon) Epitome de la Bibliotheca Oriental

y Occidental en que fe continen los Efcritores de las Indias
Orienta!es y Occidentales, fol. 2 vols. Mad. 1737.

Pinzonius focius Admirintis Columbi-N avigatio & res

per rum reperta . Exft. Nov. Orb. Grynae, p. I9g.

Pizarro y Orellana (D. Fern.) Varones illuftres del N.

Mundo, fol. Mad 1639.

Plandlus Judorum Chrillianorum in America Peruntina,

12mo.

Puente (D. Jos. Martinez de la) Compendio de las His-

tr ns de los Defcubrimientos de la India Oriental y sus Iflas,
4:,. Mad. 168x.

Qir (Ferd. de) Terra Australis Incognita; or, a new

Southern Dicovery, containing a fifth Part of the Worl4
lahey found out, 4to. Lond. 1617.

R

RamuGo (Giov. Battifta) Racolto delle Navigationi e VI.
ig, fol. 3 vols. Venet. 158.
Real Compagnia Guipuzcoana de Caracas, Noticias bilto-
qaiei Pracicas, de los Succeffos y Adelantamientos de efta

Compagnia

Compagnia defde fu Fundaion en 17z8 hafta 1764, 4to,
1765.

Recopilacion de Leyes de los Reynos de las Indias, foL
4 vols. Mad. 1756.

Reglamento y Aranceles Reales para el Comercio de E.
pagna a Indias, fol. Mad. 1778.

Relatione d'un Gentilhuomo del Sig. Fern. CorteiI

della gran Citta Temiftatan, Mexico, & delle altre cofd
della Nova Spagna. Exft. Ramus. 111. 304.

Remefal (Fr. Ant) Hifloria general de las Indias Occider.

tales y particular de la Governadon de Chiapa y Guatimal:,
fol. Mad. 160o.

Ribadeneyra (D. Diego Portichuelo de) Relaclon del Vi2ge

defde que falio de Lima, hafta que Illego a Efpagna, 4t0.
Mad. 1657.

Ribandenevra y Barrientos (D. Ant. Joach.) Manud

Ccerpendio de el Regio Patronato Indiano, fol. Mad.
1755.

Ribas (Andr. Perez de) Hifloria de los Triumphos d

Nuefira Sta Fe, entre Gentes la mas Barbaras, en las nrri
siones de Nueva Efpagna, fol. Mad. 1645.

Riol (D. Santiago) Reprefentacion a Philipe V. fob7ed

defado aCual de los Papeles universales de la Monarchi,
MS.

Ripia (Joan de la) PraQica de la Adminihlacion y c-
branza oe las rentas reales, fol. Mad. 1768.

Rocha Pitta (Sebaftiano de) Hiftoria de America Portor

gueza des de o Anno de i 500 du fu Defcobrimento ate o a
1724, fol. Lifboa, 1730.

Rodriguez ( Manuel) Explicacion de la Bulla de la Sant
Cruzada, 4ro. Alcala, 1589.

---- - (P. Man.) El. Maragnon y Amozonas, Hief

ria de los Defcubrimientos, Entradas y Reducion de Naciono
foL Mad. 1654.

Roman (Hieron) Republicas del Mundo, foL 3 vo&
Mad. 1595.

Roma y Rofell (De Franc.) Las fegnales de la felicid,

de Efpagna y medios de haceslas efficaces, 8vo. M
1768.

Rofende (P. Ant. Gonz. de) Vida del Juan de Palss:
Arzobifpo de Mexico, fol. Mad. 1671.

Rubaclava (Don Jos. Gutiirrez de) Tratado Hifitcr

Politico, y Legal de dl commecio de la: Indias Ocidentak
limo. Cad. 1750.

Ruiz (P. Ant.) Conquifta Efpiritual becha por Ios Reldi

giofos de la Compagnia de Jerus, en las Provincias de la
Paraguay Uraguay, Parana y Tape, 4to0. Mad. 1639.-

S

Salazar de Mendoza (D. Pedro) Monarquia de Efpagna,

tom. i, ii, iii. foL Mad. 1770.

----- y Olarte (D. Ignacio) Hiltoria de la Conquifit

de Mexico-Segunda parte, Cordov. 1743.

- - y Zevallos (D. Alonz. Ed. de) Conffitucio-

ncs y Ordenanzas antiguas Agnadidas y Modernas de' la
Real Univerfidad y eftudio general fte San Marcos de la
Ciudad de los Reyes del Peru, fol. En la Ciudad de los
Reyes, 1735.

Sanchez (Ant. Ribero) Difertation fur l'Ongine de la

Mlaladie Venerienne, dans laquelle on preuve qu'elle n'a point
ti portre de I'Amerique, lzmo. Paris, 1765.

Sarmiento de Gamboa (Pedro de) Viage al Eftrecho de

Magellanes, 4to. Mad. 1768.

Santa Cruz (El Marques) Comercio Suelto y en Com-

plnias General, izmo. Mad. 1732.

Santo Domingo, Puerto Rico, y Margarita, Real Compag-

n'a de Comercio, xzmo. 1756.

Schemidel (Hulderico) Hifloria y Defcubrimiento de

Rio de la Plata y ParaguLy. Exft. Barcia Hill. Prim.
tom. iii.

I Sebara da Sylva (Jos. de) Recueil Chronologique & Ana-

ltiqiue de tout ce qu'a fait en Portugal la Sociee ditede
Jesus, depuis son Entree dans ce Royaume en 54.o jurqu'a
fan Expulfon 1759, Izmo. 3 vols. Lifb. 1769.

Segni (D. Diego Raymundo) Antiquario Noticofa Genc-

ral de Epagna y sus Indius, izmo. 1769.

Sepulveda (Genefius) Dialogus de juftis belli caufis, pr-
frtim in Indos Novi Orbis. MS.

- (Jo. Genefius) Epifolarum Libri VII. 12mo.

Saam. 1557.

Sepulveda de regno, Likri III. Izmo. DlerdE, 1570.
Scyias y Lovero (D. Fr.) Theatro Naval HydrographicQ,

41. 1648.

- - Defcripcion Geographica y Derrotra de la Re-

gion Aufral Magellanica, 4to. Mad. 1690.
YOL.I. . Sima

Simon (Pedro) Noticias Hiftoriales de las ConquifRa; i

Tierra Firme en las Indias Occidentalca, foi. Cuen%,
1627.

Solis (D. Ant. de) Hiftorias de las Conquifts de Mex'co,
foL Mad. 1684.

- - History of the Corqueft of Mexico.-Trarf.
lIted by Tmonfend, fol. i 74-

Solazano y Pereyrra (Joan) Politica Indiana, fol. I
eols. Mad. 1776.

------ De Indiarurn jure, five de jufRa Indiarum Ocd.
denoahum Gubernatione, fol. 2 vols. Lugd. 1672.

-- Obras Varias pohumas, so'. Mad. 1776.

Soto y marne (P. Franc. de) Copia de la Relacion a

Viage que deide la ciudad de Caaiz a la Cartagena de India4
hizo, 4to. Mad. 1753.

Spilbergen et Le Maire Specalum Orientalis Occidenat

iIque Navigationum, 4to. L. Bat. 1 6 9.

Suarez de Figueioa (Chriltov.) Hechos de D. Gar(i
lHuttado ae Mendoza, 4.o. Mad. 1613.

T

Tanco (Luis Bezerra) Felicidad de Mexico en la adm.

rable Apasicion de N. Signora di Guadalupe, Zvo. ?,:.
174S-'

Tarragones (Hieron. Gir.) Dos Libros dc Cofmogra'n L
4to. Milan, 1556.

Techo (F. Nichol. de) The History of the Provirx.

Paraguay, Tucuman, Rio de la Plata, &c. Ex.t. Church....
Coll. VI. 3.

Torquemnada (Juan de) Monarquia Indiana, fol. 3 vYi
Mad. 12z3.

Torres (Sim. Per. de) Vi2ge del Mundo. Exit. Ear:
Hifte Prim. 1ll.

- Franc. Caro de) Hiftoria de las Ordenes Ml'.ar

de Santiago, Calbtrava y Alcantara, defde fu Funda-.c
hafta el Rey D. Felipe II. Ad3iinilador perpetuo dc-a,
fol. Mad. 16z9.

Torribio (P. F. Jos.) Aparato para la HiRoria Na:i-
EfpagLnala, fol. Mad. 1754-

--- - Differtacion Hiflrico Politica y en mrut'

parte Gecogaphica de las Iflas Phlipinas, lzmo. I5-
1753.

To:.

Totanes (F. Sebaflian de) Manual Tagalog para auxio de

Pruincia de las Philipinas, 4to. Samplai en las Philipinas,
17.5.

U

Ulloa (D. Ant. de) Voyage Hiftorique de 'Atmerique

M;cridionaie, 4to. z torn. Paris, 1752. ·

- (D. Ant. de) Noticias Americanas, Entretenimien-

ts Phyficos-Hiltoricos, fobre la America Meridional y li
5e:pentrinal Oriental, 4to. Mad. 1772.

(D. Bern. de) Reftablecimiento de las Fabricas,

traico, y comercio maritimo de Efpagna, z1mo. a vols..
Mad. 1740.

- (Franc.) Navigatione per fcoprire I'lfole delle Spe.

rierie fino al Mare derto Vermejonel 1539. Exflt. Ramus.
11. 339.

- (D. Bernardo) Retabliffement des Manufahures &
du Commerce d'Efpagne, izmo. Amft. 1753.

Uziariz (D. Geron.) Theoria y PraeCica de Commercio

& de Marina, fol. Mad. 1757.

- Tne Theory and Praftice of Commerce and Mari-
time Affairs. Svo. z vols. Lond. 1751.

V

Verages (D. Thor. Tama;o de) Reftauracion de Ia

C;iaad dcl Salvadir y Baia de Todos San&os en la Provincia
del Brfil, 4to. Mad. 16zS.

Vargas Machuca (D. Bern. de) Milicia y Defcripcion de

las Indais, 4to. Mad. 1699.

Vega (Garcilaffo ae la) Hiftoire de la Conquete de la
F:or;Je. Traduite par Richeler, szmo. z toUs. Leyd.

- Royal Commentaries of Peru, by Rycaut, fol.

Load. 1688.

Vega (L'Ynca Garcilaffo de la) Hifloire des Guerres

Civilts osa Espagnoles dans les Indes, par Baudouin, 4to.
2 tom. Paris, 164S.

Veitia Linage (Jos.) The Spanish Rule of Trade to the
W'ert Incies, Yvo. Lond 170z.

-- - _- Declamac.on Oratoria en Defenfa de D.
Jot, Ferr. Veiia Linage, fol. 170..

ID a VataVeitia

Vdtia Linage (Tof.) Norte de la Contrataion de las India
Occidentales, fol. Sevill. 67z.

Venegas (Micel) A Natural and Civil History of Cai.
fornia, Svo. z vols. Lond. I759.

Verazzano (Giov.; Relatione delle Terra per lui Scoper
nel 15z4- Exft. Ramufio III. p. 420o.

Vefputius (Americus) Dug Navigationes fob aufpicii
Ferdinandi, &c. Exf. DeBry America. Pars X.

Navigatio prima, fcunda, tertia, quarta. EiS.
Nov. Orb. Gryni, p. 155.

Viage de Efpagna, lmo. 6 tom. Mad. 1776.
Viaoria (Fran.) Relationes Theologice de Indis & de
jure beili contra eos, 4co. 1765.

Viera y Ciavijo (D. Jos.) Noticis dela Hifloria geneml
de las Illas de Canaria, 4to. 3 tom. Mad. 177-.

Villalobos (D. Juan de) Manifieflo fobrein introduccioa

de efclavos negrosen las Indias Occidentales, 4to. Sevilla,
168z.

Villagra (Gasp. de) Hitoria de Nueva Mexico Poemn,
izmo. Alcala. 1610i

Villa Scgnor y Sanchez (D. Jos. Ant) Theatro Ameri-

cano. Defcripcion general de los Reynos y Provincias de 1
Nucva Efpagna, fol. z ton.. Mcx. 1746.

- Res puafa fobre el precio de Azogue, 4to.
Vocabulario Brafiliano y Portugues, 4to. MhS.

W

Ward (D. Bernardo) Proyeto Economico fobre la pobla.

cicn de Efpagna, la agricultuia en todos (us ramos, y dc
mas eftab!ecimientos de induftria, comercio con nueftn
marina, arreglo de nu.ftra inteefcs en America, libertad ci
commercio en Indias, &c. z vols. 4to. MS.

X

Xcres (Franc. de) Verdadera Relacion de la Conquihla dd

peru y Provirnia de Cuzco, Embiada al Emperador Cartl
V. Exft. Barcia Hill. Prim. tom. iii.

Relatione, &c. &c. ExfL Ramufio Il.
37z.

Zansa

z

Zarate ( Aug. de) Hiforia del Defcubrimiento y Conquita
ce la Provincia del Peru. Erst. Barcia Hit. Prim. tom. iii.

-- Hiitoire de la Decouverte & de la Conquete du

Perou, izmo. 2 tom. Paris, 174z.

Zavzal y Augnon (D. Miguel de) Reprefentacion al Rey

N. Segnor ?. Philipe V. dirigida al mas feguro Aumento del
Real Erario. No place. 1732.

ZovlAos (D. Pedro Ordognez de) Hifroria y Viage del
Ijrjndo, 4to. Mad. 169i.

s3 THE

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK I.

THE -
HISTORY OF AMERICA.

BOOK I.
r H E progress of men in discovering and peo-

pling the various parts of.the: earth, has

been extremely flow. Several ages; elapfsl -be
fore they removed far from those: mild and.fertil.
regions in which they were originally placed by
their Creator. The occasion. f their first gene-
ral dispersion is known ; but we are u.nacquainte4
with the course of their migrations, or the time
when they took pofftffion of the different c9.n-
tries which they now inhabit. Neither hiltory
nor tradition furnish such information concerning
those remote events, as enables us to trace, with
any certainty, the operations of the human race
in the infancy of society.

We may conclude, however, that all the early

migrations of mankind were made bylaud. The
ocean, which surrounds the habitable earth, as
well as the various arms of the sea which separate
one region from another, though destined to fa-
cilitate the communication between distant coun-
tries, seem, at firt view, to be formed to check
the progress of man, and to mark the bounds of
that portion of the globe to which nature .had
confined him. It was long, we may belieye,
before men attempted to pass these formidable

z bariners,

barriers, and became so skilful and adventrous as
to commit themselves to the mercy of the wind3
and waves, or to quit their native shores in queii
of remote and unknown regions.

Navigation and ship-building are arts so nice

and complicated, that they require the ingenuity,
as well as experience, of many fucccffive ages to
bring them to any degree of perfection. From
the raft or canoe, which first served to carry a
savage over the river that obftruced him in the
chafe, to the construction of a vessel capable of
conveying a numerous crew with safety to a dif.
tant coast, the progress in improvement is im.
mense. Many efforts would be made, many ex-
periments would be tried, and much labour as
well as invention would be employed, before men
could accomplish this arduous and important un-
dertaking. The rude and imperfet state in
which navigation is till found among all nations
which are not considerably civilized, corresponds
with this account of its progress, and demon-
firates that, in early times, the art was not so far
improved as to enaDie men to undertake distant
voyages, or to attempt remote discoveries.

As loon, however, as the art of navigation

became known, a new species of correspondence
among men took place. It is from this ara, that
we munf date the commencement of such an in-
tercourfe between nations as deserves the appel-
lation of commerce. Men are, indeed, far ad-
vanced in improvement before commerce becomes
an objec of great importance to them. They
must even have made some considerable progress
towards civilization, before they acquire the idea
of property, and ascertain it so perfecly as to be

acquainted

acquainted with the most simple of all contrac&s,
that of exchanging by barter one rude commo-
dity for another. But as soon as this important
right is eftablilhed, and every individual feels
that he has an exclusive title to possess or to alie-
nate whatever he has acquired by his own labour
or dexterity, the wants and ingenuity of his na-
ture fuggeit to him a new method of increasing
his acquisitions and enjoyments, by disposing
of what is fuperfiuous in his own stores, in
order to procure what is necessary or desirable
in those of other men. Thus a commercial in-
tercourfe begins, and is carried on among the
members of the fame community. By degrees,
they discover that neighbouring tribes possess
what they themselves want, and enjoy comforts
of which fhey wifi to partake. In the fame
mode, and upon the fame principles, that do-
meftic traffic is carried on within the society, an
external commerce is eftabliihed with other tribes
or nations. Their mutual interefl and mutual
wants render this intercourfc desirable, and im-
perceptibly introduce the maxims and laws which
facilitate its progress and render it secure. But
no very extensive commerce can take place be-
tween contiguous provinces, whose foil and cli-
mate being nearly the fame, yield similar pro-
duStions. Remote countries cannot convey their
commodities by land, to those places, where- on
account of their rarity they are desired, and be-
eome valuable. It is to navigation that men are
indebted for the power of transporting the super-
fiuous flock of one part of the earth, to supply
the wants of another. The luxuries and blessings
of a particular climate are no longer confined to

itself

itself alone, but the enjoyment of them is corn.
municattd to the most distant regions.

In proportion as the knowledge of the advan.

tages derived from navigation and commerce con-
tinned to spread, the intercourse among nations
extended. The ambitidn of conqueit, or the
necessity of procuring new settlements, were no
longer the sole motives of visiting distant lands.
The desire of gain became a new incentive tc
activity, routed adventurers, and sent them forth
upon long voyages, in search of countries, whofi
products or wants might increase that circula
tion, which nourishes and gives vigour to corn
rnerce. Trade proved a great source of disco
very, it opened unknown seas, it penetrated into
new regions, and contributed more than an'
other cause, to bring men acquainted with the
situation, the nature, and commodities of th
different parts of the globe. But even after
regular commerce was established in the world
after nations were considerably civilized, and th
sciences and arts were cultivated with ardour and
success, navigation continued to be so imperfec,
that it can hardly be said to have advanced be
yond the infancy of its improvement in the an
cient world.

Among all the nations of antiquity the ftruc

ture of their vessels was extremely rude, and thei
method of working them very defective. The
were unacquainted with several principles an
operations in navigation, which are now cons
dered as the first elements on which that fcienc
is founded. Though that property of the mag
net, by which it attracts iron, was well know:
to the ancients, its more important and amazin

virti

\irtue of pointing to the poles had entirely
escaped their observation. Destitute of this
fairhful guide, which now conducs the pilot
with so much certainty in the unbounded ocean,
during the darkness of night, or when the hea-
vens are covered with clouds, the ancients had
no ozher method of regulating their course than
by observing the fun and liars. Their navigation
was of consequence uncertain and timid. They
durfl seldom quit fight of land, but crept along
the coast, exposed to all the dangers, and re-
tarded by all the obstructions, unavoidable in
holding such an awkward course. An incredible
length of time was requisite for performing voy-
ages, which are now finished in a short space.
Even in the mildest climates, and in seas the
leait tempestuous, it was only during the fum-
ruer months that the ancients ventured out of
tltir harbours. The remainder of the year was
lout in inactivity. It would have been deemed
i-.ofi incoifiderate rashness to have braved the
Lfrv of the winds and waves during winter a.

Whllile both the science and practice of naviga-

tin continued to be so defecive, it was an un-
dertaking of no small difficulty and danger to
'ifi any remote region of the earth. Under
cv-rv disadvantage, however, the acive spirit of
commerce exerted itself. The Egyptians, soon
after the eftablifliment of their monarchy, are
said to have opened a trade between the Arabian
Gulf or Red Sea, arid the western coast of the
great Indian continent. The commodities which
they imported from the east, were carried by land

* Vegetius de Re milit. lib. iv.

from

from the Arabian Gulf to the banks of the
Nile, and conveyed down that river to the Me.
diterranean. But if the Egyptians in early times
applied themselves to commerce, their attention
to it was of short duration. The fertile foil and
mild climate of Egypt produced the necessaries
and comforts of life with such profusion, as ren-
dered its inhabitants so independent of other
countries, that it became an established maxim
among that people, whose ideas and inflitutions
differed in almost every point from those of other
nations, to renounce all intercourse with so-
reigners. In consequence of this, they never
went out of their own country; they held all
seafaring persons in detestation, as impious and
profane; and fortifying their own harbours, they
denied strangers admittance into them b. It was
in the decline of their power, and when their ve.
neration for ancient maxims had greatly abated,
that they again opened their ports, and resumed
any communication with foreigners.

The charader and situation of the Phenicians

were as favourable to the spirit of commerce and
difcovcry as those of the Egyptians were adverse
to it. They had no diffinguiflhing peculiarity in
their manners and institutions; they were not
addiced to any singular and unsocial form of fu-
perftition ; they could mingle with other nations
without scruple or reluctance. The territory
which they possessed was neither large nor fertile.
Commerce was the only source from which they
could derive opulence or power. Accordingly,

b Diod. Sicul. b. i. p. 78. Ed. Welfflingi. Ami.
1756. Strab, lb. xvii p. Ip4. Ed. Ams. 1707.

the

the trade carried on by the Phenicians of.Sidon
and Tyre, was more extensive and enterprising
than that of any state in the ancient world. The
genius of the Phenicians, as well as the object of
their policy and the spirit of their laws, were en-
tirely commercial. They were a people of mer-
chants who aimed at the empire of the sea, and
actually possessed it. Their ships not only fre-
quented all the ports in the Mediterranean, but
the- were the first who ventured beyond the an-
cient boundaries of navigation, and pafling the
Straits of Gades, visited the western coalts of
SDain and Africa. In many of the places to
which they resorted, they planted colonies, and
communicated to the rude inhabitants some
k:.owledge of tLeir arts and improvements.
While they extended their discoveries towards
the north and the welt, they did not negleE to
penetrate into the more opulent and fertile re-
ri( ns of the south and ealt. Having rendered
t!lemfelves masters of several commodious har-
bours towards the bottom of the Arabian Gulf,
thev, after the example of the Egyptians, efta-
blif ed a regular intercourse with Arabia and the
continent of India on the one hand, and with
the taftern coast of Africa on the other. From
tlhcf counti ;cs they imported many valuable com-
r, 'ities, unknown to the left cf the world, and,
during a long period, engrofled that lucrative
branch of commerce . ithout a rivalc.

The vast wealth which the Phenicians acquired

bv m.onopclizing tle trade carried on in the Red
.:a, i:cited their netohr.ours tle Jews, under
h.t prrofje-rous reigns of David and Solomon, to

See NcTE I. at the end of the volume.
TOL. I. E aim

aim at being admitted to some share of it. Thi;
they obtained, partly by their conquest of Idu.
mea, which stretches along the Red Sea, and
partly by their alliance with Hiram king of
Tvre. Solomon fitted out fleets, which, under
the dire&ion of Phenician pilots, failed from the
Red Sea to Tarshish and Ophir. These it ii
probable were ports in India and Africa which
their conductors were accufomed to frequent,
and from them the Jewish ships returned with
such valuable cargoes as fud lenly diffused wealth
and fpiendour through the kingdom of Israel:.
But the finiilar inlitutions of the Jews, the oh,
fer;ance of which was enjoined by their divine
legillator, wi:-h an intention of preserving then
a lcparate people, uninfeted by idolatry, formed
a national charafier incapable of that open and
liberal intercourse with strangers which corn.
rerce requires. Accordingly, this unsocial ge.
nius of the people, together with the difaften
which besel the kingdom of Israel, prevented th:
commercial spirit which their monarchs laboured
to introduce, and to cherish, from fpreadin9
among them. The Jews cannot be numbered
among the nations which contributed to impror
navigation, or to extend discover-.

But though the inftrunlions and example o

the Phenicians were unable to mould the man
ners and temper of the Jews, in opposition t
the tendency of their laws, they transmitted th
commercial spirit with facility, and in full V.
gour,' to their own descendants the Carthag:
nuns. The commonwealth of Carthage applic

Memoire far Ic Pays d'Ophir par M. D'Anvillc, lMe
d: I'Acaiem. dce Infcript. &c. tom. xxx. 83.

to trade and to naval affairs, with no less ardour,
ingenuity, and success, than its parent state.
Carthage early rivalled, and soon surpassed Tyre,
in opulence and power, but seems not to have
aimed at obtaining any share in the commerce
with India. The Phenicians had engrofled this,
and had such a command of the Red Sea, as
secured to them the exclusive possession of that
lucrative branch of trade. The commercial ac-
tivity of the Carthaginians was exerted in ano-
ther dire&ion. Without contending for the
trade of the eait with their mother-country,
they extended their navigation chiefly towards
the weft and north. Following the courfe'which
the P!t:;iciar:s had opened, they passed the
Straits of Gades, and puffing their difcove-
ri;s far Le-ond those of the parent state, vi-
fincd rn, olivy all the coasts of Spain, but those
of Gaul, and penetrated at lalt into Britain.
At the fame time that they acquired knowledge
of new countries in this part of the globe, they
gradually carried their researches towards the
south. They made considerable progress, by
lbnd, into the interior provinces of Africa,
traded with some of them, and subjected others
to tlhir empire. They failed along the western
cocaf of that great continent, almost to the tro-
pic of Cancer, and planted several colonies, in
Drder to civilize the natives, and accustom them
to commerce. They discovered the Fortunate

zfnd:, now known by the name of the Cana,
es, the utmost boundary of ancient navigatioq
the weilern ocean .

' Pi;ii Nat. Hilt lib. vi. cap. 37. edit. in ufum Delph.
to. 1625.

I 2 Nor

Nor was the progress of the Phenicians and

Carthaginians in their knowledge of the globe,
owing entirely to the desire of extending then
trade from one country to another. Commerce
was followed by its usual effets among both
these people. It awakened curiosity, enlarged
the ideas and desires of men, and incited then
to bold enterprizes. Voyages were undertaken,
the sole objec of which was to discover new
countries, and to explore unknown seas. Such,
during the prosperous age of the Carthaginian
republic, were the famous navigations of Hanra
and Himilco. Both their fleets were equipped
by authority of the senate, and at public ex-
pence. Hanno was direted to ifeer towards
the south, along the coast of Africa, and he
seems to have advanced much nearer the equi.
nocial line than any former navigator f. Himilco
had it in charge to proceed towards the north
and to examine the western coasts of the Eu.
ropean continent g. Of the fame nature was the
extraordinary navigation of the Phenicians rouni
Africa. A Phenician fleet, we are told, fitted
out by Necho king of Egypt, took its departur
about fix hundred and four years before the
Christian aera, from a port in the Red Sa,
doubled the fouthernpromontory of Africa, and,
after a voyage of three years, returned by th:
Straits of Gades, to the mouth of the Nile.

r Plini; Nat Hist. lib. v. c. i. Hannonis Perip'us a.
Geograph. minores, edit. Hudfoni, vol. i. p. 1.

t Plinii Nat. Hist. lib. ii. c. 67. Felos Avienus apA

Bochart. Gcgr. S3cr. . ib. .c. 60. p. 65z. Oper. 1'
ii. L. Bat. 1707.

H. Hcr;ct. lib. iv. c. 4z.

Eudox:S

Eudoxus of Cyzicus is said to have held the fame
course, and to have accomplished the fame ardu-
ous undertakingi.

These voyages, if performed in the manner

which I have related, may justly be reckoned
the greatelt effort of navigation in the ancient
world; and if we attend to the imperfect slate of
the art at that time, it is difficult to determine,
whether we should most admire the courage and
sagacity with which the design was formed, or
the condut and good fortune with which it was
executed. But unfortunately, all the original
and authentic accounts of the P~ecnician and
Ca-Lrtaginian voyages, whether undertaken by
pubc authority, or in prosecution of their pn-
vate trade, have perished. The information
which we receive concerning them from the
Greek and Roman authors, is not only obscure
a:id inaccurate, but, if we except a (hort narra-
ti.; of Harmno's expedition, is of suspicious au-
tbritL k. Whatever acquaintance with the re-
rz.o; rtgions of the earth the Phenicians or Car-
thagi-nans may have acquired, was concealed
f-om the reft of mankind with a mercantile jea-
loui'. Every thing relative to the course of
t!,eir navigation was not only a myfiery of trade,
but a secret of state. Extraordinary fa&s are
recorded concerning their solicitude to prevent
;ther nations from penetrating into what they
wishtd should remain undivulged1. Many of
their discoveries seem, accordingly, to have been
scarcely known beyond the precints of their

P pnii Nat. Hife. lib. ii. c. 67. k See NOTE II.
Sulab. Ceogr, lib, iii. p. 265. lib, xviii, p. 1 54.

3 own

own state. The navigation round Africa, in
particular, is recorded by the Greek and Roman
writers, rather as a itrange amusing tale, which
they did not comprehend, or did not believe,
than as a real tranfation, which enlarged their
knowledge and influenced their opinionsm. As
neither the progress of the Phenician or Cartha.
ginian discoveries, nor the extent of their navi.
gation, were communicated to the reft of man-
kind, all memorials of their extraordinary (kill
in naval affairs seem, in a great measure, to have
petifhed, when the maritime power of the former
was annihilated by Alexander's conquest of Tyre,
and the empire of the latter was overturned by
the Roman arms.

Leaving then the obscure and pompous ac-

counts of the Phenician and Carthaginian voy-
ages to the curiosity and conje&tures of antiqua.
ries, hiitory must reft satisfied with relating the
progress of navigation and discovery among the
Greeks and Romans, which, though less fplen.
did, is better ascertained. It is evident that the
Phenicians, who inftruaed the Greeks in many
other useful sciences and arts, did not communi-
cate to them that extensive knowledge of naviga.
tion which they themselves possessd ; nor did the
Romans imbibe that commercial spirit and ardour
for discovery which ditinguimfed their rivals the
Carthaginians. Though Greece be almost en-
compassed by the sea, which formed many spa-
cious bays and commodious harbo !rs, though it
be surrounded by a great number of fertile
islands, yet, notwithstanding such a favourable

m Se NoTr III.

fituatio,

situation, which seemed to invite that ingeniious
people to apply themselves to navigation, it was
long before this art attained any degree of per-
fecion among them. Their early voyages, the
objeci of which was piracy rather than com-
mcrce, were so inconsiderable, that the expedi-
tion ofthe Argonauts from the coail of Thessaly
to the Euxine sea, appeared such an amazing
tffort of skill and courage, as entitled the con-
dudors of it to be ranked among the demigods,
and exalted the vessel in which they failed to a
place among the heasenly constellations. Even
at a later period, when the Greeks engaged in
their famous enterprize against Troy, their
knowledge in naval affairs seems not to have
been much improved. According to the account
of Homer, the only poet to whom hiitory ven-
tures to appeal, and who, by his scrupulous ac-
curacy in describing the manners and arts of
early ages, merits this ditinction, the science of
navigation, at that time, had hardly advanced
beyond its rudest Rate. The Greeks in the he-
roic age seem to have been unacquainted with the
ure of iron, the mofi serviceable of all the metals,
without which no considerable progress was ever
made in the mechanical arts. Their vessels
were of inconfiderabli burthen, and moilly with-
out dLcks. They had only one malt, which was
erreted or taken down at pleasure. They were
ifrangers to the use of anchors. All their opera-
tions in failing were clumsy and unflilful. They
turned their observation towards flars, which were
improper for regulating their course, and their
r(,dr of observing them was inaccurate and fal-
L:Jus. When they had finilhed a voyage they

drew

drew their paltry barks afhorc, as savages do
their canoes, and these remained on dry land
until the season of returning to sea approached.
It is not then in the early or heroic ages of
Greece that we can expeEt to observe the £cience
of navigation, and the spirit of discovery, making
any considerable progress. During that period
of disorder and ignorance, a thousand causes
concurred in restraining curiosity and enterprize
within very narrow bounds.

But the Greeks advanced with rapidity to a Rate

of greater civilization and refinement. Govern-
ment, in its most liberal and perfect form, began
to be established in their different communities;
equal laws and regular police were gradually in-
troduced; the sciences and arts which are useful
or ornamental in life were carried to a high pitch
of improvement, and several of the Grecian corn-
monwcalths applied to commerce with such ar
dour and success, that they were confidered, it
the ancient world, as maritime powers of the firfl
rank. Even then, however, the naval vicorie
of the Greeks must be ascribed rather to the na
tive spirit of the people, and to that courage
which the enjoyment of liberty inspires, than t(
any extraordinary progress in the science of na
vigation. In the Persian war, those exploit
which the genius of the Greek historians ha
rendered so famous, were performed by fleets
composed chiefly of small vessels without decksn
the crews of which rushed forward with impetu
ous volour, but little art, to board those of th
enemy. In the war of Peloponnefus, their ship

Thcyd. lib. i. c. £4.

feei

reem still to have been of inconsiderable burthen
ind force. The extent of their trade, how
highly soever it may have been estimated in an-
ient times, was in proportion to this low condi-
ion of their marine. The maritime states of
Greece hardly carried on any commerce beyond
he limits of the Mediterranean sea. Their chief
;ntercourfe waswith the colonies of their country-

pen, planted in the lefier Asia, in Italy and

Sicily. They sometimes visited the ports of
Egypt, of the southern provinces of Gaul, and
;fThracc; or, pafling through the Hellespont,
.hev traded with the countries situated around
he Euxine sea. Amazing inflances occur of
:hir ignorance even of those countries which lay
ivitllin the nanow precincts to which their navi-
,atron :was confined. When the Greeks had
.iTemblcd their combined fleet againfl Xerxes at
Egina, they thought it unadvifable to fail to
Samos, blecaufe they believed the distance be-
tween that island and Egina to be as great as the
ihlance between Egina and the Pillars of Her-
cu!rs °. They were either utterly unacquainted
:th ail the parts of the globe beyond the
MIditerranean sea, or what knowledge they had
of them was founded on conjecture, or derived
from the information of a few pcrfons, whom
c'.riolity and the love of science had prompted to
travel by land into the Upper Asia, or by sea
into Egypt, the ancient feats of wisdom and arts.
After all that the Greeks learned from them,
they appear to have been ignorant of the most
important facas on whlich an accurate and fcien-
tiF.c knovwledge of the globe is founded.

t Herodot. lib. viii. c. 1Jz.

The

The expedition of Alexander the Great into

the east, considerably enlarged the sphere of na-
vigation and of geographical know)ledge among
the Greeks. That extraordinary man, notwith.
standing the violent pafions which incited him,
at some times, to the vwidefh actions, and the
most extravagant enterprises, pofifcfed talents
which fitted him not only to conquer, but to
govern the world. He was capable of framing
those bold and original schemes of policy, which
gave a new form to human affairs. The revolu-
tion in commerce, brought about by the force of
his genius, is hardly inferior to that revolution
in empire occasioned by the success of his arms.
It i3 probable, that the opposition and efforts
of the republic of Tyre, which checked him so
long in the career of his victories, gave Alexac-
der an opportunity of observing the vast refour.
ces of a maritime power, and conveyed to him
some idea of the immense wealth which the
Tyrians derived from their commerce, especially
that with the East Indies. As soon as he had
accomplished the deitrution of Tyre, and re-
duced Egypt to subjection, he formed the plan
of rendering the empire which he proposed to
efiablilh, the centre of commerce as well as the
feat of dominion. With this view he founded
a great city, which he honoured with his owa
name, near one of the mouths of the river Nile
that, by the Mediterranean sea, and the neigh
bourhood of the Arabian Gulf, it might corn
mard the trade both of the eaf and weft P. Thk
situation was chosen with such discernment, tha

I S.:ab. Gcogr. lib. xvii. p. 1143. 1149.

Alexandri

Alexandria soon became the chief commercial
city in the world. Not only during the sub-
fifence of the Grecian empire in Egypt and in
the east, but amidst al the fucceflive revolu-
tions in those countries, from the time of the
Ptolemies to the discovery of the navigation by
the Cape of Good Hope, commerce, particularly
that of the East Indies, continued to flow in the
channel which the sagacity and foresight of
Alexander had marked out for it.

His ambition was not satisfied with having

opened to the Greeks a communication with
India by sea; he aspired to the sovereignty of
those regions which furnished the reft of man-
kind with so many precious commodities, and
coiducted his army thither by land. Enter-
prifing, how.ever, as he was, he may be said
ra'her to ha e viewed, than to have conquered that
country. He did not, in his progress towards
the eafl, advance beyond the banks of the rivers
that fall into the Indus, which is now the wcaern
boundary of the vafi continent of India. An;idf.
the wild exploits which diilinguifihd this part of
his hiflory, he pursued measu;res that mark the
superiority of his genius, as well as the extent of
his views. He had penetrated as far into India
as to confirm his opinion of its commercial im-
portance, and to perceive that immense wealth
might be derived from intercourse with a coun-
try, where the arts of elegance having been more
early cultivated, were arrived at greater perfec-
:ion in any other part of the earth q. Full of
q Strab. Ceogr. iib. xv. p. xc;6. Q Curtius, lib. xviii.

-~~9.-~~~~ ~thi

this

this idea, he refolred to examine the course of
navigation from the mouth of the Indus to the
bottom of the Persian Gulf; and if it should b
found pracaicable, to eflablifh a regular commu.
nication between them. In order to efe&
thi;, he proposed to remove the cataracts, v. ith
which, the jealousy of the Pcrfians, and their
aversion to correfponde nce with foreigners, had
obitruaed the entrance into 'he Euphrates r; to
carry the commud!;tis of th: call up that river,
and the Tigris, which unites .ith it, into th:
interior parts of his Afi-:ic dminions; while,
by the way of the Arabian Gulf, and the river
Nile, they might be c, nvcycd to Alexandria,
a-id diltributtd to the re,t of the world. Near-
c'nu;, an offcer of tlrinent abilitie., was entrultcd

.with the conmar.nd of the flect fitted out for thi:
expedition. He performed this voyage, which
was deemed an e:!terprife so arduous and irn-
portant, that Alexa.idtr reckoned it one of th:
most extraordinary events which diflingul',ed
his reign. Inco:.idcrable as it may now appea-,
it was, at that time, an u:;dcrtaki:ig of no ii;tl
nr,erit and difficulty. In the prosecution of it,
firiking instances occur of the small progrcfi
which the Greeks had made in naval knowledge'.
Ii-aving never failed beyond the bounds of th'
Mediterranean, where the ebb and flow of t!.:
sea are hardly perceptible, when they firll t
served this phenomenon at the mJuth of th:
Indus, it appeared to them a prodigy by wliri
the gods teltified the difplcafure of Hca:--

Srab. Geogr. iib, i. p.
I- j. ' See No r£ I7.

ag-.-

zaainft their enterprise t. During their whole
cu-rse, they seem never to have loft fight of
land, but followed the bearings of the coast so
fcr-ilelv, that they could not much avail them-
flvcs of those periodical winds which facilitate
r.aviation in the Indian ocean. Accordingly,
thc- iptrt no Icfs than ten u months in perform-
i:-R' thi;-voyage, wvhich, from the mouth of the
I.dus to that of the Persian Gulf, does not
e:,:--:! twenty degrees. It is probable, that
a-"'i.: c

the violent convulsions and frequent revo-

:I urni in the taft, occasioned by the contelts
z:r-,:;- tlhe successors of Alexander, the naviga-
t; io India, by the course which Nearchus had
o[.e:n, was difeontinued. The Indian trade
c;-:(!d on at Alexandria not only subsisted, but
:.-j fu. much extended under the Grecian mo-
:.:ch of E-vpt, that it proved a great source
'.' the ws-alti which diltinguifhed their king-
C ;...

The progress which the Romans made in navi-
a2:i: 0 and difcoven-, was still more inconsiderable
t: nm that of the Greeks. The genius of the
RoKnan people, their military education, and the
f',: of their laws, concurred in estranging them
::m commerce and naval affairs. It was the
r-;ciritv of opposing a formidable rival, not the
.':irc of extending trade, which first prompted
t :o aim at maritime powvr. Though they
.,n perceived that, in order to acquire the
:.;':crfal dominion after which they aspired, it
Xas cceTfary to render themselves masters of the
2, they itill confidered the naval service as a
: 5- NOTE V. U P;in. HiAf. Nat. I;b. vi. c. 23.

.^ I. F tub-

subordinate flation, and reserved for it such ci::.
zens as were not of a rank to be admitted into the
legions x. In the history of the Roman republic,
hardly one event occurs, that marks attention t!
navigation any farther than as it was inlirumentai
towards conquest. When the Roman valour an.
discipline had subdued all the maritime te:n
known in the ancient world; when Carthage,
Greece, and Egypt had submitted to their power,
the Romans did not imbibe the commercial fpir:
of the conquered nations. Among that peopkl
of soldiers, to have appl d to trade wo'li
hare been deemed a degradation of a Ron:.:
citizen. They abandoned the mechanical ars.
commerce, and navigation, to slaves, to freed.
men, to provinciaL, and to citizens of the lowc:
cilas. Even after the fulverfion of liberty, whe:
the fcveritv and haugh:incfs of ancient mantne
bchean to abate, co:nmcrce did not rife irt,
high ei imation among the Romans. The tradec
Greece, Egypt, and the other conquered cou.
tries, continued to be carried on in its utif
char:nels, after thev were reduced into the formn c
Roman provinces. As Rome was the capita!c
the world, and the feat of government, all tL
wealth, and valuable productions of the province
flowed naturally hthither. The Romans, fatifie
with this, fccm to have fuf'rred commerce:
remain almoit eintirely in the hands of the naziv:
of the respective countr.es. The extent, ho'
ever, of the Roman power, which reached vc:
the greatest part of the known world, the vi-
lant infpedion of the Roman magtilrates, and t~

Polyb, lib. v.

fp:'-

fpii't of the Roman government, no less intelli
gent than active, gave such additional security to
comrrerce, as animated it with new vigour. The
union among nations was never so entire, nor the
i-::rcourfe so perfec, as within the bounds of
t'-i.- vzt empire. Commerce, under the Roman
do nir ion, was not obftrucded by the jealousy of
ri.al iates, interrupted by frequent hostilities, or
l -ed b) partial retrictions. One superintend-
i..r power moved and regulated the industry of
rrankind, and enjoyed the fruits of their joint
enorts.

Navigation felt this influence, and improved

under it. As soon as the Romans acquired a
take for the luxuries of the east, the trade with
India through Egypt was pushcd with new
rvgour, and carried on to greater extent. By
frcquenting the Indian continent, navigators
became acquainted with the periodical course of
the wind;, which, in the ocean that separates
Africa from India, blow with little variation
during one half of the year from the east, and
during, the other half blow with equal steadiness
from the weft. Encouraged by observing this,
tihe pilots who failed from Egypt to India
abandoned their ancient flow and dangerous
courfc along the coast, and as soon as the western
rmonfoon set in, took their departure from Ocelis,
at the mouth of the Arabian Gulf, and itretched
bt.'dl across the ocean Y. The uniform direc-
t:: of the wil:d iupplying the place of the
c, rJda, and tendering the guidance of the stars
i:. i,.cccitary, conducted them to the poit of

Y Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. vi. c. 23.

F 2 Muflrs,

Mufiris, on the western shore of the Indi'a
continent. There they took on board the:
cargo, and returning with the eastern morifoon,
finished their voyage to the Arabian Gulf withi:
the year. This part of India, now known by
the name of the Malabar coast, seems to hart
been the utmost limit of ancient navigation in
that quarter of the globe. What imptrfv,
knowledge the ancients had of the immer.e
countries which fretch beyond this towards the
east, they received from a few adventurers, who
had visited them by land. Such excursions wsrr
neither frequent nor extensive, and it is probable,
that while the Roman intercourse with Indii
subsisted, nio traveller ever penetrated farthr
than to the baiiks of the Ganges z. The flee:.
from Egypt which tradrd at Mufiris were loaded,
it is true, with the spices and other rich comr
modities of the continent and islands of the farther
India; but these were brought to that port,
which became the staple of the commerce be.
twcen the East and Weft, by the Indians thetm
selves, in canoes hollowed out of one tree a. TLi
Egyptian and Roman merchants, satisficd witii
acquiring those commodities in this manner, dii
not think it necessary to explore unknown seas,
and venture upon a dangerous navigation in quei
of the countries which produced them. Bii'
though the discoveries of the Romans in Indi:
were so limited, their commerce there was fuc'
as will appear considerable, even to the prefc:.:
agi, ia which the Indian trade has been extecnd

z: C:; l~ C"31-. r-a;. X. x. p. C 6 10:0 . SCeseTe 'N"*

' i-..;! ^ ..H .-: ..a ».. .. 26.

far beyond the prancce or conception of any
preceding period. We are informed by one au-
thor of credit b, that the commerce with India
drained the Roman empire every year of more
:t:in four hundred thousand pounds; and by
2'. ther, that one hundred and twenty ships
,Ld annually from the Arabian Gulf to that
c .':" r' c.

I le dilcoverv of this new method of failing
:* Ilnia, is the most considerable improvement

.: -.ti"on made during the continuance of
':c Roman power. But in ancient times, the
;: I.'..Ldge of remote countries was acquired
-..:, ftriquently by land than by sea d; and the
R':'.n-, from their peculiar disinclination to
-:.al affair, mar be said to have negleced to-
:-'v the latter, though a more easy and expe-
r..:as r-r.chod of dlifcover-. The progress,
...;ver, of their vitorious armies through a
c ,::derable portion of Europe, Asia, and Africa,
c .tributed greatly to extend discover- by land,
a-.d gradually opened the navigation of new and
iur.knovn seas. Previous to the Roman conquerts,
the civilized nations of antiquity had little com-
rr.i ication with those countries in Europe, which
r.o-. form its most opulent and powerful king-
domrr. The interior parts of Spain and Gaul
vwere imperfectly known. Britain, separated
"-rm the reft of the world, had never been visit-
e:, except by its neighbours the Gauls, and by
a fc', Carthaginian merchants. The name of
Germany had fcarcelv been heard of. Into all

' P!n. Nat. Hist. lib. vi c. 26. c Strab. Geogr.
hb. i:. p. 1-9. d See NOTE VII,

F 3 these

these countries the arms of the Romans pene.
trated. They entirely subdued Spain and Gaul;
they conquered the greatcft and most fertile
parts of Britain; they advanced into Germanr,
as far as the banks of the river Elbe. In Africa,
they acquired a considerable knowledge of t'n
provinces which stretch along the Mediterranean
lea, from Egypt westward to the Straits of Gades.
In Asia, they not only fubjectd to their power
most of the provinces which composed the
Pruflian and Macedonian empires, but, after
their victories over Mithridates and Tigranes,
they seem to have made a more accurate iurvev
of the countries contiguous to the Euxine ard
Caspian seas, and to have carried on a more
extensive trade than that of the Greeks w:h
the opulent and commercial nations, then fra:c
round the Euxine sea.

From this succinct survey of discovery a.d

navigation, which I have traced from the earlic:
dawn of historical knowledge to the full e£:.
b]ifhment of the Roman dominion, the progrrfc
of both appears to have been wonderfully flaw.
It seems neither adequate to what we might have
expected from the activity and enterprize of t:e
human mind, nor to what might have been pcr
formed by the power of the great empires whic
fuccefilveiy governed the world. If we rejec
accounts that are fabulous and obscure ; if we
adhere steadily to the light and information o
authentic hiftorv, without substituting in i:
place the conjecures of fancy, or the dreams c
etymologiffs, we must conclude, that th
knowledge which the ancients had acquired
the habitable globe was extremely confinec

iT

I3 Europe, the extensive provinces in the eastern
part of Germany were little known to them.
I'hev were almost totally unacquainted with the
vail countries which are now subjec to the kings
of Denmark, Sweden, Prussia, Poland, and the
Ruffian empire. The more barren regions, that
firctcl v. ithin the arctic circle, were quite unex-
plored. In Africa, their researches did not
xtec:,d far heyond the provinces which border
,c ti.c Mediterranean, and those situated on the
\w:icr: fhlore of the Arabian Gulf. In Asia,
thcv wele unacquainted, as I formerly observed,

h.

i: all the fertile and opulent countries beyond
t.e Ganges, which furnish the most valuable
c,.onmodites that, in modern times, have been

. great objct of the European commerce
: .i;h India; nor do they seem to have ever
F:nC.:rated into those immense regions occupied
b:. tihe andering tribes, which they called by
t:e general name of Sarmatians or Scythians,
a-.d which are now possessed by Tartars of various.
dncominations, and by the Asiatic fubjets of
kufFla.

EBt there is one opinion, that universally pre-

vailed among the ancients, which conveys a more
striking idea of the small progress they had made
in the knowledge of the habitable globe, than
car be derived from any detail of their disco-
verics. They supposed the earth to be divided
into five regions, which they distinguished by the
r.nam.e of zones. Two of these, which were
reareft the poles, they termed frigid zones, and
believed that the extreme cold which reigned
perpetually there, rendered them uninhabitable.
A ,:.ther, feated under the line, and extending

011

on either fide towards the tropics, they called
the torrid zone, and imagined it to be so burr.:
up with unremitting heat, as to be equally deli.
tute of inhabitants. On the two other zonr, ,
which occupied the remainder of the earth, the-
bellowed the appellation of temperate, ar-
taught that there, being the only regions in wvhih
life could fuhfifr, were allotted to man for hi;
habitation. This wild opinion was not a cocrc::
of the uninformed vulgar, or a fanciful fici'n
of the poets, but a fv-iem adopted by the mo'.s
enlightened philosophers, the most accurate
historians and geographers in Greece and Rorre.
According to this theor?, a vaRt portion of the
habitable earth vwas prcn)ounced to be unfit fcr
sustaining the human siecie;. Those fertile and
populous regions within the torrid zone, v.hich
are now known not only to vield their own in-
habitants the necessaries and comforts of life
with moti luxuriant profusion, but to communi-
cate their superfluous stores to the re!t of the
world, were supposcd to be the mansion of per-
petual sterility and dcfolation. As all the parts
of the globe with which the ancients were ac-
quainted, lay within the northern temperate zone,
their opinion that the other temperate zone was
filled with inhabitants, was founded on reasoning
and conjecture, not on discovery. They even
believed that, by the intolerable heat of the
torrid zone, such an insuperable barrier wv2
placed between the two tnmperate regions of the
earth, as would prevent foi ever any intercourse
between their referive inhabitants. Thus this
extravagant theory not only proves that the an-
cients were unacquainted with the true slate of

the

the globe, but it tended to render their igno-
-:.-cc perpetual, by representing all attempts
-,,ward opening a communication with the
r.-:ote regions of the earth, as utterly imprac-
::ca'.c f

1a:, however imperfet or inaccurate the

cographical knowledge which the Greeks and
i{.uma:; had acquired may appear, in refpe2 of
tle prcfent improved state of that science, their
progress in discovery will seem considerable, and
t;,c extent to which they carried navigation and
c ).m-rce mull be reckoned great, when com-
-i.srcd wiil the ignorance of early times. As
ijng as tle Roman empire retaired such vigour
a, tu prclcrve its authority over the conquered
::a:iio., and to keep them united, it was an
object us public police, as well as of private cu-
ri,:itv, to examine and describe the countries
w.:,lhi composed this great body. Even when
t!,e other sciences began to decline, geography,
c:,ichcid with new observations, and receiving
i:r.e accession from the experience of every age,
a:.d the reports of every traveller, continued to
i:l;Jruve. It attained to the highelt point of
pcrfcction and accuracy to which it ever arrived
i:1 t!h anl ient world, by the industry and genius
of Ptolery the philosopher. He flourished in the
;(o;id cc.itury of tht Christian era, and pub-
li.?,d a dfcription of the terrelrii.l globe, more
anmpl and exact tlan that of any of his pre-
diccifurs.

But, loon after, violent convulsions began to
I .:.tc li; Romnan l4atc; the fatal ambition or

f See NOTx V11I.

caprice

caprice of Constantine, by changing the feat of
government, divided and weakened its force;
the barbarous nations, which Providence pre.
pared as infiruments to overturn the mightr
fabric of the Roman power, began to affemb!t
and to rrufter their armies on its frontier; tlh
empire tottered to its fall. During this decline
and old age of the Roman state, it was impofE;bl
that the sciences should go on improving. The
efforts of genius were, at that period, as languid
and feeble as those of government. From the
time of Ptolemy, no considerable addition fcen;
to have been made to geographical knowledge,
nor did any important revolution happen in trade,
excepting thatConftantinople,byits advantageous
situation, and the encouragement of the easler.
emperors, became a commercial city of the firy
note.

At length, the clouds which had been so lorn

gathering round the Roman empire, burst into
a form. Barbarous nations rushed in from feve.
ral quarters with irresistible impetuosity, and, vn
the general wreck, occasioned by the inundation
which overwhelmed Europe, the arts, sciences,
inventio.s,and discoveries of the Romans, periisied
in a great measure, and disappeared '. All the
various tribes, which fettled in the different
provinces of the Roman empire, were unciviliz.
ed, itrangers to letters, dcftitute of arts, un.c
quainted with regular government, fuhordin a: n-
or laws. The manners and inftitutioi:s of feCn.
of them were so rude, as to be hardly compatil'
with a state of social union. Europe, when o-.

Hi, cf Charle V. vol. i. p. '. ; .

cl;pci

c.picd by such inhabitants, may be said to have
returned to a second infancy, and had to begin
anew its career in improvement, science, and
c;vil;ty. The first effec of the settlement of
those barbarous invaders was to dissolve the union
by which the Roman power had cemented man-
ki.d together. They parcelled out Europe
inio many small and independent stares, differing
from each other in language and customs. No
ie:tcrcourfe subsisted between the members of
thole di ided and hostile communities. Accuf.
tomcd to a simple mode of life, and averse to
i-duftry, they had few wants to supply, and few
futper.iuities to difpofc of. The names of Jranger
a:;d of enemy became once more words of the
fame import. Customs every where prevailed,
an.d even laws were eitablifhed, which rendered
it difagreeablc and dangerous to visit any foreign
cuuntry h. Cities, in which alone an extensive
c..r.merce can be carried on, were few, inconfi-
dcramle, and dctitutc of those immunities which
p-rodacc security or excite enterprise. The fci-
t:..e, on which geography and navigation are
i'ju:ndd, were little cultivated. The accounts
U:. ancient improvements and discoveries, con-
tai::.d in the Greek and Roman authors, were
licgicCted or misunderstood. The knowledge of
r;:::ote regions was loft, their situation, their
cjmmodities, and almost their names, were un-
iknown.

One circumitance prevented commercial inter-

courif with distant nations from ceasing alto-
|bct!cr. Constantinople, though often threatened

H Iift. of Charles V. vol. i. p. 4. 3X1.

by

by the fierce invaders, who spread defol3tioa
over the reft of Europe, was so fortunate as t:
escape their deflrufive rage. In that city, the
knowledge of ancient arts and discoveries wia
preserved; a tafe for splendour and elegance
subsisted ; the produfcions and luxuries offoreigt
countries were in requeit; and commerce con
tinued to flourish there when it was almoli
extint in every other part of Europe. Th,
citizens of Constantinople did not confine the;:
trade to the islands of the Archipelago, or to the
adjacent coasts of Alia; they took a wider range
and following the courie which the ancients haz
marked out, imported the commodities of tht
East Indies from Alexandria. When Egvp!
was torn from the Roman empire by the Ara
bians, the industry of the Greeks discovered
new channel, by which the productions of Indi:
might be conveyed to Conilantinople. Th-:
were carried up the Indus, as far as that great
river is navigable; thence they were tranfporte,
by land to the bankR of the river Oxus, and pro.
ceeded down its ilream to the Cafiian sea. Thet;
they entered the Volga, and fanirg up it, wern
carried by land to the Tanais, which conduc&ec
them into the Euxine sea, where vefcils fror
Constantinople waited their arrival i. This ex
traordinary and tedious mode of convevance
merits attention, not only as a proof of the
violent palfion which the inhabitants of Conian.
tinople had conceived for the luxuries of the eaii.
and a. a fpvcimen of the ardour and ingenuity
with which they carried on commerce; but be.

Rimufio, vol. i. p. 372, F.

cau:.

cause it demonstrates, that, during the ignorance
. hich reigned in the reft of Europe, an extensive
knowledge of remote countries was still preserved
a tile capital of the Greek empire.

At the fame time, a gleam of light and
.-nowledge broke in upon the east. The Ara-
'as hlaving contracted some reliih for the fci-
nces of the people, whose empire they had con-

)ilu ed to overturn, translated the books of
'.veral of the Greek philosophers into their own
2nguage. One of the firtl was that valuable
Vo-k of Ptolemy, which I have already men-

:id. The study of geography became, of
.jnicquence, an early object of attention to the
-'raibans. But that acute and ingenious people
:jtiated chiefly the speculative and scientific
.ats of geography. In order to ascertain the
1.-urc and dimensions of the terrestrial globe,
.qr, applied the principles of geometry, they had
course to astronomical observations, they em-
',)-.'cd experiments and operations, which, Eu-
'Jit, in more enlightened times, has been proud
.J a(opt and to imitate. At that period, how-
:;rr, the fame of the improvements made by the
rAra'ians did not reach Europe. The know-
ad;e of their discoveries was reserved for ages
:.pahle of comprehending and of perfecting
l:.em.

By degrees, the calamities and desolation
brought upon the western provinces of the Ro-
nran empire by its barbarous conquerors, were
forgotten, and in some measure repaired.
'hcr rude tribes which fettled there, acquiring
insensibly some idea of regular government,
n.d some relish for the functions and comforts
VOL. i. C of

of civil life, Europe began to awake from ir
torpid ad unaCtive state. The first fymptoe,
of revival were discerned in Italy. The norther
tribes, which took poffeflion of this countrr,
made progress in improvement with greatc
rapidity than the people fettled in other parts rs
Europe. Various causes, which it is not th
object of this work to enumerate or explair,
concurred in restoring liberty and independen_
to the cities of Italy k. The acquisition of thet
routed indutryv, and gave motion and vigo0
to all the active powers of the human mini
Ftcn-ign commerce revived, navigation was 2:.
tended to and improved. Conitantinople bccza.
the chief mart to which the Italians resorter
There they not only met with a fa.ourable r'
ception, but obtained such mercantile privileg,
as enabled them to carry on trade with grrz
advantage. They were {upplitd botl with t'
prtciotis commodities of the e?l', and with miar
curious manufactur;s, the prodluEt of ancient a-.1
and ingenuity which still fiubilted amor.g t5
Greeks. As the labour and expence of convy.
ing the productions of India to Conftanttr,,r
bv th-.. long and indiret course which I .--:
defc.-ibcd, rendered them extremely rare, art.d
an exorbitant price, the indufry of the ItlirA
difccvcrcd ther rrmethods of procuring themr
grc-ater abundance, and at an easier rate. Tr..
forretirres prrchafed them in Aleppo, Tripo£
and other ports on the coast of Syria, to whid
the- were brought by a route not unknown
t'; a-n-ent . They were conveyed from Inv:
by fca, up the Persian Gulf, and ascending 't

' i..2. oi Cha:c; V. vol. i. p. 33.

luplhra

Eup!i-ates and Tigris, as far as Bagdat, were
a-rried by land across the defart of Palmyra, and
rrc, thence to the towns on the Mediterranean.
Bit from the length of the journey, and the
dangers to which the caravans were exposed, this
proved always a tedious, and often a precarious
:pode of conveyance. At length, the Soldans of
E-vpt:, having revived the commerce with India
i its ancient channel, by the Arabian Gulf, the
[talian merchants, notwithstanding the violent
intipathy to each other with which Chritfians
Sad the followers of Mahomet were then possessed,
repaired to Alexandria, and enduring, from the
loe of gain, the insolence and exations of the
blahometans, established a lucrative trade in that
port. From that period, the commercial spirit
f Italy became active and enterprising. Venice
eGnoa, Pisa, rose from inconsiderable towns, to
be populous and wealthy cities. Their naval
po;0cr increased; their vessels frequented not
p:;!v all the ports in the Mediterranean, but ven-
luring sometimes beyond the Streights, visited
he maritime towns of Spain, France, the Low-
Fountries, and England; and, by difftributing
heir commodities over Europe, began to com-
tnunicate to its various nations some taste for the
aluable produtions of the east, as well as some
deas of manufactures and arts, which were then
lknown beyond the precincts of Italy.
While the cities of Italy were thus advancing
D their career of improvement, an event hap-
tted, the most extraordinary perhaps in the
i:tory of mankind, which, intlead of retarding
:; commercial progress of the Italians, rendered
r'. nr rapid. The martial spirit of the Euro-

G 2 peans,

peans, heightened and inflamed by religious zd
prompted them to attempt the deliverance c
the Holy Land from the dominion of infidd
Vast armies, composed of all the nations in ES
rope, marched towards Asia, upon this wild e
terprize. The Genoese, the Pifans, and Venetia
furnished the transports which carried them tL
ther. Thcv supplied them with provisions az
military flores. Beside the immense fums whic
they received on this account, they obtaine
commercial privileges and establishments, of gra
consequence in the settlements which the cr
faders made in Palestine, and in other provir.a
of Asia. From those fourcts, prodigious weal:
flowed into the cities which I have mentionc;
This was accompanied with a proportional i:
crease of power, and, by the end of the ho:
war, Venice, in particular, became a great mr.2
time fiate, poffefling an cxtenfive commerce, a:
ample territories . Italy was not the c,-
country in which the crufadcs contributed
revive and diffuse such a spirit as prepared E:
rope for future discoveries. By their expeditc:
into Asia, the other European nations b cc
well acquainted with remote regions, which f:
rrerly they knew only by nrame, or by- the rep-c
of ignorant and credulous pilgrims. They ht
an opportunity of observing the manncr%, ,
arts, and the accommodations of people rrc:
polished than themselves. T;h:s in-ercourfe!:
tween the east and weft fubSfited almon. :.a
centuries. The adventurers, who r-.unlc.l if:
Asia, communicated to their ccuntrymen t;

I Ei de 'Hi.ftire du Commerce de V'nife, p.
P , &:'

deas which they had acquired, and the habits
f life they had contracted by visiting more re-
ned nations. The Europeans began to be fen-
fble of wants with which they were formerly
nacquainted: new desires were excited; and
ch a taste for the commodities and arts of
ther countries gradually spread among them,
that they not only encouraged the resort of
oreigners 'to their harbours, but began to per-
ceive the advantage and necessity of applying to
commerce themselves m.

This communication, which was opened be-
ween Europe and the western provinces of

ia, encouraged several peifons to advance far
beond the countries in which the crusaders
caried on their operations, and to travel by land
rnto the more remote and opulent regions of the
eai. The wild fanaticism, which seems at that
:riod to have mingled in all the schemes of
i:.'ividals, no less than in all the counsels of na-
ions, first incited men to enter upon those long
nd dangerous peregrinations. They were after-
:ards undertaken from profpets of commercial
advantage, or from motives of mere curiosity.
Bnjamin, a Jew of Tudela, in the kingdom of
Navarre, possessed with a superstitious veneration
or the law of Moses, and solicitous to visit his
countrymen in the east, whom he hoped to find
i such a state of power and opulence as might
rtdound to the honour of his feet, set out from
pain in the year I 160, and travelling by land
o Constantinople, proceeded through the coun-
ries to the north of the Euxine and Caspian

l Hist. Charles V. vol. i p. 31) &c.

c 3 seas,

seas, as far as Chinese Tartary. From thene
he took his route towards the south, and afta
traversing various provinces of the farther India,
he embarked on the Indian ocean, visited feverl
of its islands, and returned at the end of thir.
teen years by the way of Egypt, to Europe, wit-
much information concerning a large ditfrict c
the globe, altogether unknown at that tirme t
the weitern world 3. The zeal of the head c
the Christian church co operated with the super.
ftition of Benjarin the Jew, in discovering the
interior and remote provinces of Asia. A3
Chrifter.dom h baving been alarmed with accouiu
of the rapid progrcfs of the Tartar arms unDe
Zengis Khan, Innocent IV. who entertair.c
most exalted ideas concerning the plenitude d
his own power, and the fubmifiron due to Li
injunctions, sent father John de Piano Carpi;,
at the head of a mission of Franciscan mon!^,
and father Afcolino, at the head of anotherd
Domi!icans, to enjoin Kayuk Khan, the gra:.-
son of Zengis, who was then at the head of it
Tartar emrire, to embrace the Christian faAi,
and to defilt from delolating the earth by L
arms. The haughty descendant of the greatd
conquercr Asia had ever beheld, aftonillhed z
this itrange mandate from an Italian pricft, who
name and jurisdiction were alike unknown to hiz
received it

, ith the contempt which it merit&i

though he dismissed the mendicants who deliverg
it with impunity. But, as they had penetrat;
into the country by different routes, and follosd
for. some time the Tartar camps, which we

Bcrgergo Recueil des Voyages, &c. tom. i. p. r.

alwTi

anvavs in motion, they had opportunity of visit-
: a great part of Asia. Carpini, who pro-
ceded by the way of Poland and Russia, tra-
velled throiuh its northern provinces as far as
the extremities of Thibet. Afcolino, who seems
to have landed somewhere in Syria, advanced
throuih ;ts southern provinces, into the interior
parts of Peri-a .

Not long after [1253], St. Louis of France
contributed farther towards extending the know-

Idrd which the Europeans had begun to acquire

of those distant regions. Some designing im-
poitl,-, who took advantage of the fender ac-
qliai!t;ince of Chrinttndom with the state and
characttr of the Asiatic nations, having informed
i't that a powerful khan of the Tartars had em-
braced the Chriltian faith, the monarch listened
tuJ; tale with pious credulity, and instantly
sr !v'cd to fend ambassadors to this illuftious
convrt, with a view of inciting him to attack
their common enemy the Saracens in one quarter,
whie he fell upon them in another. As monks
wrre the only persons in that age who possessed
such a degree of knowledge as qualified them for
a frv-ice of this kind, he employed in it father
Andrew, aJacobine, who was followed by father
Wi'!liarn de Rubruquis, a Franciscan. With
refpet to the progress of the former, there ii no
remorial extant. The journal of the latter has
been published. He was admitted into the pre-
fnce of Mangu, the third khan in succession from
e:ngis, and made a circuit through the interior

° Hakluyt, i, az Bcrgeron, tom. L

parts

parts of Asia, more extensive than that of any
European who had hitherto explored them P.

To those travellers, whom religious zeal fest

forth to visit Asia, succeeded others who ventur.
ed into remote countries, from the profpe& of
commercial advantage, or from motives of mere
euriofity. The first and most eminent of theft
was Marco Polo, a Venetian of a noble family.
Having engaged early in trade [I269], accord.
ing to the cufom of his country, his aspiring
mind wished for a sphere of acivity more exten.
five than was afforded to it by the established
traffic carried on in those ports of Europe and
Asia, which the Venetians .frequented. This
prompted him to travel into unknown countries,
in expectation of opening a commercial inter
course with them, more suited to the sanguine
ideas and hopes of a young adventurer.

As his father had already carried some Euro

pean commodities to the court of the great khai
of the Tartars, and had disposed of them to ad
vantage, he resorted thither. Under the pro
tection of Kublay khan, the moit powerful o
all the successors of Zengis, he continued hi
mercantile peregrinations in Asia upwards o
twenty-fix years; and, during that time, ad
vanced towards the east, far beyond the utmoi
boundaries to which any European traveller hai
e-er proceeded. Instead of following the cour:
of Carpini and Rubruquis, along the vafl un
peopled plains of Tartary, he palTed through th
chief trading cities in the more cultivated part
of Aia, and penetrated to Cambalu, or Pekinc
p HakL i. 7r. Recueil des Voyages par Bergeron, tom. i!

ti

the capital of the great kingdom of Cathay, or
IChina, fubjeEt at that time to the successors of
Zengis. He made more than one voyage, on
the Indian ocean, he traded in many of the
i:lands, from which Europe had'long received
fpiccries and other commodities, which it held
in high efimation, though unacquainted with
the particular countries to which it was indebted
for those precious produtions; and he obtained
information concerning several countries, which
he did not visit in person, particularly the island
of Zipangi, probably the fame now known by
the name of Japan q. On his return, he astonished
his contemporaries with his descriptions of vast
regions, whose names had never been heard of
in Europe, and with such pompous accounts of
their fertility, their populousness, their opulence,
the variety of their manufacures, and the extent
cf their trade, as rose far above the conception
of an uninformed age.

About half a centuryafter Marco Polo [ 1 2 2],
firJohn Mandeville, an Engliihman, encouraged
by his example, visited moit of the countries in
the east which he had described, and, like him,
F'ji.lificd an account of them ,. The narrations
.1f iiofe

L ear! travellers abound with many wild
Cr.colelent tales, concerning giants, enchanters,
.aid mnnfters. But they were not, from that
c.rcumtancc, less acceptable to an ignorant
a-;, which delighted in what was marvellous.
'i n .-onders which they told, moftlv on hear-
fye, iil,;i the imulitudd with admiration. The

st;t which the)- related from thi-r own obferv-

V: e.i di Marco Polo. Ramus. ii. z. Bergeron,
-;. i;; r Voy.,es and Travels, by Sir John Mande-

ation,

ation, attra&ted the attention of the more d'i.
cerning. The former, which may be confiderde
as the popular traditions and fables.of the coun.
tries through which they had passed, were gr2.
dually disregarded as Europe advanced in know.
ledge. The latter, however incredible some oi
them may have appeared in their own time, have
been confirmed by the observations of modern
travellers. By means of both, however, the cu.
riofity of mankind was excited with refpe&t tc
the remote parts of the earth, their ideas were
enlarged, and they were not only insensibly dif.
posed to attempt new discoveries, but receivce
such information as directed to that particula
course in which these were afterwards carried on

While this spirit was gradually forming ii

Europe, a fortunate discovery w-as made, whic!
contributed more than all the efforts and inge
nuity of preceding ages, to improve and to ex
tend navigation. That wonderful property o
the magnet, by which it communicates such vir
tue to a needle or slender rod of iron, as to poin
towards the poles of the earth, was observed
The use which might be made of this in direct
ing navigation was immediately perceived. Tha
valuable, but now familiar initrument, the ma
riners compass, was conftruced. When, b2
means of it, navigators found that, at all Te2
sons, and in every place, they could discover th
north and south with so much ease and accuracy
it became no longer necessary to depend mere!
on the light of the stars and the observation c
the sea coa2l. They gradually abandoned thed
ancient tlmid ard lingering course along tL
shore, ventured boldly into the ocean, and r
lying on this new guide, could tfeer in th

darkc

darkest night, and under the most cloudy sky,
with a security and precision hitherto unknown.
The compass may be said to have opened to man
the dominion of the sea, and to have put him in
full poffeifion of the earth, by enabling him to
visit ever part of it. Flavio Gioia, a citizen of
Amalfi, a town of considerable trade in the king-
dom of Naples, was the author of this great dif-
covery, about the year one thousand three hun-
dred and two. It hath been often the fate of
those illustrious benefactors of mankind, who
have enriched science and improved the arts by
t:!cir inventions, to derive more reputation than
L-nefit from the happy efforts of their geniuq.
B'et the lot of Gioia has been still more cruel;
through the inattention or ignorance of contem-
porary historians, he has been defrauded even of
th!e fame to which he had such a just title. We
r-cei've from them no information with refpe&
to) his profcffion, his characer, the precise time
when he made this important discovery, or the
accidents and inquiries which led to it. The
iknowledge of this event, though productive of
I reater effcAs than any recorded in the annals of
t'e human race, is transmitted to us without any
of those circumstances, which can gratify the cu-
r;ofity that it naturally awakens . But though
the use of the compass might enable the Italians
to perform the short voyages to which they were
accuilomed, with greater security and expedition,
its influence was not so sudden or extensive, as
immediately to render navigation adventurous,

'Collinas & Trombellus de Acus nautice Inventore.
Jrtit. Acad. Boon. tom. ii. part iii. . 372.

and

and to excite a spirit of discovery. Many cau'f'
combined in preventing this beneficial inventic.5
from producing its full effect inftantanceouu .
Men rclinquifh ancient habits slowly, and w',:
rclu&cance. They are averse to new cxpr;.
ments, and venture upon them with timidi.;,
The commercial jealousy ot the Italians, it ia
probable, laboured to conceal the happy dihci.
very of their countryman from other natio:.
The art of fleering by the corrpafs with fud
f:i;l and accuracy as to inspire a full confidlr..:
in its dircotion, was acquired gradually. Sa.L:::
unaccuflomed to quit light of land, duri r..:
launch out at once and commit themfclves to c:.
known seas. Accordingly, near half a cer.t n
elapscd from the time of Gioila' discovery, bc;i.-
navigators ventured into any fcas wh:.ch tl::
had not bcn accjitorr.ved ti frequent.

The iril apc:ai lnce of a bolder spirit may b-

dated from the voyages of the Spaniards to ;1:
Canary or Fortunate Islands. By what accidc-
they were led to the difovery of those fn-,
ilzs, xhlich lie near five hundred miles from th:
Spanish coal, and above a hundred and ii:]
miles from the coast of Africa, conlemporar
writers have not explained. But, about th
middle of the fourteenth century, the people c
all the different kingdoms into which Spain wa
t'nen divided, were accu:tomed to make piratio
excursions thither, in order to plunder the inha
bitants, or to carry them off as slaves. Cleme:
VI. in virtue of the right claimed by the ho'.
fee, to dispose of all countries possessed by ini
dels, ercted thofc isles into a kingdom, in th
year one thousand three hundred and forty-fou!

ai

!and conferred it on Lewis de la Cerda, descended
from the royal family of Cailile. But that un-
ionurt:ate prince, deltitutt of power to aftert his
norinal title, having never vi:ited the Canaries,
John de Bethencourt, a Norman baron, ob-
tained a grant of them from Henry II. of
Caitile . Bethencourt, with the valour and good
frtunc nwhich ditirguilhed the adventurers of his
courti-, attempted and effctcd the conquest,
ziad the poiicfiioi of the Canaries remained for
stu-n time in hls family, as a fief held of the
cru-wn of Ca'tile. Pievious to this expedition of
i;t}l.cncourt, his countrymen fettled in Nor-
mndily are laid to have visited the coalt of Africa,
an:d to htave proceeded far to the south of the
Cainary ifands G365-]. But their voyages thi.
ther leem not to have been undertaken in confe-
SUrnce of any public or regular plan for extend-
?,Z navigation and attempting new discoveries.
They were either excursions fuggeited by that
/oving piratical spirit, which delcendcd to the
iurormans from their ancestors, or the commercial
ntcrprizes of private merchants, which attraccd
u little notice, that hardly any memorial of them
i to be found in contemporary authors. In a
;eneral survey of the progress of discovery, it is
AScient to have mentioned this event; and leav-
ng it among those of dubious existence, or of
mail importance, we may conclude, that though
uch additional information concerning the re-
itec regions of the east had been received by
ra\cilers who visited them by land, navigation,

Viera y Clavijo Notic. de la Hiftor. de Canaria, i. z68,

Glas Hilt. c. 1.
VOL. 1. H at

at the beginning of the fifteenth, century, had
not advanced bevond the state to which it had
attained before the downfal of the Roman em.
pire.

At length the period arrived, when Prom.

dence decreed that men were to pass the limiu
within which they had been so long confined,
and open to themftives a more ample field wherei
to display their talents, their enterprize, and cou.
rage. The firit confidcrable efforts towards thi
were not made by any of the more powerful
Rates of Europe, or by those who had applied
to navigation with the greatest assiduity and iuc.
ccfs. The glory of leading the way in this new
career was rcfcrved for Portugal, one of thi
fma!lPtf and least powerful of the Europea
kingdoms. As the attempts of the Portu rues
to acquire the knowledge of those parts of th,
globe with which mankind were then unac.
quainted, not only improved and extended tb
art of navigation, but roused such a spirit of c-
riofitv and enterprize, as led to the discover vd
the New World, of which I propose to wra
the hiftorv, it is necessary to take a full view a
the rife, the prugrefs, and success of their vi
rious naval operations. It was in this fchco
that the difcovrere of America was trained; a:-
unless we trace the steps by which his inftruc.,o
and guides advanced, it will be impo.fible to con
prehend the circumstances which suggested t'
idea, or facilitated the execution of his grta
design.

Various circumstances prompted the Port

guefe to exert their activity in this new dirt:
tiun, and enabled them to accomplifl undcrtai

sings apparently superior to the natural force of

Itheir monarchy. The kings of Portugal, hav-
ing driven the Moors out of their dominions, had
acquired power, as well as glory, by the success
or their arms againif the infidels. By their vic-
tories over them, they had extended the royal
au:hority beyond the narrow limits within which
it was originally circumscribed in Portugal, as
well as in other feudal kingdoms. They had
the command of the national force, could route
it to act with united vigour, and, after the ex-
ullfion of the Moors, could employ it without
cread of interruption from any domestic enemy.
By the perpetual hostilities carried on for several
cir;tries against the Mahometans, the martial
end adventurous spirit which diftinguiffed all the
ujrcpcan nations during the middle ages, was
Iprproved and heightened among the Portuguese.
A fierce civil war towards the close of the four-
-tenth century, occasioned by a disputed fuccef-
;on, augmented the military ardour of the na-
ion, and formed or called forth men of such
tiive and daring genius, as are fit for bold un-
ertakings. The situation of the kingdom,
ounded on every fide by the dominions of a

ree powecrful neighbour, did not afford free
cpe to the ativity of the Portuguese by land,
. te ifrength of their monarchy was no match
or that of Caflile. But Portugal was a mari-
iine late, in which there were many commo-
iu harbours; the people had begun to make
me progress in the knowledge and pracice of
a;iaticn; and the sea was open to them. pre-
.i :g the only field of enterprize in which they
culd distinguish themselves.

H 2 Such

Such was the ifate of Portugal, and such thi

disposition of the people, when John I. surnamed
the Batllard, obtained secure pofteffion of tht
crown by the peace concluded with Castile, ia
the year one thoufaud four hundred and elever,
He was a prince of great merit, who, by fupe.
rior courage had abilities, and opened his v.-a
to a throne, which of right did not belong to
him. He instantly perceived that it wou'a be
impoflible to preserve public order, or dorrciic
tranquillity, without finding some cmplovm:it
for the restless spirit of his subjects. W1ith thii
view he affernblcd a numerous fleet at Lii!x,,
composed of all the ships which he could fit ca
in his own kingdom, and of many hired frao
foreigners. This great armament was dciiieiWd
to attack the Moors fettled on the coast of ir-
bary CI4t12. While it was equipping, a fce
veffTd were appointed to fail along the weitm
{hore of Africa bounded bv the Atlantic ocz,
and to dfco.ver the unknown countries fituatd
there. From this inconsiderable attempt, tr
ma; date the commencement of that spirit ¢
dilcoverv, which opened the barriers that hbi
so long ihut out mrankind from the knowledge a
one half of the terrctrial globe.

At the time when John sent forth these r;i?

on this new voyage, the art of navigation -da
£i rill vcry imperfect. Though Africa lay so nez
to Portugal, and the feiti!;ty of the countrd
already known on that continent invited men i
explore it more fully, the Portugucfe had noct
ventured to fail beyond Cape NAcn. That prc
montory, as its name import,, was hitherto co'-
fidered as a boundanr which could not be paiTcf

£z

But the nations of Europe had now acquired as
much knowledge, as emboldened them to difre-
ard the prejudices and to corret the errors of
their ancestors. The long reign of ignorance,
:he constant enemy of every curious inquiry, and
3t every new undertaking, was approaching to
1;: period. The light of science began to dawn.
Tiie works of the ancient Greeks and Romans
began to be read with admiration and profit.
The sciences cultivated by the Arabians were
I;troduced into Europe by the Moors fettled in
Spain and Portugal, and by the Jews, who were
-erv numerous in both these kingdoms. Geo-
n.etrv, astronomy, and geography, the sciences

hn which the art of navigation is founded, be-

ame objects of studious attention. The me-
rcry of the discoveries made by the ancients
ra; revived, and the progress of their navigation
-.d commerce began to be traced. Some of the
-aufes which have obstructed the cultivation of
C-ence in PoGtnigal, during this century and the
air, did not exilt, or did not operate in the fame
ranner, in the fifteenth century t; and the Por-
uguefe, at that period, seem to have kept pace
.ith other nations on this fide the Alps in literary
3urfuits.

As the genius of the age favoured the execu-
ion of that new undertaking, to which the pe-
:uliar state of the country invited the Portuguese,
t proved successful. The vessels sent on the dif-
:overy doubled that formidable cape, which had
:rmninated the progress of former navigators, and
,roccedcd a hundred and sixty miles beyond it,

t SeC NOTE IX.

i: 3 to

to Cape Bojador. As its rocky cliffs, whicl
iretched a considerable way into the Atlantic,
appeared more dreadful than the promontory
which they had passed, the Portuguese com-
manders durst not attempt to fail round it, but
returned to Lisbon, more satisfied with havine
advanced so far, than ashamed of having vtC-
tured no farther.

Inconfidcrable as this voyage was, it increased

the passion for difcoverv, which began to arif
in Portugal. The fortunate tifue of the king's ex.
pedition against the Moors of Barbary [.1417,
added strength to that spirit in the nation, and
pushed it on to new undertakings. In order to
render these successful, it was necefTary that they
fnould be conducted by a person who possessed
abilities capable of discerning what was attain.
able, who enjoyed leisure to form a regulh
fyicm for prosecuting difcoverv, and who wai
animated with ardour that would persevere in
spite of obptacles and repulses. Happily for
Portugal, she found all those qualities in Henry
duke of Viseo, the fourth fun of king John by
Philippa of Lancafer, fitler of Henry IV. king
of England That prince, in his early youth,
having accompanied his father in his expeditido
to Barbary, distinguished himself by many deeds
of valour. To the martial fpiri:, which was thE
charaEtcriftic of every man of noble birth at thAt
time, he added all the accomplishments of a mo.
enlightened and polished age. He cultivated thi
arts and sciences, which were then unknown ai
despised by persons of his rank. He applied
with peculiar fondness to the study of geogn
phy; and by the inftrulion of able rmafers, a

vwell as by the accounts of travellers, he early ac-
quired such knowledge of the habitable globe, as
discovered the great probability of finding new
and opulent countries, by failing along the coast
of Africa. Such an objet was formed to awaken
the enthusiasm and ardour of a youthful mind,
and he espoused with the utmost zeal the pa-
tronage of a design which might prove as bene-
ficial, as it appeared to be splendid and honour-
able. In order that he might pursue this great
scheme without interruption, he retired from
court immediately after his return from Africa,
and fixed his residence at Sagres, near Cape St.
Vincent, where the prospect of the Atlantic
ocean invited his thoughts continually towards
his favourite projeE, and encouraged him to ex-
ecute it. In this retreat he was attended by
ofme of the moit learned men in his country,
who aided him in his researches. He applied for
information to the Moors of Baibary, who were
acculfomcd to travel by land into the interior
provinces of Africa, in queit of ivory, gold-duft,
and other rich commodities. He consulted the
J'-vs fettled in Portugal. By promises, rewards,
a::i mrarks of refpea, he allured into his service
fccrai persons, foreigners as well as Portuguese,
cviho were eminent for their skill in navigation.
In taking those preparatory steps, the great abi-
lities of the prince were seconded by his private
svitues. His integrity, his affability, his refpeeC
fur religion, his zeal for the honour of his coun-
try, engaged persons of all raniks to applaud his
dt;ign, and to favour the execution of it. His
fcb'mcs were allowed by the greater part of
Lts coLutrymen to pIoceed neither from ambition

nor

nor the desire of wealth, but to flow from the
warm benevolence of a heart eager to promote
the happiness of mankind, and which justly en.
titled him to assume a motto for his device, that
described the quality, by which he wvihed to be
distinguished, the talent of doing good.

His first effort, as is usual at the commence.

ment of any new undertaking, was extremely
inconsiderable He fitted out a single fhii
[1418], and giving the command of it to Joih
Gonzalez Zarco and Tristan Vaz, two gentle.
men of his household, who voluntarily offered to
condut the enterprize, he inftruted them to use
their utmost efforts to double Cape Bojador, and
thence to freer towards the south. They, ac-
cording to the mode of navigation which itil
prevailed, held their course along the shore; and
by following that diretion, they must have en-
countered almost insuperable difficulties in at.
tempting to pass Cape Bojador. But fortune
came in aid to their want of fcill, and prevented
the voyage from being altogether fruitless. A
sodden squall of wind arose, drove them out to
sea, and when they expeced every moment to
perish, landed them on an unknown island, which
from their happy escape they named Porto Santi.
In the infancy of navigation, the discovery of
this small island appeared a matter of such mo-
ment, that they instantly returned to Portugal
with the good tidings, and were received by
Henry with the applause and honour due to fortu-
nate adventurers. This faint dawn offuccefs filled
a mind ardent in the pursuit of a favourite object
with such sanguine hopes as were sufficient in-
citements to proceed. Next year [14T91,

2z Henry

Henry sent out three {hips under the fame
commanders, to whom he joined Bartholomew
Peri'trello, in order to take poeffion of the
ifiand which they had discovered. When they
began to fettle in Porto Santo, they observed
towards the south a fixed spot in the horizon
like a small black cloud. By degrees, they
were led to conjecture that it might be land,
and fleering towards it, they arrived at a con-
fiderable island, uninhabited and covered with
wood, which on that account they called
Madeira U. As it was Henry's chief objef to
Trendr his discoveries useful to his country, he
i.u;mcdiate!y equipped a fleet to carry a colony
of Portuguese to these islands [1420]. By
}.;. provident care, they were furnished not only
wv.ih tie feeds, plants, and domeltic animals corn-
.on in Europe; but as he foresaw that the
r;arrlt.h of the climate and fertility of the foil
would prove favourable to the rearing of other
productions, he procured flips of the vine from
the ifar.d of Cyprus, the rich wines of which
were then in great requcft, and plants of the
f,lgar-cane from Sicily, into which it had been
ltl.Jv introduced. These throve so prosperously
in this new country, that the benefit of cultivating
them was immediately perceived, and the sugar
and wine of Madeira auicklv became articles of
forre consequence in the commerce of Por-
tugal x

As soon as the advantages derived from this

first settlement to the welZ of the European con-

C H;i-,rical Relation of the first Discovery of Madeira,

tra3niatedfromthe Portu guefe ofFran.Alcafir'n3, p. 5,&c.
I Lud. Ga:cciardini Dectri:t. de Paefi affi, p. Il , iSl.

tineut

tinent began to be felt, the spirit of discovery
appeared less chimerical, and became more adi
venturous. By their voyages to BMadeira, tb:
Portuguese were gradually accu!tomcd to a boida
navigation, and instead of creeping servilely alr,
the coast, ventured into the open sea. In con.
sequence of taking this course, Gilianez, wh,.
commanded one of prince Henry's Inips, do'Lbic:
Cape Bojador [1433], the boundary of tLe Pu-
tuguefe navigation upwards of twenty year:, a-.
which had hitherto been dccme:d unpaf'L.c.
This fuzcefsful voyage, which the ignlorance o
the age placed on a level with the mult fa:'.a i
exploits recorded in history, opened a new fphletr
to navigation, as it difcovcred the vast corti:!cr:
of Africa, fliil waffed by the Atlantic octa::
and itretching towards the foutht Part of thi
was soon explored; the Portuguese advanced
within the tropics, and in the space of a few year
they discovered the river Senegal, and all th~,
coast extending from Cape Blanco to Cape c
Verd.

Hitherto the Portuguese had been guided ii

their discoveries, or encouraged to attempt their,
by the light and information which they received
from the works of the ancient matlhmaticia::
and geographers. But, when they began to ener
the torrid zone, the notion which prcv-ailc
among the ancients, that the heat, which reigno
perpetually there, %as so cxccffive as to rende
it uninhabitable, deterred them, for some tim,
from proceeding. Their own observations, whe:
they irft ventured into this unknown and for
inidable region, tended to confirm the opiniu:
of antiquity concerning the violent operatio:l

t}i;

the direc rays of the fun. As far as the river
Seegal, the Portuguese had found the coast of
Africa inhabited by people nearly resembling the
Moors of Barbary. When they advanced to the
south of that river, the human form seemed to
put on a new appearance. They beheld men
rith firns black as ebony, with hhort curled hair,
fat noses, thick lips, and all the peculiar features
:;'ich are now known to distinguish the race of
r,.:rc;e. This surprising alteration they natu-
aliv attributed to the influence of heat, and if
they !h'ould advance nearer to the line, they be-
g-n to dread that its effects would be itill more
violnt. Those dangers were exaggerated, and
.:nv other objections against attempting farther
difcovcries were proposed by some of the gran-
deez, who, from ignorance, irom envy, or from
that cold timid prudence which rejeEts whatever
ha; the air of novelty or enterprize, had hitherto
conde-ned all prince Henry's schemes. They
represented, that it was altogether chimeric'A to
excc-t any advantage from countries fituateU in
that region which the wisdom and experience of
antiquity had pronounced to be unfit for the
habitation of men n; that their forefathers, satis-
sied with cultivating the territory which Provi-
dence had allotted them, did not waste the
strength of the kingdom by fruitless proje&s,
in queR of new efttlkments ; that Portugal was
already exhaulted by the expence of attempts to
discover lands which either did not exile, or
};;ich nature destined to remain unknown; and
was drained of men, who might have been em-
ployed in undertakings attended with more cer-
tain success, and productive of greater benefit.

But

But neither their appeal to the authority of the
ancients, nor their reasonings concerning the
interfts of Portugal, made any impression upon
the determined philosophic mind of prince Hen.
ry. The diLcoveries which he had already made
convinced him that the ancients had little more
than a conjedtural knowledge of the torrid zone.
He was no less satisfied that the political argu.
ments of his opponents with refpec to the inte.
reit of Portugal were malevolent and ill founded.
In those sentiments he was tirenuoufly supported
by his brother Pedro, who governed the king.
,iom as guardian of their nephew Alphonfo V.
who hzd fucceccd to the throne during h:i
minnorit, [I438 ; and, instead of slackening hi;
cnorts, Henry cunt'nued to pursue his discoveries
with freih, ardour.

But, in order to silence all the murmurs of

opposition, he endcavourcd to obtain the fancion
of the highcill authority in favour of his opera.
tions. With this view, he applied to the pope,
and reprefcnted, in pompous terms, the pious and
unwearied zeal with which he had exerted him.
felfduring twvnty years, in discovering unknown
countries, the Wretched inhabitants of which
were utter itrangers to true religion, wandering
in heathen darkness, or led affray by the delufioi
of Mahomet. He besought the holy father, to
whom, as the vicar of Christ, all the kingdoms
of the earth were subjet, to confer on the crown
of Portugal a right to all the countries poffiffed
by infidel, which should be difcovcred by the
indultry of its subje&s, and subdued by the
force of its arms. He intreated him to enjoin
al Chriftia poweas, uader the highest penaliue:

120:

,.t to molest Portugal while engaged in this
=:dable enterprize, and to probibit them from
.:!!ng in any of the countries which the Portu-
'-,ic .hould discover. He promised that, in all

.r :rit:-iions, it Icould be the chief object

,; ini countrymcn to spread the knowledge of
:: Chnrilan religion, to eltablfh the authority
:i' . h,'v fee, and to increase the flock of the
:-.:.'ral paitor. As it was by improving with

',:t :-:t; every favourable conjuncture for acquir-
nc.v powers, that the court of Rome had

:--'u!ly extended its usurpations, Eugene IV.
.c p',:iti' to whom this application was made,
-_ -iy ieizcd the opportunity which now pre-
: rd itfclf. He inltanlly perceived, that by
-.'?i!'in withl prince Hcnry'ó request, he might
::creisc a preroative io less flattering iii its uwn
:::, than likely to prove beneficial in its con-
-:L:;iccs5. A bull was accordingly issued, in
.'.icil, after applauding in the llrongelt terms

?.: pa;t e'Torts ot the Portuguese, and exhortingl
ernm to proceed in that laudable career on
rich they had entered, he granted them an
iclji;e iight to all the countries which they
.,jid discover, from Cape Non to the continent
' iLdia.

L.:travag,.nt as this donation, comprehending
s.nh a large portion of the habitable globe, would
Buw appcar even in catholic countries, no person

he iifteenth century doubted that the pope,
the plenitude of his apostolic power, had

a r;ht to confer it. Prince Henry was soon
:.;:ble of the advantages which he derived from
. tranfaEtion. His schemes were authorised
L' llaitified by the bull approving of them.
V TCL. I. I The

The spirit of discovery was conneced with z7i
for religion, which, in that age, was a princid
of such a&tivity and vigour, as to influence tlh
conduct of nations. All Chriflian princes wer
deterred from intruding into thole countria
which the Portuguese had discovered, or froa
interrupting the progress of their navigation a4s
conquests Y.

The fame of the Portuguese voyages so

spread over Europe. Men, long accustomed
circumscribe the activity and knowledge of ;i.
human mind within the limits to which tht
had been hitherto confined, were astonished it
behold the sphere of navigation so suddenly -.
larged, and a profpet opened of viiiting rrgieu
of the globe, the existence of which was unknoI
in former times. The learned and fpeculatiI
reasoned and formed theories concerning thy~
unexpected difcovcries. The vulgar inquired a,'
wondered ; while enterpnriing adventurers crowd-
ed from every part of Europe, soliciting prine
Henry to employ them in this honourable ftrvic.
Many Venetians and Genoese, in particular, wb)
were, at that time, superior to all other natil
in the science of naval affairs, entered abo.'
the Portuguese ships, and acquired a more perfc
and extensive knowledge of their profeflion
that new school of navigation. In emulation d
these foreigners, the Portuguese exerted the
own talents. The nation seconded the defiga
of the prince. Private merchants formed co.
panies [1446], with a view to search for i-
known countries. The Cape de Verd iflanA.

7 See NOTE X.

vhi,

which lie off the promontory of that name, were
discovered [1449], and soon after the ifes called
the Azores. As the former of these are above
three hundred miles from the African coast, and
the latter nine hundred miles from any continent,
it is evident, by their venturing so boldly into the
open seas, that the Portuguese had, by this time,
improved greatly in the art of navigation.

While the paIfion for engaging in new under-
takings was thus warm and active, it received an
unfortunate check by the death of prince Henry,
whose superior knowledge had hitherto direced
all the operations of the discoverers, and whose
patronage had encouraged and proteced them.
But notwithstanding all the advantages which
they derived from these, the Portuguese, during
his life, did not advance, in their utmost pro-
giefs towards the south, within five degrees of
the equinoctial line ; and, after thei. continued
exertions for half a century [from 1412 to 1463],
hardly fifteen hundred miles of the coast of
Africa were discovered. To an age acquainted
with the efforts of navigation in its state of ma-
turity and improvement, those essays of its early
Iyears must necessarily appear feeble and unfkil-
ful. But, inconsiderable as they may be deemed,
they were sufficient to turn the curiosity of the
European nations into a new channel, to excite
n enterprising spirit, and to point the way to
uture discoveries.
Alphonfo, who poffcfsed the throne of Portu-
gal at the time of prince Henry's death, was so
tuch engaged in supporting his own pretensions
to e crown of Caltile, or in carrying on his
xpeditions against the Moors in Barbary, that

1 2 the

the force of his kingdom being exerted in otk:
operations, he could not prosecute the difcoverI
in Africa with ardour. He committed the c-
duct of them to Fernando Gomez, a merche_
in Lisbon, to whom he granted an exclufe
right of commerce with all the countrit:
which prince Henry had taken poffefilon. Unrde
the rellraint and oppression of a monopoly, t!
spirit of discovery languished. It ceased to '
a national object, and became the concern .
a priiate man, more attentive to his own g2:
than to the glory of his country. Some pr-
grefs, however, was made. The Portuge'.
ventured at length to cross the line [147,
and, to their astonishment, found that region
the torrid zone, which was supposed to
scorched with intolerable heat, to be not orT
habitable, but populous and fertile.

John II. who succeeded his father Alphona3

[1481], possessed talents capable both of forre
ing and executing great designs. As part d
his revenues, while prince, had arisen from dutia
on the trade with the newly-difcovered countrie
this naturally turned his attention towards them,
and satisfied him with respect to their utility ari.
importance. In proportion as his knowledge a
these countries extended, the possession of thn
apppeared to be of greater consequence. WhB
the Portuguese proceeded along the coast i
Africa, from Cape Non to the river of Seneca
they fund all that extensive tract to'be fandrT
barren, and thinly inhabited by a wretched pe
pie, profefing tlhe Mahometan religion, and i,
ject to the vait empire of Morocco. But to :
south of that river, the power and icligiiona

0.

the Mahometans were unknown. The country
was divided into small independent principalities,
the population was considerable, the foil fertile z,
and the Portuguese soon discovered that it pro-
duced ivory, rich gums, gold, and other valuable
commodities. By the acquisition of these, com-
merce was enlarged, and became more adventu-
rous. Men, animated and rendered a&ive by the
certain profpeft of gain, pursued discovery with
greater eagerness, than when they were excited
onil by curiosity and hope.

This spirit derived no, small reinforcement of

vi-our from the countenance of such a monarch
2, Jinn. Declaring hinrfelf the patron of every
aetcmpt towards discovery-, he promoted it with
a-. the ardour of his grand-uncle prince Henry,
and with superior power. The effecs of this
were immediately felt. A powerful fleet was
fitted out [1484], which, after discovering the
kingdoms of Benin and Congo, advanced above
fifteen hundred miles beyond the line, and the
Portuguese, for the first time, beheld a new
heaven, and observed the flars of another hcmi-
sphere. John was not only solicitous to discover,
but attentive to fccure the poffiefion of those
countries. He built forts on the coast of Guinea;
he sent out colonies to fettle there ; he eftablilhed
a commercial intercourse with the more power-
ful kingdoms; he endeavoured to render such as
were feeble or divided, tributary to the crown of
Portugal. Some of the petty princes voluntarily
acknowledged themselves his vassals. Others

' Naig2tio Aloyfii Cadamufti apud Novum Orbem Gry-

"i'> p- . 8. Navigat. all Ifola di San Tome per un Pi-
:·::t Portogh. Ramufio, i. 115.

1 3 were
~i

were compelled to do so by force of arms. .
regular and well-digefted fvftem was formed wvi'
respect to this new obje& of policy, and bT
firmly adhering to it, the Portuguese power ar;
commerce in Africa were established upon a fou;i
foundation.

By their conifant intercourse with the peope

of Africa, the Portuguese gradually acquire
some knowledge of those parts of that count.
which they had not visited. The informatic5
which they received from the natives, added to
what they had observed in their own voyage,1
began to open profpeas more extensive, and '0
fuggeit the idea of schemes more important, thua
those which had hitherto allured and occupic!
them. They had detected the error of th,
ancients concerning the nature of the torrni
zone. They found, as they proceeded south.
wards, that the continent of Africa, intlead c,
extending in breadth, according to the doutri:
of Ptolemy 2, at that time the oracle and guide oi
the learned in the fcicnce of geography, appear:i
sensibly to contract itself, and to bend towarc.
the ealt This induced them to give credit to
the accounts of the ancient Phenician voyagd
round Africa, which had long been deernm
fabulous, and led them to conceive hopes taut
by following the fame route, they might ardnr
at the East Indies, and engross that commera
which has been the source of wealth and power
to every nation pofieffed of it. The comprehen.
five genius of prince Henry, as we may conjet-
ture from the words of the pope's bull, had ea-i

a Vide Nov. Orb:& Tabul. Geograph. fecund. Ptolt.
Aast. i-'. .

fOrrJI

formed some idea of this navigation. But though
hi: countrymen, at that period, were incapable
o0 conceiving the extent of his views and schemes,
aii the Portuguese mathematicians and pilots
ro.v concurred in representing them as well-
fjunded and practicable. The king entered with
warmth into their sentiments, and began to
mc;nctrt measures for this arduous and important
V.0v)-a7C.

Before his preparations for this expedition

we-e finished, accounts were transmitted from
Africa, that various nations along the coast had
mentioned a mighty kingdom situated on their
cnntineit, at a great distance towards the east,
the king of which, according to their defcrip-
tion, profeled the Chriflian religion. The Por-
tuguefe monarch immediatelyconcluded, that this
r mit he the emperor of Abyflinia, to whom the
Europeans, seduced by a mistake of Rubruquis,
M'.rco Polo, and other travellers to the east,
a.birdly gave the name of Prester or Presbyter
John: aid as he hoped to receive information
a-id affiltance from a Christian prince, in prose-
cutinlg a scheme that tended to propagate their
coimron faith, he resolved to open, if possible,
rime i.tercourfe with his court. With this
sicw, he made choice of Pedro de Covillam and
Althonfo de Payva, who were perfect masters
fs the Arabic language, and sent them into the
|ea, to search for the residence of this unknown
potentate, and to make him proffers of friendship.
They had in charge likewise to procure what-
ever intelligence the nations which they visited
c| ald supply, with refpeEt to the trade of In-

dia,

lia, and the course of navigation to that cos
tinent b

While John made this new attempt by lang

to obtain some knowledge of the country, whiC
he wifutd so ardently to discover, he did n,
neglect the prosecution of this great design h
sea. The conduct of a voyage for this purpo
[1486], the most arduous and important whci
the Portuguese had ever projeced, was coB
nitted to Bartholomew Diaz, an officer .ubh,
sagacity, experience, and fortitude rendered }Lir
equal to the undertaking. He firetched bold
towards the south, and proceeding beyond th
utmost limits to which his countrymen had ':
therto advanced, discovered near a thoufan
miles of new country. Neither the danger t
which he was exposed, by a fuccfflion of violet
tempests in unknown seas, and by the freque:
mutinies of his crew, nor the calamities of farnir
which he suffered from losing his store-ship, coul
deter him from prosecuting his enterprize. I
recomrpence of his labours and perfeveranci
he at last descried that lofty promontory whic
bounds Africa to the south. But to descry
was all that he had in his power to accompliii
The violence of the winds, the (hattered co'
dition of his ships, and the turbulent spirit (
his sailors, compelled him to return, after
voyage of sixteen months, in which he disc
vered a far greater extent of country than an
former navigator. Diaz had called the promo:
tory which terminated his voyage Cabo Torw
tofo, or the stormy Cape; but the king, h

b aria y Sousa Port. AGa, vol i. p. 26. Lafitau Dr
couT. LC Port. i. 46.

mafic

rai;er, as he now entertained no doubt of
hia.i-g found the long desired route to India,

ve i: a name more inviting, and of better omen,
be Cape of Good Hope c.
Those sanguine expectations of success were

confirmed by the intelligence which John received
over land, in consequence of his embassy to Abyf-
fiia. Covillam and Payva, in obedience to their
mal:er's inftruaions, had repaired to Grand
Cairo. From that city, they travelled along
with a caravan of Egyptian merchants, and em-
barking on the Red Sea, arrived at Aden in
Arabia. There they separated; Payva failed
direcly towards Abyssinia; Covillam embarked
for the East Indies, and having visited Calecut,
Goa, and other cities on the Malabar coast, re-
turned to Sofala, on the eal fide of Africa, and
.tence to Grand Cairo, which Payva and he
had rixed upon as their place of rendezvous. Un-
fortunately the former was cruelly murdered in
Abi,.finia, but Covillam found at Cairo two
Portuguese Jews, whom John, whose provident
iazacity attended to every circumltance that
could facilitate the execution of his fcheres, had
dispatched after them, in order to receive a de-
tail of their proceedings, and to communicate
to them new infrructions. By one of these Jews,
Covillain transmitted to Portugal a journal of his
travels by sea and land, his remarks upon the
trade of India, together with exact maps of the
oi2;ts on which he had touched ; and from what
he lhimfelf had obicrvtd, as well as from the
i::oJ:mation of frtilful iaamrn in different coun-

a Faia y Sou.i Port. Alia, vol. i. p. 25.

tries,

tries, he concluded, that by failing rour
Africa, a passage might be found to the Eat
Indies d.

The happy coincidence of Covillam's opinio

and report, with the discoveries which Diaz ha
lately made, left hardly any shadow of doub
with refpet to the possibility of failing from Ec
rope to India. But the vast length of the voyage
and the furious storms which Diaz had encoun.
tered near the Cape of Good Hope, alarmed ad;
intimidated the Portuguese to such a degree, a
though by long experience they were now be.
come adventurous and skilful mariners, that fonm
time was requisite to prepare their minds for thi
dangerous and extraordinary voyage. Th
courage, however, and authority of the mo.
narch, gradually dispelled the vain fears of hid
fubjets, or made it necessary to conceal them.
As John thought himself now upon the eve d
accomplishing that great design, which had been
the principal object of his reign, his earneftni
in prosecuting it became so vehement, that i
occupied his thoughts by day, and bereaved him
of sleep through the night. While he was taking
every precaution that his wisdom and experience
could suggest, in order to insure the success of
the expedition, which was to decide concerninz
the fate of his favourite projec, the fame of tl
vast discoverics which the Portuguese had already
made, the reports concerning the extraordinary
intelligence which they had received from thi
eafl, and the profpea of the voyage which they

d Faria v Scufa Port. AGa, vol. i. p. 27. Lafitau Dt-
ccuv. i- 45.

IlCeW

# BOOK II.

iow meditated, drew the attention of all the
uropean nations, and held them in fufpence and
espectation. By some, the maritime tiill and
navigations of the Portughefe were compared
!ith those of the Phenicians and Carthaginians,
land exalted above them. Others formed con-
|dtures concerning the revolutions which the
faccefs of the Portuguese schemes might occasion
n the course of trade, and the political itate of
Europe. The Venetians began to be disquieted
with the apprehension of losing their Indian com-
merce, the monopoly of which was the chief
source of their power as well as opulence, and
the Portuguese already enjoyed in fancy, the
wealth of the east. But, during this interval,
which gave such scope to the various workings
of curiosity, of hope and of fear, an account
was brought to Europe of an event no less extra-
ordinary than unexpeced, the discovery of a
New World situated in the weft; and the eyes
and admiration of mankind turned immediately
towards that great objet.

BOO K II.

A MoNG the foreigners whom the fame of the
Adifcoveries made by the Portuguese had al-
lured into their service, was Christopher Colon
or Columbus, a subjed of the republic of Ge-
noa. Neither the time nor place of his birth are
known with certainty a ; but he was descended-

§ See NOTE XI;

of

of an honourable family, though reduced to i:.
digence by various misfortunes. His ance'ulon
having betaken themselves for subsistence to a
seafaring life, Columbus discovered, in his ear r
youth, the peculiar character and talents which
mark out a man for that profeflion. His parents
instead of thwarting this original propensity of
his mind, seem to have encouraged and confirmed
it, by the education which they gave him. Afte
acquiring some knowledge of the Latin tongue,
the only language in which science was taught
at that time, he was initruted in geornetr-,
cosmography, aftronomv, and the art ot dlawin,-
To these he applied with such ardour and predi
lection, on account of their connection with nari.
gation, his favourite object, that he advanced
with rapid proficiency in the study of them. ThuJs
qualified, he went to sea at the age of fourtece
[1461 , and began his career on that element
which conducted him to so much glory. Hi;
early voyages were to those ports in the Mhdi.
terranean which his countrymen the Genoce
frequented. This being a sphere too nanrrow fr
his active mind, he made an excursion to the
northern seas [i467], and vifltrd the coals .:
Iceland, to which the Englifl and other nationi
had begun to resort on account of its fifherv
As navigation, in every diredtiun, was now be.
come enterprising, he proceeded beyond that
island, the Thule of the ancients, and advanced
several degrees within the polar circle. }Having
satisfied his curiofitv, by a voyage which tended
more to enlarge his knowledge of naval affair,
than to improve his fortune, he entered into the
service of a famous fea-captain, of his own nanrm

acJ

and family. This man commanded a small
squadron, fitted out at his own expence, and by
cruising sometimes against the Mahometans,
sometimes against the Venetians, the rivals of his
country in trade, had acquired both wealth and
reputation. With him Columbus continued for
ft-eral years, no less diftinguiffied for his courage,
than for his experience as a sailor. At length,
in an obstinate engagement, off the coast of Por-
tugal, with tome Venetian caravals, returning
richly laden from the Low-Countries, the vessel
on board which he served took fire, together
with one of the enemy's ships, to which it was
jfal grappled. In this dreadful extremity his
intrepidity and presence of mind did not forsake
him. He threw himself into the sea, laid hold
of a floating oar, and by the support of it, and
his dexterity in swimming, he reached the shore,
though above two leagues distant, and saved a
life reserved for great undertakings b.

As soon as he recovered strength for the jour-

nev, he repaired to Lisbon, where many of his
countrymen were fettled. They soon conceived
such a favourable opinion of his merit, as well as
talents, that they warmly solicited him to re-
n:in in that kingdom, where his naval skill and
experience could not fail of rendering him con.
fpicuous. To every adventurer, animated either
with curiosity to visit iew countries, or with
ambition to distinguish himself, the Portuguese
service was at that time extremely inviting.
Columbus listened with a favourable ear to the
advice of his friends, and having gained the
tefeem of a Portuguese lady, whom he married,

b Life of Columbus, c. v.
X vnL. I; K fixed

of an honourable family, though reduced to in.
digence by various misfortunes. His ancetion
having betaken themselves for subsistence to a
seafaring life, Columbus discovered, in his earT
youth, the peculiar character and talents which
mark out a man for that profession. His parents,
instead of thwarting this original propenfitv of
his mind, seem to have encouraged and confirmed
it, by the education which they gave him. After
acquiring some knowledge of the Latin tongue,
the only language in which science was taught
at that time, he was initructed in geometr-,
cosmography, astronomy, and the art of drawing.
To these he applied with such ardour and predi-
le&ion, on account of their connection with na.i.
gation, his favourite objcEt, that he advanced
with rapid proficiency in the itudy of them. Tiiu)
qualified, he went to sea at the age of fourteen
[1461], and began his career on that element
which condu&ted him to so much glory. HiU
early voyages were to those ports in the Medi-
terranean which his countrymen the Genoeóe
frequented. This being a sphere too narrow f.;
his active mind, he made an excursion to the
northern seas [1467], and visited the coasts ,
Iceland, to which the English and other natioii
had begun to resort on account of its filhery.
As navigation, in every direction, was now be-
come enterprising, he proceeded beyond that
island, the Thule of the ancients, and advanced
several degrees within the polar circle. Having
satisfied his curiosity, by a voyage which tended
more to enlarge his knowledge of naval affair,
than to improve his fortune, he entered into thb
service of a famous fea-captaLn, of his own narr.!

walt

and family. This man commanded a small
squadron, fitted out at his own expence, and by
.ruifing sometimes against the Mahometans,
[ometimes against the Venetians, the rivals of his
country in trade, had acquired both wealth and
reputation. With him Columbus continued for
[Iveral years, no less distinguished for his courage,
than for his experience as a sailor. At length,
hr an obstinate engagement, off the coast of Por-
tugal, with some Venetian caravals, returning
richly laden from the Low-Countries, the vessel
on board which he fcrved took fire, together
with one of the enemy's ships, to which it was
fz£t grappled. In this dreadful extremity his
intrepidity and presence of mind did not forsake
him. He threw himself into the sea, laid hold
of a floating oar, and by the support of it, and
his dexterity in swimming, he reached the shore,
though above two leagues distant, and saved a
life reserved for great undertakings b.

As soon as he recovered strength for the jour-
nev, he repaired to Lisbon, where many of his
countrymen were fettled. They soon conceived
such a favourable opinion of his merit, as well as
talents, that they warmly solicited him to re-
rr.in in that kingdom, where his naval Ikill and
experience could not fail of rendering him con-
fpicuous. To every adventurer, animated either
with curiosity to visit new countries, or with
ambition to distinguish himself, the Portuguese
service was at that time extremely inviting.
Columbus listened with a favourable ear to the
advice of his friends, and having gained the
[ fteem of a Portuguese lady, whom he married,

b Life of Columbus, c v.
VOL. i. K fixed

fixed his residence in Lisbon. This allianct,
instead of detaching him from a seafaring life,
contributed to enlarge the sphere of his nav-l
knowledge, and to excite a desire of extending
it fill farther. His wife was a daughter of Bar.
tholomew Pereftrello, one of the captains er.
ployed by prince Henry in his early navigations,
and who, under his protection, had discovered
and planted the iflanCs of Porto Santo and Ma.
deira. Columbus got poffefion of the journali
and charts of this experienced navigator, and
from them he learned tie course which the Por.
tuguefe had held in making their discoverics, ai
well as the various circumstances which guidd
or encouraged them in their attempts. TL,
study of these toothed and inflamed his favourn:
passion; and while he contemplated the maps
and read the descriptions of the new countrics
which Pereftrello had fcen, his impatience to
vilit them became irresistible. In order to indulge
it, he made a voyage to Madeira, and continued
during several years to trade with that iflard,
with the Canaries, the Azores, the fettlerrenti
in Guinea, and all the other places which the
Portuguese had discovered on the continent oi
Africa C.

By the experience which Columbus acquired,

during such a variety of voyages, to almost everj
part of the globe with which, at that time, an
intercourse was carried on by sea, he was nor
become one of the most skilful navigators in Eu.
rope. But, not satisfied with that praise, hi
ambition aimed at something more. The fuc.
cefsful progress of the Portuguese navigators had

Liic of Columbus, c. iv. v.

awakere'

!wakened a spirit of curiosity and emulation,
which set every man of science upon examining
all the circumstances that led to the discoveries
.lhich they had made, or that afforded a profpea
los succeeding in any new and bolder undertaking.
The mind of Columbus, naturally inquisitive,
capable of deep reflection, and turned to fpecula-
Mtiols of this kind, was so often employed in re-
kolving the principles upon which the Portuguese
had founded their schemes of discovery, and the
mode on which they had carried them on, that
he gradually began to form an idea of improving
upon their plan, and of accomplishing disco-
vcries which hitherto they had attempted in
vain.

To find out a passage by sea to the East Indies,
was the great objea in view at that period.
From the time that the Portuguese doubled
Cape de Verd, this was the point at which they
aimed in all their navigations, and, in comparison
with it, all their discoveries in Africa appeared
inconsiderable. The fertility and riches of India
had been known for many ages; its spices and
other valuable commodities were in high requeat
throughout Europe, and the vast wealth of the
Venetians arising from their having engrossed
this trade, had raised the envy of all nations.
But how intent soever the Portuguese were upon
discovering a new route to those desirable regions,
they searched for it only by s(eering towards the
south, in hopes of arriving at India, by turning
to the east, after they had failed round the far-
ther extremity of Africa. This course was still
unknown, and, even if discovered, was of such
immense length, that a voyage from Europe to

K 2 India

India must have appeared, at that period, a
undertaking, extremely arduous, and of very us
certain issue. More than half a century had bet
employed in advancing from Cape Non to tn
equator; a much longer space of time migdi
dapfe before the more extensive navigation fron
that to India could be accomplished. Th&i
refleEtions upon the uncertainty, the danger ard
tediousness of the course which the Portuguelc
were pursuing, naturally led Columbus to co.
fider whether a shorter and more dire& paffagt
to the East Indies might not be found out. Afte
revolving long and seriously every circumilanu
suggested by his superior knowledge in the theon
as well as practice of navigation, after compar
ing attentively the observations of modern pilots
with the hints and conjectures of ancient author,
he at last concluded, that by failing directly to
wards the weft, across the Atlantic ocean, ne
countries, which probably formed a part d
the great continent of India, murt infallibly y
discovered.

Principles and arguments of various kinds, anm

derived from different sources, induced him tU
adopt this opinion, seemingly as chimerical as i
was new and extraordinary. The spherical figure
of the earth was known, and its magnitud
ascertained with some degree of accuracy. Froe
this it was evident, that the continents of Eu-
rope, Asia, and Africa, as far as they wen
known at that time, formed but a frrall portioa
of the terraqueous globe. I; was suitable to our
ideas concerning the wifdorn and beneficence d
the Author of Nature, to believe that the va2
space fill unexplored, was not covered entirdr

by a waste unprofitable ocean, but occupied by
countries fit for the habitation of man. It ap-
peared likewise extremely probable, that the
continent, on this fide of the globe, was balanced
by a proportional quantitv of land in the other
hemisphere. Thele conclusions concerning the
existence of another continent, drawn from the
figure and ftruture of the globe, were confirmed
by the observations and conjectures of modern
navigators. A Portuguese pilot, having stretched
farther to the well than was usual at that time,
took up a piece of timber artificially carved,
floating upon the sea; and as it was driven to-
wards him by a wcfterly wind, he concluded that
it came from some unknown land, situated in that
quarter. Columbus's brother-in-law had found,
to the weft of the Madeira isles, a piece of timber
fashioned in the fame manner, and brought by
the fame wind ; and had seen likewise canes of
an enormous size floating upon the waves, which
resembled those deferibed by Ptolemy as produc-
tions peculiar to the East Indies d. After a course
of westerly winds, trees, torn up by the roots,
were often driven upon the coasts of the Azores)
and at one time the dead bodies of two men
with singular features, refembliig neither the in-
habitants of Europe nor of Africa, were cad.
adhore there.

As the force of this united evidence, arising

from theoretical principles and practical obferva-
tions, led Columbus to expect the discovery of
new countries in the western ocean, other rea-
ions induced him to believe that these must be
conne&ted with the continent of India. Though

Lib. i. c. ;

K 3 the

the ancients had hardly ever penetrated into-Indi
farther than the banks of the Ganges, yet sorn
Greek authors had ventured to describe the pro.
vinces beyond that river. As men are prone, and
at liberty, to magnify what is remote or unknown,
they repreftnted them as regions of an immense
extent. Ctefias affirmed that India was as large
as all the reft of Asia. Oneficritus, whom Pliny
the naturalist follows e, contended that it wav
equal to a third part of the habitable earth
Nearchus afterted, that it would take four
months to march in a ifraight line from one
extremity of India to the other f. The journal
of Marco Polo, who had proceeded towardi
the east far beyond the limits to whicn any Eu.
ropean had ever advanced, seemed to confirm
these exaggerated accounts of the ancients. By
his magnificent descriptions of the kingdoms of
Cathay and C;pango, and of many other countrits,
the names of which were unknown in Europe,
India appeared to be a region of vast extent.
From these accounts, which, however defective,
were the most accurate that the people of Eu-
rope had received at that period, with refpet to
the remote parts of the east, Columbus drew
just conclusion. He contended, that, in propor.
tion as the continent of India stretched out to.
wards the eail, it must, in consequence of the
spherical figure of the earth, approach nearer to
the islands which had lately been discovered to
the weft of Africa ; that the distance from the
one to the other was probably not very confider
able; a.d that the most dired, as well as short.

' Nat. Hist. lib. vi. c. 17.
Strab. Geogr. lib. v. p. isol.

'.

es, course to the remote regions of the east, was
to be found by failing due weft g. This notion
concerning the vicinity of India to the western
parts of our continent, was countenanced by some
eminent writers among the ancients, the fantion
of whose authority was necessary, in that age,
to procure a favourable reception to any tenet.
Aristotle thought it probable that the Columns
of Hercules, or Straits of Cibraltar, were not
far removed from the East Indies, and that there
might be a communication by sea between them h.
Seneca, in terms still more explicit, affirms, that,
with a fair wind, one might fail from Spain to
India, in a few days i. The famous Atlantic
ifiand described by Plato, and supposed by many
to be a real country, beyond which an unknown
continent was situated, is represented by him as
Iying at no great distance from Spain. After
weighing all these particulars, Columbus, in
whose charater the modesty and diffidence of
true genius was united with the ardent enthusiasm
of a projecor, did not reft with such absolute
assurance either upon his own arguments or upon
the authority of the ancients, as not to consult
such of his contemporaries as were capable of
comprehending the nature of the evidence which
he produced in support of his opinion. As early
as the year one thousand fourhundred andfeventy-
four, he communicated his ideas concerning the
probability of discovering new countries, by failing
westwards, to Paul, a physician of Florence,
eminent for his knowledge of cosmography, and

See NOTE X11. h Ariltot. de Ccalo, lib. ii. c. 14.

ri!. Du Val, Par. 1629. vol. i. p. 472. i Seec.
Q2tt}. Natur. lib.i, in proem.

who,

who, from the learning as well as candour whici
he discovers in his reply, appears to have ben
well entitled to the confidence which Columba
placed in him. He warmly approved of the plan,
fuggetied several fats in confirmation of it, aj
encouraged Columbus to persevere in an under.
taking so laudable, and which must redound
so much to the honour of his country, and the
benefit of Europe k.

To a mind less capable of forming and of exe.

cuting great designs than that of Columbus, an
those reasonings, and observations, and autho.
rities, would have served only as the foundation
of tome plausible and fruitless theory, which
might have furnished matter for ingenious dif.
course, or fanciful conjecture. But with hi
sanguine and enterprising temper, fpeculatio&
led diretly to aftion. Fully satisfied himsei
with refpe& to the truth of his system, he was
impatient to bring it to the test of experiment,
and to set out upon a voyage of discovery. The
first flep towards this was to secure the patronage
of some of the considerable powers in Europe,
capable of undertaking such an enterprize. AJ
long absence had not extinguilhed the affectio
which he bore to his native country, he wished
that it should reap the fruits of his labours and
invention. With this view, he laid his fcherm
before the senate of Genoa, and making hi
country the first tender of his service, offered to
fail under the banners of the republic, in quest of
the new regions which he expeted to discover.
But Columbus had resided for so many years in
foreign parts, that his countrymen were unac

k Life of Columbus, c. vii.

quaintcd

uainted with his abilities and chara&er; and,
ough a maritime people, were so little ac-
uomed to distant voyages, that they could
form no julf idea of the principles on which he
ounded his hopes of success. They inconfider-
ately rejeted his proposal, as the dream of a
himerical projecor, and loft for ever the oppor-
unity of restoring their commonwealth to its
ancient splendour1.

Having performed what was due to his coun-
ry, Columbus was so little discouraged by the
rpulfe which he had received, that, instead of
elinquifhing his undertaking, he pursued it with
freh ardour. He made his next overture to
John II. king of Portugal, in whose dominions
he had been long eftablilhed, and whom he con-
fidered, on that account, as having the second
claim to his service. Here every circumstance
seemed to promise him a more favourable re-
ception. He applied to a monarch of an enter-
rising genius, no incompetent judge in naval
affairs, and proud of patronising every attempt
to discover new countries. His fubjets were
he most experienced navigators in Europe, and
the leaf apt to be intimidated either by the no-

hcky or boldness of any maritime expedition.
In Portugal, the profefional skill of Columbus,
as well as his personal good qualities, were
thoroughly known; and as the former rendered
t probable that his scheme was not altogether
|ifionary, the latter exempted him from the sus-
picion of any sinister intention in proposing it.
Accordingly, the king listened to him in the
msif gracious manner, and referred the con-

Henera Hifi, de las Indias Ocid. dec. i. lib. i. c. 7.

fideration

fideration of his plan to Diego Ortiz, bifhopd
Ceuta, and two Jewish physicians, eminent co.
mographers, whom he was accustomed to con
fult in matters of this kind. As in Genoa, ign.
rance had opposed and disappointed Columbus;
in Lisbon, he had to combat with prejudice, a
enemy no less formidable. The persons, accord
ing to whose decision his scheme was to k
adopted or rejeted, had been the chief dire&on
of the Portuguese navigations, and had advifd
to search for a paflage to India, by fleeringl
course directly opposite to that which Colum.
bus recommended as shorter and more certain
They could not, therefore, approve of his pro.
pofal, without filbmitting to the double mort.
fication, of condemning their own theory, ad
of acknowledging his superior sagacity. Afta
teasing him with captious questions, and starting
innumerable objections, with a view of betrayin
him into such a particular explanation of his si.
tem, as might draw from him a full discovery
its nature, they deferred passing a final judgmen
with refpea to it. In the mean time, they cob
spired to rob him of the honour and advantage
which he expeced from the success of his fchenm,
advising the king to dispatch a vessel secretly, i
order to attempt the proposed discovery, by fdo
lowing exactly the course which Columbus fees
ed to point out. John, forgetting on this occ
sion the sentiments becoming a monarch, meanl
adopted this perfidious counsel. But the pilo
chosen to execute Columbus's plan, had neith
the genius, nor the fortitude of its author. Co:
trary winds arose, no fight of approaching bd
appeared, his courage failed, and he returned a

Lil'i.

,ifbon, execrating the projec as equally extra-
,agant and dangerous m.
Upon discovering this dishonourable tranfac-
ion, Columbus felt the indignation natural to
an ingenuous mind, and in the warmth of his re-

[cntment determined to break off all intercourse

with a nation capable

of such flagrant treachery.

e instantly quitted the kingdom, and landed in

Spain towards the close of the year one thousand
rour hundred and eighty-four. As he was now
t liberty to court the protection of any patron,
khorn he could engage to approve of his plan,
and to carry it into execution, he resolved to
;rupofe it in person to Ferdinand and Isabella,
rho at that time governed the united kingdoms
ps Cartile and Aragon. But as he had already
ripcrienced the uncertain issue of applications to
ings and ministers, he took the precaution of
:;diiig into England his brother Bartholomew,
o whom he had fully communicated his ideas, in
rder that he might negociate, at the fame time,
;ith Henry VII. who was reputed one of the most

dgacious as well as opulent princes in Europe.
It was not without reason that Columbus en-
ertained doubts and fears with refpe6t to the
eception of his proposals in the Spanish court.
)pain was, at that juncure, engaged in a dan-
crous war with Granada, the last of.the Moorish
ingdoms in that country. The wary and sus-
iious temper of Ferdinand was not formed

relilh bold or uncommon designs. Isabella,
ough more generous and enterprising, was un-

the influence of her huiband in all her actions.
he Spaniards had hitherto made no efforts to
Life of Columbus, c. xi. Herrera, decad. 1. lib. i. c. 7.

extend

extend navigation beyond its ancient limits, ad
had beheld the amazing progress of discover
among their neighbours the Portuguese, with
out one attempt to imitate or to rival the.
The war with the Infidels afforded an ample sidd
to the national ativity and love of glory. UndI
circumstances so unfavourable, it was impolfibS
for Columbus to make rapid progress with a .
tion, naturally flow and dilatory in forming A
its resolutions. His characer, however, was ad
mirably adapted to that of the people, whos
confidence and protetion he solicited. He w
grave, though courteous in his deportment; ci
cumfpea in his words and actions; irreproah.
able in his morals; and exemplary in his atte.
tion to all the duties and funcions of religioi.
By qualities so refpe&able, he not only gaind
many private friends, but acquired such gened
esteem, that, notwithfsanding the plainness d
his appearance, suitable to the mediocrity of li
fortune, he was not confidered as a mere adve.
turer, to whom indigence had suggested a visiT.
ary proje&, but was received as a person to wh&o
propositions serious attention was due.

Ferdinand and Isabella, though fully occupyd

by their operations against the Moors, paid f
much regard to Columbus, as to remit the cos
fideration of his plan to the queen's confess,
Ferdinand de Talavera. He confuted such d
his countrymen as were supposed belt qualifi
to decide with refpet to a subjef of this kid
But true science had, hitherto, made so liri
progress in Spain, that the pretended philof
phers, feleced to judge in a matter of such me
ment, did not comprehend the firit prindph

vUP

upon which Colmnbus founded his conjetures
and hopes. Some of them, from mistaken no-
ions concerning the dimensions of the globe,
contended that a voyage to tbofe remote parts of
he east, which Columbus expe&ed to discover,
could not be performed in less than three years.
Others concluded, that either he would find the
ocean to be of infinite extent, according to the
opinion of some ancient philosophers; or, if he
should persist in steering towards the weft beyond
a certain point, that the convex figure of the
globe would prevent his return, and that he
must inevitably perish, in the vain attempt to
open a communication between the two opposite
hemispheres, which nature had for ever disjoined.
Even without deigning to enter into any particu-
lr discussion, many reje&ed the scheme in gene-
ral, upon the credit of a maxim, under which
the ignorant and unenterprifing shelter them-
selves in every age, " That it is presumptuous
in any person, to suppose that he alone possesses
knowledge superior to all the reft of mankind
united." They maintained, that if there were
really any such countries as Columbus pretended,
they could not have remained so long concealed,
nor would the wisdom and sagacity of former
ages have left the glory of this invention to an
obscure Genoefc pilot.

It required all Columbus's patience and ad-

dress to negociate with men capable of advan-
cing such strange propositions. He had to con-
tend not only with the obstinacy of ignorance,
but with what is still more intractable, the pride
of false knowledge. After innumerable con-
ferences, and wafiing five years in fruitless en-

VOL. 1. L deavours

deavours to inform and to satisfy judges so litf
capable of deciding with propriety, Talavera, as
last, made such an unfavourable report to Feri.
nand and Isabella, as induced them to acquaia
Columbus, that until the war with the Moon
should be brought to a period, it would be im.
prudent to engage in any new and extensive es
terprze.

Whatever care was taken to soften the harib

ness of this declaration, Columbus confidered it
as a final rejection of his proposals. But happily
for mankind, that superiority of genius, which
is capable of forming great and uncommon d.
signs, is usually accompanied with an ardent es.
thufiafm, which can neither be cooled by delay,
nor damped by disappointment. Columbus wa
of this sanguine temper. Though he felt deeply
the cruel blow given to his hopes, and retired
immediately from a court, where he had bee
amused so long with vain expetations, his con
fidence in the jultnefs of his own fyifem did no
diminifn, and his impatience to demonstrate the
truth of it by an actual experiment, became
greater than ever. Having courted the pro.
tection of sovereign Rates without success, lh
applied, next, to persons of inferior rank, and
addressed successively the dukes of Medina, Si.
donia, and Medina Celi, who, though fubje&,
were possessed of power and opulence more tha
equal to the enterprize which he projeced. - i
negociations with them proved as fruitless, a
those in which he had been hitherto engaged:
for these noblemen were either as little con-
vinced by Columbus's arguments as their fupe-
riors, or they were afraid of alarming the ja'

loufv,

oUy, and offending the pride of Ferdinand, by
untenancing a scheme which he had rejeted D.
Amid the painful sensations occasioned by such
fucceflion of disappointments, Columbus had to
ifain the additional distress, of having received

accounts of his brother, whom he had sent to
ecourt of England. In his voyage to that

countr, Bartholomew had been so unfortunate
as to fall into the hands of pirates, who having
lripped him of every thing, detained him a pn-
fner for several years. At length, he made his
cape, and arrived in London, but in such ex-
treue indigence, that he was obliged to employ
himself, during a considerable time, in drawing

d felling maps, in order to pick up as much
money as would purchase a decent dress, in
which he might venture to appear at court.
He then laid before the king the proposals,
th which he had been entrusted by his bro-
ther, and, notwithstanding Henry's excessive cau-
tion and parsimony, which rendered him averse
to new or expensive undertakings, he received
Columbus's overtures, with more approbation
tsan any monarch to whom they had hitherto
een presented.
Meanwhile, Columbus being unacquainted
Oh his brother's fate, and having now no
profpe& of encouragement in Spain, resolved
to visit the court of England in person, in hopes
of meeting with a more favourable reception
there. He had already made preparations for
this purpose, and taken measures for the disposal
of his children during his absence, when Juan
erez, the guardian of the monastery of Rabida,
k Life of Colhmb. c. 13. Herera, dcc. I. lib. i. c. 7.

L 2 near

near Palos, in which they had been educate
earnestly solicited him to defer his journey fort
short time. Perez was a man of confideraa :
learning, and of some credit with queen Ifabeld
to whom he was known personally. He wa
warmly attached to Columbus, with whose aS
lities as well as integrity he had many opportr
nities of being acquainted. Prompted by ca
riofity or by friendfnip, he entered upon an a.
curate examination of his system, in conjunciio
with a physician fettled in the neighbourhood,
who was a considerable proficient in mathern
tical knowledge. This investigation fatisfi
them so thoroughly, with refpe& to the óf
lidity of the principles on which Columba
founded his opinion, and the probability of fao
cess in executing the plan which he propofde
that Perez, in order to prevent his country fron
being deprived of the glory and benefit, whid
mnft accrue to the patrons of such a grand en
terprife, ventured to write to Isabella, conjurin
her to confider the matter anew, with the attes
tion which it merited.

Moved by the representations of a perfI

whom The refpeted, Isabella desired Perez t
repair immediately to the village of Santa Fe,
which, on account of the siege of Granada, th
court resided at that time, that ihe might con&
with him upon this important subjet. The fid
effet of their interview was a gracious invitatia
of Columbus back to court [ 1 49 ], accompane
with the present of a small fum to equip him si
the journey. As there was now a certain pro
fpct, that the war with the Moors would fpeedi
be brought to an happy issue by the reduction c

Granad

ranada, which would leave the nation at liberty
o engage in new undertakings; this, as well as
te mark of royal favour, with which Columbus
ad been lately honoured, encouraged his friends
appear with greater confidence than formerly
support of his scheme. The chief of these,
Aonfo de Quintanilla, comptroller of the si-
ances in Cafile, and Luis de Santangel, re-
ivtr of the ecclesiastical revenues in Aragon,
hose meritorious zeal in promoting this great
sign entitles their names to an honourable
ce in history, introduced Columbus to many
ons of high rank, and interested them warmly
his behalf.
But it was not an easy matter to inspire Ser-
id with favourable sentiments. He itill re-
ardd Columbus's proje& as extravagant and
. erical; and in order to render the efforts of

partizans ineffetual, he had the address to
ploy in this new negociation with him, some
the persons who had formerly pronounced his
htme to be impracticable. To their astonish-
|ent, Columbus appeared before them with the

econfident hopes of success as formerly,

;d infied upon the fame high recompence.
He proposed that a small fleet should be fitted
ut, under his command, to attempt the disco-
ery, and demanded to be appointed hereditary
umiral and viceroy of all the seas and lands
hch he fould discover, and to have the tenths
the profits arising from them, fettled irre-
cably upon himself and his descendants. At
e fame time, he offered to advance the eighth

of the fum necessary for accomplishing his
n, on condition that he ihould be entitled

L 3 to

to a proportional fihare of benefit from the a
venture. If the enterprise ihould totally min
carry, he made no stipulation for any rewardr
emolument whatever. Instead of viewing ti
conduc as the clearest evidence of his full pe.
suasion with refpeE to the truth of his own frf
ten, or being struck with that magnanim"t
which, after so many delays and repulses, woui
stoop to nothing inferior to its original claims
the persons with whom Columbus treated, bega
meanly to calculate the expence of the expel
tion, and the value of the reward which he d
manded. The expence, moderate as it wa
they represented to be too great for Spain,
the present exhausted state of its finances. The
contended, that the honours and emolumet
claimed by Columbus were exorbitant, even
he should perform the utmost of what he h
promised; and if all his sanguine hopes shoul
prove illusive, such vast concessions to an adve
turer would be deemed not only inconfidera
but ridiculous. In this imposing garb of ca
tion and prudence, their opinion appeared 1
plausible, and was so warmly supported by Fe
dinand, that Isabella declined giving any con
tenance to Columbus, and abruptly broke off d
negociation with him which she had begun.

This was more mortifying to Columbus thi

all the disappointments which he had hithen
met with. The invitation to court from If
bella, like an unexpe&ed ray of light, h,
opened such profpeEts of success, as encourage
him to hope that his labours were at an enO
but now darkness and uncertainty returned, aE
his mind, firm as it was, could hardly fuppo

d

the shock of such an unforeseen reverse. He
withdrew in deep anguish from court, with an
intention of prosecuting his voyage to England,
as his last resource.

About that time Granada surrendered, and
Ferdinand and Isabella, in triumphal pomp,
took possession of a city [Jan. 2, 1492], the
reduction of which extirpated a foreign power
from the heart of their dominions, and rendered
them mailers of all the provinces, extending
from the bottom of the Pyrenees to the fron-
tiers of Portugal. As the flow of spirits which
accompanies success elevates the mind, and ren-
ders it enterprising, Quintanilla and Sartangel,
the vigilant and discerning patrons of Columbus,
took advantage of this favourable situation, in
order to make one effort more in behalf of their
friend. They addressed themselves to Isabella,
and after expressing some surprise, that she, who
had always been the munificent patroness of ge-
nerous undertakings, should hesitate so long to
countenance the most fplcndid scheme that had
ever been proposed to any monarch'; they re-
presented to her, that Columbus was a man of a
found understanding and virtuous chara&er, well
qualified, by his experience in navigation, as well
as his knowledge of geometry, to form just ideas
with refpe& to the ftruaure of the globe and the
situation of its various regions; that, by offering
to risk his own life and fortune in the execution
of his scheme, he gave the most satisfying evi-
dence both of his integrity and hope of success;
that the fum requisite for equipping such an ar-
mament as he demanded was inconsiderable, and
the advantages which might accrue from his un.

dertaking

dertaking were immense; that he demanded n
recompence for his invention and labour, bt
what was to arise from the countries which ht
should discover; that, as it was worthy of her
magnanimity to make this noble attempt to es.
tend the sphere of human knowledge, and to
open an intercourse with regions hitherto un
known, so it would afford the highelft fatisfac.
tion to her piety and zeal, after re-establishing
the Christian faith in those provinces of Spais
from which it had been long banilhed, to disco
ver a new world, to which (he might communi
cate the light and blessings of divine truth; that
if now (he did not decide inflantly, the op.
portunity would be irretrievably loft; that Co
lumbus was on his way to foreign countries
where some prince, more fortunate or adven.
turous, would close with his proposals, and
Spain would for ever bewail the fatal timidity
which had excluded her from the glory and ad.
vantages that (he had once in her power to have
enjoyed.

These forcible arguments, urged by perfonm

of such authority, and at a jun&ure so weD
chosen, produced the desired effeL .They dif.
pelled all Isabella's doubts and fears; (he ordered
Columbus to be instantly recalled, declared ha
resolution of employing him on his own terms,
and regretting the low estate of her finances,
generously offered to pledge her own jewels, in
order to raise as much money as might be needed
in making preparations for the voyage. Sant.
angel, in a transport of gratitude, kissed the
queen's hand, and in order to save her from bar.
ing recourse to such a mortifying expedient for

procurin

,rocnring money, engaged to advance imedi-
itely the fum that was requisite ".

Columbus had proceeded some leagues on his
ourney, when the messenger from Isabella over-
took him. Upon receiving an account of the
unexpeded revolution in his favour, he returned
irectly to Santo F6, though some remainder of
difidence still mingled itself with his joy. But
the cordial reception which he met with from
Ilabella, together with the near profpeat of set-
ting out upon that voyage which had so long
been the objea of his thoughts and wishes, soon
effaced the remembrance of all that he had sus-
sered in Spain, during eight tedious years of so-
licitation and suspense. The negociation now
went forward with facility and dispatch, and a
treaty or capitulation with Columbus was signed
on the seventeenth of April, one thousand four
hundred and ninety-two The chief articles of
it were, x. Ferdinand and Isabella, as sovereigns
of the ocean, constituted Columbus their high
admiral in all the seas, islands, and continents
which should be discovered by his industry; and
fipulated that he and his heirs for ever should
enjoy this office, with the fame powers and pre.
rcgatives which belonged to the high admiral
of Castile, within the limits of his jurifdiftion.
a. They appointed Columbus their viceroy in all
the islands and continents which he should disco-
vei; but if, for the better administration of as-
fairs, it should hereafter be necessary to establish
a separate governor in any of those countries,
they authorised Columbus to name three perr
sons, of whom they would choose one for that

° Herr dec. . lib. i. . .S.

office i

office; and the dignity of viceroy, with an i
immunities, was likewise to be hereditary in ti
family of Columbus. 3. They granted to C
lumbus and his heirs for ever, the tenth of th
free profits accruing from the productions at
commerce of the countries which he should di
cover. 4 They declared, that if any contn
verfy or law-suit shall arise with respect to as
mercantile tranfa&ion in the countries wbi
should be discovered, it should be determine
by the sole authority of Columbus, or of judg
to be appointed by him. 5. They permitt
Columbus to advance one-eighth part of wh
mhould be expended in preparing for the expe
tion, and in carrying on commerce with t
countries which he should discover, and entitl
him, in return, to an eighth part of the profit

Though the name of Ferdinand appears co

joined with that of Isabella in this tranfaedic
his distrust of Columbus was fiill so violent th
he refused to take any part in the enterprise
king of Aragon. As the whole expence of t
expedition was to be defrayed by the crown
Caftfle, Isabella reserved for her subjects of tb
kingdom an exclusive right to all the beneE
which might redound from its success.

As soon as the treaty was signed, Isabella, 1

her attention and adivity in forwarding the pi
parations for the voyage, endeavoured to mai
some reparation to Columbus for the time whii
he had loft in fruitless solicitation. By tJ
twelfth of May, all that depended upon her vP
adjusted; and Columbus waited on the king a
queen, in order to receive their final inftru&iox
P Life of Columbus, c. 5. Hee, dec. . .lib. i. c.

Ert

Every thing refpe&ing the destination and con-
!u& of the voyage, they committed implicitly
:o the disposal of his prudence. But that they
night avoid giving any just cause of offence to
he king of Portugal, they ftridly enjoined him
lot to approach near to the Portuguese fettle-
nents on the coast of Guinea, or in any of the
,ther countries to which the Portuguese claimed
ight as discoverers. Isabella had ordered the
hips, of which Columbus was to take the corn-
nand, to be fitted out in the port of Palos,-
i small maritime town in the province of Anda-
ufia. As the guardian Juan Perez, to whom
2olumbus had already been so much indebted,
fided in the neighbourhood of this place, he,
iy the influence of that good ecclesiastic, as well
3 by his own connection with the inhabitants,
Lot only raised among them what he wanted of
he fum that he was hound by treaty to advance,
Hut engaged several of them to accompany him
a the voyage. The chief of these associates
sere three brothers of the name of Pinzon, of
onfiderable wealth, and of great experience in
vaal affairs, who were willing to hazard their
;Ses and fortunes in the expedition.
But, after all the efforts of Isabella and Co-
gmbus, the armament was not suitable, either

the dignity of the nation by which it was
quipped, or to the importance of the service
or which it was destined. It confiued of three
effels. The largest, a ship of no considerable
,urden, was commanded by Columbus, as ad-
pral, who gave it the name of Santa Maria,
iut of refpet for the Blessed Virgin, whom he
4noured with singular devotion. Of the fe-

cond,
I:

cond, called the Pinta, Martin Pinzon was cap
tain, and his brother Francis pilot. The thir,
named the Nigna, was under the. command d
Vincent Yanez Pinzon. These two were ligh
veffes, hardly superior in burden or force t
large boats. This squadron, if it merits thi
name, was vi&ualled for twelve months, and ha
on board ninety men, motly sailors, togethi
with a few adventurers who followed the for
tune of Columbus, and some gentlemen of Ii
bella's court, whom she appointed to accompar
him. Though the expence of the undertakwin
was one of the circumstances which chiefly alar;
cd the court of Spain, and retarded so long th
negociation with Columbus, the fum employv
in fitting out this squadron did not exceed sos
thousand pounds.

As the art of ship-building in the fifteenth cc

tury was extremely rude, and the bulk of veffd
was accommodated to the ihort and easy voyage
along the coast which they were accufiomed t
perform, it is a proof of the courage as welli
enterprising genius of Columbus, that he vs
tured, with a fleet so unfit for a distant navig
tion, to explore unknown seas, where he had D
chart to guide him, no knowledge of the tide
and currents, and no experience of the dangt
to which he might be exposed. His eagerne
to accomplish the great defgn which had so lon
engrossed his thoughts, made him overlook (
disregard every circumstance that would have i
timidated a mind less adventurous. He pufly
forward the preparations with such ardour, a,
was seconded so effeEually by the persons t
whom Isabella committed the superintendence c

his business, that every thing was soon in readi-
,fs for the voyage. But as Columbus was
leeply impressed with sentiments of religion, he
rould not set out upon an expedition so arduous,
nd of which one great object was to extend the
nowvledgc of the Chrittian faith, without im-
)loring publicly the guidance and proteaion of
Heaven. With this view, he, together with all
he persons under his command, marched in
'olern proceflion to the monastery of Rabida.
After confessing their fins, and obtaining abfolu-
ion, they received the holy sacrament from the
hands of the guardian, who joined his prayers to
heirs for the success of an enterprise which he
had so zealously patronized.

Next morning, being Friday the third day of
August, in the year one thousand four hundred
and ninety-two, Columbus set fail, a little before
sun-rise, in presence of a vast crowd of fpeftators,
who sent up their supplications to Heaven for
the prosperous issue of the voyage, which they
wilhed rather than expeted. Columbus fleered
direfly for the Canary Islands, and arrived there
AAug. 13] without any occurrence that would
have deserved notice on any other occasion. But,
in a voyage of such expe&ation and importance,
ever) circumitance was the objet of attention.
The rudder of the Pinta broke loose, the day
after she left the harbour, and that accident
alarmed the crew, no less fuperititious than un-
fifful, as a certain omen of the unfortunate
eftiny of the expedition. Even in the short
rn to the Canaries, the ships were found to be
so crazy and ill appointed, as to be very impro-
er for a navigation which was expeced to be
VOL. 1. M both

both long and dangerous. Columbus refitted
them, however, to the best of his power, and
having supplied himself with fresh provisions, 0h
took his departure from Gomera, one of th:
most welterly of the Canary Islands, on the sixth
day of September.

Here the voyage of discovery may properly be

said to begin ; for Columbus holding his courfi
due weft, left immediately the usual track o0
navigation, and stretched into unfrequented and
unknown seas. The firit day, as it was very caln,
he made but little way; but on the second, he
loft fight of the Canaries; and many of the
sailors, dejeced already and dismayed, when thq
contemplated the boldness of the undertaking,
began to beat their breasts, and to 'ned tears, a
if they were never more to behold land. Co.
lumbus comforted them with assurances of fuc.
cess, and the profpe&t of vast wealth, in thole
opulent regions whither he was conducing them
This early discovery of the spirit of his follow.
ers taught Columbus, that he must prepare to
firuggle, not only with the unavoidable difficul
ties which might be expected from the nature o/
his undertaking, but with such as were likely to
arile from the ignorance and timidity of tlh
people under his command; and he perceived tha
the art of governing the minds of men woul
be no less rcquifite for accomplishing the dico.
veries which he had in view, than naval Ald
and undaunted courage. Happily for himsel
and for the country by which he was employed
he joined to the ardent temper and invenurt
genius of a projector, virtues of another fpecide
,which are rarely united with them. He poffeied

a thsl<

a thorough knowledge of mankind, an insinuating
address, a patient perseverance in executing any
plan, the perfea government of his own passions,
and the talent of acquiring an ascendant over
those of other men. All these qualities, which
formed him for command, were accompanied
with that superior knowledge of his profession,
which begets confidence in times of difficulty
and danger. To unskilful Spanish sailors, accuf.
tomed only to coasting voyages in the Medi.
terranean, the maritime science of Columbus, the
fruit of thirty years experience, improved by an
acquaintance with all the inventions of the Portu-
guefe, appeared immense. As soon as they put
to sea, he regulated every thing by his sole au-
thority; he superintended the execution of every
order; and allowing himself only a few hours
for seep, he was at all other times upon deck.
As his course lay through seas which had not
formerly been visited, the founding-line, or ih-
iruments for observation, were continually in
his hands. After the example of the Portuguese
discoverers, he attended to the motion of tides
and currents, watched the flight of birds, the
appearance of fishes, of sea-weeds, and of every
thirg that floated on the waves, and entered every
occurrence, with a minute exafnefs, in the jour-
nal which he kept. As the length of the voyage
could not fail of alarming sailors habituated only
to short excursions, Columbus endeavoured to
conceal from them the real progress which they
made. With this view, though they run eighteen
leagues on the fecoud day after they left Go-
ncra, he gave out that they had advanced only
vtaec., and he uniformly employed the fame

!MI z~ Rartifice

artifice of reckoning short during the whoe
voyage. By the fourteenth of September, th
fleet was above two hundred leagues to the wei
of the Canary Isles, at a greater distance from
land than any Spaniard had been before tht
time. There they were struck with an appear.
ance no less astonishing than new. They obfervn
that the magnetic needle, in their compasses, did
not point exactly to the polar star, but varied
towards the weft; and as they proceeded, thi
variation increased. This appearance, which
now familiar, though it still remains one of ti
mysteries of nature, into the cause of which the
sagacity of man hath not been able to penetrate,
filled the companions of Columbus with terr.:,
They were now in a boundless and unknow-
ocean, far from the usual course of navigation:
nature itself seemed to be altered, and the onbl
guide which they had left was about to fail thep
Columbus, with no less quickness thaiqingenuty,
invented a reason for this appearance, which
though it did not satisfy himself, seemed so plhu
fible to them, that it dispelled their fears, a
silenced their murmurs.

He till continued to fleer due weft, nearly is

the fame latitude with the Canary Islands. I
this course he came within the sphere of th
trade wind, which blows invariably from east t[
weft, between the tropics and a few degrees hb
yond them. He advanced before this fteadj
gale with fueh uniform rapidity, that it was fd
dom necessary to (hist a fail. When about foa
hundred leagues to the weft of the Canaries, b
found the sea so covered with weeds, that i
relaeblal a meadow of vast extent, and in for

P1c

places they were so thick, as to retard the mo-
tion of the vessels. This strange appearance occa-
siored new alarm and disquiet. The sailors ima-
ined that they were now arrived at the utmost
boundary of the navigable ocean; that these
floating weeds would obftruc their farther pro-
grefs, and concealed dangerous rocks, or some
large tract of land, which had funk, they knew
not how, in that place. Columbus endeavoured
to persuade them, that what had alarmed, ought
rather to have encouraged them, and was to be
confidered as a sign of approaching land. At
the fame time, a briik gale arose, and carried
them forward. Several birds were seen hover-
ing about the ship P, and directed their flight
towards the weft. The desponding crew re-
fumed some degree of spirit, and began to enter-
tain fresh hopes.

Upon the first of Otober they were, accord-
ing to the admiral's reckoning, seven hundred
and seventy leagues to the weft of the Canaries;
but left his men should be intimidated by the
prodigious length of the navigation, he gave out
that they had proceeded only five hundred and
eighty-four leagues; and, fortunately for Co-
lumbus, neither his own pilot, nor those of the
other ships, had skill sufficient to correct this
error, and discover the deceit. They had now
been above three weeks at sea; they had pro-
ceeded far beyond what former navigators had
attempted or deemed possible; all their prog-
noftics of difeovery, drawn from the flight of
birds and other circumitances, had proved falla-
cious; the appearances of land, with which their

P See NOTE XIII.

M 3 -own

own credulity or the artifice of their commando
had from time to time flattered and anused
them, had been altogether illusive, and the
profpe& of success seemed now to be as diftnt
as ever. These refle&tions occurred often to
men who had no other objec or occupation than
to reason and discourse concerning the intention
and circumrfances of their expedition. Ther
made impreflion, at first, upon the ignorant and
timid, and extending, by degrees, to such a
were better informed or more resolute, the con.
tagion spread at length from ship to ship. From
secret whispers or murmurings, they proceeded
to open cabals and public complaints. They
taxed their sovereign with inconsiderate credulity,
in paying such regard to the vain promises and
rash conjecures of an indigent foreigner, as to
hazard the lives of so many of her own fubjeis,
in prosecuting a chimerical scheme. They as.
firmed that they had fully performed their duty,
by venturing so far in an unknown and hopelef
course, and could incur no blame, for refuiing
to follow, any longer, a desperate adventurer to
certain destruction. They contended, that it
was neceflary to think of returning to Spain,
while their crazy vessels were till in a condition
to keep the sea, but expressed their fears that
the attempt would prove vain, as the wind which
had hitherto been so favourable to their course,
mufl render it impossible to fail in the oppofitc
dire&ion. All agreed that Columbus should be
compelled by force to adopt a measure on which
their common safety depended. Some of the
nmore audacious proposed, as the most expeditious
and certain method for getting rid at once of bis

remon>

remonstrances, to throw him into the fca, being
persuaded that, upon their return to Spain, the
death of an unsuccessful projector would excite
little concern, and be inquired into with no
curiosity.

Columbus was fully sensible of his perilous

situation. He had observed, with great uneafi-
ness, the fatal operation of ignorance and of fear
in producing difaffe&ion among his crew, and
saw that it was now ready to burift out into open
mutiny. He retained, however, perfet presence
of mind. He affected to seem ignorant of their
machinations. Notwithstanding the agitation and
solicitude of his own mind, he appeared with a
cheerful countenance, like a man satisfied with
the progress he had made, and confident of
success. Sometimes he employed all the arts of
insinuation, to sooth his men. Sometimes he
endeavoured to work upon their ambition or
avarice, by magnificent descriptions of the fame
and wealth which they were about to acquire.
On other occasions, he assumed a tone of autho-
rity, and threatened them with vengeance from
their Sovereign, if, by their dastardly behaviour,
they should defeat this noble effort to promote
the glory of God, and to exalt the Spanish name
above that of every other nation. Even with
seditious sailors, the words of a man whom they
had been accustomed to reverence, were weighty
and persuasive, and not only restrained them fromr
tbofe violent excesses, which they meditated, but
prevailed with them to accompany their admiral
for some time longer.

As they proceeded, the indications of ap-
proaching land seemed to be more certain, and

excited

excited hope in proportion. The birds began
to appear in flocks, making towards the south.
weft. Columbus, in imitation of the Portuguese
navigators, who had been guided, in several
of their discoveries, by the motion of birds, altered
his course from due weft towards that quarter
whither they pointed their flight. But, after
holding on for several days in this new dirttion,
without any better success than formerly, having
seen no objec, during thirty days, but the sea
and the sky, the hopes of his companions sub.
fided faster than they had risen; their fears re.
vived with additional force; impatience, rage,
and despair, appeared in every countenance. All
sense offubordination was loft: the officers, who
had hitherto concurred withColumbus in opinion,
and supported his authority, now took part with
the private men; they assembled tumultuouly
on the deck, expoftulated with their commander,
mingled threats with their expostulations, and
required him instantly to tack about and to re.
turn to Europe. Columbus perceived that it
would be of no avail to have recourse to any of
his former arts, which having been tried so often,
had loft their effect; and that it was impossible
to rekindle any zeal for the success of the expe.
dition among men, in whose breasts fear had
extinguished every generous sentiment. He saw
that it was no less vain to think of employing
either ger.tle or severe measures to quell a mutiny
so general and so violent. It was necessary, on
all there accounts, to sooth passions which he
could no longer command, and to give way to
a torrent too impetuous to be checked. He
promiftd solemnly to his men that he would

comply

comply with their request, provided they would'
accompany him, and obey his commands for
three days longer, and if, during that time,
land were not discovered, he would then aban-
don the enterprize, and dire&t his course towards
Spain r.

Enraged as the tailors were, and impatient to

turn their faces again towards their.native coun-
try, this proposition did not appear to them un-
reaifnable. Nor did Columbus hazard much in
confining himelf to a term so fmort. The pre-
fages of discovering land were now so numerous
and promising, that he deemed them infallible.
For some days the founding line reached the
bottom, and the foil which it brought up indi-
cated land to be at no great distance. The flocks
of birds increased, and were composed not only
of sea-fowl, but of such land birds as could not
be supposed to fly far from the ihore. The
crew of the Pinta observed a cane floating, which
seemed to have been newly cut, and likewise a
piece of timber artificially carved. The sailors
aboard the Nigna took up the branch of a tree
with red berries, perfectly fresh. The clouds
around the fetting-fun assumed a new appear-
ance; the air was more mild and warm, and,
during night, the wind became unequal and
variable. From all these symptoms, Columbus
was so confident of being near land, that on the
evening of the eleventh of Ocober, after public
prayers for success, he ordered the fails to be
furled, and the ships to lie-to, keeping firid
watch, left they should be driven ashore in the
night. During this interval of suspense and

r O0iedo Hit. ap. Ramus. vol. iii. p. 61. E.

expectation,

expe&ation, no man shut his eyes, all kept upon
deck, gazing intently towards that quarter where
they expeted to discover the land, which had
been so long the objec of their wiihes.

About two hours before midnight, Colum.

bus standing on the forecastle, observed a light at
a distance, aind privately pointed it out to Pedro
Guttierez, a page of the queen's wardrobe.
Guttierez perceived it, and calling to Salcedo,
comptroller of the fleet, all three saw it in mo.
tion, as if it were carried from place to place. A
little after midnight the joyful found of land, land,
was heard from the Pinta, which kept alvavy
ahead of the other ships. But, having been so
often deceived by fallacious appearances, every
man was now become flow of belief, and waited, in
all the anguish of uncertainty and impatience,
for the return of day. As soon as morning
dawned [Friday, Oc. t2], all doubts and fears
were dispelled. From every ship an island was
seen about two leagues to the north, whose flat
and verdant fields, well stored with wood, and
,watered with many rivulets, presented the afpeEt
of a delightful country. The crew of the Pinta
instantly began the Te Deum, as a hymn oi
thanksgiving to God, and were joined by those
of the other ships, with tears of joy and trarf-
ports of congratulation. This office of grati
tude to Heaven vas followed by an aft of jul'ice
to their commander. They threw themselves at
the feet of Columbus, with feelings of felf-cor.
demnation mingled with reverence. They ir.
plored him to pardon their ignorance, incredu.
lity, and insolence, which had created him fc
much unnecessary disquiet, and had so often ob.

ftrustc

/.~

'eB1 ~ .7
M; ~I ·

it ~-aa=- ~ lpts~a~~i ~ /

tv~~~~~~~~~~,...
...-,r

irued the prosecution of his well-concerted
lan; and passing, in the warmth of their ad-
niration, from one extreme to another, they
low pronounced the man, whom they had so
atcly reviled and threatened, to be a person in-
pired by Heaven with sagacity and fortitude
nore than human, in order to accomplish a design
o far beyond the ideas and conception of all
ormer ages.
As soon as the fun arose, all their boats were
nannrd and armed. They rowed towards the
jand with their colours displayed, with warlike
rnuic, and other martial pomp. As they ap-
proached the coast, they saw it covered with a
nultitude of people, whom the novelty of the
pe'tacle had drawn together, whose attitudes
iad gestures expressed wonder and astonishment
it the strange objects which presented themselves
: their view. Columbus was the first European
who fct foot in the New World which he had
discovered. He landed in a rich dress, and with
a naked sword in his hand. His men follow-
ed, and kneeling down, they all kissed the
ground which they had so long desired to fee.
They nexi ere&cd a cruciilx, and proftrating
themselves before it, returned thanks to God
ir cut;ducting their voyage to such an happy
i:je. They then took folcmn possession of the
cjuntry for the crown of Caitile and Leon, with
ll the formalities which the Portuguese were
accuttomed to observe in afts of this kind, in
:her new discoveries '.

' L;fe of Coumbus, c. 2, 13. Herrra, dec. z, lib. ;i
..The

Th
l

The Spaniards, while thus employed, were

surrounded by many of the natives, who gazed,
in silent admiration, upon actions which thr
could not comprehend, and of which they di
not foresee the consequences. The dress of
the Spaniards, the whiteness of their skiss, their
beards, their arms, appeared strange and fur.
prifing. The vast machines in which they had
traversed the ocean, that seemed to move upoo
the waters with wings, and uttered a dreadful
found resembling thunder, accompanied wit
lightning and smoke, itruck them with such ta.
ror, that they began to rcfpeca their new gueil
as a superior order of beings, and concluded that
they were children of the Sun, who had de.
scended to visit the earth.

The Europeans were hardly less amazed a!

the scene now before them. Every herb, a.d
shrub, and tree, was different from those which
flourished in Europe. The foil seemed to be
rich, but bore few marks of cultivation. The
climate, even to the Spaniards, felt warm, t}ioug-
extremely delightful. The inhabitants appeared
in the simple innocence of nature, entirely nakei
Their black hair, long and uncurled, floated upon
their ihoulders, or was bound in tresses aro.-id
their heads. They had no beards, and ever
part of their bodies was perfectly smooth. The,
complexion was of a dusky copper colour, thbei
features singular, rather than disagreeable, tchi
aspect gentle and timid. Though not tall, the7
were well shaped, and active. Their faces, and
several parts of their body, were fantaflica.!
painted with glaring colours. They wvere ':-
at firit through fear, but loon became farr::"

V: .5

rh the Spaniards, and with transports of joy
-eived from them hawks-bells, glass beads, or
:her baubles, in return for which they gave
;:h provisions as they had, and some cotton
in, the only commodity of value that they
ould produce. Towards evening, Columbus
turned to his ship, accompanied by many of
'e islanders in their boats, which they called
sor, and though rudely formed out of the
:-nk of a single tree, they rowed them with
:rtiling dexterity. Thus, in the first interview
t.aween the inhabitants of the old and new

E

.ids, every thing was condu&ed amicably, and
their mutual fatisfaAion. The former, en-
.zh:ened and ambitious, formed already vast ideas
;ih respect to the advantages which they might
i-'e from the regions that began to open to
,'ir view. The latter, simple and undifcerning,
:i no foresight of the calamities and desolation
F.L.ch were approaching their country.

Columbus, who now assumed the title and
:r.lhrity of admiral and viceroy, called the island
F.ich he had discovered San Salvador. It is
better known by the name of Guanahani, which
'it natives gave to it, and is one of that large
c:'.cr of islands called the Lucaya or Bahama
i"q. It is situated above three thousand miles

the weft of Gomera, from which the squadron

look its departure, and only four degrees to the
Ruth of it; so little had Columbus deviated
f-om the westerly course, which he had chosen
}i the most proper.
| Columbus employed the next day in visiting
ite coasts of the ifand; and from the universal
.venty of the inhabitants, he perceived that this
wra not the rich country for which he fought.

OL. I. N But,

But, conformably to his theory concerning ,
discovery of those regions of Asia which frc:'..,
towards the east, he concluded that San Salv.e
was one of the isles which geographers defcr-.z
as situated in the great ocean adjacent to Ird'.
Having observed that most of the people w'.:
he had seen wore small plates of gold, by v,-
of ornament, in their nostrils, hc eagcri¥
quired where they got that precious irc.
Tihey pointed towards the south, and miade
comprehernd by signs, that gold aboundc;
countries situated in that quarter. Tit'nc.
im.mediately determined to dircct his couric,:
full confidence of finding there those opL-r
regions which had been the objeEt of his uva;.
and would be a recompence for all his toil ia:
dangers. He took along with him seven c::.
natives of San Salvador, that, by acquiring :
Spanifn language, they might fcrvc as gr-:
and interpreters ; and those innocent peopie cv.
fidered it as a mark of dif:inction when thty YLa
felc^ted to accompany him.

He iaw fcveral islands, and toucled at thre:

the largcft, on which he beilowed the nar.c 3
St. Mary of the Conception, Fernandina, '
Isabella. But as their foil, productions, anr. .
habitants, nearly resembled those of San Sar-
dor, he made no rfay in any of them. H.-
quired every whsere for gold, and the fignn;:
were uniformly made by way of answer, confir_
him in the opinion that it was brought fro.T. 2
south. He followed that course, and soon :
covered a couurtry which appeared very ex::.
five, not perfectly level, like those which he :
already visited, but so diversified with r-

' t. MPart. cpil. 135.

.';c

*-unds, hills, rivers, woods, and plains, that he
,i uncertain whether it might prove an island,
- part of the continent. The natives of San
:l,;aqor, whom he had on board, called it Cuba;

,:Imbus gave it the name of Juanna. He en-
:-ed the mouth of a large river with his fqua-
:n, and all the inhabitants fled to the moun-
1ls as he approached the shore. But as he
Solved to careen his ships in that place, he sent
jine Spaniards, together with one of the people
, San Salvador, to view the interior part of the
:,ntry. They, having advanced above sixty
:%s from the shore, reported, upon their re-
.--., that the foil was richer and more culti-
nrtd than any they had hitherto discovered;
.'.:, befids many scattered cottages, they had
. o:l::d one village, containing above a thouandr
:.haSitants ; that the people, though naked,

s-med to be more intelligent than those of San

Sa!vador, but had treated them with the fame
rtfpectful attention, khifing their feet, and ho-
. .ain'n them as sacred beings allied to Heaven;
t. t hct had given them to eat a certain root,
;.e taz; of which resembled roasted chefnuts,
i- iinwifc a singular species of corn called
z::- '.vich, either when roated whole or

I- jr, into meal, was abundantly palatable;

. . there seemed to be no four-footed animals
in the country, but a species of dogs, which
'ri.i nct bark, and a creature resembling a rab-
-', Lat of a much fialler size ; that they had
.-ervc4 iome ornaments of gold among the
--I's, but of no great value .

' ic -f CAiumbus, c. 24-28. Herrcra, dec. i. lib. i.
. ;4t

s, There

These messengers had prevailed with fomty

the natives to accompany them, who informd
Columbus, that the gold of which they mkA.
their ornaments was found in Cubanacan. El
this word they meant the middle or inland pa:
of Cuba; but Columbus, being ignorant of tiC
language, as well as unaccustomed to their pr,
nunciation, and his thoughts running continua
upon his own theory concerning the difcovtry.,
the East Indies, he was led, by the refembia;'
of found, to suppose that they spoke of *:
Great Khan, and imagined that the opuc
kingdom of Cathay, described by Marco PCA
was not very remote. This induced him to et
ploy some time in viewing the country. H;
visited almost every harbour, from Porto a
Principe, on the north coast of Cuba, to &
eastern extremity of the island: but, though &
lighted with the beauty of the scenes whid
every where presented themselves, and amaze!
at the luxuriant fertility of the foil, both whici
from their novelty, made a more lively impreffi
upon his imagination x, he did not find gold i
such quantity as was sufficient to satisfy eitec
the avarice of his followers, or the expectatio.i
of the court to which he was to return. Th
people of the country, as much astonished at u
-agernefs in quest of gold, as the Europez¢i
were at their ignorance and simplicity, poin:`
towards the east, where an ifand which th'c
called Hayti was situated, in which that rr;'-
was more abundant than among them. Colurr.li
ordered his squadron to bend its course thitrc:;
but Martin Alonfo Pinzon, impatient to b tL,

X See NOTE XIV.

L;t v.i-o should take possession of the treasures

h.ch this country was supposed to contain,.
c'!;:'c this companions, regardless of all the ad-
;-..;'-, i. rr.s to flacken fail until they should
c.-.p. u;; with him.

LC,-::-bus, retarded by contrary winds, did
.-: rr;: ayti till the sixth of December. He

c.c- ,:' c port where lie first touched St. Nicho-

i;', :- :h il!and itflf Efpagnola, in honour of

-:.: k.: nd-i by which lie was employed; and it
:-.: c:.\ country, of those he had yet disco-
. *::1, -.ith las retained thle name that he gave

;'. ;:

he could neither mneet with the Pinta, nor

iL. .: .::. intrcoul-e wi:il the inhabitants, who
r.: 1i: gecat conitcrn. tion towards the woods,

i. :',o-1 c!i ttcd St. NiclolAa, and failing along

r-. nir'tiilrn coalt of the island, lie entered
; .:.cr harbour, whicl hie cailcd Conception.
i r:c : \:. ia mure forturate ; his people over-

t /<

a \woma: who was flying from them, and
::'.rtr';:ing her with grea.t gent!cnefs, dismissed
.: tjti, a prcfernt of such toys as they knew
s:c rr.]lt xalued in those regions. The de-

'-.p:i;.l which fle gave to her countrymen of
humanity and wonderful qualities of the

?-z."'-;r; their admiration of the trinkets, which

.: ic:w'ed with exultation; and their eagerness
, participate of the fame favours; removed all
.::r fears, and induced many of them to repair
;,te harbour. The itrange obje&s which they
iae!d, and the baubles, which Columbus be-
ircd upon them, amply gratified their curiosity

a:. their wishes. They nearly resembled the
,ple of Guanahani and Cuba. They were
Ld lkc them, ignorant, and simple; and

| 3 seemed

seemed to be equally unacquainted with all tI
arts which appear most necessary in polished .
cieties: but they were gentle, credulous, a.
timid, to a degree which rendered it easy to <.
quire the ascendant over them, especially as the
exceflive admiration led them into the fame err.
with the people of the other islands, in betii.
ing the Spaniards to be more than mortals, ar:
descended immediately from Heaven. Thei
possessed gold in greater abundance than the
neighbours, which they readily exchanged i'c
bells, beads, or pins; and in this unequal traEf
both parties were highly pleased, each confidenri;
themielves as gainers by the tranfacion. Hlt
Columbus was visited by a prince or caziqu.c
the country. He appeared with all the por
known among a simple people, being carried i
a fort of palanquin upon the shoulders of sec
men, and attended by many of his subje&s, we
served him with great refpe&. His deportmc
was grave and flately, very reserved towards h
own people, but with Columbus and the Spaniar
extremely courteous. He gave the admiral foae
thin plates of gold, and a girdle of curious wo.-
manship, receiving in return presents of small ~
lue, but highly acceptable to him r.

Columbus, still intent on discovering the ma

which yielded gold, continued to interrogate s
the natives with whom he had any intercoC2
concerning their situation. They concurred
pointing out a mountainous country, which tf
called Cibao, at some distance from the sea, vi
farther towards the east. Struck with this so0;
w'hich appeared to him the fame with Cpa.1h
7 Life of Columbus, c. 3%. Hcnera, dcc, . lib. i. c. 15,

mse name by which Marco Polo, and other tra-
cUclrs to the east, distinguished the island of Ja-
pan, he no longer doubted with refpeft to the
rcinitv of the countries which he had discovered
ul the remote parts of Asia; and, in full ex-
pectation of reaching soon those regions which
had been the objet of his voyage, he direEted
Lis course towards the east. He put into a com-
n;odious harbour, which he called St. Thomas,
a.d found that diftrit to be under the govern-
ment of a powerful cazique, named Guacanahari,
who, as he afterwards learned, was one of the
fi.e sovereigns among whom the whole island
was divided. He immediately sent messengers
to Columbus, who, in his name, delivered to
him the present of a mask curiously fashioned,
with the ears, nose, and mouth of beaten gold,
and invited him to the place of his residence,
near the harbour now called Cape Fran9ois,
some leagues towards the call. Columbus dif-
patched some of his officers to visit this prince,
who, as he behaved himself with greater dignity,
fcemed to claim more attention. They return-
ed, with such favourable accounts both of the
country and of the people, as made Columbus
impatient for that interview with Guacanahari to
which he had been invited.

He failed for this purpose from St. Thomas,
on the twenty-fourth of December, with a fair
wind, and the sea perfectly calm; and as, amidst
the multiplicity of his occupations, he had not
shut his eyes for two days, he retired at mid-
night in order to take some repose, having com-
mitted the helm to the pilot, with ftrid injunc-
tions not to quit it for a moment. The pilot,

dreading

dreading no danger, carelessly left the helm to a2
unexperienced cabin-boy, and the ship, carried
away by a current, was dashed againit a rock.
The violence of the {hock awakened Columbu.
He ran up to the deck. There, all was cc2.
fusion and despair. He alone retained prefen.c
of mind. He ordered some of the sailors to take a
boat, and carry out an anchor altern; but, i-
stead of obeying, they made off towards t.e
Nigna, which was about half a league dillant.
He then commanded the masts to be cut dow.,
in order to lighten the ship; but ail his endea.
vours were too late; the vessel opened near the
keel, and filled so fait with water that its loi
was inevitable. The smoothness of the sea, and
the timely afitttance of boats from the Nigna,
enabled the crew to save their lives. As foun as
the islanders heard of this disaster, they crowded
to the shore, with their prince Guacanahari at
their head. Initead of taking advantage of the
diitrefs in which they beheld the Spaniards, to
attempt any thing to their detriment, they la-
mented their misfortune with tears of sincere
condolence. Not satisfied with this unavailing
expression of their sympathy, they put to sea
a number of canoes, and, under the direction of
the Spaniards, assisted in saving whatever could
be got out of the wreck; and by the united la-
bour of so many hands, almost every thing of
value was carried ashore. As fait as the goods
were landed, Guacanahari in person took charge
of them. By his orders they were all deposited
in one place, and armed centinels were polled,
who kept the multitude at a distance, in order
to prevent them not only from embezzling, but

fro;:i

rom infpeaing too curiously what belonged to
heir guelts . Next morning this prince visited
3olumbus, who was now on board the Nigna,
nd endeavoured to console him for his loss, by
ifering all that he possessed to repair it a.
The condition of Columbus was such, that he
ood in need of consolation. He had hitherto
-rocured no intelligence of the Pinta, and no
onger doubted but that his treacherous associate
lad set fail for Europe, in order to have the
nerit of carrying the first tidings of the extraor.
linary discoveries which had been made, and to
3re-occupy so far the ear of their sovereign, as
.o rob him of the glory and reward to which he
as juifly entitled. There remained but one
;eflel, and that the smallest and most crazy of
le squadron, to traverse such a vafi ocean, and
arry so many men back to Europe. Each of
Lhofe circumstances was alarming, and filled the
mind of Columbus with the utmost solicitude.
The desire of overtaking Pinzon, and of effacing
the unfavourable impressions which his mifrepre-
ientations might make in Spain, made it necef-
iary to return thither without delay. The dif-
-cilty of taking such a number of persons aboard
the Nigna, confirmed him in an opinion, which
·:.e fertility of the country, and the gentle tem.
per of the people, had already induced him to
form. He resolved to leave a part of his crew
ia the island, that, by residing there, they might
Itarn the language of the natives, study their
disposition, examine the nature of the country,
farch for mines, prepare for the commodious
,t"dement of the colony, with which he pro-
z St NOTT XV. ' Herrcra, dec. z. lib. i. c. iS.

posed

posed to return, and thus secure and facilita.
the acquilition of those advantages which hc ex.
peted from his discoveries. When he mre,.
tioned this to his men, all approved of the &.
ign ; and from impatience under the fatigue o
a long voyage, from the levity natural to sailon,
or from the hopes of amafling wealth in a coup.
try, which afforded such promising specimens of
its riches, many offered voluntarily to be amono
the number of those who should remain.

Nothing was now wanting towards the exec-.

tion of this scheme, but to obtain the confert
of Guacanahari ; and his unfufpicious fimplicit
soon presented to the admiral a favourable op
portunity of proposing it. Columbus having, i
the belt manner he could, by broken words and.
signs, expressed tome curiosity to know the cause
which had moved the islanders to fly with such
precipitation upon the approach of his hips,
the cazique informed him that the country vwa
much infrfted by the incursions of certain pee-
ple, whom he called Carribeans, who inhabitd
several islands to the south-east. These he de.
fcribed as a fierce and warlike race of men, tho
delighted in blood, and devoured the flefl ofth;
prifoncrs who were so unhappy as to fall inr:
their hands; and as the Spaniards, at their si
appearance, were supposed to be Cambears
whom the natives, however numerous, durst no!
face in battle, they had recourse to their ufial
method of securing their safety, by flying i-:o
the thickest and most impenetrable woods. Ga-
canahari, while speaking of those dreadful is.
vaders, discovered such fvmptoms of terror, i
well as such consciousness of the inability of .i

O,'r

o.;m people to resist them, as led Columbus to
conclude that he would not be alarmed at the
·prpofition of any scheme which afforded him
the profpec -of an additional security against
their attacks. He inflantly offered him the
aflitance of the Spaniards to repel his enemies;
he engaged to take him and his people under
the protection of the powerful monarch whom
Le served, and offered to leave in the island such
a number of his men as should be sufficient, not
nl'- to defend the inhabitants from future in-
c.lions, but to avenge their past wrongs.

The credulous prince closed eagerly with the
ruopofal, and thought himself already safe under
;ic patronage of beings sprung from Heaven,
and Superior in power to mortal men. The
g-rcu;ud was marked out for a small fort, which
Coui!nbus called Navidad, because he had land-
c'i there on Chl-ritmas-day. A deep ditch was
c.-'n around it. The ramparts were fortified
\i:hi pallifades, and the great guns, saved out of
the admiral's ship, were planted upon them. In
tcn days the work was finished; that simple race
Li men labouring with inconsiderate assiduity in
erecting this firis monument of their own ser-
vitude. During this time, Columbus, by his
careffis and liberality, laboured to increase the
high opinion which the natives entertained of
tLe Spaniards. But while he endeavoured to
inipire them with confidence in their disposition
to do good, he wished likewise to give them
lfme striking idea of their power to punish and
dctlroy such as were the objects of their in-
d;gnation. With this view, in pretence of a vast
;lenmbly, he drew up his men in order of battle,

and

and made an ostentatious but innocent display of
the sharpness of'the Spanish swords, of the force
of their spears, and the operation of their cross.
bows. These rude people, strangers to the us
of iron, and unacquainted with any hoftilc wea.
pons, but arrows of reeds pointed with the bones
of fishes, wooden swords, and javelins hardened
in the fire, wondered and trembled. Before this
surprise or fear had time to abate, he ordered the
great guns to be fired. The sudden explosion
ifruck them with such terror, that they fell flat
to the ground, covering their faces with their
hands; and when they beheld the astonishing
effet of the bullets among the trees, toward
which the cannon had been pointed, they con.
cluded that it was impossible to resist men, who
had the command of such deftruc&ive infirumentu,
and who came armed with thunder and lightning
against their enemies.

After giving such impressions both of the be.

nificence and power of the Spaniards, as might
have rendered it easy to preserve an afcendct
over the minds of the natives, Columbus ap-
pointed thirty-eight of his people to remain in
the island. He entrusted the command of these
to Diego de Arada, a gentleman of Cordon,
investing him with the fame powers which hE
himself had received from Ferdinand and If2-
bella; and furnished him with every thing re-
quifite for the subsistence or defence of this in-
sant colony. He ftricAl enjoined them to main-
tain concord among themselves, to yield an unre-
served obedience to their commander, to avoid
giving offence to the natives by any violence
or exation, to cultivate the friendship of Gu2

canahar,

nahari, but not to put themselves in his power,
i raggling in small parties, or marching too
r from the fort. He promised to revisit them
)n, with such a reinforcement of strength as
:iZht enable them to take full possession of the
o0ntry, and to reap all the fruits of their disco-
cries. In the mean time, he engaged to men-
ion their names to the king and queen, and to
lace their merit and services in the most advan-
ageous light b.
14933 Having thus taken every precaution for
ae security of the colony, he left Navidad on the
ourth of January one thousand four hundred
nd ninety-three, and steering towards the east,
iicovered, and gave names to most of the har-
oxurs on the northern coast of the island. On
he sixth, he descried the Pinta, and soon came
Dp with her, after a separation of more than fix
;ceks. Pinzon endeavoured to justify his con-
iuc, by pretending that he had been driven
rom his course by stress of weather, and pre-
;e:,tcd from returning by contrary winds. The
Wairal, though he fill fufpefed his perfidious
::entions, and knew well what he urged in his
jwn defence to be frivolous as well as false, was
ls sensible that this was not a proper time for
venturing upon any high strain of authority, and
fcl: such satisfaction in this jun&ion with his
corfort, which delivered him from many dif-
quieting apprehensions, that lame as Pinzon's
apolocgy was, he admitted of it without difficulty,
aid reitored him to favour. During his absence
:rom the adr.miral, Pinzon had visited several har-

O vieo ap. Ramufio, iiL p. S2. E. Henera, dec. 1.

'. i. c. 20. Life of Columbur, c. 34.
VOL. i. o bours

bours in the island, had acquired some gold h
trafficking with the natives, but had made no d
covery of any importance.

From the condition of his ships, as well as t4

temper of his men, Columbus now found it nr
ceffary to haffen his return to Europe. The fa.
mer, having suffered much during a voyage a
such an unusual length, were extremely leaky,
The latter expressed the utmost impatience tm
re-.-it their native country, from which they ha:
been so long absent, and where they had thiu
so wonderful and unheard-of to relate. Accord
ingly, on the sixteenth of January, he direis
his course towards the north-east, and soon Id'
fight of land. He had on board some of the 2
tives, whom he had taken from the differa
islands which he discovered; and besides th
gold, which was the chief objet of research, h
had collected specimens of all the productiro
which were likely to become fubjecs of con
merce in the several countries, as well as man
unknown birds, and other natural curiofitin
which might attra& the attention of the learnci
or excite the wonder of the people. The voyas?
was prosperous to the fourteenth of Februarr,
and he had advanced near five hundred leaguM
across the Atlantic ocean, when the wind begs
to rife, and continued to blow with increasi
rage, which terminated in a furious hurricam
Every thing that the naval Skill and experiena
of Columbus could devise was employed, in or
der to save the ships. But it was impoflible ia
waithftand the violence of the sorn, and, as the
were ftll far from any land, deftrution feend
inevitable. The sailors had recourse to prays

o Almighty God, to the invocation of faints,
:o voWS and charms, to every thing that religion
Scdates, or superstition suggests, to the affrighted
mind of man. No profpet of deliverance ap-
pearing, they abandoned themselves to despair,
ad expected every moment to be swallowed up
h the waves. Besides the pafflons which natu-
rally agitate and alarm the human mind in such
awful situations, when certain death, in one of
his most terrible forms, is before it, Columbus
had to endure feelings of diftrcfs peculiar to
himself. He dreaded that all knowledge of the
amazing discoveries which he had made was now
to perfh; mankind were to be deprived of every
benefit that might have been derived from the
happy success of his schemes, ard his own name
would descend to posterity as that of a rash de-
laded adventurer, instead of being transmitted
with the honour due to the author and con-
d&ctor of the most noble enterprize that had
ever been undertaken. These reflections extin-
gOifhed all sense of his own personal danger.
Lets affeEted with the loss of life, than solicitous
to preserve the memory of what he had at-
tempted and atchieved, he retired to his cabin,
and wrote, upon parchment, a short account of
the voyage which he had made, of the course
which he had taken, of the situation and riches
of the countries which he had discovered, and
of the colony that he had left there. Having
wrapped up this in an oiled cloth, which he in-
closed in a cake of wax, he put it into a cask
carcfuliy flopped up, and threw it into the sea,
E hopes that some fortunate accident might pre-

o z serve

serve a deposit of so much importance to th
world c.

At length Providence interposed, to save a

life reserved for other services. The wind
abated, the sea became calm, and on the evening
of the fifteenth, Columbus and his companions
discovered land; and though uncertain what i
was, they made towards it. They soon knoe
it to be St. Mary, one of the Azores or wefti
ifes, subjed to the crown of Portugal Thee,
after a violent contest with the governor, i
which Columbus displayed no less spirit than
prudence, he obtained a supply of fresh pro
visions, and whatever else he needed. One dr.
cumftance, however, greatly disquieted hi.
The Pinta, of which he had loft fight on th
first day of the hurricane, did not appear; he
dreaded for some time that {he had foundered a
Lea, and that all her crew had perished: aftr.
wards, his former suspicions recurred, and he
became apprehensive that Pinzon had born
away for Spain, that he might reach it befor
him, and by giving the first account of his ds
coveries, might obtain some share of his fame.

In order to prevent this, he left the Azora

as soon as the weather would permit [Feb. 24].
At no great distance from the coast of Spas,
when near the end of his voyage, and feemingi.
beyond the reach of any disaster, another ftor
arose, little inferior to the former in violence;
and after driving before it during two days a:i
two nights, he was forced to take shelter in ti:

c Life of Colombus, c. 37. Herrera, dec. . liii.
c.. , z. See NOTz XVI.

rn '

river Tagus [March 4]. Upon application to
the king of Portugal, he was allowed to come
up to Lisbon; and, notwithstanding the envy
which it was natural for the Portuguese to feel,
when they beheld another nation entering upon
that province of discovery which they had
hitherto deetned peculiarly their own, and in its
sirs essay, not only rivalling, but eclipsing their
fame, Columbus was received with all the marks
of diflinCtion due to a man who had performed
things so extraordinary and unexpeEted. The
king admitted him into his pretence, treated
him with the highest refpec, and listened to the
account which he gave of his voyage with ad-
miration mingled with regret. While Columbus,
on his part, enjoyed the satisfaction of describing
the importance of his discoveries, and of being
now able to prove the solidity of his schemes to
those very persons, who, with an ignorance dif-
graceful to themselves, and fatal to their country,
had lately rejected them as the projects of a
drionary or designing adventurerd.

Columbus was so impatient to return to Spain,
that he remained only five days in Lisbon. On
the fifteenth of March he arrived in the port of
Palos, seven months and eleven days from the
time when he set out thence upon his voyage.
As soon as the ship was discovered approaching
the port, all the inhabitants of Palos ran eagerly
to the (hore, in order to welcome their relations
and fllow-citizens, and to hear tidings of their
,yvage. When the prosperous issue of it was
krnorn, when they beheld the firange people,

: L:s otfColumbu', c. 40, 41. Hcrrera, dec. I. lib.ii.
.3 th

o 3 the

the unknown animals, and singular produ&iomn
brought from the countries which had been di.
covered, the effusion of joy was general and u.
bounded. The bells were rung, the cannot
fired; Columbus was received at landing wiha
royal honours, and all the people, in folema
procefion, accompanied him and his crew to ti
church, where they returned thanks to Heaven,
which had so wonderfully conduAed and crown.
ed with success, a voyage of greater length and
of more importance than had been attempted
in any former age. On the evening of the ifa
day, he had the fatisfa&ion of feeing the Pints,
which the violence of the tempest had driven fa
to the north, enter the harbour.

The first care of Columbus was to inform the

king and queen, who were then at Barcelona, ot
his arrival and success. Ferdinand and Ifabelk
no less astonished than delighted with this unex.
peced event, desired Columbus, in terms the
mnof refpe&ful and flattering, to repair immedi.
ately to court, that from his own mouth they
might receive a full detail of his extraordinary
services and discoveries. During his journey to
Barcelona, the people crowded from the adjacent
country, following him every where with admi-
ration and applause. His entrance into the cit!
was conduced, by order of Ferdinand and If.
bella, with pomp suitable to the great event,
which added such distinguishing lustre to thei
reign. The people whom he brought aloft
with him from the countries which he had du-
covered, marched first, and by their fingula
complexion, the wild peculiarity of their feature,
and uncouth finery, appeared like men of a-

ot hL

ii I

lis i l : IT1
u

1 C2 E 1 ,. -

,ther species. Next to them were carried the
mnaments of gold fashioned by the rude art of
he natives, the grains of gold found in the
nountains, and dust of the fame metal gathered
D the rivers. After these, appeared the various
ommodities of the new-difcovered countries,
ogether with their curious productions. Co-
Iambus himself closed the procession, and at-
tra&ed the eyes of all the spectators, who gazed
with admiration on the extraordinary man,
Bohofe superior sagacity and fortitude had con-
dined their countrymen, by a route concealed
from pafl ages, to the knowledge of a new
world. Ferdinand and Isabella received him
dad in their royal robes, and feated upon a
throne, under a magnificent canopy. When he
approached, they stood up, and raising him as
be kneeled to kifs their hands, commanded him
to take his feat upon a chair prepared for him,
and to give a circumstantial account of his
voyage. He delivered it with a gravity
and composure no lets suitable to the difpo-
fition of the Spanish nation, than to the dig-
nity o the audience in which he spoke, and with
that modest simplicity which chara&erifes men
of superior minds, who, satisfied with having
performed great actions, court not vain applause
by an ostentatious display of their exploits.
When he had finished his narration, the king
and queen, kneeling down, offered up solemn
thanks to Almighty God for the discovery of
thofc new regions, from which they expected so
r.any advantages to flow in upon the kingdoms
i-ec;t to their government C. Every mark of

c SCe NoT XVII.

honour

honour that gratitude or admiration could fug.
gest was conferred upon Columbus. Letter
patent were issued, confirming to him and td
his heirs all the privileges contained in the cap.
tulation concluded at Santa F ; his family wa
ennobled; the king and queen, and, after their
example, the courtiers, treated him, on every
occasion, with all the ceremonious refpea paid
to persons of the highest rank. But what
pleated him most, as it gratified his a&ive mind,
bent continually upon great objeAs, was, an
order to equip, without delay, an armament of
such force, as might enable him not only to take
possession of the countries which he had alreadl
discovered, but to go in search of those more
opulent regions, which he still confidently ex.
pe&ed to find f.

While preparations were making for this ex.

pedition, the fame of Columbus's successful
voyage spread over Europe, and excited general
attention. The multitude, struck with amaze.
ment when they heard that a new world had
been found, could hardly believe an event so
much above their conception. Men of fciencc,
capable of comprehending the nature, and of
discerning the effecs of this great discover,
received the account of it with admiration and
joy. They spoke of his voyage with rapture,
and congratulated one another upon their felicity
in having lived in the period when, by this ex-
traordinary event, the boundaries of human
knowledge were so much extended, and such 2
new field of inquiry and observation opened, a

f Life of Columbus, c, 2 . 43. Herera, dec. . lib. i'.
-C 3.

.O^i.i

would lead mankind to a perfec acquaintance
with the ftlruure and productions of the habit-
able globeg. Various opinions and conjecures
were formed concerning the new-found countries,
and what division of the earth they belonged to.
Columbus adhered tenaciously to his original
opinion, that they should be reckoned a part of
thoie vast regions in Asia, comprehended under
the general name of India. This sentiment was
confirmed by the observations which he made
concerning the productions of the countries he
had discovered. Gold was known to abound in
India, and he had met with such promising
samples of it in the islands which he visited, as
led him to believe that rich mines of it might be
found. Cotton, another produOtion of the East
Indies, iwas common there. The pimento of the
iracds, he imagined to be a species of the Eait
Indian pepper. He mistook a root, somewhat
resembling rhubarb, for that valuable drug,
which was then supposed to be a plant peculiar
to the Eait Indies h. The birds brought home
by him were adorned with the fame rich plumage
which distinguishes those of India. The alliga-
tor of the one country appeared to be the fame
with the crocodile of the other. After weighing
all these circumstances, not only the Spaniards,
but the other nations of Europe, seem to have
adopted the opinion of Columbus. The countries
which he had discovered were confidered as a
part of India. In consequence of this notion,
the name of Indies is given to them by Ferdi-
nand and Isabella, in a ratification of their

1 P. Mart. epift. 33, 134, 135. See NOT-e XVIII.
b H:rrcra, dec. I. lib. i. c. -c. Gomara Hi!t. c. 17.

former

former agreement, which was granted to C,
lumbus upon his return i. Even after the error
which gave rife to this opinion was deteted,
and the true position of the New World wa
ascertained, the name has remained, and the
appellation of WIll Indies is given by all the
people of Europe to the country, and thatof
Indians to its inhabitants.

The names by which Columbus diftinguilhed

the countries which he had discovered was fa
inviting, the specimens of their riches and ser.
tility, which he produced, were so considerable,
and the reports of his companions, delivered fre-
quently with the exaggeration natural to tra.
vellers, so favourable as to excite a wonder.
ful spirit of enterprze among the Spaniards.
Though little accuitomed to naval expeditions,
they were impatient to set out upon the voyage.
Volunteers of every rank solicited to be em-
ployed. Allured by the inviting profpedi
which open:d to their ambition and avarice,
neither the length nor danger of the navigation
intimidated them. Cautious as Ferdinand was,
and averse to every thing new or adventurous,
he seems to have catched the fame spirit with
his fubjeds. Under its influence, preparatio2s
for a second expedition were carried on with a
rapidity unusual in Spain, and to an extent that
would be deemed not inconsiderable in the pre-
sent age. The fleet confited of seventeen ships,
some of which were of good burden. It had
on board fifteen hundred persons, among whom
were many of noble families, who had served ia
honourable itations. The greater part of threc

i Life of Columbus, c. 44.

bcng

being defined to remain in the country, were
furnished with every thing requisite for conquest
or settlement, with all kinds of European do-
i;cefic animals, with such feeds and plants as
verc most likely to thrive in the climate of the
W'eft Indics, with utensils and infiruments of
every fort, and with such artificers as might be
molR useful in an infant colony k.

But, formidable and weHll-provided as this
set was, Ferdinand and Isabella did not reft
their title to the possession of the newly-dif-
covered countries upon its operations alone.
The example of the Portuguefc, as well as the
faperftition of the age, made it necessary to
obtain from the Roman pontiff a grant of those
territories which they wished to occupy. The
pope, as the vicar and representative of Jesus
Chriit, was supposed to have a right of dominion
over all the kingdoms of the earth. Alexander
VI a pontiff infamous for every crime which
digraces humanity, filled the papal throne at
that time. As he was born Ferdinand's subje&E,
and very solicitous to secure the protection of
Sain, in order to facilitate the execution of his
zanljitious schemes in favour of his own family,
he was extremely willing to gratify the Spaniih
monarchs. By an aEt of liberality which col
him nothing, and that served to establish the
i.riidiction and pretensions of the papal fee, he
giuted in full right to Ferdinand and Isabella
ai the countries inhabited by Infidels, which
thty had discovered, or should discover; and,
i:. virtue of that power which he derived from
J,.s Christ, he conferred on the crown of

1 errera, dec, I. lib. ii. c. 5. Life of Columbus, c.45.

Calile

Castile vast regions, to the poffeflion of whid
he himself was so far from having any title, tbz
he was unacquainted with their situation, a
ignorant even of their existence. As it w.
necessary to prevent this grant from interferi;
with that formerly made to the crown of Ponr
gal, he appointed that a line, supposed to b
drawn from pole to pole, a hundred leagues t
the westward of the Azores, should serve as
limit between them; and, in the plenitude o
his power, bestowed all to the east of this irr
ginary line upon the Portuguese, and all to th
vwet of it, upon the Spaniards . Zeal for pr
pagating the Christian faith was the confideratio:
employed by Ferdinand in soliciting this bul
and is mentioned by Alexander as his chic
motive for issuing it. In order to manifest sorn
concern for this laudable objec, several frian
under the direction of father Boyl, a Cataloniaz
monk of great reputation, as apoftolical vicar
were appointed to accompany Columbus, andts
devote themselves to the instruction of the na
tives. The Indians, whom Columbus hLa
brought along with him, having received son
tincure of Christian knowledge, were baptil:
with much solemnity, the king himself, ti
prince his son, and the chief persons of hi
court, slanding as their godfathers. Those si
fruits of the New World have not been followwd
by such an increase as pious men wilhed, a.
had reaion to expet.

Ferdinand and Isabella having thus acquli.-
a title, which was then deemed completely vai,

m Herrcra, dec, . lib. ii. c. 4. Torquenme'a Mon. I:L
ib. vii. . c.

'.

: extend their discoveries and to establish their

,!rnion over such a considerable portion of the

%obe, nothing now retarded the departure of
i fleet. Columbus was extremely impatient
rcvifit the colony which he had left, and to
:rfue that career of glory upon which he had
:ttred. He set fail from the bay of Cadiz on
'e twenty-fifth of September, and touching
.ain at the island of Gomera, he steered farther
ivrd the south than in his former voyage.
Bv ihulding this course, he enjoyed more steadily
-. bcnr.f of the regular winds, which reign
;::'n the tropics, and was carried towards a
ark cluster of islands, situated considerably to

a:. alt of those which he had already discovered.

3n the twenty-fixth day after his departure from
Grnmera FNov. 2], he made land". It was one
as the Caribbee or Leeward islands, to which he
;ave the name of Defeada, on account of the

patience of his crew to discover some part
r- the New World. After this he visited fuc-
ctvely Dominica, Marigalante, Guadaloupe,
A'tigua, San Juan de Puerto Rico, and several
u-'er islands, scattered in his way as he ad-
.i:,cd towards the north-west. All there he
.-.d to be inhabited by that fierce race of
p:jple whom Guacanahari had painted in such

::iitfil colours. His descriptions appeared

- to lave been exaggerated. The Spaniards
-:;:r attempted to land without meeting with
.0ch a reception, as discovered the martial and
.:ring spirit of the natives; and in their habita-
: -., wcre found relics of those horrid feats

i

.'! tliey had made upon the bodies of their
:..::.i taken in war.

" OvieJJ ap. Ramus. iii. 85, B.
':. r. P But

But as Columbus was cager to know the ftatet

the colony which he had planted, and to fupp
it with the necefaries of which he supposed it to a
ia want, he made no tfay in any of those iflas
and proceeded directly to Hispaniola" [Nov. 22
When he arrived off Navidad, the station i
which he had left the thirty-eight men under :
command of Arada, he was altonifhcd that n,:
of them appeared, and expected every morrc:
to fee them running with transports of joy:
welcome their countrymen. Full of solicit-
about their safety, and foreboding in his nr.:
what had befallen them, he rowed inftantlv;
land. All the natives from whom he mig:
have received information had fltd. But it
fort which he had built was entirely demolith.
and the tattered garments, the broken arm as,
utensils scattered about it, left no room to doud
concerning the unhappy fate of the garrison.
W.hile the Spaniards were shedding tears o;t
those fad memorials of their fellow-citizens,
brother of the cazique Guacanahari arrived
From him Columbus received a particular detm
of what had happened after his departure fro:
the island. The familiar intercourse of tL
Indians with the Spaniards tended gradually:
diminish the superstitious veneration with w.:c:
their firt appearance had inspired that fimnp
people. By their own indiscretion and il!-c,:
duct, the Spaniards speedily effaced those f
vourable impressions, and Loon convinced
natzies, that they had all the wants, and weax

P. Martyr, dec. p 15. 8. Herrera, dec. I. ..
c. 7. Life of Columbus, c. 46, &c.

,Hist. de Cura dc los Palacios. MS.

ne;^4

icfses, and passions of men. As soon as the
-r.,arful reltraint which the presence and
acthority of Columbus imposed was with-
d:a.hvn, the garrison threw off all regard for the
micer whom he had invested with command.
Rec-aidlefs of the prudent inftrutions which
L. had given them, every man became inde-

.r dent, and gratified his desires without con-
i:i. The gold, the women, the provisions
,f the natives, were all the prey of those
lenntious oppressors. They roamed in small
pa-ties over the island, extending their ra-
tacity and insolence to every corner of it. Gen-
:e and timid as the people were, those unpro-
vcked injuries at length exhausted their patience,
uai routed their courage. The cazique of
C;oao, whose country the Spaniards chiefly in-
f:ed on account of the gold which it contained,
surpriscd and cut off several of them, while they
ELaggltd in as perfec security as if their condu&
had been altogether inoffensive. He then as-
'nrbled his fubjeAs, and surrounding the fort,
.r it on fire. Some of the Spaniards were
kiied in defending it, the reft perished in at-
;:.Tp:irg tu make their escape by crossing an
arn of the sea. Guacanahari, whom all their
t:ac2ions had not alienated from the Spaniards,
,xok arrrs in their behalf, and, in endeavouring
:. protect them, had received a wound, by which

i: as itill confined R.
Though this account was far from removing
:' suspicions which the Spaniards entertained
,4:th refpedt to the fidelity of Guacanahari,

! P. \Mirtyr, decad. p. z2, &c. Herrera, dec. i: lib. ii.
c. . Lie of Coluambus, c. .9 joo.

v 2 Columbus

Columbus perceived so clearly that this was r.t.
a proper juncture for inquiring into his conduc
with scrupulous accuracy, that he rejeced t
advice of several of his officers, who urged hia
to seize the person of that prince, and to revenge
the death of their countrymen by attacking Ei
fubjecds. He represented to them the neceCitr
of securing the friendship of some potentate 'i
the country, in order to facilitate the fettleme::
which they intended, and the danger of driv:--
the natives to unite in some desperate atterrm:
against them, by such an ill-timed and unava:.:
ing exercise of rigour. Initead of wafting .:i
time in punishing past wrongs, he took prea:.
tions for preventing any future injury. W\i;:
this view he made choice of a situation more
healthy and commodious than that of Navida.
He traced out the plan of a town in a large plaia
near a spacious bay, and obliging every perf:j
to put his hand to a work on which their corn
mon safety depended, the houses and rampar.t
were soon so far advanced by their united labou:,
as to afford them shelter and fecuritv. T'..
riling city, the first that the European:
founded in the New World, he named Ia.
bella, in honour of his patroness the queer. c
Catile '.

In carrying on this necessary work, Colunmbu

had not only to sustain all the hardships, and :o
encounter all the difficulties, to which infa::
colonies are exposed when they fettle in an --
cultivated country, bat he had to contend wi:;
what was more insuperable, the laziness, the ir.
patience, and mutinous disposition of his f

L;fc of Columbus, c. 51. Hcircra, dec. . lib. il. c- i

lo:.)-:

icvers. By the enervating influence of a hot
c'rnate, the natural inativity of the Spaniards
ertmed to increase. Many of them were gentle-
,-n, unaccultomed to the fatigue of bodily la-
bour, and all had engaged in the enterprize with
tL faingulne hopes excited by the splendid and
t,-aggcrated description of their countrymen
wi:', returned from the first voyage, or by the
-.i'taken opinion of Columbus, that the country
whlchl he had discovered was either the Cipango
of Marco Polo, or the Ophir', from which
olrr.on imported those precious commodities
which suddenly diffused such extraordinary
riches through his kingdom. But when, initead
of that golden harvest which they had expeEted
to reap without toil or pains, the Spaniards saw
that their profpeA of wealth was remote' as well
as uncertain, and that it could not be attained
btt bv the flow and persevering efforts of in-
daurv, the disappointment of those chimerical
hopes occasioned such dejeCtion of mind as bor-
d&red on despair, and led to general discontent.
In vain did Columbus endeavour to revive their
fpirsts by pointing out the fertility of the foil,
and exhibiting the specimens of gold daily
brought in from different parts of the island.
They had not patience to wait for the gradual
returns which the former might yield, and the
latter they despised as scanty and inconsiderable.
The spirit of difaffetion spread, and a confplracy
v.wa formed, which might have been fatal to
C'lumbus and the colony. Happily he disco-
vered it, and seizing the ringleaders, punished
some of them, sent others prisoners into Spanr,

1 P. Martyr, dec. p. 29.

P 3 whither

whither he dispatched twelve of the ships which
had served as transports, with an earneit requeg
for a reiaforccment of men and a large supply of
provisions .

1494.] Meanwhile, in order to banish thE:

idlencfs, which, by allowing his people leisure to
brood over their disappointment, nourished the
spirit of discontent, Columbus planned fcv..-z
expeditions into the interior part of the countr:.
He sent a detachment, under the command '
Alonfo de Ojeda, a vigilant and enterprifi.;;
officer, to visit the district of Cibao, which wle
said to yield the greatest quantity of gold, ar.d
followed him in person with the main body of hLs
troops [March 12]. In this expedition he di".
played all the pomp of military magnificenc
that he could exhibit, in order to strike t!,e
imagination of the natives. He marched wit;h
colours flying, with martial music, and withi a
small body of cavalry that paraded sometimes i
the front and sometimes in the rear. As those
were the first horses which appeared in the Ncw
World, they were objects of terror no less than
of admiration to the Indians, who having no
tame animals themselves, were unacquainted with
that vast accefion of power, which man hath
acquired by fubje&ing them to his dominion.
They supposed them to be rational creatures.
They imagined that the horse and the rider
formed one animal, with whose speed they wxe
astonished, and whose impetuosity and itrength
they conlidered as irresistible. But while Co.
lumbus endeavoured to inspire the natives with a
dread of his power, he did not negle&c the arts

Herrera, dec. i. ;b. il. c. Io, ii.

L:

c, gaining their love and confidence. He ad-
r;-:d icrupuloufly to the principles of integrity

ud juilice in all his tranfacions with them, and
--at-ed them on every occasion, not only with
- .atv, but with indulgence. The diftri& of
C:sbo alnfwcred the description given of it by the
^:?;.s. It was mountainous and uncultivated,
.:: in every river and brook gold was gathered
:'c-r in duff or in grains, some of which were
c: c-nfiderable size. The Indians had never
c.ercd any mines in search of gold. To pene-
.:r t into the bowels of the earth, and to refine
::. rude ore, were operations too complicated
:-.d laborious for their talents and industry, and
:'- had no such high value for gold as to put
:..:i ingenuity and invention upon the stretch in
:l:'r to obtain it . The small quantity of that
::cL:s metal which they possessed, was either
: i.k- up in the beds of the rivers, or walhed
:- n the mountains by the heavy rains that fall
*. lin the tropics. But, from those indications,
: Spaniards could no longer doubt that the
.ar.t-v contained rich treasures in its bowels, of
:ich they hoped soon to be matiers w. In order
:. fccure the command of this valuable pro-
,::.ce, Columbus creted a small fort, to which
. gave the name of St. Thomas, by way of
::iicule upon some of his incredulous followers,
who would not believe that the country pro-
diced gold, until they saw it with their own
rc', and touched it with their hands x,

The account of those promising appearances
e vwcalth in the country of Cibao came very sea-

Oviedo, lib. ii. p. 90. A. ' P. Martyr, dec. p. 3z.
Hearera, dec. I. lib. ii. c, 12. Life of Columbus, c. 5z.

fonably

fonably to comfort the desponding colony, wh!:'
was affected with distresses of various kir.;_
The flock of provisions which had been broug:.
from Europe was mostly consumed; what rema:-.
ed was so much corrupted by the heat and nmof.
ture of the climate, as to be almost unfit for us.;
the natives cultivated so small a portion ofgro.:rd,
and with so little skill, that it hardly yiecd:-
what was sufficient for their own fubfiitenc;
the Spaniards at Isabella had hitherto neit'r,-
time nor leisure to clear the foil, so as to reap
any considerable fruits of their own industry. -,
all these accounts, they became afraid of peri..
ing with hunger, and were reduced already to
fcauty allowance. At the fame time, the difeai
predominant in the torrid zone, and which rr.
chiefly in those uncultivated countries, where t.:
hand of industry has not opened the woo'.,
drained the marshes, and confined the riveie
w.-ithin a certain channel, began to spread amnu-.:
them. Alarmed at the violence and unusual fr.
torr.s of those maladfec, they exclaimed aa'i:.
Columbus and hIs companions in the fo'rr'
voyzae, i ho, bv their sp!endid but dcce:.-
defrip:i;ons of Hiipaniola, had allured ther.::
quit Spain for a barbarous uncultivated la-
where thev r,.ust either be cut off by famine,
die of unknown diitctrr.pcr. Several of :
officers and persons of note, inicad of chcc"--: ,
joined in those seditious complaints. Fa-:.
Boy!, the apo.olical vicar, wns one of the .:.
turbulent a:id outragcou7. It requircd al! :'
authority and addrcfs of Colurr.nbs to re-e:.
bli!h fubor:iiation and tranquillity in the col-r".
Thrtcts and promises were alternately empit-

2 ;;

br this purpose; but nothing contributed more
:- tfooth the malcontents, than the profpec& of
.:ding, in the mines of Cibao, such a rich store
o0 trcafure as would be a recompence for all their
..erings, and efface the memory of former dif-
a:?ointments.

i'hen, by his unwearied endeavours, concord

a:.i order were so far restored, that he could
rc:ture to leave the island, Columbus resolved to
pursue his discoveries, that he might be able to
azcertain whether tlhof new countries with which
Lh had opened a communication were connecRed
i,-th any region of the earth already known, or
whether they were to be confidered as a separate
prtion of the globe hitherto unvisited. He ap-
pointed his brother Don Diego, with the affilt-
ance of a council of officers, to govern the island
in his absence; and gave the command of a body
cf Loldiers to Don Pedro Margarita, with which
he was to visit the different parts of the island,
and endeavour to eftablilh the authority of the
SPaniards among the inhabitants. Having left
tlem very particular inftni&ions with refpe& to
their conduc, he weighed anchor on the twenty-
fourth of April, with one ihip and two small
barks under his command. During a tedious
voyage of full five months, he had a trial of
air-olt all the numerous hardships to which per-
f'.in of his profession are exposed, withoutmaking
:m. discovery of importance, except the island
ct Jamaica. As he ranged along the southern
coaut of Cuba Y, he was entangled in a labyrinth
f,-rmed by an incredible number of small islands,
:- \-i icl he gave the name of the Queen's Gar-

Y Se NOTE XIX,,

den.

den. In this unknown courfc, among roch
and (helves, he was retarded by contrary winsC,
assaulted with furious storms, and alarmed with
the terrible thunder and lightning which is ofte
almioft incessant between the tropics. At length
his provisions fell short ; his crew, exhausted wi:h
fatigue as well as hunger, murmured and thrat.
ened, and were ready to proceed to the mrc:
desperate extremities against him. Beset with
danger in such various forms, he was obliged ta
keep continual watch, to observe every occur.
rence with his own eyes, to issue every ordr,
and to superintend the execution of it. On ra
occasion, was the extent of his skill and expen.
ence as a navigator so much tried. To theic
the squadron owed its safety. But this unie.
mitted fatigue of body, and intense application
of mind, overpowering his conflitution, though
naturally vigorous and robust, brought on a
feverish disorder, which terminated in a lethargp,
that deprived him of fenie and memory, and had
almost proved fatal to his life z.

But, on his return to Hispaniola [Sept. 27],

the sudden emotion of joy which he felt upon
meeting with his brother Bartholomew at Ifa-
bella, occasioned such a flow of spirits as contr-
buted greatly to his recovery. It was nov
thirteen years since the two brothers, whom firn'.
larity of talents united in close friendflip, had
separated from each other, and during that los1
period there had been no intercourie betw-cea
them. Bartholomew, after finishing his negotia-
tion in the court of England, had fct out :I

z Life of Columbus, c. 54, &c. Herrera, dec . .ii....
c. I3, 14. . Martyr, dec. p. 34, &c.

Sp:''

sain by the way of France. At Paris he re-
:ived an account of the extraordinary difcove-

s, which his brother had made in his first
,,-ge. and that he was then preparing to em-
;:k on a second expedition. Though this
,a:urally induced him to pursue his journey with
:e utmost dispatch, the admiral had failed for
r ipaniola before he reached Spain. Ferdinand
,d Isabella received him with the refpet due
;j the nearest kinsman of a person whose merit
.:d services rendered him so conspicuous ; and as
:iy knew what consolation his presence would
a-:7rd to his brother, they persuaded him to take
:re command of three ships, which they had
ap??oited to carry provisions to the colony at
I:abclla .

He could not have arrived at any jun&ure
shin Columbus flood more in need of a friend
cgpable of afflifing him with his counsels, or of
d ;iding with him the cares and burden of go.
.-rnment. For although the provisions now
b-',ught from Europe afforded a temporary relief
t :ie Spaniards from the calamities of famine,
::.e supply was not in such quantity as to support
th;mn long, and the island did not hitherto yield
what was sufficient for their sustenance. They
-:re threatened with another danger, still more
iormidable than the return of scarcity, and which
(rnanded more immediate attention. No sooner
d.d Columbus leave the island on his voyage of
ifcoverv, than the soldiers under Margarita, as
.. they Lad been set free from discipline and sub-
ordination, scorned all restraint. InItead of con-
fLring to the prudent inftruaions of Columbus,

Herrera, de. . lib. ii. c. Ij.

they

they dispersed in straggling parties over t
iflard, lived at discretion upon the natives, vas'.
their provifincs, seized their women, and treat';
that inoffensive race with all the insolence cr
military oppreflion a.

As long as the Indians had any profpct thb:

their sufferings might come to a period by ti:
voluntary departure of the invaders, they fu.
mitted in silence, and dissembled their forro';.
but they now perceived that the yoke would .
as permanent as it was intolerable. The a.
niards had built a town, and surrounded it w::'
ramparts. They had erected forts in diffcic:,:
places. They had inclosed and sown fe.rr
fields. It was apparent that they came not to
visit the country, but to fettle in it. Thouh.
the number of those firangers was inconfiderabi;,
the state of cultivation among this rude peop':
was so imperfect, and in such exac proportic:
to their own consumption, that it was with :'.
ficulty they could afford subsistence to their n:'
gucfts. Their own mode of life was so indoe:.:
and inaftive, the warmth of the climate so ene-.
vating, the constitution of their bodies natur;.!.
so feeble, and so unaccustomed to the laborio-.
exertions of indutry, that they were fatisfit
with a proportion of food amazingly small. A
handful of maize, or a little of the insipid bread
made of the caffada-root, was sufficient to fu-
port men, whose ftrcngth and spirits were no'
exhausted by any vigorous efforts either of body
or mind. The Spaniards, though the most a'b
flemious of all the European nations, appeared
to them excessively voracious. One Spaniad

a P. Martyr, dec. p. 47.

r~l!G

c-nfumed as much as several Indians. This
C-rnncs of appetite surprised them so much,
:-.d seemed to be so insatiable, that they sup-
-*:d the Spaniards had left their own country,
.* aufe it did not produce as much as was re-
ciite to gratify their immoderate defure of food,
.d had come among them in quest of nourish-
r..nt b. Self-prefervation prompted them to

t;i;r for the departure of guests who wafted so

: their slender stock of provisions. The in-
::.; which they suffered, added to their impa-
l-:'ce for this event. They had long expeted
:.at the Spaniards would retire of their own
a:cord. They now perceived that in order to
a.:rt the deftru&tion with which they were
t::reatened, either by the flow consumption of
fnmine, or by the violence of their oppressors, it
vas necessary to assume courage, to attack those
fo'nidable invaders with united force, and drive
them from the settlements of which they had
violently taken possession.

Such were the sentiments which universally
:rcvailed among the Indians, when Columbus re-
:rned to Isabella. Inflamed by the unprovoked
outrages of the Spaniards, with a degree of rage
sI which their gentle natures, formed to susser
and submit, seemed hardly susceptible, they
waited only for a signal from their leaders to fall
upon the colony. Some of the caziques had
already surprised and cut off several stragglers.
The dread of this impending danger united the
Spaniards, and re-established the authority of
Columbus, as they saw no profpea of safety but
in committing themselves to his prudent guid-

b Herrera, dec. i. lib. ii. c. 17.
VnL. I. q_ ance,

ance. It was now nec.ffary to have recourse :
zr .i-., :re employing of which against the Indi-.,
Columbus had hitherto avoided iwith the greatr;
solicitude. Unequal as the confiidt may fc-,
betw'c;n the naked inhabitant5 (of the New 'w0r-,
armedl with clubs, iticks hardened in the 4::
wrcden sword;, and arrows pointed with bo,'
or lints ; ard troops accustomed to the C:..
pli:n. and pro. idcd with the inllruments of d:.
Itrunei' :: known in the European art of war, ih:
fi:u.:ion of the Spai;iards was far from be--
exempt from dangcr. Tle vait fuperiorit c!
thsc nazi:c. in nurmber, compcnfated many def.::,
An ha!;.iful of men was about to encountc:.
wvbho!]: nati'?n. O..c advcrfe event, or eve:l 2:
ur orecfen dclavy': detcrminil:.g the fateofthe w .
minht prove fatal to the Spaniards. Cunfeio.i
that fueccfs depicded on the vigour and rapic.':
of h;s o:;-c;tion3, Coiun;bus inlaantlv alimcnib
his forc;. Th v were reduced to a very fmrn
n'-ir.br. Di fa!i-c, e.;gendered by the warn::n
and humid:tv of the eou;tr, oroccalioned bv th::
own licentioufntf-, had r;,ed among them u-::
much violence; experience had not yet tauz':
them ti .c art either of curing these, or the pr.
cau:; ):s requirfji: for guarding agaiinft the.;
two-:'.lirds ,f the oririnal adventurers were dea,
a2d manv- of thofc who fur.i\ed were incapab'
vs service :. Tiic body wlhich took the sic
[rMIreh 2z, ij conliiled (,inl of two hu',.
drrd foot, w.'t it l:orfc, and twenty large do,-;
al.d how ltrange 'otvcr it may seem, to mentwn
th:e ;a1' as coi:pofing part ofa military force, they
v.tre Iot perhaps the least formidable and (c.

' Lisc of Columbus, c. 6x.

mruct.:

-~jtive of the whole, when employed againif
-:;'d and timid Indians. All the caziques of
:?-.¢ iland, Guachanari excepted, who retained
. i:siolable attachment to the Spaniards, were
:. ans to oppose Columbus, with forces amount-
"^, if e may believe the Spanish hiltorians, to
.'.uadred tioufand men. Intead of attempt-
i to draw the Spaniards into the fatliiefes
, the woods and mountains, they were so
p::prudent as to take their lsation in the Vega

th, tlie imoft open plain in the country. Co-

-:: bu; did not allow them time to perceive their
-::,r, or to alter their position. He attacked
t:;im duri'lg the night, when undisciplined troops
-C Iealt capable of acting with union and con-
(cr., and obtained an easy and bloodless vidtory.
The conlltrnation with which the Indians were
f.id by the noise and havoc made by the fire-
arms, by .:he impetuous force of the cavalry, and
the nirce onset of the dogs, was so great, that
,thcv tlhrew down their weapons, and fled with-
cut attr-ipting refiitance. Many were slain;
r ,re wcre taken pritoners, and reduced to fervi-
td-: d; and so thoroughly were the ret intilni-
ldat'd, tliat from that moment they abandoned
thcn:mlv:s to dcfpair, relinquilhing all thoughts
(. conteirding with aggressors whom they deemed
in;;ancible,.

C)lumbus employed several months in march-

: ithroligh the illand, and in subjecting it to
t c Spaniih government, without meeting with
an upipo ition. He imposed a tribute upon all
tilc iriiatiaoanit above the age of fourteen. Each
Fcrinll who lived in those diftridts where gold

0 See NOTE XX,

(2 \2 wa

was found, was obliged to pay quarterly as muo
gold dust as filled a hawk's bell; from thof h
other parts of the country, twenty-five pounD
of cotton were demanded. This was the i.
regular taxation of the Indians, and served asi
precedent for exations still more intolerab'
Such an imposition was extremely contrary-:
those maxims which Columbus had hitherto :.
culcated, with refpet to the mode of treati:.
them. But intrigues were carrying on in
court of Spain at this juncture, in order to u:
determine his power, and discredit his oper
tions, which constrained him to depart from L
own system of administration. Several unfavco:
able accounts of his condu&, as well as of t:
countries discovered byhim, had been tranfmittre
to Spain. Margarita and father Boyl were nG-o
at c urt; and in order to justify their own cor,
duc, or or gratify their resentment, watchec
with malevolent attention for every opportunity
of spreading insinuations to his detriment. Man]
of the courtiers viewed his growing reputa:io:
and power with envious eyes. Fonseca, arch.
deacon of Seville, who was entrusted with the
chief direction of Indian affairs, had conceive:
such an unfavourable opinion of Columbus, fc:
some reason which the contemporary writcr
have not mentioned, that he listened with par
tialitv to every invective against him. It was r;'
easy for an unfriended stranger, unpractised i
courtly arts, to counterat the machinations o:
so many enemies. Columbus saw that there wza
but one method of supporting his own cred:,
and of silencing all his advcrfaries. He mc:.
produce such a quantity of gold as would r.:

0~~~~~~

:,!v justify what he had reported with refpet
:j the richness of the country, but encourage
F;dinand and Isabella to persevere in profecut-
:.r his plans. The neceffiyt of obtaining it,
:ced him not only to impose this heavy tax
_-:, tc Indiianis, but to cxat payment of it
;:. c:;tl-!ne rigour; and may be pleaded in ex-
:.c for his deviating on this occalfion from the
-. :,el dand humanity with which he uniformly
i:;.<d th!:t unhappy people e,

nhe labour, attention, and foresight, which

:-. I:.;as wcre obliged to employ in procuring
:-.: t':-i;'- dcmandt( of them, appeared the nofit
- :,e-ic of all e!ils, to men accultomed to

:. hirc days ia a carclefs, improvident in-
:...ice. Tlicy were incapable of such a regular

i pcrcvcelinig x:t-rt ion of inldutlrv, and felt it

..a d c.;ic; s rciErainlt upon their liberty, that
. ,ad recourfL to an expedient for obtaining
...:;ace from this yoke, which demonltrates

.:-.:i us their impatience and despair. They
:-.--d a fchclne of itarvingr thole oppreflors

r.'.i they durit not attempt to expel; and

-ni t'ec opinion which they entertainid with
-. to t tle voracious appetite of the Spaniards
t.; co ncl'ded the execution of it to be very
:- ::icabl. W\ith this view they suspendcd all
:.; ,pratiolii of agriculture; the) sowed no
::.-, they pulled up the roots of the manioc or
i-:..!- wlhich were planted, and retiring to the

. . inacccffibie parts of the mountains, left the
;.'.-.;va:ed plains to their enemies. This def-

f-:; rcrolution produced in some degree the
~*:x.; which they expeted. Tie Spaniardw
I Herrera, dec. i. lib. ii. c. 17.

| L3 were

were reduced to extreme want; but theyr.
ceived fiich seasonable supplies of provisions ':.
Europe, and found so many resources in ;t-.
own ingenuity and industry, that they susser::
great loss of men. The wretched Indians v--.
the vicdims of their own ill-concerted policv.
great multitude of people, shut up in the r-:.
tainous or woodcd part of the country, v.i':.
any food but the spontaneous produEtions ofr:
earth, focn felt the utmost diifreffes of far.:-
This brought on contagious diseases ; ar.',
the course cf a few nonths, more tl.an a ':'
part of the inhabitants of the island per'::.-
after expri-encing misery in all its va:..
forms f.

But while Columbus was eftablifhn;g- :

foundation, of the Spanish grandeur in the N --
World, his cnemi--s laboured with unwean-id £.
duitv to deprive h:m of the glory and rewl-..
which by his fcrvices and sufferings he wa -.
titled to er.joy. The hardships unavoidab!; :-:
nnew fettlemert, tlhe calamities occasioncd by ::
tnhealihv climate, the difailtrr atttndinga vc-::
in unknown sea-, vwere all reprfenttd a-::
effecs of his rcfticfs and inconsiderate an.'i:.:.
His prudent attention to prefervc difciplrin. -:
fubordiration was denominated excess of rnc--:
the puriifr.ments which he infliced upon
mutinous and disorderly werc imputed to cnr.::'.
These accusations gained such credit in a crls'"
court, that a commirfioner was appointed t::

Herrera, dec. i. 1b. xi. c. 18. Life of Cc!lc.:',

c. c6. Oviedo, lib. iii. p. 93. D. Benzon Hil. ''r.
Orbis, lib. i. c. 9. P. Martr, dec. p. 4t,

z F";

-:r to Hispaniola, and to infpe& into the con-

of Columbus. By the recommendation of

r.: enemies, Aguado, a groom of the bed-
ci2,'r:., wvas the person to whom this important

:-: wa committed. But in this choice they
--rm to have been more influenced by the obh
:;tuious attachment of the man to their interest,
*:an bv his capacity for the itation. Puffed up
. t'h such sudden elevation, Aguado displayed, in
*.c exercise of this office, all the frivolous self-
:-:ortance, and ac&ed with all the disgusting in-

- ':.e, which are natural to little minds, when

n-.-rd to unexpected dignitv, or employed in
-.:;iJn, to which they are not equal. By liften-
i' v ith eagcrnefs to every accusation againfi
C i:m:u., and encouraging not only the mal-
c.nt.-nt Spaniards, but even the Indians, to pro-

c.- their grievances, real or imaginary, he so-

r.e-tcd the spirit ofdiffenfion in the island, with-
ca- eliabl;fli;ng any regulation of public utility,
o: that tended to redress the many wrongs, with
tSe odium of which he wished to load the ad-

a.:rl's administration. As Columbus felt fen-

-L1v. how humiliating his situation must be, if
e flou ld remain in the country while such a
partial inspector observed his motions, and con-
trolled his jurifdicion, he took the resolution of
returning to Spain, in order to lay a full account
if all his transactions, particularly with refpe&
to the point, in dispute between him and his
a2Vcrfaries, before Ferdinand and Isabella, from
v'hofe justice and discernment he expeAed an
tqral and a favorable decision. [r496] He
c'rm-nitted the adminiRration of affairs, during
.',;ciincc, to Don Bartholomew his brother,

with

ii the title of Ade!antado, or licutenant-g,;-.
nor. Ev a choice less fortunate, and vi..,
proved tihe source of many calamities to the c,
lony, he appointed Francis Roldan chiefjuiL.4
with \ rv cxtenwive powcr) g.

In returning to Europe, Columbus hcl z

course Cifferent from that which he had tak:.'
his former voyage. He steercd almost due t-.:
from Hispaniola, in the parallel of twenty. t.-
degrees of latitude; as experience had not :
dlifovered the more certain and expeditiou, .-
thod of itretching to the north, in ord.r to £.
in with the fouth-welt wvirds. By this iil-ad:-.i
choice, nwich, in the infancy of navigation '-.
twcen the new and old worlds, can hardl-v e i:.
puted to the admiral as a defcck in navill Ik'
le was expofd to infinite fatigue and dap-':,
in a perpetual struggle w itll the trade ,.:,
whichl blow without variation from the ca;t Lt.
twveen the tropics. Notwithstanding the al:n,,
infuperaLle dificulties of such a navigation, :
pcrfiiled in his course with his usual pati.::;
and firmness, but made so little way, that he;:
three mronths without feci, land. At le.
lis provifiorn began to fail, tlhe crew vas rcd.-.
to the fcantv allo wance of si: ounces of bx:i
a-day for each perion. The admiral farid ..
better than the mearelt sailor. But, even i::
extreme dilfrefs, he retained the humanity ;v ...
di:'ingu::hcs his character, and refused to c rr:...
with the carrcft solicitations of his crew, iom r.:
whom pro zeld to feed upon the Indian prifor.c:
whom :tl-v vwcre carryiing over, and others infi;c.
to tirw\- them ouerboard, in order to lessen -..

:r c:.r c, 1i `b.
} jiiD . c, C, iI, lib. ii. c i.

cullulr'.i,..a

:r.i;nption of their small flock. He repre-
-::.: tat they were human beings, reduced by
;nommon calamity to the fame condition with
;.m:"elves, and entitled to share an equal fate.
i:. a- hority and remonstrances dissipated those
w:; ideas suggested by despair. Nor had they
,ti.e to recur, as he came soon within fight of
;. coail of Spain, when all their fears and susser-
i:-; ended h

'olumbus appeared at court with the modest
:-: determined confidence of a man conscious not
c-: of integrity, but of having performed great
:; ices. Ferdinand and Isabella, ashamed of
;:r own facility in lending too favourable an
: to frivolous or ill-founded accufations,received
.-. ;i:.h such diltingufhed marks of refpeft as
-.:-rcd his enemies with shame. Their censures
c.1 calmnies were no more heard of at that
i.-..re. The gold, the pearls, the cotton,
-.d other commodities of value which Columbus
i'oduced, seemed fully to refute what the mal-
c.:::nts had propagated with respect to the po-
:-tv of the country. By reducing the Indians
t. cbedcince, and imposing a regular tax upon
:.cm, lie had secured to Spain a large accession
-: tew subjects, and the eftablifliment of a re-
v--uc that promised to be considerable. By the
-'nes c hich he had found out and examined, a
:rcc of wealth fiill more copious was opened.
(;:at and unexpected as those advantages were,
*,. i:.bus represented them only as preludes to
..re acquisition., and as the earne{t of more im-
ir. aat discoverics, which he fill meditated, and
i H:rcra, dec. i. lib. iii, c., . Life of Columbus,

to

to which thoJe he had already made would cz.
duct him with ease and certainty i

The attentive consideration of all these c:.

cumilances made such impression. not only u.-
Isabella, who was flattered with the idea of t:et
the patroness of all Columbus's enterprizes, b<
even upon Ferdinand, who, having origiiajT
expresscd his disapprobation of his schemes, r-,
till apt to doubt of their success, that they re.
solved to supply the colony in Hispaniola ';:
every thing which could render it a perrrane.
establishment, and to furnish Columbus with f.ch
a fleet, that he might proceed to search for ths:
ncw countries, of whiofe existence he seemed t
be confident. The measures most proper for a.
corrplifhing both thef designs were concerted
wv.-h Columbus. Discovery had been the fc.z
object of the first voyage to the New WVrorid;
and though, in the second, settlement had bea
proposed, the precautions taken for that purpo'e
had either been insufficient, or were rtcr.rda
intffcctual by the mutinous spirit of the Si.
niards, and the unfcrefcen calamities ari;inr h"-
varioti; causes. Now a plan was to be furr:-
of a regular colony, that might serve as a mr.-:
in all future eitabli'rmei;ts. Every partni-
wa; confidcred with attention, and the c.holl a:-
ranged w.ith fcrp,,ulous accuracy. The prc-.::
number of ad.ciiturcrs whrio f.could be perrrn.':
to rembark was fixtd. T'icy were to bc ill .:
fcrcnt rad;,k; 'id jr(,f'filonsi; and the propori::
of cach wa. c:iablilied, acco,-ding to their :-:
ful.:-f, ..rd the wa:;ts of the colonv. A s'i:
nu::.br ;,r women l ta, to bc cl!fca to accc.:l-.?
i Lf;i of Co:J-rus, c. 65. Her.:-., de. l. l.ib. i

;'e new settlers. As it was the first objec to
-.- provisions in a country where scarcity of
,' Lad been the occasion of so much distress, a
.inicrable body of husbandmen was to be car-
cl over. As the Spaniards had then no con-
::z;in of deriving any benefit from those pro-
:cliois of the New World which have lince
id cd such large returns of wealth to Europe,
.i: had formed magnificent ideas, and entertained
ia',ine hopes with refpe& to the riches con-
iiicd in the mines wllicli had been discovered, a

or.d of workmen, flillcd in the various arts em-

i,;da i:i digging and refining the precious me-
;., .va= provided. All thcfc emigrants were to
.civc pay and fubffitence for some years, at the

i.Jlic cxpncet k

T:i,;. iar the regulations were prudent, and
S: j adapctd to the end in view. But as it was
.rcc:; that few would engage voluntarily to
.::it in a country, whose noxious climate had

'.. iftal to so many of their countrymen, Co-

:.:.) proposed to transport to Hispaniola such
r.-;actors as had been convicted of crimes,

tic!l, though capital, were ofa less atrocious na-

t.-c; and that for the future a certain proportion
, :ihec offenders usually sent to the gallil., should
ic condem; ed to labour in the mines which were
,, be ope;ed. This advice, given without due
:.irction, was as inconsiderately adopted. The

.'n,::; of Spain were drained, in order to
cc:t members for the intended colony; and
.i judges empowered to try criminals, were in.

-cd to recruit it by their future sentences.
1: L, not, however, with such materials that the

I Herrera, dec, I. lib. iii, . 2.

found.

foundations of a society, destined to be pera.
nent, should be laid. Induftrv, fobrietv, .
tience, and mutual confidence arc indifpenr;.
requilite in an infant settlement, where puint
morals must contribute more towards elabl.'-
order, than the operation or authority of law.
But when such a mixture of what is corrj, a
admitted into the original constitution of th 7..
litical body, the vices of those unsound anc '
curable members will probably inset the whe:
and must certainly be productive of violent *:
unhappy effects. This the Spaniards fatall-v .
perienced; and the other European r.at;.'i
having successively imitated the practice of Sp
in this particular, pernicious consequences Lk
followed in their fcttlements, which can be i-.
puted to no other cause 1.

Though Columbus obtained, with great f.

litv and dispatch, the royal approbation of er-r
reafure and regulation that he proposcd, his ;.
deavours to carry them into execution werrib
long retarded, as must have tired out the patie't
of any man, less accustomed to encounter a.2et
surmount difficulties. Those delays were cc.
sioned partly by that tedious formality and s;I
of procrastination, with which the Spaniards c-.
dud business; and partly by the exhausted .'
of the treasury, which was drained by the a.
pence of celebrating the marriage of Ferdinard i:
Isabella's only sorn with Margaret of Austria, a:
that of Joanna, their second daughter, rw
Philip archduke of Auftriam; but muit 't
chiefly imputed to the malicious arts of Col0-

l Herrera, dc. i. lib. iii. 3. c. 2. Touron Hi-.Cc-
de i'Amerique, i. p. 51. " P. Martyr, epi:i. i.1

b:'s enemies. Astonished at the reception
.hich he met with upon his return, and over-
aercd by his presence, they gave way, for some
t ,c, to a tide of favour too strong for them to
c:3ofe. Their enmity, however, was too in-
c:'crate to remain long inactive. They resumed
their operations, and by the assistance of, Son-
fca, the miniiter for Indian affairs, who was
Rcw promoted to the bishopric of Badajos, they
ir.rw in so many obstacles to protraf the pre-
Frrtions for Columbus's expedition, that a
nar elapsed before he n could procure two ships
to carre over a part of the supplies destined for
tire coluill, and almost two years were spent be-
,re the {mall squadron was equipped, of which
Lc himfTlf was to take the command".

1u...] This squadron consisted of fix ships

tr.l, of no great burden, and but indifferently
r.,':,cd for a long or dangerous navigation.
1;: voyage which he now meditated was in a
corj ec diffcrcnt from any he had undertaken.
Ai .c w-as fully persuaded that the fertile regions
o;i India lay to the south-west of those countries
vclc he had discovered, he proposed as the
rci, certain method of finding out these, to stand
irec-ly south from the Canary or Cape de Verd
i.ands, until he came under the equino&ial line,
a-d then to stretch to the weft before the favour.
hice wind for such a courfe,which blowsinvariably
ki-ween the tropics. With this idea he set fail
[Mav 30], and touched first at the Canary, and
t:i at the Cape de Verd islands [July 4]. From
ttormer he difoatched three of his (hips with a

L :- o; Ccl!urbu, c. G. c Herrera, dec. I.
V Do. i, R supply

supply of provisions for the colony in Hi.
paniola: with the other three, he continued i
vovage. towards the south. No remarkable rx.
currcnce happened until they arrived within jo
degrees of the line [July 19]. There they wet
becalmed, and at the fame time the heat beca-
so ex.ccffic, that many of their wine caji
burlt, the liquor in others foured, and their p:;,
vi;lons corrupted . The Spaniards, who h,
never ventured so far to the iouth, were ar.-
that the Ihips would take tire, and becran to ,.
prehend the reality of whlt the ancients }l3
taught concerning the deltructive quaities d
that torrid region of the globe. They were rt.
lieved, in some mcalure, from their scars b,',
seasonable fall of rain. This, however, thlou-i
so heavy and unintermitting that the men cou'i
hardly keep the deck, did not greatly mitigriu
the intcnfenefs of the heat. Ti;e admiral, w:o
with his usual vigilance had in person dircc-d
every operation from the heginning of tl
voyage, was so much exhausted by fatigue as1
want of flcep, that it brought on a violent si: g
the gout, accompanied with a fever. All t,:.
circumilances conitraincd him to yield to the is
portunities of his crew, and to alter his cour: -
the north-welt, in order to reach some of ti
Caribbec illands, where he might reiit, and kx
supplied with provi;,inj.

On the tint of August, the man ilationdr3

the round top surprised them with the joysu l rc
of land. Tlhey ilood towards it, and dii'or'
a considerable island, which the admiiral c.id
Trinidad, a name it tllil retains. It lies o :

p P. Mar:yr, dec. p. 70.

C'".,

Ir:: of Guiana, near the mouth of the Orinoco.
This, though a river only of the third or fourth
ragnitude in the New World, far surpasses any
of the streams in our hemisphere. It rolls to-
v-rds the ocean such a vast body of water, and
r 5es into it with such impetuous force, that

hlen i: r'-c:s the tide, which on that coast rifes
;-, an unic.Jrmon height, their coliifion occasions
a fiell and agitation of the waves no less fur-
iinr than formidable. In this conflict, the
i-.'lti!le torrent of the river so far prevails, that
i. friThlns the ocean many leagues with its
5 -dq. Columbus, before he could perceive the
a:i-er, was entangled among those adverse cur-
Tr-s and tempestuous waves, and it was with the
u'moft diiScuity that he escaped through a nar-
row -v s.i, which appeared so tremendous, that
he called it La Boca del Irago. As soon as
the crnflerration which this occasioned, per-
mi.ced him to refle& upon the nature of an ap-
ptarance so extraordinary, lie discerned in it a
ic'.rce of comfort and hope. He juilly con-
c':;ded, that fuchl a vast body of water as this
rvir contained, could not be supplied by any
iS.acd, but mutt flow through a country of im-
r.enfe extent, and of consequence that he was
now arrived at that continent which it had long
bEen the object of his wishes to discover. Full
cf his idea, he flood to the weft along the coast
of those provinces which are now known by the
Imes of Paria and Cumana. He landed in
feeral places, and had some intercourse with the
|p')ple, who resembled those of Hispaniola in
tUiur appearance and manner of life. They

R G iLa;i Hilt. de l'Orenoque, ton. i. p. i4-

i . 2 wore

wore, as ornaments, small plates of gold, ad
pearls of considerable value, which they willingly
exchanged for European toys. They feemedto
poffeis a better understanding, and greater coa-
rage, than the inhabitants of the islands. The
country produced four-footed animals of fe;e-
ral kinds, as well as a great variety of fowls and
fruits r. The admiral was so much delightd
with its beauty and fertility, that, with the war
enthusiasm of a discoverer, he imagined it to be
the paradise described in scripture, which the Al-
mighty chose for the residence of man, while be
retained innocence that rendered him worthy of
such an habitation . Thus Columbus had the
glory not only of discovering to mankind the ei.
iftence of a New World, but made confiderabk
progress towards a perfect knowledge of it; and
was the first man who conducted the Spaniards
to that vast continent which has been the chidf
feat of their empire, and the source of their trez-
fures in this quarter of the globe. The shattered
condition of his ships, scarcity of provisions, his
own infirmities, together with the impatience d
his crew, prevented him from pursuing his ds.
coveries any farther, and made it necessary to
bear away for Hispaniola. In his way thither
he discovered the islands of Cubagua and Marga.
rita, which afterwards became remarkable for
their pearl-fifhery. When he arrived at His.
paniola [Aug. 30], he was wafted to an extreme
degree with fatigue and sickness; but found the
affairs of the colony in such a situation, as afforded

' Herrera, dec. x. lib. iii. c. 9, o1, nI. Life ofColIam

bus, c. 66-73. ' Herrera, dec. I. lib. iii. c. 1-.
Comara c. 84. See NOTr XXI.

him

bm no profpec of enjoying that repose of which
be foodfo much in need.
Many revolutions had happened in that coun-
try during his absence. His brother, the ade-
bntado, in consequence of an advice which the
aniiral gave before his departure, had removed
the colony from Isabella to a more commodious
fttion, on the opposite fide of the island, and
hid the foundation of St. Domingo", which
.ws long the molt considerable European town
ia the New World, and the feat of the supreme
courts in the Spanish dominions there. As soon
a the Spaniards were established in this new
settlement, the adelantado, that they might
dither languish in inactivity, nor have leisure
to form new cabals, marched into those parts
oi the island which his brother had not yet
riited or reduced to obedience. As the people
were unable to refit, they submitted every where
to the tribute wich he imposed. But they soon
fLund the burden to be so intolerable, that, over-
awed as the) were by the funerior power of
their oppressors, they took anrs against them.
Those infurrcEtions, however, were not formid-
able. A conflict with timid and naked Indians
as neither dangerous nor of doubtful issue.
But while the adelantado was employed againit
th-n in the field, a mutiny, of an aspet far
mor- alarming, broke out among the Spaniards.
The ringleader of it was Francis Roldan, whom
Columbus had placed in a station which required
hli. to be the guardian of order and tranquillity
m the colony. A turbulent and inconsiderate
a-.iuLion precipitated him into this desperate

u p. Martyr, dec. p. 56.

R 3 measure,

measure, so unbecoming his rank. The arg.
ments which he employed to seduce his countrr.
men were frivolous and ill-founded. He accuse
Columbus and his two brothers of arrogance and
severity; he pretended that they aimed at '.
tablifhing an independent dominion in the
country; he taxed them with an intention of
cutting off part of the Spaniards by hunger a:d
fatigue, that they might more ealily reduce the
remainder to fubjetion; he represented it as un.
worthy of Castilians, to remain the tame asd
passive saves of three Genoese adventurers. Ai
men have always a propensity to impute th'
hardships of which they feel the pressure, to thi
mifconduEt of their rulers; as every nation viems
with a jealous eye the power and exaltation o
foreigners, Roldan's insinuations made a dee
impression on his countrymen. His chara&ce
and rank added weight to them. A coniide.
able number of the Spaniards made choice o
him as their leader, and taking arms agair.
the adelantado and his brother, seized the king'
magazine of provisions, and endeavoured to 1u-
prise the fort at St. Domingo. This was p-c
fcrved by the vigilance and courage of Do,
Diego Columbus. The mutineers were oblige
to retire to the province of Xaragua, wher
they continued not only to disclaim the adelas
tado's authority themselves, but excited the In
dians to throw off the yoke*.

Such was the diftra&ed state of the colo0i

when Columbus landed at St. Domingo. H,
was aftonified to find that the three (hips wh:i.

' Herrera, dec. r. lib. iii c. 5-S. Life of Cohuzr..,
c. 74-77. Gomara, c. 23. P. Martyr, p. 78.

L

be had dispatched from the Canaries were not
Tet arrived. By the unfkilfulnefs of the pilots,
and the violence of currents, they had been car-
red a hundred and sixty miles to the weft of St.
Domingo, and forced to take Ihelter in a har-
bour of the province of Xaragua, where Roldan
and his seditious followers were cantoned. Roldan
carefully concealed from the commanders of the
hips his infurre&ion againfl the adelantado, and
employing his utmost address to gain their con-
fidence, persuaded them to set on ihore a confi-
derable part of the new settlers whom they
brought over, that they might proceed by land
to St. Domingo. It required but few argu-
mnents to prevail with those men to espouse his
cause. They were the refuse of the jails of
Spain, to whom idleness, licentiousness, and
deeds of violence were familiar; and they re-
tcmed eagerly to a course of life nearly re-
fembling that to which they had been accustom-
ed. The commanders of the ihips perceiving,
when it v.as too late, their imprudence in difem-
harling so many of their men, stood away for
St. Domingo, and got safe into the port a few
days after the admiral; but their stock of pro-
viions was so wafted during a voyage of such
long continuance, that they brought little relief
to the colony x

By this jun&ion with a band of such bold and

d perate associates, Roldan became extremely
i'r.niialhi, and no less extravagant in his de-
mards. Columbus, though filled with resent-
ment at his ingratitude, and highly exasperatcd

Hirrra, dec. . lib. ii. c. Iz. Life of Columbus,
', 7, 7).

by

by the insolence of his followers, made no has
to take the field. He trembled at the though
of kindling the flames of a civil war, in which,
whatever party prevailed, the power and strength
of both must be so much wafled, as might e.
courage the common enemy to unite and con,
plete their deflruction. At the fame time, he
observed, that the prejudices and paflions.h*icb
incited the rebels to take arms, had so far in.
feded those who fill adhered to him, that-many
of them were adverse, and all cold to the fenice.
From such sentiments, with refpeEt to the pub-
lic interest, as well as from this view of his own
situation, he chose to negotiate rather than to
fight. By a seasonable proclamation, offering
free pardon to such as should merit it by return.
ing to their duty, he made imprefflon upon some
of the malcontents. By engaging to grant such
as should desire it the liberty of returning to
Spain, he allured all those unfortunate adven.
turers, who, from sickness and disappointment,
were disgusted with the country. By promising
to re-eflablilh Roldan in his former office, he
toothed his pride; and, by complying with most
of his demands in behalf of his followers, he
satisfied their avarice. Thus, gradually and
without bloodshed, but after many tedious nego-
tiations, he dissolved this dangerous combination
which threatened the colony with ruin ; and re-
stored the appearance of order, regular govern-
ment, and tranquillity 1.

In consequence of this agreement with the
mutineers, lands were allotted them in different

y Herrera, der I. lib. iii c. 13, I4. Lifeof Columbus,
c. Sa, &c.

parts

arts of the ifand, and the Indians fettled in
ech diftri& were appointed to cultivate a certain
portion of ground for the use of those new maf-
ars. [1499] The performance of this work
rs fub.lituted in place of the tribute formerly
imofed; and how. necessary soever such a regu-
ation might be in a sickly and feeble colony, it
ntroduced among the Spaniards the Reparti-
nito; or distributions of Indians established by
:hem in all their settlements, which brought
.n.r.:berlefs calamities upon that unhappy peo-
p;e, and fujeeced them to the most grievous
oDpreffion z. This was not the only bad effect
of the infurrealon in Hispaniola; it prevented
Columbus from prosecuting his discoveries on the
continent, as felf-prefervation obliged him to keep
t-ar his person his brother the adelantado, and
the sailors whom he intended to have employed
:i that service. As soon as his affairs would

n.mnit, he sent some of his ships to Spain with

a journal of the voyage which he had made, a
defcriution of the new countries which he had
2;covered, a chart of the coast along which he
had failed, and specimens of the gold, the pearls,
and other curious or valuable productions which
he had acquired by trafficking with the natives.
At the fame time he transmitted an account of
the infurretion in Hispaniola; he accused the
mutineers not only of having thrown the colony
into such violent convulsions as threatened its
dissolution, butof having obftruted everyattempt
towards discovery and improvement, by their
unprovoked rebellion against their superiors, and
proposed several regulations for the better go-

Herrcra, dec. i. lib. 'ui..c 14, &c.

vernment

vernment of the island, as well as the extinc&i
of that mutinous spirit, which, though fuppreffd
at present, might soon burst out with addition
rage. Roldan and his associates did not neglek
to convey to Spain, by the fame (hips, an apolog
for their own condut, together with theirre
criminations upon the admiral and his brothem
Unfortunately for the honour of Spain, and the
happiness of Columbus, the latter gained moi
credit in the court of Ferdinand and Isabella, and
produced unexpected effects a.

But, previous to the relating of these, it:

proper to take a view of some events, which
merit attention, both on account of their own
importance, and their connection with the history
of the New World. While Columbus was en-
gaged in his successive voyages to the weft, the
spirit of discovery did not languish in Portugal,
the kingdom where it first acquired vigour, acd
became enterprising. Self-condemnation and
regret were not the only sentiments to which
the success of Columbus, and reflection upon
their own imprudence in rejecting his proposal,
gave rife among the Portuguese. They exciteda
general emulation to surpass his performances,
and an ardent desire to make some reparation to
their country for their own error. With this
view, Emanuel, who inherited the enterprising
genius of his predecessors, persisted in their grand
scheme of opening a passage to the East Indit;
by the Cape of Good Hope, and soon after hi
accession to the throne, equipped a squadron for
that important voyage. He gave the command

' Herrera, dec. r. lib. iii. c. i. Benzon. HifL Nom.
Orb. lib. i. c. 2.

of it to Vasco de Gama, a man of noble birth,
possessed of virtue, prudence, and courage, equal
to the fation. The squ'adron, like all those fitted
out for discovery in the infancy of navigation,
as extremely feeble, consisting only of three
vcffels, of neither burden nor force adequate to
the service. As the Europeans were at that time
litle acquainted with the course of the trade-
winds and periodical monsoons, which render
ravigation in the Atlantic ocean, as well as in the
so that feuarates Africa from India, at some sea-
fLs cafy, and at others not only dangerous, but
amoft impracticable, the time chosen for Ga-
ma's departure was the most improper during the
w-ole year. He fct fail from Lisbon on the
Enith oi July [1497], and standing towards the
fcuth, Lad to fruggle for four months with
ccutrary winds, before he could reach the Cape
oi Good Hope. Here their violence began to
abate [Nov. 20]; and during an interval of
ar. weather, Gama doubled that formidable
promnontery, which had so long been the bound-
ay of navigation, and direEted his course to-
wards the north-taft, along the African coast.
He touched at several ports; and after various
adventures, which the Portuguese historians re-
hte with high but just encomiums upon his con-
duct and intrepidity, he came to anchor before
te I;y of Melinda. Throughout all the vast
cuuiit its which extend along the coast of Africa,
Erm thl river Senegal to the confines of Zan4
guebar, the Portuguese had found a race of men
rude and uncultivated, trangers to letters, to
ar;, and commerce, and differing from the in-
hi:tants of .Europe, no lcfs in their features

and

and complexion, than in their manners and ini.
tutions. As they advanced from this, they od.
served, to their inexprefiible joy, that the humna
form gradually altered and improved; the Aiia'.
features began to predominate, marks of civnz.
ation appeared, letters were known, the Mahl.
metan religion was established, and a commerc,
far from being inconiiderable, was carried on
At that time several veflels from India were a
the port of Melinda. Gama now pursued hi
voyage with almost absolute certainty of fucces,
and, under the conduct of a Mahometan piUt,
arrived at Calecut, upon the coast of Malabi,
on the twenty-fecond of May one thouland foie
hundred and ninety-eight. What he beheld o
the wealth, the populousness, the cultivation, th
iadudtry and arts of this highly civilized countrr,
far surpassed any idea that he had formed, from
the imperfec accounts which the Europeans hbd
hitherto received of it. But as he posseTsd
neither sufficient force to attempt a settlement,
nor proper commodities with which he coul
carry on commerce of any consequence, he bh.
tened back to Portugal, with an account of hi
success in performing a voyage, the longed, a
well as molt difficult, that had ever been mad,
since the firit invention of navigation. He landed
at Liibon on the fourteenth of September ore
thousand four hundred and ninety-nine, two
ears two months and five days from the time hk
left that port a.
Thus, during the course of the fifteenth ceo-

tury, mankind made greater progress in expior
ing the itate of the habitable globe, than in t

* Ramufio, vol. i. 1 9, D.

L-i

th ages which had elapsed previous to that pe-
rdl The spirit of discovery, feeble at firfi and
autious, moved within a very narrow sphere,
ad made its efforts with hesitation and timidity.
Encouraged by success, it became adventurous,
ad boldly extended its operations. In the
course of its progression, it continued to ac-
quire vigour, and advanced at length with a
rapidity and force which burRt through all the
limits within which ignorance and fear had hi.
tbhto circumscribed the acivity of the human
race. Almost fifty years were employed by the
Portuguese in creeping along the coast of Africa
from Cape Non to Cape de Verd, the latter of
.hich lies only twelve degrees to the south of
te former. In less than thirty years they ven-
t.rcd beyond the equinotial line into another
rnifpihere, and penetrated to the southern ex-
trcmity of Africa, at the distance of forty-nine
dgrees from Cape de Verd. During the last
fieen years of the century, a New World was
dicovered in the weft, not inferior in extent to all
the parts of the earth with which mankind were
at that time acquainted. In the east, unknown
fas and countries were found out, and a com-
munication, long delired, but hitherto concealed,
was opened between Europe and the opulent
regions of India. In comparison with events so
wondecful and unexpeaed, all that had hitherto
kben deemed great or splendid, faded away and
di:appeared. Vas obje&s now presented them-
ide-s. The human mind, routed and interested
by the profpe&, engaged with ardour in pursuit
'thlcm, and exerted its active powers in a new

Lrccuoin.
YQL. . . This

This spirit of enterprize, though but nel

awakened in Spain, began soon to operate a.
tenfively. All the attempts towards discover
made in that kingdom, had hitherto been carrin
on by Columbus alone, and at the expence of
the sovereign. But now private adventurer,
allured by the magnificent descriptions he gare
of the regions which he had visited, as well a
by the specimens of their wealth which he pro
duced, offered to fit out squadrons at their own
risk, and to go in quest of new countries. The
Spanish court, whose scanty revenues were ex.
haufted by the charge of its expeditions to the
New Wrorld, which, though they opened alluricn
profpecs of future benefit, yielded a very fparinn
return of present profit, was extremely willingto
devolve the burden of discovery upon its subjec.
It seized with joy an opportunity of renderiig
the avarice, the ingenuity, and efforts of projt.
tors, infirumental in promoting designs of certai
advantage to the public, though of doubtfnl
success with respect to themselves. One of the
first propositions of this kind was made by
Alonfo de Ojeda, a gallant and acive officer,
who had accompanied Columbus in his second
voyage. His rank and chara&er procured him
such credit with the merchants of Seville, tba
they undertook to equip four ships, provided he
could obtain the royal licence, authorising the
voyage. The powerful patronage of the bilbo?
of Badajos easily secured success in a fut so
agreeable to the court. Without consulting
Columbus, or regarding the rights and jurifdiiona
which he had acquired by the capitulation in oce
thousand four hundred and ninety-two, Ojtb

v.1

,s permitted to set out for the New World.
in order to direc his course, the bishop com-
municated to him the admiral's journal of his last
Forage, and his charts of the countries which he
had discovered. Ojeda struck out into no new
path of navigation, but adhering servilely to the
route which Columbus had taken, arrived on
the coast of Paria [May]. He traded with the
natives, and landing to the weft, proceeded as
Ear as Cape de Vela, and ranged along a confider-
able extent of coast beyond that on which Co.
lumbus had touched. Having thus ascertained
the opinion of Columbus, that this country was
2 part of the continent, Ojeda returned by way
ofHifpaniola to Spain [O&ober], with some
reputation as a discoverer, but with little bene-
fit to those who had raised the funds for the
expedition b.

Amerigo Vespucci, a Florentine gentleman,
accompanied Ojeda in this voyage. In what
fation he served, is uncertain; but as he was an
experienced sailor, and eminently (kilful in all the
sciences subservient to navigation, he seems to
have acquired such authority among his com-
panions, that they willingly allowed him to have
a chief share in direAing their operations during
the voyage. Soon after his return, he tranf-
.itted an account of his adventures and disco-
vcenes to one of his countrymen; and labouring
"ith the vanity of a traveller to magnify his
own exploits, he had the address and confidence
:o frame his narrative, so as to make it appear
:.at he had the glory of having first discovered
ite continent in the New World. Amerigo's

b Herrera, dec. x. lib. iv. c. 1 ,2 3.

5 2 account

account was drawn up not only with art, but
with some elegance. It contained an amrufag
history of his voyage, and judicious obfervatior
upon the natural productions, the inhabitants
and the customs of the countries which he had
visited. As it was the first description of anr
part of the New World that was published, a
performance so well calculated to gratify tte
passion of mankind for what is new and marvel.
lous, circulated rapidly, and was read with ad.
miration. The country of which Amerigo wa
supposed to be the discoverer, came gradually
to be called by his name. The caprice of man.
kind, often as unaccountable as unjust, has per.
petuated this error. By the universal consent
of nations, AMERICA is the name bestowed ca
this new quarter of the globe. The bold pre.
tenfons of a fortunate impostor have robbed the
discoverer of the New World of a diftincion
which belonged to him. The name of Amerigo
has supplanted that of Columbus; and mankind
may regret an at of injufice, which, having
received the fanc&ion of time, it is now too ika
to redress c.

During the fame year, another voyage ci

discovery was undertaken. Columbus not o:.7
introduced the spirit of naval entcrprize i::.
Spain, but all the first adventurers who d.i'
tinguifhed themselves in this new career, werC
formed by his instructions, and acquired in }i
voyages the klill and information which qualifed
them to imitate his example. Alonfo Nigrno
who had served under the admiral in his last xa
pedition, fitted out a tingle ship, in conjuncrio;

' See NOTE XXII.

~-'::

with Chri[topher Guerra, a merchant of Seville,
and failed to the coast of Paria. This voyage
seems to have been conducted with greater at-
tention to private emolument, than to any gene-
ral or national objet. Nigno and Guerra made
no discoveries of any importance; but they
brought home such a return of gold and pearls,
asiflamed their countrymen with the desire of
enCaginginn similar adventures d.

Soon after [Jan. 13, 1500], Vincent Yanez
Pinzon, one of the admiral's companions in his
first voyage, failed from Palos with four (hips.
He flood boldly towards the south, and was
the firit Spaniard who ventured to cross the
equinoaial line ; but he seems to have landed on
ro part of the coast beyond the mouth of the
Maragnon, or river of the Amazons. All these
navigators adopted the erroneous theory of Co-
lumbus, and believed that the countries which
they had discovered were part of the vast con-
tinent of India e.

During the last year of the fifteenth century,

that fertile diftri&t of America, on the confines
of which Pinzon had ftopt short, was more fully
discovered. The successful voyage of Gama to
the East Indies having encouraged the king of
Portugal to fit out a fleet so powerful, as not
only to carry on trade, but to attempt conquest,
he gave the command of it to Pedro Alvarez
CabraL In order to avoid the coast of Africa,
where he was certain of meeting with variable
breezes, or frequent calms, which might retard
his voyage, Cabral stood out to sea, and kept so

d P. Martyr, dec. p. 87. lienera, dec. i. lib. iv. c. 5.
Herrira, dec. I. lib. iv. c. 6. P. Martyr, dec. p. 9g.

5 3 far

far to the weft, that, to his surprise, he fon.d
himself upon the (hore of an unknown country,
in the tenth degree beyond the line. He ima
gined, at first, that it was some island in the
Atlantic ocean, hitherto unobserved; but,-pro.
ceeding along its coast for several days, be'r-
led gradually to believe, that a country so es.
tensive formed a part of some great continent.
This latter opinion was well founded. The
country with which he fell in belongs to tha
province in South America, now known by the
name of Brasil. He landed; and having formed
a very high idea of the fertility of the foil, and
agreeableness of the climate, he took pofeffion
of it for the crown of Portugal, and difpatcheda
ship to Lisbon with an account of this event,
which appeared to be no less important than it
was unexpected f. Columbus's discovery of the
New World was the effort of an a&ive genius,
enlightened by science, guided by experience, and
acting upon a regular plan, executed with no le:i
courage than perseverance. But from this ad.
venture of the Portuguese, it appears that chance
might have accomplished that great design which
it is now the pride of human reason to have
formed and perfeced. If the sagacity of Co.
lumbus had not conduced mankind to America,
Cabral, by a fortunate accident, might have led
them, a few years later, to the knowledge of that
extensive continent -.

While the Spaniards and Portuguese, by those

successive voyages, were daily acquiring more
enlarged ideas of the extent and opulence of tht
quarter of the globe which Columbus had nLaz:

Hcrrera, dec. . lib. iv. c. 7. c Id. lib. vii. c. .

k1u si

known to them, he himself, far from enjoying
the tranquillity and honours with which his ser-
vices should have been recompenfed, was ftrug-
pling with every dilrefs in which the envy and
malevolence of the people under his command,
or the ingratitude of the court which he served,
could involve him. Though the pacification
with Roldan broke the union and weakened the
farce of the mutineers, it did not extirpate the
feeds of discord out of the ifiand. Several of
the malcontents continued in arms, refusing to
fabmit to the admiral. He and his brothers
were obliged to take the field alternately, in
ordr to check their incursions, or to punish
their crimes. The perpetual occupation and
d::qu;et which this created, prevented him from
eiving dueattention to the dangerous machinations
of his enemies in the court of Spain. A good
rninr.her of such as were most dissatisfied with his
zadzi:ii.ration, had embraced the opportunity of
returning to Europe with the ships which he
d:,patched from St. Domingo. The final difap-
pjintment of all their hopes inflamed the rage
of these unfortunate adventurers against Colum-
bus to the utmost pitch. Their poverty and
dillrefs, by exciting compassion, rendered their
accusations credible, and their complaints inte-
refting. They teazed Ferdinand and Isabella
incessantly with memorials, containing the detail
of their own grievances, and the articles of their
charge against Columbus. Whenever either the
king or queen appeared in public, they fur-
rounded them in a tumultuary manner, inlifting
w.th importunate clamours for the payment of
tis arrears due to them, and demanding ven-

geance

geance upon the author of their suffering.
They insulted the admiral's sons wherever they
met them, reproaching them as the offspring of
the projecor, whose fatal curiosity had discovered
those pernicious regions which drained Spain of
its wealth, and would prove the grave of its
people. These avowed endeavours of the nal.
contents from America to ruin Columbus, weTe
seconded by the secret, but more dangerous in.
finuations of that party among the courtie,,
which had always thwarted his schemes and en.
vied his success and credit h.

Ferdinand was disposed to liften, not only with

a willing, but with a partial ear, to these accu.
iations. Notwithitanding the flattering accoun,.
which Columbus had given of the riches of
America, the remittances from it had hithero
been so scanty, that they fell far short of defray.
ing the expence of the armaments fitted ou:.
The glory of the discovery, together with the
prospect of remote commercial advantages, was
all that Spain had yet received in return for the
efforts which (he had made. But time had al-
ready diminished the first sensations of joy which
the difcoverv of a New World occasioned, and
fame alone was not an object to satisfy the cold
interested mind of Ferdinand. The nature oc
commerce was then so little understood, that,
where irmediate gain was not acquired, the hope
of ditlant benefit, or of flow and moderate returnr,
was totally disregarded. Ferdinand confidered
Spain, o:- this account, as having loft by the e::
terprife of Columbus, and imputed it to Lti
nifconduct and incapacity for government, than

b Ls:; of C.;Iumbus, c. SS.

a corn

z country abounding in gold had yieTded'nothing
of value to its conquerors. Even Ifaiblla, who,
from the favourable opinion whicb {heentertained
of Columbus, had uniformly prote&ced him, was
naken at length by the number and boldness of
his accusers, and began to suspect that a difaffece
tion so general must have been occasioned by
real grievances, which called for redress. The
bishop of Badajos, with his usual animosity
against Columbus, encouraged these suspicions,
and confirmed them.

As soon as the queen began to give way to
the torrent of calumny, a resolution fatal to
Columbus was taken. Francis de Bovadilla, a
knight of Calatrava, was appointed to repair to
Hispaniola, with full powers to inquire into the
conduc of Columbus, and, if he should find the
charge of mal-administration proved, to super-
fede him, and assume the government of the
iland. It was impossible to escape condemna-
tion, when this preposterous commission made it
the interest of the judge to pronounce the person
whom he was sent to try, guilty. Though
Columbus had now composed all the diffcnfions
in the island; though he had brought both Spa-
niards and Indians to submit peaceably to his
government; though he had made such effectual
provilon for working the mines, and cultivating
the country, as would have secured a confider-
able revenue to the king, as well as large profits
to individuals, Bovadilla, without deigning to
attend to the nature or merit of those services,
discovered, from the moment that he landed in
Id;.paniola, a determined purpafe of treating
him. as a criminal He took possession of the ad-

miral's

miral's house in St. Domingo, from which it
mailer happened at that time to be absent, and
seized his effecs, as if his guilt had been already
fullyproved; he renderedhimfelf malter of the son
and of the king's stores by violence; he required
all persons to acknowledge him as supreme go
vernor; he set at liberty the prisoners confined
by the admiral, and summoned him to appea
before his tribunal, in order to answer for hi
conduct ; transmitting to him, together with the
summons, a copy of the royal mandate, by whici
Columbus was enjoined to yield implicit obediene,
to his commands.

Columbus, though deeply affe&ed with the

ingratitude and injustice of Ferdinand and Ifs
bella, did not hesitate a moment about his owr
conduct. He submitted to the will of his fove
reigns with a refpecful silence, and repaired di.
redly to the court of that violent and partial
judge whom they had authorized to try him.
Bovadilla, without admitting him into his pre.
fence, ordered him instantly to be arrested, to be
loaded with chains, and hurried on board a sip.
Even under this humiliating reverse of fortune,
the firmness of mind which distinguishes the cha.
ra&er of Columbus, did not forsake him. Con.
fcious of his own integrity, and solacing himfcel
with refleting upon the great things which he
had atchieved, he endured this insult offered to
his charaAer, not only with composure, but with
dignity. Nor had he the consolation of fvr-
pathy to mitigate his sufferings. Bovadilla had
already rendered himself so extremely popular,
by granting various immunities to the colony,
by liberal donations of Indians to all who applied

for

for them, and by relaxing the reins of difciplne
and government, that the Spaniards, who were
mofly adventurers, whom their indigence or
crimes had impelled to abandon their native
country, expressed the most indecent fatisfacion
with the disgrace and imprisonment of Colum-
bus. They flattered themselves, that now they
should enjoy an uncontrolled liberty, more suit-
able to their disposition and former habits of
li;e. Among persons thus prepared to censure
the proceedings, and to asperse the charafter of
Columbus, Bovadilla colleced materials for a
charge against him. All accusations, the mofl
improbable, as well as inconsistent, were receiv-
ed. No informer, however infamous, was
rejeted. The result of this inquest, no less
indecent than partial, he transmitted to Spain.
At the fame time, he ordered Columbus,
with his two brothers, to be carried thither
in fetters; and adding cruelty to insult, he
confined them in different /hips, and excluded
them from the comfort of that friendly inter-
course which might have toothed their common
distress. But while the Spaniards in Hispaniola
viewed the arbitrary and insolent proceedings of
Bovadilla with a general approbation, which re-
flects dishonour upon their name and country,
one man still retained a proper sense of the great
a:tions which Columbus had performed, and
wai touched with the sentiments of veneration
and pity due to his rank, his age, and his merit.
Alonfo de Vallejo, the captain of the vessel on
board which the admiral was confined, as soon
ai he was clear of the island, approached his
p;ifcner with great respect, and offered to release

him

him from the fetters with which he was unjufly
loaded. " No," replied Columbus, with a ge.
nerous indignation, " I wear these irons in co.-
sequence of an order from my sovereigns. They:
shall find me as obedient to this as to theirothe,
injunctions. By their command I have bhei
confined, and their command alone shall set me
at liberty :."

Nov. 23.1 Fortunately the voyage to Spasu

was extremely snort. As soon as Ferdinand ahd
Isabella were inforr.ed that Columbus was
brought home a prisoner, and in chains, they
perceived at once what univcrfal aftoniihmint
this event must occasion, and what an impref
sion to their disadvantage it must make. Al
Europe, thev foresaw', would be filled with
indignation at this ungenerous requital of a
man who had performed aEtions worthy of
the highelt recompence, and would exclaim
against the iniuftice of the nation, to which hi
had been such an eminent benefactor, as well
as against the ingratitude of the princes whose
reign he had rendered illultriots. Afhamedof
their oun conduct, and eager not only to make
for.e reparation for this injury, but to efface the
rtain which it might fix upon their charactr,
they inftar.tly iflued orders to set Columbus at
liberty [Dec. 17i, invited him to court, and re.
mitttd rr.oney tu ern:I e himl to .!,pear there in i
rmanner f,:iable to li, rank. \When he eltcrd
the rnval pr.efrnce, Columbus threw himfilfv:
the feet of his fovtrci.ns. He remained fc':
some time ilcnt ; the xaricus passions ,hich

Life of Coiumrb:s, c. 86. Herrra, dec. i. ii'.v ;.
--x. GorarraHRPiit. c. 23. Ov.-o,; i;u. c. 6.

",,,: ;

*<*--/1^ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ -
-^

/ " A - 'I, J/rBn Pe

^ra~e o~1 7

S1J~o
~Jl~iri wih i.~ -i"(77

agitated his mind suppressing his power of utter.
ance. At length he recovered himself, and vin-
dicated his condud in a long discourse,. pro-
dicing the most satisfying proofs of his own in-
tgrity, as well as good intention, and evidence,
so less clear, of the malevolence of his enemies,
who, not satisfied with having ruined his for-
tune, laboured to deprive him of what alone was
ros left, his honour and his fame. Ferdinand re-
c:;ved him with decent civility, and Isabella with
:edernefs and refpet. They both expressed
their sorrow for what had happened, disavowed
their knowledge of it, and joined in promising
him protection and future favour. But though
they instantly degraded Bovadilla, in order to re-
movc from themselves any suspicion of having
a.:horized his violent proceedings, they did not
eftore to Columbus his jurifdidion and privi.
leges as viceroy of those countries which he had
ilcovered. Though willing to appear the
a7engers of Columbus's wrongs, that Illiberal
jaloufy which prompted them to invefl Bovadilla
with such authority as put it in his power to
treat the admiral with indignity fifll fubfilted.
They were afraid to trust a man to whom they
had been so highly indebted, and retaining
LEa at court under various pretexts, they ap-
pJinted Nicholas de Ovando, a knight of the
mi;tary order of Alcantara, governor of His-
?2rllola k.

Columbus was deeply asseted with this new
,jary, which came from hands that seemed to
he employed in making reparation for his past

Herrera, dec. z. lib. iv,. c lo-i-. Life of Colum-
.,, c. 27.
VOL. I. T fiffer.

sufferings. The sensibility with which great
minds feel every thing that implies any fufpcion
of their integrity, or that wears the aspect of an
affront, is exquisite. Columbus had experienced
both from the Spaniards; and their ungenerous
conduc exasperated him to such a degree, that
he could no longer conceal the sentiments which
it excited. Wherever he went, he carried about
with him, as a memorial of their ingratitude,
those fetters with which he had been loaded.
They were constantly hung up in his chamber,
and he gave orders that when he died they hould
be buried in his grave 1.

1501.] Meanwhile. the spirit of discover-,

notwithstanding the severe check which it had
received by the ungenerous treatment of the m2c,
who firit excited it in Spain, continued aAive
and vigorous. [January] Roderigo de Baflida:,
a person of diftinEtion, fitted out two ships in co-
partnery with John de la Cosa, who havi'-
served under the admiral in two of his voyage;,
was deemed the most skilful pilot in Spain.
They lteered dire&tly towards the continent, a-
rived on the coast of Paria, and proceeding
the weft, discovered all the coast of the provir.c
now known by the name of Tierra Firme, fro3
Cape de Vela to the gulf of Darien. Not lo:-
after Ojeda, with his former associate Amenig
Vespucci, set out upon a fScond voyage, avs
being unacquainted with the destination a
Baftidas, held the fame course, and touched i
the fame places. The voyage of Baftidas ra
prosperous and lucrative, that of Ojeda unf:
tunate. But both tended to increase the ardc

L;s of Columbus, c. 56. p. 577,

ofdifcovery; for in proportion as the Spaniards
acquired a more extensive knowledge of the
American continent, their idea of its opulence
and fertility increased m.

Before these adventurers returned from their
7oyages, a fleet was equipped, at the public ex-
pence, for carrying over Ovando, the new go-
v-rnor, to Hispaniola. His presence there was
citremely requisite, in order to flop the incon-
hierate career of Bovadilla, whose imprudent ad-
ministration threatened the settlement with ruin.
Conscious of the violence and iniquity of his
proceedings against Columbus, he continued to
rake it his sole obje& to gain the favour and
bpport of his countrymen, by accommodating
·iimfelf to their passions and prejudices. With
thi vite, he eltablifhed regulations, in every
J;nt the reverse of those which Columbus
itemed essential to the prosperity of the colony.
i:::ead of the severe discipline, ncceffary in order
' tabituate the dissolute and corrupted members
C. which the society was composed, to the re-
i:aints of law and subordination, he suffered
t-hm to enjoy such uncontroled licence, as en-
c.uraged the wildest excesses. Intlead of pro-
:-,ingn the Indians, he gave a legal fanEtion to
c'. oppreflion of that unhappy people. He took
'c exact number of such as lurvived their past
iamriries, divided them into diilic& classes, dif-
.luu:cd them in property among his adherents,
:- reduced all the people of the illand to a Rate
: cvm.plctc fcrvitude. As the avarice of the
ianiards was too rapacious and impatient to
' any method of acquiring wealth but that of

r Herrcr., dec. . lib. iv. c. 11.

T 2 searching

searching for gold, this servitude became as
grievous as it was unjust. The Indians were
driven in crowds to the mountains, and compelled
to work in the mines by mailers, who imposed
their talks without mercy or discretion. Labour,
so difproportiored to their strength and former
habits of life, wafted that feeble race of men wi:b
such rapid consumption, as muff have soon ttr.
minated in the utter extinction of the anci:t
inhabitants of the country n

The necessity of applying a speedy remedy to

those disorders, hastened Ovando's departur.
He had the command of the most refpcratl;
armament hitherto fitted out for the New World.
It confited of thirty-two ships, on board d
which two thousand five hundred persons em-
barked, with an intention of fettling in the
country. [ Icz] Upon the arrival of the nm
governor, with this powerful reinforcement to
the colony, Bovadilla resigned his charge, acd
was commanded to return instantly to Spain, h
order to answer for his conduct. Roldan, acd
the other ringleaders of the mutineers, who hzd
been most acive in opposing Columbus, wme
required to leave the island at the fame time
A proclamation was issued, declaring the nia:1:'
to be free fubjets of Spain, of whom no fern;:
was to be exa&ed contrary to their own ird;
nation, and without paying them an adequr2
price for their labour. With refpeEt to tb
Spaniards themselves, various regulation; va
made tending to suppress the licentious fp..
which had been so fatal to the colony, and:

Herrern, dec. I. lib. iv. . I, &c. Ovicio E:
li. iiic. c. . 97. Bczon. Hist. lib. i. c. 12. p. i'

clia'LL

óablifh that reverence for law and order on
which society is founded, and to which it is in-
debted for its increase and liability. In order
to limit the exorbitant gain which private persons
were fuppofedtomake by'workingthe mines, anor-
dinance was published, dire&ting all the gold to be
brought to a public fmelting-houfe, and declaring
c:e half of it to be the property of the crown o.

While these steps were taking for securing the
:nquillity and welfare of the colony which
Columbus had planted, he himself was engaged
- the unpleasant employment of Soliciting the fa-
tcurof an ungrateful court, and, notwithstanding
2a his merit and services, he solicited in vain.
He demanded, in terms of the original capitula-
:on in one thousand four hundred and ninety-
':o, to be reinstated in his office of viceroy over
:e countries which he had discovered. By a
½:nge fatality, the circumstance which he urged

support of his claim, determined a jealous
onarch to rejec it. The greatrefs of his dif-
c;'eries, and the profpec& of their increasing
-!ue, made Ferdinand confider the concessions

the capitulation as extravagant and impolitic.
Ue was afraid of entrusting a subjec& with the
tiercife of a jurisdiction that now appeared to

so extremely extensive, and might grow to be
j less formidable. He inspired Isabella with
-e fame suspicions; and under various pretexts
zailv frivolous and unjust, they eluded all Co-
'-- .'u,' requisitions to perform that which a
t"-rmn compaa' bound them to accomplih.
A.:cr attending the court of Spain for near two

:Solorzano Politica Indiana, lib. i. . 1c. 1Herrera,
.I, l. b. iv. c. c".

T 3 years,

years, as an humble suitor, he found it impof.
fible to remove Ferdinand's prejudices and ap.
prehensions; and perceived, at length, that he
laboured in vain, when he urged a claim of
justice or merit with an interested and unfeeling
prince.

But even this ungenerous return did not dif.

courage him from pursuing the great obje~t
which first called forth his inventive genius. ac
excited him to attempt discovery. To open i
new passage to the East Indies was his originl
and favourite scheme. This still engrossed ks
thoughts; and either from his own observation:
in his voyage to Paria, or from some obfcur"
hint of the natives, or from the accounts give
by Baftidas and de la Cosa, of their expedition
he conceived an opinion that,beyond the cont.-
nent of America, there was a sea which extender
to the East Indies, and hoped to find so£:
strait or narrow neck of land, by which a cor-
munication might be opened with it and the pir-
of the ocean already known. By a very fur.-
nate conjecture, he supposed this strait or ill'.:
to be situated near the gulf of Darien.

Full of this idea, though he was now of '

advanced age, worn out with fatigue, a:J
broken with infirmities, he offered, with &'
alacrity of a youthful adventurer, to underai:
a voyage which would ascertain this imports
point, and perffct the grand scheme whci
from the beginning he proposed to accompii.
Several circumftaices concurred in difpo-i:
Ferdinand and Isabella to lend a favourable s
to this proposal. They were glad to have u
pretext of any honourable employment for.

moiO

moving from court a man with whose demands
they deemed it impolitic to comply, and whose
ferices it was indecent to neglet. Though un-
willing to reward Columbus, they were not m-
sensible of his merit, and from their experience
of his ficill and condu&, had reason to give credit
to his conjecures, and to confide in his success.
To there considerations, a third muff be added
cf till more powerful influence. About this
time the Portuguese fleet, under Cabral, arrived
from the Indies; and, by the richness of its
cargo, gave the people of Europe a more perfec
idea than they had hitherto been able to form,
of the opulence and fertility of the east. The
Portuguese had been more fortunate in their dif-
coverics than the Spaniards. They had opened
a communication with countries where industry,
arts, and elegance flourished; and where com-
mrce had been longer established, and carried
to greater extent, than in any region of the
earth. Their first voyages thither yielded imme-
diate as well as vast returns of profit, in com-
rodities extremely precious and in great request.
Li:bon became immediately the feat of com-
.trce and wealth; while Spain had only the ex-
pecation of remote benefit, and of future gain,
f:om the western world. Nothing, then, could
be more acceptable to the Spaniards than Co-
lumbus's offer to conduct them to the east, by a
route which he expected to be shorter, as well as
lIss dangerous, than that which the Portuguese
had taken. Even Ferdinand was roused by such
a profpet, and warmly approved of the under-
:aking.

But

But interesting as the object of this voyage

was to the nation, Columbus could procure onry
four small barks, the largef of which did not ex.
ceed seventy tons in burden, for performing it.
Accustomed to brave danger, and to engage in
arduous undertakings with inadequate force, he
did not hesitate to accept the command of thi
pitiful squadron. His brother Bartholomew,
and his second son Ferdinand, the historian of
his acions, accompanied him. He failed from
Cadiz, on the ninth of May, and touched, as
usual, at the Canary islands; from thence he pro.
posed to have flood directly for the continent;
but his largest vessel was so clumsy and unfit for
service as confirained him to bear away for Hifpa.
niola, in hopes of exchanging her for some fh;?
of the fleet that had carried out Ovando. Wheo
he arrived at St. Domingo [June 29], he fouai
eighteen of these (hips ready loaded, and oa
the point of departing for Spain. Columbiu
immediately acquainted the governor with tet
deOination of his voyage, and the accident which
had obliged him to alter his route. He requeFltc
permifflion to enter the harbour, not only tha:
he might negotiate the exchange of his sipS,
but that he might take shelter during a viole.:
hurricane, of which he discerned the approach
from various prognostics, which his experience
and sagacity had taught him to observe. On that
account, he advised him likewise to put off fc
some days the departure of the fleet bound for
Spain. But Ovando refused his requet, acd
despised his counfcl. Under circumniances j
which humanity would have afforded refuge to I
itranger, Columbus was denied admittance into;

COlU'-J

country of which he had discovered the existence
and acquired the poffeflion. His salutary warn-
ing, which merited the greatest attention, was
regarded as the dream of a visionary prophet,
who arrogantly pretended to predit an event
beyond the reach of human foresight. The fleet
set fail for Spain. Next night the hurricane
ame on with dreadful impetuosity. Columbus,
aware of the danger, took precautions against
it, and saved his little squadron. The fleet def-
tided for Spain met with the fate which the
rashness and obstinacy of its commanders deferv-
cI Of eighteen {hips two or three only es-
caed. In this general wreck perished Bova-
lla, Roldan, and the greater part of those who
bad been the most a&tive iputin perecuing Colum-
bus, and oppressing the Indians. Together with
themselves, all the wealth which they had ac-
quired by their injustice and cruelty was swallowed
up. It exceeded in value two hundred thousand
?.fw; an immense fum at that period, andifuffi-
cicnt not only to have screened them from any
fcvere scrutiny into their condua, but to have
ftcured them a gracious reception in the Spanifl
wcurt. Among the ships that escaped, one had
on board all the effects of Columbus which had
tcnrecoveredfromthe ruins of his fortune. Hifto-

ans, struck with the exat discrimination of cha-
rCters, as well as the just distribution of rewards
:iA punishments, conspicuous in those events, uni-
:tri2ly attribute them to an immediate interpo.
':on of Divine Providence, in order to avenge
t-c wvrongs of an injured man, and to punish the
:??rcfors of an innocent people. Upon the
1gorOant and superstitious race of men, who

were

were witnesses of this occurrence, it made a
different impression. From an opinion which
vulgar admiration is apt to entertain with refpea
to persons who have distinguished themfeles
by their sagacity and inventions, they believed
Columbus to be possessed of supernatural powes,
and imagined that he had conjured up this dread-
ful storm by magical arts andincantations, in order
to be avenged of his enemies P.

Columbus soon left Hispaniola [July 141,

where he met with such an inhospitable reception,
and stood towards the continent. After a tedious
and dangerous voyage, he discovered Guanaia, an
island not far distant from the coast of Hondura.
There he had an interview with some inhabitants
of the continent, who arrived in a large canoe.
They appeared to be a people more civilized, and
who had made greater progress in the knowledge
of useful arts, than any whom he had hitherto
discovered. In return to the inquiries which the
Spaniards made, with thrir usual eagerness, con-
cerning the places where the Indians got the
gold which they wore by way of orname::,
they direEted them to countries situated to th
weft, in which gold was found in such profufi.:,
that it was applied to the most common ufw.
Instead of teering in quest of a country so i:
viting, which would have conduced him alioz
the coast of Yucatan to the rich empire .o
Mexico, Columbus was so bent upon his favoue:
scheme of finding out the strait which he f'-
posed to communicate with the Indian ocea:,
that he bore away to the eait towards the gali:

P Ovieco, lib. iii. c. 7. 9. Herrcxa, dec. I. L '.
c. I, z. Lic of Comuabu,, c. S3.

DarD

Darien. In this navigation he discovered all the
Cast of the continent, from Cape Gracias a
Dios, to a harbour which, on account of its
Eeautv and security, he called Porto Bello. He
earched, in vain, for the imaginary frait, through
which he expeced to make his way into an un-
'nown sea; and though he went on shore several
Lz.es, and advanced into the country, he did not
pnetrate so far as to cross the narrow isthmus
;hich separates the gulf of Mexico from the
creat southern ocean. He was so much delight-
e, however, with the fertility of the country,
,ad conceived such an idea of its wealth, from
:he specimens of gold produced by the natives,
:h.t he resolved to leave a small colony upon the
r-er Belem, in the province of Veragua, under
:.: command of his brother, and to return him-
:. to Spain [1o03], in order to procure what
,H requilite for rendering the establishment per-
:-_iert. But the ungovernable spirit of the
;-':.e under his command, deprived Columbus
::he glory of planting the first colony on the
continent of America. Their insolence and ra-
.:iioufncfs provoked the natives to take arms,
z--! as there were a more hardy and warlike race

.nen than the inhabitants of the islands, they

c:: of part of the Spaniards, and obliged the
: to abandon a station which was found to be
' -Lnable q.

This repulse, the first that the Spaniards met
:h from any of the American nations, was not
e only misfortune that besel Columbus; it was
I;i;Uved by a succession of all the disasters to

Hercr a,dec. I. lib. . c. 5, &c. Life of Columbus,
';, &c. Oviedo, ib, iii. c. 9.

which

which navigation is exposed. Furious hurricane,
with violent florms of thunder and lightning,
threatened his leaky vessels with deftru&on;
while his discontented crew, exhausted with i-.
tigue, and deflitute of provisions, was unwind?
or unable to execute his commands. One of il
ships perished; he was obliged to abandon an.
other, as unfit for service; and with the tvu
which remained, he quitted that part of the con.
tinent which in his anguish he named the Coa:
of Vexation r, and bore away for Hifpanil,.
New distresses awaited him in this voyage. H:
was driven back by a violent tempeit from the
coast of Cuba, his ships fell foul of one another,
and were so much shattered by the shock, tha
with the utmost difficulty they reached Jamaia
[June 24], where he was obliged to run then
aground, to prevent them from finking. The
measure of his calamities seemed now to be fil.
He was cafl ashore upon an island at a confide.
able distance from the only settlement of i
Spaniards in America. His ships were ruri
beyond the possibility of being repaired. To
convey an account of his situation to Hifpanio's,
appeared impracticable; and without this i: mi
vain to expea relief. His genius, fertile in
sources, and most vigorous in those perilou a-
tremities when feeble minds abandon themic;fc
to despair, discovered the only expedient whj
afforded any profpea of deliverance. He Li
recourse to the hospitable kindness of the natir,
who confidering the Spaniards as beings of
superior nature, were eager, on every ocabA
to minister to their wants. From them be c/

' La Costa de los Conuaftae.

t wa~~~:t

tined two of their canoes, each formed out of
he trunk of a single tree hollowed with fire, and
bo ims-fhapen and awkward as hardly to merit the
are of boats. In these, which were fit only
for creeping along the coast, or crossing from one
rde of a bay to another, Mendez, a Spaniard,
.cd Fiefchi, a Genoese, two gentlemen particu-
ar attached to Columbus, gallantly offered to
!t out for Hispaniola, upon a voyage of above
tirty leagues . This they accomplihed in ten
aevs, after surmounting incredible dangers, and
eduring such fatigues, that several of the In-
ia;.s who accompanied them funk under it, and
5ed. The attention paid to them by the go-
rernor of Hispaniola was neither such as their
courage merited, nor the distress of the persons
0frm whom they came required. Ovando, from
amean jealousy of Columbus, was afraid of al-
kwing him to set foot in the island under his
-,rernment. This ungenerous passion hardened
Li: leart against every tender sentiment, which
ret£eeion upon the services and misfortunes of
:hat great man, or compaflion for his own fel-
low-citizens involved in the fame calamities, muff
have excited. Mendez and Fiefchi spent eight
months in soliciting relief for theircommanderand
aiociates, without any profpea of obtaining it.

During this period, various paflions agitated
the mind of Columbus, and his companions in
dverfity. At firit the expectation of speedy
deliverance, from the success of Mendez and
Fiefchi's voyage, cheered the spirits of the molt
ctfponding. After some time the more timorous
began to fufpeEt that they had miscarried ia

' Oviedo, lib. iii. c. g.
VOL. i. u their

their daring attempt. [I504] At length, era
the most sanguine concluded that they had pe
rifhcd. The ray of hope which had broke a
upon them, made their condition appear now
more dismal. Despair, heightened by disappoint.
ment, fettled in every breast. Their last resource
had failed, and nothing remained but the pro.
fpeA of ending their miserable days among
naked savages, far from their country and thea
friends. The seamen, in a transport of rage,
rose in open mutiny, threatened the life of C-
lumbus, whom theyreproached as the author of
all their calamities, seized ten canoes, which he
had purchased from the Indians, and defpifig
his remonitrances and entreaties, made off wi'h
them to a distant part of the island. At the
fame time the natives murmured at the long
residence of the Spaniards in their country. Ai
their industry was not greater than that of thde
neighbours in Hispaniola, like them they found
the burden of supporting so many itrangers to be
altogether intolerable. They began to bring ia
provisions with reluctance, they furnished them
v ith a sparing hand, and threatened to withdraw
those supplies altogether. Such a resolution mul
have been quickly fatal to the Spaniards. Their
safety depended upon the good-will of the I:.
dians; and unless they could revive the admi
ration and reverence with which that simple peop'
had at first beheld them, destruction was unavoids
able. Though the licentious proceedings of the
mutineers had, in a great measure, effaced tholc
impressions which had been so favourable to the
Spaniards, the ingenuity of Columbus fuggeltd
a happy artifice, that not only restorcd b.-

heightres

eightened the high opinion which the Indians
bad originally entertained of them. By his kill
i aftonomy he knew that there was Ihortly to

a total eclipse of the moon. He assembled
al the principal persons of the diftria around
Ehi on the day before it happened, and, after
reproaching them for their fickleness in with.
rawing their affetion and assistance from men
Foom the) had lately revered, he told them, that
the Spaniards were servants of the Great Spirit
who dwells in heaven, who made and governs
the world; that he, offended at their refusing to
fipport men who were the objects of his peculiar
fvour, was preparing to punish this crime with
nemplary ftverity, and that very night the moon
lould withhold her light, and appear of a
hloodv hue, as a sign of the divine wrath, and
in emblem of the vengeance ready to fall upon
terr.. To this marvellous prediction some of
,-en litlened with the careless indifference pe.
c liar to the people of America ; others, with
.he credulous astonishment natural to barbarians.
Bt when the moon began gradually to be
darkened, and at length appeared of a red co-
locr, all were flruck with terror. They ran
with consternation to their houses, and returning
i.ilantly to Columbus loaded with provisions,
t.rew them at his feet, conjuring him to inter-
cede with the Great Spirit to avert the deftruc-
tron with -which they were threatened. Colum-
bus, seeming to be moved by their entreaties,
prmiicd to comply with their desire. The
edipfe went off, the moon recovered its fplen-

a:-r, and from that day the Spaniards were not
esry furnifled profusely with provisions, but the

u z natives8

natives,with fuperititious attention, avoided even
thing that could give them offence t.

During those tranfations, the mutineers ha1

made repeated attempts to pass over to Hifpe.
niola in the canoes which they had seized. BEt,
from their own mifcondu&, or the violence ci
the winds and currents, their efforts were all us
successfuL Enraged at this disappointment, the
marched towards that part of the island whet
Columbus remained, threatening him with ne
insults and danger. While they were advancin,
an event happened, more cruel and afflifing tha
any calamity which he dreaded from them. Tt
governor of Hispaniola, whose mind was f
filled with some dark suspicions of Columbus,
sent a small bark to Jamaica, not to deliver ha
distressed countrymen, but to spy out their con-
dition. Left the sympathy of those whom IL
employed should afford them relief, contrary to
his intention, he gave the command of this vsfd
to Efcobar, an inveterate enemy of Columbus
who adhering to his inftruftions with malignant
accuracy, caf anchor at some distance from the
island, approached the shore in a small boat, ob-
served the wretched plight of the Spaniards, de.
livered a letter of empty compliments to the ad
miral, received his answer, and departed. Whe
the Spaniards first descried the vessel standing
towards the island, every heart exulted, as if
the long-expeced hour of their deliverance had
at length arrived; but when it disappeared si
suddenly, they funk into the deepeftdeje&io;,
and all their hopes died away. Columbus alon,

t Life of Columbus, c. o03. Hrrera, dec. . lb. 11.
c. 5, 6. Eenzo, Hist. lib. i c. 14.

thu3g,

though he felt most sensibly this wanton insult
which Ovando added to his past negle&, retained
fouh corrpofure of mind, as to be able to cheer
his followvers. He assured them, that Mendez
nd Fiefchi had reached Hispaniola in safety;
that they would speedily procure ships to carry
them off; but as Efcobar's vessel could not take
them all on board, that he had refused to go with
her, because he was determined never to abandon
the faithful companions of his distress. Soothed
itth the expetation of speedy deliverance, and
dighted with his apparent generosity in attend-
ing mole to their preservation than to his own
ifety, their spirits revived, and he regained their
confidence U.

Without this confidence, he could not have
resifted the mutineers, who were now at hand.
All his endeavours to reclaim those desperate
rren had no effe& but to increase their frenzy.
Their demands became every day more extrava-
pnt, and their intentions more violent and
bloody. The common safety rendered it ne-
ctiary to oppose them with open force. Co.
Imbus, who had been long affliated with the
gout, could not take the field. His brother, the
adelantado, marched aga;nft them [May 2o0]
They quickly met. The mutineers reje&ed with
corn terms of accommodation, which were once
more offered them, and rulhed on boldy to the
atack. They fell not upon an enemy unpre-
Fpred to receive them. In the first shock, feve-
rl of their most daring leaders were slain. The
iclaDtado, lhofe strength was equal to his
' fe of Coliarbus, c. Io4. Herreia, dec. . lib. vi.

L.v 1urage

v 3 courage,

courage, closed with their captain, wounded, di.
armed, and took him prisoner x. At figt of
this, the reft fled with a dastardly fear, fuitab'
to their former insolence. Soon after, they fui
mitted in a body to Columbus, and bound tha.
selves by the most solemn oaths to obey al hu
commands. Hardly was tranquillity re-etabli.
ed, when the ships appeared, whose arrival Co.
lumbus had promised with great address, thoun
he could foresee it with little certainty. W;i
transports of joy, the Spaniards quitted an iftai2
in which the unfeeling jealousy of Ovando hi'
suffered them to languish above a year, expofdo
to misery in all its various forms.

When they arrived at St. Domingo [Aug. 13,
the governor, with the mean artifice of a vulge
mind, that labours to atone for insolence by fa.
vility, fawned on the man whom he envied, an
had attempted to ruin. He received Columbu
with the most fludied refpet, lodged him in hi
own houle, and distinguished him with evte
mark of honour. But amidt those over-a&i
demonstrations of regard, he could not coucn
the hatred and malignity latent in his heart. He
set at liberty the captain of the mutineers, whoa
Columbus had brought over in chains, to be tria
for his crimes, and threatened such as had 2L
hered to the admiral with proceeding to ajudic!
inquiry into their condut. Columbus fubmi;;d
in silence to what he could not redress; but Ed
covered an extreme impatience to quit a counrs
which was under the jurifdi&ion of a man wS:
had treated him, on every occasion, with inh

Life of Columbus, c. 107. Henera, dec. i. lii.
C. ll.

Dnaog

ssnity and injustice. His preparations were foou
fihed, and he set fail for Spain [Sept. 12],
with two ships. Difalters funilar to those which
bad accompanied him through life continued to
crfue him to the end of his career. One of
Ls vcffels being disabled, was soon forced back
to St. Domingo; the other, shattered by violent
forrs, failed fevtn hundred leagues with jury-
r.aits, and reached with difficulty the port of
St. Lucar [December] Y.
There he received the account of an event the
ooft fatal that could have befallen him, and
which completed his misfortunes. This was the
Ceath of his patroness queen Isabella [Nov. 9],
in hiofe justice, humanity, and favour, he con-
fded as his last resource. None now remained
to redress his wrongs, or to reward him for his
services and sufferings, but Ferdinand, who had
so long opposed and so often injured him. To
solicit a prince thus prejudiced against him, was
an occupation no less irksome than hopeless. In
this, however, was Columbus doomed to employ
the close of his days. As soon as his health was
in some degree re-established, he repaired to
court; and though he was received there with
civility barely decent, he plied Ferdinand with
petition after petition, demanding the punish-
ment of his oppressors, and the restitution of all
the privileges bestowed upon him by the capitu-
lation of one thousand four hundred and ninety-
two. Ferdinand amused him with fair words
and ur meaning promises. Instead of granting
Li; clain.s, he proposed expedients in order to

Lifr of Columb's, c. o03. Herrera, acc. i. lib. vi.

elude

# BOOK III.

elude them, and spun out the affair with such
apparent art, as plainly discovered his intention
that it should never be terminated. The de.
dining health of Columbus flattered Ferdinand
with the hopes of being soon delivered from a
importunate suitor, and encouraged him to per.
severe in this illiberal plan. Nor was he deceived
in his expectations. Disgusted with the ingra.
titude of a monarch whom he had served with
such fidelity and success, exhausted with the fa.
tigues and hard(hips which he had endured,
and broken with the infirmities which theft
bad brought upon him, Columbus ended his life
at Valladolid on the twentieth of May one thou.
sand five hundred and fix, in the fifty-ninth year
of his age. He died with a composure of mind
suitable to the magnanimity which diflinguilhed
his characer, and with sentiments of piety be.
coming that supreme refpei for religion, which
he manifeted in every occurrence of his lifez.

BOOK IIL
V ILE Columbus was employed in his las

voyage, several events worthy of notice hap.

pened in Hispaniola. The colonythere,the paent
and nurse of all the subsequent eftablifinenu
of Spain in the New World, gradually acquired
the form of a regular and prosperous society.

z Life of Columbus, c. tog. HarTra, dc_ I. lb. i-
c. 13, 14, 15.

The

The humane solicitude of Isabella to prote&
the Indians from oppression, and particularly the
proclamation by which the Spaniards were pro-
ibited to compel them to work, retarded, it is
a-e, for some time, the progress of improve-
rent. The natives who confidered exemption
L-fm toil as supreme felicity, scorned every allure-
r.tet and reward by which they were invited to
luour. The Spaniards had not a sufficient
L-mber of hands either to work the mines or
to cultivate the foil. Several of the first colo-
ris, who had been accuilomed to the service
cf the Indians, quitted the island, when deprived
f those initruments, without which they knew
rot how to carry on any operation. Many of
the new settlers who came over with Ovando,
sere seized with the distempers peculiar to the
cimnate, and in a short space above a thousand of
them died. At the fame time, the exa&ing one
ia1f of the product of the mines as the royal
fare, was found to be a demand so exorbitant,
".at no adventurers would engage to work them
upon such terms. In order to save the colony
:om ruin, Ovando ventured to relax the rigour
cf the royal edics. [J505] He made a new
I cifnbution of the Indians among the Spaniards,
zd compelled them to labour for a stated time,
in digging the mines, or in cultivating the
gound; but, in order to screen himfelffrom
the imputation of having fubjeEed them again
to servitude, he enjoined their masters to pay
them a certain fum, as the price of their work.
He reduced the royal share of the gold found in
the mines from the half to the third part, and
ion after lowered it to a fifth, at which it long

remained.

remained. Notwithf2anding Isabella's tendt
concern for the good treatment of the Indian,
and Ferdinand's eagerness to improve the royd
revenue, Ovando persuaded the court to approe
of both these regulations a.

But the Indians, after enjoying respite from

oppression, though during a short interval, now
felt the yoke of bondage to be so galling, tht
they made several attempts to vindicate ther
own liberty. This the Spaniards confidereda
rebellion, and took arms in order to reduce then
to fubjedion. When war is carried on betwen
nations whose Rfate of improvement is in any de.
gree similar, the means of defence bear some pro,
portion to those employed in the attack; and
in this equal contest such efforts must be made,
such talents are display)ed, and such pafioa
routed, as exhibit mankind to view in a fituatim
no less striking than interesting. It is one of
the noblest functions of history, to obfeT
and to delineate men at a junture when ther
minds are most violently agitated, and aU
their powers and passions are called forth. Hence
the operations of war, and the struggles betwea
contending fates, have been deemed by him
rians, ancient as well as modern, a capital zn
important article in the annals of human a;tios
But in a contest between naked savages, and
one of the most warlike of the European 1z.
tions, where science, courage, and discipline cl
one fide, were opposed by ignorance, timidit,
and disorder on the other, a particular detail .
events would be as unpleasant as uninftruire
If the simplicity and innocence of the Indian

a H~rrr, dec. z. lb. v. c. 3.

bd inspired the Spaniards with humanity, had
aftened the pride of superiority into compassion,
.ad had induced them to improve the inhabitants
o the New World, instead of oppressing them,
some sudden a&s of violence, like the too rigor-
ou chaitifements of impatient inftrutors, might
bate been related without horror. But, un-
srtunately, this consciousness of superiority
operated in a different manner. The Spaniards
were advanced so far beyond the natives of Ame-
rca in improvement of every kind, that they
rewed them with contempt. They conceived
the Americans to be animals of an inferior na-
tsre, who were not entitled to the rights and
pivileges of men. In peace, they fubjesied them
to servitude. In war, they paid no regard to
hose laws, which, by a tacit convention be.
teeen contending nations, regulate hostility,
nd fct some bounds to its rage. They con-
bdered them not as men fighting in defence of
ter liberty, but as slaves, who had revolted

a^init their mailers. Their caziques, when

Acen, were condemned, like the leaders of ban-
iSti, to the most cruel and ignominious punilfh

pats; and all their fubjets, without regarding
e diilinAion of ranks established among them,
wee reduced to the fame slate of abjet slavery.
'ith such a spirit and sentiments were hostilities
smed on against the cazique of Higuey, a
mince at the eastern extremity of the island.
his war was occasioned by the perfidy of the
nenihrds, in violating a treaty which they had
Ae with the natives, and it was terminated
7 hanging up the cazique, who defended his

people

people with bravery so far superior to that of h
countrymen, as entitled him to a better fate',

The conduc of Ovando, in another part e

the island, was still more treacherous and cnit
The province anciently named Xaragua, whia
extends from the fertile plain where Leogane a
now situated, to the western extremity of th
island, was subjef to a female cazique, named
Anacoana, highly refpeced by the natives. She,
from that partial fondness with which the womrn
of America were attached to the Europea:n
(the cause of which shall be afterwards a.
plained,) had always courted the friendfhi d
the Spaniards, and loaded them with bene'm.
But some of the adherents of Roldan har;i'
fettled in her country, were so much exafperatt
at her endeavouring to reitrain their exce.:s,
that they accused her of having formed a phi
to throw off the yoke, and to exterminate tL
Spaniards. Ovando, though he knew well whk
little credit was due to such profligate mi-,
marched, without further inquiry, tow-rid
Xaragua, with three hundred foot and fevtWT
horsemen. To prevent the Indians from taki:l
alarm at this hoft1e appearance, he gave out :
his sole intention was to visit Anacoana, to vr-.n
his countrymen had been so much indebted, 3
the moR respectful manner, and to regulate -i
her the mode of levying the tribute payabe :
the king of Spain. Ar.acoana, in ord:rto '
ceive this illulirious guelt with due honour, ,
fcmbled the principal men in her dominion;,
the :iumber of three hundred, and advaacir,

b Htrera, dec. i. lib. vL c. 9, lo.

r_

head of these, accompanied by a great crowd
pefons of inferior rank, the welcomed Ovanda
h songs and dances, according to the mode
fthe country, and conduced him to the place
her residence. There he was feasted for some
;i, with all the kindness of simple hospitality,
1 amnufed with the games and fpe&acles usual
ng the Americans upon occasions of mirth
ad fltivity. But, amidst the security which
;s inspired, Ovando was meditating the deftruc-
n of his unfufpicious entertainer and her sub-
-ts; and the mean perfidy with which he exe-
t:d this scheme, equalled his barbarity in
,,ing it. Under colour of exhibiting to the
ians the parade of an European tournament,
: advanced with his troops, in battle array,
cards the house in which Anacoana and the
.iJ.s who attended her were assembled. The
-f;try took possession of all the avenues which
to the village. The horsemen encompassed
house. These movements were the objec
iadmiration without any mixture of fear, un-
, upon a signal which had been concerted, the
Saniards suddenly drew their swords, and rushed

n the Indians, defenceless, and aitonifhed at
a of treachery which exceeded the concep-
a of undesigning men. In a moment Anaco-
: was fcured. All her attendants were seized

bound. Fire was set to the house; and,
Vthout examination or convilion, all these un-
ppy persons, the most illuftricus in their own
cuantry, were consumed in the flames. Ana.
ts.a ,ras reserved for a more ignominious fate.

; v-z carried in chains to St. Domingo, and,
:rthe formality of a trial before Spanish
tl. ..x x judges,

judges, she was condemned, upon the evidsen
of those very men who had betrayed her, tob
publicly hanged c.

Overawed and humbled by this atrocious trez

ment of their princes and nobles, who were ob
jects of their highest reverence, the peope i
all the provinces of Hispaniola submitted, wlid
out farther refifance, to the Spanilh yoku
Upon the death of Isabella, all the regulatio
tending to mitigate the rigour of their ferviti
were forgotten. The small gratuity paid t
them as the price of their labour was withdrawn
and at the fame time the talks imposed ups
them were increased. [1506] Ovando, witl
out any restraint, diftnbuted Indians among h
friends in the island. Ferdinand, to whom td
queen had left by will one half of the rerenz
arising from the fettlcments in the New Work
conferred grants of a similar nature upon h
courtiers, as the least expensive mode of re'.ra
ing their services. They farmed out the India
of whom they were rendered proprietor, t
their countrymen fettled in Hispaniola; and t:h
wretched people, being compelled to labour
order to satisfy the rapacity of both, the (x:
tions of their oppressors no longer knew rz
bounds. But, barbarous as their policy Wa
and fatal to the inhabitants of Hispaniola,
produced, for some time, very confiderabck
fe&s. By calling forth the force of a wh\
nation, and exerting it in one direction, the wr'i
ing of the mines was carried on with amnal:

C Ovicdo, lib. iii. c. Iz. Herrera, dec. I. lib. ri. c

Oviedo, lib. iii. .

c. . Rlacion dc dsru/c. de I la '
Gor Bin. ds 1u Ciaa, p. S

pidity and success. During several years, the
ild brought into the royal fmelting-houfes in
ilfp2niola amounted annually to four hundred
ad iixty thousand pesos, above a hundred thou.
ad pounds sterling; which, if we attend to the
Teat change in the value of money since the be-
inning of the sixteenth century to the present
ime, muds appear a considerable fum. Vast for-
anes were created, of a sudden, by some. Others
iffiated in ostentatious profusion, what they
cquired with facility. Dazzled by both, new
drenturers crowded to America, with the moit
ager impatience, to (hare in those treasures which
adenriched their countrymen; and, notwith-
anding the mortality occasioned by the un-
nithinefs of the climate, the colony continued
oincreafe d.
Ovando governed the Spaniards with wisdom
adjuftice, not inferior to the rigour with which

treated the Indians. He established equal
,i, and, by executing them with impartiality,
a.ufomed the people of the colony to rever-
nce them. He founded several new towns in
ferent parts of the island, and allured inhabit-
:-u to them, by the conceflion of various immu-
:3ss. He endeavoured to turn the attention of

Spaniards to some branch of induitry more
.'l than that of searching for gold in the
-es. Some flips of the sugar-cane having been

r.ght from the Canary islands by way of ex-
rt:nt, they were found to thrive with such
-retfe in the rich foil and warm climate to

Ech they were transplanted, that the cultiva-
-: of them soon became an objec of commerce.

! Herrera, dec x. lib. vi. c. i , &c.

x z Extensive

Extensive plantations were begun; fugar.worhi
which the Spaniards called ingenio':, from tA
various machinery employed in them, were erea
ed, and in a few years the manufacure of ti
commodity was the great occupation of the i
habitants of Hispaniola, and the most confide
able source of their wealth e.

The prudent endeavours of Ovando, to pn

mote the welfare of the colony, were powerrl
seconded by Ferdinand. The large remittanc
which he received from the New World open
his eyes, at length, with refpe&t to the i:
portance of those discoveries, which he h
hitherto asseted to undervalue. Fortune, E
his own address, having now extricated him o
of those difficulties in which he had been :
volved by the death of his queen [1507], a:
by his disputes with his fon-in-law about t
government of her dominions f, he had full le\I:
to turn his attention to the affairs of Amern
To his provident sagacity, Spain is indebted
many of those regulations which gradually for=
that system of profound, but jealous policy
which (he governs herdominions in theNewWor'
He erected a court, diffinguifhed by the tit!e
the Casa do Contratacion, or Board of Tr'
composed of persons eminent for rank and a'
lities, to whom he committed the adminiilrar-
of American affairs. This board affembied
gularly in Seville, and was invested with a diize
and extensive jurifdiation. He gave a re~g
form to ecclefialical government in Ame.
by nominating archbishops, bilhops, deans, ts;

e Oviedo, lib. iv. c. 8.
i Hi& of tht Reign of Chrles V. Vol. ii. p. ;, k:

t.

itr with clergymen of subordinate ranks, to
take charge of the Spaniards established there,
i well as of the natives who should embrace the
Christian faith. But, notwithstanding the ob-
fquious devotion of the Spanish court to the
papal fee, such was Ferdinand's solicitude to
:.-ecr,t any foreign power from claiming jurif-
cLi)n, or acquiring influence, in his new do.
r3i:ors, that he reserved to the crown of Spain
he sole right of patronage to the benefices in
America, and stipulated that no papal bull or
ra.date should be promulgated there, until it
.-. previously examined and approved of by
Li council. With the fame spirit of jealousy,
L- pro:iSbited any goods to be exported to Ame-
rca, or any person to fettle there, without a
.:cial liceuce from that councils.

iE: i,;,twithftanding this attention to the police

Lr' ',vtfare of the colony, a calamity impended
'k.:h threatened its dissolution. The original
:'":.hi;a!:t, on whose labour the Spaniards in
Hipariola depended for their prosperity, and
rTen their existence, wafted so fast, that the ex-
:-.rion of the whole race seemed to be inevitable.
V.T.en Columbus d(iscovered Hispaniola, the
.-rbr of its inhabitants xas computed to be
a: ieaft a million h. They were now reduced to
f'"r thousand in the space of fifteen years.
This consumption of the human species, no less
Razing than rapid, was the effe& of several con-
c:ir.g causes. The natives of the American
:'-:'!i were of a more feeble constitution than
the inhabitants of the other hemisphere. They

c Herrera, dec . lib. vi. c. 9 , ZQ.
I bid. dec, . .lib. x. c. 1,.

X 3 could

could neither periorm the fame work, nor,,
aure the fame fatigue, with men whose orga
were of a more vigorous conformation. Thi
lifilefs indolence in which they delighted to pvi
their days, as it was the effecA of their debilit,
contributed likewise to increase it, and renderd
them, from habit as well as constitution, inc.
pable of hard labour. The food on which the
subsisted afforded little nourishment, and they
were accustomed to take it in small quantiti
not sufficient to invigorate a languid frame, a:d
render it equal to the efforts of a&ive indftrr.
The Spaniards, without attending to those A.
culiarities in the contitution of the American,
imposed talks upon them, which, though r
greater than Europeans might have performed
with ease, were so disproportioned to the;
strength, that many funk under the fatigue, a:-
ended their wretched days. Others, prompted
by impatience and despair, cut short their owM
lives with a violent hand. Famine, brought cr
by compelling such numbers to abandon the c.
ture of their lands, in order to labour in the
mines, proved fatal to many. Diseases of varid,ci
kinds, tome occasioned by the hardships to which
they were exposed, and others by their inter.
course with the Europeans, who communicatd
to them some of their peculiar maladies, ccr.
pleted the desolation of the island. The Spaniari
being thus deprived of the instruments which
they were accustomed to employ, found it is-
pofiible to extend their improvements, or even to
carry on the works which they had already be.
gun. [I5cS] In order to provide an immtdia:
renuedy for an evil so alarming, Ovando pry

,fed to transport the inhabitants of the Lucayo
P.nds to Hispaniola, under pretence that they
ciht be civilized with more facility, and in.
fbed to greater advantage in the Christian re;
;,ion, if they were united to the Spanish colony,
ad placed under the immediate infpeEtion of the
cifionaries fettled there. Ferdinand, deceived

this artifice, or willing to connive at an a& of

n.ience which policy represented as necessary,
F;e his assent to the proposaL Several vessels
were fitted out for the Lucayos, the com-
,adcers of which informed the natives, with
wife language they were now well acquainted,
tLt they came from a delicious country, in
l.ich the departed ancestors of the Indians re-
v&d, by whom they were sent to invite their
&Lcendants to retort thither, to partake of the
!'; enjoyed there by happy spirits. That
i?lc people listened with wonder and credu-
E:;; and, fond of visiting their relations and
frends in that happy region, followed the
S-aniards with eagerness. By this artifice, above
i;r.y thousand were decoyed into Hispaniola, to
'-are in the fufftrings which were the lot of the
ihabitants of that island, and to mingle their
goans and tears with those of that wretched
re of men 1.
The Spaniards had, for tome time, carried
n their operations in the mines of Hispaniola
.ih such ardour as well as success, that these

.nr.ed to have engrossed their whole attention.
The spirit of discovery languished; and, since
t last voyage of Columbus, no enterprise of

Henera, dec. i. lib, v. ,C. 3. Ovicdo, lib. iii. c. 6
~>::e Hilt. c. 41.a

any

any moment had been undertaken. But as t
decrease of the Indians rendered it impossible-,
acquire wealth in that island with the fame n.
pidity as formerly, this urged some of the mot
adventurous Spaniards to search for new couL-
trics, where their avarice might be grati;di
with more f; cility. Juan Ponce de Leon, wko
commanded under Ovando in the eastern dift..-
of Hifp2riiola, passed over to the island of
St. Juan de Puerto Rico, which Columbus hai
discovered in his second voyage, and peneitr
into the interior part of the country. As
found the foil to be fertile, and expeced, f~r
fore symptoms, as well as from the inforn'.a:'
of the inhabitants, to discover mines of goc'd
the mountains, Ovando permitted him to a:.
tempt making a settlement in the island. Tli
was easily effec&ed by an officer eminent for cc;-
duit no less than for courage. In a few Yei
Puerto Rico was fubjeated to the Spanish g
vernment, the natives were reduced to fervitui&;
and, being treated with the fame inconfidcr-
rigour as their neighbours in Hispaniola, t:
race of original inhabitants, worn out with fat,:g-.
and fuffertr:gs, was soon extcrmiriated k.

About the fame time, Juan Diaz de Sol',

coniunction with Vincent Yanez Pinzon, o:.
Col.:nmbus's original companions, made a vy.g'
to the continent. They held the fame cc-e
which Colunmus had taken, as far as to :
island of Guanaios; but, standing from th.-e
t.- the weft, they discovercd a new and ext:-:5
provi:,ce, afterwards known by the nar.e:

k ir e.era, dcc. . lib. vii. c. i--+. Gom.ra Hist. c'
Plzcilon dc B. de 1s Cafe;, p. 1O,

Sy';-"i

facatan, and proceeded a considerable way along
se coast of that country'. Though nothing
Smtorable occurred in this voyage, it deserves
rtoice, because it led to discoveries of greater
dportance. For the fame reason, the voyage
of Sebastian de Ocampo must be mentioned.
Br the command of Ovando, he failed round
Cuba, and first discovered with certainty, that
ts country, which Columbus once supposed
t be a part of the continent, was a large
i.bd .

This voyage round Cuba was one of the last
occurrences under the administration of Ovando.
Ever since the death of Columbus, his son Dod
Diego had been employed in soliciting Ferdinand
t grant him the offices of viceroy and admiral
; the New World, together with all the other
*munities and profits which descended to him
by inheritance, in consequence of the original
caitulation with his father. But if these dig-
:.ies and revenues appeared so considerable to
Ferdinand, that, at the expence of being deemed
=just as well as ungrateful, he had wreited them
from Columbus, it is not surprising that he
Iaould be unwilling to confer them on his son.
Accordingly, Don Diego wafted two years in
i- :sant but fruitless importunity. Weary of
tiis he endeavoured at length to obtain, by a
!:gl ftntence, what he could not procure from
the favour of an inrerefted monarch. He com-
rtnced a suit againit Ferdinand before the coun.
dr which managed Indian affairs, and that court,
F4tiA integrity which refecEts honour upon its

Hcrera, dec. I. 1ib. vi. c. 17.
"' Ibid. dc. ,. lib. y. Vi. . .

proceed

proceedings, decided against the king, and f{
tained Don Diego's claim of the viceroyalt
together with all the other privileges ftipulte
in the capitulation. Even after this decre,
Ferdinand's repugnance to put a fubje& 6
pofeffion of such cxtenfive rights, might bt
thrown in new obstacles, if Don Diego had nu
taken a Ptep which interefred very powerful pa.
sons in the success of his claims. The fentern
of the council of the Indies gave him a title toa
rank so elevated, and a fortune so opulent, tha
he sur.d no difficulty in concluding a maniag,
with Donna Maria, daughter of Don Ferdinand
de Toledo, great commendator of Leon, and
brother of the duke of Alva, a nobleman of ta
firlt rank, and nearly related to the king. Tu
duke and his family espoused so warmly tl
cause of their new ally, that Ferdinand couk
not resist their solicitations. [ 5o9] He recalvd
Ovando, and appointed Don Diego his fx
ceffor, though, even in conferring this favotu
he could not conceal his jealousy; for he al
lowed him to assume only the title of governor,
not that of viceroy, which had been adjudged tL
belong to him ".

Don Diego quickly repaired to Hifpaniol,

attended by his brother, his uncles, his wv'
whom the courtesy of the Spaniards honourd
with the title of vice- queen, and a numerous rrtr.s,
of persons of both sexes, born of good familii.
He lived with a splendour and magniricetr
hitherto unknown in the New World; and ti:
family of Columbus feerned now to enjoy t't
honours and rewards due to his inventive gecri,

Hericra dec, . lib. vii, c. 4, &c.

of which he himself had been cruelly defrauded.
Tle colony itself acquired new lustre by the
cceffion of so many inhabitants, of a different
rak and character from moit of those who had
kitherto migrated to America, and many of
the most illustrious families in the Spanish set-
tkrnents are descended from the persons who
,, that time accompanied Don Diego Co-
Irmbus .

No benefit accrued to the unhappy natives
from this change of governors. Don Diego
was not only authorized by a royal edict to con-
t·ue the repart;mienios, or distribution of Indians,
but the particular number which he might grant
to every person, according to his rank in the
colony, was specified. He availed himself of
that permission, and soon after he landed at
S Domingo, he divided such Indians as were
I11 unappropriated, among his relations and
a.endants P.

The next care of the new governor was to
comply with an inftruc;ion which he received
fi'm the king, about fettling a colony in Cu-
tagua, a small island which Columbus had dif-
c;Tered in his third voyage. Though this bar-
rn spot hardly yielded subsistence to its wretched
khabitants, such quantities of those oysters
which produce pearls were found on its coast,
-;.at it did not long escape the inquisitive avarice
of the Spaniards, and became a place of con-
Aerable resort. Large fortunes were acquired
v the fishery of pearls, which was carried on
ith extraordinary ardour. The Indians, es-

' Ovijeo, lib. iii. c. i. P Recopila-ion de Leyes,
i. 'i. ur. 8 1. 1, z. Herrera, dec. i. lib. vii. c. io

pedaly

pecially those from the Lucayo islands, we
compelled to dive for them; and this dangerous
and unhealthy employment was an additio0l,
calanitv, which contributed not a little to t-e
extin&ion of that devoted race q.

About this period, Juan Diaz de Solis and

Pinzon set out, in conjuncion, upon a feco.:
voyage. They flood directly south, towards
the equinoAial line, which Pinzon had fonrder.
crossed, and advanced as far as the fortieth de.
gree of southern latitude. They were aftoniihcd
to find that the continent of America stretched
on their right hand, through all this vail ei.
tent of ocean. They landed in different place;,
to take possession in name of their sovereign;
but though the country appeared to be extrenmte
fertile and inviting, their force was so fra.i,
having been fitted out rather for discovery tha
making settlements, that' they left no colony be.
hind them. Their voyage served, however, .o
give the Spaniards more exalted and adequa:c
ideas with refpet to the dimensions of this nn
quarter of the globe r.

Though it was about ten years since C;-

lumbus had discovered the main land of Amc.
rica, the Spaniards had hitherto made no f..
tlerrment in any part of it. What had been so
long negle&ed was now seriously attempted, ard
with -cofiderable vigour, though the plan ito
this pur-ofe was neither formed by the crowr,
nor e'c(:uted at the expence of the nation, bs:
carried on by the enterpriling spirit of privz;:
adve' turers. This scheme took its rife sris

q Herrer3, dec. 1. lib. vii. c. 9. Gomar His. c. 7t-
'r tlrrera, dec. ,. lib. vii. c. 9.

AlSt'

ionfo de Ojeda, who had already made two
jrages as a discoverer, by which he acquired
,3iiderable reputation, but no wealth. But
· charaEter for intrepidity and conduct easily
-acured him associates, who advanced the mo-
ic requilite to defray the charges of the expe-
1;ion. About the fame time, Diego de Nicu-
taL, who had acquired a large fortune in His-
paiola, formed a limil3r design. Ferdinand en-
nuraged both; and though he refused to ad-
race the smallest fum, was extremely liberal of
ades and patents. He erected two govern-
ments on the continent, one extending from
Cape de Vela to the gulf of Darien, and the
c:.er from that to Cape Gracias a Dios; The
;rmer was given to Ojeda, the latter to Nicu-
ra. Ojeda fitted out a ship and two brigan-
;es, with three hundred men; Nicueffa, fix
Tt-Se!s, with seven hundred and eighty men.
m. failed about the fame time from St. Do-
-. igo for their refpe&iTe governments. In
c-idr to give their title to those countries some
?pearance of validity, several of the most emi-
'L-t divines and lawyers in Spain were employed
vJ prescribe the mode in which they (hould take
?ff!eflion of them'. There is not in the history
of mankind any thing more iingular or extra-
raant than the form which they devised for
-.-s purpose. They inftruced those invaders,
v. soon as they landed on the contiuent, to de-
cire to the natives the principal articles of the
C(irillan faith; to acquaint them, in particular,
.-'h the supreme jurisdiction of the pope over
hi the kingdoms of the earth; to inform them

' Herria, dec. x. lib. ii c. c5,
VOL. I, Y ot

of the grant which this holy pontiff had rma.
of their country to the king of Spain; to r.
quire them to embrace the doctrines of that rdi.
gion which the Spaniards made known to thei;
and to submit to the sovereign whose authorit
they proclaimed. If the natives refused to c0.
ply with this requisition, the terms of which
mulf have been utterly incomprehensible to W,
inltruted Indians, then Ojeda and Nicuiit
were asthorifed to attack them with fire ard
sword; to reduce them, their wives and childre,
to a state of servitude; and to compel them ½
force to recognize the jurifdition of the church
and the authority of the monarch, to which the
would not voluntarily subject themfelvest.

As the inhabitants of the continent could roS

at once yield assent to doEtrines too refined for
their uncultivated understandings, and explaind
ti them by interpreters imperfectly acquainted
with their language; as they did not conceti:
:ow a foreign prielt, of whom they had nerr
heard, could have any right to dispose of their
country, or ho.' an unknown prince should clzn
iirifdicxion over them as his fubjeEts; thcy
i1crce!y oppoftd the new invaders of their terr.
tories. Ojeda and Nict!iTa endeavoured to eficn
hv f!rrce what they could not accomplish by p-:.
fu;jiu,::. T!e contemporary writers enter inte a
vtr Irirnutc detail in relating their tranfatiom;
but as tlhey made no discovery of importance,
nor ciablifhcd any permanent settlement, th.c
adxe:!tures are not entitled to any confiderab:
plate in the general liltory of a period, vt:cs
run.a!.zic valour, struggling with incredjil.

Se NoTi. XXIII.

he".i

rJdips, diftinguifli every effort of the Spanish
;s. They found the natives in those coun-
,Lcs of which they went to assume the govern-
Bent, to be of a charater very different from
Lt.t of their countrymen in the islands. They
irre fierce and warlike. Their arrows were
sipped in a poison so noxious, that every wound
ws followed with certain death. In one en-
counter they flew above seventy us Ojeda's fol-
bwers, and the Spaniards, for the first time, were
aught to dread the inhabitants of the New
World. Nicueffa was opposed by people equally
rc;olute in defence of their possessions. Nothing
could soften their ferocity. Though the Spa-
r.ards employed every art to sooth them, and
to gain their confidence, they refused to hold
vu intercourse, or to exchange any friendly
ofce, with men whose residence among them
they confidered as fatal to their liberty and in-
csendence. [i510] This implacable enmity
of the natives, though it rendered an attempt to
ciablifh a settlement in their country extremely
diffcult as well as dangerous, might have been
firrr,ounted at length by the perseverance of the
Spaniards, by the superiority of their arms, and
their skill in the art of war. But every disaster
which can be accumulated upon the unfortunate,
c-.bined to complete their ruin. The loss of
t:!.r ships by various accidents upon an unknown
ca,2, the diseases peculiar to a climate the most
;.x:ous in all America, the want of provisions,
-,v. oidable in a country imperfectly cultivated,
c:.nli,,n among themflves, and the incessant
hc::ilitics of the natives, involved them in a fuc-
ci .on of calamities, the bare recital of which

Y 2 strikes

firikes one with horror. Though they receivri
two considerable reinforcements from Hifpanioh,
the greater part of those who had engaged i
this unhappy expedition, perished, in lets thaI
a year, in the most extreme misery. A few w.Ih
survived, fettled as a feeble colony at Santa
Maria el Antigua, on the gulf of Darien, unde
the command Ds Vasco Nugnez de Balboa, whe,
in the mos desperate exigencies, displayed such
courage and condue, a. first gained the coni.
dence of his countryn en, and marked him out 4
their leader in more splendid and successful ,n.
dertakings. Nor was he the only adventurer n
this expedition who will appear with lustre i
more important scenes. Francisco Pizarro vw
pne of Ojeda's companions, and in this fchoolo:
adversity acquired or improved the talents which
fitted him for the extraordinary actions which he
afterwards performed. Hernan Cortes, whoit
name became still more famous, had likewise en
gaged early in this enterprise, which routed a1
the active youth of Hifpapiola to arms; ba
the good fortune that accompanied him in hib
subsequent adventures, interposed to save him
from the diftafters to which his companions were
exposed. He was taken ill at St. Domingo tb.
fore the departure of the fleet, and detaincd
there by a tedious indifpoition u.

Notwithftandipg the unfortunate iffTe of ;':-

expedition, the Spaniards were not deterred fron
engaging in new schemes of a similar natu:e
When wealth is acquired gradually by the pr.

Herrerz, dec. x. lib. vii. c. 1, &c. Gornn:a H.

c. 57, 5% 59. Bcnzon Hist. lib. i. cap. 19-23. P. Mora,
dccd. zz.

fever:;

earing hand of industry, or accumulated by the
Mw operations of regular commerce, the means
-ployed arc so proportioned to the end attain-
, that there is nothing to t rike the imagina-
an, and little to urge on the active powers of
n: mind to uncommon efforts. But when large
,atunes were created almoit inRantaneoufly;
rsan gold and pearls were procured in exchange
: baubles; when the countries which produced
.tc rich commodities, defended only by naked
a-ges, might be seized by the first bold invader;
toics so singular and alluring, roused a wonder-

spirit of enterprise among the Spaniards, who
.;.cd with ardour into this new path that was
txned to wealth and distinction. While this
:'rit continued warm and vigorous, every at-
kcpt either towards discovery or conquest was
-;?Lauded, and adventurers engaged in it with
-iltion. The passion for new undertakings,
,;ich characeerifes the age of discovery in the
i::r part of the fifteenth and beginning of the
,:cnth century, would alone have been fuffi-
:.t to prevent the Spaniards from stopping short
t .tir career. But circumflances peculiar to
.Epaniola at this juncture, concurred with it in
:unding their navigation and conqueits. The
..c:ous treatment of the inhabitants of that
L;d having almost extirpated the race, many
i the Spanish planters, as I have already ob-

f!ed, finding it impossible to carry on their

pi .k with the fame vigour and profit, were
ouged to look out for settlements in some
ountry where people were not yet wafted by
£prefiion. Others, with the inconsiderate levity

ral to men upon whom wealth pours in with

Y 3 a fud-

a sudden flow, had squandered in thoughtlti
prodigality, what they acquired with ease, ax
were driven by necessity to embark in the m:o
desperate schemes, in order to retrieve their affain.
From all there causes, when Don Diego Colua-
bus proposed [l 1 i ] to conquer the island of Cc
ba, and to establish a colony there, many perions r,'
chief diffin&ion in Hispaniola engaged with ah.
crity in the measure. He gave the command of i;
troops destined for that fen-ice to Diego Vei;
quez, one of his father's companions in his :.
cond voyage, and who, having been long fetti,
in Hispaniola, had acquired an ample fortune,
with such reputation for probity and prudence,
that he seemed to be well qualified for condu.-
ing an expedition of importance. Three hundrX
men were deemed sufficient for the conquest
an island of above seven hundred miles in length
and filled with inhabitants. But they were
the fame unwarlike character with the peoDieu
Hispaniola. They were not only intimidated '
the appearance of their new enemies, but L:
prepared to resist them. For though, from A:
time that the Spaniards took poffeflion of t!:
adjacent island, there was reason to e:pec 1
descent on their territories, none of the frl
comrimunities into which Cuba was divided, b
either made any provision for its own defence.e
had formed any concert for their common fafec.
The only obftrution the Spaniards met with ga
from Hatue-, a cazique, who had fled from FH
paniola, and had taken possession of the eaift
extremity of Cuba. He flood upon the defendi
at their first landing, and endeavoured to c':
them Lack to their ships. His feeble tric?,

! . . - ,

however, were soon broken and dispersed; and
be himself being taken prisoner, Velasquez,
a:cording to the barbarous maxim of the Spa-
,Iards, confidered him as a slave who had taken
Zar.. againfs his mailer, and condemned him to
:;e flames. When Hatuey vas fastened to the
::Le, a Franciscan friar labouring to convert
'r., promised him immediate admittance into
:-e juys of heaven, if he would embrace the
Chrliiian faith. " Are there any Spaniards,"
*aIs he, after some pause, " in that region of
"bliss which you describe ?"-" Yes," replied
the monk, " but only such as are worthy and
"good."-" The best of them," returned the
:.r:'gn2nt cazique, " have neither worth nor
"goodness: I will not go to a place where I
"may meet with one of that accursed racex."
This dreadful example of vengeance struck the
people of Cuba with such terror, that they
icarcely gave any opposition to the progress of
their invaders; and Velasquez, without the loss
of a man, annexed this extensive and fertile island
to the Spanish monarchy Y.

The facility with which this important conquest
was completed, served as an incitement to other
undertakings. Juan Ponce de Leon, having
acquired both fame and wealth by the reduction
of Puerto Rico, was impatient to engage in some
new enterprise. He fitted outthree lhips at his own
expe:ce, for a voyage of discovery [15 21, and
his reputation soon drew together a refpe&able
'td)y of followers. He direAed his course towards
the Lucayo islands; and after touching at several

B. delas Casas, p. 40. r Herrera, dec. x. lib. i.
c 2, 3, &c. Oviedo, lib. xvii. c. 3. p. 179.

of them, as well as of the Bahama isles, he ftio,
to the south-west, and discovercd a countny i.
therto ur.:nown to the Spaniards, which he cdi>,
Florida, either because he fell in with it on Pals
Sundav, or on account of its gay and beautifl
appearance. He attempted to land in differe.t
places, but met with such vigorous oppofitia
from the natives, who were fierce and warlike,
as convinced him that an increase of force -Es
requisite to effec a settlement. Satisfied w'::
having opened a communication with a new
country, of whose value and importance he co:.
ceived very sanguine hopes, he returned to Puerto
Rico, through the channel now known by the
name of the Gulf of Florida.

It was not merely the paliion of searching for

new countries that prompted Ponce de Leon :o
undertake this voyage ; he was influenced by one
of those visionary ideas, which at that time often
mingled with the spirit of discovery, and rendered
it more active. A tradition prevailed among
the natives of Puerto Rico, that in the ille of
Limini, one of the Lucayos, there was a fountain
of such wonderful virtue as to renew the youth,
and recal the vigour of every person who bathed
in its salutary waters. In hopes of finding this
grand restorative, Ponce de Leon and his follow.
ers ranged through the islands, searching, with
fruitless solicitude and labour, for the fountain,
which was the chief objet of their expedition.
That a tale so fabulous should gain credit among
simple uninftru&ed Indians is not surprising.
That it should make any impression upon an
elightened people appears, in the present age,
atogethcr incredible. The sac, however, !

ccrtali;

c.ain; and the most authentic Spanish hifto-
r, s mention this extravagant sally of their cre-
cjlous countrymen. The Spaniards, at that
:.riod, were engaged in a career of a&ivity
v::ch gave a romantic turn to their imagination,
:i uailv presented to them strange and marvel-
3.; objedts. A New World was opened to their
;:;'. Thev visited ifands and continents, of
0fo!e exiitence mankind in former ages had no
c-ception. In those delightful countries nature
/:rTied to assume another form: every tree and
;.'t and animal was different from those of the
:.:ient hernirphere. They seemed to be tranf-
p:nted into enchanted ground; and, after the
a:ders which they had seen, nothing, in the
zrrnth and novelty of their admiration, appeared
: them so extraordinary as to be beyond belief.
i: the rapid succession of new and striking
i::nes made such impression even upon the found
:-derianding of Columbus, that he boasted of

sLaing found the feat of Paradise, it mill not ap-

wr itrange that Ponce de Leon should dream of
cHcovering the fountain of youth ~.

Soon after the expedition to Florida, a dif-
c;very of much greater importance was made in
a.other part of America. Balboa having been
r.:;cd to the government of the small colony at
'a.ta Maria in Darien, by the voluntary sus-
;:- of his associates, was so extremely desirous

t, atain from the crown a confirmation of their

'-;::..i, that he dispatched one of his officers

:P '.lrirtr, decad. p. 2oz. tnfayo Chronol. para la
e . la F oridr, por D. (ab. C.rdenas, p. i. Uviedo,

C' .

; · . 11. Herrcra, dtc. i. lib. ix. c. 5. Hii. de 1I
"ri- "it la Florida, par Garc. dt la Vega, lib. i. c. 3.

tR

to Spain, in order to solicit a royal corminic:,
which might nnveft him with a legal title to t.L
supreme command. Conscious, however, t¼i
he could not expect success from the patronaze
of Ferdinand's minimfers, with whom he was -.
conne&ced, or from negociating in a court to :Lt
arts of which he was a stranger, he endeavoured
to merit the dignity to which he aspired, 2-:
aimed at performing some signal fenrice t;-
would secure him the preference to every cor'..
petitor. Full of this idea, he made frequent .-
roads into the adjacent country, subdued fevc.-i
of the caziques, and colleEted a coniderkz
quantity of gold, which abounded more in tia
part of the continent than in the islands. In o03
of those excursions, the Spaniards contended wvi'
such eagerness about the division of some go0.,
that they were at the point of proceeding to :i-
of violence against one another, A young caziQce,
who was present, astonished at the high vli
which they set upon a thing of which he did no
discern the use, tumbled the gold out of tiu
balance with indignation; and, turning to th
Spaniards, "' Why do you quarrel (fays bh)
about such a trifle ? If you are so paffionatc:i
fond of gold, as to abandon your own coul;'.',
and to difurb the tranquillity of distant natt:l
for its fake, I will conduct you to a regi: .
where the metal which seems to be the c...c:
object of your admiration and desire, is so c--
mon that the meanest utensils are formed of it.'
Transportcd with what they heard, Balboa ia-
his companions inquired eagerly where -i
happy country lay, and how they might sa::
at it. He informed them that at the dialr-

" funs, that is of fix days journey towards

sout, they should discover another ocean,

t-r to which this wealthy kingdom was situ-
r-r; but if they intended to attack that power-
,i'; te, they mult assemble forces far superior in
I:-Scr and strength to those with which they
-I. a:'!pcared a.

This was the first information which the Spa-
-rd- received concerning the great southem
o--, or the opulent and extensive country
- n afterwards by the name of Peru. Balboa
::- now before him objects suited to his bound-
-. ambition, and the enterprising ardour of his
:is. He immediately concluded the ocean
i.;ch the cazique mentioned, to be that for
-ht'i C'jii:mbu5 had searched without success in
i5 part us America, in hopes of opening a more
'-t con.!nunication with the East Indies; and
c onecEured that the rich territory which had
t- dcfcribed to him, must be part of that vast
_ opulent region of the earth. Elated with
: idea of performing what so great a man had
:-:rpted in vain; and eager to accomplish a
o,.-rv wrhich he knew would be no less ac-
:-2ble to the king than beneficial tohis country,
'as impatient until he could set out upon
:i cterprife, in comparison of which all his
r.cr exploits appeared inconsiderable. But
-.ious arrangement and preparation were re-
.:ite to ensure success. He began with court-
ar!d securing the friendship of the neighbour-
- caziqucs. He sent some of his officers to
:!pniola with a large quantity of gold, as a

Hrnera, cec. . lib. ix. c. , Gcara, c. 60. P.
r'-::, ;(id. p.
cp9.

proof

proof of his past success, and an earnef of his f.
ture hopes. By a proper distribution of tit
they secured the favour of the governor, an
allured volunteers into the service. A confide.
able reinforcement from that island joined hi,
and he thought himself in a condition to atte-n.
the discovery.

The ifthrbms of Darien is not above sixty rnri

in breadth; but this neck of land, which bird
together the continents of North and Sou:i
America, is fSrengthened by a chain of lo.tyl
mountains firetching through its whole extena
which render it a barrier of solidity sufficient u
reflii the impu!fe of two opposite oceans. Te
mountains are covered with forests almost inc.
ceffible. The valleys in that moist climate
where it rains during two-thirds of the year, .t
marrny, .and so frequently overflowed, that ti
inhabitants find it neeeffary, in many places, u
build their houses upon trees, in order to k
elevated at some distance from the damp so,
and the odious reptiles engendered in the putrA
waters b. Large rivers rush down with an ir-
petuous current from the high grounds. Inl
region thinly inhabited by wandering fagaz,
the hand of indufry had done nothing to ml.-
gate or correct those natural disadvantages. To
march across this unexplored country,with no o;h
guides but Indians, whose fidelity could be liE:
truiled, was, on all thofc accounts, the bolddt
enterprise on which the Spaniards had hithtcr
vertured in the New World. But the intrepidi
of Balboa was such as difRinguifhed him amo0i
his countrymen, at a period when every adzs

b P. Ma!ryr, dead p. p. S.

trf

.er was conspicuous for daring courage E 1 13 ].
or was bravery his only merit; he was prudent
coniuct, generous, affable, and possessed of
Kit popular talents which, in the most desperate

:crtakings, inspire confidence and secure at-

Lnment. Even after the jundtion of the vo-
t-eers from Hispaniola, he was able to mnfter
v an hundred and ninety men for his expe-
;on. But they were hardy veterans, inured to
clir.ate of America, and ready to follow him
?ough every danger. A thousand Indians
:-ered them to carry their provisions; and to
:lckte tl;eir v.arlike arra), the) took with them
-21 of those fierce dogs, nwhich were no less
nidaLlt than dcitructise to their naked

Balboa fct out upon this important expedition

it.e firit of September, about the time that
peeriodical rains began to abate. He pro-
:id bv sea, and without any difficulty, to the
:orics of a cazique whose friendship he had
-ied; but no sooner did he begin to advance

' t'he interior part of the country, than lie
retarded by every obflacle, which he had
:,n to apprehend, from the nature of the
tory, or the difpoiition of its inhabitants.
-e ot the caz7i;cs, at his approach, fled ts
'. ountains with all their people, and carried
or dtliroyed whatever could afford subsistence
his troops. Others collcted their fulbjecs,
order to oppose his progress, and he quickly
rcei.ed vhat an arduous undertaking it was,
con:;uct such a body of men through hostile
,.ons, across swamps and rivers, and woods,

bct had never been passed but by itraggling
VCL. i. a Indians,

Indians. But by fiaring in every hardship
the mcaneft soldier, by appearing the for,
to meet every danger, by promiling confi'--
to his troops the enjoyment of honour and r
superior to what had been attained by the r
successful of their countrymen, lie inspired .
with such enthusiastic resolution, that thev
lowed him without murmuring. When the-
penetrated a good way into the mcuntai:.-,
powerful cazique appeared in a narrow -
with a numerous body of his fub'jets, to ob:ir;j
their progress. But men who had furmot-.:
so many obltacles, dcfpifed the opposition of 'I
feeble enemies. They attacked them with ihk>
tuofity, and having disperscd them with ..:
ease and great slaughter, continued their rr.2ri
Though their guides had represented the breci
of the isthmus to be only a journey of fix dn
they had already spent twenty-five in foc:'
their way through the woods and mountra
Many of them were ready to fink under iad
uninterrupted fatigue in that sultry ciir:;
several were taken ill of the dysentery and oc
difcafes frequent in that country, and all be"'
impatient to reach the period of their labours -
fufftrings. At length the Indians aiT-red t'-.
that from the top of the next mountain
should dilcovcr the ocean which was the c-
of their viihes. When, with infinite toil, :
had clirr.ebd up the greater part of that :'-
afccnt, Balboa commanded his men to liil:,
advanced alone to the summit, that he rmi":.:
the firl who should enjoy a spectacle nwh.'
had so long desired. As soon a3 he bete.:
South Sea stretching in endlcis profpec:.

'"~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~4
1Aa~o~a d&-rorerrr b~t S4MT73i ~~.i

,, he fell on his knees, and lifting up his hands
,iieaven, returned thanks to God, who had
s;duced him to a discovery so beneficial to his
mstrv, and so honourable to himself. His
irorers, observing his transports of joy, rushed
rw-ard to join in his wonder, exultation, and
ctitude. They held on their course to the
-.-c with great alacrity, when Balboa advancing
: :o the middle in the waves with his buckler

: sword, took possession of that ocean in

a: same of the king his maser, and vowed
&s cfend it, with these arms, againil all his

aiies .

.That part of the great Pacific or Southern

atn, which Balboa first discovered, 1 ill retains
i name of the Gulf of St. Michael, which he
We to it, and is situated to the east of Panama.
romfeveral of the petty princes, who governed

Iihe districts adjacent to that gulf, he extorted
i7tfions and gold by force of arms. Others
it them to him voluntarily. To these accept-
:-e presents, some of the caziques added a
rafiderable quantity of pearls; and he learned
bom them, with much satisfaction, that pearl
l-furs abounded in the sea which he had newly
:Fovered.

Togthler with the acquisition of this wealth,

hih frved to sooth and encourage his follow-
i, he received accounts which confirmed his
ci!; c hopcs of future and more extensive bene-
iroin the expedition. All the people on the
t of the South Sea concurred in informing
'la. there was a mighty and opulent king-
.:--ic. G- . lib. x. c. i, &c. Gcmara, c. 62, &c;
.;.I.::j, ccad. p. zo , &c.

z 2 domn

dom situated at a considerable distance toward
the south-east, the inhabitants of which had tan
animals to carry their burdens. In order t
give the Spaniards an idea of these, they &Fe
upon the sand the figure of the Llana, or
fhcep, afterwards found in Peru, which t*;
Peruvians had taught to perform such fer;i:1
as they described. As the Llama, in its for-,
nearly resembles a camel, a beast of burm
deemed peculiar to Asia, this circumitanc. ui
conjunction with the difcoverv of the pearls, :-
other noted prodlucion of that country, teali.
to confirm the Spaniards in their mirtaken thcan
with refpet to the vicinity of the New Wo0-
to the Ealt Indies a.

But though the information which Bali

received from the people on the coaf, as wc]
as his own conjecures and hopes, rendered hia
extremely impatient to visit this unknown coa>
try, his prudence restrained him from attempt.
ing to invade it with an handful of men, x.
haufted by fatigue, and weakened by difeafs '.
He determined to lead back his followers, atpr.
sent, to their settlement at Santa Maria in Dars,
and to return next feafol with a force more ias.
quate to such an arduous enterprise. In olrd
to acquire a more extensive knowledge of ia
iithmus, he marched back by a different rosut
which he found to be no less dangerius ad
difficult than that which he had formerly ta"k.
But to men elated with success, and animna:'
with hope, nothing is iinurmountable. Balia
returned to Santa Maria [ 514], from which hi
bad been absent four months, with greater gbir
d Hrrera, dec. . lib. io. c. z. e See NOTE XX;.

a:.

iai more treasure than the Spaniards had acquired
J any expedition in the New World. None of

h,?ba's officers distinguished thenmflves more in

i;i fervic than Francisco Pizarro, or aiifted
r;:h greater courage and ardour in opening a
crimcuuiication with those countries, in which

was deilined to a&t soon a molt illustrious
Lalboa's firfl care was to fend information to

oisn of the important discovery which he had

a:e; and to demand a reinforcement of a thou-
.;' men, in order to attempt tile conquest of
at opulent country, concerning which he had
:cc.ived such inviting intelligence. The first
_count of the discovery of the New \World
il-dly occafiuned greater joy, than the unex-
:--.d tidings that a passage was at lars found to
. great Southern Ocean. The communication
i;th the Ealt Indies, by a course to the westward
athe line of demarcation, drawn by the pope,
.;emed now to be certain. The vast wealth
iiici flowed into Portugal from its settlements
ad corquets in that country, excited the envy
ad calld forth the emulation of other itates.
Fcai:tand riprd now to corne in for a share in
ai, ucra:;,'c commerce, and in his cagcrnefs to
.sira: it, was willing to make an effort beyond
;-at balboa required. But even in this exertion,
i jalou, policy, as well as the fatal antipathy
dlonieca, now bishop of Burgos, to every man
« merit who ditAinguifhed himself in the New
g0Ad, wsere conspicuous. Notwithstanding
kiboa's recent fenrices, which marked him out
' Hcnra, dec. I. Ib . x. c. -6. Gmara, c. 64.
} 2 'r,: ,, c.c. . ;-,-, c..

Z 3 as

as the most proper person to finish that grez
undertaking which he had begun, Ferdinand wa.
so ungenerous as to overlook these, and to a
point Pedrarias Davila governor of Darien. H.
gave him the command of fifteen stout veffls
and twelve hundred soldiers. Thefc were fitte
out at the public expence, with a liberality whici
Ferdinand had never displayed in any formr
armament destined for the New World; ac
such was the ardour of the Spanish gentlemen
follow a leader who was about to conduc the:
to a country, where, as fame reported, they h
only to throw their nets into the sea and drs
out gold g, that fifteen hundred embarked c
board the fleet, and if they had not been r
strained, a much greater number would have e.
gaged in the service h.

Pedrarias reached the gulf of Darien withor

any remarkable accident, and immediately fe:
some of his principal officers ashore to infor
Balboa of his arrival, with the king's commiffio
to be governor of the colony. To their aflonii
ment, they found Balboa, of whose great c
ploits they had heard so much, and of who
opulence they had formed such high ideas, cA
in a canvas jacket, and wearing coarse hempc
sandals used only by the meanest peasants, c
ployed, together with some Indians, in thatchi;
his own hut with reeds. Even in this siep
garb, which corresponded so ill with the c
pedations and wishes of his new gueits, Balb
received them with dignity. The fame of
discoveries had drawn so many adventurers fro

I Herrera, dec. i. lib. x. c. 4. Ibid. dec. I. io.
c 6, 7. P. Martyr, dec. p. 177. i6,.

te ifands, that he could now muster four hun-
bred and fifty men. At the head of those daring
rterans, he was more than a match for the forces
w'ich Pedrarias brought with him. But though
his troops murmured loudly at the injustice of
the king in fuiperfeding their commander, and
csnmplained that strangers would now reap the
f-uts of their toil and success, Balboa fuibmitted
with implicit obedience to the will of his fove-
ign, and received Pedrarias with all the defer-
ence due to his chara&er .

Notwithstanding this moderation, to which
Pedrari2s owed the peaceable poffeTion of his

vYernment, he appointed a judicial inquiry to
be made into Balboa's conduct, while under the
comrrnmad of Nicueffa, and imposed a considerable
fne upon him, on account of the irregularities of
which he had then been guilty. Balboa felt
sensibly the mortification of being subjected to
trial and to punishment in a place where he had
so lately occupied the first station. Pedrarias
could not conceal his jealousy of his superior
.erit ; so that the resentment of the one, and
the envy of the other, gave rife to diffenfiona
extremely detrimental to the colony. It was
threatened with a calamity still more fatal. Per
drarias had landed in Darien at a most unlucky
time of the year [July], about the middle of
the rainy season, in that part of the torrid zone
where the clouds pour down such torrents as
are unknown in more temperate climates k. The
illage of Santa Maria was featcd in a rich plain,
tuvironed with marshes and woods. The con,

' Herrera, dec. i. lib. x. c. 13, 14.
' .r.cird Hist-, 'ia;ucll de P'Air tomn. i. p 04.

Rtitutiox

ititution of Europeans was unable to withifand
the peltilential influence of such a situation, in a
climate naturally so noxious, and at a fealon so
peculiarly unhealthy. A violent and deftructve
malady carried off many of the soldiers who
accompanied Pedrarias. An extreme scarcity 0o
provisions augmented this diflrefs, as it rendered
it impossible to find proper refreshment for the
sick, or the necessary sustenance for the healthyl.
In the space of a month, above fix hundred pr.
sons perished in the utmost misery. Dejecion
and despair spread through the colony. Many
principal persons solicited their dismission, and
were glad to relinquish all their hopes of wealth,
in order to escape from that pernicious region.
Pedrarias endeavoured to divert those who re.
mained from brooding over their misfortunes,
by finding them employment. With this view,
he sent several detachments into the interior parts
of the country, to levy gold among the natives
and to search for the mines in which it wai
produced. Those rapacious adventurers, more
attentive to present gain than to the means of faci-
litating their future progress, plundered without
dilfintion wherever they marched. Regardlef
of the alliances which Balboa had made wi'
several of the caziques, they stripped them of
every thing valuable, and treated them, as wdl
as their subje&s, with the utmost insolence and
cruelty. By their tyranny and exations, which
Pedrarias, either from want of authority or i
inclination, did not refirain, all the countrs
from the gulf of Darien to the lake of Nicaraga
was desolated, and the Spaniards were incos-

J Herrcra, dec. 1. lib. x. c. 14. P. Martyr, dec. p.:7:.

fiderate'i

e-rately deprived of the advantages which they
aight have derived from the frlendfhip of the
Eatives, in extending their conquests to the
South Sea. Balboa, who saw with concern that
,ucli ill-udged proceedings retarded the execu-
ticn of lis favourite scheme, sent violent remon-
trances to Spain against the imprudent govern-
rent of Pedrarias, which had ruined a happy
nd flourishing colony. Pedrarias, on the other
bhad, accused him of having deceived the king,
br c-.agnifying his own exploits, as well as by
afaIfe representation of the opulence and value
d the country m.

Ferdinand became sensible at length of his
inprudence in superseding the most afive and
cpericnced officer he had in the NewWorld,
ci, by way of compcnfation to Balboa, ap-
t;-':td him adelantado, or lieutenant-governor
c. the countries upon the South Sea, with very
nc:rrive priv;ileges and authority. At the fame
tlre he enjoined Pedrarias to support Balboa in
2 his operations, and to consult with him con-
cerning every measure which he himself pursued.
[1515] But to effef such a sudden transition
,om inveterate enmity to perfcEt confidence,
aceeded Ferdinand's power. Pedrarias con-
ti.ued to treat his rival with neglet; and Bal-
boa's fortune being exhaulfed by the payment of
his fine, and other exactions of Pedrarias, he
could ilt make suitable preparations for taking
pofcfilion of his new government. At length,
by the inrcrpofition and exhortations of the bishop

' Herrera, dec. I. lib. x. c. i5. dec. z. c. I, &c.
Co-rr.a, c 66. P. Martyr, dec. 3. c. 10. lelacion dc
B. c: las Casas, p. 12.

no

of Darien, they were brought to a reconcilation;
and, in order to cement this union more firrnl
Pedrarias agreed to give his daughter in marniaz
to Balboa. [1516] The first effect of th
concord was, that Balboa was permitted to m.i
several small incursions into the country. The.
he conducted with such prudence, as added to th
reputation which he had already acquirc-
Many adventurers resorted to him, and, with tu:
countenance and aid of Pedrarias, he begant
prepare for his expedition to the South Sa
In order to accomplish this, it was necessary -
build vefTels capable of conveying his troops::
those provinces which he purposed to invad-
[I517] After surmounting many obstacles, ar-
enduring a variety of those hardShips whici
were the portion of the conquerors of Amcric
he at length finished four small brigantines. I:
these, with three hundred chosen men, a forc
superior to that with which Pizarro aftervard
undertook the fame expedition, he was ready t
fail towards Peru, when he received an unex
peted meflage from Pedrarias ". As his reco:
ciliation with Balboa had never been cordial, :'.
progress which his fon-in-law was making revir;e
his ancient enmity, and added to its rancour
He dreaded the prosperity and elevation or
man whom he had injured so deeply. He ls:
peaed that success would encourage him to air
at independence upon his jurifdi&ion ; and r.
violently did the paflions of hatred, fear, and
jealousy operate upon his mind, that, in order tr
gratify his vengeance, he scrupled not to dc;;::
an entcrprife of the greatest moment to :i

Heir ra, dec. . lib. i. c. 3. lib. ii. c. II. 1 3.
I3 .

countis.

c.tntrr. Under pretexts which were false, but
-'ufble, he desired Balboa to postpone his voyage
i a fIrtt time, and to repair to Acla, in order
:;i he might have an interview with him.
f:',ba, with the unfufpicious confidence of a
:r. coinfcious of no crime, instantly obeyed the
f-.rr.ons; but as soon as he entered the place,
. -7as arrestcd by order of Pedrarias, whose im-
-:er.ce to satiate his revenge did not susser him
: l.-'if oni in confinement. Jndges were
-mretciatel- appointed to proceed to his trial.
.- accusation of disloyalty to the king, and of
.. :tcr.tin to revolt against the governor, was
-:"-:r d against him. Sentence of death was
'-.:;.'.i:ccd; and though the judges who passed
. ccondcd by the whole colony, interceded
i;.~l. v for his pardon, Pedrarias continued in-
:, n.!ii!; and the Spaniards beheld, with afto-
:'?-r.cnt and sorrow, the public execution of
;-n w-horr they universally deemed more ca-
:'ic than any who had borne command in
/.-.crica, of forming and acconiplifhiug great
,5gns5 . Upon his death, the expedition which
t !,ad planned was relinquished. Pedrarias, not-
:}.gfa:. ding the ;io;ence and injustice of his pro-
:.dir-fs, v as not only fcrecred from punishment
Z: tlc powerful patronage of the bishop of
J:roT5s and other courtiers, but continued in
:'wcr. Soon after, he obtained permission to

c.t.e the colony from its unwholesome ftatioh
s Santa Maria to Panama, on the opposite fide
:: hE ifhmus ; and though it did not gain
-c! in point of healthfulness by the change,
::.; con:mrcdious situation of this new fettle-

O Heerr a, dec. z. lib. ii. c. 2 , za.

ment

ment contributed greatly to facilitate the fubfe.
quent conquests of the Spaniards in the ex.
tensive countries situated upon the Souther.
Ocean P,

During these tr-nfactions in Darien F'51;] ,

the hiitory or which it was proper to carry oa Ja
an uninterrupted tenour, several important evCres
occurred with refped to the difcoveiy, 'the cyj.
quest, and government, of other provinces in tlc
New World. Ferdinand was so intent upJa
opening a communication with the Molucca or
Spice Islands by the weit, that, in the year (.-
thousand five hundred and fifteen, he fitted i,:
two Ihips at his o:wn expence, in order to .:.
tempt such a voyage, and gave the cor..:
of them to Juan Diaz de Solis, wh-o w''
deemed one of the molf skilful navigators i
Spain. He isood along the coast of S'u:h
America, and on the firlt of January one tiio.-
sand five hundred a sixteen, entered a n;T
which he called janciro, where an exten:.;c
commerce is now ca-ried on. From thence 'e
proceeded to a spacious bay, whc ih he fupp'ci
to be the entrance into a firait that conm-.:.--
cated with the Indian Ocean ; but upon ad.:.-
ci;Ig farther, he found it to be the mouta us
Rio de Plata, one of the vast rivers by oh.:
the southern continent of America is wat;rri
In endeavouring to make a defccnt in i.s
country, De Solis and several of his crew v-':e
slain by the natives, who, in fight of the fn:--
cut their bodies in pFices, roasted and dero-cd
them. Discouraged with the loss of their cc:-
mander, and terrified at this shocking fpecaclt, '

P Hcerera, dec,. .lib. iv. c. I.

f.:.

-ring Spaniards set fail for Europe, without
,-iz at any farther discovery . Though this

-::mt proved abortive, it was not without be-
/:. It turned the attention of ingenious men
-::.: course of navigation, and prepared the

r for a more fortunate voyage, by which, a

; vtar polterior to this period, the great de-

-r tr.h Ferdinand had in view was accom-

'-in' h the Spaniards were thus aftively em-
;!'ii in extending their discoveries and fettle-
::; in America, they fill confidered Hifpa-
: a thcir princip.l colony, and the feat of

;:'. Don Diego Columbus wanted

.lr i:; iination nor abilities to have rendered
:: -cniLrs of this colony, who were most im-

r

: I;:' r,dcr his jurisdiction, prosperous and

-:L. lut he wvas circumscribed in all his
::-::iny. by the suspicious policy of Ferdinand,

;,on ev;.ry occalion, and under pretexts the
.. frivolous, retrenched his privileges, and en-
c .-r-d the treasurer, the judges, and other
:.rdinate officers, to counteract his measures,
:- .o dispute his authority. The most valuable
.-- ga-:'e which the governor pofflffed, was
": c diiributing Indians among the Spaniards

:d in the iland. The rigorous servitude

*:::.oe unhappy men having been but little miti-
*:cs bt all the regulations in their favour, the
;crtr of parceiling out such necessary inftru-
:'t, of labour at pleasure, secured to the go-
-..,r great influence in the colony. In order
'.:u iJ him of this, Ferdinand created a new
:-.:,, .vwh the power of difiributing the In-

c'C.- , de. 2. lib. i. c. 7. P. Martyr. decad. p. 117,
'CL . A A dians,

dians, and bestowed it upon Rodrigo Albu
querque, a relation of Zapata, his confiders-
minister. Mortified with the injustice, as wd
as indignity, of this invasion upon his right, i:
a point so essential, Don Diego could no longe
remain in a place where his power and conle
quence were almost annihilated. He repaire
to Spain with the vain hopes of obtaining r
dtfs r. Albuquerque entered upon his ofic
with all the rapacity of an indigent adventure
impatient to amass wealth. He began Mi
taking the exact number of Indians in the ilanc
and found, that from sixty thousand, who,
the year one thousand five hundred and eig':
survived after all their sufferings, they were n;
reduced to fourteen thousand. Thele he thrr
into fepa;ate divilions or lots, and bestowed the
upon such as were willing to purchase thema
the highcel price. By this arbitrary dilfributio
several of the natives were removed from the
original habitations, many were taken from the
ancicnt malters, and all of them fubjeced:
heavier burdens, and to more intolerable labour
in order to reir.burfe their new proprietoo
Those additional calamities completed th
miferr, and hastened on the extinction of th
wretched and innocent race of men .

The violence of these proceedings, togethe

with the fatal consequences which attendte
them, not only excited complaints among fui
as thought themselves aggrieved, but touch,
the hearts of all who retained any sentiment,' c
humanity. From the time that ecclekfiatk

Herrera, dec. l. lib. ix. c. 5. lib. x. c. 12.
' HcircZa, dec. i. lib. x. c. 1..

2 gta

5cre sent as inftrucors into America, they per-
cived that the rigour with which their country.
men treated the natives, rendered their ministry
;-ogether fruitless. The miflionaries, in con-
ormity to the mild spirit of that religion which
hey were employed to publhfh, early remon-
rated against the maxims of the planters with
rcptct to the Americans, and condemned the
riarlimienlos, or dzfiribulitns, by which they
-cre given up as slaves to their conquerors, as

less contrary to natural justice and the pre-
its of Christianity, than to found policy.
he Dominicans, to whom the inftruaion of
'_k Americans was originally committed, were
v.ft vehement in testifying against the reparti.
:.'oj:. In the year one thousand five hundred
L-d lteven, Montefino, one of their most emi-
:it preachers, inveighed against this practice
; the great church at St. Domingo, with all
le impetuosity of popular eloquence. Don
Diego Columbus, the principal officers of the
JOlny, and all the laymen who had been his
:arcrs, complained of the monk to his fupe.
rers; but they, instead of condemning, ap-
j;uddl his docrine, as equally pious and sea.

btible. The Franciscans, influenced by the
,;t o opposition and rivalfhip which subsists
k:vwetn the two orders, discovered some incli-
W;ion to take part with the laity, and to es-
y. fe the defence of the rfpartimientos. But as
'- could not with decency give their avowed
;probation to a system of oppression, so repug-
-': to the spirit of religion, they endeavoured
a lliate what they could not justify, and al-
k--:, in excuse for the conduct of their coun-

A A 2 tryliictll

trymen, that it was impossible to carry on any
improvement in the colony, unless the Spaniard
possessed such dominion over the natives, tht
they could compel them to labour .

The Dominicans, regardless of such politicl

and intereited considerations, would not relax
in any degree the rigour of their ftntiment,,
and even restsed to absolve, or admit to tL:
sacrament, such of their countrymen as continued
to hold the natives in servitude u. Both parties
applied to the king for his decision in a mat:e
of such importance. Ferdinand empowered a
committee of his privy-council, assisted by for:
of the most eminent civilians and divines ;i
Spain, to hear the deputies sent from HifpaniK,
in support of their respective opinions. Afl:
a long discussion, the speculative point in coc:
troverfy was determined in favour of the D3
minicans, the Indians were declared to be a fr:
people, entitled to all the natural rights of mec
but, notwithfAanding this decilion, the ripar.i
inientor were continued upon their ancient foe:
ing . As this determination admitted the pnr
ciple upon which the Dominicans founded thec
opinion, they renewed their efforts to obtai
relief for the Indians with additional boldne
and zeaL At length, in order to quiet th
colony, which was alarmed by their remonftrarct
and censures, Ferdinand issued a decree of t
pri council [ 15 3 ], declaring, that after mat;-:
consideration of the apostolic bull, and c.:
titles by which the crown of Castile clain.:

Herrera, dec. J. lib. vii. . I. . Oviedo, lib. iii. ;.
p. 97. ' Oviedc, lib. iii. c. 6. p. 97.

i H-rrera, dec. I. lib. viii. c. 12. lib. ix. c. 5.

s r·.'

s right to its possessions ia the New World,
e rfenritude of the Indians was warranted
both by the laws of God and of man; that
slcfs they were subjected to the dominion of
tie Spaniards, and compelled to reside under
their infpeciion, it would be impossible to re-
c-m them from idolatry, or to inftruEt them in
,e principles of the Christian faith; that no
itnhcr scruple ought to be entertained concern-
i:g the lawfulness of the repartimientos, as the
i;;g and council were willing to take the charge
i' that upon their own consciences; and that
:.hrefore the Dominicans, and monks of other
:;gious orders, fnould abhdain, for the future,
;fro those invecives, which, from an excels of
:,aritable but ill-informed zeal, they had uttered
.ai:itl that practice r.
Tlat his intention of adhering to this decree
:r.gtt be fully understood, Ferdinand conferred
;c,. grants of Indians upon several of his cour-
i.:rs. But in order that he might not seem
Ltoge:her inattentive to the rights of humanity,
;c published an edic, in which he endeavoured
; provide for the mild treatment of the Indians
,ader the yoke to which he fubje&ed them;
h: rgulated the nature of the work which they
.ould be required to perform, he prescribed
'ie mode in which they should be clothed and
fed, and gave diredtions with refpet to their in-
.nrction in the principles of Chriftianitya.

But the Dominicans, who, from their experi.
nce of what was past, judged concerning the
i.:ure, soon perceived the inefficacy of those

Herrera, dec. A. lib. ir. c. 14^ z See NoKTZ XXV.
' Htrera, dec. i. lib. it. c. ix.

a 3 pro-

provisions, and foretold, that as long as it wni
the intereit of individuals to treat the Indians
with rigour, no public regulations could rend-
their servitude mild or tolerable. They confidered
it as vain to waste their own time and ftrengh
in attempting to communicate the sublime truth.
of rclig.on to men, whose spirits were broken,
and their faculties impaired by oppression. Sorr.
of them, in despair, requested the permission 0f
their superiors to remove to the continent, a:d
to pursue the object of their mifion among such
of the natives as were not hitherto corupted by
the example of the Spaniards, or alienated by
their cruelty from the Christian faith. Such ai
remained in Hispaniola continued to remonftrat:,
with decent firmness, against the servitude of the
Indians b.

The violent operations of Albuquerque, the

new distributor of Indians, revived the zealof
the Dominicans against the reparlimienlos, and
called forth an advocate for that oppreffd
people, who possessed all the courage, the
talents, and activity requisite in supporting
such a desperate cause. This was Bartholomew
de las Casas, a native of Seville, and one of the
clergymen sent out with Columbus in his second
voyage to Hispaniola, in order to fettle in that
island. He early adopted the opinion prevalent
among ecclesiastics, with respect to the unlaw-
fulness of reducing the natives to servitude; and
that he might demonfirate the sincerity of hit
conviction, he relinquiffied all the Indians who
had fallen to his own lhare in the division of the

i Herrera, dec. I. lib. ix. c. 1I4 Touon, Hist. Gca,,
i l'Amn:rique, tom. i. p. z52.

. asiin

ihabitants among their conquerors, declaring
that he should ever bewail his own misfortune
and guilt, in having exercised for a moment
this impious dominion over his fellow-creatures c.
From that time, he became the avowed patron
of the Indians; and by his bold interpositions in
their behalf, as well as by the refpet due to his
abilities and charaaer, he had often the merit
of setting some bounds to the excesses of his
countrymen. Hle did not fail to reinonftrate
warmly against the proceedings of Albuquerque,
ad, though he floon found that attention to his
own interest rendered this rapacious officer deaf to
admonition, he did not abandon the wretched
people whose cause he had espoused. He in-
rrntly set out for Spain, with the most fan-
guine hopes of opening the eyes and softening
the heart of Ferdinand, by that striking pi&ure
of the oppression of his new fubjefts, which he
would exhibit to his view .

1516.] He easily obtained admittance to the
king, whom he found in a declining state of
h:alth. With much freedom, and no less elo-
cuence, he represented to him all the fatal es-
sets of the repartimientos in the New World,
boldly charging him with the guilt of having
uthlorifed this impious measure, which had
brought misery and deftruaion upon a numerous
and innocent race of men, whom Providence had
placed under his protecion. Ferdinand, whose

' Fr. Aug. Daviia Padilla Hilt. de la Fundacion de la
Priincia ce St. Jago de Mexico, p. 303, 304. Herrera,
ti . lib. x. c. Iz. H Herrera, dec. I. lib. x. c. IZ.
D:.. lib. i. c. ZI, Davila Padilla Hist. p. 30o.

mind

uMind a- well as body was much enfeebled by hL
dilfemper, was greatly alarrred at this charge of
impiety, which at another juncture he would
Lav:e despised. He liflened with deep compunc-
tion to the discourse of Las Casas, and promiied
to take into serious consideration the means of
redrefing the evil of which he complained.
But death prevented him from executing his
resolution. Charles of Auilria, to whom all his
crowns devolved, resided at that time in his
paternal dominions in the Low-Countries. Las
Casas, with his usual ardour, prepared immedi-
ately to set out for Slanders, in order to occupy
the ear of the young monarch, wl.;n cardinal
Ximenes, who, as regent, assumed the reins d,
government in Castile, commanded him to deti
from the journey, and engaged to hear his co..
p:aints in perion.

He accordingly weighcd the matter with at.

tention equal to its importance ; and as his ir..
petuous mind delighted in schemes bold and ur.
common, he soon fixed upon a plan which ado-
uiihed the miniiters, trained up under the forrrl
and cautious administration of Ferdinand. With-
(,ut regarding either the rights of Don Diego
Columbu,, or the regulations established by the
lat king, he rcfoled to fend three persons to
America as fuperiltendants of all the colonies
there, wi-h authority, after examining all circum-
itances on the spot, to decide finally with refpci.
to the point 11 qujtiion. It was a matter c:
deliberation and delicacv to choose men qualiii't
or such an irrportant fIation. As all thelayvrea
ftited i- .rr.crica, or who had been consulted a
Lth: admi;i:i-::':l.n of that departlnbt, had g:,.

U....

j:if opinion that the Spaniards could not keep
.pofeffion of their new settlements, unless they
were allowed to retain their dominion over the
Indians, he saw that he could not rely on their
spartiality, and determined to commit the trufte
:o ecclefialtics. As the Dominicans and Fran;
cicans had already espoused opposite fides in the.
cantrovcrfy, he, from the fame principle of impar-
tiality, excluded both these fraternities from the
commission. He confined his choice to the
monks of St. Jerome, a small, but iefpectable
order in Spain. With the assistance of their
general, and in concert with Las Casas, he soon
*itched upon three persons whom he deemed
equal to the charge. To them he joined Zuazo,
a private lawyer of distinguished probity, with
unboanded power to regulate all judicial pro-
ceedings in the colonies. Las Casas was ap-
pointed to accompany them, with the title of
prote&or of the Indians e.

To vest such extraordinary powers, as might
at once overturn the system of government elta-
biiled in the New World, in four persons, who,
from their bumble condition in life, were little
entitled to possess this high authority, ap-
peared to Zapata, and other ministers of the
Lte king, a measure so wild and dangerous, that
they refused to issue the dispatches neceflary for
carrying it into execution. But Ximenes was
not of a temper patiently to brook opposition to
any of his schemes. He sent for the refractory
ntinilers, and addressed them in such a tone,
that in the utmoil contternation they obeyed his
orders f. The fuperintendants, with their affo-

' He era, dec. z. lib. ii. . 3. Id. ibid. c. 6.

ciate

ciate Zuazo, and Las Casas, failed for St. Do.
mingo. Upon their arrival, the sirs ac of their
authority was to set at liberty all the Indians
who had been granted to the Spanimh courtier,
or to any person not residing in America. This,
together with the information which had bete
received from Spain concerning the object of the
commission, spread a general alarm. The colo.
nifts concluded that they were to be deprived at
once of the hands with which they carried on
their labour, and that, of confequeilce, ruin was
unavcidable. But the fathers of St. Jerome pro.
ceeded with such caution and prudence, as soon
dissipated all their fears. They discovered, in
every ftep of their conduct, a knowledge of the
world, and of affairs, which is seldom acquired
in a cloiter; and displayed a moderation as well
as gcntlencfs still more rare amorng persons trained
up in the solitude -and austerity of a monaiic
life. Their ears were open to information from
every quarter, they compared the different ac-
counts which they ieceived, and, after a mature
confidcration of the whole, they were fully
satisfied that the state of the colony rendered it
impcffible to adopt the plan proposed by La,
Caias, and recommended by the cardinal. They
plain'y perceived that the Spaniards fcttled in
America were so few in number, that they could
neither work the mines which had been opened,
nor cultivate the country ; that they depended for
ffecting both, upon the labour of the natives,
and if deprived of it, they must instantly relin-
quifh their conquests, or give up all the advantages
which they derived from them; that no ailure-
mecnt was so powerful as to surmount the natira

averiuji

averion of the Indians to any laborious effort,
and that nothing but the authority of a matter
could compel them to work; and if they were
not kept constantly under the eye and discipline
ofa superior, so great was their natural listless-
ness and indifference, that they would neither
attend to religious inftru&ion, nor observe those
rites of Christianity which they had been already
::ught. Upon all those accounts, the super-
intendants found it necessary to tolerate the re-
,;rimientos, and to susser the Indians to remaid
undcr fubjei:on to their Spanish masters. They
uccd their utmost endeavours, however, to pre-
rent the fatal effects of this establishment, and to
f£cure to the Indians the consolation of the befl
:-eat:nent compatible with a state of servitude.
For this purpose, they revived former regulations;
t!,ey prescribed new ones, they negle&ed no cir-
curmtance that tended to mitigate the rigour of

a.e yoke ; and by their authority, their exam-

?'e, and their exhortations, they laboured to
i-fpire their countrymen with sentiments of equity
..d gentleness towards the unhappy people upon
.hose industry they depended. Zuazo, in his
d&partment, seconded the endeavours of the
!.perintendants. He reformed the courts of
.:ticc, in such a manner as to render their de-
.:ons cquitable as well as expeditious, and in-
:-;uced various regulations which greatly imr
r-vcd the interior police of the colony. The
'sifaction which his condu&, and that of the
-pcrTintendants gave, was now universal among
:.: Spaniard. fettled in the New World, and all
zmircd the boldness of Ximenes, in having de-
r-.itd from the ordinary path of bufinrfs in

form ing

forming his plan, as well as his sagacity, in
pitching upon persons, whose wisdom, mode.
ration, and difintcre{fednefs rendered them wor.
thy of this high trust g.

Las Casas alone was dissatisfied. The pru.

dential considerations which influenced the super.
intendants, rr.ade no impreflion upon him. He
regarded their idea of accommodating their con-
duct to the state of the colony, as the maxim of
an unhallowed timid policy, which tolerated what
was unjust, because it was beneficial. He con-
tended, that the Indians were by nature free,
and, as their protec&or, lie required the super.
intendarts not to bcreave them of the cotnrr:o
privilege of humanity. They received his rno:l
virulent reronrirarces without emotion, but ad.
hered firrr.l- to their own fvyfem. The Spanif;
planters did not bear with him so patiently, and
wecre ready to tear him il pieces for insisting i;
a requiitiln so odious to them. Las Casas, in
order to screen himself from their rage, found i:
ueceffar- to take fhclter in a convent ; and per.
ceiv-r.g that all his efforts in America wetr
fruitlfs, he soon set out for Europe, with a
fixed resolution not to abandon the protecit:.
of a people whom he deemed to be cruel,-
opprcf'td h.

Had Xirrenes retained that vigour of rrird

with hllich he usually applied to business, Las
Casas must ihave ret w ith no very gracious rece;.
tion upon .is return to Spain. But he fousC
the cardinal languishing under a mortal dillerr
per, and preparing to resign his authority to 'h

r Herrera, dec. %. lib. ii. . 15. Remefal Hilt. CGet
lib. ii. ¢. 14, 1 5, 16. h ierrcia, dec. z. Ilb. ii. c-.

*c::

Toang king, who was daily expeced from the
,wiv-Countries. Charles arrived, took possession
c;the government, and, by the death of Xime-
c;, lult a minister, whose abilities and integrity
r;i;led him to direct his affairs. Many of the

'in.ilh nobility had accompanied their sovereign
Spain. From that warm predilection to his
.uiltrymen, which was natural at his age, he
5niulted them with lefpeEt to all the tranfac-
·;n0s in his new kingdom, and they, with an
=-ifcrect eagerness, intruded themselves into
!:nv business, and seized almofi every depart-
rcrnt of administration i. The direction of
American affairs was an object too alluring to
icape their attention. Las Casas observed their
Irowing influence, and though projecaors are
5call too sanguine to conduct their schemes
r!:h much dexterity, he possessed a bustling in-
ia'atigable acivity, which Sometimes accomplishes
i purposes with greater success, than the most
l'tiGiiite discernment and address. He courted
z' Flemish ministers with assiduity. He repre-
i'.ed to them the absurdity of all the maxims
L:'.erto adopted with refped to the government
i.iAmerica, particularly during the adminiftra-
-, of Ferdinand, and pointed out the detects
. :;,ife arrangements which Xinicnes had intro-
c.c:d. The memory of Ferdinand was odious

:. , Flemings. The fuperioi virtue and abili-
of Ximenes had long been the object of their
;v. They fondly wiihed to have a plausible
:':cxt for condemning the meafurcs, both of the
::Iarch and of the minister, and of reflecting
.: difcrcdit on their political wisdom. The

Hilt. of Charles V. vol. ii. p. 50.
['L. 1. I, B friends

friends of Don Diego Columbus, as well as the
Spanish courtiers, who had been dissatisfied wi-i.
the cardinal's adminiitration, joined Las Casa, 3
censuring the scheme of fendir:gfnlperintendant ')
America. Thi- union of so manvynterefts and p?,.
sions waS irresistible ; and, in consequence of it, 0te
father; of St. Jerome, together with their a',-
ciate Zuazo, were recalled. Roder;go de Fige-
eroa, a lawyer of foine eminence, was appointd
chief judge of the island, and received infir:-.
tions, in compliance with the request of Li
Casas, to examine once more, with the utrtmc
atttntion, the point of controversy between 1:-.
and the peo.p!e of the colony, w.ith refpeet to :
treatment of the natives; and in the mt:-
time to do everv thing in his power to allevia:
their fuferings,, and prevent the extiniic(;n
the race i

This nwa? all that the zeal of Las Casas co,'

procure, at that junrtire, in favour of the 1
d;ans. T1} irpoib;lityv of ca:-rv;ng on a
improiern'--t in Amrr.ri.a, i!nlcfs tihe Sp .i
planters ce.uld command the lahour of the
tives, i.as a's i: ;fn!ie:-blc ol,:ction to his i'
of treati-,g them as flee ftliujcEtC?. In ,rd.:.
providc forr.e remedy for this, without wh:

ii

found it wa. in vain to mention his scheme, L.
C4.fas pro;posed to pu:chafc a sufficient nui:-
of nerocs frnm the Portuguese settlement,.;
the coast of Africa, and to trunfport then.
America, in order tiat they might be (mtrl!
a2 flIres in working the mines and cltivati:'
grce;?d. Ore of tl:he trlt advantag; whichi
Pertuguefe had dtrivtd from their dif ."-
i herrct:, dec. 2. '. ii. c. 15. 5. :. lib. ib . c.-,

2

r Africa, arose from the trade in slaves. Va-
:7is circumltances concurred in reviving this

jb'Js commerce, which had been long abolifled
Eur pe, and which is no less repugnant to the
i-:lings of humanity, than to the principles of
-~.ron. As carly as the year one thousand fivc
.-d'd and three, a fex'w negro slaves had been
- into tie New World k. In the year one
_iand five hundred and eleven, Ferdinand per-
:--:td the importation of them in greater num-

':-. 'They were found to be a more robust

-.i hard' race than the natives of America.
:.-yV were more capable of enduring fatigue,
E're patient under servitude, and the labour of
r-c ncgro was computed to be equal to that
c :-o:ir Indians m. Cardinal Ximenes, however,
F,-:. solicitcd to encourage this commerce, pe-

'-aturily rejected the proposition, because he

zc:cived the iniquity of reducing one race of
., to slavery, while he was consulting about
--. mcans of restoring liberty to another n. But

. Cafais, from the inconfiltencv natural to men
r- hurr- wvith headlong impetuolity towards a

..ie point, was incapable of making this
-..::; \n. \Vllle he contended earneltly for

-:;.: ir).t of the people born in one quarter of
':-- rs)b, he laboured to e:iflae he inhabitants
;: c.,thcr region; and in the warmth of his
.t' to fa';e the Americans from the yoke, pro-
:.:-ctd it to be la.vful and expedie.it to impose
:--::ill heavier upon the Africans. Unfortu-
-.; fr the latter, Las Cafai's plan was

' ir- ra, de.. l. lib. v. c. 2. I lb. iib. Viii c. 9.
.;. ,. C. iC. c. 5. r. l . ud c. 2. ;ii. :i. C. 8

B B z adopted.

adopted. Charles granted a patent to one G
'his Flemish favourites, containing an exclu:-.
right of importing four thousand negroes i:.,
America. The favourite fold his patent to sI-
Genoese merchants for twenty-five thou'a.:
ducats, and they were the sirs who brou^:
into a regular form that commerce for la';:
between Africa and America, which has f:.:
been carried on to such an amazing extent

1518.] But the Genoese merchants, cond'-

ing their operations, at firfi, with the rapacityv
monopolilss, demanded such an high price ;.
negroes, that the number imported into K:
pa.iola made no great change upon the state
the colony. Las Casas, whose zeal was no i:
inventive than indefatigable, had recourse to a:
other expedient for the relief of the Indians. E
obferned, ,hat rnoft of the persons who had '.
tlcd hitllerto in America were sailors and fold:-
emplovyd in the discovery or conqueR f

,f

cou-r-y; the younger sons of noble farri:::
allurco by the profpedt of acq;iring f-c.
xvcaith; or defpcrate adventurers, whom tl..
i:;.eir.ce or crimes forced to abandon tr.:
native lard. Ini!cad of such men, who w-:
diffolite, rapacious, and incapable of that i,'-
yerfe''c-rig induilry which is requilite in fc-.
irng new colonies, he proposed to supply tht '
ticmcnts in Hiipaniola and other parts cf
New W\orld with a sufficient number of labour:-
and hufbandmen,-who should he allured by fuita.
premiums to rcm ve thither. These, as :.
,were accuflorred to fatigue, would be a::.:
perfonn the work, to ivliich the Indians, .

o Heriera, dec. I. lib. ii. c. z2.

:!.e fecblenefs of their conflitution, were unequal,
:A n-,ighit soon become ufcful and opulent citi-

B:. But though Hispaniola stood much in

i-.; of a recruit of inhabitants, having been
:'(Ld at this time with the small-pox, which
:..pt off almost all the natives who had fur-

.c
, ltheir long-continued oppreflion, and though
L:, Casas had the countenance of the Flemish
-:-.;;r, this scheme was defeated by the bishop
c: Burgos, who thwarted all his projects P.

La; Casas now despaired of procuring any
.: for the Indians in those places where the
.an.iards were already fettled. The evil was
.inme so inveterate there, as not to admit of
cure. But fucl discoverics vwere daily making
. the continent, as gave an high idea both of
.:: extent and populoufilcfs. In all those vast
r.;o:s there was but one feeble colony planted;
-. except a finall spot on the isthmus of Darien,

i..; .zi:'-es till occupied the whole country.

':.I opencd a new and more ample field for the
;..naniv and zeal of Las Casas, who flattered
:...f.lf that he might prevent a pernicious system

,m Ling introduced there, though he had
;... :d f success in his attempts to overturn it,
;.:,re it was already eitabliihed. Full of this
.--, he applied for a grant of the unoccupied
..c.ti-', ltretching alo.,g the sea-coast from the
:-. (f Paria to the weftclrn frontier of that pro-
r..,ce now kinown by thc name of Santa Martha.
.. proposed to fettle there with a colony com-
;-:d of husbandmen, Ltbourers, and ecclesias-

sHe engaged, in the space of two years,
- ;.iize ten thoJ.f;ln; tf the natives, and to

P icrrcra, dec. 2. ;ib. ii. c. zi.

., jl
jinftru&

inftru& them so thoroughly in the arts of foc:-
life, that, from the fruits of their induler, 21
annual revenue of fifteen thousand ducats f;: E.'
arise to the king. In ten years he expected c-:
his improvements would be so far advanced, -c ',
yield annually fixt;- thousand ducats. Hc !i; .
lated, that no sailor or soldier should ceer he: .
nitted to fettle in this ditnlri ; and that r-,
Spaniard whatever should enter it withou:t .'
permission. He even projected to c!uthir tr
people whom he took along with him in :.
diftinguif}.ing garb, which did not resemble :
Spaniff drefe, that they might appear to :-
natives to be a different race of men from th,
who had brought so many calamities upon! th:.
country- . Frorm th, scheme, of which I 1h'.
traced only the great lines, it is maniferf that I.-:
Casas had formed ideas concerning the ment'r-
of treating the Indians, similar to those hby wh-!:
the Jesuits afterwards carried on their :.-:
opera:tons in another part of the fame contir--:.
He supposed that the European%, t) avai":
themselves of that a.cer.dant which they 'of:' s
in confui-er.ce of their superior progre's in :
ence aid irn.rover-ert, nrmiht gradually sorn' *
irnr.ds of the Amcricans to relish thofc cc;rrn.r-:
of which th.e were dcititute, might train i'-
to the armt of ci-il life, and render them ca;
of irt fL:rtiur.s.

But to the bhil.o of Burgos and the cou:'

of thi- Indies this pr ject: appeared not only c;.
merical, b't dar.Crcus ; in a high degree. T'.
deermd the faculties of the Americans to '
paturally so lir.ited, and their indolence so :x

Herrn;a, dcc. :, lib, iv. c z.

c:T;.e, that every attempt to inftru&t or to im-
:nve them would be fruitless. They contended,
:-t it would be extremely imprudent to give the
Tiar.d of a country extending above a thousand
-'r> along the coast, to a fanciful presumptuous

h.uliaft, a Itranger to the affairs of the world,

?-d unacquainted with the arts of government.
L;s Casas, far from being discouraged with a
r-:ille, wlhich he had reason to expec, had re-
.,lrfe once more to the Flemish favourites, who
:-:lliv patronized his scheme, merely because

had ibeen rejecred by the Spanish ministers.
I:cv prevailed with their ma{er, who had lately
:;:- rifcd to the Imperial dignity, to refer the
: :..'idration of this measure to a felet numbel
; ii pri v-counfellors ; and Las Casas having
xcr-ptcd against the members of the council of
::- I.;ic , as partial and interested, they were

u::(cluded. The decision of men chosen by

-;cr, n.mrendation of the Flemings, was perfetly
,.:.',rmable to their sentiments. They warmly
;: r.;-,d of Las Cafas's plan ; and gave orders
.r cairrving it into execution, but reliricted the
:.-'orv allotted him to three hundred miles

t-, e

the coast of Cumana, allowing him, how-

e:r, to extend it as far as he pleased towards
;:.: irtrior part of the country .

Iilis ('termination did not pass uncenfured.
:.. o rt every person wvho had been in the Weft
-.: e:claimed against it, and supported their
c.ion so confidently, a:id with such plausible
'.-:.,n, as made it advisable to pause and to
r*;r w tle fubjeEt more deliberately. Charles

Ccgnmaa His. Gener. c. 77. Herrera, dec. 2. lib. iv.
('. Oviedo, lib. xiX. . 5c.

h1iifelf,

himfcif, thouzh accuitomed, at this early perird
of his life, to adopt the sentiments of his c.-
nif.irs, with such submissive deference as did r'.t
promise that decisive vigour of mind which d..
tinguifhed his riper years, could not help i..
pecting that the eagerness with which the Si.
mings took part in every anair relating to Arn.
rica, flowed from some improper motive, a:.
began to discover an inclination to examine i1
person into the Iate of the quellion concernin
the character of the Americans, and the prj-.:
manner of treating them. An opportunity;
making this ir.quirv with great advantage ioci
occurred [Jui:e 2' 1. Qet.cdo, the bilhiJp c,
)arien, who had accompa;iied Pcdrarias to:
contine.-t in the year one thousa:d live h!injcd:
and thirteen, happened to land at Barcclor,r,
where the court then resided. It was qii,:.:;
known, that his sentiments concern;in the :a--::
ard dispci(ition of the Indians differed from. rt..:;
of Las Casas ; and Charles naturally concliud
that h,- confronting two respcetablc perfoun, uhi,
during their residence in America, had fuil lchu:V
to observe the i:ranners of the ptple whom tl!:
prete.nded to dcfcribe, he rmi-ht be able to L;.
cover which of them had furmei d hio opinioi
withi the g rea:.c: difccrr,mert and accuracy.

,A day tor thi, solemn audience was apoli-,

c . The emerorr appeared with extraurdi':ari
pomp, and took his feat on a throne in the gr.:
hall of the palac.. His principal cournt.-
att.-ndcd. Dor; I)ieo Columbus, admiral of;'
Illdic>, :wa; ilummoned to be prefcnt. Thei.
ir,)p or l)ari:;n v.a-. called up, ;i iirit to dc: .:

,i pn:ui.;i;,. II., :. a l;;l. d;courfe, Inamr.:.

t .-

:, fatal desolation of America, by the extinction
;C f( many of its inhabitants; he acknowledged
:.? this must be imputed, in some degree, to

c e :ceflive rigour and inconsiderate proceedings
c the Spaniards; but declared, that all the
:..ple of the New World, whom he had seen
c:'!er in the continent or in the islands, appeared
: hirn to be a race of men marked out, by the
:-.frioritv of their talents, for servitude, and
fino n it would be impossible to initruct or im-
:'-e, unless they were kept under the continual
i:petcion of a mailer. Las Casas, at greater
!kr.,h, and with more fervour, defended his own
M:v.m. He rejeced with indignation the idea
tiat any race of men was born to servitude, as
i-cldious and inhuman. He affcrted, that the
cu!tics of the Americans were not naturally
dc&icable, but unimproved; that they were ca-
p_.'c of receiving inltruc.ion in the principles of
r:l:\ion, as well as of acquiring the industry and
2; which would qualify them for the various
cices of social life ; that the mildness and timi-
c::v of their nature rendered them fu fibmiffive
2-d docile, that they might be led and formed
:.1h a gentle hand. He professcd, that his in-
:-t;ons in proposing the scheme now under con-
:' rtion were pure and difi::tereftcd; and
t:,:ih, from the accomplifhmc.rt of his designs,
i'-' imable benefits would result to the crowu of
Ca::i'e, he never had claimed, nor ever would

i.. c, anv rccompence on that account.
Chdarld;, after hearing both, and consulting
F:h his ministers, did not think himself fuffi.

.loI informed to ietablifh any general arrange-

:..t with respect to the slate of the Indians;

but

but as lie had perfect confidence in the integrity
of Las Casas, and as even the bishop of Darica
admitted his ficrme to be of such importanrc,
that a trial Inouid be made of its effects, he ililcd
a patent [1520], granting him the diitric& ;
Curnana formerly rrentioned, with full powvr
to eilablilh a colony there according to his oa:i
plan 5.

Las Casas puflied on the preparations for h!s

voyage with his uiual ardour. But, either frer
his own inexperience in the conduct of affair,
or from the iecret o'po;:tion of the Spani(h noj-
bilitv, who univerialiv drradcd tie fucccfs of ai
institution that might rob them of the industrious
and ufcful handj which cultiva'ed their estates,
his progress in engaging huibandmen and labour.
ers was extremely flow, and he could not prevail
on more than two hundred to accompany him
to Cumana.

Nothing, however, could damp his zeal. With

this slender train, hardly fuficient to take pc'-
felilon of such a large territory, and altogcterr
unequal to any efTectual attempt to ards civi:Lz
ing its inhabitants, he fct fail. The tril phlc
at which lie touched was the ifiand of Pucr:o
Rico. There he received an account of a new
obitcle to the execution of his fclieme, more
infriperable than any lie had hitherto encountcr-
ed. W'hcn he left America in the year one
thousand five hundred and lixteen, the Spanris3c
h-d little intercourse wilh any part of the con-
tinent, exccpt tl:e cour:tlics adjiccl,t to tie ;;:C-
of Darien. But as evtey fp:cies of irntrnal :::

Herrra, dec. z. lib. ;v. c. 3, 5. Ar7er.icn, Anr'.r ;
d'Aragoo, 7+. ,7. Remilal HIt. Gecer. lib. ii. c. Ic,:

t;L;:. IJ

i'rv began to flagnate in Hispaniola, when, by
-: rapid de reafe of the natives, the Spaniards
r-- dcprivcd of those hands w+ith which they

hitherto carried on their operations, this

:-orpted them to try various expedients for

-fyin, that lo5. Considerable numbers of
:-:-aes were imported; but, on account of

:: exorbitant price, many of the planters
::4 not afford to purchase them.. In order to
:-..:re fvxesa at an easier rate, some of the
':-niards in Hispan.iola fitted out vefels to cruize

1.::. the c'o-it of the continent. In places

T-:re tli-v found thcmitlvcs inferior in strength,
::.v traded vith the natives, and gave Iuropcan
::.; in xchange for the plates of gold worn by
-:. as ornaments ; but, wherever hey could
:.-.;c I.r overpower the Indians, they carried
:-. off by furce, and fold them as fla:'est.
: those predatory excursions, such atrocious
i-:. of vo,!lice and cruelty had been comm-t-

, thlat the SpaniSh name was hldd in detefa-
- ai o .cr the continent. A'henc:ver an) fiips
:-;.2red, the inhabitants either fled to the

.d, or rufhled down to the shore in arms, to
'..1; .';oe hated disturbers of their tranquillity.
T.. f,,rccd some parties of tle Spaniards to
:-: v.'-ihi precipitation; they cut off others;

:.i ;'i tL violence of their resentment againfr the

: '.- nration, tiey murdered two Dominican
.. :nari , wihofe zeal had prompted them to

:: i Lthe province of Cunrana ". Thiis out-
:-:: r'.'..: p''rfons revered for their fantity,
.1 .: fch indignation among the people of

' Ferr-ea, dec. 3. lib ii. c. 3.

UO',al-Iit. i lb . ib
. ix. 3.

Hiif'paniola,

Hispaniola, who, notwithstanding all their lite:.
tious and cruel proceedings, were possessed w::1
a wonderful zeal for religion, and a fupeRti;i'
respect for its ministers, that they determined to
inflict exemplary puni.hment, not only upon th;
perpetrators of that crime, but upon the wh!ol
race. 'ith this vie-, they gave the commar-1
of five Chips and three hundred men to Diego
Ocanpo, with orders to lay waste the country c.
Cumnana with fire and sword, and to traifport ail
the inhabita;.:s as slaves to Hispaniola. Tr.i3
armament I.as Casas found at Puerto Rico, in
its way to the coi.tinent; and as Ocampo refuscd
to defer his voyage, he immediately percei;-c
that it would be impossible to attempt the exec..
tion of his pacific plan in a country destined :o
be the feat of war and desolation x.

In order to provide against the effects of ttl;

unfortunate incident, he set fail directly for S:.
Domingo [12th April], leaving his followm
cantoned out among the planters in Puerto Rico.
Fromn many concurring causes, the reception
which Las Casas met with in Hispaniola wai
ver- unfavourable. In his negotiations for :t
relief of the Indians, he had censured the co-.
duct of his countrymen fettled there with f'c'
huncil severity as rendered him universally odc.Ui
to them. They confidered their own ruin
the inevitable consequence of his success. Thq
were now elated with hope of receiving a large
recruit of slaves from Cumana, which must !x
relinquished if Las Casas were assisted in fettEig
his projected colony there. Figueroa, in consr.
quence of the instructions which he had recei td

Herrera, dec. z. lib. ix. c. 8, 9.

gSDain, had made an experiment concerning the
,apc;tv of the Indians, that was represented as
ciaive against the system of Las Casas. He
rsieced in Hispaniola a good number of the

:ii es, and fettled them in two villages, leaving

tai at perfect liberty, and with the uncon-
coiled direction of their own actions. But that

ccple, accustomed to a mode of life extremely

cerent from that which takes place wherever
crifization has made any considerable progress,
rore incapableof assuming newhabits at once. De.
i-.d with their own misfortunes as well as those
: -:heir country, they exerted so little indullry
cltivating the ground, appeared so devoid of
i:citude or foresight in providing for their own
r2.ts, and were such Strangers to arrangement
conducting their affairs, that the Spaniards
-:nounctd them incapable of being formed to
te like men in social life, and contidered them
a children, who should be kept under the per-

uetual tutelage of persons superior to themfel;'es
i wisdom and sagacity Y.
Notwiithitanding all those circumstances,
t/ich alienated the persons in Hispaniola to
nom Las Casas applied from himself and from
Tmeafures, he, by his acivity and perseverance,
rT some concefions, and many threats, obtained
r Itngth a small body of troops to prote& him
d his colony at their first landing. But upon
ii return to Puerto Rico, he found that the
cEases of the climate had been fatal to several
ihis people ; and that others having got em-
;rmcent in that ifand, refused to follow him.

i:h the handful that remained, he set fail and

y Hervrra, dec. 2. lib, x, c. 5.
vYL. I. c c landed

landed in Cumana. Ocampo had executed is
comminion in that province with such barbarc:s
rage, havi;l,. nma.acred mary of the inhabitanu,
sent others in chains to Hilfaniola, and forc-i
the reft to fly for shelter to the woods, that t.
people of a small colony, which le had plantc
at a place which he named T'Ali2, were rtadvy t
perish for want in a deifu1tcd country. Th-,
however, Las Casas w.as cbl.-cd to fix his re.
dcnce, though deserted both by th- troops
pointcd to protec, him, and by those u:-;i
the command of Ocampo, who forerfaw. :.
dreaded the calamities to *,hich he mu:. be h:
posed in that .-rctched llation. He made
belt provision in his power for the safety and i..
filtence of hi, followers; but as his utmoi. ejr.i
availed little towards fecuri::r either the one.,
the other, he returned to PHltpaniola, in order:
solicit more efiectual aid :ir tih prcfervatiL:un
men, wh) from cG;iiid c:ce in him lad vc.t-.-d
irto a poiti of so much dan-er. Soon atfer :.i
dcpartu'-, the na:ic , having discovercd ':
feeble and def:-.ce!cfs ita- of the Spaniar.,
affl-mbld fecrcely, attacked them with the f-,
naturai to men cxaiperated by many injuris. c::
off a g,oud number, and cuomplled the rL:: :
fiv in the utmolt conitcrnation to the iflan:- c
Cubagoua. The frmall colonv fettled there, n
account of the pearl firnerv, catching the pi.:-
witi which their countr;mcn had been I:.':.
ablndo:lcd the i:iand, :i;rld ,.t a Spaniard rten: -
in a:.v part of the conti;L-:,t, or aijacent iia:..-,
from the gulf of Paria to the boorders of Dar. '
Ali,)nilhid at such a fu,;c'cl-,i. of difa!cer, I;;
C(fa, wa, afliuamlc to :c',v }his facc ai!.r ;

ic-.

rl termination of all his splendid schemes.
i shut himfclf up in the convent of the Do-
:;ica;n at St. Dominigo, and soon after assumed
_c hlbit of that order Z.
Tlicuh the expulion of the colony from
;j.iia3 happened in the year one thousand five
.:,l;cd and twenty-one, I have chosen to trace
;: progress of Las Cafas's negotiations from
:: irlt rife to their final issue without interrup-

Hs. His fyitlm was the objac of long and

::.,;;ic diicufion; and though his efforts in
:..f of the oppreTed Americans, partly from
:i; _.u 1rahiinesi and imprudence, and partly
- :. tlh male;olent opposition of his adversaries,
i-r: It aLttinded wvith that success which he
;;,.i.;.d wv it too sanguine confidence, great
.-jiie ;1 due to his humane activity, which gave
-c to various regulations that were of some
.:..iit to that unhappy people. I return now
:, tl }itoDtory of tle Spanish difeoverics, as they
c ':r in the order of time a.
i).co la-fqu.z, who conquered Cuba in
::- yc;tr one thuufand five hundred and eleven,
:-I rta;i;:ud tl:h government of that island, as
: cputy of L£on Diego Columbus, though he
i.'m, acknowledged his superior, and aimed at
-:icr:ing his own authority altogether iMdepend-

'. Under his prudent adminifiration, Cuba

irv: c one of the rroi fiourifiing of the Spa.
-L ;c;ilneOnts. The fame of this allured thi-

r Herrera, dec. 2. lib. x. c. 5. dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 3, 4, 5.
(':; -ii';. iiD x. . 5. Gjrrara , c. 77. Ua:.:a Pa-
t.:, ;,i. i. c. 97. Remifal Hi:}. Gen. lib. xi. c. iz, 23.

H-r-er3, dec. 2. lib. x. c. 5. p. 39.
' i., ..Dc. ii, tc.

c c 2 ther

ther many persons from the other colonies,
hopes of finding either some permanent eftabli-.
mcnt or some employment for their aciivitv
As Cuba lay to the weft of all the islands occd
pied by the Spaniards, and as the ocean, whic
itretches beyond it towards that quarter, ha
not hitherto been explored, these circumftanc^
naturally invited the inhabitants to attempt r
difcoveri-.. An expedition for this purporf, :
which activitv and resolution might conduct t!
sudden wealth, was more suited to the genius r
the age, than the patient industry requisite ia
clearing ground, and manufacturing sugar. I-.
fiigated by this spirit, several officers, who hld
served under Pedrarias in Darien, entered inr:
an association to undertake a voyage of difcorerT,
They persuaded Francisco Hernandez Cordo-,
an opulent planter in Cuba, and a man of di.
tinguiihed courage, to join with them in the a,.
venture, and chose him to be their command:.
Vtlafqutz not or.ly approved of the defiga, b;-
affilted in carrying it on. As the veterans fro,
Darien rwre extremely indigent, he and Cordon
advanced money for purchating three small vc:.
fcls, and furnilhing them with every thing reqi.
site either for traffic or for war. A hundred at.
ten men embarked on board of them, and fa'..
from St.Jago de Cuba on the eighth of Februan
one thousand five hundred and seventeen. Byvt:.
advice of their chief pilot, Antonio Alaminc'.
who had servcd ur.d-r the first admiral Columa ,
thev- flood directlv weft, relying on the op:n..:.
of that great navigator, who uniformly ma2..
tained that a wefterlv course would lead to ;:
moti important difcovcries.

C:

On the twenty-firft day after their departure
rTm St. Jago, thev saw land, which proved to
) Cape Cap'nhe, the ealtern point of that large
:,ninfula projcting from the continent of Arrne-
ica, vhich fill retains its original name of
Frsa:ln. As they approached the shore, five
,noes came off full of people decently clad in
nt;ton garments; an astonishing spectacle to the
paniards, who had found every other part of
Ar.mrica poffelfed by naked savages. Cordova
-dea-;oured by frmall presents to gain the good-
i.'l of there people. They, though amazed at
:he irange objects now prcfented for the first
rrme to their view, invited the Spaniards to visit
:.er ;abitations, vith an appearance of cordi-
;.ty. ITey landed accordinigly, and as they
_'i;.nce'd into the co'intry, t!..- obrerved with
rCw wvonder forne large houfcs bi:ilt with stone.
bts: ticv soon found that, if the people of Yu-
ntan l;ad mad: pro,refs in improvement beyond
tn:;r cou:itrv-r.-n, tievy were likewise more artful
-ad warlike. Fcr th;;gh the cazique received
Cordo.va v.ith, malv tokens of friendship, he had
r,::ed' a col:flirrable body of his fubjeas in am-
t': h lbii'i a thlcw.et, who, upon a signal given
tI hi:n, ruflird o;:t and attacked the Spaniards
;!i great bij,;lnefi, and some degree of martial
orler. At tch first flight of their arrowv, sis-
te. ouf the Spauiards were wounded ; but the In-
rc: 3 were itruck with such terror by the sudden
,i?, ion of the fire-arms, and so firplrifed at the
rl.;,iir (lone by them, by the crot's-bows, and
-' h.: other wcpcons iof their new enemies,
. ;he-v fii ,! r.''pi:ateily. C'ord iva quitted a

.. --;tr)ir wir he
l had met wiLl lucl a iierce

cc 3 r3ctptioi,

reception, carrying off two prisoners, togethr
with the ornaments of a small temple, which he
plundered in his retreat.

He continued his course towards the wt,

without losing fight of the coail, and on the
fixteenLh day arrived at Campeachy. There the
natives received them more hospitably ; but tie
Spaniards were much surprised, that on all the
extensive coalt along which they had failed, ar,
which they imagined to be a large fland, the.
had not observed any river c. As their wiat-
began to fail, they advanced, in hopes of find;,;,
a supply; and at length they discovered th.,
mouth of a river at Potonchan, some leagues
beyond Campcachy.

Cordova larded all his troops in order to pro.

tect the sailors while employed in filling the
casks; but notwithltanding this precaution, the
natives rushed down upon them with such fuii,
and in such numbers, that forty-feven of the
Spaniards were killed upon the spot, and one
man only of the whole body escaped unhurt
Their commander, though wounded in twvcl:
different places, directed the retreat with presence
of mind equal to the courage with which he had
led them on in the engagement, and with much
difficulty they regained their ships. After th:i
fatal repulse, nothing remained but to halta
back to Cuba with their shattered forces. In
their passage thither they suffered the molt ex-
quifite dittrefs for want of water, that rnn
wounded and sickly, shut up in small vcffel, ar.
cxpofed to the heat of the torrid zone, can be
supposed to endure. Some of them, finkin.

' See NOTZ XXVL

unfl.!

rader these calamities, died by the way; Cor-
iova, their commander, expired soon after they
iadcd in Cuba '.
Notwithstanding the disastrous conclusion of
t-i; expedition, it contributed rather to animate
than to damp a spirit of enterprise among the
Sa-niards. They had difeovered an extensive
(jntrvn, situated at no great diflance from Cuba,
rfrtile il appearance, and poffffed by a people
f.r superior in imiprovement to any hitherto
known in America. Though they had carried
on little commercial intercourse with the natixcs,
tV had brought oiT some ornaments of gold,
,o; considerable in value, but of singular fabric.
Tiief circumllnces, related with the exaggera.
ti:, rna.:u-l to men desirous of heightening the
Gr it. of their own exploits, were rr.ore than
if.cicnt to excite romantic hopes and expct-

riurs. Great lnumles off-ered to engage in a
Ec s excdiltinl. Vela'n.uc z, fciicitous to dif-
.-.ui:h hi: nifel by some service so meritorious as
;: ilt entitle him to claim the governmentofCuba
i-dependent of the admiral, not only encouraged
U.itr a dour, but at his own expence fitted out
our ihips for the voyage Two hundred and
rtv volunteers, among whom were several per-
i2. ot rank and fortune, embarked in this en-
tc.rife. Thle command of it was given to Juan
dc Grialva, a young man of known merit and
curage, with iniflruetions to observe attentively
;:ec nature of the countries which he (hould dif-

e Herrera, dec. . l. ;i. c. 17, 19. iftor Verjadera
'.a Conqij a dc la ueva Efana por Bernal Diaz del Caf-
:.o, ca-. i--. Ovieco, Ib xvii. c. 3. Gomara, c. 5.
F. bia::) d: nitulih uipt i ntatis p. zg.

cover,

cover, to barter for gold, and, if circumitanca
were inviting, to fettle a colony in some prope
flation. He failed from St. Jago de Cuba on t'h-
eighth of April one thousand five hundred ar..
eighteen. The pilot Alaminos held the far.n
course as in the former voyage ; but the violencr
of the currents carrying the ships to the foutr,
the first land w-hich they made was the island c£
Carumel, to the east of Yucatan. As all th.
inhabitants fled to the wood; and mountai;:s at
the approach of the Spaniards, they made no
long stay there, and without any remarkab!e
occurrence they reached Potonchan on theoppo.
site fide of the peninsula. The desire of avenging
their country-men \ ho had been slain there, con-
curred with their ideas of good policy, in prompt.
ing them to land, that they might chaflife the
Indians of that difrnct with iuch exemplary
rigour, as would strike terror into all the people
around them. But though they disembarked
all their troops, and carried afliore some field.
pieces, the Indians fougrht with such courage,
that the Spaniards gained the victory wi'h
difficulty, and were confirmed in their opinion
that the inhabitants of this country would prove
more formidable enemies than any they had rret
with in other parts of America. From Potcn-
chan, they continued their voyage towards the
weft, keeping a. near as pofliblc to the (hore,
and caling anchor every evening, from dread
of the dangerous accidents to which they mig;R
be exposed in an unknown sea. During the day,
their eyes were turned continually towards lai:d,
with a mixture of surprise and wonder at the
beauty of the country, as well as the novelty oJ

t'L:

the objecs which they beheld. Many villages
were scattered along the coast, in which they
could distinguish houses of stone that appeared
white and lofty at a distance. In the warmth
of their admiration, they fancied these to be
cities adorned with towers and pinnacles; and
one of the soldiers happening to remark that this
country resembled Spain in its appearance, Gri-
il-va, with universal applause, called it New
Spain, the name which still distinguishes this
cxteniv;e and opulent province of the Spanish em-
pire in America e. They landed in a river which
the natives called Tabasco [June 9], and the fame
of their victory at Potonchan having reached this
place, the cazique not only received them ami-
cably, but beflowed presents upon them of such
ralue, as confirmed the high ideas which the
Spaniards had formed with refpet to the wealth
ned fertility of the country. These ideas were
ranid fill higher by what occurred at the place
where they next touched. This was confider-
-blv to the weft of Tabasco, in the province since
known by the name of Guaxaca. There they
were received with the respect paid to superior
beings. The people perfumed them as they
landed, with incense of gum copal, and presented
to them as offerings the choiceit delicacies of
their country. They were extremely fond of
trading with their new visitants, and in fix days
the Suaniards obtained ornaments of gold, of
curious workmanship, to the value of fifteen
thousa-.d pesos, in exchange for European toys
of small price. The two prisoners whom Cor-
dova had brought from Yucatan, had hitherto

c See NoTE XXVII.

fenred

served as interpreters; but as they did not under.
stand the language of this countr-, the Spaniards
learned from the natives by iigns, that they were
fubjeas of a great monarch called Montezuma,
whole dominion extended over that and many
other provinccs. Leaving this place, with whicn
he had so much reason to be pleased, Grijalva
continued his course towards the well. He
landed on a fmail island [June 19], which he
named the Isle of Sacrifices, becaule there the
Spaniards beheld, for the firit time, the horrid
spectacle of human viEtims, which the barbarous
superstition of the natives offered to their gods
He touched at another small island, which he
caled St. Juan de Ulua. From this place he
dispatched Pedro de Alvarado, one of his offices,
to Velasquez, with a full account of the im.
portant discoveries which he had made, and with
all the treasure that he had acquired by traffick.
ing with the natives. After the departure oi
Alvarado, he himfeif, with the remaining veffl!s,
proceeded along the coail as far as the river
Panuco, the country still appearing to be wdl
peopled, fertile, and opulent.

Several of Grijalva's officers contended, that

it was not enough to have discovered those de.
lightful regions, or to have performed, at thidr
different landing-places, the empty ceremony ot
taking possession of them for the crown of Caf-
tile, and that their glory was incomplete, unlef3
they planted a colony in some proper station,
which might not only secure the Spanish nation
a footing in the country, but, with the rein.
forcements which they were certain of receivin5,
might gradually subjed the whole to the dj.

miiaon

i:non of their sovereign. But the squadron
i'd now been above live months at sea; the
crrateit part of their provisions was exhausted,
and what remained of their stores so much cor-
rpted by the heat of the climate, as to be al-
rFol unfit for ufc ; they had loft some men by
death; others were sickly ; the country was
crowded with people who seemed to be intelli-
gent as well as brave ; and they were under the
government of one powerful monarch, who
could bring them to act against their invaders
vith united force. To plant a colony under so
cany circumitances of diiadvantagt, appeared a
f&i.me too perilcus to be attempted. Grijalva,
though poifcffed both of ambition and courage,
w2s destitute of the superior talents capable of
forming or executing such a great plan. He
judged it more prudent to return to Cuba, having
uiiilled the purpose of his voyage, and accom-
Flifned all that the armament which he com-
m2ndcd enabled him to perform. He returned
tj St. Jago de Cuba on the twenty-fixth of Oto-
ber, from which he had taken his departure
aoJut ,ix months before f.

This was the longest as well as the most fuc-
cdsful voyage which the Spaniards had hitherto
made in the Nev. World. They had discovered
t-at Yucatan vwa not an island as they had fiip-
pc;fd, but part of the great continent of Ame-
nca. Irom P'otonchan they had pursued their
course fur many hundred miles along a coat
.rmtrly- unexplurcd, stretching at firit towards
:.: wit, anrd rh-ll turning to the north; all the

f Herrtra, d-c. I . lib. iii. c. I, 2. 9, 1o. Bernal Diz,
'. 17. Qviedn HiSt. iib. xvii. c, 9. 2c. Gornra, c. 49.

country

country which they had discovered appeared to
be no less valuable than cxtenfive. As soon a
Alvarado reached Cuba, Velasquez, transported
-with success so far beyond his most sanguine
expectations, immediately dispatched a person of
confidence to carry this important intelligence
to Spain, to exhibit the rich productions of the
countries which had been discovered by his
means, and to solicit such an increase of autho.
rity as might enable and encourage him to at.
tempt the conqulef of them. Without waiting
for the return of his messenger, or for the arrival
of Grijalva, of whom he was become so jealous
or diftruitful that he resolved no longer to em-
ploy him, he began to prepare such a powerful
armament, as might prove equal to an enterpri
of so much danger and importance.

But as the expedition upon which Velasquez

was now intent, terminated in conquelts rs
greater moment than what the Spaniards had

itherto atchicved, and led them to the knoir
ledge of a people, who, if compared with thcft
tribes of America with whom they were hitherto
acquainted, may be confidered as highly civil-
ized; it is proper to pause before we proceed tc
the hiitory of events extremely different frog
those which we have already related, in orde;
to take a view of the state of the New World
when firit discovered, an.d to contemplate :he
policy and manners of the rude uncultivated trib
that occupied all the parts of it with which th(
bpaniards were at this time acquainted.

# BOOK IV.

BOOK IV.

rWENTY-SIX years had elapsed since Columbus

conducted the people of Europe to the New

iorld. During that period the Spaniards had
ade great progress in exploring its various
:zions. They had vilited all the islands scattered
different clusters through that part of the
cean which flows in between North and South
-Aerica. They had failed along the eastern
:a2i of the continent from the rivet I)e la Plata to
. bottom of the Mexican gulf, and had found
:.t it itrerched without interruption through
.;; raft portion of the globe. They had dif-
:j;ered the great Southern Ocean, which operr-

:: new proipects in that quarter. They had
:2ired some knowledge of the coast of Florida,

.:,;h led them to observe the contiaent as it ex-
:ndcd in an oppolite direction ; and though they
:hed their discoveries no farther towards the
:th, other nations had visited those parts
;:.ich they neglected. The English, in a voyage,

: motives and success of which shall be related
.another part of this History, had failed along
:e coalt of America from Labrador to the con-
ies of Florida; and the Portuguese, in quest
j a ihorter passage to the East Indies, had ven:
-7td into the northern seas, and viewed the fame
r:zons a. Thus, at the period where I have
::..,n to take a view of the state of the New

iid ld, its extent was known almoit from its
nancrn extremity to thirty-five degrees south

Herrera, dec . . lib. vi. c, 16.
tiL, . D I of

of the equator. The countries which flretc
from thence to the southern boundary of Ar'
rica, the great empire of Peru, and the intc:.
state of the extensive dominions subject to t
sovereigns of Mexico, were {till undiscovered.

When we contemplate the New World, th

first circumtlance that strikes us is its immern
extent. It was not a small portion of the eanr
so inconsiderable that it might have escaped th
observation or research of former ages, whic
Columbus discovered. He made known a ne
herr.iphere, laiger than either Europe, or Alz
or Africa, the three noted divisions of the ancic:
continent, and not much inferior in dimenfior.i:
a third part of the habitable globe.

America is remarkable not only for its ma;-

nitude, but for its position. It ltretches £ro0
the northern polar circle to a high fouthe-
latitude, above fifteen hundred miles beyond ;h.
farthest extremity of the old continent on tha:
fide of the line. A country of such extct
pages through all the climates capable of becor.
ing the habitation of man, and fit for vied
ing the various productions peculiar either :0
the temperate or to the torrid regions of tL'
earth.

Next to the extent of the New World, th

grandeur of the objecs which it presents to Je
Is most apt to firike the eye of an observer. NaS
ture seems here to have carried on her operationt
upon a larger scale, and with a bolder hand,
to have distinguished the features of this countr
by a peculiar magnificence. The mountains c
America are much superior in height to thui
in the other diiflions us the globe. Even :

1 .

:al of Quito, which may be confidered as the
¼ of the Andes, is elevated farther above the

,a than the top of the Pyrenees. This itupen-
!oui ridge of the Andes, no less remarkable for
::tent than elevation, rifes in different places

sore than one third above the Pike of Teneriffe,
er higheit land in the ancient hemisphere. The
r.dcs may literally be said to hide their heads
- th clouds; the storms often roll, and the

L-s.der bursts below their summits, which,

:jg'i exposed to the rays of the fun in the
c-.:li of the torrid zone, arc covered with ever-

s-i; ilows b

from these lofty mountains descend rivers,
:-,?ortiriably large, with which the itreams in

:: ancient continent arc not to be compared,

r:ncr for length of course, or the vast body of
-:.r which they roll towards the ocean. The Ma-
znon, the Orinoco, the Plata in SouthAmerica,
a SMlifiippi and St. Laurence in North Ame-
:.., flow in such spacious channels, that, long
;nJre they feel the influence of the tide, they
r-.n:b! arms of the sea rather than rivers of fresh

'-.er c.
The lakes of the New World are no less con-
.iuous for grandeur than its mountains and
r.-as. There is nothing in other parts of the

W,,be which resembles the prodigious chain of

:s in North America. They may properly
'. icrmed inland seas of fresh water; and even
t:,ie of the second or third class in magni-
;-, are of larger circuit (the Caspian Sea ex-
c-::cd) than the greatelL lake of the ancient

iirlent.
' Sc NOTE XXVIII. C See NorT XXIX.

D D 2 The

The New World is of a form extremely i.

vourable to commercial 'ntercourfe. When a
continent is formed, like Africa, of one v-,
solid mass, unbroken by arms of the sea prne.
trating into its interior parts, with few large
rivers, and those at a considerable distance from
each other, the greater part of it seems dettied
to remain for ever uncivilized, and to be debarrd
from any active or enlarged communication witl
the rett of mankind. When, like Europe,
continent is opened by inlets of the ocean
great extent, such as the Mediterranean ard
Baltic; or when, like Asia, its coast is brokel
by deep bays advancing far into the count-,
such as the Black Sea, the gulfs of Arabia, (q
Persia, of Bengal, of Siam, and of Leotang;
when the surrounding seas are filled with lar;
and fertile islands, and the continent itkflf wa
tered with a variety of navigable rivers, th,'
regions may be said to possess whatever cai
facilitate the progrefa of their inhabitants Li
commerce and improvement. In all these e.
fpeets America may bear a comparison with th.
other quarters of the globe. The gulf of Me:x
ico, which flows in between North and Sou:i
America, may be confidered as a Mediterrante
sea, which opens a maritime commerce with -l
the fertile countries by which it is encirclei
The islands scattered in it are inferior only :j
those in the Indian Archipelago, in number, :
magnitude, and in value. As we stretch alog
the northern division of the American her-.
sphere, the Bay of Chefapeak presents a fpi.
cious inlet, which conducts the navigator fa
into the interior parts of provinces no lefi ftr

than extensive ; and if ever the progress of cul.
tre and population shall mitigate the extreme
nigour of the climate in the more northern dif-
trits of America, Hudson's Bay may become
E fiubfervient to commercial intercourse in that
c:_rter of the globe, as the Baltic is in Europe.
The other great portion of the NewWorld is
encom-passed on every fide by the sea, except one
nrrow neck, which separates the Atlantic from
!'. Pacific Ocean; and though it be not opened
bv spacious bays or arms of the sea, its interior
ra-ts are rendered accessible by a number of large
ri'er;, fed by so many auxiliary streams, flowing
ii such various dire&ions, that, almost without
z-v aid from the hand of indufiry and art, an
:..arnd navigation may be carried on through
z'. the provinces from the river De la Plata to
the gulf of Paria. Nor is this bounty of Nature
confined to the southern division of America
i:. northern continent abounds no lels in rivers
r..:-h are navigable almost to their sources, and

ib- its irmenfe chain of lakes provision is made

.) an inland communication, more extensive and
ern..modious than in any quarter of the globe.
The countries itretching from the gulf of Darien
cn one fide, to that of California on the other,
Rhich form the chain that binds the two parts
cf the American continent together, are not
e:itute of peculiar advantages. Their coast on
e-.e f.e is washed by the Atlantic Ocean, on the
o'her by the Pacific. Some of their rivers flow
is:o the former, some into the latter, and secure
to them all the commercial benefits that may
reulit from a communication with both.

But what most distinguishes America frdrh
oTi cr parts of the earth, is the peculiar temper-

D 3 ature

ature of its climate, and the different laws to
which it is subjea with respect to the difiribu.
tion of heat and cold. We cannot determine with
precision the portion of heat felt in any part oi
the glob:, merely by measuring its distance
from the equator. The climate of a country is
affeided, in some degree, by its elevation above
the sea, by the extent of continent, by the .a.
ture of the foil, the height of adjacent mountains,
and many other circumifances. The influence of
these, however, is, from various causes, less con.
fiderable in the greater part of the ancient con-
tinent; and from knowing the position of any
country there, we can pronounce with greater
certainty, what will be the warmth of its climatc,
and the nature of its productions.

The maxims which are founded upon obfcr-

vation of our hemisphere will not apply to ihe
other. In the New World, cold predominates.
The rigour of the frigid zone extends over half
of those regions, which should be temperate hy
their position. Countries where the grape and
the fig should ripen, are buried under snow one
half of the year; and lands situated in the fame
parallel with the molt fertile and best cultivated
provinces in Europe, are chilled with perpetual
froits, which almost destroy the power of vcgeta-
tion d. As we advance to those parts of Ame-
rica which lie in the fame paraliei with provirces
of Asia and Africa, blessed with an uniform c;:-
joyment of such genial warmth as is moit friel;d;v
to life and to vegetation, the dominion of cui
continues to be felt, and winter reigns, thou!l
during a short period, with extreme fevcrity. it
we proceed along the American continent in:.

c Si NO'rE XXX.

t:.

ae torrid zone, we shall find the cold prevalent

i the New World extending itself also to this
region of the globe, and mitigating the ex-
ceis of its fervour. While the negro on the
coast of Africa is scorched with unremitting heat,
He inhabitant of Peru breathes an air equally
rid and temperate, and is perpetually shaded
under a canopy of grey clouds, which intercepts
ile fierce beams of the fun, without obstructing
r friendly influence c. Along the eastern coast

r; America, the climate, though more similar
:; that of the torrid zone in other parts of the

c-toh, is nevertheless considerably milder than

those countries of Asia and Africa which lie
: the fame latitude. If from the southern
--pic we continue our progress to the extre-
Z:iy of the American continent, we meet with
H.zen leas, and countries horrid, barren, and
a rccl habitable for cold, much sooner than
- -,tC north f.

Various causes combine in rendering the cli-
-ate of America so extremely different from
C. the ancient continent. Though the utmost
:tent of America towards the north be not yet
c:covered, we know that it advances much
:irer to the pole than either Europe or Asia.
Lth these have large seas to the north, which
i'. open during part of the year; and even
Y:.n covered with ice, the wind that blows over
-:m is less intensely cold than that which blows
;er land in the fame high latitudes. But in
'Voyage de Ulloa, tom. i. p. 453. Anfn's Voyage,

f Anson's Voyage, p 74; and Voyage de

I:a.:, chez Hist. de Gen. des Voyages, tom. xiv. p. 83.
-.:ua Hiit. Natur. de 1'Air, ii. 305, &c.

America

America the land tretches from the river
St. Lawrence towards the pole, and spreads out
inmenfely to the weft. A chain of enormous
rrountains, covered with snow and ice, runr
through all this dreary region. The wind, in
pasing over such an extent of high and frozel
land, becomes so impregnated with cold, that i;
acquires a piercing keenness, which it retains in
its progress thrcug-h warmer climates, and is no:
entirely mitigated until it reach the Gulf cf
Mexico. Over all the continent of NcTr!
America, a north-wcfterly wind and excefiyi
cold are fvnonimous terms. Even in the mr:!
sultry weather, the moment that the wi.d
veers to that quarter, its penetrating influern-
is felt in a transition from heat to cold, no lek
violent than sudden. To this powerful czc.'
we may ascribe the extraordinary dominio, c:
eold, and its violent inroads into the fouthera
provinces in that part of the globe g.

Other causes, no less remarkable, dimi-;'

the active power of heat in those parts cf t&e
American continent which lie between the
tropics. In all that portion of the globe, tkh
wind blows in an invariable direction from ec'
to wct. As this wind holds its course acr;
the ancient continent, it arrives at the count-.
which ftreich aon:g the western shores of Afrnc
inflamed with all the fiery particles which it has'
collected from the sultry plains of Asia, ar.
the burning sands in the African deserts. T-:
coalt of Africa is, accordingly, the region of t:
carth which feels the mo fervn-ent heat, and

e Charlvoix H;it. de Nov. Fr. iii, 65. Hist. ge-er'
Vo)a:tct tom. Xv. Z15, &c.

expóc:

spofed to the unmitigated ardour of the- torrid
.one. But .this fame wind which brings such an
:ccflion of warmth to the countries lying be-
eern the river of Senegal and Cafraria, traverses
, Atlaitic Ocean, before it reaches the Ame-
-can shore. It is cooled in its passage over this
:il body of water, and is felt as a refreshing
:-ie along the coast of Biafilh, and Guiana,
.ideri.g these countries, though among the
;.-nneft in America, temperate, when compared
Fih tliofe which lie opposite to them in Africa i.

tA this wind advances in its course across Ame-
nca, it meets with immense plains, covered with
ipenctrable forets, or occupied by large rivers,
'arihes, and tfagnating waters, where it can
recover no considerable degree of heat. At
Lagth it arrives at the Andes, which run from
,jnth to south through the whole continent.
I? passing over their elevated and frozen summits,
: i fu thoroughly cooled, that the greater palt
c the countries beyond them hardly feel the
,aour to which they seem exposed by their
£:uation k. In the other provinces of America,
lorn Tierra Ferme weltward to the Mexican
Cr.pire, the heat of the climate is tempered, in
i.-.e places, by the elevation of the land above
the fca, in others, by their extraordinary hu-
:idiy), and in all, by the enormous mountains
afttcred over this tract. The islands of Ame-
r.ca in the torrid zone are either small or
mountainous, and are fanned alternately by re-
i:.cning efa and land breezes.

See NOTE XXXI. 'See NOT XXXII.
Acofta Hist. Novi Orbis, lib. ii. c. ii. Buffon Hiih

\':jrehl-, &c. torn. ii. 512, &c. ix. 107, &c. Olrran'
C:.e.t, of Vo)ases, ii. p. 863.

The

The caufcs of the extraordinary cold toward

the southern limits of America, and in the fey[
beyond it, cannot be ascertained in a manr.r
equally satisfying. It was long supposed th-t
a vast continent, diftinguiihed by the name of
Terra Auflrair Incognita, lay between the southern
extremity of America and the Antarctic pol;.
The fame principles which account for the ex-
traordinary degree of cold in the northern re.
gions of America, were employed in order tg
explain that which is felt at Cape Horn and the
adjacent countries. The immense extent of tbh
southern continent, and the large rivers hilic'
it poured into the ocean, were mentioned and
admitted by philosophers as causes sufficient to
ccafion the unusual sensation of cold, and the
till more uncommon appearances of frozen sea
in that region of the globe. But the imaginary
continent to which such influence was ascribed,
having been searched for in vain, and the space
,Which it was supposed to occupy having been
found to be an open sea, new conjecturcs m.il
be formed with refpec to the causes of a tern-
perature of climate, so extremely different from
that which we experience in countries removed
at the fame ditlance from the opposite pole1.

After contemplating those permanent and

charaaeriftic qualities of the American conti-
nent, which arine from the peculiarity of its
situation, and the difpoiiti.in of its part!., tle
next object that merits attention is its condition
vil!:l lr1-di dlscovercd, as far as that dcpended
upoi lhe ianduilry a:,d operations of man. Tln
txfccL s
of Lumani ingenuity and labour are more

i ee NOTE XXX11I.

tkert, vc

eltenfive and considerable, than even our own
ranity is apt at first to imagine. When we fur-
vey the face of the habitable globe, no small
part of that fertility and beauty which we ascribe
to the hand of nature, is the work of man.
His efforts, when continued through a succession
o ages, change the appearance and improve the
cualities of the earth. As a great part of the
ancient continent has long been occupied by na-
tions far advanced in arts and industry, our eye
is accustomed to view the earth in that form
which it assumes when rendered fit to be the
rcfidence of a numerous race of men, and to
fpply them with nourishment.

But in the New World, the state of mankind
was ruder, and the aspet of nature extremely
ciferent. Throughout ail its vast regions, there
were only two monarchies remarkable for extent
of territory, or distinguished by any progress
1i improvement. The reft of this continent
was possessed by small independent tribes, defti-
tute of arts and industry, and neither capable
to correct the defecs, nor desirous to meliorate
the condition of that part of Lii; earth allotted
to them for their habitation. Countries, occu-
.id by such people, were almost in the fame
rate as if they had been without inhabitants.
iznmenfe forests covered a great part of the un-
altivated earth; and as the hand of industry
L-d not taught the rivers to run in a proper
dcannel, or drained off the stagnating water,
many of the most fertile plains were overflowed
with inundations, or converted into marshes. In
':e southern provinces, where the warmth of
'te fun, the moisture of the climate, and the

fcrtility

fertility of the foil, combine in calling forth t{lc
molt vigorous powers of vegetation, the wood,
are so choked with its rank luxuriance, as to be
almost impervious, and the surface of the ground
is hid from the eve under a thick covering of
thrubs and herbs and weeds. In this state of
wild unassisted nature, a great part of the large
provinces in South America, which extend from
the bottom of the Andes to the sea, still remain,
The European colonies have cleared and cuit-
vated a few spots along the coait, but the orig.
nal race of inhabitants, as rude and indolent ai
ever, have done nothing to open or improve a
country, possessing almost every advantage of
situation and climate. As we advance towar:-
the northern provinces of America, nature con-
tinues to wear the fame uncultivated afpecd, and
in proportion as the rigour of the climate i:,
creales, appears more desolate and horrid.
There the forells, though not encumbered wi:h
the fame exuberance of vegetation, are of ina-
mnnfe extent; prodigious marfhcs o;erfpread
the plainr, and few marks appear of human ac-
tivity in any attempt to cultivate or embc!ii.
the earth. No wonder that the colonies f.::
from Europe were alfonifhcd at their tirlt eC.
trance into the New World. It appeared :o
them waste, solitary, and uninviting. \\Whe
the English began to fettle in America, tlie
termed the countries of which the) took po.-
session, The Wildtrnerf. Nothing but their eager
expectation of finding mines of gold, could
have induced the Spaniards to penetrate through
the woods and marshes of America, where, :
cvery itep, they obfcrved the extreme-diffcrcrcc

bietw:.i

between the uncultivated face of Nature, and
hat which it acquires under the forming hand
f:induftry and art m.
The labour and operations of man not only
i:prove and embellish the earth, but render it
rore wholesome, and friendly to life. WVhen
-v region lies negleced and destitute of culti-
r.:ion, the air stagnates in the woods, putrid
nhalations arise from the waters; the surface of
,-e earth, loaded with rank vegetation, feels

;: the purifying influence of the fun or of the
i:d ; the malignity of the distempers natural
: the climate increases, and new maladies no
:., noxious are engendered. Accordingly, all

provinces of America, when first discovered,

were found to be remarkably unhealthy. This
::e Spaniards experienced in every expedition
:o the New World, whether defined for con-
ciac, or settlement. Though by the natural
constitution of their bodies, their habitual tem-
-rance, and the persevering vigour of their
nind;, they were as much formed as any people

Europe for af&ive service in a sultry climate,
*ev felt severely the fatal and pernicious qua-
;:ie of those uncultivated regions through
:.-ich they marched, or where they endeavoured
:2 plant colonies. Great numbers were cut off
r the unknown and violent diseases with which
:'ey were infeated. Such as survived the de-
-ic.ive rage of those maladies, were not ex-
r.sted from the noxious influence of the cli-
ate. They returned to Europe, according to
'e description of the early Spanish hitorians,
:rile, emaciated, with languid looks, and corn

m See NOTE XXXIV.
VOL, I. F. plexions

plexions of such a sickly yellow colour, as inc
cated the unwliolcfome temperature of thi
countries where they had refidtd n.

The uncultivated state of the New W'oi:

affccted not only the temperature of the air, Lu
the qualities of its productions. The princi?;i
of life items to have been ltfs active and vigc;
Ous there, than in the ancient continent. Noh
-iithifai ding the valt extent of America, al
the variety of its climates, the different specie
of animals peculiar to it are much fewer in pre
portion, than thcfe of the other hemifpllere. I
the islands, there were only four kind of q.a
druptds known, the largest of which did not c.
ceed the size of a rabbit. On the continent, ti
variety was greattr; and though the indisidua
of each kind could not fail of multiplying cI
ceedinglv, when almost unmolested by men, wi'

iere ..ciiier so numerous, nor so united in ;t

ciitv, as to be forrr.idablt enemies to the anima
creation, the nunber of ditinct fpccies mull i
bc co:iidercd as rxtrcrrieel finall. Of tw.o has
dred di;trceit kinds of animals spread over tb
facc of the earth, only about one third exinc
in America, at the time of its discover'y . Na
t::re was not onlv les, prolific in the New Worik
but lhe appears likcwilc to have been lcfs vigu:
ous in her productiou.s. The animals originau]
bl(,nginrg to thi- quarter of the globe appca
to be us an inferior race, neither so robull, rn,
so rierce, as those of the other continent. Amc
rica gics birth to no creature of such bulk a

Gom ra Hi;s. c. ^o. O2. Ovicdo HiR. lib. i c. . 1

lib. %. c. ic. P Mart. S.i:. 545. Decad. p. 176.
' Bffon Hit. Naturelle, torm ix. p. S6.

1i

b e compared kwith the elephant or rhinoceros,
-:hat equals the lion and tiger in strength and

v-'.t'; P. The Tapyr of Brasil, the largest

[idrutped of the ravenous tribe in the New
Wiur!d, is not larger than a calf of fix months
':. The Puma and jaguar, its fiercest beasts
5 ?pev, which Europeans have inaccurately de-
--;ated lions and tiger3, possess neither the
_'au-nted courage of the former, nor the
r'-enous cruelty of the latterq. They are inac-
t-z and timid, hardly formidable to man, and
c-.n turn their backs upon the least appearance
cfrefiftance '. The fame qualities in the climate
c:.America which stinted the growth, and en-
i-'!led the spirit, of its native animals, have
;-jvcd pernicious to such as have migrated into
r voluntarily from the other continent, or have
b?:i transported thither by the Europeans .
Tn: bears, the wolves, the deer of America,
2re not equal in size to those of the Old World [.
Moi of the domestic animals, with which the
Europeans have itored the provinces wherein
te- fettled, have degenerated with refpec
c:her to bulk or quality, in a country whole
:.nperature and foil seem to be less favourable

·' the ftrcingth and perfection of the animnal cre-

r S- NOT- XXXV. q Buffon Hilt. Natur. tom.
iL r. 3-. Nlargravii Hil. Nat. Bralii, p. zzg.

P. - i.n Hil. Narur. ix. 1i . zc3. Ac ta Hi:t. lib. iv.
54. I'iln;',I Hist. p. 6. Hcrrera, dec. 4. lib. iv. c. 1.

L . x. c. . 'Churchili, v. p. 691. Ovaile Relac.
.;: (, C. irh. ii. p. i. Srr.mia:i de Oviedo, C.
1':- - . Vo!age Cu D.s Marc.ais, iii. 299. ' Buffon

. .:. X iurx. ixo. K1alm's Travels, i. lo2 Biet.
;.. :. Franae E£uinor. p. 339. u See NOTE XXXVI.

E E 2 Th,

The fame causes, which checked the growsi

and the vigour of the more noble animals, w;:e
friendly to the propagation and increase of r,.
tiles and infects. Though this is not pecuLr
to the New World, and those odious tribx,
nourished by heat, moilture, and corruption, i,.
felt every part of the torrid zone; they multi:'.
faster, perhaps, in America, and grow to a rr.
monstrous bulk. As this country is, on t.:
whole, less cultivated, and less peopled, tha:
the other quarters of the earth, the actrie pr:..
ciple of life waites its force in productions c:
this inferior form. The air is often darkenr:
ritlh clouds of infccts, and the ground coverc'
with shocking and noxious reptiles. The cour.t;
ar.und Porto-Beilo swarms with toads in iiu.
mult;ticdes, as hide the surface of the earth. :
Guvaquil, snakes and vipers are hardly les :..
merou;. Carthagena is inseRted with i.umc.,:-
flocks of bats, which annoy not only the ca.::
but the inhalitants x. In the i;ianc', !gion; c:
ants ha--, at dii/-rcnt times, consumed evre'
vegetab.e prduction Y, and left the earth ct.
tirely bare, a, if it had been burnt with fre.
The damp foretls, and rank foil of the countrics
on the larks of the Orinoco and Maragncu::,
teem with almost every offenlive and poifvnio;
creature, which the power of a sultry fun c-n
quicken ino lifez.

The Lirds of the N-w Wrorld are not d'?.-

gui hcd by qualitis so conspicuous and cliar-.

x Voyage cc Ul!ia, torn. i. p. So. Id. p. 147. Her:%;,

dec. II. I I. Ci.i. 3. . 9. See NOTir XXXVjI.

z Voy2 - c: CConj- r.,ine, p. I'7. - urr.illa, iii. 12C, &..

Iiift. Gcntr. ces Voy 2ges, Xiv. 3 7. Durnont ,ez-.oir^ '.:
L LoahiiLinc, i S.o. Scrra.m-i ce Ovieaco, c. 5z-6S.

teryit;.2.

:riftilcal, as those which we have observed in its
csadrupeds. Birds are more independent of
.-an, and less affected by the changes which his
:Auilry and labour make upon the Ctate of the
.*rth. They have a greater propensity to mi-
-:e from one country to another, and can
-:ifv this instinCt of their nature without dif-
.c::i.v or danger. Hence the number of birds
c,:n-,on to both continents is much greater than
:..t of quadrupeds; and even such as are pe-
:: ar to America nearly resemble those with
r: :h mankind were acquainted in similar regions
c:.ile ancient hemisphere. The American birds

t:'.he torrid zone, like thofc of the fame climate
- Asia and Africa, are decked in plumage,
,::;ch dazzles the eve with the beauty of its
cji!irs ; but Nature, satisfied with clothing them

this gay dress, has denied most of them that

r.clodv of found, and variety of notes, which
caIch and delight the ear. The birds of the
:.-.perate climates there, in the fame manner as
: our continent, are less splendid in their ap-
::arance, but, in compensation for that defect,
t.ev have voices of greater compass, and more
rclodious. In some districts of America, the
-w.vholefome temperature of the air seems to be
v.favourable even to this part of the creation.
The number of birds is less than in other
countries, and the traveller is struck with the
naazing solitude and silence of its foreftsa. It
i; remarkable, however, that America, where

' Bourguer Voy. au Perou, 17. Chanvalon Voyage i La
w'irjnique, p. 96. Warren Delcript. Surinam. Olborn'j
(:..et.. . 924. Lettres Edif. XivY. p. 339. Chalev. Hist.
;: : Nouv. France, iii. 55.

E s 3 the

the quadrupeds are so dwarfifh and dastard.,
should produce the Condor, which is entitled ,
pre-eminence over all the flying tribe, in bu',
in strength, and in courage b.

The foil, in a continent so extensive as 'r-

rica, muff, of course, be extremely variou. I-
each of its provinces, we find some diRingui:hr.?
peculiarities, the description of which belor:
to those who write their particular hiiior- 1
general, we may observe, that the moillure a:
cold, which predominates so remarkably in C
parts of America, must have great influer.
upon the nature of its foil; countries lyin
the fame parallel with those regions which n;.;
feel the extreme rigour of winter in the anci.'
continent, arc fiozen over in America during:
great part of the year. Cliiled by this intr,:
cold, the ground never acquires warmth fufficii.
to ripen the fruits, which are fourd in the cer
responding parts of the other continent. If v:
wish to rear in America the productions whi't
abound in any particular diilri&t of the ancic.
world, we must advance several degrees nca-
to the line than in the other hemisphere, a:
requires such an increase of heat to counter:.!
lance the natural frigidity of the foil and cl:
mate c. At the Cape of Good Hope, several
the plants, and fruits peculiar to the countr.:
-within the tropics, are cultivated wit' fuccc'
whereas, at St. Auguffine, in Florida, a.:
Charles-Town, in South Carolina, though c:.
fiderably nearer the line, they cannot be brou'.':

b Voyage de Ukica, i. 363. Voyage de Condarnne, j-:

Buffon Hilt. Nat. xsi. 1 bs. Voyage du Des Maichis, Li
320. See NOTE XXXVIIi.

r

to thrive with equal certainty d. But, if allow-
2aice be made for this diversity in the degree of
heat, the foil of America is naturally as rich
and fertile as in any part of the earth. As the
cointry was thinly inhabited, and by a people
cf little industry, who had none of the domestic
a.:lmas, which civilized nations rear in such vast
r.uj:ers, the earth was not exhausted by their
c),r;umption. The vegetable productions, to
w'.:ich the fertility of the foil gave birth, often
:cr;ai;id untouched, and being suffered to cor-
rjpt on its surface, returned with increase into
:; bofuom e. As trees and plants derive a great
part of their nourifnhment from air and water, if
they were not deltroyed by man and other ani-
ral', they would render to the earth more,
perhaps, than they take from it, and feed rather
than impoverish it. Thus the unoccupied foil of
America may have gone on enriching for many
a;c;. The vast number as well as enormous
:ze of the trees in America, indicate the ex-
:t:ordinary vigour of the foil in its native state.

'When the Europeans first began to cultivate
,?.e New World, they were altonifhed at the
laxuriant power of vegetation in its virgin
mould; and in several places the ingenuity of
-he planter is frill employed in diminishing and
wafiing its superfluous fertility, in order to bring
i; down to a state fit for profitable culture f.

Having thus surveyed the state of the New
VWorld at the time of its discovery, and con-

'See NOTE XXXIX. ' Buffon Hilt Natur. i. 242.

K-r.mn,i. 1 i. f Charlevoix, Hist. de Nouv. Fran.
L. 45. Voyage du Des Marchais, iii. 229. Lery ap de
BEr, Fa: iii. p. 174. See NOTi XL.

fidered

fidered the peculiar features and qualities which
distinguish and characterise it, the next inquiry
that mtrits attention is, How was Amer.ca
peopled ? By what course did mankind migrate
from the one continent to the other? and in
what quarter is it most probable that a comr.u.
nication was opened between them

We know with infallible certainty, that ail

the human race spring from the fame source,
and tlat the d,.fccn:l;:ts of one man, under ti.e
protection, as wel] as in obedience to the com-
mand of Hc-a-.r, mitItiplied and replenithed the
c--th. Eu: nther the annals nor the traditions
of nations reach back to those remote agei, in
which they took poff:ffion of the different
ccl..nt:iesi where they are now fettled. \We
cannot trac- the branchcs of this firfi famil, or
pi::t out wvith certaintv the time and manner
in wEich they divided and spread over the face
of the 'ljobe. Even among the most enlightened
p,'opV!, the period of authentic hi:lory is ex-
trrmelV short, and every thing prior to that iS
f-buloiil or obfeure. It is not surprising, then,
that th- unlettered inhabitants of America, who
Ihve rno solicitude about futurity, and little cu-
r: ^tv concerning what is past, should be alto.

b- her unacquiainted with their own origina!,

Th- people on thc two opposite coails of Am.-
r:ic, whooccupy thofc countries in America hich
approach nearest to the ancient continent, are :
t- markahl ' rude, that it is altogether vain tofearch
amuno thrm for such information as might d.l-
.over the place from whence they came, or tLe
Anceitors of whom thev are descended g. What-

Vcr. ca's HIi:l of Caiforaia, i. 60.

eCv-

cier light has been thrown on this fubje&, is de-
.vled, not from the natives of America, but from
t.e inquisitive genius of their conquerors.

When the people of Europe unexpe&edly dif-
c.)vered a New World, removed at a vast
cLtance from every part of the ancient continent
which was then known, and filled with inhabit-
,ats whose appearance and manners differed re-
, arkably from the reft of the human species, the
q:cllion concerning their original became natu-
raly an objet of curiosity and attention. The
theories and speculations of ingenious men with
lifpect to this subject, would fill many volumes;
but are often so wild and chimerical, that I
'.juid offer an insult to the undcrftanding of my
rcd&rs, if I attempted either minutely to enu-
:r:ate or to refute them. Some have prefump-
touily imagined, that the people of America
a: not the offspring of the fame common pa-
:.. with the refl of mankind, but that they
.'.: d a separate race of men, diltinguiflable by
:c'.,l.ar features in the constitution of their
i'dices, as well as in the charateriftic qualities
. their minds. Others contend, that they are
c;:cended from some remnant of the antediluvian
i:.ahitants of the earth, who survived the deluge,
w'hich swept away the greatest part of the hu-
aan species in the days of Noah; and pre-
pfiteroufly suppose rude, uncivilized tribes,
:atered over an uncultivated continent, to be
'.: mot ancient race of people on the earth.
Ta:ere is hardly any nation from the north to the
Lath pole, to which some antiquary, in the ex-
:'.'-agance of conjecure, has not ascribed the
-Jaour of peopling America. The Jews, the

Canaanites

Canaanite;, the Phonicians, the Carthagenians,
the Greeks, the Scvthians in ancient times, are
supposed to have fettled in this wetlern world.
The Chincfe, the Swedes, tle Norwegians, tl;
Welsh, the Spaniards, are said to have sent co-
lonies thither in later ages, at different period,
and on various occasions. Zealous advocatc3
stand forth to support the respective claims of
those peoplc; and though they reft upon no
better foundation than the casual resemblance of
forr.e cuitom:, or the supposed affinity betwcen
a few words in their different languages, much
erudition and more zeal have been employed,
to little purpose, in defence of the opposite
fyitems. Those regions of conjecture and con-
troverfy belong not to the hiilorian. His is a
more limited province, confined to what is
established by certain or highly probable evi-
dence. Bevond this I shall not venture, in
offering a few obfcrvations, which may contni.
bute to throw some light upon this curious and
much agitated question.

I. There are authors who have endeavoured

by mere conjectures to account for the peopling
of America. Some have supposed that it wa;
originally united to the ancient continent, and
disjoined from it by the shock of an earthquake,
or the irruption of a deluge. Others have ima-
gi:!ed, that fme vessel bcing forced from its
cuurfe by the violence of a welterly wind, migl.t
be drie.n by accident towards the American
coa't, and have given a beginning to populat'oa
in that derulate continenth. But with refpec

I'arin's Remains of lJahct, p. 20o. Ancient Unic'".

HiR. val. xx. p. .16. P. F-ev;y TIeatro Cri:ico, torn.
p. 3;4, &c. Acoi, 1.:i. Moia.. Novi Orbis,lib. i. c. j', :

to all those fy{tems, it is vain either to reason or
iaquire, because it is impossible to come to any
ccifion. Such c:.ents as they suppose are barely
pvffible, and may have happened. That they
:ccr did happen, we have no evidence, either
-"an the clear testimony of hiitory, or from the
Ic:urc intimations of tradition.
2. Nothing can be more frivolous or uncertain
:.ai: the attempts to dilcover the oiginal of the
A.icr.cans, merely by tracing the rcfeinblancc
bc:wccn their manners and thole of any particular
;-uplc i:1 the ancient continient. If we fuppo.e
ti..,o trlibe, tlough placed .n the molt remote
,::i'!i of the globe, to live in a climate nearly
cithe fame temperature, to be in tl:e fame ilate
. focicty, alnd to rcfc-nble each other in the de-
recc ,f their improvement, they mult feel tie
:-.c wants, and exert tle fame endeavours to
:,ply) tlicin. The fame objccts will allure, the
-:.e passions will animate them, and the fame
: las and fcntimrents will arifc in their mindj.
. !: character and occupations of the hunter in
A.erica mult be little different from those of an
.Aliatic, who depends for subsistence on the
tace. A tribe of savages on the banks of the
Danube mull nearly resemble one upon the plains
waflhcd by the Miffifippi. Instead then of pre-
aining from this similarity, that there is any
ffinity between them, we ihould only conclude,
tlat the disposition and manners of men are
farmed by their situation, and arise from the itate
f society in which they live. The moment that
begins to vary, the characer of a people mult
change. In proportion as it advances in im-
p:ovcincut, their manners refine, their powers

and

and talents are called forth. In every part of
the earth the progress of man hath been nearly
the fame, and we can trace him in his career
from the rude simplicity of savage life, until he
attains the industry, the arts, and the elegance
of polished society. There is nothing wonder.
ful then in the similitude between the Americans
and the barbarous nations of our continent. Had
Lafitau, Garcia, and many other authors, at.
tended to this, they would not have perplexed
a fubje& which they pretend to illuilrate, by
their fruitlefr endeavours to establish an affinitv
between various races of people in the old ar,
new continents, upon no other evidence than
such a resemblance in their manners as neceffanly
arises from the similarity of their condition.
There are, it is true, among every people, orme
customs, which, as they do not flow from anr
natural want or desire peculiar to their situation,
may be denominated usages of arbitrary inflitu.
tion. If between two nations fettled in remote
parts of the earth, a perfect agreement with re-
spec to any of these ihould be discovered, one
might be led to fufpe& that they were connected
by some affinity. If, for example, a nation were
found in America that consecrated the seventh
day to religious worship and reft, we might
justly suppose that it had derived its knowledge
of this usage, which is of arbitrary inflitution,
from the Jews. But, if it were discovered that
another nation celebrated the first appearance of
every new moon with extraordinary demonstrations
of joy, we should not be entitled to conclude
that the obfcrvation of this monthly festival was
borrowed from the Jews, but ought to confider

I!

merely as the expreflion of that joy which is
2:ural to man on the return of the planet which
rides and cheers him in the night. The in-
:nces of customs, merely arbitrary, common to
.: inhabitants of both hemispheres, are, indeed,
.few and so equivocal, that no theory concern-
- the population of the New World ought to
?. founded upon them.

3. The theories which have been formed with
.deEt to the original of the Americans, from
-'ervation of their religious rites and pracices,
i;.: no less fanciful, and destitute of solid
sundation. When the religious opinions of any
eople are neither the result of rational inquiry,
::r derived from the instructions of revelation,
.±rn must needs be wild and extravagant. Bar-
arous nations are incapable of the former, and
-e not been blessed with the advantages arising

the latter. Still, however, the human
d, even where its operations appear most

".d and capricious, holds a course so regular,
it in every age and country the dominion of
-ticular passions will be attended with similar
ects. The savage of Europe or America,
'en filled with fuperititious dread of invisible
.ngs, or with inquisitive solicitude to pene-
te into the events of futurity, trembles
Se with fear, or glows with impatience.
e. has recourse to rites and pracices of the
me kind, in order to avert the vengeance
ich he supposes to be impending over him, or
divine the secret which is the objet of his
rofity. Accordingly, the ritual of fuperfti-
, in one continent, seems, in many par-
rlars, to be a transcript of that established in
VL. . F F the

th:e other, and both authorir- similar inRitutior,
for.ttimes so frivolous as to excite pity, fn.:.
times so bloody and barbarous as to create il.,:,
But without supposing any confai.guinitybctwc--
such ditant natior.s, or imag.ling that their r.;:
gous ceremonies were convey-ed by tradi.t-
from the one to the other, we mav ascribe t.
unifornitv, which in rr.anv in2ianccs seems vc:
arr.az.ing,to thie naturl' optrat on offuperinitiuna :
crithuiia:r upu;v the he-ikn~ls
of tie human rr.inj

4. \We may lay it down as a certain prlrci;'

:n this inqu.n' , that America was not pro:.:
Lv anv rnati;:; of the ancient contine;it, w.::' 3
had made conider-able progress in civiliza' io
The ini:mai:a;ntj of the New World were i:. a
state of focirty so extremely rude, as to Le .-
acquainted with th(lfe art; whii h are the i.:
c:la'.; of human in{enui.y in its advance tu,.'r5i
in.prosement. IL-.cn the mo:. cultvatcd L.a:I.
of America were itra-:cers to many of t. .
fi:iplc inv'c:.tiJo., v.-ici were al;noul coeval ".:
focicty in :other parts of the world, and v.-:
knuvwii in the carlicA periods of civil life w::l
which we have any acquaintance. From tr: i
is rr.anife, thath he tribes which origir.allv :
.grattd to .- erica, came off f:om nations, .'i.
iuil have bcen no lei; barbarous than t...i
pocllriVy, at thie time iwhen thiy .wre tir.:t c!
covered by the Europeans. For, although :
elcgar.t and refined arts may d:cliire or F:r.:
ami.i.s tii- violent shocks of those rcvoluti r>ia
difaliers to which nations are exposcd, '
.nccrflry arts of life, when once they have L::
introduced among any people, are never i-:
Noac of the vicissitudes in human 'miai ;-

i-..

i:'c, arnd they continue to be pratlifed as long
a the race of men exists. If ever the use of
::n had been known to the savages of America,
-t t their progenitors, if ever they had em-
:'.^td a plough, a loom, or a forge, the utility
- ;ofe inventions -ould have preserved them,
: 'it is impoflible that they should have been
:ie-,dcnd cr forgotttn. We may conclude
.':2, thiat the Americans sprung from some
:K.?i, -ho vere themselves in such an early
:: -.improved sage of society, as to be unac-

:t:d with all those necessary arts, which
:- '!d to be unknown among their posterity,
r-n rift \ifitcd by the Spaniards.

it appears no less evident that America

.: n',t peopled by any colony from the more
:l:rn nations of the ancient continent. None
.r t;,e r:le tribes fettled in that part of our
I.Tfhere can be supposed to have visited a
r .:rv so remote. They pofeffed neither en-
i:-, nor ingenuity, nor power, that could
.rpt them to undertake, or enable them to

r../i, fach a diflant voyage. That the more
:z:ed nations in Asia or Africa are not the
..- 'n;tors of the Americans i; rnanifeft, not
.- from the observations which I have already
: concerning their ignorance of the most
rie and necessary arts, but from an additional
rnc.itancc. Whenever any people have ex-
-nced the advantages which men enjoy, by
'. dominion over the inferior animals, they
-i:her subsist without the nourishment which
: afford, nor carry on any considerable ope-
',i :dependcnt of their ministry and labour.
cordingly, the first care of the Spaniards,

F F 2 whcl

when they fettled in America, was to Rock i
with all the domestic animals of Europe; ad
if, prior to them, the Tvrians, the Carthagini3n
the Chinese, or any other polished people, ha
taken possession of that continent, we sho'.
have found there the animals peculiar to th0r
regions of the globe where they were originai
feated. In all America, however, there isr,
one animal, tame or wild, which properly bclon?
to the warm, or even the more temperate co!.
tries of the ancient continent. The camel, th
dromedary, the horse, the cow, were as m,-.
unknown in America, as the elephant or t.
lion. From which it is obvious, that the plc'.
who firfl fettled in the wefiern world did -'
ifie from the countries where those ani
abound, and where men, from having been lon
accutomred to their aid, would naturally conGfi'
it, not only as beneficial, but as indifpenf;s:
necessary to the improvement, and even the p
servation, of civil focietv.

6. From confidering the animals with whic

America is stored, we may conclude that t
neareif point of contact between the old
new continents is towards the northern extremi:
of both, and that there the communication w,
opened, and the intercourse carried on betwe
them. All the extensive countries in Arnerc
which lie ithin the tropics, or approach n.
to them, are filled with indigenous animal;
various kinds, entirelv different from those
the corresponding regions of the ancient conis
nent. But the northern provinces of the Noi
World abound with many of the wild anir2]
which are common in such parts of our he.-

fp::

'here as lie in a similar situation. The bear,
he wolf, the fox, the hare, the deer, the roe-
cick, the elk, and several other species frequent
.he forests of North America, no Icfs than those
n the north of Europe and Asia h. It seems to
:e evident then, that the two continents approach
ach other in this quarter, and are either united,
: so nearly adjacent, that these animals might
Spss from the one to the other.
7. The aAual vicinity of the two continents
so clearly established by modern discoveries,
'at the chief difficulty with respect to the
peopling of America is removed. While those
i.menfe regions, which stretch eafbvard from
Ahe river Oby to the sea of Kamchatka were
zsrnown, or imperfecly explored, the north-
t: extremities of our hemisphere were supposed
: be so far distant from any part of the New
World, that it it was not easy to conceive how
:v communication should have been carried orn
it.ween them. But the Ruffians, having sub.
.&ed the western part of Siberia to their em-
i:r;, gradually extended their knowledge of that
,R't country, by advancing towards the east into
:krnowvn provinces. These were discovered
k hunters in their excursions after game, or by
'flciers employed in levying the taxes, and the
c;urt of Moscow estimated the importance of
'.oe countric; only by the small addition which
'-7 made to its revenue. At length Peter the
C--at afcendecl t!;e Ruffian throne. His en-
Lr.tend, cormprehecnfive mind, intent upon every
c:':r fiance that could aggrandi7e his empile,
' rrc:.dr his rcign illuflrious, discerned confc-
.x: of those discoveries, which had escaped

' BI.r;.ai tlilt. N3'. ix. 97) &C,

: F 3 tlte

the observation of his ignorant predeceffo. |
He perceived, that in proportion as the regiors,
of Asia extended towards the east, they mri,
approach nearer to America; that the commui-
cation between the two continents, which hd
long been searched for in vain, would probab!
be found in this quarter, and that by opening i:,
some part of the wealth and commerce of th
welfern world might be made to flow into Li
dominrions by a new channel. Such an o05:jt
suited a genius that delighted in grand scheme.
Peter drew up inftmru^ions with his own hand f
prosecuting tnis design, and gave orders for ca:.
ry ing it into execution i

His fucceifurs adopted his ideas, and purfuj

his p!-`. ''t;L officers whom the Ruffian co-=
employed in this fcrvice, had to struggle w':5
so manr ciEcultics, that their progress was es-
trerrcl)y o>n. Encouraged by some faint ta-
ditions among the people of Siberia, concerning
a fuccefsfil voyage in the year one thousand £x
hundred ar.d forty-eight, round the north.es.i
promontory of Asia, they attempted to foi,.s
the fame cour'e. Veffcls were fitted out, w:i
this view, at different times, from the ri;.:i
Lena and Kolyma; but in a frozen ocean, wh:
nature seems not to have deilined for naig2,
tion, they were exposed to many disasters, wi-.
out being able to accomplif thheir purpose. 5N
vcffel fitted out by the Ruffian court ever doubli
this formidable cape k; we are indebted :
what is known of those extreme regions of All
to the discoveries made in excursions by land

i Mulecr Voyages e: Decouvertes par leI RuiT:s, ton;
p. 4, . J41. k See NOTE XLL

I

In all thcfe provinces an opinion prevails, that
there are countries of great extent and fertility,
shich lie at no considerable distance from their
cmn coasts. These the Ruffians imagined to be
Fa-r of America ; and several circumifances con-
carred not only in confirming them in this belief,
but in persuading them that some portion of that
continent could not be very remote. Trees of
rious kinds, unknown in those naked regions
cifAfia, are driven upon the coail by an eaterly
rind. By the fame ind, floating ice is brought
thither in a few days; flights of birds arrive
annually from the fame quarter; and a tradition
c:tains among the inhabitants, of an irtercourfe
;rrr.erly carried on with some countries situated
to the east.

After weighing all these particulars, and com-
pr.ng the position of the countries in Alia
which had been discovered, with stich parts in
:he ncrthl-weft of America as were already known,
:te Ruffian court formed a plan, which would
:ave hardly occurred to a nation leis accuRtomed
a engage in arduous undertakings, and to con-
ni. with great difficulties. Orders were issued
:o bDuld two vefflls at the small village of Ochotz,
,ua:cd on the sea of Kamchatka, to fail on a
;r:age of discovery. Though that dreary un-
:..::vatcd region furnished nothing that could
ae of use in conitructing them, but some larch
::et;; though not only the iron, the cordage,
: .'a;::, and all the numerous articles requisite
;:.-.cir equipment, but the provisions for vic-

:: iin them were to be carried through the

-'...ic deserts of Siberia, down rivers of diffi-
.: :;.a'gation, and along roads almeft impaff-

able,

able, the mandate of the sovereign, and the per.
severance of the people, at last surmounted every
oblfacle. Two vessels were finished, and, undo
the command of the captains Behring and Tfchi.
rikow, failed from Kamchatka [June 4, 174-,4]
in quest of the New World, in a quarter wheri
it had never been approached. They fhap.d
their course towards the east ; and though a
storm soon separated the vessels, which never re-
joined, and many disasters besel them, the ex.
pecations from the voyage were not altogether
frustrated. Each of the commanders discovered
land, which to them appeared to be part of the
American continent; and, according to the'r
observations, it seems to be situated within a few
degrees of the north-west coast of California. Each
set some of his people ashore; but in one pla::
the inhabitants fled as the Ruffians approached;
in another, they carried off those who landed,
and destroyed their boats. The violence of the
weather, and the diftrcfs of their crews, oblige;
both captains to quit this inhospitable coast. hi
their return they touched at several island,
which stretch in a chain from east to weft be-
tween the country which they had discovered
and the coast of Asia. They had some intercour'
with the natives, who seemed to them to rcfernmhb
the North Americans. They presented to the
Ruffians the calumet, or pipe of peace, which :;
a symbol of fricndfhip universal among the pco'.
of North America, and an usage of arbitrra'
inflitution, peculiar to them.

Though the islands of this New Arcliipela-

have been frequented since that time by the R'.:
fian hunters, the cou-t of St. Peterfburgh, duri.:

a ?-

periood of more than forty years, seems to have
idirquifhed every thought of prosecuting dif-

enrias in that quarter. But in the year one

tuliand seven hundred and fixty-eight, it was
-xipecitedly resumed. The sovereign, who had
'i:n lately feated on the throne of Peter the
G:eat, possessed the genius and talents of her
;,;rious predecessor. During the operations
, the moit arduous and extensive war in which
:.e Ruffian empire was ever engaged, she formed
::-:er:s and executed undertakings, to which

limited abilities would have been incapable

' a::etnding but amidst the leisure of pacific
:-:;. A new voyage of discovery from the
tr:_. rn extremity of Alia was planned, and cap-
::n: Krenitzin and lieutenant Levafhcff were
:.pointed to command the two vessels fitted out
: t' at purpose. In their voyage outward they
:d :.early the fame course with the former
2;li-.ars, they touched at the fame islands,
:'.r'.cd thlir situation and produc&ions more
| carifull, and discovered several new islands, with
ai;ih Bc3hring and Tfchirikow had not fallen in.
Though they did not proceed so far to the east
;, to rcvifit the country which Behring and
Tfchirikow supposcd to ,e part of the American
cenitnent, yet, by returning in a course confider-
ab!y to the north of thcirs, they corrected some
capiral Iniiakes into which their predecefiors
had falln, and have contributed to facilitate the
Fpru-refs of future navigators in thofc seas .

T'i'u, the possibility of a communication be-
twetn the continents in this quarter refts no
l-o er upon mere conjecture, but is eitablifhcd

I See NOTE XLII,

by

by undoubted evidence m. Some tribe, or for,
families of wandering Tartars, from the reit!d
spirit peculiar to their race, might migrate ta
the nearest islands, and, rude as their knowledge
of navigation vwa, might, by passing from c-.
to the other, reach at length the coal of AT:.
rica, and give a beginning to population in tht:
continent. The distance between the Mar:.n
Ladrone island; and the nearest land in Afla,;;
greater than that between the part of Am:--r
which the Ruffians discovered, and the coafl cf
Kamchatka ; and vet the inhabitants of thrfe
islands are manifeftl) ofAfiatic extracL If, n:,-
with!tanding their remote situation, we adzn.:
that the Marian islands were peopled from co-:
continent, diflance alone is no reason why w:
should hesitate about admitting that the Amre
ricans may derive their original from the fa.e
source. It is probable that future navigat)-r
in those seas, by tfeering farther to the north,
may find that the continent of America ap.
proaches still nearer to Asia. According to the
information of the barbarous people who inhab:t
the country about the north-east promontory of
Asia, there lies, off the coast, a small island, ta
which they fail in less than a day. From that
they can descry a large continent, which, ac-
cording to their defcriptiou, is covered wi:
forests, and possessed by people whose langua;,
they do not underfiand ". By them they are
filpplied with the skins of martens, an animal
unknown in the northern parts of Siberia, a '
which is never found but in countries aboundingr

Mlu'ltr's XVoage;, tom. i. p. 24Z, &c. 267. 276.
c AMul.er's Voy3ags & Decouv. i. 166.

wv th

i:-h trees. If we could rely on this account,
,L. rr.nght conclude, that the American continent
;'earated fi-om ours only by a narrow firait,
,: all the difficulties with respect to the com-
-:,ic2tion between them would vanish. What
c:'!d be offered only as a conjecture when this
-:itory wsas firl' published is now known to be
c:.ain. The near approach of the two conti-
-:..ts to each other has been discovered and
-.:-ccd in a voyage undertaken upon principles
' pure and so liberal, and conducted with so
::.ch profcflfonal skill, as refle& lustre upon the
::-n of the fovercign by whom it was planned,
-d do honour to the officers entrufled with the
etcution of it °.
I: ia likewise evident from recent discoveries,
-;: an intcrcourfe between our continent and
' .crica might be carried on with no less facility
i:-; tile north-well extremities of Europe. As
:'.': as tlih ninth ccntury [A. D. 830], the
'.,r-,'.gians discovered Greenland, and planted
c.;u;:ii there. The communication with that
;-:.':., after a long interruption, was renewed
_ :;c lalt century. Some Lutheran and Mo-
- :-1 missionarics, prompted by zeal for pro.

b;.:ilig the Chriltian faith, have ventured to

:c in tlis frozen and uncultivated region P.
, '3,wm we arc indtbted for much curious in-
:':: aiioa with rcfpect to its nature and inhabit-
L:. \Ve learn, that the north-well coalt of
C-.;.'.and i; ifparated from America by a very
:;:.-. Itrait; that, at the bottom of the bay

: -' NCT-E XLIII. P Cranz' Hist. of Greenl.
:'. 4. i'r!ot: PIi'2. Gen. des Voyages, tom, Y. 151,

-:~.:.

, c~6,

.
.into

into

into which this strait conduts, it is highly p
bable that they are united q; that the inhabr
ants of the two countries have some intercou
with one another ; that the Efquimaux of A'.
rica perfectly resemble the Greenlanders in th5
aipec', drcfs, and mode of living; that so.
sailors, who had acquired the knowledge of
few words in the Greenlandlfh language, rreo-
ed that these were undcrftood by the E:c-,
maux; that, at length [A. I). 1764], a Mora.:
missionary, well acquainted with the langua;;.:
Greenland, ha ving ited the country of ;'
Efquimaux, found, to his aftonilhment, t.l
they spoke the fame language with th: GCrc-
landers, that they were in every refpe&t t-i
fame people, and he was accordingly recri;.
and entertained by them as a friend arid a br
ther r

By these decisive fa&ts, not only the confan,

guinity of the Efquimaux and Greenlandern
eitablifhed, but the poflibility of peopling Arr
rica from the north of Europe is demonltrz::d
If the Norwegians, in a barbarous age, whs
science had not begun to dawn in the nort' 'j
Europe, possessed such naval skill as to openr
communication with Greenland, their ance::!'
as much addicted to roving by sea, as the T'z
tars arc to wandering by land, might, at 'i-
more remote period, accomplish the fame v:i"z:
and fettle a colony there, whose defce:ndrn.
might, in progress of time, migrate into A.nm:ri.-
But if, initead of venturing to fail di:c::.
from their own coast to Greenland, we sip?.
that the Norwegians held a more cautious cou-.
i ggscde, p, z, 3. r Crantz' Hist. of Greenl. p. z51, :'

!. advanced from Shetland to the Feroe Ifands,
d from them to Iceland, in all which they had
rnted colonies, their progress may have been
--radual, that this navigation cannot be con-
.cred as either longer or more hazardous, than
:.-.e voyages which that hardy and enterprising

.: of men is known to have performed in

:-:i age.

. Though it be possible that America may
-e received its first inhabitants from our con-

-;.t, either by the north-west of Europe or

-. orth-eaft of Asia, there seems to be good
rson for supposing that the progenitors of all

: American nations, from Cape Horn to the
::henm confines of Labrador, migrated from
.latter rather than the former. The Efqui-
_:'x are the only people in America, who, in
'-:. aspect or character, bear any resemblance

: the northern Europeans. They are mani-
Sv a race of men, diftin& from all the nations
EC:',e American continent, in language, in dif-

y..ion, and in habits of life. Their original,

-., rray warrantably be traced up to that
n:zce, which I have pointed out. But, among
t'.he other inhabitants of America, there is such
inking similitude in the fonr of their bodies,
i the qualities of their minds, that, notwith-
i-ding the diversities occasioned by the influ-
:: ofclimate, or unequal progress in improve-

w--, e must pronounce them to be descended

. one fourcc. There may be a variety in the

:e-, but we can everywhere trace the fame
rgnal colour. Each tribe has something pe-
r.ar which ditingluifhes it, but in all of them
;: fccnl certain features common to the whole

LvL. i. G race.

race. It is remarkable, that in every peculiar:-
whether in their prfions or dispositions, wi.;:
charaacerif the Anmericans, they have sorn. rr
semblance to the rude tribes scattered ov-. ;:.
north-eafr of Asia, but almofr none to the na:ir
fettled in the northern extremities of Euro-
\'c may, therefore, refer them to the fLr.-:
origin, a.d conclude that their Asiatic prno-.:
tors, having fcttlcd in those parts of Amer:::
where the Ruflians have discovercd the proxri.-:
of the two contiie:it-, spread gradually o;e:-
various regions. This account of the progrc.i.
population in America coincides with the ti
ditiona of the Mexicans concerning their c-
origin, which, imperft t as they are, were v-
served with more accuracy, and merit gra::
credit, than thole of any people in the N:
World. According to them, their ancciL:
came from a remote country, situated to ;:
north-wcii of Mexico. The Mexicans poirn o.
their various flations as they advanced from th:
into the interior provinces, and it is preciscl '.
fame route which they must have held, if thc' hi
been emigrants from Alia. The Mexicanrs,
describing the appearance of their progeri,:;-
their manners and habits of life at that ?p::-a
exaEtly delineate those of the rude Ta'n.:
from whom I suppose them to have sprung.

Thus have I finished a disquisition which ::

been deemed of so much importance, tha:
would have been improper to omit it in wv--:

r Acofla Hilt. Nat. & Mor. lib. vii. c. 2, &c. Gi-;

Origen de ,os Indios, lib. v. c. 3. Torqurr.adr M.'
Ind. lib. i. c. z, &c. B:,turini Benaduci Idea dc ui-:
de ia Amer. Sertent. xri. p. 127.

I hhlory of America. I have ventured to in-
?:c, but without prefurning to decide. Satis-

'r- with offering conjetures, I pretend not to
ri i. any system. When an investigation is,

-,i nature, so intricate and obscure, that it

i :..cfible to arrive at conclusions which are

-.in, thre mav be some merit in pointing out
.: has are probable 5.
The condition and charaAter of the American
'K:n_, at the time when the) became known
: e Europeans, deserve more attentive con-
-:;on, than the inquiry concerning their
-^::ial. The latter is merely an objeEt of curi-
:., the former is one of the most important
;.e!! as infttniive researches which can occupy
; iilofopher or hiftoran. In order to com-
:-i'.: l hiito of the human mind, and attain
:a ?e.:ct knv.-ledge of its nature and ope-
-.:.:, we must contemplate man in all those

-: fitations wherein he has been placed.

r':.'.:5 follow him in his progress through the
i:-rt stages of focietv, as he gradually ad-
:-- fron the infant state of civil life towards
-.at'-ity and decline. Wre must observe, at
.ipe -;od, how the faculties of his understand-

r.',ld; we must attend to the efforts of his
: e powers, watch the various movements of

-and affection, as they rife in his breast,
..ark whither they tend, and with what
- thv arc eC.Yrtcl. The philosophers and
-i:, of ancient Greece and Rome, our
- i. t!3; a;s well. as every other disquisition,

.. a limited vic;v ofthis fublject, as they had
':T.i.s fur la LouTfiane, par Dumont, tom. i;

c G 2 hardly

hardly any opportunity of surveying man in E:
rudet and molt early state. In all those regi:3
of the earth with which they were well acquit:.
ed, civil fuciety had made considerable advance,
and nations had finished a good part of th&
career before they began to observe them. T:.i
Scvthians and Germans, the rudelt people r'
whom any ancient author has transmitted to _s
an authentic account, possessed flocks and he-r-,
had acquired property of various kinds, ar.,
when compared with mankind in their prir&j:-.
itate, may be reckoned to have attained to
great degree of civilization.

But the discovery of the New World enlarg::

the sphere of contemplation, and presented i.i
tions to our view, in fages of their prog:.
much less advanced than those wherein they hai
been observed in our continent. In Amerz
man appears under the rudeil form in which =
can conceive him to fubfit. We behold c'.
munities just beginning to unite, and may ;:2
mine the sentiments and actions of human be :-
in the infancy of social life, while they feei k-
imperfectly the force of its ties, and have fca-;:-
relinquilhed their native liberty. That fta:e
primeval simplicity, which was known in c.
continent only by the fanciful defcriptio r.
poets, really existed in the other. The grc-:-
part of its inhabitants were strangers to in: -
and labour, ignorant of arts, imperfectly a
quainted with the nature of property, and c
joying almoti without reftrictJon or c.
troul the blessings which flowed fpontaneo:;
from the bounty of nature. There were
t.wo nations in this valt continent which :

c :.
.

r-crzed from this rude state, and had made any
;. -idrable progress in acquiring the ideas, and
.':ting the institutions, which belong to po-
';cd societies. Their government and manners
1il fall naturally under our review in relating
:- discovery and conquest of the Mexican and
P:-uvian empires; and we shall have there an

-ctunity of contemplating the Americans in
: slate of highest improvement to which they
e -r attained.

.t present, our attention and researches shall
i .
uri:ed to the small independent tribes which

:.'-picd every other part of America. Among
:'-' , though with some diversity in their cha-
7".:-r, their manners, and institutions, the itate
f fucictv was nearly similar, and so extremely
*is, that the denomination of Sa .vge may
'; applied to them all. In a general history of
r-.-i-a, it would be highly improper to de-
f-be the condition of each petty commtunity, or

: ievftigate every minute circumstance which
; -n'nbutes to form the characer of its members.
:ch an inquiry would lead to details of immea-
::zalc and tiresome extent. The qualities be-
;--?>ng to the people of all the different tribes

r2,c fiich a near resemblance, that they may be
: :-ted with the fame features. Where any cir-
.'m.anccs seem to conltitute a diverfitv in their
:.r-acter and manners worthy of attention, it

' be sufficient to point these out as they
:'-, and to inquire into the cause of such
,.;'iarities.

I: i; extremely difficult to procure satisfying
^ aitthcntic information concerning nations
r..a they remain uncivilized. To discover their

G G 3 true

true character under this rude form, and to
fclect the features by which they are diftingui'.
ed, requires an observer posse .cd of no less :;.
partiality than discernment. For, in every l-a,
of focietv, the faculties, the sentiments and dt.
fires of men are so accommodated to their GoI
slate, that they become flandard. of exceller.c
to themselves, they affix the idea of perfeta:c,
and happiness to those attainments which re.
femble their own, and v.-herevcr the objects a.d
enjoyments to which they have been acculor:c-
are wanting, confidently pronounce a people :n
be barbarous and mifcrable. Hence ti : mu::
contempt with which the members of comrr.:..-
ties, unequal in their degrees of imnroverr.c-.:,
regard each other. Poliih-d nations, confcic-'
of the advantages which they derive from t,.!:
knowledge and arts, are apt to view rude natieoi
with peculiar scorn, and, in the pride of f:p-
riority, will hardly allow either their occup:-
tions, their feelings, or their pleasures, to ie
worthy of men. It has seldom been the lot .:
communities, in their early and unpolifhed fta:',
to fall under the obferv:ati,n of persons endow-
ed with force of mind superior to vulgar pre;:.
dices, and capable of contemplating man, un.-.
whatever asped he appears, with a candid aL?
difccrning eye.

The Spaniards, who firtr visited America, a:-

who had opportunity of beholding its var;.i
tribes while entire and unfubdued, and beo":
any change had been made in their ideas or nma
nera by intercourse with a race of men much a-
vanced beyond them in improvement, were ;.:
from poffleifng the qualities requ;ite for obs:'-

-g the striking fpe&cacle presented to their view.
Ncither the age in which they lived, nor the
z::ion to which they belonged, had made such
progress in true science, as inspires enlarged and
B-ell sentiments. The conquerors of the New
V.'orld were mostly illiterate adventurers, destitute
fr all the ideas which should have direced them
contemplating objects, so extremely different
--:n those with which they were acquainted.
S.rounded continually with danger, or ftrug-
:.. ig with hardships, the) had little leisure, and
1:i capacity, for any speculative inquiry. Eager
!. take poffeflion of a country of such extent
i-i opulence, and happy in finding it occu-
;.d by inhabitants so incapable to defend it,
Lev haflily pronounced them to be a wretched
s--er of men, formed merely for servitude;
r-. were more employed in computing the pro-
:: of their labour, than in inquiring into the
::rations of their minds, or the reasons of their
cftomrs and inititutions. The persons who pene-
.--cd at subsequent periods into the interior

iov nces, to which the knowledge and devafta-

1,.,i of the first conquerors did not reach, were
"erall! of a similar character ; brave and enter-
i-ing in an high degree, but so uninformed as
.e little qualified either for observing or de-
:-Bing what they beheld.
Not only the incapacity, but the prejudices of

Spaniaids, render their accounts of the
.,ple of America extremely defective. Soon
:er they planted colonies in their new con-
. s, a difference in opinion arose with respect
' he treatment of the natives. One party,
-..ious to render their servitude perpetual,

represented

represented them as a brutish, obstinate race,
incapable either of acquiring religious knowdtdgt,
or of being trained to the funtions of focid
life. The other, full of pious concern for their
conversion, contended that, though rude ard
ignorant, they were gentle, affe&ionate, docik,
and by proper instructions and regulations mi;1.
be formed gradually into good Christians a-d
useful citizens. This controversy, as I ha.-
alreadv related, was carried on with all t!L.
warmth which is natural, when attenton to n.
terest on the one hand, and religious zeal on t e
other, animate the disputants. Mos of the lav-;
espouscd the former opinion ; all the ecclefiali:.
were advocates for the latter; and we f.'
uniformly find that, accordingly as an auth.:
belonged to either of these parties, he is apt:'
Irnaa:'f; the virtues or aggravate the defedts '
the Americans far beyond truth. Those repu:
rant accounts ircreafe the difficulty of attaini'l
n pcrfe&t knowledge of their character, and rendc
it neceffarv to peruse all the descriptions of the-
by Spanish writers with distrust, and to receri:
their information with some grains of allow.
ar.ce.

Alrnofl two centuries elapsed after the disc-

vrer, of America, before the manners of i: t-

ahsi'ar.ts attracted, in any considerable deg-r.
th}i attention of philosophers. At length, tLh-
cifcovered that the contemplation of the oc
calion and character of the Americans in th:r
( r;'nal state, tended to complete our knowled:
Of the human species, might enable us to'
up a confid-rable chasm in the hillorv of :
?iogrefs, and lead to speculations no lcfs cur' -

z ;:._

'.an important. They entered upon this new
:id of Itudy with great ardour; but, instead of
i.roring light upon the subje&t, they have con-
.-uted, in some degree, to involve it in addi-
ianal obfcuritv. Too impatient to inquire, they
;.tc:ed to decide ; and began to erec systems,
.en they should have been searching for facts on
;-: h to eitablifh their foundationis. Struck
5ih :ie appearance of degeneracy in the human
';cc's throughout the New World, and afto-
.d at beholding a vast continent occupied by
nalked, feeble, and ignorant race of men,
-.e authors of great name have maintained,
:.2 this part of the globe had but lately emerged
:.;T, the sea, and become fit for the recidence of

:a:.; that ecvry thing in it bore marks of a
:ccent original; and that its inhabitants, lately
i; cdd into existence, and still at the beginning
of their career, were unworthy to be compared

i:! the people of a more ancient and improved
co::tner.t t. Others have imagined, that, under
:-, in.fluence of an unkindly climate, which
c-.-cks and enervates the principle of life, man
::",r attained in America the perrfcction which
cior-s to his nature, but remained an animal of
. i.-rior order, deft&ive in the vigour of his
.dilv frame, and dcfitute of sensibility, as well
i. oft urc:, in the operations of Lis mind 1. In
cpliItiuon to both these, other phlilofophers have
:-ppofed that man arrives at his highelt dignity
a-.d excellence long before he reaches a state of
-.ineme:lt ; and, in the rude iimplicity of savage
:.:c, diflay' s an elevation of sentiment, and in-

: M. de B ffon Hist. Nat. iii. 4%, &c. ix. 1C3. x14.
- M. de 1'. Rl.;-rches lhiloL. fir !es Americ. pafiim.

dependence

dependence of mind, and a warmth of attach.
ment, for which it is vain to search among t.e
members of polished societies x. They fecm to
confider that as the most perfect state of man
which is the least civilized. They describe the
manners of the rude Americans with such ra-
turc, as if they proposed them for models to the
reft of the species. These contradicory theorict
have been proposed with equal confidence, and
uncommon powers of genius and eloquence ha e
been exerted, in order to clothe them with az
appearance of truth.

As all those circumstances concur in renderin"

an inquiry into the state of the rude nations il:
America intricate and obscure, it is neceffar' to
carry it on with caution. When guided in our
refcarches by the intelligent observations of the
few philofophcrs who have visited this part of te
glohc, we may venture to decide. When obliged
to have recourse to the superficial remarks cf
vulgar travellers, of sailors, traders, buccaneers,
and missionaries, we must often pause, and, corn-
paring detached facts, endeavour to discover
what they wanted sagacity to obfcrve. Without
indulging conjecure, or betraying a propner.!'t
to either fvfitm, we mlift ftudv with equal ca-t
to avoid the -xtremcs cf cxtra-;agant admi:;aio-,
or of supercilious contempt for those m.annrc:
which we defcri;e.

In order to conduci thi:;s inqlir- w-th grea.:

accuracy, it shold he rendered as firrplc as pc'
fible. MIan eYxi ftd as an individual before ,h
became the memrbc;- of a community ; znd the
,ualities which belurg to him under h;i sorn:.

L M. RouffI2u.

caFpac;:

capacity should be known, before we proceed
to examine those which arise from the latter
relation. This is peculiarly ncceffary in in-
vr-tigating the manners of rude nations. Their
political union is so incomplete, their civil infti-
;iations and regulations so few, so simple, and of
ech slender authority, that men in this itate
ioght to be viewed rather as independent agents,
than as members of a regular society. The cha-
nater of a savage results almost entirely from
Lii sentiments or feelings as an individual, and
i, but little influenced by his imperfect fubje&ion
t: government and order. I (hall conduc my
rcicarches concerning the manners of the Ame-
r|ans in this natural order, proceeding gra-
dually from what is simple to what is more
cmnplicated.

I Ihall confider, I. The bodily confitution
of the Americans in those regions now under re-
*cew. II. The qualities of their minds. III. Their
domeftc state. IV. Their political state and in-
;;iutions. V. Their system of war, and public
fcurity. VI. The arts with which they were
acquainted. VII. Their religious ideas and in-
itutions. VIII. Such singular detached customs
ai are not reducible to any of the former heads.
iX. I (hall conclude with a general review and
etlmnate of their virtues and defe&s.

I. The bodily constitution of the Americans.
-The human body is less affected by climate
ti:a: that of any other animal. Some animals
>re confined to a particular region of the globe,
Lrid cannot exist beyond it; others, though they
rF2v be brought to bear the injuries of a climate
:-.:gn to them, cease to multiply when carried

out

out of that diftrin which Nature destined to \.
their mansion. Even such as seem capablc rc
being naturalized in various climates, feel the es.
seA of e.-ery remove from their proper flatic-,
a-d gradually dwindle and degenerate from t.h
vigour and perfection peculiar to their specie!.
Ian is the only living creature whose frame fs
at once so hardy and so flexible, that he c,
spread over the whole earth, become the inhabita,.
of evrrv region, and thrive and multiply undc
every climate. Subject, however, to the generl
law of nature, the human bodv is not entirely ex-
empt from the operation of climate; and when
exposed to the extremes either of heat or cold,
its size or vigour diminishes.

The f-rft appearance of the inhabitants of th

Ne-.v World, ilzed the discoverers with such t-
toni:hmrcnt, that they wvere apt to imagine thec
a race of men different from those of the othe
hemifihere. Their complexion is of a redd'i
bro-vn, r.car!y referr.blirg the colour of copper'.
The hair cf their heads is always black, lo1r,
coarse, ar.d ucurled. They have no beard, a'd
every par (;f their body is perfe&ly fmoot'.
Their persons are of a full size, extremely ftrai'.:
and well proportioned z. Their features are r
g:lar, though often ditorted by absurd en&d-
vours to improve the beauty of their natgr-
form, or to render their afpeEt more dreadful :
their enemies. In the islands, %ihere four-foo:'.
animals were both few and fmail, and the er2i
vielded her productions almost fpontaneecir.,
the confiStution of the natives, neither braced br

r Oviedo Somario, p. ;6, D. Life of Col.mb:s, c.:
' Stt NT. XLIV.

t ·

:he ative exercises of the chace, nor invigorated
bv the labour of cultivation, was extremely
fceble and languid. On the continent, where
;-e forefis abound with game of various kinds,
2ad the chief occupation of many tribes was to
p.irfue it, the human frame acquired greater
r-mnefs. Still, however, the Americans were
,ore remarkable for agility than strength. They
rfembled bealts of prey, rather than animals
formed for labour a. They were not only averse
: toil, but incapable of it; and when roufedc
b- force from their native indolence, and com-
xlled to work, they funk under tasks which
,he people of the other continent would have
-,rfrmed with ease b. This fceblenefs of con-
n.:tition was universal among the inhabitants of
:o'ie regions in America which we are survey-
i-g, and may be confidered as charateriaic of
the species there C.

The beardlef; countenance and smooth flci.
( the American seems to indicate a defect of

ioutr, occasioned by some vice in his frame.
He is destitute of one sign of manhood and of
:-ength. This peculiarity, by which the inha-
itants of the New World are diftinguiihed
onm the people of all other nations, cannot be
.:tributed, as some travellers have supposed, to
:F'ir mode of fubfiftenced. For though the
i.d of many Americans be extremely insipid, as
;:.- are altogether unacquainted with the use

See NOTE XLV. b Oviedo Som. p. 51, C. Voy.
Correal, ii. i3S. Wafer's Description, p. 131.
' B. Las Casas Brev. Relac. p. 4. Torquern. Monar. i.
;. Oviedo Somario, p. 41. Hiftor. lib. iii. c. 6. Hcrrcra,
- _. lib. ix. c. 5. Simon, p. 4!.

Charlev. Hill. de Nouv. Fr. iii. 310.
VOL. 1, / H of

of salt, rude tribes in other parts of the earth
have fubtiited on aliments equally iimple, with.
out this mark of degradation, or any appartLt
fvmptom of a diminution in their vigour.

As the external form of the Americans leads

us to suspect that there is some natural debility
in their frame, the smallness of their appetite
for food has been mentioned by many author
as a confirmation of this suspicion. The quan.
tity of food which men consume varies according
to the temperature of the climate in which thcv
live, the degree of acivity which they exer,
and the natural vigor of their conltitution:.
Under the enervating heat of the torrid zcrc,
and when men pass their days in indolnce a.d
ease, they require less nourishment than the ac-
tive inhabitants of temperate or cold countnie.
But neither the warmth of their climate, Ir
their extreme laziness, will account for the :-.
common defc: of appetite among the Atrn.c
cans. The Spaniards were allonilhed \ith o'.
firving this, not only in the islands, but in i.
veral parts of the continent. The conlitutioonl
temperance of the natives far exceeded, in tlir
opinion, the abstinence of the most mortiticd
hermitse; while, on the other hand, the app-
tite of the Spaniards appeared to the Americar.
insatiably vorac'ous; and they affirmed, that oc:
Spaniard devoured more food in a day than was
fufficien: fur ten Americans'.

A proof of some feebleness in their frame, fl.

more itriking, is the infentibility of the An.c.
ricans to the charms of beauty, and the pJow:

' RPamufo, i. 3c4, F. o30, A. Simon Conquil!, li'

F. 39. Hak:ut, iii. 468. 5cS. f Herr:ra, dc.
~Law. c. 6.

llove. That passion which was destined to

,trpttcate life, to be the bond of social union,
;:,d the source of tenderness and joy, is the molt
-dcnt in the human breast. Though the perils
zad hardships of the savage slate, though excef-
-,e fatigue, on some occasions, and the difficulty
i: all times of procuring fublfltence, may seem
; be adverse to this palion, and to have a ten-
::-v to abate its vigour, yet the rudeit nations

every other part of the globe seem to feel
: influence more powerfully than the inhabitants
rs the New World. The negro glows with
il the warmth of defre natural to his climate;
;-d the most uncultivated Asiatics discover that
:.'nibility, which, from their situation on the
g'.be, we should expet them to have felt. But
:~ Americans are, in an amazing degree,
:-rngers to the force of this firit initint of na-
:.e. In every part of the New World the

y::ives treat their women with coldness and in-

c:erence. They are neither the objects of
::.at tender attachment which takes place in civil-
-.:d society, nor of that ardent delire confpi-
c.:us among rude nations. Even in climates
san-e this passion usually acquires its greatest
::,-our, the savage of America views his female
a.:h disdain, as an animal of a less noble
ccie;. He is at no pains to win her fa-
.-r by the afliduity of courtship, and still less
. citous to prefcrve it by indulgence and gen-
:.:rcfsg . Mifflonaries thernftlves, notwithftand-

t Hcnnepin Mcrurs des Sauvages, 32, &c. Rochefort
: .des lfles Antilles, p. 461. Voyage de Coreal, ii. i41.
.-lrr.ui, iii. 309. F. Lozano Defer. del Gran Chaco, 71.
..s-ner'= Defer. of Patagon. p. lz5. Lettere di P. Catanco
'.luratori I1 Chritian. Felice, i. 305.

E H 2 ing

ing the auferity of monastic ideas, cannot rtfri'a
from (xpreffing their astonishment at the :i.
pafSonate coldness of the American young ren
in their intercourse with the other fexb. N
is this reserve to be ascribed to any opinion which
they entertain with refpet to the merit of serr.a;
chastity. That is an idea too refined for a
savage, and suggested by a delicacy of fcntmic::
and affcEtion to which he is a stranger.

But in inquiries concerning either the bod3-

or mental qualities of particular races of n-r,
there is not a more common or more ftduc:;
error, than that of ascribing to a single cauf;
thole chara&eriftic peculiarities, which are t'.
cftfi of the combined operation of many caufv.
The climate and foil of America differ, in :'
manv refpeas, from those of the other hemifpheri,
and this difference is so obvious and irikin:g,
that philosophers of great eminence ha-.c la;'
hold on this as sufficient to account for wha: i
peculliar in the constitution of its inhabita.,-.
They reft on physical causes alone, and conlidce
the feeble frame and languid desire of the Ar.t
ricans, as consequences of the temperan-ent: .:
that portion of the globe which they uccu;r.
But the influences of political and moral cau:ci
ought not to have been overlooked. Tc:'
operate with no less effect than that on wh:.h
rnany philosophers ref. as a full explanation ot t2.
singular appearances which have been Inertior.cC
Wherever the ntate of society is such as to
create many wants and dcrires, which cannut ':
satisficd without regflar exertions of i:idu;i-,
t!.e body accustomed to labour becomes rob-::

h Chanvl-on. F. ;i. Lttr. rFir. tom. xxiv. 1g. Tt::,
i. 377. Venegas, i. 81. Ribas H.il. ce ;os Tri'umf. . '-

5-^

i patient of fatigue. In a more simple
:e, where the demands of men are so few
:i so moderate, that they may be gratified,
:ull without any effort, by the spontaneous
A-uctions of nature, the powers of the body
not called forth, nor can they attain their

-pcer firength. The natives of Chili and of
,r.h-Amtrica, the two temperate regions in
: New World, who live by hunting, may be

,t~cd an active ald vigorous race, when com-

:-: \\with the inhabitants of the isles, or of

c parts of the continent where hardly any
v .;r is rcquifite to procure subsistence. The

;:nions of a hunter are not, however, so re-
-:.r, or so continued, as thofc of persons em-
-,cd in the culture of the earth, or in the
:-,/i arts of civilized life, and though his
-:ty may be greater than theirs, his strength

. the whole inferior. If another direction
given to the active powers of man in the
W\'orld, and his force augmented by exer-
he might acquire a degree of vigour which
udoc not in his present state possess. The
-.a of this is confirmed by experience. Where-
- the Americans have been gradually ac-

-...;mnd to hard labour, their conititutions be-

.zr. robult, and they have been found capable
.rrforming such talks, as seemed not only to
-::cd the powers of such a feeble frame as has

:i -deemed peculiar to their country, but to
C..a any effort of the natives, either of Africa
· f Europe
Ti.c fanle reasoning will apply to what has
.i Jb5fcrsd concerning their slender demand

i Sec NOTE XLVL

H H 3 for

for food. As a proof that this should be afcrt:-'
as much to their extreme indolence, ard ofc-
total want of occupation, as to any thing pc'.
liar in the phvfical ftructuri of their bodi s, t
has been observed, that in those diRfricj;, uL:.
the people of America are obliged to exert.
unuf:oal effort of activity, in order to pro".-
f'i'bfiitcnce, or whercver they are emlulov' '-
feseTe labour, their appetite is not i;.c;icr:
that (;f othcr men, and, in some places, it .i
itr-ck obfcrvers as remarkably voraciou! k.

T1he operation of political and mor.al c2J

is !ill more conspicuous, in modifvinir the
grec of attachment between the sexes. 1
ilate of high civilization, this pafiuon, infla-
by reitraint, refined by delicacv, and cher..:
by fashion, occupies and engronffe the heart .
is no longer a simple inftinet of nature ; sentI.'.
heightens the ardour of desire, and the mo: .
der emotions of which our frame is fufce;:.:.
sooth and agitate the foul. This defcrir'
however, applies only to those, who, byv -.
situation, are exempted from the cares and
hours of life. Among persons of inferior o:.-
vho are doomed by their condition to inc::'
toil, the dominion of this passion is leli
lent; their solicitude to procure fubfiftenct,
to provide for the first demand of nature, aI':
little leisure for attending to its fccond c.
But if the nature of the intercourse between t
sexes varies so much in persons of different --
in polishcd societies, the condition of 2
v.hile he remains uncivilized, must occalion a

k Cumilia, ii. 1. 7c. 27. Lafiuu, i. 515. O
Churth. ii. S1. Muratori, i. z95,

.'.ion fill more apparent. We may well sup-
nose, that amidst the hardships, the dangers
and the simplicity of savage life, where fubfifl-
cnce is always precarious, and often scanty,
h'nere men are almost continually engaged in the
;.rfuit of their enemies, or in guarding against
i:.ir attacks, and where neither dress nor re-
-.-' ;c are employed as arts of female allurement,
t:at the attention of the Americans to their

rjmncn would be extremely feeble, without im-
ptinr.g this solely to any physical defe& or degra-
dxtion in their frame.

It is accordingly observed, that in those coun-

tric; of America, where, from the fertility of
',c foil, the mildness of the climate, or some
fir'hcr advances which the natives have made in
improvement, the means of subsistence are more
abu:.dant, and the hardships of savage life are
ic£ severely felt, the animal passion of the sexes
becor.es more ardent. Striking examples of
this occur among some tribes feated on the banks
cf great rivers well flored with food, among
o'hers who are maiters of hunting-grounds
abounding so much with game, that they have
a regular and plentiful supply of nourishment
with little labour. The superior degree of fecu-
r:v and affluence which these tribes enjoy, is
folowed by their natural effecs. The passions
i:mplantcd in the human frame by the hand of
Nature acquire additional force; new taftes and
desires are formed ; the women, as they are more
valued and admired, become more attentive to
dref; and ornament; the men, beginning to
iccl how much of their own happiness depends
ton them, no longer disdain the arts of winning

tlabe

their favour and affcEtion. The intercourse f
the sexes becomes very different from that whic'
takes place among their ruder countrymrn.;
and as hardly any refraint is imposed on trh
gratification of desire, either by religion, or
laws, or decency, the dissolution of their man.
ners is excessive1.

Notwithstanding the feeble make of the

Americans, hardly any of them arc deformed,
or mutilated, or defective in any of their senses.
All travellers have been struck with this cir.
cumftance, and have celebrated the uniform
fyvmctry and perfection of their external figure.
Some authord search for the cause of this ap-
pearance in their physical condition. As the
parents are not exhautled or over-fatigued witn
hard labour, they suppose that their children
ale born vigorous and found. They imag;r.e,
that in the liberty of savage life, the hulta.i
body, naked and unconfined from its tarlic:t

,ge, preserve3 its natural form; and that ll its
mrnbs and members acquire a juster proportion,
than when fettered with artificial re:traints,
. hich flint its growth, and dillort its shape .
Something, without doubt, may be ascribed to
the operation of these causes; but the true
reasons of this apparent advantage, which is
common to all savage nations, lie deeper, and
are clof-ly interwoven with the nature and ge-
nius of that state. The infancy of man is so
long and so helpless, that it is extremely dif-
ficult to rear children among rude nationa.
Their means of subsistence are not only fcantr,

Biet. 38S. Charley. iii. 423. Dumint Mern, fit
Loi>.tau; i.. 155,. r' Pifo, p. 6.

2 bac

et precarious. Such as live by hunting must

-i-' over extensive countries, and shift often
;-rn place to place. The care of children, as
r-!l as every other laborious talk, is devolved
-;-,n the women. The difireffes and hardships
i'the favagc life, which are often such as can
.-?dl' be supported by persons in full vigour,
:. be fatal to those of more tender age.
.Araid of undertaking a talk so laborious, and
cf such long duration, as that of rearing their
.sspring, the women, in some parts of America,
vrocure frequent abortions by the use of cer-
uin herbs, and extinguish the first sparks of
:;,t life which they are unable to cherifhn.
-r:fible that only flout and wellUformed children

s.

e force of constitution to struggle through

:rh an hard infancy, other nations abandon or
.::iiroy such of their progeny as appear feeble
; defective, as unworthy of attention °. Even

o.;n they endeavour to rear all their children

'!:nout diftincion, so great a proportion of the
.:loe number perishes under the rigorous treat-
c-,t which must be their lot in the savage state,
:a few of those who laboured under any original
ilt" attain the age of manhood P. Thus, in
.fi:hcd societies, where the means of fubfiltence
.t secured with certainty, and acquired with
Ie[; where the talents of the mind are often of
:rre importance than the powers of the body;
.:ldren are preserved notwithstanding their
c:-ects or deformity, and grow up to be use-

: Eiliis Voyage to Hudson's Bay, r19. Herrera, dec. 7.
* :. C. . ° Gumilla Hist.. 234. Techo'&
t .' Parraglav, &c. Cthurchill's Col!et. vi. icS.
' '::Jxi Hilt. CanaL. p. 57,

s41

ful citizens. In rude nations, such persons a-e
either cut off as soon as they are born, or .
coming a burden to themselves and to the cor.
munity, cannot long protract their lives. But
in those provinces of the New World where, by
the establishment of the Europeans, more regukar
provision has been made for the fubfiltence of it
inhabitants, and they are restrained from la)ing
violent hands on their children, the American
are so far from being eminent for any fuperiw
perfection in their form, that one fmould rathe
fufpet some peculiar imbecility in the race
from the extraordinary number of individua
who are deformed, dwarfifh, mutilated, blind
or deaf .

How feeble soever the constitution of to

Americans may be, it is remarkable, that then
is less variety in the human form througho:i
the New World, than in the ancient confine:.
When Columbus and the other discoverers si
visited the different countries of America wvhib
lie within the torrid zone, they naturally e.
peded to find people of the fame complexio=
with those in the corresponding regions of ti
other hemisphere. To their amazement, how.
ever, they discovered that Anlerica containe
no negroesr; and the cause of this singular a?
pearance became as much the object of curiofitT
as the fact itself was of wonder. In what p-tl
or membrane of the body that humour refidc
which tinges the complexion of the negro in;
a deep black, it is the business of anatomif ':
inquire and defcribc. The powerful opera'!:
of beat appears manifestly to be the cause wh.'

' Vo)agc ce UL'ca, i.32. 3 . r P. Martyr, d..;.-

pro --

iduces this striking variety in the human
ckCis. All Europe, a great part of Asia, and
ie temperate countries of Africa, are inhabited
men of a white complexion. All the torrid
Osc in Africa, some of the warmer regions ad-
ceit to it, and several countries in Asia, are
'cd with people of a deep black colour. If
> furvev the nations of our continent, making
: progress from cold and temperate coun-

towards those parts which are exposed.
the influence of vehement and unremitting

w:, we (hall find, that the extreme whiteness

::heir (kin soon begins to diminish; that its
'.ur deepens gradually as we advance; and

':- passing through all the successive gradations
!hade, terminates in an uniform unvarying
ick. But in America, where the agency of
s: iS checked and abated by various causes,
-..h I hlave already explained, the climate

-, to be destitute of that force which pro-
.cs such wonderful effecs on the human

'.irc. The colour of the natives of the torrid
.-c, in America, is hardly of a deeper hue

.: that of the people in the more temperate

srts of their continent. Accurate observers.
.' had an opportunity of viewing the Ameri-
i": in very different climates, and in provinces
i rermoved from each other, have been ftinck
r-h the amazing similarity of their figure and

:;ect'.

But though the hand of Nature has deviated
i ittle from one itandard in fashioning the
'.!r.a! form in America, the creation of fancy

be:a: various and extravagant. The fame

V See NoTS XLVII.

fables

fables that were current in the ancient contint-.
have been revived with respect to the };-
World, and America too has been peoplkd;.i:
human beings of monstrous and fantastic apFp
ance. The inhabitants of certain proviec:
were described to be pigmies of three feet higi.
those of others to be giants of an enorr,
size. Some travellers published accounts c
people with only one eye, others preterdc
to have discovered men without heads, wh0!
eyes and mouths were planted in their bread
The variety of Nature in her productions i; i
deed, so great, that it is presumptuous to
bounds to her fertility, and to reject indifcri:
nately every relation that does not pcrfectlv a(
cord with our own limited observation and c
perience. But the other extreme, of vtildi:
a hasty aflent, on the slightest evidence, to wu:
ever has the appearance of being strange az
marvellous, is Itill more unbecoming a ph.';.
fophical inquirer, as, in every period, men a:
more apt to be betrayed into error, by t:
weakness in believing too much, than by tc
arrogance in believing too little. In prc.;:
tion as science extends, and nature is cxarmirc
with a discerning eve, the wonders vhbci
amused ages of ignorance disappear. The ti:
of credulous travellers concerning America 1a
forgotten; the monsters which they defc-:
have been searched for in vain; and those p.
vinces where they pretend to have found inb.
bitants of singular forms, are now known t
be possessed by people nowise different from tL
other Americans.

Though those relations may, without dif-'.
sion, be rejected as fabulous, there are ot,

...,,. ,,;

accounts of varieties in the human species in some

oarts of the New World, which reft upon better

rvidcnce, and merit more attentive examination.
This variety has been particularly observed in

three different diftrits. The firit of these is
i:ua:cd in the iithmus of Darien, near the centre
:America. Lionel Wafer, a traveller possessed
:: more curiofitv and intelligence than we should
Lave expehed to find in an associate of Bucca-
rcers, difeovered theei a race of men few in

rumbrer, but of a singular make. They are of
.w Ptature, according to his description, of a
Frtble frarne, incapable of enduring fatigue.
Their colour is a dead milk white; not refem-
i:irz that of fair people among Europeans, but
R-:hout any tincture of a blush or sanguine com-
; xion. Their skin is covered with a fine hairy

'Gnn of a chalky white, the hair of their heads,
etir eve-brows, and cye-lafhes, are of the fame

L-c. Their eyes are of a singular form, and so

cz'k, that they can hardly bear the light of the
.i: but they fee clearly by moon-light, and
L-e moil ative and gay in the night °. No race
-,ilar to this has been discovered in any other
art of America. Cortes, indeed, found some
r;~ons exactly resembling the white people of
Darien, among the rare and monstrous animals
which Montezuma had colle&ted '. But as the
7,wer of the Mexican empire extended to the
'ouincts bordering on the isthmus of Darien,
::- were probably brought thence. Singular as
;:c appearance of those people may be, they can-
;,. be conlidered as constituting a distinct species.

' V.afrr Defcript. of lfh. ap. Dampier, iii. p. 346.

Cltes ap. Raauf. iii p. 241, E.
V0OL. 1. i Among

Among the negroes of Africa, as well as tir
natives of the Indian ifands, nature fometimrn|
produces a fmal number of individuals, with al
the charateriftic features and qualities of the
white people of Darien. The former are called
Albinow by the Portuguese, the latter Kackerlazl
by the Dutch. In Darien the parents of the'.
Wbites are of the fame colour with the otLhr
natives of the country; and this obferva:ion 2a
plies equally to the anomalous progeny of the
negroes and Indians. The fame mother who
produces some children of a colour that does not
belong to the race, brings forth the reft with tbe
complexion peculiar to her country X. One con.
clufion may then be formed with refpeEt to th:
people described by Wafer, the Albinos and ti.
Kackrlakaes; they are a degenerated breed, not a
separate class of men ; and from some difcafe or
defect of their parents, the peculiar colour az-
debility which mark their degradation are trac:.
mitted to them. As a decisive proof of this, -:
has been observed, that neither the white p -oe
of Darien, nor the Albinos of Africa, propagate
their race: their children are of the colour and
temperament peculiar to the natives of teir
refpedtive countries Y.

The second diftric- that is occupied by i-

habitants differing in appearance from the other
people of America, is situated in a high northen
latitude, extending from the coatt of Labrid.;
towards the pole, as far as the country is hati:-
able- The people scattered over those drta'

x Marrav. Hifl. Rer. Nat. Bras. lib. i.i. c. 4.
Y Waer, p. 34S. Denmnet Hist. ce l'Afr;iue, i. -:
R1:cthe:ch. I'ilful. f.r les Amer. ii. x, CSc. NoTr XLV....

reg: .

regions, are known to the Europeans by the
same of Efquimaux. They themselves, with that
idea of their own superiority, which consoles the
rudest and most wretched nations, assume the
rame of Keralit or M]en. They are of a middle
fze, and robust, with heads of a disproportioned
bulk, and feet as remarkably small. Their
corrplexion, though swarthy, by being conti-
tuaily exposed to the rigour of a cold climate,
icliines to the European white, rather than to
the copper colour of America, and the men have
cbards which are sometimes bushy and long Y.
From these marks of diftin&tion, as well as from
;:.c tilll less equivocal, the affinity of their lan-
guage to that of the Greenlanders, which I
Lare already mentioned, we may conclude, with
-ime degree of confidence, that the Efqui-
raux are a race different from the reft of the
Arnel icails.

We cannot decide with equal certainty con-
cening the inhabitants of the third district, situ.
a:ed at the southern extremity of America.
T;:ec are the famous Patagonians, who, during
t'o centuries and a half, have afforded a subject
uo controversy to the learned, and a objet of
wonder to the vulgar. They are supposed to be
one of the wandering tribes, which occupy that
ant, but least known region of America, which
etrids from the river lDe la Plata to the Straits
c Magellan. Their proper itation is in that
part of the interior country which lies on the
banks of the river Negro; but in the hunting

E;'s Voy. to Hudf. Bay, p. 131. 139. De la Potherie,
i";. i. 9.

9 Wales'Journ. of a Voy. to Churchill River.
r-.. 'irdaf, lol. Ix. I 1

I 1 2 fcafonI

season they often roam as far as the straits which
separate Tierra del Fuego from the main-land
The first accounts of this people were brought
to Europe by the companions of Magellanz,
who described them as a gigantic race, above
eight feet high, and of strength in proportion to
their enormous size. Among several tribes of
animals, a disparity in bulk, as considerable, rrm2
be observed. Some large breeds of horses ard
dogs exceed the more diminutive races in ftatu-t
and fitrength, as far as the Patagonian is supposcd
to rife above the usual standard of the huma
body. But animals attain the highest perfection
of their species, only in mild climates, or where
they find the most nutritive food in greated
abundance. It is not then in the uncultivatd
waste of the Magellanic regions, and among
tribe of improvident savages, that we fLould
expect to find man, pofclffing the higheftho.
nours of his race, and diltinguilhed by a fuic-
riority of size and vigour, far beyond what he
has reached in any other part of the earth. The
most explicit and unexceptionable evidence is
requisite, in order to establish a fact repugnant
to those general principles and laws, which seem
to affect the human frame in every other instance,
and to decide with respect to its nature and quali
ties. Such evidence has not hitherto been pro.
duced. Though several persons, to whose teili
mony great refpec is due, have visited this part
of America since the time of Magellan, and have
had interviews with the natives; though fore
have affirmed, that such as they saw were:
gigantic fiature, and others have formed tie

£ Falkncr'i Deftripdon of Patagonia, p. 102.

Ame conclusion from measuring their footsteps,
cr from viewing the Iceletons of their dead ;-
yet their accounts vary from each other in so
Zany essential points, and are mingled with so
many circumitances manifestly false or fabulous,
as detract much from their credit. On the other
hand, some navigators, and those among the most.
eminent of their order for discernment and ac-
ciracy, have asserted that the natives of Pata-
gonia, with whom they had intercourse, though
tout and well-made, are not of such extraordinary
size as to be distinguished from the reft of the
human species a. The existence of this gigantic
race of men seems, then, to be one of those
points in natural hiitory, with refpec to which
a cautious inquirer will hesitate, and will choose
to suspend his assent until more complete evi.
dencc fliall decide, whether he ought to admit a
fa, fecmingly inconsistent with what reason and
aperience have difcovcred concerning the ftruc.
ture and condition of man, in all the various
i!t;ations in which he has been obfcrved.

Il, order to form a complete idea with refpe&
:^ the constitution of the inhabitants of this and
..e other hemisphere, we should attend not only
to the make and vigour of their bodies, but con-
Lrr what degree of health they enjoy, and to
5hat period of longevity they usually arrive. In
te f:;nplicity of the savage fiate, when man is
Bt oppressed with labour, or enervated by lux-
ry, or disquieted with care, we are apt to
;aginc that his life will flow on almolt un-
:'ob1cd by difrafe or suffering, until his days
ki ttrTi:.:r d, in extreme old age, by the gradual

Sw NoTEr XLIX.

I ] 3 decays

decays of nature. We find, accordingly, among
the Americans, as well as among other rude peoc
ple, persons, whose decrepit and shrivelled form
seems to indicate an extraordinary length of life.
But as most of them are unacquainted with the
art of numbering, and all of them as forgetful
of what is past, as they are improvident for
what is to come, it is impossible to ascertain
their age, with any degree of precision b. It
is evident, that the period of their longevity
must vary considerably, according to the diver-
fity of climates, and their different modes of sub-
fiftence. They seem, however, to be even.
where exempt from many of the ditlempers which
afflicd polished nations. None of the maladiez,
which are the immediate offspring of luxury,
ever visited them; and they have no names in
their languages by which to distinguish this nu.
merous train of adventitious evils.

But, whatever be the situation in which man

is placed, he is born to susser; and his difeafer,
in the savage state, though fewer in number, are,
like those of the animals whom he nearly re.
fembles in his mode of life, more violent, and
more fatal. If luxury engenders and nourif:cs
distempers of one species, the rigour and il.
trefies of savage life bring on those of anothe.
As men, in this liate, are wonderfully improvi.
dent, and their means of subsistence precariou,
they often pass from extreme want to exuberart
plenty, according to the vicissitudes of fortuwe
in the chace, or in consequence of the variouc
degree of abundance with which the earth as.

b Ulloa Notic. Americ. 3z3. Bancroft Nat, HiA. c
Guiana, 334.

f rj

fords to them its produfions, in different seasons.
Their inconsiderate gluttony in the one situation,
and their severe abstinence in the other, are
equally pernicious. For, though the human
constitution may be accustomed by habit, like
that of animals of prey, to tolerate long famine,
and then to gorge voraciously, it is not a little
affected by such sudden and violent transitions.
The strength and vigour of savages are, at some
{eafons, impaired by what they susser from scar-
city of food; at others they are affliced with
disorders arising from indigestion and a super-
Ruity of gross aliment. These are so common,
that they may be confidered as the unavoidable
c.nfequcnce of their mode of subsisting, and cut
off considerable numbers in the prime of life.
They are likewise extremely subjet to confump-
tions, to pleuritic, asthmatic, and paralytic dif-
orders c, brought on by the immoderate hard-
ships and fatigue which they endure in hunting
and in war; or owing to the inclemency of
the fcafons to which they are continually ex-
posed. In the savage state, hardships and fatigue
Y;ilItly assault the constitution. In polished
focic:;es, intemperance undermines it. It is not
easy to determine which of them operates with
moll fatal cffcct, or tends most to abridge human
lite. The influence of the former is certainly
mo:t extensive. The pernicious consequences
of luxury reach only a few members in any
community, the distresses of savage life are felt
by all. As far as I can judge, after very minute
i-qu;ry, the general period of human life is

'Cnarlev. N. Fr. iii. 364. Lfitau, ii. 360. Dc la Po-
t:cxe, ii. 37.

shorter

{horter among savages, than in well-regulated
and industrious societies.

One dreadful malady, the fevereit scourge, with

which, in this life, offended Heaven chatens the
indulgence of criminal desire, seems to have been
peculiar to the Americans. By communicating
it to their conquerors, they have not only amply
avenged their own wrongs, but by adding this
calamity to those which formerly embittered hu-
man life, they have, perhaps, more than counter.
balanced all the benefits which Europe has de-
rived from the discovery of the New World.
This distemper, from the country in which it
firif raged, or from the people by whom it was
supposcd to have been spread over Europe, has
been sometimes called the Neapolitan, and some.
times the French disease. At its first appear.
ance, the infection was so malignant, its fymp-
toms so violent, its operation so rapid and fatal,
as to baffle all the efforts of medical (kilL
Astonishment and terror accompanied this un.
known afflidion in its progress, and men began
to dread the extinction of the human race by
such a cruel visitation. Experience, and the in-
genuity of physicians, gradually discovered reme.
dies of such virtue as to cure or to mitigate the
eviL During the course of two centuries and
a half, its virulence seems to have abated con-
fiderably. At length, in the fame manner with
the leprosy, which raged in Europe for forme
centuries, it may waste its force and disappear;
and in some happier age, this western infection,
like that from the East, may be known only by
description d.

c Sec NOTE L.

II. After

II. After confidering what appears to be
peculiar in the bodily constitution of the Ame-
ricans, our attention is naturally turned towards
the powers and qualities of their minds. As
the individual advances from the ignorance and
imbecility of the infant state, to vigour and ma-
tuity of understanding, Something similar to
this may be observed in the progress of the
sfccies. With respect to it, too, there is a
priod of infancy, during which several powers
of the mind are not unfolded, and all are fee-
ble and defective in their operation. In the
early ages of society, while the condition of man
i, imple and rude, his reason is but little exer-
ciicd, and his desires move within a very nar.
row sphere. Hence arise two remarkable cha-
rateriftics of the human mind in this state. Its
intellectual powers are extremely limited; its
ernotions and efforts are few and languid. Both
t'!cer diltincions are conspicuous among the
rideri and most unimproved of the American
tribes, and constitute a itriking part of their
ctlcnption.

What, among polished nations, is called fpe-
calative reasoning or research, is altogether un-
known in the rude fiate of society, and never
becomes the occupation or amusement of the
umran faculties, until man be so far improved
2s to have secured, with certainty, the means
ds fubfiitence, as well as the poffefflon of leisure
_-.d tranquillity. The thoughts and attention of a
-rage are confined within the small circle of
ojcuts, immediately conducive to his preferva.
tUin or enjoyment. Every thing beyond that,
;capcs his observation, or is perfectly indif-

fcrent

ferent to him. Like a mere animal, what is e.
fore his eyes interests and affects him; what is
out of fight, or at a distance, makes little in.
pression e. There are several people in America
whose limited understandings seem not to be
capable of forming an arrangement for futurity;
neither their solicitude nor their foresight ex.
tend so far. They follow blindly the impule
of the appetite which they feel, but are entirel
regardless of distant consequences, and even 0
those removed in the least degree from imme.
diate apprehension. While they highly prize
such things as serve for present use, or miniler
to present enjoyment, they set no value upon
those which are not the objec of some imme.
diate want f. WVhen, on the approach of the
evening, a Caribbee feels himself disposed to go
to reft, no consideration will tempt him t. feil
his hammoc. But, in the morning, when he ii
sallying out to the business or pastime of the
day, he will part with it, for the flightef toy
that catches his fancy g. At the close of win-
ter, while the impression of what he has suffercd
from the rigour of the climate is fresh in the mind
of the North American, he sets himself with
vigour to prepare materials for erecting a com-
sortable hut to protect him againfl the incle.
mency of the succeeding season; but as soon as
the weather becomes mild, he forgets what i
paRs, abandons his work, and never thinks of it

c Ulloa Noticias Americ. 222. f Venegas Hi!i. i

Calif i. 66. Supp. Church. Coll. v. 693. Borde Defi
des Caraibes, p. 16. Ellis Voy. 194. s Labat Vo.

s ii.; 114, 115;. TTeruc, ii. 385,

Inor;i

nore, until the return of cold compels him,
when too late, to resume it b.

If in concerns the most interesting, and seem-
i:glv the most simple, the reason of man, while
r.de and destitute of culture, differs so little
irom the thoughtless levity of children, or the
improvident inftin& of animals, its exertions in
ether directions cannot be very considerable.
The objecs towards which reason turns, and
the disquisitions in which it engages, mulf de-
,-nd upon the state in which man is placed, and
.re suggested by his necessities and desires.
Difquilitions, which appear the most neceffaly
znd important to men in one state of society,
Cver occur to those in another. Among civil-
led nations, arithmetic, or the art of number.
3r, is deemed an essential and elementary science,
md in our continent, the invention and use of

reaches back to a period so remote as is be-
,dn( the knowledge of history. But among
:i.ages, who have no property to estimate, no
?Jarded treasures to count, no variety of ob-
:; or multiplicity of ideas to enumerate, arith-
rtic is a superfluous and useless art. Accord-
^lv, among some tribes in America it seems to
'c quite unknown. There are many who can-
.it reckon farther than three; and have no
nnomination to dilfinguifh any number above
. i Several can proceed as far as ten, others

tv't'.-. When they would convey an idea
; an.v nurber beyond these, they point to the
i- ,'f their head, intimating that it is equal

' A-:-': Hist. of Arer. Indians, 4T7. 'Condam.

; - .:i.as ap. de Bry, ix. sl8. Lery. ibid. 251.
-.:, .;-. La.t r, Ei. z3. 314.

to

to them, or with wonder declare it to be so
great that it cannot be reckoned r. Not only
the Americans, but all nations, while extremey!
rude, seem to be unacquainted with the art of
computation Z. As soon, however, as thev ac.
quire such acquaintance or conneEtion with a
variety of objects, there is frequent occasion to
combine or divide them, their knowledge of num-
bers increases, so that the state of this art among
any people may be confidered as one standard,
by which to estimate the degree of their im-
provement. The Iroquois, in North-America,
as they are much more civilized than the rude
inhabitants of Brail, Paraguay, or Guiana, have
likewise made greater advances in this refpeci;
though even their arithmetic does not eyterd
beyond a thousand, as in their petty tranfad'ion
they have no occasion for any higher number r.
The Cherokee, a less considerable nation on the
fame continent, can reckon only as far as a hun.
dred, and to that extent have names for the fevtral
numbers; the smaller tribes in their neighbour-
hood can rife no higher than ten b.

In other refpedts, the exercise of the under-

flanding among rude nations is still more limited.
The first ideas of every human being muf be
such as he receives by the senses. But, in th-
mind of man, while in the savage itate, there
seem to be hardly any ideas but what enter by

I Dumont Louis. i8. 7 Herrera, dec. i. lb. ii. c-i.

Bict. 396. Borde, 6. z This is the cafe with th
Greenlanders, Crantz, i. 225. and with Kamchatlli£-,
M. I'Abbb Chappe, iii. 17. ' Charley. Nouv. Frnc.
iii. 402. b Adir's Hist. of Amer. Indiaun, 77. '
N'TE LI.

tait

this avenue. The obje&s around him are pre-
sented to his eye. Such as may be subservient'
to his use, or can gratify any of his appetites,-
attract his notice; he views the reft without
c.riofity or attention. Satisfied with confider-
ib: them under that simple mode, in which they
Ie-Iar to him as separate and detached, he nei-
t cr combines them so as to form general classes,
rr contemplates their qualities apart from the
H.bict in which they inhere, nor bellows a
,:o!ghlt upon the operations of his own mind
..,ccrnniig them. Thus, he is unacquainted
with all the ideas which have been denominated
wn.wierfal, or chflraA, or of rffefiion. The range
c' his underitanding must, of course, be very
cnnfined, and his reasoning powers be em-
:lovcd merely on what is sensible. This is so
'-markably the cafe with the ruder nations of
Ar.merica, that their languages (as we hall after-
'arcd find) have not a word to express any thing
;:: what is material or corporeal. Time, space,
;. iance, and a thousand other terms which re-
:K-cnt abftrast and universal ideas, are altoge-
':-r unknown to them c, A naked savage,
(:wering over the fire in his miserable cabin, or
retched under a few branches which afford him
a temporary helter, has as little inclination as
capacity for useless speculation. His thoughts
utend not beyond what relates to animal life,
iz-d when they are not direEted towards some of
i.t concerns, his mind is totally inaAive. In
::'ations where no extraordinary effort either
t ingenuity or labour is requisite, in order to
-iJfy the simple demands of nature, the powers

c Condam. p. 54
rOL. I. K K of

of the mind are so seldom routed to any exertion,
that the rational faculties continue almost dor.
mant and unexercifed. The numerous tnrb
feattered over the rich plains of South-America,
the inhabitants of some of the islands, and of
several fertile regions on the continent, come
under this description. Their vacant count-.
nance, their flaring unexpressive eye, their liftitf
inattention, and total ignorance of fubjectl,
which seem to be the first which should occupy
the thoughts of rational beings, made such ir.-
pression upon the Spaniards, when they first be.
held those rude people, that they confiderid
them as animals of an inferior order, and could
not believe that they belonged to the human
species d. It required the authority of a papal
bull to counteract this opinion, and to convince
them that the Americans were capable of tit
funetions, and entitled to the privileges of hu-
manitye. Since that time, persons more en-
lightened and impartial than the discoverers or
conquerors of America, have had an opportunity
of contemplating the most savage of its in-
habitants, and they have been astonished and
humbled, with observing how nearly man, 13
this condition, approaches to the brute creation.
But in feverer climates, where subsistence cannct
be procured with the fame ease, where men
mmft unite more closely, and a& with greate
eoncert, necefity calls forth their talents, and
Iharpens their invention, so that the intelle&tua
powers are more exercised and improved. The
North-American tribes and the natives of Chil

Herrera, dec. z. lib. ii. c. 15-
c Torqucr. Mon. lad. iii. 19.

8trY

who inhabit the temperate regions in the two
great diftrits of America, are people of culti-
vated and enlarged understandings, when viewed
in comparison with some of those feated in the
ilands, or on the banks of the Maragnon and
Orinoco. Their occupations are more various,
their system of policy, as well as of war, more
complex, their arts more numerous. But,
even among them, the intellecual powers are
extremely limited in their operations, and unless
when turned directly to those objeets which in.
terest a savage, are held in no estimation. Both
the North-Americans and Chilefe, when not en-
gaged in some of the functions belonging to a
wvarrior or hunter, loiter away their time in
thoughtless indolence, unacquainted with any
other subjec worthy of their attention, or capable
of occupying their mindss. If even among
them, reason is so much circumfcnbed in its ex-
ertions, and never arrives, in its highest attain-
ments, at the knowledge of those general prin.
ciples and maxims, which serve as the foundation
of science, we may conclude, that the intellec.
tual powers of man in the savage state are
cltitute of their proper objec, and cannot ac-
quire any considerable degree of vigour and en.
largement.

From the fame causes, the aaive efforts of
the mind are few, and, on most occasions, lan-
guid. If we examine into the motives which
route men to a&ivity in civilized life, and
prompt them to persevere in fatiguing exertions
of their ingenuity or strength, we mall find that
they arise chiefly from acquired wants and ap.

f Lafitau, ii. z.

K K 2 petites

petites. Tiefe are numerous and importunatet
they keep the mind in perpetual agitation, and,
in order to gratify them, invention mutt be alwar
on the firetch, and indufiry muff be inceffantjv
employed. But the desires of simple nature art
few, ai:d where a favourable climate yields alino(,
spontaneously what suffices to gratify them,
they scarcely stir the foul, or excite any violkr
emotion. Hence the people of several tribes in
America waste their life in a liitlefs indolenct,
To be free from occupation, seems to be al
the enjoyment towards which they aspire. They
will continue whole days stretched out in the:
hanmrocs, or feated on the earth in persecd idle.
ness, without changing their posture, or raisin;
their eyes from the ground, or uttering a finglc
word g.

Such is their aversion to labour, that ne;the

the hope of future good, nor the apprehenioon oi
future evil, can surmount it. They appear equall)
indifferent to both, discovering little solicitude,
and taking no precautions to avoid the one, or tc
secure the other. The cravings of hunger ma)
roufi them; but as they devour, with little dii;
tin&ion, whatever will appease its inftintive de
mands, the exertions which these occasion an
of short duration. Defittute of ardour, a
well as variety of desire, they feel not the forct
of those powerful springs which give vigour t
the movements of the mind, and urge the pa.
tient hand of industry to persevere in its effort
Man, in some parts of America, appears in a
form so rude, that we can discover no effeti 0o
his activity, and the principle of underitandir.

s BoSucr Vqy. au Pcrou, 102. Borde, 5.

n·'it;

wiich should direc it, seems hardly to be un-
;'cd. Like the other animals, he has no
i;ed residence; he has ere&ed no habitation to
cicter him from the inclemency of the weather;
; has taken no measures for securing certain
;iblnl!ence; he neither sows nor reaps; but
;:-v.s about as led in search of the plants
s. fruits which the earth brings forth in fuc-
ciTon; and in quest of the game which he kills

the forests, or of the fish which he catches
the rivers.
This description, however, applies only to
;..e tribes. Man cannot continue long in this
:-:e of feeble and uninformed infancy. He was
;ade for industry and aftion, and the powers

hi3 nature, as well as the necessity of his

c.dition, urge him to fulfil his destiny. Ac-
c- ingly, among most of the American na-
-~., cfpecially those feated in rigorous climates,
e.e efforts are employed, and some previous
:.:cagions are taken, for securing subsistence.
-: career of regular industry is begun, and
: laborious arm has made the first essays of
. power. Still however the improvident
Ld fiothful genius of the savage state pre-
:..inates. Even among those more improved
:.es, labour is deemed ignominious and de-
ading. It is only to work of a certain kind
t a man will deign to put his hand. The
eater part is devolved entirely upon the
;.Ten. One half of the community remains
-;.iire while the other is oppressed with the
:!'itude and variety of its occupations. Thus
2.r induflry is partial, and the foresight which

K K 3 regulates

regulates it, is no less limited. A remarkae
instance of this occurs in the chief arrangemr-
with refpea to their manner of living. Th
depend for their subsistence, during one pan
the year, on fishing ; during another, on hcn:
ing; during a third, on the produce of thw:
agriculture. Though experience has tauo,
them to foresee the return of those various i
sons, and to make some provision for the
fpeaive exigencies of each, they either wl-
sagacity to proportion this provision to their c'-
fumption, or are so incapable of any comm:-.
over their appetites, that, from their inconfid:-
ate waste, they often feel the calamities of famr-
as severely as the rudest of the savage tnri
What they susser one year does not augrrc-!
their induiry, or render them more provident'
prevent similar diftretesh. This inconfidcr-e
thoughtlessness about futurity, the effeEt ofi
norance and the cause of sloth, accompanies a-i
charadtcrizes man in every stage of savage li{'
and by a capricious singularity in his operati'.s
he is then least solicitous about supplying
wants, when the means of satisfying them za
molt precarious, and procured with the gre.-cd
difficulty I.

III. After riewing the bodily constitution c

the Americans, and contemplating the powc
of their minds, we are led, in the natural o
of inquiry, to confider them as united togetft

" Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 33S. Lettr. Edif. 13. :1

Dcicript. of N. France, Olorn's Collc&. ii .

So. i

Pothcre, ii. 63. ' Bancroft' Na. HI. ofG!-
3z6. 333. k Sec NOTL Lll.

in society. Hitherto our researches have been
confined to the operations of underitanding
refpeEting themselves, as individuals, now they
will extend to the degree of their sensibility and
affei;on towards their species.

The domestic itate is the first and most simple

form of human association. The union of the
sexes, among different animals, is of longer or
shorter duration in proportion to the ease or dif-
ficulty of rearing their offspring. Among those
tribes where the season of infancy is short, and
the young soon acquire vigour or agility, no per-
manent union is formed. Nature commits the
care of training up the offspring to the mother
alone, and her tenderness, without any other as-
fillance, is equal to the talk. But where the
state of infancy is long and helpless, and the joint
assiduity of both parents is requisite in tending
their feeble progeny, there a more intimate con-
nexion takes place, and continues until the pur-
pole of nature be accomplished, and the new race
grow up to full maturity. As the infancy of man is
more feeble and helpless than that of any other
animal, and he is dependent, during a much longer
period, on the care and foresight of his parents,
the union between husband and wife came early
to be confidered not only as a solemn, but as a
permanent contrat. A general state of pro.
mifcuous intcrcourfe between the sexes never
existed but in the imagination of poets. In
the infancy of society, when ,men, destitute of
arts and industry, lead a hard precarious life,
the rearing of their progeny demands the at-
tentiou and efforts of both parents: and if their

union

union had not been formed and continued with
this view, the race could not have been preserved.
Accordingly, in America, even among the rudest
tribes, a regular union between husband and
wife was universal, and the rights of marriage
vwere understood and recognized. In those dif-
tricts where subsistence was scanty, and the
difficulty of maintaining a family was great, the
man confined himself to one wife. In warmer
and more fertile provinces, the facility of pro.
curing food concurred with the influence of
climate, in inducing the inhabitants to increase
the number of their wives1. In some countries,
the marriage union subsisted during life; in
others, the impatience of the Americans under
reflraint of any fpccies, together with their na-
tural levity and caprice, prompted them to dif-
solve it on very flight pretexts, and often without
aisgning any cause .

But in whatever light theAmericans confidered

the obligation of this contrac, either as per-
petual, or only as temporary, the condition of
women was equally humiliating and miserable.
Whether man has been improved by the progress
of arts and civilization in society, is a queflion,
which, in the wantonness of disputation, has
been agitated among philosophers. That women
are indebted to the refinements of polished man-
ners for a happy change in their itate, is a point

'Lettr. Edf. 23. 31S. Lafitan Mceurs, i. 554. Ltry
ap. de Bry, iii 234. Journal de Grillet et Bech2mel, p. 8S.

" Lazfiu, i. 50S. Joutel Journ. Hifror. 345. Loarno

Defer. del Gran Chaco, 70. Hennepin Mcur3 des Sauvatu,
P. 33. hic

which

w-hich can admit of no doubt. To despise and
tn degrade the female sex, is the characeriftic
of the savage state in every part of the globe.
lan, proud of excelling in strength and in cou-
rage, the chief marks of pre-eminence among
rade people, treats woman, as an inferior,
with diidain. The Americans, perhaps from
that coldness and insensibility which has been
canfidered as peculiar to their constitution, add
tegl-ct and harshness to contempt. The most
i'telligent travellers have been struck with this
i-attention of the Americans to their women,
It is not, as I have already observed, by a
nudied display of tcndernefs and attachment,
tat the American endeavours to gain the heart
or the woman whom he withes to marry. Mar-
rage itself, inflead of being an union of as-
dction and interests between equals, becomes,
among them, the unnatural conjunction of a
railer with his sLave. It is the observation of
an author, whose opinions are deservedly of
Feat weight, that wherever wives are pur-
c:ased, their condition is extremely depressed ".
They become the property and the slaves of those
who buy them. In whatever part of the globe
this cuilom prevails, the observation holds. In
countries where refinement has made sone pro-
greis, women, when purchased, are excluded from
"iciety, itut up in fcqueftered apartments, and
kept under the vigilant guard of their masters. In
rader nations, they are degraded to the meanest
fiictions. Among many people of America,
':- marriage contract is properly a purchase.

Sketches of Hi;. of Man, i. I 4.

The

The man buys his wife of her parents. Th0iou
unacquainted with the use of money, or wii
such commercial transactions as take place i
more improved society, he knows how to ge
an equivalent for any obje& which he deires to
possess. In some places, the suitor devotes bi
service for a certain time to the parents of the
maid whom he courts; in others he hunts so-
them occasionally, or assists in cultivating thei
fields, and forming their canoes; in others, he
offers presents of such things as are deemed mot
valuable on account of their usefulness or rarity:.
In return for these, he receives his wife; andthi
circumstance, added to the low estimation of woc
men among savages, leads him to confider her as
female servant whom he has purchased, and whoa
he has a title to treat as an inferior. In all unpolih.
ed nations, it is true, the functions in domwid
economy, whiich fall naturally to the share o:
women, are so many, that they are fubje&ed tc
haid labour, and must bear more than their fui
portion of the common burden. But in Ame
rica their condition is so peculiarly grierous
and their depreflion so complete, that fervitud
is a name too mild to describe their wretches
state. A wife, among molt tribes, is no bette
than a beast of burden, destined to every omfi
of labour and fatigue. While the men loit.
out the day in foth, or spend it in amuferner,
the women are condemned to incessant toil
Talks are imposed upon them without pity, ar.
services are received without complacence o

o Lafitau Maurs, &c. i 560, &c. Charlev. iii. 2z5,t:
Herrna, dec. 4. lib. iv. c. 7. Duminr, ii. 156.

gratitude

ratitude P. Every circumstance reminds women
r' this mortifying inferiority. They must ap-
proach their lords with reverence; they must
.gard them as more exalted beings, and are not
permitted to eat in their presence q. There are
iltricts in America where this dominion is so
gevous, and so sensibly felt, that some women,
n a wild emotion of maternal tenderness, have
&dMroyed their female children in their infancy,
i order to deliver them from that intolerable
bondage to which they knew they were doomedr.

Thus the first institution of social life is per-
rcrted. That itate of domestic union towards
which nature leads the human species, in order
ut soften the heart to gentleness and humanity,
is rendered so unequal, as to establish a cruel
diiinEtion between the sexes, which forms the
one to be harsh and unfeeling, and humbles the
other to servility and fubjecdion.

It is owing, perhaps, in some measure, to this
iate of depression, that women in rude nations
are far from being prolific'. The vigour of
their constitution is exhausted by excessive
fatigue, and the wants and diltreffes of savage
Lic are so numerous, as to force them to take
uariuus precautions in order to prevent too rapid
:i iilcreafe of their progeny. Among wandering
lu.bc, or such as depend chiefly upon hunting

; Tertre, ii. 3Sz. Borde Relat. des Mceurs des Caraibes,
i.:i. Biet. 37. Condamine,p 113. Fermin. i.79.

uGanilla, i. ;3. Birrere, 164. Labat Voy. ii. 73.

Chanvalon, i Tertre, ii. 3oo. r Gumilla, ii.
13. 3. Heriera, d-c.-. ii. .
ii . . 4.

Lf.:a, i. g90. Charl-voix, ill. 304.

for

for subsistence, the mother cannot attempt to
rear a fecund child, until the first has attained
such a degree of vigour as to be in rome meafu:e
independent of her care. From this rrotre, i:
is the universal practice of the American women
to suckle their children during several yearst
and as they seldom marry early, the period 0f
their fertility is over, before they can finish the
long but necessary attendance upon two or
three children". Among some of the le:1
polished tribes, whose industry and forefiglt
do no extend so far as to make any regular
provision for their own fubfiflence, it is a
maxim not to burden themselves with rearin;
more than two children x; and no such nu.
merous families, as are frequent in civiliye?
focicties, are to be found among men in the
savage itate . When twins are born, one es
them commonly is abandoned, because t!h
mother is not equal to the task of rearir-
both2. When a mother dies while (he i
nurting a child, all hope of preferring it;
life fails, and it is buried together with her
in the fame grave . As the parents are
frequently exposed to want by their own ir-

t Herre:, dec. 6. lib. i. c. 4.
u Charlev. iii. 0o3. Dumont Mem. fur Louifiaie, u;

270. Deoys Hist. Natur. de l'Amerique, &c. i 365
CharLv. -ift. Je Parag. ii. 422. Techc
Account of Paraguay, &c. Church. Collea. vi. ioS. Le'.
Edif. 24. 2co. Lozano Defcr. 92. Y Macccl-.r'
Journal, 63. z Lctt. Edif. x. zoo. Set
No'Tr LI11. ' Charley. hi. 368. Let:. Edif. r
.oo. P. Melch. Hcrnandez Mcmor. de Chcriqui. Cc:br.,
CollQ. Orig. Pap. i.

prov;cK'.

'-ovident indolence, the difficulty of fuRiaining
·eir children becomes so great, that it is not
,ccommon to abandon or destroy them b.
'nus their experience of the difficulty of
:rnaing up an infant to maturity, amidst the
.rdihips of savage life, often stifles the voice
c; nature among the Americans, and suppresses
,'e itrong emotions of parental tenderness.
But, though necessity compels the inha.
i::ants of America thus to set bounds to the
.-reafe of their families, they are not deficient
:affeetion and attachment to their offspring.
:T:c feel the power of this inftinc in its full
.':c-, and as long as their progeny continue
-Tb!e and helpless, no people exceed them in
:.,dcrncfs and carec. But in rude nations, the
i.?pd(lnce of children upon their parents is of
..rter continuance than in polished societies.
iW in men must be trained to the various func-
'.s of civil life by previous dicfipline and edun
-r::n, when the knowledge of abstruse sciences
-.:t be taught, and dexterity in intricate arts
:r. be acquired, before a young man is pre-
,;-:d to begin his career of ation, the atten-

s,- feelings of a parent are not confined to the

Tt1rs of infancy, but extend to what is more

:.:e, the eitablifhment of his child in the
v3red. Even then, his solicitude does not ter-
-..ae:. His protedtion may still be requisite, and

.. ;i.dom and experience lill prove useful guides.
.-., a permanent connexion is formed; parental
:-'. ness is exercised, arid filial refpe& re-
:.Ted, throughout the whole course of life.

b Veieg2's Hist. of Caeiforn. i. 82,
' Gumilla, i. 211. rict. 39,.
Tr;, i. L L But

But in the simplicity of the savage state,
the affection of parents, like the infiin&irs
fondness of animals, ceases almost entirely vs
soon as their offspring attain maturity. Lit;.
inftru&ion fits them for that mode of life to
which they are destined. The parents, as if
their duty were accomplished, when they hbae
conduced their children through the helplef
years of infancy, leave them afterwards at ent::.
liberty. Even in their tender age, they feldc.
advise or admonish, they never chide ur chas.
tife them. They susser them to be abfoii.:
m.asters of their own a&tions d. In an Amemc:
hut, a father, a mother, and their polter:.,
ii;e together like persons assembled by accidt:..
witholt feerring to feel the obligation of ::;
duties mutually arising from this connectif,:.
As filial love is not cherished by the conti:..
ance of attention or good officec, the recollcct:
of benefits received in early infancy is too i.::
to excite it. Conscious of their own libr--:.
and impatient of restraint, the youth of Arr:r.ncr
are accuftorr.ed to act as if thry were toa -v
independent. Their parents are not objeis .:
greater regard than other personS. The y e:-
them alwvavs with neglect, ar.:l often with lu.
harfhncfs and infolencc, as to fill those s!0o ha.:
been wi:neffes of their conduct with hiro r'.

d Cbarley. iil. 272. Biet. 3.c. Gunni a, i. ::.

Lafitau, i. 6cz. Creuxii Hifr. Canad. p. 7. Se:r.a,
Reiac. Hilt de Icl Chequ;t . 3. Cha'iv. k
N. Fr. iii. 273. f Gumiiia, i. 212. Ter:r, ..
;;6. Charlev. Hi: .ir N. Frar.c, iii 3c9. (:. t:
Hist. de Parag. i. i ;. I.ozano, DPfr-i.: c.i (ran C.:':.
p. 68. Ic, il1. Sc;r.anrd. Rcla;. Hi:.;r. cc io; C'.-:
4e6.

T'a::

Thus the ideas which seem to be natural to man
in his savage slate, as they result necessarily
-:om his circumfLances and condition in that
period of his progress, affect the two capital
r:ations in domcitic life. They render the
::ion between husband and wife unequal. They
rn.jrtcn the duration. and weaken the force, of
:.: conncsion between parents and children.

» L LZ NOTES

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

# NOTE I. p. 7.

# NOTE II. p. 11.

'AND
ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTE I. p.7.
TYRE was situated at such a distance from the Ara.

bian Gulf, or Red Sea, as made it impracticable

·; convey commodities from thence to that city by
a-d carriage. This induced the Phenicians to render
,tmnfelves mailers of Rbinvcrura, or Rbinoco!ura, the
rtare:r port in the Mediterranean to the Red Sea. They
.nded the cargoes which they purchased in Arabia,
I.tiopia, and India, at Elath, the safest harbour in the
?.d -ea towards the North. Thence they were carried
-, land to Rhinocolura, the distance not being very con-
'.:-able; andt being reflippe I in that port, were tranf-
.rt.ed to Tyre, and distributed over the world. Strabon.
G-o-r. Edit. Cafaub. lib. xvi. p. xr 8. Diodor. Sicul.
:.bioth. Hiflor. Edit. Weffelingi, lib. I. p. 70.

NOTE II. p. 1.

THa Periplus Hannonis is the only authentic monu-
reat of the Carthaginian skill in naval affairs, and one
;i the most curious fragments transmitted to us by an-
'.Aity. The learned and indufirious Mr. Dodwell, in
; duTertation prefixed to the Periplus of Hanno, in the
-:.ion of the Minor Geographers, publishcd at Oxford,
erteavours to prove that this is a (purious work, the
oaaofition of some Greek, who assumed Hanno's name.
but M. de Montesquieu, in his 1'Esprit des Loix, liv. xxi.

LL3 c. 8.

c. 2. and M. de Bougalnville, in a ditTertation publif,eI
torn. xxvi. of the Memoires de l'Academie des Infcrio.
tions, &c. have established its authenticity by argumrnts
which to me appear unanswerable. Ramufio has a:.
companied his translation of this curious voyage w::'
a dissertation tending to illustrate it. Racolte deV.
3ggi, vol. i. p. iit. M. de Bougainville has, with grcs:
learning and abiGty, treated the fame fubje&. It appeanr
that Hanno, according to the mode of ancient naviga.
:;on, undertook this voyage in fmali vetTels, so conrtru&.
ed, that he could keep close in with the coast. H:

i:;ed from Gades to the island of Cerne in twelve day;.

This is probably what is known to the moderns by tic
name of the isle of Arguim. It became the chief station
of the Carthaginians on that coast ; and M. de Bougain-
ville contends, that the ciflerns found there are mor.s.
rnenit of the Carthaginian power and ingenuity. Pro.
ceeding from Cerne, and still following the winding of
the coast, he arrived, in seventeen days, at a promon.
tory which he called Tbe WIst Horn, probably Cape
Palmas. From this he advanced to another promon.
tory, which he named 7Te Sotrb Horn, and which ii
manifestly Cape de Tres Puntas, about five degrees nortn
of the line. All the circumstances contained in the fr.cn
abftraft of his journal, which is handed down to us,
concerning the appearance and slate of the countries on
the coast of Africa, are confirmed and illuftratedl by a
comparison with the accounts of modern navigators.
Even those circumstances, whic", from their feemr,.r
improbability, have been produced to invalidate the crc.
d.bi:ity of his relation, tend to confirm it. He observes,
that in the country to the south of Cerne, a profonrd
silence reigned through the day; but during the nightinna-
merable fires were kindled along the banks of the riverc,
and the air resounded with the noise of pipes and drons,
and cries of ioy. The fame thing, as Ramufio obferva,
still takes place. The excessive heat obliges the negroe
to take shelter in the woods, or in their hosfes, during
the day. As soon as the fun sets, they sally out, and
by torch light enjoy the pleasure of music ;d dancinag

ta

# NOTE III. p. 12.

in which they spend the night. Ramus. i. Ii3. F.
In another place, he mentions the sea as burning with
.orents of fire. V, iat occurred to M Adanfon, on the
fmane coast, may explain this; " As soon," fays he,
" as the fun dipped beneath the horizon, and night
overspread the earth with darkness, the sea lent us its
ifendly light. While the prow of our vessel ploughed
nce foaming surges, it seemed to set them all on fire.
Thus we failed in a luminous inclofure, which fur-
:*unded us like a large circle of rays, from whence
carted in the wake of the ship a long fiream of light."
"?y. to Senegal, p. 176. This appearance of the sea
o'.trved by Hunter, has been mentioned as an argument
)rainit the authenticity of the Periplus. It is, however,
a phenomenon very common in warm climates. Capt.
C9k's Second Voyage, vol. i. p. 15. The Periplus of
niano has been tranfated, and every point with respect
: i: has been illuflrated with much learning and in-
'cnuity in a work published by Don Pedr. Rodrig. Carm-
srnanes, intitled, Antiguedad maritima de Cartago,
csn el Periplo de fu General Hannon traducido e illus-
sadr.. Mad. I756. 4°.

NOTE III. p. I2.

I.,.G after the navigation of the Phenicians and of
:udoxus round Africa, Polybius, the most intelligent
or.d best informed hitlorian of antiquity, and particularly
:..fnguifhed by his attention to geographical researches,
afirm5, that it was not known, in his time, whether
Africa was a continued continent, itretching to the
futh, or whether it was encompassed by the sea. Po-
*ybii Hist. lib. iii. Pliny the naturalill asserts, that
:sere can be no communication between the southern
and northern temperate zones. Plinii Hist. Natur.
dr,. in ufum Delph. 4to. lib. ii. c. 68. If they had
Yven full credit to the accounts of those voyages, the
-n;r could not have entertained such a doubt, the
l:'et could not have delivered such an opinion. Strabo
cnuaoas the voyage of Eudoxus, but treats it as a

fabulous

# NOTE IV. p. 18.

fabulous tale, lib. ii. p. 15i; and, according to ha
account of it, no other judgment can be formed weib
refpea [to it. Strabo teems not to have known any
thing with certainty concerning the form and ftatect
the southern parts of Africa. Geogr. lib. xvii. p. 118:.
Ptolemy, the most inquisitive and learned of all the an-
cient geographers, was equally unacquainted with any
part of Africa firuated a few degrees beyond the cqui.
no&ial line; for he supposes that this great continent
was not surrounded by the tea, but that it firetched,
without interruption, towards the south pole: and he f)
far mistakes its true figure, that he describes the conti-
nent as becoming broader and broader as it advanced
towards the south. PtolemaiGeogr. lib. iv. c. 9. Bn.
etii Parallela Geogr. veteris et nova, p. 96.

NOTE IV. p. 18.

A FATr, recorded by Strabo, affords a very firong

and singular proof of the ignorance of the ancients wi,-i
refpe: to the situation of the various parts of the earth.
When Alexander marched along the banks of the H)-
dafpes and Acefine, two of the rivers which fall inrt
the Indus, he observed that there were many crocodiles
in those rivers, and that the country produced beans ci
the fame species with those which were common in
Egypt. From these circumstances, he concluded that
he had discovered the source of the Nile, and prepared a
fleet to fail down the Hydafpes to Egypt. Strab. Geog.
lb. xv. p. 0ozo. This amazing error did not arise from
any ignorance of geography peculiar to that monarch;
for we are informed by Strabo, that Alexander applied
with particular attention in order to acquire the know-
ledge of this science, and had accurate maps or defcnp-
tions of the countries through which he marched.
Lib.ii. p. iso. But in his age, the knowledge of the
Greeks did not extend beyond the limits of the Mea-
terranean.

a

# NOTE V. p. 19.

# NOTE VI. p. 22.

# NOTE VII. p. 23.

NOTE V . p.9.

As the flux and reflux of the sea is remarkably great
! the mouth of the river Indus, this would render the
;,cnomonon more formidable to the Greeks. Varen
CGogr. vol. i. p. 251.

NOTE VI. p. 22.

IT is probable that the ancients were seldom induced
to advance so far as the mouth of the Ganges, either by
ootives of curiosity, or views of commercial advantage.
In consequence of this, their idea concerning the position
cf that great river was very erroneous. Ptolemy places
that branch of the Ganges which he diftinguifles by the
tine of the Great Mouth, in the hundred and forty-
Ex:h degree of longitude from his first meridian in the
foarnate Islands. But its true longitude, computed
hm that meridian, is now determined by agronomical
tfervations to be only a hundred and five degrees. A
[orapher so eminent must have been betrayed into
i. error of this magnitude by the imperfection of the
cformation which he had received concerning those
sant regions; and this affords a striking proof of the
ir:courfe with them being extremely rare. With re-

A to the countries of India beyond the Ganges, his
rtlligence was still more defef-ive, and his errors more
crrmnous. I shall have occasion to observe in another
;ia, that he has placed the country of the Seres, or
-.noa, no less than sixty degrees farther east than its
': position. M. d'Anville, one of the most learned
i' intelligent of the modern geographers, has (et this

t!tcr in a clear light, in two dissertations published in
.t.. de l'Academ. des Infcript. &c. tom. xxxii.
j73. 6o04

NOTE VII. p.23.

IT is remarkable, that the discoveries of the ancients
':': made chiefly by land; those of the moderns are

garried

# NOTE VIII. p. 27.

carried on chiefly by tea. The progress of conquest le
to the former, that of commerce to the latter. Iti,
judicious observation of Strabo, that the conquelts o
Alexander the Great made known the East, thole of
the Romans opened the Weft, and those of Mithrida:1l
king of Pontus the North. Lib. i. p. 26. When if.
covery is carried on by land alone, its progress mnul b.
flow, and its operations confined. When it is carntd
on only by sea, its sphere may be more extensive, ar
its advances more rapid , but it labours under pecuhl:
defets. Though it may make known the poiition ci
different countries, and ascertain their boundaries as fa
as these are determined by the ocean, it leaves us n
ignorance with refpe& to their interior slate Abo;:
two centuries and a half have elapsed since the Eiro.
peans failed round the southem promontory of Afriu,
and have traded in most of its ports; but, in a con.
fiderable part of that great continent, they have docs
little more than survey its coasts, and mark its cap
and harbours. Its interior regions are in a great na.
lure unknown. The ancients, who had a very impr.
sea knowledge of its coasts, except where they ae
washed by the Mediterranean or Red Sea, were accuf-
tomed to penetrate into its inland provinces, and, if wt
may rely on the testimony of Herodotus anA DioCcr;,
Siculus, had explored many parts of it now altoget.-r
unknown. Unless both modes of discovery be unitd,
the geographical knowledge of the earth must remu.n
incomplete and inaccurate.

NOTE VIII. p.27.

TaE notion of the ancients concerning flch an r-

ceffive degree of heat in the torrid zone, as rendert :
uninhabitable, and their perfifling in this error sc'
after they began to have some commercial intercoc:
with several parts of India lying within the trot:,
must appear so singular and absurd, that it may nc'
nnacceptable to some of my readers to produce eviCtr
of their holding this opinion, and to account for :'

,^*e 'r

Tp3rent inconriftence of their theory with their expe-
r.:nC. Cicero, who had beflowed attention upon every
;rt of philoforh y known to the ancients, seems to have
.;ieved that the torrid zone was uninhabitable, and,
c: consequence, that there could be no intercourse be-
t.veen the northern and southern temperate zones. He
r.troduces Africanus thus addressing the younger Sci-
?,o: " You fee this earth encompafied, and as it were
o:und in by certain zones, of which, two, at the greatest
c.:;ianr from e.ch other, and sustaining the opposite
riles of heaven, are frozen with perpetual cold ; the
r idle one, and the largest of all, is burnt with the heat
ci the fun ; two are habitable, the people in the southern
cne are antipodes to us, with whom we have no con-
r.-eion." Sirnni.i Sciponis, c. 6. Geminus, a Greek
p' lofopher, contemporary with Cicero, delivers the
fame docrine, not in a popular work, but in his
i..:-ziyn Et; 9an!Au'st , a treatise purely scientific.
" When we speak," fays he, " of the southem tem-
perase zone, and its inhabitants, and concerning those
:r:o are called antipodes, it mull be always understood,
0a t we have no certain knowledge or information con-
:e:ning the southern temperate zone, whether it be in-
r.ji:ed or not. But from the spherical figure of the
;:h, and the course which the fun holds between the
tropics, we conclude that there is another zone, situated
to the south, which enjoys the fame degree of tempera-
:.re with the northern one which we inhabit." Cap. xiii.
p ;1. ap. Petavii Opus de Dodr. Tempor. in quo Ura.
r,ioglum five Syftemata var. Auaorum. Amft. 1705,
vl. ii. The opinion of Pliny the naturalist, with refpet
to both these points, was the fame: " There are five
ca..fions of the earth, which are called zones. All that
Fprton which lies near to the two opposite poles is op-
prc:rTd with vehement cold, and eternal frost. There,
rnbrlft with the aspect of milder stars, perpetual dark-
nrfs reigns, or at the utmost a feeble light reflected from
(fr:ounding snows. The middle of the earth, in which
,' the orbit of the fun, is scorched and burnt up with
*arn;i and fiery vapour. Between these torrid and

frozen

frozen diftri&cs lie two other portions of the earth, whibc
are temperate; but, on account of the burning region
interposed, there can be no communication between
them. Thus Heaven has deprived us of three parts of
the earth." Lib. ii. c. 68. Strabo delivers his opinion
to the fame effet, in terms no less explicit: "The
portion of the earth which lies near the equator, in
the torrid zone, is rendered uninhabitable by heat."
Lib. ii. p. 54. To there I might add the authority of
many other refpecable philosophers and historians of
antiquity.

In order to explain the sense in which this dodrine

was generally received, we may observe, that Parrne.
nides, as we are informed by Strabo, was the first who
divided the earth into five zones, and he extended the
limits of the zcne which he supposed to be uninhabitab!e
on account of heat, beyond the tropics. Aristotle, as
we learn likewise from Strabo, fixed the boundaries of
the different zones in the fame manner as they are de-
fined by modern geographers. But the progress of d;s-
covery having gradually demonstrated that several re-
gions of the earth which lay within the tropics were no!
only habitable, but populous and fertile, this induced
later geographers to circumscribe the limits of the torr d
zone. It is not easy to ascertain with precision the
boundaries which they allotted to it. From a paffat
in Strabo, who, as far as I know, is the only author of
antiquity from whom we receive any hint concerning
this fubje&, I should conjecture, that those who calcu-
lated according to the measurement of the earth by
Eratofihenes, supposed the torrid zone to comprehend
near sixteen degrees, about eight on each fide of the
equator; whereas such as followed the computation of
Pofidonius allotted about twenry.four degrees, or some-
what more than twelve degrees on each fide of the
equator to the torrid zone. Strabo, lib. ii. p. 151.
According to the former opinion, about two-thirds of
that portion of the earth which lies between the tropics
was confidered as habitable; according to the latter,
about one half of it. With this refritioo, the do&rre

- o~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~f

# NOTE IX. p. 47.

# NOTE X. p. 56.

of the ancients concerning the torrid zone appears less
Ib(urd; and we can conceive the reason of their atTert-
irg this zone to be uninhabitable, even after they had
crned a communication with several places within the
uopics. When men of science spoke of the torrid zone,
they confidered it as it was limited by the definition of
pgraphers to sixteen, or at the utmost to twenty-four
ctcrees; and as they knew almost nothing of the
i.rntries nearer to the equator, they might fiill suppose
ivtr to be uninhabitable. In loose and popular discourse,
t. rnamn of the torrid zone continued to be given to all
tiat portion of the earth which lies within the tropics.
C;cero seems to have been unacquainted with those ideas
i the later geographers, and adhering to the division of
hirn nides, describes the torrid zone as the largef of
It five. Some of the ancients rejected the notion con-
crr.ing the intolerable heat of the torrid zone as a po-
Fear error. This, we are told by Plutarch, was the
kntiment of Pythagoras, and we learn from Strabo,
.jt Eratofihenes and Polybius had adopted the fame
c-.rin, i hii. i. 154 Ptolemy seems to have paid no
*:ard to the ancient doctrine and opinions concerning
torrid zone.

NOTE IX. p.47.

TtE court of inquisition, which effeaually checks a
(>rit of liberal inquiry, and of literary improvement,
sr.trvecr it is eflabli.shed, was unknown in Portugal in
t fifteenth century, when the people of that kingdom
kzsn their voyages of discovery. More than a century
rapf.d, before it was introduced by John III, whose
;3Sn commenced A.D. 15 1.

NOTE X. p.56.

A. ir,nflance of this is related by Hakluyt, upon the
r:or.ty of the Portuguese hifiorian Garcia de Refende.
9tn- English merchants having resolved to open a
*e with the coafi of Guinea, John IL of Portugal dif-

.. 1. ,M M. patched

# NOTE XI. p. 65.

# NOTE XII. p. 73.

patched ambafladors to Edward IV. in order to !iy
before him the right which he had acquired by thePope'&
bull to the dominion of that country, and to requfti
him to prohibit his fubje.ts to prosecute their intertd
voyage. Edward was so much satisfied with theexcd.
five title of the Portuguese, that he issued his orden a
the terms which they desired. Hackluyt, Navigation,
Voyages, and Traffics of the English, vol. ii, paru
p. z.

NOTE XI. p.65.

THE time of Columbus's death may be nearly afic.

tamed by the following circumstances. It appears frc
the fragment of a letter, addressed by him to Ferdinard
and Isabella, A. D. So 1, that he had, at that time, been
engaged forty years in a sea-faring life. In ano:h
letter, he informs them, that he went to sea at the a.
of fourteen i from those fads it follows, that he wa
born A. D. I447. Life of Christ. Columbus, by his fra
Don Ferdinand. Churchill's Collecdion of Voyae,[
vol. li. p. 484, 485.

NOTE XII. p.73.

Taz spherical figure of the earth was known to t-.

ancient geographers. They invented the method, flt
in use, of computing the longitude and latitude of diftr-
ent places. According to their dotrine, the equaor,
or imaginary line which encompasses the earth, containd
three hundred and sixty degrees; these they divided icno
twenty-four parts, or hours, each equal to fifteen c-
grees. The country of the Snres or Sinre, being ib
farthest part of India known to the ancients, was sup-
posed, by Marinus Tyrius, the most eminent of t'.
ancient geographers before Ptolemy, to be fifteen hourn,
or two hundred and twenty-five degrees to the ealt a
the first meridian, passing through the Fortunate flaids
Ptolemri Geogr. lib. i. c. ls. If this supposition va
well-founded, the country of the Seres, or China, W-s
only nine hours, or one hundred and thirty-five dcgrt

, J

# NOTE XIII. p. 95.

weft from the Fortunate or Canary Islands; and the
navigation, in that direction, was much shorter than by
the course which the Portuguese were pursuing. Marco
Polo, in his travels, had described countries, particularly
the island of Cipargo or Zipangri, supposed to be Japan,
considerably to the east of any part of Asia known to
th ancients. Marcus Paulus de Region. Oriental.
lib. ii. c. 7. lib. iii. c. 2. Of course, this country, as it
extended further to the east, was fill nearer to the
Canary lilands. The conclusions of Columbus, though
crawn from inaccurate observations, were just. If the
fcppofitions of Marinus had been well founded, and if
the countries which Marco Polo visited had been situ-
ited to the east of those whose longitude Marinus had
ascertained, the proper and nearest course to the Eafl
Indies rnmu have been to fleer directly weft. Herrera,
adc. I. lib. i. c. a. A more extensive knowledge of the
gcbe has now discovered the great error of Marinus, in
f:?pofng China to be fifteen hours, or two hundred and
:wny.nfive degrees east from the Canary Islands, and
ta.t teen Ptolemy was miflaken, when he reduced the
.r itude of China to twelve hours, or one hundred and

d:ht/ degrees. The longitude of the western frontier

c: :hat vail empire is seven hours, or one hundred and
Eiheen degrees from the meridian of the Canary Illands.
Bot Columbus followed the light which his age afforded,
sr. relied upon the authority of writers, who were, at
:.ht time, regarded as the inftruaors and guides of man.
krd in the science of geography.

NOTE XIII. p. 9.

As the Portuguese, in making their discoveries, did
ret depart far from the coast of Africa, they concluded
That birds, whose flight they observed with great atten-
ton, did not venture to any considerable distance from
lad. In the infancy of navigation, it was not known,
t'st birds often firetched their flight to an immense dif-
tanc from any shore. In failng towards the Weft-
ilzian islands, birds are often seen at the ditlance of two

m M 2 hundred

# NOTE XIV. p. 106.

hundred leagues from the nearest coast. Sloane's Nat.
Hist. of Jamaica, vol. i. p. 30. Catefby saw an owl
sea, when the Chip was fix hundred leagues diflant imf
land. Nat. Hist. of Carolina, pref. p. 7. Hist. Nature.
de M. Buffon, tom. xvi p. 32. From which it app-anr
that this indication of land, on which Columbus feern
to have relied with some confidence, was extrenmj
uncertain. This observation is confirmed by Cay.
Cook, the most extensive and experienced navigator a
any age or nation. " No one yet knows (fays be! t
what diflance any of the oceanic birds go to sea for
my own part, I do not believe that there is one in te
whole tribe that can be relied on in pointing out thb
vicinity of land." Voyage towards the South Pole
voL i p. Z75.

NOTE XIV. p. xo6.

Is a letter of the admiral's to Ferdinand and Ifabell,

be describes one of the harbours in Cuba, with all th.
enthusiastic admiration of a discoverer.-'" I difcovcred
a rivet which a galley might easily enter the beauty of
it induced me to found, and I have found from five ta
eight fathoms of water. Having proceeded a confider-
able way up the river, every thing invited me to fetd:
there. The beauty of the river, the clearness of th
water, through which I could fee the sandy bottam,
the multitude of palm trees of different kinds, the
tallest and finest I had seen, and an infinite numbs
of other large and flourishing trees, the birds, and th-
verdure of the plains, are so wonderfully beautiful, that
this country excels all others as far as the day surpas:s
the night in brightness and splendour, so that I oftca
laid, that it would be in vain for me to attempt to i.;
your highnesses a full account of it, for neither my tongr
nor my pen could come up to the truth; and indeed I ar
so much amazed at the fight of such beauty, that I ko-d
not how to defcribq it." Life ofColumb. c. 30.

# NOTE XV. p. 111.

NOTE XV. p. ix.

THr account which Columbus gives of the humanity
and orderly behaviour of the natives on this occasion is
very friking. " The king (fays he, in a letter to
Ferdinand and Isabella) having been informed of our
misfortune, expressed great grief for our loss, and im-
mediately sent aboard all the people in the place in
many large canoes; we soon unloaded the ship of every
thing that was upon deck, as the king gave us great
aflifance: he himself, with his brothers and relations,
took all possible care that every thing (hould be properly
done, both aboard and on (hore. And, from time to
urne, he sent rome of his relations weeping, to beg of
me not to be dejeted, for he would give me all that he
had. I can assure your highnesses, that so much care
would not have been taken in securing our effects in
any part of Spain, as all our property was put together
in one place near his palace, until the houses which he
wanted to prepare for the custody of it, were emptied.
Ee immediately placed a guard of armed men, who
wa;ched during the whole night, and those on shore
lamented as if they had been much interested in our
lb;. The people are so affecionate, so tracable, and
so peaceable, that I swear to your highnesses, that there
is not a better race of men, nor a better country in the
world. They love their neighbour as themselves; their
ccnverfation is the sweetest and mildest in the world,
cheerful, and always accompanied with a smile. And
although it is true that they go naked, yet your highnesses
may be assured that they have many very commendable
ctfioms; the king is served with great fate, and his
ibhaviour is so decent, that it is pleasant to fee him, as
i: is likewise to observe the wonderful memory which
tefe people have, and their desire of knowing every
tl.r.z, which leads them to inquire into its causes and
eius2." Life of Columbus, c. 32. It is probable,

at the Spaniards were indebted for this officious atten-
t.in to the opinion which the Indians entertained of
-tta a3 a (uperior order of beings.

mI ml 3

# NOTE XVI. p. 118.

NOTE XVI. p. xI.

EVtER monument of such a man as Columhuo is

valuable. A letter which he wrote to Ferdinand and
lfabella, decfribing what passed on this occasion, ex.
hibits a mos flriking picture of his intrepidity, hit
humanity, his prudence, his public (pirit, and courtly
addrefi. " I would have been less concerned for this
misfortune, had I alone been in danger, both becaure
my life is a debt that I owe to the Supreme Creator,
and because I have at other times been exposed to the
most imminent hazard. But what gave me infinite
gr,ef and vexation was, that after it had pleased our
Lord to give me fa;th to undertake this enterprise, in
which I had now been so successful, that my opponents
wculd have been convinced, and the glory of your high.
r.tffes, and the extent of your territory increased by
me i i: should pleare the Divine Majefly to tlop all by
my death. All this would have been more tolerable, had
it not been attended with the loss of those men whom I
bad carried with me, upon promise of the greateil pro.
fperity, who feeing themselves in such distress, cursel
not only their coming along with me, but that fear an!
awe of me, which prevented them from returning as
they often had resolved to have done. But besides a'l
this, my sorrow was greatly increased, by recolleeing
that I had left my two sons at school at Cordova, defli.
tote of friends, in a foreign country, when it could not
in all probability be known that I had done such ser-
vices as might induce your highnesses to remember
them. And though I comforted myself with the faith
that our Lord would not permit that, which tended si
much to the glory of his church, and which I had brought
about with so much troub!e, to remain imperfea, yet I
confidered, that on account of my fins, it was his will
to deprive me of that glory, which. I might have av-
tained in this world. While in this confused slate, I
thought on the good fortune which accompanies your
highnesses, and imagined, that although I should pen'h
and the vcffcl be loft, it was possible that you mict

[INc i-,

# NOTE XVII. p. 121.

somehow come to the knowledge of my voyage, and the
success with which it was attended. For that reason I
wrote upon parchment with the brevity which the situ-
ation required, that I had discovered the lands which
i prorifed, in how many days I had done it, and what
course I had followed. I mentioned the goodness of the
country, the character of the inhabitants, and that your
bighneffes fubjeds were left in poffefion of all that I had
discovered. Having fealed this writing, I addreled it
to your highnesses, and promised a thousand ducats to
any person who should deliver it fealed, so that if any
foreigners found it, the promired reward might prevail
on them not to give the information to another. I then
caused a great cask to be brought to me, and wrapping
up the parchment in an oiled cloth, and afterwards in
a cake of wax, I put it into the cask, and having ftopt
it well, I call it into the sea. All the men believed that
it was some a& of devotion. Imagining that this
might never chance to be taken up, as the (hips ap-
proached nearer to Spain, I made another packet like
the sirs, and placed it at the top of the poop, so that
if the hip funk, the calk remaining above water might
be committed to the guidance of fortune."

NOTE XVII. . I.2.

SOMI Spanish authors, with the meanness of national

jealousy, have endeavoured to detrac from the glory
of Columbus, by insinuating that he was led to the dif.
covery of the New World, not by his own inventive or
enterprising genius, but by information which he had
received. According to their account, a vessel having
been driven from its course by easterly winds, was car-
ried before them far to the well, and landed on the coast
of an unknown country, from which it returned with
difficulty; the pilot and three sailors being the only
persons who survived the dirfreffes which the crew sus-
sered, from want of provisions, and fatigue in this long
voyage. In a few days after their arrival, all the four
ied i but the pilot haying been received into the house

of

of Columbus, his intimate friend, disclosed to him, be.
fore his death, the fecrer of the discovery which he had
accidentally made, and left him his papers containing a
journal of the voyage, which served as a guide to Co.
lumbus in his undertaking. Gomara, as far as I know,
is the first author who published this flory, Hist. e. 1;.
Every circumfiance is deflitute of evidence to support it.
Neither the name of the vessel nor its deflination is
known. Some pretend that it belonged to one of the
sea-port towns in Andalusia, and was failing either to
the Canaries, or to Madeira; others, that it was a B.s.
cayner in its way to England ; others, a Portuguec
ship trading on the coast or Guinea. The name of th.
pilot is a!ike unknown, as well as that of the port in
which he landed on his return. According to some, it
was in Portugal; according to others, in Madeira, or
the Azores. The year ;n which this voyage was mate
is no left uncertain. Monfon's Nav. Traes. Church;,l,
iii. ;71. No men:ion is made of this pilot or his dif.
covcries, by And. Bernaldes, or Pet. Martyr, the ccn.
temporaries of Columbus. Herrera, with his usual juds.
ment, passes over it in silence. Oviedo takes notice oi
this report, but confiders i: as a tale fit only to amuse the
vulgar. Hifi. lib. ii. c. -. As Columbus held his couofe
diretly weft from the Canaries, and never varied i!,
some later authors have supposed, that this uniformity is
a proof of his being guided by some previous informa-
tion. But they do not recollea the principles on which
he founded all his hopes of success, that by holding a
westerly course, he mull certainly arrive at those regions
of the east described by the ancients. His firm belief of
his own fyflem led him to take that course, and to pur.
sue it without deviation.

The Spaniards are not the only people who have

called in question Columbus's claim to the honour of
having discovered America. Some German authors
ascribe this honour to Martin Behaim, their countryman.
He was of the noble family of the Behaims of Schwartz-
bach, citizens of the first rank in the Imperial town
of Nuremberg, Having fludied under the celebrated

John

john Muller, better known by the name of Regiomon-
tanus, he acquired such knowledge of cosmography, as
excited a delire of exploring those regions, the situation
and qualities of which he had been accustomed, under
that able mafler, to invefRigate and describe. Under
the patronage of the duchess of Burgundy he repaired to
Lisbon, whither the fame of the Portuguese d,fcoveries
invited all the adventurous spirits of the age. There, as
we leam from Herman Schedel, of whole Cbronicon Mun-
di a German translation was printed at Nuremberg
A. D. I493, his merit as a cosmographer raised him, in
conjuncion with Diego Cano, to the command of a
squadron fitted out for discovery in the year i483. In
that voyage, he is said to have discovered the kingdom
of Congo. He fettled in the iland of Fayal. one of the
Azores, and was a particular friend of Columbus. Her-
rera, dec. a. lib. i. c. . Magellan had a terrestrial
globe made by Behaim, on which he demonstrated the
course that he purposed to hold in search of the com-
munication with the South Sea, which he afterwards
discovered. Gomara HiR. c. 19. Herrera, dec. II.
Alb. ii. c. 19. In the year 1491, Behaim visited his
relations in Nuremberg, and left with them a map drawn
wl:h his own hand, which is fill preserved among the
ar:hives of the family. Thus far the story of Martin
PBhaim seems to be well authenticated ; but the account
of his having discovered any part of the New World ap-
pears to be merely conjefcural.

In the firfl edirion, as I had at that time hardly any

knowledge of Behaim but what 1 derived from a frivo-
lous Differta:ion de vero Novi Orbis Inventore, publi(hed
at Francfort, A. D. 1714, by Jo. Frid. Stuvenius, I was
induced, by the authority of Herrera, to suppose that
Behalm was not a native of Germany ; but from more
full and accurate information, communicated to me by
the learned Dr. John Reinhold Forster, I am now satis-
fed that I was mislaken. Dr. Forster has been likewise
so good as to favour me with a copy of Behaim's map,
as publishcd by Doppelmayer in his account of the Ma-
tht-naticians and Artifis of Nuremberg. From this

map,

map, the imperfeaion of cosmographical knowledge at
that period is mamfet. Hardly one place is laid down
in its true situation. Nor can I discover from it any
reason to suppose that Behaim had the leaPt knowledge
of any region in America. He delineates, indeed, an
island to which he gives the name of St. Brandon. This,
it is imagined, may be Come part of Guiana, supposed at
first to be an island. He places it in the fame latitude
with the Cape Verd isles, and I fufpet it to he an inm-
ginary island which has been admitted into some an-
cient maps on no better authority than the legend of
the Irish St. Brandon or Brendan, whose flory is f(
childilhly fabulous as to be unworthy of any notice.
Glrald. Cambrienfis ap. Miflingham Florilegium Sanio.
rum, p. 4:7.

The pretenflons of the Welsh to the discovery of

America seem not to reft on a foundation much more
solid. In the twelfth century, according to Powell,
a dispute having arisen among the sons of Owen
Guyneth, king of North-Wales, concerning the fuccet.
sion to his crown, Mladoc, one of their number, weary
of this contention, betook himself to sea in quest of a
more quiet settlement. He fleered due weft, leaving
Ireland to the north, and arrived in an unknown
country, which appeared to him so desirable, that he
returned to Wales, and carried thither several of his
adherents and companions. This is said to have hap.
pened about the year 170, and after that, he and his
colony were heard of no more. But it is to be obferv-
ed, that Powell, on whose testimony the authenticity
of this story refts, published his history above four
centuries from the date of the event which he relatea
Among a people as rude and as illiterate as the Welth at
that period, the memory of a tranfa&ion so remote mult
have been very imperfe&ly preserved, and would require
to be confirmed by Come author of greater credit, and
nearer to the ara of Madoc's voyage than Powell. Later
antiquaries have indeed appealed to the testimony of
Meredith ap Rhees, a Wellh bard, who died A. D. 1477.
But he too lived at fvch a diltance of time from the

event,

event, that he cannot be confidered as a witness of much
more credit than Powell. Besides, his verses, published
by Hakluyt, vol. iii. p. i. convey no information, but
that Madoc, dissatisfied with his domeflic situation,
employed himself in searching the ocean for new pof-
sessions. But even if we admit the authenticity of Pow-
etl's story, it does not follow that the unknown country
vhich Maroc discovered by Ileering weft, in such a course
a, to leave Ireland to the north, was any part of Ame-
r;ca. The naval skill of the Welsh in the twelfth cen-
tury was hardly equal to such a voyage. If he made
any discovery at all, it is more probable that it was
Madeira, or some other of the western isles. The affi-
nty of the Welsh language with some dialecs spoken
in America, has been mentioned as a circumstance which
corfirms the truth of Madoc's voyage. But that affi-
rity has been observed in To few instances, and in some
of thefr is so obscure, or so fanciful, that no conclusion
can be drawn from the casual resemblance of a small
number of words. There is a bird, which, as far as is
yet known, is found only on the coalis of South Ame-
r:ca, from Port Desire to the Straits of Magellan. It is
ditllngumlhed by the name of Penguin. This word in the
Wellh language signifies fW'bit-bead. Almost all the
althors who favour the pretensions of the Wel(h to the
dfcovery of America, mention this as an irrefragable
proof of the affinity of the Wel(h language with that
spoken in this region of America. But Mr. Pennant,
who has given a scientific description of the penguin,
observes, that all the birds of this genus have black
heads, ' so that we must resign every hope (adds he)
founded on this hypothesis of retrieving the Cambrian
race in the New World." Philof. Tranfa&. vol. lviii.
p. 91, &c. Beside this, if the Welsh, towards the close
of the twelfth century, bed fettled in any part of Ame-
rica, some remains of the Chriflian dotrine and rites
must have been found among their descendants, when
they were discovered about three hundred years pofie-
rir to their migration ; a period so (hort, that, in the
nutsfe of it, we cannot well suppose that all European

ideas

ideas and arts would be totally forgotten. Lord Lyttel.
ton, in his notes to the fifth book of his History of
Henry 11. p. 371. has examined what Powell relates
concerning the discoveries made by Madoc, and invali-
dates the truth of his ficry by other arguments of great
weight.

The pretensions of the Norwegians to the discovery

of America, seem to be better founded than those ofthe
Germans or Welsh. The inhabitants of Scandinavia
were remarkable in the middle ages for the boldness and
extent of their maritime excursions- In 874, the Nor.
wegians discovered, and planted a colony in Iceland.
In 982, they discovered Greenland, and eflablifhed
fettlemcns there. From that, some of their navigators
proceeded towards the weft, and discovered a country
more inviting than thjfe horrid regions with which they
were acqua:nted. According to their representation,
this country was sandy on the coaifs, but in the inte.
rior parts level and covered with wood, on which ac.
count they gave it the name of Hel.e-aind, and Mat.
La.d, and hav.ng afterwards found rome plants of the
vine which bore grapes, they called it nm-/ar.d. The
credit of this fiory refis, as far as I know, on the au-
thority of the J ga, or chronicle of king Olaus, corn-
posed by Snorro S!urlonides, or SrIt'1fr.s, publilhed by
Pennf.iold at Stockholm A. D. 1697. As Snorro was
born in the year 79, his chronicle might be compiled
about two centuries after the event which he relates.
His account of the navigation and d-fcoveries of Bi:r,
and his companion Lif, is a very rure ccnfufed tale,
p. .

14 i ic.- 26. It is imooffibie to discover from him,

what part of America it was in which the Norwegians
landed. According to his accunt of the length of the
days and nights, it must have been as far north as the
fifty-eighth degree of latitude, on some part of the coilt
of Laradore, approaching near to the entry of Hud-
son's Stra:ts. Grapes, certainly, are not the producEion
of that country. Torfe'.s fuppoes that there is an
error in the text, by recifyir.g of which, the place
where the Norwvegians landed may be supposed to be

fi;ua;cc

# NOTE XVIII. p. 123.

# NOTE XIX. p. 135.

f:ua'ed in latitude 49°. But neither is that the region
ci the vine in Amtrica. From perusing Snorro's tale, I
l-ould think that the situation of Newfoundland corre-
sIonds befl with that of the country discovered by the
Norweglans. Grapes, however, are not the produc-
:.on of that barren ifhlnd. Other conjectures are men-
:,cr.ed by M. Mallet, Introd. a 1'Hist. de Dennem. i75,

.. I am not sufficiently acquainted with the literature
: the north, to examine them. It seems manifest, that
.: he Norwvegians did discover any part of America at
:.na period, their attempts to plant colonies provtd
·nfu:cefsful, and all knowledge of it was soon loft.

NOTE XVIII. p. 123.

PiTER MARTYR, ab Angleria, a Milanese gentle-
r..n, residing at that time in the court of Spain, whose
.::;ers contain an account of the tranfaaions of that
.rie;d, in the order wherein they occurred, describes
* r fntiments with which he himself and his learned
.; :crondents were arfected, in very striking terms.
" P.x :titia profiluiffe te, vixque a lachrymis pra gau-
:. :;n;erai2'e, quando literas adfpexilli meas quibus,
.c tn-ipodum orbe latenti hatenus, te certiorem feci,
. \

i iarllime Pomponi, infinuaRti. Ex tuis ipfc litcris
..:.5o, quid fenferis. Senfifi autem, tantique rem

.:, quanti virum summa doArina infignitum decuit.
. r..nque cibus fublinibus praetari potelt ingeniis,
. - i.'icr ? quod condimentum gratius ? A me facto

.:curam. Beari fentio spiritus meos, quando accitos
.,quor prudentes aliquos ex his qui ab ea redeunt
i.-ainia. Implicent animos pecuniarum cumulis au-
't'.is miferi avari, libidinibus obfcceni; nofiras nos
-'.ntes, poftquam Deo pleni aliquando fuerimus, con-
;trnilando, hujufcemodi rerum notitia demulciamus.'
i..:t. 152. Pomponio Laeto.

NOTE XIX. p. 135.

So firmly were men of rcience, in that age, perfuarled
t't tie countries which Columbus had discovered were
r .OL. 1i, N conneltd

# NOTE XX. p. 141.

# NOTE XXI. p. 154.

conneced with the East Indies, that Bernaldes, the
Cura de los Palacios, who seems to have been no incon.
fiderable proficient in the knowledge of cosmography,
contends that Cuba was not an illand, but a part of the
continent, and united to the dominions of the Great
Khan. This he delivered as his opinion to Columbus
himself, who was his guest for some time on his return
from his second voyage; and he supports it by several
arguments, moflly founded on the authority of Sir John
Mandeville. MS. per. e me. Antonio Gallo, who was
secretary to the magiltracy of Genoa towards the close
of the fifteenth century, publihmed a short account of the
navigations and discoveries of his countryman Colum-
bus, annexed to his O;ufcula Hiflorica de rebus popu:i
Cenuenfis; in which he informs us from letters of Co.
lumbus which he himself had seen, that it was his
opinion, founded upon nautical observations, that one
of the islands he had discovered was difRant only t-o
hours or thirty degrees from Cattigara, which, in the
charts of the geographers of that age, was laid down,
upon the authority of Ptolemy, lib. vii. c. 3. as the
most easterly place in Asia. From this he concluded,
that if some unknown continent did not obfirua the
navigation, there must be a (hort and easy access, by
holding a westerly course, to this extreme region of the
Eafl. Muratori Scriptores Rer. Italicarum, vol. xxiii.
p. 3C4-

NOTE XX. p. 41.

BERNALDES, the Cura or Reaor de los Palacios, a

contemporary writer, fays, that five hundred of thefc
captives were lent to Spain, and fold publicly in SeviLe
as slaves; but that, by the change of climate and ther
inability to bear the fatigue of labour, they all died in a
fiort time. MS. per.s me.

NOTE XXI. p. 154..

COLUM BLS seems to have formed some very finghla
opinions concernin the countries which he had nov

difcovcred

# NOTE XXII. p. 166.

dscovered. The violent swell and agitation of the
waters on the coast of Trinidad led him to conclude this
to be the highest part of the terraqueous globe, and he
nimgintd that various circumstances concurred in proving
that the lea was here visibly elevated. Having adopted
this erroneous principle, the apparent beauty of the
country induced him to fall in with a notion of Sir John
!Mandevlle, c. 1oz. that the terrefirial paradise was the
bigheft land in the earth i and he believed that he had
been so fortunate as to discover this happy abode. Nor
ought we to think it strange that a person of so much
sagacity (hould be influenced by the opinion or reports
of such a fabulous author as Mandeville. Columbus and
the other discoverers were obliged to follow such guides
as they could find i and it appears from several passages
in the manuscript of Andr. Bernaldes, the friend of Co,
lumbus, that no inconsiderable degree of credit was
given to the testimony of Mandeville in that age. Ber.
nuldes frequently quotes him, and always with refpet.

NOTE XXII. p.i66.

IT is remarkable, that neither Gomara nor Oviedo,
the most ancient Spanilh historians of America, nor
Herrera, confider Ojeda, or his companion VeCpucci, as
the first discoverers of the continent of America. They
uniformly ascribe this honour to Columbus. Some have
(uppofed that national resentment against Vespucci, for
deserting the service of Spain, and entering into that of
Portugal, may have prompted these writers to conceal
the actions which he performed. But Martyr and Ben-
zoni, both Italians, could not be warped by the fame
prejudice. Martyr was a contemporary author; he
resided in the court of Spain, and had the best oppor-
tunity to be exaEly informed with refpe& to all public
tearfdcions ; and yet, neither in his Decads, the first

nr.tral history published of the New World, nor in his
EIitles, which contain an account of all the remarkable
c'tnts of his time, does he ascribe to Vespucci the ho-
treur of having first discovered the continent. Benzomi

NI a, went

went as an adventurer to America in the year y41,
and resided there a considerable time. He appears to
have been animated with a warm zeal for the honor:
of Italy. his na:ive country, and yet does not menuic?
the exploits and discoveries of Vespucci. Herrera, who
compiled his general history of America from the mofi
authentic records, not only follows those early writer:,
but accuses Vespucci of falsifying the dates of both tnr
voyages which he made to the New World, and of con.
founding the one with the other, in order that he migh:
arrogate to himself the glory of having discovered r!:
conunent. Her. dec. I. lib. iv. c. a. He afiTrts, tha:
a judicial inquiry into this matter by the royal fifcai, i
was proved by the testimony of Ojeda himself, that ie
touched at Hispaniola when returning to Spain from ',s
first voyage; whereas Vespucci gave out that they ri-
turned dire&ly to Cadiz from the coast of Paria, and
touched at Hispaniola only in their second voyage; a"?.
that be had finished the voyage in five months ; whrr--
as, according to Vespucci's account, he had em;n..c :i
fe--en:een monthl in performing it. Viaggio prir,' -:
Am. Vespucci, p. 56. Viag. fecundo, p. 45. Hert-s
gives a more full account of this inquest in another
part of his Decads, and to the fame effe&t. Her. dec. r.
lib. vii. c. 5. Columbus was in Hispaniola when Ojrda
arrived there, and bad by that time come to an agree-
ment with Roldan, who opposed Ojeda's attempt to
ex-ite a new infurrecion, and, of consequence, h.i
voyage mall have been posterior to that of the admiral.
Life of Columbus, c. g4. According to Vespucci's a:-
count, he set out on his first voyage May loth, 149y.
Viag. pnmo, p. 6. At that time Columbus was in it
court of Spa:n preparing for hit voyage, and seems to
have enjoyed a considerable degree of favour. Th:
affairs of the New World were at this juncture under it
direction of Antonio Torres, a friend of Columbu. I
is not probable, that at that period a commillion woo '
be granted to another person, to anticipate the adm:ri'
by undertaking a voyage which he himfeif intended'
.perorm. Fonseca, who patronized Ojeda, and ga3n':

IL

# NOTE XXIII. p. 212.

the licence for his voyage, was not recalled to court,
and reinstated in the direcion of Indian affairs, until
the death of prince John, which happened September
149, P. Martyr, Ep. 181. several months posterior to
the time at which Vespucci pretends to have set out
upon his voyage. A life of Vespucci was published at
Florence by the Abate Bandini, A. D. 1745, 4to. It is
a work of no merit, written with little judgment, and
its! candour. He contends for his countryman's title to
the discovery of the continent with all the blind zeal of
n'aional partiality, but produces no new evidence to
fjpport it. We learn from him that Vespucci's account
of his voyage was published as early as the year aS5o,
and probably sooner. Vita di Am. Vefp. p. 5s. At
what time the name of AMER ICA came to be first given
to the New World, is not certain.

NOTE XXIII. p. 212.

THE form employed on this occasion served as a

model to the Span;ards in all their subsequent conquests
in America. It is so extraordinary in its nature, and
gives us such an idea of the proceedings of the Spa-
niards, and the principles upon which they founded
their right to the extensive dominions which they ac-
quired in the New World, that it well meri's the atten-
tion of the reader, " I Alonfo de Ojeda, servant of the
moRi high and powerful kings of Castile and Leon, the
conquerors of barbarous nations, their messenger and
captain, notify to you and declare, in as ample form as
I am capable, that God our Lord, who is one and
eternal, created the heaven and the earth, and one man
and one woman, of whom you and we, and all the
men who have been or shall be in world, are descend-
ed. But as it has come to pass, through the number
of generations during more than five thousand years,
that they have been dispersed into different parts of the
world, and are divided into various kingdoms and pro.
'inces, because one country was not able to contain
them, nor could they have found in one the means of

N N 3 subsist.

fubfifience and prefetvation; therefore God our Lcro
gave the charge of all those people to one man, nami,
St. Peter, whom he constituted the lord and head of ,i
the human race, that all men, in whatever place they
are born, or in whatever faith or place they are e-lj
cated, might yield obedience unto him. He bath fu-.
jecetd the whole world to his jurifdi&ion, and con-
mardcd him to cftablifh his residence in Rome, as the
mcft proper place for the government of the wor;-
He likewise promised and gave him power to efiab.,f.
his authority in every other part of the world, and to
judge and govern all Christians, Moors, Jews, Gentiles,
and all ether people of whatever feet or faith they msy
be. To him is given the name of Pope, which fignifi-s
admirable, great father and guardian, because he is txe
father and governor of all men. Those who lived in ¢he
time of this holy father obeyed and acknowledged hn
as their lord and king, and the superior of the un:v-fe
The fame has been observed with respect t-, them v.'-,
since his time, have been chosen to tile pon'ifica
Thus it now continues, and will continue to the end rs
the world.

" One of these pontiffs, as lord of the world, h3'h

made a grant of these islands, and of the Tierra Firrni
of the ocean sea, to the catholic kings of Catlile, Dcn
Ftrd:nand and Donna Isabella, of glorious memory,
and their successors, our sovereigns, with all they con-
tain, as is more fully expressed in certain deeds pa:T-l
upon that occasion, which you may fee if you desire i'.
Thus his majesty is king and lord of these islands, and
of the continent, in virtue of this donation; and, as
king and lord aforesaid, rmof of the islands to which
his title hath been notified, have recognised his majesty,
and now yield obedience and fubjetion to him as the:r
lord, voluntarily and without resistance and inflan:!y
as soon as they received information, they obeyed the
religious men sent by the king to preach to them, and
to ;nftrua them in our holy faith; and all these, of
their own free will, without any recompence orgratmity,
became Chriilians, and continue to be so i and hn

VAr,'a''

rnz:e.y having received them graciously under his pro.
tr-ic.n, has commanded that they (hould be treated in
rie fame manner as his other fubjeds and vassals. You
a-e hound and obliged to acd in the fame manner.
Therefore I now entreat and require you to confider
a:-entive!y what I have declared to you; and that you
ray more perfeAly comprehend it, that you take such
::ne as is reasonable, in order that you may acknow-
li'ee the church as the superior and guide of the uni-
ve:ie, and likewise the holy father called the pope, in
} i own right, and his majesty by his appointment, as
k.ng and sovereign lord of these islands, and of the
T::rra Firme ; and that you consent that the aforesaid
;l;y fathers (hall declare and preach to you the doarines
above mentioned. If you do this, you a& well, and
periorm that to which you are bound and obliged; and
Fhi majeity, and I in his name, will receive you with
l\v. and kindness, and will leave you, your wives and
:;.ldren, free and exempt from servitude, and in the
tjoyment of all you poiTefs, in the fame manner as the
in'abiPants of the islands. Besides this, his majefly will
betlo. upon you many privileges, exemptions, and re-
.ards. But if you will not comply, or maliciously
delay to obey my injuncion, then, with the help of
Gad, I will enter your country by force, I will carry
cn war againfl you with the utmost violence, I will
L[bjee you to the yoke of obedience to the church and
tie king, I will take your wives and children, and
v-:lI make them slaves, and fell or dispose of them ac.
ccrd:ng to hs majfty's pleasure; I will seize your
goods and do you all the mischief in my power, as re-
bellious fubjets, who will not acknowledge or submit
to their lawful sovereign. And 1 protef, that all the
kioodfhed and calamities which (hall follow are to be
imputed to you, and not to his majesty, or to me, or
tie gentlemen who serve under me; and as I have now
made this declaration and requisition unto you, I require
the notary here present to grant me a certificate of this,
subscribed in proper form." Herrera, dec. I. lib. vii.
P 14-

# NOTE XXIV. p. 226.

# NOTE XXV. p. 239.

# NOTE XXVI. p. 264.

# NOTE XXVII. p. 267.

NOTE XXIV. p.226.

BALBOA, in his letter to the king, obrerves, that of

the hundred and ninety men whom he took with him,
there were never above eighty fit for service at one time.
So much did they susser from hunger, fatigue, and sick-
ness. Herrera, dec. I. lb. x. c. 16. P. Mart.
decad. 1z6.

NOTE XXV. p.239.

FonsrcA, bishop of Palencia, the prircipal direfor

of Amencan affairs, had eight hundred Indians in pro-
perty; the commendator Lope de Conchillos, his chief
associate in that department, eleven hundred; and other
favourites had considerable numbers. They sent over-
seers to the islands, and hired out thole slaves to the
planters. Herr. dec. I. lib. ix. c. 14. p. 325.

NOTE XXVI. p. 264.

THrUGH America is more plentifully supplied wi i

water than the other regions of the globe, there is no
river or fiream of water in Yucatan. This peninfu!a
projets from the continent a hundred leagues, but,
where broadest, does not extend above twenty-five
leagues. It is an extensive plain, not only without
mountains, but almofi without any inequality of ground.
The inhabitants are supplied with water from pits, and
wherever they dig them, find it in abundance. It is
probable, from all those circumfiances, that this country
was formerly covered by the sea. Herrer2 Defcriptio
Indim Occidentalis, p. 14. Hiltoire Naturelle, par M.
de Buffon, tom. i. p. 593.

NOTE XXVII. p. 267.

M. CLAVIGERO censures me for having represented

the Spaniards who failed with Cordova and Grijalva, as
fancjing, in the warmth of their imaginaLion, that they

(aw

# NOTE XXVIII. p. 273.

i.- cities on the coast of Yucatan adorned with towers
r. :?:las. I know not what translation of my his-
try he has consulted, (for his quotation from it is not
taken from the original,) but I never imagined that any
building ere&ed by Americans could suggest the idea of
a cupola or dome, a flru&ure which their utmost skill
in arthitecure was incapable of rearing. My words are,
tha: they fancied the villages which they saw from their
(hips , to be cities adorned with towers and pinacles."
By pira.'es I meant some elevation above the reft of the
bu!iding; and the pafiage is translated almost literally
from Herrera, dec. 2. lib. iii. c. i. In almost all the
accounts of new countries given by the Spanish disco-
verers in that age, this awarmth of admiration is con-
fpicjous ; and led them to describe these new objects in
tie mos splendid terms. When Cordova and his com-
pan:ons first beheld an Indian village of greater mag-
nrtude than any they had beheld in the ifands, they dig-
r'!ied it by the name of Grand Cairo, B. Diaz. c. z.
Fcrm the fame cause Grijalva and his associates thought
the country along the coast of which they held their
course, entitled to the name of New Spain.

NOTE XXVIII. p. 273.

THE height of the most elevated point in the Pyrenees

is, according to M. Catfini, fix thousand fix hundred
ar.J fLrty-fix feet. The height of the mountain Gemmi,
i. the Canton of Berne, is ten thousand one hundred
a.a. ten feet. The height of the Peak of Teneriffe,
a:cording to the meafurcment of P. Feuille, is thirteen
tijufand one hundred and feventy-eight feet. The
height of Chimb.razzc, the most elrvared point of the
An.ds, is twenty thoufsnd two hundred and eighty
feet; no less than seven thousand one hundred and two
!f-t above the highelt moun'ain in th: ancient conti-
rer. . Voyage de D. Juan Ui!oa, Observations Afiron.
-' Phyfliq. torn. ii. p. 114. The line ,f c)ngelition on
(C:.rn razzo, or that part of the mountain which is
:;ver:- peretua!ly wi:h snow, is no less than two
!'Jufanl fou.r hundred feet fron its summit. Prevot.
i:..i. Grnr .-es Voyages, vol. xiii. p. 636.

# NOTE XXIX. p. 273.

NOTE XXIX. p. 273.

As a particular description makes a stronger impref.

sion than general assertions, I halla give one of Rio de ;a
Plata by an eye-witness, P. Cattaneo, a Modeneic
Jesuit, who landed at Buenos Ayres in 1749, and thus
represents what he felt when such new objects were firle
presented to his view. " While I resided in Europe,
and read in books of history or geography that the
mouth of the river De la Plata was an hundred ard
fifty miles in breadth, I confidered it as an exaggeration,
because in this hemisphere we have no example of such
valt rivers. When I approached its mouth, I had the
most vehement desire to ascertain the truth with my
own eyes; and I have found the matter to be exatly
as it was represented. This I deduce particularly from
one circumstance: when we took our departure from
?.!onte Video, a fort situated more than a hundred miles
from the mouth of the river, and where its breadth is
considerably diminished, we failed a complete day before
we discovered the land on the oppcfi:e bank of the river;
and when we were in the middle of the channel, we
could not discern land on either fide, and saw nothing
but the fiy and water, as if we had been in some great
ocean. Indeed, we should have taken it to be sea, if
the fresh water of the river, which was turbid like the
Po, had not satisfied us that it was a river. Moreover,
at Buenos Ayrcs, another hundred miles up the river,
and where it is frill much narrower, it is not only im-
possible to discern the oppofi:e coast, which is indeed
very low and flat ; hut one cannot perceive the houses
or the tops of the fleeples in the Portuguese settlement
at Colonia on the other fide of the river." Let'-er
prima, published by Muratori, I1 Chriflianefimo Ft!icu,
c. i. p. 257.

# NOTE XXX. p. 276.

# NOTE XXXI. p. 279.

NOTE XXX. p.276.

NEWFOUNDLAND, part of Nova Scotia and Canada,

art the countries which lie in the fame parallel of lati-
tude with the kingdom of France; and in every part of
there the water of the rivers is frozen during winter to
the thickness of several feet; the earth is covered with
snow as deep ; almost all the birds fly, during that sea-
son, from a climate where they could not live. The
country of the Elkimaux, part of Labrador, and the
countries on the south of Hudson's Bay, are in the fame
parallel with Great Britain ; and yetin all these the cold
is so intense, that even the industry of Europeans has
not attempted cultivation.

NOTE XXXI. p. 279.

ACOSTA is the first philosopher, as far as I know,

who endeavoured to account for the different degrees of
heat in the old and new continents, by the agency of
the winds which blow in each. Hilt. Moral. &c. lib. ii.
and in. M. de Buffon adopts this theory, and has not
only improved it by new observations, but has employed
his amazing powers of descriptive eloquence in embel-
hlhing and placing it in the most striking light. Some
remarks may be added, which tend to illustrate more
fully a dotrine of much importance in every inquiry
concerning the temperature of various climates.

When a cold wind blows over land, it must in

its passage rob the surface of some of its heat. By
means of this, the coldness of the wind is abated. But
if it continue to blow in the fame direchnon, it will come,
by degrees, to pass over a surface already cooled, and
will susser no longer any abatement of its own keen-
refs. Thus as it advances over a large tra& of land, it
brings on all the severity of intense frost.

Let the fame wind blow over an extensive and deep
-a ; the superficial water muff be immediately cooled
to a certain degree, and the wind proportionally warm-

ed.

ed. But the superficial and colder water beccrrirt
specifically heavier than the warmer water below It
dtfcends; what is warmer supplies its place. which, as
it comes to be cooled in its turn, continues to warm the
air which passes over it, or to diminish its cold. This
change of the superficial water, and successive ascent of
that which is warmer, and the consequent successive
abatement of coldness in the air, is aided by the agita-
tion caused in the sea by the mechanical aaion of the
wind, and a!so by the motion of the tides. This will
go on, and the rigour of the wind will continue to di-
rninilh until the whole water is so far cooled, that the
water on the surface is no longer removed from the ac-
tion of the wind, fat enough to hinder it from being
arrested by frofl. Whenever the surface freezes, the
wind is no longer warmed by the water from below,
and it goes on with undiminished cold.

From those principles may be explained the severity

of winter frosts in extensive continents ; their mildness
in frnall islands; and the superior rigour of winter la
those parts of North America with which we are belt
acquainted. In the norch-weft parts of Europe, the
severity of winter is mitigated by the well winds,
which ufuaily blow in the months of November, Decem.
ber, and part of January.

On TLe other hand, when a warm wind blows over

land, it beats the surface, which mutl therefore cease to
abate the fervour of :he wind. But the fame wind
blowing over water, agitates it, brings up the colder
water from below, and thus is continually losing fomc-
what of its own heat.

But the great power of the sea to mitigate the heat

of the wind or air passing over it, proceeds from the
1oic..-.ng dcrcumftance, that on account of the tran(ps-
rency of bhe sea, its surface cannot be heated to a great
digres by the fun's rays ; whereas the ground, fi:jKc:ed
to their influence, very soon acquires great heat. When,
therefore, the wind blows over a torrid continent, it i;
soon raised to a heat almost intolerable: but during its
paffige over an extenlive ocean, it is gradually cooled i

io

# NOTE XXXII. p. 279.

to that on its arrival at the farthest Ihore, it is again fit
for respiration.

Those principles will account for the sultry heats of

large continents in the torrid zone; for the mild climate
of islands in the fame latitude; and for the superior
warmth in summer which largecontinents, situated in the
temperate or colder zones of the earth, enjoy, when com-
pared with thatof islands. The heat of a climate depends
not only upon the immediate effec of the fun's rays,
but on their continued operation, on the effet which
they have formerly produced, and which remains for
some time in the ground. This is the reason why the
day is warmest about two in the afternoon, the si'mmer
warmest about the middle of July, and the winter
coldest about the middle of January.

The forests which cover America, and hinder the
sun-beams from heating the ground, are a great cause
of the temperate climate in the equatorial parts. The
eround, not being heated, cannot heat the air; and the
icaves, which receive the rays intercepted from the
eround, have not a mars of matter sufficient to absorb
e-at enough for this purpose. Besides, it is a known
si2, that the vegetative power of a plant occasions a
prrfpiration from the leaves in proportion to the heat
to which they are exposed; and, from the nature oE
evaporation, this perspiration produces a cold in the
leaf proportional to the perspiration. Thus the effet
of the leaf in heating the air in conta& with it, is pro-
diitoufly diminished. For those observations, which
throw much additional light on this curious subjee, I
am indebted to my ingenious friend, Mr. Robifon, pro-
feifor of natural philosophy in the university of Edinm
burgh.

NOTE XXXII. p. 279.

Tar climate of Brasil has been described by two emi-
bent naturalists, Pifo and Margrave, who observed it
with a philosophical accuracy, for which we search in
vain in the accounts of many other provinces in Ame-
VOL. 1,o r ic

# NOTE XXXIII. p. 280.

rica. Both represent it as temperate and mild, whn
compared with the climate of Africa. They ascribe ths
chiefly to the refreshing wind which blows continual y
from the sea. The air is not only cool, but chliiy
through the night, insomuch, that the natives kindle
fres every evening in their huts. Pifo de Mledicina
Brafilienfi, lib. i. p. , &-c. Margravius Hiftor. Rtrum
Naural. Brasilia, lib. viii. c. 3. p. 264. Nieuhoff,
who resided long in Brasil, confirms their defctiption.
Churchill's Collction, vol. ii. p. 26. Gumilla, who
was a missionary many years among the Indians upon
the river Oronco, gives a similar description of the
temperature of the climate there. Hiil. de l'Orenoque,
tomr . i.p. 26. P. Acugna felt a very considerable de.
gree cf cold in the countries on the banks of the river
Amazonj. Relat. vol. ii. p. 56. M. Biet, who livd a
considerable time in Cayenne, gives a similar acccunt
of the temperature of that climare, and afcrbes it m0
the fame cause. Voyage de la France, Equinox, p. 33c.
Nothing can be more different from there defcripnor.;
than that of the burning heat of the African coast gi;tr
by M. Adanfon. Voyage to Senegal, palfm.

NOTE XXXII. p. 28.o

Two French frigates were lent upon a voyage of

discovery in the year 1779. In latitude 44' sout;,,
they began to feel a considerable degree of cold. In
latitude 48°, they met v;lth islands of floating ice.
Hiftoire des Navigations aux Terres Aufirales, tom. r.
S56 &c. Dr. Halley fell in with ice in laitude 59".
Id. tom. i. p. 47. Commodore Byron, when on tt:
ccaft of Patagonia, latitude 50° 33' south, on the ;j.
teenth of December, which is midsummer in that pi-
of the globe, the twenty.firft ci December being !:;
longert day there, compares the climare to that c:
England in the middle of winter. Voyages by Hawlk'.
xvarth, i. z5. Mr. Banks having landed on Terra dI
Fueo, in the Bay of Good Success, latitude 55%, or
the sixteenth of January, which corresponds to'

Iat.

.cnth of July in our hemisphere, two of his attendants
,ed in one night of extreme cold, and all the party
were in the most imminent danger of perishing. Id. ii.
rc, t5. By the fourteenth of March, corresponding to
September in our hemisphere, winter was set in with
rslour, and the mountains were covered with snow.
lDid. 7z. Captain Cook, in his voyage towards the
Suth pole, furnishes new and striking inflances of the
extraordinary predominance of cold in this region of the
reobe. " Who would have thought (fays he) that an
.ian i, of no greater extent than seventy leagues in cir-
uit, situated between the latitude of 54° and 55°,
ihould in the very height of summer be, in a manner,
uholly covered, many fathoms deep, with frozen snow;
but more especially the S. W. coat ? The very fumnilts
ci the lofty mountains were cared with snow and ice;
b-t the quantity that lay in the valleys is incredible;
a.d at the bottom of the bays, the coast was terminated
ty a wall of ice of considerable height." Vol. ii.
f z17.

In some places of the ancient continent, an extraordi-
Gary degree of cold prevails in very low latitudes. Mr.
Bozle, in his embafly to the court of the Delai Lama,
pa:sed the winter of the year 774 at Chamnanning, in
la.tude 31° 39s N. He often found the thermometer in
k.s room twenty nine degrees under the fieezing point
by Fahrenheit's scale; and in the middle of April the
nnding waters were all frozen, and heavy showers of
(row frequently fell. The extraordinary elevation of the
country seems to be the caure of this excessive cold. In
travelling from Indoftan to Thibet, the ascent to the
rummit of the Boutan Mountains is very great, but the
d-fcent on the other fide is not in equal proportion.
2't.e kingdom of Thibet is an elevated region, extremely
bare and desolate. Account of Thibet, by Mr. Stewart,
read in the- Royal Society, p. 7. The extraordinary cold
in low latitudes in America cannot be accounted for by
th1 fame cause. Those regions are not remarkable for
e:eva'ion. Some of them are countries deprefed and

o o Tel.h
ooz The

The most obvious and probable cause of the fuperio0

degree of cold, towards the southern extremity of Ame.
rica, seems to be the form of the continent there. It
breadth gradually decreases as it firetches from St. An-
tonio southwards, and from the bay of St. Julian to the
Straits of Magellan its dimensions are much contracted.
On the east and weft fides, it is waffled by the Atlantic
and Pacific Oceans. From its southern point it is prc-
bable that a great extent of sea, without any confiderabi;
traf of land, reaches to the Antaraic pole. In which.
ever of these directions the wind blows, it is cooled be.
fore it approaches the Magellanic regions, by passing
over a vail body of water, nor is the land there of such
extent that it can recover any considerable degree of
heat in its progress over it. These circumstances con.
cur in rendering the temperature of the air in this dl.
trit of America, more timilar to that of an insular, than
to that of a continental climate, and hinder it from ac.
qoiring the fame degree of summer heat with place in
Europe and Afla, in a corresponding northern latitude.
The north wind is the only one that reaches this part of
America, after blowing over a great continent. But
from an attentive survey of its position, this will be
found to have a tendency, rather to diminish than aug.
ment the degree of heat. The southern extremity d
America is properly the termination of the immense ridge
of the Andes, which stretches nearly in a direct bhn
from north to south, through the whole extent of the
continent. The moit sultry regions in South America,
Guiana, Brafi, Paraguay, and Tucuman, lie many de
grees to the ealf of the Magel;anic regions. The leve
country of Peru, which enjoys the tropical heats, i'
tituated considerably to the weft of them. The nont
wind then, though it blows over land, does not bring t(
the southern extremity of America an increase of hea
colleaed in its pafTage over torrid regions; but befori
it arrives there, it must have (wept along the summit
of the Andes, and comes impregnated with the cold o
that frozen region.

Ttougl

# NOTE XXXIV. p. 283.

Though it be now demonstrated that there is no
,f ohern continent in that region of the globe which it
3-s supposed to occupy, it appears to be certain from
Cap:ain Cook's discoveries, that there is a large trac of
Lsnd near the south pole, which is the source of most of
the ice spread over the vast southern ocean. Vol. ii.
p. 130. 239, &c. Whether the influence of this remote
frozen continent may reach the southern extremity of
America, and asset its climate, is an inquiry not un-
worthy of attention.

NOTE XXXIV. p. 283.

M.. CONDAMINE is one of the latest and most accu.
r-:e observers of the interior state of South America
'. After descending from the Andes (fays he), one be-
holds a vail and uniform profpec of vwater and verdure,
and nothing more. One treads upon the earth, but
ies not fee it ; as it is so entirely covered with luxu-
r.ant plants, weeds, and shrubs, that it would require a
tr.fiderable degree of labour to clear it, for the space
of a foot." Relation abrege d'un Vjyage, &c. p. 4..
One of the singularities in the forests is a fort of osiers,
or withs, called bejucos by the Spaniards, liar.e by the
French, and nibbes by the Indians, which are usually
employed as ropes in America. This is one of the para-
ftical plants, which twists about the trees it meets with,
and rising above their highest branches, its tendrils de-
fend perpendicularly, strike into the ground, take root,
nfe up around another tree, and thus mount and descend
alternately. Other tendrils are carried obliquely by the
wind, or some accident, and form a confusion of inter-
woven cordage, which resembles the rigging of a ship.
Bancroft, Nat. Hifi. of Guiana, 99. These withs are
iofen as thick as the arm of a man. lb. p 75. M.
Bouguer's account of the forests in Peru perfealy re-
fembles this description. Voyage au Peru, p. i6.
0-viedo gives a similar description of the forests in other
pans of America. Hist. ib. ix. p. 144.. D. The coun-
ry of the Moxos is so much overflowed, that they are

00 3 obliged

# NOTE XXXV. p. 285.

obliged to reside on the summit of some rising grour.
during some part of the year, and have no commni.
cation with their countrymen at any distance. LeItrt
Edifiantes, tom. x. p. 187. Garcia gives a full and jJil
defcriprion of the rivers, lakes, woods, and marhes In
those countries of America which lie between the tro-
pica. Origen de los Indios, lib. ii. c. R. § 4, 5. The
incredible hardships to which Goncalez Pizarro was ex.
pored in attempting to march into the country to the
cast of the Andes, convey a very firiking idea of that
part of America in its original uncultivated state. Gar.
cil. de la Vega, Royal. Comment. of Peru, part
book. iii. c. --j.

NOTE XXXV. p. z85.

TEa animals of America seem not to have bea

always of a size inferior to those in other quarters of
the globe. From antlers of the moofe-deer which halt
been found in America, it appears to have been 2a
animal of great size. Near the banks of the Ohio a
considerable number of bones of an immense magnirude
have been found. The place where this discovery has
been made lies about one hundred and ninety miles be-
low the junaion of the river Scioto with the Ohio. l!
is about four miles distant from the banks of the latter,
on the fide of the marffi called the Salt Lick. The boor
lie in vast quantities about five or fix feet under ground,
and the stratum is visible in the bank on the edge 0o
the Lick. Journa of Colonel Gcrge Crrg.'an, MS. pe-:
me. This spot seems to be accurately laid down by
Evans in his map. These bones must have belonged t
animals of enormous bulk ; but naturalifls being ac
quainted with no living creature of such size, were a
first inclined to think that they were mineral substances
Upon receiving a greater number of specimens, an<
after inepeeing them more narrowly, they are noa
allowed to be the bones of an animal. As the elephan
is the largcft known quadruped, and the tusks whi!
were found nearly refenbled, both in form and quaLrY

St

# NOTE XXXVI. p. 285.

the tusks of an elephant, it was concluded that the car-
cafes deposited on the Ohio were of that species. But
Dr. Hunter, one of the persons of our age bes qualified
to decide with refpe& to this point, having accurately
examined several parcels of tu&ks, and grinders, and jaw-
bones, sent from the Ohio to London, gives it as his
opinion, that they did not belong to an elephant, but
tc some huze carnivorous animal of an unknown fpe-
c es. Phil. Tranfat. vol. lviii. p. 34. Bones of the
fWmn kind, and as remarkable for their size, have been
found near the mouths of the great rivers 0by, Jeni-
feia, and Lena, in Siberia. Stralbrenberg, Defcript. of
r:-rtk and Eafl Parts of Europe and Asia, p. 4.0, &c. The
elephant seems to be confined in his range to the torrid
zitn, and never multiplies beyond it. In such cold
rezions as those bordering on the frozen sea, he could
r. t hv'2. The exifence of such large animals in Ame-
r ca mght open a wide field for conjeaure. The more
v:e contemplate the face of nature, and confider the
variety of her produaions, the more we must be satis-
fidJ that afqonifhing changes have been made in the
te-raqueous globe by convulsions and revolutions, of
which no account is preserved in hifiory,

NOTE XXXVL p. 285.

THIS degeneracy of the doefltic European animals

in America may be imputed to Come of these causes,
In the Spanish settlements, which are situated either
within the torrid zone, or in countries bordering upon
it, the increase of heat, and diversity of food, prevent
sheep and horned cattle from attainirg the fame size as
in Europe. They seldom become so fat, and their
efleh is not so juicy, or of such delicate flavour. In
North America, where the climate is more favourable,
and similar to that of Europe, the quality of the graffes
which spring up naturally in their pafture-grounds is
not good. Mitchell, p. Str. Agriculture is fill so
much in its infancy, that artificial food for cattle is not
aifed in any quantity. During a winter, long in many

provinces,

# NOTE XXXVII. p. 286.

# NOTE XXXVIII. p. 288.

# NOTE XXXIX. p. 289.

provinces, and rigorous in all, no proper care is taken
of their cattle. The general treatment of their horses
and horned cattle is injudicious and harih in all the
English colonies. These circumftancescontribute more,
perhaps, than any thing peculiar in the quality of the
climate, to the degeneracy of breed in the horses, cows,
and sheep, of many of the North American provinces.

NOTE XXXVII. p. 286.

IN the year 15rS, the island of Hispaniola was as-

sliced with a dreadful vifiration of those deftrucilve in-
seas, the particulars of which Herrera describes, and
mentions a singular instance of the fuperflition of the
Span!fn planters. After trying various methods of ex-
terminating the ants, they resolved to implore protec.
tion of the faints i but as the calamity was new, they
were at a loss to find out the faint who could give them
the most effecual aid. They cast lots in order to dif-
cover the patron whom they should invoke. The lots
decided in favour of St. Saturninus. They celebrated i:s
festival with great solemnity, and immediately, adds the
historian, the calamity began to abate. Herrera, dec. a.
lib. iii. c. 15. p. 1 7.

NOTE XXXVIII. .. 288.

THi author of Recherches Philofophiques fur les

Americains supposes this difference in heat to be equal
to twelve degrees, and that a place thirty degrees from
the equator in the old continent, is as warm as one
situated eighteen degrees from it in America, tom. i.
p. x. Dr. ,Mitchell, after observations carried on du.
r.ng thirty years, contends that the difference is equal
to fourteen or fifteen degrees of latitude. P. efent State,
&. p. 257.

NOTE XXXIX. p. 289.

JANUAtRY 3d, 1765, Mr. Bertram, near the head of
St. John's river in East Florida, observed a frost lo in-

tenfc,

# NOTE XL. p. 289.

# NOTE XLI. p. 300.

ten', that in one night the ground was frozen an inch
thick upon the bants of the river. The limes, citrons,
and banana trees, at St. Auguftin, were destroyed.
Bertram's Journal, p. 2o. Other instances of the ex-
traordinary operations of cold in the southern provinces
of North America are colleted by Dr. Mitchell. Present
State, p. 1o6, &c. February 7th, 1747, the frost at
Charleftown was so intense, that a person having car-
rind two quart bottles of hot water to bed, in the
morning they were split to pieces, and the water con-
verted into solid lumps of ice. In a kitchen, where
there was a fire, the water in a jar in which there was
a large live eel, was frozen to the bottom. Almost all
the orange and olive trees were destroyed. Description
of South Carolina, gvo. Lond. 1761.

NOTE XL. p. 289.

A EzMABRABLE instance of this occurs in Dutch
Guiana, a country every where level, and so low, that
during the rainy fcafons it it usually covered with
water near two feet in height. This renders the foil so
rich, that on the surface, for twelve inches in depth, it
is a firatum of perse& manure, and as such has been
transported to Barbadoes. On the banks of the EfIe-
quebo, thirty crops of ratan canes have been railed
successively, whereas in the Weft Indian islands not
mere than two is ever expeced from the richest land.
The expedients by which the plantera endeavour to di.
minith this excefflve fertility of foil are various. Ban-
cioit, Nat. Hist. of Guiana, p. so, &c.

NOTE XLI. p. 300.

MULLrE seems to have believed, without sufficient

evidence, that the Cape had been doubled, tom. i.
p. i , &c.; and the Imperial Academy of St. Peters-
hurgh give some countenance to it, by the manner in
vhich 'TfcbukoA'i-ros is laid down in their charts. But
I am assured, from undoubted authority, that noRutRian

vtffel

# NOTE XLII. p. 503.

vessel has ever failed round that cape, and as the
country of T-fcbtki is not subjed to the Ruffian empire,
it is very imperfectly known.

NOTE XLII. p. 503.

WrzE this the place for entering into a long and

intricate geographical disquisition, many curious ob-
servations might anfe from comparing the accounts of
the two Ruffian voyages, and the charts of their refpec.
tive navigations. One remark is applicable to both.
We cannot rely with absolute certainty on the potinon
which they assign to several of the places which they
vificed. The weather was so extremely foggy, that they
seldom saw the fun or stars, and the position of the
ifands and supposed continents was commonly deter.
mined by reckoning, not by observation. Behring and
Tfchirikow proceeded much farther towards the ea;t
than Krenitzin. The land discovered by Behring, whidl
he imagined to be part of the American continent, is
in the z36th degree of longitude from the first men.
dian in the isle of Ferro, and in 580° 28 of latitude.
Tfchirikow came upon the fame coast in longit. 241,
lat. 560. Muller, i. t4S, 249. The former must hae
advanced 60 degrees from the Port of Petropawlowf.i,
from which he tok his departure, and the latter 6;
degrees. But from the chart of Krenitzin's voyage, it
appears that he did not fail farther towards the ealt
than the to8th degree, and only 32 degrees from Petro-
pawlowfki. In 1741, Behring and Tfchirikow, botn in
going and returning, held a course which was mostly to
the south of that chain of islands, which they disco:.er
ed; and observing the mountainous and rugged alp:.
of the head-lands which they deCcried towards tre
north, they foppofed them to be promontories belong-
ing to some part of the American continent, which, as
they fancied, firetched as far south aa the latitude 6.
In this manner they are laid down in the chart publiihet
by Muller, and likewise in a manuscript chart drawn bj
a mate of Behring's ship, communicated to me by Mr

ProfetfT;

profetTor Robifon. But in 1769, Krenitzin, after
wvintering in the island Alaxa, flood so far towards the
north in his return, that his course lay through the
middle of what Behring and Tfchirikow had supposed
to be a continent, which he found to be an open Tea,
and that they had mistaken rocky ifes for the head-lands
of a continent. It is probable, that the countries dif-
covered in 1741, towards the east, do not belong to
the American continent, but are only a continuation of
the chain of islands. The number of vo'canos in this
region of the globe is remarkable. There are several
in Kamchatka, and not one of the islands, great or
f(na!l, as far as the Ruffian navigation extends, is with-
cut them. Many are actually burning, and the moun-
ra.r.s in all bear parts of having heen once in a state of
eruption. Were I disposed to admit such conjeftues as
have found place in other inquiries concerning the peo-
p:ing of America, I might suppose that this part of the
earth, having manifestly suffered violent convulsions from
earthquakes and volcanos, an iflhmus, which may
l.ave formerly united Asia to America, has been broken,
ard formed into a clufler of islands by the thock.

It is singular, that at the very time the Ruffian naviga-

trs were attempting to make discoveries in the north.
weft of America, the Spaniards were prosecuting the
fame design from another quarter. In 1769, two small
vefflcl failed from Loretto in California to explore the
coafis of the country to the north of that peninsula,
They advanced no farther than the port of Monte Rey
in lJtitude 36. But, in several successive expeditions
sie:d out from the port of St. Bias in New Galicia, the
Spaniards have advanced as far as the latitude 53. Ga-
z':J de Madrid March 19, and May 14, 1776. But as
the journals of those voyages have not yet been publish-
ed, I cannot compare their progress with that of the
R .iTans, or (hew how near the navigators of the two
na:oins have approached to each other. It is to be
hbped, that the enlightened minister who has now the
d;reton of American affairs in Spain, will not with.-
htld tuns information from the public.

# NOTE XLIII. p. 305.

NOTE XLIII. p. 305.

Oou knowledge of the vicinity of the two continents

of Asia and America, which was very imperfea when
I publilhed the history of America in the year 1777, ii
now complete. Mr. Coxe's Account of the Ruffian Ds.
coveries between Asia and America, printed in the yea
178c, contains many curious and important fads with
refped to the various attempts of the Ruffians to open
a communication with the New World. The history
of the great voyage of discovery, begun by Captain
Cook in r776, and completed by Captains Clerk and
Gore, published in the year 1780, communicates all the
information that the curiosity of mankind could defir
with regard to this fubje&.

At my request, my friend Mr. Playfair, prfeffor c.

mathematics in the university of Edinburgh, has corn
pared the narrative and charts of those illufirious navi.
gators, with the more imperfe& relations and maps of
the Ruffians. The refIlt of this comparison I commu-
nicate in his own words, with much greater confider,:
in his fcienrific accuracy than I could have ve.tured tc
place in any observations which I myself might have
made upon the fubje.

"The discoveries of Captain Cook in his last voyag

have confirmed the conclusions which Dr. Robertfcr
had drawn, and have conneted together the fae,
from which they were deduced. They have now ren.
dered it certain that Behring and Tfchirikow touched
on the coaR of America in I741. The former disco
vered land in lat. 58° zi', and about 236° east from
Ferro. He has given such a description of the bay in
which he anchored, and the high mountain to the weft
ward of it, which he calls St. Elias, that though the
account of his voyage is much abridged in the Englil
translation, Captain Cook recognized the place as hi
failed along the western coast of America in the yOr
1778. The isle of St. Hermogenes, near the mouth o
Cook's river, Schumagins Ifes on the coast of Alashka
and Foggy Ile, retain in Captain Cook's chart the name

a whic

rwich they had received from the Ruffian navigator.
Cook's Voy. vol. ii. p. 347.

1 Tfchirikow came upon the fame coast about z030'

further south than Behring, near the Mount Edgecumbe
of Captain Cook.

"With regard to Krenitzin, we learn from Coxe's

Account of the Ruffian Discoveries, that he failed from
the mouth of the Kamtchatka river with two chips in
the year i76S. With his own ship he reached the
iflhr. Oonolafhka, in which there had been a Ruffian
fe:tlement since the year t762, where he wintered pro-
bably in the fame harbour or bay where Captain Cook
afterwards anchored. The other ship wintered at Alafh-
ka, which was supposed to be an island, though it be
in faE a part of the American continent. Krenitzin,
accordingly, returned without knowing that either of
his ships had been on the coast of America; and this is
the more surprising, because Captain Cook has in-
formed us that Alafhka is understood to be a great
continent both by the Ruffians and the natives at
Oorolathka.

, According to Krenitzin, the ship which had win-

tered at Alafhka had hardly failed 3z° to the eastward
c, the harbour of St. Peter and St. Paul in Kamtchat-
ka; but, according to the more accurate charts of Cap-
tain Cook, it had failed no less than 370 17' to the
eavtward of that harbour. There is nearly the fame
rmiltake of o5 in the longitude which Krenitzin assigns
to Oonolafhka. It is remarkable enough, that in the
c'art of those seas, put into the hands of Captain
Cock by the Ruffians on that island, there was an
error of the fame kind, and very nearly of the fame
cx tnt.

"But what is of moue consequence to be remarked

on this subjea is, that the discoveries of Captain Cook
have fully verified Dr. Robertson's conjeaure, ' that it
is probable that future navigators in those seas, by
fleering farther to the north than Behring and Ticbiri-
k.xw or Krenitzin had done, may find that the con-
tn.cnt of America approaches (till nearer to that of
YVL. I, P P Asia.*

Asia.' Vol. ii. p. 44. It has accordingly been foun:
that these two continents, which in the parallel of 5So,
or that of the southern extremity of Alaflka, are about
four hundred leagues asunder, approach continually to
one another as they stretch together toward the north,
until, within less than a degree from the polar circle,
they are terminated by two capes, only thirteen leagues
difant. The east cape of Asia is in latitude 66° 6, and
in longitude 90oC z' east from Greenwich; the wcflern
extremity of America, or Prince of Wales Cape, is in
latitude 650 4b', and in longitude 191° 4 j. Nearly in
the middle of the narrow strait (Behring's Strait) which
separates these capes, are the two islands of St. Diomede,
from which both continents may be seen. Captain
King informs us, that as he was failing through th:s
firait July 5, 1779, the fog having cleared away, he
enjoyed the pleasure of feeing from the ship the conti.
nents of Asia and America at the fame moment, toge.
ther with the islands of St. Diomede lying between them.
Cook's Voy. vol. iii. p. 244.

' Beyond this point the firait opens towards the

Araic Sea, and the coasts of Asia and America diverge
so fart from one another, that in the parallel of 69°
they are more than one hundred leagues asunder. lb
p. 277. To the south of the strait there are a number
of islands, Clerke's, King's, Anderson's, &c. which,
as well as those of Sr. Diomede, may have facilitated the
migrations of the natives from the one continent to
the other. Captain Cook, however, on the authority
of the Ruffians at Oonolafhka, and for other good rea-
sons, has diminished the number of islands which had
been inferred in former charts of the northern Archi-
pelago. He has alft placed Alatnka, or the promontory
which firetches from the continent of America S. W.
towards Kamtchaika, at the difitnce of five degrees of
longitude farther from the coast of Asia than it was
reckoned by the Ruffian navigators.

" The geography of the Old and the New World is

therefore equally indebted to the discoveries made in
this memorable voyage and as many errors have betn

corraced,

-rrre&ed, and many deficiencies supplied by means of
:hefe discoveries, so the accuracy of some former obfer-
;atdons has been efiablifhed. The basis of the map of
the Ruffian empire, as far as regarded Kamtchatka, and
the country of the Tfchutzki, was the position of four
places, Yakutfh, Ochotz, Bolcherefk, and Petropaw-
[lowfki, which had been determined by the afironomer
Kraffilnicow in the year 174.4. Nov. Coment. Petrop.
v!. iii. p. 46 5, &c. But the accuracy of his obferva-
tions was contefled by M. Engel, and M. Robert de
Vaugondy; Coxe Append. i. No. 2. p. 267. z27.; and
the former of these geographers ventured to take away
no less than 28 degrees from the longitude, which, on
the faith of Kraffilnicow's observations, was assigned
to the eaflern boundary of the Ruffian empire. With
how little reason this was done, will appear from con-
fi'ring that our Pritifh navigators, having determined
th,- pofi:ion of Petropawlowfki by a great number of
very accurate observations, found the longitude of that
port 15° 43' E. from Greenwich, and its latitude
5 1'; agreeing, the first to less than seven minutes,
an- the second to less than half a minute, with the cal-
culations of the Ruffian astronomer: a coincidence
which, in the situation of so remote a place, does not
leave an uncertainty of more than four English miles,
and which, for the credit of (cience, deserves to be
particularly remarked. The chief error in the Ruffian
maps has been in not extending the boundaries of that
empire sufficiently towards the east. For as there was
nothing to conne& the land of the Tfchutzki and the
ncrth-eafl point of Asia with those places whereof the
position had been carefully ascertained, except the im-
perses accounts of Behring's and Synd's voyages, con-
fEderable errors could not fail to be introduced, and that
point was laid down as not more than z;o 2' east of
the meridian of Petropawlowfki. Coxe App. i. No. 2.
Py the cbfervations of Captain King, the difference of
lingitude between Petropawlowfki and the East Cape
is 31 9' i that is S° 7' greater than it was supposed to
to be by the Ruffian geographers."-It appears from

r L 2 Cook's

Cook's and King's Voy. iii. p. 172. that the continents
of Asia and America are usually joined together by ice
daring winter. Mr. Sarmwell confirms this account of
his foperior officer. " At this place, viz. near the
latitude of 66° N. the two coasts are only thirteen
leagues asunder, and about midway between them lie
two ilands, the diflance from which to either shore is
(hort of twenty miles. At this place, the natives of
Asia could find no difficulty in pafling over to the oppo.
file coast, which is in fight of their own. That in a
course of years such an event would happen, either
through design or accident, cannot admit of a doubt
The canoes which we saw among the Tfchutzki were
capable of performing a much longer voyage; and,
however rude they may have been at some distant pe-
riod, we can (carcely suppose them unequal to a passage
of fix or seven leagues. People might have been
carried over by accident on floating pieces of ice. They
might also have travelled across on fledges or on foot;
for we have reason to believe that the strait is entirety
frozen over in the winter; so that during that season, the
continents, with refpe& to the communication between
them, may be confidered as one land." Letter from
Mr. Samwell, Scots Magazine for 17gg, p. 604. It i
probable that this interesting portion of geographical
knowledge will, in the course of a few years, receive
farther improvement. Soon after the publication of
Captain Cook's last voyage, the great and enlightened
sovereign of Russia, attentive to every thing that may
contribute to extend the bounds of science, or to reader
it more accurate, formed the plan of a new voyage of
discovery, in order to explore those parts of the ocean
lying between Asia and America, which Captain Coors
did not visit, to examine more accurately the islands
which stretch from one continent almost to the other, to
forvey the north-east coast of the Ruffian empire, from
the mouth of the Kovyma, or Kolyma, to the Nor:h
Cape, and to fettle, by aflronomical observations, the
pofiton of each place worth notice. The condua of
this important enterprize is committed to Captain B I-

Ilngs,

# NOTE XLIV. p. 318.

6nes, an Englifl officer in the Ruffian service, of whose
ibilities for that station it will be deemed the bes evi-
icnce, that he accompanied Captain Cook in his last
cryage. To render the expedition more extensively
jeful, an eminent naturalist is appointed to attend Cap-
ain Billings. Six years will be requisite for accom-
:]:fhing the purposes of the voyage. Coxe Supplement
*o Ruffian Discoveries, p. 2 7, &c.

NOTE XLIV. p. 318.

Frv travellers have had such opportunity of obferv-
,ng the natives of America, in its various diftrits, as Don
Antonio Ulloa. In a work lately publi(hed by him, he
hus describes the charateriftical features of the race:
"A very small forehead, covered with hair towards its
rxtremities, as far as the middle of the eye-brows i
inle eyes; a thin nose, small and bending towards the
sFper lip; the countenance broad; the ears large i the
hair very black, lank, and coarse; the limbs well
trned, the feet small, the body of just proportion;
and altogether smooth and free from hair, until old age,
when they acquire some beard, but never on the cheeks."
Noticias Americanas, &c. p. 307. M. le chevalier de
Pinto, who resided several years in a part of America
which Ul!oa never visited, gives a sketch of the general
aspet of the Indians there. " They are all of copper
colour, with some diversity of shade, not in proportion
to their distance from the equator, but according to the
degree of elevation of the territory which they inhabit.
Those who live in a high country are fairer than those
in the marshy low lands on the coast, Their face is
round, farther removed, perhaps, than that of any people
from an oval shape. Their forehead is small, the ex-
tremity of their ears far from the face, their lips thick,
their nose flat, their eyes black, or of a chefnut colour,
fr.all, but capable of dicferning objeas at a great dif-
tance. Their hair is always thick and sleek, and with-
cut any tendency to curl. They have no hair on any
part of their body but the head. At the first aspeA, a

r P 3 fouthcrn

# NOTE XLV. p. 319.

# NOTE XLVI. p. 323.

# NOTE XLVII. p. 329.

foutbern Americ-n appears to be mild and innocent,
but on a more attentive view, one discovers in his
countenance Comething wild, diilrufiful, and fullen."
MS. pena me. The two portraits drawn, by hands very
different from those of common travellers, have a near
refembiance.

NOTE XLV. p. 39.

AM.AZNG accounts are given of the persevering

speed of the Americans. Adair relates the adventurer
of a Chikkafah warrior, who run through woods and
over mountains, three hundred computed miles, in a
day and a half and two nights. Hist. of Amer. Ind. 396.

NOTE XLVI. p.323.

M. GODIT LZ JEUNE, who resided fifteen years

among the Indians of Peru and Q.ito, and twenty years
in the French colony of Cayenne, in which there is a
constant intercourse with the Galibis and other tribes
on the Orinoco, observes, that the vigour of conftitu.
tion among the Americans is exa&ly in proportion to
their habits of labour. The Indians, in warm climates,
such as those on the coasts of the South Sea, on the river
of Amazons, and the river Orinoco, are not to be
compared for strength with those in cold countries
and yet, fays he, boats daily set out from Para, a Por.
tuguefe settlement on the river of Amazons, to ascend
that river against the rapidity of the stream, and with
the fame crew they proceed to San Pablo, which is eight
hundred leagues difiant. No crew of white people, or
even of negroes, would be found equal to a tafl of
such persevering fatigue, as the Portuguese have ex-
perienced, and yet the Indians, being accuflomed to thu
labour from their infancy, perform it. MS. pacts me.

NOTE XLVII. p. 329.

DoN ANTOgNIO ULLOA, who visited a great part of
Peru and Chili, the kingdom of New Granada, arn

fectrl

# NOTE XLVIII. p. 332.

:veral of the provinces bordering on the Mexican
,ii, while employed in the fame service with the
rerch mathematicians during the space of ten years,
nd who afterwards had an opportunity of viewing the
iorth-Americans, asserts, " that if we have seen one
~merican, we may be said to have seen them all, their
lour and make are so nearly the fame." Notic.
.mericanas, p. 3c8. A more early observer, Pedro
le Cieca de Leon, one of the conquerors of Peru, who
tad likewise traversed many provinces of America,
iffirms, that the people, men and women, although
:here is such a multitude of tribes or nations as to be
airnoft innumerable, and such diversity of climates, ap-
pear nevertheless like the children of one father and
mother. Chronica del' Peru, parte i. c. I9. There is,
no doubt, a certain combination of features, and
peculiarity of aspea, which forms what may be called a
European or Asiatic countenance. There must likewise
be one that may be denonfinated American, common to
the whole race. This may be supposed to firike the
traveller at first fight, while not only the various shades
which distinguish people of different regions, but the
peculiar features which discriminate individuals, escape
the notice of a transient observer. But when persons
who had resided so long among the Americans concur in
bearing testimony to the similarity of their appearance in
erery climate, we may conclude that it is more remark-
able than that cf any other race. See likewise Garcia
Origen de los Indies, p. 54. 242. Torquemada Mo-
narch. Indiana, ii. 57r.

NOTE XLVIII. p.332.'

M.. rZ cnteTALtR Dz PIntTO observes, that in

th- interior parts of Brasil, he had been informed tiat
some persons resembling the white people of Darien have
been found ; but that the breed did not continue, and
te.r children became lIke other Americans. This race,
however, is very irrperfe-tly known. MS, tene me.

# NOTE XLIX. p. 335.

NOTE XLIX. p. 335.

Tez testimonies of different travellers, concerning

the Patagomans, have been col!eded and flated with a
considerable degree of accuracy by the author of Re.
cherches Philofophiques, &c. tom. i. 281, &c. iii. 181,
&c. Since the publication of his work, several naviga-
tors have visited the Magellanic regions, and, like their
predecessors, differ very widely in their accounts of its
inhabitants. By Commodore Byron and his crew, who
failed through the Straits in 1764, the common size of
the Patagonians was estimated to be eight feet, and
many of them much taller. Phil. Tranfad. vol. Ivii.
p. 78. By Captains Wallis and Carteret, who 3aually
measured them in ri66, they were found to be from
fix feet to fix feet five and seven inches in height.
Phil. Tranf. vol Ix. p. 22. These, however, seem to
have been the very people whose size had been rated so
high in the year 1764; for several of them had beads
and red baize of the fame kind with what had been put
aboard CaptainWallis's ship, and he naturally concluded
that they had got there from Mr. Byron. Hawkefw. i.
In I767 they were again measured by M. Bougainville,
whose account differs little from that of Captain Wallii.
Voy. z19. To there I ihall add a teffimony of great
weight. In the year 762, Don Bernardo Ibagnez de
Echavarri accompanied the Marquis de Valdelirios to
Buenos Ayres, and recided there several years. He is
a very intelligent author, and his reputation for veracity
unimpeached among his countrymen. In speaking of
the country towards the southern extremity of Ame-
rica, " By what Indians,' fays he, " is it possessed ?
Not certainly by the fabulous Patagonians, who are
supposed to occupy this diftrid. I have from many
eye-witnefles, who have lived among those Indians,
and traded much with them, a true and accurate de-
(cription of their persons. They are of the fame stature
with Spaniards. I never saw one who role in height
two varas and two or three inches," i. e. about So or

81.31:

# NOTE L. p. 338.

gr. i, inches Engliih, if Echavarri makes his compu-
tation according to the vara of Madrid. This agrees
rear;y with the measurement of Captain Wallis. Reyno
Jtfultico, 238. Mr. Falkner, who resided as amiffion-
ary forty years in the southern parts of America, fays,
" that the Patagonians, or Puelches, are a large-bodied
peop:e; but I never beard of that gigantic race which
o.hers have mentioned, though I have seen persons of
a:i the different tribes of southern Indians." Introd.
p. z6. M. Dobrizhoffer, a Jesuit, who resided eighteen
etara in Paraguay, and who had seen great numbers of
tri: various tribes which inhabit the countries situated
upon the Straits of Magellan, confirms, in every point,
the tefi;mony of his brother-miffionary Falkner. Do-
Lrizhtffer enters into some detail with refped to the
c.inicns cf several authors concerning the fiature of the
Pa'azcniars. Having mentioned the reports of some
cariy travellers with regard to the extraordinary size
of sone bones found on that coast, which were
fup-)fed to be human; and having endeavoured to
f..v that these bones belonged to some large marine or
iard animal, he concludes, " de hifce offibus crede
cu.cquid lihuerit, dummodo, me fuafore, Patagones
pro gigantibus definas hahere," Hiftoria de Abiffonibus,
vol. ii. p. 19, &c.

NOTE L. p. 338.

ANTONIO SANCHEZ RIBEIRO, a learned and in-

gerious physician, published a dissertation in the year
1765, in which he endeavours to prove, that this dif-
ea(e was not introduced from America, but took its
rife in Europe, and was brought on by an epidemical and
malignant disorder. Did I choose to enter into a dif-
quifition on this fubje&, which I should not have men-
tioned, if it had not been intimately connected with this
part of my inquiries, it would not be difficult to point
out rome miflakes with refpe& to the fats upon which
he founds, as well as some errors in the consequences
which he draws from them. The rapid communicatioiT

of

# NOTE LI. p. 342.

# NOTE LII. p. 348.

of this disease from Spain over Europe, seems however
to referble the progress of an epidemic, rather than
that of a disease transmitted by infecion. The first
mention of it is in the year 1493, and before the year
1497 it had made its appearance in most countries of
Europe, with such alarming symptoms as rendered it
necessary for the civil magistrate to interpose, in order
to check its career.-Since the publication of this work,
a second edition of Dr. Sanchez's Dissertation has been
communicated to me. It contains several a'iitional
fa&s in confirmation of his opinion, which is fupportne
with such plausible arguments, as render it a fubjct
of inquiry well deferring the attention of learned
physicians.

NOTE LI. p.342.

Tar people of Otaheite have no denomination for any

number above two hundred, which is fufficien: for their
tranlacions. Voyages, by Hawkefworth, ii. 2zS.

NOTE LII. p. 348.

As the view which I have given of rude nations is

extremely different from that exh:bited by very refpea-
able authors, it may be proper to produce some of the
many authorities on which I found my defcrip'in.
The manners of the savage tribes in America ha.e
never been viewed by persons more capable of observing
them with discernment, than the philosophers employed
by France and Spain, in the year 1735, to determine
the figure of the earth. M. Bouguer, D. Antonio d'UI-
loa, and D. Jorge Juan, resided long-among the natives
of the least civilized provinces in Peru. M. de la Con-
damine bad not only the fame advantages with them
for observation, but, in his voyage down the Maragnon,
be had an opportunity of infpectng the state of the
various nations feated on its banks, in its vast course
across the continent of South America. There is a
wonderful resemblance in their representation of the

charater

charaaer of the Americans. " They are all extremely
indolent," fays M. Bouguer, " they are supid, they pass
whole days fitting in the fame place, without moving,
or speaking a single word. It is not easy to describe
the degree of their indifference for wealth, and all its
advantages. One does not well know what motive to
propose to them, when one would persuade them to
perform any service. It is vain to offer them money i
they answer, that they are not hungry." Voyage au
Perou, p. o02. " If one confiders them as men, the
nariowlnefs of their understanding seems to be incom-
patible with the excellence of the foul. Their imbe-
cility is so visible, that one can hardly form an idea
oi them different from what one has of the brutes.
Nothing diflurbs the tranquillity of their fouls, equally
insensible to disasters and to prosperity. Though half-
naked, they are as contented as a monarch in his most
splendid array. Riches do not attrac them in the
smallest degree, and the authority or dignities to which
they may a(pire are so little the objets of their ambition,
that an Indian will receive with the fame indifference
tLe office of a judge (Alcade) or that of a hangman, if
deprived of the former and appointed to the latter.
Nothing can move or change them. Interest has no
Sower over them, and they often refute to perform a
f-rall service, though certain of a great recompence.
Fear makes no impression upon them, and refpea as
i.:tle. Their disposition is so singular that there is no
nethod of influencing them, no means of rousing them
from that indifference, which is proof against all the
tr,.leavours of the wisest persons no expedient which
can induce them to abandon that gross ignorance, or lay
aside that careless negligence, which disconcert the pru-
cence and disappoint the care of such as are attentive
t their welfare.' Voyage d'Ulloa, tom. i. 335. 356-
Oi those singular qualities he produces many extraor-
i.nary inflances, p. 336-347. " Infenfbility," fays
M. de la Condamine, " is the basis of the American
tchracer. I leave others to determine, whether this
:u- be dignified witi the name of apalhy, or dif-

graced

graced with that of ftopidity. It arires, without doubt,
from the (mall number of their ideas, which do not ex-
tend beyond their wants. Gluttons even to voracity,
when they have wherewithal to satisfy their appetite.
Temperate, when necessity obliges them to such a de.
gree, that they can endure want without teeming to
desire any thing. Pusillanimous and cowardly to excels,
unless when they are rendered desperate by drunkenntei
Averse to labour, indifferent to every motive of glory,
honour, or gratitude i occupied entirely by the objtd
that is present, and always determined by it alcne,
without any solicitude about futuriry; incapable oi
foresight or of refletion i abandoning themselves, wheb
under no restraint, to a puerile joy, which they expret
by frisking about, and immoderate fits of laughter;
without object or design, they pass their life without
thinking, and grow old without advancing beyond chld.
hood, of which they retain all the defects. If this de.
scription were applicable only to the Indians in some
provinces of Peru, who are slaves in every refpea bat
the name, one might believe, that this degree of de-
generacy was occasioned by the servile dependence to
which they are reduced; the example of the modern
Greeks being proof how far servitude may degrade thk
human species. But the Indians in the missions of thi
Jesuits, and the savages who fRill enjoy unimpaired
liberty, being as limited in their faculties, not to fay ai
flupid as the other, one cannot observe, without hunrm
liarion, that man, when abandoned to simple nature,
and deprived of the advantages resulting from education
and society, differs but little from the brute cleation.'
Voyage de la Riv. de Amaz. 52, 53. M. de Chanvalon,
an intelligent and philosophical observer, who vified
Martinico in r751, and resided there fix years, gives teb
following defeription of the Caraibs " It is not the red
colour of their complexion, it is not the singularity o
their features, which confitites the chief differenc
between them and us. It is their excessive fimplicly i
it is the limited degree of their faculties. Their rcafon
is not more enlightened or more provident than t1.

inft.na

Instinct of brutes. The reason of the most gross pea-
sants, that of the negroes brought up in the parts of
Africa most remote from intercourse with Europeans,
is such that we discover appearances of intelligence,
which, though imperfet, is capable of increase. But of
this the understanding of Caraibs seems to be hardly sus-
ceptible. If found philosophy and religion did not as-
ford us their light, if we were to decide according to
the firtl impreflion which the view of that people makes
upon the mind, we should be disposed to believe that
they did not belong to the fame species with us. Their
stupid eyes are the true mirrour of their fouls; it ap-
pears to be without functions. Their indolence is ex-
treme; they have never the leatf solicitude about the
moment which is to succeed that which is present."
Voyage a la Martinique, p. 44, 45-. T. M. de la
Borde, Tertre, and Rochefort, confirm this description.
'" The charaderiflics of the Californians," fays P.Vene-
gas, " as well as of all other Indians, are stupidity and
insensibility; want of knowledge and reflecion; in-
constancy, impetuosity, and blindness of appetite; an
excessive sloth, and abhorrence of all labour and fa-
tigue; an excessive love of plealure and amusement of
every kind, however trifling or brutal; pusillanimity,
and, in fine, a most wretched want of every thing which
conflitutes the real man, and renders him rational, in-
ventive, tractable, and useful to himself and society.
It is not easy for Europeans, who never were out of
their own country, to conceive an adequate idea of
those people: for, even in the least frequented corners
of the globe, there is not a nation so stupid, of such
contrated ideas, and so weak both in body and mind,
as the unhappy Californians. Their understanding com-
prehends little more than what they fee abftrac ideas,
and much less a chain of reasoning, being far beyond
their power i so that they scarce ever improve their first
ideas, and these are in general false, or at least inade-
quate. It is in vain to represent to them any future
advantages which will result to them from doing or ab-
slaining from this or that particular immediately pre-
vOL, 1, q. fcnt

sent; the relation of means and ends being beyond the
firetch of their faculties. Nor have they the leaf no.
tion of pursuing such intentions as will procure them.
selves some future good, or guard them against future
evils. Their will is proportional to their faculties, and all
their passions move in a very narrow sphere. Ambition
they have none, and are more desirous of being accounted
firong than valiant. The objeas of ambition with us,
honour, fame, reputation, titles, polrs, and diftinaions
of fuperiorily, are unknown among them ; so that this
powerful spring of alion, the cause of so much seeming
good and real evil in the world, has no power here.
This difpofijion of mind, as it gives them up to an
amazing languor and laffirude, their lives fleeting away
in a perpetual inactivity and detestation of labour, so it
likewise induces them to be attrated by the first obje&
which their own fancy, or the persuasion of another,
places before them ; and at the fame time renders them
as prone to alter their resolutions with the fame facility.
They look with indifference upon any kindness done
them; nor is even the bare remembrance of it to be
expedted from them. In a word, the unhappy mortals
may be compared to children, in whom the develope-
ment of reason is not completed. They may indeed be
called a nation who never arrive at manhood." Hit.
of Californ. Engl. Transl. i. 64. 67. Mr. Ellis gives a
similar account of the want of foresight and incon-
fiderate difpofikion of the people adjacent to Hudson's
Bay. Voyage, p. 194, 195.

The incapacity of the Americans is so remarkable,

that negroes from all the different provinces of Africa
are observed to be more capable of improving by in-
firufion. They acquire the knowledge of several par-
ticulars which the Americans cannot comprehend.
Hence the negroes, though slaves, value themselves as a
superior order of beings, and look down upon the
Americans with contempt, as void of capacity and of
rational discernment. Ulloa Notic. Americ. 31X, 313.

NOTE LIII. p. 354

DonRIZHoFFER, the last traveller, I know, who

has resided among any tribe of the ruder Americans,
has explained so fully the various reasons which have
induced their women to suckle their children long, and
never to undertake rearing such as were feeble or dif-
torted, and even to destroy a considerable number of-
t'.er offspring, as to throw great light on the obferva-
ticns I have made, p. 72, 73. Hist. de Abiflonibus,
vl. ii. p. 107. Zz. So deeply were these ideas im-
printed in the minds of the Americans, that the Peru-
v.ans, a civilized people, when compared with the bar-
barous tribes, whose manners I am describing, retained
them; and even their intercourse with the Spaniards
has not been able to root them out. When twins are
bcrn in any family, it is frill confidered as an ominous
e'ent, and the parents have recourse to rigorous a&s of
mortification, in order to avert the calamities with
,:hch they are threatened. When a child is born with
sny deformity, they will not, if they can possibly avoid
it, bring it to be baptized, and it is with difficulty they
can be brought to rear it. Arriaga Extirpac. de la
Idolat del Peru, p. 31, 33.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
