THE

T
OF THE

I

0

R
G

Y

N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES

V.

VO L. II.
H

I

S
R

E

ii

1, '

:1 * 1 ,
t

* .

. "

t,. '

"A4 -

:x,, ,,/z,,,.r:,;/,, N /~.IC~l;;rllij/r~r) l;l /i: .
1

THE
H

I

S

T

0

'R

Y

OFT H;E
R

E

I

G N

OF THE
E MPE ROR C H A R LE S

V.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.
PRINCIPAL of the University of EDINBURGH, and HISTORIO-

GRAPHER to His M.AJESTY for SCOTLAND.

VOL.

LONDON:

Printed by W. and W. STRAH AN,
For W. STRAIAN; T. CADELL, in the Strand; and J. BALFOUR,

at Edinburgh. MDCCLXIX.

t

)/J L 0
III.

# THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK VII.

T-HE

T
OF THE

I

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES

B O K
~1THE calamities which the Emperor suffered in his

unfortunate enterprize against Algiers were great;
and the account of these, which augmented in pro-

portion as it spread at a greater distance from the scene of
his disasters, encouraged Francis to begin hostilities, on which
he had been for some time resolved. But he did not think it
prudent, to produce as the motives of this resolution, either his
ancient pretensions to the dutchy of Milan, or the Emperor's
difingenuity in violating his repeated promises with regard to
the reftitutioA of that country. The former might have been a

VOL. III. B good

BOOK VIL

1541.

Renewal of
hosliliies by
Francis, and
his motives
for it,
H

I

R

S
E

Y

0

G
R

N

V.
VIL

BOOK VII.

1541.

good reason againfl concluding the truce of Nice, but was none
for breaking it; the latter could not be urged without exposing
his own credulity as much as the Emperor's want of integrity.
A violent and unwarrantable acion of one of the Imperial
generals furnished him with a reason to justify his taking arms,
which was of greater weight than either of these, and such
as would have rouzed him, if he had been as desirous of peace,
as he was eager for war. Francis, by signing the treaty of
truce at Nice, without consulting Solyman, gave (as he fore-
saw) great offence to that haughty Monarch, who confidered an
alliance with him as an honour of which a Christian prince had
cause to be proud. The French King's friendly interview
with the Emperor in Provence, followed by such extraordinary
appearances of union and confidence as accompanied Charles's
reception in France, induced the Sultan to fufped that the two
rivals had at last forgotten their ancient enmity, in order that
they might form such a general confederacy against the
Ottoman power, as had been long wished for in Christendom
and often attempted in vain. Charles, with his usual art, en-
deavoured to confirm and flrengthen there suspicions, by
inftruting his emiflEries at Constantinople as well as in those
courts with which Solyman held any intelligence, to represent
the concord between him and Francis to be so entire, that their
lciltiments, views and pursuits, would be the fame for the fu-
ture a. It was not without (ifliculty that Francis effaced there
imprcflions; but the addlrcfs of Rincon, the French ambaflhdor
at the Porte, together with the manifcft advantage of carrying
on hoflilitics against the houl 'of Aufiria in concert with France,

a Mem. de Ribicr. tom. I. p. 502.

t

prevailed

prevailed at length on the Sultan to enter into a closer con-
junction with Francis than ever. Rincon returned into
France, in order to communicate to his master a scheme of
the Sultan's for 'gaining the concurrence of the Venetians in
their operations against the common enemy. Solyman having
lately concluded a peace with that republic, to which the media-
tion of Francis, and the good-offices of Rincon had greatly
contributed, thought it not impofliblc to allure the senate by
such advantages, as, together with the example of the French
Monarch, might overbalance any scruples arising either from
decency or caution that could operate on the other fide. Fran-
cis, warmly approving of this measure, dispatched Rincon back
to Conltantinople, and directing him to go by Venice along
with Fregofo a Genoese exile whom he appointed his ambaffa-
dor to that republic, empowered them to negotiate the matter
with the senate, to whom Solyman had sent an envoy for the
fame purpose b. The marquiss del Guafto, governor of the Mi-
lanefe, an officer of great abilities, but capable of attempting
and executing the most atrocious actions, got intelligence of
the motions and destination of thefc ambassadors. As he knew
how IImuch Ills maltcr wishcd to difcovcr the intentions of the
French King, and of what consequence it was to retard the
execution of his mcafuires, he employed fbme ibldiers belonging
to the garrison of Pavia to lie in wait for Rincon and Fregofo
as they failed down the I'o, who murdered them and most of
their attendants and fcized their papers. IUpon receiving an
account of this barbarous outrage, committed, during the filb-
fificnce of truce, against persons held sacred by the mol
,uncivilized nations, Francis's grief for the unhappy fate of

b Ilift, de Vcnct. ie Puraita, iv. 1 25.

13 2 two

B )OK VIL

Th. murder
or nis ambaf.
fadors his
pretext tor
this.

4
BOOK VI. two servants whom he loved and trufled, his uneafnefs- at the

st54. interruption of his schemes by their death, and every other

passion were swallowed up and loft in the indignation which
this insult on the honour of his crown excited. He exclaimed
loudly against Guafto, who, having drawn upon himself all the
infamy of assassination without making any discovery of im-
portance, as the ambassadors had left their infiruaions and
other papers of consequence behind them, now boldly denied
his being accessary in any wife to the crime. He sent an am-
baffador to the Emperor to demand fuitabIe reparation for an
indignity, which no prince, how inconsiderable soever or pu-
fillanimous, could tamely endure: And when Charles, im-
patient at that time to set out on his African expedition, en-
deavoured to put him off with an evasive answer, he appealed:
to all the courts in Europe, setting forth the heinousness of the
injury, the spirit of moderation with which he had applied for
redress, and the iniquity of the Emperor in disregarding this;
just request.

NOTWITHSTANDING the confidence with which Guafto

asserted his own innocence, the accusations us the Ficnch gained
greater credit than all his protestations; andBellay, the French:
commander in Piedmont, procured, at length, by his indufiry:
and address, such a minute detail of the tranfadion, with the
testimony of to many of the parties concerned, as amounted
almost to a legal proof of the marquis's guilt. In consequence
of this opinion of the publick, confirmed by such strong evi-
dlcncc, Francis's complaints were univcrfally allowed to be well
founded, and the fleps he took towards renewing hofsilities

4 were

3

were ascribed not merely to ambition or resentment, but to the BooK VIL.
unavoidable necessity of vindicating the honour of his crown . 1sC;

BUT how just soever Francis might esteem his own cause, he

did not trust so much to that, as to neglect the proper pre-
cautions for gaining other allies besides the Sultan, by whose
aid he might counterbalance the Emperor's superior power.
But his negociations to this effeat were attended with very little
success. Henry VIII. more and more bent upon schemes against
Scotland, which he knew would at once dissolve his union with
France, was inclinable rather to take part with the Emperor
than to contribute in any degree towards favouring the opera-
tions against him. The Pope adhered inviolably to his antient
system of neutrality. The Venetians, notwithstanding Soly-
man's solicitations, imitated the Pope's example. The Germans,
satisfied with the religious liberty which they enjoyed found it
more their interest to gratify than to irritate the Emperor; so
that the Kings of Denmark and Sweden, who on this occasion
were first drawn in to interest themselves in the quarrels of the
more potent Monarchs of the south, and the duke of Cleves,
who had a dispute with the Emperor about the poifelion of
Gueldres, were the only confederates Francis securcd. But the
dominions of the two former lay at fulch a distance, and the
power of the latter was so inconsiderable, that he gained little
by their alliance.

FRANCIS, however, supplied all defets by his own aEtivity. Franci's in-
Being affliced at this time with a diftcmpcr, the cffet of his dulry in pre-

paring so:
war.
Bellay, 367, &c. Jovii Hist. lib. 40. 268.

irregular

BOOK VII.

154.l,

154,.

Hle brings
five armies
into the fiell.

irregular pleasures, and which prevented his pursuing them
with the fame licentious indulgence, he applied to business with
more than his usual industry. The fame cause which occasioncd
this extraordinary attention to his affairs, rendered him morose
and difatisfied with the ministers whom he had hitherto em-
ployed. This accidental peevishness of temper being sharpened
by reflecting on the faife fleps into which he had lately been be-
trayed, and the insults to which he had been exposed, some of
those in whom he had hitherto placed the greatest confidence
felt the effeCts of this change in his temper, and were deprived
of their offices. At last he disgraced Montmorency himself, who
had long directed affairs as well civil as military with all the
authority of a minister nolefs beloved than trusted by his maf-
ter; and Francis being fond of shewing that the fall of such a
powerful favourite did not affect the vigour or prudence of his
adminifiration, this was a new motive to redouble his diligence
in preparing to open the war-by some splendid and extraordi-
nary effort.

FRANCIS accordingly brought into the field five armies. One

to at in Luxembourg under the duke of Orleans, accompanied
by the duke of Lorraine as his infirudor in the art of wai. An-
other commanded by tlle dauphin mlarched towards the fron-
tiers of Spain. A third led by Van Roffem the marshal of
Gueldres, and composed chiefly of the troops of Clevcs, had
Brabant allotted for the theatre of its operations. A fourth, of
which the duke of Vcndomne was general, hovered on the bor-
dlers of Flandcrs. The last, confifning of the forces cantoned in
I'idmont, was destined for the admiral Annibaut. The dauphin

ind his brother were appointed to command where the chief
cxcrtion Was intended, and the grcatcft honour to be reaped;

the
6

the army of the former amounted to forty thousand, that of BOOK VII.
the latter to thirty thousand men. Nothing appears more 4
furprizing than that Francis did not pour with these numerous
and irresistible armies into the Milanese, which had so long been
the obje&t of his withes as well as enterprizes, and that he should
chufe rather to turn almost his whole strength into another direc-
tion, and towards new conquests. But the remembrance of the
disasters which he had met with in his former expeditions into
Italy, together with the difficulty of supporting a war carried on
at such a distance from his own dominions, had gradually abated
his violent inclination to obtain footing in that country, and made
him willing to try the fortune of his arms in another quarter.
At the fame time he expeced to make such a powerful impref-
sion on the frontier of Spain, where there were few towns of any
strength, and no army assembled to oppose him, as might en-
able him to recover poifeffion of the county of Roufillon lately
difinembered from the French crown, before Charles could
bring into the field any force able to obftrud his progress. The
necessity of supporting his ally the duke of Cleves, and the
hope of drawing a cunfiderable body of soldiers out of Germany
by his means, determined him to act with vigour in the Low-
Countries.

THE dauphin and duke of Orleans opened the campaign June.

'1'heir opera-

much about the fame time, the former laying fiegc to Perpignan tions. ra
the capital of Roufillon, and the latter entering Luxembourg.
Tlhe duke of Orleans pulled his operations with the grcatct
rapidity and success, one town falling after another, untill no
place in that large dutchy remained in the Emperor's lhands but
Thionville. Nor could he have failed of over-running the ad-

jaccnt
V

7

BOOK VIL

54+2.

jacent provinces with the fame ease, if he had not voluntarily
flopt short in this career of vitory. But a report prevailing
that the Emperor had determined to hazard a battle in order to
save Perpignan, on a sudden the duke, prompted by youthful
ardour, or moved, perhaps, by jealousy of his brother, whom
he both envied and hated, abandoned his own conquests, and
hastened towards Roufillon in order to divide with him the
glory of the victory.

ON his departure some of his troops were disbanded, others

deserted their colours, and the reft, cantoned in the towns which
he had taken, remained inactive. By this conduct, which leaves
a dishonorable imputation either on his understanding or his
heart, or on both, he not only renounced whatever he could have
hoped from such a promising opening of the campaign, but gave
the enemy an opportunity of recovering, before the end of fum-
mer, all the conquests which he had gained. On the Spanish
frontier, the Emperor was not so inconsiderate as to venture on
a battle the loss of which might have endangered his kingdom.
Perpignan, though poorly fortified, and briskly attacked, hav-
ing been largely supplied with ammunition and provisions by
the vigilance of Doria d, was defended so long and so vigorously
by the duke of Alva, the persevering obstinacy of whose tem-
per fitted him admirably for such service, that at last the French,
after a ficge of three months, wafted by diseases, repulsed
in several aflaults, and despairing of success, relinquished the
undertaking, and retired into their own country . Thus all
Francis's mighty preparations, cither from some defet in his

d Sigonii Vita A. Dorix, p. 1191.

* Sandov. Hist. tom. ii. 315.1

ownl
8

own condut, or from the superior power and prudence of his
rival, produced no effeas that bore any proportion to his ex-
pence and efforts, or such as gratified, in any degree, his own
hopes, or answered the expetation of Europe. The only
solid advantage of the campaign was the acquisition of a few
towns in Piedmont, which Bellay gained rather by stratagem
and address, than by the force of his arms'.

MEANWHILE the Emperor and Francis, though both con-

fiderably exhausted by such great but indecisive efforts, discover-
ing no abatement of their mutual animosity, employed all their
attention, tried every expedient, and turned themselves towards
every quarter, in order to acquire new allies, together with such
a reinforcement of strength as would give them the superiority
in the ensuing campaign. Charles, taking advantage of the
terror and resentment of the Spaniards, upon the sudden inva-
sion of their country, prevailed on the Cortes of the several
kingdoms to grant him subsidies with a more liberal hand than
usual. At the fame time, he borrowed a large fum from John
King of Portugal, putting him in poffeflion by way of security
for his being repayed, of the Molucca isles in the East Indies,
with the gainful commerce of precious spices, which that fe-
questered corner of the globe yields. Not satisfied with
this, he negociated a marriage between Philip his only son,
now in his sixteenth year, and Mary daughter of that Monarch,
with whom her father, the most opulent prince in Europe, gave
a large dower; and having likewise persuaded the Cortes of
Aragon and Valencia to recognize Philip as the heir of these

BOOK VI.

1543;

Preparations
for another
campaign,

t Sandov. lHit. ii. 318. Bellay, 387, &c. Ferrcr. 9. 237.
VOL. III.

C

crowns,

BOOK VII.

1543.
lsz)y.

crowns, he obtained from them the donative usual on such oc-
cafions '. These extraordinary supplies enabled him to make
such additions to his forces in Spain, that he could detach a great
body into the Low-Countries, and yet reserve as many as were
fufficicnt for the defence of the kingdom. Having thus provided
for the security of Spain and committed the government of it
to his son, he failed for Italy, in his way to Germany. But
how attentive soever to raise the funds for carrying on the war,
or eager to grasp at any new expedient for that purpose, he
was not so inconfidcrate as to accept of the overture which Paul,
knowing his necessities, artfully threw out to him. That am-
bitious Pontiff, no less sagacious to discern, than watchful' to
seize opportunities of aggrandizing his family, follicited him-
to grant Ocavio his grandchild, whom the Emperor had ad-
mitted to the honour of being his fon-in-law, the investiture of
the dutchy of Milan, in return for which he promised such a
vast fum of money as would have gone far towards supply-
ing his present exigencies. But Charles, as well from unwil-
lingnefs to alienate a province of so much value, as from dif-
gust at the Pope, who had hitherto refused to join in the war
againflFrancis, rejected the proposal. His dissatisfaCtion with
Paul at that juncture was so great, that he even refused to approve
his alienating 'arma and Placentia from the patrimony of St.
Petcr, and feittling them on his own ftn and grandson as a
fief to be held of the Holy Ice. As no other expedient for
raising money among the Italian fiates remained, lie consented
to withdraw the garrilons which lie hiad hitherto kept in the
citadels of Fllorcnce anl Icghorn, in colnfideration for which,

Fr ;crcras, 9. 238. 241. Jovii l-ilt. lib. 42. 298. 6.

i4

he

he received a large present from Cosmo de Medici, who by this BOOK VII.
means secured his own independance and got possession of two 154.
forts, which were justly called the fetters of Tuscany h.

BUT Charles, while he seemed to have turned his whole atten-

tion towards raising the fums necefrary for defraying the
expences of the year, had not been negligent of objects more
distant, though no less important, and had concluded a league
offensive and defensive with Henry VIII, from-which he de-
rived, in the end, greater advantage than from all his other
preparations. Several flight circumstances, which have already
been mentioned, had begun to alienate the affections of that
Monarch from Francis his present ally, and new incidents of
greater moment had occurred to increase his disgust and ani-
mofity. Henry, desirous of establishing an uniformity in reli-
gion in Great Britain, as well as fond of making proselytes to his
own opinions, had formed a scheme of persuading his nephew
the King of Scotland to renounce the Pope's supremacy, and
to adopt the fame system of reformation which he had intro-
duced into England. This measure he pursued with his usual
eagerness and impetuosity, making such advantageous over-
tures to James, whom lie confidered as not over crtupiiloufly
attached to any religious tenets, that he scarce doubted of fuc-
cess. His propositions were accordingly received in fucl a
manner that he flattered himself with having gained his point.
But the Scottish ccclefiaflics, foreseeing the ruin of the church
to be the confcquencc of the King's union with England; and

The Empe-
ror's negocia.
tions with
Henry VIII,

Henry's rup-
ture with
France and
Scotland.

h Adriani Ifloria i. 195. Sleid. 312. Jovii Hit. lib. 43. p. 301. Vita di
Cuo. Medici di Baldini, p. 34.

C z

ltec

IA

BOOK .VII

1543.

Pebrunry i x.
All.ince he-
tweeul Ch.ires
anad Hellry.

the partizans of France, no less convinced that it would put an
end to the influence of that crown upon the publick councils of
Scotland, combined together, and by their insinuations defeated/
Henry's scheme at the very moment when he expeced it to have-
taken effea. Too haughty to brook such a disappointment,,
which he imputed as much to the arts of the French as to the
levity of the Scottifi Monarch, he took arms againif Scotland,.
threatening to subdue the kingdom, since he could not gain the
friendship of its King. At the fame time, his resentment at
Francis quickened his negociations with the Emperor, an alli-
ance with whom he was now as forward to accept as the other-
could be to offer it. During this war with Scotland,. and before
the conclusion of his negociations with Charles, James V. died,.
leaving his crown to Mary his only daughter, an infant a few
days old. Upon this event, Henry altered at once his whole
system with regard to Scotland, and abandoning all thoughts
of conquering it, aimed at what was more advantageous as
well as practicable, an union with that kingdom by a marriage-
between Edward his only son and the young Queen. But here,
too, he apprehended a vigorous opposition from the French,
facion in Scotland, which. began to bestir itself in order to.
thwart the measure. The neceffily of crushing this party
among the Scots, and of preventing Francis from furniflling
them any effedual aid, confirmed Henry's resolution of break-
ing with France, and pufled him on to put a finishing hand to:
the treaty of confederacy with the Emperor..

IN this league were contained first of all, articles for fccuring:

their future amity and mutual defence; then were enumerated
the demands which they ware rclfpctivcly to make upon Fran-

cis
Z2

13

css; and the plan of their proceedings was fixed, if he should
refute to grant them fatisfa&ion. They agreed to require, that
Francis should not only renounce his alliance with Solyman,
which had been the source of infinite calamities to Christendom,
but also that he should make reparation for the damages which
that unnatural union had occasioned; that he should restore
Burgundy to the Emperor; that he should desist immediately
from hostilities, and leave Charles at leisure to oppose the
common enemy of the Christian faith; and that he should im-
mediately pay the fums due to Henry, or put some towns in
his hands as security to that effet. If, within forty days, he
did not comply with these demands, they then engaged to
invade France each with twenty thousand foot and five thousand
horse, and not to lay down their arms until they had reco-
vered Burgundy, together with the towns on the Somme, for the
Emperor, and Normandy and Guienne, or even the whole realm
of France, for Henry'. Their heralds, accordingly, set out
with these haughty requisitions; but not being permitted to
enter France could not perform their commission, and the two
Monarchs held thcmfclvcs fully entitled to execute whatever
was flipulated in their treaty.

FRANCIS on his part was not less diligent in preparing for

the approaching campaign. Having early observed the fymp-
toms of Henry's digtuft and alienation, and finding all his
cndeavours to tooth and reconcile him incffclual, he knew his
temper too well not to expedl that open hoflilities would quickly
follow upon this ccflttion of fricndlhip. For this reaoln lie re-
doubled his endeavours to obtain from Solyman filch aid as
might countcrbalance tie great accefion of itrength which the

s Rym. xiv. 768. Ilcrb. 238,

BOOK VII.

'543.

Francis's nwa-
gociations
with Soly-
man.
9

EinPecon,

BOOK VII.

1543.

Emperor would receive by his alliance with England. In order
to supply the place of his two ambassadors murdered by Guafto,
he sent as his envoy first to Venice, and then to Constantinople,
Paulin, a captain of foot, a man of a daring acive spirit, and
on account of these qualities thought worthy of this service, to
which he was recommended by Bellay, who had trained him to
the arts of negociation, and made trial of his talents and ad-
dress on several occasions. Nor did he belie the opinion con-
ceived of his courage and abilities. Hastening to Constantinople,
without regarding the dangers to which he was exposed, he
urged his master's demands with such boldness, and availed him-
self of every circumstance with such dekterity, that he removed
all the Sultan's own difficulties. He silenced likewise some of the
Baifas, who either swayed by opinion, or having been gained
by the Emperor, whose emissaries had made their way even into
that court, had declared in the Divan against ading in concert
with France k. At last he obtained orders for Barbarossa to fail
with a powerful fleet, and to regulate all his operations by the
direcions of the French King. Francis was not equally success-
ful in his attempts to gain the princes of the Empire. The extra-
ordinary rigour with which he thought it necessary to punish
fiuch of his fubjeds as had embraced the proteflant opinions, in
order to give some notable evidence of his own zeal for the
Catholick faith, and to wipe off the imputations to which lie
was liable from his confederacy with the Turks, placed an in-
superable barrier between him and such of the Germans as
intercft and inclination would have prompted most readily to
join him '. His chief advantage, however, over the Emperor

k Sandov. Hiflor. tom. ii. 346. Jovii Hifl. lib. 41. 285, &c. 300, &c.
Brantome. 1 Seek. lib. iii. 403.

Ihe
14

he derived on this, as on other occasions, from the contiguity
of his dominions, as well as from the extent of the royal autho-
rity in France, which exempted him from all the delays and dif-
appointments unavoidable wherever popular assemblies provide
for the expences of government by occasional and frugal sub-
sidies. Hence his domeflick preparations were always carried'
on with vigour, and rapidity, while those of the Emperor, un-
less when quickened by some foreign supply, or some temporary
expedient, were to the last degree flow and dilatory.

LONG before any army was in readiness to oppose him,

Francis took the field in the Low-Countries, against which
he turned the whole weight of the war. He made himself
master of Landrecy, which he determined to keep as the key
to the whole province of Hainault; and ordered it to be
fortified with great care. Turning from thence to the right,
he entered the dutchy of Luxembourg, and found it in the
fame defenceless state as in the former year. Meanwhile, the
Emperor, having drawn together an army composed of all'
the different nations, subjed to his government, entered the
territories of the Duke of Cleves, on whom he had vowed to
inflict exemplary vengeance. This prince, whose conducd and
situation were finilar to that of Robert de la Mark in the first
war between Charles and Francis, refcmblcd him likewiie in
his fate. Unable with his feelle army, to face the Emperor, who
advanced at the head of forty-four thousand men, he retired
at his approach; and the Imperiailifs being at liberty to ad as
they pleated, immedniatcly invcflcd D)uren. That town, though
gallantly dcfi(ndcd, was vwon y a;s iult, all the inhabitants put
to the sword, and the place itself reduced to allies. This dread-

ful

BOOK VIL

1543.

Operations in
the Low-
Countries.

Tile Fmperor
t;ecolle: IllaIf
tir of tht
Dutch/ of

Aultv ' .
Au-1ljt z.i.

BOOK VII.

1543.
September 7.

ful example of severity struck the people of the country with
such general terror, that all the other towns, even such as were
capable of resistance, sent their keys to the Emperor; and be-
fore a body of French detached to his assistance could come
up, the duke himself was obliged to make his fubmiflion to
Charles in the most abjec manner. Being admitted into the
Imperial pretence, he kneeled together with eight of his prin-
cipal fubjeds, and implored mercy. The Emperor allowed
him to remain in that ignominious posture, and eyeing him
with an haughty and implacable look, without deigning to an-
fwer a single word, remitted him to his ministers. The con-
ditions, however, which they prescribed were not so rigorous
as he had reason to have expected after such a reception. He
was obliged to renounce his alliance with France and Denmark;
to resign all his pretensions to the dutchy of Gueldres; to enter
into perpetual amity with the Emperor and King of the Ro-
mans. In return for which all his hereditary dominions were
reltored, except two towns which the Emperor kept as pledges
of his fidelity during the continuance of the war, and he was
re-inflated in his privileges as a prince of the Empire. Not
long after Charles, as a proof of the sincerity of his reconcile-
ment, gave him in marriage one of the daughters of his brother
Ferdinand m.

Befieget IIAVING thus chastised the presumption of the Duke of
Landrecy. Cleves, detached one of his allies from Francis, and added to

his dominions in the Low-Countries a contiderable province
which lay contiguous to them, Charles advanced towards
Ilainault, and laid siege to Landrccy. There, as the firit fruits

o" Harei. Annal. Brabant, t. i. 628. Rccucil des Traitcz, t. ii. 226.

of

?EMPEROR CHAAES V.

of his alliance with Henry, he was joined by fix thouiand
English under Sir John Wallop. The garrison, confifing
of veteran troops commanded by de la Lande and .Defe, two
officers of reputation, made a vigorous resistance. Francis ap-
proached with all his forces to relieve the place; Charles covered
the siege; both were determined to hazard an engagement; and
all Europe expected to fee this contest, which had continued to
long, decided at last by a battle between two great armies led
by them in person. But the ground which separated their two
camps was such, as put the disadvantage manifestly on his fide
who should venture to attack, and neither of them chore to run
that rifque: amklft a variety of movements, in order to draw
the enemy into this snare, or to avoid it themselves, Francis,
with admirable condut, and equal good fortune, threw fir{} a
supply of fresh troops, and then a convoy of provisions into
the town, so that the Emperor, despairing of success, with-
drew into winter quarters " in order to preserve his army from
being entirely ruined by the rigour of the season.

MEANWHILE, Solyman fulfilled his engagements to the

French King with great punEtuality. He himself marched into
Hungary with a numerous army, and as the princes of the
Empire made no great effort to save a country which Charles,
by employing his whole force against Francis, seemed willing
to sacrifice, there was no appearance of any body of troops
to oppose his progress. He besiegcd, one after another,
Quinque Ecclesia, Alba and Gran, the three most confider-
able towns in the kingdom, of which Ferdinand kept pof-
feflion. The firfl was taken by florm ; the other two furren-

" Bellay, 405, &c.

D

BOOK Vtr,

1543--

November.
Solyman in,
vades Hun-
gary.
VO L. III.

dercd

BOOK VII. dered; and the whole kingdom, a finall corner excepted, wao

1543. fubjeted to the Turkili yoke °. About the fame time, Barba-

Barbarofla's rofla failed with a fleet of an hundred and ten gallies, and coast-
dercent on
Italy. ing along the shore of Calabria, made a descent at Rheggio(

which he plundered and burnt; and advancing from thence to-
the mouth of the Tiber he flopt there to water. The citizens of
Rome, ignorant of his deflination, and filled with terror, began
to fly with such general precipitation, that the city would have
been left deserted, if they had not resumed courage upon letters;
from Polin the French envoy, assuring them that no violence
or injury would be offered by the Turks to any state in alliance-
with the King his mailer .. From Ostia Barbarossa failed to
Marseilles, and being joined by the French fleet with a body of
land forces on board under the count d' Enguien, a gallant young
prince of the house of Bourbon, they direced their course to-
wards Nice, the sole retreat of the unfortunate duke of Savoy.
Atgsil i. There to the aftonilhment and scandal. of all Christendom, the

Lilies of France and Crescent of Mahomet appeared in conjunc-
tion againR a fortref3 on which the Cross of Savoy was displayed.
The town, however, was bravely defended against their com-
bined force by Montfort a Savoyard gentleman5 who Rood a
general assault, and repulsed the enemy with great loss, before
he retired into the cafle. That fort situated upon a rock, on,
which the artillery made no impression, and which could not
be undermined, he held out so long, that Ioria had time to
approach with his, fleet, and the marquis del Guafto to march
Septembrc , with a body of troops from Milan, Upon intelligence of this,

the French and Turks raised the siege q; and Francis had not

Iliuanhaff. Hiftor. Hung. 1. 15. 167.

P Jovii Hist. 1. 43. 304, &c. Pallavic. i60.
Guichcnon hifloirc de Savoye, t. i. p. 65 1 Bcllay, 425, &c.

evre

even the consolation of success, to render the infamy, which BOOK VII.
he drew on himself by calling in such an auxiliary, more to- 543.
lerable.

FROM the small progress of either party during this cam- Preprations

for a new

paign, it was obvious to what a length the war might be drawn capaig.
out between two princes, whose power was so equally ballanced,
and who by their own talents or activity, could so vary and
multiply their resources. The trial they had now made of each
others strength might have taught them the imprudence of
persisting in a war, wherein there was greater appearance of
their distressing their own dominions than of conquering those
of their adversary, and should have disposed both to with for
peace. If Charles and Francis had been influenced by confide-
rations of interest or prudence alone, this, without doubt, muff
have been the manner in which they would have reasoned, but
the personal animosity, which mingled itself in all their quarrels,
had grown to be so violent and implacable, that for the pleasure
of gratifying it, they disregarded every thing else; and were
infinitely more follicitous how to hurt their enemy, than how
to secure what would be of advantage to themselves. No sooner
then did the season force them to suspend hostilities, than, with-
out paying any attention to the Pope's repeated endeavours or
paternal exhortations to re-establish peace, they began to pro-
vide for the operations of the next year with new vigour, and
an acivity increasing with their hatred. Charles turned his
chief attention towards gaining the princes of the Empire, and
endeavoured to route the formidable but unweildy strength
of the Germanick body against Francis. In order to under- Aff'rs of
Rand the propriety of the steps which he took for that purpose,

D it

.1>

BobK VAi. -k is hecefiary to review the chief tranfaaions in that country.

s 43 i fcethe diet of Ratiboni in the year one thousand five hundred

and forty one.

Maurice of MucH about the time that afembly broke up, Maurice £uc-
cSed his . eeded his father Henry in the government of that part of
ther. Saxony which belonged to the Albertine branch of the Saxons

family. This young prince, then only in his twentieth year,
had, even at that early period, begun to discover the great ta-
lents which qualified him for adcing such a distinguished part in.
the affairs of Germany. As soon as he entered upon the ad-
ministration, he struck out into such a new and singular path,
as shewed that he aimed, from the beginning, at something

The views great and uncommon. Though zealously attached to the Pro-
and condufa teftant opinions both from education and principle, he refused
of this young
Prince. to accede to the league of Smalkalde, being determined, as he

said, to maintain the purity of religion which was the original;
objec of that confederacy, but not to entangle himself in the
political interefis or combinations to which it had given rife. At
the fame time, foreseeing a rupture between Charles and the
confederates of Smalkalde, and perceiving which of them was
moit likely to prevail in the contest, instead of that jealousy and
difnruft which the other Protestants expressed of all the Empe-
ror's designs, he affected to place in him an unbounded confi-
dence; and courted his favour with the utmost assiduity. When
the other Protestants, in the year fifteen hundred and forty two,
either dcclined assisting Fcrdinand in Hungary, or afforded him
relutant and feeble aid, Maurice marched thither in person,
and rendered himself conspicuous by his zeal and courage. From
the fame motive, he had led to the Emperor's afliftance, dur-

~~~~t 1^ing

ing the frmer campaign a body of his own troops; and the
gracefulness of his person, his dexterity in all military exercises,
together with his intrepidity which courted and delighted in
dangers, did not distinguish him more in the field, than his great
abilities and insinuating address won upon the Emperor's con-
fidence and favour '. While by this condua, which appeared
extraordinary to those who held the fame opinions with him
concerning religion, Maurice endeavoured to pay court to the
Emperor, he began to discover some degree of jealousy of his
cousin the Eletor of Saxony. This, which proved in the fe-
quel so fatal to the Elector, had almost occasioned an open
rupture between them; and soon after Maurice's acceflion to the
government, they both took arms with equal rage, upon ac-
count of a difputc about the right of jurifdition over a paultry
town situated on the Moldaw. They were prevented, however,
from coming to blows by the mediation of the Landgrave of
Hesse, whose daughter Maurice had married, as well as by. the
powerful and authoritative admonitions of Luther '.

MEANWHILE the Pope, though extremely irritated at the

Emperor's concessions to the Protestants in the diet of Ratisbon,
was so warmly solicited on all hands, by fulch as were most de-
voutly attached to the fee of Rome, no less than by those whose
fidelity or dcfigns he fufpeded, to summon a general council,
that he found it impossible to avoid any longer calling that
assembly. The impatience for its meeting, and the expeca-
tions of great cffedts from its dccifions seemed to grow in pro-
portion to the difficulty of obtaining it. He fiill adhered, how-
ever, to his original resolution of holding it in tIme town of
* Sleid. 317. Seck. 1. iii. 371, 386, 428.

BOOK VII

I

v

154j.

The Pope
propores to
hold a general
council at
Tenat.
' Sleid. 292. Seek. 1. iii. 403.

Italy,

BoOK VII. Italy, where, by the number of ecclefiafticks, retainers to his

j543* court, and depending on his favour, who could repair to it

without difficulty or expence, he might influence and even
direc all its proceedings. This proposition, though often re-
jeaed by the Germans, he inftruted his nuncio to the diet held
March 3. at Spires, in the year one thousand five hundred and forty two

to renew once more; and if he found it gave no greater satis-
fadion than formerly, he empowered him, as a last conceflion,
to propose for the place of meeting, Trent a city in the Tyrol,
subjea to the King of the Romans, and situated on the confines
between Germany and Italy. The Catholick princes in the
diet, after giving it as their opinion that the council might
have been held with greater advantage in Ratisbon, Cologne,
or some of the great cities in the Empire, approved of the
place which the Pope had named. The Protestants unanimously
expressed their dilfatisfadion, declaring that they would pay
no regard to a council held without the precincs of the Empire,
called by the Pope's authority, and in which he assumed the
right of presiding '.

THE Pope, without taking any notice of their objecions,

May 2Z. published the bull of intimation, named three cardinals to

1542.

Summons it preside as his legates, and appointed them to repair to Trent
to mect. before the firfl of November, the day he had fixed for opening

the council. But if Paul had desired the meeting of a council
as sincerely as he pretended, he would not have pitched on filch
an improper time for calling it. Instead of that general union
and tranquillity, without which the deliberations of a council
could neither be conducted with fccurity, nor attended with

Slid. 291. Seek. 1. iii. 283.

authority,
22.

authority, such a fierce war was just kindled between the Em-
peror and Francis, as rendered it impossible for the ecclefiafticks
from many parts of Europe to retort thither in safety. The
legates, accordingly, remained several months at Trent with-
out any persons appearing, except a few prelates from the
ecclesiastical state; upon which the Pope, in order to avoid the
ridicule and contempt which this drew upon him from the ene-
mies of the church, recalled them and prorogued the council .

UNHAPPILY for the authority of the Papal fee, at the very

time that the German Protestants took every occasion of pouring
contempt upon it, the Emperor and King of the Romans found
it necessary not only to connive at their condut, but to court
their favour by repeated ads of indulgence. In the fame diet
of Spires, wherein they had protested in the most difrefpe&fu}
terms against assembling a council at Trent, Ferdinand who
depended on their aid for the defence of Hungary, not only
permitted that protestation to be inserted in the records of the
diet, but renewed in their favour all the Emperor's concessions
at Ratisbon, adding to them whatever they could demand for
their farther security. Among other particulars, he granted a
filfpenfion of a decree of the Imperial chamber againRf the city
of Goflar, one of those which had entered into the league of
Smalkalde, on account of its having seized the ecclefiafticaI re-
venues within its domains, and enjoined Henry duke of Brunf-
wick to desist from his attempts to carry that decree into exe-
cution. But Henry, a furious bigot, and no less obstinate than
rafli in all his undertakings, continuing to diiquiet the people

BOOK VII.

'543.

Obliged to
prorogued it.

The Emperor
courts the
Proteftanus.
F. Paul' p. 97. Slid. 296.

of

23.

BOOK VII.

543.

Their vigo.
rous proceed-
ings.
April z3.

1543.
Dietat Spires,

1544.

of Goflar by his incursions, the Elector of Saxony and Land-
grave of Hesse, that they might not susser any member of the
Smalkaldick body to be oppressed, assembled their forces, de-
clared war in form against Henry, and in the space of a few
weeks fiript him intirely of his dominions, and drove him as
a wretched exile to take refuge in the court of Bavaria. By
this ac of vengeance, no less severe than sudden, they filled
all Germany with dread of their power, and the confederates
of Smalkalde appeared, by this firfi effort of their arms, to be
as prompt as capable to protect those who had joined their aiob-
ciation '.

EMBOLDENED by so many colceffions in their favour, as

well as by the progress which their opinions daily made, the
princes of the league of Smalkalde took a solemn protest againit
the Imperial chamber, and declined its jurifdition for the
future, because that court had not been visited or reformed
according to the decree of Ratisbon, and continued to discover
a most indecent partiality in all its proceedings. Not long after
this, they ventured a ftep farther, and protesting against the
recess of a diet held at Nuremberg, which provided for the
defence of Hungary, refused to furnifl their contingent for that
purpose, unless the Imperial chamber were reformed, and full
security granted them in every point with regard to religion .

SUCH were the lengths to which the Protestants had pro-
ceeded, and such their confidence in their own power, when

1 Sleid. 296. Commcmoratio fuccinaa caufarum Belli, &c. a Smalcadicis
contra Henr. Brunfw. ab iifdem edita; ap Scardium. Tom. ii. 307.

r Slkid. 304, 307. Seck. 1. iii. 404, 416.

the
14,

the Emperor returned fmraL the Low-Countiea, to hold x diet, B .OOK V
which he had fummnoed to meet at Spires. The refpe flde --.
to the Emperor, as well as the importance of the affairs which
were to be laid before it, rendered this aflferb.y extremely full.
-Al the Ele&ors, a great nuimberof princes ecclefiafieal and fecu-
lar, with thedeputies of mAt of the cities were present. Charles
fbon perceived that this was not a time to offend the jealous spirit
ofthe Proteta!nts by aflerting in any high tone the authority and
doctrines of the church, or by abridging in the smallest article,
the liberty which they now enjoyed; but that, on the contrary,
if he expeced any support from them, or wished to preserve
Germany from inteffine disorders while he was engaged in a
foreign war, he mull sooth them by new concessions, and a
more ample extenslon of their religious privileges. He began,
accordingly, with courting the Elector of Saxony and Land-
grave of Hesse, the heads of the Protestant party, and by giving
up rime things in their favour, and granting liberal promises
with regard to others, he secured himself from any danger of
opposition on their part. Having aScertained this capital point, The.Cnperor

foulicijs its aid

he then ventured to address the diet Alh greater freedom. againf
He began by representing his own zeal, and unwearied efforts Francev
with regard to two thifgs most efiential to Christendom, the
procuring of a general council in order to compose the religious
diflenfions which had unhappily arisen in Germany, and the
providing some proper means for checking the formidable pro-
grefs of the Turkish arms. But that his pious endeavours had
been entirely defeated by the unjutfifiable ambition of the
French King, who having wantonly kindled the flame of war
in Europe, which had been so lately extinguilhed by the truce
of Nice, rendered it impofllble for the fathers of the church to
assemble in council, or to deliberate with security sand obliged

VOL. III. E hlim

*

,3

BOOK VII.

c544.

him to employ those forces in his own defence, which with greater
fatisfadion to himself, as well as more honour to Christendom,
he would have turned against the Infidels. That Francis not
thinking it enough to have called him off from opposing the
Infidels, had, with unexampled impiety, invited them into
the heart of ChriRendom, and joining his arms to theirs, had
openly attacked the Duke of Savoy a member of the Empire.
That Barbarossa's fleet was now in one of the ports of France,
waiting only the return of spring to carry terror and desolation
to the coast of some Christian state. That in such a situation it
was folly to think of distant expeditions against the Turk, or
of marching to oppose his armies in Hungary, while such a
powerful ally received him into the centre of Europe, and gave
him footing there. That prudence dictated to oppose, first of
all, the nearest and most imminent danger, and by humbling
the power of France, to deprive Solyman of the advantages,
which he derived from the unnatural confederacy formed be-
tween him and a Monarch, who fill arrogated the name of Most
Chriflian. That, in truth, a war against the French King and
the Sultan ought to be confidered as the fame thing; and that
every advantage gained over the former, was a revere and fen-
fible blow to the latter. That, therefore, he now demanded
their aid againit Francis, not merely as an enemy of the Ger-
manick body, or of him who was its head, but as an avowed
ally of the Infidels, and a publick enemy to the Christian name.

IN order to give greater weight to this violent invective of

the Emperor, the King of the Romans flood up, and related
the rapid conquests of the Sultan in Hungary, occasioned, as
he said, by the fatal neccflity imposcd on his brother of employ-

ing

hng his arms against France; and the ambassadors of Savoy gave BOOK VHlir
a detail of Barbarossa's operations at Nice, and of the ravages i54
which he had committed on that coast. All these, added to the
general indignation which Francis's unprecedented union with the
Turks excited in Europe, made such an, impression on the diet
as the Emperor wished, and disposed most of the members to
grant him such effe&ual aid as he had demanded. The ambaf-
fadors Francis had sent to explain the motives of his conduct,
were not permitted to enter the bounds of the Empire; and the
apology which they published for their mafler, vindicating his
alliance with Solyman, by examples drawn from scripture, and
the pratice of Christian princes, was little regarded by men,
irritated already or prejudiced againit him to such a degree, as
to be incapable of allowing their proper weight to any argu-
ments in his behalf.

SUCH being the favourable disposition of the Germans, His va ccn.

cefllons in

Charles perceived that nothing could now obftrud his gaining all order to gain
that he aimed at, but the fears and jealousies of the Protestants, the Prote-
which he determined to quiet by granting every thing, that the
utnoft solicitude of these pafions could desire for the security
of their religion. With this view, he consented to a recess,
whereby all the rigorous edits hitherto issued againfl the
Proteflants were fuf)cnded; a council either general or national
to be assemblcd in Germany was declared necessary in order to
rc-cflabliflh peace in the church ; until one of there fllould be
held, (which the Emperor undertook to bring about as soon as
possib)le) the free and publick exercise of the Protcflant religion
was authorized; the Imperial chamber was to give no molelta-

E 2 tiol

1OOK VIT.

r544.

And granted
by thc dig:.

Chn:les's ne-
gori;iti) ns
with Den-
mark and
England.

tion to the Protestants; and when the term, for which the present
judges in that court were elected, should expire, persons duely
qualiied were then to be admitted as members, without any
diftinaioa on account of religion. In return for these extra-
ordinary ads of indulgence, the Proteftats concurred, with
the other members of the diet, in declaring war against Francis
in name of the Empire; in voting the Emperor a body of
twenty-four thousand foot, and four thousand horse, to be
maintained at the publick expence for fix months, and to be
employed against France; and at the fame time the diet imposed
a poll-tax to be levied throughout all Germany on every person
without exception, for the support of the war againit the
Turks.

CIiARLES, while he gave the greatest attention to the minute

and intricate detail of particulars necessary towards conducting
the deliberations of a numerous and divided assembly to such a
successful period, negociated a separate peace with the King of
Denmark, who, though he had hitherto performed nothing
considerable in confcquence of his alliance with Francis, had it
in his power, however, to make a formidable diversion in
favour of that monarch . At the fame time, he did not ne-
glea proper applications to the King of England, in order to
rouze hiin to more vigorous efforts against their common enemy.
lttle, indeed, was wanting to accomplish this; for ihch events
had happened in. Scotland as inflamed Henry to the most vio-
lent pitch of rcfentment against Francis. Having concluded
with the parliament of Scotland a treaty of marriage between.

' Dumont Corps Diplom. t. iv. p. ii. p. 274.

his,

his son and their young-Qween, by which he reckoned :himfeif
secure of effeting the union of the two kingdoms, which had
been long desired, and often attempted without success by ,his
predecessors, Mary of Guise the Queen mother, cardinal Bea-
toun, and other partizans of France, found meaans not only to
break off the match, but to alienate the Scottish nation entirely
from the friendship of England, and to ftrengthcn its antient
attachment to France. Henry, however, did not abandon an
object of so much importance. As the humbling of Francis,
betides the pleasure of taking revenge upon an enemy who.
had disappointed a favourite measure, appeared the most effec-
tual method of bringing the Scots to accept once more of the
treaty which they had rejected, he was so fond of this scheme,
that he was ready to second whatever the Emperor could pro-
pose to be attempted againfl that monarch. The plan, accord-
ingly, which they concerted, was such as, if it had been punc-
tually executed, must have ruined France in the first place,
and would have augmented so prodigiously the Emperor's
power and territories as might in the end have proved fatal to
the liberties of Europe. They agreed to invade France each
with an army of twenty-five thousand men, and, without losing
time in besieging the frontier towns, to advance direcly to-
wards the interior provinces, and to join their forces near Paris a.

MEANWHILE, Francis flood alone in opposition to all the

enemies that Charles was mnuftring againfi him. Solyman. was
the only ally who had not dcfi'rtcd him; but the aflitance he
received from him had rendered him fb odious to all Chriflen-

' Herbert 24 5. Bcllay, 448.

dotr,

?9
BooK VIL

1544.

The French
take the field
in Piedmont.

BooK VII. dom, that he resolved rather to forego all the advantages of

1544. his friendship, than to become, on that account, the objet of

general horror and detestation. For this reason, he difiniffed
Barbarossa as soon as winter was over, who after ravaging the
coasts of Naples and Tuscany returned to Constantinople. As
Francis could not hope to equal the forces of his rival, he
endeavoured to supply that defed by dispatch, which was more
in his power, and to get the start of him in taking the field.

Invefl Car'g- Early in the spring the count d' Enguien invested Carignan, a
nan.

town in Piedmont, which the marquis de Guafto the Imperial
general having furprized the former year confidered as of so
much importance, that he had fortified it at great expence.
The count pushed the siege with such vigour, that Guafto, fond
of his own conquest, and feeing no other way of saving it from
falling into the hands of the French, resolved to hazard a battle

The Imperia in order to relieve it. He began his march from Milan for
lifts march to
relieve t. this purpose, and as he was at no pains to conceal his intention,

it was soon known in the French camp. Enguien, a gallant and
enterprizing young man, wished passionately to try the fortune
of a battle; his troops desired it with no less ardour; but the
peremptory injuncion of the King not to venture a general
engagement, flowing from a prudent attention to the present
situation of affairs, as well as from the remembrance of former
difaflers, tied up his hands. Unwilling, however, to abandon
Carignan, when it was just ready to yield, and eager to dil-
tinguilh his command by fonme memorable action, he dispatched
Monluc to court in order to lay bcfore tll King the advantages
of fighting the enemy, and the hopes which he had of viciory.
The King referred tile matter to the council; all the miniifcrs
tlcclared, one after another, againfl lighting, and fiupportcd

4* their

their sentiments by reasons extremely plausible. While they
were delivering their opinions, Monluc, who was permitted to
be present, discovered such visible and extravagant symptoms of
impatience to speak, as well as such diffatisfadion with what he
heard, that Francis, diverted with his appearance, called on him
to declare what he could offer in reply to sentiments which
seemed to be as just as they were general. Upon this, Monluc,
a plain but spirited soldier, and of known courage, represented
the good condition of the troops, their eagerness to meet the ene-
my in the field, their confidence in their officers, together with
the everlasting infamy which the declining of a battle would
bring on the French arms; and urged his arguments with such
lively impetuosity, and such a flow of military eloquence, as
gained over to his opinion, not only the King, naturally fond
of daring actions, but several of the council. Francis catching
the fame enthusiasm which had animated his troops, suddenly
ifarted up, and having lifted his hands to heaven, and im-
plored the divine protection and aid, he then addressed himself
to Monluc, " Go, fays he, return to Piedmont, and fight in
the name of God'."

No sooner was it known that the King had given Enguien

leave to fight the Imperialifis, than such was the martial ardour
of the gallant and high spirited gentlemen of that age, that the
court was quite deserted, every person desirous of reputation,
or capable of fcrvicc, hurrying to Piedmont in order to share,
as volunteers, in the danger and glory of the acion. Encou-
raged by the arrival of lo many brave officers, Enguien imme-
diately prepared for battle, nor did Guafto decline the combat.

Mcmoircs dc Monluc.

The

BOOK VI.

1544-

Battle of Ce-
rifoles.

3!

BOOK VI.

1544.
April Ii.

The number of cavalry was almost equal, but the Imperial
infantry exceeded the French by at least ten thoufaad men.
They met near Cerifoles, in an open plain, which afforded to
neither any advantage of ground, and both had full time to
form their army in proper order. The shock was such as might
have been expe&ted between veteran troops, violent and obfii-
nate. The French cavalry running to the charge with their
usual vivacity bore down every thing that opposed them, but
on the other hand, the fReddy and disciplined valour of the
Spanish infantry having forced the body which they encoun-
tered to give way, victory remained in fufpence, ready to
declare for which ever general could make the best use of that
critical moment. Guafto, engaged in that part of his army
which was thrown into disorder, and afraid of falling into the
hands of the French whose vengeance he dreaded on account of
the murder of Rincon and Fregofo, loft his presence of mind,
and forgot to order a large body of reserve to advance; whereas
Enguien, with admirable courage and equal condud, supported,
at the head of his gens d'armes, such of his battalions as began
to yield; and at the fame time he ordered the Swiss in his ser-
vice, who had been vicorious wherever they fought, to fall upon
the Spaniards. This motion proved decisive. All that followed
was confusion and slaughter. The marquis de Guafto wounded
in the thigh, escaped only by the swiftness of his horse. The
victory of the French was complete, ten thousand of the Impe-
rialifts being slain, and a conliderable number, with all their
tents, baggage and artillery, taken. On the part of the con-
querors, their joy was without allay, a few only being killed,
and among these no officer of diftintion b.

Belay, 429, &c. Mcmoircs de Monluc. Jovii hist. 1. 44. . 327. 6.

+ T 'ills
32

THIS splendid action, befidcs the reputation with which it

'was attended, delivered France from an imminent danger, as
it ruined the army with which Guafto had intended to invade
the country between the Rhofne and Saone, where there were
neither fortified towns nor regular forces to oppose his progress.
But it was not in Francis's power to pursue the vidtory with
such vigour as to reap the advantages which it might have
yielded; for tho' the Milanese remained now alnofl defenceless;
though the inhabitants, who had long murmured under the
rigour of the Imperial government, were ready to throw off the
yoke; though Enguien, flushed with success, urged the King
to seize this happy opportunity of recovering a country, the
acquisition of which had been long his favourite object; yet
as the Emperor and King of England were preparing to break
in upon the opposite frontier of France with such superior force,
it became necessary to sacrifice all thoughts of conquest to the
publick safety, and to rccal twelve thouiand of Enguien's best
troops to be employed in defence of the kingdom. Enguien's
fiibfequent operations were, of consequence, so languid and in-
considerable, that the redudiion of Carignan and some other
towns in Piedmont, was all he gained. by his great vitory at
Ccrifolcs .

THE Emperor, as usual, was late in taking the field, but he

appeared, towards the beginning of June, at the head of an
army more numerous, and' better appointed than any which he
had hitherto led againfl France. It amounted almost to fifty
thousand men, and part of it having reduced Luxembourg and
some other towns in the Netherlands, before he himself joined it,

' Bclay, 438, &c.

F

BOOK VIr.

1 544.

EfcEt, of it.

Operations in
the Lcw-
Couitl iie.
VOL. III.

he

33

THE REIGN OF THIE
BOOK VII.

'544.

June.

The Emperor
invcfts St.
Dificr.
July '.

he now marched With the whole towards the frontiers of
Champagne. Charles, according to his agreement with the
King of England, ought to have advanced direcly towards
Paris; and the dauphin, who commanded the only army to
which Francis trusted for the security of his dominions, was in
no condition to oppose him. But the success with which the
French had defended Provence in the year one thousand five
hundred and thirty-fix, had taught them the most effecual
method of distressing an invading enemy. Champagne, a coun-
try abounding more in vines than corn, was incapable of
maintaining a great army, and before the Emperor's approach,
whatever could: be of any use to him had been carried off or
destroyed. This rendered it necessary for him to be master of
some places of strength, in order to secure the convoys on which
alone he now perceived that he must depend for subsistence;
and he found the frontier towns so ill provided for defence, that
he hoped it would not be a work either of much time or dif-
ficulty to reduce them. Accordingly Ligny and Commercy,
which he first attacked, surrendered after a short resistance. He
then invested St. Difier, which, though it commanded an im-
portant pass on the Marne, was destitute of every thing necef-
fary for ifltaining a siege. But the count de Sancerre and M. de
la ILande, who had acquired such reputation by the defence of
Landrecy, generously threw themselves into the town, and un-
dertook to lold it out to the last extremity. The Emperor
ibon found how capable they were of making good their pro-
inifi, and that he could not cxpet to take the town without
beficging it in form. This accordingly he undertook; and as
it was his nature nevcr to abandon any cnterprize in which lie

had

had once engaged, he persisted in it with an inconliderate
obflinacy.

THE King of England's preparations for the campaign were

compleatrlong before the Emperor's; but as he did not chufe, on
the one hand, to encounter alone the whole power of France,
and was unwilling, on the other, that his troops should remain
unadive, he took that opportunity of daftifing the Scots, by
fending his fleet, together with a considerable part of his infantry,
under the earl of Hertford, to invade their country. Hertford
executed his commission with vigour, plundered and burnt
Edinburgh and Leith, laid waste the adjacent country, and
X* teimbarked his men with such dispatch, that they joined their

sovereign soon after his landing in France. When Henry
arrived in that kingdom, he found the Emperor engaged in the
siege of St. Difier; an ambassador, however, whom he sent to
congratulate the Englifl Monarch on his safe arrival on the
continent, follicited him to march in terms of the treaty direcly
to Paris. But Charles had set his ally such an ill example of
fulfilling the conditions oftheirconfederacy with exadnefs, that
Henry, observing him employ his time and forces in taking
towns for his own behoof, saw no reason why he should not
attempt the reduction of tbme places that lay conveniently for
himself. Without paying any regard to the Emperor's remon-
firances, he immediately inverted Bolognc, and commanded the
Duke of Norfolk to press the siege of Montrculil, which had
been begun before his arrival, by a body of Flemings, in conjunc-
tion with ibme Englifi troops. VWlilc Charlcs and IHcnry ihcwed
fiuch attention each to his own interief, they both l ncgllcted the
common cause; and, inflead oftlic union and colii(dlcncc r-cqifite
towards condutlingb the great plan they 1lid form ci, l tlc.' cly (li 1-

F '2 coverCed

as
hOOK Vii.

15 44..

I-lenry VIII,
jnvcts Bo-
1ogne.
July 14.,

*

BOOK VII.

»544.

Gallant de.,
frnce of St.
Diser.

covered a mutual jealousy of each other, which, by degrees,.
begot distrust, and ended in open hatred d

MEANWHILE, Francis had, with unwearied induflry, drawn

together an army capable, as well from the number as from the
valour of the troops, of making head againfi the enemy. But
the dauphin, who still acted as general, prudently declining a
battle, the loss of which would have endangered the kingdom,
satisfied himself with harraffing the Emperor with his light
troops, cutting off his convoys, and laying waste the country
around him. Though extremely distressed by these operations,
Charles fiill pressed the siege of St. Difier, which Sancerre dev- m
fended with aftonifling fortitude and conduct. He flood
repeated assaults, repulsing the enemy in them all; and un-
dismayed even by the death of the brave de la Lande, who
was killed by a cannon ball, he continued to shew the fame bold
countenance and obstinate resolution. At the end of five weeks,
he was still capable of holding out some time longer, when an
artifice of Granvelle's induced him to surrender. That crafty
politician, having intercepted the key to the cypher which the
Duke of Guise used in communicating intelligence to Sancerre,
forged a letter in his name authorizing Sancerre to capitulate,
as the King, though highly satisfied with his behaviour, thought
it imprudent to hazard a battle for his relief. This letter he
conveyed into the town in a manner which could' raise no sus-
picion, and the governor fell into the finar. Even then, lie
obtained filch honourable conditions as his gallant defence
Ducritc(l, and among others a ccffation of hoflilitics for eight

I-erbert.

days,
36

days, at the expiration of which he bound himself to open the
, gates, if Francis, during that time, did not attack the Imperial

army, and throw fresh troops into the town '. Thus Sancerre, by
detaining the Emperor so long before an inconsiderable place,
afforded his sovereign full time to assemble all his forces, and,
what rarely falls to an officer in such an inferior command,
acquired the glory of having saved his country.

As soon as St. Difier surrendered, the Emperor advanced

into the heart of Champagne, but Sancerre's obftinaterefiftance
had damped his sanguine hopes of penetrating to Paris, and led
him seriously to reflcct on what he might expea before towns
of greater strength, and defended by more numerous garrisons.
At the fame time, the procuring fubfiftencc for his army was
attended with great difficulty, which increased in proportion as
he withdrew from his own frontier. He had loft a great number
of his best troops in the siege of St. Difier, and many fell daily
in skirmishes, which it was not in his power to avoid, though
they wafted his army insensibly, without leading to any decisive
acion. The season advanced apace, and he had not yet the
command either of a sufficient extent of territory, or of any
fiuch confidcrable town as rendered it safe to winter in the ene-
mies country. Great arrears too, were due to his soldiers, who
were upon the point of mutinying for their pay, while lie knew
not from what funds to satisfy them. All tliclc confidcrations
induced hin to liflen to the overtures of peace which a Spanish
Dominican, tlh confcfior of his filler the Qlcen of France, had
£ccrctly made to his confcllbr, a monk of the fame order. Iu

BOOK VII

1544.

AugufR r7.
The Emperor
penetrates in-
to the heart
of France.
B3rantomc, torn. vi. 489..

s1qu uencc
1 ol(LCIC

37

THE REIGN OF THE

oi
BOOK VII. consequence of this, plenipotentiaries were nrmed on both ·

A54 . fides, and began their conferences in Chaufle, a small villages

near Chalons. At the fame time, Charles, either from adefire
of making one great final effort against France, or merely
to gain a pretext for deserting his ally and concluding a fepa-
rate peace, sent an ambiffador formally to require Henry,
according to the stipulation in their treaty, to advance towards
Paris. While he expected a return from him, and waited the
issue of the conferences at Chauffe, he continued to march for-
ward, though in the utmost distress from scarcity of provisions.
But at last, by a fortunitte motion on his part, or through some
neglet or treachery on that of the French, he furprized first
Efpernay and'then Chateau Thierry, in both which were con-
fiderable magazines. No sooner was it known that there towns,
the latter of which is not two days march from Paris, were in
the hands of the enemy, than that great capital, defenceless,
and susceptible of any violent alarm in proportion to its great-
ness, was filled with consternation. The inhabitants, as if the
Emperor had been already at their gates, fled in the wildest
confifion and despair, many fending their wives and children
down the Seine to Rou/;n, others to Orleans, and the towns
upon the Loire. Francis himself, more afflicted with this, than
with any other event during his reign, and fcnfible as well of
the triumph his rival would enjoy in insulting his capital, as of
the danger to which the kingdom was exposed, could not re-
frain, in the first emotion of his furprize and sorrow, from
crying out, " How dear, O my God, do I pay for this crown,
which I thought thou hadflt granted me freely '." But rccover-
ing in a moment from this sudden sally of pccviflncfs and im-

f Brantome, tom. 6. 381.

patiencc,

patience, he devoutly added, " Thy will, however, be done;" BOOK VII.
and proceeded to issue the necessary orders for opposing the ,154.
enemy with his usual composure and presence of mind. The
dauphin detached eight thousand men to Paris, which revived
the courage of the affrighted citizens; he threw a strong garrison
into Meaux, and by a forced march got into Ferte, between'the
Imperialists and the capital.

UPO N this, the Emperor, who began again to feel the want of Obliged to

provisions, perceiving that the dauphin fill prudently declined
a battle, and not daring to attack his camp with forces so much
mIattered and reduced by hard service, turned suddenly to the
right, and began to fall back towards Soiflons. Having
about this time received Henry's answer, whereby he refused to
abandon the sieges of Bologne and Montreuil, of both which
he expected every moment to get possession, he thought himself
absolved from all obligations. of adhering to the treaty with him,
and at full liberty to consult his own interest in what manner
soever he pleased. He consented, therefore, to renew the con-
ference, which the furprize of Efpernay had broke off. To
conclude a peace between two princes, one of whom greatly Peace be
desired, and the other greatly needed it, did not require a long twcn himr

-and Francis'

negociation. It was signcd at Crcfpy, a finall town near Meaux, concluded at
on the eighteenth of September. The chief articles of it were, Crry
That all the conqucfis which. cithcr party had made since the
truce of Nice flhall be restored ; that the Fmpcror ihall give in
marriage to the Duke of Orleans, cithcr his own cldcft daughter,
or the second daughter of his brother Ferdiand l; that if he
chose to bestow on him his own daughter, lie Ihall fttle on her
all the provinces of the Low-Countries, to b cred-cd into an

I. independent:

39

FO;K VII. independent slate, which fiall dcfcend to the male iffuc of the

154. marriage; that if he determined to give him his niece, he ifall,

with her, grant him the investiture of Milan and its dependen-
cies; that he shall within four months declare which of these
two Princesses he had pitched upon, and fulfil the refpedive
conditions upon the coniummation of the marriage, which ihall
take place within a year from the date of the treaty; that as
soon as the Duke of Orleans is put in pofleflion either of the
Low-Countries or of Milan, Francis lhall restore to the Duke of
Savoy all that he now poffefcs of his territories, except Pig-
nerol and Montmilian; that Francis shall renounce all preten-
sions to the kingdom of Naples, or to the sovereignty of Slanders
and Artois, and Charles shall give up his claim to the dutchy
of Burgundy and county of Charolois; that Francis shall give
no aid to the exiled King of Navarre; that both Monarchs
ihall join in making war upon the Turk, towards which the
King shall furnifi, when required by the Emperor and Empire,
fix hundred men at arms, and ten thousand foot r.

Motives of BE.SIDES the immediate motives to this peace arising from
concluding it. the diltrefs of his army through want of provisions; from the

difficulty of retreating out of France; and the impossibility of
securing winter quarters there ; the Emperor was influenced by
other confidcrations, more dillant, indeed, but not less weighty.
The Pope was offended to a great degree, as well at his con-
ceflions to the Protestants in the late diet, as at his consenting to
call a council, and to admit ofpublick disputations in Germany

s Rccucil des Traitcz, t. i. 227. Bclius de caufis Pacis Crcpiac. in A'is
Erudit. Lips. 1763.

t

with

with a view of determining the dotrines in controversy; and
confidering both these steps as sacrilegious encroachments on
the jurifdiaion as well as privileges of the Holy fee, he had ad-
dressed to him a remonstrance rather than a letter on this subjed,
written with such acrimony of language, and in a flile of such
high authority, as discovered more of an intention to draw on a
quarrel than of a desire to reclaim him. This ill humour was
not a little inflamed by the Emperor's league with Henry, which
being contrated with an heretick, excommunicated by the apo-
flolic fee, appeared to the Pope a profane alliance, and was not
less dreaded by him, than that of Francis with Solyman. Paul's
son and grandson, highly incensed at the Emperor for having re-
fused to gratify them with regard to the alienation of Parma and
Placentia, contributed by their infusions to four and disgust hirm
still more. To all which was added the powerful operation of
the flattery and promises which Francis inceflantly employed
to gain him. Though from his desire of maintaining a
neutrality, the Pope had hitherto suppressed his own resent-
ment, had eluded the artifices of his own family, and refilled
the follicitations of the French King, it was not safe to rely
much on the flcddincfs of a man whom his paflions, his friends,
and his intcrcft combined to flakc. The union of the Pope
with France, Charles well knew, would inflantly expole his
dominions in Italy to be attacked. I'ihe Vcnetians, he foresaw,
would probably follow the cx;:mpll of a Pontiff, who was con-
fidcrcd as a model of political wifiom among the Italians; and
thus at a juncture when lhe felt hiinfclf scarce equal to the bur-
den of tlie prfcfnt war, lie would lbe overwhelnmed cv'it l tlie
weight of a new confederacy againls him h. At the fime time,

h F. Paul, too. I'allt'ic, 163,

'G

BOOK VII.

1544.

__-

41

the
1VO L. I11.

dioOK VII.

54 4.

the Turks, almost unresisted, made fuich progress in Hungary,
reducing town after town, that they approached near to the
confines of the Austrian provinces'. Above all these, the
extraordinary progress of the Protestant doctrines in Germany,
and the dangerous combination into which the Princes of that
profession had entered, called for his immediate attention.
Almost one half of Germany had revolted from the established
church; the fidelity of the reft was much shaken; the nobility
of Austria had demanded of Ferdinand the free excrcife of
religion k; the Bohemians, among whom some feeds of the
doftrines of Huss flill remained, openly favoured the new
opinions; the archbishop of Cologne, with a zeal rare among
ecclefiafticks, had begun the reformation of his diocese; nor
was it possible, unless some timely and cffc@tual check were
given to the spirit of innovation, to foresee where it would end.
He himfelfhad been a witness, in the late liet, to the peremp-
tory and decisive tone which the Protestants ; Ld now assumed;
and had seen how, from confidence in their n:dilcr and union,
they had forgotten the humble stile of their first petitions, having
grown to such boldlnes as openly to dcfpife the Pope, n (nd to llew
no great reverence for the Imperial dignity itfclf. If, thlircfore,
lie wiflhcd to maintain cither the ancient religion, or his ovwn
authority, and would not chufe to dwindle into a mere nominal
head of the Empire, foine vigorous effort was rcquilite, which
could not be made during a war that required the grcateft cxcr-
tion of his frcngth against a foreign and powerful cnemy.

Src(:n being the Emperor's inducements to peace, he had the
adtlrcs to franme the treaty of Crcldy so as to promote all the

Ifluanhafiji. Ilift. Iung. 177. k Sicid. 285.

cnds
42

ends which he had in view. By coming to an agreement with
Francis, he took from the Pope all profped of advantage in cQurt-
ing the friendship of that Monarch in preference to his. By the
proviso with regard to a war with the Turks, he not only deprived
Solyman of a powerful ally, but turned the arms of that ally
againit him. By a private article, not inserted in the treaty
that it might not raise any unseasonable alarm, he agreed with
Francis that both should exert all their influence and power in
order to procure a general council, to aflert its authority, and to
exterminate the Proteflant heresy out of their dominions. This
cut off all hope of affiitance which the confederates of Smalkalde
might expect from the French King '; and leit their follicita-
tions, or his jealousy of an ancient rival, should hereafter tempt
Francis to forget this engagement, he left him embarrafled
with a war against England, which would put it out of his
power to take any part in the affairs of Germany.

HENRY, poffeflcd at all times with an high idea of his own

pow.er and importance, felt, in the mofi fcnfible manner, the
neglct with which the Emperor had treated him in concluding
a separate peace. But the situation of his affairs was such as.
flmcwhat alleviated the mortification which this occasioncd.
For though he was obliged to recal the Duke of Norfolk from
the liege of Montreuil, becaufc the Flemifli troo)ps received
orders to retire, Bologne had furrcndcred Ibfore the negocia-
tions at Crcfpy were lrought to an illilc. While elated wviti
vanity on account of this conqIuefl, and i- inlaedcl with ilinligna-
tion lagaiillt the Emperor, the aruballl.lors vliwho!1 Francis

X Seek, 1. iii. 496.

C 2

BOOK VII.

154+.

War con-
tinues be-
t.vern Franc,
and England.

Septemb. l,,.
le;tc

BJOK VII.

1544.

The (d1lplin
difl'ltisfied
with the peace
of Crefpy.

sent to make overtures of peace found him too arrogant to
grant what was moderate or equitable. His demands were indeed
extravagant, and made in the tone of a conqueror; that Francis
flould renounce his alliance with Scotland, and not only pay
up the arrears of former debts, but reimburse the money which
he had expended in the present war. Francis, though sincerely
desirous of peace, and willing to yield a great deal in order to
obtain it, being now free from the prefllure of the Imperial
arms, rejeded these ignominious propositions with disdain;
and Henry departing for England, hostilities continued between
the two nations m

TH1 E treaty of peace, how acceptable soever to the people of

France, whom it dclivcicd from the dread of an enemy who had
penetrated into the licart of the kingdom, was loudly com-
plained of by the dauphin. He confidered it as a manifetl proof
of the King his father's extraordinary partiality towards his
younger brother, now Duke of Orleans, and complained that from
his eagerness to gain an cflablifhment for a favourite son, he had
sacrificed the honour of the kingdom, and renounced the Inof
antient and valuable rights of the crown. But as he durst not
venture to offend the king by refusing to ratify it, though
extremcly desirous at the lfme time of securing to hinfelf the
privilege of reclaiming what was now alienated so much- to his
detriment, lie fccrctly protcfed, in pretence of some of his adhe-
rents, againfl the whole tranfaCdiol ; and dcclarcd whatever he
should be obliged to do in order to confirm it, null in iticlt,
and void of all obligation. The parliament of Thouloufe, pro-

" Mem. de Ribicr, t. i. p. 572. Herbert, 244.

bably

+
-4.
44

bably by tle instigation of his partizans, did the fame ". Bt BOOK VII.
Francis, highly pleased aswell with having delivered his fubjeds 154.4
from the miseries of an invasion, as with the profpea of ac-
quiring an independent iettlement for his son at no greater price
than the renouncing conquefrs to which he had no just claim;
titles which had hitherto proved the source of expence or dif-
afters to the nation; and rights grown to be obsolete and of
no value; ratified the treaty with great joy. Charles, within
the time prescribed by the treaty, declared his intention of
giving Ferdinand's daughter in marriage to the Duke of Or-
leans, together with the dutchy of Milan as her dowry°. Every
circumstance seemed to promise the continuance of peace. The
Emperor, cruelly afflided with the gout, appeared to be in no
condition to undertake any enterprize where great ativity was
requisite, or much fatigue to be endured. He himself felt this,
or wished at least that it should be believed; and being so much
disabled by this excruciating distemper, when a French ambaf-
fador followed him to Bruffcls in order to be present at his rati-
fication of the treaty of peace, that it was with the ttmoft diffi-
culty he signed his name, he observed, that there was no great
dangcr of his violating tlicf articles, as a hand that could fcarcc
1hold a pen, was little able to branudifl a: lance.

TIr violence of his disease confined the Emperor several The Empe-
months in Brulln'is, and was the apparent caufle of putting off ror's fCllemes

with rcf]Pect

the execution of the vast fchcmes which lie had formcd in order to;errnay.
to humble the ProtcfLint party in Germany. But there were
tlher realons for this delay. For, how prevalent soever

Rccueil de Traitez, t. ii. 235, 238.

o Rccucil de Traitez, t. ii. 228.

the

45

BooK; VII.

1544.

li'. Pcpe
funimnns a
rencraI Cousl-
cI to ii Pt at
'I rent.
Novmb. ac.

the motives were which determined him to undertake this enter-
prize, the nature of that great body which he was about to attack,
as well as the situation of his own affairs, made it necessary to
deliberate long, to proceed with caution, and not to throw aside
too suddenly the veil under which he had hitherto concealed his
real sentiments and schemes. He was sensible that the Prote-
slants, conscious of their ownr flrength, but under continual
apprehensions of his designs, had all the boldness of a powerful
party, and all the jealousy of a feeble facion; and were no less
quick-fighted to discern the firfl appearance of danger, than
ready to take arms in order to repel it. At the fame time, he
continued involved in a Turkilh war; and though, in order to
deliver himself from this incumbrance, he had determined to
fend an envoy to the Porte with most advantageous and even
submissive overtures of peace, the resolutions of that haughty
court were so uncertain, that before these were known it would
have been. the height of imprudence to have kindled the flames
of civil war in his own dominions.

UPON this account, he appeared diflatisfied with a bull issued

by the Pope immediately after the peace of Crefpy, fuinmon--
ing the council to assemble at Trent early next spring, and
exhorting all Christian Princes to embrace the opportunity
that tli present happy interval of tranquillity afforded tlhmc,,
of fup)prctling thofc heretics which threatcned to lfbvert what-
ever was sacred or vcnerable among Chriflians. But after such
a flight exprcflion of dislike as was necessary in order to cover
his declgns, lie determined to countenance the council, whlich
might become no inconldlera)le inflrumcnt towards acconmplilh-
ing his projeas, and therefore not only appointed ambaflIadors

to
46

to appear there in his name, but ordered the ecclefiafticks in his BooK VIL
dominions to attend at the time prefixed P. ,4.

SUCH were the Emperor's views, when the Imperial diet, after 154S.

Diet at
several prorogations, was opened at Worms. The Protestants, Worms.

March z,.

who enjoyed the free exercise of their religion by a very pre- arc
carious tenure, having no other security for it than the recess
of the last diet, which was to continue in force only until the
meeting of a council, wiihed earnestly to establish that impor-
tant privilege upon some firmer basis, and to hold it by a per-
petual not a temporary title. But, instead of offering them any
additional security, Ferdinand opened the diet with observing,
that there were two points, chiefly, which required confidera-
tion, the prosecution of the war against the Turks, and the state
of religion; that the former was the mofl urgent, as Solyman,
after conquering the greatest part of Hungary, was now ready
to fall upon the Austrian provinces; that the Emperor, who,
from the beginning of his reign, had negleted no opportunity
of annoying this formidable enemy, and with the hazard of his
own person had resifted his attacks, being animated fill with
the fame zeal, had now confcnted to flop short in the career of
his fuicccft againif France, that, in conjunction with his antient
rival, lie minght turn his arms with greater vigour against the
commlon advcrlary of the Christian faith; that it became all
the members of the Ikmpilrc to second there pious endeavours of
its headl; that, thercfore, they ought, without dl.lay, to vote
him I'ch cflccual aid as both their duty and their interest called
llp)n them to furnilh; that the controvcrfics about rcligion

P F. Paul, 104.

were

BOOK VII.

'545.

Ferdinand
requies the
Germans to
acknowledge
the council.

were so intricate, and of such difficult discussion, as to give no
hope of its being possible to bring them at present to any final
issue; that by perseverance and repeated follicitations the Em-
peror had at length prevailed on the Pope to call a council, for
which they had so often wiihcd and petitioned; that the time
appointed for its meeting was now come, and both parties
ought to wait for its decrees, and submit to them as the deci-
sions of the universal church.

THE popish members of the diet received this declaration with

great applause, and signified their entire acquiescence in every
particular which it contained. The Protestants expressed great
furprize at propositions, which were so manifefily repugnant to
the recess of the former diet; they insisted that the questions
with regard to religion, as first in dignity and importance, ought
to come first under deliberation; that alarming as the progress
of the Turks was to all Germany, the securing the free exer-
cifc of their religion touched them itill more nearly, nor could
they prosecute a foreign war with spirit, while follicitous
and concerned about their domestic tranquillity; that if the
latter were once rendered firm and permanent, they would
concur with their countrymen in pushing the former, and yield
to none of them in aCtivity or zeal. But if the danger from
the Turkish arms was indeed ti imminent, as not to admit of
ilch a delay as would be occasioncd by an immediate examina-
ti(on of the contraverted points in religion, they rcquired that a
diet flhould be inaltntly apl,)oinlted, to which the final fettlcment
of their rcligious dilputcs lits uld be rcfcrrced; and that in the

canc timel thle lecrcc of tlhe to)ner (lit concerning religion
Ihould be explained in a point whiichl they deemed eclcntial. By

the

49

the recess of Spires it was provided, that they ihould enjoy unmo- BOOK VII.
Iefed the public exercise of their religion, until the meeting of 5,4i
a legal council; but as the Pope had now called a council, to
which Ferdinand had required them to submit, they began to
fufped that their adversaries might take advantage of an ambi-
guity in the terms of the recess, and pretending that the event
therein mentioned had taken place, might pronounce them to
be no longer entitled to the fame indulgence. In order to guard
againfR this interpretation, they renewed their former remon-
firances againfi a council called to meet without the bounds of
the Empire, summoned by the Pope's authority, and in which
he aflumed the right ofprefiding; and declared that, notwith-
fRanding the convocation of any such illegal assembly, they Rfill
held the recess of the late diet to be in full force.

AT otherjunaures, when the Emperor thought it of advantage Emperor ar-

rives at

to tooth and gain the Protestants, he had devised expedients for worms.
giving them fatisfadion with regard to demands seemingly more
extravagant; but his views at present being very different, Ferdi-
nand by his command adhered inflexibly to his first propositions,
and would make no conceflions which had the most remote ten-
dency to throw discredit on'the council, or to weaken its autho-
rity. The Proteflants, on their part, were no less inflexible; and
after much time iient in fruitless endeavours to convince each
otll'r, they came to no conclusion. Nor did the presence of
the LEmperor, lwho upon his recovery arrived at Vorlns, con- ' .a:' ;
tribute in any ldegree to ecnder the IProtcfLants il;mL' COJmlianlt.
lFully convinced that they were maintaining the caulfe of Go(d
;'ld of truth, they llhcwcd thcmlfclves fuill)cior to the alluremnclts
of intcreft, or the uiggcflions; of :fe:ir ; and in proportioll as the
1'.ilperor Icdoii)l'dl hii; 1(licittti',;., or dit Ovcercd li;; defigins,

VOL. 1fs. 1I tir

I

POOK VII.

s145.

The Pro-
teltants dif.
clain all con
rect on w;th
, the council of
'rrett.

their boldness seems to have increased. At last they openly
declared, that they would not even deign to vindicate their tenets.
in presence of a council, assembled not to examine, but to con-
demn them; and that they would pay no regard to an assembly
held under the influence of a Pope, who had already precluded
himself from all title to ac as ajudge, by his having stigmatized
their opinions with the name of heresy, and denounced against
them the heaviest censures, which, in the plenitude of his usurped
power, he could inflit q.

C ,nlu-t of VH I L E the Protcftants, with such union as well as firmness,

lua:ice of

Sa:xo ) in rejected all intercourse with the council, and refused their assent
this d t. to the Imperial demands in refied to the Turkifih war, Mau-

rice of Saxony alone flewed an inclination to gratify the Empe-
ror with regard to both. Though he professed an inviolable
regard for the Protestant religion, he assumed an appearance of
moderation peculiar to himself, by which he confirmed the
favourable sentiments that the Emperor already entertained
of him, and gradually paved the way for executing the ambi-
tious designs which always occupied his adive and cnterprizing
mind'. His example, however, had little influence upon such
as agreed with him in their religious opinions; and Charles
perccived that he could not hope either to procure present aid
from the Prrtctants against the Turks, or to quict their fears
and jealousies on account of their religion. But as his fchemcs
wcrc not yet ripe for execution, nor his preparations so fiar
advanced that he could force their compliancc, or punifl their
obltinacy, lie artfully conccalcd his own intentions; and that hc
Au'!, . 4. miight augmlnt their Icmic ity, lle appointed a diet to e held at

Ratifxon early next year, ill order t:) adjufl what was now left

'lciil. 34.3, &c. SeCk. iii. 5 3, &c. I'liihu . -liltor. lib. ii. p. 56.
' Sek. iii. 5. .

I57eter-
50

5I

-undetermined; and previous to it, he agreed that a certain num-
. ber of divines of each party should meet, in order to confer upon
the points in dispute.'.

BUT how far soever this appearance of a desire to maintain

-the prefcnt tranquillity might have impqfed upon the Protestants,
the Emperor was incapable of such uniform and thorough difli-
rnulation, as to hide altogether from their view the dangerous
dcfigns which he was meditating against them. Herman count de
Wicd, Archbifmop and Eledtor of Cologne, a prelate conspicuous
for his virtue and primitive simplicity of manners, though not
more distinguished for learning than the other descendants of
noble families, who in that age pofleffed Inoft of the great
benefices in Germany, having become a proselyte to the doc-
trines of the Reformers, had begun in the year one thousand five
hundred and forty-three, with the.afiflance of Melandhon and
Eucer, to alolifh the ancient superstition in his diocese, and to
introduce in its place the rites established among the Proteflants.
But the canons of his cathedral who were not possessed with
the fame spirit of innovation, and who foresaw how fatal the
levelling genius of the new fed would prove to their dignity
and wealtl, opposed, from the beginning, this un!prcccdcnted
cntcrprize of their Archbiflop with all the zeal flowing from
reverence for old inflitutions, heightened by conccrn for their
own ilntcref. This opposition, which the Archlbiliop con-
fid(lrc(l only as a new argument to (dcmolnflrate the ncccflity
of a rcformation, neither shook his rcfolution nor slackened -his
ardour in procfcuting his plan. The canons, perceiving all
their cndcavours to check his career to lbe ineicFeCtal, lflcmiily

S' (id. 351.
Jj 2

PooK VII.

A 54S*

The Prg-
teltknts bepia
to fufr.ea' tke
E np ror.
,'rotl cflcd

protelfed againit his proceedings, and appealed for redress to the
Pope and Emperor, the former as his ecclesiastical, the latter as
his civil superior. This appeal being laid before the Emperor,
during his refidence-in Worms, he took the canons of Cologne
under his immediate protection; enjoined them to proceed with
rigour against all who revolted from the eftablified church; pro-
hibited the Archbishop to make any innovation in his diocese;
and summoned him to appear at Brussels within thirty days, to
answer the accusations which should be preferred against him'.

To this clear evidence of his hostile intentions against the

Protestant party, Charles added other proofs fill more explicit.
In his hereditary dominions of the Low-Countries, he persecuted
all who were fufpeded of Lutheranifm with unrelenting rigour.
As soon as he arrived at Worms, be silenced the Protefant
preachers in that city. He allowed an Italian monk to inveigh
against the Lutherans from the pulpit of his chapel, and to call
upon him, as he regarded the favour of God, to exterminate that
peflilent heresy. He dispatched the embassy, which has been
already mentioned, to Constantinople, with overtures of peace,
that he might be free from any apprehensions of danger or
interruption from that quarter. Nor did any of these fleps, or
their dangerous tendency, escape the jealous observation of the
Proteflants, or fail to alarm their fears, and to excite their folli-
citude for the fafcty of their fed.

ME A NWH I LE, Charles's good fortune, which predominated

on all occasions over that of his rival Francis, extricated him out
of a difficulty, from wlhich, with all his sagacity and address, he

lSkiJd 310, 310, 351. Seckend. iii. 443, 553.

would

B OK VIV
L -- -

15 SS

rcCth of the
IBuke of ( r-
1 c,..

S2

would have found it no easy matter to have disentangled him-.
sets. Just about the time when the Duke of Orleans .should
have received Ferdinand's daughter in marriage, and together
with her the possession of the Milanese, he died of a pestilential
fever. By this event, the Emperor was freed frih the neceflity
of giving up an important province into the hands of an enemy,
or from the indecency of violating a recent and solemn engage-
inent, which muff have occasioned an immediate rupture with
Francc. FIe asseted, however, to express great forrow-for the
untimely death of a young Prince, who was to have been so
nearly allied to him; but he carefully avoided entering into any
fresh discussions concerning the Milanese, and would not liften
to a proposal which came from Francis of new modelling the
treaty of Crefpy, so as to make him some reparation for the ad-
vantages which he had loft by the demise of his son. In the more
active and vigorous part of Francis's reign, a declaration of war
would have been' the certain and instantaneous consequence of
such a flat refufal'to comply with a demand seemingly so equi-
table; but the declining state of his own health, the exhausted
condition of his kingdoms, together with the burden of the war
againit England, obliged him, at present, to dissemble his resent-
ment, and to put off thoughts of revenge to some other junc-
ture. In consequence of this event, the unfortunate Duke of
Savoy loft all hope of obtaining the reltitution of his terri-
tories; and the rights or claims relinquished by the treaty of
Crcfpy, returned in full force to the crown of France, to fcrve as
pretexts for future wars".

UPON the firfi intelligence of the Duke of Orleans's death,
the confederates of Smalkalde flattered themselves that the

B ulcarii Com.mcht. 769. Paruta, Hist. Vcnet. iv. p. 177.

BOOK IHI.

t.45.

Scrt. 8.
essential

s3.
2

BOOK VII. efflntial alterations which it occasioned could scarce fail of pro-

45rT. ducing a rupture, which would prove the means of their safety.

The Poe But they were not more disappointed with regard to tllis, than
grants the
cutc:.ies of in their expecations from an event which seemed to be the cer-
Parma and
I aceltia to tain prelude of a quarrel letween the Emperor and the Pope.

Paul, whose passion for aggrandizing his family, increased as he
advanced in years, and as lie iaw the dignity and power which
they derived immediately from him becoming more precarious,
finding that lie could not bring the Emperor to approve of his
ambitious fchemcs, ventured, though at the rifque of incurring
his displeasure, to grant his son Peter Lewis the investiture of
Parma and Placentia. At a time when a great part of Europe in-
veighed openly against the corrupt manners and exorbitant power
of Ecclefiattics, and when a council was summoned to reform the
disorders in the church, this indecent grant of such a principa-
lity to a son of whose illegitimate birth the Pope ought to have
been afhamned, and whose licentious morals all good men detested,
gave general offence. Some Cardinals in the Imperial interest
remonftratod againit such an unbecoming alienation of the
patrimony of the church; the Spanish ambassador would not
.be prefcnt at the iolemnity of his cafcofment; and the Emperor
percmptorily reftifed, upon prctcxt that thfee cities were part of
the Milanese flatc, to confirm the deed of invcfliture. But botli
the lEnmpcror and Pope being intent upon one common olbjec in
(crmany, sacrificcd tlhir particular paflions to that public
caulie, and fulpprcfied the emotions of jealou!y or rclintnment
wllichl were riling on this occasion, that they might jointly pulr-
'.ic wllat each cfcclcd of greater importancec.

A or'T
54

,, Paruta, 1-lia. Veict. . i7S. i,8n

ABOUT this time the peace of Germany was disturbed by a BOOK VII.

violcnt but short eruption of Henry Duke of Brunswick. This , -S '
Prince, though still itript of his dominions, which the Emperor, henry of
held in fequefiration, until his differences with the confederates, kindlec a war
of Smalkalde should be adjusted, possessed however so much in Cermana.
credit in Germany that he undertook to raise for the French.
King a considerable body of troops to be employed in the war
against England. The money flipulated for this purpose was
duly advanced by Francis; the troops were levied ; but IHenry,
instead of leading them towards France, suddenly entered his
own dominions at their head, in hopes of recovering them before
any army could be assembled to oppose him. The confcderates
were not more furprized at this unexpeaed attack, than the
King of France was aftonifbed at a mean thievish fraud so
unbecoming the charaaer of a Prince. But the Landgrave of
Hesse, with incredible expedition, collected as many men as
put a flop to the progress of Henry's undisciplined forces, and
being joined by his fon-in-law Maurice, and some troops of the
Eledor of Saxony, he gained fitch advantages over Henry,
who was rash and bold in forming his schemes, but feeble and
undetermined in executing them, as obliged him to disband his
army, and to surrender himself together with his eldest son pri-
lners at difcrction. He was kept in close confinement, until a
new rcvcrfe of affairs procured him liberty Y.

As this defeat of IIenry's wild entcrprize added new repu- ,46.
tation to the arms of tle Protclants, the reformnationl of the Thi lt rfor.

I,,lti (. (,f Ilue

IPaliltirnate brought a great acccffion of firength to their party. laliatilatc.
F;rcdcrick, who succeeded his brother Lewis in that llctorate,

r Slit . 352. Stek. iii, 567.

55
4

hadl

BOOK VII. had long been fufpe&ed of a secret propensity to the docrines

154S5 . of the Reformers, which, upon his accession to the principality,

;he openly matifefted. But as he expeced that something
effecual towards a general and legal eflablifhment of religion
would be the fruit of so many diets, conferences, and negocia-
tions, he did not, at first, attempt any public innovation in
his dominions. Finding all there issue in nothing, lie thought
Jan. io. himself called, at length, to countenance by his authority the

system which he approved of, and to gratify the wishes of his
fubjeds, who by their intercourse with the Protcftant flates
had universally imbibed their opinions. As the warmth and
im.petuosity which accompanied the spirit of Reformation in its
first efforts had somewhat abated, this change was made with
great order and regularity; the ancient rites were abolished,
and new forms introduced without any act of violence, or
symptom of discontent. Though Frederick adoped the reli-
gious system of the Proteflants, he imitated the example of
Maurice, and did not accede to the league of Smalkalde ",

The council
;ifrernb:cs at
TiCept.

A FEW weeks before this revolution in the Palatinate, the

general council was opened with the accustomed solemnitics at
Trent. The eyes of the Catholick flatcs were turned with much
cxp)cation towards an affcmbly, which all had confidered as a
natural and adequate remedy for the difordcrs of the church
whln they firfl brol:e out, though many were afraid that it was
now too late to hope for great benefit fiom it, when thl. malady,
by being fiuf'crcd to make progress (uring twenty-cihllt vcars,
had become inveterate, and growni to fiich cxtrcim violcncc.

SIeid. 356. Seck. 1. iii. 616.
56

'I'lte

The Pope, by his lass bull of convocation, had appointed the BOOK VII
first meeting to be held in March. But his views and those of 15+6.
the Emperor were so different, that almost the whole year was
spent in negociations. Charles, who foresaw that the rigorous
decrees of the council againfi the Protestants would soon drive
them, in felf-defence as well as from resentment, to some def-
perate extreme, laboured to put off its meeting until his
warlike preparations were so far advanced, that he might be in
a condition to second its decisions by the force of his arms.
The Pope, who had early sent to Trent the legates who were to
prefidc in his name, knowing to what contempt it would expose
his authority, and what suspicions it would beget of his inten-
tions, if the fathers of the council should remain in a state of in-
adivity, when the church was in such danger as to require their
immediate and vigorous interposition, insisted either upon tranf-
lating; the council to some city in Italy, or upon suspending
its procccdings, at that junturc, or upon authorising it to
begin its dcclibcrations immcd(iately. The Emperor rejcted the
two former as equally oicnfive to tile Germans of every deno-
mination, but finding it in.poflible to elude the latler, lhe pro-
pos"cd that tlle council fhlt.ld begin with refomining the diborders
in the church, before i!- pro.cedcd to examine or define articles
of faith. This . vas the very thingv w)hich tlie court of Romne
dreaded moin, all vwhich had prompted it to employ si many
artifices iln oltcr to prcevent tlic mccting of flich a dangerous
jitlicat)ry. I'a1l], tlhoullIih more coiplia.lt than liome of is
r;-cdccc l:rs withl ircrelrd lo callin g a coulncil, was no lies jcalous
than tlhey hlad ben of i t juriif lidion, and ftiw wlat mattcr or'
trim,1lnll) filch a mctlo,)d o(f p1ro(cc(dilng would afford the heretics.
JIe a l(pprhcndcd colieqlllcccs not ol1-y Iltutbllingt but ittlal to

V' L. III. I tlhe

57

BOOK VII. the papal fee, if the council came to confider an inquest into

154. abuses as their only business; or if inferior prelates were

allowed to gratify their own envy and peevishness by prescribing
rules to those who were exalted above them in dignity and
power. Without listening, therefore, to this insidious proposal
of the Emperor,. he inftruaed his legates to open the council.

Jan. I8. THE frfit session was spent in matters of form. In a fubfe-
Its proceed.
sigs. quent one, it was agreed that the framing a confcffion of faith,

containing all the articles which the church required its mem-
bers to believe, ought to be the first and principal business of the
council; but that at the fame time, it should give attention to
what was necessary towards the reformation of manners and
discipline. From this first symptom of the spirit with which
the council was animated, from the high tone of authority
which the legates who presided in it assumed, and from the
implicit deference with which most of the members followed
their direcions, the Proteflants conjectured with ease what de-
cifions they might expect. It astonished them, however, to fee
forty prelates, (for no greater number were yet affemnbled)
affunie authority as representatives of the universal church, and
proceed to determine the most important points of docrine in its
name. Sensible of this indecency, as well as of the ridicule with
which it might be attended, the council advanced slowly in its
deliberations, and all its proceedings were for tome time lan-
guifling and feeble "'. As loon as the confederates of Smalkalde
received information of the opening of the council, they pulbllin-
cd a long manif ito containing a renewal of their protelt against
its meeting, together with the reasons which induced tllchn to,

F. Paul, 120, &c. Pallavic. p. 18o, &c.

.,V. declie:

59

dxecline its jurifdiaions b. The Pope and Emperor, meanwhile, BooK VIT
were so little follicitous to quicken or add vigour to its opera- 1546.
tions, as plainly discovered that some object of greater importance
occupied and interested them.

THE Protestants, as they were not inattentive or unconcerned Apprehen-

flons of the

fpedators of their motions, entertained every day more violent Protelfants.
suspicions of their intentions, and received intelligence from
different quarters of the machinations carrying on against them.
The King of England informed them, that the Emperor hav-
ing long resolved to exterminate their opinions, would not fail to
employ this interval of tranquillity which he now enjoyed, as
the most favourable juncture for carrying his design into execu-
tion. The merchants of Augsburg, which was at that time a
city of extensive trade, received advice by means of their corre-
fpondents in Italy, among whom were some who secretly favoured
the Proteflant cause c, that a dangerous confederacy againfi it
was forming between the Pope and Emperor. In confirmation
of this, they heard from the Low-Countries that Charles had
ifucd orders, though with every precaution which could keep the
measure concealed, for railing troops both there and in other
parts of his dominions. Such a variety of information, cor-
roborating all that tlcir own jcalouty or olfcrvation led them
to apprchend, left the l'rotcflants little rcafon to doubt of the

l'nperor's lhofile intentions. Unlder this imprcffion, the depu- Their dellbe-

ration,.

tic,; of the confederatcs of Snalkalde afcirbled at Frankfort,
and by commniuiicating their intelligence and Icntilnents to cach
other, reciprocally hcightened their sense of the impending
danger. But their union was not such as their situation required,

' Scckcnd. i. iii. 602, &C.

Seeck. 1. iii. 579.

or
I z

BOOK VII.

J546.

or the preparations of their enemies rendered necessary. Their
league had now subsisted ten years. Among so many mem-
bers whose territories were intermingled with each other, and
who, according to the custom of Germany, had created an
infinite variety of mutual rights and claims by intermarriages,
alliances, and contracts of different kinds, fubjets of jealousy and
discord had unavoidably arisen. Some of the confederates, being
conneced with the Duke of Brunswick, were highly disgusted
with the Landgrave, on account of the rigour with which he
had treated that rash but unfortunate Prince. Others taxed the
Eletor of Saxony and Landgrave, the heads of the league, with
having involved the members in unnecessary and exorbitant
expences by their profuseness or want of oeconomy. The
views, likewise, of these two great Princes, who, by their
superior power and authority, influenced and directed the whole
body, being extremely different, rendered all its motions
languid, at a time when the utmost vigour and dispatch
were requisite. The Landgrave, of a violent and enterprizing
temper, but not forgetful, amidst his zeal for religion, of the
usual maxims of human policy, insistcd that the danger which
threatened them, being manifefl and unavoidable, they should
have recourse to the most effectual expedient for securing their
own safety, by courting the protecion of the Kings of France
and England, or by joining in alliance with the Protestant can-
tons of Swifterland, from whom they might cxpet filch
p werful and prcfcnt afliftance as their situation demanded.
The Elc(aor, on the other hland, with the molt upilight inten-
tions of any lrin(ce in that age, and with talCelts which
might have qualified him abl)ndantly for the ad(lniiliflrattion
of govclnmicnt in any tranqllil period, was pollclllcd wiith filch
i;'iprllitious vcneration for all the parts of the Lutheran fyflcm,

audt
60

and such bigotted attachment to all its tenets, as made him averse
to an union with those who differed from him in any article of
faith, and rendered him very incapable of undertaking its defence
in times of difficulty and danger. He seemed to think, that the
concerns of religion were to be regulated entirely by principles
and maxims different from those which apply to the common
affairs of life; and being swayed too much by the opinions of
Luther, who was not only a firanger to the rules of political con-
ducl, but despised them; he often discovered an uncomplying
spirit, which proved of the greatest detriment to the cause that he
wished to filpport. Influenced, on this occasion, by the severe
and rigid notions of that Reformer, he refused to enter into any
confederacy with Francis, becauf e we as a persecutor of the
truth; or to solicit the friendship of Henry, because he was no
less impious and profane than the Pope himself; or even to join
in alliance with the Swiss, because they differed from him in
several essential articles of faith. This diffenfiorr, about a point
of such consequence, produced its natural effeds. Each secretly
censured and reproached the other. The Iandgrave confidered
the Elcdor as fettered by narrow prejudices, unworthy of a
Prince called to at a chief part in a scenic of fichl importance.
The Elctor fufpcded him of loose principles and ambitious
views, which correfjlondcd ill with the sacred cause in which
they were engaged. But though the Elcdor's fcruplcs prevented
their timely application for foreign aidl; and tlhe jealousy or
(liiconternt of the other Prinices (defaticd a 1)r(,ofil for renewing
lheir originial confederacy, the term lduring whlich it was to con-
tinue iln iorec l)eing on the point of cxp)iring; yet the fiinfc of
'L.ir colmmon danger ilnduced them to agree with regard to.

othler

BOOK VII.

1,46.
9

6i

BOOK VII. other points, particularly that they would never acknowledge

146. the aflembly at Trent as a lawful council, nor susser the Arch-

bishop of Cologne to be oppressed on account of the fleps which
he had taken towards the reformation of his dioccfe d

Their nego- THE Landgrave, meanwhile, desirous of penetrating to the
ciations with
thcipnltror. bottom of the Emperor's intentions, wrote to Granvelle, whom

he knew to be thoroughly acquainted with all his master's
schemes, informing him of the fevcral particulars which raised
the suspicions of the Protestants, and begging an explicit decla-
ration of what they had to fear or to hope. Granvelle, in return,
assured them that the intelligence which they had received of the
Emperor's military preparations was exaggerated, and all their
suspicions destitute of foundation; that, though in order to
guard his frontiers against any insult of the French or English,
he had commanded a finall body of men to be raised in the
Low-Countries, he was as follicitous as ever to maintain tran-
·quillity in Germany e

BUT the Emperor's ations did not correspond witlh these

profcifions. For, inficad of appointing mcn of known modera-
tion and a pacific temper to appear in dcfcnce of the Catholic
doElrincs at the conference which had bccn agreed on, he made
choicc of fierce bigots, attached to their own tyfltc with a
blind ol)tinacy, whlich rendercd all hope of rcconcilement dcf-
perate. Malvcnda, a Spanilh divine, who took the condud of
the debate on tlhe part of the Catholics, managed it witli all the
ilubtlc dcxtcrity of a tlholafllic mctaphyficial, more fludious to

Seek. . iii. 566, 570, 613. Slcid. 355.

e Slcid. 356.

)perplex

perplex his adversaries than to convince them, and more intent BOOK VII.
on palliating error than on discovering truth. The Protestants 546.
filled with indignation, as well at his fophifiry as at some
regulations which the Emperor endeavoured to impose on the
disputants, broke off the conference abruptly, being fully con-
vinced of the Emperor's having had nothing in view but to
amuse them, and to gain time for ripening his own schemes f.

f Sleid. 358. Seek. 1. iii. 620.

TIlE

63

# THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK VIII.

THE

T
OF THE

I

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES

B O O
BooKVIII.

I 546.

Death of
Luther.
Feb. 18.

V.

K VIII.
W H I LE appearances of danger daily cncrcafcd, and the

tcmpeft which had been io long a gathering was ready

to break forth in all its violence against the Protestant church,
Luther was saved, by a fcafonable death, from feeling or behold-
ing its defirudive rage. Having gone, though in a declining
state of health, and during a rigorous fcafon, to his native city of
Eyflcebn, in order to compoic, b)y his authority, a difl'nliio
among tlhe counts of Mansfield, lie wvas fcizcd' witl a violent
int.lrlmation in his Itomach, which in a few days put an end
to his life, in the fixty-third year of his age. As lie was

raifled
H

I

S
E

R

Y

0

G
R

N

raised up by providence to be the author of one of the greatest
and most interesting revolutions recorded in history, there is
not any person perhaps whose character has been drawn with
such opposite colours. In his own age, one party, struck with
horror and inflamed with rage, when they saw with what a da-
ring hand he overturned every thing which they held to be fa-,
cred, or valued as beneficial, imputed to him not only all the de-
feets and vices of a man, but the qualities of a dsamon. The other,
warmed with admiration and gratitude, which they thought he
merited as the restorer of light and liberty to the Christian church,
ascribed to him perfecions above the condition of humanity,
and viewed all his ations with a veneration bordering on that
which should be paid only to those who are guided by the imme-
diate inspiration of heaven. It' is his own condut, not the
undiflinguilhing censure or the exaggerated praise of his con-
temporaries, which ought to regulate the opinions of the present
age concerning him. Zeal for what he regarded as truth,
undaunted intrepidity to maintain it, abilities both natural and
acquired to defend it, and unwearied industry to propagate it,
are virtues which ihine so conspicuously in every part of his
behaviour, that even his enemies must allow him to have poflelfed
them in an eminent degree. To there may be added with equal
juflice, such purity and even austerity of manners, as became
one who aflnumed the character of a Reformer; such fanatity of
life as suitcd the doctrine which he delivered; and such perfect
difintereltednefs as affords no flight presumption of his fineerity.
Superior to all fclfilh considerations, a stranger to the elegancies of
life, and despising its plealures, he left the honours and emolu-
ments of the church to his difciplcs, remaining satisfied hiinrflf
in his original slate of professor in the university, and paflor of

Vol. III. K the

BookVIII.

z546.
His charcare.

BboKVIII. the town of Wittemberg, with the moderate appointments

1 46. annexed to these offices. His extraordinary qualities were

allayed with no inconsiderable mixture of human frailty and
human pafions. These, however, were of such a nature, that
they cannot be imputed to malevolence or corruption of heart,
but seem to have taken their rife from the fame source with
many of his virtues. His mind forcible and vehement in all its
operations, rouzed by great objects, or agitated by violent pas-
sions, broke out, on many occasions, with an impetuosity which
aflonifhes nen of feebler spirits, or fuch-as are placed in a more
tranquil situation. By carrying some praise-worthy dispositions
to excess, he bordered sometimes on what was culpable, and was
often betrayed into actions which exposcd him to censure. His
confidence that his own opinions wv-ce well founded, approached
to arrogance; his courage in asserting them, to raflincfs; his
firmness in adhering to them, to obstinacy; and his zeal in con-
futing his adversaries, to rage and scurrility. Accustomed him-
self to confider every thing as subordinate to truth, he expeced
the fame deference for it from other men ; and without making
any allowances for their timidity or prejudiccs, he poured forth
against thole, who disappointcd him in this particular, a torrent
of invective mingled with contempt. Regardless of any diftinc-
tion of rank or character when his dotrincs were attacked, he
chatifcd all his advcrf'ries, indlifcrimlinatcly, with the iame
rough hand ; neither the royal dignity of Henry VIII. nor
the eminent Icarning and abilities of Erafnius, fercened them
from the fame grots abufc with which he treated Tctzcl or
Eccius.

BuTr these indecencics of which Luther was guilty, must not
be imputed wholly to the violence of lis templer. Thely ought

t(

to be charged in part on the manners of the age. Among a
rude people, unacquainted with those makims,which, by putting
Continual restraint on the passions of individuals, have polished
society and rendered it agreeable, disputes of every kind were
managed with heat, and flrong emotions were uttered in their
natural language, without reserve or delicacy. At the fame time,
the works of learned men were all comnpofed in Latin, and they
were not only authorized, by the example of eminent writers in
that language, to use their antagonists with the most illiberal
scurrility; but, in a dead tongue, indecencies of every kind
appear less hocking than in a living language, whose idioms
and phrases teem gross, because they are familiar.

IN passing judgment upon the characers of men, we ougllt

to try them by the principles and ma.ims of their own age,
not by those of another. For, although virtue and vice are at
all times the fame, manners and customs vary continually.
Sone parts of Luther's behaviour, which to us appear most cul-
pable, gave no disgust to his contemporaries. It was even
by some of those qualities, which we are now apt to blame,
that he was fitted for accomplishing the great work which
lie undertook. To rouze mankind, when funk in ignorance
or fupertitioh, and to encounter the rage of bigotry, armed
with power, required the utmost vehemence of zeal, and
a temper daring to excess. A gentle call would neither have
rcailcdc, nor have excitcl those to whoml it was addrcfl'el.
A fjiirit, Inore amiable, but lcts vigorous than Luther's,
w.vould have fllrunk back from the dangers, which he braved and

K^ z iurmountcd.

BOOKVIIj -

1146.

BooKVIII.

1546.

surmounted. Towards the close of Luther's life, though with.
out any perceptible declension of his zeal or abilities, the infir-
mities of his temper increased upon him, so that he grew daily
more peevish, more irascible, and more impatient of contradic-
tion. Having lived to be witness of his own amazing fuc-
cess; to fee a great part of Europe embrace his doctrines; and
to shake the foundation of the Papal throne, before which the
mightiest Monarchs had trembled, he discovered, on some occa-
sions, symptoms of vanity and felf-applaufe. He must have
been indeed more than man, if, upon contemplating all that he
actually accomplilhed, he had never felt any sentiment of this
kind rising in his breast*.

SO M E time before his death he felt his firength declining, his

constitution being worn out by a prodigious multiplicity ofbufi ness,
added to the labour of discharging his ministerial funtion with
unremitting diligence, to the fatigue of confiant study, besides the
composition of works as voluminous as if he had enjoyed unin-

* A remarkable infiance ofthis, as well as of a certain singularity and elevation

es fcntinent, is found in his Last Will. Though the effees which he had to
bequeath were very inconsiderable, he thought it necessary to make a Teft.;ment,
but scorncd to frame it with the usual legal formalities. Notus fum, fays he, in
ccelo, in terra, & in inferno, & auAoritatem ad hoc sufficientem habeo, ut mihi
fuli credatur, cum Deus mihi, homini licet damnabili, et miferabili peccatori,
ex paterna mifericordia Evangelium filii fui crediderit, dederitque ut in co verax
& fidelis fuerim, ita ut multi in mundo illud per me acceperint, & me pro Doclore
veritatis agnoverint, fprcto banno Papa, Caefaris, Regum, Principum & facer-
dotum, immo omnium daemonum odio. Quidni, igitur, ad dispositionem hanc,
iJ re exigua, fufficiat, si adfit manus mae teitimonium, & dici poslit, haec fcripfit
I). Martinus Luther, Notarius iei, & tcflis Evangelii ejus. Seek. 1. iii.
p. 651.
68

6

terruptect

frrrupted leisure and retirement. His natural intrepidity
did not forsake him at the approach of death; his last
conversation with his friends was concerning the happiness
reserved for good men in a future world, of which he spoke with
the fervour and delight natural to one who expeced and wished
to enter soon upon the enjoyment of it'. The account of his
death filled the Roman Catholic party with excessive as well as
indecent joy, and damped the spirits of all his followers; neither
party sufficiently confidering that his doarines were now so
firmly rooted, as to be in a condition to flourish independent of
the hand which firRf had planted them. His funeral was
celebrated by order of the Eletor of Saxony with extraordinary.
pomp. He left several children by his wife Catharine Bore,,
who survived him; towards the end of the lafi century,.
there were in Saxony some of his descendents in decent and._
honourable stations b.

BooKVIII .

546.
l 546.

TH E Emperor, meanwhile, pursued the plan of dissimulation- The Emperor

with which he had set out, employing every art to amuse the e'dmv"ofur to
Protestants,. and to quiet their fears and jealousies. For this deceive the

Proteltants.

purpose he contrived to have an interview with the Landgrave
of Heffi, the most active of all the confederates, and the most
suspicious of his designs. To him he made such warm profef-.
sions of his concern for the happiness of Germany, and of his
aversion to all violent measures;. he denied, in such express
terms, his having entered into any league, or having begun any
military preparations which ihould give cause of alarm to the
Protestants, as seem to have dispelled all the Landlgravecs

a Sleid. 362. Seek. lib. iii. 632, &a.

h Seck. I.,d. 65r. .

dóUlitts,

BoOKVItI.

1546.

Proceedings
tof the coun-
Fil against the
Pro;etants.
April 8.

doubts and apprehensions, and sent him away fully satisfied of
his pacific intentions. This artifice was of great advantage,
and effectually answered the purpose for which it was intended.
The Landgrave upon his leaving Spires, where he had been
admitted to this interview, went to Worms, where the Sral-.
kaldic confederates were assembled, and gave them such a flat-
tering representation of the Emperor's favourable disposition
towards them, that they, too apt, as well from the temper of the
German nation as from the genius of all great afrociations or
bodies of men, to be flow, and dilatory, and undecifive in their
deliberations, thought there was no necessity of taking any
immediate measures against danger, which appeared to be diflant
or imaginary c.

S u c H events, however, soon occurred, as staggered the credit

which the Proteflants had given to the Emperor's declarations.
The council of Trent, though flill composed of a imall number
of Italian and Spanish prelates, without a single deputy from
many of the kingdoms which it assumed the right of binding
by its decrees, being ashamed of its long inacivity, proceeded
now to fettle articles of the greatest importance. Having begun
with examining the first and chief point in controversy between
the church of Rome and the Reformers, concerning the rule
which should be held supreme or decisive in matters of faith,
the council, by its infallible authority, determined, " That the
books to which tlie designation of Apocryphal hath been given,
arc of equal authority with those which were received by the
Jews and primitive Christians into the sacred canon; that the
traditions handed down from the alpofolic age, and prcfervcd

' Slcid. lHifl. 367, 373.

a* in

in the church, are entitled to as much regard as the dodtrines
and precepts which the inspired authors have committed to
writing; that the Latin translation of the Scriptures, made or
revised by St. Jerome, and known by the name of the Vulgate
translation, flould be read in churches, and appealed to in
the schools as authentic and canonical. Against all who
disclaimed the truth of thcfe tenets, anathemas were denounced
in the name and by the authority of the Holy Ghost. The
decision of these points, which undermined the main pillar of
the Lutheran system, was a plain warning to the Protestants
what judgment they might exped when the council should have-
leisure to take into consideration the particular and subordinate
articles of their Creedd.

5 6.

THIS discovery of the council's readiness to condemn their

opinions, was soon followed by a striking inflance of the Pope's
resolution to punish such as embraced them. The appeal of the
canons of Cologne against their Archbiflop having been carried
to Rome, Paul eagerly seized on tlat opportunity, both of dif-
playing the extent of his own authority, and of teaching the
German ccclcfiaftics the danger of revolting from the eflablifled
church. As no pcribn appeared in behalf of' the Archbishop,
he was held to be convicted of the crime of heresy, and a Papal Apil t6.
bull was iflued, depriving him of his cclefiaftical dignity, infli&-
ing on him the lfcntence of excommunication, and absolving his
tflbjcds from the oath of allegiance which they had taken to him
as their civil fuiperior. The countenance which he had given to the
Lutheran licrefy was the only crime iniputed to him, as well as
the only reason aflignled to juflitfy the extraordinary rigour of

F. Paul. 14r. Pallav. 206.

tlhis

BooLVin.

Charles about
to commence
hostilities
againfi the
Protestants.

Ncgociales
x'ith the
Pope.

this decree. The Protefiants could scarce believe that Paul,
how zealous soever to defend the eftabliihed system, or to humble
those who invaded it, would have ventured to proceed to such
extremities against a Prince and Eleaor of the Empire, without
having previously secured such powerful protection as would ren-
der his censure something more than an impotent and despicable
rally of resentment. They were of course deeply alarmed at
this sentence againfi the Archbiihop, confidcring it as a sure
indication of the malevolent intentions not only of the Pope,
but of the Emperor, against the whole party'.

UPON.this fresh revival of their fears, with such violence as

is natural to men rouzed from a false security, and conscious of
their having been deceived, Charles saw that it was now necef-
fary to throw aside the veil, and to declare openly what part he
determined to ac. By a long series of artifice and fallacy, he
had gained so much time, that his measures, though not altogether
ripe for execution, were greatly matured. The Pope, by his
proceedings against the Eledor of Cologne, as well as by the
decree of the council, had precipitated matters into such a fitua-
tion, as rendered a breach between the Emperor and the Pro-
teflants almost unavoidable. Charles had no choice left him
but either to take part with them in overturning what the
the Sec of Rome had determined, or to support the authority of
the church openly by force of arms. Nor did the I')pe think it
enough to have brought the Emperor under a nccclity of al ing;
he prilcld him to begin his operations, by promising to fccond
him with such vigour as could scarce fail of fccuring his success.
Transportcd by his zeal againit hercfy, he forgot all the prudent

Slcid. 354. F. Paul, 155. Pallavic. 224.

and

and cautious maxims of the Papal See, with regard to the daA-
ger of extending the Imperial authority beyond due bounds,
and in order to crush the Lutherans, he was willing to contribute
tqwards raising up a maIter that might prove formidable to him-
fclf as well as to the reft of Italy.

BUT, besides the certain expectation of affiflance from the

Pope, Charles was now secure from any danger of interruption
to his designs by the Turkiflh arms. His negociations at the
Porte, which he had carried on with great afliduity since the
peace of Crefpy, were on the point of being terminated in 5uch
a manner as he desired. Solyman, partly in compliance with
the French King, who, in order to avoid the disagreeable obli-
gation of joining the Emperor against his ancient ally, laboured
with great zeal to bring about an accommodation between
them; and partly from its being necffary to turn his arms
towards the east, where the Persians threatened to invade his
dominions, consented without difficulty to a truce for five years,
The chicf article of it was, that each fiould retain poffffion of
what he now held in Hungary; and Ferdinand, as a sacrifice to
the pride of the Sultan, submitted to pay an annual tribute of
fifty thousand crowns .

BLT it was upon the aid and concurrence of the Germans

themfclvcs tlat the lnmperor relied with the grcateft confidence.
The Germanic body, lie knew, was of fulch val. flrcngth, as to
be invincillc if it wcrc united, and that it was only by employ-
illg its own force that he could hope to fubtduc it. HIappily for
hin, tlme union of the fevcral members in this great y'flem
was tb fccblc, the whole frame was so loofcly compaced, and
its (dilcrcnt parts tcdlcd li violently towards icp)arationl fiomi

' Ifluiahafli. i l-ilt lhung. 18o. Mcm. de Ribicr. tom. i. 582.
VOLI Ilf. I, cach

BooRVIIL.

1 546

Concludes a
truce wilt
Silymanr

Gainm M.u-
rice, ann
other Princes
of Gerrniany.

73

' 74
BOOKVIII.

j 5 6.

T old 1 n (llct
at Ratijion.

each other, that it was almost impossible for it, on any impor-
tant emergence, to join in a general or vigorous effort. In the
present juncture, the sources of discord were as many, and as
various as had been known-on any occasion. The Roman Ca-
tholics, animated with a zeal in defence of their religion pro-
portional to the ficrccnefs with which it had been attacked,
were eager to fccond any attempt to humble thoic innovators,
who had overturned it in many provinces, and endangered it in
more. John and Albert of Brandenburg, as well as several other
Princes, incensed at the haughtincfs and rigour with which the
Duke of Brunswick had been treated by the confederates of
Smalkaldc, were impatient to rescue him, and to be revenged
on them. Charles obfcrved, with satisfaction, the working of
there paflions in their minds, and counting on them as sure
auxiliaries whenever he ihould think it proper to adt, he found
it, meanwhile, more necessary to moderate than to inflame
their rage.

SUc(i was the situation of affairs, such the discernment

with which the Emperor foresaw and provided for every
event, when the diet of the Empire met at Ratisbon. Many of
the Roman Catholic members appeared there in pcrfon, but
most of the confederates of Smalkalde, under pretence of their
being unable to bear the cxpcnce occationed by the late unnc-
ccflry frequency of flich anflemblies, tlnt only deputies. Their
jcaloufy of the Emperor, and apprelhenlions that violence, per-
I;it;, mlight be cmp)loycd in order to force their approbation of
wlhat lie should propose in the diet, was the true caucl of their
ableincc. The fpcech with which the Emperor opened the diet
was extremely artful. After profifling, in common form, his

regard

regard for the prosperity of the Germanic body, and declaring BOKYVIII.
that in order to bestow his whole attention upon the re-establish- 1546.
ment of itg order and tranquillity, he had at present abandoned
all other cares, rejeced the most pressing follicitations of his
other fubjeds to reside among them, and postponed affairs of
the greatest importance; he took notice, with some indignation,
that his difintcrefted example had not been imitated; many mem-
bers of chief conidlcration having neglected to attend an assem-
bly to which he had repaired with such manifest inconvenience
to himself. He then mentioned their unhappy difefnfions about
religion; lamented tlie ill success of his past endeavours to com-
pose them; complained of the abrupt dissolution of the late
conference, and craved their advice wilh regard to the best and
most effectual method of refioring union to the churches of Ger-
many, togethcr with that happy agreement in articles of faith,
which their anceflors had found to be of no less advantage to
their civil interest, than becoming their Christian profession.

BY this gracious and popular method of consulting the mem-
)crs of the diet, rather than of obtruding upon them any
opinion of his own, befidcs the appearance of great moderation,
and the merit of paying much rcflpct to their judgment, the
Emperor dcxtroutly avoided difcovcring his own fentimcnts,
and rclcrvcd to himself, as his only part, that of carrying into
execution vwhat they fliould recommend. Nor was he less fecurc
of filch a dcciliolm as lie wiflced for by rcfcrring it wholly to
thlcmiilvce,. Tlce Romana Catholic menbercs, prompted by their
own /.eal, or )prellpred by his intrigues, joined immediatcly in
rcpreflenting tliat tlme authority of tlhe council now me(t at 'Trelt
ought to be final in all matters of' controvcrly; thlIt all

L C(l'riflians

75 '

BooKVIn. Christians should submit to its decrees as the infallible rule of

1546. their faith; and therefore they besought him to exert the power,

with which he was invested by the Almighty, in protecting that
assembly, and in compelling the Protestants to acquiesce in its
determinations. The Protestants, on the other hand, presented
a memorial, in which, after repeating their objections to the
council of Trent, they proposed, as the only effedual method of
deciding the points in difputc, that either a free general council
should be assembled in Germany, or a national council of the
Empire should be called, or a feled number of divines should be
appointed out of each party to examine and define articles of'
faith; they mentioned the recesses of several diets favourable to
this proposition, and which gave them hope of terminating all
their differences in this amicable manner; they now conjured the
Emnperor not to depart from his former plan, and by offering
violence to their consciences to bring calamities upon Germany,
the very thought of which must fill every lover of his country
with horror. The Emperor receiving this paper, with a con-
temptuous finile, paid no farther regard to it. H-aving
already taken his final rcfouhtion, and perceiving that nothing
but force could compel them to acquiesce in it, he dispatched tlic
June 9. Cardinal of Trent to Rome, in order to conclude an alliance with

the Pope, the terms of which were already agreed on; lie com-
manded a body of troops, levied on purpose in tlhe Low-Collt-
tries, to advance towards Gernanyl; lie gave comnllllions to
fcveral officers for raising men in different parts of the lEmpirct;
he warned John and Albert of Branden;l lrg, tliat now w\is IIt'
proper time of exerting thiemnfelves, in order to rclfue their allf,
'Icnry of Brunlwick, from captivity'.

1 Skitd. 374. Seck. iii. 658.

Al.
766

ALL these things could not be tranfaded without the obfer-

vation and knowledge of the Proteflants. The secret was now
in many hands; under whatever veil of artifice or secrecy
the Emperor fill affeded to conceal his designs, his officers kept
no such mysterious reserve, and his allies and fubjeds spoke out
his intentions plainly. Alarmed with reports of this kind, from
everyquarter, as well as with the preparations of war which they
saw begun, the deputies of the confederates demanded audience
of the Emperor, and in the name of their mailers, required to
know whether these military preparations were carried on by his
command, and for what end, and against what enemy. To a
question put in such a tone, and at a time when fads were become
too notorious to be denied, it was necessary to give an explicit
answer. He owned the orders which he had issued, and profef-
sing his purpose not to mole.t any on account of religion who
hould ad as dutiful fubjeds, declared that he had nothing in
view but to maintain the rights and prerogatives of the Im-
perial dignity, and by punishing some fadious members
to preserve the ancient constitution of the Empire from bcinrg
impaired or dissolved by their irregular and licentious condud.
Though the Emperor did not name the persons whom he charged
with such high crimes, and dcfinedl to be the objeds of his ven-
geance, it was ol)vious that he had the Eledor of Saxony, and
Landgrave of Hefle in view. Their deputies conlidering what
he liad said, as a plain declaration of his hoflile intentions, iminmc-
diatcly retired from llatifl)onl.

TirE Cardinal of Trent foulnd it no difficllt matter to treat
',ith the Pope, who having at length broulght the Enlteror to

Slkid. 37G.

a/tlI,)t

7.7
B~oRVIII.

i 46.

The Pro-
tesants
alarm ed.

'The T'inpe.

joI Z I,,iy

w it (li
Po (..

1Boo0KV!H.

,i46.
J-1y z5.

adopt that plan which he had long recommended, assented with
eagerness to every article that he proposed. The league was
signed a few days after the Cardinal's arrival at Rome. The
pernicious herefies which abounded in Germany, the obstinacy
of the Proteltants in rejecting the holy council affrebled at
Trent, and the necessity of maintaining found doctrine together
with good order in the church, are mentioned as the motives
of this union between the contracting parties. In order to check
the growth of these evils, and to punish such as had impioully
contributed to spread them, the Emperor, having long and with-
out success made trial of gentler remedies, engaged initantly
to take the field with a sufficient army, that he might compel
by force all who difbwned the council, or had apostatized from
the religion of their forefathers to return into the bosom of the
church, and to submit with due obedience to the Holy See. He
likewise bound himself not to conclude a peace with them during
fix months without the Pope's content, nor without afigning
him his share in any conquest which should be made upon them;
and that even after that period he should not agree to any accom-
inodation which might be detrimental to the church or to the
intcrcft of religion. On his part, the Pope stipulated to depofite
a large film in the bank of Venice towards defraying the expence
of the war ; to maintain at his own charge, dcluring the ipace of
fix months, twelve thoufland foot, and live hundredl horfi; to
grant the Inmpcror for one year lalfofthe ccclcfiainlicil revenues
tlhroi(tloght Spain; to authorize cliin ly a bull to alienate ;Is
inucll of( the la(nds I)Clolnginig to religious liouies in that country,
as would amount to the lim of five llundred tlhiofand crowns;
alnd to cimploy not only Ipiritual ccnfurcs but military force againit

alily
78

79

any Prince who should attempt to interrupt or defeat the execu- BCoKVIItL
tion of this treaty h. 1546.

NOTWITIISTANsDING the explicit terms in which the extir- Fndeatours

fl :. to conceal'
pation of heresy was declared to be the objcE of the war which his intentions

from !le

was to follow upon this treaty, Charles still endeavoured to per- Protefilts.
fuade the Germans that he had no dcfign to abridge their reli-
gious liberty, but that he aimed only at vindicating, his own
authority, and repressing the insolence of those who had
encroached upon it. With this view, he wrote circular letters,
in the fame strain with his answer to the deputies at Ratisbon, to
moif of the free cities, and to several of the Princes who had
embraced the Protestant dotrines. In these he complained loudly,
but in general terms, of the contempt into which the Imperial
dignity had fallen, and of the presumptuous as well as difor-
dcrly behaviour of some members of the Empire. Hc declared
that he now took arms, not in a religious but in a civil quarrel;
not to oppress those who continued to behave as quiet and duti-
fItl fiujecds, but to humble the arrogance offuch as had thrown
off all fenfeof that subordination in which they were placed under
him as head of the Germanic body. Gross as this deception
was, and manifcft as it might have appeared to all who confi-
dered the Emperor's conduct with attention, it became ncccfflry
for him to make trial of its effec; and such was the confidence
and dexterity with which lie employed it, that lie derived the
molt solid advantages from this artifice. If he had avowed
at once an intention of overturning the Protcflant chullrchl, and(l of
reducing all Gecrmany under its ancient slate of fu1jcdionl to
thlcPapal See, none of the cities or Princes who lhad a ll
c racced

' Slkid. 38i. P.llav, 255. Dumont Corps Diplorn, I.

IV
T

the

BOOKYEII.

j 146.

'The Pore dif-
concerts his
p1ln.

the new opinions could have remained neutral after such a decla-
ration, far less could they have ventured to assist th' Emperor in
such an enterprize. Whereas by concealing, and even disclaim-
ing any intention of that kind, he not only saved himself from
the danger of being overwhelmed by a general confederacy of
all the Protetfant states, but he furnithed the timid with an
cxcufe for continuing inaCtive, and the designing or interefled
with a pretext for joining him without exposing themselves to
the infamy of abandoning their own principles, or having an
active hand in fupprcffing them. At the fame time the
Emperor well knew that if he were enabled, by their affiltance,
to break the power of the EleCtor of Saxony and Landgrave, he
mright aferwnards prescribe what terms he pleased to the feeble
remains of a party without union or leaders, who would then
regret, too late, tlicir miflaken confidence in him, and their
inconsiderate defection of tlhcir afiociatcs.

THE Pope, by a sudden and unforefcen display of his zeal,

had well nigh difconccrtcd tli.; plan which the Emperor
had formed with so much care and art. Proud of having been
the authlor of tiich a fiormidabile confedelracy againti the Lutheran
heresy, and happy in thinking that the glory of extirpating it
was rclrvcd for his Pontificatc, he pulblilhcd the articles of his
leaguc with tlhe E1mpcror as a proof of their pious intention, as well
as o(f t he extrao(rdinary efiort' which he limnfelf was about to make
for tmiaintainiliIg the ftith in its purity. Not latisfied with thli.;,
lie soon after iillced a b)t l containing Inofl liberal promilfes of in-
(ltil;c1n( -e tallll w ho lhomdl ( nagc ill this holy cnterlpri)e, together
wv i xtIllwilm xhliorittionsi; to licl ;as could not bear a part in it tlicm-
fllves, to iucrrcaie the fervour of tleir prayers, and the fcvcrity
1' their mIortilicatiolls, that they might draw down the blefling

.it ~of
80

of heaven upon those who undertook it'. Nor was it zeal alone
which pushed the Pope to make declarations so inconsistent with
the account which the Emperor himself gave of his motives
for taking arms. He was much scandalized at Charles's dif-
simulation in fi;ch a cause; at his teeming to be ashamed of
owning his zeal for the church; and at his endeavours to make
that pass for a political contest, which he ought to have gloried
in as a war which had no other object than the defence of reli-
gion. With as much solicitude, therefore, as the Emperor
laboured to disguise the purpose of the confederacy, did the Pope
endeavour to publish their real plan, in order that they might come
at once to a rupture with the Protestants, that all hope of recon-
cilement might be cut off, and that Charles might be under
fewer temptations, and have it less in his power than at present,
to betray the interells of the church by any accommodation
beneficial to himfclf '.

THE Emperor, though not a little offended at the Pope's

indiscretion or malice in making this discovery, continued boldly
to pursue his own plan, and to aflert his intentions to be no
other than what he had originally avowed. Several of the Pro-
teflant flates, whom he had previously gained, thought thein-
selves juflified in fomc meafulrc, by his declarations, for aban-
doning their aflociates, and even for giving aflifancc to him.

BUT there artificcs did not impose oin the greater and founder

part of the Protcflant confcderates. They clearly perceived it to
beagainft the reformed religion that the Emperor had taken arms,

l'Du Mont Corps l)iplom.
k FS.'aul, 188. ua. i. i. 61.
VOL. III. MN and

BOOKYITI.

1-J

ryt('.

The prpran-
tions of' the
IProteflant, Ior
their own do.
fcncc.

.BooKVIII. and that not only the fupprefion of it, but the extintion of the

r546. German liberties, would be the certain consequence of his ob-

taining such an entire superiority as would enable him to execute
his schemes in their full extent. They determined, therefore,
to prepare for their own defence, and neither to renounce those
religious truths to the knowledge of which they had attained
by means so wonderful, nor to abandon those civil rights which
had been transmitted to them by their anceflors. In order to
give the necessary directions for this purpose, their deputies
met at Ulm, soon after their abrupt departure from Ratisbon.
Their deliberations were now conduced with such vigour and
unanimity, as the imminent danger which threatened them
required. The contingent of troops, which each of the con-
federates was to furnish having been fixed by the original treaty
of union, orders were given for bringing them immediately
into the field. Being sensible, at last, that through the narrow
prejudices of some of their members, and the imprudent fecu-
rity of others, they had neglected too 19ng to firengthen them-
fclves by foreign alliances, they now applied with great earnest-
ness to the Venetians and Swiss.

They follicit To the former, they rcprcfented the Emperor's intention of
Vc^tian.the overturning the present fyflem of Germany, and of railing

himself to absolute power in that country by means of foreign.
force furnishcd by the lope ; they warned them how fatal this
event would prove to the liberties of Italy, and that by fifl'er-
ing Charles to acquire unlimited auithority in the one country,
they would soon feel his dominion to be no less despotic in the
other; they bcfought thci, thercforc, not to grant a paffag,
thro' their territories to tllofc troops, which ought to be treated as
commono cncmics, bccaulite ly fi;bduing Germany they prcpared

9 clhains
82

chains for the reft of Europe. These reflections had not
escaped the sagacity of those wife republicans. They had com-
municated their sentiments to the Pope, and had endeavoured
to divert him from an alliance which tended to render irrefiflible
the power of a potentate, whose ambition he already knew to be
boundless. But they had found Paul so eager in the prosecution
of his own plan, that he disregarded all their remonflrances'.
They would do nothing more towards preventing the dangers
which they foresaw; and in return to the application fiom the
confederates of Smalkalde, informed them, that they could not
obflruE the march of the Pope's troops through an open coun-
try, but by levying an army strong enough to face them in the
field, and that this would draw upon themselves the whole
weight of his as well as of the Emperor's indignation. For the
fame reason they declined lending a fum of money, which the
Eledor of Saxony and Landgrave proposed to borrow of them,
towards carrying on the war".

TIHEIR demands upon the Swiss were not confined to the

obflruacing of the entrance of foreigners into Germany; they
required of them, as the nearfct neighbours, and clofcei allies of
the Empire, to interpose with their wonted vigour for the prc-
fcrvation of its liberties, and not to fland as inactive flpecators,
while their brethren were opprefled and cnflavcd. But witl
wliat zeal foevcr the reformed cantons might have been disposcd
to adt when the cault of the Reformation was in danger, the
1Helvctic body was io divided with regard to religion, as ren-
dered it iuntfe for the Protcflants to take any flcp without con-

L Adriani i Iflorin di fioi tc pi, liv. v. p. 33..
" Slcid. 38g. PIarutat Iflor. Vcnct. toni. iv. 180. Lambcrtus l-lortcnlfilt; id
hello (cGrni;iiico .aluld Scairdium, vol. ii. p. 547.

M 2 fullting

BooKVIII.

1j4ó.
Of she Swirs,

BOoKVIII.

15 46.

ofrFranri: r.
; J, s /
'v j( A .

fulting their associates; and among them the emissaries of the
Pope and Emperor had such influence, that a resolution of main-
taining an exact neutrality between the contending parties, was.
the utmost which could be procured".

EE I (; dlifappoilted in both these applications, they not long

after had rccourfe to the Kings of France and England; the
approach of danger either overcoming the Eledor of Saxony's
ftruplcs, or olliging him to yield to the importunities of his
conf;2derates. The situation of the two Monarchs flattered them
with hopes of success. Hostilities between them had continued
for some time after the peace of Crefpy. But becoming weary
at last of a war, attended with no glory or advantage to either,
tlcey had lately terminated all their differences by a peace con-
cluded at Campe near Ardres. Francis having with great dif-
ficulty procured his allies, the Scots, to be included in the treaty,
in return for that concession he engaged to pay a great fum,,
which Henry dcmanded as due to him on several accounts, and
lie left Bologne in the hands of the English as a pledge for his
fiitllhfl j)prforlmance of that article. But though the re-
cflablifimcint of peace seemed to leave the two Monarchs at
liberty to turn their attention towards Germany, so unfortunate
were the Protetlants, that they derived no immediate advantage
from this circumfilncc. FIenry appeared unwilling to enter
into any alliance wili them, but on fiucl conditions as would
render hinl not (only thc lea(, blt the ftupreme director of their
league;c a prc-clinilnetce which, as the bonds of union or intcrefl
Kt'twccn themi were but ftcl)lc, and as lie differed from thein so
wilc!y in his rcliSious fcltiltmcnts, they had no inclination to

' Sleid. 392.

admlit.
84

admit'. Francis, more powerfully inclined by political confide-
rations to furnish them with assistance, found his kingdom so
much cxhaufted by a long war, and was so much afraid of irri-
tating the Pope by entering into close union with excommuni-
cated Heretics, that he durst not undertake the protecion of the
Smalkaldic league. By this ill-timed caution, or superstitious
deference to scruples, to which at other times he was not much
addiced, he loft the most promising opportunity of mortifying
and diftrefing his rival, which presented itself during his whole
reign.

BUT, notwithstanding their ill success in their negociations

with foreign courts, the confederates found no difficulty at home,
in bringing a sufficient force into the field. Germany abounded
at that time in inhabitants; the feudal institutions subsisted in
full force, and enabled the nobles to call out their numerous
vassals, and to put them in motion on the shortest warn-
ing; the martial spirit of the Germans, not broken or ener-
vated by the introdution of commerce and arts, had acquir-
ed additional vigour duriin the continual wars in which they
had been employed, for half a century, cither in the pay of
the Emperors, or Kings of France. Upon every oplortunity of
entering into service, they were accuflomcd to run eagerly to
armns; and to every standard that was crectld, voluntiers flockedl
froin all (juarters P. Zeal fcconded, on tllis oCC:!ioIn, theiir native
ardour. Men, on wvhom the (lodtrincs of thlle lIforilation hlad
tnmade tlhat dcep ilnprellion which accompanies truth when IlfMl
dlitcovered, prepared to maintain it witlh pr'o;ortioval vigour;
.ui:l among a warlike people, it appeared infhlllous to remnail

85
BoOKVIIIT

1546.

Pro'eft.ints
take the field
with a great
ar;ny.
Rymncr, xv. 93. lIcLbCrt, 258.

._ 1

p Se( k, 1. Iiii r 6 Y

i I L;L I i VC

BooKVIII.

1546.

The itequa-
lity of' the
I'.npcroI's
forces to
theirs.

inactive, when the defence of religion was the motive for taking
arms. Accident combined with all these circumstances in faci-
litating the levy of soldiers among the confederates. A confi-
derable number of Germans in the pay of France, being dif-
miffed by the King on the profpe& of peace with England,
jined in a body the flandard of the Proteflants . By such a con-
currence of causes, they were enabled to assemble in a few weeks
an army composed of fevcnty thousand foot and fifteen thousand
horse; provided with a train of an hundred and twenty cannon,
eight hundred ammunition waggons, eight thousand beasts of
burden, and fix thousand pioneers '. Nor was this army, one of
the molt numerous, and undoubtedly tlhe best appointed of any
which had been levied in Europe during that century, raised by
the united effort of the whole Protestant body. The Elector of
Saxony, the Landgrave of Hesse, the Duke of Wurtcmberg, the
Princes of Anhalt, and the Imperial cities of Aufbourg, Ulm,
and Strafburg, were the only powers which contributed towards
this great armament: The Eletors of Cologne, of Brandenbourg,
and the Count Palatine, overawed by the Emperor's threats,
or deceived by his professions, remained neuter. John marquis
of Brandenburg Barcith, and Albert of I3raldcnlbrg Anfpach,
though both early converts to Luthcranifin, entcred openly into
the Emperor's service, under pretext of having obtained his pro-
nilfe for the security of the Iroteftant rcligion; and Maurice of
Saxony soon followed their example.

Tif E inmecnlc number of their troops, as well as the amazing
rapidity wlhrewitli they had affeimblcd them, ailoniflcd the im-

q Thuan. 1. i. 6,. r Thuan. 1. i. 6oi. , Ludovici ab Avila & Z'/ting
Commciitaiiorun dc bpl]. Germ. lib. Duo Antw. 1550. I2mno. p. 13, a.

peror,

peror, and filled him with the most disquieting apprehensions.
He was, indeed, in no condition to resist such a mighty force.
Shut up in Ratisbon, a town of no great strength, whose inhabi-
tants, being mostly Lutherans, would have been more ready to
betray than to assist him, with only three thousand Spanifl foot,
whom he had called from the frontiers of Hungary, and about
five thousand Germans who had joined him from different parts
of the Empire, he must have been overwhelmed by the approach
of such a numerous army, which he could not fight, nor even
hope to retreat from it in safety. The Pope's troops, though in
full march to his relief, had scarce reached the frontiers of Ger-
many; the forces which he expected from the Low-Countries had
not yet begun to move, and were even far from being complete'.
His situation, however, called for more immediate succour, nor
did it seem practicable for him to wait for such distant auxiliaries,
with whom his junction was so precarious.

BUT it happened fortunately for Charles, that the confederates

did not avail themselves of the advantage which lay so full in
their view. In civil wars, the first fleps arc commonly taken
with much timidity and hclitation. Men are follicitous, at that
time, to put on the fmniblance of moderation and equity; they
flrive to gain partizans ly ficming to adhere ftridly to known
forms; nor can they be I)rou;ght, at once, to violate those clla-
bliflc'(l infiitutions, wlhich in times of traiiqtillity they have bccn
.icctuflomcd to reverence; hence their proceedings arc often
feeble or dilatory vwhen they ought to )be nolt vigorous and
dccifivc. liillucnced lby thlefC confidcritions, wh\icl, Ihappily for
the peace of fociCty, )operate powerfully on the hlutm.tn Iilnd, the

BOOKVIII.

1546.

They impru-
denily reg-
ciate inticad -
ot a.tilTg.
Scid. 389. Avila, 8, a,

87

Boor.VIII. confederates could not think of throwing off that allegiance

1546. which they regularly owed to the head of the Empire, or of

turning their arms against him without one solemn appeal more
to his candour, and to the impartial judgment of their fellow
July 5. fuibje&cs. For this purpose, they addressed a letter to the Empe-

ror, and a manifcflo to all the inhabitants of Germany. The
tenor of both was the fame. They represented their own conduc
with regard to civil affairs as dutiful and submissive; they men-
tioncd the inviolable union in which they had lived with the
Emperor, as well as the many and recent marks of his good-will
and gratitude wherewithal they had been honoured; they aflerted
religion to be the sole cause of the violence which the Emperor
now meditated against them; and in proof of this adduced many
arguments to convince those who were so weak as to be deceived
by the artifices with which he endeavoured to cover his real
intentions; they declared their own resolution to rifque every
thing in maintenance of their religious rights, and foretold the
dissolution of the German constitution, if the Emperor flould
finally prevail against them '.

The Emperor Bu'r Charles, though in such a perilous situation as might
puts them i
under the ban have inspired him with moderate sentiments, appeared as inflexi-
of the
Eimpire. ble and haughty as if his affairs had been in the most prosperous

flatc. His only reply to the address and manifesto of the Pro-
July 20. tetlants, was to publifl the ban of the Empire against the Eledtor

of Saxony and Landgrave of Hesse, their leaders, and against all
who should dare to aflift them. By this sentence, the ultimate
and molt rigorous one which the German jurisprudence has pro-

t Sleid. 384.

vidcd
W

88

vided for the puniflment of traitors, or enemies to theircoun-
try, they were declared rebels and outlaws, and deprived of
every privilege which they enjoyed as members of the Germanic
body; their goods were confiscated; their fubjeds absolved from
their oath of allegiance; and it became not only lawful but meri-
torious to invade their territories. The nobles, and free cities, who
framed or perfeced the confiitution of the German government,
had not been so negligent of their own safety and privileges as to
trust the Emperor with this formidable jurifdiCion. The autho-
rity of a diet of the Empire ought to have been interposed
before any of its members could be put under the ban. But
Charles overlooked that formality, well knowing that, if his
arms were crowned with success, there would remain none who
would have either power or courage to call in queflion what he
had done u. The Emperor, however, did not found his fen-
tence against the Eledor and Landgrave on their revolt from
the established church, or their conduc with regard to religion,
he affeded to assign for it reasons purely civil, and these too
expressed in such general and ambiguous terms, without fpeci-
fying the nature or circumstances of their guilt, as rendered it
more like an ad of despotic power than of a legal and limited
jurifdidion. Nor was it altogether from choice, or to conceal
his intentions that Charles had recourse to the ambiguity of
general expreflions, he durst not mention too particularly the
causes of his sentence; as every adion which he could have charged
upon the Elcdor and Landgrave as a crime, might have bccn
employed with equal juflice to condemn fiich of the Protefiants
whom lie still prctcndcd to confider as faithful fubjeds, and

Slcid. 386. Du Moet Corps Diplonl. iv. p. I1. 314. Pfcftil Hilt. Abrcgc
du Droit Iubl. 168. 736. 158.

Vol. IIL. N whom

89
BooKVIII.

i546.

BooKVIII. whom it would have been extremely imprudent to alarm or

77 _7 disgust

They declare THE confederates, now perceiving all hopes of accommoda-
.hailes.l tion to be at an end, had only to chufe whether they would sub-

mit without reserve to the Emperor's will, or proceed to open
hoflilities. Nor did they want public spirit and resolution to
make the proper choice. A few days after the ban of the
Empire was published, they according to the custom of that
age, lent a herald to the Imperial camp with a solemn declara-
tion of war against Charles, to whom they no longer gave any
other tide than that of pretended Emperor, and renounced all
allegiance, homage or duty which he might claim, or they
had hitherto yielded to him. But previous to this formality, part

' hir fir l of their troops had begun to at. The command of a confider-
Oprilos, able body of men raised by the city of Augflurg having been

given to Scbaftian Schertel, a soldier of fortune, who by the booty
that he got when the Imperialists plundered Rome, together with
the merit of long service, had acquired wealth and authority which
placed him on a level with the chief of the German nobles;
that gallant veteran resolved before he joined the main body
of the confederates, to attempt fomcthing suitable to his for-
mer fame and to the expecation of his countrymen. As the
Popc's forces were hastening towards Tyrol, in order to pene-
trate into Germany by the narrow passes through the mountains
which run acrofl that country, lie advanced thither with the
utnmoft rapidity, and lfrzed Ehrcniberg and Cuffltcin, two firong
castles which commanded the principal defiles,. Without
fiopping a Inoment, lC continued his mnarch towards Infpruck,
by getting poflTflion of which he woitld have obliged the
Italians to flop flhort, and with a finall body of xncn could Have

refilted

resifted all the efforts of the greatest armies. Cafilealto, the
governor of Trent, knowing what a fatal blow this would
be to the Emperor, all whose designs must have proved
abortive if his Italian auxiliaries had been intercepted, raif-
ed a few troops with the utmoit dispatch and threw himself
into the town. Schertel, however, did not abandon the enter-
prize, and was preparing to attack the place, when the intelli-
gence of the approach of the Italians, and an order from the
Eledor and Landgrave obliged him to desist. By his retreat
the passes were left open, and the Italians entered Germany
without any opposition, but from the garrisons that Schertel had
placed in Ehrenberg and Cuffltein, which having no hopes of
being relieved, were not long of surrendering x *.

No R was the recalling of Schertcl the only error of which the

confederates were guilty. As the supreme command of their
army was committed, in terms of the league of Smalkalde, to
the Eleator of Saxony and Landgrave of HefTe with equal autho-
rity, all the inconveniencies arising from a divided and co-ordi-
nate jurisdiction, which is always of fatal consequence in the

BooKVIII.

1546.

and ill con-
dutt.

x Seckend. lib. ii. 70. Adriani Iftoria di fuoi tempi, lib. 335.
*Seckeedorf the indufirious author of the Commentarius Apologeticus de

Lutheranifmio, whom I have so long and safely followed as my guide in Gcrman
affairs, was descended from Schcrtel. With the care and follicitude of a Ger-
man, who was himself of noble birth, Seckendorf has publishcd a longl digrcf-
sion concerning his anceflor, calculated chiefly to shew how Schertel was eniiinbled,
and his posterity allied to many of the molt ancient families il the Empire.
Among otler curious particulars, he gives us an account of his wealhh, the
chlif source of which was the plunder he got at Rome. -lis landed ellete was
fold by his granclfons for fix hundred thoiifind florins. By duis we nuy
form fbme idea of the liches amafldh by the (;onu/otlieri or commander s of merce-
nary bands in that age. At tile taking of Rome Schcrtel was only a captain.
Secccnd. lib. ii. 73.

9I
N 2

()pc raati o )8

BOOKVIII.

1546.

'lhc P're's
2 r .p~SjOi:i the

t

operations of war, were immediately felt. The Ele&or,
though intrepid in his own person to excess, and most ardently
zealous in the cause, was flow in deliberating, uncertain as well as
irresolute in his determinations, and constantly preferred mea-
fures which were cautious and safe to such as were bold or deci-
five. The Landgrave, of a more acive and enterprizing nature,
formed all his resolutions with promptitude, wished to execute
them with spirit, and uniformly preferred such schemes as
tended to bring the contest to a speedy issue. Thus their maxims,
with regard t6 the conduc of the war, differed as widely as those
by which they were influenced in preparing for it. Such per-
petual contrariety in their sentiments gave rife, imperceptibly,
to jealousy and the spirit of contention. These multiplied the
dissensions flowing from the incompatibility of their natural
temper, and rendered them more violent. The other members
of the league confidering themselves as independant, and subjea
to the Elector and Landgrave, only in consequence of the arti-
cles of a voluntary confederacy, did not long retain a proper
veneration for commanders, who proceededcwith so little unani-
mity; and the numerous army of the Protestants, like a vast
machine whose parts are ill compaced, and which is deflitute
of any power sufficient to move and regulate the whole, aced
with no confifiency, vigour or effeCt.

Tn i. EEmperor, who was afraid that, by remaining at Ratisbon,

he would render it impossible for the Pope's forces to join him,
having boldly advanced to Landshut on the Ifer, the confede-
rates loft some days in deliberating whether it was proper to
1ilow him into the territories of the Duke of Bavaria, a neutral
Prince. When at ladt they surmounted that scruple, and
began to move towards his camp, they suddenly abandoncdlthe

dcfign,.

design, and hastened to attack Ratisbon, in which town Charles BooKVIII.
could leave only a small garrison. Meanwhile the Papal troops, 1546.
amounting fully to that number which Paul had flipulated to
furnish, reached Landshut, and were soon followed by fix thou-
sand Spaniards of the veteran bands flationed in Naples. The
confederates, after Schertel's spirited but fruitless expedition,
seem to have permitted these forces to advance unmolested to the
place of rendezvous, without any attempt to attack either them
or the Emperor separately, or to prevent, their jundion .X The
Imperial army amounted now to thirty-fix thousand men, and
was still more formidable by the discipline and valour of the
troops, than by their number. Avila, commendador of Alcan-
tara, who had been present in all the wars carried on by Charles,
and had served in the armies which gained the memorable vic-
tory at Pavia, which. conquered Tunis, and invaded France,
gives this the preference to any martial force he had ever seen
afTembled Y. Otavio Farnese, the Pope's grandson, assisted by
the ablest officers formed in the long wars between Charles and
Francis, commanded the Italian auxiliaries. His brother, the
Cardinal Farnese, accompanied him, as Papal legate; and in
order to give the war the appearance of a religious enterprize,
he proposed to march at the head of the army, with a cross car-
ried before him, and to publish Indulgences wherever he came
to all who Ihould give them any afliflance, as had anciently
been the pratice in the Cruzades against the Infidels. But this
the Emperol flridly prohibited, as inconfiflcntwith all the decla-
rations which he had made to the Germans of his own party;
and the legate perceiving, to his. a(loniflmcnt, that thd exercise
of the Protefiant religion, the extirpation of which he con-

x" Adiiani ]floria di fuoi tempi, lib. v. 340.

Y A· ila, i8.

fidered

93

«

.BooKiVII. fidered as the sole obje&c of the war, was publicldy permitted in

7 46s. the Imperial canp; soon returned in disgust to Italy z.

TTH E arrival of these troops'enabled the Emnperor to fend such

.a reinforcement to the garrison of Ratisbon, that the confeder-
ates relinquishing all hopes of reducing that town, marched to-
wards Ingoldftadt on the Danube, near to which Charles was
now encamped. 'Meanwhile they exclaimed loudly against the
Emperor's notorious violation of the laws and conftttution of
the Empire, in having called in foreigners to lay waste Ger-
many, and to oppress its liberties. As in that age, the domi-
nion of the Roman See was so odious to the Protestants, that
the name of the Pope alone was sufficient to infpire'them with
horror at any enterprize which he countenanced, and to raise in
their minds the blacket suspicions, it came to be universally
believed among them, that Paul, not satisfied with attacking
them openly by force of arms, had dispersed his emissaries all over
Germany to set on fire their towns and magazines, and to poison
the wells and fountains of water. Nor did this rumour spread
only among the vulgar, being extravagant as well as frightful
enough to make a deep impression on their credulity; even the
leaders of the party, blinded by their prejudices, published a
declaration, in which they accused the Pope of having employed
these Antichriftian and diabolical arts against thema. These
fcntilnents of the confederates were confirmed, in some mea-
furc, by the behaviour ofthe Papal troops, who, thinking nothing
too rigorous towards Heretics anathematized by the church,
were guilty of great exceffcs in the Lutheran territories, and

F F. Paul. 191. · Slcid. 399.

aggravated
'-94

aggravated the calamities of war, by mingling with it all the BoKVIII¢
cruelty of bigotted- zeal. . 46.

TH E first operations in the field, however, did not correfpbnd 'The conrede- -
with the violence of those passions which animated individuals. r;.tesadvance.

towardb ,he:

The Emperor had prudently taken the resolution of avoiding an Imperial
action with an enemy so.far superior in number b, especially as he a.
foresaw that nothing could keep a body composed of so many and
fuchdiffimilarmembers, from falling to pieces, but the pressing to
attack it with an inconsiderate precipitancy. . The confederates,
though it was no less evident that to them every moment's delay
was pernicious, were still prevented by the weakness or division
of their. leaders from exerting that vigour,wi-th lwhich their
situation as well as the ardour of their soldiers ought to have
inspired them. . On their arrival at rngoldfladt, they found the. Aug. 29.,;
Emperor in a camp not remarkable for strength, and.furroundecl
only by a flight entrenchment.-. Before the camp lay a plain of .
such extent,- as afforded sufficient space for drawing. out their
whole army, and bringing it to at at once. Every confidera-
tion should have determined them to have seized this opportu-.
nity of attacking the Emperor; and their:vaft ftrperiority in num -
bers, the eagerness of their, troops, together with the fability of
the German infantry in pitched battles, afforded them the most
probable expectation of vidory; The, Landgrave urged this with ,
great warmth; declaring that if the sole command. were vefled '
in him, he would terminate the war on that occasion, and decide
by one general afion the fate of the two parties. But the
ElcEtor, reflecting on the valour and discipline of the enemics
force.s, animated by the presence of the.Emperor, and conduc'ed

b AviL, 78..a. .

95"

BooKVII!. by the best officers of the age, would not venture upon an acion,

i- 6. ,vwhich he thought to be so doubtful, as the attacking such a body

of vctcrans on ground which they thcmfelves had chosen, and
while covered by fortifications which, tho' imperfect, would afford
them no final advantage in the combat. Notwithflanding his
hesitation and remonstrances, it was agreed, to advance towards
the enemies camp in battle array, in order to make trial whether
by that insult, and by a furious canonade which they began,
they could draw the Imperialists out of their works. But the

Thle Emperor Emperor had too much sagacity to fall into this snare. He
declines a
attie, adhered to his own fyfrem with inflexible constancy; and draw-

ing up his soldiers behind their trenches, that they might be ready
to receive the confederates if they should venture upon an afiault,
-calmly waited their approach, and carefully refirained his own
men from any excursions or skirmishes that might bring on an
engagement. Meanwhile, he rode along the lines, and addref-
sing the troops of the different nations in their own language,
encouraged them by the chearfulnefs of his voice and counte-
nance; he cxpofed himself in places of greatefl danger, and
amidst the warmet fire of the enemies artillery, the most
numerous that had hitherto been brought into the field by
.any army. Rouzed by his example, not a man quitted his ranks;
it was thought infamous to discover any symptom of fear when
the Emperor appeared so intrepid; and the meanest soldier
plainly perceived, that their declining the combat at present was
not the cffec of timidity in their general, but the result of a
well weighed caution. The confederates, after firing several
hours on the Inperialifis, with more noise and terror than exe-
cution, feeing no profpctc of alluring them to fight on equfl
terms, retired to their own camp. The Emperor employed the

night
96

night with such diligence in strengthening his works, that the
,confederates, returning to the canonade next day, found that,
though they had now been willing to venture upon such a bold
experiment, the opportunity of mtaking an attack with advan-
tage was loft '

A FTER such 8 diflovery of their owri feebletefs or irresolution,

and of the prudence as well as firmness of the Emperor's con-
'dut, the confederates turned their whole attention towards pre.
venting the arrival of a powerful reinforcement of ten thousand
foot, aid four thousand horse, which the count de Buren was
bringing to the Emperor from the Low-Countries. But though
that general had to traverse such an extent of country; though
his route lay through the territories of several states warmly dif-
posed to favour the confederates; though they were apprized of
his approach, and by their vast superiority in numbers might
easily have detached a force sufficient to overpower him, he
advanced with such rapidity, and by such well concerted move-
ments, while they opposed him with such remissness, and so little
military ikill, that he condu&ed this body to the Imperial camp
without any loss d

BooKVIII.

1 s46.

The Plemli
troops jin
the Emperor.

Sept. 1o.

AFTER.the arrival of the Flemings, in whom he placed great

confidence, the Emperor altered, in some degree, his plan of ope-
rations, and began to a& more upon the offensive, though he
fill avoided a battle with the uttnoft industry. He made himself
dhafter of Neuburg, Dillingen, and Donawert, on the Danubc;

Sleid. 395, 397. Avila 27. a. Lamb. Hortens. ap. Leard. ii.

d Sleid. 403.
VOL. II. 0 of

97

BooKVIII.

1546.

State of both
armies.

THE REIGN O EOS T H E,

of Nordlingen, and several other towns, fituated-on the moR
considerable fireams that fall into that mighty river. By this he
got the command of a great extent of country, though not with-
out being obliged to engage in several sharp encounters,of which
the success was various, nor without the most imminent danger
oftener than once of being drawn into a battle. In this manner
the whole autumn was spent; neither party gained any remark-
able superiority over the other, and nothing was yet done towards
bringing the war to a period. The Emperor had often foretold,
with confidence, that discord and the want of money would compel
the confederates to disperse that unwieldy body, which.they had
neither abilities to guide, nor funds to support "; but though
he waited with impatience for the accomplishment of his pre-
dicion, there was no profped of that event being at hand.
Meanwhile, he himself began to susser from the want of forage
and provisions; even the Catholic provinces being so much
incensed at the introdution of foreigners into the'Empire, that
they supplied them with relucance, while the camp of the con-
federates abounded with a profusion of all necefraries, which the
zeal of their friends in the adjacent countries furnished with the
utmost liberality and good-will. Great numbers of the Italians
and Spaniards, unaccustomed to the climate or food of Ger-
many, were become unfit for service through sickness'. Con-
fiderable arrears were now due to the troops, who had scarce
received any money from the beginning of the campaign; the
Emperor, experiencing on this as well as on former occasions,
that his jurifdidion was more extensive than his revenues, and

Belli Smalkaldici Commentarius Greco fermone fcriptus a Joach. Came-
iario ap. I'rchcrum, Vol. iii. p. 479.

Camicrar. ap. Frcher. 483,

6 that

that the former enabled him to assemble a greater number of fol-
diers, than the latter were sufficient to pay. Upon all these ac-
counts, he found it difficult to keep his army in the field; some
of his ablest generals, and even the Duke of Alva himself, per-
fevering and obstinate as he usually was in the prosecution of
every measure, advising him to disperse his troops into winter-
quarters. But as the arguments urged against any plan
which he had adopted, rarely made much impression upon the
Emperor, he paid no regard to their opinion, and determined
to continue his efforts in order to weary out the confederates;
being well assured that if he could once oblige them to 'eparate,
there was little probability of their uniting again in a body g.
Still, however, it remained a doubtful point, whether his steadiness
was most likely to fail, or their zeal to be exhausted. It was still
uncertain which party, by first dividing its forces, would give the
superiority to the other; when an unexpected event decided the
contest, and occasioned a fatal reverse in the affairs of the con-
federates.

MAURICE of Saxony having, by the arts which have already

been described, insinuated himself into the Emperor's confi-
dence, no sooner saw hoflilities ready to break out between him
and the confederates of Smalkalde, than vast profpeds of
ambition began to open upon him. That portion of Saxony,
which descended to him from his anceflors, was far fiom satis-
fying his aspiring mind; and he perceived with plcafure the
approach of' civil war, as amidnit the revolutions or convulsions
which it occasions, opportunities which at other timces ar-
fought in vain, of aclquiring new power as well as additionlal
dignity, prcfent thcmnfclves to an cntcrl] izing fijirit. As he was

g Thutan. 83.

() e tlloroughllly

BooKVIII.

1546.

The schemes
of Maurice of
Saxony.

99

BooKVIII.

His league
with the Em-
peror.

thoroughly acquainted with the state of the two contending par-.
ties, and the qualities of their leaders, he did not hesitate long
in determining on which fide the greatest advantages were to be
expeted. Having revolved all there things inhieown mind, and
having taken his final resolution of joining the Emperor, he
prudently determined to declare early in his favour; that, by the
merit of this, he might acquire a title to a proportional'recompence.
With this view, he had repaired to Ratisbon in the month of
May, under pretext of attending the diet; and after many con-
ferences with Charles or his ministers, he concluded, though-
with the most mysterious secrecy, a treaty in which he engaged
to concur in assisting the Emperor as a faithful subjed; and
Charles, in return, stipulated to bestow on him all the spoils..
of the Elecor of Saxony, his dignities as well as territoriesh.
History scarce records any treaty. which can be confidered as a
mere manifest violation of the most powerful principles which
ought to influence human aCtions, Maurice, a profefled
Protestant, at a time when the belief of religion, as well as zeal.
for it interests, took strong pofeffion of every mind, binds himself
to contribute his assistance towards carrying on a war, which had
manifestly no other object than the-extirpation of the Proteflant
doctrines. He engages to take arms against his father-in-law,
and to itrip his nearest relation of his honours and dominions.
He joins a dubious friend againfi a known benefactor, to whom
his obligations were both great and recent. Nor was the Prince
who ventured upon all this, one of those audacious politicians,
who, provided they can accomplifli their ends, and secure their
intcrcft, disregard avowedly the most sacred obligations, and,
glory in contemning whatever is honourable or decent. Mau-

hi Jar.ec. Annal. Brabant. vol. i. 638. Struvii Corp. o148. Thuan. 84.

5 rice's
100

- rice' condu&, if the whole must be ascribed to policy, was more BooKVIlI.
artful and maRferly; he executed his plan in all its parts, and 1546.
yet endeavoured to preserve, in every ftep which he took, the
appearance of what was fair, and'virtuous, and laudable. It is
probable, from his subsequent behaviour, that with regard to the
Protestant religion at least, his intentions were upright, that he-
fondly trusted to the Emperor's promises for its security, but that,
according to the fate of all who refine too much in policy, and' '
who tread in dark and crooked paths, in attempting to deceive.
others, he himself was, in Come degree, deceived.

HIs first care, however wvas to keep these engagements with, His artifices
the Emperor closely concealed: and so perfec a master was he in order to.

conceal his

in the art ofdiffimulation, that the confederates, notwithstanding, itnteions.
his declining all connetions with them, and his remarkable
assiduity in paying court to the Emperor, seemed to have enter-
tained no suspicion of his designs. Even the EleCtor. of
Saxony; when he marched at the beginning of the campaign to.
join his associates, committed his dominions to his.proteEtion,
which Maurice, with an insidious appearance offriendfhip, readily
undertook'.. But scarce had. the EleCtor taken the field, when.
Maurice began to consult privately with the Kingof the Romans
how to invade those very territories, with the defence of which
he was entrusted. Soon after, the Emperor sent him a copy of
the Imperial ban denounoed against the Elecor and'Landgrave.
As he, was next heir to the former, and particularly interefled
in preventing firangers from getting his dominions into their
poffeflion, Charles required him, not only for his own fake, but
upon the allegiance and duty which he owed. to the head of the

.Struvii Corp. 1046.

Empire,

i0O

BooKVIII. Empire, instantly to seize and detain in his hands the forfeited

t 46. cftates of the Elecor; warning him, at the fame time, that if

he neglected to obey these commands, he should be held as ac-
ceffary to the crimes of his kinsman, and be liable to the fame
punishment .

Tiii s artifice, which it is probable Maurice himself fuggefled,

was employed by him in order that his condut towards the
Eledor might seem a matter of necessity but not of choice, an
at of obedience to his superior, rather than a voluntary inva-
sion of the rights of his kinsman and ally. But in order to
give some more specious appearance to this thin veil with which
he endeavoured to cover his ambition, he had called together,
soon after his return from Ratisbon, the states of his country;
and representing to them that a civil war between the Em-
peror and confederates of Smalkalde was now become unavoid-
,able, desired their advice with regard to the part which he should
ax& in that event. They being prepared, no doubt, and tutored
before-hand, as well as desirous of gratifying their Prince,
whom they both eflcemed and loved, gave such counsel as they
knew would be most agreeable; advising him to offer his medi-
ation towards reconciling the contending parties; but if that
wcrc rejected, and he could obtain proper security for the Pro-
tcllant religion, they delivered it as their opinion that he
ol;hlt, in all other points, to yield obedience to the Emperor.
ui !:n receiving the Imperial rescript, together with the ban
agiai!fl the Elecor and Landgrave, he fuimmoned the states
of his country a iccond time; he laid before them the
ordlcrs wich lie had received, and the lpnifirnent with
which hc was threatened in cafe of difobcdiencc; he acquaint-

k SICid. 391. Thuan. 84.

ed

ed them that the confederates had refused to admit of his BooKVIII.
mediation, and that the Emperor had given hiin the most 146
fatisfadory declarations with regard to religion; he mentioned
his own interest in fecuring.poffeffion of the electoral dominions,
together with the dlager of allowing strangers to obtain an efta-
blifhment in Saxony; and upon the whole, as the point under deli-
beration refpeded his fubjets no less than himself, he desired to
know their sentiments how he should fleer in that difficult and ar.-
duous conjuncture. Thet ates, no lefsobfequious and complaifanti
than formerly, relying on the Emperor's promises as a perfet
security for their religion, proposed that, before he had recourse
to more violent methods, they would write to the Eledor,
exhorting him, as the best means of appeasing the Emperor, and
of preventing his dominions from being seized by foreign or
hostile powers, to give his content that Maurice should take pof-
session of them quietly and without opposition. Maurice him-
self seconded their arguments in a letter to the Landgrave, his
father-in-law.. Such an extravagant proposition was rejeced
with the scorn and indignation which it deserved. The Land-
grave, in return to Maurice, taxed him with-his treachery and
ingratitude towards a kinsman to whom he was so deeply
indebted; he treated with contempt his affecation of executing
the Imperial ban, which he could not but know to be altogether
void, by the unconstitutional and arbitrary manner in which it
had been issued; he besought him, not to fuffcr hinifelf to be
so far blinded by ambition, as to forget the obligations of honour
and friendship, or to betray the Protestant religion, the cxtir-
pation of which out of Germany, even by the acknowlcdgment
of the Pope himnfelf, was the great objcd of the prcfent wvar'.

J Slid. 405, &c. Thuan. 85. Camerar. 484.

Io3

THE REIGN 0 -T'HE
BOOKVIII. BUT Maurice had proceeded too far to be diverted from pute

S46. suing his plan by reproaches or arguments. Nothing now

He invades remained but to execute with vigour, what he had hitherto car*
,the territories
of the Elaor ried on by artifice and dissimulation. Nor was his boldness in
·of Saxony.
-Novembcr. ation inferior to his subtlety in contrivance. H1aving assem-

bled about twelve thousand 'men, he suddenly invaded one part
of the eletoral provinces, while Ferdinand with an artny comr
posed of Bohemians and Hungarians over-ran the other. Mau.
rice, in two 'harp encounters, defeated the troops which the
Elector had left.touard his country; and improving there advan-
tages to the utmost, made himself master of the whole Elecorate,
except Wittemberg, Gotha and Eisenach, which being places
*of considerable strength, and defended by fufficiett garrisons
refused to open their gates. The news of there rapid conquests
soon reached the Imperial and confederate camps. It the for-
mer, their fatisfation with -alt event, which it was foreseen
would be produtive of the most important consequences, was
expressed by every possible demonfirarion of joy. The latter
-was filled with astonishment and terror. The name of Maurice
,was mentioned, with execration, as an apostate from religion,
a betrayer of the German liberty, and a contemner of the moRt
sacred and natural ties, Every thing that the rage or invention of
the party could suggest, in order to blacken and render him odious ;
inveaives, satires and lampoons, the furious declamations of
their preachers, together with the rude wit of their authors, were
all employed against him. While he, trusting tothe arts which he
had so long pradifed, as if hisa&ions could have admitted of any
fcrious justification, published a manifesto, containing the fame
frivolous reasons for his condut, which he had formerly alledged
:in the meeting of his flates, and in his letter to the Landgrave '.

A SIcid. 409, 410o

TIFE

' THE Eletor, upon the first intelligence of Maurice's motions,
proposed to return home' with his troops for the defence of
Saxony. But the deputies of the league, assembled at Ulm,
prevailed on him, at that time, to remain with the army, and
to prefer the success ofthe common cause before the security of
his own dominions. At length the sufferings and complaints of
his fubjets increased so much, that he discovered the utmost
impatience to set out, in order to rescue them from the
oppreflion of Maurice, and from the cruelty of the Hungarians,
who having been accustomed to that licentious and merciless
species of war which was thought lawful against the Turks,
committed, wherever they came, the wildest ads of rapine and
violence. This desire of the Elecor's was so natural and so
warmly urged, that the deputies at Ulm, though fully sensible
of the unhappy consequences of dividing their army, durst not
refute their content, how unwilling soever to grant it. In this
perplexity, they repaired to the camp of the confederates at
Giengen on the Brenz, in order to consult their constituents.
Nor were they less at a loss what to determine in this prefling
emergence. But, after having confidered seriously the open
desertion of some of their allies; the Scandalous lukewarmness of
others who had hitherto contributed nothing towards the war;
the intolerable load which had fallen, of consequence, upon such
members as were most zealous for the cause, or most faithful to
their engagements; the ill success of all their endeavours to ob-
tain foreign aid; the unusual length of the campaign; the rigour
of the season; together with the great number of soldiers, and even
officcrs, who had, on that account, quitted the service; they con-
cluded that nothing could save them, but cither the bringing
the contest to the immediate dccifion of a battle by attacking the

VOL. IIl. P Imperial

BOOKVIII.

1546.

The confede-
rates make
overtures of
accommoda-
tion to the
Emperor;

tog

BooKVIU.

,vO
354>6.

which he re-
jeas.

The troops of
the confede-
racy ieparate.

Impenial arwmy o o w c Qs all. their diffeence
with. Chares by- a teaity. Such wa* tlh dfpQkdecy and dejec-
tiQn whiech now oppQ pildthe partytlat of thei wo they chose.
what w mft at feelt and i VaWaFy, em~Iorwerig i miiiftr of
thEl.eIQT of lade4bg to propoun owvetumie of peace in
te ii nam to the Kmpero,

No foQnex did Chaxlcs. perceive this haughty confederacy,

which had sI lately threatened to drive him out of Germany,
condescending to make the firft.advances towards an agreement,
than concluding their spirit to be gone, or their union to be
broken, he immediately afiumed the tone of a. conqueror; and
as if they bad been already at his mercy, would not hear of
a negociation, but upon condition of the Eletor of Saxony's
consenting pxe.viQoly to give up himself and his dominions.
absolutely to his. disposal". As nothing more intolerable
Qr igrnominious could have been prescribed, even in the
worst situation of their affairs, it is no wonder this propo-
fition was rejeatedby a party, humbled and disconcerted rather
than subdued. But though they refused to submit tamely to the
Emperor's will, they wanted spirit to purfue.the only plan which
could have preserved their independence; and forgetting that
it was the union of their troops in one body which had hitherto.
rendered the confederacy formidable,. and had more than once
obliged the Imperialifs to think of quitting the field; they
inconsiderately abandoned that advantage, which, in spite of
the diversion in Saxony, would flill have kept the Emperor
in awe; and yielding to the Elecor's intreaties, consented
to his proposal of dividing the army. Nine thousand

* Hortcnfius ap. Scard. ii. 485.

men
ie6

mcen were left in the dutchyt of Wurtembert, in order tb prote&t BOKVtTII
that province, as well as the fefe cities of Uppit GeOmany;' a i6.
considerable body matched with the Ele&or towards Saxoiny
but the geater part returned with their refpetive leaders iiitd
their own countries, and were difperied there .

THE moment the troops separated, the confederacy ceased to A.lmoRnall t1e

members ns

be the obje& of terror; and the members of it, who while to submit to
they compoied part of a great body had felt but little anxiety the Li.-cur.
about their oxn security, began to tremble when they reflected
that they now flood exposed singly to the whole weight of the
Emperor's vengeance. Charles did not allow them leisure to
recover from their confernation, or to form any new rchemes of
union. As soon as the confederates began to retire, he put his
army in motion, and though it was now the depth of winter,
he resolved to keep the field, in order to make the most of that
favourable juncure for which he had waited so long. Some
small towns in which the enemy had left garrisons immediately
opened their gates. Norlingen, Rotenberg and Hall, Imperial
cities, submitted soon after. Though Charles could not prevent
the Eletor from levying, as he retreated, large contributions
upon the archbishop of Mentz, the abbot of Fulda, and other
ecclefiafticsP, this was more than balanced by the fubmiflion
of Ulm, one of the chief cities of Suabia, highly diftinguifled
by its zeal for the Smalkaldic league, As soon as an example
was set of deserting the common cause, the reft of the members
became instantly impatient to follow it, and seemed afraid left
others, by getting the flart of them in returning to their duty,

o Sleid. 411. P Thuan. 88.

should,
P 2

BOOKVII!.

x S46.

ihould, on that account, obtain more favourable terms. The
Eledor Palatine, a weak Prince, who, notwithstanding his pro-
feflions of neutrality, had, very preposterously, sent to the con-
federates four hundred horse, a body so inconsiderable as to
be scarce any addition to their strength, but great enough to
render him guilty in the eyes of the Emperor, made his acknow-
ledgements in the most abjedc manner. The inhabitants of
Augsburg, flaken by fb many insanees of apoflacy, expelled
the brave Schertel out of their city, and accepted such condi-
tions as the Emperor was pleated to grant them.

THE Duke of Wurtemberg, though among the first who had

offered to submit, was obliged to sue for pardon on his knees,
and even after this mortifying humiliation obtained it with
4547. difficulty . Memmingen, and other free cities in the circle of

Suabia, being now abandoned by all their former associates, found
it necessary to provide for their own safety by throwing them-
fclves on the Emperor's mercy. Strafburg and Franckfort on
the Maine, cities far remote from the feat of danger, discovered
no greater ifeddinefs than those which lay more exposed. Thus
a confederacy, lately so powerful as to shake the Imperial throne,
fell to pieces and was dissolved in the space of a few weeks;
lcarce any member of that formidable combination now remain-
ing in arms, but the Eledor and Landgrave, whom the Empe-
ror, having from the beginning marked out as the vicims of his

The ripnrous vengeance, was at no pains to reconcile. Nor did he grant
cAid itions
im,,p,sed by those who submitted to him a generous and unconditional par-
tih Ellycrjr. don. Conscious of his own superiority, he treated them both

with haughtiness and rigour. All the Princes in pcrfon, and

1 Mem. ec Ribier, tom. i. 589.
lo8

the cities, by their deputies, were compelled to implore mercy BooKVIIT.
in the humble poflure of supplicants. As the Emperor laboured , 7.
under great difficulties from the want of money, he imposed
heavy fines upon them, which he levied with most rapacious
exaanefs. The Duke of Wurtemberg paid three hundred
thousand crowns; the city of Augiburg an hundred and fifty
thousand; Ulm an hundred thousand; Frankfort eighty thou-
sand; Memmingen fifty thousand; and the reft in proportion
to their abilities, or their different degrees of guilt. They were
obliged, besides, to renounce the league of Smalkalde; to fur-
nifh affiflance, if required, towards executing the Imperial ban
against the Elecor and Landgrave; to give up their artillery
and warlike flores to the Emperor; to admit garrisons into their
principal cities and places of strength; and in this disarmed and
dependent situation, to exped the final award which the Empe-
ror ihould think proper to pronounce when the war came to an
issue'. But, amidst the great variety of articles dicated by
Charles on this occasion, he, in conformity tohis original plan,
took care that nothing relating to religion should be inserted;
and to such a degree were the confederates humbled or over-
awed, that, forgetting the zeal which had so long animated them,
they were follicitous only about their safety, without venturing to
insist on a point, the mention of which they saw him avoiding
with so much indufiry. The inhabitants of Memmingen alone
made some feeble efforts to procure a promise of protection in
the exercise of their religion, but were checked so severely by
the Emperor's miniflers, that they inflantly fell from tleir
demand.

' Sleid. 41 1, &c. Thuan. lib. iv. p. 125, Mem. de Ribicr, torn. i. 66.

og9

BOOKV IIl THE Elecaor of Cologne, whom, notwithfsanding the sentence

_of excommunication issued against him by the Pope, Charles

bad hitherto allowed to remain in pofleflion of the archiepifco-
pal fee, being now, required by the Emperor to submit to the
censures of the chur?'h, this virtuous and disinterested prelate,
unwilling to expose his subje&s, on his account, to the miseries
Jan. 25. of war, voluntarily resigned that high dignity. With a

moderation becoming his age and charater, he chore to enjoy
truth together with the exercise of his religion in the retirement
of a private life, rather than to disturb society by engaging in a
doubtful and violent struggle in order to retain his office '.

The Ele&or MEANWHILE theElector of Saxony reached the frontiers of
Seatunnd t his country. As Maurice could assemble no force equal to
Saxony, and
rwovers pof. the army which accompanied him, he, in a short time, not only
£¢f1iou of it.

recovered possession of his own territories, but over-ran Mifnia,
and itripped his rival of all that belonged to him except Dref-
den and Leipfic, which being towns of some strength could not
be suddenly reduced. Maurice, obliged to quit the field, and
to shut himself up in his capital, dispatched courier after cou-
rier to the Emperor, representing his dangerous situation, and
folliciting him with the most earnest importunity to march
immediately to his relief. But Charles, busy at that time in
prescribing terms to such members of the league as were daily
returning to their allegiance, thought it sufficient to detach
Albert Marquis of Brandenburg-Anfpach with three thousand
men to his assistance. Albert, though an enterprizing and ative
officer, allowed himself to be furprized by the Eledor, who
killed many of his troops, difpcrfed the remainder, and took

* Sleid. 418. Thuan. lib. iv. z18.

t

him
110

him prisoner '. Maurice continued as much exposed as for-
merly; and if his enemy had known how to improve the op-
portunity which presented itself, his ruin muff have been
immediate and unavoidable. But the Eletor, no less flow and
dilatory when invefled with the sole command, than he had
been formerly when joined in authority with a partner, never
gave any proof of military acivity but in this enterprize
against Albert. Instead of marching direcly towards Mau-
rice, whom the defeat of his ally had greatly alarmed, he
inconsiderately listened to overtures of accommodation, which
his artful antagonist proposed with no other intention than to
amuse him, and to flacken the vigour of his operations.

SUCH, indeed, was the posture of the Emperor's affairs

that he could not march inflantly to the relief of his ally.
Soon after the reparation of the confederate army, he, in order
to ease himself of the burden of maintaining a fiperfluous num-
ber of troops, had difmifled the count of Buren with his Flem-
ings , imagining that the Spaniards and Germams, together
with the papal forces, would be fully sufficient to crush any
degree of vigour that yet remained among the members of the
league. But Paul, growing wife too late, began now to difern
the imprudence of that measure, from which the more sagacious
Venetians had endeavoured in vain to difruade hlim. The rapid
progrcfs of the Imperial arms, and the cafe with which they
had broken a combination that appeared so firm and powerful,
opened at length his eyes, made him forget at once all the

Boot VIII.

1547-

The Emperor
prevented
from att ck-
ing the Elec-
tor and Land-
grave.

' Avila 99. 6. Mem. de Ribier. tom. i. 620.
* Avila 83, 6. Meom. cd Raier. torn. i. 591.

advantages

IIl

Boox VIII. advantages which he had expected from such a compleat triumph

1547. over hcrefy, and placed, in the strongest light, his own impolitic

conduC, in having contributed towards acquiring for Charles
such an immense increase of power, as would enable him, after
oppressing the liberties of Germany, to give law with absolute
authority to all the flates of Italy. The moment he perceived
his error, he endeavoured to correct it. Without giving the Empe-
ror any warning of his intention, he ordered Farnese, his grand-

The Pope son, to return inflantly to Italy with all the troops under his
ecaps his command, and at the fame time recalled the licence which he had

granted Charles, of appropriating, to his own use, a large ihare
of the church-lands in Spain. He was not destitute of pretences
to jutify this abrupt desertion of his ally. The term of fix
months, during which the fRipulations in their treaty were to
continue in force, was now expired; the league, in opposition
to which their alliance had been framed, seemed to be entirely
dissipated; Charles, in all his negociations with the Princes and
cities which had submitted to his will, had neither consulted the
Pope, nor had allotted him any part of the conquests which he had
made, nor had communicated to him any share in the vast contri-
butions that he had raised. He had not even made any provision
for the suppression of heresy, or the re-eflabliflmcnt of the
catholic religion, which were Paul's chief inducements to be-
flow the treasures of the church so liberally in carrying on the
war. These colours, how fpccious soever, did not conceal from
the Emperor that secret jealousy which was the true motive of
the Pope's conduct. But, as Paul's orders with regard to the
march of his troops were no less peremptory than unexpected,
it was impossible to prevent their retreat. Charles exclaimed
loudly against his treachery, in abandoning him sb unfeafon-

$~~~t ~ ably,

ably, while he was prosecuting a war undertaken in compliance BooK VIII.
with his earnef follicitations, and from which, if successful, so '47
much honour and advantage would redound to the church. To
complaints he added threats and expostulations. But Paul re-
mained inflexible; his troops continued their march towards
the ecclesiastical state; and in an elaborate memorial, intended
as an apology for his behaviour, he discovered new and more
manifest symptoms of alienation from the Emperor, together
with a deep rooted terror of his power . Charles weakened
by the withdrawing of so great a body from his army, which
was already much diminiihed by the number of gatrifons that
he had been obliged to throw into the towns which had capitu-
lated, found it necessary to recruit his forces by new levies, be-
fore he could venture to march in person towards Saxony.

THE fame and splendor of his success could not have failed A cornpiracy

to overturn

of attra&ing such multitudes of soldiers into his service from all the govern-
the extensive territories now subjed to his authority, as must Genoa.
have soon put him in a condition of taking the field against the
Elcor; but the sudden and violent eruption of a conspiracy at
Genoa, as well as the great revolutions which that event, ex-
tremely myflerious in its firfl appearances, seemed to portend,
obliged him to avoid entangling himself in new operations in
Germany, before he had fully discovered its fourceand tendency.
The form of government which had been efcablifhed in Genoa,
at the time when Andrew Doria restored liberty to his country,
though calculated to obliterate the memory of former dissensions,

F. Paul. 208. Pallavic. par . i. 5. Thuan. 126.
VOL. III. 0

and

"3

BooKV ll.

154'.

T-e objec of
Ihe confpir.-
torS.

and received at first with eager approbation, did not, after a trial
of near twenty years, give universal fatisfa&ion to these turbu-
lent and faCious republicans. As. the entire administration of
affairs was now lodged in a certain number of noble families,
many, envying them that pre-eminence, wished for the reftitutibn
of a popular government, to which they had been accustomed;
and though all reverenced the disinterested virtue of Doria,
and admired his talents, not a few were jealous of that afcen-
dant which he had acquired in alt the councils of the common-
wealth. His age, however, his moderation, and love of liberty,
afforded ample security to his countrymen that he would not
abuse his power, nor slain the close of his days by attempting
to overturn that fabrick, which it had it been the labour and
pride of his life to ered. But that authority and influence,
which in his hands were innocent, they easily saw would prove
defrudive, if usurped by any citizen of greater ambition, or
less virtue. A citizen of this dangerous charater had adualiy
formed such pretensions, and with some profped of success.
Giannetino Doria, whom his grand uncle Andrew deflined to
be the heir of his private fortune, aimed likewise at being his
successor in power. His temper haughty, insolent, and over-
bearing to such a degree as would scarce have been tolerated in
one born to reign, was altogether insupportable in the citizen
of a free state; and the more sagacious among the Genoese
-already feared and hated him as the enemy of those liberties for
which they were indebted to his uncle. While Andrew hinm-
self, blinded by that violent and undifcerning affetion which
persons in advanced age often contra&t for the younger members
of their family, set no bounds to the indulgence with which he

treated
114

treated him; seeming less follicitous to secure and perpetuate BooKVII1.
the freedom of the commonwealth, than to aggrandize that ' 7
undeferving kinsman.

BUT whatever suspicion of Doria's designs, or whatever dif-

fatisfadion with the system of administration in the common-
wealth, these circumstances might have occasioned, they would
have ended, it is probable, in nothing more than murmurings
and complaints, if John Lewis Fiefco count ofLavagna, obferv-
ing this growing disgust, had not been encouraged by it to
attempt one of the boldest acions recorded in history. That
young nobleman, the richerf and most illuitrious subjea in the
republick, possessed, in an eminent degree, all the qualities
which win upon the human heart, which command respeCt, or
secure attachment. He ias graceful and majestic in his per-
son; magnificent to profusion; of a genorofity that prevented
the wishes of his friends, and exceeded the expecations of
firangers; of an insinuating address, gentle manners and a
flowing affability. But under the appearance of these virtues,
which feeencd to form him for enjoying and adorning civil life,
he concealed all the dispositions which mark men out for taking
the lead in the inoft dangerous and dark conspiracies; an infati-
able and rcftlefs ambition, a courage unacquainted with fear,
and a mind that disdaincd subordination. Such a temper could
ill brook that station of inferiority, wherein lie was placed in
the republick; and as he envied the power which the elder
Doria had acquired, he was filled with indignation at the
tlhughts of its dcfecnding, like an hereditary poirenion, to
Giannetino. These various passions, preying with violence on

Q2 hIis

F~esco cntunt
of Laxvagn
the hca'! sos
tihe cow lj:-
racy'.

115

BOOKVIlI his turbulent and aspiring mind, determined him to attempt

-57.- overturning that domination to which he could not submit.

Intrigues and AT first he thought of an alliance with Francis, and even pro-
f the racon pored it to the French ambassador at Rome, as the most effecual
fpiraitos. means of accomplishing this; and after expelling Doria together

with the Imperial facion by his assistance, he resolved to put the
publick once more under the proteCion of that Monarch, hop-
ing in return for that service to be entrusted with the principal
ihare in the adminiitration of government. But having com-
municated his scheme to a few chosen confidents, from whom
he kept nothing secret, Verrina, the chief of them, a man of
desperate fortune, capable alike of advising and of executing the
most audacious deeds, remonstrated with earnestness against the
folly of exposing himself to the most imminent danger, while
he allowed another to reap all the fruits of his success; and
exhorted him warmly to aim himself at that pre-eminence in
his country, to which he was destined by his illustrious birth,
was called by the voice of his fellow citizens, and would be
raised by the zeal of his friends. This discourse opened such
vast profpeds to Fiefco, and so suitable to his genius, that
abandoning his own plan, he eagerly adopted that of Verrina.
The other persons present, though sensible of the hazardous
nature of the undertaking did not chute to condemn what their
patron had so warmly approved. It was instantly resolved, in
this dark cabal, to assassinate the two Dorias as well as the prin-
cipal perfous of their party, to overturn the eftablithed system of
government, and to place Fiefco on the ducal throne of Genoa.
Time, however, and preparations were requisite to ripen fucll

*t a dcfign
X16

adefign for execution; and whilehe was employed in carrying on BooKVIII.
these, Fiefco made it his chief care to guard against every thing that 147.
might betray his secret, or create suspicion. The disguise he as-
fumed was of all others the most impenetrable. He seemed to be
abandoned entirely to pleasure and dissipation. A perpetual gaiety,
diversified by the pursuit of all the amusements becoming his
age and rank, engrossed, in appearance, the whole of his time
and thoughts. But amidst this hurry of dissipation, he prose-
cuted his plan with the most cool attention, neither retarding
the design by a timid hesitation, nor precipitating the execu-
tion by an excess of impatience. He continued his correfpon-
dence with the French ambassador at Rome, though without
communicating to him his real intentions, that by his means he
might secure the protecion of the French arms, if hereafter he
should find it necessary to call them to his aid. He entered
into a close confederacy with Farnese Duke of Parma, who
being disgusted with the Emperor for refufng to grant him the
investiture of that dutchy, was eager to promote any measure
that tended to diminish his influence in Italy, or to ruin a
family so implicitely devoted to him as that of Doria. Being
sensible that in a maritime state, the acquisition of naval power
was what he ought chiefly to aim at, he purchascd four galleys
from the Pope, who probably was not unacquainted with the
design which he had formed, and did not disapprove of it. Under
colour of fitting out one of these gallies to fail on a cruise
against the Turks, he not only aflimblcd a good number of
his own vassals, but engaged in his service many bold adven-
turers, whom the truce betwcen the Emperor and Solyinan lad
deprived of their usual occupation and lubliftencc.

WHILE

1I7

BOOKcVI1J. WHILE Fiefco was taking these important steps, he pre-

.;47 ' served so admirably his usual appearance of being devoted

intirely to pleasure and amusement, and paid court with such
artful address to the two Dorias, as imposed not only on the
generous and unfufpicious mind of Andrew, but deceived
Giannetino, who conscious of his own criminal intentions, was
more apt to distrust the designs of others. So many infirunients
being now prepared, nothing remained but to firike the blow.
Various consultations were held by Fiefco with his confi-
dents, in order to fettle the manner of doing it with the
greatest certainty and effect. At first, they proposed to mur-
der the Dorias and their chief adherents, during the cele-
bration of high mass in the principal church; but as Andrew
was often absent from these religious folemnities, on account of
of his great age, that design was laid aside. It was then con-
certed that Fiefco ihould invite the uncle and nephew, with all
their friends whom he had marked out as victims, to his house;
where it would be easy to cut them off at once without danger
or resistance; but as Giannetino. was obliged to leave the town
on the day which they had chosen, it became necelfary likewifc
to alter this plan. They at last determined to attempt by open
force, what they found difficult to effect by stratagem, and
fixed on the night between the second and third of January, for
the execution of their enterprize. The time was chosen with
great propriety; for as the Doge of the former year was to quit
his office, according to custom, on the firfl of the month, and
his fiiccfflor could not be clected sooner than the fourth, the
republick remained during that interval in a fort of anarchy, and
F'ieico might with less violence take possession of the vacant dig-
nity.

I I8
I

TirE morning of that day Fiefco employed in visiting his

friends, passing some hours among them with a spirit as gay
and unembarraffed as at other times. Towards evening,- he
paid court to the Dorias with his usual marks of refpea, and
Surveying their countenance and behaviour with the atten-
tion natural in his situation, was happy to observe the per-
sea security in which they remained, without the least fore-
fight or dread of that florm which had been so long- a gather-
ring, and was now ready to burst over their heads. From
their palace he hastened to his own, which flood by itfeif in
the middle of a large court, surrounded by a high wall. The
gates had been set open in the morning, and all persons, with-
out diftintion, were allowed to enter, but firong guards posted
within the court fuffcred no one to return. Verrina, mean-
while, and a few persons trusted with the secret of the con-
fpiracy, after conduting Fiefco's vassals, as well as the crews of
his gallies into. the palace in small. bodies, with as little noise as
poflible, dispersed themselves through the city, and in the name of
their patron, invited to an entertainment the principal citizens
whom they knew to be disgusted with the adminifiration of the
Dorias, and to have both inclination and courage to attempt a
change in the government. Of the vast number of persons who
now filled the palace, a few only knew for what purpose they
were assembled, the reft aftoniflled at finding instead of the pre-
parations for a seas, a court crouded with armed men, and apart-
ments filled with the instruments of war, gazed on each other-
with a mixture of impatience, curiosity and terror.

BooK VIII.

1547.

The corfpi-
rators aflem-
ble to execute
their plan.

WHILE their minds were in this slate of fifpenfe an(t agita- riefco'5 ax-
tion, Ficfco appeared. With a look full of alacrity and con- 1ornatiolis ,

1' fidence,,

Ir9

BooKV11I. fidence, he addrefed himself to the persons of chief diftinadin,

547 - telling them, that they were not now called to partake of the plea-

sure of an entertainment, but to join in a deed of valour, which
would lead them to liberty and immortal renown. He set before
their eyes the exorbitant as well as intolerable authority of the
elder Doria, which the ambition ofGiannetino, and the partiality
of the Emperor to a fafnily more devoted to him than to their
country, was about to enlarge and to render perpetual. This
unrighteous domination, continued he, you have it now in
your power to subvert, and to establish the freedom of your
country on a firm bails. The tyrants must be cut off. I have
taken the most effedual measures for this purpose. My afio-
ciates arc numerous. I can depend on allies and protecors if
ncceffary. Happily the tyrants are as secure as I have been
provident. Their insolent contempt of their countrymen, has
banished the suspicion and timidity which usually render the guilty
quick-fighted to discern, as well as sagacious to guard against
the vengeance which they deserve. They will now feel the blow,
before they fufped any hostile hand to be nigh. Let us then
rally forth, that we may deliver our country by one generous
effort, almost unaccompanied with danger, and certain of success.
These words, uttered with that irrcfiftible fervour which ani-
mates the mind when rouzed by great oljects, made the desired
imprefIion on the audience. Fiefco's vaflals, ready to execute
whatever their master Ihould command, received his difcourfc
with a mumur of applautl. To many whose fortunes were de-
fipratc, the licence and contfuion of an infurredion afforded an
agreeable profplcC. T[hose ofllighcr rank and more virtuous fen-
timcnts, durfl not difcovcr the furprize or horror with which they
were llruck at tlc propo:al of an cntcrprize so unexpeced and
atrocious; as each imagined the other to be in the fccrct of the

colliiracy,
x20

t21

*lxke s iad fiw hitnfef umttmded by peibtn Who waited btkVlf.

0tl7 a signal fro dt-teir ltedrte to peptrate the' greteft crie.; t s
With one voice thii ill appladdit& - 'r seied to applaud' tIei
undertaking.

HAVING thus fiaed and encoUraged his aftodait, before His intervie

he gave theftl is- last orders, he haftetied for a moment ith i
to the aparthment of his wife, a lady of the noble hou'se of Cibo~
whom he loved with tendet affetlion, and whose beauty and
virtud te ndered hdr Worthy of his lovt. The noise of the armed
mhen who crowded the court and palace, having lorg before this
teached het ears, she concluded some hazardous enterprize to bd
in hand, and the trembled for her husband. He found her in
xll the anguish of uncertainty and fear; and as it was now
impoftib'le to keep his design concealed, he informed her of what
he had undertaken. The ptofpeCt of a scene so full of horror
as well as dranger, cdtpleated he agony; and foteboding irimedia
ately in her mitd the fatal iffne of it, she endeavourEd, by he&
tears, her etrdatides, and her despair, to divert him froin
iis ptrpofe. PiefTcO, after tfy?Ing ri vain to sooth and to inspire
her With hoie, broke' frort a fitiatison into which an excess of
tendernefTg had tnwartiy seduced him, though it could not shako
his refofutiort. " FareWel, he cried, a4 he quitted the apart.
merit, yot' shall either never fee mhe more, or you flall behold
to-morrow every fhitg in Ctenoa filje'd to' yoA'r power."

As fibn as he rejoined his companions, hd allotted each his They attaic

proper fiation; fomc were appointed to affaulf and seize the dif- O cit
ferent gate& of the city; foine to make themselves mailers of
the principal fireets or places of strength: Fiefco reserved for
himself the attack of the harbour where Doria's gallies were

VOL. III. R laid

BooKVIII.

1547.

laid up, as the post of chief importance, and of greatest danger.
It was now midnight, and the citizens slept in the security of
peace, when this band of conspirators, numerous, desperate, and
well armed, rufled out to execute their plan. They furprized
without refitance some of the gates. They got possession of
others after a sharp conflict with the soldiers on guard. Verrina,
with the galley which had been fitted out against the Turks,
blocked up the mouth of the Darfena or little harbour where
Doria's fleet lay. All possibility of escape being by this pre-
caution cut off, when Fiefco attempted to enter the gallies from
the shore to which they were made fast, as they were unrigged
and disarmed, having no crew on board but the slaves chained
to the oar, they were in no condition to make resistance. Every
quarter of the city was now filled with noise and tumult, all
the streets resounding with the cry of Fiefco and liberty. At
that name, so popular and beloved, many of the lower rank
took arms, and joined the conspirators. The nobles and parti-
zans of the aristocracy, astonished or affrighted, shut the gates
of their houses, and thought of nothing but of securing them
from pillage. At last, the noise excited by thisfeene of violence
and confusion, reached the palace of Doria; Giannetino started
immediately from his bed, and imagining that it was occasioned
by some mutiny among the tailors, ruffed out with a few atten-
dants, and hurried towards the harbour. The gate of St. Tho-
mas, through which he had to pass, was already in the possession
of the conspirators, who, the moment he entered, fell upon him
with the utmost fury, and murdered him on the spot. The fame
must have been the fate of the elder Doria, if Jerome de Fiefco
had executed his brother's plan, and had proceeded immediately
to attack him in his palace; but he, from the fordid consideration
of preventing its being plundered amidst the confusion, having

forbid
1P2

forbid his followers to advance, Andrew got intelligetce of his
nephew's death, as well as of his own danger; and mounting on
horseback, saved himself by flight. Meanwhile, a few senators
had the courage to assemble in the palace of the republickT. At
first, some of the most daring among them attempted to rally
the scattered soldiers, and to attack a body of the conspirators;
but being repulsed with loss, all agreed that nothing now
remained, but to treat with the party which seemed to be ir-
refiffible. Deputies were accordingly sent to learn of Fiefco
what were the concessions with which he would be satisfied, or
rather to submit to whatever terms he should please to prescribe.

BUT by this time Fiefco, with whom they were empowered

to negociate, was no more. Just as he was going to leave the har-
bour, where every thing had succeeded to his wish, that he might
join his vicorious companions, he heard some extraordinary
uproar on board the Admiral galley. Alarmed at the noise, and
fearing that the slaves might break their chains, and overpower
his afrociates, he ran thither; but the plank which reached from
the shore to the vessel happening to overturn, he fell into the
lea, whilfi he hurried forward too precipitately. Being loaded
with heavy armour, he funk to the bottom, and perished in the
very moment when he must have taken full poffeflion of every
thing that his ambitious heart could desire. Verrina was the
first whodifcovered this fatal accident, and forefceing, at once,
all its consequences, concealed it with the utmost industry from
every one but a few leaders of the conspiracy. Nor was it diffi-
cult, amidst the darkness and confusion of the night, to have
kept it fecrct, until itreaty with the senators should have put the

) r.il;iza della Signoria.

11 2 city

BOOKVI IL

.1-.

CIAC of their
m.,carragc.

1e3

city in tle power of the qo00pijKtors. AllU. ~r hgpe ps this
were diei[ncePted by the imprudence Qs Je.Qne Biq»,.
who, when the deputies of the senate enquired for his brotihr,
the count of Laivaga, that they might make their popofal, t
him, repied with a childiF vaity, " I am now the only pecfoir
to.whor that tide belongs, and with me yqu ButR treat." These
wodds difeovered both to his .einds and enemies what had
happened, and made the iuprIffon whihn might baNe been.
expe£ted upon both. The deputies, encouraged;by this event,.
the only one which could occasion fueh a sudden. revolution as.
might turn to their advantage, afiumed instantly, with admirable-
presence of mind, a new tone, suitable to the change in their.
circumstances, and made high demands. While they endea--
voured to gain time by protrafing the negociation, the reft of
the senators were busy in assembling their partizans, and form-.
ing a body capable of defending the palace of the republick,
On the other hand, the conspirators aftoniihed at the death of
a man whom they adored and truRtedi and placing no confi-.
dence in Jerome, a giddy youth, felt their courage die away,
and their arms fall from their hands. That profound and
amazing fccrecy with which the conspiracy had been concerted,
and which had contributed hitherto so much to its success, proved:
now the chief cause of its miscarriage. The leader was gone,
the greater part of those who a&ed under him, knew not his
confidents, and were strangers to the objeEt at which he aimed..
There was no person among them whose authority or abilities
entitled him to aflume Fiefco's place, or to finiih his plan;
after having loft the spirit which animated it, life and activity
deserted the whole body. Many of the conspirators withdrew'
to their houses, hoping that amidst the darkness of the night

they
gog5~vWg.

£54;,.
IM

tfey had p4id unbfrved, .ad night xremair. ,uie.wn.
Othars fCught fr faety by a timelyr etrait; and, befoe brac
of 4ay, 4 ll.f-them fled wih .precipitation from a sity, whisb
b lut a.fw hours befpre, was ready to lCkpqowl.edg e rtlma,
liserts,

NAxT morning every thing was quiet in Genoa; not an

¢xemy was to be seen; few marks of the violence of the
former night appeared, the conspirators having conduaed
their entrprize with more noise than bloodihed, and gained
all their advantages by fvrprize, rather than by force of arms.
Towards evening, Andrew Doria returned to the city, being
met by all the inhabitants, who received him with acclamations
of joy. Though the disgrace as well as danger of the preced-
ing night, were freff in his mind, and the mangled body of his
kinsman still before his eyes, such was his moderation and mag-
nanimity, that the decree issued by the senate against the confpi-
rators, did not exceed that just measure of severity which was
requisite for the support of government, and was didateed neither
by the violence of resentment, nor the rancour of revenge .*

AFTER taking the necessary precautions for preventing the

flame, which was now so happily extinguished, from breaking
out anew, the first care of the senate was to fend an ambassador

090qVII4g

1..4t.

'T$,47.ranq

Tranquillity re-eflablilhed
in Genoa.

The Emperot
alarmed at
this confpi-
racy.

1 Thuan. 93. Sigonii vita Andreae Doria, I196. La Conjuration du

Comte de Fiefque par Cardin. de Rctz. Adriani Iftoria, lib. vi. 369. Folict:
Conjuratio Jo. Lud. Fiefci ap. Graev. Thcf. Ital. i. 883.

* It is remarkable, that Cardinal de Rctz composed, at the age of eighteen, a

hiflory of this conspiracy, containing such a discovery of his admiration of Fiefco
and his enterprize, that it is not furprizing that a miniffer, so jealous and dif-
cerning as Richlicu, fliould be led by the peruf.il of it topredia the turbulent and
dangerous spirit of that young Ecclcfiaflick. Mcm. de Rctz, tom. i. p. 13.

:t to

Surpends his
-operalions in
Germany.

THE REIGN OF THE

to the Emperor, to give him a particular detail of what had hap-
-pened, and to beg his affitance towards the redution of Mon-
tobbio, a firong fort on the hereditary estate of the Fiefci, in
which Jerome had slut himself up. Charles was no less alarmed
than astonished at an event so strange and unexpected. He
could not believe that Fiefco,.how bold or adventurous foeveri
'durflthave attempted such an enterprize, but on foreign fug-.
geftion, and from the hope of foreign aid. Being informed
.that the Duke of Parma was well acquainted with the plan of
the conspirators, he immediately Sup posed that the Pope could
not be ignorant of a measure, which his son had countenanced.
Proceeding from this to a farther conjecture, which Paul's cau-
tious maxims of policy in other instances, rendered extremely
probable, he concluded that the French King.muft have known
and approved of the design; and he began to apprehend that this
spark might. again kindle the flame of war which had raged so
.long in Italy. As he had drained his Italian territories of troops
.on account of the German war, he was.altogether unprovided
for relifting any hostile attack in that country; and on the first
appearance of danger, he must have detached thither the greatest
part of his forces for its defence. -In this situation of affairs, it
would have been altogether imprudent in the Emperor to hb'v
advanced in person against the Eletor, until he Ihould l;.Jn witlI
fbme degree of certainty whether such a scene were not .: loit 1
open in Italy, as might put it out of his power to keep thl.: Jl !
*with an army fuficient to oppose him.

RT .; ) i
4

# THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK IX.

THE

T E
OF THE

[

0
G

Y

N

OF T. HE
EM PER.O R

B' ' C

C H A R LES

K

IX.
T HE Emperor's dread of the hostile intentions of the

Pope and French King did not proceed from any imagi-

nary or ill-grounded suspicion. Paul had already given the
firongeft proofs both of his jealousy and enmity. Charles could
not hope, that Francis, after a rivalfhip of so long continuance,
would behold the great advantages which he had gained over the
confederate Protestants, without feeling his ancient emulation
revive. He was not deceived in this conjecure. Francis had
observed the rapid progress of his arms with deep concern, and
though prevented hitherto, by circumstances which have been
mentioned, from interposing in order to check them, he was
now convinced that, if he did not make fonae extraordinary and

timely

BbeK IX.

1547.

Francis jea-
Ious of the
Emperor's
power and.
focccfs.
.11

I

S-

E
R

V.

BOOK IX. timely effort, Charles muff :cquire ruch a degree of power as

·S47. would enable him to give law to the reft of Europe. This

apprehension, which did not take its rife from the envy of
rivalihip alone, but was entertained by the wisest politicians of
the age, suggested various expedients which might serve to
retard the course of the Emperor's viCtories, and to form by
degrees such a combination against him as might put a flop to
his dangerous career.

NegDc;ates WITH this view, Francis inftruaed his emiflaries in Germany
witthan PrlO to employ all their address in order to revive the courage of the

confederates, and toprevent them from submitting to the Empe-
ror. He made liberal offers of his assistance, and entering into a
close correspondence with the Elector and Landgrave, whom he
knew to be the most zealous as well as the most powerful of the
whole body, he used every argument, and proposed every ad-
vantage which could either confirm their dread of the Emperor's
dcfigns, or determine them not to imitate the inconsiderate cre-
dulity of their associates in giving up their religion and liberties
to his disposal. Whit le took this ftep towards conttiinuing the
civil war which raged in Germany, he erdeavoured, likewise,

with Soly- to stir up fwreign enemies against the Efperor. He follicited
tlnO; Soolymaft to feiat this favourtable opportunity of iutading Lubi

gary, which had been drained of all th. tropa iieeftiary for its
defence, in order to form the army against the confederates of
Smalkalde. He exhorted the Pope to repair, by a vigorous and
seasonable effort, the error of which he had been guity in con.-
tributing td raiie the Emperor to such a foridable height of

with the power. Findilg Paul, both from the eonfeioufnefs of his own
Y,,pe and
Vcnctimns. mistake, and his dread of its consequences, abundantly disposed

to Iiftcn to his exhortations, he availed himself of this favour-

able

a
128

able disposition which the Pontiff began to discover, as an argu-
ment to gain the Venetians. He endeavoured to convince them
that nothing could save Italy, and even Europe from oppression
and servitude, but their joining the Pope and him in giving the
first beginning to a general confederacy in order to humble that
ambitious potentate, whom they had all equal rcafon to dread.

HAVING set on foot these negociations in the southern courts,

he turned his attention next towards those in the north of
Europe. As the King of Denmark had particular reasons to
be offended with the Emperor, Francis imagined that he would
not be backward to approve of the league which he had projea-
cd; and left considerations of caution or prudence should
refirain him from joining in it, he attempted to overcome these,
by offering him the young Queen of Scots in marriage to his
son a. As the ministers who governed England in the name of
Edward VI, had openly declared themselves converts to the
opinions of the Reformers, as soon as it became safe upon
Henry's death to lay aside that disguise which his unforgiving
bigotry had forced them to assume, Francis flattered himself that
their zeal would not allow them to remain inative fpedators of
the overthrow and deitruCtion of tholf who profcfcd the fame
faith with themselves; and he hoped that notwithstanding the
ftrugglos of faction incident to a minority, and the profpcd of
an approaching rupture with the Scots, he might prevail on
them likcwife to take part in the common caul b1.

BooK IX.

75 7.

With the
Kings of
Denmark and
England.

WHILE Francis employed fiicl variety of expedients, and
exerted himself with such extraordinary activity, to rouze the

" Mem. de Ribier, i. 600, 606.
VOL. III.

b Mem. de Ribicr, i. 635.

different
S

BOOK IX.

The Emperor
great I
alarmed.

different flates of Europe against his rival, he did not neglect
what depended on himself alone. He levied troops in all parts
of his dominions; he collected military stores; he contracted with
the Swiss cantons for a considerable body of men; he put his
finances in admirable order; he remitted considerable fums to
the Ele&or and Landgrave; and took all the other steps necessary
towards commencing hostilities, on the fiorteft warning, and
with proper vigour'.

OPERATIONS so complicated, and which required the putting

so many instruments in motion, did not escape the Emperor's
observation. He was soon informed of Francis's intrigues in the
efveral courts, as well as of his domestic preparations; and fen-
fib!c how fatal an interruption a foreign war would prove to his
deligns in Germany, he trembled at the profpet of that event.
The danger, however, appeared to him as unavoidable as it was
great. He knew the insatiable and well-direded ambition of
Solyman, and that he always chose the season for beginning his
military enterprizes with prudence equal to the valour with
which he conduced them. The Pope, as he had good reason
to believe, wanted not pretexts to justify a rupture, nor inclina-
tion to begin hostilities. He had already made some discovery
of his sentiments, by expressing a joy altogether unbecoming the
head of the church, upon receiving an account of the advantage
which the Elector of Saxony had gained over Albert of Bran-
denburg; and as he was now secure of finding in the French
King, an ally of sufficient power to support him, he was at no
pains to conceal the violence and extent of his enmityd. The
Venetians, Charles was well affirced, had long observed the growth
of his power with jealousy, which added to the follicitations and

c Mem. de Rib. i. 595.

' Mlcm. de Ribier, toni. i. 637.

p1)rol itics

prdmifes of France, might at lass quicken their flow counsels, and
overcome their natural caution. The Danes and Engliih, it was
evident, had both peculiar reason to be disgusted, as well as firong
motives to act against him. But above all, he dreaded the
ascive emulation of Francis himself, whom he confidered as the
foul and mover of any confederacy that could be formed against
hiln; and as that Monarch had afforded proteeion to Verrina,
who failed diredlyto Marseilles upon the miscarriage of Fiefco's
confpiracy,.Charles expeced every moment the commencement
of those hostile operations in Italy, of which he conceived the
infurretion in Genoa to have been only the prelude.

Booic IX.

- -7J1
BUT while he remained in this fiate of suspense and follici- Enterta;ns

hope from

tude, there was one circumstance which afforded him some the declining
profpeA of escaping the danger. The French King's health fiath oflFrn-
b1egan to decline. A disease, the effect of his intemperance-and
inconsiderate pursuit of pleasure, preyed gradually on his confti-
tution. The preparations for war, as well as the negociations
in the different courts, began to languifl, together with the
Monarch, who gave spirit to both. The Genoese, during that March.
interval, reduced Montobbio, took Jerome Fiefco prisoner, and
putting him together with his chiefadhernts to death, extinguish-
ed all remains of the conspiracy. Several of the Imperial cities in
Germany, despairing of timely assistance from France, submittcd
to the IlCinpcror. Elvcn the Landgrave fccmcnd dili)ofied to aban-
don the Elcaor, and to bring matters to a speedy accommoda-
tion, on such terms as lie could obtain. In the mean time,
Charles waited witlh impatience the issue of a distemper, which
was to decide whether he miuf relinquish all other fchemcs, in
order to prepare for reftiling a combination of the greater part

.S - of

13

BooK. IX.

'S47.

teath of
Franci5, and
refledlions on
his charater
wgd Civalrsip
with Ch~arlos.

of Europe against him, or whether he might proceed to invade:
Saxony, without interruption or fear of danger.

TH E good fortune, so remarkably propitious to his family, that

some historians have called it the Star of the House of Auflria, did
not desert him on this oecafion. Francis died at Rambouillet, on the
last day of March, in the fifty-third year ofhiis age, and the thirty.-
third of his reign. During twenty-eight years of that time, an
avowed rivalfhip subsisted between him and the Emperor, which
involved not only their own dominions, but the greater part of
Europe in wars, prosecuted with more violent animosity, and
drawn out to a greater length than had been known in any for-
mer period. Many circumstances contributed to both. Their
animosity was founded in opposition of intercl, heightened by
personal. emulation, and exasperated not. only by mutual inju-
ries, but by reciprocal insults. At the fame time, whatever
advantage one feeined to pofrefs towards. gaining the ascendant,
was wonderfully ballanced' by some favourable circumstance,
peculiar to the other. The Emperor's dominions were of great
extent, tho French King's lay more compac; Francis governed
his kingdom with absolute power; that of Charles was limited,
but he supplicd the want o£autthority by address; the troops of
the former were more impetuous and cntcrprizing; those of the
latter better disciplined, and more patient of fatigue. The talents
and abilitics of the two Monarchs, wscre as differcnt as the advan-
tages which they polffcfid, and contributel no lcfs to prolong.
the contcfl betwccl thelm. Francis took his rcfolutionsfuddenly,.,
profcctitcd theni at firlt with warmth, and puflicd them into cxe--
cultion xVith a ol advcttrous courage; but being dcfiitute of the.
prfvcran;cc neccfliary to fur nount difficulties, hl often abandoned.

his.
I*2

* fli designs, or relaxed the vigour of pursuit, from impatience, BOOK-IX..
.and sometimes from levity. Charles deliberated long, and deter- '5 -
mined with coolness; but, having once fixed his plan, he adhered
to it with inflexible obstinacy, and neither danger. nor difcou-
ragement could turn him aside from tie execution of it. The
success of their enterprizes was as different as their characters,
and was uniformly influenced by them. Francis, by his impe-
tuous adivity, often disconcerted the Emperor's best laid schemes;
Charles, by a more calm but steady prosecution of his designs,
checked the rapidity of his rival's career, and baffled or repulsed
his most vigorous efforts. The former, at the opening of a war
or of a campaign, broke in upon his enemy with the violence
of a torrent, and carried all before him; the latter, waiting until
he saw the force of his rival begin to abate, recovered in the end
not only all that he had loft, but made new acquisitions. Few of the.
French NMnarch's attempts towards conquelt, whatever promif-
ing afpedt they might wear at.firft, were conducted to an happy
issue; many of the Emperor's enterprizes, even after they
appeared desperate and impracticable, terminated in the most:
prosperous manner.. Francis was dazzled with the splendour of
an undertaking; Charles was allured by the profped of its"
turning to his advantage. The degree, however, of their com-
parative merit and reputation, has not been fixed cither by a
flria scrutiny into their abilities for government, or by an impar-
tial consideration of the greatness and success of their undertak-
ings; and Francis is one of those Monarchs who occupiesa hihlicr
rank in the temple of fame, than either his talents or performln-
ances intitle him to hold. This pre-eminnccc lie owed to many
diffcrent circumflances. The iuperiority which Charles acquired(l
hy the victory of Pavia, and which from that period he prcfcrvcdl
throlugh the remainder of his reign, wav'; so manifcfl, that Fran-

cis'&

cis's struggle againt Ihis exorbitant and growing dominion was
viewed by most of the other powers, not only with the partia-
lity which naturally arises for those who gallantly maintain an
unequal contefi, but with the favour due to one who was refifling
a common enemy, and endeavouring to set bounds to a Monarch
equally formidable to them all. The characters of Princes, too,
cfpccially among their contemporaries, depend not only upon
their talents for government, but upon their qualities as men.
Francis, notwithltanding the many errors conspicuous in his
foreign policy and domefic administration, was nevertheless
humane, beneficent, generous. He possesscd dignity without
pride; affability free from meanness; and courtesy exempt from
decei'. All who had access to him, and no man of merit was
ever denied that privilege, refpeded and loved him. Captivated
with his personal qualities, his fubjcds forgot his defects as a
Monarch, and admiring him as the most accomplished and
amiable gentleman in his dominions, they never murmured at
acs of male-adminiftration, which in a Prince of less engaging
lifpofitions, would have becn deemed unpardonable. This admi-
ration, however, inufl have been temporary only, and would
have died away with tlh courtiers wlo bcftowed it; the illusion
ariiing from his private virtues imntl hlave ccafcd, and poflerity
would have judged of his public condluc with its ufuial impar-
tiality; but another circuinflance prevented this, and his name
hath been tranfinitted to posterity with incrcaling reputation.
Science and the arts had, at that time, made little progrcfs in
France. They were just beginning to advance beyond the limits
of Italy, where they had revived, and which had hitherto been

their

134
BOOK IX.

3 517.

their only feat. Francis took them immediately under his pro- BOOK. IX.
tesion, and vied with Leo himself, in the zeal and munificence '-

1547-

with which he encouraged them. He invited learned men to
his court, he conversed with them familiarly, he employed
them in business, he raised them to offices of dignity, and
honoured them with his confidence. That race of men, not
more prone to complain when denied the refped to which they
fancy themselves entitled, than apt to be pleased when treated
with the diftindion which they confider as their due, thought
they could not exceed in gratitude to such a benefacor, and
firained their invention, and employed all their ingenuity in
panegyric. Succeeding authors, warmed with their descriptions
of Francis's bounty, adopted their encomiums, and refined upon
them. The appellation of Father of Letters bestowed upon
Francis, hath rendered his memory sacred among historians, and
they seem to have regarded it as a fort of impiety to uncover his
infirmities, or to point out his defects. Thus Francis, notwith-
standing his inferior abilities, and want of success, hath more
than equalled the fame of Charles. The virtues which he
possessed as a man, have entitled him to greater admiration and
praise, than have been bestowed upon the extensive genius, and
fortunate arts oPa more capable, but less amiable rival.

BY his death, a considerable change was made in the slate of Effeas of
Europe. Charles, grown old in the arts of government and Franti's

death.

command, had now to contend only with younger Monarchs,
who could not be regarded as an equal match for hiin, who had
flood the encounter with IIenry V11I. and Francis I. and come
off with honour in all tliefe (liffercnt contefis. By this event,
he was calcd of all his difquictudc, and was happy to find that he

might

BOOK IX.

!547.

-'Pliirrlie
27U1r( hics
igain t i c
J 1eh'trr of
` 'X r').
-7A PIil.13

might begin with safety those operations againfl the Ele£tor of
Saxony, which he had hitherto been obliged to suspend. He
knew the abilities of Henry II. who had just mounted the throne
of France, to be greatly inferior to those of his father, and fore-
Ifaw that he would bce so much occupied for ime time in difpla-
cing the late King's.miniflers, whom he hated, and in gratifying
the ambitious demands of his own favourites, that he had
nothing to dread, either from his personal efforts, or from any
confederacy which this unexperienced Prince could form.

BUT 1.S it was uncertain how long such an interval of security

might continue, Charles determined inflantly to improve it; and
as soon as he heard of Francis's demise, he began his march from
l.gra on thc borders of Bohemia. But the departure of the Papal
troops, together with the retreat of the Flemings, had so much
diminiflhcd his army, that sixteen thousand men were all he could
affcmblc. With this inconsiderable body he set out on an expe-
dition, the event of which was to decide what degree of autho-
rity he flould poffcfs from that period in Germany: But as this
little army confifled chiefly of the veteran Spanifil and Italian
bands, he did not, in truiting to them, commit much to the deci-
sion of chance, and even with so frnall a force he had reason to
entertain the mofi fangulne hopes of fucccfs. The EleCtor, it is
true, had levied an army greatly superior in number; but neither
the experience and difciplinc of his troops, nor the abilities of his
officers, were to be compared with those of the Emperor. The
Elctor, besides, had already been guilty of an error, which depriv-
cd Iinm of all the advantage which he might have derived from
his lupcriority in number, and was alone filficicnt to have occa-
sioned his ruin. Inftcad of keeping his forces united, lie dctached

8 (Ani1

I37

one great body towards the frfntiers;of Bohemia, in order to BOOK IX.
facilitate his juntion with the malecontents of that kingdom,
and cantoned a considerable part of what remained in different
places of Saxony,- where he expeaed the Emperor would make
the first impression, vainly imagining that these open towns, with
small garrisons, might be rendered tenable against an enemy.

THE Emperor entered the southern frontier of Saxony, and Progress of

his arms.

attacked Altorf upon the Elfier. The folly of the measure which
the Eletor had taken was immediately seen, the troops polced
in that town surrendering without refiflancc; and those in all
the other places between that and the Elbe, either imitated their
example, or fled as the Imperialists approached. Charles, that
they might not recover from the panic with which they seemed
to be struck, advanced without losing a moment. The EleEtor,
who had fixed his head-quarters at Meissen, continued in his
wonted state of fluctuation and uncertainty. He even became
more undetermined, in proportion as the danger drew near and
called for prompt and decisive resolutions. Sometimes he
aced, as if he had resolved to defend the banks of the Elbe,
and to hazard a battle with the enemy, as soon as the dc-
tachments which he had called in were able to join him. At
other times, he abandoned this as rash and perilous, teeming
to adopt the more prudent counsels of those who advised him to
endeavour at protracting the war, and for that end to retire
under the fortifications of Wittemberg, where the Imperialifls
could not attack him without manifcft difadvantagc, and where
lie might wait, in safety, for the succours which he expetcd
from Mccklcnburgh, Poecrania and the Protestant cities on the
Baltic. Without fixing upon either of these plans, he broke

Vo L. III. T1 down

BOOK IX. down the bridge at Meiflen, and marched along the east bank

1. s of the Elbe to Muhlberg. There he deliberated anew, and after

much hesitation, adopted one of these middle schemes, which
are always acceptable to feeble minds incapable of deciding. He
left a detachment at Muhlberg to oppose the Imperialists, if they
should attempt to pass at that place, and advancing a few miles
with his main body, encamped there in expeaation of the
event, according to which he proposed to regulate his fubfe-
quent motions.
Passs the CHARLES, meanwhile, pushing forward incessantly, arrived

the evening of the twenty third of April on the banks of the
Elbe opposite to Muhlberg. The river, at that place, was three
hundred paces in breadth, above four feet in depth, its current
rapid, and the bank possessed by the Saxons was higher than
that which he occupied. Undismayed, however, by all these
obstacles, he called together his general officers, and with-
out asking their opinions, communicated to them his inten-
tion of attempting next morning to force his passage over the
river, and to attack the enemy wherever he could come up with
them. They all expressed their astonishment at such a bold
resolution, and even the Duke of Alva, though naturally daring
and impetuous, and Maurice of Saxony, notwithfianding his
impatience to crush his rival the Eledor, remonstrated earnestly
against it. But the Emperor, confiding in his own judgment
or good fortune, paid no regard to their arguments, and gave
the orders necessary for executing his design.

EARLY in the morning, a body of Spanilh and Italian foot
marched towards the river, and began an incclIant fire upon

the
'~38

J3.

the enemy. The long heavy muskets used in that age, did exe-
cution on the opposite bank, and many of the soldiers, hur-
ried on by a martial ardor in order to get nearer the enemy,
rushed into the fiream, and advancing breast high, fired with a
more certain aim, and with greater effet. Under cover of their
fire, a bridge of boats was begun to be laid for the infantry; and
a peasant having undertaken to conduct the cavalry through
the river by a ford with which he was well acquainted, they
also were put in motion. The Saxons poiftd in Muhlberg
endeavoured to obftrua these operations, by a briik fire from
a battery, which they had erected; but as a thick fog
covered all the low grounds upon the river, they could not
take aim with any certainty, and the Imperialists suffered very
little; at the fame time the Saxons being much galled by
the Spaniards and Italians, they set on fire some boats which
had been colleced near the village, and prepared to retire. The
Imperialists perceiving this, ten Spanish soldiers instantly stript
themselves, and holding their swords with their teeth, swam
across the river, put to flight such of the Saxons as ventured to
oppose them, saved from the flames as many boats as were sus-
ficient to complete their own bridge, and by this spirited and
successful acion, encouraged their companions no less than
they intimidated the enemy.

BY this time, the cavalry, each trooper having a foot soldier

behind him, began to enter the river, the light horse marching
in the front, followed by the men at arms, whom the Emperor
led in person, mounted on a Spaniff horse, drefled in a sump-
tuous habit, and carrying a javelin in his hand. Such a nu-
merous body struggling through a great river, in which accord-

T 2 ing

Boor, IX.

1547.

BOOK 1X.
I ,

547.

111 conduat of
the Elecor.

ing to the diretions of their guide they were obliged to male
several turns, fomnetimes treading on a firm bottom, sometimes
fwiaming, pefented to their companions, whom they left be-
hind, a fpe&acle equally magnificent and interesting d. Their
courage, at last, surmounted every obstacle, no man betraying
any fymploa of fear, when the Emperor lhared in the danger
no ess than the meanest soldier. The moment that they reached
the opposite fide, Charles, without waiting the arrival of the
ref of the infantry, advanced towards the Saxons with the
troops which had passed along with him, who flushed with
their good fortune, and despising an enemy who had neglected
to oppose them, when it might have been done with such ad-
vantage, made no account of their superior numbers, and
marched on as to a certain vidtory.

DURING all these operations, which necessarily consumed

much time, the EleCtor remained inadive in his camp; and
from an infatuation which appears to be so amazing, that
the best informed historians impute it to the treacherous arts
of his generals, who deceived him by false intelligence, he
would not believe that the Emperor had passed the river or
could be so near at hand'. Being convinced, at last, of his
fatal miltake, by the concurring tcftimony of eye witnefics,
he gave orders for retreating towards Wittemberg. But a
German army encumbered, as usual, with baggage and artil-
lery, could not be put suddenly in motion. They had scarce
b:gun to march when light troops of the enciny came in
view, and the Eledor saw an engagement to be unavoidable.

Av;la, 115. a.
* Camerar. ap. Frchcr. iii. 493. Struv. corp. hifi. Germ. 1047, 1049.

As
£4o

.As he was no less bold in a&ion than irresolute in council, he BeoK IX.
made the disposition for battle with the greatest presence of 1547.
,mind, and in the most proper manner, taking advantage of a Battle of

Mulhaufen.

great forest to cover his wings, so as to prevent his being fur-
rounded by the enemies cavalry which were far more numerous
.than his own. The Emperor, likewise, ranged his men in
order as they came up, and riding along the ranks, exhorted
them with few but efficacious words to do their duty. It was
with a very different spirit that the two armies advanced to
the charge. As the day, which had hitherto been dark and
cloudy, happened to clear up at that moment, this accidental
circumstance made an impression on the different parties corre-
.fponding to the tone of their minds the Saxons, furprized and
l-ifheartened, felt pain at being exposed fully to the view of the
enemy; the Imperialists, being now secure that the Protestant
forces could not escape from them, rejoiced at the return of fun-
shine, as a certain presage of victory. The shock of battle would
not have been long or doubtful, if the personal courage which the
Elector displayed, together with the arcivity which he exerted
from the moment that the approach of the enemy rendered an en-
gagement certain, and cut off all possibility of hceitation, had not
revived in some degrce the spirit of his troops. They repulsed
the Hungarian light horfi who began the attack, and received
with firmness the men at arms who next advanced to the charge;
but as thefc were the flower of the Imperial army, were com-
nanded by experienced officers, and fought under the Empe-
ror's eye, the Saxons soon began to give way, and the light
troops rallying at the fame time and falling on their flanks,
the sliglt became general. A finll body of chosen foldicrs, The Eleror
among whom the Eledlor had fought in pcrfon, fill continued 'taken 1"ri

t( to 1liur.

BOOK IX. te defend themselves, and endeavoured to save their mailer by

1547. retiring into the forest; but being surrounded on every fide,

the Ele&or, wounded in the face, exhausted with fatigue, and
perceiving all refifance to be vain, surrendered himself a pri-
soner. He was conducted immediately towards the Emperor,
whom he found juss returned from the pursuit, flanding on the
field of battle in the full exultation of success, and receiving the
congratulations of his officers, upon this compleat viaory ob-
tained by his valour and conduct. Even in such an unfortunate
and humbling situation, the Elecor's behaviour was equally
magnanimous and decent. Sensible of his condition, he ap-
proached his conqueror without any of the sullenness or pride,
which would have been improper in a captive; and conscious of
his own dignity, he descended to no mean submission, unbecom-
ing the high station which he held among the German Princes.
" The fortune of war, said he, has made me your prisoner,
most gracious Emperor, and I hope to be treated "- Here,

His harfi Charles harshly interrupted him. " And am I then, at last,
rCecptiofY acknowledged to be Emperor; Charles of Ghent was the only
the Emperor. acknowledged to be Emperor; Charles of Ghent was the only

title you lately allowed me. You shall be treated as you de-
serve." At these words, he turned from him abruptly, with an
haughty air. To this cruel repulse, the King of the Romans
added reproaches in his own name, using expressions still more
ungenerous and insulting. The Elecor made no reply; but,
with an unaltered countenance, which discovered neither afto-
nifhment nor dejedion, accompanied the Spanish soldiers ap-
pointed to guard him '.

f Slcid. hist. 426. Thuan. 136. Hortenfius de Bcllo German. ap. Scard.

vol. ii. 498. Dcecript. pugna Mulberg. ibid. p. 509. P. Hcutcr. Rer.
Auftr. lib. xii. c. 13. p. 298.
142

THIS decisive vicory cost the Imperialists only fifty men.

Twelve hundred of the Saxons were killed, chiefly in the pur-
suit, and a greater number taken prisoners. About four hun-
dred kept in a body, and escaped toWittemberg, together with
the electoral Prince, who had likewise been wounded in the
action. After refting two days on the field of battle, partly to
refresh his army, and partly to receive the deputies of the ad-
jacent towns, which were impatient to secure his protection by
submitting to his will, the Emperor began to move towards
Wittemberg, that he might terminate the war at once, by the
reduction of that city. The unfortunate Elector was carried
along in a fort of triumph, and exposed every where, as a cap-
tive, to his own fubjeds; a fpedacle extremely affliting to
them who both honoured and loved him; though the insult
was so far from subduing his firm spirit, that it did not even
ruffle the wonted tranquillity and composure of his mind.

As Wittemberg, the residence, in that age, of the electoraI

branch of the Saxon family, was one of the strongest cities in
Germany, and would not be taken, if properly defended, without
great difficulty, the Emperor marched thither with the utmost
dispatch, hoping that while the consternation occasioned by his
vicory was fiill recent, the inhabitants might imitate the ex-
ample of their countrymen, and submit to his power, as soon
as he appeared before their walls. But Sybilla of Cleves the
ElcCor's wife, a woman no less distinguishcd by her abilities
than her virtue, inflead of abandoning herself to tears and
lamentation upon her huiband's misfortune, endeavoured, by her
example as well as exhortations, to animate the citizens; and Ihe

in spired

143
BOOK IX.

1547.

Charles's pro-
grefs after his
vitory.

Invests Wit-
temberg.

inspired them with such resolution, that, when summoned to
surrender, they returned a vigorous answer, warning the Empe-
ror to behave towards their sovereign with the refpeCd due to his
rank, as they were determined to treat Albert of Brandenburg,
who was flill a prisoner, precisely in the fame manner that he
treated him. The spirit of the inhabitants no less than the
.strength of the city seemed now to render a siege in form ne-
ceffary. After such a signal victory it would have been dif-
graceful not to have undertaken it, though at the fame time the
Emperor was deflitute of every thing requiite for carrying it
on. But Maurice removed all difficulties, by engaging to fur-
nifh provisions, artillery, ammunition, pioneers, and whatever
else should be needed. Trusting to this, Charles gave orders
to open the trenches before the town. It quickly appeared,
that Maurice's cagernefs to reduce the capital of those domi-
nions, which he expeced as his reward for taking arms against
his kinsman, and defcrting the Proteflant cause, had led him to
promise what exceeded his power to perform. A battering train
was, indeed, carried fafcly down the Elbe from Dresden to
Wittemberg; but as Maurice had not fufficicnt force to preserve
a secure communication between his territories, and the camp
of the besiegers, Count Mansfeldt, who commanded a body
of electoral troops, dectroyed a convoy of provisions and mi-
litary frorcs, and disperscd a band of pioneers destined for
the fcrvice of the lnpcrialifls. This put a flop to the progrcfs of
the ficge, and convinced the Emperor that as he could not rely
on Maurice's promifcs, rccourfe ought to be llad to some more
cxpeditious as well as more certain method of gctting pofllffion
of tlle town.

Ti rE

L44
BOOK IX.

IS 47.

THE unfortunate Ele&or was in his hands, and he was un-

generous and hard-hearted enough to take advantage of this, in
order to make an experiment whether he might not bring about
his design, by working upon the tenderness of a wife for her
husband, or upon the piety of children towards their parent.
With this view, he summoned Sybilla a second time to open the
gates, letting her know that ifihe again refused to comply, the
Eletor Ihould answer with his head for her obstinacy. To con-
vince her that this was not an empty threat, he brought his
prisoner to an immediate trial. The proceedings against him
were as irregular, as the stratagem was barbarous. Inflead
of consulting the states of the Empire, or remitting the
cause to any court, which according to the German conftitu-
tion might have legally taken cognizance of the Elecor's crime,
he fubjeded the greatest Prince in the Empire to the jurifdidtion
of a court-martial composed of Spanish and Italian officers, and
in which the unrelenting Duke of Alva, a fit infirument for
any ac of violence, presided. This strange tribunal founded
its charge upon the ban of the Empire which had been issued
against the prisoner, a sentence pronounced by the sole autho-
rity of the Emperor, and destitute of every legal formality which
could render it valid; but presuming him to be thereby manifestly
conviced of treason and rebellion, the court-martial condemned
him to susser death by being beheaded. This decree was inti-
mated to the Elector while amusing himself in playing at Chefs
with Ernef of Brunswick his fellow-prifoner. He paused for
a moment, though without difcovcring any symptom either of
furprize or terror; and after taking notice of the irregularity
as well as injuflice of the Emperor's proceedings: " It is easy,
continued he, to comprehend his iclicmc. I .nuft die, becatfe

VOL. III. U Wittemberg

BOOK IX.

1547-

The Enpe-
ror's ungene-
rou» treict-
ment of the
Eleaor.

May lo.

The Eletor's
magnaliimity.

I4;

Wittembcrg will not surrender; and I {hall lay down my life
with pleasure, if, by that sacrifice, I can preserve the dignity
of my house, and transmit to my posterity the inheritance which
belongs to them. Would to God, that this sentence may not
asset my wife and children more than it intimidates me! and
that they, for the fake of adding a few days to a life already too
long, may not renounce honours and territories which they were
born to possess 3." He then turned to his antagonif, whom he
challenged to continue the game. He played with his usual'
attention and ingenuity, and having beat Ernest, expressed all
the fatisfadion which is commonly felt on gaining such vito-
ries. After this he withdrew to his own apartment, that he
might employ the reft of his time in such religious exercises as
were proper in his situation h.

IT vwas not with the fame indifference, or composure, that the

account of the Elecior's danger was received in Wittemberg.
Sybilla, who had fiipported with such undaunted fortitude her
husband's misfortunes, while flc ilmagined that they could reach
no farther than to diilnii f his nower or territories, felt allher rc-
fi!lition fall tlie momncit his lilc was threatened. Sollicitous to
tI\c t!'a t, Ife (dcT)ificd ever! otlicr confidclration; and was wil-
ling to ina: , any f:icrihcc, in ordeir to :appac'at an inccnfcd con-
(Lticror. At the .llc: time, the )Duk of Clevrs, the El.cor of
EIrtndcnlnll;, atl Manurice, t) llone ot wltoin iCarles had coin-
in':.,.l'i;cl lic truie irnoives of lliE violznt proccedings againIt
tl}) I'J.:Lclor, intercded warmly \.it ililm to Jare hlis lift. The
lir v
w , pro(imptcd to do lb merely by coni,;alliion for his filler,

'I'hua. i. 142.

1' Struvii corpits ic5o.
BOOK IX.

1547.

The I';il ers
clt lis fanmi'y.

and
I46

t47

and regard for his brother-in-law. The two other dreaded the B3oK IX;
universal reproachthat they would incur, if, after having boasted
so often of tie amiple security which the Emperor had promifel
them with refpet to their religion, the first effead of their unioli
with hlim lhould be the public execution of a Prince, who was
justly held in reverence as the moil zealous prote-or of the Pro-
teftant cause. Maurice, in particular, forenaw that he must
become the objet of detestation to the Saxons, and could never
hope to govern them with tranquillity, if he were confidered by
them as accessary to the death of his nearest kinsman, in order
that he might obtain poffieioa of his dominions.

WHILE they, from fiich various motives, follicited Charles,

with the most earnest importunity, not to execute the sentence;
Sybilla, and the reft of the Eletor's family, conjured him bylet-
ters as well as meflengers to scruple at no conceflions that would
extricate him out of the present danger, and deliver them from
their fears and anguish on his account. The Emperor, perceiving
that the expedient which he had tried began to produce the effect
he intended, fell by degrees from his former rigour, and allowed
himself to soften into promises of clemency and forgivcnefs, if
the Eleaor would flcw himrnlf worthy of' his favour by sub-
mitting to rcafonable terms. The Eledor, on whom the confi-
deration of what he might susser himself had made no imprcffion,
was ncilted ly the tears of a wife whom lie loved, and'could not
refill the intreatics of his family. In compliance witli their
repeated follicitations, he agreed to articles of accommodation,
which lie would otherwifc have rijctlced with dlil.lain. The
chiif of tllcm n.'crc, that lie ihould rcfign the llcCtlor;il dignity,
as well for hiilfelf, as ior his )i pulrily, into thle Ijlplror's

U.J 9 landc),

hlis teaty
will Charlesl
by which he
surrenders
the E.edo-
nitdy Jc;

BOOK IX.

1547.

and remains
a prisoner.

Miau ice put
il poflI;nli,n
ffilt 1 I'.lclo.
raJ (lmini ,ns.

hands, to be disposed of entirely at his pleasure; that he ihould
instantly put the Imperial troops in possession of the cities of
Wittemberg and Gotha; that he should set Albert of Branden-
burg at liberty without ransom; that he should submit to the
decrees of the Imperial chamber, and acquiesce in whatever refor-
mation the Emperor should make in the constitution of that
court; that he ihould renounce all leagues against the Emperor
or King of the Romans, and enter into no alliance for the future;
in which they were not comprehended. In return for these
important concefions, the Emperor not only promised to spare his
life, but to fettle on him and his posterity the city of Gotha and
its territories, together with an annual pension of fifty thousand
florins, payable out of the revenues of the eletorate; and like-
wife to grant him a fum in ready money to be applied. towards
the discharge of his debts. Even these articles of grace were clogged
with the mortifying condition of his remaining the:Emperor's
prisoner during the reft of his life'.. To the whole, Charles had
subjoined, that he should submit to the decrees of the Pope and
council with regard to the controverted points in religion ;but the
Eleaor, though he had been persuaded to sacrifice all. the objects
which men.commonly hold.to be the dearest and most valuables
was inflexible with regard to this point; and neither threats nor
intreaties could prevail to make him renounce what he deemed
to be truth, or persuade him to ad in opposition. to the dicates
of his conscience.

As soon as the Saxon garrifn marched out of Wittemberg,

the Emperor fulfilled his engagements to Maurice; and in
reward for his merit in having dcfcrtcd the Protcflant cause, and

Slid. 427. Thuan, i. 142. Du Mont Corps Diploni, iv. p. tl, 332.

having
148

hiving contributed with such success towards the diflolution of
the Smalkaldic league, he gave him pofleffion of that city, toge-
ther with all the other towns in the elecorate. It was not without
relucance, however, that he made such a sacrifice; the extraor-
dinary success of his arms had begun -to operate, in its usual
manner, upon his ambitious mind, fuggefling new and vast pro-
jeds for the aggrandizement of his family, towards the accom-
plifhment of which the retaining of Saxony would have been of
the utmost consequence. But as this scheme was not then ripe
for execution, he durst not yet venture to disclose it; nor would
it have been either safe or prudent to have offended Maurice, at
that junture, by such a manifest violation of all the promises,
which had seduced him to abandon his natural allies.

THrE Landgrave, Maurice's father-in-law, was still in arms;

and though now left alone to maintain the Protestant cause, was
neither a feeble nor contemptible enemy. His dominions were
of considerable extent; his fubjedts animated with zeal for the
Reformation; and if he could have held the Imperialifis at bay
for a short time, he had much to hope from a party whose
strength was still unbroken, whose union as well as vigour might
return, and which had reason to depend, with certainty, on being
effedually supported by the King of France. The Landgrave
thought not of any thing so bold or adventerous; but being
seized with the fame conflernation which had taken pof[effion of
his associates, he was intent, only, how to procure favourable
terms from the Emperor, whom he viewed as a conqueror, to
wliofc will there was a nceffity of fibmitting. Maurice encou-
raged this tame and pacific spirit, by magnifying, on the one
;lncd, the Empcrolr's powvcr; by IboalfiJl, on the other,. of

his

'49
BOOK IX:

1547-

Negociations
with the
Landgrave.

1rAOK IX.

1 5i7.

s I

tLL

'
.i

his owm intered with -his vidorious ally; and by repref£nting tht
advantageou~tonditions which he could not fail of'obtaining by
his interccfion for a friend, vAhom he w-as so follicitous to save.
Sometimes, the Landgrave was induced to place such unbounded
confidence in his promises, that he was impatient to bring mat-
ters to a final accommodation. On oLther occafionrs, the Empe-
ror's exorbitant ambition, restraincd neither by the scruples of
decency, nor the maxims ofjuffice, together with the recent and
Ihocking proof which he had given of this in the cruel and op-
preffive treatment of the Eletor of Saxony, 'ame so full into his
thoughts, and made such a lively impression on them, that he broke
oNT abruptly the negociations which he had begun; seeming to be
convinced that it was more prudent to depend for safety on his own
arms, than to confide in Charles's generosity. But this bold refolu-
ticn, which despair had suggested to an impatient fpirit,fretted by
dilappointments, was not of long continuance. Upon a more
deliberate furvcy of the enemies power, and his own weakness,
his doubts and fears returned upon him, and together with them
the spirit of negociating, and the desire of accommodation.

MAI. R ICF, and tlhe rEleor of Brandenburg, acled as media-

tors bctwvccn hin and the Emperor; and after all that the former
h ::d vatrntcd ofiis influence, thc'conditions prescribed to the LanI-
gravc werc cxtrlcitcl' rigorous. The articles with regard to his
r(c:'! !:cT;.' thlt hl'.:agiC of S'malkaldc, acknowledging, tlic .mpc-
r')r'; atlli)l'ily, nil(t ftilniitting to the dccrccs of' ic

t nipcrial
clU:1lnl)Cr, wr tlic il iic wsliiclli'had been impose(d on tlic llcalor

(i' axoIr t Plcidcs thlicc, he was rcqilliire( to filrrclldcr lhis

!ci I,'n ;,n'' tcrrii (,rics to te lilmperor ; to i m )lore for pardon on
li; l: cc:;; t,' p:'y an hundredl and fifty thloufindl crovins towards

8» dclray ingF
J50

deftaying the expences of the war; to demolikh the fortifica- BOOK IX"
tions of all the towns in his dominions except one; to oblige 547.
the garrison which he placed in it to take an oath of fidelity to
the Erqperor; to allow a free pafiage through his territories to
the Imperial troops as often as it ffali be demanded; to deliver
up all his artillery and ammunition to the Emperor; to set at
liberty, without ransom, Henry of Brunswick, together with the
other prisoners he had taken during the war; and neither to take
arms himself, for the future, nor to permit any of his fubjcs-
to serve against the Emperor or his allies ".

THE Landgrave ratified thefc articles, though with the utmofl To wmlich he

submits..

relutance, as they cont:l^;,-( no flipulation with regard to the
manner in which he was to be treated, and left him entirely at
the Emperor's mercy. Necctfflty, however, compelled him to
give his assent. Charles, who had assumed the' haughty and im-
perious tone of a conqueror, ever since the reducion.of Saxony,
inlifed on an unconditional submission, and would permit nothing
to be added to the terms which he had prescribed, that could
in any degree limit the fulness of his power, or reftrailn hin
from behaving as he saw meet towards a Prince lwhomn lie
regarded as abfi)lutely at his diliofal. Buit though he would
not vouchflf-c to ncgociate Vwith the Landgrave, on iich a 1oot-
ing of cquality, as to litf-er any article to be il Ilrtci amllion
thole which he had dictated to him, that could be coin(idercd as
a formal stipulation fbr the security and freedom of his pcrfln;
he, or his miniflkrs in his name, gave the iClor of B-ralldeln-
(lclldurg and Maurice fucli full fatisftcio(n with rcard to this
point, that they assured the Iandglavc that Challrls v ;iuld l)C'lav

kSlcid. 430. Thuain. 1. iv. 146.

to

15I.

BOOKIX.

A S47.

HM repair. to
the JIiperial
COurt.

tohim in the fame way that he had done to the Duke of Wirtem-
berg, andwould allow him, as soon as he had made his submission,
to return to his own territories. Upon finding the Landgrave
to be still possessed with his former suspicions of the Emperor's
intentions, and unwilling to trust -verbal or ambiguous declara-
tions, in a matter of such essential concern as his own liberty,
they sent him a bond signed by them both, containing the most
solemn obligations, that if any violence whatsoever were offered
to his person, during his interview with the Emperor, they would
instantly surrender themselves to his sons, and remain in their
hands to be treated by them in the fame manner as the Emperor
should treat him'.

THIS, together with the indispensable obligation of perform-

ing what was contained in the articles of which he had accepted,
removed his doubts and scruples, or made it necessary to get
over them. He repaired, for that purpose, to the Imperial camp
at Hall in Saxony, where a circumstance occurred which revived
his suspicions and increased his fears. Just as he was about to
enter the chamber of presence, in order to make his public sub-
mission to the Emperor, a copy of the articles which he had ap-
proved of was put into his hands, in order that he might ratify
them anew. Upon perusing them, he perceived that the Imperial
miniftcrs had added two new articles; one importing, that if any
dispute should arise concerning the meaning of the former con-
ditions, the Emperor should have the right of putting what inter-
*pretation upon them he thought most reasonable; the other,
that the Landgrave was bound to submit implicitly to the deci-
sions of the council of Trent. This unworthy artifice, calculated

ADu Mont Corps Diplom. iv. p. I , 336.
I 5z

to furprize him into an approbation of articles, to which he had
not the most distant idea of afenting, by presenting them to him
at a time when his mind was engrossed and difqueited with the
thoughts of that humbling ceremony which he had to perform,
filled the Landgrave with indignation, and made him fly out
into all those violent expressions of rage to which his temper
was prone. With some difficulty, the Elector of Brandenburg
and Maurice prevailed at length on the Emperor's ministers to
drop the former article as unjust, and to explain the latter in such
a manner, that he could agree to it, without openly renouncing
the Protestant religion.

THIS obstacle being surmounted, the Landgrave was impatient

to finifl a ceremony which, how mortifying soever, had been
declared necessary towards his obtaining pardon. The Emperor
was feated on a magnificent throne, with all the ensigns of his
dignity, surrounded by a numerous train of the Princes of the
Empire, among whom was Henry of Brunswick, lately the
Landgrave's prisoner, and now, by a sudden reverse of fortune,
a -fpeaator of his humiliation. The Landgrave was introduced
with great solemnity, and advancing towards the throne, fell
upon his knees. His chancellor, who walked behind him,
immediately read, by his maRler's command, a paper which con-
tained an humble confeflion of the crime whereof he had been
guilty; an acknowledgment that he had mcritcd on that account
the mofl revere puniflncent; an absolute resignation of himself
and his dominions to be disposed of at the Emperor's pleasure;
a filbniflive petition for pardon, hisl hopes of which were founded
entirely on the Emperor's clemency; and it concluded, with pro-
miscs of behaving, ifor the future, like a subjec, whose principles
of loyalty and obedience would be confirmed, and would even
derive new force from the fcntiments of gratitude which must

VoL. II . X hercaftcr

BOOK IX.

'547-

The manner
in which the
Emperor re-
ceived him.

153

Boo IX. hereafter fill and animate his heart. While the chancellor was

1,47. reading this abjec declaration, the eyes of all the fpe&ators were

fixed on the unfortunate Landgrave; few could behold a Prince, so
powerful as well as high-fpirited, suing for mercy in the posture
of a suppliant, without being touched with commiseration, and
perceiving serious refletions arise in their minds upon the infta-
bility and emptiness of human grandeur. The Emperor viewed
the whole tranfadion with an haughty unfeeling composure; and
preserving a profound silence himself, made a sign to one of his
secretaries to read his answer; the tenor of which was, That tho'
he might have jutfly inflited on him the grievous puniihment
which his crimes deserved, yet, prompted by his own generosity,
moved by the follicitations of several Princes in behalf of the
Landgrave, and influenced by his penitential acknowledgments,
he would not deal with him according to the rigour ofjuflice,
and would subjed him to no penalty which was not specified
in the articles that he had already subscribed. The moment the
secretary had finished, Charles turned away abruptly without
deigning to give the unhappy suppliant any sign of companion
or reconcilement. He did not even desire him to rife from his
knees; which the Landgrave having ventured to do unbidden,
advanced towards the Emperor with an intention to kits his hand,
flattering himself, that his guilt being now fully expiated, he
might presume to take that liberty. But the Eletor of Bran-
denburg perceiving that this familiarity would be offensive to the
Emperor, interposed, and desired the Landgrave to go along with
him and Maurice to the Duke of Alva's apartments in the castle.

I-I: was received and entertained by that nobleman with the

rcfpet and courtesy due to such a guest. But, after supper,
while he was engaged in play, the Duke took the Eledor and
Maurice aside, and communicated to them the Emperor's orders

2 that
154

that the Landgrave mutl remain a prisoner in that place under BoOK IX.
the custody of a Spanish guard. As they had not hitherto en- 47.
tertained the molt distant suspicion of the Emperor's sincerity He is detain-

td a prisoner.

and recitude of intention, their furprize was exceflive, and
their indignation not inferior to it, on discovering how greatly
they had been deceived themselves, and how infamously abused
in having been made the instruments of deceiving and ruining
their friend. They had recourse to complaints, to arguments and
to intreaties, in order to save themselves from that disgrace, and
to extricate him out of the wretched situation into which he had
been betrayed by too great confidence in them. But the Duke
of Alva remained inflexible, and pleaded the necessity of exe-
cuting the Emperor's commands. By this time it grew late,
and the Landgrave, who knew nothing of what had passed, nor
dreaded the snare in which he was entangled, prepared for de-
parting, when the fatal orders were intimated to him. He was
firuck dumb at first with astonishment, but after being silent a
few moments, he broke out into all the violent expressions,
which horror at injustice accompanied with fraud naturally fug-
gefls. He complained, he expoftulated, he exclaimed; some-
times inveighing against the Emperor's artifices as unworthy of
a great and generous Prince; sometimes censuring the credulity
of his friends in trusting to Charles's insidious promises; some-
times charging them with meanness in slooping to lend their
affiflance towards the execution of such a perfidious and dif-
honourable scheme; and in the end he required them to remem-
ber their engagements to his children, and inltantly to fulfil
them. They, after giving way for a little to the torrent of his
passion, solemnly aftcrted their own innocence and upright in-
tention in the whole tranfadion, and encouraged him to hope,
that as soon as they law the Emperor, they would obtain rcdrcfs

X 2 of

xr$

BOOK IX. of an injury, which affe&ed their own honour, no less than it

15+7. did his liberty. At the fame time, in order to sooth his rage

and impatience, Maurice remained with him during the night,
in the apartment where he was confined .

eT e LcCNor NEXT morning, the Eleaor and Maurice applied jointly
urg ande to the Emperor, representing the infamy to which they would
Macrice folli- be exposed throughout Germany, if the Landgrave were de-
cit in vain for
hi libcerty. tained in custody; that they would not have advised, nor would

he himself have consented to an interview, if they had fufpeted
that the loss of his liberty was to be the consequence of his
submission; that they were bound to procure his release, hav-
ing plighted their faith to that effet, and engaged their own
persons as sureties for his. Charles listened to their earnest
remonstrances with the utmost coolness. He now stood no
longer in need of their services, and they had the mortification
to find that their former obsequiousness was forgotten, and
little regard paid to their intercession. He was ignorant, he
told them, of their particular or private tranfadions with the
Landgrave, nor was his conduct to be regulated by these;
though he knew well what he himself had promised, which
was not that the Landgrave should be exempt from all restraint,
lbut that he should not be kept a prisoner during life *. Having
f.id this with a peremptory and decisive tone, he put an end to

the

* Sleid. 433. Thuan: 1. iv. 147. Struv. corp. hist. Germ. ii. 1052.
* According to fevcral historians of great name, the Emperor, in his treaty

wxith the Landgrave, flipulated that he would not detain him in any prison. But
in executing the deed, which was written in the German tongue, the Imperial
niiniacrs fraudulently fubfititcd the word ewiger instead of einiger, and thus the
treaty in place of a promise that he Ihould not be detained in any prison, con-
tained only an engngement that he should not be detained in perpetual impfifon-

mcnt.
136

the conference; and they feeing no probability, at that time, of BOOK IX.
making any impression upon the Emperor, who seemed to have
taken his resolution deliberately, and to be obflinately bent on
adhering to it, were obliged to acquaint the unfortunate pri-
soner with the ill success of their endeavours- in his behalf.
This disappointment threw him into a new and more violent
transport of rage, so that to prevent his proceeding to some
desperate extremity, the Eletor and Maurice promired that'
they would not quit the Emperor, until, by the frequency and
fervour of their importunity, they had extorted his consent to
set him free. They accordingly renewed their follicitations as
few days afterwards, but found Charles more haughty and in-
tratable than before, and were warned that if they touched.
again upon a subjea so disagreeable, and with regard to which
he had determined to hear nothing farther, he would instantly
give orders to convey the prisoner into Spain. Afraid of hurt-
ing the Landgrave by an officious or ill-timed zeal to serve
him, they not only desisted, but left the court, and as they didl
not chufe to meet the firfR rallies of the Landgrave's rage upon.
his learning the cause of their departure, they informed him of
it by a letter, wherein they exhorted him to fulfil all that he
had promised to the Emperor, as the most certain means of
procuring a speedy release.

ment. But authors eminent for historical knowledge and critical accuracy have
called in quefiion the truth of this common story. Thefilence of Sleidan
with regard to it, as well as its not being mentioned in the various memorials
which he has published concerning the Landgrave's imprisonment, greatly favour
this opinion. But as several books which contain the information neccfrary to.
wards difcufling this point, with accuracy, are written in the German language,
which I do not underfland, I cannot pretend to inquire into this matter with the
fame accuracy, with which I have endeavoured to fettle some other contraverted
sacs that have occurred in the course of this history. Sce.Struv. Corp. io52.
Moficimi's Eccief. ifti. vol. ii. p. 161, 162. Engl. Edition.

WHATEVER.

x57

BOOK IX. WHATEVER violent emotions their abandoning his cause in
'^ ' tthis manner occasioned, his impatience to recover liberty made
Hies Impa. him follow their advice. He paid the fum which had been im-
tience under
rearaint. posed on him, ordered his fortresses to be razed, and renounced

all alliances that could give offence. This prompt compliance
with the will of the conqueror produced no effet. He was still
guarded with the fame vigilant severity; and being carried about,
together with the degraded Eledtor of Saxony, wherever the
Emperor went, their disgrace and his triumph was each day re-
newed. The fortitude and equanimity, with which the Elecor
bore these repeated insults, were not more remarkable than
the Landgrave's fretfulness and impatience. His active impe-
tuous mind could ill brook refiraint; and reflecion upon the
shameful artifices by which he had been decoyed into that
situation, as well as indignation at the injustice with which he
was still detained in it, drove him often to the wildest excesses
of passion.

The rigour of THE people of the different cities, to whom Charles
the Emperor's thus wantonly exposed these illuRrious prisoners as a pub-
exations in
Germany. lic fpecacle, were sensibly touched with such an insult offered

to the Germanic body, and murmured loudly at this indecent
treatment of two of its greatest Princes. They had soon other
causes of complaint, and such as affeced them more nearly.
Charles proceeded to add oppression to insult, and arrogating
to himself all the rights of a conqueror, exercised them
with the utmost rigour. He ordered his troops to seize the
artillery and military stores belonging to such as had been mem-
bers of the Smalkaldic lcague, and having collected upwards of
five hundred pieces of cannon, a great number in that age, lie
Lent part of them into the Low-Countries, part into Italy, and

part
l5S

part into Spain, in order to spread by this means the fame of his
success, and that they might serve as monuments of his having
subdued a nation, hitherto deemed invincible. He then levied,
by his sole authority, large fums as well upon those who had
served him with fidelity during the war, as upon such as had
been in arms against him; upon the former, as their contingent
towards a war, which having been undertaken, as he pretended,
for the common benefit, ought to be carried on at the common
charge; upon the latter, as a fine by way of punishment for
their rebellion. By these exaaions he amasscd above one million
lix hundred thousand crowns, a fum which appeared prodigious
in the sixteenth century. But so general was the conflernation
which had seized the Germans upon his rapid success, and fucl
their dread of his victorious troops, that all implicitly obeyed
his commands; though, at the fame time, these extraordinary
stretches of power greatly alarmed a people, jealous of their
privileges, and habituated during several ages to confider the
Imperial authority as neither extensive nor formidable. This dif-
content and resentment, howinduftrioufly soever they concealed
them, became universal; and the more these passions vcere
restrained and kept down for the prefcnt, the more likely were
they to burst out soon with additional violence.

WHILE Charles gave law to the Germans like a conquered

people, Ferdinand treated his fubjeds in Bohemia with flill
greater rigour. That kingdom poffcflcd privileges and immu-
nities as cxtenfive as tlofe of any nation in which the feudal
institutions were eflalliffhcd. The prerogative of their Kings
was extremcly limited, and the crown iticlfelective. Ferdinand,
when placed on the throne, had confirmed their liberties vwith
cvcry fIolcmnity prcicrilbcd by their cxcclfive follicitudec ;r 1ho

fLcrily

BOOK IX.

1547.

F'crdit :'-

i G . (,L
su hj ellh.

i59

BOOK JX.

15.47.

security of a constitution of government to which they were ex-
tremcly attached. He soon began, however, to be weary of a
jurifdidtion so much circumscribed, and to despise a sceptre
which he could not tranfinit to his posterity; and notwithftand-
ing all his former engagements, he attempted to overturn the
conltitution from its foundations; that inflead of an eleeive
kingdom he might render it hereditary. But the Bohemians
fcemed resolved not to relinqui(h, tamely, privileges which they
had long enjoyed. At the fame time, many of them having
cmlraced the docrines of the Reformers, the feeds of which
John Huss and Jerome of Prague had planted in their country
about the beginning of the preceding century, the desire of
acquiring religious liberty mingled itfelfwith their zeal for their
civil rights; and these two kindred passions heightening, as
usual, each other's force, precipitated them immediately into
violent measures. They had not only refused to serve their
tovcrcign against the confederates of Smalkalde, but having
entered into a close alliance with the Eledor of Saxony, they
bound themselves, by a solemn association, to defend their
ancient constitution; and to persist, until they ihould obtain
such additional grants as they thought necessary towards per-
feding the present model of their government, or rendering it
more permanent. They chose Caspar Phlug, a nobleman ofdif-
tindion, to be their general; and levied an army of thirty thou-
sand men to enforce their petitions. But either from the weakness
of their leader, or from thedlifenfions in a great unwieldy body,
which, having united hatily, was not thoroughly compaced, or
from some other unknown cause, the subsequent operations of the
B3ohemians bore no proportion to the zeal and ardour with which
they took their first resolutions. They suffered themselves to
be amused so long with negociations and overtures of different

7 kinds,
i6o

kinds, that before they could enter Saxony, the battle of Muhl-
berg was fought, the Ele&or deprived of his dignity and terri-
tories, the Landgrave confined to close custody, and the league
of Smalkalde entirely dissipated. The fame dread of the Empe-
ror's power which had seized the reft of the Germans, reached
them. As soon as their sovereign approached with a body of
Imperial troops, they instantly dispersed, thinking of nothing
but how to attone for their past guilt, and to acquire some hope
of forgiveness, by a prompt fubmiiffion. But Ferdinand, who
entered his dominions full of that implacable resentment which
inflames Monarchs whose authority has been despised, was not
to be mollified by the late repentance and involuntary return of
rebellious fubjets to their duty. He even heard, unmoved, the
intreaties and tears of the citizens of Prague, who appeared
before him in the posture of suppliants, and implored for mercy.
The sentence which he pronounced against them was rigorous to
extremity; he aboliihed many of their privileges, he abridged
others, and new modelled the conflitutionaccording to his pleasure.
He punished many of those who had been most active in form-
ing the late aflociation against him with death, and still a greater
number with confiscation of their goods, or perpetual banish-
ment. He obliged all his fubjeds, of every condition, to give
up their arms to be deposited in forts where he planted garrisons;
and after disarming his people, he loaded them with new and
exorbitant taxes. Thus, by an ill conducted and unsuccessful
effort to extend their privileges, the Bohemians not only en-
larged the sphere of the royal prerogative which they intended
to have circumfcribed,-but they almost annihilated those liberties
which they aimed at eflablifling on a broader and more secure
foundation ".

"Sleid. 408, 419, 434. Thuan. 1. iv. 129, 150. Struv. Corp. ii.
VOL. .11. Y T-l F

BOOK IX.

1547'

I6I

BOOK IX. THE Emperor, having now humbled, and, as ha imagined,
-7 vT 'subdued the independant and flubbora spirit of the Germans by

1547.
Diet held at the terror of arms and the rigour of punishments held a diet

Aurg. at Augiburg, in order to compose finally the controversies with

regard to religion, which had so long disturbed the Empire. He
durfi not, however, trust the determination. of a matter so inte-
refling to the free suffrage of the Germans, broken as their minds.
now were to fubjeaion. He entered the city at the head of
his Spaniih troops, and assigned them quarters there. The reft
of his soldiers he cantoned in the adjacent villages; so that the
members of the diet, while they carried on. their deliberations,
.were surrounded by the fame army which had overcome their-
countrymen. Immediately after his public entry, Charles gave'
a proof of the violence with which he intended to proceed. He:
took possession by force of the cathedral together with one of the-
principal churches; andhis priefts.having, by various, ceremonies,.
purified them from the pollution with which they supposed the
unhallowed ministrations of the Protestants to have defiled them,,
they re-eftablihed with great pomp the rites of the Romish,
worship °.

ThoEmre- THE concourse of members to this diet was extraordinary;
ror exhorts
t!er f
to h- the importance of the affairs concerning which it was to delibe-.

it to rate, and the fear of giving offence to the Emperor by an ab-
Council. fence which lay open to mifconftruCion, brought together almost

all the Princes, nobles, and rcprefentatives of cities who had right
to fit in that assembly. The Emperor, in the speech with which
he opened the meeting, called their attention immediately to
that point, which feenled chiefly to merit it. Having men-

Sleid. 435, 437.

tioncd
x62

/ioned the fatal effecs of the religious dissensions which had BOOK IX.
arisen in Germany, arid taken notice of his own unwearied 547.
endeavours to procure a general council, which alone could pro-
vide a remedy adequate to these evils, he exhorted them to recog-
nize its authority, and to stand to the award of an assembly, to
which they had originally appealed, as having the sole right of
judgment in the cafe.

BUT the council, to which Charles wished them to refer Varirus revb-

tluli,)n- in the

all their controversies, had, by this time, undergone a violent ciu.icl.
change. The fear and jealousy, with which the Emperor's firit
successes against the confederates of Smalkalde had inspired the
Pope, continued to encreafe. Not satisfied with attempting to
retard the progress of the Imperial arms, by the sudden recal of
his troops, Paul began to confider the Emperor as an enemy,
the weight of whose power he must soon feel, and against
whom he could not be too hasty in taking precautions. He
foresaw that the immediate effet of the Emperor's acquiring
absolute power in Germany, would be to render him entirely
master of all the decisions of the council, if it ihould continue
to meet in Trent. It was dangerous to allow a Monarch, so
ambitious, to get the command of this formidable engine, which
he might employ at pleasure to limit or overturn the Papal
authority. As the only method of preventing this, he deter-
mined to translate the council to some city more immediately
under his own jurifdidtion, and at a greater distance from the
terror of the Emperor's arms, or the reach of his influence. An
.incident fortunately occurred which gave this measure the
appearance of being neccfsary. One or two of the fathers of the
council, together with some of their domestics, happening to

Y 3 die

BOOK IX.

1547.

March 1I.
Trandated
from Trent
to Bologna.

Symptoms of
difgult be.
tween the
Pope and
Emperor.

die suddenly, the physicians, deceived by the symptoms, or
suborned by the Pope's legates, pronounced the distemper to be
infectious and peflilential. Some of the prelates, struck with a
panic, retired; others were impatient to be gone; and after a
short consultation, the council was translated to Bologna, a city
subjet to the Pope. All the bishops in the Imperial interest,
warmly opposed this resolution, as taken without neceflity, and
founded on false or frivolous pretexts. All the Spanish pre-
lates, and most of the Neapolitan, by the Emperor's express
command, remained at Trent; the reft, to the number of thirty-
four, accompanying the legates to Bologna. Thus a schism
commenced, in that very assembly, which had been called to heal
the divisions of Christendom; the fathers of Bologna inveighing
against those who staid at Trent, as contumacious and regardless
of the Pope's authority; while the other accused them of being
so far intimidated by the fears of imaginary danger, as to remove
to a place where their consultations could prove of no service
towards re-establishing peace and order in Germany P.

TH E Emperor, at the fame time, employed all his interest to

procure the return of the council to Trent. But Paul, who
highly applauded his own sagacity in having taken a ftep
which put it out of Charles's power to acquire the direcion of
that assembly, paid no regard to a request, the objec of which
was Co extremely obvious. The summer was confilmed in fruit-
less negociations with refpetl to this point, the importunity of
the one and the obstinacy of the other daily increasing. At last an
event happened which widened tie breach irreparably, and ren-
dered the Pope utterly averfc from liftcning to any proposal that

* F. Paul, 248, &c.

came
164

came from the Emperor. Charles, as has been already observed,
had so violently exasperated Peter Lewis Farnese, the Pope's son,
by refusing to grant him the investiture of Parma and Placentia,
that he had watched ever since that time with all the vigilance of
resentment for an opportunityof revenging that injury. He had
endeavoured to precipitate his father into open hostilities against
the Emperor, and had earnestly follicited the King of France to
invade Italy. His hatred and resentment extended to allthofe
whom he knew that the Emperor favoured; he persecuted Gon-
zaga, governor of Milan, with ill offices, and had encouraged
Fiefco in his attempt upon the life of Andrew Doria, because both
Gonzaga and Doria pofleffed a great degree of the Emperor's
esteem and confidence. His malevolence and secret intrigues were
not unknown to the Emperor, who could not be more desirous
to take vengeance on him, than Gonzaga and Doria were to be
employed as his infiruments in inflicting it. Farnese, by the
profligacy of his life, and by enormities of every kind, equal
to those committed by the worst tyrants who have disgraced
human nature, had rendered himself so odious, that they
thought any violence whatever might be attempted against him.
They soon found among his own fubjeas, persons who were
eager, and even deemed it meritorious to lend their hands in
such a service. As he, animated with the jealousy which
usually possesses petty sovereigns, had employed all the cruelty
and fraud, whereby they endeavour to supply their defec of
power, in order to humble and extirpate the nobility subjed
to his government, five noblemen of the greatcft diflindion
in Placentia, combined to avenge the injuries, which they
themselves had iuffered, as well as those which he had offer-
ed to their order. They formed their plan in conjunc-
tion with Gonzaga; but it remains uncertain whether he

* o-originally

BoOK IX.

1547.

The afillana-
tion of the
l'opc's son.

BOOK '.

1547.

ipt, 1o.

The Imperial
troops take
pofflcfio of
Placentia.

originally faggefted the scheme to then, or only approved of
what they proposed, and co-operated in carrying it on. They
concerted all the previous steps with such foresight, con-
duted their intrigues with such secrecy, and displayed such
courage in the execution of their design, that it may be ranked
among the most audacious deeds of that nature mentioned in
history. One body of the conspirators fwprized, at mid-day,
the gates of the citadel of Placentia where Varnefe rerfded,
overpowered his guards, and murdered him. Another party of
them made themselves masters of the town, and called upon their
fellow-citizens to take arms, in order to reaffume their liberty.
The multitude ran towards the citadel, from which three great
guns, a signal concerted with Gonzaga, had been fired; and
before they could guess the cause or the authors of the tumult,
they saw the lifeless body of the tyrant hanging by the heels
from one of the windows of the citadel. But so universally
detestable had he become, that not one expressed any sentiment
of concern at such a fad reverse of fortune, or of indignation
at this.ignominious treatment of a sovereign Prince. The exul-
tation at the success of the conspiracy was general, and all
applauded the acors in it, as the deliverers of their country.
The body was tumbled into the ditch that surrounded the cita-
del, and exposed to the insults of the rabble; the reft of the
citizens returned to their usual occupations, as if nothing extra-
ordinary had happened.

BEFORE next morning, a body of troops arriving from the

frontiers of the Milanese, where they had been polled in expec-
tation of the event, took possession of the city in the Emperor's
name, and reinstated the inhabitants in the possession of their
ancient privileges. Parma, which the Imperialists attempted

t likewise

likewise to furprize, was fared by the vigilance and fidelityof the BoOK IX.
officers whom Farnese had intsufted with the command of the gar- 15" -
rifon. The death of a son whom, notwithfianding his infamous
vices, Paul loved with an excess of parental tenderness, over-
whelmed him with the deepest afflition; and the loss of'a ciy,
of such consequence as Placentia, greatly embittered his sorrow;
He accused Gonzaga, in open consistory, of having committed
a cruel murder in order to prepare the way for an unjust ufur.
pation, and immediately demanded of the Emperor fatisfation
for both; for the former, by the punishment of Gonzaga; for the
latter, by the restitution of Placentia to his grandson Ocavio, its
rightful owner. But Charles, who, rather than quit a prize of such
value, was willing to expose himself to the imputation of being
accessary to the crime which had given an opportunity of seizing
it, and to bear the infamy of defrauding his own fon-in-law of
the inheritance which belonged to him, eluded all his follicita-
tions, and determined to keep pofeffion of the city together with
its territoriesq.

THIS refolutionr, flowing from an ambition so rapacious, as The Pope

to be restrained by no consideration either of decency or justice, iance ofth a
transported the Pope so far beyond his usual moderation and cau- ndthh KVing
tion, that he was eager to take arms againf the Emperor in order net'ans.
to be avenged on the murderers of his son, and to recover the
inheritance wrested from his family. Conscious, however, of
his own inability to contend with such an enemy, he warmly
follicited the French King and the republick of Vcnice to join.
in an offensive league against Charles. But Henry was intent at

q F..Paul. 257. Pallavic. 41, 42. Thuan. iv. 156. Mem. de Ribier. 59, 67,.
Natalis Comitis Hiftor. lib. iii. p. 64,

that

167

BooKIX.

'S47.

The diet of
Auglburg pe-
titions for the
return of the
council to
Trent.

that time on other objecs. His ancient allies the Scots, having
been defeated by the English in one of the greatest battles ever
fought between these two rival nations, he was about to fend a
numerous body of veteran troops into that country, as well to
preserve it from being conquered, as to gain the acquisition of a
new kingdom to the French monarchy, by marrying his son
the Dauphin to the young Queen of Scotland. An undertaking
accompanied with such manifest advantages, the success of which
appeared to be so certain, was not to be relinquished for the re-
mote profpea of benefit from an alliance depending upon the pre-
carious life of a Pope of fourscore, who had nothing at heart but
the gratification of his own private resentment. Instead, therefore,
of rushing headlong into the alliance proposed, Henry amused the
Pope with fuchgeneralprofeffions and promises, as might keep him
from any thoughts of endeavouring to accommodate his diffe-
rences with the Emperor, but at the fame time avoided any such
engagement as might occasion an immediate rupture between
Charles and himself, or precipitate him into a war for which he
was not prepared. The Venetians, though much alarmed at
feeing Placentia in the hands of the Imperialifis, imitated the
wary conduc of the French King, which resembled so nearly
the spirit with which they themselves usually carried on their
negociations r.

BUT, though the Pope found that it was not in his power to

light up immediately the flames of war, he did not forget the
injuries, which he was obliged for the preient to endure;
resentment fettled deeper in his mind, and became more ranco-
rous in proportion as he felt the difficulty of gratifying it. It

' Mem. de Ribier. ii. 63, 71, 78, 85, 95. Paruta Iflor. di Vcnez. 199, 203.
Thuan. iv. 160.

was,
x68

was, while these sentiments of enmity were in full force, and BooK IX.
the desire of vengeance at its height, that the diet of Augsburg, I..
by the Emperor's command, petitioned the Pope, in name of the
whole Germanic body, to enjoin the prelates who had retired to
Bologna, to return again to Trent, and to renew their delibera-
tions in that place. Charles had been at great pains in bringing
the members to join in this request. Having observed a confi-
derable variety of sentiments among the Protestants with refpet
to the submission which he had required to the decrees of the
council, some of them being altogether intradtable, while
others were ready to acknowledge its right of jurifdidion
upon certain conditions, he employed all his address in order
to gain or to divide them. He threatened and over-awed the
Eletor Palatine, a weak Prince, and obnoxious to vengeance
on account of the affiflancc which he had given to the confe-
derates of Smalkalde. The hope of procuring liberty for the
Landgrave, together with the formal confirmation of his own
electoral dignity, overcame Maurice's scruples, or prevented
him from opposing what he knew would be agreeable to the
Emperor. The Elector of Brandcnburgh, less influenced by
religious zeal than any Prince of that age, was cafily induced
to imitate their example in assenting to all that the Emperor
required. The deputies of the cities remained still to be brought
over; they were more tenacious of their principles, and though
every thing that could operate cither on their hopes or fears was
tried, the utmiofl that they would promifi was to acklnowlcdlge
the jurifdlicion of the council, if cflcdual provision were nmade
for fccuring the divines of all parties free acccfs to that afcnimbly,
with entire liberty of' debate; and if all points in controversy
vcre decided according to ifripttlrc and the ufige of the prini-

VoL,. Ill. liv;e

I69

X17-
OOK IX.

134 7.

OC. Z9.

'I he PTne

deniannJ.
PtC. 2-,

ti.e church. But whenr the memorial containing this declara-
tion was presented to the Emperor, he ventured to put in prac-
tice a very extraordinary artifice. Without reading the paper, or
taking any notice of the conditions on which they had insisted, he
seemed to take it for granted that they had complied with hisde-
mand, and gave thanks to the deputies for theirfull and unreserved
fubinifflon to the decrees of the council. The deputies, though afto-
nifhed at what they had heard, did not attempt to set him right,
both parties being better pleased that the matter ihould remain
under this slate of ambiguity, than to push for an explanation,
which muff have occasioned a dispute, and would have led, per-
haps, to a rupture'.

I-HAVING obtained this seeming submission of the diet to the

authority of the council, Charles employed that as an argument
to enforce their petition for its return to Trent. But the Pope,
from the iatisfadion of mortifying the Emperor, as well as
from his own aversion to what was demanded, resolved, without
hesitation, that this petition should be rejeced; though in order
to avoid the imputation of being influenced wholly by resent-
ment, he had the address to throw it upon the fathers at Bologna,
to put a dircd negative upon the requcft. He referred to their
consideration the 12tition of the diet, and they, ready to con-
firm by their afflnt whatever the legatcs were pleased to didatc,
dcclarcd that the council could not, in confiflcnce with its dig-
nity, return to Trent, unless the prelates who, by remaining
there, had difcovcred a fchimiatick spirit, would sirss repair to
Bologna, and join their brethren; and that, even after their
jituniion, the council could not renew its consultations with any

P . Paul, 259. Slcid. 440. Tiuan. tom. * 55.

,. V..

prolpecc
7

profpe& of benefit to the church, if the Germans did not prove
their intention of obeying its future decrees to be sincere, by
yielding immediate obedience to those which it had already
pal '.

THIS answer was communicated to the Emperor by the

Pope, who at the fame time exhorted him to comply with
demands that appeared to be so reasonable. But Charles was
better acquainted with the duplicity of the Pope's characer than
to be deceived by such a gross artifice; he knew that the prelates
of Bologna durst utter no sentiment but what Paul inspired; and,
therefore, overlooking them as mere infiruments in the hand of
another, he confidered their reply as a full discovery of the
Pope's intentions. As he could no longer hope to acquire
such an ascendant in the council as to render it subservient to
his own plan, he saw it to be necessary that Paul flould not have
it in his power to turn against him the authority of so venerable
an assembly. In order to prevent this, he lent two Spaniih
lawyers to Bologna, who, in the presence of the legates, pro-
tefled, That the translation of the council to that place had been
unnecessary, and founded on false or fiivolous pretexts; that
while it continued to meet there, it outght to be deemed an
unlawful and fchliiatical conventicle; that all its dcci!i'r s ouillt
of course to be held as null and invalid; and tli:it as the Pope,
togetherwith the corrupt ccclciaflics vho depended on li i, hadl
abandoned the care of the church, the IEmpror, :s it3 protcc-
tor, would employ all the po.?tr which Cod hall cotmnlitted to
him, in order to prefcrve it fromi thote callamltl s withi wthicll it
was threatencd. A tfwv days after, the Ill:erial ambafl.ilor at

a

BooK IX;

1547.

2'~

I; &~: 1

Bo.") 1 r a -

January i6.

I L 1.

' F. I'a~l '2 I(,.I
4

51,

I7I
Rolmc

BooK IX. Rome demanded an audience of the Pope; and in presence of

LTs all the Cardinals as well as foreign ministers, protefled against the

proceedings of the prelates at Bologna, in terms equally harsh
and difrefpeCful'.

The Fmftor IT was not long before Charles proceeded to carry these
v p.re3to threats, which greatly alarmed both the Pope and council at
erve oas the Bologna, into execution. He let the diet know the ill success
iR Germany. of his endeavours to procure a favourable answer to their peti-

tion, and that the Pope, equally regardless of their entreatiess
and of his services to the church, had refused to gratify them by
allowing the council to meet again at Trent; that, though all
hope of holding this assembly in a place, where they might look
for freedom of debate and judgment, was not to be given up,
the profped of it was, at present, distant and uncertain; that, in
the mean time, Germany was torn in pieces by religious difien-
sions, the purity of the faith, corrupted, and the minds of the
people disquieted with a multiplicity of new opinions and con-
troverfies formerly unknown among Christians; that, moved by
the duty which he owed to them as their sovereign, and to the
Church as its protedor, he had employed some divines, of known
abilitics and learning, to prepare a system of docrine, to which
all flould conform until a council, such as they wiflled for,
could be convocated. This fyftcm was compiled by Pflug§
IHIlding and Agricola, of lwhom the two formcr were dignitas
ri:s in the lRoiif(h clhurchl, but rcemarkable for their pacific and
Ihealing spirit; the last was a PI'otflant (livine, iufpeced, not
vithout reason, of Iaiving becen ;aiLnecd by bribes and promises,
to l)btray or nuflcad his party ion tlis occalion. The articles

*'F. Pitul, 2t 4. P.lhlav. 51. lcid. < ,6 G olJafli Ct(i2l it. Imperial. i 56r..

prclcntcd.
172

I'7

prifented to the diet of Ratiibon in the year one thousand five BooK IX.-
hundred and forty-one, in order to reconcile the contending par- 5g.
ties, served as a model for the present work. But as the Empe-
ror's situation was much changed since that time, and he found
it no longer necessary to manage the Protestants with. the fame
delicacy as at that juncture, the concefflons in their favour were
not now so numerous, nor did they extend to points of so much
consequence. The treatise contained a compleat system of theo-
logy, conformable in almost every article to the tenets of the
Romifli church. though expressed, for. the most part, in the
softest words, or in scriptural phrases, or in terms of studied
ambiguity. Every doctrine, however, peculiar-to Popery, was
retained; and all the rites, which the Protestants condemned as
inventions of men introduced into the worship of God, were
enjoined. With regard to two points only, some relaxation of
their rigour was granted, and some latitude in pratice admitted.
Such ecclesiastics as had married, and would not put away their
wives, were allowed, nevertheless, to perform all the functions
of their sacred office; and those provinces which had been
accustomed to partake of the cup, as well as of the bredl in the
sacrament of the Lord's Supper, were still indulged the privi-
lege of receiving both. Even there were declared to be conce'-
sions for the fake of peace, and granted only for a season, in
compliance with the weakness or prejudices of their country-
men x.

THIS fyflem of doctrine, known aftcrwards by thel nameof tle Thie, \,i;h'
Interim, bccaufe it contained temporary regulations which were ,,,im, l

tl:et'

. .

x F. Paul, 270. Pallav. ii. 6o. Skid 453, 457. Struv. Corp. 10o4. ;y 5.
C;ol]J.af. Confit, Impcr. i. 5 '.

'3

to,

B300K IX.

1545.

and cxt rts

bdiioll of ;t.

Ne .v nA

citit n(,is for
thce L..id
bvrty.

to continue no longer in force than until a free general council
could be held, the Emperor presented to the diet with a pompous
declaration of his sincere intention to re-establish tranquillity and
order in the church, as well as of his hopes that their adopting
these regulations would contribute greatly to bring about that
desirable event. It was read, in presence, according to form,
As soon as it was finished the archbishop of Mentz, prefidefit
of the eletoral college, rose up hastily, and having thanked the
Emperor for his unwearied and pious endeavours in order to re-
fore peace to the church, he, in name of the diet, signified their
approbation of the system of dotrine which he had prepared, to-
gether with their resolution of conforming to it in every particu-
lar. The whole assembly was amazed at a declaration so unpre-
cedented and unconfittutional, as well as at the Eledor's prefump-
tion in pretending to deliver the sense of the diet, upon a point,
which had not hitherto been the subjed of consultation or debate.
3ut not one member had the courage to contradit what the
l]ctor had said; some being overawed by fear, others remaining
filcnt through complaisance. The Emperor held the archbishop's
declaration to be a full conititutional ratification of the Interim,
and prepared to enforce the observance of it, as a decree of the
Empire .

DURING this diet, tlhe wife and children of the Landgrave,

warmly fccondcd by Maurice of Saxony, endeavoured to in-
tcrcit the mcmlbers in bhcalf of that unhappy Prince, who
frill languilhcd in confinement. But Charles, who did not
chulif to be brought under the rrcceffity of rejctIing any requefc
that came fromn fitch a rcefpccable body, in order to prevent their
rcprefentations, laid before the diet an account of his trantac-
tions with the Landgrave, together with the motives which had

y Skid. 460. F. Paul, 273. Pallav. 63,

at
T74

at firfl induced him to detain that Prince in custody, and which BooKx IX.
rendered it prudent, as he alledged, to keep him iill under -;3.
refiraint. It was no easy matter to give any good reason for an
acion, incapable of being justified. But he thought the most
frivolous pretexts might be produced in an assembly willing to
be deceived, and afraid of nothing so much as to discover that
it saw his conduc in its true colours. His account of his own
condud was accordingly admitted to be fully fatisfadory, and
after some feeble intreaties that he would extend his clemency to
his unfortunate prisoner, the Landgrave's concerns were no
more mentionedz.

IN order to counterbalance the unfavourable impression which

this inflexible rigour might leave in their minds, Charles, as a
proof that his gratitude was no less permanent and unchangeable
than his resentment, invested Maurice, in the eled -al dignity,
with all the legal formalities. The ceremony was performed, with
extraordinary pomp, in an open court, so near the apartment in
which the degraded Eledor was kept a prifoncr, that he could
view it from his windows. Even this insult did not ruffle his usual
tranquillity; and turning his eyes that way, he beheld a prof-
perous rival receiving those ensigns of dignity of which he had
been firipped, without uttering one fentimcnit unbecoming the
fortitude which he had preserved amidst all his calamitiesa.

IMMEDIATE L Y after the dissolution of the diet, the Emperor The rnteri;

equally dif
ordered the Interim to be publilhed in the German as well as "p1proved of

'y I'ro c,!a2n
Latin language. It met with the usual reception of conciliating ;,,d 1'apiit,.

Slcid. 441. ' Thuan. Sift. lib. v. 1;6. Struv. Corp. 1054.
tnvcflitura Mauritii a Mrnmmcrano Luccmburgo dcfcriipta ap. Scardium ii. 508.

fhlicinea

'TRHE REIGN OF THE
-BOOK IX. schemes when proposed to men heated with disputation; both

I.-,--.g parties declaimed against it with equal violence. The Proteflante

condemned it as a fyflem containing the grossest errors of Popery,
.disguised with so little art, that it could impose only on the molt
.ignorant, or on those who by wilfully shutting their eyes
favoured the deception. The Papifis inveighed.againft it, as a
wvork, in which some docrines of the church were impiously
given up, others meanly concealed, and all of them delivered
in terms calculated rather to deceive the unwary, than to inftru6t
ithc ignorant, or to reclaim those who were enemies to the truth.
VWhile the Lutheran divines fiercely attacked it, on one hand,
the general of the Dominicans with no less vehemence impugned
it, on the other. But at Rome, as soon as the contents of the
Interim came to be known, the indignation of the courtiers and
ccclcfiaftics rofc to the greatest height. They exclaimed againit
the Emperor's profane encroachment on the sacerdotal function,
in presuming, with the concurrence of an assembly of laymen,
to define articles of faith, and to regulate modes of worship.
They compared this rash deed to that of Uzzah, who, with an
unhallowed hand, had touched the ark of God; or to the bold at-
tcmpts of those Emperors, who had rendered their memory dctef-
t:ll)lc, by endeavouring to model the Chriflian church according
to their plcafilrc. They even afletcd to find out a resemblance
between the nEmp)cror's conidut and that of Henry VIII. and cx-
prcll:d tllci r car of his imi tati n; the cxample of tlat Monarch, by
lliurping thle title as well as jiiriitlilioni belonging to the head of
the church. All, thereforc, contended, with one voice, tlat as
the foLunldations of ccclcfil;liLcal authority were now fliaken, and
tlei whole albric ready to 1)e ovcrt-rllced by a new enemy ; fom
,ouvcrliil l mlthlod of' tlc'cc mufl be
l provilcdl, and a vigorous

rcfi fiance

I7,7

refifiance must be made, at the beginning, before he grew too
formidable to be opposed.

THE Pope, whose judgment was improved by longer expe-

rience in great tranfations, as well as by a more extensive obfer-
vation of human affairs, viewed the matter with more acute dif-
cernment, and derived comfort from the very circumstance
which filled them with apprehension. He was aflonifhed, that a
Prince of such superior sagacity as the Emperor ihould be so in-
toxicated with a tingle victory, as to imagine that he might give
law to mankind, and decide even in those matters, with regard
to which they are most impatient of dominion. He saw that, by
joining any one of the contending parties in Germany, Charles
might have had it in his power to have oppressed the other, but
that the presumption of success had now inspired him with the
vain thought of his being able to domineer overboth; he foretold
that a system, which all attacked, and none defended, could not
be of long duration; and that, for this reason, there was no
need of his interposing in order to haften its fall; for as soon as
the powerful hand which now upheld it was withdrawn, it
would fink of its own accord, and be forgotten for ever b

BOOK IX.

158.

The senti.
ments of the
Pope with
regard to it.
THE Emperor, fond of his own plan, adhered to his refolu- TheEmperor

enforces corn-

tion of carrying it into full execution. But though the Elector pliance with
Palatine, the Elecor of Brandenburg, and Maurice, influenced
by the fame considerations as formerly, seemed ready to yield
implicit obedience to whatever he should enjoin, he met not
every where with a like obfcquious filbmiffion. John Marquis
of Brandenburg Anfpach, although he had taken part with

b Slcid. 468. F. Paul. 271, 277. Pallav. ii. 64.
VOL. III. A a

great
~4

BooK IX. great zeal in the war against the confederates of Smalkalde, re-

/s. fused to renounce doctrines which he held to be sacred, and

reminding the Emperor of the repeated promises which he had
given his Protestant allies of allowing them the free exercise of
their religion, he claimed, in consequence of these, to be ex-
empted from receiving the Interim. Some other Princes, also,
ventured to mention the fame scruples, and to plead the fame
indulgence. But on this, as on other trying occasions, the
firmness of the Eletor of Saxony was most distinguished, and
merited the highest praise. Charles, well knowing the authority
of his example with all the Protestant party, laboured, with
the utmost earnestness, to gain his approbation of the Interim,
and by employing sometimes promises of setting him at liberty,,
sometimes threats of treating him with greater harshness, at-
tempted alternately to work upon his hopes and fears. But he
was, alike, regardless of both. After having declared his fixed
belief in the dotrines of the reformation, " I cannot now, said
he, in my old age, abandon the principles, for which I early
contended; nor, in order to procure freedom during a few de-
clining years, will I betray that good cause, on account of
which I have suffered so much, and am still willing to susser.
Better for me to enjoy, in this solitude, the esteem of virtuous
men, together with the approbation of my own conscience, tltan
to return into the world, with the imputation and guilt of
apoftacy, to disgrace and embitter the remainder of my days."
By this magnanimous resolution, he set his countrymen a pat-
tern of couduc, so very different from that which the Em-
peror wishcd him to have exhibited to them, that it drew upon
him frclh marks of his indignation. The rigour of his con-
finement was increascd ; the number of his servants abridged;.

t tihe
t79

the Lutheran clergymen who had hitherto been permitted to at-
tend him, were dismissed; and even the books of devotion,
which had been his chief consolation during a tedious imprison-
ment, were taken from him'. The Landgrave of Hesse, his
companion in misfortune, did not maintain the fame conflancy.
His patience and fortitude were both so much exhausted by the
length of his confinement, that willing to purchase freedom at
any price, he wrote to the Emperor, offering not only to ap-
prove of the Interim, but to yield an unreserved fubmiflion to
his will in every other particular. But Charles who knew,
that what course soever the Landgrave might hold, neither his
example nor authority would prevail on his children or fubjcds
to receive the Interim, paid no regard to his offers. He was
kept confined as ftritly as ever; and while he fuffcred the
cruel mortification of having his conduct set in contrast to that
of the EleCtor, he derived not the finalleft benefit from the
mean ftep which exposed him to such deserved censure .

BUT it was in the Imperial cities that Charles met with the

most violent opposition to the Interim. These finall common-
wealths, the citizens of which were accustomed to liberty and
independence, had embraced the doctrines of the Reformation
when first publiflied with remarkable cagernefs ; the bold spirit
of innovation being peculiarly suited to the genius of free go-
vernment. Among them, the Protestant teachers had made the
greatest number of proselytes. The most eminent divines of
the party were fettled there as pastors. By having the direction
of the schools and other seminarics of learning, they had trained
aip difciplcs as well infiruted in the articles of their faith, as

i
Slcid. 462.

" Slcid. 462.
Aaz

BOOK IX.

Isi8.

The free cities
struggle
againit re-
ceiving the
Interim.
zealous

i79

BOOK IX.

1548.

zealous to defend them. Such persons were not to be guided
by example, or swayed by authority, but having been taught
to examine and to decide in matters of controversy, thought
that they were both qualified and entitled to judge for them-
selves. As soon as the contents of the Interim were known,
they, with one voice, joined in refuting to admit it. Strafburg,
Constance, Bremen, Magdeburgh, together with many other
towns of less note, presented remonfirances to the Emperor,
setting forth the irregular and unconffitutional manner in which
the Interim had been enacted, and beseeching him not to offer
such violence to their consciences, as to require their assent to
a form of doctrine and worship, which appeared to them
repugnant to the express precepts of the divine law. But
Charles, having prevailed on so many Princes of the Empire
to approve of his new model, was not much moved by the re-
presentations of these cities, which how formidable soever they
might have proved if they could have been formed into one
body, lay so remote from each other, that it was easy to op-
press them separately, before it was possible for them to unite.

Compelled IN order to accomplish this, the Emperor saw it to be requisite
by violence that his measures ihould be vigorous, and executed with such ra-
to submit.

pidity as to allow no time for concerting any common plan of
opposition. Having laid down this maxim as the rule of his
proceedings, his first attempt was upon the city of Augsburg,
which, though overawed by the pretence of the Spanish troops,
he knew to be as much dissatisfied with the Interim as any in
the Empire. He ordered one body of there troops to seize the
gates; he porled the reft in diflerent quarters of the city; and
Aug. 3. aflcmbling all the burgcffes in the town, he, by his tble ab-

solute
x80

solute authority, published a decree abolishing their present BOOK IX.
form of government, dissolving all their corporations and fra- 548.
ternities, and nominating a small number of persons, in whom
he vested for the future the right of adminifiration. Each of
the persons, thus chosen, took an oath to observe the Interim.
An ad of power, so unprecedented as well as arbitrary, which
excluded the body of the inhabitants from any share in the
government of their own community, and fubjeaed them to
men who had no other merit than their servile devotion to the
Emperor's will, gave general disgust; but as they durst not
venture upon resistance, they were obliged to submit in silence c.
From Aufburg, in which he left a garrison, he proceeded to
Ulm, and new modelling its government with the fame violent
hand, he seized such of their pafors as refused to subscribe the
Interim, committed them to prison, and at his departure carried
them along with him in chains '. By this severity, he not
only secured the reception of the Interim in two of the moit
powerful cities, but gave warning to the reft what such as con-
tinued refradory had to expedt. The cffet of the example
was as great as he could have wilhed, and many towns, in
order to save themeflves from the like vengeance, found it ne-
ceffary to comply with what he enjoined. Tllis obedience,
extorted by the rigour of authority, produced no change in
the sentiments of the Germans, and extended no farther than to
make them conform so far to the letter of the law, as was barely
filficient to fcrceen them from )unifhmcnCt. Their prcachers ac-
co),n ianied those ceremonies, the oblfcrvation of which the Intcriln
prsciribed, with fich an explication of their tendency, as lerved

Slcid. 469. Slcid. 472.

*k

ra her

I8,

BOOK IX. rather to confirm than to remove the scruples of their hearers

' ^ with regard to them. The people, many of whom had grown

up to mature years since the eftabliflment of the reformed re-
ligion, and had been accustomed to no other form of publick
worship, beheld the pompous pageantry of the popish service
with contempt or horror; and in most places the Pomiih eccle-
fiatficks who returned to take possession of their churches could
scarce be protected from insult, or their minifirations from in-
terruption. Thus, notwithstanding the apparent compliance
of so many cities, the inhabitants being accustomed to freedom,
submitted with relutance to the power which now oppressed
them. Their underfianding as well as inclination revolted
againift the dodtrines and rites imposed on them; and though,
for the present, they concealed their indignation and resent-
ment, it was evident that these paflions could not always be
kept under restraint, but would break out at last in effets pro-
portional to their violence ?.

'he Pope CHARLES, meanwhile, highly pleated with having bended
Colminl she the stubborn spirit of the Germans to such general submission,
Council af.t
oambledat departed for the Low-Countries, fully determined to compel

the cities, which still tsood out, to receive the Interim. He
carried his two prisoners the Elector of Saxony and Landgrave
of Hesse along with him, either because he durst not leave them
behind him in Germany, or because he wiflhcd to give his
countrymen the Flemings this illustrious proof of the success of
his arms, and the extent of his power. Before Charles arrived
Sept. 17. at Bruflcls he was informed that the Pope's legates at Bologna

* Mcm. de Ribicr. ii. 218. Slcid. 491.

had
1i82

had difmiefid the council by an indefinite prorogation, and that
the prelates assembled there had returned to their refpedive coun-
tries. Necessity had driven the Pope into this measure. By the
secession of those who had voted against the translation, together
with the departure of others, who grew weary of continuing in
a place where they were not suffered to proceed to business, so
few and such inconsiderable members remained, that the pom-
pous appellation of a General Council could not, with decency,
be bestowed any longer upon them. Paul had no choice but
to dissolve an assembly which was become the objet of con-
tempt, and exhibited to all Christendom a most glaring proof of
the impotence of the Romish fee. But unavoidable as the mea-
sure was, it lay open to be unfavourably interpreted, and had
the appearance of withdrawing the remedy at the very time
when those for whose recovery it was provided, were prevailed
on to acknowledge its virtue, and to make trial of its effect.
Charles did not fail to put this conftrudion on his conduct;
and by an artful comparison of his own efforts to suppress
heresy, with Paul's scandalous inattention to a point so essential,
he endeavoured to render the Pontiff odious to all zealous
Catholicks. At the fame time, he commanded the Prelates of
his faction to remain at Trent, that the Council might fill ap-
pear to have a being, and might be ready, whenever it was
thought expedient, to resume its deliberations for the good
of the church ".

TII E motive of Charles's journey to the Low-Countries,

besides gratifying his favourite paflion of travelling from one
part of his dominions to another, was to receive I'hilip his

h Pallav. p. I. 72.

only

BoOK IX.

1 4.8.

Tl c Emperor
receives his
fun Philip in
the Low-
Cv UlltiiC.

.83

THE REIGN OF THE
BOOK IX. only son, who was now in the twenty-firfR year of his age,

' .a.' and whom he had called thithcr, not only that he might be

recognized by the States of the Nethcrlands as heir apparent,
but in order to facilitate the ex(cu ;on of a vail fchemc, the ob-
jed of which, and the rcc(-pti: n it met with, fiba1l be hereafter
explained. Philip, having LI/t the governm.nt of Spain to
Maximilian, Ferdinand's cidelt ion, to wh ;:: the Emperor had
given the Princess Mary his daughter in In;ir i.ge, embarked
for Italy attended by a numerous retinue oi Spanish nobles'.
The squadron which escortcd him, was commanded by Andrew
Doria, who, notwithstanding his advanced age, insisted on
the honour of performing, in person, the fame duty to the
son, which he had often discharged towards the father. He
Novem. 2;. landed safely at Genoa; from thence he went to Milan, and

proceeding through Germany, arrived at the Imperial court in

',49. Brussels. The States of Brabant in the firfi place, and those of
April . the other provinces in their order, acknowledged his right of

succession in common form, and he took the cultomary oath to
prefcrve all their privileges inviolate k. In all the towns of the
Low-Countrics through which Philip passed he was received
with extraordinary pomp. Nothing that could express the
rcfpcd of the people, or contribute to his amufcment was ne-
glclced; pageants, tournaments, and publick fpedacles of
every kind were exhibited with that cxpcnfive magnificence
whiclh commercial nations display, when, on any occasion, they
depart fromn their ufilal maxims of frugality. But amidfl thcfe
fccncs of feflivity and ,leafiure Philip's natural severity of tem-
per was diccerniblc. Youth itfclf could not render him agreeable,
nor his being a candidate for power form him to courtesy. He

Ochoa, Carolea, 362. k HIarxi. annal. Brabant. 652.

mintatained

maintained a haughty refervein his behaviour, and discovered such BooK IX,
manifest partiality towards his Spanish attendants, together with ' ',-
such an avowed preference to the manners of their country, as
highly disgusted the Flemings, and gave rife to that antipathy,
which afterwards occasioned a revolution so fatal to him in that
part of his dominions '.

CHARLES was long detained in the Netherlands by a vio-

lent attack of the gout, which returned upon him To frequently,
and with such increasing violence, that it had broken to a great
degree the vigour of his constitution. He, nevertheless, did not
intermit his endeavours, to enforce the Interim. The inhabi-
tants of Strasbourg after a long struggle, found it necefrary to
give obedience; those of Constance, .who had taken arms in
their own defence, were compelled by force not only to con-
form to the Interim, but to renounce their privileges as a free
city, to do homage to Ferdinand as Archduke of Aufiria, and
as his vassals to admit an Austrian governor and garrison %.
Magdeburg, Bremen, Hamburg, and Lubeck were the only
Imperial cities of note that still continued refractory.

' Mem. de Ribier ii. 29. L'Evefque Mem. do Card. Granvelle, i. 21.
m Sleid. 474, 491.
VOL. III.

185.
B b

THE

# THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK X.

THE

T
OF THE

I
OF THE

0
G

R

Y

N
EMPEROR CHARLES.

V.
BOO

K X.
W H I LE Charles laboured, with such unwearied indufiry,

to overcome the oLftinacy of the Protestants, the effects

of his tfeddinefs in the execution of his plan were rendered
less considerable by his rupture with the Pope, which daily
incrcafed. The firm resolution which the Emperor seemed to
have taken against refloring Placentia, together with his re-
peated encroachments on the ecclefiafticaljurifdidion, both by
the regulations contained in the Interim, and by his attempt to
rc-afl[mblc a council at Trent, exasperatcd Paul to the utmost,
\vho with the wcakne's incident to old age grew more attached

to
H

I

S

E

R
BooK X.

'I49.

1 he P, pe's
ckliircs a-
R,,;l;! the
tl~iiicror.

to his family, and more jealous of his authority, as he advanced
in years. Puihed on by these passions, he made new efforts to
draw the French King into an alliance against the Emperor '.
But finding that Monarch, notwithflhnding his hereditary en-
mnity to Charles, and dread of his growing power, as unwilling
as formerly to involve himself in immediate hostilities, he was
obliged to contraa. his views, and to think of preventing future
encroachments, since itiwas not in his. power to inflict. vengeance
on- account- of those which were past. For this purpose he
determined to recall his. grant of Parma and Placentia, and after
declaring them to be re-annexed to the HoLy febe to indemnify
Otavio by, a new efthilfih ment in the ecclefiafical state, By
this expedient, he hoped to gain two points of no fiall con-
sequence; the security of Parma. firfof all, as the Emperor
would be cautious of invading the patrimony of the church,
though he might seize without scruple a town belonging to
the house of Farnese; and in the next place, some chance of
recovering Placentia, as his follicitations to that effect might
decently be urged with greater importunity, and would infal-
libly be attended with more weight, when he was confidered
not as pleading the cause of his family, but as an advocate
for the interest of the church. But while Paul was priding
himself in this device, as a happy refinement in policy, Oc-
tavio an ambitious and high' spirited young man, who could
not bear with patience to be spoiled of one half of his territories
by the rapaciousness of his father-in-law, and to be deprived
of the other by the artifices of his grand father, took measures
in order to prevent the execution of a plan fatal to his in-

Mem. de Ribier. ii. 230.

B b 2 terefl

I

s'87
BOOxX,

'Ss9.

BOOK X.

1509.

terest. He set out secretly from Rome, and having first endea,
voured to furprize Parma, which attempt was frustrated by the
fidelity of the governor to whom the Pope had entrusted the de-
fence of the town, he made overtures to the Emperor of renounr
cing all connecion with the Pope, and depending entirely on him
for his future fortune. This unexpected defection of one of the
Pope's own family to an enemy whom he hated, irritated,
almost to madness, a mind peeviih with old age; and there was
no degree of severity to which Paul might not have proceeded
against a grandson whom he reproached as an unnatural apo-
state. But happily for Otlavio, death prevented his carrying into
execution the harsh resolutions which he had taken with refped
to him, and put an end to his pontificate in the sixteenth year
of his administration, and the eighty second of his age *.

As

* Among many inflances of the credulity or weakness of historians in attri-

buting the death of illufRrious personages to extraordinary causes, this is one.
Almost all the historians of the sixteenth century affirm that the death of Paul
III. was occasioned by the violent palions which the behaviour of his grandson
excited; that being informed while he was airing himself in one of his gardens
near Rome, of Ocavio's attempt on Parma, as well as of his negociations with.
the Emperor by means of Gonzaga, he fainted away, continued some hours in a
swoon, then fevered, and died within three days. This is the account given of it by
Thuanus, lib. vi. 211. Adriani Iflor. di fuoi tempi, lib. vii. 480. and by Father
Paul, 280. Even cardinal Pallavicini, better informed than any writer with
regard to the events which happened in the papal court, and when not warped.
by prejudice or system, more accurate in relating them, agrees with their nar-
lative in its chief circumstances. Pallav. b. ii. 74. Paruta, who wrote his
history by command of the senate of Venice, relates it in the fame manner.
Hillories Vencz. vol. iv. 212. But there was no occasion to search for any e.-
traordinary cause to account for the death of an old man of eighty two. There
remains an authcntick account of this event, in which we find none of those-
marvellous circumftanccs of which the hiltorians are so fonl. The cardinal

of
188

As this event had been long expeced, there was an extraor- B

dinary concourse of Cardinals at Rome; and the various com-
petitors having had time to form their parties, and to concert
their measures, their ambition and intrigues protracted the con-
clave to a great length. The Imperial and French factions
strove, with emulation, to promote one of their own number,
and had, by turns, the profpe& of success. But as Paul during a
long Pontificate had raised many to the purple, and those chiefly
persons of eminent abilities as well as zealously devoted to his
family, Cardinal Farnese had the command of a powerful and

of Ferrara, who was entrusted with the affairs of France at the Court of Rome;
and M. D'Urf6, Henry's ambassador in ordinary there, wrote an account to that
Monarch of the affair of Parma, and of the Pope's death. By these it appears,.
that Octavio's attempt to furprize Parma was made on the twentieth of
October; that next day in the evening, and not while he was airing himself in,
the gardens of Monte-Cavallo, the Pope received intelligence of what he had,
done; that he was seized with such a transport of paflion, and cried so bitterly
that his voice was heard in several apartments of the palace; that next day,
however, he was so well as to give an audience to the Cardinal of Ferrara, and
to go through business of different kinds; that Octavio wrote a letter to the Pope,
not to Cardinal Farnese his brother, intimating his resolution of throwing himself
into the arms of the Emperor; that the Pope received this on the twenty-firft with-
out any new sy.mptoms of emotion, and returned an an fwer to it ;that on the twenty,
second of October, the day on which the Cardinal of Ferrara's letter is dated,.
the Pope was in his usual state of health. Mem. de Ribier. ii. 247. By a letter
of M. D'Urf6, Nov. 5. it appears that the Pope was in such good health, that
on the third of that month he had celebrated the anniversary of his coronation.
with the usual folemnities. Ibidem 251. By another letter from the fame per--
son, we learn that on the sixth of November a catarrh or defluxion fell down on
tile Pope's lungs, with such dangerous symptoms that his life was immediately
decpaired of,.Ibid. 252* And by a third letter, we are informed that he died Novcrn
her the tenth. In none of there letters is his death imputed to any extraordinary,
cause. It appears that more than twenty days clapscd between Oflavio's attempt
on Parma and the death of his grandfather, and that the disease was the natural,
effca of old age, not one. of thole occasioncd by violence of paflioll.

united;

OOK X.
15o0.

i8g

1
,BooK X.

s550.

February ?th.
' he elefeion
of Julius III.

His cliraiecr
' and condutl.

united squadron, by whose address and firmness he exalted to the
Papal throne the Cardinal di Monte, whom Paul had employed
as his principal legate in the, council of Treat, an4d trusted with
his molt secret intentions. He aqfumed the name of Julius III.
and in order to cxprefs his gratitude towards his benefator,. the
first at of his administration was to put Ocavyio larnef¢ in pof-
fefiipn of Parma, Whenlrs was told; of the injury, which he did
the Holy See by alienatipg a territory of such value, he briskly
replied, " that he would rather, be a poor Pope, with the reputa-
tion of a gentleman, thap a,rich one, with. the ipfany of having
forgotten the obligations conferred upon him, and the promises
which he had made '." Iut all the, lustre of this candour or gene-
rofity he quickly effaced. by an acion most shockingly indecent.
According to an ancient and established practice, every Pope upon
his eledion claims the privilege of beflowing, on whom he
pleases, the Cardinal's hat, which falls to be disposed of by his
being invefled with the triple crown. Julius, to the astonish-
ment of the sacred college, conferred this mark of diftinEion,
together with ample ecclefiafIical revenues, and the right of bear-
ing his name and arms, upon one Innocent, a youth of sixteen,
born of obscure parents, and known by the name of the Ape,
from his having been trusted with the care of an animal of that
species, in the Cardinal di Monte's family. Such a prostitution
of the highest dignity in the church would have given offence,
even in those dark periods, when the credulous superstition of
the people emboldened ecclesiastics to venture on the most flag-
rant violations of decorum. But in an enlightened age, when by
the progress of knowledge and philosophy the obligations of
duty and decency were better understood, when a blind vcnera-

b Mem. dc Ribicr.

t: tion
190

tion for the Pontifical chara&er was every Where aliated, and
one half of Chriflendom in open rebeflioi against the Papal See,
this afcion was viewed with horror. Roime was immnediately
filled with libels and pasquinades, which imputed the Pope's
extravagant regard for such an unWorthy obje& to the mofi
criminal paflions. The Protestants exclaimed agaihft the abfur-
dity of supposing that the infallible spirit of divine truth could
dwell in a breast fb impidre, and called mnie loudly, than ever,
and with greater appearance of jufiice, for the immediate and
thorough Reformation of a church, tile Head of which was a
disgrace to the Chrifliah name c. The reft of the Pope's condu&t
wat of a piece with this firfi fpecimeri of his dispositions. Hav-
ing now reached the summit of ecclefiaflical ambition, he feemedl
eager to indemnify himself, by an urireft-ained indulgence of his
desires, for the felf-denial or difimulatidn which he had thought
it prudent to pradtif while in a subordinate station. He became
careless, to so great a degree, of all serious business, that he could'
seldom be brought to attend to it, but in cafes of extreme necef-
fity; and giving up himself to amusements and dissipation of
every kind, he imitated the luxuriouseleganceof Leo, ratherthan
the severe virtue of Adrian, the latter of which it was neceflary
to display, in contending with a fed which derived great credit
from the rigid and austere manners of its teachers '.

THi Pope, how ready soever to fulfil his cngagemcnts to

the family of Farnese, difcovcrcd no inclination to observe the
oath, which each Cardinal had taken when lie entered the con-
clave, that if the choice should fall on him, he would immediately

Sleid. 492. F. Paul, 281. Pallay. ii. 76. Tbuan. lib. vi. 215.
' F. Paul, ibid.

call

Book X.

Ilis views
and proceed-
ings with re-
fpled to the
get eral
couUcJi.

* § 1J

call the council to re-aflume its deliberations. Julius knew, by
experience, how difficult' it was to confine such a body of men
within the narrow limits which it was the interest of the church
of Rome to prescribe; and how easily the zeal of some members,
the rashness of others, or the suggestions of the Princes on whom
they depended, might precipitate a popular and ungovernable
assembly into forbidden inquiries, as well as dangerous deci-
sions. He wished, for these reasons, to have eluded the obliga-
tion of his oath, and gave an ambiguous answer to the first pro-
pofals, which were made to him by the Emperor, with regard
to that matter. But as Charles, either from his natural obstinacy
in adheridg to the measures which he had once adopted, or from
the mere pride of accomplishing what was held to be almost
impossible, persisted in his resolution of forcing the Protestants
to return into the bosom of the church: As he had persuaded
himself that the authoritative decisions of the council might be
employed with efficacy in combating their prejudices; and in
consequence of that persuasion, follicited earnestly that a new
bull of convocation might be issued, the Pope could not, with
decency, reject that request. When Julius found that he could
not prevent the calling of a council, he endeavoured to take the
merit of having procured the meeting of an assembly, which was
the objec of such general desire and expectation. A congrega-
tion of Cardinals, to whom he referred the consideration of what
was necessary for restoring peace to the church, recommended,
by his diretion, the speedy convocation of a council, as the most
effetual expedient for that purpose; and as the new herefies
raged with the grcateft violence in Germany, they proposed
Trent as the place of its meeting, that by a near inspection of
the evil, the remedy might be applied with greater discernment
and certainty of success. The Pope warmly approved this

9 advice,
Boo~ X.

'55 0
19c

advice, which he himself had dictated, and sent nuncios to the
Imperial and French courts, in order to make known his inten-
tions e.

MEANWHILE, the Emperor had summoned a new diet to meet

at Augsburg, in order to enforce the observation of the Interim,
and to procure a more authentic aa of the Empire, acknow-
ledging the jurifdidion of the council, as well as an explicit
promise of conforming to its decrees. He appeared there in
person, together with his son the Prince of Spain. Few of the
Elecors were prefcnt, but all sent deputies in their name.
Charles, notwithfianding the despotic authority with which lie
had given law in the Empire during two years, knew that the
spirit of independance among the Germans was not entirely
subdued, and for that reason took care to over-awe the diet by
a considerable body of Spaniff troops which escorted him thi-
ther. The first point, futbmitted to the consideration of the diet,
was the necessity of holding a council. All the Popish members
agreed, without difficulty, that the meeting of that aflembly
should be renewed at Trent, and promised an implicit acquief-
cence in its decrees. The Protefiants, intimidated and disunited,
must have followed their example, and the resolution of the diet
have proved unanimous, if Maurice of Saxony had not begun
at this time to difclofc new intentions, and to at a part very dif-
ferent from that which he had so long assumed.

BY an artful dissimulation of his own fcntiments; by ad-
drcfs in paying court to the Emperor ; and by thc feming

IF. Paul, 281. Pallav ii. 77;

C c

1 C %
BooKX.

' 150.

A 'itt at
Augsb r, to
enrorce the
In~erlm.

Jure z5.

Maurice bc-
gins to f'ortit
ddi·~!-n s
rig~iin(1 the
Fznpe or.

zeal
VOL. III.

BOOK X.

1550.

'I'lle plhtical
sllorl Ves
Cai cAl tiriu.

zeal with which he forwarded all his ambitious schemes, Maurice
had raised himself to the Eletoral dignity; and having added
the dominions of the elder branch of the Saxon family to his
own, was become the most powerful Prince in Germany. But
his long and intimate union with the Emperor had afforded
him many opportunities of observing narrowly the dan-
gerous tendency of his schemes. He saw the yoke that
was preparing for his country; and from the rapid as well as
formidable progress of the Imperial power, was convinced that
but a few steps more remained to be taken, in order to ren-
der Charles as absolute a Monarch in Germany, as he had
become in Spain. The more eminent the condition was to
which he himself had been exalted, the more follicitous did he
naturally become to maintain all its rights and privileges, and
the more did he dread the thoughts of descending from the rank
of a Prince almost independent, to that of a vassal subjed to the
will of a mailer. At the fame time, he perceived that Charles,
inflead of allowing liberty of conscience, the promise of which
had allured several Proteltant Princes to affilt him in the war
against the confederates of Smalkalde, was bent on exacing a
rigid conformity to the docdrines and rites of the Romish church.
As he, notwithstanding all the compliances which he had
made from motives of interest, or an excess of confidence in the
Emperor, was sincerely attached to the Lutheran tenets, he
determined not to be a tame fpedator of the overthrow of a
system which he believed to be founded in truth.

TH IS resolution, flowing from the love of liberty, or zeal for

religion, was flrengthened by political and intercftcd confidera-
tions. In that elevated fiation, in which Maurice was now
placed, new and more cxtenfive prol)cds opened to his view.

1 is
'94

His rank and power entitled him to be the head of the Pro-
teftants in the Empire. His predecessor, the degraded Elecor,
with inferior abilities, and territories less considerable, had
acquired such an ascendant over the councils of the party; and
Maurice neither wanted discernment to fee the advantage of this
pre-eminence, nor ambition to aim at attaining it. But he found
himself in a situation which rendered the attempt no less diffi-
cult, than the object of it was important. On the one hand, the
connection which he had formed with the Emperor was so intimate,
that he could scarce hope to take any flep which tended to dissolve
it, without alarming his jealousy, and drawing on himself the
whole weight of that power, which had crushed the greatest
confederacy ever formed in Germany. On the other hand, the
calamities which he had brought on the Protestant party were
so recent and so great, that it seemed almost impossible to regain
their confidence, or to rally and re-animate a body of men, after
himself had been the chief infrument in breaking their union and
vigour. These considerations were sufficient to have discouraged
any person of a spirit lcfs adventurous than Maurice's. But to
him the grandeur and vastness of the enterprize were allurements;
and he boldly resolved on measures, of which a genius of an infe-
rior order could have conceived no idea, or would have trembled
at the thoughts of the danger which attended the execution of
thcen.

His pafrions concurred with his interest in confirming this

resolution; and the rcfentment excited by an injury, which he
fcnfibly felt, added new force to the motives for opposing the
Emperor, which found policy fuggcfted. Maurice, by his
authority, had prevailed on the Landgrave of Heffl to put Iis

C c 2 perion

BOOK X.

155o.

The paflions
which co-
operated with
there.

x95

person in the Emperor's power, and had obtained a promise from
the Imperial ministers that he should not be detained a pri-
soner. This had been violated in the manner already related.
The unhappy Landgrave exclaimed as loudly againfi his son-
In-law as against Charles. The Princes of Hesse required him.
incessantly to fulfil his engagements to their father, who had.
loft his liberty by trusting to him; and all Germany fufpeaed
him of having betrayed, to an implacable enemy, the friend.
whom he was most bound to protec. Roused by these follici-
tations and reproaches, as well as prompted by duty and assec-
tion to his father-in-law, Maurice had employed not only
entreaties but remonstrances in order to procure his release. All
these Charles had disregarded; and the shame of having been
first deceived and then flighted by a Prince whom he had served
with zeal and success, which merited a very different return,.
made such a deep impreflion on Maurice, that he waited with
impatience for an opportunity of being revenged.

T HIE utmost caution as well as delicacy were requisite in taking

every ftep towards this end; as he had to guard, on the
one hand, against giving a premature alarm to the Emperor;
while, on the other, something considerable and explicit was
neceflary to be done, in order to regain the confidence of the Pro-
teftant party. Maurice had accordingly applied all his pow-
ers of addrcfs ant difflimulation to attain both there points.
As he knew Charles to be inflexible with regard to the sub-
mission whiclh he required to the Interim, he did not hesitate
one moment whether lie fihould cftallifll that form of doctrine
and worship in his dominions. But being fcnfible how odious it
was to llis fubjcds, iitlead of violently imposing it on them by

the

3J9
BoOd X.

1;50

The caution
and address
with which
le carries on
his schemes.

the mere terror of authority, as had been done in other parts of
Germany, he endeavoured to render their obedience a voluntary
deed of iheir own. For this purpose, he had assembled the clergy
of his country at tLeipfick, and had laid the Interim before
them, together With the reasons which made it necessary to con-
form to it. He had gained some of them by promises, others
he had wrought upon by threats, and all were intimidated by the
rigour with which obedieice to the Interim was extorted in the
neighbouring provinces. Even Melandhon, whose merit of
every kind entitled him to the first place among the Protestant
divines, being now deprived of the manly counsels of Luther,
which were wont to inspire him with fortitude, and to preserve
him steady amidit the storms and dangers that threatened the
church, was reduced into unwarrantable concessions, by the timi-
dity of his temper, his fond desire of peace, and his excessive
complaisance towards persons of high rank. By his arguments
and authority, no less than by Maurice's arts, the assembly was
prevailed on to declare, that in points which were purely
indifferent, obedience was due to the commands of a lawful
superior. Founding upon this maxim, no less uncontravertible
in theory, than dangerous when carried into pracice, especially
in religious matters, they proceeded to class, among the num-
ber of things indifferent, several doctrines, which Iuther had
pointed out as gross and pernicious errors in the Romish creed,
as well as many of those rites which diflinguiihed the Reformed
from the Popish worship, and by confclquence, they exhorted
their people to comply with the Emperor's injunctions con-
cerning these particulars '.

BOOK 2.

155.ss

He enforces
the Interim
in SaxQny.

' Sleid. 48r. 485. Jo. Laur Mofhcmii Inftitutionum Hilt. Ecclcfiaficr,
Kb. iv. Ilclmnl. 1755. 4to. p. 748.

,4T7

BOOK X.

155c.

Makes pro-
feflions of
zeal for the
Proteflant
religion.

At the fame
time courts
the Emperor.

BY this dextrous condua, the introdution of the Interim

excited none of those violent convulsions in Saxony, which it
occasioned in other provinces. But though the Saxons submit-
ted, the more zealous Lutherans exclaimed against Melandhon
and his associates, as false brethren, who were either so wicked
as to apoflatize from the truth altogether; or so artful as to
betray it by subtle diftintions; or so feeble-fpirited as to give
it up from pusillanimity and criminal complaisance to a Prince,
capable of sacrificing to his political interest, that which he him-
self regarded as most sacred. Maurice, being conscious what a
colour of probability his pals conduc gave to there accusations,
as well as afraid oflofing entirely the confidence of the Protestants,
issued a declaration containing profeflions of his zealous attach-
ment to the Reformed religion, and of his resolution to guard
against all the errors or encroachments of the Papal fee g.

HAVIN G gone so far in order to remove the fears and jealou-

fies of the Proteflants, he found it necessary to efface the impref-
sion which such a declaration might make on the Emperor. For
that purpose, he not only renewed his professions of an inviolable
adherence to his alliance with him, but as the city of Magde-
burg flill perfifled in rcjeding the Interim, he undertook to
reduce it to obedience, and inflantly let about levying the troops
to be employed in that fcrvice. This damped all the hopes
which the Protcflants begun to conceive of Maurice, in confe-
qutencc of his declaration, and left them more than ever at a loss
to gucls at his real intentions. Thcir former iifipicion and
difiruft of him rcvived, and tlhe divines of Magdeburg tilled

t S!eid. 485.
198

G(.rinaii
1*

Germany with writings in which they represented him as the
most formidable enemy of the Protestant religion, who treache-
roufly assumed an appearance of zeal for its interest, that he
might more effetually execute his schemes for its deftrution.

THIS charge, supported by the evidence of recent fads, as

well as by his present dubious condut, gained such universal
credit, that Maurice was obliged to take a vigorous ftep in his
own vindication. As soon as the re-assembling of the council
at Trent was proposed in the diet, his ambassadors protested that
their mailer would not acknowledge its authority, unless all
the points which had been already decided there were re-
viewed, and cunfidered as entire; unless the Protestant divines
had a full hearing granted them, and were allowed a deci-
five voice in the council; and unless the Pope renounced his
pretensions to preside in the council, engaged to submit to its
decrees, and absolved the bishops from their oath of obedience,
that they might deliver their sentiments with greater freedom.
These demands, which were higher than any that the Reformers
had ventured to make, even when the zeal of their party was
warmest, or their affairs most prosperous, counterbalanced,
in some degree, the effect of Maurice's preparations against
Magdeburg, and kept the Protestants in suspense with regard to
his designs. At the fame time, he had address enough to repre-
sent this part of his conduc in such a light to the Emperor, that
it gave hini no offence, and occasioned no interruption of the ftric
confidence which fulfified between them. What the pretexts were
which lie employed in order to give such a bold declarationan inno-
cent appearance, the contemporary hiflorians have not explained;
that they ilnpofcd upon Charlcs is certain, for lie hill continued

to

'99
BOOK X.

1550.

Protests
againit the
mode of pro-
ceeding in
the council.

BaOOK'X.

155e.

The diet re-
solve to make
war on the
city ofMag-
deburg;

to prosecute his plan as well concerning the Interim, asthe coun-
cil,- with the fame ardour; and to .place .he. fame confidence
in Maurice, with regard to:the exeaction of.both.

THE Pope's resolution concerning the council not being yet

known at Augsburg, the chief business of the diet was to enforce
the observation of the Interim. As the senate of Magdeburg,
notwithfianding various endeavours to frighten or to tooth them
into compliance, not only persevered obstinately in their opposition
to the Interim, but began to strengthen the fortifications of their
city, and to levy. troops in their own defence, Charles required of
the diet that they would assist him in quelling this audacious re-
bellion againfi a decree of the Empire. Had the members of the
diet been left to act agreeably to their own inclination, this
demand would have been rejected without hesitation. All the
Germans who favoured, in any degree, the new opinions in
religion, and many who were influenced by no other confidera-
tion than jealousy of the Emperor's growing power, regarded
this effort of the citizens of Magdeburg, as a noble fland for the
liberties of their country. Even such as had not resolution
to exert the fame spirit, admired the gallantry of. their enter-
prize, and wished it success. But the presence of the Spanish troops,
together with the dread of the Emperor's displeasure, over-awed
those who were pretent in the diet to such a degree, that with-
out venturing to utter their own sentiments, they tamely rati-
sied, by their votes, whatever thelcEmperor was pleased to pre-
scribe. The rigorous decrees, which Charles had iftucd by his
own authority against the Magdcburgers, were confirmed; a
resolution was taken to raifc troops in order to beficge the city
in form; and pcrfons were named to fix the contingent in men

or

or money to be furnished by each state. At the fame time, the
diet petitioned that Maurice might be entrusted with the com-
mand of that army, to which Charles gave his consent with
great alacrity, and with high encomiums upon the wisdom of
the choice which they had made h. As Maurice conduted all his
schemes with profound and impenetrable secrecy, it is probable
that he took no ftep avowedly in order to obtain this charge. The
recommendation of his countrymen was either purely accidental,
or flowed from the opinion generally entertained of his great
abilities; and neither the diet had any foresight, nor the Empe-
ror any dread of the consequences which followed upon this
nomination. Maurice accepted without hesitation the trust com-
mitted to him, instantly discerning the important advantages
which he might derive from it.

MEANWHILE, Julius, in preparing the bull for the convoca-

tion of the council, observed all those tedious forms which the
court of Rome can employ, with so much dexterity, to retard
any disagreeable measure. At last it was published, and the
council summoned to meet at Trent on the firlf day of the enfu-
ing month of May. As he knew that many of the Germans
rejecded or disputed the authority and jurifditdion which the
Papal fee claims with rcfped to general councils, he took care,
in the preamble of the bull, to afecrt, in the strongest terms,
his own right, not only to call and prcfide in that assembly, but
to direc its proceedings; nor would lie soften these cxprcflions,
in any degree, notwitlllanding the repeated follicitations of the
Emperor, who foresaw what offence they would give, and what
confllu-idion might be put on them. They were censurcd, ac-

h Skid. 503, 512.
VOL. III. 1) d cordingly,

BOOK X.

1550.

A ppoint
Maurice
general.

The ccun'il
summoned to
re-assemble at
Trent.
December.

201

BooK X. cordingly, with great severity, by several members of the diet,

,551. but whatever disgust or suspicion they excited, such absolute

diredcion of all their deliberations had the Emperor acquired,
Feb. 13. that he procured a recess in which the authority of the council

was recognized, and declared to be the proper remedy for the
evils which at that time afflided the church; all the Princes and
flates of the Empire, such as had made innovations in religion,
as well as those who adhered to the system of their forefathers,
were required to fend their representatives to the council; the
Emperor engaged to grant a safe conduct to fuchas demanded it,
and to secure them an impartial hearing in the council; he pro-
mifed to fix his residence in some city of the Empire,' in the
neighbourhood of Trent, that he might protec the members of
the council by his presence, and take care that, by conducting
their deliberations agreeably to scripture and the doctrine of the
fathers, they might bring them to a desirable issue. In this.recefs,
the observation of the Interim was more firidly enjoined than
ever, and the Emperor threatened all who had hitherto neglect-
ed or refused to conform to it, with the severest effets of his
vengeance, if they persisted in their disobedience'.

Anotherfruit- DURING the meeting of this diet, a new attempt was made in
to 'pr cur order to procure liberty to the Landgrave. That Prince, no-wise
the Land- reconciled by time to his situation, grew every day more impa-

tient ofreftraint. Having often applied to Maurice and the Elec-
tor of Brandenburg, who took every occasion of folliciting the
Emperor in his behalf, though without any effect, he now com-
7manded his sons to summon them, with legal formality, to per-
form what was contained in the bond they had granted him,

i Slcid. 512. Thuan. lib. vi. 233. Goldafti Conflit.. Imperiales, vol. ii. 340.
202

by
9

by surrendering themselves to be treated with the fame rigour
as the Emperor had used him. This furnished themn with a
freih pretext for renewing their application to the Emperor, toge-
ther with an additional argument to enforce it. Charles firmly
resolved not to grant their request; though at the fame time being
extremely desirous to get rid of their incefrant importunity, he
endeavoured to prevail on the Landgrave to give up the obliga-
tion which he had received from the two Electors. But that Prince
refuting to part with a security which he deemed essential to his
safety, the Emperor boldly cut the knot which he could not
untie; and by a public deed annulled the bond which Maurice
and the Elecor of Brandenburg had granted, absolving them
from all their engagements to the Landgrave. No pretension
to a power so pernicious to society as that of abrogating at plea-
sure the most sacred laws of honour, and most formal obligations
of public faith, had hitherto been formed by any but the Roman
Pontiffs, who, in consequence of their claim of infallibility,
arrogate the right of dispensing with precepts and duties of
every kind. All Germany was filled with astonishment, when
Charles assumed the fame prerogative. The state of subjec-
tion, to which the Empire was reduced, appeared to be
more rigorous as well as intolerable than that of the nmoft
wretched and enslaved nations, if the Emperor by an arbitrary
decree might cancel those solemn contracts, which are the foun-
dation of that mutual confidence whereby men arc held together
in social union. The Landgrave himself now gave up all hopes
of recovering his liberty by the Emperor's consent, and endea-
voured to procure it by his own address. But the plan which lie
had formed to deceive his guards being discovercd, such of his
attendants as he had gained to favour his escape were put to

D d 2 death,

BOOK X.

1551.

203

BooK X. death, and he was confined in the citadel of Mechlin more

,5s5. closely than ever .

Charles's ANOTHER tranfa&ion was carried on during this diet, with
plan of pro-
curing the refpeA to an affair more nearly interefling to the Emperor, and
Imperial
crown for ,is which occasioned likewise a general alarm among the Princes
foa Lhilip. of the Empire. Charles, though formed with talents which

fitted him for conceiving and cunduding great designs, was
not capable, as has been often observed, of bearing extraordi-
nary success. Its operation on his mind was so violent and in-
toxicatin , that it elevated him beyond what was moderateor at-
tainable, and turned his whole attention to the pursuit ofvaft but
chimerical objecs. Such had been the effec of his vidcory over
the confederates of Smalkalde. He did not long reft satisfied
with the substantial and certain advantages which were the result
of that event, but despising there, as poor or inconsiderable fruits
of such great success, he had aimed at bringing all Germany to an
uniformity in religion, and at rendering the Imperial power de-
fpotic. These were objecs extremely splendid, it must be acknow-
ledged, and alluring to an ambitious mind; the pursuit of them,
however, was attended with manifest danger, and the attainment
of them very precarious. But the steps which he had already
taken towards them being accompanied with such success, his
imagination, warmed with contemplating this vast design, over-
looked or despised all difficulties. As he conceived the execution
of his plan to be certain, he began to be follicitous how he might
render the poffefion of such an important acquisition perpetual
in his family, by tranfinitting the German Empire, as well as
the kingdoms of Spain,. and his dominions in Italy and the

k Sleid. 504. Thuan. 1. vi. 231, 235.
Io4

Low-Countries, to his son. Having long revolved this flattering
idea in his mind, without communicating it, even to those mini-
fters whom he most trusted, he had called Philip out of Spain,
in hopes that his pretence would facilitate the carrying forward
the scheme.

GREAT obstacles, however, and such as would have deterred

any ambition less accuflomed to overcome difficulties, were to be
surmounted. He had in the year one thousand five hundred
and thirty imprudently assisted in procuring his brother Ferdi-
nand the dignity of King of the Romans, and there was no pro-
bability that this Prince, who was still in the prime of life, and
had a son grown up to the years of manhood, would relinquish,,
in favour of his nephew, the near profpedc of the Imperial throne,
which Charles's infirmities and declining fate of health opened
to him. This did not deter the Emperor from venturing to
make the propolition; and when Ferdinand, notwithstanding
his profound reverence for his brother, and obsequious fubmif-
sion to his will in other instances, rejeted it in a peremptory
tone, he was not discouraged by one repulse. He renewed his
applications to him by his sifter, Mary Queen of Hungary, to
whom Ferdinand flood indebted for the crowns both of Hungary
and Bohemia, and who, by her great abilities, tempered with
extreme gentleness of disposition, had acquired an extraordinary
influence over both the brothers. She entered warmly into a
mcafurc, which tended so manifelly to aggrandize the lioufc of
Aufiria; and flattering herself that fle could tempt Ferdinand
to renounce the reversionary pofllffion of the Imnperial dignity
for an immediate eltabliflhncnt, flic afluredl hln that the Empe-
ror, by way of compcniation for his giving up his chance of
fuccclfion, would inflantly bellow upon him territorcis of very

conlidcrable

205
BOOK X,

155'.

The obflacles
that fltod in
its way.

considerable value, and pointed out in particular those of the
Duke of Wurtemberg, which might be confiscated upon diffe-
rent pretexts. 3ut Ferdinand was more ambitious than to be
persuaded, by her address or intreaties, to approve of a plan,
which would have degraded him from the highest rank among
the Monarchs of Europe to that of a Subordinate and dependent
Prince. He was at the fame time, more attached to his children
than to frustrate, by a rash concession, all the high hopes in
profpeC of which they had been educated.

NOTWITHSTANDING the immoveable firmness which Ferdi-

nand discovered, the Emperor did not abandon his scheme. He
flattered himself that he might attain the objet in view by ano-
ther channel, and that it was not impossible to prevail on the
Electors to cancel their former choice of Ferdinand, or at least
to elec Philip a second King of the Romans, substituting him as
next in succession to his uncle. With this view he took Philip
along with him to the diet, that the Germans might have an
opportunity to observe and become acquainted with the Prince,
in behalf of whom he courted their interest; and he himself
employed all the arts of addrcfs or insinuation to gain the
Elecors, and to prepare them for lending a favourable ear to
the proposal. But no sooner did he venture upon mentioning
it to them, than they, at once, saw and trembled at the confe-
quences with which it would be attended. They had long felt
all the inconveniencies of having placed at the head of the
Empire a Prince whose power and dominions were so extensive;
if they filould now repeat the folly, and continue the Imperial
crown, like an hereditary dignity, in the fame family, they forc-
saw that they would give the son an opportunity of carrying on

that
BOOK X.

IS'.

His endea-
vours to fur-
mount there.

2o6

that system of oppression, which the father had begun; and
would put it in his power to overturn whatever was yet left entire
in the ancient and venerable fabric of the German conflitution.

THE charater of the Prince, in whose favour this extraordi-

nary proposition was made, rendered it still less agreeable. Phi-
lip, though poffiered with an insatiable desire of power, was a
firanger to all the arts of conciliating good-will. Haughty,
reserved and severe, he, instead of gaining new friends, disgusted
the ancient and most devoted partizans of the Austrian interest.
He scorned to take the trouble of acquiring the language of the
country, to the government of which he aspired; nor would he
condescend to pay the Germans the compliment of accommo-
dating himself, during his residence among them, to their man-
ners and customs. He allowed the Electors and most illustrious
Princes in Germany to remain in his presence uncovered,
affecing a stately and distant demeanour, which the greatest of
the German Emperors, and even Charles himself, amidst the
pride of power and victory, had never assumed'. On the other
hand, Ferdinand, from the time of his arrival in Germany, had
fludied to render himself acceptable to the people, by a confor-
mity to their manners, which seemed to flow from choice; and
his son Maximilian, who was born in Germany, poffefied in an
eminent degree, such amiable qualities, as rendered him the dar-
ling of his countrymen, and induced them to look forward to
his elction as a most desirable event. Their esteem and assec-
tion for him fortified the resolution which found policy had fug-
gefled; and determined the Germans to prefer the popular vir-

BOOK X.

1551.

Philip's cha-
raAer dila-
greeable to
the Germans.

' Frcdiman Andrcex Zulich Iifcrtatio politico-l-itforica de Nevis politicis
Caroli V. LipL. 1705. 400. p. 21.

tlUCi

207

BOOK X.

Charles
obliged to
relinquilh this
(cheme.

The Pope
and Emperor
form a de-
sign to reco-
ver Parma
all PIlacentia.

tues of Ferdinand and his son, to the flubborn austerity of Philip,
which interest could not soften, nor ambition teach him to dif-
guise. All the Eletors, the ecclesiastical as well as secular, con-
curred in expressing such strong disapprobation of the measure,
that Charles, notwithstanding the relucance with which he gave
up any point, was obliged to drop the scheme as impracticable.
By his unseasonable perseverance in pushing it, he not only filled
the Germans with new jealousy of his ambitious designs, but
laid the foundation of rivalfhip and discord in the Austrian
family, and forced his brother Ferdinand, in felf-defence, to
court the Elecors, particularly Maurice of Saxony, and to form
such connecions with them, as cut off all profpee of renewing
the proposal with success. Philip, sowered by his disappoint-
ment, was lent back to Spain, to be called thence when any new
fchemc of ambition should render his presence necessary .

HAVING relinquished this plan of domestic ambition which

had long occupied and engrossed him, Charles imagined that
he would now have leisure to turn all his attention towards his
grand scheme of establishing uniformity of religion in the
Empire, by forcing all the contending parties to acquiesce in
the decisions of the council of Trent. 13ut such was the extent
of his dominions, the variety of connecions in which this
entangled him, and the multiplicity of events to which these
gave rife, as seldom allowed him to apply his whole force to any
one olbjcC. The machine which le had to conduct was so great
and complicated, that an unforefccn irregularity or obftrution
in one of the inferior wheels, often disconcerted the motion of

m Slcid. 505. Thuan. i8c, 238. Memoir. de Ribicr, ,

ii. 29, 281, 314.
Adriani ltor. lib. viii. 507, 520.

~~~~~~~~t tlhe
o208

the whole, and disappointed him of the mofl considerable effe&s BOOK X.
which he expeaed. Such an unlooked-for occurrence happened
at this junture, and created new obstacles to the execution of
his schemes with regard to religion. Julius III. though he had
confirmed Octavio Farnese in the poffeflion of the dutchy of Parma,
during the first effusions of his joy and gratitude on his promo-
tion to the Papal throne, soon began to repent of his own gene-
rofilty, and to be apprehensive of consequences which either he
did not foresee, or had disregarded while the sense of his obliga-
tions to the family of Farnese was recent. The Emperor flill
retained Placentia in his hands, and had not relinquished his pre-
tensions to Parma as a fief of the Empire. Gonzaga, the gover-
nor of Milan, having, by the part which he took in the murder
of the late Duke Peter Ludovico, offered an insult to the family
of Farnese, which he knew could never be forgiven, had for that
reason vowed its deftrudion; and employed all the influence,
which his great abilities as well as long services gave him with
the Emperor, in persuading him to seize Parma by force of arms.
Charles, in compliance with his follicitations, and that he might
gratify his own desire of annexing Parma to the Milanese,
listened to the proposal; and Gonzaga, ready to take encourage-
ment from the flightcft appearance of approbation, began to
assemble troops, and to make other preparations for the execu-
tion of his fchcme.

OCTAVIO, who saw the impending danger, found it neceltrry 0(oaio Fir-

for his own fafcty to incrcafe the garrison of his capital, and th adiliunce
to levy soldiers for defending the reft of the country. But as the of la'u
expenc of such an effort far exceeded his scanty revenues, lie
reprcifnted his situation to the Pope, and implored that protec-
tion aid afliftancc which was due to him as a vassal of the

VOL. III. E c church.

church. The Imperial minister, however, had already pre-
occupied the Pope's ear; and by discoursing continually concern-
ing the danger of giving offence to. the Emperor, as well as the
imprudence of supporting Odavio in an usurpation so detrimen-
tal to the Holy See, had totally alienated him from the family
of Farnese. Odavio's remonstrance and petition met, of confe-
quence, with a cold reception; and he, despairing of any assist-
ance from Julius, began to look round for protection from some
other quarter. Henry II. of France was the only Prince power-
ful enough to afford him this proteaion, and fortunately he was
now in a situation which allowed him to undertake it. He had
brought his tranfaaions with the two British kingdoms, which
had hitherto diverted his attention from the affairs of the conti-
nent, to such an issue as he desired. This he had effected partly
by the vigour of his arms, partly by his dexterity in taking
advantage of the political factions which raged in both king-
doms, and rendered the counsels of the Scots violent and pre-
cipitate, and the operations of the English feeble and unsteady.
He had procured from the English favourable conditions of peace
for his allies the Scots; he had prevailed on the nobles of
Scotland not only to affiance their young Queen to his son the
Dauphin, but even to fend her into France that she might be
educated under his eye; and had recovered Boulogne together
with its dependencies which had been conquered by Henry VIII.

HAVING gained points of so much confequcnce to his crown,

and disengagcd himself with filch honour from the burden of
supporting the Scots, and maintaining a war against England,
Henry was now at full leisure to pursue the meafurcs which his
hereditary jealousy of the Emperor's power naturally suggestcd.
lie listened, accordingly, to the first overtures which Otavio

*.)W,^~ ~~I Farncfe
BOOK X.

1551.

Hlis league
with
Henry II.
210

Farnese made him; and embracing eagerly an opportunity of
recovering footing in Italy, he instantly concluded a treaty, in
which he promised to espouse his cause, and to furnish him all
the assistance which he desired. This tranfa&ion could not be
long kept secret from the Pope, who foreseeing the calamities
which must follow if war were rekindled so near the eccle-
fiaftical slate, immediately issued monitory letters, requiring
Odavio to relinquish his new alliance. Upon his refusal to
comply with the requisition, he soon after pronounced his fief to
be forfeited, and declared war against him as a disobedient and
rebellious vassal. But as he could not hope, with his own forces
alone, to subdue Otavio while supported by such a powerful ally
as the King of France, he had recourse to the Emperor, who
being extremely follicitous to prevent the establishment of the
French in Parma, ordered Gonzaga to second Julius with all
his troops. Thus the French took the field as the allies of
Odavio; the Imperialifis as the protectors of the Holy See;
and hoflilities commenced between them, while Charles and
Henry themselves lill affected togive out that they would adhere
inviolably to the peace of Crefpy. The war of Parma was not
diflinguifhed by any memorable event. Many small rencoun-
ters happened with alternate success; the French ravaged part
of the ecclesiastical territories; the Imperialiits laid wafle the
Parmesan; and the latter, after having begun to besiege Parma
in form, were obliged to abandon the enterprize with disgrace .

BUT the motions and alarm which this war, or the prepara-

tions for it, occasioned in Italy, prevented most of the Italian
prelates from repairing to Trent on the first of May, the day

BOOK X.

1551.

Occasions the
renewl of
holtilities I'e-
twecn Charles
and Henry.

Rert.rrl the
meeting of
tillh Coullil.

"Adriani Iflor. lib. viii. 505, 514, 524. Sleid. 513. Paruta, p. 220.
Lcttere del Caro Icritte al nome dcl Card. Farnefc, tom. ii. p. x I, &c.

E c 2 appointed

21t

BooK X.

1551.

Henry pro-
tefs ag'iirf
hie council.

appointed for re-assembling the council; and though the Papar
legate and nuncios resorted thither, they were obliged to adjourn
to the first of September, hoping such a number might then
assemble, that they might with deeency begin their deliberations.
At that time, about sixty prelates, mostly from the ecelefialical
slate or from Spain, together with a few Germans, convened°.
The session was opened with the accustomed formalities, and the
fathers were about to proceed to business, when the abbot of
Pellozane appeared, and presenting letters of credence as ambaf-
fador from the French King, demanded audience. Having
obtained it, he protested in Henry's name against an assembly
called at such an improper juncture, when a war, wantonly
kindled by the Pope, made iv impossible for the deputies from
the Gallican church to resort to Trent in safety, or to deliberate
concerning articles of faith and discipline with the requisite tran-
quillity; he declared that his mailer did not acknowledge this
to be a general or oecumenick council, but must confider and
would treat it as a particular and partial convention P. Thelegate
affeced to despise this protest; and the prelates proceeded, not-
withfianding, to examine and decide the great points in contro-
verfy concerning the sacrament of the Lord's Supper, penance,
and extreme undion. This meafire of the French Monarch,
however, gave a deep wound to the credit of the council, at the
very commencement of its deliberations. The Germans could
not pay much regard to an assembly, whose authority the second
Prince inChrillendom had formally disclaimed, or feel any great
reverence for the decisions of a few men, who arrogated to them-
selves all the rights belonging to the representatives of the church.
universal, a title to which they had such poor pretensions.

* F. Paul. 268,

Sleid. 518. Thuan. 282. F. Paul. 30r.

THE
212

THE Emperor, nevertheless, was straining his authority to

the utmost, in order to establish the reputation and jurifdition
of the council. He had prevailed on the three ecclesiastical
Elecors, the prelates of greatest power and dignity in the church
next to the Pope, to repair thither in person. He had obliged
several German bishops of inferior rank to go to Trent them-
selves, or to fend their proxies. He granted an Imperial safe
conduct to the ambassadors nominated by the Eletor of Bran-
denburg, the duke of Wurtemberg, and other Protestant fiates,
to attend the council; and exhorted them to fend their divines.
thither, in order to propound, explain and defend their doctrine.
At the fame time, his zeal anticipated the decrees of the council;
and as if the Protestant doctrines had already been condemned,
he took large fleps towards exterminating them. With this
intention, he called together the minifiers of Augsburg; and
after interrogating them concerning several controverted points,
enjoined them to teach nothing with refped to there, contrary
to the tenets of the Romish church. Upon their declining to
comply with a requisition so contrary to the dictates of their
consciences, he commanded them to leave the town in three
days, without revealing to any person the cause of their banish-
ment; he prohibited them to preach for the future in any of
the countries subjed to the Imperial jurifdidion; and obliged
them to take an oath that they would punCually obey thefc
injuncions. They were not the only vidim3 to his zeal. The
Protestant clergy, in most of the cities in the circle of Swabia,
were ejeted with the fatme violence; and in many places, such
magistrates as had ditlinguifhed themfelvcs by their attachment
to the new opinions, were dillinifcd with the mofi abrupt irre-
gularity, and their ofliccs filled, in colnfcq(ucnce of the Emperor's
arbitrary appointment, with the most bigotted of their adverfa-

X~~~1 ~rics.

BOOK X.

Violence of
the Emperor's
proceedings
against the
Protestants.

2.3

ries. The Reformed worship was almost entirely suppressed
throughout that extensive province. The ancient and fundamen-
tal privileges of the free cities were violated. The people
were compelled to attend the ministration of priests, whom they
regarded with horror as idolaters; and to submit to the jurifdic-
tion of magiitrates, whom they detested as usurpers .

Hs endea- THE Emperor, after this discovery, which was more explicit
yours to sup-
port the than any that he had hitherto made, of his intention to subvert the

uncil. German conflitution, as well as to extirpate the Protestant reli-
November. gion, set out for Infpruck in the Tyrol. He fixed his residence

in that city, as by its situation in the neighbourhood of
Trent, and on the confines of Italy, it appeared a commodious
flation, whence he might infped the operations of the council,
and observe the progress of the war in the Parmesan, without
losing fight of the occurrences that might happen in Germany".

The siege of
1l.tgdeburg.

DURING thcCe tranfadions, the siege of Magdeburg was car-

ried on with various success. At the time when Charles pro-
fcriled the citizens of Magdeburg, and put them under the ban
of the Empire, lie had exhorted and even enjoined all the neigh-
bouring tfatcs to take arms against them, as rebels and common
enemies. Encouraged by his exhortations as well as promiefs,
George of Mccklciln)urg, a younger brother of the reigning Duke,
an ative and ambitious Princc, collccdl a con fi(leralble number of
those foldicrs of fortunc who had accompanied I-enry of Brunf-
wick in all his wild cnttcrprizcs; and IltoL511 a /c:;ll; Illthleran
himfilclf, invaded the territorics of tlle Mvlagdcblgcrs, liopilig

Sleid. 516, 528. Thuan. 276.

, Slcid. 329.

thlat,

2I4
BOOK X.

'55.

»_
, '·

'5

that, by the merit of this service, he might procure some part of BOok X
their domains to be allotted to him as an establishment. The ' '

I551.

citizens, unaccustomed as yet to endure patiently the cala-
mities of war, could not be restrained from sallying out in order
to save their lands from being laid waste. They attacked the
duke of Mecklenburg with more courage than conduc, and were
repulsed with great slaughter. But as they were animated with
that unconquerable spirit, which flows from zeal for religion
co-operating with the love of civil liberty, far from being dif-
heartened by their misfortune, they prepared to defend them-
selves with vigour. Many of the veteran soldiers who had
servcd in the long wars between the Emperor and King of
France, crowding to their standards under able and experienced
officers, they acquired military ikill by degrees, and added all
the advantages of that to the efforts of undaunted courage.
The duke of Mecklenburg, notwithfianding the severe blow
which he had given the Magdeburgers, not daring to invest a
town firongly fortified, and defended by such a garrison, con-
tinued to ravage the open country.

As the hopes of booty drew many adventurers to his camp,

Maurice of Saxony began to hejealous of the power which he pof-
sesscd by being at the head of such a numerous body, and marching
towards Magdeburg with his own troops, anffmcd the fiiprcme
command of the whole army, an honour to which his high rank
and great abilities, as well as the nomination of the diet, gave
him an indifiptable title. With this united force lie invested
the town, and began the fiegc in fornm; claiming great merit
with the nEmperor on that account, as, from his zeal to execute
the Imperial ldecree, lie wv;; cxlpoling himfllf' once more to
the ccntircs and malcditoions of the party with which he agreed

in

Mauri ctakes
the command
of the army
which carried
on the siege.

BOOK X.

155-1

Tie c;ty fur-
ri idcts to
Mlauricc.

in religious sentiments. But the approaches to the town went on
slowly; the garrison interrupted the besiegers by frequent fal-
lies, in one of which the duke of Mecklenburgh was taken pri-
soner, levelled part of their works, and cut off the soldiers in
their advanced posts. While the citizens of Magdeburg, ani-
mated by the discourses of their pastors, and the soldiers encou-
raged by the example of their officers, endured all the hardships
of a siege without murmuring, and defended themselves with
the fame ardour which they had at firi discovered; the troops of
the besiegers aded with extreme remissness, repining at every
thing they suffered in a service which they disliked. They broke
out, more than once, into open mutiny, demanding the arrears
of their pay, which, as the Germans contributed with great
reluctance towards defraying the expences of this war, amoun-
ted to a considerable fum '. Maurice, too, had particular mo-
tives, though such as he durst not avow at that junCture, which
induced him not to push the siege with vigour, and made him
chufe rather to continue at the head of an army exposed to all
the imputations which his dilatory proceedings drew upon him,
than to precipitate a conqucfl which might have brought him
some accession of reputation, but would have rendered it necessary
to disband his forces.

AT las, the inhabitants of the town beginning to susser dif-

trefs from want of provisions, and Maurice, finding it impossible
to protrac matters any longer without filling the JEmperor with
fuchl fiifpicions as might have difconccrtcd all his mcafures, he
concluded a trcaty of capitulation with the city upon the follow-

Thuan. 277. Sicid. 514.

ing
2I6

ing conditions; that the Magdeburgers should humbly implore
pardon of the Emperor; that they should not for the future
take arms, or enter into any alliance against the house of Austria;
that they ihould submit tothe authority of the Imperial chamber;
that they should conform to the decree of the diet at Augsburg
with refpe& to religion; that the new fortifications added to
the town should be demolished; that they should pay a fine of
fifty thousand crowns, deliver up twelve pieces of ordnance to
the Emperor, and set the Duke of Mecklenburg together with
theirother prifoncrs at liberty without ransom. Next day their
garrison marched out, and Maurice took poffeflion of the town
with great military pomp.

BEFO RE the terms of capitulation were fettled, Maurice had

held many conferences with Albert count Mansfeldt, who had
the chief command in Magdeburg, and with count Heideck, an
officer who had served with great reputation in the army of the
league of Smalkalde, whom the Emperor had proscribed on
account of his zeal for that cause, and whom Maurice had, not-
withflanding, secretly engaged in his service, and admitted into
the most intimate confidence. To them he communicated a scheme,
which he had long revolved in his mind, for procuring liberty to
to his father-in-law the Landgrave, for vindicating the privileges
of the Germanic body, and setting bounds to the dangerous en-
croachments of the Imperial power. Having consulted with
them about the measures which might be neceflary for fccuring
the success of such an arduous enterprize, he gave Mansfeldt fe-
crct affuranccs that the fortifications of Magdcburg fould not be
dcfiroyed, and that the inhabi tants flo,:hlii neither be disturbcd in
the excrcife of their religion, nor be dcprived of any of their
anticnt immunities. In order to engage Maurice more thoroughly

VOL. III. F f from

BOOK X.

1;51.-

Novemb. 3.

Maurice's
views at this
jundure.

1"7

BOOK X.

~ ,I

1551.

The advan-
tages he de-
rived from his
negociaiions
with the Mag-
deburgerf.

from considerations of interest to fulfil these engagements, the
senate of Magdeburg eleted him their Burgrave, a dignity
which had formerly belonged to the electoral house of Saxony,
and which entitled him to a very ample jurisdiction not only
in the city but in its dependencies '.

THUS the citizens of Magdeburg, after enduring a siege of

twelve months, and struggling for their liberties religious and
civil with an invincible fortitude worthy of the cause in which
it was exerted, had at lait the good fortune to conclude a treaty
which left them in a better condition than the reft of their
countrymen, whom their timidity or want' of publick spirit
had betrayed into such mean submissions to the Emperor. But
while a great part of Germany applauded the gallant conduct of
the Magdeburgers, and rejoiced in their having escaped the
deftrudion with which they had been threatened, all admired
Maurice's address in the condut of his negociation with them,
as well as the dexterity with which he converted every event to
his own advantage. They saw, with amazement, that after hav-
ing afflited the Magdeburgers during many months with all
the calamities of war, he was at last, by their voluntary elec-
tion, vested with supreme authority in that city which he had
so lately besieged; that after having been so long the objea
of their invectives and satire as an apostate, and an enemy to
the religion which he professed; they seemed now to place un-
bounded confidence in his zeal and good will . At the fame
time, the publick articles in the treaty of capitulation were so

Sleid. 528. Thuan. 276. Obfidionis Magdeburgici dcfcriptio per Sebafl.
Befelmeicerum. ap. Scard. ii. 518.

Arnoldi vita Maurit. apud Mcnkcn, ii. 1227.

pcrfcetly
218

·perfectly conformable to those which the Emperor had granted BOOK X.
to the other Protestant cities, and Maurice took such care to 'I
magnify his merit in having reduced a place which had de-
fended itself with so much obitinacy, that Charles, far from
fufpeaing any thing fraudulent or collusive in the terms of
accommodation, ratified them without hesitation, and absolved
the Magdeburgers from the sentence of ban which had been
denounced againf them.

THE only point that now remained to embarrass Maurice

was how to keep together the veteran troops which had served
under him, as well as those which had been employed in the
defence of the town. For this, too, he found an expedient
with singular art and felicity. His schemes against the Emperor
were not yet so fully ripened, that he durst venture to dif-
close them, and proceed openly to carry them into execution.
The winter, was approaching which made it impossible to
take the field immediately. He was afraid that it would give
a premature alarm to the Emperor, if he ihould retain such a
considerable body in his pay until the season of acion returned
in the spring. As soon then as Magdeburg opened its gates,
he sent home his Saxon fubjets, whom he could command to
take arms and re-assemble on the shortest warning, to their
own habitations; and at the fame time, paying part of the
arrears due to the mercenary troops, who had followed his flan-
dard, as well as to the fkLdiers who had served in the garrison, he
absolved them from their refpe&ive oaths of fidelity, and dif-
banded them. But the moment he gave them their discharge,
George Duke of Mccklenburg, who was now set at libcrty,
offered to take them into his service, and to become furcty for

Fs the

His expedient
for keeping
an army on
foot.

219

BOOK X.

1551.

bis address in
concealin his

i .tent: ns
f:')n the Em-
p .or.

the payment of what was flill owing to them. As such ad-
venturers were accustomed often to change mailers, they in-
flantly accepted the offer. Thus, these troops were kept
united, and ready to march wherever Maurice should call
them, while the Emperor, deceived by this artifice, and ima-
gining that the Duke of Mecklenburg had hired them with an
itntention to assert, by force of arms, his claim to a part of his
brother's territories, suffered it to pass without obfervatibn, as
if it had been a matter of no consequence x.

HAVING ventured to take these fleps which were osso much

consequence towards the execution of his schemes, Maurice, that
he might divert the Emperor from observing their tendency too
narrowly, and prevent the suspicions which that must have
excited, saw the necessity of employing some new artifice in
order to engage his attention, and to confirm him in his present
security. As he knew that the chief object of the Emperor's
follicitude at this jun&cure, was how he might prevail with the
Proteflant States of Germany to recognize the authority of the
council of Trent, and to fend thither ambassadors in their own
name, as well as deputies from their refpedive churches, lie
took hold of this predominating passion in order to amuse and
to deceive him. He affcdcd a wonderful zeal to gratify Chartes
in what he desired with regard to this matter; he nominated
amnlaffadois, whom he inmpowcred to attend the council; he
made choice of Mclanchthon and some of the inoll eminent
among his brethren to prepare a confcflion of faith, and to lay

Thuan. 278. Struv. corp. hist. Germ. 1o64.. Arnoldi vita Mauritii apud
Mcutkcn, ii. i?27.

it
220

it before that assembly. After his example, and probably in
consequence of his follicitations, the Duke of Wurtemberg,
the city of Strafburg, and other Protestant States appointed
ambassadors and divines to attend the council. They all ap-
plied to the Emperor for his fafe-conduC, which they obtained
in the most ample form. This was deemed sufficient for the
security of the ambassadors, and they proceeded accordingly on
their journey; but a separate fafe-condud from the council it-
self, was demanded for the Proteflant divines. The fate of
John Huss and Jerome of Prague, whom the council of Con-
fiance, in the preceding century, had condemned to the flames
without regarding the Imperial fafe-conduc which had been
granted them, rendered this precaution prudent and necessary.
But as the Pope was no less unwilling that the Protestants
should be admitted to an hearing in. tle council, than the Em-
peror had been eager in bringing them to demand it, the legate
by promises and threats prevailed on the fathers of the council
to decline issuing a fafe-condud in the fame form with that
which the council of Basil had granted to the followers of Huss.
The Protestants, on their part insisted upon the council's copying
theprecife words of that infirumcnt.. The Imperial ambassadors
.interposed in order to obtain what would satisfy them. Altera-
tions in the form of the writ were proposed; expedients were
fuggefled; protefs and counter protefls were taken; the legate
together with his associates laboured to gain their point by artifice
and chicane ; the Protestants adhered to theirs with firmness and
obflinacv. An account of every thing that paflcd in lTrent was
tranfinitted to the Emperor at Infllruck, who, attempting from
an cxccfs of zeal, or of confidence in his own addrels, to recon-
cile the contending parties, was involved in a labyrinth of in-

-:( cxtricable

BOO.K X.

15.51.

221

BooK X. extricable negociations. By means of this, however, Maurice
- i', gained all that he had in view; the Emperor's time was wholly

engrossed, and his attention diverted; while he had leisure to
mature his schemes, to carry on his intrigues, and to finish
his preparations before he threw off the mask, and fruck the
blow which he had so long meditated a
The affairs of BUT previous to the history of Maurices operations, some

'na "account muff be given of a new revolution in Hungary, which

contributed not a little towards their producing such extraordi-
nary effe&s. When Solyman, in the year 154r, by a stratagem,
which suited the base and insidious policy of a petty usurper,
rather than the magnanimity of a mighty conqueror, deprived
the young King of Hungary of the dominions which his
father had left him, he had granted that unfortunate Prince the
country of Transylvania, a province of his paternal kingdom.
The government of this, together with the care of educating
the young King, for he still allowed him to retain that title,
though he had rendered it only an empty name, he committed
to the Queen and Martinuzzi bishop of Waradin, whom the late
King had appointed his sons guardians and regents of his domi-
nions, at a time when those offices were of greater importance.
This co-ordinate jurifdi&tion occasioned the faiae dissentions in a
small principality as it would have excited in a great kingdom;
an ambitious young Queen, conscious of her capacity -for go-
verning, and an high spirited prelate, contending who should
engross the greatest fiare in the administration. Each had their
partizans among the nobles, but as Martinuzzi, by his grcat

S Sleid. 526, 529. F. Paul. 323, 338. Thuan. 286.

talents,
22

talents, began to acquire the ascendant, Isabella turned his own
arts against him, and courted the protetion of the Turks.

THE neighbouring baihas, jealous of the bishop's power as

well as abilities, readily promised her the aid which she demanded,
and would soon have obliged Martinuzzi to have given up to her
the sole direction of affairs, if his ambition, fertile in expedients,
had not suggested to him a new measure, and one that tended
not only to preserve but to enlarge his authority. ' Having con-
cluded an agreement with the Queen, by the mediation of
some of the nobles who were follicitous to save their country
from the calamities of a civil war, he secretly dispatched one of
his confidents to Vienna, and entered into a negociation with
Ferdinand. As it was no difficult matter to persuade Ferdinand
that the fame man whose enmity and intrigues had driven him
out of a great part of his Hungarian dominions, might, upon
a reconciliation, become equally infirumental in recovering
them, he listened eagerly to the first overtures of an union with
that prelate. Martinuzzi allured him by such prospects of.ad-
vantage, and engaged, with so much confidence, that he would
prevail on the most powerful of the Hungarian nobles to take
arms in his favour, that Ferdinand, notwithflanding his truce
with Solyman, agreed to invade Transylvania. The com-
mand of the troops defiined for that service, confifing of ve-
teran Spanith and German soldiers, was given to Caflaldo Mar-
quis de Piadena, an officer formed by the famous Marquis de
Plfcara, whom lie firougly rcfimbled both in his cnterprizing
genius for civil bulinefs, and in his great knowledge in the art
of war. This army, more formidable by the discipline of the
fbldiers, and the abilities of the general, than by its numbers,

Was
2

BooK X.

1551.

Martinuzzi
favours Ser-
dinand's pre.
tensions in
that kingdom.

223

BoOK X. was powerfully seconded by Martinuzzi and his fadtion among

xSS.. the Hungarians. As the Turkish Bafhas, the Sultan himself

being at the head of his army on the frontiers of Persia, could
not afford the Queen such immediate or. effecual affitance
as the exigency of her affairs required, she quickly loft all hopes
of being able to retain any longer the authority which she pof-
sessed as regent, and even began to despair of her son's safety.
Thefruccefof MARTINUZZI did not susser this favourable opportunity of

accomplishing his own designs to pass unimproved, and ven-
tured, while she was in this state of dejeaion, to lay before her
a proposal, which at any other time, ihe would have rejected
with disdain. He represented how impossible it was for her to
resist Ferdinand's victorious arms; that even if the Turks should
enable her to make head against them, she would be far from
changing her condition to the better, and could not con-
fider them as deliverers but as masters to whose commands she
must submit; he conjured her, therefore, as she regarded her
own dignity, the safety of her son, or the security of Christen-
dom, rather to give up Transylvania to Ferdinand, and to
make over to him her son's title to the crown of Hungary, than
to allow both to be usurped by the inveterate enemy of the
Christian faith. At the fame time, he promised her, in Ser-
dinand's name, a compensation for herself, as well as for her son,
suitable to their rank, and proportional to the value of what they
wcre to sacrifice. Isabella, deserted by some of her adherents,
trufling others, destitute of friends, and surrounded by Caftal-
do's and Martinuzzi's troops, subscribed, though with a
reluCtant hand, there hard conditions. Upon this, she furren-

dered

dered fich places of strength as were still in her possession, she
gave up all the ensigns of royalty, particularly a crown of gold,
which, as the Hungarians believed, had descended from heaven,
and conferred on him who wore it an undoubted right to the
throne. As flie could not bear to remain a private person,
in a country where she had once enjoyed sovereign power, fle
infiantly set out with her son for Silesia, in order to take posses-
sion of the principalities of Oppelen and Ratibor, the invefliture
of which Ferdinand had engaged to grant her son, and likewise
to beflow one of his daughters upon him in marriage.

UPON the resignation of the young King, Martinuzzi, and

after his example the reft of the Transylvanian grandees, swore
allegiance to Ferdinand; who, in order to tefrify his grateful sense
of the zeal as well as success with which that prelate had served
him, affected to diflinguiih him by every possible mark of favour.
and confidence. He appointed him governor of Transylvania,
with almost unlimited authority; he ordered Caftaldo to pay the
greatest deference to his opinion and commands; he encreafed
his revenues, which were already very great, by new appoint-
ments; he nominated him archbilhop of Gran, and prevailed on
the Pope to raise him to the dignity of a Cardinal. All this
ostentation of good-will, however, was void of sincerity, and
calculated to conceal sentiments the most pcrfedly its reverse.
Ferdinand dreaded Martinuzzi's abilities; diflrufed his fidelity;
and foresaw, that as his extcnfive authority enabled him to
check any attempt towards circlumfcribing or abolishing the
extensive privileges which the Hungarian nobles poffeflld, he
would fland forth, on every occalion, the guardian of the liber-

VOL. III. G g ties

BooK X.

1551.

Appointed
g Iernor of
nhat p.rt of
llum,g,ary
whi'ch was
ulhjcdt to
Ferdinatid.

22j

ties of his country, rather than a&t the part of a viceroy devoted
to the will of his sovereign.

FOR this reason, he secretly gave it in charge to Caftaldo, to

watch his motions, to guard againit his designs, and to thwart
his measures. But Martinuzzi, either because he did not per-
ceive that Caftaldo was placed as a spy on his acions, or because
he despised Ferdinand's insidious arts, assumed the direcion of
the war against the Turks with his usual tone of authority, and
conducted it with great magnanimity, and no less success. He
recovered tome places of which the Infidels had taken possession;
he rendered their attempts to reduce others abortive; and eftab-
lifhed Ferdinand's authority not only in Transylvania, but in the
Bannat of Temefwar, and several of the countries adjacent. In
carrying on these operations, he often differed in sentiments from
Caftaldo and his officers, and treated the Turkish prisoners with
a degree of humanity, and even of generosity, which Caftaldo
loudly condemned. This was represented at Vienna as an art-
ful method of courting the friendship of the Infidels, that, by
securing their protecion, he might shake off all dependence upon
the sovereign whom he now acknowledged. Though Marti-
nuzzi, injutfification of his own conduct, contended that it was
impolitic to exasperate, by unneceflary severities, an enemy
prone to revenge, Caftaldo's accusations gained credit with Ferdi-
nand, prepofleffed already against Martinuzzi, and jealous of
every thing that could endanger his authority in Hungary, in
proportion as he knew it to be precarious and ill eflablifhed.
These suspicions, Caftaldo confirmed and flrcngtlencd, by the
intelligence which lie tranfinitted continually to his confidents
at Vienna. By mifreprcfenting what was innocent, and put-
ting the worst confirudion on what fCemed dubious inl Marti-

nIZZi 'S
BOOK X.

1551.

Ferdinand
begins to
form deigns
againt him.
226

nuzzi's condu&; by imputing to him designs which he nevet
formed, and charging him with ations of which he was not
guilty; he at last convinced Ferdinand, that, in order to preserve
his Hungarian crown, he must cut off that ambitious prelate.
But Ferdinand, foreseeing that it would be dangerous to pro-
ceed in the regular course of law againit a subjed of such exorbi-
tant power, as enabled him to set his sovereign at defiance, deter-
mined to employ violence in order to obtain that fatisfadion,
which the laws were too feeble to afford him.

Joo, X.

5I .
HE iflued his orders accordingly to Caftaldo, who willingly He is air-

finated by his

undertook that infamous service. Having communicated the command.
design to some Italian and Spanish officers whom he could. trust,
and concerted with them the plan of executing it; they entered
Martinuzzi's apartment, early one morning, under pretence of Dec. 18.
presenting to him some dispatches which were to be sent off
immediately to Vienna; and while he perused a paper with
attention, one of their number fruck him with his poinard in
the throat. The blow was not mortal; Martinuzzi flarted up
with the intrepidity natural to him, and grappling the aflaffin,
threw him to the ground; but the other conspirators ruffling in,
an old man, unarmed, and alone, could not long fuflain such an
unequal conflit, but funk under the wounds which he received
from so many hands. Their dread of the foreign troops reirained
the Transylvanians from rising in arms, in order to take ven-
geance on the murderers of a prelate who had long been the ob-
jcd of their love as well as veneration. They spoke of the The effcato

that violent

deed, however, with horrorand execration; and exclaimed againit aaion.
Ferdinand, whom neither gratitude for recent and important
services, nor reverence for a characer confidered as sacred and
inviolable among Christians, could restrain from shedding the

G g blood

BOOK X.

Maurice
courts the
protection of
the French
King.

blood of a man, whose only crime was attachment to his native
country. The nobles, detesting the jealous as well as cruel policy
of a court, which, upon uncertain and improbable surmises, had
given up a person no less conspicuous for his merit than his
rank, to be butchered by assassins, either retired to their own
efiates, or if they continued with the Aufirian army, grew cold
to the service. The Turks, encouraged by the death of an
enemy whose abilities they knew and dreaded, prepared to
renew hostilities early in the spring; and inflead of the security
which Ferdinand had expeted from the removal of Martinuzzi,
it was evident that his territories in Hungary were about to be
attacked with greater vigour, and defended with less zeal than
ever a.

MEANWHILE, Maurice having almost finished his intrigues

and preparations, was on the point of declaring his intentions
openly, and of taking the field against the Emperor. His firfi
care, after he came to this resolution, was to disclaim that narrow
and bigotted maxim of the confederates of Smalkalde, which
had led them to shun all connecion with foreigners. He had
observed how fatal this had been to their cause; and infiruded
by their error, he was as eager to court the protetion of Henry IL
as they had been follicitous to prevent the interposition of
Francis I. Happily for him, he found Henry in a disposition
to liflen to the firfl overture on his part, and in a situation which
enabled him to bring the whole force of the French monarchy
into acion. Henry had long observed the progrcfs of the

* Sleid. 535. Thuan. lib. ix. 309, &c. Ifluanhaffi Hilf. Regn. Hungarici

lib. xvi. 189, &c. Mem. de Ribicr, ii. 871. Natalis Comitis Hiftoria lib. iv.
84, &c.

Emperor's
228

Emperor's arms with jealousy, and wilhed to distinguish him- BOOK X..
self by trying his strength against the fame enemy, whom it "-'
had been the glory of his father's reign to oppose. He had
laid hold on the firfi opportunity in his power of thwarting the
Emperor's designs, by taking the Duke of Parma under his pro-
tedion; and hostilities were already begun, not only in that dut-
chy but in Piedmont. Having terminated thewarwith England
by a peace, no less advantageous to himself than honourable for
his allies the Scots, the restless and enterprizing courage of his
nobles was impatient to display itself on Come theatre of acion
more conspicuous than the petty operations in Parma or Pied-
mont afforded them.

JOHN DE SI ESSE, bishop of Bayonne, whom Henry had sent His treaty

with him.

into Germany, under pretence of hiring troops to be employed
in Italy, was empowered to conclude a treaty in form with
Maurice and his associates. As it would have been very inde-
cent in a King of France to have undertaken the defence of
the Protestant church, the interests of religion, how much
soever they might be affeEted by the treaty, were not once men-
tioned in any of the articles. Religious concerns they pre-
tended to commit entirely to the disposition of divine provi-
dence; the only motives assigned for their present confederacy
against Charles were to procure the Landgrave liberty, and to
prevent the subversion of the ancient constitution and laws of
the German Empire. In order to accomplish thcfe ends, it was
agreed, that all the contrading parties flould, at the fame time,
declare war against the Emperor; that neither peace nor truce
ihould be made but by common consent, nor without including
each of the confederates; that, in order to guard against the

t inco-ll

229

BOOK X.

ISSI.

Sol;i its the
,:l1id k I. of

inconveniencies of anarchy, or of pretensions to joint command,
Maurice should be acknowledged as head of the German confe-
derates, with absolute authority in all military affairs; that
Maurice and his associates should bring into the field seven thou-
sand horse, with a proportional number of infantry; that
towards the subsistence of this army, during the three first months
of the war, Henry should contribute two hundred and forty
thousand crowns, and afterwards sixty thousand crowns a month,
as long as they continued in arms; that Henry should attack the
Emperor on the fide of Lorrain with a powerful army; that if
it were found requisite to elect a new Emperor, such a person
should be nominated as shall be agreeable to the King of France b.
This treaty was concluded on the fifth of Otober, some time
before Magdeburg surrendered, and the preparatory negocia-
tions were conduced with such profound secrecy, that of all the
Princes who afterwards acceded to it, Maurice communicated
what he was carrying on to two only, John Albert, the reigning
duke of Mecklenburg, and William of Hesse, the Landgrave's
eldefl son. The league itself was no less anxiously concealed,
and with such fortunate care, that no rumour concerning it
reached the ears of the Emperor or his ministers, nor do they
fccni to have conceived the most distant filfpicion of such a
transaction.

ATr the fame time Maulrice, with a follicitude which was

carcful to draw some acccflion of flrength from every quar-
ter, applied to Edward VI. of England, and requcflcd a
fiblidy of four hundrcd thouland crowns for the sUpport of

b Recucil des Traitcz, tom. ii. 258. Thuan. lib. viii. 279.

:. a con-
230

a confederacy formed in defence of the Protestant religion.
But the factions which prevailed in the English court during
the minority of that Prince, and which deprived both the
councils and arms of the nation of their wonted vigour, left
the English miniflers neither time nor inclination to attend to
foreign affairs, and prevented Maurice's obtaining that aid,
which their zeal for the Reformation would have prompted
them to grant him'.

MAURICE, however, having secured the protecion of such a

powerful Monarch as Henry II. proceeded with great confidence,
but with equal caution, to execute his plan. As he judged it
neceffiary to make one effort more, in order to obtain the Empe-
ror's consent that the Landgrave should be set at liberty, he sent
a solemn embassy, in his own name, and in that of the Elecor
of Brandenburg, to Infpruck. After resuming, at great length,
all the fads and arguments upon which they founded their
claim, and representing, in the firongeft terms, the peculiar
engagements which bound them to be so assiduous in their iol-
licitations, they renewed the requef in behalf of the unfortu-
nate prisoner, which they had so often preferred in vain. The
Eledor Palatine, the Duke of \Wurtenmberg, the Dukes of Meck-
lenburg, the Duke of Dcuxponts, the Marquis of Brandenburg
Bareith, and the Marquis of Baden,, by their ambassadors, con-
curred with them in their suit. Letters were licewife delivered
to the fame cfFct from the King of' Denmark, the Duke of
Bavaria, and the Dukes of Lunenburg. Even the King of
the Romans, moved witl compailion towards the Landgrave in

' Burntt's Ilif. of the Rcform. vol. i, Append. 37.

his

BOOK X.

155'.

Demands

once more
that the
Landgrave
lfiould be let
at ;lberty.
Decembe-.

23J

BOOK X.

551.
1551.

his wretched situation, or influenced, perhaps, by a secret jea-
lousy of his brother's power and designs, which since his attempt
to alter the order of succession in the Empire, he had come to
view with other eyes, and dreaded to a great degree, joined in
this application.

BUT Charles, conitant to his own system, with regard to the

Landgrave, eluded a demand urged by fuich powerful intercef-
fors; and having declared that he would communicate his refo-
lution concerning the matter to Maurice as soon as he arrived at
Infpruck, where he was every day expe&ed, he did not deign to
descend into any more particular explication of his intentionsd.
This application, though of no benefit to the Landgrave, was of
great advantage to Maurice. It served tojuftify his subsequent
proceedings, and to denmonlrate the necessity of employing arms
in order to extort that equitable concession, which his mediation
or intreaty could not obtain. It was of use, too, to confirm the
Emperor in his security, as both the solemnity of the application,
and the follicitude with which so many Princes were drawn in to
enforce it, led him to conclude, that Maurice placed all his hopes
of restoring the Landgrave to liberty, in gaining his content
to difinifs him.

1 5 2.

Mauric con-
tinurt tu)
armu! the
Emperor.

MAURICE employed artifices flill more refined to conceal his

machinations, to amuse the Emperor and to gain time. He
affclcd to be more follicitous than ever to find out some expe-
dient for removing the difficulties with regard to the fafe-con-
duia for the Protestant divines appointed to attend the council,

dSleid. 53z. Thuan. lib viii. 280.

f(
£3»

so that they might repair thither with safety. His amlaffadors
at Trent had frequent conferences concerning this matter, with
the Imperial ambassadors in that city, and laid open their senti-
ments to them with the appearance of the most unreserved confi-
dence. He was willing, at last, to have it believed, that he thought
all differences with refpea to this preliminary article were on
the point of being adjusted; and in order to give credit to this
opinion, he commanded Melandhon together with his brethren to
set out on their journey to Trent. At the fame time, he held a cloie
correspondence with the Imperial court at Infpruck, and renewed
on every occasion his profeflions of fidelity and attachment to
the Emperor. He talked continually of his intention of going
to Infpruck in person; he ordered a house to be hired for him
in that city, and to be fitted up with the greatest dispatch for
his reception'.

BUT, profoundly {killed as Maurice was in the arts of deceit,

and impenetrable as he thought the veil to be under which he
concealed his designs, there were several things in his conduct
which alarmed the Emperor amidst his security, and tempted him
frequently to fufpea that he was meditating something extraor-
dinary. As there suspicions took their rife from circumflanccs
inconsiderable in themselves, or of an ambiguous as well as un-
certain nature, they were more than counterbalanced by Mauricc's
address,; and the Emperor would not, lightly, give up his con-
fidence in a man, whom he had once trufcd and loaded with
favours. Ohe particular alone seemed to be of fucl conlfquencc,
that he thought it nccefalry to demand an cxplanation with
'regard to it. The troops, wlichl Gcorge of Mecklenburg had

e Arnoldi vita Maurit. ap. Mcnkcn, ii. 1229.
VOL. III. II 1h tlakn

30K X,

's.

The E.p'eror
conceivss
some fufpi-
cion concern-
i:ig his i:tca.
tionn.

B00K X.

Maurice pre-
pares for
action.

taken into pay after the capitulation of Magdeburg, having
fixed their quarters inThuringia, lived atdifcretion on the lands
of the rich ecclesiastics in their neighbourhood. Their licence
and rapaciousness were intolerable. Such as felt or dreaded
their exactions, complained loudly to the Emperor, and repre-
sented them as a body of men kept in readiness for some defpe-
rate enterprize. But Maurice, partly by extenuating the enor-
mities of which they had been guilty, partly by representing the
impoflibility of disbanding these troops, or of keeping them to
regular discipline, unless the arrears still due to them by the
Emperor were paid, either removed the apprehensions which
this had occasioned, or as Charles was not in a condition to
satisfy the demands of there soldiers, obliged him to be silent
with regard to the matter'.

TH E time of acion was now approaching. Maurice had

privately dispatched Albert of Brandenburg to Paris, in order to
confirm his league with Henry, and to haften the march of the
French army. He had taken measures to bring his own fubjeds
together on the first summons; he had provided for the security
of Saxony while he should be absent with the army; and he
held the troops in Thuringia, on which he chiefly depended,
ready to advance on a moment's warning. All these compli-
cated operations were carried on without being discovered by
the court at Infpruck, and the Emperor remained there in per-
fed tranquillity, buffed entirely in counteradting the intrigues
of the Pope's legate at Trent, and in fettling the conditions on
which the Protestant divines flhould be admitted into the coun-
cil, as if there had not been any tranfadion of greater moment
in agitation.

f Skid. 549. Thuan. 339.

Tins
234

nts credulous security in a Prince, whose sagacity in

observing the conduc of all around him, commonly led him
to an excess of distrust, may seem unaccountable, and has been
imputed to infatuation. But besides the exquisite address with
which Maurice concealed his intentions, two circumstances con-
tributed to the delusion. The gout returned upon Charles soon
after his arrival at Infpruck, with an encreafe of violence; and
his confiitution being broken by such frequent attacks, he was
seldom able to exert his natural vigour of mind, or to confider
affairs with his usual vigilance and penetration; and Granvelle,
bishop of Arras, his prime minister, though one of the most
subtle statesmen of that, or perhaps of any age, was on this
occasion the dupe of his own craft. He entertained such an
high opinion of his own abilities, and held the political talents
of the Germans in such contempt, that he despised all the inti-
mations given him concerning Maurice's secret machinations,
or the dangerous designs which he was carrying on. When
the Duke of Alva, whose dark suspicious mind harboured
many doubts concerning the Eledor's sincerity, proposed calling
him immediately to court to answer for his conduc, he replied
with great scorn, that these apprehensions were groundless, and
that a drunken German head was too gross to form any scheme
which he could not easily penetrate and baffle. Nor did he
assume this peremptory tone merely from confidence in his own
discernment; he had bribed two of Maurice's ministers, and
received from them frequent and minute information concern-
ing all their malter's motions. But through this very channel,
by which he expeted to gain access to all Maurice's counsels,
and even to his thoughts, such intelligence was conveyed to him
as compleated his deception. Maurice fortunately discovercd

Hh 2 . the

BOOK X.

I5S.

Circumftancea
which con-
tributed to
deceive the
Emperor,

and his
minilters.

23S

BOQK X.

r5Sz.

the correspondence of the two traitors with Granvelle, and instead
of punishing them for their crime, he dexterously availed him-
self of their fraud, and turned his own arts against the bishop.
He affected to treat these ministers with greater confidence than
ever; he admitted them to his consultations, and seemed to lay
open his heart to them; and taking care all the while to let
them be acquainted with nothing but what it was his interest
mhould be known, they transmitted to Infpruck such accounts
as possessed Granvelle with a firm belief of his sincerity and
good intentions g. The Emperor himself, in the fulness of fecu-
rity, was so little moved by a memorial, in name of the ecclefi-
aftical Elctors, admonishing him to be on his guard againit
Maurice, that he made light of this intelligence; and his answer
to them abounds with declarations of his entire and confident
reliance on the fidelity as well as attachment of that Prince h.

MauIice takes AT last Maurice's preparations were compleated, and he had
the sió,1
aainfl-the the fatisfation to find that his intrigues and- designs were still

l-la eror. unknown. But, though now ready to take the field,.he did not lay

aside the arts which he had hitherto employed; and by one piece
of craft more, he deceived his enemies a few days longer. He
give out, that he was about to begin that journey to Infpruck of
which he had so often talked, and he took one of the ministers
whom Granvelle had bribed to attend him thither.. After tra-
velling post a few ftagcs, he pretended to be indisposed by the
fatigue of the journey, and dispatching the fifpeded minister to
make his apology to the Emperor for this delay, and to affurc
him that he would be at Infpruck within a few days; as fooln
as this spy on his adions was gone, he mounted on horicback,
M-cll; 8. rode full speed towards Thuringia, joined his army wllicl.

& NILdvil. Nlcmoir,, fol.. dit. p. 12.

` Slkid. 535.

aiixnteiltd

amounted to twenty thousand foot and five thousand horfi, and BooK X.
put it immediately in motion *. ss'.

AT the fame time he published a manifesto containing his publilhes a
reasons for taking arms. These were three in number; That ,,aniir fhisf-

tifying his

he might secure the Protestant religion, which was threatened cornua.
with immediate deftrudion; That he might maintain the con-
Ilitution and laws of the Empire, and save Germany from be-
ing fubjeaed to the domination of an absolute monarch; That
he might deliver the Landgrave of Hesse from the miseries of a
long and unjust imprisonment. By the first, he rouzed all the
favourers of the Reformation, a party formidable by their
zeal as well as numbers, and rendered desperate by oppression.
By the second, he interested all the friends of liberty, Catho-
licks as well as Protestants, and made it their interest to
unite with him in aflerting the rights and privileges com-
mon to both. The third, besides the glory which he acquired '-
by his zeal to fulfil his engagements to the unhappy prisoner,
was become a cause of general concern, not only from the com-
paflion which the Landgrave's sufferings excited, but from
indignation at the injufiice and rigour of the Emperor's' pro-
ceedings againtf him. Together with Maurice's manifesto,-
another appeared in the name of Albert Marquis of Branden-
burgh Culmbach, who had joined him with a body of adven-
turcrs whom he had drawn together. The fame grievances
which Maurice had pointed out are mentioned in it, but with
an cxcefs of virulence and animosity, suitable to the character
of the prince in whole name it was publishcd.

* Mclv. Mem. p. 13. Thcfe ciwrumflanccs concerning the Saxon minifecrs

whom Granvelle had bribed, are not mrnntioncd by the German hiltorians ; but
[ as Sir James Mc!vil received his infoirmation from the Elctor P.il.itih, a111 as
they are perfettly agrecable to the reit of Mauticc's coudt, ud, they mtiy be con-
fid,'rcd as authentick..

BOOK X.

1552.

He is power-
fully support-
ed by the
French King.

Maui ce's
operations in
the field.

THz King of France added to there a manifesto in his own

name; in which, after taking notice of the ancient alliance
between the French and German nations, both descended from
the fame ancestors; and after mentioning the applications, which,
in consequence of this, some of the most illustrious among the
German Princes had made to him for his protection; he declared
that he now took arms to re-establish the ancient conititution of
the Empire, to deliver some of its princes from captivity, and
to secure the privileges and independence of all the members of
the Germanick body. In this manifesto, Henry assumed the
extraordinary title of ProteSor of the Liberties of Germany, and
of its captive Princes; and there was engraved on it a cap, the
ancient symbol of freedom, placed between two daggers, in
order to intimate to the Germans, that this blessing was to be
acquired and secured by force of arms'.

MAURICE had now a very different part to a&t, but his

flexible genius was capable of accommodating itself to every
situation. The moment he took arms, he was as bold and
enterprizing in the field, as he had been cautious and crafty in
the cabinet. He advanced by rapid marches towards the
Upper Germany. All the towns in his way opened their gates
to him. He reinstated the magifirates whom the Emperor had
deposed, and gave possession of the churches to the Proteflant
miniflcrs whom he had ejected. He directed his march to
Augsburg, and as the Imperial garrison which was too incon-
fiderable to think of defending it, retired immediately, he took

J Skcid. 549. Thuan. lib. x. 339. Mcm. de Ribier. ii. 371.

poffcflion

*
238

poireffion of that great city, and made the fame changes there
as in the towns through which he had passed.

No words can express the Emperor's astonishment and con-

flernation at events so unexpeced. He saw a great number of
the German Princes in arms against him, and the reft either
ready to join them, or wishing success to their enterprize.
He beheld a powerful Monarch united with them in close
league, seconding their operations in person at the head
of a formidable army, while he, through negligence and cre-
dulity, which exposed him no less to scorn than to danger, had
neither made nor was in condition to make any effectual provi-
sion either for crushing his rebellious fubjeds, or resisting the
invasion of the foreign enemy. Part of his Spanish troops had
been ordered into Hungary against the Turks; the reft had
marched back to Italy upon occasion of the war in the dutchy
of Parma. The bands of veteran Germans had been dismissed, be-
cause he was not able to pay them; or had entered into Maurice's
service after the siege of Magdeburg; and he remained at Ins-
pruck with a body of soldiers scarce firong enough to guard his
own person. His treasury was as much exhausted, as his army
was reduced. He had received no remittances for some time from
the new world. He had forfeited all credit with the merchants of
Genoa and Venice, who refused tolend him money, tho' tempted
by the offer of exorbitant intcreft. Thus Charles, though un-
doubtedly the most considerable potentate in Christendom, and
capable of exerting the greatest strength, as his power, though
violently attacked, was fill unimpaired, found limfelf in a
situation which rendered him unable to make fucl a sudden

k Scid. 555. Thuan. 342.

and

BOOK X.

1i52.

April 1.

The Empe-
ror's aftoniih-
ment and
distress.

239

DBoo X. and vigorous effort'as thejunture required,. and was necefary

;sz. -to have saved him from the present danger.

£ndeavcurs to
gpin time by
a negociation.

Progrcf ,'f
the Frcnch
army.

IN this situation, he placed all his hopes on negociating; the

only resource of those who are conscious of their own weakness.
But thinking it inconsistent with his dignity to make the first
advances to fubjeds who were in arms against him, he avoided
that indecorum by employing the mediation of his brother Ferdi-
nand. Maurice confiding in his own talents to conduc any
negociation in such a manner as to derive advantage from it, and
hoping that by the appearance of facility in hearkening to the
first overture of accommodation, he might amuse the Emperor
and tempt him to flacken the acivity with which he was now
preparing to defend himself, readily agreed to an interview with
Ferdinand in the town of Lintz in Austria: and having left his
army to proceed on its march under the command of the Duke
of Mecklenburg, he repaired thither,

THE King of France puntually fulfilled his engagement to

his allies. He took the field early with a numerous and well
appointed army, and marching direcly into Lorrain, Toul and
Verdun opened their gates at his approach. His forces appeared
next before Metz, and that city by a fraudulent firatagem of
the Conflable Montmorency, who having obtained permission to
pass through it with a small guard, introduced as many troops
;,s wcre fuficient to overpower the garrison, was likewise seized
without bloodfihed. Henry made his entry into all these towns
with great pomp; he obliged the inhabitants to swear allegiance
to him and annexed these important conquests to the French
lMonarchy. Ie left a strong garrison in Metz. From thence
he advanced towards All'cc in order to attempt new conquetfs,

7 to

to which the success that had hitherto attended his arms invited
him 1.

THE conference at Lintz did not produce any accommodation.
Maurice, when he consented to it, seems to have had nothing
in view but to amuse the Emperor; for he made such demands
both in behalf of his confederates, and their ally the French
King, as he knew would not be accepted by a Prince, too
haughty to submit, at once, to conditions dicated by an enemy.
But how firmly soever Maurice adhered during the negociation
to the interests of his associates, or how fleddily soever he kept
in view the obje&s which had induced him to take arms, he
often professed a strong inclination to terminate the differences
with the Emperor in an amicable manner. Encouraged by this
appearance of a pacifick disposition, Ferdinand proposed a
second interview at Palfau on the twenty-fixth of May, and
that a truce should commence on that day, and continue to the
tenth of June, in order to give them leisure for adjusting all the
points in dispute.

UPON this, Maurice rejoined his army on the ninth of May,

which had now advanced to Gundelfingen. He put his troops
in motion next morning; and as sixteen days yet remained for
aaion before the commencement of the truce, he resolved, during
that period, to venture upon an enterprize, the success of which
would be so decifivc, as would render the negociations at Paflau
extremely short, and entitle him to treat upon his own terms.
He foresaw that the profped of a ceflation of arms, which was
to take place so fbon, together with the opinion of his earnefl-

l Thuan. 349.
VOL. III. 1 i nef

BOOK X.

I5 S2.

The negocia-
tions between
the Emperor
and Maurice
of no effect.

Maurice ad-
vances to-
wards Ins-
pruck.

241

BOOK X.

*55z.

Takes the
castle of
Ehrenbergh.

ness to re-eftablif peace, with which he hid artfully amtnfed Ser-
dinand, could not fail of inspiring the Emperor with such false
hopes, that he would naturally become remiss, and relapse into
some degree of that security, which had already been so fatal to
him. Relying on this conjecture, he marched diretly towards
Infpruck, and advanced with the most rapid motion that could be
given to so great a body of troops. On the eighteenth he arrived
at Fieffen, a post of great consequence, at the entrance into the
Tyrolefe. There he found a body of eight hundred men,
whom the Emperor had assembled, strongly entrenched, in order
to oppose his progress. He attacked them instantly with such
violence and impetuosity, that they abandoned their lines pre-
cipitantly, and falling back on a second body pofled near Rtuten,
communicated to those troops, the pannick terror with which
they themselves had been seized, so that they likewise took to
flight, after a feeble refitance.

ELATED with this success, which exceeded his most sanguine

hopes, Maurice pafled on to Ehrenbergh, a cafile situated on an
high and steep precipice, which commanded the only pass through
the mountains. As this fort had been surrendered to the Pro-
tefiants, at the beginning of the Smalkaldic war, because the
garrison was then too weak to defend it, the Emperor, sensible
of its importance, had taken care, at this juncure, to throw into
it a body of troops fifficicnt to maintain it against the greatefl
army. But a shepherd, in pursuing -a goat which had strayed
from his flock, having difcovcred an unknown path by which
it was poilible to ascend to the top of the rock, came with this
seasonable piece of intelligence to Maurice. A finall band of
chosen soldiers under the command of George of Mecklenburgh

was
242

was instantly ordered to follow this guide. They set out in the
evening, and clambering up the rugged track with infinite
fatigue as well as danger, they reached the summit unperceived;
and at an hour which had been concerted, when Maurice began the
aflault on the one fide of the castle, they appeared on the other,
ready to scale the walls, which were feeble in that place, because
it had been hitherto deemed inacceflible. The garrison, firuck
with terror at the fight of an enemy on a quarter where they
had thought themselves perfectly secure, immediately threw
down their arms. Maurice, almost without bloodshed, and
which was of greater consequence to him, without loss of
time, took poffeflon of a place, the redution of which might
have retarded him long, and have required the ut-.oft efforts of
his valour and ikill .

MAURICE was now only two days march from Infpruck, and

without losing a moment he ordered his ,infantry to advance
thither, having left his cavalry, which was unserviceable in that
mountainous country, at Fieffen, to guard the mouth of the
pass. He proposed to advance with such rapidity as to anticipate
any accounts of the loss of Ehrenbergh, and to furprize the Em-
peror together with his attendants in an open town incapable
of defence. But just as his troops began to move, a battalion of
mercenaries mutinied, declaring that they would not stir until
they had received the gratuity, which, according to the custom
of that age, they claimcl as the recompence due to them for
having taken a place by assault. It was with great difficulty as well
as danger, and not without some confidcrable loss of time, that

Arnoldi vita Maurit. 123'

I i 2 Maurice

BrOK X.

1552.

A mutiny of
his troops re-
tards his
march.

243

BOOK X.

1552.

The Emperor
flies in con-
fofion from
Infpruck.

Maurice en-
ters that
town.

Maurice quieted this infurredtion, and prevailed on the soldiers.
to follow him to a place where he promised them such rich
booty as would be an ample reward for all their services.

To the delay, occasioned by this unforeseen accident, the

Emperor owed his safety. He was informed of the approach-
ing danger late in the evening, and knowing that nothing
could save him but a speedy flight, he instantly left Infpruck,
without regarding the darkness of the night, or the vio-
lence of the rain which happened to fall at that time; and
notwithstanding his being so much debilitated by the gout that
he could bear no motion but that of a litter, he travelled by the
light of torches, taking his way over the Alps, by roads almost
impassable. His courtiers and attendants followed him with
equal precipitation, some of them on such horses as they could
hastily procure, many of them on foot, and all in the utmost
confusion. In this miserable plight, very unlike the pomp
with which Charles had appeared during the five preceding
years as the conqueror of Germany, he arrived at length with
his dejeced train at Villach in Carinthia, and scarce thought
himself secure even in that remote inaccessible corner.

MAURICE entered Infpruck a few hours after the Emperor

and his attendants had left it; and enraged that the prey fiould
escape out of his hands when he was just ready to seize
it, he pursued them some miles; but finding it impoifible to
overtake persons, to whom their feargave speed, he returned to
the town, and abandoned all the Emperor's baggage and that of
his ministers to be plundered by the ioldiers; while he prefcrvcd.
untouched every thing belonging to the King of the Romans,
citllr because he had formed some friendly connection with

9 that
244

that Prince, or because he wished to have it believed that such BOOK X.
a connection subsisted between them. As there now remained ''5--

1552.

only three days to the commencement of the truce, (with such
nicety had Maurice calculated his operations) he set out for
l'affau, that he might meet Ferdinand on the day appointed.

BEFORE Charles left Infpruck, he withdrew the guards The Emperor

sets the Elec-

-placed on the degraded Elector of Saxony, whom, during five tor of Saxony
years, he had carried about with him as a prisoner; and set atlibey..
him entirely at liberty, either with an intention to embarafs
Maurice by letting loose a rival, who might dispute his title to
his dominions and dignity, or from a sense of the indecency
of detaining him a prisoner, while he himself run the rifque of
being deprived of his own liberty. But that Prince, feeing no
way of escaping but that which the Emperor took, and abhor-
ring the thoughts of falling into the hands of a kinsman, whom
he jufily confidered as the author of all his misfortunes, chose
rather to accompany Charles in his flight, and to expect the final
decifionof his fate from the treaty which was now approaching.

THII was not the only effec which Maurice's operations pro- The counti;

of Tren t

duced. It was no sooner known at Trent that he had taken breaks up in
arms, than a general consternation seized the fathers of the ngation.0"
council. The German prelates immediately returned home,
that they might provide for the safety of their territories. The
reft were extremely impatient to be gone; and the legate, who
had hitherto disappointed all the endeavours of the Imperial
ambafiadors to procure for the Protestant divines an audience in
the council, laid hold with joy on such a plausible prctext for di-

iniffing

Boox X.

15j2.

The effclt of
its decrees.

milling an assembly, which he had found it so difficult to govern.
In a congregation held on the twenty-eighth of April, a decree
was issued proroguing the council during two years, and ap-
pointing it to meet at the expiration of that time, if peace were
then re-established in Europe ". This prorogation, however, con-
tinued no less than ten years; and its proceedings when re-
assembled in the year one thousand five hundred and fixty-two,
fall not within the period prescribed to this hiltory.

TH E convocation of this assembly had been passionately desired

by all the states and Princes in Christendom, who, from the
wisdom and piety of prelates representing the whole body of the
faithful, expeced rome charitable and efficacious endeavours
towards composing the dissensions which unhappily had arisen
in the church. But the several Popes by whose authority it was
called, had other objeCs in view; and exerting all their power
or policy to attain these; acquired by the abilities as well as
address of their legates, by the ignorance of many of the pre-
lates, and by the servility of the indigent Italian bishops, such
influence in the council, that they dictated all its decrees, and
framed them not with an intention to restore unity and concord
to the church, but to eflablifh their own dominion, or to con-
firm there tenets, upon which they imagined that dominion to
be founded. Dotrines, which had hitherto been admitted upon
the credit of tradition alone, and received with some latitude of
interpretation, were defined with a scrupulous nicety, and con-
firmed by the fandion of authority. Rites which had formerly
been observed only in deference tocuflom flppofed to be ancient,
were cflablifhed by the decrees of the church, and declared to

^ F. Paul, 353.
e-46

3

be

be eflential parts of its worship. The breach, initead of being
closed, was widened, and made irreparable. In place of any
attempt to reconcile the contending parties, a line was drawn
with such fludied accuracy, as ascertained and marked out the
diftincion between them. This still serves to keep them at a
distance; and must, without some signal interposition of divine
Providence, render the separation perpetual.

OUR knowledge of the proceedings of this assembly is derived

from three different authors. Father Paul of Venice wrote his
history of the Council of Trent, while the memory of what had
pased there was recent, and some who had been members of it
were fill alive. He has exposed the intrigues and artifices by
which it was conduced, with a freedom and severity which have
given a deep wound to the credit and reputation of the council.
He has described its deliberations, and explained its decrees,
with such perspicuity and depth of thought, with such various
erudition and such force of reason, as have justly entitled his
work to be placed among the most admired historical compofi-
tions. About half a century thereafter, the Jesuit Pallavicini
publiflsed his hiflory of the council in opposition to that of
Father Paul, and by employing all the force of an acute and re-
fining genius to invalidate the credit, or to confute the reasonings
of his antagonist, he labours to prove, by artful apologies for the
proceedings of the council, and subtile interpretations of its de-
crees, that it deliberated with impartiality, and decided with
judgment as well as candour. Vargas, a Spanilh dotor of laws,
who was appointed to attend the Imperial ambassadors at Trent,
lent the bishop of Arras a regular account of the tranfationo
there, explaining all the arts which the Legate employed to in-
fluence, or over-awe the council. His letters have been publish-

VOL. III. I i 4 cd,

BOOKX.

155z.

Charaler of
the hiltorians
of this coun-
cil.

247

lBoo, X.

1552.

' The French

endeavour to
lurprize
Stralburgh.

ed, in which he inveighs againtl the Papal court with that afpe-
rity of censure, which was natural to a man whose situation en-
abled hlim to obferye its axts thoroughly, and who was obliged to.
exert all his attention and talents in order to disappoint them.
But whichsoever of these authors an intelligent person takes for
his gui4e, in forming a judgment concerning the spirit of the
council, he must discover so much ambition as well as artifice
among some of the members, so much ignorance and corruption
among others; he must observe such a large infusion of human
policy and paflions, blt such a scanty portion of that simplicity
of heart, fandity of manners, and love of truth, which alone
qualify men to determine what do&trines are worthy of God,
and what worihip is acceptable to him; that he will find it no
easy matter to believe, that any extraordinary influence of the
Holy Ghost hovered over this assembly, and diaated its decrees.

WHILE Maurice was employed in negociating with the King-

of the Romans at Lintz, or in making war on the Emperor in
the Tyrol, the French King had advanced into Alsace as far as.
Strafburgh; and having demanded leave of the Senate to march
through the city, he hoped that by repeating the fame fraud
which he had praaifed at Metz, he might render himself master
of the place, and by that means secure a paflage over the Rhine
into the heart of Germany. But the Strafburghers, inifruded:
and put on their guard by the credulity and misfortune of their
neighbours, shut their gates; and having assembled a garrison
of five thousand soldiers, repaired their fortifications, razed the
h6uses in their fuiburhs, and determined to defend themselves to
the utmost. At the fame time they sent a deputation of their
most refpechable citizens to the King, in order to divert him
from making any hoflile attempt upon them. The Electors of

it Trcvcs
s48

Treves and Cologn, the Duke of Cleves, and other Princes in
the neighbourhood, interposed in their behalf; beseeching Henry
that he would not forget so soon the title which he had generously
assumed; and instead of being the Deliverer of Germany, be-
come its Oppressor. The Swiss cantons seconded them with zeal,
folliciting Henry to spare a city which had long been connected
with their community in friendship and alliance.

POWER UL as this united intercession was, it would not have

prevailed on Henry to forego a prize of so much value, if he had
been in a condition to have seized it. But, in that age, the
method of subsisting numerous armies at a distance from the
frontiers of their own country, was imperfectly understood, and
neither the revenues of Princes, nor their experience in the art
of war, were equal to the great and complicated efforts which
such an undertaking required. The French, though not far
removed from their own country, began already to susser for
want of provisions, and had no sufficient magazines collected to
support them during a siege, which must necessarily have been
of great length °. At the fame time, the Queen of Hungary,
governess of the Low-Countries, had assembled a considerable
body of troops, which, under the command of Martin de Roffem,
laid waste Champagne, and threatened the adjacent provinces of
France. These concurring circumstances obliged the King,
though with reluctance, to abandon the enterprize. But being
willing to acquire some merit with his allies, by this retreat
which he could not avoid, he pretended to the Swiss that he had
taken the resolution merely in compliance with their requefl P;
and then, after giving orders that all the horses in his army

Thuan. 351, 352.
VOL. 1tI.

P Slcil. 557. Brantome, tom. vii. 39.
K k illould

1300K X.

Rut W;tllout
fuccetss.

249

BOOK X. should be led to drink in the Rhine, as a proof of his having
1- z- pushed his conquests so far, he marched back towards Cham-

pagne.

The opera- WHI E the French King and the main army of the confe-
tionsof Albert
of Branden- derates were thus employed; Albert of Brandenburgh was
burg. entrusted with the command of a separate body of eight thou-

sand men, confifing chiefly of mercenaries who had resorted to
his standard, rather from the hope of plunder, than the expec-
tation of regular pay. That Prince, feeing himself at the head
of such a number of desperate adventurers ready to follow
wherever he should lead them, soon began to disdain a slate of
subordination, and to form such vast schemes of aggrandizing
himself, as seldom occur, even to ambitious minds, unless when
civil war or violent factions rouze them to bold exertions, by al-
luring them with immediate hopes of success. Full of these afpir-
ing thoughts, Albert made war in a manner very different from
the other confederates. He endeavoured to spread the terror of
his arms by the rapidity of his motions, as well as the extent and
rigour of his devastations; he cxated contributions wherever he
came, in order to amass such a fum of money, as would put it in his
power to keep his army together; he laboured to get poffeflion
of Nurembergh, Ulme, or some other of the free cities in up-
per Germany, in which, as a capital, he might fix the feat of
his power. But, finding these cities on their guard, and in a con-
dition to resist his attacks, he turned all his rage against the
popith ecclefiafticks, whose territories he plundered with such
wanton and mcrcilefs barbarity, as gave them a very unfavour-
able impreflion of the spirit of that reformation in religion,
with zeal for which he pretended to be animated. The bishops

of

of Bambergh and Wurzburgh, by their situation, lay particu-
larly exposed to his ravages; he obliged the former to transfer
to him, in property almost one half of his extensive diocese;
and compelled the latter to advance an immense fum in order
to save his country from ruin and desolation. During all these
wild rallies, Albert paid no regard either to Maurice's orders,
whose commands as Generalissimo of the league he had en-
gaged to obey, or to the remonfirances of the other confede-
rates; and manifestly discovered that he attended only to his own
private emolument, without any follicitude about the common
cause, or the general objecs which had induced them to take

q
arms

MEANWHILE, Maurice having ordered his army to march back

into Bavaria, and having published a proclamation enjoining the
Lutheran clergy and inftrudors of youth, to resume the excr-
cife of their funcions in all the cities, schools, and universities,
from which they had been ejeaed, met Ferdinand at Paffau on
the twenty-fixth day of May. As matters of the greatest con-
sequence to the future peace and independance of the Empire
were to be fettled in this congress, the eyes of all Germany
were fixed upon it. Besides Ferdinand and the Imperial
ambassadors, the Duke of Bavaria, the bishops of Saltzburgh,
and Aichfiadt, the miniflers of all the Elctors, together with
deputies from molt of the considerable Princes and free cities
retorted to Paffu. Maurice, in name of his associates, and the
King of the Romans as the Emperor's rcprcfentative opened the
negociation. The Princcs who were present, together with the
deputies of ftch as were abfcnt, aacd as intcrccffors or media-
tors between them.

1 Sleid. 56r. Thuan. 357.

K k 2 MAURICE,

BOOK X.
, ,,,

15j2.

The negoci-
ationw of
peace at Pas-
fau.

-5a

BOOK X.

1552.

The terms
which Mao-
rice proposed.

Pc wc lfil v
1i;pportcd by
thie I'linccs
ofthe Empire.

MAURICE, in a long discourse, explained the motives of hia

own conduct. After having enumerated all the unconstitutional
and oppreflive ads of the Emperor's administration, he, agree-
ally to the manifeflo which he had publiihed when he took
arms against him, limited his demands to three articles.
That the Landgrave of Hesse hfould be immediately set at
liberty; That the grievances in the civil government of the
Empire should be redrelfed; and that the Protestants should be
allowed the publick exercise of their religion without molefta-
tion. Ferdinand and the Imperial ambassadors discovering their
unwillingness to gratify him with regard to all these points, the
mediators wrote a joint letter to the Emperor, beseeching him
to deliver Germany from the calamities of a civil war, by giving
such fatisfadion to Maurice and his party as might induce
them to lay down their arms; and at the fame time they pre-
vailed upon Maurice to grant a prolongation of the truce for a
short time, during which they undertook to procure the Em-
peror's final answer to his demands.

THIS request was presented to the Emperor in the name of

all the Princes of the Empire, Popish as well as Protestant, in
the name of such as had lent an helping hand to forward his
amblitious schemes, as well as of those who had viewed the pro-
grfs of his power with jealousy and dread. The uncommon and
cordial unanimity with which they concurred at this juncure
in enforcing Maurice's demands, and in recommending peace,
flowe-d froml different causes. Such as were most attached to
tile Roman catholick church could not help observing that
the Protcflant confderatcs were at the head of a numerous
arily, whilc the Emperor was but jul beginning to provide for

(8) his
252

his own defence. They foresaw that great efforts would be re-
quired of them, and would be necessary on their part, in order
to cope with enemies, who had been allowed to get the start so far
and to attain such formidable power. Experience had taught
them that the fruit of all these efforts would be reaped by the
Emperor alone, and the more compleat any victory proved which
they ihould gain, the faster would they bind their own fetters,
and render them the more intolerable. These considerations
made them cautious how they contributed a second time, by
their indiscreet zeal, to put the Emperor in possession of power
which would be fatal to the liberties of their country. Not-
withstanding the implacable fierceness of the spirit of bigotry in
that age, they chose rather that the Protestants should acquire
that security for their religion which they demanded, than by
affilfing Charles to oppress them, to give such additional force
to the Imperial prerogative, as would overturn the constitution
of the Empire. To all these considerations, the dread of feeing
Germany laid waste by a civil war added new force. Many
states of the Empire already felt the deftruaive rage of Albert's
arms, others dreaded it, and all wished for an accommodation
between the Emperor and Maurice, which they hoped would
save them from that cruel scourge.

Suckr were the reasons that induced so many Princes, not-

withstanding the variety of their political intcrefts, and the op-
position in their religious fcntiments, to unite in recommending
to the Emperor an accommodation with Maurice, not only as a
salutary, but as a neceflary mcafiire. The motives which prompt-
ed Charles to desire it were not cfwcr or of lcfs weight. IIe
was pcrfcCtly fcnfible of the advantage which the confederates

Lad

BOO1K X.

155?.

The motives:
which influ-
enced the

rEmnperor r t
this junitllr¢.

2z3

454

had acquired through his own negligence; and he now felt the
insufficiency of his own resources to oppose them. His Spanish
fubjeds, disgusted at his long absence, and weary of endless
wars, which were of no benefit to their country, refused to fur-
nifh him any considerable supply either of men or money; and
although he might have hoped by his address or importunity to
draw from them at last more effectual aid; that, he knew, was
too distant to be of any service in the present exigency of
his affairs. His treasury was drained; his veteran forces were
dispersed, or disbanded, and he could not depend much either
on the fidelity or courage of the new levied soldiers whom he was
collecting. There was no hope of repeating with- success the
fame artifices which had weakened and ruined the Smalkaldic
league. As the end at which he aimed was now known, he could
no longer employ the specious pretexts, which had formerly con-
cealed his ambitious designs. Every Prince in Germany was
alarmed and on his guard; and it was vain to think of blinding
them a second time to such a degree, as to make one part of
them instruments to enslave the other. The spirit of a confe-
deracy whereof Maurice was the head, experience had taught
him, to be very different from that of the league of Smalkalde;
and from what lie had already felt, he had no reason to flatter
himself that its counsels would be as irrefolutc, or its efforts as
timid and feeble. If he flhould resolve on continuing the war,
he might lay his account that the moil considerable flates in
Germany would take part in it againfil him; and a dubiotus
neutrality was the utmost he could cxpect froml the reft. While
the confederates found flull cmployment for his arms in one
quartcr, the King of France would fcize the favourable oppor-
tunity, and pulh on his operations ii another, with alinoft

* certain
BOOK X.

1552.

certain success. That Monarch had already made conquests in
the Empire, which he was no less eager to recover, than impa-
tient to be revenged on him for aiding his malecontent fubjeds.
Though Henry had now retired from the banks of the Rhine,
he had only varied the scene of hostilities, having invaded the
Low-Countries with all his forces. The Turks, routed by the
follicitations of the French King, as well as Stimulated by re-
fentment against Ferdinand for having violated the truce in
Hungary, had prepared a powerful fleet to ravage the coasts of
Naples and Sicily, which he had left almost defenceless, by calling
thence the greatest part of the regular troops to join the army
which he was now assembling.

FERDINAND, who went in person to Villach, in order to lay

before the Emperor the result of the conferences at Paffau, had
likewise reasons peculiar to himfclf for desiring an accommoda-
tion. These prompted him to second, with the greatest earnest-
ness, the arguments which the Princes assembled there had em-
ployed in recommendingit. He had observed, notwithoutfecret
satisfaCtion, the fatal blow which had been given to the despotic
power which his brother had usurped in the Empire. He was
cxtremcly f 'llicitous to prevent Charles from recovering what he
had loft, as he foresaw that he would immediately resume with
firefh eagerness, and a better chance offuccefs, his favourite fchcme
of transmitting that power to his son by excluding him fiom the
right of fiiccefion to the Imperial throne. O)n this account, he
was willing to contribute towards circumscribing the Imperial
authority, in order to render his own pofreffion of it certain.
Besides, Solyman, exafpcraltcd at the loss of Transylvania, and
flill more at the fraudulent arts by which it had been seizcd,

had

BOOK X.

1552.

Ferdinand
zealous to
prom te an
accommoda-
tion.

255

had ordered into the field an army of an hundred thousand men,
which having defeated a great body of Ferdinand's troops, and
taken several places of importance, threatened not only to com-
pleat the conquest of the province, but to drive him out of that
part of Hungary which was flill subjea to his jurifdidion. He
was unable to resist such a mighty enemy; his brother, while
engaged in a domeflic war, could afford him no aid; and he
could not even hope to draw from Germany the contingent either
of troops or money usually furnifled to repel the invasions of
the Infidels. Maurice having observed Ferdinand's perplexity,
with regard to this last point, had offered, if peace were re-efta-
blilhed on a fecurc foundation, that he would march in person
with his troops into Hungary to his affiflance. Such was the
effeA of this well-timed proposal, that Ferdinand, destitute of
every other profped of relief, became the most zealous advocate
the confederates could have chosen to urge their claims, and there
was scarce any thing that they could have demanded which he
would not have chosen to grant, rather than have retarded a
pacification, to which he trusted as the only means of saving his
Hungarian crown.

Circumnian- WHIEN so many causes conspired in rendering an accommo-
ces which rc-
tard it. dation eligible, it might have been expcted that it would have

immediately taken place. But the inflexibility of the Emperor's
temper, together with his unwillingness to relinquiih, at once,
objecds which he lad long pursued with such earnestness and
assiduity, counterbalanced, for iomc time, the force of all the mo-
tives which (lifpofcd him to peace, and not only put that event at
a dillancc, but ticemed to render it uncertain. When Mauricc's
demands, together with the letter of the mediators at Paffau,
were prcfented to him, he percinptorily refused to redrcfli the

grievances
BOOK X.

1 2.
'5_'1

grievances which were pointed out, nor would he agree to any
stipulation for the immediate security of the ProteRant religion,
but proposed referring both these to the determination of a future
diet. On his part, he required that infant reparation should
be made to all who, during the present war, had suffered either
by the licentiousness of the confederate troops, or the exaations
of their leaders.

Booix M

1j552.

MAURICE, who was well acquainted with the Emperor's arts, Maurice's vi-
immediately concluded that he had nothing in view in these gorou opera-

tions facilitato

overtures but to amuse and deceive; and therefore, without it.
listening to Ferdinand's intreaties, he left Paflau abruptly, and
joining his troops which were encamped at Mergentheim, a city
in Franconia, belonging to the knights of the Teutonic order, he
put them in motion, and renewed hostilities. As three thousand
men in the Emperor's pay had thrown themselves into Frankfort
on the Maine, and might from thence infest the neighbouring
country of Hesse, he marched towards that city, and laid siege
to it in form. The briskness of this enterprize, and the vigour Ju'y I 7
with which Maurice carried on his approaches against the town
gave such an alarm to the Emperor, as disposed him to lend a
more favourable ear to Ferdinand's arguments in behalf of an
accommodation. Firm and haughty as his nature was, he found
it neceflary to bend, and signified his willingness to make con-
ceflons on his part, if Maurice, in return, would abate fofne-
what of the rigour of his demands. Ferdinand as soon as he
perceived that he began to yield, did not desist from his impor-
tunities, until he prevailed on him to declare what was the utmost
that he would grant for the security of the confederates. Having
gained this difficult point, he instantly dispatchcd a meflengcr

VOL. III. L I to

257

Boox X. to Maurice's camp, and imparting to him the Emperor's final

15, resolution, conjured him not to frudtrate his endeavours for the

re-eftblifiment of peace; or, by an unseasonable obfinacy on
his fide, to disappoint the wiihes of all Germany for that falu-
tary event.

Maurice de- MAURICE, notwithstanding the prosperous situation of his as-
firous of an
accommoda. fairs was strongly inclined to liften to his advice. The Emperor,

lion though over-reached and furprized, had now begun to assemble

troops, and how flow soever his motions might be, while the first
effeas of his consternation remained, he was sensible that Charles
mufl at last a& with vigour proportional to the extent of his power
and territories, and lead into Germany an army formidable by its
numbers, and still more by the terror of his name, as well as the
remembrance of his pall victories. He could scarce hope that a
confederacy composed of so many members would continue to
operate with sufficient union and perseverance to resist the con-
fiftent and well directed efforts of an army, at the absolute dif-
pofal of a leader accustomed to command and to conquer. He
felt already, although he had not hitherto experienced the ihock
of any adverse event, that he was the head of a disjointed body.
He saw, from the example of Albert of Brandenburgh, how
difficult it would be, with all his address and credit, to prevent
any particular member from detaching himself from the whole,
and how impossible to recal him to his proper rank and sub-
ordination. This filled him with apprehensions for the com-
mon cause. Another consideration gave him no less dif-
quiet with regard to his own particular interests. By setting at
liberty the degraded Elctor, and by repealing the aa depriving
lim of his hercditary honours and dominions, the Emperor had

it
258-,

it in his power to wound him in the most fenrible part. The
efforts of a Prince beloved by his ancient fubjetrs, and
revered by all the Proteflant party, in order to recover what
had been unjustly taken from him, could scarce have failed of
exciting commotions in Saxony, which would endanger all that
he had acquired at the expence of so much dissimulation and
artifice. It was no less in the Emperor's power to render vain
all the follicitations of the confederates in behalf of the Land-
grave. He had only to add one adt of violence more to the
injustice and rigour with which he had already treated him;
and he had accordingly threatened the sons of that unfortunate
Prince, that if they persisted in their present enterprize, instead
of feeing their father restored to liberty, they should hear of his
having suffered the punishment which his rebellion had
merited a.

BooK X.
LI v

ISyze '
HAVING deliberated upon all there points with his associates, The peace of

Religion coa-

Maurice thought it more prudent to accept of the conditions offer- cluded at
ed, though less advantageous than those which he had proposed, Paffau.
than again to commit all to the doubtful issue of war . He
repaired forthwith to Paffau, and signed the treaty of peace; of Aug. z.
which the chief articles were, That before the twelfth day of
August, the confederates shall lay down their arms, and disband
their forces; That on or before that day the Landgrave shall be
set at liberty, and conveyed in safety to his castle of Rheinfels;
That a diet shall be held within fix months in order to dclilcrate
concerning the mofl proper and effeCual method of preventing
for tile future all disputes and dissentions about religion; That,

a Sleid. 57 .
1i SlciJ. Hist. 563, &c. Thuani. lib. x. 359, c.

L 1 2

in

S59

BooK X. in the mean time neither the Emperor nor any other Prince,

I2-. Ithall, upon any pretext whatever, offer any injury or violence to

such as adhered to the confession of Augsburg, but allow them
to enjoy the free and undisturbed 'exercise of their religion;
That the Protestants in return, Ihall not molest the Catholicks
either in the exercise of their ecclefiafical jurifdiaion, or in
performing their religious ceremonies; That the Imperial
chamber shall administer justice impartially to persons of both
parties, and Protestants be admitted indiscriminately with the
Catholicks to fit as judges in that court; That if the next diet
should not be able to terminate the disputes with regard to reli-
gion, the itipulations in the present treaty in behalf of the Pro-
teftants, fhal continue for ever in full force and vigour ; That
none of the confederates Ihall be liable to any action on account
of what had happened during the course of the war; That the
consideration of those encroachments which had been made, as
Maurice pretended, upon the constitution and liberties of the
Empire shall be remitted to the approaching diet; That Albert
of Brandenburgh shall be comprehended in the treaty, provided
he shall accede to it, and disband his forces before the twelfth
of August ,

Refletions SUCH was the memorable treaty of Paflau, that overturned the
upon this vast fabric, in erecing which Charles had employed so many
peace and
upon the con- years, and had exerted the utmost efforts of his power and
du, of Mau-

sics, policy; which annulled all his regulations with regard to reli-

gion; defeated all his hopes of rendering the Imperial authority
absolute and hereditary in his family; and eftablified the Pro-

c Rccucil des Traitcz, ii. a61i

tefRah
a60

teftant church, which had hitherto fubfilfed precariously in
Germany, through connivance, or by expedients, upon a firm
and secure basis. Maurice reaped all the glory of having concert-
ed and compleated this unexpeted revolution. It is a singular
circumfiance, that the Reformation should be indebted for its
security and full eflablifhment in Germany, to the fame hand
which had formerly brought it to the brink of deftruaion, and
that both events should have been accomplished by the fame arts
of dissimulation. The ends, however, which Maurice had in view,
at there different juncures, seem to have been more attended to
than the means by which he attained them; and he was now
as universally extolled for his zeal and publick spirit, as he had
lately been condemned for his indifference and interested policy.
It is no less worthy of observation, that the French King, a
monarch zealous for the Catholick faith, ihould, at the very time
when he was persecuting his own Protestant fubjeds with all
the fierceness of bigotry, employ his power in order to protet
and maintain the Reformation in the Empire; and that the
league for this purpose, which proved so fatal to the Romish
church, should be negociated and signed by a Roman cathohck
bishop. So wonderfully doth the wisdom of God superintend
and regulate the caprice of human passions, and render them
subservient towards the accompliihment of his own purposes.

LITTLE attention was paid to the interests of the French

King during the ncgociations at Paffau. Maurice and his affo-
ciates, having gained what they had in view, difcovcred no great
follicitude about an ally, whom, perhaps, they reckoned to be
overpaid, by his acquisitions in Lorrain, for the assistance which
he had given them. A short clause which they procured to be

At inserted

BOOK X.

1552.

Little atten-
tion paid to
the Frenchr
King in this
treaty.

261

BOOK X.

I; .Z

inserted in the treaty, importing that the King of Francemight
communicate to these confederates his particular pretensions or
causes of hostility, which they would lay before the Emperor, was
the only sign that they gave of their remembring howmuch they
had been indebted to him for their success. Henry experienced
the fame treatment, which every Prince who lends his aid to the
authors of a civil war may expe&. As soon as the rage of faction
began to subside, and any profped of accommodation to open,
his services were forgotten, and his affciates made a merit with
their sovereign, of the ingratitude with which they abandoned
their protector. But how much soever Henry might be en-
raged at the perfidy of his allies, or at the impatience with which
they hastened to make their peace with the Emperor at his ex-
pence, he was perfecly sensible that it was more his interest to
keep well with the Germanick body, than to resent the indigni-
ties offered him by any particular members of it. For that reason
he dismissed the hostages which he had received from Maurice
and his associates, and affected to talk in the fame strain, as for-
merly, concerning his zeal for maintaining the ancient conftitu-
tion and liberties of the Empire.

THE
262

# THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK XI.

THE

T 1
OF THE

I

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES

B OOK
AS soon as the treaty of Paflau was signed, Maurice, in

consequence of his engagements with Ferdinand, marched

into Hungary at the head of twenty thousand men. But the
vast superiority of the Turkish armies, the frequent mutinies, both
of the Spanish and German soldiers, occasioned by their want of
pay, together with the dissentions between Maurice and Caftaldo,
who was piqued at being obliged to resign the chief command
to him, prevented his performing any thing in that country
worthy of his former fame, or of great benefit to the King of
the Romans .

BOOK XT.

155z.

Aug. 3.
Maurice
marches into
Hungary
against the.
Turks.
Iftuanhaffi Iift, Hungar. 228. Thuan. lib. x. 371.

9
H

I

O
S

E

R

Y
R

G

N

V.
XI.

1300K XI.

The L.ind-
grave of Ht1ie
LtcnIecs his
libtzty.

WHEN Maurice set out for Hungary, the Prince of Hesse

parted from him with the forces under his command, and
marched back into his own country, that he might be ready to
receive his father upon his return, and give up to him the reins
of government which he had held during his absence. But
fortune was not yet weary of persecuting the Landgrave. A
battalion of mercenary troops, which had been in the pay of
Hesse, being seduced by Reifenberg their colonel, a soldier of
fortune, and ready to engage in any enterprize, secretly withdrew
from the young Prince'as he was marching homewards, and
joined Albert of Brandenburgh, who still continued in arms
against the Emperor, refuting to be included in the treaty of
Paffau. Unhappily for the Landgrave, an account of this
reached the Netherlands, just as he was difnmiffed from the
citadel of Mechlin where he had been confined, but before he
had got beyond the frontiers of that country. The Queen of
Hungary, who governed there in her brother's name, incensed
at such an open violation of the treaty to which he owed his
liberty, commanded him to be arrested, and committed him
again to the custody of the fame Spanish captain who had
guarded him for five years with such severe vigilance. Philip
beheld all the horrors of his imprisonment renewed, and
his spirits subsiding in the fame proportion as they had risen
during the short interval in which he had enjoyed liberty, he
funk into despair, and believed himfclf to be doomed to per-
petual captivity. But the matter being explained to the Em-
peror's full fatisfaaion, that the revolt of Reifenberg's mer-
cenaries could be imputed neither to the Landgrave nor to his
son, he gave orders for his release; and Philip at last obtained

the
264

the liberty for which he had to long languifled%. But thoagh
be recovered his freedom, and was reinstated in his dominiom,
his sufferings seem to have broken the vigour, and to have ex-
tinguified the a&ivity of his mind: From being the boldest
as well as mofi enterprizing Prince in the Empire, he became the
most timid and cautious, and pased the remainder of his days in
a pacific indolence.

TH E degraded Eletor of Saxony, likewise, procured his liberty

in consequence of the treaty of Paffau. The Emperor having
been obliged to relinquift all his schemes for extirpating the
Protestant religion, had no longer any motive for detaining him
a prisoner; and being extremely follicitous, at that junture, to
recover the confidence and goodwill of the Germans, whose affif-
tance was essential to the success of the enterprize which he medi-
tated againf the King of France, he, among other expedients
for that purpose, thought of releasing from imprisonment a
Prince whose merit entitled him no less toefteem, than his sus-
ferings rendered him the object of compaflion. John Frederick
took possession accordingly of that part of his territories which
had been reserved for him, when Maurice was invested with the
Elecoral dignity. As he continued to display in this situation,
the fame virtuous magnanimity, for which he had been confpi-
cuous in a more prosperous and splendid fiate, and which he
had retained amidst all his sufferings, he lived several years in
that high reputation to which he had so just a title.

THE loss of Metz, Toul and Verdun, had made a deep impref-
sion on the Emperor. Accuflomed to terminate all his operations

b Sleid. 573. Belcarii Comment. 834.
VOL. III. M m against

BoOK XL

15z2.

Likewise the
Ele&or of
Saxony.

The Emperor
rc(olves to
in;ke war
upon France.

26s
---

BooKXI. aganift France-with advantage td himself, he thought that it

i S2.- nearly concerned his honour not to allow Henry the superiority

inthis war, or to susser his own adhtiniftration to be tained with
the infamy of having permitted territories of such consequence to
be dismembered from the Empire. This was no less a point of
interest than of honour. As the frontier of Champagne was
more naked, and lay more exposed than that of any province in
France, he had frequently, during his wars with that kingdom,
made inroads upon it with great success and effect; but if Henry
were allowed to retain his late conquests, France would gain
such a formidable barrier on that fide, as to be altogether secure,
where formerly she had been weakest. On the other hand,
the Emperor had now loft as much, in point of security, as
France had acquired, and being stripped of the defence which
those cities afforded it, lay open to be invaded on a quarter,
where all the towns having been hitherto confidered as interior,
and remote from any enemy, were but slightly fortified. These
considerations determined Charles to attempt recovering the
three towns of which Henry had made himself master; and the
preparations which he had made against Maurice and his aflo-
ciates enabled him to carry his resolution into immediate exe-
cution.

His prepara.
tions for this
purpose.

As soon, then, as the peace was concluded at PafTau, he left

his inglorious retreat at Villach, and advanced to Augsburg at the
head of a considerable body of Germans which he had levied, to-
gether with all the troops which he had drawn out of Italy and
Spain. To these he added several battalions, which having been
in the pay of the confederates, entered into his service when dif-
miffed by them; and he prevailed likewise on some of the Princes
of the Empire to join him with their vassals. In order to conceal

the
266

the dehination of this formidable army, and to guard against
alarming the French so as to put them on preparing for their
defence, he gave out that he was to march forthwith into
Hungary, in order to second Maurice in his operations against
the Infidels. When he began to advance towards the Rhine,
and could no longer employ that pretext, he tried a new artifice,
and spread a report that he was marching in order to chastise
Albert of Brandenburg, whose cruel exacions in that part of
the Empire called loudly for his interposition to check them.

BUT the French having grown acquainted, at last, with arts

by which they had been fb often deceived, viewed all Charles's
motions with distrust. Henry immediately guessed the true objea
of his vast preparations, and resolved to defend the important
conquests which he had gained with vigour equal to that with
which they were about to be attacked. As he foresaw that the
whole weight of the war would be turned against Metz, the fate
of which would decide that of Toul and Verdun, he nominated
Francis of Lorrain Duke of Guise to take the command in that
city during'the siege, the issue of which would equally assec the
honour and interest of his country. His choice could not have
fallen upon any person more worthy of that trust. The Duke
of Guise poiTefled, in a high degree, all the qualities of courage,
sagacity, and prefcnce of mind, which render men eminent in
military command. He was largely endowed with that magna-
nimity of foul which delights in bold enterprizes, and afpircs to
fame by splendid and extraordinary actions. He repaired with
joy to the dangerous flation assigned him, as to a theatre on
which he might display his great qualities under the immediate
eye of his countrymen all ready to applaud him. The martial

M m 2 genius

BOOK XI.

1s 5.

The precau-
tions of the
French for the
defence of
Metz.

The Duke of
Guise ap-
pointed go-
vernor of the
town.

267

BooK XI. genius of the French nobility in that age, which confidered it as

553 the greatest reproach to remain inactive, when there was any

opportunity of signalizing 'their courage, prompted great num-
bers to follow a leader who was the darling as wellas the patterrn
of all that courted military fame. Several Princes of the bloody
many noblemen of the highest rank, and all the young officers.
who could obtain the King's permiflion, entered Metz as volun-
tiers. By their presence they added spirit to the garrison,
and enabled the Duke of Guise to employ on every emergency
persons eager to distinguish themselves, and fit to condut any
service.

Prepares for a BUT with whatever alacrity the Duke of Guise undertook the
·igorou de- defence of Metz, he found every thing, upon his arrival there,
Anci.

in such a situation, as might have induced any person of less
intrepid courage to despair of defending it with success. The
city was of great extent, with large suburbs; the walls were in
many places feeble and without ramparts; the ditch narrow;
and the old towers, which proje&ted instead of bastions, were at
too great distance from each other to defend the space between
them. For all these defects he endeavoured to provide the best
remedy, which the time would permit. He ordered the suburbs,
without sparing the monasteries or churches, not even that of
St. Arnulph, in which several Kings of France had been buried,
to be levelled with the ground; but in order to guard against
the imputation of impiety, to which such a violation of so many
sacred edifices, as well as of the alies of the dead might ex-
pose him, he executed this with much religious ceremony.
Having ordered all the holy vestments and utensils, together with
the bones of the Kings, and other persons deposited in these

churches

churches to be removed, they were carried in solemn proceflion BooK XL
to a church within the walls, he himself walking before them C"..-..
uncovered, with a torch in his hand. He then pulled down
such houses as stood near the walls, cleared and enlarged the
ditch, repaired the ruinous fortifications, and erected new ones.
As it was necessary that all these works should be finished with
the utmost expedition, he laboured at them with his own hands:
the officers and voluntiers imitated his example, and the fol-
diers submitted with chearfulnefs to the molt revere fatigues,
when they saw that their superiors did not decline to bear a
part in there together with them. At the fame time he com-
pelled all useless persons to leave the place; he filled the maga-
zines with provisions and military stores; burnt the mills; and
destroyed the corn and forage for several miles round the town.
Such were his popular talents, as well as his arts of acquiring
an ascendant over the minds of men, that the citizens seconded
him with no less ardour than the soldiers; and every other pafion
being swallowed up in the zeal to repulse the enemy, with which
he inspired them, they beheld the ruin of their estates, together
with the havock which he made among their publick and private
buildings, without any emotion of resentmentc.

MEANTIME the Emperor, having collected all his forces, Charles ac

continued his march towards Metz. As he pafled through the ^ncM tz
cities on the Rhine, he saw the dismal effe&s of that licentious
and wasteful war which Albert had carried on in there parts.
Upon his approach, that Prince, though at the head of twenty
thousand men, withdrew into Lorrain as if he had intended to

¢ Thuan. xi. 387.

269

BOOK XL

1552.,

join the French King, whose arms he had quartered with his
own in all his standards and ensigns. Albert was not in a
condition to cope with the Imperial troops d, which amounted at
leat' to sixty thousand men, forming one of the most nume-
rous and best appointed armies that had been brought into the
field during that age in any of the wars among the Christian
Princes.

Invefl the THE chief command under the Emperor, was committed to
towns.

the Duke of Alva, assisted by the Marquis de Marignano, to-
gether with the most experienced of the Italian and Spanifl
generals. As it was towards the end of Oftober, these intelligent
officers represented the great danger of beginning, at such an
advanced season, a siege which could not fail to prove very
tedious. But Charles adhered to his own opinion with his
usual obitinacy, and being confident that he had made such
preparations, and taken such precautions, as would ensure
success, he ordered the city to be invested. As soon as the
Duke of Alva appeared, a large body of the French sallied
out and attacked his van guard with great vigour, put it in
confilfion, and killed or took prisoners a considerable num-
ber of men. By this early specimen which they gave of the
condut of their officers, as well as the valour of their troops,
they shewed the Imperialits what an enemy they had to en-
counter, and how dear every advantage mufl colt them. The
place, however, was compleatly invested, the trenches were
opened and the other works begun.

Both parties
eiidcavour to
j'tin AIIcrt of
1.Brandecub urg.

TItE attention both of the bcfiegers and besieged was turned
for some time towards Albert of Brandelnburgll, and they ftrovc

d Natal. Comitis, IIift. 127.

v it h

with emulation which should gain that Prinuc, who fill hovered BOOK XI.
in the neighbourhood fluctuating in all the uncertainty of irre- 155
solution, natural to a- man, who being swayed by no principle,
was allured different ways by contrary views of interest. The
French tempted him with offers extremely beneficial; the Im-
perialifts scrupled at no promise which they thought would make
an impreflion upon him. After much hesitation he was gained
by the Emperor, from whom he expeced to receive advan-
tages, which were both more immediate and more permanent.
As the French King, who began to fufpec his intentions, had
appointed a body of troops under the Duke of Aumale, bro-
ther to the Duke of Guise, to watch his motions, Albert fell
upon them unexpectedly with such vigour that he routed them Nov. 4.
entirely, killed many of the officers, wounded Aumale himself,
and took him prisoner. Immediately after this vicory, he
marched in triumph to Metz, and joined his army to that of the
Emperor. Charles, in reward for this service, and the great
accession of strength which he brought him, granted Albert a
pardon in form of past offences, and confirmed him in the
possession of the territories which he had violently usurped
during the war'.

THE Duke of Guise, though deeply affected with his bro- The gallant
ther's misfortune, did not remit, in any degree, the vigour with behaviour of

the Duke of
which he defended the town. He harraffed the besiegers by Guise and his

garrion.

frequent sallies, in which his officers were so eager to diflinguifh
themselves, that his authority being scarce fifficient to rcftrain the
impetuosity of their courage, he was obliged at different times to
flhut the gates, and to conceal the keys, in order to prevent the
Princes of the blood, and noblemen of the first rank, from ex-

* Slcid, 575. Thuan. lib. xi, 389. 392.

posing

27I

BOOK XL posing thenfelvcs to danger in every sally. He repaired in

the night what the enemy's artillery had beat down during the
day, or ereded behind the ruined works new fortifications
of almost equal strength. The Imperialists, on their part,
pushed on the attack with great spirit, and carried forward,
at once, approaches againlt different parts of the town. But
the art of attacking fortified places was not then arrived at
that degree of perfecion to which it was carried towards the
close of the sixteenth century, during the long war in the
Netherlands. The besiegers, after the unwearied labour of
many weeks, found that they had made but little progress; and
although their batteries had made breaches in different places,
they saw, to their afonifhment, works suddenly appear, in de-
molilhing which their fatigues and dangers would be renewed.
The Emperor, enraged at the obstinate resistance which his army
met with, left Thionville, where he had been confined by a violent
fit of the gout, and though still so infirm that he was obliged to
Nov. 26. be carried in a litter, he repaired to the camp; that by his pre-

fence he might animate the soldiers, and urge on the attack with
greater spirit. Upon his arrival new batteries were ereaed,
and new efforts made with redoubled ardour.

The dierefi BUT, by this time, the winter had set in with great rigour;
of the Impe-
rial army. the camp was alternately deluged with rain or covered with

snow; at the fame time provisions were become extremely
scarce, as a body of French cavalry which hovered in the neigh-
bourhood, often interrupted the convoys, or rendered their
arrival difficult and uncertain. Diseases began to spread among
the soldiers, especially among the Italians and Spaniards, unac-
customed to such inclement weather; great numbers were dif-
a7s

t

abled

abled from serving, and many died. At length, such breaches
were made as seemed practicable, and the Emperor resolved to
hazard a general assault, in spite of all the remonstrances of his
generals concerning the imprudence of attacking a numerous
garrison, conducted and animated by the most gallant of the
French nobility, with an army weakened by diseases, and dif-
heartcned with ill success. The Duke of Guise, fufpeding his
intentions from the extraordinary hurry which he observed in
the enemy's camp, ordered all his troops to their refpclive polrs.
They appeared immediately on the walls, and behind the breaches,
with such a determined countenance, so eager for the combat,
and so well prepared to give the assailants a warm reception, that
the Imperialists, instead of advancing to the charge when the
word of command was given, flood motionless, in a timid dejeded
silence. The Emperor perceiving that he could not trust troops
whose spirits were so much broken, retired abruptly to his quar-
ters, complaining that he was now deserted by his soldiers, who
deserved no longer the name ofimen'.

DEEPLY as this behaviour of his troops mortified and affccdc

him, Charles would not hear of abandoning the siege, though lhe
saw the necessity of changing the method of attack. He fifiiended
the fury of his batteries, and proposed to proceed by the more
secure but tedious method of ftapping. But as it flill continued
to rain or to fiow almost inccffantly, ficlh as were employed
in this service endured incredible haidfiips; and the duke of
Cuife, whofc indufiry was not inferior to his valour, difcovcring
all their mines, countcr-worked them, and prevented their cf.
set. At last, Charles finding it imposible to contend any longer

a Thuan. 397.
VOL. III. N n with

273
BOOK XI.

1552.

The Emperor
changes the
method of
attack.
. _ .

---

BOOK XI. with the rigour of the season, and with enemies whom he could

^'' neither overpower by force, nor subdue by art, while at the fame

time a contagious distemper raged among his troops, and cut off
daily great numbers of the officers as well as soldiers, yielded to
the follicitations of his generals, who conjured him to save the
remains of his army by a timely retreat; " Fortune," fays he,
" I now perceive, resembles other females, and chufes to con-
ser her favours on young men, while fhe.forfakes those who are
advanced in years."

Pec. 26. UPON this, he gave orders immediately to raise the siege, and
Obliged to o
aiI thedfilge. submitted to the disgrace of abandoning the enterprize, after

having continued fifty-fix days before the town, during which.
time he had loft upwards of thirty thousand men, who died of
diseases, or were killed by the enemy. The duke of Guise, as
;son as he perceived the intention of the Imperialists, took mea-
fures to prevent their retiring unmolested, and sent out feve-
ral bodies both of cavalry and infantry to infest their rear, to
pick up firagglers, and to seize every opportunity of attacking
them with advantage. Such was the confusion with which
they made their retreat, that the French might have annoyed

Ruin or the them in the most cruel manner. But when they rallied out, a
I flu -ril~
.trmy, anld ticdacle pretented itself to their view, which extinguished at
hum:unity of
Lci',,IcI1I. once all hoffile rage, and melted them into tenderness and com-

pafilon. The Imperial camp was filled with the lick and
wvoundcd, with the dead and the dying. In all the different
roads by which the armry retired numbers were found, who hav-
ing nmade an effort beyond their firength to escape, were lcft,
when they could go no farther, to perilh without affillancc. This.
they rcceivcd from their enemics, alnd were indebted to them for

all
274

all the kind offices which their friends had not the power to per-
form. The duke of Guise immediately ordered proper refresh-
ments for such as were dying of hunger; he appointed surgeons
to attend the sick and wounded; he removed such as could bear
it into the adjacent villages; and those who would have suffered
by being carried so far, he admitted into the hospitals which he
had fitted up in the city for his own soldiers. As soon as they
recovered he sent them home, under an escort of soldiers, and
with money to bear their charges. By these aas of humanity,
which were uncommon in that age, when war was carried on
with greater rancour and ferocity than at present, the duke of
Guise completed the fame which he had acquired by his gallant and
successful defence of Metz, and engaged those whom he had van-
quifhed to vie with his own countrymen in extolling his name '

To these calamities in Germany, were added such unfortu-

nate events in Italy, as rendered this the most disastrous year in
the Emperor's life. During his residence at Villach, Charles
had applied to Cosmo de Medici for the loan of two hundred
thousand crowns. But his credit at that time was so low, that in
order to obtain this inconsiderable funm, he was obliged to put
him in poflfefion of the principality of Piombino, and by giving
tip that he loft the footing which he had hitherto maintained in
Tuscany, and enabled Cofino to assume, for the future, the tone
and deportment of a Prince altogether inlcpcndant. Much
about the time that his indigence constraincd him to part with

BooK -XL
i ,.

I52.

Bad fituatioa
of the Em-
peror's affairs
in Italy.

b Slkid. 575. T'huan. lib. xi. 389, &c. Pcrc Dani l, lift. de Fiance, tom.

iii. 392. Pcrc Daniel's account of this siege is taken from the.journal of the
'Eieur de Salignac, who was prcfcnt. Natal. Comit. Iliitor. i29.

N n 2 thii

^75

BOOK XI. this valuable territory, he loft Siena, which was of still greater

.' ' consequence, through the ill condut of Don Diego de Mendoza'.

The revolt SIENA, like most of the great cities in Italy, had long enjoyed
of Siena.

a republican government, under the protedion of the Empire;
but being torn in pieces by the dissensions between the nobles
and the people, which divided all the Italian commonwealths,
the faction of the people, which gained the ascendant, besought
the Emperor to become the guardian of the administration which
they had established, and admitted into their city a finall body
of Spanish soldiers, whom he had sent to countenance the exe-
cution of the-laws, and to preserve tranquillity among them.
The direcion of these troops was given to Mendoza, at that time
ambaflador for the Emperor at Rome, who persuaded the credu-
lous multitude, that it was necessary for their fccurity against any
future attempt of the nobles, to allow him to build a citadelin
Siena; and as he flattered himself that by means of this fortress he
might render the Emperor master of the city, he pushed on the
works with all possible dispatch. But he threw off the mask
too soon. Before the fortifications were compleated, he began
to indulge his natural haughtiness and severity of temper, and
to treat the citizens with great insolence. At the fame time
the soldiers in garrison being paid as irregularly as the Empe-
ror's troops ufiJally were, lived almofl at discretion upon the.
inhabitants, and were guilty of many aas of licence and oppr.cf-
flon.

Thre Sirnce TI.SI. E injuries awakened the Sicncfe to a sense of their dan--
ccumlt t!)Ce ;,f- '
lilt.lnc of ger. As they law the nccfclity of exerting thcmfclvcs, while the.
I ral.ec.

' Thuan. lib. xi. 376.

unfifi.flce
276

unfinllhed fortifications of the citadel left them any hopes of BaoK -X,.
success, they applied to the French ambassador at Rome, who S'. '
readily promised them his master's protedion and aflfltance. At
the fame time, forgetting their domestic animofities when such a-
mortal blow was aimed at the liberty and existence of the repub-
lick, they sent agents to the exiled nobles, and invited them to-
concur with them in saving their country from the servitude-
with which it was threatened. As there was not a moment to.
lose, measures were concerted speedily, but with great prudence;
and were executed with equal vigour. The citizens rose suddenly in
arms; the exiles flocked into the town from different parts with air
their partizans, and what troops they could draw together; and
several bodies of mercenaries in the pay of France appeared
to support them. The Spaniards, though furprized, and much
inferior in number, defended themselves with great courage; but
feeing noprofpe& of relief, and having no hopes of maintaining
their station long in a half-finiffed fortress, they soon gave it up.
The Sienefe, with the utmost alacrity, levelled it with the ground,
that no monument might remain of that odious ftruclure, which
had been raised in order to enslave them. At the fame time re-
nouncing all connecion with the Emperor, they sent amnbafitidors
to thank the King of France as the restorer of their liberty, and
to intreat that he would secure to them the perpetual enjoyment
of that blessing by continuing his protection to their rcpublick ''.

To these misfortunes, one flill more fatal had almnof filc- Descent of'

thie 'tiLt ks in
ceeded. The severe adininifiration of Don Pedro de Toledo, the kingdom;

of NapIe .

d Pccci Mcmorie de Siena, vol. iii. p. 230, 261. Thuan, 375, 377, &c. P'.-.
ruta. [Iilt.Venct. 267. Memn. de Ribicr, 42, &c..

27T

-vicero y
8,

sDoore Sr.
BOOK X.
k _

i ; 5 z
.' . A)
. ', .

viceroy of Naples, having filled that kingdom with nmurmuring
and difaffetion, the Prince of Salerno, the head of the malecon-
tents, had fled to the court of France, where all who bore ill-will
to the Emperor or his ministers, were sure of finding protecioa
and assistance. That nobleman, in the usual flile of exiles, boait-
ing much of his partizans, and of his great influence with them,
prevailed on Henry to think of invading Naples, from expeda-
tion of being joined by all those with whom the Prince of Sa-
lerno held correspondence, or who were dissatisfied with Tole-
-lo's government. But though the first hint of this enterprize
was iuggefted by the Prince of Salerno, Henry did not chufe
that its success mould entirely depend upon his being able to fulfil
the promises which he had made. He applied for aid to Soly-
man, whom he courted, after his father's example, as his most
vigorous auxiliary against the Emperor, and follicited him to
fccond his operations by fending a powerful fleet into the Me-
ditcrrancan. It was not difficult to obtain what he requested of
the Sultan, who, at this time, was highly incensed againit the
house of Austria, on account of their proceedings in Hungary.
I-Ie ordered an hundred and fifty flips to be equipped, that they
might fail towards the coast of Naplcs, at whatever time Henry
should name, and inight co-operate with the French troops in their
attempts upon that kingdom. The command of this fleet was given
to the corsair Dragut, an ofliccr trained up under Barbarossa, and
fiarcc inferior to his mailer in courage, in talents, or in good for-
tune. I lc appeared on the coast of Calabria at the time which had
been agreed (,o, landedl at icvcral places, plundered and burnt fcve-
ral villa^cs; and at last cafling anchor in the bay of Naples, filled
tlitt city with conflcrnation. But as the French fleet, detained by
finc accident, which the contemporary hiflorians have not ex-
j)lained, did not join the Turks according to concert, they, after

,~~~~~7 ~~waiting
t7ro

waiting twenty days, without hearing any tidings of it, set fail Boo Xf.
for Constantinople, and thus delivered the viceroy of Naples from l

. '

the terror of an invasion, which he was in no condition to have
resifted '.

As the French had never given so severe a check to the Em- 's53-

The Emperor"
peror in any former campaign, they expressed immoderate joy fenfbly as.

seced with

at the success of their arms. Charles himself, accustomed to a fthe fwitof
long series ofprofperity, felt the blow most sensibly, and retired his assais.
from Metz into the Low-Countries, much dejeded with the cruel
reverse of fortune which affected him in his declining age, when-
the violence of the gout had increased to such a pitch, as entirely
broke the vigour of his constitution, and rendered him peevish,
difficultofaccefs, and often incapable of applying to business. But
whenever he enjoyed any interval of ease, all his thoughts were
bent on revenge; and he deliberated, with the utmost follicitude,
concerning the most proper means of annoying France, and of
effacing the slain which had obscured the reputation and glory
-of his arms. All the schemes concerning Germany, which had:
engrossed him so long, being disconcerted by the peace of Pafllu,
the affairs of the Empire became only secondary objects of attcn-
tion; and enmity to France was the predominant paflion which
chiefly occupied his mind.

THE turbulent ambition of Albert of Brandenburgh cx- The vi;e,,e
*ited violent commotions, which diflurbed the Empire during i'0,,;.i,;:

of '\:bcrt o5
this year. That Prince's troops having flharcd in the calamities Bint.Jn

bur iii.

of the siege of Metz, were greatly reduced in number. But the
Emperor, prompted by gratitude for his diflingulifhlcd firvices

c lhuan. 375, 38o. Meni. de Ribier, ii. 403. G iaCne.

oiV;

?13oOK XI.

J553.

.1 ' is con-
demiined by
tile 1tnperial
-Chamber.

Jon that occasion, or perhaps with a secret view of fomenting di.
visions among the Princes of the Empire, having paid up all the
,money due to him, he'was enabled with that fum to hire so many
of the soldiers difinifled from the Imperial army, that he was
soon at the head of a body of men as numerous as ever. The
bishops of Bamberg and Wurtzburg having follicited the Impe-
rial chamber to annul, by its authority, the iniquitous conditions
which Albert had compelled them to sign, that court unani-
inoufly found all their engagements with him to be void in
their own nature, because they had been extorted by force; en-
joined Albert to renounce all claim to the performance of them;
and exhorted all the Princes of the Empire, if he should persist
in fuch.an unjust demand, to take arms against him as a disturber
of the publick tranquillity. To this decision Albert opposed the
confirmation of his tranfadionswith the two prelates, which the
Emperor had granted him as the reward of his having joined the
Imperial army at Metz; and in order to intimidate his antago-
nifis, and to convince them of his resolution not to relinquish his
pretensions, he put his troops in motion, that he might secure
the territory in question. Various endeavours were employed,
and many expedients proposed, in order to prevent the kindling
aincw war in Germany. But the fame warmth of temper which
rendered Albert turbulent and entcrprizing, inspiring him with
the mofl sanguine hopes of success, even in his wildest under-
takings, he difdainfully.rejeQed all reasonable overtures of ac-
commodation.

UPON this, the Imperial chamber iflucd its decree againfl

him, and reqluircd the Eledor of Saxony, together with fcvcral
other Princes mentioned by name, to take arms in order to

carry
.8o

carry it into execution. Maurice and those afrociated with him BOOK Xr.
were not unwilling to undertake this service. They were ex- '-'
tremely follicitous to maintain publick order by supporting the
authority of the Imperial chamber, and saw the necessity of
giving a timely check to the usurpations of an ambitious Prince
who had no principle of action but regard to his own interest,
and no motive to direa him but the impulse of ungovernable
passions. They had good reason, to fufped that the Emperor
encouraged Albert in his extravagant and irregular proceedings,
and secretly afforded him assistance, that by raising him up to
rival Maurice in power, he might in any future broil make use
of his assistance to counterbalance and controul the authority
which the other had acquired in the Empire '.

THESE considerations united the mofl powerful Princes in April 2.

A confede-

Germany in a league against Albert, of which Maurice was racy formed
declared generalissimo. This fbrmidable confederacy, however, afain him,

of which
wrought no change in Albert's sentiments; but as he knew that Maurice was

head.

he could not resist so many Princes, if he should allow them
time to assemble their forces, he cndeavoured, by his activity,
to deprive them of all the advantage which they might derive
from their united power and numbers; and for that reason
marched directly againfl Mauricc, the enemy whom he dreaded
most. It was happy for the allies, that the conduc of their affairs
was committed to a Prince of such abilities. IHe by his autho-
rity and cxample had inspircd them with vigour, and having
carried on tlcir prcparations with a degrcc of rapidity, of
which confederate bodies arc seldom capable, he was in condi-

' Sleid. 585. MIlcm. d Ribicr. ii. 442. Arnolli. vita Maurit. np. Mcii'ecn.
ii. 1242.

VOL. III. 0 o tion

281

BOOK XI. tion to face Albert before he could make any considerable

T153. progress.

Ite attacks THEIR armies, which were nearly equal in number, each
Albett.

confifing of twenty four thousand men, met at Sieverhaufen in
the dutchy of Lunenburgh; and the violent animosity against
each other, which possessed the two leaders, did not susser them.
to continue long inacive. The troops inflamed with the fame
July 9. hostile rage marched fiercely to the combat; they fought with

the greatest obstinacy; and as both generals were capable of
availing themselves of every favourable occurrence, the battle
remained long doubtful, each gaining ground upon the other

And defeats alternately. At last vicory declared for Maurice, who was
his arm/. superior in cavalry, and Albert's army fled in confusion, leaving

four thousand dead in the field, and their camp, baggage and
artillery, in the hands of the conquerors. The allies bought
their vicory dear, their best troops suffered greatly, two sons
of the Duke of Brunswick, a Duke of Lunenburgh, and many
other pcrfons of diflindion were among the number of the

B,,t is 1 i led hlain . But all these were soon forgotten, for Maurice himself,
Ji the batlle. as he led up to a second charge a body ofhorfe which had been

broken, received a wound with a piflol bullet in the belly,
of which he died two days after the battle, in the thirty-fecond
year of his age, and in the sixth after his attaining the clecoral.
dignity.

i [litforia pugna infclicis inter Maurit. & Albert. Thorn. WVintzero audore

aplid Scarl. ii. 559. Slid. 583. Rufcclli cpifircs aux Princes 154. Arnoldi,
vi:a Maurit. 1245.

OE.
282

OF all the personages who have appeared in the history of

this acive age, when great occurrences, and sudden revolutions,
called forth extraordinary talents to view, and afforded them
full opportunity to display themselves, Maurice may justly be
confidered as the most remarkable. If his exorbitant ambi-
tion, his profound dissimulation, and his unwarrantable ufurpa-
tion of his kinsman's honours and dominions exclude him from
being praised as a virtuous man; his prudence in concerting
his measures, his vigour in executing them, and the uniform
success with which they were attended, entitle him to the appel-
lation of a great Prince. At an age, when impetuosity of
spirit commonly predominates over political wisdom, when the
highest effort even of a genius of the firfl order is to fix on a bold
scheme, and to execute it with promptitude and courage, he
formed and conduced an intricate plan of policy, which de-
ceived the most artful Monarch in Europe. At the very junc-
ture when the Emperor had attained almost unlimited defpo-
tifm, Maurice, with power seemingly inadequate to such an
undertaking, compelled him to relinquish all his usurpations,
and established not only the religious but civil liberties of Gernany
on such foundations as have hitherto remained unthakcn. Al-
though at one period of his life, his condudt excited the jcaloufy
of the Protestants, and at another drew on him the rcfcntmcnt
of the Roman Catholicks, such was his masterly addrces, that
he was the only Prince of the age, who in any dcgrce 1pofletlcd
the confidence of both, and whom both lamented as the nmot
able as well as faithful guardian of the conftitutioni and laws
of his country.

BooK XI.

s chaa3er.

['is chatader.
oz 2

283
' 'll

Boox XI. TlIE consternation which Maurice's death occasioned among

--'' his troops, prevented them from making the proper improve-
a5;3.

Albert con- ment of the victory which they had gained. Albert, whose
tinues the
war. acive courage, and profuse liberality rendered him the darling

of such military adventurers as were little follicitous about the
justice of his causf, soon re-assembled his broken forces, and
made froth levies with such success, that he was quickly at the
lhead of fifteen thousand men, and renewed his depredations
with additional fury. But Henry of Erunfwick having taken,
the command of the allied troops, defeated him in a second
Sept 12. battle scarce less bloody than the former. Even then his cou-

rage did not fink, nor were his resources exhausted. He made
several efforts, and some of them very vigorous, to retrieve
his affairs: But, being laid under the ban of the Empire by the
Imperial chamber; being driven by degrees out of all his here-
ditary territories, as well as those which he had usurped;
being forsaken by many of his officers, and overpowered by

He is driven the number of his enemies, he fled for refuge into France.
out of Ger-
many. After having been, for a considerable time, the terror and

scourge of Germany, he lingered out a few years in an indi-
gent and dependant irate of exile, the miseries of which his
rcftlefs and arrogant spirit endured with the moif indignant im-

January 1, patience. Upon his death without issue, his territories, which
1557. hhad been fcizcd by the Princes who took arms againfl him,

were rcflorcd, by a decree of the Emperor, to his collateral
heirs of the liouli of I3randcnburgh h.

Maur:iue's MAURI(E, having left only one daughter, who was aftcr-
brother Au-
Rnftus fuc- wards married to William Prince of Orange, by whom he hiad
cceds Ilit in
th- e!cttoral

th t,,Itty. k Slcid. 592. 594. 599. Struv. Corp. hilt. Gcrm. 1075.

a fen
284

a son who bore his grandfather's name, and inherited the great BooK XI,
talents for which he was conspicuous, a violent dispute arose ,,
concerning the succession to his honours and territories. John
Frederick, the degraded Eleaor, claimed the eletoral dignity,
and that part of his patrimonial eflate, of which he had
been violently stripped after the Smalkaldic war. Augustus,
Maurice's only brother, pleaded his right not only to the here-
ditary poffeflions of their family, but to the electoral dignity
and to the territories which Maurice had acquired. As Augustus
was a Prince of considerable abilities, as well as of great candour
and gentleness of manners, the States of Saxony, forgetting the
merits and sufferings of their former master, declared warmly
in his favour. His pretensions were powerfilly supported by
the King of Denmark whose daughter he had married, and
zealously espoused by the King of the Romans out of regard to
Maurice's memory. The degraded Eledor, though secretly
favoured by his ancient enemy the Emperor, was at last obliged
to relinquish his claim, upon obtaining a small addition to the
territories which had been allotted to him, together with a fli-
pulation, securing to his family the eventual fuccefion, upon a
failure of male heirs in the Albertine line. That unfortunate
but magnanimous Prince died next year, soon after ratifying
this treaty of agreement; and the elctoral dignity is flill pof-
sessed by the descendants of Augustus '.

DURING these tralntictions in Germany, war was carried on lhiiil;ties in
n the Low-Countries with confiderablc vigour. The Emperor, tle l,,-
impatient to cfface the slain which his ignominious rclpu)li at
Mctz left upon his military reputation, had an army early in

i Slci(. 587. Thlluan. 409. Struv. Corp. hill. Germ.

the.
3

285

1'HE REIGN OF THE
B3ooKXI. the field, and lid siege to Terouane. Though the town was

~v~' Of such importance that Francis used to call it one of the two

pillows on which a King of France might sleep with security,
the fortifications were in disrepair: Henry, trusting to what had
happened at Mctz, thought nothing more was necessary to ren-
-der all the efforts of the enemy abortive, than to reinforce the
garrison with a considerable number of the young nobility. But
d' Effi, a veteran officer who commanded them, being killed, and
the Imperialifis pushing the siege with great vigour and perse-
verance, the place was taken by assault. That it might not
June 21. fall again into the hands of the French, Charles ordered not

only the fortifications but the town to be rafed, and the inha-
bitants to be difperled in the adjacent cities. Elated with this
success, the Impcrialifis immediately inveRted Hefdin, which,
though defended with great bravery, was likewise taken by
afault, and such of the garrison as escaped the sword were made
prifoncrs. The Emperor entrustcd the condud of this ficge to
Emanuel Philibcrt of Savoy Prince of Piedmont, who, on that
occasion, gave the firlt display of his great talents for military
command, which soon entitled him to be ranked among the
firfl generals of that age, and facilitated his re-establishment in
his hereditary dominions, the greater part of which having
been over-run by Francis in his expeditions into Italy, were
still occupied by Henry k.

Thec prtrerC Ti E loss of tlhcfe towns, togetlher with so many pcrfons of
er the Impe-
ri:ilil (if- difinindion, cither killed or taken by the enemy, was no inconfi-
(1ucc Iing. dcral)c calamity to France, and Henry fcltit very fcnfibly; but he

k Thuan.i 41 1. IIlrxi Annalcs Brabant, 669.
0

was

was still more mortified at the Emperor's having assumed his
wonted superiority in the field so soon after the brow at Metz,
which the French had represented as fatal to his power. He
was ashamed, too, of his own remissness and excessive security
at the opening of the campaign; and in order to repair that
error, he assembled a numerous army, and led it into the Low-
Countries.

BoosK XL

15733

ROLTZED at the approach of such a formidable enemy,

Charles left Brussels, where he had been shut up so closely dur--
ing seven months, tiat it came to be believed in many parts of'
Europe that he was dead; and though he was so much debili-
tated by the gout that he could scarce bear the motion of a.
litter, he hastened to join his army. The eyes of all Europe
were turned with expectation towards these mighty and exaf-
perated rivals, between whom a decisive battle was now thought
unavoidable. But Charles having prudently declined to hazard a.
general engagement, and the violence of the autumnal rains
rendering it ilnpofible for the French to undertake any fiegc,.
they retired without having performed any thing fuitablc to.
the great preparations which they had made '.

TIlE Imperial arms did not make the fame progrcfs in The Tmpe
Italy. The narrowness of the Emperor's finances feldoln al- rinlisis Ltntli-

cefbful inll

lowed him to aa with vigour in two different places at the famle :aly.
time; and having exerted lhimfelf to the ulmotl in order to make
a great'cffort in the cLow-Countrics, his operations on the other
fide of the Alps were proportionally feeble. The viceroy of'

J Ilar:eus 672. Thuan. 414.

Narplcs,

BOOK XI.

153.

And in Hun.
gary.

Naples, in conjundlion with Cosmo di Medici, who was greatly
alarmed at the introdution of French troops into Siena,
endeavoured to become mailer of that city. But instead of re-
ducing the Sienefe, the Imperialists were obliged to retire ab-
ruptly, in order to defend their own country, upon the appear-
ance of the Turkish fleet, which threatened the coait of Naples;
and the French not only eftablifled themselves more firmly in
Tuscany, but, by the assistance of the Turks, conquered a great
part of the island of Corsica, subjed, at that time, to the
Genoese m.

THIE affairs of the house of Auflria declined no less in Hun-

gary during the course of this year. As the troops which Ser-
dinand kept in Transylvania received their pay very irregularly,
they lived almost at discretion upon the inhabitants; and their
insolence and rapaciousness greatly disgusted all ranks of men,
and alienated them from their new fovercign, who, inflead of
proteting, plundered his fubjeds. Their indignation at this,
added to their desire of revenging Martinuzzi's death, wrought
so much upon a turbulent nobility, impatient of injury, and
upon a fierce people, prone to change, that they were ripe for a
revolt. At that very juncure, their late Q2een Isabella, toge-
tlhr with her son, appeared in Transylvania. Her ambitious
mind could not bcar the solitude and inactivity of a private life;
and rcpcnting quickly of the ccffion which fle had made of the
crown in tlh year one tloufand five Ihuudrcd and lifty-onc, ihe
left the placc of her rctreat, hoping that the diflTatisfahion of
thc I-ungarians with the Autfrian government, would prompt
lihcm to rccoinize once more her fonl's right to time crown. Some

'" Thuan. 117.

noblemen
288

noblemen of great eminence declared immediately in his favour.
The Balhaw of Belgrade, by Solyman's order, espoused his
cause in opposition to Ferdinand; the Spaniih and German fol-
diers, instead of advancing against the enemy, mutinied for want
of pay, declaring that they would march back to Vienna; so that
Caftaldo, their general, was obliged to abandon Transylvania
to Isabella and the Turks, and to place himself at the head of the
mutineers, that by his authority he might restrain them from
plundering the Austrian territories, through which they passed ".

FERDINAND'S attention was turned so entirely towards the

affairs of Germany, and his treasures so much exhausted by his
late efforts in Hungary, that he made no attempt to recover
this valuable province, although a favourable opportunity for
that purpose presented itself, as Solyman was then engaged in a
war with Persia, and involved besides in domeflick calamities
which engrossed and disturbed his mind. Solyman, though
distinguished, by many accomplishments, from the other Otto-
man Princes, had all the passions peculiar to that violent and
haughty race. He was jealous of his authority, sudden and fu-
rious in his anger, and susceptible of all that rage of love, which
reigns in 'the East, and often produces the wildest and most
tragical effects. His favourite miflrefs was a Circafllan slave
of exquisite beauty, who bore him a son called Muftapha, whom,
both on account of his birth-right and merit, he destined to be
the heir of his crown. Roxalana, a Ruffian captive, soon sup-
planted the Circassian, and gained the Sultan's heart. Having
the address to retain the conquest which she had made, she
kept possession of his love without any rival for mayy years,

a Thuan. 430.

P p

BOOK XI.

1553.

Ferdinand
obliged to
abandon
Transylvania.

Solyman's
domefick
diltrefes.

The tragical
hillory ,f his
fun Multapha.

289
VOL. III.

during

BooK XI.

\_ __s
tas

during which the brought him several tons and one daughter.
All the happiness, however, which she derived from the un-
bounded sway that she had acquired over a monarch whom one
half of the world revered or dreaded, was embittered by perpetual
refletions on Muftapha's accession to the throne, and the cer-
tain death of her sons, who ihe foresaw would be immediately
sacrificed, according to the barbarous jealoufy.of Turkish policy,
to the safety of the new Emperor. By dwelling continually on
this melancholy idea, she came gradually to view Muftapha as
the enemy of her children, and to hate him with more than
a step-mother's ill-will. This prompted her to wish his deftruc-
tion, in order to secure for one of her own sons the throne
which was destined for him. Nor did she want either ambition
to attempt such a high enterprize, or the arts requisite for car-
rynig it into execution. Having prevailed on the Sultan to give
her only daughter in marriage to Ruftan the Grand Vifier, fle
disclosed her scheme to that crafty minifier, who perceiving that
it was his own interest to co-operate with her, readily promised
his assistance towards aggrandizing that branch of the royal
line, to which he was now so nearly allied.

As soon as Roxalana had concerted her measures with- this

able confident, she began to affeCt a wonderful zeal for the
Mahometan religion, to which Solyman was superstitiously
attached, and proposed to found and endow a royal mosque, a
work of great cxpence, but deemed by the Turks meritorious
in the highest degree. The Mufti whom she consulted approved
much of her pious intention; but, having been gained and
infmruted by Ruflan, told her that she being a save could de-
rive no benefit herself from that holy deed, for all the merit of

t it
290

it would accrue to Solyman the malter whose property the was.
Upon this Ihe seemed to be overwhelmed with sorrow, and to
fink into the deepest melancholy, as if she had been difgufled
with life and all its enjoyments. Solyman, who was absent with
the army, being informed of this dejetion of mind, and of the
cause from which it proceeded, discovered all the follicitude
of a lover to remove it, and by a writing under his hand de-
clared her a free woman. Roxalana having gained this point,
proceeded to build the Mosque, and re-affumed her usual chear-
fulness and gaiety of spirit. But when Solyman, on his return
to Constantinople, sent an eunuch, according to the cuflom of
the seraglio, to bring her to partake of his bed, she, seemingly
with deep regret, but in the most peremptory manner, declined
to follow the eunuch, declaring that what had been an honour to
her while a slave, became a crime as she was now a free woman,
and that she would not involve either the Sultan or herself in the
guilt that must be contraced by such an open violation of the law
of their prophet. Solyman, whose passion this difficulty, as well
as the affected delicacy which gave rife to it, heightened and in-
flamed, had recourse immediately to the Mufti for his direction.
He replied, agreeably to the Koran, thatRoxalana's scruples were
well founded, but added, artfully, in words which Ruftan had
taught him to use, that it was in the Sultan's power to remove
these difficulties by espousing her as his lawful wife: The
amorous monarch closed eagerly with the proposal, and bolemnly
married her according to the form of the Mahometan ritual;
though by doing so he disregarded a maxim of policy which
the pride of the Ottoman blood.had taught all the sultans fincc
Bajazet I. to confider as inviolable. From his time, none of
the Turkifi monarchs had married, because when he was van-

P p 2 quifhcd

BoK XI.

1553.

291

BooK XI. quifhed and taken prisoner by Tamerlane, his wife had been

153· abused with barbarous insolence by the Tartars. That no fimi-

lar calamity might subjea the Ottoman family to the like dif-
grace, the sultans admitted none to their bed but slaves whose
dishonour could not bring any such stain upon their house.

BUT the more uncommon the ftep was, the more it convinced

Roxalana of the unbounded influence which he had acquired
over the Sultan's heart; and emboldened her to prosecute, with
greater hope of success, the scheme that she had formed in order
to destroy Muflapha. This young Prince having been entrusted
by his father, according to the practice of the sultans in that age,
with the government of several different provinces, was at that
time invelted with the adminifiration in Diarbequir, the ancient
Mesopotamia, which Solyman had wrested from the Persians,
and added to his empire. In all these different commands,
Muftapha had conduted himself with such cautious prudence as
could give no offence to his father, though, at the fame time, he
governed with so much moderation as well as justice, and dif-
played fiuch valour atfd generosity as rendered him equally the
favourite of the people and the darling of the soldiery.

THERE was no room to lay any folly or vice to his charge,

that could impair the high opinion which his father entertained
of him. Roxalana's malevolence was more refined; she turned
his virtues againit him, and made use of these as engines for
his deftruaion. She often mentioned, in Solyman's pretence,
the splendid qualities of his son; fle celebrated his courage,
his liberality, his popular arts, with malicious and exaggerated
praise. As soon as the perceived that the Sultan heard these

* encomiums,
S92

encomiums, which were often repeated, with uneasiness; that BOOK XI.
suspicion of his son began to mingle itself with his former A;
esteem of him; and that by degrees he came to view him with
jealousy and fear, she introduced, as by accident, some discourse
concerning the rebellion of his father Selim against Bajazet his
grandfather; she took notice of the bravery of the veteran
troops under Muftapha's command, and of the neighbourhood
of Diarbequir to the territories of the Persian Sophi, Solyman's
mortal enemy. By these arts, whatever remained of paternal
tenderness was entirely extinguiihed, and such paflions were
kindled in his breast as gave all Roxalana's malignant fuggef-
Rions the colour not only of probability but of truth. A deep-
rooted hatred succeeded, now, to his suspicions and fear of
Muftapha. He appointed spies to observe and report all his
words and ations; he watched and flood on his guard against
him as his most dangerous enemy.

HAVING thus alienated the Sultan's heart from Muftapha,

Roxalana ventured on another flep, and entreated Solyman to
allow her own sons the liberty of appearing at court, hoping
that by gaining access to their father, they might, by their good
qualities and dutiful deportment, insinuate themselves into
that place in his affections which Muflapha had formerly
held; and, though what she demanded was contrary to
the practice of the Ottoman family in that age, the uxorious
monarch granted her request. To all these female intrigues
Ruftan added an artifice frill more subtle, which compleated the
Sultan's delusion, and heightened his jealousy and fear. He
wrote to tile Bashaws of the provinces adjacent to Diarbequir,
inftruaing them to fend him regular intelligence of Muftapha's

proceedings

293

BOOK XI.

1553.

proceedings in his government, and to each of them he gave a
private hint, flowing, in appearance from his zeal for their
interest, that nothing would be more acceptable to the Sultan
than to receive favourable accounts of a son whom he destined
to sustain the glory of the Ottoman name. The Bashaws,
ignorant of his fraudulent intention, and eager to pay court to
their sovereign at such an easy price, filled their letters with
fludied but fatal panegyricks of Multapha, representing him as
a Prince worthy to succeed such an illustrious father, and as en-
dowed with talents which might enable him to emulate, per-
haps to equal his fame. These letters were industriously shewn
to Solyman, at the seasons when it was known that they would
makethe deepest impression. Every exprefflon in recommendation
of his son wounded him to the heart; he fufpeded his principal
officers of being ready to favour the most desperate attempts of
a Prince whom they were so fond to praise; and fancying fhat
he saw them already assaulting his throne with rebellious arms,
he determined, while it was yet in his power, to anticipate the
blow, and to secure his own safety by his son's death.

FOR this purpose, though under pretence of renewing the

war against Persia, he ordered Ruflan to march towards Diar-
bequir at the head of a numerous army, and to rid him of a
a son whose life he deemed inconsistent with his own safety.
But that crafty miniser (lid not choose to be loaded with the
odium of having executed this cruel order. As soon as he arrived
in Syria he wrote to Solyman, that the danger was so immi-
acnt as called for his immediate presence; that the camp was
full of Muftapha's cmiffarics; that many of the soldiers were cor-
ruptcd; that the affetions of all leaned towards him; that he had

d ifcovercd
29t

diftovered a negociation which had been carried on with the BaoKXLE
Sophi of Persia in order to marry Muftapha with one of his '553

155.3.,

daughters; that he already felt both his talents and his autho-
rity to be inadequate to the exigencies of such an arduous con-
junaure, that the Sultan alone had sagacity to discern what
resolution ihould be taken in those circumstances, and power to
carry that resolution into execution.

THIS charge of courting the friendship of the Sophi, Roxa-

lana and Ruftan had reserved as the last and most envenomed of
all their calumnies. It operated with the violence which they
expeced from Solyman's inveterate abhorrence of the Persians,,
and threw him into the wildest transports of rage. He set out
instantly for Syria, and hastened thither with all the precipita-
tion and impatience of fear and revenge. As soon as he joined
his army near Aleppo, and had concerted measures with Ruftank
he sent a Chiaus or messenger of the court to his son, requiring.
him to repair immediately to his pretence. Muftapha, though;
no stranger to his step-mother's machinations, or to Ruftan's
malice, or to his father's violent temper, yet relying on his own
innocence, and hoping to discredit the accusations of his ene-
mies by the promptitude of his obedience, followed the messen--
ger without delay to Aleppo. The moment he arrived in the
camp, he was introduced into the Sultan's tent. As he entered
it, he observed nothing that could give him any alarm; no
additional crowd of attendants, no body of armed guards, but
the fame order and silence which always reign in the Sultan's
apartments. In a few minutes, however, fevcral' mutes ap-
peared, at the fight of whom Muftapha knowing what was his
doom, cried with a loud voice, " Lo, my death !" and attempt-

aGU

BOOK XI.
I ,,
0

ed to fly. The mutes rushed forward to seize him, he resifted
and struggled, demanding with the utmost earnestness to fee the
Sultan; and despair, together with the hope of finding protec-
tion from the soldiers, if he could escape out of the tent, anni-
mated him with such extraordinary strength, that, for some
time, he baffled all the efforts of the executioners. Solyman
was within hearing of his son's cries, as well as of the noise
which the struggle occasioned. Impatient of this delay of his
revenge, and itruck with terror at the thoughts of Muftapha's
escaping, he drew aside the curtain which divided the tent, and
thrufling in his head, darted a fierce look towards the mutes,
and with wild and threatening gestures seemed to chide them for
sloth and timidity. At fight of his father's furious and unre-
lenting countenance, Muftapha's strength failed, and his
courage forsook him; the mutes fastened the bow-string about
his neck, and in a moment put an end to his life.

TIlE dead body was exposed before the Sultan's tent. The

soldiers gathered round it, and contemplating that mournful
objed with aflonifhment, and sorrow, and indignation, were
ready, if a leader had not been wanting, to have broke out into
the wildest exceffcs of rage. After giving vent to the first expref-
sions of their grief, they retired each man to his tent, and shutting
thcmfelvcs up, bewailed in secret the cruel fate of their favourite;
nor was there one of them who tailed food or even water during
the remainder of that day. Next morning the fame solitude
and filcnce rcigned in the camp; and Solyman, being afraid that
fomc dreadful florm would follow this fullen calm, in order
to appcafe the enraged soldiers, deprived R uflan of the feals,
ordered him to leave the camp, and raised Ahmct a gallant

officer,
296

officer much beloved in the army, to the dignity of Vifier.
This change, however, was made in concert with Ruflan him-
self; that crafty minister suggesting it as the only expedient
which could save himself or his master. But within a few
months, when the resentment of the soldiers began to subside,
and the name of Muftapha to be forgotten, Achmet was
firangled by the Sultan's command, and Ruftan reinstated in
the office of Vifier. Together with his former power, he re-
assumed the plan for exterminating the race.of Muftapha which
he had concerted with Roxalana; and as they were afraid that
an only son whom Muftapha had left might grow up to avenge
his death, they redoubled their activity, and by employing the
fame arts against him which they had praaifed against his fa-
ther, they inspired Solyman with the fame fears, and prevailed
on him to issue orders for putting to death that young innocent
Prince. These orders were executed, with barbarous zeal, bv
a eunuch, who was dispatched to Bursa, the place where the
Prince resided; and no rival was left to dispute the Ottoman
throne with the sons of Roxalana °.

SuCH a tragical scene, productive of so deep distress, fel-

dom occurs but in the history of the great monarchies
of the East, where the force of the climate works up and
fuiblimes all the paflions of the human mind into the greatest
fury, and the absolute power of sovereigns enables them to ad
with uncontrouled violence; but while it passed in the court
of Solyman and engaged his whole attention, Charles was
pursuing with the utmost ardour a new scheme for aggran-

BOOK XL

At53.

Char'es pro-
je&s a mar-
riage between
his Ton and
Mary of Eng-
land.

°Augerii Giflcnii Bufbequii Legationis Turcicz Epiftole iv. Franc. 161r.

p. 37. Thuan. Ijb. 12. p. 432. Mem. de Ribier. ii. 457. Mauroceni hiftor.
Veneta, lib. vii. p. 60.

VOL. III. Qq diJzia

292

BOOK XI.

J553.

To which
Philip gives
his content.

dizing his family. About this time, Edward the sixth of Eng'
land, after a short reign, in which he displayed such virtues
as filled his fubjetas with sanguine hopes of being happy un-
der his government, and made them bear with patience all
that they suffered from the weakness, the dissentions and the
ambition of the ministers who assumed the administration during
his minority, was seized with a lingering distemper which
threatened his life. The Emperor no sooner received an account
of this, than his ambition, always attentive to seize every op-
portunity of acquiring an increase of power or of territories to
his son, he fuggefled the thought of adding England to his
other kingdoms by the marriage of Philip with the Princess.
Mary, the heir of Edward's crown. Being apprehensive, how-
ever, that his son, who was then in Spain, might decline a
match with a Princess in her thirty-eighth year, and eleven
years older than himfelfq; Charles determined, notwithftand-
ing his own age and infirmities, to make offer of himself as a
husband to his cousin,

BUT though Mary was so far advanced in years, and detli-

tute of every charm either of person or of manners that could;
win affetion, or command esteem, Philip, without hesitation,
gave his content to the match proposed by his father, and was.
willing, according to the'ufual maxim of Princes, to sacrifice his
inclination to his ambition. In order to insure success, the Em-
peror, even before Edward's death, began to take such fleps as
might facilitate it. Upon Edward's. demise, Mary mounted the
throne of England; the pretensions of the lady Jane Gray

* Palav. hist. Concil. Trid. v. ii. c. 13. p. 150.

proving
298

proving as unfortunate, as they were ill founded '. Charles lent
immediately a pompous embassy to London to congratulate
Mary on her acceflion to the throne, and to propose the alliance
with his son. The Queen, dazzled with the profped of marry-
ing the heir of the greatest Monarch in Europe; fond of uniting
more closely with her mother's family to which she had been
always warmly attached; and eager to secure the powerful
aid which she knew would be necessary towards carrying on her
favourite scheme of re-establishing the Romish religion in Eng-
land, listened in the most favourable manner to the proposal.
Among her fubjeds, it met with a very different reception.
Philip, it was well known, contended for all the tenets of the
church of Rome with a sanguinary zeal which exceeded the
measure even of Spanish bigotry: this alarmed all the numerous
partizans of the Reformation. The Castilian haughtiness and
reserve were far from being acceptable to the English, who hav-
ing several times seen their throne occupied by those who were
born subje&s, had become accustomed to an unceremonious and
familiar intercourse with their sovereigns. They could not
think, without the utmost uneasiness, of admitting a foreign
Prince to that influence in their councils, which the husband
of their Queen would naturally possess. They dreaded, both
from Philip's overbearing temper, and from the maxims of the
Spanish monarchy which he had imbibed, that he would infuse
ideas into the Quccn's mind, dangerous to the liberties of the
nation, and would introduce foreign troops and money into the
kingdom to aflift her in any attempt against them.

BOOK Xr.

'553.

The senti-
ments of
Mary and of
the English
with regard
to it.
' Carte's hist. of England, iii. 287.

Q~q 2 FUL

a99
FuL4

BooK XI. FULL of there apprehensions, the house of Commons, though

-"3'"-- in that age extremely obsequious to the will of their Monarchss

1553.

The house of presented a warm address againfi the Spanish match; many
Commons re- pamphlets were published representing the dangerous confe-
monltraw
againf is quences of the alliance with Spain, and describing Philip's bi-

gotry and arrogance in the most odious colours. But Mary,
inflexible in all her resolutions, paid no regard to the remon-
firances of her Commons, or to the sentiments of the people.
The Emperor, having secured, by various arts, the ministers
r'whom she trufled most, they approved warmly of the match,
and large fums were remitted by him in order to gain the reft
of the council. Cardinal Pole, whom the Pope, immediately
upon Mary's acceflion, had dispatched as his legate into Eng-
land, in order to reconcile his native country to the fee of Rome,
was detained by the Emperor's command at Dillinghen, in
Germany, left by his pretence he should thwart Philip's preten-
sions, and employ his interest in favour of his kinsman Courtnay
Earl of Devonlhire, whom the English ardently wished their
sovereign to chufe for a husband '.

The marriage MEANWHILE, the negociation was carried forward with the
t<eaty con- greatest rapidity, the Emperor agreeing, without hesitation, to
giuded.

every article in favour of England which Mary's ministers either
represented as necessary to soothe the people and reconcile them
to the match, or that was suggested by their own fears and
jealousy of a foreign master. The chief articles were, that
Philip during his marriage with the Queen should bear
Jo'Lut 2. the title of King of England, but the entire adminiftra-

' Cart. iii. 289.

tio,

tion of affairs, as well as the sole disposal of all revenues, offices,
and benefices should remain with the Queen; that the heirs
of the marriage should, together with the crown of England,
inherit the dutchy of Burgundy and the Low-Countries; that
if Prince Charles, Philip's only son by a former marriage,
should die without issue, his children by the Queen whether
male or female should succeed to the crown of Spain and all the
Emperor's hereditary dominions; that before the confumma-
tion of the marriage, Philip should swear solemnly that he
would retain no domeftick who was not a fubjeat of the Queen,
and would bring no foreigners into the kingdom that might
give umbrage to the English; that he would make no altera-
tion in the constitution or laws of England; that he would not
carry the Queen or any of the children born of this marriage
out of the kingdom; that if the Queen should die before him
without issue, he should immediately leave the crown to the
lawful heir, without claiming any right of administration
whatever; that England should not, in consequence of this
marriage, be engaged in any war subsisting between France and
Spain; and that the alliance between France and England
should remain in full force'.

BUT this treaty, though both the Emperor and Mary's mi-

nifters employed their utmost address in framing it so as to please
the English, was far from quieting their fears and jealousies.
They saw that words and promises were a feeble security against
the encroachments of an ambitious Prince, who, as soon as he
got poffeflion of the power apd advantages which the Queen's

BOOK XI,

1554.

Discontent
and appre
henfions of
the Englilh.
* Rymer's Feed. vol. xv. 377. 393. Mem. de Ribier, ii. 498.

huflband
7

301

BooK XI. husband muff neceflarily enjoy, could easily evade any of
' Ii-4- the articles that either limited his authority or obftruded his

schemes. They were convinced that the more favourable the
conditions of the present treaty were to England, the more
Philip would be tempted to violate them; and they dreaded
that England, like Naples, Milan, and the other countries
annexed to the Spanish crown, would soon feel the intolerable
·weight of its oppreifive domination, and be confirained, as these
had been, to waite its wealth and' vigour in wars wherein it
had no intcreft, and from which it could derive no advantage.

Wvat's inJur- These sentiments prevailed so generally that every part of the
rcfion. kingdom was filled with discontent at the match, and with in-

dignation against the advisers of it. Sir Thomas Wyat, a gen-
tleman of some note, and of good intentions towards the pub-
lick, took advantage of this, and routed the inhabitants of
Kent to arms in order to save their country from a foreign yoke.
Such numbers resorted in a short time to his standard; he
marched to London with such rapidity; and the Queen was so
utterly unprovided for defence, that the asped of affairs was
.extremely threatening, and if any nobleman of diflindion had
joined the malecontents, or had Wyat pofeffed talents equal, in
any degree, to the boldness of his enterprize, the infurredion
must have proved fatal to Mary's power. But all his measures
were concerted with so little prudence, and executed with such
irresolution, that many of his followers forsook him; the reit
were dispersed by an handful of men; and he himfelfwas taken
prisoner without having made any effort worthy of the cause
that he had undertaken, or suitable to the ardour with which he
engaged in it. He fiuffcred the puniiniecnt due to his rashness
nad rebellion. The Qucen's authority was confirmed and in-

crcaced

treated by her success' in defeating this inconsiderate attempt
to abridge it. The lady Jane Gray, whose title the ambition of
her relations had set up in opposition to the Queen's, was, not-
withfanding her youth and innocence, brought to the scaffold.
The lady Elizabeth, the Queen's sifter, was observed with the
tnoft jealous attention. The treaty of marriage was ratified by
the parliament.

PHILIP landed in England, with a magnificent retinue, cele-

brated his nuptials with great solemnity, and though he could
not lay aiide his natural severity and pride, or afrume gracious
and popular manners, he endeavoured to conciliate the favour
of the English nobility by his extraordinary liberality. In
c"e' that should fail of acquiring him such influence in the
government of the kingdom, as he aimed at obtaining, the
Emperor kept a body of twelve thousand men on the coast of
Slanders, in readiness to embark for England, and to support
him in all his enterprizese

E B O L D E N E D by all these favourable circumstances,

Mary pursued the scheme of extirpating the Protestant re-
ligion out of her dominions, with the most precipitant zeal.
The laws of Edward the sixth in favour of the Reforma-
tion were repealed; the Protestant clergy ejeced; all the
forms and rites of the Popiih worihip were re-eflablifhled;
the nation was solemnly absolved from the guilt which it
had contrated during the period of its apoftacy, and was
publickly reconciled to the church of Rome, by cardinal
Pole, who, immediately after the Queen's marriage was
permitted to continue his journey to England, and to cx-

4 crciff

BOOKXI.

1554.

The marriage
celebrated.

Mary's meac
fores to over-
turn the Pro.
teflant reli-
gion in Eng-
land.

303

Book . X. ercirc his legantine fiunions with the most ample power. Not

vo satisfied with having overturned the Protestant church, and
'iS ,.

having efRablifhed her own system on its ruins, Mary insisted
that all her subjes mhould conform to the fame mode of wor&hip
which she preferred; should profess their faith in the fame creed
which she had approved; and abjure every practice or opinion
that was deemed repugnant to either of them. Powers altoge-
ther unknown in the English constitution were vefied in certain
persons appointed to take cognizance of heresy, and they pro-
ceeded to exercise them with more than inquisitorial severity.
The profpea of danger, however, did not intimidate the
teachers of the Protestant doarines, who believed that they
were contending for truths of the utmost consequence to the
happiness of mankind. They boldly avowed their sentiments,
and were condemned to that cruel death which the church of
Rome reserves for its enemies. This shocking punishment was
inflided with that barbarity which the rancour of false zeal alone
can inspire. 'The English, who are inferior in humanity to no
people in Europe, and remarkable for the- mildness of their
publick executions, beheld, with astonishment and horror, per-
sons who had filled'the most refpedable fiations in their church,
and who were venerable on account of their age, their piety and
their literature, condemned to endure torments to which even
the most atrocious criminals were not fubjeded.

The tblfclcs THIS extreme rigour did not accomplish the end at which
.hichifl had Mary aimed. The patience and fortitude with which these mar-
to surmount.

tyrs for the Reformation submittcd to their suffering, the
bcroick contempt of death exprefed by persons of every rank,

and
35 _ _X ,)*

and age, and sex, confirmed many more in the Protestant faith,
than the threats of their enraged persecutors could frighten into
apoftacy. The business of such as were entrusted with trying of
hereticks grew upon them, and appeared to be as endless as it
was odious. The Queen's ablest ministers became sensible how
impolitick as well as dangerous it was to irritate the people by
the frequent fpedacle of publick executions, which they detested
both as unjust and cruel. Even Philip was so thoroughly con-
vinced of her having run to an excess of rigour, that on this
occasion he assumed a part to which he was little accustomed,
becoming an advocate for moderation and lenity ".

BUT, notwithstanding this attempt to ingratiate himfelfwith

the English, they discovered a constant jealousy and distrust of
all his intentions; and when some members who had been
gained by the court ventured to move in the house of Commons
that the nation ought to assist the Emperor the Queen's father-
in-law, in his war against France, the proposal was rejected
with general diflatisfation. A motion which was made, that
the parliament should give its content that Philip might be pub-
lickly crowned as the Queen's husband, met with such a cold
reception, that it was instantly withdrawn Y.

MEANWHILE, the King of France had observed the progress

of the Emperor's negociation in England with much uneasiness.
The great acceflion of territories as well as reputation which his

BooK XL

1SS+4.

The Englilh
jealous of
Philip.

The French
King alarmed
at the match
between Phi-
lip and Mary.

· Godwin's Annals of Q: Mary pp. Kennett. v. ii. p. 329. Burnet' hill. of
Refbr. ii. 298. 305.

Y Carte's hilt. of England, iii. 314.
VOL. II. - R r enemy

Boo XI. enemy would acquire by the marriage of his son with the

'54. Queen of such a powerful kingdom was obvious and formid-

able. He easily foresaw that the English, notwithstanding all
their fears and precautions, would be soon drawn in to take part
in the quarrels on the continent, and be compelled to ant in sub-
ferviency to the Emperor's ambitious schemes. For this reason,
Henry had given it in charge to his ambassador at the court
of London, to employ all his address in order to defeat or re-
tard the treaty of marriage; and as there was not, at that time,
any Prince of the blood in France, whom he could propose to
the Queen as a huiband, he infru&ed him to co-operate with
such of the English as wished their sovereign to marry one of
her own fubjeds. But the Queen's ardour and precipitation,
in cloing with the first overtures in favour of Philip, having
rendered all his endeavours ineffectual, Henry was so far from
thinking it prudent to give any aid to the English malecontents,
though earnestly follicited by Wyat and their other leaders,
who tempted him to take them under his protection, by offers
of great advantage to France, that he commanded his ambaffa-
dor to congratulate the Queen in the warmest terms upon the
suppression of the infurreeion.

His prepara- BUT, notwithstanding these external profefflons, he dreaded
ionsfora vi- so much the consequence of this alliance, which more than
gorous cam-
paign. compensated for all that the Emperor had loft in Germany, that

he determined to carry on his military operations both in the Low-
Countries, and in Italy, with extraordinary vigour, in order that
he might compel Charles to accept of an equitable peace, before
his daughter-in-law could surmount the aversion of her fubjeas
to a war on the continent, and prevail on them to assist the

Emperor
3o6

Emperor either with money or troops. For this purpose, he
exerted himself to .the utmost in order to have a numerous
army early assembled on the frontiers of the Netherlands, and
while one part of it laid waste the open country of Artois, the
main body, under the Conflable Montmorency, advanced towards
the provinces of Liege and Hainaut by the forest of Ardennes.

THE campaign was opened with the siege of Mariemburgh,

a town which the Queen of Hungary, the governeds of the
Low-Countries, had fortified at great expence; but, being
destitute of a sufficient garrison, it surrendered in fix days.
Henry, elated with this success, put himself at the head of his
army, and investing Bouvines, took it by aflault, after a short
refinance. With equal facility he became master of Dinant; and
then turning to the left bent his march towards the province of
Artois. The vast fums which the Emperor had remitted into
England had so exhausted his treasury, as to render his prepara-
tions at thisjundure, flower and more dilatory than usual. He had
no body of troops to make head against the French at their first
entrance into his territories; and though he drew together all
the forces in the country, in the utmost hurry, and gave the
command of them to Emanuel Philibert of Savoy, they were in
no condition to face an enemy so far superior in number. The
Prince of Savoy, however, by his activity and good conduct,
made up for his want of troops. By watching all the motions of
the French at a diliancc, and by chufing his own posts with frcih
{kill as put it out of their power either to form any siege of
consequence or to attack hlim, he obliged them to fall back for
waint of lubfillcncc towards their own fiontiers, after having burnt
all the open towns, and having plundered the country through

It r z which

.BOOK Xr.

1554.
' , _*

*5S4-

The progress
of his aims.

June 2z.

The Emperor
little able to
obfirud it.

307

Booh X. which they marched with a cruelty and licence more becom-

?n g a body of light troops than a royal army led by a great
monarch.

The French BUT Henry, that he might not dismiss his army without at-
iveft Renti. tempting some conquest adequate to the vail preparations, as

well as sanguine hopes with which he had opened the campaign,
invested Renti, a place deemed in that age of great importance,
as, by its situation on the confines of Artois and the Bpulonnais,
it covered the former province, and protected the parties which
made incursions into the latter. The town, which was strongly
fortified and provided with a numerous garrison, made a gal-
lant defence; but being warmly pressed by a powerful army,
it mufl foonr have yielded. The Emperor, who at that time
enjoyed a short interval of ease from the gout, was so follicitous
to save it, that, although he could bear no other motion but
that of a litter, he instantly put himself at the head of his
army, which having received several reinforcements was now
strong enough to approach the enemy. The French were eager
to decide by a battle, what should be the fate of Renti, and ex-
peded it from the Emperor's arrival in his camp; but Charles
avoided it with great industry, and as he had nothing in view
but to save the town, he hoped to accomplish that without ex-
posing himself to the consequences of such a dangerous and
doubtful event.

An ation be- NOTWITHSTANDING all his precautions, a difputc, about a
taen the two pof which both armies endeavoured to seize, brought on an
armies.
Aug. 3. engagement which proved almost general. The Duke of Guifc,

who commanded the wing of the French which flood the

brunt

309

brunt of the combat, displayed valour and conduct worthy of BOOKX. X
the defender of Metz; the Imperialists after an obstinate ,'sr'
struggle were repulsed; the French remained masters of the
post in dispute, and if the Constable, either from his natural
caution and slowness, or from unwillingness to support a rival
whom he hated, had not delayed bringing up the main body to
second the impression which Guise had made, the rout of the
enemy must have been complete.- The Emperor, notwithftand-
ing the loft which he had sustained, continued in the fame camp;
and the French, being straitened for provisions, and finding it
impossible to carry on the siege in the face of an hostile army,
quitted their intrenchments. They retired openly, courting thy
enemy to approach, rather than shunning an engagement.

BUT Charles, having gained his end, suffered them to march The imperia,

lifts invade

off unmolested. As soon as his troops entered their own Picardy.
country, Henry threw garifons into the frontier towns, and
dismissed the reft of the army. This encouraged the Imperia-
liss to puih forward with a considerable body of troops into
Picardy, and by laying waste the country with fire and sword,
they endeavoured to revenge themselves for the ravages which
the French had committed in Hainault and Artois I. But as they
were not able to reduce any place of importance, they gained
nothing more than the enemy had done by this cruel and inglo-
rious method of carrying on the war.

MEANWHILE, the arms of France were still more unsuccess- Aftairs of

ful in Italy. The footing which the French had acquired in Siena Italy.
occasioned much uneasiness to Cosmo di Medici the molt saga-

X Thuan. 460, &c. IIarxci Ann. Brab. 674.

cous

BooK XI. cious and enterprizing of all the Italian Princes. He dreaded
e, ~ the neighbourhood of a powerful people, to whom all who

favoured the ancient republican government in Florence would
have recourse, as to their natural prote&ors against that abfo-
lute authority which the Emperor had enabled him to usurp;
he knew how odious he was to the French, on account of his

Cotmodi Me. attachment to the Imperial party; and he foresaw that if they
dici's shemes
with regard to were permitted to gather strength in Siena, Tuscany would soon
"ier'a. feel the effects of their resentment. For these reasons, he wish-

ed with the utmost follicitude for the expulsion of the French
out of the Sienefe, before they had time to establish them-
selves thoroughly in the country, or to receive such reinforce-
ments from France as wculd render it dangerous to attack
them. As this, however, was properly the Emperor's business,
who was called by his interest as well as honour to dislodge these
formidable intruders into the heart of his dominions, Cosmo
laboured to throw the whole burden of the enterprize on him;
and on that account had given no affiflance, during the former
campaign, but by advancing tome small fumsn of money towards
the payment of the Imperial troops.

IHe neo(ciites BUT as tile defence of the Netherlands engrossed all the Em-
with the Lri-
peror. peror's attention, ain his remittances into England had

drained his treasury, it was obvious that his operations in Italy
would be extremely feccble; and Cofino plainly perceived that if
he hirnlclf did not take part openly in the war, and ad with
vigour, the French would Icarce meet with any annoyance. As
his fituation.rcendered this refollltion necessary and unavoidable,
his next care was to execute it in fiuch a manner, that he might
derive from it some other advantage, belile that of driving the

2 ;French

French out of his neighbourhood. With this view, he dispatched an Boo K XL
envoy to Charles, and offered to declare war againfi France, and ' ss-'
to reduce Siena at his own charges, on condition that he should
be repaid whatever he ihould expend in the enterprize, and be
permitted to retain all his conquefis until his demands were
fully satisfied. Charles to whom, at this junture, the war
against Siena was an intolerable burden, and who had neither
expedient nor resource that could enable him to carry it on with
proper vigour, closed gladly with this overture; and Cosmo;
well acquainted with the low state of the Imperial finances,
flattered himself that the Emperor finding it impossible to ro.
imburfe him, would susser him to keep quiet possession of what-
ever places he should conquer a.

FULL of there hopes, he made great preparations for war, and Enters into

as the French King had turned the strength of his arms againift Far ncth
the Netherlands, he did not despair of assembling such a body
of men as would prove more than a sufficient match for any force
which he could bring into the field in Italy. He endeavoured to
obtain assistance from the Pope, or at least to secure his remain-
ing neutral, by giving one of his daughters to that Pontiff's
nephew. He attempted to detach the Duke of Orsini, whose
family had been long attached to the French party, from his
ancient confederates, by beflowing on him another of his daugh-
ters; and what was of greater consequence than either of these, Gives the
he engaged John James Medecino, Marquis of Marignano, to cornmin(nd of
take the command of his army b. This officer, from a very lohw iv icin,

* Adriani Iforia dc fuoi tempi, vol. i. 662.
b Adriani Iftoria, vol. i. p. 663.

Z ;o: s tior

BOOK XI.

J55s.

Peter Strozzi
,entrultcd with
the command
of the 1 icnch
armny il Italy.

condition in life, had raised himself, through all the ranks of
fcrvice, to high command, and had displayed talents and ac-
quired reputation in war, which entitled him to be placed on a
level with the greatest generals of that martial age. Having
attained a fiation of eminence so disproportionate to his birth,
he laboured with a fond follicitude to conceal his original obfcu-
rity, by giving out that he was descended of the family of Me-
dici, to which honour the casual resemblance of his name was
his only pretension Cosmo, happy that he could gratify him
at such an easy rate, flattered his vanity in this point, acknow-
ledged him as a relation, and permitted him to assume the arms
of his family: Medecino, eager to serve the head of that family
of which he now confidered himself as a branch, applied with
wonderful zeal and assiduity to raise troops; and as during his
long service, he had acquired great credit with the leaders of
those mercenary bands which formed the strength of Italian
armies, he engaged the most eminent of them to follow Cosmo's
standard.

To oppose this able general, and the formidable army which

he had assembled, the King of France made choice o 'Peter
Strozzi, a Florentine nobleman, who had resided long in France,
as an exile, andwho had risen by his merit tohigh reputation and
command inr the army. He was the son of Philip Strozzi, who,
in the year one thousand five hundred and thirty-feven, had con-
curred with such ardour in the attempt to expel the family of
Medici out of Florence, and to re-establish the ancient republi-
can form of government;. and. who had perished in the under-
taking. The son inherited the implacable avcrfion to the Mc-
dici, as wcll as the fame enthuliafick zeal for the liberty of Flo-
rence which had animated his father, whose death he was impa-

tient

tient to revenge. Henry flattered himself that his army would BooK XL
make rapid progress under a general whose zeal o promote his '-"
intereftwas roused and seconded by such powerful passions; efpe-
cially as he had allotted him, for the scene of action, his native
country, in which he had many powerful partizans ready to
facilitate all his operations.

BUT how specious soever the motives might appear which The impru-

dence of this

induced Henry to make this choice, it proved fatal to the interefis choice.
of France in Italy. Cosmo, as soon as he heard that the mortal
enemy of his family was appointed to take the command in
Tuscany, concluded that the King of France aimed at some-
thing more than the protection of the Sienefe, and saw the
necefity of making extraordinary efforts, not merely to reduce
Siena, but to save himself from deftrudion . At the fame
time, the Cardinal of Ferrara, who had the entire direction of
the French affairs in Italy, confidered Strozzi as a formidable
rival in power, and in order to prevent him from acquiring any
increase of authority from success, he was extremely remiss in
supplying him either with money to pay his troops, or with
provisions to support them. Strozzi himself, blinded by his
resentment against the Medici, pushed on his operations with the
impetuosity of revenge, rather than with the caution and pru-
dence becoming a great general.

AT fifrt, however, he attacked fevcral towns in the territories The batt'c rs

of Florence with such vigour as obliged Mcdccino, in order to aalo
check his progress, to withdraw the greater part of his army
from Siena, which he had inveted before Strozzi's arrival in Italy.

c Pccci Mcinoric di Sicna, vol. iv. p. 103, &c.
VOL. III. S f

3t3

Boot XI. As Cosmo fuflained the whole burden of military operations,

the expence of which must soon have exhausted his revenues; as
neither theviceroyof Naples nor governor of Milan were in con-
dition to afford him any effecual aid; and as the troops which
Medecino had left in the camp before Siena could attempt nothing
against it during his absence; it was Strozzi's business to have
protraaed the war, and to have transferred the feat of it into the
territories of Florence; but the hope of ruining his enemy by
one decisive blow, precipitated him into a general engagement
Aug. 3. not far from Marciano. The armies were nearly equal in num-

ber; but a body of Italian cavalry in which Strozzi placed great

which the confidence, having fled either through the treachery or cowar-
French are dice of the officers who commanded it, without making any

defeated refitance, the infantry remained exposed to the attacks of all

Mcdecino's troops. Encouraged, however, by Strozzi's pre--
fence and example, who after receiving a dangerous wound
in endeavouring to rally the cavalry, placed himself at the:
head of the infantry, and manifested an admirable presence
of mind, as well as extraordinary valour, they stood their ground:
with great firmness, and repulsed such of the enemy as ventured
to approach them. But there gallant troops being Surrounded at
last on every fide, and torn in pieces by a battery of cannon
which Medecino brought to bear upon them, the Florentine
cavalry broke in on their flanks, and a general rout ensued.
Strozzi, faint with the loss of blood, and deeply affected
with the fatal confcqucnces of his own rashness, found the
utmost difficulty in making his cfcape with a handful of men c.

1 Pccci Memorie dclla Siena, vol. iv. p. 157.

MEDECIN0
314

MEDECINO returned immediately to the siege of Siena with

his vicorious troops, and as Strozzi could not, after the utmost
efforts of acivity, colle& as many men as to form the appear-
ance of a regular army, he had leisure to carry on his approaches
against the town without molestation. But the Sienefe, inflead
of finking into despair upon this cruel disappointment of their
only hope of obtaining relief, prepared to defend themselves to
the utmost extremity, with that undaunted fortitude, which the
love of liberty alone can inspire. This generous resolution
was warmly seconded by Monluc, who commanded the French
garrison in the town. The active and enterprizing courage
which he had displayed on many occasions had procured him
this command; and as he had ambition which aspired at the
highest military dignities, without any pretensions to attain them
but what he could derive from merit, he determined to diftin-
guifh his defence of Siena by extraordinary efforts of valour
and perseverance. For this purpose, he, with unwearied industry,
repaired and strengthened the fortifications; he trained the citi-
zens to the use of arms, and accustomed them to go through the
fatigues and dangers of service in common with the soldiers;
and as the enemy were extremely ftrid in guarding all the
avenues to the city, he husbanded the provisions in the maga-
zines with the most parfimonjous oconomy, and prevailed on
the soldiers as well as the citizens to reftrit themselves to a very
moderate daily allowance for their fubfifltncc. Medecino,
though his army was not numerous enough to florm the town
by open force, ventured twice to assault it by lurprize, but he
was received each time with so much spirit, and repulscd with
filch loss, as discouraged him from repeating the attempt, and
left him no hopes of reducing the town but by famine.

tooK X.

1554.

Medicino be-
sieges Siena,

which is gal-
lantly de-
fended by
the citizens
and Monlac.
WITH

r315
Ss 2

Bo3K XI. WITH this view, he fortified his own camp with great care,

15L4. 4 occupied all the pofis of firength round the place, and having

Medicino entirely cut off the besieged from any communication with the
converts the
siege into a adjacent country, he waited patiently until necessity should com-
blockade.

pel them to open their gates. But the enthufiaftick zeal of the
citizens for liberty, made them despise the inconveniencies
occasioned by scarcity of provisions, and even supported them
long under all the miseries of famine; Monluc by his example
and exhortations taught his soldiers to vie with them in patience
and abstinence; and it was not until they had withstood a siege
of ten months, until they had eaten up all the horses, dogs, and
other animals in the place, and were reduced almost to their lafl
,1555. morsel of bread, that they proposed a capitulation. Even then they

demanded honourable terms; and as Cosmo, though no stranger
to the extremity of their condition, was afraid that despair
might prompt them to venture upon some wild enterprize, he
immediately granted them conditions more favourable than
they could have expectcd.

April 22.
'1 he town
obligedl by
lamine to (a.
}'itulate.

THE capitulation was made in the Emperor's name, wlio en-

gaged to take the republick of Siena under the protecion of
the Empire; he promised to maintain the ancient liberties of
the city, to allow the magistrates the full exercise of their
former authority, to ficure the citizens in the undisturbed
possession of their privileges and property; he granted an ample
and unlimited pardon to all who had born arms against him;
he reserved to himself the right of placing a garrison in the
town, but engaged not to rebuild the citadel without the con-
sent of the citizens. Monluc and his French garrison were
allowed to march out with all the honours of war.

ME DECINO

MEDECINO observed the articles of capitulation, so far as' de-

pended on him, with great exadnefs. No violence or insult
whatever was offered to the inhabitants, and the French garri-
son was received with all the refpe& due to their spirit and
bravery. But many of the citizens fufpeding from the extra-
ordinary facility with which they had obtained such favourable
conditions, that the Emperor, as well as Cosmo, would take the
first opportunity of violating them, and disdaining to possess a
precarious liberty, which depended on the will of another,
abandoned the place of their nativity, and accompanied the
French to Monte-Alcino, 'Porto Ercole, and other finall towns in
the territory of the republic. They eltablifhed in Monte-Alcino
the fame model of government to which they had been accuf-
tomed at Siena, and appointing magifirates with the fame
titles and jurifdition, solaced themselves with this image of
their ancient liberty.

THE fears of the Sienefe concerning the fate of their coun-

try were not imaginary, or their suspicion of the Emperor and
Cosmo ill-founded; for no sooner had the Imperial troops taken
pofeflion of the town, than Coino, without regarding the ar-
ticles of capitulation, not only displaced the magiflrates who
were in office, and nominated new ones devoted to his interest,
but commanded all the citizens to deliver up their arms to per-
fins whom he appointed to reccivc them. They ffibmitted to
the former from neccffity, though with all the rcluctance and
regret which men accuflomed to liberty feel in obeying the
firfl commnands of a mailer. They (lid not yield the finme
tame obedience to the latter; and many pcrtbns of diflindion,
rather than degrade thcmfelves, by furreudering their arms,,

.1- froml

Boo:R XI.

1555.

Many of the
Sienefe retire
to Monte-
Alcino,

and eftablilh a
free govern-
ment there.

Htardships to
which the
citizens of
Siena were
fubjeAed.

317

BooK XI. from the rank of freemen to the condition of slaves, fled to
-s ..-- their countrymen at Monte-Alcino, and chore to endure all

the hardships, and encounter all the dangers which they had
reason to expect in that new station, where they had fixed the
feat of their republick.

Cofmoat- CosMo, not reckoning himself secure while such numbers of
tacks those implacable and desperate enemies were fettled in his neighbour-
who had re-
tired. hood, and retained any degree of power, follicited Medecino to

attack them in their different places of retreat, before they had
time to recruit their strength and spirits, after the many calami-
ties which they had suffered. He prevailed on him, though his
army was much weakened by hard duty during the siege of
Siena, to invest Porto Ercole; and the fortifications being both
flight and incompleat, the besieged were soon compelled to open
June 13. their gates. An unexpected order which Medecino received

from the Emperor to detach the greater part of his troops into
Piedmont, prevented farther operations, and permitted the
Sienefe exiles to reside for some time undisturbed in Monte-
Alcino. But their unhappy countrymen who remained at
Siena, were not yet at the end of their sufferings; for the Em-
peror inftcad of adhering to the articles of capitulation, granted
his son Philip the inveftiturc of that city and all its dependen-
cies; and Francis de Toledo, in the name of their new matter,
proceeded to fettle the civil and military government, treated
them like a conquered people, and fubjeced them to the Spa-
nifh yoke, without paying any regard whatever to their privi-
leges or cflablilhed forms of policy ".

c Sleid. 617. Thuan. lib. xv. 526. 537. Joan. Camerarii adnot. rcr. pre-

cipuarum ab anno 155o ad 1561 ap Frchcrum, vol. iii. p. 564. Pccci Mcm-
morie dell a Sicna, iv. 164, &c.

9 Tir:
3i8

3Io

THE Imperial army in Piedmont had been so feeble, for BooK XI.

some time, and its commanders so inative that the Emperor,
in order to give vigor to his operations in that quarter, found Operations in

Piedmont.

it neceflary not only to call off Medecino's troops from Tuf-
eany while in the career of conquest, but to employ in Pied-
mont a general of such reputation and abilities, as might
counterbalance the great military talents of the Marechal
Briffac, who was at the head of the French forces in that
country.

HE pitched on the Duke of Alva for that purpose; but Charles ap.

it was as much the effect of a court intrigue, as of his opinion Duke ofAlva
of the Duke's merit, which led him to this choice. Alva gheneraliffun
had long attended Philip with the utmost- assiduity, and had
endeavoured to work himself into his confidence by all the in-
finuating arts of which his haughty and inflexible nature was
capable. As he nearly resembled that Prince in many features
of his character, he began to gain much of his good-will. Ruy
Gomez de Silva, Philip's favourite, who dreaded the progress
which this formidable rival made in his malter's affections, had;
the address to prevail with tle Emperor to name Alva to this
command. The Duke, though sensible that he owed this diftinc-
tion to the malicious arts of an enemy, who had no other aim,
than to remove him at a difiancc from court, was of such punc-
tilious honour, that he would not decline a command that ap-
peared dangerous anl dificult, but, at the falne time, so
haughty that he would not acccpt of it but on his own terms,
intilting (on being appointed the lEmpror's Vicar General in
Italy, with the fuprlmc military colmmand in all the Imperial
and Spani'h territories in that country. Charles granted all his

demands ;.

BOOK XI. demands; and he tookpoffeffion of his new dignity with almost

xrsj7 unlimited authority.
1555.

slis opera.
ti-ns there
inconsider.
able.

A conrpiracy
to betray
Metz to the
lmperialift.

His first operations, however, were neither proportioned to

his former reputation and the extensive powers with which he
was invested, nor did they come up to the Emperor's expeda-
tions. Briffac had under his command an army which, though
inferior in number to the Imperialilts, was composed of chosen
troops, which having grown old in service in that country,
where every town was fortified, and every castle capable of
being defended, were perfectly acquainted with the manner of
carrying on war there. By their valour, and his own good con-
dua, Briffac not only defeated all the attempts of the Imperia-
lifts, but added new conquests to the territories of which he was
formerly master. Alva, after having 'boafled, with his usual
arrogance, that he would drive the French out of Piedmont in
a few weeks, was obliged to retire into winter quarters, with the
ignominy of being unable to preserve entire that part of the
country of which the Emperor had hitherto kept pofleffion '.

As the operations of this campaign in Piedmont were indeci-

five, those in the Netherlands were inconsiderable, neither the
Emperor nor King of France being able to bring into the field
an army firong enough to undertake any enterprize of moment.
But what Charles wanted in force, he endeavoured to supply by
a bold flratagem, the fuiccefs of which would have been equal to
that of the most vigorous campaign. During the siege of Metz,
Leonard Father Guardian of a convent of Franciscans in that
city had, by his attachment to the French interclt, insinuated

I Thuan. lib. xv. 529. Guichenon Hill. de Savoye, tom. i. 67o.

hinmfelf

himfelffar into the esteem and favour of the Duke of Guise. Be-
ing a man of an ative and intriguing spirit, he had been extremely
useful both in animating the inhabitants to sustain with patience
all the hardships of the siege, and in procuring intelligence of
the enemies designs and motions. The merit of these impor-
tant services, together with the warm recommendations of the
Duke of Guise, secured him such high confidence with Vielleville,
who was appointed governor of Metz, when Guise left the town,
that he was permitted to converse or correspond with whatever
persons he chose, and nothing that he did created any suspicion.
This monk, from the levity natural to bold and projeting ad-
venturers; or from resentment againfi the French, who had not
bestowed on him such rewards as he thought due to his own
merit; or tempted, by the unlimited confidence which was
placed in him, to imagine that he might carry on and accomplish
any scheme with perfect security; formed a design of betray-
ing Metz to the Imperialifis.

HE communicated his intention to the Queen-dowager of

Hungary, who governed the Low-Countries in name of her
brother. She approving, without any scruple, an at of trea-
chery, from which the Emperor might derive such signal ad-
vantage, aflifled the Father Guardian in concerting the most pro-
per plan for ensuring its success. They agreed that the Father
Guardian should endeavour to gain the monks of his convent to
concur in promoting the design; that he fliould introduce into
the convent a certain number of chosen foldicrs, disguised in the
habit of friars; that when every thing was ripe for execution,
the governor of Thionville should march towards Mctz in the
,night with a confiderablc body of troops, and attempt to

VOL. III. T t scale

BOOK Xr.

'S5S-
1555.

The plan of
it.

BooK XT. scale the ramparts; that while the garrison was employed in

3- --. refiting the aflailants, the monks should set fire to the town in
J555.

different places; that the soldiers who lay concealed should sally
out of the convent, and attack those who defended the ramparts
in the rear. Amidst the universal terror and confusion, which
events so unexpeted would occasion, it was not doubted but
that the Imperialifis might become mailers of the town. As a
recompence for this service the Father Guardian Stipulated that
he should be appointed bishop of Metz, and ample rewards were
promised to such of his monks as should be most adive in co-
operating with him.
Is progress. THE Father Guardian acconplifhed what he had undertaken,

to perform with great secrecy and dispatch. By his authority
and arguments, as well as by the profpec of wealth or ho-
nours which he set before his monks, he prevailed on all of
them to enter into the conspiracy. He introduced into the con--
vent, as many soldiers as were thought sufficient, without being
fufpe.ded. The governor of Thionville, apprised in due time
of the design, had assembled a proper number of troops for exe-
cuting it; and the moment approached, which probably would
have wrested from Henry the. most important of all his con-
quests.
Is difeovetrc. BUT happily for France, on the very day that was fixed for

firiking the blow, Vielleville, an able and vigilant officer, re-
ceived information from a spy whom he entertained at Thion-
ville, that certain Franciscan friars resortcd frequently thither, and
awerc admitted to many private confclrnccs with the govcrnor,who
was carrying on preparations for fonc military cntcrprize with

8 great
32»

great dispatch, but with a most mysterious secrecy. This was
sufficient to awaken Vielleville's suspicions. Without commu-
nicating there to any person, he instantly visited the convent of
Franciscans; deteted the soldiers who were concealed there;
and forced them to discover as much as they knew concerning
the nature of the enterprize. The Father Guardian, who had
gone to Thionville that he might put the last hand to his ma-
chinations, was seized at the gate as he returned; and he, in
order to save himself from the rack, revealed all the circum-
fiances of the conspiracy.

VIELLEVILLE not satisfied with having seized the traitors,

and having frustrated their schemes, was follicitous to take ad-
vantage of the discoveries which he had made, so as to be
revenged on the Imperialists. For this purpose he marched out
with the best troops in his garrison, and placing there in ambush
near the road, by which the Father Guardian had informed him.
that the governor of Thionville would approach Metz, he fell
upon the Imperialists with great fury, as they advanced in per-
fed security, without fufpeding any danger to be near. Con-
founded at this sudden attack, by an enemy whom they expct-
ed to furprize, they made little rcfitance; and a great part of
the troops employed in this service, among which were many
persons of diflinaion, was killed or taken prisoners. I3cfor*
next morning, Vielleville returned to Mctz in triumph.

No resolution was taken for some time concerning the fate of

the Father Guardian and his monks, tlhe framers and condutors
of this dangerous confpirac). Regard for the honour of a body
so numerous and rcfpccable as the Franciscans, and unwilling-

T t nest

BOOK XI.

.555.

A body of
Impcrialifta
defeated.

The cor. fplra
tors piunilhcd.

233

-BOOK XI.
i

ness to afford a subjea ofitriumph to the enemies of the Romifhi
church by their disgrace, seem to have occasioned this delay.
But at length, the necessity of inflicing exemplary punishment
upon them, in order to deter others from venturing to commit
the fame crime, became so evident, that orders were issued to
proceed to their trial. Their guilt was made apparent by the
clearest evidence; and sentence of death was passed upon the
Father Guardian together with twenty monks. On the even-
4ng previous to the day fixed for their execution, the jailor
took them out of the dungeons in which they had hitherto been
confined separately, and ihut them all up in one great room,
that they might confess their fins one to another, and join to-
gether in preparing for a future slate. But as soon as they were
left alone, inflead of employing themselves in the religious ex-
ercifes suitable to their condition, they began to reproach the
Father Guardian, and four of the senior monks who had been
most acive in seducing them, for their inordinate ambition,
which had brought such misery on them, and such disgrace
upon their order. From reproaches they proceeded to curses and
execrations, and at last, in a frenzy of rage and despair, they fell
upon them with filch violence, that they murdered the Father
Guardian on the spot, and so disabled the other four, that it
became necelfary to carry thein next morning in a cart, together
with the dead body of the Father Guardian to the place of exe-
cution. Six of the youngest were pardoned, the reft suffered
the lpuniflmcnt which their crime mcrited 6.

g Tlhuianlb. x. v. p. 522. Bclcar. Cor. Rer. Gal. 866. Mlemoircs dii
MalcIh. Vicllcvi'lc, par M. Cliatloix, tom. iii. p. 219, &c. p. 347. Par. 1757.

Tiiou, l·(.
324

THOUGH both parties, exhausted by the length of the war, BooKc X:

carried it on in this languishing manner, neither of them lhewed ,-55
any disposition to lifen to overtures of peace. Cardinal Pole As uitlefsne-

gociation in

indeed laboured with all the zeal becoming his piety and huma- order to ela-
nity, to re-establish concord among the Princes of Christendom. bl'h peac.
He had not only persuaded his mistress, the Queen'of Englando
to enter warmly into his sentiments and to offer her mediation.
to the contending powers, but had prevailed both on the Em-
peror and King of France to fend their- plenipotentiaries to at
village between Gravelines- and Ardres. He. himself, together
with Gardiner bishop of Winchester repaired thither in order to-
preside as mediators in the conferences, which were to be held.
for adjusting all the points in difference. But though both the
monarchs committed this negociation to those ministers, in whom-
they placed the greatet confidence, it was soon evident that they
came together with no sincere desire of accommodation. Each May 21z.
proposed articles so extravagant that they could have no hopes
of their being accepted. Pole, after exerting, in vain, all his
zeal; address and invention, in order to persuade them to re-
linguifh such extravagant demands, and to content to the sub-
flitution of more equal conditions became sensible of the folly
of wafting time, in attempting to reconcile those, whom their
obflinacy rendered irreconcileable, broke off the conferencc, anli.
returned into England \.

DI RI NC tlice tranfacdionsin other parts of Europe, CGnma ny .d-,; .of

enjoyed fiuch profound tranquillity, as affordcd the diet full lci- (i'CIII-"Y-
sure to dcliberate, all to clI:blifn proper regulatiols concerltingi a.

', T'huan. lib. xv. p. 523. Mm. dcm. RibiLr, tor. ii p. 613.

ioiut :

:BOK XL

-1 55.

Dietlield at
Aulfbi rg,
.and Ferdi-
nand's speech
in it.

point of the greatest consequence to the internal peace of the
Empire. By the treaty of Paffau in one thousand five hundred
and fifty-two, it had been referred to the next diet of the Em-
pire to confirm and perfec the plan of religious pacificationr
which was there agreed upon. The terror and confusion with
which the violent commotions excited by Albert of Branden-
burgh had filled the Empire, as well as the conflant attention
which Ferdinand was obliged to give to the affairs of Hungary,
had hitherto prevented the holding a diet, though it had been
summoned, soon after the conclusion of the treaty, to meet at
Augiburg.

BUT as a diet was now necessary on many accounts, Ferdi.

nand about the beginning of this year had repaired to Augsburg.
Though few of the Princes were present either in person or by
their deputies, he opened the assembly by a speech, in which he
proposed the termination of the dissentions, to which the new
tenets and controversies with regard to religion had given rife, not
only as the first and great business of the diet, but as the point which
both the Emperor and he had most at heart. He represented the
innumerable obstacles which the Emperor had to surmount be-
fore he could procure the convocation of a general council, as well
as the fatal accidents which had for sometime retarded, and had
at last suspended the consultations of that assembly. He observed
that experience had already taught them how vain it was to
cxpec any remedy for evils, which demanded immediate re-
dress, from a general council, the assembling of which would
cither be prevented, or its deliberations be interrupted by the
di:lcntions and hostilities of the Princes of Christendom; That
.a national council in Germany, which, as some imagined, might

be
33<6

be called with greater ease, and deliberate with more perfeA
security, was an assembly of an unprecedented nature, the jurif-
dition of which was uncertain in its extent, and the form of its
proceedings undefined; That in his opinion there remained but
one method for composing their unhappy differences, which
though it had been often tried without success, might yet prove-
effecual if it were attempted with a better and more pacific
spirit than had appeared on former occasions, and that was to
chufe a few men of learning, abilities and moderation, who by
difcufling the disputed articles in an amicable conference, might
explain them in such a manner as to bring the contending parties.
either to unite in Sentiment, or to differ with charity.

THIS speech being printed in common form, and dispersed

over the Empire, revived the fears and jealousies of the Prote-
sants; Ferdinand, they observed with much furprize, had not
once mentioned, in his address to the diet, the treaty of Pafiau,
the stipulations in which they confidered as the great security of
their religious liberty. The suspicions to which this gave
rife were confirmed by the accounts which theydaily received of
the extreme rigor with which Ferdinand treated.their Protestant
brethren in his hereditary dominions, and as it was natural to
tonfider his ations as the furefl indication of his intentions,
this diminished their confidence in those pompous professions of
moderation or of zeal for the re-establishment of concord, to,
which his pratice was so utterly repugnant.

BOOK X[.

15-5.

Surpicionr
and fears o.:-
the Prote-
slants..

TI E arrival of the Cardinal Morone, wiom the Pope had' Thereincre: -
appointed to attend the diet as his nuncio, compleated their con- cfl 1)v th ,r-

rival of a
vidion, and left them no room to doubt that some dangerous ,tincio toin

the Pope to
machination.was forming againfl the peace or safety of the Pro- ti dict.

teflant

.32_7-

:BooK XL.

1555.

The death of
Julius 11I.

teftant church. Julius elated with the unexpeaed return of
the English nation from apoftacy, began to flatter himself that
the spirit of mutiny and revolt having now spent its force the
happy period was come when the church' might resume its an-
cient authority, and be obeyed by the people with the fame
,tame fubmiffioaas formerly. Full of these hopes, he had sent
Morone to Augsburg with infhru&ions to employ his elo-
xquence in order to excite the Germans to imitate the laudable
example of the English, and his political address in order to
prevent any decree of the diet to the detriment of the catholick
faith. As Morone inherited from his father, the chancellor of
Milan, uncommon talents for negociation and intrigue; he could
scarce have failed of embarrassing the measures of the Prote-
slants in the diet or of defeating whatever they aimed at obtain-
ing in it for their farther security.

BUT an unforeseen event delivered them from all the danger

which they had reason to apprehend from Morone's presence.
Julius, by abandoning himself to pleasures and amusements
no less unbecoming his age than his charater, having con-
traaed iuch habits of dissipation, that any serious occupation,
cfpecially if attended with difficulty, became an intolerable
burden to him, had long refifed the follicitations of his nephew
to hold a confifory, because he expected there a violent oppofi-
lion to his fchcmes in favour of that young man. But when all
the pretexts which he could invent for eluding his request were
cxhauftcd, and at the fame time his indolent aversion to business
continucd to grow upon him, he feigned indisposition rather
thlan yield to his nephew's importunity; and that he might give
the deceit a grcater colour of probability, he not only confined

himnfclf'

himself to his apartment, but changed his usual diet and man- BooK XI.
ner of life. By persisting too long in acting this ridiculous -;
part, he contracted a real disease, of which he died in a few
days, leaving his infamous minion the Cardinal de Monte to March 23.
bear his name, and to disgrace the dignity which he had con-
ferred upon him'. As soon as Morone heard of his death, he set The nuncio

sets out for

out abruptly from Augiburg, where he had resided only a few Rome.
days, that he might be present at the elecion of a new Pontiff.

ONE cause of their suspicions and fears being thus removed, the Ferdinand'a

reasons for

Protestants soon became sensible that their conjetures concerning wiafling to
Ferdinand's intentions, how plausible soever, were ill-founded, satisfy the

Proteltants.

and that he had no thoughts of violating the articles favourable
to them in the treaty of Paffau. Charles, from the time that
Maurice had defeated all his schemes in the Empire, and over-
turned the great system of religious and civil despotism, which
he had almost established there, gave little attention to the in-
ternal government of Germany, and permitted his brother to
pursue whatever measures he judged moRs falutaryand expedient.
Ferdinand, less ambitious and enterprizing than the Emperor,
intfead of resuming a plan, which he, with power and resources
so far superior, had failed of accomplishing, endeavoured to
attach the Princes of the Empire to his family by an admini-
firation uniformly moderate and equitable. To this he gave,
at present, particular attention, because his situation at this
junaure rendered it necessary to court their favour and support
with more than usual assiduity.

l Onuphr. Panvinius de vitis Pontificum. p. 320. Thuan. lib. xv. 5 7.

CHIARLES

329
VOL. III.

U u

Eoox XL

'555-

Charles had
resumed his
plan of alter-
Ig the scc-

flicon to the

/nbpirc.

The Turks
were ready ta
invade Hun.
gary.

He is alarmed
at some llcps
taken by the
't otcllants.

CHARLES had again resumed his favourite project of acquir&

ing the Imperial crown for his fort Philip, which the ill receptior
it had met with when first proposed had obliged him to inter-
mit, but had not persuaded him to relinquish. This led him
warmly to renew his requests to his brother that he would ac-
cept of some compensation for his prior right of succession, and
sacrifice that to the grandeur of the house of Austria. Ferdinand
who was as little disposed, as formerly, to-give such an extraor-
dinary proof of felf-denial, being sensible that, in order to de-
feat this scheme, not only the most inflexible firmness on- his
part, but a vigorous declaration from the Princes of the Empire
in behalf of his title, were requisite ; was willing to purchase
their favour by gratifying them in every point that they deemed
interesting or essential-

ON the other hand, the Turks, after having-wreitedfrom hint

great part of his Hungarian territories, were ready to attack, the
provinces fiill subject to his authority with a formidable army,
against which he could bring no equal force into the field, unless
the diet should grant him immediate and. extraordinary aid;
Ior this he could not hope if the internal peace of the Empire
were not eftabliihcd on a foundation solid in itself, and which
should appear, even to the Protefcants, so secure and so perma-
nent, as might not only allow them to.engage in a ditfant war
with safety, but encourage them to act with vigour.

A sT F.P taken by the Proteflants themselves, a short time after

the opening of the diet, rendered him still more cautious of giving
them any new cause of offence. As soon as the publication of Fcr-
dinadtl's fpccch created the fears and suspicions which have been,

mcntioned,
330

mentioned, the Ele&ors of Saxony and Brandenburgh, together
with the Landgrave of Hefle, met at Naumburgh, and renewing
the ancient treaty of confraternity which had long united
their families, they added to it a new article, by which the
contracting parties bound themselves to adhere to the confeflion
of Augsburg, and to maintain the dotrine which it contained in
their refpetive dominions k.

FERDINAND, influenced by all these considerations, employ-

ed his utmost address in conducting the deliberations of the diet
£o as not to excite the jealousy of a party on whose friendship
he depended, and whose enmity, as they had not only taken the
alarm, but had begun to prepare for their defence, he had so
much reason to dread. The members of the diet readily agreed
to Ferdinand's proposal of taking the state of religion into con-
fideration, previous to any other business. But, as soon as they
entered upon it, both parties discovered all the zeal and ani-
mofity which a subjea so interesting naturally engenders, and
which the rancour of controversy, together with the violence of
civil war, had inflamed to the highest pitch.

THE Proteflants contended that the security which they

claimed in consequence of the treaty of Paffau Ihould extend,
without limitation, to all who had hitherto embraced the doc-
trine of Luther, or who should hereafter embrace it. The
Catholics, having first of all afitrted the Pope's right as the
supreme and final judge with rcfpeea to all articles of faith, in-
sised that the toleration granted, by the treaty of Paflau, to

kChytrai Saxonia, 480.

U u 2 fu

BOOK XL

155S.

Ferdinand
zealous to
promote an
accom moda-
tion.

The preten.
lions of the
Catholicks
and'Prote-
slants.

331

BOOK XI.

1555.

Sert. 25.
The peace of
rel gion efla.
Linified.

such as had adopted the new opinions; which, on account
of the present situation of the Empire, and for the fake of
peace, they were willing to confirm; should not be extended
either to those cities which had conformed to the Interim, or to
such ecclesiastics as should for the future apostatize from the
church of Rome. It was no easy matter to reconcile such oppo-
site pretensions, Wvhich were supported, on each fide, by the
most elaborate arguments, and the greatelt acrimony of expref-
sion, that the abilities or zeal of theologians long exercised in
disputation could suggest. Ferdinand, however, by his address
and perseverance; by foftcning some things on each fide; by
putting a favourable meaning upon others; by representing in-
ceffantly the necessity as well as the advantages of concord;
and by threatening on some occasions, when all other confidera-
tions were disregarded, to dissolve the diet, brought them at
length to a conclusion in which they all agreed.

CONFORMABLY to this a recess was framed, approved of,

and published with the usual formalities. The following are
the chief articles which it contained, That such Princes and
cities as have declared their approbation of the Confession of
Augsburg, shall be permitted to profcfs the doctrine and
exercifc the worship which it authorii's without interruption or
molestation from the Emperor, the King of the Romans, or
any power or person whatsoever; That the Protestants on their
part, hlall give no dif(quict to the Princes and States who ad-
here to the tenets and rites of the Church of Rome; That, for
the future, no attempt shall be made towards terminating
religious differences, but by the gentle and pacillck metlods of
pcrfuafion and conference; That the Plopilh ccclclianlics shall

clainl
332

claim no spiritual jurifdidion in such flates as receive-the Con-
session of Augsburg; That such as had seized the benefices or
revenues of the church, previous to the treaty of Paffau, shall
retain possession of them, and be liable to no prosecution in the
Imperial chamber on that account; That the supreme civil
power in every slate shall have right to establish what form of
doctrine and worship it fiall deem proper, and if any of its
fubjeEts refuse to conform to these, ihall permit them to remove
with all their effects wherever they please; That if any prelate
or ecclesiastic shall hereafter abandon the Romish religion, he
shall instantly relinquish his diocese or benefice, and it shall be
lawful for those in whom the right of nomination is vefled, to
proceed immediately to an election, as if the office were vacant
by death or translation, and to appoint a successor of undoubtedl;
attachment to the ancient system '.

SucHI are the capital articles in this famous Recess, which is

the basis of religious peace in Germany, and the bond of union
among its various flates, the sentiments of which are so extremely
different with refpea to points the most intcrefting and impor-
tant. In our age and nation, to which the idea of foleration is
familiar, and its beneficial effects well known, it may seem
strange that a method of terminating their difflntions, so suit-
able to the mild and charitable spirit of the Christian religion,
did not sooner occur to the contending parties. But an expe-
dient, which, how salutary focvcr it mighlt be, was repugnalt
to the fcntiInents and praQice of Clriflians during many ages,
did not lie obvious to (lilcovery. Among the ancient heathens,
all wholi deities were local and tutelary, divcrsity of fentinent

BOOK XI.

Reflefton3 nn
the progress
of the prin-
ciples of tul-
ration.

' SliJ. .
620 . Paul, 368. Palla. P. ii. 161.

couccrning

333
0

BOOK XI.

155.
xss5·

THE REIGN OF THE

concerning the objec or rites of religious worihip seems to have
been no source of animosity, because the acknowledging vene-
ration to be due to any one God, did not imply denial of the
exiRfence or the power of any other God; nor were the modes
and rites ofworfhip eftabliflhed in one country incompatible with
those which other nations approved of and observed. Thus the
errors in their fyflem of theology were of such a nature as to be
productive of concord, and notwithstanding the amazing number
of their deities, as well as the infinite variety of their ceremonies,
a sociable and tolerating spirit subsisted almost universally in
the pagan world.

BvUT when the Chriffian revelation declared one Supreme

Being to be the sole object of religious veneration, prescribed the
form of worship most acceptable to him, whoever admitted the
truth it held, of consequence, every other mode of religion to be
absurd and impious. Hence the zeal of the firfl converts to the
Christian faith in propagating its dotrines, and the ardour with
which they laboured to overturn every other form of worship.
They employed, however, for this purpose no methods but such
as suited the nature of religion. By the force of powerful argu-
ments, they convinced the understandings of men; by the
charms of superior virtue, they allured and captivated their
hearts. At length the civil power declared in favour of Chri-
ftianity, and though numbers, imitating the example of their
fuiperiors, crouded into the church, many still adhered to their
ancient superstitions. Enraged at their obffinacy, the ministers
of religion, whose zeal was still unabated, though their fandity
and virtue were much diminished, forgot so far the nature of
their own miffton, and of the arguments which they ought to

have

have employed, that they armed the Imperial power againfi these BOOK XTL
unhappy men, and as they could not persuade, they tried to 5
compel them to believe.

AT the fame time, controversies concerning articles of faith

multiplied, from various causes, among Christians themselves,
and the fame unhallowed weapons which had first been used
against the enemies of their religion, were turned against each
other. Every zealous disputant endeavoured to interest the
civil magistrate in his cause, and each in his turn employed the
secular arm to crush or to exterminate his opponents. Not long
after, the bishops of Rome put in their claim to infallibility iri
explaining articles of faith, and deciding points in contro-
verfy, and bold as the pretension was, they, by their artifices
and perseverance, imposed on the credulity of mankind, and
brought them to recognize it. To doubt or to deny any doc-
trine to which these unerring inftru&ors had given the fan&ion
of their approbation, was held to be not only a resisting of truth,
but an a& of rebellion against their sacred authority; and the
secular power, of which by various arts they had acquired the
absolute diretion, was instantly employed to avenge both.

THUS Europe had been accustomed, during many centuries,

to fee speculative opinions propagated or defended by force; the
charity and mutual forbearance which Chriflianity recommnenda
with so much warmth were forgotten, the sacred rights of con-
science and of private judgment were unheard of, and not only
the idea of toleration, but even the word itself, in the sense now
affixed to it, was unknown. A right to extirpate error by force was
universally allowed to be the prerogative of those who poiefltd

t the

335

300KK XI.

1555.

the knowledge of truth, and as each party of Christians believed
that they had got possession of this invaluable attainment, they all
claimed and exercised, as far as they were able, the rights which
it was supposed to convey. The Roman catholicks, as their system
relied on the decisions of an infallible judge, never doubted that
truth was on their fide, and openly called on the civil power to
repell the impious and heretical innovators who had risen up
against it. The Protestants, no less confident that their doctrine
was well founded, required, with equal ardour, the Princes of
their party to check such as presumed to impugn or to oppose
it. Luther, Calvin, Cranmer, Knox, the founders of the re-
formed church in their refpetive countries, infliced, as far as
they had power and opportunity, the fame punishments which
were denounced against their own disciples by the churchof
Rome, on such as called in question any article in their creeds.
To their followers, and perhaps to their opponents, it would
have appeared a symptom of diffidence in the goodness of their
cause, or an acknowledgement that it was not well founded, if
they had not employed in its defence all those means which
it was supposed truth had a right to employ.

IT was towards the close of the seventeenth century, before

Toleration, under its present form, was admitted first into the
rcpublick of the United Provinces, and from thence introduced
into England. Long experience of the calamities of mutual per-
fccution, the influence of free government, the light and humanity
acquired by the progress of fcicnce, together with the prudence
and authority of the civil magiftratc, were all rcquifitc in order
to cflablihl a regulation, to repugnant to the ideas which all the
different fcets had adopted from milltakcn conceptions concern-

8 ing
336

ing the nature of religion and the rights of truth, or which all BOOK XL
of them had derived from the erroneous maximn eftablilhed by
the church of Rome.

THE recess of Augsburg, it is evident, was founded on no Advantage.
such liberal and enlarged sentiments concerning freedom of of the religi-

speace to
religious inquiry or the nature of toleration. It was nothing the Lutc-

rans.

more than a scheme of pacification, which political confidera-
tions alone had suggested to the contending parties, and regard
for their mutual tranquility and safety had rendered necessary. Of
this there can be no stronger proof than an article in the recess it-
self, bywhich the benefits of the pacification are declared to extend
only to the Catholicks on the one fide, and to such as adhered
to the Confeflion of Augsburg on the other. The followers of
Zuinglius and Calvin remained, in consequence of that exclusion,
without any protection from the rigour of the laws denounced
against hereticks. Nor did they obtain any legal security, until
the treaty of Westphalia, near a century after this period, pro-
vided that they should be admitted to enjoy, in as ample manner
as the Lutherans, all the advantages and protection which the
recess of Augiburg affords.

BUT if the followers of Luther were highly pleated with the And to the

security which they acquired by this recess, such as adhered to aholic
the ancient system had no less reason to be satisfied with that
article in it, which preserved entire to the Roman catholick
church the benefices of such ecclefiafticks as should hereafter
renounce its docrines. This article, known in Germany by
the name of the Ecclefiaflical Referation, was manifeitly so
conformable to the idea and to the rights of an eflablifhfed

VOL. III. X x church;

S37

33

Coa K XI.
j3555

"is.·

church; and it appeared so equitable to prevent revenues, which
had been originally appropriated for the maintenance ofperfons
attached to a certain system, from being alienated to any other
purpose, that the Protestants, though they foresaw its confe-
quences, were obliged to relinquish their opposition to it. As
the Roman catholick Princes of the Empire have taken care to
fee this article exatly observed in every cafe where there was an
opportunity of putting it in execution, it has proved the great
barrier of the Romish church in Germany againfl the Reforma-
tion; and as from this period the fame temptation of interest did
not allure ecclefiafticks to relinquish the established system, there
have been few of that order, who have loved truth with such
disinterested and ardent affection, as to abandon for its fake the
rich benefices which they had in'poffeflon.

DURING the fitting of the diet, Marcellus Cervino, Cardinal

Marcellus II.
elected Pore, of Santa Croce, was elected Pope in room of Julius. He, in
April 9 imitation of Adrian, did not change his name on being exalted

to the Papal Chair. As he equalled that Pontiff in purity of inten-
characer. tion, and excelled him much in the arts of government, and fill

more in knowledge of the slate and genius of the papal court;
as he had capacity to discern what reformation it needed, as well
as what it could bear, such regulations were expected from his
virtue and wisdom, as would have removed many of its grossest
and most flagrant corruptions, and have contributed towards re-
conciling to the church, such as from indignation at these enor-
mities had abandoned its communion, But this excellent
Pontiff was only fhewnto the church and immediately filatched
lis death. away. The confinement in the conclave had impaired his

health, and the fatigue of tedious ceremonies upon his acceflion,

together

together with too intense and anxious application of mind to
the schemes of improvement which he meditated, eshaiuled so
entirely the vigour of his feeble constitution, that he sickened
on the twelfth, and died on the twentieth day after his elec-
tort m.

ALL the refinements in artifice and intrigue, peculiar to

conclaves, were displayed in that which was held for elecing
a successor to Marcellus;, the Cardinals of the Imperial and
French facions labouring, with equal ardour, to gain the necef-
fary number offuffrages for one of their own party. But, after
a struggle of no long duration, though conduaed with all the
warmth and eagerness natural to men contending for so great
an object, they united in chufing John Peter Caraffa the eldest
member of the sacred college and the son of Count Montorio, a
nobleman of an illustrious family in the kingdom of Naples.
The address and influence of Cardinal Farnese who favoured
his pretensions, Caraffa's own merit, and perhaps his great age,
which soothed all the disappointed candidates with the near pro-
sped of a new vacancy, concurred in bringing about this speedy
union of suffrages. In order to tcfiify his rcfpce for the me-
mory of Paul III. by whom he had been created Cardinal, and
his gratitude to the family of Farnese, he assumcd the name of
Paul IV.

BOOK Xr.

The eleinn.
of Paul IV..

May 23.

TIIE choice of a prelate of fucli a singular character, and Hi. rife ana

who had long held a courtl extremely different from that chaiaetcr..
which usually led to the dignity now conferred upon him, filled,

' Thuan. 520. F. Paul, 365. Onuph. Panvin. 321, &c.

Xx. 2 the

339'

BOOK XI.

1555.

the Italians, who had neareif access to observe his manners and
deportment, with astonishment, and kept them in suspense and
solicitude with regard to his future condut. Paul, though born
in a rank of life which, without any other merit, might have
secured to him the highest ecclesiastical preferments, had from
his early years applied to study with all the assiduity of a man,
who had nothing but his personal accomplishments to render
him conspicuous. By means of this he not only acquired
profound skill in fcholaftick theology, but added to that a con-
fiderable knowledge of the learned languages and of polite lite-
rature, the fiudy of which had been lately revived in Italy, and
was pursued at this time with great ardour. His mind, how-
ever, naturally gloomy and severe, was more formed to imbibe
the four spirit of the former, than to receive any degree of ele-
gance or liberality of sentiment from the latter; so that he
acquired rather the qualities and passions of a recluse ecclefiaftick,
than the talents neceflary for the conduct of great affairs. Ac-
cordingly, when he entered into orders, although several rich
benefices were bellowed on him, and he was early employed as
nuncio in different courts, he soon became disgusted with that
course of life, and languished to be in a situation more suited to
his taste and temper. With this view he resigned at once all his
ecclesiastical preferments, and having inflituted an order of re-
gular priests, whom he denominated Theatines, from the name
of the archbifhoprick which he had held, he alTociated himself
as a member of their fraternity, conformed to all the rigorous
rules to which he had fulejetcd them, and preferred the solitude
of a monaftick life, with thc honour of being the founder of a
new order, to all the vast objeas which the court of Rome pre-
sented to his ambition.

IN
340

IN this retreat he remained for many years, until Paul III in- BOOK XL

duced by the fame of his fantity and knowledge, called him to 5 S
Rome, in order to consult with him concerning the measures
which might be most proper and effectual for the suppressing of
heresy, and re-establishing the ancient authority of the church.
Having thus allured him from his solitude, the Pope, partly by his
intreaties, and partly by his authority,prevailed on him to accept
of a Cardinal's hat, to re-affume the benefices which he had re-
signed, and to return again into the usual path of ecclefialfical
ambition which he seemed to have relinquished. But, during two
successive Pontificates, under the first of which the court of Rome
was the most artful and interested, and under the second the most
dissolute of any in Europe, Caraffa retained his monaftick aufte-
rity. He was an avowed and bitter enemy not only of all in-
novation in opinion, but of every irregularity in practice; he
was the chief instrument in establishing the formidable and
odious tribunal of the Inquisition in the papal territories; he
appeared a violent advocate on all occasions for the jurifdiaion
and discipline of the church, and a severe censurer of every
measure which seemed to flow from motives of policy or interest,
rather than from zeal for the honour of the ecclesiastical order,
and the dignity of the Holy See. Under a prelate of such a
charater, the Roman courtiers expeced a severe and violent
Pontificate, during which the principles of found policy would
be sacrificed to the narrow prejudices ofprieftly zeal; while the
people of Rome were apprehensive of feeing the fordid and for-
bidding rigour of monaffick manners substituted in place of the
gaiety or magnificence to which they had long been accuf-
temed in the papal court. These apprehensions Paul was Thefirf feps
extremely solicitous to remove. At his first entrance on the of hisadmini-

a inifratin fration.
admminiltration

341

dOOKXI.
I--__.-_

The excels of
his attach-
ment to his
nephews.

Their amb-
tious projcts.

adminifiration he laid aside that austerity which had hitherto,
distinguished his person and family, and when the master of his
houfhold inquired in what manner he would chufe to live, he
haughtily replied, " As becomes a great Prince." He ordered
the ceremony of his coronation to be conducted with more than.
usual magnificence; and endeavoured to render himself popular
by several ads of liberality and indulgence towards the inhabi-
tants of Rome".

Hrs natural severity of temper, however, would have foois

returned upon him, and would have justified the conjectures of
the courtiers, and the fears of the people, if he had not, imme-
diately after his election, called to Rome two of his nephews,
the sons of his brother the Count of Montorio. The eldest he
promoted to be governor of Rome, the youngest, who had
hitherto served as a soldier of fortune in the armies of Spain or
France, and whose disposition as well as manners were frill more
foreign from the clerical character than his profession, he created
a Cardinal, and appointed him legate of Bologna, the second office
in power and dignity which a Pope can bestow. These marks of
favour, no less sudden than extravagant, he accompanied with
the most unbounded confidence and attachment, and forgetting-
all his former severe maxims, he seemed to have no other object
than the aggrandizing of his nephews. Their ambition, unfor-
tunately for Paul, was. too aspiring to be satisfied with any
moderate acquisition. They had seen the family of Medici
raised by the intercft of the Popes of that house to supreme
power in Tuscany; Paul III. had by his abilities and address
securcd the dutchies of Parma and Placentia to the family of

Platina, p. 327. Caflaldo Vita di Paolo IV. Rom. 1615. p. 70.

*^~t ~Farnese..

Farnese. They aimed at some establishment for themselves, no BOOK XL
less considerable and independant; and as they could not expe& ' s
that the Pope would carry his indulgence towards them so far
as to secularize any part of the patrimony of the church, they
had no profpet of attaining what they wished, but by difinem-
bering the Imperial dominions in Italy, in hopes of seizing
some portion of them. This alone would have been to them
a fuflicient reason for sowing the feeds of discord between their
uncle and the Emperor.

BUT Cardinal Caraffa had, besides, private reasons which Reafins of
filled him with hatred and enmity to the Emperor. While he the:r difgult

wit the Eta-

served in the Spanifli troops he had not received such marks of peror.
honour and diftintion as he thought due to his birth and merit.
Disgusted with this ill-ufage, he had abruptly quitted the Imperial
service, and entering into that of France; he had not only met
with such a reception as soothed his vanity, and attached him to
the French interest, but by contracing an intimate friendship
with Strozzi, who commanded the French army in Tuscany,
he had imbibed a mortal antipathy to the Emperor as the great
enemy to the liberty and independence of the Italian states.
Nor was the Pope himself indisposed to receive impreflions
unfavourable to the Emperor. The opposition given to his
election by the Cardinals of the Imperial faction left in his
mind deep resentment, which was heightened by the remem-
brance of ancient injuries from Charles or his minilRers.

OF this his nephews took advantage, and employed various They endea-

dcvices, in order to exafpcrate him beyond a possibility of natoetle-
reconciliation. They aggravated every circuintance which fro the Lm-

could ,

343

BooKXI. could be deemed any indication of the Emperor's diffatis,-

55s faction with his promotion; they read to him an intercepted

letter in which Charles taxed the Cardinals of his party with
negligence or incapacity in not having defeated Paul's
eletlion: They pretended, at one time, to have discovered
a conspiracy formed by the Imperial minister and Cosmo de
Medici against the Pope's life; they alarmed him, at another,
with accounts of a plot for aflaflinating themselves. By there
artifices, they kept his mind, which was naturally violent, and
become suspicious from old age, in such perpetual agitation, as
precipitated Irim into measures, which otherwise he would have
been the first person to condemn o° He seized some of the Car-
dinals who were most attached to the Emperor, and confined
them in the castle of St. Angelo; he persecuted the Colonnas
and other Roman barons, the ancient retainers to the Imperial
faction, with the utmost severity; and discovering on all occa-
sions his diitruft, fear, or hatred of the Emperor, he began at
last to court the friendship of the French King, and seemed will-
ing to throw himself absolutely upon him for support and pro-
tedio..

Induce him THIS was the very point to which his nephews wished to,
King of e bring him as most favourable to their ambitious schemes; and
france, as the accomplishment of these depended on their uncle's life,

whose advanced age did not admit of losing a moment un-
ncceffarily in negociations, inflead of treating at second hand
with the French ambassador at Rome, they prevailed on the
Pope to dispatch a person of confidence directly to the court of

o Ripamontii Hill. Patria, lib. iii. 1146. Ap. Grzv. Thef, vol. ii. Mem.
de Ribler. ii. 615. Adriani Iftor. i. 906.

XA Frank s»
344

345

France with such overtures on his part as they hoped would
not be rejected. He proposed an alliance offensive and de-
fenfive between Henry and the Pope; that they should attack
the dutchy of Tuscany and the kingdom of Naples with their
united forces; and if their arms ihould prove successful, that
the ancient republican form of government should be re-efta-
blifhed in the former, and the investiture of the latter flould be
granted to one of the French King's sons, after reserving a cer-
tain territory which should be annexed to the patrimony of the
church, together with an independant and princely eflablifh-
ment for each of the Pope's nephews.

TIIE King, allured by these fpccious projects, gave a most

favourable audience to the envoy. But when the matter was
proposed in council, the conflable Montmorency, whose natu-
ral caution and avcrfion to daring enterprizes increased with
age and experience, remonstrated with great vehemence against
the alliance. He put Henry in mind how fatal every expe-
dition into Italy had been to France during three fucceflive
reigns, and if such an cnterprize had proved too great for the
nation even when its strength and finances were entire, there
was no reason to hope for success, if it should be attempted
now when both were exhausted by extraordinary cfnorts during
wars, which had lasted, with little interruption, almost half a
century. He representcd the manifcit imprudence of entering
into engagements with a Pope of fourscore, as any fyflcmi which
refltd on no better foundation that his life mufl be extremncly
precarious, and upon the event of his death, which could
not be ditfant, the face of things together with the inclination
of the Italian States must inflantly change, and the whole weight
of the war be left upon the King alone. To there confidera-
tions lie added the near profpce which they now had of a final

Vol. I. L. Y y accomm1o-

BooK XL

Con~l~ible
Montmerency
oppOses the
aiiian(e vi

w
tile Popc.

BIoOK XL

is.

The Duke of
Guise favcurs
i,.

Cardinal of
Lorrain font
to nerociate
with the
)Poe.

accommodation with the Emperor,. who having taken the re-
solution of retiring from the world, wished to tranfinit his
kingdoms in peace to his for; and he concluded with repre-
senting the absolute certainty of drawing the arms of England
upon France, if it should appear that the re-efiabliliment of
tranquility in Europe was prevented by the ambition of its,
Monarch.

TaESE arguments, weighty in themselves, and urged by a

minister of great authority, would probably have determined.
the King to decline any connection with the Pope. But the
Duke of Guise and his brother the Cardinal of Lorrain, who.
delighted no. less in bold and' dangerous undertakings than,
Montmorency shunned them, declared warmly for an alliance
with the Pope. The cardinal expeced to be. entrusted with
the conduct of the negociations in the court of Rome to which.
this alliance would give rife; the duke laid -his account with
obtaining the command of the army which would be appointed
to invade Naples; and confidering themselves as already in
these fRations vast projets opened to their aspiring and un-
bounded ambition. Their credit, together with the influence
of the King's mistress, the famous Diana of Poitiers, who was,,
at that time, entirely devoted to the interest of the family of
Guise, more than counterbalanced all Montmorency's prudent
remonstrances, and prevailed on an inconsiderate Prince to,
liften to the overtures of the Pope's envoy.

Tile cardinal of Lorrain, as he had expeded, was immedi-

ately sent to Rome with full powers to conclude the treaty, and
to concert mcafures for carrying it into execution. Meanwhile,
the Pope, either from reflcting on the danger and uncertain issus

:t of

347

Of all military operations, or through the address of the Imperial
ambassador who had been at great pains to sooth him, had not
only begun to lose much of the ardour with which he had set
on foot the negociation with France, but even discovered great
unwillingness to continue it. In order to route him from this
fit of despondency, and to rekindle his former rage, his ne-
phews had recourse to the arts which they had already pradtifed
with so much success. They alarmed him with new reprefen-
tations of the Emperor's hostile intentions, with fresh accounts
which they had received of threats uttered against him by the
Imperial ministers, and with new discoveries which they pre-
tended to have made of conspiracies formed, and just ready to
take effec against his life.

BUT these artifices, having been formerly tried, would not

have operated a second time with the fame force, nor have made
the impression which they wiihed, if Paul had not been ex-
cited by an offence of that kind which he was least able to bear.

-He received advice of the recess of the diet of Augsburg, and
of the toleration which was thereby granted to the Protestants,
and this threw him at once into such transports of paflion
against the Emperor and King of the Romans, as carried him
headlong into all the violent measures of his nephews. Full of
high ideas with refpea to the papal prerogative, and animated
with the fiercest zeal against heresy, he confidered the liberty of
deciding concerning religious matters, which had been assumed by
an assembly composed partly of laymen, as a prcfumptuous and
unpardonable encroachment on that jurifdidion which belonged
to him alone; and regarded the indulgence which had been
givcn to the Protestants as an impious ad of that power which
tle diet had usurped. He complained loudly of both to the
Imperial ambaflador. He insistcd that the rccefs of the diet

Y y 2 %hould

BOOKX.

51*55.

Paul enraged
at the pro-
ceedings of
the diet of
Augsburg.

BoOK XI.

J555.

should immediately be declared illegal and void. He threatened
the Emperor and King of the Romans, in cafe they should either
refufeor delay to gratify him in this particular, with the severest
effeas of his vengeance. He talked in a tone of authority and
command which might have suited a pontiff of the twelfth cen-
tury, when a papal decree was sufficient to have shaken or to have
overturned the throne of the greatest Monarch, but which was al-
together improper in that age, especially when addressed to
the minister of a Prince who had so often made Pontiffs more
formidable feel the weight of his power. The ambassador,
however, heard all his extravagant propositions and mena-
ces, with much patience, and endeavoured to sooth him
by putting him in mind of the extreme distress to which the
Emperor was reduced at Infpruck, of the engagements which
he had come under to the Protestants in order to extricate him-
self, of the necessity of fulfilling there, and of accommo-
dating his conduct to the situation of his affairs. But weighty
as these considerations were, they made no impression on
the mind of the haughty and bigotted pontiff, who in-
flantly replied, that he would absolve him by his apoftolick
authority from the obligation of there engagements, and
even command him not to perform them; that in carrying on
the caufc of God and of the church, no regard ought to be
had to the maxims of worldly prudence and policy, and that
the ill success of the Emperor's fchcmes in Germany might
justly he deemed a mark of the divine difplcafutre againfl him,
on account of his having paid little attention to the former, while
he regulated his conduct entirely by the latter. Having said
this, lie turned from the ambafIItdor abruptly without waiting
for a reply.
348

6

His

HSs nephews took care to applaud and cherish these senti- BoOK XI.

ments, and easily wrought up his arrogant mind, fraught. ,555
with all the monkish ideas concerning the extent of the And exafpe-
papal supremacy, to such a pitch of resentment against the nephewy.ll
house of Austria, and to such an high opinion of his own power,
that he talked continually of his being the successor of those
who had deposed Kings and Emperors; that he was exalted
as head over them all, and would trample such as opposed him
under his feet. In this disposition, the cardinal of Lorrain Decem. xi.

Concludes a

found the Pope, and easily persuaded him to sign a treaty, treaty with
which had for its objed, the ruin of a Prince against whom he France.
was so highly exasperated. The tfipulations in the treaty were
much the fame as had been proposed by the Pope's envoy at
Paris; and it was agreed to keep the whole tranfadion secret
until their united forces should be ready to take the field P.

DURING the negociation of this treaty at Rome and Paris, TheEmperor

ref lves to re-

an event happened which seemed to render the fears which had sign his heri-
given rife to it vain, and the operations which were to follow ditry dom'i-
upon it unnecessary. This was the Emperor's resignation of his
hereditary dominions to his son Philip; together with his refo-
lution to withdraw entirely from any concern in bufincfs or tile
affairs of this world, in order that he might fpcnd the rcmaildler
of his days in retirement and folitudc. Though it requires
neither deep reflection nor extraordinary difccrnmcnt to difiovci-
that the flatc of royalty is not exempt from cares and difap poinit-
mcnt; though most of those who arc exalted to a throne findl
folicitudc, and faticty, and dilguft to be their perpetual attcnl-

P Pallav. lib. 13. p. 163. F. Paul 365. Thuan. lib. xv. 525. lib. xvi. 540.
Mcm. de Ribicr. ii. 609, &c.

dr(l ttlt

349

BK" XI.

The motives
of this rcfig-
nation.

dants in that envied pre-eminence; yet, to descend voluntarily
from the supreme to a subordinate fiation, and to relinquish the
poffefion of power in order to attain the enjoyment of happi-
ness, seems to be an effort too great for the human mind. Se-
veral inflances, indeed, occur in history of Monarchs who have
quitted a throne, and have ended their days in retirement. But
they were either weak Princes who took this resolution rashly,
and repented of it as soon as it was taken; or unfortunate Princes
from whose hands some firong rival had wrested their sceptre,
and compelled them to descend with reluctance into a private
flation. Dioclefian is perhaps the only Prince capable of hold-
ing the reins of government, who ever resigned them from de-
liberate choice, and who continued during many years to enjoy
the tranquillity of retirement without fetching one penitent
sigh, or casting back one look of desire, towards the power or
dignity which he had abandoned;

No wonder, then, that Charles's resignation should fill all Eu-

rope with astonishment, and give rife, both among his contempo-
raries, and among the historians of that period, to various conjec-
tures concerning the motives, which determined a Prince, whole
ruling paflion had been uniformly the love of power, at the age
of fifty fix, when objects of ambition operate with full force on
the mind, and are pursued with the greatest ardour, to take a
rcolution so singular and unexpeced. But while many authors
have imputed it to motives so frivolous and fantastical, as can
hardly be supposed to influence any reasonable mind; while
others have imagined it to be the result of some profound
scheme of policy; historians more intelligent, and better in-
formed, neither ascribe it to caprice, nor search for myfteriolus
secrets of slate, where limple and obvious causes will fully ac-

couint

count for the Emperor's conduct. Charles had been attacked
early in life with the gout, and notwithstanding all the precau-
tions of the most skilful physicians in his time, the violince:
of the distemper encreafed as he advanced in age, and the fits be
came every year more frequent, as well. as more intolerable. Not
only was the vigour of his conflitution broken, but the facul-
ties of his mind were impaired by the excruciating torments
which he endured. During the continuance of the fits, he was
altogether incapable of applying to, business, and even when
they began to abate, as it was only at intervals that he could
attend to what was serious, he gave up the greatest part of his
time to trifling and even childish occupations, which served to
relieve or to amuse his mind, enfeebled and worn out with ex-
eefs of pain. Under these circumstances, the conduct of such
affairs as occurred, of course, in governing so many kingdoms
was a burden more than sufficient; but to push forward and
compleat the vast schemes, which the ambition of his more
active years had formed, or to keep in view and carry on.
the fame great fyflem of policy, extending to every nation in
Europe, and connected with the operations of every different
court, were talks, which far exceeded his strength, and op-
pressed and overwhelmed his mind. As he had been long ac-
customed to view the business of every department, whether
civil, or military, or ecclefiaflical, with his own eyes, and to
decide concerning it according to his own ideas; it gave him the
utinofl pain, when he felt his infirmities encrcafe so fast upon
him, that he was obliged to commit the condut of all affairs
to his Ininifters, He imputed every misfortune which befcl
him, and every miscarriage that happened, even when the
former was unavoidable, and the latter accidental, to his ina-
bility to take the infpcation of business himself. He complained'

o£

BOOK XL

155 S

32M

BOOK XI.

'55 .

of his hard fortune, in being opposed, in his declining years,
to a rival, who was in the full vigour of life, and that while
Henry could take and execute all his resolutions in person, he
should now be reduced, both in council and in aaion, to rely on
the abilities of other men. Having thus grown old before his
time, he wifely judged it more decent to conceal his infirmities
in some solitude, than to expose them any longer to the publick
-eye; and prudently determined not to forfeit the fame, or lose
the acquisitions of his better years, by firuggling, with a vain
obstinacy, to retain the reins of government, when he was no
longer able to hold them with ftcadinefs, or to guide them
with addrcfs :.

* Dom Leverque in his memoirs of cardinal Granvelle gives a reason for the

Emperor's reignation, which, as I recollecd, is not mentioned by any other his-
torian. He fays, that the Emperor having ceded the government of the king-
dom of N. plcs and the dutchy of Milan to his son, upon his marriage with the
(QuJe(n of England ; Phiiip, notwithstanding the advice and intreaties of his fa-
ther, rcTnovcd all the miniflcrs and officers in those countries, and appointed crea-
tures of his own, to fill the places which they held. '1hat he aspired openly, and
with little delicacy, to obtain a fliare in the administration of affairs, in the Low-
Counries. That he endeavoured to thwart the Emperor's meafurcs, and to
limit his au.hority, behaving towards him fomctimes with inattention, and
foim.tines with haughtiness. That Chailes finding that he muff either yield to
his fun, or openly contend with him, in order to avoid these, which were both
difagrecal le and mortifying to a father, he took the resolution of resigning his
crowns, and of retiring from the world, vol. i. p. 24, &c. Dom Lcvefquc
derived his information concerning thfe curious facqs, which he relates very
bricfly, from the original papers of cardinal Gianvellc. BLut as that vafi collcc-
tion ut papcrs, one of the most valuable historical monuments of the fixtecnth
century, ;nd which could not fail of throwing much light on the tranfa.tions of
Charles V, though prcfcrved and arranged by M. L'Abbe Boizot of Befancon, is
not publilhed, I cannot determine what degree of credit ihould be given to this
account of Charles's rcfignation. I have therefore taken no notice of it in relat-
ing this event.

BUT

*
·352

BUT though Charles had revolved this scheme in his mind BOOK XX.
for several years, and had communicated it to his sifters the sT

I53;.
dowager Queens of France and Hungary, who not only ap- CiFcumtan-

ces which had

proved of his intention, but offered to accompany him to what- retarded it.
ever place of retreat he should choose; several things had hi-
therto prevented his carrying it into execution. He could not
think of loading his son with the government of so many king-
doms, until he should attain such maturity of age, and of abi-
lities, as would enable him to sustain that weighty burden; but
as Philip had now reached his twenty-eighth year, and had been
early accustomed to business, for which he discovered both in-
clination and capacity, it can hardly be imputed to the partiality
of paternal affection, that his scruples, with regard to this
point, were entirely removed; and that he thought he might,
without further hesitation or delay, place him on the throne
which he was about to abandon. His mother's situation had
been another obstruction in his way. For although ihe had con-
tinued almost fifty years in confinement, and under the fame
disorder of mind which concern for her husband's death had
brought upon her, yet the government of Spain, was still veiled
in her jointly with the Emperor; her name was inserted to-
gether with his, in all the publick writs issued in that kingdom;
and such was the fond attachment of the Spaniards to her, that
they would probably have scrupled to recognize Philip as their
fovercign, unlcfs fle had consented to aflume him as her partner
on the throne. Her utter incapacity for business rendered it impof-
fible to obtain this. But her death, which happened this year,
removed this difficulty; and as Charles, upon that event, bc-
came sole Monarch of Spain, it left the filcceflion open to his
lto. The war with France had likewise been a reason for re-
taining the adminiflration of affairs in his own hand, as he was

VOL. III. Z z extremely

BooKXI.

'555.

The formali-
tie, with
v .;:, h he cxe-
'.,, ;1 :t.

THE REIGN OF THE

extremely solicitous to have terminated it, that he might have
given up his kingdoms to his son at peace with all the world.
But as Henry had discovered no disposition to close with any
of his overtures, and had even rejeaed proposals of peace,
which were equal and moderate, in a tone, that seemed to in-
dicate a fixed purpose of continuing hoitilities, he saw that it was
vain to wait longer in expecation of an event, which, how de-
firable soever, was altogether uncertain.

As this, then, appeared to be the proper juncture for exe-

cuting the scheme which he had long meditated, Charles
resolved to resign his kingdoms to his son, with a solemnity,
suitable to the importance of the tranfadion, and to perform this
lafl adt of sovereignty, with such formal pomp, as might leave
a Lifting impression on the minds not only of his fubjeds but of
;is fLlccciTr. With this view he called Philip out of England,
wh.. r the peevish temper of his Queen, which increased vwith
her dcfpair of having issue, rendered him extremely unhappy,
and the jealousy of the English left him no hopes of obtaining
the direcion of their affairs. Having assembled the States of the
Iow-Countries at Bruirels, on the twenty-fifth of Otober,
hie f:ated himself, for the lait time, in the chair of ltate, on
one fide of which was placed his son, and on the other his
sifter the Qecen of Hungary regent of the Netherlands, with a
fplcidlid retinue of the grandecs of Spain and princes of the
FEmpire flanding behind him. The prclident of the council of
Slanders, by his comnmarnl, explained in a few words his in-
tention in calling this extraordinary meeting of the States. He
then read the instrument ofrcfignation by which Charles furren-
dered to his son Philip all his territorics, jurifdidion, and au-
,hority in the Low-Countries, absolving his fubjeds there from

4 their

their oath of allegiance to him, which he required them to BOOK XI.
transfer to Philip his lawful heir, and to serve him with the
fame loyalty and zeal that they had manifested, duving so long
a course of years, in support of his government.

CHARLEs-then rose from his feat, and leaning on the shoulder

of the Prince of Orange, because he was unable to fland without
support, he addrefled himself to the audience, and from a paper
which he held in hia hand, in order to assist his memory, he re-
counted, with dignity, but without ostentation, all the great
tliings which he had undertaken and performed since the com-
mencement of his adminiitration. He observed, that from the
seventeenth year of his age, he had dedicated all his thoughts
and attention to publick objets, reserving no portion of his
time for the indulgence of'is ease, and very little for the enjoy-
ment of private pleasure; that either in a pacifick or hostile
manner, he had visited Germany nine times, Spain fix times,
France four times, Italy seven times, the Low-Countries ten
times, England twice, Africa as often, and had made eleven
voyages by Tea; that while his health permitted him to dif-
charge his duty, and the vigour of his conflitution was equal,
in any degree, to the arduous office of governing filch extensive
dominionc, he had never Ihunned labour, nor rcpined under
fatigue; that now when his health was broken, and his vigour
cxhaufled by the rage of an incurable (liftcmper, his growing
infirmities admonished him to retire, nor was he so fond of
reigning, as to retain the sceptre in an impotent hand, which
was no longer able to protcd his fuljedts, or to render them
happy; that instead of a fovcrcign worn out with diseases, and
scarce half rtlive, he gave them one in the prime of life, acctlf-
tomed already to govern, and who added to the vigour of youth
all the attention and sagacity of maturer years; that, if during the

Z z 2 course

BooK XL course of a long administration, he had committed any material

5 1s. -error in government, or if under the pressure and amidst the at-

tention which he had been obliged to give to so many and great
affairs, he had either negle3ed or injured any of his fubjeas, he
now implored their forgiveness; that, for his part, he ihould ever
retain a grateful sense of their fidelity and attachment, and would
carry the remembrance of it along with him to the place of his
retreat, as his sweetest consolation, as well as the befl reward
for all his services, and in his last prayers to Almighty God
would pour forth his ardent withes for their welfare.

THEN turning towards Philip, who fell on his knees and

kissed his father's hand, "' If, fays he, I had left you by my
death this rich inheritance, to which I have made such large
additions, some regard would have been justly due to my me-
inory on that account; but now when I voluntarily resign to you
what I might have still retained, I may well expec the warmest
expressions of thanks on your part. With these, however, I
dispense, and shall confider your concern for the welfare of your
fubjeas, and your love of them, as the best and most acceptable
testimony of your gratitude to me. It is in your power, by a wife
and virtuous administration, to justify the extraordinary proof
which I give this day of my paternal affecion, and to demon-
firate that you are worthy of the confidence which I repose in you.
Preserve an inviolable regard for religion; maintain the Catho-
lick faith in its purity; let the laws of your country be sacred
in your eyes; encroach not on the rights and privileges of your
people; and if the time shall ever come, when you flall wifl to
enjoy the tranquillity of private life, may you have a son en-
dowed with such qualities, that you can resign your sceptre to
bLun, with as much fatisfaacion, as I give up mine to you."

As

As soon as Charles had finished this long address to his

subje&s and to their new sovereign, he funk into the
chair, exbaufted and ready to faint with the fatigue of such
an extraordinary effort. During his discourse, the whole
audience melted into tears, some from admiration of his mag-
nanimity, others softened by the expreflions of tcndernefs
towards his ion, and of love to his people; and all were
affecded with the deepest sorrow at losing a sovereign, who had
distinguished the Netherlands, his native country, with parti-
cular marks of his regard and attachment.

PHILIP then arose from his knees, and after returning thanks

to his father, with a low and fubmiflive voice, for the royal gift
which his unexampled bounty had bestowed upon him, he ad-
dressed the assembly of the states, and regretting his inability to
speak the Flemish language with such facility as to express what
he felt on this interefling occasion, as well as what he owed to his
good fubjeds in the Netherlands, he begged that they would allow
Granvelle bishop of Arras, to deliver what he had given him in
charge to speak in his name. Granvelle, in a long discourse,
expatiated on the zeal with which Philip was animated for the
good of his fubjeds, on his resolution to devote all his time and
talents to the promoting of their happiness, and on his inten-
tion to imitate his father's example in diffinguilhing the Nether-
lands with peculiar marks of his regard. MaEs, a lawyer of
great eloquence, replied, in name of the States, with large pro.
sessions of their fidelity and affetion to their new sovereign.

THEN Mary, Qtecn-dowager of Hungary, resigned the

regency, with which file had been entrusted by her brother
during the space of twenty-five years. Next day Philip, in
presence of the States, took the usual oaths to maintain the

righst
5.

357
BoOK XI.

1555.
X_ - _
ISS5«

BooxXI. rights and privileges of his fubjeds; and all the members, in

s5s. their own name, and in that of their constituents, swore alle-
Jaauary 6. glance to him .

A PEW weeks thereafter, Charles, in an assembly no less

splendid, and with a ceremonial equally pompous, resigned to
his son the crowns of Spain, with all the territories depending
on them, both in the old and in the new world. Of all these
vast possessions, he reserved nothing for himself but an annual
pension of an hundred thousand crowns, to defray the charges
of his family, and to afford him a finall fum for ads or be:efi-
cence and charity'.

As

q Godleveus Relatio Abdicationis Car. V. ap. Goldat. Polit. Imper. p. 377.
Strada de 'ello Belgico, lib. i. p. 5.

· The Emperor's resignation is an event not only of such importance, but of

such a nature, that the precise date of it, one would expe&, lhould have been afcer-
tainei by historians with the greatcft accuracy. There is, however, an amazing
and unaccountable diversity among them with regard to this point. All agree
that the deed by which Charles transferred to his son his dominions in the Nether-
lands, bears date at Brussels the 25th of October. Sandoval fixes on the 28th
of OEtober as the day on which the ceremony of resignation happened, and he
was present at the tranfa&ion, vol. ii. p. 592. Godleveus who published a treatise
de Abdicatione Caroli V. fixes the publick ceremony as well as the date of the in-
tlrumcnt of resignation on the 25th. Pere Barre, I know not on what authority,
fixes it on the 24th of November. Hist. D'Alem. viii. 976. Herrera agrees with
Godleveus in sentiment, tom. i. 155. as likewise does Pallavicini, whose authority
with refped to dates, and every thing where a minute accuracy is requisite, is of
great weight. Hist. lib. xvi. p. 168. Hiflorians differ no less with regard to the day
on which Charles resigned the crow; of Spain to his son. According to M. de
Thou, it was a month after his having resigned his dominions in the Netherlands,
i.e. about the 25th of November, Thuan. lib. 16. p. 571. According to Sandoval
it was on the 16th January 1556, Sand. ii. 603. Antonio di Vera agrees with
him, Epitome del Vida del Car. V. p. i to. According to Pallavicini it was
en the 17th. Pal. lib. xvi. p. 168. and with him Herrera agrees, Vida del 1).
Fclipc, tom. i. p. 233. But Ferreras fixes it ox the first day of January, His.

Gener.

As he had fixed on a place of retreat in Spain, hoping that the

dryness of the air and warmth of the climate in that country might
mitigate the violence of his disease, which had been much en-
creased by the moisture of the air and the rigour of the winters
in the Netherlands, he was extremely impatient to embark for that
kingdom, and to disengage himself entirely from business, which
he found to be impoflible while he remained in Brussels. But his
physicians remonstrated so firongly against his venturing to sea
at that cold and boisterous season of the year, that he consented,
though with reluctance, to put off his voyage for some months.

BY yielding to their intreaties, le had the fatisfadtion, before

he left the Low-Countries, of taking a considerable ftep towards
a peace with France, which he ardently wished for, not only on
his son's account, but that he might have the merit, when
quitting the world, of re-establishing that tranquillity in Europe,
which he had banished out of it almost from the time that he as-
fumed the adminifiration of affairs. Some time previous to his
resignation, commissioners had been appointed by him and by
the French King, in order to treat of an exchange of prisoners.
In their conferences at the abbey of Vaucelles, near Cambray,
an expedient was accidentally proposed for terminating hostilities.

BOOK XI.

1556.

Resolves to
fix his refi-
dence in
Spain.

Obliged to
remain for
some time in
the Nether-
lands.

Promotes the
negociation
for peace.

Gener. tom. ix. p. 371. M. de Beaucaire supposes the resignation ofthe crown of
Spain to have been executed a few days after the resignation of the Netherlands,
Corn. de Reb. Gall. p. 879. It is remarkable that in the treatyof truce, atVauccllcs,
though Charles had made over all his dominions to his son rome weeks previous
to the conclusion of it, all the stipulations are in the Emperor's name, and
Philip is only designed King of England and Naples. It is certain Philip was
not proclaimed King of Castile, &c. at Valladolid sooner than the 24th of
March. Sandov. ii. p. 6o(, and previous to that ceremony, he did not chufc, it
would fcem, to afuine the title of King of any of his Spanish kingdoms, or to
perform any aft of royal jurildi6tion. In a deed annexed to the treaty of truce,
dated April l9th, he aflumes the title of King of Caffilc, &c. in the usual flilc
of the Spanifl monarchs in that age. Corps Dipl. toin. iv. 4Appfnd. p. 85.

betwixt

359

BOOK XI.

J556.

A truce con-
cluded.
5th Feb.

betwixt the contending monarchs, by a long truce, during the
fubfiftance of which, and without discussing their refpetliv
claims, each should retain what was in his possession. Charles,
sensible how much his kingdoms were exhausted by the ex-
pensive and almost continual wars in which his ambition had
engaged him, and eager to gain for his son a ihort interval of
peace, that he might establish himself firmly on his throne, de-
clared warmly for closing with the overture, though manifefRly
dishonourable as well as disadvantageous; and such was the
refpea due to his wisdom and experience, that Philip, not-
withstanding his unwillingness to purchase peace by such con-
cessions, did not presume to urge his opinion in opposition to
that of his father.

HENRY could not have hesitated one moment about giving his

consent to a truce on such conditions, as would leave him in quiet
possession of the greater part of the Duke of Savoy's dominions,
together with the important conqueRs which he had made on the
German frontier. But it was no easy matter to reconcile such a flep
with the engagements that he had come under to the Pope, in his
late treaty with him. The Conflable Montmorency, however,
represented in such a firiking light, the imprudence of facri-
sicing the true interests of his kingdom to thcfc rafli obligations,
and took fiich advantage of the absence of the Cardinal of Lor-
rain, who had seduced the King into his alliance with the
Caraffas, that Henry, naturally fluctuating and unsteady, and
apt to bc influenced by the advice last given him, authorized his
ambassadors to sign a treaty of truce with the Emperor for five
years, on the terms which had been proposed. But that he might
not seem to have altogether forgotten his ally the Pope, who he
foresaw would be highly exasperated, he, in order to sooth him,
took care that he should be exprefly included in the truce '.

* Mem. de Ribicr. ii. 626. Corps Diplom. tom. iv. App. 81.

TIIE
360

THE Count of Lalain repaired to Blois, and the Admiral

Coligny to Brussels, the former to be present when the King of
France, and the latter when the Emperor and his son, ratified
the treaty and bound themselves by oath to observe it'. When
an account of the conferences at Vaucelles, and of the conditions
of truce which had been proposed there, were firfi carried to
Rome, it gave the Pope no manner of disquiet. He trusted so
much to the honour of the French monarch, that he would not
allow himfclf to think that Henry could forget so soon, or violate
so shamefully, all the flipulations in his league with him. He
had such an high opinion of the Emperor's wisdom, that he made
no doubt of his refusing his content to a truce on such unequal
terms; and on both these accounts he confidently pronounced
that this, like many preceding negociations, would terminate in
nothing. But later and more certain intelligence soon con-
vinced him that in political affairs no reasoning is more falla-
cious, than, because an event is improbable, to conclude that it
will not happen. The sudden and unexpected conclution of the
truce filled Paul with astonishment and terror. The Cardinal
of Lorrain durst not encounter that storm of indignation, to
which he knew he should be exposcd from. the haughty Pontiff,
who had so good reason to be incensed; but departing abruptly
from Rome, he left to the Cardinal Tournon the difficult talk of
attempting to tooth Paul and his nephews. They were fully

BOOK IX.

1556.

Ratified by
both mon-
arch s.

The Pcpe's
altoniflment
and dillfefs.

t One of Admiral Coligns's attendants, who wrote to the court of Fiance

an account of what happened while they refded at Brutfels, takes n 1t:c, as an
instance of Philip's irpolitcnefs, that he received the French ambassador in an
apartment hung with tapestry, which represented the battle of Pavia) the
manner in which Francis I. was taken prifoncr, his voyage to Spain, with all
the circumflanccs of his captivity and iinprifonment at Madrid. Mem. de
Ribicr, ii. 634.

VOL. III. A a a fcnfible

36i.

BOOK XI. sensible of the perilous situation in which they now flood. By

31 6 their engagements with France, which were no longer secret,.

they had highly irritated Philip. They dreaded the violence of
his implacable temper. The Duke of Alva, a minister, fitted
as well by his abilities as by the severity of his nature, for exe-
cuting all Philip's rigorous schemes, had advanced from Milan
to Naples, and began to assemble troops on the frontiers of the
Ecclesiastical State. While they, if deserted by France, mull
not only relinquish all the hopes of dominion and fove-
reignty to which their ambition aspired, but remain exposed to,
the resentment of the Spanish monarch, without one ally to
protet them against an enemy with whom they were so little
able to contend.

tie attempts UNDER there circumflances, Paul had recourse to the arts of
to rekindle
te war. negociation and intrigue, of which the Papal court knows well

how to avail itself in order to ward off any calamity-threatened
by an enemy superior in power. He affected to approve highly
of the truce, as an happy expedient for putting a stop to the
effusion of Christian blood. He expressed his warmest wishes
that it might prove the forerunner of a definitive peace. He
exhorted the rival Princes to embrace this favourable opportu-
nity of setting on foot a negociation for that purpose, and offer-
ed, as their common father, to be mediator between them.
Under this pretext, he appointed Cardinal Rebiba his nuncio to
the court of Brussels, and his nephew Cardinal Caraffa to that
of Paris. The publick inftruaions given to both were the
fame; that they ihould use their utmost endeavours to prevail
with the two monarchs to accept of the Pope's mediation, that
by means of it, peace might be re-established, and measures

t oight
362

might be taken for assembling a general council. But under
this specious appearance of zeal for attaining objeas so defir-
able in themselves, and so becoming his sacred characer to pur-
sue, Paul concealed very different intentions. Caraffa, besides
his publick inftrutions, received a private commission to follicit
the French King to renounce the treaty of truce, and to renew
his engagements with the Holy See, 'and he was impowered to
spare neither entreaties, nor promises, nor bribes, in order to gain
that point. This, both the uncle and the nephew confidered
as the real end of the embassy; while the other served to amuse
the vulgar, or to deceive the Emperor and his son. The Car-
di nal, accordingly, set out instantly for Paris, and travelled with
the greatest expedition, while Rebiba was detained some weeks
at Rome; and when it became necessary for him to begin his
journey, he received secret orders to protra& it as much as pof-
fible, that the issue of Caraffa's negociation might be known
before he ihould reach Brussels, and according to that, proper
directions might be given to him with regard &o the tone which
he ihould assume, in treating with the Emperor and his son '.

CARAFFA made his entry into Paris with extraordinary

pomp; and having presented a consecrated sword to Henry, as
the protecor, on whose aid the Pope relied in the present exi-
gency, he besought him not to disregard the entreaties of a
parent in distress, but to employ that weapon which he gave
him in his defence. This he represented not only as a duty of
filial piety, but as an act of justice. As the Pope, from con.
fidence in the afiitance and support which his late treaty with

BOOK XI.

i5s6.

Ilth May.

His stegocia-
tions fir that
purpose.
' Pallav. lib. Kiii. p. 169. Burnet Hist. of Reform. ii. App. 309.

A a a France

363

THE REIGN OF THE'

BLjoo XI.

Ji c ir 31Al a.
J11j 31.

France entitled him to expe&, had taken such steps as had irri-
tated the King of Spain, he conjured Henry not to susser Paul
and his family to be crushed under the weight of that resent-
ment which they had drawn on themselves merely by their
attachment to France. Together with this argument addressed
to his generosity, he employed another which he hoped would
work on his ambition. He affirmed that now was the time,
when, with the most certain profpea of success, he might attack
Philip's dominions in Italy; that the flower of the veteran
Spanish bands had periihed in the wars of Hungary, Germany,
and the Low-countries; that the Emperor had left his son an
exhaufled treasury, and kingdoms drained of men; that he had
.no longer to contend with the abilities, the experience, and
good fortune of Charles, but with a monarch scarce feated on
his throne, unpradifed in command, odious to many of the
Italian States, and dreaded by all; that the Pope, who had al-
ready levied soldiers, would bring a considerable army into the
field, which when joined by a sufficient number of French troops,
might, by one brisk and sudden effort, drive the Spaniards out
of Naples, and add to the crown of France a kingdom, the
conquest of which had been the great objea of all his predecef-
lors during half a century, and the chief motive of all their
cxpeditions into Italy.

EVERY word Caraffa spoke made a deep impression on

Henry; conscious, on the one hand, that the Pope had just cause
to reproach him with not having consulted the laws either of
generosity or of decency, when he renounced his league with
him, and had agreed to the truce of Vacelles; and eager, on the
other hand, not only to distinguish his reign by a conquef,

Y*^~~~~~~ which
564

which three former monarchs had attempted without fuccels, BoorIXT.
but likewise to acquire an establishment of such dignity and ;6.
value for one of his sons. Reverence, however, for the oath,
by which he had so lately confirmed the truce of Vaucelles;
the extreme old age of the Pope, whose death might occasion an
intire revolution in the political system of Italy; together with the
representations of Montmorency, who repeated all the arguments
that he had used against the first league with Paul, and pointed
out the great and immediate advantages which France derived
from the truce;. kept Henry forfome time in fufpence, and might
possibly have outweighed all Caraffa's arguments. But the Car-
dinal was not such a novice in the arts of intrigue and negocia-
tion, as not to have expedients ready for removing or fur-'
mounting all these obflacles. To obviate the King's scruple with
regard to his oath, he produced powers from the Pope to absolve
him from the obligation of it. By way of security against any
danger which he might apprehend from the Pope's death, he
engaged that his uncle would make such a nomination of Car-
dinals, as should give Henry the absolute command of the next
election, and enable him to place in the Papal chair a person
entirely devoted to his interefl.

IN order to counterbalance the effc' of the Constable's opi-

nion and influence, he employed not only the acive talents of
the Duke of Guifc, and the eloquence of his brother the Cardinal
of Lorrain, but the address of the Queen, aided by the more power-
ful arts of D)iana of Poitiers, who, unfortunately for France,
co-operated with Catharine in this point, though she took plea-
furc, on almost every other occasion, to thwart and mortify her.
They, by their united solicitations, easily swayed the King, who

leaned

365

BooKXI. leaned of his own accord to that fide, towards which they

Le6. wished him to incline. All Montmorency's prudent remonfiran-

ces were disregarded; the nuncio absolved Henry from his
oath; and he signed a new league with the Pope, which re-
luly 31. kindled the flames of war both in Italy and in the Low.-

Countries.

The Pope's As soon as Paul was informed by his nephew that there was
violent pro-
ceedings a fair profpe& of his succeeding in this negociation, he dif-

patched a messenger after the nuncio Rebiba, with orders to
return to Rome, without proceeding to Brussels. As it was
now no longer necessary to preserve that tone of moderation,
which suited the characer of a mediator, and which he had
asseted to assume, or to put any farther restraint upon his re-
fentment against Philip, he boldly threw off the mask, and took
such violent steps as rendered a rupture unavoidable. He
seized and imprisoned the Spanish envoy at his court. He
excommunicated the Collonna's; and having deprived Mark
Antonio, the head of that family, of the dukedom of Paliana,
he granted that dignity, together with the territory annexed to
it, to his nephew the Count of Montorio. He ordered a legal
information to be presented in the consistory of Cardinals against
Philip, setting forth that he, notwithstanding the fidelity and
allegiance due by him to the Holy See, of which he held the
crown of Naples, had not only afforded a retreat in his domi-
nions to the Colonna's, whom the Pope had excommunicated and
declared rebels, but had furnishcd them with arms, and was ready,
in conjunction with them, to invade the Ecclesiastical State in an
hostile manner; that iuch conduct in a vassal was to be deemed
treason against his liege lord, the punilhment of which was the

forfeiture
366

forfeiture of his fief. Upon this the consistorial advocate re-
quefled the Pope to take cognizance of the caife, and to appoint
a day for hearing of it, when he would make good every article
of the charge, and expec from his justice that sentence which
the heinousness of Philip's crimes merited. Paul, whose pride
was highly flattered with the idea of trying and passing judg-
ment on so great a King, assented to his request; and as if it had
been no less easy to execute than to pronounce sentence, declared
that he would consult with the Cardinals concerning the forma-
liries requisite in conduaing the trial '.

BUT while Paul allowed his pride and resentment to drive him

on with such headlong impetuosity, Philip discovered an amaz-
ing moderation on his part. He had been taught by the Spanish
ecclefiafticks who had the charge of his education, a profound
veneration for the Holy See. This sentiment, which had been
early infused, grew up with him as he advanced in years, and
took fullpoffefion of his mind, which was naturally thoughtful,
serious, and prone to superstition. When he foresaw a rupture
with the Pope approaching, he had such violent fcrupTes with
refpea to the lawfulners of taking arms against the Vicegerent
of Christ, and the common father of all Christians, that he
consulted some Spanish divines upon that point. Though
they, with the usual dexterity of cafuifis in accommodating
their responses to the circumstances of those who apply
to them for direction, assured him that, after employing
prayers and remonfirances in order to bring the Pope to reason,
he had full right, both by the laws of nature and of Chrifli-
anity, not only to defend himself when attacked, but to beginr

Boo K XI.

155).-

July 27.

Philip's fr.
perftitious
scruples.
X Pallav. lib. xiii. 171.

hollilitics,

BOOK XI. hoflilities, if that were judged the most proper expedient, for

^ preventing the effeds of Paul's violence and injuflice: Yet

Philip still deliberated and delayed, confidering it as a most cruel
misfortune, that his administration should open with an attack
on a perfoil, whose sacrcd function and character he so highly
refpetcd Y.

liTe Dk. of AT last the Duke ofAlva, who, in compliance with his maf-
Aiva t,:ies ter's fcruplcs, had continued to negociate long after he should
the sild
agailnf the have begun to adc, finding Paul inexorable, and that every over-
Pope.

ture of peace, and every appearance of hcfitation on his part
Sept. ;. encrcafed the Pontiff's natural arrogance, took the field and

entered the cclefiaftical territories. His army did not exceed
twclve thousand men, but it was composed of veteran soldiers,
and commanded chiefly by those Roman barons, whom Paul's
violence had driven into exile. The valour of the troops, and
the animosity of their leaders who fought in their own quarrel,
and to recover their own cflatcs, supplied the want of num-
bers. As none of the French foirces were yet arrived, Alva
soon )becamc mlancr of the Compagna Romana; some cities
being ftirrcndcred through the cowardice of the garrisons, which
conlilled of raw fol(licrs, ill (lifcipliicd, and worlc co)mman(l-
ted; tlhe gates of (otliers being oi)ene Iby tlhe inhal)itants, xlwho
werce ecager to reccive b t:ck their ancient malters. Alva, tliat lie
miglit not be taxed wAith impiety in l-ci/ing thle p1atrinll(Iy of
tie cihurch, took poiflenio!l of tl tt)wILs wvlil'h ca;iittiilted, in
tlll ntame of the college (of clrdin:lls, to whichl, or tohe tlPop,:
tliat lK)l1i1d l ) c vlofiln to I'nuccd Palli, lic d'ela ted t]iat lie wo u [

Tlli:
Miunediately reshore tChei.

Y Fcrrcr. IiUI. dc Es,:gac i x. 373. Itc',id, i.3':.

373.~~~~~~~Ti
368

THE rapid progress of the Spaniards, whose light troops made BOOK XI.
inroads to the gates of Romi, filled that city with confterna- v5

i556.

tion; and Paul, though inflexible and undaunted himself, was A truce be-
obliged to give way so far to the fears and solicitations of'the p"tweenthe

Pope and

Cardinals, as t6 fend deputies to Alva in order to propose a Philip.
ceflation of arms. The Pope yielded the more readily, as he
was sensible of a double advantage which might be derived
from obtaining that point. It would deliver the inhabitants
of Rome from their present terror; and woulda afford time
for the arrival of the fuceours which he expeced from
France. Nor was Alva unwilling'to close with the overture,
both as he knew how desirous his master was to terminate a
war, which he had undertaken with reluctance, and-as his army
was so much weakened by garrisoning the great number of'
towns which he had reduced, that it was scarce in a condition to
keep the field without fresh recruits. A truce was accordingly
concluded first for ten, and afterwards for forty days, during Nov. ,19
which, various schemes of peace were proposed, and perpetual
negociations were carried on, but with no sincerity on the part
of the Pope. The return of his nephew the Cardinal to Rome,
the receipt of a considerable fum remitted by the King of France,
the arrival of one body of French troops, together with the ex-
pecation of others which had begun their march, rendered him
more arrogant than ever, and banished all thoughts from his
mind, but those of war and revenge *.

' PaHav. lib. xiii. 177. Tiuani; lib. xvii. 588. Mem. de Ribier, ii. 664.
VOL. III.

369
Bbb

THE

# THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK XII.

THE

T E
OF THE

I

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES

BOOK
BooKXII.

:556.

Chules's new
attempt to
alter the fuc-
effion of the
Impire.

W HHILE these operations or intrigues kept the Pope and

Philip busy and attentive, the Emperor disentangled

himself finally from all the affairs of this world, and set out for
the place of his retreat. He had hitherto retained the Imperial
dignity not from any unwillingness to relinquish it, for after
having resigned the real and extensive authority that he enjoyed
in his hereditary dominions, to part with the limited and often
ideal jurifdition, which belongs to an elecive crown, was no
great sacrifice. His sole motive for delay was to gain a few
months, for making one trial more, in order to accomplish his
favourite scheme in behalf of his Con. At the very time Charles
seemed to be ioft sensible of the vanity of worldly grandeur,,

and,
H

I

S

0

R

Y
R

E

G

N

V.

XII.
1!

and when he appeared to be quitting it not only with indiffer-
ence, but with contempt, the vast schemes of ambition, which
had so long occupied and engrossed his mind, still kept possession
of it. He could not think of leaving his son, among the Princes
of Europe, in a rank inferior to that which he himself had
held. As he had, some years before, made a fruitless attempt
to secure the Imperial crown to Philip, that by uniting it to the
kingdoms of Spain, and the dominions of the house of Burgundy,
he might put it in his power to prosecute, with a better profpe&
of success, those great plans, which his own infirmities had
obliged him to abandon, he was frill unwilling to relinquifli
this flattering project as chimerical or unattainable.

NOTWITHSTANDING the repulse which he had formerly

met with from his brother Ferdinand, he renewed his follicita-
tions with fresh importunity, and during the summer, had tried
every art, and employed every argument, which he thought
could induce him to quit the Imperial throne to Philip, and to
accept of the investiture of some province, either in Italy, or
in the Low-Countries, as an equivalent '. But Ferdinand, who
was so firm and inflexible with regard to this point, that he
had paid no regard to the solicitations of the Emperor, even
when they were enforced with all the weight of authority,
which accompanies supreme power, received the overture,
that now came from him in the situation to which he
had descended, with greater indifference, and would not
deign to liften to it. Charles, ashamed of his own credulity

* Ambafiades des Noailles, tom. v. 356.

Bbb2

Boo.K XII.

' 556

Which proves
unficcefbful.
i1

371

BOOK XII.

1556.

Augulf 27.

Charles sets
oat for Spain.

in having imagined that he might accomplish that now, which
he had attempted formerly without success, desisted finally from
his scheme. He then resigned the government of the Em.
pirc, and having transferred all his claims of obedience and
allegiance from the Germanick body, to his brother the King
of the Romans, he executed a deed to that effect, with all the
formalities, requisite in such an important tranfa&ion. The
infirument of resignation he committed to William Prince of
Orange, and impowered him to lay it before the college of
electors b

NOTHING now remained to detain Charles from that retreat

forwhich he lanquifhed. Every thing having been prepared some
time for his voyage, he set out for Zuitburg in Zealand, where
the fleet had orders to rendezvous. In his way thither he passed
through Ghent, and after stopping there a few days, to indulge
that tender and pleasant melancholy, which arises in the mind of
every man in the decline of life, on visiting the place of his
nativity, and viewing the scenes and objects familiar to him in
his early youth, he pursued his journey, accompanied by his
son Philip, his daughter the archdutchefs, his fiflers the dow-
ager Queens of France and Hungary, Maximilian his fon-in-
law, and a numerous retinue of the Flemith nobility. Before
hewent on board, he difmifled them, with marks of his atten-
tion or regard, and taking leave of Philip with all the tenderness
of a father who embraced his son for the last time, he set fail
on the seventeenth of September under convoy of a large fleet

b Goldaft. Conflit. Imper. pars i. 576.
372

of
9

373

ofSpanilh, Flemlh and Englilh ships. He declined a pressing 'BOOK XII.
invitation, from the Queen of England, to land in some part 556.
of her dominions, in order to refresh himself, and that she
might have the comfort of feeing him once more. It cannot
surely, said he, be agreeable to a Queen to receive a visit from
a father-in-law, who is now nothing more than a private
gentleman.

His voyage was prosperous and agreeable, and he arrived at

Laredo in Biscay on the eleventh day after he left Zealand. As
soon as he landed, he fell prostrate on the ground; and confider-
ing himself now as dead to the world, he kissed the earth, and
said, " Naked came I out of my mother's womb, and naked I
now return to thee, thou common mother of mankind." From
Laredo he pursued his journey to Burgos, carried by his atten-
dants sometimes in a chair, and sometimes in a horse litter, sus-
fering exquisite pain at every ftep, and advancing with the
greatest difficulty. Some of the Spanish nobility repaired to
Burgos in order to pay court to him, but they were so few
in number, and their attendance was so negligent, that Charles
observed it, and felt, for the firfi time, that lie was no longer a
Monarch. Accuflomed from his early youth to the dutiful and
officious refpe& with which tlofe who possess sovereign
power are attended, he had received it with the credulity com-
mon to Princes, and was weak enough to be mortified, when
he now discovered, that he had been indebted to his fortune,
for much of that obfcquious regard, which he had fondly
thought was paid to his personal qualities. But though he
night have soon learned to forget the levity of his flb-

jeis,,.

His arrival
and reception
there.

. BOOK XII.

1556.

The place of
Ins Ictrcat.

je8s, or to have despised their negle&, he was more deeply
affltied with his son's ingratitude, who, forgetting already how
much he owed to his father's bounty, obliged him to remain
some weeks at Burgos, before he paid him the first moiety of
that finall pension, which was all that he had reserved of so
many kingdoms. As without this fum, Charles could not dif-
miss his domeiftcks with such rewards as their services merited,
or his generosity had destined for them, he could not help ex-
pressing both furprize and diffatisfadion b. At last the money
was paid, and Charles having dismissed a great number of his
domeflicks, whose attendance he thought would be superfluous
or cumbersome in his retirement, he proceeded to Valladolid.
There he took a last and tender leave of his two sifters, whom
he would not permit to accompany him to his solitude, though
they entreated it with tears, not only that they might have the
consolation of contributing by their attendance and care to miti-
gate or to tooth his sufferings, but that they might reap in-
ftruaion and benefit by joining with him in those pious ex-
ercifes, to which he had consecrated the remainder of his days.

FROM Valladolid he continued his journey to Plazencia in

Estremadura. He had passed through that city a great many
years before, and having been firuck at that time with the de-
lightful situation of the monastery of St. Juftus belonging to
the order of St. Jerome, not many miles distant from that place,
he had then observcd to some of his attendants, that this was a
spot to which Dioclefian might have retired with pleasure. The
impression had remained so ilrong on his nind, that he pitched
on it as the place of his retreat. It was featcd in a vale of

b Strada dc Bello Bclg. lib. i. 9.
374

3

no

no great extent, watered by a small brook, and surroundcd BooK XI.
by rising grounds, covered with lofty trees; both from the 5 56,
nature of the foil, and temperature of the climate, it was
esteemed the mofi healthful and delicious situation in Spain.
Some months before his resignation he had sent an archite& thi-
ther, to add a new apartment to the monafiery, for his accommo-
dation; but he gave ftri& orders that the flile of the building
should be such as suited his present flation, rather than his for-
mer dignity. It confited only of fix rooms, four of them in
the form of Friars cells, with naked walls; and the other two,
each twenty feet square, were hung with brown cloth, and fur-
nifhed in the most simple manner. They were all level with the
ground; with a door on one fide into a garden, of which Charles
himself had given the p!an, and had filled it with various plants,
which he proposed to cultivate with his own hands. On the
other fide it communicated with the chapel of the monastery,
in which he w;'s to pcrform his devotions. Into this humble S57-
retreat, scarce fufiicient for the comfortable accommodation of a Set rary 2*
private gentleman, did Charles enter, with twelve domefircks
only. He buried there, in solitude and filencc, his grandeur,
his ambition, together with all those vast projeds, which, dur-
ing half a century, had alarmed and agitated Europe, filling
every kingdom in it, by turns, with the terror of his arms,
and the dread of being fubje&ed to his power'..

THE contrail between Charles's condut, and that of the Conhl be.

Pope at this junaure, was so obvious, that it firuck even the th'ieJ ,us
moRs careless observers; nor was the comparison which they C'harlc na:i.t

thce I'op ,
mlade much to Paul's advantage. The former, a conqueror,

'Sandov. ii. 607. & Zuniga. nzo. Thuan. lib. xvii. 609.

bor t

375'

BooxXMJ.

A5 7.
'5j7-

The duke of
Guise leads
the French
army into
Italy.

THE REIGN OF THE,

born to reign, long accufiomed to the splendor which accompa-
nies supreme power, and to those busy and interesting scenes in
which an active ambition had engaged him, quitted the world,
at an early period of life, that he might close the evening of his
days in tranquillity, and secure some interval for fober thought,
and serious recolletion. The latter, a priest, who had pased the
early part of his life in the shade of the schools, and in the fludy
of the Speculative sciences, who was seemingly so detached from
the world, that he had ihut himself up for many years in the soli-
tude of a cloister, and who was not raised to the Papal throne
until he had reached the extremity of old age, discovered at
once all the impetuosity of youthful ambition, and engaged in
vast schemes, in order to accomplish which, he scrupled not to
scatter the feeds of discord and to kindle the flames of war in
every corner of Europe. But Paul, regardless of the opinion and
censures of mankind, held on his own course with his wonted
arrogance and violence. These, although they seemed already
to have exceeded all bounds, rose to flill a greater height, upon
the arrival of the duke of Guise in Italy.

THAT which the two Princes of Lorrain foresaw and desired,

had happened. The duke of Guise was entrusted with the com-
mand of the army appointed to march to the Pope's affifance.
It consisted of twenty thousand men, of the best troops in the ser-
vice of France. So high was the Duke's reputation, and such
the general expectation of beholding some extraordinary exertion
of his courage and abilities in a war, into which he had precipi-
tated his country, chiefly with the design of gaining a field
where he might display his own talents, that many of the
French nobility, who had. no command in the troops em-
ployed, accompanied him as volunteers. This army passed the

Alps

377

Alps in a rigorous season, and advanced towards Rome, without
any opposition from the Spaniards, who, as they were not firong
enough to aa in different parts, had collected alltheir forces in one
body on the frontiers of Naples, for the defence of that kingdom.

EMBOLDENED by the approach of the French, the Pope let

loose all the fury of his resentment against Philip, which, not-
withstanding the natural violence of his temper, prudential con-
fiderations had hitherto obliged him to keep under some re-
firaint. He named commissioners, whom he empowered to pass
judgment in the suit, which the consistorial advocate had com-
menced against Philip, in order to prove that he had forfeited
the crown of Naples, by taking arms against the Holy See, of
which he was a vassal. He recalled all the nuncios resident in
the courts of Charles V. of Philip, or of any of their allies. This
was levelled chieflyagainft Cardinal Pole, the Papal legate in the
court of England, whose great merit, in having contributed so
successfully to reconcile that kingdom to the church of Rome,
together with the expetation of farther services that he might
perform, was not sufficient to screen him from the resentment
which he had incurred by his zealous endeavours to re-eflablifh
peace between the house of Aufiria and France. He commanded
an addition to be made to the anathemas annually denounced
against the enemies of the church on Maundy-Thurfday,
Yvhereby he inflicted the censure of excommunication on the
authors of the late invasion of the ecclesiastical territories, what-
ever their rank or dignity might be; and, in consequence of this,
the usual prayers for the Emperor were omitted next day in the
Pope's chapel d.

Book XIL

1SS7.

The Pope re.
news hoftili-
ties againit
Philip.

February i z,

April 9,

d Pal. lib. xiii. lSo. Mem. de Ribicr, ii. 678.
VOL. Il.u

BuT
Ccc

BOOKX.I.

I . - *

Hi, military
preparations
inadequate.

BUT while the Pope indulged himself in these wild and

childlih sallies of rage, he either negIfted, or it exceeded his
power, to take such measures as would have rendered his resent-
ment really formidable, and fatal to his enemies. For, whetn
the duke of Guise entered Rome, where he was received with a
triumphal pomp, which would have been more suitable if he had
been returning from having terminated the war with glory, than
when he was going to begin it with a doubtful chance of success,
he found none of the preparations for war in such forwardness
as Caraffa had promised, or he had expected. The Papal troops
were far inferior in number to the quota stipulated; no maga-
zines sufficient for their fubfiftance were formed; nor was money
for paying them provided. The Venetians, agreeably to that
cautious maxim which the misfortunes of their state had first
led them to adopt, and which was now become a fundamental
principle in their policy, declared their resolution to preserve an
exac neutrality, without taking any part in the quarrels of
Princes so far their superiors in power. The other Italian states
were either openly united in league with Philip, or secretly
wilhed success to. his arms against a Pontiff, whose inconsiderate
ambition had rendered Italy once more the feat of war.

rue (of THE duke of Guise perceived that the whole weight of the
itrtdionr. war would devolve on him; and became sensible, though too

late, how imprudent it is to rely, in the execution of great enter-
prizcs, on the aid of feeble allies. Pufled on, however, by the
P'op's impatience for adion, as well as by his own desire of per-
forming something of what he had so confidently undertaken,
Ap il 3 hlie mn;rcled towards Naples, and began his operations. But the

futccfs of thecie fell far Ihort of his former reputation, of what
the wvprld cxpl)cdc, and of what he himself had pronirfcd. IIc

lti~~: 'op ned
378

opened the campaign with the siege of Civitella, a town of some
importance on the Neapolitan frontier. But the obstinacy with
which the Spaniih governor defended it, baffled all the impetuous
efforts of the French valour, and obliged Guise, after a siege of three
weeks, to retire from the town with disgrace. He endeavoured
to wipe off that stain, by advancing boldly towards the duke of
Alva's camp, and offering him battle. But that prudent com-
mander, sensible of all the advantages of tfanding on the defen-
five before an invading enemy, declined an engagement, and
kept within his entrenchments; and adhering to his plan with
the teadinefs of a Caflilian, eluded with great address all Guise's
stratagems, to draw him into adion'. Meanwhile, sickness
wafted the French army; violent dissensions had arisen between
Guise and the commander of the Pope's forces; the Spaniards
renewed their incursions into the ecclesiastical state; the Pope,
when he found, initead of the conquests and triumphs which he
had fondly expected, that he could not secure his own territories
from depredation, murmured, complained, and began to talk of
peace. The duke of Guise, mortified to the last degree with having
aced such an inglorious part, not only follicited his court either
to reinforce his army, or to recal him, but urged Paul to fulfil
his engagements; and called on Cardinal Caraffa, sometimes with
rcproaches, and fometimcs with threats, to make good these
magnificent promises, from a rafll confidence in which he had ad-
vised his master to renounce the truce of Vauccllcs, and to join
in league with the Popes.

BUT while the French affairs in Italy were in this wretclihed
situation, an unexpected event happened in the Low-Coun-

c Hcrrcra vida de Felipe, i8r.
Thuan. lib. xxviii. 614. Palav. lib. xiii. 18i. Burn. ii. app. 317.

C c c 2 tries,

379
Boo.KXI!.

I557.

Holtilities in
the Low-
Countries.

BOOK XII. tries, which called the duke of Guise from a Ration wherein he

v could acquire no honour, to the mofidignified and important charge

which could be committed to a subjeC. As soon as the French had
discovered their purpose of violating the truce of VauceHes, not
only by fending an army into Italy, but by attempting to fur-
prize some of the frontier towns in Slanders, Philip, though wil-
ling to have avoided a rupture, determined to prosecute the war
with such spirit, as should make his enemies sensible, that his
father had not erred, when he judged him to be so capable of
government, that he had given up the reins into his hands. As
lie knew that Henry had been at great expence in fitting out the
army under the duke of Guise, and that his treasury was hardly
able to answer the exorbitant and endless demands of a distant
war, he foresaw that all his operations in the Low-Countries
must, of consequence, be feeble, and be confidered only as fecon-
dary to those in Italy. For that reason, he prudently reoblved
to make his principal effort in that place where he expected the
French to be weakelt, and to bend his chief force against that
quarter where they would feel a blow most sensibly. With this
view, he assembled in the Low-Countries an army of about fifty
thousand men, the Flemings serving him on this- occasion with
that active zeal, which fubjeas are wont to exert in obeying the
commands of a new sovereign. But Philip, cautious and pro-
vident, even at that early period of life, did not ref all his hopes
of success on that formidable force alone.

Phillte'dea- HE had been labouring for some time to engage the English to
Yours to en-
;nge Englarnd espouse his quarrel; and though it was manifestly the interest of
in che war. that kingdom to maintain a ftri& neutrality, and the people them-

selves were sensible of the advantages which they derived from it ;
though lie knew how odious his name was to the English, and

how
35«

how averse they would be to co-operate with him in any measure, BooXII...
he nevertheless did not despair ofaccomplifhing his point. He re- L
lied on the affection wherewith the Queen doated on him, which
was so violent, that even his coldness and neglec had not extin-
guifhed it; he knew her implicit reverence for his opinion, and
her fond desire of gratifying him in every particular. That he
might work on these with greater facility, and more certain fuc-
cess, he set out for England. The Queen who, during her
husband's absence, had languished in perpetual dejeaion, re-
fumed fresh spirits on his arrival; and without paying the least
attention either to the interest or to the inclinations of her people,
entered warmly into all his schemes. In vain did her privy-council
remonstrate against the imprudence as well as danger of involv-
ing the nation in an unnecessary war; in vain did they put
her in mind of the solemn treaties of peace subsisting between
England and France, which the conduct of that nation had afforded
her no pretext to violate. Mary, soothed by Philip's carefies,
or intimidated by the threats which his ascendant over her em-
boldened him at some times to throw out, was deaf to every
thing that could be urged in opposition to his sentiments, and
insisted with the greatest vehemence on an immediate declara-
tion of war against France. The council, though all Philip's
address and Mary's authority were employed to gain or over-
awe them, struggled long, and yielded at last, not from convic-
tion, but merely from deference to the will of their fovercign.
War was declared against France, the only one perhaps against June o20
that kingdom into which the Englilh ever entered with reluc-
tance. As Mary knew the avcrfion of the nation to tlis mea-
sure, she durst not call a parliament in order to raise money for
carrying on the war. She supplied this want, however, by a

strain

BooK XII. firain of prerogative; and levied large fums on her fubjets by

her own authority. This enabled her to assemble a fuflicient
body of troops, and to fend eight thousand men under the con-
du& of the earl of Pembroke to join Philip's army .

Operations of PHILIP, who was not ambitious of military glory, gave the
Phil;P's ar-
my in tihe command of his army to Emanuel Philibert, duke of Savoy,
Low CSun. and fixed his own residence at Cambray, that he might be at
tries.

hand to receive the earliest intelligence of his motions, and to
aid him with his counsels. The duke opened the campaign with
a masterly stroke of address, which justified Philip's choice, and
discovered such a superiority of genius over the French generals,
as almost ensured success in his subsequent operations. He ap-
pointed the general rendezvous of his troops at a place confidera-
bly diflant from the country which he destined to be the scene
of acion; and having kept the enemy in fufpence for a good
time with regard to his intentions, he at last deceived them so
effetually by the variety of his marches and counter-marches,
that they concluded that he meant to bend all his force against the
province of Champagne, and would attempt to penetrate into the
kingdom on that fide. In consequence of this opinion, they
drew all their ftrcngth towards that quarter, and reinforcing the
garrisons there, left the towns on other parts of the frontier
dcftitute of troops fufficint to defend them.

Invelt s.. I M ! NU E ., as soon as he perccived that this feint had its fit I
QL'n ill. cftcd, turned suddenly to the right, advanced by rapid marches

into l'icardy, and iending his cavalry, in which lie was ex-
tremely strong, before him, invcflct St. Qjintil. This was at

C Carte iii. 337.

to''I .
382

town deemed in that age of considerable firength, and of great BOOK XII.
importance, as there were few fortified cities between it and '

155;7

Paris. The fortifications, however, had been much negleced ;
the garrison, weakened by draughts sent towards Champagne,
did not amount to a fifth part of the number requisite for its
defence; and the governor, though a brave officer, was nei-
ther of rank, nor authority, equal to the command in a place
of so much consequence, besieged by such a formidable army.
A few days must have put the Duke of Savoy in possession of
the town, if the admiral de Coligny, who thought it concerned
his honour to attempt saving a place of such importance to his
country, and which lay within his jurifdidion as governor of Pi-
cardy, had not taken the gallant resolution of throwing himself
into it, with such a body of men as he could colledt of a sudden.
This resolution he executed with great intrepidity, and confider-
ing the nature of the enterprize, with no contemptible fucccfs;
for though one half of his small body was cut off, he, with the
other, broke through the enemy, and entered the town. The
unexpected arrival of an officer of such high rank and reputa-
tion, and who had exposed himself to such danger in order to
join them, inspired the desponding garribon with courage. EIvcry
thing that the admiral's great skill and experience in the art of
war could Iuggcft, for annoying the cncny, or defending the
town, was attempted; and the citizens as well as the garrison
fecondling his zeal with equal ardour, tfcmed to be detcrminlcd
that they would hold out to the lafi, and l acrificc thenifelvcs in
order to Iave their country ".

b Thualn. lib. xix. 647.

T'l E

383

3oo XII. THE Duke of Savoy, whom the English under the Earl of

';S7. Pembroke, joined about this time, pushed on the siege with

Tnhe Fresh the greatest vigour. An army so numerous, and so well
¢ndcato1.ur to
relieve the supplied with every thing requisite, carried on its approaches

with great advantage against a garrison which was till so feeble
that it durst seldom venture to diflurb or retard the enemy's
operations by sallies. I he admiral, sensible of the approaching
danger and unable to avert it, acquainted his uncle the constable
Montmorency, who had the command of the French army,
with his situation, and pointed out to him a method by which
he might throw relief into the town. The constable, follicitous
to save a town, the loss of which would open a passage for the
enemy into the heart of France; and eager to extricate his ne-
phew out of that perilous situation, in which zeal for the pub-
lick had engaged him; resolved, though aware of the danger,
to attempt what he desired. With this view he marched from
La Fere towards St. Quintin at the head of his army, which
was not by one half so numerous as that of the enemy, and
having given the command of a body of chosen men to Co-
ligny's brother Dandelot who was colonel general of the French
infantry, he ordered him to force his way into the town by that
avenue which the admiral had represented as most practicable,
while he himself with the main army would give the alarm to
the enemy's camp on the opposite fide, and endeavour to draw
Augut o. all their attention towards that quarter. Dandelot executed his

orders with greater intrepidity than condut. His soldiers
rushed on with such headlong impetuosity, that though it broke
the first body of the enemy which flood in their way, it threw
themselves into the utmost confusion; and being attacked by
fresh troops which closcd in upon them on every fide, the

t greater
384

greater part of them were cut in pieces, Dandelot, with about
five hundred of the most adventrous, and most fortunate, mak-
ing good 'his entrance into the town.

MEANWHILE the Confiable, in executing his part of the

plan, advanced so near the camp of the besiegers, as rendered
it impossible to retreat with safety in the face of an enemy so
much superior in number. The Duke of Savoy instantly per-
ceived Montmorency's error, and prepared, with the pretence
of mind and abilities of a great general, to avail himself of it.
He drew up his army in order of battle, with the greatert ex-
pedition, and watching the moment when the French began to
file off towards La Fere, he detached all his cavalry under the
command of the count of Egmont to fall on their rear, while
he, at the head of his-infantry, advanced to support him. The
French retired at firRf in perfec order, and with a good counte-
nance; but when they saw Egmont draw near with his formi-
dable body of cavalry, the shock of which they were conscious
that they could not withfland, the profpea of imminent danger,
added to difiruft of their general, whose imprudence every soldier
now perceived, struck them with general consternation. They
began insensibly to quicken their pace, and thofic in the rear began
to press so violently on such as were before them, that in a short
time their march resembled a flight rather than a retreat. Egmont,
observing their confusion, charged them with the grcatefl filry,
and in a moment all their Gcnfilarmcric, the pride and strength
of the French armies in that age, gave way and fled with pre-
cipitation. The infantry, however, whom the conllable, by his
presence a.nd authority, kept to their colours, flill continued
their retreat, until the cnemy lroughlt tlime pieccs of cannon

VoL . II. D d d to

BOOK XII.

A S _ .

1597.

The battle of
St. Qmitria.

Total defeat
of tile l' .cdil.

t ) bear upon their center, which threw them into such disorder,
that the cavalry renewing their attack, broke in, and the rout
became universal. About four thoufandof the French fell in the
field, and amongthofe the Duke of Anguyen a Prince of the blood,
together with fix hundred gentlemen. The Constable, as soon
as he perceived the fortune of the day to be irretrievable, rushed
into the thickest of the enemy, with a resolution not to survive
the calamity, which his ill-conduCt had brought upon his country;
but having received a dangerous wound, and being wafted with
the loss of blood, he was surrounded by some Flemish officers,
to. whom he was known, who protected him from the violence
of the soldiers, and obliged him to surrender. Besides the con-
flable, the Dukes of Montpenfier and Longueville, the Marechal
St. Andre, many officers ofdiflintion, three hundred gentlemen,
and near four thousand private soldiers were taken prisoners.
All the colours belonging to the infantry, all the ammunition,
and all the cannon, two pieces excepted, fell into the enemy's
hands. The vicorious army did not lose above fourscore

men

Tl; !, f.. THIS battle, no less fatal to France than the ancient vidories
k ic. of Crccy and Agincourt, gained by the English on the fame

fionticr, bore a more near refcmblance to these, in the fud-
lcnncfs of the rout; in the raihfnefs of the comman-
der in chief; in the n bumber of perlons of note slain or
taken; and in the small loss fullained by the enemy. It filled
France with equal conflernation. Many inhabitants of Paris
with the lianc precipitancy and trepidation, as if tke enemy

Thuan. 65o. Harxai Annal. Brabant, ii. (92. Hcrrcra, 291.

had

i5 7.
3.6:

had been already at their gates, quitted the city, and retired
into the interior provinces. The King, by his presence and ex-
hortations, endeavoured to console and to animate such as
remained, and applying himself with the greatest diligence to
repair the ruinous fortifications of the city, prepared to defend
it against the attack which he instantly expeted.. But happily
for France, Philip's caution, together with the intrepid firmness
of the Admiral de Coligny not only saved the capital from the
danger to which it was exposed, but gained the nation a fort
interval, during which the people recovered from the terror and
dejeCion occasioned by a blow no less severe than unexpeced,
and Henry had leisure to take measures for the publick security
with the spirit which became the sovereign of a powerful and
martial people.

B0óKxll;

'557.

PHILIP, immediately after the battle, visited the camp at Philp repairs

St. Quintin, where he was received with all the exultation of to Lisarn
military triumph; and such were his transports of joy on ac-
count of an event, which threw so much lustre on the
beginning of his reign, that they softened his severe and
haughty temper, into an unusual flow of courtesy. When the
Duke of Savoy approached, and was kneeling to kifs s ihandJ,
he caught himn in his arms, and embracing him with warmth,
" It becomes me, fays he, rather to kils your handls, 'which have
gained nm fucl a glorious and alnioft bloodllcs ivi'orry."

As soon as the rejoicings and congratulations on Philip's

arrival were over, a council of war was hcl( in order to dcter-
mine how they might improve their victory to tlhe bhcl advan-
tage. The Duke of Savoy, fcconded by) livci'al of the allcll

D (d 2 oflicers

l i s

d c i w , -

sitms concern-

ij~l the 1rr1e.
Clit~oli ul thae
war.

387

Boox XII. officers formed under Charles V. insisted that they should imme-

1- 5I57 diately relinquish the siege of St. Quintin, the redudion of

which was now an objec below their attention, and advance
diredly towards Paris; that as there were neither troops to
oppose, nor any town of strength to retard their march, they
might reach that capital while under the full impression of the
astonishment and terror occafioped by the rout of the army,
and take pofieffion of it without resistance. But Philip, less
adventrous or more prudent than his generals, preferred a mo-
derate but certain advantage, to an enterprize of greater fplen-
dour, but of more doubtful success. He represented to the council
the infinite resources of a kingdom so powerful as France; the
great number as well as martial spirit of its nobles; their attach-
ment to their sovereign; the vast advantages with which they
could carry on war in their own territories; and the unavoidable
deftrudion, which must be the consequence of their penetrat-
ing too rashly into the enemy's country, before they had secured
such a communication with their own, as might render a retreat
safe, if upon any difaflrous event that hould become neceflary.
On all there accounts, he advised the continuance of the siege,
and his generals acquiesced the more readily in his opinion, as
they made no doubt of being mailers of the town in a few
days, a loss of time of so little consequence in the execution of
their plan, that they might easily repair it by their subsequent
acivity'.

s$. Qintin TIHE weakness of the fortifications, and the small number of
Admiral the garrison, which could no longer hope either for reinforce-
t'oligny,

' Belcar. Commentar. di Reb. Gallic. 901.
388

2

ment,

ment, or relief, seemed to authorize this calculation of Philip's BOOK XII.
generals. But, in making it, they did not attend sufficiently to I
the charater of Admiral de Coligny, who commanded in the
town. A courage undismayed and undifconcerted amidst the
greatest dangers, an invention fruitful in resources, a genius which
rouzed and seemed to acquire new force upon every disaster, -a
talent of governing the minds of men, together with a capacityof
maintaining his ascendant over them even under circumstances
the most adverse and distressful, were qualities which Coligny
poffefled in a degree superior to any general of that age. These
qualities were peculiarly adapted to the station in which he was
now placed; and as he knew the infinite importance to his coun-
try of every hour which he could gain at this juncture, he exert-
ed himself to the utmost in contriving how to protract the siege,
and to detain the enemy from attempting any enterprize more
dangerous to France. Such were the perseverance and skill with' which is
which he conducted the defence, and such the fortitude and taken by as-
patience with which he animated the garrison, that though the
Spaniards, the Flemings, and the Engliih, carried on the attack
with all the ardour which national emulation inspires, he held
out the town seventeen days. He was taken prisoner, at last, Augua 27.
on the breach, overpowered by the superior number of the
enemy.

HENRY availed himself, with the utmost adivity, of the in- Irenry's mca-
terval which the Admiral's well-timed oblfinacy had afforded fures for the

defence of his

him. He appointed officers to collec the scattered remains of kingdom.
the constable's army; he issued orders for levying soldiers in
every part of the kingdom; he commanded the ban and arriere
ban of the frontier provinces inflantly to take the field, and to

join

a89

THE REIGN OF THE
;J OOK XII.

,ju).

The vi6crV
of St. CQuin
tin proc']ii~i.e
of few b' ne-
sical c. I!e-

* (.L .

join the Duke of Nevers at Laon in Picardy; he recalled the
greater part of the veteran troops which served under the
Marcchal Brifac in Piedmont; he sent courier after courier
to the Duke of Guise, requiring him, together with all his
army, to return inflantly for the defence of their country; he
dispatched one envoy to the Grand Signior, to follicit the assist-
ance of his fleet, and the loan of a fum of money; he sent
another into Scotland, to incite the Scots to invade the north of
England, that by drawing Mary's attention to that quarter,
he might prevent her from reinforcing her troops which served
under Philip. These efforts of the King were warmly seconded
by the zeal of his fubjeds. The city of Paris granted him a free
gift of three hundred thousand livres. The other great towns
imitated the liberality of the capital, and contributed in propor-
tion. Several noblemen of diflinaion engaged to garrison and to
defend at their own expenco the towns which lay most exposed
to be attacked by the enemy. Nor was this general concern for
the publick confined to communities alone, or to those in the
higher sphere of life, but diffusing itself among persons of every
rank, each individual seemed disposed to ad with as much vigour
as if the honour of the King, and the safety of the state had de-
pended on his personal efforts m

PIrrLIP, who was no firanger either to the prudent mcafurcs

taken by the French monarch for the security of his dominions,
or to the fplrit with which his fubjeds prepared to defenil thcm-
fcl vcs, perceived, when it was too late, that he had loll an
(lopportunity which could never be recallcd, and that it was now
vain to think of penetrating into the heart of France. I-le

* Mnem, de Ribicr. ii. 701. 703.

abandoned,

39'

abandoned, therefore, without much reluctance, a scheme which ThoKXILI
was too bold and hazardous to be perfectly agreeable to his 7'
cautious temper; and employed his army, during the remain-
der of the campaign, in'the sieges of Ham and Catelet. Of
these, he soon became mailer; and the reduction of these two
pettytowns, together with the acquisition of St. Quintin, were all
the advantages which he derived from one of the molt decisive
viaories gained in that century. Philip himself, however, con-
tinued in high exultation, on account of his success; and as all
his passions were tinged with superstition, he, in memory of the
battle of St. Quintin, which had been fought on the day con-
fecrated to St. Laurence, vowed to build a church, a monaftry,
and a palace sacred to that faint and martyr. Before the expira-
tion of the year, he laid the foundation of an edifice, in which
all these were united, at the Escurial in the neighbourhood of
Madrid; and the fame principle, which dictated the vow, direc-
ted the building. For the plan of the work was so formed as
to resemble a gridiron, which, according to the legendary tale,
had been the intfrument of St. Laurence's martyrdom. Notwith-
flanding the vait and expensive fchenes, in which his rchefes am-
bition involved him, Philip continued the building with filch
perfevcrance for twenty-two years, and rcfervcd such vail umss
for this monument of his piety and vanity, that the monarchs
of Spain arc indebted to him for a royal rcfidcnce, which tholugh
not the most elegant, is certainly the molt sumptuous and mag-
nificent of any in Europe *.

TI:E firfi account of that fatal blow which the Frcnch had ' h'Frri,

I [ny re c 1 cd

received at St. Qmintin was carried to Rome by the courier, outol ial.
whom IIenry had sent to recall the Duke of Guifc. As Paul,

* Colmcnar Annalcs tl' ;fipasnc, torn. ii. p. X 36.

C'( 1
7

BOOKXI. even with the aliftance of his French auxiliaries, had scarce been

-s7' able to check the progress of the Spanish arms, he foresaw that

as-loon as he was deprived of their protection, his territories must
be over-run in a moment. He remonstrated therefore with the
greatest violence against the departure of the French army, re-
proaching the Duke of Guise for his ill conduc, which had
brought him into such an unhappy situation; and complaining
of the King for deserting him so ungenerously under such
circumfiances. Guise's orders, however, were peremptory.
Paul, inflexible as he was, found it necessary to accommodate
his conduc to the exigency of his affairs, and to employ the
mediation of the Venetians, and of Cosmo di Medici in order
to obtain peace. Philip, who had been forced unwillingly
to a rupture with the Pope, and who, even while success
crowned hisarms, doubted so much thejuftice of his own cause,
that he had made frequent overtures of pacification, listened
eagerly to the first proposals of this nature from Paul, and dif-
covered such moderation in his demands, as could scarce have
been expcded from a Prince elated with vitory.

A treaty of THE Duke of Alva on the part of Philip, and the Cardinal
teace bte Caraffa in the name of his uncle, met at Cavi, and both being
'Pope and equally disposcd to peace, they, after a fliort conference, termi-
Philip.

nated the war by a treaty on the following terms: That Paul
ljiould renounce his league with France, and maintain for the
future such a neutrality as became the common father of
Chriltendom ; That Philip ihould inflantly restore all the towns
of the ccclefiafical territory of which he had takecn poffeflion;
That the claims of the Caraffa's to the dutchy of Paliano, and
other dcmefncs of the Colonna's flould be referred to the

decision
392

decision of the republick of Venice; That the Duke of Alva BooKXIL.
lhould repair in person to Rome, and after asking pardon of Paul 55
in his own name, and in that of his master, for having invaded
the patrimony of the church, should receive the Pope's abfolu-
tion from that crime. Thus Paul, through Philip's fcrupiilous
timidity, finished an unprofperous war without any detriment to
the Papal See. The conqueror appeared humble, and acknow-
ledged his error; while he who had been vanqifhed retained
his usual haughtiness, and was treated with every mark of fu-
periority ". The Duke of Alva, in terms of the treaty, repaired to
Rome, and in the posture of a supplicant, kiiTed the feet, and
implored the forgiveness of that very person, whom his arms
had reduced to the last extremity. Such was the fuperfitious
veneration of the Spaniards for the papal characer, that Alva,
though perhaps the proudest man of the age, and accustomed
from his infancy to a familiar intercourse with Princes, acknow-
ledged that when lie approached the Pope, he was so much
overawed, that his voice failed, and his presence of mind for-
sook him °.

BUT though this war, which at its commencement threatened Philip reiores

Placentia to

mighty revolutions, was brought to an end without occafioining Otavio Far-
any alteration in those States, which were its immediate object, nere.
it produced effecs of considerable confcquence in other parts of
Italy. As Philip was extremely solicitous to terminate his quarrel
with Paul as speedily as poffibl, lie was willing to make any
ficrifice in order to gain those Princes, who, by joining their

" Pallav. lib. xiii. 183. F. Paul. 380. Ilerrcra, vol. i. 3ro.
* Pallav. lib. xiii. 185. Summonte Ioria di Napoli, k. 286.
VOL. III. E c troops

393

g394
BooxXII.

$157.

Cosmo di Me-
dici'b measures
for obtaining
biena.

troops to the Papal and French army, might have prolonged the
war. With this view, he entered into a negociation with
O&avio Farnese, Duke of Parma, and in order to reduce him
from his alliance with France, lie restored to him the city of
Placentia with the territory depending on it, which Charles V.
having seized in the year one thousand five hundred and forty-
seven, had kept from that time in his possession, and had tranf-
mitted together with his other dominions to Philip.

THIS tfep made such a discovery of Philip's characer and

views to Cosmo di Medici, the mnoft sagacious and provident of
all the Italian Princes, that he conceived hopes of accomplishing
his favourite scheme of adding Siena and its territories to his
dominions in Tuscany. As his success in this attempt depended
entirely on the delicacy of address with which it was conducted,
he employed all the refinements of policy in the negociation
which he set on foot for this purpose. He began with solicit-
ing Philip, whose treasury he knew to be entirely drained by
the expence of the war, to repay the great fums which he had
advanced to the Emperor during the siege of Siena. When
Philip endeavoured to elude a demand which he was unable to
satisfy, he affctced to be extremely disquieted, and making
no secret of his disgust, inftrudted his ambassador at Rome to
open a negociation with the Pope, which seemed to be the effec
of it. The ambassador executed his-commiflion with such dex-
terity, that Paul, imagining (ofino to be entirely alienated from.
the Spanish intcrefl, prop ,lld to him an alliance with France,,
which should be cemented by the marriage of his eldefl son to
one of Hcnry's datghters. Cofino received the overture with
such apparent fatisfa4tion, and with so many professions of gra-

titude

395

titude for the high honour of which he had the profped, that BooK XIL
not only the Pope's ministers, but the French envoy at Rome -7
talked confidently, and with little reserve, of the acceflion of that
important ally, as a matter certain and decided. The account of
this was quickly carried to Philip; and Cosmo, who foresaw
how much it would alarm him, had dispatched his nephew Lu-
dovico de Toledo into the Netherlands, that he might be at hand
to observe and take advantage of his consternation, before the
first impression which it made should in any degree abate.
Cosmo was extremely fortunate in the choice of the inftru-
ment whom he employed. Toledo waited, with patience, until
he discovered with certainty, that Philip had received such intel-
ligence of his uncle's negociations at Rome, as must have filled
his suspicious mind with fear and jealousy; and then craving an
audience, he required payment of the money which had been
borrowed by the Emperor, in the most earnest and peremptory
terms. In urging that point, he artfully threw out several dark
hints and ambiguous declarations, concerning the extremities,
to which Cofino might be driven by a refusal of this just de-
mand, as well as by other grievances of which he had good
reason to complain.

PHILIP, aftoniflied at an address in such a strain, from a Prince

so far his inferior as the Duke of Tuscany, and comparing what
he nowhcard, with the information which he had received from
Italy, immediately concluded that Cofino had ventured to affumc
this bold and unusual tone on the profp)e of his union with
France. In order to prevent the Pope and Henry from acquiring
an ally, who by Iis abilities and the situation of his dominions
would have added both reputation and flrcngth to their confe-
dlracy, he offered to grant Cofino the inveltiturc of Sienla, if

1 c e2 le

Their fuccefi,

BooK XIT.

557.

he would consent to accept of this, as an equivalent for the
fums due to him, and engage to furnish a body of troops to-
wards the defence of Philip's territories in Italy, against any
power who should attack them. As soon as Coino had brought
Philip to this, which was the objct of all his artifices and in-
trigues, he did not protract the negociation by any unnecessary
delay, or any excess of refinement, but closed eagerly with the
proposal, and Philip, in spite of the remonstrances of his ablest
counf'llors, signed a treaty with him to that effect P.

As no Prince was ever more tenacious of his rights than Philip,

or less willing to relinquish any territory which he possessed, by
what tenure soever he held it, these unusual conceflions to the
Dukes of Parma and Tuscany, by which he wantonly gave up
countries, in acquiring or defending which, his father had em-
ployed many years, and wafted much blood and treasure, cannot
be accounted for from any motive, but his superstitious desire
of extricating himself out of the war which he had been forced
to wage against the Pope. By there treaties, however, the
balance of power among the Italian States was poized with
greater equality, and rendered less variable than it had been
fincc it received the first violent shock from the invasion of
Charles VIII. of France. From this period Italy ceased to be
the great theatre, on which the monarchs of Spain, France, and
Germany, contended for power or for fame. Their dissentions
and hostilities were neverthclefs as frequent and as violent as
ever; but being excited by new objecs, they stained other re-
gions of IEurope with blood, and rendered them, in their turn,
mnilrable by tlh dcvaflations of war.

P 'Iluan. lib. xviii. 624. Hcrrcra, i. 263. 275. Palav. lib. xiii, 180.

Ti r.
396

THE Duke of Guise left Rome on the fame day that his BooK XI.

adversary the Duke of Alva made his ignominious fubmiflions 1557.
to the Pope. He was received in France as the guardian angel Sept. 29.

The Duke of

of the kingdom. His late ill success in Italy seemed to be for- Guise's recep-
gotten, while his former services, particularly his defence of onina
Metz, were recounted with exaggerated praise; and he was
welcomed in every city through which he pafred, as the re-
ftorer of publick security, who after having set bounds by his
conduct and valour to the vitorious arms of Charles V. returned
now, at the call of his country, to check the formidable progress
of Philip's power. The reception which he met with from Henry
was no less. cordial and honourable. New titles were invented,
and new dignities created in order to distinguish him. He was
appointed lieutenant-general in chief both within and without
the kingdom, with a jurifdidion almost unlimited, and hardly
inferior to that which was pollefed by the Kinghimfelf. Thus,
through the singular felicity which attended the Princes of
Lorrain, the miscarriage of their own schemes contributed to
aggrandize them. The calamities of his country, and the ill
condua of his rival the Constable, exalted the Duke of Guise to
a height of dignity and power, which he could not have ex-
peded to attain by the moil fortunate and most compleat fuccefi
of his own ambitious projets.

TIIE Duke of Guise, eager to perform something suitable to Takes the

the high expetations of his countrymen, and that he might crltimlndof
juflify the cxtraordinary confidence which the King had reposcd
in him, ordered all the troops, wtvich could be got together, to
alfemble at Campiegne. 'lhough the winter was well ad-
vanced, and had set in with extreme rigour, he placed himl'1 '

397
1:

:IL

IBooK XU. at their head, and took the field. By Henry's aaivity and the

1557. zeal of his fubjeds, so many soldiers had been raised in the king-

dom, and such considerable reinforcements had been drawn from
Germany and Swifterland, as formed an army refpedable even
in the eyes of a vi&orious enemy. Philip, alarmed at feeing it
put in motion at such an uncommon season, began to tremble
for his new conquefs, particularly St. Q.intin, the fortifications
of which were hitherto but imperfectly repaired.

LIe iverts BUT the Duke of Guise meditated a more important enter-
Caiais.

, 558. prize; and after amusing the enemy with threatening successively
Jaruary ;i. different towns on the frontiers of Slanders, he turned suddenly

to the left and invetecd Calais with his whole army. Calais had
been taken by the English under Edward III. and was the fruit of
that monarch's glorious victory at Cressy. Being the only place
that they retained of their ancient and extensive territories in
France, and which opened to them, at all times, an easy and secure
passage into the heart of that kingdom, their keeping possession
of it soothed the pride of the one nation as much as it morti-
sied the vanity of the other. Its situation was naturally so
firong, and its fortifications deemed so impregnable, that no
nmonarch of France, how adventrous soever, had been bold enough
to attack it. Even when the domeftick firength of England was
broken and exhausted by the bloody wars between the houses of
York and Lancaster, and its attention entirely diverted from
forcign objeCts, Calais had remained undisturbed and un-
thrcatencd. Mary and her council, composed chiefly of Ecclc-
fiaflicks, unacquainted with military affairs, and whose whole
attention was turned towards extirpating heresy out of the
kingdom, had not only ncglected to take any precautions for

.;d~~~3 tilt~~the
398

the safety of this important place, but seemed to think that the
reputation of its strength alone was sufficient for its security.
Full of this opinion, they ventured, even after the declaration
of war, to continue a pracice which the low state of the
Queen's finances had introduced in times of peace. As the
country adjacent to Calais was overflowed during the winter, and
the marshes around it became impaflable, except by one avenue,
which the forts of St. Agatha and Newnhambridge command-
ed, it had been the cufftom of the English to dismiss the greater
part of the garrison towards the end of autumn, and to replace it
in the spring. In vain did Lord Wentworth, the governor of
Calais, remonstrate againfl this ill-timed parsimony, and represent
the possibility of his being attacked suddenly, while he had not
troops sufficient to man the works. The privy council treated-
these remonitrances with scorn, as if they had flowed from the
timidity or the rapacioufrrefs of the governor; and some of them,
with that confidence which is the companion of ignorance,
boasted that they would defend Calais with their white rods
against any enemy who ihould approach it during winter q. In.
vain did Philip, who had passed through Calais as he returned:
from England to the Netherlands, warn the Queen of the dan-
ger to which it was exposcd; and acquainting her with what
was neceifary for its security, offer to reinforce the garrison
during winter with a detachment of his own troops. Mary's.
counsellors, though obfcquious to her in all points wherein.
religion was concerned, distrusted, as much as the reft of their
countrymen, every proposition that came from her huiband.;
and fuifpeting this to be an artifice of Philip's in order to g:ai

q Carte, iii. 345.

Boox XII..

Its defence'esw
flace..

399'

l3O0KXX.

Irs B

JSS

the command of the town, they ncglected his intelligence, de.
clined lis offer, and left Calais with less than a fourth of the
men requisite for its defcnce.

(cife putses IT was his knowledge of this which encouraged the Duke.
the siege with
thfigur wh of Guile to venture on an enterprize, that furprized his own

countrymen, no less than his enemies. As he knew that its fuc*.
cess depended on conducting his operations with such rapidity as
would afford the EngliIh no time for throwing relief into the
town by sea, and prevent Philip from giving him any interrup-
tion by land, he pushed the attack with a degree of vigour little
'known in carrying on sieges, during that age. He drove the
English from Fort St. Agatha at the first assault; obliged them
to abandon the fort of Newnhambridge, after defending it
three days; took the castle which commanded the harbour by
Itorm; and on the eighth day after he appeared before Calais
compelled the governor, whose feeble garrison, which did not
exceed five hundred men, was worn out with the fatigue of

Tales the fiflaining to many attacks, and defending such extensive works,
town, to sign a capitulation.

THE Duke of Guise, without allowing the English time to

recover from the consternation occasioned by this blow, imme-
diately invested Guifnes, the garrison of which, though more
numerous, defended itself with less vigour, and after fianding
one brisk assault, surrendered the town. The castle of Hames
was abandoned by the troops posted there, without waiting the
approach of the enemy.

TivH

and likewise
Guifnes and

anmcs.
400

THUS, in a few days; during the depth of winter; and at a

time when the fatal battle of St. Quintin had so depressed the
sanguine spirit of the French, that their utmost aim was to pro-
tedc their own country, without dreaming of making conquefis
on the enemy; the enterprizing valour of one man drove the
English out of Calais, after they had held it two hundred and
ten years, and deprived them of every foot of land in a king-
dom, where their dominions had been once so extensive. This
exploit, at the fame time that it gave an high idea of the power
and resources of France to all Europe, set the Duke of Guise,
in the opinion of his countrymen, far above all the generals of
the age. They celebrated his conquests with immoderate tranf-
ports of joy; while the English gave vent to all the pafions,
which animate a high-fpirited people, when any great national
calamity is manifefily owing to the ill conduct of their rulers.
Mary and her ministers, formerly odious, were now contemp-
tible in their eyes. All the terrors of her severe and arbitrary
adminiffration could not restrain them from uttering execrations
and threats against those, who having wantonly involved the
nation in a quarrel wherein it was nowise interefied, had by
their negligence or incapacity brought irreparable difgracc on
their country, and loft the most valuable pofreiion belonging to
the Englifli crown.

BooKXIL

1-5,8.

The fplen.
dour and
effea of there
conquelfs.

TIHE French King imitated the conduct of its former con-

queror, Edward III. with regard to Calais. HIc commanded
all the IEniglifl inhabitants to quit the town, and giving their
hioufes to his own fb jeils, whoml lie allured to fettlc there by
granting tlhen various iinlnullitics, lie left a numetous garrison,
uintlr an experienced governor, , ior their defcncc. After this, his

Vol.. 111. 1' f f vitorious

401

Boo XII. vidorious army went into quarters of refreshment, and the

^Ls usual inadion of winter returned.

Feb. 24. MEANWHILE Ferdinand afembled the college of Electors at
CgnaltiOnf Frankfort, in order to lay before them the deed whereby
the Imperial Charles V. had resigned the Imperial crown, and transferred it

to him. This he had hitherto delayed, on account of some diffi-
culties which had occurred concerning the formalities requisite
in supplying a vacancy occasioned by an event, to which-there
was no parallel in the annals of the Empire. These being at
length adjusted, the Prince of Orange executed the commission
with which he had been entrusted by Charles; the Eledtors ac-
cepted of his resignation; declared Ferdinand his lawful successor;
and put him in poffeflion of all the ensigns of the Imperial
dignity.

The Pnpe BUT when the new Emperor sent Gufman his chancellor, to
refuses to ac-
knowledge acquaint the Pope with this tranfadaion, to testify his reverence
ermaperd as towards the Holy See, and to signify that, according to form,

he would foor dispatch an ambassador extraordinary to treat
with his holiness concerning his coronation; Paul, whom neither
experience nor disappointments could teach to bring down his
lofty ideas of the papal prerogative to such a moderate standard
as suited the genius of the times, refuscd to admit the envoy
into his presence, and declared all the proceedings at Frank-
fort irregular and invalid. He contended that the Pope, as the
.vicegerent of Christ, was entrusted with the keys both of cele-
flial and terrefirial government; that from him the Imperial jurif-
didion was derived; that though his predeceflors had autho-
rized the Electors to chufe an Emperor whom the Holy See

confirmed,,
402

confirmed, this privilege was confined to those cafes when a
vacancy was occasioned by death; that the instrument of
Charles's resignation had been presented in an improper court,
as it belonged to the Pope alone to reject or to accept of it, and
to nominate a person to supply his place; that, setting aside all
these objections, Ferdinand's election laboured under two defects
which alone were sufficient to render it void, for the Protestant
Electors had been admitted to vote, tho', by their apoftacy from the
catholick faith, they had forfeited that and every other privilege
of the electoral office; that Ferdinand, by ratifying the con-
cessions of several Diets in favour of hereticks, had rendered
hnmfelf unworthy of the Imperial dignity, which was inffituted
for the protection, not for the deftrudtion of the church. But after
thundering out these extravagant maxims, he added with an ap-
pearance of condescension, that if Ferdinand would renounce all
title to the Imperial crown, founded on the election at Frank-
fort, make professions of repentance for his past conduct, and
supplicate him, with due humility, to confirm Charles's refig-
nation, as well as his assumption to the Empire, he might expet
every mark of favour from his paternal clemency and goodness.
Gufman, though lie had laid his account with considerable
difficulties in his negociation with the Pope, little expected that
he would have revived these antiquated and wild prctenfions,
which affonifhed him so much that he scarce knew in what tone
lie ought to reply. He prudently declined entering into any
controversy concerning the nature or extent of the papal jurif-
tlidion, and confining hi-nfelf to the political considerations,
which flould determine the Pope to recognize an Emperor
already in poffeflion, he endeavoured to place tlhere in such a
light, as lie imagined could scarce fail to frike Paul, if he were

f f 2 not

Boo K XI.

1558.

403

BooKXII.

1558.

Henry endea-
vours to ex-
cite the Scots
againfl Eng-
land.

not altogether blind to his own interest. Philip seconded Gus-
man's arguments with great earneffnefs, by an ambassador whom
he icnt to Rome of purpose, and besought the Pope to desist
from claims so unseasonable, as might not only irritate and alarm
Ferdinand and the Princes of the Empire, but furnifl the ene-
mies of the Holy See with a new reason for representing its
jurifdicion as incompatible with the rights of Princes, and sub-
verfive of all civil authority. But Paul, who deemed it a crime
to attend to any consideration suggested by human prudence or
policy, when he thought himself called to assert the preroga-
tives of the Papal See, remained inflexible; and during his
pontificate, Ferdinand was not acknowledged as Emperor by the
court of Rome .

WHILE Henry was preparing for the approaching campaign,

he received accounts of the issue of his negociations in Scotland.
Long experience having at last taught the Scots the imprudence
of involving their country in every quarrel between France and
England, neither the solicitations of his ambassador, nor the
address and authority of the Queen-regent, could prevail on
them to take arms againfl a kingdom, with which they were at
peace. On this occasion the ardor of a martial nobility and
of a turbulent people was restrained by regard for the publick in-
terest and tranquillity, which in former deliberations of this kind,
had been fcldom attended to by a nation always prone to rufli into
every new war. But though the Scots adhered with flcadinefs
to their pacific fyftcm, thcy were extremely ready to gratify

r Godleveus de Abdicat. Car. V. ap. Gold. polit. Imp. 392. Palav. lib. xiii.
189. Ribicr. ii. 746. 759.

the
404

405

the French King in' another particular, which he had given in Boo XIL.
charge to his ambassador. , 8.

THE young Queen of Scots had been affianced to the Dauphin Marriage of

in the year one thousand five hundred and forty-eight, and theh the,
having been educated since that time in the'court of France, Qeen of

Scots.

ihe had grown up to be the most amiable, and one of the most
accomplished Princesses of that age. Henry demanded the con-
sent of her fubjets to the celebration of the marriage, and a
parliament which was held for that purpose, appointed eight
commissioners to represent the whole body of the nation at that
solemnity, with power to sign. such deeds as might be requisite
before it was concluded. In fettling the articles of the marriage,
the Scots took all the precautions, that prudence could dictate,
in order to prefcrve the liberty and indcpcndence of their coun-
try; while the French used every art to cfcure to the Dauphin
the conduct of affairs during the Quecn's life, and the fuccefion
of the crown on the event of her demise. The marriage was Airil 14.
celebrated with pomp suitable to the dignity of the parties, andr
the magnificence of a court at that time the nmof splendid in
Europe'. Thus Henry, in the course of a fiw months, had
the glory of recovering an important poflcflion which had anci-
cntly belonged to the crown of France, and of adding to it the,
acquisition of a new kingdom. By this event, too, the Duke of,
Guifei acquired new conlidcration and importance; the marriage
of his niece to the apparent heir of the crown, railitg him io far:
beyond the condition of other fiiubjecs, as seemed to rendle thc-
credit which lie had gained by hlis great adtions, no lcs perla-l
lent than it was cxtnclivc.
' Kcith's Iuisoio of Scotla:.d, p. 73. Appund. 13. Cerps 1)i,!otn. v. z r.

1 j~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~s
2

BooKXII. WHiEN the campaign opened, soon after the Dauphin's mar-

.
" riage, the Duke of Guise was placed at the head of the army

The cam- with the fame unlimited powers as formerly. Henry had re-
pp.gnoLnL. ceived such liberal supplies from his fubjeets, that the troops under

his command were both numerous and well appointed; while
Philip, exhausted by the extraordinary efforts of the preceding
year, had been obliged to dismiss so many of his forces during
the winter, that he could not bring an army into the field
capable of making head against him. The Duke of Guise did
not lose the favourable opportunity which his superiority afford-
ed him. He invested Thionville in the dutchy of Luxemburg,
one of the firongeft towns on the frontier of the Netherlands,
and of great importance to France by its neighbourood to Metz;
and, notwithitanding the obflinate valour with which it was
defended, he forced it to capitulate after a siege of three
June 22.

weeks'.

The French
army de-
feated at Gra-
velines.

BUT the success of this enterprize, which it was expected

would lead to other conquests, was more than counterbalanced
by an event that happened in another part of the Low-Coun.
tries. The Marechal de Termes, governor of Calais, having
penetrated into Slanders without opposition, invefled Dunkirk
with an army of fourteen thousand men, and took it by storm
on the fifth day of the siege. From that he advanced towards
Nieuport, which must have soon fallen into his hands, if the
approach of the Count of Egmont with a superior army had
not made it prudent to retreat. The French troops were so
much encumbered with the booty which they had got at Dunkirk,
or by ravaging the open country, that they moved slowly ;

* Thuan. lib. xx. 690o

anId
406

407

and Egmont, who had left his heavy baggage and artillery BooKXII,
behind him, marched with such rapidity, that he came up with '-ss8 '
them near Gravelines, and attacked them with the utmost im-
petuofity. De Termes, who had the choice of the ground,
having posted his troops to advantage in the angle formed by
the mouth of the river Aa and the sea, received him with great
firmness. Vidory remained for some time in suspense, the-
desperate valour of the French, who foresaw the unavoidable
deftru&ion that must follow upon a rout in an enemy's coun-
try, counterbalancing the superior number of the Flemings,
when one of those accidents to which human prudence does not
extend, decided the contefl in favour of the latter. A squadron
of English lhips of war, which was cruizing on the coast,
being drawn by the noise of the firing towards the place of
the engagement, entered the river Aa and turned its great
guns against the right wing of the French with such effect as
immediately broke that body, and spread terror and confu-
sion through their whole army. The Flemings, to whom affif-
tance, so unexpeced and so seasonable, gave fresh spirit,
redoubling their efforts, that they might not lose the advantage
which fortune had presented them, or give the enemy time
to recover from their consternation, the rout of the French soon
became universal. Near two thousand were killed on the spot;
a greater number fell by the hands of the peasants, who in
revenge for the cruelty with which their country had been
plundered, pursucd the fugitives and massacred them without
mercy; the reft were taken prisoners, together withde Termes
their general, and many officers of diftintion ".

Thuan. lib. xx. 694.

t Tmas

.BooXII. THls signal vi&ory, for which the Count of Egmont was

~C~ST8 afterwards so ill requited by Philip, obliged the Duke of Guise i

The Duke of -to relinquiih all other schemes, and to haften towards the fron-
Guifeopposed
to the vio- ,tier of Picardy, that he might oppose the progress of the enemy
rioNs army. . This disaster refleted new lustre on his reputation, and

once more turned the eyes of his countrymen towards him, as
:the only genera' on whose arms vi&tory always attended, and in
whose conduct as well as good fortune they could confide in every
danger. Henry Reinforced Guise's army with so many troops
drawn from tie adjacent garrisons, that it soon amounted to
forty thousand men. That of the enemy, after the juntion of
Egmont with the Duke of Savoy, was not inferior in number.
They encamped at the distance of a few leagues from one an-
other; and each monarch having joined his refpeCive army,
it was expeced that, after the vicissitudes of good and bad success
during this and the former campaign, a decisive battle would at
last determine which of the rivals should take the ascendant for
the future, and give law to Europe. But though both had it in
their power, neither of them discovcred any inclination to bring
the decision of a point of such importance to depend upon the
uncertain and fortuitous iifue of a single battle. The fatal en-
gagcments at St. Quintin and Gravelines were too recent to
be so soon forgotten, and the profpcd of encountering the fame
trox)ps, commanded by the fame generals who had twice tri-
umiiphcdl over his arms, ilifpired Henry with a degree of caution
which was not common to him. Philip, of a genius aver1e to
.bold operations in war, naturally leaned to cautious mea-
fiircs, and would hazard nothing agaiint a general so fortu-
nate and ficccfsful as the Duke of Guili. Both monarchs,

A1S
.4o8

as if by agreement, flood on the defensive, and fortifying their BoOK XII.
-camps carefully, avoided every fkirmifl or rencounter that 55
might bring on a general engagement.

WHILE the armies continued in this inadion, peace began to Both mon

be mentioned in each camp, and both Henry and Philip disco- a,,' tlir'
vered an inclination to liilen to any overture that tended to peace.
re-establish it. The kingdoms of France and Spain had'been
engaged during half a century in almost continual wars, carried
on at great expence and productive of no considerable advantage to
either. Exhaufted-by extraordinary and unceasing efforts, which
far exceeded those to which the nations of Europe had been ac-
cultomed before the rivalfhip between Charles V. and Francis I.
both nations longed so much for an interval of repose, in order
to recruit their strength, that their sovereigns drew from them
with difficulty the supplies necessary for carrying on hostilities.
The private inclinations of both the Kings concurred with those
of their people. Philip was prompted to wish for peace by his
fond desire of returning to Spain. Accustomed from his infancy
to the climate and manners of that country, he was attached to it
with fuclh extreme predilection, that he was unhappy in any
other part of his dominions. But as he could not either with
decency or safety quit the Low-Countries, and venture on a
voyage to Spain, dlillg the continuance of war, the profpedt
of a pacification which would put it in his power to execute this
favourite scheme, was highly acceptable. Henry was no les
desirous of being delivered from the burden, and avocations of
war, that he might have Icifire to turn all his attention, and
bend the whole force of his government towards fupprefling the

VOL,. H1. G g g ,opiuiom

Boo3KXI.

1958.

An intrigue
in the court
of France fa-
cilitates it.

opinions of the Reformers, which were spreading with such
rapidity in Paris and other great towns of France, that they
began to grow formidable to the eflablifhed church.

BESIDES these publick and avowed considerations arising

from the late of the two hostile kingdoms, or from the wishes
of their refpecive monarchs, there was a secret intrigue carried
on in the court of France, which contributed as much as either
of the other, to haften and to facilitate the negociation of a peace.
The Conflable Montmorency, during his captivity, beheld the
rapid success and growing.favour of the Duke of Guise, with the
envious solicitude of a rival. Every advantage gained by him he
confidered as a frefli wound to his own reputation, and he knew
with what malevolent address it would be improved to diminish
his credit with the King, and to augment that of the Duke of
Guise. These arts, he was afraid, might, by degrees, work on
the easy and duCtile mind of Henry, so as to efface all remains
of his ancient affetion towards him. But he could not dif-
cover any remedy for this unless he were allowed to return home,
that lie might try whether by his presence he could defeat the
artifices of his enemies, and revive those warm and tender fen-
timcnts which had long attached I-enry to him, with a confi-
dence so entire, as rcfembled rather the cordiality of private
friendship, than the cold and selfish connclion between a mo-
narch and one of his courtiers. While Montmorency was form-
ing fchcmcs aln wishes for his return to France with much
anxiety of mind, but with little hope of fulccefs, an unexpected
incident prepared the way for it. The Cardinal of Lorrain, who
had fliarcd with his brother in the King's favour, and particir
patcd of the power which that conferred, did not bear profpe-

rity
4Io

rity with the fame discretion as the Duke of Guise. Intoxicated BooK XII.
with their good fortune, he forgot how much they had been ,1s .
indebted for their present elevation to their conneaions with the
Duchess of Valentinois, and vainly ascribed all to the extraor-.
dinary merit of their family. This led him not only to neglect
his beneiatrefs, but to thwart her schemes, and to taik with a
farcaftick liberty of her character and person. That singular
woman, who, if we may believe contemporary writers, retain-
ed the beauty and charms of youth at the age of threescore, and
on whom it is certain that Henry still doated with all the fond-
ness of love, felt this injury with sensibility, and set herself with
eagerness to revenge it. As there was no method of supplanting
the Princes of Lorrain so effetually as by a coalition ofinterefts
with the Constable, she proposed the marriage of her grand-
daughter with one of his sons, as the bond of their future
union, and Montmorency readily gave his consent to the match.
Having thus cemented their alliance, the duchess employed all
her influence with the King in order to confirm his inclinations
towards peace, and to induce him to take the steps necessary for
attaining it. She insinuated that any overture of that kind
would come with great propriety from the Conflable, and if
committed to the condut of his prudence, could hardly fail of
success.

HENRY, long accuflomed to devolve all affairs of importance Henry com-'
on the Conflable, and needing only this encouragement to return mitsthe ncgo.

ciation to

to his ancient habits, wrote to him immediately with his usual Montmo-
familiarity and affecion, impoweri ng him at the fame time to take rcncy'
the firftopportunityof founding Philip and his miniftcrs with re-
gard to peace. Montmorcncy made his application to Pillip by the

G g g In oft

41f

Boo KXII.

- -2.J
hi.

moit proper channel. He opened himself to the Duke of Savoy,
who, notwithstanding the height of preferment to which he had
been raised, and the military glory which he had acquired in the
Spanish service, was weary of remaining fn exile, and languished
to return into his dominions. As there was no profped of
his recovering poffeflion of these by force of arms, he confi-
dered a definitive treaty of peace between France and Spain, as
the only event by which he could hope to obtain reflitution.
Being no firanger to Philip's private withes with regard to
peace, he ealily prevailed on him not only to discover a difpo-
fition on his part towards accommodation, but to permit Mont-
morency to return, on his parole, to France, that he might con-
tirm his own sovereign in his pacifick sentiments. Henry
received the Conltable with the most flattering marks of
regard; absence, instead of having abated or extinguished his
friendihip, seemed to have given it new ardour; and he assumed,
from the moment of his appearance in court, a higher place, if
possible, in his affetion, and a more perfect ascendant over his
mind, than ever. The Cardinal of Lorrain and Duke of Guile
prudently gave way to a tide of favour too strong for them to
oppose, and confining themselves to their proper departments,
permitted, without any si uggle, the Conitable and Duchess of
Valcntinois to (lirccd puiblick affairs at their pleasure. They
toon prevailed on the King to nominate plenipotentiaries to
treat of peace. Philip did the fame. The abbey of Cercamp
was fixed on as the place of congress; and all military opera-
tions were imniiediately terminated by a suspension of arms.

n.atlh of W IIiL r, tecre prcliminary flRps were taking towards a
C"ii''I V. tlreaty wllich rcflorcd tranqltillity to Il'iitrIc, Charles V. wliole

ambition)
4 r

ambition had so long disturbed it, ended his days in the monallry of
St. Juftus. When Charles entered this retreat, he formed such a
plan of life for himself, as would have suited the condition of a
private gentleman of a moderate fortune. His table was neat
but plain; his domefticks few; his intercourse with them fami-
liar; all the cumbersome and ceremonious forms of attendance
on his person were entirely abolished, as deftrueive of that social
ease and tranquillity which he courted in order to tooth the re-
mainder of his days. As the mildness of the climate, together with
his deliverance from the burdens and cares of government pro-
cured him at firfl, a considerable remission from the acute pains
wnih which he had been long tormented, he enjoyed, perhaps,
more complete fatisfacdion in this humble solitude, than all his
grandeur had ever yielded him. .The ambitious thoughts and
projects which lhad so long engrossed and disquieted him, were
quite effaced from his mind: Far from taking any part in
the political tranfadions of the Princes of Europe, he restrained
his curiosity even from any inquiry concerning them; and he
seemed to view the busy scene which he had abandoned with all
the contempt and indifference arising from his thorough expe-
rience of its vanity, as well as from the pleasing reflection of
having disentangled himnlff from its cares.

OTHER amusements, and other objects now occupied him.

Sometimes he cultivated the plants in his garden with his own
hands; Sometimes he rode out to the ncighbouring wood on a
little horse, the only one that he kept, attended by a single servant
on foot. When his infirmitics confined him to his apartment,
which often happened, and deprived him of thetI more active
recreations, he cither admitted a few gcntlcmcn who rcfidcd

4 1 lcal

BooxXII.

1558.

His nmLI'r-
ments in hii
retreat.

413

BooKXII. near the monaftry to visit him, and entertained them familiarly

, at llis table; or he employed himself in fludying the principles

and in forming curious works of mechanifin, of which he had
always been remarkably fond, and to which his genius waspecu-
liarly turned. With this view he had engaged Turriano, one
of the most ingenious artists of that age, to accompany him in
his retreat. He laboured together with him in framing models of
the most useful machines, aswellas in making experiments with
regard to their refpedive powers, and it was not seldom that the
ideas of the monirch aIfifted or perfcaed the inventions of the
artif. lie relieved his mind, at intervals, with flighter and
more fnltaftick works of mechanifin, in fashioning puppets,
whlich by the firutuire of internal springs, mimicked the
gestures and actions of men, to the no finall astonishment
of the ignorant monks, who beholding movements, which
they could not comprehend, sometimes distrusted their own
senses, and sometimes fufpeedc Charles and Turriano of being
in compat with invisible powers. He was particularly
curious with regard to the conftruaion of clocks and watches,
and having found, after repeated trials, that lie could not
bring any two of them to go exacly alike, he reflected, it is
tfid, with a mixture of furprize and regret on his own folly, in
having bestowed so much time and labour on the more vain
attempt of bringing mankind to a prccife uniformity of senti-
ment concerning the intricate and myftcrious doctrines of
religion.

Illumoref- BUT in what manner foevcr Charles disposed of the reft
rious occupa- of his time, he conltantly reserved a considerable portion

of it for religious cxcrcifcs. IIe regularly attended divine

fervicc
414

service in the chapel of the monaftry, every morning and even- BooKXIr.
ing; he took great pleasure in reading books of devotion, par- 8.
ticularly the works of St. Augustine and St. Bernard; and con-
versed much with his confessor, and the prior of the monaftry
on pious fubjeds. Thus did Charles pass the fir'fl year of his
retreat, in a manner not unbecoming a man perfe&ly disengaged
from the affairs of the present life, and standing on the confines
of a future world either in innocent amusements, which soothed
his pains, and' relieved a mind worn out with excessive appli-
cation- to bufnefs; or in devout occupations, which liedeemed
necessary in preparing for another slate..

BuT about fix months before his death, the gout, after a Tlecaufre3ofp

longer intermission than usual, returned with a proportional his death.
increase of violence. His shattered conflitution had fcarcc
vigour enough remaining to withstand such a Ihock. It en-
feebled his mind as much a3 his body, and from that period we
scarce discern any traces of that found and masculine under-
flanding, which diflinguifhed Charles among his contempora-
ries. An illiberal and timid fuperflition deprcfcd llis spirit. Iie
had no relish for amusements of any kind. I-Ie cndeavoured to
conform, in his manner of living, to all the rigour of nonallick
auflerity. He desircd no other focicty than that of monks, and
was almost continually employed with them in chanting the hymns
in the Milifal. As an expiation for his fins, lie gave Iiimfclf the
discipline in fecrctwith fucic fivcrity, that tle w\vip (' ordl wl icil
he employcd as the illn.riincnt of lhis pLnilhinicnt, was foIbnd after
his d(cccalc tinged with lhis lMlool. Nor was lie i.tisficd wviti
thcfe adcs of' noitification, wlicll, iiowver i wcvcc, wenr not n111-
cxampl)td. The timorous alnd (lilhiflf'll fiJciituc whlich alwv;,;

3 ac :lto i'; ::-'

4I5$

Boox XII. accompanies superstition fill continued to disquiet him, and de.

ss8. -preciating all that he had done, prompted him to aim at some-

thing extraordinary, at some new and singular a& of piety that
would display his zeal, and merit the favour of heaven. The aa
on which he fixed was as wild and uncommon, as any that
fuperffition ever suggested to a weak and disordered fancy. He
resolved to celebrate his own oblequies before his death. He
ordered his tomb to be ereaed in the chapel of the monaitry.
His domefRicks marched thither in funcral procession, with
black tapers in their hands. He hirli;I!f' followed in his shroud.
He was laid in his coffin, with much solemnity. The service for
the dead was chanted, and Charles joined in tlih prayers which
were offered up for the reft of his !oul, imingling his tears with
those which his attendants shed, as if they had l)cen celebrating
a real funeral. The ceremony closed with fprinllilmg holy
water on the coffin in the usual form, andl ill the affirlarts re-
tiring, the doors of the chapel were slut. Then Charles role
out of the coffin and withdrew to his apartment, full of thlet
awful sentiments, which such a singular folclLmnity was calcuilhited
to inspire. But either the fatiguing length of the ccrem,-llv,
or the impression which this image of d'cah let: ,on h]i mind
affected him so much, that next day he wa;s i i7.Cd tl ait fcevcr
His feeble frame could not long resist it:; vilciacncc; ;t l1 Cx--
pired on the twenty-firlt of September, ater a lilc oI lifi y-cigllL
years, fix months, and twenty-five days.

" Strada de Bcllo Belg. lib. i. p. II. Thuan. 723. Sandov. ii. 6o9, &c.
Miniana Contin. Marianne, vol. i. z6. Vcray Zuniga vida de Carlos, p. U I.

As
416

As Charles was the first prince of the age in rank and dig- BooKXII.

nity, the part which he aced, whether we confider the great- ,s
ness, the variety, or the success of his undertakings, was the His charaaer.
most conspicuous. It is from an attentive observation of his
condut, not from the exaggerated praises of the Spanish hifto-
rians, or the undillinguifhing censure of the French, that a just
idea of Charles's genius and abilities is to be colleced. He
possessed qualities so peculiar, as firongly mark his character, and
not only distinguish him from thePrinces who were his contem-
poraries, but account for that superiority over them which he so
long maintained. In forming his schemes, he -vas, by nature,
as well as by habit, cautious and considerate. Born with talents,
which unfolded themselves slowly, and were late in attaining
maturity, he was accustomed to ponder every subjed that de-
manded his consideration with a careful and deliberate attention.
He bent the whole force of his mind towards it, and dwelling
upon it with a serious application, undiverted by pleasure, and
hardly relaxed by any amusement, he revolved it, in silence, in
his own breast. He then communicated the matter to his mi-
nifters, and after hearing their opinions, took his resolution with
a decisive firmness, which seldom follows such flow consultations.
In confcquence of this, Charles's measures, instead of rcfem-
bling the desultory and irregular iallies of Henry VIII. or
Francis I. had the appearance of a confiflent system, in which
all the parts were arranged, the cneles were forefecn, and the ac-
cidents wcre provided for. IHis promptitude in execution was no
lcfs remarkable than his patience in deliberation. He consulted
with phlcgin, but lie ated with vigour; and did not discover
greater sagacity in his choice of the meafurcs which it was
proper to purfiec, than fertility of genius in finding out the

VOL. .
I. H 1 h means

417

BoOK XII.

15,8.

means for rendering his pursuit of them successful. Though
he had naturally so little of the tnartial turn, that during the
most ardent and bustling period of life, he remained in- the
cabinet inaetive, yet when he chose at length to appear at the
head of his armies, his mind was so formed for vigorous
exertions in every diretion, that he acquired such knowledge
in the art of war, and such talents for command, as rendered
him equal in reputation and success to the most able generals of
the age. But Charles poffefled, in the most eminent degree, the
science which is of greatest importance to a monarch, that
of knowing men, and of adapting their talents to the various.
departments which he allotted to them. From the death of
Chievres to the end of his reign, he employed no general in the
field, no minister in the cabinet, no ambassador to a foreign
court, no governor of a province, whose abilities were inade-
quate to the trust which he reposed in them. Though destitute
of that bewitching affability of manners, which gained Francis
the hearts of all who approached his person, he was no firanger
to the virtues which secure fidelity and attachment. He placed
unbounded confidence in his generals; he rewarded their ser-
vices with munificence; he neither envied their fame, nor dif-
covered any jealousy of their power. Almost all the generals
who conduced his armies may be placed on a level with those
illustrious personages, who have attained the highest eminence
of military glory; and his advantages over his rivals are to be
ascribed so manifeffly to the superior abilities of the commanders
whom he set in opposition to them, that this might seem to de-
trad, in some degree, from his own merit, if the talent of
discovering and employing such initruments were not the most
undoubted proof of a capacity for government.

THERE
418

TH z .E were, neverthelefa, defets in his political charaer

which must considerably abate the admiration due to his ex-
traordinary talents. Charles's ambition was insatiable; and
though there seems to be no foundation for an opinion prevalent
in his own age, that he had formed the chimerical projec of
establishing an universal monarchy in Europe, it is certain that
his desire of being diftinguiffed as a conqueror involved him
in ,continual wars, which exhausted and oppreT'ed his sub-
jeds, and left him' little leisure for giving attention to the inte-
rior police and improvement of his kingdoms, the great objects
of every Prince who makes the happiness of his people the
end of his government. Charles, at a very early period of life,
having added the Imperial crown to the kingdoms of Spain, and
to the hereditary dominions of the houses of Austria and Bur-
gundy, this opened to him such a vast field of enterprize, and
engaged him in schemes so complicated as well as arduous, that
feeling his power to be unequal to the execution of these, he had
often recourse to low artifices unbecoming his superior talents,
and sometimes ventured on such deviations from integrity as
were dishonourable in a great Prince. His inlidious and frau-
dulent policy appeared more conspicuous, and was rendered more
odious, by a comparison with the open and undefigring charac-
tcr of his contemporaries Francis I. and Henry VIII. This dif-
ference, though occasioned chiefly by the divcrfity of their tem-
ers, must be ascribed, in some degree to such an opposition in the
principles of their political conduct as affords some cxcufe for
this defect in Charles's behaviour, though it cannot serve as a
justification of it. Francis and Henry seldom aCed but from
the impulse of their pafions, and ruflecd headlong towards the
object in view. Charles's measures being the refillt of cool re-

H h 2 flection,

BooKXIT.
t '

15SR.

419

BOOKXII.

vj8

fle&ion, were disposcd into a regular fyftcm, and carried on
upon a concerted plan. Persons who aft in the former manner
naturally pursue the end in view without assuming any disguise,
or displaying much address. Such as hold the latter course are
apt, in forming as well as in executing their designs, to employ
such refinements, as always lead to artifice in conduct, and often
degenerate into deceit.

The circumRances transmitted to us, with refped to Charles's

private deportment and characer, are fewer and less interesting,
than might have been expected, from the great number of
authors who have undertaken to write an account of his life.
These are not the object of this history, which aims at repre-
senting the tranfafions of the reign of Charles V. not at deline-
ating his private virtues or defects.

Corference in
(,'der t
pL"' t

MEANWHILE the plenipotentiaries of France, Spain and

England continued their conferences at Cercamp; and though
each of them, with the usual art of negociators, made at first
very high demands in name of their refpedive courts, yet as
they were all equally desirous of peace, they would have consented
reciprocally to such abatements and rctrictions of their claims
as mufl have removed every ol)ftacle to an accommodation.
The death of Charles V. was a new motive with Philip to haften
the conclusion of a treaty, as it incrcafed his impatience for
returning into Spain, where there was now no person greater
or more illufirious than himself. But in spite of the concur-
ring wilhcs of all the parties intcrcefed, an event happened
which occalioned an unavoidable delay in their negociations.
About a month after the opening of the confcrcnccs at Cer-

camp,
420

camp, Mary of England ended her short and inglorious reign,
and Elizabeth her filler was immediately proclaimed Queen by
the English with universal joy. As the powers of the Engliih
plenipotentiaries expired on the death of their mistress, they
could not proceed until they received a commiflion and inftruc-
tions from their new sovereign.

HENRY and Philip beheld Elizabeth's elevation to the throne

with equal follicitude. As during Mary's jealous adminiflra-
tion, under the most difficult circumflances, and in a situation
extremely delicate, she had conduted herfelfwith prudence and
address far exceeding her years, they had conceived an high
idea of her abilities, and already formed expectations of a reign
very different from that of her filter. Equally sensible of the
importance of gaining her favour, both monarchs set themselves
with emulation to court it, and employed every art in order to
insinuate themselves into her confidence. Each of them had
something meritorious, with regard to Elizabeth, to plead in his
own behalf. Henry had offered her a retreat in his dominions,
if the dread of her sifter's violence fliould force her to fly for
safety out of England. Philip had, by his powerful intercession,
prevented Mary from proceeding to the mofl fatal extremities
against her. Each of them endeavoured now, to avail himself
of the circumstances in his favour. Henry wrote to Elizabeth
soon after her accession with the warmest expressions of regard
and friendship. He rcprefented the war which had unhappily
been kindled between their kingdoms, not as a national quarrel,
but as the effect of Mary's blind partiality to her husband and
ftond comIf)liance writh all his willies. LHe entreated lier to clitfiItg.i
hcrtlilf frolm an alliance which lhad proved ib uiliortolnate to

'!<k L, D<EJglandiu

BooKXII.

1 553.

Nov. 17.
Death of
M.iry of
England.

IHenry and
Philip court
Elizabe'h her
fucccflbr.

'42I

BoO K XII.

'SS,.

Elizabeth's
deliberations
concerning
her condut.

England, and to consent to a separate peace with him, without
mingling her interefis with those of Spain, from which they
ought now to be altogether disjoined. Philip, on the other
hand, unwilling to lose his connecion with England, the im-
portance of which during a rupture with France he had so
recently experienced, not only vied with Henry in declarations of
efleem for Elizabeth, and in profeilons of his resolution to cul-
tivate the ftrideft amity with her, but in order to confirm and
perpetuate their union, he offered himself to her in marriage,
and undertook to procure a dispensation from the Pope to that
effct.

ELIZABETH weighed the proposals of the two Monarchs

attentively, and with that provident discernment of her true
interest which was conspicuous in all her deliberations. She
gave some encouragement to Henry's overture of a separate
negociation, because it opened a channel of correspondence
with France, which he might find to be of great advantage, if
Philip Ihould not discover sufficient zeal and follicitude for fecur-
ing to her proper terms in the joint treaty. But she ventured
on this with the utmost reserve and caution, that she might not
alarm Philip's suspicious temper, and lose an ally in attempting
to gain an enemy '. Henry himself, by an unpardonable aaof
indiscretion, prevented her from carrying her intercourse with him
to such a length as might have offended or alienated Philip. At
the very time he was courting Elizabeth's friendlhip with the
greatest assiduity, he yielded with an inconsiderate facility to the
follicitations of the Princes of Lorrain, and allowed his daugh-

' Sorbes i. p. 4.

ter-
422

ter-in-law the Queen of Scots to assume the title and arms of
Q.een of England. This ill-timed pretension, the fouree of
many calamities to the unfortunate Q .ueen of Scots, extin-
guifhed at once all the confidence that might have grown be-
tween Henry and Elizabeth, and left in its place distrust, re-
ientment and antipathy. Elizabeth found that she mull unite
her interests closely with Philip's, and expet peace only from
negociations carried on in conjunction with him z

As she had granted a commission, immediately after her

accession, -to the fame plenipotentiaries whom her sifter had
employed, she now inftruaced them to a& in every point in
concert with the plenipotentiaries of Spain, and to take no flep
until they had previously consulted with them'. But though
she deemed it prudent to assume this appearance of confidence
in the Spanish Monarch, she knew precisely how far to carry it;
and discovered no inclination to accept of that extraordinary
proposal of marriage which Philip had made to her. The En-
glifh had expressed so openly their detestation of her filler's
choice of him, that it would have been highly imprudent to
have exasperated them by renewing that odious alliance. She
was too well acquainted with Philip's harsh imperious temper,
to think of him for a husband. Nor could ihe admit a difpen-
fation from the Pope to be sufficient to authorize her marrying
him, without condemning her father's divorce from Catherine of
Aragon, and acknowledging of confequcnce that her mother's

* Strype's Annals of the Reformation, i. I l. Carte's Hilt. of Engl. vol. iii.
p. 375. * Sorbes full view, i. 1. 37. 40.

t marriage

423
Boox XII.

1558.

She em-
powers her
ambassadors
to treat of
peace.

DooK-Ml.

1558Xrji

marriage was null and her own birth illegitimate. But though
she determined not to yield to Philip's addresses, the situation of
her affairs rendered it dangerous to rejedc them; she returned
her answer, therefore, in terms which were evasive, but so tem-
pered with refpeC, that though they gave him no reason to be
secure of success, they did not altogether extinguilh his hopes.

Negoci;,tions BY this artifice, as well as by the prudence with which she
at Catcau-
'mtercfis. concealed her sentiments and intentions concerning religion,

for some time after her accession, she so far gained upon Philip,
that he warmly espoused her intcreft in the conferences which

,1;., were renewed at Cercamp, and afterwards removed to Cateau-
February 6 Cambrefis. A definitive treaty, which was to adjust the claims

and pretensions of so many Princes, required the examination
of such a variety of intricate points, and led to such infinite and
minute details, as drew out the negociations to a great length.
But the constable Montmorency exerted himself with such inde-
fatigable zeal and industry, repairing alternately to the courts
of Paris and Brussels, in order to obviate or remove every diffi-
culty, that all points in difputc were adjuft;d at length in such
a manner, as to give entire fatisfaClion in every particular to
-Icenry and Philip; and the last hand was ready to be put to the
treaty between them.

Ii h ice --
to tlic clainis
of FogI ind.ld

Tori cliains of England remnained as the only olflaclc to re-

tard it. Eli/.abcth demanded the restitution of Calais, in the
molt peremptory tone, as an cflcntial condition of her conilcnt-
ing to peace; Henry refused to give up that important con-
(lufit ; andl both fiemicd to have taken their reltolition with

uinal tcrable
424

unalterable firmnefl. Philip warmly supported Elizabeth's pre-
tensions' to Calais, not merely from a principle of equity towards
the English nation, that he might appear to have contributed
to their recovering what they had loft by espousing his cause;
nor solely with a view of soothing Elizabeth by this manifefta-
tion of zeal for her interest; but in order to render France less
formidable, by securing to her antient enemy this easy access into
the heart of the kingdom. The earnestness, however, with which
he seconded the arguments of the English plenipotentiaries,
soon began to relax. During the course of the negociation, Eliza-
beth, who now felt herself firmly feated on her throne, began to
take such open and vigorous measures not only for overturning
all that her sifter had done in favour of popery, but for efa-
blifhing the protestant church on a firm foundation, as con-
vinced Philip that his hopes of an union with her had been
from the beginning vain, and were now desperate. From that
period, his interpositions in her favour became more cold and
formal, flowing merely'from regard to decorum, or from the
consideration of remote political interests. Elizabeth, having rea-
son to expect such an alteration in his conduct, quickly per-
ceived it. But as nothing would have been of greater detri-
ment to her people, or more inconsistent with her schemes of
domefRick administration, than the continuance of a war with
France, the saw the neceflity of submitting to such conditions as
the situation of her affairs imposed, and that the must lay her ac-
count with being deserted by an ally who was now united to her
by a very feeble tie, if lhe did not speedily reduce her demands
to what was moderate and attainable. She accordingly gave
new infirudions to her ambafidors; and Philip's plcnipotcn-

VOL. III. I i i tiarieC

BOOK XIL.

1559. 42S

Boot XII.
I 

1559.

Articles of
peace between
France and
England.

tiaries aaing as mediators between the French and them', an
expedient was fallen on, which justified, in some degree, Eliza-
beth's departing from the rigour of her first demand with regard
to Calais. All lesser articles were fettled without much discussion
or delay. Philip, that he might not appear to have abandoned
the English, insisted that the treaty between Henry and Elizabeth
flould be concluded in form, before that between the French
monarch and him. The one was signed on the second day of
April, the other on the day following.

THE treaty of peace between France and England contained

no articles of real importance, but that which refpeaed Calais.
It was stipulated that the King of France Should retain poffeffon
of that town, with all its dependencies, during eight years; that,
at the expiration of that term, he should restore it to England;
that in cafe of non-performance, he should forfeit five hundred
thousand crowns, for the payment of which fum, seven or eight
wealthy merchants, who were not his subjeCts, should grant fecu-
rity; that five persons of diftintion should be given as hostages
till that security were provided; that, although the forfeit of
five hundred thousand crowns should be paid, the right of Eng-
land to Calais should still remain entire, in the fame manner as
if the term of eight years were expired; that the King and Queen
of Scotland should be included in the treaty; that if they, or the
French King, should violate the peace by any hostile action,
Henry should be obliged instantly to restore Calais; that on the
other hand, if any breach of the treaty proceeded from Elizabeth,
then Henry and the King and Queen of Scots were absolved from
all the engagements which they had come under by this treaty.

b Sorbes, i. 59.

NOTWI T H-
4-6

7

NOTWITHSTANDING the fludied attention with which ft

many precautions were taken, it is evident that Henry did not
intend the restitution of Calais, nor is it probable that Elizabeth
expeced it. It was hardly possible that Ihe could maintain, during
the course of eight years, such perfea concord both with France
and Scotland, as not to afford Henry some pretext for alledging
that she had violated the treaty. But even if that term fhoukl
elapse without any ground for complaint, Henry might then
chute to pay the fum stipulated, and Elizabeth had no method of
asserting her right but by force of arms. However, by throw-
ing the. articles in the treaty with regard to Calais into this
form, Elizabeth satisfied her fubjea.s of every denomination; fle
gave men of discernment a firiking proof of her address, in pal-
liating what she could not prevent; and amused the multitude,
to whom the final surrender of a place of such importance would
have appeared altogether infamous, with the profped of recover-
ing in a short time that favourite pollelfion.

THE expedient which Montmorency employed, in order to

facilitate the conclusion of peace between France and Spain,
was the negociating two treaties of marriage, one between Eli-
zabeth, Henry's eldest daughter, and Philip, who supplanted
his son, the unfortunate Don Carlos, to whom that Princess had
been promised in the former conferences at Cercamp; the other
between Margarct, Henry's only sifter, and the duke of Savoy.
For feeble as the tics of blood often are among Princes, or
how little soever they may regard them when pufl ed on lo at
by motives of ambition, they aflinei on other cccafions the alp-
pearance of being so far ilnfluenccd by thcif domcnlick aflcli(on,: ,
as to employ them to juflify mcalurcs and conccilions which
they find to be nccflhary, but know to be impolitic or (i;!so-

I i i 2 ni urablc.

427
BOOKXIM.

1559.

The views of
both parties
with refpet
to these.

An expedJent,
which pro-
mote. pe-ce
brtveeii
Fiance and
SpAinw

BooKXII. nourablc. Such was the use Henry made of the two marriages

to which he gave his content. Having secured an honourable
eflablifhment for his siser and his daughter, he, in consideration
of these, granted terms both to Philip and the duke of Savoy,
of which he would not, on any other account, have ventured to

approve.

The terms of THE principal articles in the treaty between France and Spain
pacification.

were, That a sincere and perpetual amity mfould be eftabliihed be-
tween the two crowns and their refpedive allies; that the two mo-
narchs should labour in concert to procure the convocation of a
general council, in order to check the progress of heresy, and re-
store unity and concord to the Christian church; that all conquests
made by either party, on this fide of the Alps, since the commence-
ment of the war in one thousand five hundred and fifty-one,
should be mutually restored; that the dutchy of Savoy, the prin-
cipality of Piedmont, the country of Breffe, and all the other ter-
ritories formerly subjea to the dukes of Savoy, ihould be restored
to Emanuel Philibert, immediately after the celebration of his
marriage with Margaret of France, the towns of Turin, Quiers,
Pignerol, Chivaz and Villanova excepted, of which Henry
should keep possession until his claims on that Prince, in right
of his grandmother, should be heard and decided in course of
law; that as long as Henry retained these places in his hands,
Philip ihould be at liberty to keep garrisons in the towns of Ver-
celli and Asti; that the French King ihould immediately evacuate
all the places which he held in Tuscany and the Sienefe, and
renounce all future pretensions to them; that he fllould restore
the marquisate of Montfcrrat to the duke of Mantua; that he
Uhould receive the Genocfe into favour, and give up to them

the

9
428

the towns which he had conquered in the island ofCorfica;. that
none of the Princes or states, to whom these cessions were made,
should call their fubjeds to account for any part of their conduc
while under thedominion of their enemies, but should bury all
past tranfadions in oblivion. The Pope, the Emperor, the
Kings of Denmark, Sweden, Poland, Portugal, the King and
Queen of Scots, and almost every Prince and state in Christen-
dom, were comprehended in this pacification as the allies either
of Henry or of Philip '.

THUS, by this famous treaty, peace was re-established in

Europe. All the causes of discord which had so long embroiled
the powerful monarchs of France and Spain, which had tranf-
mitted hereditary quarrels and wars from Charles to Philip,
and from Francis to Henry, seemed to be wholly removed, or
finally terminated: The French alone complained of the une-
qual conditions of a treaty, into which an ambitious minister,
in order to recover his liberty, and an artful mistress, that ihe
mightgratify herrefentment, had seduced their too easy monarch.
They exclaimed loudly against the folly of giving up to the
enemies of France, an hundred and eighty-nine fortified places,
in the Low-Countries or in Italy, in return, for the three infig-
nificant towns of St. Q.intin, Ham and Catelet. They con-
fidered it as an indelible stain upon the glory of the nation, to
renounce in one day territories so extensive, and so capable
of being defended, that the enemy could not have hoped to
wrest them out of thcir hands, after many years of vicory and
success.

BooKXII.

1559.

Which re-
establishes
tranquillity
in Europe.
c Recucil dc Traitc7, t. ii. 287.

BUT

429

BooK XII. 'BiT Henry, without regarding the fentimnents of his people,

or being moved by the remontrances of his council, ratified the

Thr peace treaty, and executed with great fidelity whatever he had ftipu-
hetween
Fr^.c and lated to perform. The duke of Savoy repaired with a numerous
pi'tau[lieJ. retinue to Paris, in order to celebrate his marriage with Henry's

sifter. The duke of Alva was sent to the fame capital, at the
head of a splendid embassy, to espouse Elizabeth in name of his
mailer. They were received with extraordinary magnificence
by the French court. Amidst the rejoicings and festivities on

ea, of that occasion, Henry's days were cut short by a singular and tra-

shenry,
Juy io. gical accident. His son, Francis II. a Prince under age, of a

feeble constitution, and of a mind still weaker, succeeded him.
Augufi l . Soon after, Paul ended his violent and imperious Pontificate, at

enmity with all the world, and disgusted even with his own
nephews. They, persecuted by Philip, and deserted by the fuc-
ceeding Pope, whom they had raised by their influence to the
Papal throne, were condemned to the punishment which their
crimes and ambition had merited, and their death was as infa-
mous as their lives had been criminal. Thus all the personages,
who had long sustained the principal characers on the great
theatre of Europe, disappeared about the fame time. A more
known period of hiltory opens at this era; other actors appear
on the flagc, with different views and different paflions; new
contests arose, and new schemes of ambition occupied and dif-
quieted mankirid.

A 'eneral , UPON reviewing the transaCtions of any acive period, in the
ievi(l 'lTlthe hifory of civilizedl nations, the changes which arc accolnplilhcd

appear wonderfilly disproportioned to the efforts which liavc
been exerted. Conquelts are never very cxtcnfivc or rapid, but
among nations, whose progvcfs in improvement is extremely un-

equal.
.43o

equal. When Alexander the Great, at the head of a gallant
people, of simple manners, and formed to war by admirable mi-
litary institutions, invaded a state funk in luxury, and enervated
by excessive refinement; when Genchizcan and Tamerlane, with
their armies of hardy barbarians, poured in upon nations, en-
feebled by the climate in which they lived, or by the arts and
commerce which they cultivated, they, like a torrent, swept
every thing before them, subduing kingdoms and provinces
in as short a space of time as was requisite to march through
them. But when nations are in a similar slate, and keep pace
with each other in their advances- towards refinement, they are
not exposed to the calamity of sudden conquest. Their acqui-
fitions of knowledge, their progress in the art of war, their po-
litical sagacity and address, are nearly equal. The fate of Rtates
in this situation, depends not on a single battle. Their internal
resources are many and various. Nor are they themselves alone
interested in their own safety, or active in their own defence.
Other tates interpose, and balance any temporary advantage which
either party may have acquired. After the fiercest and moll
lengthened contest, all the rival nations are exhauffed, none are
conquered. At length a peace is concluded, which re-inflates each
in poffefion of almost the fame power and the fame t:rritorics.

SUCH was the slate of Europe during the reign of Charles V.

No Prince was so much superior to the reft in power, as to render
his efforts irrefiflible, and his conquests cafy. No nation had
made progress in improvement so far beyond its neighbours as
to have acquired a very manifeit pre-eminence. Each state de-
rived some advantage, or was fibjetl to fimc inconvenicnce, fromi.
its fliation or its climate; each was diltinguililcd by fonietling
peculiar in the genius of its people, or the conflitution of its go-

VCl'llll.1( :i'.

BOOK XI.

Th' n'ticn.
of Fur( pe i i
a f I mlar Ilcte
durnng the
sixt 'CIAi tet i
LuIy.

43t'

BOOK XII.

A remarkable
change in the
state of Eu-
rope, during
the reign of
Charles V.

vernment. But the advantages poffefled by one, were counter-
ballanced by circumstances favourable to others; and this pre-
vented any from attaining such superiority as might have been
fatal to all. The nations of Europe in that age, at in the pre-
sent, were like one great family; there were some features com-
mon to all, which fixed a resemblance; there were certain pecu-
liarities conspicuous in each, which marked a diffindion. But
there was not among them that wide diversity of character and
of genius which, in almost every period of history, hath exalted
the Europeans above the inhabitants of the other quarters of the
globe, and seems to have destined the one to rule, and the other
to obey.

BUT though the near resemblance and equality in improve-

ment among the different nations of Europe, prevented the
reign of Charles V. from being distinguished by such sudden
and extensive conquefs as occur in some other periods of history,
yet, during the course of his administration, all the considerable
flates in Europe suffered a remarkable change in their political
situation, and felt the influence of events, which have not hi-
therto spent their force, but fRill continue to operate in a greater
or in a le's degree. It was during his reign, and in consequence
of tile perpetual efforts to which his enterprizing ambition rouzed
them, that the different kingdoms of Europe acquired internal
vigour, that they discerned the resources of which they were
pofflicfld, that they came both to feel their own ftrcngth, and to
know how to render it formidable to others. It was during his
reign, too, that the different kingdoms of Europe, formerly
single and (lisjoined, became to thoroughly acquainted, and so
intimatcly connected with each other, as to form one great poli-

tical
432

tical fytem, in which each took a station, wherein it has remained
since that time with less variation than could have been expeded
after the events of two active centuries.

THE progress, however, and acquisitions of the house of

Auflria, were not only greater than those of any other power,
but more discernible and conspicuous. I have already enume-
rated the vast territories which descended to Charles from his
Aufirian, Burgundian, and Spanish ancestors *. To these he
himself added the Imperial dignity; and, as if all this had
been too little, the bounds of the universe were extended,
and a new world fubjeded to his command. Upon his refig-
nation, the Burgundian provinces, and the Spanish kingdoms
with their dependencies, both in the old and new worlds, de-
volved to Philip. But Charles transmitted his dominions to
his son, in a condition very different from that in which he had
received them. They were augmented by the accession of new
provinces; they were habituated to obey an administration
which was no less vigorous than fleady; they were accustomed
to expensive and persevering efforts, which, though necessary in
the contests between civilized nations, had been little known in
Europe before the sixteenth century. The provinces of Friesland,
Utrecht and Overyffel, which he acquired by purchase from their
former proprietors, and the dutchy of Gelders, of which he made
himself master, partly by force of arms, and partly by the arts of
negociation, were additions of great value to his Burgundian
dominions. Ferdinand and Isabella had transmitted to him all
the provinces of Spain, from the bottom of the Pyrenees to the
frontiers of Portugal; but as he maintained a perpetual peace

* Vol. ii. p. 2.
VOL. III. K k k witb

BOOKXI.

The progrere
of the i'oufe
of Austria.

433

BooK XII. with that kingdom, amidf the various efforts of his enterprizing

ambition, he made no acquisition of territory in that quarter.

Particularly CHARLES had gained, however, a vail accession of power
ha Spain.

in this part of his dominions. By his success in the war with
the commons of Castile, he exalted the regal prerogative on
the ruins of the privileges of the people. Though he
allowed the name of the Cortes to remain, and the formality
of holding it to be continued, he reduced its authority and
jurifdidion to nothing, and modelled it in such a manner, that
it became rather a junto of the servants of the crown, than
an assembly of the representatives of the people. One mem-
ber of the conffitution being thus lopped off, it was impossible
But that the other must feel the stroke, and susser by it. The
suppression of the popular power rendered the ariftocratical
less fbrmidable. The grandees, prompted by the warlike spirit
of the age, or allured by the honours which they enjoyed in
a court, exhausted their fortunes in military service, or in at-
tending on the person of their Prince. They did not dread,
perhaps did not observe, the dangerous progress of the royal
authority, which leaving them the vain diftincaion of being co-
vered in presence of their sovereign, firipped them by degrees
of that real power which they possessed while they formed one
body, and aded in concert with the people. Charles's success in
abolishing the privileges of the commons, and in breaking the
power of the nobles of Caflile, encouraged Philip to invade the
liberties of Aragon, which were fill more extensive. The
Castilians, accustomed to fubjedion themfclves, afiRled in impo-
ling the yoke on their more happy and indcpendant neighbours.
The will of the sovereign became the fupremc law in all the
kingdoms of Spain; and Princes who wcre not checked in form-

ing
434

ing their plans by the jealousy of the people, nor controuled in BoocXII.
executing them by the power of the nobles, could both aim at
great objecs and call forth the whole strength of the monarchy
in order to attain them.

As Charles, by extending the regal prerogative, rendered the Also in other

parts of Eu-

monarchs of Spain matiers at home, he added new dignity and rope.
power to their crown by his foreign acquisitions. He secured to
Spain the quiet pofleffion of the kingdom of Naples, which
Ferdinand had usurped by fraud, and held with difficulty. He
united the dutchy of Milan, one of the most fertile and populous
provinces in Italy, to the Spaniff crown; and left his successors,
even without taking their other territories into the account, the
most considerable Princes in that country, which had been long
the theatre of contention to the great powers of Europe, and in
which they had firuggled with emulation to obtain the superiority.
When the French, in consequence of the treaty of Catcau Cam-
brefis, withdrew their forces out of Italy, and finally relinquished
all their schemes of conquest on that fide of the Alps, the
Spanish dominions there rose in importance, and enabled their
Kings, as long as the monarchy retained any degree of vigour,
to preserve the chief sway in all the tranfadions of that coun-
try. But whatever accession either of interior authority or
of foreign dominion Charles gained for the monarchs of Spain
in Europe, it was inconsiderable when compared with his
acquisitions in the new world. lie added, there, not provinces,
but empires to his crown. tie conquercd territories of filch
imincnfc extent; lie difcovcrcd fucli incxhauflible veins of
wcalth, and opcncd filch l)oundlefs profpcds of every kind, as
mutl have rouzed and called forth to acion his fiucccfllbr, tliouLi

K k k 2 his

435

BooKXn. his ambition had been much less ardent than Philip's, and muf

"-- ' have rendered him not only enterprizing but formidable.

Piogrdi of WH L E the elder branch of the Austrian family rose to such.
brhe scfahe pre-eminence in Spain, the younger, of which Ferdinand was.

eouia of the head, grew to be considerable in Germany. The ancient
Aulria.

hereditary dominions of the house of Austria in Germany, united
to the kingdoms of Hungary and Bohemia, which Ferdinand had
acquired by marriage, formed a refpeaable power; and when
the Imperial dignity was added to these, Ferdinand poflefled
territories more extensive than had belonged to any Prince,
Charles V. excepted, who had been at the head of the Empire
during several ages. Fortunately for Europe, the disgust which
Philip conceived an account of Ferdinand's refuting to relin-
quifh the Imperial crown in his favour, not only prevented for
some time the separate members of the house of Austria from:
acing in concert, but occasioned a visible alienation and rival-
ship. By degrees, however, regard to the interest of their fa-
mily extinguished this impolitic animosity. The confidence
which was natural returned; the aggrandizing of the house of
Austria became the common objet of all their schemes; they
gave and received affiflance alternately towards the execution of
them; and each derived consideration and importance from the
other's success. A family so great and so aspiring became the
general objec ofjealoufy and terror. All the power as well aa
policy of Europe were exerted during a century, in order to
check and humble it. Nothing can give a more firiking idea
of the afccndant which it had acquired, and of the terror
which it had inspired, than that after its vigour was spent
with extraordinary exertions of its ftrcngth, after Spain

was
436

4$7

was become only the shadow of a great name, and its mo-
narchs were funk into debility and dotage, the house of Aufiria
still continued to be formidable. The nations of Europe had so
often felt its superior power, and had been so conflantly em-
ployed in guarding against it, that the dread of it became a
kind of political habit, the influence of which remained when
the causes, which had formed it, ceased to exist.

3WHILE the house of Aufiria went on with such success in
enlarging its dominions, France made no considerable acquifi-
tion of new territory. All its schemes of conquest in Italy had
proved abortive; it had hitherto obtained no establishment of
consequence in the new world; and after the continued and
vigorous efforts of four successive reigns, the confines of the
kingdom were much the ifme as Louis XI. had left them. But
though France made not such large strides towards dominion as
the house of Austria, it continued to advance by fleps which
were more secure, because they were gradual and less observed.
The conquest of Calais put it out of the power of the En-
glifh to invade France but at their utmost peril, and delivered
the French from the dread of their ancient enemies, who,
previous to that event, could at any time penetrate into
the kingdom by that avenue, and thereby retard or defeat
the execution of their best concerted enterprizes againit any
foreign power. The important acquisition of Metz covered that
part of their frontier which formerly was most feeble, and
lay most exposed to insult. France, from the time of its ob-
taining these additional fccurities against external invasion, must
be deemed the most powerful kingdom in Europe, and is more
fortunately situated than any on the continent cither for conquest
or defence. From the confines of Artois to the bottom of the

t Pyrencee,

BooKXIL

Acquisitions
of the Kings
of France
during the
reign of
Charles V.

BooKXI.

Enables them
to aflumn an
higher Itation
among the
powers of
Europe.

Pyrenees, and from the British channel to the frontiers of
Savoy and the coast of the Mediterranean, its territories lay
compa& and unmingled with those of any other power. Several
of the considerable provinces, which, by their having been long
fubje& to the great vassals of the crown, who were often at
variance or at war with their master, had contraaed a spirit
of independance, were now accustomed to recognize and to obey
one sovereign. As they became members of the fame mon-
archy, they assumed the sentiments of that body into which they
were incorporated, and co-operated with zeal towards promot-
ing its interest and honour. The power and influence wrested
from the nobles were seized by the crown. The people were
not admitted to share in these spoils; they gained no new pri-
vilege; they acquired no additional weight in the legislature.
It was not for the fake of the people, but in order to extend
their own prerogative, that the monarchs of France had laboured
to humble their great vassals. Satisfied with having brought
them under entire fubjeaion to the crown, they discovered no
follicitude to free the people from their ancient dependance on
the nobles of whom they held.

A MONARCH, at the head of a kingdom thus united at home

and secure from abroad, was entitled to form great designs, be-
cause he felt himself in a condition to execute them. The
foreign wars which had continued with little interruption from
the accefflon of Charles VIII. had not only cheriihed and aug-
mented the martial genius of the nation, but by inuring the troops
during the course of long fIrvice to the fatigues of war, and accuf-
toming them to obedience, had added the force of discipline to
their natural ardour. A gallant and aaivc body of nobles who con-

fidered
438

fidered themselves as idle and useless, unless when they were in
the field; who were scarce acquainted with any pastime or ex-
ercife but what was military; and who knew no road to power,
or fame, or wealth, but war, would not have suffered their fove-
reign to remain long in ination. The people, little acquainted
with the arts of peace, and always ready to take arms at the
command of their superiors, were accustomed by the vast
expence of long wars, carried on in distant countries, to bear
impositions, which, how inconsiderable soever they may seem if
estimated by the exorbitant rate of modern exations, appear
immense when compared with the fums levied in France, or in
any other country of Europe, previous to the reign of Louis XI.
As all the members of which the state was composed were thus
impatient for acion, and capable of great efforts, the schemes
and operations of France mufl have been no less fomidable to
Europe than those of Spain. The superior advantages of its
situation, the contiguity and compadnefs of its territories, toge-
ther with the- peculiar fate of its political constitution at that
junature must have rendered its enterprizes frill more alarming
and more decisive. The King possessed such a degree of power as
gave him the entire command of his fubjeds; the people were
firangers to those occupations and habits of life which render
men averse to war, or unfit for it; and the nobles, though
reduced to the subordination neccfary in a regular govern-
merit, fill retained the high undaunted spirit which was the
effect of their ancient independence. The vigour of the Feudal
times remained, their anarchy was at an end; and the Kings of
France could avail themfelvcs of the martial ardour which that
singular inltitution had kindled or kept alive, without Ibeing
cxpofed to any of the dangers or inconvenicncies which are
inseparable from it whcn in entire force.

A KINGDOMI

BooxXIE

439

3ooxXII. A KINGsDOM in such a fiate is, perhaps, capable of greater
Circumfan. military efforts than at any other period in its progress. But
ces which how formidable soever or fatal to the other nations of Europe
prcvented the
immediate the power of such a monarchy might have been, the civil
effects of their
power. wars which broke out in France saved them at that juncure

from feeling its effecs. These wars, of which religion was
the pretext and ambition the cause; wherein great abilities were
displayed by the leaders of the different facions, and little con-
du& or firmness were manifested by the crown under a succession
of weak Princes, kept France occupied and embroiled for half
a century. During there commotions the internal strength of
the kingdom was much wafted, and such a spirit of anarchy
was spread among the nobles to whom rebellion was familiar,
and the restraint of laws unknown, that a considerable interval
became requisite not only for recruiting the internal vigour of
the nation, but for re-eflablifhing the authority of the Prince;
so that it was long before France could turn her whole attention
towards foreign tranfadions, or aa with her proper force in
foreign wars. It was long before she rose to that ascendant in
Europe which she has maintained since the administration of
Cardinal Richlieu, and which the situation as well as extent of
the kingdom, the nature of her government, and the character
of her people, entitle her to maintain.

ProRrefs of WHILE the kingdoms on the continent grew into power and
E'ngland with
relprato its consequence, England likewise made considerable progress to-
intrior fate. wards regular government and interior strength. Henry VIII.

probably without intention, and certainly without any confilent
plan, of which his nature was incapable, pursued the scheme

of
440

'4+

ofdepreffing the nobility, which the policy of his father HenryVII.
had begun. The pride and caprice of his temper led him to em-
ploy chiefly new men in the administration of affairs, because he
found them most obsequious, or least scrupulous; and he not only
conferred on these such plenitude of power, but exalted them to
such pre-eminence in dignity, as mortified and degraded the
ancient nobility. By the alienation or sale of the church lands,
which were diffipatad with a profusion not inferior to the rapa-
cioufnefs with which they had been seized, as well as by the pri-
vilege granted to the ancient landholders of felling their estates,
or disposing of them by will, an immense property, formerly
locked up, being brought into circulation, put the spirit of in-
duftry and commerce in motion, and gave it some considerable
degree of vigour. The road to power and to opulence became
open to persons of every condition. A sudden and excessive
flow of wealth from the Weft Indies proved fatal to industry in
Spain; a moderate accession in England to the fum in circula-
tion gave life to commerce, awakened the ingenuity of the
nation, and excited it to useful enterprize. In France, what the
nobles loft the crown gained. In England, the commons were
gainers as well as the King. Power and influence accompanied
of course the property which they acquired. They rose to con-
fideration among their fellow fubjeds; they began to feel
their own importance; and extending their influence in the
legilative body gradually, and often when neither they thcm-
selves nor others foresaw all the effect of their claims and pre-
tensions, they at last attained that high authority, to which tlhe
British conflitution is indebted for the exilfencc, and must owe
tie preservation of its liberty. At the fame time that the Eng-
jifh constitution aydanced towards perfecion, fcvclal circiun-

VoL, III. L I ancc

BooxXlI. BOOKM1.

BooKXII. fiances brought on a change in the ancient system with refpea

to foreign powers, and introduced another more beneficial to
the nation. By'difclaiming the supremacy andjuriifdition of the
Papal See, considerable fums were saved to the nation, of which
it had been annually drained, by remittances to Rome'for dif-
penfations and indulgences, or in order to defray the expence of
pilgrimages into foreign countries *, or by payment of annates,
first fruits, and a thousand other taxes which that artful and
rapacious court levied on the credulity of mankind. The idea
of a jurifdidion different from the civil power, and claiming not
only to be independant but superior to it, a wild solecism in
government, apt not only to perplex and disquiet weak minds,
but tending dire&ly to disturb society, was finally aboliffed. Go-
vernment became more simple as well as more respeCtable, when
no rank or character exempted any person from being amen-
able to the fame courts, from being tried by the fame judges,
and from being acquitted or condemned by the fame laws.

vieh rcfpct BY the loss of Calais the English were excluded from
t 'slccol the continent. All schemes for invading France became of

course as chimerical as they had formerly been pernicious.
The views of the English were confined, first by necessity, and
afterwards from choice, within their own island. That rage
for conqucft which had poffeflcd the nation during many cen-
turics, and wailed its firength in perpetual and fruitless wars,

* The loss whith the nation fuflained by mofl of these articles is ,,bvious,

anld inul have been great. Even that by pilgrimages was not inconfidcrable.
In the ycr i428, licence was obtained by no fewer than 916 persons to visit the
fhllilmc of St. James of Coinpoflella in Spain. Ryiner, vol. x. p. . In 1434,
the nuimber of pilgrims to the fame place was 7460. Ibid. p. . In 1445,
hlley wclc 2ZI ). vol. xi. p).

at
442

at length ceased. Those aCive spirits which had known and
followed no profeflion but war, fought for occupation in the
arts of peace, and their country benefited as much by the one
at it had suffered by the other. The nation, exhausted by fre-
quent expeditions to the continent, recruited, and acquired new
strength; and when rouzed by any extraordinary exigency to
take part in foreign operations, the vigour of its efforts were
proportionally great, because they were only occasional and of a
short continuance.

TH.E fame principle which had led Ehgland to adopt this

new system with regard to the powers on the continent occa-
sioned a change in its plan of condut with refped to Scotland, the
only foreign state, with which, on account of its situation in the
liame island, the English had such a close connetion as demand-
ed their perpetual attention. Inflead of prosecuting the ancient
scheme of conquering that kingdom, which the nature of the
country, defended by a brave and hardy people, rendered dan-
gerous if not impracticable; it appeared more eligible to endea-
vour at obtaining such influence in Scotland as might exempt
England from any danger or disquiet from that quarter. The
national poverty of the Scots, together with the violence and
animosity of their factions rendered the execution of this
plan easy to a people far superior to them in wealth. Their
popular leaders. were gained; the minillcrs and favourites of
the crown were corrupted; and such ablolute dircaion of
their councils acquired, as rendered the operations of the one
kingdom dependant in a great measure on the sovereign
of the other. Such perfet external security added to the
interior advantages which England nrow poffoffed, mull loon

L 21 have

4A1

BooKXII.

With ref[i)e
to Scotlar.d.

BooK Xn.

Changes in
the political
slate of the
secondary
power. In
Europe.

The most
confiderab'e
revolution
of the fix-
tecnth cen-
tury in the
court of
Rome.

have raised it to new consideration and importance; the long
reign of Elizabeth, equally conspicuous for wisdom, for fleddi-
ness, and for vigour, accelerated its progress, and carried it with
greater rapidity towards that elevated station which it hath
since held among the powers of Europe.

DURING the period in which the political state of the great

kingdoms underwent such changes, revolutions of considerable
importance happened in that of the secondary or inferior powers.
Those in the Papal court are most obvious, and of most exten-
five consequence.

IN the Preliminary Book I have mentioned the rife of that

spiritual jurifdicion which the Popes claim as Vicars of Jesus
Christ, and have traced the progress of that authority which
they possess as temporal Princes *. There was nothing previous
to the reign of Charles V. that tended to circumscribe or to mo-
derate their authority, but science and philosophy, which began
to revive and to be cultivated. The progress of there, however,
was still inconsiderable; they always operate slowly; and it is
long before their influence reaches the people, or can produce
any sensible effec upon them. They may perhaps gradually,
and in a long course of years, undermine and shake an efta-
blifhcd fyflem of false religion, but there is no instance of their
having overturned one. The battery is too feeble to demolifli
those falbricks which fupcrfiition r.lics on deep foundations,
and can fircngthcn with the mofi counfummnatc art.

'ol. I. p. 124.

LUTHER
444

445

LUTHER had attacked the Papal supremacy with other wea-

pons, and with an impetuosity more formidable. The time
and manner of his attack concurred with a multitude of circum-
fiances, which have been explained, in giving him immediate
success. The charm which had bound mankind for so many
ages was broken at once. The human mind, which had con-
tinued long as tame and pallive, as if it had been formed to
believe whatever was taught, and to bear whatever was imposed,
rouzed of a sudden and became inquisitive, mutinous, and dif-
dainful of the yoke to which it had hitherto submitted. That
wonderful ferment and agitation of mind, which, at this distance
of time, appears unaccountable or is condemned as extravagant,
was so general, that it must have been excited by causes which
were natural and of powerful efficacy. The Kingdoms of
Denmark, Sweden, England and Scotland, and almost one half
of Germany threw off their allegiance to the Pope, abolished
his jurifdiCion within their territories, and gave the fandion of
law to modes of discipline and systems of doctrine which
were not only independant of his power, but hofRile to it. Nor
was this spirit of innovation confined to those countries which
openly revolted from the Pope; it spread through all Europe,
and broke out in every part of it with various degrees of vio-
lence. It penetrated early into France and made progress apace.
The number of converts to the opinions of the Reformers was so
great, their zeal so enterprizing, and the abilities of their leaders
so difltinguifhed, that they soon ventured to contend for superiority
with the eflablifhed church, and were sometimes on the point
of obtaining it. In all the provinces of Germany which con-
tinucd to acknowledge the Papal supremacy, as well as in the
Low Countries, the Proteflint docrines were ficrctly taught,

4 ajli

BooKXH.

The general
revolt against
the doctrines
of the church
of Rone, and
the power of
the Popes.

BooKXII.

Thisabridged
the extent of
the !'ope'
dominion',

and had gained so many proselytes, that they were ripe for revolt,
and were restrained merely by the dread of their rulers from
imitating the example of their neighbours, and asserting their
independance. Even in Spain and in Italy, symptoms of the
fame disposition to Ihake off the yoke appeared. The pretensions
of the Pope to infallible knowledge and supreme power were
treated by many persons of eminent learning and, abilities with
such scorn, or impugned with such vehemence, that the most
vigilant attention of the civil magistrate, the highest firains of
pontifical authority, and all the rigour of the inquisitorial jurif-
diCtion were requisite to check and extinguish it.

THE defecion of so many opulent and powerful king-

doms from the Papal See, was a fatal blow to its grandeur and
power. It abridged the dominions of the Popes in extent, it
diminished their revenues, and left them fewer rewards to be-
flow on the ecclefiafticks of various denominations, attached to
them by vows of obedience as well as by ties of interest, and
whom they employed as inflruments to eftabli{h or support their
ufilrpations in every part of Europe. The countries too whicl
now disclaimed their authority, were those which formerly had
been moRl devoted to it. The empire of superstition differs
from every other species of dominion; its power is often greateff,
and most implicitly obeyed in the provinces most remote from the
feat of government; while such as arc situated nearer to that

arc more apt to discern the artifices by which it is upheld, or
the imploftures on which it is founded. The personal frailties
or vices of the Popes, the errors as well as corruption of their
adlminifration, the ambition, venality and deceit which rcigned
in their court, fell immed(iately under the obli)rvation of the Ita-

lians,
44'

lians, and could not fail of diminishing that refped which be-
gets submission. But in Germany, England, and the more
remote countries, these were either altogether unknown, or
being only known by repprt, made a flighter impression. Their
veneration for the Papal dignity increased with their distance
from Rome; and that, added to their gross ignorance, rendered
them equally credulous and passive. In tracing the progress of
the Papal domination, the boldest and molt successful inflances
of encroachment are to be found in Germany and other coun-
tries distant from Italy. In these its impositions were heaviest,
and its exaaions the most rapacious; so that in estimating the
diminution of power which the court of Rome suffered in
consequence of the Reformation, not only the number but the
characer of the people who revolted, not only the great extent
of territory, but the extraordinary obsequiousness of the fubjeds
which it loft, must be taken into ,the account.

NOR was it only by this defection of so many kingdoms and

flates which it occasioned, that the Reformation contributed to
diminish the power of the Roman Pontiffs. It obliged them to
adopt a different fyflem of conduct towards the nations which
continued to recognize their jurifdition, and to govern them by
new maxims and with a milder spirit. The Reformation taught
them, by a fatal example, what they seem not before to have ap-
prehended, that the credulity and patience of mankind might be
overburdened and cxhaullcd. They became afraid of vcntnring
on any fich exertion of their authority as might alarm or exal-
peratc their fuijccds, and excite them to a new revolt. lTlcy lw a;
rivxal cl lltc ceflablifhced in many countries of Europe, the miem-
hers of -which were on the watch to obl'crvc any errors inl their

adilinifilrat.ioun,

BOOK XII.

and obliged
them to
change the
spirit (if thtir
govcrnmenit.

447

BooKXII.

.administration, and eager to expose them. They were sensible
that the opinions adverse to their power and usurpations were
not confined to their enemies alone, but had spread even
among the people who still adhered to them. Upon all these
accounts, it was no longer poflible to lead and to govern their
flock in the fame manner as in those dark and quiet ages, when
faith was implicit, when fubmiflion was unreserved, and all
tamely followed and obeyed the voice of their flepherd. From
the ara of the Reformation, the Popes have ruled rather by ad-
dress and management than by authority. The stile of their de-
crees is the fame, but the effec of them is very different. '1hose
Bulls and Interdits which, before the Reformation, made the
greatest Princes tremble, have since that period been disregarded
or despised by the most inconsiderable. Those bold decisions and
ads of jurifdiEtion which,, during many ages, not only passed
uncenfured, but were revered as the akwards of a sacred tri-
bunal, would, since Luther's appearance, be treated by one part
of Europe as the effet of folly or arrogance, and be deteficd
by the other as impious and unjust. The Popes, in their admi-
nifiration, have been obliged not only to accommodate them-
selves to the notions of their adherents, but to pay some regard
to the prejudices of their enemies. They seldom venture to
claim new powers, or even to jnfift obflinately on their ancient
prerogatives, left they should irritate the former; they carefully
avoid every measure that may either excite the indignation or
draw on them the xerifion of the latter. The policy of the
court of Rome has become as cautious,, circumfpet, and timild,
as it was once adventurous and violent; and though their pr/:-
tensions to infallibility, on which all their authority is founded,
does not allow them to renounce any jurisdiction which they

havl
448

have at any time claimed or exercised, they find it expedient to
susser many of their prerogatives to lie dormant, and not to ex-
pose themselves by ill-timed attempts towards reviving these, to
the rifque of losing that remainder of power which they still
enjoy. Before the sixteenth century, the Popes were the mo-
vers and directors in every considerable enterprize; they were
at the head of every great alliance; and being confidered as
arbiters of the affairs of Christendom, the court of Rome was
the centre of political negociation and intrigue. From that
time, the greatest operations in Europe have been carried on in-
dependant of them; they have funk almost to a level with the
other petty Princes of Italy; they continue to claim, though they
dare not exercise, the fame spiritual jurifdidion, but scarce retain
any shadow of the temporal power which they anciently pof-
fefled.

BUT how fatal soever the Reformation may have been to the

power of the Popes, it contributed to improve the church of
Rome both in science and in morals. The desire of equalling
the reformers in those talents which had procured them refpet;
the necessity of acquiring the knowledge requisite for defending
their own tenets, or refuting the arguments of their opponents;
together with the emulation natural between two rival churches, en-
gaged the Roman Catholic clergy to apply themselves to the fludyof
ufcful fcicnce, which they cultivated with fitch assiduity and
success, that they have gradually become as eminent in litera-
ture, as they were in some periods infamous for ignorance. The
fame principle occasioned a change no less conliderable in the
manners of the clergy of the Romilh church. Various caufcs
which have formerly been cnumcerated, had concurred in introdu-

VoL,. III. M m m cing

BOOK XII.

The Reforma-
tion contri-
buted to im-
prove Ihe
church both in
science and
morals.

BOOK XII.
»--,--

cing great irregularity, and even dissolution of manners among
the Popish clergy. Luther and his adherents began their attack
on the church with such vehement inveaives against these, that,
in order to remove the scandal, and silence their declamations,
greater decency of conduct became necessary. The Reformers
themselves were so eminent not only for the purity but even aufte-
rity of their manners, and had acquired such reputation among the
people on that account, that the Roman Catholick Clergy must
have soon loft all credit, if they had not endeavoured to conform
in some measure to their standard. They knew that all their
actions fell under the severe infpedion of the Protestants, whom
enmity and emulation prompted to observe every vice, or even
impropriety in their conduct; to cenfilre them without indul-
gence, and to expose them without mercy. This rendered
them, of course, not only cautious to avoid such enormities as
might give offence, but studious to acquire the virtues that might
merit praise. In Spain and Portugal, where the tyrannical ju-
rifdition of the Inquisition crushed the Protestant faith as soon
as it appeared, the spirit of Popery continues invariable; science
has made small progress, and the characer of ecclesiastics has
undergone little change. But in those countries where the mem-
bers of the two churches have mingled freely with each other, or
have carried on any considerable intercourse, either commercial
or literary, an extraordinary alteration in the ideas as well as in
the morals of the Popish ecclesiastics, is manifest. In France, the
manners of the Dignitaries and secular clergy have become de-
cent and exemplary in an high degree. Many of them have
been difinguifhcd for all the accompliflhmcnts and virtues which
ran adorn their profession; and differ greatly from their pre-

deceffors
4SO

decelrors before the Reformation, both in their maxims and in BOOK XII.
their condud.

NoR has the influence of the Reformation been felt only by Tle cffets of

it extend to
the inferior members of the Roman Catholick Church; it has the chlara'.r

of the Popes

extended to the See of Rome, to the sovereign Pontiffs them- themfclves.
selves. Violations of decorum, and even trespasses against mo-
rality, which passed without censure in those ages, when neither
the power of the Popes, nor the veneration of the people for
their charadcer, had any bounds; when there was no hostile eye
to observe the errors in their condu2, and no adversaries zealous
to inveigh against them; would be liable now to the severest
animadversion, and excite general indignation or horror. In-
stead of rivalling the courts of temporal Princes in gaiety, and
surpassing them in licentiousness, the Popes have tfudied to as-
fume manners more severe and more fuitablc to their ecclefiafti-
cal charader. The chair of St. Peter hath not been polluted,
during two centuries, by any Pontiff that resembled Alexander VI.
or several of his predecessors, who were a disgrace to religion
and to human nature. Throughout this long fucceflion of
Popes, a wonderful decorum of condud, compared with that of
preceding ages, is observable. Many of them have been confpi-
cuous for the virtues becoming their high flation; and by their
human ity, their love of literature, and their moderation, have made
fomc atonement to mankind for the crimes of their p1rclcceflorls.
Thus the beneficial influences of tlhe Reflorn'tion have )ben
more cxtenfive than they appear on a filpcrficial view; and this
great division in the Chriflian church hath contributld, in loine
incafilre, to cncrcafi purity of manners, to diflufIe fcicllnc, anid
to inliirc hlumanlity. IIiflory recites lichl a number of'l oc1kilng

M In Im z Cevents,

451

Boo KXII.

Stite or the
re u'Itkof
Vellice.

events, occasioned by religious dificnfions, that it must afford
particular fatisfadion to trace any one salutary. or beneficial
effeCt to that source, from which so many fatal calamities have
flowed.

TH E republick of Venice which, at the beginning of the fix-

teenth century, had appeared so formidable, that almost all the po-
tentatcs of Europe united in a confederacy for its deftruaion, de-
dined gradually from its ancient power and fplcndour. TheVene-
tians not only loft a great part of their territory in the war excited
by the league of Cambray, but the revenues as well as vigour of
the Rate were exhausted by their extraordinary and long continued
efforts in their own defence; and that commerce by which they
had acquired their wealth and power began to decay, without any
hopes of its reviving. All the fatal consequences to their-re-
publick, which the sagacity of the Venetian senate foresaw on
the first discovery of a passage to the Eaft-Indies by the Cape of
Good Hope, took place. Their endeavours to prevent the Por-
tugluef from establishing themfclves in the Eal-Indies, not only
by exciting the Soldans of Egypt and the Ottoman monarchs to
turn their arms againfl flch dangerous intruders, but bly afford-
ing secret aid to the Infidels in order to insure their fucccs ', proved
incffcuial. The activity and valour of the Portuguefc fury
mounted every obflaclc, and obtained ficlh firm footing in that
fertile country, as secured to them large pofcfnions, together with
influence fill more cxtcnfivc. Lisbon, intcead of Venice, became
the f o;pilc fir the prccious cminnoditics of the Tlaic f The Vene-
tians, after having pofciffed for many years the monopoly of
that beneficial commerce, had the mortification to be excluded

"Irchqr. Sciipt. Rcr. Gcrman. vol. ii. 529.

fro tu
4w2

from almost any share in it. The discoveries of the Spaniards
m the western world, proved no less fatal to inferior branches
of their commerce. The original defects which were formerly
pointed out in the conflitution of the Venetian republick conti-
nued, and the disadvantages with which it undertook any great
enterprize, increased rather than diminished. The sources from
which it derived its extraordinary riches and power being dried
up, the interior vigour of the slate declined, and of course, ren-
dered its external operations less formidable. Long before the
middle of the sixteenth century, Venice ceased to be one of the.
principal powers in Europe, and became a secondary and fubal-.
tern state. But as the senate had the address to conceal its di-
minution of power, under the veil of moderation and caution;.
as it made no rash effort that could discover its impotence; as
the symptoms of political decay in states are not soon observed,
and are seldom so apparent to their neighbours, as to occasion
any sudden alteration in their condutd towards them, Venice con-
tinued long to be confidered and refpeEed. She was treated
not according to her present condition, but according to the
rank which she had formerly held. Charles, as well as the mo-
narchs of France his rivals, courted her allillance with emula,
tion and follicitude in all their entcrprizes. Even down to th.e
close of the century, Venice remained not only an object of at-
tention, but a considerable Icat of political negociation and intrigue.

BOOKXIL..
»-- r -.

TIlAT authority which the sirs Cosmo de Medici, and Law- of Oufciiny.

rence, his grandson, l;dl ac(lllircl in the rcpublick of Florence
by their beneficence and abilities, inliired their dlefecnlaiits with
the ail)ition of ultturing the fIvcrcignty in their country, and
paved their way toward:; it. Charles placetl Alexander de Me-.
di';i at the head of the rcpul)lick, and to the natural intcrelt a:(l A. D. 153011.

X~~~8 p('low cr

-BOOK XII.

Of the dukes
of Savoy.

power of the family added the weight and credit of the Impe-
rial protecion. Of these, his successor Cosmo, firnamed the
Great, availed himself; and establishing his supreme authority
on the ruins of th ancient republican constitution, he tranf-
mitted that, together with the title of Grand Duke of Tuscany,
to his descendants. their dominions were composed of the terri-
tories which had belonged to the three commonwealths of Flo-
rence, Pisa, and Siena, and formed one of the most refpe&able of
the Italian flates.

THE dukes of Savoy, during the former part of the sixteenth

century, possessed territories which were not considerable either
for extent or value; and the French, having seized the greater
part of them, obliged the reigning duke to retire for safety to
the strong fortress of Nice, where he shut himself up for several
years; while his son, the Prince of Piedmont, endeavoured to
better his fortune, by serving as an adventurer in the armies of
Spain. The peace of Cateau Cambrefis restored to him his pa-
ternal dominions. As these are environed on every hand by
powerful neighbours, all whole motions the dukes of Savoy must
observe with the greatest attention, in order not only to guard
againf[ the danger of being furprized and overpowered, but that
they may chufi their fide with discernment in those quarrels
wherein it is impossible for them to avoid taking part, this pe-
culiarity in their situation fetms to have had no inconfidcrable
influence on their character. By rouzing them to perpetual at-
tention, by keeping their ingenuity always on the firetch, and
engaging them in almost continual action, it hath formed a race
of Princes more figacious in discovering their true intcrcef, more
dccifive in their rcfolutions, and more dextrous in availing them-
I'lvcs of every occurrence which presented itself, than any per-

i haps
454

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

455

haps that can be singled out in the history of mankind. By BooxXIL
gradual acquisitions the Dukes of Savoy have added to their - -
territories as well as to their own importance; and aspiring at
length to regal dignity, which they obtained about halfa century
ago, they hold no inconsiderable rank among the monarchs of
Europe.

THE territories which now form the republick of the united

Netherlands, were loft during the first part of the sixteenth cen-
tury, among the numerous provinces subjed to the house of
Austria; and were then so inconsiderable, that hardly one oppor-
tunity of mentioning them hath occurred in all the busy period
of this history. But soon after the peace of Cateau Cambrefis,
the violent and bigoted maxims of Philip's government, car-
ried into execution with unrclcnting rigour by thc duke of Alva,
exasperated the free-people of the Low-Countries to such a de-
gree, that they threw off the Spanish yoke, and asserted their
ancient liberties and laws. These they defended with a perse-
vering valour, which occupied the arms of Spain during half a
century, exhausted the vigour, ruined the reputation of that
monarchy, and at last constraincd their ancient mailers to recog-
nize and to treat with them as a free indepcndant slate. This
state, founded on liberty, and reared by industry and ccconomy,
had grown into reputation, even while firuggling for its existence.
But when peace and security allowed it to enlarge its views, and
to extend its commerce, it rose to be one of the most refpetable
as well as enterprizing powers in Europe.

THE tranfadions of the kingdoms in the North of Europe,
have been seldom attended to in the courfc of this history.

Of the United
Provinces.
RUv81A

M3BeoKXIL 'RusI A remained buried in that barbarism and obscurity, front

·' which it was called about the beginning of the present century,
·Of Ru3a. by the creative genius of Peter the Great, who made his country

known and formidable to the reft of Europe.

u'Of Denmark
-and Sweden.

IN Denmark and Sweden, during the reign of Charles V. great

revolutions happened in their conflitutions, civil as well as eccle-
fiaftical. In the former kingdom, a tyrant being degraded from
the throne and expelled the country, a new Prince was called
by the voice of the people to assume the reins of government.
In the latter, a fierce people, rouzed to arms by injuries and op-
pression, {hook off the Danish yoke, and conferred the regal dig-
nity on its deliverer Guflavus Ericson, who had all the virtues
of a hero and of a patriot. Denmark, exhausted by foreign
wars, or weakened by the diflenfions between the King and
she nobles, became incapable of such efforts as were requisite in
order to recover the ascendant which it had long poffefied in the
North of Europe. Sweden, as soon as it was freed from the
dominion of frangers, began to recruit its firength, and acquired
in a' short time such interior vigour, that it became the first
kingdom in the North. Early in the subsequent century, it rose
to such a high rank among the powers of Europe, that it had
the chief merit both in forming and conducting that powerful
league, which proteced not only the Protestant religion, but the
liberties of Germany against the bigotry and ambition of the
bouse of Austria.

INDEX
5.6

1

1
1 k .

# INDEX TO THE SECOND AND THIRD VOLUMES.

I

N

D

E

'

\'**
TO THE

X

.

SECOND AND THIRD VOLUMES.
N. B. The Roman numerals direCt to the volume, and the figures to the page.

A

BSOLUTION, the form of that
used by father Tetzel in -Germany,
I1. 80

.dorni, the faetion of, alifts the Impe-

rial general Colonna in the reduction of
Genoa, 11. 149.
Adrian of Utrecht, made preceptor to Charles V.

under William de Croy, lord of Chievres,
11. 21. His charaaer, 22. Sent by Charles
with power to assume the regency of Caflile
on the death of his grandfather, 27. His
claim admitted by Cardinal Ximenes, and
executed in conjunction, ib. Authorized
by Charles to hold the cortes of Valencia,
which refuses to aflnmhle before him, 63.
Made viceroy of Castile on the departure of
Charles for Germany, 66. His eleLtion re-
jnonltrated againit by the Castilians, ib. Is
horsen Pope, 145. RetrofpcEt of his con-
duit in Spain during the abcncce of Charles,
1 57. Sends Ronquillo to reduce tire Sego-
vians, who repulse him, ib. Sends Fonlcca
to brficge the city, who is replilled Ly the
inhabitanits of Mcdina del Caanpo, 148.

VOL. Ill.

Apologizes for Fonseca's condua to the
people, 159. Recals Fonseca and dimlinffcs
his troops, ib. His authority disclaimed by
the Holy Junta, 161. Deprived of power
by them, 163. His ill reception on his ar-
rival at Rome on being chosen to the Pa-
pacy, 187. .Refores the territories acquired
by his predeceffcr, 188. Labours to unite
the contending powers of Europe, ib. Pub-
liflics a hull for a three years truce among
them, 189. Accedes to the league againf
the French King, 190. His death, 197.
The sentiments and behaviour of the people
on that occasion, ib. A retroflect of his
condut toward the Reformers, 206. His
brief to the diet at Nuremburgh, 207. Re-
ceivcs a lift of grievances from the diet, 209.
Ilis conduct to the Reformers, how eteccm-
ed at Rome, 211.
Africa, the Spanilh troops sent by Cardinal

Ximenns againfi Barbarofli, defeated there,
If. 36.
,igulss Mortes, interview between the Em;pCe

ror Clhirles, ainl Francis, there, II. 414.
Ai.x la C/'.,/'/lli, the IlIpeCur Clharles crowned

N ln these,

there, II. 77. Ferdinand his brother crown-
ed King of the Romans there, 334.
Alarcon, Don Ferdinand, Francis I. of France,

taken prisoner at the battle of Pavia, com-
mitted to his custody, II. 229. ConduAs
Francis to Spain, 238. Delivers up Francis
in pursuance of the treaty of Madrid, 254.
Is sent ambassador to Francis to require the
fulfilment of his treaty, 268. Pope Cle-
ment VII. taken prisoner by the Imperia-
lits, is committed to his culfody, 287.
IAbany, John Stuart duke of, commands the
French army sent by Francis I. to invade
Naples, II. 224.
Albert, of Brandenburgh, grand rafter of the

Teutonic Order, becomes a convert to the
doctrines of Luther, 11. 263. Obtains of
Sigismund King of Poland the invefliture
of Pruflia, ereted into a dutchy, 264. Is
put under the ban of the empi;e, ib. His
family fixed in the inheritance of Prussia,
ib. Commands a body of troops in behalf
of Maurice of Saxony, but endeavours to
aftert an independency, 111. 250. Defeats
and takes th» Duke d'Aumale prisoner, and
joins the Emperor at Metz, 271. Is con-
demned by the Imperial chamber for his de-
mands on the bishops of Bamberg and
Wortfburg, 280. A league formed against
him, 281. Is defeated by Maurice, 282.
Is again defeated by Henry of Brunswick,
284. Is driven out of Germany and dies in
exile, ib. His territories restored to his
collateral heirs, ib.
Albert, clector of Metz, the publication of in-

dulgcnccs in Getmany, committed to him,
II. 8o.
Alexander VI. Pope, remarks on the pontificate

of, II. 102.

.lfxander di Medici. See MEDICI.
/l/irr, how it was seized by lHaibarona, II.

365. Is seized by the brother of the fame
name, on the death of the former, 366. Is
t.ken under the protection of the Porte, ib.
Is governed by Hafccn Aga in the abfen c of
Barharofa, 471. Is besiegcd by the Em-
peror Charles V. 474. Charles forced to
rc-imh;uk by bad weather, 478.
.lb;af;hid, brother of Muley Hafcen King of

Tunis, solicits the protection of Barbaioll'i
aglinlt himii, II. 367. Ilis treacherous treat-
Awnt by 1.rbarolld, 368,

,h/a, Duke of, adheres to Ferdinand of Ara-

gon, in his dispute with the Archduke Phi-
lip concerning the regency of Castile, II.
9. Forces the Dauphin to abandon the
iege of Perpignan, HII. 8. Presides at the
court-martial which condemns the Elector
of Saxony to death, 145. Detains the
Landgrave prisoner by -the Emperor's order,
155. Commands under the Emperor, the
army defined against France, 270. Is ap-
pointed commander in chief in Piedmont,
319. Enters the Eeclefiaftical territories
and seizes the Campagna Romana, 368.
Concludes a truce with the Pope, 369.
Negociates a peace between Philip and the
Pope, with Cardinal Caraffa, 392. Goes to
Rome to aik pardon of the Pope for his hof-
tilities, 393. Is sent to Paris in the name
of Philip to espouse the Princess Elizabeth,
430.
Amerjlorf, a nobleman of Holland, aflociated

by Charles V. with Cardinal Ximenes, in
the regency of Castile, II. 34.
.nabaptiJts, the origin of that fee deduced,

II. 348. Their principal tenets, 349. Their
settlement at Munfier, 350. Characer of
their principal leaders, ib. They seize the
city of Munlter, 3ir. They establish a
new form of government there, ib. Chufe
Bocold King, 355. Their licentious prac-
tices, ib. A confederacy of the German
Princes formed againfi them, 356. Are
blockaded in Munster by the bishop, 357.
The city taken and great slaughter made of
them, 358. Their King put to death, 359.
CharaCter of the fedt since that period, ib.
See Mattbias, and Bocold.
Anglria, his authority cited in proof of the

extortions of the Flemifli ministers of
Charles V. II. 45.
Abnhalt, Prince of, avows the opinions of Mar-

tin Luther, II. 206.

Annats to the court of Rome, what, II. i 13.
.racon, how Ficdinand became poffelred of

that kingdom, II. 2. The cortes of, ac-
knowledges the Archduke Philip's title to
the crown, 3 Antient enmity between this
kingdom and i Caflile, 7. Navarre added to
this crown by the arts of Fcrdinand, 19.
Arrival of Clharles V. 46. The cortes not
allowed to aftlmnble in his name, ib. The
rcfractory behaviour of the Aragonlials, ib.

, 'llchry

They refuse reflitution of the kingdom of
Navarre, 47. Don John Lanuza appoint- Barbarossa,
ed regent, on the departure of Charles for Algiers
Germany, 66. Who composes the diftur- Spanish
bances there, 184. The moderation of Ximene
Charles towards the insurgents on his ar- mences
rival in Spain, 186. See Spain. How he
Jfrdres, an interview there between Francis I. Infests t

and Henry VIII. of England, II. 75. and kill,
Aflurias, Charles son of Philip and Joanna, of Orar

acknowledged Prince of, by the Cortes of Barbarofa,
Caflile, II. 14. of the si
.,ugiburg, a diet called there by Charles V. on his

II. 328. His public entry into that city, dominio
329. The confeflion of faith named from Signior,
this city, drawn up by Melancahon, 329. Turkift
Resolute behaviour of the protestant Princes ment of
at, 330. Its form of government violently Tunis,
altered, and rendered fubmiflive to the Em- his depr
peror, 18r. The diet reassembled there, ift the
193. The diet takes part with the Emperor 371. (
against the city of Magdeburg, 200. Is defeated
seized by Maurice of Saxony, 238. Another 375.
diet at, opened by Ferdinand, 326. Car- Burns I
dinal Morone attends the diet as the Pope's juntion
nuncio, 327. Morone departs on the Pope's retire, ii
death, 329. Recess of the diet on the sub- Barbary,
je6l of religion, 332. Remarks on this re- of, II.
cess, 337. The diet again assembled there, kingdon
III. 162. Is intimidated bybeing surrounded 364. S
with tle I'.mperor's Spanish troops, ib. The Barelona,
Empercr re-eftabliihes the Romish worship, Charles
in the churches of, ib. The diet, by the 320. 1
Emperor's order, petitions the Pope for the Italian S
return of the council to Trent, 169. A Bayard, ch
s'ystem of theology laid before the diet by the gallant d
Emperor, 174. The archbishop of Mentz, Imperiai
declares, without authority, the diet's ac- siege, ib.
ceptance of it, 174. 203. H
Avila, a convention of the malecontents in Bdlly, M.

Spain held there, II. 160. A confederacy tion of (
termed the Holy Junta, formed there, 161. His accc
which disclaims the authority of Adrian, ib. Emperor
The Holy Junta removed to 'Iordcfillas, 'rovencc
162. See 7unta. Bible, a tr.
du/lria, by what means the house of, became Luther,

lo formidable in Germany, 11. 289. The the peopl
extraordinary acquisitions of the houfc of, Bliocca, ba
in the perfln of the Emperor Charles V. Marecha
11. 433. 436. Bocold or Bi

becomes

VOLUMMES.

B

, Horuc, his rife to the kingdoms of
and Tunis, II. 36. Defeats the
troops sent against him by Cardinal
s, ib. His parentage, 364. C6m-
pirate with his brother Hayradin, ib.
acquired pofleflion of Algiers, 365.
he coafis of Spain, 366. Is reduced
ed hy Comares the Spanish governor
i, ib.
,Hayradin, brother to the former
ime name, takes pofiefsion of Algiers
brother's death, II. 366. Put his
>ns under the protection of the Grand
, ib. Obtains the command of the
i fleet; ib. His treacherous treat-
'Alrafchid, brother to the King of
368. Seizes Tunis, 369. Extends
edations by sea, io. Prepares to re-
Emperor's armament against him,
Goletta and his fleet taken, 372. Is

by Charles, 374. Tunis taken,
Makes a descent on Italy, III. I8.
Rheggio, ib. Befiecs Nice in con-
I with the French, but is forced to
b. Is difmifled by Francis, .o.
a summary view of the revolutions
363. Its division into independant
ns, ib. Rife of the piratical States,
See Barb, 'rosa.
the publick entry of the Emperor
V. into that city as its count, II.
She treaties of Charles with the
;tates, published there, 324.
evalier, his character, 11. 125. His
lcfence of Mczieres, bfiecgcd by the
iiRs, ib. Obliges them to raise the

His noble behaviour at his death,

[is respectful funeral, 204.
his erroneous account of the educa-
Charles V. correted, II. 21. Note.
)unt of the dilhiflrous rctreat of the

Charles V. from his invafin of
e, II. 403.
anfltion of, undcrr;tkcn by Maitin
and its eflects in opening the eyes es
Ic, I. 205.
ttle of, between Colonna, and
I Lautrcc, II. 147.
eukels, John, a journeyman tavlor,
a leader of the anabaptifis, at Mun-

Nnn a . flr,

Per, 1I. 350. Succeeds Matthias in the
'diretion of their affairs, 353. His enthu-
fiatick extravagances, ib. Is choren King,
354. Marries fourteen wives, 355. Be-
heads one of them, 357. Is put to a cruel
death at the taking of Munfier, 358. See
,nabaptfts.
Bchtmia, the Archduke Ferdinand choren

King of, II. 289. Ferdinand encroaches on
the liberties of the Bohemians, III. I60.
The Reformation introduced by John HuTs
ard Jerome of Prague, ib. Raise an army
to no purpose, ib. Is closely confined in the
citadel of Mechlin, 204.
Bonnivet, admiral of France, appointed to

command the invasion of Milan, II. 195.
Hlis character, ib. Enables Colonna to de.
fend the city of Milan by his imprudent de-
lay, 196. Forced to abandon the Milanese,
202. Is wounded and his army defeated by
the Imperialifis, 203.. Stimulates Francis
to an invasion of the Milanese, 219. Ad-
vises Francis to besiege Pavia, 221. Ad-
vises him to give battle to Bourbon who
advanced to the relief of Pavia, 226. Is
killed at the battle of Pavia, 227.
Bologna, an interview between the Emperor

Chailes V. and Pope Clement VII. there,
II. 321. Another meeting between them
there, 339.
Bouffer, sent by Francis I. King of France,

to negociate a peace with Charles V. II.
38.
Eouillon, Robert de la Marck, lord of, declares

war against the Emperor Charles, at the in-
ftigation of Francis, II. 134. Is ordered
by Francis to disband his troops, ib. His
territories reduced by the Emperor, 135.
Bcul/gne, besieged by Henry VIII. of England,

111. 35. Taken, 43.
Bourbon, Charles Duke of, bis charaacer, II.

191. The causes of his discontent with
Francis 1. ib. His duchess dies, 192. Re-
jcls the advances of Iouife the King's mo-
ther, ib, His estate fequefcered by her in-
trigues, 193. Negociates secretly with the
Emperor, ib. Is included in a treaty between
the Emperor and Henry VIII. of England,
ib. Is taxed by the King with betraying
him, which he denies, 194. Escapes to
Italy, 195. Direts the measures of the
Inicrial army under Lannoy, 201. Defeats

7

the French on the banks of the Seffia, 203.
Infligates Charles to an invasion of France,
215. Advances to the relief of Pavia, 224.
Defeats Francis, and takes him prisoner,
227. Hastens to Madrid to secure his own
interests on the interview between Charles
and Francis, 240. His kind reception by
Charles, 247. Obtains a grant of the dutchy
of Milan, and is made general of the Im-
perial army, 248. Obliges Sforza to fur-
render Milan, 271. Is forced to oppress
the Milanese to satisfy his troops mutinying
for pay, 276. Set Morone at liberty, and
makes him his confident, ib. Appoints
Leyva governor of Milan, and advances to
invade the Pope's territories, 278. His dif-
appointed troops mutiny, ib. He determines
to plunder Rome, 282. Arrives at Rome,
and aflaults it, 284. Is killed, ib.
Brandenburgh, Eleaor of, avows the opinions

of Luther, II. 206.

--- - Albert of. See Albert.
Bruges, a league concluded there between the

Emperor, and Henry VIII. of England,
against France, II. 137.
Brunswick, Duke of, avows the opinions of

Luther, II. o26.
---- Henry Duke of, driven from his

dominions by the Protestant Princes of the
league of Smalkalde, III. 24. Raises men
for Francis, but employs them to recover
his own dominions, 55. Is taken prisoner,
ib.
Buda, siege of, by Ferdinand King of the

Romans, II. 468. Is treacherously seized
by Sultan Solyman, 469.

C
Cajetan, Cardinal, the Pope's legate in Ger-

many, appointed to examine the doctrines
of Martin Luther, II. 88. Requires Lu-
ther peremptorily to retran his errors, ib.
Requires the EleAor of Saxony to furren-
der or baniih Luther, 90. His condut jus-
tified, 9i.
Calais, an ineffectual congress there, between

the Emperor and Francis, under the me-
diation of Henry VIII. II. 136. The
carclefs manner in which it was guard-
ed in the reign of Mary Queen of England,
111. 398. Ineffeaual remonftances of Phi-
liJ, and Lord Wcntworth the governor,

concerning

concerning its defenceless slate, 399. Is in-
veRed and taken by the Duke of Guise, 400.
The Engliih inhabitants turned out, 401.
Stipulations concerning, in the treaty of
Chateau Cambrefis, 426.
Cambray, articles of the peace concluded there,

between the Emperor Charles, and Francis
of France, II. 315. Remarks on this treaty,
316.
Campe, peace of, between Henry VIII. and

Francis, III. 84.
Campeggio, Cardinal, made legate from Pope

Clement VII. to the second diet at Nurem-
berg, II. 212. Publishes articles for re-
forming the inferior clergy, 213. Advises
Charles to rigorous measures against the
Proteflants, 331.
Capitulation of the Germanick body, signed by

Charles V. and prescribed to all his fuccef-
fors, II. 60.
Caraffa, Cardinal, his precipitate election, III.

342. Is appointed legate to Bologna, ib.
Reasons of his disgust with the Emperor,
343. Persuades the Pope to solicit an alli-
ance with France against the Emperor, 344.
346. 348. His insidious commiflion to the
court of France, 363. His publick entry
into Paris, ib. Exhorts Henry to break his
truce with the Emperor, 364. Absolves
Henry from his oath, 366. Negociates a
peace between the Pope and Philip, with
the Duke d'Alva, 392. The fate of him
and his brother on the death of Pope Paul,
430. Carlo/ladius, imbibes the opinions of Martin

Luther, at Wittemburg, II. 97. His in-
temperate zeal, 2c4. Awed by the reproofs
of Luther, 205.
Carignan, besiegcd by the count d'Enguien,

and defended by the marquis de Guafto, IlI.
30. Guafto defeated in a pitched battle, 32.
The town taken, 33.

Ca/Italto, Marquis of Piadeno. See Piadeno.
Ca/Jilt, how Isabella became poflnefed of that

kingdom, II. 2. The Archduke Philip's
title acknowledged by the Cortes of that
kingdom, 3. Isabella dies and leaves her
husband Ferdinand of Aiagon, regent, 6.
Ferdinaid resigns the crown of, ib. }erdi-
nand acknowledged regent by the Cortes, 7.
Enmity between this kingdom and Aragon,
ib. 1 he particular dislike of the Caltilians

to Ferdinand, ib. The regency of, joint'y
vefied in Ferdinand, Philip and Joanna, I y
the treaty of Salamanca, xi. Declares.
against Ferdinand, 12. The regency (f,
resigned by Philip to Ferdinand, 13. Philip
and Joanna acknowledged King and Queen
by the Cortes, J4. Death of Philip, ib.
The perplexity of the Castilians on Joanna's
incapacity for government, ib. Ferdinand
gains the regency and the good will of the
Castilians by his prudent adminifiration, 18.
Oran and other places in Barbary annexed
to this kingdom by Ximenes, ibx Ximenes
appointed regent by Ferdinand's will, until
the arrival of Charles V. 25. Charles as-
fumes the regal title, 28. Ximenes procures
its acknowledgement, 29. The nobility
depressed by Ximenes, 30. The grandees
mutiny against Ximenes, 31. The mu-
tiny fupprefled, ib. Ximenes resumes the
grants made by Ferdinand to the nobles, 32.
The bold reply of Ximenes to the discontent-
ed nobles,33. Other associates in the regency
appointed with Ximenes at the instigation of
the Flemish courtiers, 34. Ximenes dies,
42. Charles acknowledged King by the
Cortes, on his arrival, with a reservation in
favour of his mother Joanna, 43. The
Castilians receive unfavourable impreflions
of him, 44. Disgusted by his partiality to
his Flemilh ministers, ib. Sauvage made
chancellor, ib. William de Croy, appoint-
ed archbishop of Toledo, 45. The princi-
pal cities confederate and complain of their
grievances, 47. The clergy of, refuse to
levy the tenth of benefices granted by the
Pope to Charles V. 62. lnterditled, but
the interdict taken off, by Charles's applica-
tion, ib. An insurrection. there, 64. In-
crease of difaffetlion, 65. Cardinal Adrian
appointed regent; on the departure of Charles
for Germany, 66. The views and preten-
lions of the commons, in their infurrctions,
159. The confederacy called the Holy Junta
formed, J60. The proceedings of which are
carried on in the name of QteenJoanna, 1 62.
Receives circulatory letters from Charles for
the insurgents to lay down their arms, with
promises of pardon, 164. 'lhc nobles un-
dertake to suppress the insurgent, 168.
Raise an army against them under the Conde
de Haro, 170. IHaro gets polufflion of Jo.

aiIUa

mnna, 171. Expedients by which they raise
money for their troops, 173. Unwilling to
'roceed to extremities with the Junta, ib.
The army of the Junta routed and Padilla
executed, 177. Dissolution of the Junta,
179. The moderation of Charles toward
the insurgents on his arrival in Spain, 186.
He acquires the love of the Caflilians, 187.
See Spain.
Catherine of Aragcn, is divorced from Henry

VIII. of iEngland, II. 347. Dies, 420.
Cathrizne a Boria, a nun, flies from her cloitfer,

and irarrics Martin Luther, II. 262.

Catherine di Medici. See MEDICI.
Cavi, peace concluded there between Pope

Paul IV. and Philip II. of Spain, III. 392.
Cercamp, negociations for peace entered into

there between Philip II. of Spain, and
Henry II. of France, III. 412. 420. The
negociations removed to Chateau Cambrefis,
424. See Chateau Cambrefis.
Charal7ers of men, rules for forming a proper

eflimate of them, III. 67. Applied to the
cafe of Luther, ib.
Charles IV. IEmperor of Germany, his obfer-

vations on the manners of the clergy, in his
letter to the archbishop of Mentz, II. xo4.
Note.
Charles V. Emperor, his descent and birth, II.

I. How li he came to inherit such extensive
dominions, ib. Acknowledged Prince of
Aflurias, by the Cortes of Castile, 14. His
father 'hilip die,, ib. Jealousy and hatred of
his grandfather Fecdinand toward him, 19.
left ieir to his don:inions, 20. Death of
Yerdiniind, 21. Ilis education committed
to William de Croy, lord of Clievres, ib.
Adrian of Utrctcht appointed to be his pre-
ceptor, ib. 'I he first opening of his charac-
ter, 22. Afnumcs the government of Flan-
dcir, and attends to buffices, 23. Sends
cardinal Adrian to be regent of Caflile,
who executes it jointly with Ximcncs, 27.
Aflumes the regal title, 28. His title ad-
mitted with difficulty by the Caflilian no-
bility, 29. Pcrfuaded to add affociatc re-
gents to Ximcnes, 34 Iis Flemish court
corrupted' by the avarice of Chievres, 36.
Perluaded by Ximencs to visit Spain, but
how that julvncy is retarded, 37. The pre-
sent slate of his affairs, ib. Concludes a peace
at Noycn with Francis I. of France, and

the conditions of the treaty, 38. Arrives in
Spain, 40. His ungrateful treatment of
Ximenes, 42. His publick entry into Val-
ladolid, 43. Is acknowleged King by the
Cortes, who vote him a free gift, ib. The
Castilians receive unfavourable impressions
of him, 45. Disgusts them by his parti-
ality to his Flemish ministers, ib. Sets out
for Aragon, 45. Sends his brother Ser-
dinand to visit their grandfather Maximi-
lian, ib. Cannot assemble the Cortes of
Aragon in his own name, 46. The op-
position made by that assembly to his desires,
ib. Refuses the application of Francis I. for
restitution of the kingdom of Navarre, ib.
Negleas the remonfirances of the Castilians,
47. Death of the Emperor Maximilian, 48.
View of the present itate of Europe, ib.
How Maximilian was obftruAed in fecurin,
the Empire to him, 49. Francis 1. alpires
to the Imperial crown, ib. Circumstances
favourable to the pretensions of Charles, 50.
The Swiss cantons espouse his cause, 53.
Apprehensions and condu&t of Pope Leo X.
on the occasion, 54. Afllembling of the diet
at Frankfort, 56. Frederick Duke of
Saxony refuses the offer of the Empire and
votes for him, 57. And refuses the presents
offered by his ambassadors, 58. Concurring
circumstances which favoured his elecion,
ib. His eledion, 59. Signs and confirms
the capitulation of the Gcrmanick body, 60.
The elecion notified to him, ib. AiFumes
the title of Majesty, ib. Accepts the Im-
perial dignity offered by the count Palatine
ambassador from the Eletors, 62. Ihe
clergy of Castile refuse the tenth of bene-
sices granted him by the Pope, ib. Procures
the interdia the kingdom is laid under for
refusal, to be taken off, ib. Empowers car-
dinal Adrian to hold the Cortes of Valencia,
63. The nobles refuse to affembei without
his presence, ib. Authorizes the insurgents
there to continue in arms, ib. Summons the
Cortes of Catfile. to meet in Galicia, 64.
Narrowly escapes with his Flemilh ministers
from an infurretion on that account, 65.
Obtains a donative from the Cortes, 66.
Prepares to leave Spain, and appoints re-
gents, ib. Embarks, ib. Motives of this
journey, 67. Rife of the rivalfhi, between
him and Francis I. ib. Courts the favour

of

Henry VIII. of England and his minister
cardinal Wolfey, 73. Visits Henry at Do-
ver, 74. Promises Wolfey his interest for
the papacy, 75. Has a second interview
with Henry at Gravelines, 76. Offers to
submit his differences with Francis to
Henry's arbitration, ib. His magnificent
coronation at Aix-la-Chapelle, 76. Calls a
diet at Worms, to check the reformers, 77.
Causes which hindered his espousing the
party of Martin Luther, 121. Grants Lu-
ther a safe condu&t to the diet of Worms,
122. An edict published against him, ib.
His embarrassment at this time, 126. Con-
cludes an alliance with the Pope, 130. The
conditions of the treaty, ib. Death of his
minister Chievres, and its advantages to him,
131. Invasion of Navarre by Francis, 132.
The French driven out, and their general
L'Efparre taken prisoner, 133. WVar de-
clared against him by Robert de la Marck,
lord of Bouillon, who ravages Luxemburg.
134. Reduces Bouillon, and invades France,
135. His demands at the congress at Calais,
136. Has an interview with cardinal Wol-
fey at Bruges, and concludes a league with
Henry V11I. against France, 137. Pope
Leo declares for him against France, 140.
The French driven out of Milan, 143, 147.
Visits England in his passage to Spain, 15o.
Cultivates the good will of cardinal Wolfey,
and creates the Earl of Surrey his high ad-
miral, ib. Grants the island of Malta, to
the Knights of St. John, expelled from
Rhodes by Solyman the magnificent, 153.
Arrives in Spain, r54. A retrofpea of his
proceedings in relation to the infulrrctions in
Spain, 163 Iflues circulatory letters for the
insurgents to lay down their arms, with pro-
mises of pardon, 16.. His prudent mode-
ration toward the insurgents, on his arrival
in Spain, 186. Acquires the love of the
Castilians, 187. Enters into a league with
Charles Duke of Bouibon, 193. Why he
did not endeavour to get Wolfey elEtcLd
Pope, i(X8. Invades Guienne and Burgundy
but without fiucccfs, 200. His troops in
Milan mutiny for want of pay, but .e pa-
cified by Morone, 202. Undertakes an in-
vafion of Provence, 2 15. Orders Pescara to
besiege Marseilles, 216. Pcfcara obliged to
crtire, 217. Difconccrted by the French

over-running the Milanese again, 220. The
revenues of Naples mortgaged to raise mo-
ney, ib. His troops defeat Francis and take
him prisoner at the battle of Pavia, 228.
His aftfeied moderation at receiving the
news, 229. Avails himself of a treaty con-
cluded between Lannoy and Pope Clement,.
but refuses to ratify it, 235. His army in
Pavia mutiny, and are obliged to be disband-
ed, 236. His deliberations on the proper
improvement of his disadvantages, ib. His
propositions to Francis, 237. After many
delays grants Sforza, the investiture of Mi-
lan, 240. Morone's intrigues betrayed to
him by Pescara, 243, Orders Pescara to
continue his negociations with Morone, 244.
His rigorous treatment of Francis, 245.
Visits Francis, 246. His kind reception of
the Duke of Bourbon, 247. Grants Bour-
bon the dutchy of Milan, and appoints
him general in chief of the Imperial army
there, 248. Fruitless negociations for
the delivery of Francis, ib. Treaty of Ma-
drid, with Francis, 250. Delivers up Fran-
cis, 254. Marries Isabella of Portugal, ib.
An alliance formed againit him at Cognac,
266. Sends ambassadors to Francis to re-
quire the fulfilment of the treaty of Madrid,
268. Prepares for war against Francis, 270.
The Pope reduced to an accommodation
with him, 274. The exhaufled itate of his
finances, 275. His troops under Bourbon
difirefled and mutinous for want of pay, ib.
Bourbon aflaults Rome, and is slain but the
city taken, 284. The Princ of Orange ge-
neral on Bourbon's death, takes the castle of
St. Angelo, and the Pope prisoner, 287.
The Emperor's conduct on that occasion,
288. His difentions with the Pope, how
far favourable to the reformation, 290. lis
infirutiions to the diet at Spires, ib. His
manifcfto against the Pope, and letter to the
cardinals, 29r. France and England league
againfl him, 294. Is refufird supplics by the
Cortes of Carlilc, 28. I)elivcrs the Pope
for a ransom, 299. Iis overtures to lHenry
and Francis, 300. Their declaration of war
againlt him, 302. Is challenged by Francis
to single combat, ib. Andrew Doria revolts
from Francis to him, 308. His forces de-
feat the French in Italy, 310. 312. His
motives for dcfriig an accommodation, 313.

Concludes.

Concludes a separate treaty with the Pope,
314. Terms of the peace of Cambray con-
cluded with Francis by the mediation of
Margaret of Aufiria and Louise of France,
315. Remarks on the advantages gained
by him in this treaty, and on his condut of
the war, 316. Visits Italy, 320. His po-
licy on his publick entry into Barcelona, ib.
Has an interview with the Pope at Bologna,
321. Motives for his moderation in Italy,
ib. His treaties with the States of, 322. Is
crowned King of Lombardy and Emperor of
the Romans, 324. Summons adiet at Spires
to confider the slate of religion, 325. His
deliberations with the Pope, refpecing the
expediency of calling a general council, 327.
Appoints a diet at Augsburg, 328. Makes
a publick entry into that city, 329. His en-
deavours to check the reformation, ib. Re-
solute behaviour of the protestant Princes
toward him, 330. His severe decree against
the Protestants, 331. Proposes his brother
Ferdinand to be elected King of the Romans,
332. Is opposed by the Proteflants, 333.
Obtains his election, 334. Is desirous of an
accommodation with the Protestants 336.
Concludes a treaty with them at Rurem-
burg, 337. Raises an army to oppose the
Turks under Solyman, and obliges him to
retire, 338. Has another interview with the
Pope, and presses him to call a general
council, 339. Procures a league of the Ita-
lian States to secure the peace of Italy, 3 1.
Arrives at Barcelona, 342. His endeavours
to prevent the negociations and meeting be-
tween the Pope and Francis, 344. Under-
takes to expel Barbarofla from Tunis, and
restore Muley Hafcen, 370. Lands in
Africa, and besieges Goletta, 371. Takes
Goletta, and seizes Barbarofla's fleet, 273.
Defeats B.iibaroflih, and takes Tunis, 374.
Restores Muley Hafcen, and the treaty be-
tween them, 376. The glory acquired by
this cnterprize and the delivery of the Chri-
ftian captives, 377. Seizes the dutchy of
Milan'on the death of Francis Sforza, 389.
His policy with regard to it, ib. Prepares for
war with Fr'lncis, 390. His invective against
Fr.ancis at Rome before the Pope in council,
391. Remarks on this tranfdction, 394.
i[,vades Flatce, 395. Enters Provence, and
finds it dcfolatld, 400. Beficgcs Marfcilles

and Aries, 401. His miserable retreat from
Provence, 403. His invasion of Picardy
defeated, 404. Is accused of poi'oning the
dauphin, 405. Improbability of its truth,
ib. His conjeture concerning the dauphin's
death, 406. Slanders invaded by Franois,
407. A suspension of arms in Slanders,
how negociated, 408. A truce in Pied-
mont, 409. Motives to these truces, ib.
Negociation for peace with Francis, 4t2.
Concludes a truce for ten years at Nice,
413. Remarks on the war, ib. His in-
terview with Francis, 414. Courts the
friendship of Henry VIII. of England, 420.
Indulges the ProteRant Princes, 421. Quiets
their apprehensions of the Catholick league,
425. His troops mutiny, 427. Assembles
the Cortes of Castile, 428. Destroys the
ancient conflitution of the Cortes, 429. In-
fiance of the haughty spirit of the Spanish
grandees, 430. Desires permiflion of Fran-
cis to pass through France to the Nether-
lands, 438. His reception in France, 439.
His rigorous treatment of Ghent, 442. Re-
fuses to fulfil his engagements to Francis,
443. Appoints a friendly conference be-
tween a deputation of Catholick and Pro-
teftant divines before the diet at Ratisbon,
462. Result of this conference, 464. Grants
a private exemption from oppreflions to the
Protestants, 465. Undertakes to reduce Al-
giers, 472. Is near being cast away by a
violent form, 474. Lands near Algiers, ib.
His soldiers exposed to a violent tempest and
rain, 475. His fleet shattered, 476. His
fortitude under there dirafters, 478. Leaves
his enterprize and embarks again, ib. Is
difreffed with another form at sea, 479.
Takes advantage of the French invasion of
Spain to obtain subsidies from the Cortes,
III. 9. His treaty with Portugal, ib. Con-
cludes a league with Henry VIII. it. Par-
ticulars of the treaty, 12. Over-runs Cleves,
and his barbarous treatment of the town of
1)urci, 15. His behaviour to the Duke of
Cleves, 16. Besieges Landrecy, ib. Is
joined by an English detachment, 17. Is
forced to retire, ib. Courts the favour of
the i'rotcfltints, 23. His negotiations with
thel Proteflants, at the diet of Spires, 25.
Procures the concurrence of the diet in a
war againfi Francis, 28. Negociates a fe-

parate
THE

· arate peace with the Kingof Denmark, ib.
Invades Champagne, and invefis St. Difiere,
34. Want of concert between his opera-
tions and those of Henry, who now invades
France, 36. Obtains St. Difiere by artifice,
ib. His distresses and happy movements,
38. Concludes a separate peace with Fran-
cis, 39. His motives to this peace, 40. His
advantages by this treaty, 42. Obliges him-
self by a private article to exterminate the
Proteltant heresy, 43. Is cruelly afflitied
with the gout, 45. Diet at Worms, 47.
Arrives at Worms and alters his conduct to-
ward the Proteflants, 49. His conduct on
the death of the Duke of Orleans, 53. His
diflimulation to the Landgrave of Hefle, (9.
Concludes a truce with Solyman, 73. Holds
a diet at Ratisbon, 74. His declaration to
the Protestant deputies, 77. His treaty with
the Pope, concluded by the cardinal of
Trent, ib. His circular letter to the Pro-
teftant members of theGermanickbody, 79.
The Protestants levy an army againit him,
86. Is unprepared against them, 87. Puts
them under the ban of the Empire, 88. The
Proteflants declare war against him, 90.
Marches to join the troops sent by the Pope,
92. Farnele the Pope's legate returns in
disgust, 94. His prudent declension of an
ation with the Protestants, 96. Is joined
by his Flemish troops, 97. Propolals of
peace made by the Proteflants, 106. Their
army disperse, ib. His rigorous treatment
of the Proteflant Princes, 1o8. Dismisses
part of his army, 1i . The Pope recals his
troops, 112. His reflection on Fiefco's in-
furresiion at Genoa, 126. Is alarmed at
the hostile preparations of Francis, 130.
Death of Francis, 132. A parallel drawn
between him and Francis, ib. Confequen-
ces of Francis's death to him, 135. Marches
against the Elector of Saxony, 136. Passes
the Elbe, 138. Defeats the Saxon army,
14 1. Takes the Elcaor prisoner, 142. His
harlh reception of him, ib. Invests Wittem-
berg, 143. Condemns the Elector to death,
by a court martial, 145. The Elcaor by
treaty surrenders the elecorate, 148. The
hazrh terms imposed by him on the Land-
grave of Hefle, 150. His haughty reception
of the Landgrave, 153. Detains him pri-
loner, 154. Seizes the warlike stores of the

VOL. III.

HIRD VOLUMES.

league, 158 His cruel exacions, is9.
Afrembles a diet at Augsburg, 162. Intimi-
dates the diet by his Spanibh troops, ib. Re-
establishes the Romish worship in the
churches of Augsburg, ib. Seizes Placentia,
166. Orders the diet to petition the Pope
for the return of the council to Trent, 169.
Protefis against the council of Bologna, 171.
Causes a sysem of faith to be prepared for
Germany, 172. Lays it before the diet, 174.
The Interim opposed, 178. And rejeaed
by the Imperial cities, 179. Reduces the
city of Augiburg to fubmiflion, 181. Re-
peats the fame violence at Ulm, ib. Carries
the Ele&or and Landgrave with him into
the Low-Countries, 183. Procures his son
Philip to be recognized by the States of the
Netherlands, 184. Establishes the Interim
there, 185, Reassembles the diet at Aug-
fburg, under the influence of his Spanish
troops, 193. The city of Magdeburg re-
fuses to admit the Interim and prepares for
resistance, 200. Appoints Maurice Elector
of Saxony to reduce it, ib. Promises to
protect the Protestants at the council of
Trent, 202. Arbitrarily releases Maurice
and the Elecor of Brandenburg, from their
engagements to the Landgrave for the re-
covery of his liberty, 203. Endeavours to
secure the Empire for his son Philip, 205.
His brother Ferdinand refuses to resign his
pretensions, ib. Besieges Parma, but is re-
pulscd, 211. Proceeds rigorously against the
Protestants, 213. Endeavours to (upport the
council of Trent, 214. Puts Magdehurg
under the ban of the Empire, ib. Absolves
the city, 219. Is involved in disputes be-
tween the council and the Protestant depu-
ties, concerning their safe conduct, 221.
Begins to fuifpct Maurice of Saxony, 233.
Circutnltances which contributed to deceive
him with regard to Maurice, 235. Miu-
rice takes the sie'd againfi him, 237. Mau-
rice seconded by Henry If. of France, 238,
His diflrefs and conflernation, 239. An in-
effecual ncgociation with Maurice, 240.
Flies from Infpruck, 244. Releases the E-
ledor of Saxony, 245. Is solicited to fa..
tisfy the demands of Maurice, 252. His
present difficulties, 253. Refuses any dire&
compliance with the demands of Maurice,
256. Is disposed to yield by the progress of

0 o o Maurice'&

Maurte's operation, 257. Makes a peace
with Maurice at Pafiau, 259. ReBeions
on this treaty, 260. Turns his arms againit
France, 266. Lays siege to Metz, 270.
Is oined by Albert of Brandenburgh, 27I.
His army diftrcfld by the vigilance of the
Duke of Guise, 272. Raises the siege and
retires in a ihattered condition,-274. Cosmo
di Medici aflerts his independancy against
him, 275. Siena revolts againfi him, 276.
Is dejected at his bad success, 279. Takes
Terrouane and demolifbes it, 286. Takes
Hefdin, ib. Proposes his Ton Philip as a
husband to Mary Queen of England, 299.
The articles of the marriage, 300. Marches
to oppose the French operations, 308. Is
defeated by Henry, 3c9. Invades Picardy,
ib. Grants Siena, subdued by Cosmo di
Medici to his son Philip, 318. A diet at
Augsburg opened by Ferdinand, 326. Leaves
the interior administration of Germany to
Ferdinand, 329. Applies again to Ferdi-
nand to resign his pretensions of succession
to Philip, but is refused, 330. Recess of
the diet of Augsburg on the subjeE of reli.
gion, 332. A treaty concluded between
.Pope Paul IV. and Henry II. of France
against him, 349. Resigns his hereditary
dominions to his son Philip, ib. His mo-
tives for retirement, 35o. Had long medi-
tated 'this resignation, 353. The ceremony
.of this deed, 354. His speech on theocca-
sion, 355. Resigns also the dominions of
Spain, 358. His intended retirement into
Spain retarded, 359. A truce for five years
concluded with France, 360. Endeavours
in vain to secure the Imperial crown for
Philip, 370. Resigns the Imperial crown
to Ferdinand, 372. Sets out for Spain, ib.
His arrival and reception in Spain, 373. Is
difrcffed by his son's ungrateful neglcA in
paying his pension, 374. Fixes his retreat
in the monaftcry of St. Jultus in Plazencia,
ib. The situation of this monastery, and
his apartments, described, 375. Contrat
between the conduct of Charles and the
Pope, ib. His manner of life in his retreat,
413. His death precipitated by his monas-
tick (everitjes, 415 Celebrates his own
funeral, 416. Dies, ib. His character, 417.
A review of the fate of Europe during his
reign, 431. His rcquifition to the crown
of paiul, 435.

Cb.is G r
C I.r s, the conference for peace

b~tween Philip II. of Spain, and Henry IL
of France, removed thither from Cercamp,
III. 424. The peace retarded by the de-
mand of Elizabeth of England for reftitu-
tion of Calais, ib. Particulars of the treaty
signed there between England and France,
426. Terms of the pacification between
Philip and Henry, 428.
Chbregato, nuncio from the Pope to the diet at

Nuremburgh, his inftruaions, II. 207. Op-
poles the aflembling a general council, 208.
Cbtevrcs, William de Croy, lord of, appoint-

ed by Maximilian to superintend the edu-
cation of his grandson Charles, II. 21. Adrian
of Utrecht made preceptor under him, ib.
His direAion of the studies of Charles, 23.
His avarice corrupts the Fleminh court of
Charles, 36. Negociates a peace with
France, 38. Endeavours to prevent an in-
terview between Charles and Ximenes, 39,
Attends Charles to Spain, 40. His afcen-
dancy over Charles, 44. His extortions, ib.
His death and the supposed causes of it, 130.
Chrijians, primitive, why averse to the prin-

ciples of toleration, 11. 334.
Clement VII. pope, his elecion, II. I97. His

characer, ib. Grants Cardinal Wolfey a
legatinecommiflion in England for life, 198.
Refuses to accede to the league against
Francis, 201. Labours to accommodate
the differences between the contending par-
ties, ib. His proceedings with regard to the
Reformers, 212. Concludes a treaty of
neutrality with Francis, 223. Enters into
a separate treaty with Charles after the battle
of Pavia, and the consequences of it, 234.
Joins in an alliance with Francis Sforza,
and the Venetians, against the Emperor,
266. Abfo!ves Francis from his oath toob-
serve the treaty of Madrid, 267. Cardinal
Colonna seizes Rome, and invcfis him in
the cafile of St. Angelo, 274. Is forced to.
an accommodation with the Imperialists, ib.
His revenge againit the Colonna family,
277. Invades Naples, ib. His territories.
invaded by Bourbon, and his perplexity on
the occasion, 279. Concludes a treaty with
Lannoy viceroy of Naples, 280. His con-
fternation on Bourbon's motions towards
Rome, 283. Rome taken, and himfell be.
icged in the caflle of St. Angelo, a85. Sur.

renders

tenders himelf prisoner, J87. The Flo-
te~tines revolt again him, 294. Pays
Charles a ransom for his liberty, with other
flipulations, 299. Makes his escape from
confinement, 300. Writes a letter of thanks
to Lautrec, ib. Is jealous of the intentions
of Francis, and negociates with Charles,
306. His motives and feps towards an ac-
commodation, 313. Concludes a separate
treaty with Charles, 314. His interview
with the Emperor at Bologna, 32 . Crowns
Charles, King of Lombardy and Emperor
of the Romans, 324. His representations
to the Emperor againff calling a general
council, 328. Has another interview with
Charles at Bologna, and the difficulties raised
by him to the calling a general council, 339.
Agrees to a league of the Italian States for
the peace of Italy, 341. His interview and
treaty with Francis, 344. Marries Catba-
rine di Medici to the Duke of Orleans, 345.
His protraction of the affair of the divorce
solicited by. Henry VIII. ib. Reverses
Cranmer's sentence of divorce, under penalty
of excommunication, 346. Henry re-
nounces his supremacy, ib. His death, 347.
Reflections on his Pontificate, ib.
Clrgy, Romish, remarks on the immoral lives

of, and how they contributed to the progress
of the Reformation, II. ro3. The facility
with which they obtained pardons, 104.
Their usurpations in Germany, during the
disputes concerning inveititures, 106. Their
other opportunities of aggrandizing them-
fclves there, 107. Their personal immuni-
ties, ib. Their encroachments on the laity,
0o8. The dreadful effeas of spiritual cen-
fures, Io9. Their devices to secure their
usurpations, I lo. The united effe6 of all
these circumstances, 1 4. Oppose the ad-
vancement of learning in Germany, 1 17.
Cl/ves, invaded and over-run by the Emperor

Charlcs V. III. 15. Cruel treatment of
Duren, ib. Humiliating submission of the
Dtke, 16.
Cnippedoling, a leader of the Anabaptists at

Munster, an account of, 1I. 351. 354. See
A.a6aptijls.
Cognac, an alliance formed there against

Charles V. by the Pope, the Venetians, the
Duke of Milan, and Francis I. 11. 266.
Cdigni, admiral, governor of Picardy, defends

St. Quintin againfi the Spanib general
Emmanuel Phillibert Duke of Savoy, III.
383. His brother D'Andelot defeatedin an
endeavour to join the garrison, 384. But
D'Andelot enters the town, 385. His cha-
rater, 389. The town taken by aflault,
and himself taken prisoner, ib.
Cologne, Ferdinand King of Hungary and Bo-

hemia, brother to the Emperor Charles V.
eleted King of the Romans by the college
of Elecors there, II. 334.
c--- Herman, count de Wied, archbilhop
and eletor of, inclines to the Reformation,
and is opposed by his canons, who appeal to
the Emperor and Pope, III. p. Is deprived
and excommunicated, 71. Resigns, o.
Colunna, Cardinal Pompeo, his charater, and

rivalfhip with Pope Clement VII. II. 273.
Seizes Rome, and invests the Pope in the
castle of St. Angelo, 274. Is degraded and
the reft of the family excommunicated by
the Pope, 277. Is prevailed on by the Pope
when prisoner with the Imperialifis, to soli-
cit his delivery, 299.
--- Prosper, the Italian general, his cha-

rater, II. I41. Appointed to command
the troops in the invasion of Milan, ib.
Drives the French out of Milan, 143. His
army how weakened at the death of Pope
Leo X. 144. Defeats Marechal de Lautrec,
at Bicocca, 147. Reduces Genoa, 149.
The bad state of his troops when the French
invade Milan, 196. Is enabled to defend
the city by the ill condu& of Bonnivet the
French commander, ib. Dies, and is fuc-
ceeded by Lannoy, 201.
Conchil/os, an Aragonian gentleman, employed

by Ferdinand of Aragon, to obtain Joanna's
content to his regency of Castile, II. 9.
Thrown into a dungeon by the Archduke
Philip. ib.
Cnfetfon of Augsburg, drawn up by Melanc-

thon, II. 329.
Con/lance, the privileges of that city taken

away by the Emperor Charles V. for difo-
bedience to the Interim, Il. 185.
Corlais of Badbary, an account of the rife of,

1. 364. See Algiers, arhBarjo2a.
Cortes of Aragon, acknowledges the Archduke

Philip's title to the crown, II. 3. Not al-
lowed to afremble in the name of Charles V.
Their' opposition to his desires, ib. Is

O o
o a prevailed

prevailed on by the Emperor to recognize
his (on Philip as fuccefior to that kingdom,
lIL, 9. See Spain.
Cortes of Castile, acknowledges the Archduke

Philip's title to the crown, 11. 3. Is pre-
vailed on to acknowledge FerdinanJ regent,
according to Isabella's will, 7. Acknow-
ledges Philip and Joanna King and QiJeen
of Castile, and their Con Charles, Prince of
Allurias, 14. Declares Charles King, and.
votes him a free gift, 43. Summoned by
Charles to meet at Compofiella in Galicia,
64. Tumultuary proceedings thereupon,
65. A donative voted, 66. Loses all its
influence by the dissolution of the Holy
Junta, 182. Its backwardness to grant sup-
plies for the Emperor's wars in Italy, 275.
Refuses his prefling Solicitations for a supply,
298. Alfembled at Toledo to grant sup-
plies to the Emperor, 428. The remon-
firances of, 429. The ancient conflitution
of, Subverted by Charles, ib. See Spain.
*--- of Valencia, prevailed on by the Em-

peror Charles V. to acknowledge his son
Philip successor to that kingdom, III. 9.
See Spain.
Cortina, Cardinal di, governor of Florence for

the Pope, expelled by the Florentines, on
the Pope's captivity, II. 294.

Cofin di Medici. See Medici.
Cranmir, archbifbop of Canterbury, annuls the

marriage of Henry VIII. with Catharineof
Aragon, which was refused to Henry by the
Pope, II. 345. His fcntence reverted by the
Pope, 34b.
CIrfpy, peace of, between the Emperor and

Francis, III. 39.
Croy, William de, nephew to Chievres, made

archbishop of Toledo, by Charles V. II. 45.
Dies, 18i.

D
D'Allbrt, John, expell d from his kingdom of

NavJrre by Ferdinand of Aragon, II. 19.
Invades Navarre, but is defeated by Cardinal
X'menes, 35.
7)'Almbert, M. his observation on the order

of Jesuits, 1. 456. Note.
D'Andelot, brother to Coligni, is defeated by

the Duke of Saxonv in an endeavour to fuc-
cour St. Qlintin, III. 384. But entcrsthe
ton with the fugitives, 385. The town
taken by alfault, 389.

T T H E
Dauphin of France, eldest Con of Francis T.

is delivered up with the Duke of Orleans,
to the Emperor Charles V. in exchange for
his father, as hostage for the peformanceof
the treaty of Madrid, 254. His death im-
puted to poison, 405. The most probable
cause of it, 406.
------- late Duke of Orleans, second Con of

Francis I. commands an army and invaurcs
Spain, III. 7. Is forced to abandon the
siege of Perpignan, 8. Is diflatisfied at the
peace of Crefpy, 44. Makes a secret pro-
teftation against it, ib.
-- of France, son of Henry II. con-

tra6ed to Mary the young Queen of Scot-
land, III. i68. Is married to her, 405.
Denmark, a summary view of the revolutions

in, during the sixteenth century, III. 456.
_------ King of, joins the Protestant league

at Smalkalde, 1I. 424.
De Retz, Cardinal, wiites a hifiory of Fiefo's

conspiracy while a youth, III. 125. Note.
Diana of Poitiers, miflrefs to Henry II. of

France, afifis the Guises in persuading Henry
to an alliance with Pope Paul IV. against
the Emperor, III. 346. Induces Henry to
break the treaty of Vaucelles, 365. Mar-
ries her grandaughter to one of Montmor-
ency's sons, 411. Joins Montmorency
against the Guises, ib.
Doria, Andrew, assisis Lautrec in subduing

Genoa, II. 296. Conquers and kills Mon-
cada in a sea engagement before the harbour
of Naples, 305. His character, 307. Is
difgufled with the behaviour of the French,
ib. Revolts to the Emperor, 308. Opens
to Naples a communication by lea, ib. Re-
fcues Genoa from the French, 310. Re-
stores the government of, to the citizens,
311. T he refpe& paid to his memory, 312.
Attends the Emperor Charles in his difaf-
trous expedition against Algiers, 473. Hid
partial fondness for his kinsman Giannetino,
11. 114. His narrow elcape in Lavagno's
insurrection, 122. Returns on Lavagno's
death, and the dispersion of his party, 125.
See Genoa, and Lavagno.
-- Giannctino, his character, II. 14.

Is murdered by Lavagno's conspirators,
122.
Dovr, an interview there between Henry VIII.

and the Lmperor Charles V. 11. 74.

Dragut

Dragut a corsair, commands the Turkish fleet freed fr

which ravages the coafis of Naples, 11I: 278. ceived t
Du Prat, chancellor of France, his character, 346. 1

II. 192. Commences a law suit againt Philip,
Charles Duke of Bourbon, for his estate, at trary to
the instigation of Louise the King's mother, The m
ib. Is relu&
Duelling, the custom of, how rendered general, of Spaii

II. 303. Its influence on manners, 304. Mary 1
Duren in Cleves, taken by the Emperor carry or

Charles V. the inhabitants put to the sword, Duke o
and the town burnt, IIl. 15. taken, i

Elizabe

E eftablifi
EcDius, an adversary of Luther's, holds a pub- France

lick disputation with him at Leipfic, on the Its inte
validity of the Papal authority, II. 94. condu6t
Ecdclfiflical censures of the Romish church, longer

the dreadful effecs of, II. 19o. 442.

-- Reservation, in the recess of the Scotlane

diet of Augsburg, remarks on, II. 337. Enguien, tl
Edinburgh, plundered and burnt by the earl of 30. D

Hertford, III. 35. gage G
Edward VI. of England, his character, III. pitched

298. Erard de 1
Egmont, count of, commands the cavalry at the to the d

battle of St. Quintin, and puts Montmo- for thw;
rency's troops to flight, III. 385. Engages of Fran
Marefbal de Termes, and defeats him by the Signs tl
casual arrival of an English squadron, 407. body, o
Egypt, how and by whom adced to the Otto- EraJmus, si

man Enipire, II. 50. Luther
Ehrenburg. the cattle of, taken by Maurice of church,

Saxony, IJ. 242. tions of
Eignotz, a faction in Geneva so termed, an checked

account of, il. 386.Escurial, p
Elizabeth lifter of Mary, her acceflion to the rory of

crown of England, II . 421. Her charac- Europe, a
ter, ib. Is addrcffed by Philip of Spain, death of
and Ijenry of France, for marriage, ib. Her 'Ihe cc
prudent condu& between them, 422. How lu(triou,
determined againfi Henry, 423. -Her mo- The mi
tives for rejecting Philip, ib. Returns Philip improve
an evasive anlwer, 424. Demands rcftitu- aces, !
tion of Calais at the conferences at Chateau Charles'
Cai),.efis, ib. Eflablifhes the Pr-rteftant A revi(
relii ion in England, 425. Treaty between reign of
herand Heary signed at Chateau Cambiefis, The ren
426. 432. 1
Etmmatiu' l Phillibert, Duke of Savoy. See against t

Savoy. Eutemi, Ki
Engla.nd, by what means that kingdom was his Irvil

VOLUMES.

om the papal supremacy, and r ,
he d&,trines of the Reformation,' II.
Vary Queen of, married to Prince
son of tne Emperor Caiarles V. con-
the fenre of the nation, IIT. 300.
arriage ratified by parliament, 303.
tacntly engaged by Philip, now King
n, in the war against France, 381.
evies money by her preroga ive to
i the war, 382. Calais taken by the
f Guise, 400. Guifnes and Hames
b. Death of Mary and acceflin of
th, 421. The Protestant religion
Led by Elizabeth, 425. Treaty with
signed at Chatfau Cambrefis, 426.
rior strength how increased by the
of Henry VIII. 440. Its power no
fruitlessly wafted on the continent,
Alteration of its conduct toward
d, 443.
he count de, besieges Carignan, II.
efires of Francis, permiflion to en-
;uafto, 31. Defeats Guafto in a
battle, 32.
a Mark, ambassador of Charles V.
iet of Frankfort, his private motives
rriiig the pretensions of Francis I.
ce, to the Imperial crown, II. 58.
he capitulation of the Germanick
on behaif of Charles, 60.
o ie account of, II. Xi 8. Preceded
in his censures against the Romifl
ib. Concurs with him in his inten-
reforrrmaion, 19. Motives which
him in this, ib.
lalace of, built by Philip II. in me-
the battle of St. Q(lintin, II. 3)i1.
short view of the tfate of, at the
the Emperor Maximilian, II. 48.
)nremnprary monarchs of, all il-
, ;t the time of Charles V. 77.
ethod of carrying on war in, how
d beyond the practice of earlier
I. 199. The sentiments of, on
s ticatinent of the Pope, 292.
iw of the taite of, during the
:he Emperor Charles V. 111. 41.
narkahle change in, at this peridl,
low aflcflctl b;v he revolt of Luther
:he church of Roiie, 445.
ng of Algiers, engages Barbarofla in
cc, and is niurdcied by him, II. 36,.

Excoammnunicataio
*

frme;rafiobN in the Romiih church, the

original ioRitution of, and the use made of
it, U. 0o9.

F
Farntft, Alexander, his unanimous election to

theTapacy, II. 37. See P/ , Ill.
.- Cardinal, accompanies the troops sent

by the Pope to the Emperor, againf the
army of the Proteflantteague, Ill. 93. Re-
turns disgusted, 94. Leads the troops home
again by the Pope's order, 12. Contributes
to the elecion of Cardinal di Monte to the
Papacy, 190.
---- O Oavio, grandson of Pope Paul III.

endeavours to furprize Parma, and enters
into treaty with the Emperor, III. 188.
Is confirnmd in Parma, by Julius III. 209.
Procures an alliance with France, 211. Is
attacked by the Imperialists, but successfully
prote&ed by the French, ib. Placentia re-
fiored to him by Philip II. of Spain, 394.
_le Peter Lewis, natural son of Pope
Paul III. obtains of his father the dutchies
of Parma and Placentia, III. 54. His cha-
ra&er, I65, Is assassinated, 166.
Ferdinand King of Aragon, how he acquired

his kingdoms, II. 2. Invites his daughter
Joanna, and her husband, Philip Archduke
of Auitria, to Spain, 3. Becomes jealous
of Philip, ib. Carries on his war with France
vigorously, notwithitanding Philip's treaty
with Lewis, 5. His Queen Isabella dies,
and leaves him regent of Caitile, under rc-
firidions, 6. Resigns the kingdom of Caf-
tile, and is acknowledged regent by the
Cortes, ib. His character, 7. His maxims
of government, odious to the Castilians, ib.
Required by Philip to resign his regency, 8.
Joanna's letter of content procured by him,
intercepted by Philip, and herself confined,
q. Is deserted by the Castilian nobility, ib.
Determines to exclude his daughter from the
fucceflion by marrying, ib. Marries Gcr-
maine de Foix neice to Lewis XII. of France,
Is. A treaty between him and Philip at
Salamanca, by which the regency of Caflile
is jointly vetted in them, and Joanna, ib.
Prevails on Henry VII. of England to de-
tain Philip for three months, when driven
on that coast, 12. The CafRilians declare
againit him, ib. Resigns the regency of

Cafile by treaty, i3. Interview btwee
him and Philip, ib. Is abfnt, at Naples,
when Philip died, 17. Returns and gains
with the regency of Castile, the good will
of the natives by his prudent administration,
IS. Acquires by dishonourable means the
kingdom of Navarre, 19. How he destroy-
ed his constitution, ib. Endeavours to ex-
clude his grandson Charles from his Spanish
fucceflfon, 20. Alters his will in favour of
Charles, ib. Dies, 21. Review of his ad-
ministration, 24. Ximenes appointed by
his will, regent of Castile, until the arrival
of Charles V. 25.
Ferdinand, second son of Philip Archduke of

AuRtria born, II. 5. Left regent of Aragon,
by his grandfather Ferdinand, 20. This,
revoked by a subsequent will, by which he
obtains only a pennon, z2. Discontented
with his disappointment, he is taken to
Madrid under the eye of Cardinal Ximenes,
27. Sent by Charles V. to visit their grand-
father Maximilian, 45. Is eleeed King of
Hungary and Bohemia, 289. Signs a deed
called the Reverse, ib. The Emperor en-
deavours to get him eleced King of the
Romans, 332. He is opposed by the Pro-
teftants, 333. Is crowned King of the Ro-
mans, 334. Forms a confederacy against
the Anabaptists at Munfier, 356. Opposes
the refRoration of Ulric Duke of Wurtem-
berg 360. Recognizes his title and con-
cludes a treaty with him, ib. His kingdom
of Hungary wrcfted from him by John
Zapol Scaepius, 466. Besieges the young
King Stephen and his mother in Bda, but
is defeated by the Turks, 468. His mean
offers of submission to the Porte, ib.
which are rejected, 470. Courts the favour
of the Proteflants, 111. 23. Opens the diet
at Worms, 47. Requires it to submit to
the decisions of the council of Trent, 48.
Agrees to pay a tribute to Solyman for Hun-
gary, 73. Encroaches on the liberties of
Bohemia, 159. HIis rigorous treatment of
Prague, 16r. Dilarms the Bohemians, ib.
Obtains the sovereignty of the city of Con-
fiance, i85. Invades Transylvania by in-
vitation of Martinuzzi, 223. Obtains the
rcfignation of Tran(ylvania from Queen
Isabella, 225. Orders Martinuzzi to be
afalffiaatcd, 227. Enters into negociation

t with

SECOND AND

THIRD

VOLU, MES.

with Mauice on behalf of the Emperor,
251. His motives for promoting the Em-
peror's agreeing with Maurice, 255. Jfa-
bella and her son Stephen, recover possession
of Transylvania, 289. Opens a diet at
Augsburg, and excites suspicions in the
Protestants, 326. The Emperor leaves the
internal administration of German affairs to
him, 329. Is again applied to by the Em-
peror to resign his pretensions of fucceflion
to Philip, but refuses, 330. Endeavours
therefore to gain the friendihipof the diet,
331. Again refuses the Emperor's folicita-
ions, 371. Charles resigns the Imperial
crown to him, 372. Aflembles the collegeof
Eleaors at Frankfort, which acknowledges
him Emperor.of Germany, 402. The Pope
refuses to acknowledge him, ib.
Feudal government, a view of, as it existed in

Spain, II. 159.

Fiefco, Count of Lavagna. See Lavagna.
-- Jerome, engages in his brother's con-

fpiracy, and fails in securing Andrew Doria,
122. His imprudent vanity on his bro-
ther's death, 124. Shuts himself up in a
fort on his estate, 126. Is reduced and put
to death, 131.

Slanders. See Netherlands.
Florence, the inhabitants of, revolt against

Pope Clement VII. on the news of his cap-
tivity, and recover their liberty, II. 294.
Are reduced to fubjeaion to Alexander di
Medici, by the Emperor, 323. Alexander
di Medici, Duke of, alfafinated by his
kinsman Lorenzo, 416. Colmo di Medici,
advanced to the sovereignty, 417. Cos-
mo, supported by the Emperor, defeats the
partizans of Lorenzo, 418. Cosmo afterts
his independency on the Emperor, ill.
275.
Fonjeca, Antonio de, conlmanler in chief of

the forces in Spain, ordered by Cardinal
Adrian to besiege the insurgents in Segovia,
JI. 157. Is denied liberty of taking mili-
tary Itores, by the inhibitants of Medna
del Campo, ib. Attacks and almost burns
the whole town, 158. Is repulsed, ib. His
house at Valladolid burnt, ib.
France, the acquisitions of that kingdom, du-

ring the reign of the Emperor Charles V.
Ill. 437. The character of the people of,
438. The good conlcquenccB of tlh civil

wars in that kingdom to thoret of Europ,
440.
Francis I. King of France, concludes a peace

with Charles V. and the conditions of the
treaty, II. 38. Sends a fruitless embafly to
Charles for the restitution of Navarre to the
young King, 46. Aspires to the Imperial
crown at the death of Maximilian, 49. Rea.
sons by which he supported his pretenfidas,
50. Remarks on the equipages of his am-
baffadors to the German States, 52. His
pretensions adopted by the Venetians, 53.
Loses the election, 59. Rife of the rival-
ship between him and Charles, 67. Courts
the favour of Cardinal Wolfey, 73. Pro-
mises Wolfey his interest for the Papacy, 75.
Has an interview with Henry VIII. of Eng-
land, ib. WreRles with Henry and throws
him, ib. Nste. His advantages over Charles,
at the commencement of hostilities between
them, 1 27. Concludes an alliance with the
Pope, I29. Invades and reduces Navarre,
in the name Henry D'Albert, Ton of John,
the former King, 132. The French driven
out by the imprudence of L'Efparre their
general, who is taken prisoner by the Spa-
niards, 133. Retakes Moufon from the
Imperialists, 135. Invades the Low Coun-
tries, but loses the opportunities of success
by imprudence, ib. Rejects the demands
of Charles at the congress at Calais, 137.
A league concluded between Charles and
Henry VIII. against him, ib. His inpru-
dent appointment of the Marcchal de Foix
to the government of Milan, 139. De Foix
attacks Rcggio, hut is repulsed by the go-
vernor Guicciardini the hilorian, 140. 'he
Pope declares againfi him, ib. His embar-
ralfinents on the invasion of Milan, t41.
His mother seizes the money appointed for
payment of the Milancfe troops, ib. Milan
taken, and the Frcnch driven out, 143.
Levies a body of Swilf, 146. Who infilt
on giving a precipitate battle to the Impe ia-
lills, which is loft, 147. War declared
against him by Henry VIII. 149. His ex-
pedients to supply his treasury, ib. The
plan purfiled by him to resist the incursion,
of the English, 151. Picardy invaded by
Henry, ib. ' he Venetians league with the
Emperor against him, 189. To which Pope
Adrian accedes, 19o. His expeditious

movement

ljwmimnma atin in the Romiib church, the

original institution of, and the use made of
it, II. 1o9.

F
Farneft, Alexander, his unanimous elecion to

the'Papacy, JI. 347. See Paul, III.
·-- Cardinal, accompanies the troops sent

by the Pope to the Emperor, against the
army of the Proteftantleague, 111. 93. Re-
turns difgufled, 94. Lead the troops home
again by the Pope's order, 112. Contributes
to the ele&ion of Cardinal di Monte to the
Papacy, I90.
---- OtOavio, grandson of Pope Paul III.

endeavours to furprize Parma, and enters
into treaty with the Emperor, III. 188.
Is confirmed in Parma, by Julius III. 209.
Procures an alliance with France, 211 . Is
attacked by the Imperialists, but successfully
proteeted by the French, ib. Placentia re-
florcd to him by Philip II. of Spain, 394.
--- --- Peter Lewis, natural son of Pope

Paul III. obtains of his father the dutchies
of Parma and Placentia, III. 54. His cha-
rater, i65, Is affaflinated, i66.
Ferdinand King of Aragon, how he acquired

his kingdoms, II. 2. Invites his daughter
Joanna, and her husband, Philip Archduke
of Austria, to Spain, 3. Becomes jealous
of Philip, ib. Carries on his war with France
vigorously, notwithflanding Philip's treaty
with Lewis, 5. His Queen Isabella dies,
and leaves him regent of Caitile, under re-
firitions, 6. Resigns the kingdom of Caf-
tile, and is acknowledged regent by the
Cortes, ib. His character, 7. His maxims
of government, odious to the Castilians, ib.
Required by Philip to rcfign his regency, 8.
Joanna's letter of consent procured by him,
intercepted by Philip, and hcrfelf confined,
9. Is defeited by the Castilian nobility, ib.
Determines to exclude his daughter from the
fucceflion by marrying, ib. Marries Gcr-
maine de Foix neice to Lewis XII. of France,
xi. A treaty between him and Philip at
Salamanca, by which the regency of Caflile
is jointly vested in them, and Joanna, ib.
Prevails on Henry VII. of England to de-
tain Philip for three months, when driven
on that coast, 12. The Castilians declare
against him, ib. Resigns the regency of

Cafile by treaty, 13. Interview betweea
him and Philip, ib. Is absent, at Naples,
when Philip died, 17. Returns and gains
with the regency of Caflile, the good will
of the natives by his prudent adminifration,
18. Acquires by dishonourable means the
kingdom of Navarre, 19. How he destroy-
ed his conftilution, ib. Endeavours to ex-
clude his grandson Charles from his Spanish
fuccefion, 20. Alters his will in favour of
Charles, ib. Dies, 2i. Review of his ad-
ministration, 24. Ximenes appointed by
his will, regent of Caltile, until the arrival
of Charles V. 25.
Ferdinand, second son of Philip Archduke of

Aufiria born, II. 5. Left regent of Aragon,
by his grandfather Ferdinand, 20. This,
revoked by a subsequent will, by which he
obtains only a pension, 21. Discontented
with his disappointment, he is taken to
Madrid under the eye of Cardinal Ximenes,
27. Sent by Charles V. to visit their grand-
father Maximilian, 45. Is eleEted King of
Hungary and Bohemia, 289. Signs a deed
called the Reverse, ib. The Emperor en-
deavours to get him elected King of the
Romans, 332. He is opposed by the Pro-
teftants, 333. Is crowned King of the Ro.
mans, 334. Forms a confederacy against
the Anabaptists at Munster, 356. Opposes
the restoration of Ulric Duke of Wurtem-
berg 360. Recognizes his title and con-
cludes a treaty with him, ib. His kingdor
of Hungary wrclted from him by John
Zapol Scaepius, 466. Besieges the young
King Stephen and his mother in Bnda, but
is defeated by the Turks, 468. His mean
offers of fubmifion to the Porte, ib.
which are rejected, 470. Courts the favour
of the Proteltants, 111. 23. Opens the diet
at Woinms, 47. Requires it to submit to
the dccifions of the council of Trent, 48.
Agrees to pay a tribute to Solyman for Hun-
gary, 73. Encroaches on the liberties of
Bohemia, 159. His rigorous treatment of
Prague, 161. Dilarms the Bohemians, ib.
Obtains the fovcreignty of the city of Con-
fiance, t85. Invades Transylvania by in-
vitation of Martinuzzi, 223. Obtains the
resignation of 'Iranfylvania from Queen
Isabella, 225. Orders Martinuzzi to be
aflaffiaatcd, 227. Enters into negociation

t with

SECOND AND THIRD VOLUMES.

with Maucice on behalf of the Emperor,
251. His motives for promoting the Em-
peror's agreeing with Maurice, 255. Ifa-
bella and her son Stephen, recover pofleflion
of Transylvania, 289. Opens a diet at
Augsburg, and excites suspicions in the
Protestants, 326. The Emperor leaves the
internal administration of German affairs to
him, 329. is again applied to by the Em-
peror to resign his pretensions of succession
to Philip, but refuses, 330. Endeavours
therefore to gain the friendihipof the diet,
33i. Again refuses the Emperor's folicita-
tions, 371. Charles resigns the Imperial
crown to him, 372. Assembles the collegeof
Eleaors at Frankfort, which acknowledges
him Emperor of Germany, 402. The Pope
refuses to acknowledge him, ib.
Feudal government, a view of, as it existed in

Spain, II. 159.

Fiefro, Count of Lavagna. See Lavagna.
-- Jerome, engages in his brother's con-

fpiracy, and fails in securing Andrew Doria,
122. His imprudent vanity on his bro-
ther's death, 124. Shuts himself up in a
fort on his eflate, 126. Is reduced and put
to death, I31.

S/anders. See Netherlands.
Florence, the inhabitants of, revolt against

Pope Clement VII. on the news of his cap-
tivity, and recover their liberty, II. 294.
Are reduced to f'bjeaion to Alexander di
Medici, by the Emperor, 323. Alexander
di Medici, Duke of, assai inated by his
kinsman Lorenzo, 416. Cotmo di Medici,
advanced to the sovereignty, 417. Cos-
mo, supported by the Emperor, defeats the
partizans of Lorenzo, 418. Cofnmo affrts
his independency on the Emperor, Ill.
275.
Fonjeca, Antonio de, consmanJlcr in chief of

the forces in Spain, ordered by Cardinal
Adrian to besiege the insurgents in Segovi;,
I. 157.. Is denied liberty of taking niili-
tJry itores, by the inhabitants of Mcd na
del Campo, ib. Attacks and almost burns
the whole town, 158. Is repullid, ib. His
house at Valladolid burnt, ib.
France, the acquisitions of that kingdom, du-

ring the reign of the Emperor Charles V.
111. 437. The character of the people of,
438. 'he good conlcqucnceb of tlb ci:'l

wars in that kingdom to thereft of Emror,
440.
Francis I. King of France, concludes a peace

with Charles V. and the conditions of the
treaty, II. 38. Sends a fruitless embafly to
Charles for the restitution of Navarre to the
young King, 46. Atpires to the Imperial
crown at the death of Maximilian, 49. Rea-
sons by which he supported his pretensions,
50. Remarks on the equipages of his am-
baffadors to the German States, 52. His
pretensions adopted by the Venetians, 53.
Loses the election, 59. Rife of the rival-
Ihip between him and Charles, 67. Courts
the favour of Cardinal Woltey, 73. Pro-
mises Wolfey his interest for the Papacy, 75.
Has an interview with Henry VIII. of Eng-
land, ib. Wrefiles with Henry and throws
him, ib. Note. His advantages over Charles,
at the commencement of hofilities between
them, I 27. Concludes an alliance with the
Pope, 129. Invades and reduces Navarre,
in the name Henry D'Albert, ton of John,
the former King, 132. The French driven
out by the imprudence of L'Efparre their
general, who is taken prisoner by the Spa-
niards, 133. Retakes Moufon from the
Imperialifis, 135. Invades the Low Coun-
tries, but loses the opportunities of success
by imprudence, ib. Rejecs the demands
of Charles at the congrets at Calais, 137.
A league concluded between Charles and
Henry VIII. againfi him, ib. His impru-
dent appointment of the Marcchal de Foijc
to the government of Milan, 139. De Foix
attacks Rcggio, hut is repulscd by the go-
vcrnor Guicciardini the hiflorian, 140. 'he
Pope declares aeainft him, ib. His embar-
r;afinents on the invasion of Milan, t41.
His mother seizes the money appointed for
payment of the Milanefc troops, ib. Milan
taken, and the French driven out, 143.
Ievies a body of Swils, 146. Who infill
on giving a precipitate battle to the Impei ia-
lilts, which is lofl, 147. War declared
againfl him by Henry VIII. 149. His ex-
prdients to supply his treasury, ib. The
plan pulfited by him to refilf the incursions
of the English, 151. Picardy invaded by
IIeny, ib. ' he Venetians league with the
Emperor against hiim, 189. To which Pope
Adrian accedes, 1i90. Hi expeditious

movement

movement against the Milanese, ib. Dif-
concerted by the Duke of Bourbon's con-
fpiracy, ib. Taxes him with betraying his
cause, which Bourbon denies, [94. Bour-
bbn escapes to Italy and Francis returns,
195. Appoints the admiral Bonnivet to
command against the Milanese, ib. Picardy
invaded by the Duke of Suffolk, who is
driven back, 2^0. Repulses the i-ivafion
of Guienne and Burgundy by Charles, ib.
His successful close of the campaign, ib.
His prudent care to disappoint the Imperia-
lifts in their invasion of Provence, 216.
Assembles an army, which causes the lm-
perialifis to retire from Marseilles, 217.
)etermunes to invade the Milanese, 218.
Appoints his mother Louile regent during
his absence, 219. Enters Milan, and takes
poffeflion of the city, ih. Advi(ed by Bon-
nivet to besiege Pavia, 221. His vigorous
attacks on Pavia, 222. Concludes a treaty
of neutrality with Pope Clement, 223.
His imprudent invafi,n of Naples, 224.
Resolves by Bonnivet's advice to attack
Bourbon's army, ad'anced tc the relief of
Pavia, 226. Is routed at the battle of Pa-
via, 227. Is taken prisoner, 228. Is sent
to the cafile of Pizzitchitone under the cuf-
tody of Don Ferdinand Alarcon, 229. Re-
fuses the propositions made to him by Cha les,
23'. Is carried to Spain on his dellir of a
personal interview wi'h Charles, 238. Is
rigoroufiv treated in Spain, 245. Falls dan-
eroufly ill, ib. Is visited ny Cia'les, 246.
Rfolvcs to resign his kingdm, 249. Is
delivered from hi:, captivity by the treaty of
MadrJ.l, 25o0 Htis F ciet protcfiations againfl
the vwlidity of this treaty, 252. Marries
the (Qucen of Portugal, ib. Recovers his
liberty, and the I)auplliin ;,id the Duke of
Oikans eIlivered utp hoilagcs to Charles for
the performance of the treaty of Madrid,
254. Writes a letter of acknowled ement
to Hery V1I1. of England, 264. Hlis re-
ply to the Imperial alnhll;lfdo:s, 265. En-
ters into a Icagu,. vi'h the Pope, the Vene-
tians an.I Storza, ;tg;inft Charles, 266. Is
ab'olvcd flomr his oa'h to oblcrve the treaty
of Madrid, 267. His behaviour t(, the
Emprior's f'icoJ ahbafl'y, 269. Is difpi-
rited by his former ill fucccfs, 270. Enters
into a treaty with Henry V11I. of Lngland

against the Emperor, 294. Guccefes of his
general Lautrec in Italy, 297. His reply
to the Emperor's overtures, 301. Declares
war against him, and challenges him to single
combat, 302. Treats Andrew Doria ill,
who revolts from him to the Emperor, 308.
His army, under Saluces, driven out of italy,
310. His troops in Milan routed, 312.
Iis endeavours toward an accommodation,
313. Terms of the peace of Cambray,
concluded by the mediation of his mother
Louise and Margaret of Aufiria, 415. Re-
marks on the facrificts made by him in this
treaty, and on his conduct of the war, 316.
Leagues secretly with the Protestant Prin-
ces, 3t4. His measures to elude the treaty
of Cambray, 342. His negociations with
the Pope, 343. His interview and treaty
with the Pope, 344. Gives the Duke of
Orleans in marriage to Catharine di Medici,
345. Negociates a treaty with Francis
Sforza, Duke of Milan, 379. His envoy
Merveille executed at Milan for murder, ib.
Is disappointed in his endeavours to nego-
ciate allian:es against the Emperor, 38c.
Invites Melan&hon to Paris, 38I. Evi-
dences his 7eal for the Romish religion,
382. Caules of his quarrel with the Duke
of Savoy, 384. Seizts the Duke's territo-
ries, 385. His pretensions to the dutchy of
Milan, on the death of Francis `forza, 389.
The Empeor's invecive againfi him before
the Pope in council. 3,I. Is invadel by
Charles, 395. His prudent plan of defence,
398. Joins the :lrny under Montmorency,
402. Death of the Dauphin, 405. Ob-
tains a decree of the pa liament of Paris
against the Empleror, 406. Invades the Low
Countries, 40-. A fulpenlion of arms in
Slanders, and how negociited, 408' A
truce in Piedmont, 4( 9. Motives fothelf
tru(es, lb. Concludes an alliance with So-
I man the Magnificent, 40o. Negociations
fr a peai c with the Emperor, 412. Con-
cludes a truce for ten years at Nice, 413.
Rcflecthons on the war, ib. His interview
with Charles, 414. Mariits Mary of Guise
to, Jaics V. of S,.otland, 420. kefitlcs the
oflers of the deputies of Ghent, 436 In-
forms Charles of the ofcfr made by them,
437. (rants th: Einmpror leave to pals
through France to the Netherlands, 4 9.

Hlia

His reception of the Emperor, 440. Is de-
ceived by the Emperor in refpe& to Milan,
443. His ambassador to the Porte, Rincon,
murdered by the Imperial governor of the
Milanese, fll. 3. Preparts to resent the
injury, 4. Attacks the Emperor with five
armies, 6. His fiti attempts rendered
abortive, by the imprudence of the Duke of
Orleans, 8. Renews his negociations with
Sultan Solyman, 14. Invades the Low
Countries, 5. Forces the Emperor to raise
the siege of Landrccy, 17. Ditmiffes Bar-
baroffa, 30. Gives the count d'Enguien
pe mifion to engage Guafto, 31. Relieves
Paris, in danger of being furprized by the
Emperor, 39. Agrees to a separate peace
with Francis, ib. Henry's haughty return
to his overtures of peace, 44. Death of
the Duke of Orleans, 53. Peace of Campe,
84. Perceives a neceifity of checking the
Emperor's ambitious designs, 128. Forms
a general league againfl him, ib. Dies, i32.
His life and character summarily compared
with those of Charles, ib. Consequences
of.his death, 135.
F ancis II. his acceflion to the crown of France,

and character, III. 430.
Frankfort, the diet of, assembled for the choice

of an Emperor at the death of Maximilian,
If. 56. Names and views of the Electors,
ib. The Empire offered to Frederick of
Saxony, ib. Who rejecEs it, with his rea-
sons, 57. Chufes Charles V. Emperor, 59.
Hisconfirmation of theGermanick privileges
required and agreed to, 60. City of, em-
braces the reformed religion, II. 206. The
college of Eletors agfembled there by Ser-
dinand, who is acknowledged Emperor of
Germany, lIl. 402.
Fiederick IDuke of Saxony, aflnmbles with the

other Eleadrs at the diet of Frankfort, to
chufe an Emperor, II. 56. 'I he Empire
offered to him, ib. Rejects it, and votes
for Charles V. .7. Refuses the prefects of
the Spanish ambafladors, 58. This disinter-
cfted ehaviour confirmed by the testimony
of hiflorians, ib. Nete. Chtfes Martin
Luther philosophical profeinir at his univer-
fity of Wittemberg, 8. Encourages Luther
in his opposition to inaii'lg'nces, 85. Pro-
teats him against Caj'taln, 90. Causes
Luther to be reized at his return from the

VOL. 111.

diet of Worms, and conceals him at Wart-
burg, I24. Dies, 263.
FregofJ, the French amb:i'ador to Venice,

murdered by the Marquis del Guaflo, the
Imperial governor of the Milanese, III.; .
Frondfperg, George, a German nobleman, some

account of, he joins the army of Charles V.
I1 275.

G
General of the Je'uits, an inquiry into his

office and defpotick authority, II. 448.
Geneva, an account of its revolt against the

Duke of Savoy, II. 386.
Getna, reduced by Lautrec,' the French gene-

ral, II. 296. The French endeavour to
prejudice its trade in favour of Savona, 307.
Is rescued from the French by Andrew Do-
ria, 310. The government of, fettled \by
the difinterefieJnefs of Doria, 311. The
honour paid to Doria's memory, 312. Is
vilited by the Emperor, 321. A fcleme
formed to oierturn the conflitution of,
by Fiefco, count of Lavagno, III. g§5.
He assembles his adherents, 19g. The
conspirators sally forth from Lavagno's
palace, r 2. Deputies sent to know La-
vagno's tenns, 123. Lavagno drowned, ib.
The infurre&ion ruined by the imprudence
of his brother Jerome Fiefco, 124. The
conspirators disperse, ib. Jerome reduced
and put to death, 131.
Germanada, an association in Valencia, so term-

ed, on what occasion formed, II. 18. Re-
fuse to lay down their arms, ib. Their re-
fentment levelled at the nobility, who raise
an army against them, 183. Defeat the
nobles in several qaions, 184. But are
routed and disperscd by them, ib.
Germany, slate of, at the death of the Empe-

ror Maximilian, II. 48. Charles V. of
Spain, and Francis I. of France, form pre-
tcnfions to the Imperial crown, 49. 'Their
rrfpeóive reasons offered in favour of their
claims, 50, 51. Views and interelts of
the other European States in re'atinn to the
competitors, 52. Henry VIII. of England,
advances a claim, 53. But is discouraged from
prosecuting it, 54. How the Papacy was
likely to be assetcd in the choice of an Em-
peror, ib. Advice of Pope Leo X. to the
Gceriman. Princes, 55. Opening of the diet

1 p p at

INDEX TO THE

at Frankfort, ib. In whom the election of
«n Emperor is veied, 56. Views of the
Eleaiors, ib. The Empire offered to Fre-
derick of Saxony, ib. Who rejeacs it, and
his reasons, 57. Charles V. chosen, 59.
The capitulation of the Germanick privi-
leges confirmed by him, 60. Charles sets
out for, 66. Charles crowned at Aix la
Chapellc, 76. Commencement of the Re-
formation there, by Martin Luther, 78.
Treatment of the bull of excommunication
published against Luther, 96. The ufurpa-
tions of the clergy there, during the disputes
concerning invefiitures, ic6. The clergy
of, mofily foreigners, rlo. The benefices
of, nominated by the Pope, I I I. The ex-
pedient of the Emperors for restraining this
power of the Pope, ineffectual, 112. The
great progress ot Luther's doctrines in, II.
2c6. Grievances of the peasants, 255. In-
furrecion in Suabia, 256. The memorial
of their grievances, 257. The infurreaion
quelled, 258. Another infurredtion in
Thuringia, ib. How the house of Aufiria
became so formidable in, 289. Proceedings
relating to the Reformation there, 290.
Great progress of the Reformation there,
324. Ferdinand King of Hungary and Bo-
hemia, brother to Charles V. eleced King
of the Romans, 334.. The Protestant re-
ligion effablifhed in Saxony, 427. The
Protefla:lt religion eftablilhed in the Pala-
tinate, III. 56. The league of Smalkaldc
raise an army against the Emperor, 86. Are
put under the ban of the Empire, 88. The
Protestant army disperscd, xo6. The In-
terim enforced by the Emperor, 180. Mau-
rice of Saxony raises an army, and declares
in favour of the Protefiants, 237. Maurice
favoured even by the Catholick Princes, and
why, 252. ''rcaty of PaIEau, between the
Emperor and Maurice of Saxony, 259.
'Truce between the Emperor and Henry of
France, 360. Charles resigns the Imperial
crown to his biother Ferdinand, 372.
(;hent, an infurrceion there, II. 431. The

prctenfions of the citizens, 432. Form a
confederacy against the Qucen-dowager of
llungary, their govcrnefs, 433. Their de-
puties to the Emnperor, how ticated by him,
ib. Offer to futbmit to France, 434. I& W;-
duced by Charles, 442.

Ghibeline faaion, in Italy, a view of, II. 272;
Giron, Don Pedro de, appointed to the com-

mand of the army of the Holy Junta, II.
170. Resigns his commifflon and Padilla
replaced, 172.
Goletta in Africa, taken by the Emperor

Charles V. If. 37 1. Gonzaga, the Impe-
rial governor of Milan, procures Cardinal
Farnese to be affafinated, and takes poffif-
sion of Placentia for the Emperor, II. x66.
Prepares to seize Parma, 209. Is repulsed
by the French, 211.
Granvele, Cardinal, his artifice to prevail on

the count de Sancerre to surrender St. Difiere
to the Emperor, III. 36. Endeavours to
lull the Proteflants into security withregard
to the Emperor's condut toward them, 62.
Is commiflioned by Philip to address the as-
fembly at the Emperor's resignation of his
hereditary dominions, 357.
Gravelines, an interview there between the

Emperor Charles V. and Henry VIII. of
England, II. 76.
Gropper, canon of Cologne, is appointed a

manager of the Protestant and Catholick
conferences before the diet at Ratisbon, 11.
462. Writes a treatise to compose the dif-
ferences between them, ib. The sentiments
of both parties on this work, 46 .
Granada, archbishop of, president of the coun-

cil of Castile, his imprudent advice to Car-
dinal Adrian, relating to the infurrEtion in
Segovia, 1[. 157.
GuaJY7, the Marquis del, appointed govern 'r

of Milan, by the Emperor, II. 404. Pro-
cures Rincon the French ambaflhdor to the
Porte, to be murdered on his journey thi-
ther, III. 3. Defends Carignan againit tlih
Frcinch, 30. Defeated by d'Enguien in a
pitched battle, 3z.
Gui: iar,/-ini, h,' account of the publication -f

Indtulgences; contradi¢ctd, II. 86. Dcfenid
Reg'io ag.ijift the French, 140. Repulfcs
ani attack upon l',irT, by the French, 145.
His (cntimeits of the rope's treaty with
Lannoy viceroy of Naples, 280.
Guise, Francis of Loirain, Duke of, is mae!

governor of Metz. by lenry II. of lFmln(c,
Ill. 267. Iis charatebr, ib. Prepares to
defend it agairift the i.iiiperor, 268. Iits
brother d'Auniale t;iken priloner by the lIn-
pc:i1ihili, 271i, The Einpcror raifeq the

(ic~c·,

siege, 274. His humane treatment of the
diftreled and sick Germans left behind, ib.
Pelfuades Henry to an alliance with Pope
Paul IV. 346. Marches with troops into
Italy, 376. Is unable to effect any thing,
377. Is recalled from Italy after the defeat
of St. Quintin, 393. His reception in
France, 397. Takes the field against Philip,
398. Invefls and takes Calais from the
Englilh, 400. Takes alto Guifnes and
Hames, ib. Takes Thionville in Luxem-
bourg, 406.
Guise, Mary of, married to James V. of

Scotland, II. 420. Fruffrates the intended
marriage between her daughter Mary, and
prince Edward of England, III. 29.
Gurk, Cardinal de, why he favoured the elec-

tion of Charles V. to the Imperial crown,
II. 58. Signs the capitulation of the Ger-
manick body on behalf of Charles, 60.
Gufman chancellor to the Emperor Ferdinand,

is sent to Pope Paul IV. to notify the elec-
tion, who refuses to fee him, III. 402.

H
Hamburgh, city of, embraces the reformed

religion, II. 206.
Haro, the conde de, appointed to command

the army of the Castilian nobles against
the Holy Junta, It. 171. Attacks Torde-
fillas, and gets possession of Queen Joanna,
ib. Routs the army of the Junta, and takes
Padilla prisoner, who is executed, 177.
Hafcen A/ga, deputy governor of Algiers, his

piracies against the Christian tfates, II. 472.
Is besieged in Algiers by the Emperor
Charles V. 474. Makes a successful sally,
475. The tEmperor forced by bad weather
to return back again, 478.
Hayradin, a potter's son of Lesbos, commences

pirate, II. 364. See Barbarofa.
Heathens, ancient, why the principles of mu-

tual toleration were generally admitted
among them, III. 334.
Ilel/o, vice chancellor to Charles V. attenJs

the Pope's nuncio to Smalkaldc, 11. 422.
Forms a Catholick league in opposition to
the Plroteftant one, 424.
Ienry II. King of France, his motives for de-

cling an alliance with Pope Paul l11.
again tthc Emperor, Ill. 168. Procures for
Scotland a peace with England, 210. 'lTc

young Queen Mary, eontraced to the Daul-
phin, and sent to France for education, ib.
Enters into an alliance with Ofavio Farnese
Duke of Parma, 211. Protefis against the
council of Trent, 212. Makes alliance
with Maurice Elecor of Saxony, 229. Se-
conds the operations of Maurice, 238. His
army marches and seizes Metz, 240. At-
tempts to furprize Strafburgh, 248. Is
flrongly solicited to spare it, 249. Returns,
250. The Emperor prepares for war against
him, 267. Infligates the Turks to invade
Naples, 278. Terrouane taken and demo-
lilhed by Charles, 286. Hefdin taken, ib.
Leads an army into the Low-Countries
against Charles, 287. Endeavours to ob-
flruct the marriage of Mary of England with
Philip of Spain, 306. The progress of his
arms against the Emperor, 307. Engages
Charles, 309. Retires, ib. Cosmo di Me-
dici, Duke of Florence, makes war against
him, 311. Appoints Peter Strozzi com-
mander of his army in Italy, 312. Strozzi
defeated, 314. Siena taken, 316. Pope
Paul IV. makes overtures to an alliance
with him against the Emperor, 345. Mont-
morency's arguments againfi this alliance,
ib. Is persuaded by the Guises to accept it,
346. Sends the Cardinal of Lorrain with
powers to conclude it, ib. The Pope signs
the treaty, 348. A truce for five years con-
cluded with the Emperor, 360. Is exhorted
by Cardinal Caraffa, to break the truce,
363. Is absolved from his oath, and con-
cludes a new treaty with the Pope, 366.
Sends the Duke of Guise into Italy, 378.
The Conltable Montmorcncy defeated and
taken prisoner at St. Qiintin, 385. Henry
prepares for the defence of Paris, 387. St.
Quintin taken by affult, 389. Collecs his
troops and negociates for afliflance, ib. His
kind reception of the Duke of Guise, 397.
Calais taken by Guise, 400. Impowcss
Montmorcncy to negociate a peace with
Philip, 41 1. Honours him highly on his re-
turn to France, 412. Writes to Qicen
}!lizabetli, with propofalsof marriage, 421.
How he failed in his suit, 422. Hlis daugh-
ter miariird to Philip, and his siser to the
])ike of S.ivov, 427. Terms of the treaty
rs ChailCdle Cambrefis, 47Y. The mar-
Jia ge of his fifler and daughter ccclbrit-

P p p 2 ed
SECOND

' with great pomp, 34C. His death,
Hery VII. of England, detains the archduke

Philip and his duchess when driven on his
coast, three months at the instigation of
Ferdiwand, II. 12.
sentry VIII. of England, fends an ambassador

to Germany to propefe his claims to the Im-
perial crown, I. 53. Is discouraged from
his pretcnfions, and takes no part with the
other competitors, 54. His personal cha-
racer and political influence in Europe, 70.
Entirely guided by Cardinal Woltey, 72.
Receives a visit from the Emperor Charles V.
74. Goes over to'France to visit Francis,
75. WreRles with Francis and is thrown
by him, ib. Note. Has another interview
with Charles at Gravelines, 76. Charles
offers to submit his d.ffcrences with Francis
to his arbitration, ib. Publiihes a treatise
on the Seven Sacraments, against Martin
Luther, 125. Obtains of the Pope the title
of Defender of the Faith, 126. Takes part
with Charles againfi Francis, 127. Sends
Wolfey to negociate an accommodation be-
tween the Emperorand Francis, 136. Con-
cludes a league u ith Charles against Francis,

37. His avowed reasons for this treaty, ib.
His private motives, 138. Declares war
against Francis, 149. Is visited by Charles

50o Makes descents upon the coaf of
France, ib. Advances with an army into
Picardy, iS1. Obliged to retire by the
Duke-de Vendome, ib. Enters into a treaty
with the Emperor and Charles Duke of
Bourbon, 193. How he raised supplies for
his wars beyond the grants of his parliament,
i;9. Sends the Duke of Suffolk to invade
Picardy, who penetrates almoit to Paris, but
is driven back, 200. Engages to affif Charles
in an invasion of Provence, 215. Causes
of hs not supporting the Inmprialifls, 217.
Effcls of the battle of Pavia, and captivity
of Francis on him, 231. Particulars of his
embassy to Charles, 233. Concludes a
defentive alliance with Fiance, 239. Is de-
clared proteaor of the league of Cognac
against the Emperor, 267. His motives for
affiliing the Pope againfl the Emlperor, 293.
'Enters into a ceague with Francis, and re-
nounces the English claim to the crown of
France, 294. Declares war against the

TO T H E

Emperor, 30.: Concludes a'truce with the
governers of the Low Countriei, 306. Pro-
jecs his divorce from Catharine of Aragon,
318. Motives which withheld the Pope-
from granting it, 319. Acquiesces in the
peace of Cambray, 320. Sends a (upply of
money to the ProteRant league in Germany,
336. Procures his marriage to be annulled
by Cranmer archbishop of'Canterbury, 345.

'he divorce reversed by the Pope under pe-
nalty of excommunication, 346. Renounces
the Papal supremacy, ib. Refutes to ac-
knowledge any council called by the Pope,
362. Opposes James V. of Scotland mar-
rying Mary of Guise, 420. His disgusts
with Francis and intercourse with the Em-
peror, ib. Concludes a league with Charles,.
III. Jr. Makes war with Scotland, 12.
Particulars of his treaty with Charles, ib.
Invades France and invefis Boulogne, 35.
Refuses the Emperor's plan of operations,.
39. Is deserted by the Emperor, 43. Takes
Boulogne, ib. His haughty proposals to
Francis, 44. Peace of Campe, 84. Is
succeeded by his son Edward VI. 129. A
review of his p,.licy, 441.
HIeriford, earl of, plunders and burns Edin-

burgh, III. 35. Joins Henry after, in his
invasions of France, ib.
Hjef, the Landgrave.of, procures the reftora-

tion of his kinsman, Ulric Duke of Wur-
temnberg, II. 360. His views compared
with.thofe of the Eleftor of Saxony, III.
62. The Emperor's deceitful lrofefions to
him, 69. Quiets the apprehensions of the
Proteflant league with regard to the Empe-
ror, 70. Is appointed joint commander of
the army of the league with the Elector of
Saxony, 91. Their charaiters compared,
92. Ur^cs an attack of the Emperor, but
is opposed by the illcbr, 95. His letter
to Maurice Duke of Saxony, 103. Tle
army of the league difpcrfe, ioG. Is ir-
duced to accept ha fih terms from Charles,
150. Flii humiliating reception by the Em-
peror, 153. Is detained in confinement,
155. His offirs of fubmiflion flighted by
the Emperor, 179. Is carried by the Em-
peror with him into the Netherlands, 183.
Renews his endeavours for libcity, 203.
Charles rcleafes arbitrarily the Elector of
Brandenburg, and Maurice, from their cn-

4 '
ga'.· niclta

gagements to him, 203. Obtains his liber-
ty bythe treaty of Pafau, 259. Is arrested
by the Queen of Hungary, but freed by the
Emperor, 264. The effects of his con-
finement on him, 265.
Heuterus, his account of Lewis XII. ihewn to

contradia the relations given by Bellay and
other French historians of the education of
Charles V. II. 21. Note.

Hoy Junta. See Junta.
Holy League, against the Emperor Charles V.

formed at Cognac, under the proteclion of
Henry VIII. of England, II. 266.
Horuc, a potter's son of Lesbos, commences

pirate, with his brother Hayradin, II. 364.
See Barbarofa.
Hungary, is invaded by Solyman the Magnifi-

cent, and its King Lewis II; killed, II. 288.
His tuccefles, and the number of prisoners
carried away, 289. The archduke Ferdi-
nand eleced King of, together with Bohe-
mia, ib. John Zapol Scaepius wrests it
from Ferdinand, 466. Stephen succeeds on
the death of his father John, 467. Is trea-
cheroufly seized by Solyman, 469. See
Ifabel/a, and Martinuzzi.

I
James V. of Scotland, levies troops to afliRf

Francis in Provence, but his intention fruf-
trated, II. 419. His negociations for mar-
riAge with Francis's daughter, ib. Marries
Mary of Guise, 420. Dies, and leaves
Mary his infant daughter to succecd him,
111. 12. See Mary.
rfiiJis, the order of, by whom founded, II.
132. Charafter of that order, ib. Cha-
racter of Ignatio Loyola their founder, 445.
The order confirmed by the Pope, 446. An
examination into the conflitution of the
order, ib. Office and power of thtir gene-
ral, 448. The rapid progress of the order,
451. Engage in trade, and eltablifli an em-
pire in South America, 453. Bid tendency
of the or(ler, 454. Are relponfible for most
of the pernicious effeAs of Popery, since their
inflitution, 455. Advantages rcfultingfrom
their inflitution, ib. Civilize the natives of
Paraguay, 457. Their precautions for the in-
dependency of their empire there, 458. How
the particulars of their government and in-

ftitution came to be disclosed, 459. Sum-
mary of their character, 461. .
Indulgences, in the Romnih church, the dotrine

of, explained, II. 79. By whom first in-
vented, ib. Martin Luther preaches against
them, 83. Writes against them to Albert
Eletor of Mentz, 84. A bull issued in'fa-
vour of, 92. The sale of, opposed in Swit-
zerland by Zuinglius, 94.
Infantado, Duke of, his haughty resentment of

a casual blow on his horse, 1L 430. Is pro-
teEted by the Conitable of Castile, 431.
Innocent, a young domeftick of Cardinal di

Monte, obtains his Cardinal's hat, on his
election to the Papacy, III. 19o.
Interim, a fyfIem of theology so called, pre-

pared by order of the Emperor Charles V.
for the use of Germany, Ill. 172. Is dif-
approved of, both by Protefiants and Papists,
176. Inveflitures, usurpations of the Romish clergy

in Germany, during the disputes between the
Emperors and Popes, concerning, II. 0o6.
Joanna, daughter of Ferdinand, and mother

of Charles V. visits Spain with her hufbaod
Philip Archduke of Aufiria, II. 3. Is flight-
ed by her husband, 4. Her character, ib.
Is abruptly left in Spain by her husband, ib.
Sinks into melancholy on the occasion, and
is delivered of her second son Ferdinand, 5.
Her letter of consent to her father's regency
of Castile intercepted, and hei self confined
9. Made joint regent of Cafile wxith Ser-
dinand and Philip by the treaty of Salaman-
ca, iI. Sets out for Spain with Philip, are
driven on the coast of England and detained
three months by Henry Vi 1 2. Acknow-
ledged Quleen by the Cortes, 14. Her ten-
dernefs to her husband in his-ficknefs, and.
extraordinary attachment to ris botly when
dead, ib. Is incapable of government,, I.
Her son Charles aflimes' the crown, 28.
The Cortes acknowledge her son King, with
a reservation in her favour, 44. Her reccp-
tion of Padilla the chief of the Spanish
malcontents, 16X. The Holy Junta re-
moved to Tordefillas the place of her refi-
dence, I62. Relapses into her former me-
lancholy, ib. The proceedings of the Holy
Junta carried on in her name, ib. Is feined,
by the conde de Haro, 1 7 . Dies, af(t t. lar
fifty years confinement, 11I. 353,

Job»
SECOND

yt4, Zapol Scaepiug, by the afliftance of Sul-

tan Solyman, eltablilhes himself in the
kingdom of Hungary, II. 466. Leaves
the kingdom to his son Stephen, 467. See
Hungary, Isabella, and Martinuzzi.
ijabel, daughter of John II. of Caflile, and

.wife of Ferdinand King of Aragon, her
history, II. 2. Her concern at the archduke
Philip's treatment of her daughter Joanna,
4. Her death and character, 6. Appoints
Ferdinand regent of Castile under refiric-
tions, ib.
- daughter to Sigismund King of Poland,

married to John King of Hungary, II. 467.
Her characer, ib. Is treacieroufly carried
with her infant son into Transylvania by
Sultan Solyman, 469. The government
of this province and the education of her
son committed to her jointly with Marti-
nuzzi, III. 222. Is jealous of Martinuzzi's
influence, and courts the Turks, 223. Is
prevailed on to resign Transylvania to Ser-
dinand, 224. Retires to Silesia, 225. Re-
covers poffeflion of Transylvania, 289.
-- of Portugal, married to the Emperor

Charles V. II. 254.
Jta*, consequences of the league between Pope

Leo X. and the Emperor Charles V. to, II.
139. The characters of the Italians, Spa-
niards and French, contrasted, ib. State of,
at the accession of Clement VII. to the Pa-
pacy, 201. Views of the Italian States
with refpeE to the Emperor and Francis on
the expulsion of the French from Genoa
and the Milanese, 214. Their apprehen-
sions on the battle of Pavia and captivity of
Francis, 234. The principal States, join
in the Holy league againfi the Emperor,
266. Are disgusted at the tardiners of
Francis, 272. A view of the Ghibeline
facion, ib. Sentiments of the States of,
on the peace of Cambray, 317. Is visited
by the Emperor Charles, 320. The mo.
tives of his moderation toward the States
of, 321. A league among the States of,
formed by Charles, 341. Placcntia granted
to Odavlo Farncfe by Philip I. of Spain,
11I. 394. The investiture of Siena given
by Philip to Cofrno di Medici, 396. The
confequencc of there grants, ib.
'unta, Holy, a view of the confederacy in
Sain, so termed, II. 16o. The authority

T 0 T E

.of Adrian disclaimed by, 6 r. Removed to
Tordefillas where Queen Joanna resided,
162. Their proceedings carried on in the
name of Joanna, 162. Receives letters from
Charles to lay down their arms, with pro-
mises of pardon, I64. Remonstrance of
grievances drawn up by, ib. The particu-
lar of this remonstrance, 165. Remarks on
the spirit of it, 167. Are intimidated from
presenting it to Chailes, 169. Propose to
deprive Charles of his royalty during the
life of Joanna, ib. Take the field, 170.
CharaAer of their army, rb. The Queen
seized by the conde de Haro, 17I. How
they obtained money to support their army,
172. Lose time in negociating with the
nobles, 173. Propose to make their peace
with Charles at the expence of the nobles,
175. Their irrefolutecondu&, ib. Their
army defeated by Haro, and PadiUja taken
prisoner, 176. Padilla executed, 177. His
letters to his wife, and the city of Toledo,
178. The ruin of the confederacy, 179.
Julius II. Pope, observations on the pontificate

of, II. 102.
-- II. Pope his characer, III. 10o. Be-
flows his Cardinal's hat infamously, ib. Is
averse to the calling a council, 192. Sum-
mons one at Trent, 193. Aflerts his fu-
preme authority peremptorily in the bull f6r
it, 201. Repents confirming Odtavio Farnese
in Parma, 209. Requires Octavio to relin-
quifh his alliance with France, 211. The
manter of his death, 328.

L
La Chau, a Flemilb gentleman, aflociated by

Cliarles V. with Cardinal Ximenes in the
regency of Castile, II. 34.
Landrecy, ficge of, by the Emperor Charles V.

III. 16. Is abandoned by him, 17.
Lannoy, mortgages the revenues of Naples, to

supply the exigences of the Emperor, II.
220. Francis surrenders himself prisoner
to him at the battle of Pavia, 228. His
cautious disposal of him, 229. Delivcrs
him up in pursuance of the treaty of Ma-
diid, and receives the Duke of Orleans and
the Dauphin, as hostages in exchange, 254.
Is sent amballador to l'rancis to require his
fulfilment of the treaty of, 268. Concludes
a treaty with the Pope, 280. Marches to

join

join the ImperiliIs at Rome, where the
troops refuse to obey him, 295.
Lanuza, don John de, made viceroy of Aragon,

on the departure of Charles V. for Ger-
many, II. 66. CompoTes the disturbances
there, 184,
Lavagna, John Lewis Fiefco, count of, his

charaaer, III. I 5. Meditates fubvefting
the government of Genoa, ir6. His pre-
parations, 117. His artful method of assem-
bling his adherents, 119. His exhortation
to them, 120o. His interview with his wife,
z21. Sallies forth, 122. Andrew Doria
escapes, 123. Deputies sent to know his
terms, ib. Is drowned, ib. His brother's
vanity ruins their design, 124. See Fiefo.
Lautrtc, Odet de Foix, marechal de, the French

governor of Milan, his charaAer, II. 139.
Alienates the affet&ions of the Milanese from
the French, ib. Invests Reggio, but is re-
pulsed by Guicciardini the hiltorian, then
governor, 140. Is excommunicated by the
Pope, ib. The money for paying his troops,
seifed by Louise of Savoy, 14 . Is left by
his Swiss troopr, 142. Is driven out of the
Milanese territories, 143. A new body of
Swiss under him insist on giving battle to
the Imperialiits, who defeat him, 147. The
Swift leave him, 148. Retires into France
with the residue of his troops, ib. Delivers
up the Dauphin and Duke of Orleans, in
exchange for Francis I. as hostages for the
performance of the treaty of Madrid, 254.
Is appointed generalifirmo of the league
againit the Emperor, 296. His successes in
Italy, 297. Motives which withheld him
from fiubduing the Milanese, ib. Obliges
the Prince of Orange to retire to Naples,3o04
Blockades Nap'e', 305. His army wafled,
and himself killed by the pc(tilence, 309.
Learning, the revival of, favourable to the rc-

formation of religion, 11. 116.
Lripjic, a public dllpuitation held there by Mar-

tin Luther, a.;d Eccius, on the validity of
the Papal authority, 11, 94.
Lfo X. Pople of tRoeR( , hi, characeer, VI. 54.

H-is aFprcli' sis on the cletion of an l n-
peror of (Crlnany, at thec death of Maxi-
milian, ib. lis council to the German
Princes, 55. (rants Charlcs V. a tentlh of
all eccclcl;llical leneficcs in Caitile, 62.
La)' Caltilc tindlr an inerli('i, lint take., it

15

off, at the instance of Charles, ib. His
condut on the profpet of war between
Charles and F4ancis, 69. Situation of the
Papacy at his acceflion, and his views of
policy, 79. His inattention to Martin Lu-
ther's controversy with the Dominicans,
concerning indulgences, 87. Is inltigated
against him, and summons him to Rome, ib.
Desires the elector of Saxony not to prote&
him, ib. Is prevailed on to permit Luther's
do&trines to be examined in Germany, 88.
Cardinal Cajetan appointed to try him, ib.
Issues a bull in favour of Indulgences, 92. A
suspension of proceedings against Luther, and
why, 93. Publishes a bull of excommunica-
tion against him, 95. The political views ofhis
condu&t between Chafles and Francis, rz28
Concludes a treaty with Frandis, 129, Coo-
cludes a treaty also with Charles, ib. The con-
ditions of the treaty with Charles, 130. Its
consequences to Italy, I39. Is disappointed
in a scheme formed by Merone, chancellor
of Milan, for attacking that dutchy, I4o0
Excommunicates Marechal de Foix for his
attack of Reggio, and declares against
France, ib. Takes a body of Swiss 'into
pay, 141. The French driven out of the
Milanese, i43. He dies, 144. The spirit
of the confederacy broken by his death, ib.
L'Efparrt, Foix de, commands the French

troops in Navarre for Henry D'Albert; II.
132. Reduces that kingdom, ib. His'iim,
prudent progress into Castile, 133. Is taken
prisoner by the Spaniards, and the French.
driven out of Navarre, ib.
Ltonard, father, forms a fchemne to betraying

Metz to the Imperialifls, III. 321. Intro-
duces soldiers clad like friars, 322. Is de-
teaed, 323. Is murdered by his monks, 32.
Lrvejgue, Don, his account of the motives whichl

induced the Emperor Charles V. to refigi
his hereditary dominions, III. 352. Note.
Lewis II. King of IHungary and lohemia, his

character, I,. 288. Is invaded and killed by
Solyman the Magnificent, ih.
- XII. King of France, receives homage

of the Archduke Philip, 'for the carldom of
kFlanders, 11. 3. Concludes a treaty withl
him, while at war with Ferdirlnnd of 'Ar.t-
onl, 5. Bclows his lnicc Germaine dc
I'oix, on Fcrdinand, anil (ioncliudes a I:caec
with himi, so. Loss the corridrncc (f

l'hl,p

Philip ont that occafton, 21. Net,. Beflows
bt eldde daughter, already betrothed to
Chbes V. on the count of Angouleme, ib.
.Lta, Antonio de, defends Pavia for the Em-

peror adaina Francis, 1I. 221. His vigo-
rous defence, 222. Sallies out at the battle
of Pavia, and contributes to the defeat of
Francis, 227. Is left governor of Milan by
the Duke of Bourbon, 278. Defeats the
forces there, 312. Is appointed generalif-
limo of the Italian league, 341. Direds
the operations of the invasion of France,
under the Emperor, 395. Dies, 403.
Literaturc, its obligations to the order of

Jesuits, II. 456.

Lorenzo di Medici. .See Medici.
LouiSe of Savoy, mother of Francis I. of

France, her charaaer, II. 141. Her motives
for seizing the money appointed for pay-
ment of marechal Lautrec's troops, ib.
Cause of her aversion to the bouse of Bour-
bon, Iq9. He, advances toward a marriage
with Charles Duke of Bourbon, rejected by
him, 192. Determines to ruin him, ib.
Inltigates a law-suit against him, for his
estates, ib. Goes to difluade Francis from
his intended invasion of the Milanese, who
willnot wait for her, 218. Is appointed
regent during his absence, 219. Her pru-
dent conduct on the defeat of Pavia, and
captivity of her son Francis, 231. Con-
cludes a defensive alliance with Henry VIII.
239. Ratifies the treaty of Madrid for the
recovery of her son's liberty, 253. Under-
takes, with Margaret of Savoy, to accom-
modate the differences between the Emperor
And Francis, 314. Articles of the peace of
Cambray, 315.
Loyola, Ignatio, commands the castle of Pam-

pcluna in Navarre, and is wounded in its
defence, II. 132. His enthufiaftick turn of
mind, ib. The founder of the society of
Jfuits, ib. Prevails on the Pope to cfta-
blilh the order, 446. An examination into
the conititution of the order, ib. Office and
power of the general, 448. The rapid pro-
grefC of the order, 451. See ,'fui is.
Lorrain, Cardinal of, pcrtiades lienry If. of

France, to accept the offered alliance with
Pope Paul IV. and is sent to Rome to nc-
gociate it, 11. 346. His imnpudent beha-
viour toward theduclhf of Valciltinois, 411.

TO THE
Lunmburgh, Duke of, avows the opinions of

Luther, IL 206.
Luthr, Martin, the happy consequences of

the opinions propagated by him, 11. 78.
Attacks Indulgences, 82. His birth and
education, ib. Chosen philosophical pro-
fellbr at the university of Wittemberg, 83.
Inveighs against the publishers of Indulgen-
ces, ib. Writes to Albert EleCtor of
Mentz, against them, 84. Compotes theses
againfi Indulgences, ib. Is supported by the
Auguffinians, and encouraged by Frederick
Elecor of Saxony, ib. Is summoned to
Rome by Pope Leo, 87. Obtains of the Pope
leave to have his doctrines examined in Ger-
many, 88. Appears before Cardinal Caje-
tan at Augsburg, ib. His resolute reply to
the peremptory order of Cajetan, to retract
his principles, 89. Withdraws from Augf-
burg, and appeals from the Pope ill-inform-
ed, to the Pope when better informed con-
cerning him, ib. Appeals to a general
council, 92. The death of Maximilian,
how of service to him, 93. Questions the
Papal authority in a publick disputation, 94.
His opinions condemned by the universities
of Cologne and Louvain, ib. A bull of
excommunication published against him, 95.
Pronounces the Pope to be Anticlrifl, and
burns the bull, 96. Reflections on the con-
dut of the court of Rome toward h11m 97.
Reflections on his condut, 99. Caulcs
which contributed to favour his oppofi:ion
to the church of Rome, Ior. Particularly
the art of printing, 115. And the revival
of learning, 1 6. He is summoncd to ap-
pear at the diet of Worms, 122. A safe
condu&t granted him thither, ib. His recep-
tion there, ib. Refuses to retract his opi-
nions, 123. D)parts, ib. An edic pub-
lifhed against him, ib. He is seizcd and con-
ccaled at WVartburg, 124. Progress of his
doctrines, i/'. The univerficy of Palis
publilhes a decree against him, 125. Wrote
againfi by Henry VIII. of England, ib.
Answers both, 126. Withdraws from his
retreat to check the inconsiderate zeal of
Carloftadius, 205 Undertakes a tr;anfa-
tion of the bible, ib. His doctrines avowed
by several of the German Princes, 206. His
moderate and prudent condu t, 262. .Mar-
ries Catharine a. Boria, a nlui, ib. The

great

great progrefi of his doctrines among the
Germanick States, 324. Encourages the
Protestants dispirited by the Emperor's de-
cree againf him, 331. His concern at the
pra6tices of the Anabaptifis at Munfier,
356. Is invited to Leipfick, by Henry Duke
of Saxony, 427. His opinion of Grop-
per's treatise to unite the Protestants and
Catholicks, 463. Dies, III. 64. Sum-
mary of his chara&er, 65. Extra& from
his last will, 68. Note. See ProletJants.
A view of the extraordinary effets of his
revolt from the church of Rome, on that
court and on Europe in general, 445.
Luxemburg, invaded by Robert de la Marck,

lord of Bouillon, Il. 134. Invaded and
over-run by the Duke of Orleans, 11I. 7.
Is again invaded by Francis, 15.

M
Madrid, treaty of, between the Emperor

Charles V. and his prisoner Francis I. King
of France, II. 250. Sentiments of the
publick with regard to this treaty, 251.
Magdeburg, the city of, refuses to admit the

Interim enforced by Charles V. and prepares
for defence, III. 200. Maurice Elector of
Saxony appointed to reduce it, 201. Is
put under the ban of the Empire, 214. The
territories of, invaded by George of Meck-
lenburg, ib. The inhabitants defeated in a
sally, 25 . Maurice of Saxony arrives and
besieges the city, 216. Surrenders, ib. The
senate elets Maurice their burgrave, 218.
Mahmed, King of Tunis, history of his sons,

II. 367.
Majorca, an infurretion there, II. 185.

Which is quelled with difficulty, ib. The
moderation of Charles toward the infur-
gents, on his arrival in Spain, 186.
MajtJly, the appellation of, assumed by

Charles V. on his election to the Imperial
crown, and taken by all the other monarchs
of Europe, II. 6x.

Malines, council of, an account of, If. 434.
Malta, the island of, granted by the Emperor

Charles V. to the knights of St. John, ex-
pelled from Rhodes by the Turks, II. 153.
Mamalukes, cxtirpated by Sultan Selim I1.

II. 50.
Mammelukes, a faction in Geneva, so termed,

fume account of, II. 386.

VOL. 111.

THIRD VOLUMES.

Monul, Don John, Ferdinand's ambaflador at

the Imperial court, pays his court to the
Archduke Philip on Queen Isabella's death,
II. 8. Intercepts Joanna's letter of content
to Ferdinand's regency of Castile, 9. Ne-
gociates a treaty between Ferdinand and
Philip, l . Declares for Maximilian's re-
gency on Philip's death, 16. Is made Im-
perial ambaflador at Rome, and concludes
an alliance between Charles V. and Leo X.
130. The conditions of the treaty, ib. Pro-
cures Adrian of Utrecht to be eleted Pope,
146.
Marcellus IJ. Pope, his charater, III. 338.

Dies, 339.
Mardano, battle of, between Peter Strozzi,

and the marquis de Marignano, III. 314.
Margaret of Aufiria, and. Dowager of Savoy,

aunt to Charles V. undertakes with Louise,
mother of Francis I. of France, to accom-
modate the differences between those two
monarchs, II. 314. Articles of the peace
of Cambray, 315.
Marignano, marquis of, appointed commander

of the Florentine army, acing against the
French, III. 311. Defeats the French
army under Peter Strozzi, 314. Lays siege
to Siena, 315. Converts the siege into a
blockade, 316. Siena surrenders, ib. Re-
duces Porto Ercole, 318. His troops or-
dered into Piedmont by the Emperor, ib.
Marck, Robert de la, lord of Bouillon, de-

clares war againt theEmperorCharles V. I.
134. Ravages Luxemburg with French
troops, ib. Is commanded to disband his
troops by Francis, ib. His territories re-
duced by the Emperor, 135.
Marseilles, besieged by the Imperialists, IT.

216. Refcuec by Francis, 217. Interview
and treaty there between the Pope and
Francis, 344.
Martinuzzi, bilhop of Waradin, is appointed

guardian to Stephen, King of Hungary, IL.
467. His chara&er, ib. Solicits the aflift-
ance of Sultan Solyman againf Ferdinand,
468. Solyman seizes the kingdom, 469.
Is appointed to the government of Tranfyl-
vania and the education of the young King,
jointly with the Queen, III. 222. Negociatee
with Ferdinand, 223. PIevails on the (Queen
to resign Transylvania to Ferdinand, 224.
Is appointed governor of Transylvania, and

Q.q q made

made a Cardinal, 225. Is aflaffinated by Ser-
dinand's order, z27.
Mart)r, Peter, his authority cited in proof of

the extortions of the Flemish minsters of
Charles V. II. 45.
Mary of Burgundy, contracted to Lewis XII.

of France, but married to the Emperor
Maximilian, 1II. 2.
Mary of England, her acceflion, III. 298. Re-

ceives proposals from theEmperor CharlesV.
of marrying his son Philip, 299. The
English averse to this union, ib. The house
of commons remonfirates againfi the match,
300. The articles of marriage, ib. The
imiarriage ratified by parliament, and com-
pleated, 303. Re-efiablifhes the Romish
religion, ib. Persecutes the Reformers, 304.
Invites Charles to England on his resignation
and paflage to Spain, which he declines, 373.
Is engaged by Philip to assist him in his war
against France, 381. Levies money by her
Prerogative to carry on the war, 382. Her
neglect in the security of Calais, 398. Calais
invested and taken by the Duke of Guile,
40D. Lies, 421.
Mary, daugh'cr of James V. of Scotland, fuc-

ceeds to the crown an infint, III. 12. Is
contra&ted to the Dauphin of France, 168.
Is educated at the court of France, 210, 405.
The marriage compleated, ib. Assumes the
title and arms of England on the death of
Miry, 423.
a.ils/hias, John, a baker, becomes a leader of

the Anihabltils, at Munf(er, 11. 350 Seizes
the city and cltabliflies a new form of go-
vernmcnt there, -351. IRelulfes the bishop
of Munftcr, 53. Is killed, ib. S, c 1B-
oldl and /InAl/-iiti//s.
Alaurice, dukc of Saxony, his Inotincs for not

accediii l to thie Iroteflanlt eaguC of Smidl-
kallc, III. 20. M.ili( is to the ;fifllance of
Ferdinand in H-untgary, i/. Ils diftlirence
with his uncle the elector, ib. I-lis conduct
at the diet of Worms, 5o. Joins the Il'-
pcror againit the Proteliants, 86. Ilis mo-
tives, 100oo. Ilis infilious coliitlitt toward
the Elector, loi. Seizes the clecorate of
Saxony, 104. Saxony recovered by the
elector, 10. Ilis ineflcctual endeavours to
reduce Wittcmbcrg for the Emperor, 144.
Obtains pofl.ffion of the electorate, 148.
Is formally invcflcd at the diet of Autgfburg,

175. Becomes d;itatisfied with the Empe-
ror, 194. His motives to discontent ex-
plained, i95. His address and caution in
his conduct, 196. Enforces the Interim in
his territories, 197. Makes, nevertheless,
profefflons of his attachment to the Refor-
mation, 198. Undertakes to reduce Mag-
deburg to submit to the Interim, ib. Protefis
against the council of Trent, 199. Is com-
missioned by the Emperor to reduce Magde-
burg, 201. Joins George of Mecklenburg
before Magdeburg, 215. The city capitu-
lates, 216. Begins to intrigue with count
Mansfeldt, 217. Is elected Burgrave of
Magdeburg, 218. Difmiffeshis troops, 219.
His address in amusing the Emperor, 220.
Makes an alliance with Henry II. of France,
to make war on the Emperor, 229. Makes
a formal requisition of the Landgrave's li-
berty, 231. Joins his troops, and publifhcs
a manifcfto, 237. Takes pofeffion of Augf-
burg and other cities, 238. An ineffectual
negociation with Charles, 240. Defeats a
body of the Emperor's troops, 242. Takes
the castle of Ehrenburg, ib. Is retarded by
a mutiny in his troops, 243. Enters In-
fpruck, and narrowly mifls taking Charles,
244. A negociaton between him and
Ferdinand, 25 . Besieges Frankfort on the
Maine, 257. lis inducements to an accom-
modation, 258. Signs a treaty with the
Emperor at Paffiu, 259. R.flections on
hi' conduct in this war, 260. MIarches into
}lungary to oppofc the Turks, 262. Is
placed at the head of the league a ainft Al-
bert of Brandenlbirg, 281. )efeats Albert,
but is killed in the battle, 282. Ii is charac-
ter, '83. Is fuccceded by his brother Au-
gu(lus, 284.
,Ihxli:ilian, tlmperor of (;irmraly, claims the

rcCency of Caltile on his son Phiilip's death,
II. 16. Is fupportd(l ill his claim by Don
John Manluel, ib. Lofces it, 18. Obtains
the 1Fovcrnnltlet of tile 1Low-Countllriis by
thie cctli it 'hilip, 21. Appoints William
de Croy, lord of Chicvres to superintend the
education of his giralldflu Charles, it. Con-
cludes a peace with France and Veiiicc, 3').
Dies, 48. State of ';urop. at this period,
ib. His endeavours to fcciile the Imperial
crown to his grandlon Charles, 49. How
obllructcd, ib.

Al/ecknlnburgh,

Meeklenburgh, George of, invades the territo- 184. ]

ries of Magdeburg for the Emperor, III. 214. ib. De
Defeats the Magdeburghers who sally out Mentz, arc
on him, 215. Is joined by Maurice of the Em|
Saxony, who aftumes the supreme command, tance of
ib. rized b)

Medicino, John James; fee Marignano. Merveille,
Medici, Alexander, restored to the dominions envoy f

of Florence, by the Emperor Charles, II. 323. duke of
Is assassinated, 415. Metz, feiz
Medici, Cardinal de, elected Pope, and afWumes neral, I

the title of Clement VII. II. 197. See governo
Clement VII. peror, 2
Medici, Catharine di, is married to the duke tires in

of Orleans, II. 345. Is conjectured, by the scheme
Emperor Charles V. to have poisoned the the city
Dauphin, 406. fpiracy
Medici, Cosmo de, made duke of Florence, II. Leonarc

417. Is supported by the Emperor, and de- associate
feats the partizans of Lorenzo, 418. Asserts Mezieres,
his independency against the Emperor, III. rialifts,
275. Offers to reduce Siena for the Em- chevalie
peror, 3 . Enters into awar with France, Milan, m
ib. See Marignano. His address in pro- French
curihg the investiture of Siena from Phi- ib. The
lip 11. of Spain, 394. It is granted to him, by his
396. clefiaftic
.AeJdici, Lorenzo de, affaflinates his kinsman 141.

Alexander II.416. Flies, 4I7. Attempts pressed
to oppose Cosmo, but is defeated, 418. vaded b
.Medina del Campo, the inhabitants of, refute to ven out

let Fonseca take the military flores there, for troops tl
the siege of the insurgents in Segovia, II. by More
157. 'lhe town almost burnt by Fonseca, ib. Ov
i58. The inhabitants repulse him, ib. Sur- the city,
Jenders after the battle of Villalar, and dif- of the b:
solution of the Holy Junta, 179. of, grar
Ml'lanflhon, imbibes the opinions of Martin him and

Luther, II. 97. Is employed to draw up a 248. I.
confeflion of faith by the lrotcflant Princes troops tl
at the diet of Auflburg, 329. Is dejectcd Bourbor
by the Emperor's decree against the Plo- ''he Fr,
teftants, but comforted by Luther, 3 {I. Is nio de L
invited to Paris by Francis, 381. lHii con- lEKperoi
fercuce with Eckius, 462. Is prevailed on 388. 1
to flvour the Intritn enforced by the Em- dutchy,
peror, 111. 197. The ina
Mclito, Conde de, made viceroy of Valencia, nor, 404

on the departure of Charles V. for Gcr- Aolhacz, ba
many, 11. 66. Appointed to command the nificclnt
troops of the notables againit the Germnanadta, Manajtic o0

VOLU MES.

Defeated by them in several actions;
eftroys the afflociation, ib.
:hbifhop of, artfully declares before
peror, thedietofAugibourg's accep-
the Interim, without being autho-
y it, III. 1 74.
a Milanese gentleman employed as
from Francis I. to Francis Sforza,
Milan, his fate, II. 379.
ed by Montmorency the French ge-
II. 240. The duke of Guise made
ir of, 267. Is besieged by the Em-
270. The Emperor desists, and re-
a diflreffed condition, 274. A
formed by father Leonard to betray
to the Imperialifls, 321. The con-
deteeed by the governor, 323.
1 murdered by his monks, and his
:s executed, 324.
in France, besieged by the Impe-
II. 135. Gallant defence of, by the
r Bayard, ib. The siege raised, ib.
arechal de Foix appointed to be the
governor of, II. 139. His character,
: Milanese alienated from the French
oppressions, ib. Invaded by the ec-
:al troops under Prosper Colonna,
The French driven out, 143. Op-
by the Imperial troops, 188. In-
by the French, 195. Who are dri-
by Colonna, 196. The Imperial
here mutiny for pay, but are appeased
)ne, 202. Abandoned by the French,
'er-run again by Francis, who flezes
, 219. The rench retire on news
attle of Pavia, '28. The invceliture
ited to Sforza, 240. Taken from
1 granted to the duke of Bourbon,
)ilorders committed by the Imperial
here, 266. Oppreflive imcalurcs of
i to supply his imutinous troops, 276.
ench tobces there defeated by Anto-
eyva, 312. Is again grantcd by thl
r to Stoi za, 322. I)ath of Storza,
'he prttenlioiis of Frnancis to that
389. Is Icized by the Emnperor, ib.
rquis del Guafto appointed gover-

Lttle of, between Solyman the Mag-
ind the Hungarians, 1I. 288.
.dcrs, enquiry into the fundtmcota.l

Q'q q 2 principles

principli of, IL. 447. Peculiar constitution
ofthe order of Jesuits, ib.
JMcada, Don Hugo di, the Imperial ambaf-

fador at Rome, his intrigues with cardinal
Colonna, against Pope Clement II. 273.
RIeduces the Pope to an accommodation,
274. Is defeated and killed by Andrew
Doria in a naval engagement before the har-
hour of Naples, 305.
Monlui, is sent by the count d'Enguicn to

Francis for permiflion to give battle to the
marquis de Guafto, III. 30. Obtains his
suit by his spirited arguments, 31. Com-
mands in Siena, when beieged by the mar-
quis de Marignano, III. 315. His vigo-
rous defence, ib. Is reduced by famine, and
capitulates, 316.
Monts Alcino, numbers of the citizens of Siena

retire thither after the reduaion of that city
by the Florentines, and eflablifh a free go-
vernment there, III. 317.
Moniteuicli, count of, accused and tortured for

poisoning the dauphin, charges the Empe-
ror with infligating it, II. 405.
Montmorency, marefchal, his charalcer, II. 399.

Francis adopts his plan for refifing the Em-
peror, and commits the execution to him,
ib. His precautions, ib. His troops dcfpife
his condud, 40o. Observations on his ope-
rations, 403. Is disgraced, 11I. 6. Con-
duets the army of Henry II. to join Maurice
of Saxony, and seizes Metz, 240. Dif-
fuades Henry from accepting the offered al-
liance with Pope Paul IV. 345. Commands
the French army againfR the duke of Savoy,
384. Detaches D'Andelot to relieve St.
Otlintin, ib. Expofis himelf imprudently to
an a&ion, and is defeated, 385. Is takenr
plifoner, 386. Negociatcs-apeacc between
Philip and Henry, 411. Returns to France,
and is highly hoioured by. Henry, 412. His
afliduity in forwardilng the negociations,
424. His expedient for promoting the
t; caty of Chateau Canbrefi, 427.
MAott/itr, a fruitless conference held there for

the ,cfiitutiou of the kingdom of Navarre,
11. 47.
MeotJ, Jerom, chancellor of Milan,, his cha-

rader, 11. 139. Retires from the French
cxactions in Milan to Francis Sforza, ib.
His ntrigues how reludecd alottivce. 140.

TO THE

Quiets the mutiny of the Impejri troops in
Milan, II. o02. Is difatei with the be-
baviour of Charles, 239. Intrigues against
the Emperor with Pescara, 241. Is betrayed
to the Emperor by Pccara, 243. Is areled
at his visit to Pescara, 244. Is set at liberty
by the duke of Bourbon, and becomes his
confident, 276.
MUlax in France, taken by the Imperialists, If.

135. Retaken by Francis, ib.
Mulbaufin, battle of, between the Emperor

Charles V. and the Elceor of Saxony, III..
141.
MuLby, Hafben, king of Tunis, his inhuman

treatment of his father and brothers, II. 367.
Is expelled by Barbarossa, 369. Engages
the Emperor Charles V. to retore him, 370.
Is eftablilhed again by the surrender of Tu-
nis, 375. His treaty with Charles, 376.
Munctr, Thomas, a disciple of Luther, opposes..

him with fanatical notions, II. 259. Heads
the infurredion of the peasants in Thuringia,
260. His extravagant schemes, ib. Is de-
feated and put to death, 261.
Munfler, the first Settlement of the Ana6aptifts

in that city, II. 350. The city seized by
them, 351. They eflablifh a new form of.
government there, ib. Is called Mount
Sion, 352. The bishop of, repulsed by them,
353. Is blockaded by the bishop, 356. The
city taken, 358. See Anaboptits.
Murder, the prices of compofuion for, by the

Romiih clergy, II. zoS.
Mufataha, the declared heir to Sultan Solyman,

the Magnificent, is invested with the admi-
nilfratiorof Diarbequir, Ill. 292. His fa-
ther rendered jealous of his popularity, by
the arts of Roxalana, 293. Is frangled by,.
his fither's order, 296. Hit only son mur,
dated, 297.

N
Naplts, the revenues of, mortgaged by Lannoy-

to supply the Emperor i. his exigencies, II.
220. Invaded by thoFrench under the duke
of Albany, 224. Invaded by Pope Clement
VII. 277. Treaty between the Pope. and
Iannoy viceroy of, 280. The Prince of
Orange retrcats tlitlher before Iauttrcc, 304.
lJ blockaded by Lautrec, 305. Sea engage-
uncut in thL harbour of, betweeni Andrew

Doria

Doria and Moncada, ib. Causes which dif-
appointed the French operations against,
306. Doria revolts, and opens the commu-
nication by sea again, 308. Opprefled by
the Spanilh viceroy Don Pedro de Toledo,
becomes disaffected to the Emperor Charles
V. III, 277. Ia harraffed by a Turkilh.
Ilet, 278.
3.aTfau, count of, invades Bouillon at the head

of the Imperialifs, II. 135. Invades France,
takes Moufon, and besieges Mezieres, but is

. repulsed, iA
Navarre, the kingdom of, unjustly acquired by

Ferdinand of Aragon, II. 19. D:Albert's
invasion of, defeated by cardinal Ximenes,.
35. Its cafiles dismantled, except Pampe-
luna, which Ximenes firengthens, ib. In-
vaded by Francis I. in the name of Henry
D'Albret, I32. Reduced by L'Efparre,
te French general, 133. The French dri,
ven out by the Spaniards, and L'Efparre ta.
ken prisoner, ib..
Netberlandd, the government of, .sift assumed by.

Charles V. I1 23. The Flemings averse to
Charles's going to Spain, 39. Invaded by
Francis I. king of France, 135. A truce
concluded with, by Henry VIII, of England,.
306. Invaded by Francis again, 407. A
suspension of arms there, 408. An infur,
reation at Ghent, 431. See Ghent. Is
once more invaded by Francis, II. iS. Re-
signed by the Emperor to his son Philip, 354.
A review. of the alterations in, during the
sixteenth century, 455.
Nice, a truce for ten years concluded there be.

twcen the Emperor and Francis, 413. Bc-
fieged by the.French and Turks, Ill. 18.
Nyten, treaty of, between Charles V. and

Fiancis I. of France, 11. 78. The terms of,
neglected Ly Cliarleó, 6'.
Nurcmburrgh, the c ity of; embraces the reformedl

religion, 11. 206. D)et of, plrticulIrs of
Pope Adriai's rief to, rtIfpj)itihg the re-
f0rnmrs, 207. The reply to, 208. Pro-
pet fc, a i-neral council, ib. I'rclcnts a lift of
grieviicc, «to the lope, 70). 'Ihe recess,
or edict, otf 210. 'I'lis diet of great ad-
vantatr: to the refoiinrcrs, ib. ProcecJdiigs
of a fIc-ond ; lit tli:i , Vi 2. R(ccfs of tlic
<lict, 2 1t . Ar a (cnc rnilol;od ti),ln ;Ircc .l t')
there, hutweiel tlhe J)':ljltrr Cha;jc. V. a I,
tL J'iutdtI',llt,>i 337.

O
Oran, and ether places in Barbary annexed to.

the crown of Castile, by Ximenes, II. i8.
Orange, Phillibert de Chalons, prince of, gene-

ral of the Imperial army on the death of the-
duke of Bourbon, takes the castle of St.
Angelo, and Pope Clement VII. prisoner,.
11. 287. Retires to Naples on the approach,
of Lautrec, 304. Takes his successor the.
marquis de Saluces, prisoner at Averfa, 30Q.
Orleans, duke of, delivered up to the Emperor

Charles V. with the Dauphin, as hostages
for the performance of the treaty of Madrid,
II. 254. Is married to Catharine di Medici/,
345. Becomes Dauphin by the death of his
brother, 405. See Dauphin:
-- Duke of, brother to the former, commands

the army appointed by Francis I. for the in,
vafion of Luxembourg, III. 7. Is prompted i
by envy to abandon. his conquests, and join:
his brother the Dauphin in.Roufillon, 8.
Dies, 53.;

P
Pdcheco, Donna Maria, wife to Don John de

Padillo, her artful scheme to raise money to
fiupply the army of the Holy Junta, II. i72 .
Her husband taken prisoner and executed,
177. His letter to her, 178. Raises forces
to revenge his death, 80o. . Is reduced and
retires to Portugal, I81.
Padilla, Don John de, his family and charater,

If. 155. Heads the infurredtion at Toledo,
ib. Routs the troops underRonquillo, 157.
Calls a convention of the. malcontents at
Avila, 160. . Form:; the confederacy called
the Holy Junta, 16r.. Disclaims Adrian's
authority, ib. Gets pofleffi ol of QQueen
Joanna, ib. Removcs the Holy Junta to
Tordefill.s, the p'ace ol hlr rcfidence, 167..-
Sent with troo), to Valladolid, and dep ivcs
Adrian of all power of government, 63.. Is
ILperfl(ed in the corrmand of the army of
the Junlta, by I)on Pedro de (,ir'n, .170.
Is appointed commander at the rcfignatironl
of (Giron, 172.' His army lupplicd with,
nioliy by an expedient of his.wife, 73. -
lieiteue:i 'Tlorelobaiton, 175., Takes and
pllutrers it, il. Concludes a truce with thz
olble:, i'l. I;s wounded and taken prisoner
illn a;n ation with the conc dde I'laro, 1 77.,
Is put to le.iclh, ib. His letter to his wile,
178. 1lij lttcl to tlie city of Toledo, ii,.

i'lAi,'ii:r' , .G

Palatniate, the Reformation established there

by the Ele&or Frederick, III. 56.
Palatine, count, ambassador from the diet at

Frankfort, brings Charles V. the offer of the
Imperial crown, which he accep:s, II. 62.
Pampeluna, castle of, in Navarre, its fortifica-

tions ftrengthcned by Cardinal Ximenes, II.
35. Taken by L'Efparre, the French ge-
neral for Henry D'Albret, 133. Retaken
by the French, ib.
Papacy, how liable to be affeced by the dif-

pofal of the Imperial crown, II. 54.
Paraguay, a fovcreignty eflablifhed there, by

the order of Jesuits, II. 453. The inha-
bitants of, civilized by them, 457. Pre-
cautions used by the Jesuits to preserve the
independency of their empire there, 458.
Paris, a decree published by the university of,

against Martin Luther the Reformer, II.
125. A decree of the parliament of, pu-
blifhed against the Emperor Charles V.
406.
Parma, the dutchy of, confi:med to OEtavio

Farne'e, by Pope Julius III. IIl. 209. Is
attacked by the Imperialifls and fuccclsfully
proteEted by the French, 211.
Pafu, a treaty concluded the:e between the

Emperor Charles V. and Maurice of Saxony,
III. 259. Reflections on this peace and the
conduct of Maurice, 260.
Pavia, beficged by Francis I. of France, II.

221. Vigorously defended by Antonio de
Leyva, 222. Battle of, between Francis
and the Duke of Bourbon, 226. 'Ihe Im-
perial troops in that city mutiny, 235.
Paul I . Pope, elected, II. 347. His charac-

ter, ib. Propofcs a general council to be
held at Mantua, 36?. Negociates perlon-
ally between the Emperor and Francis, 412.
Iflues a bull for a council at Mlantua, 421.
Prorogues and transfers it to Vicenza, 423.
A partial reformation of abuses by, ib. Sum-
mons the council of Trent, III. 22. Pro-
rogues it, 23. Summons it again, 46.
Grants the dutchics of Parma and 'lacentia
to his illegitimate son, 54. Deprives and
excommunicates the clectoral biflop of
Cologne, 7 1. Prclfes the Emperor to de-
clare against the Protestants, 72. Concludes
an alliance with him against the Protestants,
78. Inaifcreetly publitehs this treaty, 8o.
Hiis troops join the Emperor, 93. Rccals

them, x 12. Removes the council from Tr'ent
to Bologna, 164. Refuses the Emperor's
request to carry the council back to Trent,
ib. His resentment against the Emperor for
the murder of his son Cardinal Farnese, 167.
Is petitioned by the diet of Augsburg for
the return of the council to Trent, 169.
Eludes the complying with this request, 170.
His sentiments of the Interim published by
Charles, I77. Difmiifes the council of
Bologna, 182. Annexes Parma and Pla-
centia, to the Holy See, 187. Dies, 188..
The manner of his death inquired into, ib.
Paul IV. Pope, elc&ted, II. 339. His cha-

racter and history, 340. Founds the order
of Theatines, ib. Is the principal occasion
of establishing the inquisition in the Papal
territories, 341. Lays aside his austerity on
his election, 342. His partiality to his ne-
phews, ib. Is alienated from the Emperor
by his nephews, 344. Makes overtures to
an alliance with France, 345. Is enraged
by the recess of the diet of Augsburg, 347.
Signs a treaty with France, 348. Is in-
cluded in the truce for five years, concluded
between the Emperor and Henry, 360. His
insidious artifices to defeat this truce, 362.
Absolves Henry from his oath, and con-
cludes a new treaty with him, 366. His
violent proceedings against Philip, now
King of Spain, 376. The Campagna Ro-
mana fcized by the Duke d' Alva, 368.
Concludes a truce with Alva, 369. Con-
traft between his conduct: and that of Charles,
375. Renews his hoflilitics against Philip,
377. Is tinprovided for military operations,
378. Is reduced to make peace with Philip,
by the recal of the Duke of Guise after the
deteat of St. Q(Qintin, 392. Receives an
amh;fihdor from the Emperor Ferdinand to
notiiy his election, but refutes to fee him or
to acknowledge the Emperor, 402. Dies,
430.
Paulin, a French officer, sent ambafl.ador from

Frlaicis I. to Sultan Solyman, II. 14. His
fucccfsful iieg(ciations at the Porte, ib.
Pembroke, earl of, sent by Queen Mary of

England with a body of men to joinl the
Spanish army in the Low Countries, 382.
Perpignan, the capital of Roufhillon, belieged

by the Dauphin of France, Ill. 7. 'he
siege railed, 8.

Pefiara,

Ptfara, marquis de, takes Milan by assault,

11. 143. Drives Bonnivet back to France,
203. His generous care of the chevalier
Bayard, ib. Commands in the invasion of
Provence, 216. Besieges Marseilles, ib.
His army retires toward Italy, on the ap-
pearance of the French troops, 217. Re-
signs Milan to the French, 219. Prevails
on his Spanifl troops not to murmur at pre-
isnt for their pay, 220. Contributes to the
defeat of Francis at the battle of Pavia, 227.
Is difgufed at Francis being taken to Spain,
without hisconcurrence, 240. His resentment
inflamed by Iorone, 241. Betrays Morone's
designs to the Emperor, 243. Arrests Mo-
rone, 244. )ies, 248.
Philip, Archduke of Auiria, and father of

Charles V. visits Spain, with his wife
Joanna, II. 3. Does -honmage by the way
to Lewis XII. of France for the earldom of
of Slanders, ib. His title to the crown ac-
knowledged by the Cortei, ib. Is difgufld
with the formality cf the Spanish court, ib.
Ferdinand becomes jealous of his power, ib.
Slights his wifc, 4. Hls abrupt departure
from Spmin, ib. 'alii' through France, and
enteCs into a treaty with Lewis, 5. His
fcntitnciits onl Fcr iJ al'd's obtaining the
regency or C'.tile, 8. Requircs lerdinand
to retire to Arigon, and rcfign his regency
of C;: ;il, ib. 'I he iegcncy ofiCafile vcflid
jointly in hin. Ferdinand and Joanna, l.y
the tr.aty (,' S;!amaninca, I . Sets out for
S ':in, ;,nd i:, diivcn cn tlic coast of I'.i, .land,
wlicie li is detained thlrce iioitlhs lby Henry
VII. 1. Arrives at Corunna, lb. The
( 'illi;, in nobility tcLl.da opnlyv for him, ib.
]Fcrdinallll rfii.:s tlhe regency of C.ltilc to
him, 1. Intcivicw bctwccn theml, ib. Ac-
knoiwlctpdgcd iiirg of Callile ly the Cortles,
14. 1 )i.:, '. Jonna.'s xtiao;(ilinary con-
dlii.t i, l.It;id to liis body, 15. Scc al/ui.
Pl'i'i), l'i i icc, lon t tlie lnimpror Charles V.

his i ihl'lt (,1i tl.i( tl'ioll iccogni.cd by the
Cortes ol Ai; 'lii

o land V.i'ciii,l III. o.

Is ;c:klo)wlcdJ'cd by tli Stat,'; of (lie Nc-
tlhcrla;nds, 184. Ill ; dcportnic'nt dilgul thlic
J'lclllinlls, 185. lil ciiar.lter, 207. Is m ar-
litn to ,M.,y Qui), ,c ( F ItiiL;land, 300. 3( 3.
'1'l.c I ,lihi pai;ulimctiu t je.ilous of hinl, 305.
lii tatl r ,eligiis his iclteltiatry dominiiolis
to hliil, 34). 'Is called by his lather out of

5

England, 354. The ceremony of investing
him, ib. His father's address to him, 356.
Commiflions Cardinjl Granvelle to address
the assembly in his name, 357. Mary (.ucen-
eowagcr of Hungary resigns her regency,
ib. The dominions of Spain resigned to
him, 358. His unpolitenefs to the French
ambassador Coligni, 361. Note. The Pope's
violent proceedings against him, 366. His
scruples concerning commencing hoffilities
againff the Pope, 367. His ungrateful ne-
glea in paying his father's pension, 374.
The Pope renews hoffilities against him,
377. Assembles an army in the Low Coun-
tries against France, 380. Goes over to
England to engage that kingdom in the
war, 38r. Visits the camp at St. Quintin,
after the vitory, 387. Opposes the scheme
of penetrating to Paris, and orders the liege
of St. Quintin to be prosecuted, 388. St.
Quintin taken by aflault, 389. 'The fm.iil
advantages he reaped by these fuccf-i1cs, 390.
Builds the Escurial in memory of the battle
of St. Quintin, 391. Concludes a peace
with the l'op, 392. Reftorcs Placcntia to
Octavio Farnese, 394. Grants the invef-
titure of Siena to Corno di Medici, 396.
Enters into negociations for peace with his
prisoner Montmoreicy, 41 I. Death of Qucen
Mary, 421. Addreflis her fucceflor Eliza-
beth f)r marriage, ib. Elizabeth's motives
for rjectillg him, 423. Her evalive a!ifwer
to llim, 42. . Suipplatits hi;s fonl Don Carloo
anld matlice; Iclnry's (laughter Elizibetlh,
427. Articles of the treaty of Chateau
Cambreis, 428.
PhIilliIt, Emnmanuel, Duke of Savoy. See

Saz, oy.
P/hi./>isni, nlpliew to Andrew Doria, (lefc'is

Aloncada in a Ifea cll;iLgncit before the
lharbour of Napll.es, II. io5.
Piai/'na, ]n iarl: ,is (t.*, invades i;iranfylvmii iit

for l'cidiniit !, 11. 22 '. Mlicdpirc;fut'i
C:irdini;il M.,rtitni./.i to F'cldiii.,(l, and
olbt;aii s a co(.iiiti lilil to a.lltlil.tc lIim, 227.
Is foreo l to ,, l.tido 'l'r. inylv.iiiat, 289.
Pi/ ',rl, iliv.aidlc by lienlry VIll. 1I. 15 .

Il1riy bir'tc lby lte I)uk e to Venl mle to
rcliic , i//. Inv.iald natill t1n(l d.' the )Duke of
Sullolk, 20o. \Who p'netratcs allioft to.
]'.tris b)it is driven ba;k, ib. lnctl'cdtul, in-
'v.lion by the Iniplrialillt., 4'4.

Placcntia,.

P.lartni;a, the d'utchy of, granted together with

that of Parma by Pope Paul III. to his na-
tural son, Cardinal Farnese, III. 54. Far-
nefe, aflaflinated there, 166. Is taken pof-
felion of by the Imperial troops, ib. Re-
stored to Otavio Farnese, by Philip II. of
Spain, 394.
JPole, Cardinal, arrives in England with a le-

gantine commiflion, III. 304. Endeavours
to mediate a peace between the Emperor and
the King of France, without ruccefs, 325.
Is recalled from the court of England, by
Pope Paul IV. 377.
Printing, its effets on the progress of the Re-

formation, II. 115.
Prague, its privileges abridged by Ferdinand

King of Bohemia, III. 16 .
.tProteflants, the derivation of the name, II.

327. Of whom they originally consisted,
ib. A severe decree published against them
by the Emperor, 331. They enter into
a league, 332. See Smalkalde. Renew their
league, and apply to Francis King of France,
and Henry VIIf. of England, for protec-
tion, 334. Are secretly encouraged by
Francis, ib. Receive a supply of money
from Henry, 336. Terms of the pacifica-
tion agreed to between them and the Em-
peror at Nuremburg, 337. Assist the
Emperor againit the Turks, 338. Their
negociations with the Pope, relative to a
general council, 340. Renew the league
of Smalkalde for ten years, 362. The mo-
tives for refusing to assist the King of France
against the Emperor, 382. Refuse to ac-
knowledge the council summoned by the
Pope at Mantua, 422. A conference be-
tween their principal divines and a deputa-
tion of C itholicks, at Ratisbon, 462. This
conference how rendered fruitless, 464.
Obtain a private grant from Charles in their
favour, 465. Drive the Duke of Brunf-
wick from his dominions, III. 24. All
rigoious edicts against them suspended by a
reccfs of the diet of Spires, 27. Their
remonftrallccs to Ferdinand at the diet of
Worms, 48. Their inflexible adherence to
the recess of Spires, 49. Disclaim all con-
nection with the council of Trent, 5o. Are
Itrcngtlcnied by the acccflion of Frederick
Elecqor l'alatiiir, 6. Are alarmed at the pro-
cecdings of the Emperor, 59. 77. The

Emperor leagues with the Pope againlt them,
78. Prepare to resist the Emperor, 82.
-Levy an army, 86. The operations of the
army diitraaed by thejoint commanders, 92.
The army dispersed, Io6. The Eletor of
Saxony reduced, I42. The landgrave de-
·ceived by treaty and confined, 154. The
Emperor's cruel treatment of them, I58.
The Interim, a system of theology recom-
mended by the Emperor to the diet at Augf-
burg, 174. Are promised protection by the
Emperor at the council of Trent, 202. The
Emperor proceeds rigorously against them,
213. Their deputies obtain a fafe-condu&t
from the Emperor, but are refused by the
council, 221. Maurice of Saxony raises an
army in their cause, 237. See Maurice.
Treaty of Paffau, 259. The Protestant
Princes again unite to strengthen the Pro-
teftant interest, 33I. Recess of the diet of
Augsburg on the fubjeat of religion, 332.
Why originally averse to the principles of
toleration, 336.
Provence, is laid waste by the marefchal Mont-

morency on the approach of the Emperor
Charles V. II. 399. Is entered by the Em-
peror, 400. The disastrous retreat of the
Emperor from, 403.
Pruftia, when conquered by the Teutonick

order, II. 263. Is erelced into a dutchy,
and finally into a kingdom, and enjoyed by
the house of Brandenburgh, 264.

R
Ratifson, a conference between a deputation of

Proteflant and Catholick divines, before
the Emperor and diet there, II. 462. This
conference how rendered fruitless, 464.
A diet opened there by the Emperor, III.
74. The Catholick members of, assert the
authority of the council of Trent, 75. The
Protestants present a memorial against it,
76. The Protestant deputies retire, 77.
Reformation in religion, the rife of, explained,

II. 78. The diet at Worms called by
Charles V. to check the progre's of, ib. Ac-
count of Martin Luther, the Reformer, 82.
Beginning of in Switzerland by Zuinglius,
94. State of, in Germany, at the arrival
of Charles V. 97. Reflection on the con-
duct of the court of Rome toward Luther,
ib. And on Luther's conduct, 99. Inquiry

8 into

into the causes which contributed to the
progress of, lot. Observations on the pon-
tificate of Alexander VI. and Julius II. 102.
The immoral lives of the Romish clergy,
103. The progress of, favoured by the in-
vention of printing, 1 5. And the revival
of learning, 116. The great progress of, in
Germany, 206. Advantages derived to, from
the diet at Nuremburgh, 210. Its tendency
in favour of civil liber;y, 258. The dif-
fenfions between the Emperor and the Pope,
favourable to, 290. The great spread of,
among the German Princrs, 324. The
confession of Augsburg drawn up by Melanc-
thon, 329. Causes which led to that of
England, 3 .5 The excesses it gave rife to,
348. See Prottflants, Maurice, and Smal-
kalde. Is eftiblifhed in Saxony, 427. The
great alteration occasioned by, in the court
of Rome, III. 445. Contributed to im-
prove both the morals and learning of the
Romish church, 449.
Reggio, invested by the French, who are re-

pulsed by the governor Guicciardini the
historian, II. 140.
RemonJirance of grievances drawn up by the

Holy Junta, the particulars of, 11. I65.
Remarks on, 167.
Reverje, a deed To called, signed by the arch-

duke Ferdinand on being elected King of
Bohemia, 11. 289.
Rheggio, plundered and burnt by Barbarofra,

Ill. 18.
Rhodes, the island of, besieged by Solyman

the Magnificent, II. 152. Taken by him.
153. The island of Malta granted to the
knights of, by the Emperor Charles V. ib.
Richlieu, Cardinal, his remarks on De Retz's

hiflory of Ficlco's conspiracy, 11. 125.

rote.
Rincon, the French ambassador at the Porte,

the motives of his return to France, III. 2.
Is murdered in his journey back to Contian-
tinoble, by order of the Imperial governor
of the Milanese, 3.
Rome, reflections on the conduct of the court

of, refpccting the proceedings against Martin
Lutther, I1. 98. The exorbitant wealth of
the church of, previous to the Reformation,

0o6. Venality of, 113. flow it drained
other countries of their wealth, ib. The
dty Jeized by Cardinal Colonna, and Pope

VOL. III.

Clement VII. befie-ed in the castle of -'t.
Angelo, 274. The city taken by the Ihn-
perialifts, and Bourbon killed, 285. Ii
plundered, 286. The great revolution ill
the court of, during the sixteenth centu v,
Ill. 444. How afledted by the revolt of
Luther, 445. The spirit of its government
changed by, 44..
Ronquillo, sent by Cardinal Adrian with troows

to suppress the infurrction in Segovia, 1!.
157. Is routed by them, ib.
Rovcre. Francesco Maria de, reflored to his

dutchy of Urbino, by Pope Adrian, I!. 188'.
Roxalana, a Ruffian captive becomes the fa-

vourite miftrcfs of Sultan Solyman the Mag-
nificent, III. 289. Her only daughter mar-
ried to Ruftan the Gran I Vizier, 293. Pro-
cures herrelf to be decl ired a free woman by
the Sultan, 291. Is formally married to
him, ib. Renders Solyman jealous of the
virtues of his son Muflapha, 292. Mul-
tapha strangled, 296.
RuJian, Grand Vificr to S)lyman the Magni-

ficent, is married to his daughter by Roxa-
lana, 111. 290. Enters into Roxalani's
scheme to ruin Solyrrnan's fin MufRapha, ib.
Is sent with an army to destroy him, 2;:4.
Draws Solyman to the army by false reports,
295.

S
Salamanca, treaty of, between Ferdinand of

Aragon, and his (on-in-law Philip, 11. I r.
Sa.erno, Prince of, heads the dirlff'eced Nea-

politans, against the oppreflions of the
viceroy Don Pedro de Toledo, III. 278.
Solicits aid from Henry II. of France, who
infligates the Tuiks to invade Naples, ib.
Saluces, tarquis de, fuccceds Lautrec in the

command of the French arsmy befcre Naples,
11. 309. Retires to Averfa, whern he is
taken prisoner by the Prince of Orange, ib.
Betrays his charge in Piedmont, 3(97
Sancere, count de, defends St. I)ifiere, againfr

the kimperor Charles, 111. 34. Is deceived
into a surrender by thie Cardinal Granvellc,
36.
Sauvage, a Fleming, made chancellor of Caf-

tile by Charles, on the death of Ximenes,
11. 44. I-Is extortions, ib.
Savona, is foitified, and its harbour cleared by

the French to favour its rivalfhip with Ge-
noa, 1I, 307.

R r r Svoy,

SaOy, a view of the ta'e of, during the fix-

teenth century, I1I. 454.
,- Charles Duke of, marries Beatrix of

Portugal, sifter to the Emperor Charles V.
II. 384. The cause of Francis's difplca-
sure against him, ib. His territories over-
run by the French troops, '85. Geneva
recovers its liberty, 386. His fitua;ion by
the truce at Nice, between the Emperor and
Francis, 414. Is btfitgcd at Nice, by tle
French and Turk,, 11l. 18.
- Emmanuel Phillibcrt Duke of, appointed

by Philip of Spain to command his army in
the Low Countries, 382. Invests St. Quintin,
ib. Defeats i)'Anrelot in an endeavour to
join the garrison, 334. But does not hinder
him from entering the town, 385. Defeats
the C,.nftable Montmorency, and takes him
prisoner, ib. Is graciously visited in the canip
by Philip, 387. Takes St. Quintin by aflault,
389. Assists Montmorency in negociating
peace between Philip and Henry, 412. Mar-
ries Henry's sifter Elizabeth, 427. 430.
Sar.'ry, Eilctor of, appointed joint commander

of the army of the Proteflant league, with
the landgrave of Hesse, III. 91. Their
charadters compared, 92. Opposes the
.andgrave's intention of giving battle to
the Emperor, 95. His Electorate seized
by Maurice, 1o4. 'The army of the league
disperse, io6. Recovers Saxony, 1 o. Is
ainuecd by Maurice with a negociation, 1 l I.
Raises an army to defend hihmfllf against the
i:mpciior, 136. Is irresolute in his meafurcs,
37 . Charles paflns the Elbe, 138. Is at-
tacked by the Inperialifs, 141. Is taken
prifoncr and harlhly received by the Empe-
ror, 14i. Is condemned to death by a court
martial, 145. lis rcfolution on the occa-
lion, 146. Is inditced by regard to his fa-
mriily to iur render his electoratc, 148. Re-
tfues the Emperoi's dcfire of his approving
the Interim, 1 8. The rigour of his con-
finement increased, ib. Js carried by the
Emperor with him into the Netherlanis,
183. Is rclcafed by the Emnperor on Mau-
rire taking arins againlt him, but chules to
continue with the Emperor, 245. (btains
his liberty after the treaty of Panf.ll, 265.
----- George uke of, an enemy to the

Reformation, II. 426. Hi.s death an al-
Want;ge to the Reformation, ib. Thie Pio.

8

teftant religion eflablifhcd by Henry Duke
of, 427. . Henry is succeedcd by his son
Maurice, III. 20. His motives for not ac-
ceding to the league of Sma!kaldc, ib.
Marches to the aflifiance of Ferdinand in
Hungary, ib. Joins the Emperor against
the Proteltants, 86. Ioo. See Maurirce.
Sckertel, Sebastian, a commander in the army

of the Protestant league, his vigorous com-
mencement of hoflilities, III. 9o. Is in-
judiciously recalled, 91. Is expelled from
Augsburg on the dispersion of the Protestant
army, lo8.
Scstland, James V. of, married to Mary of

Guise, duchefs-dowager of Longueville, II.
420. Death of James and accession of his
infant daughter Mary, III. 12. Mary con-
tracted to the Dauphin of France, 168.
The marriage celebrated, 405. Mary as-
fumes the title and arms of England on the
death of Mary of England, 423. Included
in the treaty of Chateau Cambrefis, 426.
Alteration in the condu& of England to-
ward, 443.
Sea7s in religion, refleAtions on the origin of,

II. 348.
Segovia, an infurretion there, on account of

their representative Tordefillas voting for the
donative toCharlesV. II. 155. He is kill-
ed by the populace, 156. The insurgents
there defeat Ronquillo, sent to suppress them
by Cardinal Adrian, 157. Surrenders after
the battle of Villal.r, 179.
Selim II. Sultan, extirpates the Mamalukes, and

adds Egypt and Syria to his empire, II. 50.
Conlidered as formidable to the European
powers, ib.
Sforza obtains of Charles V. the invcftiture of

Milan, II. 240. Forfeits the dutchy, by his
intrigues with Moroni, 244. Joins in a
c.ague agaiiflt Ch.rles for the recovery of
Milan, 266. Is t',tccd to fui rcnder Milan
to the Imperialists, 271. Obtains agiin of
the Emperor tl:( ivcltiture ot Milan, 322.
Enters into a pirivate treaty wilh I'raucis,
379. Mcrveille Fiancis's envoy executed
for murder, ib. I)is, '8H8.
Siena, the inhabitant, of, inljplore the affifiance

of the Emperor Charles V. to defend 'hieni
againlt their irolbles, 11. 276. The Impe-
rial troops endeavour to cnflave theln, i/.
Regain pofiiEilon of their city, 277. Re-

pulfc
T H.E

pulse an attack as the Germans, 2E8. Is reace to
besieged by the marquis deMarignano, 315. disperse,
The commanderMonluc repulses the afaults duced, I
vigorously, ib. The town reduced by fa- confined.
mine, 316. Numbers of the citizens retire, by the E
and eflablifh a free government at Monte Solytnan the
Alcino, 317. The remaining citizens op- throne, I
pressed, ib. And flock to Monte Alcino, Belgrade
318. Is granted by the Emperor to his son ib. Del
Philip, ib. The invefliture given by Philip 288. H
to Cosmo di Medici, 396. foners he
Sieverhaufen, battle of, between Maurice of 322. Ent

Saxony, and Albert of Brandenburgh, III. but is for
282. 338. 1
Sion, Cardinal of, his scheme for weakening proteclio

the French army in the Milanese, 1I. 143. with Fra
Leaves the Imperial army to attend the con- pares to
clave on the death of Leo X. 144. phen Kit
Smalkalde, the Protestants enter into a league nand, 4(

there, f.:r their mutual support, II. 332. 469. O
The league renewed at a second meeting ment of
there, 334. The league of, renewed for ten Conclude
years, 362. A manifesto, refusing to ac- Loses T
kno,;ledge a council called by the Pope, coafs ofl
422. The King of Denmark joins the army int
league, 424. The Princes-of, protest againf Isabella a
the authority of the Imperial chamber, and His viole
the recess of the diet at Nuremburg, III. Roxalana
24. Publifl a manifeffo againfi the pro- a free wo
ceedings of the council of Trent, 58. Are ib. Is re
alarmed at the proceedings of the Emperor, son Mufl
59. A want of unity among the members, 293. 0
60. The views of the Elector of Saxony, Orders tl
and the Landgrave, explained, ib. Appear Spain, the t
at the diet of Ratisbon by deputies, 74. Their of Arago
deputies protefi againfi the council of Trent, aspires to
76. Their deputies alarmed at the Empc- of Maxin-
ror's proceedings and declarations, leave the Reflefior
diet, 77. The Emperor leagues with the 6r. Cha
Pope againfi them, 78. Prepare to resist for Germ:
theEmpcior, 82. Are disappointed in their A view o
application to the Venetians and Swiss, 83. account (
As also with Henry VIII. and Francis, 84. Holy Juni
Assemble a large army, 86. Are put under an union (
the b.n of the Empire, 88. Declare w;r tive provi
against the Emperor, 90. Hoflilities begun Charles t
by Schertel, ib. They recal him, 91. The Jllnancc o
l'.'tSor of Sixony and Landgrave of Htfe ldecs, 430.
appointcd joint commande s of' their army, 7. Tle
ih. 'T'he cllaraflcrs of the two commanders to his foi
compared, 92. Their opcration; difllradld Charles, a
by this joint command, i!,. Ca nnonade the place (if h
Emperor's canip, 96.. Make ovcrtures of regal )powe

VOLUME S.

the Emperor, o16. Their arny
ib. The EleEtor of Saxony re-
I42. The Landgrave deceived and

1, 54. 'heir warlike stores seized
mperor, 158. See Maurie.
Magnificent, ascends the Ottoman
I.. 77. Invades Hungary and takes
, I52. Takes the ifand of Rhodes,
feats the Hungarians at Mohacz,
.is successes, and the number of pri-
carried away, 289. Besieges Vienna,
:ers Hungary again with a vaftarmy,
:ed to retire by the EmperorCharles,
akes Barbarossa the pirate under his
n, 366. Concludes an alliance
ncis King of France, 410. Pre-
invade Naples, ib. Proteets Ste.
ig of Hungary, and defeats Ferdi-
68. Seizes Hungary for hinfilf,
ver-runs Hungary again, in fulfill-
his treaty with Francis, III. 17.
es a truce with the Emperor, 73.
ranfylvania, 225. Ravages the
Italy, 255, 278. Carries a mighty
to Hungary, 256. Re-efltblifhcs
nd her son in Transylvania, 289.
:nt attachment to his concubine
i, ib. Is prevailed on to declare her
man, 291. Formally marries her,
enderedjealous of the virtues of his
tapha, by the arts of Roxalana,
rders him to be firangled, 296.
he murder of Muftapha's son, 297.
slate of, at the death of Ferdinand
on, II. 23. Charles King of,
the Imperial crown on the deatl
iilian, 49. Is eledled Emperor, 59.
is of the Spaniaids on that event,
lrles appoints viceroys, and departs
any, 66. Infurretions there, 155.
f the feudal fyflcrn in, 159. An
of the confederacy, ternmel the
ta, 160. Caufcs which inel enrtc l
of the malcontents in the relpec-
inces, 85. 'l'he moderation of
oward them on his arrival, 186.
f the hanughty spirit of the gran-

Is invaded by the J)aiuphin, II.

dominionis (f, rdeigned by Charlec
1 Philip, 358. The arrival on'
nd his ireceltioll there, 373. T'1he
iis retrc.it dclirihcd, 374. 'The
;r in, how enlarged by Charkls,

Rrr 2 434.

434. The foreign acquisitions added to,
435. See Aragon, Ca/ilb, Galicia, alencia,
Cortes, Germanada, and Holy Junta.
Spires, diet of, its proceedings relative to the

Reformation, II. 29o. Another diet called
there by the Emperor, 325. Another diet
at, 111. 25. Recess of, in favour of the Pro-
teflants, 27.
Spiritual cenfurcs of the Romish church, the

dreadful effects of, II. lo9.
St. Di/ir, in Champagne, inveRted by the Em-

peror, III. 34 Is obtained by the artifice of
cardinal Granvel!c, 36.
St. 7u7ius, moraftery of, in Plazencia, is cho-

fen by the Emperor Charles V. for his re-
treat after his resignation, III. 374. His
situation described, 375. His apartments,
ib.
St. !.uintin, invefled by the Spanish troops, and

defended by admiral Coligni, III. 383.
D'Andelot defeated in an endeavour to join
the garrifcn, 34.. But enters the town,
385. Montmorency defeated by the duke
of Savoy, ib. The town taken by aflault,
389.
Strozzi, Peter, some account of, III. 312. Is

intruted with the command of the French
army in Italy, 313. Is defeated by the
marquis de Marignano, 314.
Siabia, an infurrecion of the peasants against

the nobles theec, II. 256. They publish
a memorial of their grievances, 257. The
insurgents dispersed, 258. The Protestant
religion suppresscd there by the Emperor
Charles V. II. 213.
Sffolk, duke of, invades Picardy, penetrates

almost to Paris, but is driven back, II. 200.
Surrey, earl of, created high admiral to the

nEmperor Charles V. II. 15o. Obliged to
retire out of Picardy by the duke de Ven-
dome, 15 .
widen, a funimary view of the revolutions
il, during the sixteenth century, III. 456.
Swiuzerland, the cantons of, cfpoulc the preten-

sion. of Cha les V. to the Imperial crown,
II. 5 3. (omlnci c incelt of the Reforma-
tion there iy Zuin;,liiis, 94.. The rcgula-
tion under which they hire out their troops,
142. The precipitate battle, infifled on by
their troops utnder Lautrec, loll, 1 47.
Syria, how and by whom added to the Ottoman

Empire, ii. 50.

TO THE

T
Tirmes, marefchal de, governor of Calais,

takes Dunkirk by storm, III. 406. Engages
the count of Egmont, and is defeated by the
accidental arrival of an English squadron on
the coast, 407. Is taken prisoner, ib.
Terrut-ane, taken and demolished by the Em-

peror Charles V. III. 286.
Tetzel, a Dominican friar, his shameful con-

du& in the sale of Indulgences in Germany,
11. 8o. His form of absolution, and recom-
mendation of the virtues of Indulgences, ib.
Note. His debauched course of life, 81.
Publilhes theses against Luther, 85.
Teutonic order, a character of, II. 263. Con-

quer the province of Pruflia, ib. Their
grand mater Albert made duke of Prussia,
264.
Theatines, the order of, by whom founded, III.

340.
Thionviile, in Luxembourg, taken by the duke

of Guise, III. 4c6.
7huringia, an infurredion of the peasants

there, against the nobility, II. 258. The
fanatical notions inspired into them by Tho-
mas Muncer, 260. Their disorderly army
defeated, 261.
Toledo, infurrestion in, at the departure of

Charles V. for Germany, 1I. 66, 155. The
cathedral of, firipped of its riches to support
the army of the Holy Junta, 173. Pa-
dillo's letter to, at his execution, 178. Is
instigated to continue in arms by Padillo's
wife, 180. Isreduced, 181.
Toledo, Ludovico de, nephew to Cosmo di Me-

dici sent by his uncle to negociate with
Philip II. of Spain for the invefliture of
Siena, III. 395.
Toledo, Don Pedro de, viceroy of Naples, op-

presses the Neapolitans, III. 278. And oc-
caslons the Turks to ravage the coais of
Naples, ib.
oleration, rcflections on the progress of, in
Germany, 111. 333. Why mutually allowed
among the ancient Heathens, 334. How
the primitive Chriffians became averse to, ib.
Tonorri, Paul, a Francifcanl monk, archbilhop

of Golocza, is made general of the lungia-
rian army against Solyman the Magnificent,
and is defcated by him, II. 288.
Tordfillas, the rcfidcnce of Queen Joanna, the

confederacy of malcontents called the Holyr

Junta,

Junta, removed thither, II. i62. The
Queen taken there by the conde de Haro,
171.
Tordefillas, one of the representatives of Sego-

via, killed by the populace for voting the do-
na:ive to Charles V. at the Cortes aflembled
in Galicia, II. 1 55.
Tratjylvania, is surrendered to Ferdinand King

of the Romans, by Queen Isabella, II1. 225.
Tremoiii le, La, drives the English under the

duke of Suffolk out of Picardy, 1I. 200.
Trent, the council of, summoned, 111. 22.

Prorogued, 23. Again summoned, 46. Is
opened, 56. Declares the apocr) phal scrip-
tures canonical, 70. Eflablifhes the autho-
rity of the church traditions, 71. The coun-
cil, on rumours of an infection in the city,
is translated to Bologna, 164. Henry II. of
France protefits against the council, 2r2.
The council breaks up on the approach of
Maurice of Saxony, 245. Historical remarks
on this council, 246. Characers of its hi-
ftorians, 247.
Trent, cardinal of, sent by the Emperor Charles

V. to conclude an alliance with the Pope,
Il. 76. The nature of this treaty, 78.
Tunis, the means of its coming under the power

of Barbarossa, traced, II. 367. The Empe-
ror and other Chriflian powers unite to ex-
pel Barbarossa, and restore Muley Hafcen,
370. Is taken by the Emperor, 375. Muley
-lafcen restored, and his treaty with Charles,
376.
Tuscany, a reviewof the irate of, during the fix-

teenth century, 1II. 453.

V.
Valencia, an infurrealion in, IH. 62. The

people there greatly oppreficd by the nobl s,
63. The nobles lefufc to asi-mble the
Cortes except the King is pref-nt, ib.
Charles authrifes the people to continue in
arms, ib. 'lhey expel the nobles, 64. As-
fociatc under the CGermana./a, andu appoint
their own Imagifratcs, ib. J)on )iego cde
Mendora, Conde de Pel;to, appointed re-
Cent, on the departure of Cl.allcs fbo (Ger-
many, 66. The Gcrlnanal;da refcfie to lay
down their arms, 187. Dcf'at the nobles
in fIvcral aftions, 184. Are at length
routed by the ctnde de Melito, ib. The

t

moderation of Charles toward the Insurgents
on his arrival, 186.

Fa'entinois, duchess of; fee Diana of Poitiers.
Valladlid, the firit public entry of Charles V.

to that city, 11. 43. The inhabitants rife,
burn Fonleca's house, and fortify the town,
II. 158. Surrenders after the battle of Va-
lalar, and diffolutien of the HolyJunta, 179.
[aucelles, treaty of, between Charles V. and

Henry II. of France, III. 359.
Vendome, duke of, his plan of operations in op-

posing the progress of the invasion of Picardy
by Henry VIII. II. x51. Obliges him to
retire, ib.
Fenice, the republic of, incline in favour of the

pretensions of Francis I. of France, to the-
Imperial crown, 1I. 53.' Their views and
apprehensions on the approaching rupture
between the Emperor Charles V. and Frarn-
cis, 69. Leagues with the Emperor against
Francis, 189. A final accommodation be-
tween, and the Emperor, 322. Refuies to-
enter into the league of the Italian fiates,
formed by the Emperor, 341. A review of
the slate of that republic during the sixteenth
century, 11I. 452.
Ferrina, the confident of the count of La-

vagno, encourages him in his scheme of
overturning the government of Genoa, Ilf.
I 16. Is proteted by Francis on the ruin of
that conlpiracy, 1 I.
Vielleville, the French governor of Metz, de-

tc6ts father Leonard's conspiracy to betray
the city to the lirperialifls, III. 322. i.xe-
cutes the conspirators, 324.
Vienna, is 'besiegcd by Sultan Solyman the

Magnificent, 11. 32?.
Villlar, battle of, beiween Padilla, and the conde

de Haro, II. 176.
Villcna, marquis dc, his fpiiited reply to the re-

qucft of the llpcror to lolge Bourbon ill
his pLalcc, 1I. 247.
Ulm, the ov( rnimeit of that city violently al-

tered, and its reformed niniflcrs callicl away
in chains, by the Emperor Charles V. IIL
181.
Un.trd Provinces, of the Nctherlandi.s, a hlitf

view of their revult againit the dominnion of
Spamli, II1. 455.
U,tino, ieltored by Pop' Adrian to Francclio

Maria de Ruver:, 11. 188..

WYallp,,

W
Wallop, Sir John, joins the Emperor CharlesV.

at the siege of l.andrecy, with a body of
Englilh troops, II. 17.
War, the method of carrying on in Europe,

how improved at this period from the prac-
tice of eariier ages, II. I99. General re-
fictions on the viciflitudes of, 11I. 430.
Wartburg, Martin Luther concealed there by

the Elcttor of Saxony, II. 124.
/enltwotth, lord, governor of Calais, remon-
firates in vain with the English privy coun-
cil to provide for its security, II1. 399. Is
attacked by the duke of Guise, and forced to
capitulate, 400.
F/ittemhbrg, invefied by the EmperorCharlesV.

and defended by Sybilla of Cleves, wife to
the Eletor of Saxony, lII. 143.
-Jffey, cardinal, his riff, character, and influ-

ence over Henry VIII. of England, 11. 72.
Receives a pension from Francis I. of France,
73. And from the Emperor Charles V.
ib. Detached from the French interest by
the latter, 74. Inclines Henry to join the
Emperor against Francis, 127. Sent by
Henry to Calais, to negociate an accommo-
dation between the Emperor and Francis,
136. Has an interview with Charles at
Bruges, and concludes a league with him on
the part of Henry, against France, 137.
Meditates revenge against Charles on his fe-
tond disappointment of the Papacy by the
.eleaion of Clement VII. 198. Obtains of
Clement a legatine commission in England
for life, 198. Negociates a league with
Francis against the Emperor, 294.
A1orms, a diet called there by Charles V. to

check the progress of the Reformers, 1I. 77.
Proceedings of, 121. Martin Luther cited
before it, 178. Refufts to retract his opi-
nions, 12q. An cdiC published against
h:m, ib. Diet at, op ned, 1II. 47.
7f'uirt,.rmbrg, Ulric duke of, why expelled his

dominions, II. 359. Recovers his donii.i-
ons by the aflifance of Francis King of
France, and receives the l'roteltant Icligion,
3:60.
l/yat, Sir Thomas, raises an infit relion in

Kent againit (2Quecn Mary of E:nglandl, oi
;ccnirnt of the Spaniil Inatcl, llJ. 302. 1A
fulducd and puniflcd, ib.

Ximenes, archbishop of Toledo, adheres to Ser-

dinand of Aragon, in his dispute with the
archduke Philip concerning the regency of
Caffile, II. 9. Espouses Ferdinand's claim
to the regency of Caflile on Philip's death,
17. Conquers Oran, and other places in
Barbary, for the crown of Catile, 18. Ap-
pointed regent of Castile, by Ferdinand's
will, until-the arrival of Charles V. in Spain,
25. His rife and character, ib. Admits
the claim to the regency of cardinal Adrian,
sent with that commiflion by Charles, and
executes it jointly with him, 27. Takes
the infant Don Ferdinand to Madrid under
his own eye, ib. Procures Charles, who
assumed the regal title, to be acknow-
ledged by the Castilian nobility, 29.
Schemes to extend the regal prerogative, ib.
Depresses the nobility, 30. Frees the King
from the feudal limitations, and eftablithes a
regal army to check the barons, 31. Sup-
presses a mutiny headed by the grandees, ib.
Resumes the grants of Ferdinand to his no-
bles, 32. His prudent application of the
revenue, ib. His bold aflertion of his autho-
rity to the discontented nobles, 33. Other
aflociates in the regency appointed at the
infligation of the F lemiih courtiers, 34. Re-
tains the superior management, ib. De-
feats John D'Albert's invasion of Navarre,
35. Dismantles all the caffles there, ex-
cept Pampeluna, which he flrengthens, ib.
The troops lent by him against Barbarofla
defeated, and his equanimity on that otca-
sion, 36. Alarmed at the corruption of the
Flemish court, he persuades Charles to visit
Spain, 37. Falls sick on his journey to
meet Charles at his arrival, 41. His letter
of council to Charles, ib. Requefis an in-
terview, ib. T'he ingratitude of Charles to
him, 42. His death, ih. His charater,
lb. Reverence paid to his memory by the
Spaniards, 43.

Z
Zan.tra, biihop of, railis a regiment qs i icfls

to defend 'I'ordefillas, for the Holy Junta,
which is forced by the conde de Haro, 11.
171. Zuiil.iiui, attacks the sale of Indulgences at

Zuiich in Switzerland, II. 94.
F I N I S.

# ERRATA.

E R RATA.

VOL. II.
LPge 22, 1. 8, for Mafler of the Sentences, read The book of Sentences.

32, 1. Io, for titles, read title.
38, 1. 16, for Bouffer, read Gouflier.
10o, . 17, for country, read countries.
117, 1. 23, for opinions, read ignorance.
118, i. 3, for Reuchlia, read Reuchlin.
231, 1. 14, for example, read her example.
274, 1. I7, for were, read was.
279, . 7, for when, read where.
291, 1. 3, for appealed, read he appealed.
349, 1. 20, for motion, read motions.
440, 1. 14, for do, read to do.

V O L. III.

Ix6, 1. 7, for publick, read Republick.
140, 1. penult, for light troops, read the light troops,
143, 1. 19, for would, read could.
224, 1. antepenult, for trusting, read difirufiing.
226, 1. 13, for Emperor, read Empire.
298, 1. 1I, dele he.
317, 1. 4. for their, read its.
VOL. III.

Sss
