THE
HISTORY

O F THE
REIGN

0 F THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

V 0 L. II.

*\

HI STOR R

OF THE
R E ! G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V,

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.
PRINCIPAL of the University of EDINBURGH, and HIS-

TORIOGRAPHER to his MAJESTY for SCOTLAND.

V O L. I.

D U B L I N:
Printed for W. and W. SMITH, A. LF.ATHLEY, G.

FAULKNER, S. POWELL, P. WILSON, J. EXSHAW,
H. SAUNDERS, W. WHITESTONE, W. SLEATER,
L. FLIN, B. GRIERSON, E. LYNCH, D. CHAMBER-
.AINE, J. POTTS, J. HOEY, jun. J. WILLIAMS,
J. MITCHELL, W. COLLES, J. MILIKEN, C.ING-
HAM, and J. PORTER, Booksellers.

M.DCC.LXIX.

# BOOK I.

THE

I~~ ~

~~~~~~~. -.. .
T. '

T H E
HI S T OR Y

I , . *

. i

,
RE i G N-

O F T H E
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

B 0 0 K I.
CJH HARLES V. was born at Ghent on the BOOK I.

twenty-fourth day of February, in the B--
year one thousand five hundred. His hirsle fV.
father, Philip the Handrome, Archduke

of Austria, was the son of the Emperor Maximi-
lian, and of Mary, the only dhild of Charles the
Bold, the last prinee of the house of Burgundy.
His mother, Joanna, was the second daughter of
Ferdinand and Isabella, king and queen ofCagiile
and Aragon.

A LONG train of fort.unate events had opened Hi donu-

the way for this young prince to the inheritance of ,,,,
more extensive dominions, than any European rnoo- by wh:b he

VOL. 11 B narch, `Cq.:ui

BooK I. narch, since Charles the Great, had possessed. Each
'' ^' of his anceflors had acquired kingdoms or provin-

ces, towards which their profpeEt of fucceflion was
extremely remote. The rich poffeflions of Mary
of Burgundy were destined for another family, she
having been contracted by her father to the only son
of Lewis XI. of France; but that capricious mo-
narch, indulging his hatred to her family, chose
rather to strip her of part of her territories by force,
than to secure the whole by marriage; and by this
mifcondut, fatal to his posterity, threw all the
Netherlands and Franche Comt6 into the hands of
a rival. Isabella, the daughter of John II. of Caf-
tile, far from having any profpet of that noble in-
heritance which she transmitted to her grandson,
passed the early part of her life in obscurity and in-
digence; but the Castilians, exasperated against
her brother Henry IV. an ill-advifed and vicious
prince, publickly charged him with impotence, and
his queen with adultery; and, upon his demise, re-
jeting Joanna, whom the King had uniformly, and
even on his death-bed, owned to be his lawful
daughter, and whom an assembly of the flates had
acknowledged to be the heir of his kingdom, they
obliged her to retire into Portugal, and placed Ifa-
bella on the throne of Castile. Ferdinand owed the
crown of Aragon to the unexpeded death of his
elder brother, and acquired the kingdoms of Na-
ples and Sicily by violating the faith of treaties,
and disregarding the ties of blood. To all there
kingdoms, Christopher Columbus, by an effort of
genius and of intrepidity, the boldest and most fuc-
cefsful that is recorded in the annals of mankind,
added a new world, the wealth of which was one
considerable source of the power and grandeur of
the Spanish monarchs.

P1';p and DON JOHN, the only son of Ferdinand and Ifa-
Joanna, his
ttherani bella, and their eldest daughter, the queen of Por-
mother, vpi, tugal,

*~~~~~~~I I

tigal, being cut off in the flower of youth, all BooK I.
their hopes centered in Joanna and her posterity. -v-'
But as her husband, the Archduke, was a stranger
to the Spaniards, it was thought expedient to invite
him into Spain, that by residing among them, he
might aecuftom himself to their laws and manners;
and it was expected that the Cortes, or aifembly of
itates, whose authority was then so great in Spain,
that no title to the crown was reckoned valid unless
it received their sanction, would acknowledge his
right of succession, together with that of the Infan-
ta, his wife. Philip and Joanna, passing through
France in their way to Spain, were entertained in ISoz.
that kingdom with the utmost magnificence. The
Archduke did homage to Lewis XII. for the earldom
of Slanders, and took his feat as a peer of the realm
in the parliament of Paris. They were received in
Spain with every mark of honour that the parental
affection of Ferdinand and Isabella, or the refped
of their subjects, could devise; and their title to
the crown was soon after acknowledged by the
Cortes of both kingdoms.

B UT amidst these outward appearances of satis- Ferdinand

faction and joy, some secret uneasiness preyed upon ealos of
the mind of each of thete princes. The stately power.
and reserved ceremonial of the Spanish court, was
so burdensome to Philip, a prince young, gay, as-
fable, fond of society and of pleasure, that he soon
began to express a desire of returning to his native
country, the manners of which were more suited to
his temper. Ferdinand, observing the declining
health of his queen, with whose life his right to the
government of Castile must cease, easily foresaw,
that a prince of Philip's dilpofition, and who al-
ready discovered an extreme impatience to reign,
would never content to his reiaining any degree of
authority in that kingdom; and the prospect of this

k d 2 diminution

BooK I. diminution of his power, awakened thejealoufy of
'--v-- that ambitious monarch.

Ifabella'sfo- ISABELLA beheld, with the sentiments natural to
licitude,
with refpea a mother, the indifference and neglet with which
to him and the Archduke treated her daughter, who was defti-
er dauh tute of all those beauties of person, and all those

accomplishments of mind, which fix the affections
of an husband. Her understanding, always weak,
was often disordered She doated on Philip with
such an excess of childish and impertinent fondness,
as excited disgust rather than affetion. Herjealou-
fy, for which her husband's behaviour gave her too
much cause, was proportioned to her love, and of-
ten broke out in the most extravagant actions. Ifa-
bella, though sensible of her defects, could not
help pitying her condition, which was soon render-
ed altogether deplorable, by the archduke's abrupt
resolution of setting out in the middle of winter
for Slanders, and of leaving her in Spain. Isabella
intreated him not to abandon his wife to grief and
melancholy, which might prove fatal to her, as she
was near the time of her delivery. Joanna con-
jured him to put off his journey for three days on-
ly, that she might have the pleasure of celebrating
the festival of Christmas in his company. Ferdi-
nand, after representing the imprudence of his leav-
ing Spain, before he had time to become acquainted
with the genius, or to gain the affections of the peo-
ple who were one day to be his fubjefts, besought
him, at leafi, not to pass through France, with which
kingdom he was then at open war. Philip, with-
out regarding either the dictates of humanity, or
the maxims of prudence, persisted in his purpose,
and on the twenty second of December set out for
the Low Countries, by the way of Francea.

X Petri Mnrtyris Anglerii Epiffola;, 250. 253.

FROM

FROM the moment of his departure, Joanna BOOR I.
funk into a deep and fullen melancholy b, and while .~,-,

Disorder of

she was in that situation bore Ferdinand her second Joanna's
son, for whom the power of his brother Charles as- min.h
terwards procured the kingdoms of Hungary and Ferdinand,
Bohemia, and to whom he at last transmitted the "f.perwrd

Emperor.

Imperial sceptre. Joanna was the only person in
Spain who discovered no joy at the birth of this
prince. Insensible to that, as well as to every other
pleasure, she was wholly occupied with the thoughts
of returning to her husband; nor did she, in any
degree, recover tranquillity of mind, till she arri-
ved at Brussels next year c. I'S

PHILIP, in passing through France, had an inter-

view with Lewis the XII. and signed a treaty with
him, by which he hoped that all the differences be-
tween France and Spain would be finally terminated.
But Ferdinand, whose affairs, at that time, were
extremely prosperous in Italy, where the superior
genius of Gonfalvo de Cordova, the great captain,
triumphed on every occasion over the arms of
France, did not pay the least regard to what his
fon-in-law had concluded, and carried on hostilities
with greater ardour than ever.

FROM this time Philip seems not to have taken Death of

, ~ . „ .' . . . Irabella.

any part in the affairs of Spain, waiting in quiet,
till the death either of Ferdinand or of Isabella
should open the way to one of their thrones.
The latter of these events was not far distant,
The untimely death of her children had made a
deep impression on the mind of Isabella, and as lhe
could derive but little consolation for the losses ihe
had sustained either from her daughter Joanna,
whose infirmities daily increased, or from her son-

ib Id. Epift. z55.

Mariana, lib. 27. c. It, 14. Flechier Vie de Ximen.
!. 191.

B 3 in-law,

BooK I. in-law, who no longer preserved even the appear-

ance of a decent refpet towards that unhappy prin-
cess, her spirits and health began gradually to de-
cline, and after languishing some months, she died
at Medina del Campo on the twenty-fixth of No-
vember, one thousand five hundred and four. She
was no less eminent for virtue, than for wisdom ;
and whether we confider her behaviour as a queen,
as a wife, or as a mother, she is justly entitled to
the high encomiums bestowed on her by the Spanish
historiansd.

Her will, A FE w weeks before her death, fie made her last
appointing will, and being sensible of Joanna's incapacity to
Ferdinand
regent of assume the reins of government into her own hands,
Cafile. and having no inclination to commit them to Philip,

with whose conduct she was extremely diflatisfied,
ihe appointed Ferdinand regent or administrator of
the affairs of Castile till her grandson Charles at-
tained the age of twenty; she bequeathed to him
likewise one half of the revenues that should arise
from the Indies, together with the grand master-
ships of the three military orders; dignities, that
rendered those who poffefled them almost indepen-
dent, and which Isabella had, for that reason, an-
nexed to the crown c. But before she signed a deed
lo favourable to Ferdinand, she obliged him to
swear that he would not, by a second marriage, or
by any other means, endeavour to deprive Joanna
or their posterity of their right of succession to any
of his kingdoms .

IMMEDIATELY upon the queen's death, Ferdi-

nand resigned the title of king of Caitile, and com-
manded Joanna and Philip to be publickly pro-

d P. Mart. Ep. 279. c P. Martyr. Ep. 277. Mar. Hist.
lib. 28. c. 1 . Ferterns Hist. Gener. d' Efpagne, tom. viii. 263.

' Mar. Hilt. lib, 28. c. 14.

claimed

claimed the Sovereigns of that kingdom. But, at BooK I.
the fame time, he assumed the character of Regent, Ferd
in consequence of Isabella's testament, and not long acknowled-
after he prevailed on the Cortes of Castile to ac- ged asb r
knowledge his right to that office. This, however, cortes.
he did not procure without difficulty, nor without '505.
discovering such symptoms of alienation and disgust
among the Castilians as filled him with great unea-
finess. The union of Castile and Aragon, for al- The Cali.l-

ans diffatis-

mofft thirty years, had not so entirely extirpated the edd.T
ancient and hereditary enmity which subsisted be-
tween the natives of there kingdoms, that the Caf-
tilian pride could submit, without murmuring, to
the government of a king of Aragon. Ferdinand's
*own character, with which the Castilians were well
acquainted, was far from rendering his authority
desirable. Suspicious, discerning, revere and par-
fimonious, he was accustomed to observe the most
minute actions of his fubjeEts with ajealous atten-
tion, and to reward their highest services with lit-
tle liberality; and they were now deprived of Ifa-
bella, whose gentle qualities, and partiality to her
Castilian fubjets, often tempered his austerity, or
rendered it tolerable. The maxims of his govern-
ment were especially odious to the Grandees; for
that artful prince, sensible of the dangerous privi-
leges conferred upon them by the Feudal inftituti-
ons, had endeavoured, by extending the royalju-
rifdiation, by protecting their injured vassals, by
increasing the immunities of cities, and by other
measures equally prudent, to curb their exorbitant
power g. From all these causes, a formidable par-
ty among the Castilians united against Ferdinand,
and though those who composed it, had not hither-
to taken any publick ftep in opposition to him, he
plainly saw that upon the least encouragement from
their new king, they would proceed to the most
violent extremities.

* Marian. lib. 28. c. 12.

B 4 NOR

BOOK I. No' was there less agitation in the Netherlands

upon receiving the accounts of tfabtlla's death,. and

Philip en-
deavours to of Ferdinand's having assumed the government of
obtain the Castile. Philip was not of a temper tamely to sus-
government
of Cafile. ser himself to be supplanted by the unnatural am-

bition of his father-in-law. If Joanna's infirmities,
and the nonage of Charles rendered them incapable
of government, lie, as a husband, was the proper
guardian of his wife, and as a father, the natural
tutor of his son. Nor was it sufficient to oppose to
thefejiuf rights, and to the inclination of the peo-
ple of Caffile, the authority of a testament, the
genuineners of which was perhaps doubtful, and
its contents certainly iniquitous. A keener edge
was added to Philip's tefentment, and new vigour
infused into his councils by the arrival of Don John
Manuel. He was Ferdinand's ambafiador at the
Imperial court, but upon the firit notice of Isabel-
la's death repaired to Brussels, flattering himself
that in the court of a young and liberal prince, he
might attain to power and honours, which he could
never hope for in the service of an old and frugal
maiter. He had early paid court to Philip during
his residence in Spain, with such assiduity as entire-
ly gained his confidence; and having been trained
to business under Ferdinand, could oppose his
schemes with equal abilities, and with arts not in-
ferior to those for which that monarch was diitin-
guifhed h.

e redquires By his advice, ambassadors were dispatched to
Ferdinand
to resign the require Ferdinand to retire into Aragon, and to re-
regency. sign the government of Castile to thofeperfons whom

Philip should entrust with it till his arrival in that
kingdom. Such of the Castilian nobles as had dif-
covered any diitatisfiation with Ferdinand's admi-
niflration, were encouraged by every method to

h Zurita Anales de Aragon, toin, vi. p. 12.

oppose

oppose it. At the fame fame time a treaty was Btor I.
concluded with Lewis XII. by which Philip flattered -
himself that he had secured the friendship and aflift-
ance of that monarch.

M MAN W ILE, Ferdinand employed all the arts

of address and policy, in order to retain the power
of which he had got poffeflion. By means of Con-
chillos, an Aragonian gentleman, he entered into a
private negociation with Joanna, and prevailed on
that weak princess to confirm, by her authority, his
right to the regency. But this intrigue did not
escape the penetrating eye of Don John Manuel;
Joanna's letter of consent was intercepted; Conchil-
los was thrown into a dungeon; and she herself con-
fined to an apartment in the palace, and all her
Spaniih domefticks secluded from her presence'.

THE mortification which the di(covery of this Ferdinand

scheme occasioned to Ferdinand, was much increaf- bytnhdeC2i.
ed by his observing the progress that Philip's emit- lia n ,b'es.
saries made in Castile. Some of the nobles retired
to their caffles; others to the towns in which they
had influence; they formed themselves into confe-
deracies, and began to aflemnble their vassals Ser-
dinand's court was almost totally deserted; not
a person of diftintion but Ximenes, archbi-
Ihop of Toledo, the duke of Alva, and the mar-
quis of Denia, remaining there; while the houses of
Philip's ambassadors were daily crowded with those
of the highest rank.

Ex A s PER ATED at this universal defetion, and Ferdinand

piqued, perhaps, at feeing all his schemes defeated rcfole.to
by a younger politician, Ferdinand rciolved, in de- der to x.
fiance of the law of nature, and of decency, to de- cT, de hi
prive his daughter and her posterity of the crown frno the

throne.
P. Mart. Ep. 287. Zurita Anales vi. p. 14.

of

BooK I. of Castile, rather than renounce the regency of that
''^~>
j kingdom. His plan for accomplishing this was no

less bold, than the intention itself was wicked.
He demanded in marriage Joanna, the supposed
daughter of Henry IV. on the belief of whose illegi.
timacy, Isabella's right to the crown of Castile was
founded; and by reviving the claim of this princess,
in opposition to which he himself had formerly led
armies, and fought battles, he hoped once more to
get pofiefoin .of the throne of that kingdom But
Emanuel, King of Portugal, in whose dominions
Joanna resided, being married to one of Ferdinand's
daughters by Isabella, refused his consent to that un-
natural match; and the unhappy princess herself,
having loft, by being long immured in a convent,
all relish for the objects of ambition, discovered no
less aversion to it k

Mrmeaa THE resources, however, of Ferdinand's ambiti-
niecneoF theon, were not exhausted. Upon meeting with a re-
King. pulse in Portugal, he turned towards France, and

fought in marriage Germaine de Foix, a daughter
of the viscount of Narbonne, and of Mary, the filler
of Lewis XII. The war which that monarch had
carried on against Ferdinand in Naples, had been so
unfortunate, that he listened with joy to a proposal,
which furnished him with an honourable pretence
of concluding peace And though no prince was
ever more remarkable than Ferdinand for making
all his paflions bend to the maxims of interest, or
become subservient to the purposes of ambition, yet
so vehement was his resentment against his fon-in-
.- law, that in order to be revenged of him, by

detaching Lewis from his interest, and in order
to gain a chance of excluding him from his here-
ditary throne of Aragon, and the dominions an-
nexed to it, he was ready once more to divide Spain

k Sandov. HilR. of Civil Wars in Cafiilc. Lond. 1655. p. 5.
Zurita Anales lie Aragon, tomi. vi. p. z13.

into

into separate kingdoms, ihough the union of these Roog I..
was the great glory of the reign, and had been the -
chief objet of his ambition; he consented to restore
the Neapolitan nobles of the French faction to
their poifeflions and honours; and fibbmitted to the
ridicule of marrying, in an advanced age, a princess
of eighteen'.

THE conclusion of this match, which deprived

Philip of his only ally, and threatened him with the
iofs of so many kingdoms, gave a dreadful alarm to
him, and convinced Don John Manuel that there
was now a necefi ty of taking other measures with
regard to the affairs of Spaini'. He accordingly
inftruted the Flemiflh ambassadors in the court of
Spain, to teftity the ftrorg desire which their mat-
ter had of terminating all differences between him
and Ferdinand in an amicable manner, and his wil-
lingnefs to content to any conditions that would re-
establish the friendship which ought to subsist be-
tween a father and a fon-in-law. Ferdinand, though A treatyh -
he had made and broken more treaties than any tweenpFrdi
prince of any age, was apt to confide to far in the pa"dan"d
sincerity of other men, as to be always extremely
fond of a negpciatioo. He listened with eagerness
to these declarations, and fbon concluded a treaty
at Salamanca; in which it was ftipilated, that the
government of Castile should be carried on in Nov. 4,
the joint names of Joanna, of Ferdinand, and of
Philip; and that the revenues of the crown, and the
right of conferring offices, should be shared between
Ferdinand and Philip by an equal division".

NOTHING, however, was farther from Philip's

thoughts than to observe this treaty. His oble inten- PhiliSpi'nd
tion in proposing it was to amuse Ferdinand, and to joan.a let
prevent him from taking any measures for obftruL- sp.in.

P. Mart. Ep. 290. 292. Mariann lib. 28. c. 16, 17.
P. Mart. Ep. 293.
* Zurita Anales d Aragon, vi. 19. P. Mart. Ep. 293, 294.

ing

BooK I. ing his voyage into Spain. It had that effet. Ser-
<"v'- dinand, sagacious as he was, did not for some time

fufpet his design; and though when he perceived
it, he prevailed on the king of France not only to
remonstrate against the archduke's journey, but to
threaten hostilities if he undertook it; though he
solicited the duke of Gucldres to attack his fon-in-
law's dominions 'in the Low Countries, Philip and
his consort nevertheless set fail with a numerous
fleet, and a good body of land forces. They were
obliged by a violent tempest to take shelter in En-
gland, where Henry VII. in compliance with Ferdi-
nand's solicitations, detained them upwards of three
months , at last they were permitted to depart,
and after a more prosperous voyage, they arrived in
safety at Corunna in Galicia, nor durst Ferdinand
attempt, as he had once intended, to oppose their
landing by force of arms.

The nobili- THE Castilian nobles, who had been obliged hi-
ty of Cailie therto to conceal or dissemble their sentiments, now
declare for
Philip. declared openly in favour of Philip. From every

corner of the kingdom, persons of the highest rank,
with numerous retinues of their vassals, repaired to
their new king. The treaty of Salamanca was uni-
verfally condemned, and all agreed to exclude from
the government of Castile a prince, who by con-
senting to disjoin Aragon and Naples from that
crown, discovered so little concern for its true inte-
refts. Ferdinand, mean while, abandoned by al-
most all the Caflilians, disconcerted by their revolt,
and uncertain whether he would peaceably relin-
quifh his power, or take arms in order to maintain
it, eancftly solicited an interview with his fon-in-
law, who by advice of Manuel tfudioufly avoided it.
Convii:ccd at lass, by feeing the number and zeal
oPlPhilip's adherents daily increase, that it was in
vain to think of resitting fich a torrent, he consent-

Ferrer. Hist. viii. 285.

ed

ed by a treaty, to resign the regency of Castile into BooK I.
the hands of Philip, to retire into his hereditary do- '--"
minions of Aragon, and to reft satisfied with the Fcrjrd.,
masterships of the military orders, and that {hare resign the
of the revenue of the Indies, which Isabella had be- Cagf e, and
queathed to him. Though an interview between retires to
the princes was no longer necessary, it was agreed
to on both fides from motives of decency. Philip
repaired to the place appointed with a splendid re-
tinue of the Castilian nobles, and a considerable bo-
dy of armed men. Ferdinand appeared without
any pomp, attended by a few followers, mounted
on mules, and unarmed. On that occasion don
John Manuel had the pleasure of displaying before
the monarch whom he had deserted, the extenlive
influence he had acquired over his new master:
while Ferdinand suffered in pretence of his former
fubjeds the two most cruel mortifications which an
artful and ambitious prince can feel; being at once
over-reached in conduct, and stripped of power. P

NoT long after, he retired into Aragon; and july.

hoping that some favourable accident would soon
open the way for his return into Castile, he took
care to protest, though with great secrecy, that the
treaty concluded with his fon-in-law, being extor-
ted by force, ought to be deemed void of all obli-
gations q.

PHILIP took pofreffion of his new authority with pilp a,,nd
a youthful joy. The unhappy Joanna, from whom J01onl1a 1a-

1 1 . j

*- . , , rl- *' ,, ,* „ knowilp(;dgc

he derived it, remained during all these contests, as king and
under the dominion of a deep melancholy; she was 'que' b:'tt
Icldom allowed to appear in publick; her father,
though he had often desired it, was refused access

P Zurita Anales tie Arag. vi. 64. Mar. lib. 28. c. 1. o. P.
Mart. ep. 304, 305, &c.

q Zurita Anales de Arag. vi. p. 68. Ferrer Hilt. viii. 290.

to

Boot I. to her; and Philip's chief object was to prevail dt6
'r"'r the Cortes to declare her incapable of governments

that an undivided power might be lodged in his
hands, till his son should attain to full age. But
such was the partial attachment of the Castilians to
their native princess, that though Manuel had the
address to gain some members of the Cortes assem-
bled at Valladolid, and others were willing to grati-
fy their new sovereign in his first request, the great
body of the representatives refused their content to
a declaration which they thought so injurious to the
blood of their monarchs'. They were unanimous,
however, in acknowledging Joanna and Philip,
queen and King of Castile, and their son Charles
prince of Asturias.

Death of THIS was almost the only memorable event du-
Philip. ring Philip's adminftration. A fever, occasioned

by a debauch, put an end to his life in the twenty-
Sert. 15. eighth year of his age, not having enjoyed the regal

dignity which he had been so eager to obtain, full
three months .

The difor- THE whole royal authority in Castile ought of
der of oan-courfe to have devolved upon Joanna. But the
inree. mhock occasioned by a disaster so unexpected as the

death of her husband compleated the disorder of her
understanding, and her incapacity for government.
During all the time of Philip's sickness, no intreaty
could prevail oh her, though in the sixth month of
her pregnancy, to leave him for a moment. When
he expired, however, she did not shed one tear,
or utter a single groan. Her grief was silent and
fettled. She continued to watch the dead body with
the fame tenderness and attention as if it had been
alive', and though at last the allowed it to be buri-
ed, the soon removed it from the tomb to her own
apartment. There it was laid upon a bed of fate,
in a splendid dress; and having heard from some

R Zurita Anales de Arag. vi. p. 75. Marian, lib. 28. c. 23.
' P. Manl. Ep. 316. monk

monk a legendary tale of a king who revived after BOOK I,
he had been dead fourteen years, ihe kept her eyes
almost constantly fixed on the body, waiting for the
happy moment of its return to life. Nor was this
capricious affetion for her dead husband less tinc-
tured with jealousy, than that which she had borne
to him while alive. She did not permit any of her
female attendants to approach the bed on which his
corpse was laid; she would not susser any woman
who did not belong to her family to enter the
apartment; and rather than grant that privilege.to a
midwife, tho' a very aged one had been chosen of
purpose, she bore the princess Catherine without
any other assistance than that of her own domestics".

A WOMAN in such a Rfate of mind was little ca- She i inca-

pable of go-

pable of governing a great kingdom; and Joanna, vernment.
who made it her sole employment to bewail the loss,
and to pray for the foul of her husband, would have
thought her attention to public affairs an impious
neglect ofthofe duties which she owed to him. But
though ihe declined assuming the administration
herself, yet, by a strange caprice of jealousy, she
refused to commit it to any other perfbn; and no
intreaty of her fubjets could persuade her to name
a regent, or even to sign such papers as were necef-
fary for the execution of justice, and the security
of the kingdom.

THi death of Philip threw the Caflilians into

the greatest perplexity. It was necessary to appoint
a regent, both on account of Joanna's frenzy, and
the infancy of her son; and as there was not among
the nobles, any person so eminently distinguished
as to be called by the publick voice to that high

'Mar. Hill. lib. 29. c. 3 &5. P.Mart. Ep. 318,324, 328,332.

office,
I.

Booc I. office, all naturally turned their eyes either to Ser-
'"-- dinand, or to the Emperor Maximilian. The for-
Maximilian theEmperor mer claimed that dignity as administrator for his
and Ferdi- daughter, and by virtue of the testament of Isabella;
nand com-
petitors for the latter thought himielf the legal guardian of his
theregency. grandson, whom on account of his mother's infir-

mity, he already confidered as king of Castile.
Those who had lately compelled Ferdinand to re-
sign the government of the kingdom, trembled at
the thoughts of his being reffored so soon to his for-
mer dignity. They dreaded the return of a mo-
narch, not apt to forgive, and who to those defecs
with which they were already acquainted, added
-that resentment which the remembrance of their
behaviour, and reflection upon his own disgrace,
must naturally have excited. Though none of
these objetions held against Maximilian, he was a
stranger to the laws and manners of Castile, and
.deititute of troops and money to support his pre-
tensions, nor could his claim be admitted without
a public declaration of Joanna's incapacity for go-
vernment, an indignity, to which, notwithstanding
the notoriety of her distemper, the delicacy of the
Castilians would never content.

DON JOkHN MAN U E L, howsever, and a few of the

nobles, who confidered themifelves as moR obnoxi-
ous to Ferdinand's displeasure, declared for Maxi-
milian, and offered to support his claim with all
their interest. Maximilian, always enterprizing
and decisive in council, though feeble and dila-
tory in execution, eagerly embraced the offer.
But a series of ineffetual negociations was the
only consequence of this tr.afaCation. The Em-
pero.r, as usual, afterted his xights in a high strain,
promired a great deal, and performed nothing '.

A PEW days before the death of Philip, Ferdi-
nand had set out for Naples, that, by his own pre-

Mariana, lib 29. c. 7. Zurita Anales de Arag. vi. 93.

tence

:fnce, he might put an end, with the greater de- BOOK I.
cency, to the vice-royalty of the great captain, erdi n

,, )

-

. * '-

* i -

. *ii r> Ferdinand

whose important Services, and cautious c6nduct, abent. on
did not screen him from the suspicions of hisjea- vfit to his
lous master. Though an account of his fon-in-law's Naples.
death reached him at Porto-fino, in the territo-
ries of Genoa, he was so follicitous to discover the
secret intrigues which he supposed the great cap-
tain to have been carrying on, and to establish his
own authority on a firm foundation in the Neapoli-
tan dominions, by removing him from the supreme
command there, that rather than discontinue his
voyage, he chore to leave Castile in a slate of anar-
chy, and even to rifque, by this delay, his obtain-
ing poffeflion of the government of that kingdom .

NOTHING but the great abilities and prudent

conduc of his adherents, could have prevented
the bad effects of this absence. At the head of
there was Ximenes, archbishop of Toledo, who, Acquires
though he had been raised to that dignity by Ira- the regency
bella, contrary to the inclination of Ferdinand, chiefly
and though he could have no expectation of en- through the

insuence of

joying much power under his jealous adminiftra- cardinal
tion, was nevertheless so disinterested, as to prefer ximenes-
the welfare of his country before his own grandeur,
and to declare, that Castile could never be so hap-
pily governed as by a prince, whom long experi-
ence rendered thoroughly acquainted with its true
interest. His zeal to bring over his countrymen
to this opinion, induced him to lay aside somewhat
of his usual austerity and haughtiness. He con-
descended, on this occasion, to court the disaffeCted 10o7;
nobles, and employed address, as well as argu-
ments, to persuade them. Ferdinand seconded his
endeavours with great art; and by concefions to
some of the grandees, by promiles to others, and
by letters full of complaisance to all, he gained

Y Zurita Anales de Arag. vi. p. 85.
VOL. II. C many

1BK -I. many of his most violent opponents z. And though

many cabals were formed, and some comnotions

A5:g. r excited, yet when Ferdinand, after having fettled
Ftrdinand the affairs of Naples, arrived in Castile, he entered
set.is o upon the administration, without opposition. The

prudence with which he exercised his authority in
that kingdom, equalled the good fortune by which

THis prudent he had recovered it. By a moderate, but fleady ad-
rmion.iarn ministration, free from partiality and from resent-

mcnt, he entirely reconciled the Castilians to his
person, and secured to them, during the remainder
of his life, as much domeffic tranquill ty, as wascon-
fiflent with the genius of the feudal government,
-which flill subsisted among them in full vigour a.

NOR was the preservation of tranquillity in his

hereditary kingdoms, the only obligation which
the archduke Charles owed :to the wife regency of
his grandfather.; he had the satisfaction, during
that period, of feeing very important acquisitions
added to the dominions over which he was to

Conqtid of reign. On the coast of Barbary, Oran, and other
Oran. conquests of no finall value, were annexed to the

crown of Castile by cardinal Ximenes, who, with
a spirit very uncommon in a monk, led in person
1509. a numerous army against the Moors of that coun-

try; and, with a generosity and magnificence frill
more singular, defrayed the whole expence of the
expedition out of his own revenues b. While in
Europe, Ferdinand, under pretences both frivolous
and unjust, and by artifices the most shameful and
treacherous, expelled John d' Albert, the lawful

At sovereign, from the throne of Navarre; and feiz-
ot Nav\le. ing on that kingdom, extended the limits of the

Spanish monarchy from the Pyrenees on the one
hand, to the frontiers of Portugal on the other'.

IT was not, however, the desire of aggrandizing
the Archduke, which influenced Ferdinand in this

z Zuritn Anales de Arag. vi. 87. 94. o09,
a Mariana, lib .

2 . c . lo. Mariana, lib. 29. c. 18.
' Mar. lib 30. c. 1;. z, 19.24, or

or in any other of his actions. He was more apt to BooK I.
confider that young prince as a rival, who might "'
one day wrest out of his hands the government of
Cafiile, than as a grandson, for whose behoof he
was entrusted with the administration. Thisjea-
lousy soon begot aversion and even hatred, the Ferd'nand

.;,*; "

- . . * < i * jealous of

¥;:symptoms of which he was at no pains to conceal. his grandfo
!Hence proceeded his immoderate joy when his charlei-
young queen was delivered of a son, whose life
;:would have deprived Charles of the crowns of
lAragon, Naples, Sicily, and Sardinia; and upon
'the untimely death of that prince, he discovered,
for the fame reason, an exceflive solicitude to have
'other children. This impatience of his hastened,
in all probability, the acceflion of Charles to the ,5
icrown of Spain. Ferdinand, in order to procure
a blefling, of which, fromn his advanced age, and
the intemperance of his youth, he could have little
profped, had recourse to his physicians, and by
their prescription took one of those potions, which
are supposed to add vigour to the constitution,
though they more frequently prove fatal to it. '5'3.
This was its effect on a frame so feeble and ex-
haufted as that of Ferdinand; and though he fur-
vived a violent disorder which it at firfl: occasion-
ted, it brought on such an habitual languor and de-
'jeEtion of mind, as rendered him averse from any
serious attention to public affairs, and fond of fri-
volous amusements, on which he had not hitherto
eftowed much time '. Though lie now derpair-
d of having any son of his own, hisjealoufy of the
rchduke did not abate, nor could lie help view-
ng him with that aversion, which princes often
ear their successors. In order to gratify this un-
atural paflion, he made a will, appointing prince
erdinand, who having been born and educated '5'
n Spain, was much beloved by the Spaniards, to
be regent of all his kingdoms, till the arrival of the
d ZuritaAnales de Arng.vi.347. P. Mart. Ep. 531. Argenfola
Snales de Aragon, lib. I. p. 4.

C 2 arch-

BooK I. archduke his brother; and by the fame deed hel
- v--v' fettled upon him the grand-mafterfhip of the three
to exclude military orders. The former of these grants might
him from have put it in his power to have disputed the throne
the Spanish
kingdoms, with his brother; the latter would, in any event,
byawill in have rendered him almost independent.
favour of
Ferdinand. FERDINAND retained to the last thatjealous love

of power, which was so remarkable through his
whole life. Unwilling to resign it, even at the
approach of death, he removed continually from
place to place, in order to fly from his distemper,
or to forget it; and though his strength declined
every day, none of his attendants durst mention
his condition; nor would he admit his father con-
feflbr, who thought such silence criminal and un-
christian, into his pretence. At last the danger
became so imminent, that it could be no longer
concealed. Ferdinand received the intimation
with a decent fortitude; and touched, perhaps,with
compunction at the injustice he had done hisgrand-
son, or influenced by the honest remonstrances of
Carvajal, Zapata and Vargas, his most ancient and
faithful counsellors, who represented to him that
by investing prince Ferdinand with the regency,
he would infallibly entail a civil war on the two
brothers, and by bestowing on him the grand
mastership of the military orders, would strip the
crown of its noblest ornament and chief strength,

'i perluaded he consented to alter his will in both there parti-

rn alter that ne
will, culars. By a new deed he left Charles the sole

heir of all his dominions, and allotted to prince
Ferdinand, instead of that throne of which he
thought himself almost secure, an inconsiderable
establishment of fifty thousand ducats a year ". He
*nddice, died a few hours after signing this will, on the

twenty-third day of January, one thousand five
hundred and sixteen.

e Mar. Hil. lib. 30. c. ult. Zurita Anales de Arag, vi. 401.
P. Mart. Ep. 565, 566. Argenfola Anales de Arag. lib.l p. 1 .

CHARLESI

CHARLES, to whom such a noble inheritance Book I.

descended by his death, was near the full age of'- -J
sixteen. He had hitherto resided in the Low ofdChati
Countries, his paternal dominions. Margaret of v.
Austria, his aunt, and Margaret of York, the
sifter of Edward IV. of England, and widow of
Charles the Bold, two princefles of great virtue
and abilities, had the care of forming his early
youth. Upon the death of his father, Philip, the
Flemings committed the government of the Low
Countries to his grandfather, the Emperor Maxi-
milian, with the name rather than the authority of
regent'. Maximilian made choice of William
de Croy lord of Chievres to superintend the edu-
cation of the young prince his grandson g. That
nobleman possessed, in an eminent degree, the ta-
lents which fitted him for such an important of-
fice, and discharged the duties of it with great si-
delity. Under Chievres, Adrian of Utrecht ac-
ted as preceptor. This preferment, which open-
ed his way to the highest dignities an Ecclesiastic
can attain, he owed not to his birth, for that

f Pontius Heuterus Rerum Aufiriacarum, lib. xv. Lov. 1649,
lib. 7. c. 2. p. 155.

g The French historians, upon the authority of M. de Bel-

lay, Mem. p. 1 1. have unanimnoufly aflerted that Philip, by his
last will, having appointed the King of France to have the di-
reetion of his son's education, Louis XII. with a disinterested-
ness, suitable to the confidence reposed in him, named Chiev-
res for that office. Even the president Henault has adopted this
opinion. Abrege Chron. A. D. 1507. Varillas, in his usual
manner, pretends to have seen Philip's testament. Prat. de 1'
education des Princes, p. 16. But the Spanifli, German and
Flemifl historians concur in contradicting this assertion of the
French authors. It appears from Heutcrus, a contemporary
Flemifl historian of great authority, that Louis XII. by con-
senting to the marriage of Germaine de Foix with Ferdinand,
had loft much of that confidence which Philip once placed in
him; that this disgust was increased by the French King's giv-
ing in marriage to the count of Angouleme his eldest daughter
whom he had formerly betrothed to Charles. H-euter. Rer. Auitr.
lib. v. 1 5 1; That the French a flort time before Philip's death,
lad violate4 the peace, which subsisted between them and thq

C 3 Ficminis,

BooK I. was extremely mean; nor to his interest, for he
. .... was a stranger to the arts of a court; but to the

opinion which his countrymen entertained of his
learning. He was indeed no inconsiderable pro-
ficient in those frivolous sciences which, during
several centuries, assumed the name of Philofo-
phy, and published a commentary, which was
highly esteemed, upon The Book of Sentences, a
famous treatise of Petrus Lombardus, and con-
fidered at that time, as the standard system of
metaphysical theology. But whatever admirati-
on there procured him in an illiterate age, it was
soon found that a man accustomed to the retire-
ment of a college, unacquainted with the world,
and without any tincture of taste or elegance, was
by no means qualified for rendering science agree-
able to a young prince. Charles, accordingly,
discovered an early aversion to learning, and an
exceflive fondness for those violent and martial

Flemings, and Philip had complained of this injury, and was
ready to resent it. Heuter. ibid. All these circumfrances render
it improbable that Philip, who made his will a few days be-
fore he died, Heuter. p. 1z5, should commit the education or
his son to Louis XII. In confirmation of there plausible conjec-
tures, pofirive teffimony can be adduced. It aopears from
Heuterus, that Philip, when he set out tfr Spain, had entrust-
ed Chievrcs both with the care of his son's education, and with
the government of his dominions in the Low Countries. Heu-
ter. lib. vii. p. 153. That an attempt was made, soon after
Philip's death, to have the Emperor Maximilian appointed re-
gent, during the minority of his grandson, but that being op-
posed, Chievrcs seems to have continued to discharge both the
offices rhich Philip had committed to him, H-eut. ibid. 153.

55, That in the beginning of the year 108, the Flemings
invited Maximilian to accept of the regency, to which he con-
sented, and appointed his daughter Margaret, together with a
council of Flemiings, to exercise the supreme authority, when
he himself fliould, at any time, be absent. He likewise named
Chievrcs as governor, and Adrian of Utrecht as preceptor to
his son, Heut. ibid5. 155. 7. What Hcuterus relates with
rcfpcEt to this matter is confirmed by Moringus in Vita Adriani,
apud Analetda Catp. Burmalnni de Adriano, cap. ; by Ilarliin-
dus, Chronic. Brabant. ibid. p. z5 ; and by Harxaus Alnal. l;r:a,.
vol. ii. 5zo, &c. cxeCr

exercises, to excel in which was at that time, the BooK I.
chief pride, and almost the only fiudy of persons ,,
of rank. Chievres encouraged this tafle, either
from desire of gaining his pupil by indulgence,
or from too flight an opinion of the advantage of
literary accomplifhmentsh. He instructed him,
however, with great care in the arts of govern-
ment; he made him study the history not only of
his own kingdoms, but of those with which they
were connected; he accustomed him, from the
time of his assuming the government of Slanders
in the year one rhoufand five hundred and fifteen, The
to attend to bufinels; hle persuaded him to peruse op.i:g! o'
all papers relating to public affairs; to be present at hi Ch:ai-
the deliberations of his privy counsellors, and to
propose to them hlimtelf those matters concerning
which he required their opinion '. From luch an
education, Charles contracccl-d habits of gravity
and recolledt.ion which scarce suited his time of
life. The firfi openings of his genius did not indi-
cate that liperiority which its maturer age di!play-
ed k. He did. not discover in his youth that im-
petuofity of spirit which commoniy ufners in an
active and entcrrrzi:;g mnnhioci. Nor did Vis
early obfequioulife!s to Chievres, and his other
favouritts, promlie that cnp;liiiotis a;d deci1ive
judgment, which afterwards directed t.e ai';irs
of one half of Europe. But !iis flbj-cis, dazzl,-d
with the external ac' omplifn!r;-:ijs :f a gracecfil
figure and manly addlrels, viewing his charac'cr
with that partlility which is always f(i:\)rn to pri;i-
ces during their youth, ent:r r:aiinleid tlininc hlops
of his adding lustre to toil: cr,;)wns wiich l !t-
scended to him by the death of Ferdinand.

T'lHr. kingdoms of Sp.1in, as is cviilfplr Fromr the
view which I have givscn of tleir polirical co. 1

h Jovii Vitan drinni, p. 91. Srruvii Corpuis, I-ill. Germ. ii.
967 . . ecuter. Rer. Aillr libi. 7. c. 3 p. 157.

i MClmoires dle B3lly, Svo. Pi.r. 1S7 p. 1I. P. Iciurer l).
viii.ez'. p. 1., PI. .NLtttri, 'p 5 . 6;t,.

C 4 l.liUsl),

BooK I. tution, were, at that time, in a situation, which

s-7' required an administration, no less vigorous than.

Spain re- prudent. The feudal intfitutions, which had been
quiresavi- introduced into all its different provinces by the
riniftration. Goths,the Suevi, and the Vandals, subsisted in great

force. The nobles, who were powerful and war-
like, had long possessed all the exorbitant privile-
ges, which these institutions vested in their order.
The cities in Spain were more numerous and more
considerable, than the genius of feudal govern-
ment, naturally an enemy to commerce, and to
regular police, seemed to admit. The personal
rights, and political influence, which the inhabi-
tants of these cities had acquired, were extensive.
The royal prerogative circumscribed by the pri-
vileges of the nobility, and by the pretensions of
the people, was confined within very narrow li-
mits. Under such a form of government, the
principles of discord were many; the bond of u-
nion was extremely feeble; and Spain felt not only
all the inconveniencies occasioned by the defects
in the feudal system, but was exposed to disorders
arifing'from the peculiarities in its own constitution.

DURING the long administration of Ferdinand,

no internal commotion, it is true, had arisen in
Spain. His superior abilities enabled him to restrain
the turbulence of the nobles, and to moderate
thejealoufy of the commons; and by the wisdom
of his domestic government, by the sagacity with
which he conducted his foreign operations, and by
the high opinion that his fubjets entertained of
both, he preserved among them a degree of tran-
quillity greaterthan was natural to a constitution, in
which the feeds of discord and disorder were to co-
pioully mingled. But, by the death of Ferdinand,
these restraints were at once withdrawn, and sac-
tion and discontent, from being long rcprcfed,
were ready to break out with fiercer animosity.

IN

IN order to prevent these evils, Ferdinand had in BOOR I.
his last will taken a most prudent precaution, by Fr""diad

Ferdinand

appointing cardinal Ximenes, archbilhop of To- hadappoint.
ledo, to be sole regent of Castile, till the arrival e cdinal
of his grandson in Spain. The singular character Regent.
of this man, and the extraordinary qualities which
marked him out for that office, at such a juncture,
merit a particular description. He was descended His rife and
of an honourable, not of awealthy family; and the chraer.
circumstances of his parents, as well as his own in-
clinations, having determined him to enter into the
church, he early obtained benefices of great va-
lue, and which placed him in the way of the high-
eft preferment. All these, however, he renounced
at once; and after undergoing a very severe novi-
ciate, assumed the habit of St. Francis in a monas-
tery of Obfervantine friars, one of the most rigid
orders in the Romish Church. There he soon be-
came eminent for his uncommon austerity of man-
ners, and for those excesses of superstitious devo-
tion, which are the proper characteristics of the
monastic life. But notwithstanding these extrava-
gancies, to which weak and enthufiaffic minds a-
lone are usually prone, his understanding, natural-
ly penetrating and decisive, retained its fullvigour,
and acquired him such great authority among his
own order, as raised him to be their provincial.
His reputation for sanctity, boon procured him the
office of father confeilbr to the queen Isabella,
which he accepted with the utmost reluctance. He
preserved in a court the fame austerity of manners,
which had diflinguifhed him in the cloister. He
continued to make all hisjournics on foot; he lub-
sifted only upon alms; his ais of mortification
were as revere as ever; and his penancts as ri-
gorous. Isabella, pleased with her choice, confer-
red on him, not long after, the Archbifhoprick of
Toledo, which, next to the Papacy, is the richelt
dignity in the church of Romc. This honour he
declined with a firmness, which nothing but the

autho..

BooK L authoritative injunction of the Pope was able to
*V· ' overcome. Nor did this height of promotion change

his manners. Though obliged to display in public
that magnificence which became his ifation, he
himself retained his monaffic severity. Under his
pontifical robes he conflantly wore the coarse frock
of St. Francis, the rents in which he used to patch
with his own hands. He at no time used linen;
but was commonly clad in hair-cloth. He tlept
always in his habit, most frequently on the ground,
or on boards, rarely in a bed. He did not taste a-
ny of the delicacies which appeared at his table,
but satisfied himself with that simple diet which
the rule of his'order prescribed k. Notwithstanding
these peculiarities, so oppofire to the manners of
the world, he poflef-ed a thorough knowledge of
its affairs; and no sooner was he called by his fca-
tion, and by the high opinion which Ferdinand and
IfEabela entertained of him, to take a principal
lhare ii the administration, than he displayed ta-
Jents for bufinels, which rendered the fameof his
wisdom equal to that of his fandity. Bold and
original in all his plans, his political conduct flow-
ed from his real clinrater, and partook both of
its virtues and its diLlet's. His extensive genius
suggested to him fcherncs, vast and magnificent.
Cornfcious of the integrity of his intentions, he
puriied these with unrlemitting and undaunted
firmness. Accuflomed from his early youth to
mortify his own pallions, lie shewed little indul-
gence towards those of other men. Taught by
his sys(em of religion to check even his mofl: inno-
cent desires, he was the enemy of every thing to.
which he could aflix the name of elegance and
pleasure; and, though free from any lillpicion of
cruelty, he discovered in all his commerce with the
world a cfvere inflexibility of mind, and austerity
of charaCter, pieculiar to the monaflic profelliohi,

k Hifloir e de I'ldl inllIration du Card. Xiien. par Mich.
Baudici, 4t0. 1635. p. 13.

and

and which can scarce be conceived in a country BOOK I.
where that is unknown. . c

SUCH was the man to whom Ferdinand corn-Cardinal

mitted the regency of Cattile, and though he was Adrian ap-
then near fourscore, and perfeEtly acquainted with gent by
the labour and difficulty of the office, his natural Charles.
intrepidity of mind, and zeal for the public good,
prompted him to accept of it without hesitation:
And though Adrian of Utrecht, who had been sent
into Spain a few months before the death of Ser-
dinand, produced full powers from the archduke
to assume the name and authority of regent upon
the demise of his grandfather; such was the aver-
sion of the Spaniards to the government of a ftran-
ger, and so unequal the abilities of the two com-
petitors, that Adrian's claim would at once have
been rejected, if Ximenes himself, from complai- Ximne.
fance to his new master, had not consented to ac- obtains the
knowledge him as regent, and to carry on the go-lle direri-

* * n° -i i- J

, . , " on of as-

vernment in conjunti;,n with him. By this, how- fairs.
ever, Adrian acquired a dignity merely nominal;
and Ximenes, though he treated him with great
decency, and even respect, retained the whole
power in his own hands'.

THE Cardinal's first care was to observe the His precau-

tion, againtxl

motions of the Infant Don Ferdinand, who having the intnt
been flattered with so near a profpecd of the fu- DonFperdi-
prerne power, bore the difippointment of his hopes
with greater impatience than could have been ex-
pected of a prince lb young. Ximenes, under pre-
tence of providing more effectually for his fafcty,
removed him from Guadalupe, the place in whicli
he had been educated, to Madrid, where lie fix-
ed the residence of the court. There he was un-
der the cardinal's own eye, and his conduit, with
that of his domestics, were watched with the ut-
mloft attention ".

Gomnerius de reb. gest. Ximenii, p. 1o. fol. Comipl. 569.
" M/iniana Contin. IMarianc, lib, i. c. z. Iaudier, Hillt. de
Ximeces, p. 1 il. T-lt

BooK I. THE firfl intelligence he received from the Low
,'-v- Countries, gave greater disquiet to the Cardinal,

and convinced him how difficult a talk it would
be to conduct the affairs of a young prince, under
the influence of counsellors unacquainted with the

Charles as- laws and manners of Spain. No sooner did the ac-
fumcs the count of Ferdinand's death reach Brussels, than
titlof king. Charles, by the advice of his Flemish ministers,

resolved to aflume the title of king. By the laws
of Spain, the sole right to the crowns both of
Castile and of Aragon, belonged to Joanna; and
though her infirmities disqualified her from go-
verning, this incapacity had not been declared by
any public adt of the Cortes of either kingdom; so
that the Spaniards confidered this resolution, not
only as a direc violation of their privileges, but as
an unnatural usurpation in a son on the preroga-
tives of a mother, towards whom, in her present
unhappy situation, he manifested a less delicate re-
gard than her fubjeds had always expreffedn. The
Flemish court, however,prevailed both on thePope
and on the Emperor to address letters to Charles
as king of Castile; the former of whom, it was
pretended, had a. tight, as head of the church;
and the latter, as head of the empire, to confer
this title; and infftruions were sent to Ximenes,
to prevail on the Spaniards to acknowledge it. Xi-
menes, though he had earnestly remonstrated a-
gainft the meafuire, as equally unpopular and un-
necessary, resolved to exert all his authority and
credit in carrying it into execution, and immedi-
ately assemblcd filch of the nobles as were then at
court. What Charles required was laid before
them; and when, inflead of complying with his
demands, they began to murmur againfl such an
unprecedented encroachment on their privileges,
and to talk high of tie rights of Joanna, and their

RrogRn;,cd oath of allegiance to her, Ximenes haffily interpo.,
(>.li,,il: trde fed, and with that firm and decisive tone which
1!liiaii'llCt' O
Xilric ... was natural to him, told them, that they were

'1 P. Mart. Ep. 568. not

not now called to deliberate, but to obey; that Boot I.
their sovereign did not apply to them for advice, ''
but expected submission; and " this day, added April 13.
he, Charles shall be proclaimed King of Caffile in
Madrid, and the reft of the cities will follow its
example." On the spot he gave orders for that
purpose"; and notwithitanding the novelty of the
praacice, and the secret discontents of many per-
sons of diftinEtion, Charles's title was universally
recognized. In Aragon, where the privileges of the
subjea were more extensive, and the abilities and
authority of the archbiffiop of Saragossa, whom
Ferdinand had appointed recent, were far inferior
to those of Ximenes, the fame obsequiousness to
the will of Charles did not appear, nor was he ac-
knowledged there under any other character but
that of Prince, till his arrival in Spain P.

XIMENES, though possessed only of delegated His chemes

power, which, from his advanced age, he could fr exhte.e-
not expedt long to enjoy, assumed, together with rogatire,
the character of regent, all the ideas natural to a
monarch, and adopted schemes for extending the
regal authority, which he pursued with as much
intrepidity and ardour, as if he himself had been
to reap the advantages resulting from their success.
The exorbitant privileges of the Castilian nobles,
circumscribed the prerogative of the prince within
very narrow limits. These the cardinal confidered
as so many unjufl extortions from the crown, and
determined to reduce them. Dangerous as the
attempt was, there were circumstances in his situ-
ation which promised him greater success than any
king of Caffile could have expected. His striA and
prudent economy of his archiepiscopal revenues,
furnished him with more ready money, than the
crown could at any time command; the fanLtity
of his manners, his charity and munificence ren-
dered him the idol of the people; and the nobles

° Gometius, p. 152, &c. Baudier His. de Ximen. p. 2I .
P P. Mart. Ep. 572. them-

BOOK I. themselves, not fufpeaing any danger from him
''' did not observe his motions with the famejealouw

attention, as they would have watched those oi
one of their monarchs.

Bydepref- IMMEDIATELY upon his acceflion to the regent
sing the no-
bfiity. cy, several of the nobles, fancying that the reins

of government would of consequence be romewhat
relaxed, began to assemble their vassals, and to pro-
fecute, by force of arms, animofities and pretenfi-
ons which the authority of Ferdinand had obliged
them to dissemble, or to relinquish. But Ximenes,
who had taken into pay a good body of troops,
opposed and defeated all their designs with unex-
peted vigour and facility; and though he did
not treat the authors of there disorders with any
cruelty, he forced them to acts of fubmiflion, ex-
tremely mortifying to the haughty spirit of Cafti-
lian grandees.

By Forming BuT while the Cardinal's attacks were confined
a body of
troops de- to individuals, and every at of rigour wasjufti-
pending on sied by the appearance of necessity, founded on

the forms ofjuatice, and tempered with a mixture
of lenity, there was scarce room forjealoufy or
complaint. It was not so with his next measure,
which, by striking at a privilege essential to the
nobles, gave a general alarm to the whole order.
By the feudal constitution, the military power was
lodged in the hands of the nobles, and men of an
inferior condition were called into the field only
as their vassals, and to follow their banners. A
king with scanty revenues, and a limited preroga-
tive, depended on these potent barons in all his
operations. It was with their forces he attacked
his enemies, and with them he defended his own
kingdom; and while at the head of troops attach-
ed only to their own lords, and accustomed to o-
bey no other commands, his authority was preca-
rious, and his efforts feeble. From this state Xi-
menes resolved to deliver the crown; and as mer-
cenary standing armies were unknown under the

feudal

feudal government, and would have been odious Boot I.
to a martial and generous people, he issued a pro- '-v
clamation, commanding every city in Caffile to
enroll a certain number of its burgeftes, in order
that they might be trained to the use of arms on
Sundays and holidays; he engaged to provide of-
ficers to command them at the publick expence;
and as an encouragement to the private men, pro-
mifed them an exemption from all taxes and im-
positions. The frequent incursions of the Moors
from Africa, and the neceflity'of having rome force
ready to oppose them, furnished a plausible pre-
tence for this innovation. The objeEt really in
view was to secure the king a body of troops inde-
pendent of his barons, and which might serve to
counterbalance their power q. The nobles were not
ignorant of his intention, and saw how effecually
the scheme he had adopted would accomplish his
end; but as a measure which had the pious ap-
pearance of resisting the progress of the Infidels
was extremely popular, and as any opposition to it
arising from their order alone, would have been
imputed wholly to interefled motives, they endea-
voured to excite the cities themselves to refute o-
bedience, and to remonstrate against the procla-
mation, as inconsistent with their charters and pri-
vileges. In consequence of their infligations, Bur-
gos, Valladolid, and several other cities, rose in
open mutiny. Some of the grandees declared
themselves their proteLtors. Violent remonstrances
were presented to the King. His Flemifl counsel-
lors were alarmed. Ximenes alone continued firm
and undaunted; and partly by teiror, partly by
intreaty; by force in some instances, and by for-
bearance in others, he prevailed on all the refrac-
tory cities to complyr. During his administration,
he continued to execute his plan with vigour, but
ioon after his death it was entirely dropt.

q Minianae Continuatio Mnriana fol. Hng. 1733. p. 3.
P. Mart. Ep. 556, &c. Gomnetius, p. 160, &c.

His

poK I. His success in this scheme for reducing the en
!--l'i"g orbitant power of the nobility, encouraged him t
the grants of attempt a diminution of their pofleflions, whic
former m°o- were no less exorbitant. During the contefis an
thenobility. disorders inseparable from the feudal government

the nobles, ever attentive to their own interefl
and taking advantage of the weakness and diftreJ
of their monarchs, had seized tome parts of th
royal demesnes, obtained grants of others, ant
gradually wrested almost the whole outof the hand
of the prince, and annexed them to their own es
tares. The rights, by which most of the gran
dees held these lands, were extremely defective
it was from tome successful usurpation, which thi
crown had been too feeble to dispute, that man,
derived their only title to possession. An enquiri
carried back to the origin of these encroachments
.which were almost co-eval with the feudal system
-was impracticable; and as it would have ftrippec
every nobleman in Spain of great part of his lands
it must have excited a general revolt. Such a fte[
was too bold, even for the enterprizing genius o:
Ximenes. He confined himself to the reign o!
Ferdinand.; and beginning with the pensions gran
ted during that time, refused to make any farthel
payment, because all right to them expired with
his life. He then called to account those who had
acquired crown lands under the adminifRration of
that monarch, and at once resumed whatever he
had alienated. The effects of these revocations
-extended to manyperfonsofgreat rank; for though
Ferdinand was a prince of little generosity; yet he
and Isabella having been raised to the throne of
Caffile by a powerful faftion of the nobles, they
were obliged to reward the zeal of their adherents
with great liberality, and the royal demefies were
their only fund for that purpose. The addition
made to the revenue of the crown by these revo-
cations, together with his own frugal oeconomy,
enabled Xinenes not only to discharge all the debts

which

which Ferdinand had left, and to remit considerable Boot I.
fums to Slanders, but to pay the officers of his new
militia, and to eftabiifh magazines more numerous,
and better firnifhed with artillery, arms, and war-
like stores, than Spain had ever possessed in any for-
mer ager. The prudent and difintereffed application
of thefie ums was a full apology to the people for
the rigour with which they were exacted.

THE nobles, alarmed at these repeated attacks, The nobles

thought it necessary to take precautions for the safe- mepore
ty of their order. Many cabals were formed, loud
complaints were uttered, and desperate resolutions
taken; but before they proceeded to extremities,
they appointed some of their number to examine
the powers in consequence of which the Cardinal
exercised acts of such high authority. The admi-
ral of Caffile, the duke de Infantado, and the con-
de de Benevento, grandees of the first rank, were
entruffed with this commission. Ximenes received
then with cold civility, and in answer to their de-
mand produced the teflament of Ferdinand, by
which he was appointed regent, together with the
ratification of that deed by Charles. To both
these they objected; and he endeavoured to efta-
blifh their validity. As the conversation grew
warm, he led them insensibly towards a balcony,
from which they had a view of a large body of Butwithout
troops under arms, and of a formidable train of ""uce"
artillery. " Behold," fays he, pointing to these
and railing his voice, " the powers which I have
received from his catholick majesty. With there I
govern Caffile; and with therf I will govern it,
till the king your mafier and mine takes poffefion
of his kingdom ." A declaration so bold and
haughty fi!enced them, and astonished their affoci
ates. To take arms against a man aware of his
danger, and prepared for his defence, was what
despair alone would dictate. All thoughts of a ge-

' Flechler Vie de Ximen. ii. 600.
· Flech. ii. 55. Ferreras, Hilt. viii. 433.
VOL. II. D neral

BOOK 1. neral confederacy against the Cardinal's adminiftra-
v-^-~- tion were laid aside; and except from some flight

commotions, excited by the private resentment of
particular noblemen, the tranquillity of Castile sus-
sered no interruption.

Thwarted IT was not only from the opposition of the Spa-.
Flemilh i- nifh nobility that obstacles arose to the execution of
nifters. the Cardinal's schemes; he had a constant struggle

to maintain with the Flemish ministers, who prefu-
ming upon their favour with the young king, aim-
ed at directing the affairs of Spain, as well as those
of their own country. Jealous of his great abili-
ties, and independent spirit, they confidered him
rather as a rival who might circumscribe their pow-
er, than as a miniffer who by his prudence and vi-
gour was adding to the grandeur and authority of
their master. Every complaint against his admi-
niftration was listened to with pleasure by the cour-
tiers in the Low Countries. Unnecessary obilruc-
tions were thrown by their means in the way of all
his measures, and though they could not either with
decency or safety deprive him of the office of re-
gent, they endeavoured to lessen his authority by
dividing it. They soon discovered that Adranof
Utrecht, already joined with him in office, had
neither genius or spirit sufficient to give the least
check to his proceedings; and therefore Charles by

An additi. their advice added to the commission of regency La
onal number
of gents Chau, a Fletnifh gentleman, and afterwards Amer-
appointed. ftorf, a nobleman of Holland; the former diftin-

guifhed for his address; the latter for his firmness.
Ximenes, though no itranger to the malevolent in-
tention of the Flemish courtiers, received them
with all the external marks of diftinticn due to
the office with which they were invested; but when
they came to enter upon bufinef, he abated no-
thing of that air of superiority with which he had
treated Adrian, and still retained the sole direction
of affairs. The Spaniards, more ayerfe, perhaps,

than

an any other people to the government of ftran- BooK I.
ers, approved of all his efforts to preserve his au- ,x--.
ority; and even the nobles, influenced by this resains the
tional paflion, and forgetting their jealousies and die.a;on of
ifcontents, chose rather to fee the supreme power

the hands of one of their countrymen, whom
ey feared, than in those of foreigners, whom
ey hated.

XIMENtS, though engaged in such great schemes is frccefs-
domestic policy, and embarrassed by the artifices Navarre.
d intrigues of the Flernifh ministers, had the
urden of two foreign wars to support. The one
as in Navarre, invaded by its unfortunate mo-
arch, John d'Albret. The death of Ferdinand,
e absence of Charles, and the discord and difaf-
tion which reigned among the Spaniflh nobles,
emed to present him with a favourable opportuni-
of recovering his dominions. The Cardinal's
igilance, however, defeated a measure so well
ncerted. Foreseeing the danger to which that
ingdom might be exposed, one of his first afts of
ministration was to order thither a considerable
dy of troops. While the king was employed
ith one part of his army in the siege of St. Jean
ied en Port, Villalva, an officer of great experi-
ce and courage, attacked the other by furprize,
d cut it to pieces. The king inflantly retreated
ith precipitation, and an end was put to the war'.
ut as Navarre was filled at that time with towns
d cafftles, slightly fortified, and weakly garrison-
, which being unable to resist an enemy, firved
ly to furnish him with places of retreat; Xi-
enes, always bold and decisive in his measures,
dered every one of there to be dismantled, ex-
pt Pampeluna, the fortifications of which lie pro-
letd to render very firong. To this uncommon
ecuation Spain owes the pofffnion of Navarre.

1P. Mart. Ep. 570.

D 2 Tlhe

BooK I. The French, since that period, have often entere(
~'-*v- and have as often over-run the open country; bu

while they were exposed to all the inconveniencie
attending an invading army, the Spaniards hay
easily drawn troops from the neighbouring provin
ces to oppose them; and the French, being deftitut
of strong towns to which they could retire, havy
been obliged to abandon their conquest with a
much rapidity as they gained it.

His opera- THE war which he carried on in Africa, againl
frica le the famous adventurer Horuc Barbarossa, who
fortunate. from a private corsair, raised himself by his fingu.

lar valour and address, to be king of Algiers and
Tunis, was far from being equally successful. Tli
ill conduct of the Spanish general, and the rash va.
lour of his troops, presented Barbarofia with an
easy viEtory. Many perished in the battle, more
in the retreat, and the remainder returned into
Spain covered with infamy. The magnanimity,
however, with which the Cardinal bore this dif
grace, the only one he experienced during his ad
ministration, added new lustre to his characer'
Great composure of temper under a disappoint'
ment, was not expected from a man fb remarkabl]
for the eagerness and impatience with which he ur.'
ged on the execution of all his schemes.

Corruption THI s disaster was soon forgotten; while the cot
ofi temi dudt of the Flemish court proved the cause of con
fer6,aarti- ifant uneasiness, not only to the Cardinal, but to tl
cuiargqf
Chicves. whole Spanish nation. All the great qualities

Chievres, the prime minister and favourite of tile
young king, were sullied with an ignoble and fordid
avarice. The acceflion of his master to the cro0w
of Spain, opened a new and copious source for thl

, Gometius, lib. vi. p. 179.

gratificatij

ratification of this pafiion. During the time of BooK I.
Charles's residence in Slanders, the whole tribe of '-
pretenders to offices or to favour retorted thither.
They soon discovered that, without the patronage
of Chievres, it was vain to hope for preferment;
nor did they want sagacity to find out the proper
method of securing him. Vast fums of money
were drawn out of Spain. Every thing was venal,
and disposed of to the highest bidder. After the
example of Chievres, the inferior Flemish ministers
engaged in this traffick, which became as general
and avowed, as it was infamous w. The Spaniards
were filled with rage when they beheld offices of
great importance to the welfare of their country,
set to sale by firangers, unconcerned for its honour
or its happiness. Ximenes, disinterested in his
whole administration, and a stranger, from his na-
tive grandeur of mind, to the pafiion of avarice,
inveighed with the utmost boldness against the ve-
nality of the Flemings. He represented to the
King in strong terms, the murmurs and indignati-
on which their behaviour excited among a free and
high-fpirited people, and besought him to set out
without loss of time for Spain, that, by his pre-
fence, he might dissipate the clouds which were ga-
thering all over the kingdom .

CHARLES was fully sensible that he had delayed charlesper.

too long to take poffellion of his dominions in Spain. Ximenes to
Powerful obifacles, however, flood in his way, and visit Spain.
detained him in the Low Countries. The war
which the league of Cambray had kindled in Italy,
fill subsisted; though, during its course, the ar-
mies of all the parties engaged in it, had taken dif-
erent directions. France was now in alliance with
Venice, which it had at firit combined to destroy.
Maximilian and Ferdinand had for some years car-
w Miniana, Contin. 1. i. c. 2. x P. Mart. Ep. 576.

D 3 ried

BooK I. ried on hostilities against France, their original ally
~-'r-'~ to the valour of whose troops the confederacy owe

all its success. Together with his kingdoms, Ser
dinand transmitted this war to his grandson; an(
there was reason to expect that Maximilian, alway
fond of new enterprizes, would persuade the youns
monarch to enter into it with ardour. But the Fie
mings, who had long possesed an extensive corn
merce, which during the league of Cambray, hac
grown to a great height upon the ruins of the Vent
tian trade, dreaded a rupture with France; anc
Chievres, sagacious to discern the true interest ol
his country, and not warped on this occasion by hi!
love of wealth, warmly declared for maintaining
peace with the French nation. Francis I. deftitutt
of allies, and solicitous to secure his late conqueftr
in Italy by a treaty, listened with joy to the firi
overtures of accommodation. Chievres himfeli
conducted the negociation in name of Charles,
Gouffier appeared as plenipotentiary for Francis,
Each of them had presided over the education ot
the prince whom he represented. They had both
adapted the fame pacific system; and were equally
persuaded that the union of the two monarchs was
the happiest event for themselves, as well as for
their kingdoms. In such hands the negociation did

A peace not languish. A few days after opening their con-
coW luhdcd
,wili,,rance ferences at Noyon, they concluded a treaty of con

federacy and mutual defence between the two mo-
A5g6. 3' narchs; the chief articles in which were, that Fran-

cis flould give in marriage to Charles his eldest
daughter, the princess Louisa, an infant of a year
old, and as her dowry, should make over to him
all his claims and pretensions upon the kingdom of
Naples; that in consideration of Charles's being
already in pofefflion of Naples, he fllould till the
accompliflrnent of the marriage, pay an hundred
thoulhnd crowns a year to the French king; and

the

the half of that rum annually, as long as the prin- BooR I.
cess had no children; that when Charles shall arrive --
in Spain, the heirs of the King of Navarre may
represent to him their right to that kingdom ; and
if he do not give them faiisfation, Francis ihall be
at liberty to assist them with all his forcesx. This
alliance not only united Charles and Francis, but
obliged Maximilian, who was unable alone to cope
with the French and Venetians, to enter into a
treaty with those powers, which put a final period
to that bloody and tedious war which the league of
Cambray had occasioned. Europe enjoyed a few
years of universal tranquillity, and was indebted
for that blessing to two princes, whose rivalfhip and
ambition kept it in perpetual discord and agitation
during the remainder of their reigns.

BY the treaty of Noyon, Charles secured a safe The Flem.

paflage into Spain. It was not, however, the in- gsaverfe
terest of his Flemish ministers, that he should visit visit to
that kingdom soon. While he resided in Slanders, Spain.
the revenues of the Spanish crown were spent there,
and they engrofled, without any competitors, all
the effects of their monarch's generosity; their
country became the feat of government, and all
favours were dispensed by them. Of all there ad-
vantages, they ran the rifque of feeing themselves
deprived, from the moment that their sovereign
entered Spain. The Spaniards would naturally atf
fume the diretion of their own affairs; the Low
Countries would be confidered only as a province of
that mighty monarchy; and they who now diftri-
buted the favours of the prince to others, muff then
be content to receive them from the hands of ftran.
gers. But what Chievres chiefly wifled to avoid Afraid of
was, an interview between the King and Ximenes. Ximenc:.
On the other hand, the wisdom, the integrity, and

X Leonard Recueil des Traitez, tom. ii. 69.

D 4 the

Boox I. the magnanimity of that prelate, gave hir a won.
,'---
- derful ascendant over the minds of men; and is

was extremely probable, these great qualities, ad-
ded to the reverence due to his age and office.
would command the respeCt of a young prince:
who, capable of noble and generous sentiment,
himself, would, in proportion to his admiration ol
the Cardinal's virtues, lessen his deference toward&
persons of another character. Or, on the othei
hand, if Charles should allow his Flemish favour-
ites to retain all the influence over his councils
which they at present poffefied, it was easy to fore-
fee that the Cardinal would remonilrate loudly a-
gainfl such an indignity to the Spanish nation, and
vindicate the rights of his country with the fame
intrepidity and Iiiccefs, that he had aflerted the
prerogatives of the crown. For these reasons, all
his Flemish counsellors combined to retard his de-
parture; and Charles, unfulpicious, from want ol
experience, and fond of his native country, suffered
himself to be unnecefflrily detained in the Nether-
lands a whole year after signing the treaty of Noyon.

C117em TIIE repeated intreaties of Ximenes, the advice

Charles emrn.
barks for of his grandfather Maximilian, and the impatient
Spain. murmurs of his Spanish fubjedts, prevailed on him

at last to embark. He was attended not only by
Chievres, his prime-minifter, but by a numerous
and splendid train of the Flemish nobles, fond of
beholding the grandeur, or of sharing in the boun-
Sept. 13. ty of their prince. After a dangerous voyage, he

landed at Villa Viciofa, in the province of Asturias,
and was received with such loud acclamations of
joy, as a new monarch, whole arrival was to ar-
dently defiled, had reason to expet. The Spanish
nobility resorted to their fovercign from all parts
of the kirgdom, and displayed a magnificence
which the Flemings were unable to emulatey.

Y P. Mart. Ep. 599. 601.

XIMENES,

XIMENES, who confidered the pretence of the Bool I.

king as the greaieft blefling to his dominions, was -
advancing towards the coast, as fait as the infirm Hniniteers
tate of his health would permit, in order to receive endeavour
him. During his regency, and notwithstanding his an interview
extreme old age, he abated, in no degree, the rigour with Ximi-
or frequency of his mortifications; and to these he n
added such laborious alfiduity in business, as would
have worn out the most youthful and vigorous con-
fti-ution. Every day he employed several hours in
devotion; he celebrated maTs ir. person; he even al-
lotted some (pac, for itudy. Notwithstanding there
occupations he regularly attended the council; he re-
ceived and read all papers preiented to him; he dic-
tated letters and intrusions; and took under his in-
fpection all business, civil, ecclesiastical, or milita.
ry. Every mo.ment of his time was filled up with
some serious employment. The only amusement
in which he indulged himself by way of relaxation
after business, was to canvass, with a few friars and
divines, some intricate article in scholastic theology.
Wafted by such a course of life, the infirmitiesof age
daily grew upon him. On hisjourney, a violent difor-
der seized him at BosEquillos, attended with uncom-
mon symptoms; which his followers confidered as
the effect of prison ", but could not agree whether
the crime ought to be imputed to the hatred of the
Spanilh nobles, or to the malice of the Flemish
courtiers. This accident obliging him to stop short,
he wrote to Charles, and with his usual boldness ad- clharle,'
vised him to dil'nifs all the itrangers in his train, ximl'i."t
whose numbers and crcdit gave offence already to
the Spaniards, and would ere long alienate the assec-
tions of the whole people. At the fame time, he ear-
nefly defiredtohave an interview with theking, that
he might inform him of the slate of the nation, and
the temper of his fubjedts. To prevent this, not only
the Flemings, but the Spanish grandees, employed

Miniana, Contin. lib, i. c. 3,

all

BoOK I. all their address, and industriously kept Charles at

a distance from Aranda, the place to which the
Cardinal had removed. Through their suggestions,
every measure that he recommended was rejected;
the utmost care was taken to make him feel, and
to point out to the whole nation, that his power was
on the decline; even in things purely trivial, such a
choice was always made, as was deemed most dif-
agreeable to him. Ximenes did not bear this treat-
ment with his usual fortitude of spirit. Conscious
of his own integrity and merit, he expected a more
grateful return from a prince, to whom he delivered
a kingdom more flourishing than it had been in any
former age, and authority more extensive and bet-
ter established, than the most illustrious of his an-
ceftors had ever possessed. He could not, therefore,
on many occasions, refrain from giving vent to his
indignation and complaints. He lamented the fate
of his country, and foretold the calamities it would
susser from the insolence, the rapaciousness, and ig-
norance of strangers. While his mind was agita-
ted by these palions, he received a letter from the
king, in which, after a few cold and formal expref-
sions of regard, he was allowed to retire to his dio-
cefe; that after a life of such continued labour, he
His death. might end his days in tranquillity. This message

proved fatal to Ximenes. His haughty mind, it is
probable, would not survive disgrace; perhaps his
generous heart could not bear the profpet of the
misfortunes ready to fall on his country. Which,
Nov. 8 soever of there opiiions we embrace, certain it is

that he expired a few hours after reading the
letter Z. The variety, the grandeur, and the success
of his schemes, during a regency of only twenty
months, leave it doubtful, whether his sagacity in
council, his prudence in conduct, or his boldnels in

z Marfallier Vie de Ximenes, p. 447. Gometius lib. vii. p.
2o6, &c. Baudier Hist. de Xinen. p. $o8.

CXcCutollt ,

execution, deserve the greatest praise. His reputa- BOOK I.
tion is still high in Spain, not only for wisdom, but '-"
for sanctity; and he is the only prime minister
mentioned in history, whom his contemporaries re-
verenced as a faint a, and to whom the people under
his government ascribed the power of working mi-
racles.

SOON after the death of Ximenes, Charles made sos.

his public entry, with great pomp, into Valladolid, C"'vnesllh
whither he had summoned the Cortes of Castile, lid.
Though he aflumed on all occasions the name of
king, that title had never been acknowledged in the
Cortes. The Spaniards confidering Joanna as possess-
ed of the sole right to the crown, and no example of
a Won's having enjoyed the title of king during the life
of his parents occurring in their history, the Cortes
discovered all that scrupulous refped for antient
forms, and that aversion to innovation, which are
conspicuous in popular assemblies. The presence,
however, of their prince, the address, the artifices,
and the threats of his ministers, prevailed on them
at last to declare him king, in conjun&tion with his Declare
mother, whose name they appointed to be placed Charles
before that of her son in all publick afts; and de- king.
dared that, if at any future period she should reco-
ver the exercise of reason, the whole royal authori-
ty should return into her hands. At the fame time,
they voted a free gift of fix hundred thousand du-
cats to be paid in three years, a fum more confide-
rable than had ever been granted to any former
monarch b,

NOTWITHSTANDING this obsequiousness of the Discontent

Cortes to the will of the king, the most violent of the Cai-
symptoms of diffatisfation with his government the'cauiof
began to break out in the kingdom. Chievres had it

'Flechier, Vie de Ximen. ii. 746. b Miniana, Con-
tin. lib. i. c. 3. P. Mart. Ep. 608. Sandov. p. iz.

acquired

BooK T. acquired over the mind of the young monarch the

v"'' ascendant not only of a tutor, but of a parent.

Charles seemed to have no sentiments but those
which his minister inspired, and scarce uttered a
word but what he put into his mouth. He was
constantly surrounded by Flemings; no person got
accels to him without their permillion; nor was any
admitted to audience but in their pretence. As he
spoke the Spanish language very imperfectly, his
answers were always extremely short, and often
delivered with hesitation. From all these circum-
stances, many of the Spaniards were led to believe
that he was a prince of a flow and narrow genius;
some pretended to discover a strong refemblancebe-
tween him and his mother, and began to whisper
that his capacity for government would never be far
superior to hers; and though they who had the best
opportunity of judging concerning his character,
maintained, that notwithstanding such unpromising
appearances, he pofleffed a large fund of know-
ledge and fagacityC; yet all agreed in condemning
his partiality towards his countrymen, and his at-
tachment to his favourites as unreasonable and im-
moderate. Unfortunately for Charles, there fa-
vourites were unworthy of his confidence. To
amass wealth seems to have been their only aim;
and as they had reason to fear, that either their
nmafter's good sense, or the indignation of the Spa-
niards, might soon abridge their power, they has-
tened to improve the present opportunity, and their
avarice was the more rapacious, because they ex-
pected their authority to be of no long duration.
All honours, offices and benefices, were either en-
grolIed by the Flemings, or publickly fold by them.
Chievres, his wife, and Sauvage, whom Charles,
on0 the death of Ximenes, had imprudently raised
tobe chancellor of Caffilc, vied with each other
in all the refinements of extortion and venality.

c Sndoval, p. 31. P. Mart. Ep. 655.

Not

Not only the Spanish hifforians, who, from resent- BOOK I.
ment, may be fufpe&ed of exaggeration, but Pe- --v--
ter Martyr Angleria, an Italian, who resided at that
time in the court of Spain, and who was under no
temptation to deceive the persons to whom his let-
ters are addrefled, give a description which is al-
most incredible, of the insatiable and shameless co-
vetoufnefs of the Flemings. According to Angle-
ria's calculation, which he asserts to be extremely
moderate, they remitted into the Low Countries,
in the space of ten months, no lets a fum than a
million and one hundred thousand ducats. The
nomination of William de Croy, Chievres' inephew,
a young man not of canonical age, to the Arch-
bifhoprick of Toledo, exasperated the Spaniards
more than all these exactions. They confidered
the elevation of a firanger to the head of their
church, and to the richest benefice in the kingdom,
not only as an injury, but as an insult to the whole
nation; and both clergy and laity, the former from
interest, the latter from indignation, joined in ex-
claiming against itd.

CHARLES leaving Castile thus disgusted with his Chales

administration, set out for Saragofia, the capital of hlds the
Aragon, that he might be present in the Cortes of Aragon.
that kingdom. On his way thither, he took leave
of his brother Ferdinand, whom he sent into Ger-
many on the pretence of visiting their grandfather,
Maximilian, in his old age. To this prudent prc-
caution, Charles owed the preservation of his Spa-
nifh dominions. During the violent commotions
which arose there soon after this period, the Spani-
ards would infallibly have offered the crown to a
prince, who was the darling of the whole nation;
nor did Ferdinand want ambition, or counsellors,

d Sandoval, 28-31. P. Mart. Ep.6o8, 611, 613,614,62z,
623, 639. Niniana, Contin, lib. i, c. 3. p. 8.

that

BooK I. that would have prompted him to accept of the
'-v--.a offer *.

The Arago- THE Aragonefe had not hitherto acknowledged
inec mole Charles as king, nor would they allow the Cortes
than the to be aflembled in his name, but in that of the
Cailians. Jufiiza, to whom, during an interregnum, this pri-

vilege belongedf. The opposition Charles had to
struggle with in the Cortes of Aragon, was more
violent and obstinate than that which he had over-
come in Castile; after long delays, however, and
with much difficulty, he persuaded the members to
confer on him the title of king, in conjunction with
his mother. At the fame time he bound himself
by that solemn oath, which the Aragonefe exated
of their king, never to violate any of their rights
or liberties. When a donative was demanded, the
members were still more intractable; many months
elapsed before they would agree to grant Charles
two hundred thousand ducats, and that fum they
appropriated so ftrtdly for paying debts of the
crown, which had long been forgotten, that a very
small part of it came into the King's hands. What
had happened in Castile taught them caution, and
determined them rather to satisfy the claims of their
fellow citizens, how obsolete soever, than to fur-
nifh firangers the means of enriching themselves
with the spoils of their country'.

DURING these proceedings of the Cortes, am-

baffadors arrived at Saragofla from Francis I. and
the young king of Navarre, demanding the reffi-
tution of that kingdom in terms of the treaty of
Noyon. But neither Charles, nor the Castilian no-
bles whom he consulted on this occasion, discover-
ed any inclination to part with this acquisition. A

P. Martyr, Ep. 619. Fcrreras, viii. 460.
f P. Martyr, Ep. 605. g P. Martyr, Ep. 61 5-634.

COnl-

ference held Coon after at Montpelier, in order to BOOK I.
bring this matter to an amicable iffuie, was altoge- '-"
ther fruitless; and while the French urged the in-
justice of the usurpation, the Spaniards were atten-
tive only to its importance".

FROM Aragon, Charles proceeded to Catalonia, sI 9.

where he wafted as much time, encountered more
difficulties, and gained less money. The Flemings
were now become so odious in every province of
Spain by their exactions, that the desire of morti-
fying them, and of disappointing their avarice,
augmented the jealousy with which a free people
usually condut their deliberations.

THE Castilians, who had felt most sensibly the combnati-

weight and rigour of the oppreflive schemes, car- on of the
ried on by the Flemings, resolved no longer to Cub- againf the
mit with a tameness fatal to themselves, and which Flemif mi-
rendered them the objects of scorn among the reft
of the Spaniards. Segovia, Toledo, Seville, and
several other cities of the first rank, entered into a
confederacy for the defence of their rights and pri-
vileges; and notwithstanding the silence of the no-
bility, who, on this occasion, discovered neither
the publick spirit, nor the resolution which became
their order, they laid before the king a full view
of the state of the kingdom, and of the mal-ad-
ministration of his favourites. The pr-ferment of
firangers; the exportation of the current coin;
the increase of taxes, were the grievances of which
they chiefly complained; and of there they de-
manded redress with that boldness, which is natural
to a free people. These remonstrances, preiented
at first at SaragolTa, and renewed afterwards at Bar-
celona, Charles treated with great neglet. The

1 p Martyr. Ep. 605, 633. 640.

confe-

BoorK . confederacy, however, of there cities at thisjunc-

-'CV ' ture, was the beginning of that famous union a.

mong the commons of Castile, which not long as.
ter threw the kingdom into such violent convulfi~
ons, shook the throne, and almost overturned the
constitution'.

SOON after Charles's arrival at Barcelona, he re,

ceived the account of an event which interested
him much more than the murmurs of the Caftili-
ans, or the scruples of the Cortes of Catalonia,

Death of This was the death of the Emperor Maximilian;
Maximilian an occurrence of iinall importance in itself, for he

was a prince conspicuous neither for his virtues, his
January . power, nor his abilities; but rendered by its confe-

quences more memorable than any that had hap-
pened during several ages. It broke that profound
and universal peace which then reigned in the Chris-
tian world; it excited a rivalfhip between two
princes, which threw all Europe into agitation, and
kindled wars more general, and of longer duration,
than had hitherto been known in modern times.

THE revolutions occasioned by the expedition of

the French king, Charles VIII. into Italy, had in-
spired the European princes with new ideas concern-
ing the importance of the Imperial dignity. The
claims of the Empire upon some of the Italian
states were numerous; its jurifdidtion over others
was extensive; and though the former had been al-
most abandoned, and the latter seldom exercised,
under princes of no abilities, and of little influ-
ence, it was obvious, that in the hands of an Em-
peror pofleffed of power and genius, they would
be employed as engines for stretching his dominion
over the greater part of that country. Even Maxi-
milian, feeble and unsteady as his conducL always

P. Martyr, Ep. 630. Ferreras, viii. 464.

was,

was, had availed himself of the infinite pretenfi- BooK I.
ons of theEmpire, and had reaped advantage from ' -v-
every war and every negociation in Italy during
his reign. Thefe'confiderations, added to the dig-
nity of the fiatioh, confessedly the firfi among
Christian princes, and to the rights inherent in the
office, which, if exerted with vigour, were fai
from being inconsiderable, rendered the Imperial
crown more than ever an object of ambition.

NOT long before his death, Maxiilian had dif- Maximilian

covered great Solicitude to preserve this dignity in voured to
the Austrian family, and to procur'e'the king'of fecurethe
Spain to be chosen his successor; - But he himself ,rowto hi
having never been crowned by tle .Pope, a cerer grandson.
mony deemed effentialin that age,.was confidered
only as Emperor elecf; and though hiftorians'did
not attend to that diftintion, neither the Italian:
not German chanicery bestowed any' ther titleup-
on him than that of King of the Ronians; adid no
example occurring in history of any .person's be-
ing chosen a successor to a king of the Roman's,
the' Germans, always tenacious of their forms,.
and unwilling to confer upon Charles an office for
which their conifitution knew no'name, obstinate-
ly refused to gratify Maximilian in that pointk.

BY his death, this difficulty was at once remo- Charle, and

ved, and Charles openly aspired to that dignity competitors
which his grandfather had attempted, without fuc- o1. the em
cess, to secure for him. At the fame time, Francis
I. a powerful rival, entered the lifts against him;
and the attention of all Europe was fixed upon this
competition, no less illustrious from the high rank
of the candidates, than from the importance of
the prize for which they contended. Each of them
urged his pretentions with sanguine expectati-
ons, and with no unp;iomifing profipet of success.

k Guicciardini, lib. 13, p. 15. Hit. Gener. d'Allemagne, par

P. Barre, torn. vi i. part. 1. p. 1o87. P. Heuter, Rer. Aulir.
lib. vii. 17. 179. lib. viii . c. z p. 183.

VOL. II. E Charles

BOOK I. Charles confidered the Imperial crown as belong-
' Ov`i~s ing to him of right, from its long continuance in
Pretensions
and hopesof the Austrian line; he knew that none of the Ger-
Charles. man princes poffeifed power or influence enough

to appear as his antagoniff; he flattered himself,
that no consideration would induce the natives of
Germany to exalt any foreign prince to a dignity,
which during so many ages had been deemed pe-
culiar to their own nation; and least of all, that
they would confer this honour upon Francis I. the
sovereign of a people whose genius, and laws, and
manners differed so widely from those of the Ger-
mans, that it was scarcely poflible to establish any
cordial union between them: he trusted not a lit.
tie to the effect of Maximilian's negociations,
which though they did not attain their end, had
prepared the minds of the Germans for his eleva-
tion to the imperial throne; but what he relied on
as his chief recommendation, was the fortunate
Situation of his hereditary dominions in Germany,
which served as a natural barrier to the Empire
againfl the encroachments of the Turkish power.
The conquests, the abilities, and the ambition of
Sultan Selim II. had spread over Europe, at that
time, a general and well founded alarm. By his
victories over the Marmalukes, and the extirpati-
on of that gallant body of men, he had not only
added Egypt and Syria to his empire, but had fe-
cured to it such a degree of internal tranquillity,
that he was ready to turn against Chriitendom the
whole force of his arms, which nothing had hi-
therto been able to resist: The most effecual ex-
pedient for flopping the progress of this torrent,
seemed to be the election of an Emperor, poffelled
of extensive territories in that country, where its
first impreflion would be felt, and who, besides,
could combat this formidable enemy with all the
forces of a powerful monarchy, and with all the
wealth furnished by the mines of the new world,
or the commerce of the Low Countries. Thece

were

were the arguments by which Charles publickly BOOK I.
supported his claim; and to men of integrity and
refletion, they appeared to be not only plausible,
but convincing. He did not, however, trust the
success of his cause to there alone. Great fums of
money were remitted from Spain; all the refine-
ments and artifice of negociation were employed;
and a considerable body of troops kept on foot by
the flates of the Circle of Suabia, was secretly ta-
ken into his pay. The venal were gained by pre-
sents; the objections of the more scrupulous were
answered or eluded; and some feeble princes were
threatened and over-awed'.

ON the other hand, Francis supported his claim of Francs.

with equal eagerness, and no less confidence of its
being well founded. His emissaries contended that
it was now high time to convince the Princes of
the house of Austria that the Imperial crown was
elective, and not hereditary; and that other per-
sons might aspire to an honour which their arro-
gance had come to regard as the property of their
family; that it required a sovereign of mature
judgment, and of approved abilities, to hold the
reins of government in a country where such un-
known opinions concerning religion had been pub-
lifhed, as had thrown the minds of men into an
uncommon agitation, which threatened the most
violent effects; that a young prince, without ex-
perience, and who had hitherto given no fpeci-
mens of his genius for command, was no equal
match for Selim, a monarch, grown old in the art
of war, and in the course of victory; whereas a
king, who, in his early youth had triumphed over
the valour and discipline of the Swiss, till then
reckoned invincible, would be an antagonist not
unworthy of the Conqueror of the East; that the

' Guic. lib. 13. 9. Sleidan, Hist. of the Reformat. 14.
Struvii Corp. Hilt. German. ii. 971. Not. 20.

E a fire

BObK I. fire and impetuosity of the French cavalry, added

to the discipline and liability of the German in-
fantry, would form an army so irresistible, that in-
stead of waiting the approach of the Ottoman
forces, it might carry hostilities into the heart of
their dominions; that the election of Charles would
be inconfiRfent with a fundamental conifitution,
by which the person who holds the crown of Na-
ples, is excluded from aspiring to the Imperial
dignity; that his elevation to that honour would
soon kindle a war in Italy, on account of his pre-
tensions to the dutchy of Milan, the effects of
which could not fail of reaching the Empire, and
might prove fatal to itm. But while his ambaffa-
dors enlarged upon these and other topicks of the
fame kind, in all the courts of Germany, Francis,
sensible of the prejudices entertained againif him
as a foreigner, unacquainted with the German lan-
guage or manners, endeavoured to overcome
these, and to gain the favour of the princes by
immense gifts, and by infinite promises. As the
expeditious method of transmitting money, and
the decent mode of conveying a bribe by bills of
exchange was then little known, the French am-
baffadors travelled with a train of horses loaded
.with treafire, an equipage not very honourable
for that prince by whom they were employed, and
infamous for those to whom they were tent".

Views and TIE other European princes could not remain
interest of
ther ttes. indifferent fpedators of a contefl, the decision of

which tb nearly aiflcted them. Their cornmon
interefl: ought naturally to have formed a gcneral
combination, in orderto dihappoint both compe-
titors, and to prevent either of them from obtain-
ing such a pre-eminence in power and dignity, as
might prove dangerous to the liberties of Europc.

'Guic. lib. 13. 16o. Sleid, p. 16. Geor. Saibii de elel
Car. V. Hiftoria apud. Scardii Script. Rer. German. vol. ii. p. 4.

Memoires de Marech. de Fleuranges, p. 296.

But

But the ideas with respect to a proper difiribution BOOK I.
and balance of power were so lately introduced
into the fyltem of European policy, that they were
noi hitherto objects of sufficient attention. The
pailions of some princes, the want of foresight in
others, and the fear of givingoffence to the candi-
dates, hindered such a lalutary union of the powers
of Europe, and rendered them either totally negli-
gent of the publick safety, or kept them from ex-
erting themselves with vigour in its behalf.

THE Swiss Cantons, though they dreaded the OftheSwifs.

elevation of either of the contending monarchs,
and though they wished to have seen some prince
whose dominions were less extensive, and whose
power was more moderate, feated on the Imperial
throne, were prompted, however, by their hatred
of the French nation, to give an open preference to
the pretensions of Charles, while they used their
utmost influence to frustrate those of Francis°.

THE Venetians easily discerned, that it was the, of the V-

interest of their republick to have both the rival netians
set aside; but their jealousy of the house of Au-
stria, whose ambition and neighbourhood had been
fatal to their grandeur, would not permit them
to atA up to their own ideas, and led them hastily
to give the fainion of their approbation to the
claim of the French king.

IT was equally the interest, and more in the Of Hcnry

power of Henry VIII. of England, to prevent ei- VI'
ther Francis or Charles from acquiring a dignity
which would raifl them so far above other mo-
narchs. But though Henry often boasted, that he
held the balance of Europe in his hand, he had
neither the lteady attention, the accurate dilcern-
ment, nor the dilpaflionate temper which that de-
licate function required. On this occasion it mor-
tified his vanity bo much, to fee himself excluded

° Sabitlus, p. 6.

E 3 fiom

BoOK I. from that noble competition which reflected such
"' honour upon the two antagonists, that he took

the resolution of fending an ambassador into Ger-
many, and of declaring himself a candidate for
the Imperial throne. The ambassador, though
loaded with caresses by the German princes and
the Pope's nuncio, informed his master, that he
could hope for no success in a claim which he had
been so late in preferring; and Henry, imputing
his disappointment to that circumstance alone,
and soothed with this ostentatious display of his
own importance, seems to have taken no farther
part in the matter, either by contributing to thwart
both his rivals, or to promote one of them P.
Of LeoX; LEO X. a pontiff no less renowned for his po-

litical abilities, than for his love of the arts, was
the only prince of the age who observed the moti-
ons of the two contending monarchs with a pru-
dent attention, or who discovered a proper folici-
tude for the public safety. The Imperial and Pa.
,aljurifdiaion interfered in so many infances, the
complaints of usurpation were so numerouson both
fides, and the territories of the church owed their
safety so entirely to the weakness of their neigh-
bours, and To little to their own force, that no-
thing was so formidable to the court of Rome as
an Emperor of extensive power, or of enterpriz-
ing genius. Leo trembled at the profpet of be-
holding the Imperial crown placed on the head of
the king of Spain and of Naples, and the master
of the new world; nor was he less afraid of fee-
ing a king of France, who was duke of Milan
and lord of Genoa, exalted to that dignity. He
foretold that the eletion of either of them would
be fatal to the independence of the holy fee, to
the peace of Italy, and perhaps to the liberties of
Europe. To oppose them, however, required ad-
dress and caution in proportion to the greatness of
P'Memoirc dc Fleuranges, 3 4. Herbert, Hilt. of Hcnry Viii.

thcei

their power, and their opportunities of taking re- BooK I.
venge. Leo was defective in neither. He secretly ,~.
exhorted the German princes to place one of their
own number on the Imperial throne, which many
of them were capable of filling with honour; he
put them in mind of the constitution by which the
Kings of Naples were for ever excluded from that
dignity q; he warmly exhorted the French king to
persist in his claim, not from any desire that he
should gain his end, but as he foresaw that the
Germans would be more disposed to favour the
king of Spain, he hoped that Francis himself,
when he discovered his own chance of success to
be desperate, would be stimulated by resentment
and the spirit of rivalfhip, to concur with all his
interest in raising some third person to the head of
the Empire; or on the other hand, if Francis
should make unexpected progress, he did not doubt
but that Charles would be induced by similar mlo,
tives to at the fame part; and thus by prudence
and attention, the mutual jealousy of the two ri-
vals might be so dextroufly managed, as to dif-
appoint both. But this scheme, the only one
which a prince in Leo's situation could adopt,
though concerted with great wisdom, was execu-
ted with little discretion. The French ambafla-
dors in Germany fed their master with vain hopes;
the pope's nuncio, being gained by them, altoge-
ther forgot the inftrudtions he had received; and
Francis persevered so long and so obflinately in
urging his own pretensions, as rendered all Leo's
measures abortive'.

SucH were the hopes of the candidates, and The det

the views of the different princes, when the diet 'r",'bz.
was opened according to form at Frankfort. The
right of chufing an Emperor had long been vefied

q Goldalti Conflitutiones Imperiales. Francof. 1673. vol. 1.
~4,. ' Guicciar. lib. 13. 161.

E 4 in

BoOK I. in seven great princes, difftinguifhed by the name of
~'- " eElectors, the origin of whose office, and the nature

and extent of their powers, have already been ex-
plained. These were, at that time Albert of Bran-
denburgh, archbishop of Mentz; Herman count de
Wied, archbishop of Cologne; Richard de Greif-
fenklau, archbishop of Treves; Lewis, king of Bo-
hemia; Lewis, count Palatin of the Rhine; Frede-
rick, duke of Saxony; and Joachim I. marquis of
Brandenburgh. Notwiihftanding the artful argu-
ments produced by the ambafladors of the two
kings, in favour of their refpedive masters, and
,thew Ie- in spite of all their solicitations, intrigues, and pre-

sents, the Eletors did not forget that maxim on
which the liberty of the German conflitution was
thought to be founded. Among the members of
the Germanick body, which is a great republick
composed of states almost independent, the first
-principle of patriotism is to depress and limit the
power of the Emperor; and of this idea, so natu-
ral under such a form of government, a German
:politician seldom loses fight. No prince of confi-
derable power, or extensive dominions, had for
some ages been raised to the Imperial throne; and
to this prudent precaution many of the great fami-
lies in Germany owed the splendor and independ-
ence which they had acquired during that period.
To elet either of the contending monarchs, would
have been a gross violation of that salutary maxim;
would have given to the Empire a matter, instead
of an head; and would have reduced themselves
from the rank of equals, to the condition of fubjeds.

offer the Fu lr, of there ideas, they all turned their eyes
imperial
crown to towards Frederick, duke of Saxony, a prince of such
Frederickof eminent virtue, and abilities, as to be distinguishcd
SaxonY. by the name of the Sage, and with one voice offer-

ed him the Imperial crown. He was not dazzled

with

with that objet, which monarchs To far superior BOoK I.
to him in power courted with such eagerness; and '-'-
after deliberating upon the matter a short time,
he rejected it with a magnanimity and disinterest-
ednefs, no less singular than admirable. Nothing, ,,ho"eJca,
he observed, could be more impolitic, than an ob-
Itinate adherence to a maxim which, though found
and jus in many cafes, was not applicable to all.
In times of tranquillity, said he, we wish for an
Emperor who has not power to invade our liber-
ties; times of danger demand one who is able to
secure our safety. The Turkish armies, led by a
gallant and victorious monarch are now assembling
They are ready to pour in upon Germany with a
violence unknown in former ages. New conjunc-
tures call for new expedients. The Imperial fcep-
tre muff be committed to some hand more pow-
erful than mine, or that of any other German
prince. We possess neither dominions, nor reve-
nues, nor authority which enable us to encoun-
ter such a formidable enemy. Recourse must be
had in this exigency to one of the rival monarchs.
Each of them can bring into the field forces fuffi-
cient for our defence. But as the king of Spain
is of German extraction, as he is a member and
prince of the empire by the territories which de-
scend to him from his grandfather; as his domini-
ons stretch along that frontier which lies most ex-
posed to the enemy; his claim is preferable, in
my opinion, to that of a firanger to our language,
to our blood, and to our country; and therefore I
give my vote to confer on him the Imperial crown.

THIS opinion, diltated by such uncommon ge- and rerure

nerofity, and supported by arguments so plausible, fy mchxt
made a deep impreflion on the Electors. The tie'ambll;
king of Spain's ambafliadors, sensible of the im- fado,.
portant service which Fr deric had done their rnatf
ter, sent him a considerable fum of money, as the

firfl;

BooK I. first token of that prince's gratitude. But he
c'*' who had greatness of mind to refuse a crown, dif-

dained to receive a bribe; and upon their intreat-
ing that, at least, he would permit them to dif-
tribute part of that fum among his courtiers, he
replied, that he could not prevent them from ac-
cepting what should be offered, but whoever took
a tingle florin hould be dismissed next morning
from his servicer.

Further de- No prince in Germany could now aspire to a
liberations dignity, which Frederick had declined for reasons
tofrse . lec- applicable to them all. It remained to make a

choice between the two great competitors. But
betides the prejudice in Charles's favour arising
from his birth, and the situation of his German
dominions, he owed not a little to the abilities
of the cardinal de Gurk, and the zeal of Erard
de la Mark, bishop of Liege, two of his ambaf-
fadors who had conducted their negociations with
more prudence and address, than those entrusted
by the French king. The former, who had long
been the minister and favourite of Maximilian,
was well acquainted with the art of managing the
Germans; and the latter having been disappointed
of a cardinal's hat by Francis, employed all the

'P. Daniel, an historian ofconliderable name, seems to call in quef.
tion the truth of this account of Frederick's behaviour, becaule it
is not mentioned by Georgius Sabinus in his Hitfory of the elcc.
tion and coronation of Charles V. tom. iii. p. 63. But no great
firess ought to be laid on an omillion in a superficial author, whole
treatise, though dignified with the name of hiftoly, contains only
/ilch an account of the ceremonial of Charles's election as is usually
published in Germany on like occasions. Scard. Rer. Germ.
Script. v. z. p. i. The teftimonyof Erasmus, lib. 1,. epit. 4.
and that of Sleidan, p. 1 . are exprcfs. Seckendorf in his cotP-
mentarius Hiftoricus & Apologeticus de Lutheranifmo, p. iiz,
has examined this sac with his ufital industry, and has aoablilhed
its truth by the noft undoubled evidence. To there testimonies
which lie has colleeled, I may add the decisive one of cardinal Ca-
jetan, the pope's legate at Frankfort, in his letter July 5th, i5$i.
Epiltrcs au princes, &c. rectiellies par Rutfelli, trrduigts par B-l.
loJ'efi. Par. 1572. p. 60.

malicious

malicious ingenuity with which the desire of re- BooK I.
venge inspires an ambitious mind, in thwarting''"
the measures of that monarch. The Spanish
party among the Eletors daily gained ground;
and the Pope's nuncio, being convinced that it
was vain to make any farther opposition, endea-
voured to acquire some merit with the future Em-
peror, by offering voluntarily, in the name of his
master, a dispensation to hold the Imperial crown
in conjunction with that of Naples'.

ON the twenty-eighth of June, five months

and ten days after the death of Maximilian, this
important contest, which had held all Europe in
suspense, was decided. Six of the Electors had They fchu
already declared for the king of Spain, and the charte'-
archbilhop of Treves, the only firm adherent to Pe'r
the French interest, having at lai joined his bre-
thren, Charles was by the unanimous voice of the
Eledoral college raised to the Imperial throne '.

BUT though the Eleators consented, from vari-

ous motives, to promote Charles to that high fta-
tion, they discovered at the fame time great jea-
lousy of his extraordinary power, and endeavour-
ed, with the utmost solicitude, to provide against They ire
his encroaching on the privileges of the Germa-sfieof hi
nick body. It had long been the custom to de-P°,cr, and
mand of every new Emperor a confirmation of cautions
there privileges, and to require a promise that hegan'"Rt it.
would never violate them in any instance. While
princes who were formidable neither from extent
of territory, nor of genius, potfefled the Imperial
throne, a general and verbal engagcment to this
purpose was deemed fuflicient security. But un-
der an Emperor so powerful as Charles, other ple-
cautions ieemed neceflary. A (Cpitlalion or

s Freheri. Rcr. German. Scriptores, vol. iii. t72. cur. Struvii
Argent. 1717. Gianone I-lil. ot Naples, 2, 498.

Jac. Aug. Thuan. l-lill. ui tcniporis. Edit. Bulklcy,lib. .c. 9.

claim

BooS f. claim of rights was formed, in which the privile.

ges and immunities of the elecors, of the princes
of the empire, of the cities, and of every other
member of the Germanick body are enumerated,
This capitulation was immediately signed by
Charles's ambassadors in the name of their maf-
ter, and he himself at his coronation confirmed it
in the most solemn manner. Since that period,
the Eletors have continued to prescribe the fame
conditions to all his successors; and in Germany
the Capitulation or mutual contract between the
emperor and his fubjets, is confidered as a strong
barrier against the progress of the imperial power,
and as the great charter of their liberties to which
they often appeal".

The eleti- THE important intelligence of his election was
to l.tifi conveyed in nine days from Frankfort to Barcelo-

na, where Charles was still detained by the ob-
ftinacy of the Catalonian Cortes, which had not
hitherto brought to an ilfue any of the affairs that
came before it. He received the account with
the joy natural to a young alpiring mind, on an
acceilion of power and dignity which railed him
lo far above the other princes of Europe. Then
it was that those vast profpets which allured him
during his whole administration began to open,
and from this ara we may date the formation, and
ale able to trace the gradual progress of a grand
system of cnterprizing ambition which renders the
liftory of his reign lb worthy of attention.

Ir',,a.p- A TRIVIAL circumstance first discovered the
on hin, ef'c;ts of this great elevation upon the mind of

Charles. In all the publick writs which he ifiied
as king of Spain, he afilmed the title of Majetl)',
and rLquired it from his fubjeOts as a mark ot their
reipect. Bclore that time, all the monarchs of
Europe were satisfied with the appellation of

Pfelfel Ahrec dce I' Hid. de Droit Pullique d'Allemnagn 59o.
Linlmi i Capitulat. inpecr. Elpiftres des Priinces par Rulicelli, p. 60.

H rl.lj;

[iygbne.fs, or Grace; but the vanity of other courts BooK 1.
sion led them to imitate the example of the Spa-
nilh. The epithet of Majesty is no longer a mark
of pre-eminence. The most inconsiderable mo-
narchs in Europe enjoy it, and the arrogance of
the greater potentates has invented no higher
denomination ".

THE Spaniards were far from viewing the pro- The Spaoi-

ards dilfh-

motion of their King to the Impeii.il throne with titfiedwilti
the fame satisfaction which he himfldf felt. To thi. e-l-a,
be deprived of the pretence of their sovereign,
and to be fubjedted to the government of a vice-
roy and his council, a species of administration
often oppressive, and always disagreeable, were
the immediate and necessary consequences of this
new dignity. To fee the blood of their country-
men shed in quarrels wherein the nation had no
concern, to behold its treasures wafted in support-
ing the splendour of a foreign title, and to be
plunged in the chaos of Italian and German poli-
tics, were effects of this event almost as unavoid-
able. From all thefeconfiderations, theyconcluded,
that nothing could have happened more pernici-
ous to the Spanish nation; and the fortirude and
publick spirit of their anccftors, who, in the Cor-
tes of Castile, prohibited Alfonzo the WVile from
leaving the kingdom, in order to receive the Im-
pe ial crown, were often mentioned with the high-
eft praise, and pronounced to be extremely worthy
of imitation at thisjundture'

BU T Charles, without regarding the fentimecnts

or murmurs of his Spanish ltbl-cts, mc :rptcd of
the Imperial dignity which the count Pa!naiiie, at
the head of a solemn embassy, offered him in the
name of the Electors; and declared his intention
of setting out fbon for Germany, in order to take
pofleflion of it. This was the more neceilary,

" Miniana Contin. Mar. p. 13. Fcrreras. viii. 475. IMeiloilcs
ilft tiL lia Houffaie, tonm. i. p. 53, &c.
"andloval, i. p. ja, Miniana, Cotiln p. 1. bccauie,

BooK I. because, according to the forms of the German
'v-'Y confitution, he could not, before the ceremony

No r. of a publick coronation, exercise any aa of ju-

rifdiCtion or authority ".

THEIR certain knowledge of this resolution

augmented the difgufl of the Spaniards; and a
fullen and refractory spirit prevailed among persons
of all ranks. The Pope having granted the king

Their di- the tenths of all ecclesiastical benefices in Castile to
content in-
creates. assist him in carrying on war with greater vigour

against the Turks, a convocation of the clergy
unanimously refused to levy that rum, upon pre-
tence that it ought never to be exaded but at
those times when Christendom was actually invad-
ed by the Infidels; and though Leo, in order to
filpport his authority, laid the kingdom under an
interdict, so little regard was paid to a censure
which was universally deemed unjust, that Char-
les himself applied to have it taken off; and thus
the Spanish clergy, besides their merit in opposing
the usurpations of the pope, and disregarding the
influence of the crown, gained the exemption
which they had claimed Y.

THE commotions which arose in the kingdom

of Valencia, annexed to the crown of Arragon,
were more formidable, and produced more dange-
rous and lasting effects. A seditious monk having

rAniurn by his sermons excited the citizens of Valencia,
valencia. the capital city, to take arms, and topunifh cer-

tain criminals in a tumultuary manner, the people,
pleased with this exercise of power, and with such
a discovery of their own importance, not only re-
fused to lay down their arms, but formed them-
selves inta troops and companies that they might
be regularly trained to martial exercises. To ob-
tain Ibme security against the oppression of the
grandees was the motive of this association, and
proved a powerful bond of union; for as the ari-

x S;tbinus. .

1. Barre, viii. 1085.
y P. Martyr, L'p. 462. l'errleru s viii. 473, ftocratical

ftocratical privileges and independence were more BooK I.
complete in Valencia than in any other of the "
Spanish kingdoms, the nobles, being scarce ac-
countable for their conduct to any superior, treat-
ed the people not only as vassals but as slaves.
They were alarmed, however, at the success of
this unexpected insurrection, as it might encou-
rage the people to attempt shaking off the yoke;
but as they could not repress them without tak-
ing arms, it became necessary to have recourse to
the Emperor, and to desire his permiflion to at-
tack them. At the fame time the people made itlp s
choice of deputies to represent their grievances
and to implore the protection of their sovereign.
Happily for the latter, they arrived at court when
Charles was exasperated to an high degree against
the nobles. As he was eager to visit Germany,
where his pretence became every day more necef-
fary, and as his Flemish courtiers were still more
impatient to return into their native country, and
to carry thither the spoils they had amassed in Caf-
tile, it was impossible for him to hold the Cortes
of Valencia in person. He had for that reason
empowered the cardinal Adrian to represent him
in that assembly, and in his name to receive their
oath of allegiance, to confirm their privileges with
the usual folemnities, and to demand of them a
free gift. But the Valencian nobles, who confi-
dered this measure as an indignity to their coun-
try, which was no less entitled, than his other
kingdoms, to the honour of their sovereign's pre-
fence, decla'ed that by the fundamental laws of
the constitution they could neither acknowledge a
person who was absent as king, nor grant him any
subsidy, and to this declaration they adhered with
an haughty and inflexible obstinacy. Charles
piqued, by their behaviour, decided in favour
of the people, and ralhly authorized them to con-
tinue in arms. Their deputies returned in tri-
umph, and were received by their fellow-citizens

as

BooK 1. as the deliverers of their country; and the info-
t 'V 'lence of the multitude increasing with their sic-

cess, they expelled all the nobles out of the city,
committed the government to magistrates of their
own election, and entered into an association dif-
tinguifhed by the name of Germanada or Brother-
hood, which proved the source not only of the
wildest disorders, but of the most fatal calamities
ill that kingdom z.

The Cortes MEANWHILE, the kingdom of Caftilewasagi-
ofCaftile tated with no less violence. No sooner was the

meet in Emperor's intention to leave Spain made known,
Calicia. than several cities of the first rank resolved to re-

monftrate against it, and to crave redress once
more of those grievances which they had former-
ly laid before him. Charles artfully avoided ad-
mittingtheir deputies to audience; and as he saw
from this circumstance how difficult it would be
at this junaure to restrain the mutinous spirit of
greater cities, he summoned the Cortes of Castile
to meet at Compoftella in Galicia. His only rea.
son for calling that assembly, was the hope of ob-
taining another donative; for as his treasury had
been exhausted in the fame proportion that the
riches of his ministers increased, he could not,
without Tome additional aid, appear in Germany
with splendour suited to the Imperial dignity. To
appoint a meeting of the Cortes in so remote a
province, and to demand a new subsidy before
the time for paying the former was expired,
were innovations of a most dangerous tendency;
and among people jealous of their liberties, and
accustomed to fipply the wants of their fovereig.is
with a very frugal hand excited an universal
alarm. The magistrates of Toledo remonftrat-
ed against both there measures in a very high
tone; the inhabitants of Valladolid, who ex-
pected that the Cortes should have been held
in that city, were so enraged that they took

' P. Martyr. Ep. 65 . Ferrcras viii. 476, 485. armsll

arms in a tumultuary manner; and if Charles with Boos I.
his foreign counfeliorshad not fortunately made their '"
escape during a violent tempest, they would have
maflacred all theFlemings, and have prevented him
from continuing hisjourney towards Compoftella.

EVERY City through which they pafled, petiti- The pro.

oned against holdilg a Cortes in Galicia, a point that asem.
with regard to which Charles was inflexible. But bly.
though the utmost i:fluence had been exerted by
the ministers, in order to procure a choice of repre-
fentatives favourable to their designs, such was the
temper of the nation, that at the opening of the
assembly, there appeared among many of the April 1.
members unusual symptoms of ill humour, which
threatened a fierce opposition to all the measures
of the court. No representatives were lent by To-
ledo, for the lot, according to which, by ancient
cuflom, the election was determined in that city,
having fallen upon two persons, devoted to the
Flemiih ministers, their fellow-citizens refused to
grant them a commiflion in the usual form, and in
their stead made choice of two deputies, whom
they empowered to repair to Compoftella, and to
protest against the lawfulness of the Cortes assem- The d
bled there. The reprefentati es of Salamanca re- teieinofthe
fused to take the usual oath of fidelity, unless Castilians
Charles contented to change the place of meeting. "irca"e
Those of Toro, Madrid, Cordova, and several o-
ther places, declared the demand of another dona-
tive to be unprecedented, unconstitutional, and un-
necefTary. All the arts, however, which influence
popular assemblies, bribes, proiniles, threats, and
even force, were employed in order to gain mem-
bers. The nobles, loothed by the refpedtful affi-
duity with which Chievres and the other Flemings
paid court to them, or instigated by a meanjea-
lousy of that spirit of independence which they saw
irifng among the commons, openly favoured the

VOL. 1I. F pre-

BOOK I. pretensions of tie court, or at the utmost did not

L-v-' oppose them ; and at last, in contempt both of ril

sentiments of the nation, and of the ancient forms
of the constitution, a majority voted to grant the
donative for which the Emperor had applied". To-
gether with this grant, the Cortes laid before Charlcs
a representation of those grievances whereof his
people craved redress; but he, having obtained
from them all he could expeCt, paid no attentiol to
tis ill-timed petition, which it was no longer dan-
gerous to disregard b.

Clhnries a- As nothing now retarded his embarkation, he

lpoints re-

gentsduring di.clofed his intention with regard to the regency ot
his abience, Castile during his absence, which he had hitherto

kept secret, and nominated cardinal Adrian to that
office. The vice-royalty of Aragon he conferred
on Don John de Lanuza; that of Valencia on Don
Diego de Mendoza Conde de Mclito. The choice
of the two latter was universally acceptable; but
the advancement of Adrian, though the only Flem-
;ing whQ had preserved any reputation among the
Spaniards, animated the Castilians with new hatred
against foreigners; and even the nobles, who had
Ib tamely fufiered other inroads upon the confliti-

in, felt the indignity offered to their own order

by his promotion, and remonitrated againit it as
illegal. But Charles's defirc of visiting Germann,
and the impatience of his ministers to leave Spain,
were now so much incrcaled, that without regard-
ing the murmurs of the Cafiilians, or even takii'
time to provide any remedy againfi an infurrecti,.;:
in Toledo, which at that time threatened, and ;,l

nticnmbailkr terwards produced mofl: bormidable effcis, ie lt;i-
ftih, i Low ed from Corogna on the tvjenly-ficond of M1);

and by seting out so abruptly in qilucf of a nc'
crown, he endangered a more important one Pl
which he was already in poflullon '.

D I'. Martyr. Ep. 663. Sandoval, p. 32, &c. b Sandoval, 81
c P. Martyr, Ep. 670. Sandov. b.

IsTHE

# BOOK II.

Tr H E
HISTORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

B O O K II.
IM ANY concurring circumstances, not only BooK TI.

called Charles's thoughts towards the affairs

of Germany, but rendered his presence in that piche nein
country neceflary. The Elecdors grew impatient Germany
of so long an interregnum ; his hereditary domini- necc(fary.
ons were disturbed by intestine commotions; and
the new opinions concerning religion, made such
rapid progress as required the moit ifeious confide-
ration. But above all, tile motions of the French
king drew his attention, and convinced him that it
was neceflilry to take meaiuhres for his own defence,
both witlh lpced and with vigour.

Wii.N. Charlcs and Francis entered the lills as Rif; a:,n

candidates fir the Imperial dignity, they condutl-

' ""!'"';e F

ed their rivalfhip with miiay prolell'oios of regard ,t,:ccn
fir each other, and with rc;p.atcd declarations that al:i-!: 1"nd
thcy would not fiffTLr any tincture of entmity to
mingle itfclf with tllis honourable emul;tion, " \\'e
both court the fame miflrcfs," said Francis, wvith
his usual vivacity, ' each uught to urge his itit

1"' 2 with

BooK II. with all the address of which he is master; the
..-r-- most fortunate will prevail, and the other must reft

contented d." But though .'to young and high-fpi-
rited Princes, and each of them animated with the
hope of success, might be capable of forming fuel
a generous resolution, it was soon found that they
promised upon a moderation too refined and difin-
terested for human nature. The preference given to
Charles in the fight of all Europe, mortified Fran-
cis to the highest degree5 and inspired him with all
the paflions natural to disappointed ambition. To
this was owing the personal jealousy and rivalfhip
which subsisted between the two monarchs during
their whole reign; and the rancour of these, ad-
ded to a real opposition of interest, and to maliy
unavoidable causes of discord, involved them in
almost perpetual hostilities. Charles had paid no
regard to the principal article in the treaty of Noy-
on, by refusing oftener than once to do justice to
John d'Albret, the excluded monarch of Navarre,
whom Francis was bound in honour, and prompted
by interest, to restore to his throne. The French
king had pretensions to the crown of Naples, of
which Ferdinand had deprived his predecessor by a
most unjustifiable breach of faith. The Emperor
might reclaim the dutchy of Milan as a fief of the
empire, which Francis had seized, and still kept in
pofiefilon, without having received investiture.
Charles confidered the dutcly of Burgundy as the
patrimonial domain of his ancestors wrcfled fiom
them by the unjust policy of Lewis XI. and ol-
served with the greatest jealorfy the ftrid conneii-
ons which Francis had fbrmcd with the duke of
Gueldres, the hereditary enemy of his family.

'Their deli- WHEN the sources of discord were so many and
berations lpevioul;to various, peace could be of no long continuance
lthe con- even between princes the most exempt from ambi-
nllenc(*ment
ofiholiliic:,, tion or emulation. But as the flhock between two

Iilcli
d Guic. lib. 13. p. 159.

fich mighty antagoniffs could not fail of being both BOOK II.
desperate and dangerous, they both discovered no ,--
small iblicitude about its consequences, and took
time not only to collect, and to weigh their own
strength, and to compare it with that of their ad-
verfary, but to secure the friendship or afliftance of
the other European powers.

THE Pope had equal reason to dread the two ri- They nego

ciate with

vals, and saw that he who prevailed, would become th Pop".
absolute master in Italy. If it had been in his
power to engage them in hostilities, without ren-
dering Lombardy the theatre of war, nothing
would have been more agreeable to him than to fee
them w4fte each other's strength in endless quarrels,
But this was impoflible. Leo foresaw that on the
filft rupture between the two monarchs, the armies
of France and Spain would take the field in the
Milanese, and while the scene of their operations
was so near, and the subjet for which they con-
tended so interesting to him, he could not long re-
main neuter, He was obliged therefore to adapt his ,
plan of conduct to his political situation. He cour-
ted and soothed both the Emperor and king of
France with equal induflry and address; and tho'
warmly solicited by each of them, he assumed all
the appearances of entire impartiality, and atternpt-
ed to conceal his real sentiments under thatprofound
dillimulation which seems to have been affeced by
molt of the Italian politicians in that age,

T-HE, views and interest of the Venetians were not With the

different from thole of the Pope; nor were they Ven"tians.
lets solicitous to prevent Italy fiom becoming the
feat of war, and their own republick from being
involved in the quarrel. Bui through all Leo's ar-
tifices, and notwithstanding his high pretentious to
a perfet neutrality, it was visible that he leaned
towards the Emperor, from whom he had both
more to fear and more to hope than from Francis
and it wias equally manifest, that if it became ne-

F 3 ceffiry

BoOK TI. ceffary to take a fide, the Venetians would, from
'-V----- motives of the fame nature, declare for the king of

France. Noconfiderable afliftance, however, was
to be expected from the Italian states, who were jea-
lous to an extreme degree of the Transalpine pow-
ers, and carefil to preserve the balance between
them, unless when they were seduced to violate this
favourite maxim of their policy, by the certaii
profpe&t of great advantage to themselves.

With BUT the chief attention both of Charles and of
Henry VII. Francis, was employed in order to gain the kingof

England, from whom each of them expeted assist-
ance more effectual, and afforded with less politic!l
caution. Henry VIII. had ascended the throne oi
that kingdom in one thou sand five hundred and
nine, with such circumfiances of advantage, as

The great promised a reign of distinguished felicity and fplen-
p,,,htos dour. The union in his person of the two contend-
naicLi. ing titles of York and Lancaster, and the alacrity

and emulation with which both fa&tions obeyed
him, not only enabled him to exert in his domestic
government a degree of vigour and authority which
none of his predecessors could have safely affimed!
but permitted him to take a share in the affairs o;
the continent, from which the attention of the Eng
lifll had long been diverted by their unhappy divi-
sions. The immense treasures which his father ha.
amassed, rendered him the most wealthy prince i;
Europe. The peace which had subsisted under tli
cautious administration of that monarch, was u:
fuflicinit length to recruit the nation after the dlci!-
lation of the civil wars, but had not enervated is
fpririt; and tlhe lnglilh, aflamcd of having To lo:g
rendered their own country a Icene of dilcord al;d
bloodllhed, were eager to dclillay their valour 1
some foireign \war, and to revive the memory ol tlh1

si;.chiiaac- vidorics gained by their ancefiors. Henry'so:
tI'. temper pc/rf:tly iiited the slate of his kitigdotll

and the dilijoiltion of his fiilhjcis. Anibitious, ;li

tI'ht

tive, enterprizing and accomplifled in all the mar- BooK Il.
tial exercises which in that age formed a chief part .
in the education of persons of noble birth, and'in-
spired them with an early love of war, he longed
to engage in real adtion, and to signalize the begin-
ning of his reign by rome remarkable exploit. An
opportunity of this kind loon presented ittlef; and
the victory at Guinegate, and the successful sieges
of Terouienne and Tournay, though of little utili-
ty to England, refleted great lustre on its monarch,
and confirmed the idea which foreign pi;,ces en-
tertained of his power and importance. So many
concurring causes, added to the happy situation of
his own dominions, which secured them from so-
reign invasion; and to the fortunate ciicumftance
of his being in pofleflion of Calais, which served
not only as a key to France, but opened an easy
passage into the Netherlands, rendered the King of
England the natural guardian of the liberties of
Europe, and the arbiter between the Emperor and
French monarch. Henry hinmfef was fenfible'of
this singular advantage, and convinced, that in or-
der to preserve the balance even, it 'ivas his office'to
prevent either of the rivals from acquiring fucl
superiority of power as might be, fatal to the other,
and formidable to the retl of Chrilendom. But.he
was dcftitute 9f the penetration, and 'ftlll more of
the temper, which such a function required. In-
fluenced by caprice, by vanity, by resentment, by
affection, he was incapable of forming any regular
and exteniive system of policy, or of adhering to it
\yith ltl adinefi. His mealures feldlom resulted from
attention to the g'neral welfare, or fiom a delibe-
rate regard to his own interest, but were dictated
by palfions which rendered him blind to both, and
prevented his gaining that afccndant in the afflirs
of Europe, or frilom reaping fchl advantages to
hiniitclf, as a prince of grcater art, though withlin-
tcr'ior talcnis, mihlit have easily ficcurcd.

1F '4 AlL,

BooK II. ALL the impolitic steps in Henry's adminiftratiot

muff not, however, be imputed to defects in hi,

And of hi.
minife. car- own character; many of them were owing to the
dinal Wol- violent pailions and insatiable ambition of his primi

minister and favourite cardinal Wolfey. This man
from one of the lowest ranks in life, had risen t(
an height of power and dignity, to which no Eng
lifh subject ever arrived; and governed the haugh
ty, presumptuous and untractable spirit of Henlr
with absolute authority. Great talents, and ofve.
ry different kinds, fitted him for the two oppofit(
flations of minister, and of favourite. His pro.
found judgment, his unwearied industry, his tho-
rough acquaintance wih the ftnte of the kingdom,
and his extensive knowledge of the views and inter
efts of foreign courts, qualified him for dhat uncon-
trouled direction of affairs with which he was in-
trusted. The elegance of his manners, the gaiet)
of his conversation, his insinuating address, his love
of magnificence, and his proficiency in those part,
of literature of which Henry was fond, gained
him the affection and confidence of the young mo-
narch Wolfey was far from employing this vafi
and almost royal power, to promote either the true
interest of the nation, or the real grandeur of his
master. Rapacious at the fame time, and profuse,
he was insatiable in desiring wealth Of boundless
ambition, he aspired after new honours with an ea-
gernefs unabated by his former success; and being
rendered presumptuous by his uncommon elevation,
and the ascendant he had gained over a prince, who
scarce brooked advice from any other perfbn, he
discovered in his whole demeanour the most over-
bearing haughtiness and pride. To theie pallions he
himself facrificccl every consideration ; and who-
ever endeavoured to obtain his favour, or that of
his mailer, found it neceflry to sooth and to grati-
fy them.

As

As all the itates of Europe fought Henry's friend- Bo o II.

ship at that time; all courted his minister with in- lr
credible attention and obsequiousness, and strove by paid toWol-
presents, by promises, or by flattery to wurk upon ley by Fran.
his avarice, his ambition, or his pride . Francis had
in the year one thouland seven hundred and eighteen
employed Bonnivet, admiral of France, one of his
molt accomplished and artful courtiers, to gain the
haughty prelate. He himself bestowed on him every
mark of respect and confidence. He consulted him
with regard to his most important affairs, and re-
ceived his responses with implicit deference. By there
arts, tog-ther with the grant of a large pension,
Francis secured the Cardinal, who persuaded his ma-
fter to surrender Tournay to France, to conclude a
treaty of marriage between his daughter the prin-
cess Mary and to conlent to a personal interview
with the French ki :g'. From that time, the most
familiar intercourse subsisted between the two
courts; Francis, sensible of the great value of Wol-
fey's friendihip, laboured to secure the continuance
of it by every pollble expreflion of regard, bestow-
ing on him in all his letters the honourable apella-
tion of Father, Tutor, and Governor.

CHAR LES observed the progress of this union with And iy

the utmost jealousy and concern. His near relation Chale".
to the kirg of England gave him rome title to his
friendship, and soon after his acceflion to the throne
of Castile, he attempted to ingratiate himself with
Wolfey, by fettling on him a pension of three thou-
sand livres. His chief solicitude at present was to
prevent the intended interview, the effedts of which
upon two young princes, whose hearts were no less
susceptible of friendship than their manners were of
inipiring it, he extremely dreaded. But after many
delays occasioned by difficulties about the ceremo-
nial, and by the anxious precautions of both courts
for tile safety of their respective sovereigns, the time

; Fiddes's Life of Wolfey, 166. Rymer's Foedera, xiii, 718.

-lerbert's Hilt. of Henry VIII, 30. Rymier, xiii. 624.

and

BOOK II and place of meeting were at last fixed. Messengers
'---v--' had been sent to different courts inviting all comers,

who were gentlemen, to enter the lifts at tilt and
tournament, againfl the two monarchs and their
knights; and both Francis and Henry loved the
splendour of these spectacles too well, and were too
much delighted with the graceful figure they made
on such occafons, to forego the pleasure or glory
which they expected fiom fich a singular and bril-
liant aflembly. Nor was the Cardinal less fond of
displaying his magnificence in the pretence of two
courts, and of di [covering to the two nations the ex.
tent of his influence over both their monarchs.
Charles finding it impoflible to prevent the inter
view, endeavoured to disappoint its effects, and tc
pre-occupy the favour of the English monarch ant
his minister by an ad of complaisance frill mor

Ch.:.ci vi- flattering and more uncommon. Having failed fronr
ftsngland. Corunna, as has already been related, he fleered hi!

course directly towards England, and relying wholl)
on Henry's generosity for his own safety, landed a
aM:y 26th. Dover. This unexpected visit furprized the nation

Wolfey, however, was well acquainted with thn
Emperor's intention.. A negociation, unknown t(
the historians of that age, had been carried on be
tween him and the court of Spain, this visit had beei
concerted, and Charles granted the Cardinal, when
he calls his m^fZ sincere friend, an additional penfio
es seven thousand ducatsg. Henry, who was thei
at Canterbury, in his way to France, immediatce
di'patched Wolfey to Dover, and being highly plca:
ed with an event (b oomthing to his vanity, haftenc(
to receive, with suitable respect, a guest who h.a
placed in him ilich unbounded confidence. C'harlIt
to whom time was precious, staid only four da:,
in England: But during that short space, he had i:l
adcldrcl not only to give Henry favourable imprelii
oils of his characler and intentions, but to dctac.

g Ryiner, xiii. 7 14,

W0l t.I

Wolfey entirely from the interest of the French BOOK I.
king. All the grandeur, wealth and power, which

C v rr 1 r ^ r . . Insinuates

the Cardinal poltll'fed, did not satisfy his ambitious imiIfelf ina
mind while there was ftll one fcep higher to which an Sa.ur b"-:t
ecclefiaflic could aficerd. The papal dignity had for liing and
Iome time been the object of his wilhes, and Francis, Wo!!ey.
as the most effectual method of securing his fi-iend-
hlip, had pronmied to favour his pretenhions, on the
first vacancy, with all his iniereft. But as the Em-
peror's influence in the college of cardinals was
greatly superior to the French king's, Wolfey grasp-
ed eagerly at an offer which that artful prince had
made him of exerting it vigorously in his behalf;
and allured by this profped, which under the ponti-
ficate of Leo, still in the prime of his life, was a
very distant one, he entered with warmth into all the
Emperor's schemes. No treaty, however, was con-
cluded at that time, between the two monarchs; but
Henry, in return for the honour which Charles had
done him, promised to visit him in some place of the
Low Countries, immediately after taking leave of
the French king.

His" interview with' that prince was in an open June -h.

plain between Guifies and Ardres, where the two Iteric.,
kings and their attendants diiplayed their magnifi- Hc.ry and
cence with such emulation and profuife expence, as Flan-ib.
procured it the name of the Si'id of tbe Cloth ns Gold.
Feats of chivalry, parties of gallantry, and flch ex-
ercifes and pastimes as were in that age reckoned
manly or elegant, rather than icrious business, occu-
pied both courts during eighteen days that they con-
tinued together". Wlhaiever imprellion the engag-

i::g

h The French and Englifl hiilorinns dcfcribe the pomp of

this interview, and the various Ip.Ctacl)es witih great minrtenefs.
One circuiiillance imentioned by the mnarechli 1e llieurages,
who was prfelnt, and which appears fingilar in the prlelnr a;e,
is coilionly omiitted. " Aiter the tournanments," iays he. ", lte
Frcnch and Il'g.lill wrctllers mitde their appena:imcc, and wtirl

tied inl the preu ince Iof
the Kihng, and the lad is; and as thlic

WU:le

BOOK Ii. ing manners of Francis, and the liberal and unfufpi.

ciOus confidence with which he treated Henry, made
on the mind of that monarch, was soon effaced by
Wolsey's artifices, or by the interview which he had
with the Emperor a. Gravelinesi which was con-
du.ted by Charles with less pomp than that near
Guifies, but with greater attention to his political
interest,

Henry's de- THIS afliduity with which the two greatest mo.
...h't.n narchs in Eu!ope paid court to Henry, appeared to

him a plain acknowledgment that he held the ba-
lance in his hands, and convinced him of thejuft-
ncfs of the motto he had cholen, " That whoever he
favoured would certainly prevail," In this opinion
he was confil med by an offer which Charles made of
submitting any difference llha. might arise between
him and Fiancis to his sole arbitration. Nothing
could have the appearance of greater candour and
moderation, than the choice of a judge who was
reckoned the common friend of both. But as the
Emperor had now attached Wolfey entirely to his
interest, no proposal could be more insidious, nor, as
appeared by the sequel, more fatal to the French
king i

Coronwiati,, CHARLE.S, notwithstanding his partial fondness
ai tl, Erm- for the Netherlands, the place of his nativity, made
r'""' no long flay there; and after receiving the homage

and congratulations of his countrymen, haffened to
were many flout wreflers there, it afforded excellent paflime;
but as the King of France had neglected to bring any wrestlers
out of lretagne, the Englilh gained the prize.- After this,
the Kings of France and England retired to a tent, where they
drank together, and the King of England seizing the King of
France by the collar, laid, ' My ,'rotbet,, I jmufi twreflee with
you," and endeavoured once or twice to trip up his heels; but
the King of France, who is a dextrous wrefller, twilled him
round, and threw him on the ground with prodigious violence.
1 he King of England wanted to renew the combat, but was
prevented." Menioires de Fkiuranges, i °o. Paris, 175 3. p. 329.

I Hctbert, 37.

Aix-

Aix-la-Chapelle, the place appointed by the golden BOOK II.
bull for the coronation of the Emperor. There, in ---
presence of an aTfembly more numerous and fplen- O&ober 3.
did than had appeared on any former occasion, the
crown of Charlemagne was placed upon his head,
with all the pompots solemnity which the Germans
assec in their publick ceremonies, and which they
deem essential to the dignity of their empire k

ALMOST at the fame time, Solyman the Magni- Soblmanth-

ficent, one of the most accomplished, enterprizing, afc.nds the
and victorious of the Turkish princes, a constant Ottoman
and formidable rival to the Emperor, alcended the Lo
Ottoman throne. It was the peculiar glory of that
period to produce monarchs the most illustrious, that
have at any one time appeared in Europe. Leo,
Charles, Francis, Henry and Solyman were each of
them possessed of talents which would have render-
ed any age in which they happened to flourish, con-
fpicuous. But such a constellation of great princes
shed uncommon lustre on the sixteenth century. In
every contest, great power and great abilities were
set in opposition; and the efforts of valour and con-
duEt on one fide, counterbalanced by an equal exer-
tion of the fame qualities on the other, not only oc-
cafioned such a variety of events as renders the his-
tory of that period intereffing, but served to check
the exorbitant progress of any of those princes, and
to prevent their attaining fuich pre-eminence in pow-
er as would have been fatal to the liberty and happi-
ncfs of mankind.

THi first a& of the Emperor's administration was nDi,: :i,,

to appoint a Diet of the empire to be held at Worms l' 5L' '.t
on the lixih of January, one thousand five hundred,
and twenty-one, and in his circular letters to the dif-
ferent princes, he informed them that hli had called
this allembly in order to concert with them the molt

k Hartman. Maurus Relatio Coronat. Car. V. ap. Goldatl.
P'olit Imperial. Franc 1614. fol. p. 264.

proper

BOoK II. proper measures for checking the progress of thofr

new and dangerous opinions, which threqtencd to
disturb the peace of Germany, and to overturn tlh
religion of their ancestors.
Ric or thle CHARLES had in view the opinions propagated

fonati- by Luther and his disciples since the year one thou-

sand five hundred and seventeen; and as these led
to that happy reformation in religion which rescucd
one part of Europe from the papal yoke, mitigated
its rigour in the other, and produced a revolution il
the sentiments of mankind, the greatefi as well as
the most beneficial that has happened since the pub-
lication of Christianity, the events which at first gave
birth to these opilions, and the causes which render-
ed their progrels so rapid and successful, deserve to
be confidered with minute attention.

To overturn a system of religious belief founded

on ancient and deep-rooted prejudices, supported by
power, and defended with art and industry; to e-
Itablith in its room doEtrines of the most contrary
genius and tendency ;. and to accomplish all this, not
by external violence or the force of arms, are ope-
rations which hiflorians the least prone to credulity
and fuipe!.ftition, must ascribe to that Divine Provi-
dence which can, with infinite eate, bring about e.
vents thnt to human sagacity appear impoflible. Tll
interpotirion of Heaven in favour of tle Chriflia:
religion at its first publication, was manifested b:
milraclcss and proplhecies wrought and uttered in coi;.
tirmlation olt it: And though none of the relfrmecr
lposi'iicd, or pretended to poflcls, thefc fuperlattnili
gifts, yet tihat wonderful preparation of cilrculmftn-
ct:.; \\licli dilpofed the minds of men for receiving
tli'.ir doCtrines, that iingular combination of cauli'
which it;clr thlred leir fhcccfs, and enabled men dtcfi-
utet of power and of policy to triumph over tlolih
who employed botl against them, may be conlidil-
cd as no Ilight proof tlat tle fame hland which plant-

id

ed the Christian religion, proteated the reformed BOOK II.
faith, and reared it, from beginnings extremely fee- -----
ble, to an amazing degree of strength and maturity.

IT was from causes, seemingly fortuitous, and ,orn incoh-

from a source very inconsiderable, that all the migh- s !,:i' lh"-
ty effets of the reformation flowed. Leo X. when
raised to the papal throne, found the revenues of the
church exhausted by the vast projects of his two am-
bitious predecessors, Alexander VI. and Julius II;
and his own temper, naturally liberal and entcrpriz-
ing, rendered him incapable of that revere and pa-
tient oeconomy which the situation of his finances
required. On the contrary, his schemes for aggran-
dizing the family of Medici, his love of splendour,
his talle for pleasure, and his magnificence in re-
warding men of genius, involved him daily in new
expences, in order to provide a fund for which, eve-
ry device, that the fertile invention of priests had
fallen upon to drain the credulous multitude, was
tried. Among others, he had recourse to a sale of
Indulgences.. According to the doctrine of the Ro- A file o in-
mifh church, all the good works of the Saints, over dulgenc,,
and above those which were necefary towards their fLoi '
own jufification, together with the infinite merits of
Jesus Christ, are deposited in one inexhaustible trea-
filry. The keys of this were committed to St. Pete:-
and to his fuicceflbrs the Popes, who may open it at
pleafilre, and by transferring a portion of this f(l-
perabundant merit to any particular person, for a
fiun of money, may convey to him either the par-
don of his own fins, or a relcafe for any one in whom
lie is interestid, from the pains of purgatory. Such
!ndulgnces were first invented in the eleventh cuin-
lury by Urban'll11. as a recompcnce for thole who
Wvcnt in pertbn upon the wild cnterprize of conquer-
ing the Holy Land They were afterwards granted
to thole who hired a (oldier for that purpo1e; and
in pFroefs of time were bestowed on such as gave

money

BooK II. money for accomplishing any pious work enjoined

v'<" by the Pope'. Julius II. had belltowed Indulgences

on all who contributed towards building the church
of St. Peter at Rome; and as Leo was carrying on
that magnificent and expensive fabric, his grant was
founded on the fame pretence "m

So condua- THE promulgating of there Indulgences in Ger-
edasto give many, together with a share of the profits arising
general of-
fence. from the sale of them, was aflig.ied to Albert,

elector of Mentz and archbishop of Magdeburg,
who, as his chief agent for retailing them in
Saxony, employed Tetzel, a Dominican friar,
of licentious morals, but of an active spirit, and
remarkable for his noisy and popular eloquence.
He, aflifted by the monks of his order, executed
the commillion with great zeal and success, but
with little discretion or decency; and though by
magnifying exceflively the benefit of their Indul-
gences", and by disposing of them at a very low

price

I History of the Council of Trent, by F. Paul, p. 4.
m Palavic. Hist. Conc. Trident. p. 4.
n As the form of these Indulgences, and the benefits which

they were supposed to convey are unknown in proteltant coun-
tries, and little understood, at present, in several places where
the Roman catholic religion is eltabliflied, I have, for the infor-
mnation of nmy readers, translated the form of absolution used by
Tetzel. " May our Lord Jelus Christ have mercy upon thee,
and absolve thee by the merits of his most holy pailion. And I
by his authority, that of his blefled apostles Peter and Paul, and
of the nolt holy Pope, granted and coimitted to me in these
parts, do absolve thee, first from all ecclefiafical censures in
whatever manner they have been incurred, and then trom
all thy fins, tranfgrellions and excesses, how enormous so-
ever they may be, even from such as are reserved tor the
cognizance of the holy lee, and as far as the keys of the holy
church extend, I remit to you all puniflnment which you
deserve in Purgatory on their account, and I restore you to
the holy sacraments of the church, to the unity of the failh-
ful, and to that innocence aind purity which you poflfifed at
baptism, fe that when you die the gates of punifliment Ihall

be

price, they carried on for some time an extenfiveB6o0 11
and lucrative traffick among the credulous multi-"'-'
tude, the extravagance of their aflertions, and the
irregularities in their condu&, came at last to give
general offence. The princes and nobles were
irritated at feeing their vassals drained of so much
wealth, in order to replenish the treasury of a pro-
fuse pontiff. Men of piety regretted the delusion of
the people, who being taught to rely for the pardon
of their fins on the Indulgences which they pur-
chased, did not think it incumbent on them either
to abound in faith, or to pratife holiness. Even
the most unthinking were shocked at the scan-
dalous behaviour of Tetzel and his associates,
who often squandered in drunkenness, gaming,
and low debauchery, those fums which were
piously bestowed in hopes of obtaining eternal
happiness; and all began to wifl that some

be Ihut, and the gates of the paradise of delight shall be opened, and
if you shall not die atprefent, this grace /hall remain in full force when
you are at the point of death. In the name of the Father and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghot. Seckend. Comment. lib. x. p. 14.

The terms in which Tetzel and his associates described the benefits

of Indulgences, and the necessity of purchasing them are so extrava-
gant, that they appear tobe almot incredible. If any man (raid they)
purchases letters of indulgence, his Ibul may reft secure with refpet
to its salvation. The fouls confined in purgatory, for whose redemption
indulgences are purchased, as Ibon as the money tinkles in the chefR,
infantly escape from that place of torment, and ascend into heaven.
That the efficacy of indulgences was ib great, that the molt heinous
fins, even if one Ihould violate (which was impossible) the Mother of
God, would be remitted and expiated by them, and the person be
freed both from punishment and guilt. That this was the unlpeakable
gift of God, in order to reconcile men to himself. That the cross
ereceed by the preachers of indulgences, was as efficacious as the cross
of Chrilt itself. Lo I the heavens are open; if you enter not now,
when will you enter ? For twelve-pence you. may redeem the foul of
your father out of purgatory i and arc you so ungrateful, that you
will not rescue your parent from torment ? If you had but one coat,
you ought to firip yourself instantly, and fell it, in order to purchase
I'uch benefits, &c. Thece, and many fulch extravagant cxpreffious,
are feleeted out of Luther's works by Chemniitius in his Examcn
Concilii Tridentini apud Herm. Vonder H-ardt. Hit+. Liter. Reforin.
pars iv. p. 6. The imec author has puiliflicd tlveral of Tctzel's
Difeourles, which prove that thele exprellions were neither fingul.r
nor exaggerate4. Ibid. p. x.1.

VOL. II. G check

BboK II. check were given to this commerce, no leas detri.
'-v-` mental to society than defiructive-to religion.

First appear- SUCH was the favourable juniure, and so difpof-
ance of Lu-ed were the minds of his countrymen to liflen to
ther, andhis his discourses, when Martin Luther first began to

call in quetlion the efficacy of Indulgences, and to
declaim against the vicious lives and faife doctrines
of. those who promulgated them. He was a native
of Eifleben in Saxony, and though born of poor
parents, had received a learned education, during
the progress of which he gave many indications of
uncommon vigour and acuteness of genius. As his
mind was naturally iilfceptible of lerious impreflions,
and tincured with somewhat of that religious me-
lancholy which delights in the solitude and devotion
of a monastic life, he retired into a convent of
Augustinian friars, and without suffering the intrea.
ties of his parents to divert him from what he
thought his duty to God, he assumed the habit ot
that order. There he acquired great reputation,
not only for piety, but for his love of knowledge,
and unwearied application to fludy. He had been
taught the scholastic philosophy and theology which
were then in vogue by very able matters, and want.
ed not penetration to comprehend all the nicetie
and distinCtions with which they abound; but his
understanding, naturally found, and Cuperior ti
every thing frivolous, soon became disgusted will
there subtile and uninftrutive sciences, and sough
for rome more solid foundation of knowledge anm
of piety in the holy scriptures. Having found;
copy of the Bible, which lay neglected in the libra
ry of his monastery, he abandoned all other purfilits
and devoted himself to the tfudy of it, with fuil
eagerness and afliduity, as astonished the monks
who were little accustomed to derive their theo
logical notions from that source. The gtrc
progress which he made in this uncommon court

of study, augmented so much the fame both ofBooK II.
his sanCtity and of his learning, that Frederick,'---
Elector of Saxony, having founded an university
at Wittemberg on the Elbe, the place of his refi-
dence, Luther was chosen first to teach philosophy,
and afterwards theology there, and discharged both
offices in such a manner, that he was deemed the
chief ornament of that society.

WHILE Luther was at the height of his reputationHe oppose,

and authority, Tetzel began to publish Indulgences induleeacec.
in the neighbourhood of Wittemberg, and to
ascribe to them the fame imaginary virtues, which
had, in other places, imposed on the credulity of
the people. As Saxony was not more enlightened
than the other provinces of Germany, Tetzel met
with prodigious success there. It was with the ut-
most concern, that Luther beheld the artifices of
those who fold, and the simplicity of those who
bought, Indulgences. The opinions of Thomas
Aquinas and the. other fchoolmen, on which the
doctrine of Indulgences was founded, had already
loft much of their authority with him; and the
Scriptures, which he began to confider as the great
flandard of theological truth, afforded no counte-
nance to a practice, equally subversive of faith and
of morals. His warm and impetuous temper did
not susser him long to conceal luch important dif-
coveries, or to continue a silent fpedtator of the
delusion of his countrymen. From the pulpit in
the great church of Wittemberg he inveighed bit.
terly against the irregularities and vices of those
who published Indulgences; lie ventured to exa-
mine the dodcrines which they taught, and pointed
out to the people the danger of relying for salvation
upon any other means than those appointed by God
in his word. The boldness and novelty of thece
opinions drew great attention, and being recoln-
lended by the authority oif luthcr's perfbnal charac-

G 2 tcr,

BOOK II. ter, and delivered with a popular and persuasive
'c"'^1 eloquence, they made a deep impression on his hear.

ers. Encouraged by the favourable reception of his
doctrines among the people, he wrote to Albert,
elector of Mentz, and archbishop of Magdeburg,
to whofejurifdiction that part of Saxony was subject,
and remonstrated warmly against the false opinions
and wicked lives of the preachers of Indulgences;
but he found that prelate too deeply interested in
their success to corret theirabufes. His nextattempt

He publifles was to gain the suffrage of men of learning. For
his theses this purpose, he published ninety-five theses, con.
against them. . .n'. r

taming his Sentiments with regard to Indulgences.
These he proposed, not as points fully established,
or of undoubted certainty, but as fubjeds of inqui.
ry and disputation ; he appointed a day, on which
the learned were invited to impugn them either in
person, or by writing; and subjoined to the whole,
solemn protestations of his high refpedt for the apol
tolic fee, and of his implicit fubmiflion to its autho.
rity. No opponent appeared at the time prefixed;
the theses spread over Germany with astonishing
rapidity; they were read with the greatest eager-
ness; and all admired the boldness of the man who
had ventured to call in question the plenitude of
papal power, and to attack the Dominicans, armed
with all the terrors of inquisitorial authority a.
Supported by THE Friars of St. Augustine, Luther's own

order, though addiced with no less obfequi-
oufnles than the other monastic fraternities to
the papal fee, gave no check to the publication of
these uncommon opinions. Lutherhad by his piety
and learning acquired extraordinary authority
among his brethren; he profelled the highest
regard for the authority of the Pope; his profellions

x Lutheri Opera Jena, 1612. vol. i. prafat. 3. p. z. 66. Hilt
ofCounc. of Trent by F. Paul, p. 4. Seckend. Coen. Apol. p. 16

were

were at that time sincere; and as a secret enmity, BooK I.
excited by interest and emulation, subsists among '-
all the monadic orders in the Romish church, the
Augustinians were highly pleated with his invec-
tives against the Dominicans, and hoped to fee
them exposed to the hatred and scorn of the peo-
ple. Nor was his Sovereign the Eletor of Saxony,
the wisest prince at that time in Germany, diffatis-
fled with this obltrudion which Luther threw in
the way of the publication of indulgences. He fe-
cretly encouraged the attempt, and flattered him-
elf that this dispute among the Ecclefiafticks them-
selves, might give some check to the exactions of
the court of Rome, which the secular princes had
long, though without success, been endeavouring
to oppose.

MANY zealous champions immediately arose to Many en-

defend opinions on which the wealth and power ofdvfuthi
the church were founded, against Luther's attacks.
In opposition to his theses, Tetzel published coun-
ter-thefes at Francfort on the Oder; Eccius, a cele-
lebrated Divine of Augsburg, endeavoured to re-
fiute his notions; and Prierias, a Dominican friar,
matter of the sacred palace and Inquisitor general,
wrote against him with all the virulence of a fcho-
laftic disputant. But the manner in which they
conducted the controversy, did little service to
their cause. Luther attempted to overturn Indul-
gences by arguments founded in reason, or derived
from scripture; they produced nothing in support
of them but the sentiments of fchoolmen, the con-
clufions of the canon law, and the decrees of Popesb.
Thedecifion of judges so partial and interested, did
not satisfy the people, who began to call in quefti-
on the authority even of these venerable guides,

b F. Paul, p. 6. Seckend. p, 4.. Palavic. p. 8.

G 3 when

BooK II. when they found them itanding in direct oppofiti-
'.-v--' on to the dicates of reason, and the determinations

of the divine law C. *

c Seckend. p. 3o.
* Guicciardini has asserted two things with regard to the firRf pro-

mulgation of indulgences; i. That Leo bestowed a gift of the profits
ariing from the lale of ind.lgences in Saxony, and the adjacent pro.
vinces of Ge many, upon his sifter Magdalen the wife of Francefcetto
Cibo. Guic. lib. 1 3. 168. z.ThatArcembolio, a Genoese ecclefiafiic,
who had been bred a merchant, and (till retained all the arts of that
profcffion, was appointed by her to colle& the money which (hould
be railed. F. Paul has followed him in both these particulars, and
adds that the Augultinians in Saxony had been immemorially em-
ployed in preaching indulgences, but that Arcemboldo and his de-
puties, hoping to gain more by committing this trust to the Domini-
cans, had made their bargain with Tetzel, and that Luther was
prompted at first to oppose Tetzel and his afrociates, by a desire of
taking revenge for this injury offered to his order. F. Paul, p. 5.
Almof all the historians since their time, popish as well as protestant,
have, without examination, admitted thele assertions to be true upon
their authoritv. But notwithstanding the concurring testimony of
two authors so eminent both for exatnels and veracity, we may obferre,

l. That Felix Contolori who searched the pontifical archives of

purpose, could not find this pretended grant in any of those registers
where it must necessarily have been recorded, Palav. p. 5.--z. That
the profits arising from Indulgences in Saxony and the adjacent coun
tries, had been granted not to Magdalen, but to Albert archbilhop
of Mentz, who had the right of nominating those who published them.
Seek. p. Xz. Lith. Oper. i. praef. p. I. Palav. p. 6.-3. That Ar-
cemboldo never had concern in the publication of Indulgences in Sax-
ony; his diftri& was Slanders and the Upper and Lower Rhine,
Seek. p. 14. Palav. p. 6.-4. That Luther and his adherents never
mention this grant of Leo's to his sifter, though a circumstance of
which they could scarce have been ignorant, and which they would
have been careful not to fipprefs.- 5. The publication of Indulgences
in Germany was not ufuially committedto the Augustinians. The pro-
mulgation of them at three different periods under Julius II. was
granted to the Franciscans; the Dominicans had been employed in
the fame office a (hort time before the present period. Palav. p. 46. 6.
The promulgation of those Indulgences which first excited Luther's
indignation was entiuflcd to the archbiflop of Mcntzin conjunncion
with the guardian of the Franciscans; but the latter having declined
accepting of that trult, the Cole right became velted in the archbiflop.
Palav. 6. Seek. i6, 17.-7. Luther was not infligated by his lupcl-
ors among the Augiftiti;ians to attack the Dominicans their rivals, ot
to depreciate indulgences hecanfe they were promulgated by them
his oppolition to their opinions and vices proceeded from mnore landla-
ble motives. Stck. p. i5, 32. Luthcri Opera i. p. 6. 6. 6. .-A di
ploma of indulgences is publiffied by Hermn. onder Hardt, froll
which it appears that the name of the guardian ofthe Fralnilcansis re-
tained together with that of the a chbilhop, although the former did
not act. The limits of the country to which their commiflions extend-
ed, viz. the dioccics of Mentz, Magdeburg, llalbcrftadt, and Ih0
ttrritories of the marquis of Br.ndebiug, are mentioned in that di-
ploma. lifR. Literalria Reformat, pars iv. p. 14.

MEAN

MEANWHILE, there novelties in Luther's doc-BooK ITI.

trines which interested all Germany, excited little:"7'-'
attention and no alarm in the court of Rome. Leo, of Rome at
fond of elegant and refined pleasures, intent upon first dilre-

gard Luther.

great schemes of policy, a stranger to theological
controversies, and apt to despise them, regarded
with the utmoft.indifference the: operations of an
obscure Friar, who,: in the heart of Germany, car-
ried on a scholastic disputation in a barbarous stile.
Little did he apprehend, or Luther himself dream,
that the effects of this quarrel would be so fatal to
the papal fee. Leo imputed the whole to monastic
enmity and emulation, and stemed inclined not to
interpose in the contest, but to allow the Augufti-
nians and Dominicans to wrangle about the matter
A'ith their usual animolity.

THE solicitations; however, of Luther's adverfa- The pro-

ries, exasperated to an high degree by the boldnef r's;°ft pLu-
and severity with which he animadverted on their ons.
writings, together with the furprizing progress
which his opinions made in different parts of Ger-
many, rouzed at last the attention of the court of
Rome, and obliged Leo to take measures for the
security of the church against an attack that appear-
ed now too serious to be despited. For this end,
he summoned Luther to appear at. Rome, within l-le is fum.
lixty days, before the auditor of the chamber, and moned to
the fame Prierias who had written against him, Rome.
whom he empowered to examine his doctrines,.
and to decide concerning them. He wrote, at the
fametime, to the Elector of Saxony, beseeching
him not to protect a man whose heretical and pro-
fane tenets were so shocking to pious ears; and en-
joined the Provincial of the Augustinians to check
by his authority the ralhnefs of an arrogant monk,
which brought dilgrace upon the order of St. Au-
guftine, and gave offence and diffurbance to the
whole church.

G 4 FROM

BooK II. FROM the frain of these letters, as well as from
TE' -/`the nomination of .a judge so prejudiced and parti-
empowers al as Prierias, Luther easily saw what sentence he
his legate to might expet at Rome. He discovered, for that
try him in I**
Germany. reason, the utmost solicitude, to have his cause tri-

ed in Germany, and before a less suspeCted tribu-
nal.. The univerlity of Wittemberg, anxious for
the safety of a man who did so much honour to
their society, wrote to the Pope, and after employ-
ing several pretexts to excuse Luther from appear-
ing at Rome, intreated Leo to commit the exami-
nation of his doctrines to some persons of learning
and authority in Germany. The Eletor request-
ed the fame thing of the Pope's legate at the diet of
Augsburg; and as Luther himself, who, at that
time, was Co far from having any intention to dif-
claim the papal authority, that he did not even en-
tertain the smallest suspicion concerning its divine
original, had written to Leo a most submissive let-
ter, promising an unreserved compliance with his
will, the Pope gratified them so far as to empower
his legate in Germany, cardinal Cajetan, a Domi-
nican, eminent for scholastic learning, and passion-
ately devoted to the Roman fee, to hear and deter-
mine the cause.

Luther ap- LUTHER, though he had good reason to de-
pear before dine a judge chosen among his avowed adversaries,

lgae. did not hesitate about appearing before Cajetan,

and having obtained the Emperor's fafe-condut,
immediately repaired to Augsburg. The Cardinal
received him with decent relpe&, and endeavoured
at first to gain upon him by gentle treatment: But
thinking it beneath the dignity of his station to
enter into any formal dispute, he required him,
by virtue of the apostolic powers with which
he was cloathed, to retract the errors he had
uttered with regard to Indulgences, and the na-
ture of faith; and to abstain, for the future, from

the

the publication of new and dangerous opinions. BooK II.
Luther, fully persuaded of the truth of his own te-
nets, and confirmed in the belief of them by the ap-
probation they had met with among persons confpi-
cuous both for their learning and piety, was fur-
prized at this abrupt mention of a recantation be-
fore any endeavours were used to convince him
that he was mistaken. He had flattered himself,
that in a conference concerning the points in dispute,
with a prelate of such distinguished abilities, he
would be able to remove many of those imputati-
ons with which the ignorance or malice of his an-
tagonifts had loaded him; but the high tone of au-
thority which the Cardinal assumed, extinguished
at once all hopes of this kind, and cut off every
profpet of advantage from the interview. His na- Hi; intrepid
tive intrepidity of mind, however, did not desert behaviour.
him. He declared, with the utmost firmness, that
he could not, with a safe conscience, renounce opi-
nions which he believed to be true; nor should any
consideration ever induce him to do what would be
so base in itself, and so offensive to God. At the
fame time, he continued to express no less reverence
than formerly for the authority of the apostolic feed;
he signified his willingness to submit the whole con-
troverfy to certain universities which he named, and
promised neither to write nor to preach for the fu-
ture concerning Indulgences, provided his adver-
saries were likewise enjoined to be silent with re-
spect to them '. All these offers Cajetan disregarded
or rejected, and still infifled peremptorily on a fim-
ple recantation, threatening him with eccleliaftical
censures, and forbidding him to appear again in
his pretence, unless he resolved instantly to comply
with what he required. This haughty and violent
manner of proceeding, as well as other circumffan-
ces, gave Luther's friends such strong reasons to fill-

d Luth. Oper. vol. i. p. 164 Ibid. p. 169.

pc.t,

BOOK II. pee, tlat even the Imperial fafe-conduct would not
- -v- be able to protect him from the legate's power and

resentment, that they prevailed on him to withdraw
secretly from Auglburg, and to return to his own
country. But before his departure, according to a
HiP appeal. form of which there had been some examples, he

prepared a solemn appeal, from the Pope ill-inform-
ed at that time concerning his cause, to the Pope
when he flould receive more full information with
refpet to its.

Hcisfup- CAJETAN, enraged at Luther's abrupt retreat,
rl' ,',l,, and the publication of his appeal, wrote to the
ct Saxuny. Eledor of Saxony, complaining of both; and re-

quiring him, as he regarded the peace of the church,
or the authority of its head, either to fend that fe-
ditious monk a prisoner to Rome, or to baniih him
out of his territories. It was not from theological
considerations that Frederick had hitherto counte-
nanced. Luther; he seems to have been much a
firanger to controversies of that kind, and to have
been little interested in them. His protection flow-
ed almost entirely, as hath been already observed,
from political motives, and was afforded with
great ftc.recy and caution. He had neither heard
any of Luther's discourses, nor read any of his
books; and though all Germany resounded with his
fame, he had never once admitted him into his
prelenceg. But upon this demand which the Car-
dinal made, it became necefeary to throw offfome-
what of his former refelve. He had been at great
cxpence, and had bcftowed much attention on
flunding a new univei fity, an objet of considerable
ill:portai.ce to every Gcrlnan prince; and foerefeciig
lhlw tiaral a blow the rcilioval of .utlier would be to
its r:cpllationh, he, under various pretexts, and

f Slei(. I-lift. ofRcform.. p. 7. Seckcnd. p. 4q. Iirh. Oper. i. 16;.
g Stckend, p. 27. Sleid. Hill. p. 12. h Sckeld. p. 59.

with

with many profeflions of esteem for the Cardinal, BOOK II.
and of reverence for the Pope, declined complying''v"
with either of his requests, and openly discovered
great concern for Luther's safety .

THE inflexible rigour with which Cajetan insist- Motves of

the legate's

ed on a simple recantation, gave great offence to condut.
Luther's followers in that age, and hath since been
cenfured-as imprudent, by several popish wri-
ters. But it was impossible for the legate to ad
another part. The judges before whom Luther
had been required to appear at Rome, were so eager
to display their zeal against his errors, that, with-
out waiting the expiration of the sixty days allowed
him in the citation, they had already condemned
him as an heretick k. Leo had in several of his
brieves and letters, stigmatized him as a child of
iniquity, and a man given up to a reprobate sense.
Nothing less, therefore than a recantation could
save the honour of the church, whose maxim it is
never to abandon the smallest point it has establish-
ed, and which is even precluded, by its pretensions
to infallibility, front having it in its power to do so.

LuTHe R's situation, mean while, was such as Luther'spe.

would have filled any other person with the most `loUs Gftua-
dilquieting apprehensions. He could not expeft
that a prince so prudent and cautious as Frederick
would, on his account, Let at defiance the thunders of
the church, and brave the papal power which had
crllhed foiiie of the molt powerfill of the German
Llnpcl-rs. He knew what veneration was paid, at
that time, to eccleliaftical decisions; what terror
eccklialfical cen(ures carried along with them, and
how cafily theie might intimidate and shake a pr ince,

i Sleid. Hilt. p. o. Luth. Oper. i. 172. k Luth. Oper . i. 61.

who

BOOK II. who was rather his protector from policy, than his
-' --'disciple from conviction. If he should be ob-

liged to quit Saxony, he had no profpet of any
other asylum, and must stand exposed to whatever
punishment the rage or bigotry of his enemies could
inflict. Thoughfenfible ofhisdanger, hedifcover-
ed no symptoms of timidity, or remissness, but con-
tinued to vindicate his own conduct and opinions,
and to inveigh againift those of his adversaries with
more vehemence than ever '
He appeals BUT as every ftep taken by the court of Rome,

,olner'il particularly the irregular sentence by which he had

been so precipitately declared an heretick, convinced
Luther that Leo would soon proceed to the most
violent measures against him, he had recourse to the
only expedient in his power, in order to prevent
the effect of the Papal censures. He appealed to a
general council, which he affirmed to be the repre-
fentative of the catholic church, and superior in
power to the Pope, who being a fallible man,
might err, as St. Peter, the most perfect of his pre-
deceflors, had erred ".

A new bull IT soon appeared, that Luther had not formed
in favour of .
Intlulgen- rash conjectures concerning the intentions of the
c'e. Romish church. A bull, of a date prior to his ap-

peal, was issued by the Pope, in which he magni-
fies the virtue and efficacy of Indulgences in terms
as extravagant as any of his predecessors had ven-
tured to ule in the darkest ages; and without ap-
plying filch palliatives, or mentioning such concel:
lions as the juncture seemed to call for, he required
all Christians to assent to what he delivered as the
doitrine of the Catholic church, and fubjeted those
who Ihouldl hold or teach any contrary opinion to
tlle lieavieft ecclcfiaftical cenfires.

I Sckind. p. 59. "Sleid. Hia. 12. Luth. Oper. i. 179.

AMONG

AMoNG Luther's followers, thisbull, which they Boot II.

confidered as an unjustifiable effort of the Pope in -- "
order to preserve that rich branch of his revenue an's deth
which arose from Indulgences, produced little es- of dvan-
set. But among the reft of his countrymen, such thr.
a clear decision of the sovereign Pontiff against him,
and enforced by such dreadful penalties, must have
been attended with consequences very fatal to his
cause; if there had not been prevented in a great
measure by the death of the Emperor Maximilian,
whom both his principles and his interest prompted to
support the authority of the holy fee. In consequence
of this event, the vicariat of that part of Germany
which is governed by the Saxon laws, was commit-
ted to the Elector of Saxony, and under the ihel-
ter of his friendly administration, Luther not only
enjoyed tranquillity, but his opinions were fliffered,
during the inter-regnum which preceded Charles's
eleetion, to take root in different places, and to grow
up to some degree of strength and firmness. Leo
too, to whom the election of an Emperor was a
point more interesting than a theological controver-
fy, which he did not underifand, and of which he
could not foresee the consequences, being extreme-
ly solicitous not to irritate a Prince of such confider-
able influence in the eletoral college as Frederick,
discovered a great unwillingness to pronounce the
sentence of excommunication against Luther, which
his adversarics continually demanded with the most
clamorous importunity.

To there political views of the Pope, as well as s,,ripcnioa

to his natural aversion from revere meaftires, wast ip,"""',-.
owing the fuifpenfion of any further proceedings iihuj.
against Luther for eighteen months. Perpetual ne-
gociations, however, in order to bring the matter
to some amicable issue, were carried on during that
space. The manner in which these were conducted
having given Luther many opportunities of obier-

ving

BOOK II. ving the corruption of the court of Rome ; itsob-
Hei tin nacy in adhering to established errors; and its
to call in indifference about truth, however clearly proposed,
quefslom the or flrongly proved, he began to utter some doubts
papal autho-
riLy. with regard to the divine original of the Papal au-

thority. A publick disputation was held upon this
important question at Leipfic, between Luther and
Eccius, one of his most learned and formidable an-
tagonifts; but it was as fruitless and indecisive as such
scholastic combats usually prove. Both parties boast-
ed of having obtained the victory; both were con-
firmed in their own opinions; and no progress was
made towards deciding the point in controversy ".

fn in Swit- NOR did this spirit of mutiny against the doc-
erland. trines and usurpations of the Romish church,

break out in Saxony alone an attack no less fierce,
and occasioned by the fame causes, was made upon
them about this time in Switzerland. The Fran-
cifcans being entrusted with the promulgation of
Indulgences in that country, executed their com-
mission with the fame indiscretion and rapaciousness,
which had rendered the Dominicans so odious in
Germany. They proceeded, nevertheless, with un-
interrupted success till they arrived at Zurich. There
Zuinglius, a man not inferior to Luther himself in
zeal and intrepidity, ventured tooppofe them; and
being animated with a republican boldness, and free
from those restraints which fubjeation to the will of
a Prince imposed on the German reformer, he ad-
vanced with more daring and rapid steps to over-
turn the whole fabric of the eftablilhed religion °.
The appearance of such a vigorous auxiliary, and
the progress which he made, was, at firfl, matter
of great joy to Luther, though on the other hand,
the decrees of the universitics of Cologne and Lou-
vain, which pronounced his opinions to be errone-
ous, atforded great caufc of triumph to his adverla-
rics.

n Iuih. Oper. i. 199. V Slcid. I-ift. 22. Seckencl. 59.

BUT

BUT the undaunted spirit of Luther, acquiredBOOK II

fiefl vigour from every infnance of opposition; and Luher'-
puthing on his inquiries and attacks from one doc. boldnel-;,
trine to another, he began to flake the firmest gradpr°
foundations on which the wealth or power ofthe
church were established. Leo came at last to be con-
vinced, that all hopes of reclaiming him by forbear-
ance were vain; several prelates of great wisdom
exclaimed no lets than Luther's personal adversaries
against the Pope's unprecedented lenity in permit-
ting an incorrigible heretick, who during three
years had been endeavouring to subvert every thing
sacred and venerable, still to remain within the bo-
fom of the church; the dignity of the pap l fee ren-
dered the most vigorous proceedings necessary; the
new Emperor, it was hoped, would support its au-
thority; nor did it feern probable that the Eleftor of
Saxony would so far forget his u'ual caution, as to
set himfelfin opposition to their united power. The
college of cardinals was often assembled, in order
to prepare the sentence with due deliberation, and
the most able canons were consulted how it might
be exprelfed with most unexceptionable formality.
At last, on the fifteenth of June, one thousand five lmnf n.
hundred and twenty, the bull so fatal to the church ti:n ruiiifi-
of Rome, was ilued. Forty-one propositions, ex- tim.""t
trakted out of Luther's works, are therein con-
demned as heretical, scandalous, and offensive to pi-
ous ears; all persons are forbidden to read his wri-
tings, upon pain of excommunication; filch as had
any of them in their custody, are commanded to
commit them to the flames; and he him(tlf; if he
did not, within lixty days, publicklv recant his er-
rors, and burn his books, is pronounc-d an oblti-
natc heretick ; is excommunicated, and delivered
unto Satan for the destruction of his ficlh ; and all
fiecular Princes are required, under pain of incurring
the fame censure, to seize his perlon, that he mig',t
be punifhled as his crimes dclerived P.

' Palavic. 27. Luth. Opcr, i. 423. TiE

Boot II. THE publication of this bull in Germany excited

M'a'"'' various paflions in different places. Luther's ad-
The effe&
of this in verfaries exulted, as if his party and opinions had
Germany, been cruihed at once by such a decisive blow. His

followers, whose reverence for the papal authority
daily diminished, read Leo's anathemas with more
indignation than terror. In some cities, the people
violently obftruted the promulgation of the bull;
in others, those who attempted to publish it were
insulted, and the bull itself torn in pieces, and trod-
den under foot '.

And upon THIS sentence, which he had for some time ex-
Luther. peeted, did not disconcert or intimidate Luther.

After renewing his appeal to a general council, he
publilhed remarks upon the bull of excommunicati-
on; and being now persuaded that Leo had been
guilty both of impiety and injustice in his proceed-
ings against him, he boldly declared the Pope to be
that man of fin, or Antichrist, whose appearance is
foretold in the New Testament; he declaimed
against his tyranny and usurpations with greater vio-
lence than ever; he exhorted all Christian Princes
to ihake off such an ignominious yoke; and boasted
of his own happiness in being marked out as the ob-
jeE of ecclesiastical indignation, because he had
ventured to assert the liberty of mankind. Nor did
he confine his expressions of contempt for the papal
power to words alone; Leo having, in execution of
the bull, appointed Luther's books to be burnt at
Rome, he, by way of retaliation, assembled all the
professors and tludents in the university of Wittem-
berg, and with great pomp, and before a valt mul-
titude of fpedators, cast the volumes of the canon
law, together with the bull of excommunication in-
to the flames; and his example was imitated in le-
veral cities of Germany. The manner in which he
jultificd this adion was flill more provoking than

'.Scck p. 116.

the

the action itself. He collected from the canon law Boor II.
some of the most extravagant propositions with re- v
gard to the plenitude and omnipotence of the Pope's
power, and Subordination of all secular jurifdition
to his authority, and published these with a com-
mentary, pointing out the impiety of such tenets,
and their evident tendency to subvert all civil go-
vernment r.

SUCH was the progress which Luther had made, State of the

and such the state of his party, when Charles arrived wi,'hen
in Germany. No secular Prince had hitherto em- Charles ar.

rived in

braced Luther's opinions; no change in the efta- cermany.
blifhed forms of worship had been introduced;
and no encroachments made upon the pofleffions
orjurifdistion of the clergy; neither party had yet
proceeded to action; and the controversy, though
conduted with great heat and paflion on both lides,
was still carried on with its proper weapons, with
theses, disputations, and replies. A deep impreffi-
on, however, was made upon the minds of the peo-
pie; their reverence for ancient institutions and
doctrines was shaken; and the materials were alrea-
' dy scattered which produced the combustion that
soon spread all over Germany. Students crowded
from every province of the Empire to Wittemberg;
and underLuther himself, Melanthon, Carloftadi-
us, and other masters, then reckoned eminent, im-
bibed opinions, which, on their return, they pro-
; pagated among their countrymen, who listened to

them with that fond attention, which truth when
accompanied with novelty naturally commands'.

DURING the course of these tranfalions, the Reeions
court of Rome, though under the direction of one ofupoll the

W~th o nduc of

its ablest Pontiffs, neither formed its schemes withe court of
tthat profound sagacity, nor executed them with that Rome,
steady perseverance, which had long rendered it

' Iuth. Oper. ii. 3t6. ' Seckend. 59.
VOL. I1. H Ihe

BPos II. the most perfeat model of political wisdom to the
----reQft of Europe. When Luther began to declaim

against Indulgences, two different methods of treat-
ing him lay before the Pope; by adopting one of
which the attempt, it is probable, might have been
crushed, and by the other it might have been ren-
dered innocent. If Luther's first departure from
the doctrines of the church had instantly drawn up-
on him the weight of its censures, the dread of
there might have restrained the Elector of Saxony
from protecting him, might have deterred the peo-
ple from listening to his discourses, or have over-
awedLuther himself; and his name, like that of ma-
ny good men before his time, would now have been
known to the world only for his honest but ill-timed
effort to correct the corruptions of the Romish
church. Or on the other hand, if the Pope had
early testified some displeasure with the vices and
excesses of those who had been employed to publish
Indulgences; if he had forbidden the mentioningof
controverted points in discourses, addressed to the
people; if he had enjoined the disputants on both
fides to be silent; if he had been careful not to rif-
que the credit of the church by defining articles
which had hitherto been left undetermined, Luther
would, probably, have fiopt short at his firit dif-
coveries: He would not have been forced in felf-de-
fence to venture upon new ground, and the whole
controversy might possibly have died away infenfi-
bly; or being confined entirely to the schools,
might have been carried on with as little detriment
to the peace and unity of the Romish church, as
that which the Franciscans maintain with the Domi-
nicans, concerning the immaculate conception, or
that between the Jansenists and Jesuits concerning
the operations of grace. But Leo, by flucuating
between there opposite systems, and by embracing
them alternately, defeated the effects of both. By
an improper exertion of authority, Luther was ex-

afperated

afperated, not restrained. By a mistaken exer- Boor i.
cife of lenity, time was given for his opinions to
spread, but no progress made towards reconciling
him to the church; and even the sentence of ex-
communication, which at another juncture might
have been decisive, was delayed To long, that it be-
came at last scarce an object of terror.

SUCH a series of errors in the meafureof a court, andupon the

seldom chargeable with mistaking its own true in- Luth0 of
terest, is not more astonishing than the wisdom
which appeared in Luther's conduct. Though a
perfect stranger to the maxims of human prudence,
and incapable, from the impetuosity of his temper,
of observing them, he was led naturally by the
method in which he made his discoveries, to carry
on his operations in a manner which contributed
more to their success, than if every ftep he took
had been prescribed by the most artful policy. At
the time when he set himself to oppose Tetzel, he
was far from intending that reformation, which he
afterwards effected; and would have trembled
with horror at the thoughts of what at last he glo-
ried in accomplishing. The knowledge of truth
was not poured into his mind, all at once, by any
special revelation; he acquired it by industry and
meditation, and his progress, of consequence, was
gradual. The doctrines of Popery are To closely
connected, that the exposing of one error conduet-
ed him naturally to the deteetion of others; and
all the parts of that artificial fabrick were so linked
together, that the pulling down of one loosened
the foundation of the reft, and rendered it more
easy to overturn them. In confuting the extrava-
gant tenets concerning Indulgences, he was obli-
ged to inquire into the true cause of our justification
and acceptance with God. The knowledge of that,

HI: z disco-

Boox nI. discovered to him by degrees the inutility of pilgrim.

-v-'.ages and penances; the vanity of relying on the

intefceffion of faints; the impiety of worlhippinE
them; the abuses of auricular confeflion; and tht
imaginary existence of purgatory. The detetior
of so many errors, led him of course to confides
the charadter of the clergy who taught them; anc
their exorbitant wealth, the severe injunction of ce
libacy, and the intolerable rigour of monastic vow!
appeared to him the great sources of their corrupti
on. From thence, it was but one ftep to call ir
question the divine original of the papal power
which authorized and supported such a system of er
rors. As the unavoidable result of the whole, h
disclaimed the infallibility of the Pope, the decifi
ons of fchoolmen, or any other human authority
and appealed to the word of God as the only stand
ard of theological truth. To this gradual progref
Luther owed his success. His hearers were no
shocked at first by any proposition too repugnant t(
their ancient prejudices, or too remote from efta
blifhed opinions. They were conducted infenfibl,
from one doctrine to another. Their faith and con
vidion were able to keep pace with his discoveries
To the fame cause was owing the inattention, an
even indifference, with which Leo viewed Luther'
first proceedings. A direct or violent attack upoi
the authority of the church, would have drawn up
on him at once the whole weight of its vengeance
but as this was far from his thoughts, as he conti
nued long to profess great refpect-for the Pope, an(
made repeated offers of fubmiflion to his decisions
there seemed to be no reason for apprehending tha
he would prove the author of any desperate revolt
and he was suffered to proceed ftep by itep, in un
dermining the constitution of the church, till th
remedy applied at last came too late to produce an'

~~~~effe~~c~~Bt.u

Bmv

BUT whatever advantages Luther's cause derived BooK II.
either from the mistakes of his adversaries, or from .j`

An inquiry

his own good conduct, the Hudden progress andintothe
firm establishment of his doctrines, must not becaufrisbwtih
ascribed to there alone. The fame corruptions in tothe pro-
the church of Rome which he condemned, had been gres of he
attacked long before his appearance, and the fame on.
opinions which he now propagated, had been pub-
lilhed in different places, and were supported by the
fame arguments. Waldus in the twelfth century,
Wickliff in the fourteenth, and Huss in the fifteenth,
had inveighed against rhe errors of Popery with
great boldness, and confuted them with more inge-
nuity and learning than could have been expected in
those illiterate ages in which they flourished. But
all there premature attempts towards a reformation
proved abortive. Such feeble lights, incapable of
dispelling the darkness which then covered the
church, were soon extinguished; and though the
doctrines of these pious men produced some effects,
and left some traces in the countries where they were
taught, they were neither extensive nor considerable.
Many powerful causes contributed to facilitate Lu-
ther's progress, which either did not exist, or did
not operate with full force in their days; and at the
critical and maturejuncture when he appeared, cir-
cumftances of every kind concurred in rendering
each ftep hle took successful.

THE long and Scandalous fchiCm which divided The long

the church, during the latter part of the fourteenth, the four-
and the beginning of the fifteenth centuries, had a tecn~h cen-
great effect in diminishing the veneration with which tury.
the world had been accustomed to view the papal
dignity. Two or three contending Pontiffs roam-
ing about Europe at a time; fawning on the Princes
whom they wanted to gain; squeezing the countries
which acknowledged their authority; excommuni-

H 3 cating

boon I. eating their rivals, and cursing those who adhere(

to them, discredited their pretensions to infallibili
ty, and exposed both their persons and their offic
to contempt. The laity, to whom all parties ap
pealed, came to learn that some right of privati
judgment belonged to them, and acquired the ex
erciei of it so far as to choose, among there infalli
ble guides, whom they would please to follow. The
proceedings of the councils of Conflance and Basil
spread fill wider this difrefpet for the Romish fee
and by their bold exertion of authority in depofin
and electing Popes, taught the world that there
was in the church ajurifdidtion superior even to the
papal power, which they had long believed to bx
supreme.

The pontifi THE wound given on that occasion to the papa
cate ofa authority was scarce healed up, when the pontifi
Alexander
vi. and of cates of Alexander VI. and Julius II. both able
Julus i. princes, but detestable ecclesiastics, raited nea

icandal in Christendom. The profligate morals ol
the former in private life; the fraud, the injustice
and cruelty of his publick administration, place
him on a level with those tyrants, whose deeds are
the greatest reproach to human nature. The latter,
though a stranger to these odious passions whic
prompted his predecessor to commit so many unna.
tural crimes, was under the dominion of a reftlefi
and ungovernable ambition, which scorned all con-
fiderations of gratitude, of decency, or of justice,
when they obftruded the execution of his schemes
It was scarce pollible to be firmly persuaded that
the infallible knowledge of a religion, whose chiel
precepts are purity and humility, was deposited in
the breasts of the impious Alexander, or the over-
bearing Julius. The opinion of those who exalted
the authority of a council above that of the Pope
spread wonderfully under their pontificates: And
as the Emperor and French Kings, who were

alternately

alternately engaged in hostilities with these a6tive BooK It.
pontiffs, permitted and even encouraged their sub- ' '
jedts to expose their vices with all the violence of
invective, and all the petulance of ridicule, men's
ears being accustomed to these, were not shocked
with the bold or ludicrous discourses of Luther and
his followers concerning the papal dignity.

NOR were such excefles confined to the head of The imm-

ral lives of

the church alone. Many of the dignified clergy, the clergy.
both secular and regular, being the younger sons of
noble families, who had assumed the ecclesiastical
character for no otler reason but that they found in
the church stations of great dignity and affluence,
were accustomed totally to neglect the duties of
their office, and indulged themselves without re-
serve in all the vices to which great wealth and idle-
ness naturally give birth. Though the inferior
clergy were prevented by their poverty from imitat-
ing the expensive luxury of their superiors, yet gross
ignorance and low debauchery rendered them as
contemptible as the other were odious t. The revere
and unnatural law of celibacy, to which both were
equally subjed, occasioned such irregularities, that
in several parts of Europe the concubinage of priests
was not only permitted, but enjoined. The em-
ploying of a remedy so contrary to the genius of
the Christian religion, is the strongest proof that
the crimes it was intended to prevent were both
numerous and flagrant. Long before the sixteenth
century, many authors of great name and authority

t The corrupt slate of the church prior to the Reformation, is ac-

knowledged by an author, who was both abundantly able to judge
concerning this matter, and who was not over forward to confess it.
" For some years (fays he) before the Lutheran and Calviniftic here-
fies were publilled, there was not (as contemporary authors testify)
any severity in ecclesiastical judicatories, any discipline with regard to
morals, any knowledge of sacred literature, any reverence for divine
things, there was not almost any religion remaining." Bellarminus
Concio. xxviii. Oper. tom. vi. col. 296. edit. Colon. 1617. alud
Gerdefii His. Evang. Renovati. vol. i. p. IS.

H 4 give

BooK II. give such descriptions of the dissolute morals of the
''cl* ' clergy, as seem almost incredible in the present

age ". The voluptuous lives of ecclesiastics occa.
sioned great scandal, not only because their manners
were inconsistent with their sacred character; but
the laity being accustomed to fee several of them
railid from the lowest fiations to the greatest
affluence, did not shew the fame indulgence to
their excesses, as to those of persons possessed of
hereditary wealth or grandeur; and viewing their
condition with more envy, they censured their
crimes with greater severity. Nothing, therefore,
could be more acceptable to Luther's hearers, than
the violence with which he exclaimed against the
immoralities of churchmen, and every person in
his audience could, from his own observation, con-
firm the truth of his invedives.

The facility The scandal of there crimes was greatly increased
there iwmch by the facility with which those who committed
ralitieswere them, obtained pardon. In all the European king-
pardoned.

u Centum Gravamina. Nat. German. in Fafciculo Rer. Expen-

tend.' & Fugiendarum, per Ortuinum Gratium, vol. i. 361. See
innumerable passages to the fame purpose in the appendix, or second
volume, publifiied byEdw. Brown. See also Herm. Von der Hardt,
Hifi. Lit. Reform. pars iii. and the vast collections of Walchius in
lhis fourvolumes of Monumenta medii aevi. Gotting. 1757.

The authors I have quoted enumerate the vices of the clergy.

When they ventured upon crimes, they would not be scrupulous with
refpe& to the decorum of behaviour. Accordingly their neglecc of
the decent condu& suitable to their profession, seems to have given
great offence. In order to.illuflrate this I flall transcribe one paflage,
because it is taken not from any author whose professed purpole it was
to describe the improper conduc of the clergy ; and who from preju-
dice or artifice may be supposed to aggravate the charge against them.
The Emperor Charles IV. in a letter to the archbiflop ofMentz, A.
D. 1359. exhorting him to reform the disorders of the clergy, thbs
expreifes himself: " De Chrifli patrimonio, ludos, hafliludia & tor-
neamentaexercent habitum militaiem cum practextis aureis & argen-
teis geftant, & calceos militares; comam & barbam nutriunt, &
nihir quod ad vitam & ordinem ecclefiafticum fpe&at, ofteodunt.
Militarlhus le dunttxat & fecularibtis a&ibus, vita & moribus, in fie.
falutisdilisendium, & generalepopuli fcandalum, immircent. Cpdex
Diplomaticus Anecdotolunl, pei Val. Ferd. Gudenum. 4to. vol.
iii. p. 438.

donis,

doms, the impotence of the civil magistrate, under Boot IL.
forms of government extremely irregular and tur- -
bulent, made it necessary to relax the rigour of
justice, and upon payment of a certain fine or com-
position prescribed by law, to remit farther punish-
ment, even of the moil atrocious crimes. The
court of Rome, always attentive to the means of
augmenting its revenues, imitated this practice,
and by a preposterous accommodation of it to reli-
gious concerns, granted its pardons to such tranf-
greffors as gave a fumr of money in order to pur-
chafe them. As the idea of a composition for
crimes was then familiar, this strange traffick was
so far from Ihocking mankind, that it loon became
general; and to prevent any imposition in carrying
it on, the officers of the Roman chancery publish-
ed a book, containing the precise funm to be exated
for the pardon of every particular fin. A deacon
guilty of murder was absolved for twenty crowns.
A bishop or abbot might aflaffinate for three hun-
dred livres. Any ecclesiastic might commit unclean-
ness, though with the molt aggravating circum-
-Iances, for the third part of that fum. Even such
flocking crimes, as occur seldom in human life,
and perhaps exist only in the impure imagination
of a casuist, were taxed at a very moderate rate
When a more regular and perfect mode of difpen-
sing justice came to be introduced into civil courts,
lhe practice of paying a composition for crimes
went gradually into disuse; and mankind having
acquired more accurate notions concerning religion
and morality, the conditions on which the court of
Rome bestowed its pardons appeared impious, and
were confidered as one great source of ecclesiastical
corruption .

' Fafciclul. Rer. Expet. & Fug. I. 35;. 1. G. Schelhornii

Amcenit. Literar. Francof. 1725. vl. ii. 369. DitQion. de 3avle.
Artic. Banck & Tuppius, Taxa Cancellar. Romian;e, Elit.
prancf. 1651. palirn.

1'H I s

BoOK II. THIS degeneracy of manners among the clergy
`---`' might, perhaps, have been tolerated with greater
The exorbi- m

nt welth indulgence, if their exorbitant riches and power
of the had not enabled them at the fame time, to oppress
hul"il all other orders of men. It is the genius of super-

ftition, fond of whatever is pompous or grand, to
set no bounds to its liberality towards persons whom
it esteems sacred, and to think its exprefflons of re-
gard defective unless it hath raised them to the
heighth of wealth and authority Hence flowed
the extensive revenues and jurifdition possessed by
the church in every country of Europe, and which
were become intolerable to the laity from whose un-
discerning bounty they were at first derived.

rarticuIaiy THE burden, however, of ecclefiattical oppref-
inerma" sion had fallen with iuch peculiar weight on the Ger-

mans, as rendered them, though naturally exempt
from levity, and tenacious of their ancient customs,
more inclinable than any people in Europe to liften
to those who called on them to assert their liberty.
During the long contest between the Popes and
Emperors concerning the right of inveltiture, and
the wars which these occasioned, most of the con-
fiderable German ecclesiastics joined the papal sac-
tion; and while engaged in rebellion against the
head of the Empire, they seized the Imperial reve-
nues, and ufilrped the Imperial jurifdition within
their own dioceses. Upon the re-establishment of
tranquillity, they itill retained there usurpations, as
if by tlhe length of an unjust poffeflion they had ac-
quired aleg;l right to them. The Emperors, too
feeble to wrest them out of their hands, were ob-
liged to grant them fiefs of thelie vait territories,
a:d they eiioyed all the immunities and honours
which bclo:(;gd to feudal barons. By means of these,
rmany bishops and abbots in Germany were not only

eeclfiaflics,

ecclesiastics, but princes, and their character and BOOK II.
manners partook more of the licence, too frequent ' 'J
among the latter, than of the fa&ity which became
the former 7.

THE unsettled fate of government in Germany, where the

and the frequent wars to which that country was eg greuat
exposed, contributed in another manner towards partofthe
aggrandizing Ecclesiastics. The only property du- proper'y.
ring there times of anarchy which enjoyed security
from the oppreflion of the great, or the ravages of
war, was that which belonged to the church. This
was owing, not only tothe great reverence for the fa-
cred charaEter prevalent in those ages, but to a fu-
perftitious dread of the sentence of excommunica-
tion, which the clergy were ready to denounce
againi all who invaded their possessions. Many ob-
serving this, made a surrender of their lands to the
ecclefiatics, and consenting to hold them in fee of
the church, obtained as itsvaffals a degree of safety,
which without this device they were unable to pro-
cure. By such an increase of the number of their
vassals, the power of ecclefiaitics received a real and
permanent augmentation; and as lands, held in
fee by the limited tenures common in those ages,
often returned to the persons on whom the fief de-
pended, considerable additions were made in this
way to the property of the clergy z.

Ti-IE solicitude of the clergy in providing for the T1, ,n"

perlonal

safety of their own persons, was fill greater than that inmmuniic
which they displayed in securing their polfeilior.s; ,"o''fleila.
and their efforts to attain it were fiill more iiccefbful.
As they were consecrated to the priestly office with
much outward solemnity; were dittinguifled from
the reft of mankind by a peculiar dress and manner

Y F. Paul, Hiitory of Ecclefiat. Benefices, p. 107.
z F. Paul, Hill of Eccles. Benef. p. 66. Boulainvilliers, Etat
de France, toim. i. 169. Lond. 1737.

of

BooK II. of life; and arrogated to their order many privileges
<-- lwhich do not belong to other Christians, they natu-

rally became the objets of excessive veneration. As
a fiuperftitious spirit spread, they were regarded as
beings of a superior pecies to the profane laity, whom
it would be impious to try by the fame laws, or to
fibjedt to the fame punishments. This exemption
from civil jurifdition, granted at firit to ecclesias-
tics, as a mark of refpet, they soon claimed as a
point of right. This valuable immunity of the priest-
hood is aiferted, not only in thedecreesof Popes
and councils, but was confirmed in the moit ample
form by many of the greatest Emperors '. As long
as the clerical cllarater remained, the person of an
ecclesiastic was sacred; and unless he were degraded
from his office, the unhallowed hand of the civil
judge durst not touch him. But as the power of
degradation was lodged in the spiritual courts, the
difficulty and expence of obtaining such g sentence,
too often secured offenders of absolute impunity.
Many assumed the clerical character for no other
reason, than that it might screen them from the
punishment which their ations deserved b. The
German nobles complained loudly, that there anoint-
ed..malefactors, as they call them c, seldom susser-
ed capitally, even for the most atrocious crimes;
and their independence on the civil magistrate is
often mentioned in their remonitrances, as a privi-
lege equally pernicious to society, and to the mo-
rals of the clergy.

Tlhicrcn- WHI LE the clergy aferted the privileges of their
Conch- own order with such zeal, they made continual en-
l'rent,; oil
the jurilific- croachments upon those of the laity. All causes rela-
,; tllu tive to matrimony, to teflaments, to ulhry, to legi-

timacy of birth, as well as those which concerned

3 Goldlai Conflitut. Imperial. Francof. 1673. vol. ii. 92, 107.
Rb Kt er's Foedcra, vol. xiii. 532. ' CeniLU Gravai. § 31.

eccle-

ecclesiastical revenues, were thought to be To con- BOOK II.
nected with religion, that they could be tried only tv-
in the spiritual courts. Not satisfied with this am-
ple jurifdiation, which extended to one half of the
fubjeEts which give rife to litigation among men, the
clergy, with wonderful industry, and by a thousand
inventions, endeavoured to draw all other causes
into their own courts d; and as they had engrossed
the whole learning known in the dark ages, the fpi-
ritual judges were commonly so far superior in
knowledge and abilities to those employed in the fe-
cular courts, that the people at first favoured any
stretch that was made to bring their affairs under the
cognizance of a judicature, on the decisions of
which they could rely with superior confidence.
Thus the interest of the church, and the inclination
of the people, concurring to elude the jurifdiEtion
of the lay-magiftrate, loon reduced it almost
to nothing *. By means of this, vast power ac-
crued to ecclesiastics, and no inconsiderable addition
was made to their revenue by the fums paid in those
ages to such as administered justice.

THE penalty by which the spiritual courts enfcr-The dred-

ced their Sentences, added to them great weight fpirhual
and terror. The censure of excommunication cenlure.
was infRituted originally for preserving the purity of
the church, that obstinate offenders, whose im-
pious tenets or profane lives were a reproach to
Christianity, might be cut off from the society
of the faithful: This, ecclesiastics did not scruple
to convert into an engine for promoting their
own power, and inflidted it on the mos frivolous
occasions. Whoever despised any of their decifi-
ons, even concerning civil matters, immediately in-
curred this dreadful cenfire, which not only exclu-
ded them from all the privileges of a Christian, but

d Giannone HiR, of Naples, book xix. § 3. c Centum Gia-
vam. § 9. 56. 64.

deprived

BooK II. deprived them of their rights as men and citizenss;

"*-' and the dread of this rendered even the most fierce

and turbulent spirits obsequious to the authority of
the church.

The devices NoR did the clergy neglect the proper methods
of eccTefa- of preserving the wealth and power which they had
Rics to fe-
cure their acquired with such industry and address. The pof-
ifurpations. sessions of the church, being consecrated to God,

were declared to be unalienable; so that the funds
of a society which was daily gaining, ' and could ne-
ver lose, grew to be immense. In Germany, it
was computed that the ecclesiastics had got into
their hands more than one half of the national pro-
perty'. In other nations, the proportion varied;
but the share belonging to the church was every
where prodigious. These vast possessions were not
subjet to the burdens imposed on the lands of the
laity. The German clergy were exempted by law
from all taxes b; and if, on any extraordinary emer-
gence, Ecclesiastics were pleated to grant any aid
towards supplying the publick exigencies, this was
confidered as a free gift flowing from their own ge-
nerofity, which the civil magistrate had no title to
demand, far less to exat. In consequence of this
strange solecism in government, the laity in Germa-
ny had the mortification to find themselves loaded
with excessive impositions, because those who pof-
fefl'ed the greatest property were freed from any ob-
ligation to support, or to defend the state.

The Cer- GRIEVOUS, however, as the exorbitant wealth
man ceclefi-
a^ie, mos- and numerous privileges of the clerical order were
Iy foreign- to the other members of the Germanick body, they

would have reckoned it foine mitigation of the evil,
if these had been pofreffed only by ecclesiastics

fCentumn Gravain. § 34. Centum Gravam. § 28. h Cen-

tum Gravaim. Ibid. Goldafti Cont., Imper. ii. 79, 108. Pfeffcl
Hifl. du Dioit Publ. 350, 374.

residing

residing among themselves, who would have been BoOK IL
less apt to make an improper use of their riches, or '-^
to exercise their rights with unbecoming rigour.
But the bishops of Rome having early put in a claim,
the boldest that ever human ambition suggested, of
being supreme and infallible heads of the Christian
church; they, by their profound policy and unwea-
ried perseverance, by their address in availing them-
selves of every circumstance which occurred, by
taking advantage of the superstition of some Prin-
ces, of the necessities of others, and of the credu-
lity of the people, at length established their pre-
tensions in opposition both to the interest and com-
mon sense of mankind. Germany was the country
which there ecclesiastical sovereigns governed with
most absolute authority. They excommunicated
and deposed some of its most illustrious Emperors,
and excited their fubjedts, their ministers, and
even their children to take arms against them.
Amidst there contests, the Popes continually ex-
tended their own immunities, and spoiled the fecu-
lar Princes of their most valuable prerogatives, and
the German church felt all the rigour of that op-
preflion which flows from flbjetion to foreign dc-
minion, and foreign exactions.

THE right of conferring benefices, which the Nominated

Popes usurped during that period of confusion, was by t poi"e.
an acquisition of great importance, and exalted the
ecclesiastical power upon the ruins of the temporal.
The emperors and other princes of Germany had
long been in poffeflion of this right, and it (erved
to increase both their authority and their revenue.
But by wresting it out of their hands, the Popes
were enabled to fill the Empire withi their own
creatures; they accuftorr.ed a great body of every
prince's subjects to depend not upon him but upon
the Roman fee; they bestowed the richest benefi-
ces in every country upon frangers, and drained

their

BOOK II. their wealth to supply the luxury of a foreign court.
'-v^- Even the patience of the most superstitious ages mu-

tinied under such oppression; and so loud and fre-
quent were the complaints and murmurs of the Ger-
mans, that the Popes, afraid of irritating them too
far, consented, contrary to their usual pra&ice, to
abate somewhat of their pretensions, and to reft fa-
tisfied with the right of nomination to those bene-
sices which happened to fall vacant during fix
months in the year, leaving the disposal of the re-
mainder to the princes and other legal patrons .

eThe xr ' Bu T the court of Rome easily found expedients
ftrainingthis for eluding an agreement which put such restraints on
Pope6s ief its power. The practice of reserving certain bene-
fedual. sices in every country to the Pope's immediate no-

mination, which had been long known, and often
complained of, was extended far beyond its anti-
ent bounds. All the benefices possessed by Cardi-
nals, or any of the numerous officers in the Roman
court; those held by persons who happened to die
at Rome, or within forty miles of that city on their
journey to or from it; those which became vacant
by translation, with many others, were included in
that number; and Julius II. and Leo itretching the
matter to the utmost, often collated to benefices
where the right of reservation had not been declared,
on pretence of having mentally reserved this privi-
lege to themselves. The right ofrefervation, how-
ever, even with this extension, had certain limits,
as it could be exercised only where the benefice was
atually vacant; and therefore, in order to render
the exertion of papal power unbounded, expedative
graces, or mandates nominating a person to succeed
to a benefice upon the first vacancy that should
happen, were brought into use. By means of

F. Paul, Hist. of Eccl. Bcnef. zo4. Gold. Confl. Imper. i. 408.

there,

these, Germianyi was filled with perfors depending Bbio II.
on the court of Rome, fromh which it received, these '9
reversionary. grrits; princes were defrauded, in a
great degree; of their prerogatives, and the rights
of lay-patrons were pre-occupied, and rendered al-
most entirely vain k.

THE mariner in which these extraordinary puewvenlity

ers were exercised, rendered them itill rmore odious the court of
and intolerable. The avarice and extrotion of the R'°m
court of Rome were become exceflive almbft 'to a
proverb. The sale of benefices was so notorious
that no pains were taken- to edrieal, or t6 disguise
it. Comfpaies of merchants' openly purchased the
benefices of diffderet diftrits in Germany from the
Pope's mnihifersi and retailed them at an advanced
price'. Pious men beheld with deep regret there
fimoniacal trarifaftons, f6 unworthy the ministers
of a christian church; while politicians complained
of the loss sustained by the- xportation of so much
wealth in that irreligious traffick.

THE fums, indeed, which the court of Rome

drew by its stated and legal impositions from all other coun.
the countries that acknowledged its authority, were triesof their
so considerable, that it is not strange that they mur-
mured at the smallest addition made to them by
unnecessary or illicit means. Every ecclefiaifical
person, upon his admission to his benefice, paid
annats or one year's rent of his living to the Pope,
and as that tax was exa&ed with great rigour,, its
amount was prodigious. To this must be
added the frequent'demands made by the Popes of
free-gifts from the clergy, together with the extraor-
dinary levies of tenths upon ecclesiastical benefices,

k Centum Gravam. § 3 1. Fafcic. Rer. Expet. &c. 334. Gold.

Cont. Imper. i. 391 404,405. F. Paul,Hift. of Eccl Benef. 167,
199. ' Fafcic. Rer. Expet i. 3 59.

VOL. II. I on

BOOK II. on pretence of expeditions against the Turks, fel-

'v_-~ dom.intended, or carried into execution; and from

the whole, the vast proportion of the revenues of
the church which flowed continually to Rome, may
be estimated.

The united SUCH were the difiolute manners, the exorbitant
fsea of al wealth, and power, and privileges of the clergy be-
tfecaufes. fore the reformation; such the oppreflive rigour of

that dominion which the Popes had established over
the christian world; and such the sentiments con-
cerning them that prevailed in Germany, at the be-
ginning of the sixteenth century. Nor has this
Iketch been copied from the controversial writers of
that age, who, in the heat of disputation, may be
fufpeted of having exaggerated the errors, or of
having misrepresented the conduct of that church
which they laboured to overturn; it is formed upon
more authentick evidence, upon the memorials and
remonstrances of the Imperial diets, coolly enume-
rating the grievances under which the Empire
groaned, in order to obtain the redrefsof them.
Diffatisfation mufft have arisen to a great 'height
among the people, when these grave assemblies ex-
prefled themselves with such acrimony; and if they
demanded the abolition of these enormities with so
much vehemence, the people, we may be assured,
uttered their sentiments and desires in bolder and
more virulent language.

Men pre- To men thus prepared for shaking off the yoke,
b^.Lcu. Luther addressed himself with certainty of fuccel's
ther's opini- As they had long felt its weight, and borne it with
'," impatience, they listened with joy to the first propo-

fal for procuring deliverance. Hence proceeded the
fond and eager reception that his dotrines met with,
and the rapidity with which they spread over all
the provinces of Germany. Even the impetuosity

and to tol - and fierceness of Luther's spirit, his confidence in al-
r" hi d- serting his own opinions, and the arrogance and

contempt

contempt wherewith he treated all who drifered BooK II.
from him,; which,; in ages ;f greater moder'ation-i'
and refinremeht,; have been reckoned defects in the
charater 'f'th'at''reformer, did' riot appear excef-
five to his contemporaries, whose minds were
strongly agitated by those intereffing controversies
which he carried on, and who had themselves en-
dured the rigourof papal tyranny, and seen the cor-
ruptions in the church agaiift which he exclaimed.

NOR were they greatly offended at that gross

scurrility with which his polemical' writings are filled,
or at the low buffoonery he sometimes introduces
into his gravest difcoarfes. No dispute was ma-
naged in those 'rude times without a large portion
of the former,' and the latter was common, even
onh the most solemn occasions,'- and in treating the
rridft iacred fubjeas. So far were either of themr
from doing hurt to: his cause, that inveclive and: ri-
dicule had some effet, as well as more laudable ar-
guments, in exposing the errors of popery, and in
determining mankind to abandon them.

BES IDES all these caures of Luther's rapid pro- The effeC

.1 of the inven-

grefs, arising from' the nature'of his enterprize, and tionof print-
thejuncture at which he undertook it, he reaped ad- ing on the
vantage from some foreign and adventitious circumrn- tpheRefor
stances, the beneficial influence of which none ofmntion.
his forerunners in the fame course had enjoyed.
Among there may be reckoned the invention of the
art of printing, about half a century before his time.
By this fortunate discovery, the facility of acquir-
ing and of propagating knowledge, was wonder-
fully increased, and Luther's books, which must
otherwise have made their way slowly and with un-
certainty into distant countries, spread at once all
over Europe. Nor were they read only by the rich
and the learned, who alone had access to books be-

I , fore

BoK.on II. fore~ ~1 invention, they got i ntopthands of the
;;'~,e' eoT.e,, ..ho, upQn jt'his appeal to.the.n asjpdges,.

vente.id to examine and to ,ejet:; many,, doatrines,
whicli t~,hey hiad fprimeriy. belen, requd to. beieve,
witiuit being tauglit to'underftani them .

And of the r ofa
An e Trevival of .earnig at the fameperiod was a
learnin. ciIrcumtance extremely friendly to thie reformation

The'..:udy of the ancient Greek and, cRoman au-,
th'ors, '''nd the di'scovery of that liberal and found
know,,ledge which they contain,, rouzed.the human
rminid' from tie..profound lethargy in,' hich it had,
been, ii'ik during several centuries , ,.a'kin4 seem,
at that period, to hiave recovered tkh powers; of jp
quiring and of thinking, facuitie;of w.bicti they _had
longtoft'the use;: and.. fid of the 'ac:.;ilipon, th"ey
exercifad them with great, boldners upn 'll subies.:
T:e; were not nQwarai of enteng ' iunin. ..
path,' or of embrang a new opini,

n N oveltyr.p-

pear%, at this time, .ather. to have'been a .eoprnmmen.

atiion. to a doatne;, ani :instead of: beiPg started

when the daring h aUi iof

,ut; dre'.wraide, or'tag

the veil which covered effii blltied errors, the genius
of the age applauded ,ndaided the. attempt. Luther,
thohugh a ftrangerto elegance in taste or comnpofition,
izealouny promoted the cultivation of ancient litera-
tur.e;. and.fenplle4 ;of its. being neceariy in studying
th'e'hriptures, 'hehi'iTeIlf: had acquireadconfiderable
knowrltege both in th' '4br.ew 'an'd .reek tongues.
Melqagthon, and' fomne 6othr of his di(iples, were
eminent proficienis, i'n. theipolite..arts,.. and as the
famrie barbarous monks who oppored the introduc-
tion of learning into Germany, set tliemfelves with
equal fierceness'. against Luther's opinions, and de-
clared the good recepton of. the one to be the effed
of the progress which the oiher had nade, the
cause of learning and of the ',eformation came
t''be confidered as closely conneted, and, in

every

.every counitry, had the fatie:frieids and thre ankeBooK tU.
enemies. 'This enabled tlie' reformiers to carfr ot '
the contelft t first with great ifperiorityr . Ekdditiont,
industry, accuracy f fentitient, purity ofbcorfipo
fition, and even'wit and raillery, were wholly: o
their fide;: and triilmphed with ease over illiterate
monks, whose rude argumen't, -exprefled iin per-
plexed and barbarous flile, were found infufficjent
for the defence of a fyfterii, the errior of Vh'ich,
all the art and ingenuity of its later and mort.learn-
ed advocates have not been able to palliate. '

THAT bold spirit of inquiry, which the revival

of learning excited in Europe, was so favourable to
the 'Reformation, that Luther was aided in hispro-
grefs, and mankind were prepared to embrace his
doctrines, by persons who did not wish success to
his undertaking. ' The greater part of the ingeni-
ous men who applied to the study of ancient litera-
ture, towards the clofe'of the fifteenth century, and
the beginning of the sixteenth, though they had
no intention, and perhaps no with to overturn the
established system of religion, had discovered the
absurdity of many tenets and practices authorized
by the church, and perceived the futility of those
arguments, by which illiterate monks endeavoured
to defend them. Their contempt'of these advo-
cates for the received errors, led them frequertly to
expose the ignorance which they supported, and to
ridicule their opinions with the utmost freedom and
severity. By this'men were prepared for the more
serious attacks made upon them by Luther, and
their reverence both for the doctrines and persons
against whom he inveighed, was considerably aba-
ted. This was particularly the cafe in Germany.
When the first attempts were made to revive a taste
for ancient learning in that country,. the Ecclesias-
tics there, who were still more ignorant than their
brethren on the other fide of the Alps, set them-

I 3 felvcs

BooK I1L.felves to oppose its progress withmore active zeal!;
%'--~ aand the, patrons of the new ftdies, in return, at-

tacked them with great violence. In the writings
of.Reuchlin, Hutten, and the other revivers of learn-
ing in Germany, the corruptions of the church of
'Rome are censured with an acrimony of fyle, little
inferior to that of Luther himself',

FROM the fame cause proceeded the frequent
Iriptures of Erasmus upon the errors of the church,
as well asupon the ignorance and vices of the cler-
gy. His reputation and authority were so high in
furope at the beginning of the sixteenth century,
and his.works were read with fucl universal admira-
tion, that the effect of there deserves to be menti-
oped asone of the circumstances, which contribu-
ted towards Luther's success. Erasmus having been
destined for the church, and trained up in the
knowledge of Ecclesiastical literature, applied him-
self more to theological inquiries than any of the re-
vivers of learning in that age. His acutejudgment
and vast erudition, enabled him to discover many
errors, both in the doctrine and worship of the Ro-
mifh church. Some of these he confuted with great
solidity of reasoning, and force of eloquence. Others
he treated as objecs of ridicule, and turned againfi
them that irrefiftable torrent of popular and satirical
wit,, of which he had the command. There was
scarce any opinion or practice ofthe Romish church
which Luther endeav.oured to reform, but what had
been previously animadverted upon by Erasmus,
and had offorde! inim.fubject either ofcenfure or of
raillery. When Luther first began his attack upon
the church, Eranfus seemed to applaud his conduct;
he courted the' friendlhip of several of his difci-
ples and patrons; and condemned the behaviour

f Gerdefius Hist. Evang. repov. vol. i. p. 11, 1 57. Seckend.
lib. i. pio. V910 nder Hardt. Hist. Literar. Reform. pars ii.

and

and spirit of his adversaries'. He concurred open- BOOK I.
ly with him in inveighing against the fchool-divines, <
as the teachers of a system equally unedifying and
obscure. He joined him in endeavouring to turn
the attention of men to the study of the holy scrip-
tures, as the only standard of religious truth h

VARIOUS circumstances, however, prevented

Erasmus from holding the fame course with Luther.
The natural timidity of his temper; his want of
that force of mind which alone can prompt a man
to aliume the charaderof a reformer i; his excessive
deference for persons in high station; his dread of
losing the pensions and other emoluments which their
liberality had conferred upon him; his extreme
love of peace, and hopes ot reforming abuses gra-
dually, and by gentle methods; all concurred in de-
termining him to repress and to moderate the zeal,
with which he had once been animated against the
errors of the church k; and to assume the character
of a mediator between Luther and his opponents.
But though Erasmus Goon began to censure Luther as
too daring and impetuous, and was at last prevailed
upon to write against him, he must, nevertheless,
be confidered as his forerunner and auxiliary in this
war upon the church. He first scattered the feeds,
which Luther cherished and brought to maturity.
His raillery and oblique censures, prepared the way

g Seckend. lib. i. p 40, 6.
h Vonder Hardt. Hiltor. Literar. Reform. pars i. Gerdes. Hitt.

Evang. Renov. i. 147.

I Erafnus himself is candid enough to acknowledge this:

"Luther, fays, he, has given us many a wholesome doetrine,
and many a good counsel. I wilt he had not defeated the es-
sea of them by intolerable faults. But if he had written every
thing in the molt unexceptionable manner, I had no inclination
to die for the fake of truth. Every man hath not the courage
requisite to make a martyr; and I am afraid, that if I were put
to the trial, I Ihould imitate St. Peter." Epift. Erafmi in Jortn's
Life of Erafin. vol. i. . 273.

k Jortin's Life of Erafinus, vol. i. p. 258.

I 4 for

Boo1 I1. for Luther's inve&ives- and more diret attacks. In

-- tthis light Erafnus appeared to the zealous defenders

of the,.Romifh chuurch in his own times'. In this
light :he must be confidered by every person
conversant in the history of that period.

IN this long enumeration of the circumstances

which combined in favouring theprogrefs of Luther's
opinions, or in weakening the resistance of his ad-
verfaries, I have avoided entering into any difcuffi-
on of the theological docrines of popery, and have
thot attempted to tew how repugnant they are to the
spirit of Christianity, and how destitute of any foun-
dation in reason, in the word of God, or in the practice
of the primitive church, leaving these topics entire-
ly to ecclesiastical historians, to whose province they
peculiarly belong. But when we add the effect of
these religious considerations to the influence of po-
litical causes, it is obvious that the united operation
of both on the human mind, must have been fud-
den and irrefiftable. And though, to Luther's con-
temporaries, who were too near perhaps to the scene,
or too deeply interested in it, to trace causes with
accuracy, or to examine them with coolness, the
rapidity with which his opinions spread appeared to
be so unaccountable, that some of them. imputed it
to a certain uncommon and malignant position of
the flars, which scattered the spirit of giddiness and
innovation over the world m, it is evident, that their
fqucefs was the natural effec of many powerful
causes prepared by peculiar providence, and hap-
pily conspiring to that end. This attempt to invef-
tigate the causes, and to throw light on an event

Vonder Hardt. iti. Literar. Reform. pars i. p. 2.
a' Jovii Hiltoria, Lut. 553. fol. p. 134.

so

so singular and important, will not, perhaps, be Boox I.
deemed an unneceiFary digreflion.-I retnrn from ''
it to the course of the history.

THE Diet at Worms conduced its deliberations Proceedings

with that flow formality peculiar to such assemblies. as wheol
Much time was spent in eflabliflhing some regulati-
ons with regard to the internal policeof the Empire.
Thejurifdiftion of the Imperial chamber was con-
firmed, and the forms of its proceeding rendered
more fixed and regular. A council of regency was
appointed to aflfft Ferdinand in the government of
the Empire during his brother's absence; which,
from the extent of the Emperor's dominions, and
the multiplicity of his affairs, was an event that
might be frequently expected ". Theftate of reli-
gion was then taken into consideration. There were
not wanting some plausible reasons which might
have induced Charles to have declared himself the
protector of Luther's cause, or at least to have con- The Empe-

ror's views

nived at its progress. If he had possessed no other with regard
dominions but those which belonged to him in Ger- to Luther.
many, and no other crown beside the Imperial, he
might have been disposed perhaps to favour a man,
who asserted so boldly the privileges and immunities
for which the Empire had struggled so long with
the Popes. But the vast and dangerous schemes
which Francis I. was forming against him, made it
necelFary for him to regulate his conduct by views
more extensive than those which would have suited
a German prince; and it being of the utmost im-
portance to secure the Pope's friendship, this deter-
mined him to treat Luther with great severity, as
the most effecual method of soothing Leo into a

" Pont. Heuter. Rer Aufr. Lib. viii. c. 1.. p. 195. Pfffel
AbregdChronol. p 598.

concur-

Boox l. concurrence with his measures. His eagerness to

V accomplish this, rendered him not unwilling to gra-

tify the Papal legates in Germany, who insisted
that, without any delay or formal deliberation,_the
diet ought to condemn a man whom the Pope had
already excommunicated as an incorrigible heretick.
Such an abrupt manner of proceeding, however,
being deemed unprecedented and unjust by the
members of the diet, they made a point of Luther's

He is rum- appearing in person, and declaring whether he ad-
mppe'dr. hered or not to those opipions, which had drawn up-

on him the censures of the church °. Not only the
Emperor, but all the princes through whose territo-
ries he had to pass, granted him a fafe-condud; and
March 6. Charles wrote to him at the fame time, requiring

his immediate attendance on the diet, and renew-
ing his promises of protection from any injury or
violenceP. Luther did not hesitate one moment
about yielding obedience, and set out for Worms
attended by the herald who had brought the Empe-
ror's letter and fafe-condut. While on hisjourney,
many of his friends, whom the fate ofHuls, under
similar circumstances, and notwithstanding the fame

His undaun- security of an Imperial fafe-conduct, filled with
ted ipiit. solicitude, advised and intreated him not to rush

wantonly into the midst of danger. But Luther,
superior to such terrors, silenced them with this re-
ply, " I am lawfully called," said he, " to appear
in that city, and thither will I go in the name of the
Lord, though as many devils as there are tiles on
the houses, were there combined against me q."

His recepti- THE reception he met with atWorms, was fhch
WVorms. as he might have reckoned a full reward of all his

labours, if vanity and the love of applause had been
the principles by which he was influenced. Great-

0 P. Mart. Ep. 722. ' Luth. Oper. ii. 411.
Luth. Oper. ii. 41Z.

er

er crowds assembled to behold him, than had ap-BooK IT.
peared at the Emperor's publick entry ; his apart- "'
ments were daily filled with princes and personages
of the highest rank , and he was treated with all
the respeCt paid to those who possess the power of
directing the understanding and sentiments of other
men; an homage, more sincere, as well as more
flattering, than any which pre-eminence in birth or
condition can command. At his appearance before The ma-

ner of his

the diet, he behaved with great decency, and with appearance.
equal firmness. He readily acknowledged an excess
of vehemence and acrimony in his controversial
writings, but refused to retract his opinions unless he
were convinced of their falfhood; or to consent to
their being tried by any other rule than the word of
God. When neither threats nor entreaties could
prevail on him to depart from this resolution, Come
of the ecclesiastics propoled to imitate the exam-
ple of the council of Constance, and by punilhing
the author of this pestilent heresy, who was now in
their power, to deliver the church at once from fich
an evil. But the members of the diet refuting to
expose the German integrity to frelh reproach by a
second violation of publick faith; and Charles be-
ing no less unwilling to bring a stain upon the begin-
ning of his administration by such an ignominious
action, Luther was permitted to depart in safety f. April. 6.
A few days after he left the city, a revere edict was ',lia
published in the Emperor's name, and by authority gin hi
of the diet, depriving him as an obstinate and ex-
communicated criminal of all the privileges he en-
joyed as a subjed of the Empire, forbidding any
prince to harbour or protect him, and requiring all
to concur in seizing his perbon as soon as the term
specified in his fafe-conduct was expired'.

r Seckand. 56. Luth. Qper. ii. 41 4. r F Paul. Hilt. of
Counc. . 13, 'Seckend. io. ' Gold. Confl. Imperial. ii. 4r8.

Bur

BOOK IT. ' '
...

'~'" BET this rigorous decree had no Considerable es-

He is £eized,.
andconceal-'fet, the execution of it being prevented partly by
d at Wart- the multiplicity of occupations which the commoti,

ons in Spain, and the wars in Italy and the Low
Countries, created to the Emperor . and partly by
a prudent precaution employed by the etiedor of
Saxony, Luther's faithful patron. As Luther, on
his return from Wormsr was pafling near Altenftein
in Thuringia, a number 6f horsemen in masks rush-
ed suddenly but of a wood, where the Eletor had
appointed them to lie in wait:for him, and surround-
ing his company, carried him, after difmifling all
his attendants, to Wartburgs a strong castle not
far distant.. here the Eli6tor ordered him to be
supplied with every thing necessary or agreeable,
but the place of his retreat was carefully concealed,
until upon a change in the political situation of Eu-
rope, the filry of the present storm agairift him
began to abate. In this solitude, where he remain-
ed nine months, and which he frequently called his
Patmos, after the name of that island to which the
apostle John was banished, he exerted his usual
vigour and industry in defence of his do&trines, or
in confutation of his adversaries, publishing several
treatises, which revived the spirit of his followers,
allonifhed to a great degree, and disheartened at
the sudden disappearance of their leader.

PiogrX oiF DU RING his confinement, his opinions continued
his opi:.,,n..

to gain ground, acquiring the ascendant in almost
every city of Saxony. At this time, the Augufti-
nians of Wittemberg, with the approbation of the
univerlity, and the connivance of the Ele&or, ven-
tured upon the sirs flep towards an alteration in
the cftablilhcd forms of publick worship, by abo-
lliilng the celebration of private masses, and by
giving the cup as well as the bread to the laity in
adriiiiiftring the facramcnt of the Lord's supper.

WHATEVER

...:.;.., ,

,: : . .- . , BobK: IL:

WHATEVER consolation the courage and success ,_eo

of hisdiciples, or theprogrefs of his dot)rines in the univer-
his own. country afforded Luther in his retreat, he fitYn f Paris
there received. information of two events which.them.
confide.rablyt damped his joy, as they seemed to lay
infiuperablp-obftacles in the way of propagating his
princip!es in. the two' most powerful kingdoms of
Europe., .One was,: a solemn decree, condemning
his:opinio ns, .publjfhed by the university of Paris,
themoft;aitcient, and at.tatttime the most repeda-
ble of the, learned societies in Europe. The other
was, the answer written. to his book concerning the
Babylonifhi captivity by Henry VIII. of England. HenryVIIL
That young monarch, having.been educatid.under gainsthem.
the eye of-a suspicious father, who, in:order to pre-
vent his attending to bufiiefs, kept him occupied
in the.ft:udy of literature, still retained a.-greater
love of learning, and stronger habits of application.
to it, than. are common among Princes of :b active
a disposition,. and such violent passions;: and being
ambitious:ofi acquiring glory of every kind,. as. well
as zealously. attached to the Romilh church, and
highly exalperated against Luther, who'had treated
Thomas Aquinas, his favourite author, with. great
contempt, he did not think it enough to exert his
royal authority in opposing the opinions of the re-
former, but resolved likewise to combat them with
fcholaltic weapons. With. this view he publifled
histreatifeon the Seven Sacraments, which, though
forgotten at present, as books ofcontroverfy always
are, when the occasion that produced. them is pait,
is not destitute of polemical ingenuity and acuteness,
and was represented by the flattery of his courtiers
to be a work of such wonderful science and learning,
as exalted him no leTs above other authors in merit,
than he;was diftinguilhed among them by his rank.
The Pope,. to whom it was presented with the great-
eft formality in! full conliftory, spoke of it in such

terms,

Boox II. terms, as if it had been diCtated by immediate in-
.'~-. fpiration ; and as a testimony of the gratitude of the

church for his extraordinary zeal, conferred on him
the title of Defender of the Faith, an appellation
which Henry soon forfeited in the opinion of those
from whom he derived it, and which is still the title
of his successors, though the avowed enemies of
those opinions, by contending for which he merited

Luther's re- that honourable diftindion. Luther, who was not
ply to both. overawed either by the authority of the University,

or the dignity of the monarch, soon published his
animadversions on both, in a flile no less vehement
and revere than he would have used in confuting his
meanest antagonist. This indecent boldness, in-
stead of shocking his contemporaries, was 'cobfider-
ed by them as a new proof of his undaunted spirit;
a controversy managed by disputants fo'illuftrious,
drew more general attention; and such was the
contagion of the spirit of innovation, diffused
through Europe in that age, and so powerful the
evidence which accompanied the doctrines of the
reformers on their first publication, that, in spite
both of the civil and ecclesiastical powers combin-
ed against them, they daily gained converts both in
France and in England.

State of as- HowEVER desirous the Emperor might be to put
tgir, be- a flop to Luther's progress, he was often obliged,
Charles and during the diet at Worms, to turn his thoughts to
Francis. matters fill more interesting, and which demanded

more immediate attention. A war was ready to
break out between him and Francis in Navarre, in
the Low-Countries, and in Italy; and it required
either great addrers to avert the danger, or timely
and wife precautions to resist it. Every circum-
stance, at that junCture, inclined Charles to prefer
the former meafiure. Spain was torn with intestine
commotions. In Italy, he had not hitherto secured
the allillance of any one ally. In the Low-Coun-

tries,

tries, his fubjeafs trembled at the thoughts of a rup- Boo II.
ture with France, the fatal effects of which on their ',-.
commerce they had often experienced. From these
considerationss as well as from the solicitude of
Chievres during his whole adminifiration to main-
tain peace between the two monarchs, proceeded
the Emperor's backwardness to commence hoftili-
ties. But Francis and his ministers did not breathe
the fame pacific spirit. He easily foresaw that con-
cord could not long subsist, where interest, emula-
tion, and ambition conspired to difiolve it; and
he possessed several advantages which flattered him
with the hopes of surprising his rival, and of over-
powering him before he could put himself in a pof-
ture of defence. The French King's dominions,
from their compac situation, from their subjection
to the royal authority, from the genius of the peo-
ple, fond of war, and attached to their Sovereign by
every tie of duty and affection, were more capable
of a great or'fidden effort, than the larger but dif-
united territories of the Emperor, in one part of
which the people were in arms againit his ministers,
and in all his prerogative was more limited than
that of his rival.

THE only princes, in whose powerit was to have Henry VI.

kept down, or to have extinguithed this flame on Emperor.
its first appearance, either neglected to exert them.
(elves, or were ative in kindling and spreading it.
Henry VIII. though he affected to atFume the name
of mediator, and both parties made frequent ap-
peals to him, had laid aside the impartiality which
suited that character. Wolfey, by his artifices,
had estranged him so entirely from the French
King, that he secretly fomented the discord which
he ought to have composed, and waited only for
some decent pretext to join his arms to the Empe-
ror's'.

a Herbert. Fiddes's Lift of Wolfey, 258.

LEO's

Boot II. LEo'S endeavours to excite discord between the

` ' Emperor and' Francis were more avowed, and had

Leo hesitates
between the greater influence. Not only his duty, as the corn-
rivals. noh father, r.of Chrifendom, but his interest as an

Italian potentate, called upbn the Pope to adt as the
guardian. of. the public tranquillity, ahd to avoid
any meafire.that might overturn the system, which
after much bloodshed, and many negociations, was
now eftablilhed in Italy. Accordingly Leo, who
instantly discerned the propriety of this conduct,
had formed. a scheme upon Charles's promotion to
the Imperial: dignity, of rendering himself the
umpire between the rivals, by soothing thern alter-
nately, while he entered into no close confederacy
with either; and a Pontiff less ambitious and enter-
prizing, might have saved Europe from many cala-
mities by adhering to this plan. . But this high-
spirited prelate, who was still in the prime of life,
lo'ged pallionately to distinguish his pontificate by
some splendid action. He'was impatient to wash
away the infamy of having loft Parma and Placen-
tia, the acquisition of which reflected so much lustre
on theadmihiftration of his predecessor Julius. He
beheld, with the indignation natural to Italians in
that age, the dominion which the Transalpine, or
as they, in imitation of the Roman arrogance deno-
minated them,, the barbarous nations, had attained
in Italy. He flattered himself, that after afifting
the one monarch to strip the other of his possessions
in that country, he might find means of driving
out the. vi.tor in his turn, and acquire .the glory of
reitoring Italy to the liberty and happiness it enjoy-
ed before the invasion of Charles VIII. when every
state was governed by its native princes, or its own
laws, and.unacquainted wirh a foreign yoke. Ex-
travagant and chimerical as this projet may seem,
it was.the favourite objet of almost every Italian
eminent for genius or enterprize during great part
of the sixteenth century; they vainly hi ped, that
by liiperior skill in thg artifices and refit. nents of

nego-

negociation, they would be able to baffle the efforts BooK II.
of nations, ruder indeed than themselves, but much '
more powerful and warlike. So alluring was the
prospect of this to Leo, that notwithstanding the
gentleness of his disposition, and his fondnets for
the pleasures of a refined and luxurious ease, he
hastened to diflurb the peace of Europe, and to
plunge himself in a dangerous war, with an impe-
tuofity scarce inferior to that of the turbulent and
martial Julius b.

IT was in Leo's power, however, to choose

which of the monarchs he would take for his con-
federate against the other. Both of them courted
his friendship ; he wavered for some time between
them, and at first concluded an alliance with
Francis. The object of this treaty was the conquest
of Naples, which the confederates agreed to divide
between them. The Pope, it is probable, flatter-
ed himself that the brisk and ative spirit of Francis,
seconded by the fame qualities in his fubjeds, would
get the start of the flow and wary councils of the
Emperor, and that they might over-run with ease
this detached portion of his dominions, ill provided
for defence, and always the prey of every invader.
But whether the French King, by discovering too
openly his suspicions of Leo's sincerity, disappoint-
ed there hopes; whether the treaty was only an
artifice of the Pope's, to cover the more serious
negociations he was carrying on with Charles;
whether he was enticed by the profped of reaping
greater advantages from an union with that prince;
or whether he was toothed by the zeal which Charles
had manifested for the honour of' the church in con- tCt wyith
demning Luther; certain it is, that he fbon desert- Charles.
ed his new ally, and made overtures of friendship,
though with great secrecy, to the Emperor '. Don

b Guic. I. 14. p. 173. cGuic. lib. 14. p. 175. Mcm. de
Bellay, Par. 15. 3. p. 24.

VOL. II. K John

Book II. John Manuel, the fame man who had been the fa-
-.,-o- vourite of Philip, and whose address had difcon-

certed all Ferdinand's schemes, having been deliver-
ed, upon the death of that monarch, from the
prison to which he was confined, was now the Im-
perial ambassador at Rome, and fully capable of
improving this favourable disposition in the Pope to
his master's advantage d. To him the conduc of
this negociation was entirely committed, and being
carefully concealed from Chievres, whose aversion
from a war with France would have prompted him
May 8. to retard or defeat it, an alliance between the Pope

and Emperor was quickly concluded '. The chief
articles in this treaty, which proved the foundation
of Charles's grandeur in Italy, were, that the Pope
and Emperor should join their forces to expel the
French out of the Milanese, the poffeflion of which
should be granted to Francis Sforza, a son of Ludo-
vico the Moor, and who had relided at Trent since
the time his brother Maximilian had been difpoffef-
fed of his dominions by the French King; that
Parma and Placentia should be restored to the church;
that the Emperor should aflift the Pope in conquer-
ing Ferrara; that the annual tribute paid by the
kingdom of Naples to the Holy See should be in-
creased; that the Emperor should take the family of
Medici under his protection; that he should grant
to the Cardinal of that name a pension often thou.
sand ducats upon the archbifhoprick of Toledo;
and fettle lands in the kingdom of Naples to the
fame value upon Alexander the natural (on of Lo-
renzo de Medici.

Death of THE transacting an affair of such moment with-
Chievrcs, out his participation, appeared to Chievres so deci-
rheEml'e five a proof of' his having loft the ascendant which
rite and he had hitherto maintained over the mind of his
mrinislcr.

rainir. d Jovii Vita Leonis, lib. iv. p. 89. C Guic. 1. 14. 181. Meem.

ds Bcllay, p. 24 Du Mont Corpa Diplom, tom. iv. suppl. p. 96

pupil,
Il

pupil, that his chagrin on this account, added to the Boor: II.
melancholy with which he was overwhelmed on
taking a view of the many and unavoidable cala-
mities attending a war against France, is said to
have shortened' his days . But though this, per-
haps, may be only the conjecture of historians,
fond of attributing every thing that befals illustrious
personages to extraordinary causes, and of ascribing
even their diseases and death to the effect of political
paflions, which oftener disturb the enjoyment than
they abridge the period of life, it is certain that his
death at this critical jundure extinguished all hopes
of avoiding a rupture with France . This event,
too, delivered Charles from a minister, to whose
authority he had been accustomed from his infancy
to submit with such implicit deference, as checked
and depressed his genius, and retained him in a state
of pupillage, unbecoming both his years and his
rank; but this restraint being removed, the native
powers of his mind were allowed to unfold them-
selves, and he displayed such great talents, both in
council and in execution, as exceeded the hopes of
his contemporaries b, and command the admiration
of posterity.

WHILE the Pope and Emperor were preparing, Commence-

in consequence of their secret alliance, to attack, tiities i,
Milan, hoftilitiescommenced in anotherquarter. The Navarr.
children of John d'Albret King of Navarre having
often demanded the restitution of their hereditary
dominions, in terms of the treaty of Noyon, and
Charles having as often eluded their request upon
very frivolous pretexts, Francis thought himself au-
thorized by that treaty to aflift the exiled family.
The juncture appeared extremely favourable for
fuich an enterprize. Charles was at a distance from

f Belcarii Comment. de reb. Gallic. 483. g P. Heuter. Rer.
Autriac. lib. viii. c. I. p. 197. h P. Mart. Ep. 735.

K 2 that

Boot iI-that part of his dominions; the troops usually fta-

Y- tioned there had been called a-. ay to quell the com-

motions in Spain; the Spanish malecontents warmly
flicited him to invade Navarre', in which a confi-
derable faction was ready to declare for the defcen-
dants of their ancient monarchs. But in order to
avoid, as much as poflible, giving offence to the
Emperor, or King of England, Francis directed
forces to be levied, and the war to be carried on,
not in his own name, but in that of Henry d'Albret.
The conduct of there troops was committed to An-
drew de Foix, de l'Efparre, a young nobleman,
whom his near alliance to the unfortunate King
whose battles he was to fight, and what was still
more powerful, the interest of his sifter, madame
de Chateaubriand, Francis's favourite mistress, re-
commended to that important trust, for which he
Progress of had neither talents nor experience. But as there was

no army in the field to oppose him, he became
master, in a few days, of the whole kingdom of
Navarre, without meeting with any obtrudtion but
from the citadel of Pampeluna. The additional
works to this fortress begun by Ximenes, were
still unfinished; nor would its flight resistance have
deserved notice, if Ignatio Loyola, a Bifcayan gen-
tleman, had not been dangerously wounded in its
defence. During the progress of a lingering cure,
Loyola happened to have no other amusement than
what he found in reading the lives of the faints:
The effect of this on his mind, naturally enthu-
fiaftic, but ambitious and daring, was to in-
spire him with such a desire of emulating the glory
of there fabulous worthies of the Romilh church,
as led him into the wildest and most extravagant
adventures; which terminated at last in inftitut-
ing the society of Jesuits, the most political and
best regulated of all the monallic orders, and from

i P.Mart Ep. 721.

which

which mankind have derived more advantages, and Boot II.
received greater hurt, than from any other of these 'v'
religious fraternities.

IF, upon the reduction of Pampeluna, L'Efparre They enter

had been satisfied with taking proper precautions Cafiile
for securing his conquest, the kingdom of Navarre
might still have remained annexed to the crown of
France, in reality, as well as in title. But, pushed
on by youthful ardour, and encouraged by Francis,
who was too apt to be dazzled with success, he
ventured to pass the confines of Navarre, and to lay
siege to Logrogno, a finall city in Castile. This
rouzed the Castilians, who had hitherto beheld the
rapid progress of his arms with great unconcern;
and the dissensions in that kingdom being almost
composed, both parties exerted themselves with
emulation in defence of their country; the one that
it might efface the memory of past misconduct by
their present zeal; the other that it might add to
the merit of having subdued the Emperor's rebelli-
ous fubjeCds, that of repulsing his foreign enemies.
The sudden advance of their troops, together
with the gallant defence made by the inhabitants of
Logrogno, obliged the French general to abandon
his rash enterprize. The Spanish army, which in- They are
created every day, harassing him during his retreat, and drien
lie, instead of taking shelter under the canon of ot ofNa.
Pampeluna, or waiting the arrival of some troops vrre
who were marching to join him, attacked the Spa-
niards, though far liperior to him in number, with
great impetuosity, but with so little condut, that
his forces were totally routed, he himself, together
with his principal officers, was taken prisoner, and
Spain recovered poffeflion of Navarre in still Ihorter
time than the French had spent in the conquest of
it".

k Mem, de Bellay, p. 21. P. Mart. Ep. 726.

K 3 WHIILE

BooK II. WHILE Francis endeavoured tojuftify his invafi.
..ii"7 on of Navarre, by carrying it on in the name of
begun in the Henry D'Albret, he had recourse to an artifice much
Low Coun- of the fame kind, in attacking another part of the

Emperor's territories. Robert de la Marck, lord of
the small but independent territory of Bouillon, si-
tuated on the frontiers of Luxemburg and Cham-
pagne, having abandoned Charles's service on ac-
count of an encroachment which the Aulic council
made on hisjurifdiEtion, and having thrown him-
self upon France for protection, was easily perfuad.
ed, in the heat of his resentment, to fend a herald
to Worms, and to declare war in form againRf the
Emperor. Such extravagant insolence in a petty
prince furprized Charles, and appeared to him a
certain proof of his having received promises of
powerful support from the French King. The just.
ness of this conclusion soon became evident. Ro-
bert with troops levied in France, by the King's
connivance, though seemingly in contradiction to
his orders, entered Luxembourg, and after ra-
vaging.the open country, laid siege to Vireton. Of
this Charles complained loudly, as a direct violati-
on of the peace lubfifting between the two crowns,
and summoned Henry VIII. in terms of the treaty
concluded at London in the year one thousand
five hundred and eighteen, to turn his arms againfl
France as the first aggreflor; and though Francis
pretended that he was not answerable for Robert's
conduct, whose army fought under his own ftan-
dards, and in his own quarrel, and who, contrary
to an express prohibition, had reduced some sub-
ijets of France into his service; Henry paid so little
regard to this evasion, that the French King, ra-
ther than irritate a prince whom he still hoped to
gain, commanded de la Marck to disband his
troops'.

1 Mlem, de Bellay, p. z2, &c. Me. de Fuleuranges, p. 335 , &c

'!' HI

THE Emperor, meanwhile, was assembling an Boo II'

army to chastise Robert's in[olence Twenty thou- h''
sand men under the count of Nassau invaded his lit-
tle territories, and in a few days became masters of
every place in them but Sedan. After making him
feel so sensibly the weight of his master's indignat'-
on, Nassau advanced towards the frontiers of
France; and Charles knowing that he might pre-
fume so far on Henry's partiality in his favour, as
not to be over-awed by the fame fears which had
refrained Francis, ordered his general to besiege
Moufon. The cowardice of the garrison having
obliged the governor to surrender almost without
rdfiftance, Nassau invested Mezieres, a place atsiegeofMr.
that time of no considerable strength, but so advan- zieres by the
tageoufly situated, that by getting poffeflion of it, mperi.
the Imperial army might have penetrated into the
heart of Champagne, in which there was scarce any
other town capable of obftruEting its progress.
Happily for France, its monarch, fenfibleof the
irmportai:ce of this fortress, and of the danger to
which it was exposed, committed the defence of it
to the chevalier Bayard, distinguished among his
contemporaries by the appellation of The Knight
'without fear, and withoit reproach". This man,
whose prowess in combat, whose puntilious ho-
nour, and formal gallantry, bear a nearer refem-
blance, than any thing recorded in history,' to the
charaAer ascribed to the heroes of chivalry, pof-
sessed all the talents which form a great general.
These he had many occasions of exerting in the de-
fence of Mezieres; partly by his valour, partly by
his condut, he protracted the siege to a great
length, and in the end obliged the Imperialists to
raise it, with infamy and loss". Francis at the head R;,;d.
of a numerous army soon retook Mcufon, and en-
tering the Low Countries, made I-velal conquctls
of linall importance In the niiglibourlhood of Va-

m Oeuvres de Brantome, tom, vi. rI .1. " Me. de Bcllay, p.
25. &c.

K 4 lenciennes,

Bo OK II. lenciennes, through an excess of caution, an error

L"3 " with which he cannot be often charged, he loft an

opportunity of cutting off the whole Imperial ar-
my °; and what was still of more consequence, he
disgusted the contlable Bourbon, by giving the
command of the van to the duke D'Alencon, though
this post of honour belonged to Bourbon, as a pre-
rogative of his office.

August. DURING there operations in the field, a congress

Congress at
Calaisundr was held at Calais under the mediation of Henry
the mediati- VIII. in order to bring all differences to an amicable
on of En-
gland, issue; and if the intentions of the mediator had cor-

responded in any degree to his profeflions, it could
'carce have failed of producing some good effet.
Henry committed the sole management of the ne-
gociation, with unlimited powers, to Wolfey; and
this choice alone was sufficient to have rendered it
abortive. That prelate, bent on attaining the pa-
pal crown, the great object of his ambition, and
ready to sacrifice every thing in order to gain the
Emperor's interest, was so little abletoconceal
his partiality, that if Francis had not been well ac-
quainted with his haughty and vindictive temper,
he would have declined his mediation. Much time
was spent in inquiring who had begun hostilities,
which Wolley affedted to represent as the principal
point; and by throwing the blame of that on Fran-
cis, he hoped to justify by the treaty of London,
any alliance into which his master should enter with

without any Charles. The conditions on which hostilities might
cffet. be terminated, came next to be confidered; but

with regard to there, the Emperor's proposals were
such as discovered either that he was utterly averl;
from peace, or that he knew Wolfey would ap-
rove of whatever fliould be offered in his name.
he demanded the restitution of the dutchy of Bur-
gundy, a province, the poffflion of which woukl

P. IMalt. Ep. 747. Mem. de Bcllay, 35.

have

have given him access into the heart of the king- BooK IT.
dom; and required a discharge of the homage due""
to the crown of France for the counties of Slanders
and Artois, which none of his ancestors had ever
refused, and which he had bound himself by the
treaty of Noyon to renew. These terms, to which
an high-fpirited, prince would scarce have listened,
after the disasters of the most unfortunate war,
Francis rejected with great disdain; and Charles
shewing no inclination to comply with the more
equal and moderate propositions of the French mo-
narch, that he ihould restore Navarre to its lawful
prince, and withdraw his troops from the siege of
Tournay, the congress broke up without any other
effect, than that which attends unsuccessful negocia-
tions, the exasperating of the parties, whom it was
intended to reconcile P.

DURING the continuance of the congress, Wol- League

againit

fey, on pretence that the Emperor himself would France be-
be more willing to make reasonable concefiions twee the
than his ministers, made an excursion to Bruges, to and Henry
meet that monarch. He was received by Charles, viI.
who knew his vanity, with as much refpedt and
magnificence as if he had been King of England.
But instead of advancing the treaty of peace by this
interview, Wolfey, in his master's name, conclud-
ed a league with the Emperor against Francis; in
which it was stipulated, that Charles Lhould invade
France on the fide of Spain, and Henry in Picardy,
each with an army of forty thouhand men; and
that, in order to strengthen their union, Charles
hfould espouse the Princess Mary, Henry's only
child, and the apparent heir of his dominions' .
Henry produced no better reasons for this meafiirc,
equally unjust and impolitic, than the article in the
treaty of London, by which he pretended that he

' P. Mart. Ep. 739. Herbert. q R)y er, Fclder. xii. IIlebert.

w\as

BooK II. was bound to take arms againfl the French King at
'- '" the first aggressor; and the injury which he alledg.

ed Francis had done him, in permitting the duke
of Albany, the head of a faction in Scotland which
opposed his interest, to return into that kingdom
He was i.fluenced, however, by other confiderati.
ons. The advantages which accrued to his sub.
jets from maintaining an exat neutrality, or the
honour that resulted to himself from acting as the
arbiter between contending princes, appeared to
his youthful imagination so inconsiderable, when
compared with the glory which Charles and Francis
reaped from leading armies or conquering provin-
ces, that he determined to remain no longer in a
state of inactivity. Having once taken this refoluti-
on, his inducements to prefer an alliance with
Charles were obvious. He had no claim upon any
part of that Prince's dominions, most of which
were so situated, that he could not attack them
without great difficulty and disadvantage; whereas
several maritime provinces of France had been long
in the hands of the Englilh monarchs, whofepre-
tensions, even to the crown of that kingdom, were
not altogether forgotten; and the pofleffion of Calais
not only gave him easy access into some of these pro-
vinces, but afforded him, in cafe of any difaiter, a
secure retreat. While Charles attacked France up-
on one frontier, Henry flattered himself that he
would find little resistance on the other, and that
the glory of re-annexing to the crown of England
the ancient inheritance of its monarchs on the conti-
nent, was reserved for his reign. Wolley artfully
encouraged these vain hopes, which led his matter
into such meafiures as were mofl subservient to his
own kIcret schemes; and the English, whose here-
ditary animnolity againift the French was apt to re-
kindle on every occasion, did not dilapprove of the
nmartial l)irit of their sovereign.

MEAN-

MEANWHILE the league between the Pope andBooK II.

Emperor produced great effects in Italy, and ren-'-"'
dered Lombardy the chief theatre of war. There inH taly
was, at that time, such contrariety between the
charater of the French and Italians, that the latter
submitted to the government of the former with
greater impatience, than they expressed under the
dominion of other foreigners. The phlegm of the
Germans and gravity of the Spaniards, suited their
jealous temper and ceremonious manners better than
the French gaiety, too prone to gallantry, and too
little attentive to decorum. Lewis XII. however, by
the equity and gentleness of his administration, and
by granting the Milanese more extensive privileges
than they had enjoyed under their native princes,
had overcome, in a great measure, their prejudices,
and reconciled them to the French government.
Francis, on recovering that dutchy, did not imitate
tlhe example of his predeceflor; and though too ge-
nerous himfelfto oppress his people, his confidence
in his favourites, and his negligence in examining
into the conduct of those whom he entrusted with
power, emboldened them to venture upon many
acts of oppreflion. The government of Milan was The Mita-
committed by him to Odet de Foix, Marechal de "ed viatz.
Lautrec, another brother of Madame de Chateau- 1'rench g-
Briand, an officer of great experience and reputation, vCenmcn.
but haughty, imperious, rapacious, and incapable
either of listening to advice, or bearing contradicti-
on. His insolence and exactions totally alienated the
atfeftions of the Milanese fiom France, drove ma-
ny of the considerable citizens into banishment, and
forced, others to retire for their own safety. Among
theilaf was Jerome Merone, vice-chancellor of Mi-
lan, a man whofsegenius for intrigue and enterprize
dittinguilhed him in an age and country, where vio-
lent ftlitions, as well as frequent revolutions, afford-
ing great scope for such talents, produced or called
them forth in great abundance. He repaired to
Francis Sforza, whole brother Maximilian he had

betray-

BOOK II. betrayed; and fufpeding the Pope's intention of at
"-wV' tacking the Milanese, although his treaty with the

Emperor was not yet made publick, proposed to
him in the name of Sforza, a scheme for surprising
several places in that dutchy by means of the exiles,
who, from hatred to the French, and from attach-
ment to their former masters, were ready for any
desperate attempt. Leo not only encouraged the at-
tempt, but advanced a considerable fum towards
the execution of it; and when through unforeseen
accidents it failed of success in every part, he allow-
ed the exiles who had assembled in a body, to re-
tire to Reggio, which belonged at that time to the
June 24. church. The MarechaldeFoix, who commanded

at Milan in absence of his brother Lautrec, who
was then in France, tempted with the hopes of
catching at once as in a snare, all the avowed ene-
mies of his mailer's government in that country,
ventured to march into the ecclefiaflical territories,
and to inveil Reggio. But the vigilance and good
conduct of Guicciardini the historian, governor of
that place, obliged the French general to abandon'

T'he ope the enterprize with disgrace '. Leo, on receiving
declaes this intelligence, with which he was highly pleated,
Francis. as it furnished him a decent pretext for a rupture

with France, immediately assembled the confiflory
of Cardinals, and complaining bitterly of the hostile
intentions of the French King, and magnifying the
Emperor's zeal for the church, of which he had gi-
ven a recent proof by his proceedings against Luther,
declared that he was constrained in felf-defence, and
as tile only expedient for the security of the ecclefi-
aftical state to join his arms to those of that prince.
For this purpose, he now pretended to conclude a
treaty with Don John Manuel, although it had been
ligned Iome months before this time; and he pub-
lickly excommunicated De Foix, as an impious in-
vader of St. Peter's patrimony.

a Guic. lib. xiv. 183. Mem. de Bellay, p. 38, &c.

LEO

LEO had already begun preparations for war by BOOK II.
taking into pay a considerable body of Swiss; but

War in the

the Imperialtroops advanced so slowly from Naples Milanee.
and Germany, that it was the middle of autumn
before the army took the field under the command
of Prosper Colonna, the most eminent of the Italian
generals, whose long experience and extreme cauti-
on were opposed with great propriety to the impe-
tuofity of the French. In the mean time, De Foix
dispatched courier after courier to inform the King
of the danger which was approaching. Francis,
whose forces were either employed in the Low-
Countries, or assembling on the frontiers of Spain,
and who did not expet lb sudden an attack in that
quarter, sent ambassadors to his allies the Swiss, to
procure from them the immediate levy of an addition-
al body of troops; and commanded Lautrec to repair
forthwith to his government. That general, who
was well acquainted with the great neglect ofrceco-
nomy in the administration of the King's sinan-
ces, and who knew how much the troops in the
Milanese had already suffered from the want of their
pay, refused to set out, unless the tum of three hun-
dred thousand crowns was immediately put into his
hands. But the King, Louise of Savoy, his mother,
and Semblancay, the fuperintendant of finances, ha-
ving promised, even with an oath, that on his arri-
val at Milan he flould find remittances for the fum
wh:ch he demanded; upon the faith of this, he de-
parted. Unhappily for France, Louise, a woman
deceitful, vindiLctive, rapacious, and capable of fa-
crificing any thing to the gratification of her pailli-
ons, but who had acquired an ablblure alcendant
over her son by her maternal telndcincis, her care
of his education, and her great abilities, was rcfol-
ved not to perform this promile.. Laitrcc having
incurred her dilpleafire by his haughtincts in nc-
gleting to pay court to her, and by the freedom
with which he talked concerning some of her ad-

vent ucs

BOOK II. ventures in gallantry, she, in order to deprive hin

v'-v of the honour which he might have gained by

fuccefsfll defence of the Milanese, seized tie three
hundred thousand crowns destined for that service,
and detained them for her own use.

Progress of LAU'TRE C, notwithflanding this cruel disappoint.
the Imperi- ment, foblnd means to assemble a considerable ar-
alias.

my, thoigi"l far inferior in number to that of the
confederates. He adopted the plan of defence
most suitable to his situation, avoiding a pitched bat-
tle with the greatest care, while he harassed the
enemy continually with his light troops, beat up
their quarters, intercepted their convoys, and co-
vered or relieved every place which they attempted
to attack. By this prudent conduct, he not only
retarded their progress, but would have soon weari-
ed out the Pope, who had hitherto defrayed almost
the whole expence of the war, as the Emperor whose
revenues in Spain were diflipated during the com-
motions in that country, and who was obliged to
Iupport a numerous army in the Netherlands, could
not make any considerable remittances into Italy.
But an unforeseen accident disconcerted all his mea-
fures, and occasioned a fatal reverse in the French
affairs. A body of twelve thousand Swiss served in
their army under tliefbanners of the republick, with
which France was in alliance. By a law, no less
political than humane, eftablilhed among the can-
tons, their troops were not hired out by publick au-
thority to both the contending parties in any war.
This law, the love of gain had Sometimes eluded,
and private pertlns had been allowed to enlist in
what ftrvice they pleased, though not under the
publick banners, but under thoie of their officers.
The Cardinal of Sion, whpo lill preserved his inte-
reft among his countrymen, and hisenmity toFrancc,
having prevailed on them to permit a levy of this

kind,

kind, twelve thousand Swiss joined the army of the BOOK II.
confederates. The cantons, when they saw so ma- '"-
ny of their countrymen marching under hostile
itandards, and ready to destroy each other, became
sensible of the infamy to which they would be ex-
posed, as well as the loss they might susser, and
dispatched couriers, commanding them to leave
both armies, and to return into their own country.
The Cardinal of Sion, however, had the address,
by corrupting the messengers appointed to carry
this order, to prevent its being delivered to the
Swiss in the service of the confederates; but being
intimated in due form to those in the French army,
they, fatigued with the length of the campaign, and
murmuring for want of pay, instantly yielded obe-
dience in spite of Lautrec's remonstrances and in-
treaties.

AF'rER the desertion of a body which formed the
strength of his army, Lautrec durit no longer face
the confederates; and turning towards Milan, en-
camped on the banks of the Adda, and placed his
chief hopes of safety in preventing the enemy from
passing the river; an expedient for defending a Becom
country so precarious, that there are few examples of Milan.
its being employed with success against any general
of experience or abilities. Accordingly Colonna,
notwithstanding Lautrec's vigilance and activity,
passed the Adda with little loss, and obliged him to
shut himself up within the walls of Milan, which
the confederates were preparing to besiege when an
unknown person, who never afterwards appeared ei-
ther to boast of this service, or to claim a reward
for it, came from the city and acquainted Morone,
that if the army would advance that night, the Ghi-
belline or Imperial faction would put them in pol-
feitson of one of the gates. Colonna, though no
friend to ralh enterprizes, allowed the marquis de
Pescara to advance with the Spanish infantry, and
be himself followed with the reft of his troops.

About

BOOK I. About the beginning of night, Pescara arriving a
-.v-- the Roman gate in the suburbs, furprized the fol

diers whom he found there; those posted in thi
fortifications adjoining to it, immediately fled; the
marquis, seizing the works which they abandoned,
and pushing forward incessantly, though with no lefi
caution than vigour, became master of the city
with little bloodshed, and almost without resistance:
the vitors being as much astonished as the van-
quifhed at the facility and filccefs of the attempt,
Lautrec retired precipitately towards the Venetian
territories with the remains of his shattered army;
the cities of the Milanese following the fate of the
capital, surrendered to the confederates; Parma
and Placentia were united to the ecclesiastical state,
and of their conquests in Lombardy, only the town
of Cremona, the castle of Milan, and a few incon-
fiderable forts remained in the hands of the Frenchb.

Death of LEO received the accounts of this rapid fuc-
I.eo X. ceflon of prosperous events with such transports of

joy, as brought on (if we may believe the French
historians) a 'flight fever, which being neglected,
occasioned his death on the second of December,
while he was frill of a vigorous age, and at the
height of his glory. By this unexpected accident,
the spirit of the confederacy was broken, and its
operations suspended. Tle Cardinals of Sion and
Mledici left the army that they might be pre-
sent in the conclave; the Swiss were recalled
by their superiors; some other mercenaries
dilbanded for want of pay; and only the Spa-
niards, and a few Germans in the Emperor's lir-
vice, remained to defend the Milanese. But Lau-
trec, destitute both of men and of money, was
unable to improve this favourable opportunity in

b Guic. I xiv. 190, &c. Mein. de Bellay, 42, &c. Galeacii

Capella:l lc rfte. gefi. pro. lcllitut. Fran. Slootia Commnent. ap.
Scatdiuiii, vul. ii. iSo, &c.

the

the manner he would have wished. The vigilance BOOK 11.
of Morone, and the good conduCt of Colonna, '"'
disappointed his feeble attempts on the Milanese;
and Guicciardini, by his address and valour, repulf- ,522.
ed a bolder and more dangerous attack which he
made on Parmac.

MEANWHILE great discord prevailed in the con- Adrian

clave, which followed upon Leo's death, and all pie'd
the arts natural to men grown old in intrigue, when
contending for a prize so valuable, were pradifed.
Wolley's name, notwithstanding all the Emperor's
magnificent promises to favour his pretensions, of
which that prelate did not fail to remind him, was
scarce mentioned in the conclave. Julio Cardinal
de Medici, Leo's nephew, who was more eminent
than any other member of the sacred college for his
abilities, his wealth, and his experience in transact-
ing great affairs, had already Lecured fifteen voices,
a number sufficient, according to the forms of the
conclave, to exclude any other candidate, though
not to carry his own election. All the old cardinals
combined against him, without being united in fa-
vour of any other person. While there factions
were endeavouring to gain, to corrupt, or to weary
out each other, Medici and his adherents voted one
morning at the scrutiny, which according to form
was made every day, for Cardinal Adrian of
Utrecht, who at that time governed Spain in the
Emperor's name. This they did merely to pro-
tratt time; but the adverse party instantly doling
with them, to their own amazement and that of
all Europe, a stranger to Italy, unknown to the
persons who gave their suffrages in his favour, and
unacquainted with the manners of the people, or
the interest of the slate, the government of which
they conferred upon him, was unanimoully railed

Guic. I. xiv. 24.
Vor.. II. L to

BoOK II. to the papal throne, at a juncture so delicate and

L;'- critical, as would have demanded all the sagacity
Janry 9. and experience of one of the most able prelates in

the sacred college. The Cardinals themielves, un-
able to give a reason for this strange choice, on ac-
count of which, as they marched in procession
from the conclave, they were Ibaded with infultsand
curies by the Roman people, ascribed it to an im-
mediate impulse of the Holy Ghost. It may be
imputed with greater certainty to the influence of
Don John Manuel, the Imperial ambassador, who
by his address and intrigues facilitated the election
of a perton devoted to his master's service, from
gratitude, from interest, and from inclination'.

War renew- BESIDES the influence which Charles acquired
ed in the
Milanese. by Adrian's promotion, it threw great lustre on his

administration. To bestow on his preceptor fuid
a noble recompence, and to place on the papa.
throne a creature whom he had raised, were acs o
uncommon magnificence and power. Francis ob.
served, with the sensibility of a rival, the pre-emi
nence which he was gaining, and resolved to exer
himself with freih vigor, in order to wrest from hirr
his late conquests in Italy. The Swils, in order tc
make Come reparation to the French King, for hav
ing lb ui,:falbnably withdrawn their troops from hi!
army, which had occafioped the loss of the Mila
nlfe, permitted him to levy ten thouland men ir
the republick. Together wihl this reinforcement
Lautrcc received from the King a small fum in mo
ney, which tllabled him once more to take the field
and after il-izing by filrprize, or force, feveralpla
ees in the Millanele, to advance within a few m:le
of the capital. The confederate army was in n(

d Ger. Moringi Vita Hadriani ap. Cafp. Burman. in Analet
de Hadr, p. 52. Conclave HIadr. Ibid. p. 144, &c.

conditio;

condition to obftruEt his progress; and though the BooK II
inhabitants of Milan, inflamed by the artifices of£
Morone, and by the popular declamations of a
monk whom he employed, with the most enthufi-
aftic zeal against the French government, consented
to raise extraordinary contributions, Colonna must
soon have abandoned the advantageous camp he
had chosen at Bicocca, and have dismissed his troops
for want of pay, if the Swiss in the French service
had not once more extricated him out of his diffi-
culties.

THE insolence and caprice of that people were TIhe Frenc

often no less fatal to their friends, than their valour the battle of
and discipline were formidable to their enemies. Bicocca'
Having now served two months without pay, of
which they complained loudly, a ium destined for
their use was sent from France under a convoy of
horse; but Morone, whose vigilant eye nothing es-
caped, posted a body of troops in their way, so that
those who escorted the money durst not advance.
On receiving intelligence of this, the Swiss loft all
patience, and officers as well as soldiers crowding
around Lautrec, threatened with one voice inflantly
to retire, if he did not either advance the pay which
was due, or promise to lead them next morning to
battle. In vain did Lautrec remonstrate against
theiedemands, representing to them the impollibi-
lity of the former, and the rashness of the latter,
which must be attended with certain destruction, as
the enemy occupied a camp naturally of great
strength, and which by art they had rendered al-
most inacceflible. The Swiss, deaf to reason, and
persuaded that their valour was capable of surmount-
ing every obstacle, renewed their demand with
greater fierceness, offering themselves to form the
van-guard, and to begin the attack. Lautrec, un-
able to overcome their obstinacy, complied with
their request, hoping, perhaps, that Come of those
unforeleen accidents which so often determine the

L 2 late

BooK I. fate of battles, might crown this rash enterprize
'"rv ' with undeserved success; and convinced that the

effedts of a defeat could not be more fatal than those
which would certainly follow upon the retreat of a
body which composed one half of his army. Next
morning the Swiss were early in the field, and
Ml'y. marched with the greatest intrepidity against an

enemy deeply intrenched on every fide, lurround-
ed with artillery, and prepared to receive them.
As they advanced, they sustained a furious cannon-
ade with great firmness, and without waiting for
,s5. their own artillery, rushed impetuously upon the

intrenchments. But after incredible efforts of va-
lour, seconded with great spirit by the French, hav-
ing loft their bravest officers and befl troops, and
finding that they could make no impression on the
enemy's works, they founded a retreat; leaving
the field of battle, however, like men repulsed,
but not vanquifled, in close array, and without re-
ceiving any molestation from the enemy.

Driven out NEXT day, such as survived set out for their
oftheMila-own country; and Lautrec, despairing of being
nefe. able to make any farther resistance, retired into

France, after throwing garrisons into Cremona,
and a few other places; all which except the cita-
del of Cremona, Culonna lbon obliged to surrender.
Loe Genoa. GENOA, however, and itsterritories, remaining

fubjct to France, still gave Francis considerable
footing in Italy, and made it easy for him to exe-
cute any .scheme for the recovery of the Milanese.
But Colonna, rendered entcrprizing by continual
fuccers, and excited by the solicitations of the ftlAi-
on of the Adorni, the hereditary enemies of the Fre-
gofi, who under the protection of France possessed
the chief authority in Genoa, determined to at-
tempt the reducltion of that fate; and accomplish-

ed

ed it with amazing facility. He became master ofBooK II
Genoa by an accident as unexpected as that which'-
had given him possession of Milan; and almost
without opposition or bloodshed, the power of the
Adorni and the authority of the Emperor were efta-
blissed in Genoa'.

SUCH a cruel succession of misfortunes affected HenryVIII.

declares ivar

Francis with deep concern, which was not a little agairnf
augmented by the unexpected arrival of an English France.
herald, who, in the name of his sovereign, de- May .9'
dared war in form against France. This ftep was
taken in consequence of the treaty Wolfey had con-
cluded with the Emperor at Bruges, and which had
hitherto been kept secret. Francis, though he had
reason to be furprized with this denunciation, after
having been at such pains to sooth Henry and to
gain his minister, received the herald with great
composure and dignityf; and without abandoning
any of the schemes he was forming against the Em-
peror, began vigorous preparations for resisting this
new enemy. His treasury, however, being ex-
haufted by the efforts which he had already made,
as well as by the fums he expended on his pleasures,
he had recourse to extraordinary expedients for sup-
plying it. Several new offices were created, and
exposed to sale; the royal demefiles were alienated;
unusual taxes were imposed; and the tomb of St.
Martin was stripped of a rail of mallive silver, with
which Lewis XI. in one of his fits of devotion, had
encircled it. By means of these expedients he was
enabled to levy a considerable army, and to put the
frontier towns in a good posture of defence.

e Jovii Vita Ferdin. Davali. p. 344. Guic. 1. xiv. a33.
f Journal de Louise de Savoic, p. 199.

L 3 THE

BOOK II. THE Emperor, meanwhile, was no less solicitous

s'vij to draw as much advantage as pofflble from the ac-
fits England. cession of such a powerful ally; and the prosperous

situation of his affairs, at this time, permitting him
to set out for Spain, where his pretence was ex-
tremely necessary, he visited the court of England
in his way to that country. He proposed by this
interview not only to strengthen the bonds of friend-
ship which united him and Henry, and to excite
him to pulh the war against France with vigour,
but hoped to remove any disgust or resentment
Wolfey might have conceived on account of the
cruel disappointment which he had met with in the
late conclave. His success exceeded his most fan-
guine expectations; and by his artful address, dur-
ing a residence of fix weeks in England, he gained
not only the King and the minister, but the nation
itself. Henry, whose vanity was sensibly flattered
by.fuch a visit, as well as by the fludied respeCt
with which the Emperor treated him on every occa-
sion, entered warmly into all his schemes. The
Cardinal, foreseeing from Adrian's age and infirmi-
ties, a sudden vacancy in the papal fee, dissembled
or forgot his resentment; and as Charles augment-
ed the pensions which he had already fettled on
him, and renewed his promire of favouring his pre-
tensions to the papacy, with all his interest, he en-
deavoured to merit the former, and to secure the
accomplishment of the latter, by fresh services.
The nation, sharing in the glory of its monarch,
and pleased with the confidence which the Emperor
placed in the English by creating the earl of Surrey,
his high-admiral, discovered no less inclination to
commence hostilities than Henry himself.

The English IN order to give Charles, before he left England,
inrade a proof of this general ardour, Surrey failed with

such forces as were ready, and ravaged the coasts
of Normandy. He then, made a descent on Bre-

tagneA

tagne, where he plundered and burnt Morlaix, and Book II.
some other places of less consequence. After therfe' '
flight excursions, attended with greater dishonour
than damage to France, he repaired to Calais aad
took the command of the principal army, consist-
ing of sixteen thousand men; with which having
joined the Flemish troops under the count de Buren,
he advanced into Picardy. The army which Fran-
cis had afembled, was far inferior in number to
these united bodies. But during the long wars be- with little
tween the two nations, the French had discovered fuccecf.
the proper method of defending their country
against the English. They had been taught by
their misfortunes to avoid a pitched battle with the
utmost care, and to endeavour, by throwing gar-
rifons into every place capable of resistance, by
watching all the enemy's motions, by intercepting
their convoys,, attacking their advanced potls, and
harafling them continually with their numerous ca-
valry, to ruin them with the length of the war, or
to beat them by piece-meal. This plan the duke
of Vendome, the French general in Picardy, pur-
sued with no less prudence than success; and not
only prevented Surrey from taking any town of im-
portance, but obliged him to retire with his army
greatly reduced by fatigue, by want of provisions,
and by the loss it had sustained in several unficcefs-
ful skirmishes.

THUS ended the second campaign in a war the

most general that hitherto had been kindled in
Europe; and though Francis, by his mother's ill-
tired resentment, by the disgusting insolence of his
general, and the caprice of the mercenary troops
he employed, had loft his conquests in Italy, yet
all the powers combined against him had not been
able to make any imprellion on his hereditary domi-
nions; and wherever they either intended or at-
tempted an attack, he was well prepared to receive
them.

L 4 WHII E

BOOK II.

^n~'.' WHILE the Christian princes were thus wafting

Solyman s i

i*

conquest of each other's strength, Solyman the Magnificent
Rhodes. ;entered Hungary with a numerous army, and in-

vesting Belgrade, which was deemed the chief
barrier of that kingdom against the Turkish arms,
foon'forced it to surrender. Encouraged by this
success, he turned his victorious arms against the
island of Rhodes, the feat, at that time, of the
knights of St. John of Jerusalem. This small state
he attacked with such a numerous army, as the lords
of Asia have been accustomed in every age to bring
*to the field. Two hundred thousand men, and a
fleet of four hundred fail appeared against a town
defended by a garrison consisting of five thousand
soldiers, and fix hundred knights, under the com-
mand of Villiers de L'isle Adam, the grand master,
whose wisdom and valour rendered him worthy of
thatftation at such a dangerousj unture. No sooner
did he begin to fufped the deftiration of Solyman's
vast armaments, than he dispatched messengers to
all the Christian courts, imploring their aid against
the common enemy. But though every prince in
that age, acknowledged Rhodes to be the great bul-
wark of Christendom in the east, and trusted to the
gallantry of its knights as the best security against
the progress of the Ottoman arms; and though
Adrian, with a zeal which became the head and
father of the church, exhorted the contending
powers, to forget their private quarrels, and by
uniting their arms, to prevent the Infidels from
destroying a society which did honour to the Christian
name; yet so violent and implacable was the ani-
mofity of both parties, that, regardless of the
danger to which they exposed all Europe, and un-
moved by the intreaties of the grand rafter, or the
admonitions of the Pope, they suffered Solyman,
without disturbance, to carry on his operations
against RhQdes. The grand master, after incredible

eflbrts

efforts of courage, of patience, and of military con- BooK IL
duCt during a siege of fix months; after sustaining --v
many assaults, and disputing every post with amaz-
ing obftinaly, was obliged at last to yield to num-
bers, and having obtained an honourable capitulation
from the Sultan, who admired and refpeded his
virtue, he surrendered the town, which was redu-
ced to a heap of rubbish, and destitute of every
resource g. Charles and Francis, ashamed of hav-
ing occasioned such a loss to Christendom by their
ambitious contests, endeavoured to throw the blame
of it on each other, while all Europe, with greater
justice, imputed it equally to both. The Emperor,
by way of reparation, granted the knights of St.
John the small island of Malta, in which they fixed
their residence, retaining, though with less power
and splendour, their ancient spirit, and implacable
enmity to theInfidels.

9 Fontanus de Bello Rhodio ap. Scard. Script. Rer. German.
Vol. ii. p. 88. P. Barre. His. d'Allem. tom. viii. 57.

THE

# BOOK III.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK II.

BooK III. HARLES, having had the fatisfaaion of
_--./..o te feeing hostilities begun between France and
Civil war in T, -- ll r · .

· *
·
cailile. England, took leave of Henry, and arrived in

Spain on the seventeenth of June. He found that
country just beginning to recover order and strength
after the miseries of a civil war to which it had
been exposed during his absence; an account of
the rile and progress of which, as it was but little
connected with the other events that happened in
Europe, hath been reserved to this place.

Inrurrcaion No sooner was it known that the Cortes assembled
of Toledo. in Galicia had voted the Emperor afree-gift, with-

out

out obtaining the redress of any grievance, than BoK III.
it excited universal indignation. The citizens of -v
Toledo, who confidered themselves, on account of
the great privileges which they enjoyed, as guardi-
ans of the liberties of the Castilian commons, find-
ing that no regard was paid to the remonstrances of
their deputies against that unconflitutional grant,
took arms with tumultuary violence, and seizing
the gates of the city which were fortified, attacked
the al-cazar, or castle, which they loon obliged the
governour to surrender. Emboldened by this fuc-
cess, they deprived of all authority every person
whom they fufpeded of any attachment to the
court, established a popular form of government,
composed of deputies from the several parishes in
the city, and levied troops in their own defence.
The chief leader of the people in these infurretions
was Don John de Padilla, the eldest son of the
commendador of Castile, a young nobleman of a
generous temper, of undaunted courage, and pof-
lesed of the talents as well as of the ambition which
in times of civil discord raise men to power and emi-
nence'.

THE resentment of the citizens of Segovia pro- of Segovia

duced effets still more fatal. Tordefillas, one of
their representatives in the late Cortes, had voted
for the donative; and being a bold and haughty
man, ventured, upon his return, to call together his
fellow citizens in the great church, that he might
give them, according to cuflom, an account of his
condut in that assembly. But the multitude, una-
ble to bear his insolence, in attempting to justify
what they thought inexcusable, burst open the
gates of the church with the utmost fury, and feiz-
ing the unhappy Tordefillas, dragged him through
the streets, with a thouiand curses and inuilts, to-

a Sandov. p. 77.

wards

BOOK III. wards the place of publick.execution. In vain did

.-.. the dean and canons come forth in procession with

the holy sacrament, in order to appease their rage.
In vain did the monks of those monasteries by which
they passed, conjure them on their knees to spare
his life, or at least to allow him time to confess, and
to receive absolution of his fins. Without listening
to the dictates either of humanity or of religion, they
cried out, " That the hangman alone could ab-
solve such a traitor to his country," hurried him
along with greater violence, and finding that he
had expired under their hands, they hung him up
with his head downwards on the common gibbet '.
The fame spirit seized the inhabitants of Burgos,
Zamora, and several other cities; and though their
representatives, taking warning from the fate of
Tordefillas, had been so wife as to save themselves
by a timely flight, they were burnt in effigy, their
houses razed to the ground, and their effects con-
fumed with fire ; and such was the horror the peo.
ple had conceived againit them as betrayers of the
publick liberty, that not one in those licentious mul-
titudes w uld touch any thing, however valuable,
which ha~belonged to them '.

difan re" f ADRIAN, at that time regent of Spain, had scarce
ol,,r to fixed the feat of his government at Valladolid,
punic, hem. when he was alarmed with an account of there inlur-

'so. redtions. He immediately assembled the council

to deliberate concerning the proper method of sup-
prelling them. The counsellors differed in opinion;
lbme iniifting it was necetfary to check this audaci-
ous spirit in its infancy by a revere execution of jus-
tice; othersadvifing to treat with lenity a people
who had iome realbn to be incensed, and not to

b P. Martyr. EP. 671. Sandov. 103. P. Mart. Ep. 674.

drive

drive them beyond all the bounds of duty by an BOOK 1III.
ill-timed rigour. The sentiments of the former be- --v---
ing warmly supported by the arch-bishop of Grana-
da, president of the council, a person of great autho-
rity, but cholerick and impetuous, were approved
of by Adrian, whole zeal to support his mafler's
authority hurried him into a measure, to which,
from his natural caution and timidity, he would
otherwise have been averse. He commanded Ron-
quillo, one of the King'sjudges, to repair inflantly
to Segovia, which had set the first example of mu- His toop
tiny, and to proceed against the delinquents accor- repuied at
ding to law; and left the people should be so out- Segovia.
rageous as to resist his authority, a considerable body
of troops was appointed to attend him. The Se-
govians, foreseeing what they might expect from a
judge so well known for his austere and unforgiving
temper, took arms with one content, and having
muttered twelve thousand men, shut their gates
againfl him. Ronquillo, enraged at this iniult, de-
nounced them rebels and outlaws; and his troops
seizing all the avenues to the town, hoped that it
would Coon be obliged to surrender for want of pro-
visions. The inhabitants, however, defe.ted them-
selves with vigour, and having received a confider-
able reinforcement from Toledo, under the com-
mand of Padilla, attacked Ronquillo, and forced
him to retire, with the loss of his baggage and mili-
tary chest d

UPON this Adrian ordered Antonio de FonCeca, nd at Mc-

whom the Emperor had appointed commander in c:.
chief of the forces in Spain, to assemble an army,
and to befieg6 the city in form. But the inhabit-
ants of Medina del Campo, where Cardinal Xiie-
nes had established a vati magazine of military
flores, would not susser him to draw fromn it a train
of battering cannon, or to destroy their country-

dSandov. 11z. P. Mart. Fp. 679. Miniana, Contin p. l.

111C'll

BooK III. men with those arms which had been prepared
.V v-" against the enemies of the kingdom. Fonseca, who

could not execute his orders without artillery, de-
Aug. n. termined to seize the magazine by force, and the

citizens slanding on their defence, he assaulted the
town with great briskness: But his troops were so
warmly received, that despairing of carrying the
place, he set fire to some of the houses, in hopes
that the citizens would abandon the walls in order
to save their families and effets. Initead of that,
the expedient to which he had recourse served only
to increaJc their fury, and he was repulsed with
great infamy, while the flames Ipreading from street
to street, reduced to ashes almost the whole town,
one of the most considerable at that time in Spain,
and the great mart for the manufacures of Segovia,
and several other cities. As the warehouses were
then filled with goods for the approaching fair, the
loss was immense, and was felt universally; and
this, added to the impreflion which such a cruel ac-
tion made on people long unaccustomed to the hor-
rors of civil war, enraged the Caitilians almost to
madness. Fonseca became the object of general in-
dignation, and was branded with the name of in-
cendiary and enemy to his country; and even the
citizens of Valladolid, whom the pretence of the
Cardinal had hitherto refirained, declared that they
co(nld no loLger remain inactive Ipetators of the fils-
ferings of their countrymen, and taking arms with no
leis fury than the other cities, they burnt Fonseca's
houle to the ground, elected new magistrates, railed
foldicis, appointed officers to command them, and
guaided their walls wvith as much diligence, as if an
enemy had been ready to attack them.
AdiHn, dift: 'Ti Cardinal, who though virtuous and difinte-

o' reflcd, and capable of governing the kingdom with

iulnuolr in times of tranquillity, poflelfed neither the

courage

courage nor sagacity necessary at such a dangerous BooK III.
jundture, finding himself unable to check theei out-
rages committed under his own eye, attempted to
.appease the people, by protesting that Fonseca ha'd
exceeded his orders, and had by his rash conduct
offended him, as much as he had injured them.
This condescension, the effect of irresolution and
timidity, rendered the malecontents bolder and
more insolent; and the Cardinal having soon after
recalled Fonseca, and dismissed his troops, which
he could no longer afford to pay, as the treasury
had been drained by the rapaciousness of the Flemilh
mi;nifers, and received no supply from the great
cities which were all in arms, the people were left
at full liberty to act without controul, and scarce
any shadow of power remained in his hands.

NOR were the proceedings of the commons the The views

effeds merely of popular and tumultuary rage; f ofthe
they aimed at obtaining redress of their political commonsof
grievances, and an establishment of publick liberty Caltle.
on a secure basis, objecds worthy of all the zeal they
discovered in contending for them. The feudal go-
vernment in Spain, was at that time in a state more
favourable to liberty than in any other of the great
European kingdoms. This was owing chiefly to
the number of great cities in that country, a cir-
cumftance of which I have already taken notice,
and which contributes more than any other to mi-
tigate the rigour of the feudal institutions, and
to introduce a more liberal and equal form of
government. The inhabitants of every city
formed a great corporation with valuable immu-
nities and privileges; they were delivered from a
state of fubjedion and vaifalage; they were admit-
ted to a considerable (lare in the Iegillantre ; they
acquired the arts of industry, without which cities
cannot subsist; they accumulated wealth, by en-
gaging in commerce , and being free and indepcli-

dei-nt

BOOK ITI. dent themselves, were the guardians, of the pub-
^-v-~~ lick fi-ecdom and independence. The genius of the

internal government established in cities, which,
even in countries where despotic power prevails
most, is democratical and republican, rendered the
idea of liberty familiar and dear to them. Their
representatives in the Cortes were accustomed to
check with equal spirit the encroachments of the
King, and the oppreflion of the nobles. They en-
deavoured to extend the privileges of their own or-
der; they laboured to shake off the remaining en-
cumbrances with which the feudal tyranny had bur-
dened them ; and conscious of being one of the most
considerable orders in the state, were ambitious
of becoming the most powerful.

Their con- THE present junaure appeared favourable for
federacy by .
ate name f fpufhing any new claim. Their lovereign was absent
the Holy from his dominions; by the ill-conduct of his mini-
Junto. t iers he had loft the esteem and affection of his sub-

jets; the people exaiperated by many injuries had
taken arms, though without concert, almost by
general consent; they were animated with fury ca-
pable of carrying them to the most violent extremes;
the royal treaiury was exhausted; the kingdom de-
flitute of troops; and the government committed
to a itranger, of great virtue indeed, butof abilities
unequal to such a trust. The first care of Padilla,
and the other popular leaders who observed and de-
termined to improve there circumstances, was to
eflablilh tfome form of union or association among
the malecontents, that they might ael with greater
regularity and pursue one common end; and as the
different cities had been prompted to take arms
by the finme motives, and were accuflomed to con-
fkler thlmli-lvas as a dillindt body from the reft of
the ll biects, they did lout find this difficult. A general
convention was appointed to be held at Avila. Depu-

ties

ties appeared there in name of almost all the ci- BOOK IT.
ties entitled to have representatives in the Cortes. ', .'
They all bound themselves by solemn oath, to
live and die in the service of the king, and in de-
fence of the privileges of their order; ani affim-
ing the name of the holy Junta or afrociation,
proceeded to deliberate cncerning the. slate of the
nation, and the proper method of redrefling its
grievances. The firfl that naturally ptefented it- They dif-

rclai!, Adri-

feil, was the nomination of a foreigner to be re- an's autho-
gent; this, they declared with one voice to be a rity.
violation of the fundamental laws of the kingdom,
and rtfolved to lend a deputation of their mem-
bers to Adrian, requiring him in their name to lay
aside all the ensigns of his office, and to abflain
for the future from the exercise of ajurifdiction
which they had pronounced illegal k.

WHILE they were preparing to execute this Get poffefi-
bold resolution, Padilla accomplished an enterprize Jnf:,,et
of the greatest advantage to the cause. After
relieving Segovia, he marched suddenly to Tor- Ag 9
defillas, the place where the unhappy Queen Jo-
anna had resided since the death of her husband,
and being favoured by the inhabitants, was ad-
mitted into the town, and became master of her
person, for the security of which Adrian had ne-
glected to take proper precautions 1. Padilla wait-
ed immediately upon the Qui n, and accosting
her with that profound respect, which f(e exaded
from the few persons, whom she deigned to admit
into her prelciKe, ncquainted her at large with the
mifcrable ',!ndition o' her Castilian fubjets under
the goverim:.'i of her i.;:., ;.vo being deftiture of
expericnce hinllcif, permitted liis ior* iT rni;iiflers
to treat the n with inch ri gour, as had <,hlitu iem
to take arms in defence of tihe liberatis of their coun-

k P. M:art. Ep. 691. I Vita cdel' Imper. Carl. V.
dall Als. Ulloa Vcn. 1509, p. 67. Miniana. Contin. p. 17.
VOL. 11. M try.

Boor III. try. The Queen, as if she had been awakened out

ve'-' of a lethargy, expressed great affonifhment at what

he said, and told him, that as she had never heard
till that moment, of the death of her father, or
known the sufferings of her people, no blame
could be imputed to her, but that now she would
take care to provide a sufficient remedy; and in
the mean time, added she, let it be your concern
to do what is necessary for the public welfare.
Padilla, too eager in forming a conclusion agree-
able to his withes, mistook this lucid interval of
reason for a perfea return of that faculty; and
acquainting the Junta with what had happened,
advised them to remove to Tordefillas, and to hold
their meetings in that place. This was inflantly
done; but though Joanna received very graciously
an address of the Junta, beseeching her to take
upon her the government of the kingdom, and in
token of her compliance, admitted all the depu-
ties to kits her hand; though she was present at a
tournament held on that occasion, and seemed
highly satisfied with both there ceremonies, which
were conducted with great magnificence in
order to please her, she soon relapsed into her for-
mer melancholy and sullenness, and could never
be brought by any arguments or intreaties, to
sign any one paper necessary towards the dispatch
of business m

Carry on TiHE Junta concealing as much as poflible this
,,eramec. last circumstance, carried on all their deliberati-

ons in her name; and as the Castilians, who ido.
lized the memory of Isabella, retained a wonderful
attachment to her daughter, no sooner was it
known that she had consented to ailume the reigns
of government than the people expressed the most
univerlal and immoderate joy; and believing hei
recovery to be compleat, ascribed it to a miracu-

a' Sandov. 164. P. Mart. Ep. 685, 686.

loll

lous interposition of heaven, in order to rescue BOOK III.
their country from the oppression of foreigners. andepive
The Junta, conscious of the reputation and pbw- Adrian of
er they had acquired by seeming to at under the all power.
ro)al authority, were no longer satisfied with re-
quiring Adrian to resign the office of regent, they
detatched Padilla to Valladolid with a confidera-
ble body of troops, ordering him to seize such
members of the council as were frill in that city,
toconduct them to Tordefillas, and to bring away
the feals of the kingdom, the public archives and
treasury books. Padilla, who was received by
the citizens, as the deliverer of his country, exe-
cuted his commillion with great exactness; per-
mitting Adrian however, flill to reside in Valla-
dolid, though only as a private person, and with-
out any shadow of power "

THE Emperor, to whom frequent accounts of The Empe-

there ttanfadtions were transmitted while he was
still in Slanders, was lenfible of his own impru-
dence and that of his ministers in having despised
too long the murmurs and renonftrances of
the Castilians. He beheld, with deep concern,
a kingdom the molt valuable of any he possessed,
and in which lay the f:'ength and sinews of his
power, just ready to dilbwn his authority, and on
the point of being plunged in all the miseries of ci-
vil war. Eut though his pretence might have
averted this calamity, he could not at that time,
vifitSpain without endangeringthe imperial crown,
and allowing the French King full leilfre to exe-
cute his ambitious schemes. The only points now Ii m-
to be deliberated upon, were whether he Ihould lurcswiit
attempt to gain the malecontents by indulgence ticc(1t,,
and conceflions, or prepare directly to tilpprels tc.t.
them by force; and lie rt iolved to make trial of
the former, while at the fame time, if that should

nSandov. 174. P. Mart. Ep. 791.

M fail

Book I. fail of success, he prepared for the latter. Fc

-"Y3 this purpose, he issued circular letters to all th

cities of Castile, exhorting them in moss gentli
terms, and with assurances of full pardon, to la,
down their arms; he promised such cities as ha(
continued faithful not to exadt from them tlie
subsidy granted in the late Cortes, and offered the
fame favour to those who returned to their duty;
he engaged that no office (hould be conferred for
the future upon any but native Castilians. On the
other hand, he wrote to the nobles cxciting them
to appear with vigour in defence of their own
rights, and those of the crown, against the exorbi-
tant claims of the commons; he appointed the
high admiral, Don Fadrique Enriquez, and the
high constable of Cartile, Don Inigo de Velafco,
two noblemen of great abilities and influence, re-
gents of the kingdom in conjunction with Adrian;
and he gave them full power and infirudions,
if the obftinancy of the malecontents should ren-
der it necessary, to vindicate the royal authority
by force of arms .

The large THE concessions he was willing to make, which,
remon- at the time of his leaving Spain, would have ful-
Rance of
the Junta ly satisfied the people, came now too late to pro-
co"cernilg duce any effect. The Junta, relying on the una-
ances. nimity with which the nation submitted to their

authority, elated with the fuccers which hitherto
had accompanied all their undertakings, and feeing
no military force collected to defeat or obflrud their
designs, aimed at a more thorough reformation of
political abuses. They had been employed for
some time in preparing a remonstrance containing
a large enumeration not only of the grievances, of
which they craved redress, but of such new regu-
lations as they thought necessary for the security
of their liberties. This remonstrance, which is

*P. Heuter. Rer. Auftr. lib. viii. c. 6. p. x88.

divided

divided into many articles relating to all the dif- BOOK IIT.
ferent members of which the conffitution was
composed, as well as to the various departments
in the administration of government, furnishes us
with more authentic evidence c-ncerning the in-
tentions of the Junta, than can be drawn from the
testimony of the latter Spanish historians, who liv-
ed in times when it became faihionable and even
necessary to represent the condut of the malecon-
tents in the worst light, and as flowing from the
worst motives. After a long preamble concern-
ing the various calamities under which the nation
groaned, and the errors and corruption in govern-
ment to which there were to be imputed, they
take notice of the exemplary patience wherewith
the people had endured them, till felf-prefervati-
on, and the duty which they owed to their coun-
try, had obliged them to assemble in order to pro-
vide in a legal manner for their own safety, and
that of the conffitution: For this purpose they de-
manded that the King would be pleated to return
to his Spanish dominions, and reside there, as all
their former monarchs had done; that he would
not marry but with content of the Cortes; that
if he should be obliged at any time to leave the
kingdom, it ihall not be lawful to appoint any so-
reigner to be regent; that the present nomination
of Cardinal Adrian to that office Ihall instantly be
declared void; that he would not, at his return,
bring along with him any Flemings or other
strangers i that no foreign troops ihall, on any
pretence whatever, be introduced into the king-
dom; that none but natives Ihall be capable of
holding any office or benefice either in church or
state; that no foreigners (hall be naturalized; that
free quarters Ihall not be granted to soldiers, nor
to those of the King's houlhold for any longer
time than fix days, and that only when the court
is in a progress; that all the taxes Ihall be reduced
to the fame state they were in at the death of Queen
Isabella; that all alienations of the royal demesnes

M 3 or

BOOK III. or revenues since that Queen's death shall be re

'v- filmed; that all new offices created since that pe

riod be abolished; that the subsidy granted by tih
late Cortes in Galicia shall not be exa&ted; that ii
all future Cortes each city shall fend one reprefen
tative of the clergy, one of the gentry, and on,
of the commons, each to be elected by his owi
order; that the crown shall not influence or dire~
any city with regard to the choice of its reprefen
tatives that no member of the Cortes ihall re
ceive an office or pension from the king, either so:
himself or for any of his family, under pain o
death, and confiscation of his goods; that eact
city or community shall pay a competent salary t(
its representatives for his maintenance during hi!
attendance on the Cortes; that the Cortes shall aft
femble once in three years at least, whether fum
moned by the King or not, and fhal lthen enquire
into the observation of the articles now agreed up.
on, and deliberate concerning public affairs; thai
the rewards which have been given or promised
to aiy of the members of the Cortes in Galicia.
shall be revoked; that no gold, silver, orjewels.
/hall, upon pain of death, be sent out of the
kingdom; that judges shall have fixed salaries
assigned them, and shall not receive any share ol
the fines and forfeitures of peifons condemned by
them; that no grant of the goods of persons ac-
cufed shall be valid, if given before sentence was
pronounced against them; that all privileges which
the nobles have at any time obtained, to the pre-
judice of the commons, flall be revoked ; that the
government of cities or towns fiall not be put into
the hands of the nobles; that the lands of the no-
bles shall be subje&t to all public taxes in the fame
manner as those of the commons; that an enquiry
be made into the condudtofthofe whohave been en-
trufled with the'management of the roy al patrimo-
ny since the accefion of Ferdinand; and if the King
do not within thirty days appoint persons properly

qualified

qualified for that service, it shall be lawful for thy BOOtK i.
Cortes to nominate them; that Indulgences shall Y "
not be preached or dispersed in the kingdom until
the cause of publishing them be examined and ap-
proved of by the Cortes; that all the money arising
from the sale of Indulgences, shall be faithfully
employed in carrying on war againfi the Infidels;
that such prelates as do not reside in their dioceses
fix months in the year, shall forfeit their revenues
during the time they are absent; that the eccle-
fiaftical judges and their officers shall not exaAt
greater fees than those which are paid in the secular
courts; that the present archbishop of Toledo,
being a foreigner, be compelled to resign that
dignity, which shall be conferred upon a Castilian;
that the king shall ratify and hold as good service
done to him andto the kingdom all the proceedings
of the Junta, and pardon any irregularities which
the cities may have committed from an excess of
zeal in a good cause: That he shall promise and
swear in the most solemn manner to observe all
there articles, and on no occasion attempt either to
elude, or to repeal them; and that he hall never
solicit the Pope or any other prelate to grant him
a dispensation or absolution from this oath and
promise P.

SUCH were the chief articles presented by the The Spirit
Junta to their sovereign. As the feudal inftitu, of liberty

which it

tions in the several kingdoms of Europe were breathed.
originally the fame, the genius of those govern-
ments wich arose from them bore a strong refem-
blance to each other, and the regulations which
the Castilians attempted to establish on this oc-
cafion, differ little from those which other nations
laboured to procure in their struggles with their
monarchs for liberty. The grievances complain-
ed of, and the remedies proposed by the English
commons in their contests with the princes of the

P Sandov. 2Q6. P. Mart. Ep. 686.

house

BoOK III. house of Stuart, particularly resemble those upon
<Cc*3 which the Junta now insisted. But the Spaniards

had already acquired ideas of their own liberty
and independence, had formed bold and generous
sentiments concerning government, and discover-
ed an extelit of political knowledge to which the
English did not attain till more than a century
afterwards.

IT is not improbable, however, that the spirit

of reformation among the Castilians, hitherto un-
restrained by authority, and emboldened by fuc-
cess, became too impetuous, and prompted the
Junta to propose innovations which by alarming
the other members of the conflitution, proved fa-
tal to their cause. The nobles, who instead of
obftru&ing, had favoured or connived at their
proceedings, while they confined their demands
of redress to fiich grievances as had been occa-
sioned by the King's want of experience, and by
the imprudence and rapaciousness of his foreign

Irritates the ministers, were filled with indignation when they
aobles. began to touch the privileges of their order, and

plainly saw that the measures of the commons
tended no less to break the power of the ariflocracy,
than to limit the prerogatives of the crown. The
resentment which they had conceived on account of
Adrian's promotion to the regency, abated confi-
derably upon the emperor's raising the constable
and admiral to a joint power with him in that of-
fice; and as their pride and dignity were less hurt
by suffering the prince to possess an extensive pre-
rogative, than by admitting the high pretensions of
the people, they determined to give their sovereign
the afliftance which he had demanded of them, and
began to assemble their vassals for that purpose.

The icpt-
tics of the THE Junta, meanwhile, expeted with impa-
Junta d tience the Emperor's answer to their remonstrance,
their re- which they had appointed fnme of their number
montfrance. to

present. The members entruffed with this corn- BOOK In.
mifion set out immediately for Germany, but 'V
having received at different places certain intelli-
gence from court, that they could not venture to
appear there without endangering their lives,
they ftopt short in their journey, and acquainted
the Ju ;ta of the information which had been
given them . This excited such violent paflions
as transported the whole party beyond all bounds
of prudence, or of moderation. That a Castilian
King should deny his fubjets access into his pre-
fence, or refute to liften to their humble petitions,
was represented as an act of tyranny so unprece-
dented and intolerable, that nothing now remain-
ed but with arms in their hands to drive away that
ravenous band of foreigners which encompassed
the throne, who after having devoured the wealth
of the kingdom, found it necessary to prevent the
cries of an injured people from reaching the ears of
their sovereign. Many insisted warmly on approv-
ing a motion which had formerly been made, for
depriving Charles, during the life of his mother, Violentpro-
of the regal titles and authority which had been too poitions of
rashly conferred upon him from a false supposition the Ju"ta.
of her total inability forgovernment. Some pro-
posed to provide a proper person to assist her in the
administration of public affairs, by marrying the
Queen to the Prince of Calabria, the heir of the
Aragonefe Kings of Naples, who had been de-
tained in prison since the time that Ferdinand
had difpoffelfed his ancestors of their crown. All
agreed that, as the hopes of obtaining redress
and security merely by presenting their requests
to their Ibvereign, had kept them too long in a
ltate of inaction, and prevented them from taking
advantage of the unanimity with which the na-
tion declared in their favour, it was now necessary
to collec their whole force, and to exert themselves

I Sandov. 143.

with

BooK III. with vigour, in opposing this fatal combination

"'^^' of the king and nobles againif their liberties m.

Take the THEY soon took the field with twenty thousand
field.

men. Violent disputes arose concerning the com-
mand of this army. Padilla, the darling of the
people and soldiers, was the only person whom
they thought worthy of this honour. But Don
Pedro de Giron, the eldest son of the Condd de
Uruena, a young nobleman of the first order,
having lately joined the commons out of private
resentment against the Emperor, the refpet due to
his birth, together with a secret desire of disappoint-
ing Padilla, of whose popularity many of the Junta
had become jealous, procured him the office of
general; though he soon gave them a fatal proof
that he pofletTed neither the experience, the abili-
ties, nor the steadiness which that important fta-
tion required.

The regents THE Regents, meanwhile, appointed Riofeco
and noblcs as the place of rendezvous for their troops, which,

though far inferior to those of the commons
in number, excelled them greatly in difci-
pline and in valour. They had drawn a confider-
able body of regular and veteran infantry out of
Navarre. Their cavalry, which formed the chief
strength of their army, consisted mostly of gen-
tlemen accustomed to the military life, and ani-
mated with the martial spirit peculiar to their or-
der in that age. The infantry of the Junta was
formed entirely of citizens and mechanics, little
acquainted with the use of arms. The frmall body
of cavalry they had been able to raise, was com-
posed of persons of ignoble birth, and perseEt
strangers to the service into which they entered.
The charater of the, generals differed no less than
that of their troops. The royalists were com-

n 1P. Mart. Ep. 668.

mended

manded by the Conde de Haro, the constable's BOOK ITI.
eldest Con, an officer of great experience, and of'c '
distinguished abilities.

GIRON marched with his army direcly to Rio- imrnpyence

and illu -

feco, and seizing the villages and passes around ce,,i,,,
it, hoped that the royalists would be obliged either gllta o
to surrender for want of provisions, or to fight juta.
with disadvantage before all their troops were
assembled. But he had not the abilities, nor his
troops the patience and discipline necessary for the
execution of such a scheme. The Condo de Haro
found little difficulty in conduting a considerable
reinforcement through all his ports into the town;
and Giron despairing of being able to reduce it,
advanced suddenly to Villa-panda, a place belong-
ing to the Conflable, in which the enemy had their
chief magazine of provisions. By this ill-judged
motion, he left Tordefillas open to the royalists,
whom the Conde de Haro led thither in the night, Deccmb. 5.
with the utmost secrecy and dispatch; and attack-
ing the town, in which Giron had left no other
garrison than a regiment of priests raised by the
bishop of Zamora, he, by break of day forced his
way into it after a desperate refitance, became
master of the Queen's person, took prisoners many
members of'the Junta, and recovered the great
feal, with the other ensigns of government.

BY this fatal blow, the Junta loft all the repu-

tation and authority which they derived from
seeming to adt by the Queen's commands; such of
the nobles as had hitherto been wavering or un-
determined in their choice, now joined the re-
gents with all their forces; and an universal con-
fternation seized the partizans of the commons.
This was much increased by the suspicions they
began to entertain of Giron, whom they loudly
accused of having betrayed Tordefillas to the
enemy; and though that charge seems to have

been

BooK III. been deflitute of foundation, the success of the

-'' -' froyalifis being owing to Giron's ill-condua rather

than to his treachery, he so entirely loft credit with
his party, that he resigned his commission, and
retired to one of his castles n.

The junta SUCH members of the Junta as had escaped the
adhere to
deirryftem. enemy's hands at Tordefillas, fled to Valladolid;

and as it would have required long time to supply
the places of those who were prisoners, by a new
eledion, they made choice among themselves of a
small number of persons to whom they committed
the supreme direction of affairs. Their army,
which grew stronger every day by the arrival of
troops from different parts of the kingdom,
marched likewise to Valladolid; and Padilla be-
ing appointed commander in chief, the spirits of
the soldiery revived, and the whole party forget-
ting the late misfortune, continued to express the
fame ardent zeal for the liberties of their country,
and the fame implacable animosity against their
oppreflors.

Their expe- WHAT they flood most in need of, was money
dients for .
rifingmo- to pay their troops. A great part of the current coin
CY.- had been carried out of the kingdom by the

Flemings; the flated taxes levied in times of
peace were inconsiderable; commerce of every
kind being interrupted by the war, the fum
which they yielded decreased daily; and the
Junta were afraid of disgusting the people by
burdening them with new impositions, to which,
in that age, they were little accuflomed. But
from this difficulty they were extricated by Donna
Maria Pacheco, Padilla's wife, a woman of
noble birth, of great abilities, of boundless
ambition, and animated with the most ardent
zeal in support of the cause of the Junta. She, with

n Mifecllanous Trais by Dr. Mich, Geddc, vol. i, 278.

a boldz

a boldness superior to those superstitious fears which Boot IIL
often influence her sex, proposed to seize all the ~
rich and magnificent ornaments in the cathedral
of Toledo; but left that action, by its appearance
of impiety, might offend the people, she and her
retinue marched to the church in solemn procef-
sion, in mourning habits, with tears in their eyes,
and beating their breasts, and falling on their
knees, implored the pardon of the faints whose
Ihrines (he was about to violate. By this artifice,
which sireened her from the imputation of facri-
lege, and persuaded the people that necessity and
zeal for a good cause had constrained her, though
with relucance, to venture upon this acion, she
procured a considerable supply of money for the
Junta o. The regents, no less at a lols how to
maintain their troops, the revenues of the crown
having either been dilltpated by the Flemings, or
being seized by the commons, were obliged to
take the Queen'sjewels, and the plate belonging
to the nobility, and apply them to that purpose;
and when these failed, they obtained a frmall fum
by way of loan from the King of Portugal P.

THE nobility discovered great unwillingnefi to Lore time

proceed to extremities with the Junta. They i" ,eoia-
were animated with no less hatred than the com- the nobi-
mons against the Flemings; they approved much lity.
of several articles in the remonstrance; they
thought the juncure favourable, not only for re-
dressing past grievances, but for rendering the con-
ftitution more perfelt and lecure by new regula-
lations; they were afraid that while the two orders
of which the legislature was composed, wafted e:ach
other's strength by mutual hostilities, the crown
would rife to power on the ruin or weaknets of
both, and encroach no less on the independence
of the nobles, than on the privileges of the com-

o Sandov. 308. Di&. de Bayle, Art. Padilla.
P P. Mart. Ep. 718.

mons.

BOOK III. mons. To this disposition were owing the fre-

quent overtures of peace which the regents made
to the Junta, and the continual negociations they
carried on during the progress of their military
operations. Nor were the terms which they offer-
ed unreasonable; for on condition that the Junta
would pass from a few articles most subversive of
the royal authority, or inconsistent with the rights
of the nobility, they engaged to procure the Em-
peror's content to their other demands, which, if
he, through the influence of evil counsellors, should
refuse, several of the nobles promised to join with
them in order to extort it q. Such divisions, how-
ever, prevailed among the members of the Junta,
as prevented their deliberating calmly, orjudging
with prudence. Several of the cities which had
entered into the confederacy, were filled with that
mean jealousy and diftruit of eachother, which ri-
vallhip in commerce or in grandeur is apt to inspire;
the conflable, by his influence and promises, had
prevailed on the inhabitants of Burgos to abandon
the Junta, and other noblemen had shaken the
fidelity of some of the lefier cities; no person had
arisen among the commons of such superior abili-
ties or elevation of mind, as to acquire the direc-
tion of their affairs; Padilla, their general, was
a man of popular qualities, but diftrufled for that
reason by those of highest rank who adhered to
the Junta; the condut of Giron led the people to
view with furpicion every person of noble birth
who joined their party; so that the firongeft marks
of irresolution, mutual diflruft, and mediocrity of
genius, appeared in all their proceedings at this
time. After many conlhltations held concerning
the terms proposed by the regents, they suffered
themfelvcs to be fb carried away by resentment
against the nobility, that rejecing all thoughts of
accommodation, they threatened to firip them of

q P. Mart. Ep. 695, 713. Geddes's Trafts, i. 261.

the

the crown-lands, which they or their ancestors had BooK IIl.
usurped, and to re-annex them to the royal domain:
And on this preposterous scheme, which would at
once have annihilated all the liberties for which
they had been struggling, by rendering the Kings
of Catile absolute and independent on their people,
they were so intent that they exclaimed with lets
vehemence against the exactions of the foreign
ministers, than against the immense power and
wealth of the nobles, and seemed to hope that they
might make peace with Charles, by offering to
enrich him with their spoils.

THE success which Padilla had met with in fe- Elatd with

veral small encounters, and in reducing some in- th1ei1^ccS
considerable towns, helped to precipitate them in- imall rcn-
to this measure, filling them with such confidence coutcrs.
in the valour of their troops, that they hoped for
an easy vietory over the royalists. Padilla, that his
army might not remain inactive, while flufled
with good fortune, laid siege to Torrelobaton, a
place of greater strength and importance than any
he had hitherto attacked, and which was defend-
ed by a sufficient garrison; and though the befieg-
ed made a desperate resistance, and the admiral
attempted to relieve them, he took the town by Marrch 3,
storm and gave it up to be plundered by his fol- '152'
diers. If he had marched instantly with his vic-
torious army to Tordefillas the head quarters of
the royalists, he could scarce have failed of mak-
ing an effecual imprellion on their troops, furpriz-
ed at the brifknels of his operations, and far fiom
being of sufficient firength to give him battle.
But the fickleness and imprudence of the junta lmprudence
prevented his taking this ftep. Incapable alike of ondia.
carrying on war, or of making peace, they liften-
ed again to overtures of accommodation, and
even agreea to a fhnrt ftupenfion of arms Th s
negociation terminated in nothing; but while it

was

BooK III. was carrying on, many of Padilla's soldiers, un-
<-v~' cacquainted with the restraints of discipline, went

off with the booty they had got at Torrelobaton;
and others, wearied out by the unusual length of
the'campaign, deserted r. The Constable too had
leisure to aflemble his forces at Burgos, and to pre.
pare every thing for marching, and as soon as the
truce expired, he effected a juntion with the
Condd de Haro, in spite of all Padilla's efforts to
prevent it. They advanced immediately towards
Torrelobaton, and Padilla finding the number of
his troops so diminished that he durst not rifl a
battle, attempted to retreat to Toro, which if he
could have accomplished, the invasion of Navarre
at that junAure by the French, and the necessity
which the regents muff have been under of de-
taching men to that kingdom, might have saved
him from danger. But Haro, sensible how fatal
the consequences would be of suffering him to

The nobles
attack the escape, marched with such rapidity at the head of
armyof the his cavalry, that he came up with him near Villalar,
Juntaw
Aprils3. and without waiting for his infantry, advanced to

the attack. Padilla's army, fatigued and difhear-
tened by their precipitate retreat, which they could
not distinguish from a flight, happened at that time
to be passing over a ploughed field, on which fich
a violent rain had fallen, that the soldiers Iunk al-
most to the knees at every ftep, and remained ex-
posed to the fire of some field-pieces which the
royalists had brought along with them. All these
circumstances so disconcerted and intimidated raw
soldiers, that without facing the enemy, or making

and defeat any resistance, they fled in the urmoft confusion.
its Padilla exerted himself with extraordinary courage

and activity in order to rally them, though in vain;
fear rendering them deaf both to his threats and
intreaties: Upon which, finding matters irretriev-
able, and relolving not to survive the disgrace of
that day, and the ruin of his party, he rushed

r Sandov. 336.

into

into the thickest of the enemy; but being wound- BOOK IlL.
ed and dismounted, he was taken prisoner. His'- 'r
principal officers ihared the fame fate; the com-
mon soldiers were allowed to depart unhurt, the
nobles being too generous to kill men who threw
down their arms t.

THE resentment of his enemies did not susser

Padilla to linger long in expectation of what should
befal him. Next day he was condemned to lose
his head, though without any regular trial, the
notoriety of the crime being supposed sufficient to
supercede the formality of a legal process. He
was led instantly to execution, together with Don Pdilla,
John Bravo, and Don Francis Maldonada, the ral, putto
former commander of the Segovians, and the death.
latter of the troops of Salamanca. Padilla viewed
the approach of death with calm but undaunted
fortitude; and when Bravo, his fellow-fuffer, ex-
prefled some indignation at hearing himself pro-
claimed a traitor, he checked him, by observing,
" That yesterday was the time to have displayed
the spirit of gentlemen, this day to die with the
meekness of Chriflians." Being permitted to
write to his wife and to the community of Toledo,
the place of his nativity, he addressed the former
with a manly and virtuous tenderness, and the lat-
ter with the exultation natural to one who confi-
dered himself as a martyr for the liberties of

t Sandov. 345, &c. P. Mart. Ep. 720. Miniana. Contin.
p. 26. Epitome de la vida y Hechos del Emper. Carlos V.
per D. Juan Anton. de Vera y Zuniga, 4to. Madr. 1627.
P. 19.

VOL. Il. N his

BOOL III. his country u. After this, he submitted quietly
-.V-.- to his fate. Most of the Spanish historians, ac-

customed to ideas of government, and of regal

power

u The strain of these letters is so eloquent and high spirited
that I have tranllated them for the entertainment of my readers.

The Letter of Don sohn Padilla to his Wife.

SENNORA;

" IF your grief did not afflit me more than my own

death, I should deem myself perfecly happy. For the end of
life being certain to all men, the Almighty confers a mark ofdif-
tinguifling favour upon that person, for whom he appoints a
death filch as mine, which though lamented by many, is ne-
verthelefs acceptable unto him. It would require more time
than I now have. to write any thing that could afford yon
consolation. That my enemies will not grant me, nor do I
wilh to delay the reception of that crown which I hope to en.
joy. You may bewail your own loss, but not my death, which,
being so honourable, ought not tobe lamented by any. My foul,
for nothing else is left to me, I bequeath to you. You will re-
ceive it, as the thing in this world which you valued most. I do
not write to my father Pero Lopez, because I dare not, for though
I have Ihewn myself to be his son in daring to lose my life, I
have not been the heir of his good fortune. I will not attempt
to fay any thing more, that I may not tire the executioner who
waits for me, and that I may not excite a suspicion, that in
order to prolong my life, I lengthen out my letter. My ser-
vant Soffa, an eye witness, and to whom I have communicated
my most secret thoughts, will inform you of what I cannot
now write; and thus I reft, expecting the instrument of your
grief, and of my deliverance."

His Letter to the City of 7oledo.

" To thee, the crown of Spain, and light of the wholi

world, free from the time of the mighty Goths; to thee, who
by ihedding the blood of strangers, as well as thy own blood,
haft recovered liberty for thyself, and thy neighbouring cities.
Thy legitimate son Juan de Padilla gives information, how by
the blood of his body, thy antient victories are to be refreshed.
If fate hath not permitted my ationsjo be placed among yonl
successful and celebrated exploits, the fault hath been in my ill
fortune not in my good will. This I request of thee as of a
mother, to accept, since God hath given me nothing more to

loci

power very different from those upon which he acted, BooK III
have been so eager to testify their disapprobation " --.
of the cause in which he was engaged, that they
have negle&ced, or have been afraid to dojuffice
to his virtues; and by blackening his memory,
have endeavoured to deprive him of that pity,
which is seldom denied to illufirious sufferers.

THE victory at Villalar proved as decisive as it pR^ost

was compleat. Valladolid, the most zealous of all
the associated cities, opened its gates immediately
to the conquerors, and being treated with great
clemency by the Regents, Medina del Campo,
Segovia, and many other cities followed its exam-
ple. This sudden dissolution of a confederacy,
formed not upon flight disgusts or upon trifling
motives, into which the whole body of the people
had entered, and which had been allowed time to
acquire some degree of order and confidlence by
establishing a regular plan of government, is the
frongeft proof of the inability of its leaders, or
of some secret discord reigning among the mem-
bers. Though part of the army by which they
had been subdued, was obliged, a few days after
the battle, to riarch towards Navarre, in order to
check the progress of the French in that king-
dom, nothing could prevail on the dejeCted com-

lose for thy fake, than that which I am now to relinquish. I
am more follicitous about thy good opinion than about
my own life. The Ihiftings of fortune which never stand till,
are many. But this I fee with infinite consolation, that I, the
least of thy children, susser death for thee; and that thou haft
nursed at thy breasts such as may take vengeance for my wrongs.
Many tongues will relate the manner of my death, of which
I am still ignorant, though I know it to be near. My end
will testify what was my desire. My foul I recommend to thee
as to the patroness of Christianity. Of my body I fay nothing,
for it is not mine. I can write nothing more, for at this very
moment, I feel the knife at my throat with greater dread of thy
difpleafilre, than apprehension of my own pain." Sandov.
Hist. vol. i. p. 478.

N 2 mons

BooK IU. commons of Castile to take arms again, and tc
psad"'. embrace such a favourable opportunity of acquir.
wife defends ing those rights and privileges for which they hac
grledrth appeared so zealous. The city of Toledo alone,

animated by Donna Maria Pacheco, Padilla's wi.
dow, who, instead of bewailing her husband with
a womaniflh sorrow, prepared to revenge his death,
and to prosecute that cause in defence of which
he had suffered, must be excepted. Refped for
her sex, or admiration of her courage and abili-
ties, as well as sympathy with her misfortunes,
and veneration for the memory of her husband,
secured her the fame ascendant over the people
which he had possessed. The prudence and vigour
with which ihe acted, justified the confidence they
placed in her. She wrote to the French general
in Navarre, encouraging him to invade Castile by
the offer of powerful afliftance. She endeavoured
by her letters and emissaries to revive the spirit and
hopes of other cities. She raised soldiers, and ex-
aded a great fum from the clergy belonging to
the cathedral to defray the expence of keeping
them on foot x. She employed every artifice that
could interest or inflame the populace. For this
purpose she ordered crucifixes to be used by her
troops instead of colours, as if they had been at
war with infidels, and enemies of religion; she
marched through the streets of Toledo with her
son, a young child, clad in deep mourning, feated
on a mule, having a standard carried before him
representing the manner of his father's execution y.
By all there means fle kept the minds of the peo-
ple in such perpetual agitation as prevented their
paflions from subsiding, and rendered them insen-
fible of the dangers to which they were exposed by
standing alone in oppofiLion to the royal authority.
While the army was employed in Navarre, the
Regents were unable to attempt the reduction of

X . Mart. Mt . 727. Sandov. 375.

Toledo

Toledo by force; and all their endeavours either BOOK III.
to diminish Donna Maria's credit with the people, L" /
or to gain her by large promises and the folicita-
tions of her brother the Marquis de Mondeair,
proved ineffectual. Upon the expulsion of the
French out of Navarre, part of the army returned
into Caitile, and inverted Toledo. Even this made
no impreflion on the intrepid and obstinate cou-
rage of Donna Maria. She defended the town
with vigour, her troops beat the royalists in feve-
ral rallies, and no progress was made towards re-
ducing the place, till the clergy, whom she had
highly offended by invading their property, hav-
ing received information of the death of William
de Croy archbishop of Toledo, whose pofieffion
of that fee was their chief grievance, and that the
Emperor had named a Castilian to succeed him,
began to turn against her. They persuaded the
people that she had acquired such influence over
them by the force of enchantments, that (he was
assisted by a familiar demon which attended her
in the form of a Negro-maid, and that by its
suggestions she regulated every part of her con-
dut z. The credulous multitude, whom their im-
patience of a long blockade, and despair of ob-
taining succours either from the cities formerly in
confederacy with them, or from the French, ren-
dered desirous of peace, took arms against her,
and driving her out of the city surrendered it to Oaober a6.
the royalists. She retired to the citadel, which she
defended with amazing fortitude four months
longer; and when reduced to the last extremities,
fle made her escape in disguise, and fled to Por- Feb. ,o,
tugal, where she had many relations '. 'Is.

* P. Mart. Ep. 727;
* Sandov. 375. P. Mart. Ep. 754. Frrer. viii. 563.

N 3 UPor

BoOK III. UP o N her flight, the citadel surrendered.
` v` Tranquillity was re-efablifhed in Cafile; and this
Fatal efltcas ult wa t
of this civil bold attempt of the commons, like all unsuccess.
war. ful infurre&ions, contributed to confirm and ex-

tend the power of the crown, which it was in-
tended to moderate and abridge. The Cortes
fiill continued to make a part of the Caftiiian con.
fritution, and were summoned to meet whenever
the King flood in need of money; but inflead of
adhering to their antient and cautious form of ex-
amining and redressing public grievances, before
they proceeded to grant any supply, the more
courtly custom of voting a donative in the first
place was introduced, and the Sovereign having
obtained all he wanted, never allowed them to en-
ter into any scrutiny, or to 'attempt any reforma-
tion injurious to his authority. The privileges
which the cities had enjoyed were gradually cir-
cumfcribed or abolilhed; their commerce began
from this period to decline; and becoming less
wealthy and less populous, they loft that power
and influence which they had acquired in the
Cortes.

The proh WHILE Castile was exposed to the calamities of
Jturrcons civil war, the kingdom of Valencia was torn by
in Valcncia. intestine commotions still more violent. The as.

fociation which had been formed in the city of
Valencia in the year one thousand five hundred and
twenty, and which was distinguished by the name
of the Germanada, continued to subsist after the
Emperor's departure from Spain; and the mem.
bers of it, upon pretext of defending the coast!
against the descents of the Corsairs of Barbary
and under fandeion of that permiflion, whicl
Charles had rashly granted them, refuiled to la1
down their arms. But as the grievances, which th(
Valencians aimed at redrefling, proceeded frorr
the arrogance and exations of the nobility, rather

tiha

than from any unwarrantable exercise of the roy- Boox UII.
al prerogative, their resentment turned chiefly '
against the former. As soon as they were allow-
ed the ule of arms, and became conscious of their
own strength, they grew impatient to take ven-
geance of their oppressors. They drove the no-
bles out of most of the cities, plundered their
houses, wafted their lands, and assaulted their
castles. They then proceeded to elet thirteen
persons, one from each company of tradesmen
established in Valencia, and committed the admi-
niftration of government to them, under pretext
that they would reform the laws, establish one uni-
form mode of dispensing justice without partiality,
or regard to the diftindion of ranks, and thus re-
store men to some degree of their original equa-
lity.

THE nobles were obliged to take arms in felft

defence. Hostilities began, and were carried on
with all the rancour, with which resentment at
oppression inspired the one party, aud the idea
of insulted dignity animated the other. As no
person of honourable birth, or of liberal educa-
tion joined the Germanada, the councils as well
as troops of the confederacy were conducted by
low mechanics, who acquired the confidence of an
enraged multitude chiefly by the fierceness of their
zeal, and the extravagance of their proceedings.
Among such men, the laws introduced in civiliz-
ed nations, in order to restrain or moderate the
violence of war, were unknown or despised; and
they committed the wildest aAs of cruelty and
outrage,

THE Emperor occupied with fupprefling the

infurretion in Castile, which more immediately
threatened the subversion of his power and
prerogative, was unable to give much attention to

the

BooK III. the tumults in Valencia, and left the nobility of

that kingdom to fight their own battles. His
viceroy, the Condd de Melito, had the flpreme
command of the forces which the nobles raised a-
mong their vasals. The Germanada carried on the
war during the years 1520 and 21, with a more per-
fevering courage, than could have been expeLted
from a body so tumultuary, under the conduft of
such leaders. They defeated the nobility in feve-
ral actions, which; though not considerable, were
extremely sharp. They repulsed them in their at-
tempts to reduce different towns. But the nobles,
by their superior skill in war, and at the head of
troops more accustomed to service, gained the ad-
vantage in moss of the rencounters. At length,_they
were joined by a body of Castilian cavalry, which
the regents dispatched towards Valencia, soon
after their victory over Padilla at Villalar, and
by their afliflance they acquired such superiority,
that they entirely broke and ruined the Germa-
nada. The leaders of the party were put to
death, almost without any formality of legal trial,
and suffered such cruel punishments, as the
fenCe of recent injuries prompted the nobles to
infiit. The government of Valencia was re-
established in its antient form b.

AppearanPes IN Aragon, violent symptoms of the fame spirit
of dilhffec-
tionin Ara- of difaffetion and mutiny, which reigned in the
ton, other kingdoms of Spain, began to appear; but by

the prudent conduct of the viceroy, Don John de
Lanuza, they were so far composed, as to pre-
vent their breaking out into any open infurrredion.
But in the island of Majorca, which was annexed

b Argenfola Anales de Aragon, cap. 75. 90. 99. 118.

Sayas Analesde Aragon, cap. 5. 12, &c. P. Mart. Ep. lib. 33.
& 34. paflim. Ferrer. Hist. d'Efpagne. viii. 542. 564. &c.

to

the crown of Aragon, the fame causes that had Boo0 III
excited the commotions in Valencia, produced Fidable
effects no less violent. The people, impatient inturreaion
of the hardships which they endured under inMajorca.
the rigidjurifdiction of the nobility, took arms in March 9g.
a tumultuary manner; deposed their viceroy; s15
drove him out of the island; and massacred every
gentleman who was so unfortunate as to fall into
their hands. The obstinacy with which the peo-
ple of Majorca persisted in their rebellion, was
equal to the rage with which they began it. It
required no inconsiderable effort to reduce them
to obedience; and tranquillity was re-eflablifhed
in every part of Spain before they could be
brought to submit to their sovereign d.

WHILE the spirit of disaffection was so general Caure,
among the Spaniards, and so many causes con- wlhite pre-

vented the

curred in precipitating them into filch violent unicnofthe
measures, in order to obtain the redress of their tmacon
grievances, it may appear strange, that the
malecontents in the different kingdoms should
have carried on their operations without any
mutual concert, or even any intercourse with
each other. By uniting their councils and arms,
they might have acted both with greater force,
and with more effect. The appearance of a
national confederacy would have rendered it no
less refpeaable among the people, than formida-
ble to the crown; and the Emperor, unable to
resist such a combination, muff have complied with
any terms which the members of it thought fit to
prescribe. Many things, however, prevented
the Spaniards from forming themselves into
one body, and pursuing common measures. The

d Argenfola Anales de Aragon, c. 113. Ferrcr. Hist. viii.

542. Sayas Annales de Aragon, cap. 7, 11, 14, 76, 81.
Ferreras Hilt. d'Dcfpagne, viii. 579. &c. 609.

people

BOOK III. people of the different kingdoms in Spain, though
""'v~ they were become the subjects of the fame fove-

reign, retained, in full force, their national anti-
pathy to each other. The remembrance of their
antient rivalihip and hostilities was rtill recent,
and the sense of reciprocal injuries so intire, as to
be incompatible with their acting with confidence
and concert. Each nation chose rather to depend
on its own efforts, and to maintain the struggle
alcne, than to implore the aid of 'eighbours,
whom they diffrufted arid hated. At the fame
time, the forms of government in the several
kingdoms of Spain were so different, and the
grievances, of which they complained, as well
as the alterations and amendments which they at-
tempted to introduce, so various, that it was not
easy to bring them to unite in any common plan.
To this disunion Charles was indebted for the
preservation of his Spanish crowns; and while
each of the kingdoms followed separate mea-
fires, all of them were obliged at last to conform
to the will of their sovereign.
The Empe- THE arrival of the Emperor in Spain filled

~ P4nad his lubjeats who had been in arms against him

rg.neeroshbe-with deep apprehensions; from which he soon
wardsthe I delivered them by an aft of clemency, no less
,,tcon"- prudent than generous. After a rebellion so

general, scarce twenty persons, among so many
criminals obnoxious to the law, had been pu.-
nifhed capitally in Castile, Though strongly
follicited by his council, Charles refused to filed
any more blood by the hands of the executioner;
and published a general pardon, extending to all
on. .8. crimes committed since the commencement of

the insurrections, from which only fourscore were
excepted. Even these he seems to have named,
rather with an intention to intimidate others, than
from any inclination to seize them; for when an
officious courtier offered to inform him where oneof

the

the molt considerable among them was concealed, BOOK IIT.
he avoided it by a good-natured pleasantry ;
" Go," fays he, " I have now no reason to be
afraid of that man, but he has some cause to keep
at a distance from me, and you would be better
employed in telling him that I am here, than
in acquainting me with the place of his retreat e."
By this appearance of magnanimity, as well as
by his care to avoid every thing which had dif-
gusted the Castilians during his former residence
among them; by his address in assuming their
manners, in speaking their language, and in com-
plying with all their humours and cuffoms, he
acquired an ascendant over them which scarce any
of their native monarchs had ever attained, and
brought them to support him in all his enterprizes
with a zeal and valour to which he owed much
of his success and grandeur f.

ABOUT the time that Charles landed in Spain, Adrian fcts

Adrian set out for Italy to take poffeflion of his new outmr and
dignity. But though the Roman people oihged hl il eceCp
extre;vely for his arrival, they could not, ol hi;s
first appearance, conceal their furprize and 'dif-
appointment. After being accuflomed to the
princely magnificence of Julius, and the elegant
splendour of Leo, they beheld with contempt an
old man of an humble deportment, of austere
manners, an enemy to pomp, destitute of taste
in the arts, and unadorned with any of the
external accomplishments which the vulgar ex-
peet in those raised to eminent ftationsg. Nor
did his political views and maxims seem less
strange and affonifhing to the pontifical mi-
nifters. He acknowledged and bewailed the cor-

e Sandov. 377, &c. Vidadel. Empcr. CarlosporDon Jian
Anton. de Vera y Zuniga. p. 30.

f Ulloa Vita de Carlo V. p. 85.
g Giuic.l ,

1 . 238. JoviilVita Adriani, 17. Bcllefor. Epitr.

dc -
Prhi. 4.

ruptions

BOOK II!. ruptions which abounded in the church, as well

as in the court of Rome, and prepared to reform
both; he discovered no intention of aggrandizing
his family; he even scrupled at retaining such ter-
ritories as some of his predecessors had acquired
by violence and fraud, rather than by any legal
title, and for that reason he invested Francesco
Maria de Rovere anew in the dutchy of Urbino,
of which Leo had firipped him, and surrendered
to the duke of Ferrara several places wrested from
him by the church h. To men little habituated to
fee princes regulate their conduct by the maxims of
morality and the principles ofjuftice, there ations
of the new Pope appeared inconteftible proofs of
his weakness and inexperience; and Adrian, who
was a perfet stranger to the complex and
intricate system of Italian politics, and who could
place no confidence in persons whose subtilty and
refinements in bufinels suited so ill with his natu-
ral finplicity and candour, being often embaraffed
and irresolute in his deliberations, the opinion of
his incapacity daily increased, until both his person
and government became objects of ridicule among
his fubjets i.

H endea- ADRIAN, though devoted to the Emperor, en-
store peace deavoured to assume the impartiality which be-
in Europe. came the common father of Christendom, and la-

boured to reconcile the contending princes, that
they might unite in a league against Solyman, whose
conquest of Rhodes rendered him more formida-
ble than ever to Europe k. But this was an under-
taking far beyond his abilities. To examine such
a variety of pretensions, to adjust such a num-
ber of interfering interests, to extinguish the
paflions which ambition, emulation, and mu-
tual injuries had. kindled, to bring so many

h Guic.lib. 15. 240.
i Jov. Vita Adr. l18. P. Mart, Ep. 774. Rucelli Lettere de
Princ. vol. i. 87, 96, ioi. k Bcllefor. Fpitr. p. 86.

hostile

hostile powers to pursue the fame scheme with Boot IsI.
unanimity and vigour, required not only up-
rightness of intentions, but a great superiority
both of underflanding and address.

THE Italian fates were no lets desirous of peace

than the Pope. The Imperial army under Colonna
was till kept on foot, but as the Emperor's reve-
nues in Spain, in Naples, and in the Low-countries,
were either exhausted, or applied to rome other
purpose, it depended entirely for pay and sub-
fiftence on the Italians A great part of it was
quartered in the ecclesiastical slate, and monthly
contributions were levied upon the Florentines,
the Milanese, the Genoese, and Lucchefe, by the
viceroy of Naples; and though all exclaimed
against such oppreflion, and were impatient to be
delivered from it, the dread of worse consequences
from the rage of the army, or the resentment of
the Emperor, obliged them to submit'.

So much regard, however, was paid to the T523.

Pope's exhortations, and to a bull which he issued agew
requiring allChriftian princes to content to a truce gainft the
for three years, that the Imperial. the French, and "i
English embafadors at Rome were impowered to
treat of that matter; but while they wafted their
time in fruitless negociations, their masters conti-
nued their preparations for war. The Venetians,
who had hitherto adhered with great firmnels to
their alliance with Francis, being now convinced
that his affairs in Italy were in a desperate situ-
ation, entered into a league against him with June a.,
the Emperor; to which Adrian, at the infti-
gation of his countryman and friend Charles de
Lannoy, viceroy of Naples, who perl'uaded him
that the only obstacles to peace arose from the

Guic. 1. 15. 238.

ambition

BOOR III. ambition of the French King, soon after acceded,
'L~-- The other Italian states followed their example;

and Francis was left without a single ally; to
resist the efforts of so many enemies whose ar-
mies threatened, and whose territories encom-
passed his dominions on every fide -.

Frinciss vi- THE dread of this powerful confederacy, it
ure In- was thought, would have obliged Francis to keep
pofitiontolt. wholly on the defensive, or at least have prevent-

ed his entertaining any thoughts of marching into
Italy. But it was the characer of that prince,
too apt to become remiss, and even negligent on
ordinary occasions, to rouze at the approach of
danger, and not only to encounter it with spirit
and intrepidity, qualities which flever forsook him,
but to provide against it with diligence and in-
duftry. Before his enemies were ready to exe-
cute any of their schemes, Francis had assembled
a numerous army. His authority over his own
fubje&ts was far greater than that which Charles
or Henry possessed over theirs. They depended
on their parliaments for mony, which was usually
granted them in small fums, very slowly, and
with much relutance. The taxes he could im-
pole were more confiderahle, and levied with
greater dispatch; so that on this, as well as on
other occasions, his army was in the field while
they were devising ways and means for raising
theirs. Sensible of this advantage, Francis hoped
to disconcert all the Emperor's schemes by march-
ing in person into the Milanese; and this bold

SurpAdc4 measure, the more formidable, because unex-
dicoer of pesed, could scarce have failed of producing
!helO"' that effet. The vanguard of his army had al-
bie Bour- arm
bonscon- ready reached Lyons, and he himself was haften-
ipiracy. ig after it with the second division of his troops,

m Guic. 1. 15, 241, 248.

when

when the discovery of a domestic conspiracy which BooK IIr.
threatened the ruin of the kingdom, obliged him r'
to flop short, and to alter his measures.

THE author of this dangerous plot was Charles His charc-

duke of Bourbon, lord high constable, whose no- t
ble birth, vast fortune, and high office, raied him
to be the most powerful subje&t in France, as his
great talents, equally suited to the field or the
council, and his signal services to the crown
rendered him the most illustrious and deserving.
The near resemblance between the King and him
in many of their qualities, both being fond of war,
and arobitious to excel in active and manly exer-
cifes, as well as their equality in age, and their
proximity of blood, ought naturally to have fe-
cured him a considerable share in that Monarch's
favour. But unhappily Louise, the King's mo- Th^icauf
ther, had contracted a violent aversion to the house fetion.
of Bourbon, for no better reason than because
Anne of Bretagne, the Queen of Lewis the
Twelfth, with whom she lived in perpetual en-
mity, discovered a peculiar attachment to that
branch of the royal family; and she had taught
her son, who was too susceptible of any impreifion
ihe gave him, to view all the constable's actions
with a mean and unbecoming jealouiy. His dif-
tinguifhed merit at the battle of Marignano had
not been sufficiently rewarded; he had been re-
called from the government of Milan upon very
frivolous pretences, and had met with a cold re-
ception, which his prudent conduct in that difficult
station did not deserve; the payment of his pen-
sions had been fulpended without any good
cause; and during the campaign of one thou-
sand five hundred and twenty-one, the King,
as has already been related, had affronted him
in the presence of the whole army, by giving
the command of the van to the duke of Alen-

Eon.

Boo inI. con. The conRtable, at firif, bore there indigni-
--'"'-'' ties with greater moderation than could have been

expeced from an high-fpirited Prince, conscious
of what was due to his rank, and to his fervi-
ces. Such a multiplicity of injuries, however,
exhausted his patience; and inspiring him with
thoughts of revenge, he retired from court, and
began to hold a secret correspondence with rome
of the Emperor's ministers.

ABOUT that time the Dutchess of Bourbon hap.

pened to die without leaving any children; and
Louise, of a disposition no leTs amorous than vin-
ditive, and still susceptible of the tender passions
at the age of forty-fix, began to view the Confta-
ble, a Prince as amiable as he was accomplished,
with other eyes; and notwithstanding the great
disparity of their years, she formed the scheme of
marrying him. Bourbon, who might have ex-
pe&ed every thing to which an ambitious mind
can aspire, from the doting fondness of a wo-
man who governed her son and the kingdom,
being incapable either of imitating the queen in
her sudden transition from hatred to love, or of
dissembling so meanly as to pretend affection for
one who had prosecuted him so long with unpro-
voked malice, not only rejected the match, but
embittered his refusal by some revere raillery
on Louise's person and character. She finding her-
self not only contemned, but insulted, her difap-
pointed love turned into hatred, and since she
could not marry, she resolved to ruin Bourbon.

For this purpose she consulted with the chan-

cellor du Prat, a man, who by a bale prostitution
of great talents and of superior skill in his profession,
had risen to that high office. By his advice a law-suit
was commenced against the constable, for the

whole

whole estate belonging to the house of Bourbon. BooK III
Part of it was claimed in the King's name, as 3
having fallen to the crown; part in that of Louise, 523.
as the nearest heir in blood of. the deceased
Dutchess. Both these claims were equally defti;
tute of any foundation injustice; but Louise, by
her follicitations and authority, and Du Prat by
employing all the artifices and chicanery of law,
prevailed on the judges to order the estate to be
fequeftred. This unjust decision drove the Hs ,ecret
Constable to despair, and to measures which de- negociations
fpair alone could have dictated. He renewed his Emperor.
intrigues in the Imperial court, and flattering him-
self that the injuries he had suffered would justify
his having recourse to any means in order to ob-
tain revenge, he offered to transfer his allegiance
from his natural sovereign to the Emperor, and to
assist him in the conquest of France. Charles, as
well as the King of England, to whom the secret
was communicated n, expecting prodigious advan-
tages from his revolt, were ready to receive him
with open arms, and spared neither promises nor
allurements that might help to confirm him in his
resolution. The Emperor offered him in mar-
riage his sifter Eleanor, the widow of the King
of Portugal, with a vast portion. He was includ-
ed as a principal in the treaty between Charles and
Henry. The counties of Provence and Dauphind
were to be fettled on him, with the title of King.
The Emperor engaged to enter France by the Pyre-
nees, and Henry, supported by the Flemings, to
invade Picardy; while twelve thousand Germans,
levied at their common charge, were to pe-
netrate into Burgundy, and to act in concert
with Bourbon, who undertook to raise fix
thousand men among his friends and vassals in
the heart of the kingdom. The execution of
this deep-laid and dangerous plot was fulpended,

n Rymer's Faeder. xiii. 794.
VOL. II. 0 until

BooK III. until the king ihould cross the Alps with the only
a--" , army capable of defending his dominions; and

1523- as he was far advanced in his march for that pur-

pose, France flood on the brink of deftrution o.
Discovered. . HAPPILY for that kingdom, a negociation

which had now been carrying on for several
months, though conducted with the most pro-
found secrecy and communicated only to a few
chosen confidents, could not altogether escape the
observation of the reft of the Constable's numer-
ous retainers, rendered more inquisitive by finding
that they were distrusted. Two of these gave
the king Come intimation of a mysterious corref-
pondence between their malfer and the Comte
de Roeux, a Flemish nobleman of great confi-
dence with the Emperor. Francis, who could
not bring himself to suspect that the first prince
of the blood would be so base as to betray the
kingdom to its enemies, immediately repaired to
Moulins, where the Constable was in bed, feigning
indisposition that he might not be obliged to ac-
company the King into Italy, and acquainted him
of the intelligence which he had received. Bour-
bon, with great solemnity and the most imposing
affectation of ingenuity and candour, aiferted
his own innocence; and as his health he said,
was now more confirmed, he promised tojoin
the army within a few days. Francis, open and
candid himself, and too apt to be deceived by the
appearance of those virtues in others, gave Cuch
credit to what he said, that he refuted to arieft
him, although advised to take that precaution by
his wisest counsellors, and as if the danger had been
over, he continued his march towards Lyons.
September. The Constable set out soon after, seemingly with

an intention to fpllow him; but turning suddenly to
Flics tolta, the left, he crossed the Rhone, and after infinite

o Thuani Hitt. lib. i. c. io. Heutr. Rcr. Alftr. lib. viii.
c¢ 18. p. 207.

fatigues and perils escaped all the parties which BooK III.
the king, sensible too late of his credulity, sent -V--
out to intercept him, and reached Italy in safety . 1523-

FRANCtS took every possible precaution to

prevent the bad effects of the irreparable error
he had committed. He puttgarrifons in all the
places of strength in the Constable's territories.
He seized all the gentlemen whom he could sus-
pect of being his aflociates, and as he had not
hitherto discovered the whole extent of the con-
fpirator's schemes, nor knew how far the infection
had spread among his fubjeats, he was afraid that
his absence might encourage them to make rome
desperate attempt, and for that reason relinquished
his intention of leading his army in person into
Italy.

HE did not, however, abandon his design on French hi.

the Milanese; but appointed admiral Bonnivet to Mlh'ce,.
take the supreme command in his stead, and to
march into that country with an army thirty
thoufapd strong. Bonnivet did not owe this pre-
ferment to his abilities as a general; for of all
talents requisite to form a great commander, he
poflefled only personal courage, the lowest and the
molt common. But he was the molt accomplish-
ed gentleman in the French court, of agreeable
manners, an insinuating address, and a sprightly
conversation; and Francis, who lived in great
familiarity with his courtiers, was to charmed with
these qualities that he honoured him, on all occafi-
ons, with the most partial and diftinguifing marks
of his favour. He was, besides, the implacable
enemy of Bourbon; and as the king scarce knew

c Mem. de Bellay, p. 64, &c. Pafquier Recherches dle la
France, p. 481.

0 z whom

BOOK III. whon to trust at that junture, he thought the
`'.` chief command could be lodged no where so safe-

-523. ly as in his hands.
Theirill COLONNA, who was entrusted with the defence

of the Milanese, his own conquest, was in no con-
dition to ;efift such a formidable army. He had
scarce money sufficient to pay his troops, re-
duced to a small number by sickness or desertion,
and had, for that reason, been obliged to neglect
every precaution necessary for the security of the
country. The only plan he formed was to defend
the passage of the river Tefino against the French;
and as if he had forgotten how easily he himself
had disconcerted a similar scheme formed by Lau-
trec, he promired with great confidence on its be-
ing effecual. But in spite of all his caution, it fuc.
ceeded no better with him than with Lautrec.
Bonnivet passed the river without loss, at a ford
which had been neglected, and the Imperialists
retired to Milan, preparing to abandon the town as
soon as the French ffould appear before it. By an
unaccountable negligence which Guiccardini im-
putes to infatuation q, Bonnivet did not advance
for three or four days, and loft the opportunity
with which his good fortune presented him.
The citizens recovered from their consternation:
Colonna still active, at the age of fourscore, and
Morons, whose enmity to France was indefatiga-
ble, were employed night and day in repairing
the fortifications, in amassing provisions, in col-
lecting troops from every quarter, and by the
time the French approached, had put the city in a
condition to stand a siege. Bonnivet after some
fruitless attempts on the town, which harraffed his
own troops more than the enemy, was ob-
liged, by the inclemency of the season to retire
into winter-quarters.

q Guic.lib.ss. 254.

DURING

DURING there tranfaftions, Pope Adrian died; BooK m.

an event so much to the fatisfa&ion of the Roman 'v'
people, whose hatred or contempt of him aug- Deachof
mented every day, that the night after his decease, Adrian VI.
they adorned the door of his chief physician's
house with garlands, adding this inscription, TO
THE DELIVERER OF HIS COUNTRY r.
The Cardinal de Medici infsantly renewed his pre-
tensions to the Papal dignity, and entered the
conclave with high expectations on his own part,
and a general opinion of the people that they
would be successful. But though supported by
the Imperial facion, possessed of great personal
interest, and capable of all the artifices, refine-
ments, and corruptions, which reign in those as-
femblies, the obstinacy and intrigues of his rivals
protracted the conclave to the unusual length of
fifty days. The address and perseverance of the Elefionof
Cardinal, surmounted at last every obstacle. He vin."
was raised to the head of the church, and assumed
the government of it by the name of Clement VII. No'' '
The choice was universally approved of. High
expetations were conceived of a Pope, whose
great talents, and long experience in business,
seemed to qualify him no less for defending the
fpilitual interests of the church, exposed to immi-
nent danger by the progress of Luther's opinions,
than for conduaing its political operations with
the prudence requisite at such a difficult juncture;
and who, besides there advantages, rendered the
ecclesiastical state more refpe&table, by having
in his hands the government of Florence, and the
wealth of the family of Medici .

CARDINA L Wo L E Y, not dilheartened by WolUey dif.

the disappointment of his ambitious views at nPd^ll
the former election, had entertained more with resent-
sanguine hopes of success on this occasion. met'

r Jovii Vit. Adr. 127. a Guic. lib. 1 5.263.

0 3 Henry

BoOK III. Henry wrote to the Emperor, reminding him of
· '"i ' lhis engagements to second the pretensions of his

,523. minister. Wolfey beftirred himself with ativity

suitable to the importance of the prize for which
he contended, and inftrudted his agents at Rome
to spare neither promises nor bribes in order to
gain his end. But Charles had either amused
him with vain hopes which he never intended
to gratify, or he judged it impolitic to oppose
a candidate who had such a profpea of lic-
ceeding as Medici; or perhaps the cardinals
durst not venture to provoke the people of
Rome, while their indignation against Adrian's
memory was still fresh, by placing another Ultra-
montane in the papal throne. Wolfey, after all
his expectation's and endeavours, had the morti.
fication to fee a Pope elected, of such an age,
and of so vigorous a constitution, that he could
not comfort himself much with the chance of
surviving him. Wolfey, by this second proof,
was fully convinced of the Emperor's insincerity,
land it excited in him all the resentment which an
haughty-mind feels on'being at once disappoint-
ed, and deceived; and though Clement endea-
voured to footl his vindictive nature by granting
him a commiflion to be legate in England during
life, with such ample powers as veiled in him
almost the whole papal jurifdiaion in that king-
dom, the injury he had received entirely diffolv-
ed the tie which had united him to Charles, and
from that moment he meditated revenge. It was
necessary, however, to conceal his: intention from
his mailer, and 'to suspend the execution of it,
until by a dextrous improvement of the incidents;
which might occur, he should be 'able gradually
to'alien'ate the King's affections from the Empe-
':6r. For this rdafon, he was o' far frim exprefling
any uneafiiefs on account of the repulse he had

met

met with, that he abounded on every occasion, BOOK III.
private as well as public, in declarations of his c
high fatisfaAion with Clement's promotion . 1524

HENRY had, during the campaign, fulfilled Henry's

with great sincerity whatever he was bound to operations
perform by the league against France, though
more slowly than he could have wifhied. His
thoughtless profusion, and total neglect of oeco-
nomy reduced him often to great firaits for mo-
ney. The operations of war were now carried
on in Europe in a manner very different from that
which had long prevailed. Instead of armies fud-
denly assembled, which under diftinEt chieftains
followed their prince into the field for a short space,
and served at their own cost; troops were now le-
vied at a great charge, and received regularly
considerable pay. Instead of impatience on both
fides to bring every quarrel to the issue of a bat-
tle, which commonly decided the fate of open
and defenceless countries, and allowed the barons
together with their vassals to return to their ordi-
nary occupations; towns were fortified with great
art, and defended with much obstinacy; war,
from a simple, became a very intricate science;
and campaigns grew of course to be more tedious,
and leTs decisive. The expence which these alte-
rations in the military fy tem necessarily created, ap-
peared intolerable to nations hitherto unaccustomed
to the burthen of heavy taxes. Hence proceeded
the frugal, and even parsimonious spirit of the
Englifl parliaments in that age, which Henry,
with all his authority, was seldom able to over-
come. The commons, having refused at this
time to grant him the supplies he demanded, he
had recourse to the ample and almost unlimited

tFidde's Lifeof Wolfey, 294, &c. Herbert.

prerogative,

,BOOK III. prerogative, which the Kings of England, then,
'""J pofleffed, and by a violent and unusual exertion
Sptember, of it, raised the money he wanted. This, how-

so. ever, wafted so much time, that it was late in

the season before his army, under the duke of
Suffolk, could take the field. Being joined by a
considerable body of Flemings, Suffolk marched
into Picardy, and Francis from his extravagant
eagerness to recover the Milanese, having left that
frontier almost unguarded, he penetrated as far as
the banks of the river Oyfe, within eleven leagues
of Paris, filling that capital with conRfernation. But
the arrival of some troops detached by the King,
who was fill at Lyons; the active gallantry of
the French officers, who allowed the allies no
respite night or day ; the rigour of a most unnatu-
Novmber.ral season, together with scarcity of provisions,

compelled Suffolk to retire; and La Tremoiille,
who commanded in those parts, had the glory of
having, with an handful of men, checked the
progress of a formidable army, and of having
driven them with ignominy out of the French
territoriesu.

And those THE Emperor's attempts upon Burgundy and
of theGer- Guienne were not more fortunate, though in both
spniards these provinces Francis was equally ill prepared to

resist them. The conduct and valour of his ge-
nerals supplied his want of foresight; the Ger-
mans who made an irruption into one of these
provinces, and the Spaniards who attacked the
other, were repulsed with great disgrace.

Endofthe Thus ended the year 1523, during which
ampaign. Francis's good fortune and success had been such

as gave all Europe an high idea of his power
and resources. He had discovered and difcon-

UHerbert. Mem. deBcllay, 73, &c.

certed

certed a dangerous conspiracy, the author of BooK III.
which he had drived into exile, almost without c
an attendant, he had rendered abortive all the 1523.
schemes of the powerful confederacy formed
against him; he had protected his dominions when
attacked on three different fides; and though his
army in the Milanese had not made such progress
as might have been expected from its superiority
to the enemy in number, he had recovered and
flill kept poffefion of one half of that dutchy.

THE ensuing year opened with events more dif- Sentiments

aftrous to France. Fontarabia wasloft by the cowar- eope.
dice or treachery of its governor. In Italy, the allies February
resolved on an early and vigorous effort in order to 27'
dispossess Bonnivet of that part of the M1ilanese
which lies beyond the Tefino; Clement, who,
under the pontificates both of Leo and Adrian, had
discovered an implacable enmity to France, be-
gan now to view the power which the Emperor
was daily acquiring in Italy, with so muchjealoufy,
that he refuted to accede, as his predecessors had
done, to the league againf: Francis; and forget-
ting private passions and animofities, laboured with
the zeal which became his character, to bring
about a reconciliation among the contending par-
ties. But all his endeavours were ineffectual; a
numerous army, to which each of the allies fur- iyPea
niflfed their contingent of troops, was assembled takiet,
at Milan by the beginning of' March. Lannoy,
viceroy of Naples, took the command of it upon
Colonna's death, though the chief direction of
military operations was committed to Bourbon,
and the marquis de Pescara; the latter, the ablest
and most enterprizing of the Imperialgenerals; the
former inspired by his resentment with new activity
and invention, and acquainted so thoroughly with

the

BooK III. the characters of the French commanders, the
,~J4.. genius of their troops, and the strength as well as

weakness of their armies, as to be of infinite ser-
vice to the party which he joined. But all these
advantages were nearly loft through the Emperor's
inability to raise money sufficient for executing
the various and extensive plans which he had

etarded by formed. When his troops were commanded to
a mutiny of march, they mutinied against their leaders, de-
*he troops. manding the pay which was due to them for some

months; and disregarding both the menaces and
intreaties of their officers, threatened to pillage
the city of Milan if they did not instantly receive
fatisfadion. Out-of this difficulty the generals of
the allies were'extricated by Morons, who, pre-
vailing on-lis countrymen, over whom his influence
was prodigious, to advance the fum that was re-
quifite, the army took the field .

TheFrench BONNIVET was destitute of troops to oppose
obliged to a-
bandon the this army, and still more of the talents that could
Milanele. render him an equal match for its leaders. As-

ter various movements and encounters, described
with great accuracy by the contemporary hifto-
rians, a detail of which, at this ditfance of time,
would be equally uninteresting and uninftructive,
he was forced to abandon the strong camp in which
he had entrenched himself at Biagrafla. Soon as-
ter, partly by his own mitcondut, partly by the
activity of the enemy, who harassed and ruined
his army by continual skirmishes, while they care-
fully declined a battle which he often offered
them; and partly by the caprice of 6000 Siss,
who refused to join his army though within a day's
march of it; he was reduced to the neceflity of
attempting a retreat into France through the
valley of Aoft. Just as he arrived on the banks

x Guic. 1. xv. 267. Capella, 190.

of

of the Seffia, and began to pass that river, Bourbon BOOK II.
and Pescara appeared with the vanguard of the al- V''
lies, and attacked his rear with great fury. At the 1524
beginning of the charge, Bonnivet, while exerting
himself with much valour, was wounded so dan-
geroufly as obliged him to quit the field; and the Dcathofthe
conduct of the rear was committed to the che- Bhayvalan
valier Bayard, who, though so much a stranger ruin of the
to the arts of a court that he never rose to the Fry"nhar
chief command, was always called, in times of
real danger, to the posts of difficulty and impor-
tance. He put himself at the head of the men
at arms, and animating them by his presence and
example to sustain the whole shock of the ene-
my's troops, he gained time for the reft of his
countrymen to make good their retreat. But in
this service he received a wound which he imme-
diately perceived to be mortal, and being unable
to continue any longer on horseback, he ordered
one of his attendants to place him under a tree,
with his face towards the enemy; then fixing his
eyes on the guard of his sword, which he held up
instead of a cross, he addrefied his prayers to
God, and in this posture, which became his cha-
racter both as a soldier and as a Chrifftian, he
calmly waited the approach of death. Bourbon,
who led the foremost of the enemies troops, found
him in this situation, and expressed regret and pity
at the fight. " Pity not me," cried the high-
spirited chevalier, " I die as a man of honour
" ought, in the diScharge of my duty: They
" indeed are objects of pity, who fight against
" their King, their country, and their oath."
The marquis de Pescara, palling soon after, ma-
nifefted his admiration of Bayard's virtues, and
his sorrow for his fall, with the generosity of a
gallant ;enemy; and finding that he could
not be removed with safety from that spot,

ordered

Boor III. ordered a tent to be pitched there, and appointed

proper persons to attend him. He died, nowith-
1524. standing their care, as his anceflors for several ge-

nerations had done, in the field of battle. Pescara
ordered his body to be embalmed, and sent to
his relations; and such was the refpe't paid to mi-
litary merit in that age, that the duke of Sa-
voy commanded it to be received with royal ho-
nours in all the cities of his dominions; in Dau-
phine, Bayard's native country, the people of all
ranks came out in a solemn proceflion to meet it y.

BONNIVET led back the shattered remains

of his army into France; and in one short cam-
paign, Francis was firipped of all he had pofeffeed
in Italy, and left without one ally in that country.

Progrefsof WHILE the war kindled by the emulation of
tie Retor- Charles and Francis spread over so many coun-
madion in
Cermany. tries of Europe, Germany enjoyed a profound

tranquillity, extremely favourable to the reforma-
tion, which continued to make progress daily.
During Luther's confinement in his r, treat at
Wartburg, Carloftadius, one of his disciples, ani-
mated with the fame zeal, but possessed of less
prudence and moderation than his master, began
to propagate wild and dangerous opinions, chiefly
among the lower people. Encouraged by his
exhortations, they rose in several villages of Sax-
ony, broke into the churches with tumultuary
violence, and threw down and deflroyed the ima-
ges with which they were adorned. These irre-
gular anid outrageous proceedings were so re-
pugnant to all the Elector's cautious maxims

Y Bellefor. Epitr. p. 73. Mem. de Bellay, 7S. Oeuv. de
Brant. tom. vi. 108, &c. Pafquier Rcchcrches, p. 526.

that

that if they had not received a timely check, they BOOR III.
could scarce have failed of alienating from the '-v
reformers that prince, jealous to a great degree of I5Z4'
his own authority, and afraid of giving offence to
the Emperor, and other patrons of the antient
opinions. Luther, sensible of the danger, imme-
diately quitted his retreat, without waiting for
Frederick's permission, and returned to Wittem-
berg. Happily for the reformation, the venera- March 6,
tion for his person and authority were still so great, 151.
that his appearance alone suppressed that spirit of
extravagance which began to seize his party.
Carloftadius and his fanatical followers struck
dumb by his rebukes, declared that they heard
the voice of an angel; not of a man z.

BEFORE Luther left his retreat, he had begun Luther

to translate the Bible into the German tongue, an tc Bible.
undertaking of no less difficulty than importance,
of which he was extremely fond, and for which
he was well qualified: He had a competent
knowledge in the original languages; a thorough
acquaintance with the style and sentiments of the
inspired writers; and tho' his compositions in Latin
were rude and barbarous, he was reckoned a
great master of the purity of his mother tongue,
and could express himself with all the elegance of
which it is capable. By his own afiduous appli-
cation, together with the afliffance of MelanhEon
and several other of his disciples, he finished part
of the New Testament this year; and the publi-
cation of it proved more fatal to the church of
Rome, than that of all his own works.. It was
read with wonderful avidity and attention by
persons of every rank. They were astonished
at discovering how contrary the precepts of
the Author of our religion are, to the inven-
tions of those who pretended to be his vicege-

Sleid. Hist. 5. Seckcnd. 195.

rents;

BOOR m. rents; and having now in their hand the rule
"so""~os faith, they thought themselves qualified by
1524. applying it to judge of the eflablifhed opinions,

and to pronounce when they were conformable to
the standard, and when they departed from it.
The great advantage arising from Luther's tranf-
lation of the Bible, encouraged the advocates for
reformation, in the other countries of Europe, to
imitate his example, and to publish versions of the
Scriptures in their refpeative languages.

Several ci- ABOUT this time, Nuremberg, Francfort, Ham-
tics aholilh
the rites of burg, and several other cities in Germany of the
the popifi firif rank openly embraced the reformed religion,

and by the authority of their magistrates abolished
the mass, and the other superstitious rites of Po-
pery a. The Elector of Brandenburgh, the Dukes
of Brunswick and Lunenburgh, and Prince of
Anhalt, became avowed patrons of Luther's opi-
nions, and countenanced the preaching of them
among their fubjedts.

Meafurrs THE court of Rome beheld this growing de-
employed
by Adrian fetion with great concern; and Adrian's first
in order to care after his arrival in Italy, had been to deli-
check the
progrers of berate with the Cardinals, concerning the proper
th Refor- means of putting a flop to it. This Pope was

profoundly skilled in icholaflic theology, and ha-
ving been early taken notice of on that account,
he still retained such an excessive admiration of
the science to which he owed his reputation and
success in life, that he confidered Luther's invec-
tives againfi the fchoolmen, particularly Thomas
Aquinas, as little leTs than blasphemy. All the
tenets of that dodor appeared to him so clear and

a Secklcd. 241. Chytrai Contin. Krantzii, 203.

irrefragable,

irrefragable, that he supposed every person who Boo Ilr.
called in question or contradicted them, to be
either blinded by ignorance, or to be a&ing in £524'
opposition to the conviction of his own mind: Of
course, no Pope was ever more bigotted or in-
flexible with regard to points of doctrine than
Adrian; he not only maintained them as Leo had
done, because they were antient, or because it
was dangerous for the church to allow of innova-
tions, but he adhered to them with the zeal
of a theologian, and with the tenaciousness of a
disputant. At the fame time his own manners
being extremely simple, and uninfeted with any
of the vices which reigned in the court of Rome, he
was as sensible of its corruptions as the reformers
themselves, and viewed them with no less indig-
nation. The brief he addrelfed to the Diet of
the Empire assembled at Nuremberg, and the in- November.
ftrutions he gave Cheregato the nuncio whom
he sent thither, were framed agreeably to these
views. On the one hand, he condemned Luther's
opinions with more asperity and rancour of ex-
preflion than Leo had ever used; he severely
censured the Princes of Germany for suffering
him to spread his pernicious tenets, by their ne-
gleting to execute the edit of the Diet at
Worms, and required them, if Luther did not
instantly retract his errors, to destroy him with
fire as a gangrened and incurable member, in like
manner as Dathan and Abiram had been cut off
by Moses, Annanias and Sapphira by the apostles,
and John Huts and Jerom of Prague by their an-
ceftors b. On the other hand, he, with great can-
dour, and in the most explicit terms, acknowledged
the corruptions of the Roman court to be the source
from which had flowed all the evils that the church
now felt or dreaded; he promised to exert all his
authority towards reforming there abuses, with as

t1 Fafcic. Rcr. Expet. & Fugiend. 342.

much

BOOK III. much dispatch as the nature and inveteracy of the

C4_"' disorders would admit; and he requested of them
1524. to give him their advice with regard to the most

effectual means of suppressing that new heresy
which had sprung up among them .

DetofNu- THE members of the Diet, after praising the
rembergpro- Pope's pious and laudable intentions, excused them-
pete a ge- sCIv o t
peral cn- elves for not executing the edict of Worms, by
cil as the alleging that the prodigious increase of Luther's
proper re-
Pmey. followers, as well as the aversion to the court of

Rome among their other fubjets on account of
its innumerable exactions, rendered such an at-
tempt not only dangerous, but impoflible. They
affirmed that the grievances of Germany, which
did not arifefrom imaginary injuries, but from impo-
fitions no less real than intolerable, as his Holiness
would learn from a catalogue of them which they
intended to lay before him, called now for some
new and efficacious remedy; and in their opinion,
the only remedy adequate to the disease, or which
afforded them any hopes of feeing the church re-
tfored to soundness and vigour, was a general
council. Such a council, therefore, they advised
him, after obtaining the Emperor's content, to
assemble without delay, in one of the great cities
of Germany, that all who had a right to be present
might deliberate with freedom, and propose their
opinions with such boldness, as the dangerous situ-
ation of religion at thisjuncture required d.

THE nuncio, more artful than hismafter, and bet-

ArtificesoF ter acquainted with the political views and interests
theludiCitO of the Roman court, was startled at the propofi-

tion of a council; and easily foresaw how dange-
rous such an assembly might prove at a time when

e Fafcic. Rer. Expet. & Fugiend. p. 345.
d Ibid. p. 346.

many

many openly denied the papal authority, and the BooK III.
reverence and submission yielded to it visibly de- '" '
dined among all. For that reason he employed 1524.
his utmost address, in order to prevail on the
members of the Diet to proceed themselves with
greater severity againit the Lutheran heresy, and
to relinquish their proposal concerning a general
council to be held in Germany. They, perceiv.
ing the nuncio to be more follicitous about the in-
terests of the Roman court, than the tranquillity
of the Empire, or purity of the church, remained
inflexible, and continued to prepare the catalogue
of their grievances to be presented to the Pope e.
The nuncio, that he might not be the beaier of a
remonstrance so disagreeable to his court, left Nu-
remberg abruptly, without taking leave of theDiet.

THE secular Princes accordingly, for the eccle- The Diet

fiaftics, although they gave no opposition, did not psen a, hu"
think it decent to join with them, drew up the lift dredgrie-
(so famous in the German annals) of an hundred Pope.
grievances which the Empire imputed to the in-
iquitous dominion of the papal fee. This lifE
contained grievances much of the fame nature
with that prepared under the reign of Maximili-
an. It would be tedious to enumerate each of
them; they complained of the fums exaated for
dispensations, abrolutions, and indulgences; of
the expence arising from the law-liits carried to
Rome; of the innumerable abuses occasioned by
reservations, commendams, and annates; of the
exemption from civil jurifdistion which the clergy
had obtained ; of the arts by which they brought
all secular causes under the cognisance of the eccle-
fiaftical judges; of the indecent and profligate
lives which not a few of the clergy led; and
of various other particulars, many of which
have already been mentioned among the cir-
cumftances which contributed to the favourable

· Fafcic. Rcr. Expct. & Fagicnd. 349. f Ibid. 376.
VOL, I1. P reception,

BOOK Ilr. reception, or to the quick progress of Luther's
^'v"- doctrines. In the end they concluded, that if the

5s4-. holy fee did not speedily deliver them from those

intolerable burdens, they had determined to en-
dure them no longer, and would employ the pow-
er and authority with which God had entrusted
them, in order to procure relief g.

The reces INSTEAD of such severities against Luther and
athchiet his followers as the nuncio had recommended,
'5s3. the recess or edict of the Diet contained only a

general injunaion to all ranks of men to wait with
patience for the determinations of the council
which was to be assembled, and in the mean time
not to publish any new opinions, contrary to the
eftablilhed dotrines of the church ; together with
an admonition to all preachers to abstain from
matters of controversy in their discourses to the
people, and to confine themselves to the plain and
inftrutive truths of religion h.

The NerooF THE reformers derived great advantage from
grC ftnt the tranfadions of this Diet as they afforded them
foim-icon. the fullest and moss authentic evidence that gross

corruptions prevailed in the court of Rome, and
th:,t the empire was loaded by the clergy with in-
supportable burdens. With regard to the former,
they had now the testimony of the Pope himself
that their invectives and accusations were not
malicious or ill-founded. As to the latter, the
representatives of the Germanick body, in an
assembly where the patrons of the new opinions
were far from being the most numerous or power-
ful, had pointed out as the chief grievances of the
Empire, those very practices of the Romish
church against which Luther and his difci-
ples were accustomed to declaim. Accordingly
in all their controversial writings after this period,
8 Fafcic. Rer. Expet. & Fugiend. 354. h Ibid. 348,

they

they often appealed to Adrian's declaration, and Boor II.
to the hundred grievances, in confirmation of 154.
whatever they advanced concerning the difiolute 54
manners, or insatiable ambition and rapaciousness
of the papal court.

AT Rome, Adrian's condu& was confidered as Adr;an's

a proof of the most childish simplicity and im- Ceduat
prudence. Men trained up amidst the artifices Romc.
and corruptions of the papal court, and accustom-
ed to judge of actions not by what was just, but
by what was useful, were astonished at a Pontiff,
who, departing from the wife maxims of his pre-
deceffors, acknowledged disorders which he ought
to have concealed; and forgetting his own digni-
ty, asked advice of thole, to whom he was enti-
tled to prefclibe. By such an excess of impo-
litic sincerity, they were afraid that instead of re-
claiming, he would render the enemies of the
church more presumptuous, and instead of extin-
guifhing herely, would weaken the foundations of
the papal power, or ltop the chief sources from
which wealth flowed into the church i. For this
reason they induffrioufly opposed all his schemes of
reformation, and by throwing objecions and diffi-
culties in his way, endeavoured to retard or to de-
feat the execution of them. Adrian, amazed on
the one hand, at the obstinacy of the Lutherans,
disgusted, on the other, with the manners and
maxims of the Italians, and finding himself una-
ble to correct either the one or the other, often
lamented his own situation, and often looked back
with pleasure on that period of his life when he
was only dean of Louvain, a more humble but
happier station, in which little was expected from
him, and there was nothing to frustrate his good
intentions. k.

i . Paul, Hill. of Counc. p. a2. Pallavic. Hist. 58.
k Jovii Vit. Adr. p. 18.

P 2 CLEMENT

BooK III. CLEMENT VII. his fucceflbr, excelled Adrian

as much in the arts of government, as he was in-

lement's feriour to him in purity of life, or uprightness
measures a- of intention. He was animated not only with the
her andhis aversion which all Popes naturally bear to a coun-
dread of a cil, but having gained his own election by means
general
council very uncanonical, he was afraid of an assembly

that might subjet it to a scrutiny which it could
not fiand. He determined therefore, to elude by
every possible means the demands of the Ger.
mans, both with refpet to the calling of a coun-
cil, and reforming abuses in the papal court,
which the rashness and incapacity of his prede-
ceffor had brought upon him. For this purpose
he made choice of cardinal Campeggio, an artful
man, often entrusted by the Popes with negocia-
tions of importance, as his nuncio to the Diet of
the Empire aflembled again at Nuremberg.

Feb. 1e524 C A M P E G G IO, without taking any notice of
'The negoci-
ationsofhls what had passed in the last meeting, exhorted the

cond diet Diet in a long discourse, to execute the edit of
at Nurem- Worms with vigour, as the only effetual means
be g. of fupprefling Luther's doctrines. The Diet, in

return, desired to know the Pope's intentions con-
cerning the council, and the redress of the hun-
dred grievances. The former, the nuncio endea-
voured to elude by general and unmeaning decla-
rations of the Pope's resolution to pursue such
measures as would be for the greatest good of the
church. With regard to the latter, as the cata-
logue of grievances did not reach Rome till after
Adrian's death, and of consequence had not been
regularly laid before the present Pope, Campeggio
took advantage of this circumrtance to decline
making any definitive answer to them in Cle-
ment's name; though, at the fame time, he ob-
served that their catalogue of grievances contained
many particulars extremely indecent and undutiful,

and

that the publishing it by their own authority was Boot III.
highly difrefpeEtful to the Roman fee. In the end, -"
he renewed his demand of their proceeding with attended
rigour againit Luther and his adherents; but tho' withlittle
an arnbaffador from the Emperor, who was at
that time very solicitous to gain the Pope, warmly
seconded the Nuncio, with many profeflions of
his master's zeal for the honour and dignity of the
papal fee, the rece/s of the diet was conceived in April 18.
terms of almost the fame import with the former,
without enjoining any additional severity against
Luther and his party .

BEFORE he left Germany, Campeggio, in order

to amuse and tooth the people, published certain
articles for the amendment of some dilbrders
and abuses which prevailed among the inferior
clergy; but this partial reformation, which fell so
far short of the expectations of the Lutherans, and
of the demands of the Diet, gave no fatisfadtion,
and produced little effect. The Nuncio, with a
tender hand, lopped a few branches; the Ger-
mans aimed a deeper blow, and by striking at
the root wished to exterminate the evil m.
I Seckend. 286. Sleid. Hist. 66. m Seckend. 292.

# BOOK IV.

THE
H I S T O R Y

OF THE

R E I G N
REIGN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK IV.
BOOK IV. Fr1HE expulsion of the French, both out of the

t-""" J[ Milanese, and the republic of Genoa, was

Italian fates confidered by the Italians, as the conclusion of the
with repea war between Charles and Francis; and as they be-
ndFranci,. gan immediately to be apprehensive of the Empe-

ror, when they saw no power remaining in Italy
capable either to controul or oppose him, they
longed ardently for the re-efiablifhment of peace.
Having procured the restoration of Sforza to his
paternal dominions, which had been their chief mo-
tive for entering into a confederacy with Charles,

they

they plainly discovered their intention to contri-BooK V;
bute no longer towards increasing the Emperor's '-.v
superiority over his rival, which was already the I524.
object of their jealousy. The Pope especially,
whose natural timidity increased his fifpicions of
Charles's designs, endeavoured by his ambaffa-
dors and remonstrances to inspire him with mo-
deration, and incline him to peace.

BUT the Emperor intoxicated with success, and Chariesre-

urged on by his own ambition, no less than by ;aFrIne.
Bourbon's desire of revenge, contemned Cle-
meut's admonitions, and declared his resolution of
ordering his army to pass the Alps, and to invade
Provence, a part of his rivals dominions where
he least dreaded an attack, and was least prepared
to resist it. His most experienced ministers dif-
fuaded him from undertaking such an enterprize
with a feeble army, and an exhausted treasury:
But he relied so much on having obtained the
concurrence of the King of England, and on the
hopes which Bourbon, with the confidence and
credulity natural to exiles, entertained of being
joined by a numerous body of his partisans as
soon as the Imperial troops should enter France,
that he persisted obstinately in the measure.
Henry undertook to furnish an hundred thou.
sand ducats towards defraying the expence of
the expedition during the firit month, and had
it in his choice either to continue the payment
of that fum monthly, or to invade Picardy be.
fore the end of July with a powerful army.
The Emperor engaged to attack Guienne at
the fame time with a considerable body of men,
and if these enterprizes proved successful, they
agreed that Bourbon, besides the territories he
had loft, should be put in poffeflion of Pro.
vence, with the title of King, and should
do homage to Henry as the lawful King of
France, for his new dominions. Of all the parts

of

BOOK IV. of this extensive but extravagant project, the in-

1 ~4 vafion of Provence was the only one which was

54 executed. For although Bourbon, with a fcrupu-

lous delicacy, altogether unexpeaed after the part
he had acted, positively refused to acknowledge
Henry's title to the crown of France, and thereby
absolved him from any obligation to promote the
enterprize, Charles's eagerness to carry his own
plan into execution did not in any degree abate.
The army he employed for that purpose amount-
ed only to eighteen thousand men; the supreme
command of which was given to the Marquis de
Pescara, with inftrudtions to pay the greatest
deference to Bourbon's advice in all his operations.

Theimpe- Pescara passed the Alps without opposition, and
ialifts enler entering Provence, laid siege to Marseilles. Bour-
Proveiicc
Augut 19. bon had advised him rather to march towards

Lyons, in the neighbourhood of which city his
territories were situated, and where of course his
influence was most extensive: But the Emperor
was so desirous to get poffeflion of a port, which
would, at all times, secure him easy access into
France, that by his authority he over-ruled the
Conifable's opinion, and directed Pescara to make
the reduction of Marseilles his chief objet a.

Prudlent FRANCIS, who foresaw, but was unable to pre-
meaihres of
Francis. vent this attempt, took the most proper precau-

tions to defeat it. He laid waste the adjacent
country, in order to render it more difficult for
the enemy to fibfift their army; he razed the fu-
lurhs of the city, strengthened its fortifications,
and threw into it a numerous garrison under the
command of brave and experienced officers. To
these, nine thousand of the citizens, whom their
dread of the Spaniflvyoke inspired with contempt
of danger, joined themselves; by their united

a Guic. 1. . . 273, &c. Mem. dcBcllay, p. 80.

courage

courage and industry, all the efforts of Pescara's BooK IV.
military skill, and of Bourbon's activity and re-
venge, were rendered abortive. Francis, mean- 24.
while, had leisure to aflemble a powerful army un-
der the walls of Avignon, and no sooner began to
advance towards Marseilles, than the Imperial
troops, exhausted by the fatigues of a siege which I .m
had lasted forty days, weakened by diseases, and forcedto
almost destitute of provisions, retired with preci- retreat
pitation towards Italy b. Sept. 19.

IF during these operations of the army in Pro-

vence, either Charles or Henry had attacked
France in the manner which they had projeted,
that kingdom must have been exposed to the most
imminent danger. But on this, as well as on many
other occasions, the Emperor found that the ex-
tent of his revenues was not adequate to the
greatness of his power, or the ardour of his am-
bition, and the want of money obliged him,
though with much reluctance, to circumicribe his
plan, and to leave part of it unexecuted. Henry,
disgusted at Bourbon's refuting to recognize
his right to the crown of France; alarmed
at the motions of the Scots, whom the follici-
tations of the French King had perftaded to march
towards the borders of England; and no longer
incited by his minister, who was become ex-
tremely cool with regard to the Emperor's inte-
refts; took no measures to support an enterprize,
of which, as of all new undertakings, he had been
at first exceflively fond c.

Ir thcKing of France had been satisfied with hav- Francis ela-

ing delivered his fubjecs from this formidable invafi- ¢wch his
sion, and having flewn all Europe the facility with
which the internalftrength of his dominions enabled
him to refill the impreflions of a foreign enemy,

b Guic. 1. 15. 277. Ulloa Vitadell Carlo V. p. 93.
c Sided's Life of Wolfcy. Append. No. 70, 71, 72.

even

BOOK IV. even when seconded by the abilities and powerful

-''"V efforts of a rebellious subjeCt, the campaign, not-
1524. withstanding the loss of the Milanese, would have

been far from ending ingloriously. But Francis,
animated with courage more becoming a soldier
than a general; pushed on by ambition, enterpriz-
ing rather than considerate; and too apt to be
elated with success; was fond of every undertak-

Refolvesto ing that seemed bold and adventurous. Such an
invade the undertaking, the situation of his affairs at that
Milanese. junture, naturally presented to his view He had

under his command one of the most powerful and
best appointed armies France had ever brought
into the field, which he could not think of disband-
ing without having employed it in any service.
The Imperial troops had been obliged to retire
almost ruined by hard duty, and disheartened with
ill success; the Milanese had been left altogether
without defence; it was not impoflible to reach
that country before Pescara, with his shattered
forces, could arrive there; or if fear should add
speed to their retreat, they were in no condition
to make head against his fresh and numerous
troops; and Milan would now, as in former in-
flances, fiibmit without refifance to a bold in-
vader. Those considerations, which were not de-
ftitute of plausibility, appeared to his sanguine
temper to be of the utmost weight. In vain did
his wisest ministers and generals represent to him
the danger of taking the field at a season so far
advanced, with an army composed chiefly of Swiss
and Germans, to whose caprices he would be (lb-
jet in all his operations, and on whose fidelity his
safety must absolutely depend. In vain did Louise
of Savoy advance by hasty journies towards Pro-
vence, that she might exert all her authority in
difliading her son from such a rash enterprize.
Francis disregarded the remonitrances of his sub-
jeds; and that he might save himself the pain

-~- of

of an interview with his mother, whose counsels BOOK IV.
he had determined to rejec, he began his march ''
before her arrival; appointing her, however, by 5Z4.
way of atonement for that neglect, to be regent
of the kingdom during his absence. Bonnivet, Appoints
by his persuasions, contributed not a little to con- his mo-her
firm Francis in this resolution. That favourite inghis ab-
who iWrongly resembled his master in all the de-fene.
feeive parts of his character, was led by his na-
tural impetuosity, warmly to approve of fich an
enterprize; and being prompted betides by his
impatience to revisit a Milanese lady, of whom he
had been deeply enamoured during his late ex-
pedition, he is said, by his flattering descriptions
of her beauty and accomplishments, to have in-
spired Francis, who was extremely susceptible of
such passions, with an equal desire of feeing her d

THE French pawsed the Alps at Mount Cenis; Operations

in ,he Mi~

and as their success depended on dilpatch, they anecr1.
advanced with the greatest diligence. Pcfcara,
who had been obliged to take a longer and more
difficult rout by Monaco and Final, was soon in-
formed of their intention; and being sensible that
nothing but the pretence of his troops could save
the Milanese,. marched with fich rapidity, that he
reached Alva on the fame day that the French
army arrived at Vercelli. Fiancis, infirulted by
Bonnivet's error in the former campaign, advanced
direcly towards Milan, where the unexpected ap-
proach of an enemy so powerful, occalioned such
confiernation and disorder, that although Pescara
entered the city with tome of his best troops, he
found that the defence of it could not be under-
taken with any probability of success; and having
thrown a garrison into the citadel, retired through
one gate, while the French were admitted at an-
other

d Ouv. de Brant. tom. vi. 253.
* Men. dc Bollay, p. 81. Guic. 1. is. 278.

TMEs

BOOK IV. THESE brisk motions of the French Monarch

'"'' disconcerted all the schemes of defence which the

'Erbra4fng Imperialists had formed. Never, indeed, did ge-
tateorfthe nerals attempt to oppose a formidable invasion

. under such circumstances of disadvantage. Tho'
Charles pofflffed dominions more extensive than
any other Prince in Europe, and had, at this time,
no other army but that which was employed in
Lombardy, which did not amount to sixteen thou-
sand men, his prerogative in all his different fiates
was so limited, and his fubjeas, without whose
consent he could raise no taxes, discovered such
unwillingners to burthen themselves with new and
extraordinary impositions, that even this small
body of troops was in want of pay, of ammuni-
tion, of provisions, and of cloathing. In such a
situation, it required all the wisdom of Lannoy,
the intrepidity of Pescara, and the implacable re-
fentment of Bourbon, to preserve them from fink-
ing under despair, and to inspire them with refo-
lution to attempt, or sagacity to discover what was
eitential to their safety. To the efforts of their
genius, and the activity of their zeal, the Empe-
ror was more indebted for the preservation of his
Italian dominions than to his own power. Lannoy,
-.hy mortgaging the revenues of Naples, procured
some money, which was immediately applied to-
wards providing the army with whatever was most
neceflary f. Pecfara, beloved and almost adored
by the Spanish troops, exhorted them to shew the
world, by their engaging to serve the Emperor,
in that dangerous exigency, without making any
immediate demand of pay, that they were ani-
mated with sentiments of honour very differ-
ent from those of mercenary soldiers, to which
propolition, that gallant body of men with an

f Guic. 1, 15. 28o.

unexampled

unexampled generosity gave their consent g. Bour- BOOK IV.
bon having raised a considerable fum, by pawning -v
his jewels, let out for Germany, where his influ- I 24'
ence was great, that by his pretence he might
haften the leying of troops for the Imperial ser-
vice h.

FRANCIS, by a fatal error, allowed the Empe- F:,ncbe-

ror's generals time to derive advantage fiom all r. acpi";'..
these operations. Instead of pursuing the enemy,
who retired to Lodi on the Adda, an untenable
post, which Pescara had resolved to abandon on
his approach, he, in compliance with the opinion
of Bonnivet, though contrary to that of his other
generals, laid siege to Pavia on the Tefino; a abc s
town, indeed, of great importance, the poffefiton
of which would have opened to him all the fertile
country lying on the banks of that river. But
the fortifications of the place were strong; it was
dangerous to undertake a difficult siege, at so late
a season; and the Imperial generals, sensible of its
consequence, had thrown into the town a garrison
of fix thousand veterans, under the command :f
Antonio de Leyva, an officer of high rank; of
great experience; of a patient but enterprizi;ry
courage; fertile in resources; ambitious of difti:-
guifhing himself; and capable, for that reatbn, is
well as from his having been long accustomed both
to obey and to command, of fulfering or perform-
ing any thing in order to procure success.

FRANCIS prosecuted the siege with obfli-l Hivi-.r-

nacy equal to the rafhlnefs with which he h;:!1°l"'"l'"m'
undertaken it. During three months, evci V
thing known to the engineers of that age, or

R Jovii Vit. Davali. lib. v. p. 386. Santlov. vol. 6hz. I'llia

Vita Jell Carlo V. v. p. 94, &c. Vida deli Emper. Carlos V.
per Vera y Zuniga. p. 36. h Mem. de Bcllay, p. 83.

that

BOOK IV. that could be effected by the valour of his troops,
'- ^~' was attempted in order to reduce the place; while

1524. Lannoy and Pescara, unable to obftrut his opera-

tions, were obliged to remain in such an ignomi-
nious slate of inaction, that a Pasquinade was
published at Rome, offering a reward to any per-
son who could find the Imperial army, loft in the
month of October in the mountains between
France and Lombardy, and which had not been
heard of since that time i.

The town LEYVA, well acquainted with the difficulties
gallantlyde under which his countrymen laboured, and the
fended. impossibility of their facing, in the field, such a

powerful army as formed the siege of Pavia,
placed his only hopes of safety in his own vigi-
lance and valour. The efforts of both were ex-
traordinary, and in proportion to the importance
of the place, with the defence of which he was
entrusted. He interrupted the approaches of the
French by frequent and furious (allies. Behind
the breaches which their artillery made, he ereat-
ed new works, that appeared to be scarce inferior
in strength to the original fortifications. He re-
pulsed the besiegers in all their aftaults; and by his
own example, brought not only the garrison, but
the inhabitants to bear the most intolerable fa-
tigues, and to encounter the greatest dangers with-
out murmuring. The rigour of the season con-
spired with his endeavours in retarding the pro-
grefs of the French. Francis attempting to be-
come master of the town, by diverting the course
of the Tefino, which is its defence on one fide,
a Hidden inundation of the river destroyed, in one
day, the labour of many weeks, and (wept away
all the mounds which his army had raised with infi-
nite toil, as well as at great expencek.

I Sandov. i. 608.
k Guic. 1. 15. a80. Ulloa Vita di Carlo V. p. 9.

NOTWITH-

NOTWITHSTANDING the flow progress of the Bool IV.

besiegers, and the glory which Leyva acquired by T ~
his gallant defence, it was not doubted but that The Pope
the town would at last be obliged to furrrender. concludesa
The Pope, who already confidered the French neutacy.
arms as superior in-Italy, became impatient to
disengage himself from his connections with
the Emperor, of whose designs he was extremely
jealous; and to enter into terms of friendship
with Francis. As Clement's timid and cautious
temper rendered him incapable of following the
bold plan which Leo had formed of delivering
Italy from the yoke of both the rivals, he return-
ed to the more obvious and practicable scheme
of employing the power of the one to balance
and to restrain that of the other. For this reason,
he did not dissemble his fatisfation at feeing the
French King recover Milan, as he hoped that
the dread of such a neighbour would be rome
check upon the Emperor's ambition, which no
power in Italy was now able to controul. He
laboured hard to bring about a peace that would
secure Francis in pofleffion of his new conquests;
and as Charles, who was always inflexible in the
prosecution of his schemes, rejeced the propofi-
tion with disdain, and with bitter exclamations
against the Pope, by whose persuasions while
Cardinal de Medici, he had been induced to
invade the Milanese, Clement immediately con-
cluded a treaty of neutrality with the King of
France, in which the republic of Florence was
included .

FRANCIS having by this tranfafion, deprived Francis n-

the Emperor of his two most powerful allies, and at vades Na-
the fame time having secured a passage for his own
troops through their territories, formed a scheme
of attacking the kingdom of Naples, hoping either

l Guic. 1 5. 5. 28. 285.

to

BOOK IV. to over-run that country, which was left altoge-

~"'- ' ther without defence, or that at least such an un-
1524. expected invasion would oblige the viceroy to re-

cal part of the Imperial army out of the Mila-
nefe. For this purpose he ordered fix thou-
sand men to march under the command of
John Stuart duke of Albany. But Pescara fore-
feeing that the effe&t of this diversion would depend
entirely upon the operations of the armies in the
Milanese, persuaded Lannoy to disregard Albany's
motions", and to bend his whole force against
the King himself; so that Francis not only weak-
ened his army very unseasonably by this great de-
tachment; but incurred the reproach of engaging
too rashly in chimercial and extravagant projecs.

Efforts of MEANWHILE the garrison of Pavia was reduced
Pefcaraand to extremity; their ammunitions and provisions
Bourbon, began to fail; the Germans, of whom it was

chiefly composed, having received no pay for
seven months", threatened to deliver the town in-
to the enemies hands, and could scarce be retained
frorm mutiny by all Leyva's address and authority.
The Imperial generals, who were no itrangers to
his situation, saw the necessity of marching with-
out loss of time to his relief. This they had now
in their power: Twelve thousand Germans, whom
the zeal and activity of Bourbon taught to move
with unusual rapidity, had entered Lombardy un-
der his command, and rendered the Imperial ar-
my nearly equal to that of the French, greatly di-
minifhed by the absence of the body under Al-
bany, as well as by the fatigues of the siege, and
the rigour of the season. But the more their troops
increased in number, the more sensibly did they feel
the distress arising from want of money. Far from

mGuic. 1. 15. 285. nGold. Polit. Imperial. 875.

having

laving funds for paying a powerful army, they BOOK IV.
iad scarce what was sufficient for defraying the -.-
:harges of conducting their artillery, and of car- 55
rying their ammunition and provisions. The abi-
ities of the generals, however, supplied every de-
set. By their own example, as well as by mag-
nificent promises in the name of the Emperor,
they prevailed on the troops of all the different
nations which composed their army, to take the
field without pay ;they engaged to lead them di-
redly towards the enemy; and flattered them with
the certain profpedt of victory, which would at
once enrich them with such royal spoils as would
be an ample reward f6r all their services. The
soldiers, sensible that by quitting the army, they
would forfeit the vast arrears due to them, and
eager to get poffefiion of the promised treasures,
demanded a battle with all the impatience of ad-
venturers who fought only for plunder .

THE imperial generals, without suffering the ar- They march

dour of their troops to cool, advanced immediately tFmtc
towards the French camp. On the firit intelli- February3.
gence of their approach, Francis .called a council
of war, to deliberate what course he ought to take.
All his officers of greatest experience were unani-
mous in advising him to retire, and to decline a
battle with an enemy who courted it from de-
fpair. The leaders of the Imperialifis, they ob-
served, would either be obliged in a few weeks
to disband an army, which they were unable to
pay, and which they kept together only by the
hope of pillage, or the soldiers enraged at the
non-performance of the promises to which they had
trusted, would rife in some furious mutiny which
would allow them to think of nothing but their own
safety: That, meanwile, he might encamp in some

m Eryci Petceani Hist. Cifalpina ap. Gravii Thcf. Antiquit.
tal. iii. p. 170, 1179.
VoL. II Q_ strong

BoOK IV. fRrong pof, and waiting in safety the arrival of

- fresh troops from France and Switzerland, might,
5s25- before the end of Spring, take poffeflion of all the

Milanese, without danger, or bloodihed. But in
opposition to them, Bonnivet, whose destiny it was
to give counsels fatal to France during the whole
campaign, represented the ignominy it would re-
flet on their sovereign if he Ihould abandon a
siege which he had prosecuted so long, or turn his
back before an enemy to whom he was still fupe.
rior in number; and infifed on the neceflity of
fighting the Imperialifis rather than relinquish an
undertaking, on the success of which the King's
future fame'depended. Unfortunately, Francis's
notions, of honour were delicate to an excess that
bordered on what was romantic. Having often
said that he: would take Pavia, or perish in the
attempt, he thought himself bound not to depart
from that resolution; and rather than expose him-
self to the slightest imputation, he chore to forego
all the advantages which were the certain confe-
quences of a retreat, and determined to wait for
the Imperialists before the walls of Pavian.

Battle of THE Imperial generals found the French so
Pav'a. frongly entrenched, that notwithstanding the pow-

erful motives which urged them on, they hesitated
long before they ventured to attack them; but at
last the necessities of the besieged, and the murmurs
of their own soldiers obliged them toput every thing
Fcbru, 24. to hazard. Never did armies engage with greater

ardour, or with an higher opinion of the impor-
tance of the battle they were going to fight;
never were troops more strongly animated with
emulation, national antipathy, mutual resentment,
and all the paflions which inspire obstinate brave.
ry, On the one hand, a gallant young Monarch,

a Guic, 1. 15. 291.

seconded

seconded by a generous nobility, and followed by Bob0t TV.
fubje6ts to whose natural impetuosity, indignation '~
at the opposition they had encountered, added new L525.
force, contended for victory and honour. On the
other fide, troops more completely disciplined, and-
conducted by generals of greater abilities, fought
from neceflicy, with courage heightened by de-
fpair. The Imperialists, however, were unable to
resist the first efforts of the French valour, and'
their firmest battalions began togive way. But the
fortune of the day was quickly changed. The-
Swiss in the Service of France, unmindful of the
reputation of their country for fidelity and martial'
glory, abandoned their post in a cowardly manner.
Leyva, with his garrison, sallied out and attacked
the rear of the French during the heat of the
action with such fury as threw it into confusion;
and Pescara falling on their cavalry, with the Ili-
perial horse, among whom he had prudently in-
termingled a considerable number of Spanish foot,
armed with the heavy mufkets'then in use, broke
this formidable body by an unuflial method of
attack against which they were wholly unprovid-
ed. The rout became universal; and refifFance TheFrench
ceased in almost every part, but where the King Al.Y
was in perion, who fought now, not for fame or
victory, but for safety. Though wounded in fe-
veral places, and thrown from his horse which
was killed under him, Francis defended himselF:
on foot with an heroic courage. Many of his
bravest officers gathering round him, and endea-
vouring to lave his life at the expence of their
own, fell at his feet. Among these was Bonni-
vet, the author of this great calamity, who alone
died unlamented. The King exhausted with fa-
tigue, and scarce capable of farther resistance, was:
left almost alone, exposed to the fury of some Span-
ilh soldiers, strangers to his rank, and enraged at

Qjl his

BOr IV. his obstinacy. At that moment came up Pompe-
4-""" rant, a French gentleman, who had entered to-

1525. gether with Bourbon into the Emperor's service,

and placing himself by the fide of the Monarch
againit whom he had rebelled, assisted in protet-
ing him from the violence of the soldiers; at the
fame time beseeching him to surrender to Bourbon,
who was not far distant. Imminent as the danger
was which now surrounded Francis, he rejeEted
with indignation the thoughts of an action which
would have afforded such matter of triumph to
his traiterous fubje&; and calling for Lannoy,
who happened likewise to be near at hand, gave

Francis up his sword to him; which he, kneeling to kifs
takner the King's hand, received with profound respect;

and taking his own sword from his fide, presented
it to him, faying, That it did not become To gleat
a Monarch to remain disarmed in the pretence of
one of the Emperor's fubjets o.

TEN thousand men fell on this day, one of

the molt fatal France had ever seen. Among
these were many noblemen of the highest diftinc-
tion, who chore rather to perish than to turn their
backs with dishonour. Not a few were taken
prisoners, of whom the most illustrious was Henry
D'Albret, the unfortunate King of Navarre. A
small body of the rear-guard made its escape un-
der the command of the duke Alenfon; the
feeble garrison of Milan dn the firRf news of the
defeat, retired without being pursued, by another
road; and in two weeks after the battle, not a
Frenchman remained in Italy.

o Guic. 1. i5. 292. Oeuv. de Brant. vi. 355. Mem. de

Bellay, p. 90. Sandov. Hist. i. 638, &c. P. Mart. Ep. 80o.
8 o. Rufcelli Lettere de Principi ii. p. 70. Ulloa Vita dell
Carlo V. p. 98.

LANNOY,

LANNOY, though he treated Francis with all BooK IV.

the outward marks of honour due to his rank and ^
character, guarded him with the utmost atten-
tion. He was follicitous, not only to prevent
any possibility of his escaping, but afraid that
his own troops might seize his person, and de-
tain it as the belt security for the payment of their
arrears. In order to provide against both these
dangers, he conduted Francis, the day after the
battle, to the strong castle of Pizzichitone near
Cremona, committing him to the custody of
Don Ferdinand Alarcon, general of the Spanish
infantry, an officer of great bravery, and of strict
honour, but remarkable for that severe and fcru-
pulous vigilance which such a trufft required.

MEANWHILE Francis, who formed a judg-

ment of the Emperor's dispositions by his own,
was extremely desirous that Charles ihould be
informed of his situation, fondly hoping that
from his generosity or sympathy, he would ob-
tain speedy relief. The Imperial generals were
no less impatient to give their sovereign an early
account of the decisive vi&tory which they had
gained, and to receive his inftrutions with regard
to their future conduct. As the most certain and
expeditious method of conveying intelligence to
Spain, at that season of the year, was by land,
Francis gave the Commendador Pennalofa, who
was charged with Lannoy's dispatches, a passport
to travel through France.

CHARLES received the acccount of this signal E^feof

and unexpected success that had crowned his arms, uporn
with a moderation, which if it had been real, would Cmh^'o.
have done him more honour than the greatest vic-
tory. Without uttering one word expreflive of exul-

Q. 3 tation,

BOK IV. tation, or of intemperatejoy, he retired imme-

I--J diately into his chapel, and having spent an hour

in offering up his thanksgivings to heaven, return.
ed to the prefence-chamber, which by that time
was filled with grandees and foreign ambassadors,
assembled in order to congratulate him: He ac-
cepted of their compliments with a modest de-
portment; he lamented the misfortune of the
captive King, as a firiking example of the fad re-
verse of fortune, to which the most powerful mo-
narchs are fubjedt; he sorbad any public rejoi-
cings, as indecent in a war carried on among
Christians, relerving them until he should obtain a
vicory equally illufbious over the infidels; and
seemed to take pleasure in the advantage he had
gained, only as it would prove the occasion of re-
itoring peace to Christendom p.

schemes he CHARLES, however, had already begun to form
began to schemes in his own mind, which little suited such
form, external appearances. Ambition, not generosity,

was the ruling passion in his mind; and the victory
at Pavia optned such new and unbounded prof.
peAs of gratifying it, as allured him with irre-
fiitible force: But it being no easy matter to ex-
ecute the vast designs which he meditated, he
thoug!-t it nec.-ffary, while proper measures were
taking for that purpose, to affect the greatest
moderation, hoping under that veil to conceal his
real intentions from the other Princes of Europe.

Thegeneral MEANWHILE France was filled with confterna.
contcrnati- painErance. tion. I he King himself had early transmitted an

account of the rout at Pavia in a letter to his mother
delivered by Pennalofa, which contained only
thele words, " Madam all is loft except out

P Sandov. Hist i. 651. Ulloa Vita dell Carlo V. p. 1 o.

h" honour.'

" honour." Those who survived, vhen they ar- BOOK IV.
rived from Italy, brought such a melancholy de- '
tail of particulars as made all ranks of men fen-
sibly feel the greattnfs and extrent of the crla-
mity. France, without its Sovereign, without mo-
ney in her treasury, without an army, without
officers to command it, and encompalTed on all
fides by a victorious and active eierny, seemed to
be on the very brink of deftrudion. But on that The p
occasion the great abilities of Louise the regent dent con-
saved the kingdom, which the violence of her pas- egq the
sions had more than once exposed to the greatest
danger. Initead of giving herself up to such la-
fmentations as were natural to a woman so remark-
able for her maternal tenderness, {he discovered
all the foresight, and exerted all the aftivity of a
consummate politician. She afrehibled the nobles
at Lions, and animated them by her example no
less than by her words with .such zeal in defence
of their country as its present situation required.
She colleted the remains of the army which had
served in Italy, ransomed the prisoners, paid their
arrears, and put them in a condition to take the
field. She levied new troops, provided for the fe-
curity of the frontiers, and raised furns sufficient for
defraying these extraordinary expences. Her chief
care, however, was to appease the resentment,
or to gain the friendihip of the King of England;
and from that quarter, the firfl ray of comfort
broke in upon the French affairs.

THOUGH Henry, in entering into alliances with Efres, of
Charles or Francis, seldom followed any tegularthc viaory

.m · ~. ' . _ · · , at Pavia on

or concerted plan of policy, but was influencedHenryvli.
chiefly by the caprice of temporary passions, such
occurrences often happened as recalled his atted-
tion towards that equal balance of power which
it was necessary to keep between the two con-
tending potentates, the preservation of which he

always

BOOR IV. always boasted to be his peculiar office. He had
ccv3 expe&ed that his union with the Emperor might

25 afford him an opportunity of recovering Come part

of those territories in France which had belonged
to his ancestors, and for the fake of such an ac-
quifition he did not scruple to give his assistance
towards raiitng Charles to a considerable pre-
eminence above Francis. He had never dreamt,
however, of any event so decisive and so fatal as
the vi&cory at Pavia, which seemed not only to
have broken, but to have annihilated the power
of one of the rivals; to that the profpe& of
the sudden and entire revolution which this would
occasion in the political fyttem, filled him with
the most disquieting apprehensions. He saw all
Europe in danger of being over-run by an ambi-
tious prince, to whole power there now remained
no counterpoise; and though he himself might at
first be admitted, in quality of an ally, to some
share in the (ioils of the captive Monarch, it was
easy to discern that with regard to the manner of
making the partition, as well as his security for
keeping poffefilon of what should be allotted him,
he must absolutely depend upon the will of a con-
federate, to whose forces his own bore no propor-
tion. He was sensible that if Charles were per-
mitted to add any considerable part of France
to the vast dominions of which he was already
master, his neighbourhood would be much more
formidable to England than that of the antient
French Kings; while, at the fame time, the
proper balance on the continent, to which Eng-
land owed both its safety and importance, would
be entirely loft. Concern for the situation of the
unhappy Monarch co-operated with there political
considerations; his gallant behaviour in the battle
of Pavia had excited an high degree of admira-
tion, which never fails of augmenting sympathy;
and Henry, naturally susceptible of generous

sentiments,

fentirnents; was fond of appearing as the deliverer BOOK IV.
of a vanquished enemy from a state of captivity. '
The paflions of the English minister seconded 1525.
the inclinations of the Monarch. Wolfey, who
had not forgot the disappointment of his hopes in
two fucceflive conclaves, which he imputed chiefly
to the Emperor, thought this a proper opportunity
of taking revenge; and Louise courting the friend-
ship of England with such flattering fubmiflions as
were no less agreeable to the King than to the
Cardinal, Henry gave her secret assurances that he
would not lend his aid towards opprefling France,
in its present helpless state, and obliged her to
promile that she would not content to dismember
the kingdom even in order to procure her son's
liberty q.

BUT as Henry's conneEtions with the Emperor

made it necessary to act in such a mannner, as to
save appearances, he ordered public rejoicings to be
made in his dominions for the success of the Impe-
rial arms; and as if he had been eager to seize the
present opportunity of ruining the French monar-
chy, he sent ambastadors to Madrid, to congratu-
late with Charles upon his victory; to put him in
mind, that he, as his ally, engaged in one com-
mon cause, was entitled to partake in the fruits of
it; and to require that in compliance with the
terms of their confederacy, he would invade
Guienne with a powerful army in order to give
him pofleflion of that province. At the lame
time, he offered to fend the princess Mary into
Spain or the Low Countries, that (he might be
educated under the Emperor's direction until the
conclusion of the marriage agreed on between
then-, and in return for that mark of his confidence
he insisted that Francis flould be delivered to him,

qMcm, deBellay, 94. Guic. 1. 6, 318. Herbert.

ill

00o IV. in consequence of that article in the treaty of Bru-
s52v-I ges, whereby each of the contracting parties was

bound to surrender all usurpers to him whose rights
they had invaded. It was impossible that Henry
could expect that the Emperor would liften to
there extravagant demands, which it was neither
his interest, nor in his power to grant. They ap-
pear evidently to have been made with no other
intention than to furnish him with a decent pretext
for entering into such engagements with France as
the juncture required r.

On the Ita IT was among the Italian states, that the victory
lin power. at Pavia occasioned the greatest alarm and terror.

That balance of power on which they relied for
their security, and which it had been the constant
object of all their negociations and refinements to
maintain, wasdeftroyed in a moment. They were
exposed by their situation to feel the first effets of
the uncontrouled authority Charles had acquired.
They observed many symptoms of a boundless
ambition in that young prince, and were sensible
that as Emperor, or King of Naples, he could
either form dangerous pretensions upon each of
their territories, or invade them with great
advantage. They deliberated, therefore, with
much follicitude concerning the means of raising
such a force as might obstruct his progresss.
But their consultations, conducted with little union,
and executed with less vigour, had no effect.
Clement, instead of pursuing the measures which
he had concerted with the Venetians for securing
the liberty of Italy, was so intimidated by Lannoy's
April i. threats, or overcome by his promises, that he

entered into a separate treaty, binding himself
to advance a considerable fum in return for

r Herbert, p. 64.

6 Gnic. 1. »6. 300. RufcelliLetteredePrinc. ii. 74, 76, &c.
Thuani Hilt. lib. i. c. ii.

certain

certain emoluments which he was to receive. BooK IV.
The money was instantly paid; Charles after- --T
wards refused to ratify the treaty; and the Pope 2S'
remained exposed at once to infamy and to ridi-
cule; to the former, because he had deserted the
public cause for his private interest; to the latter be-
cause he had been a loser by that unworthy action '.

How dishonourable soever the artifice might be Mutinyin

which was employed in order to defraud the Pope the '"1mpc
of this rum, it came very seasonably into the vice-
roy's hands, and put it in his power to extricate
himself out of an imminent danger. Soon after
the defeat of the French army, the German troops
which had defended Pavia with such meritorious
courage and perseverance, growing insolent upon
the fame they had acquired,and impatient of relying
any longer on fruitless promises with which they had
been so often amused, rendered themselves masters
of the town, with a resolution to keep pofleffion of
it as a security for the payment of their arrears
and the reft of the army discovered a much ftron-
ger inclination to aflift, than to punish the muti-
neers. By dividing among them the money ex-
aded from the Pope, Lannoy quieted the tumul-
tuous Germans; but though this satisfied their pre-
sent demands, he had so little profpe& of being
able to pay them or his other forces regularly for
the future, and was under such continual apprehen-
sions of their seizing the person of the captive
King, that not long after, he was obliged to dif-
miss all the Germans and Italians in the Imperial
service u. Thus, from a circumstance that
now appears very singular, but arising natural-
ly from the constitution of most European
governments in the sixteenth century, while
Charles was fufpeted by all his neighbours

tGuic. 1. 6. 30o. Manroceni Hitor. Venet. ap. Iforichi
dcllecoc Vcnae.V. 131, 36. u Guwi.. 16. . 30.o

BOOK IV. of aiming at universal monarchy, and while he

was really forming vast projects of this kind, his
1515. revenues were so limited, that he could not keep

on foot his victorious army, though it did not ex-
ceed twenty-four thousand men.

The Empe- DURING there tranfadions, Charles, whore pre-
ror's delibe-
rations con- tensions to moderation and disinterestedness were
eannen ofe were soon forgotten, deliberated with the utmost
improving follicitude, how he might derive the greatest ad-
hisvyory. vantages from the misfortune of his adversary.

Some of his counfellorsadvifed him to treat Francis
with the magnanimity that became a vitorious
Prince, and inflead of taking advantage of his
situation to impose rigorous conditions, to dismiss
him on such equal terms, as would bind him for
ever to his interest by the ties of gratitude and
affection, more forcible as well as more permanent
than any which could be formed by extorted oaths
and involuntary stipulations. Such an exertion of
generosity is not, perhaps, to be expected in the
condut of political affairs, and it was far too resin-
ed for that Prince to whom it was proposed. The
more obvious, but less splendid scheme of endea-
vouring to make the utmost of Francis's calamity,
had a greater number in the council to recom-
mend it, and suited better with the Emperor's
genius. But though Charles adopted this plan, he
did not execute it in a proper manner. Instead
of making one great effort to penetrate into
France with all the forces of Spain and the Low-
Countries; initead of crushing the Italian states
before they recovered from the consternation
which the success of his arms had occasioned; he
had recourse to the artifices of intrigue and nego-
ciation. This proceeded partly ftom necessity,
partly from the natural dilpofition of his mind.
The situation of his finances at that time rendered
it extremely difficult to carry on any extraor-
dinary armaments and he himself having never

appeared

appeared at the head of his armies, the command BooK IV.
of which he had hitherto committed to his gene- -- "
rals, was averse from bold and martial counsels, 1525.
and trusted more to the arts with which he was ac-
quainted. He laid, besides, too much stress upon
the victory of Pavia, as if by that event the
strength of France had been annihilated, its re-
sources exhausted, and the kingdom itself, no less
than the person of its Monarch, had been sub-
jeted to his power.

FULL of this opinion, he determined to set the Therigo-

highest price upon Francis's freedom, and having hcpropofer
appointed the count de Roeux to visit the captive to 'rancis.
King in his name, he infiruted him to propore the
following articles, as the conditions on which he
would grant him his liberty; that he should re-
store Burgundy to the Emperor, from whose an-
ceftors it had been unjustly wrested, that he should
surrender Provence and Dauphine, that they might
be erected into an independent kingdom for
the Constable Bourbon; that he should make full
fatisfation to the King of England for all his
claims; and finally, renounce the pretensions of
France to Naples, Milan, or any other territory
in Italy. When Francis, who had hitherto flat-
tered himself that he should be treated by the Em-
peror with the generosity becoming one great
Prince towards another, heard these rigorous con-
ditions, he was so transported with indignation,
that drawing his. dagger hastily, he cried out,
" 'Twere better that a King Ihould die thus."
Alarcon, alarmed at his vehemence, laid hold
on his hand; but though he soon recovered great-
er compolure, he still declared in the most solemn
manner, that he would rather remain aprifoner
during life, than purchase liberty by such ignomi-
nious conceflionsx.

x Mcm. de Bellay, 94. Fcrrcra'sHift. ix. 43.

PTHI

BooK IV. THIS mortifying dircovery of the Emperer's
^'*--' intentions, greatly augmented Francis's chagrin
Facis5car- and impatience under his confinement, and must
riedprioner have driven him to absolute despair, if he had not
toSpa'. laid hold of the only thing which fill could ad-

minister to him any comfort. He persuaded him-
self, that the conditions which Roeux had propos-
ed, did not flow originally from Charles himself,
but were dictated by the rigorous policy of his
Spanish council, and that therefore he might hope
in one personal interview with him, to do more
towards hastening his own deliverance, thanl could
be effected by long negociations pafling through
the subordinate hands of his ministers. Relying
on this supposition, which proceeded from too
favourable an opinion of the Emperor's character,
he offered to visit him in Spain, and was willing to
be carried thither as a fpecacle to that haughty
nation. Lannoy employed all his address to confirm
him in these sentiments; and concerted with him
in secret the manner of executing this resolution.
Francis was so eager on a scheme which seemed to
open some profped of liberty, that he furnished
the gallies necessary for the voyage, Charles being
at that time unable to set any fleet to sea. The
viceroy without communicating his intentions
either to Bourbon or Pescara, conducted his prifo-
ner toward Genoa, under pretence of transporting
him by sea to Naples; though soon after they set
fail, he ordered the pilots to fleer directly for
Spain; but the wind happening to carry them
near the French coast, the unfortunate monarch
hiad a full profpet of his own dominions, towards
which he cadt many a sorrowful and desiring look.
They landed, however, in a few days at Barcelo-
na, and soon after, Francis was lodged, by the
Emperor's command, in the Alcazar of Madrid,
Auguf 4. under the care of the vigilant Alarcon, who guard-

ed him with as much circumfpedtion as ever y.

Y Mem. de Bellay, 95. VP. Mat Ep. ult. Guic. 1. 16. 323.

A FEw

A FEW days after Francis's arrival at Madrid, Boo IV.

and when he began to be sensible of his having -' '
relied without foundation on the Emperor's gene- HenSry v
rofity, Henry VIII. concluded a treaty with the condudesa
Regent of France, which afforded him some hope Frc i
of liberty from another quarter. Henry's extra- order to
vagant demands had been received at Madrid Prcic.
with that neglect which they deserved, and which
he probably expeated.' Charles, intoxicated with
prosperity, no longer courted him in that refpet-
ful and fubmiflive manner which pleated his
haughty temper. Wolfey, no less haughty than
his master, was highly irritated at the Empe-
ror's discontinuing his wonted carefles and pro-
sessions of friendship to him. These flight offen-
ces, added to the weighty considerations formerly
mentioned, induced Henry to enter into a defen-
five alliance with Louise, in which all the differ-
ences between him and her son were adjusted;
at the fame time he engaged that he would em-
ploy his best offices in order to procure the deli-
verance of his new ally from a state of captivity z.

WHILE the open defection of such a powerfill .Mon's

confederate asseted Charles with deep concern, inorderte
a secret conspiracy was carrying on in Italy, erturn
which threatened him with consequences still more ror's er
fatal. The restless and intriguing genius of Mo- it "y-
rond, chancellor of Milan, gave rife to this. . His
revenge had been amply gratified by the expul-
sion of the French out of Italy, and his vanity no
less toothed by the re-establishment of Sforza, to
whose interest be had attached himfelf,in thedutchy
of Milan. The delays however, and evasions
of the Imperial court in granting Sforza the in-
veftiture of his new-acquired territories had long
alarmed Morond; there were repeated so often,
and with such apparent artifice, as became a full

z Herbert. FiddWe'a Life of Wolfey, 337.

proof

Book IV. proof to his suspicious mind that the Emperor in-
'-v3 ' tended to firip his master of that rich country

525. which he had conquered in his name. Though

Charles, in order to quiet the Pope and the Vene-
tians, no less jealous of his designs than Morone,
gave Sforza, at last, the investiture which had
been So long desired, the charter was clogged
with so many reservations, and fubjeted him to
such grievous burdens, as rendered the duke of
Milan a dependant on the Emperor, rather than a
vassal of the Empire, and afforded him scarce any
other security for his poffeflions, than the good
pleasure of an ambitious superior. Such an ac.
cession of power as would have accrued from the
addition of the Milanese to the kingdom of Na-
ples, was confidered by Morond as fatal to the
liberties of Italy no less than to his own power and
importance. Full of this idea, he began to re-
volve in his mind the poflibility of rescuing Italy
from the yoke of foreigners, the darling scheme,
as has been already observed, of the Italian poli-
ticians in that age, and which it was the great ob-
jea of their ambition to accomplish. If to the
glory of having been the chief infirument of driv-
ing the French out of Milan, he could add that
of delivering Naples from the dominion of the Spa-
niards, he thought that nothing would be wanting
to compleat his fame. His fertile genius soon tug-
gested to him a project for that purpose; a difficult
indeed, and daring one, but for that very reaoln,
more agreeable to his bold and enterprizing temper.

His negoci- BOURBON and Pescara were equally enraged at
tcara.th Lannoy's carrying the French King into Spain

without their knowledge. The former, being
afraid that the two Monarchs might, in his
absence, conclude tome treaty in which his in-
terests would be entirely sacrificed, hastened to
Madrid, in order to guard against that danger.
The latter, on whom the command of the army

now

now devolved, was obliged to remain in Italy; BOO IV.
but in every company, he gave vent to his indigna- -52
tion against the viceroy in expreflions full of ran-
cour and contempt; he accused him in a letter
to the Emperor of cowardice in the time of dan-
ger, and of insolence after a victory, towards the
obtaining of which he had contributed nothing
either by his valour or his conduct; nor did he
abstain from bitter complaints against the Emperor
himself, who had not discovered, as he imagined,
a sufficient sense of his merit, nor bestowed any
adequate reward on his services. It was on this
difguit of Pescara, that Morond founded his whole
system. He knew the boundless ambition of his
nature, the vast extent of his abilities in peace as
well as war, and the intrepidity of his mind ca-
pable alike of undertaking and of executing the
most desperate designs. The cantonment of the
Spanish troops on the frontier of the Milanese,
gave occasion to many interviews between him
and MoronS, in which the latter took care fre-
quently to turn the conversation to the tranfadions
subsequent to the battle of Pavia, a subjet upon
which the marquis entered willingly and with
pallion; and Morons observing his resentment
to be uniform and violent, artfully pointed out
and aggravated every circumstance that could in-
crease its fury. He painted in the itrongeft colours
the Emperor's want of discernment, as well as of
gratitude, in preferring Lannoy to him, and in
allowing that presumptuous Fleming to dispose of
the captive King without consulting the man to
whose bravery and wisdom Charles was indebted
for the glory of having him in his power. Hav-
ing warmed him by such dilcourfes, he then be-
gan to insinuate that now was the time to be
avenged for those insults, and to acquire im-
mortal renown as the deliverer of his country
from the oppreflion of itrangers i that the tlates

VOL. II R of

BooK IV. of Italy, weary of the ignominious and intolera.

5-v5. ble dominion of barbarians, were at last ready to
5s25' combine in order. to vindicate their own indepen.

dence; that their eyes were fixed on him as
the only leader whose genius and good fortune
could ensure the happy success of that noble en-
terprize; that the attempt was no less practicable
than glorious, it being in his power so to dif-
perse the Spanish infantry, the only body of
the Emperor's troops in Italy, through the villa.
ges of the Milanese, that, in one night they
night be destroyed by the people, who, having
suffered much from their exactions and insolence,
would gladly undertake this service; that he might
then, without opposition, take possession of the
throne of Naples, the elevation destined for
him, and a reward not unworthy the restorer of
liberty to Italy i that the Pope, of whom that
kingdom held, and whose predecessors had dif-
posed of it on many former occasions, would will-
ingly grant him the right of investiture; that the
Venetians, the Florentines, the duke of Milan, to
whom he had-communicated the (cheme, together
with the French would be the guarantees of his
right; that the Neapolitans would naturally prefer
the government of one of their countrymen,
whom they loved and admired, to that odious do-
minion of strangers, to which they had been so
long fubjeated; and that the Emperor, astonished
at a blow so unexpected, would find that he had
neither troops nor money to resist such a powerfill
confederacy b.

PESCARA, amazed at the boldness and extent
of the scheme, listened attentively to Morone,

b Guic. xvi. 1. 325. JoviiVita Davali, p. 417. Oeuv. de Bran-

tome, iv. 71. Rufcelli Lettere de Princ. ii. 91. Thuani Hilt,
lib. i. c. . . P. Hcuter. Rer. Auftr. lib. ix. c. 3. p. 207.

but

but with the countenance of a man loft in pro- Booi Iv.
found and anxious thought. On the one hand, -' '~
the infamy of betraying his Sovereign under whom Betrayed
he bore such high command, deterred him from andtaken
the attempt; on the other, the prbfpeA of oh- e bara.
raining a crown allured him to venture upon it.
After continuing a short space in furpenfe, the leads
commendable motives, as is usual after such
deliberations, prevailed, and ambition triumphed
over honour. In order, however, to throw a
colour of decency on his conduct, he infifed that
some learned casuists should give their opinion,
"Whether it was lawful for a subjeCt to take arms
against his immediate sovereign, in obedience to
the Lord Paramount of whom the kingdom itself
was held." Such a resolution of the cafe, as he
expected, was Coon obtained from the divines and
civilians both of Rome and Milan; the negociation
went forward; and measures seemed to be taking
with great spirit for the speedy execution of the
design.

MEANWHILE Pescara, either flocked at the
treachery of the ation which he was going to
commit, or despairing of its success, began to
entertain thoughts of abandoning the engagements
he had come under. The indisposition of Sforza,
who happened at that time to be taken ill of
a distemper which was thought mortal, confirm-
ed this resolution, and determined him to make
known the whole conspiracy to the Emperor,
deeming it more prudent to expect the dutchy
of Milan from him as the reward of this discovery,
than to aim at a kingdom to be purchased by a fe-
ries of crimes. This resolution, however, proved'
the source of actions scarce less criminal and igno-
minious. The Emperor, who had already received
full information concerning the conspiracy from
other hands, seemed to be highly pleated with

R z Pescara's

BooK IV. Pescara's fidelity, and commanded him to conti.

.-v',. nue his intrigues for rome time with the Pope and
J525- Sforza, both that he might discover their inten-

tions more fully, and be able to convia them
of the crime with greater certainty. Pescara,
conscious of guilt, as well as sensible how fufpi-
cious his long silence muff have appeared at
Madrid, durit not decline that dishonourable of-
fice; and to his eternal disgrace, was obliged to
at the meanest of all parts, that of seducing
with a purpose to betray. Confidering the abili.
ties of the persons with whom he had to deal, the
part was scarce less difficult, than base; but he
acted it with such address, as to deceive even the
penetrating eye of MoronS, who relying with full
confidence on his sincerity, visited him at Novara
in order to put the last hand to their machinations.
Pescara received him in an apartment where
Antonio de Leyva was placed behind the tapestry,
that he might overhear and bear witness to their
conversation; as Morons was returning home-
wards, that officer suddenly appeared, and to his
astonishment arreffted him prisoner in the Empe-
ror's name. He was conducted to the castle of
Pavia; and Pescara, who had so lately been his
accomplice, had now the assurance to interrogate
him as his judge. At the fame time, the Emperor
declared Sforza to have forfeited all right to the
dutchy of Milan, by his engaging in a conspiracy
against the sovereign of whom he held; Pescara,
by his command, seized on every place in the
Milanese, except the cafftles of Cremona and
Milan, which the unfortunate duke attempting to
defend, were closely blockaded. by the Imperial
troops c.

c Guic. 1. i6. 329. Jovii HiRt. 319. Capella, lib.v.
p. 2oo.

BuT

BUT though this unsuccessful conspiracy, inflead BooK IV.

of stripping the Emperor of what he already pof- ','-
fefed in Italy, contributed to extend his domi-The rigor-
nions in that country, it shewed him the neceflity ou treat-

me1r t of

of coming to some agreement with the French Francis in
King, unless he would draw on himself a confe- Spain.
deracy of all Europe, which the progress of his
arms, and his boundless and undisguised ambition,
filled with general alarm. He had not hitherto
treated Francis with the generosity which that mo-
narch expected, and scarce with the decency due
to his station. Instead of displaying the senti-
ments becoming a great Prince, he seems to have
aced with the mercenary art of a corrair, who by
the rigorous usage of his prisoners, endeavours to
draw from them an high price for their ransom.
The captive King was confined in an old cafile,
under a keeper whose formal austerity of manners
rendered his vigilance itill more disgustful. He
was allowed no exercise but that of riding on a
mule, surrounded with armed guards on horse-
back. Charles, on pretence of its being necessary
to attend the Cortes afembled in Toledo, had
gone to reside in that city, and suffered several
weeks to elapse without visiting Francis, though
he follicited an interview with the most pressing and
fubmiflive importunity. So many indignities made
a deep impression on an high-fpirited Prince; he
began to lose all relish for his usual amusements;
his natural gaiety of temper forsook him; and as- Endangers
ter languishing for some time, he was seized hislife.
with a dangerous fever, during the violence of
which he complained constantly of the unex-
peaed and unprincely rigour with which he had
been treated, often exclaiming, that now the
Emperor would have the fatisfaaion of his dy-
ing in his hands, without having once deigned to
fee his face. The physicians, at last, derpaired
of his life, and informed the Emperor that they

R3 saw

BooK IV. iaw no hopes of his recovery, unless he were gra-

3525 tified with regard to that point on which he seemed
15251 to be so strongly bent. Charles, follicitous to

preserve a life, with which all his profpe6ts of
farther advantage from the vitory at Pavia must
have terminated, immediately consulted his mi-
nifters concerning the course to be taken. In
vain did the chancellor Gattinara, the most able
among them, represent to him the indecency of
his visiting Francis, if he did not intend to set him
at liberty immediately upon equal terms; in
vain did he point out the infamy to which he
would be exposed, if motives of avarice or
ambition Ihould prevail on him to give the cap-
tive monarch this mark of attention and sym-
pathy, for which humanity and generosity had
pleaded so long without effet. The Emperor,
less delicate, or less follicitous about reputation

Sept. . than his minister, set out for Madrid to visit his
The Empe-prifoner. The interview was short; Francis
ror visits
im.Vj being too weak to bear a long conversation.

Charles accofled him in terms full of affection
and respect, and gave him such promises of fpee-
dy deliverance and princely treatment, as would
have refleted the greatest honour upon him, if
they had flowed from another source. Francis
grasped at them with the eagerness natural in his
situation; and cheared with this gleam of hope
began to revive from that moment, and soon re-
covered his wonted healthd.

The con HE had soon the mortification to find, that his
flable Bour- confidence in the Emperor was not better founded
bon arrives
at Madrid. than formerly. Charles returned instantly to

Toledo; all negociations were carried on by his
ministers; and Francis was kept in as ftrid

a Guic. 1. 16. 339. Sandov. Hist. i. 665.

custody

custody as ever. A new indignity, and that very BOOK IV.
galling, was added to all there he had already v
Cussered. Bourbon arrived in Spain about this 1525.
time, Charles, who had so long refused to visit
the King, received his rebellious subjeCt with the
most studied refpe4. He met him without the
gates of Toledo, embraced him with the greatest
affetion, and placing him on his left hand, con- v
duaed him to his apartment. These marks of ho-
nour to him, were so many insults to the unfortu-
nate Monarch; which he felt in a very sensible
manner. It afforded him Come consolation, how-
ever, to observe that the sentiments of the Spani-
ards differed widely from those of their sovereign.
That generous people detested Bourbon's crime;
and notwithstanding his great talents and impor-
tant services, they shunned all intercourse with
him to such a degree, that Charles having desired
the marquis de Villena to permit Bourbon to reside
in his palace while the court remained in Toledo,
he politely replied, " That he could not refuse
gratifying the Emperor in that request ;" but
added with a Castilian dignity of mind, " That he
must not be furprized if the moment the Constable
departed, he should burn to the ground a house,
which having been polluted by the presence of a
traitor, became an unfit habitation for a man of
honour e."

THE Emperor himself, nevertheless, seemed to Appointed

have it much at heart to reward Bourbon's services t5e Imperial
in a signal manner. But as Bourbon insisted, in the armyin
first place, on the accomplishment of his promibe y
of giving him in marriage his sifter Eleanora,
Queen dowager of Portugal, the honour of which
alliance had been one of his chief inducements to
rebel against his lawful sovereign; as Francis, in
order to prevent such a dangerous union, had offered

Guic. 1. xvi. 335.

before

BooK IV. before he left Italy, to marry that Princess; and as
.v ' Eleanora discovered an inclination rather to match
1s25. with a powerful Monarch, than with his exiled

subjet; all these inrerfering circumstances creat-
ed great embaraffment to Charles, and left him
scarce any hope of extricating himself with decen-
Pdember. . But the death of Pescara, who at the age of

eme thirty-fix, left behind him the reputation of being

one of the greatest generals and ablest politicians
of that century, happened opportunely at this
juncture for his relief. By that event, the com-
mand of the army in Italy became vacant, and
Charles, always fertile in his resources, persuaded
Bourbon, who was in no condition to dispute his
will, to accept the office of general in chief there,
together with a grant of the dutchy of Milan for-
feited by Sforza, and in return for there to relin-
buifh all hopes of marrying the queen of Por-
tugal f.
Negociati- THE Chief obstacle that flood in the way of

so p'ro- Francis's liberty, was the Emperor's insisting so pe.
'ranciss remptorily on the restitution of Burgundy, as a
liberty. preliminary to that event. Francis declared that

he would never content to dismember his kingdom;
and that if even he should so far forget the duties
of a Monarch as to come to such a resolution, the
fundamental laws of the kingdom would prevent its
taking effet. On his part he was willing to make
an absolute ceflion to the Emperor of all his pre-
tensions in Italy and the Low-Countries; he pro-
mifed to restore Bourbon ali his lands which had
been confiscated; he renewed his proposal of mar-
rying the Emperor's filler, the Queen dowager of
Portugal; and engaging to pay a great fum by
ransom for his own person. But all mutual esteem
and confidence between the two Monrachs were
now entirely loft; there appeared on the one

f Sandov. Hist. i. 676. Oeuv. de Brant. iv. 249.

hand,

hand, a rapacious ambition labouring to avail it- BooK IV.
self of every favourable circumstance; on the -
other, suspicion and resentment, standing perpetu- 525
ally on their guard; so that the profpec of bring-
ing their negociations to an issue, seemed to be far
distant. The dutchess of Alencon, the French
King's sifter, whom Charles permitted to visit her
brother in his confinement, employed all her ad-
dress, in order to procure his liberty on more rea-
fonable terms: Henry of England interposed his
good offices to the fame purpose; but both with so Francis in
little success, that Francis in despair took suddenly fepasrto're-
the refolntion of resigning his crown with all its fignhis
rights and prerogatives to his son the Dauphin, de- crow"'
termining rather to end his days in a priSon, than to
purchase his freedom by conceflions unworthy of
a King. The deed for this purpose he signed with
legal formality at Madrid, empowering his filter
to carry it into France that it might be registered
in all the parliaments of the kingdom; and at the
fame time intimating his intention to the Emperor,
he desired him to name the place of his confine-
ment, and to assign him a proper number of atten-
dants during the remainder of his days g.

THIS resolution of the French King had greacharlcs

effedt; Charles began to be sensible, tha' by alarmed'
pulhing rigour to excess, he might defeat his/own
measures, and instead of the vast advantages he
hoped to draw from ransoming a powerful Mo-
narch, he might at last find in his hands a Prince
without dominions or revenues. About the fame
time, one of the King of Navarre's domestics
happened by an extraordinary exertion of fide-
lity, courage and address, to procure his master
an opportunity of escaping from the prison in which
his master had been confined ever since the battle of

g This paper'is published in Mcmoires HiRoriques, &c. par.
M, 1'. Abbe Raynal, tom. ii. p151.

Pavia.

Boor IV. Pavia. This convinced the Emperor, that the
'r ^
, most vigilant attention of his officers might be

1525. eluded by the ingenuity or boldness of Francis, or

his attendants, and one unlucky hour might de-
prive him of all the advantages which he had been
to follicitous to obtain. By these considerations,
he was induced to abate somewhat of his former
demands. On the other hand, Francis's impati-
ence under confinement daily increased; and
having received certain intelligence of a powerful
league forming against his rival in Italy, he grew
more compliant with regard to concessions, trust-
ing, that if he could once obtain his liberty, he
would soon be in a condition to resume whatever
he had yielded.

Trea16. As there were the views and sentiments of the
Treaty of
Madrid. two Monarchs, the treaty which procured Francis

his liberty was signed at Madrid on the fourteenth
of January, one thousand five hundred and twen-
ty-fix. The article with regard to Burgundy,
which had hitherto created the greatest difficulty,
was compromised, Francis engaging to restore
that dutchy with all its dependencies in full fove-
reignty to the Emperor; and Charles consenting
that this restitution ihould not be made till the
King was set at liberty; in order to secure the
performance of this, as well as the other conditi-
ons in the treaty, Francis agreed that at the fame
infiant he himself was released, he would deliver
as hostages to the Emperor, his eldest son the
Dauphin, his second son the duke of Orleans, or
in lieu of the latter, twelve of his principal nobili-
ty, to be named by Charles. The other articles
swelled to a great number, and though not of such
importance, were extremely rigorous. Among
there the most remarkable were, that Francis
should renounce all his pretensions in Italy; that
he should disclaim any title which he had to the
foverelgnity of Slanders and Artois that within

"*\~

fix weeks after his release, he ihould restore to BooK IV.
Bourbon and his adherents, all their goods, -6
moveable and immoveable, and make them full
reparation for the damages they had sustained by
the confiscation of them; that he should use his
interest with Henry D'Albret to relinquish his pre-
tensions to the crown of Navarre, and should not
for the future assist him in any attempt to recover
it; that there should be established between the
Emperor and Francis a league of perpetual friend-
ship and confederacy, with a promise of mutual
assistance in every cafe of neceflity. That in cor-
roboration of this union, Francis ihould marry the
Emperor's sifter, the Queen dowager of Portugal;
that Francis should cause all the articles of this
treaty to be ratified by the States, and registered
in the Parliaments of his kingdom; that upon the
Emperor's receiving this ratification, the hostages
should be set at liberty; but in their place, the
duke of Angouleme, the King's third son, should
be delivered to Charles, that in order to manifest,
as well as to strengthen the amity between the
two Monarchs, he might be educated at the im-
perial court; and that if Francis did not, within
the time limited, fulfil the itipulations in the trea-
ty, he fhoild promise, upon his honour and oath,
to return into Spain, and to surrender himself again
a prisoner to the Emperor h.

BY this treaty, Charles flattered himself that Sentiments

of that age

he had not only effetually humbled his rival, withl relpe
but that he had taken such precautions as would to it.
for ever prevent his re-attaining any formidable
degree of power. The opinion, which the wisest'
politicians formed concerning it, was very dif-
ferent; they could not perfiuade themselves that
Francis, after obtaining his liberty, would execute
these articles against which he had struggled so

h Recueil des Trait. tomrn. i. . Ulloa Vita dell Carlo. V.
p. 102, &c.

long,

BOOK IV. long, and to which even amidst the horrors of
--''4 captivity he had conrented with such reluctance.
1526. Ambition and resentment, they knew, would con-

spire in prompting him to violate the hard condi-
tions to which he had been constrained to submit;
nor would arguments and casuistry be wanting to
represent that which was so manifestly advantage-
ous, to be necessary and just. If one part of
Francis's condut had been known, at that time,
this opinion might have been founded, not in con-

Fre re- jeCture, but in certainty. A few hours before he
teftsagainf signed the treaty, he afembled such of his coun-
the validity
of it.d' fellors as were then in Madrid, and having exact-

ed from them a solemn oath of secrecy, he made a
long enumeration in their pretence of all the dif-
honourable arts, as well as unprincely rigour,
which the Emperor had employed in order to en-
snare or intimidate him. For that reason, he took
a formal protest in the hands of notaries, that his
consent to the treaty should be confidered as an
involuntary deed, and be deemed null and void '.
By this disingenuous artifice, for which even the
treatment he had received was no apology, Fran-
cis endeavoured to satisfy his honour and confci-
ence in signing the treaty, and providing at the
fame time a pretext on which to break.itt

MEANWHILE, great were the outward demon-

firations of love and confidence between the two
Monarchs; they appeared often together in public;
they frequently had long cenferences in private;
they travelled in the fame litter, and joined in the
fame amusements. But amidst these signs of
peace and friendflip, the Emperor still harbour-
ed suspicion in his mind. Though the cere-
monies of the, marriage between Francis and
the Queen of Portugal were performed soon
after the conclusion of the treaty, Charles
would not permit him to consummate it until

i Recueil de Trait. tom. ii. p. 1o7.

the

the return of the ratification from France. Even BOOK IV.
then Francis was not allowed to be at full liberty; 1 56.
his guards were still continued; and while he was
carefled as a brother-in-law, he was still watched
like a prisoner; and it was obvious to attentive
observers, that an union, in the very beginning
of which there might be discerned such symptoms
of jealousy and diiRruft, could not be cordial, or
of long continuance k

ABOUT a month after the signing of the treaty, Ratified in

the Regent's ratification of it was brought from Franc.
France; and that wife Princess, preferring, on this
occasion, the public good to domestic affedion,
informed her son, that inflead of the twelve noble-
men named in the treaty, she had sent the duke
of Orleans along with his brother the Dauphin to
the frontier, as the kingdom could susser nothing
by the absence of a child, but must be left almost
incapable of defence, if deprived of its ablest
flatefmen, and most experienced generals, whom
Charles had artfully included in his nomination.
At last Francis took leave of the Emperor, whose fat libety
suspicion of the King's sincerity increasing, as the
time of putting it to the proofn approached, he
endeavoured to bind him still faster by exacting
new' promises, which after those he had already
made, the French Monarch was not flow to grant.
He set out for Madrid, a place which the remem-
brance of many affliding circumstances rendered
peculiarly odious to him, with the joy natural on
such an occasion, and began the long-wifhed-for
journey towards his own dominions. He was
escorted by a body of hors'e under the command of
Alarcon, who, as the King drew near the fron-
tiers of France, guarded him with more scrupulous
exactness than ever. When he arrived at the river
Andaye, which separates the two kingdoms,Lautrec

k Guic. 1. 16. 353.

appeared

BOOK IV. appeared on the opposite bank with a guard of

.-Y' horse equal in number to Alarcon's. An empty
5 26. bark was moored in the middle of the stream;

the attendants drew up in order on the opposite
banks; at the fame initant, Lannoy with eight
gentlemen put off from the Spanish, and Lautrec
with the fame number from the French fide of the
river; the former had the King in his boat; the
latter, the Dauphin and duke of Orleans; they
met in the empty vessel; the exchange was made
in a moment; Francis, after a short embrace to
his children, leaped into Lautrec's boat, and reach-
ed the French shore. He mounted that initant a
Turkish horse, waved his hand over his head, and
with a joyful voice crying aloud several times,
"C I am yet a King," galloped full speed to St.
John de Luz, and from thence to Bayonne. This
event, no less impatiently desired by the French
nation than by their Monarch, happened on the
eighteenth of March, a year and twenty-two days
after the fatal battle of Pavia i.

Th"e Eme- SOON after the Emperor had taken leave of
age with Francis, and permitted him to begin his journey
beorual towards his own dominions, he set out for Seville,

in order to solemnize his marriage with Isabella,
the daughter of Emanuel, the late King of Portu-
gal, and the filler of John III. who had succeeded
him in the throne of that kingdom. Isabella was
a princess of uncommon beauty and accomplish-
ments; and as the Cortes both in Castile and Ara-
gon had warmly follicited their sovereign to marry,
the choice of a wife to nearly allied to the royal
blood of both kingdoms, was extremely acceptable
to his fubjeds. The Portugefe, fond of this new
connection with the first Monarch in Christendom,
granted him an extraordinary dowry with Isabella,

I Sandov. Hilt. i. 735. Guic. . 16. 355.

amount-

amounting to nine hundred thousand crowns, aBooK IV.
fum, which, in the situation of his affairs at that :

15 26.

junture, was of no small consequence to the Em- March 12.
peror. The marriage was celebrated with that
splendor and gaiety, which became a great and
youthful Prince. Charles lived with Isabella in
perfect harmony, and treated her on all occasions
with much diftintion and regard m.

DURING these tranfadions, Charles could scarce Affairs of

give any attention to the affairs of Germany, tho' Germany.
it was torn in pieces by commotions, which threat-
ened the most dangerous consequences. The feu-
dal institutions still subsisted almoff unimpaired in
the Empire. The property of lands was vested in
the Princes, and free-barons. Their vassals held Grievanc
of them by the ftrideft and most limited tenures; pof he
while the great body of the people was kept in a
ifate but little removed from absolute servitude.
In some places of Germany, people of the lowest
class were so entirely in the power of their maf-
ters, as to be subjed to personal and domestic
slavery, the most rigorous form of that wretched
state. In other provinces, particularly in Bohe-
mia and Lusatia, the peasants were bound to re.
main on the lands to which they belonged, and
making part of the estate, were transferred like
any other property from one hand to another.
Even in Suabia, and the countries on the banks of
the Rhine, where their condition was most toler-
able, the peasants not only paid the full rent of
their farms to the landlord; but if they chose
either to change the place of their abode, or to
follow a new profeflion, they were obliged to
purchase this privilege at a certain price. Be-
fides this, all grants of lands to peasants expired at
their death, without descending to their posterity.
Upon that event, the landlord had a right to the

m IUlloa Vita di Carlo V. p. xo6. Belcarius Corn. Rer. Gal-
lic. p. 565. Spalatiinu ap. Struv. Corp. Hist. Germ. ii. so8x.

best

Br.oK IV. bes of their cattle, and of their furniture; and
1- '' their heirs, in order to obtain a renewal of the

1526. grant, were obliged to pay large fums by way of

fine. These exactions, though grievous, were
borne with patience, because they were customary
and antient: But when the progress of elegance
and luxury, as well as the changes introduced in-
to the art of war came to increase the expence of
government, and made it necessary for Princes to
levy occasional or itated taxes on their fubjedts,
such impositions being new, appeared intolerable;
and in Germany, there duties being laid chiefly
upon beer, wine, and other necessaries of life, as-
feded the common people in the most sensible
manner. The addition of such a load to their
former burdens, drove them to despair. It was
to the valour inspired by resentment againit impo-
fitions of this kind, that the Swiss owed the ac-
quifition of their liberty in the fourteenth century.
The fame cause had excited the peasants in feve-
ral other provinces in Germany to rebel againif
their superiors towards the end of the fifteenth and
beginning of the sixteenth centuries; and tho' there
infurredtions were not attended with like success,
they could not however be quelled without much
difficulty and bloodihed n.

Their infur- BY there checks, the spirit of the peasants was
Suab'i overawed rather than fiubdued; and their griev-

ances multiplying continually, they ran to arms,
this year, with the most frantic rage. Their first ap-
pearance was near Ulm in Suabia. The peasants in
the adjacent country flocked to their standard with
the ardour and impatience natural to men, who ha-
ving groaned long under oppreflion, beheld at last
some profpeat of deliverance; and the contagion
spreading from province to province, reached almost

n Seckend. lib. ii. p. 2. 6.

every

every part of Germany. Wherever they came, BOOK IV
they plundered the monasteries; wafted the lands 't
of their superiors; razed their castles; and maf- '
sacred without mercy all persons of noble birth
who were so unhappy as to fall into their hands n.
Having intimidated their oppressors, as they ima-
gined, by the violence of there proceedings, they
began to confider what would be the most proper
and effectual method of securing themselves for
the future from their tyrannical exactions. With
this view, they drew up and publilhed a memorial,
containing all their demands, and declared that
while arms were in their hands, they would either
persuade or oblige the nobles to give them full
satisfaCtion with regard to these. The chief ar-
ticles were, that they might have liberty to chufe
their own pastors; that they might be freed from
the payment of all tythes but those of corn; that
they might no longer be confidered as the slaves
or bondmen of their superiors; that the liberty of
hunting and fishing might be common; that the
great forests might not be regarded as private
property, but be open for the use of all; that they
might be delivered from the unusual burden of
taxes under which they laboured; that the admi-
niftration of justice might be rendered less rigo-
rous and more impartial; that the encroachments
of the nobles upon meadows.and commons might
be restrained o.

MANY of there demands were extremely rea- Quelled.

fonable; and being urged by such formidable num-
bers, might have met with some redress. But those
vast unwieldy bodies, assembled in different places,
had neither union, conduct, nor vigour. They were
led by persons of the lowest rank without kill in war,

n Petr. Crinitus de Bello Rufticano. ap. Freher. Script. Rtr.
Germ. Argent. 1717. vol. iii . p. 3. o Sleid. Hit. p. 9o.

VOL. II. S or

BooK IV. or knowledge of what was necessary for accomp-

.'- liihing their designs; and all their exploits were
1526. distinguished by a brutal and unmeaning fury.

To oppose this, the princes and nobles of Suabia
and the Lower Rhine raised their vassals, and at-
tacking some of the mutineers with open force,
and others by furprize, cut to pieces, or dispersed
all who infested those provinces; so that the pea-
sants, after ruining the open country, and losing
upwards of twenty thousand of their aflociates in
the field, were obliged to return to their habita-
tions with less hope than ever of relief from their
grievances P.

Theirinrur- THESE commotions happened at first in pro-
reCtion in
Thuringia. vinces of Germany where Luther's opinions had

made little progress; and being excited wholly by
political causes, had no connection with the dif-
puted points in religion. But the frenzy reaching
at last those countries in which the Reformation
was established, derived new strength from cir-
cumifances peculiar to them, and rose to a fill
greater pitch of extravagance. The Reformation,
wherever it was received, increased that bold and
innovating spirit to which it owed its birth. Men
who had tle courage to overturn a system support-
ed by every thing which can command refpeca or
reverence, were not to be overawed by any au-
thority, however great or venerable. After hav-
ing been accuflomed to confider themselves as
judges of the most important doctrines in religion,
to examine there freely, and to reje&, without
scruple, what appeared to them erroneous, it was
natural for them to turn the fame daring and in-
quifitive eye towards government, and to think of
retifying whatever disorders or imperfecions

P Seckend. lib. ii. p. io. Petr. Gnodalius de Ruficanorum
Tumultu in Getmania ap. Scard. Script. vol. ii. p. 131, &c.

were

were discovered there. And as religious abuses BOOi IV.
had been reformed in several places without the 16
permiflion of the magistrate, it was an easy tran- 56
fition to attempt the redress of political grievances
in the fame manner.

No sooner, then, did the spirit of revolt break Morefonnim

out in Thuringia, a province fubje&, to the Elector dable.
of Saxony, the inhabitants of which were mofty
converts to Lutheranifm, than it assumed a new
and more dangerous form. Thomas Muncer, one
of Luther's disciples, having established himself
in that country, had acquired a wonderful afcen-
dant over the minds of the people. He propagat- Their fana
ed among them the wildest and most enthufiaftictical spirit.
notions, but fich as tended manifestly to inspire
them with boldness, and lead them to sedition.
" Luther he told them, had done more hurt than
good to religion. He had indeed rescued the
church from the yoke of Popery, but his doctrines
encouraged, and his life set an example of the ut-
most licentiousness of manners. In order to avoid
vice, fays he, men must practice perpetual morti-
fication. They muff put on a grave countenance,
speak little, wear a plain garb, and be serious in
their whole deportment. Such as prepare their
hearts in this manner, may expec that the fu-
preme Being will direct their steps, and by rome vi.
fible sign discover his will to them; if that illumi-
nation be at any time with-held, we may expoftu-
late with the Almighty, who deals with us so harlh-
ly, and remind him of his promires. This ex-
poflulation and anger will be highly acceptable to
God, and will at last prevail on him to guide us
with the fame unerring hand that guided the pa-
triarchs of old. Let us beware, however, of of-
fending him by our arrogance, but as all men are
equal ir his eye, let them return to that condition
of equality in which he formed them, and having

S a all

BOOK IV. all things in common, let them live together like
' -~' brethren, without any marks of Subordination or

6 pre-eminence q."

EXTRAVAGANT as there tenets were, they

flattered so many paflions in the human heart, as
to make a deep impreflion. To aim at nothing
more than abridging the power of the nobles was
now confidered as a trifling and partial reforma-
tion, not worth the contending for; it was pro-
posed to level every diftintion among mankind,
and by abolishing property, to reduce them to
their natural state of equality, in which all ihould
receive their subsistence from one common flock.
Muncer aflured them, that the design was approv-
ed of by heaven, and that the Almighty had in a
dream ascertained him of its success. The pea-
sants set about the execution of it, not only with
the rage which animated those of their order in
other parts of Germany, but with the ardour that
enthusiasm inspires. They deposed the magi-
firates in all the cities of which they were maf-
ters; seized the lands of the nobles; and obliged
such of them as they got into their hands, to put
on the dress commonly worn by peasants, and in-
stead of their former titles, to be satisfied with
the appellation given to people in the lowest class
of life. Vast numbers engaged in this wild un-
dertaking; but Muncer, their leader and their
prophet, was destitute of the abilities necessary
for condu&ing it. He had all the extravagance,
but not the courage, which enthusiasts usually pof-
fess. It was with difficulty he could be perfuad-
ed to take the field; and though he soon drew
together eight thousand men, he suffered himself
to be surrounded by a body of cavalry under the
command of the Elector of Saxony, the Landgrave
of Hefle, and duke of Brunfwic. These Princes un-

q Seckend. lib. ii. p. 13. Slcid. Hist. p. 83.

willing

ling to (hed the blood of their deluded subjes, Boo IV.
sent a young nobleman to their camp, with the 96.
offer of a general pardon, if they would immedi-
ately lay down their arms, and deliver up the
authors of the sedition. Muncer, alarmed at this,
began to harangue them with his usual vehe-
mence, exhorting them not to trufl these deceitful
promises of their oppressors, nor to desert the cause
of God, and of Christian liberty.

BUT the sense of present danger made a deeper Pearants de-

impression on the peasants than his eloquence,
and confusion and terror were visible in every
face, when a rainbow, which was the emblem
the mutineers had painted on their colours, hap-
pening to appear in the clouds, Muncer, with
admirable pretence of mind, laid hold of that
incident, and suddenly raised his eyes and hands
towards heaven, "Behold," cries he, with an
elevated voice, " the sign which God has given.
" There is the pledge of your safety, and a token
"that the wicked (hall be defiroyed." The
fanatical multitude set up instantly a great shout,
as if victory had been certain; and passing in a
moment from one extreme to another, murdered
the unfortunate nobleman who had come with
the offer of pardon, and demanded to be led
towards the enemy. The Princes enraged at
this shocking violation of the laws of war, pre-
vented them by beginning the attack; but the May s.
behaviour of the peasants in the combat was not
such as might have been expected either from their
ferocity or confidence of success; an undisciplined
rabble was no equal match for well-trained troops;
above five thousand were slain in the field,
almost without making resistance; the reft fled,
and among the foremost Muncer, their general.
He was taken the next day, and being condemn-
ed to such punilhments as his crimes had

S 3 deserved,

BOOK IV. deserved, he suffered them with a poor and daft-
,~-v-.. ardly spirit. His death put an end to the incur-

6. redions of the peasants which had filled Germany

with filch terrorr; but the enthufiafic notions
which he had scattered were not extirpated, and
produced, not long after, effecs more memorable,
as well as more extravagant.

Luther's DURING there commotions, Luther ated with
mnoderate
and prudent exemplary prudence and moderation; like a
Condut. common parent, follicitous about the welfare of

both parties, without sparing the faults-or errors of
either. On the one hand, he addressed a moni-
tory discourse to the nobles, exhorting them to
treat their dependants with greater humanity and
indulgence. On the other, he severely censured
the leditious spirit of the peasants, advising them
not to murmur at hardships inseparable from their
condition, nor to seek for redress by any but le-
gal meanss.

LUTHER'S famous marriage with Catharine a

Boria, a nun of a noble family, who having
thrown off the veil, had fled from the cloister,
happened this year, and was far from meeting with
the fame approbation. Even his most devoted
followers thought this indecent at a time when his
country was involved in so many calamities; while
his enemies never mentioned it with any softer ap-
pellation than that of incestuous or profane. Lu-
ther himself was sensible of the impreflion it had
made to his disadvantage; but being satisfied with
his own conduct, he bore the censure of his
friends, and the reproaches of his adversaries, with
his usual fortitude .

r Skid Hilt. p. 84. Scckcnd. lib. ii. p. z1. Gnodalius
Tumult. Ruftican. 155.

a cSid. Hist. p. 87. t Scckend. lib. ii. p. 15.

THIS

THIS year the Reformation loft its sirs pro- BooK IV.

tector, Frederick, Elector of Saxony; but the "
blow was the less sensibly felt, as he was succeed- May 5.
ed by his brother John, a more avowed and zeal-
ous, though less able patron of Luther and his
doctrines.

ANOTHER event happened about the fame Prff

time, which, as it occasioned a considerable aw^ed
change in the state of Germany, must be traced Tuetonic
back to its source. While the frenzy of the Cru- oder-
fades possessed all Europe during the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries, several orders of religious
knighthood were founded in defence of the Chri-
tian faith against Heathens and Infidels. Among
there the Teutonic order in Germany was one
of the most illustrious, the knights of which
diftinguilhed themselves greatly in all the wild
enterprizes carried on in the Holy Land. Being
driven at last from their settlements in the Eait,
they were obliged to return to their native coun-
try. Their zeal, and valour, were too impetuous
to remain long inactive. They invaded, on very
flight pretences, the province of Prussia, the inha-
bitants of which were fill idolaters; and having
completed the conquest of it about the middle of
the thirteenth century, held it many years as a
fief depending on the crown of Poland. Fierce
contests arose during this period, between the
grand masters of the order, and the Kings of
Poland; the former struggling for independence,
while the latter afterted their right of sovereignty
with great firmness. Albert, a Prince of the
house of Brandenburgh, who was elected grand
maiter in the year one thousand five hundred and
eleven, engaging keenly in this quarrel, main-
tained a long war with Sigismund, King of Poland;
but having become an early convert to Lu-
ther's doctrines, this gradually lessened his zeal
for the intereis of his fraternity, so that he

took

BooK iv. took the opportunity of the confusions in the Em.

CV"3* pire, and the abflnce of the Emperor, to conclude

5 a treaty with Sigismund, greatly to his private

emolument. By it, that part of Prussia which
belonged to the Teutonic order, was ereEted
into a Secular and hereditary dutchy, and the
investiture of it granted to Albert, who, in re.
turn, bound himself to do homage for it to the
Kings of Poland as their vassal. Immediately as-
ter this, he made public profeflion of the reform.
ed religion, and married a Princess of Denmark.
The Teutonic knights exclaimed so loudly against
the treachery of their grand master, that he was
put under the ban of the Empire; but he (iill
kept poffeflion of the province he had usurped,
and transmitted it to his posterity. In process
of time this rich inheritance fell to the eletoral
branch of the family, all dependance on the
crown of Poland was shaken off, and the Mar-
graves of Brandenburgh, having assumed the
title of Kings of Pruflia, have not only risen to
an equality with the first Princes in Germany, but
take their rank among the great Monarchs of
Europe U.
irat mea- UPON the return of the French King to his do.

csresci minions, the eyes of all the powers in Europe

upon his re- were fixed upon him, that by observing his first
trLndt. motions, they might form a judgment concern-

ing his subsequent condua. They were not held
long in fufpence. Francis, as soon as he arrived at
Bayonne, wrote to the King of England, thanking
him for his zealous and affectionate interposition in
his favour, to which he acknowledged that he
owed the recovery of his liberty. Next day
the Emperor's ambassadors demanded audience,
and in their master's name, required him to

Sled. Hist. . . te.fel Abrege de I'hit. de dtoit PlW-
p. 605, &c. '

ifsuo

iflue such orders as were necessary for carrying the BooK IV.
treaty of Madrid into full and immediate exe- --,
cution; he coldly answered, that though for his I526.
own part he determined religiously to perform all
he had promised, the treaty contained so many
articles relative not to himself alone, but affecing
the interests of the French monarchy, that he
could not take any farther ftep without consulting
the states of his kingdom, and that some time
would be neceflary in order to reconcile their
minds to the hard conditions which he had con-
sented to ratify x. This reply was confidered as
no obscure discovery of his being resolved to elude
the treaty; and the compliment paid to Henry,
appeared a very proper ftep towards securing the
assistance of that Monarch in the war with the
Emperor, to which such a resolution would cer-
tainly give rife. These circumstances, added to
the explicit declarations which Francis made in
secret to the ambassadors from several of the Ita-
lian powers, fully satisfied them that their con-
je&ures with regard to his conduct had been just,
and that instead of intending to execute an unrea-
fonable treaty, he was eager to seize the firif op-
portunity of revenging thole injuries which had
compelled him to feign an approbation of it.
Even the doubts, and fears, and scruples which
used, on other occasions, to hold Clement in a
t(ate of uncertainty, were diflipated by Francis's
teeming impatience to break through all his engage-
ments with the Emperor. The situation, indeed,
of affairs in Italy at that time, did not allow the
Pope to hesitate long. Sforza was still besieged by
the Imperialists in the castle of Milan. That feeble
Prince, deprived now of Morond's advice, and un-
provided with every thing necessary for defence,

x Mem. de Bellay, p. 97.

found

BOoK IV. found means to inform Clement and the Vene-

C-r^ tians, that he must soon filrrender, if they did
i526. not come to his relief. The Imperial troops, as

they had received no pay since the battle of
Pavia, lived at discretion in the Milanese, levying
such exorbitant contributions in that dutchy, as
amounted, if we may rely on Guiccardini's cal-
culation, to no less a fum than five thousand ducats
a day Y; nor was it to be doubted, but that the
soldiers, as soon as the castle Ihould submit, would
chufe to leave a ruined country which scarce as-
forded them subsistence, that they might take
possession of more comfortable quarters in the ser-
tile and untouched territories of the Pope and
Venetians. The affiflance of the French King
was the only thing which could either save Sforza,
or enable them to protect their own dominions
from the insults of the Imperial troops.

A league FOR theie reasons, the Pope, the Venetians, and
formt th duke of Milan, were equally impatient to come
Emperor. to an agreement with Francis, who on his part,

was no less desirous of acquiring so considerable
an accefison both of strength and reputation as
such a confederacy would bring along with it. The
chief objets of this alliance, which was concluded
at Cognac on the twenty-fecond of May, though
kept secret for rome time, were to oblige the Em-
peror to set at liberty the French King's sons, upon
payment ofa reasonable ransom, and to re-eftab!ifh
Sforza in the quiet pofiefion of the Milanese. If
Charles should refute either of these, the con-
trafing parties bound themselves to bring into
the field an army of thirty-five thousand men,
with which, after driving the Spaniards out

y Guic. 1. 17. 360.

of

of the Milanese, they would attack the kingdom BOOK IV.
of Naples. The King of England was declared '"
Protetor of this league, which they dignified with 5
the name of Holy, because the Pope was at the head
of it; and in order to allure Henry more effetu-
ally, a principality in the kingdom Naples, of
thirty thousand ducats yearly revenue, was to be
fettled on him; and lands to the value of ten
thousand ducats on Wolfey his favourite z.

No sooner was this league concluded, than Cle- The Pope

ment, by the plenitude of his papal power, abfolv- absolves
ed Francis from the oath he had taken to observe from iis
the treaty of Madrid a. This right, how pernicious oath to

observe

soever to morals, and inftrutive of that integrity the treaty
which is the basis of all tranfaftions amongst men, of Madrld
was the natural consequence of the powers which
the Popes arrogated as infalliable vicegerents of
Christ upon earth; and they having, in virtue of
there, often dispensed with obligations which were
held sacred, the interest of some men, and the
credulity of others led them to imagine that the
decisions of a sovereign pontiff authorized or jufti-
sied actions which would, otherwise, have been
criminal and unbecoming.

MEANWHILE, the discovery of Francis's inten- TheL Empe

tion to elude the treaty of Madrid, filled the Em-
peror with a variety of disquieting thoughts.
He had treated an unfortunate Prince with
the most ungenerous rigour; he had displayed
an insatiable ambition in all his negociations
with his prisoner: He knew what censures the
former had drawn upon him, and what appre-

z P. Heuter. Rer. Auftr. lib. ix. c. 3. p. 217. Recucil drs
Trait. ii. 124.

a Goldaft. Polit. Imperial. p. iooa. Pallav. Hist. p. 70.

henfions

BOOK IV. henfions the latter had excited in every court of

ó' "

E Europe; nor had he reaped from the measures he
152. pursued, any of those advantages which politici-

ans are apt to confider as an excuse for the most
criminal condut, and a compensation for the fe-
vereft reproaches. Francis was now out of his
hands, and not one of all the mighty confequen,
ces which he expected from the treaty that set him
at liberty, was likely to take place. His rashness
in relying so far on his own judgment as to trust to
the'fincerity of the French King, in opposition to
the sentiments of his wisest ministers, was now
apparent; and he easily conjectured, that the fame
confederacy, the dread of which had induced
him to set Francis at liberty, would now be form-
ed agaift him with that gallant and incensed Mo-
narch at its head. Self-condemnation and shame,
on account of what was pals, with anxious appre-
henfions concerning what might happen, were the
necessary result of there reflections on his own
conduct and situation. Charles, however, was na-
turally firm and inflexible in all his measures. To
have receded suddenly from any article in the trea-
ty of Madrid, would have been a plain confession
of imprudence, and a palpable symptom of fear;
he determined therefore, that it was most fuita-
ble to his dignity; to insist, whatever might be
the consequences, on the ftri& execution of the
treaty, and particularly not to accept of any thing
which might be offered as an equivalent for the
restitution of Burgundy b.

Francito IN consequence of this resolution, he appointed
ptrform Lannoy and Alarcon, to repair, as his ambassadors
stipulated. to the court of France, and formally to summon

the King either to execute the treaty with the

b Glic. 1. xvii. 366.

sincerity

sincerity that became him, or to return, accord- BOOK IV.
ing to his oath, a prisoner to Madrid. Instead of ' '
giving them an immediate answer, Francis admit- l a6
ted the deputies of the states of Burgundy to an
audience in their presence. They. humbly repre-
sented to him, that he had exceeded the powers
veiled in a King of France when he consented to
alienate their country from the crown, the do-
mains of which he was bound by his coronation
oath to preserve entire and unimpaired. Francis,
in return, thanked them for their attachment to
his crown, and intreated them, though very faint-
ly, to remember the obligations which he lay un-
der to fulfil his engagements with the Emperor.
The deputies assuming an higher tone, declared
they would not obey commands which they confi.
dered as illegal; and if he should abandon them
to the enemies of France, they had resolved to
defend themselves to the belt of their power, with
a firm purpose rather to perish than to submit to
a foreign dominion. Upon which Francis turning HEafli,.
towards the Imperial ambafladors, represented to
them the impoflibility of performing what he had
undertaken, and offered in lieu of Burgundy, to
pay the Emperor two million of crowns. The
Viceroy and Alarcon, who easily perceived that
the scene to which they had been witnesses, was
concerted between the King and his fubjets in
order to impose on them, signified to him their
master's fixed resolution not to depart in the fmal-
left point from the terms of the treaty, and with-
drew c. Before they left the kingdom, they had
the mortification to hear the Holy league against
the Emperor published with great solemnity. June ,.

Belcar. Comment de Reb. Gal. 573. Mem de Bellay, 97.

CHARLES

BOOK IV. CHARLES no sooner received an account of this
ó-co confederacy than he exclaimed in the most pub-

1526. lic manner, and in the harshest terms, against

The Empe. Francis, as a Prince void of faith, or of honour.
rationPrfo He complained no less of Clement, whom he
War. follicited in vain to abandon his new allies, he

accured him of ingratitude; he taxed him with an
ambition unbecoming his character; he threaten.
ed him not only with all the vengeance which the
power of an Emperor can inflict. but by appealing
to a general council, called up btfore him all the ter-
rors arising from the authority of those aflemblies Co
formidable to the Papal fee. It was necessary, how
ever, to oppose something else than reproaches and
threats to the powerful combination formed against
him; and the Emperor, prompted by so many
paflions, did not fail to exert himself with unusual
vigour, in order to fend supplies not only of men,
but of money, which was still more needed, into
Italy.

Feeble ope- ON the other hand, the efforts of the confede-
rations of rates bore no proportion to that animosity against
ratec. the Emperor with which they seemed to enter into

the holy league. Francis it was thought, would
have infused spirit and vigour into the whole body.
He had his loft honour to repair, many injurics
to revenge, and the station among the Princes of
Europe from which he had fallen to recover.
From all there, added to the natural impetuosity
of his temper, a war more fierce and bloody
than any he had hitherto made upon his rival,
was expeted. But Francis had gone through
such a scene of distress, and the impreflion it had
made was still so fresh in. his memory, that he
was become diffident of himself, diftruftfil of
fortune, and desirous of tranquillity. To procure
the release of his sons, and to avoid the restitution
of Burgundy by paying some reasonable equiva-

lent,

lent, were his chief objects, and for the fake of BooK IV
these, he would willingly have sacrificed Sforza ,526
and the liberties of Italy to the Emperor. He 2
flattered himself that the dread alone of such a
confederacy would induce Charles to liften to
what was equitable ; and was afraid of employ-
ing any considerable force for the relief of the
Milanese, left his allies, whom he had often
found to be more attentive to their own interest,
than puntual in fulfilling their engagements,
should abandon him as soon as the Imperialists
were driven out of that country, and deprive his
negociations with the Emperor of that weight
which they derived from his being at the head of
a powerful league. Meanwhile the castle of Milan
was pressed more clofe!y than ever, and Sforza was
now reduced to the last extremity. The Pope
and Venetians, trusting to Francis's concurrence,
commanded their troops to take the field, in order
to relieve him; and an army more than sufficient
for that service was loon formed. The Milanese,
passionately attached to their unfortunate duke,
and no less exasperated against the Imperialists,
who had oppressed them so cruelly, were ready to
aid the confederates in all their enterprizes. But
the duke d'Urbino, their general, naturally flow
and indecisive, and refrained, besides, by his anti-
ent enmity to the family of Medici, fiom taking any
flep that might aggrandize or add reputation to
the Pope d, loft rome opportunities, and refuted to
improve others, of attacking the Imperialists,
and raising the siege. Thele delays gave Bour-
bon time to bring up a reinforcement of fresh
troops, and a supply of money. He immediate- July s4.
ly took the command of the army, and pushed
on the siege with such vigour, as quickly obliged
Sforz a to lurrender, who retiring to Lodi, which
the confederates had furprized, left Bourbon in

d Guic. . 17. 382.

full

BOOK IV. full poffleflion of the reft 'of the dutchy, the in-

L^ ' fveftiture of which the Emperor had promised to

1 grant him .

Diofbetude THE Italians began now to perceive the game
lian pows. which Francis had played, and to be sensible that,

notwithstanding all their address, and refinements
in negociation, which they boasted of as talents
peculiarly their own, they had for once been over-
reached in those very arts by a tramontane Prince.
He had hitherto thrown almost the whole burden of
the war upon them,taking advantage of their efforts
in order to enforce the proposals which he often re-
newed at the court of Madrid for obtaining the li.
berty of his sons. The Pope and Venetians expoftu-
lated and complained f, but as they were not able
to rouze Francis from his inactivity, their own
zeal and vigour gradually abated, and Clement
having already gone farther than his timidity ufu-
ally permitted him, began to accuse himself of
rashness, and to relapse into his natural itate of
doubt and uncertainty.

Feeble ope- ALL the Emperor's motions depending on him-
rations of self alone, were more brisk and better concerted.
deraes. The narrowness of his revenues, indeed, did not

allow him to make any sudden or great effort in
the field, but he abundantly supplied that defeCt
by his intrigues and negociations. The family of
Colonna, the most powerful of all the Roman ba-
rons, had adhered uniformly to the Ghibeline or
Imperial faction, during there fierce contentions
between the Popes and Emperors, which for several
ages, filled Italy and Germany with discord and

eGoic. 1. 17. 376, &c.
fRufcclli LctteredePrincipi ii. 157, &c. 159 i6o-166.

bloodshed.

bloodshed. Though the causes which at first gave BoOK IV.
birth to there defirutive factions existed no longer, 6
and the rage with which they had been animated
was in a great measure spent, the Colonnas still
retained their attachment to the Imperial interest,
and by placing themselves under the protection of
the Emperors, secured the quiet pofleffion of their
own territories and privileges. The Cardinal
Pompeo Colonna, a man of a turbulent and am-
bitious temper, at that time the head of the family,
had long been Clement's rival, to whose influence
in the last conclave he imputed the disappointment
of all his schemes for attaining the Papal dignity,
of which, from his known connection with the Em-
peror, he thought himself secure. This was too
great an injury to an aspiring mind ever to be for-
given; and though he had difiembled his resent-
ment so far as to vote for Clement at his election,
and to accept of great offices in his court, he wait-
ed with the utmost impatience for an opportunity
of being revenged. Don Hugo di Moncada, the
Imperial ambaflador at Rome, who was no ftrang-
er to there sentiments, easily persuaded him that
now was the time, while all the Papal troops were
employed in Lombardy, to attempt Something
which would, at once, avenge his own wrongs,
and be of essential service to the Emperor his
patron. The Pope, however, whose timidity
rendered him quick-fighted, was lo attentive to
their operations, and began to be alarmed so
early, that he might have drawn together troops
sufficient to have disconcerted all Colonna's mea-
fures. But Moncada amu'ed him so artfully
with negociations, promises, and faire intelli-
gence, that he lulled asleep all his liifpicions,
and prevented his taking any of the precautions
neceflary for his safety; and to the eternal. dif-
grace of a prince poffeled of great power, as
well as renowned for political wisdom, Colonna at
the head of three thputfind men, seized one of the SC't. 9g

VOL. II. T gates

Bbok IV. gates of his capital, while he imagined hinmfelf to
S~26 be in perfet security, and was altogether unpre-
The Colon- pared for refilling such a feeble enemy. The in-
nas become habitants of Rome permitted Colonna's troops,
Rorof. from whom they apprehended no injury, to ad-

vance without opposition; the Pope's guards were
dispersed in a moment; and Clement himself, ter-
rified at the danger, ashamed of his own credulity,
and deserted by almost every person, fled with
precipitation into the castle of St. Angelo, which
was immediately invested. The palace of the
Vatican, the church of St. Peter, and the houses
of the Pope's ministers and servants, were plun.
dered in the most licentious manner; the reft of
the city was left unmolested. Clement, destitute

ccommo. of every thing necessary either for subsistence or
daion be- defence, was soon obliged to demand a capitula.
tpeen de tion; and Moncada, being admitted into the castle,
Emperor prescribed to him, with all the haughtiness of a

conqueror, conditions which it was not in his power
to rejet. The chief of these was, That Clement
should not only grant a full pardon to the Colonnas,
but receive them into favour, and immediately
withdraw all the troops in his pay from the army
of the confederates in Lombardy g.

THE Colonnas, who talked of nothing less than

of deposing Clement, and of placing Pompeo,
their kinsman, in the vacant chair of St. Peter,
exclaimed loudly against a treaty which left them
at the mercy of a Pontiffjuftly incensed against
them. But Moncada, attentive only. to his maT.
ter's interest, paid little regard to their complaints,
and by this fortunate measure, broke entirely the
power of the confederates.

g Jovii Vita Pomp. Colon. p. Guic. 1. 17. 407. Ruf.
ceUi Lcttere de Principi i. p. 04.

WHIL

WHILE the army of the confederates suffered Boot IV.

such a considerable diminution, the Imperialists -
received two great reinforcements; one from The nmpe-
Spain, under the command of Lannoy and Alarcon, rial arm
which amounted to fix thousand men. The other
was raised in the Empire by George Frondfperg,
a German nobleman, who having served in Italy
with great reputation, had acquired such influence
and popularity, that multitudes of his countrymen,
fond on every occasion of engaging in military
enterprizes, and impatient at that junture to
escape from the oppression of their superiors both
in religious and civil matters, crouded to his flan-
dard; so that without any other gratuity than the
payment of a crown to each man, fourteen thou-
sand enlisted in his service. To there the Arch;
duke Ferdinand added two thousand horse, levied
in the Austrian dominions. But although the Em-
peror had raised troops, he could not remit the
fums necessary for their support. His ordinary
revenues were exhausted; the credit of princes;
during the infancy of commerce, was not extent
tensive; and the Cortes of Castile, though every
art had been tried to gain them, and, some inno-
vations had been made in the constitution in order
to secure their concurrence, peremptorily refused
to grant Charles any extraordinary supply h; so
that the more his army increased in number, the
more were his generals embaraffed and distressed.
Bourbon, in particular, was involved in such dif-
ficulties, that he stood in need of all his address
and courage in order to extricate himself. Vast
rums were due to the Spanish troops already
in the Milanese, when Frondfperg arrived with
sixteen thousand hungry Germans, destitute of T4 Empe
every thing. Both made their demands with equal ot'fina

co 4ofIci-
fierceness; the former claiming their arrearsj ,na

h Sandov. i. 814.

T : and

BooK IV. and the latter, the pay which had been promised
" -'- them on their entering Lombardy: Bourbon was
x526. altogether incapable of giving fatisfaaion to ei-

ther. In this situation, he was constrained to con.
mit acts of violence extremely shocking to his
own nature, which was gentle and humane. He
seized the principal citizens of Mlian, and by
threats, and even torture, forced from them a
considerable fum; he rifled the churches of all
their plate and ornaments; the inadequate supply
which there afforded, he distributed among the
boldiers, with so many soothing expressions of his
sympathy and affection, that, though it fell far
short of the rums due to them, it appeared their
present murmurs h.

Brtrbon AMONG other expedients for raising money,
rone at Bourbon granted his life and liberty to Morone,
libery. who having been kept in prison since his intrigue

with Pescara, had been condemned to die by the
Spanifhjudges empowered to try him. For this
remiflion he paid twenty thousand ducats;
and such were his singular talents, and the won-
derful ascendant he acquired over the minds of
those to whom he had access, that in a few days,
from being Bourbon's prisoner, he became his
prime confident, with whom he consulted in all
affairs of importance. To his insinuations muff
be imputed the suspicions which Bourbon began
to entertain, that the Emperor had never intended
to grant him the investiture of Milan, but had
appointed Leyva, and the other Spanish generals,
rather to be spies on his conduct, than to co-oper-
ate heartily towards the execution of his fchemts.
To him likewile, as he still retained at the age of
fourscore all the enterprizing spirit of youth, may
be attributed the bold and unexpe&ted measure
on which Bourbon soon after ventured i.

h Ripamont. Hist. Mediol. lib. ix. p. 717. i Guic. 1. 17. 419.

SUCH1

SUCH, indeed, were the exigencies of the Im- BOOK IV.

perial troops in the Milanese, that it became in- x$'2ó
difpenfably necessary to take some immediate ftep His celibe-
for their relief. The arrears of the soldiers in- rationswith

rerpct to

creased daily; the Emperor made no remittances hismotions.
to his generals; and the utmost rigour of military
extortion could draw nothing more from a country
entirely drained and ruined. In this situation
there was no choice left, but either to disband the
army, or to march for subsistence into the enemies
country. The territories of the Venetians lay
nearest at hand.; but they, with their usual fore-
fight and prudence, had taken such precautions as
secured them from any insult. Nothing therefore
remained but to invade the dominions of the
church, or of the Florentines; and Clement had
of late acted such a part, as merited the severest
vengeance from the Emperor. No sooner did the
troops return to Rome after the infurredion of the
Colonnas, than, without paying any regard to the
treaty with Moncada, he degraded the Cardinal
Colonna, excommunicated the reft of the family,
seized their places of strength, and wafted their
lands with all the cruelty which the smart of a
recent injury naturally excites. After this, he
turned his arms againit Naples, and as his opera-
tions were seconded by the French fleet, he made
some progress towards the conquest of that king-
dom; the Viceroy being no less destitute than the
other Imperial generals, of the money requisite
for a vigorous defence k.

T H E S E proceedings of the Pope, justified, st57.

in appearance, the measures which Bourbon's ^invade h
situation rendered necessary; and he set about exe- P,,'Is tc-
cuting them under such disadvantages, as furnish rituric.

k Jovii Vita Pomp. Colon. Guic. 1. 18. 43a.

T 3 the

BOOK IV. the frongeft proof, both of the despair to which
'^'.V he was reduced, and of the ,greatness of his abi-

. lities which were able to surmount so many obfta-

cles. Having committed the government of Milan
to Leyva, whom he was not unwilling to leave be-
Jan. 30. hind; he began his march in the depth of winter,

at the head of twenty-five thousand men, composed
of nations differing from each other in language
and manners; without money, without magazines,
wi'thout artillery, without carriages; in short,
without any of those things which are necessary to
the smallest party, and which seem eflential to
the exiffence and motions of a great army. His
rout lay through a country cut by rivers and
mountains, in which the roads were almost im-
practicable; as an addition to his difficulties, the
enemy's army, superior to his own in number,
was at hand to watch all his motions, and to im-
prove every advantage. But his troops, impatient
of their present 'hardships, and allured by the
hopes of obtaining an immense booty, did not
cotifider how i'll provided they were for a march,
and followed him with great chearfulnefs. His
sirs' scheme was to have made himself master of
Placentia, and to have gratified his soldiers with
the plunder of that city; but the vigilance of the
confederate generals rendered the design abortive;
nor had he better success in his project for the re-
dution of Bologna, which was seasonably sup-
plied with as many troops as secured it from the
insults of an army which had neither artillery nor
ammunition. Having failed in both these attempts
to become mailer' of some great' city, he was
finder a neceflity' of advanciga. But he had
,iow been two 'months in the' field , his troops
had suffered every calamity 'wll'ieh a long march,
together with the uncommon rigour of the season
could bring upon men d'ftfitdte of all necessary
accommodations, in an enemies country; the
li troops. magnificent promises to which they trufled, had

proved

proved altogether vain; they saw no profped of BooK IV.
relief; their patience, tried to the utmost, failed
at last, and they broke out into open mutiny. 1527'
Some officers, who rafily attempted to restrain
t.hem, fell victims to their fury; Bourbon him-
self, not daring to appear during the first tranf-
ports of their rage, was obliged to fly secretly from
his quarters . But this sudden ebullition of wrath
began at last to subside; when Bourbon, who pof-
sessed in a wonderful degree, the art of governing
the minds of soldiers, renewed his promises with
more confidence than formerly, and assured them
that they would be soon accomplished. He en-
deavoured to render their hardships more tolera-
ble by partaking of them himself; he fared
no better than the meanest centinel; he marched
along with them on foot; he joined them in sing-
ing their camp-ballads, in which, with high prailes
of his valour, they mingled many strokes of mili-
tary raillery on his poverty; and wherever they
came, he allowed them, as a foretaste of what he
had promised, to plunder the adjacent villages at
discretion. Encouraged by all these soothing arts,
they entirely forgot their sufferings and complaints,
and followed him with the fame implicit con-
fidence as formerly m.

Bo u R BO N, meanwhile, carefully concealed The Pope',

his intentions. .Rome and Florence, not know- a iirreout
ing on which the blow would fall, were held in dencc.
the most disquieting state of furpence. Clement,
equally follicitous for the safety of both, -fluc-
tuated in more than his usual uncertainty; and
while the rapid approach of danger called
for prompt and deciive measures, .he ,tpent tle
time in deliberations which camneto no ifiue, or in

1 Guic. 1. 18. 434. Jovii Vit. Colon. 163.
m Ocuvres de Brant. vol. 4. 246, &c.

taking

Boos IV. taking resolutions, which next day, his refflefr

a v -

- mind, more sagacious in discerning than in obvi-
1527. atingdifficulties, overturned, without being able

to fix on what should be substituted in their
place. At one time he determined to unite
himself more closely than ever with his allies,
and to push the war with vigour; at another, he
inclined to bring all differences to a final accom-
modation by a treaty with Lannoy, who knowing
his paflion for negociation, follicited him in-
cefsantly with proposals for that purpose., His ti-

March g. midity at length prevailed; and led him to con-
Concludesa a o

. , __

treaty with lude an agreement with Lannoy, of which the
the Viceroy following were the chief articles: That a fi.fpen-
ofNaples. sion of arms should take place between the

Pontifical and Imperial troops for eight months;
That Clement should advance sixty thousand
crowns towards satisfying the demands of the'Im-
perial army; That the Colonnas should be ab-
solved from censure, and their former dignities
and poffeflions be restored to them; That the
viceroy should come to Rome, and prevent Bour-
bon from approaching nearer to that city, or to
Florence n. On this sudden treaty, which deprived
him of all hopes of assistance from his allies, with-
out affording him any solid foundation of security,
Clement relied so firmly, that like a man extricated
at once out of all difficulties, he was at perfect
ease, and in the fulness of his confidence disbanded
all his troops, except as many as were sufficient to
guard his own person. This amazing confidence
of Clement's, who on every other occasion was
fearful and suspicious to excess, appeared so un-
accountable to Gulicciardini, who being at that
time the pontifical commifTary-general and resident
in the confederate army, had great opportunity as
well as great abilities for observing how chimerical
all his hopes were, that he imputes the Pope's

a Guic. 1. 18. 436.

conduct,

conduct, at this jun&ure, wholly to infatuation, BOOK IV.
which those who are doomed to ruin cannot avoid °. 5z7

LANNOY, it would seem, intended to have ex- whichBour-

bon difrc-

ecuted the treaty with great sincerity; and having gard.
detached Clement from the confederacy, wilhed to
turn Bourbon's arms against the Venetians, who,
of all the powers at war with the Emperor, had
exerted the greatest vigour. With this view he
dispatched a courier to Bourbon, informing him
of the suspension of arms, which in the name of
their common matter, he had concluded with the
Pope. Bourbon had other schemes; and he had
prosecuted them now too far to think of retreating.
To have mentioned a retreat to his soldiers, would
have been dangerous; his command was indepen-
dant on Lannoy; he was fond of mortifying a man
whom he had many reasons to hate; for there rea-
sons, without paying the least regard to the
ineffage, he continued to ravage the ecclesiastical
territories, and to advance towards Florence.
Upon this, all Clement's terror and anxiety re-
turning with new force, he had recourse to Lannoy,
and intreated and conjured him to put a stop to
Bourbon's progress. Lannoy accordingly ret out
for his camp, but durst not approach it; Bourbon's
soldier's having got notice of the truce, raged and
threatened, demanding the accomplishment of the
promires to which they had trusted; their general
himself could scarce restrain them; every person
in Rome, perceived that nothing remained but
to prepare for resisting a storm which it was now
impossible to dispel. Clement alone, relying on
tome ambiguous and deceitful profeflions which
Bourbon made of his inclination towards peace,
uink back into his former security P.

* Guic. 1. 8. 446.
P Gllic,.. 18. 437, &c. Me, de Bellay, p. 1oo.

BOURBON,

BOOK IV. BOURBON, on his part, was Far from being fro
^' r from follicitude. AH his attempts 6n any place
iAdaes of importance had hitherto miscarried; ant
towards Florence, towards which he had been approachinE
Iome¢.

for some time, was, by the arrival of the duke
d'Urbino's army, put in a condition to set hit
power at defiance. As it now became neceffar)
to change his rout, and to tale instantly some
new resolution; he fixed without hesitation on
one no less daring in itself, than it was impious
according to the opinion of that age. This was
to assault and plunder Rome, Many reasons,
however, prompted him to it. He was fond ol
thwarting Lannoy, who had undertaken for the
safety of that city; he imagined that the Em.
peror would be highly pleased to fee Clement,
the chief author of the league againfl him, hum-
bled; he flattered himself, that by gratifying the
rapacity of his soldiers with such immense booty,
he wcui!d attach them for ever to his interest;
or (which is'ftill more probable than any of these)
he hoped that by means of the power and
splendor he would acquire from the conquest of
the firif city in Christendom, he might lay the
foundation of an independent power; and that
after shaking off all connection with the Emperor,
he might take poffefion of Naples, or of some of
the Italian states in his own name q.

The Pope's WHATEVER his motives were, he executed
for drcncc. his resolution with a rapidity equal to the boldness

with which he had formed it. His soldiers, now
that they had their prey in full view, complained
neither of fatigue, nor famine, norwant of pay.
No sooner did they begin to move from Tuscany
towards Rome, than the Pope, sensible at last
how fallacious the hopes had been on which he
repoued, flarted from his security. But no.time

q Drant . 4. 271. 6. 189. Belcar Comment, 594.

now

now remained, even for a bold ,and decisive Pon- BooK IV.
tiff, to have taken proper measures, or to have -
formed any effectual plan of defence. Under 1527'
Clements's feeble condult, all was conlternation,
disorder, and irresolution. He collected, howe-
ver, such of his disbanded soldiers as still remained
in the city; :he armed the artificers of Rome, and
the footmen and train-bearers of the Cardinals;
he repaired the breaches in the walls; be begun to
erected new works; he excommunicated Bour-
bon and all his troops, branding the Germans with
the name of Lutherans, and the Spaniards with
that of Moors r. Trusting to these ineffecual mi-
litary preparations, or to his spiritual arms, which
were still more despised by rapacious soldiers, he
seems to have laid aside his natural timidity, and
contrary to the advice of all his counsellors, de-
termined to wait the approach of an enemy
whom, by a timely retreat, he might easily have
avoided.

BOUR'BON, who saw the neceflity of dispatch, Aflaukof

now that 'his intentions were known, advan- Rome.
ced with filch speed, that he gained several
marches on the duke d'Urbino's army, and en-
camped in the plains of Rome on the evening of
the fifth of 'May. From thence he (hewed his fol-
diers the palaces and churches of that city, into
which, as the capital of the Christian common-
wealth, the wealth of all Europe had flowed during
many centuries, without having been once violat-
ed by any hostile hand ; and commanding them to
rrefhrethemfelves that'night, as a preparation for
the afau'lt next day, promised them in reward of
their toils and valour, the poffeflion of all the trea-
fures: actiirhllated there.

r Seckend. Lib. ii 68.

EARLY

BooK IV. EARLY in the morning, Bourbon, who had de.

v'-'- termined to distinguish that day either by his death
1527. or the fnccefs of his enterprize, appeared at the

head of his troops, clad in compleat armour
above which he wore a velt of white tiflue, that
he might be more conspicuous both to his friend,
and to his enemies; and as all depended on one
bold impression, he led them instantly to scale
the walls. Three diftinEt bodies, oneof Germans,
another of Spaniards, and the.laft of Italians, the
three different nations of whom the army was
composed, were appointed to this service; a fepa.
rate attack was assigned to each; and the whole
army advanced to support them as occasion should
require. A thick mist concealed their approach
until they reached almost the brink of the ditch
which surrounded the suburbs; having planted
their ladders in a moment, each brigade rushed
on to the assault with an impetuosity heightened
by national emulation. They were received at
first with fortitude equal to their own; the Swiss
in the Pope's guards, and the veteran soldiers who
had been assembled, fought with a courage be-
coming men to whom the defence of the noblest
city in the world was entrusted. Bourbon's troops,
notwithstanding all their valour, gained no ground,

n and even began to give waay; when their leader,

Bourbon .. _. r
aiin. perceiving that on this critical moment the fate of

the day depended, threw himself from his horse,
pressed to the front, snatched aTcaling ladder from
a soldier, planted it against the wall, and began
to mount it, encouraging his men with his voice
and hand, to follow him, but at that very instant,
a musket bullet from the ramparts pierced his
groin with a wound, which he immdiately felt to
be mortal; but he retained so much presence of
mind as to desire those who were near him to cover
his body with a cloak, that his death might not
dishearten his troops; and soon after he expired

with

with a courage worthy of a better cause, and BooK IV.
which would have entitled him to the higheit r--
praise, if he had thus fallen in defence of his 7
country, not at the head of its enemies8.

1 T was impossible, to conceal this fatal event Thecity

from the army; the soldiers soon miffed their ge-
neral, whom they were accultomed to fee in eve-
ry time of danger; but instead of being dilheart-
ened by their loss, it animated them with new va-
lour; the name of Bourbon resounded along theline,
accompanied with the cry.of blood and revenge.
The veterans who defended the walls, were soon
over-powered by numbers; the untrained body of
city recruits fled at the fight of danger, and the
enemy with irresistible violence rushed into the
town.

DURING the combat, Clement was employed

at the altar of St. Peter's in offering up to heaven
unavailing prayers for victory. No sooner was he
informed that his troops began to give way than
he fled with precipitation; and with an infatuati-
on still more amazing than any thing already men-
tioned, instead of making his escape by the opposite
gate where there was no enemy to oppose it, he
Ihut himself up, together with thirteen cardinals,
the foreign ambassadors, and many persons of dif-
tintion, in the catlfe of St. Angelo, which from
his late misfortune, he might have known to be an
insecure retreat. In his way from the Vatican to that
fortress, he aw his troopsflying beforean enemy who
pursued without giving quarter; he heard the
cries and lamentations of the Roman citizens, and
beheld the beginning of those calamities which

M Mem. de Bellay, iox. Guic. I. 18. p. 445, &c. Oeuv.
de Brant. iv. 257, &c,

his

BooK IV. his own credulity and ill-condu& had brought ur

-v--' on his fubjeds t.
1527.
Plundered. IT is impossible to describe, or even to imagin

the misery and horror of that scene which follow
ed. Whatever a city taken by storm can dreac
from military rage unrestrained by discipline
whatever excesses the ferocity of the Germans, th(
avarice of the Spaniards, or the licentiousness o
the Italians could commit, there the wretched in
habitants were obliged to susser. Churches, pala
ces, and the houses of private persons were plun
dered without diftindion. No age, or character
or sex was exempt from injury. Cardinals, nobles
priests, matrons, virgins, were all the prey of fol
diers, and at the mercy of men deaf to the voice
of humanity. Nor did there outrages cease, as ii
usual in towns which are carried by assault, when
the first fury of the torm was over; the Imperialists
kept possession of Rome several months; and
during all that time the insolence and brutality of
the soldiers scarce abated. Their booty in ready
money alone amounted to a million of ducats;
what they raised by ransoms and exactions far ex-
ceeded that ilm. Rome, though taken several diffe-
rent times by the northern nations, who over-ran the
Empire in the fifth and sixth centuries, was never
treated with so much cruelty by the barbarous and
heathen Huns, Vandals or Goths, as now by the
bigotted fubjets of a catholic Monarch u

ThePope AFTER Bourbon's death, the command of the
bhefege in Imperial army devolved on Philibert de Chalons
the-caftle of .
St. Angelo. prince of Orange, who with difficulty prevailed

t Jov. Vit. Colon. 16. u Jov. Vit. Colon. 166. Guic.

1. 18. 440 &c. Comment. de capta urbeRomaap. Scardium
2. 2 6. Ulloa Vita dell. Carlo V. p. lo, &c. Gianonne Hill.
of Nap. B. xxxi. c. 3. p. 507.

on

on as many of his soldiers to defif from the pil- BooK Iv.
lage, as were necessary to invest the cattle of St. ' '
Angelo. Clement wasimmediately sensible of his 1527.
error in having retired into that ill provided and
untenable fort. But as the Imperialists, scorn-
ing discipline, and intent only on plunder, pushed
the siege with little vigour, he did not despair of
holding out, until the duke d'Urbino should come
to his relief. That general advanced at the head of
an army composed of Venetians, Florentines, and
Swiss in the pay of France, of sufficient strength to
have'delivered Clement from the present danger.
But d'Urbino, preferring the indulgence of his ha-
tred againit the family of Medici to the glory of de-
livering the capital of Chriitendom, and the head of
the church, pronounced the enterprize to be too ha-
zardous; and having from an exquisite refinement
in revenge, marched forward so far, that his ar-
my being seen from the ramparts of St. Angelo,
flattered the Pope with the prospect of certain re-
lief, he immediately retired x. Clement, deprived Sourrder

'r~~ ~ ~ ~ ~

' /*~ ~ ~~~~~

i i « »hims'elf a

of every resource, and reduced to such extremity prisoner.
of famine as to feed on ases flesh Y, was obliged June 6.
to capitulate on such conditions as the conquerors
were pleated to prescribe. He agreed to pay four
hundred thousand ducats to the army; to furren-
der to the Emperor all the places of strength be-
longing to the church; and betides giving holta-
ges, to remain a prisoner himself until the chief
articles were performed. He was committed to
the care of Alarcon, who, by his revere vigilance
in guarding Francis, had given full proof of his
being qualified for that office; and thus, by a fin-
gular accident, the fame man had the custody of
the two most illustrious personages who had been
made prisoners in Europe during several ages.

x Guic. 1. 18. 450. y Joy. Vit. Colon. 167.

THE

BOOK IV. THE account of this extraordinary and unex.
q^- ' peeted event was no less furprizing than agreeable
Th E7mpe- to the Emperor. But in order to conceal hisjoy
rors beta- from his fubjeats, who were filled with horror al
jiuerc. the success and crimes of their countrymen, anc

to lessen the indignation of the reft of Europe, he
declared that Rome had been assaulted without any
order from him; he wrote to all the princes with
whom he was in alliance, disclaiming his having
had any knowledge of Bourbon's intention z; he
put himself and court into mourning; command-
ed the rejoicings which had been ordered for the
birth of his son Philip to be flopped; and employ.
ing an artifice no less hypocritical than gross, he
appointed prayers and proceflions throughout all
Spain for the recovery of the Pope's liberty, which
by an order to his generals he could have immedi.
ately granted him .

Solymanin- THE good fortune of the house of Austria was
vades Hun-
gary. no less conspicuous in another part of Europe.

Solyman having invaded Hungary with an army
three hundred thousand firong, Lewis II. King of
that country, and of Bohemia, a weak and unexpe.
rienced prince, advanced rashly to meet him with
a body of men which did not amount to thirty
thousand. With an imprudence frill more un.
pardonable, he gave the command of these,
troops to Paul Tomorri, a Franciscan monk,
archbishop of Golocza. This aukward general,
in the dress of his order, girt with its cord,
marched at the head of the troops; and hurri-
ed on by his own presumption, as well as by the
impetuofitv of nobles who despised danger, but
were impatient of long service, fought the fatal
battle of Mohacz, in which the King, the flow-
er of the Hungarian nobility, and upwards of

aRufcelli Lettere di Principi, ii. 234.
SSlcid. 109. i. 822. Mauroc. Hist. Veneta. lib. iii. 220.

twenty

twenty thousand men fell the victims of his folly BOOK IVE
and ill.-conduct.': Solyman, after his victory, feiz- -v''
ed and kept pofleffion of several towns of greatest Defat of
strength in the southern provinces of Hungary, the ung,-

. .

i ft c i * rians, and

and over-running the reft of the country, carried death of
near two hundred thousand persons into captivity. theirKing.
As Lewis was the last male of, the royal family of
Jagellon, the'. Archduke Ferdinand claimed both
his crowns. This claim was founded on a double
title; the one' derived from the- antient pretensions
of the house of 'Austria to both kingdoms; the
other from the right 'of his wife, the only sifter of
the deceased Monarch. The feudal inftitutiins
however subsisted :both in Hungary and Bohemia
in fich vigour, and. the nobles pofTeffed such ex-
tensive power, that the crowns were still eletive,
and Ferdinand's rights, if they had not been pow-
erfrlly fiupported, would have met with little re-
gard. But his own personal merit; the refpet Ferdinand
due :to the brother of the greatest Monarch in eleted
Christendom; the necessity ofchufing a prince able King.
to 'afford his fubjeats some additional protection
against the Turkish arms, which, as they had'felt
their weight so lately, they greatly dreaded; to-
gether with the intrigues of his filter, who had
been married to the late King, overcame the pre-
judices which the Hungarians had conceived a-
gainft the Archduke as a foreigner; and though
a considerable party voted for the Waywode of
Tranfilvania, at length secured Ferdinand the
throne of. that kingdom. The states of Bohemia
imitated the example of their neighbour kingdom;
but in order to ascertain and secure their own privi-
leges, they obliged Ferdinand before his coronati-
on, to subscribe a deed which they term a Reverse,
declaring that he held that crown not by any previ-
ous right, but by their gratuitous and voluntary
eletion. By such a vast acceflion of territories, the
hereditary poffeflion of which they secured in procefl

VOL. II. U of

BOOK IV. of';time to their family, the prinqgs of the-houfe
' "-~" of AuRfria attained. that pre-eminepce in power

1527' which hath rendered: them. so, formidable to the

* reft of Germany, .,:..

Progrefsoof THE dissension .between the Pope and Empe-
thiRf"°r' ror proved extrernely favourable to the progrefi

ofl, utieranirnm. .,harles, exasperated by Cle.
ment's condut, and fully employed in opposing
the, league which, he had formed .against them,
ihad little inclination and less leisure to take any
m,easures for fiuppreifing the ne.w, opinions in Ger.
many. In: a .djiet of the Empire' held at Spires,
JiSrn te, ieftate, of religion came to. be confidered, and

-ali that the Emperor required of the princeS was,
that they, would wait patiently, land without en.

iouraging innovations, for the,iimeeting of a ge-

neral council which he had derhanded of the. Pope
They, in.return, acknowledged dthe convocation

, - ofa council to be the proper and regular ftep.to-
:, w.rds reforming abuses in the, church; but con,

itended, that a national council:held in Germany
:would be more, effetual forti.at purpose than what
lie had propoe.d., ''To his aidvice, concerning the
difcouragemenit of innovations, they paid so little
regard, that even during the meeting of the diet
at Spires, the divines who attended the.Ele&or ol
Saxony and Landgrave of 'effe-Caffel thither,
-preached publickly, and admniniftered the sacra.
xments according to the rites''of the 'refor.ned
church '. The Emperor's, owni example.. em.
boldened the Germans. to treat the Papal au.
thiority with little reverence. During, the heal
of'his retentment::againft c'mepint, he had pub'
lifhe d a long reply to an angry brief whicl
the Pope ,had intended as an apology. for hii
own condut. In this manifesto, the.Emperor

b Steph. Broderick Procancelarii Hungar. Clades in Camp

-Mohacz ap. Scardium a;. 2a8. P. Barre Hist. d'Allemagne
tom. viii. parti, p. 198. c Slkid. 103.

aftei

after having enumerated many instances of that Book IV.
pontiff's ingratitude, deceit and ambition, all '
which he painted in the ftrongeftl ind most aggra- 52
vated coloirs, he appealed from him to a general
council. At the fame time, he wrote to the col-
lege of Cardinals, complaining of Clement's par-
tiality and injustice; and requiring them, if he
refused or delayed to call a council, to manifest
their concern for the peace of the Chriftianr church,
so ihamefully neglected by its chief pastor, by
summoning that assembly in their own named.
This manifesto, scarce inferior in virulence to the
invectives of Luther himself, was dispersed over
Germany with great industry, and being eagerly
read by perobns of every rank, did much more
than counterbalance the effect of all Charles's de-
clarations against the new opinions.

d Goldaft. Polit. Imper. p. 984.

U 2 THE

# BOOK V.

T H
HISTOR

.OF THE
RE I GN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V

BOOK V.
Boo 'V. H E account of the cruel manner in which

%--->- the Pope had been treated, filled all Europe
I 27. with astonishment or horror. To fee a Chriflian

:igation- Emperor, who, by poifling that dignity, oughi
xtoitia- to have been the protecor and advocate of the
iZeror holy fee, lay violent hands on him who represent.

ed Christ on earth, and detain his sacred person in
a rigorous captivity, was confidered as an impiety
that merited the severest vengeance, and which
called for the immediate interposition of every
dutiful son of the church. Francis and Henry.
alarmed at the progress of the Imperial arms in
Italy, had, even before the taking of Rome, enter.
ed into a closer alliance; and, in order to give forc

check

check to the Emperor's ambition, had agreed to Boor v.
make a vigorous diversion in the Low-Countries. '~'
The force of every motive which had influenced 5.
them at that time, was now increased; and to
there were added, the desire of rescuing the Pope
out of the Emperor's hands, a measure no less po-
litical, than it appeared to be pious. This, how-
ever, rendered it 'necessary to abandon their de-
signs on the Low-Countries, and to make Italy the
feat of war, as it was by vigorous operations in
that country, they might promise molt certainly
upon delivering Rome, and setting Clement at
liberty. Francis being now sensible, that in his
system with regard to the affairs of Italy, the fpi.
rit of refinement had carried him too far; and
that, by an excess of reminffefs, he had allowed
Charles to attain advantages which he might easily
have prevented, was eager to make reparation for
an error for which he was not often guilty, by an
activity more suitable to his temper. Henry thought
his interposition necefrary, in order to hinder the
Emperor from becoming mailer of all Italy, and
acquiring by that means such superiority of power,
as would enable him, for the future, to dictate
without controul to the other princes of Europe.
Wolfey, whom Francis had taken care to secure
by flattery and presents, the certain methods of
gaining his favour, neglefted nothing that could
incense his malter against the Emperor. Besides
all these public considerations, Henry was influ.
enced by one of a more private nature; having
begun about this time to form his great scheme
of divorcing Catharine of Aragon, towards the
execution of which he knew that the fantion of
Papal authority would be necessary, he was de-
firous to acquire as much merit as possible with
Clement, by appearing to be the chief instrument
of his deliverance.

THE

BOOK' V. THE negociation, between winces thus di
^'^' posed, was not tedious. Wolfey himself con
Confede- du&ed it, on the part of his sovereign, with ur
racy against bounded powers. Francis treated with him i
him. July 1x. person at Amiens, where the Cardinal appeared

and was received with royal magnificence. ,
marriage between the duke of Orleans and th
princess Mary was agreed to as the basis of th
confederacy; it was resolved that Italy ihould h
the theatre of war; the ffrength of the arm
which should take the field, and the continger
of troops or of money which each prince fhoul
furnifb, were fettled; and if the Emperor did nc
accept of the proposals they were jointly to mak
him, they bound themselves immediately to de
dare war, and to begin hostilities. Henry, wh
A took every resolution with impetuofiry, entered(

'eagerly into this new alliance, that in order to giv
Francis the strongest proof of his friendlhip and
refpeat, he formally renounced the antient claim
of the English Monarchs to the crown of France
which had long been the pride and ruin of the
nation; as a full compensation for which, he ac
cepted a pension of fifty thousand crowns, to be
paid annually to himself and his successors a.

TheFlo- MEANWHILE the Pope, being unable to fulfi
rentin re- the conditions of his capitulation, remained a pri
fr¢edom. toner under the revere custody of Alarcon. The

Florentines no sooner heard of what had happened
at Rome, than they ran to arms in a tumultuous
manner; expelled the Cardinal di Cortona, wN
governed their city in the Pope's name; defacec
the armsof the Medici; broke in pieces the statues
of Leo and Clement; and declaring themselves
'free fiate, re-established their antient popular
government. The Venetians, taking advantage

a Herbert, 83, &c. Rym. Foeder 14. 203.

of

of the calamity of their ally the Pope, seized BOOK V.
Ravenna, and other places belonging to thel l"
church, under pretext of keeping them in depo- 1527.
site. The dukes of Urbino and Ferrara, laid hold
likewise on part of the spoils of the unfortunate Pon-
tiff, whom they confidered as irretrievably ruined b.

LANNOY, on the other hand, laboured to de-The Impe-

rive rome solid benefit from that unforeseen event, ridc troo
which gave such splendour and superiority to his
master's arms. For this purpose he marched to
Rome, together with Moncada, and the marquis
del Guafto, at the head of all the troops they
could assemble in the kingdom of Naples. The
arrival of this reinforcement brought new cala-
mities on the unhappy citizens of Rome; for the
soldiers envying the wealth of their companions,
imitated their licence, and with the utmost rapa-
city gathered the gleanings, which had escaped
the avarice of the Spaniards and Germans.
There was not now any army in Italy capable
of making head against the Imperialists; and
nothing more was requisite to reduce Bologna,
and the other towns in the ecclesiastical state, than
to have appeared before them. But the soldiers
having been Co long accustomed, under Bourbon,
to an entire relaxation of discipline, and having
tafted the sweets of living at discretion in a great
city, almost without the controul of a superior,
were become so impatient of military fubordina-
tion, and so averse to service, that they refused to
leave Rome, unless all their arrears were paid ; a
condition which they knew to be impollible;
and declared that they would not obey any other
person than the prince of Orange, whom the army
had chosen general. Lannoy, finding that it was
no longer safe for him to remain among li-

b Guic. 1. j8. 453.

centious

BOOK V. centious, troops who despised his dignity, and hat.
~"-.. ed his person, returned to Naples; soon after the

527 marquis del Guafto and Moncada thought it pru-

dent to quit Rome for the fame reason. The
prince of Orange, a general only in name, and
by the most precarious of all tenures, the good
will of soldiers whom success and licence had ren-
dered capricious, was obliged to pay more atten-
tion to their humours, than they did to his corn.
mands. Thus the Emperor, instead of reaping
any of the advantages he might have expected
from the reduction of Rome, had the mortification
to fee the most formidable body of troops he had
ever brought into the field, continue in a slate of
inativity from which it was impossible to rouze
them c

TheFrench THIS gave the King of France and the Veneti.
army arches in. ans leilure to form new schemes, and to enter into
to Italy. new engagements for the delivering the Pope, and

prefeivlng the liberties of Italy. The newly re-
ifored republic of Florence very imprudently join
ed with them, and Lautrec, of whose abilities the
Italians entertained a much more favourable opi-
nion than his own master, was, in order to gratify
them, appointed generaliflimo of the leage. It
was with the utmost reluctance he undertook that
office, being unwilling to expose himself a second
time to the difficulties and dilgraces which the ne-
gligence of the King, or the malice of his favou-
rites might bring upon him. The best troops in
France marched under his command, and the
King of England, though he had not yet declared
war againfl the Emperor, advanced a considerable
fum towards carrying on the expedition. Lautrec's
first operations were prudent, vigorous, and 'uccefs-
Ii o,'rat ful. By the afliftance of Andrew Doria, the ablest

c Guic. I. 18. 454.

fed

sea officer of that age, he rendered himself ma-sBooK v.
ter of Genoa, and re-eftablithed in that republic the
faction of the Fregofi, together with the domi- '527
nion of France. He obliged Alexandria to fur-
render after a short siege, and reduced all the
country on that fide of the Tefino. He took Pavia,
which had so long resifted the arms of-his fove-
reign, by assault, and plundered it with his cruel-
ty which the memory of the fatal disaster that had
befallen the French nation before its walls natu-
rally inspired. All the Milanese, which Antonia
de Leyva defended with a small body of troops
kept together and supported by his own address
and industry, muff have loon submitted to his
power, if he had continued to bend the force
of his arms against that country. But Lautrec
durst not compleat a conquest which would
have been so honourable to himself, and of such
advantage to the league. Francis knew his confe-
derates to be more desirous of circumscribing the
Imperial power in Italy, than of acquiring new
territories for him, and was afraid that if Sforza
were once re-eftablilhed in Milan, they would
second but coldly the attack which he intended to
make on the kingdom of Naples. For this rea-
son he inftruted Lautrec not to push his operations
with too much vigour in Lombardy; and happily
the importunities of the Pope, and the follicitati-
ons of the Florentines, the one for relief, and the
other for protection, were so urgent as afforded
him a decent pretext to march forward without
yielding to the entreaties of the Venetians and
Sforza, who insisted on his laying siege to Milan d.

d Guic. 1. xviii. p. 461. de Bellay, 170, &c. Mauroc.
Hist. Vcnet. lib. iii. 238.

WHILE

BooK V.- W H L E Lautrec advanced slowly towards

v'-^" Rome, the Emperor had time to deliberate con.

Thi7pe cerning the disposal of the Pope's person, who still
ror fctsthe remained a prisoner in the castle of St. Angelo.
bope at Notwithstanding the specious veil of religion with

which he usually endeavoured to cover his actions.
Charles in many instances appears to have been
but little under the influence of religious confider-
ations, and had frequently on this occasion express.
ed an inclination to transport the Pope into Spain,
that he might indulge his ambition with the
spectacle of the two most illustrious personages in
Europe successively prisoners in his court. But
the fear of giving new offence to all Christendom,
and of filling his own fubjeds with horror, obliged
him to forego that satisfaction e The progress of
the confederates made it now neceflary either to set
the Pope at liberty, or to remove him to rome place
of confinement more secure than the cattle of St. An-
gelo. Many considerations induced him to prefer
the former, particularly his want of the money
requisite as well for recruiting his army, as for
paying off the vast arrears due to it. In order to
Ycb. my. obtain this he had assembled the Cortes of Castile

at Valladolid about the beginning of the year,
and having laid before them the state of his as-
fairs, and represented the necessity of making
great preparations to resist the enemies, whom
envy at the success which had crowned his arms
would unite against him, he demanded a large
supply in the most pressing terms. But the Cortes,
as the nation was already exhausted by ex-
traordinarry donatives, refused to load it with
any new burden, and in spite of all his en-
deavours to gain or to intimidate themembers,
perfilled in this resolution . No resource, there-
fore remained but the extorting from Clement,

e Guicl. L18.457 f Sa .
f S p. 814,

by

by way of ransom, a fum sufficient for discharging BooK IV-
what was due to his troops, without which it was
vain to mention to themtheir leaving Rome. 5Z27'

NOR was the Pope ina&ive on his part, or his

intrigues unsuccessful towards hastening such a
treaty. By flattery, and the appearance of un-
bounded confidence, he disarmed the resentment
of the cardinal Colonna, and wrought upon his
vanity, which made him desirous of shewing the
world that as his power had at first depremfed the
Pope, it would now raise him to his former digni-
ty. By favours and promises he gained MoronS,
who, by one of those whimsical revolutions which
occur so often in his life, and which so strongly
display his character, had now recovered his cre-
dit and authority with the Imperialists. The ad-
dress and influence of two such men easily remov-
ed all the difficulties of the Emperor's ambafladors,
and brought to a conclusion the treaty for Clement's
liberty, upon conditions hard indeed, but not
more intolerable than a prince in his situation had
reason to expet. He was obliged to advance in
ready money an hundred thousand crowns for the
use of the army; ,to pay the fame rum at the dif-
tance of a fortnight; and at the end of three
months, an hundred and fifty thousand more.
He engaged not to take part in the war against
Charles, either in Lombardy or in Naples; he
granted him a cruzado, and the tenth of ec-
clefiaftical revenues in Spain; and he not only
gave hostages, but put the Emperor in poffeflion
of several towns, as a security for the perfor-
mance of there articles g. Having raised the firit
moiety by a sale of ecclesiastical dignities and

g, Gilic. 1. 18. 467, &c.

benefices,

BOOK V. benefices, and other expedients equally uncanno-
''y- ~ nical, a day was fixed for delivering him from im.
Dccemb.6. prifonment. But Clement, impatient to be free,

after a tedious confinement of fix months, as well
as full of the suspicion and distrust natural to the
unfortunate, was so much afraid that the Imperia-
lifts might still throw in obstacles to put off his
deliverance, that he disguised himself the preced-
ing night in the habit of a merchant, and A!arcon
having remitted romewhat of his vigilance upon the
conclusion of the treaty, he made his escape un-
discovered. He arrived before next morning,
without any attendants but a single officer, at
Orvieto; and from thence wrote a letter of
thanks to Lautrec, as the chief instrument of pro.
curing him liberty h.

Overtures DURING there tranfadtions, the ambassadors of
peror to France and England repaired to Spain, in confe.
Francis and quence of the treaty which Wolfey had concluded

with the French King. The Emperor, unwilling
to draw on himself the united forces of the two
Monarchs, discovered an inclination to relax some-
what the rigour of the treaty of Madrid, to which
hitherto, he had adhered inflexibly. He offered
to accept of the two millions of crowns which
Francis had proposed to pay as an equivalent for
the dutchy of Burgundy, and to set his sons at li-
berty on condition that he would recal his army
out of Italy, and restore Genoa together with the
other conquests he had made in that country.
With regard to Sforza, he insisted that his fate
should be determined by the judges appoint-
ed to enquire into his crimes. These propofi-
tions being made to Henry, he transmitted them
to his ally the French King, whom it more
nearly concerned to examine, and to answer
them; and if Francis had been sincerely follicitous

h Guic. 1. 18. 467, &c. Jov. Vit. Colon. 69. Manuroc.
HiftiVcnet. e lib. iii. 25,

either

either to conclude peace, or preserve consistency Boorc .
in his own conduct, he ought instantly to have -*
closed with overtures which differed but little 527
from the propositions he himself had formerly
made'. But his views were now much changed;
his alliance with Henry; Lautrec's progress in Ita-
ly, and the superiority of his army there above
that of the Emperor, scarce left him room to
doubt of the success of his enterprize against Na-
ples. Full of there sanguine hopes, he was at no
loss to find pretexts for rejecting or evading what
the Emperor had proposed. Under the appearance
of sympathy with Sforza, for whose interests he had
not hitherto discovered much follicitude, he again
demanded the full and unconditional re-establish-
ment of that unfortunate prince in his dominions.
Under colour of its being imprudent to rely on
the Emperor's sincerity, he insisted that his sons
Ihould be set at liberty before the French troops
left Italy, or surrendered Genoa. The unreafona-
blenefs of these demands, as well as the reproach-
ful insinuation with which they were accompanied,
irritated Charles to such a degree that he could
scarce liften to them with patience; and repenting
of his moderation which had made so little impref-
sion on his enemies, declared that he would not
depart in the smallest article from the conditions he
had now offered. Upon this the French and En-
glilh ambassadors, for Henry had been drawn un-
accountably to concur with Francis in there strange
propositions, demanded and obtained their audi-
ence of leave k.

N E x T day two heralds who had accom- Is23.
panied the ambafradors on purpose, though January ro
they had hitherto concealed their charac-

i Recueil des Traitez, 2. 249.
k Hym. 14. aoo. Herbert 85. Guic. 1. 18. 471.

ter,

BOOK V. ra&er, having afiumed the ensigns of their office,
~'iV ' appeared in the Emperor's court, and being ad.
TheyZd mitted into his pretence, they ih the name of their
dare war refpeeive masters, and with all the solemnity
gmeairohe customary on such occasions, denounced war against

him. Charles received both with a dignity fui-
table to his own rank, but spoke to each in a tone
adapted to the Sentiments which he entertained of
their sovereigns. He accepted the defiance of the
English Monarch with a firmness tempered by some
degree of decency and refped. His reply to the
French King abounded with that acrimony of ex-
preflion, which personal rivalfhip, exasperated by the
memory of many injuries inflicted as well as susser-
ed, naturally suggests. He desired the French
herald to accquaint his sovereign, that he would
henceforth confider him as a bale violator of public
faith, and a ifranger to the honour and integrity

chalenge, becoming a gentleman. Francis, too high spirit-
the Empe- ed to bear such an imputation, had recourse to an
ror to single
ombat.fe uncommon expedient in order to vindicate his

charater. He instantly sent back the herald with
a cartel of defiance, in which he gave the Empe-
ror the lie in form, challenged him to single com-
bat, requiring him to name the time and place of the
encounter, and the weaponis with which he chose
to fight. Charles, as he was not inferior to his ri-
val in spirit or bravery, readily accepted the chal-
lenge; but after several meflagts concerning the
arrangement of all the circumstances relative to
the combat, accompanied with mutual reproaches,
bordering on the most indecent scurrility, all
thoughts of this duel, more becoming the heroes
of romance tl-an the two greatest Monarchs of their
age, were entirely laid alide .

I Recueil des Traitez 2. Mem. de Bellay, 103, &c. San-
dov. Hilt. l. 837.

THr

THE example, of two personages so illustrious BooK V.
drew such general attention, and carried along --.J
with it so much authority, as gave rife to an impor- 52
tant change in manners all over Europe. Duels, The effea

of this in

as has already been observed, had long been per- prooting
mitted by the laws of all the European nations, .the custom
and forming a part of their jurisprudence, were of dueling.
authorized by the ragiftrate on many occasions as
the most proper method of terminating questions
with regard to property, or of deciding in thoee
which refpeted crimes. But single combats be-
ing confidered as solemn appeals to the omniscience
and justice of the supreme Being, they were al-
lowed only in public causes, according'to the pre-
scription of law, and carried on in a judicial form.
Men accustomed to this manner of decision in
courts ofjuftice, were naturally led to apply it to
personal and private quarrels. Duels, which at first
could be appointed by the civil judge alone, were
fought without the interposition of his authority,
and in cafes to which the laws did not extend.
The tranfaftion between Charles and Francis
strongly countenanced this practice. Upon eve-
ry affront, or injury which seemed to touch his ho-
nour, a gentleman thought himself entitled to
draw his sword, and. to call on his adversary to
make reparation. Such an opinion introduced
among men of fierce courage, of high spirit, and
of rude manners, when offence was often given,
and revenge was always prompt, produced most
fatal consequences. Much of the best blood in
Christendom was shed ; many useful lives were fa-
crificed; and at tome periods, war itself hath
scarce been more deftrudtive than these contests of
honour. So powerful, however, is the dominion
of fashion, that neither the terror of penal laws,
nor reverence for religion have been able entirely
to abolish a practice unknown among the antients,

and

Boot V. and not justifiable by any principle of reason;

2 though at the fame time it mufl be admitted, that

to this absurd custom, we must ascribe in some
degree the extraordinary gentleness and complai-
fance of modern manners, and that respectful
attention of one man to another, which, at present,
render the social intercourses of life far more agree-
able and decent than among the mos civilized
nations of antiquity.

Retreat of WHILE the two monarchs seemed so eager to
the Imperi-
~aifts from terminate their quarrel by a personal combat,
Rome. Lautrec continued his operations which promised
February. to be more decisive. His army, which was now

increafld to thirty-five thousand men, advanced
by great marches towards Naples. The terror
of their approach, as well as the remonfirances
and the entreaties of the prince of Orange, pre-
vailed at last on the Imperial troops, though with
difficulty to quit Rome, of which they had kept
possession during ten months. But of that flou.
rilhing army which had entered the city, scarce
one half remained; the reft, cut off by the
plague, or wafted by diseases, the effects of their
inactivity, intemperance, and debauchery, fell
victims to their own crimesm. Lautrec made
the greatest efforts to attack them in their retreat
towards the Neapolitan territories, which would
have finished the war at one blow. But the pru-
dence of their leaders disappointed all his measures,
and conduced them with little loss to Naples.
The people of that kingdom, always the prey
of every invader, extremely impatient to shake
off the Spanilh yoke, received the French with
open arms, wherever they appeared to take
pofleffion; and Gaeta and Naples excepted,
scarce any place of importance remained in the
hands of the imperialists. The preservation

m Guic. 1. 8 487.

of

of the former was owving to the strength of itsBoOK V.
fortifications, that of the latter to the presence of- -.,
the Imperial army. Lautrec, however, fat downFrench hc-
before Naples, but finding it vain to think of re-fisPgNaP"l
ducing by force a city defended by so many troop's,
he was obliged to employ the flower, but less
dangerous method of blockade; and having taken
ineafures which appeared to him effectual, he con-
fidently assured his master, that famine would soon
compel the besieged to capitulate. These hopes
were firongly confirmed by the defeat of a vigor-
ous attempt made by the enemy in order to reco-
ver the command of the sea. The gallies of
Andrew Doria, under the command of his nephew
Philippino, guarded the imouth of the harbour.
Moncada, who had succeeded Lannoy in the vice-
royalty, rigged out a number of gallies superior to
Doria's, and going on board himself, together
with the marquis del Guafto, anid the flower of
the Spanish officers and soldiers, attacked Doria
before the arrival of the Venetian and French
fleets. But Doria, by his fuperiorAkill in naval
operations, easily triumphed over the valour and
number of the Spaniards. 'The viceroy was
killed, most of his fleet destroyed, and Guafto,
with many officers of diftination being taken
prisoners, were put on board the captive gallies,
and sent by Philippino, as trophies of his victory,
to his uncle a.

BuT notwithstanding this flattering profpea of.fuc- Circumfan-

cess, many circumstances concurred to fruftrateLau- X 1the
trec'sexpectations. Clement, tho' he always acknow- progrcu of
ledged his being indebted to Francis for the recovery
of his liberty, and often complained us the cruel
treatment he had met with from the Emperor, was

n Guic. 1. 1. 487. P. Heuter. lib. x. c. 2. p. 23 .
VOL. II. X not

BooK V. not influenced at this junaure by principles ol
' ~ ~' gratitude, nor, which is more extraordinary, wal
I5?s' he swayed by the desire of revenge. His pafi

misfortunes rendered him more cautious than ever,
and his recolletion of the errors which he had
committed, incieafed the natural irresolution ol
his mind. Whilehe amused Francis. with pro.
mises, he secretly negociated with Charles; and
being follicitous, above all things, to re-eflablilh
his family in Florence with their antient authority,
which he could not expec from Francis, who had
entered into AriE alliance with the new republick,
he leaned rather towards the fide of his enemy
than that of his benefactor, and gave Lautrec no
assistance towards carrying on his operations. The
Venetians, viewing with jealousy, theprogrefs of
the French arms, were intent only on recovering
such maritime towns in the Neapolitan dominions
as were to be possessed by their republick, while
they were altogether careless about -the reduction
of Naples, on which the success of the common
cause depended °. The King of England, instead
of being able, as had been projeted, to embar-
rafs the Emperor by attacking his territories in the
Low-Countries, found his fubjets so averse to an
unnecessary war, which would have ruined the
trade of the nation, that in order to silence their
clamours, and put a flop to the infurretions ready
to break out among them, he was compelled to
conclude a truce for eight months with the gover-
ness of the Netherlands P. Francis himself, vith
the fame unpardonable inattention of which he
had formerly been guilty, and for which he had
suffered so severely, negleted to make proper re.
mittances to Lautrec for the support of his army 9.

o Guic. 1. xix. 491. r Herbert, 90. Rymer, 14. 2SS.
q Guic. 1. xviii. 478.

Ti-Ei.

- THESE unexpected events retarded the progress BOOK V.
of the French, and difcburaged both the general, -'~
and his troops; but the revolt of Andrew Dor-ia Revolt o6
proved a fatal blow to all their measures. That. ArDo-
gallant officer, the citizen of a republick, and France.
trained up from his infancy in the fea-fervice; re-
tained the spirit of independence natural to the
former, and the plain liberal manners peculiar to
the latter. A perfect stranges to the arts of fCub-
mifiion or flattery'necefiary in courts, and.con(ci-
ous at the fame-time of his own merit and im-
portance, he always offered his advice with free-
dom, and often preferred his complaints ind re-
ronftrances with boldness. The French ministers,
unaccustomed to fiuch liberties, determined to ruin
a man who treated them with To little deference;
and though Francis himself had a just sense of
Doria's services, as well as an high esteem for his
charafter, the cotrtiers, by continually represent-
ing him as a man hiughty, intractable, and more
lollicitous to aggrandize h'imself,. than to promote
the interest of France, gradually. undermined' the
foundations of his credit,: and filled the King's
mind with fufpiciori and diftrufft. From thence
proceeded several affronts and indignities put uponi
Doria. His appointments were not regularly paid;
his advice, even in naval affairs, was often flight-
ed; an attempt was made to seize the prisoners
taken by his nephew in the fea-fight off Naples;
all which he bore with abundance of ill humrour.
But an injury offered to his country, tranfporred
him beyond all bounds of patience. The French
began to fortify Savona, to clear its harbour, and,
removing thither some branches of trade carried on
at Genoa, plainly shewed that they intended to ren-
der that town, long the object ofjealoufy and hatred
to the Genoese, their rival in wealth and com-
merce. Doria, animated with a patriotic zeal for the

X 2 honour

Boot V. honour and interest of his country4 remonstrated

..J- against this in the highest tone, not without

threats, if the measure were not inffantly aban.
doned. This bold action, aggravated by the
malice of the courtiers; and placed in the mofi
odious light, irritated Francis to such a degree,
that he commanded Barbefieux, whom he appoint.
ed admiral of the Levant, to fail diretly to
Genoa, with the French fleet, to arrest Doria,
and to seize his gallies. This rash order, of which
the most profound secrecy alone could have fecu.
red the execution, was concealed with so little
care, that Doria got timely intelligence of it, and
retired with all his gallies to a place of safety,
Guafto his prisoner, who had long observed and
fomented his growing discontent, and had often
allured him by magnificent promises to enter in.
to the Emperor's service, laid hold on this fa.
vourable opportunity.. While his indignation and
resentment were at their height, he prevailed on
him.to dispatch one of his officers to the Imperial
court with his overtures and demands. The ne.
gociation was not long; Charles fully sensible ol
the importance of such an acquisition, granted him
whatever terms he required. Doria font back his
commission, together with the collarof St. Michael
to Francis, and hoisting the Imperial colours,
failed with all his gallies towards Naples, not to
block up the harbour of that unhappy city as he
had formerly engaged, but to bring them protecion
and deliverance.

Wretched Hi s arrival opened the communication with
situation of 1
the French the sea, and reftored.plenty in Naples, which was
NSbfore now reduced to the last extremity; and the Frenchl

having loft their superiority at tea, were soon re'
duced to great straits for want of provisions. TIh
prince of Orange, who succeeded the viceroy ir
the command of the Imperial army, Ihewed himn
self by his prudent conduct worthy of that honour

whicl

which his good fortune and the death of his generals BooK V.
had twice acquired him. Beloved by the troops, .--"~
who remembering the prosperity they had enjoyed
under his command, served him with the utmost
alacrity, he let flip no opportunity of harafling the
enemy, and by continual alarms or sallies, fa-
tigued and weakened them r. As an addition to
all these misfortunes, the diseases common in
that country during the sultry months, began to
break out among the French troops. The pri-
foners communicated to them the pestilence which
the Imperial army had brought to Naples from
Rome, and it raged with such violence, that few,
either officers or soldiers, escaped the infection.
Of the whole army, not four thousand men, a
number scarce sufficient to defend the camp, were
capable of doing duty ; and being now besieged in
their turn, they fuffired all the miseries of which the
Imperialists were delivered. Lautrec, after
firuggling long with so many disappointments and
calamities, which preyed on his mind at the fame
time that the pestilence wafted his body, died,
lamenting the negligence of his foverign, and the Aug. i5.
infidelity of his allies, to which To many brave men
had fallen vidimst. By his death, and the indif-
position of the other generals, the command de-
volved on the marquis de Saluces, an officer alto-
gether unequal to such a trust. He, with troops no Raise the
lets dispirited than reduced, retreated in disorder fige.
to Averfa; which town being invested by the
prince of Orange, Saluces was under the necessity
of consenting, that he himself should remain a
prisoner of war, that his troops ihould lay down
their arms and colours, give up their baggage,
and march under a guard to the frontiers of

r Jovii Hist. lib. 36. p. 31, &c. SigoniiVita Dorie, p. 1139.
Bellay, 114, &c.
'Bellay, 17, &c. t P. Heuter. Rerum Autr. lib. x. c 2. 231.

X 3 France.

BooK V. France. By this ignominious capitulation, th
~"'"' wfetched remains of the French army were saved

and the Emperor by his own perseverance ant
the good conduct of his generals, acquired onc
more the superiority in Italy .

Genoa re- THE lots of Genoa followed immediately upo.
cover" itsli- the ruin of the army in Naples. To deliver hi

country from the dominion of foreigners was Do
ria's highest ambition, and had been his principa
inducement to quit the service of France, and en
ter into that of the Emperor. A most favourable
opportunity for executing this honourable enter
prize now presented itself. The city of Genoa
afflited by the pestilence, was almost deserted by
its inhabitants; the French garrilbn being neither
regularly paid nor recruited, was reduced to ai
inconsiderable number; Doria's emissaries found
that such of the citizens as remained, being weary
alike of the French and Imperial yoke, the rigour
of which they had alternately felt, were ready to
welcome him as their deliverer, and to second all
his measures. Things wearing this promising
afpedt, he failed towards the coast of Genoa; or
his approach the French gallies retired; a fmal
body of men which he landed, furprized one ol
the gates of Genoa in the night time; Trivulci,
the French governor, with his feeble garrison,
Sept . (fhlut himself up in the citadel, and Doria took

poffeflion of the town without bloodshed or refif-
ance. Want of provifiors quickly obliged Tri
vuilci to capitulate; the people, eager to abolihf
such an odious monument of their servitude, ran to-
gether with a tumultuous violence, and levelled
the citadel with the ground.

Difntcrecf- IT was now in poria's power to have rendered
of Dri himself the sovereign of his country, which he had

uBellay, 117, &c. JoviiHift. lib. 2S, 6.

so happily freed from oppreflion. The fame of BOOK V.
his former actions, the success of his present at- O
tempt, the attachment of his friends, the grati- I5Z8.
tude of his countrymen, together with the support
of the Emperor, all conspired to facilitate his at-
taining the supreme authority, and invited him to
lay hold of it. But with a magnanimity of which
there are few examples, he sacrificed all thoughts
of aggrandizing himself to the virtuous fatisfaaion
of establishing liberty in his country, the highest
object at which ambition can aim. Having as-
fembled the whole body of the people in the court
before his palace, he assured them, that the hap-
piness of feeing them once more in poffefion of free-
dom, was to him a full reward for all his services;
that more delighted with the name of citizen than
offovereign, he claimed no pre-eminence or power
above his equals; but remitted entirely to them
the right of fettling what form of government
they would now chute to be established among
them. The people listened to him with tears of
admiration, and of joy. Twelve peribns were
elected to new-model the conifitution of the re-
public. The influence of Doria's virtue and ex-
ample, communicated itself to his countrymen;
the factions which had long torn and ruined the
state, seemed to be forgotten ; prudent precau-
tions were taken to prevent their reviving; and
the fame form of government which hath subsisted
with little variation since that time in Genoa,
was established with universal applause. Doria,
lived to a great age, beloved, refpeded and
honoured by his countrymen ; and adhering uni-
formly to his profeflions of moderation, with-
out arrogating any thing unbecoming a private
citizen, he preserved a great ascendant over
the councils of the republic, which owed its
being to his generosity. The authority he pof-
lined was more flattering, as well as more
IatisfaCtory, than that derived from sovereignty;

a dominion

Boor V. a dominion founded in love and in gratitude; and
L';'r upheld by veneration for his virtues, not by the

5 dread of his power. His memory is fti'l reve-

renced by the Genoese, and he isdiftinguifhed in
their public monuments, and celebrated in the
works of their historians by the most honourable
of all appellations, THE FATHER OF HIS
COUNTRY, AND THE RESTORER OF ITS
LIBERTYx.

1529. FRANCIS, in order to recover the reputaion of

operations his arms, discredited by so many losses, made new
lnelM. efforts in the Milanese. But the Count of St. Pol,

a rash and unexperienced officer, to whom he
gave the command, was no match for Antonio de
Leyva, the ablest of the Imperial generals. He,
by his superior flill in war, checked with a hand-
ful of men, the brisk, but ill-concerted motions
of the French; and though so infirm himself that
he was carried constantly in a litter, he furpafed
them when occasion required, no less in acivity
than in prudence. By an unexpected march he
furprized, defeated, and took the Count of St. Pol,
and ruined the French army in the Milanese as en-
tirely as the prince of Orange had ruined that
which besieged Naples Y.

:,o.a;- AMIDST there vigorous operations in the field,

ons bhtwecn each party discovered an impatient desire of peace,
kra;'cis. and continual negociations were carried on for

that purpose. The French Kingdifcouraged, and
almost exhausted by so many unfuccefsfiil enterpri-
zes, was reduced now to think of obtaining the
release of his sons by concessions, not by the ter-
ror of his arms. The Pope hoped to recover by

x Guic. 1. 19. p. 498. Sigonii Vita Doria, p. 1146. Jovii

l-ift. lib. 26. p. 36, &c. Y Guic. . 19. 520. P.
lelttcr. Rcr, Auf.r. lib. x. c. 3. p. 233. Mem. de Bcllay, 121.

a treaty

a treaty whatever he had loft in the war. The BooK V.
Emperor,. notwithstanding the advantages which - ^
he had gained, had many reasons to make him 1529'
wish for an accommodation; Solyman, having
over-run Hungary, was ready to break in upon
the Austrian territories with the whole force of the
East; the Reformation gained ground daily in Ger-
many, the princes who favoured it entered in-
to a confederacy, which he thought dangerous to
the tranquillity of the Empire; the Spaniards
murmured at a war the weight of which refted
chiefly on them; the variety and extent of his
operations, far exceeded what his revenues could
support; his success hitherto had been owing chiefly
to his own good fortune, and to the abilities of
his generals, nor could he flatter himself that they
with troops destitute of every thing necessary,
would always triumph over enemies still in a con-
dition to renew their attacks. All parties, howe-
ver, were at equal pains to conceal, or to diffem-
ble ther real sentiments. The Emperor, that his
inability to carry on the war might not be sus-
pected, insisted on high terms in the tone of a con-
queror. The Pope, follicitous not to lose his pre-
sent allies, before he came to any agreement with
Charles, continued to make a thousand proteftati-
ons of fidelity to the former, while he privately
negociated with the latter. Fra' cis, afraid that his
confederates might prevent him by treating for
thlemfelves with the Emperor, had recourse to ma-
ny difhooulrable artifices in order to turn their at-
tention from the measures which he was taking to
adjust all differences with his rival.

IN this situation of affairs, when all the

contending powers wished for peace, but durfl
not venture too hastily on the steps necefiary for
attaining it, two ladies undertook to procure

this

BOOK V. this blefling so much desired by all Europe. These
<"-" were Margaret of Austria, dowager ofSavoy, the
ay.5 9 Emperor's aunt, and Louise Francis's mother.

They agreed on an interview at Cambray, and
beinglodged in twoadjoining houses between which
a communication was opened, met together with-
out ceremony or observation, and held daily confe-
rences to which no person whatever was admitted. As
both were profoundly skilled in business, thorough-
ly acquainted with the secrets of their refpetive
courts, and pofflfed with perfec confidence in each
other, they ioon made great progress towards a
final accommodation ; and the ambassadors of all
the confederates waited in anxious fufpence to
know their fate, the determination of which was
entirely in their hands z.

separate Bu r whatever diligence they used to haflen for-
treat be ward a general peace, the Pope had the address
Pope and and industry to get the flart of his allies, by con-

hc cluding at Barcelona a particular treaty for him-
jnne. to. self. The Emperor, impatient to visit Italy in his

way to Germany; and desirous of re-establishing
tranquillity in the one country, before he attemp-
ted to compose the disorders which abounded in
the other, found it necessary to secure at least one
alliance on which he might depend, among the
Italinn flates. That with the Pope, who courted it
with unwearied importunity, seemed more proper
than any other. Charles being extremely follici-
tots to make rome reparation for the intults which
he had offered to his sacred character, and to re-
deem past offences by new merit, granted Cle-
ment, after all his misfortunes, terms more favour-
able than he could have expected after a continued
series of success. Among other articles, he engaged

z P. Heuter. Rcr. Auftr. lib. x. c. 3. p. 133. Mem. deBcl-
lay, p. 12z.

to

to restore all the territories belonging to the ecclefi- B o OK V.
aftical late; to re-establish the dominion of the ^
Medici in Florence; to give his natural daughter
in marriage to Alexander the head of that family;
and to put it in the Pope's power to decide concern-
the fate of Sforza, and the poffeflion of the Mi-
lanefe. In return for these ample concefions,
Clement gave the Emperor the investiture of Na-
ples without the reserve of any tribute, but the
present of a white iteed in acknowledgement of
his sovereignty; absolved all who had been con-
cerned in aflaulting and plundering Rome; and
permitted Charles arid his brother Ferdinand to
levy the fourth of the ecclesiastical revenues
throughout their dominions a

THE account of this tranfation, quickened the AuguR5.

negociations at Cambray, and brought Margaret Carbray
and Louise to an immediate agreement. The 1e wte',

Charles and

treaty of Madrid lerved as the basis of that Francis.
which they concluded; the latter being intended
to mitigate the rigour of the former. The chief
articles were, That the Emperor should not, for
the present, demand the restitution of Burgundy,
reserving however, in full force, his rights and pre-
tensions to that dutchy; That Francis should p;y
two millions of crowns as the ransom of his sons,
and, before they were set at liberty, should restore
such towns as he still held in the Milanese; That
he should resign the sovereignty of Slanders and
Artois, that he should renounce all his pretensions
to Naples, Milan, Genoa, and every other place
beyond the Alps, that he should immediately con-
fumrnmate the marriage concluded between him
and the Emperor's sifter Eleanorab.

' Gilic. 1. 19. 522. b p. Heacter. Rcr. Anftr. lib,
x. c. 3. p. 234. Sandov. Hist, dell. Emper. Carl. V. ii. 28.

Tau s

Boo : V. THUS Francis, chiefly from his impatience to
'^'J procure liberty to his sons, sacrificed every thing
Advtaes which .had at first prompted him to take arms,
for thefm- or which had induced him, by continuing hoftili-
Peror. ties, during nine successive campaigns, to protraft

the war at a length scarce known in Europe before
the establishment of standing armies, and the im-
positions of exorbitant taxes became universal.
The Emperor, by this treaty, was rendered sole
arbiter of the fate of Italy; he delivered his
territories in the Netherlands from an ignominious
badge of fubjeAion; and after having baffled his
rival in the field, he prescribed to him the conditi-
ons of peace. The different conduA and spirit
with which the two Monarchs carried on the ope-
rations of war, led naturally to such an issue of it.
Charles, inclined by temper, as well as obliged by
his situation, concerted all his schemes with cau-
tion, pursued them with perseverance; and obferv-
ing circumstances and events with attention, let
none escape that could be improved to advantage.
Francis, more enterprising than fteady,,undertook
great designs with warmth, but executed them
with remissness; and, diverted by his pleasures,
or deceived by his favourites, he often loft the
most promising opportunities of success. Nor had
the character of the two rivals themselves greater
influence on the operations of the war, than the op-
pofite qualities of the generals whom they employ-
ed. Among the Imperialiffs, valour tempered
with prudence; fertility of invention aided by ex-
perience; sagacity to penetrate the designs of their
enemies, as well as to conduct their own, with all
the talents that form great commanders and ensure
victory, were conspicuous. Among the French,
these qualities were either wanting, or the very re-
verse of them abounded; nor could they boast of
one man (unless we except Lautrec, who was

always

always unfortunate) that equalled the merit of BooK V.
Pescara, Leyva, Guafto, the prince of Orange, and ' -r J
other leaders whom Charles had to set in oppofi- i9
tion to them. Bourbon, Morone, and:Driia, who
might have been capable of balancing by their
abilities and conduct the fuperiority-which the Im-
perialifts had acquired, were loft through the care-
leffnefs of the King, and the malice' or injustice of
his counsellors; and the molt fatal blows given to
France during the progress of the war, proceeded
from the despair and resentment of these three
persons, who were forced to abandon her service.

THE hard conditions to which Francis was obli- Dishonour-

able to

ged to submit, were not the molt afficting cir- Frans.
cumftance.to him in the treaty of Cambray. He
loft his reputation and the confidence of all Eu-
rope, by abandoning his allies to his rival. Un-
willing to enter into the details necessary for ad-
justing their interests, or afraid that whatever he
claimed for them must have been purchased by
farther conceflions on his own part, he gave them up
in a body; and without the least provision in their
behalf, left the Venetians, the Florentines, the
duke of Ferrara, together with such of the Nea-
politan barons as had joined his army, to the mer-
cy of the Emperor. They exclaimed loudly a-
gainft this base and perfidious action, of which
Francis himself was so much alhamed, that, in
order to avoid the pain of hearing from their am-
baffadors the reproaches which hejuftly merited,
it was some time before he would content to al-
low them an audience. Charles, on the other
hand, was attentive to the interest of every person
who had adhered to him; the rights of some of
his Flemish subjeCts, who had estates or pretensions
in France, were secured; one article was inlerted,
obliging Francis to restore the blood and memory
of the Constable Bourbon; and to grant his heirs

the

BOOK V. the poflfiffo of his lands which had been forfeit-
'^^' ed; another, by which indemnification was ftipu-

1529- lated for those French gentlemen who had accom-

panied Bourbon in' his exile e. This cond:ut, lau-
dable in itself, and placed in the noft striking
light by a comparison with that of Fra.icis, gained
Charles as much esteem as the success of his arms
had acquired him glory.

Heryzc.- FRANCIS, did not treat the King of England
quicfces in
~it. with the fame neglec as his other allies. He

communicated to him all the ifeps of his negocia-
tion at Cambray, and luckily found that Monarch
in a situation which left him no choice, but to ap-
prove implicitly of his meafilres, and to concur
Hisfcheme with them. Henry had been folliciting the Pope

°oifrd n for some time, in order to obtain a divorce from
hisQueen. Catharine of Aragon his Queen. Several mo-

tives combined in prompting the King to urge this
suit; as he was powerfully influenced at tome sea-
sons by religious considerations, he entertained ma-
ny scruples concerning the legitimacy: of his mar-
riage with his brother's widow; his affections had
long been estranged fromthe Queen, who Was older
than himself, and had loft all the charms she pof-
sessed in the earlier part of her life;- he was pas-
fionately desirous of having male issue; Wolfey
artfully fortified his scruples, and encouraged his
hopes, that he might widen the breach between
him and the Emperor, Catharine's nephew; and,
what was more forcible perhaps in its operation
than al these united, the King had conceived a vi-
olent love for the celebrated Anne Boleyn, a
young lady of great beauty, and of greater accom-
pliflments, whom, ashefound it impofiible togain
her on other terms, he determinad to raise to the
throne. The papal authority had often been inter-

c Guic. 1, 19. p. 525. P. Heuter. Rer. Autr. lib. x. c. 4.
p. 235.

posed

posed to grant divorces for reasons less specious BooK V.
than those which Henry produced. When. the -
matter was first proposed to Clement, during his '529'
imprisonment in the castle of St. Angelo, as his
hopes of recovering liberty depended entirely on
the King of England, and his ally of France, he
expressed the warmef inclination to gratify him.
But no sooner was he (et free, than he discovered
other sentiments. Charles, who espoused the pro-
tection of his aunt with zeal inflamed by re1int-
ment, alarmed the Pope on the one hand with
threats which made a deep impreflion on his timid
mind; and allured him on the other with those
promises in favour of his family, which he after-
wards accomplished. Upon the profped of there
Clement not only forgot all his obligations to
Henry, but ventured to endanger the interest of
the Romish religion in England, and to run the
rilk of alienating that kingdom for ever from the
obedience of the Papal fee. After amusing Henry
during two years, with all the subtleties and chi-
cane which the court of Rome can so dextroufly
employ to protrat or defeat any cause; after dif-
playing the whole extent of his ambiguous and de-
ceitful policy, the intricacies of which the Engliflh
hiitorians, to whom it properly belongs, have found
itno easy matter to trace and. unravel ; he, at last,
recalled the powers of the delagates whom he had'
appointed to judge in the point, avocated the cause
to Rome, leaving the King no other hope of ob-
taining a divorce but from the personal decision
of the Pope himself. As Clement was now in
ftriat alliance with the Emperor, who had purchaf-
ed his friendship by such exorbitant conceflions,
Henry despaired of procuring any sentence from
the former, but what was dictated by the latter.
His honour, however, and paflions concurred in
preventing him from relinquishing his fchcme of a
divorce, which he determined to accomplish by
other means, and at any rate; and the continuance

of

BooKt V. of Francis's friendship being necef{ary to counter
'"vI' balance the Emperor's power, he, in order to fe

1529. cure that, not only offered no romonftrances a

gainft the total neglect of their allies, in the treat]
of Cambray, but made Francis the present of i
large fum, as a brotherly contribution towards the
payment of the ransom for his sons d.

Aug. 12. MEANWHILE the Emperor landed in Italy witi
rorvifitP a numerous train of the Spanish nobility, and
aly. considerable body of troops. He left the govern.

ment of Spain during his abSence to the Emprefi
Isabella. By his long residence in that country,
he had acquired such thorough knowledge of the
character of the people, that he could perfectly
accommodate the maxims of his government to
their genius. He could even assume, upon rome
occasions, such popular manners, as gained won-
derfully upon the Spaniards. A ftrlking instance
of his disposition to gratify them had occurred a
few days before he embarked for Italy: He was
to make his public entry into the city of Barce-
lona; and some doubts having arisen among the
inhabitants, whether they should receive him as
Emperor, or as Count of Barcelona, Charles in-
ftantly decided in favour of the latter, declaring
that he was more proud of that antient tittle, than
of his Imperial crown. Soothed with this flatter-
ing expression of his regard, the citizens welcom-
ed him with acclamations of joy, and the states
of the province swore allegiance to his Ton Philip,
as heir of the county of Barcelona. A similar
oath had been taken in all the kingdoms of Spain,
with equal satisfaction .

T H Emperor appeared in Italy with the

pomp and power of a conqueror; and am-
baffadors from all the princes and states of

d Herbert. Mem. dcBellay, p. lz. ¢ Sandov.ii. p. 50o
Ferrer. ix 116.

that

that country attended his court waiting to receive BooK V.
his decision with regard to their fate. At Genoa, '''
where he first landed, he was received with the ac- 5
clamations due to the protector of their liberties.
Having honoured Doria with many marks of dif-
tinftion, and bestowed on the republick several
new privileges, he proceeded to Bologna, the place
fixed upon for his interview with the Pope. He
affected to unite in his publick entry into that city
the state and majesty that suited an Emperor, with
the humility becoming an obedient son of the
church; and while at the head of twenty thou-
sand veteran soldiers, able to give law to all Italy,
he kneeled down to kifs the feet of that very Pope
whom he had so lately detained a prisoner. The
Italians, after suffering so much from the ferocity
and licentiousness of his armies, and after having
been long accuftorned to form in their imagination
a piCture of Charles which bore some resemblance
to that of the barbarous Monarchs of the Goths
or Huns, who had formerly afflicted their country
with like calamities, were furprized to fee a prince
of a graceful appearance, affable and courteous in
his deportment, of regular manners, and of ex-
emplary attention to all the offices of religions.
They were still more astonished when he fettled
all the concerns of the princes and states which
now depended upon him, with a degree of mode-
ration and equity much beyond what they had
expected.

CHARLES himself, when he set out from Spain, His mode-

far from intending to give any such extraordinary ration and
proof of this felf-denial, seems to have been re- te rotives
solved to avail himself to the utmost of the fupe-
riority which he had acquired in Italy. But vari-

f Sandov. Hilt. dell Emp. Carl. V. ii. 50, 53, &c.
Vo L. 1. Y ous

BOOK V. ous circumstances concurred in pointing out the
.vLC".J necessity of pursuing a very different course. The

51'9 progress of the Turkish Sultan, who, after over.

running Hungary, had penetrated into Austria, ant
Sept. 13 laid siege to Vienna with an army of an hundrec

and fifty thousand men, loudly called on him t(
collect his whole force to oppose that torrent; anc
though the valour of the Germans, the pruden
conduct of Ferdinand, together with the treachern
oa. 16. of the Vizier soon obliged Solyman to abandor

that enterprize with infamy and loss, the religion!
disorders still growing in Germany made the Em
peror's pretence highly necessary there : The Flo
rentines, instead of giving their content to the re.
establishment of the Medici, which by the treaty ol
Barcelona the Emperor had bound himself to pro.
cure, were preparing to defend their liberty b)
force of arms; the vast preparations for his jour.
ney had involved him in unusual expences; and on
this, as well as many other occasions, the multi-
plicity of his affairs, and the narrowness of his
revenues obliged him to contract his vast scheme,
of ambition, and to forego present and certain ad-
vantages, that he might guard againfl more remote
but unavoidable dangers. Charles, from all theef
considerations, finding it necessary to afflume an air
of moderation, adted his part with a good grace.
He admitted Sforza into his pretence, and not only
gave him a full pardon of ail past offences, but
granted him the investiture of the duchy together
with his niece the King of Denmark's daughter in
marriage. He allowed the duke of Ferrara to
keep poifeflion of all his dominions, adjutfing the
points in dispute between him and the Pope with
an impartiality not very agreeable to the latter.
He came to a final accornoiodation with the Vene-
tians upon the realisable condition of their refto-

I $leidan, 121. Guic. I. x. 55o.

ring

ring whatever they had usurped during the late Boo: V.
war, either in the Neapolitan or papal territories. .
In return for so many concessions he exaded confi-
derable fums from each of the powers with whom
he treated, which they paid without reluctance,
and which afforded him the means of proceeding
on his journey towards Germany with a magnifi-
cence suitable to his dignity h.

THESE treaties, which restored tranquillity to R53°:

Italy after a tedious war, the calamities of which bliahen the
had chiefly ass'eted that country, were published uth h4rid'
at Bologna with great solemnity on the first day of in Florence.
the year one thousand five hundred and thirty,
amidst the universal acclamations of the people,
applauding the Emperor to whose moderation and
generosity they ascribed the blefiings of peace which
they had To long desired. The Florentines alone
did not partake of this general joy. Animated
with a zeal for liberty more laudable than prudent,
they determined to oppose the restoration of the
Medici. The Imperial army had already entered
their territories, and formed the siege of their ca-
pital. But though deserted by all their allies, and
left without any hope of succour, they defended
themselves many months with an obstinate valour
worthy of better success, and even when they fur-
rendered, they obtained a capitulation which gave
them hopes of securing some remains of their
liberty. But the Emperor, from his desire to gra-
tify the Pope, frustrated all their expecations,
and abolishing their ancient form of government,
raised Alexander Medici to the fame absolute
dominion over that tfate which his family have re-
tained to the present times. Philibert de Chalons
prince of Orange, the Imperial general, was killed

h Sandov. ii. 55, &c.

Y ?. during

Bood V. during this siege. Flis estate and titles defcende(

t ' to his fiflet Claude de Chalonsi who was married to

Rene couht of Nassau, and (he tranfinitted to he
posterity of the house of Naflau the title of Prince
of Orange which they have rendered so illuftriolus

State of ns- AFTER the publication of the peace at Bologna
fairs, ciil and the ceremony of his coronation as King o
in Ccrm- Lombardy and Emperor of the Romans, whicl

b 2 stnd tle Pope performed with the accuflomed formali.
34. ties, nothing detained Charles in Italy k; and he

began to prepare for his journey to Germany. Hi!
presence became every day more neceflary in thai
country, and was solicited with equal importunit)
by the catholicks and by the favourers of the nevt
doctrines. During that long interval of tranquil-
lity which the absence of the Emp-rror, the con.
tests between him and the Pope, and his attention
to the war with France afforded them, the latter
had gained much ground. Molt of the prince,
who had embraced Luther's opinions, had not only
eftablilhed in their territories that form of worship
which he approved, but had entirely suppressed
the rites of the Romish church. Many of the free
cities had imitated their condunt. Almost one
half of the Germanick body had revolted from
the Papal fee, and its dominion, even in that part
which had not hitherto shaken off the yoke, was
considerably weakened by the example of the
neighbouring states, or by the secret progress of
tlofe doctrines which had undermined it among
them. Whatever fatisfadtion the Emperor, while
he was at open enmity with the fee of Rome,
might have felt in those events that tended to mor.

GOuic. I xx p 541, &c. .P. Heutei. Rer. Auflr. lib. x.

c. 4. p. 230. k H Coinel. Agripz dce diplici Corona-
tioiie Lar. V. -p. °S,.tr. ii. 26(.

tify

tify and embarrass the Pope, he could not help BOOK V.
perceiving now, that the religious divisions in Ger- 0
many would, in the end, prove extremely hurtful 530
to the Imperial authority. The weakness of for-
mer Emperors had suffered the great vassals of the
Empire to make-fuch successful encroachments upon
their power and prerogative, that during the whole
cour'e of a war, which had often required the ex-
ertion of his utmost strength, Charles scarce drew
any effecftual aid from Germany, and found that
magnificent titles or obsolete pretensions were al-
most the only advantages which he had gained by
swaying the Imperial sceptre He now became
fully sensible that if he did not recover in some
degree the prerogatives which his predecessors had
loft, and acquire the authority, as well as possess
the name of head of the Empire, his high dignity
would contribute more to obtruct than to promote
his ambitious schemes. Nothing, he saw, was
moreeffential towards attaining this than to suppress
opinions might form new bonds of confederacy a-
mong the princes of the Empire, and unite them
by ties stronger and more sacred than any political
connection. Nothing seemed to lead more cer-
tainly to the accomplishment of his designs, than
to employ zeal for the established religion, of
which. he was tile natural protetor, as the initru-
menat of extending his civil authority.

ACCORDINGLY, a profped no sooner opened of rrectdin,

coming to a accmmodation with the Pope, than at Spireh.
by dte Emperor's appointment, a diet of the Em- March '5,
pire was held at Spires, in order to take into confi- '519'
deration the state of religion. The decree of the
diet aflembled there in the year one thousand five
hundred and twenty.fix, which was almost equiva-
lent to a toleration of Luther's opinions, had given
great offence to the reft of Clriftendom. Tile

Y 3 greatetl

BoOK V. greatest delicacy of address, however, was requ

si te in proceeding to any decision more rigorou
The minds of men kept in perpetual agitation t
a controversy carried on during twelve years with
out intermiflion of debate, or abatement of zea
were now inflamed to an high degree. They we
accustomed to innovations, and saw the boldest c
them successful Having not only abolished ol
rites, but fuftituted new forms in their place, the
were influenced as much by attachment to the fy
tern which he had embraced, as by aversion t
that which they had abandoned. Luther himsel
of a spirit not to be worn out by the length an
obifinacy of the combat, or to become remiss upo
success, continued the attack with as much vigou
as he had begun it. His disciples, of whom man
equalled him in zeal, and some furpafled him in lear
ning, were no less capable than their malter to con
dud the controversy in the propereft manner. Man)
of the laiety, and even of the princes, trained ui
amidfl these incefiant disputations, and in the habi
of listening to the arguments of the contending par
ties who alternately appealed to them as judges
came to be profoundly skilled in all the question
which were agitated, and, upon occasion, could
shew themselves not inexpert in any of the art
with which there theological encounters were ma-
naged. It was obvious from all there circumfian
ces, that any violent decision of the diet must have
immediately precipitated matters into confusion,
and have kindled in Germany the flames of a reli-
gious war. All, therefore, that the Archduke,
and the other commissioners appointed by the Em-
peror demanded of the diet, was, to enjoin those
states of the Empire who had hitherto obeyed the
decree issued against Luther at Worms in the year
one thousand five hundred and twenty-four, to per-
severe in the observation of it, and to prohibit the

other

other ifates from attempting any farther innovation BOOK V.
in religion, particularly from abolishing the Mass, --v.
before the meeting of a general council. After 530
much difput¢, a decree to that effec was approved
of by a majority of voices'.

THE Eletor of Saxony, the marquis of Bran- The follow.

denburgh, the Landgrave of Hefre, the dukes of ther protef
Lunenburgh, the prince of Anlalt, together with againaf
the deputies-of !fourteen Imperial or free cities m, April '9.
entered a solemn prpteft against this decree, as un-
jiif and impious. On that account they were. dif-
tingui(hed by the name of PROTESTANTS ",
an appellation, which hath since become better
known, and more honourable, by its being ap-
plied indiscriminately to all the feets of whatever
denomination which have revolted from the Ro-
man fee. Not satisfied with this declaration of
their diffent'from the decree of the diet, the Pro-
teflants sent ambassadors into Italy to lay their
grievances before the Emperor, from whom they
met with the most discouraging reception. Charles Deliber»-
was at that time in close union with the Pope, and pope fhd
follicitous to attach. him inviolably to his interest. Emperor.
D. ring their long residence at Bologna, they held
many consultations concerning the most effectual
mea-s of extirpating the herefies which had sprung
up in Germany. Clement, whose cautious and
timid mind the proposal of a general council filled
with horror, even beyond that which Popes, the
constant enemies of such assemblies, usually feel,
employed every argument to difluade the Empe-

I1Sleid. Hilt. 117. m The fourteen cities were Straf-

burg, Nurctibergh, Ulm, Conltance, Reutlingen, W ind-
Iheiin, Melnerigen, Lindaw, Kenipten, Hailbron, lina,
Weiffemburgh, Nordlingen, and St. Gal. n Sleid.
Hi; 19 F. Piul Hil. t. 45. Seckend. ii. 1z7.

Y 4 ror

BOoK V. ror from confenting'to that ieafure. He repre
.-v.-' frented general councils as faCious, utg6vernable

5. presumptuous, formidable to civil authority, an

too lowb in their op;rations to remedy disorder!
which required an immediate cure. Experience
he said, had now taught both the Emperor an(
himself, that forbearance and lenity exafperatec
the spirit of innovation which they ought to have
mollified; it was necessary, therefore, to have re.
course to the rigorous methods which such a def
perate cafe required; Leo's sentence of excomnmu.
nication, and the decree of the diet at Worm!
should be carried into execution, and it was in
cumbent on the Emperor to employ his whole
power, in order to overawe those on whom the re.
verence due either to ecclesiastical or civil autho.
rity had no longer any influence. Charles, whose
views were very' different from the Pope's, and
who became daily more sensible how obstinate and
deep rooted the evil was, thought of reconciling
the Protestants by means less violent, and confi.
dered the convocation' of a council as no improper
expedient for that purpose; but prbmifed, if these
gentler 'arts failed of success, that' then he would
exert himself with vigour to reduce those stubborn
enemies of the Catholic faith °.

Emperor SUCH' were the sentiments with which the Em-
prelent at
the Diet of peror set out for Germany, haviing already ap-
Augfbiiig. pointed a diet of the Empire to be held at Augf-
M,53h 'i, burg.' In his journey towards 'that city, he had

many opportunities of observing the disposition
of the Germans with regard to the points in
controversy, and found their minds every where
so much irritated and inflamed, as convinced

o F. Paul, 47. Seck. .. ii. 142. Hi-i. de Confeflt
d' Auxbourg, par D. Chytreus, 4to. Antw. 1572, p. 6.

him

him that nothing tendxlig to severity or rigour Boot V.
ought to be attempted, till all other measures pro- *
ved ineffe&ual. He made his public entry into -3°'
Augsburg with extraordinary pomp;' and:found Juiae 15.
there such a full assembly of the members of the
diet as was suitable both to the importance of the
affairs which were to come under their confidera-
tion, and to the honour of an Emperor, who,, as-
ter a long absence, returned to them crowned with
reputation and: success. His presence seems to have
coiimmunicated to all parties an] unusual spirit of
moderationarfiid' desire of peace. The Elecdr of
Saxony' woutld' not permit Luther to accompany
him to the diet, left he (hould offend the Empe-
ror by bringing into his pretence a person excom-
municated by the Pope, and the author of all those
dissensions which it now appeared so difficult to
compose. .At' the Emperor's desire, all the Pro-
teftant princes sorbad the divines who accompani-
ed them to preach in publick during their refi-
dence at Augtburgh. For 'the fame reason they
employed: -Melandthon, the man of the greatest
learning:,-as w41l as of the moft..pacific and. gentle
spirit among 'the Reformers, to draw up a consef-
sion of their faith, expressed in terms as little of-
fenfive' to the Roman Catholics, as a regard for
truth wnilid'.permit. MelantIhon, who seldom The consef-
futiered the' rancour of controveriy to envenom his f'" 'fAuf,-
style, even ,ih' Writings purely polemical, executed
a 'task g.fo agreeable to his natural difpofition'with
great moderation and fucoefs. The Creed; which
he composed, known by the'name of the Conftf-
sion of Augsburg, from the place where it was
presented;' was read publickly in the diet; some
Popish divines were appointed to. examine it;
they brought in their animadversions; a dispute
ensued betw'een 'themn and Melarithon, seconded
by some of his brethren ; but though Melanhlon
softened some articles, made concellions with re-

gard

BooK V. gard to others, and put the least exceptionable

,'"," sense upon all; though the Emperor himself la-

boured with great earnestness to reconcile the con-
tending parties; so many marks of diftinftion
were now established, and such insuperable bar-
riers placed between the two churches, that all
hopes of bringing about a coalition seemed utterly
desperate P.

FROM the divinesi among whom. his endea-

vours had been so unficcefsful, Charles turned
to the princes their patrons. Nor did he find them,
how defirons soever of accommodation, or willing
to oblige the Emperor, more disposed than the
former to renounce their opinions. At that time,
zeal for religion took possession of the minds of
men to a degree which can scarce be conceived
by those who live in an age when the paflions ex-
cited by the first manifestation of truth, and the
first recovery of liberty, have in great measure
ceased to operate. This zeal was then of such
strength as to overcome attachment to their politi-
cal interest, which is commonly the predominant
motive among princes. The Ele&or of Saxony,
the Landgrave of Hefie, and other chiefs of the
Protestants, though solicited separately by the
Emperor, and allured by the promire or profpet
of those advantages, which it was known they
were molt solicitous to attain, refused, with a for-
titude highly worthy of imitation, to abandon
what they deemed the caufc of God for the fake
of any earthly acquisition q.

Severe de- EVERY scheme in order to gainaor difinite the
thLtC. EProteftant party proving abortive, nothing now
tantb.

P Seckend. lib. ii. 159, &c Abr Sculteti Annales Evan-

gelici ap. Herm. Von der Hard. Hilt. Liter. Reformn. Lips.
i7i7. fol. p. .19.

Sleid. 132. Scuitet. Annal, 158.

remained

remained for the Emperor but to take some vigo- Book V.
rous measures towards aflerting the dotrines and ,55.
authority of the established church. These, Cam-
peggio, the Papal nuncio, had always recom-
mended as the only proper and effectual course of
dealing with such obstinate heretics. In compli-
ance with his opinions and remonfirances, the di- Nov. i.
et ifued a decree, condemning most of the pecu-
liar tenets held by the Protestants; forbidding any
person to protec or tolerate those who taught
them; enjoining a strict observance of the establish-
ed rites; and prohibiting any further innovation
under revere penalties All orders of men were
required to aflift with their persons and fortunes
in carrying this decree into execution ; and such
as refused to obey it were declared incapable of
acting as judges, or of appearing as parties in
the Imperial chamber, the supreme court of judi-
cature in the Empire. To all which was subjoin-
ed a promise that an application should be made
to the Pope, requiring him to call a general coun-
cil within fix months, in order to terminate all
controversies by its sovereign decisions '.

THE severity of this decree, which they confi- Thy enter

dered as a prelude to the most violent perfecuti- 't smll
ons, alarmed the Protestants, and convinced themkalde.,
that the Emperor was resolved on their deftruaion.
The dread of those calamities which were ready
to fall on the church, oppressed the feeble spirit of
Melanfthon; and as if the cause had already been
desperate, he gave up himself up to melancholy
and lamentation. But Luther, who during the
meeting of the diet had endeavoured to confirm
and animate his party by fcveral treatises which he
addressed to them, was not disconcerted or dismay-
ed at the prospect of this new danger. He coI-

Sleid. 139.

forted

SooK V. forted MelanCthon and his other desponding difci-
-'" pies, and exhorted the princes not to abandon

'53°0 those truths which they had lately asserted with

such laudable boldners s. His exhortations made
the deeper impreflion upon them as they were
greatly alarmed at that time by the account of a
combination among the Popish princes of the Em-
pire for the maintenance of the established religion,
to which Charles himself had acceded t. This
convinced them that it was necessary to stand on
their guard; and that their own safety as well as
the success of their cause depended on union. Fil-
led with this dread of the adverse party, and with.
there Sentiments concerning the conduct proper for
themselves, they afiembled at Smalkalde. There,
Decemb.zz. they concluded a league of mutual defence against

all aggreflors , by which they formed the Protef.
tant states of the Empire into one regular body,
and beginning already to confider themselves as
such, they resolved to apply to the Kings of France
and England, and to implore them to assist and
patronize their new confederacy.
The Empe. AN affair not conne&ed with religion furnished

or proofe, s

tp havehis them with a pretence.for courting the aid of so-
brotlre. reign princes. Charles, whose ambitious views
leaed Ktin "'

re ig 'p:nce

of the Ro- enlarged in proportion to the increase of his pow-
mans. er and grandeur, had formed a icheme of conti-

nuing the Imperial crown in his family, by procu-
ring his brother Ferdinand to be elected king of
the Romans. The present juncture was favour-
able for the execution of that design. The Empe-
ror's arms had been every where victorious; he
had given law to all Europe at the late peace;
no rival now remained in a condition to balance
or to eontroul him; and the Eleaors, dazzled

'Seck. ii. io. Sleid. z4o. t

Seek. ii. zoo. iii.
Il. u Sleid. Hifl. 142

by

by the splendour of his success, or over-awed by BOOK V.
the greatness of his power, durst scarce dispute the 3.
will of a prince whose follicitations carried with 53
them the authority of commands. Nor did he
want plausible reasons to enforce the measure.
The affairs of his other kingdoms, he said, obli-
ged him to be often absent from Germany; the
growing disorders occasioned by the controversies
about religion, as well as the formidable neigh-
bourhood of the Turks, who continually threat-
ened to break in with their desolating armies into
the heart of the Empire, required the constant
presence of a prince, endowed with prudence ca-
pable of composing the former, and with power
and valour sufficient to repel the latter. His bro-
ther Ferdinand possessed there qualities in an emi-
nent degree; by residing long in Germany, he
had acquired a thorough knowledge of their con-
flitution and manners; having been present almost
from the first rife of their religious dissensions, he
knew what remedies were most proper, what they
could bear, and how to apply them; as his own
dominions lay on the Turkish frontier, he was the
natural defender of Germany against the invasions
of the Infidels, being prompted by interest no less
than he would be bound in duty to oppose them.

THESE arguments made little impreflion on the The Protie.

Proteflants. Experience taught them, that no- ats aver
thing had contributed more to the undisturbed
progress of their opinions, than the interregnum
after Maximilian's death, the long absence of
Charles, and the flackncfs in the reins of govern-
ment which there occasioned; after deriving such
advantages fiom a irate of anarchy, they were
extremely unwilling to give themselves a new and
a fixed master. They perceived clearly the extent
of Charles's ambition, that he aimed at rendering

the

Boos V. the Imperial crown hereditary in his family, and
'-'- ' would of course establish in the Empire an abfo-

1530' lute dominion, to which eletive princes could not

have aspired with equal facility They determi-
ned therefore to oppose Ferdinand's election with
the utnloft vigour, and to route their countrymen
by their example and exhortations, to withifand
this encroachment on their liberties. The Eletor

's5;. of Saxony accordingly, not only refused to be
Jinuiry 5. present in the electoral college, which the Empe-

ror summoned to meet at Cologne, but inftruided
his eldest son to appear there, and to protest agailft
the elecion as informal, illegal, contrary to the
articles of the golden bull, and subversive of Iie
liberties of the Empire. But the other Elelcrs,
s.i ho- whom Charles had been at. great pains to gain,

without regarding either his absence or protest,
chore Ferdinand King of the Romans.; who a few
days after was crowned at Aix la-Chapelle '.

Ncgotiati- THE account of this tranfation, as well as of
ons of th e ecommencement of rome prosecutions against
Protestants . .. .
withFrance. them on account of their religious principles, in

the Imperial chamber, bei:g brought to the Pro-
teftants, who were alfembled a second time at
Smalkalde, they thought it necessary both to re-
new their former confederacy, and immediately
to difpatdh their ambassadors into France and En-
Feb.29 gland. Francis had observed, with all the jealou-

fy of a rival, the reputation which the Emperor
had acquired by his seeming disinterestedness and
moderation in fettling the affairs of Italy; and be-
held with great concern, the successful ftep which
he had taken towards perpetuating and extending
his authority in Germany by the election of a King
of the Romans. Nothing, however, would have

' Sleid. 142. Seck. iii. i. 1'. Hcuter Rer Auar. lib. x
c. 6. p. 240.

been

been more impolitic than to precipitate into a new BOOK V.
war his kingdom exhausted by extraordinary es- ,' .
forts, and discouraged by ill success, before it had
got time to recruit its strength, or to forget past
misfortunes. Nor could he, when no provocati-
on had been given, and scarce a pretext had been
afforded him, violate a treaty of peace which he
himself had so lately solicited, without forfeiting
the esteem of all Europe, and being detested as a
prince void of probity and honour. He observed,
with great joy, powerful factions beginning to
form in the Empire; he listened with the utmost
eagerness to the complaints of the Protestant prin-
ces; and without seeming to countenance their
religious opinions, determined secretly to cherish
those sparks of political discord which might be as-
terwards kindled into a flame. For this purpose,
he sent William de Bellay, one of the ablest ne-
gociators in France, into Germany, who visiting
the courts of the malecontent princes, and height-
ened their ill humour by various arts, concluded
an alliance between them and his master Y, which
though concealed at that time, and productive of
no immediate effects, laid the foundation of an
union fatal on many occasions to Charles's ambiti-
ous projects; and shewed the discontented princes
of Germany, where they might, for the future,
find a protector no less powerful than willing to
undertake their defence against the encroachments
of the Emperor.

THE King of England, highly incensed againit With Eng-

Charles, in complailance to whom, the Pope had land.
long retarded, and now openly opposed his di-
vorce, was no less difpoled than Francis to itrength-
en a league which might be rendered so formida-

Y Bellay, 129, a. 130, b, Seek. iii. 14.

ble

Bo6b V. ble to the Emperor. But his favourite project of

VEJt the divorce led him into filch a labyrinth ol
1531. fcheies and negotiations, and he was, at the fame

time, so, intent on abolishing the papal jurifdition
in England, that he had ho leisure for foreign as
fairs; and was obliged to satisfy himself with gi.
ving general prormies,. together with a small sup.
ply in money to the confederates of Smalkalde z.

Cot'i, he MEANWHILE, many circumstances convinced
Pmtetlants. Charles that this was not a junture when the ex-

tirpation of heresy was to be attempted by violence
and rigour; that, in compliance with the Pope's
inclinations, he had already proceeded with impru
dent precipitation; and that it was more his inte-
reft to consolidate Germany into one united and
vigorous body, than to divide and enfeeble itb9
a civil war. The Protetfants, already confidera-
ble by their numbers, and their zeal, had now ac-
quired additional weight and importance by their
joining in that confederacy into which the rash
steps taken at Augsburg had forced them Having
now digcovered their own strength, they despised
the decisions of the Imperial chamber; and being
secure of foreign protection, were ready to set the
head of the Empire at defiance. At the fame
time his peace with France was precarious, the
friendflip of an irresolute and interested pontiff was
not to be relied on; and Solyman, in order to re-
pair the infamy and loss which his arms had sustain-
ed in the former campaign, was preparing to enter
Austria with more numerous forces. On all these
accounts, especially the last, a speedy accommo-
dation with the malccontent puinces, was neceffa-
ry not only for the accomplifliment of his future
iclhemes, but for ascertaining his present safety.
Negotiations were, accordingly, carried on by his

leIHbcit, izs, 154.

direCion

diredion with the Eledor of Saxony and his afro- BOOK V.
ciates; after many delays occasioned by the jea- tY
louiy of the Emperor, and of each other, after 153
innumerable difficulties ariing from the inflexible
nature of religious tenets, which cannot admit of
being altered, modified, or relinquished in the Grant,
fame manner as points of political interest, terms them favou-

roble terms.

of pacification were agreed upon at Nuremberg,
and ratified Lblemnly in the Diet at Ratisbon. In July3.
this treaty, it was stipulated, That universal AUgU13'
peace be established in Germany, until the meet-
ing of a general council, the convocation of
which within fix months the Emperor (hall en-
deavour to procure; That no person be molested
on account of religion That a stop be put to
all processes begun by the Imperial chamber
againtt Protestants, and the sentences already pas-
fid to their detriment be declared void. On their
part, the Protestants engaged to allift the Empe-
ror with all their forces in reifting the invasion
of the Turks a Thus by their firmness in ad-
hering to their principles, by the unanimity
with which they urged all their claims, and by
their dexterity in availing themselves of the Em-
peror's situation, the Protestants obtained terms
which amounted almotn to a toleration of their re-
ligion ; all the concessions were made by Charles,
none by them ; even the favourite point of their
approving his brother's election was not mention-
ed; and the Protestants of Germany, who had
hitherto been viewed only as a religious feel,
came henceforth to be confidered as a political
body of no small consequence b

THE intelligence which Charles received of So- c paign

lyman's having entered Hungary at the head of i"s""r".
three hundred thousand men cut short the deli-

Du Mont Corps Diplomatique, tom. iv. part ii. 87, 89.
i Sleid. 149, &c. Seek. iii. 19.
V L. 11. Z berations

BOOR V. berations of the Diet at Ratisbon; the contin-
'>'~' gent both of troops and money with each prince

was to furnish towards the defence of the Empire
having been already fettled. The Protestants,
as a testimony of their gratitude to the Empe-
ror, exerted themselves with extraordinary zeal,
and brought into the field forces that exceeded in
number the quota imposed on them; and the Ca-
tholics imitating their example, one of the great-
eft and best appointed armies that had ever been
levied in Germany, assembled near Vienna. Be-
ingjoined by a body of Spanish and Italian vete-
rans under the marquis del Guafto; by some
heavy armed cavalry from the Low-Countries;
and by the troops which Ferdinand had raised in
Bohemia, Auitria, and his other territories, il
amounted in all to ninety thousand disciplined
foot, and thirty thousand horse, besides a prodi.
gious swarm of irregulars. Of this vast army.
worthy the first prince in Christendom, the Em
peror took the command in person; and man-
kind waited in suspense the issue of a decisive bat
tie between the two greatest Monarchs in the
world. But each of them dreading the other':
power and good fortune, they both condudec
their operations with fiuch exceflive caution, tha
a campaign, for which such immense prepa
rations had been made, ended without any me

September morable event. Solyman finding it impofliblet(
and aobtr gain ground upon an enemy always attentive

and on his guard, marched back to Conftantino
pie towards the end of autumn c. It is remarka
ble that in such a martial age, when every gentle
man was a soldier, and every prince a general
this was the first time that Charles, who had al
ready carried on such extensive wars, and gainec
so many victories, appeared at the head of hi

' Jovii. His. lib. 30 p. zoo, &c. Barre Hist. de 1'En
pire, i. 8. 347.

troop!

froops. In this first essay of his arms, to have GooK V.
oppoted such a leader as Solyman, was no frnall '-
honour; to have obliged him to retreat merited 153-.
very considerable praise.

ABOUT the beginning of this campaign, the Aug. r6.

EleCtor of Saxony died, and was uicceeded by
his son John Frederick. The Reformation ra-
iler gained than loft by that event; the new
Ele1or, no less attached than his predecefiors to
the opinions of Luther, occupied the flation
which they held .at the head of the Proteffant
party, and defended, with the boldness and zeal
of youth, the cause which they had softered
and reared with the caution of old age.

IMMEDIATELY after the retreat of the Turks, The Empe-
Charles, impatient to revisit Spain, set out, o0n or' inte'-

, vi ew

v l ith

his way thither, for Italy. As he was extremely the Pope i,
'desirous of an interview with the Pope, they meth wai. to
,a second time at Bologna, with the fame external
demonstrations of respect and friendihip, but with
little of that confidence which had subsisted be-
tween them during their late negotiations there.
Clement was much difratisfied with the Empe-
ror's proceedings. at Augsburg; his concefions
with regard to the speedy convocation of a coun-
cil, having more than cancelled all the merit of
the revere decree against the doctrines of the Re-
formers The toleration granted to the Protef-
tants at Ratisbon, and the more explicit promile
c)ncerning a council with which it was accompa-
nied, had irritated him still farther. Charles,
however, partly from conviction that the meeting
of a council would be attended with salutary es-
fess, and partly from his desire to pleale the
Germans, having solicited him by his ambaffa-
dors to call that assembly without delay, and now Nc,,ociti.
"rging the fame thing in person, Clement was ?' .""b""

z greatly.. o.,,i ..

BOOK V greatly embaraffed what reply he should make tc

Ct--V-a request, which it was indecent to refule, and

dangerous to grant. He endeavoured at filft tc
divert Charles from the measure, but findinE
him inflexible, he had recourse to artifices whicd
he knew would delay, if not entirely defeat thl
calling of that aiermbly. Under the plaiifikhl
pretext of its being previoully neceflTiry to letile,
with all parties concerned, the place of the coun.
cil's meeting ; the manner of its proceedings:
the right of the persons who thould be admitted tc
vote; and the authority of their decisions; he
dispatched a nuncio, accompanied by an amrbaf
fador from the Emperor, to the Elector of Saxo
ny as head of the Protestants. With regard t(
each of there articles, inextricable difficulties at(
contests arose. Tle Protestants demanded
council to be held in Germany; the Pope insistet
that it should meet in Italy ; they contended tha
all points in dispute should be determined by thi
words of holy scripture alone; he confidered the
decrees of the church, and the opinions of father
and doctors as of equal authority ; they require(
a free council in which the divines commiilionec
by different churches should be allowed a voice
he aimed at modelling the council in such a man
ner as would render it entirely dependent on hi
pleasure: Above all, the Protestants thought i
unreasonable that they fhluld bind themlelvest
submit to the decrees of a council, before the
knew on what Principles there decrees were to b
founded, by what perlbns they were to be pro
nounced, and what forms of proceeding the
would observe. The Pope maintained it tob
altogether unnecessary to call a council, if thol
who demanded it did not previously declare the
relblution to acquiesce in its decrees. In orderi
adjust such a variety of points, many expedienl
were proposed, and the negociations spun out t

luc

fich a length, as effectually answered Clement's BOOK V.
purpose of putting off the meeting of a council, -v
without drawing on himself the whole infamy of
obftruiting a measure which all Europe deemed
so eflential to the good of the church d

Too ETHE R with this negociation about calling and r<r pre-

a council, the Emperor carried on another which trangulit!y
he had fill more at heart, for securing the peace of ittly.
etablifhed in Italy. As Francis had renounced
his prcteniions in that country with great reluc-
tance, Charles made no doubt but that he would
lay hold on the first pretext afforded him, or em-
brace the first opportunity which presented itself
f recovering what he had loft. It became necef'
l;iry, on this account, to take measures for as-
fembling an army able to oppose him. As his
treasury, drained by a long war, couild not sip-
ily the fums requisite for keeping such a body
constantly on foot, he attempted to throw that
burden on his allies, and to provide for the safety
of his own dominions at their expence, by pro-
posing that the Italian flates lmould enter into a
league of defence against all invaders; that, cn
the firfl appearance of danger, an army should
be railed and maintained at the cmmon charge;
aicd that Antonio de Leyva should be appointed
the generalilfimo. Nor was the propolal unac-
ceptable to Clement, tho' for a reason very dif-
fren!t from that which induced the Emperor to
mike it. He hoped, by this expedient, to deliver 1,33.
laly from the German and Spanish veterans which
had ti, long filled all the powers in that coun-
try with terror, and flill kept them in fubje(ttion
to the imperial yoke. A league was accordingly Feb. 4.
Cticlutled; all the Italian states. the Venetians
excepted, acceded to it ; tle f lm which each of
t'l contracting parties should fur'nllh towards

F. Paul, HIfl. 61. Seckcnd. iii. 73.

7 3 ni;i:1-

BOOK V. maintaining the army was fixed; the Empero
,'. agreed to withdraw the troops which gave To mud

umbrage to his allies, and which he was unabli
any longer to lupport, Slaving disbanded part n
them, and removed the reft to Sicily and Spain
he embarked on board Doria's gallies, andai

April az. rived at Barcelona e

Designs and NOTWITI-ISTANDINO all his precautions for fc
negotiations
of theL" curing the peace of Germany and maintainini
irench king that system which he had established in Italy, tli

against the
Emperor. Emperor became every day more and more ap

prehenfive that both would be soon disturbed b,
the intrigues or arms of the French King. Hi
apprehensions were well founded, as nothing bu
the desperate situation of his affairs could hav,
brought Francis to give his content to a treaty li
dishonourable and disadvantageous as that o
Cambray: He at the very time of ratifying it
had formed a resolution to observe it no longe
than necessity compelled him, and took a folemi
protest, though with the most profound secrecy
against several articles in the treaty, particular!
that whereby he renounced all pretensions to thi
dutchy of lMilan, as unjust, injurious to his heirs
and invalid. One of the crown lawyers, by hi
command, entered a protest to the fame purpore
and with the like secrecy, when the ratificatio
of the treaty was regiflered in the parliamento
Pal is f ; and Francis seems to have thought that
by employing an artifice unworthy of a King, de
ftruCtive of public faith, and of the mutual cot
fidence on which all tranfaaions between nation
are founded, he was releaned from any obligati
on to perform the most solemn promises, orr
adhere to the most flcred engagements. Fre'
the moment he concluded the peace of Cambra)

c Guic. 1. xx. 5 51. Ferreras, ix. 149.
f Du Mont. Coups Diplomn. toll. iv. part 2. p. 52.

lh

he willed and watched for an opportunity of vio- BOOK V.
lating it with safety. He endeavoured for that '
reason to strengthen his alliance with the King of 1533
England, whose friendship he cultivated with the
greatest assiduity. He put the military force of
his own kingdom on a better and more refpeda-
ble footing than ever. He artfully fomented the
jealousy and discontent of the German princes.

BUT above all, Francis laboured to break the particularly

ftrii confederacy which subsisted between Charles with the
and Clement; and he had soon the satisfaction to
observe appearances of disgust and alienation ari-
sing in the mind of that suspicious and interefled
Pontiff, which gave him hopes that their union
would not be lasting. As the Emperor's decifi-
on in favour of the duke of Ferrara had greatly
irritated the Pope, Francis aggravated the injuf-
tice of that proceeding, and flattered him that
the Papal fee would find in him a more impartial
and no less powerful protector. As the impor-
tunity with which Charles demanded a council
was extremely offensive to the Pope, Francis art-
fully created obstacles to prevent it, and attempt-
ed to divert the German princes, his allies, from
iliitting so obstinately on that point g. As the
Emperor had gained such an ascendant over Cle-
ment by contributing to aggrandize his family,
Francis endeavoured to allure him by the fame
irrdliltible bait, proposing a marriage between
his second son Henry duke of Orleans, and Ca-
tharine, the daughter of the Pope's cousin Lau-
rence di Medici. On the first overtures of this
match, the Emperor could not periiade himself
that Francis really intended to debale the royal
blood of France by an alliance with Catharine,

h\ole ancctlors had been tl lately private citizens
; Bclay, 14, &c, Suck. iii. 48 . F Paul, 63.

Z 4 and

BOOK V. and merchants in Florence, and believed that he

3 meant only to flatter or amuse the ambitious Pon.

tiff. He thought it necedary, however, to es.
face the impreflion which such a dazzling ossie
might have made, by promiling to break off the
marriage which had been agreed on between hi~
own niece the King of Denmark's daughter, and
the Duke of Milan, and to fubflitute Catherine
in her place. But the French ambassadors pro.
ducing unexpectedly full powers to conclude the
marriage treaty with the duke of Orleans, this
expedient had no effet. Clement was so highly
pleated with an honour which added such lustre
and dignity to the house of Medici, that he offered
to grant Catharine the investiture of considerable
territories in Italy by way of portion ; he feenled
ready to support Francis in prosecuting his ancient
claims in that country, and consented to a perft-
nal interview with that Monarch .

Interview CHARLES was at the utmost pains to prevent
betweenthe a meeting, in which nothing was likely to pals
Pope and
Francis. but what would be of detriment to him; nor

could he bear, after he had twice condescended
to visit the Pope in his own territories, that Cle-
ment should bestow such a mark of diftindcion on
his rival, as to venture on a voyage by sea, at
an unfavourable'feafon, in order to pay court to
Francis in the French dominions. But the Pope's
eagerness to accomplish the match overcame all
scruples of pride, or fear, or jealousy, which
must have influenced him on any other occasion.
The interview, notwithstanding several artifices
of the Emperor to prevent it, took place at Mar-
eaober. feilles with extraordinary pomp, and demon-

tfrations of confidence on both fides; and the mar-

h Guic. 1. xx. 551. 533. Belay, 138.

riage,

riage, which the ambition and abilities of Catha- BOOK V.
rine rendered in the sequel as fatal to France, as
it was then thought difhon:urable, was confum- 1534
mated. But whatever schemes may have been
secretly concerted by the Pope and Francis in fa-
vour of the duke of Orleans, to whom his father
proposed to make over all his rights in Italy, so
careful were they to avoid giving any cause of of-
fence to the Emperoer, that no treaty was con-
cluded between them h; and even in the marriage-
articles, Catharine renounced all claims and pre-
tensions in Italy, except to the dutchy of Urbino i.

BUT at the very time when he was carrying on Pope'a con;

these negociations, and forming this connection drgrd it
with Francis, which gave so great umbrage to the the King of
Emperor, such was the artifice and duplicity ofGdiv'rce
Clement's character, that he suffered the latter to
direct all his proceedings with regard to the King
of England, and was no less attentive to gratify
him in that particular, than if the most cordial
union had fill luhfifted between them. Henry's
suit for a divorce had now continued near fix
years; during all which period the Pope negoci-
ated, promised, retracted, and concluded no-
thing. After bearing repeated delays and difap-
pointments, longer than could have been expec-
ted from a prince of such a cholerick and impe-
tuous temper, his patience was at last so much
exhaulled, that he applied to another tribunal
for that decree which he had solicited in vain at
Rome. Cranmer, archbishop of Canterbury, by
a sentence founded on the authority of Univer-
lities, Doftors, and Rabbies, who had been con-
fulted with refpetfp to the point, annulled the
King's marriage with Cathanine ; her daughter
'was declared illegitimate; and Anne Boleyn ac-
h Guic. I. 20. 5 .
Du Mont Crps Diplo0n, iv p. ii. oi.

;no\vledged

BOOK V. knowledged as Queen of England. At the fam,

--v time Henry began to neglect and to threaten thi
'534. Pope whom he had hitherto courted, and t(

make innovations in the church, of which hi
had formerly been such a zealous defender. Cle
ment, who had already seen so many province
and kingdoms revolt from the Holy See, becami
apprehensive at last that England would imitatt
their example, and partly from his solicitude t(
prevent that fatal blow, partly in compliance witl
the French King's Iblicitations, determined tc
give Henry such fatisfadion as might till retail
him within the bosom of the church. But thl
violence of the Cardinals, devoted to the Empe.
ror, did not allow the Pope leisure for executing

1534. this prudent resolution, and hurried him with a
Mrch "-3. precipitation fatal to the Roman fee, to ifiue a bull

rescinding Cranmer's sentence, confirming Hen.
rv's marriage with Catharine, and declaring him
excommunicated, if, within a time specified, lie
did not abandon the wife he had taken, andi re-
turn to her whom he had deferred. Enraged at

',prl ut- this unexpcted decree, Henry kept no longer
t;],hrit , aho-
li,.d I, any mealures with the court of Rome; his lilib
i0,1laid. jes ieconded his relentment and indignation ; an

acd of parliament was paged, abolishing the Pa-
pal power and jurili'litlon in England; by ano-
ther, the King was declared supreme head of the
church, ard all the authority of which the Popes
were cdprived was vested in him. That vafl fa-
brick of ecclefiaflical dominion which had been
)iifid wLi.h fuhl art, and whose foundations ftnm-
cd (l d.ecp, being no longer lipported by the
veneration of tilt people, was overturned in a
mointn. i-lenry himlitf, with the caprice pecu-
liar to his character, continued to defend the doc-
triiies of the Romiif church as fiercely as he at-
tacked its jurilielion. He alternately persecuted
the Protcflants !or rejedling the former, and thli

Catio

Catholicks for acknowledging the latter. But his BooK V.
fubjeAs being once permitted to enter into new
paths, did not chufe toftopfhortat the precise point 534
prescribed by him. Having been encouraged by
his example to break rome of their fetters, they
were To impatient to shake off all that remained k
that in the following reign, with the general ap-
plaiife of the nation, a total reparation was made
from the church of Rome in articles of doctrine,
as well as in matters of discipline and jurifdidion.

A SHORT delay might have saved the See of Death of

Rome from all the unhappy consequences of Cle- Clement
rnent's rafhne£s. Soon after his sentence against
Henry, he fell into a langui(hing distemper,
which gradually wafting his constitution, put an Sept. 15.
end to his Pontificate, the most unfortunate, both
during its continuance, and by its effects, that
the church had known for many ages. The ve- letion of

Paul lll.

ry day on which the Cardinals entered the con- oa. 13.
clave, they raied to the Papal throne Alexander
Farnese, dean of the sacred college, and the el-
deft member of that body, who aflumed the name
of Paul III. The account of his promotion was
received with extraordinary acclamations of joy
by the people of Rome, highly pleated, after an
interval of more than an hundred years, to fee
the crown of St. Peter placed on the head of a
Roman citizen, Persons more capable of judg-
ing, formed a favourable presage of hisadminif-
tratiun, from the experience which he had acqui-
red under four pontificates, as well as the charac-
ter of prudence and moderation which he had uni-
formly maintained in a station of great eminence,
and during an active and difficult juncture that
required both talents and address

k Hcibcrt.'Burn. I-lit. of Reform.
'Cuic. 1.zo. 556. F. Paul. 6+.

EU ROPE,

BOOK V. EUROPE, it is probable, owed the continuance

of its peace to the death of Clement; for al.
534though no traces remain in history of any league

concluded between him and Francis, it is scarce
to be doubted but that he would have seconded the
operations of the French arms in Italy, that he
might have gratified his ambition by lecing ore
of his family possessed of the supreme power in
Florence, and another in Milan. But upon the
election of Paul III. who had hitherto adhered
uniformly to the Imperial interest, Francis found
it necefary to suspend his operations for lome
time, and to put off the commencement of hodli.
lities against the Emperor, on which he was fully
determined.

Inrurreaion W1VHILE Francis waited for an opportunity to
of the Ana-
baptists in renew a war which had hitherto proved £o fatal
Germany. to himself and his subje&s, a transaction of a very

singular nature was carried on in Germany.
Among many beneficial and salutary effecds of
which the Reformation was the immediate cause,
it was attended, as mufl he the cafe, in all ati-
ons and events wherein men are concerned, with
lome consequences of an opposite nature. When
the human mind is rouzed by grand objedts, and
agitated by strong pallions, its operations acquire
such force, that they are apt to become irregular
and extravagant. Upon any great revolution in
religion, such irregularities abound mofi, at that
particular period, when men having thrown off
the authority of their ancient principles, do not
yet fully comprehend the nature, or feel tie obli-
gation of those new ones which they have em-
braced. The mind, in that situation, pushing
forward with the boldness which prompted it to
reject eftabliflied opinions, and not guided by a
clear knowledge of the lyftem substituted in their
place, disdains all retlraint, and runs into wild

notions,

notions that often lead to scandalous or immoral BOOK V.
conduct. Thus, in the first ages of the Christian --.v
church, many of the new converts, having re- 534'
nounced their ancient Creeds, and being but imper-
fetly acquainted with the doctrines and precepts of
Chriftianiry, broached the most extravagant opi-
nions equally subversive of piety and virtue; all
which errors disappeared or were exploded when
the knowledge of religion increased, and came to
be mi re generally difiufed. In like manner, soon
after Luther's appearance, the rafhnefsor ignorance
of some of his disciples led them to publilh absurd
and pernicious tenets, which being proposed to
men extremely illiterate, but fond of novelty,
and at a time when their minds were turned
wholly towards religious speculations, gained too
ealy credit and authority among them. To there
caunes mull be imputed the extravagancies of
Munster, in the year one thousand five htundred
and twenty-five, as well as the rapid progress
which they made among the peasants; but though
the insurrection excited by that Fanatic was soon
ftupprefled, several of his followers lurked in dif-
ferent places, and endeavoured privately to pro-
pagate his opinions.

lN those provinces of Upper Gerrmany, which Origin and

had already been To cruelly wafted by their en- tenetsof
thufiaflic rage, the magistrates watched their tat *e
motions with such revere attention, that many of
them found it necessary to retire into other coun-
tries, ftme were punified, others driven into ex-
ile, and their errors were entirely rooted out.
But in the Netherlands and Westphalia, where
the pernicious tendency of their opinions was
more unknown, and guarded against with less
care, they got admittance into several towns, and
spread the infection of their principles. The
most remarkable of their religious tenets related

to

BOOK V. to the Sacrament of Baptism, which as they con.
'-v-
r tended, ought to be adminiltred only to persons,

1534' grown up to years of understanding, and Ihould

be performed not by sprinkling them with water,
but by dipping them in it : For this reason they
condemned the baptism of infants, and rebaptiz-
ing all whom they admitted into their society,
the fed came to be distinguished by the name of
Anabaptists. To this peculiar notion concern-
ing baptism, which has the appearance of being
founded on the pradice of the church in the
apostolic age, and contains nothing incon-
fiftent with the peace and order of human
society, they added other principles of a
most enthusiastic, as well as dangerous nature.
They maintained that, among Chriltians who
had the precepts of the gospel to direEt, and the
spirit of God to guide them, the office of magif-
tracy was not only unneceflary, but an unlawful
encroachment on their spiritual liberty ; that the
diftintions occasioned by birth, or rank, or
wealth, being contrary to the spirit of the gospel,
which confiders all men as equal, should be en-
tirely abolished ; that all Christians throwing their
pofleffions into one common stock, should live
together in that slate of equality which becomes
members of the fame family ; that as neither the
laws of nature, nor the preceptsof the New Tef-
tament had placed any restraints upon men with
regard to the number of wives which they might
marry, they should use that liberty which God
himself had granted to the patriarchs.

Settle in SUCH opinions, propagated and maintained
MunSer. with enthusiastic zeal and boldness, were not long

of producing the violent effects natural to them.
Two Anabaptist prophets, John Matthias, a ba-
ker of Haerlem, and John Bocold, or Befikels,
a journeyman taylor of Leyden, pofiffed with

' the

the rage of making proselytes, fixed their refi- BooK V.
dence at Munster, an Imperial city in Wefiphalia, '
of the first rank, under the sovereignty of its 34
bishop, but governed by its own senate and con-
fils. As neither of there Fanaticks wanted the
talents necessary for such an undertaking, great
resolution, the appearance of fantity, bold pre-
tensions to inspiration, and a confident and plau-
lible manner of difcourling, they Coon gained
many converts. Among there were Rothman,
who had first preached the Protestant docarine in
Munfler,. and Cnipperdoling, a citizen of good
birth, and considerable eminence. Emboldened
by the countenance of such disciples, they openly
taught their opinions; and not satisfied with
that liberty, they made several attempts, though
without (uccefs, to f ize the town, in order to
get their tenets eftablifed by publick authority. Become
At laps, having secretly called in their associates maitersof
from the neighbouring country, they suddenly that cit
took poffeflion of the arsenal and fenate-houle in
the night time, and running through the streets
with drawn swords, and horrible howlings, cried
out alternately, " Repent, and be baptized," a:;d
" Depart ye ungodly." The senators, the ca-
nons, the nobility, together with the more fober
citizens, whether Papists or Protestants, terrrifi-
ed at their threats and outcries, fled in confusion,
and left the city under the dominion of a frantic
multitude, consisting chiefly of strangers. No-
thing now remaining to overawe orcontroul them,
they set about modelling the government accord-
ing to their own wild ideas i and though at first
they flewed so much reverence for the ancient
conltitution, as to elet senators of their own set,
and to appoint Cnipperdoling and another proe Ell r:
lyte conluls, this was nothing more than form ne ,fom of
for all their proceedings were dirededl by IMat r gJven-
thias, who in the stile, and with the authority ol
a prophet, uttered his commands, which it was

instant

oaoK V. instant death todifobey. Having begun with en

v
-J Acouraging the multitude to pillage the churches

and deface their ornaments; he enjoined them to
deltroy all books except the Bible, as ufelels o
impious; he appointed the estates of such as fled
to be confilcated, and fold to the inhabitants o
the adjacent country; he ordered every man t(
bring forth his gold, silver, and precious effcts
and to lay them at his feet; the wealth amafled
by these means, he deposited in a publick treafu-
ry, and named deacons to dispense it for the com-
mon ule of all. The members of his common-
wealth being thus brought to a perfect equality,
he commanded all of them to eat at tables pre-
pared in public, and even prescribed the dilhes
which were to be served up each day. Having
finished his plan of Reformation, his next care
was to provide for the defence of the city; and
he took measures for that purpose with a pru-
dence which favoured nothing of fanaticism. He
collected vast magazines of every kind; he re-
paired and extended the fortifications, obliging
every person without diftindion to work in his
turn ; he formed such as were capable of bearing
arms into regular bodies, and endeavoured to add
the vigour of discipline to the impetuolity of en-
thufiafm. He sent emiflsaries to the Anabaptists
in the Low-Countries, inviting them to assemble at
Munster, which he dignified with the name of
Mount-Sion, that from thence they might set out to
reduce all the nations of the earth under their do-
minion. He himself was unwearied in attending
to every thing necessary for the feourity or increase
of the fe t; animating his disciples by his own
example to refuse no labour, as well as to repine
at no hardship; and their enthusiastic paflions
being kept from subsiding by a perpetual fuccel-
sion of exhortations, revelations and prophecies,
they seemed ready to undertake or to susser any
thing in maintenance of their opinions.

MEAN WHILE

MEANWHILE, the bishop of Munster having Booic V
affenmbled a considerable army, advanced to besiege '---
the town. On his approach, Matthias lallied out TrhIbop
at the head of some chosen troops, attacked one "f Munltcr

„ , . /. ,P ~

. a ~ . ~ r~t lakes armns

quarter of his camp, forced it, and after great againil
slaughter, returned to the city loaded with glory them.
and spoil. Intoxicated with this success, he ap-
peared next day brandishing a spear, and decla-
red, that in imitation of Gideon, he would go forth
with a handful of men and (mite the host of the
ungodly. Thirty persons, whom he named, fol- May
lowed him without hesitation in this wild en-
terprize, and rushing on the enemy with a
frantic courage were cut off to a man. The
death of their prophet occasioned at first
great consternation among his disciples, but
Boccold, by the fame gifts and pretensions
which had gained Matthias credit, soon re-John of
vived their spirits and hopes to such a degree, quiregreat
that he succeeded him in the fame absolute direc- atihority1-

rnong the

tion of all their affairs. As he did not possess that Anabaptifc
enterprizing courage which distinguished his pre-
decelbr, he satisfied himself with carrying on a
defensive war, and without attempting to annoy
the enemy by sallies, he waited for the fucours he
expected from the Low-Countries, the arrival of
which was often foretold and promised by their
prophets. But though less daring in attion than
Matthias, he was a wilder enthusiast, and of more
unbounded ambition. Soon after the death of
his predecessor, having by obscure visions, and
prophesies, prepared the multitude for some ex-
traordinary event, he firipped himself naked, and
marching through the streets, proclaimed with a
loud voice, " That the kingdom of Sion was at
hand; that whatever was highest on earth should
be brought low, and whateverwasloweft fhuuldbe
exalted." In order to fulfil this, he commanded
tile churches, as the molt lofty buildings in the
city, to be levelled with the ground; he degraded

VOL. 11. A a the

BOOK V. the senators chosen by Matthias, and depriving

v'--. Cnipperdoling of the consulship, the highest of.
154 fice in the commonwealth, he appointed him to

execute the lowest and most infamous, that of
common hangman, to which strange transition
the other agreed, not only without murmuring,
but with the utmost joy; and filch was the detl
potifm and rigour of Boccold's adminiltration,
that he was called almofft every day to perform
iome duty or other of his wretched fundtion. l:i
place of the deposed senators, he named twelve
judges, according to the number of tribes in li
rael, to preside in all affairs; retaining to himfiel
the fame authority which Moses anciently poffci:
fed as legislator of that people.
FIe&ead No? satisfied, however, with power or ti:lcs

which were not supreme, a prophet, whom he
had gained and tutored, having called the mui-
titude together, declared it to be the will of God,
that John Boccold should be King of Sion, and
fit on the throne of David. John kneding
June 4. down, accepted of the heavenly call, which he

solemnly protested had been revealed likewise to
himself, and was immediately acknowledged as
Monarch by the deluded multitude. From that
moment he afiumed all the state and pomp of
royalty. He wore a crown of gold, and the
richest and most sumptuous garments. A Bible
was carried on his one hand, a naked sword on
the other. A great body of guards accompanied
him when he appeared in publick. He coined
money stamped with his own image, and ap.
pointed the great officers of his houfhold and
kingdom, among whom Cnipperdoling was not
minated governor of the city, as a reward tbi
his former fubmifnion.

HAVING

HAVING now attained the heighth of power, BOOK V.
Boccold began to discover passions, which he had '--'

,514.

hitherto retirained or indulged only in secret. As Hi lt;,ti-
the excesses of enthusiasm have been oblerved ustc':et

andcondust.

in every age to lead to sensual gratifications, the
lame constitution that is fifceptible of the for-
mer, being remarkably prone to the latter, he
instructed the prophets and teachers to harrangue
the people for several clays concerning the law-
fulnefl, and even neceflity of taking more wives
than one, which they asserted to be one of the
privileges granted by God to the faints. When
thiir ears were once accustomed to this licentious
doctrine, and their pallions inflamed with the
profpeEt of such unbounded indulgence, he him-
lelf let them an example of using what he called
their Christian liberty, by marrying at once three
wives, among which the widow of Matthias, a
woman of singular beauty, was one. As he was
allured by beauty, or the love of variety, he gra-
dually added to the number of his wives until
they amounted to fourteen, though the widow of
Matthias was the only one dignified with the title
of Queen, or who shared with him the splendor
and ornaments of royalty. After the example
of their prophet, the multitude gave themlelves
up to the molt licentious and uncontrouled gra-
tification of their delires. No man remained fa-
tisfied with a tingle wife. Not to use their Crif-
tian liberty was deemed a crime. Perlbns were
appointed to search the houses for young women
grown up to maturity, whom they inlfantly com-
pelled to mary. Together with polygamy, free-
dom of divorce, its infeperable attendant, was
introduced, and became a new source of cor-
ruption. Every excels was committed, of which
the paflions of men are capable, when restrained
neither by the authority of laws nor the sense of

A a : decency;

BooK.V. decency m; and by a monstrous and almost in.

-... credible conjundtion, voluptuoufnefs was engraf.

ted on religion, and dissolute riot accompanied
the aufterities of fanatical devotion.

A confede- MEANWHILE, the German princes were high.
racy againfsi
tlheAnabap- ly offended at the insult offered to their dignity
tilts, by Boccold's presumptuous usurpation of royal

honours; and the profligate manners of his fol.
lowers, which were a reproach to the Clrillian
name, filled men of all professions with horror.
Luther, who had testified against this fanatical
spirit on its firfi appearance, now deeply lamen
ted its progress, and exposing the delusion with
great strength of argument, as well as acri-
mony of stile, called loudly on all the states of
Germany to put a flop to a phrenzy no less per.
nicious to society, than fatal to religion. The
Emperor, occupied with other cares and projecs,
had no leisure to attend to such a distant objet.
But the princes of the Empire, assembled bythe
King of the Romans, voted a supply of men and
money to the bishop of Munster, who being un.
Befregedthe able to keep a sufficient army on foot, had con-

tu verted the siege of the town into a blockade.

The forces railed in consequence of this refolu.

" Prophetae & concionatornm autoritate juxta et exemplo,

tota urbe ad rapiendas pulcherrimas quafque falninas difcu
fum eft. Nec intra paucos dies, in tanta hominium turbi,
fere ulla reperta eft fuipra animum decimum quartum, qux
fluprum paisa non fuerit. Lamb. Hortenf. . 303. VulIg
viris quinas effe uxores, pluribus senas, nonnullis feptenas&
otonas. Puellas supra duodeciuium aetatis annum fIatim a
mare. Id. 305. Neino una contentus suit, ncque cuiquaiii ext
effaetas & viris imiliaturascontinenti effelicuit. Id. 307. Tacebo
hic, ut fit fuus honor auribus, quanta barbarie et mnalitia uli
funt in puellis vitiandis nondunm aptis matrimoniae, id quod Ili
hi neque ex vano, neque ex vulgi fcrmonibus hautllim eft, fc
ex ea vetula, cui cura sic vitiatarum denandata suit, audilulII
Joh. Corvinus, 316.

tlol0.

tion, were put under the command of an officer Boon V.
of experience, who approaching the town to-'--
wards tie end of spring in the year one thou- 535-
land five hundred and thirty-five, pressed i.t
more closely than formerly, but found the forti-
fications so strong, and so diligently guarded,
that he durst not attempt an assault. It was now
above fifteen months since the Anabaptitls had
established their dominion in Munster; they had
during that time undergone prodigious fatigue
in working on the fortifications, and perform-
ing military duty. Notwithstanding the prudent
attention of their King to provide for their sub-- m n

. Difirefs and

fiftence, and his frugal and regular oeconomy in fanaticirm
their publick meals, they beagan to feel the ap-of the be.
proach of famine. Several small bodies of theirieged'
brethren, who were advancing to their assistance
from the Low-Countries, had been intercepted,
and cut to pieces; and while all Germany was
ready to combine against them, they had no prof-
pee of Luccour. But such was the ascendant
l hich Eoccold had acquired over the multitude,
and so powerful the fascination of enthufiaam,
that their hupes were as sanguine as ever, and
they hearkened with implicit credulity to the vi-
sions and predictions of their prophets, which
allured them, that the Almighty would speedily
interpose, in order to deliver the city. The
faith, however, of tome few, shaken by the
violence and length of their sufferings, began to
fail; but being fiufpcted of an inclination to
liirrender to the enemy, they were punished
'with immediate death, as guilty of impiety in
dillrufling the power of God. One of the King's
wives, hal ing uttered certain words that impli-
ecd fume doubt concerning his divine miflion, he
inllantly called the whole number together, and
commanding the blasphemer, as he called her,
to kneel down, cur off her head with his own

A a 3 hands;

BOOK V. hands; and so far were the reft from expressing

any horror at this cruel deed, that they joined
him in dancing with a frantick joy around the
bleeding body of their companion.

taken. Y R B this time, the besieged endured the utnoft
Junle i. rigor of famine; but they chose rather to filftr

hardships, the recital of which is shocking to
humanity, than to liften to the terms of capitu-
lation offered them by the bishop. At last, a
ceferter, whom they had taken into their service,
being either less intoxicated with the fumes of
enthnfiafmi, or unable any longer to bear such
dicfrefs, made his escape to the enemy. He in-
formed their general of a weak part in the for-
tifications which he had observed, and affuri.:g
him that the besieged, exhausted with hunger
and fatigue, kept watch there with litle care, he
offered to lead a party thither in the night. The
proposal was accepted, and a chosen body of
troops appointed for the service; who, fcali, g
the walls unperceived, seized one of the gates,
a;,(l admitted the reft of the army. The Aia-
June a4. baptists, though furprized, defended themlilves

in the market place with valour, heightened by
despair; but being overpowered by numbers, and
surrounded on every hand, moil of them w(re
slain, and tle remainder taken prisoners. Among

Puniflimen tile last were the Kin:g and Cnip':ellolin1g Tlhe
of theKini. ir * . . -

i

and i, ;al. i'np, loaded witli clains, was carried fil-m city
Futiuae. to city as a f,)ectacle to gratify the curiolity of

the people, and was cxpolcd to all their iililhts,
Hiis pirit, hlowever, wab nuot orkeln or lhuniibldt
by this lad rcveri '

of his conditionl; aid lie Il;t

1(re'd witllh ul.liakl.ni fir inel to the dillili.tgill!-
ing tenets of his sett. Afrter his, le was bruoghlt
back to Munfler, the Icene of his royalty allin
crimes, and put to death with the nmoffi exquifiil
nard lingcri:jg tortures, all which he bore Vwill

allonifiting

lalonifhing fortitude. This extraordinary man, BOOK V.
\who had been able to acquire such amazing do-
minion over the milnds of his followers, and to 5
excite commotions lo dangerous to society, was
only twenty-fix years of age."

TOLETHER with its Monarch, the kingdom chraeer of
of the Anabiptifts came to an end. Their prin- that
ciples having taken deep root in the Low-Coun- period.
tries, the party still fiufifts there, under the name
of Mennonites; but by a very singular revolu-
tion, this se&t, so mutinous and sanguinary at its
iirft origin, hath become altogether innocent and
pacific. Holding it unlawful to wage war, or to
accept of civil offices, they devote themrelves en-
tirely to the duties of private citizens, and by
their industry alnd charity endeavour to make re-
parati)n to human fnciety for the violence com-
mitted by their founders °. A small number of
this Ilt which is fettled in England, retain its
peculiar tenets concerning baptimi, but without
aiy dangerous mixture of enthusiasm.

T-iE mutiny of the Anabaptilts, though Proceeding,
it drew general attention, did not so entirely and atUo-

yrity of th6

e.grofs tilhe princes o Germany, as not to le:.ue of
aliow eifuire for other transactions. The alliance Smalcalde.
b1twecn the IFrench King andl the confederates
at Smalkalde, bgana about this time to produce
great effects. Ulric, Duke of \Vurtemberg,
hlaving been exe;llcd his dominions in the year
o:ic thiotifand si e hundred and nineteen, on ac-
*cuunt of ihis viOlient and oppreilive administration,

" Slcid. i.o, &c. Tuinultuiiin Anabaptiftaruii Liber unus.

Ant. Lamberto t-lortenlio nuictore ap. Scardiuiii vol 2. p. 298,
&c Dle Mlierabili Moiinatericliiliiii oblidione, &c libellus
Antr nii Corvini ap. Scnrd. 3 1 3 Annales An;tbiptiltici a Joh.
Ilenrico Ottio, 4tO. I.aflle:e, 1672. ('or l-leilib:cliiuis Hilt.
Ana!). Edit 1637 P. po. 40 °ylc Didion. Alt./HIn{sa:tijtl.

A a 4 the

Boa' V. the house of Auflria had got poffeflion of hil
^'v' dutchy. That prince having now by alongexil

f53S atoned for the errors in his conduct, which were

the effeat rather of inexperience than of a tvran.
nical disposition, was become tle objet of ge.
neral compassion. The Landgrave of Helfe, in
particular, his near relation, warmly espouscd
his interest, and used many efforts to recover for
him his ancient inheritance. But the King of the
Romans obstinately refuted to relinquish a valuable
acquisition which his family had made with so
much ease. The Landgrave, unable to compel
him, applied to the King of France his new ally.
Francis, eager to embrace any opportunity ofdif
trefling the house of Austria, and desirous ds
wresting from it a territory, which gave it foot-
ing and influence in a part of Germany at a difl
tance from its other dominions, encouraged the
Landgrave to take arms, and fccretly iupplied
him with a large urnm of money. This he em-
ployed to raile troops, and marching with great
expedition towards Wurteinberg, attacked, de-
feated, and dispersed a considerable body of Autl
trians, entrusted with the defence of the country.
All the Duke's fubjets hastened, with emulation,
to receive their native Prince, and re-invelted
him with that authority which is still enjoyed by
his descendants. At the fame time the exercise
of the Protestant religion was established in his
dominions P.

The King FERDINAND, how sensible soever of this unex.
of the Rlo-
mans court peded blow, not daring to attack a Prince whom
0mc-. all the Proteflant powers in Germany were ready

to support, judged it expedient to conclude a trea-
ty with him, by which he recognized in the moti
rample form his title to the dutchy. The success

P Sleid. 172. Bellay, 159, &c.

of the Landgrave's operations in behalf of the BooK V.
Duke of Wurtemberg, having convinced Ferdi- '-v
nand that a rupture with a league so formidable 53
as that of Smalkalde, was to be avoided with the
utmost care, he entered likewise into a negociati-
on with the Elector of Saxony, the head of that
union, and by tome conceflions in favour of the
Piotefeant religion, and others of advantage to the
Eiedor himlelf, he prevailed on him together
with his confederates to acknowledge his title as
King of the Romans. At the lame time, in or-
der to prevent any ifch precipitate or irregular
eletion in times to come, it was agreed that no
perlbn should hereafter be promoted to that dig-
nity without the unanimous content of the Elec-
tors; and the Emperor loon after confirmed this
fllpulatiun q.

THESE aas of indulgence towards the Protet- Paul II.
tants, and the close union into which the King of calls a ge-

l'leral coun-

the Romans seemed to be entering with thecil to meet
'rinces of that party, gave great offence at Rome. at M"tu;.
Paul ill. though he had departed from a refolu-
tion of his predecessor, never to content to the
calling of a general council, and had promised,
in the fiift consistory held after his election, that
he would convoke that affemblv lo much desired
by all Christendom, was no iefs enraged than
Clement at the innovations in Germany, and no
Ile averle to any scheme for relorming either the
doctrines of the church, or the abuses in the
court of Rome: But having been a witness of
the univertal censure which Clement had incurred
by his obstinacy with regard to these points, he
hoped to avoid the fame reproach by the leem-
ing alacrity with which he proposed a council ;
flattering himself, however, that fich difficulties
would arilf concerning tile time and place of meet-

ing
Slcid., i73 Coip I);poin . tomn. i . p . 1 9.

BooK V. ing, the persons who had a right to be present,

and the order of their proceedings, as would es-
'35 fetually defeat the intention ot those who de-

manded that atlembly, without exposing himfi;if
to any imputation for refuting to call it. With
this view he dispatched nuncios to the several
courts, in order to make known his intention, and
that he had fixed on Mantua as a proper place
in which to holdthel council. Such difficulties as
the Pope had foreseen, immediately presented
themselves in great number. The Frencl1 King
did not approve of the place which rtaul had clh-
fen, as th: Papal and imperial influence would
necessarily be too great in a town situated in that
part of Italy. The King of England not only
concurred with Francis in urging that objection,
but refused, besides, to acknowledge any council
called in the name and by the authority of ihe
DecU 11. Pope. Tle German Proteflants having met to-

gether at Smalkalde, iniifted on their orginal
demand of a council to be held in Germany, and
pleading the emperor's promise, as well as the
agreement at Ratisbon to that effel, declared
that they would not confider an affernbly held at
MIantua as a legal or free rcprelentative of the
church. By this diversity of sentiments and views,
such a field for intrigue and negociation opened,
as made it easy for the Pope to aflume the merit
of beirg eager to atlrmble a council, while at tlie
fame time he could put off its meeting at plea-
ftle. The Proteflants on the other hand liil'ec-
ting his dtfigns, and sensible of the importance
wlich they derived from their union, renex\ed
for ten years the league of Smalkalde, which
now became firongcr and more formidable by
the acceflion of everal new memlbers

DURI NG

rTilis leagne wae conclulded December, one thoufin ml fi't
hunldred and tliitiy five, but not extcndel d (l f ignii in fo(iil ii

Scel-

DURING these tranfaOtions in Germany, the BooK V.
Emperor undertook his famous enterprize against '-v
the piratical states in Africa. That part of the Th E5mpe-
African continent lying along the coast of the ror'sexpe-
Mediterranean sea, which anciently formed the Afra, ,and
kingdoms of Mauritania and Maflylia, together slate of that
with the republick of Carthage, and which is county
now known by the general name of Barbary, had
undergone many revolutions. Subdued by the
Romans, it became a province of their empire.
Conquered afterwards by the Vandals, they erec-
ted a kingdom there. That being overturned by
Eelifarius, the country continued futjeE to the
Greek Emperors, until it was over-run towards
the end of the seventh century, by the rapid and
irrefiftable arms of the Arabs. It remained for
sometime a part of that vast empire of which the
Caliphs were the head. Its immense distance,
however, from the feat of government, encou-
raged the descendants of those leaders, who had
subdued the country, or the chiefs of the Moors,
its ancient inhabitants, to throw off the yoke, and
to set up for independence. The Caliphs, who
derived their authority from a spirit of enthusiasm,
more fitted for making conquests than for prefer-
ving them, were obliged to connive at ads of re-
bellion which they could not prevent; and Bar-
bary was divided into fcveral kingdoms, of which
Morocco, Algiers and Tunis were the most con-
fiderable. The inhabitants of these kingdoms

September in the following year. The Princes who acceded
to it were John Elector of Saxony, Ernest Duke of Brunf-
wick, Philip Landgrave of H-clie, Ulric Duke of Wurtciem-
berg, Barnim and I'hilip Dukes of Pomecrania, John George,
and Joachim Princes of Anhalt, Gebhard and Albert Counts
of Mansfield; William Count of Nalfau. The cities, Straf-
burg, Nureinbeig, Conflance, Ulm, Magdeburg, Bremen,
Reutliilgen, HI-ailbron, McIVinljeene, Lindaw, C:nipen, lnla,
Bibrac, Windlhein, Anfblurg, FanLafort, Efling, Brunlwick,
Gofar, Hanover, Goitingcn, Einbeck, Hamburg, Minden.

were

Boo~ V. were a mixed race, Arabs, Negroes from the

' uthern provinces, and Moors, either natives of
I535 Africa, or who had been expelled out of Spain;

all zealous professors of the Mahometan religion,
and inflamed againfl Christianity with a bigotted
hatred proportional to their ignorance and barba-
rous manners.
Rife of the AMONG there people, no less daring, incon-

,atecal sant and treacherous, than the ancient inhabi-

tants of the fame country described by the Roman
historians, frequent seditions broke out, and ma-
ny changes in government took place. These, as
they affected only the internal state of a country
so barbarous are but little known, and deserve to
be so But about the beginning of the sixteenth
century a sudden revolution happened, which by
rendering the states of Barbary formidable to the
Europeans, hath made their history worthy of

·ndof the more attention. This revolution was brought
Barbarofrfa. about by persons born in a rank of life which en-

titled them to aa no such illustrious part. Horuc
and Hayradin, the tons of a potter in the Isle of
Lesbos, prompted by a restless and enterprizing
spirit, forsook their father's trade, ran to sea, and
joined a crew of pirates They soon diflinguifhed
themselves by their valour and activity, and be-
coming masters of a small brigantine, carried on
their infamous trade with such conduct and fuc-
cess, that they affernbled a fleet of twelve galleys,
besides many vessels of smaller force. Of this fleet
Horuc, the elder brother, called Barbarossa from
the red colour of his beard, was admiral, and
Hayradin second in command, but with almoftc
qual authority. They called themselves the friends
of the tea, and the enemies of all who fail upon
it; and their names fbon became terrible from
the Straits of the Dardanels to those of Gibraltar
Together with their fame and power, their ambi-

tious

tious views opened and enlarged, and while ac- BOOK V.
ting as Corsairs they adopted the ideas, and ac-
quired the talents of conquerors. They often car- 535'
ried the prizes which they took on thie coafis of
Spain and Italy into the ports of Barbary, and
enriching the inhabitants by the sale of their boo-
ty, and the thoughtless prodigality of their crews,
were welcome guests in every place at which they
touched. The convenient situation of there har-
bours lying so near the greatest commercial states
at that time in Christendom, made the brothers
wish for an eftabliflment in that country. An
opportunity of accomplishing this quickly pre-
sented itself, which they did not susser to pass un-
improved. Eutemi, King of Algiers, having at-
tempted several times, without success. to take a
fort which the Spanilh governors of Oran had
built not far from his capital, was so ill advised as
to apply for aid to Barbarofla, whose valour the
Africans confidered as irresistible. The active
Corsair gladly accepted of the invitation, and
leaving his brother Hayradin with the fleet,
marched at the head of five thousand men to Al-
giers, where he was received as their deliverer.
Such a force gave him the command of the
town ; and observing that the Moors neither fiuf-
peated him of any bad intention, nor were capable
with their light-armed troops of opposing his dif.
ciplined veterans, he secretly murdered the Mo- Horuc, the
narch whom he had come to aflift, and caused t''l bo-

ther, be-

himself to be proclaimed King of Algiers in his comes maf-
stead. The authority which he had thus boldly trofAl-
ulirped, he endeavoured to establish by arts suited
to the genius of the people whom he had to go-
vern; by liberality, without bounds to those who
favoured his promotion, and by cruelty no less
unbounded towards all whom he had any reason to
diftrult. Not Latisfied with the throne which he
had acquired, he attacked the neighbouring

King

BOOK V. King of Tremecen, and having vanquished him

- -V--i in battle, added his dominions to those of Algiers.
1535. At the fame time, he continued to infest the coasts

of Spain and Italy with fleets which refeimbkd
the armaments of a great Monarch, rather than
the light fquadirons of a Corsair. The devaltati-
ons which these committed obliged Charles about
the beginning of his reign, to furnish the ;nar-
quis de Comares, governor of Oran, with troops
fufficiert to attack him. That officer, aflifled by
the dethroned King of Tremecen, executed the
commiflion with Iuch spirit, that Barbarossa's troops
being beat in several encounters, he hirmfelf was
shut up in Tremecen; after defending it to the
last extremity, he was overtaken in attempting
to make his escape, and slain while he fought
with an obstinate valour, worthy of his former
fame and exploits.

The pro- His brother Hayradin, known likewise by the
grefs of
Hayradin name of Barbarossa, affnmed the scepter of Al-
the second giers with the fame ambition and abilities, but

with better fortune. His reign being undisturbed
by the arms of the Spaniards, which had full oc-
cupation in the wars among the European powers,
he regulated with admirable prudence the interi-
or police of his kingdom, carried on hiis naval
operations with great vigour, and extended
his conquefis on the continent of Afiica. Bur,
perceiving that the Moors and Arabs submitted
to his government with the utmost impatience,
and being afraid that his continual depredations

Puts hi. do- would, one day, draw upon him the arms of the
minions un- Christians, he put his dominions under the pro-
teaito of tetion of the Grand Seignior, and received from
the Sultan. him a body of Turkish soldiers sufficient for his

security againfl his domestic as well as his foreign
enemies. At last, the fame of his exploits daily
increasing, Solyman offered him the command of

the

the Turkish fleet, as the only person whose valour BOOK V.
and skill in naval affairs entitled him to command '-
against Andrew Doria, the greatelt lea officer of 135
that age. Proud of this diftintion, Barbarossa re-
paired to Constantinople, and with a wonderful
versatility of mind, mingling the arts of a courtier
with the boldness of a Corlair, gained the entire
confidence both of the Sullan and his Vizier. To
them he communicated a scheme that he had
formed of making himself matter of Tunis, the
most flourishing kingdom, at that time, on the
coast of Africa; which being approved of by
them, he obtained whatever he demanded for
carrying it into execution.

His hopes of success in this undertaking were His rcheme

founded on the intestine divisions in the kingdom for conque-
of Tunis. Mahmed, the last King of thatring Tu'i,
country, having thirty-four sons by different wives,
named Muley-Hafcen, one of the youngest
among them, his fuccefTor. That weak Prince,
who owed his preference not to his own merit,
but to the ascendant which his mother had acqui-
red over an old doating monarch, first poisoned
his father in order to prevent him from altering
his destination ; and then, with the barbarous po-
licy which prevails wherever polygamy is permit-
ted, and the right of luccelfion is not precisely
fixed, he put to death all his brothers whom he
could get into his power. Alrafchid, one of the
eldest, was so fortunate as to escape his rage; and
finding a retreat among the wandering Arabs,
made ieveral attempts, by the afliftance of some
of their chiefs, to recover the throne, which of
right belonged to him. But these proving un-
successful, and the Arabs, from their natural le-
vity, being ready to deliver him up to his merci-
less brother, he fled to Algiers, the only place of
refuge remaining, and implored the protection

of

BOOK V. of Barbarossa ; who, discerning at once all the

i'3 ' advantages that might be gained by fiipportini

his title, received him with every poifible demon
firation of friendship and refped. Being ready
at that time, to flt fail for Conflantinople, he ea
fily persuaded Alrafchid, whole eagerness to ob
tain a crown disposed him to believe or undertake
any thing, to accompany him thither, promising
him effetual afliftance from Solvman, whom he
represented to be the most generous, as well as
most powerful Monarch in the world. But ne
sooner were they arrived at Constantinople, thai
the false Corsair, regardless of all his promises t
him, opened to the Sultan a plan for conquering
Tunis, and annexing it to the Turkish empire
by making use of the name of this exiled Prince
and by means of the party ready to declare in his
favour. Solyman approved with too much faci
lity, of this perfidious proposal, extremely fuita
ble to the character of its author, but altogether
unworthy of a great Prince. A powerful fleet
and numerous army were loon aflembled ; at the
fight of which the credulous Alrafchid flattered
himself, that he would soon enter his capital ir
triumph.
Itsfuccers. BUT just as this unhappy Prince was going to

embark, he was arrested by order of the Sultan
shut up in the seraglio, and was never heard o
more. Barbarossa tailed with a fleet of two huni
dred and fifty vefiels towards Africa. After ra
vaging the coasts of Italy, and Spreading terro
through every part of that country, he appeared
before Tunis; and landing his men, gave ou
that he came to assert the right of Alrafchid
whom he pretended to have left sick aboard
the Admiral galley. The fort of Goletta which
commands the bay, Coon Ifell into his hands
partly by his own address, partly by the treaclier
of its commander; and the inhabitants of Tunis

weary

weary of Muley-Hafcen's government, took arms, BOOK V.
and declared for Alrafchid with such zeal and unani- 1
mity, as obliged the former to fly To precipitately,
that he left all his treasures behind him. The gates
were immediately set open to Barbarossa, as the re-
ftorer of their lawful Sovereign. But when Alrafchid
himself did not appear, and when instead of his
name, that of Solyman alone was heard among
the acclamations of the Turkish soldiers marching
into the town, the people of Tunis began to sus-
pet the Corsair's treachery; and their suspicions
being soon converted into certainty, they ran to
arms with the utmost fury, and surrounded the
citadel, into which Barbarossa had led his troops.
But having foreseen such a revolution, he was not
unprepared for it; he immediately turned againfl
them the artillery on the ramparts, and by one
brisk discharge of it, and of his fmall-arms, he
dispersed the numerous but undirected assailants,
and forced them to acknowledge Solyman as their
sovereign, and to submit to himself as his viceroy.

His first care was to put the kingdom, of which Barbaroia's

l'"

.j ... n-rr * formidable

he had thus got pofleffion, in a proper posture of p.wer.
defence. He strengthened the citadel which com-
mands the town; and fortifying the Goletta in a
regular manner, at vast expence, made it the prin-
cipal station for his fleet, and his great arsenal
both for military and naval flores. Being now
poifeffed of such extensive territories, he carried
on his depredations against the Christian states to
a greater extent, and with more deftru&ive vio-
lence than ever. Daily complaints of the outrages
committed by his cruizers were brought to the
Emperor by his fubjets, both in Spain and Italy.
All Christendom seemed to expect from him, as
its greatest and most fortunate Prince, that he
would put an end to this new and odious species

VoL. II. B b of

BOOK V of oppreflion. At the fame time Muley-Hafcen,
- V the exiled king of Tunis, finding none of the
ThSe3 xied Mahometan Princes in Africa willing or able to
kin of Tu assist him in recovering his throne, applied to
riE implores
the Empc. Charles as the only person who could aflert his
rTnceali rights in opposition to such a formidable usurper.
April 2, The Emperor, equally desirous of delivering his
'553 dominions from the dangerous neighbourhood of

Barbarossa; of appearing as the protector of an
unfortunate Prince; and of acquiring the glory
annexed in that age, to every expedition against
the Mahometans, readily concluded a treaty with
Muley-Hafcen, and began to prepare for invading
Tunis. Having made trial of his own abilities
for war in the late campaign in Hungary, he was
now become to fond of the military character, that
he determined to command on this occasion in

;q prepira- person. The united strength of his dominions
tion io the was called out upon an enterprize in which the

Emperor was about to hazard his glory, and which
drew the attention of all Europe. A Flemish fleet
carried from the ports of the Low-Country a body
of German infantry'; the gallies of Naples and
Sicily took on board the veteran bands of Italians
and Spaniards, which had distinguished themselves
by so many victories over the French; the Empe-
ror himself embarked at Barcelona with the flow-
er of the Spanilh nobility, and was joined by a
considerable squadron from Portugal, under the
command of the Infant Don Lewis, the Empress's
brother; Andrew Doria conducted his own gal-
lies, the bell appointed at that time in Europe,
and commanded by the most skilful officers: the
Pope furniihed all the alliftance in his power to.
wards such a pious enterprize; and the orderol

' Hardi Annalcs Brabant. i. 599.

Malla

Malta, the perpetual enemies of the Infidels, BooK V.
equipped a small squadron, but formidable by -.:"v"
the valour of the knights who served on board it. 35
The port of Cagliari in Sardinia was the general
place of rendezvous. Doria was appointed High
Admiral of the fleet; the command in chief of
the land forces was given to the marquis di
Guafto.

ON the sixteenth of July, the fleet, consisting Land. in

of near five hundred vessels, having on board Afric
above thirty thousand regular troops, set fail from
Cagliari, and after a prosperous navigation, land-
ed within fight of Tunis. Barbarofla having ear-
ly intelligence of the Emperor's immense arma-
ment, and fufpeeting its destination, prepared with
equal prudence and vigour for the defence of his
new conquest. He called in all his corsairs from
their different stations; he drew from Algiers what
forces could be spared; he dispatched messengers
to all the African Princes, Moors as well as Arabs,
and by representing Muley-Hafcen as an infamous
apostate, prompted by ambition and revenge, not
only to become the vassal of a Christian Prince,
but to conspire with him to extirpate the Mahom-
medan faith, he inflamed those ignorant and bi-
gotted chiefs to such a degree. that they took
arms as in a common cause. Twenty thousand
horse together with a vast body of foot, soon as-
fembled at Tunis; and Barbarossa, by a proper
distribution of presents among them from time to
time, kept the ardour which had brought them
together from subsiding. But as he was too well
acquainted with the enemy whom he had to op-
pose, to think that these light troops could resist
the heavy armed cavalry and veteran infantry
which compored the Imperial army, his chief con-
fidence was in the strength of the Goletta, and in Lay, cg
his body of Turkish soldiers who were armed and to Goleta.

B b dif-

Boot V. disciplined after the European fashion. Six thou.
'-'v~ sand of these, under the command of Sinan, a

53. renegado Jew, the bravest and most experienced

of all his corsairs, he threw into that fort, which
the Emperor immediately invested. As Charles
had the command of the lea, his camp was so
plentifully supplied not only with the necessaries,
but with all the luxuries of life, that Muley-Hafcen,
vho had not been accustomed to fee war carried
on with such order and magnificence, was filled
with admiration of the Emperor's power. His
troops, animated by his presence, and confider.
ing it as meritorious to shed their blood in such a
pious caule, contended with each other for the
pofis of honour and danger. Three separate at.
tacks were concerted, and the Germans, Spa.
niards and Italians, having one of these commit-
ted to each of them, pushed them forward with
the eager courage which national emulation in-
spires. Sinan displayed resolution and skill be-
Coming the confidence which his master had put
in him; the garrilon performed the hard service
on which they were ordered with great fortitude,
But though he interrupted the beliegers by fre.
quent sallies; though the Moors and Arabs alarm
ed the camp with their continual incursions; the
breaches soon became so considerable towards the
land, while the fleet battered the fortification0
which it could approach, with no lets fury and

Take itby success, that an assault being given on all fides
form. at once, the place was taken by storm; Sinan
JuJY aS. with the remains of his garrison, retiring, aftel

an obfrinate resistance, over a illallow part of th(
bay towards the city. By the reduction of th(
Goletta, the Emperor became mailer of Barba
roffa's fleet, consisting of eighty-feven gallies anc
galliots, together with his arsenal, and three
hundred cannon mostly brass, which were plant
ed on the ramparts; a prodigious number in tha

age!

sge, and a remarkable proof of the strength of Boos V.
the fort, as well as of the greatness of the cor- V
fair's power. The Emperor marched into the 535'
Goletta through the breach, and turning to Mu-
ley-Hafcen who attended him, " Here," fays he,
' is a gate open to you, by which you shall re-
" turn to take poffiefion of your dominions."

BARBAROSSA, though he felt the full weight
of the blow which he had received, did not,
however, lose courage, or abandon the defence
of Tunis. But as the walls were of great extent,
and extremely weak; as he could not depend on
the fidelity of the Inhabitants, nor hope that the
Moors and Arabs would sustain the hardships of
a siege, he boldly determined to advance with
his army, which amounted to fifty thousand men t,
towards the Imperial camp, and to decide the
fate of his kingdom by the issue of a battle. This
resolution he communicated to his principle offi-
cers, and representing to them the fatal confe-
quences which might follow, if ten thousand
Christian slaves, whom he had shut up in the ci-
tadel, (hould attempt to mutiny during the ab-
fence of the army, he proposed as a necessary
precaution for the publick security, to maifacre
them without mercy before he began his march.
They all approved warmly of his intention to
fight; but inured as they were, in their piratical
depredations, to scenes of bloodshed and cruelty,
the barbarity of his proposal concerning the slaves
filled them with horror; and Barbarolfa, rather
from the dread of irritating them, than swayed
by motives of humanity, consented to spare the
lives of the fiaves.

BY this time the Emperor had begun to ad- DefeatsBar.

vance towards Tunis; and though his troops surf- ar"''i' "
sered inconceivable hardihips in their march over my'

Epiftres de Princes, par Rufcelli, p. 1 9, &c.

B b 3 burning

BOOK V. burning sands, destitute of water, and exposed

t o the intolerable heat of the fun, they soon came
535 up with the enemy. The Moors and Arabs,

emboldened by their vast superiority in number,
immediately rushed on to the attack with loud
Ihouts, but their undisciplined courage did not
stand one moment the shock of regular battali-
ons; and though Barbarossa, with admirable pre-
fence of mind, and by exposing his own person
to the greatest dangers, endeavoured to rally
them, the rout became so general, that he him.
self was hurried along with them in their flight
back to the city. There he found every thing in
the utmost confusion; some of the inhabitants
flying with their families and effects; others rea-
dy to set open their gates to the conqueror; the
Turkish soldiers preparing to retreat; and the ci.
tadel, which in luch circumstances might have
afforded him some refuge, already in the posses
lion of the Christian captives. These unhappy
men, rendered desperate by their situation, had
laid hold on the opportunity which Barbarofa
dreaded. As soon as his army was at some dif.
tance from the town, they gained two of their
keepers, by whose alliftance, knocking off their
fetters, and bursting open their prisons, they
overpowered the Turkish garrison, and t,.-ined
the artillery of the fort against their former maf-
ters. Barbarossa, disappointed and enraged, ex.
claimed sometimes against the false compafnion of
his officers, and i()metimes condemning his own
imprudent compliance with their opinion, fled
precipitately to Bona.

'TUI1;i,- ME ANWHILE Charles, satisfied with the easy
rt"lc"" and almost bloodlefi victory which he had gain.

ed, and advancing slowly with the precaution
neceflary in an enemy's country, did not yet
know the whole extent of his own good fortune.

Bus

But at last, a messenger dispatched by the slaves BOOK V.
acquainted him with the success of their noble es- '"-
fortfor the recovery of their liberty; and at the fame 535.
time deputies arrived from the town, in order to
present him the keys of their gates, and to implore
his protection from military violence. While he
was deliberating concerning the proper meahires
for thispurpofe, the soldiers fearingthat they would
be deprived of the booty which they had expec-
ted, broke suddenly, and without orders, into
the town, and began to kill and plunder without
diltindion. It was then too late to restrain their
cruelty, their avarice, or licentioulnclf. All the
outrages of which soldiers are capable in the fury
of a storm, all the excesses of which men can be
guilty when their paflions are heightened by the
contempt and hatred which difference in manners
and religion inspire, were committed. Above
thirty thousand of the innocent inhabitants perish-
ed on that unhappy day, and ten thouland were
carried away as slaves. Muley-Hafcen took pol-
feflion of a throne surrounded with carnage, ab-
horred by his fubjeds on whom he had brought
such calamities, and pitied even by those whose
ralhnefs had been the occasion of them. The
Emperor lamented the fatal accident which had
stained the lultre of his victtory ; and amidst such
alcene of horror there was but one fpe-tacle that
afforded him any satisfaction. Ten thousand
Christian slaves, among whom were several per-
sons of diftindtion, met him as he entered the
town; and falling on their knees, thanked and
blefled him as their deliverer.

AT the fame time that Charles accomplished Retores the

his promise to the Moorish King of re-eftablilh- :xli'tholi'
ing him in his dominions, he did not neglect what
was necessary for bridling the power of the Afii-

B b 4 can

BOOK V. can corsairs, for the security of his own fubjeets
'-' and for the interest of the Spanish crown: In or

1535. der to gain these ends, he concluded a treat)

with Muley-Hafcen on the following conditions
that he should hold the kingdom of Tunis in fez
of the crown of Spain, and do homage to the
Emperor as his liege lord; that all the Chriftiar
slaves now within his dominions, of whatever na.
tion, should be set at liberty without ranfomr
that no fubjeat of the Emperor's should for the
future be detained in servitude; that no Turkifl
corsair should be admitted into the ports of his
dominions; that free trade, together with the
publick exercise of the Christian religion, should
be allowed to all the Emperor's fubjeds; that
the Emperor should not only retain the Goletta,
but all the other sea-ports in the kingdom which
were fortified, should be put into his hands; that
Muley-Halcen should pay annually twelve thou-
sand crowns for the subsistence of the Spanilh
garrison in the Goletta; that he should enter in-
to no alliance with any of the Emperor's enemies,
and should present to him every year, as an ac-
knowledgment of his vaflalage, fix Moorish
horses, and as many hawks ". Having thus set-
tled the affairs of Africa; chastised the insolence
of the corsairs; secured a safe retreat for the ships
of his fubjeds, and a proper station for his own
fleets, on that coast from which he was most in-
Augur ,7. fested by piratical depredations; Charles em-

barked again for Europe, the tempestuous wea-
ther, and sickness among his troops, not permit-
ting him to pursue Barbarossa x.

" Du Monts Corps Diplomat. ii. 128. Summonte Hill
di Napoli, iv. 89.

" Joh. Etropii Diariuin Expedition. Tunetane ap. Scard.

v. ii. p. 320, &c. Jovii Hiftor. lib. xxxiv. 153, &c. San-
dov. ii. 54, &c. Vertot. Hist. de Cheval. de Malthe. Epif-
tre: des Princes, par Rufcelli, traduites par Bellefor, p. l19,
1 o, &c,

BY this expedition, the merit of which seems BooK V.
to have been estimated in that age, rather by the '--.
apparent generosity of the undertaking, the mag- The gry
nificence wherewith it was conducted, and the which the
success which crowned it, than by the importance acquired.
of the consequences that attended it, the Emperor
attained a greater height of glory than at any other
period of his reign. Twenty thousand laves
whom he freed from bondage, either by his arms,
or by his treaty with Muley-Hafcen Y, each of
whom he cloathed and furnished with the means
of returning to their respeCtive countries, spread
all over Europe the fame of their benefactor's
munificence, extolling his power and abilities with
the exaggeration flowing from gratitude and ad-
miration. In comparison with him, the other
Monarchs of Europe made an inconsiderable si-
gure; he, as the chief Prince in Christendom,
appeared to be concerned for the honour of the
Christian name, for the publick security and wel-
fare, while they were attentive only to their pri-
vate and particular interests.

Y Summonte Hist. de Nap. vol. iv. p. 103.

THE

# BOOK VI.

THE
H IST OR Y

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK VI.
BOOK vI. TNFORTUNATELY for the reputation

i__ ) of Francis I. among his cotemporaries,

rTh5cufeshis condu&t, at this juncure, appeared a per-
of anew feet contrast to that of his rival, as he laid
twebthe hold on the opportunity afforded him, by the
Emperor Emperor's having turned his whole force a-
and Francis. gainl the common enemy, to revive his preten-

sions in Italy, and to plunge Europe into a new
war. The treaty of Cambray, as has been ob-
served, did not remove the causes of enmity be-
tween the two contending Princes; it covered up,
but did not extinguish the flames of discord.
Francis, in particular, who waited with impati-
ence for a proper occasion of recovering the repu-
tation as well as territories which he had loft, con-

tinued

tinued to carry on his negociations in different BooK vr.
courts against the Emperor, taking the utmost s ."
pains to heighten the jealousy which many Princes 153
entertained of his power or designs, and to inspire
the reft with the fame suspicion and fear: Among
others, he applied to Francis Sforza, who, though
indebted to Charles for the pofeffion of the durchy
of Milan, had received it on fich hard conditions,
as rendered him not only a vassal of the Empire,
but a tributary dependant upon the Emperor. The
honour of having married the Emperor's niece, did
not reconcile him to this ignominious state of sub-
jeftion, which became so intolerable even to Sfor-
za, a weak and poor spirited Prince, that he lift-
ened with eagerness to the first proposals Francis
made of rescuing him from the yoke. These pro-
pofals were conveyed to him by Maraviglia, or
Merveille, as he is called by the French historians,
a Milanese gentleman residing at Paris; and soon
after, in order to carry on the negociation with
greater advantage, Merveille was sent to Milan,
on pretence of visiting his relations, but with fe-
cret credentials from Francis as his envoy. In this
character he was received by Sforza. But notwith-
flanding his care to keep that circumstance concea-
led, Charles suspecting, or having received informa-
tion of it, remonstrated and threatned in such a high
tone, that the Duke and his ministers, equally inti-
midated, gave the world immediately a most infa-
mous proof of their servile fear of offending the
Emperor. Having decoyed Merveille, who had
neither the prudence nor temper which the station
wherein he was placed required, into a quarrel, in
which he happened to kill his antagonist, one of
the Duke's domestics, they instantly commanded
him to be seized, to be tried for that crime, and
to be beheaded. Francis, aftonilhed at this viola- Dcc. 1533.
tion of a characer held sacred among the molt un-

civilized

BooK VI. civilized nations, and enraged at the insult offere

~' 'to the dignity of his crown, threatened Sforz
535* with the effects of his indignation, and complained

to the Emperor, whom he confidered as the rea
author of that unexampled outrage. But meetin,
with no fatisfation from either, he appealed t
all the Princes of Europe, and thought himsel
now entitled to take vengeance for an injury
which it would have been indecent and pufillani
mous to let pass with impunity.

Francis de BEING thus furnished with a pretext for begin
llieis°. ning a war, on which he had already resolved, h

multiplied his efforts in order to draw in othe
Princes to take part in the quarrel. But all hi
measures for this purpose were disconcerted by
unforeseen events. After having sacrificed th
honour of his house by the marriage of his son
with Catharine of Medici, in order to gain Cle
ment, the death of that Pontiff had deprived hin
of all the advantages which he expected to deriv
from his friendship. Paul, his fuccefior, tho' at
tached by inclination to the Imperial interest
seemed determined to maintain the neutrality fui
table to his character as the common father of the
contending Princes. The King of England, oc
cupied with domestic cares and projects, declined
for once, engaging in the affairs of the continent
and refused to assist Francis, unless he would imi
tate his example, in throwing off the Papal fupre

iH; negoci- macy. These disappointments led him to follicit

ati llns with

the (erman with greater earnestness, the aid of the Proteftan
lotenailnts. Princes aflbciated by the league of Smalkalde

That he might the more easily acquire their confi
dence, he endeavoured to accommodate himsel
to their predominant passion, zeal for their religi
ous tenets. He asseted a wonderful mode
ration with regard to the points in dispute; he
permitted Bellay, his envoy in Germany, to ex

plaii

plain his sentiments concerning some of the most BooK VI.
important articles, in terms not far different from '"
those used by the Protestants'; he even conde- 15'
scended to invite Melanthon, whose gentle man-
ners and pacific spirit distinguished him among the
Reformers, to visit Paris, that by his afliftance he
might concert the most proper measures for recon-
ciling the contending sets, which so unhappily di-
vided the church b. These conceflions muff be
confidered rather as arts of policy, than the result
of conviction; for whatever impression the new
opinions in religion made on his sifters, the Queen
of Navarre and Dutchess of Ferrara, the gaiety of
Francis's own temper, and his love of pleasure, al-
lowed him little leisure to examine theological con-
troverfies.

BUT soon after he loft all the fruits of this dif- Irrites

ingenuous artifice, by a ftep very inconsistent with the".
his declarations to the German Princes. This
ftep, however, the prejudices of the age, and
the religious Sentiments of his own subjects, ren-
dered it necessary for him to take. His close
union with the King of England, an excommu-
nicated heretick; his frequent negociations with
the German Protestants; but above all, his giving
publick audience to an envoy from Sultan Soly-
man, had excited violent suspicions concerning the
sincerity of his attachment to religion. To have
attacked the Emperor, who, on all occasions, made
high pretensions to zeal in defence of the Catho-
lick faith, and at the very juncture, when he was
preparing for his expedition against Barbaroffal
which was then confidered as a pious enterprize,
could not have failed to confirm such unfavour-

a Preheri Script. Rer. German. iii. 354, &c. Sleid. Hist.

178, 183. Seckend. lib. iii. 103. b Camerarii Vita
Ph. Melanchthonis, i rno, Hag. 1655. p. i2.

able

BOOK VI. able sentiments with regard to Francis, and calles

on him to vindicate himself by some extraordinar)
1535 demonstration of his reverence for the efftablifhed

docrines of the church. The indiscreet zeal ol
some of his fubjets, who had imbibed the Pro.
teffant opinions, furnished him with such an occa.
lion as he desired. They had affixed to the gates
of the Louvre, and other public places, papers
containing indecent reflecions on the doc'ti.,es
and rites of the Popish church. Six of the per-
sons concerned in this rafl adion were discovertd
and seized The King, in order to avert the judg-
ments which it was supposed their blasphemies
might draw down upon the nation, appointed a
solemn proceflion. The holy sacrament was car-
ried through the city in great pomp; Francis
walked uncovered before it, bearing a torch in his
hand; the princes of the blood supported the ca-
nopy over it; the nobles marched in order behind.
In the pretence of this numerous assembly, the
King, accustomed to express himself on every sub-
'ject in strong and animated language, declared
that if one of his hands were infected with heresy,
he would cut it off with the other, and would not
spare even his own children, if found guilty of
that crime. As a dreadful proof of his being in
earnest, the fix unhappy persons were publickly
burnt before the procellion was finifled, with cir-
cumftanccs of the most (hocking barbarity attend-
ing their execution c.

They re- THE Princes of the league of Smalkalde, filled
hiJ^.Ol with resentment and indignation at the cruelty

with which their brethren were treated, could not
conceive Francis to be lincere, when he offered to
protect in Germany thoie very tenets, which lhe

c Belcarii Comment. Rer. Gallic. 646. Slcid. Hill. 17'j
&c.

per-

persecuted with such rigour in his own dominions; l3ooK VI.
so that all Bellay's art and eloquence in vindicating '-
his master, and apologizing for his condut, made s53'
but little impression upon them. Besides, the
Emperor, who hitherto had never employed vio-
lence against the doctrines of the Reformers, nor
even given them much molestation in their pro-
grefs, was now bound by the agreement at Ratif-
bon, not to disturb those who had embraced the
new opinions; and the Protestants wifely confi-
dered this as a more certain and immediate fecu-
rity, than the precarious and distant hopes with
which Francis endeavoured to allure them. The
manner too in which he had behaved to his allies
at the peace of Cambray, was too recent to be
forgotten, and did not encourage others to rely
much on his friendship or generosity. Upon all
these accounts, the Protestant Princes refused to
assist the French King in any hostile attempt against
the Emperor. The Eletor of Saxony, the most
zealous among them, in order to avoid giving any
umbrage to Charles, would not permit Melanc-
thon to visit the court of France, although that
Reformer, flattered perhaps by the invitation of
so great a Monarch, or hoping that his presence
there might be of signal advantage to the Protef-
tant cause, discovered a itrong inclination to un-
dertake the journey d.

BuT though none of the many Princes who en- The French
vied or dreaded the power of Charles, would te- army ad-

varces tO-

cond Francis's efforts in order to reduce and cir- wards Itai.-
cumfcribe it, he, nevertheless, commanded his
army to advance towards the frontiers of Italy.
As his role pretext for taking arms was, that he
might chastise the Duke of Milan for his insolent
and cruel breach of the law of nations, it might
Calllrarii Vita Melan. 14, &c 415. Seckend.lib. iii. 107.

have

Bod0 VI. have been expeted that the whole weight of his

'--- ' vengeance was to have fallen on his territories,
535' But on a sudden, and at their very commence-

ment, the operations of war took another direti.
on. Charles Duke of Savoy, one of the least
adive and able Princes of the line from which he
descended, had married Beatrix of Portugal, the
Empress's sifter. By her great talents, she soon
acquired an absolute ascendant over her husband;
and proud of her affinity to the Emperor, or allu.
red by the magnificent promises with which he
flattered her ambition, fle formed an union be-
tween the Duke and the Imperial court, extremely
inconsistent with -that neutrality, which wife policy
as well as the situation of his dominions had hi-
therto induced him to observe in all the quarrels
between the contending Monarchs. Francis was
abundantly sensible of the distress to which he
might be exposed, if when he entered Italy, he
should leave behind him the territories of a Prince,

Takes Pof devoted so obsequiously to the Emperor, that he
feflion of
the Duke had sent his eldest son to be educated in the court
of Sanvoy' of Spain, as a kind of hostage for his fidelity.
dominions. s h

Clement the Seventh, who had represented this
danger in a strong light during his interview with
Francis at Marseilles, suggested to him, at the fame
time, the proper method of guarding against it,
having advised him to begin his operations against
the Milaneie, by taking pofiflion of Savoy and
Piedmont, as the only certain way of securing a
communication with his own dominions. Francis,
highly irritated at the Duke on many accounts,
particularly for having supplied the Constable
Bourbon with the money, which enabled him
to levy that body of troops which ruined the
French army in the fatal battle of Pavia, was
not unwilling to let him now feel both how
deeply he resented, and how severely he
could punilh there injuries. Nor did he want

several

jfvetal pretexts tthat would give some colour of BooK Vtf
equtity to the violence hichi he intended. The' J
te.itiosies of France and Savoy lying contiguous to '535
each other, and intermingled in imany places,
vaiious di'sputes-, unavoidable in such a situation,
ihbfifted concerning the limits of their refpetive
property; and betides, Francis had, in right of
his mother Louise of Savoy, large claims ilpon the
Duke her brother, for her share in their father's ftc-
ceflion. Being unwilling, however, to begin hofti-
lities without sone cause of quarrel more specious
than these pretehfions, many of which were obfo-
lete, and others dubious, he demanded permiflion
to march through Piedmofnt in his way to the Mi-
lahfee hoping that the Duke, from an excess of
attachment to the Imperial interest, might refuse
this request, and thus give a greater appearance of
justice to all his operations against him But, .if
we may believe the historians of Savoy, better in-
formed with regard to this particular than those of
Franee, the Duke readily, and with a good grace,
gianted what it was not in his power to deny, pro-
tnifing free pafiage to the French troops as wat
defited; so that Francis, as the only method now
left ofjuftifying the meafuires which he determined
to take, was obliged to insist for full fatisfaOtion
with regard to every thing that either the crown
of France or his mother Louise could demand of
the house of Savoy e. Such an evasive answer, as
might have beeh 'expeted, being made to this re-
quifition, the French army under the admiral Brion
poured at once into the Duke's territories at diffe-
rent places, The countries of Breffe and Bugey,
United at that time to Savoy, were over-run in a
moment. Mofl of the towns in the dutchy of Sa-
voy opened their gates at the approach of the ene-

' Hifloite Geneanlgique de Savoye, par Guichenon. a
toin. fol. Lyon. 1660, i. 639, &c.

VOL. II. C c my

BooK VI. my; a few which attempted to make resistance

'3 5" were easily forced; and before the end of the
1535. campaign, the Duke saw himself stripped of all his

dominions, but the province of Piedmont, in which
there were not many places in a condition to be
defended.

The city of To compleat the Duke's misfortunes, the city
Gena, te- of Geneva, the sovereignty of which he claimed,
I! rty. and in some degree poflefied, threw of his yoke,

and its revolt drew along with it the loss of the
adjacent territories. Geneva was, at that time, an
Imperial city; and though under the direct domi-
nion of its own bithops, and the remote sovereignty
of the Dukes of Savoy, the form of itsinternal con-
flitution was purely republican, being governed by
1yndics and a council chosen by the citizens. From
these diftint and often clashing jurifditions,
two opposite parties took their rife, and had long
fubfifled in the state; the one composed of the
advocates for the privileges of the community,
assumed the name of Eignotz, or confederates in
defence of liberty; and branded the other, which
supported the episcopal or ducal prerogatives,
with the name of Mammnelukes or slaves. At
length, the Proteflant opinions beginning to spread
153L. among the citizens, inspired such as embraced them

with that bold enterprizing spirit which always ac-
companied or was naturally produced by them in
their firtf operations. As both the Duke and Bi-
Ihop were from interest, fiom prejudice, and fiom
political considerations, violent enemies of the
Reformation, all the new converts joined with
warmth the party of the Eignotz; and zeal for
religion, mingling with the love of liberty, added
strength to that generous paflion. The rage and
animosity of two factions, shut up within the lame
walls, occasioned frequent infurredions, which

terminating

terminating mostly to the advantage of the friends BooK Vr.
of liberty, they daily gained ground. -s55

THE Duke and Bishop, forgetting their ancient
contests about jurifdiftion, had united against
their common enemies, and each attacked them
with his proper weapons. The Bishop excommu-
nicated the people of Geneva as guilty of a dou-
ble crime; of impiety, in apostatising from the
efablifhed religion; and of sacrilege, in inva-
ding the rights of his fee. The Duke attacked
them as rebels against their lawful Prince, and at-
tempted to render himself master of the city, first
by furprize, and then by open force. The citizens,
despising the thunder of the Bishop's censures, '534'
boldly asserted their independance against the
Duke; and partly by their own valour, partly by
the powerful assistance which they received from
their allies, the canton of Berne, together with
some small flpplies both of men and money,
secretly furnished by the King of France, they
defeated all his attempts. Not satisfied with ha-
vig repulsed him, or with remaining always upon
the defensive themselves, they now took advantage
of the Duke's inability to resist them, while over-
whelmed by the armies of France, and seized fe-
veral castles and places of strength which he pof-
selfed in the neighbourhood of Geneva; thus deli-
vering the city from these odious monuments of
its former fubjeftion, and rendering the public
liberty more secure for the future. At the fame
time the canton of Berne invaded and conquered
the Paijis de Vaud, to which it had some pretenfi-
ons. The canton of Friburgh, though zealously
attached to the Catholic religion, and having no
fulbjet of contest with the Duke, laid hold on
part of the spoils of that unfortunate Prince. A
great portion of there conquests or usurpations

C c 2 being

jooiK VI. being still retained by the two cantons, add con

' fiderably to their power, and have become tl
153j most valuable part of their territories. Genev

notwithflanding many schemes and enterprizes i
the Dukes of Savoy to re-establish their dominic
there, ifill keeps pofleflion of its independance
and in confequtence of that blefling, has attaine
a degree of consideration, wealth and elegance
which it could not otherwise have reached f.

Thi Ermpi- AMIDST such a fiaccefflon of difafirous e
to r'll th i
vents, the Duke of Savoy had no other refourc

uktt but the Emperor's protection, which, upon hi

return from Tunis, he demanded with the mol
earnest importunity ; and as his misfortunes wer
occasioned chiefly by his attachment to the Impe
rial interefl, he had ajuft title to immediate a
fitance. Charles, however, was not in a cond
tion to fipport him with that vigour and difpatc
which the exigency of his affairs called for. Mol
of the troops employed in the African expeditior
having been raiied for that lervice alone, wer
disbanded as soon as it was finished; the veters
forces under Antonio de Leyva were scarce fuffi
cient for tlhe defence of the Mlilanefe; and thl
Emperor's treasury was entirely drained by hi
vast efforts against the Infidels.

Oal. Z4. BUT the death of Francis Sforza, occasionec
Death of
sfoi. - according to some historians, by the terror of
Dule f French invasion, which had twice been fatal t

his family, afforded the Emperor full leisure ti
prepare for action. By this unexpected event
the nature of the war, and the causes of discord
were totally changed. Francis's first pretext fc

r Hill. de la Ville dte Geneve, par Spon. 12o. Utr. 168.

p. 99. Hist. de la Reformation de Suiffc, par Roucha
(en. 1728 tom. iv. p. 294, &c. tom, v. p. 216, &c. Mei
de Bellay, 181.

takir;g

talking arms, in order to chartire Sforza for the Boor V1.
jnfult offered to the dignity of his crown, was at 35
once cut off; but, as that Prince died without if-
sue, all Francis's rights to the dutchy of Milan,
which he had yielded only to Sforza and his pot-
terity, returned back to him in full force. As
the recovery of the Milanese was the favourite
object of that Monarch, he inflantly renewed his
claim to it; and if he had supported his pretenfi- Fn-,,;.'
ons by ordering the powerful army quartered in p'-t"crfi-(on
Savoy to advance without losing a moment to- dutLIy.
wards Milan, he could scarce have failed to Iecure
the important point of poflellion. But Francis,
who became daily less enterprizing as hle advanced
in years, and who was overawed at tome times
into an excess of caution by the remembrance of
his pafi misfortunes, endeavoured to eltablifh his
righ.s by negociation, not by arms; and from a
timid moderation, fatal in all gre:t afflirs, ne-
glected to improve the favourable opportunity
which presented itself. Charles, meanwhile, in
quality of iovereign, took pofieilon of the dut-
chy, as a vacant fief of the Empire; and while
Francis endeavoured to explain and aflert his title
to it, by arguments and memorials, using every
art in order to reconcile the Italian powers to the
thoughts of his regaining footing in Italy. his ri-
val was lilently taking effetual steps to prevent it.
'he Emperor, however, was very careful not to
dilicover too early any intention of this kind; but
eeilning to admit the equity of Francis's claim, he
appeared Ibllicitous oily about giving himn posses-
liin in Ilich a manner as might not dilur-b the
peace of Europe, or overturn the balance of
prwer in Italy, which the politicians ol tha; coun-
try were To fond of prel-rving. By this artifice
lie deceived Francis, and gained to much confi-
dence with the reft of Europe, that alim{llo with-
(ut incurring any flipicion, he involved the affair

Cc3 3

BOOK VI. in new difficulties, and protracted the negociation

at pleasure. Sometimes he propored to grant th
535' investiture of Milan to the Duke of Orleans

Francis's second son, sometimes to the Dukeoi
Angouleme, his third son ; as the views and incli
nations of the French court varied, he transferred
his choice alternately from the one to the other,
with such profound and well condus}ed diffimula.
tion, that neither Francis nor his ministers feein
to have penetrated his real intention; and all
military operations were entirely suspended, asif
nothing had remained but to enter quietly into
possession of what they demanded.

1536. DURING the interval gained in this manner,

Chesrlat Charles prevailed on the tlates both of Sicily an;d
ons for war. Naples, who thought themselves greatly honour

ed by the pretence of their sovereign on his return
from Tunis, and who were no less pleated with
the apparent difinteretlednefs of his expedition
into Africa, than dazzled by the success which
had attended his arms, to vote him such liberal
subsidies as were seldom granted in that age.
This enabled him to recruit his veteran troops, to
levy a body of Germans, and to take every other
proper precaution for executing or fipporting the
measures on which he had determined. Bellav,
the French envoy in Germany, having diCcovercd
the intention of raising troops in that country, not-
withflanding all the pretexts employed in order
to conceal it, firlt alarmed his master with this
evident proof of the Emperor's infincerityg.
But Francis was so possessed at that time with the
rage of negociation, in all the artifices and refine-
ments of which his rival far furpaafld him, that
inflead of beginning his military operations, and
pushing them with vigour, or seizing the Milanele
before the Imperial army was assemblcd, lie faii-

Mei. de Bellay, 19z.fi
g Malen. de Bellay, 192,

fled himself with making new offers to the Empe- IorK vr.
ror, in order to procure the investiture by his vo- C
luntary deed. His offers were, indeed, so liberal
and advantageous, that if ever Charles had intend-
ed to grant his demand, he could not have recjeced
them with decency. He dcxtroufly eluded them
by declaring that, until he consulted the Pope in
person, he could not take his final resolution with
regard to a point which so nearly concerned the
peace of Italy. By this evasion he gained some far-
ther time for ripening the schemes he had in view.

THE Emperor at !aft advanced towards Rome, The Empe-

and made his public entry into that city with ex- Rom"T.
traordinary pomp; but it being found necessary to April 6.
remove the ruins of an ancient temple of peace,
in order to widen one of the streets, through
which the cavalcade had to pass, all the hitforians
take notice of this trivial circumitance, which
they are fond to interpret as an omen of the
bloody war that followed. Charles, it is certain,
had by this time banished all thoughts of peace;
and at last threw off the mask, with which he
had Ib long covered his designs from the court of
France, by a declaration of his sentiments no lets
singular than explicit The French ambassadors
having in their master's name demanded a defini-
tive reply to his propositions concerning the in-
veftiture of Milan, Charles promised to give it
next day in pretence of the Pope and Cardinals
aflembled in full consistory. These being accor- Hi, public
dingly met, and all the foreign ambafiadors invi- ,,:,,'"
led to attend, the Emperor stood up, and a,!- l':,a,1.
drefling himself to the Pope, expatiated for some
time on the sincerity of his own withes for the
peace of (Chriitendom, and his abhorrence of
war, the mileries of which he enumerated at great
length, with studied and elaborate oratory; he
complained that all his endeavours to prctcrve the

C c 4 tran-

BooK VI. tranquillity of Europe had hitherto been defeated

·"" by the refllefs and unjulf ambition of the French

53' King that even during his minoxity he had proofs

of the unfriendly and hoflile intentions of that
Monarch; that afterwards, he had openly attemp-
ted to wrefl from him the Imperial crown which
belonged to him by a title no leIs just than natural;
that he had next invaded his kingdom of Navarre;
that not satisfied with ttis, he had attacked his
territories as well as thol.e of his allies both in
Italy an,d the Low-Countries; that when the
valour of the Imperial troops, rendered irre-
fiftibile by the protecti.on of the Almighty, had
chec:ked his progress, ruined his armies, and leized
his peribn, he continued to pur-iue by deceit what
he had undertaken with injultice; that he had Vl)-
!ated every article in, the treaty of Madrid to which
he owed his liberty, and as soon as he returned to
hlis dominions took meafnres for rekindling the war
wh;ich that pacification had happily extinguished;
that when new misfortunes compelled him to fle
again for peace at Cambray, he concluded and
observed it with great insincerity; that soon there-
after he had formed dangerous connedious with
the heretical Princes in Germany, and incited them
to disturb the tranquillity of the Empire ; that now
he had driven the Duke of Savoy, his brother-in
law and ally, out of the greater part of his territo-
ries;. th;lt after injuries lo often. repeated, and
amidit so many Sources of discord, all hope of amity
or concord became desperate ; and though he was
Iiltl willing to grant the inveltiture of Milan to one
of the Pri;ices of France, there was little probahi-
lity of that event's taking place, as Francis, oil the
one hand, would not conlt ent to what he judged ntc
ceflary for securing the traiqui.lli.ty.of l[ulrope, nor,
on the other, could lie think it reafli.atle or lafeto
givehim the iunconditional poitilelion of all that he
demlanded. Let us not, however, added he, continll

Wal'.11

wantonly to shed the blood of our innocent fubjeats;Boo VI.
let us decide the quarrel man to man, with what ¢
arms he pleases to chute, in our shirts, on an Challnges
ifand, a bridge, or aboard a galley mooredin a ri- hm to fin-
ver; let the dutchy of Burgundy be put in deposit combat.
on his part, and that of Milan on mine; there (hall
be the prize of the conqueror; and after that, let
the united forces of Germany, Spain, and France,
be employed to humble the power of the Turk,
and to extirpate heresy out of Chriflendom. But if
he, by declining this method of terminating our
differences, renders war inevitable, nothing shall
divert me from prosecuting it to such extremity,
as (hall reduce one of us to be the pooreit gentle-
man in his own dominions. Nor do 1 fear that
it will be on me this misfortune (hall fall; I en-
ter upon adion with the fairest profped of fuc-
cess; the justice of my cause, the union of my
fubjeEts, the number and valour of my troops, the
experience and fidelity of my generals, all com-
bine to ensure it. Of all there advantages, the
Kingof France isdeftitute; and were my resources
no more certain, and my hopes of victory no bet-
ter founded than his, I would instantly throw
myself at his feet, and with folded hands and a
rope about my neck, implore his mercy h.

THIS long harangue the Emperor delivered
with an elevated voice, a haughty tone, and the
greatest vehemence of expreflion and gesture.
The French ambassadors, who did not fully com-
prehend his meaning, as he spake in the Spanish
tongue, were totally disconcerted, and at a loss
how they fiould answer such an unexpected in-
vetive; when one of them began to vindicate
his master's conduct, Charles interposed abrupt-
(y, and would not permit him to proceed. The

I' Bellay, 199. Sandov. Iliftor. del Eimpcr. 11. 226.

Pope,

BOOK VI. Pope, without entering into any particular detail,

L'c"y satisfied himself with a short but pathetic recorm-
536. mendation of peace, together with an offer of

employing his sincere endeavours, in order to pro-
cure that blessing to Christendom; and the as.
fembly broke up in the greatest aftonill ment at the
extraordinary scene which had been exhibited. In

The mo- no part of his conduct, indeed, did Charles ever
tives of this deviate so widely from his general charater. In-
rure. flead of that prudent recolleftion, that compoled

and regular deportment so ftritly attentive to
decorum, and so admirably adapted to conceal
his own passions, for which he was at all other
times conspicuous, he appears on this occasion
before the most august assembly in Europe, boast-
ing of his own power and exploits with insolence;
inveighing against his enemy with indecency;
and challenging him to combat with an oftentati-
ous valour, more becoming a champion in ro-
mance, than the first Monarch in Christendom.
But the well known and powerful operation of
continued prosperity, and of exaggerated praise,
even upon the firmest minds, sufficiently account
for this seeming inconsistency. After having
compelled Solyman to retreat, and having firip-
ped Barbarossa of a kingdom, Charles began to
confider his arms as invincible. He had been en-
tertained, ever since his return from Africa, with
repeated Icenes of triumphs and public rejoicings;
the orators and poets of Italy, the most elegant
at that time in Europe, had exhausted their ge-
nius in panegyric, to which the astrologers added
magnificent promises of a more splendid fortune
still in store. Intoxicated with all these, he for-
got his ulual reserve and moderation, and was
unable to restrain this extravagant sally of vanity,
which became the more remarkable, by being
both ib uncommon and fb public.

1HE

He himself seems to have been immediately BOOR VI.

sensible of the impropriety of his behaviour, and \
when the French ambassadors demanded next day 536
a more clear explanation of what he had said
concerning the combat, he told them, that they
were not to confider his proposal as a formal chal-
lenge to their master, but as an expedient for
preventing bloodshed ; he endeavoured to soften
other expreflions in his discourse; and spoke in
terms full of refpedt towards Francis. But though
this flight apology was far frorm being sufficient to
remove the offence which had been given, Fran-
cis, by an unaccountable infatuation, continued to
negociate, as if it had still been poflible to bring
their differences to a period by, an amicable com-
position. Charles, finding him so eager to run
into the fiare, favoured the deception, and by
teeming to liften to his proposals gained time to
prepare for the execution of his own defignsi.

AT last, the Imperial army aflembled on the Charlesin-

frontiers of the Milanete, to the amount of forty pe.
thousand foot, and ten thousand horse, while that
of France encamped near Vercelli in Piedmont,
being greatly inferior in number, and weakened
by the departure of a body of Swiss, whom
Charles artfully persuaded the Popish cantons to
recall, that they might not serve against the
Duke of Savoy, their ancient ally. The French
general, not daring to rifque a battle, retired as
loon as the Imperialists advanced. The Empe- May 6.
ror put himself at the head of his forces, which
the marquis del Guaffo, the Duke of Alva, and
Ferdinand de Gonzaga commanded under him,
though the supreme direction of the whole was
committed to Antonio de Leyva, whose abilities
and experience justly entitled him to that diftinc-

Menr. de Belly, o05, &c.

tion

BooK VI. tion. Charles soon discovered his intention not

to confine his operations to the recovery of Pied-
153 mont and Savoy, but to push forward and invade

the southern provinces of France. This (ciheme
he had long meditated, and had long been taking
meatlures for executing it with such vigour as
might ensure success. He had remitted large
fuims to his siser, the governess of the Low-
Countries, and to his brother, the King of tile
Romans, instructing them to levy all the forces in
their power, in order to form two separate bodies,
the one to enter France on the fide of Picardy,
the other on the fide of Champagne; while he,
with the main army, fell upon the opposite fron-
tier of the kingdom. Trusting to there vast pre-
parations, he thought it impofiible that Francis
could refiflt o many unexpected attacks, on fucil
different quarters ; and begun his enterprize with
such confidence of its happy issue, that he delired
Paul Jovius the historian, to make a large pro-
vision of paper sufficient to record the victories
which he was going to acquire.

His ministers and generals, instead of enter-

taining the fame sanguine hopes, represented to
him in the. strongest terms the danger of leading
his troops ta far from his own territories, to
such a distance from his magazines, and into pro-
vinces which did not yield luflicient subsistence
for their own inhabitants. They entreated him
to coufider the inexhauflible refburces of France
in maintaining a defensive war, and the ac-
tive zeal with which a gallant nobility would
serve a Prince whom they loved, in repelling
the enemies of their country; they recalled to
his -remembrance the fatal milcarriage of Bour-
hon and Pelcara, when they ventured upon tlte
fame enterprize under circumstances which f(eni-
ed as certainly to promile liccefs; the marquis

del

del Guafto in particular, fell on his knees, and BOOK VI.
coniured him to abandon the undertaking as def- -536.
perate. But many circumstances combined in lead-
ing Charles to disregard all their remonstrances.
He could seldom be brought, on any occasion,
to depart fiom a resolution which he had once ta-
ken ; he was too apt to under-rate and despise the
talents of his rival the Kincg of France, which dif-
sered io widely from his own; he was blinded by
the presumption which accompanies prosperity;
and relied, perhaps, in some degree, on the pro-
phecies which predieted the increase of his own
grandeur. lie not only adhered obstinately to
his own plan, but determined to advance towards
France without waiting for the redu.tion of any
part of Piedmont, except such towns as were ab-
lolutely necessary for preserving his communica-
tion with the Milanese.

Ti. E marquis de Saluces, to whom Francis had Recover

er: tufte(i the command of a small body of troops Duke of
left for the defence of Piedmont, rendered this'voysdo
more easy than he had any reason to expect.
That nobleman, educated in the court of France,
diftingiilhed by continual marks of the king's fa-
vour, and honoured so lately with a charge of
such importance, suddenly, and without any pro-
vocation or pretext of disgust, revolted from his
benefador. His motives to this treacherous ac-
tion, were as childish as the deed itself was base.
Being strongly pofleffed with a filperftitious faith
in divination and afrology, he believed with full
afiulanie, that the fatal period of the French na-
tion was at hand; that on its ruins the Emperor
would eftablilh an universal monarchy; that
therefore he ought to follow the dictates of pru-
dence, in attaching himfelfto his rising fortune,
and would incur no blame for deserting a Prince

whom

BOOK VI. whom heaven had devoted to deftrustion k. His
,_--. treason became still more odious, by his employ-

3 ing that very authority with which Francis had

inverted him, in order to open the kingdom to
his enemies. Wnatever was proposed or under-
taken by the officers under his command for the
defence of their conquests, he rejected or defeat-
ed. Whatever properly belonged to himself as
commander in chief, to provide or perform for
that purpose, he totally neglected. In this man-
ner, he rendered towns even of the greatest con-
sequence untenable, by leaving them dellitute
either of provifious, or ammunition, or artillery,
or a sufficient garrilbn ; and the Imperialitls must
have reduced Piedmont in as short time as was
necessary to march through it, if Montpezat, the
governor of Foffano, had not, by an extraordi-
nary effort of courage and military condut, de-
tained them, almost a month, before that incon-
fiderable place.

Francis's BY this meritorious and seasonable service, he
defencof gained his master sufficient time for assembling
his kingdom his forces, and for concerting a system of defence

against a danger which he now saw to be inevi-
table. Francis fixed upon the only proper and
effectual plan for defeating the invasion of a pow-
erful enemy; and his prudence in chufing this
plan, as well as his perseverance in executing it,
deserve the greater praise, as it was equally con-
trary to his own natural temper, and to the ge-
nius of the French nation. He determined to re-
main altogether upon the defensive; never to ha-
zard a battle, or even a great skirmish, without
certainty of tlccefs ; to fortify his camps in a re-
gular manner ; to throw garrisons only into towns
of great strength; to deprive the enemy of ftubil:
tence, by laying waste the country before them;

k Bellay, 2zz2. n. 246, 1.

and

and to save the whole kingdom, by sacrificing one BOOK VI.
ofits provinces. The execution of this plan he --v
c(mmitted entirely to the marechal Montmoren- Entrufs
cy, who was the author of it; a man wonderfully encywith
fitted by nature for such a truss, Haughty, e- the executi-
vere, confident in his own abilities, and delpiling n of it.
those of other men; incapable of being diverted
from any resolution by remonstrances or intrea-
tits; and in prosecuting any scheme, regardless
alike of love and of pity.

MONTMORENCY, made choice of a flrongHeencampr
camp, under the walls of Avignon, at the conflu- atAvignon.
ence of the Rhofne and Durance, one of which
plentifully supplied his troops.with all neceflaries
from the inland provinces, and the other covered
his camp on that fide, where it was most probable
the enemy would approach. He laboured with
unwearied industry to render the fortifications of
this camp impregnable, and assembled there a con-
liderable army, though greatly inferior to that of
the enemy; while the king with another body of
troopsencamped at Valence, higher up the Rhofne.
Marseilles and Aries were the only towns he
thought it necessary to defend the former, in
order to retain the command of the lea; the lat-
ter, as the barrier of the province of Languedoc;
and each of there he furnilhed with numerous gar-
rfons of his best troops, commanded by officers, on
wvholi fidelity and valour he could rely. The in-
habitants of the other towns as well as of the open
country, were compelled to abandon their houfcs,
and were conduaed to the mountains, to the
camp at Avignon or to the inland provinces.
The fortifications of such places as might have
afforded ihelter or defence to the enemy, were
thrown down. Corn, forage and provisions of
every kind, were carried away or destroyed;
all the mills and ovens were ruined, and the
wells filled up 'or rendered useless. The deva-

station

Book VI. station extended from the Alps to Marseilles and
.-- from the Tea to the confines of Dauphine; nor

i536. does history afford any infitance among civilized

nations, in which this cruel expedient for the
public safety was employed with the fame rigour.

MEANWHILE, the Emperor arrived with the

ters Pro- van of his army on the fiontiers of Provence,
·ence. and was fill so possessed with confidence of lilc.

cess, that during a few days, when he was obli-
ged to halt until the reft ot his troops came up,
he began to divide his future conquests am'nong
his officers; and as a new incitement to lerve
him with zeal, gave them liberal promises of of-
sices, lands and honours in France 1. The face
of desolation, howevers which presented itfelfto
him, when he entered the country, coiud scarce
fail to damp his hopes; and to convince him that
a Monarch, who, in order to distress an enemy,
had voluntarily ruined one of his richest provin-
ces, would defend the reft with obstinate despair.
Nor was it long before he became sensible, that
Francis's plan of defence was as prudent as it ap,
peared to be extraordinary. His fleet, on which
Charles chiefly depended for subsistence, was
prevented for some time by contrary winds, and
other accidents to which naval operations are ihb-
ject, from approaching the French coast; and
even after its arrival, it afforded at best a preca-
rious and scanty supply to such a numerous body
of troops m; nothing was to be found in the
country itself fur their support ; nor could
they draw any considerable aid from the
dominions of the Duke of Savoy, exhauflec
already by maintaining two great armies. The
Emperor was no less embaraffed how to em
ploy, than how to subsist his forces; for, thongl
he was now in pofleflion of almost an entir

province
Bellay, 266, a. m Sandov. ii. 231.

province, he could not however be said to haveBooK Vi.
the command of it, while he held only defenceless ' ~
towns; and while the Frenchj besides their camp
at Avignon, continued masters of Marseilles and Ar-
ies. At sirs- he thought of attacking the camp,
and of determinating the war by one decisive blow;
but skilful officers, who appointed to viewv it, de-
clared the attempt to be utterly impractLicable. He Befiegc
then commanded Marseilles and Aries to be invest- Mrei
ed, hoping that the French would quit their advan-
tageous post in order to relieve them; but Mont-
morency adhering firmly to his plan, remained im-
moveable at Avignon, and the Imperialists met
with such a warm reception from the garrisons of
both towns, that they relinquished their enterprizes
with loss and disgrace. As a last effort, the Emperor
advanced once more towards Avignon, tho' with
An army harraffed by the perpetual incursions of
small parties of the French light troops, weakened
by diseases, and dispirited by disasters, which
seemed more intolerable, because they were unex-
peAed.

DU RING there operations Montmorency found Montmro-

himself exposed to greater danger from his own itudeinaF
troops than from the enemy ; and their inconfide- her ng to
rate valour went near to have precipitated the king- hiplC .f'
dom into thofecalamities, which he with fich in-
duffry and caution had endeavoured to avoid. Un-
accustomed to behold an enemy ravaging their
country almost without controul ; impatient of
fich long inaction; unacquainted with the flow
and remote, but certain effets of \4ontmorency's
fyfterh of defence ; the Frcnch wised for a battle
with no le's ardour than the Imperialists. They
confidered the conduct of their general as a disgrace
to their country. His caution they imputed to ti-
midity ; his circumfpebtion to Vant of spirit ; and

VO. ITI D d the

BooK VI. the constancy with which he pursued his plan to

C-^- -obstinacy or pride. These reflections, whispered,
1536. at firif, among the soldiers and subalterns, were

adopted, by degrees, by officers of higher rank;
and as many of there envied Montmorency's favour
with the King, and more were dissatisfied with his
harsh disgusting manner, the discontent loon be-
came great in his camp, which was filled with ge-
neral murmurings and almost open complaints
against his meafares. Montmnorency, on whom the
Pentiments of his own troops made as little impref-
sion as the insults of the enemy, adhered teadily
to his 1yflem ; though in order to reconcile the ar.
my to his maxims, no lcfs contrary to the genius of
the nation, than to the ideas of war among undif-
ciplined troops, he assumed an unusual affability in
his deportment, and often explained with great
condecfenfion the motives of his conduct, the ad-
xantages which had already resulted from it, and
the certain iiiccefs with which it would be attend-
ed. At last Francis joined his army at Avignon,
v.hich having received several reinforcements, he
now confidered as of strength sufficient to face the
enemy. As he had put upon himself no fmallcon-
iiraint, in having consented that his troops should
remain so long upon the defensive, it can be scarce
doubted blit that his fondness for what was daring
and splendid, added to the impatience both of of-
ficers and soldiers, would have over-ruled Mont-
morency's salutary caution "

-lh, . 1 A P 'IAPIlI.Y the retreat of the enemy delivered the

;'. i'l ,':,,h- ki:gdom:n from the danger which any rath riellution
4 ,1 Il\- might have occasioned. The Emperor, after
.i" .
" "'l). Ipending two inglorious months in Pruvince, hav.

, ,1 il. ic 1Bellay, 269, &c. 31z, &c.

ing

ing performed nothing suitable to his vast prepara- BOOK VI.
tions, or that could juflify the confidence with - ~'
which he had boasted of his own power, found 1536.
that, besides Antonio de Leyva, and other officers
of diftin&ion, he had loft one half of his troops by
diseases, or by famine; and that the reft were in
no condition to struggle any longer with calamities,
by which so many of their companions had perifil-
ed. Necessity, therefore, extorted from him or-
ders to retire; and though he was some time in
motion before the French fufpeted his intention,
a body of light troops, aflifted by crowds of pea-
sants, eager to be revenged on those who had
brought iuch desolation on their country, hung
upon the rear of the Imperialists, and by seizing
every favourable opportunity of attacking them,
threw them often into confusion. The road by
which they fled, for they pursued their march
with such disorder and precipitation, that it scarce
deserves the nameotf a retreat, was firewed with
arms or baggage, which in their hurry and trepida-
tion they had abandoned, and covered with the
sick, the wounded, aed the dead ; infomucli, that
Martin Bellay, an eye-witness of their calamities,
endeavours to give his readers some idea of it, by
comparing their miseries to those which the Jews
suffered from the vicorious and deftru&tive arms of
the Romanso. If Montmorency at this critical
moment had advanced with all his forces, nothing
could have saved the whole Imperial army from ut-
ter ruin. But that general, by flanding so long and
!b obstinately on the defensive, had become cauti-
ous to excess ; his mind, tenacious of any bent it
had once taken, could not assume a contrary one
as suddenly as the change of circumstances rt quir-
ed and he still continued to repeat his favourite
maxims, that it was more prudent to allow the
o Mcm. de Bellay, 316. Sandov. Hilt. del lEmpcr. ii. 232.

D d lion

BOOK VI. lion to escape, than to drive him to despair, and
v-ó that a bridge of gold should be made for a retreat.

ing enemy.

THE Emperor having conducted the shatterec

remains of his troops to the frontiers of Milan, and
appointed the marquis del Guafto to succeed Ley.
va in the government of the dutchy, set out for
Genoa. As he could not bear to expose himself to
the scorn of the Italians, after such a fad reverfeof
fortune; and did not chute, under his present cir-
cumftances, torevifit those cities through which
he had so lately passed in triumph for one conquest,
and in certain expectation of another; he embark.

ovneb. ed directly for Spain P.
Operations NOR was the progress of his arms on the oppo.

Picardy. site frontier of France such as to alleviate in any de-

gree the losses which he had sustained in Provence
Bellay by his address and intrigues had prevailed or
so many of the German Princes to withdraw the
contingent of troops which they furniihed to the
King of the Romans, that he-was obliged to lay
aside all thoughts of his intended irruption into
Champagne. Though a powerful army levied in
the Low-Countries entered Picardy, which they
found but feebly guarded, while the strength o
the kingdem was drawn towards the south; yet
the nobility taking arms with their usual alacrity
Iupplied by their spirit the defects of the King'
preparations, and defended with such vigour Pe
ronne, and other towns which were attacked, a
obliged the enemy to retire without making any
conquest of importance q.

THUS Francis, by the prudence of his own mea

fures, and by the union and valour of his fubjedts
rendered abortive those vast efforts by which hi

loOvii lliltol. lib. 35. p. 174, &c.
* Merl. de l, llay, 318, &c.

rivp

rival had almost exhausted his whole force. As BooK. IV-
this humbled the Emperor's arrogance no less '"
than it checked his power, he was mortified more 1536
sensibly on this occasion than on any other,. du-
ring the course of the long contests between him
and the French Monarch.

ONE circumstance alone embittered the joy with Deathofth.

which the success of the campaign inspired Francis. ^)aup)in.
That was the death of the Dauphin, his eldest
son, a Prince of great hopes, and extremely be-
loved by the people on account of his resemblance
to his father. This happening suddenly, was im-
puted to poison, not only by the vulgar, fond of
ascribing the death of illustrious personages to ex-
traordinary causes, but by the King and his minis-
ters. The count de Montecuculi, an Italian no- Imputedto
bleman, cupbearer to the Dauphin, being seized on poion.
suspicion and put to the torture, openly charged
the Imperial generals, Gonzaga and Leyva, with
having instigated him to the commiflion of that
crime, and threw out some indirect and obscure
accusations against the Emperor himself. At a time
when all France was animated with implacable ha-
tred against Charles, this was confidered as an
inconteftible proof of guilt; while the confidence
with which both he and his officers aflerted their
own innocence, together with the indignation and
horror which they expressed on their being sup-
posed capable of such a detestable action, were lit-
tle attended to, and less regarded '. It is evident,
however, that the Emperor could have no induce-
ment to perpetrate such a crime, as Francis was till
in the vigour of life himself, and had two sons,
betides the Dauphin, grown up to a good age.
That tingle consideration, without mentioning the
Emperor's general character, unblemished by the

Mem. de Bel}ay, 289,

D d 3 imputation

BooKVI. imputation of any deed resembling this in atroci-

-v ty, is more than .ufficient to:counterbalance the
!536. weight of a dubious tefftimony uttered during the

anguish of torture S. According to the moss unpre-
judiced historians, the Dauphin's death was occa-
sioned by his having drunk too freely of cold wa-
ter after overhating himself at tennis; and this ac-
count, as it is the moit simple, is likewise the most
credible. But if his days were cut short by poison,
it is not improbable that the Emperor conjetured
rightly, when he affirmed that it had been admi-
niftered by the direction of Catharine of Medici,
in order to secure the crown to the Duke of Or-
leans, her hufband.t The advantages resulting to
her by the Dauphin's death, were obvious as well
as great; nor did her boundless and daring ambi-
tion- ever scruple at any ation necessary towards
attaining the objeds which she had in view.

,Y37. NEXT year opened with a tranfadion very tn-

Dect,, of common, but so incapable of producing any es-
1, enr, rp'- fed, that it would not deserve to be mentioned, if
rl agi ift, it were not a striking proof of that personal animo-
ro. '" fity which mingled itself in all the hostilities be-

tween Charles and.Francis, and which often be-
trayed them into such indecencies towards each
other, as lessened the dignity of both. Francis,
accomnianied by the peers and princes of the blood,
having taken his feat in the parliament of Paris
wi!h the usual Ilemnities, the advocate-general
appeared; and after accufirg Charles of Auftia,i
(for To he af'cdted to call the Emperor) of having
violated the treaty of Cambray, by which he was
absolved from the homage due to the crown of
France for the counties of Artois and Slanders;
infited that this treaty being now void, he was fill

' Sani'lv. J-if. dcl Er.npcr. ii. 2 1.
x \ cr;a y i ,', ilC.u: ' i.i I: Cauilo V. p. 75,

to

to be confidered as a vassal of the crown, and, by BOOK VI.
consequence, had been guilty of rebellion in taking '
arms against his sovereign ; and therefore he de- 537
manded that Charles should be summoned to ap-
pear in person, or by his counsel, before the parli-
ment of Paris, his legal judges to answer for his
crime. The request was granted; a herald re-
paired to the frontiers of Picardy, and summoned
him, with the accustomed formalities, to appear
against a day prefixed. That term being expired,
and no person appearing in his name, the parlia-
ment gave judgment, " That Charles of Austria
had forfeited by rebellion and contumacy there
fiefs; declared Slanders and Artois to be re-united
to the crown of France; and ordered their decree
for this purpose to be publilhed by found of trum-
pet on the frontiers of these provinces u."

SOON after this vain display of his resentment, campaipn

rather than of his power, Francis marched to- "'i'" 'l'
wards the Low-Countries, as if he had intended c;u..tries.
to execute the sentence which his parliament had al"''!
pronounced, and to seize those territories which
it had awarded to him. As the Queen of Hunga-
ry, to whom her brother the Emperor had com-
mitted the government of that part of his dormi-
nions, was not prepared for so early a camnpaign,
he at first made some progress, and took several
towns of importance. But being obliged 'oion to
leave his army, in order to superintend the other
operations of war, the Flemings having atlcinblcd
a numerous army, not only recovered Imolt u the
places which they had lhi, but began to make coi.-
quefs in their turn. At last they in veil:led TerIu-
enne, and the Duke of Orleans, now Daupiin, by

u Lcttres ct Memoircs d'Etat, par Ribicr, z tom. Blnis.
1666. tom. i. p. i.

D d 4 thi

l;oor- VI. the death of his brother, and Montmorency, whom
^'/" < Francis had honoured with the constable's sword,

M37. as the reward of his great services during the for.

mer campaign, determined to hazard a battle in
order to relieve it. While they were advancing

,nofarms for this purpose, and within a few miles of the
t:; e:. enemy, they were ftopt short by the arrival of an

herald from the Queen of Hungary, acquainting
him that a suspension of arms was now agreed
upon.

THIS unexpeced event was owing to the zea.

lous endeavours of the two fiRers, the Queens of
France and of Hungary, who had long laboured to
reconcile the contending Monarcls. The war in
the Netherlands had laid waite the frontier pro.
vinces of both countries, without any real ad.
vantage to either ; the French and Flemings equal-
ly regretted the interruption of their commerce,
which was beneficial to both; and Charles andFran-
cis, who had each firained to the utmost, in order to
support the vast operations of the former cam-
paign, found that they could not now keep armies
on foot in this quarter, without weakening their
operations in Piedmont, where both wished to pufl
the war with the greatest vigour. All there circum-
,Y 3. flances facilitated the negociations of the' two

Queens; a truce was concluded, to continue in
force for ten months, but it extended no farther
than the Low Countries x

,, in IN Piedmont the war was fill prosecuted with
l:.dmont. great animosity ; and though neither Charles nor

Francis could make the powerful efforts to which
their animosity prompted them, they continued to
exert themselves like combatants, whose rancour

x Memoires de Ribier, 56.

remains

remains after their strength is exhausted. Towns BooK- VL.
were alternately loft and retaken ; fkirmifnes were
fought every day; and much blood was shed, with- I53
out any decisive aftion, that gave the superiority
toeither fide. At last the two Queens determining
not to leave unfinished the good work which they
had begun, prevailed, by their importunate follici-
tations, the one on her brother, the other on her
husband, to content also to a truce in Piedmont
for three months, upon condition that each should
keep poffeflion of what was in his hands, and leav-
ing garrisons in the towns, withdraw his army out
of the province ; and that plenipotentiaries should
be appointed to adjust all matters in dispute by a
final treaty

THe powerful motives which inclined both Prin- Motive, of

ces to this accommodation, have been often menti- It
oned. The expences of the war had far exceed-
ed the rums which their revenues were capable of
supplying, nor durst they venture upon any great
addition to the impositions then established, as sub-
jets were not yet taught to bear with patience the
immense burthens to which they have become ac-
customed in modern times. The Emperor, in par-
ticular, though he had contracted debts which in
that age appeared prodigious , had it not in his
power to pay the large arrears which had been long
due to his army. At the fame time he had no
profpet of deriving any aid in money or men ei-
ther from the Pope or Venetians, though he had
employed promises and treats, alternately, in or-
der to procure it. But he found the former fixed
in his resolution of adhering ifeadily to the neutra-
lity which he had always declared to be suitable to
his character, and paflionately desirous of bringing
about a peace. He perceived that the latter were

Y Mem. de Ribier, 62. z Ribier, i. 294.

(ill

BOOK VI. still intent on their ancient objec of holding the
X'L"'^ balance even between the rivals, and follicitous not

to throw too great a weight into either scale.

rancis's WHAT made a deeper impreflion on Charles
alliance than all these, was the dread of the Turkish arms,
Turkish which Francis had drawn upon him by his league
Emperor with Solyman. Though Francis, without theas-
the roft
confidera fiftance of a single ally, had a war to maintain
ble. againit an enemy greatly superior in power to him-

self, yet so great was the horror of Christians, in
that age, at any union with Infidels, which they
confidered not only as dishonourable but profane,
that it was long before he could be brought to
avail himself of the obvious advantages resulting
from such a confederacy. Neceflity at last fur-
mounted his delicacy and scruples; and towards
the close of the preceding year, La Forest, a fe-
cret agent at the Ottoman porte, had concluded a
treaty with the Sultan, whereby Solyman engaged
to invade, next campaign, the kingdom of Na-
ples, and to attack the King of the Romans in
Hungary with a powerful army, while Francis un-
dertook to enter the Miianefe at the fame time
with a proper force. Solyman had pundtually
performed what was incumbent on him. Barba-
roffa with a great fleet appeared on the coast of
Naples, filled that kingdom, from which all the
troops had been drawn towards Piedmont, with
consternation, landed without resistance near Ta-
rantoo, obliged Cailro, a place of some strength,
to surrender, plundered the adjacent country, and
was taking measures for securing and extending his
conquefls, when the unexpected arrival of Doria, to-
gcther with the Pope's gallies, and a squadron of the
Venetian fleet, made it prudent for him to retire. In
Hulngary the progre's of the Turks was more for-

midable.

midable. Mahmet, their general, after gaining BooK Vr
several small advantages, defeated the Germans in '-
a great battle at Effek on the Drave a. Happily for S537'
Christendom, it was not in Francis's power to ex-
ecute with equal exaftnefs what he had stipulated;
nor could he assemble at this juncure an army
strong enough to penetrate into the Milanese. By
this he failed in recovering poffeflion of that dutchy;
and Italy was not only saved from the calamities
of a new war, but from feeling as an addition to
all that it had suffered the desolating rage of the
Turkish arms b. As the Emperor knew that he
could not long resist the efforts of two such power-
ful confederates, nor could expeE that the fame for-
tunate accidents would concur'a second time to de-
liver Naples, and to preserve the Milanese: As he
foresaw that the Italian states would not only tax
him loudly with insatiable ambition, but might
even turn their arms against him, if he ihould be
so regardless of their danger as obflinately to pro-
trat the war, he thought it necessary, both for his
safety and reputation, to give his content to a
truce. Nor was Francis willing to sustain all the
blame of obstructing the re-establishment of peace,
or to expofe.himfelf on that account to the danger
of being deserted by the Swiss and other foreign-
ers in his service. He even began to apprehend
that his own fubjeats would serve him coldly, if by
contributing to aggrandize the power of the Infi-
dels, which it was his duty, and had been the am-
bition of his ancestors to depress, he continued to
aft in direct opposition to all the principles which
ought to influence a Monarch dillinguifhed by the
title of Most Christian King. He chore, for nil
there realons, rather to run the rilque of (lifoblig-
ing his new ally the Sultan, than, by an unfeafon-

I llLnanhnafi I-lit. I-ung. lib. xiii. p. 139.
t J(ovii llillor. lib. xxxv. p. 183.

able

Booc VI. able adherence to the treaty with him, to forfeit

'37J what was of greater consequence.
's37;

?egociati- BUT though both parties consented to a truce,
oe of · the plenipotentiaries found insuperable difficulties
ptwbe in fettling the articles of a definitive treaty. Each
Charles of the Monarchs, with the arrogance of a conque.

ris. ror, aimed at giving law to the other; and neither

would so far acknowledge his inferiority, as to fa.
crifice any point of honour, or to relinquish any
1538. matter of right; so that the plenipotentiaries spent

the time in long and fruitless negociations, and fe-
parated after agreeing to prolong the truce for a
few months.

The Pope THE Pope, however, did not despair ofaccom-
thee in per plifhing a point in which the plenipotentiaries had
Con. failed, and took upon himself the role burden of

negociating a peace. To form a confederacy ca-
pable of defending Christendom from the formida-
ble inroads of the Turkish arms, and to concert
effeAual measures for the extirpation of the Lu-
theran heresy, were two great objects which Paul
had much at heart, and he confidered the union of
the Emperor with the King of France as an efienti-
al preliminary to both. To be the instrument of
reconciling these contending Monarchs, whom his
predecessors by their interested and indecent in-
trigues had To often embroiled,'was a circumstance
which could not fail of throwing diftinguilhed luf-
tre on his character and administration. Nor was
he without hopes that while he pursued this lauda-
ble end, he might secure advantages to his own
family, the aggrandizing of which he did not ne-
gleA, though he aimed at it with a less audaci-
ous ambition than was common among the Popes
of that century. Influenced by these confidera-
tions, he proposed an interview 1etween the

two

two Monarchs at Nice, and offered to repair BoOK VI.
thither in person, that he might at as mediator in '
composing all their differences. When a Pontiff 1s38'
of a venerable character, and of very advanced age,
was willing, from his zeal for peace, to undergo
the fatigues of such a distant journey, neither
Charles nor Francis could with decency decline the
interview. But though both came to the place of
rendezvous, so great was the difficulty of adjusting
the ceremonial, or such the remains of distrust and
rancour on each fide, that they refused to fee one
another, and every thing was tranfaAed by the in-
tervention of the Pope, who visited them alternate-
ly. Nor could he, with all his zeal and ingenuity,
find out any method of removing the obstacles,
particularly those arising from the poffeflion of the
Milanese, which prevented a final accommodation;
nor was all the weight of his authority, sufficient to
overcome the obstinate perseverance of either Mo-
narch in aflerting hisown claims. At last, that he A ruce so,
might not seem to have laboured altogether with- ten years
out effect, he prevailed on them to sign a truce .nncludedat
for ten years, upon the fame condition with the June is:
former, that each should retain what was now in
his possession, and in the mean time should fend
ambassadors to Rome, to discuss their pretensions
at leisure c.

THUS ended a war of no long continuance, but

very extensive in its operations, and in which both
parties exerted their utmost strength. Tho' Fran-
cis failed in the objet that he had principally in
view, the recovery of the Milanese, he acquired,
nevertheless, great reputation by the wisdom of
his measures, as well as the fhccefs of his arms in
repulsing a formidable invasion; and by securing
poffeflion of one half of the Duke of Savoy's do-

c Recueil des Traitez, ii. 210. Relatione del Nicolo Tie-

polo de l'abocamcnto di Nizza chez. Du Mont Corps Di-
plomat. par. ii. p. 172.

minions,

BOOK VI. minions, he added no inconsiderable accession t

-.--'. his kingdom. Whereas, Charles, repulsed an
1538. baffled, after having boasted so arrogantly of viao

ry, purchased an inglorious truce, by facrificinj
an ally who had rashly confided too much in hi
friend(hip and power. The unfortunate Duke
murmured, complained, and remonstrated againf
a treaty so much to his disadvantage; but in vain
he had no means of redress, and was obliged tc
submit. Of all his dominions, Nice, with its de.
pendencies, was the only corner of which he him-
self kept possession. He saw the reft divided be.
tween a powerful invader, and the ally to whose
protecion he had trusted, while he remained a fad
monument of the imprudence of weak Princes,
who, by taking part in the quarrel of mighty neigh-
bours, between whom they happen to be situated,
are crushed and overwhelmed in the shock.

Interview A FEW days after signing the treaty of truce,
between the Emperor set fail for Barcelona, but was driven
Francis at by contrary winds to the island St. Margaret on the
Aigues- coast of Provence. When Francis, who happen-
mortes. ed to be not far distant, heard of this, he con-

fidered it as an office of civility, to invite him to
take shelter in his dominions, and proposed a per-
fonal interview with him at Aigues-mortes. The
Emperor, who would not be outdone by his rival
in conplaifance, inflantly repaired thither. As
soon as he cast anchor in the road, Francis, with-
out waiting to fettle any point of ceremony, but
relying implicitly on the Emperor's honour for
his security, vilited him on board his galley, and
was received and entertained with the warmest
demonstrations of esteem and affecion. Nc\:t
day, the Emperor repaid the confidence which the
King had placed in him. He landed at Aigues-
mortes with as little precaution, and met with a

recccp-

reception equally cordial. He remained on hforeBooK VI.
during the night, and in both visits, they vied with --
each other in expreflions of refpef and friendship d. 1538
After twenty years of open hostilities, or of secret
enmity; after lb many injuries reciprocally in-
flited or endured; after having formally given
the lie, and challenged one another to single com-
bat; after the Emperor had inveighed so publick-
ly against Francis, as a Prince void of honour or
integrity; and Francis had accused him as accef-
fary to the murder of his eldest son; such an inter-
view appears altogether singular, and even un-
natural. But the history of these Monarchs a-
bsunds with such furprizing transitions. From im-
placable enmity, they appeared to pass, in a mo-
ment, to the most cordial reconcilement; from
suspicion and distrust, to perfect confidence; and
from practising all the dark arts of a deceitful po-
licy, they could aflume, of a sudden, the liberal
and open manners of two gallant gentlemen.

THE Pope, betides the glory of having restored The ltrfli-

nation of

peace to Europe, gained, according to his ex-Al:xande.
pecdation, a point of great consequence to his fa- ieMedici
mily, by prevailing on the Emperor 'to betroth
Margaret of Austria his natural daughter, former-
ly the wife of Alexander de Medici, to his grand-
fun Odtavio Farnese, and in conficleration of this
marriage, to bestow several honours and territories
upon his future fon-in-law. A very tragical event,
wlich happened about the beginning of the year
one thousand five hundred and thirty-feven, had
deprived Margaret of her firfl hulband. That
young prince, whom the Emperor's partiality liad

,I Sandov. Hill. vol. ii. 2 3. Rclation de l'cntrcviuedc

Chlarl. V. & Fian. 1. par M i .

fe c. Hilit. dc a;ngiucd.

';i;. 1. D. De Vic & Vailcttc. loin v.

V '. L
r cm , 1). 93.

rai td

.BooK VI. raised to the supreme power in Florence, upon the

-v-*--' ruins of the publick liberty, neglected entirely the

3 cares ofgovernrnent, and abandoned himself to the

most diflblute debauchery: Lorenzo de Medic
his neared kinsman, was not only the companion
but director of his pleasures, and employing al
the powers of a cultivated and inventive genius in
this dishonourable ministry, added such elegance
and variety to vice, as gained him an absolute as
cendant over the mind of Alexander. But while
Loreno seemed to be funk in Luxury, and asseted
such an appearance of indolence and effeminacy
that he would not wear a sword, and trembled at
the fight of blood, he concealed under that dif
guise, a dark, designing, audacious spirit. Promp
ted either by the love of liberty, or allured by the
hope of attaining the supreme power, he determin
ed to assassinate Alexander his benefactor and friend
Though he long revolved this design in his mind
his reserved and suspicious temper prevented hin
from communicating it to any person whatever
and continuing to live with Alexander in their ufua
familiarity, he, one night, under pretence of hav
ing secured him an aflignation with a lady of high
rank, whom he had often oIlicited, drew that un
wary Prince into a secret apartment of his houfs
and there stabbed him, while h. lay carelessly on
couch, expeting the arrival of the lady whol
company he had been promised. But no foone
was the deed done, than flanding astonished, an
struck with horror at its atrocity, he forgot, in
moment, all the motives which had induced hin
to commit it, and, instead of rouzing the peop
to recover their liberty, by publilhing the deal
of the tyrant, instead of taking any itep towar
opening his own way to the dignity now va
cant, he locked the door of the apartment, an,

lil

like a man bereaved of reason and pretence gof Bok VI.
mind, fled with the utmost precipitation out of the "
Florentine territories. It was late next morning
before the fate of the unfortunate Prince was
known, as his attendants, accustomed to his irre-
gularities, never entered his apartment early. Im-
mediately the chief persons in the state assembled.
Being induced partly by the zeal of cardinal Cibo
for the house of Medici, to which he was nearly
related, partly by the authority of Francis Guic-
ciardini, who recalled to their memory and repre-
sented in striking colours the caprice as well as tur-
bulence of their ancient popular government, they
agreed to place Cosmo di Medici, a youth of eigh- Cormo de

Medici plz"

teen, the only male heir of that illustrious hoiufe, ced at the
at the head of the government; though at the Had ofthe

Florentine

fame time such was their love of liberty, that they iate.
established several regulations in order to circum-
scribe and moderate his power.

MEANWHILE Lorenzo having reached a place of His govettn

r1 1.1.,i* ment oppo.

safety, made known what he had done, to Philip fed by the
Strozzi and the other Florentines who had beenFlorentine
driven into exile, or who had voluntarily retired,xile
when the republican form of government was abo-
lifhed in order to make way for the dominion of
the Medici. By them, the deed was extolled with
extravagant praises, and the virtue of Lorenzo was
compared with that of the elder Brutus, who dif-
regarded the ties of blood, or with that of the
younger, who forgot the friendship and favours of
the tyrant, that they might preserve or recover the
liberty of their country c. Nor did they reft satis-
fled with empty panegyricks they immediately
quitted their different places of retreat, afembled
forces, animated their vassals and partisans to take

e Lettere di Principi, tom. iii. p. z.
Vo., 1I. E e arms,

BooK Vi. arms, and to seize this opportunity of re eitablil~

j38. ing the publick liberty on its ancient foundation.

Being openly assisted by the French ambassador at
Rome, and secretly encouraged by the Pope, who
bore no good will to the house of Medici, they en-
tered the Florentine dominions with a considerable
body of men. But the persons who had elefted
Cosmo possessed both the means of supporting his
government, and abilities to employ them in the
most proper manner, They levied, with the grea-
test expedition, a good number of troops; they
endeavoured by every art, to gain the citizens of
greatest authority, and to render the administration
us the young prince agreeable to the people.
Above all, they courted the Emperor's protetiion,
as the only firm foundation of Coarmo's dignity and
power. Charles, knowing the propensity of the
Florentines to the friendship of France, and how
much all the partizans of a republican government
detested him as the oppreflor of their liberties, saw
it to be greatly for his interest to prevent the re-
establishment of the ancient conflitution in Flo-
rence; For this reason, he not only acknowledged
Colmo as head of the Florentine state, and con
ferred on him all the titles of honour with which
Alexander had been dignified, but engaged to de-
fend him to the utmost ; and as a pledge of this,
ordered the commanders of fueh of his troops as
were stationed on the frontiers of Tuscany, to sup-
port him against all aggressors. By their aid, Co!
mo obtained an easy vitory over the exiles, whole
troops he furprized in the night-time, and took
most of the chiefs prisoners; an event which broke
all their measures, and fully established his own
authority. But though he was extremely defirois
of the additional honour of marrying the Emperor'
daughter, the widow of his predeceflor, Charles,
secure already of his attachment, cliofl rather

to

to gratify the Pope by beflowing her on his ne- BooK VI.
phew f. X533

DURINa the war betweed the Emperor and Thefriend-

-l(ip betweeri

Francis, an event had happened which abated in Francisand
some degree the warmth and cordiality of friend- Henry V"Il.
ship which had long subsisted between the latter bt°
and the King of England. James the fifth of Scot-
land, an enterprizing young Princei having heard
of the Emperor's intention to invade Provence,
and being fond of shewing that he did not yield
to any of his aneeftors in the fineerity of his at-
tachment to the French crown, as well as eager to
diftinguifli himself by fame military exploit, levied
a body of troops with an intention of leading them
in person to the assistance of the King of France.
Though Come unfortunate accident prevented his
carrying any troops into France, nothing could di-
vert him from going thither in person. Immedi-
ately upon his landing he hafteried to Provence, but
had been detained so long in his voyage that he
could not have any (hare in the military operations,
and he met the King on his return after the retreat
of thelmperialifts. Francis, greatlypleafed with
his zeal, and no less with his mariners and conver-
fation, could ndt refute him his daughter Magda- Jan. 1ls37;
len, whom he demanded in marriage. It morti-
sied Henry extremely to fee a Prince of whom he
was lately becomejealous, after having long treat-
ed him and his subjes. with contempt, form an
alliance, from which he derived such an acceflion
both of reputation and security g. He could not,
however, with decency oppose Francis's bellowing

f Jovii Hill. c. xcviii. p. 218, &c. Belcarii Comment.

1. 2z. p. 696. Iftoria de fui tempi di Giov. Bat. Adriani.
Vei. 1587 .
p. o.

Hillt or Scotland, vol. i. p. 77.

Ee X hia

BOOK VI. his daughter upon a Monarch descended from a

race of Princes, the most antient and faithful al-
;38. lies of the French crown. But when James, upon

the sudden death of Magdalen, demanded as his
second wife Mary of Guise, he warmly solicited
Francis to deny his suit, and in order to difappeint
him asked that lady in marriage for himself.
When Francis preferred the Scottish King's sincere
courtship to his artful and malevolent proposal,
he discovered much diffatisfaAion. The pacifica-
tion agreed upon at Nice, and the familiar inter-
view of the two rivals at Aigues-mortes, filled
Henry's mind with new suspicions, as if Francis
had altogether renounced his friendship for the fake
of new connections with the Emperor. Charles,

The Empe- thoroughly acquainted with the temper of the
ror courts Englilh King, and watchful to observe all the shift-

Hy ings and caprices of his passions, thought this a

favourable opportunity of renewing his negotia-
tions with him, which had long been broken off.
By the death of Queen Catherine, whose interest
the Emperor could not with decency have aban-
doned, the chief daufe of their discord was re-
moved; so that without touching upon the deli-
cate queflion of her divorce, he might now take
what measures he thought most effectual for re-
gaining Henry's good will. For this purpose, he
began with proposing several marriage-treaties to
the King. He offered his niece, a daughter of the
the King of Denmark, to Henry himself; he
demanded the Princess Mary for one of the
Princes of Portugal, and was even willing to
receive her as the King's illegitimate daugh-
ter h. Though none of there projected alli-
aces ever took place, or perhaps were ever fe-
rioully intended, they occasioned fiich frequent in-

h Mem. dc Ribier, t. i. 4'i. t

tercourse

tercourfe between the courts, and so many recipro- BOOK VI.
cal professions of civility and esteem, as confidera- 1535
bly abated the edge of Henry's rancour againif the
Emperor, and paved the way for that union be-
tween them which afterwards proved so difadvan-
tageous to the French King.

THE ambitious schemes in which the Emperor Progrcfs of

had been engaged, and the wars he had been car- ta'ro,
rying on for some years proved, as usual, extreme-
ly favourable to the progress of the reformation in
Germany. While Charles was absent upon his
African expedition, or intent on his vait projects
against France, his chief objeat in Germany was
to prevent the dissensions about religion from dif-
turbing the publick tranquillity, by granting such
indulgence to the Protestant Princes as might in-
duce them to concur with his measures, or at least
hinder them from taking part with his rival. For
this reason, he was careful to secure to the Protef-
tants the poffeflion of all the advantages which
they had gained by the articles of pacification at
Nuremberg, in the year one thousand five hun-
dred and thirty-two i; and except some flight
trouble from t'ieproceedingsof the Imperial cham-
ber, they met with nothing to disturb them in the
exercise of their religion, or to interrupt the fuc-
cefsful zeal with which they propagated their opi-
nions. Meanwhile the Pope continued his nego- oNsg°d, n.

,* .* r i * i *T P~~~~ ons and in-

cations for convoking a general council.; and trigues
though the Protestants had expressed great difflatis- with r

s *pe& to a

faction will his intention to fix upon Mantua as general
the place of meeting, he adhered obstinately to his cou"il
choice, iflued a bull on the second of June, one
thousand five hundred and thirty-fix, appointing
i Du Mont Corps Diplor. tom. iv.part 2. p. 138,

Ee3 it

BOOK VI. it to assemble in that city on the twenty-third of
~-,"'- May the year following; he nominated three car-
4538' dinals to preside in his name; enjoined all Chrifti.

an Princes to countenance it by their authority,
and invited the prelates of every nation to attend
in person. This citation of a council, an assembly
which from its nature and intention demanded quiet
times, as well as pacific dispositions, at the veryjunc-
ture, when the Emperor was on his march towards
France, and ready to involve a great part of Eu-
rope in the confusions of war, appeared to every
person extremely unseasonable. It was intimated,
however, to all the different courts by nuncios
dispatched of purpose k. The Emperor, with an
intention, to gratify the Germans, had, during his
residence at Rome, warmly solicited the Pope to
call a council; but being at the fame time willing
to try every art in order to persuade Paul to
depart from the neutrality which he preserved be-
tween him and Francis, he sent Heldo his vice
chancellor along with the nuncio whom the Pope
employed in Germany, instructing him to second
all the nuncio's representations, and to enforce
them with the whole weight of the imperial autho-
ribnt:y rity. The Protetfants gave them audience at Smal-

kalde, where they had'afembled in a body, in order
to receive them. But after weighing all their ar-
guments, they unanimously refused to acknow-
ledgela council summoned in the name and by the
authority of the Pope alone; in Which he assumed
the sole right of presiding; which was to be held
in a city not only far distant from Germany, but
fubjeet to a Prince, a firanger to them, and close-
ly connected with the court of Rome; and to
which their Divines could not repair with safety,
cfpecially after their doctrines had been ftigmatiz-
gd in the very bull of convocation with the name

k Pallavic. Hilt. Conc. Trid. 113.

0(

ofherefy. These and many other objections a- BOOK VI.
gainft the council, which appeared to them unan- '-
fwerable, they enumerated in a large manifesto, t53s'
which they published in vindication of their con-
dut 1.

AGAINST this the court of Rome exclaimed as

a flagrant proof of their obflinacy and prefimpti-
on, and the Pope flll perfifled in his resolution to
hold the council at the time and in the place ap-
pointed. But some unexpeted difficulties being
itarted by the Duke of Mantua, both about the
right ofjurifdiAion over those who retorted to the
council, and the security of his capital amidst such
a concourse of strangers, the Pope, after fruitless
endeavours to adjust these, first prorogued the
council for some months, and afterwards transfer-
ring the place of meeting to Vicenza in the Vene- oa. 8.
tian territories, appointed it to aifemble on the 153
firift of May in the following year. As neither the
Emperor nor French King, who had not then come
to any accommodation would permit their fubjeets
to repair thither, not a single prelate appeared on
the day prefixed, and the Pope, that his authori-
ty might not become altogether contemptible by so
many ineffecual intimations, put off the meeting
by an indefinitive prorogation m.

MEANWHILE, that he might not seem to have Apartialr-
turned his whole attention towards a reformation formation of

abuses by

which he was not able to accomplish, while he ne- thf PoS,.
glected that which was in his power, he deputed
a certain number of cardinals and bihlops with full
authority to inquire into the abuses and corruptions

I Sliedan, 1. xii. z13, &c. Seckcnd. Coin. lib. iii, p.
,14, &c.
n F. Paul, 117. Pallavic. 117.

Ee 4 of

Booit Vl. of the Roman court; and to propose the most es

z'$ " 'fe&ual iethod of removing them. This scrutiny,

tindertaken with reluctance, was carried on flow.
ly and with remissness. All defeAs were touched
with a gentle hand, afraid of probing too deep, or
of discovering too much. But even by this par.
tial examination, many irregularities were dete-.
ed, and many enormities exposed to light, while
the remedies which they suggested as most proper
were either inadequate, or were never applied.
the report and resolutions of these deputies,
though intended to be kept secret, were transmitted
by some accident into Germany, and being imme-
diately made publick, afforded ample matter for
reflection and triumph to the Protestants n . On
the one hand they demonstrated the necessity of a
reformation in the head as well as the members of
the church, and even pointed out many of the cor-
ruptions against which Luther and his followers
bad remonitrated with the greatest vehemence.
They (hewed, on the other hand, that it was vain
to expet this reformation ftom ecclefiafticks them-
'feles, who, as Luther strongly exprefled it, pid-
dled at curing warts, while they overlooked or
confirmed ulcers o

A league THR earnestness with which the Emperor seem-
fmi in}, ed, at first, to press their acquiescing in the Pope's
to tla i, scheme of holding a council in Italy, having alarm-
SBtuhI.lde. ed the P.:orefant Princes so much, that they

thought it prudent t, firengthen their confederacy,
by admitting several new members who follicited
that privilege, particularly the King of Denmark;
Heldo, who during his residence in Germany, had
observed all the advantages which they derived
from that union, endeavoured to counterbalance its

P Slcidan, 233. * Seek. I. iii. i6..

ef'fct

effe&s by an alliance among the catholick powers BOOKc VI.
of the Empire. This league, diftinguifled by the "
name of Holy, was merely defensive, and though I39'
concluded by Heldo in the Emperor's name, was
afterwards disowned by him, and subscribed by
very few Princes P.

THE Protestants Coon got intelligence of this as- Alarms the

fociation, notwithstanding all the endeavours ofPrtc'"0"''t
the contracting parties to conceal it; and their
zeal, always apt to fufpedt and to dread, even to
excess, every thing that seemed to threaten religi-
on, instantly took the alarm, as if the Emperor
had been just ready to enter upon the execution of
tome formidable plan for the extirpation of their
opinions. In order to disappoint this, they held
frequent consultations; they courted the Kings of
France and England with great afliduity, and even
began to think of raising the refpetive contingents
both in men and money, which they were obliged
to furnish by the treaty of Smalkalde. But it was
not long before they were convinced, that there ap-
prehensions were without foundation, and that the
Emperor, to whom repose was absolutely necef-
fary, after being exhausted by efforts beyond his
strength in the war with France, had no thoughts
of disturbing the tranquillity of Germany. As a
proof of this, his ambassadors, at an interview April ,g.
with the Protestant Princes in Francfort, agreed
that all conceflions in their favour, particularly
those contained in the pacification of Nuremberg,
should continue in force for fifteen months; that
during this period, all proceedings of the Imperial
chamber against them flould be suspended; that a
.conference should be held by a few divines of each

P Seck. 1. iii. z17 Recuil de Traitez.

party,

BOOK VI. party, in order to discuss the points in, controver,

fy, and to propose articles of accofmmodation,
159s which should be laid before the next diet. Though

the Emperor, that he might not irritate the Pope,
who remonstrated againit the first part of this
agreement as impolitick, and against the latter, as
an impious encroachment upon his prerogative,
never formerly ratified this convention, it was ob.
served with considerable exadnefs, and greatly
strengthened the basis of that ecclefiaflical liberty,
for which the Proteltants contended q.

April 4. A FEW days after the convention at Francfort,
Retorma-
tion eftabli- happened the death of George Duke of Saxony,
fiedineve an event of great advantage to the reformation.
ry part of
SaXoy. That Prince, the head of the Albertine or younger

branch of the Saxon family, pofleffed, as marquis
of Mifnia and Thuringia, extensive territories,
comprehending Dresden, Leipfick, and other cities
now the most considerable in the eleEtorate. From
the first dawn of the reformation, he had been its
enemy as avowedly, as the elecoral Princes were
its protetors, and had carried on his opposition not
only with all the zeal flowing from religious pre-
judices, but with a virulence inspired by personal
antipathy to Luther, and imbittered by the domes-
tick animosity, subsisting btween him and the
other branch of his family. By his death without
iflue, his fucceflion fell to his brother Henry,
whose attachment to the Proteflant religion, fur-
passed, if possible, that of his predecessor to popery.
Henry no sooner took poffeflion of his new domi-
nions, than, disregarding a clause in George's
will, dictated by his bigotry, whereby he be-
queathed all his territories to the Emperor and

i F. Paul, 82. Sleid. 247. Seck. 1. iii. 200.

King

King of the Romans, if his brother should attempt BooK VI.
to make any innovation in religion; he invited '539.
some Protestant divines, and among them Luther
himself, to Leipfick. By their advice and aflif-
tance, he overturned, in a few weeks, the whole
fyflem of antient rites, establishing the full exer-
cife of the reformed religion, with the universal
applause of his fubjets, who had long wished for
this change, which the authority of their Duke
alone had hitherto preventedr. This revolution
delivered the Protestants from the danger to which
they were exposed, by having an inveterate enemy
situated in the middle of their territories; and their
dominions now extended in one great and almost
unbroken line, from the shore of the Baltick to the
banks of the Rhine.

SOON after the conclusion of the Truce at Nice, A mutiny

an event happened, which satisfied all Europe, that ,ral troops
Charles had prosecuted the war to the utmost ex-
tremity, that the state of his affairs would permit.
Vast arrears were due to his troops, whom he had
long amused with vain hopes and promises. As
they now foresaw that little attention would be
paid to their demands, when by the re-eftablilh-
ment of peace, their services became of less im-
portance, they loft all patience, broke out into
an open mutiny, and declared, that they thought
themselves entitled to seize by violence, what was
detained from them contrary to all justice. Nor
was this spirit of sedition confined to one part of
the Emperor's dominions; the mutiny was almost
as general as the grievance which gave rife to it.
The obldiers in the Milanese, plundered the open
country without controul, and filled the capital

r Sleidan, 249.

itself

BOOK VI. itself with consternation. Those in garrison at

.-v---, Goletta, threatened to give up that important for-
'539* trefs to Barbarossa. In Sicily, the troops proceed.

ed to still greater excesses; having chaced away
their officers, they elected others in their stead,
defeated a body of men whom the viceroy sent
against them, took and pillaged several cities, con-
ducting themselves all the while, in such a man-
ner, that their operations resembled rather the re-
gular proceedings of a concerted rebellion, than
the rashness and violence of a military mutiny.
But by the address and prudence of the generals,
who, partly by borrowing money in their own
name, or in that of their master, partly by extort-
ing large tums from the cities in their refpedtive
provinces, raised what was sufficient to discharge
the arrears of the soldiers, there infurredtions were
quelled. The greater part of the troops being dif-
banded, such a number only as was necessary for
garrisoning the principal towns, and protecting the
sea coasts from the insults of the Turks, was kept
in pay 6.

Cortes of IT was happy for the Emperor, that the abili-
Castile held ties of his generals extricated him out of thele dif-

Toldo. ficulties, which it exceeded his own power to have

removed. He had depended, as his chief resource
for discharging the arrears due to his soldiers, upon
the subsidies which he expected from his Castilian
fubjeds. For this purpose, he assembled the
Cortes of Caflile at Toledo, and having repre-
sented to them the great expence of his military
operations, together with the vast debts in which
these had necessarily involved him, he proposed
to levy such supplies as the present exigency of
his affairs demanded, by a general excite or

a Jovii Hilfor. 1. xxxvii. 203. c. SIndov. Fecreras, ix.

commodities.

commodities. But the Spaniards who already feltB°°k v
themselves opppreffed with a load of taxes un- ,53
known to their ancestors, and who had often corn- The com-

plaint anlld

plained that their country, in order to profecutedi rrtaifac
quarrels in which it was not interested, and to tin oftthat
fight battles from which it could reap no benefit, airemby
was drained not only of its wealth but of its in-
habitants, determined not to add voluntarily to
their own burthens, or to furnish the Emperor
with the means of engaging in new enterprizes no
less ruinous to the kingdom than most of those
which he had hitherto carried on. The nobles, in
particular, inveighed with great vehemence against
the imposition proposed, as an encroachment upon
the valuable and distinguishing privilege of their
order, that of being exempted from the payment
of any tax. They demanded a conference with
the representatives of the cities concerning the state
of the nation. They contended that if Charles
would imitate the example of his predecessors, who
had resided constantly in Spain, and would avoid
entangling himself in a multiplicity of tranfations
foreign to the concerns of his Spanish dominions,
the stated revenues of the crown would be fully
filfficient to defray the necessary expences of go-
vernment. They represented to him that it would
be unjust to lay new burthens upon the people,
while this prudent and effeeual method of re-
eilablilhing public credit, and securing national
opulence, was totally negleced '. Charles, after
employing arguments, entreaties and promises, but
without success, in order to overcome their obfi-
nacy, dismissed the aflembly with great indignati-
on. From that period neither the nobles nor the Thc ncicrnt
prelates have been called to there assemblies, on pre- co".ni'cio

oflth Collte
tence that mfich as pay no part of the public taxes, lubvcrted.

t Sandov. lliit vol. ii 269

should

Book vI. should claim no vote in laying them on. 1ori

v'-J- have been admitted to the Cortes but the procura.
539i tors or representatives of eighteen cities. Thefei

to the number of thirty-fix, being two from each
community, form an assembly which bears no re;
semblance either in power or dignity or indepen-
dence to the ancient Cortes, and are absolutely at
the devotion of the court in all their determinati.
ons ". Thus the imprudent zeal with which the
Castilian nobles had Supported the regal preroga-
tive, in oppofiticn to the claims of the commons
during the commotions in the year one thousand
five hundred and twenty-onei proved at last fatal
to their own body. By enabling Charles to depress
one of the orders in the state, they deflroyed that
balance to which the constitution owed its fecurityi
and put it in his power and that of his successors to
humble the other, and to strip it of its most valua-
ble privileges,

Trhe anef AT that time, however, the Spanish grandees
fill pofrefred flill pofeffed extraordinary power as well as privi-
gh rivi- leges, which they exercised and defended with an

haughtiness peculiar to themselves. Of this the
Emperor himself had a mortifying proof during the
meeting of the Cortes at Toledo. As he was re-
turning one day from a tournament accompanied
by most of the nobility, one of the serjeants of
the court, out of officious zeal to clear the way for
the Emperor, struck the Duke of Infantado's horl
with his batton, which that haughty grandee re-
senting, drew his sword, beat and wounded the offi-
cer. Charles, provoked at fucl an insolent deed in his
presence, immediately ordered Ronquillo thejudg(
of the court to arrest the Duke; Ronquillo advance(

u Sandov. ibid. La Scicnce du Gouvernement, par M. de
Real, tom. ii. p. o12.

to

to execute his charge, when the constable of Ca- BOOK VI.
file interposing, checked him, claimed the right .-
of jurifdidion over a grandee as a privilege of his
office, and conduded Infantado to his own apart-
ment. All the nobles present were so pleated with
the boldness of the constable in asserting the rights
of their order, that deserting the Emperor, they
attended him to his house with infinite applauses4
and Charles returned to the palace without any
person along with him but the cardinal Tavera.
The Emperor, how sensible soever of the affront,
saw the danger of irritating a jealous and high-
spirited order of men whom the slightest appear-
ance of offence might drive to the most unwar-
rantable extremes. For that reason, instead of
fraining at any ill-timed exertion of his preroga-
tive, he prudently connived at the arrogance of a
body too potent for him to controul, and sent next
morning to the Duke of Infantado offering to in-
fli& what punishment he pleased on the person who
had affronted him. The Duke confidering this as
a full reparation to his honour, instantly forgave
the officer; bestowing on him, besides, a confi-
derable present as a compensation for his wound.
Thus the affair was entirely forgotten x; nor
would it have deserved to be mentioned, if it were
not a striking example of the haughty and inde-
pendent spirit of the Spanilh nobles in that age,
as well as an instance of the Emperor's dexterity
in accommodating his condut to the circumstances
in which he was placed.

CHARLnS was far from discovering any such lnfurreia

condescension or lenity towards the citizens of"atGhe"'
Ghent, who not long after broke out into open

* Sandov, . 2 74. Ferreras, ix. 212. Miniara, 113,

rebellion

Booe VI. rebellion againts his government. An event which
'-^^ r happened in the year one thousand five hundred

'S39' and thirty-fix, gave occasion to this rath infurrec.

tion so fatal to that flourithing city. At that time
the Queen dowager of Hungary, governers of the
Netherlands, having received orders from her bro.
ther to invade France with all the forces which she
could raise, she afernbled the States of the united
Provinces, and obtained from them a subsidy of
twelve hundred thousand florins, to defray the ex-
pence of that undertaking. Of this fum, the
county of Slanders was obliged to pay a third part

Pretensions as its proportion. But the citizens of Ghent, the
f the citi- most considerable city in that country, averse to a
ens.' war with France with which they carried on an

extensive and gainful commerce, refused to pay
their quota, and contended that in consequence of
stipulations between them and the ancestors of
their present sovereign the Emperor, no tax could
be levied upon them, unless they had given their
express content to the imposition of it. The go-
vernefs, on the other hand, maintained that as the
fublidy of twelve hundred thousand florins had
been granted by the States of Slanders, of which
their representatives were members, they were
bound, of course, to conform to what was enact
ed by them, as it is the first principle in society, on
which the tranquillity and order of government
depend, that the inclinations of the minority mull
be over-ruled by thejudgment and decision of the
superior number.

Pinceedingi THE citizens of Ghent, however, were not vil-
aainfthem. ling to relinquiih a privilege of such high impor-

tance as that which they claimed. Having been
accultomed, under the government of the houfc
of Burgundy, to enjoy extensive inmmunities, and

to

to be treated with much indulgence, they difdain-BooK vrI
ed to sacrifice to the. delegated power of a regent
those rights and liberties which they had often and 539
successfully ,affertd againlt their greatest Princes.
The Queen, though she endeavoured at first to
sooth them, and to reconcile them to their duty
by various cinceflibns, was at last so much irri-
tated by the obstinacy with :hich they adhered to
their claim, that she ordered all the citizens of
Ghent, on whom fle could lay.hold in any part of
the Netherlands, to be arrested.., But this rash ac-,
tion made an impreflion very different fiomr what
the expeCted on then, whose minds were agitated
with all the violent passions which indignation. at
oppreflion and zeal for liberty inspire. Less affect-
ed with the danger of their friends and compa-
nions, than irritated at the governess,. they openly
despised her authority, and :sent deputies to the
other towns. of Slanders, conjuring them not to
abandon their cbuntry at such a jinctute, but to
concur with them in vindicating its rights against
the encroachments of a woman, who either did
not know or did not regard their immunities. All
but a few inconsiderable, twns declined entering
into any confederacy against the governess; .how-
ever, they joined in petitioning her to put off the
term for payment of the tax so long, that they
might have it.in their power to fend some .of their
number into Spain, in order to lay their title to ex-
emption before their forereign. This fie granted
with some difficulty. But Charles received their
conmiflioners with an haughtine!s to which they
were not accustomed from their ancient Princes,
and enjoining them to virld the fame refpecdful
obedience tohlis sifter, which they owed to him in
person, remitted the examlination of their claim to
the council of Malines. This court, which is pro-
perly a fancling committee of the parliament or

VOL. III.F f state'

BooK VI. states of the county, and which poflfffes the fu-
'""' preme'jarifdi''ion in all matters civil as well as

9 cirninal Y; pronounced the claim of the citizens of

Ghent to be ill fouilded, and appointed:them- forth-
witlihtd pay the!proportion of the tax.

They take ENRAGED at this.'decifion, which they confider-
fmcrtou'L ed as notoriously tinjuft, and rendered desperate on
mit to feeing their rightsi betrayed by that very court
rance. *which was bound to proted them, the people of

Ghent ran to aims in a tumultuary manner, drove
ftuch of the nobility as resided among them out of
the city; secured iifveral of theEmperbr's officers;
put one, of theri :tob 'the torture, whom they ac.
cufed of having 'folehn or destroyed the record,
that eonr-ained thle privileges of exemption from
taes. vwhich they' pleaded; ;chose a council to whom
they-committed th'e ditection of their affa:irs ; gave
orders. for :repairiflg and adding to' tleir fortifica-
tions; and openly ere6ted the ftandard:of rebel-
lion against their .sovereign z. . Sensible,. however,
of their inability to support what their zeal had
prompted them to untdertake, and defirouis of fe-
curing a protector againfi the formidable forces by
which they might expect soon to be attacked, they
sent tome of their number to Francis, offering not
only to acknowledge him as their sovereign, and
to put him in immediate poffeflion of Ghent, but
to aflift him with all their forces inirecovering those
provinces in the Netherlands, which had antientlv
belonged to the cr-wn of France, and had been lb

DJef:critti?:l'' c tutti pacfi bafli di Lud. Guicciardlii.
'\ut, 5;7I. t;,i., . ~3'

M'.:w';';'t':, 1ljr i.d y.'lltc de G:inOi,; en 15 9, pa:r jc1'

T' :' ,!i::'.(!r. cci'it cn 1i -7. A la IHivec i' 7- 1. ['. I '';lt'-
,'rr. ,'\aul;. lil,. xi. p. . !)2. S;l3'1dUo. I itlor, ;?oin. ii. tI. Zsz.

lately

lately re-united to it by the decree of the parlia- BOOK VI.
ment of Paris. This unexpected proposition cor- 53
ing from persons who had it in their power to have
performed inflantly one part of what they.under-
took, and who could contribute so effeCtually to-
wards the execution of the whole, opened vait as
well as alluring profpeds to Francis's ambition.
The counties of Slanders and Artois were'of great-
er value than the Dutchy of Milan, which he had
so long laboured to acquire with paflionate but
fruitlels desire; their situation with respeCt to France
rendered it more easy to conquer or to defend
them; and they might be formed into a separate
principality for the Duke of Orleans, no less fuita-
ble to his dignity than that which his father aimed
at obtaining. From this, the Flemings, who were
acquainted with the French rnanners and' govern-
ment, would not have been averse; and his own
subjects, weary of their deftrudive expeditions
into Italy, would have turned their arms towards
this quarter with more good will, and with greater
vigour. Several considerations, nevertheless, pre- Francis dc
vented Francis from laying hold of this opportu- ln"1'h'i'r
nity, the moil favourable in appearance which had
ever prefenrted itself, of extending his dominions
or diftrelling the Emperor. From the time of
their interview at Aigues-mortes, Charles had con-
tinued to court the King of France withl wonderful
attention ; and often flattered him with hopes of
gratifying at last his wih.hs concerning the Mila-
nefe, by granting the iiiveltiturc (If it either to him
or to one of his lons. But though thele hopes and
pronmifes were thrown out with no other intention
than to detach him from his confederacy with the
grand Scignior, or to raifi futllicions in Solymran's
mind by the appearance ofr 1 cordial and faimiliar
intercourftr fuibfifting between the couits of Paris

F f ?z and

Book vI. and Madrid, Francis was weak enough to catch
-v--' at the shadow by which he had been so often de-

53'9. ceived, and from eagerness to seize it, relinquish-

ed what must have proved a more substantial ac-
quifition. Besides this, the Dauphin jealous to
excess of his brother, and unwilling that a Prince
who seemed to be of a restless and enterprising
nature should obtain an establishment, which from
its situation might be confidered almoit as a do-
meftick one, made ufeof Montmorency, who by
a singular piece of good fortune, was at the fame
time the favourite of the father and of the son,
to defeat the application of the Flemings, and to
divert the King from espousing their cause. Mont-
morency represented accordingly the reputation
and power which Francis would acquire by reco-
vering that footing which he had formerly in Italy,
and that nothing could be so efficacious to over-
come the Emperor's aversion to this$ as his adhe-
ring sacredly to the truce, and refusing on this oc-
cafion to countenance his rebellious fubjefts. Fran-
cis, apt of himself to over-rate the value of the
Milanese, because he eflimated it from the length
of time as well as from the great efforts which he
had employed in order to re-conquer it, and fond
of every action which had the appearance of ge-
nerofity, assented without difficulty to fentirnents
so agreeable to his own, rejected the propositions
of the citizens of Ghent, and dismissed their de-
puties with an harsh answer a.

comnmi,ni- Not satisfied with this, by a farther refinement
cates their in generosity, he communicated to the Emperor
intentlons
to the Em- his whole negociation with the malecontents, and all

a Mene. dc Bellan, p. 263. P. Heute-. Rcr. Aulir. lib.
xi. ,63.

that

that he knew of their schemes and intentions b. This BOOK VI.
convincing proof of Francis's disinterestedness re- 59
lieved Charles from the mofft disquieting apprehen-
sions, and opened a way to extricate himself out
of all difficulties. He had already received full in-
formation of all the tranfaftions in the Nether-
lands, and of the rage with which the people of
iGhent had taken arms, against his government.
1He was thoroughly acquainted with the genius and
qualities of his subjects in that country; with
their love of liberty; their attachment to their an-
tient privileges and customs; as well as the in-
vincible obstinacy with which their minds, flow
but firm and persevering, adhered to any measure
on which they had leilure to fix. He easily saw
what encouragement and support they would have
derived from the afliftance of France; though now
free from any danger on that quarter, he was still
sensible that Come immediate and vigorous inter-
position was necessary in order to prevent the spirit
of disaffection and rebellion from spreading in a
country where the number of cities, the multitude
cf people, together with the great wealth diffused
among them by commerce, rendered it peculiar-
1, formidable, and would supply it with inexhaufli-
ble resources. No expedient, after long delibe-
ration, appeared to him so effectual as his going
ir person to the Netherlands; and the governess delibera-
hs sifter being of the fame opinion, warmly fol- tins con-
licited him to undertake the journey. There were j"urngey
only two different routs which he could take; one the Nether-
by land through Italy and Germany, the other, 1'".t.
entirely by sea, from some port in Spain to one in
the Low-Countries. But the former was more te-
dious than ffited the present exigency of his as-
stirs; nor could he in consistency with his dig-

b Sandov. Hillor. tom. ii. 284.

F f 3 Jily

BooK VI. nity or even his safety pass through Germany with
'-----' out such a train both of attendants and of troops

15359 as would have added greatly to the time that he

muff have consumed in his journey ; the latter was
dangerous at this season, and not to be ventured
upon, while he was on bad terms with the King
of England, unless under the convoy of a power-
ful fleet. This perplexing situation, in which he
was under a neceflity of chufing, and did no
know what to chufe, inspired him at last with the
singular and seemingly extravagant thought o

I..rofCreto paainng through France, as the moss expeditiou
.G through pa n hrtg
f;-..c.u way of reaching the Netherlands. He propose

in his council to demand Francis's permifion so
that purpose. All his counsellors joined with on:
voice in condemning the meahfre as no leTs rafi
than unprecedented, and which must infallibly
expose him to disgrace or to danger; to difgrac,
if the demand were rejected in the manner that le
had reason to expeEt; to danger, if he put lis
person in the power of an enemy whom he hid
often offended, who had antient injuries to :e
venge, as well as fubjets of present contest fill
remaining undecided. But Charles who had fLu
died the charadter of his rival with greater care
and more profoiind discernment than any oF hii
miniifers, persisted in his plan, and flattered him
self that it ni ilht be nccomplifhed not only witlhdu
danger to l;i o\wn person. hut even without the
exptnce of any concelion detrimental to his crown

r,< .,..l', W 7 'i this view he communicated the matter to
L i*. C1'"' thr F-ench ambailfdor at his court, and sent Gran

veil:' Ihis chief miliner to Paris, in order to cbtail
fi'tn FIrancis pelrmillion to pals through hisdo
minions, lind to promise that he would soon set
tic ;!.e .;.,ir of the Milanese to his fltisfhaion

btl

but at the fame time to intreat that he would- not Book VL
exadt any new promise, or even insist on former - 9
engagements, at this juncture, .left whatever he '539
should grant, under his present circumstances,
might seem rather to be extorted by necellity, than
to flow from friendship or tlie love of juflice.
Francis, instead of attending to the snare which
fiuch a flight artifice scarce concealed, was So daz-
hzled with the splendour of overcoming an enemy
by aAs of generosity, and fb pleastd with the air
of superiority, which the reditdde and disinteref-
tednefs of his proceedings gave him on this occa,-
fi)n that he at once airented to all that was de-
manded. Judging of the Emperor's heart by his
own, he imagined that the sentiments of gratitude,
arising from the remembrance of good offices and
liberal treatment, would determine him more for-
cibly to fulfill what he had so often promised,. than
I the most precile stipulations that could be inserted
in any treaty.

UPON this, Charles, to whom every moment His recep-

was precious, set out, notwithitanding the fears kigdo .
and fiulicions of his Spanish fubjeds, with a imall
but splendid train of an hundred. persons. At
:Baonne, on the frontiers of France, lie was re-
ceived by th'e Dauphin and the. Duke of Orleans,
!attended by the conflable Montmorency. The
two Princes offered to go into Spain, and to r.e-
imain there as hostages for the Emperor's :afety:
but this he rejeted, declaring, that he relied with
implicit confidence on the King's honour, and had
never demanded, nor would accept of any other
,pledge for his security. In allthe towns through
which lie passed, the greatest poflible magnificence
was displayed; the magistrates presented him the
keys of the gates; the prilon dours were set open
and by the royal honoulrs paid to him, he appear-

F f 4 ed

BOOK Vi. ed more like the sovereign ot the country, than a
--v---' stranger. The King advanced as far as Chatel-
'539; herauit to meet him ; their interview was diftin-

guifhed by the warmest expreflions of friendship
and regard. They proceeded together towards
Paris, and presented to the inhabitants of that city,
the extraordinary fpecacle of two rival Monarchs'
whole enmity had disturbed and laid waste Europe,
during twenty years, making their solemn entry
together, with all the symptoms of confidence and
harmony, as if they had forgotten, for ever, pafc
injuries, and would never revive hostilities for the
future c

The r- . CH AR.Es remained fix days at Paris; but amidst
plror':de the perpetual caresses of the French court, and the
l;tlicitude,

-various entertainments contrived to amuse or to
do him 'honour, he discovered an extreme impa-
tience to' continue his journey, arising as much
from an apprehension of danger which constantly
oppressed him, as from the neceflity of his pre-
fence in the Low-Countries. Conscious of the dif-
ingenuity of his own intentions, he trembled when
he reflected, that some fatal accident might betray
them to his rival, or lead him to fufped them;
and though his artifices to conceal there should be
successful, he could not help fearing that motives
of interest, might at last triumph over the scruples
of honour, and tempt Francis to avail himself of
the advantage now in his hands. Nor were there
wanting perfbns among the French ministers, who
advised the King to turn his own arts against the
Emperor,'and as the retribution due for so many
jnflances of fraud or falsehood, to seize and detain

c 'Thuan, Hilt. lib. i. c. 14. Mem. de Bella;,, a6..

!'ih

his person, till he granted him full fatisfation with BOOK VI.
regard to all thejuft claims of the French crown.
But no consideration could induce Francis to vio- '540'
late the faith which he had pledged, nor could any
argument convince him, that Charles, after all the
promiles that he had given, and all the favours
which he had received, might still be capable of
deceiving him. Full of this false confidence, he
accompanied him to St. Quintin, and the two
Princes, who had met him on the borders of Spain,
did not take leave of him, until he entered his
dominions in the Low-Countries.

As Soon as the Emperor reached his own terri- :Intl jiin-

tories, the French ambassadors demanded the ac- genuity.
complilhment of what he had promised, concern-
ing the investiture of Milan, but Charles, under
the plausible pretext, that his whole attention was
then engrossed by the consultations necessary to-
wards fupprefling the rebellion in Ghent, put off
the matter for some time. But in order to prevent
Francis from fufpeding his sincerity, he still con-
tinued to talk of his relolutions with refped to that
matter, in the fame strain as when he entered
France, and even wrote to the King much to the
fame purpose, though in general terms, and with
equivocal expreflions, which he might afterwards
explain away or interpret at pleasure .

MEANWHILE, the unfortunate citizens of Ghent, Re.ud,,io

destitute of leaders capable either of directing their of(;hl1t
councils, or conducting their troops; abandoned
by the French King, and unsupported by their
countrymen; were unable to refill their offended
sovereign, who was ready to advance againfl them
with one body of troops, which he had raised in

a Mcmoircs de Ribicr, i. 504.

the

BooK VI. the Netherlands, with another drawn out of Ger-

many, and a third which had arrived from Spain
by sea. The near approach of danger made them,
at last, so sensible of their own folly, that they
sent ambafladors to the emperor imploring his mer-
cy, and offering to set open their gates at his ap-
proach. Charles without vouchsafing them any
other answer, than that he would appear among
them, as their sovereign, with the sceptre and the
sword in his hand, began his march at the head of
his troops. Though he chose to enter the city on
the twenty-fourth of February, his birth-day, he
was touched with nothing of that tenderness or in-

nd punif- dulaence which was natural towards the place of
ment of the his nativity. Twenty-fix of the principal citizens
.itizs. were put to death; a greater number was sent

into baniflment: the city was declared to have
forfeited all its privileges and immunities; the re-
venues belonging to it were confiscated ; its anci-
ent form of government was abolished; the nomi-
nation of its magistrates was vested for the future
in the Emperor and his fucceflbrs; a new sys-em
of laws and political adminifiration was prefcrib-
ed b, and in order to bridle the seditious spirit of
the citizens a Ilrong citadel was appointed to be e-
rected, for defraying the expence of which a fine
of an hundred and fifty thousand florins was irn-
Dosed on the inhabitants, together with an annual
tax of fix thousand florins for the support of a gar-
rifon c By these rigorous proceedings, Charles not
only punifled the citizens of Ghent, but set an awfil
example offeverity before his other fuljeds in the
Netherlands, whole immunities and privileges,
partly the effect, partly the cause of their exten-
five commerce, circumscribed the royal prerogative

h ,es coutumes & loix du Coinptc de Flandrc, par Alex.

)c CGran:., 3 tom f. al. iamlbry, 7,
17, ton . p. i9.

' l1.ra'i Atiialnes l.';>aiti:r , vol. i. 616.

\vithir

within very narrow bounds, and often flood in the Boo, VLr
way of measures which he wished to undertake, or ,5'
fettered and retarded him in his operations.

CHARLES having thus vindicated and re-efta- Chlales re-

t ulc> co ful-

blifled his authority in the Low-Countries, and i,,,,; 'i,,
being now under no neceflity of continuing thega tn;''"it
fame scene of falfchood and diflimulation witht° l s.
which he had long amused Francis, began gradual-
ly to throw aside the xeil under \ hich lie had con-
cealed his intentions with relpcet to the Milanese.
At first, he eluded the demands of the French am-
bafiadors when they again reminded him of his
promises; then he proposed, by way of equivalent
for the dutchy of Milan, to grant the Duke of
Orleans the investiture of Slanders, clogging the
offer, however, with impra&icable conditions, or
iuch as he knew would be rejected d At last,
being driven from all his evafiuns and subterfuges
by their insisting for a categorical answer, he per-
emptorily refused to give up a territory of such
value, or voluntarily to make s(uch a liberal'addi-
tion to the strength of an enemy by diminishing his
own power e. He denied at the fame time, that
he had ever made any promise which could bind
him to an adion so foolish, and so contrary to his
own interest f

Or all the acions in the Emperor's life, this,

without doubt, reflects the greatelt diflonour on
his reputation . Tho' Charles was not extreme-
ly scrupulous at other times about the means
which he employed for accomplifning his ends, or
always observant of the striCt precepts of veracity
and honour, he had hitherto maintained tome re-
gard for the maxims of that less precise and rigid

d Mem. de Ribier, i. 509. q''. ' Ribier, i. 19.
I Bellay, 365-6. g Jovii iill. lib. xxxix .
p. 238. a.

morality

BOOK VI. morality by which monarchs think themselves en-
*'-v--= titled to regulate their conduct. But, on this oc-

,540. cafion, the scheme that he formed of deceiving a

generous and open-hearted Prince; the illiberal
and mean artifices by which he carried it on; the
infenlibility with which he received all the marks
of his friendship, and the ingratitude with which
he requited them; are all equally unbecoming the
dignity of his character, and inconsistent with the
grandeur of his views.

TH;s tranfaAion exposed Francis to as much

scorn as it did the Emperor to censure. After the
experience of a long reign, after so many opportu-
nities of diicovering the duplicity and artifices of
his rival, the credulous simplicity with which he
trufed him at this junt ure seemed to merit no
other return than it actually met with. Francis,
however, remonflrated and exclaimed, as if this
had been the first inllance in which the Emperor
had deceived him. Feeling, as is usual, the insult
which was offered to his undertlanding still more
sensibly than the injury done to his interest, he
discovered such resentment as made it obvious that
lie would lay hold on the firfl opportunity of be-
ing revenged, and that a war, no less rancorous
than that which had- so lately raged, would soon
break out anew in Europe.

'i.e I'ope THIS year is rendered memorable by the efta-
auth,,,i.e blifhment of the order of Jesuits; a body whole
thcl ntit', influence on ecclesiastical as well as civil affairs
tinn f the

ctr of Je- hatlh been so considerable, that an account of the
ull11 genius of its laws and government justly merits a

place in hiltory. When men take a view of the
rapid progices of this society towards wealth and
'ower ; when they contemplate the admirable pru-
cIt'licc with which it has been governed; whlen
tihcy attend to tlhe lerievering and fyftematick lpi-

rit with which its schemes have been carried on ;BOOK VI.
they are apt to ascribe such a singular institution --
to the superior wisdom of its founder, and to sup- 540'
pose that he had formed and digested his plan with
profound policy. But the Jesuits, as well as the
other monastic orders, are indebted for the exif-
tence of their order not to the wisdom of their
founder, but to his enthusiasm. Ignatio Loyola,
whom I have already mentioned on occasion of the
wound which he received in defending Pampe-
luna h, was a fanatick distinguished by extrava-
gancies in sentiment and condu6t, no lets incom-
patible with the maxims of Ibber reasbn, than ie-
pugnant to the spirit of true religion. The wild
adventuresy and visionary schemes, in which his
enthusiasm engaged him, equal any thing recoid-
ed in the legends of the Romish faints; but un-
worthy of notice in history.

PROMPTED by this fanatical spirit, or incited by FI..nitic;i

the love of power and and diftindion, from which 1f '. !:
filch pretenders to superior sanctity are not exempt,
Loyola was ambitious of becoming the founder of
a religious order. The plan which he formed of
its conlitution and laws, was suggested, as he
gave out, and as his followers still teach, by the
immediate inspiration of heaven i. But notwith-
itinding this high pretension, his design met at
first with violent opposition. The Pope, to whom
Loyola had applied for the fanlion of his autho-
rity to confirm the inflitution, referred his petiti.
on to a committee of Carditnals. They represent-
ed the eftallifniient to be unneceiiary as well as
dangerous, and Paul resiled to grant his appro.
bation of it. At last, Loyola remo, ed all his fcru-

B(.,k ii. 1p. 132.

' Coenpoe rendu des Conllitutions des J:l(fit'es, :au PaI'lc-
m'lent' dc I'Pm :cC, p;r MI. de Monclar. p. zs.

pies

BoorVI. ples by an offer which it was impossible for any

'- -' Pope to resist. le proposed that besides the three
Th540.s vows of poverty, of chastity, and of monaftick
motives for obedience, which are common to all monatic or-
Confil ming
thefrder. ders, the members of his society should take a

fourth vow of obedience to the Pope, binding
themselves to go whitherlbever he Ihould command
for the service of religion, and without requiring
any thing from the Holy See for their support. At
a time when the papal authority had received such
a shock by the revolt of so many nations from the
Romish church; at a time when every part of the
popish system was attacked with so much violence
and success, the acquisition of a body of men, thus
peculiarly devoted to the fee of Rome, and whom
it might set in opposition to all its enemies, was
an object of the highest consequence. Paul, in-
ept. 27. fantly perceived this, confirmed the institution of

the Jesuits by his bull; granted the most ample
privileges to the members of the society; and ap-
pointed Loyola to be the first General of the order.
The event had fully justified Paul's discernment,
in expecting such beneficial consequences to the
fee of Rome from this inflitution. In less than halfa
century, the society obtained eftablifhmentsin every
country that adhered to the Roman catholic church;
its power and wealth increased amazingly; the
number of its members became great; their cha-
radler and aceomplifhments were still greater; and
the Jesuits were celebrated by the friends, and
dreaded by the enemies of the Romifhl faith, as
the mol: able and enterprizing order in the church.

Ih. coniu- THe constitution and laws of the society were
i.,
,,1 d ge. perfected by Laynez and Aquaviva, the two ge-
urtnicul.l neIlals who succeeded Loyola, men far Lilpcrlcl
.tttntiu. to their master in abilities, and in the science oI

governs

government. They framed that system of pro-BooK VI.
found and artful policy which distinguished the or- ~o
der. The large infulion of fanaticism, mingled 154°"
with its regulations, should be imputed to Loyola
its founder. Many circumstances concurred in
giving a peculiarity of chara6ter to the order of Je-
suits, and in forming the members of it not only
to take greater part in the affairs of the world than
any other body of monks, but to acquire superior
influence in the conduct of them.

THE primary objec of almost all the monaflic Ttie objc

orders is to separate men from the world, and from or th'" oIr'le
any concern in its affairs. In the solitude and si r.
lence of the cloitler, the monk is called to work
out his own salvation by extraordinary ads of mor-
tification and piety. He is dead to the world, and
ought not to mingle in its tranfadions. He can be
of no benefit to mankind, but by his example and
by his prayers. On the contrary, the Jesuits are
taught to confider themselves as formed for action;
They are chosen soldiers, bound to exert them-
selves continually in the service of God, and of
the Pope, his vicar on earth. Whatever tends to
initrud the ignorant; whatever can be of use to
reclaim or to oppoie the enemies of the Holy See,
is their proper objea. That they may have full
leisure for this active tf(rvice, they are totally ex-
empted from those functions, the performance of
which is the chief bufinefsof other monks. They
appear in no proceflions; they pradtile no rigorous
aufteritis ; they do not conlume one half of their
time in the repetition of tedious ofliccs k. But they
are required to attend to all the tranlattions of the
wo0llj, on account of the influence which there

k Compte Rcndu, par M. de M1,nclar. p. I 1 2. )0 Sur
la detludt. des Jeliites, par M. D'Alembtrt, p. ::.

BooK VI. may have on religion; they are directed to study
- -' " the dispositions of persons in high rank, and to cul-
1540. tivate their friendship 1; and by the very confitu-

tion as well as genius of the order, a spirit of ac-
tion and intrigue is infused into all its members.

Peculiarities As the objet of the society of Jesuits differed
in the fom from that of the other monastic orders, the diver.
of its policy,
paiticularly fity was no less in the form of its government.
toithep: r The other orders are to be confidered as voluntary
f the genc-afociations, in which whatever affects the whole
r"'s body, is regulated by the common suffrage of all

its members. The executive power is vested in
the persons placed at the head of each convent, or
of the whole society; the legislative authority re-
fides in the community. Affairs of moment, re-
lating to particular convents, are determined in
conventual chapters; such as refpec the whole or-
der are confidered in general congregations. But
Loyola, full of the ideas of implicit obedience,
which he had derived from his military profeflion,
appointed that the government of his order should
be purely monarchical. A General, chosen for life
by the deputies from the several provinces, pof-
sessed power that was supreme and independent,
extending to every person, and to every cafe. He,
by his sole authority nominated provincials, rectors,
and every other officer employed in the govern-
ment of the society, and could remove them at
pleasure. In him was vested the sovereign admi-
niftration of the revenues and funds of the or-
der. Every member belonging to it was at
his disposal; and by his uncontroulable man-
date, he could impnie on them any talk, or em-
ploy them in what service soever he pleated. To
his commands they were required to yield not

I Compte par M. de Monclar. p. 12.

only

oJly outward obedience, but to refigal up to him BOOK VI.
the inclinations of their oxvn wills, and the senti- '5'4
ments of their own tnderffaidings. They were to
liften to his i'jiuncttions, as if they had been utter-
ed by Clrift himfeilf. Under his direction, they
wvere to be mere pa!live infrtiments, like clay in
the hands of the potter, or like dead carcases in-
capable of refiflanc.en. Stch a singular form of
policy could not fail to irnprefs its charater on all
the members of the order, and to give a peculiar
force to all its operations. There is not in the an-
nals of mankind any example of Ilch a perfect
defpotifrn, exercised not over monks shut up. in
the cells of a convent, but over men dispersed a-
mong all the nations of the earthl

As the conffitutions of the order vest, in the CircumRan.

t ces which

General, such absolute dominion over all its mem- enable him
bers, they carefully provide for his being perfealyv toeercife

. ~

, .

' , .

i r ·i i _ .,. .

.i

i it with the

informed with respe<ct to the charaEter and abilities greated ad-
of his fubhjets. Every novice who offers himelf van"'"g
as a candidate for entering into the order, is obli-
ged to manifel /,'is cfiiZ/ence t to the superior, or to
a person appointed by him ; and is required to
confess not only his fins and defects, but to disco-
ver the iicclinations, the pa.lioos, and the bent of
his foul. This fm::lifeftation must be renewed
every fix months". The fociely not satisfied with
penetrati in in this manner into the innermofi re-
cefles of the heart, directs each member to ob-
serve the words and a'tions of the novices; they
are confituted spies upon their condiit ; and are
bound to disclose every thing of importance con-
cerning them to the superior. In order that this
scrutiny into their character may be as compleat as

m Compte rendu au Parlem. de Bretagne, par M. de Chalo-
tais, p. 41, &c. Compte par M. de Monclar. 83, 185. 334.

' Compte par M. de Monclar. p. 121, &c.
VOL. II. G g pofli-

BooK VI.poffible, a long :ioviciate muff expire, during

- which they pass through the several gradations of
Ji4.' ranks in the society, and they muiff have attain-

ed the full age of thirty three years, before they
can be admitted to take the final vows, by which
they become professed members°. By there vari-
ous methods, the superiors, under whose imme-
diate infpetion the novices are placed, acquire a
thorough knowledge of their dispositions and ta.
lents. In order that the General, who is the foul
that animates and'"moves the whole society, may
have under his eye'every thing necessary to in-
form or direct hiim, the provincials and heads of
the several houfes'are obliged to transmit to him
regular and frequent reports concerning the mem-
bers under their infpedion. In there they descend
i'rto minute details with refpeEt to the charater of
each person, his abilities natural or acquired, his
temper, his experience in affairs, and the parti-
cular department for which he is best fittedP.
These reports, when digeffted and arranged, are

entered

° Compte par M. de Moncl. 215. 241. Sur la deft. des Jer.
ar M. D'Alemb. p. 39.
P P'M. de Chalotais has made a calculation of the number of

these reports, which the general of the Jesuits mutt annually
receive according to the regulations of the society. These a.
mount in all to 6584. If this fum be divided by 37, the num-
ber of provinces in the order, it appears that 177 reports con-
cerning'the state of each province are transmitted to Romean-
nually. Compte, p. 52. Besides this, there may be extraordi-
nary letters, or such as are sent by the monitors or spies which
the general and provincials entertain in each house. Compte
par M. de Moncl. p. 431. Hifl. des Jesuites, Arnll. 1761. tom.
iv. p. 56. The provincials and heads of houses not only re-
port concerning the members of the society, but are bound to
give the general an account of the civil affairs of the country
wherein they are fettled, in so far as the knowledge of these may
be of benefit to religion. This condition may extend to every

particular,

entered into registers, kept of purpose that the BooK VI.
General may, at one comprehensive view, survey '-
the state of the society in every corner of the 5s4'o
earth; observe the qualifications and talents of
its members; and thus chufe, with perfect infor-
mation, the instruments, which his abfulnte pow-
er can employ in any service for which he thinks
meet to destine them.

As it was the professed intention of the order Pogrer of

of Jesuits to labour with unwearied zeal in pro- the power
moting the salvation of men, this engaged them, ae.din'fh
of course, in many active fiuntions. From their order.
firit institution, they confidered the education of
youth as their peculiar province; they aimed at
being spiritual guides and confessors; they preach-
ed frequently in order to instruct the people; they
set out as miflionaries to convert unbelieving na-
tions. The novelty of the institution, as well as
the singularity of its objects procured the Order
many admirers and patrons. The governors of
the society had the address to avail themselves of
every circumitance in its favour, and in a short
time, the number as well as influence of its
members increased wonderfully. Before the ex-
piration of the sixteenth century, the Jelitits had
obtained the chief direCtion of the education of
youth in every catholic country in Europe. They
had become the confeifors of almost all its mo-

particular, so that the general is furniflied with full informati-
on concerning the tranfaf.ions of every Prince and state in the
world. Compte par M. de Moncl. 443. Hist. des Jesuit. ibid.
p. 58. When the affairs with respeCt to which the provincials
or rEtors write are of importance, they are direted to use cy-
phera, and each of them has a particular cypher front the Ge-
neral. Compte par M. de Chalotais, p. 54.

q Compte par M. de Moncl. p. az 5. 439.-Compte par M.
de Chalotais, p. 5z. 222.

G g 2 narcl s,

BOOK Vi. narchs, a funcion of no small importance in any

54 reign, but under a weak Prince, superior even to

that of minister. They were the spiritual guides
of almost every person eminent for rank or pow-
er. They possessed the highest degree of confi-
dence and interest with the papal court, as the
rnoft zealous and able champions for its authority.
The advantages which an active and enterprizing
body of men might derive' from all these circum-
fiances are obvious. They formed the minds of
men in their youth. They retained an ascendant
over them in their advanced years. They posses-
fed, at different periods, the direcion of the most
considerable courts in Europe. They mingled in
all affairs. They took part in every intrigue and
revolution. The General, by means of the ex-
tensive intelligence which he received, could re-
gulate the operations of the order with the most
perfect discernment. and by means of his abfo-
lute power could carry them on with the utmost
vigour and effetr.

Progrefsof TOGETHER with the power of the order, its
its wealth. wealth continued to increase. Various expedients

were devised for eluding the obligation of the
vow of poverty. The order acquired ample pof-
fellions in every catholic country; and by the

r When Loyola in the year 1540 petitioned the Pope to au-

thorize the institution of the order, he had only ten disciples.
But in the year 1608, sixty eight years 'after their firfi inftitu-
tion, the number of Jesuits had increased to ten thousand five
hundred and eighty one. In the year 71o, the order possessed
twenty-four professed houses; fifty-nine houses of probation;
three hundred and forty refidencies; fix hundred and twelve
colleges; two hundred miflions; one hundred and fifty femina-
ries and boarding schools; and confifed of 19,998 Jesuits. Hil.f
des Jesuites, tom. i. p. 20.

number

number as well as magnificence of its publick BooK VI.
buildings, together with the value of its proper- vo
ty, moveable or real, it vied with the most opu-
lent of the monaftick fraternities. Besides the
sources of wealth common to all the regular cler-
gy, the Jesuits possessed one which was peculiar
to themselves. Under pretext of promoting the
success of their millions, and of facilitating the
support of their miflionaries, they obtained a
special licence from the court of Rome, to trade
with the nations which they laboured to convert.
In consequence of this, they engaged in an exten-
five and lucrative commerce, both in the East and
Weft Indies. They opened ware-houses in differ-
ent parts of Europe, in which they vended their
commodities. Not satisfied with trade alone,
they imitated the example of other commercial
societies, and aimed at obtaining settlements.
They acquired possession accordingly of a large
and fertile province in the southern continent of
America, and reigned as Sovereigns over some
hundred thousand fubhjets,

UNHAPPILY for mankind, the vast influence Pernicouo

which the order of Jesuits acquired by all these tessen oi
different means, has been often exerted with the vi society.
most pernicious effect. Such was the tendency of
that discipline observed by the society in forming
its members, and such the fundamental maxims
in its constitution, that every Jesuit was taught
to regard the interest of the order as the capital
objet, to which every consideration was to be
sacrificed. This spirit of attachment to their or-
der, the most ardent, perhaps, that ever influen-
ced any body of men'. is the charaderiftic prin-

Hist. de Jef. iv. 168-196, &c.
' Compte par M. de Moncl. p. a85.

G g 3 ciple

BooV VI.ciple of the Jesuits, and serves as a key to the
-"- ' genius of their policy, and to the peculiarities in
I540. their sentiments and conduCt.

As it was for the honour and advantage of the

society, that its members should poflefs an ascend-
ant over persons in high rank or of great power,
the desire of acquiring and preserving such a di-
rection of their conduct, with greater facility, has
led the Jesuits to propagate a system of relaxed
and pliant morality, which accommodates itself to
the paflions of men, which justifies their vices,
which tolerates their imperfecions, which autho-
rizes almost every action that the most audacious
or crafty politician would wish to perpetrate.

As the prosperity of the order was intimately

connected with the preservation of the papal au-
thority, the Jesuits, influenced by the fame prin-
ciple of attachment to the interests of their foci-
ety, have been the most zealous patrons of those
dotrines, which tend to exalt ecclesiastical pow-
er on the ruins of civil government. They have
attributed to the court of Rome ajurifdiction as
extensive and absolute as was claimed by the most
presumptuous pontiffs in the dark ages. They
have contended for the entire independence of
ecclefiafticks on the civil magistrate. They have
published such tenets concerning the duty of op-
posing Princes who were enemies of the catholic
faith, as countenanced the most atrocious crimes,
and tended to dissolve all the ties which conneA
fubje.ts with ltIeir rulers.

As the order derived both reputation and

authority from the zeal with which it stood forth
in defence of the Romilh church againit the at-

tacks

tacks of the reformers, its members, proud of Bo6 VI,
this diftin-tion, have confidered it as their pecu-A
liar function to combat the opinions, and to check
the progress of the Protestants. They have made
use of every art, and have employed every wea-
pon against them. They have set themselves in
opposition to every gentle or tolerating measure in
their favour. They have incessantly stirred up
against them all the rage of ecclesiastical and ci-
vil persecution.

MONKS of other denominations have, indeed,

ventured to teach the fame pernicious doctrines,
and have held opinions equally inconsistent with
the order and happiness of civil society. But
they, from reasons which are obvious, have ei-
ther delivered such opinions with greater reserve,
or have propagated them with less success. Who-
ever recollects the events which have happened
in Europe during two centuries, will find that the
Jesuits mayjuftly be confidered as responsible for
most of the pernicious effects arising from that
corrupt and dangerous casuistry, from those ex-
travagant tenets concerning ecclesiastical power,
and from that intolerant spirit. which have been
the disgrace of the church of Rome throughout
that period, and which have brought so many ca-
lamities upon civil society".

BUT amidst many bad consequences flowing some ad-

from the inffitution of this order, mankind, it vantagesre-
must be acknowledged, have derived from it some tihe ifnrit-
considerable advantages. As the Jesuits made tionot this
the education of youth one of their capital ob- oder.
jets, and as their first attempts to eftablifl col-

Encyclopedic, Art. :Jesuites, tom. viii, 513.

G g 4 leges

BooR VI. leges for the reception of fludents were violently

-'-' opposed by the universities in different countries,
1540. it became necessary for them, as the most effectu-

al method of acquiring the publick favour, to
surpass their rivals in science and indufiry. This

Particulaily prompted them to cultivate with great ardour the
to litera- fludy of ancient literature. This put them upon

various methods for facilitating the instruction of
youth; and by the improvements which they made
in it, they have contributed not a little towards
the progress of polite learning, and have on this
account merited well of fociery. Nor has the or-
der of Jefuiits been successful only in teaching the
elements of literature, it has produced likewise
eminent malters in many branches of science,
and can alone boast of a greater number of inge-
nious authors, than all the other religious fraterni-
ties taken together".

x M. d'Alembert has observed that though the Jesuits have

made extraordinary progress in erudition of every species;
though they can reckon up many of their brethren who have
been eminent mathematicians, antiquarians, and criticks; though
they have even formed fonme orators of reputation; yet the or-
der has never produced one man, whose mind was so much en-
lightened with found knowledge, as to merit the name of a
philosopher. But it seems to be the unavoidable effet of mo-
natlick education to contra& and fetter the human kind. The
partial attachment of a monk to the interest of his order, which
is often incompatible with that of other citizens; the habit of
implicit obedience to the will of a superior, together with the
frequent return of the wearisome and frivolous duties of the
cloilter, debase his faculties, and extinguilh that generofty of
sentiment and spirit, which qualifies men for thinking or teel-
ing justly with respect to what is proper in life and condua.
Father Paul of Venice ist perhaps, the only person educated in
a cloiller, that ever was altogether fpupclior to its prejudices,
s)r who viewed the tranfaEtions of men, and rcafoned concern-
ing the interefis of society, with the enlarged sentiments of a
pliiiofopl)er, with the dlilceilllenrt o"' a man converfintl in al-
titirs, and witJh the liberality of a gellcitlen.m.

U r

Bu T it is in the new world that the Jesuits have BooK VI.

exhibited the most wonderful display of their abili- '-
ties, and have contributed most effectually to the be- More efpe-
nefit of the human species. The conquerors of that cially tom

the fettle-

unfortunate quarter of the globe had nothing in view ment cf the
but to plunder, to enslave, and to exterminate its Jesuits in
inhabitants. The Jesuits alone have made humanity araguay
the object of their fettling there.About the beginning
of the last century they obtained admission into the
fertile province of Paraguay, which stretches across
the southern continent of America, from the bottom
of the mountains of Potofi to the confines of the Spa-
nifl and Portuguese settlements on the banks of the
riverde la Plata: they found the inhabitants in a state
little different from that which takes place among
men when they first begin to unite together; firan-
gers to the arts; subsisting precariously by hunting
or fishing; and scarce acquainted with the first prin-
ciples of subordination and government, The Jesu-
its set themselves to inftrud and to civilise these sava-
ges. They taught them to cultivate the ground, to
rear tame animals, and to build houses. They
brought them to live together in villages. They
trained them to arts and manufactures. They made
them taste the sweets of society; and accustomed
them to the blessings of security and order. These
people became the fubjelts of their benefactors;
who have governed them with a tender attention,
resembling that, with which a father direets his chil-
dren. Refpedted and beloved almost to adoration,
a few Jesuits presided over some hundred thousand
Indians. They maintained a perfec equality among
all the members of the community. Each of them
was obliged to labour not for himself alone, but for
the public. The produce of their fields, together
with the fruits of their industry of every species, were
dcpofited in common storehouses, from which each
individual received every thing necessary for the
ftupply of his wants. By this institution, almost all

the

BooK VI. the palions which disturb the peace of society, and
'"-~' ie:der the members of it unhappy, were extinguish-

s54' *ed. A few magistrates, chosen by the Indians them-

selves, watched over the publick tranquillity, and
secured obedience to the laws. The sanguinary pu-
nilhments frequent under other governments were
unknown. An admonition from a Jesuit; a flight
mark of infamy; or, on some singular occasion, a
few lathes with a whip, were sufficient to maintain
good order among there innocent and happy peopleY.

rEen here BUT even in this meritorious effort of the Jesuits
theambition for the good of mankind, the genius and spirit of
and policy of
a., older their order have mingled and are discernible. They
d iceinible. plainly aimed at establishing in Paraguay an inde-

pendant empire, subje&t to the society alone, and
which, by the superior excellence of its constitution
and police, could scarce have failed to extend its do-
minion over all the southern continent of America.
WTith this view, in order to prevent the Spaniards or
Portuguese in the adjacent settlements, from acquir-
ing any influence over the people whom they go-
verned that might be dangerous, the Jesuits endea-
voured to inspire the Indians with hatred and con-
tempt of these nations. They cut off all intercourse
between their fubjets and the Spanish or Portuguese
settlements. They prohibited any private trader of
either nation from entering their territories. When
they were obliged to admit any person in a publick
character from the neighbouring governments, they
did not permit him to have any conversation with
their fubjets, and no Indian was allowed even to
enter the house where these strangers resided, unless
in the presence of a Jesuit. In order to render any
communication between them as difficult as poflible,

Y Hilt. de Paraguay par Pere de Charlevoix, tom. ii. 42. &c.

Voyage au Pelou par Don G. Juan & D. Ant. de Ulloa, tomi. i.
540, &c. Par. 4t0. 1752.

they

they industriously avoided giving the Indians any b1oK VI.
knowledge of the Spanish or any other European v---V
language; but encouraged the different tribes, 5'4
which they had civilized, to acquire a certain dia-
ledt of the Indian tongue, ard laboured to make
that the universal language throughout their domi-
nions. As all these precautions, without military
force, would have been iniufficient to have rendered
their empire secure and permanent, they inftruded
their filbjects in the European arts of war. They
formed them into bodies of cavalry and infantry,
completely armed and regularly disciplined. They
provided a great train of artillery, as well as maga-
zines stored with all the implements of war. Thus
they established an army so numerous and well ap-
pointed, as to be formidable in a country, where a
few sickly and ill-difciplined battalions composed all
military force kept on foot by the Spaniards or Por-
tuguefe Z.

THE Jesuits gained no considerable degree of Reaon for

power during the reign of Charles V. who, with his giegfth
usual sagacity, discerned the dangerous tendency of government
the institution, and checked its progress a. But as oftheorder.
the order was founded in the period of which 1
write the history, and as the age to which I address
this work hath seen its fall, the view which I have
exhibited of the laws and genius of this formidable
body will not, I hope, be unacceptable to my read-
ers; especially as one circumstance has enabled me
to enter into this detail with particular advantage.
Europe had observed, for two centuries, the ambi-
tion and power of the order. But while it felt ma-
ny fatal effects of there, it could not fully discern
the causes to which they were to be imputed. It

2 Voyage de Juan & de Ulloa, ton. i. 549. Recueil des

toutes les ieces qui ont paru fur les Affaires des Jesuites en
Portugal, tomn. i. p. 7, &c.

a Compte par M. de Moncl. p. 31i.

was

Boot VI. was unacquainted with many of the singular regu.
'-"'"~ lations in the political conititution or government

'54"0 of the Jesuits, which formed that spirit of intrigue

and enterprize which distinguished its members, and
elevated the body itself to such a height of power.
It was a favourite maxim with the Jesuits, from
their first institution, not to publish the rules of
their order. These they kept concealed as an im-
penetrable mystery. They never communicated
them to strangers; nor even to the greater part of
their own members. They refused to produce them
when required by courts of justice b; and by a
ifrange solecism in policy, the civil power in diffe-
rent countries authorized or connived at the efta-
blifhment of an order of men, whose constitution
and laws were concealed with a follicitude, which
alone was a good reason for having excluded them.
During the prosecutions lately carried on against
them in Portugal and France, the Jesuits have been
so inconsiderate as to produce the mysterious vo-
lumes or their inflitute. By the aid of there au-
thentic records, the principles of their government
may be delineated, and the sources of their power
investigated with a degree of certainty and precili-
on, which, previous to that event, it was impolli-
ble to attainc. But as I have pointed out the dan-
gerous tendency of the constitution and spirit of the
order with the freedom becoming an historian, the

b Hid. des Jef. tom. iii. 236, &c. Conpte par M. de Cha,
lotais, p. 38,

c The greater part of my information concerning the go-

vernment and laws of the order of Jesuits, I have derived fronm
the reports of M. de Chalotais and M de Monclar. I reft not,
lhowever, upon the authority even of thele relpedable inagif-
trates, and elegant writers, but upon innurnerable paflhgct
which they have extraced from the constitutions of the order,
deposited in their hands. Hofpinian, a Protellant divine of
Zurich, in his Ifijloria Yefuitira, printed A, D. 1619, publifl-
ed a finall part of the conllitutions of the Jesuits, of which
by Iome accident he had got a copy; p. 1 3-54.

candour

candour and impartiality no less requisite in that no",,x VI
charadter call on me to add one obfervai ion, That"
noclafs of regular clergy in the Romilh church has L40'
been more eminent for decency, and even pui .y of
manners, than the major part of the order of Je-
suitsd. The maxims of an intriguing, ambitious,
interested policy, might influence those who go-
verned the society, and might even corrupt the
heart, and pervert the conduct of some individuals,
while the greater number,. engaged in literary pur-
suits, or employed in the functions of religion, was
left to the guidance of those common principles
which restrain men from vice, and excite them to
what is becoming and laudable. The causes which
occasioned the ruin of this mighty body, as well as
the circumstances and effects with which it has been
attended in the different countries of Europe, tho'
objects extremely worthy the attention of every in-
telligent observer of human affairs, do not fall with-
in the period of this history.

No sooner had Charles re-established order in the AflaiF ,,i

Low Countries, than he was obliged to turn his at- GCerm;;'
tention to the affairs of Germany. The Protestants
prefied him earnefftly to appoint that conference be-
tween a felet number of the divines of each party,
which had been stipulated in the convention at
Frankfort. The Pope, confidering such an attempt
to examine or decide the points in diipute as dero-
gatory to his right of being the fuprene judge in
controversy, and persuaded that it would either be
ineffectual by determining nothing, or prove dan-
gerous by determining too much, employed every
art to prevent the meeting. The Emperor, how-
ever, finding it more for his interest to looth the
Germans, than to gratify Paul, paid little regard to

$ Sur la dcftrug. de Jes. par M. D'Alencbcrt, p. 55,

BOOK VI. his remonfirances. In a diet held at Haguenaw,
-.v-_ matters were ripened for the conference. In ano-
A confe- ther diet afiembled at Worms, the conference was
teen be- begun, Melanthon on the one fide and Eckius on
Popifhand the other, sustaining the principal part in the dif-
d.ivitnestt pute; but after they had made rome progress, tho'
June i5. without concluding any thing, it was suspended by
Dec. 6. the Emperor's command, that it might be renewed

with greater bolemnity in his own pretence in a diet
summoned to meet at Ratisbon. This assembly
1541, was opened with great pomp, and with a general

expectation that its proceedings would be vigorous
and decisive. By the consent of both parties, the
Emperor was entrusted with the power of nominat-
ing the persons who should manage the conference,
which it was agreed should be conduEted not in the
form of a public disputation, but as a friendly fcru-
tiny or examination into the articles which had giv-
en rife to the present controversies. He appointed
Eckius, Gropper and Pflug, on the part of the Ca-
tholicks, and Melandhon, Bucer and Piftorius, on
that of the Protestants, all men of distinguished re-
putation among their own adherents, and, except Ec-
kius, all eminent for their moderation, as well as de-
firous of peace. As they were about to begin their
consultations, the Emperor put into their hands a
book, compored, as he said, by a learned divine in
the Low-Countries, with such extraordinary perfpi-
cuity and temper, as might go far, in his opinion, to
unite and comprehend the two contending parties.
Gropper, a canon of Cologne, whom he had named
among the managers of the conference, a man of
address as well as of erudition, was afterward sus-
peded to be the author of this short treatile. It
contained positions with regard to twenty-two of
the chief articles in theology, which included most
of the questions then agitated in the controverly
between the Lutherans and the church of Rome.

By

By ranging his sentiments in a natural order, and BOOK VI.
expressing them with great simplicity; by employ- .-'v-
ing often the very words of scripture, or of the pri- 4
mitive fathers; by softening the rigour of some opi-
nions, and explaining away what was absurd in
others; by conceflions, now on one fide, and now
on the other; and especially by banishing as much
as poflible scholastic phrases, those words and terms
of art in controversy, which serve as badges of dif-
tinfion to the different fe&s, and for which theo-
logians often contend more fiercely than for opini-
ons themselves; he framed his work in iich a man-
ner, as promised fairer'than any thing that had hi-
therto been attempted, to compose and to termi-
nate religious diffenfionsc.

B U the attention of the age was turned, with Pruitletr.

such acute observation, towards theological contro-
verfies, that it was not easy to impose on it by any
gloss how artful or specious soever. The length
and eagerness of the dispute had separated the con-
tending parties so compleatly, and had set their
minds at such variance, that they were not to be re-
conciled by partial conceflions. All the zealous Ca-
tholics, particularly the ecclesiastics who had a feat
in the diet, joined in condemning Gropper's treatise
as too favourable to the Lutheran opinions, the
poison of which heresy it conveyed, as they pre-
tended, with greater danger, because it was in some
degree disguised. The rigid Proteflants, especially
Luther himself, and his patron the Eledtor of Saxo-
ny, were for rejeting it as an impious com-
pound of error and truth, craftily prepared tlhat
it might impose on the weak, the timid, and the un-
thinking. But the divines, to whom the examina-
tion of It was committed, entered upon that buti-

c Goldaft. Conflit. Imper. ii. p. 1Sz.

nets

BOOK VI. riefs with greater deliberation, and temper. As it
·-^^ ,was more easy in itself, as well as more consistent
1541. with the dignity of the church to make concessions,

and even alterations with regard to speculative dpi.
nions, the difcuflion whereof is confined chiefly to
schools, and which present nothing to the people
that either strikes their imagination' or assets their
senses, they came to an accommodation about those
without much labour, and even defined the great
article concerningjuftification to their mutual satis-
faftion. But, when they proceeded to points ofju-
rifdiction, where the interest and authority of the
Roman See were concerned, or the rites and forms
of external worship, where every change that could
be made must be public, and draw the observation
of the people, there th!e Catholics were altogether
untraftable; nor could the church either with safe-
ty or with honour abolish its ancient institutions.
All the articles relative to tlie power of the Pope,
the authority of councils, the administration of the
sacraments, the worship of faints% and many other
particulars did not, in their nature, admit of any.
temperament . so that after labouring long to bring
about an accommodation with refpedt to.thefe, the

Recefsofthe Emperor found all-his endeavours ineffectual. Be-
dibon in R^ ing impatient, however, to close the diet, he at lafl
vourofage- prevailed on a majority of the members to approve

i.la coun- of the following recess; " That the articles con-
!uly 9. cerning which the divines had agreed in the confe-

rence, should be held as points decided, and be ob-
served inviolably by all; that the other articles
aibout which they had differed, fiould be referred
to the determination of a general council, pr if that
could not be obtained, to a national fynod of Ger-
many; and if it thould prove impracticable, like-
wife, to aflemble a fynod, that a general diet of
the Empire should be called within eighteen months,
in order to give fbme final judgment upon the whole

contro-

controversy; that the Emperor ihould use all his in- BooK VI.
terest and authority with the Pope, to procure the '''
meeting either of a general council or fynod; that, 1541'
in the mean time, no innovations should be attempt-
ed, no endeavours should be employed to gain pro-
felytes; and neither the revenues of the church, nor
the rights of the monasteries, should be invaded .

ALL the proceedings of this diet, as well as the Gives of-
recess in which they terminated, gave great offence fence both to

Papists and

to the Pope, The power which the Germans had Protestants.
aflumed of appointing their own divines to examine
and determine matters of controversy, he confider-
ed as a very dangerous invasion on his rights; the
renewing of their ancient proposal concerning a na-
tional fynod, which had been so often rejeted by
him and his predecessors, appeared extremely un-
dutiful; but the bare mention of allowing a diet,
composed chiefly of laymen, to pafsjudgment with
refpe& to articles of faith, was deemed no less cri-
minal and profane, than the worst of those herefies
which they seemed zealous to suppress. On the
other hand, the, Protestants were no less dissatisfied
with a recess, which considerably abridged the li-
berty which they enjoyed at that time. As they Charles
murmured loudly against it, Charles, unwilling to Protts .
leave any feeds of discontent in the Empire, grant-
ed them a private declaration, in the most ample
terms, exempting them from whatever they thought
oppressive or injurious in the recess, and ascertain-
ing to them the full poffeflion. of all the privileges
which they had ever enjoyed g.

f Sleidan, 267. &c. Pallav. 1.4. c. 1c. p. 36. F. Paul,
p. 86. Seckend. 1. iii. 256.

6 Sleid. 283. Seckend. 366. Dumont Corps Diplon. iv.
p. ii. p. 210.

VOL. II. Hh EXTRA-

BOOK VI. EXTRAORDINARY as these conceflions may ap-

pear, the situation of his affairs at thisjunature made

Affairs of it necessary for the Emperor to grant them. He
Hungary. foresaw a rupture with France to be unavoidable, as

well as near at hand, and durff not give any such
cause of disgust or fear to the Protestants, as might
force them, in felf-defence, to court the protection
of the French King, from whom, at present, they
were much alienated. The rapid progress of the
Turks in Hungary, was a more powerful and pre-
sent cause of the moderation which Charles disco-
vered. A great revolution had happened in that
kingdom; John Zapol Scxepus having chosen, as
has been related, rather to possess a tributary king-
dom, than to renounce the royal dignity to which
he had been accufftomed, had, by the assistance of
-his mighty protector Solyman, wrested from Ser-
dinand a great part of the country, and left him
only the precarious possession of the reft. But be-
ing a prince of pacific qualities, the frequent at-
tempts of Ferdinand, or of his partizans among the
Hungarians, to recover what they had loft, gave
him great pain; and the necessity, on these occafi-
ons, of calling in the Turks, whom he confidered
and felt to be his mailers rather than auxiliaries,
were scarce less mortifying. In order, therefore,
to avoid these distresses, and to secure quiet and
leisure to enjoy the arts and amusements in which
he delighted, he secretly came to an agreement
A.D. 1535. with his competitor, on this condition; That Ferdi-

nand fllould acknowledge him as King of Hungary,
and leave him, during life, the unmolested posies-
sion of that part of the kingdom now in his power;
but that, upon his deiife, the Ible right to tilt
whole flould devolve upon Ferdinand h. As John
had never been married, and was then far advancec
in life, the terms of the contract seemed very fa.

1 Ifluanhaffi Hist. Hung. lib, xii. p. 135.

vourabl»

vrirable to Ferdinand. But, soon after, Come of ooK VI.
the Hungarian nobles, follicitous to prevent a so- '.-~'
reigner from afeending their throne, prevailed on
John to put an end to a long celibacy, by marry
ing Isabella, the daughter of Sigifmond, King of
Poland. John had the fatisfadtion, before his death, Death of
which happened within less than a year thereafter, He Kyig of
to fee a son born to inherit his kingdom. To him,
without regarding his treaty with Ferdinand, which
he confidered, no doubt, as void, upon an event
not foreseen when it was concluded, he bequeathed
his crown; appointing the Queen and George Mar-
tinuzzi, bishop of Waradin, guardians of his Ton;
and regents of the kingdom. The greater part of the
Hungarians immediately acknowledged the young
King, to whom, in memory of the founder of their
monarchy, they gave the name of Stephen i.

FERDINAND, though extremely disconcerted by Ferdinand's

this unexpected event, resolved not to abandon the thie, b
kingdom which he had acquired by his compact crown.
with John. He Cent ambassadors to the Queen to
claim poffeflion, and to offer the province of Tran-
fylvania as a settlement for her Ton, preparing at the
fame time to assert his right by force of arms. But
John had committed the care of his son to persons,
who had too much spirit to give up the crown tame-
ly, and who poffefied abilities sufficient to defend
it. The Queen, to all the address peculiar to her
own sex, added a masculine courage, ambition, and
magnanimity. Martinuzzi, who had railed him- Chalraer
self from the lowest rank in life to his present dig- dof Mart
nity, was one of those extraordinary men, who by nulzi.
the extent as-well as variety of their talents, are fit-
ted to at a superior part in bustling and factious
times. In discharging the fundions of his ecclefi-

Jovii Hist. lib. 39. p. 239, a. &c.

H 1 2 aflical

BOOK VI. aftical office, he put on the semblance of an humble
'T'^~ and austere fantity. He discovered, in civil tranf-

'54' actions, industry, dexterity and boldness. During

war he laid aside the cassock, and appeared on
horseback with his fcymeter and buckler, as active,
as ostentatious, and as gallant as any of his coun-
trymen. Amidst all these different and contradic-
tory forms which he could assume, an insatiable de-
fire of dominion and authority was conspicuous.
From such persons it was obvious what answer Ser-
dinand had to expect. He soon perceived that he
must depend on arms alone- for recovering Hunga-
ry. Having levied for this purpose a considerable
body of Germans, whom his partizans among the
Hungarians joined with their vassals, he ordered
them to march into that part of the kingdom which
adhered to Stephen. Martinuzzi, unable to make
head against such a powerful army in the field, fa-
tisfied himself with holding out the towns, all of
which, especially Buda, the place of greatell con-
sequence, he provided with every thing necessary
for defence; and in the mean time he sent ambaf-

Calls in the fadors to Solyman, beseeching him to extend to-
Turks. wards the son, the fame Imperial protection which

had so long maintained the father on his throne. The
Sultan, though Ferdinand used his utmost endea-
vours to thwart this negociation, and even offered
to accept of the Hungarian crown on the fame ig-
minious condition of paying tribute to the Ottoman
Porte, by which John had held it, saw such pro-
fpets of advantage from espousing the interest of
the young King, that he instantly promised him his
protetion; and commanding one army to advance
towards Hungary, he himself followed with ano-
ther. Meanwhile the Germans, hoping to termi-
nate the war by the redution of a city in which
the King and his mother were shut up, had formed
the siege of Buda. Martinuzzi, having drawn thi-

ther

ther the strength of the Hungarian nobility, defend- Boox VI.
ed the town with fitch courage and skill, as allowed - '
the Turkish forces time to come up to its relief. £54'.
They instantly attacked the Germans, weakened
by fatigue, diseases and desertion, and defeated
them with great slaughter k.

SOLYM AN soon after joined his victorious troops, Solyman's

and being weary of so many expensive expeditions ungenerour
undertaken in defence of dominions which were
not his own, or being unable to resist this alluring
opportunity of seizing a kingdom, while poisesed
by an infant, under the guardianship of a woman
and a priest, he allowed interested considerations to
triumph with too much facility over the principles
of honour and the sentiments of humanity. What
he planned ungenerously, he executed by fraud.
Having prevailed on the Queen to fend her son,
whom he pretended to be desirous of feeing, into
his camp, and having at the fame time invited the
chief of the nobility to an entertainment there,
while they, suspecting no treachery, gave themselves
up to the mirth and jollity of the feast, a felea band
of troops by the Sultan's orders seized one of the
gates of Buda. Being thus master of the capital,
of the King's person and of the leading men among
the nobles, he ordered the Queen together with her
son to be conduaed to Tranfilvania, which province
he allotted to them, and appointing a Bafha to re-
fide in Buda with a large body of soldiers, annexed
Hungary to the Ottoman Empire. The tears and
complaints of the unhappy Queen had no influence
to change his purpose, nor could Martinuzzi either
resist his absolute and uncontroulable command, or
prevail on him to recal it'.

k Ifluanhaffi. hit. Hung. lib. 14. p. o50.
Ifluanhaffi. lib. 14 p. 56. Jovii hist. lib. 39. p. 2476, &c.

H h 3 BEFORE

BooK VL -B EFORE the account of this violent usurpation
'-Y4' reached Ferdinand, he was fa unlucky as to have
Ferdinand's dispatched new ambafiadors to Solyman with a fresh
overtures to representation of his- right to the crown of Hungary,

as well as a renewal of his former overture to hold
the kingdom, of the Ottoman Porte, and to pay for
it an annual tribute. This ill-timed proposal was
rejected with scorn. The, Sultan elated with iuc-
cess, and thinking that he might prescribe what
terms he pleated to a prince who voluntarily pro-
sered conditions so unbecoming his own dignity,
declared that he would not fulpend the operations
of war, unless Ferdinand instantly evacuated all the
towns which he held in Hungary, aid consented to
the imposition of a tribute upon Austria, in order
to reimburse the fums, which his presumptuous in-
vafion of Hungary had obliged the Otcoman Porte
to expend in defence of that kindom "

SUCH was the slate of affairs in Hungary. As

the unfortunate events there had either happened
before the dissolution of the diet at Ratisbon, or
were dreaded at that time, Charles saw the danger
of irritating and inflaming the minds of the Ger-
mans, while such a formidable enemy was ready
to break into the Empire; and perceived that he
could not expeEt any vigorous afliftance either to-
wards the recovery of Hungary or the defence of
the Auffrian fiontiers, unless he courted and astis-
fled the Protestants. By the conceilions which have
been mentioned. he gained this point, and fich li-
beral fiipplies both of men and money were voted
for carrying on the war against the Turks, as lcft

m Ifluanhaffii hil. Hung I. x4. p. i58.

him

him under little anxiety about the security of Ger.- BooK VI..
many during next campaign ", '-

IMMEDIATELY upon the conclusion of the diet, Emperor

the Emperor set out for Italy. As he passed through visits taly
Lucca he had a short interview with the Pope, but
nothing could be concluded concerning the proper
method of composing the religious disputes in Ger-
many, between twoprinces whose views and interest
with regard to that matter were at this junaure fa
opposite. The Pope's endeavours to remove the
causes of discord between Charles and Francis, and~
to extinguish all those mutual animofities which
threatened to break out suddenly into open hoftili-
ty, were not more successful.

THE Emperor's thoughts were bent so entirely, His expedi-

at that time, on the great enterprize which he had t'Ain, gain
concerted against Algiers, that he listened with little motives of
attention to the Pope's schemes or overtures, and ''
hastened tojoin his army and fleet .

ALGIERS still continued in that state of depend-

ance on the Turkish empire to which Barbarofla
had fubjefted it. Ever since he, as captain Bafhia,
commanded the Ortornan fleet, Algiers had been
governed by Hafcen-Aga, a renegado eunuch, who
by pafling through every fation in the Corsairs ser-
vice, had acquired great experience in war, and
was well fitted for a station which required a man
of tried and daring courage. Hafeen, in order to
shew how well he deserved that dignity, carried on
his piratical depredations against the Christian
States with amazing activity, and out-did, if pof-

Sleid, 283. Sandov. hiflor. ton. ii. 298.

-1 h 14 fible,

Booi VI. fible, Barbarossa himself in boldness and cruelty.
`,, The commerce of the Mediterranean was greatly
1541 interrupted by his cruisers, and such frequent

alarms given to the coasts of Spain, that there was
a necessity of erecting watch-towers at proper difp
tances, and of keeping guards constantly on foot,
in order to descry the approach of his squadrons,
and to protect the inhabitants from their defcentsP.
Of this the Emperor's fubjets had long com-
plained, representing it as an enterprize corre-
fponding to his power, and becoming his huma-
nity, to reduce Algiers, which since the conquest
of Tunis, was the common receptacle of all
the free booters; and to exterminate that law-
less race, the implacable enemies of the Chrifti-
an name. Moved partly by their intreaties, and
partly allured by the hope of adding to the glory
which he had acquired by his last expedition into
Africa, Charles before he left Madrid in his way
to the Low-Countries, had ifrued orders both in
Spain and Italy to prepare a fleet and army for
this purpose. No change in circumstances, since
that time, could divert him from this refoluti-
on, or prevail on him to turn his arms towards
Hungary; though the success of the Turks in that
country seemed more immediately to require his
pretence there; though many of his most faithful
adherents in Germany urged that the defence of
the Empire ought to be his firit and peculiar care
though such as bore him no good will ridiculed his
preposterous conduct in flying from an enemy al-
most at hand, that he might go in quest of a remote
and more ignoble foe. But to attack the Sultan in
Hungary, how splendid soever that measure might
appear, was an undertaking which exceeded his

P Jovii hid. 1. 40. p. 266.

power,

power, and was not consistent with his interest, To BOOk VL
draw troops out of Spain or Italy, to march them 4,-1
into a country so distant as Hungary, to provide
the vast apparatus necessary for transporting thither
the artillery, ammunition and baggage of a regu-
lar army, and to push the war in that quarter,
where it could scarce be brought to any issue du-
ring several compaigns, were undertakings so ex-
tensive and unwieldy as did not correspond with
the low condition of the Emperor's treasury,
While his principal force was thus employed, his
dominions in Italy and the Low-Countries must
have lain open to the French King, who would
not have allowed such a favourable opportunity of
attacking them to go unimproved. Whereas the
African expedition, the preparations for which
were already finished and almost the whole ex-
pence of it defrayed, would depend upon a single
effort, and betides the security and fatisfation
which the success of it must give his fubjeds,
would detain him during so short a space, that
Francis could scarce take advantage of his ab-
fence, to invade his dominions in Europe,

ON all these accounts, Charles adhered to hisHis prepa-

first plan, and with such determined obftinacy,r'tions.
that he paid no regard to the Pope who advised,
or to Andrew Doria who conjured him not to ex-
pose his whole armament to almost unavoidable
destruction, by venturing at such an advanced
season of the year, and while the autumnal winds
were so violent, to approach the dangerous coast
of Algiers Having embarked on board Doria's
gallies at Porto Venere in the Genoese territories,
he Coon found that this experienced sailor had not
judged wrong concerning the element with which
he was so well acquainted; for such a storm arose
that it was with the utmost difficulty and danger

he

BOOK V[. he reached Sardinia, the place of general rendez-

vous. But as his courage was undaunted, and
his temper often inflexible, neither the remenitran-
ces of the Pope and Doria, nor the danger to
which he had already been exposed by disregard-
ing therm, had any other effect than to confirm
him in his fatal resolution. The force, indeed,
which he had colleted was such as might have
inspired a Prince less adventurous, and less confi-
dent in his own schemes, with the most sanguine
hopes of success. It consisted of twenty t:ioufand
foot and two thousand horse, Spaniards, Italians
and Germans, mostly veterans, together with
three thousand volunteers, the flower of the Spa-
nifh and Italian nobility, fond of paying court to
the Emperor by attending him in this favourite
expedition, and eager to share in the glory which
they believed he was going to reap; to there were
added a thoufand'foldiers sent from Malta by the
order of St. John, led by an hundred of its most
gallant Knights.
Lind in THE voyage, from Majorca to the African

. coast, was not less tedious, or full of hazard, than

that which he had jift finished. When he ap-
proached the land, the roll of the sea, and vehe.
rnence of the winds, would not permit the troops
to dieimbark. But at last, the Emperor seizing a
favourable opportunity, landed them without op-
p:fition, not far from Algiers, and immediately
advanced towards the town. To oppose this
mighty army, Hafcen had only eight hundred
Turks, and five thousand Moors, partly natives
of Africa, and parly refugees from Granada. He
returned, however, a fierce and haughty answer
when summoned to surrender. But with such a
handful of soldiers, neither his desperate courage,
nor confulnmate Skill in war could have long re-

fiflcd

sifted forces superior to those which had defeated BOOk VI,
Barbarossa at the head of sixty thousand men, and v_
had reduced Tunis, in spite of all his endeavours 54.
to save it,

BUT how far soever the Emperor might think ThedifaR-

himself beyond the reach of any danger from the bfell'hic;
enemy, he was suddenly exposed to a more dread- army.
ful calamnity, and one against which human pru-
dence, and human efforts availed nothing. On
the fccond d-y after his landing, and before he
had time For tny thing but to disperse Come light
armed Arabs who molested his troops on their
march, the clouds began to gather, and the hea-
vens to appearwith afierce and threatening asped,
Towards evening rain began to fall accompanied
with violent wind, and the rage of the tempest in-
creasing during the night, the soldiers who had
brought nothing ashore but their arms, remained
exposed to all its fury without tents, or shelter, or
cover of any kind. The ground was so wet that
they could not lie down on it; their camp being
in a low situation was overflowed with water, and
they funk at every ftep to the ankles in mud;
while the wind blew with such impetuosity, that
to prevent their falling they were obliged to thrust
their spears into the ground, and to support them-
selves by taking hold of them. Hafcen was too
vigilant an officer to allow an enemy in such dif-
trefs to remain unmolested. About the dawn of
morning, he sallied out with soldiers, who having
been tcreened from the storm under their own
roofs, were fresh and vigorous. A body of Itali-
ans who were stationed nearest the city, difpi-
rited and benumbed with cold, fled at the ap-
proach of the Turks. The troops at the post be-
hind them, discovered greater courage, but as the
rain had extinguished their matches and wet their

powder,

B6O1t VI. powder, their muskets were useless, and having

scarce strength to handle their other arms, they
were soon thrown into confusion. Almost the
whole army, with the Emperor himself in person,
was obliged to advance before the enemy could
be repulsed, who, after spreading such general
consternation, and killing a considerable number
of men, retired at last in good order.
Ahd feet, Bu all feeling or remembrance of this loss and

danger were quickly obliterated by a more dread-
fil as well as affecding fpetacle. It was now
broad day; the hurricane had abated nothing of
its violence, and the Tea appeared agitated with
all the rage of which that deftrutive element is
capable; all the ships, on which alone the whole
arnmy knew that their safety and fubfiftance de-
pended, were seen driven from their anchors,
some dashing against each other, some beat to
pieces on the rocks, many forced a shore, and
not a few finking in the waves. In less than an
hour, fifteen ships of war, and an hundred and
forty transports with eight thousand men perished;
and such of the unhappy crews, as escaped the
fury of the Tea, were murdered, without mercy,
by the Arabs, as soon as they reached land. The
Emperor flood in silent anguish and astonishment
beholding this fatal event, which at once blasted
all his hopes of success, and buried in the depths
the vast stores which he had provided as well for
annoying the enemy, as for subsisting his own
troops. He had it not in his power to afford them
any other assistance or relief than by fending some
troops to drive away the Arabs, and thus deliver-
ing a few who were so fortunate as to get ashore
from the cruel fate which their companions had
met with. At last the wind began to fall, and to
give some hopes that as many ships might escape,

as

as to save the army from perishing by famine, BOOK VI,
and transport them back to Europe. But these ""
were only hopes; the approach of evening covered 5s4'
the sea with darkness; and it being impossible for
the officers aboard the ships that had out-lived the
storm to fend any intelligence to their compani-
ons who were a shore, they remained during the
night in all the anguish of tifipenfe and uncer-
tainty. Next day, a boat dispatched by Doria
made shift to reach land, with information, that
having weathered out the storm, to which, during
fifty years knowledge of the sea, he had never
seen any equal infiercenefs and horror, he had
found it neceflary to bear away with his f(attered
ships to Cape Metafuz. He advised the Emperor,
as the face of the fly was still lowering and tern
peftuous, to march with all speed to that place,
where the troops could reimbark with greater ease.

WHATEVER comfort this intelligence afforded obliged to

Charles, from being assured that part of his fleet rtreat
had escaped, was ballanced by the new cares and
perplexity in which it involved him with regard
to his army. Metafuz was at least three days
march from his present camp; all the provisions
which he had brought ashore at his sirss landing
were now consumed; his soldiers, worn out with
fatigue, were scarce able for such a journey, even
in a friendly country; and being dispirited by a
fucceflion of hardships, which viaory itself would
scarce have rendered tolerable, they were in 4no
condition to undergo new toils. But the lituation
of the army was such, as allowed not one momecir.
for deliberation, nor left it in the leafl duul)tfuil
what to chufe. They were ordered inflantly to
march, the wounded, the lick and the feeble be,
ing placed in the centre; such as seemed mn-of vi-
gorous were stationed in the front and rear. Then

Ihl(:

BOOK VI. the fad effets of what they had suffered begad

%-Vi to appear more manifestly than ever, and new ca-

lamities were added to all there which they had
already endured. Some could scarce bear the
weight of their arms; others, spent with the toil
of forcing their way through deep and almoff im-
passable roads, funk down and died; many perish-
ed by famine, as the whole army subsisted chiefly
on roots and berries, or the flesh ofhorfes, killed
by the Emperor's order, and distributed among
the several battalions; many were drowned in
brooks which were fwoln so much by the exceflfive
rains, that in pafling them they waded up to the
chin; not a few were killed by the enemy, who
during the greatest part of their retreat, alarmed,
harraffed and annoyed them night and dayv At
last they arrived at Metafuz; and the weather be-
ing now To calm as to restore their communication
with the fleet, they were supplied with plenty of
provisions, and cheered with the profped of safety

His forti- DURING this dreadful series of calamities, the
ind.f Emperor discovered great qualities, many of which

an almost uninterrupted flow of prosperity had
hitherto afforded him no opportunity of displaying.
He was conspicuous for firmness and conflancyof
spirit, for magnanimity, fortitude, humanity and
compaflion He endured as great hardihips as
the meanest soldier; he exposed his own person
wherever danger appeared; he encouraged the
desponding; visited the tick and wounded; and
animated all by his words and example. When
the army embarked, he was among the last wvho
left the shore, although a body of Arabs hovered
at no great distance, ready to fall on the rear.
By there virtues, Charles attoned, in some degree,
for his obstinacy and presumption in undertaking
an expedition so fatal to his ilbjets.

THe

THE calamities which attended this unfortunate BOOr VI.

enterprize did not end here; for no sooner were' -'"
the forces got on board, than a new storm arising, Rci'rI 'to
though less furious than the former, scattered the 1LwO"-'.
fleet, and obliged them, separately, to make to-
wards such ports in Spain or Italy as they could
first reach; thus Spreading the account of their
disasters, with all the circumstances of aggravation
and horror, which their fear or fancy liggefted.
The Emperor himself, after escaping great dan-
gers, and being forced into the port of Bugia in
Africa, where he was obliged by contrary windsoDecemb,.:
to remain several weeks, arrived at last in Spain,
in a condition very different from that in which
he ead returned fromr his former expedition
against the Infidels.z

z Carol. v. Expeditio ad Argyriam per Nicolaum Villagno-

nem Equitem Rhodium ap. Scardium, v. ii. 365. Jovii Hilf. 1.
xl. p. 269-b. Vera y Zuniga vida de Carlos v. p 83. S;Lrdov.
Hiltor. ii. 299, &c.

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
