";;;'~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~q
til iii tll1 llril 1111

THE
HISTORY

OFG
SCOTLAND

DURING THE REIGNS OF
Queen MARY and of King JAMES VI.

TILL
His AecEssIoa to the CROWN of ENGLAND.

WITH A

REVIEW of the SCOTTISH HISTORY previous to that Period;

Andan ApPEDix containing ORICINsAL PAPERS.
BY WILLIAM ROBE RTSON, D.D,

MINlISTER of LADY YESTER'S, Edinburgh.

VOLUME I.
A NEW EDITION.

D U B L I N:
Printed by JAMES WILLIAMS.

M DCC LXXVYj.

# PREFACE.

P R E F A C E.
IDeliver this book to the world with all the dif-

fidence and anxiety natural to an Author on

publilhing his first performance. The time I have
employed, and the pains I have taken, in order to
render it worthy of the public approbation, it is,
perhaps, prudent to conceal, till it be known
whether that approbation fliall ever be bellowed
upon it.

BUT, as I have departed, in many instances,

from former Historians, as I have placed fat&s in a
different light, and have drawn characters with new
colours, 1 ought to account for this conduct to my
readers; and to produce the evidence, on which,
at the distance of two centuries, I presume to con-
tradit the teslimony of leos remote, or even of co-
temporary historians.

TnuL tranfaEtions in Mary's reign gave rife to

two parties, which were animated against each other
with the fiercest political hatred, embittered by re-

a 2 ligious

ligious zeal. Each of these produced historians of
considerable merit, who adopted all their senti-
mnents, and defended all their actions. Truth was
not the sole object of these authors. Blinded by
prejudices, and heated by the part which they
themselves had aced in the scenes they describe,
they wrote an apology for a fation, rather than
the history of their country. Succeeding historians
have followed there guides almost implicitly, and
have repeated their errors and misrepresentations.
But as the fame paffons which inflamed parties in
that age have descended to their posterity; as al-
most every event in Mary's reign has become the
object of doubt or dispute; the eager spirit of
controversy soon discovered, that without rome evi-
dence more authentic and more impartial than that
of historians, none of the points in question could
be decided with certainty. Records have there-
fore been searched, original papers have been pro-
duced, and public archives, as well as the repofi-
tories of private men, have been ransacked by the
zeal and curiosity of writers of different parties.
The attention of Cecil to collect whatever related
to that period, in which he acted so conspicuous a
part, hath provided such an immense store of ori-
ginal papers for illustrating this part of the Englilh
and Scottish history, as are almost sufficient to satis-
fy the utmost avidity of an Antiquarian. Sir Ro-
bert Cotton (whose library is now the property of
the public) made great and valuable additions to

Cecil's

Cecil's collecion; and from this magazine, Digges,
the compilers of the Cabala, Anderson, Keith,
Haynes, Sorbes, have drawn most of the papers
which they have printed. No History of Scotland,
that merits any degree of attention, has appeared
since these collections were published. By con-
fulting them, I have been enabled, in many in-
fiances to correct the inaccuracies of former His-
torians, to avoid their mistakes, and to detet their
misrepresentations.

BUT many important papers have escaped the

notice of those industrious Collefors, and after all
they have produced to light, much tfill remained
in darkness, unobserved or unpublished. It was
ny duty to search for these, and I found this un-
pleasant task attended with considerable utility.

THE library of the honourable faculty of Advo-

cates at Edinburgh, contains not only a large col-
leetion of original papers relating to the affairs of
Scotland, but copies of others no less curious, which
have been preserved by Sir Robert Cotton, or are
extant in the public offices in England. Of all these,
the Curators of that library were pleased to allow
me the perusal.

THOUGH the Britifl Mufauum be not yet open

to the public, Dr. Birch, whose obliging disposition
is well known, procured me access to that noble

collection,

collection, which is worthy the magnificence of a
great and polished nation.

THAT vast and curious collecion of papers re-

lating to the reign of Elizabeth, which was made
by Dr. Sorbes, and of which he published only two
volumes, having been purchased since his death,
by the Lord Viscount Royfton, his Lord.flip was
lo good as to allow me the use of fourteen Volumes
in Quarto, containing that part of them which is
connected with my subject.

SIR Alexander Dick communicated to me a very

valuable colleftion of original papers, in two large
Volumes. They relate chiefly to the reign of James.
Many of them are marked with Archbilhop Spots-
wood's hand; and it appears from several passages
in his history, that he had perused them with great
attention.

MR. Calderwood, an eminent Presbyterian Cler-

gyman of the last century, compiled an History of
Scotland from the beginning of the reign of James
V. to the death of James VI. in fix large Volumes;
wherein he had inserted many papers of confe-
quencc, which are no where else to he found. A
copy of this hilsory, which lfill remains in manu-
script in the pofllflion of the Church of Scotland,
was put into my hands by my worthy friend the

Reverend

Reverend Mr. George Wiflart, principal Clerk of
the Church.

Sr/ David Dalrymple, not only communicated to

me the papers which he has collc&ed relating to
Gowrie's conspiracy, but, by explaining to me his
sentiments with regard to that problematical pas-
sage in the Scottilh History, has enabled me to
place that transaction in a light which dispels much
of the darkness and confusion in which it has been
hitherto involved.

MR. Goodall, though he knew my sentiments

with regard to the conduct and charaEer of Queen
Mary to be extremely different from his own, com-
municated to me a Volume of manuscripts in his
possession, which contains a great number of valua-
ble papers copied from the originals in the Cottoni-
an Library and Paper Office, by the late Reverend
Mr. Crawford, Regius Professor of Church History
in the University of Edinburgh. 1 likewise receiv-
ed from him the original Register of letters kept by
the Regent Lennox during his administration.

I HAVE consulted all these papers, as far as I

thought they could be of any use, towards illuftrat-
ing that period of which I write the history. 'With
what success I have employed them to confirm what
was already known, to ascertain what was dubious,

or

or to determine what was controverted, the public
must judge.

I MIGHT easily have drawn, from the different

repositories to which I had access, as many papers
as would have rendered my Appendix equal in size
to the most bulky collection of my predecessors.
But I have satisfied myself with publishing a few
of the most curious among them, to which I found
it necessary to appeal as vouchers for my own vera-
city. None of these, as far as I can recollect, ever
appeared in any formir collection.

1 HAVE added to the Appendix a Critical Dif-

fertation concerning the murder of King Henry, and
the genuineness of the ,ufeet's letters to Bothwell,
The facts and observations which relate to Mary's
letters, I owe to my friend Mr. John Davidson,
one of the Clerks to the Signet, who hath examined
this point with acuteness and industry,

THE

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK I. Containing a Review of the SCOTTISH History previous to the death of JAMES V.

THE
HISTORY

. R Y
S C O T L A N D.

BOO K I.
Containing a Review of the SCOTTISH Hi/fory previous

to the death of JAMES V.

HE first ages of the Scottish history are BooK I.
dark and fabulous. Nations, as well as _--

men, arrive at' maturity by degrees, and the of nations
events, which happened during their infancy 6r fabulous
early youth, cannot be recolle&ed, and deserve ndt fcure.
to be remembered. The gross ignorance, which an-
ciently covered all the North of Europe, the co6nti-
nual migrations of its inhabitants, and the frequeiit
and deftru&ive revolutions which these occasioned,
render it impossible to give any authentic account
of the origin of the different kingdoms now efta-
bliihed there.' Every thing beyond that Ihort
period, to which well attested annals reach, is ob-

VOL. I. B fcure;

BooKI. fcure; an immense space is left for invention to
h-'% -Y occupy; each nation, with a vanity inseparable

from human nature, hath filled that void with
events calculated to display its own antiquity and
lustre. And history, which ought to record truth
and teach wisdom, often sets out with retailing
ficions and absurdities.
Origin of THE Scots carry their pretensions to antiquity as

high as any of their neighbours. Relying upon
uncertain legends, and the traditions of their bards,
still more uncertain, they reckon up a series of kings
-everal ages before the birth of Christ; and give a
particular detail of the occurrences, which happened
in their reigns. But with regard to the Scots, as
well as the other northern nations, we receive the
earliest accounts on which we can depend, not from
their own, but from the Roman authors. When
the Romans under Agricola, first carried their arms
A' D. S. into the northern parts of Britain, they found it pof-

fefed by the Caledonians, a fierce and warlike peo-
ple; and having repulsed, rather than conquered
. them, they erected a strong wall between the firths
of Forth and Clyde, and there fixed the boundaries
,of their empire. Adrian, on account of the diffi-
culty of defending such a distant frontier, contrat-
4 * Ar . ed the limits of the Roman province. in Britain, by

building a second wall, which ran between New-
castle and Carlisle. The ambition of succeeding
:Emperors endeavoured to recover what Adrian had
abandoned; and the country between the two walls
was.alternately under the dominion of the Romans,

and

And the Caledonians. About the beginning ofthe BooKI.
fifth century, the inroads of the Goths and other * v-J
Barbarians obliged the Romans, in order to defend
the centre of their empire, to recal those legions,
which guarded the frontier provinces; and at that
time they quitted all their conquests in Britain.

THEIR long residence in the ifand had polilhed, A. D. 421'
in some degree, the rude inhabitants, and the Bri-
tons were indebted to their intercourfewith the Ro-
mans, for the art of writirtg, and the use of num-
bers, without which it is impossible long to preserve
the memory of past events.

NOITH BRITAIN wass by their retreat, left uh-

der the dominion of the Scots and Picts. The for-
mer, who are not mentioned by any Roman author,
before the end of the fourth century, were probably
a colony of the Celtxa or Gauls: Their affinity to
whom appears from their language, their manners,
and religious rites; circumstances more decisive,
with regard to the origin of nations, than either fa-
bulous traditions, or the tales of ill-informed, and
credulous Annalists. The Scots, if we may believe
the common accounts, fettled at first in Ireland;
and, extending themselves by degrees, landed at
last on the coast opposite to that island, and fixed
their habitations there. Fierce and bloody wars
were, during several ages, carried on between them
and the Pits. At length, Kenneth II. the sixty- A.D. 838.
ninth King of the Scots (according to their own fa-
bulous authors) obtained a complete vi&ory over

B 2 the

BooK I. the PiCts and united under one monarchy, the
1---i- whole country, from the wall of Adrian, to the

northern ocean. And his kingdom became known
by its present name, which it derived fiom a people
who at first fettled there as strangers, and remained
long obscure and inconsiderable.

dOflryof FROM this period the history of Scotland would

peculily merit some attention, were it accompanied with any
Obkure. certainty. But as our remote antiquities are involv-

ed in the fame darkness with those of other nations,
a calamity peculiar to ourselves has thrown almost
an equal obscurity over our more recent tranfa&ions.
This was occasioned by the malicious policy of Ed-
ward I.:of England. Towards the end of the thir-
teenth century, this monarch called in question the
independence of Scotland; pretending that that
kingdom was held as a fief of the crown of Eng-
land, and fubje&ed to all the conditions of a feudal
tenure. In order to eftablilh his claim, he seized
the public archives, he ransacked churches and mo-
nafteries, and getting possession by. force, or fraud,
of many historical monuments, which tended to
prove the antiquity or freedom of the kingdom, he
carried some of them into England, and commanded
the reft to be burned*. An universal oblivion of
past transactions might have been the effe& of this
fatal event, but some imperfect Chronicles had es-
caped the rage of Edward; foreign writers had re-
corded some important sacs relating to Scotland;
and the traditions concerning recent occurrences were

* Innes, Essay 552.

frefe

fresh and worthy of credit. These broken fragments BOOK I.
John de Fordun, who lived in the fourteenth cen-
tury, colleced with a pious industry, and from them
picked out materials which he formed into a regu-
lar history. His work was received by his country-
men with applause; and, as no recourse could be
had to mere ancient records, it fuppliedthe place of
the authentic annals of the kingdom. It was copi-
ed in many monasteries, and the thread of the nar-
rative was continued by different monks, through the
subsequent reigns. In the beginning of the sixteenth
century, John Major and He&orBoethiuspublifhed
their histories of Scotland, the former a fuccin& and
dry writer, the latter a copious and florid one, and
both equally credulous. Not many years after, Bu-
chanan undertook the fame work; and if his accu-
racy and impartiality had been, in any degree, equal
to the elegance of his taste, and to the purity and
vigour of his style, his history might be placed on a
level with the most admired compositions of the an-
cients. But, initead of rejeting the improbable
tales of Chronicle writers, he was at the utmost pains
to adorn them; and hath clothed with all the beau-
ties and graces of fi&tion, those legends, which for-
nerly had only its wildness and extravagance.

THE history of Scotland may properly be divided
into four periods. The first reaches from the ori- Four e-

markable

gin of the monarchy, to the reign of Kenneth II. xras in the
The second from Kenneth's conquest of the Picts, to hlotrY
the death of Alexander III. The third extends to

B 3 the

BOOK I. the death of James V. The last, from thence tq
'- * ' the accession of James VI. to the crown of England.

THE first period is the region of pure fable and

conjecture, and ought to be totally negleted, or be
abandoned to the industry and credulity of antiqua-
ries. Truth begins to dawn in the second period,
with a light; feeble at first, but gradually increaf-
ing; and the events which then happened, may be
sightly touched, but merit no particular or labori-
ous inquiry. In the third period, the history of
Scotland, chiefly by means of records preserved in
England, becomes more authentic; not only are
events related, but their causes and effecs explained;
the characters of the actors are displayed; the man-
ners of the age described; the revolutions in the
constitution pointed out: and here every Scotfian
ihould begin not to read only, but to study the his-
tory of his country. During the fourth period, the
affairs of Scotland were so mingled with those of
other nations, its situation in the political state of
Europe was so important, its influence on the ope-
rations of the neighbouring kingdoms was so visible,
that its history becomes an objec of attention to
foreigners; and without some knowledge of the va-
rious and extraordinary revolutions which happened
there, they cannot form a juit notion either of the
molt illustrious events, or of the chara&ers of the
molt ditinguifhed personages in the sixteenth cen-
tury.

THE '

THE following history is confined to the last of BooK I.

these periods: To giye a view of the political state
of the kindom, during that which immediately of the third
preceded it, is the design of this preliminary Book. ara
The imperfec knowledge which strangers have of
the affairs of Scotland, and the prejudices Scotsmen
themselves have imbibed with regard to the various
revolutions in the government of their country, ren-
der such an introdution equally necessary to both.

THE period, from the death of Alexander III.

to the death of James V. contains upwards of two
centuries and a half, from the year 1286, to the
year 542.

IT opens with the famous controversy concern- Rie of the
ing the independence of Scotland. Before the union controvern
of the two kingdoms, this was a question of much the inde-
importance. If the one crown had been confidered Scotlancd
not as imperial and independent, but as feudatory
to the other, a treaty of union could not have been
concluded on equal terms, and every advantage
which the dependent kingdom procured, must have
been esteemed the concession of a Sovereign to his
vassal. Accordingly, about the beginning of the
present century, and while a treaty of union between
the two kingdoms was on foot, this controversy was
agitated with all the heat, which national animofities
naturally inspire. What was then a fubje& offeri-
ous concern, the union of the two kingdoms hath
rendered a matter of mere curiosity. But though
the objects, which at that time warmed and interest-

B 4 ed

Boos.I. ed both nations exist, no longer, a question which

"- I appeared so momentous to our ancestors cannot be

altogether indifferent or uninftructive to us.

SOME of the northern counties of England were

early in the hands of the Scottish Kings, who, as
far back as the feudal customs can be traced, held
there. possessions of.the Kings of England, and did
homage to them on that account, This homage,
due only for the territories which they held in Eng-
land, was in no wife derogatory from their royal dig-
nity. Nothing is more suitable to feudal ideas, than
that the fame person should be both a Lord and a
Vassal, independent in one capacity, and dependent
in another *. The Crown of England was without
doubt imperial and independent, though the Princes
who wore it were, for many ages, the vassals of the
Kings of France; and, in consequence of their pof-
sessions in that kingdom, bound to perform all the
services, which a feudal Sovereign has a title to

A very fingnlar proof of this occurs in the French history.

Arpin fold the vicomti of the city Bourges to Philip I. who
did homage to the count of Sancerre for a part of there lands,
which held of that Nobleman, A. D. Iloo. I believe that no
examp!e, of a King's doing homage to one of his own fubjeca.
is to be met with in the histories either of England or Scotland.
Philip le Bel zbolifhed thi practice in France A. D. 1302. He-
vut doregi Croerd. Somewhat similar to this, is a charter of
the abbot of Me!tross, A. D. 535, constituting James V. the
Bailiff or Steward of that Abby, veiling in him all the powers
which pertained to that office, and requiring him to be answer-
able to the Abbot for his exercise of the fame. Arthiv. pull.

exact.

exat. The fame was the condition of the Monarchs BooKI.
of Scotland; free and independent as Kings, but, as r
poffefling English territories, vassals to the King of
England, The Englilh Monarchs, satisfied with
their legal and uncontroverted rights, were neither
capable, nor had any thoughts of usurping more.
England, when conquered by the Saxons, being di-
vided bythem into manyifmall kingdoms, was in no
condition to extend its dominion over Scotland,
united at that time under one Monarch: And tho'
these petty principalities were gradually formed into
one kingdom, the reigning princes, exposed to con-
tinual invasions of the Danes, and often subjected
to the yoke of those formidable pirates, seldom turn-
ed their arms towards Scotland, and were utterly in-
capable of eftablilhing new rights in that country.
The first Kings of the Norman race, buffed with
introducing their own laws and manners into the
kingdom which they had conquered, or with main-
taining themselves on the throne which some of them
pofleffed by a very dubious title, were as little soli-
citous to acquire new authority, or to form new
pretensions in Scotland. An unexpected calamity
that besel one of the Scottilh Kings first encouraged
the English to think of bringing his kingdom under
dependance. WilliamKingof Scotland beingtaken
prisoner at Alnwick, Henry II. as the price of his
liberty, not only extorted from him an exorbitant
ransom, and a promise to surrender the places of
greatest strength in his dominions, but compelled
him to do homage for his whole kingdom. Ri-
chard I. a generous Prince, folemnlyrenounced this

claim

BOOK I. claim of homage, and abfolyed William from the
.--.. hard conditions which Henry had imposed. Upon

the death of Alexander III. near a century after, Ed-
ward I. availing himself of the situation of affairs in
Scotland, acquired an influence in that kingdom
which no Englilh Monarch before him ever poflef-
fed, and imitating the interested policy of Henry,
rather than the magnanimity of Richard, revived
the claim of Sovereignty to which the former had
pretended.

Prtenfions MARGARET of Norway, Grand-daughter of Alex-
of Bric ander, and heir to his crown, did not long survive
cuined. him. The right of succession belonged to the de-

fcendants of David Earl of Huntingdon, third son
of King David I. Among these, Robert Bruce,
and John Baliol, two illustrious competitors for the
crown, appeared. Bruce was the son of Isabel, Earl
David's second daughter; Baliol, the grandson of
Margaret the eldest daughter. According to the
rules of fucceflion which are now established, the
right of Baliol was preferable, and notwithstanding
Bruce's plea of being nearer in blood to Earl David,
Baliol's claim, as the representative of his mother
and grandmother, would be deemed inconteftible.
But in that age, the order of fuccefion was not as-
certainedwith the fame precifiop. The question ap-
peared to beno less intricate, than itwas important.
And though the prejudices of the people, and per-
haps the laws of the kingdom, favoured Bruce, each
of the rivals was fuppor:ed by a powerful faction.
Arms alone, it was feared, must terminate a dispute
too weighty for the laws to decide. But, in order

to

to avoid the miseries of a civil war, Edward was BOOK I.
chosen umpire, and both parties agreed to acquiesce '.-.--.
in his decree. This had well nigh proved fatal to.
the independence of Scotland; and the nation, by
its eagerness to guard against a civil war, was not
only exposed to that calamity, but almost fubje&ed
to a foreign yoke. Edward was artful, brave, en-
terprifing, and commanded a powerful and martial
people, at peace with the whole world. The anar-
chy which prevailed in Scotland, and the ambition of
competitors ready to sacrifice their country in order
to obtain even a dependent Crown, invited him first
to seize, and then to fubje& the kindom. The au-
thority of an umpire, which had been unwarily be-
stowed upon him, and from which the Scotch dread-
ed no dangerous consequences, enabled him to exe-
cute his schemes with the greater facility. Under
pretence of examining the question with the utmost
solemnity, he summoned all the Scottish Barons to
Norham, and having gained some, and intimidated
others, he prevailed on all who were present, not
excepting Bruce and Baliol, the competitors, to ac-
knowledge Scotland a fief of the Englilh Crown,
and to swear fealty to him as their Sovereign or Liege
Lord. This ftep led tp another fill more impor-
tant. As it was vain to pronounce a sentence which
he had not power to execute, Edward demanded
possession of the kingdom, that he might be able to
deliver it to himwhofe right should be found prefer-
able. And such was the pusillanimity of the nobles,
and the impatient ambition of the competitors, that
both assented to this strange demand, and Gilbert de
lUmfraville, Earl of Angus, was the only man, who

refused

BooK I. refused to surrender the castles in his custody to the

enemy of his country. Edward finding Baliol the
molt obsequious, and the least formidable of the two
competitors, soon after gave judgment in his favour.
Baliol once more professed himself the vassal of Eng-
land, and submitted to every condition, which the
Sovereign whom he had now acknowledged was
pleased to prescribe.

EDWARD, having thus placed a creature of his

own upon the throne of Scotland, and compelled the
nobles to renounce the ancient liberties and indepen-
dence of their country, had reason to conclude that
his dominion was now fully established. But he be-
gan too soon to afrume the master; his new vassals,
fierce and independent, bore with impatience a yoke,
to which they were not accustomed. Provoked by
his haughtiness, even the passive spirit of Baliol be-
gan to mutiny. But Edward, who had no longer
use for such a pageant King, forced him to resign the
Crown, and openly attempted to seize it as fallen to
himself by the rebellion of his vassal. At that cri-
tical period, arose Sir William Wallace, a hero, to
whom the fond admiration of his countrymen hath
ascribed many fabulous acts of prowess, though his
real valour, as well as integrity and wisdom, is such,
as needs not the heightenings of fition. He, al-
most single, ventured to take arms in defence of the
kingdom, and his boldness revived the spirit of his
countrymen. At last, Robert Bruce, the grandson
of him who stood in competition with Baliol, appear-
ed to assert his own rights, and to vindicate the ho-
nour of his country. The nobles, aihamed of their

former

former baseness, and enraged at the many indigni- BooKI.
ties.offered to the nation, crowded to his standard. '-- '
In order to crulh him at once, the English Mo-
narch entered Scotland, at the head of a mighty
army. Many battles were fought, and the Scots,
though often vanquifled, were not subdued. The
ardent zeal with which the nobles contended for the
independence of the kingdom, the prudent valour
of Bruce, and above all a. national enthusiasm in-
spired by such a cause, baffled the repeated efforts
of Edward, and counterbalanced all the advantages
which he derived from the number, and wealth of
his fubjels. And though the war continued with
little intermission upwards offeventy years, Bruce
and his posterity kept poffeflion of the throne of
Scotland, and ruled with an authority not inferior
to that of its former Monarchs.

BUT while the sword, the ultimate judge of all

disputes between contending nations, was employed
to terminate this controversy, neither Edward nor
the Scots seemed to distrust the juftice.of their
cause; and both appealed to history and records,
and from these produced, in their own favour, such
evidence, as they pretended to be unanswerable.
The letters and memorials addressed by each party
to the Pope, who was then reverenced as the common
father, and often appealed to as the common judge
of all Christian Princes, are still extant. The fa-
bulous tales of the early Britilh history; the partial
testimony of ignorant Chroniclers; supposititious
treaties and charters; are the proofs, on which Ed-
ward founded his title to the sovereignty of Scot-

land;

BoOK I. land; and the homage done by the Scottilh Mo-

,--siJ narchs for their lands in England is preposterously

supposed to imply the subjection of their whole kihg-
dom*. Ill founded, however, as their right was,
the English did not fail to revive it, in all the sub-
sequent quarrels between the two kingdoms; while
the Scots disclaimed it with the utmost indignation.
To this, we must impute the fierce and implacable
hatred to each other, which long inflamed both.
Their national antipathies were excited, not only by
the usual circumstances of frequent hostilities, and
reciprocal injuries; but the Englifli confidered the
Scots as vassals who had presumed to rebel, and the
Scots, in their turn, regarded the Engliffi, as ufur-
pers who aimed at enslaving their country.

,306. AT the time, when Robert Bruce began his reign

Stte of th in Scotland, the fame form of government was efta-
kingdom waeMnBre blilhed in all the kingdoms of Europe. And the
ep his~ surprising similarity in their constitution and laws

demonflrates that the nations which overturned the
Roman empire, and erected these kingdoms, though
divided into different tribes, and distinguished by
different names, were originally the fame people.
When-we take a view of the feudal system of laws
and policy, that stupendous and singular fabric
ereced by them; the first object that Ptrikes us is
the King. And when we are told that he is the sole
proprietor of all the lands within his dominions,
that all his fubjefs derive their poffeiTions from him,

* Anderson's Historical Essay concerning the Independency,
&c.

and

and in return cdfifecrate their lives to his service BooK I.
when we hear that all marks of diftin&ion, and ti- '--v
ties of dignity, flow from him as the only fountain
of honour; when we behold the most potent peers,
on their bended knees, and with folded hands, swear-
ing fealty at his feet, and acknowledging him to be
their Sovereign and their Liege Lord; we are apt to
pronounce him a powerful, nay an absolute Mo-
narch. No conclusion, however, would be more
rash, or worse founded. The genius of the feudal
government was purely ariftocratical. With all
the ensigns of royalty, and with many appearances
of despotic power, a feudal King was the moit li-
mited of all Princes.

Origin of
BEFORE they sallied out of their own habitations the fudal

conquer the many Govern-

to conquer the world, many of the northern nations nent, and
seem not to have been fubje& to the government of itsarifto-

cratical ge-

Kings*; and even where monarchical government nius.
was established, the prince possessed but little autho-
rity. A general rather than a King, his military
command was extensive, his civil jurifdiaion almost
nothing t. The army which he led was not com-
posed of soldiers, who could be compelled to serve,
but of such as voluntarily'followed his standard t.
These conquered not for their leader, but for them-
selves; and being free in their own country, re-
nounced not their liberty when they acquired. new
settlements. They did not exterminate the ancient
inhabitants of the countries, which they subdued,

Caf. lib. vi. c. 23. t Tacit. de Mor. Germ. c. 7. 1 .
i COs. ibid.

but

Boor IL but seizing the greater part of their lands, they took
' - their persons under protecion. And the difficulty

of maintaining a new conquest, as well as the danger
of being attacked by new invaders, rendering it
necessary to be always in a posture of defence, the
form of government which they established was al-
together military, and nearly resembled that to which
they had been accustomed in their native country.
Their general still continuing to be the head of the
colony, part of the conquered lands were allotted to
him; the remainder, under the name of.beneficia or
.ifs, was divided amongst his principal, officers. As
the common safety required that these officers mhould,
upon all occasions, be ready to appear in..arms, for
the common defence, and should continue obedient
to their general, they bound theimfelves to take'the
field, when called, and to serve him with a number
of men, in proportion to the extent of their territo-
ry. These great officers, again parcelled out their
lands among their followers, and annexed the fame
condition to the grant. A feudal kingdomnwas pro-
perly the encampment of a great army; military
ideas predominated, military Subordination was efta-
bliffied, and the possession of land was the pay which
soldiers received for their personal service. In con-
sequence of these notions, the possession of land was
granted during pleasure only, and Kings were elet-
tive. In other words, an officer disagreeable to his
general was deprived of his pay, and the perfonwho
was most capable of'condu&ing an army, was chosen
to command it. Such were the firit rudiments, or
infancy of feudal government.

BUT

BUT long before the beginning of the fourteenth BooK I.

Century, the feudal system had undergone many
changes, of which the following were the most con-
fiderable. Kings formerly ele&ive, were then here-
ditary; and fiefs granted at first during pleasure,
descended from father to son, and were become per-
petual. These changes, not less advantageous to
the nobles than to the prince, made no alteration in
the ariftocratical spirit of the feudal constitution.
The King, who at a distance seemed to be inverted Goneral

causes

with majesty and power, appears on a nearer view, wHichlimil
to possess none ofthofe advantages, which bestow on ted the
monarchs their grandeur and authority. His reve- the feudal
nues were scanty; he had not aftanding army; and moh
he enjoyed no proper jurifdi&ion.

AT a tiie when pomp and splendor were un-
known, even in the palaces of kings; when the of- Their rev-
ficers of the crown received little salary besides the nmll"
fees and perquisites of their office; when embaflies
to foreign courts Were rare, when armies were com-
posed of soldiers who served without pay; it Was not
necessary that a king Ihould possess a great revenue;
nor did the condition of Europe, in tho'e ages, al-
low its princes to be opulent: Commerce made
little progress in the kingdoms where the feudal go-
vernment was established. Institutions, which had .
no other objet but to inspire a martial spirit; to
train men to be soldiers3 and to make arms the only
honourable ptofeffion, naturally discouraged the
commercial arts. The revenues, arising from the
taxes imposed on the different branches of com-
merce, were by consequence inconsiderable; and
VOL. I; C the

BooK I. the prince's treasury received little supply from a

f- ' source, which, among a trading people, flows with
such abundance, and is almost inexhauitible. A
fixed tax was not levied even on land; such a bur-
then would have appeared intolerable to men who
received their estates as the reward of their valour,
and who confidered their service in the field as a
full retribution for what they possessed. TheKing's
demesnes, or the portion of land which he still re-
tained in his own hands unalienated, furnilhed sub-
fiftence to his court, and defrayed the ordinary ex-
pence of government*. The only stated taxes
which the feudal law obliged vassals to pay to the
king, or to those of whom they held their lands,
were three; one when his eldest son was made a
knight; another when his eldest daughter was mar-
ried; and a third in order to ransom him if he should
happen to be taken prisoner. Besides these, the
king received the feudal casualties of the ward, mar-
riage, &c. of his own vassals. And, on some ex-
traordinary occasions, his fubjecs granted him an
aid, which they diftinguilhed by the name of a be-
nevolence, in order to declare that he received it not
in consequence of any right, but as a gift, flowing
from their good-will t. All these added together,
produced a revenue, scanty and precarious, which,
far from enabling the king to attempt any thing that
could excite the jealousy or fear of the nobles, kept
him in continual indigence, anxiety, and depen-
dence.

* Craig. de Feud. lib. i. Dieg. 14. Du Cange Gloss. voc.
Dominicum. t Du Cange voo. Auxilium.

OR

NOR could the king supply the defect of his re- BooK I.

venues, by the terrorof his arms. Mercenary troops Th vd
and standing armies were unknown, as long as the no franding
feudal government subsisted in vigour. Europe was
peopled with soldiers. The vassals of the king, and
the fub-vaflals of the barons, were all obliged to carry
arms. And while the poverty of princes prevented
them from fortifying their frontier towns, while a
campaign continued but a few weeks, and while a
fierce and impetuous courage was impatient to bring
every quarrel to the decision of a battle, an army,
without pay, and with little discipline, was sufficient
for all the purposes both of the security and of the
glory of the nation. Such an army, however, far
from being an engine at the king's disposal, was
often no less formidable to him, than to his ene-
mies. The more warlike any people were, the
more independent they becamie; and the fame per-
sons being both soldiers andfubjects, civil privileges
and immunities were the consequence of their victo-
ries, and the reward of their martial exploits. Con-
querors, whom mercenary armies, under our pre-
sent forms of government, often render the tyrants
of their own people, as well as the scourges of man-
kind, were commonly, under the feudal conftitu.
tion, the most indulgent of all princes to their sub-
jects, because they stood most in need of their assist-
ance. A prince whom even war and victories did
not render the master of his own army, possessed no
shadow of military power during times of peace.
His disbanded soldiers mingled with his other sub-
jecs; not a tingle man received pay from him;
many ages elapsed even before a guard was appoint-

C 2 ed

BooK I. ed to defend his person; and destitute of that great
-.- .. instrument of dominion a standing army, the au-

thority of the king continued always feeble, and
often contemptible.

Thenijuri- NR were there the only circumstances, which
distso ~ contributed towards depressing the regal power. By

the feudal system, the king's judicial authority was
extremely circumscribed. At first, princes seem to
have been the supreme judges of their people, and,
in person, heard and determined all controversies
among them. The multiplicity of causes soon made
it necessary to appoint judges, who, in the king's
name, decided matters, that belonged to the royal
jurifdi&ion. But the Barbarians, who over-ran Eu-
rope, having destroyed most of the great cities, and
the countries which they seized being cantoned out
among powerful barons, who were blindly follow-
ed by numerous vassals, whom, in return, they
were bound to protec from every injury; the ad-
ministration of justice was greatly interrupted, and
the execution of any legal sentence became almost
impracicable. Theft, rapine, murder, and difor-
der of all kinds prevailed in every kingdom of Eu-
rope, to a degree almost incredible, and scarce com-
patible with the subsistence of civil society. Every
offender lheltered himself under the protecion of
fdme powerful chieftain, who screened him from
the pursuits of justice. To apprehend, and to pu-
nifh a criminal, often required the union and effort
of half a kingdom *. In order to remedy these

evils,

A remarkable inflance of this occurs in the following his-
tory, so late as the year 1561. Mary, having appointed a court

of

evils, many persons of diftin&tion were entrusted BOOK I.
with the administration of justice within their own -
territories. But what we may presume was, at first,
only a temporary grant, or a personal privilege, the
incroaching spirit of the nobles soon converted into
a right, and rendered hereditary. The lands of
some were ereEted into Baronies, those of others in-
to Regalities. The jurifdition of the former was
extensive, that of the latter, as the name implies,
royal, and almost unbounded. All causes, whether
civil or criminal, were tried by judges, whom the
lord of the regality appointed; and if the king's
courts called any person within his territory before
them, the lord of regality might put a itop to their

of justice to be held on the borders, the inhabitants of no less
than eleven counties were summoned to guard the person, who
was to as as judge, and to enable him to enforce his decisions,
p. 234. The words of a proclamation, which afford such a con-
vincing proof of the feebleness of the feudal government, deserve
our notice..-'i And because it is necessary for the execution of
her Highness' commandments and service, that her justice be
well accompanied, and her authority fuffciently fortified, by the
concurrence of a good power of her faithful fubjets.-Therefore
commands and charges all and sundry Earls, Lords, Barons,
Freeholders, Landed-men, and other Gentlemen, dwelling with-
in the said counties, that they, and every one of them, with
their kin, friends, fenrants, and houfhold men, well bodin in
feir of war in the molt fubftantious manner, [i. e. compleatly
armed and provided,] and with twenty days viauals to meet
and to pass forward with him to the borough of Jedburgh, and
there to remain during the said space of twenty days, and to re-
ceive such diretion and commands, as Shall be given by him
to them in our Sovereign Lady's name, for quietness of the coun-
try; and to put the fame in execution under the pain of losing
their life, lands, and goods." Keith's Hilt. of Scotland, 198.

3- pro-

E

BooK I. proceedings, and by the privilege of repledging, re-
'- - -,-' move the cause to his own court, and even punish

his vassal, if he submitted to a foreign jurifdiftion *.
Thus almost every question, in which any person
who resided on the lands of the nobles, was inte-
refted, being determined by judges appointed by
the nobles themselves, their vassals were scarce fen-
fible of being, in any degree, fubje& to the crown.
A feudal kingdom was split into many small princi-
palities, almost independent, and held together by
a feeble and commonly an imperceptible bond of
union. And the king was not only stripped of the
authority annexed to the person of a fupremejudge,
but his revenue suffered no small diminution, by the
loss of those pecuniary emoluments, which were, in
that age, due to the person who adminifteredjuftice.

IN the fame proportion that the king funk in

power, the nobles rose towards independence. Not
satisfied with having obtained an hereditary right to
their fiefs, which they formerly held during plea-
sure, their ambition aimed at something bolder, and
by introducing entails, endeavoured, as far as hu-
man ingenuity and invention can reach that end, to
render their possessions unalienable and everlasting.
As they had full power to add to the inheritance
iranfmitted to them from their ancestors, but none
to diminish it; time alone, by means of marriages,
legacies, and other accidents, brought continual ac-
ceflions of wealth, and of dignity; a great family,
like a river, became confiderablefrom the length of

Craig, lib. iii. Dieg -.

its

its course, and as it rolled on, newhonours and new BOOK I.
property flowed successively into it. Whatever in- - '
fluence is derived from titles of honour, the feudal
barons likewise possessed in an ample manner.
These marks of distinction are, in their own nature,
either official or personal, and being annexed to a
particular charge, or bestowed by the admiration of
mankind upon illustrious chara&ers, ought to be
appropriated to these. But the son, however un-
worthy, could not bear to be stripped of that ap-
pellation, by which his father had been diftinguilh-
ed. His presumption claimed, what his virtue did
not merit; titles of honour became hereditary, and
added new lustre to nobles already in possession of
too much power. Something more audacious, and
more extravagant still remained. The supreme di:
reftion of all affairs, both civil and military, being
committed to the great officers of the crown, the
fame and safety of princes, as well as of their peo-
ple, depended upon the fidelity and abilities of these
officers. But such was the preposterous ambition
of the nobles, and so successful even in their wildest
attempts to aggrandize themselves, that in all the
kingdoms where the feudal institutions prevailed,
moit of these offices were annexed to great fami-
lies, and held, like fiefs, by hereditary right. A
person whose undutiful behaviour rendered him odi-
ous to his prince, or whose incapacity exposed him
to the contempt of the people, often held a place of
power and truit, of the greatest importance to both.
In Scotland, the offices of Lord Justice General,
Great Chamberlain, High Steward, High Confta-

C 4 ble,

BooK I. ble, Earl Marshal, and High Admiral, were all he-

_, - reditary; and in many counties, the office of Sheriff

was held in the fame manner.

NOBLES, whose property was so extensive, and

whose power so great, could not fail of being tur-
bulent and formidable. Nor did they want initru-
ments for executing their boldest designs. That
portion of their lands, which they parcelled out
among their followers, supplied them with a nu-
merous band of faithful and determined vaftals;
while that, which they retained in their own hands,
enabled them to live with a princely splendor. The
great hall of an ambitious baron was often more
crowded than the court of his sovereign. The
strong castles, in which they resided, afforded a fe-
cure retreat to the discontented and seditious. A
great part of their revenue was spent upon multi-
tudesofindigent, but bold retainers. And ifatany
time they left their retreat to appear in the court
of their sovereign, they were accompanied, even in
times of peace, with a vast train of armed follow-
ers. The usual retinue of William the sixth Earl
of Douglas consisted of 2ooo horse. Those of
the other nobles were magnificent and formidable
in proportion. Impatient of subordination, and
forgetting their proper rank, such potent and haugh-
ty barons were the rivals, rather than the fubjedts of
their prince. They often despised his orders, in-
fulted his person, and wrested from him his crown.
And the history' of Europe, during several ages,
contains little else, but the accounts of the wars and

revo-

revolutions, occasioned by their exorbitant ambi- BooK I,
tion.

BUT, if the authority of the barons far exceeded Theirpow-
its proper bounds in the other nations of Europe, we eir glat

th Scotland

may affirm that the balance which ought to be pre- than inny
served between a king and his nobles was entirely loft dom.
in Scotland. The Scottish nobles enjoyed, in com-
mon with those of other nations, all the means for
extending their authority which arise from the arif-
tocratical genius of the feudal government. Besides
these, they possessed advantages peculiar to them-
selves: The accidental sources of their power were
considerable; and singular circumifances concurred
with the spirit of the constitution to aggrandize
them. To enumerate the most remarkable of these,
will serve both to explain the political state of the The part'
kingdom, and to illuifrate many important occur- of this.
rences, in the period now under our review.

I. THE nature of their country was one cause of

The nature

the power and independence of the Scottish nobility. of the
Level and open countries are formed for servitude. cou""n
The authority of the supreme magistrate reaches
with ease to the most distant corners, and when na-
ture has ere&ed no barrier, and affords no retreat,
the guilty or obnoxious are soon detested, and
punilhed. Mountains, and fens, and rivers set
bounds to despotic power, and amidst there, is the
natural feat of freedom and independence. In such
places, did the Scottish nobles usually fix their refi-
dence. By retiring to lis own castle, a mutinous
baron could defy the power of his sovereign, it be-

ing

BooK I. ing imprafticable to lead an army, through a bar-

.-v » ren country, to places, almost inaccessible to a single

man. The fame causes, which checked the pro-
gref of the Roman arms, and rendered all the es-
forts of Edward I. abortive, often proteted the
Scottiih nobles from the vengeance of their prince;
and they owed their personal independence, to those
very mountains and marshes, which saved their
country from being conquered.

The fnall II. THE want of great cities in Scotland contri-
ntibe.r buted not a little to increase the power of the nobi-

lity, and to weaken that of the Prince. Where-
ever numbers of men assemble together, order must
be established, and a regular form of government
instituted, the authority of the magistrate must be
recognized, and his decisions meet with prompt and
full obedience. Laws and subordination take rife
in cities; and where there are few cities as in Po-
land, or none as in Tartary, there are few or no
traces of any fort of police, But under the feudal
governments, commerce, the chief means of assem-
bling mankind, was negle&ed; the nobles, in or-
der to strengthen their influence over their vassals,
resided among them,, and seldom appeared at court,
where they found a superior, or dwelt in cities,
where they met with equals. In Scotland, the rich
counties in the South lying open to the English, no
town situated there could rife to be great or popu-
lous amidst continual inroads and alarms: The re-
fidence of our monarchs was not fixed to any par-
ticular place; many parts of the country were bar-
ren and uncultivated; and in consequence of these

peculiar

peculiar circumstances, added to the general causes BOOK If
flowing from the nature of the feudal institutions,
the towns in Scotland were extremely few, and very
inconsiderable. The vassals of every baron occupi-
ed a diftint portion of the kingdom, and formed
a separate and almost independent society. Instead
of giving aid towards reducing to obedience their
seditious Chieftain, or any whom he took underhis
protetion, they were all in arms for his defence,
and obftruted the operations of justice to the ut-
most. The prince was obliged to connive at cri-
minals, whom he could not reach; the nobles,
conscious of this advantage, were not afraid to of-
fend; and the difficulty of punilhing almost assured
them of impunity.

III. THE division of the country into clans had Theinfi.

no small effect in rendering the nobles considerable. tution of
The nations, which over-ran Europe, were original-
ly divided into many small tribes; and when they
came to parcel out the lands which they had con-
quered, it was natural for every chieftain to bestow
a portion, in the first place, upon those of his own
tribe or family. These all held their lands of him;
and as the safety of each individual depended on the
general union, these small societies clung together,
and were diftinguilhed by some common appellation,
either patronymical, or local, long before the intro-
dution of surnames, or ensigns armorial. But when
there became common, the descendants and relations
of every chieftain assumed the fame name and arms
with him; other vafials were proud to imitate their
example, and by degrees they were communicated

to

BooK I. to all those who held of the fame superior. Thus
'_,-v- clanihips were formed; and in a generation or two,

that consanguinity which was, at firit, in a great
measure, imaginary, was believed to be real. An
artificial union was converted into a natural one;
men willingly followed a leader, whom they regard-
ed both as the superior of their lands, and the chief
of their blood, and served him not only with the
fidelity of vassals, but with the affecion of friends.
In the other feudal kingdoms, we may observe such
unions, as we have described, imperfe&ly formed;
but in Scotland, whether they were the prodution
of chance, or the effet of policy, or introduced by
the Iriih colony above-mentioned, and strengthened
by carefully preserving their genealogies both ge-
nuine and fabulous, clanihips were universal. Such
a confederacy might be overcome, it could not be
broken; and no change of manners, or of govern-
ment, has been able, in some parts of the kingdom,
to dissolve associations which are founded upon pre-
judices so natural to the human mind. How for-
midable were nobles at the head of followers, who
counting that caufejuft and honourable which their
chief approved, were ever ready to take the field at
his command, and to sacrifice their lives in defence
of his person, or of his fame ? Against such men, a
king contended with great difadvantage,and that cold
service, which money purchases, or authority extorts,
was not an equal match for their ardour and zeal.

The finl- IV. TuEfinallnefs of their number may be men-
nume tioned among the causes of the grandeur of the

Scottish nobles. Our annals reach not back to the

firit

first division of property in the kingdom; but so far BOOr I,
as we can trace the matter, the original possessions '
of the nobles seem to have been extensive. The an-
cient Thanes were the equals and the rivals of their
prince. Many of the earls and barons, who fuc-
ceeded them, were masters of territories no less am-
ple. France and England, countries wide and ser-
tile, afforded settlements to a numerous and power-
ful nobility. Scotland, a kingdom neither extensive
nor rich, could not contain many such overgrown
proprietors. But the power of an aristocracy always
diminishes, in proportion to the increase of its num-
bers; feeble if divided among a multitude; irre-
fiftible if centered in a few. When nobles are nu-
merous, their operations nearly resemble thore of the
people, they are roused only by what they feel, not
by what they apprehend; and submit to manyarbi-
trary and oppressive acts, before they take arms
against their sovereign. A small body, on the con-
trary, is more sensible, and more impatient; quick
in discerning, and prompt in repelling danger; all
its motions are as sudden, as those of the other are
flow. Hence proceeded the extreme jealousy, with
which the Scottish nobles observed their monarchs,
and the fierceness with which they opposed their
incroachments. Even the virtue of a prince did not
render them less vigilant, or less eager to defend
their rights; and Robert Bruce, notwithftandirig the
splendour of his victories, and the glory of his
name, was upon the point of experiencing the vi-
gour of their resistance, no less than his unpopular
descendant James III. Betides this, the near alli-
ance of the great families, by frequent intermar-

riages,

BOOK I. riages, was the natural consequence of their small
-v-' *number. And as consanguinity was, in those ages,

a powerful bond of union, all the kindred of a
nobleman interested themselves in his quarrel, as a
common cause, and every contest the king had,
though with a single baron, soon drew upon him
the arms of a whole confederacy.

Their V. THOSE natural connexions, both with their
combna equals, and with their inferiors, the Scottish nobles
'ons. strengthened by a device, which, if not peculiar to

themselves, was at least more frequent among them,
than in any other nation. Even in times of pro-
found peace, they formed associations, which when
made with their equals, were called leagues of mu-
tual defence; and when with their inferiors, bonds of
manrent. By the former, the contracing parties
bound themselves mutually to aflift each other, in
all causes, and against all persons. By the latter,
prote&ion was stipulated on the one hand, and fide-
lity and personal service promised on the other *.
Self-prefervation, it is probable, forced men at first
into these confederacies, and while disorder and ra-
pine were universal, while government was unsettled,
and the authority of laws little known or regarded,
near neighbours found it necessary to unite in this
manner for their security, and the weak were ob-
liged to court the patronage of the strong. By de-
grees, these associations became so manyalliances
offensive and defensive against the throne; and as
their obligation was held to be more sacred than any

tie
* A 30. Parl. 1424. A& 43. P. 155.

tie whatever, they gave much umbrage to our kings, BOOKI.
and contributed not a little to the power and inde- u..
pendence of the nobility. In the reign of James II.
William the eighth earl of Douglas entered into a
league of this kind with the earls of Crawford, Ross,
Murray, Ormond, the lords of Hamilton, Balveny,
&c. and so formidable was this combination to the
king, that he had recourse to a measure no less vio-
lent than unjust, in order to dissolve it.

VI. THE frequent wars between England and The fre

Scotland proved another cause of augmenting the quent ware
power of the nobility. Nature has.placed no bar- wit Ens-
rier between the two kingdoms; a river, almost
every where fordable, divides them towards the east:
on the weft they are separated by an imaginary line.
The small revenues of our kings prevented them
from fortifying, or placing garrisons in the towns
on the frontier; nor would the jealousy of their sub-
je&ts have permitted such a method of defence. The
barons, whose estates lay near the borders, confider-
ed themselves as bound both in honour and in inte-
reft to repel the enemy. The wardenihips of the
different marches, offices of great trust and dignity,
were always betlowed on them. This gained them
the leading of the warlike counties in the south;
and the vassals, living in a state of perpetual hofti-
lity, or enjoying at best an insecure peace, became
more inured to war than even the reft of their coun-
trymen, and more willing to accompany their chief-
tain in his molt hardy and dangerous enterprises.
It was the valour, no lets than the number of their
followers, that rendered the Douglases great. The

nobles

BOOK I. nobles in the northern and midland counties were
i'' . often dutiful and obsequious to the crown, but our

monarchs always found it impra&icable to subdue
the mutinous and ungovernable spirit of the bor-
derers. In all our domestic quarrels, those who
could draw to their fide the inhabitants of the south-
ern counties, were sure of vi&ory; and conscious of
this advantage, the lords who possessed authority
there, were apt to forget the duty which they owed
their sovereign, and to aspire beyond the rank of
subjects.

The rt- VII. THE calamities which besel our kings con-
queat mi-
norities tributed more than any other cause to diminish the
wih hp- royal authority. Never was any race of monarchs
Scotand so unfortunate as the Scottish. Of fix fuccefive

princes, from Robert III. to JamesVI. not one died
a natural death; and the minorities, during that
time, were longer, and more frequent, than ever
happened in any other kingdom. From Robert
Bruce to James VI. we reckon ten princes; and
seven of these were called to the throne, while they
were minors, and almost infants. Even the most
regular and best established governments feel fenfi-
bly the pernicious effe&s of a minority, and either
become languid and inactive, or are thrown into
violent and unnatural convulsions. But, under the
imperfec and ill adjusted system of government in
Scotland, these effects were still more fatal; and the
fierce and mutinous spirit of the nobles, unrestrained
by the authority of a king, scorned all fubje&ion
to the delegated jurifdi&ion of a regent, or to the
feeble commands of a minor. The royal authority

was

was circumscribed within narrower limits than ever; BooK I.
the prerogatives of the crown, naturally inconfider- '-
able, were reduced almost to nothing; and the arif-
tocratical power gradually rose upon the ruins of the
monarchical. Left the personal power of a regent
lhould enable him to aFwith too much vigour, the
authority annexed to that office, was sometimes ren-
dered inconsiderable, by being divided; or if a
single regent was chosen, the greater nobles, and
the heads of the more illuitrious families, were fel-
dom raised to that dignity. It was often conferred
upon men, -who possessed little influence, and excit-
ed no jealousy. They, conscious of their own weak-
ness, were obliged to overlook tome irregularities,
and to permit others; and in order to support their
authority, which was destitute of real itrength, they
endeavoured to gain the molt powerful and active
barons, by granting them possessions and immuni-
ties, which raised them to still greater power. When
the king himself came to assume the reins of go-.
vernment, he found his revenues waited or alienat-
ed, the crown lands seized or given away, and the
nobles so accuitomed to independence, that, after
the struggles of a whole reign, he was seldom able
to reduce them to the fame state, in which they had
been at the beginning of his minority, or to wrest
from them what they had usurped during that time. R"i of

' the events

If we take a view of what happened to each of our favourable
kings who was so unfortunate as to be placed in to btldur
this situation, the truth and importance of this ob- ing each

minority,
servation will fully appear.

VOL. I. D TIIE

BOOK I. THE minority of David II. the son of Robert
c-r-- Bruce, was disturbed by the pretensions of Edward
DaVid i. Baliol, who, relying on the aid of England, and on

the support of some difaffe&ed barons among the
Scots, invaded the kingdom. The success which
at firit attended his arms, obliged the young king
to retire to France; and Baliol tookpoffelion of the
throne. A small body of the nobles, however, con-
tinuing faithful to their exiled prince, drove Baliol
out of Scotland, and after an absence of nine years,
David returned from France, and took the govern-
ment of the kingdom into his own hands. But the
nobles, who were thus wafting their blood and trea-
sure in defence of the crown, had a right to the un-
disturbed possession of their ancient privileges; and
even some title to arrogate new ones. It seems to
have been a maxim in that age, that every leader
might claim as his own, the territory which his
sword had won from the enemy. Great acquifi-
tions were gained by the nobility in that way: and
to thete the gratitude and liberality of David added,
by distributing, among such as adhered to him, the
vast possessions which fell to the crown by the for-
feiture of his enemies. The family of Douglas,
which began to rife above the other nobles, in the
reign of his father, augmented both its power and
its property, during his minority.

140o. JAMES I. was seized by the Englilh during the
3mes 1. continuance of a truce, and ungenerously detained

a prisoner, almost nineteen years. During that pe-
riod, the kingdom was governed, first by his uncle
Robert duke of Albany, and then, by Murdo his

son.

son. Both there noblemen aspired to the crown, BooK I.
and their unnatural ambition, if we may believe '---
mot of our historians, not only cut ihort the days
of prince David, the king's elder brother, but pro-
longed the captivity of James. They flattered them-
selves, that they might Itep with less opposition in-
to a throne, when almost vacant: and, dreading
the King's return, as the extinaion of their autho-
rity, and the end of their hopes, they carried on
the negociations for obtaining his liberty, with ex-
treme remissness. At the fame time, they neglect-
ed nothing that could either sooth or bribe the no-
bles to approve their scheme. They slackened the
reins of government; they allowed the prerogative
to be encroached upon; they suffered the most ir-
regular a&s of power, and even wanton instances
of oppression, to pass with impunity; they dealt
out the patrimony of the crown among those whose
enmity they dreaded, or whose favour they had
gained; and reduced the royal authority to a state
of imbecillity, from which succeeding monarchs la-
boured in vain to raise it.

DURING the minority of James Ii. the admini- 1437.

ftration of affairs and the custody of the King's James .
person were committed to Sir William Crichton,
and Sir Alexander Livingston. Jealousy and dif-
cord were the effects of their conjunt authority,
and each of them, in order to strengthen himself,
bestowed new power and privileges upon the great
men, whose aid he courted. While the young earl
of Douglas, encouraged by their divisions, ereced
a fort of independent principality within the king-

D dom

BooKI. dog; and forbidding his vassals to acknowledge

=--> any authority but his own, he created Knights, ap-

pointed a privy council, named officers civil and
military, assumed every ensign of Royalty, but the
title of King, and appeared in public with a magni-
ficence more than royal.

1460. EIGHT persons were chosen to govern the king-
Jame * dom during the minority of James III. Lord

Boyd, however, by seizing the person of the young
King, and by the ascendant which he acquired over
him, soon engrossed the whole authority. He
formed the ambitious projet of raising his family
to the fame pitch of power and grandeur with those
of the prime nobility; and he effected it. While
intent on this, he relaxed the vigour of govern-
ment, and the Barons became accustomed, once
more, to anarchy and' independence. The power,
which Boyd had been at so much pains to acquire,
was of no long continuance, and the fall of his
family, according- to the fate of favourites, was
sudden and deftru&ive; but upon its ruins, the-
family of Hamilton rose, which soon attained the
highet ranl in the kingdom.
[us v As the minority of James V. was longer, it was

likewise more turbulent than those of the preced-
ing Kings. And the contending nobles, encou-
raged or proteced either by the King of France, or
of England, formed themselves into more regular
factions, and disregarded more than ever the re-
ftraints' of order and authority. The French had
the advantage of feeing one, devoted to-their interest,

raised

raised to be regent. This was the duke of Albany, BOOK I.
a native of France, and a grandson of James II. i v.
But Alexander Lord Home, the molt eminent of
all the Scottish peers, who survived the fatal bat-
tle of Flowden, thwarted all his measures, during
the first years of his administration; and the in-
trigues of the Queen Dowager, sifter of HenryVIII.
rendered the latter part of it no less feeble. Though
supported by French auxiliaries, the nobles despised
his authority, and regardless either of his threats, or
his entreaties, peremptorily refused, two several
times, to enter England, to the borders of which
kingdom he had led them. Provoked by these re-
peated instances of contempt, the regent abandon-
ed his troublesome station, and retiring to France,
preferred the tranquillity of a private life, to an
office destitute of real authority. Upon his retreat,
Douglas Earl of Angus became malter of the
King's person, and governed the kingdom in his
name. Many efforts were made to deprive him of
his usurped authority. But the numerous vassals
and friends of his family adhered to him, because
he divided with them the power and emoluments
of his office; the people reverenced and loved the
name of Douglas; he exercised, without the title of
regent, a fuller and more absolute authority than
any who had enjoyed that dignity; and the ancient,
but dangerous pre-eminence of the Douglases,
seemed to be restored.

To there, and to many other causes, omitted or

unobserved by us, did the Scottish nobility owe that
exorbitant and uncommon power, of which instances

D 3 occur,

BooK I. occur, so frequently, in our history. Nothing how-
t' K ' Iever demonstrates so fully the extent of their power,

as the length of its duration. Many years after the
declension of the feudal systems, in the other king-
doms of Europe, and when the arms or policy of
Princes had, every where, shaken, or laid it in
ruins, the foundations of that ancient fabric remain-
ed, in a great measure, firm and untouched in Scot-
land.

The power THE powers, which the feudal institutions vested
of tthe feu-
dal nobles in the nobles, soon became intolerable to all the
bOIae Princes of Europe, who longed to possess some-
tolerable to
Princes thing more than a nominal and precarious authori-

ty. Their impatience to obtain this, precipitated
Henry III, Qs England, Edward II. and some other
weak Princes, into rath and premature attempts
against the privileges of the Barons, in which they
were disappointed or perihed. Princes, of greater
abilities, were content to mitigate evils which they
could not cure, they fought occupation for the tur-
bulent spirit of their nobles, in frequent wars; and
allowed their fiery courage to evaporate in foreign
expeditions, which, if they brought no other advan-
tage, secured at least domestic tranquillity. But
time and accidents ripened the feudal governments
for defruCtion. Towards the end of the fifteenth

empt to century, and beginning of the sixteenth, all the
humble the Princes of Europe attacked, as if by concert, the
nobles fuc- '
cefsfu in power of their nobles. Men of genius then under-
Frnce and took with success, what their unskilful predecessors

had attempted in vain. Lewis XI. of France, the
most profound and the most adventurous genius of

that

that age, began, and in a single reign, almost corn- BooK I
pleted the scheme of their deftruEtion. The sure ,
but conealed policy of Henry VII. of England
produced the fame effe&. The means, indeed, em-
ployed by these monarchs were very different. The
blow, which Lewis struck, was sudden and fatal.
The artifices of Henry resembled those flow poisons,
which waste the constitution, but become not mor-
tal till some distant period. Nor did they produce
consequences less opposite. Lewis boldly added to
the crown whatever he wrested from the nobles.
Henry undermined his Barons, by encouraging them
to fell their lands, which enriched the commons,
and gave them a weight in the legislature unknown
to their predecessors. But while these great revo- B th no
lutions were carrying on in two kingdoms, with bles conti.

nue to

which Scotland was intimately conne&ed, no alter- gather
ation happened there; the King neither extended trength in

,t>~~~~ . - .,,Scotland.

his own prerogative, nor enabled the commons to
encroach upon the aristocracy; the nobles not only
retained their ancient privileges and possessions, but
daily made new acquisitions,

THIS was not owing to the inattention of our Our Kings

Princes, or to their want .of ambition. They were endeavour,
abundantly sensible of the exorbitant power of the tend the
nobility, and extremely solicitous to humble that thoyari
order. They did not, however, possess means sus-
ficient for accomplishing that end. The resources
of our monarchs were few, and the progress which
they made inconsiderable. But as the number of
their followers, and the extent of their jurifdieion, means t
were the two chief circumstances which rendered wardsthi5

end,
the

BooK I. the nobles formidable; in order to counterbalance
^-Yv-- the one, and to restrain the other, all our Kings had

recourse to the fame expedients.

Encourae I. AMONG nobles of a fierce courage, and of un-
discord a-
dogthe polifled manners, surrounded with vassals bold and
pobles. licentious, whom they were bound by interest and

honour to protect, the causes of discord were many
and unavoidable. And as the contending parties
could seldom agree in acknowledging the authority
of any common superior or judge, and their impa-
tient spirit would seldom wait the flow decisions of
justice, theirquarrels were usually terminated by the
fyord. The offended Baron assembled his vassals,
and wafted the lands, or shed the blood of his ene-
my. To forgive an injury, was mean; to forbear
revenge, infamous or cowardly *. Hence quarrels

* The spirit of revenge was encouraged, not only by the

manners, but what is more remarkable, by the laws of those
ages. If any person thought the prosecution of an injury offered
to his family, too troublesome, or too dangerous, the Salique
laws permitted him publickly to desist from demanding venge-
ance; but the fame laws, in order to puniih his cowardice, and
want of affeoion to his family, deprived him of the right of fuc-
cefiion. Henault's Abrege Chronol. p. 81. Among the Anglo-
Saxons, we find a singular institution diftinguilhed by the name
of fodalitium; a voluntary affodation, the object whereof was
the personal security of those who joined in it, and which the
feebleness of government at that time rendered necessary. Among
pther-regulations, which are contained in one of these still ex-
tant, the following deserves notice. " If any afbodate shall ei-
ther eat or drink with a person who has killed any member of
the fodalitium, unlef in the pretence of the King, the Bishop, or
die 'Cbott, and unless he can prove that he did: not know the
person, let him pay a great fine." Hicks 'iffert. EpiRfolar. apud
Thiefaur. Ling. Septentr. vol. i. p. 21.

wyere

were tranfinitted from father to son, and under the BOOK I.
name of deadly feuds, subsisted for many generations, '-v-'
with unmitigated rancour. It was the interest of
the crown to foment rather than to extinguish these
quarrels, and by scattering or cherishing the feeds
of discord among the nobles, that union which
would have rendered the aristocracy invincible, and
which must at once have annihilated the preroga-
tive, was effetually prevented. To the fame cause,
our Kings were indebted for the success, with which
they sometimes attacked the most powerful chief-
tains. They employed private revenge to aid the
impotence of public laws, and arming against the
person who had incurred their displeasure, those ri-
val families which wished his fall, they rewarded
their service, by sharing among them the spoils of
the vanquished. But this expedient, though it
served to humble individuals, did not weaken the
body of the nobility. Those, who were now the
instruments of their Prince's vengeance, became, in
a short time, the obje&s of his fear. Having ac-
quired power and wealth by serving the Crown,
they, in their turn, set up for independence: And
tho' there might be a fluEtuation of power, and
of property: tho' old families fell, and new ones
rose upon their ruins; the rights of the aristocracy
remained entire, and its vigour unbroken.

II. As the administration ofjuftice is one of the Extend the

most powerful ties between a King and his fubjets, jurifiaion
all our monarchs were at the utmost pains to cir- King's
cumfcribe the jurisdiction of the Barons, and to court.
extend that of the Crown. The external forms of

sub-

BOOK I. subordination, natural to the feudal fyitem, favour-
t-v-- ed this attempt. An appeal lay from the judges

and courts of the Barons, to those of the King.
The right, however, of judging in the first instance,
belonged to the nobles, and they easily found means
to defeat the effet of appeals, as well as of many other
feudal regulations. The royal jurifdi&ion was al-
most confined within the narrow limits of the King's
demesnes, beyond which his judges claimed indeed
much authority, but poleffed next to none. Our
Kings were sensible of there limitations, and bore
them with impatience. But it was impossible to
overturn, in a moment, what was so deeply rooted;
or to Trip the nobles, at once, of privileges which
they had held so long, and which were wrought al-
most into the frame of the feudal constitution. To
accompliih this, however, was an object of uni-
form and anxious attention to all our princes,
James I. led the way, here, as well as in other in-
Itances, towards a more regular and perfect police.
He made choice, among the estates of parliament,
of a certain number of persons, whom he diftin-
guifhed by the name of Lords ps Seion, and ap-
pointed them to hold courts for determining civil
causes, three times in the year, and forty days at a
time, in whatever place he pleased to name. Their
jurifdiaion extended to all matters, which formerly
came under the cognizance of the King's council,
and being a committee of parliament, their deci-
sions were final. James II. obtained a law, annex-
ing all regalities, which should be forfeited, to the
crown, and declaring the right of jurifdi&ion to be
unalienable for the future. James III. imposed fe-

Verc

vere penalties upon those judges appointed by the BOOK I.
Barons, whose decisions should be found on a re- t-
view to be unjust; and by many other regulations,
endeavoured to extend the authority of his own
court *. James IV. on pretence of remedying the
]inconveniencies arising from the ihort terms of the
court of Session, appointed other judges called
Lords of Daily Council. The Se/ion was an ambula-
tory court, and met seldom: the Daily Council was
fixed, and fat constantly at Edinburgh; and though
not composed of members of parliament, the fame
powers, which the Lords of Session enjoyed, were
vested in it. At last James V. ere&ed a new
court that fill subsists, and which he named the
College of yufJice, the judges or Senators of which
were called Lords of Council and Serfion. This court
not only exercised the fame jurifdi&ion which for-
merly belonged to the Session and Daily Council,
but new rights were added. Privileges of great
importance were granted to its members, its forms
were prescribed, its terms fixed, and regularity,
power, and splendour conferred upon it. The per-
sons constituted judges in all these different courts,
had, in many refpe&s, the advantage of those who
presided in the courts of the Barons; they were
more eminent for their skill in law, their rules of
proceeding were more uniform, and their decisions
more consistent. Such judicatories became the ob-
je&s of confidence, and of veneration. Men wil-
lingly submitted their property to their determina-
tion, and their encroachments on the jurifdi&tions of

A 26 P. 1469. A 94 P. 1493. A 99 P. 1487.

the

BOOK I. the nobles were popular, and for that reason fuc-

e'- - * cefsful. Bydevices of a similar nature, the jurifdic-

tion of the nobles in criminal causes was restrained,
and the authority of the court of -Justiciary extend-
ed. The crown, in this particular, gaining insen-
sibly upon the nobles, recovered more ample autho-
rity; and the King, whose jurifdicion once refern-
bled that of a Baron, rather than that of a fove-
reign*, came more and more to be confidered as

the

The moit perfec idea of the feudal fyflem of government

may be attained by attending to the slate of Germany, and to
the hiflory of France. In the former, the feudal institutions
fill subsist with great vigour; and though altogether abolilhed
in the latter, the public records have been so carefully preserved,
that the French lawyers and antiquaries have been enabled, with
more certainty and precision, than those of any other country in
Europe, to trace its rife, its progress, and revolutions. In Ger-
many, every principality may be confidered as a fief, and all its
great Princes as vassals, holding of the Emperor. They possess
all the feudal privileges: their fiefs are perpetual; their jurif-
diCtions within their own territories, separate and extensive; and
the great offices of the empire are all hereditary, and annexed
to particular families. At the fame time the Emperor retains
many of the prerogatives of the feudal monarchs. Like them,
his claims and pretensions are innumerable, and his power small:
his jarifdilion within his own demesnes or hereditary countries,
is complete; beyond the bounds of these it is almost nothing,
and so permanent are feudal principles, that although the feu-
dal fyflem-be overturned in almost every particular state in Ger-
many, and although its Princes have all become absolute, the
original feudal conditution of the empire till remains, and ideas
peculiar to that form of government, direc all its operations,
and determine the rights of all its Princes. Our observations,
with regard to the limited jurifdi&ion of kings under the feu-
dal governments, are greatly illustrated by what happened in
France. The feebleness and dotage of the descendants of Char-
lemaine encouraged the Peers to usurp an independent jurifdic-

tion.

the head of the community, and the supreme dif- BOOK I.
penser of justice to his people. These acquisitions ' '
of our Kings, however, though comparatively
great, were in reality inconsiderable; and notwith-
franding all their e fforts, many of the separate ju-
rifditions possessed by the nobles remained in great
vigour; and their final abolition was reserved to a
distant and more happy period.

Bu T besides these methods of defending their pre- Each of

our Kings

rogative, and humbling the aristocracy, which may pursued
be confidered as common to all our Princes, we fofC hu
shall find, by taking a review of their reigns, that blingthe

nobles.

almost every one of our Kings, from Robert Bruce
to James V. had formed some particular system for
depressing the authority of the nobles, which was
the object both of their jealousy and terror. This
condu& of our monarchs, if we reft satisfied with
the accounts of their historians, must be confidered
as flowing entirely from their resentment against
particular noblemen; and all their attempts to hum-
ble them, mufft be viewed as the sallies of private
passion, not as the consequences of any general

tion. Nothing remained in the hands of the crown; all was
seized by them. When Hugh Capet ascended the throne, A. D.
987. he kept pofleffion of his private patrimony the Cont6 of
Paris, and all the jurifdiaion, which the Kings his successors
exercised for some time, was within its territories. There were
only four towns in France, where he could eftablilh Grands
Baillis or royal judges; all the other lands, towns, and bail-
lages belonged to the nobles. The methods to which the French
monarchs had recourse for extending their jurifdi&tion were
exactly similar to those employed by our Princes. Henault's
Abrege, p. 617, &c. De l'Efprit desLoix, liv. 30. ch. 20. &c.

plan

BOOK I. plan of policy. But, though some of their acions
r--1' may be imputed to those passions, though the diffe-

rent genius of the men, the temper of the times,
and the state of the nation necessarily occasioned
great variety in their schemes, yet, without being
chargeable with excessive refinement, we may as-
firm that their end was uniformly the fame. And
This prov- the proje& of reducing the power of the aristocracy,

of thae sometimes avowed, and pursued with vigour; some-
eRent in times concealed, or seemingly suspended; was ne-

ver altogether abandoned.

Robert No Prince was ever more indebted to his nobles
B"ce' than Robert Bruce. Their valour conquered the

kingdom, and placed him on the throne. His gra-
titude and generosity beflowed on them the lands of
the vanquished. Property has seldom undergone
greater or more sudden revolutions, than those to
which it was subjet, at that time, in Scotland,
Edward I. having forfeited the estates of most of
the ancient Scottiih Barons, granted them to his
English fubjecfs. These were expelled by the Scots,
and their lands seized by new masters. Amidfi
such rapid changes, confusion was unavoidable;
and many possessed their lands by titles extremely
defective. During one of those truces between the
two nations, occasioned rather by their beingweary
of war, than desirous of peace, Robert formed a
scheme for checking the growing power and wealth
of the nobles. He summoned them to appear, and
to flew by what rights they held their lands. They
assembled accordingly, and the question being put,
they itarted up, at once. and drew their swords,

" By

" By these, said they, we acquired our lands, and BOOK I.
with these we will defend them." The King, in- L-
timidated by their boldness, prudently dropt the
proje&. But so deeply did they resent this attack
upon their order; that notwithstanding Robert's po-
pular and splendid virtues, it occasioned a dange-
rous conspiracy against his life.

DAVID his son, at first an exile in France, after- David n.

wards a prisoner in England, and involved in con-
tinual war with Edward III. had not leisure to at-
tend to the internal police of his kingdom, or to
think of retrenching the privileges of the nobility.

OUR historians have been more careful to relate Robert n.

the military, than the civil tranfations of the reign
of Robert II. Skirmishes and inroads of little con-
sequence, they describe minutely, but with regard
to every thing that happened, during several years
of tranquillity, they are altogether silent.

THE feeble administration of Robert III. mufft Robertl .

likewise be passed over slightly. A Prince, of a
mean genius, and of a frail and sickly constitution,
was not a fit person to enter the lifts with acive and
martial Barons, or to attempt wresting from them
any of their rights.

THE civil tranfaftions in Scotland are better James .

known since the beginning of the reign of James I.
and a complete series of our laws supplies the de-
sects of our historians. The English made some
amends for their justice in detaining that Prince a

prisoner,

BooK I. prisoner, by their generous care of his education.

, -v' During his long residence in England, he had an

opportunity of observing the feudal system in a more
advanced state, and refined from many of the im-
perfe&tions which frill adhered to it, in his own
kingdom. He saw there nobles great, but not in-
dependent; a King powerful, though far from ab-
solute; he saw a regular administration of govern-
ment wife laws ena&ed; and a nation flourishing
and happy, because all ranks of men were accuf-
tomed to obey them. Full of these ideas, he re-
turned into his native country, which presented to
him a very different scene. The royal authority,
never great, was now contemptible, by having been
so long delegated to regents. The ancient patri-
mony, and revenues of the crown, were almost
totally alienated. During his long absence, the
name of a king was little known, and less regard-
ed. The licence of many years had rendered the
nobles independent. Universal anarchy prevailed.
The weak were exposed to the rapine, and oppref-
sion of the strong. In every corner some barbarous
chieftain ruled at pleasure, and neither feared the
King, nor pitied the people '.

JAMES was too wife a Prince to employ open

force to correct such inveterate evils. Neither the

* A cotemporary Monkiih writer describes there calamities
very feelingly, in his rude Latin. In diebus illis, non erat lex
in Scotia, fed quilibet potentiorum juniorem opprelfit; et totum
regnum suit unmm latrocinium; homicidia, depridationes, in-
cendia, et catera maleficia remanferunt impunita; & jutitia re-
lagata extra terminos regni exulavit. Chartular. Morav. apud
innes Essay, vol. i. p. 272.

men,

mnen, nor the times would have borne it. He ap- BOOK I.
plied the gentler, and less offensive remedy of laws
and statutes. In a parliament held immediately
after his return, he gained the confidence of his
peoples by many wife laws, tending visibly to re-
eftablilh orders tranquillity, and justice, in the king-
dom. But, at the fame time, that he endeavoured
to secure these blessings to his subjects, he disco-
vered his intention to recover those polefflons of
which the crown had been justly bereaved; and
for that purpose obtained an act by which he was
impowered to summon those, who had obtained
crown lands during the three last reigns, to produce
the rights by which they held them*. As this
statute threatened the property of the nobles, ano-
ther which passed in a subsequent parliament, aimed
a dreadful blow at their power. By it the leagues
and combinations, which we have already described,
and which rendered the nobles so formidable to
the crown, were declared unlawful t, Encouraged
by this success in the beginning of his enterprise,
James's next ftep was still bolder and more decisive.
During the fitting of parliament, he seized at once,
his cousin Murdo Duke of Albanyj and his sons;
the Earls of Douglas, Lennox, Angus, March,
and above twenty other peers and barons of prime
rank. To all of them, however, he was imme-
diately reconciled, except to Albany, and his sons,
and Lennox. These were tried by their Peers, and
condemned; for what crime is now unknown.
Their execution struck the whole order with terror,
and their forfeiture added vast poffellions to the

* AA 9 P. 1424. t Aft 30 P. 1424.
VoL. I, E crown.

BOOK I. crown. He seized, likewise, the earldoms of Bu-
^-»~ chan and Strathern, upon different pretexts; and

that of Mar fell to him by inheritance. The pa-
tience and inactivity of the nobles, while the King
was proceeding so rapidly towards aggrandizing the
crown, are amazing. The only obstruction he met
with was from a flight infurre&ion headed by the
Duke of Albany's youngest son, and that was easily
suppressed. The splendour and pretence of a King,
to which the great men had been long unaccustomed,
inspired reverence: James was a Prince of great
abilities, and condu&ed his operations with much
prudence. He was in friendship with England,
and closely allied with the French King: He was
adored by the people, who enjoyed unusual security
and happiness under his administration: And all
his acquisitions, however fatal to the body of the
nobles, had been gained by attacks upon individu-
als;- were obtained by decisions of law; and being
founded on circumstances peculiar to the persons
who suffered, might excite murmurs and apprehen-
sions, but afforded no colourable pretext for a ge-
neral rebellion. It was not so with the next attempt
which the King made. Encouraged by the facility
with which he had hitherto advanced, he ventured
upon a measure that irritated the whole body of the
nobility, and which the event shews either to have
been entered into with too much precipitancy, or
to- have been carried on with too much violence:
The father of George Dunbar Earl of March had
taken arms against Robert III. the King's father;
but that crime had been pardoned, and his lands
reetored by Robert duke of Albany. James, on

pre-

pretext that the regent had exceeded his power, and BOOK I.
that it was the prerogative of the King alone to par- ~
don treason, or to alienate lands annexed to the
crown, obtained a sentence declaring the pardon to
be void, and depriving Dunbar of the earldom.
Many of the great men held lands by no other right
than what'they derived from grants of the two Duk es
of Albany. Such a decision, though they had rea-
son to expe& it in consequence of the fiatute which
the King had obtained, occasioned a general alarm.
Though Dunbar was, at present, the only sufferer,
the precedent might be extended, and their titles to
pofleffions, which they confidered as the rewards of
their valour, might be subjected to the review of
courts of law, whose forms of proceeding, and ju-
rifdi&ion, were in a martial age little known, and
extremely odious. Terror and discontent spread
fast upon this discovery of the King's intentions;
the common danger called on the whole order to
unite, and to make one bold stand, before theywere
firipped successively of their acquisitions, and re-
duced to a state of poverty and insignificance. The
prevalence of these sentiments among the nobles
encouraged a few desperate men, the friends or fol-
lowers of those who had been the chief sufferers
under the King's administration, to form a confpi-
racy against his life. The first uncertain intelligence
of this was brought him, while he lay in his camp
before Roxburgh castle. He durst not confide in
nobles, to whom he had given so many causes of
disgust, but instantly dismissed them and their vas-
fals, and retiring to a monastery near Perth, was
soon after murdered there, in the molt cruel man-

E 2 ner.

BoOK I. ner. All our historians mention, with aftonifi'-

ment, this circumstance of the King's disbanding
his army, at a time when it was so necessary for
his prcdervatioir. A King, fay they, surrounded
with his Barons, is secure from secret treason, and
may defy open rebellion. But those very Barons
were the persons whom he chiefly dreaded; and it
is evident, from this review of his administration,
that he had greater reason to apprehend danger, than
to expe& defence from their hands. It was \the
misfortune of James, that his maxims and man-
ners were too refined for the age in which he lived.
Happy t had he reigned in a kingdom more civi-
lized; his love of peace, of justice, and of ele-
gance, would have rendered his schemes successful;
and instead of perifling because he had attempted
too much, a grateful people would have applauded
and seconded his efforts to reform and to improve
them.
fanes l. CRICHTON, the most able man of those, who

had the direcion of affairs during the minority of
James II. had been the minister of James I. and
well acquainted with his resolution of humbling the
nobility. He did not relinquish the design, and
he endeavoured to inspire his pupil with the fame
sentiments. But what James had attempted to es-
fe& slowly, and by legal means, his son and Crich-
ton pursued with the impetuosity natural to Scots-
men, and with the fierceness peculiar to that age.
William the sixth Earl of Douglas was the first
vidim to their barbarous policy. That young no-
bleman (as we have already observed) contemning

the

the authority of an infant prince, almost openly re- BOOK I.
nounced his allegiance, and apired to independance _
Crichton, too high-fpirited to bear such an insult,
but too weak to curb or to bring to jufticefo power-
ful an offender, decoyed him by many promises to
an interview in the castle of Edinburgh, and, not-
withstanding these, murdered both him and his
brother. Crichton, however, gained little by his
ac of treachery, which rendered him universally
odious. William the eighth Earl of.Douglas was
no less powerful, and no less formidable to the
crown. By forming the league which we already
mentioned with the Earl of Crawford and other
Barons, he had united against his Sovereign almost
one half of his kingdom. But his credulity led
him into the fame snare, which had been fatal to
the former Earl. Relying on the King's promises,
who had now attained to the years of manhood,
and having obtained a fafe-condu& under the great
feal, he ventured to meet him in Stirling castle.
James urged him to dissolve that dangerous confe-
deracy into which he had entered; the Earl obfti-
nately refused; "If you will not," said the en-
raged monarch, drawing his dagger, " this ihall;"
and stabbed him to the heart. An acion so unwor-
thy of a King filled the nation with astonishment,
and with horror, The Earl's vassals ran to aims
with the utrmoft fury, and dragging the fafe-con-
du&, which the King had granted and violated, at
a horse's tail, they marched towards Stirling, burnt
the town, and threatened to besiege the castle. An
accommodation ensued, on what terms is not known.

E3 Bu3

Boo. I. But the King's jealousy, and the new Earl's power
'*-1--' and resentment, prevented it from being of long

continuance. Both took the field, at the head of
their armies, and met near Abercorn. That of the
Earl, composed chiefly of borderers, was far fupe-
rior to the King's, both in number and in valour;
and a single battle mufl, in all probability, have
decided whether the house of Stewart or of Douglas
was henceforth to possess the throne of Scotland.
But, while his troops impatiently expe&ed the fig-
nal to engage, the Earl ordered them to retire to
their camp, and Sir James Hamilton of Cadyow,
the person in whom he placed the greatest confidence,
convinced of his want of genius to improve an op-
portunity, or of his want of courage to seize a
crown, deserted him that very night. This exam-
ple was followed by many; and the Earl, despised
or forsaken by all, was soon driven out of the king-
dom, and obliged to depend for his subsistence, on
the friendship of the King of England. The ruin
of this great family, which had so long rivalled
and overawed the crown, and the terror with which
such an example of unsuccessful ambition filled the
nobles, secured the King, for some time, from op-
position; and the royal authority remained uncon-
trolled and almost absolute, James did not susser
this favourable interval to pass unimproved; he
procured the consent of parliament to laws more
advantageous to the prerogative, and more fubver-
five of the privileges of the aristocracy, than were
ever obtained by any former or fubfequept monarch
of Scotland.

Br

By one of these, not only all the vast poffeffionsof BOOK I;

the Earl of Douglas were annexed to the crown, but '-.-'
all prior and future alienations of crown lands were
declared to be void, and the King was impowered to
seize them at pleasure, without any process or form
of law, and oblige the possessors to refund whar-
ever they had received from them *. A dreadful
instrument of oppreflion in the hands of a Prince.

ANOTHER law prohibited the wardenship of the

marches to be granted hereditarily; restrained, in
several instances, the jurifdiCion of that office; and
extended the authority of the King's courts t.

BY a third, it was ena&ed that no Regality, or

exclusive right of administering justice within a man's
own lands, should be granted in time to come, with-
out the consent of parliament I, a condition, which
implied almost an express prohibition. Those no-
bles who already poffTeed that great privilege, would
naturally be solicitous to prevent it from becoming
common, by being bestowed on many. Those,
who had not themselves attained it, would envy
others the acquisition of such a flattering diftinc-
tion; and both would concur in rejeaing the claims
of new pretenders.

BY a fourth a&t, all new grants of hereditary of-

sices were prohibited, and those obtained since the
death of the last King were revoked §.

* At. 41. P. 1453, t Ibid. A&. 42.
Ibid. A&. 43. § A& 44.

EACH

BOOK I. EACH of these statutes undermined some of the
' . i-- great pillars, on which the power of the aristocracy

refted. During the remainder of his reign, this
Prince pursued the plan which he had begun, with
the utmost vigour; and had not a sudden death,
occasioned by the splinter of a cannon which burst
near him at the siege of Roxburgh, prevented his
progress, he wented neither genius nor courage to
perse& it: And Scotland might, in all probabi-
lity, have been the first kingdom in Europe, which.
would have seen the subversion of the feudal
system.
Jam.s m. JAMES III. discovered no less eagerness than his

father or grandfather to humble the nobility; but
far inferior to either of them in abilities and address,
he adopted a plan extremely impolitic, and his
reign was difaitrous, as well as his end tragical:
Under the feudal governments, the nobles were
not only the King's ministers, and possessed of all
the great offices of power or of trust; they were
likewise his companions and favourites, and fcarcc
any but them approached his person, or were en-
titled to his regard. But James, who both feared
and hated his nobles, kept them at an unusual dif-
tance, and bestowed every mark of confidence and
affetion upon a few mean persons, of professions
so dishonourable, as ought to have rendered themi
unworthy of his presence. Shut up with these, in
his castle of Stirling, he seldom appeared in public,
and amused himself with archite&ure, music, and
other arts, which were then little esteemed. The
pobles beheld the power and favour of these mini-

ons

ons with indignation. Even the sanguinary mea- BooK I.
fures of his father provoked them less than his '-'-
negle&. Individuals alone suffered by the former;
by the latter, every man thought himself injured,
because all were contemned. Their discontent was
much heightened by the King's recalling all rights
to crown lands, hereditary offices, regalities, and
every other concession, which was detrimental to
his prerogative, and which had been extorted during
his minority. Combinations among themselves,
secret intrigues with England, and all the usual
preparatives for civil war, were the effecs of their
resentment. Alexander Duke of Albany, and John
Earl of Mar, the King's brothers, two young men
of turbulent and ambitious spirits, and incensed
against James, who treated them with the fame
coldness as he did the other great men, entered
deeply into all their cabals. The King deteced
their designs, before they were ripe for execution,
and seizing his two brothers, committed the Duke
of Albany to Edinburgh castle. The Earl of Mar
having remonstrated with too much boldness against
the King's condu&c, was murdered, if we may be-
lieve our historians, by his command. Albany,
apprehensive of the fame fate, made his escape out
of the castle, and fled into France. Concern for the
King's honour, or indignation at his measures, were
perhaps the motives, which first induced him to
join the malecontents. But James's attachment to
favourites rendering him every day more odious to
the nobles, the profpea of the advantages which
might be derived from their general difaffe&ion,
ad4ed to the resentment which he felt on account

of

BooK I. of his brother's death, and his own injuries, soon

- d inspired Albany with more ambitious and criminal

thoughts. He concluded a treaty with Edward IV.
of England, in which he assumed the name of
Alexander King of Scots, and in return for the
afiftance which was promised him towards dethron-
ing his brother, he bound himself, so soon as he
was put in poffeflion of the kingdom, to swear
fealty and do homage to the English monarch,
to renounce the ancient alliance with France, to
contra& a new one with England, and to surrender
£ome of the strongest castles, and most valuable
counties in Scotland *. That aid, which the Duke
so basely purchased at the price of his own honour,
and the independence of his country, was pun&u-
ally granted him, and the Duke of Gloucester with
a powerful army condu&ed him towards Scotland.
The danger of a foreign invasion obliged James to
implore the assistance of those nobles whom he had
so long treated with contempt. Some of them were
in close confederacy with the Duke of Albany, and
approved of all his pretensions. Others were im-
patient for any event, which would restore their or-
der to its ancient pre-eminence. They took the
field, however, at the head of a powerful army of
their followers, but with a stronger disposition to
redress their own grievances, than to annoy the ene-
my: and with a fixed resolution of punishing those
minions, whose insolence they could no longer to-
lerate. This resolution they executed, in the camp
near Lawder, with a military dispatch and rigour.

Abercr. Man. Atch, v, ii. p. 443.

Having

Having previously concerted their plan, the Earls BooK I.
of Angus, Huntly, Lennox, followed by almost all '-v.-
the barons of chief note in the army, forcibly en-
tered the apartment of their sovereign, seized all
his favourites except one Ramsay, whom they
could not tear from the King, in whose arms he
took Ihelter, and, without any form of trial, hanged
them instantly over a bridge. Among the most
remarkable of those who had engrossed the King's
affection, were Cochran a mason, Hommil a taylor,
Leonard a smith, Rogers a musician, and Torfifan
a fencing-mafter. So despicable a retinue discovers
the capriciousness of James's character, and accounts
for the indignation of the nobles, when they be-
held the favour, due to them, bestowed on such un-
worthy obje&s.

JAMES had no reason to confide in the army so

little under his command, and difinifing it, Ihut
himself up in the castle of Edinburgh. After va-
rious intrigues, Albany's lands and honours were
at length restored to him, and he seemed even to
have regained his brother's favour, by ome import-
ant services. But their friendship was not of long
duration. James abandoned himself, once more,
to the guidance of favourites; and the fate of those
who had suffered at Lawder, did not deter others
from courting that dangerous pre-eminence. Al-
bany, on pretext that an attempt had been made to
take away his life by poison, fled from court, and
retiring to his castle of Dunbar, drew thither a
greater number of Barons than attended on the
King himself. At the fame time, he renewed his

former

BooK I. former confederacy with Edward; the Earl of An,

.i5 -8gus openly negociated that infamous treaty; other

Barons were ready to concur with it; and if the
sudden death of Edward had not prevented Alba-
ny's receiving any aid from England, the crown of
Scotland would probably have been the reward of
this unworthy combination with the enemies of his
country. But, instead of any hopes of reigning in
Scotland, he found, upon the death of Edward,
that he could not reside there in safety; and flying
first to England, and then to France, he teems from
that time to have taken no part in the affairs of his
native country. Emboldened by his retreat, the
King and his Ministers multiplied the insults which
they offered to the nobility. A itanding guard, a
thing unknown under the feudal governments, and
inconsistent with the familiarity and confidence
with which monarchs then lived amidst their nobles,
was raised for the King's defence, and the command
of it given to Ramsay, lately created Earl of Both-
well, the fame person who had so narrowly escaped
when his companions were put to death at Lawder.
And, as if this precaution had not been sufficient;
a proclamation was issued, forbidding any person to
appear in arms within the precincts of the court *;
which, at a time when no man of rank left his
own house without a numerous retinue of armed
followers, was, in effect, debarring the nobles from
all access to the King. James, at the fame time,
became fonder of retirement than ever, and funk
in indolence, or superstition, or attentive only to

aimufei
Ferrerius, 399.

amusements, devolved his whole authority upon his BOOK I.
favourites. So many injuries provoked the most *~
considerable nobles to take arms, and having per-
fuaded or obliged the duke of Rothesay, the King's
eldest son, a youth of fifteen, to set himself at
their head, they openly declared their intention of
depriving James of a crown, of which he had dif-
covered himself to be so unworthy. Roused by
this danger, the King quitted his retirement, took
the field, and encountered them near Bannockburn;
but the valour of the Borderers, of whom the army
of the malcontents was chiefly composed, soon
put his troops to flight, and he himself was slain in
the pursuit. Suspicion, indolence, immoderate
attachment to favourites, and all the vices of a fee-
ble mind, are visible in his whole condut&; but the
chara&er of a cruel and unrelenting tyrant seems
to be unjuffly affixed to him by our historians.
His neglect of the nobles irritated, but did not
weaken them; and their discontent, the immoderate
ambition of his two brothers, and their unnatural
confederacies with England, were sufficient to have
disturbed a more vigorous administration, and to
have rendered a prince of superior talents unhappy.

THE indignation, which many persons of rank

expressed against the conduCt of the conspirators, to-
gether with the terror of the sentence of excommu-
nication which the Pope pronounced against them,
obliged them to use their victory with great mode-
ration and humanity. And being conscious how
detestable the crime of imbruing their hands in the

blood

BOOK I. blood of their sovereign appeared, they endeavoured
*-,--' to regain the good opinion of their countrymen,

and to atone for the treatment of the father, by
their loyalty and duty towards the son. They pla-
ced him instantly on the throne, and the whole king-
dom soon united in acknowledging his authority.
Jes rv. JAMES IV. was naturally generous and brave; he

felt, in an high degree, all the passions which ani-
mate a young and noble mind. He loved magni-
ficence, he delighted in war, and was eager to ob-
tain fame. During his reign, the ancient and here-
ditary enmity between the King and nobles seems
almost entirely to have ceased. He envied not their
Splendour, because it contributed to the ornament of
his court; nor did he dread their power, which he
confidered as the security of his kingdom, not as an
object of terror to himself. This confidence on his
part met with the proper return of duty and as-
fe&ion on theirs; and, in his war with England,
he experienced how much a King, beloved by his
nobles, is able to perform. Though the ardour of
his courage, and the spirit of chivalry, rather than
the prospect of any national advantage, were the
motives of that expedition; such was the zeal of his
subjects for the King's glory, that he was followed
by as gallant an army, as ever any of his ancestors
had led upon Englifl ground. But though James
himself formed no scheme dangerous or detrimen-
tal to the aristocracy, his reign was distinguished by
an event, extremely fatal to it; and one accidental
blow humbled it more than all the premeditated at-
tacksof preceding Kings. In the rafli and unfortu-

nate

nate battle of Flowden, a brave nobility chose ra- BooK- .
ther to die than to desert their Sovereign. Twelve -
Earls, thirteen Lords, five eldest sons of noblemen,
and an incredible number of barons, fell with the
King *. The whole body of the nobles, long and
sensibly, felt this disaster; and if a Prince of full
age had then ascended the throne, their confterna-
tion and feebleneis would have afforded him advan-
tages, which no former monarch ever possessed.

BUT James V. who fucceded his father, was an Jame

infant of a year old; and tho' the office of re-
gent was conferred on the duke of Albany, a man
of genius and enterprise, a native of France, and
accustomed to a government where the power of the
King was already great; though he made many
bold attempts to extend the royal authority, tho'
he put to death Lord Home, and banished the Earl
of Angus, the two noblemen of greatest influence in
the kingdom, the aristocracy loft no ground under
his administration. A itranger to the manners, the
laws, and the language of the people whom he was
called to rule, he acted, on some occasions, rather
like a viceroy of the French King than the gover-
nor of Scotland; but the nobles asserted their own
privileges, and contended for the interest of their
country with a boldness, which convinced' him of
their independence, and of the impotence of his own
authority. After several unsuccessful struggles, he
voluntarily retired to France, and the King, being
then in his thirteenth year, the nobles agreed that

*Aber. ii. o40.

he

BooK I. he Ihould afirne the government, and that eight
i . - persons should be appointed to attend him by turns,

and to advise and assist him in the adminifiration of
public affairs. The Earl of Angus, who was one of
that number, did not long remain satisfied with such
divided power. He gained some of his colleagues,
removed others, and intimidated the reft. When
the term of his attendance expired, he frill retained
authority, to which all were obliged to submit, be-
cause none of them was in a condition to dispute it,
The affection of the young King was the only thing
wanting, to fix and perpetuate his power. But an
active and high spirited Prince submitted, with great
impatience, to the restraint in which he was kept.
It ill suited his years, or disposition, to be confined
as a prisoner within his own palace; to be treated
with no refpet, and to be deprived of all power.
He could not, on some occasions, conceal his in-
dignation and resentment. Angus forelaw that he
had much to dread from these, and as he could not
gain the King's heart, he resolved to make sure of
his person. James was continually surrounded by
the Earl's spies and confidents, many eyes watched
all his motions, and observed every ftep he. took.
But the King's eagerness to obtain liberty eluded all
their vigilance. He escaped from Falkland, and
fled to the castle of Stirling, the residence of the
Queen his mother, and the only place of strength
in the kingdom which was not in the hand of the
Douglases. The nobles, of whom some were influ-
enced by their hatred to Angus, and others by their
refpe& for the King, crowded to Stirling, and his
court was soon filled with persons of the greatest dif-

tinction.

ftintion. The Earl, though aftonilhed at this urn- BooK I;
expected revolution, resolved, at first, to make one ir''
bold pulh for recovering his authority, by march-
ing to Stirling at the head of his followers; but he
wanted either courage or strength to execute this
resolution. In a parliament held soon after, he and
his adherents were attainted, and after efcapirig from
many dangers, and enduring much misery, he was
at length obliged to fly into England for refuge.

JAMES had now not only the name, but, though

extremely young, the full authority of a King. He
was inferior to no Prince of that age in gracefulness
of person, or ih vigour of mind. His understand-
ing was good, and his heart warm; the former
capable of great improvement, and the latter sus-
ceptible of the best imprefflons. But according to
the usual fate of Princes who are called to the throne
in their infancy, his education had been neglected,
His private preceptors were more ready to flatter,
than to iriltrut him, It was the interest of those
who governed the kingdoms to prevent him front
knowing too much. And the Earl of Angus, in
order to divert himi from business, gave him an early
taste for such pleasures, as afterwards occupied and
engrossed him more than became a King. Accord-
ingly we discover in James all the features of a
great but uncultivated spirit. On the one hand,
violent pafions, implacable resentment, an immo-
derate deilre of power, and the utmost rage at dif-
appointment, On the other, love to his people,
zeal for the punifihment of private oppressors1 con-
VOL.- . F fidenee

BoOK I. fidence in his favourites, and the most engaging

Y--' openness and affability of behaviour.

WHAT he himself had suffered from the exorbi-

tant power of the nobles, led him early to imitate
his predecessors, in their attempts to humble them,
The plan he formed for that purpose was more
profound, more systematic, and pursued with great-
er constancy and steadiness, than that of any of
his ancestors. And the influence of the events
in his reign upon those of the subsequent period,
render it necessary to explain his condu& at greater
length, and to enter into a more minute detail of
his aftions. He had penetration enough to discover
those defects in the schemes adopted by former
Kings, which occasioned their miscarriage, The
example of James I. had taught him, that wife laws
operate slowly on a rude people, and that the fierce
spirit of the feudal nobles was not to be subdued by
these alone. The effets of the violent measures of
James II. convinced him, that the oppression of one
great family is apt either to excite the suspicion and
resentment of the other nobles, or to enrich with its
ipoils some new family, which would soon adopt
the fame sentiments, and become equally formidable
to the crown. He saw, from the fatal end of
James III. that negleEt was still more intolerable to
the nobles than oppreflion, and that the Ministry of
new men and favourites was both dishonourable and
dangerous to a Prince. At the fame time, he felt
that the authority of the crown was not sufficient t6
counterbalance the power of the ariflocracy, and
that without some new accefilon of strength, he

could

could expe& no better success in the struggle than his BOOK I.
ancestors. In this extremity, he applied himself to
the clergy, hoping that they would both reliih his
plan, and concur, with all their influence, in en-
abling him to put it in execution. Under the feudal
government, the church being reckoned a third
estate, had its representatives in parliament; the
number of these was considerable, and they possessed
great influence in that assembly. The superstition
of former Kings, and the zeal of an ignorant age,
had bestowed on ecclesiastics, a great proportion
of the national wealthj and the authority which
they acquired by the reverence of the people, was
superior even to that which they derived from their
riches. This powerful body, however, depended
entirely on the crown. The Popes, notwithstanding
their attention to extend their usurpations, had ne-
gleeed Scotland as a distant and poor kingdom, and
permitted its Kings to exercise powers, which they
disputed with more considerable Princes. The Scot-
tifh monarchs had the sole right of nomination to
vacant bishoprics and abbeys*; and James natu-
rally concluded, that men who expeced preferment
from his favour, would be willing to merit it, by
promoting his designs. Happilyfor him, the nobles
had not yet recovered the blow which fell on their
order at Flowden, and if we may judge either. from
their condu&, or from the charater given of them
by Sir Ralph Sadler the English envoy in Scotland,
they were men of little genius, of no experience in
business, and incapable of aaing either with una-

Epift. Reg. Scot. I. 197. &c. At 125. P. i140.

F e nimity,

BooK I. nimity, or with vigour. Many of the clergy, on
v-'J r the other hand, were distinguished by their great

abilities, and no less by their ambition. Various
causes of disgust had arisen between them and the
nobles who despised their character, and envied
their power, or their wealth. By acing in concert
with the King, they not only gratified him, but
avenged themselves, and hoped to aggrandise their
own order, by depressing those, who were their sole
rivals. Secure of so powerful a concurrence, James
ventured to proceed with greater boldness. In the
first heat of resentment, he had driven the Earl of
Angus out of the kingdom; and sensible that a per-
son, so far superior to the other nobles in abilities,
might create many obstacles, which would retard
or render ineffecual all his schemes, he solemnly
swore, that he would never permit him to return
into Scotland, and, notwithstanding the repeated
solicitations of the King of England, he adhered to
his vow with unrelenting obstinacy. He then pro-
ceeded to repair the fortifications of Edinburgh, Stir-
ling, and other catles, and to fill his magazines
with arms and ammunition. Having taken these
precautions by way of defence, he began to treat
the nobility with the utmost coldness and reserve.
Those offices, which they were apt, from long pof-
feflion, to .confider as appropriated to their order,
were now bestowed on ecclesiastics, who alone pof-
sessed the King's ear, and together with a few gentle-
men of inferior rank, to whom he had communi-
cated his schemes, were intrusted with the manage-
ment of all public affairs. These ministers were
cihofen w ith judgment; and Cardinal Beatoun, who

soon

loon became the most eminent among them, was a BOOK I.
man of superior genius. They served the King with '--
fidelity, they carried on his measures with vigour,
with reputation, and with success. James no longer
concealed his contempt of the nobles, and suffered
no opportunity of mortifying them to escape. Slight
offences were aggravated into real crimes, and pu-
nifhedwith severity. Every accusation against per-
sons of rank was heard with pleasure, every appear-
ance of guilt was examined with rigour, and every
trial proved fatal to those who were accused: the
banishing Hepburn Earl of Bothwell for reasons ex-
tremely frivolous, the beheading the Maiter of
Sorbes without sufficient evidence of his guilt, and
the condemning Lady Glamis, a filter of the Earl
of Angus, to be burnt for the crime of witchcraft,
of which that credulous age believed her inno-
cent, are monuments both of the King's hatred of
the nobility, of the severity of his government, and
of the stretches he made towards an absolute power.
By these aids of authority, he tried the spirit of the
nobles, and how much they were willing to bear.
Their patience increased his contempt for them, and
added to the ardour and boldness with which he
pursued his plan, Meanwhile they observed the
tendency of his schemes with concern, and with re-
fentment; but the King's sagacity, the vigilance of
his ministers, and the want of a proper leader, made
it dangerous to concert any measures for their de-
fence, and impossible to a& with becoming vigour.
James and his counsellors, by a false ftep which they
took, presented to them, at length, an advantage
which they did not fail to improve.

F 3 MoTIvEs,

BOOK I. MOTIVES, which are well known, had prompted
'.----' Henry VIII. to disclaim the Pope's authority, and

to seize the Revenues of the regular clergy. His
system of reformation satisfied none of his fubjecs.
Some were enraged because he had proceeded so far,
others murmured because he proceeded no farther;
and by his imperious temper, and alternate profecu-
tions of the zealots for Popery, and the converts
to the Protestant opinions, he was equally formi-
dable to both. Henry was afraid that this general
diffatisfaftion of his people might encourage his
enemies on the continent to invade his kingdom.
He knew that both the Pope and Emperor courted
the friendship of the King of Scots, and endeavoured
to engage him in an alliance against England. He
resolved, therefore, to disappoint the effecs of their
negociations, by entering into a closer union with
his nephew, and for that purpose sent ambassadors
into Scotland, to propose a personal interview with
him at York. It was plainly James's interest to
accept this invitation; the assistance of so power-
ful an ally, the high honours which were promised
him, and the liberal subsidies he might have obtain-
ed, would have added no little dignity to his do-
meftic government, and muff have greatly facilitat-
ed the execution of his favourite plan. On the
other hand, a war with England, which he had
reason to apprehend, if he rejeced Henry's offers of
friendship, was inconsistent with all his views. This
would bring him to depend on his barons; an army
could not be raised without their assistance: To call
nobles incensed against their prince into the field,
was to unite his enemies, to make them sensible of

their

their own strength, and to afford them an opportu- BOOK I.
nity of revenging their wrongs. James, who was
not ignorant that all there consequences might fol-
low a breach with England, listened at first to Hen-
ry's proposal, and consented to the interview at
York. But the clergy dreaded an union, which
must have been eftablinled on the ruins of the
church. Henry had taken great pains to infuse into
his nephew his own sentiments concerning reli-
gion, and had frequently solicited him, by ambaf-
fadors, to renounce the usurped dominion of the
Pope, which was no less dishonourable to princes,
than grievous to their subje&s. The clergy had
hitherto, with great address, diverted the King from
regarding these solicitations. But, in an amicable
conference, Henry expected, and they feared, that
James would yield to his intreaties, or be convinced
by his arguments. They knew that the revenues of
the church were an alluring obje& to a Prince, who
wanted money, and who loved it; that the pride
and ambition of ecclesiastics raised the indignation
of the nobles; that their indecent lives gave offence
to the people; that the Protestant opinions were
Spreading fast throughout the nation; and that an
universal defection from the eftablilhed church,
would be the consequence of giving the smallest de-
gree of encouragement to there principles. For
there reasons, they employed all their credit' with
the King, and had recourse to every artifice and in-
finuation, in order to divert him from a journey,
which muff have been so fatal to their interest.
They endeavoured to inspire him with fear, by
magnifying the danger to which he would expose

his

BOOK I. his person, by venturing so far into England, with-
--" out any security but the word of a Prince, who,

having violated every thing venerable and sacred in
religion, was no longer to be trusted; and by way
of compensation for the fums which he might have
received from Henry, they offered an annual dona-
tive of 50,000 crowns; they promised to contribute
liberally towards carrying on a war with England,
and flattered him with the profpe& of immense
riches, arising from the forfeiture of persons, who
were to be tried and condemned as heretics. In-
fluenced by these considerations, James broke his
agreement with Henry, who, in expecation of
meeting him, had already come to York; and that
haughty and impatient Monarch resented the affront,
by declaring war against Scotland. His army was
soon ready to invade the kingdom. James was ob.
liged to have recourse to the nobles, for the defence
of his dominions. At his command, they assembled
their followers: but with the fame dispositions,
which had animated their ancestors in the reign of
James III. and with a full resolution of imitating
their example, and by punishing those to whom they
imputed the grievances, of which they had reason
to complain; and if the King's Ministers had not
been men of abilities, superior to those of James III.
and of considerable interest even with their enemies,
who could not agree among themselves what victims
to sacrifice, the camp of Fala would have been as
remarkable as that of Lawder, for the daring en-
croachments of the nobility on the prerogative of
the Prince. But though his ministers were saved by
this accident, the nobles had soon another opportu-

nity

nity ofdifcovering to the King, their dissatisfaction BOOK I.
with his government, and their contempt of his au- L--^
thority. Scarcity of provisions, and the rigour of
the season having obliged the Englith army, which
had invaded Scotland, to retire, James imagined
that he could attack them, with great advantage, in
their retreat; but the principal barons, with an ob-
Itinacy and disdain, which greatly aggravated their
disobedience, refused to advance a ftep beyond the
limits of their own country. Provoked by this in-
fult to himself, and suspicious of a new conspiracy
against his ministers, the King instantly disbanded
an army, which paid so little regard to his orders,
and returned abruptly into the heart of the kingdom.

AN ambitious and high-fpirited Prince could not

brook such a mortifying affront. His hopes of fuc-
cess had been rash, and his despair upon a difap-
pointment was excefllfive. He felt himself engaged
in an unnecessary war with England, which, instead
of yielding him the laurels and triumphs that he ex,
pesed, had begun with such circumstances as en-
couraged the insolence of his fubjefts, and exposed
him to the scorn of his enemies. He saw how vain
and ineffe&ual all his projecs to humble the nobles
had been, and that, though in times of peace a prince
may endeavour to depress them, they will rife, dur-
ing war, to their former importance and dignity.
Impatience, resentment, indignation, filled his bosom
by turns, The violence of there passions altered his
temper, and, perhaps, impaired his reason. He
became pensive, fullen, and retired. He seemed,
through the day, to be swallowed up in profound

meditation,

BooK I. meditation, and through the night, he was disturb-
A_?--
i ed with those visionary terrors which make impref-

sion upon a weak understanding only, or a disorder-
ed fancy. In order to revive the King's spirits, an
inroad on the western borders was concerted by his
ministers, who prevailed upon the Barons in the
neighbouring provinces, to raise as many troops as
were thought necessary, and to enter thg enemy's
country. But nothing could remove the King's
aversion to his nobility, or remove his jealousy of
their power. He would not even intrust them
with the command of the forces which they had
assembled; that was reserved for Oliver Sinclair
his favourite, who no sooner appeared to take
possession of the dignity conferred upon him,
than rage and indignation occasioned an universal
mutiny in the army. Five hundred English, who
happened to be drawn up in fight, attacked the
Scots in this disorder. Hatred to the King, and
contempt of their general, produced an effe&, to
which there is no parallel in history. They over,
came the fear of death, and the love of liberty; and
ten thousand men surrendered to a number so far
inferior, without striking a single blow. No man
was desirous of vicory, which would have been
acceptable to the King, and to his favourite; few
endeavoured to save themselves by flight; the Eng-
lish had the choice of what prisoners they pleased to
take; and almost every person of diftintion, who
was engaged in the expedition, remained in their
hands. This aftonifling event was a new proof to
the King of the general disaffection of the nobility,
and a new discovery of his own weakness, and want

of

of authority. Incapable of bearing these repeated BooK L
insults, he found himfelfunable to revenge them. '-i-
The deepest melancholy and despair succeeded to
the furious transports of rage, which the first ac-
count of the rout of his army occasioned. All the
violent passions, which are the enemies of life,
preyed upon his mind, and wafted and consumed a
youthful and vigorous conititution. Some authors
of that age impute his untimely death to poison;
but the diseases of the mind, when they rife to an
height, are often mortal; and the known effecs of
disappointment, anger, and resentment upon a fan-
guine and impetuous temper, sufficiently account
for his unhappy fate. "His death (fays Drum-
mond) proveth his mind to have been raised to an
high strain, and above mediocrity; he could die, but
could not digest a disaster." Had James survived
this misfortune, one of two things must have hap-
pened: Either the violence of his temper would have
engaged him openly to attack the nobles, who
would have found in Henry a willing and powerful
protecIor, and have derived the fame assistance from
him, which the malecontents, in the succeeding
reign, did from his daughter Elizabeth; in that
cafe, a dangerous civil war would have been the
certain consequence: Or, perhaps, neceflity might
have obliged him to accept of Henry's offers, and
be reconciled to his nobility. In that event the
church would have fallen a sacrifice to their union,
a Reformation, upon Henry's plan, would have
been eflablilhed by law, a great part of the tempo,
ralities of the church would have been seized, and

the.

BOOK I. the friendihip of the King and Barons would have

, --- been cemented by dividing its ipoils.

SUCH were the efforts of our Kings, towards re-

ducing the exorbitant power of the nobles. If they
were not attended with success, we muff not, for
that reason, conclude that they were not conducted
with prudence. Every circumstance seems to have
combined against the crown. Accidental events
concurred with political causes, in rendering the best
concerted measures abortive. The affaffmation of
one King, the sudden death of another, and the
fatal despair of a third, contributed no less than its
own natural strength, to preserve the aristocracy
from ruin.

AMIDST these struggles, the influence which our

Kings possessed in their parliaments, is a circum-
france seemingly inexplicable, and which merits par-
ticular attention. As these assemblies were com-
posed chiefly of the nobles, they, we are apt to ima-
gine, must have dictated all their decisions; but,
instead of this, every King found them obsequious
to his will, and obtained such laws, as he esteemed
necessary for extending his authority. All things

The cra, were conduted there with dispatch and unanimity;
inflnnceof and, in none of our historians, do we find an in-
Sino°ifh f'ance of any opposition formed against the court in
w ~asneit. Parliament, or mention of any difficulty in carrying

through the measures which were agreeable to the
King. In order to account for this singular fact, it
is necessary to inquire into the origin and conftitu-
tion of Parliament.

THE

THE genius of the feudal government, uniform BooK I.

in all its operations, produced the fame effects in T aso
small, as in great societies; and the territory of a of it.
Baron was, in miniature, the model of a kingdom.
He possessed the right ofjurifdiction, but those, who
depended on him, being free men, and not slaves,
could be tried by their peers only; and, therefore,
his vassals were bound to attend his courts, and to
aflift both in pafling and executing his sentences.
When assembled on these occasions, they establish-
ed, by mutual consent, such regulations, as tended
to the welfare of their finall society; and often
granted, voluntarily, such supplies to their Superior,
as his necessities required. Change now a single
name: In place of Baron, substitute King, and we
behold a Parliament in its first rudiments, and ob-
serve the first exertions of those powers, which its
members now possess as Judges, as Legislators, and
as dispensers of the public revenues. Suitable to
this idea, are the appellations of the King's Court*,
and of the King's Great Council, by which, Parlia-
ments were anciently distinguished; and suitable to
this, likewise, were the constituent members of
which it was composed. In all the feudal king-
doms, those who held of the King in chief were
bound, by the condition of their tenure, to attend
and to afilft in his courts. Nor was this esteemed a
privilege, but a service. It was exated likewise of
Bishops, Abbots, and the greater Ecclesiastics, who
holding vast possessions of the Crown, were deemed
subjet to the fame burden. Parliaments did not
continue long in this slate. Cities gradually acquir-
ed wealth, a considerable share of the public taxes

* Du Cange, voc. Curia.

were

BOOK I. were levied on them, the inhabitants grew into efti-
*----' marion, and being enfranchised by the Sovereign,

a place in Parliament, was the consequence of their
liberty, and of their importance. But as it would
have been absurd to confer such a privilege, or to
impose such a burden on a whole community, every
burrough vas permitted to chute one or two of its
citizens to appear in the name of the corporation;
and the idea of representation was first introduced in
this manner. An innovation, still more important,
naturally followed. The vassals of the crown were
originally few in number, and extremely powerful;
but as it is impossible to render property fixed and
permanent, many of their possessions came, gradu-
ally, and by various methods of alienation, to be
split and parcelled out into different hands. Hence
arose the distinction between the Greater and the
Lesser Barons. The former were those who retain-
ed their original fiefs undivided, the latter were the
new and .less potent vassals of the Crown. Both
were bound, however, to perform all feudal services,
and, of consequence, to give attendance in Parlia-
ment. To the Lesser Barons, who formed no incon-
fiderable body, this was an intolerable grievance.
Barons Sometimes denied their tenure, burroughs re-
nounced their right of electing, charters were ob-
tained, containing an exemption from attendance;
and the anxiety, with which our ancestors endea-
voured to get free from the obligation of fitting in
Parliament, is surpassed by that only, with which
their poffterity solicit to be admitted there. In order
to accommodate both parties, and, at once, to fe-
cure to the King a sufficient number of members

in

in his great council, and to save his vassals from an BOOK I.
unnecessary burden, an easy expedient was found A--
out. The obligation to personal attendance was
continued upon the Greater Barons, from which the
Lesser Barons were exempted, on condition of their
eleting, in each county, a certain number of Re-
presentatives, to appear in their name. Thus a Par-
liament became complete in all its members, and
was composed of Lords Spiritual and Temporal, of
Knights of the shires, and of Burgesses. As many
causes contributed to bring government earlier to
perfection in England, than in Scotland; as the ri-
gour of the feudal institutions abated sooner; and
its defects were supplied with greater facility in the
one kingdom, than in the other; England led the
way in all there changes, and Burgesses, and
Knights of the shire, appeared in the Parliaments of
that nation, before they were heard of in ours.
Burgesses were first admitted into the Scottifh-Parlia-
ments by Robert Bruce ; and in the preamble to A.D. 13Z6.
the laws of Robert III. they are ranked among the
constituent members of that assembly. The Lesser
Barons were indebted to James I. for a statute ex- 427.
empting them from personal attendance, and per-
mitting them to elet representatives; the exemp-
tion was eagerly laid hold on, but the privilege was
so little valued, that, except one or two instances,
it lay neglected during i60 years; and James VI.
first obliged them to fend representatives regularly
to Parliament t.

Abercromby, i. 635.

t Essays on Brit. Antiq. Es. II. Dalrymp. Iirt. of Feud.
Prop. ch. 8.

A ScoT-

BOOR I. A SCOTTISH Parliament, then, conified anci-
v* -- ently of Great Barons, of Ecclefiaitics, and a few

representatives of burroughs. Nor were these divid-
ed, as in England, into two houses, but composed
one assembly, in which the Lord Chancellor prefid-
ed*. And, in rude ages, when the science of go-
vernment was extremely imperfect, among a mar-
tial people, unacquainted with the arts of peace,
firangers to the talents which make a figure in de-
bate, and despising them, Parliaments were not held
in the fame estimation as at present, nor did haugh-
ty Barons love those courts, in which they appeared
with such evident marks of inferiority. Parliaments
were often hastily assembled, and it was, probably,
in the King's power, by the manner in which he
ifiued his writs for that purpose, to exclude those
who were averie from his measures. At a time
when deeds of violence were common, and the re-
ftraints of law and decency were little regarded, no
man could venture with safety to oppose the King
in his own court. The Great Barons, or Lords of

* In England, the Peers and Commons seem early to have

met in separate houses; and James I. who was fond of imitat-
ing the English in all their customs, had probably an intention
of introducing some considerable diltin&ion between the Greater
and Leser Barons in Scotland; at leait he determined that their
consultations should not be carried on under the dire&tion of the
fame President; for by his Law, A. D. 1327, it is provided,
' that out of the commissioners of all the Ihires shall be chosen
a wife and expert man, called the common Speaker of the Par-
lament, who shall propoe' all and sundry needs and causes, per-
taining to the Commons in the Parliament, or general council."
No such Speaker, it would seem, was ever chosen; and by a
fibfeqnent law the Chancellor was declared perpetual President
of Parliament.

Parlia-

Parliament, were extremely few; even so late as the BOOK I.
beginning of the reign of James VI. * they amount- '--
ed only to fifty-three. The Ecclefiafticks equalled
them in number, and being devoted implicitly to
the Crown, for reasons which have been already
explained, rendered all hopes of vitory in any
struggle desperate. Nor were the nobles themselves
so anxious, as might be imagined, to prevent ats
of Parliament favourable to the royal Prerogative;
conscious of their own strength, and of the King's
inability to carry these acs into execution without
their concurrence, they trusted either to elude, or to
contemn them; and the statute revoking the King's
property, and annexing alienated jurifditions to the
Crown, repeated in every reign, and violated and
despised as often, is a standing proof of the impo-
tence of laws, when opposed to power. So many
concurring causes are sufficient, perhaps, to account
for the ascendant, which our Kings acquired in Par-
liament. But, without having recourse to any of
these, a single circumstance, peculiar to the confti-
tution of the Scottish parliament, the mentioning
of which we have hitherto avoided, will abundantly
explain this fat, seemingly so repugnant to all our
reasonings concerning the weakness of the King,
and the powers of the nobles.

At far back as our records enable us to trace the

constitution of our Parliaments, we find a commit-
tee, diftinguilhed by the name of Lards of Articles.
It was their business to prepare, and to digest all
matters which were to be laid before the Parlia-
ment; every motion for a new law was first made

*And. Col. v. i. pref. 40.
VOL. I. G there,

BOOK I. there, and approved or rejeaed by them at pleasure;

what they approved was formed into a bill, and pre-
sented to Parliament; what they reje&ed could not
be introduced into the house. This committee owed
the extraordinary powers vested in it, to the military
genius of the ancient nobles; too impatient to sub-
mit to the drudgery of civil business, too impetu-
ous to observe the forms, or to enter into the details
necessary in conducing it, they were glad to lay
that burden upon a small number, while they them-
selves had no other labour than simply to give, or
to refuse their fan&ion to the bills, which were pre-
sented to them. The Lords of Articles, then, not
only dire&ed the whole proceedings of Parliament,
but poffeifed a negative before debate. That com-
mittee was chosen and constituted in such a manner,
as put this valuable privilege entirely in the King's
hands. It is extremely probable, that the King once
had the sole right of nominating the Lords of Ar-
ticles , They came afterwards to be ele&ed by

the

It appears from authentic records, that a Parliament was

appointed to be held March 12, 1566, and that the Lords of
Artides were chosen, and met on the 7th, five days before the
assembling of Parliament. If they could be regularly eleted so
long before the meeting of Parliament, it is natural to conclude,
that the Prince alone possessed the right of electing them. There
are two different accounts of the manner of their election at that
time, one by Mary herself, in a letter to the archbishop of
Glasgow; " We, accompanied with our nobility for the time,
"pall to the Tolbootb of Edinburgh, for holding of our Par-

liament on the 7th day of this instant, and elected the Lords

"Articulars." If we explain these words, according to ftriet
grammar, we mull conclude that the Queen herself eleAed
them. It is, however, more probable that Mary meant to fay,
that the nobles then present with her, viz. her privy counsellors,

and

the parliament, and consisted of an equal number BooK I.
out of each estate; and most commonly of eight ' '--'a
Temporal and eight Spiritual Lords, of eight repre-
fentatives of burroughs, ahd of the eight great offi-
cers of the Crown. Of this body, the eight eccle-
fiaftics, together with the Officers of the Crown;
were entirely at the King's devotion, and it was
scarce possible that the choice could fall on such
Temporal Lords and Burgesses as would unite in
opposition to his measures. Capable either of in-
fluencing their eletion, or of gaining them when
eleted, the King commonly found the Lords of
Articles no less obsequious to his will, than his own
privy council, and by means of his authority with
them, he could put a negative upon his Parliament
before debate, as well as after it; and what may
seem altogether incredible, the most limited Prince
in Europe atually possessed in one instance, a pre-
rogative which the most absolute could never at-
tain *.

To

and otheri, elefed the Lbrds of Articles. Keith's Hill. of Scot-
land, p. 33i. The other account is Lord Ruthven's, who ex-
prefsly affirms that the Queen herself elected them. Keith's
Append. 126. Whether we embrace the one or the other of
there opinions, is of no consequence. If the privy counsellors
and nobles, attending the court, had a right to elea the Lords of
Articles, it was equally advantageous for the Crown, as if the
Prince had had the sole nomination of them.

Having deduced the hitfory of the committee of Lords of

Articles, as low as the subjea of this preliminary book required,
it maybe agreeable, perhaps, to some of my readers, to know
the subsequent variations in this singular institution, and the po-
litical use which our Kings made of these. When Parliaments
became more numerous, and more corifiderable by the admifion
of the representatives of the lesser Barons, the preserving their

G 2 influence

BooK I. To this account of the internal conftitltiop of

Scotland, it will not be improper to add a view of
op at the the political state of Europe at that period, where

-bT s1" the following history commences. A thorough
centy. knowledge of that general system, of which every

kingdom in Europe forms a part, is no less re-
quifite towards understanding the history of a na-

tion,

influence over the Lords of Articles became, likewise, an objeA
of greater importance to our Kings. James VI. on pretence,
that the Lords of Articles could not find leisure to confider the
great multitude of affairs laid before them, obtained an ad,
appointing four persons to be named out of each eftatc, whp
should meet twenty days before the commencement of Parlia-
ment ', to receive all supplications, &c. and rejecing what they
thought frivolous, should engross in a book what they thought
worthy the attention of the Lords of Articles. No provifio is
made in the adt for the choice of this felef hpy, and the King
would, ofcourfe, have claimed that privilege. In 1633, when
Charles I. was beginning to introduce those innovations which
gave so much offence to the nation, he dreaded the oppofiton
of his Parliament, and in order to prevent that, an article was
made use of to secure the Lords of Articles for the Crown. The
Temporal Peers were appointed to chute eight Bithops, and the
Biifops eight Peers, these sixteen met together, and elected eight
Knights of the shire, and eight Burgefies, and to there the Crown
Officers were added as usual. If we can only suppose eight per-
sons of so numerous a body, as the Peers of Scotland were be-
come, by that time, attached to the court, these, it is obyipos,
would be the men whom the Bihops would chufe, and of cense-
quence, the whole Lords of Articles were the tools and creatures
of the King. This praftice, so inconsistent with liberty, was
abolihfed during the civil war: And the ifatute of James VI.
was repealed. After the Restoration, Parliaments became more
servile than ever. What was only a temporary device, in the
reign of Charles I. was, then, converted into a standing law.
F For my part," fays the author from whom I have borrowed

* A&. 222. P. 15994

many

ti6n, than an acquaintance with its peculiar govern- BooK I.
ment and laws. The latter may enable us to com- .
prehend domestic occurrences and revolutions, but
without the former, foreign tranfa&ions must be al-
together mysterious and unintelligible. By attend-
ing to this, many dark passages in our history may
be placed in a clear light; and where the bulk of
historians have seen only the effea, we may be able
to discover the cause.

THE subversion of the feudal government in

Fraice, and its declension in the neighbouring king-
doms, occasioned a remarkable alteration in the po-
litical state of Europe. Kingdoms, which were in-
conirderable when broken, and parcelled out among
nobles, acquired firmness and strength, by being
united in a regular monarchy. Kings became
conscious of their own power and importance. They
meditated schemes of conquest, and engaged in wars
at a distaste. Numerous armies were raised, and
great taxes imposed for their subsistence. Confider-
able bodies of infantry were kept in constant pay;
that service grew to be honourable; and cavalry, in
which the strength of European armies had hitherto
consisted, though proper enough for the short and
voluntary excursions of Barons who served at their

many of these particulars, " I flould have thought it lefi crimi-
"nal in our Restoration Parliament, to hate openly bellowed
"upon the King a negative before debate, than, in such an un-

derhand artificial manner, to betray their conitituents, and the

"nation." Essays on Brit. Antiq. 55. It is probable, how-
ever, from a letter of Randolph's to Cecil lo Aug. 1560, printed
in the Appendix, that his Parliament had rome appearance of an-
cient precedent to justify their uuworthy conduct.

G 3 own

BoK I. own expence, were found to be unfit either for
~---l making, or defending an important conquest.

IT was in Italy, that the powerful monarchs of

France and Spain and Germany first appeared to
make a trial of their new strength. The division
of that country into so many small states, the lux-
ury of the people, and their effeminate aversion to
arms, invited their more martial neighbours to an
easy prey. The Italians, who had been accustom-
ed to mock battles only, and to decide their quar-
rels by innocent and bloodless victories, were afto-
nifhed at the fight of real war; and as they could
not refill the torrent, they suffered it to take its
course, and to spend its rage. Intrigue and policy
supplied the want of strength; and necellity and
felf-prefervation led that ingenious people to the
great secret of modern politics, by teaching them
how to balance the power of one Prince, by throw-
ing that of another into the opposite scale. By this
happy device, the liberty of Italy was long preserved,
The scales were poised by very skilful hands; the
smallest variations were attended to, and no Prince
was allowed to retain any superiority, that could be
dangerous.

A SYSTEM of conduA, pursued with so much

success in Italy, was not long confined to that coun-
try of political refinement. The maxim of pre-
serving a balance of power is founded so much
upon obvious reasoning, and the situation of Eu-
rope rendered it so necessary, that it soon became
a matter of chief attention to all wife politicians.

Every

Every ftep any Prince took was observed by all his BOOK I.
neighbours. Ambassadors, a kind of honourable w--'
spies, authorised by the mutual jealousy of Kings,
resided almost constantly at every different court,
and had it in charge to watch all its motions. Dan-
gers were foreseen at a greater distance, and pre-
vented with more ease. Confederacies were formed
to humble any power which rose above its due pro-
portion. Revenge or felf-defence were no longer
the only causes of hostility, it became common to
take arms out of policy; and war, both in its com-
mencement, and in its operations, was more an
ex'ercise of the judgment, than of the passions of
men. Almost every war in Europe became gene-
ral, and the most inconsiderable itates acquired im-
portance, because they could add weight to either
scale.

FRANCIS I. who mounted the throne of France

in the year I515, and Charles V. who obtained the
Imperial Crown in the year I519, divided between
them the strength and affetions of all Europe.
Their perpetual enmity was not owing either to per-
fonal jealousy, or to the caprice of private passion,
but was founded so much in nature and true policy,
that it subsisted between their posterity for several
ages; and, notwithstanding their present acciden-
tal and unnatural union, must again revive. Charles
succeeded to all the dominions of the house of Au-
stria. No family had ever gained so much by wife
and fortunate marriages. By acquisitions of this
kind the Austrian Princes rose, in a short time,
from obscure Counts of Hapfbourg, to be Arch-

dukes

BOOK I. dukes of Austria, and Kings of Bohemia, and were
--vw-' in poffeflion of the imperial dignity by a fort of he-

reditary right. Besides these territories in Germany,
Charles was heir to the crown of Spain, and to all
the dominions which belonged to the house of Bur-
gundy. The Burgundian provinces engrossed, at
that time, the riches and commerce of one half of
Europe; and he drew from them, on many occa-
sions, those immense fums, which no people with-
out trade and liberty are able to contribute. Spain
furnilhed him a gallant and hardy infantry, to whose
discipline he was indebted for all his conquests.
And at the fame time, by the discovery of the new
world, a vein of wealth was opened to him, which
all the extravagance of ambition could not exhaust.
These advantages rendered Charles the first Prince
in Europe; but he wilhed to be more, and openly
aspired to universal monarchy. His genius was of
that kind which ripens slowly, and lies long con-
cealed; but it grew up without observation, to an
unexpected height and vigour. He possessed, in
an eminent degree, the chara&eriftic virtues of all
the different races of Princes to whom he was al-
lied. In forming his schemes, he discovered all
the subtlety and penetration of Ferdinand his grand-
father; he pursued them with that obstinate and in-
flexible perseverance which has ever been peculiar
to the Austrian blood; and, in executing them, he
could employ the magnanimity and boldness of his
Burgundian anceflors. His abilities were equal
to his power, and neither of them would have been
inferior to his designs, had not Providence, in pity
to mankind, and in order to preserve them from

the

the worst of all evils, Universal Monarchy, raised BOOK I.
up Francis I. to defend the liberty of Europe. His '-r
dominions were less extensive, but more united than
the Emperor's. His subjects were numerous, ac-
tive, and warlike, lovers of glory, and lovers of
their King. To Charles power was the only object
of desire, and he pursued it with an unwearied and
joyless industry. Francis could mingle pleasure and
elegance with his ambition; and though he neglet-
ed some advantages, which a more phlegmatic or
more frugal Prince would have improved, an active
and intrepid courage supplied all its defects, and
checked or defeated many of the Emperor's designs.

Tat reft of Europe observed all the motions of

these mighty rivals, with a jealous attention. On
the one fide, the Italians saw the danger which
threatened Christendom, and in order to avert it,
had recourse to the expedient, which they had often
employed with success. They endeavoured to di-
vide the power of the two contending Monarchs
into equal scales, and by the union of several small
ifates to counterpoise him, whore power became
too great. But, what they concerted with much
wifdonm, they were able to execute with little vi-
gour; and intrigue and refinement were feeble
fences againit the incroachments of military power.

ON the other fide, Henry VII. of England held

the balance with less delicacy, but with a stronger
hand. He was the third Prince of the age in dig-
nity and in power; and the advantageous situation
of his dominions, his domestic tranquillity, his

immense

BooK I. immense wealth, and absolute authority rendered
~'- -.' him the natural guardian of the liberty of Europe.

Each of the rivals courted him with emulation; he
knew it to be his interest to keep the balance even,
and to restrain both, by not joining entirely with
either of them. But he was seldom able to reduce
his ideas to pracice; he was governed by caprice
more than by principle; and the passions of the
man were an overmatch for the maxims of the
King. Vanity and resentment were the great springs
of all his undertakings, and his neighbours easily
found the way, by touching these, to force him
upon many rash and inconsistent enterprises. His
reign was a perpetual series of blunders in politics,
and while he esteemed himself the wisest Prince in
Europe, he was a constant dupe to those, who found
it necessary, and could submit to flatter him,

IN this situation of Europe, Scotland, which had

hitherto vested her strength in the quarrels between
France and England, emerged from her obscurity,
took her fiation in the system, and began to have
some influence upon the fate of distant nations.
Her-affiftance was, frequently, of consequence to
the contending parties, and the balance was often
so nicely adjusted, that it was in her power to make
it lean to either fide. The part assigned her, at
this junEture, was to divert Henry from carrying
his arms into the continent. That Prince, having
routed the French at Guinegat, and invested Te-
rouenne, France attempted to divide his forces, by
engaging James IV. in that unhappy expedition
which ended with his life. For the fame reason

Francis

Francis encouraged and assisted the Duke of Al- BooK I.
bany, to ruin the families of Angus and Home, '3
which were in the interest of England, and would
willingly have persuaded the Scots to revenge the
death of their King, and to enter into a new war
with that kingdom. Henry and Francis having
united not long after against the Emperor, it was
the interest of both Kings, that the Scots should
continue inactive; and a long tranquillity was the
effec of their union. Charles endeavoured to break
this, and to embarrass Henry by another inroad of
the Scots, For this end, he made great advances
to James V. flattering the vanity of the young
Monarch, by eleEting him a Knight of the Golden
Fleece, and by offering him a match in the impe-
rial family; while, in return for these empty ho-
nours, he demanded of him to renounce his alliance
with France, and to declare war against England.
But James, who had much to lose, and who could
gain little by embracing the Emperor's proposals,
rejeted them with decency, and keeping firm to
his ancient allies, left Henry at full liberty to a&
upon the continent with his whole strength.

HENRY himself began his reign, by imitating

the example of his ancestors with regard to Scot-
land. He held its power in such extreme contempt,
that he was at no pains to gain its friendship; but,
on the contrary, he irritated the whole nation, by
reviving the antiquated pretensions of the crown of
England to the sovereignty over Scotland. But his
own experience, and the example of his enemies,
gave him a higher idea of its importance. It was

impossible

Book I. impofiible to defrnd ah open and extensive fronttier,
t-- --' against the excurflons of an active and martial peo-

ple. During any war oft the continent, this obliged
him to divide the strength of his kingdom. It
was necessary to maintain a kind of army of obfer-
vati6n in the north of England; and, after all pre-
catitions, the Scottilh borderers, who were superior
to all mankind in the practice of irregular war,
often made successful inroads, and spread terror and
desolation over many counties. He fell, at lait,
upon the true secret of policy, with refpe& to Scot-
land, which his predeceffirs had too little penetra-
tion to discoVer, or too much pride to employ.
The situation of the country, and the bravery of
the people made the conquest of Scotland impolli-
ble; but the national poverty, and the violence of
faction rendered it ah easy imattet to divide, and to
govern it. He abandoned, therefoie, the former
defigh, and resolved to employ the utmfio address
in executing the latter. It had not yet become ho-
nourable for one Prince to receive pay from ano-
ther, under the more decent name of a subsidy.
But, in all ages, the fame arguments have been
good in courts, and of weight with ministers, sac-
tious leaders, and favourites. What were the argu-
ments by which Henry brought over so many to
his interest during the minority of James V. we
know by the original warrant still extant*, for re-
mitting considerable rums into Scotland. By a
proper distribution of these, many persons of note
were gained to his party, and a fation which held
secret correspondence with England, and received

all
Burnet's Hiss. Ref. v. i. p. 7.

all its direcions from thence, appears henceforward BOOK I.
in our domestic contests. In the sequel of the his- ' - -
tory, we ihall find Henry labouring to extend his
influence in Scotland. His successors adopted the
fame plan, and improved upon it. The affairs of
the two kingdoms became interwoven, and their
interests were often the fame. Elizabeth divided
her attention almost equally between them, and
the authority, which the inherited in the one, was not
greater than that, which she acquired in the other.

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK II.

THE
HISTORY

o F
SCOTLAND.

BOO K II.
M ARY Queen of Scots was born a few days B o o

before the death of her father James V. II.
The situation in which he left the kingdom alarmed

Dec. i%,

all ranks of men, with the profpeat of a turbulent I542.
and disastrous reign. A war against England had Bit' "'
been undertaken without necessity, and carried on fateof be
without success. Many persons of the first rank ngdol
had fallen into the hands of the English, in the un-
fortunate rout near the firth of Solway, and were
still prisoners at London. Among the reft of the
nobles there was little union, either in their views,
or in their affections; and the religious disputes oc-
cafioned by the opinions of the reformers, growing
every day more violent, added to the rage of those
factions which are natural to a form of government
nearly ariftocratical.

THE

B o o K THE government of a Queen was unknown in

II. Scotland, and did not imprint much reverence in
-''
* the minds of a martial people. The government

of an infant Queen was frill more destitute of real
authority; and the profpe& of a long and feeble
minority invited to fa&ion by the hope of impunity.
James had not even provided the common remedy
against the disorders of a minority, by committing
to proper persons the care of his daughter's educa-
tion, and the administration of affairs in her name.
Though he saw the clouds gathering, and foretold
that they would quickly burst into a storm, he was
so little able to disperse them, or to defend his daugh-
ter and kingdom against the imminent calamities,
that, in mere despair, he abandoned them both to
the mercy of fortune, and left open to every pre-
tender, the office of regent, which he could not
fix to his own fatisfation.

Prtnflon, CARDINAL Beatoun, who had for many years
Beaoun to been confidered as prime Minister, was the firif who
treency claimed that high dignity; and, in support of his

pretensions, he produced a testament*, which he
himself had forged in the name of the late King;
and without any other right, instantly assumed the
title of Regent. He hoped, by the afiftance of the
clergy, the countenance of France, the connivance
of the Queen Dowager, and the support of the
whole popilh faction, to hold by force, what he
had seized on by fraud. But Beatoun had enjoyed
power too long to be a favourite of the nation.
Those among the nobles who wished for a Refor-

mation
* Sadler's Lett. 1 6

mation in religion dreaded his severity, and others B o o K
confidered the elevation of a Churchman to the II.
highest office in the kingdom as a depreflioii of 'I-_'
themselves. At their instigation, James Hamilton
Earl of Arran, and next heir to the Queen, rotifed
himself from his inativity, and was prevailed on
to aspire to that station, to which proximity of
blood gave him a natural title. The nobles, who Er^ribf Ar-

ran choren

were assembled for that purpose, unanimously con- Regent.
ferred on him the office of regent; and the public
voice applauded their choice.

No two men ever differed more widely in difpQfi- Chaiader

tion and characer, than the Earl of Arran and ofBato"
Cardinal Beatoun. The Cardinal was by nature of
immoderate ambition; by long experience he had
acquired address and refinement; and insolence
grew.upon him from continual success. His high
ifation in the church placed him in the way of great
employments; his abilities were equal to the great-
eft of these; nor did he reckon any of them to be
above his merit. As his own eminence was found-
ed upon the power of the church of Rome, he was
a zealous defender of that'fuperflition, and for the
fame reason an avowed enemy to the doctrine of the
Reformers.. Political motives alone determined him
to support the one or to oppose the other, His
early application to public business kept hi'iulnaic-
quainted with the learning and controversies of the
age; he gave judgment, however, upon all points
in dispute, with a precipitancy, violence, and ri-
gour; which cotemporary hjftorians mention with
indignation.

VOL. I. H THE

B O 0 K THE chara&er of the Earl of Arran was, in al-

II. most every thing, the reverse of Beatoun's. He
~' r"ra -was neither inseted with ambition, not inclined to
of Arran

cruelty: The love of ease extinguished the former,
the fftnefs of his temper preferved-him from the
latter. Timidity and irresolution were his predo-
minant failings, the one occasioned by'his natural
confitution, and. the other arising from a confci6uf-
ness that his abilities were not equal to his flation.
With these difpoftions he might have.enjoyed and
adorned private life';' but his publick conduft was
without coiuage, .or dignity, or consistence. The
perpetual save of his own fears, and, by consequence,
the perpetual tool of:tiofe, who found their advan-
tge. in practising upcn.- them. But asno other per-
son could be. set in.c-pi-pofi tion to. the Cardinal, with-
any probability offuceefs, the nationi declared in
hisfavour with so gefieral' a consen, 't.that the arti-
fices..of his: riva} could- not withftiaii- its united
Irenth. . ' ' ;'.

s o JTgEE a

Earl of Arra /i had. scarce 'tak n pbiffeflfi

,th r-rd of.tis new dignty when a negociation as opened
oSIo-,d. wjn-h En'glarid wii'c:' ave. birth to events of'the

moi. fatal conseq encre "to himfelk and ro the kin'g-
dom. , ter the deathodf Jamees, Henry VIII.-was
nlolnger afraid-of aiiy interruption: from Scotla'iid
to hits'.4efignas. againt France,; anid'''mmediately
conceived hopes of 'rientdring-. fhii 'feciity per-
ptuai 'by the marriiage of EdWartd h'ls only son
wi-. :th:e young. Que'n of Sco's. - He' communi-
cated his 'intention' toh the- prifon'ess -ake' .i Solwnay,
ad- prevailed on.themto ravour i'r, byrhes prcmie

of

of liberty, as the reward of their success. In the B o-o K
mean time he permitted them to return into Scot- II.
land, that, by their presence in the Parliament '
which the Regent had called, they might be the
better able to persuade their count rymen to fall in
with his proposals. A caife, intrusted to such able
and zealous advocates, could not well miss of com-
ing to an. happy issue.-; All' those who. feared the
Cardinal, or.who desired a change in religion, were
fond of an'alliance, which afforded protection to
the doftrine which they had embrac&d, as well as to
their. own persons, againit the rage of that power-
ful and haughty Prelate;

BUT Henry's. rough and' impatient temper was Illcondud-

incapable. of improving this favourable conjun&ure. feby him-
Address and delicacy in managing the fears, and
follies, and interests of men, were arts with which
he. was utterly unacquainted. The designs he had
formed upon Scotland were obvious from the mar-
riage which he had proposed, and he had not dex-
terity enough to disguise, or to conceal them. In-
stead of yielding to the fear orjealoufy of the Scotsi
-what .time and accidents would so6n have enabled
him to recoveir he, at once, alarmed and irritated
the whole nation, by demanding that the 'Qeen's
*person should be immediately: committed to his cuf-
tody, and that. the government of the kingdon
should be put in his.hands during her minority;

HENRY could not have preferibed more ignomi- Odi;os to

-tiious.conditionsto. a conquered, people, andit is no the Sot,,
.wondet: they were rejeeted' with indignation, by partaccept-

ed by them.
Ht · men

B o o K men who scorned to purchase an alliance with Efig-

II. land, at the price of their own libeity; The par-
'*uV. liament of Scotland, however, influenced by the

nobles who returned from England; i:defirous of
peace with that kingdom; and delivered, by the

S 1, 'Regent's crnfining the Cardinal as a prisoner, from
I54. any opposition to hich :he might have .given. rife;

consented to a treaty-of marriageiand of union, but
upon foimewhat a more equal-foting.... And after
some dark and unfuccefsfil intriguesj: by which his
ambassador endeavoured to carry .off the young
1Queen and Cardinal Beatoun into England, Henry
was obliged to give up his own proposals, and. to
accept of theirs. On is. fide, he consented that
the Q-een :flonld rohtinie .to reside in Scotland,
.and himself- remain excluded from- any. hare in the
government of the-kingdom. On theiother hand,
the Scots agreed to fepd.their Sovereignr into Eng-
land as soon as fthe attained the full age of, ten
years, and inflandy to -deliver fix persons, .of the
first rank, to be kept as hostages by Heniryti--the
Q2een's arrival at his court, .

by te Re. THE treaty. was: 'if o .mariifeftly..of advan
&mr. to-England, that the-Regent loft rnmch-.ofithe-ipub'

lic confidence by contenting toi it.i: The .Catdinalw
who had: now recovered libertys,i-watehedfor. such
an opportunity of regaining credit, -and he did. n6r
fail to: cultivate andimprove thiis:.tothe titroft.

tor"c'dby He complained foudly, that the Iegent had be-
ha. -trayed the kirigdrm:to its rdoft inveterate -ene"ies,

and fadrificed its honour to his-own ambition. : He
foretold the extinction of true -catholic religion,

under

under the tyranny of an excommunicated heretic; B o o
but above all, he lamented to fee an ancient king- II.
dom consenting to its own slavery, descending into 'r
the ignominious station of a dependent province;
and, in one hour, the weakness or treachery of a
single man surrendering every thing for which the
Scottish nation had struggled and fought during so
many ages. These remonstrances of the Cardinal
were not without effec. They were addrefled to
prejudices and palions which are deeply rooted in
the human heart, The fame hatred to the ancient
enemies of their country, the fame jealousy of na-
tional honour, and pride of independence, which,
at the beginning of the present century, went near
to prevent the Scots from consenting to an union
with England, upon terms of great advantage, did,
at that time, induce the whole nation to declare
against the alliance which had been concluded. In
the one period, an hundred and fifty years of peace
between the two nations, the habit of being fubje&ed
to the fame King, and governed by the fame max-
ims, had considerably abated old animofities, and
prepared both people for incorporating. In the
other, injuries were fill fresh, the wounds on both
fides were open, and, in the warmth of resentment,
it was natural to seek revenge, and to be averse from
reconcilement. At the Union in 1707, the wisdom
of parliament derpifed the groundless murmurs
occasioned by antiquated prejudices; but in i543,
the complaints of the nation were better founded,
and urged with a zeal and unanimity, which it is
neither just nor safe to disregard. The rage of the
people rose to such an height, that the Englith am-

H 3 baffador

B o K baffador could hardly be prote&ed from their in-

II. fults. The clergy contributed a great fum towards
'- .-' prefervingthe church from the dominion of a Prince,

whoe system of Reformation was so fatal to their
power. The nobles, after having mortified the
Cardinal, so lately, in such a cruel manner, were,
now, ready to applaud and to second him, as the
defender of the honour and liberty of his country.

eexci;es ARGYLL, Huntly, Bothwell, and other powerful
alm, t the
hlr cr.a- Bar-ns declared openly against the alliance with
-ini,' England. By.their affiltance, the Cardinal seized

on the persons of the young Queen and her mother,
and added to his party the splendor and authority
of the royal name *. He received; at the fame
time, a more real accession to his ifrength, by the
arrival of Matthew Stewart Earl of Lennox, whose
return from France he had earnestly solicited. This
young nobleman was the hereditary enemy of the
house of Hamilton. He had many claims upon
the Regent, and pretended a right to exclude him,
not only from succeeding to the Crown, but to de-
prive him of the pofeffion of his private fortune.
The Cardinal flattered his vanity, with the profpe&t
of marrying the Queen Dowager, and asseted to
treat him with so much refpe&, that the Regent be-
came jealous of him as a rival in power.

THIS suspicion was artfully heightened by the

Abbot of Paisley, who returned into Scotland some
time before the Earl of Lennox, and aced in con-
cert with the Cardinal. He was a natural brother

of
*Keith's Hill. of Scod. 30.

of the Regent, with whom he had great credit; a B o o K
warm partisan of France, and. a zealous defender II.
of the eftabliihed Religion. He took hold of the --'
Regent by the proper handle, and' endeavoured to
'bring about a change in his sentiments, by working
upon his fears. The desertion of the nobility, the
difaffe&ion of the clergy, and the rage of the peo-
ple; the resentment of France, the power of the
Cardinal, and the pretensions of Lennox, were all
represented with aggravation, and with their most
threatening aspet.

MEAN while, the day appointed for the ratifica-

tion of the treaty with England, and the delivery
of the hostages, approached, and the Regent was
still undetermined in his owp mind. He a&ed to
the last, with that irresolution and inconsistence,
-which is peculiar to weak men, when they are so
unfortunate as to have the chief part in the condu&
of difficult affairs. On the 25th of August, he
ratified the treaty with Henry, and proclaimed the ORgen to'
Cardinal, who still continued to oppose it, an ene- renounce

,y to. ~ his>

1coun rr the friend-

my to his country. On the 3d of September, he nhip with
secretly withdrew from Edinburgh, met with the Engl",d.
Cardinal at Callendar, renounced the friendship of
England, and declared for the interests of France *.

HENRY, in order to gain the Regent, liad not

spared the most magnificent promises. He had of-
sered to give the Princess Elizabeth in marriage to
his eldest son, and to constitute him King of that
part of Scotland, which lies beyond the river Forth.

But
* Sadler, 339, 356.

B o K But up~r~iding his interest in the kingdom to be.

II. less considerable than he had imagined, the English
'-.- . monarch begata treat him with little refpe&. The

young Queen was now in the custody of his ene-
mies, who grew every day more numerous and more
popular. Theyformed a separate court at Stirling,
and threatened to elet another Regent. The French
King was ready to afford them his protecion, and
the nation, out of hatred to the English, would
have united in their defence. In this situation, the
Regent could not retain his authority, without a
sudden change of his measures; and though he en-
deavoured, by ratifying the treaty, to preserve the
appearances of good faith with England, he was
obliged to throw himself into the arms of the party,
which adhered to France.

SOON after this sudden resolution in his political

And to per-
ifcte tie principles, the Regent changed his sentiments con-
Rdor'mS cerning religion.. The spirit of controversy was

then new and warm; books of that kind were eager-
ly read by men of every rank; the love of novel-
ty, or the conviction of truth, had led the Re-
gent to express great esteem for the writings of the
Reformers; and having been powerfully supported
by those who had embraced their opinions, he, in
order to gratify them, entertained, in his own fami-
ly, two of the most noted preachers of the Protef-
tant doctrine, and, in his firt Parliament, consent-
ed to an a&d, by which the laity were permitted to
read the Scriptures in a language which they under-
fiood. Truth needed only a fair hearing to be an
over-match for error. Absurdities, which had long

im.

imposcd on the ignorance and credulity of man- B o o r
kind, were deteted and exposed to public ridicule; II.
and under the countenance of the Regent, the Re- '"' C
formation made great advances. The Cardinal ob-
served its progress with concern, and was at the ut-
most pains to obfRru& it. He represented to the
Regent his great imprudence in giving encourage-
ment to opinions, so favourable to Lennox's preten-
sions; that his own legitimacy depended upon the
validity of a sentence of divorce, founded on the
Pope's authority; and that by suffering it to be
called in question, he weakened his own title to the
fucceflion, and furnished his rival with the only ar-
gument, by which it could be rendered doubtful *.
Thele insinuations made a deep impression on the
Regent's timorous spirit, .who, at the profpeEt of
such imaginary dangers, was as much startled as
the Cardinal could have wilhed; and his zeal for
the Protestant Religion was not long proof against
his fear. He publickly abjured the do&rine of the
Reformers in the Franciscan church at Stirling, and
declared not only for the political, but the religious
opinions of his new confidents.

*The pretensions of the Earl of Lennox to the fucceflion

were thus founded. Mary, the daughter of James II. was
married to James Lord Hamilton. Elizabeth, a daughter of
that marriage, was the wife of Matthew Earl of Lennox, and
the present Earl was her grandson. The Regent was likewise
the grandson of the Princess Mary. But his father having mar-
ried Janet Beaton, the Regent's mother, after hehad obtained a
divorce from Elizabeth Home his former wife, Lennox pretended
that the sentence of divorce was unjult, and that the Regent, being
born while Elizabeth Home was fill alive, ought to be confidered
as illegitimate. Crawf. Peer. x9g.

Tap

B o o K TmE Protestant dc&rine did not susser much by

II. his apoftacy, It had already taken so deep root in
.v -' the kingdom, that ,no discouragement or severity

could extirpate it. The Regent indeed consented
-to every thing, that the zeal of the Cardinal-thought
necessary for the preservation of the ejtabljfhed, reli-
gion. The Reformers were persecuted with all the
cruelty, which superstition inspires into a barbarous
people. Many were condemned to that dreadful
death, which the church has appointed for the pu-
nilhment of its enemies; but they suffered with a
spirit so nearly resembling the patience and fortitude
of the primitive martyrs, that more were converted
than terrified by such fpe&acles,

_eatonn THE Cardinal, however, was now in .possession
th f of every thing his ambition could desire; and ex-
direion ercifed all the authority of a Regent, without the
of-af. k~s.

envy of the name. He had nothing to fear from
the Earl of Arran, who having by his inconstancy
forfeited the public esteem, was contemned by one
halfof thenation, and -little trusted by the other.
The pretensions of the Earl of Lennox were the
only thing which remained to embarrass him. He
had very successfully made use of that nobleman to
work upon the Regent's jealousy and fear, but as
he no longer stood in need of such an instrument,
he was willing to get rid of him with decency. Len-
nox soon began to fufpe& his intention; promises,
flattery, and refpe& were the only returns he had
hitherto received for substantial services; but at last
the Cardinal's artifices could no longer be conceal-
ed, and Lennox, instead of attaining power and

dig-

dignity himself, saw that he had been -employed B o o:
only to procure there for another. Resentment and II1
disappointed ambition pushed him on to seek revenge *
on that cunning prelate, who, by sacrificing his in-
terest, had so ungenerously purchased the Earl of
Arran's friendship. He withdrew, for that reason,
from court, and declared for the party at enmity
with the Cardinal, which, with open arms, received
a convert, who added so much lustre to their cause.

THE two fa&ions which divided the kingdom

were still the fame, without any alterations in their
views or principles, but, by one of those strange
revolutions, which were frequent in that age, they
had, in the course of a few weeks, changed their
leaders. The Regent was at the head of-the par-
tifans of France and the defenders of Popery, and
Lennox in the fame ifation with the advocates for
the English alliance, and a reformation in religion.
The one laboured to pull down his own work,
which the other upheld with the fame hand, that
had hitherto endeavoured to destroy it.

LENNOX'S impatience for revenge got-the start

of the cardinal's a&ivity. He surprised both him
and the Regent by a sudden march to Edinburgh
with a numerous army; and might easily have
crushed them, before they could prepare for their
defence. But he was weak enough to liften to pro-
polhls for an accommodation; and the Cardinal
amused him so artfully, and spun out the treaty to
such a length, that the greater part of the Earl's
troops, who served, as is usual wherever the feudal

infti-

Bo o K inffitutions prevail, at their own expence, deserted

11. him; and in concluding a peace, instead of giving

'--' the law, he was obliged to receive it. A second

attempt to retrieve his affairs ended yet more unfor-
tunately. One body of his troops was cut to pieces,
and the reft dispersed; and with the poor remains
of a ruined party, he must either have submitted
to the conqueror, or have fled out of the king-
dom, if the approach of an English army had not
brought him a Ihort relief.

Hea" in- HENRY was not of a temper to bear tamely the
adcs Sc,-'
;id_. indignity, with which he had been treated, both

by the Regent and Parliament of Scotland, who
at the time when they renounced their alliance with
him, had entered into a new and ftri&er confede-
racy with France. The rigour of the season retard-
ed for some time the execution of his vengeance.
But in the spring, a considerable body of infantry
which was destined for France, received orders to
fail for Scotland, and a proper number of cavalry
was appointed to join it by land. The Regent
and Cardinal little expested such a visit. They had
trusted that the French war would find employment
for all Henry's forces; and, from an unaccountable
security, were wholly unprovided for the defence
of the kingdom. The Earl of Hertford, a leader
fatal to the Scots in that age, commanded this ar-
my, and landed it, without opposition, a few miles
.'y 3, above Leith. He was quickly master of that place;

and marching dire&ly to Edinburgh, entered it
with the fame ease. After plundering the adjacent
country, the richet, and most open in Scotland, he

y, the richest, and moR ~se

set on fire both these towns, and upon the approach B o o K
of some troops gathered together by the Regent, I1
put his booty on board the fleet, and with his land
forces retired safely to the Engliih borders, deliver-
ing the kingdom, in a few days, from the terror of
an invasion, concerted with little policy, carried on
at great expence, and attended with no advantage.
If Henry aimed at the conquest of Scotland, he
gained nothing by this expedition; if the marriage
he had proposed, was still in his view, he. loft a
great deal. Such a rough courtship, as the Earl of
Huntly humorously called it, disgusted the whole
nation; their averlion for the match grew into ab-
horrence; and exasperated by so many indignities,
the Scots were never at any period more attached
to France, or more alienated from England.

THE Earl of Lennox alone, in spite to the Re-

gent and French King, continued a correspondence
with England, which ruined his own interest, with-
out promoting Henry's. Many of his own vassals
preferring their duty to their country before their
affectinoto him, refused to concur in any design to
favour the public enemy. And after a few feeble
and unsuccessful attempts to disturb the Regent's
administration, he was obliged to fly for safety to
the court of England, where Henry rewarded ser-
vices which he had the inclination, but not the
power to perform, by giving him in marriage his
niece the Lady Margaret Douglas. This unhappy
exile, however, was destined to be the father of a
race of kings. He saw his son Lord Darnley
mount the throne of Scotland, to the perpetual ex-

clufion

B o o clufion of that rival who now triumphed in his

II. ruin. And, from that time, his posterity have held
T
-i ' the sceptre in two kingdoms, by one of which he

was cast out as a criminal, and by the other received
as a fugitive.
Apece MEAN while hoffilities were continued by both

nations, but with little vigour on either fide. The
hifRorians of that age relate minutely the eircum-
fiances of several fkirmifies and inroads, which, as
they did not produce any considerable effe&, at this
distance of time, deserve no remembrance . At
last an end was put to this languidand ina&ive war,

by

* Though this war was diflinguifhed by no important or de-

cfive action, it was, however, extremely ruinous to individuals.
There fill remain two originalpapers, which give us some idea
of the miseries, to which the mofi' fertile counties in the king-
dom were exposed, by the sudden and deftrutive incursions of
the borderers. The first seems to be the report made to Henry
by the English wardens of the marches, for theyear 1544, and
contains their exploits from the 2d of July, to the 17th of No-
vember. The account it gives of the different inroads; or For-
rays, as they are called, is very minute; and in conclusion, the
fum total of michief they did is thus computed:

Towns, towersi fedes, barnekyns, parilhe-churches,

*bafel-honfes cast down or burnt - i9gz

Scots slain - -- 403
Prisoners tken - - - 816
Nolt, i. e. horned'cattle-, taken - io,386
Sheep - -. - 12,49'z
Nags andgeldings - - - ,296
Goats - 20.0:
Bols ofcorn - - 85
nfight:gear, i; e.ehoauold furniture, not reckoned.

Haynes's State Papers, 43.

The

by a peace, in which Englahd, France, and Scot- B o o K
land were comprehended. Henry laboured to ex- II.
clude the Scots from the benefit of this treaty, and Jnt
to reserve them for that vengeance, which his at-
tention to the affairs of the continent had hitherto
delayed. But although a peace with England was
of the last consequence to Francis I. whom the Em-
peror was preparing to attack with all his forces,
he was too generous to abandon allies, who had
&erved him with fidelity, and he chose rather to pur-
chafe Henry's friendship with disadvantage to him-
self, than to leave them exposed to danger. By
yielding some things to the interest, and- more to
the vanity of that haughty Prince; by submission,
flattery, and address, he, at length, prevailed to
have the Scots included in the peace agreed upon.

AN event which happened a short time before the The mur-

conclusion of this peace, rendered it more accept- o Bea

The other contaifs an account of an inroad by the Earl of

Hertford, between the 8th. and 23d of September, 1545 ; the
narrative is more general, but it appears that he had burnt,
fafed, and destroyed in the counties of Berwick and Roxburgh
only,

Monasteries and Friar-houfes - 7
Cafties, towers, and piles - - 16
Market towns - - -
Villages - - - . 243
Miln - - - - - 1
Hospitals - - - - - 3

All these were cast down or burnt. Haynes 52, As the Scots
were no less skilful in the praafice of irregular war, we may
conclude that the damage which they did in Enfgland was not
inconsiderable; and that their raids were no less wasteful, than
theforrays of the Englilh.

able

B o o able to the whole nation. Cardinal Beatoun had

II. not used his power with moderation, equal to the

-- prudence by which he attained it. Notwithftand-

ing his great abilities, he had too many of the pas-
sions and prejudices of an angry leader of a fation,
to govern a divided people with temper. His re-
fentment againit one party of the nobility, his info-
lence towards the reft, his severity to the Reformers,
and, above all, the barbarous and illegal execution
of the famous George Wifhart, a man of honour-
able birth, and of primitive san&ity, wore out the
patience of a fierce age; and nothing but a bold
hand was wanting to gratify the public wish by his
deftrution. Private revenge, inflamed and fanti-
fled by a false zeal for religion, quickly supplied
this want. Norman Lelly, the eldest son of the
earl of Rothes, had been treated by the Cardinal
with injustice and contempt. It was not the temper
of the man, or the spirit of the times, quietly to di-
gest an affront. And as the profession of his adver-
fary screened him from the effects of what is called
an honourable resentment, he resolved to take that
fatisfa'cion, which he could not demand. This re-
solution deserves as much censure, as the singular
courage and condu& with which he put it in exe-
cution excite wonder. The cardinal, at that time,
resided in the castle of St. Andrews, which he had
fortified at great expence, and in the opinion of the
age had rendered it impregnable. His retinue was
numerous, the town at his devotion, and the neigh-
bouring country full of his dependents. In this
situation, sixteen persons undertook to surprise his
castle, and to affatlinate himself; and their success

was

was equal to the boldness of the attempt. Early in B o o i
the morning they seized on the gate of the castle, II.
which was set open to the workmen who were em- -V -.

May 29,

ployed in finishing the fortifications; and having 1546.
placed sentries at the door of the Cardinal's apart-
ment, they awakened his numerous domeifics one by
one, and turning them out of the castle, they with-
out noise, or tumult, or violence to any other per-
son, delivered their country, though by a most un-
justifiable action, from an ambitious man, whose pride
was insupportable to the nobles, as his cruelty and
cunning were the great checks to the Reformation.

His death was fatal to the Catholic religion, and Tie, regent
to the French interest in Scotland. The fame zeal attempts ir

vain to

for both continued among a great party in the na- seize the
tion, but when deprived of the genius and authority murderers.
of so skilful a leader, was of small consequence.
Nothing can equal the consternation which a blow
so unexpe&ted occasioned among his adherents;
while the Regent secretly enjoyed an event, which
removed out of his way a rival, who had not only
eclipsed his grearnefs, but almost extinguished his
power. Decency, however, the honour of the
church, the importunity of the Queen Dowager and
her fa&ion, his engagements with France, and,
above all these, the desire of recovering his ,eldest
son, whom the Cardinal had retained for some time
at St. Andrew's in pledge of his fidelity, and who,
together with the cattle, had fallen into the hands
of the conspirators, induced him to take arms, in
order to revenge the death of a man he hated.
VOL. I. I HE

B o o K HE threatened vengeance, but was unable to exe-

II. cute it. One part of military science, the art of at-
t'*'' tacking fortified places, was then unknown in Scot-

'land. The weapons, the discipline, and impetuosity
of the Scots, rendered their armies as unfit for
sieges, as they were ative in the field. An hun-
dred and fifty men, which was the greatest number
the conspirators ever assembled, refited all the es-
forts of the Regent for five months*, in a place,
which a single battalion, with a few battering can-
non, would now reduce in a few hours. This tedi-
ous siege was concluded by a truce, The Regent
undertook to procure for the conspirators an abfo-
lution from the Pope, and a pardon in Parliament;
and upon obtaining these, they engaged to surrender
the cale, and to set his son at liberty.

IT is probable, that neither of them were sincere

in this treaty. On both fides, they fought only to
amuse, and to gain time. The Regent had applied
to France for assistance, and expected soon to have
the conspirators at mercy. On the other hand, if
Lefly and his afflociates were not at firif incited by
Henry to murder the Cardinal, they were, in the
sequel, powerfully supported by him. Notwith-
standing the silence of cotemporaty historians, there
are violent presumptions of the former; of the lat-
ter there is undoubted authority t. During the
siege, the conspirators had received from England
supplies both of money and provisions; and as
Henry was preparing to renew his proposals con-

Epil. Reg. Scot. 2.. 379. Keith Hill. 60.

cerning

cerning the marriage and the union he had projet- B o o K
ed, and to second his negociations with a numerous II-
army, they hoped, by concurring with him, to be *-
in a situation, in which they could no longer need a
pardon, but might claim a reward,

THE death of Henry blasted all these hopes. It January is,

happened in the beginning of next year, after a 1547,
reign of greater splendor than true glory; bustling,
though not a&ive; opreflive in domestic govern-
ment, and in foreign politics wild and irregular.
But the vices of this Prince were more beneficial to
mankind, than the virtues of others. His rapaci-
oufnefs, his profusion, and even .his tyranny, by
depressing the ancient nobility, ahd by adding new
property and power to the Commons, laid the foun-
dations of the British liberty. His other passions
contributed no less towards the downfal of Popery,
and the eftablilhment of religious freedom in the na-
tion. His resentment led him to abolish the powers
and his covetousness to seize the wealth of the
church; and by withdrawing there supports, made
it easy, in the following reign, to overturn the whole
fabric of superstition.

FRANCIS I. did not long survive a Prince, who

had been alternately his rival and his friend but
his successor Henry II. was not negletful of the
French interest in Scotland. He sent a confider- Trodps ai-
able body of men, under the command of Leon rivefrom
Strozzi, to the Regent's assistance. By their long France.
experience in the Italian and German wars, the
French had become as dextrous in the conduc of

I a sieges,

B o o K sieges, as the Scots were ignorant; and as the bold-

II. ness and despair of the conspirators could not defend
*'-~~ them against their superior art, they, after a short
Force the resistance, surrendered to Strozzi, who engaged, in

°eofst. the name of the King his master, for the security of

Andrews to
surrender. their lives; and as his prisoners transported them into

France. The castle itself, the monument of Bea-
toun's power and vanity, was demolished, in obedi-
ence to the canon law, which, with admirable po-
licy, denounces its anathemas even against the houses
in which the sacred blood of a Cardinal happens to
be ihed, and ordains them to be laid in ruins*.

THE archbilhoprick of St. Andrew's was bestow-

ed by the Regent upon his natural brother John
Hamilton Abbot of Paisley.

ewbreach THE delay of a few weeks would have saved the
Liad. conspirators. Those ministers of Henry VIII. who

had the chief dire&ion of affairs during the mino-
rity of his son Edward VI. conduted themselves,
with regard to Scotland, by the maxims of their late
master, and resolved to frighten the Scots into a
treaty, which they had no abilities or address to
bring about by any other method.

BUT before we proceed to relate the events which

their invasion of Scotland occasioned, we shall stop
to take notice of a circumstance unobserved by co-
temporary historians, but extremely remarkable for
the discovery it makes of the sentiments and spirit,

' Burn. Hill. Ref. 338.

which

which then prevailed among the Scots. The con- B o K
fpirators against Cardinal Beatoun found the Re- II-
gent's eldest son in the castle of St. Andrews; and -
as they needed the protection of the Englilh, it was
to be feared that they might endeavour to purchase
it, by delivering to them this important prize. The
presumptive heir to the crown in the hands of the
avowed enemies of the kingdom, was a dreadful
profpe&. And, in order to avoid it, the Parlia-
ment fell upon a very extraordinary expedient. By
an a& made of purpose, they excluded "the Re-
"gent's eldest son from all right of succession,
"public or private, so long as he flould be detain-
" ed a prisoner, and substituted in his place, his
" other brothers, according to their seniority, and in
"failure of them, those who were next heirs to
"the Regent *." Succefflion by hereditary right
is an idea so obvious and so popular, that a nation
seldom ventures to make a breach in it, but in cafes
of extreme necessity. Such a necessity did the Par-
liament discover in the present situation. Hatred
to England, founded on the memory of past hofti-
lities, and heightened by the smart of recent inju-
ries, was the national passion. This dictated that
uncommon statute, by which the order of lineal
fucceflion was so remarkably broken. The modern
theories which represent this right as divine and
unalienable, and that ought not to be violated upon
any consideration whatsoever, seem to have been
then altogether unknown.

Epift. Reg. Scot. 2. 359.

I 3 ' : IN

B o o K IN the beginning of September, the Earl f Hert-

II. ford, now Duke of Somerset, and Prote&or of Eng-
c-tln land, entered Scotland at the head of 18,000 men,
invded by and, at the fame time, a fleet of 60 ships appeared
theEnslil on the coast, to second his land forces. The Scots

had for some time observed this storm gathering,
and were prepared for it. Their army was almost
double to that of the enemy, and posted to the great-
eft advantage on a rising ground, above Muffelburgh,
not far from the banks of the river Efke. Both these
circumstances alarmed the duke of Somerset, who
saw his danger, and would willingly have extricated
himfelfout of it, by a new overture of peace on con-
ditions extremely reasonable. But this moderation
being imputed to fear, his proposals were rejeted
with that scorn, which the confidence of success in-
spires; and if the condu& of the Regent, who com-
manded the Scottish army, had been in any degree
equal to his confidence, the deftrution of the Eng-
lilh must have been inevitable. They were in a si-
tuation, precisely similar to that of their countrymen
under Oliver Cromwell, in the following century.
The Scots had chosen their ground so well, that it
was impossible to force them to give battle; a few
days had exhausted the forage and provision of a
narrow country; the fleet could only furnish a scanty
and precarious fubliftence; a retreat therefore was
necessary; but disgrace, and perhaps ruin, were the
consequences of retreating.

ON both these occasions, the national heat and

impetuosity of the Scots saved the English, and pre-
cipitated their own country into the utmost danger.

The

The undisciplined courage of the private men be- B o o K
came impatient at the fight of an enemy. The Ge- II.
neral was afraid of nothing, but that the English Btgo-
would escape from him by flight; and leaving his Pinkey.
itrong camp, he attacked the Duke of Somerset
near Pinkey, with no better success than his rashness Septeer
deserved. The Prote&or had drawn up his troops
on a gentle eminence, and had now the advantage
of ground on his fide. The Scottilh army consist-
ed almost entirely of infantry, whose chief weapon
was a long spear, and for that reason their files
were very deep and their ranks close. They ad-
vanced towards the enemy in three great bodies, and
as they passed the river, were considerably exposed
to the fire of the English fleet, which lay in the
bay of Muffelburgh, and had drawn near the shore.
The English cavalry, fluffed with an advantage
which they had gained in a skirmish some days be-
fore, began the attack with more impetuosity than
good condu&. A body so firm and compat as the
Scots, easily refitsed the impression of cavalry, broke
them, and drove them off the field. The English
infantry, however, advanced, and the Scots were at
once exposed to a flight of arrows, to a fire in flank
from 400 foreign fusileers who served the enemy,
and to their cannon which were planted behind the
infantry, on the highest part of the eminence, The
depth and closeness of their order making it impof-
fible for the Scots to Ifand long in this situation;
the Earl of Angus, who commanded the vanguard,
endeavoured to change his ground, and to retire to-
wards the main body. But his friends unhappily
mistook his motion for a flight, and fell into con-

fusion,

B o o K ffion. . At that very instant, the broken cavalry

II. having rallied, returned to the charge; the foot
'-'r- pursued the advantage they had gained; the prof-

pec of victory redoubled the ardour of both: And
in a moment, the rout of the Scottilh army became
universal, and irretrievable. The encounter in the
field was not long, nor bloody; but in the pursuit,
the Engiifll discovered all the rage and fierceness,
which national antipathy, kindled by long emula-
tion, and inflamed by reciprocal injuries, is apt to
inspire. The pursuit was continued for five hours,
and to a great diltance. All the three roads, by
which the Scots fled, were ifrewed with spears, and
swords, and targets, and covered with the bodies
of the slain. Above io,ooo men fell on this day,
one of the most fatal Scotland had ever seen. A few
were taken prisoners, and among these some persons
of diftincion. And the Protecor had it now in
his power to become master of a kingdom, out of
which, not many hours before, he was almost ob-
liged to retire with infamy *

Bu r

The following paflage in a curious and rare journal of the

Protedtor's expedirion in:o Scotland, written by W. Patten, who
was joined in commiilion v.ith Cecil, as Judge Marflal of the
army, and printed in I 1S, defc.nes our notice; as it gives a
jus idea of the military discipline of the Scots at that time.
"But what after I learned, specially touching their order, their
armour, and their manner as well of going to offend, as of tland-
ing to defend, I have ith.-ght necessary here to utter. Hack-
butters have they few or none, and appoint their fight motl com-
monly alwavs a foot. They come to the field well furnished all
with jack and fiull, dagger and buckler, and fiords all broad
and thin, of exceeding good terner, and universally so made to

slice,

BUT this vi&ory, however great, was of no real B o o K

utility, for want of fkcill, or of leisure, to improve II.
it. Every new injury rendered the Scots more -

Their vic-

averse from an union with England; and the Pro- tohryof
te&or negleced the only measure, which would little bene-

fit to the

have made it necessary for them to have given Englilh.
their consent to it. He amused himself in wafting
the open country, and in taking or building several
petty castles; whereas, by fortifying a few places
which were accessible by sea, he would have laid
the kingdom open to the English, and, in a short
time, the Scots muff either have accepted of his

slice, that as I never saw none so good, so I think it hard to de-
vise the better. Hereto every man his pike, and a great kercher
wrapped twice or thrice about his neck, not for cold, but for
cutting. In their array towards joining with the enemy, they
cling and thrust so near in the fore rank, shoulder and shoulder
together, with their pikes in both their hands firaight afore them,
and their followers in that order so hard at their backs, laying
their pikes over their foregoers Shoulders, that, if they do assail
undiscovered, no force can well withstand them. Standing at
defence they thrust houlders likewise so nigh together, the fore
ranks well nigh to kneeling, stoop low before, their fellows be-
hind holding their pikes with both hands, and therewith in their
left their bucklers, the one end of their pike against their right
foot, and the other against the enemy breaft-high; their followers
crofling their pike points with them forward; and thus each with
other so nigh as space and place will susser, through the whole
ward, so thick, that as easily mhall a bare finger pierce through
the skin of an angry hedge hog, as any encounter the front of
their pikes." Other curious particulars are found in this jour,
nal, from which Sir John Hayward has borrowed his account of
this expedition. Life of Edward VI. 279, &c.

The length of the Scotch pike or spear was appointed by A&
44 P. 1471. to be fix ells; i. e. eighteen feet fix inches.

terms,

B o o K terms, or have Submitted to his power. By such an

II. improvement of it, his vicory at Dunbar gave

-- - Cromwell the command of Scotland. The battle

of Pinkey had no other effec but to precipitate the
Scots into new engagements with France. The
situation of the Engliih court may, indeed, be plead-
ed in excuse for the Duke of Somerset's condu&.
That cabal of his enemies, which occasioned his tra-
gical end, was already formed; and while he tri-
umphed in Scotland, they secretly undermined his
power and credit at home. Selfprefervation, there-
fore, obliged him to prefer his safety before his
fame, and to return without reaping the fruits of his
victory. At this time, however, the cloud blew
over; the conspiracy by which he fell was not yet
ripe for execution; and his presence suspended its
effet for some time. The supreme power still re-
maining in his hands, he employed it to recover the
opportunity, which he had loft. A body of troops,
IA ri by his command, seized and fortified Haddingtoun,

a place, which, on account of its distance from the
sea, and from any English garrison, could not be
defended without great expence and danger.

Forces the MEAN while the French gained more by the de-
Scots into a 0
coferunion feat of their allies, than the English did by their
Face. victory. After the death of Cardinal Beatoun,

Mary of Guise, the Queen Dowager, took a con-
fiderable ihare in the direcion of affairs. She was
warmly attached by blood, and by inclination, to
the French interest; and, in order to promote it,
improved with great dexterity every event which
occurred. The spirit and strength of the Scots were

broken

broken at Pinkey; and in an assembly of nobles B o o K
which met at Stirling to consult upon the situation II.
of the kingdom, all eyes were turned towards France, '
no profpeEt of safety appearing but in affifance
from thence. But Henry II. being then at peace
with England, the Queen represented that they
could not expect him to take part in their quarrel,
but upon views of personal advantage; and that
without extraordinary concessions in his favour, no
assistance in proportion to their present exigencies
could be obtained. The prejudices of the nation
powerfully seconded there representations of the
Queen. What often happens to individuals took
place among the nobles in this convention; they
were swayed entirely by their passions, and in order
to gratify them, they deserted their former prin-
ciples, and disregarded their true irtereft. In the
violence of resentment, they forgot that zeal for
the independence of Scotland, which had prompted
them to reje& the proposals of Henry VIII. and by
offering, voluntarily, their young Queen in mar- AndtooffIt
riage to the Dauphin, eldest son of Henry II. and in marriage

to the Dau~

which was still more, by proposing to fend her ^6heDa
immediatelyinto France to be educated at his court,
they granted, from a thirst of vengeance, what for-
merly they would not yield upon any consideration
of their own safety. To gain at once such a kingdom
as Scotland, was amatter of no small consequence to
France. Henry, without hesitation, accepted the
offers of the Scottish ambassadors, and prepared
for the vigorous defence of his new acquisition. Six
thousand veteran soldiers, under the command of
Monsieur Defse, assisted by some of the best officers,

who

B o o K who were formed in the long wars of Francis I. ar-

II. rived at Leith. They served two campaigns in Scot-
' -= - land, with a spirit equal to their former fame. But

their exploits were not considerable. The Scots
soon became jealous of their designs, and neglected
to support them with proper vigour; and the cau-
tion of the Englilh, in aaing wholly upon the de-
fenfive, prevented them from attempting any enter-
prise of consequence; and obliged them to exhaust
their strength in tedious sieges, undertaken under
many disadvantages. Their efforts, however, were
not without some benefit to the Scots, by compel-
ling the English to evacuate Haddingtoun, and to
surrender several small forts, which they possessed in
different parts of the kingdom.

BUT the consequence of these operations of his

troops were fill of greater importance to the French
King. The diversion which they occasioned en-
abled him to wrest Boulogne out of the hands of
the English; and the influence of his army in Scot-
land obtained the concurrence 9f Parliament with
the overtures made to him, by the aflembly of no-
bles at Stirling, concerning the Queen's marriage
with the Dauphin, and her education at the court
of France. In vain did a few patriots remonstrate
against such extravagant concessions, by which Scot-

Tbc eary land was reduced to be a province of France; and
pmpofe Henry, from an ally, raised to be master of the
carxud-d. kingdom; by which the friendship of France be-

came more fatal than the enmity of England; and
every thing was fondly given up to the one, that
had been bravely defended against the other. A

point

point of so much consequence was hastily decided, B o o r
in a Parliament, assembled in the camp before Had- II.
dingtoun: The intrigues of the Queen Dowager, the June 5
zeal of the clergy, and resentment against England, s548.
had prepared a great party in the nation for such a
ifep; the French General and Ambassador, by their
liberality and promises, gained over many more.
The Regent himself was weak enough to stoop to
the offer of a pension from France, together with
the title of Duke of Chatelherault in that kingdom.
A considerable majority declared for the treaty, and
the interest of a faction was preferred before the
honour of the nation.

HAVING hurried the Scots into this rash and fa- Mary rent

tal resolution, the source of many calamities to them- tbe edu-
selves, and to their sovereign, the French allowed France.
them no time for refle&ion or repentance. The
fleet, which had brought over their forces, was still
in Scotland, and without delay, convoyed the Queen
into France. Mary was then fix years old, and by
her education in that court, one of the politest, but
most corrupted in Europe, she acquired every ac-
complilhment that could add to her charms as a wo-
man, and contracted many of those prejudices
which occasioned her misfortunes as a Queen.

FROM the time that Mary was put into'their

hands, it was the interest of the French to susser
the war in Scotland to languish. The recovering
of the Boulonnois was the object Henry had most
at heart; and a flight diversion in Britain was sus-
ficient to divide the attention and strength of the

Englilh,

B o o Englih, whose domestic factions deprived both their

II. arms and councils of their accustomed vigour. The
'* - ' government .of England had undergone a great re-

volution. The Duke of Somerset's power had been
acquired with too much violence, and was exercised
with too little moderation, to be of long continuance.
Many good qualities, added to great love of his
country, could not atone for his ambition in usurp-
ing the sole direcion of affairs. Many of the most
eminent courtiers combined against him; and the
Earl of Warwick their leader, no less ambitious,
but more artful than Somerset, conducted his mea-
fures with so much dexterity, as to raise himfelfup-
on the ruins of his rival. Without the invidious
name of Protecor, he succeeded to all the power
and influence, of which Somerset was deprived, and
he quickly found peace to be necessary for the efta-
blifhment of his new authority, and the execution
of the vast designs he had conceived.

Peace con- HENRY was no itranger to Warwick's situation,
hded. and improved his knowledge of it to good purpose,

in conducting the negociations for a general peace.
He prescribed what terms he pleased to the English
Minister, who scrupled at nothing, however advan-
tageous to that Monarch and his allies. England
MraE 24, consented to restore Boulogne and its dependencies

to France, and gave up all pretensions to a treaty
of marriage with the Queen of Scots, or to the con-
quest of her country. A few small forts, of which
the English troops had hitherto kept possession,
were rafed; and peace between the two kingdoms
was established on its ancient foundation.

BOTH

BOTH the British nations loft power, as well as B o o K

reputation, by this unhappy quarrel. It was on II.
both fides a war of emulation and resentment, ra-
ther than of interest; and was carried on, under the
influence of national animofities, which were blind
to all advantages. The French, who entered into
it with greater coolness, conducted it with more
ikill; and by dexterously availing themselves of
every circumstance which occurred, recovered pof-
session of an important territory which they had loft,
and added to their monarchy a new kingdom. The
ambition of the English Minister betrayed to them
the former; the inconsiderate rage of the Scots
against their ancient enemies bellowed on them the
latter; their own address and good policy merited
both.

IMMEDIATELY after the conclusion of the peace, TheScots

become

the French forces left Scotland, as much to their own jealous of
fatisfaaion, as to that of the nation. The Scots soon the French
found, that the calling to their assistance a people
more powerful than themselves, was a dangerous ex-
pedient. They beheld, with the utmost impatience,
those who had come over to protet the kingdom,
taking upon them to command in it; and on many
occasions they repented the rash invitation they had
given. The peculiar genius of the French nation
heightened this disgust, and prepared the Scots to
throw off the yoke, before they had well begun to
feel it. The French were, in that age, what they
are in the present, one of the moftpolifhed nations in
Europe. But it is to be observed, in all their expe-
ditions into foreign countries, whether towards the

south

B o K south or north, that their manners have been re-

II. markably incompatible with the manners of every
'--·- -' other people. Barbarians are tenacious of their own

customs, because they want knowledge and tasse to
discover the reasonableness and propriety of customs
which differ from them. Nations, which hold the
first rank in politeness, are frequently no less tena-
cious out of pride. The Greeks were so in the
ancient world; and the French are the fame in the
modern. Full of themselves; flattered by the
imitation of their neighbours; and accustomed to
confider their own modes as the flandards of ele-
gance, they scorn to disguise, or to lay aside the
distinguishing manners of their own nation, or to
make any allowance for what may differ from them
among others. For this reason, the behaviour of
their armies has, on every occasion, been infupport-
able to itrangers, and has always exposed them to
hatred, and often to destruction. In that age, they
over-ran Italy four several times by their valour,
and loft it, as often, by their insolence. The Scots,
naturally an irascible and high-fpirited people, and
who, of all nations, can least bear the most distant
insinuation of contempt, were not of a temper to
admit all the pretensions of such assuming guests.
The symptoms of alienation were soon visible; they
seconded the military operations of the French troops
with the utmost coldness, and their disgust grew in-
sensibly to a degree of indignation that could hardly
be restrained; and on occasion of a very flight
accident, broke out with fatal violence. A pri-
vate French soldier engaging in an idle quarrel
with a citizen of Edinburgh, both nations took

arms,

arms, with equal rage, in defence of their country- B 6 o tc
men. The Provost ofEdinburgh~ his son, and ie- II
veral citizens of diftin&ion, were killed in the fray; e
and the French were obliged to dvoid the fury ds
the inhabitants, by retiring out of the city. Not-
withstanding the ancient alliance of France and Scot-
land, and the long intercourse of good offices be-
tween the two nations, an avelfion for the French
took its rife at this time, among the Scots, the es
fe&s whereof were deeply felt, and operated power-
fully through the subsequent period,

FROM the death of Cardinal Beatoouri nothing Pioó,rersof

has been said of the state of religion, While the mationm
war with England continued, the clergy had no lei-
sure to molest the Protestants; and they were not
yet considerable enough to expet arny thing more
than connivance and impunity. The new doctrines
were still in their infancy; but during this flort in-
terval of tranquillity, they acquired itrength, and
advanced by large and firm fleps, towards a full
establishment in the kingdom. The first preachers
against Popery in Scotland, of whom several had
appeared during the reign of James V. were more
eminent for zeal and piety, than for learning, Their
acquaintance with the principles of the Reformation
was partial, and at second hand; some of them had
been educated in England; all of them had borrow-
ed their notions from the books published there;
and,-in the first dawn of the new light, they did noc
venture far before their leaders. But, in a ihort
time, the doctrines and writings of the foreign Re-
formers became generally known; the inquisitive

VOL. I. K genius

B o o k genius of the age pressed forward in quest of truth;

LI. the discovery of one error opened the way to others;
v'"'-' the downfal of one imposture drew many after it;

the whole fabric, which ignorance and fuperltition
had erected in times of darkness, began to totter;
and nothing was wanting to complete its ruin, but a
daring and acive leader to direc the attack. Such
was the famous John Knox, who, with better qua-
lifications of learning, and more extensive views
than any of his predecessors in Scotland, possessed
a natural intrepidity of mind, which set him above
fear. He began his public ministry at St. An-
drew'sin the year 1547, with that success, which
always accompanies a bold and popular eloquence.
Infteadof amusing himself with lopping the branches,
he fruck diretly at the root ofpopery, and attacked
both the doctrine and discipline of the established
church, with a vehemence peculiar to himself, but
admirably suitable to the temper and withes of the age.

As adversary so formidable as Knox, would not

have easily escaped the rage of the clergy, who ob-
served the tendency and progress of his opinions,
with the utmost concern. But, at first, he retired
for safety into the castle of St. Andrew's, and while
the conspirators kept possession of it, preached pub-
lickly under their protection. The great revolution
in England, which followed upon the death of
Henry VIII. contributed no less than the zeal of
Knox, towards demolishing the Popilh church in
Scotland. Henry had loosened the chains, and
lightened the yoke of Popery. -The Ministers of his
son Edward VI. cast them off altogether, and efta-

blifhed

blilhed the Protestant religion upon almost the fame B o., :K
footing, whereon it now itands in that kingdom. II
The influence of this example reached Scotland, and '--'
the happy effects of ecclesiastical liberty, in the one
nation, inspired the other with an equal desire of re-
covering it. The Reformers had, hitherto, been
obliged to conduc themselves with the utmost cau-
tion, and seldom ventured to preach,. but in private
houses, and at a distance from court; they gained
credit, as happens on the first publication of every
new religion, chiefly among persons in the lower
and middle rank of life. :But several noblemen of
the greatest diftincion, having, about this times
openly espoused their principles, they were no longer
under the necessity of a&ing with the fame reserve
and with more security and encouragement, they
had likewise greater success. The means of acquir-
ing and spreading knowledge became more com-
mon, and the spirit of innovation, peculiar to that
period, grew every day bolder and more universal.

HAPPILY for the Reformation, this fpirit.was

still under some restraint. It had not yet attained
firmness and vigour, sufficient to overturn a system,
founded on the deepest policy, and supported by
the most formidable power. Under the present cir-
cumftances, any attempt towards acion miufithave
been fatal to the Protestant do&rines; and it is no
small proof of the authority, as well as penetration
of the heads of the party, that they were able to
restrain the zeal of a fiery and impetuous people, till
that critical and mature junture, when every ftep
they took was decisive and'fuccefsful.

K 2 MEAN-

s o K MEANWHILE their cause received reinforcement
II. from two different quarters, whence they never could
-*v- 'have expe&ced it. The ambition of the house of

Guise, and the bigotry of Mary of England has-
tened the fubverfton of the Papal throne in Scot-
land i and by a singular disposition of Providence,
the persons who opposed the Reformation in every
other part of Europe with the fiercelt zeal, were
made instruments for advancing it in that kingdom.

Tiec QeM MARY of Guise possessed the fame bold and as-
Dafp piring pirit which distinguished her family. But
thefficEf in her it was softened by the female chara&er, and

accompanied with great temper and address. Her
brothers, in order to attain the high obje&ts at which
they aimed, ventured upon such daring measures,
as suited their great courage. Her designs upon the
supreme power were concealed with the utmost care,
and advanced by address and refinements more na-
tural to her sex. By a dexterous application of those
talents, she had acquired a considerable influence
on the councils of a nation, hitherto unacquainted
with the government of women; and without the
smallest right to any share in the administration of
-afairs, had engrossed the chief direction of them
into her own hands. But fle did not long reft fa-
isfied with the enjoyment of this precarious power,
which the fickleness of the Regent, or the ambition
of those who governed him, might so easily disturb;
and she began to set on foot new intrigues, with a
design of undermining him, and of opening to her-
self a way to succeed him in that high dignity.
Her brothers entered warmly into this scheme, and

sup-

supported it with all their credit at the court of B o o K
France. The French King willingly concurred in II.
a measure, by which he hoped to bring Scotland 'Y-
entirely under management, and in any future broil
with England, to turn its whole force upon that
kingdom.

IN order to arrive at the desired elevation, the

Queen Dowager had only one of two ways to chufe;
either violently to wrest the power out of the hands
of the Regent, or to obtain it by his consent. Un-
der a minority, and among a warlike and factious
people, the former was a very uncertain and dan-
gerous experiment. The latter appeared to be no
lefsimpraticable. To persuade a man voluntarily
to abdicate the supreme power; to descend to a le-
vel with those, above whom he was raised; and to
be content with the second place where he had held
the first, may well pass for a wild and chimerical
proje&. This, however, the Queen attempted;
and the prudence of the attempt was sufficiently
justified by its success.

THE Regent's inconstancy and irresolution, toge-

ther with the calamities which had befallen the
kingdom under his administration, raised the pre-
judices both of the nobles and of the people against
him, to a great height; and the Queen secretly
fomented these with much industry. All who wish-
ed for a change met with a gracious reception in
her court, and their spirit of disaffeCtion was nou-
rifhed by such hopes and promises, as, in every age,
impose on the credulity of the factious. The fa- Courts the

K 3 vourers Reformers,
K 3 vourers

B o o K vourers of the Reformation being the most nume-

II. 'roiisand spreading body of the Regent's enemies,
i''- ' fie applied to them, with a particular attention;

'and the gentleness of her disposition and teeming
-indifference to the religious points in dispute, made
all her promises of protection and indulgence pass
upon them for sincere. Finding so great a part of
the nation willing to fall in with her reafures, the
-Q'een-fet out for France, under pretence of visit-
oa. i15-: ing her daughter, and took along with her those

-noblemen, who poffiefed the greatest power and
credit -among their countrymen. Softened by the
-pleasures of an elegant court, flattered by the. civi-
lities of the French King, and the caresses of the
house of Guise, and influenced by the seasonable
distribution of a few favours, and the liberal pro-
mise of many more, they were brought to approve
of all the Queen's pretensions.

WHILE she advanced by these flow but sure steps,

the Regent either did not foresee the danger which
threatened him, or negleted to provide against it.
The firif discovery of the train which was laid,
carie from two of his own confidents, Carnegie of
Kinnaird, and Panter Bishop of Ross, whom the
Queen had gained over to her interest, and then
employed as the most proper instruments for obtain-
ing his content. The overture was made to him
in the name of the French King, enforced by pro-
per threatenings, in order to work upon his natural
timidity, and sweetened by every promise that could
reconcile him to a proposal so disagreeable. On the
pne hand, the confirmation of his French title, to-

gether

gether with a considerable pension, the parliamen- B o o K
tary acknowledgment of his right of succession to II.
the Crown, and a public ratification of his conduEL '-"
during his regency, were offered him. On the
other hand, the displeasure of the French King,
the power and popularity of the Queen Dowager,
the difaffe&ion of the nobles, with the danger of an
after-reckoning, were represented in the strongest
colours.

IT was not possible to agree to a proposal so ex-

traordinary and unexpected, without some previous
ftlrggle; and had the Archbishop of St. Andrew's
been present to fortify the irresolute and passive fpi-
rit of the Regent, he would, in all probability, have
reje&ed it with disdain. Happily for the Queen,
the sagacity and ambition of that Prelate could, at
this time, be no obftruaion to her views. He was
lying at the point of death, and in his absence, the
influence of the Queen's agents on a flexible tem-
per counterbalanced several of the strongest pas-
sions in the human mind, and obtained his consent
to a voluntary surrender of the supreme power.

AFTER gaining a point of such difficulty, with Dec. 155.

so much ease, the Queen returned into Scotland, in
full expecation of taking immediate possession of
her new dignity. But, by this time, the Archbi-
shop of St. Andrew's had recovered of that diftem-
per, which the ignorance of the Scottish Physicians
had pronounced to be incurable. This he owed to
the assistance of the famous Cardan, one of those
irregular adventurers in philosophy, of whom Italy

pro-

B o o K produced so many about this period. A bold ge-

II. nius led him to some useful discoveries, which me-
..'.- fit the esteem of a more discerning age; a wild ima-

gination engaged him in those chimerical sciences,
which drew the admiration of his cotemporaries.
As a pretender to astrology and magic, he was re-
vered and consulted by all Europe; as a proficient
in natural philosophy, he was but little known. The
archbjfhop, it is probable, confidered him as a
powerful magician, when he applied to him for
relief; but it was his knowledge as a philosopher,
which enabled him to cure his disease *.

TOGETHER with his health, the archbilhop re-

covered the entire government of the Regent, and
quickly persuaded him to recal that dishonourable
promise, which he had been seduced by the artifices
of the Queen to grant. However great her fur-
prise and indignation were, at this frelh instance of
his inconffancy, she was obliged to dissemble, that
Ihe might have leisure to renew her intrigues with
all parties; with the Protefftants, whom she favour-
ed and courted more than ever; with the nobles, to
whom ihe rendered herself agreeable by various
arts; and with the Regent himself, in order to gain
whom, she employed every argument. But what-
ever imprelflons her emissaries might have made on

* Cardan himself was more defirp4s of being confidered as

an Afcologer than a Philosopher ; in his book De Genituris, we
find a calculation of the Archbishop's nativity, from which he
nretends both to have prediced his disease, and to have effca-
ed his cure. He received, from the Archbilhop, a reward of
1Soo crowns. A great fnm in that age. De vitraJia, p. 32.

the

the Regent, it was no easy matter to over-reach or B o o K
to intimidate the archbilhop. Under.his manage- II.
ment, the negociations were spun out to a great '---
length, and his brother maintained his station with
that address and firmness, which its importance so
well merited. The universal defection of the no-
bility, the growing power of the Protestants, who
all adhered to the Queen Dowager, the reiterated
solicitations of the French King, and, above all,
the interposition of the young Queen, who was now
entering the twelfth year of her age, and claimed a
right of nominating whom the pleated to be Re-
gent, obliged him, at last, to resign that high
office, which he had held many years. He ob- Prevailson
tained, however, the fame advantageous terms for torefign h
himself, which had been formerly stipulated. office.

IT was in the Parliament which met on the Ioth Sheobtains

of April i554, that the Earl of Arran executed theRegen-
this extraordinary resignation; and at the fame time cy'
Mary of Guise was raised to that dignity, which
had been so long the. obje& of her wilhes. Thus,
with their own approbation, a woman and a ftran-
ger, was advanced to the supreme authority, over a
fierce and turbulent people, who seldom Submitted,
without reluctance, to the legal and ancient go-
vernment of their native Monarchs.

WHILE the Queen Dowager of Scotland contri- Reform,-

buted so much towards the progress of the Refor- tionconti-
mation, by the protection which she afforded it, makegreat
from motives of ambition; the English _Queen, by P:ogme.
her indiscreet zeal, filled the kingdom with persons

acive

B o o K ative in promoting the fame cause. Mary ascended

II. the throne of England, on the death of her brother

vl Edward, and soon after married Philip II. of Spain.

July 6,
155;. To the persecuting spirit of the Romish superstition,

and the fierceness of that age, she added the private
resentment of her own and of her mother's sus-
ferings, with which she loaded the reformed Reli-
gion; and the peevishness and feveritv of her natu-
ral temper carried the acrimony of all these passions
to the utmost extreme. The cruelty of her perse-
cution equalled the deeds of those tyrants, who
have been the greatest reproach to human nature.
The bigotry of her clergy could scarce keep pace
with the impetuosity of her zeal. Even the unre-
lenting Philip was obliged, on fomeoccafions, to
mitigate the rigour of her proceedings. Many
among the most eminent Reformers suffered for the
docrines which they had taught; others fled from
the storm. To the greater part of these, Switzer-
land and Germany opened a secure asylum; and not
a few, out of choice or necessity, fled into Scotland.
What they had seen and felt in England, did not
abate the warmth and zeal of their indignation
against Popery. Their attacks were bolder and
more successful than ever; and their doctrines made
a rapid progress among all ranks of men.

THESE doctrines, calculated to rectify the opi-

nions, and to reform the manners of mankind, had
hitherto produced no other effects; but they soon
began to operate with greater violence, and proved
the occasion, not only of subverting the established
religion, but of haking the throne, and endanger-

ing

ing the kingdom. The causes which facilitated the B o o K
introdu&ion of these new opinions into Scotland, II.
and which disseminated them so fast through the A'of
nation, merit, on that account, a particular and thepolitical
careful inquiry. The Reformation is one of the which con-
greatest events in the history of mankind, and in tributedlto
whatever point of light we view it, is inftru&ive
and interesting.

THE revival of learning in the isth and i6th

centuries roused the world from that lethargy, in
which it had been funk for many ages. The hu-
man mind felt its own strength, broke the fetters of
authority by which it had been so long restrained,
and venturing to move in a larger sphere, pushed
its inquiries into every subjeCt, with great boldness
and surprising success.

No sooner did mankind recover the capacity of

exercising their reason, than religion was one of the
first obje&s which drew their attention. Long be-
fore Luther published his famous Theses, which
shook the Papal throne, science and philosophy had
laid open, to many of the Italians, the imposture
and absurdity of the established superstition. That
subtle and refined people, satisfied with enjoying
those discoveries in secret, were little disposed to as-
fume the dangerous character of Reformers, and
concluded the knowledge of truth to be the prero-
gative of the wife, while vulgar minds must be over-
awed and governed by popular errors. But, animat-
ed with a more noble and disinterested zeal, the Ger-
man Theologian boldly erected the standard of truth,

and

B o o K and upheld it with an unconquerable intrepidity,

LI. which merits the admiration and gratitude of all
C.v-1' succeeding ages.-

THE occasion of Luther's being first disgusted

with the tenets of the Romish church, and how,
from a finall rupture, the quarrel widened into an
irreparable brea&, is known to every one who has
been the least conversant in history. From the
heart of Germany, his opinions spread, with alto-
nifhing rapidity, all over Europe; and wherever
they came, endangered or overturned the ancient,
but ill founded system. The vigilance and address
of the court of Rome, and the power and bigotry
of the Austrian family, suppressed these notions on
their first appearance, in the southern kingdoms of
Europe. But the fierce spirit of the north, irritated
by multiplied impositions, could neither be molli-
sied by the fame arts, nor subdued by the fame force;
and encouraged by some Princes from piety, and by
others out of avarice, it easily bore down the feeble
opposition of an illiterate and immoral clergy.

THE superstition of Popery seems to have grown

to the most extravagant height, in those countries
which are situated towards the different extremities
of Europe. The vigour of imagination, and fen-
fibility of frame, peculiar to the inhabitants of
southern climates, rendered them susceptible of the
deepest impressions of superstitious terror and cre-
dulity. Ignorance and barbarity were no less fa-
vourable to the progress of the fame spirit, among
the northern nations. They knew little, and were

dif-

disposed to believe every thing. The most glaring B o o K
absurdities did not shock their gross understandings, II.
and the most improbable fictions were received with
implicit assent and admiration.

ACCORDINGLY, that form of Popery, which pre-

vailed in Scotland, was of the most bigotted and
illiberal kind. Those doEtrines which are most apt
to shock the human understanding, and those legends
which farthest exceed belief, were proposed to the
people without any attempt to palliate or disguise
them; nor did they ever call in question the reason-
ablenefs of the one, or the truth of the other.

THE power and wealth of the church kept pace

with the progress of superstition; for it is the na-
ture of that spirit to observe no bounds in its re-
fpea and liberality towards those, whose character it
esteems sacred. The Scottiih Kings early demon-
itrated how much they were under its influence, by
their vast additions to the immunities and riches of
the clergy. The profuse piety of David I. who
acquired on that account the name of Saint, tranf-
ferred almost the whole crown-lands, which were at
that time of great extent, into the hands of eccle-
fiaftics. The example of that virtuous Prince was
imitated by his successors. The spirit spread among
all orders of men, who daily loaded the priesthood
with new possessions. The riches of the church all
over Europe were exorbitant; but Scotland was one
of those countries, wherein they had farthest exceed-
ed the just proportion. The Scottilh clergy paid one
half of every tax imposed on land; and as there is

no

B o o K no reason to think that, in that age, they would be

II. loaded with any unequal share of the burden, we
*-- ' may conclude, that, by the time of the Reforma-

tion, little less than one half of the property in the
nation had fallen into the hands of a society, which
is always acquiring, and can never lose.

THE nature too, of a considerable part of their

property, extended the influence of the clergy.
Many estates, throughout the kingdom, held of
the church; church-lands were let in lease at an easy
rent, and were pofeffed by the younger sons, and
descendants of the best families*. The connexion
betweenfitperior and va/sal, between landlord and
tenant, created dependences, and gave rife to an
union of great advantage to the church; and in
estimating the influence of the Popish ecclesiastics
over the nation, these, as well as the real amount
of their revenues, muff be attended to, and taken
into the account.

THIS extraordinary share in the national property

was accompanied with proportionable weight in the
supreme council of the kingdom. At a time, when
the number of temporal Peers was extremely small,
and when the Lesser Barons and representatives of
Burroughs seldom attended Parliaments, the Eccle-
fiaftics formed a considerable body there. And it
appears from the ancient rolls of Parliament, and
from the manner of chufing the Lords of Articles,
that the proceedings of that high court must have
been, in a great measure, under their direction t.
* Keith, 521. Not. (b) t Spots. Hill. oftheCh. ofScot.449.

THE

THE reverence due to their sacred character, B o o K

which was often carried incredibly far, contributed II.
not a little towards the growth of their power.
The dignity, the titles, and precedence of the Po-
pish clergy are remarkable, both as causes and es-
fe&s of that dominion, which they had acquired
over the reft of mankind. They were regarded by
the credulous laity as beings of a superior species;
they were neither subjea to the fame laws, nor
tried by the fame judges. Every guard, that reli-
gion could supply, was placed around their power,
their possessions, and their persons; and endeavours
were used, -not without success, to represent them
all as equally sacred.

THE reputation for learning, which, however

inconsiderable, was wholly engrossed by the clergy,
added to the reverence which they derived from
.religion. The principles of found philosophy, and
of a jus taste, were altogether unknown; in place
of these were substituted studies, barbarous and
uninftru&ive; but as the ecclesiastics alone were
converanit in them, this procured them esteem;
and a very little knowledge drew the admiration of
rude ages, which knew nothing. War was the
sole profession of the nobles, and hunting their chief
amusement; they divided their time between these;
unacquainted with the arts, and unimproved by
science, they disdained any employment foreign from
military affairs, or which required rather penetra-
tion and address, than bodily vigour. Wherever
the former were necessary, the clergy were intrusted;
because they alone were properly qualified for the

trust.

Bo o K trust. Almost all the high offices in civil govern-

II. ment devolved, on this account, into their hands.
'--.' The Lord Chancellor was the firit fubje& in the

kingdom, both in dignity and in power. From
the earliest ages of the monarchy, to the death of
Cardinal Beatoun, fifty-four persons had held that
high office; and of these, forty-three had been ec-
clefiaftics*. The Lords of Session were supreme
Judges in all matters of civil right; and by its ori-
ginal confitution, the President and one half of the
Senators in this court were churchmen.

To all this we may add, that the Clergy being

separated from the reft of mankind by the law of
celibacy; and undiftrafted by those cares, and un-
incumbered with those burdens which occupy and
oppress other men, the interest of their order be-
came their only objet, and they were at full leisure
to pursue it.

THE nature of their fun&ion gave them access to

all persons, and at all seasons. They could employ
all the motives of fear and of hope, of terror and
of consolation, which operate molt powerfully on
the human mind. They haunted the weak and the
credulous; they besieged the beds of the sick and
of the dying. They suffered few to go out of the
world without leaving marks of their liberality to
the church, and taught them to compound with
the Almighty for their fins, by bestowing riches
upon those, who called themselves his servants.

Crawf. Offic. of State.

WHEN

WHEN their own industry, or the fiperllition of B o o K

mankind failed of producing this effect, the eccle- II.
fiaftics had influence enough to call in the aid of -- '-
law. Whoever died intestate, was presumed to have
destined his moveables to pious uses. The church
took possession of them. The children, the wife,
the creditors of the person deceased were often ex-
cluded from any share, in what was esteemed a fa-
cred property*. As men are apt to trust to the
continuance of life with foolish confidence, and
childishly shun every thing that forces them to
think of their mortality, many die without fettling
their affairs by will; and the bold usurpation of the
clergy in this cafe, of which there are frequent
vestiges in our laws, though none in our hiftoriansy
may be reckoned among the moLc plentiful sources
of the wealth of the church.

AT the fame time, no matrimonial or teftamen-

tary cause could be tried but in the spiritual courts,
and by laws which the clergy themselves had framed.
The penalty, too, by which the decisions of these
courts were enforced, added to their authority. A
sentence of excommunication was no le's formid-
able, than a sentence of outlawry. It was pronounced
on many occasions, and against various crimes: And
besides excluding those, upon whom it fell, from
Christian privileges, it deprived them of all their
rights as men, or as citizens; and the aid of the
secular power concurred with the superstition of
mankind, in rendering the thunders of the church
no less deltrucive than terrible.

* Essays on Brit. Antiq. 17+.
VOL. I. L To

B o o K To these general causes, may be attributed the

II. immense growth both of the wealth and power of
----' the Popish church; and without entering into any

more minute detail, this may serve to discover the
foundations, on which a ftrucure so stupendous was
ere&ed.

BUT though the laity had contributed, by their

own superstition and profuseness, to raise the clergy
from poverty and obscurity to riches and eminence,
they began, by degrees, to feel and to murmur at
their encroachments. No wonder haughty and mar-
tial Barons should view the power and poffefions
of the church with envy; and regard the lazy and
inative character of churchmen with the utmost
contempt. While, at the fame time, the indecent
and licentious lives of the clergy gave great and just
offence to the people, and considerably abated the
veneration, which they were accustomed to yield to
that order of men.

IMM..ENSE wealth, extreme indolence, gross igno-

rance, and, above all, the severe injuncion of ce-
libacy, had concurred to introduce this corruption
of morals among the clergy; who, presuming too
much upon the submission of the people, were at
no pains either to conceal, or to disguise their own
vices. According to the accounts of the Reform-
ers, confirmed by several Popifl writers, the most
open and scandalous dissolution of manners pre-
vailed among the Scottish clergy *. Cardinal Bea-

* Winzet. ap. Keith Append. 202. 205. Lefl. dc Reb. Gest.
cot. 232.

toun,

toun, with the fame public pomp which is due to B o o K
a legitimate child, celebrated the marriage of his II.
natural daughter with the Earl of Crawfurd's son *;
and, if we may believe Knox, he publicly conti-
nued to the end of his days a criminal correspond-
ence with her mother, who was a woman of rank;
The other prelates seem not to have been more re-
gular and exemplary than their Primate t.

MEN of such charaaers ought, in reason, to have

been alarmed at the first clamours raised against their
own morals, and the docrines of the church, by
the Protestant preachers; but the Popish ecclesias-
tics, either out of pride or ignorance, negleced
the proper methods for silencing them. Instead of
reforming their lives, or disguising their vices, they
affected to despise the censures of the people. And
while the Reformers, by their mortifications and
aufterities, endeavoured to resemble the first propa-
gacors of Chriitianity, the Popish clergy were com-
pared to all those persons who are most infamous,

* The marriage articles subscribed with his own hand, in

which he calls her my daughter, are fRill extant. Keith, p. 42.
t A remarkable proof of the dissolute manners of the clergy
is found in the public records. A greater number of letters of
egitimation was granted during the firll thirty years after the
Reformation, than during the whole period that has elapsed
since that time. These were obtained by the sons of the Popifn
clergy. The ecclesiastics, who were allowed to retain their be-
nefices, alienated them to their children; who, when they
acquired wealth, were desirous that the stain of illegitimacy might
no longer remain upon their families. In Keith's Catalogue of the
Srottih BiJhops, we find several instances of such alienations of
church land,, by the Popilh incumbents, to their natural chil-
dren.

L 2 in

B o K in history, for the enormity and scandal of their

II. crimes.

ON the other hand, instead of mitigating the ri-

gour, or colouring over the absurdity of the efta-
blifhed docrines; instead of attempting to found
them upon scripture, or to reconcile them to reason;
they left them without any other support or recom-
mendation, than the authority of the church, and
the decrees of councils. The fables concerning
purgatory, the virtues of pilgrimage, and the me-
rits of the faints, were the topics, on which they
insisted in their discourses to the people; and the
duty of preaching being left wholly to Monks of
the lowest and most illiterate orders, their compo-
fitions were fill more wretched and contemptible,
than the fubjeats on which they insisted. While
the Reformers were attended by crowded and ad-
miring audiences, the Popish preachers were either
universally deferred, or listened to with scorn.

THE only device which they employed in order

to recover their declining reputation, or to con-
firm the wavering faith of the people, was equally
imprudent and unsuccessful. As many doctrines
of their church had derived their credit, at first,
from the authority of false miracles, they now en-
deavoured to call in these to their aid*. But those
lying wonders; which were beheld with unfufpici-
ous admiration, or heard with implicit faith, in
times of darkness and of ignorance, met with a

SFotfwood, 69.

very

very different reception, in a more enlightened pe- B o K
riod. The vigilance of the Reformers detected II.
these impostures, and exposed not only them, but '-
the cause, which needed the aid of such artifices,
to ridicule.

As the popish ecclesiastics became more and more

the objecs of hatred and of contempt, the dif-
courses of the Reformers were liflened to as so many
calls to liberty; and betides the pious indignation
which they excited against those corrupt doctrines,
which had perverted the nature of true Christianity;
betides the zeal, which they inspired for the know-
ledge of truth, and the purity of religion; they
gave rife also, among the Scottish nobles, to other
views and passions. They hoped to Ihake off the
yoke of ecclesiastical dominion, which they had
long felt to be oppressive, and which they now dif-
covered to be unchristian. They expected to re-
cover possession of the church revenues, which they
were now taught to confider as alienations made by
their ancestors, with a profusion no less undifcern-
ing than unbounded. They flattered themselves,
that a check would be given to the pride and lux-
ury of the clergy, who would be obliged, hence-
forward, to confine themselves within the sphere
peculiar to their sacred character. An aversion for
the established church, which flowed from so many
concurring causes, which was raised by confidera-
tions of religion, and heightened by motives of po-
licy, spread fast through the nation, and excited a
spirit, that burst out, at last, with irresistible vio-
lence.

L 3 RELI-

B o o K RELIGIOUS considerations, alone, were sufficient

II. to have roused this spirit. The points in contro-
'- -'a verfy with the church of Rome were of so much

importance to the happiness of mankind, and so
essential to Christianity, that they merited all the
zeal with which the Reformers contended in order
to establish them. But the Reformation having
been represented as the effeEt of some wild and en-
thufiaftic frenzy in the human mind, this attempt
to account for the eagerness and zeal with which
our ancestors embraced and propagated the Protef-
tant doftrines, by taking a view of the political
motives alone which influenced them, and by
shewing how naturally these prompted them to aft
with so much ardour, will not, perhaps, be esteem-
ed an unnecessary digression. We now return to the
course of the history.
;-54- THE Queen's elevation to the office of Regent

feeims to have transported her, at first, beyond the
known prudence and moderation of her character.
She began her administration, by conferring upon

The Qun foreigners several offices of trust and of dignity; a
giRehe ad - iep, which both from the inability of frangers to
minilra- discharge these offices with vigour, and from the
tion vwith
some unpo envy which their preferment excites among the na-
pUtire- tives, is never attended with good consequences.

Vilmort was made Comptroller, and intrusted with
the management of the public revenues; Bonot
was appointed Governor of Orkney; and Rubay
honoured with the custody of the Great Seal, and
the title of Vice Chancellor*. It was with the

? Lefly, de Reb. Gest. Scot. 189.

highest

highest indignation, that the Scots beheld offices of B o o K
the greatest eminence and authority, dealt out among II.
strangers. By there promotions they conceived the -'
Queen to have offered an insult both to their under-
standings and to their courage; to the former, by
supposing them unfit for those stations, which their
ancestors had filled with so much dignity; to the
latter, by imagining that they were tame enough
not to complain of an affront, which, in no former
age, would have been tolerated with impunity.

WHILE their minds were in this disposition, an

incident happened which inflamed their aversion
from French councils to the highest degree. Ever
since the famous contest between the houses of Va-
lois and Plantagenet, the French had been accuf-
tomed to embarrass the English, and to divide their
strength by the sudden and formidable incursions of
their allies, the Scots. But, as there inroads were
seldom attended with any real advantage to Scot-
land, and exposed it to the dangerous resentment
of a powerful neighbour, the Scots began to grow
less tractable than formerly, and scrupled, any long-
er, to serve an ambitious ally at the price of their
own quiet and security. The change, too, which
was daily introducing in the art of war, rendered
the assistance of the Scottish forces of less import-
ance to the French Monarch. For these reasons,
Henry having resolved upon a war with Philip II.
and foreseeing that the Queen of England would
take part in her husband's quarrel, was extremely
solicitous to secure, in Scotland, the assistance of
some troops, which would be more at his command

L 4 than

B o o x than an undisciplined army, led by chieftains who

II. were almost independent. In prosecution of this
~'---' design, but under pretence of relieving the nobles

from the expence and danger of defending the bor-
';;; ders, the Queen Regent proposed, in Parliament,

to register the value of lands throughout the king-
dom, to impose on them a small tax, and to apply
that revenue towards maintaining a body of regular.
troops, in constant pay. A fixed tax upon land,
which the growing expence of government hath in-
troduced into aliioft every part of Europe, was
unknown at that time, and seemed altogether in-.
confifent with the free and independent spirit of the
feudal government. Nothing could be more shock-
ing to a generous and brave nobility, than the in-
trufling, to mercenary hands, the defence of those
territories which had been acquired, or preserved,
by the blood of their ancestors. They received this
proposal with the utmost indignation. About 300
of the lefper Barons repaired in a body to the Queen.
Regent, and represented their sense of the intended
innovation, with that manly and determined bold-
ness which is natural to a free people, in a martial
age. Alarmed at a remonstrance delivered in so
firm a tone, and supported by fich formidable
numbers, the Queen prudently abandoned a scheme,
which she found to be universally odious. As
the Queen herself was known perfectly to under-
stand the circumstances and temper of the nation,
this measure was imputed wholly to the suggestions
of her foreign counsellors; and the Scots were
ready to proceed to the mofc violent extremities
againfl thCem.

THE

THE French, instead of extinguishing, added B o o K

fuel to the flame. They had now commenced hof- II.
tilities against Spain, and Philip had prevailed on ~---.

.Attempts

the Queen of England, to reinforce his army with to engage
a considerable body of her troops. In order to de- doe ki'n,
prive him of this aid, Henry had recourse, as he war with
projeted, to the Scots; and attempted to excit Engl
them to invade England. But, as Scotland had
nothing to dread from a Princess of Mary's charac-
ter, who, far from any ambitious scheme of dif-
turbing her neighbours, was wholly occupied in
endeavouring to reclaim her heretical fubjeas; the
nobles, who were assembled by the Queen Regent
at Newbottle, listened to the solicitations of the
French Monarch with extreme coldness, and pru-
dently declined engaging the kingdom in an enter-
prise so dangerous and unnecesSary. What she
could not obtain by persuasion, the Quieen Regent
brought about by a stratagem. Notwithstanding
the peace which subsisted between the two king-
doms, she commanded her French soldiers to re-
build a small fort near Berwick, which was appoint-
ed, by the last treaty, to be rated. The garrison
of Berwick sallied out; interrupted the work; and
ravaged the adjacent country. This insult roused
the fiery spirit of the Scots, and their promptness
to revenge the least appearance of national injury
diflipated, in a moment, the wife and pacific refo-
lutions which they had so lately formed. War was
determined, and orders instantly given for raising a
numerous army. But before their forces could as-
femble, the ardour of their indignation had time to
cool, and the Englifll having discovered no inten-

tion

B o o K tion to push the war with vigour, the nobles re-

II. fumed their pacific system, and resolved to stand al-
ut,---- together upon the defensive. They marched to the

banks of the Tweed, they prevented the incursions
of the enemy, and having done what they thought
sufficient for the safety and honour of their country,
the Queen could not induce them, either by her
entreaties. or her artifices, to advance another ftep.

WHILE the Scots persisted in their inactivity,

D'Oyfel, the Commander of the French troops,
who possessed entirely the confidence of the Queen
Regent, endeavoured, with her connivance, to en-
gage the two nations in hostilities. Contrary to the
orders of the Scottish General, he marched over the
Tweed with his own soldiers, and invested Werk,
a garrison of the Englifi. The Scots, instead of
seconding his attempt, were enraged at his prefump-
tion. The Queen's partiality towards France had
long been suspected; but it was now visible that she
wantonly sacrificed the peace and safety of Scotland,
to the intereit of that ambitious and assuming ally.
Under the feudal governments, it was in camps
that fubjefts were accustomed to address the boldest
remonstrances to their Sovereigns. While arms
were in their hands, they felt their own strength;
and at that time all their representations of grievances
carried the authority of commands. On this occa-
sion, the indignation of the nobles broke out with
such violence, that the Queen, perceiving all at-
tempts to engage them in action to bevain, abrupt-
ly dismissed her army, and retired with the utmost
flame and disgust; having discovered the impotence

of

of her own authority, without effecting any thing B o o K
which could be of advantage to France. II.

IT is observable, that this firR: instance of con-

tempt for the Regent's authority can, in no degree,
be imputed to the influence of the new opinions in
religion. As the Queen's pretensions to the Re-
gency had been principally supported by those who
favoured the Reformation, and as she still needed
them for a counterpoise to the Archbilhop of St.
Andrew's, and the partisans of the house of Hamil-
ton; they were now treated by her with great re-
spec, and even admitted to no inconsiderable share
in her favour and confidence. Kirkaldy of Grange,
and the other surviving conspirators against Cardi-
nal Beatoun, were, about this time, recalled by her
from banilhment; and, through her connivance,
the Protestant preachers enjoyed an interval oftran-
quillity, which was of great advantage to their cause.
Soothed by these instances of the Queen's modera-
tion and humanity, the Protestants left to others the
office of remonstrating; and the leaders of the op-
pofite faction set them the first example of disputing
the will of their Sovereign.

As the Queen Regent felt how limited and pre- The

C)i~~~~~~~

i *

*! * Queen's

carious her authority was, while it depended on the marriage
poise of these contrary factions, she endeavoured to itph tin
eftablifl it on a broader and more secure foundation,
by hastening the conclusion of her daughter's mar-
riage with the Dauphin. Amiable as the Queen of
Scots then was, in the bloom of youth; and confi-
derable as the territories were, which the would have

added

B o o K added to the French Monarchy; reasons were not

II. wanting to dissuade Henry from completing his
i---' first plan of marrying her to his son. The con-

frable Montmorency had employed all his interest to
defeat an alliance, which reflected so much lustre on
the Princes of Lorrain. He had represented the im-
polfibility of maintaining order and tranquillity
among a turbulent people, during the absence of their
Sovereign; and for that reason, had advised Henry
to bellow the young Queen upon one of the Princes
of the blood, who, by residing in Scotland, might
preserve that kingdom an useful ally to France,
which, by a nearer union to the Crown, would be-
come a mutinous and ungovernable province*.
But, at this time, the Constable was a prisoner in
the hands of the Spaniards, and the Princes of Lor-
rain were at the height of their glory; and their in-
fluence, seconded by the charms of the young
Queen, triumphed over the prudent, but envious
remonstrances of their rival.

C, ,4, THE French King accordingly applied to the Par-
's5;- liament of Scotland, which appointed eight of its

members t to represent the whole body of the nation,
at the marriage of the Queen. Among the persons
on whom the public choice conferred this honourable
character, were some of the most avowed and zeal-

Melv. Mem. 1j.

f Viz. TheArchbifhopofGlafgow, the Bishop of Ross, the

Biihop of Orkney, the Earls of Rothes and Caffils, Lord Fle-
ming, Lord Seton, the Prior of St. Andrew's, and John Erikine
of Dun.

Aus

ous advocates for the Reformation; by which, may B o o K
be estimated the degree of refpet and popularity, II.
which that party had now attained in the kingdom. --
The inftruttions of the Parliament to those Commis-
fioners still remain t, and do honour to the wisdom
and integrity of that assembly. At the fame time
that they manifested, with refpec' to the articles of
marriage, a laudable concern for the dignity and in-
terest of their Sovereign, they employed every pre-
caution which prudence could dictate, for preferv-
ing the liberty and independence of the nation, and
for securing the fuccefion of the Crown in the
hdufe of Hamilton.

WITH regard to each of these, the Scots obtain- Artifices o

the French

ed whatever fatisfacion their fear or jealousy could ;i themar-
demand. The young Queen, the Dauphin, and ria"gereaty.
the King of France ratified every article with the
most solemn oaths, and confirmed them by deeds
in form, under their hands and feals. But on the
part of France, all this was one continued scene of
studied and elaborate deceit. Previous to these pub-
lic transactions with the Scottish deputies, Mary had
been persuaded to fiubfcribe privately three deeds,
equally unjuff and invalid; by which, failing the
heirs of her own body, she conferred the kingdom
of Scotland, with whatever inheritance or.fucceffion
might accrue to it, in free gift upon the Crown of
France, declaring all promises to the contrary, which
the necessity of her affairs, and the solicitations of
her fubjets had extorted, or might extort from her,

tKeith, Append. 13.

to

B o o K to be void and of no obligation*. As it gives us

II. a proper idea of the character of the French court
'-v-'w under Henry II. we may observe that the King him-

self, the Keeper of the Great Seals, the Duke of
Guise, and the Cardinal of Lorrain, were the per-
sons engaged in conducing this perfidious and dif-
honourable projec. The Queen of Scots was the
only innocent acor in that scene of iniquity. Her
youth, her inexperience, her education in a foreign
country, and her deference to her uncle's will
mulf vindicate her, in the judgment of every
impartial person, from any imputation of blame
on that account.

THIS grant, by which Mary bestowed the inhe-

ritance of her kingdom upon strangers, was conceal-
ed with the utmost care from her subjects. They
seem, however, not to have been unacquainted with
the intention of the French to overturn the settlement
of the succession in favour of the Duke of Chatelhe-
rault. The zeal, with which the Archbishop of St.
Andrew's opposed all the measures of the Queen Re-
gent, evidently proceeded from the fears and fufpi-
cions of that prudent prelate, on this head t.
A-'l 14i, The marriage, however, was celebrated with

great pomp; and the French, who had hitherto as-
fe&ed to draw a veil over their designs upon Scot-

Corps Diplomat. tom. v. z1. Keith, 73.

'- About this time, the French fcem to have had some design

of reviving the Earl of Lennox's pretensions to the fucceflon,
in order to intimidate and alarm the Duke of Chatelherault.
Haynes, 21;. 219. Forbes's Collea. vol. i. 189.

land,

land, began now to unfold their intentions without B o o K
any disguise. In the treaty of marriage, the depu- II.
ties had agreed that the Dauphin should assume the '-"
name of King of Scotland. This they confidered
only as an honorary title; but the French laboured
to annex to it some solid privileges and power. They
insisted that the Dauphin's title should be publickly
recognised; that the Crown Matrimonial should be
conferred upon him; and that all the rights pertain-
ing to the husband of a Queen should be vested in
his person. By the laws of Scotland, a person who
married an heiress kept possession of her estate dur-
ing his own life, if he happened to survive her and
the children born of the marriage *. This was call-
ed the courtesy of Scotland. The French aimed at
applying this rule, which takes place in private in-
heritances, to the fucceflion of the kingdom; and
that seems to be implied in their demand of the
Crown Matrimonial, a phrase peculiar to the Scot-
tifh historians, and which they have neglected to
explain. As the French had reason to expect diffi-
culties in carrying through this measure, they began
with founding the deputies who were then at Paris.
The English, in the marriage articles between their
Queen and Philip of Spain, had set an example to
the age, of that prudent jealousy and reserve, with
which a foreigner should be admitted so near the
throne. Full of the fame ideas, the Scottish depu-
ties had, in their oath of allegiance to the Dauphin,
expressed themselves with remarkable caution .
Their answer was in the fame spirit, respectful, but
firm; and discovered a fixed resolution of consent-
* Reg. Maj. lib. ii. 58. t Keith, Append. 20.

ing

B o o K ing to nothing, that tended to introduce any alter-

II. ation in the order of succession to the Crown.

FouR of the deputies t happening to die before

they returned into Scotland, this accident was uni-
verfally imputed to the effe&s of poison, which was
supposed to have been given them by the emissaries
of the house of Guise. The historians of all nations
discover an amazing credulity with refpe&t to stories
of this kind, which are so well calculated to please
the malignity of some men, and to gratify the love
of the marvellous which is natural to all, that in
every age they have been swallowed without exa-
mination, and believed contrary to reason. No
wonder the Scots should easily give credit to a sus-
picion, which received such strong colours of pro-
bability, both from their own resentment, and from
the known characer of the Princes of Lorrain, so
little scrupulous about the justice of the ends which
they pursued, or of the means which they employ-
ed. For the honour of human nature, it murl,
however, be observed, that as we can discover no
motive, which could induce any man to perpetrate
such a crime, so there appears no evidence to prove
that it was committed. But the Scots of that age,
influenced by national animofities and prejudices,
were incapable of examining the circumstances of the
cafe with calmness, or of judging concerning them
with candour. All parties agreed in believing the
French to have been guilty of this detestable action;
and it is obvious how much this tended to increase

+ The Bishop of Orkney, the Earl of Rothes, the Earl of
C-.ils, the Lord Fleming.

the

the aversion 'for them, which was growing among Bo o o
all ranks of men. II.

NOTWITHSTANDING the cold reception which Tir.Regent

i - r i , ^ r

r id prevails otl

their proposal concerning the Crown Matrimonial tpevPariia-
met with from the Scottifl deputies, the French n"Itto

grant it.

ventured to move it in parliament. The partisans Nov. 29.
of the house of Hamilton, suspicious of their de-
signs upon the succession, opposed it with great zeal.
But a party, which the feeble and unsteady condut
of their leader had brought under much difreputa-
tion, was little able to withstand the influence of
France, and the address of the Queen Regent, fe-
conded, on this occasion, by all the numerous ad-
herents of the Reformation. Besides, that artful
Princess dressed out the French demands in a less
offensive garb, and threw in so many limitations, as
seemed to render them of finall consequence. There
either deceived the Scots, or removed their fcru-
ples: and in compliance to the Queen, they passed
an a&, conferring the Crown Matrimonial on the
Dauphin; and, with the fondest credulity, trusted
to the frail security of words and statutes, against
the dangerous encroachments of power .

The AA of Parliament is worded with the utmcrt calre

with a view to guard against any breach of the order .of futcef-
sion. Bat the Duke, not relying on this alone, entered a fole.an
I r)teftation to secure his own right, Keith. 76. It is plain,
that he fufpe&ed the Frsnch of having some intention to set aside
his right of fuccellion; and, indeed, if they had no design of
that kind, the eagerness with which they urged their demand,
was childish.

VCL. I. M TH

B o o K THE concurrence of the Protestants, with the

II. Queen Regent, in promoting a measure so accept-

Conti e able to France, while the Popish clergy, under the
to ourt influence of the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, oppof-
the Pro-
teianis. ed it with so much violence *, is one of those fingu-

lar circumstances, in the condut of parties, for
which this period is so remarkable. It may be afcri-
bed, in some degree, to the dexterous management
of the Queen, but chiefly to the moderation of
those who favoured the Reformation. The Pro-
teftants were, by this time, almost equal to the Ca-
tholics, both in power, and in number; and, con-
fcious of their own itrength, they submitted with
impatience to that tyrannical authority, with which
the ancient laws armed the ecclesiastics against them.
They longed to be exempted from this oppressive
jurifdicion, and publicly to enjoy the liberty of
professing those opinions, and ofexercifing that wor-
ship, which so great a part of the nation deemed to
be founded in truth, and to be acceptable to the
Deity. This indulgence, to which the whole weight
of priestly authority was opposed, there were only
two ways of obtaining. Either violence muff ex-
tort it from the reluctant hand of their Sovereign,
or by prudent compliances, they might expect it.
from her favour, or her gratitude. The former is
an expedient for the redress of grievances, to which
no nation has recourse suddenly; and subjects fel-
dom venture upon resistance, which is their last re-
medy, but in cafes of extreme necessity. On this
occasion the Reformers wifely held the opposite
course, and by their zeal in forwarding the Queen's

* Melv. 47.

designs,

designs, they hoped to merit her protecion. This B o o K
disposition the Queen encouraged to the utmoff, II.
and amused them so artfully with many promises, .--
and some concessions, that, by their affifance, she
surmounted in Parliament the force of a national,
and perhaps a laudable jealousy, which ,ould,
otherwise, have swayed with the greater number.

ANOTHER circumstance contributed somewhat

to acquire the Regent such considerable influence in
this Parliament. In Scotland, all the bishoprics,
and those abbeys which conferred a title to a feat in
Parliament, were in the gift of the Crown*. From
the time of her accelfion to the Regency, the 0Qeen
had kept in her own hands almost all those which
became vacant, except iLch as were, to the great
disgust of the nation, bestowed upon foreigners.
Among these, her brother the Cardinal of Lor-
rain had obtained the abbeys of Kelfo and Melrofs,
two of the most wealthy foundations in the king-
dom t. By this conduct, she thinned the ecclef:af-
tical bench $, which was entirely under the influ-nce
of the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, and wh.ch, by
its numbers and authority, usually had great weight
in the house, so as to render any opposition it could
give, at that time, of little consequence.

THE Earl of Argyll, and James Stewart, Prier

of St. Andrew's, one of the most powerful, and the

' See Book I. t Lefly, 202.
I It appears from the rolls of this Parli.inent, vhicl Lftly
.llis a very full one, that only fcven Biihops and sixteen Abbots
were present.

M 2 other

B o o K other the most popular leader of the Protestants%

1I. were appointed to carry the Crown and other ensigns

' of royalty to the Dauphin. But from this they

were diverted by the part they were called to ac, in
a more interetingfcenc, which now begins to open.

Elizabeti BEFORE we turn towards this, it is necessary to
ftheow° observe, that on the I7th of November, Mary of
otEngnd. England finished her short, and inglorious reign.

Her sifter Elizabeth took possession of the throne
without opposition; and the Protestant religion was,
once more, established by law in England. The
accession of a Queen, who, under very difficult cir-
cumftances, had given tfrong indications of those
eminent qualities, which, in the sequel, rendered
her reign so illustrious, attraaed the eyes of all Eu-
rope. Among the Scots, both parties observed her
first motions with the utmost concern, as they easily
foresaw that she would not remain long an indiffe-
rent spectator of their tranfadions.

UNDE.- many discouragements, and much op-

pression, the Rcformation advanced towards a full
eftablifiment in Scotl.nd. All the low country, the
moRs populous, and, at that time, the molt warlike,
part of the kingdom, as deeply tinctured with the
Proreftant opinions; a:i if the fame impreflions
were not made in the more distant counties, it was
owin, to no want of tl-e fame di;fofit:ons among
tie people, but to tie scarcity of preachers, whose
most indcfatigable zeal could not satisfy the avidity
of thole, who desired their instructions. Among a
pcople bred to arms, and so prone to mutiny as the

Scots;

Scots; and in an age, when religious passions had B o o K
taken such strong pofleffion of the human mind, II
and moved and agitated it with so much violence,
the peaceable and regular demeanor of so numerous
a party is truly aftoninling. From the death of
Mr. Patrick Hamilton, the first who suffercd in
Scotland for the Protestant religion, thirty years
had elapsed, and during so long a period, no vio-
lation of public order or tranquillity had proceed-
ed from that set *; and though routed and irritat-
ed by the most cruel excesses of ecclesiastical ty-
ranny, they did, in no instance, transgress those
bounds of duty which the law prescribes to sub-
jetls. Besides the prudence of their own leaders,
and the proteEtion which the Queen Regent, from
political motives, afforded them, the moderation
of the Archbishop of St. Andrew's encouraged this
pacific disposition, That Prelate, whose private
life cotemporary writers tax with great irregulari-
tiest, governed the church, for some years, with
a temper and prudence of which there are few ex-
amples in that age. But some time before the
meeting of last Parliament, the Archbishop de-
parted from those humane maxims, by which he
had hitherto regulated his conduAc; and whether, in
spite to the Queen, who had entered into so close
an union with the Proteflants, or in conpliance
with the importunities of his clergy, he let loose all
the rage of persecution against the Reformed i fen-

* The murder of Cardinal Beatoun was occalioned by private

revenge, and being contrived and executed by lixteen persons
only, cannot, with juftize, be imputed to the whole protestant
party. t Knox, Buchanan, Keith, 203.

M 3 tenced

B o o K tenced to the flames an aged priest, who had been

II. convi&ced of embracing the Protestant opinions;
'--r-J and summoned several others, fufpe&ed of the fame

crime, to appear before a fynod of the clergy, which
was soon to convene at Edinburgh.

NOTHING could equal the horror of the Protest-

ants at this unexpected and barbarous execution, but
the zeal, with which they espoused the defence of a
cause, that now seemed devoted to deitru&ion.
They had immediate recourse to the Queen Regent;
and as her success in the Parliament, which was then
about to meet, depended on their concurrence, ihe
not only iheltered them from 'he impending storm,
but permitted them the exercise of their religion,
with more freedom than they had hitherto enjoyed.
Unsatisfied with this precarious tenure, by which
they held their religious liberty, the Protestants la-
bourcd to render their possession of it more secure
and independent. WTith this view, they determined
to petition the Parliament for some legal protecion,
aga'nfc the exorLi-ant and oppressive jurifdition of
the ecclesiastical courts, which, by their arbitrary
method of proceeding, founded in the canon law,
were led to sentences the molt filocking to humani-
ty, by maxims the most repugnant tojuftice. But
the Queen, who dreaded the effect of a debate on
this delicate subje&c, whichcould not fail of exciting
high and dangerous passions, prevailed on the lead-
ers cf the party, by new and more solemn promises
of her prote&ion, to defilt from any application to
parliament, where their numbers and influence
would, in all probability, have procured them, if

not

not the entire redress, at leaat Tome mitigation of B o o K
their grievances. II.

THEY applied to another assembly, to a convoca-

tion of the Popish clergy, but with the fame ill fuc-
cess, which hath always attended every proposal for
reformation, addreifed to that order of men. To
abandon usurped power, to renounce lucrative error,
are sacrifices, which the virtue of individuals has,
on some occasions, offered to truth; but from any
society of men, no such effort can be expected. The
corruptions of a society, recommended by common
utility, andjuftified by universal praftice, are view-
ed, by its members, without shame, or horror; and
reformation never proceeds from themselves, but
is always forced upon them by some foreign hand.
Suitable to this unfeeling and inflexible spirit, was
the behayiour of the Convocation in the present
conjuncture. All the demands of the Protestants
were rejected with contempt; and the Popish
clergy, far from endeavouring, by any prudent
concessions, to sooth and to reconcile such a nu-
merous body, asserted the doctrines of their church,
concerning some of the molt exceptionable arti-
cles, with an ill-timed rigour, which gave new
offence.

DURING the fitting of the Convocation, the Pro-

teftants first began to suspect some change in the
Regent's disposition towards them. Though joined
with them for many years, by interelt, and united,
gs they conceived, by the strongest ties of affection

* Keith, SI.

and

B o o and of gratitude, Ihe discovered, on this occasion,

II. evident symptoms, not only of coldness, but of a

L--J ' growing difguif and aversion. In order to account
'559- for this, our hiftdriansdo little more than produce

the trite observations concerning the influence of
prosperity to alter her character, and to corrupt the
heart. The Queen, fay'they, having reached the
utmost point to which her ambition aspired, no
longer preserved her accustomed moderation, but,
with an insolence usual to the fortunate, looked
down upon those, by whose affiitance Ihe had been
enabled to rife so high. But it is neither in the de-
pravity of the human heart, nor in the ingratitude
of the Queen's disposition, that we must search for
the motives of her present condut. These were
derived from another, and a more remote source,
which, in order to clear the subsequent transactions,
v'e ihfal endeavour to ouen with iome care.

At.r. Sics THE ambition of the Princes of Lorrain had been
viostc no les fuccefsrul, than daring; but all their schemes
l.cnain. rwere diftinguifed by being vast and unbounded.

Though itrangers at the court of France, their emi-
nent qualities had raied them, in a short time, to
an height of power, superior to that of all other
fibjecCs, and had placed them on a level even with
the princes of the blood thermfclves. 'The church,
the army, the revenues were under their direcion.
Nothing but the royal dignity remained unattained,
and they were elevated to a near alliance with it, by
the marriage of the Queen of Scots to the Dauphin.
in order to gratify their own vanity, and to render
their niee more wor:hv the heir of France, they set

. . on

on foot her claim to the Crown of England, which B o o K
was founded on pretences not unplaufible. II.

THE tragical amours and marriages of Henry 559-

VIII. are known to all the world. Moved by the
caprices of his love, or of his resentment, that im-
patient and arbitrary Monarch had divorced, or be-
headed four of the fix Queens, whom he married.
In order to gratify him, both his daughters had been
declared illegitimate by A& of Parliament; and
yet, with that fantastic inconsistence which diftin-
guifhes his chara&er, he, in his las will, whereby
he was impowered to fettle the order of succession,
called both of them to the throne, upon the death
of their. brother Edward; and, at the fame time,
pafling by the posterity of his eldest siser Margaret
Queen of Scotland, he appointed the line of fu'c-
ceflion to continue in the descendants of his younger
sifter, the dutchess of Suffolk.

IN consequence of this destination, the validity

whereof was admitted by the English, but never
recognized by foreigners, Mary had reigned in Eng-
land, without the least complaint of neighbouring
Princes. But the fame causes, which facilitated her
accession to the throne, were obstacles to the eleva-
sion of her sifter Elizabeth, and rendered her posses-
sion of it precarious and insecure. Rome trembled
for the Catholic faith, under a Protestant Queen of
such eminent abilities. The fame superstitious fears
alarmed the court of Spain. And France beheld,
with indignation, a throne, to which the Queen of
Scors could form so many pretensions, occupied by

a rival,

B o o K a rival, whose birth, in the opinion of all good Ca-

II. tholics, excluded her from any legal right of fuc-

'-v - ce.Tion. The impotent hatred of the Roman Pon-
'559' tiff, or the flow councils of Philip II. would have

produced no sudden or formidable effect. The ar-
dent and impetuous ambition of the Princes of Lor-
rain, who, at that time, governed the court of
France, was more decisive, and more to be dread-

'Th rer- ed. Infligated by them, Henry, soon after the
to TJrum death of Mary, persuaded his daughter-in-law and
a ttn'of her husband, to assume the title of King and Queen
nsglnd. of England. They affected to publish this to all

Europe. They used that style and appellation in
public papers, some of which still remain a. The
arms of England were engraved on their coin and
plate, and borne by them on all occasions. No pre-
parations, however, were made to support this im-
politic and premature claim. Elizabeth was already
feated on her throne; she poffefled all the intrepidi-
ty offpirit, and all the arts of policy, which were
necessary for maintaining that itation. England was
growing into reputation for naval power. The ma-
rine of France had been utterly negleced; and
Scotland remained the only avenue, by which the

Ribhleo territories of Elizabeth could be approached. It
invare was on that fide, therefore, that the Princes of Lor-

rain determined to make their attackt; and, by
using the name and pretensions of the Scottifl Queen,
they hoped to route the English Catholics, formi-
dable at that time by their zeal and numbers, and

* Ander. Diplom. Scot. No. 68 and 164.
j- Sorbes, Colle1f. i. 253. 277.

cxafpe-

exasperated to the utmost against Elizabeth, on ac- B o o K
count of the change which she had made in the II.
national religion.

1559-
IT was vain to expe& the afiftance of the Scot- In or'r to

this, neccef-

tifli Protestants to dethrone a Oeen, whom all Eu- :fry to
rope esteemed the guardian and defender of the re- "ori,',,l'
formed faith. To break the power and reputation tion id.
of that party in Scotland, became, for this reason,
a necessary ftep towards the invasion of England.
With this the princes of Lorrain resolved to open
their scheme. And as persecution was the only me-
thod for suppressing religious opinions, known in that
age, or ditated by the despotic and sanguinary fpi-
rit of the Romish superstition, this, in its utmofl
violence, they determined to employ. The Earl of
Argyll, the Prior of St. Andrew's, and other lead-
ers of the party, were marked out by them for im-
mediate deftrution *; and they hoped, by punifll-
ing them, to intimidate their followers. Inftruc-
tions for this purpose were sent from France to the
Queen Regent. That humane and sagacious Prin-
cess condemned a measure, which was equally vio-
lent and impolitic. By long residence in Scotland,
she had become acquainted with the eager and im-
patient temper of the nation; she well knew the
power, the number, and popularity of the .Protef-
tant leaders; and had been a witness to the intre-
pid and unconquerable resolution which religious
fervour could inspire. What, then, could be gain-
ed by routing this dangerous spirit, which, hither-

Sorbes, i. 15z.

to,

B o o K to, all the arts of policy had scarce been able to re-

II. strain ? If it once broke loose, the authority of a

'j-*-' Regent would be little capable to subdue, or even
1559' to moderate its rage. And if, in order to quell it,

foreign forces were called in, this would give the
alarm to the whole nation, irritated already at the
excefiive power which the French possessed in the
kingdom, and suspicious of all their designs. A-
midst the shock which this might occasion, far from
hoping to exterminate the Protestant do&rine, it
would be well if the whole fabric of the established
church were not fnaken, and perhaps overturned
from the foundation. These prudent remonstrances
made no impression on her brothers; precipitant,
but inflexible in all their resolutions, they insisted on
the full and rigorous execution of their plan. Mary,
paSsionately devoted to the interest of France, and
ready, on all occasions, to sacrifice her own opinions
to the inclinations of her brothers, prepared to exe-
cute their commands, with implicit submission*;
and, contrary to her own judgment, and to all the
rules of found policy, Ihe became the instrument of
exciting civil commotions in Scotland, which ended
wih the ruin of the French power, and of the Po-
pish religion in that kingdom.
;hR,..y. FROM the time of the Queen's competition for

- the Regency with the Duke of Chatelherault, the

,;:- e-d Popiih clergy, under the direction of the Archbi-
the Pro-

.,.° hop of St. Andrew's, had set themselves in oppo-

fition to all her measures. Her first ftep toward
* M\v. ;.. Mem. de Caftlenlu, ap. Jebb, vol. ii. 446.

the

the execution of her new scheme, was to regain their B o K
favour. Nor was this reconcilement a matter of II.
difficulty. The Popish ecclesiastics, separated from
the reft of mankind by the law of celibacy, the 1559.
boldest and most successful invention of human po-
licy; and combined among themselves in the clofcft
and most sacred union; have been accustomed, in
every age, to sacrifice all private and particular pal-
lions to the dignity and interest of their order. De-
lighted, on this occasion, with the profpedc of tri-
umphing over a faction, whose encroachments they
had long dreaded, and animated with the hopes
of re-establishing their declining grandeur on a
firmer basis; they, at once, cancelled the memory
of past injuries, and engaged to second the Queen
in all her attempts to check the progress of the Re-
formation. The Queen, being ifcure of their assist-
ance, openly approved of the decrees of the Convo-
cation, by which the principles of the Reformers
were condemned; and at the fame time, ihe issued
a proclamation, enjoining all persons to observe the
approaching festival of Easter, according to the
Romilh ritual.

As it was no longer possible to mistake the Queen's

intentions, the Protestants, who saw the danger ap-
proach, in order to avert it, employed the Earl of
Glencairn, and Sir Hugh Campbell of Loudon, to
expostulate with her concerning this change to-
wards severity, which their former services had so
little merited, and which her reiterated promises gave
them no reason to expect. She, without disguise or
apology, avowed to them her resolution of extirpat-
ing the Reformed religion out of the kingdom.

And,

B o O K And, upon their urging her former engagements,

II. with an uncourtly, but honest boldness, she so far

forgot her usual moderation, as to utter a sentiment,
1559' which, however apt those of royal condition may be

to entertain it, prudence should teach them to con-
ceal as much as possible. " The promises of Princes,
fays she, ought not to be too carefully remembered,
nor the performance of them exacted, unless it suits
their own conveniency."

Summons THE indignation, which betrayed the Queen into
their pracher this rash expreffon, was nothing in comparison of
blP.e hr that, with which she was animated, upon hearing

that the public exercise of the Reformed Religion
had been introduced into the town of Perth. At
once, she threw off the mask, and commanded all
the Protestant preachers in the kingdom to be fum-
moned to a court of justice, which was to be held
at Stirling on the tenth of May. The Protestants,
who, from their union, began, about this time, to
be diftinguilhed by the name of the CONGREGATION,
were alarmed, but not intimidated by this danger;
and instantly resolved not to abandon the men, to
whom they were indebted for the most valuable of
all blessings, the knowledge of truth. At that time,
there prevailed in Scotland, with refpe&c to criminal
trials, a custom, introduced, at first, by the initi-
tutions of vassalage and clanfhip, and tolerated,
afterwards, under a feeble government; any person
accused of a crime was accompanied to the place of
trial, by a retinue of his friends and adherents, as-
fembled for that purpose, from every corner of the
kingdom. Authorised by this ancient pracice, the

Reformed

Reformed convened, in great numbers, to attend B o o K
their pastors to Stirling. The Queen dreaded their II.
approach with a train so numerous, though unarm- -
cd, and in order to prevent them from advancing, 1559.
she empowered John Erskine of Dun, a pcrlon of
eminent authority with the party, to promific, in
her name, that she would put a flop to the intended
trial, on condition the preachers and their retinue
advanced no nearer to Stirling. Erskine, being con-
vinced himfelfof the Queen's sincerity, served her
with the utmost zeal. And the Protestants, averse
from proceeding to any act of violence, listened
with pleasure to so pacific a proposition. The
preachers, with a few leaders of the party, remain-
ed at Perth the multitude, which had gathered
from different parts of the kingdom, dispersed, and
retired to their own habitations.

BUT, notwithstanding this solemn promise, the Breaks a

Queen, on the tenth of May, proceeded to call to ,^,ich triy
trial the persons who had been summoned, and upon la ,'ell;ed-
their non-appearance, the rigour of justice took
place, and they were pronounced outlaws. By this
ignoble artifice, so incompatible with real dignity,
and so inconsistent with that integrity which should
prevail in all tranfadtions between Sovereigns and
their fubjets, the Queen forfeited the esteem and
confidence of the whole nation. The Protestants,
fiocked no less at the indecency with which she
violated the public faith, than at the danger which
threatened rhemfelves, prepared boldly for their
own defence. Erskine, enraged at having been
made the instrument for deceiving his party, instantly

aban-

B o o K abandoned Stirling, and repairing to Perth, add-

II. ed to the zeal of his associates, by his representations
i-*- of the Queen's inflexible resolution to suppress their

559' religion.

fiens ann- THE popular rhetoric of Knox powerfully second-
foreaion ed his representations: He having been carried a

prisoner into France, together with the other persons
taken in the castle of St. Andrew's, soon made his
escape out of that country; and residing sometimes
in England, sometimes in Scotland, had, at last,
been driven out of both kingdoms by the rage of
the Popish clergy, and was obliged to retire to Ge-
neva. Thence he was called by the leaders of the
Protestants in Scotland; and, in compliance with
their solicitations, he set out for his native country,
where he arrived a few days before the trial ap-
pointed at Stirling. He hurried inifantly to Perth,
to share with his brethren in the common danger,
.or to assist them in promoting the common cause.
While their minds were in that ferment, which the
Queen's perfidiousness and their own danger occa-
sioned, he mounted the pulpit, and by a vehement
harangue againf idolatry, inflamed the multitude
with the utmost rage. The indiscretion of a priest,
who, immediately after Knox's sermon, was pre-
paring to celebrate mass, and began to decorate the
altar for that purpose, precipitated them into im-
mediate acion. With tumultuary, but irrefifsible
violence, they fell upon the churches in that city,
overturned the altars, defaced the piaures, broke
in pieces the images; and proceeding next to the
monasterics, they, in a few hours, laid those sump-

tuous

tuous fabrics almost level with the ground. This B o o K
riotous infurreccion was not the effe& of any con- II-
cert, or previous deliberation: Censured by the re- L
formed preachers, and publicly condemned by the
persons of most power and credit with the party, it
must be regarded merely as an accidental eruption
of popular rage *

BUT to the Queen herself, these proceedings ap- TheRegeent

peared in a very different light. Besides their ma- againt
nifeft contempt for her authority, the Protestants ther'.
had violated every thing in religion, which she
esteemed venerable or holy; and on both these ac-
counts, she determined to inflit the severest venge-
ance on the whole party. She had already drawn
the troops in French pay to Stirling; with these,
and what Scottish forces she could levy of a sudden,
she marched directly to Perth, in hopes of furprif-
ing the Protestant leaders, before they could assem-
ble their followers, whom, out of confidence in her
disingenuous promises, they had been ralhly induced
to difmils. Intelligence of these preparations and
menaces was soon conveyed to Perth. The Pro-
teftants would, gladly, have soothed the Queen, by
addresses both to herself, and to the persons of great-
elt credit in her court; but finding her inexorable,
they, with great vigour, took measures for their
own defence. Their adherents, animated with zeal
for religion, and eager to expose themselves in so
good a cause, flocked in such numbers to Perth,
that they not only secured the town from danger,

Knox, Hill. 27, 128.
VOL. I. N but,

Bo o k but, within a few days, were in a condition to take

II. the field, and to face the Queen, who advanced
559· with an army 7000 strong.
'559.

NEITHER party, however, was impatient to en-

gage. The Queen dreaded the event of a battle
with men, whom the fervour of religion raised above
the sense of fear, or of danger. The Protestants
beheld with regret, the Earl of Argyll, the Prior
of St. Andrew's, and some other eminent persons
of their party, still adhering to the Queen; and
defiitute of their aid and counsel, declined ha-
zarding an ation, the ill success of which might
have proved the ruin of their cause. The profpe&
of an accommodation was for these reasons highly
acceptable to both fides: Argyll and the Prior, who
were the Queen's commissioners for conduaing the
negociation, seem to have been sincerely desirous of
reconciling the contending facions; and the Earl
of Glencairn arriving unexpectedly with a powerful
reinforcement to the Congregation, augmented the
Queen's eagerness for peace. A treaty was accord-
A trety ingly concluded, in which it was stipulated, that

both armies fliould be disbanded, and the gates of
Perth set open to the Queen; that indemnity lhould
be granted to the inhabitants of that city, and to
all others concerned in the late insurrection; that no
French garrison should be left in Perth, and no
French foidier should approach within three miles
of that place; and that a Parliament should imme-
diately be held, in order to compose whatever diffe-
rences might fill remain *.

* K-ih, s9.

THE

THE Leaders of the Congregation, distrustful of B o o K

the Queen's sincerity, and sensible that concessions, 1II
flowing not from inclination, but extorted by the 'V-

xS59.

necessity of her affairs, could not long remain in May I59
force, entered into a new association, by which they
bound themselves, on the first infringement of the
present treaty, or in the least appearance of danger
to their religion, to re-assemble their followers, and
to take arms in defence of what they esteemed the
Cause of God, and of their country *.

THE .Qeen, by her condu&, demonstrated these Broken by

precautions to be the result of no groundless or un- leReent.
necessary fear. No sooner were the Protestant forces
difiiffed, than she broke every article in the treaty.
She introduced French troops into Perth, fined some
of the inhabitants, banished others, removed the
Magistrates out of office, and, on her retiring to
Stirling, she left behind her a garrison of 600 men,
with orders to allow the exercise of no other reli-
gion than the Roman Catholic. The situation of
Perth, a place at that time of some strength, and
a town the most proper of any in the kingdom for
the ifation of a garrison, fiems to have allured the
Queen to this unjustifiable, and ill-judged breach
of public faith; which she endeavoured to.colour,
by alleging that the body of men left at Perth was
entirely composed of native Scots, though kept in
pay by the King of France.

THE Queen's scheme began gradually to unfold;
it was now apparent, that not only the religion, but

Knox, 138.

N the

B o o K the liberties of the kingdom were threatened; and

II. that the French troops were to be employed as in-

-ftruments forfubduing the Scots, and wreathing the
1559. yoke about their necks. Martial as the genius of

the Scots then was, the poverty of their country
made it impossible to keep their armies long assem-
bled; and even a very small body of regular troops
might have proved formidable to the nation, though
confifing wholly of soldiers. But, what number
of French forces were then in Scotland, at what
times, and under what pretexts they returned, after
having left the kingdom in 1550, we cannot,
with any certainty, determine. Cotemporary his-
torians often felee, with little judgment, the cir-
cumffances which they tranfinit to posterity; and
with refpe& to matters of the greatest curiosity and
importance, leave succeeding ages altogether in the
dark. We may conjecure however, from some
paTfages in Buchanan, that the French and Scots in
French pay, amounted at least to 30co men, under
the command of Mons. D'Oyfel, a creature of the
house of Guise and they were soon augmented to
a much more formidable number.

THE Queer, encouraged by having so confider-

able a body of well disciplined troops at her com-
mand, and instigated by the violent counsels of
D'Oytl!, had ventured, as we have observed, to
violate the treaty of Perth, and, by that rash a-tion,
once more threw the nation into the mofr dangerous

The p- c3n--ulfirns. The Earl of Argyll and Prior of St.
stcn., ' Andrew's iniandy dcferred a court, where faith and
.*..- honour seemed to them to be no longer regarded.

I le

The Barons from the neighbouring counties repair- B o o K
ed to them, the preachers roused the people to II.
arms, and wherever they came, the fame violent '
operations, which accident had occasioned at Perth, 1'59
were now encouraged out of policy.- The enraged
multitude was let loole, and churches and monas-
teries, the monuments of ecclesiastic pride and lux-
ury, were sacrificed to their zeal.

IN order to check their career, the Qseen, with-

out losing a moment, put her troops in motion;
but the zeal of the Congregation got the start, once
more, of her vigilance and ativity. In that war-
like age, when all men were accustomed to arms,
and on the lead prospeCt of danger were ready to
run to them, the leaders of the Protestants found
no difficulty to raise an army. Though they set
out from St. Andrew's with a slender train of an
hundred horse, crowds flocked to their standards
from every corner of the country through which
they marched, and before they reached Falkland, a
village only ten miles distant, they were able to meet
the Queen with superior force*".

THE Queen, surprised at the approach of so for-

midable a body, which was drawn up.by its leaders
in such a manner, as added greatly in appearance
to its numbers, had again recourse to negociation.
She found, however, that the preservation of the
Protestant religion, their zeal for which had at firfi
roused the leaders of the Congregation to take
arms, was not the only object they had now in

* snox, 14l,

view.

B o o K view. They were animated with the warmest love

II. of civil liberty, which they conceived to be in im-

'---r minent danger, from the attempts of the French

1559- forces; and these two paflions mingling, added re-
They aim ciprocally to each other's strength. Together with
aint rdfas more enlarged notions in religion, the Reformation
wen as re- filled the human mind with more liberal and gene-
ligious T
sriecances. rous sentiments concerning civil government. The

genius of Popery is extremely favourable to the
power of Princes. The implicit submission to all
her decrees, which is exa&ed by the Romili Church,
prepares and breaks the mind for political servitude;
and the doctrines of the Reformers, by overturning
the established system of superstition, weakened the
firmest foundations of civil tyranny. That bold
Spirit of inquiry, which led men to reje& theologi-
cal errors, accompanied them in other sciences, and
discovered every where the fame manly zeal for
truth. A new study introduced at the fame time,
added greater force to the spirit of liberty. Men
became acquainted with the Greek and Roman au-
thors, who described exquisite models of siee go-
vernment, far superior to the inaccurate and oppref-
five fvftem established by the feudal law; and pro-
duced such illultrious examples of public virtue, as
wonderfully suited both the circumstances and fpi-
rir of that age. Many, among the most eminent
Reformers, were themselves considerable masters in
ancient learning; and all of them eagerly adopted
the maxims and spirit of the ancients, with regard
to government *. The most ardent love of liberty

accom-

The excessive admiration of ancient policy was the occasion
of Knox's famous book concerning the Government of IWomen,

wherein,

accompanied the Protestant religion, throughout all B o o K
its progress; and wherever it was embraced, it II.
roused an independent spirit, which rendered men
attentive to their privileges .as fubjets, and jealous I559-
of the encroachments of their sovereigns. Knox,
and the other preachers of the Reformation, infused
generous sentiments concerning governmont into the
minds of their hearers, and the Scottiih barons, na-
turally free and bold, were prompted to assert their
rights with more freedom and boldness than ever.
Instead of obeying the Queen Regent, who had en-
joined them to lay down their arms, they demand-
ed not only the redress of their religious grievances,
but, as a preliminary toward fettling the nation, and
securing its liberties, required the immediate expul-
sion of the French troops out of Scotland. It was
not in the Queen's power to make so important a
concession, without the concurrence of the French
Monarch; and as some time was requisite in order to
obtain that, she hoped, during this interval, to re-
ceive such reinforcements from France, as would
insure the accomplishment of that design, which
she had twice attempted with unequal strength,
Mean while, Ihe agreed to a cessation of arms for June s3.
eight days, and before the expiration of there,
engaged to transport the French troops to the south

wherein, conformable to the maxims of the ancient'legiflators,
which modern experience has proved to be ill founded, he pro-
rounces the elevation of women to the supreme authority, to
be utterly deftruaive of good government. His principles, au-
thorities, and examples were all drawn from ancient writers.
The fame observation may bc made with regard to Bachanan's
Dialogue, De Jure Regni apud Scotos. It is founded, not on the

iaxims of feudal, but of ancient government.

fide

B o K fide of the Forth; and to fend commiffloners to

II. St. Andrew's, who should labour to bring all differ-

.--.-o ences to accommodation. As fle hoped, by means
1559- of the French troops, to overawe the Protestants

in the southern counties, the former article in the
treaty was punc'ually executed; the latter having
been inserted merely to anufe the Congregation,
was no longer remembered.

A second BY these reiterated and wanton instances of per-
latd. fidy, the QOueen loft all credit with her adversaries;

and no safety appearing in any other course, they
again took arms with more inflamed refentlnent,
and with bolder and more extensive views. The
removing of the French forces had laid open to
them all the country situated between Forth and
Tay. The inhabitants of Pcrth alone remaining
subjected to the insolence and exations of the gar-
rifon which the Queen had left there, implored
the afflilance of the Congregation for their relief.
Thither they marched, and having, without effect,
required the Queen to evacuate the town in terms
of the forirer treaty, they prepared to besiege it in
form. The Queen employed the Earl of Huntly
and Lord Erskine to divert them from this enter-
prise. But her wonted artifices were now of no
avail; repeated so often, they could deceive no lon-
ger; and without liilening to her offers, the Pro-
reftants continued the siege, and soon obliged the
garrison to capitulate.

AtTER the loss of Perth, the Queen endeavour-
cd to seize Stirling, a place of some strength, and,

from

from its command of the only bridge over the B o OK
Forth, of great importance. But the leaders of the II.
Congregation, having intelligence of her design, " '
prevented the execution of it, by an haRly march R159'
thither, with part of their forces. The inhabi- arch and
tants, heartily attached to the cause, set open to thel.rot-
them the gates of their town. Thence they ad- ""'t.
vanced, with the fame rapidity, towards Edinburgh,
which the Queen, on their approach, abandoned
with precipitation, and retired to Dunbar.

THE Protestant army, wherever it came, kin-

dled, or spread the ardour of Reformation, and the
utmost excesses of violence were committed upon
churches and monasteries. The former were spoiled
of every decoration, which was then esteemed fa-
cred; the latter were laid in ruins. We are apt, at
this distance of time, to condemn the furious zeal
of the Reformers, and to regret the overthrow of
so many stately fabrics, the monuments of our an-
ceftors magnificence, and amongst the nobleftorna-
ments of the kingdom. But amidst the violence
of a Reformation, carried on in opposition to legal
authority, some irregularities were unavoidable; and
perhaps no one could have been permitted more
proper to allure and interest the multitude, or more
fatal to the grandeur of the established 'church.
However ablurd and ill-founded the speculative
errors of Popery may be, some inquiry and atten-
tion are requisite towards discovering them. The
abuses and corruptions, which had crept into the
public worflip of that church, lay more open to ob-
servation, and by striking the senses, excited more

uni-

B o oK universal disgust. Under the long reign of Hea-

II. thenifm, superstition seems to have exhausted its ta-
C' - -lent of invention, so that when a superstitious spirit
1559' seized Christians, they were obliged to imitate the

Heathens in the pomp and magnificence of their
ceremnonies, and to borrow from them the ornaments
and decorations of their temples. To the pure and
simple worship of the primitive Christians, there
succeeded a species of splendid idolatry, nearly re-
fembling those pagan originals, whence it had been
copied. The contrariety of such observances, to
the spirit of Christianity, was almost the first thing,
in the Romish system, which awakened the indig-
nation of the Reformers, who, applying to these
the denunciations in the Old Testament against ido-
latry, imagined that they could not endeavour at
suppressing them, with too much zeal. No talk
could be more acceptable to the multitude, than to
overturn those feats of superstition; they ran with
emulation to perform it, and happy was the man
whose hand was most adventurous and successful in
executing a work esteemed so pious. Nor did their
leaders labour to restrain this impetuous spirit of
Reformation. Irregular and violent as its sallies
were, they tended diretly to that end which they
had in view; for, by demolifling the monasteries
throughout the kingdom, and setting at liberty their
wretched inhabitants, they hoped to render it im-
possible ever to rebuild the one, or to re-assemble
the other.

BUT amidst these irregular proceedings, a cir-
cumtiance, which does honour to the conduit and

humr-

humanity of the leaders of the Congregation, de- B o o K
serves notice. They so far restrained the rage of II.
their followers, and were able so to temper their <"
heat and zeal, that few of the Roman Catholics 1559.
were exposed to any personal insult, and not a single
man suffered death *

AT the fame time, we discover, by the facility

with which these great revolutions were effeced,
how violently the current of national favour ran to-
wards the Reformation. No more than 300 men
marched out of Perth under the Earl of Argyll
and Prior of St. Andrew's t; with this inconfider-
able force they advanced. But wherever they came,
the people joined them in a body; their army was
seldom less numerous than 5ooo men; the gates of
every town were thrown open to receive them; and,
without striking a single blow, they took pofleflfon
of the capital of the kingdom.

THIS rapid and astonishing success seems to have June 9g.

encouraged the Reformers to extend their views,
and to rife in their demands. Not satisfied with
their first claim of toleration for their religion, they
now, openly, aimed at eftablilhing the Protestant
doctrine on the ruins of Popery. For this reason,
they determined to fix their residence at Edinburgh;
and, bytheir appointment, Knox and some other
preachers, taking possession of the pulpits, which
had been abandoned by the affrightened clergy, de-
claimed againif the errors of Popery, with such

Lefly, 231. t Keith, 94.

fervent

B o o r fervent zeal, as could not fail of gaining many

I1. proselytes.
1559 IN the mean time, the Queen, who had pru-

dently given way to a torrent which she could not
refilf, obfcrved with pleasure, that it now began to
ubfidse. The leaders of the Congregation had
been abovetwo months in arms, and by the ex-
pences of a campaign, protracted so long beyond
the usual time offervice in that age, had exhausted
all the money, which a country, where riches did
not abound, had been able to supply. The multi-
rude, dazzled with their success, and concluding
the work to be already done, retired to their own
habitations. A few only, of the more zealous or
wealthy Barons, remained with their preachers at
Edinburgh. As intelligence is procured in civil
wars with little difficulty, whatever was transacted
at Edinburgh, was soon known at Dunbar. And
the Queen regulating her own conduct by the si-
tuation of her adversaries, artfully amused ther
with the profpec of an immediate accommoda-
tion; while, at the fame time, she, by studied
delays, spun out the negociations for that purpose,
to such a length, that, in the end, the party dwin-
dled to an inconsiderable number, and, as if peace
had been already re-established, became careless of
military discipline. The Queen, who watched for
such an opportunity, advanced, unexpectedly, by
a sudden march in the night with all her forces,
and appearing before Edinburgh, filled that city
with the urmoft consternation. The Proteffants,
weakened by the imprudent dispersion of their fol-

lowers,

lowers, durst not encounter the French troops in B o o K
the open field; and were even unable to defend an II.
ill fortified town, against their assaults. Unwilling, - -'
however, to abandon the citizens to the Queen's 1559-
mercy, they endeavoured, by facing the enemies
army, to gain time for collecting their own affo-
ciates. But the Queen, in spite of all their resist-
ance, would have easily fotced her way into the
town, if the seasonable conclusion of a truce had
not procureft her admission, without the effusion of
blood.

THEIR dangerous situation easily induced the A ird

Congregation to liften to any overtures of peace; treX.
and as the Queen was looking daily for the arrival
of a strong reinforcement from France, and ex-
peEted great advantages from a cessation of arms,
ihe also agreed to it upon no unequal conditions.
Together with a suspension of hostilities, from the
24th of July to the loth of January, it was ftipu-
lated, in this treaty, that, on the one hand, the
Protestants should open the gates of Edinburgh
next morning to the Queen Regent; remain in du-
tiful fubjeftion to her government; abstain from all
future violation of religious houses; and give no
interruption to the established clergy, either in the
discharge of their funftions, or in the enjoyment
of their benefices. On the other hand, the Queen
agreed to give no molestation to the preachers or
professors of the Protestant religion; to allow no
other form of worship in Edinburgh but the Re-
formed; and to permit the free and public exercise
of it all over the kingdom. The Queen, by these

liberal

B o o K liberal concessions in behalf of their religion, hopes

II. to tooth the Protestants, and expe&ed, from indulg-
v - v ing their favourite paflion, to render them more
1559- compliant with refpe& to other articles, particularly

the expulsion of the French troops out of Scotland.
The anxiety which the Queen expressed for retain-
ing this body of men, rendered them, more and
more the objecs of national jealousy and aversion.
The immediate expulsion of them was therefore
demanded a-new, and with greater warmth; but
the Queen, taking advantage of the distress of the
adverse party, eluded the request, and would con-
sent to nothing more, than that a French garrison
ihould not be introduced into Edinburgh.

THE desperate state of their affairs, imposed on

the Congregation the necessity of agreeing to this
article, which, however, was very far from giving
them fatisfacion. Whatever apprehensions the
Scots had conceived, from retaining the French
forces in the kingdom, were abundantly justified
during the late commotions. A small body of those
troops, maintained in constant pay, and rendered
formidable by regular discipline, had checked the
progress of a martial people, though animated with
zeal both for religion and liberty. The smallest
addition to their number, and a confsderable one
was daily expe&ed, might prove fatal to public
liberty, and Scotland might be exposed to the dan-
ger of being reduced from an independent king-
dom, to the mean condition of a province, annexed
to the empire of its powerful ally.

IN

IN order to provide against this imminent cala- B o o K

mity, the Duke of Chatelherault, and Earl of I1.
Huntly, immediately after concluding the truce, '
desired an interview with the chiefs of the Congre- 15
gation. These two noblemen, the most potent, at
that time, in Scotland, were the leaders of the party,
which adhered to the established church. They had
followed the Queen, during the late commotions,
and having access to observe more narrowly the
dangerous tendency of her councils, their abhor-
rence of the yoke which was preparing for their
country, surmounted all other considerations, and
determined them rather to endanger the religion
which they profefled, than to give their aid to-
wards the execution of her pernicious designs.
They proceeded farther, and promised to Argyll,
Glencairn, and the prior of St. Andrew's, who
were appointed to meet them, that if the Queen
fnculd, with her usual insincerity, violate any arti-
cle in the treaty of truce, or refuse to gratify the
withes of the whole nation, by dismissing her French
troops, they would, then, inftantlyjoin with their
countrymen, in compelling her to a measure, which
the public 'afety, and the preservation of their li-
berties, rendered necessary *.

ABOUT this time, died Henry II. of France; Julys.

just when he had adopted a system with regard to
the affairs of Scotland, which would, in all proba-
bility have restored union and tranquillity to that
kingdomt. Towards the close of his reign, the
Princes of Lorrain began visibly to decline in

* Knox, 154. f Melv. 49.

favour,

B oo K favour, and the Constable Montmorency, by the

Ii. assistance of the Dutchess of Valentinois, recovered
.- ~ 'that ascendant over the spirit of his master, which
1559- his great experience, and his faithful, though often

unfortunate services, seemed justly to merit. That
prudent minister imputed the insurreCtions in Scot-
land wholly to the Duke of Guise and Cardinal of
Lorrain, whose violent and precipitant councils
could not fail of transporting, beyond all bounds
of moderation, men, whose minds were possessed
with that jealousy, which is inseparable from the
love of civil liberty, or inflamed with that ardour
which accompanies religious zeal: And, in order
to convince Henry, that he did not load his rivals
with any groundless accusation, he prevailed to have
Melvil*, a Scottish Gentleman of his retinue, dif-
patched into his native country, with inftruAions
to observe the motions both of the Regent, and of
her adversaries; and the King agreed to regulate
his future proceedings, in that kingdom, by Mel-
vil's report.

DID history indulge herself in these speculations,

it would be amusing to inquire what a different
direcion might have been given, by this resolution,
to the national spirit; and to what a different issue,
Melvil's report, which would have set the conduc
of the malecontents in the most favourable light,
might have conduced the public disorders. Per-
haps by gentle treatment, and artful policy, the
progress of the Reformation might have been
checked, and Scotland brought to depend upon

The Author of the Memoirs.

France.

France. Perhaps, by gaining possession of this B o o K
avenue, the French might have made their way into II.
England, and, under colour of supporting Mary's u---
title to the Crown, they might have re-established 1559-
the Roman Catholic religion, and destroyed the li-
berties of that kingdom. But, into this boundless
field of fancy and conjeEture, the historian must
make no excursions; to relate real occurrences, and
to explain their real causes and effects, is his peculiar
and only province.

THE tragical and untimely death of the French Accefrlon

of Francis

Monarch put an end to all moderate and pacific n. to the
measures, with regard to Scotland. The Duke of crwn of
Guise, and the Cardinal his brother, upon the ac-
ceflion of Francis II. a Prince void of genius, and
without experience, assumed the chief dire&ion of
French affairs. Allied so nearly to the throne, by
the marriage of their niece the Queen of Scots
with the young King, they now wanted but little
of real dignity, and nothing of the regal power.
This power did not long remain inaaive in
their hands. The fame vast schemes of ambi-
tion, which they had planned out under the for-
mer reign, were again resumed; and they were
enabled, by possessing such ample authority, to pur-
sue them with more vigour, and greater probabi-
lity of success. They beheld, with infinite regret,
the progress of the Protestant religion in Scotland;
and sensible what an unsurmountable obstacle it
would prove to their deligns, they bent all their
strength to check its growth, before it rose to any
greater height. For this purpose, they carried on

VOL. I. 0 their

B o o K their preparations with'all possible expedition, and

II. encouraged the Queen their sifter, to expe& in a
c -t-s short time, the arrival of an army, so powerful, as
1559. the zeal of their adversaries, however desperate,

would not venture to oppose.

NOR were the Lords of the Congfegation either

ignorant of those violent counsels, which prevailed
in the court of France since the death of Henry,
or careless of providing against the danger, which
threatened them from that quarter. The success of
their cause, as well as their personal safety, depend-
ing entirely on the unanimity and vigour of their
own resolutions, they endeavoured to guard against
division, and to cement together more closely, by
entering into a ftriter bond of confederacy and
mutual defence. Two persons concurred in this
new association, who brought a great accession both
of reputation and of power to the party. These
were the Duke of Chatelherault, and his eldest son
the Earl of Arran. This young nobleman, having
resided some years in France, where he command-
ed the Scottilh guards, had imbibed the Protef-
tant opinions concerning religion. Hurried along
by the heat of youth, and the zeal of a proselyte,
he had uttered sentiments, with refpe to the points
in controversy, which did not suit the temper of a
bigotted court, intent, at that jun&ure, on the ex-
tincion of the Protestant religion; in order to ac-
complilh which, the greatest excesses of violence
were committed. The church was suffered to wreak
its ntmoft fury upon all who were fufpe&ed of he-
refy. Courts were erected in different parts of

France,

France, to take cognizance of this crime, and by B o o K
their sentences, several persons of diftin&ion were II.
condemned to the flames. -

1559.

BUT, in order to inspire more universal terror,

the Princes of Lorrain resolved to felecl, for a fa-
crifice, some person, whose fall might convince all
ranks of men, that neither splendour of birth, nor
eminence in station, could exempt from punish-
ment, those who Ihould be guilty of this unpar-
donable tranfgrelflon. The Earl of Arran was the
person destined to be the unhappy victim *. As he
was allied to one throne, and the presumptive heir
to another; as he poffefled the first rank in his own
country, and enjoyed an honourable station in
France; his condemnation could not fail of making
the desired impression on the whole kingdom. But
the Cardinal of Lorrain having let fall some ex-
pressions, which raised Arran's suspicions of the
design, he escaped the intended blow by a timely
flight. Indignation, zeal, resentment, all prompt-
ed him to seek revenge upon these persecutors
of himself, and of the religion which he pro-
sessed; and as he passed through England, on his
return to his native country, Elizabeth, by hopes
and promises, inflamed those paflions, and sent him
back into Scotland, animated with the fame impla-
cable aversion to Franqe, which possessed a great
part of his countrymen. He quickly communi- EarlofAr-
cated these sentiments to his father the Duke of pan3oiShe
Chatelherault, who was already extremely disgusted

* Thuan. lib. xxiv. p. 462. Edit. Franoof.

0 2 with

B o o K with the measures carrying on in Scotland; and as

II. it was the fate of that nobleman to be governed in

every instance, by those about him, he now suffered
1559' himself to be drawn from the Queen Regent; and

having joined the Congregation, was confidered,
from that time, as the head of the party.

BUT. with refpec to him, this diftincion was

merely nominal. James Stewart, Prior of St. An-
drew's, was the person who moved and acuated
the whole body of the Protestants, among whom,
he possesed that unbounded confidence, which his
ffrenuous adherence to their interest, and his great
abilities so justly merited. He was the natural
son of James V. by a daughter of Lord Erskine;
and as that amorous Monarch had left several
others a burden upon the Crown, they were all de-
fined for the church, where they could be placed
in stations of dignity and affluence. In consequence
of this resolution, the Priory of St. Andrew's had
been conferred upon James: But, during so busy a
period, he soon became disgusted with the indolence
and retirement of a monastic life; and his enterprif-
ing genius called him forth, to ac a principal part
on a more public and conspicuous theatre. The
scene, in which he appeared, required talents of dif-
ferent kinds: Military virtue, and political discern-
ment, were equally neceflary in order to render him
illustrious. These he possessed in an eminent degree.
To the most unquestionable personal bravery, he
added great skill in the art of war, and in every en-
terprife his arms'were crowned with success. His
sagacity and penetration in civil affairs enabled him,

amidst

amidst the reeling and turbulence of faCtions, to hold B o o K
a prosperous course. While his boldness in defence II.
of the Reformation, together with the decency, and C
even severity of his manners, secured him the repu- 1559.
tation of being sincerely attached to religion, with-
out which, it was impossible, in that age, to gain
an ascendant over mankind.

IT was not without reason, that the Queen dread-

ed the enmity of a man, so capable to obftrut
her designs. And as she could not, with all her
address, make the least impressions on his fidelity to
his associates, she endeavoured to lessen his influ-
ence, and to scatter among them the feeds of jea-
lousy and distrust, by insinuating that the ambition
of the Prior aspired beyond the condition of a
fubje&, and aimed at nothing less than the Crown
itself.

AN accusation so improbable gained but little
credit. \Whatever thoughts of this kind, the pre-
fumption of unexpe&ted success, and his elevation
to the highest dignity in the kingdom, may be al-
ledged to have inspired, at any subsequent period,
it is certain that, at this juncture, he could form no
such vast design. To dethrone a Queen, who was
lineal heir to an ancient race of Monarchs; who
had been guilty of no a&ion, by which she could
forfeit the esteem and affection of her fubjeats; who
could employ, in defence of her rights, the forces
of a kingdom, much more powerful than her own;
and to substitute, in her place, a person whom the
illegitimacy of his birth, by the practice of all

0 3 civilized

B o o K civilized nations, rendered incapable of any inherit-

II. ance, either public or private; was a project, so

- ·~1- chimerical, as the most extravagant ambition would
1559. scarce entertain, and could never conceive to be

practicable. The promise too, which the Prior
made to Melvil, of residing conitantly in France,
on condition the public grievances were redressed t;
the confidence reposed in him by the Duke of Cha-
telherault and his son, the presumptive heirs to the
Crown; and the concurrence of almost the whole
Scotrilh nobles, in promoting the measures, by
which he gave offence to the French court, go far
towards his vindication from those illegal and cri-
minal designs, with the imputation of which, the
Queen endeavoured, at that time, to load him.

Trocps ar- THE arrival of a thousand French soldiers com-
Frne fram penfated, in some degree, for the loss which the
forify Queen fuffained by the defe&ion of the Duke of

* th Chatelherault. These were, immediately, com-

manded to fortify Leith, in which place, on account
of its commodious harbour, and its situation in the
neighbourhood of Edinburgh, and in a plentiful
country, the Queen resolved to fix the head-quar-
ters of her foreign forces. This unpopular mea-
sure, by the manner of executing it, was rendered
(till more unpopular. In order to bring the town
entirely under their command, the French turned
out a great part of the ancient inhabitants, and
taking poeffeon of the houses, which they had ob-
liged them to abandon, presented to the view of
the Scots, two objects equally irritating and offen-

five;
MeMil, 34.

five; on the one hand, a number of their country- B o o K
men expelled their habitations by violence, and II.
wandering without any certain abode; on the other, 1-
a colony of foreigners, fettling with their wives 55
and children, in the heart of Scotland, growing
into strength by daily reinforcements, and openly
preparing a yoke, to which, without some timely
exertion of national spirit, the whole kingdom must
of necessity, submit.

IT was with deep concern that the Lords of the The Prote.

faiants re-

Congregation beheld this bold and decisive ftep, monfirate
taken by the Queen Regent: Nor did they hesitate a"inftthis.
a moment, whether they should employ their whole
strength in one generous effort, to rescue their re-
ligion and liberty from impending destruction. But,
in order to justify their own condut, and to throw
the blame entirely on their adversaries, they resolved
to prelerve the appearances of decency and refpe&
towards their superiors, and to have no recourse to
arms, without the most urgent and apparent necef-
fity. They joined, with this view, in an address, Sept. 9.
to the Regent, representing, in the strongest terms,
their dissatisfaction with the measures mhe was pur-
suing, and beseeching her to quiet the fears and
jealousies of the nation, by defilting from fortifying
Leith. The Queen, conscious of her present ad-
vantageous situation, and elated with the hopes of
fresh succours, was in no disposition for listening to
demands, utterly inconsistent with her views, and
urged with that bold importunity, which is so little
acceptable to Prince.

0 4 THE

B o o K THE suggestions of her French counsellors con-

II. tributed, without doubt, to alienate her still farther
·' -~ from any scheme of accommodation. As the Queen
TI59ent was ready on all occasions, to discover an extraor-
dicreads dinary deference for the opinions of her countrymen,
their re-

omiO~_n- her brothers, who knew her secret disapprobation of
ces. the violent measures they were driving on, took

care to place near her such persons, as betrayed her,
by their insinuations, into many acions, which her
own unbiaffed judgment would have highly con-
demned. And aS their success in the present junc-
ture, when all things were hastening towards a cri-
sis, depended entirely on the Queen's firmness, the
Princess of Lorr.ain did not trust wholly to the in-
fluence of their ordinary agentss but, in order to
add the greater weight to their councils, they called
in aid the Ministers of religion; and, by the authori-
ty of their sacred character, they hoped effectually
to recommend to their filler, that fyiftem of severity
which they had espoused *. With this view, but
under pretence of confounding the Protestants by
the skill of such able masters in controversy, they
appointed several French divines to reside in Scot-
land. At the head of these, and with the charac-
ter of legate from the Pope, was Pelleve Bilhop of
Amiens, and afterwards Archbishop and Cardinal
of Sens, a furious bigot t, servilely devoted to the
house of Guise, and a proper instrument for re-
commending or executing the most outrageous
measures.

*Lefly, 215. Caftlenau, ap. Jebb. vol. ii. 446, 473.
- Davila, Brantome.

AMIDST

AMIDST the noise and danger of civil arms, these B o o .

Do&ors had little opportunity to display their ad- I.
dress in the use of their theological weapons. But --
they gave no small offence to the nation by one of 1559
their acions. They persuaded the Quleen to seize
the church of St. Giles in Edinburgh, which had
remained, ever since the late truce, in the hands of
the Protestants; and having, by a new and solemn
consecration, purified the fabric from the pollution,
with which they supposed the profane ministrations
of the Protestants to have defiled it, they, in dire&
contradiction to one article in the late treaty, re-
eftablilhed there the rites of the Romifl church.
This, added to the indifference, and even contempt,
with which the Queen received their remonstrances,
convinced the Lords of the Congregation, that it
was not only vain to expect any redress of their
grievances at her hands, but absolutely necessary to
take arms in their own defence.

THE eager and impetuous spirit of the nation, as They take

well as every consideration of good policy, prompt- hir o in
ed them to take this bold ftep without delay. It defence.
was but a small part of the French auxiliaries which
had as yet arrived. The fortifications of Leith,
though advancing fast, were still far from being
complete. Under these circumstances of difadvan-
tage, they conceived it possible to surprise the
Queen's party, and, by one sudden and decisive
blow, to prevent all future bloodshed and conten-
tion. Full of these expetations, they advanced
rapidly towards Edinburgh with a numerous army.
But it was no easy matter to deceive an adversary, Oaobcr 6.

so

B o oK so vigilant and attentive as the Queen Regent.

II. With her usual sagacity, she both foresaw the dan-

ger, and took the only proper course to avoid it.
1559' Instead of keeping the field against enemies, fupe-

rior in number, and formidable on a day of battle,
by the ardour of their courage, she retired into
Leith, and determined patiently to wait the arrival
of new reinforcements. Slight and unfinished as the
fortifications of that town then were, she did not
dread the efforts of an army, provided neither
with heavy cannon, nor with military stores, and
utterly ignorant of the method of attacking any
place fortified with more art than those ancient
towers, ereted all over the kingdom, in defence
of'private property against the incursions of ban-
ditti.

NoR did the Queen, mean while, negle& to

have recourse to those arts, which ihe had often
employed, to weaken or divideher adversaries. By
private solicitations and promises, she ihook the
fidelity, or abated the ardour of some. By open re-
proach and accusation, she blasted the reputation,
and diminiihed the authority of others. Her emif-
saries were every where at work, and, notwithitand-
ing the zeal for religion and liberty, which then
animated the nation, they seem to have laboured
not without success. We find Knox, about this
period, abounding in complaints of the lukewarm
and languid spirit, which had begun to spread
amonghis party *. But if their zeal slackened a lit-
tle, and suffered a momentary intermission, it soon

* Knox, 180.

blazed

blazed up with frelh vigour, and rose to a greater B o o K
heighth than ever. II.

THL Queen herself gave occasion to this, by the RIn59
reply which she made to a new remonstrance from their re-

nonftan-

the Lords of the Congregation. Upon their arri- cesi
val at Edinburgh, they once more represented to
her the dangers arising from the increase of the
French troops, the fortifying of Leith, and her
other measures, which they conceived to be deftruc-
tive to the peace and liberty of the kingdom; and
in this address, they spoke in a firmer tone, and
avowed more openly than ever, their resolution of
proceeding to the utmost extremities, in order to
put a stop to such dangerous encroachments. To
a remonstrance of this nature, and urged with so
much boldness, the Queen replied in terms no less
vigorous and explicit. She pretended that she was
not accountable to the confederate Lords for any
part of her condu&; and upon no representation
of theirs, would she either abandon measures, which
she deemed necessary; or dismiss forces, which she butwtholut
found useful; or demolilh a fortification, which
might prove of advantage. At the fame time, Ihe
required them, on pain of treason, to disband the
forces which they had assembled.

THIS haughty and imperious style founded harsh-

ly to Scottish nobles, impatient, from their national
charafter, of the slightest appearance of injury;
accustomed even from their own Monarchs, to the
mods respectful treatment; and possessing, under an
ariftocratical form of government, such a Share of

power

B o o K power as equalled, at all times, and often control-

II. led that of the sovereign. They were sensible, at

once, of the indignity offered to themselves, and
1559. alarmed with this plain declaration of the Queen's

intentions; and as there now remained but one ftep
to take, they wanted neither public spirit nor refolu-
tion to take it.

Deliberate BUT, that they might not seem to depart from
conerning the established forms of the conffitution, for which,
the course
whici they even amidst their moss violent operations, men al-
,Uht to ways retain the greatest reverence, they assembled

the whole Peers, Barons, and Representatives of
oe. _i. burroughs who adhered to their party. These form-

ed a convention, which exceeded in number, and
equalled in dignity, the usual meetings of parlia-
ment. The leaders of the Congregation laid before
them the declaration which the Queen had given in
answer to their remonstrance; represented the un-
avoidable ruin, which the measures, she therein
avowed andjuftified, would bring upon the king-
dom; and requiring their direction with regard to
the obedience due to an administration so unjust and
oppressive, they rubmitted to their decision, a quef-
rion, one of the most delicate and interesting that
can possibly fall under the consideration of fubjecs.

THrs assembly proceeded to decide, with no less

dispatch, than unanimity. Strangers to those forms
which protrat business; unacquainted with the arts,
which make a figure in debate; and much more
fitted for action, than discourse: A warlike people
always haften to a conclusion, and bring their de-

liberations

liberations to the shortest issue. It was the work B o o K
but of one day, to examine and to resolve this nice II.
problem, concerning the behaviour of fubjeRs to-
wards a ruler who abuses his power. But, however I559
abrupt their proceedings may appear, they were not
destitute offolemnity. As the determination of the
point in doubt, was conceived to be no less the of-
fice of divines, than of laymen, the former were'
called to assist with their opinion. Knox and Wil-
lox appeared for the whole order, and pronounced,
without hesitation, both from the precepts and ex-
amples in scripture, that it was lawful for subjects
not only to resist tyrannical princes, but to deprive
them of that authority, which, in their hands, be-
comes an instrument for destroying those, whom
the Almighty ordained them to prote&. The de-
cifion of persons, revered so highly for their sacred
character, but more for their zeal, and their piety,
had great weight with the whole assembly. Not
satisfied with the common indiscriminate manner of
signifying content, every person present was called
-in his turn to declare his sentiments, and rising up
in order, all gave their suffrages, without one dif- They de-
senting voice, for depriving the Queen of the of- Queen of

the office of

fice of Regent, which she had exercised so much to tReent.f
the detriment of the kingdom*.

THIS extraordinary sentence was owing no less The rights

to the love of liberty, than to zeal for religion. In con'du.
the at of deprivation, religious grievances are
slightly mentioned; and the dangerous encroach-
ments of the Queen upon the civil constitution are

*Knox, 184.

pro -

B o oK produced by the Lords of the Congregation, in

II. order to prove their condu& to have been not only

jus, but necessary. The introducing foreign troops
559' into a kingdom, at peace with all the world; the

seizing and fortifying towns in different parts of the
country; the promoting strangers to offices of great
power and dignity; the debating the current coin *;
the subverting the ancient laws; the imposing of new
and burdensome taxes; and the attempting to sub-
due the kingdom, and to oppress its liberties, by
open and repeated ats of violence, are enumerated
at great length, and placed in the strongest light.
On all these accounts, the Congregation maintained
that the nobles, as counsellors by birth-right to their
monarchs, and the guardians and defenders of the
constitution, had a right to interpose; and there-
fore, by virtue of this right, in the name of the
King and Queen, and with many exprefflons of
duty and submission towards them, they deprived
the Queen Regent of her office, and ordained, that,
for the future, no obedience lhould be given to her
commands t. Vio-

* The standard of money in Scotland was continually varying.

In the i6th of James V. A. D. 1529, a pound weight of gold,
when coined, produced io8 pounds of current money. But
under the Queen Regent's administration, A. D. 1556, a pound
weight of gold, although the quantity of alloy was confider-
ably increased, produced 1441. current money. In 15z9, a
pound weight of silver, when coined, produced 91. 2s. but in
1556, it produced 131, current money. Ruddim. Prefat. ad
Anders. Diplomat. Scotia, p. 80, 81, from which it appears,
that this complaint, which the malecontents often repeated,
was not altogether defiitute of foundation.

t M. Caltelnau, after condemning the dangerous councils of
the Princes of Lorrain, with regardto the affairs of Scotland, ac-

knowledges,

VIOLENT as this a&tion may appear, there wanted B o o K

not principles in the constitution, nor precedents in II.
the hiftoryof Scotland, to justify and to authorise it. '-
Under the ariftocratical form of government efta- 1559.
blifhed among the Scots, the power of the Sove-
reign was extremely limited. The more confider-
able nobles were themselves petty princes, possessing
extensive jurisdictions, almost independent of the
crown, and followed by numerous vassals, who, in
every contest, espoused their chieftain's quarrel, in
opposition to the King. Hence the many instances
of the impotence of regal authority, which are to
be found in the Scottish history. In every age, the
nobles not only claimed, but exercised the right of
controlling the King. Jealous of their privileges,
and eager to take the field in defence of them, every
error in administration was observed, every encroach-
ment upon the rights of the aristocracy excited in-
dignation, and no prince ever ventured to transgress
the boundaries, which the law had prescribed to
prerogative,without meeting resistance, which Ihook,
or overturned his throne. Encouraged by the spirit
of the constitution, and countenanced by the ex-
ample of their ancestors, the Lords of the Con-
gregation thought it incumbent on them, at this
juncture, to inquire into the mal-administration of
the Queen Regent, and to preserve their country
from being enslaved or conquered, by depriving

knowledges, with his usual candour, that the Scots declared war
againlt the Qneen Regent, rather from a desire of vindicating
their civil liberties, than from any motive of religion. Mem.
446.

her

Bo o c her of the power to execute such a pernicious

II. fcherme.
1559. * The ac of deprivation, and a letter from the Lords of the

Congregation to the Queen Regent, are still extant, Knox, 184.
They discover not only, that masculine and undaunted spirit,
natural to men capable of so bold a resolution ; but are remark-
able for a precilion, and vigour of exprefllion, which we are fur-
prifed to meet with in an age so unpolifhed. The fame obfer-
vation may be made with refpea to the other public papers of
that period. The ignorance or bad taste of an age may render
the compositions of authors by profeflion obscure, or affeced,
or absurd; but tho language of business is nearly the fame at
all times; and wherever men think clearly, and are thoroughly
intereifed, they express themselves with perspicuity and force.

THE

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK III.

THE
HI ST OR Y

o F
SCOTLAND.

BOOK III.
THE Lords of the Congregation soon found, III

that their zeal had engaged them in an under- -

taking, which it was beyond their utinoft ability to I559.
accomplish. The French garrison, despising their rheaton
numerous, but irregular forces, refused to surrender involved in

C

. , , -

,

°

 , , . , difficulties.

Leith, and to depart out of the kingdom; nor were
they fufiiciently skilful in the art of war to reduce
the place by force, or possessed of the artillery, or
magazines, requisite for that purpose; and their fol-
lowers, though of undaunted courage, yet being ac-
customed to decide every quarrel by a battle, were
strangers to the fatigues of a long campaign, and
soon became impatient of the severe and constant
duty which a siege requires. The Queen's emiffa-

VOL. I. P ries,

Bo o K ries, who found it easy to mingle with their coun-

III. trymen, were at the utmost pains to heighten their
--c ' disgust, which discovered itself at first in murmurs

and complaints, but on occasion of the want of mo-
ney for paying the army, broke out into open mu-
tiny. The most eminent leaders were scarce secure
from the unbridled insolence of the soldiers; while
some of inferior rank, interposing too rashly in or-
der to quell them, were torn in pieces by their rage.
Discord, conifernation, and perplexity reigned in the
camp of the Reformers. The Duke, their General,
funk, with his usual timidity, under the terror of
approaching danger, and discovered manifest fymp-
toms of repentance for his raihnefs, in espousing
such a desperate cause.

Apply to IN this situation of their affairs, the Congregation
Elizabeth
for aifft- had recourse to Elizabeth, from whose protection
'nce. they could derive their only reasonable hope of fuc-

cess. Some of their most sagacious leaders, having
foreseen that the party might probably be involved
in great difficulties, had endeavoured to secure a re-
source in any such exigency, by entering into a fe-
cret correspondence with the court of England*.
Elizabeth, aware of the dangerous designs which
the Princes of Lorrain had formed against her
Crown, was early sensible of how much importance
it would be, not only to check the progress of the
French in Scotland, but to extend her own influence
in that kingdom- t; and perceiving how effectually
the present insurrections would contribute to retard

Burn. Hist. Ref. 3. Append. 278. Keith, Append. 21,
t See Append. No. i.

or

or defeat the schemes formed against England, she B o o K
liitened with pleasure to these applications of the III.
inalecontents, and gave them private assurances of
powerful support to their cause. Randolph*, an 1
agent extremely proper for condu&ing any dark in-
trigue, was dispatched into Scotland, and residing
secretly among the Lords of the Congregation, ob-
served and quickened their motions. Money seem-
ed to be the only thing they wanted at that time;
and it was owing to a seasonable remittance from
England t, that the Scottifi nobles had been enabled
to take the field, and to advance towards Leith.
But as Elizabeth was distrustful of the Scots, and
fiudious to prelerve appearances with France, her
subsidies were bellowed at first with extreme fruga-
lity. The subsistence of an army, and the expen-
ces of a siege soon exhausted this penurious supply,
to which the Lords of the Congregation could
make little addition fiom their own funds; and
the ruin and dispersion of the party must have in-
Itantly followed.

IN order to prevent this, Cockburn of Ormifton She fends

was sent, with the utmost expedition, to the gover- thma ram
nors of the town and cattle of Berwick. As Ber- ofmon'y,
wick was, at that time, the town of greatest import-
ance on the Scottish frontier, Sir Ralph Sadler and
Sir James Crofts, persons of considerable figure,
were employed to command there, and were intrust-
ed with a discretionary power of supplying the Scot-
tifh malecontents, according to the exigency of their

Keith, Append. 29. t Knox, 214. Keith, Append. 44.

P c affairs.

B o o . affairs. From them Cockburn received 4000 crownsr

III. but little to the advantage of their party. The Earl
`- of Bothwell, by the Queen's infrigation, lay in wait
1559' for him on his return, dispersed his followers,
intercepted. wounded him, and carried off the money.

THIS unexpeced disappointment proved fatal to

the party. In mere delpair, some of the more zeal-
ous attempted to assault Leith, but the French beat
them back with disgrace, seized their cannon, and
pursuing them to the gates of Edinburgh, were on
the point of entering along with them. All the ter-
ror and confusion, which the profpeft of pillage or
of maRfacre can excite in a place taken by storm,
filled the city on this occasion. The inhabitants fled
from the enemy by the opposite gate; the forces of
the Congregation were irresolute and dismayed; and
the Queen's partisans in the town openly insulted
both. At last, a few of the nobles ventured to face
the enemy, who, after plundering some houses in
the suburbs, retired with their booty, and delivered
the city from this dreadful alarm.

A SEcoND skirmish1 which happened a few days

after, was no lets unfortunate. The French sent out a
detachment to intercept a convoy ofprovifions which
was designed for Edinburgh. The Lords of the Con-
gregation, having intelligence of this, marched in
all haste with a considerable body of their troops,
and falling upon the enemy between Reftalrig and
Leith, with more gallantry than good conduct, were
almost surrounded by a second party of French, who
advanced in order to support their own men. In

this

this situation, a retreat was the only thing which B o o K
could save the Scots; but a retreat over marshy III.
ground, and in the face of an enemy superior in ' '-
number, could not long be conduced with order. 559
A small body of the enemy hung upon their rear, They retire

from Leith

horse and foot fell into the utmost confusion, and it in consu-
was entirely owing to the caution of the French, oon'
that any of the party escaped being cut in pieces.

ON this second blow, the hopes and spirits of the

Congregation funk altogether. They did not think
themselves secure, even within the walls of Edin-
burgh, but instantly determined to retire to some
place at a greater distance from the enemy. In vain
did the Prior of St. Andrew's, and a few others, op-
pose this cowardly and ignominious flight. The
dread of the present danger prevailed over both the
sense of honour, and zeal for the cause. At mid-
night they set out from Edinburgh, in great con- Novem. C.
fusion, and marched without halting till they ar-
rived at Stirling.

DURING this last infurre&ion, the great body of

the Scottish nobility joined the Congregation. The
Lords Seton and Borthwick were the only persons
of rank who took arms for the Queen, and assisted
her in defending Leith *. Bothwell openly favour-
ed her cause, but resided at his own house. The
Earl of Huntly, conformable to the crafty policy
which diftinguilhed his characer, amused the lead-
ers of the Congregation, whom he had engaged to

* Keith, Append. 31i

assist,

B o o . assist, with many fair promises, but never joined

Ii. them with a single man t. The Earl of Morton, a

t.-r- member of the Congregation, fluctuated in a state
1559- of irresolution, and did not at heartily for the com-

mon cause. Lord Erskine, Governor of Edinburgh
Castle, though a Protestant, maintained a neutrality,
which he esteemed becoming the dignity of his of-
fice; and having been intrufded by Parliament with
the command of the principal fortress in the king-
dom, he resolved that neither faction should get it
into their hands.

Maitnd A FEW days before the retreat of the Congrega-
rvotirfrom tion, the Queen suffered an irreparable loss by the
othea defetion of her principal Secretary, William Mait-

land of Lethington. His zeal for the Reformed re-
ligion, together with his warm remonstrances against
the violent measures which the Queen was carrying
on, exposed him so much to her resentment, and
to that of her French counsellors, that he, fufper-
ing his life to be in danger, withdrew secretly from
Leith, and fled to the Lords of the Congregation §;
and they, with open arms, received a convert, whole
abilities added both strength and reputation to their
cauie. Maitland had early applied to public buii-
ness admirable natural talents, improved by an ac-
quaintance wirh the liberal arts; and, at a time of
life, when his countrymen of the fame quality were
following the pleasures of the chace, or serving as
adventurers in the armies of France, he was admit-
ted into all the ccrets of the cabinet, and put upon
: Kei:h, Append. 33. Knox, z:. SKnox, 192.

a level

a level with persons of the molt consummate expe- B o o K
rience in the management of affairs. He possessed, II.
in an eminent degree, that intrepid spirit, which '-v
delights in pursuing bold designs, and was no less '559
master of that political art and dexterity.which is
necessary for carrying them on with success. But
these qualities were deeply tinctured with the neigh-
bouring vices. His address sometimes degenerated
into cunning; his acuteness bordered upon excess of
subtlety and refinement; his invention, over fertile,
suggested to him, on some occasions, chimerical sys-
tems of policy, little suitable to the genius of the
age; and his enterprizing spirit engaged him in pro-
jects, vast and splendid, but beyond his utmost
power to execute. All the cotemporary writers to
whatever faction they belong, mention him with
an admiration, which nothing could have excited
but the greatest superiority of penetration and abi-
lities.

THE precipitate retreat of the Congregation in-

creased, to such a degree, the terror and confusion
which had seized them at Edinburgh, that before
they reached Stirling, their army dwindled to an
inconsiderable number. The spirit of Knox, how-
ever, still remained undaunted and ere&t, and
having mounted the pulpit, he addressed, to his
desponding hearers, an exhortation which wonder-
fully animated and revived them. The heads of
this discourse are inserted in his history *, and afford
P striking example of the boldness and freedom of

* Knox, 193.

reproof

B o o K reproof assumed by the first Reformers, as well as a

III. specimen of his own skill in chufing the topics most
~r- fitted to influence and route his audience.
I559.

TheLords A MEETING of the leaders being called, to con-
gretion fider what course they should hold, now that their

lto Faeal own resources were all exhausted, and their deftruc-
beth. tion appeared to be unavoidable, without foreign

aid; they turned their eyes once more to England,
and resolved to implore the assistance of Elizabeth
towards finihfing an enterprise, in which they had
so fatally experienced their own weakness, and the
strength of their adversaries. Maitland, as the most
able negociator of the party, was employed in this
embassy. In his absence, and during the inactive
season of the year, it was agreed to dismiss their fol-
lowers, worn out by the fatigues of a campaign,
which had so far exceeded the usual time of service.
But, in order to preserve the counties molt devoted
to their interest, the Prior of St. Andrew's, with
part of the leaders, retired into Fife. The Duke
of Chatelherault, with the reft, fixed his residence
at Hamilton. There was little need of Maitland's
address or eloquence to induce Elizabeth to take his
country under her protefion. She observed the
prevalence of the French counsels, and the progress
of their arms in Scotland, with great concern; and
as fne well foresaw the dangerous tendency of their
fehemes in that kingdom, ihe had already come to
a resolution with regard to the part she herself would
a&, if their power there should grow still more for-
midable.

. .. .~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~I

IN order to give the Queen and her Privy Coun- B o o -

cil a full and distinct view of any important matter III.
which might come before them, it seems to have '--v-
been the practice of Elizabeth's Ministers to prepare M1559'
memorials, in which they clearly stated the point vh;c' de-

termined

under deliberation, laid down the grounds of the hertoffit
conduc, which they held to be most reasonable, them.
and proposed a method for carrying their plan into
execution. Two papers of this kind, written by Sir
William Cecil with his own hand, still remain *
they are intitled, " A ihort discussion of the weighty
" matter of Scotland," and do honour to the in-
duftry and penetration of that great Minister. The
motives, which determined the Queen to espouse so
warmly the defence of the Congregation, are repre-
sented with perspicuity and force; and the confe-
quences of suffering the French to eftablilh them-
selves in Scotland, are prediced with great accuracy
and discernment.

HE lays it down as a principle, agreeable to the

laws both of God and of nature, that every society
hath a right to defend itself, not only from present
dangers, but from such as may probably ensue; to
which, he adds, that nature and reason teach every
Prince to defend himself by the fame means, which
his adversaries employ to distress him. Upon these
grounds, he establishes the right of England to in-
terpofe in the affairs of Scotland, and to prevent the
conquest of that kingdom, at which the French
openly aimed. The French, he observes, are the
f Burn. vol. iii. Append. 283. Keith, Append. 24.

ancient

B o o K ancient and implacable enemies of England. Hof-

III. tilities had subsisted between the two nations for
I.-- -- many centuries. No treaty of peace, into which
1559. they entered, had ever been cordial or sincere. No

good effect was therefore to be expea-ed from the
peace lately agreed upon, which being extorted by
present necessity, would be negligently observed,
and broken on the slightest pretences. In a very
short time, France would recover its former opu-
lence; and though now drained of men and money
by a tedious and unsuccessful war, it would quickly
be in a condition for a&ing, and the restless and
martial genius of the people would render action
necessary. The Princes of Lorrain, who at that
time had the entire direction of French affairs, were
animated with the most virulent hatred against the
English nation. They openly called in question the
legitimacy of the Queen's birth, and by advancing
the title and pretensions of their niece the Queen of
Scotland, fthdied to deprive Elizabeth of her Crown.
With this view, they had laboured to exclude the
English from the treaty of Chateau en Cambrefis,
and endeavoured to conclude a separate peace with
Spain. They had persuaded Henry II. to permit
his daughter-in-law to assume the title and arms of
Q(leen of England; and even since the conclusion
of the peace, they had solicited at Rome, and ob-
tained a bull, declaring Elizabeth's birth to be ille-
gitimate. And though the wisdom and moderation
of the Conifable Montmorency had, for some time,
checked their career, yet these restraints being now
removed by the death of Henry II. and the dilgrace
,f his AMr.if[er, the u-moft excesses of violence were

tQ

to be dreaded from their furious ambition, armed B o o K
with sovereign power. Scotland is the quarter, III.
whence they can attack England with most advan- '"
tage. A war on the borders of that country ex- I59-
poses France to no danger, but one unsuccessful ac-
tion there may hazard the Crown, and overturn the
government of England. In political conduc, it
is childish to wait till the designs of an enemy be
ripe for execution. The Scottilh nobles, after their
utmost efforts, have been obliged to quit the field;
and far from expelling the invaders of their liber-
ties, they behold the French power daily increasing,
and must at last cease from struggling any longer in
a contest so unequal. The invading of England
will immediately follow the reduEtion of the Scot-
tifh malecontents, by the abandoning of whom to
the mercy of the French, Elizabeth will open a
way for her enemies into the heart of her own king-
dom, and expose it to the calamities of war, and
the danger of conquest. Nothing therefore remained
but to meet the enemy while yet at a distance from
England, and by supporting the Congregation with
a powerful army, to render Scotland the theatre of
the war, to crush the designs of the Princes of Lorrain
in their infancy, and, by such an early and unex-
peted effort, to expel the French out of Britain,
before their power had time to take root, and grow
up to any formidable height. But as the matter
was of as much importance, as any which could
fall under the consideration of an English Monarch,
wisdom and mature counsel were necessary in the first
place, and afterwards vigour and expedition in con-

du&;

B o K duc; the danger was urgent, and, by losing a

III. single moment, might become unavoidable*.
1559. THESE arguments produced their full effe&t up-

on Elizabeth, who was jealous, in an extreme de-
gree, of every pretender to her Crown, and no less
anxious to preserve the tranquillity and happiness of
her fubjets. From these motives ihe had acted, in
granting the Congregation an early supply of mo-
ney; and from the fame principles she determined,
in their present exigency, to afford them more es-
fetual aid. One of Maitland's attendants was in-
ftanty dispatched into Scotland with the strongest
assurances of her protetion, and the Lords of the
Congregation were desired to fend commissioners
into England to conclude a treaty, and to fettle
the operations of the campaign, with the Duke of
Norfolk t.

he Queen MEAN while, the Queen Regent, from whom
Do,,wag no motion of the Congregation could long be con-
mnean while
fcnds her cealed, dreaded the success of this negociation with
Fpech the court of England, and foresaw how little ihe
troops a-
gsidi would be able to resist the united effort of the two

te kingdoms. For this reason he determined, if pof-

fible, to get the start of Elizabeth; and by ventur-
ing, nowvithftanding the inclemency of the winter
season, to attack the malecontents in their present

' The arguments which the Scots employed, in order to ob-

tain Elizabeth's affillance, are urged with great force, in a pa-
per of Maitland's. See Appendix, No. II.

1t Geith, Il4.f

dispersed

dispersed and helpless situation, she hoped to put B o o i
an end to the war, before the arrival of their Eng- III.
lih allies. -

1559.

A CONSIDERABLE body of her French forces,

who were augmented, about this time, by the ar-
rival of the Count de Martigues, with a thousand
veteran foot, and some cavalry, were commanded to
march to Stirling. Having there crossed the Forth,
they proceeded along the coast of Fife, destroying
and plundering, with exceflive outrage, the houses
and lands of those whom they esteemed their ene-
mies. Fife was the most populous and powerful
country in the kingdom, and most devoted to the
Congregation, who had hitherto drawn from thence
their most considerable supplies, both of men and
provisions; and therefore, besides punilhing the dif-
affection of the inhabitants, by pillaging the coun-
try, the French proposed to seize and fortify St. An-
drew's, and to leave in it a garrison sufficient to bridle
the mutinous spirit of the province, and to keep pof-
session of a port situated on the main ocean.

BUT on this occasion, the Prior of St. Andrew's,

Lord Ruthven, Kirkaldy of Grange, and a few of
the most active leaders of the Congregation, per-
formed, by their bravery and good conduct, a ser-
vice of the utmost importance to their party. Hav-
ing assembled fix hundred horse, they infested the
French with continual incursions, beat up their
quarters, intercepted their convoys of provisions,
cut off their itraggling parties, and so harassed them

with

B o o K with perpetual alarms, that they prevented them for

III. more than three weeks from advancing *
1560. AT laif the Prior, with his feeble party, was

constrained to retire, and the French set out from
Kirkaldy, and began to move along the coast to-
wards St. Andrew's. They had advanced but a
Janna-yz3. few miles, when from an eminence they descried a

powerful fleet fleering its course up the Frith of
Forth. As they knew that the Marquis D'Elbeuf
was, at that time, preparing to fail for Scotland
with a numerous army, they hastily concluded that
there ships belonged to him, and gave way to the
most immoderate transports of joy, on the profpe&
of this long expe&ed succour. Their great guns
were already fired to welcome their friends, and to
spread the tidings and terror of their arrival among
their enemies, when a small boat from the opposite
coast landed, and blasted their premature and ihort-
lived triumph, by informing them, that it was the
fleet of England which was in fight, intended for
the aid of the Congregation, and was soon to be
followed by a formidable land army t.
TheEnalfh THROUGHOUT her whole reign, Elizabeth was

tarrives cautious, but decisive; and by her promptitude in
toiter. executing her resolutions, joined to the deliberation

with which she formed them, her administration
became remarkable, no lets for its vigour, than for
its wisdom. No sooner did she determine to afford
her protection to the Lords of the Congregation,

' Knox. o02. t Ibid. zc3.

than

than they experienced the a&ivity, as well as the B o o K
extent of her power. The season of the year would III.
not permit her land army to take the field; but left '--
the French should, in the mean time, receive new i56'o
reinforcements, she instantly ordered a strong fqua-
dron to cruise in the Frith of Forth. She seems,
by her inftru&ions to Winter her Admiral, to have
been desirous ofpreferving the appearances offriend-
ship towards the French*. But these were only ap-
pearances; if any French fleet mould attempt to
land, he was commanded to prevent it, by every a&c
of hostility and violence. It was the fight of this
squadron, which occasioned at first lo much joy
among the French, but which toon inspired them
with such terror, as saved Fife from the effects of
their vengeance. Apprehensive of being cut off
from their companions on the opposite shore, they
retreated towards Stirling with the utmost precipi-
tation, and, in a dreadful season, and through roads
almof: impassable, arrived at Leith, harassed and
exhausted with fatiguet.

THE English fleet cast anchor in the road of

Leith, and continuing in that station till the con-
clufion of peace, both prevented the garrison of
Leith from receiving succours of any kind, and con-
fiderably facilitated the operations of their own
forces by land.

SOON after the arrival of the English squadron, They con-

elude a
the Commissioners of the Congregation repaired to reaty with

England.
Keith, Appendix 45. +l Knox, 203. Feb. 27.

Berwick,

B o o K Berwick, and concluded with the Duke of Norfolk,

III. a treaty, the bond of that union with Elizabethi
ó-- - which was of so great advantage to the cause. To

' give a check to the dangerous and rapid progress of

the French arms in Scotland, was the professed de-
sign of the contra&ing parties. In order to this,
the Scots engaged never to susser any closer union
of their country with France; and to defend them-
selves to the uttermost against all attempts of con-
quest; and for their assistance, Elizabeth promised
to employ, in Scotland, a powerful army, which
the Scots undertook to join with all their forces; no
place in Scotland was to remain in the hands of the
Englilh ; whatever should be taken from the enemy
was either to be rafed, or kept by the Scots, at their
choice; if any invasion should be made upon Eng-
land, the Scots were obliged to aflift Elizabeth with
part of their forces; and to ascertain their faithful
observance of the treaty, they bound themselves to
deliver hostages to Elizabeth, before the march of
her army into Scotland; in conclusion, the Scots
made many protestations of obedience and loyalty
towards their own Queen, in every thing not incon-
fiftent with their religion, and the liberties of their
country *.

The Ens- THE English army, conrifting of fix thousand
ly amY foot, and two thousand horse, under the command
to Leith. of Lord Gray of Wilton, entered Scotland early in
Aprl 2 the Spring. The members of the Congregation as-

fembled from all parts of the kingdom to meet their

* Knox, 217.

new

new allies; and having joined them with great mul- B o o K
titudes of their followers, they advanced together III.
towards Leith. The French were little able to keep
the field againit an enemy so much superior in nuri- I 560,
ber. A strong body of troops, deitined for their
relief, had been scattered by a violent form, and
had either perilhed on the coast of France, or with
difficulty had recovered the ports of that kingdom *.
But they hoped to be able to defend Leith, till the
Princes of Lorrain ihould make good the magnifi-
cent promises of assistance, with which they daily
encouraged them; or till scarcity ofprovifions should
constrain the Englilh to retire into their own coun-
try. In order to haiten this latter event, they did
not negle& the usual, though barbarous precaution
for diftrefling an invading enemy, by burning and
laying waste all the adjacent country t. The zeal,
however, of the nation fruitrated their intentions;
eager to contribute towards removing their oppref-
fors, the people produced their hidden itores to sup-
port their friends; the neighbouring counties sup-
plied every thing necessary, and far from wanting
subsistence, the English found, in their camp, all
forts of provisions, at a cheaper rate than had for
some time been known in that part of the king-
dom t.

ON the approach of the English army, the Queen

Regent retired into the castle of Edinburgh. Her
health was now in a declining stare, and her mind
broken and depressed by the misfortunes of her ad-

*Mem. de CaRlel. 450. t Knox, 225. T Knox, ibid,
VOL, . Q mini-

B o o K miniflration. To avoid the danger and fatigue of

III. a liege, she committed herself to the protection of
v.'' Lord Erikine. This nobleman still preserved his
560. neutrality, and by his integrity, and love of his

country, merited equally the esteem of both parties.
He received the Queen herself with the utmost ho-
nour and refpec, but took care to admit no such
retinue, as might endanger his command of the
caffle*.
April 6. A FEw days after they arrived in Scotland, the

English invefled Leith. The garrison, ihut up
within the town, was almost half as numerous as the
army which fat down before it, and by an obstinate
defence protrated the siege to a great length. The
circurmifances of this siege, related by cotemporary
historians, men without knowledge or experience in
the art of war, are often obscure and imperfet, and
at this distance of time are not considerable enough
to be entertaining.

AT first the French endeavoured to keep posses-

sion of the Hawk Hill, a rising ground not far dif-
April 15. tant from the town, but were beat from it with

great slaughter, chiefly by the furious attack of the
Scottish cavalry. Within a few days, the French
had their full revenge; having sallied out with a
strong body, they entered the Englih trenches,
broke their troops, nailed part of their cannon, and
killed at leaf double the number they had loft in
the former skirmish. Nor were the English more

Forbes's Collet. vol. i. 503. Keith, IZ2.

fortunate

fortunate in an attempt which they made to take the B o O K
place by assault; they were met with equal courage, I.i
and repulsed with considerable loss. From the de- 56o.
tail of these circumstances by the writers of that age, May 7.
it is easy to observe the different charaaers of the
French and English troops. The former, trained
to war, under the ative reigns of Francis I. and
Henry II. defended themselves not only with the
bravery, but with the skill of veterans. The latter,
who had been more accustomed to peace, still pre-
served the intrepid and desperate valour peculiar to
the nation, but discovered few marks of military
genius, or of experience in the practice of war. r.
Every misfortune or disappointment during the siege ' i'
muff be imputed to manifest errors in conduct. 'The
success of the besieged in their sally was owing en-
tirely to the security and negligence of the English:
many of their officers were absent; their soldiers had
left their stations; and the trenches were almost
without a guard. The ladders, which had been J
provided for the assault, wanted a great deal of the
necessary strength; and the troops employed in that
service were ill supported. The trenches were open-
ed, at firfl, in an improper place; and as it was ;
found expedient to change the ground, both time
and labour were loft. The weakness of their own ;
Generals, no less than the strength of the French
garrison, rendered the progress of the English won-
derfully flow. The length, however, of the siege, and
the loss of part of their magazines by an accidental
fire, reduced the French to extreme distress, which the

Qt2 profpec

B o o K profpe& of relief made them bear with admirable

III. fortitude.
i56o. WHILE the hopes and courage of the Frenchpro-

tra&ed the siege so far beyond expe&ation, the lead-
ers of the Congregation were not idle. By new as-
fociations and confederacies, they laboured more
perfetly to unite their party. By publickly ratify-
ing the treaty concluded at Berwick, they endea-
voured to render the alliance with England firm and
indissoluble. Among the subscribers of these pa-
pers, we find the Earl of Huntly, and some others,
who had not hitherto concurred with the Con-
* gregation in any of their measures *. Several of

these Lords, particularly the Earl of Huntly, still
adhered to the Popilh church; but on this occasion,
neither their religious sentiments, nor their former
cautious maxims, were regarded; the torrent of na-
tional reientment and indignation against the French
hurried them on t.

* Bumr. vol. 2ii .

7. Knox, 22,

t The dread of the French power did, on itany occasions,

surmount the zeal which the Catholic nobles had for their re-
ligion. Besides the presumptive evidence for this, arising from
the memorial mentioned by Burnet, Hill. of the Reformation,
vol. iii. z81. and publilhed by him, App. p. 278; the infirut-
tions of Elizabeth to Randolph her agent, put it beyond all
doubt, that many zealous Papifls thought the alliance with Eng-
land to be necessary for preferring the liberty and independence
of the kingdom. Keith, ;8. Huntly himself began a corre-
fpondence with Elizabeth's Ministers, before the march of the
Englifli army into Scotland. Haynes's State Papers, z6z, z63.
See Append. No. 1I.

THE

THE Queen Regent, the instrument, rather than B o o K

the cause of involving Scotland in those calamities, III.
under which it groaned at that time, died during ' `

! i560.

the heat of the siege. No Princess ever possessed Death and
qualities more capable of rendering her adminiftra- :hraerof
tion illuifrious, or her people happy. Of much Dowager.
discernment, and no less address; of great intrepi- Jun lo
dity, and equal prudence; gentle and humane, with-
out weakness; zealous for her religion, without bi-
gotry; a lover ofjuftice, without rigour. One cir-
cumftance, however, and that, too, the excess of a
virtue, rather than any vice, poisoned all there great
qualities, and rendered her government unfortunate,
and her name odious. Devoted to the interest of
France, her native country, and attached to the
Princes of Lorrain her brothers, with most pafion-
ate fondness; she departed, in order to gratify them,
from every maxim, which her own wisdom or hu-
manity would have approved. She outlived, in a
great measure, that reputation and popularity, which
had smoothed her way to the highest station in the
kingdom; and many examples of falsehood, and
some of severity, in the latter part of her adminiftra-
tion, totally alienated from her the affetions of a
people, who had once placed in her an unbounded
confidence. But, even by her enemies, these un-
justifiable actions were imputed to the facility, not
to the malignity of her nature; and while they taxed
her brothers, and French counsellors, with rashness
and cruelty; they fill allowed her the praise of pru-
dence and of lenity*. A few days before her death,

* uchan. 324.

Ihe

B o o K she desired an interview with the Prior of St. An-

III-.: drew's, the Earl of Argyll, and other chiefs of the
'-y -. Congregation. To thermfhe lamentedthe fatal issue

- ofthofe.violent councils, which.fhe had been oblig-

ed- to follow; and, with the. candour. natural to a
generous. mind, confeffedthe errors of her own ad-
- -minilation,, and begged forgiveness of; those, to

whom they. had been hurtful; but, at the fame time,
the warned ,them, amidft,their ftruggles,for, liberty,
and the;iihock of arms, not to lose fight of the
loyalty and fubje&ion,, which was due .to their fove-
reign-*. .The remainder ofher time, lhe employed
in religious meditations and .exercises. She even in-
vited.the attendance, of, Willox, one of the most
eminene among the Reford.. preachers, -listened to
his inftrucions with reverence and attentiont, and
prepare ;-for the approach,.of death with a decent
fortitude.. .

the Freca NTOHI NG could nowfave the French troops, shut
toconclde Up .in :eith, but the . immediate conclusion of a

peace, or the arrival of a -powerful army from the
continent. The .Princes. of Lorrain amused their
parry in Scotland, with cqntjnuual exp.ecations of the
latter, and had thereby kept :

alive their hopes and

their courage.: But a t.lat,i the situation of France,
rather-llant the terror -of .,he Engliih arms, or the
remonfiraIces. of -the. .ScottEl.h male-contents, con-
ftrained-them, though with relu-tance, to turn their
thoughts to0wards.p:cific.councils. .-T.he Protestants
in France were, at that. time a payrt.formidable by.

*Lefly, de Rebus Gelt. Scot. 222. ;f ;nox, Z;8.

their

their number, and more by the valour and enter- B o o K
prifing genius of their leaders. Francis II. had III.
treated them with extreme rigour, and discovered, 'y`
by every ftep he took, a fettled resolution to extir- I560.
pate their religion, and to ruin those who professed
it. At the profpe& of this danger to themselves,
and to their cause, the Protestants were alarmed,
but not terrified. Animated with zeal, and inflam-
ed with resentment, they not only prepared for their
own defence, but resolved, by some bold a&ion, to
anticipate the schemes of their enemies; and as the
Princes of Lorrain were esteemed the authors of all
the King's violent measures, they marked them out,
to be the first victims of their indignation. Hence,
and not from any disloyalty to the King, proceeded
the famous conspiracy of Amboise; and though the
vigilance and good fortune of the Princes of Lor-
rain discovered and disappointed that design, it was March 5:
easy to observe new storms gathering in every pro-
vince of the kingdom, and ready to burf out with
all the fury and outrage of civil war. In this fitua-
tion, the ambition of the house of Lorrain was call-
ed off from the thoughts of foreign conquests, to
defend the honour and dignity of the French crown,
and instead of fending new reinforcements into Scot-
land, it became necessary to withdraw the veteran
troops already employed in that kingdom *.

IN order to condu& an affair of so much import- The nego

ance and delicacy,, the Princes of Lorrain made ciations for
choice of Monluc Bilhop of Valence, and of the pose.

Lefly, 224.

~/"W^~ ~ Sieur

B o o K Sieur de Randan, As both these, especially the for-

III.- mer, were reckoned inferior to no persons of that
i'-6o. age, in address and political refinement; Elizabeth
i560.

opposed to them Ambassadors of equal abilities;
Cecil' her Prime Minister, a man perhaps of the
greatest capacity who had ever held that office; and
,Wotton Dean of Canterbury, grown old in the art
of negociating under three successive Monarchs.
The interests of the French and English courts were
soon adjuffed by men of so great dexterity in bufi-
ness; and as France easily consented to withdraw
those forces, which had been the chief occasion of
the war; the other points in dispute, between that
kingdom and England, were not matters of tedi-
ous, or of difficult discussion.

THE grievances of the Congregation, and their

demands upon their own Sovereigns for redress, em-
ployed longer time, and required to be treated with
a more delicate hand. Afterfo many open attempts,
carried on by command of the King and Queen,
in' order to overturn the ancient constitution, and
to suppress the .religion which they had embraced,
the Scottish nobles could not think themselves fe-
cure, without fixing some new barrier againit the
future encroachments of regal power, But the le-
gal steps towards accomplihfing this were not so ob-
vious. The French ambassadors confidered the en-
tering into any treaty with subje&s, and with rebels,
as a condescension unworthy the dignity of a Sove-
reign; and their scruples on this head might have
put an end to the treaty, if the impatience of both
parties for peace had not suggested an expedient,

which

which seemed to provide for the security of the sub- B o o K
jet, without derogating from the honour of the lII.
Prince. The Scottish nobles agreed, on this oeca- I560.
sion, to pass from the point of right and privilege, Articles of
and to accept the redress of their grievances, as a the treaty.
matter of favour. Whatever additional security
their anxiety for personal safety, or their zeal for
public liberty, prompted them to demand, was
granted in the name of Francis and Mary, as a.s
of their royal favour and indulgence. And left
concessions of this kind Ihould seem precarious, and
liable to be retrated by the fame power which
had. made them, the French ambafador agreed to
insert them in the treaty with Elizabeth, and there-
by to bind the King and Queen inviolably to obT
serve them *.

IN relating this tranfafion, cotemporary hiftori-

ans have confounded the concessions of Francis and
Mary to their Scottish subje&s, with the treaty be-
tween France and England; the latter, betides the
ratification of former treaties between the two king-
doms, and stipulations with regard to the time and
manner of removing both armies out of Scotland,
contained an article, to which, as the source of
many important events, we ihall often have occa-
sion to refer. The right of Elizabeth to her crown
is thereby acknowledged in the flrongeft terms;
and Francis and Mary solemnly engage, neither to
assume the title, nor to bear the arms of King and
Q9een of England, in any time to come.

* Keith, 134, &c.

Ho-

B o o K HONOURABLE as this article was for Elizabeth

III. herself, the conditions fhe-obtained for her allies the
'--- ' Scots were no less advantageous to them. Mon-

56o. Iluc and Randan consented, in the name of Francis
jt 6.

and Mary, that the French forces in Scotland should
instantly be sent back into their own country, and
no foreign troops be hereafter introduced into the
kingdom without the knowledge and consent of
Parliament; that the fortifications of Leith and
Dunbar should immediately be rafed, and no new
fort be erected without the permission of Parlia-
ment; that a Parliament should be held on the
first day of August, and that assembly be deemed
as valid, in all refpe&s, as if it had been called by
the express commandment of the King and Queen;
that, conformable to the ancient laws and customs
of the country, the King and Queen should not de-
clare war, or conclude peace, without the concur-
rence of Parliament; that, during the Queeh's ab-
fence, the administration of government fhould'be
vested in a council of twelve:perfons, to be chosen
out of twenty-four named by Parliament, seven of
which council. to be ele&ed by the Queen, and five
by the Parliament; that hereafter, the King and
Queen should not advance foreigners to places of
trust or dignity in the kingdom,: nor confer the of-
sices of Treasurer or Comptroller of the Revenues
upon any ecclesiastic; that-an a& of oblivion, abo-
lifing the guilt and memdry- of all offences, com-
mitted since the:6fth of March; -i558, should be
passed in the ensuing Parliament, and be ratified by
the King and Queen; that: the King and Queen
Ihould not, under colour of punithing any violation

."..: of

of their authority during that period, seek to de- B o o K;
prive any of their fubjecs of the offices, benefices, IIl.
or estates which they now held; that the redress .v-5
due to churchmen, for the injuries which they had i56o.
sustained during the late insurrections, lhould be
left entirely to the cognizance of Parliament. With
regard to religious controversies, the Ambassadors
declared that they would not presume to decide, but
permitted the Parliament, at their first meeting, to
examine the points in difference, and to represent
their sense of them to the King and Queen*.

To such a memorable period, did the Lords of the The efacs

Congregation, by their courage and perseverance, o it
conduc an enterprise, which, at firit, promised a
very different issue. From beginnings extremely
feeble, and even contemptible, the party grew. by
degrees to great power; and being favoured by
many fortunate incidents, baffled all the efforts of
their own Queen, aided by the forces of a more con-
fiderable kingdom. The sovereign authority was, by
this treaty, transferred wholly into the hands of the
Congregation; that limited prerogative, which the
Crown had hitherto possessed, was almoR entirely
annihilated; and the ariftocraticai power, which al-
ways predominated in the Scottilh government, be-
came fupreme'and! uncontrolable. By this treaty,
too, the influence of France, which had long been
of much weight in the affairs of Scotland, was
greatly diminilhed, and not only were the present
encroachments of that ambitious ally restrained, but,

* Keith, 137, &c.

by

B o o K by confederating with England, protection was pro-

Ill. vided against any future attempt from the fame
-,'--I9 quarter. At the fame time, the controversies in
i560. religion being left to the consideration of Parlia-

ment, the Protestants might reckon upon obtaining
whatever decision was most favourable to the opi-
nions which they profeiffd.

A FEW days after the conclusion of the treaty,

both the French and English armies quitted Scot-
land.

Pafria- FTHE eyes of every man in that kingdom were
.nent held. * . D

turned towards the approaching Parliament. A
meeting, summoned in a manner so extraordinary,
at such a critical juncture, and to deliberate upon
matters of so much consequence, was expected with
the utmost anxiety.

A SCOTTISH Parliament, suitable to the ariftocra-

tical genius of the government, was properly an
affembly-of the nobles. It was composed of Bi-
shops, Abbots, Barons, and a few commissioners
of burroughs, who met all together in one house.
The Lesser Barons,, though possessed of a right to
be preferit, either in person, or by their reprefenta-
tives,' seldom exercised it. The expence of attend-
ing, according to the faihion of the times, with a
numerous train of'v.afals and dependants; the in-
attention of the age, to any legal or regular system
of government; but above all, the exorbitant au-
thority of the greater nobles, who had drawn the
whole power into their own hands, made this pri-

vilege

vilege of so littlevalue, as to be almost neglected. B o o K
It appears from the ancient rolls, that during times HI.
of tranquillity, few commissioners of burroughs, ' "
and almost none of the Lesser Barons appeared in 1560.
Parliament. The ordinary administration of go-
vernment was abandoned without scruple orjealoufy,
to the King, and to the Greater Barons. But in ex-
traordinary conjunftures, when the struggle for li-
berty was violent, and the spirit of opposition to
the Crown rose to an height, the Burgesses and
Lesser Barons were roused from their inactivity,
and flood forth to vindicate the rights of their coun-
try. The turbulent reign of James III. affords ex-
amples in proof of this observation *. The pub-
lic indignation against the rash designs of that weak
and ill advised Prince, brought into Parliament,
besides the greater nobles and prelates, a confider-
able number of the Lesser Barons.

THE fame causes occasioned the unusual conflu-

ence of all orders of men to the Parliament, which
met on the first of August. The universal passion
for liberty, civil and religious, which had seized the
nation, suffered few persons to remain unconcerned
spectators of an assembly, whose ads were likely to
prove decisive with respect to both. From all, cor-
ners of the kingdom, men flocked in, eager and
determined to aid, with their voices in the senate,
the fame cause, which they had defended with their
swords in the field. Besides a full convention of
Peers, Temporal and Spiritual, there appeared the
representatives of almost all the burroughs, and

above
* Keith, 147.

B o o K above an hundred Barons, who, though of the les-
III. ser order, were gentlemen of the first rank and for-
' v -' tune in the nation *
i56o.

THE Parliament was ready to enter on bufenefs

with the utmost zeal, when a difficulty was started
concerning the lawfulness of the meeting. No
Commiflioner appeared in the name of the King
and Queen, and no signification of their consent and
approbation was yet received. There were deemed,
by many, essential to the very being of a Parliament.
But, in opposition to this sentiment, the express
words of the treaty of Edinburgh were urged, by
which this assembly was declared to be as valid, in
all refpe&s, as if it had been called and ap-
pointed by the express command of the King and
Queen. As the adherents of the Congregation
greatly out-numbered their adversaries, the latter
opinion prevailed. Their boldest leaders, and those
of mofr approved zeal, were chosen to be Lords of
the Articles, who formed a committee of ancient
use, and of great importance in the Scottish Parlia-
ment. The deliberations of the Lords of the Ar-
ticles were carried on with the molt unanimous and
ative zeal. The act of oblivion, the nomination
of twenty-four persons, out of whom the council,
intrusted with supreme authority, was to be eleced;
and every other thing prescribed by the late treaty,
or'which seemed necessary to render it effe&ual,

p paiited without dispute or delay. The article of re-

cedingr, ligion employed longer time, and was attended with
o i^i greater difficulty. It was brought into Parliament,

by
· Keith, 146.

by a petition from those who had adopted the prin- B o K
ciples of the Reformation. Many docrines of the III.
Popilh church were a contradiction to reason, and a - -
disgrace to religion; its discipline had become cor- 156o0
rupt and oppressive; and its revenues were both ex-
orbitant and ill-applied. Against all these the Pro-
teitants remonstrated with the utmost severity of
style, which indignation at their absurdity, or expe-
rience of their pernicious tendency, could inspire;
and encouraged, by the number and zeal of their
friends, to improve such a favourable juncture, they
aimed the blow at the whole fabric of Popery; and
besought the Parliament to interpose their authority
for recifying these multiplied abuses *

SEVERAL prelates, zealously attached to the an-

cient superstition, were present in this Parliament.
But during these vigorous proceedings of the Pro-
teftants, they flood confounded, and at a gaze;
and persevered in a silence which was fatal to their
cause. They esteemed it impossible to resist or di-
vert that torrent of religious zeal, which was still
in its full strength; they dreaded that their oppo-
fition would irritate their adversaries, and excite
them to new a&s of violence; they hoped that the
King and Queen would soon be at leisure to put a
stop to the career of their insolent fubjecs, and that,
after the rage and havock of the present storm, the
former tranquillity and order would be restored to
the church and kingdom. They were willing, per-
haps, to sacrifice the dotrine, and even the power

Knox, p. 237.

of

B o o K of the church, in order to ensue the safety of their

II. own persons, and to preserve the possession of those
*----- revenues, which were still in their hands. From
56. ° whatever motives they acted, their silence, which

was imputed to the consciousness of a bad cause,
afforded matter of great triumph to the Protestants,
and encouraged them to proceed with more bold-
ness and alacrity *.

THE Parliament did not think it enough to con-

demn those dotrines mentioned in the petition of
the Protestants; they, moreover, gave the sanction
of their approbation to a Confeflion of Faith, pre-
sented to them by the Reformed teachers t, and
composed, as might be expeced from such a per-
formance at thatjuncure, on purpose to expose the
absurd tenets and practices of the Romish church.
By another a&, the jurifdition of the ecclesiastical
courts was abolished, and the causes, which for-
merly came under their cognizance, were tranf-
ferred to the decision of civil judges t. By a third
flatute, the exercise of religious worship, according
to the rites of the Romish church, was prohibited.
The manner in which the Parliament enforced the
observation of this law discovers the zeal of that
afsemblv; the first transgression subjected the offen-
der to the forfeiture of his goods, and to a corpo-
ral punishment, at the discretion of the judge; ba-
nifiment was the penalty of a second violation of
the law; and a third act of disobedience was de-
clared to be capital §. Such strangers were men,

Knox, 253. t Id. Ibid. Keith, 15z. § Knox, 254.

at

St that time, to the spirit of toleration, and to the B o o K
laws of humanity; and with such indecent haste III.
did the very persons, who had just escaped the ri- - ~'
gour of ecclesiastical tyranny, proceed to imitate I560°
those examples of severity, of which they themselves
had fojuftly complained.

THE vigorous zeal of the Parliament overturned, w;it re*

gard to the

in a few days, the ancient system of religion, which reenues of
had been effablifhed so many ages. In reforming the cllu"I,
the doctrine and discipline of the church, the no-
bles kept pace with the ardour and expecations even
of Knox himself. But their proceedings, with re-
Ipeft to these, were not more rapid and impetuous,
than they were flow and dilatory when they entered
on the consideration of ecclesiastical revenues,
Among the lay members, tome were already en-
riched with the spoils of the church, and others
devoured in expectation the wealthy benefices which
tfill remained untouched. The alteration in religion
had afforded many of the dignified ecclesiastics
themselves, an opportunity of gratifying their ava-
rice or ambition. The demolition of the monafte-
ries, having set the Monks at liberty from their
confinement, they instantly dispersed all over the
kingdom, and commonly betook themselves to some
secular employment. The Abbot, if he had been
so fortunate as to embrace the principles of the Re-
formation from conviction, or so cunning as to es-
poufe them out of policy, seized the whole reve-
nues of the fraternity, and, except what he allowed
for the subsistence of a few superannuated Monks *,

* Keith, 496. Appcnd. 190, 191.
01.. I. R applied

B o o K applied them entirely to his own use. The propo-

III. fal made by the Reformed teachers, for applying
' there revenues towards the maintenance of Ministers,

the education of youth, and the support of the
poor, was equally dreaded by all these orders of
men. They oppoied it with the utmost warmth,
and by their numbers and authority, easily prevailed
on the Parliament to give no ear to such a disagree-
able demand *. Zealous as the first Reformers
were, and animated with a spirit superior to the
low considerations of interest, they beheld these
early symptoms of felfifhnefs and avarice among
their adherents, with indignation; and we find Knox
expressing the utmost sensibility of that contempt,
with which they were treated by many, from whom
he expe&ed a more generous concern for the success
of religion, and the honour of its Ministers t.

The vaSr A DIFFICULTY hath been started, with regard to
ptyali tm the afts of this Parliament, concerning religion.
q "i.Qx This difficulty, frivolous in itself, and at this dif-

tance of time of no importance, is founded on the
words of the treaty of Edinburgh. By that, the
Parliament was permitted to take into consideration
the state of religion, and to signify their sentiments
of it to the King and Queen. But, instead of pre-
senting their desires to their Sovereigns, in the hum-
ble form of a supplication or address, the Parlia-
ment converted them into so many a&s; which,
although they never received the royal assent, ob-
tained, all over the kingdom, the weight and au-

See Append. No. V. f Knox, 239. 256.

thority

thority of laws. In compliance with their injunc- B o o K
tions, the established system of religion was every 1II.
where overthrown, and that recommended by the '.
Reformers introduced in its place. The partiality
and zeal of the people overlooked or supplied any
defet in the form of these aas of Parliament, and
rendered the observance of them more universal
than ever had been yielded to the statutes of the
most regular or constitutional affemblv. By those
proceedings, it must, however, be confefed that
the Parliament, or rather the nation, violated the
last article in the treaty of Edinburgh, and even
exceeded the powers which belong to subjects. But
when once men have been accustomed to break
through the common boundaries of fubjeAion; and
their minds are inflamed with the passions which
civil war inspire; it is mere pedantry or ignorance
to measure their condu& by those rules, which can
be applied, only where government is in a state of
order and tranquillity. A nation, when obliged to
employ such extraordinary efforts in defence of its
liberties, avails itself of every thing which can pro-
mote this great end; and the necessity of the cafe,
and the importance of the objet, justify any de-
parture from the common and eftabliflled forms' of
the constitution.

IN consequence of the treaty of Edinburgh, as Ambafir-
well as by the ordinary forms of business, it became dors fntr

by the lar-

necessary to lay the proceedings of Parliament be- liamentto
fore the King and Queen. For this purpose, Sir France,
James Sandilands of Calder Lord St. John, was
appointed to repair to the court of France. After

R 2 holding

B o o R holding a course so irregular, the nobles had no rea-

III. son to flatter themselves that Francis and Mary would
'- l' ever approve their condu&, or confirm it by their
i56o. royal assent. The reception of their Ambassador was

no other than they might have expected. He was
treated by the King and Queenwith the utmost cold-
ness, and difinifed without obtaining the ratifica-
tion of the Parliament's proceedings. From the
Princes of Lorrain and their partisans, he endured
all the scorn and insult, which it was natural for
them to pour upon the party he represented *

and toEln- THOUGH the Earls of Morton, Glencairn, and
2beth'. Maitland of Lethington, the Ambassadors of the

Parliament to Elizabeth their Protectress, met with
a very different reception; they were not more fuc-
cefsful in one part of the negociation intruded to
their care. The Scots, sensible of the security which
they derived from their union with England, were
desirous of rendering it indissoluble. With this
view, they empowered these eminent leaders of their
party to testify to Elizabeth their gratitude for
that seasonable and effeftual aid which Ihe had as-
forded them, and at the fame time, to beseech her
to render the friendship between the nations perpe-
tual, by condescending to marry the Earl of Arran,
who, though a fubje&, was nearly allied to the
royal family of Scotland, and, after Mary, the un-
doubted heir to the Crown.

To the former part of this commiiflon Elizabeth
listened with the utmolt fatisfation, and encouraged

' Knox, 255. Bud-. 327.

the

the Scots, in an- future exigency, to hope for the B o o K
continuance of her good offices; with regard to the III.
latter, fie discovered those sentiments to which fihe 'ó
adhered throughout her whole reign. Averse from i56o
marriage, as some pretend through choice, but
more probably out of policy, that ambitious Prin-
cess would never admit any partner to the throne;
but delighted with the entire and uncontrolled ex-
ercife of power, she sacrificed to the enjoyment of
that, the hopes of transmitting her Crown to her
own posterity. The marriage with the Earl of
Arran could not be attended with any such extra-
ordinary advantage, as to shake this resolution; she
declined it therefore, but with many expressions of
good will towards the Scottiih nation, and of re-
spec for Arran himself*.

TOWARDS the conclusion of this year, diftinguilh- The death

ed by so many remarkable events, there happened f Francis
one of great importance. On the 4th of Decem-
ber, died Francis II. a Prince of a feeble conifitu-
tion, and of a mean understanding. As he did not
leave any issue by the Queen, no incident could
have been more fortunate to those, who, during
the late commotions in Scotland, had taken part
with the Congregation. Mary, by the charms of
her beauty, had acquired an entire ascendant over
her husband ; and as she transferred all her influence
to her uncles the Princes of Lorrain, Francis fol-
lowed them implicitly in whatever track they were
pleased to lead him. The power of France, under
such direction, alarmed the Scottish malecontents,

* Burn. 3. Append. 308. K 4ith, Ij4, &c.

with

B o o K with apprehensions of danger, no less formidable,

III. than well founded. The intestine disorders which
r'-'' raged in France, and the seasonable interposition of
i560- England in behalf of the Congregation, had hi-

therto prevented the Princes of Lorrain from carry-
ing their designs upon Scotland into execution. But
under their vigorous and decisive administration, it
was impossible that the commotions in France could
be of long continuance, and many things might
fall in to divert Elizabeth's attention, for the future,
from the affairs of Scotland. In either of these
events, the Scots would itand exposed to all the ven-
geance, which the resentment of the French court
could inflit. The blow, however long suspended,
was unavoidable, and must fall at last with redou-
bled weight. From this profpe& and expecation of
danger, the Scots were delivered by the death of
Francis; the ancient confederacy of the two king-
doms had already been broken, and by this event,
the only bond of union which remained was diffolv-
ed. Catherine of Medicis, who, during the mino-
rity of Charles IX. her second son, engrossed the
entire direction of the French councils, was far
from any thoughts of vindicating the Scottish
Queen's authority. Catherine and Mary had been
rivals in power during the reign of Francis II. and
had contended for the government of that weak
and unexperienced Prince; but as the charms of the
wife easily triumphed over the authority of the mo-
ther, Catherine could never forgive such a difap-
pointment in her favourite passion, and beheld now,
with secret pleasure, the difficult and perplexing
scene, on which her daughter-in-law was about to

enter,

enter. Mary, overwhelmed with all the sorrow B o o K
which so fad a reverse of fortune could occasion; III.
flighted by the Queen-mother * and forsaken by ' '
the tribe of courtiers, who appear only in the fun- Mry re
Ihine of prosperity, retired to Rheims, and there, tires from
in solitude indulged her grief, or hid her indigna- France.
tion. Even the Princes of Lorrain were obliged to
contra& their views; to turn them from foreign to
domestic objects; and instead of forming vast pro-
je&s with regard to Britain, found it necessary to
think of acquiring, and eftablilhing an interest with
the new adminitration.

IT is impossible to describe the emotions of joy,

which, on all these accounts, the death of the French
Monarch excited among the Scots. They regarded
it as the only event which could give firmness and
itability to that system of religion and government,
which was now introduced; and it is no wonder
cotemporary historians should ascribe it to the im-
mediate care of Providence, which by unforeseen
expedients, can secure the peace and happiness of
kingdoms, in those situations, where human pru-
dence and invention would utterly despair t.

ABOUT this time, the Protestant church of Scot- E£nblin

land began to assume a regular form. Its princi- ment of
pies had, obtained the fanltion of public authority, anfchYref
and some fixed external policy became necessary for goern'-

ment.

the government and preservation of the infant so-
ciety. The model introduced by the Reformers,
differed extremely from that, which had been so
*Henault, 340. Cailen. 454. t Knox, 259.

long

Bo o K long eilablifhed. The motives, which induced them

III. to depart so far from the ancient system, deserve to
CiS ~" be explained.
56o.

As the vices of the clergy had, at firif, excited

the indignation of mankind, and routed that spirit
of inquiry, which proved so fatal to the whole
Popish fvfrem: As this difguff at the vices of ec-
clefialf:ccwa, soon transferred to their persons, and,
shifting from them, by no violent transition, fettled
at lafl on the offices which they enjoyed; the effects
of the Reformation would naturally have extended
not only to the do&trine, but to the government
of the Popilh church; and the fame spirit which
abolished the former, would have overturned the
latter. But, in a great part of Germany, in Eng-
land, and in the northern kingdoms, its operations
were checked by the power and policy of their Prin-
ces: and the ancient Episcopal jurifdition, under
a few limitations, was still continued in those
churches. The episcopal hierarchy appears to be
more conformable to the practice of the church, since
Christianity became the established religion of the Ro-
man empire. The ecclesiastical government was, at
that time, plainly copied from the civil; the first not
only borrowed its form, but derived its authority
from the latter; and the dioceses and jurifdi&ions of
Patriarchs, Archbishops, and Bishops, corresponded
with the division and confritution of the empire. In
Switzerland, and the Low-countries, the nature of
the government allowing full scope to the genius of
the Reformation, all pre-eminence of order in the

church

church was destroyed, and an equality established B o o K
more suitable to the spirit of republican policy. The III.
situation of the primitive church suggested the -
idea, and furnished the model of the latter fyflem, I560
which has since been called Pre-hyterian. The first
Christians, oppressed by continual persecutions, and
obliged to hold their religious assemblies by stealth,
and in corners, were contented with a form of go-
vernment extremely simple. The influence of reli-
gion concurred, with the sense of danger, in ex-
tinguifhing among them, the spirit of ambition, and
in preserving a parity of rank, the effeEt of their
fifferings, and the cause of many of their virtues.
Calvin, whose decisions were' received, among the
Protestants of that age, with incredible submission,
was the patron and restorer of this scheme of ec-
clefiaftical policy. The church of Geneva, formed
under his eye, and by his direction, was esteemed
the most perfec model of this government; and
Knox, who, during his residence in that city, had
fludied and admired it, warmly recommended it to
the imitation of his countrymen.

AMONG the Scottish nobility, tome hated the per-

rons, and others coveted the wealth of the dignified
clergy; and by abolishing that order of men, the
fornmer indulged their resentment, and the latter hop-
ed to gratify their avarice. The people, inflamed
with the most violent aversion of Popery, and ap-
proving of every scheme that departed farthest from
the practice of the Romilh church, were delighted
with a system, so admirably suited to their predomi-
nant paflion. While the friends of civil liberty be-

held,

B o o K held, with pleasure, the Protestant clergy pulling

III. down, with their own hands, the fabric of ecclefi-
" -' affical power, which their predecessors had reared

-560- with so much art and industry; and flattered them-

selves, that, by lending their aid to strip churchmen
of their dignity and wealth, they might entirely de-
liver the nation from their exorbitant and oppressive
jurifdi&ion. The new mode of government easily
made its way among men, thus prepared, by their
various interests and passions, for its reception.

BUT, on the first introduaion of his system, Knox

did not deem it expedient to depart altogether from
the ancient form *. Instead of Bilhops, he propos-
ed to eftablifi ten or twelve Superintendants in dif-
ferent parts of the kingdom. These, as the name
implies, were empowered to infpec the life and doc-
trine of the other clergy. They presided in the in-
ferior judicatories of the church, and performed fe-
veral other parts of the Episcopal function. Their
jurifdition, however, extended to sacred things
only; they claimed no feat in Parliament, and pre-
tended no right to the dignity, or revenues, of the
former Bishops.

THE number of inferior clergy, to whom the care

of parochial duty could be committed, was still ex-
tremely fiall; they had embraced the principles of
the Reformation at different times, and from various
motives; during the public commotions, they were
scattered, merely by chance, over the different pro-

Spotfwood, 1,8.

vinceg

vinces of the kingdom; and, in a few places only, B o o K
were formed into regular classes or societies. The III.
firlt general assembly of the church, which was held -
this year, bears all the marks of an infant and un- Dm. 20o
formed society. The members were but few in
number, andof no considerable rank; no uniform
or consistent rule seems to have been observed in
electing them. From a great part of the kingdom
no representatives appeared. In the name of some
entire counties, but one person was present; while,
in other places, a tingle town or church sent several
members. A convention, so feeble and irregular,
could possess no great authority; and conscious of
their own weakness, the members put an end to their
debates, without venturing upon any decision of
much importance *.

IN order to give greater ltrength and consistence I56r.

to the Prelbyterian plan, Knox, with the assistance
of his brethren, composed the first book of difci-
pline, which contains the model or platform of the
intended policy t. They presented it to a conven-
tion of estates, which was held in the beginning of
this year. Whatever regulations were proposed with Jan. 15
regard to ecclesiastical discipline and jurifdicion,
would have easily obtained the fantion of that as-
fembly; but a design to recover the patrimony of
the church, which is there insinuated, met with a
very different reception.

IN vain did the clergy display the advantages

which would accrue to the public, by a proper ap-
.' Jeith, 498. t Spotfiv. 52.

plication

B o o K plication ofecclefiaftical revenues. In vain did they

III. propose, by an impartial distribution of this fund,

ó- Y- to promote true religion, to encourage learning, and
x56i. to support the poor. In vain did they even inter-

mingle threatenings of the divine displeasure against
the unjust detainers of what was appropriated to a
sacred use. The nobles held fast the prey, which
they had seized; and bellowing upon the proposal,
the name of a devout imagination, they affected to
confider it as a proje& altogether visionary, and
treated it with the utmost scorn *.

The Q~ee THIS convention appointed the Prior of St. An-
invitcd to
rura into drew's to repair to the Queen, and to invite her to
Cotland. return into her native country, and to assume the

reins of government, which had been too long com-
mitted to other hands. And though some of her
fubjecs dreaded her return, and others foresaw dan-
gerous consequences with which it might be attend-
ed t, the bulk of them desired it with so much ar-
dour, that the invitation was given with the greatest
appearance of unanimity. But the zeal of the Ro-
man Catholics got the start of the Prior, in paying
court to Mary; and Lefly, afterwards bishop of
Ross, who was commissioned by them, arrived be-
fore him at the place of her residence :. Lefly
endeavoured to infuse into the Queen's mind, fufpi-
cions of her Protestant subjects, and to persuade her
to throw herself entirely into the arms of those who
adhered to her own religion. For this purpose, he
inifted that she should land at Aberdeen; and as
* Knox, z;6. See Append. No. V. T Lefly, 227.

the

the Protestant doctrines had made rio considerable B o ol
progress in that part of the kingdom, he gave her III.
assurance of being joined, in a few days, by 20,coo
men; and flattered her, that with such an army, i5
encouraged by her presence and authority, she might
easily overturn the Reformed church, before it was
firmly fettled on its foundations.

BUT at this jun&ure, the Princes of Lorrain were

not disposed to liften to this extravagant and dan-
gerous proposal. Intent on defending themfelve3
againit Catherine of Medicis, whose insidious policy
was employed in undermining their exorbitant pow-
er, they had no leisure to attend to the affairs of
Scotland, and wished their niece to take possession
of her kingdom, with as little disturbance as pof-
fible. The French officers, too, who had served
in Scotland, dissuaded Mary from all violent mea-
fures; and, by representing the power and number
of the Protestants to be irresistible, determined her
to court them by every art; and rather to employ
the leading men of that party as her ministers, than
to provoke them, by a fruitless opposition, to be-
come her enemies *. Hence proceeded the confi-
dence and affection, with which the Prior of St. An-
drew's was received by the Queen. His fepre-
fentation of the frate of the kingdom gained great
credit; and Lefly beheld, with regret, the new
channel in which court favour was likely to run.

ANOTHER Convention of Estates was held in
May. The arrival of an Ambassador fi-om France,

- Me!:. 61.

seems

B o OK seems to have been the occasion of this meeting;

IH. He was instructed to solicit the Scots to renew their
' Y3' ancient alliance with France, to break their new

confederacy with England, and to restore the Popish
ecclefiafics to the possession of their revenues, and
the exercise of their funcions. It is no easy matter
to form any conjecure concerning the intentions of
the French court, in making there extraordinary and
ill-timed propositions. They were reje&ed with
that scorn, which might well have been expe&ed
from the temper of the nation *.

IN this convention, the Protestant clergy did not

obtain a more favourable audience than formerly,
and their profpe& of recovering the patrimony of the
church fiill remained as distant and uncertain as ever.
But with regard to another point, they found the
zeal of the nobles in no degree abated. The book
of discipline seemed to require, that the monuments
of Popery, which fill remained in the kingdom,
should be demolifhedt; and, though neither the
fame pretence of policy, nor the fame ungovernable
rage of the people, remained to justify or excuse this
barbarous havoc, the Convention, confidering every
religious fabric as a reliE of idolatry, passed fen-
tence upon them by an aet in form; and persons,
the most remarkable for the activity of their zeal,
were appointed to put it in execution. Abbies, ca-
thedrals, churches, libraries, records, and even the
sepulchres of the dead, perished in one common
ruin. The storm of popular insurrection, though

Knox, 269, 273. tSpotfwood, S13.

impe-

impetuous and irresistible, had extended only to B o o Ki
a few counties, and soon spent its rage; but now a III.
deliberate and universal rapine completed the de- --V
vaftation of every thing, venerable and magnifi- I56I'
cent, which had escaped its violence *.

IN the mean time, Mary was in no haste to re- Mary be-

turn into Scotland. Accustomed to the elegance, gare so P'i
splendour, and gaiety of a polite court, she tfill fond-
ly lingered in France, the scene of all these enjoy-
ments, and contemplated, with horror, the barba-
rifm of her own country, and the turbulence of her
subje&s, which presented her with a very different
face of things. The impatience, however, of her
people, the persuasions of her uncles, but above all,
the studied and mortifying negle&, with which The
was treated by the Queen-mother, forced her to
think of beginning this disagreeable voyaget. But
while the was preparing for it, there were sown be-
tween her and Elizabeth, the feeds of that personal
jealousy and discord, which embittered the life, and
Shortened the days of the Scottish Queen.

THE ratification of the late treaty of Edinburgh Origin or

was the immediate occasion of this fatal animosity; betweden er
the true causes of it lay much deeper. Almost and Eli7a-
every article, in that treaty, had been executed by
both parties, with a scrupulous exactness. The for-
tifications of Leith were demolished, and the armies
of France and England withdrawn within the ap-
pointed time. The grievances of the Scottish male-

Spotfwood, 174. t Brantone, Jebb, vol. ii. 482.

contents

B o o i contents were redressed, and- they had obtainec

III. whatever they could demand for their future fecu-

.-- rity. With regard to all these, Mary could have
-561' little reason to decline, or Elizabeth to urge, the

ratification of the treaty.

THE sixth article remained the only source of

contest ard difficulty. No Minister ever entered
more deeply into the schemes of his Sovereign, or
pursued them with more dexterity and success thari
Cecil. In the conduct of the negociation at Edin-
burgh, the found understanding of this able politi-
cian had proved greatly an overmatch for Monluc's
refinements in intrigue, and had artfully induced the
French Ambassadors, not only to acknowledge that
the Crowns of England and Ireland did of right be-
long to Elizabeth alone, but also to promire, that in
all times to come, Mary lhould abstain from using
the titles, or bearing the arms of those kingdoms.

THE ratification of this article would have been

of the most fatal consequence to Mary. The Crown
of England was an object worthy of hei ambitioi.
Her pretensions to it gave her great dignity and im-
portance in the eyes of all Europe. By many, her
title was efleemed preferable to that of Elizabeth,
Among the Englilh themselves, the Roman Catho-
lics, who formed, at that time, a numerous and ac-
tive party, openly espoused this opinion; and even
the Protestants, who supported Elizabeth's throne,
could not deny the Queen of Scots to be her ilnme-
diate heir. A proper opportunity to avail herself
of all these advantages, could nor, in the course of

things,

things, be far distant, and many incidents might B o o K
fall in, to bring this opportunity nearer than was III.
expected. In these circumstances, Mary, by ra-
tifying the article in dispute, would have loft that i56i-
rank which Ihe had hitherto held among neighbour-
ing Princes; the zeal of her adherents must have
gradually cooled; and she might have renounced,
from that moment, all hopes of even wearing the
Englith Crown.

NONE of these beneficial consequences escaped the

penetrating eye of Elizabeth, who, for this reason,
had recourse to every thing, by which Ihe could hope
either to tooth or frighten the Scotti/h Queen into
a compliance with her demands; and if that Pi:in-
cess had been so unadvised as to ratify the rash con-
cessions of her Ambassadors, Elizabeth, by: that
deed, would have acquired an advantage, which,
under her management, must have turned to great
account. By such a renunciation, the queltign,
with regard to the right of fuccefli0n, would:have
been left altogether open and undecided; and, by
means of that, Elizabeth might either have kept her
rival in perpetual anxiety and dependance, or, by
the authority of her Parliament, she might have
broken in upon the order of lineal succession, and
transferred the Crown to some other descendant of
the royal blood. The former conduct she observed
towards James VI. whom, during his whole reign, She
held in perpetual fear and fubjetion. The latter,
and more rigorous method of proceeding, would,..in
all probability, have been employed against Mary,

VOL. I. S whom,

B o OK whom, for many reasons, ihe both envied and

III. hated,
I56I' NOR was this ftep beyond her power, unplece-

dented in the history, or inconsistent with the con-
ftitution of England. Though succession by here-
ditary right be an idea so natural and so popular,
that it has been eftablilhed in almost every civilized
nation, yet England affords many memorable in-
stances of deviations from that rule. The Crown of
that kingdom having once been seized by the hand
of a conqueror, this invited the bold and enterprif-
ing in every age to imitate such an illustrious ex-
ample of fortunate ambition. From the time of
William the Norman, the regular course of descent
had seldom continued through three successive reigns.
Those Princes, whose intrigues or valour opened to
them a way to the throne, called in the authority of
the great council of the nation to confirm their du-
bious tites. Hence, parliamentary and hereditary
right became in England- of equal consideration.
That great assembly claimed and atually possessed a
power of altering the order of regal succession; and
even so late as Henry VIII. an act of Parliament
had authorized that capricious Monarch to fettle
the order of succession at his pleasure. The Eng-
liih, jealous of their religious liberty, and averse
from the dominion of strangers, would have eager-
ly adopted the passions of their sovereign, and
might have been easily induced to exclude the Scot-
tilh line from the right of succeeding to the Crown.
These seem to have been the views of both Queens,

and

and these were the difficulties which retarded the B o o K
ratification of the treaty of Edinburgh. II1.

BUT, if'the sources of their discord were to be 56i

traced no higher than this treaty, an inconsiderable
alteration in the words of it, might have brought the
present question to an amicable issue. The indefinite
and ambiguous expression, which Cecil had inserted
into the treaty, might have been changed into one
more limited, but more precise; and Mary, instead
of pzomifing to abstain from bearing the title of
Queen of England in all times to come, might have
engaged not to assume that title, during the life of
Elizabeth, or the lives of her lawful posterity.

SUCH an amendment, however, did not suit the

views of either Queen. Though Mary had been
obliged to suspend, for some time, the prosecution
of her title to theEnglifh crown, Ihe had not how-
ever relinquished it. She determined to revive her
claim, on the first profpeft of success, and was un-
willing to bind herself, by a positive engagement,
not to take advantage of any such fortunate occur-
rence. Nor would the alteration have been more
acceptable to Elizabeth, who, by agreeing to it,
would have tacitly recognized the right of her rival
to ascend the throne after her decease. But neither
the Scottish nor Englifl Queen durst avow these fe-
cret sentiments of their hearts. Any open discovery
of an inclination to disturb the tranquillity of Eng-
land, or to wrest the sceptre out of Elizabeth's
hands, might have proved fatal to Mary. Any sus-
picion of a design to alter the order of fucceflion,

S 2 and

B o o and to set aside the claimn of the Scottifhl Quee-n>

-III. would have exposed Elizabeth to much and deferv-
c.-'.-' ed censure, and have raited up against her many and

r dangerous enemies. These, however carefully

concealed, or artfully difgouifed, were, in all proba-
bility, the real motives which determined the one
Queen to solicit, and the other to receive the ratifi-
cation of the treaty, in its original form; while nei-
ther had recoufe to that explication of it, which to
an heart unwarped by political interest, and fin-
cerely desirous of an union and concord, would'have
appeared so obvious and natural.

BuT though considerations of interest first occa-

sioned this rupture between the British Queens, ri-
vallhip of another kind contributed to widen the
breach, and female jealousy increased the violence
of their political hatred. Elizabeth, with all those
extraordinary qualities, by which she equalled or
surpassed such of her sex, as have merited the great-
eft renown, discovered an admiration of her own
person, .to a degree, which women of ordinary un-
terftandings either do not entertain, or prudently
endeavour to conceal. Her attention to dress, her
solicitude to display her charms, her love of flattery,
were all exeeffive. Nor were these weaknesses con-
fined to that period of life, when they are more pa-
donable. Even in very. advanced years, the wisest
woman of that, or perhaps of any other age, wore
the garb, and affected the manners of a girl*.

Johnflon Hill. Rer. Bri:an. 346, 347. Carte, vol. iii. 699.
^'atalogue of Royal rad Noble Au:hors. Article Ejix.

Though

Though Elizabeth was as much inferior to Mary, B o o K
in beauty, and gracefulness ofperfon, as ihe excel- IIl
led her in political abilities, and in the arts of go- -'
vernment, fhewas weak enough to compare herself i56-
with the Scottish Queen *; and as it was impossible
the could be altogether ignorant' how much Mary
gained by the comparison, she envied and hated her
as a rival, by whom she was eclipsed. In judging
of the condut of Princes, we are apt to ascribe too
much to political motives, and too little to the pas-
sions which they feel in common with the reft of
mankind. In order to account for Elizabeth's pre-
sent, as well as her subsequent conduct towards
Mary, we must not always confider her as a Queen,
we muff sometimes regard her as a woman.

ELIZABETH, though no stranger to Mary's diffi-

culties with refpeat to the treaty, continued to urge
her, by repeated applications, to ratify it t. Mary,
under various pretences, still contrived to gain time,
and to elude the request. But while the one Queen
solicited with persevering importunity, and the other
evaded with artful delay, they both fludied an ex-
treme politeness of behaviour, and loaded each other
with professions of fifferly love, with reciprocal de-
clarations of unchangeable esteem and amity,.

IT was not long before Mary was convinced, that, izmabeth

among Princes, these expreflions of friendship are refuses
commonly far distant from the heart. In failing yua

od

from France to Scotland, the course lies along the
i Melvil, 98. t Keith, 157, 16o, &c.

S 3 English

B o K Engli/h coast. In order to be safe from the insults

III. of the English fleet, or, in cafe of tempeituous wea-
'-,' ther, to secure a retreat in the harbours of that king-

15I- dom, Mary sent M. D'Oyfel to demand of Eliza-

beth a fafe-condu& during her voyage. This re-
quest, which decency alone obliged one Prince to
grant to another, Elizabeth rejeted, in such a man-
ner, as gave rife to no flight suspicion of a design,
either to obftruc the passage, or to intercept the
person of the Scottish Queen *.

Marnbe- THIS ungenerous behaviour of Elizabeth filled
g;ns h= Mary with indignation, but did not retard her de-

V. parture from France. She was accompanied to Ca-

lais, the place where she embarked, in a manner suit-
able to her dignity, as the Queen of two powerful
kingdoms. Six Princes of Lorrain, her uncles, with
many of the most eminent among the French nobles,
were in her retinue. Catherine, who secretly re-
joiced at her departure, graced it with every circum-
itance of magnificence and refpeft. After bidding
adieu to her mourning attendants, with a fad heart,
and eves bathed in tears, Mary left that kingdom,
the snort but only scene of her life, in which for-
tune smiled upon her. While the French coast con-
tinued in fight, fle intently gazed upon it, and
muting, in a thoughtful posture, on that height of
fortune whence fie had fallen, and presaging, per-
haps, the disasters and calamities which embittered
the remainder of her days, the sighed often, and
cried our, "Farewell France ! farewell beloved coun-
' Kcih, Ti1. Cam.den. See Appendix, No. VI.

' try,

" try, which I shall never more behold!" Even B o o K
when the darkness of the night had hid the land III.
from her view, she would neither retire to the cabin, 'V
nor taste food, but commanding a couch to be pla- 156x.
ced on the deck, ihe there waited the return of day,
with the utmost impatience. Fortune toothed her.
on this occasion; the galley made little way during
the night. In the morning, the coast of France
was still within fight, and she continued to feed her
melancholy with the prospect and as long as her
eyes could distinguish it, to utter the fame tender
expressions of regret *. At last a brisk gale arose,
by the favour of which for some days, and after-
ward under the covert of a thick fog, Mary escaped
the English fleet, which lay in wait to intercept
her t; and on the i th of August, after an absence Arrives in
of near thirteen years, landed safely at Leith in her scoand.
native kingdom,

MARY was received by her fubjets with (houts

and acclamations of joy, and with everydemonftra-
tion of welcome and regard. But as her arrival was
unexpected, and no suitable preparation had been
made for it, they could not, with all their efforts,
hide from her the poverty of the country, and were
obliged to conduct her to the palace of Holyrood-
house with little pomp. The Queen, accustomed
from her infancy to splendour and magnificence, and
fond of them, as was natural at her age, could not
help observing the change in her situation, and
seemed to be deeply asseted with it:,

* Brantome, 483. He himself was in the fame galley with

theQueen. t Goodal, vol .
i. 175. Caftlen. 4~5, t Brant. 484,

NEVEB,

B o o { -NEVER did any Prince ascend the throne at a

III. junrcure which called for more wisdom in council,

- or more courage and steadiness in action. The rage

Statcf56'h of religious controversy was frill unabated. The
I-igdom at memory of past oppreflion exasperated the Protef-
that time.

tants; the smart of recent injuries rendered the Pa-
pifts desperate; both were zealous, fierce, and irre-
concilable. The absence of their Sovereign had
accustomed the nobles to independence; and dur-
ing the late commotions, they had acquired such an
increase of wealth, as threw great weight into the
icale of the arifrocracy, which stood not in need
of any accession of power. The kingdom had long
been under the government of Regents, who exer-
cifed a delegated jurisdiction, attended with little au-
thority, and which inspired no reverence. A ifate
of pure anarchy had prevailed for the two lalt
vears, without a Regent, without a supreme council,
without the power, or even the form of a regular go-
vernment*. A licentious spirit, unacquainted with
iubordination, and disdaining the refsraints of law
and justice, had spread among all ranks of men.
The influence of France, the ancient ally of the
kingdom, was withdrawn or defpiled. The English,
of enemies become confederates, had grown into
confidence with the nation, and had gained an as-
cendant over all its councils. The Scottish Mo-
rarchs did not derive more 1plendour or power from
the friendflhip of the former, than they had reason
to dread injury and diminution fronm the interpofi-
rion of the latter. Every consideration, whether of

* Keith, Appendix 92.

interest,

interest, or of felf-prefervation, obliged Elizabeth B o o K
to depress the royal authority in Scotland, and to 1II.
create the Prince perpetual difficulties, by foment- 6
ing the spirit ofdiffatisfa&ion among the people.

IN this posture were the affairs of Scotland, when

the administration fell into the hands of a young
Queen, not nineteen years of age, unacquainted
with the manners and laws of her country, a ftran-
ger to her fubjeds, without experience, without
allies, and almost without a friend.

ON the other hand, in Mary's situation we find

some circumstances, which, though they did not
balance these disadvantages, contributed, however,
to alleviate them; and, with skilful management,
might have produced great effets. Her subje&s,
unaccustomed so long to the residence of their Prince,
were not only dazzled by the novelty and splendour
of the royal presence, but inspired with awe and re-
verence. Besides the places of power and profit
bestowed by the favour of a Prince, his prote&ion,
his familiarity, and even his smiles, confer honour
and win the hearts of men. From all corners of
the kingdom, the nobles crowded to testify their
duty and affe&ion to their sovereign, and tfudied,
by every art, to wipe out the memory of patmmif-
condu&, and to lay in a frock of future merit. The
amusements and gaiety of her court, which was
filled with the moit accomplished of the French no-
bility, who had attended her, began to soften and
to polifl the rude manners of the nation. Mary
herself possessed many of those qualifications, which

raise

B o o raise affection, and procure esteem. The beauty

III. and gracefulness of her person drew universal ad-

'- -r miration, the elegance and politeness of her man-
x 5i ners commanded general refpet. To all the charms

of her own sex, she added many of the accomplish-
ments of the other. The progress she had made in
all the Arts and Sciences, which were then esteemed
necessary or ornamental, was far beyond what is
commonly attained by Princes; and all her other
qualities were rendered more agreeable by a courte-
ous affability, which, without lessening the dignity
of a Prince, iteals on the hearts of subje&s with a
bewitching insinuation.

FROM. there circumltances, notwithifanding the

threatening afpe& of affairs at Mary's return into
Scotland, notwithstanding the clouds which gather-
ed on every hand, a political observer would have
prediced a very different issue of her reign; and
whatever sudden gusts of faction he might have
expected, he would never have dreaded the deifruc-
tive violence of that storm which followed.

WHILE all parties were contending who ihould

discover the most dutiful attachment to the Queen,
the zealous and impatient spirit of the age broke
out in a remarkable instance. On the Sunday after
her arrival, the Queen commanded mass to be ce-
lebrated in the chapel of her palace. The first ru-
mour of this occasioned a secret murmuring among
the Protestants who attended the court; complaints
and threatenings soon followed; the servants belong-
ing to the chapel were insulted and abused; and, if

the

the Prior of St. Andrew's had not seasonably inter- B o o x
posed, the rioters might have proceeded to the III.
utmost excesses *. S

x561.

IT is impossible, at this distance of time, and

under circumstances so very different, to conceive
the violence of that zeal against Popery, which then
possessed the nation. Every instance of condescension
to the Papiffs was esteemed an acq of apoftacy, and
the toleration of a single mass pronounced to be
more formidable to the nation than the invasion of
ten thousand armed men t. Under the influence of
there opinions, many Protestants would have ven-
tured to go dangerous lengths; and, without at-
tempting to convince their Sovereign by argument,
or to reclaim her by indulgence, would have abrupt-
ly denied her the liberty of worshipping God in that
manner, which alone she thought acceptable to him.
But the Prior of St. Andrew's, and other leaders of
the party, not only restrained this impetuous spirit;
but, in spite of the murmurs of the people, and
the exclamations of the preachers, obtained for
the Queen and her domestics the undisturbed exer-
cife of the Catholic Religion. Near an hundred
years after this period, when the violence of religi-
ous animofities had begun to subside, when time
and the progress of learning had enlarged the views
of the human mind, an Englilh House of Com-
mons refused to indulge the wife of their Sovereign
in the private use of the mass. The Protestant
leaders deserve, on this occasion, the praise both of
wisdom and of moderation for conduci so different.

* Knox, 284. + Ibid. 287.

But,

B o o K But, at the fame time, whoever reflets upon the

III. encroaching and sanguinary spirit of Popery, will
'-r-' be far from treating the fears and caution of the

more zealous Reformers as altogether imaginary
and destitute of any real foundation.

THE Protestants, however, by this compliance

with the Queen's prejudices, obtained a proclama-
tion highly favourable to their religion. The Re-
formed dotrine, though established all over the
kingdom, had never received the countenance or
Aug. -. sanction of royal authority. On this occasion, the

(Qeen declared any attempt towards an alteration
or subversion of it, to be a capital crime*.

She cr- THE Queen, conformable to the plan which had
p:,soply been concerted in France, committed the admini-
rrotildants
m the ad- ftration of affairs entirely to Protestants. Her
Iin: tra.

.ran council was filled with the most eminent perforts of

that party; not a single Papist was admitted into any
degree of confidence t. The Prior of St. Andrew's
and Maitland of Lethington seemed to hold the
firfr place in the Queen's affection, and possessed
all the power and reputation of favourite Ministers.
Her choice could not have fallen upon persons more
acceptable to her people; and, by their prudent ad-
vice, Mary conducted herself with so much mode-
ration, and deference to the sentiments of the na-
tion, as could not fail of gaining the affection of
her lubjects, the firmest foundation of a Prince's
power, and the only genuine source of his happi-
ncfs and glory.

K erith, 504. liKnco, zS5. I Lefly, 235.

A COR-

A CORDIAL reconcilement with Elizabeth was B o o ic

another objec of great importance to Mary; and III.
though she seems to have had it much at heart, in 6

i56I.

the beginning of her administration, to arcomplifh Attempts'
such a desirable conjunction, yet many events oc- t gain£Ei-
curred to widen, rather than to close the breach. fa:our.
The formal offices of friendflip, however, are fel-
dom negle&ed among Princes, and Elizabeth, who
had attempted so openly to obitru& the Queen's
voyage into Scotland, did not fail, a few days after
her arrival, to command Randolph to congratulate
her safe return. Mary, that she might be on equal
terms with her, sent Maitland to the English court,
with many ceremonious expressions of regard for
Elizabeth*. Both the Ambassadors were received
with the utmost civility; and, on each fide, the
professions of kindness, as they were made with
little sincerity, were liflened to with proportional
credit.

BOTH were intrufded, however, with something

more than mere matter of ceremony. Randolph
urged Mary, with frelh importunity, to ratify the
treaty of Edinburgh. Maitland endeavoured to
amuse Elizabeth, by apologizing for the dilatory
conduct of his Mistress with regard to that point.
The multiplicity of public affairs since her arrival in
Scotland, the importance of the queflion in dispute,
and the absence of many noblemen, with whom she
was obliged in decency to consult, were the pre-
tences offered in excuse for her condu&; the real

Keith, 181, &c.

causes

B o causes of it were those, which have already been

III. mentioned. But, in order to extricate herself out

v of these difficulties, into which the treaty of Edin-
156I- burgh had led her, Mary was brought to yield a

point, which formerly the seemed determined never
to give up. She inftru&ed Maitland to signify her
willingness to disclaim any right to the crown of
England, during the life of Elizabeth, and the lives
of her posterity; if, in failure of these, she were
declared next heir by a& of Parliament *.

REASONABLE as this proposal might appear to

Mary, who thereby precluded herself from disturb-
ing Elizabeth's possession of the throne, nothing
could be more inconsistent with Elizabeth's interest,
or more contradictory to a pafflon, which predomi-
nated in the chara&er of that Princess. Notwith-
standing all the great qualities which threw such
lustre on her reign, we may observe, that ihe was
tinctured with a jealousy of her right to the Crown,
which often betrayed her into mean and ungenerous
actions. The peculiarity of her situation heighten-
ed, no doubt, and increased, but did not infuse
this patfion. It descended to her from Henry VII.
her grandfather, whom, in several features of his
characer, the nearly resembled. Like him, the sus-
sered the title by which she held the Crown to rc-
main ambiguous and controverted, rather than sub-
mit it to parliamentary difcuflion, or derive any
addition to her right, from such authority. Like
him, she observed every pretender to the succession,
not only with that attention, which prudence pre-

*Camden, 387. Buch. 329.

scribes;

scribes; but with that aversion, which suspicion in- B o o
spires. The present uncertainty with regard to the IIIl
right succession, operated for Elizabeth's advan- '- '
tage, both on her subje&s, and on her rivals. A- 1561.
mong the former, every lover of his country re-
garded her life as the great security of the national
tranquillity; and chore rather to acknowledge a
title which was dubious, than to search for one that
was unknown. The latter, while nothing was de-
cided, were held in dependence, and obliged to
court her. The manner in which {he received this
ill-timed proposal of the Scottish Queen, was no
other than might have been expected. She reje&-
ed it in a peremptory tone, with many expressions
of a resolution never to permit a point of so much
delicacy to be touched.

ABOUT this time, the Queen made her public Sept. I.

entry into Edinburgh with great pomp. Nothing
was negle&ed, which could express the duty and as-
section of the citizens towards their Sovereign. But
amidst there demonstrations of regard, the genius
and sentiments of the nation discovered themselves,
in a circumstance, which, though inconsiderable,
ought not to be overlooked. As it was the mode
of the times to exhibit many pageants at every pub-
lic solemnity; most of these, on this occasion, 'were
contrived to be representations of the vengeance
which the Almighty had infliced upon idolaters *.
Even while they studied to amuse and to flatter the
Queen, her subjects could not refrain from testify-

*Keith, 189.

ing

B o o K ing their abhorrence of that religion which she pro-

HII. sessed.

r56i.
Re-iri To restore the regular administration of justice,
the litce and to reform the internal policy of the country,
dre.. became the next obje& of the Queen's care. The

laws ena&ed for preservation of public order, and
the security of private property, were nearly the
fame in Scotland, as in every other civilized country.
But the nature of the Scottish constitution, the im-
potence of regal authority, the exorbitant power of
the nobles, the violence of faction, and the fierce
manners of the people, rendered the execution of
these laws feeble, irregular, and partial. In the
counties which border on England, this defe wias
most apparent; and the consequences of it molt
sensibly felt. The inhabitants, ifrangers to indus-
try, averfefrom labour, and unacquaintedwith the
arts of peace, sublisted entirely by spoil and pillage,
and, being confederated in septs or clans, commit-
ted these excesses not only with impunity, but even
with honour. During the unsettled slate of the
kingdom from the death of James V, this dange-
rous licence had grown to an unusual height; and
the inroads and rapine of those freebooters were be-
come no lets intolerable to their own countrymen,
than to the English. To restrain and pinilh these
outrages, was an action equally popular' in both
kingdoms. The Prior of St. Andrew's was the
person chosen for this important service, and extra-
ordinary powers, together with the title of the
Queen's lieutenant, were vested in him for this
purpose.

No-

NOTHING can be more surprising to men, accuf- B o o K

tomed to regular government, than the preparations I1I.
made on this occasion. They were such as might 1
be expected in the rudest and most imperfet state
offociety. The freeholders of eleven several coun-
ties, with all their followers completely armed, were
fulnmoned to assist the Lieutenant in the discharge
of his office. Every thing resembled a military ex-
pedition, rather than the progress of a court ofjuf-
tice *. The Prior executed his commission with
such vigour and prudence, as acquired him a great
increase of reputation and popularity among his
countrymen. Numbers of the banditti fufflered the
punishment due to their crimes; and, by the im-
partial and rigorous administration of justice, order
and tranquillity were restored to that part of the
kingdom.

DURING the absence of the Prior of St. Andrew's, Th'ePapifl

attempt, in
the leaders of the Popish faction seem to have taken vain, to get

into favour

some steps towards insinuating themselves into the with her.
Queen's favour and confidencet. But the Arch-
bilhop of St. Andrew's, the most remarkable per-
son in the party for abilities and political address,
was received with little favour at court; and what-
ever secret partiality the Queen might have towards
those who professed the fame religion with herself,
Ihe discovered no inclination, at that time, to take
the administration of affairs out of the hands, to
which she had already committed it.

THE cold reception of the Archbishop of St.
Andrew's was owing to his connexion with the

Keith, 198. t Ibid. 203.
VOL. I. T house

B o o K house of Hamilton; from which the Queen was

III. much alienated. The Duke of Guise and the Car-
.--.- dinal could never forgive the zeal, with which the

5 6 Duke of Chatelherault and his son the Earl of

Arran had espoused the cause of the Congregation.
Princes seldom view their successors without jea-
lousy and distrust. The Prior of St. Andrew's,
perhaps, dreaded the Duke as a rival in power. All
these causes concurred in infusing into the Queen's
mind an aversion for that family. The Duke in-
dulging his love of retirement, lived at a distance
from court, without taking pains to insinuate him-
self into favour; and though the Earl of Arran
openly aspired to marry the Queen, he, by a most
unpardonable ac of imprudence, was the only no-
bleman of distinction who opposed Mary's enjoying
the exercise of her religion; and by raihly entering
a public protestation against it, entirely forfeited her
favour *. At the fame time, the fordid parsimony
of his father obliged him either to hide himself in
some retirement, or to appear in a manner unbe-
coming his dignity as firit Prince of the blood, or
his high pretensions as suitor to the Queen :. His
love, inflamed by disappointment, and his impa-
tience exasperated by neglect, preyed gradually on
his reason; and, after many extravagances, broke
out at last in ungovernable frenzy.
D=e. .0. TOWARDS the end of the year, a Convention of

Estates was held, chiefly on account of ecclesiastical
affairs. The assembly of the church, which fat at
the fame time, presented a petition, containing many

' Keith, zox, 20. Knox, 286. ~ Keith, 196.

demands

demands with refpea to the suppressing of Popery, B o K
the encouraging the Protestant religion, and the III.
providingfor the maintenance of the clergy.* The --
last was a matter of great importance, and the steps s56
taken towards it deserve to be traced.

THOUGH the number of Protestant preachers A ne re-

gulation

was now considerably increased, many more were concerning
still wanted, in every corner of the kingdom. No theovfel
legal provision having been made for them, they church.
had hitherto-drawn a scanty and precarious subsist-
ence from the benevolence of the people. To
susser the Ministers of an eftabliflhed church to con-
tinue in this slate of indigence and dependence, was
an indecency equally repugnant to the principles of
religion, and to the maxims of bound policy; and
would have justified all the imputations of avarice,
with which the Reformation was then loaded by its
enemies. The revenues of the Popish church were
the only fund, which could be employed for their
relief; but during the three lass years, the state of
there was greatly altered. A great majority of Ab-
bots, Priors, and other heads of religious houses,
had, either from a sense of duty, or from views of
interest, renounced the errors of Popery; and not-
withstanding this change in their Sentiments, they
retained their ancient revenues. Almost the whole
order of bishops, and several of the other dignita-
ries, still adhered to the Romnih superstition : And
though debarred from every spiritual function,
continued to enjoy the temporalities of their bene-
sices. Some laymen, especially those who had been
active in promoting the Reformation, had, under

Keith, 210.

T z various

B o o K various pretences, and amidst the licence of civil

III. wars, got into their hands possessions, which be-
'I6J longed to the church. And thus, before any part

of the ancient ecclesiastical revenues could be ap-
plied towards the maintenance of the Protestant
ministers, many different interests were to be ad-
justed; many claims to be examined; and the pre-
judices and passions of the two contending parties
required the application of a delicate hand. After
much contention, the following plan was approved
by a majority of voices, and acquiesced in even by
the Popilh clergy themselves. An exact account of
the value of ecclesiastical benefices throughout the
kingdom was appointed to be taken. The present
incumbents, to whatever party they adhered,
were allowed to keep poffefion: Two thirds of
their whole revenue were reserved for their own use,
the remainder was annexed to the Crown; and out
of that, the Queen undertook to assign a sufficient
maintenance for the Protestant clergy *.

As most of the Bishops and several of the other

dignitaries were still firmly attached to the Popilh
religion, the extirpation of the whole order, rather
than an aa of such extraordinary indulgence, might
have been expected from the zeal of the preachers,
and from the spirit which had hitherto animated the
nation. But, on this occasion, other principles ob-
ftructed the operations of such as were purely reli-
gious. Zeal for liberty, and the love of wealth,
two passions extremely opposite, concurred in de-
termining the Protestant leaders to fall in with this

* eith, Append. 175. Knox, 194.

plan,

plan, which deviated so manifestly from the max- B o o K
ims by which they had hitherto regulated their III.
conduct.

I56I.

Ir the Reformers had been allowed to a& with-

out controul, and to level all diftinffions in the
church, the immense revenues annexed to ecclesias-
tical dignities could not, with any colour of justice,
have been retained by those in whose hands they
now were; but must either have been distributed
amongst the Protestant clergy, who performed all
religious offices, or muff have fallen to the Queen,
from the bounty of whose ancestors, the greater
part of them was originally derived. . The former
scheme, however suitable to the religious spirit of
many among the people, was attended with mani-
fold danger. The Popilh ecclesiastics had acquired
a share in the national property, which far exceeded
the proportion that was consistent with the happi-
ness of the kingdom; and the nobles were deter-
mined to guard against this evil, by preventing the
return of those vast possessions into the hands of the
church. Nor was the latter, which exposed the
confiitution to more imminent hazard, to be avoid-
ed with less care. Even that circumscribed prero-
gative, which the Scottish Kings possessed, was.the
object of jealousy to the nobles. If they had al-
lowed the crown to seize the spoils of the church,
such an increase of power must have followed that
accession of property, as would have raised the royal
authority above controul, and have rendered the
most limited Prince in Europe the most absolute
and independent. The reign of Henry VIII. pre-

T 3 sented

B o o K sented a recent and alarming example of this nature.

I'I- The wealth which flowed in upon that Prince, from

5 the fuppreflon of the monasteries, not only changed

the maxims of his government, but the temper of
his mind; and he who had formerly submitted to
his Parliaments, and courted his people, ditated,
from that time, to the former, with intolerable in-
folence; and tyrannized over the latter with unpre-
cedented severity: And if his policy had not been
extremely short-sighted, if he had not squandered
what he acquired, with a profusion equal to his ra-
pacioufnefs, and which defeated his ambition, he
might have established defpotifin in England, on a
basis so broad and strong, as all the efforts of the
subjects would never have been able to shake. In
Scotland, where the riches of the clergy bore as
great a proportion to the wealth of the kingdom,
the acquisition of church-lands would have been of
no less importance to the Crown, and no less fatal to
the aristocracy. The nobles, for this reason, guard-
ed against such an increase of the royal power, and
thereby secured their own independence.

AVARrCE mingled itself with their concern for the

interest of their order. The re-uniting the poflef-
sions of the church to the Crown, or the bellowing
them on the Protestant clergy, would have been a
fatal blow, both to those nobles, who had, by fraud
or violence, seized part of these revenues, and to
those Abbots and Priors who had totally renounced
their ecclesiastical character. But as the plan, which
was proposed, gave some fanEtion to their ufurpa-
tions, they promoted it with their utmost influence.

The

The popish ecclesiastics, though the lopping off a B o o K
third of their revenues was by no means agreeable III.
to them, consented, under their present circum- .--
fiances, to sacrifice a part of their possessions, in 56I
order to purchase the secure enjoyment of the re-
mainder; and after deeming the whole irrecover-
ably loft, they confidered whatever they could re-
trieve as so much gain. Many of the ancient dig-
nitaries were men of noble birth; and as they no
longer entertained hopes of restoring the Popiflh
religion, they wished their own relations, rather than
the Crown, or the Protestant clergy, to be enriched
with the spoils of the church, They connived, for
this reason, at the encroachments of the nobles;
they even aided their avarice and violence; they
dealt out the patrimony of the church among their
own relations, and by granting feus and perpetual
leafes of lands and tithes, gave, to the utmost of
their power, some colour of legal possession, to
what was formerly mere usurpation. Many vestiges
of such alienations still remain *, The nobles, with
the concurrence of the incumbents, daily extended
their encroachments, and gradually stripped the
ecclesiastics of their richest and molt valuable pof-
felfions. Even that third part, which was given up
in order to silence the clamours of the Protestant
clergy, and to be some equivalent to the Crown
for its claims, amounted to no considerable fum.
The thirds due by the more powerful nobles, efpe-
cially by such as had embraced the Reformation,
were almost universally remitted. Others, by pro-
ducing fraudulent rentals; by eftimatirg the corn,

* Keith, 507. Spotfw. 175.

ans

B o o K and other payments in kind, at an under value;

III. and by the connivance of colle&tors, greatly dimi-

-' nilhed the charge against themselves*: And the
i56I- nobles had much reason to be satisfied with a de-

vice which, at so finall expence, secured to them
such vast possessions.

The Prote NOR were the Protestant clergy considerable gain-
no= ce ers by this new regulation; they found it to be a
by it. more easy matter to kindle zeal, than to extinguish

avarice. Those very men, whom formerly they had
swayed with absolute authority, were now deaf to
all their remonstrances. The Prior of St. Andrew's,
the Earl of Argyll, the Earl of. Morton, and Mait-
land, all the molf zealous leaders of the Congre-
gation, were appointed to aflign, or, as it was
called, to rmodify their stipends. An hundred merks
Scottiih was the allowance which their liberality
afforded to the generality of Ministers. To a few
three hundred merks were grantedt. About twenty-
four thousand pounds Scottish appears to have been
the whole fum allotted for the maintenance of a
national church effablifhed by law, and esteemed,
throughout the kingdom, the true church of God t.
Even this fum was paid with little exa&nefs, and
the Ministers were kept in the fame poverty and
dependance as formerly.

1562. THE gentleness of the Queen's adminiitration,
Diffenfons and the elegance of her court, had mitigated, in
ob°le some degree, the ferocity of the nobles, and ac-

* Keith, Append. 188. Spotflw. IF3. -- Knox, 301.
X Keith, Append. i8.

customed

customed them to greater mildness and humanity; B o o
while, at the fame time, her pretence and authority III.
were a check to their facious and tumultuary fpi- '"
rit. But, as a state of order and tranquillity was not I56"
natural to the feudal aristocracy, it could not be of
long continuance; and this year became remark-
able for the molt violent eruptions of intestine difr
cord and animosity.

AMONG the great and independent nobility of

Scotland, a Monarch could possess little authority,
and exercise no extensive or rigorous jurifdition.
The interfering of interest, the unsettled state of
property, the frequency of public commotions, and
the fierceness of their own manners, sowed, among
the great families, the feeds of many quarrels and
,contentions, These, as we have already observed,
were decided not by law, but by violence. The
offended Baron, without having recourse to the
Monarch, or acknowledging his superior authority,
assembled his own followers, and invaded the lands
of his rival in an hostile manner. Together with
his estate and honours, every nobleman transmitted
some hereditary feud to his posterity, who were
bound in honour to adopt and to prosecute it with
the fame inveterate rancour.

SUCH a diffenpion had subsisted between the house

of Hamilton and the Earl of Bothwell, and was
heightened by mutual injuries during the late com-
motions *. Both the Earl of Arran and Bothwell
happening to be in waiting at the fame time, their

* Keith, z15.

fol-

B o o K followers quarrelled frequently in the flreets of

III- Edinburgh, and excited dangerous tumults in that
óT. . city. At last, the mediation of their friends, parti-

i562.
Freua- cularly of Knox, brought about a reconcilement,

but an unfortunate one to both these noblemen *.

A FEW days after, Arran came to Knox, and,

with the utnoft terror and confusion, confessed
firit to him, and then to the Prior of St. Andrew's,
that, in order ro obtain the sole direcion of affairs,
Bothwell and his kinfimen the Hamiltons, had con-
spired to murder the Prior, Maitland, and the other
favourites of the Queen. The duke of Chatelhe-
rault regarded the Prior as a rival, who. had sup-
planted him in the Queen's favour, and who filled
that place at the helm, which he imagined to be
due to himself, as first Prince of the blood. Both-
well, on account of the personal injuries which he
had received from the Prior during the late com-
motions, was no less exasperated against him. But
whether he and the Hamiltons had agreed to cement
their new alliance, with the blood of their common
enemy, or whether the conspiracy existed only in
the frantic and disordered imagination of the Earl
of Arran, it is impossible, amidit the contradiction
of historians, and the defefivenefs of records, po-
fitively to determine. Among men inflamed with
resentment, and impatient for revenge, rash expref-
sions might be uttered, and violent and criminal
expedients proposed; and on that foundation, Ar-
ran's distempered fancy might rear the whole fu-
perfiruicure of a conspiracy. All the persons ac-

* Knox, 305.

cured,

cufed, denied their guilt with the utmost confi- B o o K
dence. But the known charaaers of the men, and III.
the violent spirit of the age, added greatly to the --
probability of the accusation, and abundantly jus- 15b
tify the condut of the Queen's ministers, who con-
fined Bothwell, Arran, and a few of the ring-
leaders, in separate prisons, and obliged the Duke
to surrender the strong castle of Dumbarton, which
he had held ever since the time of his resigning
the office of Regent *

THE designs of the Earl of Huntly against the TheEarlof

-0~~~~ n ~~~~~~Huntly's

Prior of St. Andrew's were deeper laid, and pro- enmityto
duced more memorable and more tragical events. ,e .ueen's
George Gordon Earl of Huntly, having been one
of the nobles who conspired against James III. and
who railed his son James IV. to the throne, enjoy-
ed a great share in the confidence of that generous
Princet. By his bounty, great accessions of wealth
and power were added to a family, already opulent
and rpowerful. On the death of that Monarch,
Alexander the next Earl, being appointed Lord
Lieutenant of all the counties beyond Forth, left
the other nobles to contend for offices at court;
and retiring to the north, where his estate and in-
fluence lay, resided there, in a kind of princely in-
dependence. The Chieftains in that part of the
kingdom dreaded the growing dominion of such a
dangerous neighbour, but were unable to prevent
his encroachments. Some of his rivals he secretly
undermined, others he subdued by open force. His

Knox, 307, 308. Keith, 202. t Crawf, Officers
of State, 56.

estate

B o o K estate far exceeded that of any other fubje&, and

III. hisfuperiorities and jurifditions extended over many
...' of the northern counties. With power and posses-
I562. sions so immense, under too long and feeble mino-

rities, and amidst the shock of civil commotions,
the Earls of Huntly might have indulged the most
elevated hopes. But happily for the Crown, an
active and enterprising spirit was not the charater-
iftic of that family, and whatever object their am-
bition might have in view, they chose rather to ac-
quire it by political address, than to seize it openly,
and by force of arms.

THE condu& of George, the present Earl, during

the late commotions, had been perfectly suitable
to the character of the family, in that age, dubi-
ous, variable, and crafty. While the success of
the Lords of the Congregation was uncertain, he
assisted the Queen Regent in her attempts to cruffi
them. When their affairs put on a better aspe&t,
he pretended to join them, but never heartily fa-
voured their cause. He was courted and feared by
each of the contending parties; both connived at
his encroachments in the north; and, by artifice
and force, which he well knew how to employ al-
ternately, and in their proper places, he added every
day to the exorbitant power and wealth which he
possessed.

HE observed the growing reputation and autho-

rity of the Prior of St. Andrew's with the greatest
jealousy and concern, and confidered him as a rival
who had engrossed that share in the Queen's con-

fidence,

fidence, to which his own zeal for the Popilh reli- B o o K
gion seemed to give him a preferable title. Per- III.
fonal injuries soon increased the misunderstanding *'
occasioned by rivalfhip in power. The Queen hav- 56
ing determined to reward the services of the Prior
of St. Andrew's, by creating him an Earl, she
made choice of Mar, as the place whence he should
take his title; and, that he might be better able to
support his new honour, bestowed upon him, at
the fame time, the lands of that name. These Feb. to.
were part of the royal demesnes *, but the Earls
of Huntly had been permitted, for several years,
to keep possession of them t. On this occasion the
Earl not only complained, with some reason, of
the loss which he sustained, but had real cause to
be alarmed at the intrusion of a formidable neigh-
bour into the heart of his territories, who might
be able to rival his power, and excite his oppressed
vassals tofliake off his yoke.

AN incident, which happened soon after, in- June I7.

creased and confirmed Huntly's suspicions. Sir
John Gordon, his third son, and Lord Ogilvie
had a dispute about the property of an estate.
This dispute became a deadly quarrel. They
happened unfortunately to meet in the streets of
Edinburgh, and being both attended with armed
followers, a scuffle ensued, in which Lord Ogilvie
was dangerously wounded by Sir John. The Ma-
giftrates seized both the offenders, and the Queen
commanded them to be ftri&ly confined. Under
* Crawf. Peer. 297. t Buch. 334.

any

Bo oK any regular government, such a breach of public

III. peace and order would expose the person offending,

- to certain punishment. At this time, some feveriry
1562. was necessary, in order to vindicate the Queen's

authority from an insult, the most heinous which
had been offered to it, fmce her return into Scot-
land. But, in an age accustomed to licence and
anarchy, even this moderate exercise of her power,
in ordering them to be kept in custody, was deemed
an a& of intolerable rigour; and the friends of
each party began to convene their vassals and de-
pendants, in order to overawe, or to frustrate the
decisions of jufftice*. Mean while, Gordon made
his escape out of prison, and, flying into Aberdeen-
ihire, complained loudly of the indignity with
which he had been treated; and as all the Queen's
actions were, at this junture, imputed to the Earl
of Mar, this added not a little to the resentment,
which Huntly had conceived against that Nobleman.

At the very time when there passions fermented,
Augu. with the utmoit violence, in the minds of the Earl

of Huntly and his family, the Queen happened to
set out on a progress into the northern parts of the
kingdom. She was attended by the Earls of Mar and
Morton, Maitland, and other leaders of that party.
The pretence of the Queen, in a country where no
name greater than the Earl of Huntly's had been
heard of, and no power superior to his had been
exercised for many years, was an event of itself,
abundantly mortifying to that haughty nobleman.

Keith, 223.

But

But while the Queen was intirely under the direc- B o o K
tion of Mar, all her actions were more apt to be III.
misrepresented, and confirued into injuries; and a
thousand circumstances could not but occur to I5
awaken Huntly's jealousy, to offend his pride, and
to inflame his resentment. Amidst the agitations
of so many violent passions, obme eruption was un-
avoidable.

On Mary's arrival in the north, Huntly employed

his wife, a woman capable of executing the com-
mission with abundance of dexterity, to sooth the
Queen, and to intercede for pardon to their ton.
But the Queen peremptorily required, that he should
again deliver himself into the hands ofjuftice, and
rely on her clemency. Gordon was persuaded to do
to; and being enjoined by the Queen to enter him-
self prisoner in the cattle of Stirling, he promised
likewise to obey that command. Lord Erskine,
Mar's uncle, was, at that time, Governor of this
fort. The Queen's severity, and the place in which
she appointed Gordon to be confined, were inter-
preted to be new marks of Mar's rancour, and aug-
mented the hatred of the Gordons against him.

MEAN time Sir John Gordon set out towards Stir- sept. i.

ling; but instead of performing his promise to the
Queen, made his escape from his guards, and re-
turned to take the command of his followers, who
were rising in arms, all over the north. These were
destined to second and improve the blow, by which
his father proposed, secretly, and at once, to cut off
Mar, Morton, and Maitland, his principal adver-

saries.

B o K saries. The time and place for perpetrating this

III. horrid deed were frequently appointed; but the exe-
'- ' ,cuting of it was wonderfully prevented, by some of
1562. those unforeseen accidents, which so often occur to

disconcert the schemes, and to intimidate the hearts
of affafiins *. His own house at Strathbogie was the
last and most convenient scene, appointed for com-
mitting the intended violence. But, on her journey
thither, the Queen heard of young Gordon's flight
and rebellion, and refuting, in the firif transports of
her indignation, to enter under the father's roof, by
that fortunate expression of her resentment, saved
her Ministers from unavoidable deftruetion t.

,Takes as THE ill success of these efforts of private revenge
a2ainsl the
iQuan precipitated Huntly into open rebellion. As the

Queen was entirely under the direcion of his rivals,
it was impossible to work their ruin, without violat-
ing the allegiance which he owed his Sovereign.
On her arrival at Inverness, the commanding officer
in the castle, by Huntly's orders, shut the gates
against her. Mary was obliged to lodge in the town,
which was open and defenceless; but this too was
quickly surrounded by a multitude of the Earl's
followers 1. The utmost consternation seized the
Queen, who was attended by a very slender train.
She every moment expe&ed the approach of the re-
bels, and some ships were already ordered into the
river to secure her escape. The loyalty of the Mon-
roes, Frazers, Mackintolhes, and some neighbour-

* Keitb, 230, t Knox, 318. t Crawf. Offices of
State, 87, 8S.

ing

ing clans, who took arms in her defence, saved her B o o K
from this danger. By their assistance Ihe even III.
forced the castle to surrender, and inflicted on the Go- '-
vernor the punilhment which his insolence deserved. 1562.

THIS open act of disobedience was the occasion

of a measure more galling to Huntly than any the
Q.een had hitherto taken. Lord Erskine, having
pretended a right to the earldom of Mar, Stewart
resigned it in his favour; and at the fame time Mary
conferred upon him the title of Earl of Murray, with
the estate annexed to that dignity, which had been
in the possession of the Earl of Huntly since the year
1548 *. From this he concluded that his family
was devoted to deftruftion; and dreading to be
stripped, gradually, of those pofleffions, which, in
reward of their services, the gratitude of the Crown
had bestowed on himself or his ancestors, he no
longer disguised his intentions, but, in defiance of
the Queen's proclamation, openly took arms. In-
stead of yielding those places of strength, which
Mary required him to surrender, his followers dif-
perfed or cut in pieces the parties which she dif-
patched to take: possession of them t; and he him-
self advancing with a considerable body of men to-
words Aberdeen, to which place the Queen was
now returned, filled her finall court with coniferna-
tion. Murray had only a handful of men in whom
he could confide J. In order to form the appearance
of an army, he was obliged to call in the assistance
of the neigbouring barons; but as most of these

Crawf. Peer. 359. t Knox, 319. J Keith, 230.
VOL. I. U either

B o o K either favoured Huntly's designs, or flood in awe of

III. his power, from them no cordial or effecual service
't'.~ could be expected.
I562.
oaob. s2. WITH there troops, however, Murray, who could

gain nothing by delay, marched briskly towards the
enemy. He found them at Corrichie, posted to
great advantage; he commanded his northern affo-
ciates inflantly to begin the attack; but on the firit
motion of the enemy, they treacherlufly turned their
backs; and Huntly's followers, throwing aside their
spears, and, breaking their ranks, drew their swords,

e is de- and ruihed forward to the pursuit. It was then,
thelof that Murray gave proof both of steady courage,
Murray. and of prudent conduct. He stood immovable,

on a rising ground, with the finall but trusty body
of his adherents, who presenting their spears to the
enemy, received them with a determined resolution,
which they little expected. The Highland broad
sword is nor a weapon fit to encounter the Scottish
spear. In every civil commotion, the superiority
of the latter has been evident, and has always de-
cided the contest. On this occasion the irregular
attack of Huntly's troops was easily repulsed by
Murray's firm battalion. Before they recovered
from the confusion occasioned by this unforeseen re-
fiftance, those who had begun the flight, willing to
regain their credit with the victorious party, fell
upon them, and completed the rout. Huntly h'im-
self, who was extremely corpulent, was trodden to
death in the purluit. His sons, Sir John and Adam,
were taken, and Murray returned in triumph to
Aberdeen with his prisoners.

THE

THE trial of men taken in adtual rebellion against B o o K

their Sovereign was extremely imort. Three days III.
after the battle, Sir John Gordon was beheaded at '
Aberdeen. His brother Adam was pardoned on 562.
account of his youth. Lord Gordon, who.had been
privy to his father's designs, was seized in tlh south,
and upon trial found guilty of treason; but, through
the Queen's clemency, the punishment was remit-
ted: The first Parliament proceeded against this
great family, with the utmost rigour of law, and
reduced their power and fortune to the lowefi ebb *.

As

This conspiracy of the Earl of Huntly is one of the mod in-

tricate and mysterious passages in the Scottilh history. As it was
a tranfaftion purely domellic, and in which the Englilh were
little interefled, few original papers concerning it have been
found in Cecil's Collection, the great fiorehoufe of evidence and
information with regard to the affairs of this period.

Buchanan supposes Mary to have formed a design about this

time of deftro)ing Murray, and of employing the power of the
Earl of Huntly for this purpose. But his account of this whole
tranfaftion appears to be so void of truth, and even of probabi-
lity, as to deserve no serious examination. At that time, Mary
wanted power, and seems to have had no inclination to commit
any aa of evidence upon her brother.

Two other hypotheses have been advanced, in order to ex-

plain this matter; but they appear to be equally removed from
truth.

I. It cannot well be conceived, that the Queen's journey to

the north was a scheme concerted by Murray, in order to ruin
the Earl of Huntly. i. Huntly had resided at court almost
ever since the Queen's return. Keith, 198. Append. 175,
&c. This was the proper place in which to have seized him,
To attack him in Aberdeenflire, the feat of his power, and

U t in

B o o a As the fall of the Earl of Huntly is the most im-

III. portant event of this year, it would have been im-
1562. in the midst of his vassals, was a project equally absurd and

hazardous. z. The Queen was not accompanied with a body
of troops, capable of attempting any thing against Huntly by
violence; her train was not more numerous, than was usual in
times of greatelf tranquillity, Keith, 230. 3. There remain
two original letters with regard to this conspiracy, one from
Randolph the Englifli Resident, and another from Maitland,
both directed to Cecil. They talk of Huntly's measures as no-
torioufly treasonable. Randolph mentions his repeated at-
tempts to affaflinate Murray, &c. No hint is given of any pre-
vious refolotion, formed by Mary's MiniRfers, to ruin Huntly
and his family. Had any such designs ever existed, it was Ran-
dolph's duty to have discovered it; nor would Maitland have
laboured to conceal it from the English secretary. Keith, 229.
232.

II. To foppofe that the Earl of Huntly had laid any plan for

seizing the Queen and her Ministers, seems to be no less im-
probable. i. On the Queen's arrival in the north, he laboured,
in good earnesl, to gain her favour, and to obtain a pardon for
his son. Knox, 318. 2. He met the Queen, firt at Aberdeen,
and then at Rothcmay, whither he would not have ventured to
come, had he harboured any such treasonable reoblution. Knox,
318. 3. His conduct was irresolute and wavering, like that of
a man disconcerted by an unforeseen danger, not like one exe-
cuting a concerted plan. 4. The molt considerable person of
his clan fubmitred to the Queen, and found surety to obey ;;:r
commands. Keith, 226. Had the Earl been previously deter-
mined to rife in arms againlt the Queen, or to seize her Ilini-
fters, it is probable he would have imparted it to his princi!ial
followers, nor would they have deserted him in this mani...

For these reasons, we have, on the one hand, vindicai;c the

Earlof Murray from any deliberate intention of ruini ;,; a-
mily of Gordon; and oa the other hand, we have imutc.: the
violent conduct of the Ear! of Huntly, to a sudden ii_. .- re-
fentment, without charging him with any premedit.ali Ilrpofe
of rebellion.

proper

proper to interrupt the narrative by taking notice B o o K
of lesser tranfa&ions, which may now be related III.
with equal propriety.

I562.

IN the beginning of summer, Mary, who was de- An inter.
firous of entering into a more intimate correfpon- view be-

tween Eli-

dence and familiarity with Elizabeth, employed zabeth and
Maitland to desire a personal interview with her, Mayfpro-
somewhere in the north of England. As this pro-
pofal could not be rejected with decency, the time,
the place, and the circumitances of the meeting were
instantly agreed upon. But Elizabeth was prudent
enough not to admit into her kingdom, a rival,
who outshone herself, so far, in beauty, and grace-
fulness of person; and who excelled, so eminently,
in all the arts of insinuation and address. Under
pretence of being confined to London, by the atten-
tion which she was obliged to give to the civil wars in
France, she put off the interview for that season *,
and prevented her futbjeds from feeing the Scottish
Queen, the charms of whose appearance and beha-
viour, she envied, and had some reason to dread.

DURING this year, the Assembly of the church Jue 2.

met twice. In both there meetings were exhibited Decem. z5.
many complaints of the poverty and dependence oEthe
church; and many murmurs against the negligence
or avarice of those, who had been appointed to col-
let, and to distribute the small fund, appropriated
for the maintenance of preachers t. A petition,
craving redress of their grievances, was presented to
* Keith, z16. t Knox, 311, 323.

U 3 the

B o o K the Queen; butvwithout any effect. There was no

III. reason to expect that Mary would discover any for-

--6--. wardnefs to grant the requests of such supplicants.
i562 '

And as her Ministers, though all most zealous Pro-
teftants, were themselves growing rich on the inhe-
ritance of the church, they were equally regardless
of the indigence and demands of their brethren.

N-egoia- MARY had now continued above two years in a
rtd'h t fate of widowhood. Her gentle administration had
tbe Qcn-s secured the hearts of her subje&s, who were impa-
mardaSe. tient for her marriage, and wished the Crown to de-

scend in the right line from their ancient Monarchs.
She herfielf was the molt amiable woman of the age,
and the fame of her accomplishments, together with
the favourable circumstance of her having one king-
dom already in her possession, and the profpe& of
mounting the throne of another, prompted many
different Princes to follicit an alliance so illustrious.
Scotland, by its situation, threw so much weight
and power into whatever scale it fell, that all Eu-
rope waited with solicitude for Mary's determina-
tion; and no event in that age excited stronger po-
litical fears and jealousies; none interested more
deeply the passions of several Princes, or gave rife
to more contradi&cory intrigues, than the marriage
of the Scottish Queen.

sh s foi;- THE Princes of the House of Austria remember-
cited by dif-
s',yI - ed what valt projeccs the French had founded on
es.- their former alliance with the Queen of Scots; and

though the unexpected death, firit of Henry and then

of

of Francis, had hindered these from taking effet, B o o K
yet if Mary ihould again make choice of a husband II.
among the French Princes, the fame designs might -
be revived and prosecuted with better success.

IN order to prevent this, the Emperor entered into By thc

a negociation with the Cardinal of Lorrain, who Charles.
had proposed to marry the Scottifl Queen to the
Archduke Charles, Ferdinand's third son. The
matter was communicated to Mary; and Melvil,
who at that time attended the Eletor Palatine,
was commanded to inquire into the character and
situation of the Archduke *

PHILIP'II. though no less apprehensive of Mary's Byrl Do

falling once more into the hands of France, envied of Spain,
his uncle Ferdinand the acquisition of so important
a prize; and as his own insatiable ambition grasped
at all the kingdoms of Europe, he employed his am-
baffador at the French court, to solicit the Princes
of Lorrain in behalf of his son Don Carlos, at that
time, the heir of all the extensive dominions, which
belonged to the Spanifl monarchy t.

CATHERINE of Medicis, on the other hand, By the

Duke of

dreaded the marriage of the Scottish Queen with Anjou.
any of the Austrian Princes, which would have add-
ed so much to the power and pretensions of that
ambitious race. Her jealousy of the Princes of
Lorrain rendered her no less averse from an alliance,
which, by securing them the protection of the Em-

· Melv. 63, 65. Keith, 239. See Append. No. VII.
t Cafteln. 461. Addit. a Labour. 501. 50o.

peror

B o o ; peror or King of Spain, would give new boldness to

III. their enterprising spirit, and enable them to set the

ó'--r- power of the Crown, which they already rivalled,
I563. at open defiance: And as Ihe was afraid that these

splendid proposals of the Austrian family would
dazzle the young Queen, she instantly dispatched
Caftelnau into Scotland, to offer her in marriage the
Duke of Anjou, the brother of her former hulband,
who soon after mounted the throne of France*.

Mar's de- MARY attentively weighed the pretensions of so
libreaticn W
conc=ig many rivals. The Archduke had little to recom-

mend him, but his high birth. The example of
Henry VIII. was a warning against contracting a
marriage with the brother of her former husband;
nor could ihe. bear the thoughts of appearing in
France, in a rank inferior to that which she had for-
merly held in that kingdom. She listened therefore,
with partiality, to the Spanish propositions, and the
profpe& of such vast power and dominions flattered
the ambition of a young and aspiring Princess.

THREE several circumstances, however, concur-

red to divert Mary from any thoughts of a foreign
alliance.

THE first of there was the murder of her uncle

the Duke of Guise. The violence and ambition of
that nobleman had involved his country in a civil
war; which was conducted with furious animosity,
and various success. At last the Duke laid liege to

Caftelnau, 461.

Orleans,

Orleans, the bulwark of the Protestant cause; and B o o K.
hehad reduced that city to the lat extremity, when III.
he was aflalfinated by the frantic zeal of Poltrot. --v
This blow proved fatal to the Queen of Scots. The 563
young Duke was a minor; and the Cardinal of
Lorrain, though subtle and intriguing, wanted that
undaunted and enterprising courage, which rendered
the ambition of his brother so formidable. Cathe-
rine, instead of encouraging the ambition, or fur-
thering the pretensions of her daughter-in-law, took
pleasure in mortifying the one, and in disappointing
the other. In this lituation, and without such a
protetor, it became necessary for Mary to contra&
her views, and to proceed with caution; and what-
ever prospect of advantage might allure her, Ihe
could venture upon no dangerous or doubtful
measure.

THE second circumitance which weighed with The views

Mary, was the opinion of the Queen of England. ozbE'.
The marriage of the Scottish Queen interested Eli-
zabeth more deeply than any other Prince; and Ihe
observed all her deliberations concerning it with
the molt anxious attention. She herself seems early
to have formed a resolution of living unmarried, and
she discovered no finall inclination to impose the
fame law on the Queen of Scots. She had already
experienced what use might be made of Mary's
power and pretensions, to invade her dqminions, and
to disturb her possession of the Crown. The death
of Francis 1I. had happily delivered her from this
danger, which she determined to guard against for
the future, with the utmost care. As the refflefs

ambi-

B o o K ambition of the Austrian Princes, the avowed and

1II. bigotted patrons of the Catholic superstition, made

ó'.v-' her, in a particular manner, dread their neighbour-
I563' hood, Ihe inftruted Randolph to remonstrate, in

the strongest terms, against any alliance with them;
and to acquaint Mary, that as She herself would
confider such a match to be a breach of the personal
friendship, in which they were so happily united; so
the Engliih nation would regard it, as the diffolu-
tion of that confederacy which now subsisted be-
tveen the two kingdoms: That, in order to pre-
serve their own religion and liberties, they would,
in all probability, take some ftep prejudicial to
her right of succession, which, as she well knew,
they neither wanted power nor pretences to in-
validate, and set aside. This threatening was ac-
companied with a promise, but exprefled in very
ambiguous terms, that if Mary's choice of a hus-
band should prove agreeable to the English nation,
Elizabeth would appoint proper persons to examine
her title to the fuccefflon, and, if well founded,
command it to be publickly recognised. She ob-
served, however, a mysterious silence concerning
the person, on whom fle wilhed the choice of the
Scottiih Queen to fall. The revealing of this secret
was reserved for some future negociation. Mean
while fie threw out some obscure hints, that a na-
tive of Britain, or one not of princely rank, would
be her safest and most inoffensive choice*. An ad-
vice offered with such an air of superiority and com-
mand, mortified, no doubt, the pride of the Scot-

* Keith, z42. 245.

tiflh

tilh jueen. But, under her present circumstances, B o o K
she was obliged to bear this indignity. Destitute of III.
all foreign assistance, and intent upon the English '''
succession, the great object of her withes and am- I563
bition, it became necessary to court a rival, whom,
without manifest imprudence, she could not ven-
ture to offend.

THE inclination of her own fubjecs was another, The sent.

and not the least considerable circumstance, which her nts
called for Mary's attention at this conjuncure. fubja.
They had been taught, by the fatal experiment of
her former marriage, to dread an union with any
great Prince, whose power might be employed to
oppress their religion and liberties. They trembled
at the thoughts of a match with a foreigner; and
if the Crown Ihould be strengthened by new domi-
nions or alliances, they foresaw that the royal pre-
rogative would soon be itretched beyond its ancient
and legal limits. Their eagerness to prevent this
could scarce fail of throwing them into the arms of
England. Elizabeth would be ready to afford them
her aid, towards obffruting a measure so disagree-
able to herself. 'Twas easy for them to seize the
person of the Sovereign. By the assistance of the
English fleet, they could render it difficult for. any
foreign Prince to land in Scotland. The Roman
Catholics, now an inconsiderable party in the king-
dom, and dispirited by the loss of the Earl of
Huntly, could give no obftrution to their designs.
To what violent extremes, the national abhorrence
9f a foreign yoke might have been carried, is ma-

nifeft

B o o K nifeff from the tranfacions both previous, and sub-

III. sequent to the present period.
I563. FOR these reasons, Mary laid aside, at that time,

all thoughts of foreign alliance, and seemed willing
to sacrifice her own ambition, in order to remove
the jealousies of Elizabeth, and to quiet the fears of
her own fubjeats.

A Parin- THE Parliament met this year, for the first time,
mient held,
Mey h6. since the Queen's return into Scotland. Mary's ad-

ministration had hitherto been extremely popular.
Her Ministers pofleffed the confidence of the na-
tion j and, by consequence, the proceedings of that
assembly were conduced with perfect unanimity.
The grant of the earldom of Murray to the Prior
of St. Andrew's was confirmed: The Earl of Hunt-
ly, and several of his vassals and dependants, were
attainted: The attainder against Kirkaldy of Grange,
and some of his accomplices in the murder of Car-
dinal Beatoun, was reverted *: The ac of oblivion,
mentioned in the treaty of Edinburgh, received the
royal fan&ion. But Mary, who had determined
never to ratify that treaty, took care that this fanc-
tion should not be deemed any acknowledgment
of its validity; Ihe granted her consent merely in
condescension to the Lords in Parliament, who, on
their knees, besought her to allay the jealousies and
apprehensions f her fubjecs, by such a gracious
law t.

' Knox, 30. I Spotfw. 188.

No

No attempt was made, in this Parliament, to B o o i

procure the Queen's assent to the laws eftabliihing III.
the Protestant religion. Her Ministers, though zea-
lous Protestants themselves, were aware that this Nothing
could not be urged without manifest danger and im- determined

with regard

prudence. She had consented, through their influ- to religion;
ence, to tolerate and prote& the reformed do&crine.
They had even prevailed on her to imprison and
prosecute the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, and Prior
of Whithorn, for celebrating mass contrary to her
proclamation *. Mary, however, was still paflion-
ately devoted to the Romish superstition; and tho',
from political motives, she had granted a temporary
protection of opinions, which she disapproved, there
were no grounds to hope that she would agree to
eftablilh them for perpetuity. The moderation of
those who professed it, was the best method for re-
conciling the Queen to the Protestant religion.
Time might abate her bigotry. Her prejudices
might wear off gradually, and at last she might
yield to the wishes of her people, what their impor-
tunity or their violence could never have extorted.
Many laws of importance were to be proposed in
Parliament; and to defeat all these, by such a fruit-
less and ill-timed application to the Queen, would
have been equally injurious to individuals, and de-
trimental'to the public.

THE zeal of the Protestant clergy was deaf to all which of-

these considerations of policy. Eager and impa- clergy.
tient, it brooked no delay: Severe and inflexible, it

*Keith, 239.

would

B o o K would condescend tono compliances. The leading

III. men of that order insisted, that this opportunity of
' I*-' establishing religion by law, was not to be neglet-
x563- ed. They pronounced the moderation of the cour-

tiers, apoftacy; and their endeavours to gain the
Queen, they reckoned criminal and servile. Knox
solemnly renounced the friendship of the Earl of
Murray, as a man devoted to Mary, and so blind-
ly zealous for her service, as to become regardless
of those obje&s which he had hitherto esteemed most
sacred. This rupture, which is a strong proof of
Murray's sincere attachment to the Queen at that
period, continued above a year and an half*.

THE preachers being disappointed by the men in

whom they placed the greatest confidence, gave
vent to their indignation in their pulpits. These
echoed more loudly than ever, with declarations
against idolatry; with difinal presages concerning
the Queen's marriage with a foreigner; and with
bitter reproaches againift those, who, from interest-
ed motives, had deserted that cause, which they

ad occ- once reckoned it their honour to support. The
tfiuNmua people, inflamed by such vehement declamations,
mong the which were dictated by a zeal more sincere than
peop'le prudent, proceeded to rafl -and unjustifiable ats of

violence. During the Queen's absence, on a pro-
grefs into the weft, mass continued to be celebrated
Au ft· iin her chapel at Holy-rood house. The multitude

of those who openly retorted thither, gave great
offence to the citizens of Edinburgh, who, being

* Knox, 331.

free

free from the reitraint which the royal presence im- B o o r
posed, assembled in a riotous manner, interrupted III.
the service, and filled such as were present, with the ' '
utmost consternation. Two of the ringleaders in 1563.
this tumult were seized, and a day appointed for
their trial *

KNOX, who esteemed the zeal of these persons Knox tred

on that ac-

laudable, and their condua meritorious, confidered count, but
them as sufferers in a good cause; and in order to aObci.ed.
screen them from danger, he issued circular letters,
requiring all who professed the true religion, or were
concerned for the preservation of it, to assemble at
Edinburgh on the day of trial, that by their pre-
fence, they might comfort and affit their distressed
brethren t. One of these letters fell into the Queen's
hands. To assemble the subje&s without the au-
thority of the Sovereign, was construed to be trea-
son, and a resolution was taken to prosecute Knox
for that crime, before the Privy Council. Happily Decemn. '.
for him, his judges were not only zealous Protef-
tants, but the very men, who, during the late com-
motions, had openly resifted, and set at defiance the
Queen's authority. It was under precedents, drawn
from their own condu&, that Knox endeavoured to
lielter himself. Nor would it have been an easy
matter for these Counsellors to have found out a
diftindion, by which they could censure him, with-
out condemning themselves. After a long hearing,
he was unanimously acquitted. Sinclair Bilhop of
Ross, and President of the Court of Session, a zea-

* Knox, 335. t Ibid. 336.

lous

B o o g lous Papiff, heartily concurred with the other Coun-

HI. fellors in this decision *; a remarkable fact, which
.-.'. shows the unfertled slate of government in that age;

53 the low condition to which regal authority was then

funk; and the impunity with which subje&s might
invade those rights of the Crown, which are now
held sacred.

1564. THE marriage of the Scottish Queen continued
£NScih fill to be the object of attention and intrigue.
read o Though Elizabeth, even while she wished to direct
,'Q-a5ge Mary, treated her with a disgustful reserve; though

ihe kept her, without necessity, in a state of sus-
pence; and hinted often at the person, whom she
defined to be her husband, without directly men-
tioning his name; yet Mary framed all her a&ions to
express such a prudent refpec for the English Queen,
that foreign Princes began to imagine she had
given herself up implicitly to her direction t. The
profpec& of this union alarmed Catherine of Medicis.
Though Catherine had taken pleasure, all along, in
doing ill offices to the Queen of Scots; though soon
after the Duke of Guise's death, she had put iupon
her a most mortifying indignity, by flopping the pay-
ment of her dowry, by depriving her fubjeci the
Duke of Chatelherault of his pension, and by be-
stowing the command of the Scottifn Guards on a
Frenchman ; she resolved, however, to prevent
this dangerous conjunction of the Britiih Queens.
For this purpose, she now employed all her art to
appease Mary §, to whom lhe had given so many

* KIox, 343, t Keith, 24S. I Id. 244.
§ See Appendix, No. YIII.

caulfes

causes of offence. The arrears of her dowry were B o oK
instantly paid; more pun6tual remittances were III
promiled for the future; and offers made, not ..
only to restore, but to extend the privileges of the 54
Scottish nation in France. It was easy for Mary
to penetrate into the motives of this sudden change;
Ihe well knew the character of her mother-in-law,
and laid little stress upon professions of friendship,
which came from a Princess of such a false and
unfeeling heart,

THE negociation with England, relative to the

marriage, suffered no interruption, from this appli-
cation of the French Queen. As Mary, in com-
pliance to her fubjefts, and pressed by the strongest
motives ofintereft, determined speedily to marry,
Elizabeth was obliged to break that unaccountable
silence, which she had hitherto affected. The fe- March.
cret was disclosed, and her favourite Lord Robert recom-
Dudley, afterwards Earl of Leicester, was declared cccrtoiLe
to be the happy man, whom she had chosen to be for a hus-
the husband of a Queen courted by so many
Princes *.

ELIZABETH'S wisdom and penetration were re-

markable in the choice of her Ministers; in diftin-
guifhing her favourites, those great qualities were
less conspicuous. She was influenced in two cafes
To opposite, by merit of very different kinds. Their
capacity for business, their knowledge, their pru-
dence, were the talents to which alone ihe attended,

* Keith, 251.
VOL. I. X in

B o o K in chufing her Ministers; whereas beauty andgrace-

I/I. fulness of person, polihed manners, and courtly
-i.-_ address, were the accomplishments on which she

bestowed her favour. She aced in the one cafe with
the wisdom of a Queen, in the other, Ihe disco-
vered the weakness of a woman. To this Leicester
owed his grandeur. Though remarkable neither
for eminence in virtue, nor superiority of abilities,
the Queen's partiality distinguished him on every
occasion. She raised him to the highest honours,
{he bellowed on him the most important employ-
ments, and manifested an affeaion so difpropor-
tionate to his merit, that, in the opinion of that
age, it could be accounted for only by the power
of planetary influence*

ended aof THE high spirit of the Scottilh Queen could not
this. well bear the first overture of a match with a sub-

je&. Her own rank, the splendour of her former
marriage, and the solicitations, at this time, of so
many powerful Princes, crowded into her thoughts,
and made her sensibly feel how humbling and dif-
refpe&ful Elizabeth's proposal was. She diffem-
bled, however, with the English Resident; and
though she declared, in strong terms, what a de-
gradation she would deem this alliance, which
brought along with it no advantage, that could
justify such neglect of her own dignity, she men-
tioned the Earl of Leicester, notwithstanding, in
terms full of refpe& t.

* Camden, 549. t Kcith, 22z.

ELI-

ELIZABETH, we may presume, did not wilh that B o o K

the proposal should be received in any other man- 1II.
ner. After the extraordinary marks she had given '
of her own attachment to Leicester, and while he Elibeth's
was frill in the very height of favour, it is not pro- views inr¢-
bable lie could think seriously of bestowing him inllim.
upon another. 'Twas not her aim to persuade, but
only to amuse Mary*. Almost three years were
elapsed since her return into Scotland; and though
solicited by her subje&s, and courted by the great-
eft Princes in Europe, Ihe had hitherto been pre-
vented from marrying, chiefly by the artifices of
Elizabeth. And if, at this time, the English
Queen could have engaged Mary to liften to her
proposal in favour of Leicester, her power: over
this creature of her own, would have enabled. her
to protraa the negociation at pleasure; and by
keeping her rival unmarried, Ihe would have ren-
dered the profpe& of her fucceflion less acceptable
to the English.

LEICESTER'S own Situation was extremely deli-

cate, and embarrassing. To gain possession of the
mo4 .amiable woman of the age, to carry away this
prize from so many contending Princes, to mount
the throne of an ancient kingdom, might have fat-
tered the ambition of a subjec, much more confi-
derable. than him. He saw all these advantages,
no doubt; and, in secret, they made their full im-
prelfion on him. But, without offending Elizabeth,
he durst not'venture on the mofc distant discovery
of his sentiments, or take any itep towards faci-

* Melv. 104, lo5.

X _ litating

B o o K litating his acquisition of objets so worthy of de-

III. ire.
1564. ON the other hand, Elizabeth's partiality towards

him, which she was at no pains to conceal*, might
inspire him with hopes of attaining the supreme
rank in a kingdom, more illuitrious than Scotland.
Elizabeth had often declared, that nothing but her
resolution to lead a single life, and his being born
her own fubje&, would have hindered her from
chufing the Earl of Leicester for a husband. Such
considerations of prudence are, however, often fur-
mounted by love; and Leicester might flatter him-
self, that the violence- of her affection would at
length triumph both over the maxims of policy,
and the scruples of pride. These hopes induced
him, now and then, to conclude the proposal of his
marriage with the Scottish Queen to be a proje&
for his deftrucien; and he imputed it to the malice
of Cecil, who, under the specious pretence of do-
ing him honour, intended to ruin him in the good
opinion both of Elizabeth and Mary t.

A TREATY of marriage, proposed by one Q.uen,

who dreaded its success; listened to by another, who
was secretly determined against it; and scarce de-
fired by the man himself, whpfe interest and repu-
tation it was calculated, in appearance, to promote;
could not, under so many unfavourable circum-
stances, be brought to a fortunate ifue. Both Eli-
zabeth and Mary continued, however, to a& with
equal dissimulation. The former, notwithstanding

' Me!- .- t Ibid. 1or.

her

her fears of losing Leicester, solicited warmly in Boo o
his behalf. The latter, though she began about III.
this time to cast her eyes upon another fubje& of '-"
England, did not, at once, venture finally to reject I564.
Elizabeth's favourite.

THE person towards whom Mary began to turn Marven-

her thoughts, was Henry Stewart Lord Darnlv, thoughts of
eldest son of the earl of Lennox. That nobleman, maryaig

Lord Darn-

having been driven out of Scotland under the re- iy.
gency of the Duke of Chatelherault, had lived in
banishment for twenty years. His wife, Lady
Margaret Douglas, was Mary's most dangerous
rival in her claim upon the Englifli succession. She
was the daughter of Margaret, the eldest fitter of
Henry VIII. by the Earl of Angus, whom that
Queen married after the death of her husband
James IV. In that age, the right and order of
succession was not fettled with the fame accuracy,
as at present. Time, and the decision of almost
every cafe that can possibly happen, have at last in-
troduced certainty into a matter, which, naturally,
is fubje& to all the variety, arising from the caprice
of lawyers, guided by obscure, and often imaginary
analogies. Lady Lennox, though born of a second
marriage, was one degree nearer the royal blood of
England, than Mary. She was the daughter, Mary
only the grand-daughter of Margaret, This was not
the only advantage over Mary which Lady Len-
nox enjoyed. She was born in England, and by a
maxim of law in that country, with regard to pri-
vate inheritances, " whoever is not born in Eng-
land, or at least of parents, who, at the time of

X 3 his

B o o K his birth, were in the obedience of the King of

III. England, cannot enjoy any inheritance in the king-
-64. dom *." This maxim, Hales, an English lawyer,

produced, in a treatise, which he published at this
time, and endeavoured to apply it to the right of
succession to the Crown. In a private cause, there
pretexts might have given rife to a long and doubt-
ful litigation; where a Crown was at Rake, such
nice disputes and fubtilties were to be avoided with
the utmost care. If Darnly should happen to con-
tract an alliance with any of the powerful families
in England, or lhould publicly profess the Pro-
teftant religion, there plausible and popular topics
might be so urged, as to prove fatal to the preten-
sions of a foreigner, and of a Papist.

MARY was aware of all this; and in order to

prevent any danger from that quarter, had early
endeavoured to cultivate a friendly correspondence
with the family of Lennox. In the year 562 t,
both the Earl and the Lady Margaret were taken
into custody by Elizabeth's orders, on account of
their holding a secret correspondence with the Scot-
tihl Queen.

Elizabeth FROM the time that Mary became sensible of the
fecrtaiy
pleaed difficulties, which would attend her marrying a so-
with tis. reign Prince, she entered into a fill closer connexion

with the Earl of Lennox , and invited him to re-
turn into Scotland. This fie endeavoured to con-
ceal from Elizabeth; but a tranfaaion of so much

* Carte, HiR. of Eng. vol. iii. 422. t Camd. 389.
$ Id. 396.

irn-

importance did not escape the notice of that dif- B o o K
cerning Princess. She observed, but did not inter- III.
rupt it. Nothing could fall in more perfectly -
with her views, concerning Scottilh affairs. She 1564
was pleated to fee the pride of the Scottish Queen
stoop, at last, to the thoughts of taking a sub-
jest to her bed. Darnly was in no situation to
excite her jealousy, or her fears. His father's
estate lay in England, and by means of this pledge,
lie hoped to keep the negociation entirely in her
own hands, to play the fame game of artifice and
delay, which she had planned our, if her recom-
mendation of Leicester had been more favourably
received.

As before the union of the two Crowns, no sub-

jet of one kingdom could pass into the other with-
out the permission of both sovereigns; no sooner
did Lennox, under pretence of prosecuting his
wife's claim upon the earldom of Angus, apply to
Elizabeth for her licence to go into Scotland, than
he obtained it. Together with it, she gave him
letters, warmly recommending his person and cause
to Mary's friendlhip and protection*. But at the
fame time, as it was her manner to involve all her
tranfa&ions with regard to Scotland, in fomer de-
gree of perplexity and contradi&ion; she warned
Mary, that this indulgence of Lennox might prove
fatal to herself,, as his return could not fail of re-
viving the ancient animosity between him and the
house of Hamilton.

Keih, 255. 268.

THIS

B o o THIS admonition gave umbrage to Mary, and

III. drew from her an angry reply, which occasioned,
--' for some time, a total interruption of all corre-

fpondence between the two Queens *. Mary was
not a little alarmed at this; she both dreaded the
effects of Elizabeth's resentment, and felt sensibly
the disadvantage of being excluded from a free in-
tercourfe with England, where her ambassadors had,
all along, carried on, with some success, secret ne-
gociations, which increased the number of her
partisans, and paved her way towards the throne.
In order to remove the causes of the present diffi-
culty, Melvil was sent express to the court of Eng-
land. He found it no difficult matter to bring
about a reconcilement; and soon re-eflablifhed the
appearance, but not the confidence of friendship,
which was all that had subsisted, for some time, be-
twcen the two Queens.

DURING this negociation, Elizabeth's professions

of love to Mary, and Melvil's replies in name of his
Mistress, were made in the language of the warmest
and most cordial friendship. But what Melvil truly
observes, with refpet to Elizabeth, may be ex-
tended, without injustice, to both Queens. " There
was neither plain dealing, nor upright meaning,
but great diflimulation, envy, and feart."

Lennox a- LENNOX, however, in consequence of the licence
ries in which he had obtained, set out for Scotland, and was

S received by the Queen, not only with the respect

due to a nobleman, so nearly allied to the royal

Keith, 253. Melv. 83. t Melv. 104.

family,

family, but treated with a distinguished familiarity, B o K
which could not fail of inspiring him with more III.
elevated hopes. The rumour of his son's marriage
to the Queen began to spread over the kingdom;
and the eyes of all Scotland were turned upon him,
as the father of their future Maifer. The Duke of
Chatelherault was the first to take the alarm. He
confidered Lennox, as the ancient and hereditary
enemy of the house of Hamilton; and, in his gran-
deur, saw the ruin of himself and his friends. But
the Queen interposed her authority to prevent any
violent rupture, and employed all her influence to
bring about an accommodation of the differences*.

THE powerful family of Douglas no less dreaded

Lennox's return, from an apprehension, that he
would wrest the earldom of Angus out of their
hands. But the Queen, who well knew how dan-
gerous it would be to irritate Morton, and other
great men of that name, prevailed on Lennox to
purchase their friendship, by allowing his Lady's
claim upon the earldom of Angus to drop t.

AFTER these preliminary steps, Mary ventured Decembr.

to call a meeting of parliament. The ac of for-
feiture, passed against Lennox in the year 1545,
was repealed, and he was publicly restored to the
honours and estate of his ancestors i.

THE ecclesiastical transactions of this year were Tune 25.
not considerable. In the assemblies of the church, Decem.- 5

* Keith, 259, t Id. 268, Note (i)
t See Appendix, No. IX.

the

B o o K the fame complaints of the increase of idolatry, the

III. fame representations concerning the poverty of the

ó'--' clergy, were renewed. The reply which the Queen
e564 C made to these, and her promises of redress, were

ilfpiciOus more satisfying to the Protestants than any they had
Cu tn, hitherto obtained . But, notwithstanding her de-
zcal for clarations in their favour, they could not help har-

bouring many suspicions concerning Mary's designs
againit their religion. She had never once consented
to hear any preacher of the reformed dQorine. She
had abated nothing of her bigotted attachment to
the Romish faith. The genius of that superstition,
averse, at all times, from toleration, was, in that"
age, fierce and unrelenting. Mary had given her
friends on the continent repeated assurances of her
resolution to re-establish the Catholic church t.
She had induftrioufy avoided every opportunity
of ratifying the acts of Parliament 560, in favour
of the Reformation. Even the protecion, which,
ever since her return, Ihe had afforded the Prote-
ftant religion, was merely temporary, and declared
by her own proclamation to be of force, only " till
she should take some final order in the matter of
religion :." The vigilant zeal of the preachers was
inattentive to none of these circumstances. The
coldness of their principal leaders, who were, at
this time, entirely devoted to the court, added to
theirjealoufies and fears. These they uttered to the
people, in language which they esteemed suitable
to the necessity of the times, and which the Queen
reckoned disrespectful, and insolent. In a meeting

* Keith, 333, 539. t Carte, vol. iii. 415.
* Keith, 304. 510.

of the General Assembly, Maitland publickly ac- B o o K
cufed Knox of teaching seditious doctrine, con- lli.
cerning the right of fubjeas to resist those Sove- --Y-
reigns, who trespass against the duty which they 1564-
owe to the people. Knox was not backward to jus-
tify what he had taught. And upon this general
do&rine of resistance, so just in its own nature, but
so delicate in its application to particular cafes, there
ensued a debate, which admirably displays the ta-
lents and characer of both the disputants; the
acuteness of the former, embellished with learning,
but prone to subtlety, the vigorous understanding
of the latter, delighting in bold sentiments, and fu-
perior to all fear *

Two years had already been confirmed, in fruit- 1565.

less negociations concerning the marriage of the Diffimula
Scottish Queen. Mary had full leisure and oppor- Elizabet
tunityto discern the fallacy and deceit of all Eliza- ada My,
beth's proceedings, with refpe& to that affair. But, to hI Inar-
in order to set the real intentions of the English ra
Queen in a clear light, and to bring her to some
explicit declaration of her sentiments, Mary, at
last, intimated to Randolph, that, on condition her F',. j.
right of succession to the Crown of England were
publickly acknowledged, she was ready to yield to
the solicitations of his Mistress in behalf of Leicef-
tert. Nothing could be farther than this from the
mind and intention of Elizabeth. The right of fuc-
ceflion was a mystery, which, during her whole reign,
her jealousy preserved untouched, and unexplained,
She had promised, however, when fle first began

* Knox, 349. t Keith, 269.

to

B o o K to interest herself in the marriage of the Scottish

I1I. Queen, all that was now demanded. How to re-

treat with decency, how to elude her former offer,
565' was, on that account, not a little perplexing.

THE facility with which Lord Darnly obtained

permission to visit the court of Scotland, was owing,
in all probability, to that embarraffient. From
the time of Melvil's embassy, Lady Lennox had
warmly solicited this liberty for her son. Elizabeth
was no itranger to the ambitious hopes, with which
that young nobleman flattered himself. She had
received repeated advices from her Ministers of the
sentiments, which Mary began to entertain in his
favour s. It was entirely in her power to pre-
vent his stirring out of London. In the present
conjuncture, however, nothing could be of more
advantage to her, than Darnly's journey into Scot-
land. She had already brought one asor upon the
stage, who, under her management, had for a long
time, amused the Scottish Queen. She hoped, no leis
absolutely, to dire& the motions of Darnly, who
was likewise her fubje&; and again to involve Mary
in all the tedious intricacies of negociation. These
motives determined Elizabeth and her Ministers to
yield to the solicitations of Lady Lennox.

Darnly ar- But this deep-laid scheme was in a moment dif-
S'cand. concerted. Such unexpeced events, as the fancy

of poets ascribe to love, are, at some times, really
produced by that passion. An affair, which had
been the object of so many political intrigues, and

* Keith, 259. 261. 266.

had

had moved and interested so many princes, was at B o oK
last decided by the sudden liking of the two young III.
persons. Lord Darnly was, at this time, in the '--'
first bloom and vigour of youth. In beauty and i565'
gracefulness of person, he surpassed all his cotem-
poraries; he excelled, eminently, in such arts as
add ease and elegance to external form, and which
enable it not only to dazzle but to please. Mary Gains the
was of an age, and of a temper, to feel the full e1ertn
power of these accomplishments. The impression
which Lord Darnly made upon her, was visible
from the time of their first interview. The whole
business of the court was to amuse and entertain
this illustrious guest*; and in all those scenes of
gaiety, Darnly, whose qualifications were altoge-
ther superficial and showy, appeared to great ad-
vantage. His conquest of the Queen's heart be-
cafle complete; and inclination now prompted
her to conclude a marriage, the first thoughts of
which had been fugefted by considerations merely
political.

ELIZABETH contributed, and perhaps not without

design, to increase the violence of this passion.
Soon after Darnly's arrival in Scotland, Ihe, in re-
turn to that message, whereby Mary had signified
her willingness to accept of Leicester, gave an an-
fwer in such terms, as plainly unravelled her ori-
ginal intention in that intrigue t. She promised if
the Scottilh Queen's marriage with Leicester should
take place, to advance him to great honours; but,
with regard to her title to the Englifl succession,
, Knox, 369. t Keith, 2,0. Append. 1x8.

she

B o o K The would neither susser any legal inquiry to be

III. made concerning it, nor permit it to be publickly re-
'--' cognized, till Ihe herself should declare her refolu-

565.- ton never to marry. Notwithstanding Elizabeth's

former promises, Mary had reason to expeEt every
thing contained in this reply; her high spirit, how-
ever, could not bear, with patience, such a cruel
discovery of the contempt, the artifice, and mockery
with which, under the veil of friendlhip, ihe had
been so long abused. She burst into tears of indig-
nation, and expressed, with the unnoft bitterness,
her sense of that disingenuous craft, which had
been employed to deceive her *.

THE natural effe& of this indignation was to add

to the impetuofiry with which she pursued her own
scheme. Blinded by resentment, as well as by love,
ihe observed no defecs in the man, whom fihe had
chosen; and began to take the necessary steps to-
wards accomplilhing her design, with all the impa-
tience, natural to those passions.

As Darnly was so nearly rdated to the Queen,

the canon law made it neceflary to obtain the Pope's
dispensation, before the celebration of the marriage.
For this purpose, she early set on foot a negociation
with the court of Rome -.

TL-French SHE was busy, at the fame time, in procuring the
ouW t, p- content of the French King and his mother. Having
prot ofi the
=.ch. communicated her design, and the motives which

determined her choice, to Caftlenau the French

Keith, Append. 159. t Camd. 396.

Am-

Ambassador, flie employed him, as the molt proper B o o K
person, to bring his court to fall in with her views. III.
Among other arguments to this purpose, Cattlenau -
mentioned Mary's attachment to Darnly, which he 565.
represented to be so violent and deep-rooted, that
it was no longer in her own power to break off the
match *. Nor were the French Ministers back-
ward in encouraging Mary's passion. Her pride
would never stoop to an alliance with a fubje& of
France. By this choice, they were delivered from
the apprehension of a match with any of the Au-
ftrian Princes, as well as the danger of too close an
union with Elizabeth; and as Darnly professed
the Roman Catholic religion, this suited the bigot-
ted schemes which that court had adopted.

WHILE Mary was endeavouring to reconcile so- Darnly das-

reign courts to a measure which ihe had so much at guss feve-
heart; Darnly, and his father, by their behaviour, nobles.
were raising up enemies at home, to obftru& it.
Lennox had, during the former part of his life,
discovered no great compass of abilities, or political
wisdom; and appears to have been a man of a weak
understanding, and violent passions. Darhly was
not superior to his father in understanding, and all
his passions were still more impetuous t. To these,
he added that insolence, which the advantage' of
external form, when accompanied with no quality
more valuable, is apt to inspire. Intoxicated with
the Queen's favour, he began already to aifume
the haughtiness of a King, and to put on that im-
*Caftlen. 464. t Keith, 272, 273.

perious

B o o R perious air, which majesty itself can scarce render

III. tolerable.

xpa6rti IT was by the advice, or at least with the consent
Mairy. of Murray, and his party, that Lennox had been

invited into Scotland*; and yet no sooner did he
acquire a firm footing in that kingdom, than he
began to enter into secret cabals with those noble-
men, who were known to be avowed enemies to
Murray, and with regard to religion, to be either
neutrals, or favourers of Popery t. Darnly, Rfill
more imprudent, allowed some rath expressions con-
cerning those favours, which the Queen's bounty
had conferred upon Murray, to escape him 4.

BUT, above all these, the familiarity which

Darnly cultivated with David Rizio the Italian,
contributed to increase the suspicion and disgust of
the nobles.

The rife of THE low birth and indigent condition of this
Rizi' fa- man, placed him in a itation, in which he ought

naturally to have remained unknown to posterity.
But what fortune called him to ac, and to susser in
Scotland, obliges history to descend from its dig-
nity, and to record his adventures. He was the
son of a musician in Turin, and having accompa-
nied the Piedmontefe Ambassador into Scotland,
gained admission into the Queen's family, by his

ill in music. His servile condition had taught
him suppleness of spirit, and insinuating manners.

Knox, 367. Keith, 24-. t Keith, 262. t Id. 274.

HE

He quickly crept into the Queen's favour, and her B o o K
French Secretary happening to return at that time Ill.
into his own country, was preferred by her to that '."-
office. He now began to make a figure in court, I565;
and to appear as a man of weight and consequence.
The whole train of suitors and expe&ants, who
have an extreme sagacity in discovering the paths
which lead molt direcly to success, applied to him.
His recommendations were observed to have great
influence over the Queen, and he grew to be con-
fidered not only as a favourite, but as a Minister.
Nor was Rizio careful to abate that envy, which al-
ways attends such an extraordinary and rapid change
of fortune. He studied, on the contrary, to dif-
play the whole extent of his favour. He affe&ed
to talk often, and familiarly, with the Queen in
public. He equalled the greatest and most opulent
fubjets, in richness of dress, and in the number of
his attendants. He discovered, in all his behavi-
our, that assuming insolence, with which unmerited
prosperity inspires an ignoble mind. It was with
the utmost indignation that the nobles beheld the
power; it was with the utmost difficulty, that they
tolerated the arrogance, of this unworthy minion.
Even in the Queen's presence they could not for-
bear treating him with marks of contempt. · Nor
was it his exorbitant power alone, which exasperated
the Scots. They confidered him, and not without
reason, as a dangerous enemy to the Protestant re-
ligion, and fufpeEted that he held, for this purpose,
a tecret correspondence with the court of Rome *

d Buchann. 340. Melv. 107.
VOL. I. Y IT

B o o K It was Darnly's misfortune to fall under the ma-

III. nagement of this man, who, by flattery and affi-

6 duity, easily gained on his vanity and unexperience.

Darliys Rizio's whole influence on the QueeR was employ-
.l xioh ed in his behalf, and contributed, without doubt,

towards establishing him more firmly in her assec-
tions *. But whatever benefit he might reap from
his patronage, it did not counterbalance the con-
tempt, and even infamy, to which he was ex-
posed, on account of his familiarity with such an
upstart.

THOUGH Darnly daily made progress in the

Queen's affections, ihe conducted herself, however,
with such prudent reserve, as to impose on Ran-
dolph the English Resident, a man otherwise Ihrewd
and penetrating. It appears from his letters at this
period, that he entertained not the least suspicion
of the intrigue which was carrying on; and gave
his court repeated assurances, that the Scottish
Queen had no design of marrying Darnly t. In
the midst of his security, Mary dispatched Mait-
land to signify her intention to Elizabeth, and to
solicit her content to the marriage with Darnly.
This embassy was the first thing which opened the
eyes of Randolph.

ib'4h ELIZABETH asseted the greatest surprise at this

Lsizabeth
de:lares sudden resolution of the Scottish Queen, but with-
a2pinm the
Qal~.he out reason. The train was laid by herself, and she
mardie had no cause to wonder when it took effe&. She
*V.sth Darn-
i.. expressed, at the Lame time, her disapprobation of

M* elv. InI. 1 Keith, -;, and Append. 159.

the

the match, in the strongest terms; and pretended B o o K
to foresee many dangers and inconveniencies arising III.
from it, to both kingdoms. But this, too, was
mere affe&ation. Mary had often and plainly de- 5
clared her resolution to marry. It was impoflible
she could make any choice more inoffensive. The
danger of introducing a foreign interest into Britain,
which Elizabeth had so justly dreaded, was entirely
avoided. Darnly, though allied to both Crowns,
and possessed of lands in both kingdoms, could be
formidable to neither. It is evident from all these
circumstances, that Elizabeth's apprehensions of
danger could not possibly be serious; and that, in
all her violent declarations against Darnly, there
was much more grimace than of reality *

THERE were not wanting, however, political

motives of much weight, to induce that wife Prin-
cess to put on the appearance of great displeasure.
Mary, intimidated by this, might perhaps delay
her marriage; which Elizabeth desired to obftru&t
with a weakness that little suited the dignity of her
mind, and the elevation of her character. Besides,
the tranquillity of her own kingdom was the great
objec of Elizabeth's policy; and by declaring .her

' Even the Historians of that age acknowledge, that the
marriage of the Scottish Queen with a subjet was far from be-
ing disagreeable to Elizabeth. Knox, 369. 373. Buchan. 339.
Caftlenau, who, at that time, was well acquainted with the in-
trigues of both the Britilh courts, asserts, upon grounds of great
probability, that the match was wholly Elizabeth's own work:
Caftlen. 462. and that she rejoiced at the accomplishment of it,
appears from the letters of her own Ambassadors. Keith, 28o. 288.

Y 2 dif-

B o o K diffatisfaRion with Mary's conduct, she hoped to

III. alarm that party in Scotland, which was attached

-- to the Englifl interest, and to encourage such of
1565'

- the nobles, as secretly disapproved the match, open-

ly to oppose it. The feeds of discord would, by
this means, be scattered through that kingdom.
Inteflinc commotions might arise. Amidlt these
Mary could form none of those dangerous schemes,
to which the union of her people might have
prompted her. E:lizabeth would become the um-
pire between the Scottifhl (tcen, and her contend-
ing fubjecs. And England might look on, with
security, while a storm, wnich fhle had railed,
wafted the only kingdom, which could possibly
diflurb its peace.
M.,y ,. IN prosecution of this scheme, nfe laid before

her Privy Council the mefrage from the Scottilli
Qjeen, and consulted them with regard to the an-
fwer she should return. Their determination, it is
easy to conceive, was perfectly conformable to her
Iecret views. They drew up a remonflrance againll
the intended match, full of the imaginary dangers
with which that event threatened the kingdom o .

, Nor (lid fle think it enough, to signify her dililp-

t, ....p- probation of the meafiures, either by Maitland,
ton ,., ,,-

,,. Mary's Arnbaflador, or by Randolph, her own

Reflilnt in Scotland; in order to add more dig-
nity to the farce which lhe chose to ac, she ap-
pointed Sir Nicholas Throgmorton her Ambaflador
1';tr;:ordnliary. She commanded him to declare, in
t!i; llrongceit terms, her diflatisfaliion with the tlep

Kcitlh, 27.1. Sec Appnd. No. X.

which

which Mary proposed to take; and, at the fame B o o K
time, to produce the determination of the Privy 1II.
Council, as an evidence that the sentiments of the '--
nation were not different from her own. Not long 1565.
after, she confined Lady Lennox as a prisoner, first
in her own house, and then sent hcr to the Tower *.

INTCLLIGENCE of all this reached Scotland, be-

fore the arrival of the English Ambassador. In the
first transports of her indignation, Mary resolved,
no longer, so keep any measures with Elizabeth;
and sent orders to Maitland, who accompanied
Throgmorton, to return inltantly to the English
court, and, in her name, to declare to Elizabeth,
that after having been amused so long to so little
purpose; after having been fooled and imposed on
so grossly by her artifices; fle was now resolved to
gratify her own inclination, and to ask no other con-
sent, but that of her own subje&s, in the choice of
an husband. Maitland, with his usual sagacity,
foresaw all the effeas of such a rash and angry mef-
sage, and ventured rather to incur the displeasure
of his Mistress, by disobeying her commands, than
to be made the instrument of tearing asunder, so
violently, the few remaining ties, which still linked
together the two Queens t.

MARY herself soon became sensible of her error.

She received the English ambassador with respect;
justified her own conduct with decency; and though
unalterable in her resolution, fle affected a wonder-
* Keith, Append. 161. t Id. 16o.

~Y ~ ~~3 ~ ful

B o o K ful solicitude to reconcile Elizabeth to the measure;

III. and even pretended, out of complaisance towards

6 her, to put offthe consummation of the marriage

for some months ". It is probable, however, that
the want of the Pope's dispensation, and the profpe&t
of gaining the consent of her own subje&s, were
the real motives of this delay.

on O THIS consent Mary laboured with the utmost in-

averftin to
Darny. dultry to obtain. The Earl of Murray was the

person in the kingdom, whose concurrence was of
the greatest importance; but she had reason to fear
that it would not be procured without extreme dif-
ficulty. From the time of Lennox's return into
Scotland, Murray perceived that the Queen's assec-
tions began gradually to be estranged from him.
Darnly, Athol, Rizio, all the court favourites,
combined againit him. His ambitious spirit could
not brook this diminution of his power, which his
former services had so little merited. He retired in-
to the country, and gave way to rivals, with whom
lie was unable to contendt. The return of the
Earl of Bothwell, his avowed enemy, who had been
accused of a design upon his life, and who had refi-
ded for tome time in foreign countries, obliged him
to attend to his own safety. No intreaty of the
Queen could persuade him to a reconcilement with
that nobleman. He insisted on having him brought
to a public trial, and prevailed, by his importunity,
to have a day fixed for it. Bothwell durst not ap-
pear in opposition to a man, who came to the place
' Keith, Append. 278. t Id. 272. 274. Append. 159.

of

of trial, attended by 5ooo of his followers on horse- B o o K
back. He was once more constrained to leave the III.
kingdom; but, by the Queen's command, the fen- -r
tence of outlawry, which was incurred by non-appear- I565.
ance, was not pronounced against him*.

MARY, sensible, at the fame time, of how much May S.

importance, it was, to gain a subje&t so powerful
and so popular as the Earl of Murray, invited him
back to court, and received him with many demon-
ifrations of refpe& and confidence. At last ile de-
fired him to set an example to her other fubjefts by
subscribing a paper, containing a formal approba-
tion of her marriage with Darnly. Murray had
many reasons to hesitate, and even to with-hold his
assent. Darnly had not only undermined his credit
with the Queen, but discovered on every occasion,
a rooted aversion to his person. By consenting to
his elevation to the throne, he would give him such
an accession of dignity and power, as no man wil-
lingly bestows on an enemy. The unhappy confe-
quences which might follow upon a breach with
England were, likewise, of considerable weight with
Murray. He had always openly preferred a confe-
deracy with England, before the ancient alliance
with France. By his means chiefly, this change in
the system of national politics had been brought
about. A league with England had been establish-
ed; and he could not think of sacrificing, to a rash
and youthful passion, an alliance of so much utility
to the kingdom; and which he and the other nobles

* Keith, ibid. 16o,

were

B o o K were bound, by every obligation, to maintain*.

III. Nor was the interest of religion forgotten on this

occasion. Mary, though surrounded by Protestant
I$65'

Counsellors, had found means to hold a dangerous
correspondence with foreign Catholics. She had
even courted the Pope's proteEtion, who had sent
her a subsidy of 8coo crowns t. Though Murray
had hitherto endeavoured to bridle the zeal of the
reformed clergy, and to fct the Queen's conduct in
the moit favourable light, yet her obstinate adhe-
rence to her own religion, could not fail of alarm-
ing him, and by her resolution to marry a papist,
the only hope of reclaiming her, which remained,
was for ever cut off. Each of these considerations
had its influence on Murray, and all of thcm deter-
mined him to decline complying, at that time, with
the Queen's request.

,.- !;. Tiqz Convention of nobles, which was assembled
A Conven- a few days after, discovered a greater disposition to
ticn of the
r.oblcap- gratify the Queen. Many of them, without hefita-
rroves i tion, expressed their approbation of the intended
the marri-
5se. match; but as others were startled at the fame dan-

gers which had alarmed Murray, or were influenced
by his example, to refuse their content, another Con-
vention was appointed at Perth, in order to deliberate
more fully concerning this matter :.

MEAN while, Mary gave a public evidence of

her own inclination, by conferring upon Darnly
titles of honour peculiar to the royal family. The

* Keith, 169. t Id. 29;. Melv. 114.
i Keith, 283. Knox, 373.

oppQ-

opposition she had hitherto met with, and the many B o o K
contrivances employed to thwart and disappoint her III.
inclination, produced their usual effect on the heart, '
they confirmed her passion, and increased its vio- 56
lence. The simplicity of that age imputed an assec-
tion, so excessive, to the infuence of witchcraft*.
It was owing, however, to no other charm than
the irresistible power of youth and beauty over a
young and tender heart. Darnly grew giddy with
his prosperity. Flattered by the love of a Queen,
and the applause of many among her fubjets, his
natural haughtiness and insolence became infupport-
able, and he could no longer bear advice, far less
contradi&cion. Lord Ruthven, happening to be
the first person who informed him that Mary, in
order to tooth Elizabeth, had delayed, for some
time, creating him Duke of Albany, he, in a fren-
zy of rage, drew his dagger, and attempted to stab
him t. It required all Mary's attention, to prevent
his falling under that contempt, to which such be-
haviour deservedly exposed him.

IN no scene of her life was ever Mary's own ad- Mary's ad-

dress more remarkaby displayed. Love sharpened dress in
her invention, and made her study every method of gubjeas.
gaining her subjects. Many of the nobles she won
by her address, and more by her promises. On
some (he bestowed lands, to others she gave new ti-
tles of honour $. She even condescended to court
the Protenant cergy; and having invited three of
their fuperintendants to Stirling, she declared, in

Keith, 283. t Ibid. Append. 160. X Ibid. 283.

strong

B o o K frong terms, her resolution to protect their religion,

III. expressed her willingness to be present at a confer-
`'--- ence upon the points in doctrine which were dif-
565-' puted between the Protestants and Papists, and went

so far as to ihow some desire to hear such of their
preachers as were most remarkable for moderation *.
By these arts, the Queen gained wonderfully upon
the people, who, unless their jealousy be raised by
repeated injuries, are always ready to view the ac-
tions of their Sovereign with an indulgent eye.

ON the other hand, Murray and his associates

were plainly the dupes of Elizabeth's policy. She
talked in so high a Itrain, of her dipleafure at the
intended match; she treated Lady Lennox with so
much rigour; she wrote to the Scottiih Queen in
such strong terms; she recalled the Earl of Lennox
and his son, in such a peremptory manner, and with
such severe denunciation of her vengeance, if they
ihould presume to difobeyt; that all there expref-
sions of aversion fully persuaded them of her fin-
cerity. This belief fortified their scruples with re-
specd to the match, and encouraged them to oppose
it. They began with forming among themselves
bonds of confederacy and mutual defence; they en-
tered into a secret correspondence with the English
Resident, in order to secure Elizabeth's affiifance
when it should become needful 1; they endeavoured
to fill the nation with such apprehensions of dan-
ger, as might counterbalance the influence of those
arts, which the Queen had employed. *

* Knox, 373. t Keith, z85, 286,
t Ibid. 289. z92. z98.

BESIDES

BESIDES these intrigues, there were secretly car- B o o K

ried on, by both parties, dark designs of a more cri- III.
minal nature, and more suitable to the spirit of the age. - '

1565.

Darnly, impatient of that opposition, which he im- sche5of
puted wholly to Murray, and resolving, at any rate, Marnly and
to get rid of such a powerful enemy, formed a plot againftcach
to assassinate him, during the meeting of the Con- other
vention of Perth. Murray, on his part, despairing
of preventing the marriage by any other means,
had, together with the Duke of Chatelherault, and
the Earl of Argyll, concerted measures for seizing
Darnly, and carrying him a prisoner into England.

IF either of these conspiracies had taken effet,

this convention might have been attended with con-
sequences extremely tragical; but both were ren-
dered abortive, by the vigilance and good fortune of
those against whom they were formed. Murray, be-
ing warned of his danger by some retainers to the
court, who still favoured his interest, avoided the
blow, by not going to Perth. Mary, receiving intel-
ligence of Murray's enterprise, retired with the ut-
most expedition, along with Darnly, to the other fide
of Forth. Conscious, on both fides, of guilt, and in-
flamed with resentment, it was impossible they could
either forget the violence, which themselves had me-
ditated, or forgive the injuries, intended against
them. From that moment, all hope of reconcile-
ment was at an end, and their mutual enmity burst
out with every symptom of implacable hatred *.

ON

*The reality of these two opposite conspiracies has given
Occasion to many disputes and much contradiction. Some deny

that

B o o K ON Mary's return to Edinburgh, (he summoned

III. her vassals by proclamation, and solicited them by
'-- -' her letters, to repair thither in arms, for the pro-
Mar fum- teRion of her person against her foreign and do-
mens her meftic
Wanals to
take arms
against that any design was formed against the life of Murray; others
lurray. call in quetion the truth of the conspiracy againit Darnly.

There seem, however, to be good reasons for believing both;
though the zeal and credulity of party-writers have added to
each, many exaggerated circumstances. The following argu-
ments render it probable, that tome violence was intended
against Murray.

I. This is positively aflerted by Buchanan, 341. 2. The Eng-

lifh'Refident writes to Cecil, that Murray was assuredly inform-
ed that a design was laid to murder him at Perth, and describes
the manner in which this plot was to have been executed.
Keith, 287. 3. Murray himself constantly and publicly affirm-
ed, that such a design was formed against his life. Keith, App.
o10. And though he was called upon by the Queen to bring
legal evidence of his assertion, and a safe condut offered him,
while he came to court for that purpose; ibid. yet whoever
confiders Murray's situation, and the spirit of those who ruled
in court at that time, will scarce deem it any proof of his guilt,
that he did not chufe to rifle his person on such security. 4. The
furious passions of Darnly, the fierceness of his resentment,
which scrupled at no violence, and the manners of the age, ren-
der the imputation of such a crime less improbable.

II. That Murray and his associates had resolved to seize

Darnly's person, appears with still greater certainty; i. From
the express testimony of Melvil, ilz. although Buchanan,
p. 341. and Knox, p. 377. affe&, without any reason, to re-
present this as an idle rumour. z. The question was put to
Randolph, whether the Governor of Berwick would receive
Lenncx and his son, if they were carried prisoners to that place.
This plainly flews, that some such design was in hand, and Ran-
'dolph did not discourage it by the answer which he gave, Keith,
90o. 3. The precipitation, with which the Queen retired,

and

meftic enemies *. She was obeyed with all the B o o K
promptness and alacrity, with which fubjefts run to III.

and the reason Ihe gave for this sudden flight, are mentioned I565-
by Randolph, Keith, 291. 4. A great part of the Scottish
nobles, and among these the Earls of Argyll and Rothes, who
were themselves privy to the design, assert the reality of the con-
fpiracy. Good. vol. ii. 358.

All there circumstances leave little room to doubt of the truth

of both conspiracies. But we may observe how far this proof,
though drawn from public records, falls short, on both fides, of
legal and formal evidence. Buchanan and Randolph, in their
accounts of the conspiracy againlt Murray, differ widely in al-
molt every circumltance. The accounts of the attempt upon
Darnly, are not more confilent. Mclvil alleges, that the de-
sign of the conspirators was to carry Darnly a prisoner to Eng-
land; the proposal made to Randolph agrees with this. Ran-
dolph fays, that they intended to carry the Queen to St. An-
drew's, and Darnly to Cale Campbell. The Lords, in their
declaration, affirm the design of the conspirators to have been
to murder Darnly and his father, to confine the Queen in Loch-
leven during life, and to usurp the government. To believe
implicitly, whatever they find in an ancient paper, is a folly to
which Antiquaries are extremely prone. Ancient papers, how-
ever, often contain nothing more than the slanders of a party,
and the lie of the day. The declaration of the nobles referred
to, is of this kind; it is plainly rancorous, and written in the
very heat of the faction. Many things asserted in it, are evidently
false or exaggerated. Let Murray and his confederates be as
ambitious as we can suppose, they mulf have had some preten-
ces, and plausible ones too, before they could venture to impri-
son their Sovereign for life, and to seize the reins of govern-
ment; but, at that time, the Queen's condu&t had afforded no
colourable excuse for proceeding to such extremities. It is,
likewise, remarkable, that in all the proclamations againit
Murray, of which so many are published in Keith, Appendix
108, &c. neither the violent attempt upon Darnly, nor that
which he is alleged to have formed against the Queen herself,
are ever once mentioned.

X Keith, 298.

defend

B o o K defend a mild and popular administration. This

III. popularity, however, she owed in a great measure

- to Murray, who had directed her administration
i 65' with great prudence. But the crime of opposing

her marriage, obliterated the memory of his former
services; and Mary, impatient of contradi&ion,
and apt to confider those who disputed her will, as
enemies to her person, determined to let him feel
the whole weight of her vengeance. For this pur-
pose fie summoned him to appear before her upon
a lhort warning, to answer to such things as should
be laid to his charge t. At this very time, Mur-
ray, and the Lords who adhered to him, were as-
fembled at Stirling, to deliberate what course they
Thould hold, in such a difficult conjun&ure. But
the current of popular favour ran so strongly
against them, and, notwithifanding some fears and
jealousies, there prevailed in the nation such a ge-
neral disposition to gratify the Queen, in a matter
which so nearly concerned her, that, without com-
ing to any other conclusion,. than to implore the
Queen of England's prote&ion, they put an end
to their ineffectual consultations, and returned eve-
ry man to his own house.

TOGETHER with this discovery of the weakness

of her enemies, the confluence of her subjects from
all corners of the kingdom, afforded Mary an agree-
able proof of her own strength. While the Queen
was in this prosperous situation, she determined to
bring to a period, an affair, which had so long en-
grossed her heart, and occupied her attention. On

t Keith, Append. xo8.

the

the 29th of July, she married Lord Darnly. The B o o K
ceremony was performed in the Queen's chapel, ac- III.
cording to the rites of the Romish church; the 'v
Pope's bull dispensing with their mariage, having elebrates
been previously obtained *. She issued, at the her marri-

age with

fame time, proclamations, conferring the title of Darnly.
King of Scots upon her husband, and command-
ing that henceforth all writs at law should run in
the joint names of King and Queen t. Nothing
can be a stronger proof of the violence of Mary's
love, or the weakness of her councils, than this last
ftep. Whether she had any right to chufe a hus-
band, without consent of Parliament,. was, in that
age, a matter of some dispute ; that she had no right
to confer upon him, by her private authority; the
title and dignity of King; or, by a simple procla-
mation, to raise her husband to be the matter of
her people, seems to be beyond all doubt. Fran-
cis II. indeed, bore the fame title. It was not,
however, the gift of the Queen, but of the nation;
and the content of Parliament was obtained, before
he ventured to assume it. Darnly's condition, as a
subjet, rendered it frill more necessary to have the
concurrence of the supreme Council in his favour.
Such a violent and unprecedented firetch of prero-
gative as the substituting a proclamation in place
of an a& of Parliament, might have justly alarmed
the nation. But the Queen pofleffed so entirely the
confidence of her fubjefts, that, notwithstanding all
the clamours of the malecontents, no symptoms of
general discontent appeared on that account.
* Keith, 307. t Anderson, i. 33. See Append. No. XI.
X Buchan. 341.

EVEN

B o 0 K EVEN amidif that scene of joy, which always ac-

III. companies successful love, Mary did not susser the
ó'v' course of her vengeance against the malecontent

nobles to be interrupted. Three days after the
marriage, Murray was again summoned to court,
under the severest penalties, and upon his non ap-
pearance,- the rigour of juffice took place, and he
was declared an out-law *. At the fame time, the
Queen set at liberty Lord Gordon, who, ever since
his father's infurrelion in the year 1562, had been
detained a prisoner; she recalled the Earl of Suther-
land, who, on account of his concern in that con-
fpiracy, had fled into Slanders; and ihe permitted
Bothwell to return again into Scotland. The first,
and last of there, were among the most powerful
subjects in the kingdom, and all of them animated
with implacable hatred to Murray, whom they
esteemed the enemy of ther families, and the'author
of their own sufferings. This common hatred be-
came the foundation of the ftrifteft union with the
Queen, and gained them an ascendant over all her
councils. Murray himself confidered this confede-
racy with his avowed enemies, as a more certain
indication than any measure she had yet taken, of
her inexorable resentment.

a;hes THE malecontents had not yet openly taken up

againl arms t. But the Qeen having ordered her sub-
Miurray and .

W
his affoc- je

* Keith, 309, 31o.
t After their fruitless consultation in Stirling, the Lords re-

tired to their own houses. Keith, 304. Murray was still at St.
Andrew's on JIu 22. Keith, 306. By the places of rendez-

vous

je&s to march against them, they were driven to B o o K
the last extremity. They found themselves unable III.
to make head against the numerous forces, which ' -
Mary had assembled; and. fled into Argylefhire, in 156 S
expetation of aid from Elizabeth, to whom they
had secretly dispatched a messenger, in order to im-
plore her immediate assistance*.

MEAN while, Elizabeth endeavoured to etibaP- Elizabeth

rafs Mary, by a new declaration of disgust at her interpose
conduct. She blamed both her choice of Lord favour.
Darnly, and the precipitation with which she had
concluded the marriage. She required Lennox and
Darnly, whom she itill called her fubjecs, to re-
turn into England; and at the fame time, she warm-
ly interceded in behalf of Murray, whose behaviour
she represented to be not only innocent, but laud-
able. This message, so mortifying to the pride of
the Q'een, and so full of contempt for her husband,
was rendered still more insupportable, by the petu-
lant and saucy demeanour of Tamworth, the per-
son who delivered it t. Mary vindicated her own
conduct with warmth, but with great itrength of
reason; and rejeted the intercefion in behalf of
Murray, not without signs of resentment at Eliza-

vous, appointed for the inhabitants of the different counties,
August 4, it appears that the Queen's intention was to march
into Fife, the county in.which Murray, Rothes, Kirkaldy, and
other chiefs of the malecontents resided. Keith, 310. Their
flight into the weft, Keith, 312, prevented this expedition, and
the former rendezvous was altered, Keith, 310.

Keith, 312. Kuox, 380. t Camd. 398.
VOL. I. Z · beth's

B o o beth's pretending to intermeddle in the internal

III. government of her kingdom*.
I565. SHE did not, on that account, intermit in the

least the ardour, with which the pursued Murray
and his adherentst. They now appeared openly in
arms; and having received a fiall supply in money
from Elizabeth :, were endeavouring to raise their
followers in theweftern counties. But Mary's vi-
gilance hindered them from assembling in any con-
fiderable body. All her military operations, at that
time, were concerted with wisdom, executed with
vigour, and attended with success. In order to en-
courage her troops, ihe herself marched along with
them, rode with loaded pistols II, and endured all
the fatigues of war with admirable fortitude. Her
alacrity inspired her forces with an invincible refo-
iution, which, together with their superiority in
number, deterred the malecontents from facing them
in the field; but having artfully passed the Queen's
army, they marched with great rapidity to Edin-
burgh, and endeavoured to rouse the inhabitants of
.· g> ;,. that city to arms. The Queen did not susser them

to remain long unmolested; and, on her approach,
they were forced to abandon that place, and retire
in confusion towards the western borders §.

Keith, Append. 99.

t The nmot considerable persons who joined Murray, were

the Duke of Chatelherault, the Earls of Argyll, Glencairn,
Rothes; Lord Boyd and Ochiltree; the Lairds of Grange,
Cunninghamhead, Balcomie, Carmylie, Lawers, Bar, Dreghorn,
Pittarrow, Comptroller, and the Tutor of Pitcur. Knox, 382.

I Knox, 3£o. 11 Keith, Append. 164. § Id. 35.

As

As it was uncertain, for some time, what route B o o K

they had taken, Mary employed that interval in 1II.
providing for the security of the counties in the J

I565.

heart of the kingdom. She seized the places of Tiey5are
strength which belonged to the rebels; and obliged obsiged to

retire into

the considerable Barons in those shires, which she England.
most fufpeted, to join in associations for her de-
fence*. Having thus left all the country behind
her in tranquillity, she, with an army I 8ooo strong,
marched towards Dumfries, where the rebels then
were. During their retreat, they had sent letters
to the Queen, from almost every place where they
halted, full of fubmifflon, and containing various
overtures towards an accommodation. But Mary,
who determined not to let flip such a favourable op-
portunity of crushing the mutinous spirit of her sub-
jets, rejeced them with disdain. As she advanced,
the malecontents retired. And, having received
no effe&ual aid from Elizabeth t, they despaired of
any other means of fafetyj fled into England, and o0ob. io,
put themselves under the protecion of the Earl of
Bedford, Warden of the marches.

NOTHING, which Bedford's personal friendship wtehy me

for Murray could supply, was wanting to render pe&ed ill
their retreat agreeable. But Elizabeth herself treat- from Eliza-
ed them with extreme negle&. She had fully gain- beth.
ed her end, and, by their means, had excited such
discord and jealousies among the Scots, as would,
in all probability, long diftrat and weaken Mary's
councils. Her business now, was to save appear-

Keith, Append. 1 r3. - See Appendix, No. XII. XIII.

Z a ances,

B o K ances, and to justify herself to the Ministers of

III. France and Spain, who accused her of fomenting

ó*'

, the troubles in Scotland, by her intrigues. The
I$65.

expedient fie contrived for her vindication, strong-
ly displays her own characer, and the wretched con-
dition of exiles, who are obliged to depend on a so-
reign Prince. Murray and Hamilton, Abbot of
Kilwinning, being appointed by the other fugitives
to wait on Elizabeth, instead of meeting with that
welcome reception which was due to men, who,
out of confidence in her promises, had hazarded
their lives and fortunes, could not even obtain the
favour of an audience, until they had meanly con-
sented to acknowledge, in the presence of the French
-and Spanish Ambassadors, that Elizabeth had given
them no encouragement to take arms. No sooner
did they make this declaration, than Ihe astonished
them with this reply, "You have declared the
truth; I am far from setting an example of rebel-
lion to my own fubjeds, by countenancing those
who rebel against their lawful Prince. The treason,
of which you have been guilty, is detestable; and
as traitors I banish you from my presence *." Not-
withstanding this scene of farce and of falsehood, so
dishonourable to all the persons who a&ed a part in
it, Elizabeth permitted the malecontents peaceably
to reside in her dominions, supplied them secretly
with money, and renewed her intercession with the
Scottilh Queen in their favour t.

THE advantage she had gained over them did not
satisfy Mary; she resolved to follow the blow, and

' Melv. I1T2 1 Knox, 389.

tO

to prevent a party, which she dreaded, from ever B o o K
recovering any footing in the nation. With this III.
view, she called a meeting of Parliament; and in -v
order that a sentence of forfeiture might be legally I565
pronounced against the banished Lords, Ihe fum-
moned them, by public proclamation, to appear Decemb. .
before it *.

THE Duke of Chatelherault, on his humble ap-

plication, obtained a separate pardon; but not with-
out difficulty, as the King violently opposed it. He
was obliged, however, to leave the kingdom, and
to reside for some time in France t-

THE numerous 'forces which Mary brought into

the field, the vigour with which she acted, and the
length of time she kept them in arms, resemble the
efforts of a Prince with revenues much more confi-
derable than those which the possessed. But armies
were then levied and maintained by Princes, at small
charge. The vassal followed his superior, and the
superior attended the Monarch, at his own expence.
Six hundred horsemen, however, and three com-
panies of foot, besides her guards, received regular
pay from the Queen. This extraordinary charge,
together with the disbursements occasioned by. her
marriage, exhausted a treasury, which was far from
being rich. In this exigency, many devices were fal-
len upon for raising money. Fines were levied on the
towns of St. Andrew's, Perth, and Dundee, which
were fufpeced of favouring the maleconrents. An
unusual tax was imposed on the burroughs through-

* Keith, 320. t Knox, 389.

Out

B o o K out the kingdom; and a great fum was demanded

III- of the citizens of Edinburgh, by way of loan.

This unprecedented exa&ion alarmed the citizens.
They had recourse to delays, and started difficulties,
in order to evade it. These Mary construed to be
ats of avowed dibobedience, and inifantly commit-
ted several of them to prison. But this severity did
not subdue the undaunted spirit of liberty, which
prevailed among the inhabitants. The Queen was
obliged to mortgage to the city, theifuperiority of
the town of Leith, by which ihe obtained a con-
fiderable fum of money*. The thirds of ecclesias-
tical benefices proved another source, whence the
Queen derived some supply. About this time, we
find the Protestant clergy complaining more bitter-
ly than ever of their poverty. The army, it is
probable, exhausted a great part of that fund, which
was appropriated for their maintenance t

C.i,-ch - THE assemblies of the church were not uncon-
fa/rs.

cerned fpetators of the commotions of this turbulent
year. In the meeting June 24, several of the male-
content nobles were present, and seem to have had
great influence on their decisions. The high ifrain
in which the assembly addressed the Queen, can be
imputed only to those fears and jealousies, with re-
gard to religion, which they endeavoured to infuse
into the nation. The assembly complained, with
some bitterness, of the flop which had been put to
the progrels of the Reformation by the Queen's arri-
val in Scotland; they required not only the total
suppression of the Popish worship throughout the
' Knox, 383, ;96. t Maitl. Hill. of Edinburgh, 27.

king-

kingdom, but even in the Queen's own chapel; and B o o K
betides the legal establishment of the Proteltant re- III.
ligion, they demanded that Mary herself should '
publickly embrace it. The Queen, after some de-
liberation, replied, that neither her conscience, nor
her interest, would permit her to take such a ftep.
The former would for ever reproach her for a
change, which proceeded from no inward convic-
tion; the latter would susser by the offence, which
her apoftacy muff give to the King of France, and
her other allies on the continent *

IT is remarkable, that the prosperous frtuation of

the Queen's affairs, during this year, began to work
tome change in favour of her religion. The Earls
of Lennox, Athol, and Caffils, openly attended
mass; she herself afforded the Catholics a more
avowed protection than formerly; and, by her
permission, some of the ancient Monks ventured to
preach publickly to the people t.
9 KInx, 374 376. f Id. 389, 390.

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK IV.

THE
HISTORY

OF
S CO T L A N D.

BOOK IV.
A S the day appointed for the meeting of Parlia- B o o

ment approached, Mary and her Ministers IV.

were employed in deliberating concerning the course u---
whichit was most proper to hold with regard to the I566-

.. , 11 i Mal y's de-

exiled nobles. Many motives prompted her to set liberations
no bounds to the rigour of justice. The malecon- the"'eined
tents had laboured to defeat a scheme, which her nobles.
interest conspired with her passions in rendering dear
to her; they were the leaders of a party, whose
friendship she had been obliged to court, while she
held their principles in abhorrence; and they were
firmly attached to a rival, whom she had good rea-
fog both to fear and to hate.

BUT,

B o o K BUT, on the other hand, several weighty confi-

IV. derations might be urged. The noblemen, whose
óLó- ~fate was in suspense, were among the most powerful
'566. fubjets in the kingdom; their wealth great, their

connexions extensive, and their adherents nume-
rous. They were now at mercy, the objets of
companion, and suing for pardon with the most
humble submission.

IN those circumitances, an a& of clemency would

exalt the Queen's charater, and appear no less fplen-
did among foreigners, than acceptable to her own
subjects. Mary, herself, though highly incensed,
was not inexorable; but the King's rage was im-
placable and unrelenting. They were solicited in
behalf of the fugitives, from various quarters. Mor-
ton, Ruthven, Maitland, and all who had been
members of the Congregation, were not forgetful
of their antient union with Murray, and his fellow-
sufferers; nor neglectful of their safety, which they
efreemed of great importance to the kingdom. Mel-
vil, who at that time possessed the Queen's confi-
dence, seconded their solicitations. And Murray,
having itooped so low as to court Rizio, that fa-
vourite, who was desirous of securing his protection
against the King, whose displeasure he had lately
incurred, seconded the intercefflon of his other
friends, with the whole of his influence *. The
interposition of Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, who
had lately been Elizabeth's Ambassador in Scotland,
in behalf of the exiles was of more weight than all

* Melv. 125

these,

there, and attended with more success. Throgmor- B o o K
ton, out of enmity to Cecil, had embarked deeply IV.
in all the intrigues which were carried on at the '--'
English court, in order to undermine the power and I566.
credit of that minister. He espoused, for this rea-
son, the cause of the Scottish Queen, towards whose
title and pretensions the other was known to bear
little favour; and ventured, in the present critical
juncture, to write a letter to Mary, containing the
most salutary advices with regard to her condu&.
He recommended the pardoning of the Earl of
Murray and his associates, as a measure no less pru-
dent than popular. An action of this nature, fays
he, the pure effet of your Majesty's generosity,
will spread the fame of your lenity and moderation,
and engage the Englilh to look towards your accef-
sion to the throne, not only without prejudice, but
with desire. By the fame means, a perfect har-
mony will be restored among your own subjects,
who, if any rupture should happen with England,
will serve you with that grateful zeal, which your
clemency cannot fail of inspiring *.

THESE prudent remonifrances of Throgmorton, Sherefolves

to which his reputation for wisdom, and known at- them wvth
tachment to the Queen, added great authority, clemency.
made a deep impression on her spirit. Her cour-
tiers cultivated this happy disposition, and prevailed
on her, notwithstanding the King's inflexible tem-
per, to sacrifice her own private resentment to the
intercession of her fubjets, and the wishes of her
friends t. With this view, the Parliament, which

' Melv. 119. t Id. 125.

had

B o o K had been called to meet on the 4th of February, was

IV. prorogued to the 7th of April*; and in the mean
--` time, she was busy in confidering the manner and
xi66. form in which she should extend her favour to the

Lords who were under disgrace.

Is dirted THOUGH Mary discovered, on this occasion, a
irom this
neolution mind naturally prone to humanity, and capable of
by ,the: f- forgiving, she wanted firmness, however, to resist
citations of
France, and the influence, which was fatally employed to difap-
her zeal for
Pope . point the effects of this amiable disposition. About

this time, and at no great distance from each other,
two envoys arrived from the French King. The
former was intrufed with matters of mere ceremony
alone; he congratulated the Queen on her mar-
riage, and inverted the King with the ensigns of the
order of St. Michael. The inftru&ions of the lat-
ter related to matters of more importance, and pro-
duced greater effe&s t.

AN interview between Charles IX. and his Sifter

the Queen of Spain, had been often proposed; and
after many obstacles arising from the opposition of
political interest, was at last appointed at Bayonne.
Catherine of Medicis accompanied her son; the
Duke of Alva attended his Mistress. Amidst the
scenes of public pomp and pleasure, which seemed
to be the sole occupation of both courts, a scheme
was formed, and measures concerted, for extermi-
nating the Hugonots in France, the Protestants in
the Low Countries, and for suppressing the Reforma-
tion throughout all Europe :. The ative policy

Good. vol. 2z4. t Kcith, 325. Append. 167.
t Thnan. lib. 37.

of

of Pope Pius IV. and the zeal of the Cardinal of B o o K
Lorrain, confirmed and encouraged dispositions, so,' .-
suitable to the genius of the Romilh religion, and IV.
so beneficial to their own order. 1566.

IT was on account of this holy league which the

second French envoy brought to Mary, conjuring
her, at the fame time, in the name of the King of
France, and the Cardinal of Lorrain, not to restore
the leaders of the Protestants in her kingdom to
power and favour, at the very time when the Ca-
tholic Princes were combined to destroy the fe&,
in all the countries of Europe *.

POPERY is a species of false religion, remarkable

for the strong possession it takes of the heart. Con-
trived by men of deep infight in the human cha-
rater, and improved by the experience and obfer-
vation of many successive ages; it arrived at last to
a degree of perfetion, which no former system of
superstition had ever attained. There is no power
in the understanding, and no passion in the heart,
to which it does not present objecs, adapted to
route, and to interest them. Neither the love of
pleasure, which, at that time, prevailed in the court
of France, nor the pursuits of ambition which oc-
cupied the court of Spain, had secured them from
the dominion of bigotry. Laymen and courtiers
were agitated with that furious and unmerciful zeal,
which is commonly confidered as peculiar to eccle-
fiaftics; and Kings and Ministers thought them-

Melv. 126.

selves

B o K selves bound, in conscience to extirpate the Pro-

IV. teftant dotrine. Mary herself was deeply tinatured
*v-' with all the prejudices of Popery; a palfionate at-
566. tachment to that superstition is visible in every part

of her charaCter, and runs through all the scenes of
her life: She was devoted, too, with the utmost
fubmilion, to the Princes of Lorrain, her uncles,
and had been accustomed, from her infancy, to lif-
ten to all their advices with a filial refpec. The
prospect of restoring the public exercise of her own
religion, the pleasure of complying with her uncles,
and the hopes of gratifying the French Monarch,
whom the present situation of her affairs in England
made it necessary to court, counterbalanced all the
prudent considerations which had formerly weighed
with her. She instantly joined the confederacy,
which had been formed for the destruCtion of the
Protestants, and altered the whole plan of her con-
du&, with regard to Murray and his adherents *'

To this fatal resolution may be imputed all the

fulbfequent calamities of Mary's life. Ever since
her return into Scotland, fortune may be said to
have been propitious to her, rather than adverse;
and if her prosperity did not rife to any great height,
it had, however, suffered no considerable interrup-
tion. A thick and fettled cloud of adversity, with
few gleams of hope, and none of real enjoyment,
covers the remainder of her days.

THE effects of the new system, which Mary had
adopted, were loon visible. The time of the pro-

Sec Append. No. XIV.

rogation

rogation of Parliament was shortened; and by a B o K
new proclamation, the 12th of March was fixed IV.
for its meeting*. Mary resolved, without any fur- '-* -'
ther delay, to proceed to the attainder of the rebel 1A PSlia
Lords, and, at the fame time, determined to take ment call-

ed to at-

some Iteps towards the re-eftabliflhientof the Ro- taint the
mifh religion in Scotland t. The Lords of the xildo-
Articles were chosen, as usual, to prepare the bufi-
ness which was to come before the Parliament.
They were all persons in whom the Queen could
confide, and bent to promote her designs. The
ruin of Murray and his party seemed now inevita-
ble, and the danger of the Reformed Church im-
minent, when an event unexpecedly happened,
which saved both. If we regard either the barba-
rity of that age, when such ads of violence were

Keith, 326.

I It is not on the authority of Knox alone, that we charge

the Queen with the design of re-eftablilhing the Roman Catho-
lic religion. He, indeed, aflErts that the altars, which fliould
have been ereced in the Church of St. Giles, were already pro-
vided, 394. 1. Mary herself, in a letter to the Archbishop of
Glasgow, her Amba;lndor in France, acknowledges, " that in
that Parliament, flie intended to have done some good, with re-
fpc& to restoring the old religion." Keith, 331. z. The Spi-
ritual Lords, i. c. the Popinl ecclcfiaftics, had, by her authority,
-cfunicd their a:ncient place in that assembly. [bid. 3. Slhe had
joined the confederacy at Bayonne, Keith, Append. 167. 4. She
:llowe.1 mars to be celebrated in different parts of the kingdom,
ibid. and declared that file would have mnal; free for all men who
would hear it. Good. vol. i. .74. 5. Blackwood, who was fur.
nilled by the Arcl)binlop of (,I.Ifgow with materials for writing
his Mrlr, ' rl ie lMrie, affirms that the Queen intended to have
procured, in this Parliament, if not the re-ellablihment of the
Catholic religion, at Iceasl fbmething for the cafe of Catholics.
Jcbb, vol. ii. 2 04.

corn-

B o o K common, or the mean condition of the unhappy

IV. person who suffered, the event is little remarkable;
'ó -.- but if we reflec upon the circumifances with which
i566.
Ad pre- it was attended, or upon the consequences which
d" b'; followed it, it appears extremely memorable; and

the confpi-
ra~yint the rife and progress of it deserves to be traced with
Rizio.

great care.

DarlyIoCes DARNLY'S external accomplilhments had excited
the Qo"- that sudden and violent passion which raised him to
:tf/ion.

the throne. But the qualities of his mind corre-
fponded ill with the beauty of his person. Of a
weak understanding, and without experience, con-
ceited, at the fame time, of his own abilities, and
ascribing his extraordinary success entirely to his dif-
tinguifhed merit. All the Queen's favour made no
impression on such a temper. All her gentleness
could not bridle his imperious and ungovernable
spirit. All her attention to place about him
persons capable of direcing his conduct, could
not preserve him from rash and imprudent ac-
tions *. Fond of all the amusements, and even
prone to all the vices of youth, he became, by
degrees, careless of her person, and a firanger
to her company. To a woman, and a Queen,
such behaviour was intolerable. The lower she
had fsooped in order to raise him, his behaviour
appeared the more ungenerous and criminal. And
in proportion to the strength of her first affection,
was the violence with which her disappointed passion
now operated. A few months after the marriage,

* Gooa. vol . i. 12z.

their

their domestic quarrels began to be observed. The B o o K
extravagance of Darnly's ambition gave rife to IV.
these. Instead of being satisfied with a share in the '--v-
administration of government, or with the title of 566
King, which Mary, by an unprecedented stretch
of power, had conferred on him, he demanded the
Crown Matrimonial with most insolent importu-
nity*. And though Mary alleged that this gift
was beyond her power, and that the authority of
Parliament must be interposed. to bestow it, he
wanted either underitanding to comprehend, or
temper to admit so just a defence; and often re-
newed and urged his request.

RIzro, whom the King had at firit taken into Surpeas

Rizio to be

great confidence, did not humouir him in these fol- the carse
lies. By this, he incurred Henry's displeasure; of i.
and as it was impossible for Mary to behave to-
wards her husband with the fame affection, which
distinguished the first and happy days of their union,
he imputed this coldness, not to his own behaviour,
which had so well merited it, but to the infinua-
tions of Rizio. Mary's own conduct confirmed and
strengthened these suspicions. She treated this
ftrangerwith a familiarity, and admitted him to a
share in her confidence, to which neither his *first
condition, nor the office The had lately bestowed
upon him, gave him any title. He was perpetually
in her presence, intermeddled in every business, and,
together with a few favourites, was the companion
of all her private amusements. The haughty spirit
of Darnly could not bear the intrusion of such an

* Keith, 329. Knox, 404.
VOL. I. A a upstart;

Boo K upstart; and impatient of any delay, and unre-

III. strained by any scruple, he instantly resolved to get
ó'-ó' rid of him by violence.

1566.
Ri7iohated AT the fame time, another design, which took
by the
friends of its rife from very different motives, was carrying on
thnbled against the life of Rizio. Morton, Ruthven, Lind-

fay, and Maitland, were the contrivers of it. In
all former commotions they had been ftrialy united
with Murray, though in the late infurretion they
had deserted him, for various reasons. Morton
was nearly allied to the family of Angus, and dur-
ing the minority of the present Ear], aedl as Chief
of the name of Douglas. Ruthven was married to
the King's aunt. Lindsay's wife was of the fame
blood. All these had warmly concurred with the
Queen in promoting a marriage which did so much
honour to the house of Douglas, and naturally ex-
peced, that under a King of their own blood, the
chief management of affairs would be committed to
them. Maitland, with his usual sagacity, foresaw
that Murray's opposition to the match would prove
dangerous and ineffe&ual; but whoever ruled at
court, he hoped, by his dexterity and talents, to
render himself necessary and of importance. They
were all equally disappointed in their expe&ations.
The King's headstrong temper rendered him inca-
pable of advice. The Queen could not help dif-
trusting men who had been so long and so inti-
mately connefted with Murray, and gave herfclf
up entirely to such Counsellors as complied with all
her inclinations. The return of that nobleman and
his followers was therefore the only event which

could

could restore Morton, Maitland, and their associates B o o K
to their former ascendant over the Queen's councils. IV.
For this reason, nothing could be more mortifying -..
to them, than the resolution which Mary had taken 1566.
to treat the exiles with rigour. This they imputed
to Rizio, who, after he had engaged to aid Murray
with all his interest, was now the most active inftru-
ment in promoting the measures which were con-
certed for the ruin of that nobleman. This offi-
cious zeal completed the disgust which they had
conceived against him, and inspired them with
thoughts of vengeance, in no wife suitable to
justice, to humanity, or to their own dignity.

WHILE they were ruminating upon their fchenme, They coM

binc in or-

the King communicated his resolution to be avenged dcr o mur-
of Rizio to Lord Ruthven, and implored his assist- der him.
ance, and that of his friends, towards the execution
of this design. Nothing could be more acceptable
to them than this overture. They saw at once all
the advantages they would reap, by the concur-
rence of such an associate. Their own private re-
venge upon Rizio would pass, they hoped, for an
aft of obedience to the King; and they did not
despair of obtaining the restoration of their ba-
nilhed friends, and security for the Protestant reli-
gion, as the price of their compliance with his will.

BUT as Henry was no less fickle than ralf, they

hesitated for some time, and determined to advance
no farther, without taking every possible precaution
for their own safety. They did not, in the mean
time, susser the King's resentment to abate. Mor-

A a 2 ton,

B o o K ton, who was inferior to no man of that intriguing

IV. age, in all the arts of insinuation and address, took

'- -.. -
the young Prince under his management. He

56 wrought upon his ruling passion, ambition to ob-

tain the Matrimonial Crown. He representcd Rizio's
credit with the Queen to be the chief and only ob-
ltacleto his success in that demand. This minion,
alone, he said, possessed her confidence; and out of
complaisance to him, her subje&s, her nobility, and
even her husband, were excluded from any parti-
cipation of her secret councils. Under the appear-
ance of a confidence merely political, he insinuated,
and the King perhaps believed, that. a familiarity
of quite a different and of a very criminal nature
might be concealed *. Such various and compli-

cated

Of all our hiltorians, Buchanan alone avowedly accufcs

Mary of a criminal love for Rizio, 340. 344. Knox slightly
insinuates that such a suspicion was entertained, 391. Melvil,
in a conversation with the Qccn, intimates that he was afraid
her familiarity with Rizio might be liable to mifconftrution, so.
The King himfecf seems, both by Mclvil's account, and by his
expolulation with the Queen, which Ruthvcn mentions, to
have given credit to thci suspicions. Mclv. 127. Keith, Ap-
pend. 123, 124. That the King's suspicions were Itrong, is
likewise evident from the paper publilhed Append. No. XV.
But, in opposition to there suspicions, and they are nothing more,
we may observe that Raulet the Qceen's French Secretary was
dismissed from her service, and Rizio advanced to that oflice in
December 1564- Keith, z68. It was in confequencc of this
preferment, that he acquired his great credit with the Queen.
Mclv. .07. Darnly arrived in Scotland about two months as-
ter, Keith, 269. The Quccn immediately conceived for him a
pifflon, which had all the symptoms of genuine and violent
love. Rizio aided this pafioni, and promoted the marriage with
all his interest, Melv. I l i. During some months after the mar-
riage, the Qyeea's fondness for Darnly continued. She Coon

proved

cated parlions raged in the King's bosom, with the B o o K
utmost fury. He became more impatient than ever IV.
of any delay, and even threatened to strike the in- '-
tended blow with his own hand. At lafr, prelimi- 1566.
naries were fettled on both fides, and articles for
their mutual security agreed upon. The King en-
gaged to prevent the attainder of the baniffed
Lords, to consent to their return into Scotland, to
obtain for them an ample remilffion of all their
crimes, and to support to the utmost of his power,
the religion which was now eftablifled in the king-
dom. On their parts, they undertook to procure
the Crown Matrimonial for Henry, to secure his
right of fuccellion, if the Queen flhould die before
him, and to defend that right to the uttcrmoft,
against whatever person fliould presume to dispute
it; and if either Rizio, or any other person, flould
happen to be killed in prosecuting of the design,
the King promised to acknowledge himself to be
the author of the enterprise, and to prote&t those
who were embarked in it*.

NOTHING now remained but to concert the plan I'crpetratc

th]at ¢rim1:

of operation, to chufe the ators, and to aflign them ,, thl
their parts in perpetrating this detestable crime. Qccn'

proved with child. From this enumeration of circumllances,
it appears almost impoflible that the Queen, unless we suppose
her to have been a woman utterly abandoned, could carry on
any criminal intrigue with Rizio. But the silence of Randolph
the Englifl Resident, a man abundantly ready to mention, and
to aggravate Mary's faults, and who does not once infinuatc
that her confidence in Rizio concealed any thing criminal, is
in itfclf a fufficicnt vindication of her innocence.

Good, vol. i. z66.

Every

Bo o KC Every circunftance here paints and characterizes the

IV. manners and men of that age, and fills us with hor-
-' ' ror at both. The place chosen for committing such

a deed, was the Queen's bedchamber. Though
Mary was now in the sixth month of her pregnancy,
and though Rizio might have been seized elsewhere
without any difficulty, the King pitched upon this
place, that he might enjoy the malicious pleasure of
reproaching Rizio with his crimes before the Queen's
face. The Earl of Morton, the Lord High Chan-
cellor of the kingdom, undertook to direct an en-
terprife, carried on in defiance of all the laws of
which he was bound to be the guardian. The Lord
Ruthven, who had been confined to his bed for
three months, by a very dangerous distemper, and
who was still so feeble that he could scarce walk, or
bear the weight of his own armour, was intrufded
with the executive part; and while he himself need-
ed to be supported by two men, he came abroad to
commit a murder in the presence of his Sovereign.

ON the 9th of March, Morton entered the court

of the palace with an hundred and sixty men; and
without noise, or meeting with any resistance, seized
all the gates. While the Queen was at supper with
the Countess of Argyll, Rizio, and a few domes-
tics, the King suddenly entered the apartment, by
aprivate passage. At his back was Ruthven, clad
in complete armour, and with that ghastly and hor-
rid look which long sickness had given him. Three
or four of his molt trusty accomplices followed
him. Such an unusual appearance alarmed those
who were present. Rizio instantly apprehended that

he

he was the victim at whom the blow was aimed; B o o K
and in the utmost consternation retired behind the IV.
Queen, of whom he laid hold, hoping that the re- `
verence due to her person might prove some pro- 66
te&tion to him. The conspirators had proceeded
too far to be restrained by any consideration of that
kind. Numbers of armed men rushed into the
chamber. Ruthven drew his dagger, and with a
furious mien and voice, commanded Rizio to leave
a place of which he was unworthy, and which he
had occupied too long. Mary employed tears, and
entreaties, and threatenings, to save her favourite.
But, notwithstanding all these, he was torn from
her by violence, and before he could be dragged
through the next apartment, the rage of his ene-
mies put an end to his life, piercing his body with
fifty-fix wounds*,

ATHOL, Huntly, Bothwell, and other confidents

of the Queen who lodged in the palace, were alarm-
ed at the uproar, and filled with the utmost terror
on their own account; but either no violence was
intended against them, or the conspirators durst not
shed the noblest blood in the kingdom, in the fame
illegal manner with which they had ventured to
take the life of a stranger. Some of them were
difiniffed, and others made their escape.

THE conspirators, in the mean time, kept pof- They con,
session of the palace, and guarded the Queen with finc the

Queen her.

the utmost care. A proclamation was published flfr.
by the King, prohibiting the parliament to meet on

See Appendix, No. XV.

the

B o o x the day appointed; and measures were taken by

IV. him for preventing any tumult in the city*. Mur-
~6-~. ray, Rothes, and their followers being informed of
i566'

every ftep taken against Rizio, arrived at Edinburgh
next evening. Murray was graciously received both
bythe King and Queen. By the former, on ac-
count of the articles which had been agreed upon
between them; by the latter, because Ihe hoped to
prevail on him, .by gentle treatment, not to take
part with the murderers of Rizio. Their power
she fill felt, and dreaded; and the insult which they
had offered to her authority, and even to her per-
son,- o far exceeded any crime she could impute to
Murray, that in hopes of wreaking her vengeance
on them, Ihe became extremely willing to be re-
conciled to him. The obligations, however, which
Murray lay under to men, who had hazarded their
lives en his account, engaged him to labour for
their safety. The Queen, who scarce had the li-
berty of choice left, was persuaded to admit Mor-
ton and Ruthven into her presence, and to grant
them the promise of pardon in whatever terms they
should deem necessary for their own security.

Bt the THE King, mean while, stood astonished at the

sng, ad boldness and success of his own enterprise, and un-

makes her
t.cap. certain what course to hold. The Queen observed

his irresolution, and availed herself of it. She em-
pioyed all her art to disengage him from his new
afflocates. His consciousness of the insult which he
had ofered to so illufthious a benefa&refs, inspired
him with uncommon facility and complaisance. In.

· Keith, Append. iz6.

spite

spire of all the warnings he received to diftrult the B o o K
Queen's artifices, flhe prevailed on him to difinifs IV.
the guards which the conspirators had placed on t
her person; and that fame night he made his escape I566.
along with her, attended by three persons only, and
retired to Dunbar. The scheme of their flight had March n.
been communicated to Huntly and Bothwell, and
they were quickly joined by them, and several other
of the nobles. Bothwell's estate lay in that cor-
ner of the kingdom, and his followers crowded to
their Chief, in such numbers, as soon enabled the
Queen to set the power of the conspirators at de-
fiance.

THIS sudden flight filled them with inexprelfible is ron-
coniternation. They had obtained a promise of par- iled tothe

exiled no-

don; and it now appeared from the Queen's con- bles.
du&t, that nothing more was intended by this pro-
mise than to amuse them, and to gain time. They
ventured, however, to demand the accomplishment
of it; but their messenger was detained a prisoner,
and the Queen advancing towards Edinburgh, at
the head of 8ooo men, talked in the highest Itrain
of resentment and revenge. She had the address,
at the fame time, to separate Murray and his affo-
ciates from the conspirators against Rizio. Sensible
that the union of these parties would form a con-
federacy, which might prove formidable to the
Crown, she exprefied great willingness to receive
the former into favour; towards the latter she de-
clared herself. inexorable. Murray and his follow- March i9.
ers were no less willing to accept a pardon, on her raors onap
terms. The conspirators against Rizio, deprived of gainftRizio

fly into
every England.

B o o K every resource, and incapable of resistance, fled

IV. precipitately to Newcastle, having thus changed
'-Y ' situations with Murray and his party, who left that
1566.
I 566. place a few days before.

No man so remarkable for wisdom, and even for

cunning as the Earl of Morton, ever engaged in a
more unfortunate enterprise. Deserted basely by
the King, who now denied his knowledge of the
conspiracy, by public proclamations, and abandon-
ed ungenerously by Murray and his party *, he was
obliged to fly from his native country, to resign
the highest office, and to part with one, of the most
opulent fortunes in the kingdom.

ON her return to Edinburgh, Mary began to pro-

ceed againfl those concerned in the murder of Ri-
zio, with the utmost rigour of law. But, in praise
of her clemency, it muff be observed, that only
two persons, and these of no considerable rank,
suffered for this crime i.

IN this conspiracy there is one circumstance,

which, though somewhat detached, deserves not to
be forgotten. In the confederacy between the King
and the conspirators, the real intention of which
was assassination, the preserving of the Reformed
Church, is, nevertheless, one of the most confider-
able articles; and the fame men who were prepar-
ing to violate one of the first duties of morality,
affected the highest regard for religion. Hifftory re-
lates there extravagances of the human mind, with-
* Melv. 130. t Keith, Appendix, 130. 334.

out

out pretending to justify, or even to account for B o o K
them; and regulating her own opinions by the IV.
eternal and immutable laws of justice and of vir- '---
tue, points out such inconsistencies, as features of 1566.
the age which she describes, and records them for
the inftrution of ages to come.

As this is the second instance of deliberate affaf- An account
fination which has occurred, and as we shall here- of th fr-

quency of

after meet with many other instances of the fame afrafnati-
crime, the causes which gave rife to a practice so os .'n'laC
fiocking to humanity, deserve our particular at-
tention. Resentment is, for obvious and wife rea-
sons, one of the strongest passions in the human
mind. The natural demand of this passion is, that
the person who feels the injury should himself in-
fict the vengeance due on that account. The per-
mitting this, however, would have been deftruEive
to society; and punishment would have known no
bounds, either in severity, or in duration. For this
reason, in the very infancy of the social state, the
sword was taken out of private hands, and com-
mitted to the Magistrate. But at first, while laws
aimed at restraining, they really strengthened the
principle of revenge. The earliest and most fim-
ple punishment for crimes was retaliation; the of-
fender forfeiting limb for limb, and life for life.
The payment of a compensation to the person in-
jured, succeeded to the rigour of the former infti-

dution. In both there, the gratification of private

revenge was the objec of law; and he who suffered
the wrong, was the only person who had a right to
pursue, to exa&t, or to remit the punishment.

While

B o o K While laws allowed such full scope to the revenge of

IV. one party, the interests of the other were not ne-

'---_-J gleced. If the evidence of his guilt did not amount
r566. to a full proof, or if he reckoned himself to be

unjustly accused, the person to whom a crime was
imputed had a right to challenge his adversary to
single combat, and on obtaining the viaory, vin-
dicated his own honour. In almoit every confider-
able cause, whether civil or criminal, arms were ap-
pealed to, in defence, either of the innocence, or
the property of the parties. Justice had seldom
occasion to use her balance; the sword alone de-
cided every contest. The passion of revenge was
nourilhed by all there means, and grew, by daily
indulgence, to be incredibly strong. Mankind be-
came habituated to blood, not only in times of war,
but of peace; and from this, as well as other
causes, contracted an amazing ferocity of temper,
and of manners. This ferocity, however, made it
necessary to discourage the trial by combat; to abo-
lilh the payment of compensations in criminal cafe's;
and to think of some milder method of terminating
disputes concerning civil rights. The punishments
for crimes became more revere, and the regulations
concerning property more fixed; but the Princes,
whose province it was to inflict the one, and to
enforce the other, possessed little power. Great of-
fenders despised their authority; smaller ones fhel-
tered themselves under the jurisdiCtion of those,
from whose protection they expected impunity. The
administration of justice was extremely feeble and
dilatory. An attempt to punish the crimes of a
Chieftain, or even of his vassals, often excited re-

bellions

bellions and civil wars. To nobles, haughty and B o o K
independent, among whom the causes of discord IV.
were many and unavoidable, who were quick in -
discerning an injury, and impatient to revenge it; I566.
who esteemed it infamous to submit to an enemy,
and cowardly to forgive him; who confidered the
right of punishing those who had injured them, as
a privilege of their order, and a mark of indepen-
dence; such flow proceedings were extremely unfa-
tisfactory. The blood of their adversary was, in
their opinion, the only thing which could wash away
an affront; where that was not shed, their revenge
was disappointed, their courage became fufpe&ed,
and a stain was left on their honour. That ven-
geance, which the impotent hand of the Magistrate
could not inflict, their own could easily execute;
under governments lb feeble, men assumed, as in a
itate of nature, the right of judging, and redref-
sing their own wrongs. And thus assassination, a
crime of all others the most deftrufive to society,
came not only to be allowed, but to be deemed ho-
nourable.

THE history of Europe, during the i4th and

i th centuries, abounds with detestable instances of
this crime. It prevailed chiefly among the French
and Scots, between whom there was a close inter-
course at that time, and a furprizing resemblance in
their national characers. In 1407, the only brother
of the King of France was murdered publickly in
the streets of Paris; and so far was this horrible
action from meeting with proper punishment, that
an eminent lawyer was allowed to plead in defence

of

B o o K of it before the Peers of France, and avowedly to.
I V. maintain the lawfulness of aflaflination. In 1417,

óó-- it required all the eloquence and authority of the
'566- famous Gerfon, to prevail on the Council of Con-

stance to condemn this proposition, " That there
are some cafes in which affaflination is a virtue more
meritorious in a Knight than in a Squire, and more
meritorious in a King than in a Knight *." The
number of eminent persons who were murdered in
France and Scotland, on account either of private,
or political, or religious quarrels, during the isth
and I6th centuries, is almost incredible. Even as-
ter those causes, which firit gave rife to this barba-
rous practice, were removed; after thejurifdiction
of Magistrates, and the authority of laws were bet-
ter eftabliihed, and become more universal; after
the progress of learning and philosophy had polilh-
ed the manners, and humanized the minds of men,
this crime continued in some degree. It was to-
wards the close of the I7th century before it dif-
appeared in France. The additional vigour, which
the royal authority acquired by the accefion of
James VI. to the throne of England, seems to have
put a stop to it in Scotland.

THE influence, however, of any national custom,

both on the understanding and on the heart, and
how far it may go towards perverting or extinguifl-
ing moral principles of the greatest importance, is
remarkable. The authors of those ages have per-
fectly imbibed the sentiments of their cotempora-
ries, with regard to assassination; and they, who

* L'Enfant, Hist. Cone. de ConR.

had

had leisure to refle&, and judge, appear to be no B o o K
more shocked at this crime, than the persons, who IV.
committed it during the heat and impetuofsty of ' ó-
passion. Buchanan relates the murder of Cardinal I566.
Beatoun, and of Rizio, without expressing those
feelings which are natural to a man, or that indig-
nation which became an historian*. Knox, whose
mind was fiercer, and more unpolifhed, talks of the
death of Beatoun, and the Duke of Guise, not
only without censure, but with the utmost exulta-
tion t. On the other hand, the Bilhop of Ross
mentions the assassination of the Earl of Murray,
with some degree of applause 4. Blackwood dwells
upon it with the most indecent triumph, and as-
cribes it directly to the hand of II God. Lord Ruth-
ven, the principal actor in the conspiracy against
Rizio, wrote an account of it some short time be-
fore his own death, and in all his long narrative
there is not one expression of regret or one fymp-
tom of compuncion for a crime no less difho-
nourable than barbarous **. Morton, equally
guilty of the fame crime, entertained the fame fen-
timents concerning it; and in his last moments,
neither he himself, nor the Ministers who attended
him, seem to have confidered it as an action which
called for repentance; even then he talks of Da-
vid'sflaughter as coolly, as if it had been an inno-
cent or commendable deed tt-. The vices of ano-
ther age astonish and shock us; the vices of our
own become familiar, and excite little horror. I

* Buchan. 295. 345. t Knox, 334. Anders. 3. 84.
1I Jebb, z. 263. ** Keith, Append. 19. tt Crawf.
Mem. Append.

return

B o o K return from this digression to the course of the

IV history.

'.566 THE charm, which had at first attached the

Qeens Queen to Darnly, and held them for some time in
hatred to
Danly i- an happy union, was now entirely dissolved; and
ct''S- love no longer covering his follies and vices with its

friendly veil, they appeared to Mary in their full
dimension and deformity *. Though Henry pub-
lithed a proclamation, disclaiming any knowledge
of the conspiracy against Rizio, the Queen was fully
convinced, that he was not only acceflary to the
contrivance, but to the commission of that odious
crime t. That very power which, with liberal
and unfufpicious fondness she had conferred upon
him, he had employed to insult her authority, to
limit her prerogative, and to endanger her person.
Such an outrage, it was impossible any woman could
bear or forgive. Cold civilities, secret distrust, fre-
quent quarrels, succeeded to their former transports
of affiecion and confidence. The Queen's favours
were no longer conveyed through his hands. The
crowd of expectants ceased to court his patronage,
which they found to avail so little. Among the
nobles, some dreaded his furious temper, others
complained of his perfidiousness; and all of them
despised the weakness of his understanding, and the
inconstancy of his heart. The people themselves
observed some parts of his condu&, which little
suited the dignity of a King. Addicted to drunken-
ness,. beyond what the manners of that age could
bear, and indulging irregular palfions, which even
* See Append. No. XVI, - Keith, 350.

the

the licentiousness of youth could not excuse, he, by B o o K
his indecent behaviour, provoked the Queen to the IV.
utmost; and the palions which it occasioned, of- '--
ten forced tears fiom her eyes, both in public and I566.
in private . Her aversion for him increased every
day, and could be no longer concealed. He was
often absent from court, appeared there with little
splendour, and was trusted with no power. Avoid-
ed equally by those who endeavoured to please the
Queen, who favoured Morton and his associates, or
who adhered to the house of Hamilton; he was
left. alhnof alone in a neglected and unpitied soli-
tude t.

ABOUT this time a new favourite grew into great The rife of

Bothwell's

credit with the Queen, and soon gained an ascendant favour.
over her heart, which encouraged his enterprising
genius to form designs that proved fatal to himself,
and the occasion of all Mary's subsequent misfor-
tunes. This was James Hepburn, Earl of Both-
well, the head of an ancient family, and by his ex-
tensive pofleffions and numerous vassals, one of the
most powerful noblemen in the kingdom. Even in
that turbulent age, when so many vast projeas were
laid open to an aspiring mind, and invited it to ac-
tion, no man's ambition was more daring than Both-
well's, or had recourse to bolder or more singular
expedients for obtaining power. When almost every
person ofdiftindion in the kingdom, whether Pa-
pill or Protestant, had joined the Congregation in
opposing the dangerous encroachments of the

Keith, 329. - Mclv. 131, &c.
VOL. I. B b French

B o o K French upon the liberties of the nation, he, though

IV. an avowed Protestant, adhered to the Queen Re-
-"'" ' gent, and acted with vigour on her fide. The fuc-
I566.

cess which attended the arms of the Congregation
having obliged him to retire into France, he was
taken into the Queen's service, and continued with
her till the time of her return into Scotland *. From
that period, every ftep of his conduc towards Mary
was remarkably dutiful; and amidst all the shift-
ings of faction, we scarcely ever find him holding
any course which could be offensive to her. When
Murray's proceedings with regard to her marriage
gave umbrage to the Queen, she recalled Bothwell
from that banilhment into which she had with re-
lu&ance driven him, and confidered his zeal and
abilities as the most powerful supports of her au-
thority. When the conspirators against Rizio feiz-
ed her person, he became the chief initrument of
recovering her liberty, and served her, on that oc-
cafion, with so much fidelity and success, as made
the deepest imprefTion on her mind, and greatly in-
creased the confidence which the had hitherto placed
in him t. Her gratitude loaded him with marks of
her bounty; fae railed him to offices of profit and
of trust, and tranfaaed no matter of importance
without his advice _. By complaisance and affi-
duity, he confirmed and fortified these dispositions
of the Queen in his favour, and insensibly paved
the way towards that vast project, which his immo-
derate ambition had perhaps already conceived, and
which, in spite of many difficulties, and'at the ex-
peace of many crimes, he at last accomplished.

Anders. 1.9g. t Ib. i.1:, 93. M-'v. 13. Knox, 396.

Tili

THE hour of the Queen's delivery now approach- B o o K

ed. As her palace was defended only by a slender IV.
guard, it seemed imprudent to expose her person, -
at this time, to the insults she might susser in a 1566.
kingdom torn by factions, and prone to mutiny.
VFor this reason, the Privy Council advised the Queen
to fix her residence in the caffle of Edinburgh, the
ftlongeft fortress in the kingdom, and the most pro-
per place for the security of her person *. In order
to render this security more perfect, Mary laboured
to extinguish the domestic feuds which divided some
of the principal nobles. Murray and Argyll were
exasperated againit Huntly and Bothwell, by reci-
procal and repeated injuries. The Queen, by her
authority and entreaties, effected a reconcilement
among them, and drew from them a promise to
bury their discords in everlasting oblivion. This
reconcilement Mary had so much at heart, that she
made it the condition on which ihe again received
Murray into favourt-

ON the I9th of June, Mary was delivered of her Birthof

only son James, a Prince whose birth was happy JamesVI;
for the whole Island, and unfortunate to her alone.
His accession to the throne of England united the
two divided kingdoms in one mighty monarchy,
and established the power of Great Britain on a firm
foundation. While she, torn early from her son by
the cruelty of her fate, was never allowed to in-
dulge those tender passions, nor to tasse those joys
which fill the heart of a mother.

' Keith, 335. t Ibid. 336. Append. 139.

B b 2 ME-

B o o i MELVIL was instantly dispatched to London with

IV. an account of this event. It struck Elizabeth, at

'-vr- first, in a sensible manner; and the advantage and
i566. superiority which her rival had acquired by the birth

of a son, forced tears from her eyes. But before
Melvil was admitted to audience, she had so far re-
covered the command of herself, as to receive him
not only with decency, but with excessive cheerful-
ness; and willingly accepted the invitation which
Mary gave her, to stand godmother to her son *.

As Mary loved splendour and magnificence, ile

resolved to celebrate the baptism of the young Prince
with great pomp; and for that purpose sent invi-
tations of the fame kind to the French King, and
to the Duke of Savoy, the uncle of her former
husband.
The ueen THE Queen, on her recovery, discovered no

i"t change in her sentiments with respect to the King t.

Damly The death of Rizio, and the countenance he had
seraen and given to an aclion to insolent and unjustifiable, were
gile' still fresh in her memory. She was frequently pen-

five and deje&ed t. And though Henry sometimes
attended at court, and accompanied her in her pro-
greifes through different parts of the kingdom, he
met with little reverence from the nobles, while
Mary treated him with the greatest reserve, and
did not susser him to possess any authority l. The
breach between them became every day more ap-
parent §. Attempts were made towards a reconcile-

* Melv. 138. 1 See Append. No. XVII. : Ibid. 143.
1I Keith, 350. Melv. 13. § Keith, Append. 169.

inent,

ment, particularly by Caftelnau the French Am- B o o K
baffador; but after such a violent rupture, it was IV.
found no easy matter to bind the nuptial knot a-new; '
and though he prevailed on the King and Queen to 1566.
pass two nights together *, we may, with great pro-
bability, pronounce this appearance of union, to
which Caftelnau trusted, not to have been sincere;
we know with certainty that it was not lasting.

BOTHWELL, all this while, was the Queen's prime Her attach-

confident. Without his participation no business Bothwell
was concluded, and no favour bestowed. Together
with this ascendant over her councils, Bothwell, if
we may believe the cotemporary historians, acquired
no less sway over her heart. But at what precise
time, this ambitious Lord first allowed the senti-
ments of a lover to occupy the place of that duty
and refpeEt which a subject owes his Sovereign; or
when Mary, instead of gratitude for his faithful ser-
vices, felt a paflion of another nature rising in her
bosom, it is no easy matter to determine. Such de-
licate transitions of passion can be discerned only by
those, who are admitted near the persons of the par-
ties, and who can view the secret workings of the
heart with calm and acute observation. Neither Knox
nor Buchanan enjoyed these advantages. Their
humble flation allowed them only a distant access to
the Queen and her favourite. And the ardour of
their real, and the violence of their prejudices, ren-
der their opinions rash, precipitate, and inaccurate.
It is by the effects of this reciprocal pafliony rather

? Keith, Append. 169,

than

B o o K than by their accounts of it, that subsequent hilfo-

IV. rians can judge of its reality.
I566.

66 ADVENTUROUS as Bothwell's project to gain the

Queen may appear, it was formed and carried on
under very favourable circumstances. Mary was
young, gay, and affable. She possessed great fen-
fibility of temper, and was capable of the utmost
tenderness of affection. She had placed her love on
a very unworthy object, who requited it with ingra-
titude, and treated her with neglect, with insolence,
and with brutality. All these ihe felt, and resent-
ed. In this situation, the attention and complai-
fance of a man, who had vindicated her authority,
and protected her person; who entered into all her
views, who soothed all her passions, who watched
and improved every opportunity of insinuating his
design, and recommending his passion *, could
scarce fail of making an impression on a heart of
such a frame as Mary's.

The King THE haughty spirit of Darnly, nursed up in flat-
resolves to
c=ve scot tery, and accustomed to command, could not bear
land. the contempt under which he had now fallen, and

the ifate of insignificance to which he saw himself
reduced. But in a country, where he was univer-
sally hated or despised, he could never hope to form
a party, which would.fecond any attempt he might
make to recover power. He addressed himself, there-
fore, to the Pope, and to the Kings of France and
Spain, with many profefliops of his own zeal for
the Catholic religion, and with bitter complaints

* Anders. . 93, 94.

against

against the Queen, for negle&ing to promote that B o o K
interest *: And soon after, he took a resolution, IV.
equally wild and desperate, of embarking on board ---
a flip, which he provided, and of flying into foreign 1566.
parts. It is almost impoflible to form any fatisfac-
tory conjecture concerning the motives which influ-
ence a capricious and irregular mind. He hoped,
perhaps, to recommend himself to the Catholic
Princes on the continent, by his zeal for religion,
and that they would employ their interest towards
rcinftating him in the poffeflion of that power which
he had loft. Perhaps, he expeted nothing more
than the comfort of hiding the disgrace under which
he was now fallen, among flrangers, who had
never been witncffes of his former prosperity.

HE communicated the design to the French Am- Hiscapri-

¢ious bcha-

baffador Le Croc, and to his father the Earl of viour.
Lennox. They both endeavoured to dissuade him
from it, but without success. Lennox, who seems,
as well as his son, to have loft the Queen's con-
fidence, and who, about this time, was seldom at
court, instantly communicated the matter to her
by a letter. Henry, who had refused to accom-
pany the Queen from Stirling to Edinburgh, was
likewise absent from court. He arrived there; how-
ever, on the fame day fle received the account of
his intended flight. But he was more than usually
wayward and peevifi; and scrupling to enter the
palace, unless certain Lords who attended the Queen
were dismissed, Mary was obliged to meet him

* Knox, 399.

with-

B o o K without the gates. At last he suffered her to con-

IV. du& him into her own apartment. She endeavour-
'-- ed to draw from him the reasons of the strange re-

566' solution which he had taken, and to divert him

from it. In spite however of all her arguments and
intreaties, he remained silent and inflexible. Next
day the Privy Council, by her dire&ion, expoftu-
lated with him on the fame head. He persisted,
notwithstanding, in his sullenness and obstinacy;
and neither deigned to explain the motives of his.
condu&, nor signified any intention of altering it.
As he left the apartment, he turned towards the
Queen, and told her, that she ihould not fee his
face again, for a long time. A few days after, he
wrote to Mary, and mentioned two things as grounds
of his disgust. She herelf, he said, no longer ad-
initted him into any confidence, and had deprived
himof all power; and the nobles, after her ex-
ample, treated him with open neglect, so that he
appeared in every place without the dignity and
jplendour of a King.

Mary en NOTHING could be more mortifying to Mary,
deour to than this intended flight of the King's, which would
pr=ded have spread the infamyof their domestic quarrel all

s. over Europe. Co.mpalifon for a Monarch who

would then appear to be forced into exile by her
negle& and ill'ufage, might have disposed mankind
to entertain sentiments concerning the causes of their
discord, little to her advantage. In order, there-
fore, to prepossess the minds of her allies, and to
screen her reputation from any censure with which
Darnly might endeavour to load it, the Privy Coun-

cil

cil tranfiittted a narrative of this whole tranfa&ion, B o o K
both to the King, and to the Qucen Mother of IV.
France. It is drawn with great art, and sets Mary's -"
conduct in the mofl favourable point of light . '566.

ABOUT this time, the license of the borderers call-

ed for redress; and Mary resolving to hold a court
ofjuftice at Jedburgh, the inhabitants of leveral ad-
jacent counties were summoned to attend their Sove-
reign in arms, according to cultoin t. Bothwell
was, at that time, Lieutenant or Warden of all the
marches, an office among the most important in the
kingdom; and though usually divided into three
diftin& governments, bestowed by the Qu.een's fa-
vour upon him alone. In order to display his own
valour and atiyity in the diicharge of this trust, he
attempted to seize a gang of banditti, who, lurk-
ing among the marShes of Liddefdale, infested the
reft of the country. But while he was laying hold o cr
of one of those desperadoes, he was wounded by
him in several places, so that his followers were ob-
liged to carry him to Hermitage cafle. Mary in-
ftantly flew thither, with an impatience which strong-
ly marks the anxiety of a lover, but little suited the
dignity of a Queen $. Finding that BothweJl was

threatened

* Keith, 345. 347 t Ibid, 353. Good.vol. i. 30o.
t The difance between Jedburgh and Hermitage is 13 Scottish

miles, through a country almost impaflihle. The season of the
year was far advanced. Bothwell fecms to have been wounded
in a fcuflne, occasioned by the despair of a single man, rather
than any open iafurrecion of the borderers. It does not appear
that the Queen was attended thither by any considerable train.
IHad any military operation been neccffary, as is supposed,

Good.

B o o K threatened with no dangerous symptom, the return-

IV. ed that fame day to Jedburgh. The fatigue of such

a journey, added to the anguish of mind she had
566. suffered on Bothwell's account, threw her next

morning into a violent fever'. Her life was despair-
ed of, but her youth, and the vigour of her confti-
tution, resifted the malignity of her disease. During
the continuance of the Queen's illness, the King,
who resided at Stirling, never came near Jedburgh t;
and when he afterwards thought fit to make his ap-
pearance there, he met with such a cold reception,
Noycnmb.s. as did not encourage him to make any long stay t.

Mary soon recovered strength enough to return
along the eaflern borders to Dunbar.

WHILE she resided in this place, her attention

was turned towards England. Elizabeth, notwith-
flanding her promise, and even proclamations to the
contrary, not only allowed, but encouraged Mor-
ton and his associates to remain in England 1I. Mary,
on the other hand, afforded her protecion to several
English fugitives. Each Queen watched the mo-
tions of the other with jealous attention, and fe-
cretly countenanced the pracices, which were car-
rying on, to disturb the administration of her rival.

Good. vol. i. 304. it would have been extremely improper to
rifquc the Queen's person in an expedition again t thieves. So
soon as the Queen found Bothwell to be in no danger, Ihe in-
ftantly returned, and after this we hear no more of the infurrec-
tion, nor have we any proof that the rioters took refuge in Eng-
land. No other reason but that which we have produced, seems
fuflicient to account for the Queen's condut.

* Keith, 351, 35z. t Ibid. Append. 133.
: Knox, 0oo. 11 Cald. vol. ii. p. 15.

For

Son this purpose, Mary's Ambassador, RIlobrt B o o K

Melvil, and her other emissaries, wereextremelly IV.
active and fucccfsful. We may ilmpute, in a good --
degree, to their intrigues, that fp)iiri which appear- *',,:,-
ed in the Parliament of Enigland, and which railf:d "1 :,,
a storm that threatened Elizabeth's (dmcl('i traln- ,;. ...ti,.
quillity, more than any other event of her reign, xi" J.',...
and required all her art and dexterity to allay it. u.L....,n.

ELI.ZAnBETH had now reigned eight years, with-

out difeovering the leafl intention to marry. A vio-
lent distemper, with which fihe had lately been fiiz.-
ed, having endangered her life, and alarmed the
nation with the prolpte& of all those calamities which
are occasioned by a dilputed and dubious fuccefTion;
a motion was made, and eagerly liflened to in botih
houses, for addressing the Queen, to provi(le again(t
any such danger in times to come, either by fignii -
fying her own resolution to marry, or by contienting
to an aft, efFablifling the order o'f fucceflion to llic
Crown*. Her love to her ftbjcdis, her duty to,
the public, her concern for poferity, it was pr'(-
tended, not only called upon, but obliged her to
take one of these steps. The infuperal-le averlioi
which lhe had all along discovered for miarriage,
made it improbable that fle would chufe tlie for-
mer; and if the complied with the latter requefL, no
title to the crown could, with any colour of justice,
be set in oppoltion to that of the Scottifl Queen.
Elizabeth was sagacious enough to fee the remotefl
confcquences of this motion, and obfcrvcd them

s D'EwcsJourn. of l'Prl. o;.

with

B o o x with the greatest anxiety. Mary, by refuting so

IV. often to ratify the treaty of Edinburgh, had plainly
'--'4?' intimated a design of embracing the first promising

5 66. opportunity for prosecuting her right to the English

Crown; and by her secret negociations, The had
gained many to favour her title *. All the Roman
Catholics ardently wished for her succession. Her
gentleness and humanity had removed many of those
apprehensions which the Protestants entertained on
account of her religion. The court fa&tion, which
envied the power of Cecil, and endeavoured to wrest
the administration out of his hands, advanced the
pretensions of the Scottish Queen in opposition to
him. The union of the two kingdoms was a desire-
able object to all wife men in both nations; and the
birth of the young Prince was a security for the con-
tinuance of this blessing, and gaves hopes of its
perpetuity.

Elizabeti's UNDER these circumrtances, and while the nation
on tht c- was in such a temper, a parliamentary declaration of
count. Mary's title would have been highly detrimental to

Elizabeth. The present unsettled state of the fuc-
cession left much in her power. Her resentment
alone might have gone far towards excluding any
of the competitors from the Crown; and the dread
of this had hitherto restrained, and overawed the
ambition of the Scottish Queen. But if this check
ihould be removed, by the legal acknowledgment
of her tide, Mary would be at full liberty to pursue
her dangerous designs, and to a& without fear or
reserve. Her partisans were already meditating

' Melv. 136.

schemes

schemes for infurretions in different parts of the B o o K
kingdom *; and an a& of Parliament, recognising 1V.
the rights of that Princess, whose pretensions they '
favoured, would have been nothing less than a fig- 1566.
nal to arms; and notwithstanding Elizabeth's just
title to the affections of her fubjeEts, might have
shaken and endangered her throne.

WHILE this matter remained in fufpence in both Mary en-

houses, an account of it was transmitted to Mary dimro e
by Melvil her Ambassador. As she did not want this ol'por-
advocates for her right, even among those who were
near Elizabeth's person, she endeavoured to culti-
vate the disposition which appeared towards fettling
the right of succession in her favour, by a letter to
the Privy Counsellors of England. She expressed
in it a grateful sense of Elizabeth's friendship, which
she ascribes chiefly to their good offices, with their
Sovereign, in her behalf. She declared her refolu-
tion to live in perpetual amity with England, without
urging or pursuing her claim upon the Crown,
any farther than should be agreeable to the Queen.
But, at the fame time, as her right of succession
was undoubted, she hoped it would be examined
with candour, and judged of with impartiality. The
nobles who attended her, wrote to the English Privy
Council in the fame strain t. Mary artfully gave
there letters the air of being nothing more than a
declaration of her own, and of her fubjets gratitude
towards Elizabeth. But as she could not be igno-
rant of the jealousy and fear with which Elizabeth
*Melv. 147. -- Keith, 354. Append. 136.

observed

B o o K obtfrved the proceedings of Parliament, a flep so

IV. uncommon as this, of one Prince's entering into
' ' -' public correspondence with the Privy Counsellors of
i566. another, could not be otherwise construed than as

taken with an intention to encourage the spirit which
had already been raised among the English. In this
light it seems to have appeared to Elizabeth her-
self*. But the disposition of her people rendering
it necessary to treat Mary's person with great de-
cency, and her title with much regard, Ihe men-
tioned it to her only in the softest language.

EErthaT NOTHING, however, could be a more cruel mor-
orths and
rains l- tification to a princess of Elizabeth's character,
x' -la than the temper which both houses of Parliament

discovered on this occasion. She bent all her policy
to defeat or elude the motion. After allowing the
first heat of their zeal to evaporate, the called into
her pretence a certain number of each house. She
toothed and caressed them; she threatened and pro-
mifed; she remitted fubtidies which were due; and
refused those which were offered; and in the end
prevailed to have this formidable motion put off for
that session. Happily for her, the conduc of the
Scottish Queen, and the misfortunes which besel
her, prevented the revival of such a motion in any
future Parliament t.

MEAN time, in order to preserve the reputation

of impartiality, and that the might not drive Mary

' Keith, 357.
t D'Ewes Journ. 104-130. Camd. 399. Melv. 119.
Haynes, 446.

into

into any desperate measure, she committed to the B o o K
Tower one Thornton, who had published something IV.
derogatory to the right of the Scottilh line*; and 'v
signified a displeasure against a member of the 66
house of Commons, who seemed, by some words
in a speech, to glance at Mary t.

AMIDST all her other cares, Mary was ever soli- An extra-

citous to promote the interelt of that religion which I'l'p of
lhe professed. The re-establishment of the Romiflh M'ary's i

favour o£

do&rine seems to have been her favourite palfion; Popery.
and though the design was concealed with care, and
conduted with caution, she pursued it with a per-
fevering zeal. At this time, she ventured to lay
aside somewhat of her usual reserve; and the aid
which she expected from the Popish Princes, who
had engaged in the league of Bayonne, encouraged
her to take a fRep, which, if we confider the temper
of the nation, appears to be extremely bold. Hav-
ing formerly held a secret correspondence with the
court of Rome, she now resolved to allow a Nun-
cio from the Pope publickly to enter her dominions.
Cardinal Laurea, at that time Bishop of Mondovi,
was the person on whom Pius V. conferred this of-
fice, and along with him he sent the Queen.a pre-
sent of 20,000 crowns :. It is not the charater of
the Papal court, to open its treasury upon distant or
imaginary hopes. The bufiners of the Nuncio in
Scotland could be no other, than to attempt a re-
conciliation of that kingdom to the 'cmnifh fee.
Thus Mary herself understood it; and in her an-

Camd. 401. t Haynes, 449.
t Vita Card. Laur. ap. Burn. vol.iii. p. 325.

fwer

B o o K fwer to a letter which fle received from the Pope,

IV. after exprefling her grateful sense of his paternal

- 'care and liberality, lhe promises that she would bend
i566. her whole strength towards the re-eftablilhment and

propagation of the Catholic faith, that Ihe would
receive the Nuncio with every possible demonftra-
tion of refpet, and concur, with the utmost vigour,
in all his designs towards promoting the honour of
God, and restoring peace to the kingdom; that ihe
would celebrate the baptifi of the Prince, accord-
ing to the ceremonies which the Romish ritual pre-
scribes, hoping that her fubjets would be taught,
by this example, again to reverence the sacraments
of the church, which they had so long treated with
contempt; and that ihe would be careful to initil
early into her ion the principles of a sincere love
and attachment to the Catholic faith *. But though
the Nuncio was already arrived at Paris, and had
sent over one of his attendants with part of the mo-
ney, the Queen did not think the junCture proper
for his reception. Elizabeth was preparing to fend
a magnificent embassy into Scotland, against the
time of the Prince's baptism; and as it would have
been improper to offend her, ihe wifely contrived,
under various pretences, to detain Laurea at Pa-
rist. The convulsions into which the kingdom
was thrown soon after, made it impossible for him
to pursue his journey any farther.

AT the very time that Mary was secretly carrying
on these negociarions for subverting the Reform-

Conei Vita Mari- ap. Jebb, vol. ii. p. 5 .
f Keith, Append. 1j .

ed

ed Church, she did not scruple publickly to employ B o o K
her authority towards obtaining for its Ministers a IV.
more certain and comfortable subsistence *. Dur-
ing this year, she iflued several proclamations and I566.
afts of council for that purpofe,.and readily approv-
ed of every scheme which was proposed for the
more effe&ual payment of their stipends. This
part of her condua does little honour to Mary's in-
tegrity; and though justified by the example of
Princes, who often reckon falsehood and deceit
among the necessary arts of government, and even
authorised by the pernicious casuistry of the Roman
Church, which transfers breach of faith to heretics,
from the lift of crimes, to that of duties, such dif-
simulation, however, must be numbered among
those blemishes which never stain a truly great and
generous character.

As neither the French nor PiedmontefeAmbaf- December

fadors were yet arrived, the baptism of the Prince Her avers-
was put off from time to time. Mean while Mary Kin frehe
fixed her residence at Craigmillar t. Such a re- ceffive.
tirement, perhaps, suited the present temper of her
mind, and induced her to prefer it before her own
palace of Holy-rood-houfe. Her aversion for the
King grew every day more confirmed, and was be-
come altogether incurable. Adeep melancholy fuc-
ceeded to that gaiety of spirit which was natural, to
her. The raihnefs and levity of her own choice,
and the King's ingratitude and obstinacy, filled her
with shame and despair. A variety of passions

' Keith, 561, 562. Knox, 401. f Keith, 355.
VOL I. C c preyed

B o o K preyed at once on a mind, all whose sensations were

IV. exquisite, and all its emotions strong, and often ex-

'---.' torted from her, the last wish of the unfortunate,

I566. that life itself would come to an end *.

A divorce MURRAY and Maitland observed all thole work-
bemP ings of passion in the breast of the Queen, and
pcssd. conceived hopes of turning them to the advantage

of their ancient associates, Morton, and the other
conspirators against Rizio. They were still in ba-
nifhment, and the Queen's resentment against them
continued unabated. Murray and the Secretary
flattered themselves, however, that her inclination
to be separated from Darnly would surmount this
deep-rooted aversion, and that the hopes of an event
so desirable might induce her to be reconciled to the
conspirators. It was easy to find reasons, in the
King's behaviour, on which to found a sentence of
divorce. This sentence they had interest enough to
obtain, and to procure the ratification of it in Par-
liament. In return for this service, they proposed
to stipulate with the Queen to grant a pardon to
Morton and his followers. The dcfign was first of
all communicated to Argyll, who, as well as Mur-
ray, owed his return into Scotland to the confpira-
cy against Rizio. Huntly and Bothwell, who at
that time directed all Mary's councils, were like-
wife admitted into the concert. They joined toge-
ther in making the overture to the Queen, and en-
forced it with all Maitland's eloquence T. But
Mary, however defrous of obtaining that deliver-
ance from Darnly's caprices, with which they en-

· Keith, Pref. vi. -ii. nderf. vol iv. Part ii. 188.

deavoured

deavoured to allure her, had nevertheless good rea- B o o K
sons for rejecting the method, by which they pro- IV.
posed to accomplish it. The birth of her son had
greatly strengthened her claim upon the English 1566'
fucceflion, and encouraged the abettors of it to ap-
pear with great boldness, and to act with more vi-
gour. She could scarce hope to be divorced from
her husband, without throwing omre imputation on
her son. This might open a new dispute with re-
gard to the succession, and put it in the power of
Elizabeth and her Miniflers to call in question the
Prince's legitimacy, or at leafd to subject it to all
the delays and cavils of a judicial inquiry. The
fear of these inconveniences weighed with Maryj
and determined her rather to endure her hard fate,
than to seek relief, by venturing on such a danger-
ous experiment.

THE Earl of Bedford, and the Count de Brienne,

the English and French Ambassadors, being arriv-
ed, Mary set out for Stirling, to celebrate the bap-
tifin of her son. Bedford was attended by a numerous
and splendid train, and brought presents from Eli-
zabeth, suitable to her own dignity, and the refpe&
with which (he asseted, at that time, to treat the
Queen of Scots. Great preparations had been made
by Mary; and the magnificence displayed by her on
this occasion, exceeded whatever had been formerly
known in Scotland. The ceremony itself was per-
formed according to the rites of the Romish Church. em 7
But neither Bedford, nor any of the Scottish nobles
who profefled the Protestant religion, entered with-

C c 2 in

B o o K in the gates of the chapel *. The spirit of that ages

IV. firm and uncomplying, would not, upon any in-
~'yJ' ducement, condescend to witness an aEtion, which

566. it esteemed idolatrous.

The King's HENRY'S behaviour, at this juncture, perfealy
baour discovers the excess of his caprice, as well as of his
at the - folly. He chore to reside at Stirling, but confined
ifim of the
Prince. himself to his own apartment; and as the Queen

distrusted every nobleman who ventured to converse
with him, he was left in absolute solitude. Nothing
could be more singular, or was leis expected, than
his chufing to appear in a manner, that both pub-
lifhed the contempt under which he had fallen, and
by exposing the Queen's domestic unhappiness to
the observation of so many foreigners, looked like
a ftep taken on purpose to mortify and to offend her.
Mary felt this insult sensibly; and notwithstanding
all her efforts to assume the gaiety which suited the
occasion, and which was neceifary for the polite re-
ception of her guests, she was sometimes obliged to
retire, in order to be at liberty to indulge her for-
row, and give vent to her tears t. The King tfill
persisted in his design of retiring into foreign parts,
and daily threatened to put it in execution :.

THE

*Keith, 360. f Ibid. Pref. vii.
I Camden affirms, 401, that Bedford was commanded by

Elizabeth not to give Darnly the title of King. As this was
an indignity, not to be borne, either by Mary or her hulband,
it hath been aflerted to be the cause of the King's absence from
the ceremony of his son's baptism. Keith, 360. Good. 319.
But, i. No fach thing is to be found among Bedford's infRruc-

tions,

THE ceremony of witnessing the Prince's baptism B o o K

was not the sole business of Bedford's embassy. His lV.
inftrutions contained an overture, which ought to --
have gone far towards extinguishing thofejealoufies Ei6,,^6.
which had so long subsisted between the two Queens. endcavours
The treaty of Edinburgh, which has been so often modate her
mentioned, was the principal occasion of these. The diffhreMce
spirit, however, which had risen to such an height
in the late Parliament, the power of the party which
favoured the Scottish Queen's title, the number
and activity of her agents in different parts of the
kingdom, alarmed Elizabeth, and induced her to
forego any advantage, which the ambiguous and

tions, the original of which still remains. Keith, 356. 2. Bed-
ford's advice to the Queen by Melvil is utterly inconsistent with
Camden's assertion. Melv. 153. Melvil's account is confirmed
by Elizabeth's inftruflions to Sir Henry Norris, when she as-
firms that ihe commanded Bedford to employ his best offices
towards reconciling Mary to her husband, which lhe had at-
tempted to no purpose. Digges's Compl. Ambaf. p. 13. A
paper publilhed Append. No. XVIII. proves the fame thing.
3. Le Croc the French Resident mentions the King's absence,
but without giving that reason for it, which has been founded
on Camden's words, though, if that had been the real one, he
would scarce have failed to mention it. His account of this
matter is that which I have followed, Keith, Pref. vii. 4. He
informs his court, that on account of the difference be-
twixt the King and Queen, he had refused to hold any fur-
ther correspondence with the former, though he appears, in
many instances, to have been his great confident. Ibid. 5. As
the King was not present at the baptism, he seems to have
been excluded from any Ihare in the ordinary administration of
business. Two acts of Privy Council, one on the o2th, and
the other on the 2z f of December, are found in Keith, 56z.
They both run in thc Queen's name alone. The King seems
not to have been present. This could not be owing to Eliza-
beth's infiructions to Bedford.

C c 3 artful

B o o K artful expressions in that treaty might afford her.

IV. Nothing was now demanded of Mary, but to re-

nounce any title to the crown of England during
i566. Elizabeth's life, and the lives of her posterity;

who, on the other hand, engaged to take no ftep,
which might prove injurious to Mary's claim upon
the fuccefion *

MARY could not, with decency, reject a propo-

fition so equitable; she infilted, however, that Eli-
zabeth hfould order the right upon which she claim-
ed to be legally examined, and publickly recognised,
and particularly that the teffament of Henry VIII.
whereby he had excluded the descendants of his eld-
eft sifter, the Quecn of Scotland, from the place due
to them in the order of succession, might be pro-
duced, and confidered by the English nobility.
Mary's Ministers had credulously embraced an opi-
nion, that this testament, which they so jufftly con-
ceived to be injurious to their Mistress, was a mere
forgery; and on different occasions had urged Eli-
zabeth to produce it. Mary would have suffered
considerably by gaining this point. The original
testament is ffill extant, and not the least doubt can
be entertained of its genuineness and authenticity.
But it was not Elizabeth's intention to weaken or
to set aside the title of the house of Stewart. She
aimed at nothing more, than to keep the question
concerning the succession perplexed and undecided,
and, by induftriouny eluding this request, Jhe did
real service to Mary's cause i.
*Keith, 356. -ibid. 358. 361. Note(c) Murdin. 368.

A FEW

A FEW days after the baptifin of the Prince, Mor- B o o K

ton and all the other conspirators against Rizio ob- IV.
tained their pardon, and leave to return into Scot- -, --.
land. Mary, who had hitherto continued inexo- I566.
rable to every intreaty in their behalf, yielded at last
to the solicitations of Bothwell *. He could hope
for no success in those bold designs on which his am-
bition resolved to venture, without drawing aid from
every quarter. By procuring a favour for Morton
and his associates, of which they had good reason
to despair, he expeAed to secure a band of faithful
and determined adherents.

THE King frill remained at Stirling, in solitude,

and under contempt. His impatience in this fitua-
tion, together with the alarm given him, by the
rumour of a design to seize his person, and confine
him to prison t, was the occasion of his leaving
that place in an abrupt manner, and retiring to his
father at Glasgow.

Two assemblies of the Church were held during June 25.
this year. New complaints were made, and upon Decem. 25.

Church as-

good.-grounds, of the poverty and contempt under fairs.
which the Protestant clergy were suffered to lan-
guilh. Penurious as the allotment for their. sub-
fiftence was, they had not received the lealt parr
of what was due for the preceding year :. Nothing
less than a zeal, ready to endure and to susser every
thing for a good cause, could have persuaded men
to adhere to a church, so indigent and so negleced.

* Good. vol. i. 140o. Melv. 154. t Keith, Pref. viii.
I Ibid. 562.

The

Bo o K The extraordinary expences, occasioned by the

IV. Prince's baptism, had exhausted the Queen's trea-

< I- T" fury, and the fums appropriated for the subsistence
i&6. of the clergy were diverted into other channels.

The Queen was therefore obliged to prevent the
just remonstrances of the assembly, by falling on
some new method for the relief of the church. Some
symptoms of liberality, some itretch towards muni-
ficence might have been expeced in an afiignment
which was made with an intention of soothing and
silencing the clergy. But both the Queen and the
nobles held fast the riches of the church which they
had seized. A fum, which, at the highest compu-
tation, can scarce be reckoned equal to gooo9000. fter-
ling *, was deemed sufficient for the maintenance of
a whole national church, by men who had lately
seen single monasteries possessed of revenues far fupe-
rior in value.

THE ecclesiastics in that age bore the grievances

which affected themselves alone with aftonilhing pa-
tience, but wherever the reformed religion was threat-
ened, they were extremely apt to be alarmed, and to
proclaim, in the loudest manner, their apprehensions
of danger.' A just occasion of this kind was given
them a short time before the meeting-of the Assem-
bly. The usurped and oppressive jurifdi&ion of the
spiritual court had 'been abolished by the Parlia-
ment 1560, and commiffaries were appointed to
hear and determine the causes which formerly came
under their cognizance t. Among the few ads of
that Parliament, to which Mary had paid any re-

Keith, 56z. ad. ,

gard,

gard, this was one. She had confirmed the autho- B o o K
rity of the Commiffaries, and had given them in- IV.
ftru&ions for dire&ing their proceedings*, which -
are still of great authority in that court. From that I566.
time there judges had continued in the uninterrupted
exercise of their function, when of a sudden the
Queen issued a proclamation, restoring the Arch-
bishop of St. Andrew's to his ancient jurifdiaion,
and depriving the commiffaries of all authority t.

A MOTIVE, which cannot be jultified, rendered

the Queen not unwilling to venture upon this rash
action. She had been contriving, for some time,
how to re-establish the Popish religion; and the re-
itoring the ancient ecclesiastics to their former jurif-
diction, seemed to be a considerable ftep towards
that end. The motive which prompted Bothwell,
to whose influence over the Queen this ation mult
be chiefly imputed t, was still more criminal. His
enterprising ambition had already formed that bold
design, which he soon after put in execution, and
the use which we shall hereafter find him making
of that authority, which the Popish ecclesiastics re-
gained, discovers the reasons of his present conduct,
in contributing to revive their power. The pro-
teftant clergy were not unconcerned spectators of an
event, which threatened their religion with unavoid-
able deftruftion; but as they despaired of obtain-
ing the proper remedy from the Queen herself, they
addressed a remonstrance to the whole body of the
Protestant nobility, full of that ardent zeal for re-
ligion, which the danger to which it was exposed at

Keith, z25. t Knox, 403. t Id. ibid.

that

B o o r that time, seemed to require *. What effecs this

IV. vehement exhortation might have produced, we
ó---- have no opportunity of judging, the attention of
66. the nation being quickly turned towards events of

another, and more tragical nature.

The King IMMEDIATELY upon the King's leaving Stirling,
fa.lL tick at
G;a¢i.. and before he could reach Glasgow, he was seized
1567. with a dangerous distemper. The symptoms which

attended it were violent and unusual, and in that
age it was commonly imputed to the effeas of poi-
son t. It is impossible, amidst the contradictions
of historians, to decide with certainty concerning its
nature, or its cause :. His life was in the utmost

Keith, 567. t Melv. 154. Knox, 401.

: Buchananand Knox are pofirive that the King had been

poisoned. Theymention the black and putrid pustules which
broke out all over his body. Buchanan adds, that Abernethy
the King's phyfidan plainly declared that poison was the cause
ofthefe fymint6ms, and that the Queen refused to allow her own
phyfidan to attend him, Buch. 349. Knox, 401. 2. Blackwood
Caufin, &c. Jebb, vol. ii. 24. 59, assert, that the small-pox was
the disease with which the King was seized. He is called a
Pockib man in the Queen's letter, Good. vol. ii. 15. The rea-
son given by French Paris for lodging the King at the Kirk of
Field, viz. left the young Prince should catch the infection if he
flaid in the palace, seems to favour this opinion, Anders. vol. ii.
193. Carte mentions it as a proof of Mary's tenderness to her
hulband, that though Ihe never had the friall-pox herself, lhe
ventured to attend him, vol. iii. 446. This, if it had been
true, would have afforded a good pretence for not visiting him
sooner; but Mary had the finall-pox in her infancy, Sadler's
Letters. 3. Bishop Lefly affirms, that the King's disease was
the French pox, Keith, 364. Note (b). In that age, this dif-
ease was esteemed so contagious, that perions infeced with it
were removed without the walls of cities.

dan-

danger; but after languishing for some weeks, the B o o .K
vigour of his confRitution surmounted the malignity i
of the disease.

15b7.

MARY'S neglea of the King, on this occasion, r'glai

was equal to that with which he treated her dur-
ing her illness at Jedburgh. She no longer felt
that warmth of conjugal affection which prompts to
sympathy, and delights in all those tender offices
which sooth and alleviate sickness and pain. At
this juntlure, the did not even put on the appear,
ance of this paflion. Notwithstanding the King's
danger, she anused herself with excursions to diffe-
rent parts of the country, and suffered near a month
to elapse before she visited him at Glasgow. By
that time, the violence of the distemper was over,
and the King, though weak and languiflling, was
out of all danger.

THE breach between Mary and her hulband was The breach

not occasioned by any of those flight disgusts, which ihcl ir-
interrupt the domestic union, without diflolying it Pa.able.
altogether. Almost all the passions, which operate
with greatest violence on a female mind, and drive
it to the most dangerous extremes, concurred in
raising and fomenting this unhappy quarrel. Ingra-
titude for the favours she had bellowed, contempt
of her person, violations of the marriage-vow, en-
croachments on her power, conspiracies against her
favourites, jealousy, insolence, and obstinacy, were
the injuries of which Mary had great reason to com-
plain. She felt them with the utmost sensibility;
and added to the anguish of disappointed love, they

pro-

B o o K produced those symptoms of despair which we have.

IV. already described. Her resentment against the King
'-v t seems not to have abated from the time of his leav-
567. ing Stirling. In a letter written with her own hand,

to her Ambassador in France, just before she set out
for Glasgow, no tokens of sudden reconcilement ap-
pear. On the contrary, She mentions, with some
Jao 4o. bitterness, the King's ingratitude, the jealousy with

which he observed her a&ions, and the inclination
he discovered to disturb her government, and at the
fame time talks of all his attempts with the utmost
scorn *.

v-t tia AFTER this discovery of Mary's sentiments, it
ckSgno. was scarce to be expeted that she would visit the

King, or that any thing but marks of jealousy and
distrust should appear in such an interview. This,
however, was far from being the cafe; she not only
visited Henry, but, by all her words and a&ions,
endeavoured to express an uncommon affe&ion for
him: And though this made impreflion on the cre-
dulous spirit of her husband, no less flexible, on
some occasions, than obstinate on others; yet, to
those who are acquainted with the human heart,
and who know how seldom and how slowly such
wounds in domeffic happiness are healed, this fud-
den transition will appear with a very suspicious
air, and will be confidered by them as the effe& of
artifice.

. d.ii,_- BUT it is not on suspicion alone, that Mary is
a'On.- charged withdiffimulation in this part of her con-

Keith, Pref. viii.

du&.

duct. Two of her famous letters to Bothwell were B o o K
written during her stay at Glasgow, and fully lay IV.
open this scene of iniquity. He had so far succeeded '-'
in his ambitious and criminal design, as to gain an 1567.
absolute ascendant over the Queen ; and in a fitua-
tion, such as Mary's, merit not so conspicuous, ser-
vices of far inferior importance, and address much
less insinuating than Bothwell's, may be supposed to
steal imperceptibly on a female heart, and entirely
to overcome it. Among those in the higher ranks
of life, scruples with regard to conjugal fidelity are,
unhappily, neither many, nor strong: Nor did the
manners of that court, in which Mary had been
educated, contribute to increase or to fortify them.
The amorous turn of Francis I. and Henry II. the
wildness of the military character in that age, and
the liberty of appearing in all companies, which be-
gan to be allowed to women, who had 'not yet ac-
quired that delicacy of sentiment, and those polifli-
ed manners, which alone can render this liberty in-
nocent, had introduced, among the French, a licen-
tioufnefs of morals that rose to an astonishing height.
Such examples, which were familiar to Mary from
her infancy, could hardly fail of diminishing that
horror of vice which is natural to a virtuous .mind.
The King's behaviour would render the first ap-
proach of forbidden sentiments less thocking ; resent-
ment, and disappointed love, would be apt to re-
present whatever soothed her revenge, as justifiable
on that account; and so many concurring causes
might, almost imperceptibly, kindle a new paflion
in her heart.

BUT

B o o K BUT whatever opinion we may form with regard

IV. to the rife and progress of this passion, the letters

' r6 themselves breathe all the ardour and tenderness of
ih57.,-. love. The affetion which Mary there expresses for
iesoit. Bothwell, fully accounts for every subsequent part

of her conduct; which, without admitting this cir-
cumftance, appears altogether mysterious, incon-
fifent, and inexplicable. That reconcilement with
her husband, ofwhich, if we allow it to be genuine,
it is impossible to give any plausible account, is dif-
covered, by the Queen's own confellion, to have
been mere artifice and deceit. As her averfon for
her husband, and the suspicious attention with which
The observed his conduct, became universally known,
her ears were officiously filled, as is usual in such
cafes, vith groundless or aggravated accounts of his
a&tions. By some, The was told, that the King in-
tended to seize the person of the Prince his son, and
in his name to usurp the government; by others
She was assured, that he resolved instantly to leave
the kingdom; that a vessel was hired for this pur-
pose, and lay in the river Clyde ready to receive
him*. The last was what Mary chiefly dreaded.
Henry's retiring into a foreign country must have
been highly dilhonourable to the Queen, and would
have entirely disconcerted Bothwell's measures.
While he resided at Glasgow, at a distance from
her, and in that part of the kingdom where the in-
terest of his family was greatest, he might, with
more facility, accomplish his designs. In order
therefore, to prevent his executing any such wild
scheme, it was necefary to bring him to some place

Keith, Pref. viii.

where

where he would be more immediately under her own B o o K
eye. For this purpose, she first employed all her IV.
art to regain his confidence, and then proposed to
remove him to the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, Preais on
under pretence, that there he would have easer ac- hi to

come to

cess to the advice of physicians, and that she her- Edinburgh.
self could attend him without being absent from
her son *. The King was weak enough to susser
himself to be persuaded; and being fill feeble and
incapable of bearing fatigue, was carried in a litter
to Edinburgh.

THE place prepared for his reception was a housf

belonging to the Provost of a collegiate church,
called Kirk of Field. It flood almost upon the
fame spot where the house belonging to the Princi-
pal of the University now stands. Such a situation,
on a rising ground, and at that time in an open
field, had all the advantages of healthful air to re-
commend it; but, on the other hand, the solitude
of the place rendered it extremely proper for the
commission of that crime, with a view to which, it
seems manifeffly to have been chosen.

MARY continued to attend the King with the Heismur-

most assiduous care. She seldom was absent from ere
him through the day; Ihe slept several nights in the
chamber under his apartment. She heaped on him
so many marks of tenderness and confidence, as, in
a great measure, quieted thole suspicions which had
so long disturbed him. But while he was fondly
indulging in dreams of the return of his former

* Good. vol. ii. 8.

hap-

Bo K happiness, he flood on the very brink of defrruc-

IV. tion. On Sunday the ninth of February, about
- V' eleven at night, the Queen left the Kirk of Field,
1567. )

in order to be present at a masque in the palace.
At two next morning, the house in which the King
lay was blown up with gunpowder. The noise and
shock, which this sudden explosion occasioned,
alarmed the whole city. The inhabitants ran to
the place whence it came. The dead body of the
King, with that of a servant who slept in the fame
room, were found lying in an adjacent garden, with-
out the city wall, untouched by fire, and with no
bruise or mark of violence.
Ms cfrac- SiCR was the unhappy fate of Henry Stewart

Lord Darnly, in the twenty-firft year of his age.
The indulgence of fortune, and his own external
accomplilhments, without any other merit, had
raised him to an height of dignity, of which he
was altogether unworthy. By his folly and ingrati-
tude, he loft the heart of a woman who doated on
him to diftration. His insolence and inconstancy
alienated from him such of the nobles as had con-
tributed moRl zealously towards his elevation. His
levity and caprice exposed him to the scorn of the
people, who once revered him as the descendant of
their ancient Kings and heroes. Had he died a na-
tural death, his end would have been unlamented,
and his memory have been soon forgotten ; but the
cruel circunftances of his murder, and the remiss-
ness with whisi it was afterwards avenged, have
made his name to be remembered with regret, and

have

have rendered him the obje& of pity to which he B o o K
had otherwise no title. IV.

EVERY one's imagination was at work to guess Both6wI.
who had contrived and executed this execrable and tle

Queen sus-

deed. The suspicion fell, with almoff a general peeed of
content, on Bothwell*; and some refletions were the 'urder
thrown out, as if the Queen herself were no stranger
to the crime. Of Bothwell's guilt there remains the
fullest evidence, that the nature of the ation will
admit. The Queen's known sentiments with re-
gard to her husband, gave a great appearance of
probability to the imputation with which she was
loaded t.

Two days after the murder, a proclamation was

issued by the Queen, offering a considerable reward
to any person who should discover those who had
been guilty of such a horrid and detestable crime :;
and though Bothwell was now one of the greatest
subjects in the kingdom, formidable on account of
his own power, and protected by the Queen's fa-
vour, it was impossible to suppress the entiments
and indignation of the people. Papers were as-
fixed to the most public places of the city, accuf-
ing him of the murder, and naming his accom-
plices; pictures appeared to the fame purpose, and
voices were heard in the middle of the night, charg-
ing him with that barbarous action. But the au-

' Melv. 155. Anders. vol. i. 156.
t See Dissertation concerning the murder of Henry Darnly,
and the genuineness of Mary's letters to Bothwell. Appendix.

i Anders. vol. i. 36.
\VOL. . D d thors

B o o K thors of these rumours did not confine their accu-

IV. fations to Bothwell alone, they insinuated that the
'---.' Queen herself was accessary to the crime *. This

567' bold accusation, which so dire&ly attacked Mary's

reputation, drew the attention of her council; and
by engaging them in an enquiry after the authors of
there libels, diverted them from searching for the
murderers of the King . It could scarce be ex-
pe&ed that Mary herself would be extremely soli-
citous to discover those who had rid her of an hus-
band, whom she had so violently hated. It was
Bothwell's interest, who had the supreme direCtion
of this, as well as of all other affairs, to stifle and
suppress whatever evidence should be offered, and
to cover, if possible, the whole transaction under
the veil ofdarknefs and of silence. Some inquiry,
however, was made, and some persons called be-
fore the council; but the examination was con-
ducted with the most indecent remissness, and in
such a manner, as to let in no light upon that scene
of guilt :.

IT was not her own fubjets alone who fufpe&ed

Mary of having been accessary to this unnatural
crime; nor did an opinion, so dishonourable to her
character, owe its rife and progress to the jealousy
and malice of her fatious nobles. The report of
the manner and circumfsances of the King's mur-
der spread quickly over all Europe, and, even in
that age, which was accustomed to deeds of vio-
lence, it excited universal horror. As her unhappy

* Anders vol. ii. 156. t Id. vol. i. 38. t Id. vol.
iv. 167, 168.

breach

breach with her husband had long been matter of B o o K
public discourse, the first conictures .' :-- -re IV.
formed with regard to his death, were extremely to 1ó-
her disadvantage. Her friends, at a loss what apo-
logy to offer for her conduct, called on her to pro-
fecute the murderers with the utmost diligence, and
expeced that the rigour of her proceedings would
prove the best and fullest vindication of her inno-
cence *.

LENNOX, at the fame time, incited Mary to ven- Lennox ac-

geance with incessant opportunity. This nobleman well of the
had Shared in his son's disgrace, and being treated King's

0 - murder.

by Mary with neglet, usually resided at a distance
from court. Roused, however, by an event no
loss shocking to the heart of a father, than fatal to
all his schemes of ambition, he ventured to write
to the Queen, and to offer his advice with refpet Feb. zx.
to the moli effectual method for discovering and
conviaing those who had so cruelly deprived him
of a son, and her of a hufoand. He urged her
to prosecute those who were guilty with vigour,
and to bring them to a speedy trial; he declared
his own suspicions of Bothwell, and of those who
were named as his accomplices; he required that
out of regard to decency, and in order to en\cou-
rage evidence to appear against them, the persons
accused of such an atrocious crime fiould be com-
mitted to cuffody, or at least excluded from her
court and presence t.

MARY was then at Seaton, whither she had re-
tired after the burial of the King, whose body was

' Keith, I'Pr . ix. t Id. 369.

D d 2 depo-

B o o K deposited among the Monarchs of Scotland, in a

IV. private, but decent manner *. The former part of
''r_' the Earl's demand, could not, on any pretence, be

567 eluded; and it was resolved to bring Bothwell im-

mediately to trial. But, instead of confining him

ay con- to any prison, Mary admitted him into all her
nue to councils, and allowed a person, universally reputed

i
a murderer of her husband, to enjoy all the fecu-

rity, the dignity, and the power of a favourite t.
The offices which Bothwell already possessed, gave
him the command of all the south of Scotland.
The caffle of Edinburgh, however, was a place of
too much confequenee, not to wish it in his own
power. The Queen, in order to prevail on the
Earl of Mar to surrender it, contented to put the
M2rch 9. person of the young Prince in his hands, and im-

mediately bestowed the government of that impor-
tant fortress upon Bothwell i. So many iteps in her
conduc, inconsistent with all the rules of prudence,
and of decency, must be imputed to an excess ei-
ther of folly or of love. Mary's known chara&er
fully vindicates her from the former; of the latter,
many and striking proofs soon appeared.

Ha~ienso No direc evidence had yet appeared against
his `nl Bothwell; but as time might bring to light the

circumstances of a crime in which so many ac-
complices were concerned, it was of great import-
ance to hurry over the trial, while nothing more
than general suspicions, and uncertain surmises,
could be produced by his accusers. For this rea-

Anders. vol. i. 23. t Id. ibid. 40, &c.
I Id. ibid. Pref. 64. Keith, 379.

son,

ofn, in a meeting of Privy Council held on the 28th B o o K
of March, the Izth of April was appointed for the IV.
.day of trial. And though the law allowed, and the ' '
manner in which criminal causes were carried on in 567.
that age required a much longer interval, it ap-
pears, from feyeral circumstances, that this ihort
space .was considerably contracted, and that Len-
nox had only eleven days warning to prepare for
accusing a person, so far superior to himself, both
in power and in favour *. No man could be less
in a condition to contend with an antagonist who
was thus supported, Though Lennox's paternal
estate had been retored to him, when he was re-
called to Scotland, it seems to have been confi-
derably impaired during his banishment. His vas-
fals, while he resided in England, had been accuf-

* The at of Privy Council, appointing the day of Bothwel's

trial, bears date March the z8th, which happened orn a Thurf-
day, Anders. vol. i. o5. The Queen's warrant to the mejengers,
impowering them to summon Lennox to be present, is dated on
the 29th. Anders. vol. ii. 97. He was summoned by public
proclamation at the cross of Edinburgh on the fame day. Ibid.
too. He was summoned at his dwelling-houfes in Glasgow
and Dumbarton the 3oth of March, the iit and zd days of
April. Ibid. iol. He was summoned at Perth, April ift, Ibid.
102. Though Lennox resided at that time 40 miles from-Edin-
burgh, the citation might have been given him sooner Such
an unnecessary delay affords rome cause for suspicion. 'Tis true
Mary, in her letter, March 24th, invited Lennox to come to
Edinburgh the ensuing week; this gave him warning rome days
sooner, that she intended to bring on the trial without delay.
But the precise time could not be legally, or certainly known
to Lennox sooner than 1 or 12 days, before the day on which
he was required to appear. By the law and practice of Scot-
land, at that time, parties were summoned in cafes of treason
40 days previous to the trial.

D d 3 tomed

B o o K tomed to some degree of independence, and he had

IV. not recovered that absolute afcenrdant over them,

L-'t-'- which a feudal chief 'ufuall poiffefed. 'He had no
I67.' reason to expect the concurrence of any of those

factions into which 'the nobles were divided. Dur-
ing the short period of his son's prosperity, he had
takeh such f-eps as gave 'rife to an open breach
with 'Murray and all his adherents. The partizans
bf.rhe-:loufe of'Hnamilton were his hereditary and
mirtal' enemies. Hunrly was'linked in the cldfeft
'orifederacy with Bothwell; and 'thus, to the di-
grace 6f the nation, Lennox flood alone in a cause,
iviHe're''both honour and humanity called so loudly
on his co'unrtrymen'to second him.

-IT':is rernarklble too, that Bdtiwell himself was

present, and fat as a member in that meeting of
Privy :council, which gave dire&tions with regard
to'the `time and manner of his'trial: and lh.ftill
enjobyed not only full liberty, but Was received into
the Queen's pretence with the fame diftinguilhed
familiarity as lormerly *.

Lc.nno NOTH'NC could be a more cruel disappointment
drlay. to the wiflies and reeritment of a'father, thin such

a premature trial; every ifep towards which seemed
to be taken by dire&ions from the person who was
lhimfelf accuied of the crime, and calculated on
'piirpofe to conceal rather'than to detct his guilt.
Lennox foresaw what would be the ilfue of this
mock inquiry, andi with how little fafcty to himself,
or ficcefs to his cause, he could venture to appear

' Andcrf. vol. i. 50. 2z.

on

on the day prefixed. In his former letters, though B o o K
under expressions the most refpeftful, some fymp- IV.
toms of his distrusting the Queen may be disco- '"
vered. He spoke out now in plain language. He 15'67
complained of the injury done him, by hurrying
on the trial with such illegal precipitation. He
represented once more the indecency of allowing
Bothwell, not only to enjoy personal liberty, but to
retain his former influence over her councils. He
again required her, as Ihe regarded her own.honour,
to give some evidence of her sincerity in prosecuting
the murder, by confining the person who was, on
good grounds, fufpefted to be the author of it;
and, till that were done, he signified his own refo-
lution not to be present at a trial, the manner and
circumstances of which were lb irregular, and un-
satisfactory *.

HE seems, however, to have expected little fuc- Applies for

cess from this application to Mary; and therefore, thispurpofc
at the fame time, besought Elizabeth to interpose, bctiiz"-
in order to obtain such a delay as he demanded t.
Nothing can be a stronger proof, how violently he
fufpe&ed the one Queen, than his submitting to
implore the aid of the other, who had treated his
son with the utmost contempt, and himself and fa-
mily with the greatest rigour. Elizabeth, who was
never unwilling to interpose in the affairs of Scot-
land, wrote instantly to Mary, advised her to delay
the trial for some time, and urged, in such frong
terms, the fame arguments which Lennox had used,
as might have convinced her to what an unfavour-

Anders. vol. i. 52. CGood. vol. ii. 352.

D d 4 able

B o o R able construction her condu& would be liable,

IV. if fie persisted in her present method of proceed-

ing *.

I567.
The tria NEITHER her intreaties, however, nor those of
pro' s Lennox, could prevail to have the trial put off.

On the day appointed, Bothwell appeared, but with
such a formidable retinue, that it would have been
dangerous to condemn, and impossible to punish
him. Besides a numerous body of his friends and
vassals assembled, according to custom, from diffe-
rent parts of the kingdom, he was attended by a
band of hired soldiers, who marched with flying
colours along the streets of Edinburgh t. A court
of justice was held, with the accustomed formali-
ties. An indicment was presented against Bothwell,
and Lennox was called upon to make good his ac-
cufation. In his name appeared Robert Cunning-
ham, one of his dependants. He excused his Maf-
ter's absence, on acccount of the shortness of the
time, which prevented his assembling his friends and
vassals, without whose assistance he could not, with
safety, venture to set himself in opposition to such a
powerful antagonist. For this reason, he desired the
court to flop proceeding, and protested, that any
sentence which should be passed at that time, ought
to be deemed illegal and void. Bothwell, on the
other hand, insisted, that the court should instantly
proceed to trial. One of Lennox's own letters,
in which he craved of the Queen to prosecute the
murderers without delay, was produced. Cun-

Anders. Pref. 60. See Append. XIX.
f Anders. vol. i. 1 :5

ninlhanm's

ningham's objections were over-ruled; and the B o o K
jury, consisting of Peers and Barons of the first 1V.
rank, found Bothwell not guilty of the crime.

1567.

No person appeared as an accuser, not a single Bothwll is

witness was examined, nor any evidence produced
against him. Thejury, under these circumstances,
could do nothing else but acquit him. Their ver-
di, however, was far from gratifying the withes,
or ilencing the murmurs of the people. Every cir-
cumitance in the trial gave grounds for suspicion,
and excited indignation; and the judgment pro-
nounced, instead ot being a proof of Bothwell's
innocence, was esteemed an argument of his guilt.
Pasquinades and libels were affixed to different
places, expressing the sentiments of the public, with
the utmost virulence of language.

THE jury themselves seem to have been aware of

the censure, to which their proceeding would be
exposed; and, at the fame time, that they returned
their verdict acquitting Bothwell, the Earl of Caith-
ness protested, in their name, that no crime should
be imputed to them on that account, because no
accuser had appeared, and no proof was brought of
the inditment. He took notice, likewise, that the
ninth instead of the tenth of February was men-
tioned in the indictment, as the day on which the
murder had been committed. A circumstance,
which discovers the extreme inaccuracy of those
who prepared the indicment; and at a time when
men were disposed, and not without reason, to be

sus-

Bo o K suspicious of every thing, this small matter contri-

IV. buted to confirm and to increase their suspicions *
1567. EVEN Bothwell himself did not rely on the judg-

ment which he had obtained in his favour, as a full
vindication of his innocence. Immediately after
his acquittal, he, in compliance with a custom
which was not then obsolete, publilhed a writing,
in which he offered to fight, in single combat, any
Gentleman of good fame, who should presume to
accuse himof being accessary to the murder of the
King.

MARY, however, continued to treat him, as if

he had been cleared by the most unexceptionable
and fatisfafory evidence. The ascendant he had
gained over her heart, as well as over her councils,
was more visible than ever; and Lennox, who
could not expe& that his own,perfon.would be safe
in a country where the murder of his son had been
absolved, without regard to justice; and loaded
with honours, in contempt of decency; fled with
precipitation towards England t.
A rarna- Two days after the trial, a Parliament was held,

Ltd held. at the opening of which the Queen diftinguilhed

Bothwell, by appointing him to carry the sceptre
before her :. Moit of the aacs passed in this As-
fembly, were calculated on .purpose to.ftrengthen
his party, and to promote his designs. He ob-
tained the ratification of all the possessions and ho-

* Bothw. Trial, Anders. vol. i. 97, ~:c. t Keith, 378.
-Note (d). X Id. ibid.

nourS

nours which the partiality of the Queep had con- B o o K
ferred upon himn and the aa to that'effet con- 1V-
tained the firongeft declarations of his faithful ser- t-
vices to the Crown in all times pass. The surrender 57
of the caffle of Edinburgh by Mar was confirm-
ed. The law of attainder against -Hultly was re-
pealed, and he, and his adherents, were restored to
the estates and honours of their ancestors. Several
of those who had been on the jury which acquit-
ted him, obtained ratifications of the grants made
in their favour; and as pasquinades daily multi-
plied, a law passed, whereby those, into whose hands
any paper of that kind fell, were commanded in-
itantly to destroy it; and if, through their neglect,
it ihould be allowed to spread, they were fubjeted
to a capital punishment, in the fame manner as if
they had been the original authors t.

BUT the absolute dominion which Bothwell had Remark-

acquired over Mary's mind, appeared in the clearesR ls', la"w f
manner, by an as in favour of the protestant reli- thc Reor-
gion, to which, at this time, ihe gave her af&nt.
Mary's attachment to the Romish faith was uniform
and superstitious; flhe had never laid aside the de-
sign, nor loft the hope of restoring it. She had,
of late, come under new engagements to that pur-
p6fe, and, in consequence of these, had ventured
upon some steps more public and vigorous than
any :she had formerly taken. 'But Bothwell was
prompted, by powerful motives, to 'promote this
law. 'He had been guilty of crimes, which rendered
him the obje& of just and universal deteflation.

t Keith, 289.

He

B o o R He was meditating others, which he easily foresaw

IV. would heighten the public indignation against him.

'- * By this popular law, he might hope to divert, or
1567. to delay the resentment of the nation, and flattered

himself, that the obtaining this unexpected and le-
gal security for the Protestant religion, would atone
for much guilt, silence the clamours of the clergy,
and induce the people to connive at, or to tolerate
his crimes. The a& itself was so favourable to the
doctrine of the Reformers, that the Parliament,
which met next year, under very different leaders,
could substitute nothing stronger or more explicit
in its place; and thought it sufficient to ratify it
word for word*. To pass such an at was utterly
inconsistent with all the maxims which Mary fol-
lowed in every other period of her life; but what
could never be extorted from her by the folicita-
tions of the Assemblies of the church, or by the
intreaties of the people, the more powerful influ-
ence of Bothwell now obtained t.

Parl. I Jac. VIr. c. 31.

t Bichaaan. Hist. 355, not only omits taking any notice of

this law, but aflerts, that the Queen, though (he had given pro-
mises in favour of the reformed religion, refused to permit any
aa to pass in support of it, and even dismissed the deputies of the
church with contempt. ' Spotfwood, -202. and Calderwood, vol.
ni. 41. both afrm the fame thing. It would not have been ne-
ceefary to observe this irltance of Buchanan's inaccuracy, but
that an author so conversant in our laws as Spotfwood, and one
so indmftrious as Caldenvood, lhould commit such an error, when
not only the original statute was extant'in the records of Marys
Parliament, but even when the printed a& of Murray's Parlia-
ment was before their eyes, is remarkable. Even Bucbanan
hmfccL has taken notice of this a&. Detes&io, p. 8.

EVtpRY

EVERY ftep taken by Bothwell had hitherto been B o o I

attended with all the success which his moss sanguine IV.
wiihes could expet. He had entirely gained the -
Queen's heart; the murder of the King had ex- Bothwe6
cited no public commotion j he had been acquitted prevails on

the nobles

by his Peers of any share in that crime; and their torecom-
decision had been, in some fort, ratified in Parlia- mend hi
ment. But in a kingdom, where the regal autho- hand to the
rity was so extremely limited, and the power of the "
nobles so formidable, he durst not venture on the
last action, towards which all his ambitious projests
tended, without their approbation. In order to fe-
cure this, he, immediately after the dissolution of April 9.
Parliament, invited all the nobles who were present
to an entertaihment. Having filled the house with
his friends and dependants, and surrounded it with
armed men*, he opened to the company his inten-
tion of marrying the Queen, whose consent, he told
them, he had already obtained ; and demanded their
approbation of this match, which, he said, was no
less acceptable to their sovereign, than honourable
to himfelft. Huntly and Seaton, who were privy
to all Bothwell's schemes, and promoted them with
the utmost zeal; the Popith ecclesiastics, who were
absolutely devoted to the Queen, and ready to sooth
all her paflions, instantly declared their satisfaction
with what he had proposed. The reft, who dreaded
the exorbitant power which Bothwell had acquir-
ed, and observed the Queen's growing affetion to-
wards him in all her acions, were willing to make
a merit of yielding to a measure, which they could
neither oppose nor defeat. Some few were con-

* Good. vol. ii. 14-. - Anders. vo'. i. 04.

founded

B oo Ko founded and enraged. But, in the end Bothwell,

1V. partly by promises and flattery, partly by terror
-~-( -,and force, prevailed on all who were present to
1567. subscribe a paper, which leaves a deeper stain than

any occurrence in that age, on the honour and cha-
raterof the nation.

THIS paper contained the firongeft declarations

of Bothwell's innocence, and the most ample ac-
knowledgment of his good services to the kingdom.
If any future accusation should be brought againlt
him, on account of the King's murder, the sub-
scribers promised to Rfand by him as one man, and
to hazard their lives and fortunes in his defence.
They recommended him to the Queen, as the molt
proper person she could chufe for a husband; and
iffhe could condescend to bestow on him that mark
of her regard, they undertook to promote the mar-
riage, and to join him with all their forces, in op-
posing any person who endeavoured to obftru6t it*.
Among the subscribers of this paper, we find some
who were the Queen's chief confidents, others who
were ifrangers to her councils, and obnoxious to
her displeasure; some who faithfully adhered to
her through all the vicissitudes of her fortune, and
others who became the principal authors of her sus-
ferings; some passionately attached to the Romish
fuperflition, and others zealous advocates for the
Protestant faith t. No common interest can be sup-
posed to have united men of such opposite princi-
ples and parties, in recommending to their Sove-
reign a ftep so injurious to her honour, and so fatal

Anders. vol. i. -77. t Keith, 382.

to

to her peace. This itrange coalition was the cffe B o o
of much artifice, and must be confidcred as the IV.
boldest and most malterly stroke of Bothwell's ad-
dress. It is observable, that amidllt all the alterca- 1567.
tions and mutual reproaches of the two parties which
arose in the kingdom, this unworthy transition is
seldom mentioned. Conscious on both fides, that
in this particular, their conduct could ill bear exa-
mination, and would redound little to their fame,
they always touch upon it unwillingly, and seem
desirous that it should remain in darkness, or be
buried in oblivion. But as so many persons, who,
both at that time, and ever after, pofcffied the
Queen's favour, subscribed this paper, the suspicion
becomes strong, that Bothwell's ambitious hopes
were neither unknown to Mary, nor dif.lpprovcd
by her*.

T1 IES E

Of all the different fylftms with regard to this tranfaaion,

that of Camden fems to be the lealt accurate, and the worll
founded. He supposes that Bothwell was hated by Murray,
Morton, &c. who had been his associates in the murder of the
King, and that they now wanted to ruin him. He affirms, at
the fame time, that the subscriptions to this paper were obtained
by them, out of fear that Bothwell might fink in his hopes, and
betray the whole bloody secret, 404. But betides the absurdity
offuppofing, that any man's enemies would contribute towards
raising him to such high dignity, on the uncertain hopes of as-
terwards depriving him of it; betides the impoflibility of ac-
complilhing fueh a marriage, if it had been either unknown to
the Queen, or disagreeable to her; we may observe that this
supposition is deltroyed by the dire& teRfimony of the (Q.cin
herself, who arcribes the consent of the nobles to Bothwell's
artifices. ,who purrhafed it ly giving them to undclrid, that 'rue
'were content thereuwith. Andcrf. vol. i. 94. It would have been
no fiall advantage to Mary. if Ihe could have reprelfnted the

ronii/ ii

B o o cK THiSB suspicions are confirmed by the most di-

IV. ret proof. Melvil, at that time, enjoyed a confi-
'-vJ' derable ihare in her favour. He, as well as his
567' brother, kept a secret correspondence in England,

with those who favoured her pretensions to that
Crown. The rumour of her intended marriage
with Bothwell having spread early in that kingdom,
excited universal indignation; and Melvil received
a letter from thence, which represented, in the
itrongeft terms, what would be the fatal effects of
such an imprudent ftep. He put this letter into
the Queen's hands, and enforced it with the utmost
warmth. She not only disregarded these remon-
ffrances, but communicated the matter to Bothwell;
and Melvil, in order to save his life, was obliged to
fly from court, whither he durit not return, till the
Earl's rage began to abate *. At the fame time,

Eli-

consent of the nobles to have been their own voluntary deed.
It is fill more surprising to find Lefly ascribing this paper to
Murray and his fation. Anders. vol. i. 26. The Bilhop him-
self was one of the persons who subscribed it, Keith, 383.
The King's commiflioners, at the conference held at York I568,
pretended that none of the nobles, except the Earl of Huntly,
would subscribe this paper till a warrant from the Queen was
produced, by which they were allowed to do so: this warrant
they had in their cuflody, and exhibited. Anders. vol. iv.
Part 2. 5. This differs from Bnchanan's account, who supposes
that all the nobles present subscribed the paper on the Igth,
and that, next day, they obtained the approbation of what
they had done, by way of security to themselves, 355.

* Melv. 156. According to Melvil, Lord Herreis like-

wife remonfirated againfi the marriage, and conjured the
Queen, on his knees, to lay aside all thoughts of such a dif-
honourable alliance, 156. But it has been observed, that Her-
reis is one of the nobles who subscribed the bond, April 19.

Keith,

Elizabeth warned Mary of the danger and infamy B o o K
to which she would expose herself, by such an in- IV.
decent choice: but an advice from her met with fill '-
less regard* 1567.

THREE days after the rising of Parliament, Mary Bothwell

went from Edinburgh to Stirling, in order to visit Qin''by
the Prince her son. Bothwell had now brought his force o
schemes to full maturity, and every precaution being
taken which could render it safe to venture on the
last and decisive ftep, the natural impetuosity of his
spirit did not susser him to deliberate any longer.
Under pretence of an expedition against the free-
booters on the borders, he assembled his follow-
ers; and marching out of Edinburgh with a thou-
sand horse, turned suddenly towards Linlithgow, April 4.
met the Queen on her return near that place, dif-
perfed her slender train without refifance, seized
on her person, and condutled her, together with a

Keith, 383. z. That he is one of the witnesses to the mar-
riage articles between the Queen and Bothwell, May 14. Good.
vol. ii. 6i. 3. That he fat in council with Bothwell, May 17.
Keith, 386. But this remonfirance of Lord Herries againRf the
marriage happened before these, made by Melvil himself, 157.
Melvil's remonstrance must have happened some time before the
meeting of parliament; for after offending Bothwell, he retired
from court; he allowed his rage time to subside, and had again
joined the Quceu, when she was seized, April z4, 158. The
time which mull have elapsed, by this account of the matter,
w.as perhaps sufficient to have gained Herries from being an
opposer to become a promoter of the marriage. Perhaps Mel-
vil may have committed some miltake with regard to this fast,
so far as relates to what himself did.

Anders. vol. i. o16.
VOL. 1. E e few

B o o K few of her courtiers, as a prisoner to his caflle of

IV. Dunbar. She cxpreffed neither surprise, nor terror,
--- . nor indignation, at such an outrage committed on
1567. her pcrfon, and such an insult offered to her autho-

rity, but seemcd to yield without struggle or regret *.
Melvil was, at that time, one of her attendants;
and the officer by whom lie was seized, informed
him, that nothing was done without the Qucen's
own content t. If we may rely on the letters pub-
lifhed in Mary's name, the scheme had been com-
municated to her, and every ftep towards it was
taken with her participation and advice :.

BOTII the Queen and Bothwell thought it of ad-

vantage to employ this appearance of violence. It
afforded her a decent cxcufe for her conducl; and
while she could plead that it was owing to force ra-
ther than choice, fie hoped that her reputation,
among foreigners at lealt, would escape without
ccnfure, or be expoletd to less reproach. Bothwell
could not help diftruffting all the methods which had
hitherto been used, for vindicating him from any
concern in the murder of the King. Something
was still wanting for his security, and for quieting
his guilty fears. This was a pardon under the Great
Seal. By the laws of Scotland, the nmoft heinous
crime muff be mentioned by name in a pardon, and
then all lesser offences are deemed to be included
under the general clause, and all other crihnes whal-
soever I. To seize the person of the Prince, is high
treason; and Bothwvell hoped, that a pardon ol-

*'Keith, 3X3. \ Mclv. 58. u

Good. vol. ii. 37.
1 Pall. 6 Jac. IV. c. 62.

,.&iinc l

tained for this, would extend to every thing of B o o K
which lie had been accused * VI.

BOT'riwl ".L., having now got the Queen's person i, divocd

into his hands, it would have been unbecoming ei- ii..m hi,
tlier a politician or a man of gallantry to have de- "w"'n'ic.
layed consummating his schemes. For this purpose,
he inflantly commenced a suit, in order to obtain a
sentence of dlivorce firom his wife Lady Jane Gor-
don, the Earl of H-untly's filler. This process was April an,
carried on, at tie lfme time, before Proteflant and
Popifil judges; before the formler, in the court of
ComnnlilfTries; and before the latter, in the spiritual
court of the Archbiflop of St. Andrew's, whose
jurifdidion the Queen had lately restorecd. The
pretexts which he Ipleaded were trivial, or fcanda-
lous. But his authority had greater weight than
tliejuftice of his cause; and in both courts, sentence
of divorce was pronounced with the fame indecent
and suspicious precipitancy t.

WHILE tiis infamous tri!nfriacion was carrying

on, the Q(ucen resided at Dunbar; detained as a
prisoner, but treated with the greatcf't rfpelct. Soon
after Bothwell, with a numerous train of his de- Msy 3.
pendants, condludted her to Ed inbulrgh; but infltad
of lod(ing her in the Palace of I loly-rood-hloufe
lie conveyed her to the callIe, of which lie was go-
vernor. The discontent of the nation rendered this
precaution necefuary. In an house unfortified, and
of easy accel, the Queen night have ben rclcued
without difficulty out of his hands. In a place of

' Andcrf. vol. iv. part ii. (l. I An(l. i. 132.

E1 c 2 flrength,

B o o K strength, she was secured from all the attempts of

IV. his enemies.
1567. ONE small difficulty frill remained to be surmount-

ed. As the Queen was kept in a fort of captivity
by Bothwell, a marriage concluded in that condi-
tion might be imputed to force, and be held inva-
May 1:. lid. In order to obviate this, Mary appeared in

the court of Session, and in presence of the Chan-
cellor, and other judges, and ieveral of the nobility,
declared that she was now at full liberty; and though
Bothwell's violence in seizing her person had, at
first, excited her indignation, yet his refpeAful be-
haviour since that time, had not only appeared her
relentment, but determined her to raise him to
higher honours *

Is married WHAT these were soon became public. The title
othe. of Duke of Orkney was conferred upon Bothwell;

and on the i5th of May, his marriage with the
Queen, which had so long been the obje& of his
withes, and the motive of his crimes, was folem-
nized. The ceremony was performed, in public,
according to the rites of the Protestant Church, by
Adam Bothwell bilhop of Orkney, one of the few
prelates who had embraced the Reformation, and
on the fame day was celebrated in private, accord-
ing to the forms prescribed by the Popish religion t.
The boldness with which Craig, the- Minister who
was commanded to publish the banns, testified
against the design; the fiall number of the nobles,
who were prelent at the marriage; and the fullen

And. i. 87. 1 Id. 136. ii. 276. a

and

and difrefpeEtful silence of the people, when the B o o K
Queen appeared in public; were manifel: fymp- IV.
toms of the violent and general dissatisfaction of ---
her own fubjests. The refusal of Du Croc the '567
French ambassador to be present at the nuptial cere-
monyor entertainment, discovers the sentiments of
her allies, with regard to this part of her conduEt;
and although every other action in Mary's life could
be jultified by the rules of prudence, or reconciled
to the principles of virtue, this fatal marriage would
remain an inconteftible proof of her raflnefs, if not
of her guilt.

MARY'S first care was to offer some apology for

her conduct, to the courts of France and England.
The inftru&ions to her ambassadors frill remain, and
are drawn by a maflerly hand. But under all the
artificial and false colouring she employs, it is easy
to discover not only that many of the iteps she had
taken were unjustifiable, but that she herself was
conscious that they could not be justified *.

THE title of King was the only thing, which was

not bestowed upon Bothwell. Notwithstanding her
attachment to him, Mary rnmembered the in-
conveniences which had arit'n firom the rash ,ad-
vancement of her former hutband to that honour.
She agreed, however, that he {hould sign, in token
of consent, all the public writs iflued in her name t.
This was nothing more than mere form, but, to-
gether with it, he poiffcfed all the reality of power.
The Queen's person was in his hands; she was fur-

*And. i. 89. I Good. i.t 60.

rorundedt

B o o K rounded more closely than ever by his creatures;

IV. none of her subjects could obtain audience without

his permission; and, unless in his own presence,
I567. none bur his confidents were permitted to converse

with her *. The Scottish Monarchs were accustomed
to live among their fubjets as fathers or as equals,
without distrust, and with little state; armed guards
standing at the doors of the royal apartment, diffi-
culty of access, distance and retirement, were things
unknown, and unpopular.

Endea- THESE precautions were necessary for securing to
bcome Bothwell the power, which he had acquired. But,
teP ncfs without being master of the person of the young
Fpeibn. Prince, he effteemed all that he had gained to be

precarious and uncertain. The Queen had com-
mitted her son to the care of the Earl of Mar.
The fidelity and loyalty of that nobleman were too
well known to expect that he would be willing to
put the Prince into the hands of the man, who was
so violently fufpeEed of having murdered his father.
Bothwell, however, laboured to get the Prince into
his power, with an anxiety, which gave rife to the
blackest suspicions. All his address as well as au-
thority were employed to persuade, or to force Mar,
into a compliance with his demands t. And it is
no flight proof both of the firmness and dexterity
of that nobleman, that he preserved a life of so much
importance to the nation, from lying at the mercy
of a man, whom fear or ambition might have
prompted to violent attempts against it.

* And. i. 136. t Melv. 160. Buch. 361.

THE

THE eyes of the neighbouring nations were fixed, B o o K

at that time, upon the great events, which had hap- IV.
pened in Scotland, during three months. A King 'v-
murdered with the utmost cruelty, in the prime of I567n
his days, and in his capital city; the person fufpet- dignaion

which the

ed of that odious crime suffered not only to ap- Qucen's
pear publickly in every place, but admitted into the conduC
presence of the Queen, diftinguilhed by her favour,
and intrusted with the chief direction of her as-
fairs; subjected to a trial which was carried on
with molt Inamelefs partiality, and acquitted by a
sentence, which served only to confirm the fufpi-
cions of his guilt; divorced from his wife, on pre-
tences frivolous or indecent; and after all this, in-
flead of meeting with the ignominy due to his ac-
tions, or the punishment merited by his crimes, per-
mitted openly, and without opposition, to marry a
QQueen, the wife of the Prince whom he had affaf-
finated, and the guardian of those laws which he
had been guilty of violating. Such a quick fuc-
cession of incidents, lb singular, and so detestable,
is not to be found in any other history. They left,
in the opinion of foreigners, a mark of infamy on
the character of the nation. The Scots were held
in abhorrence all over Europe; they durst scarce
appear any where in public; and after fufferiiig so
many atrocious deeds to pass with impunity, they
were universally reproached as men void of courage,
or of humanity, as equally regardless of the repu-
tation of their Queen, and the honour of their
country *

Anders. vol. i. 128. 134. Melv. 163. See Appendix, No. XX.

THESE

B o O THESE reproaches roused the nobles, who had

IV. been hitherto amused by Bothwell's artifices, or in-

'-. timidated by his power. The manner in which he
T567. exercised the authority which he had acquired, his
The nobles
combine repeated attempts to become master of the Prince's
again.~ her
and Boh- person, together with some rash threatenings against
weL him, which he let fall *, added to the violence and

promptness of their resolution. A considerable
body of them assembled at Stirling, and entered into
an association for the defence of the Prince's person.
Argyll, Athol, Mar, Morton, Glencairn, Home,
Lindfav, Boyd, Murray of Tullibardin, Kirkaldy
of Grange, and Maitland the Secretary, were the
heads of this confederacy t. Stewart Earl of Athol
was remarkable for an uniform and bigotted attach-
ment to Popery, but his indignation on account of
the murder of the King, to whom he was nearly
allied, and his zeal for the safety of the Prince,
overcame, on this occasion, all consideration of re-
ligion, and united him with the most zealous Pro-
teifants. Several of the other nobles ated, with-
out qucftion, from a laudable concern for the safety
of the Prince, and the honour of their country.
But the spirit which some of them discovered, dur-
ing the subsequent revolutions, leaves little room
to doubt, that ambition or resentment were the
real motives of their conduct; and that, on many
occasions, while they were pursuing ends just and
necessary, they were actuated by principles and pas-
sions altogether unjustifiable.

* Melv:!, 161. Keith, G9+.

THi:

THE first accounts of this league filled the Queen B o o K

and Bothwell with great consternation. They were IV.
no strangers to the sentiments of the nation, with 6
respec&t to their condut; and though their marriage i567.
had not met with public opposition, they knew that
it had not been carried on without the secret dif-
gust and murmurings of all ranks of men. They
foresaw the violence with which this indignation
would burst out, after having been so long sup-
pressed; and in order to prepare for the storm,
Mary issued a proclamation, requiring her subjects May zB.
to take arms, and to attend her husband by a day
appointed. At the fame time, she published a fort
of manifesto, in which She laboured to vindicate
her government from those imputations with which
it had been loaded, and employed the strongest
terms to express her concern for the safety and wel-
fare of the Prince her son. Neither of these pro-
duced any considerable effect. Her proclamation
was ill obeyed, and her manifesto met with little
credit *.

THE confederate Lords carried on their prepara- The Queen

tions with no less activity, and with much more wanel rtire
success. Among a warlike people, men of so much to Dunbar.
power and popularity found it an easy matter to raise
an army. They were ready to march before the
Queen and Bothwell were in a condition to resist
them. The castle of Edinburgh was the place
whither the Queen ought naturally to have retired,
and there her person might have been perfe&ly safe.
But the confederates had fallen on means to ihake,

Keith, 387. 395, 396.

or

B o o K or corrupt the fidelity of Sir James Balfour the de-

IV. puty governor, and Bothwell durst not commit to
ó- him such an important trust. He conduAed the

I567.
June6. Queen to the castle of Brothwick, and on the ap-

pearance of Lord Home, with a body of his fol-
lowers, before that place, he fled with precipitation
to Dunbar, and was followed by the Queen difguif-
ed in men's cloaths. The confederates advanced to-
wards Edinburgh, where Huntly endeavoured, in
vain, to animate the inhabitants to defend the town
against them. They entered without opposition,
and were inftantlyjoined by many of the citizens,
whose zeal became the firmest support of their
cause *.

IN order to set their own conduct in the most fa-

vourable light, and to rouse the public indignation
against Bothwell, the nobles published a declaration
of the motives which had induced them to take
arms. All Bothwell's past crimes were enumerated,
all his wicked intentions displayed and aggravated,
and every true Scotsman was called upon to join
them in avenging the one, and in preventing the
other t.

MEAN while, Bothwell assembled his forces at

Dunbar, and as he had many dependants in that
corner, he soon gathered such strength, that he ven-
tured to advance towards the confederates. Their
troops were not numerous; the suddenness and fe-
crecy of their enterprise gave their friends at a dif-
tance no time to join them; and as it does not ap-

Keith, 398. t Anders. vol. i. 128.

pear

pear that they were supported either with money or B o o K
fed with hopes by the Queen of England, they IV.
could not have kept long in a body. But on the '- `
other hand, Bothwell durst not rife a delay*. 1567
I-lis army followed him with reluctance in this quar-
rel, and served him with no cordial aftfeiion; so
that his only hope of success was in surprising the
enemy, or in Itriking the blow before his own troops
had leisure to recollec themselves, or to imbibe the
fame unfavourable opinion of his actions, which
had spread over the reft of the nation. Thele mo-
tives determined the Queen to march forward, with
an inconsiderate and fatal specd.

ON the first intelligence of her approach, the The noblcs

confederates advanced to meet her. They found her 4ilm tm
forces drawn up upon the fame ground which the JUl"15.
English had occupied before the battle of Pinkie.
The numberson both fides were nearly equal; but
there was no equality in point of discipline. The
Queen's army confifded chiefly of a multitude, has-
tily assembled, without courage or experience in
war. The troops of the confederates were corn-
posed of Gentlemen of rank and reputation, fol-
lowed by their molt trusty dependants, who were
no less brave than zealous t.

Du CRoC the French Ambassador, who was in An .cco-

the field, laboured, by negociating both with the molafi,,
Queen and the nobles, to put an end to the quarrel
without the effusion of blood. He represented to
the confederates the Queen's inclinations towards

* Keith, 401. t Cald. vol. ii. 48, 49.

peace,

B o o K peace, and her willingness to pardon the offences

IV. which they had committed. Morton replied with

ó-' -' warmth, that they had taken arms not against
i567' the Queen, but against the murderer of her hus-

band; and if he were given up to justice, or banish-
ed from her presence, she would find them ready
to yield the obedience which is due from subje&s to
their Sovereign. Glencairn added, that they did
not come to ask pardon for any offence, but to pu-
nifi those who had offended. Such haughty answers
convinced the ambassador, that his mediation would
be ineffeEual, and that their passions were too high
to allow them to liften to any pacific propositions,
or to think of retreating after having proceeded so
far.

THE Queen's army was posted to advantage, on

a riling ground. Tbe confederates advanced to the
attack resolutely, but slowly, and with the caution
which was natural on that unhappy field. Her
troops were alarmed at their approach, and disco-
vered no inclination to fight. Mary endeavoured
to animate them; she wept, she threatened, she re-
proached them with cowardice, but all in vain. A
few of Bothwell's immediate attendants were eager
for the encounter; the reft stood wavering and irre-
solute, and some began to fte- out of the field.
Bothwell attempted to inspirit them, by offering to
decide the quarrel, and to vindicate his own inno-
cence in single combat with any of his adversaries.
Kirkaldy of Grange, Murray of Tullibardin, and
Lord Lindsey contended for the honour of enter-

* Keith, 4o1.

ing

ing the lifts against him. But this challenge B o oK
proved to be a mere bravade. Either the confci- IV.
oufnefs of guilt deprived Bothwell of his wonted ' '
courage, or the Queen, by her authority, sorbad I567
the combat*.

AFTER the symptoms of fear discovered by her

followers, Mary would have been inexcusable,
had she hazarded a battle. To have retreated in
the face of an enemy, who had already surrounded
the hill on which he stood, with part of their ca-
valry, was utterly impracticable. In this situation,
she was under the cruel necessity of putting her-
self into the hands of those fubjets who had taken
arms against her. She demanded an interview
with Kirkaldy, a brave and generous man, who
commanded an advanced body of the enemy.
He, with the consent and in name of the leaders
of the party, promised that, on condition she
would difinifs Bothwell from her pretence, and go-
vern the kingdom by the advice of her nobles,
they would honour and obey her as their Sove-
reign t.

DURING this parley, Bothwell took his last fare- Bothwli

well of the Queen, and rode off the field with a few obliged to
followers. This difinal reverse happened exactly
one month after that marriage, which had cost him
so many crimes to accomplilh, and which leaves
so foul a stain on Mary's memory.
'Cald. vol. ii. 5o. t Good. vol. ii. 164. Melv. 6i;.

As

B o o K As soon as Bothwell retired, Mary surrendered

IV. to Kirkaldy, who conducted her toward the con-

'Y-r ' federate army, the leaders of which received her
IM567 with much respect; and Morton, in their name,

Mary fur-
renders to made ample professions of their future loyalty and
the nobles.

obedience . But The was treated by the common
soldiers with the utmost insolence and indignity.
As she marched along, they poured upon her all the
opprobrious names, which are beltowed only on the
lowest and most infamous criminals. Wherever
ihe turned her eyes, they held up before her a stand-
ard, on which was painted the dead body of the
late King, stretched on the ground, and the young
Prince kneeling before it, and uttering these words,
"Judge and revenge my cause, O Lord!" Mary
turned with horror from such a mhocking fight.
She began already to fcel the wretched condition to
which a captive Prince is reduced. She uttered the
molt bitter complaints, she melted into tears, and
could scarce be kept from finking to the ground.
The confederates carried her towards Edinburgh;
and in spite of many delays, and after looking
with the fondness and credulity natural to the unfor-
tunate for some extraordinary relief, she arrived there.
The streets were covered with multitudes, whom
zeal or curiosity had drawn together, to behold such
an unusual scene. The Queen, worn out with fatigue,
covered with dust, and bedewed with tears, was ex-
posed as a fpetacle to her own fubjets, and led
to the Provost's house. Notwithstanding all her
arguments and intreaties, the fame standard was

' Good. vol. ii. xi6.

carried

carried before her, and the fame insults and re- B o o K
proaches repeated. A woman, young, beautiful. IV.
and in distress, is naturally the objeEt of compassion. ' '
The comparison of their present misery with their 1567.
former splendour, usually softens us in favour of
illustrious sufferers. But the people beheld the de-
plorable situation of their Sovereign with infenfibi-
lity; and so strong was their persuasion of her guilt,
and so great the violence of their indignation, that
the sufferings of their Queen did not, in any de-
gree, mitigate their resentment, or procure her that
sympathy, which is seldom denied to unfortunate
Princes *

Melvil, i66. Buch. 364.

THE

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK V.

THE

HIST H RY
H I S T 0 R Y

F
S CO TL A N D.

BOOK V.
T HE confederate Lords had proceeded to such B o o

extremities against their Sovereign, that it V.

now became almost impossible for them either to
stop short, or to pursue a course less violent. Ma- 1567.
ny of the nobles had refused to concur with them Deli^bra-
in their enterprifei others openly condemned it. nobles con-

' cering the

A small circumstance might abate that indignation Qenghe
with which the multitude were, at present, animat-
ed against the Queen, and deprive them of that po-
pular applause which was the chief foundation of
their power. These considerations inclined some
of them to treat the Queen with great lenity.

VOL. I, F f BUT,

B o K BUT, on the other hand, Mary's affection foe

V. Borhwell continued as violent as ever; ihe obfti-
67. onately refused to hearken to any proposal for dif-

solving their marriage, and determined not to aban-
don a man, for whose love she had already sacrificed
so much *. If they should allow her to recover the
supreme power, the firit exertion of it would be to
recal Bothwell; and they had reason, both from his
resentment, from her conduct, and from their own,
to expe& the severest effees of her vengeance. These
considerations surmounted every other motive; and
reckoning themselves absolved, by Mary's incur-
able attachment to Bothwell, from the engage-
ments which they had come under when she yield-
ed herself a prisoner, they, without regarding the
duty which they owed her as their Queen, and
without consulting the reft of the nobles, carried
her next evening, under a strong guard, to the

They im- castle of Lochlevin, and signed a warrant to Wil-
Frfon her liam Douglas, the owner of it, to detain her as a pri-
vin. soner. This castle is situated in a small island, in

the middle of a lake. Douglas, to whom it belong-
ed, was a near relation of Morton's, and had mar-
ried the Earl of Murray's mother. In this place,
under ftri& custody, with a few attendants, and
fubje&ed to the insults of a haughty woman, who
boasted daily of being the lawful wife of James V,
Mary suffered all the rigour and miseries of capti-
vity t.

' Keith, 419. 446. 449- Melv. 167. See Append. No. XXI.
t Keith, 4c3. Note (/).

IMMnE-

IMMEDIATELY after the Queen's imprisonment, B o o.K.

the confederates were at the utmost pains to strength- V.
en their party; they entered into new bonds of affocia- ''
tion; they assumed the title of Lords of the Jecret 1567
Council, and without any other right, arrogated to
themfclves the whole regal authority. One of their
fir& a&s of power was to search the city of Edin-
burgh for those who were concerned in the murder.
of the King. This Ihow of zeal gained reputation
to themselves, and threw an oblique reflection on:the
Queen for her remissness. Several fufpe&ed persons:
were seized. Captain Blackadder and three others
were condemned and executed. But no discovery.
of importance was made. If we believe some his-,
torians, they were convicted by sufficient evidencey
If we give credit to others, their sentence was un-i
just, and they denied, with their last breath, any;
knowledge of the crime for which they suffered *. :-

AN unexpe&ed accident, however, put into the
hands of Mary's enemies what they deemed the ful-
left evidence of her guilt. Bothwell having left in
the caffle of Edinburgh, a casket, containing several
sonnets and letters written with the Queen's own
hand; he now sent one of his confidents to bring
to him this precious depofite. But as his mefien-
ger returned, he was intercepted, and the casket
seized by Morton t. The contents of it were al-
ways produced by the party, as the most ample
justification of their own condut, and the moftunan-

* Cald. vol. ii. 53. Crawf. Mem. 35.
t Anders. vol. ii. 92. Good. vol. ii. go.

F f 2 fwerable

Bo o K fwverable proof of their not having loaded their So-

V. vereign with the imputation of imaginary crimes*.

Sm567. BUT the confederates, notwithstanding their extra-
Some of the
cobles fr- ordinary success, were still far from being perfectly
your the
qheen. at ease. That so. finall. a part of the nobles should

pretend to dispose of the person of their Sovereign
or:to-aifome the authority which belonged to her,
without. the concurrence of the reft, appeared to
many of that body to be unprecedented, and pre-
fumptaoibs. Several of these were now assembled
at Hamilton, in order to deliberate what course they
fhoultd: hold, in this difficult conjuncure. The
confederates made some attempts towards a coalition
with: them, but without effect. They employed
the. mediation of-the assembly of the church, to
draw them to a personal interview at Edinburgh,
but with. no better success. That party, however,
though its numbers were formidable, and the power
of -its leaders great, soon loft reputation by the want
of .unaninTity and vigour; all its consultations eva-
porated in murmurs-and complaints, and no scheme
was concerted for .obftruaing the progress of the
confederates '.

izabeth .TaHERE appeared fomne-profpec: of danger from
inervpofe another quarter. This great revolution in Scotland
in her be- '
21e-. had been carried on without any aid from Eliza-

beth, and even without .her knowledge t. And
though ihe was far from being displeased to fee the
affairs of that kingdom embroiled, or a rival, whom

* See Dissertation at the end of the Appelndix.
t Keith, 407. 1 Id. 415.

she

Ihe hated, reduced to distress; Ihe neither wiihed B o o i
that it should be in the power of the one fation en- V.
tirely to suppress the other, nor could she view the '-s'
Iteps taken by the confederates without great of- i567.
fence. Notwithstanding the popular maxims by
which she governed her own fubjeAs, her notions
of royal prerogative were very exalted. The con-
federates had, in her opinion, encroached on the au-
thority of their sovereign, which they had no right
to controul, and had offered violence to her person,
which it was their duty to esteem sacred. They had
set a dangerous example to other filbjects, and
Mary's cause became the common cause of Princes t.
If ever Elizabeth was influenced with regard to the
affairs of Scotland, by the feelings of her heart, ra-
ther than by considerations of interest, it was on this
occasion. She instantly dispatched Throgmorton June 3o.
into Scotland, with power to negociate both with
the Queen, and with the confederates. In his in-
ftruftions there appears a remarkable solicitude for
Mary's liberty, and even for her reputation t. And
the choice of an ambassador, so devoted to the in-
terest of the Scottish Queen, proves this solicitude
to have been sincere. But neitherElizabeth's friend-
ihip, nor Throgmorton's zeal, were of much avail
to Mary. The confederates foresaw what would be
tile effects of there good offices; and that the Queen,
elated by the profpe&t of protection, would reje&
with scorn the overtures which they were about to
make her. They, for that reason, peremptorily
denied Throgmorton access to their prisoner; and
* Keith, 412. 415. t Id. 411.

F f 3 what

B o o K what propositions he made to them in her behalf

V. they either refused or eluded *

1567.
schemes, MEAN while they deliberated with the utmost
tins- anxiety, concerning the settlement of the nation,
bles. and the future disposal of the Queen's person. -Eli-

zabeth, observing that Throgmorton made no pro-
grefs in his negociations with them, and that they
would liften to none of his demands in Mary's fa-
vour, turned towards that parry of the nobles who
were assembled at Hamilton, incited them to take
arms in order to restore their queen to liberty, and
promised to aflift them in such an attempt, to the
utmost of her power t. But they discovered no
greater union and vigour than formerly, and behav-
ing like men who had given up all concern either
for their Queen or their country, tamely allowed an
inconsiderable part of theit body, whether we confi-
der it with refpe& to numbers, or to power, to fettle
the government of the kingdom, and to dispose of
the Queen's person at pleasure. Many consultations
were held, and various opinions arose with regard
to each of these. Some seemed desirous of adher-
ing to the plan on which the confederacy was at first
formed; and after punishing the murderers of the
King, and dissolving the marriage with Bothwell;
after providing for the safety of the young Prince,
and the security of the Protestant religion; they
proposed to re-eftablifl the Queen in the possession
of her legal authority. The success with which
their arms had been accompanied, inspired others

' Ke:-h, 4- . 42- - Sec Appendix, N.). XXII.

with

with bolder and more desperate thoughts, and no- B o o K
thing less would satisfy them than the trial, the con- V.
demnation and punishment of the Queen herself, '
as the principal conspirator against the life of her i567.
husband and the safety of her son *: the former was
Maitland's system, and breathed too much of a pa-
cific and moderate spirit, to be agreeable to the
temper or wishes of the party. The latter was re-
commended by the clergy, and warmly adopted by
many laics; but the nobles durst not, or would not
venture on such an unprecedented and audacious
deed t

BOTH parties agreed at last upon a scheme, nei- They oblige

the QOeen

:her so moderate as the one, nor so daring as the torefignthe
other. Mary was to be perfuadgd or forced to re- moernt
sign the Crown; the young Prince was to be pro-
claimed King, and the Earl of Murray was to be
appointed to govern the kingdom during his mino-
rity, with the name and authority of Regent. With
regard to the Queen's own person, nothing was de-
termined. It teems to have been the intention of
the confederates, to keep her in perpetual imprison-
ment; but in order to intimidate herself, and to
overawe her partisans, they still reserved to them-
lelves the power of proceediog to more violent ex-
tremes.

* Keith, 420, 421, 422. 582.
t The intention of putting the Queen to death seems to

have been carried on by some of her lubjeets: At this time we
often find Elizabeth boasting that Mary owed her life to her
interposition. Digges's Compl. Amb. 14, &c. See Append.
No. XVIII.

IT-r

B o o K IT was obvious to foresee difficulties in the exe-

V. cution of this plan. Mary was young, ambitious,
*'- ' high-fpirited, and accustomed to command. To
I567' induce her to acknowledge her own incapacity for

governing, to renounce the dignity and power which
she was born to enjoy, to become dependant on her
own subje&s, to conlent to her own bondage, and
to invest those persons, whom she confidered as the
authors of all her calamities, with that honour and
authority of which she herself was itripped, were
points hard to be gained. These, however, the
confederates attempted, and they did not want
means to insure success. Mary had endured, for
several weeks, all the hardships and terror of a pri-
son; no prospect of liberty appeared; none of her
tubjets had either taken arms, or so much as soli-
cited her relief ; no person in whom she could
confide was admitted into her presence; even the
Ambassadors of the French King and Queen of
England were refused access to her. In this solitary
ifate, without a counsellor or a friend, under the
pressure of distress, and the apprehension of danger,
it was natural for a woman to hearken almost to
any overtures. The confederates took advantage
of her condition, and of her fears. They employed
Lord Lindfav, the fiercest zealot in the party, to
communicate their scheme to the Queen, and to
obtain her subscription to those papers which were
necessary for rendering it effectual. IHe executed
his commission with harshness and brutality. Cer-
tain death was before Mary's eyes, if fle refused to
comply with his demands. At the fame time, ihe

Keith, 425.

was

was informed .by Sir Robert Melvil, in name of B o o K
Athol, Maitland, and Kirkaldy, the persons among V.
the confederates who were most attentive to her in- k-v--
terefft, that a resignation extorted by fear, and grant- 1567.
ed during her imprisonment, was void in law, and
might be revoked so loon as she recovered liberty.
Throgmorton, by a note which he found means to
convey to her, fuggeffed the fame thing*. Defe-
rence to their opinion, as well as concern for her
own safety, obliged her to yield to every thing
which was required, and to sign all the papers which
Lindsay presented to her. By one of theft, she re-
signed the Crown, renounced all ihare in the go-
vernment of the kingdom, and consented to the
coronation of the young King. By another, she July 44.
appointed the Earl of Murray Regent, and confer-
red upon him all the powers and privileges of that
high office. By a third, lhe substituted some other
nobleman in Murray's place, if he should refute the
honour which was designed for him. Mary, when
she subscribed these deeds, was bathed in tears; and
while fne gave away, as it were with her own hands,
the sceptre which The had swayed so long, fle felt a
pang of grief and indignation, one of the severest,
perhaps, which can touch the human heart t-.

THE confederates endeavoured to give this refig- James VI.
nation all the weight and validity in their power, by .".'"'

-and Mur-

proceeding without delay to crown the young Prince. ray cliofcn
The ceremony was performed at Stirling, on the Rs:gnt.
29th of July, with much solemnity, in presence of

' Keith, 425. Note (b). Melv. 169.
t Ibid. 430. Crawf. Mem. 3em.

all

B o o K all the nobles of the party, a considerable number

V. of lesser barons, and a great aflembly of the people.
'-{ -' From that time, all public writs were issued, and

67. the government carried on, in name of James VI*.

No revolution so great was ever effeEted with

more ease, or by means so unequal to the end. In
a warlike age, and in less time than two months,
a part of the nobles, who neither pofeffed the chief
power, nor the greatest wealth in the nation, and
who never brought 3000 men into the field, seized,
imprisoned, and dethroned their Queen, and with-
our ihedding a tingle drop of blood, set her son, an
infant of a year old, on on the throne.

Rcafonings DuitNG this rapid progress of the confederates,
of both
panie the eyes of all the nation were turned on them, with

aftonilhment; and various and contradictory opi-
nions were formed, concerning the extraordinary
steps which they had taken.

EVEN under the ariftocratical form of govern-

ment, which prevails in Scotland, said the favour-
ers of the Queen, and notwithstanding the exorbi-
tant privileges of the nobles, the Prince possesses
considerable power, and his person is treated with
great veneration. No encroachmenss mhould be
made on the former, and no injury offered to the
latter, but in cafes where the liberty and happiness
of the nation cannot be secured by any other means.
Such cafes seldom exist, and it belongs not to any
part, but to the whole, or at least to a majority of

° Keith, 437.

the

the society to judge of their existence. By what B o o K
ation could it be pretended, that Mary had invad- V.
ed the rights or property of her fubjecs, or what '--
scheme had ihe formed againit the liberty and con- I567-
ftitution of the kingdom ? Were fears, and fuipi-
cions, and surmises, enough to justify the imprison-
ing, and the deposing a Queen, to whom the Crown
descended from so long a race of Monarchs ? The
principal author of whatever was reckoned culpable
in her condu&, was now driven from her presence.
The murderers of the King might have been brought
to condign punilhment, the safety of the Prince
have been secured, and the Protestant religion have
been established, without wresting the sceptre out
of her hands, or condemning her to perpetual im-
prifonment. Whatever right a free Parliament
might have had to proceed to such a rigorous con-
clufion, or whatever name its determinations might
have merited, a sentence of this nature, passed by
a few nobles, without acknowledging or consulting
the reft of the nation, must be deemed a rebellion
against the government, and a conspiracy against
the person of their Sovereign.

THE partisans of the confederates reasoned very

different. 'Tis evident, said they, that Mary
either previously gave content to the King's murder,
or did afterwards approve of that horrid action.
Her attachment to Bothwell, the powers and ho-
nours with which she loaded him, the manner in
which she suffered his trial to be carried on, and the
indecent speed with which she married a man, stained
with so many crimes, raise strong fulpicions of the

former,

B o o K former, and put the latter beyond all doubt. To

V. have suffered the supreme power to continue in the
--v--. hands of an ambitious man, capable of the most
I567. atrocious and deiperate actions, would have been

disgraceful to the nation, dilhonourable to the
Queen, and dangerous to the Prince. Recourse
was, therefore, had toarms. The Queen had been
compelled to abandon a husband, so unworthy of
herself. But her affe&ion toward him still continu-
ing unabated; her indignation against the authors
of this reparation being visible, and often expressed
in the strongest terms; they by restoring her to
her ancient authority, would have armed her with
power to destroy themselves, have enabled her. to
recall Bothwell, and have afforded her an opportu-
nity of pursuing schemes fatal to the nation, with
greater eagerness, and with more success. Nothing,
therefore, remained, but by one bold action to deli-
ver themselves and their country from all future fears.
The expedient they had chosen was no leis refpe&-
ful to the royal blood, than necessary for the public
safety. While one Prince was let aside as incapable
of governing, the Crown was placed on his head
who was the undoubted representative of their an-
cient Kings.

WHATEVER opinion posterity may form on com-

paring the arguments of the two contending parties,
whatever sentiments we may entertain concerning
the justice or necessity of that course which the con-
federates held, it cannot be denied that their con-
duet, so far as regarded themselves, was extremely
prudent. Other expedients, less rigorous towards

Mary,

Mary, might have been found for fettling the na- B o o K
tion; but, after the injuries they had already offer- V.
ed the Queen, there was none so effeeual for fe- ~ 1
curing their own safety, or perpetuating their own 1
power.

To a great part of the nation, the conduct of

the confederates appeared not only wife, but just.
The King's accefflon to the throne was every where
proclaimed, and his authority submitted to without
opposition. And though several of the nobles were
still assembled at Hamilton, and seemed to be entering
into some combination againit his government, an
association for supporting it was formed, and signed
by so many persons of power and influence through-
out the nation, as entirely discouraged the attempt*.

THE return of the Earl of Murray, about this Muiray.r-

fumes tle

time; added strength to the party, and gave it g,,.rn-
a regular and finished form. Soon after the mur- ""m'.
der of the King, this nobleman had retired in-
to France, upon what pretence historians do not
mention. During his residence there, he had held
a close correspondence with the chiefs of the confe-
deracy, and at their desire, he now returned; He
seemed, at first, unwilling to accept the office of
Regent. This hesitation cannot be ascribed to the
scruples either of diffidence, or of duty. Murray
wanted neither abilities to entitle him, nor ambition
to aspire to this high dignity. He had received the
first accounts of his promotion with the utmost fa-

* Anders vol. i1. 231.

tri f c-

B o o K tisfaction; but by appearing to continue for some

V. days in fufpence, he gained time to view with at-

---rv-- tention the ground on which he was to act; to ba-
1567. lance the strength and resources of the two contend-

ing factions, and to examine whether the founda-
tion on which his future fame and success must reft,
were found and firm.

BEFORE he declared his final resolution, he wait-

ed on Mary at Lochlevin. This visit, to a sifter, and
a Queen, in a prison, from which he had neither
any intention to relieve her, nor to mitigate the ri-
gour of her confinement, may be mentioned among
the circumstances, which discover the great want of
delicacy and refinement in that age. Murray, who
was naturally rough and uncourtly in his manner *,
expoftulated so warmly with the Queen concerning
her past condu&, and charged her faults so home
upon her, that Mary, who had flattered herself
with more gentle and brotherly treatment from him,
melted into tears, and abandoned herself entirely to
despair t. This interview, from which Murray
could reap no political advantage, and wherein he
discovered a spirit so severe and unrelenting, may
be reckoned among the most bitter circumstances
in Mary's life, and is certainly one of the most un-
justifiable in his condut.

SOON after his return from Lochlevin, Murray
Asn~ : . accepted the office of Regent, and began to act in

that charaaer without opposition.

Keith, 96. + Ibid. 445, 446.

AMIDST

AMIDST so many great and unexpeted events, B o o K

the fate of Bothwell, the chiefcaufe of them all, V.
hath been almost forgotten. After his flight from '`--
the confederates, he lurked for some time among Fa567.
his vassals in the neighbourhood of Dunbar. But Sothwe1
finding it impossible for him to make head, in
that country, against his enemies, or even to secure
himself from their pursuit, he fled for shelter to his
kinsman the bilhop of Murray; and when he, over-
awed by the confederates, was obliged to abandon
him, he retired to the Orkney isles. Hunted from
place to place, deserted by his friends, and accom-
panied by a few retainers, as desperate as himself,
he suffered at once the miseries of infamy, and of
want. His indigence forced him upon a course which
added to his infamy. He armed a few small ships,
which had accompanied him from Dunbar, and at-
tacking every vessel which fell in his way, endea-
voured to procure subsistence for himself and his
followers by piracy. Kirkaldy and Murray of Tul-
libardin were sent out againfl him by the confede-
rates; and surprising him while he rode at anchor,
scattered his finall fleet, took a part of it, and ob-
liged him to fly with a tingle ship towards Norway.
On that coast, he fell in with a vessel richly laden,.
and immediately attacked it; the Norwegians failed
with armed boats to its assistance, and after a def-
perate fight, Bothwell and all his crew were taken
prisoners. His name and quality were both un-
known, and he was treated at first with all the in-
dignity and rigour, which the odious crime of pi-
racy merited. His real character was soon disco-; r-
ed; and though it saved him fiom the infamous

death

B o o K death to which his associates were condemned, it

V. could neither procure him liberty, nor mitigate the

- ' hardlhips of his imprisonment. He languished ten
i167. years in this unhappy condition; melancholy and

despair deprived him of reason, and at last he ended
his days, unpitied by his countrymen, and unaffifi-
ed by strangers *. Few men ever accompliihed
their ambitious projects by worse means, or reaped
from them less satisfaction. The early part of his
life was restless and enterprising, full of danger and
of viciflitudes. His enjoyment of the grandeur, to
which he attained by so many crimes, was extreme-
ly short; imbittered by much anxiety, and disquiet-
ed by many fears. In his latter years, he suffered
the most intolerable calamities, to which the wretch-
ed are fubjeet, and from which persons who have
moved in so high a sphere are commonly exempted.

SUccers of THE good effecs of Murray's accession to the
th Re-
cnt's ad- regency were quickly felt. The party forming for

the Queen was weak, irresolute, and disunited; and
no sooner was the government of the kingdom in
the hands of a man, so remarkable both for his abi-
lities and popularity, than the nobles of whom it
was composed loft all hopes of gaining ground, and
began to treat separately with the Regent. So many
of them were brought to acknowledge the King's au-
thority, that scarce any appearance ofoppofition to the
established government was left in the kingdom. Had
they adhered to the Queen with any firmness, it is pro-
bable, from Elizabeth's disposition at that time, that

* Melv. 16s.

ihe

she would have afforded them such assistance as B o o K
might have enabled them to face their enemies in V.
the field. But there appeared so little vigour or '
harmony in their councils, that Ihe was discouraged 1567.
from espousing their cause; and the Regent taking
advantage of their situation, obliged them to sub-
mit to his government, without granting any terms,
either to themselves, or to the-Queen *.

THE Regent was no less successful in his attempt

to get into his hands the places of strength in the
kingdom. Balfour, the deputy governor, furren-
dered the castle of Edinburgh; and as the reward
of his treachery, in deserting Bothwell his patron,
obtained terms of great advantage to himself. The
Governor of Dunbar, who discovered more fidelity,
was soon forced to capitulate; some other small
forts furrehdered without resistance.

THIS face of tranquillity in the nation encourag- A Parlia-

ed the Regent to call a meeting of Parliament. No- jent.
thing was wanting to confirm the King's authority,
and the proceedings of the confederates, except the
approbation of this supreme court; and after the
success which had attended all their measures, there.
could be little doubt of obtaining it. The num-
bers that resorted to an Assembly, which was called
to deliberate on matters of so much importance,
were great. The meeting was opened with the
utmost solemnity, and all its a&s passed with much
unanimity. Many, however, of the Lords who

Keith, 447. 450. 463.
VOL. I. G g had

B o o K had discovered the warmest attachment to the

V. Queen, were present. But they had made their
'-,I-ó peace with the Regent. Argyll, Huntly, and

Herries acknowledged, openly in Parliament, that
their behaviour towards the King had been undu-
tiful and criminal*. Their compliance, in this
manner, with the measures of the Regent's party,
was either the condition on which they were ad-
mitted into favour, or intended as a proof of the
sincerity of their reconcilement.

THE Parliament granted every thing the confe-

tcnprnns derates could demand, either for the safety of their
thc pro-
ce.ins of own persons, or the security of that form of govern-
thl conse-
da.-_.'. ment which they had established in the kingdom.

Mary's resignation of the Crown was accepted, and
declared to be valid. The King's authority, and
Mlurray's election, were recognised, and confirmed.
The imprisoning the Queen, and all the other pro-
ceedings of the confederates, were pronounced law-
ful. The letters which Mary had written to Both-
well were produced, and she was declared to be ac-
ceffary to the murder of the King t. At the fame
time, all the ats of Parliament 1560, in favour of
the Protestant religion, were publickly ratified; new
flatutes to the fame purpose were enacted. And
nothing that could contribute to root out the re-
mains of Popery, or to encourage the growth of
the Reformation, was neglected.

Anderr. vol iv. x15. See Appendix, No. XXIII.
t Good. vol. ii. 66. Anders. vol. ii. 2zo6.

IT

IT is observable, however, that the fame parsi- B o o K

monious spirit prevailed in this parliament, as in V.
that of i56o. The protestant clergy, notwith- *'-
flanding many discouragements, and their extreme 1567-
poverty, had, for seven years, performed all reli-
gious offices in the kingdom. The expedients fal-
len upon for their subsistence had hitherto proved
ineffectual, or were intended to be so. But, not-
withstanding their known indigence, and the warm
remonstrances of the Assembly of the church, which
met this year, the Parliament did nothing more for
their relief, than prescribe some new regulations
concerning the payment of the thirds of benefices,
which did not produce any considerable change in
the situation of the clergy.

A FEW days after tle dissolution of Parliament, ,56.

four of Bothwell's dependants were convicted of Janluary 3.
being guilty of the King's murder, and suffered
death as traitors. Their confessions brought to light
many circumstances relative to the manner of com-
mitting that barbarous crime ; but they were per-
sons of a low rank, and seem not to have been ad-
mitted into the secrets of the conspiracy *

NOTWITHSTANDING the universal submission to

the Regent's authority, there still abounded in the
kingdom many secret murmurs and cabals. The
partisans of the house of Hamilton reckoned Mur-
ray's promotion an injury to the Duke of Chatel-
herault, who, as first Prince of the blood, had, in

* Anders. vol. ii. 165.

G g 2 their

B o o K their opinion, an undoubted right to be Regent,

V. The length and rigour of Mary's sufferings began
~'- "V to move many to commiserate her cafe. All who

>68. 'leaned to the ancient opinions in religion dreaded

h cesse&s of Murray's zeal. And he, tho' his abi-
lities were great, did not possess the talents requisite
for soothing the rage or removing the jealousies of
the different fa&tions. By insinuation, or address,
he might have gained or softened many, who had
opposed him; but he was a stranger to these gentle
arts. His virtues were severe; and his deportment
towards his equals, especially after his elevation to
the regency, distant and haughty. This behaviour
offended some of the nobles, and alarmed others.
The Queen's faction, which had been so easily dif-
perfed, began again to gather, and to unite, and
was secretly favoured by rome who had hitherto
zealously concurred with the confederates*.

Mary Suca was the favourable difpofitionof the na-
froo, och- tion towards the Queen, when she recovered her
La*- liberty, in a manner no less surprising to her friends,

than unexpeced by her enemies. Several attempts
had been made to procure her an opportunity of
escaping, which some unforeseen accident, or the
vigilance of her keepers, had hitherto disappointed.
At last, Mary employed all her art to gain George
Douglas her keeper's brother, a youth of eighteen.
As her manners were naturally affable and infinuat-
ing, she treated him with the molt flattering diftinc-
tion; she even allowed him to entertain the mort
ambitious hopes, by letting fall ibme expressions, as

' Me'v. ,. if

if Ihe would chute him for her husband *. At his B o o K
age, and in such circumfVances, it was impossible V.
to resist such a temptation. He yielded, and drew ---
others into the plot. On Sunday the ad of May, 58
while his brother fat at supper, and the reft of the
family were retired to their devotions, one of his ac-
complices found means to steal the keys out of his
brother's chamber, and opening the gates to the
Queen and one of her maids, locked them behind
her, and then threw the keys into the lake. Mary
ran with precipitation to the boat which was prepar-
ed for her, and on reaching the shore, was received
with the utmost joy, by Douglas, Lord Seaton, and
Sir James Hamilton, who, with a few attendants,
waited for her. She instantly mounted on horse-
back, and rode full speed towards Niddrie, Lord
Seaton's feat in Weft-Lothian. She arrived there
that night, without beingpurfued, or interrupted.
After halting three hours, ihe set out for Hamil-
ton; and travelling at tile fame pace, she reached
it next morning.

ON the first news of Mary's escape, her friends, Arries at

Hamilton,

whom, in their present disposition, a much finaller. andraife, a
accident would have roused, ran to arms. In a few t"""':'U
days, her court was filled with a great and splendid
train of nobles, accompanied by such numbers of
followers, as formed an army above 6ooo fltrono.
In their pretence, flie declared that the resignation
of the Crown, and other deeds she had signed dur-
ing her imprisonment, were extorted from her by

K eith, 469.

feZr.

Bo o r fear. Sir Robert Melvil confirmed her declaration;

V. and on that, as well as on other accounts, a coun-
' - cilof the nobles and chief men of her party pro-

t568.
May s. nounced all these tranfaaions void and illegal. At

the fame time, an association was formed for the
defence of her person and authority, and subscribed
by nine Earls, nine Bishops, eighteen Lords, and
many gentlemen of difhinAion *. Among them,
we find several who had been present in the las
Parliament, and who had signed the counter-affo-
ciation in defence of the King's government; but
such sudden changes were then so common, as to
be no matter of reproach.

conferna- AT tie time when the Queen made her escape,
tion of the
pReget's the Regent was at Glasgow, holding a court ofjuf-
adheents. tice. An event so contrary to their expectations,

and so fatal to their schemes, gave a great flock to
his adhercnts. Many of them appeared wavering
and irresolute; others began to carry on private ne-
gociations with the Queen; and some openly re-
volted to her fide. In so difficult a juncture, where
his own fame, and the being of the party depend-
ed on his choice, the Regent's most faithful affoci-
ates were divided in opinion. Some advised him
to retire, without loss of time, to Stirling. The
Queen's army was already Itrong, and only eight
miles diitans; the adjacent country was full, of the
friends and dependents of the house of Hamilton,
and other Lords of the Queen's faction; Glasgow
was a large and unfortified town; his own train
conrifted of no greater nunmbr than was usual in

* Kdm~:., - .~:.ti e

times

times of peace; all there reasons pleaded for a re- B o o K
treat. But, on the other hand, arguments were V.
urged of no inconsiderable weight. The citizens of ' 68
Glasgow were well affeced to the cause; the vassals I568
of Glencairn, Lennox, and Semple lay near at
hand, and were both numerous, and full of zeal;
succours might arrive from other parts of the king-
dom in a few days; in war, success depends upon
reputation, as much as upon numbers; reputation
is gained or loft, by the firif ftep one takes; in
his circumltances, a retreat vould be attended
with all the ignominy of a flight, and would at
once dispirit his friends, and inspire his enemies with
boldness. In such dangerous exigencies as this, the Hi prdent
superiority of Murray's genius appeared, and en-
abled him both to chufe with wisdom, and to aft
with vigour. He declared against retreating, and
fixed his head quarters at Glasgow. And while he
amused the Queen for some days, by pretending to
hearken to tome overtures, which she made for ac-
commodating their differences, he was employed,
with the utmost industry, in drawing together his
adherents, from different parts of the kingdom. I-le
was soon in a condition to take the field; and
though far inferior to the enemy in number, lie
confided so much in the valour of his troops, and
the experience of his officers, that he broke off the
negociation, and determined to hazard a battle .

AT the fame time, the Queen's generals had lay i,.
commanded her army to move. Their intention

Buchan. 369.
G g 4 wns,

B o o K was, to conduct her to Dunbarton-caftle, a place of

V. great strength, which the Regent had not been able

5 to wrest out of the hands of Lord Fleming the gover-

nor; but if the enemy should endeavour to inter-
rupt their march, they resolved not to decline an
engagement. In Mary's situation, no resolution
could be more imprudent. A part only of her for-
ces was assembled. Huntly, Ogilvie, and the nor-
thern clans were soon expected; her sufferings had
removed, or diminished the prejudices of many
among her subjects; the address with which she
surmounted the dangers that obftruted her escape,
dazzled and intereited the people; the sudden con-
fluence of so many nobles added lustre to her cause;
she might assuredly depend on the friendship and
countenance of France; she had reason to expect
the protection of England; her enemies could not
possibly look for support from that quarter. She
had much to hope from pursuing flow and cautious
measures; they had every thing to fear.

BUT Mary, whose hopes were naturally sanguine,

and her passions impetuous, was so elevated by her
sudden transition from the depth of distress, to such
an unusual appearance of prosperity, that ihe never
doubted of success. Her army, which was almoit
double to the enemy in number, consisted thiefly
of the Hamiltons, and their dependants. Of these
the Archbishop of St. Andrew's had the chief di-
rec&ion, and hoped, by a victory, not only to crulh
Murray, the ancient enemy of his house, but to get
the person of the Queen into his hands, and to oblige
her, either to marry one of the Duke's sons, or at

least

least to commit the chief direction of her affairs to B o o K
himself. His ambition proved fatal to the Queen, V.
to himself, and to his family*. 158.-

1568.

MARY'S imprudence, in resolving to fight, was Battle of

not greater than the ill condut: of her generals in Lau.sfdc.
the battle. Between the two armies, and on the
road towards Dunbarton, there was an eminence
called Langfide-Hill. This the Regent had the
precaution to seize, and pofRed his troops in a small
village, and among tome gardens and inclofures ad-
jacent. In this advantageous situation he waited
the approach of the enemy, whose superiority in
cavalty could be of no benefit to them, on such bro-
ken ground. The Hamiltons, who composed the
vanguard, ran so eagerly to the attack, that they
put themselves out of breath, and left the main
battle far behind. The encounter of the fpearmen
was fierce and desperate; but as the forces of the
Hamiltons were exposed, on the one flank, to a
continued fire from a body of mufqueteers, attack-
ed on the other by the Regent's most choice troops, The
and not supported by the reft of the Queen's army, Qoeen's
they were soon obliged to give ground, and the rout f`Y. e
immediately became universal. Few viEtories, in
a civil war, and among a barbarous people, have
been pursued with less violence, or attended with
less bloodihed. Three hundred fell in the field: In
the flight scarce any were killed. The Regent and
his principal officers rode about, beseeching the fol-
diers to spare their countrymen. The number of
prisoners was great, and among them many persons

*Anders. vol. iv. 3z. Melv. 181.

of

B o o K of distinction. The Regent marched back to Glaf-

V. gow, and returned public thanks to God for this
ó8-v- great, and, on his fide, almost bloodless viEtory *.

i568.
Herfight. DURING the engagement, Mary flood on a hill,

at no great distance, and beheld all that passed in
the field, with such emotions of mind as are not
easily described. When she saw the army, which
was her last hope, thrown into irretriveable confu-
sion, her spirit, which all her past misfortunes had
not been able entirely to subdue, funk altogether.
In the utmost confternati6n, she began her flight,
and so lively were her impressions of fear, that she
never closed her eyes till The reached the abbey of
Dundrenan in Galloway, full sixty Scottith miles
from the place of battle t.

THESE revolutions in Mary's situation had been

no less rapid than singular. In the short space of
eleven days, she had been a prisoner at the mercy
of her most inveterate enemies; she had seen a pow-
erful army under her command, and a numerous
train of nobles at her devotion: And now she was
obliged to fly, in the utmost danger of her life, and
to lurk, with a few attendants, in a corner of her
kingdom. Not thinking herself safe, even in that
retreat; her fears impelled her to an action, the
most unadvised, as well as the molt unfortunate in
her whole life. This was her retiring into England,
a siep, which, on many accounts, ought to have
appeared to her rath and dangerous.

* eith, 477. t Id. 481.

BEFORr

BEFORE Mary's arrival in Scotland, mutual dif- B o o K

trust and jealousies had arisen between her and Eli- V.
zabeth. All their subsequent transactions had con- --
tributed to exasperate and inflame thele passions. Re1r5o68esn
She had endeavoured, by secret negociations and in- retiring;nto
trigues to disturb the tranquility of Elizabeth's Engan
government, and to advance her own pretensions to
the English Crown. Elizabeth, who possessed
greater power, and a&ed with leTs reserve, had
openly supported Mary's rebellious subjects, and
fomented all the dissensions and troubles in which
her reign had been involved. The maxims of po-
licy still authorized that Queen to pursue the fame
course; as by keeping Scotland in confifion, she
effectually secured the peace of her own kingdom.
The Regent, after his victory, had marched to
Edinburgh, and not knowing what course the
Quteen had taken, it was several days before he
thought of pursuing her *. She might have been
concealed in that retired corner, among fubjets
devoted to her interell, till her party, which was
dispersed rather than broken by the late defeat,
should gather such fftrength, that fle could again
appear with safety at their head. There was not
any danger, which she ought not to have run, ra-
ther than throw herself into the hands of an enemy,
from whom she had already suffered so many inju-
ries, and who was prompted both by inclination and
by interest, to renew them.

BUT, on the other hand, during Mary's confine-
ment, Elizabeth had declared against the proceedings

* Crawf. Mem. 59.

of

B o o of her subje&s, and solicited for her liberty, with a

V. warmth which had all the appearance of sincerity.

<-^-' She had invited her to take refuge in England, and
1565. had promised to meet her in person, and to give her

such a reception as was due to a Queen, and an
ally i. Whatever apprehension Elizabeth might
entertain of Mary's designs, while she had power
in her hands, fie was, at present, the objet, not
of fear, but of pity; and to take the advantage of her
situation, would be both ungenerous and inhuman.
The horrors of a prison were fresh in Mary's me-
mory, and if the Ihould fall a second time into the
hands of her subje&s, there was no injury to which
the presumption of success might not embolden
them to proceed. To attempt escaping into France,
was dangerous; and, in her situation, almost im-
pofible; nor could mie bear the thoughts of ap-
pearing as an exile, and a fugitive, in that king-
dom, where he had once enjoyed all the splendour
of a Queen. England remained her only asylum;
and, in spite of the entreaties of Lord Herreis,
Fleming, and her other attendants, who conjured
her, even on their knees, not to confide in Eliza-
beth's promises or generosity, her infatuation was
invincible, and she resolved to fly thither. Herreis,

Her reccp- by her command, wrote to Lowther the deputy-
ionatCar- governor of Carlisle, to know what reception he

would give her; and, before his answer could re-
turn, her fear and impatience were so great, that
he got into a fifher-boat, and with about twenty
y-, 6. attendants, landed at Wirkingion in Cumberland,

Camb. 489. Anders. vol. iv. 99. 2zo. Murdin, 369.

and

and thence she was conduced with many marks of B o o K:
refpe& to Carlisle *. V.

I568.

So soon as Mary arrived in England, the wrote Elizabet6

a long letter to the Queen, representing, in the deliberates
strongest terms, the injuries which fie had suffered the mlnne
from her own fubjets, and imploring that pity and of treating
aflifiance which her present situation demandedt.
An event so extraordinary, and the conduct which
might be proper in consequence of it, drew the at-
tention, and employed the thoughts of Elizabeth
and her council. If their deliberations had been in-
fluenced by considerations of justice or generosity
alone, they would not have found them long or in-
tricate. A Queen, vanquished by her own fubjefts,
and threatened by them with the loss of her liberty,
or of her life, and fled from their violence, and
thrown herself into the arms of her nearelt neigh-
bour and ally, from whom she had received repeat-
ed assurances of friendship and protection. These
circumstances entitled her to refpec and to compaf-
sion, and required that she should either be restored
to her own kingdom, or at least to be left at full li-
berty to seek aid from any other quarter. But with
Elizabeth and her counsellors, the question was not,
what was most just and generous, but what was most
beneficial to herself, and to the Englilh nation.
Three different resolutions might have been taken,
with regard to the Queen of Scots. To re-instate
her in her throne, was one; to allow her to retire
into France, was another; to detain her in England,
was a third. Each of these drew consequences

* Keith, 483. Andler. vol. iv. 2. t id. 29.

after

B o o K after it, of the utmost importance, which were exa-

V. mined, as appears from papers still extant *, with
*-- ' that minute accuracy, which Elizabeth's Ministers
1568. employed in all their consultations upon affairs of

moment.

To restore Mary to the full exercise of the royal

authority in Scotland, they observed, would render
her more powerful than ever. The nobles who
were most firmly attached to the English interest
would quickly feel the utmost weight of her re-
fentment. And as the gratitude of Princes is fel-
dom strong or lasting, regard to her own interest
might soon efface the memory of her obligations to
Elizabeth, and prompt her to renew the alliance of
the Scottish nation with France, and revive her own
pretensions to the English Crown. Nor was it pof-
fible to fetter and circumscribe the Scottish Queen,
by any conditions that would prevent these dangers.
Her party in Scotland was numerous and powerful.
Her return, even without any support from Eng-
land, would inspire her friends with new zeal and
courage; a tingle victory might give them the fu-
periority, which they had loft by a single defeat,
and render Mary a more formidable rival than ever
to Elizabeth.

THE dangers arising from suffering Mary to re-

turn into France, were no less obvious. The French
King could not refute his assistance towards reftor-
ing his sifter and ally to her throne. Elizabeth
would, once more, fee a foreign army in the island,

Anders. vol. iv. 34. 99. 102.

over-

overawing the Scots, and ready to enter her king- B o o K
dom; and if the commotions in France, on account V.
of religion, were fettled, the Princes of Lorrain '---
might resume their ambitious projets, and the unit- 56.
ed forces of France and Scotland might invade Eng-
land, where it is weakens and most defenceless.

NOTHING therefore remained but to detain her Recolves to

in England; and to permit her either to live at li- detainsic
berty there, or to confine her in a prison. The land.
former was a dangerous experiment. Her court
would become a place of retort to all the Roman
Catholics, to the disaffected, and to the lovers of in-
novation. Though Elizabeth affected to represent
Mary's pretensions to the Engliih Crown as altoge-
ther extravagant and ill-founded, she was not igno-
rant that they did not appear in that light to the na-
tion, and that many thought them preferable even to
her own title. If the activity of her emissaries had
gained her so many abettors, her own personal in-
fluenrce was much more to be dreaded; her beauty,
her address, her sufferings, by the admiration and
pity which they would excite, could not fail of
making many converts to her party *

IT was indeed to be apprehended, that the treat-

ing Mary as a prisoner would excite universal in-
dignation against Elizabeth, and that by this unex-
ampled severity towards a Queen, who implored,
and to whom flie had promised her protection, she
would forfeit the praile of justice and humanity,
which was hitherto due to her adminiltration. But

* Anders. vol. iv. 56. 6o.

the

B o o o the English Monarchs were often so solicitous to fe-

V. cure their kingdom against the Scots, as to be little

£ scrupulous about the means which they employed
t568- for that purpose. Henry IV. had seized the heir

of the Crown of Scotland, who was forced, by the
violence of a storm, to take refuge in one of the
ports of his kingdom; and, in contempt of the
rights of hospitality, without regarding his tender
age, or the tears and intreaties of his father, de-
tained him a prisoner for many years. This a&ion,
though detested by pofferity, Elizabeth resolved
now to imitate. Her virtue was not more proof
than Henry's had been) against the temptations of
interest; and the possession of a present advantage
was preferred to the profpec of future fame. The
fatisfaaion which Ihe felt in mortifying a rival,
whose beauty and accomplishments she envied, had,
perhaps, no less influence than political confidera-
tions, in bringing her to this resolution. But, at
the fame time, in order to screen herself from the
censure which this conduc' merited, and to make
her treatment of the Scottish Queen look like the
effec of necessity, rather than of choice, she deter-
mined to put on the appearance of concern for her
interest, and of deep sympathy with her sufferings.
May 0. TWITH this view, fie instantly dispatched Lord

Scroope, warden of the weft marches, and SirFran-
cis Knollys, her vice chamberlain, to the Queen of
Scots, with letters full of expressions of kindness
and condolence. But, at the fame time, they had
private instructions to watch all her motions, and to
take care that she should not escape into her own

king-

kingdom *. On their arrival, Mary demanded a B o o K
personal interview with the Queen, that she might V.
lay before her the injuries which {he had suffered, ' 6

sinlosiewc i I568.

and receive from her those friendly offices which she Mary de-
had been encouraged to expe&. They answered, nands ad-
that it was with reluctance this honour was at pre- into Eliza-
sent denied her; that while she lay under the impu- te pre.
tation of a crime so horrid, as the murder of her
husband, their Mistress, to whom he was so nearly
allied, could not, without bringing a stain upon her
own reputationj admit her into her presence; but
as soon as she had cleared herself from that asper-
sion, they promised her a reception suitable to her
dignity, and aid proportioned to her distress t.

NOTHING could be more frivolous than this pre- Shb offer

tence. It was the occasion, however, of leading the cate her
Queen of Scots into the snare in which Elizabeth condu"a
and her Ministers wished to intangle her. Mary
expressed the utmost furprize at this unexpected
manner of evading her request; but as lhe could
not believe so many professions of friendflip to be
void of sincerity, she frankly offered to submit her
cause to the cognizance of Elizabeth, and under-
took to produce such proofs of her own innocence,
and of the falsehood of the accusations brought
against her, as mhould fully remove the scruples,
and satisfy the delicacy of the English Queen. This
was the very point to which Elizabeth laboured to Elizabeth
bring the matter. By this appeal of the Scottilh vantage of
Queen, The became the umpire between her and this offer.
her subje&s, and had it entirely in her own power

* Anders. vor. iv. 36. 70. 92; i Ibid. vol. iv. 8. 55.
VOL. I. H h to

B o o r to protract the inquiry to any length, and to per-

V. plex and involve it in endless difficulties. In the

mean time, ihe was furnished with a plausible pre-
568. tence for keeping her at a distance from court, and

for refuting to contribute towards replacing her on
the throne. As Mary's conduct had been extremely
incautious, and the presumptions of her guilt were
many and strong, it was possible her subje&s
might make good their charge against her; and if
this should be the result of the inquiry, she would,
thenceforth, cease to be the objeEt of regard, or of
compassion, and the treating her with coldness and
neglect would merit little censure. In a matter so
dark and mysterious, there was no probability that
Mary could bring proofs of her innocence, so in-
contested, as to render the conduct of the English
Queen altogether culpable. And perhaps, her im-
patience under reitraint, her suspicion of Elizabeth's
partiality, or her discovery of her artifices, might
engage her in such cabals, as would justify the
nsing her with greater rigour.

ELIZABETH early foresaw all those advantages,

which would arise from an inquiry into the conduct
of the Scottish Queen, carried on under her direc-
tion. There was some danger, however, that Mary
might discover her secret intentions too soon, and
by receding from the offer which she had made, en-
deavour to disappoint them. But even in that event,
he determined not to drop the inquiry, and had
thought of several different expedients for carry-
ing it on. The Countess of Lennox, convinced
that Mary was acceflary to the murder of her son,

and

and thirfling for that vengeance which it was natu- B o o K
ral for a mother to demand, had implored Eliza- - V.
beth's jutlice, and solicited her, with many tears, in 8-
her own name, and in her husband's, to bring the 15
Scottish Queen to a trial for that crime*. The pa-
rents of the unhappy Prince had ajuft right to pre-
ser this accusation; nor could she, who was their
nearest kinswoman, be condemned for listening to
so equitable a demand. Betides, as the Scottish
nobles openly accused Mary of the fame crime, and
pretended to be able to confirm their charge by sus-
ficient proof; it would be no difficult matter to pre-
vail on them, to petition the Queen of England to
take cognizance of their proceedings against their
Sovereign; and it was the opinion of the English
council, that it would be reasonable to comply with
the request t. At the fame time, the obsolete claim
of the superiority of England over Scotland began
to be talked of; and, on that account, it was pre-
tended that the decision of the contest between
Mary and her subjects belonged of right to Eliza-
beth. But though Elizabeth revolved all there ex-
pedients in her mind, and kept them in reserve to
be made use of as occasion might require, she wish-
ed that the inquiry into Marv's condut Ihould ap-
pear to be undertaken purely in compliance with
her own demand, and in order to vindicate her in-
nocence; and so long as that appearance could be
preserved, none of the other expedients were to be
employed.
* Camd. 412. Haynes, 469. t And. vol i. i7.

I-l h a WHEN

B o O K WHEN Mary consented to submit her cause to

V. Elizabeth, she was far from fufpe&ing that any bad
ó8' cconfequences could follow, or that any dangerous

pretensions could be founded on her offer, She ex-
pe&ed that Elizabeth herself would receive, and
examine her defences*; she meant to confider her
as an equal, for whose fatisfafion she was willing
to explain any part of her conduct that was liable
to censure, not to acknowledge her as a superior,
before whom she was bound to plead her cause. But
Elizabeth put a very different sense on Mary's of-
ser. She confidered herself as chosen to be judge in
the controversy between the Scottish Queen and her
fubjets, and began to aEt in that capacity. She
proposed to appoint commissioners to hear the plead-
ings of both parties, and wrote to the Regent of
Scotland to impower proper persons to appear be-
fore them, in his name, and to produce what he
could allege in vindication of his proceedings
against his Sovereign.

lary MARY had, hitherto, relied with unaccountable
Sgrady or- credulity on Elizabeth's professions of regard, and
Elizabeths expeted that so many kind speeches would, at last,
wonidu be accompanied with some suitable actions. But

this proposal entirely undeceived her. She plainly
perceived the artifice of Elizabeth's conduct, and
saw what a diminution it would be to her own ho-
nour, to appear on a level with her rebellious sub-
je&s, and to stand together with them at the bar of
a superior and a judge. She retracted the offer
which she had made, and which had been perverted

Anders. vol. iv. Io.

to

to a purpose so contrary to her intention. She de- B o o K
manded, with more earnestness than ever, to be ad- V.
mitted into Elizabeth's presence; and wrote to her -*'
in a strain very different from what she had for- I568'
merly used, and which fully discovers the grief and
indignation that preyed on her heart. " In my
x" present situation, fays ihe, I neither will, nor can

reply to the accusations of my subjects. I am
"ready, of my own accord, and out of friendship
" to you, to satisfy your scruples, and to vindicate
"my own condut. My subje&s are not my equals;
"nor will I, by submitting my cause to a judicial
"trial, acknowledge them to be so. I fled into
,' your arms, as into those of my nearest relation,
" and most perfect friend. I did you honour, as
"I imagined, in chufing you, preferably to any
"other Prince, to be the restorer of an injured
" Qeen. Was it ever known that a Prince was
"blamed for hearing, in person, the complaints of
"those who appealed to his justice, against the
"false accusations of their enemies ? You admitted
"into your presence my bastard brother, who had
"been guilty of rebellion; and you deny me that
" honour! God forbid that I should be the occa-.
" sion of bringing any stain upon your reputation.

I expected that your manner of treating me

"would have added lustre to it. Suffer me either
"to implore the aid of other Princes, whose deli-
"cacy on this head, will be less, and their resent-
"ment of my wrongs greater; or let me receive
"from your hands that assistance, which it becomes
"you, more than any other Prince, to grant; and

" by

Bo o K a by that benefit, bind me to yourself in the indif-

V. s" soluble ties of gratitude *."

I568. THIS letter somewhat disconcerted Elizabeth's
izabeth's plan, but did not divert her from the prosecution
pt'h°i . of it. She laid the matter before the Privy Coun-

cil, and it was there determined, notwithstanding
the intreaties and remonstrances of the Scottiffi
Queen, to go on with the inquiry into her condu&,
and till that were finished, it was agreed that Eliza-
beth could not, confidently with her own honour,
or with the safety of her government, either give
her the assistance which Ihe demanded, or permit
her to retire out of the kingdom. And left she
should have an opportunity of escaping, while She
resided so near Scotland, it was thought advifeable
to remove her to some place, at a greater distance
from the borders t.

Proaced- WHILE the English court was occupied in these
irs cf the
Rgent deliberations, the Regent did not negle&. to improve

.vfthe the vicory at Langfide. That,event was of the
ad4=ernts. unnoft importance to him. It not only drove the

Queen herself out of the kingdom, but left her
adherents dispersed, and without a leader, at his
mercy. He seemed resolved, at first, to proceed
against them with the utmost rigour. Six persons
of some diftin&ion, who had been taken prisoners
in the battle, were tried and condemned to death,
as rebels against the King's government. They
were led to the place of execution, but by the pow-
erful interceflion of Knox they obtained a pardon.

' Anders. vol. iv. 94. t Id. ibid. lo2.

Ha

Hamilton of Bothwellhaugh was one of the num- B o o K
ber, who lived to give both the Regent and V.
Knox reason to repent this commendable act of "
lenity*. I68.

SOON after, the Regent marched with an army,

consisting of 4000 horse and iooo foot, towards
the weft borders. The nobles in this part of the
kingdom were all of the Queen's faction; but as
they had not force sufficient to obftruc his progress,
he muff either have obliged them to submit to the
King, or would have laid waste their lands with fire
and sword. But Elizabeth, whose interest it was to
keep Scotland in confusion, by preserving the ba-
lance between the two parties, and who was endea-
vouring to tooth the Scottish Queen by gentle treat-
ment, interposed at her desire. After keeping the
field two weeks, the Regent, in compliance to the
English Ambassador, dismissed his forces; and an
expedition, which might have proved fatal to his
opponents, ended with a few ats of severity t.

THE resolution of the Englifl Privy Council with Marycar-

Cied to Bol.

regard to Mary's person, was soon carried into exe- nt
cution; and, without regarding her remonstrances
or complaints, %ie was conduCted to Bolton, a castle
of Lord Scroop's, on the borders of Yorklhire . July 13..
In this place, her correspondence with her friends in
Scotland became more difficult, and any profpe&
of making her escape was entirely cut off. She
now felt herself to be entirely in Elizabeth's power,
and though treated as yet with refpeft due to a

ald. vol. ii. 99. t Ibid, t And. vol. iv. 14.

(Qeen,

B o o K Queen, her real condition was that of a prisoner.

V. Mary knew what it was to be deprived of liberty,

0-
. ' and dreaded it as the worst of all evils. While the

568 remembrance of her late imprisonment was still

lively, and the terror of a new one filled her mind,
Elizabeth thought it a proper jun&ure to renew
her former proposition, that ihe would susser the
Regent and his adherents to be called into Eng-
land, and content to their being heard in defence
of their own conduct. And on her part she pro-
mifed, whatever should be the ifue of this inquiry,
to employ all her power and influence towards re-
placing Mary on her throne, under a few limita-
tions, which were far from being unreasonable.

Aers that Fear, impatience, despair, as well as this soothing

iqe iry promise, with which the proposition was accom-
Dnod her panied, induced the Scottish Queen to comply*
conduO. e
Her diffi Is order to persuade Elizabeth that she desired
m-uation nothing so much as to render the union between
.with regard
to reigicn. them as close as possible, she shewed a disposition to

relax somewhat in one point, with regard to which,
during all her pass and subsequent misfortunes, she
was uniformly inflexible. She expressed a great
veneration for the liturgy of the church of Eng-
land; she was often present at religious worship,
according to the rites of the reformed church;
made choice of a Protestant clergyman to be her
chaplain; heard him preach against the errors of
Popery with attention and seeming pleasure; and
discovered all the symptoms of an approaching con-
version t. Such was Mary's known and bigoted at-

Anders. vol. iv. 1og. Haynes, 468.
1 Anders. vol i.
iv . 1. Haynes, 509.

tachment

tachment to the Popilh religion, that it is impof- B o o K
fible to believe her sincere in this part of her con- V.
dut; nor can any thing mark more strongly the -v- -
wretchedness of her condition, and the excess of I568.
her fears, than that they betrayed her into diffi-
mulation, in a matter concerning which her fen-
timents were, at all other times, scrupulously de-
licate.

AT this time the Regent called a Parliament, in Augsift s.

A Parlia-

order to proceed to the forfeiture of those who re- ment in
fused to acknowledge the King's authority. The Scotand.
Queen's fa&ion was alarmed, and Argyll and
Huntly, whom Mary had appointed her lieute-
nants, the one in the south, and the other in the
north of Scotland, began to assemble forces to
obftru& this meeting. Compafion for the Queen,
and envy at those who governed in the King's
name, had added so much strength to the party,
that the Regent would have found it difficult to
withstand its efforts. But as Mary had submitted
her cause to Elizabeth, she could not refute, at her
desire, to command her friends to lay down their
arms, and to wait patiently till matters were brought
to a decision in England. By procuring this cef-
fation of arms, Elizabeth afforded as seasonable re-
lief to the Regent's fation, as she had formerly
given to the Queen's *.

THE Regent, however, would not content, even

at Elizabeth's request, to put off the meeting of
Parliament. But we may ascribe to her influence,

' Anders, vol. iv. 125.

as

B o o K as well as to the eloquence of Maitland, who la-

V. boured to prevent the one half of his countrymen
'- -'J from exterminating the other, any appearances of

$S68' moderation which this Parliament discovered in its

proceedings. The most violent opponents of the
King's government were forfeited; the reft were
allowed still to hope for favour *,

EizZeth No sooner did the Queen of Scots submit her
RgS to cause to her rival, than Elizabeth required the Re-
defndhis gent to fend to York deputies properly inftruted

for vindicating his conduEt, in presence of her com-
millioners. It was not without hesitation and
anxiety, that the Regent consented to this measure.
His authority was already eftablilhed in Scotland,
and confirmed by parliament. To susser its vali-
dity now to be called in question, and fubje&ed to
a foreign jurisdiction, was extremely mortifying,
To accuse his Sovereign before strangers, the an-
cient enemies of the Scottish name, was an odious
talk. To fail in this accusation was dangerous;
to succeed in it was disgraceful. But the strength
of the adverse fa&ion daily increased. He dreaded
the interposition of the French King in its behalf.
In his situation, and in a matter which Elizabeth
had so much at heart, her commands were neither
to be disputed, nor disobeyed t,

EOth t THE necessity of repairing in person to York
Qeen and added to the ignominy of the ftep which he was
he appoint
caif obliged to take, All his associates declined the
enrs- office; they were unwilling, it would seem, to

Buch. 371. t Buch. 372. See Append. No. XXV.

expofr

expose themselves to the odium and danger with B o o K
which it was easy to foresee that the discharge of it V.
would be attended, unless he himself consented to
share these in common with them. The Earl of Se56p8.
Morton, Bothwell Bishop of Orkney, Pitcairn Com-
mendator of Dumfermling, and Lord Lindsay, were
joined with him in commission. Macgill of Ran-
keilor, and Balnaves of Hallhill, two eminent Civi-
lians, George Buchanan his faithful adherent, a
man whose genius did honour to the age, Maitland,
and several others, were appointed to attend them
as assistants. Maitland owed this diftincion to the
Regent's fear, rather than to his affection. He had
warmly remonstrated against this measure. He
wished his country to continue in friendship with
England, but not to become dependant on that na-
tion. He was desirous of re-effablilhing the Queen
in some degree of power, not inconsistent with that
which the King possessed; and the Regent could
not, with safety, leave behind him a man, whose
views were so contrary to his own, and who, by his
superior abilities, had acquired an influence in the
nation, equal to that, which others derived from
the antiquity and power of their families *.

MARY impowered Lefly Biihop of Ross, Lord
Livingston, Lord Boyd, Lord Herreis, Gavin Ha-
milton Commendator of Kilwinning, Sir John
Gordon of Lochinvar, and Sir James Cockburn
of Skirling, to appear in her name t.

Buch. 37G. Anders. vol. iv. 35. Melv, 186. I88.
t Anders. vol. iv. 33.

'T.T.T l _ -

B o o K ELIZABETH nominated Thomas Howard Duke

V. of Norfolk, Thomas Ratcliff Earl of Suffex, and

'---.-' Sir Ralph Sadler, her Commissioners, to hear both
i568. parties.

The confc- THE fourth of Ocober was the day fixed for
.'c at opening the Conference. The great abilities of the

deputies on both fides, the dignity of the judges
before whom they were to appear, the high rank
of the persons whose cause was to be heard, and
the importance of the points in dispute, rendered
the whole transaction no less illustrious, than it was
singular. The situation in which Elizabeth ap-
peared, on this occasion, strikes us with an air of
magnificence. Her rival, an independant Queen,
and the heir of an ancient race of monarchs, was
a prisoner in her hands, and appeared, by her am-
baffadors, before her tribunal. The Regent of
Scotland, who represented the majesty, and pof-
sessed the authority of a King, flood in person at
her bar. And the fate of a kingdom, whose power
her ancestors had often dreaded, but could never
subdue, was now aboblutely at her disposal.

views of THE views, however, with which the several
thdi-- ent parties consented to this conference, and the issue

to which they expected to bring it, were extremely
different.

MARY'S chief obje& was the recovering her for-

mer authority. This induced her to content to a
measure against which she had long struggled.
Elizabeth's promises gave her ground for.entertain-

ing

ing hopes of being restored to her kingdom; in B o o K
order to which, she would have, willingly, made V.
many concessions to the King's party; and the in- ' -
fluence of the Englilh Queen, and her own impa- 1568.
tience under her present situation, might have led
her to many more *. The Regent aimed at nothing
but securing Elizabeth's protection to his party, and
teems not to have had the most distant thoughts of
coming to any composition with Mary. Elizabeth's
views were more various, and her schemes more in-
tricate. She seemed to be full of concern for Mary's
honour, and solicitous that she hould wipe off the
aspersions which blemilhed her character. This
she pretended to be the intention of the confer-
ence; amusing Mary, and eluding the folicita-
tions of the French and Spanish ambassadors in
her behalf, by repeated promises of assisting her, as
soon as mhe could venture to do so, without bring-
ing disgrace on herself. But, under this veil of
friendship and generosity, Elizabeth concealed fen-
timents of a different nature. She expe&ced that the
Regent would accuse Mary of being accessary to
the murder of her husband. She encouraged him,
as far as decency would permit, to take this defpe-
rate ftep t. And as this accusation might termi-
nate two different ways, she had concerted measures
for her future condu& suitable to each of these. If
the charge against Mary should appear to be well
founded, she resolved to pronounce her unworthy
of wearing a Crown, and to declare that Ihe would

* Anders. vol. iv. 33. Good vol. ii. 337.
t Anders. vol. iv. II. 45. Haynes, 487.

never

B o o K never burden her own conscience with the guilt of

V. an action so detestable, as the restoring her to her
ó-8- kingdom . If it ihould happen, that what her
156S' accusers alledged, did not amount to a proof of

guilt, but only of mal-administration, The deter-
mined to set on foot a treaty for restoring her, but
on such conditions, as would render her for ever
dependant on England, and the slave of her own
subjects t. And as every ifep in the progress of
the conference, as well as the final result of it, was
in her own power, lhe could frill be at liberty to
chufe which of these courses she would hold; or if
there appeared to be any danger or inconveniency
in pursuing either of them, Ihe might protra& the
whole cause by endless delays, and involve it in in-
extricable perplexity.

Complaint THE conference, however, was opened with much
Qeofbe solemnity. But the very first ftep discovered it to
commiffi- be Elizabeth's intention to inflame, rather than to
ainft e extinguish the dissensions and animofities among the
kiemt- Scots. No endeavours were used to reconcile the

contending parties, or to mollify the fierceness of
their hatred, by bringing the Queen to offer pardon
for what was past, or her subje&s to promise more
dutiful obedience for the future. On the contrary,
Mary's commillioners were permitted to prefer a
Oobr s. complaint against the Regent and his party, con-

taining an enumeration of their treasonable actions,
of their seizing her person by force of arms, com-
mitting her to prison, compelling her to resign the
Crown, and making use of her son's name to colour

Anders. vol. ir. 1 . t Id. ibid. 16.

their

their usurpation of the whole royal authority. And B o o K
of all there enormities, they required such speedy V.
and effectual redress, as the injuries of one Queen .-
demanded from the justice of another *. 1568.

IT was then expeaed that the Regent would have

disclosed the whole circumstances of that unnatural
crime, to which he pretended the Queen had been
accessary, and would have produced evidence in
support of his charge. But far from accusing Mary,
the Regent did not even answer the complaints
brought against himself. He discovered a relu&ance
at the undertaking that office, and iarted many
doubts and scruples, with regard to which, he de-
manded to be resolved by Elizabeth herfelft. His
reserve and hesitation were no less surprising to the
greater part of the Englilh commissioners than to
his own associates. They knew that he could not
vindicate his own condu& without charging the
murder upon the Queen, and he had not hitherto
shown any extraordinary delicacy on that head.
An intrigue had been secretly carried on, since his
arrival at York, which explains this mystery.

THE Duke of Norfolk was, at that time, the Intriguesof
most powerful and most popular man in England. Norfolk

with the

His wife was lately dead; and he began already to Regent.
form a projet, which he afterwards more openly
avowed, of mounting the throne of Scotland, by a
marriage with the Queen of Scots. He saw the
infamy which would be the consequence of a pub-
lic accusation againlf Mary, and how prejudicial it

Anders. vol. iv. 5z. t Haynes, 4. 8.

might

B o o K might be to her pretenlions to the English fuccef-

V. sion. In order to save her this cruel mortification,

8'- s' he applied to Maitland, and expressed his astonish-
i568 ment at feeing a man of so much reputation for

wisdom, concurring with the Regent in a measure
so diihonourable to themselves, to theirQueen, and
to their country; submitting the public transactions
of the nation to the judgment of foreigners; and
publilhing the ignominy, and exposing the faults
of their Sovereign, which they were bound, in good
policy, as well as in duty, to conceal and to cover.
It was easy for Maitland, whose sentiments were the
fame with the Duke's, ip vindicate his own con-
du&. He assured him, that he had employed all
his credit, to dissuade his countrymen from this
measure; and would still contribute, to the utmost
of his power, to divert them from it. This encou-
raged Norfolk to communicate the matter to the
Regent. He repeated and enforced the fame argu-
ments which he had used with Maitland. He warned
him of the danger to which he muff expose himself,
by such a violent action as the public accusation of his
Sovereign. Mary would never forgive a man, who
had endeavoured to fix such a brand of infamy on her
characer. If she ever recovered any degree of
power, his deftrucion would be inevitable, and he
would justly merit it at her hands. Nor would Eliza-
beth screen him from this, by a public approbation
of his condu&. For whatever evidence of Mary's
guilt he might produce, Ihe was resolved to give no
definitive sentence in the cause. Let him only de-
mand that the matter should be brought to decision,
immediately after hearing the proof, and he would

bs;

be fully convinced how false and insidious her in- B o o K
tentions were, and, byconfcquence, how improper V.
it would be for him to appear as the accufer'of his `v
own Sovereign *. The candour which Norfolk 568
seemed to discover in these remonstrances, as well
as the truth which they contained, made a deep im-
pression on the Regent. He daily received the
strongest assurances of Mary's willingness to be re-
conciled to him, if he abstained from accusing her
offuch an odious crime, together with the denuncia-
tions of her irreconcilable hatred, if he acted a con-
trary part t. All these considerations 'concurred in
determining him to alter his purpose, and to make
trial of the expedient which the Duke had fug-
gested.

HE demanded, therefore, to be informed, before oaober 9.

he proceeded farther, whether the Engliih commis-
fioners were empowered to declare the Queen guilty,
by a judicial a&; whether they would promise to
pals sentence, without delay; whether the Queen
should be kept under such restraint, as to prevent
her from disturbing the government now eftabliihed
in Scotland; and whether Elizabeth, if she approv-
ed of the proceedings of the King's party, would
engage to protect it for the future :. The paper
containing there demands was signed by himself
alone, without communicating it to any of his at-
tendants, except Maitland and Melvil §. Nothing
could appear more natural than the Regent's folici-

Melv. 187. Haynes, 573. t Anders. vol. iv. 77.
Good. vol. ii. 15-. See Append. No. XXVI.

.Anders. vol. i.;. 55- bid. 6. Melv. 19o.
VOL. I. I i rude,

B o o K tude, to know on what footing he stood. To have

V. ventured on a ftep so uncommon and dangerous, as
ó-v--' the accusing his Sovereign, without previously as-
5 68' certaining that he might take it with safety, would

have been unpardonable imprudence. But Eliza-
beth, who did not expec that he would have mov-
ed any such difficulty, had not empowered her com-
missioners to give him that fatisfa&ion which he de-
manded. It became necessary to transmit the arti-
cles to herself, and by the light in which Norfolk
placed them, it is easy to fee that he wished that
they should make no flight impreflion on Elizabeth
and her ministers. "Think not the Scots, said
" he, over-fcrupulous or precise. Let us view their
"condua as we would wifli our own to be viewed
" in a like situation. The game they play is deep
" their estates, their lives, their honour are at stake.
" It is now in their own power to be reconciled to
" their Queen, or to offend her irrecoverably, and
" in a matter of so much importance, the utmolt
"degree of caution is not excefrive *."

WHILE the Englilh commissioners waited for fuller

inftru&ions with regard to the Regent's demands,
he gave in an answer to the complaint, which had
been offered in name of the Scottish Queen. It was
expressed in terms perfectly conformable to the sys-
tem which he had at that time adopted. It contained
no insinuation of the Queen's being accessary to the
murder of her husband; the bitterness of style
peculiar to the age was considerably abated;
and though he pleaded, that the infamy of the

Anders. . vo. iv7.

mar-

marriage with Bothwell, made it necessary to take B o o B
arms in order to diflolve it; though Mary's attach- V.
ment to a man so odious justified the keeping her 'ó"8'
for some time under restraint; yet nothing more
was said on these fubjeats than was barely requisite in
his own defence. The Queen's commissioners did
not fail to reply*. But while the article with re- o1tber17.
gard to the murder remained untouched, there were
only skirmishes at a distance, of no consequence to-
wards ending the contest, and were little regarded
by Elizabeth or her commissioners.

THE conference had, hitherto, been conduced in Theconfe-

rence re-

a manner which disappointed Elizabeth's views, and moved to
produced none of those discoveries which she had Weftmin-
expe&ed. The distance between York and Lon-
don, and the necessity of consulting her upon every
difficulty which occurred, consumed much time.
Norfolk's negociation with the Scottish Regent,
however secretly carried on, was not, in all probabi-
lity, unknown to a princess so remarkable for her
sagacity in penetrating the designs of her enemies,
and feeing through their deepest fchemest. In-
stead, therefore, of returning any answer to the Re-
gent's demands, Ihe resolved to remove the confe-
rence to Westminster, and to appoint new commis-
fioners, in whom Ihe could more absolutely con-
fide. Both the Scottish Queen and the Regent
were brought, without difficulty, to approve of this
resolution $.

* Anders. vol. iv. 64. 80. t Good. vol. ii. 160.
And. vol. iii. 24. i Haynes, 484. Anders. vol. iv. 94.

Ii 2 WE

B o o K WE often find Mary boasting of the superiority

V. of her commissioners during the conference at York,

and how, by the strength of their arguments, they
1568' confounded her adversaries, and silenced all their

cavils*. The dispute stood, at that time, on a
footing, which rendered her victory not only appa-
rent, but easy. Her participation of the guilt of
the King's murder was the only circumstance, which
could justify the violent proceedings of her fubjefs.
And while they industriously avoided mentioning
that, her cause gained as much as that of her adver-
saries loft by suppressing this capital argument.

ELIZABETH resolved that Mary ihould not enjoy

the fame advantage in the conference to be held at
Westminster. She deliberated with the utmost anxi-
ety, how she might overcome the Regent's scruples,
and persuade him to accuse the Queen. She confi-
dered of the most proper method for bringing Mary's
commissioners to answer such an accusation; and as
she foresaw that the promises with which it was ne-
ceffary to allure the Regent, and which it was im-
possible to conceal from the Scottish Queen, would
naturally exasperate her to a great degree, she de-
termined to guard her more narrowly than ever;
and though Lord Scroop had given her no reason
to distrust his vigilance or fidelity, yet because he
was the Duke of Norfolk's brother-in-law, ihe
thought it proper to remove the Queen as loon as
possible to Tuthbury in Staffordshire, and commit
her to the keeping of the Earl of Shrewsbury, to
whom that cattle belonged t.

God . i. MAR)
Good. vol. i. 186. 284.350. t Haynes, 487.

MARY began to fufped the design of this second B o o K

conference; and notwithstanding the satisfaction fle V.
expressed at feeing her cause taken more immediately 'c

1568.

under the Queen's own eye , she framed her in- Mary's sus-
ftru&ions to her commissioners, in such a manner, picion
' of

Elizabeth's

as to avoid being brought under the necessity of intentions.
answering the accusation of her subje&s, if they Oaob. 2i.
should be so desperate as to exhibit one against her t.
These suspicions were soon confirmed by a circum-
lance extremely mortifying. The Regent having
arrived at London, in order to be present at the
conference, was immediately admitted into Eliza-
beth's presence, and received by her, not only with
refpe&, but with affetion. This Mary juffly con-
fidered as an open declaration of that Queen's par-
tiality towards her adversaries. In the first emo- Nov. 22.
tions of her resentment, she wrote to her colnmif- Claims a

personal

fioners, and commanded them to complain in the audienceof
presence of the English nobles, and before the am- Elizabeth-
baffadors of foreign Princes, of the usage the had
hitherto met with, and the additional injuries which
The had reason to apprehend. Her rebellious sub-
jests were allowed access to the Queen, fle was ex-
cluded from her presence; they enjoyed full liberty,
she languished under a long imprisonment; they
were encouraged to accuse her, in defending herself
the laboured under every disadvantage. For these
reasons flie once more renewed herdemand, of be-
ing admitted into the Queen's presence; and if that
were denied, she inftru&ed them to declare, that
(he recalled the consent she had given to the con-
' Anders. vol. iv. 95. f Good. vol. ii. 34.:

ference

Bo o K ference at Weftminfer, and protested, that what-

V. ever was done there, should be held to be null and

C'-- ' invalid *.
I568.

THIS, perhaps, was the most prudent resolution

Mary could have taken. The pretences on which
ihe declined the conference were plausible, and the
junaure for offering them well chosen. But either
the Queen's letter did not reach her commissioners
in due time, or they suffered themselves to be de-
ceived by Elizabeth's professions of regard for their
Mistress, and consented to the opening of the con-
ference t.
Nov. s5. To the commiflioners who had appeared in her

name at York, Elizabeth now added Sir Nicholas
Bacon, Keeper of the Great Seal, the Earls ofArun-
del and Leicester, Lord Clinton, and Sir William
Cecil t. The difficulties which obftru&ed the pro-
ceedings at York were quickly removed. A satis-
fying answer was given to the Regent's demands;
nor was he so much disposed to hesitate, and raise
objections as formerly. His negociation with Nor-
folk had been discovered to Morton by tome of
Mary's attendants, and he had communicated it to
Cecil 1. His personal safety, as well as the conti-
nuance of his power, depended on Elizabeth. By
favouring Mary, she might at any time ruin him,
and by a queflion which ihe artfully started, con-
cerning the person who had a right, by the law of

Good. vol. ii- 184. t Anders. vol. iii. 2;.
Id. vol. iv. 99. 1 MIeh. 191.

Scot-

Scotland, to govern the kingdom during a minority, B o o K
{he let him fee, that even without restoring the V.
Queen, it was an easy matter for her to deprive him `--
of the supreme direction of affairs *. These con- i568.
fiderations, which were powerfully seconded by most
of his attendants, at length determined the Regent
to produce his accusation against the Queen.

HE endeavoured to lessen the infamy, with The Regent
which he was sensible this acion would be attend- ""acf the

Queen of
ed, by protesting, that it was with the utmost re- being acce-

fary to her

lu&ance he undertook this disagreeable tafl; that huotand's
his party had long suffered their conduc to be mif- murder.
construed, and had borne the worfI imputations
in silence, rather than expose the crimes of their
Sovereign to the eyes of strangers; but that now
the insolence and importunity of the adverse fation,
forced them to publish, what they had hitherto,
though with loss to themselves, endeavoured to con-
ceal t. These pretexts are decent; and had the par-
ty discovered any delicacy or reserve, with regard to
the Queen's a&ions, in the reft of their conduct,
might have passed for the real principles by which
they were influenced. But their former treatment
of the Queen renders it impossible to give any credit
to these professions. And the Regent, it is plain,
was drawn by the necessity of his affairs, and Eli-
zabeth's artifices, into a situation, where no liberty
of choice was left him; and was obliged either to
acknowledge himself to be guilty of rebellion, or to
charge Mary with having committed murder.

* Haynes, 484. t Anders. vol. iv. 115.

I ji F

B o o r THE accusation itself was conceived in the strong-

V. eft terms. Mary was charged, not only with hav-
y68.J ing consented to the murder, but with being accef-

fary to the contrivance and execution of it. Both-
well, it was pretended, had been screened from the
pursuits of jufice by her favour; and she had form-
ed designs no less dangerous to the life of the young
Prince, than subversive of the liberties and coniti-
tution of the kingdom. If any of these crimes
Should be denied, an offer was made to produce
the molf ample and undoubted evidence in confir-
mation of the charge*
N-ov. ;. AT the next meeting of the commissioners, the

Earl of Lennox appeared before them; and after
bewailing the tragical and unnatural murder of his
Son, he implored Elizabeth's justice against the
Queen of Scots, whom he accused, upon oath, of
being the author of that crime, and produced pa-
pers which, as he pretended, would make good
what he alledged.' The entrance of a new acor on
the stage, so opportunely, and at a juncure so cri-
tical, can scarce be imputed to chance. This con-
trivance was manifetly Elizabeth's, in order to in-
crease, by this additional accusation, the infamy of
the Scottish Queen t.

Hercoan- MARY'S commifioners expressed the utmost fur-
nUfioDnes prise and indignation at the Regent's presumption,
answer. in loading the Qeen with calumnies, which, as they
Decemb.4. affirmed, fhe'had so little merited. But, instead of

attempting to vindicate her honour, by a reply to

*Andcrf. vol. iv. 119. t Id. ibid. z12.

the

the charge, they had recourse to an article in their B o o ,
inftrutions, which they had formerly negle&ed to V.
mention in its proper place. They demanded an ---
audience of Elizabeth; and having renewed their I568.
Mistress's request, of a personal interview, they pro-
telted, if that were denied her, against all the fu-
ture proceedings of the commissioners t. A pro-
teftation of this nature, offered just at the critical
time, when such a bold accusation had been prefer-
red against Mary, and when the proofs in support
of it were ready to be examined, gave reason to sus-
pect that she dreaded the event of that examination.
This suspicion received the strongest confirmation
from another circumstance; Ross and Herreis, be-
fore they were introduced to Elizabeth, in order to
make this protefftation, privately acquainted Leicef-
ter and Cecil, that as their Miffrefs had, from the
beginning, discovered an inclination towards bring-
ing the differences between herself and her fubjeds
to an amicable accommodation, so she was frill de-
firous, notwithstanding the Regent's audacious ac-
cufation, that they should be terminated in that
manner t

SucH moderation is scarce compatible with the

strong resentment, which calumniated innocence
naturally feels; or with that eagerness to vindicate
itself, which it always discovers. In Mary's situ-
ation, an offer so ill-timed must be confidered as a
confefion of the weakness of her cause. The known

* Anderson, vol. iv. 133. 158.

Ibid. iv. 134. Cabbala, 137.

cha-

B o o K chara&er of her commissioners exempts them from

V. the imputation of folly, or the suspicion of trea-
ó- ' chery. Some secret conviction, that the conduc of
J568. their Mistress could not bear so ftri& a scrutiny,

seems to be the most probable motive of this im-
prudent proposal, by which they endeavoured to
avoid it.
Pccmb. 4. IT appeared in this light to Elizabeth, and as-

forded her a pretence for reje&ing it. She told
Mary's commissioners, that, in the present jun&ure,
nothing could be so dishonourable to their Mistress,
as an accommodation; and that the matter would
seem to be huddled up in this manner, merelyto
suppress discoveries, and to hide her shame; nor
was it possible that she could be admitted, with any
decency, into her presence, while Ihe lay under the
infamy of such a public accusation.

UPON this repulse, Mary's commissioners with-

drew; and as they had declined answering, there
seemed now to be no further reason for the Regent's
producing the proofs in support of his charge. But
without getting these into her hands, Elizabeth's
schemes were incomplete; and her artifice for this
purpose was as mean, but as successful as any she
had hitherto employed. She commanded her com-
missioners to testify her indignation and displeasure
at the Regent's presumption, in forgetting so far
the duty of a fubje&, as to accuse his Sovereign of
such atrocious crimes. He, in order to regain the
good opinion of such a powerful proteEcrefs, ojffered
to shew that his accusations were not malicious, nor

ill

ill grounded. Then were produced and delivered B o o K
to the Englilh commiflioners, the acs of the Scot- V.
tifh Parliament in confirmation of the Regent's au-
thority, and of the Queen's resignation; the con- 1568.
sessions of the persons executed for the King's mur-
der; and the fatal casket which contained the let-
ters, sonnets, and contrasts, that have been already
mentioned.

ELIZABETH having got these into her possession, Elizabeth

began to lay asid ethe expressions of friendlhip and htsrmS ary
refpec' which the had hitherto used in all her letters er rigour.
to the Scottish Queen. She now wrote to her in
such terms, as if the presumptions of her guilt had
amounted almolt to certainty; she blamed her for
refuting to vindicate herself from an accusation
which could not be left unanswered, without a ma-
nifeft injury to her chara&er; and plainly intimat-
ed, that unless that were done, no change would be
made in her present situation *. She hoped thatfuch
a discovery of her sentiments would intimidate Mary,
who was scarce recovered from the shock of the Re-
gent's attack on her reputation, and force her to con-
firm her resignation of the Crown, to ratify Murray's
authority as Regent, and to consent that both herself
and her son should reside in England, under her
protection. This scheme Elizabeth had much at
heart; she proposed it both to Mary and to her
commissioners, and neglected no argument, nor ar-
tifice, that could poflibly recommend it. Mary
saw how fatal this would prove to her reputation,
to her pretensions, and even to her personal lafety.
* Anderson, vol. iv. 179. 183. Good. vol. ii. 260.

She

B o o K She reje&ed it without hesitation. " Death, said

V. " she, is less dreadful than such an ignominious
t'- 68 "ftep. Rather than give away, with my own

68. " hands, the Crown, which descended to me from

" my ancestors, I will part with life; but the last
" words I utter, ihall be those of a Queen of Scot-
" land ."

AT the fame time Ihe seems to have been sensible

how open her reputation lay to censure, while she
suffered such a public accusation to remain unan-
fwered; and though the conference was now dif-
solved, ihe empowered her commissioners to present
a reply to the allegations of her enemies, in which
lhe denied, in the strongef terms, the crimes im-
asmD. 4. puted to her; and recriminated upon the Regent

and his party, by accusing them of having devised
and executed the murder of the Kingt. The
Regent and his associates asserted their innocence
with great warmth. Mary continued to insist on
a personal interview, a condition which she knew
would never be granted $. Elizabeth urged her
to vindicate her own honour. But it is evident
from the delays, the evasions, and subterfuges, to
which both Queens had recourse by turns, that
Mary avoided, and Elizabeth did not desire to
make any further progress in the inquiry.

1569, THF. Regent was now impatient to return into
-Difmfes Scotland, where his adversaries were endeavouring,

r- Regent jn his absence, to raise some commotions. Before
without ti-
ther ap-
proving or Haynes, 497. See Appendix, No. XXVII. Good. vol.
condemn- ii. 274. 301. t Good. ii. 285. 1 Ibid. 283.
in his con-
du CCabbala, 157 he

he set out, he was called into the Privy Council, B o o K
to receive a final declaration of Elizabeth's senti- V.
ments. Cecil acquainted him, in her name, that '-"-
on one hand nothing had been objected to his con- 1569-
duct, which ihe could reckon detrimental to his
honour, or inconsistent with his duty; nor had he,
on the other hand, produced any thing against his
Sovereign, on which she could found an unfavour-
able opinion of her actions; and for this reason, she
resolved to leave all the affairs of Scotland, precisely
in the fame situation, in which Ihe had found them,
at the beginning of the conference. The Queen's
commissioners were difiniffed much in the fame
manner*.

AFTER the attention of both nations had been

fixed so earneffly on this conference, upwards of
four months, such a conclusion of the whole ap-
pears, at firit fight, trifling and ridiculous. No-
thing, however, could be more conformable to
her future schemes. NotwithfRanding her seeming Butfecretly
impartiality, she had no thoughts of continuing neu- hupportr
ter; nor was she at any loss on whom to bestow her
protection. Before the Regent left London, Ihe
supplied him with a considerable fum of money, and
engaged to support the King's authority, to the ut-
most of her power t. Mary, by her own condu&,
fortified this resolution. Enraged at the repeated
instances of Elizabeth's artifice and deceit, which
The had discovered during the progress of the con-
ference, and despairing of ever obtaining any fuc-

Good. ii. 315. 333 t- Id. 213. Carte, iii. 478.

Cour

B o o cour from her, lhe endeavoured to rouse her own

V. adherents in Scotland to arms, by imputing such
'-a--' designs to Elizabeth and Murray, as could not
5$69. fail to inspire every Scotchman with indignation.

Murray, ihe pretended, had agreed to convey the
Prince her son into England; to surrender to Eli-
zabeth the places of greatest strength in the king-
dom; and to acknowledge the dependance of the
Scottish upon the Englilh nation. In return for
this, he was to be declared the lawful heir of the
Crown of Scotland; and, at the fame time, the
question with regard to the Englifl succession was
to be decided in favour of the Earl of Hartford, who
had promised to marry one of Cecil's daughters.
An account of these wild and chimerical projets was
spread induffrioufly among the Scots. Elizabeth,
perceiving it was calculated of purpose to bring her
government into difreputation, laboured to destroy
its effects, by a counter-proclamation, and became
more disgusted than ever with the Scottish Queen *.

Eforts of THE Regent, on his return, found the kingdom
Maar-s ad- in the utmost tranquillity. But the rage of the
berents a- D
eaini him. Queen's adherents, which had been suspended in

expe&ation that the conference in England would
terminate to her advantage, was now ready to break
out with all the violence of civil war. They were
encouraged, too, by the appearance of a leader,
whole high quality and pretensions entitled him to
great authority in the nation. This was the Duke
of Chatelherault, who had resided for some years in

Haynes, 50o. 503. See Append. No. XXVIII.

France,

France, and was now sent over by that court, with B o o K
a small supply of money, in hopes that the pretence V.
of the first nobleman in the kingdom would -
strengthen the Queen's faction. Elizabeth had de- I569.
tained him in England, for some months, under
various pretences, but was obliged at last to susser
him to proceed on his journey. Before his depar-
ture, Mary invested him with the high dignity of
her Lieutenant General in Scotland, together with Feb. zS.
the fantastic title of her adopted father.

THE Regent did not give him time to form his His vigo-

party into any regular body. He assembled an army, rous co-a
with his usual expedition, and marched to Glasgow. her party.
The followers of Argyll and Huntly, who com-
posed the chief part of the 0Qeen's faction, lying
in very distant corners of the kindom, and many
of the Duke's dependants having fallen, or having
been taken in the battle of Langfide, the spirit and
strength of his adherents was totally broken, and
an accommodation with the Regent was the only
thing which could prevent the deftru&tion of his
estate and vassals. This was effected without diffi-
culty; and on no unreasonable terms. The Duke
promised to acknowledge the authority both of the
King and of the Regent; and to claim no jurif-
diftion in consequence of the commission, which
he had received from the Queen. The Regent
bound himself to repeal the aa which had passed
for attainting several of the Queen's adherents; to
restore all who would submit to the King's govern-
ment, to the possession of their estates and honours
and to hold a Convention, wherein all the differences

between

B o o K between the two parties should be fettled by mutual

V. consent. The Duke gave hoffages for his faithful
-s---' Xperformance of the treaty; and, in token of their fin-
1569. cerity, he and Lord Herreis accompanied the Regent

to Stirling, and visited the young King. The Re-
gent set at liberty the prisoners taken at Langfide *.

ARGYLL and Huntly refused to be included in

this treaty. A secret negociation was carrying on,
in England, in favour of the captive Queen, with
so much success, that her affairs began to wear a
better afpe&, and her return into her own kingdom
seemed to be an event not very distant. The French
King had lately obtained such advantages over the
Hugonots, that the extinction of that party appear-
ed to be inevitable, and France, by recovering do-
meftic tranquillity, would be no longer prevented
from proteting her friends in Britain. These cir-
cumirances not only influenced Argyll and Huntly,
but made so deep an impression on the Duke, that
he appeared to be wavering and irresolute, and
plainly discovered that he wilhed to evade the ac-
complifhment of the treaty. The Regent saw the
darger of allowing the Duke to shake himfelfloofe,
in this manner, from his engagements; and instant-
ly formed a resolution equally bold, and politic.
He commanded his guards to seize Chatelherault in
his own house in Edinburgh, whither he had come,
in order to attend the Convention agreed upon; and,
regardless either of his dignity as the first nobleman
in the kingdom, and next heir to the Crown, or of
the promises of personal security, on which he had
* Cabbala, 16i. Crawf. Mem. o16.

relied,

relied, committed him and Lord Herries prisoners B o o K
to the castle of Edinburgh *. A blow so fatal and V.
unexpected, dispirited the party. Argyll submitted '-
to the King's government, and made his peace with IS69.
the Regent, on very easy terms; and Huntly, be-
ing left alone, was at last obliged to lay down his
anns.

SOON after, Lord Boyd returned into Scotland, July 21.
and brought letters to the Regent, both from the A propol

in favour

Englfih and Scottish Queens. A Convention was of Mary
held at Perth, in order to confider them. Eliza- reed.
beth's letter contained three different proposals with
regard to Mary; that fle Ihould either be restored
to the full possession of her former authority; or be
admitted to reign jointly with the King her son; or at
least be allowed to reside in Scotland, in some decent
retirement, without any share in the administration
of government. These overtures were extorted by
the importunity of Fenelon the French ambassador,
and have some appearance of being favourable to
the captive Queen. They were, however, perfecly
suitable to Elizabeth's general system with regard to
Scottish affairs. Among propositions so unequal
and disproportionate, (he easily saw where the choice
would fall. The two former were rejeaed; and
long delays muff necessarily have intervened, and
many difficulties have arisen, before every circum-
fiance relative to the last could be finally adjusted t.

* Crawf. Mem. inl. Melv. 202.
t Spotfw. 230.
VOL. I. K k MARY,

3B o o K MARY, in her letter, demanded that her marri-

V. age with Bothwell should be reviewed by the pro-
_ .-.-. per judges, and if found invalid, fiould be dif-
I569. solved by a legal sentence of divorce. This fatal

marriage was the principal source of all the cala-
mities fie had endured two years; a divorce was
the only thing which could repair the injuries, her
reputation had suffered by that ftep. It was her in-
terest to have proposed it early; and it is not easy
to account for her long silence with respect to this

,,crfoas point. Her particular motive for proposing it, at
ferying this time, began to be so well known, that the
the Qee demand was rejeaed by the Convention of estates.

They imputed it not so much to any abhorrence of
Borhwell, as to her eagerness to conclude a mar-
riage with the Duke of Norfolk.

THIS marriage was the object of that secret ne-

gociation in England, which we have already men-
tioned; but, like all those concerted for the relief
of the Queen of Scots, it ended tragically. The
fertile and projecling genius of Maitland first con-
ceived this scheme. During the conference at York,
he communicated it to the Duke himself, and to
the Bishop of Ross. The former readily closed
with a scheme, so flattering to his ambition. The
latter confidered it as a probable device for reftor-
ing his Mistress to liberty, and replacing her on
her throne. Nor was Mary, with whom Norfolk
held a correspondence, by means of his fifler Lady
Scroop, averse from a measure, which would have
restored her to her kingdom, with so much fplen-

dour.

dour . The sudden removal of the conference from B o K
York to Westminster suspended, but did not break V.
off this intrigue. Maidand and Ross were fill the ó-'
Duke's prompters, and his agents; and many let- I7
ters and love tokens were exchanged between him
and the Queen of Scots..

BUT as he could not hope, that under an admi- Conceals it

from 1.11-

niftration so vigilant as Elizabeth's, such an intrigue zabeth.
could be kept long concealed, he attempted to de-
ceive her by the appearance ofopennefs and candour,
an artifice which seldom fails of success. He men-
tioned to her the rumour, which was spread of his
marriage with the Scottish Queen; he complained
of it as a groundless calumny; and disclaimed all
thoughts of that kind, with many expressions full
of contempt, both for Mary's charater, and domi-
nions. Jealous as Elizabeth was of every thing re-
lative to the Queen of Scots, she feerm to have cre-
dited these profeflions t. But, instead of difconti-
nuing the negociation, he renewed it with greater
vigour, and acnitted into it new affociares. Among
these was the Regent of Scotland. He had given
great offence to Norfolk, by his public accusation
ofthe Queen, in breach of the concert into which
he had entered at York. He was then ready to re-
turn into Scotland. The influence oftheDuke, in
the North of England, was great. The Earls of
Northumberland and Westmorland, the most
powerful noblemen in that part of the kingdom,

Camd. 49. IHaynes, 573. State Trials, I. 73.
t Haynes, 574. State Trials, i. 79, So.

K k 2 threat-

B o o K threatened to revenge upon the Regent, the injuries

V. which he had done his Sovereign. In order to fe-
^-I--r cure his safe retreat, he addressed himself to Nor-
1569. folk, and after some apology for his past condut,

he insinuated that the Duke's scheme of marrying
the Queen his fiRer was no less acceptable to him,
than beneficial to both kingdoms; and that he would
concur with the utmost ardour, in promoting so de-
firable an event . Norfolk heard him with the cre-
dulity, natural to those, who are passionately bent
upon any design. He wrote to the two Earls to
desist from any hostile attempt against Murray, and
to that he owed his paflage through the Northern
counties, without disturbance.

Gains the ENCOURAGED by his success in gaining the Re-
thn E'ntgI gent, he next attempted to draw the English nobles
noble. to approve his design. The nation began to despair

of Elizabeth's marrying. Her jealousy kept the
question with regard to the right of fuccefflion un-
decided. The memory of the civil wars, which
had desolated England for more than a century, on
account of the disputed titles of the houses of York
and Lancaster, was till recent. Almost the whole
ancient nobility had perished, and the nation itself
had been brought to the brink of destruction, in
that unhappy contest. The Scottish Queen, though
her right offucceffion was generally held to be un-
doubted, might meet with formidable competitors.
She might marry a foreign and a Popish Prince,
and bring both liberty and religion into danger.

* Anders. iii. ;4.

But,

But, by marrying her to an Englishman, a zealous B o o K
Protestant, the molt powerful and most universally V.
beloved of all the nobles, an effe&ual remedy seem- t-
ed to be provided against all these evils. The greater 1569.
part of the Peers, either directly, or tacitly, ap-
proved of it, as a salutary project. The Earls of
Arundel, Pembroke, Leicester, and Lord Lumley,
subscribed a letter to the Scottish Qeen, written
with Leicester's hand, in which they warmly re-
commended the match, but insisted, by way of
preliminary, on Mary's promise, that (he Should at-
tempt nothing, in consequence of her pretensions to
the Englilh Crown, prejudicial to Elizabeth or to
her posterity; that she should coofent to a league
offensive and defensive between the two kingdoms;
that Ihe Lhould confirm the present establishment of
religion in Scotland; and receive into favour such
of her fubjefts as had appeared in arms againit her.
Upon her agreeing to the marriage, and ratifying
these articles, they engaged that the Englilh nobles
would not only concur in restoring her, immediate-
ly, to her own throne, but in securing to her that
of England, in reversion. Mary readily consented
to all these proposals, except the second, with re-
gard to which she demanded some time for consult-
ing her ancient ally the French King*.

THE whole of this negociation was industriously

concealed from Elizabeth. Her jealousy of the
Scottish Queen was well known, nor could it be ex-
pected, that she would willingly come into a meat

Anders. vol. iii. 51. Camd. 420.

sure,

B o o f: ure, which tended so visibly to save the reputation,

V. and to increase the power of her rival. But, in a

matter of so much con1equence to the nation, the
I569. taking a few ifeps without her knowledge, could

fearce be reckoned criminal; and while every per-
son concerned, even Mary and Norfolk thenmfelves,
declared, that nothing could be concluded without
obtaining her content, the duty and allegiance of
fibje&s seered to be fully preserved. The greater
part of the nobles regarded the matter in this light.
Those who conducted the intrigue, had farther and
~ore dangerous views. They saw the advantages
which Mary procured by this treaty, to be present
and certain; and the execution of the promises
which fie came under, to be distant and uncertain.
They had early communicated their scheme to the
Kings of France and Spain, and obtained their ap-
probation *. A treaty concerning which they con-
fulted foreign Princes, while they concealed it from
their own Sovereign, could not be deemed innocent.
They hoped, however, that the union of so many
nobles would render it necessary for Elizabeth to
comply; they flattered themselves, chat a combinar
rion so strong would be altogether irresistible; and
such was their confidence of success, that when a
plan was concerted, in the North of England, for
rescuing Mary out of the 'hands of her keepers,
Norfolk, who was afraid that if she recovered her
liberty, her sentiments in his favour might change,
used all his imereft to dissuade the conspirators from
.attempting it t.

* Arder. re!. iiH. 63. t Camd. 4z'.

If

, Is this situation did the affair remain, when Lord B o o K
Boyd arived from England; and, besides the let- V.
terswhich he produced publickly, brought others "
in cyphers from Norfolk and Throgmorton to the 1569
Regent, and to Maitland. These were full of the
most sanguine hopes. The whole nobles of Eng-
land concurred, said they, in favouring the design.
Every preliminary was adjusted; nor was it possible
that a scheme so deep laid, condu&ed with so much
art, and supported both by power and by numbers,
could miscarry, or be defeated in the execution.
Nothing now was wanting, but the concluding ce-
remony. It depended on the Regent to haften that,
by procuring a sentence of divorce, which would
remove the only obstacle that Itood in the way.
This was expected of him, in consequence of his
promise to Norfolk; and if he regarded either his
interest or his fame, or even his safety, he wonld
not fail to fulfil these engagements *

BUT the Regent was now in very different cir-

cumifances, from those which had formerly induced
him to affect an approbation of Norfolk's schemes.
He saw that the downfal of his own power must be
the first consequence of the Duke's success. And
if the Queen, who confidered him as the chief au-
thor of all her misfortunes, should recover her an-
cient authority, he could never expect favour, nor
scarce hope for impunity. No wonder he declined
a ftep so fatal to himself, and which would have
*Haynes, 520. Spotfw. 230. See Appendix, No. XXIX.

K k 4 efta-

B o K eltablifhed the grandeur of another on the ruins of

V. his own. This refusal occasioned a delay. But, as
569 . every other circumtance was fettled, the Bishop of

Ross, in the name of his Miffrefs, and the Duke, in
person, declared, in pretence of the French Ambaf-
fador, their mutual content to the marriage, and a
contrac to this purpose was signed, and intruded
to the keeping of the Ambassador *.

AuuSft1 x3. THE intrigue was now in so many hands, that
Elizabeth
discovers it could not long remain a secret. It began to be

ddefiDe whispered at court; and Elizabeth calling the Duke
feats it. into her pretence, expressed the utmost indignation

at his conduct, and charged him to lay aside all
thoughts of prosecuting such a dangerous design.
Soon after Leicester, who perhaps had counte-
nanced the project with no other intention, revealed
the whole circumstances of it to the Queen. Pem-
broke, Arundel, Lumley, and Throgmorton were
confined and examined. Mary was watched more
narrowly than ever; and Hastings Earl of Hun-
tingdon, who pretended to dispute with the Scot-
tilh Queen, her right to the succession, being joined
in commission with Shrewsbury, rendered her im-
prifonment more intolerable, by the excess of his
vigilance and rigour t- The Scottish Regent,
threatened with Elizabeth's displeasure, meanly be-
trayed the Duke; put his letters into her hands;
and furnished all the intelligence in his power t.
The Duke himself retired first to Howard-houfe,

*Cane, vcl. Ii. 4ii. 6. Haynes, 525, z56. 530. 532.
See Append. No. XXX.

and

and then, in contempt of the summons, to appear B o o K
before the Privy council, fled to his feat in Norfolk. V.
Intimidated by the imprisonment of his associates; '--
coldly received by his friends in that county; un- 569'
prepared for a rebellion; and unwilling perhaps to
rebel; he hesitated for some days, and at last obeyed
a second call, and repaired to Windsor. He was oa. s.
first kept as a prisoner in a private house, and then
sent to the Tower. After being confined there up-
wards of nine months, he was released upon his
humble submission to Elizabeth, giving her a pro-
mise, on his allegiance, to hold no farther corre-
fpondence with the Scottith Queen *. During tie
progress of Norfolk's negociations, the Queen's
partisans in Scotland, who made no doubt of their
issuing in her restoration to the throne, with an in-
crease of authority, were wonderfully elevated.
Maitland was the foul of that party, and the per- mpri',nd
son, whose activity and ability the Regent chiefly by the
dreaded. He had laid the plan of that intrigue, Reent
which had kindled such combustion in England.
He continued to foment the spirit of disaffection in
Scotland, and had seduced from the Regent Lord
Home, Kirkaldy, and several of his former affoci-
ates. While he enjoyed liberty, the Regent could
not reckon his own power secure. For this reason he
employed Captain Crawford, one of his creatures,
to accuse him of being accessary to the murder of
the King; and under that pretence carried him a
prisoner to Edinburgh. He would soon have been
brought to trial, but was saved by the friendship of

*Haynes, 525. 597. i

Kirk-

B o o -Kirkaldy, governor of the caitle, who, by pretend-

V. ing a warrant for that purpose from the Regent,

^t v got him out of the hands of the person, to whose
1569. care he was committed, and conducted him into the

castle, which, from that time, was entirely under
Maitland's command. The loss of a place of so
much importance, and the defecion of a man so
eminent for military skill as Kirkaldy, brought the
Regent into some difreputation, for which, how-
ever, the success of his ally Elizabeth abundantly
compensated.

A ~blion THE intrigue carried on for restoring the Scottish
snbt bu- Queen to liberty having been discovered, and dif-
Mar's ad- appointed, an attempt was made, to the fame pur-

pose, by force of arms, but with no better success.
The Earls of Northumberland and Westmorland,
though little diftinguilhed by their personal merit,
were two of the most ancient and powerful of the
Englilh peers. Their estates in the northern coun-
ties were great, and they pofleffed that influence
over the inhabitants, which was hereditary in the
popular and martial families of Percy and of Nevil.
They were both attached to the Popish religion, and
discontented with the court, where new men, and a
new system prevailed. Ever since Mary's arrival in
England, they had warmly espoused her interest,
and zeal for popery; opposition to the court, and
commiseration of her sufferings, had engaged them
in different plots for her relief. Notwithstanding
the vigilance of her keepers, they held a close cor-
rcfpondence with her, and communicated to her all

their

their designs*. They were privy to Norfolk's B o K
fchermes; but the caution with which he proceeded V.
did not suit their ardour and impetuosity. The '
liberty of the Scottifhi Queen was not their sole ob- i569
jec. They aimed at bringing about a change in
the religion, and a revolution in the government of
the kingdom. For this reason, they solicited the
aid of the King of Spain, the avowed and zealous
patron of Popery in that age. Nothing could be
more delightful to the restless spirit of Philip, or
more necessary towards facilitating his schemes in
the Netherlands, than the involving England in the
confusion and miseries of a civil war. The Duke of
Alva, by his dire&ion, encouraged the two Earls,
and promised, fo'foon as they either took the field
with their forces, or surprised any place of strength,
or rescued the Queen of Scots, that he would sup-
ply them both with money, and a strong body of
troops. La Mothe, the Governor of Dunkirk, in
the disguise of a sailor, founded the ports where it
would be most proper to land. And Chiapini Vi-
telli, one of Alva's ablest officers, was dispatched
into England, on pretence of fettling some com-
mercial differences between the two nations; but
in reality, that the rebels might be sure of a leader
of experience, as soon as they ventured to take
arms t.

THE condu& of this negociation occasioned many Dcf2atcd.

meetings and messages between the two Earls. Eli-

* Haynes, 595. Murdin, 44. 62, &c.
t Carte, vol. iii. 489, 490. Caimd. 421.

zabeth

B o o K zabeth was informed of these; and though Ihe sus-

V. peaed nothing of their real design, she concluded

- that they were among the number of Norfolk's
1569. confidents. They were summoned, for this reason,

to repair to court. Conscious of guilt, and afraid of
discovery, they delayed giving obedience. A fe-
cond, and more peremptory order was issued. This
they could not decline, without (haking off their
allegiance. And as no time was left for deliberation,
Nov. 9. they inrfantly ereced their standard against their

Sovereign. The re-establishing the catholic religion;
the fettling the order of fucceflion to the Crown;
the defence of the ancient nobility; were the mo-
tives they alleged to justify their rebellion t. Many
of the lower people flocked to them with such arms
as they could procure; and had the capacity of the
leaders been, in any degree, equal to the enterprise,
it muff have soon grown to be extremely formida-
ble. Elizabeth a&ed with prudence and vigour; and
was served by her subjects with fidelity and ardour.
On the firit rumour of an infurreRion, Mary was
removed to Coventry, a place of strength, which
could not be taken without a regular siege, a de-
tachment of the rebels, which was sent to rescue her,
returned without success. Troops were assembled in
different parts of the kingdom; as they advanced,
the malecontents retired. In their retreat their num-
bers dwindled away, and their spirits funk. Despair
and uncertainty whither to diret their flight, kept
together for some time a small body of them among
the -nountains of Northumberland; but they were

t StrYpe, vol. i. 547.

at

at length obliged to disperse, and the chiefs took B o o K
refuge among the Scottish borderers. The two V.
Earls, together with the Countess of Northumber- *-
land, wandering for some days in the waftes of D1569
Liddifdale, were plundered by the banditti, ex-
posed to the rigours of the season, and left defti-
tute of the necessaries of life. Wefrmorland was
concealed by Scot of Buccleugh and Ker of Ser-
niherft, and afterwards conveyed into the Nether-
lands. Northumberland was seized by the Regent,
who had marched with some troops towards the
borders, to prevent any impression the rebels might
make on those mutinous provinces *.

AMIDST so many surprising events, the affairs of Church

the church, for two years, have almost escaped our aff'rs'
notice. Its General Assemblies were held regu-
larly; but no business of much importance em-
ployed their attention. As the number of the
Proteflant clergy daily increased, the deficiency of
the funds, set apart for their subsistence, became
greater. Many efforts were made towards reco-
vering the ancient patrimony of the church, or at
least so much of it as was possessed by the Popish
incumbents, a race of men, who were, now, not
only useless, but burdensome to the nation. But
though the manner in which the Regent received
their addresses and complaints, was very different
from that to which they had been accustomed, no
effectual remedy was provided; and while they
suffered intolerable oppression, and groaned under

Cabbala, 171. Camd. 4:2.

extreme

Bo o S extreme poverty, fair words, and liberal promises

V. were all they were able to obtain*.

i1^5Q- ELIZABETH now began to be weary of keeping
reolves o such a dangerous prisoner as the Scottilh Queen.
giiyupth During the former year, the tranquillity of her go-
-Reget. vernment had been disturbed, first by a secret com-

bination of some of her nobles, then by the rebel-
lion of others; and the often declared, not with-
out reason, that Mary was the bidden cause of both.
Many of her own subje&s favoured, or pitied the
captive Queen; the Roman Catholic Princes on
the continent were warmly interested in her cause.
The detaining her any longer in England, ihe fore-
saw, would be made the pr .ext or occasion of
perpetual cabals and infurretions among the for-
mer; and might expose her to the hostile attempts
of the latter. She resolved, therefore, to give up
Mary into the hands of the Regent, whose security,
no less than her own, depended on preventing her
from reafcending the throne. The negociation for
this purpose was carried some length, when it was
discovered by the vigilance of the Bilhop of Ross,
who, together with the French and Spanish Am-
bafladors, remonifrated against the infamy of such
an action, and represented the surrendering the
Queen to her rebellious subjects, to be the fame
thing, as if Elizabeth should, by her own autho-
rity, condemn her to instant death. This procured
a delay; and the murder of the Regent prevented
the revival of that design t.

* Cald. vol. ii. So, &c. t Carte, vol. iii. 491. An-
erf. vol. iii. 84.

HA-

HAMILTON of Bothwellaugh was the person B o o

who committed this barbarous ation. He had been V.
condemned to death soon after the battle of Lang- --
fide, as we have already related, and owed his life But heis
to the Regent's clemency. But part of his estate murdercd.
had been bestowed upon one of the Regent's fa-
vourites, who seized his house, and turned out his
wife naked, in a cold night, into the open fields,
where, before next morning, ihe became furiously
mad. This injury made a deeper impression on him
than the benefit he had received, and from that mo-
ment he vowed to be revenged upon the Regent.
Party-rage strengthened and inflamed his private re-
fentment. His kinsmen the Hamiltons applauded
the enterprise. The maxims of that age justified
the most desperate course he could take to obtain
vengeance. He followed the Regent for some time,
and watched for an opportunity to strike the blow.
He resolved at last to wait till his enemy should ar-
rive at Linlithgow, through which he was to pass in
his way from Stirling to Edinburgh. He took his
stand in a wooden gallery, which had a window to-
wards the street; spread a feather-bed on the floor,
to hinder the noise of his feet from being heard;
hung up a black cloth behind him, that his shadow
might not be observed from without; and after all
this preparation, calmly expe&ed the Regent's ap-
proach, who had lodged during the night in a house
not far distant. Some indiftin& information of the
danger which threatened him had been conveyed
to the Regent, and he paid so much regard to it,
that he resolved to return by the fame gate through

which

B o o K which he had entered, and to fetch a compass round

V. the town. But as the crowd about the gate was

' great, and he himself unacquainted with fear, he
1570. proceeded directly along the street; and the throng

of the people obliging him to move very slowly,
gave the assassin time to take so true an aim, that
he ihot him with a single bullet through the lower
part of his belly, and killed the horse of a gentle-
man who rode on his other fide. His followers in-
ftantly endeavoured to break into the house whence
the blow had come, but they found the door strong-
ly barricaded; and before it could be forced open,
Hamilton had mounted a fleet horse, which stood
ready for him at a back-paffage, and was got far
beyond their reach. The Regent died the fame
night of his wound *.
Hirharc- THERE is no person, in that age, about whom

historians have been more divided, or whose character
has been drawn with such opposite colours. Personal
intrepidity, military skill, sagacity and vigour in
the administration of civil affairs, are virtues, which
even his enemies allow him to have possessed, in an
eminent degree. His moral qualities are more du-
bious, and ought neither to be praised, nor cenfur-
ed, without great reserve, and many distinctions.
In a fierce age, he was capable of using viEtory
with humanity, and of treating the vanquished with
moderation. A patron of learning, which, among
martial nobles, was either unknown or despised.
Zealous for religion, to a degree, which distinguish-

Buchan. 38;. Crawf. Mem. z24.

ed

ed him, even at a time when professions of that BOOK
kind were not uncommon. His confidence in his V.
friends was extreme, and inferior only to his libe- '-'
rality towards them, which knew no bounds. A 1570.
disinterested passion for the liberty of his country,
prqmpted him to oppose the pernicious system, which
the Princes of Lorrain had obliged the Queen-mo-
ther to pursue. On Mary's return into Scotland,
he served her with a zeal and affeSion, to which he
sacrificed the friendship of those who were most at-
tached to his person. But, on the other hand, his
ambition was immoderate; and events happened
that opened to him vast projets, which allured his
enterprising genius, and led him to ations incon-
fiftent with the duty of a fubje&. His treatment
of the Queen, to whose bounty he was so much in-
debted, was unbrotherly and ungrateful. The de-
pendence on Elizabeth, under which he brought
Scotland, was disgraceful to the nation. He de-
ceived and betrayed Norfolk, with a baseness pn-
worthy of a man of honour. His elevation to such
unexpeted dignity, inspired him with new passions,
with haughtiness and reserve; and initead of his na-
tural manner, which was blunt and open, he as-
sected the arts of dissimulation and refinement.
Fond, towards the end of his life, of flattery, and
impatient of advice, his creatures, by soothing his
vanity, led him astray, while his ancient friends
ltood at a distance, and predi&ed his approaching
fall. But, among the turbulence and confusion of
that factious period, he dispensed justice with so
much impartiality, he repressed the licentious bor-
VOL. I. L 1 derers

Boox derers with so much courage, and established such.

V. uncommon order and tranquillity in the country,

' that his adminiftraton was extremely popular, and
7°. he was long and affetionately remembered among

the commons, by the name of the Good Regent.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
