vi.; 'p~~-

THE
STORY

OF THE
E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR

IN THREE

CHARLES V.

VOLUMES.

VOL. .
H I

R

A

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
RE I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

WITH
A VIEW of the PROGRESS of SOCIETY

in EUROPE, from the Subversion of the Roman Em-
pire, to the Beginning of the Sixteenth Century.

IN THREE VOLUMES.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.
PRINCIPAL of the UNIVERSITY of EDINBI?,H, and

HISTORIOGRAPHER to His MAJESTY forSCOTLAND.

VO ,. I.

D U B 1, I N:
Printed for W. and \V. SMITH, A. EATHILEY,

G. FAULKNk.IR, S. POWELL, P. and W. WILSON,
J. EXSHAW, H. SAUNDERS, W. WIITESTONE,
W. SLEATER, L. FLIN, B. GRIERSON, E. LYNCII,
D. CHAMIERL.AI NE, J. POrTS, J. Hoi.Y, jun.
J. WIJ.LIAMS, J. MITT I1.LL, W. COLLES, J. MILLI-
KEN, C. INGHAM, and J. IPORTER, Booklcllers.

M DCC LXX.

# TO THE KING.

TO THE

K I N G.

SIR,
I P R E S U ME to lay before

Your Majetfy the Hiltory of a

Period, which, if the abilities of the
Writer were equal to the dignity
of the Subjet, would not be un-
worthy the attention of a Monarch,
who is no less a Judge than a Patron
of Literary Merit.

HISTORY
A3

HISTORY claims it as her prero-

gative to offer inftrudion to KINGS,
as well as to their people. What
refleions the Reign of the Empe-
ror CHARLES V. may suggest toYour
Majetfy, it becomes not me to con-
jecture. But your SubjeEts cannot
observe the various calamities, which

that Monarch's ambition to be di-

flinguifhed as a Conqueror, brought
upon his dominions, without recol-
leing the felicity of their own
times, and looking up with grati-
tude to their Sovereign, who, dur-
ing the fervour of youth, and amidf
the career of victory, pofeffed such

self-

felf-command, and maturity ofjudg-
ment, as to set bounds to his own
triumphs, and prefer the blessings of
peace to the splendour of military
glory.

POSTERITY will not only celebrate

the Wisdom of Your Majesty's
choice, but will enumerate the many
Virtues, which render your Reign
conspicuous for a sacred regard to all
the duties, incumbent on the Sove-
reign of a Free People.

IT is our happiness to feel the in-

fluence of these Virtues; and to live
under the dominion of a Prince, who

A 4 delights

delights more in promoting the Pub-
lick Welfare, than in receiving the
just Praise of his royal beneficence.
I.am,

SIR,
YOUR MAJESTY's

Most faithful Subjet,
And mol dutiful Servant,

RUSERTSON.
WILLIA

# THE PREFACE.

THE

PREFACE.
N 0 period in the history of ones own

country can be confidered as altogether

uninteresting. Such tranfations as tend to
illufirate the progress of its conititution, laws,
or manners, merit the utmost attention. Even
remote and minute events are objects of a
curiosity, which, being natural to the human
mind, the gratification of it is attended with
pleasure.

BUT, with respect to the history of so-

reign States, we muff set other bounds to
our desire of information. The univcrfal
progress of science during the two last cen-

turies,

turies, the art of printing, and other obvious
causes, have filled Europe with such a mul-
tiplicity of histories, and with such vast col-
lections of historical materials, that the term
of human life is too short for the tfudy or
even the perusal of them. It is necessary,
then, not only for those who are called to
conduct the affairs of nations, but for such
as inquire and reason concerning them, to
remain satisfied with a general knowledge of
distant events, and to confine their itudy of
history in detail chiefly to that period, in
which the several States of Europe having
become intimately connected, the operations
of one power are so felt by all, as to influence
their councils, and to regulate their mea,
fures.

SOME boundary, then, ought to be fixed

in order to fepairate there periods. An era
should be pointed out, prior to which, each
country, little conneEted with those around it,
may trace its own hiflory apart; after which,
the tra:.faflions of every considerable nation

in

in Europe become interesting and inftrutive
to all. With this intention I undertook to

write the history of the Emperor CHARLES V.
It was during his administration that the
powers of Europe were formed into one
great political system, in which each took
a station, wherein it has since remained with
less variation, than could have been expeet-
ed after the hocks occasioned by so many
internal revolutions, and so many foreign
wars. The great events which happened
then have not hitherto spent their force.
The political principles and maxims, ther es-
tablifhed, still continue to operate. The ideas
concerning the balance of power, then intro-
duced or rendered general, still influence the
councils of nations.

THE age of CHARLES V. may therefore

be confidered as the period at which the
political fate of Europe began to aflme a
new form. I have endeavoured to render
my account of it an introduction to the

history

history of Europe subsequent to his reign.
While his numerous Biographers describe his
personal qualities and ations; while the his-

torians of different countries relate occur-

rences the consequences of which were local

or transient, it hath been my purpose to re-
cord only those great tranfations in his reign,
the effects of which were universal, or conti-
nue to be permanent.

As my readers could derive little inftruc-

tion from such a history of the reign of

CH A R LES V. 'without some information

concerning the state of Europe previous to
the sixteenth century, my desire of supplying
this has produced a preliminary volume, in
which I have attempted to point out and ex-
plain the great causes and events,. to whose
operation all the improvements in the poli-
tical state of Europe, from the subversion
of the Roman Empire, to the beginning of
the fifteenth century, must be ascribed.
I have exhibited a view of the progress of
society in Europe, not only with refped to

interior
xii

interior government, laws and manners, but
with refpet to the command of the national
force requisite in foreign operations; and I
have described the political conititution of the
principal Rfates in Europe at the time when
CHARLES V. began his reign.

IN this part of my work I have been led

into several critical disquisitions, which belong
more properly to the province of the lawyer
or antiquary, than to that of the historian.
These I have placed at the end of the sirs
volume, under the title of Proofs and Illus-
trations. Many of my readers will, proba-
bly, give little attention to such researches.
To some they may, perhaps, appear the mofl
curious and interesting part of the work. I
have carefully pointed out the sources from
which I have derived information, and have
cited the writers on whose authority I rely
with a minute exadnefs, which might ap-
pear to border upon oftcntation, if it were
poflible to be vain of having read books,
many of which nothing but tle duty ,f

ex.lminilg

Xiii

examining with accuracy whatever I laid be-
fore the publick, could have induced me to
open. As my inquiries conducted me often
into paths which were obscure or little fre-
quented, such constant recourse to the au-
thors who have been my guides, was not on-
ly necessary for authenticating the facts which
are the foundations of my reasonings, but
may be useful in pointing out the way to such
as shall hereafter hold the fame course, and in
enabling them to carry on their researches
with greater facility and success.

EVERY intelligent reader will observe one

omillion in my work, the reason of which it
is necessary to explain. I have given no ac-
count of the conquests of Mexico and Peru,
or of the establishment of the Spanish colo-
nies in the continent and islands of Ame-

rica. The history of there events I original.
ly intended to have related at considerable
length. But upon a nearer and more atten-
tive consideration of this part of my plan,
I found that the discovery of the new world;

the
xiv

the ate of society among its ancient inha-
bitants; their character, manners, and arts;
the genius of the European settlements in its
various provinces, together with the influence
of these upon the systems of policy or com-
merce in Europe, were subjects so splendid
and important, that a superficial view of
them crnlld afford little latisfaCtiol; to treat
of them as extensively as they merited, muff
produce an episode, disproportionate to the
principal work. I have therefore reserved
these for a separate history; which, if the
performance now offered to the publick hall
receive its approbation, I propose to under-
take.

THOUGH, by omitting fulch considerable

but detached articles in the reign of CHARLES
V. I have circumscribed my narration within
more narrow limits, I am yet persuaded, from
this view of the intention and nature of the
work which I thought it necessary to lay be-
fore my readers, that the plan muit still ap-

pear

XV

pear to them too extensive, and the under
taking too arduous. I have often felt then
to be so. But my conviction of the utility of
such a history prompted me to persevere
With what success I have executed it, the
publick must now judge. I wait, in folici.
tude, for its decision; to which I hall ubmit
with a refpcctful lllence.

A VIEW
xvi

## SECTION I. View of the Progress of Society in Europe, with respect to interior Government, Laws and Manners.

A

V I E W
VIEW

OF THE
PROGRESS OF SOCIETY

IN
EUROPE,

FROM THE
SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,

TO THE
BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

SECTION I.

View of the Progress of Society in Europe, with re-
fpeft to interior Government, Laws and Manners.

W O great revolutions have hapDened SECT. I.
in the political slate, an.l in the m:r- "--

T ., he cfi'ee. ts

ners of the European nations. 'l,, the Ro-

firfi was occasioned by the progress of the Ro- man power
man power; the second by the tilbverfion of the ttt of Eu-
Roman Empire. When the spirit of cnqueftroPe.
led the armies of Rome beyond the Alps, they
found all the countries which they invaded, in-
habited by people whom they denominated bar-

VoL, I. B barians,

SECT. I. barians, but who were nevertheless brave and

v'T independent. These defended their ancient pof-

feflions with obstinate valour. It was by the fu-
periority of their discipline, rather than of their
courage, that the Romans gained any advan-
tage over them. A single battle did not, as
among the effeminate inhabitants of Asia, de-
cide the fate of a ifate. The vanquished people
resumed their arms with fresh spirit, and their
undisciplined valour, animated by the love of li-
berty, supplied the want of conduct as well as

The defola-of union. During there long and fierce ftrug-
tion which
it ,,',f,-gles for dominion or independence, the coun-
ed. tries of Europe wer: successively laid waste, a

great part of their inhabitants perished in the
field, many were carried into slavery, and a fee-
ble remnant, incapable of further reiftance,
Submitted to the Roman power.

The im- THE Romans having thus desolated Europe,
provementss
rwhich it n- et themselves to civilize it. The form of go-
troduced. vernment which they established in the con-

quered provinces, though revere, was regular,
and preserved public tranquillity. As a confo-
lation for the loss of liberty, they communica-
ted their arts, sciences, language, and manners,
to their new fubjets. Europe began to breathe,
and to recover strength after the calamities
which it had undergone; agriculture was en-
couraged; population encreafed; the ruined ci-
ties were rebuilt: new towns were founded; an
appearance of prosperity succeeded, and repair-
ed, in rome degree, the havock of war.

The bad THIS state, however, was far from being
conieTuen- happy, or favourable to the improvement of the
ces of their rr'Jr
doinion. human mind. The vanquished nations were dif-

armed by their conquerors, and overawed by
foldicrs kept in pay to restrain them. They

1,;~:?',';i%. were

were given up as a prey to rapacious governors,ScTr.
who plundered them with impunity; and werel- '
drained of their wealth by exorbitant taxes im-
posed with To little attention to the situation of
the provinces, that the impositions were gene-
rally encreafed in proportion to their inability
to support them. They were deprived of their
most enterprizing citizens, who retorted to a dif-
tant capital in quest of preferment, or of riches;
and were accustomed in all their actions to look
up to a superior, and tamely to receive his com-
mands. Under all these depressing circumftan-
ces, it was impossible that they could retain vi-
gour or generosity of mind. The martial and
independent spirit, which had distinguished their
ancestors, became exlinct among all the people
fubjeted to the Roman yoke; they loft not on-
ly the habit but even the capacity of deciding
for themselves, or of acting from the impulse of
their own minds; and the dominion of the Ro-
mans, like that of all great Empires, degraded
and debated the human tpecies [A].

A SOCIETY in this state could not subsist long. The irrup-

There were defects in the Roman government,ti"o of the
even in its most perfect form, which threatened ation,.
its dissolution. Time ripened these original
feeds of corruption, and gave birth to many
new disorders. A constitution, unsound, and
worn out, must have fallen in pieces of itself,
without any external shock. The violent ir-
ruption of the Goths, Vandals, Huns, and other
barbarians hastened this event, and precipitated
the downfall of the Empire. New nations seem-
ed to arise, and to rufl from unknown regions
in order to take vengeance on the Romans for
the calamities which they had inflicted on. man-
kind. These fierce tribes either inhabited the

[A] NOTE 1.

B 2 various

3

"' °'been subdued by the Romans, or were scattered

over the vast countries in the north of Europe,
and north weft of Asia, which are now occupi-
ed by the Danes, the Swedes, the Poles, the
fubjees of the Ruffian empire, and the Tartars.
Their condition, and tranfations previous to
their invasion of the Empire are but little known.
All our information with refpe6t to these is de-
rived from the Romans; and as they did not
penetrate far into countries which were at that
time uncultivated and uninviting, the accounts
of their original state given by them are ex-
tremely imperfet. The rude inhabitants them-
selves, deffitute of science, and of records, with-
out leisure, or curiosity to enquire into remote
events, retained, perhaps, some indiftind me-
mory of recent occurrences, but beyond these,
all was buried in oblivion, or involved in dark-
ness, and in fable [B].

State of the THE prodigious swarms which poured in upon
roum trwhithe Empire from the beginning of the fourth
they iffrue. century to the final extinction of the Roman

power, have given rife to an opinion that the
countries whence they iflued were crowded with
inhabitants; and various theories have been
formed to account for such an extraordinary de-
gree of population as hath procured there coun-
tries the appellation of The Storehouse of Na-
tions. But if we confider that the countries pof-
fesTed by the people who invaded the Empire
were of vast extent; that a great part of there
was covered with woods and marshes; that tome
of the mot considerable of the barbarous nati-
ons subsisted entirely by hunting or pasturage, in
both which states of society large trats of land
are required for maintaining a few inhabitants;

[B] NOTE 1H.

and

A VRWT OF )TRE
4

and that all of them were firangera to the arts,sECT- I.
and industry, without which population cannot"
increase to any great degree, it is evident, that
these countries could not be so populous in anci-
ent times as they are at present, when they still
continue to be less peopled than any other part
of Europe or of Asia.

BUT if these circumstances prevented the bar, The people

barousnations from becoming populous, they con', ,rin
tributed to inspire, or to strengthen the martial
spirit by which they were distinguished. lnured
by the rigour of their climate, or the poverty of
their foil, to hardships which rendered their bo-
dies firm, and their minds vigorous; accuf-
tomed to a course of life which was a continual
preparation for ation: and disdaining every oc-
cupation but that of war; they undertook, and
prosecuted their military enterprizes with an ar-
dour and impetuosity, of which men softened by
the refinements of more polished times, can
scarce form any idea [CJ.

THEIR first inroads into the Empire proceed- Tle m,-

ed rather from the love of plunder, than fromhiv, 'ft
the deljre of new fettlerents. Roused to armse'Ct."'"t
by some enterprizing or popular leader, they
dallicd out of their forcfls; broke in upon her
frontier provinces with irresistible violence ; put
all who opposed them to the Iwoyd; carri, d off
the moit valuable cfftds of the inhabitants;
dragged along multitudes of captives in chains;
wafted all before them with fire or IWkvrd; and
returned in triumph to thir ilds and t.fitn11ll s.
Their success, togetli:r with tlle acconlllit which
they gave of t unknown cofnvtilcis ad
luxuries that abounded in the cotitunis Iht ti.c
cultivated, or blell.d witl a nildcr climate tilt:l

[C] N)LT 1ls.

B 3 tlcir

SECT. I their own, excited new adventurers, and exposed

' the frontier to new devastations.

Their rea- WHEN nothing was left to plunder in the ad-
sons for set-.
tling in the jacent provinces ravaged by frequent incursions,
countries they marched farther from home, and finding
which they .
conquered. it difficult, or dangerous to return, they began

to fettle in the countries which they had fubdu-
ed. The sudden and short excursions in quest
of booty, which had alarmed, and disquieted
the Empire, ceased; a more dreadful calamity
impended. Great bodies of armed men with
their wives and children, and slaves and flocks,
issued frth, like regular colonies, in quest of
new settlements. People who had no cities, and
seldom any fixed habitation, were so little at-
tached to their native foil, that they migrated
without reluctance from one place to another.
New adventurers followed them. The lands
which they deserted were occupied by more re-

The extent mote tribes of barbarians. Thele, in their turn,
tfem',t: ' pished forward into more fertile countries, and

like a torrent continually increasing, rolled on,
and swept every thing before them. In less than
two centuries from their first irruption, barba-
rians of various names and lineage, plundered
and took possession of Thrace, Pannonia, Gaul,
Spain, Africa, and at last of Italy, and Rome
itself. The vast fabrick of the Roman power
which it had been the work of ages to perfect,
was in that short period overturned from the
foundation.

The cir- MANY concurring causes prepared the way for
cumtlances
which c.- this great revolution, and ensured success to the
finnedthe nations which invaded the Empire. The Ro-
dnwnf,d of
tile ll',l man commonwealth had conquered the world
c.mrni' by the wisdom of its civil maxims, and the ri-

gour of its military discipline. But, under the

Emperors,
6

Emperors, the former were forgotten or despised, SCT. I.
and the latter was gradually relaxed. The ar- ""v-
mies of the Empire in the fourth and fifth cen-
turies bore scarce any resemblance to those invin-
cible legions which had been victorious wherever
they marched. Instead of freemen, who volun-
tarily took arms from the love of glory, or of
their country, provincials and barbarians were
bribed or forced into service. They were too
feeble, or too proud to submit to the fatigue of
military duty. They even complained of the
weight of their defensive armour, as intolerable,
and laid it aside. Infantry, from which the ar-
mies of ancient Rome derived their vigour and
liability, fell into contempt; the effeminate and
undisciplined soldiers of later times could scarce
be brought to venture into the field but on horse-
back. These wretched troops, however, were
the only guardians of the Empire. Thejealoufy
of despotism had deprived the people of the use
of arms; and subjects oppressed and rendered
incapable of defending themselves, had neither
spirit nor inclination to resist their invaders, from
whom they had little to fear, because they
could scarce make their condition more unhappy.
As the martial spirit became eytint, the reve-
nues of the Empire gradually diminifihed. The
taste for the luxuries of the East increased to such
a pitch in the Imperial court, that great fiums
were carried into India, from whence money never
returns. By the vait subsidies paid to the barba-
rous nations a AtAl greatt r quantity of 1pccies was
withdrawn froep'.circulation. The frontier pro-
vinces wafted fbyfrequent incurilions became un-
able to pay the customary tribute; and the wealth
of the world, which had long centered in the ca-
pital of the Empire, ceased to flow thither in tlie
lame abundance, or was diverted intoorlu r cllan-
ntls. The limits of the Empire continued to be

B4 as

7

SECT. I. asextenfiveasever, while the spirit requisite for its

L'T--defence declined, and its resources were exhaust-

ed. A vaif body, languid, and almost unani-
mated, became incapable of any effort to save it-
self, and was easily overpowered. The Empe-
rors, who had the absolute direction of this difor-
dered system, funk in the softness of Eastern lux-
ury, shut up within the walls of a palace, igno-
rant of war, unacquainted with affairs, and go-
verned entirely by women and eunuchs, or by-
ministers equally effeminate, trembled at the
approach of danger, and under circumstances
which called for the utmost vigour in counsel as
well as in ation, discovered all the impotent ir-
resolution of fear, and of folly.

The cir- IN every respect, the condition of the barba,
cumfiances
which con- rous nations was the reverse of that of the Rot
tributed to mans. Among them, the martial spirit was in
the success
of the bar- full vigour; their leaders were hardy and enter-
,arous nai- prizing; the arts which had enervated the Ro-

mans were unknown among them; and such
was the nature of their military inflitutions, that
they brought forces into the field without any
trouble, and supported them at little expence.
The mercenary and effeminate troops stationed
on the frontier, astonished at their fierceness, ei-
ther fled at their approach, or were routed in the
first onset. The feeble expedient to which the
Emperors had recourse, of taking large bodies of
the barbarians into pay ad of employing them
to repel new invaders, instead eif;retarding, has-
tened the defiruction of the Emntire. They soon
turned their arms against their iatrrs, and with
greater advantage than ever: for, by tfrving in
the Roman armies, they had acquired all the
discipline, or kill in war, which the Romans
still retained; and upon adding thcfe to their na-
tive fcrocity, they became altogether irresistible.

B3T
8

SECT. I.

BUT though from these, and many other caufes,hepirit

the progress and conquests of the nations which with which
over- ran the Empire, became o extremely rapid, h' rrie
they were accompanied with horrible devastations,
and an incredible deftruion of the human fpe-
cies. Civilized nations which take arms upon
cool reflection, from motives of policy or pru-
dence, with a view to guard against Come distant
danger, or to prevent ome remote contingency,
carry on their hostilities with so little rancour, or
animosity, that war among them is disarmed of
half its terrors. Barbarians are strangers to such
refinements. They rulh into war with impetu-
ofity, and prosecute it with violence. Their sole
objet is to make their enemies feel the weight of
their vengeance, nor does their rage subside until
it be satiated with inflicting on them every poffi.
ble calamity. It is with 'uch a spirit that the fa-
vage tribes in America carry on their petty wars.
It was with the fame spirit that the more power.
ful and no less fierce barbarians in the north of
Europe, and of Asia, fell upon the Roman Ems
pire.

WHEREVER they marched, their route was The dcfola-

marked with blood. They ravaged or destroycd h w"ih
all around them. They nade no diitindion be- brought
tween what was sacred, and what was profane. UrOp Eu.
They refpeted no age, or sex, or rank. What
escaped the fury of the first inundation perished
in those which followed it. The molt fertile and
populous provinces were converted into dcrts,
in which were scattered the ruins of villages and
cities, that afforded helter to a fw miserable
inhabitants whom chance had preserved, or the
sword of the enemy, wearied with destroying,
had spared. The conquerors who si:ft ittled in
the countries which they had wafted were expel-

led

SECT. I. led or exterminated by new invaders, who corn-
'-'v""ing from regions farther removed from the civi-

lized parts of the world, were fill more fierce
and rapacious. This brought new calamities upon
mankind, which did not cease' until the north, by
pouring forth fucceflive swarms, was drained of
people, and could no longer furnish initruments
of deftrution. Famine and pestilence, which
always march in the train of war, when it rava-
ges with such inconsiderate cruelty, raged in eve-
ry part of Europe, and compleated its sufferings.
If a man were called to fix upon the period in
the history of the world, during which the condi-
tion of the human race was moit calamitous and
affliated, he would without hesitation, name that
which elapsed from the death of Theodosius the
Great, to the eftablilhment of the Lombards in
Italy'. The contemporary authors who beheld
that scene of desolation, labour and are at a loss
for expressions to describe the horror of it. he
scourge of God, The destroyer of nations, are the
dreadful epithets by which they distinguish the
most noted of the barbarous leaders; and they
compare the ruin which they had brought on the
world, to the havock occasioned by earthquakes,
conflagrations, or deluges, the most formidable
and fatal calamities which the imagination of
man can conceive.

Theuniver- BUT no exprefions can convey so perfect an
hil chage idea of the deitrueive progress of the barbarians,
which they
occafiond as that which must strike an attentive observer,
i the slate when he contemplates the total change, which he

will discover in the state of Europe when it began
to recover some degree of tranquillity towards the
close of the sixth century. The Saxons were by

c Theodosius died A. D. 395. The reign of Alboinis

in Lombardy, began A. D. 571, so that this period was
1 6 years;

that
10

that time masters of the southern, and more fer-SEcr. I.
tile provinces of Britain; the Franks of Gaul ;
the Huns of Pannonia; the Goths of Spain; the
Goths and Lombards of Italy and the adjacent
provinces. Scarce any vestige of the Roman po-
licy, jurisprudence, arts, or literature remained.
New forms of government, new laws, new man-
ners, new dresses, new languages, and new names
of men and countries, were every where intro-
duced. To make a great or sudden alteration
with refpe& to any of these, unless where the
ancient inhabitantsofa country have been almost
totally exterminated, has proved an undertaking
beyond the power of the greatest conquerors [D].
The total change which the settlement of the
barbarous nations occasioned in the state of Eu-
rope, may, therefore, be confidered as a more
decisive proof, than even the testimony of con-
temporary historians, of the deftrudive violence
with which they carried on their conquests, and
of the havock which they had made from one
extremity of this quarter of the globe to the
other [E].

IN the obscurity of the chaos occasioned by thisFrom this

erierl wreck osJ

s. we ~

s ~ s~rc~ s (taLe of' dif-

general wreck of nations, we muff tearch for theorder the
feeds of order, and endeavour to di fcover the firfi la8 "f go-
rudiments of the policy and laws now eftablifhed.,,w' met
in Europe. To this source, the historians of its'1''dm"uaft
different kingdoms, have attempted, though with be ,aced.
less attention and industry than the irnportance of
the enquiry merits, to trace back the inftitutiols,
and customs peculiar to their countrymen. It is
not my province to give a minute detail of the
progress of government and manners in each par-
ticular nation, whose tranfaCrions are the ol)edt
of the following lliftory. But in ord .r to exhibit a

[D] NOTE IV. [E] NOTE
v V.

j1111

II

Sccr. I. juitview of the slate of Europe at the opening of

'the sixteenth century, it is neceflary to look back,
and to contemplate the condition of the northern
nations upon their first settlement in those coun-
tries which they occupied. It is necessary to
mark the great steps by which they advanced
from barbarism to refinement, and to point out
those general principles and events which by their
uniform as well as extensive operation conducted
all of them to that degree of improvement in
policy and in manners which they had attained at
the period when Charles V. began his reign.

The princi- WHEN nations fubje& to despotic government
T'es on make conquests, there serve only to extend the
northern dominion and the power of their mailer. But
nations armies composed of freemen conquer for them-
made their
lettlements selves, not for their leaders. The people who
in Europe. overturned the Roman Empire, and fettled in its

various provinces, were of the latter elafs. Not
only the different nations that ifued from the
north of Europe, which has always been confi-
dered as the feat of liberty, but the Huns and
Alans who inhabited part of those countries which
have been marked out as the peculiar region of
servitude', enjoyed freedom and independence to
such a high degree as seems to be scarce compati-
ble with a state of social union, or with the sub.
ordination necessary to maintain it. They follow-
ed the chieftain, who led them forth in quest of
new settlements, not by constraint, but from
choice; not as soldiers whom he could order to
march, but as volunteers who offered to accom-
pany him [F]. They confidered their eonqucfts
as a' common property, in which all had a title

De L'cfprit dcs loix, l;v. 17, cli 3. [F] NOTE VI.

to

to hare, as all had contributed to acquire them St cT. 1.
[G]. In what manner, or by what principles,-'"'
they divided among them the lands which they
seized, we cannot now determine with any cer-
tainty. There is no nation in Europe whose re-
cords reach back to this remote period; and there
is little information to be got from the uninftruc-
tive and meagre chronicles, compiled by writers
ignorant of the true end, and unacquainted with
the proper objeds of history.

THIS new division of property, however, to-The feudal

gether with the maxims and manners to which it governmyen
gave rife, gradually introduced a species of go- eablihed
vernment formerly unknown. This singular in-"g
fitution is now diitinguifhed by the name of the
Feudalfyftem: and though the barbarous nations
which framed it, fettled in their new territories
at different times, came from different countries,
spoke various languages, and were under the com-
mand of separate leaders, the Feudal policy and
laws were established, with little variation, in
every kingdom of Europe. This amazing uni
formity hath induced ome authors' to believe
that all these nations, notwithstanding so many
apparent circumstances of diftindion, were origi-
nally the fame people. But it may be ascribed
with greater probability to the similar state of
society and of manners to which they were ac-
customed in their native countries, and to the
similar situation in which they found themselves
on taking possession of their new domains.

[G] NOTE VII. i Procop. de Bello Vandal. ap.
Script. Byz. edit. Ven. vol. i. p. 345.

As

N."-'fitions to maintain, not only against uch of the
defence the ancient inhabitants as they had spared, butagainfi
great obje the formidable inroads of new invaders, felf-de-
of feudal
policy. fence was their chief care, and seems to have

been the ole objiet of their first institution and
policy. Initead of those loose afolciations, which,
though they scarce diminished their personal in-
dependence, had been sufficient for their security
while they remained in their original countries,
they saw the necessity of confederating more
closely together, and of relinquishing rome of
their private rights in order to attain publick safe-
ty. Every freeman, upon receiving a portion of
the lands which were divided, bound himself to
appear in arms against the enemies of the com-
munity. This military service was the condition
upon which he received and held his lands, and
as they were exempted from every other burden,
that tenure, among a warlike people, was deemed
both easy and honourable. The King or general,
who led them to conquest, continuing Rill to be
the head of the colony, had, of course, the lar-
gest portion allotted to him. Having thus acqui-
red the means of rewarding past services, as well
as of gaining new adherents, he parcelled out his
lands with this view, binding thoi'e on whom they
were beitowed, to follow his standard with a
number of men in proportion to the extent of
the territory, vlhich they received, and to bear
arms in his defence. His chief officers imitated
the example of the sovereign, and in distributing
portions of their lands amnong their dependants,
annexed the fame condition to the grant. Thus
a fcudal kingdom reftmbled a military establish-
intent, rather than a civil institution. The vido-
ius army cantoned out in the country which it
l.'ld I;iztt, continued ranged under its proper of-
ficers, and subordinate to military command.

The

A VIEWr OF THE
I4

The names of a soldier and of a freeman wereSEcT. I.
fynonimousk. Every proprietor of land, girt'"
with a sword, was ready to march at the summons
of his superior, and to take the field against the
common enemy.

BUT though the Feudal policy seems to be foThe feudal

admirably calculated for defence againit the af-defeeivein
faults of any foreign power, its provisions for the its provifi-

ons for in~

interior order and tranquillity of society were ex-teriororder
tremely defective. The principles of diforderin fociey.
and corruption are discernable in that constitution
under its best and mot perfect form. They soon
unfolded themselves, and spreading with rapidity
through every part of the system, produced the
molt fatal effecs. The bond of political union
was extremely feeble; the sources of anarchy
were innumerable. The monarchical and arifto-
cratical parts of the constitution, having no in-
termediate power to balance them, were perpe-
tually at variance, and juftling with each other.
The powerful vaflals of the crown soon extorted
a confirmation for life of those grants of land,
which being at first purely gratuitous, had been
bestowed only during pleasure. Not satisfied
with this, they prevailed to have them converted
into hereditary poffeions. One ftep more corn-
pleated their usurpations, and rendered them un-
alienable [H]. With an ambition no less enter-
prifing, and more preposterous, they appropriated
to themselves titles of honour, as well as offices
of power or trust. These personal marks of dif-
tintion, which the publick admiration bestows on
illufRrious merit, or which the publick confidence
confers on extraordinary abilities, were annexed
to certain families, and transmitted like fiefs, from
father to son by hereditary right. The crown

k Du Cange Gloflar. voc. Miles. [H] NOTE VJII.

vaials

[5

SECY. . 'vassals having thus secured the poffeflion of their
^'-/ ' lands and dignities, the nature of the Feudal in-

flitutions, which though founded in subordination,
verged to independence) led them to new, and
still more dangerous encroachments on the prero-
gatives of the sovereign. They obtained the'
power of fupremejurifdi6tion both civil and cri-
minal within their own territories; the right of
coining money; together with the privilege of
carrying on war against their private enemies in
their own name, and by their own authority.
The ideas of political fubjedion were almost en-
tirely loft, and frequently scarce any appearance
of feudal subordination remained. Nobles who
had acquired such enormous power, scorned to
confider themselves as fubjets. They aspired
openly at being independent: the bonds which
conneded the principal members of the corlfti-
tution with the crown, were dissolved. A king.
dom considerable in name and in extent, was
broken into as many separate principalities as it
contained powerful barons. A thousand canses
of jealousy and discord subsisted among them,
and gave rife to as many wars. Every country in
Europe, wafted or kept in continual alarm during
these endless contests, was filled with castles and
places of firength, ereEted for the security of the
inhabitants, not against foreign force, but against
internal hostilities. An universal anarchy, de-
ftrucive, in a great measure, of all the advanta-
ges which men expedt to derive from society,
prevailed. The people, the most numerous as well
as the most useful part of the community, were
either reduced to a state of actual servitude, or
treated with the fameinfolenceand rigour as if they
had been degraded in to that wretchedcondition [I).
The King, stripped of almost every prerogative,
and without authority to enactor to execute falu-

[I] NOTE IX.

tary

b 1i r i j r r. ( K v' r . 17

tary laws, could neither protet the innocent, SECT. I.
nor punish the guilty. The nobles, fup-rior to'v
all restraint, harrafled each other with perpetual
wars, oppressed their fellow fubjets, and hum-
bled or insulted their sovereign. To crown all,
time gradually fixed, and rendered venerable
this pernicious system, which violence had efta-
blilhed.

SUCH was the ifate of Europe with refped tort pcvented

the interior administration of government fromnatinslikc-
the seventh to the eleventh century. All theairgi,h
external operations of its various states, duringvi'"ur' i
this period, were, of course, extremely feeble.,al operati-
A kingdom dismembered, and torn with diffen-.O"-
tion, without any common interest to rouze, or
any common head to condudt its force, was in-
capable of ating with vigour. Almost all the
wars in Europe, during the ages which I have
mentioned, were trifling, indecisive, and produc-
tive of no considerable event. They resembled
the short incursions of pirates or banditti, rather
than the steady operations of a regular army.
Every baron at the head of his vaflals, carried
on some petty enterprize to which he was prompt,
ed by his own ambition, or revenge. The
state itself, destitute of union, either remained
altogether inacive, or if it attempted to make
any effort, that served only to discover its im-
potence. The superior genius of Charlemagne,
it is true, united all theic disjointed and difcor-
dant members, and forming them again into
one body, restored that degree of aivity to go-
vernment which distinguish his reign, and ren-
der the tranfations of it, objets not only of at-
tention but of admiration to more enlightened
times. But this state of union and vigour not
being natural to the feudal government, was of
short duration. Immediately upon his death,

VOL. I. C the

SECT. I. the spirit which animated and sustained the vast
'"--'system which he had established, being with-

drawn, it broke into pieces. All the calamities
which flow from anarchy and discord, returning
with additional force, afflited the different
kingdoms into which his Empire was split. From
that time to the eleventh century, a fucceflion
of uninterested events; a series of wars, the mo-
tives as well as the consequences of which were
equally unimportant, fill and deform the annals
of all the nations in Europe.

The fatal To there pernicious effects of the feudal anar-
this ate ofchy, may be added its fatal influence on the
society on character and improvement of the human mind.
aI arts; If men do not enjoy the protection of regular

government, together with the certainty of per-
fonal security which naturally flows from it, they
never attempt to make progress in science, nor
aim at attaining refinement in taste, or in man-
ners. That period of turbulence, oppression,
and rapine, which I have described, was ill suit-
ed to favour improvement in any of there. In
less than a century after the barbarous nations
fettled in their new conquest, almost all the es-
seas of the knowledge and civility which the
Romans had spread through Europe disappear-
ed. Not only the arts of elegance which mini-
fter to luxury, and are supported by it, but
many of the useful arts, without which life can
scarcely be confidered as comfortable, were ne-
gleaed or loft. Literature, science, taste, were
words scarce in use during the ages we are con-
templating; or if they occur at any time, emi-
nence in them is ascribed to persons and produc-
tions To contemptible that it appears their true
import was little understood. Persons of the
highest rank, and in the most eminent stations,
could not read or write. Many of the clergy did

not

not understand the breviary which they wereSECT. .
obliged daily to recite; ome of them could '"v
scarce read it [K]. All memory of past tranf-
adions was loft, or preservcd in annals filled
with trifling events, or legendary tales. Even
the codes o laws published by the several nati-
ons which established thcmfelves in the different
countries of Europe, fell into disuse, while in
their place, customs, vague and capricious, were
substituted. The human mind nglected, un-
cultivated, and deprefied, funk into the moit
profound ignorance. Europe did not produce,
during four centuries, one author who merits to
be read, either on account of the elegance of his
composition, or the juftliefs and novelty of his
sentiments. There is scarce one invention use-
ful or ornamental to society of which that long
period can boast.

EVEN the Christian religion, though its pre-upon rl;-

cepts are delivered, and its inflitutions are fixedgion;
in scripture with a precision which should have
exempted them from being misinterpreted or
corrupted, degenerated during those ages of
darkness into an illiberal fuptrftition. The bar-
barous nations when converted to Christianity
changed the object, not the spirit of their religi-
ous worship. They endeavoured to conciliate
the favour of the true God by means not unlike
to those which they had employed in order to
appease their false deities. Instead of apiring to
fandity and virtue, which alone can rendr ni-n
acceptable to the great author of order and *f
excellence, they imagined that they satisfied
every obligation of duty by a fcruptlous obfer-
vancc of extcral cerImnolics []. Iligion, a-
cording to th,-ir conception of it, corl-nlrlelll-
ed nothing clle; antl ti rites, b wich they

[KJ NOTE X. [LJ \No'1' XI.

C pcrfiidd(l

19

SECT. I. persuaded themselves that they could gain the
"'"favour of heaven, were of such a nature as

might have been expected from the rude ideas
of the ages which devised and introduced them.
They were either so unmeaning as to be altoge-
ther unworthy of the Being to whose honour they
were consecrated; or so absurd as to be a dif-
grace to reason and humanity [M]. Charlemagne
in France, and Alfred the Great in England,
endeavoured to dispel this darkness, and gave
their fubjets a short glimpse of light and know-
ledge. But the ignorance of the age was too
powerful for their efforts and institutions. The
darkness returned, and fettled over Europe more
thick and heavy than formerly.

upon the As the inhabitants of Europe during there
charaaer
and virtues centuries were strangers to the arts which embel-
ofthe hu- lifh a polished age, they were destitute of the
man mind. age,

virtues which abound among people who conti-
nue in a simple state. Force of mind, a sense
of personal dignity, gallantry in enterprise, in-
vincible perseverance in execution, and con-
tempt of danger and of death, are the charac-
teriftic virtues of uncivilized nations. But these
are all the offspring of equality and indepen-
dence, both which the feudal institutions had
destroyed. The spirit of domination corrupted
the nobles; the yoke of servitude depressed the
people; the generous sentiments inspired by a
finfe of equality were extinguished, and nothing
remained to be a check on ferocity and violence.
Human society is in its most corrupted state at
that period when men have loft their original
independence and simplicity of manners, but
have not attained that degree of refinement
which introduces a sense of decorum and of
propriety in conduct, as a restraint on those pas-

[M] NOTE XI.

sions
20

sions which lead to heinous crimes. According-SECT. I.
ly, a greater number of those atrocious aions "--
which fill the mind of man with astonishment
and horror, occur in the history of the centuries
under review, than in that of any period of the
fame extent in the annals of Europe. If we open
the history of Gregory of Tours, or of any con-
temporary author, we meet with a series of
deeds of cruelty, perfidy, and revenge, so wild
and enormous as almost to exceed belief.

BUT, according to the observation of an ele- From the

gant and profound historian, there is an ultimate of th e-
point of depreflion; as well as of exaltation,venthcen-
from which human affairs naturally return in avernment
contrary progress, and beyond which they fel-andmanner.

o

__"*.

,-3 . '

,. .

J

i ,. ' begin to

dom pass either in their advancement or decline. improve.
When defects, either in the form, or in the ad-
ministration of government, occasion such dif-
orders in society as are excessive and intolerable,
it becomes the common interest to discover and
to apply such remedies as will moss effectually
remove them. Slight inconveniencies may be
long overlooked or endured, but when abuses
grow to a certain pitch, the society must go to
ruin, or muff attempt to reform them. The
difurders ill the feudal system, together with
the corruption of taste and manners consequent
upon these, which had gone on increasing du-
ring a long course of years, seem to have attain-
ed their utmost point of excess towards the close
of the eleventh century. From that ara, we
may date the return of government and man-
ners in a contrary direction, and can trace a
fucceflion of causes and events which contributed,
some with a nearer and more powerful, others
with a more remote and less perceptible influ-

s Hume's History of England, vol. ii, p. 441.

2[
C3

encel

SECT. 1. ence, to abolish confusion and barbarism, and
-"-v--to introduce order, regularity, and refinement.
Neccrlary IN pointing out and explaining these causes
to point out
the c",ui. and events, it is not neceflary to observe the or-
and events d-r of time with a chronological accuracy; it is
which con- c'.
tributco- of more importance to keep in view their mu-
wards i tual connetion and dependance, and to show
Lui7t. how the operation of one event, or of one cause,

prepared the way for another, and augmented
its influence. We have hitherto been contem-
plating the progress of that darkness which
spread over Europe from its first approach, to
the period of greatest obscuration; a more plea-
sant exercise begins here, 'to observe the first
dawnings of returning light, to mark the vari-
ous accessions by which it gradually increased
and advanced towards the full splendor of day.

The cn- I. THE Crusades, or expeditions in order to
dency of
the Cru- rescue the Holy Land out of the hands of Infi-
icdes to il- dels, seem to be the first event that rouzed Eu-
Ihange in rope from the lethargy in which it had been long
over'nm"nt funk, and that tended to introduce any change
and man- .
nes. in government, or in manners. It is natural to

the human mind to view those places which

The mo r have been diffinguilhed by being the residence
remote C .
-

fs t ihelti of any illuflrious personage, or the scene of any
l^1'Cditt. great tranlaction, with rome degree of delight

and veneration. From this principle flowed
the liperifitious devotion with which Christians,
from the earliest ages of the church, were ac-
customed to visit that country whlich the Al-
miglity had feletted as the inheritance of his fa-
voul ite people, and in which the son of God had
!cconplifhed the redemption of mankind. As
this distant pilgrimage could not be performed
without conliderable expence, fatigue, and dan-
gL'r, it apptlarcd the more meritorious, and
calme to be conlidcred as an expiation for almost

every

every crime. An opinion which spread withSECT. .
rapidity over Europe about the close of the-v"'
tenth and beginning of the eleventh century,
and which gained universal credit, wonderfully
augmented the number of there credulous pil-
grims, and encreafed the ardour with which
they undertook this useless voyage. The thou-
sand years mentioned by St. John t were sup-
posed to be accomplished, and the end of the
world to be at hand. A general conifternation
seized mankind; many relinquished their pof-
sessions; and abandoning their friends and fa-
milies, hurried with precipitation to the Holy
Land, where they imagined that Christ would
quickly appear to judge the world u. While
Palestine continued subjed to the Caliphs, they
had encouraged the resort of pilgrims to Jeru-
falem; and confidered this as a beneficial species
of commerce, which brought into their domini-
ons gold and silver, and carried nothing out of
them but relics and consecrated trinkets. But
the Turks having conquered Syria about the
middle of the eleventh century, pilgrims were
exposed to outrages of every kind from these
fierce barbarians. This change happening pre-
cifely at the junature when the panic terror which
I have mentioned rendered pilgrimages moss fre-
quent, filled Europe with alarm and indignation.
Every person who returned from Palestine rela-
ted the dangers which he had encountered, in
visiting the holy city, and described with exag-
geration the cruelty and vexations of the Turks.

WHEN the minds of men were thus prepared, The imme.
the zeal of a fanatical monk, who conceived oatCf

C 4 the them.

' Revel, xx. , 3, 4.
u Chronic. Will. Godelli ap. Bouquet Recuell des His-

toriens de France, tom. x. p. 26z. Vita Abbonis, ibid. p.
332. Chronic. S. Pantaleonis ap. Eccard. Corp. Script.
ledii asvi, vol. i. p. 9og. AnnaliRa Saxon. ibid. 76.

23

A VIEW OF THE

SECT. . the idea of leading all the forces of Chrifiendorn
- "-v.againit the infidels, and of driving them out of

the Holy Land by violence, was sufficient to
give a beginning to that wild enterprize. Peter
the hermit, for that was the name of this marti-
al apostle, ran from province to province with
a crucifix in his hand, exciting Princes and peo-
ple to this Holy war, and wherever he came
kindled the fame enthufiaflic ardour for it with
which he himself was animated. The council
of Placentia, where upwards of thirty thousand
persons were aflembled, pronounced the scheme
to have been suggested by the immediat'inlfpi-
ration of heaven. In the council of Clermont,
still more numerous, as oon as the measure was
proposed, all cried out with one voice, " It is
" the will of God." Pcrfons of all ranks were
finitten with the contagion ; not only the gallant
nobles of that ag ; with their martial followers,
whom the boldness of a romantic enterprize
might have been apt to allure, but men in the
more humble and pacific stations of life; eccle-
fiaffics of every order, and even women and
children engaged with emulation in an under-
taking which was deemed sacred and meritori-
ous. If we may believe the concurring teftimo-
ny of conttmnporary authors, fix millions of per-
fens aflumed the crols", which was the badge
that difftinguifhed fucll as devoted themselves to
this holy warfare. All Europe, fays the Prin-
cess Anna Comnena, torn up fiom the founda-
tion, seemed ready to precipitate itself in one
united body upon Asia'. Nor did the fumes of
this enthufiatlic zeal evaporate at once: the fren-
zy was as lasting, as it was extravagant. During
two centuries, Europe leems to have had no

objce

x Fulcherius Carnotenfis ap. ongarfi Gefla Dei per
r'laiicos, vol i. 387. edit. Han. 16i i,

Y Alcxias. lib. x. ap. l3yz. Icript. vl1. xi. p. 224.

objet but to recover, or keep possession of theSEcT. I.
Holy Land, and through that period, vast armies '- "
continued to march thither [N].

The first efforts of valour animated by enthu-The uccefs
fiafm were irresistible; part of the lefler Asia,s the ru-

P fades.

all Syria and Paletfine were wrested from the
infidels; the banner of the cross was displayed
on Mount Sion; Conflantinople the capital of
the Christian empire in the East, was seized by a
body of these adventurers, who had taken arms
against the Mahometans, and an Earl of Slanders,
and his dcfcendants, kept pofeflion of the Impe-
rial throne during half a century. But though
the first impreflion of the Crusaders was so unex-
petted that they made their conquests with great
ease, they found infinite difficulty in preserving
them. Establishments so distant from Europe,
surrounded by warlike nations, animated with
fanatical zeal fearce inferior to that of the Crufa-
ders themselves, were perpetually in danger of
being overturned. Before the expiration of the A D. 1191.
thirteenth century, the Christians were driven out
of all their Asiatic pofleffions, in acquiring of
which incredible numbers of men had perished,
and immense fums or money had been wafted.
The only common enterprize in which the Eu-
ropean nations ever engaged, and which all un-
dertook with equal ardour, remains a singular
monument of human folly.

BUT from there expeditions, extravagant asT'le benefi-

they were, beneficial confequcnces followed,which of the Cra-
bad neither been foreseen nor expctted. In their f"ade on
progress towards the Holy Land, the followers of ma"'
the crols marched through countries better culti-

[NJ NOTE XIII,

vated,

25

SECT. I. vated, and more civilized than their own. Their
-'-'"first rendezvous was commonly in Italy, in which

Venice, Genoa, Pisa, and other cities had begun
to apply themselves to commerce, and had made
some advances towards wealth as well as refine-
ment. They embarked there, and landing in Dal-
matia, pursued their route by land to Conftantino-
pie. Though the military spirit had been long ex-
tint in the eastern empire, and a despotism of the
worst species had annihilated almost every public
virtue, yet Constantinople having never felt the
deftrutive rage of the barbarous nations, was the
greatest, as well as the most beautiful city in Eu-
rope, and the only one il which there remained
any image of the ancient elegance in manners,
and arts. The naval power of the eastern Em-
pire was considerable. Manufatures of the most
curious fabrick were carried on in its dominions.
Constantinople was the only mart in Europe for
the commodities of the East Indies. Although
the Saracens and Turks had torn from the Em-
pire many of its richest provinces, and had redu-
ced it within very narrow bounds, yetgreat wealth
flowed into the capital from these various sources,
which not only cherished such a taste for magni-
ficence, but kept alive such a relish for thefciences
as appear considerable when compared with what
was known in other parts of Europe. Even in
Asia, the Europeans who had affurned the cross
found the remains of the knowledge and arts
which the example and encouragement of the Ca-
liphs had diffued through their empire. Although
the attention of the historians of the Crusades
was fixed on other objeEts than the state of foci-
ety and manners among the nations which they
invaded, although most of them had neither taste
nor discernment enough to describe them, they
relate, however, such lignal ads of humanity

and

and generosity in the conduct of Saladin as wellser I.
as some other leaders of the Mahometans, as give''"
us a very high idea of their manners. It was not
polfible for the Crusaders to travel through so
many countries, and to behold their various cuf-
toms and inflitutions without acquiring informa-
tion and improvement. Their views enlarged;
their prejudices wore off; new ideas crowded in-
to their minds; and they mur have been ei fible
on many occasions of the ruflicity of their own
manners when compared with those of a more
polished people. These impreflions were not so
lilght as to be effaced upon their return to their
native countries. A close intercourse flubfifed
between the East and Weft during two centu-
ries; new armies were continually marching from
Europe to Aia, while former adventurers return-
ed home and imported many of the cufloms to
which they had been familiarized by a long refi-
dence abroad. Accordingly, we discover, oon
after the commencement of the Crusades, great-
er splendour in the courts of Princes, greater
pomp in public ceremonies, a more refined taste
in pleasure and amusements, together with a more
romantic spirit of enterprize spreading gradually
over Europe; and to there wild expeditions, the
effect of superstition or folly, we owe the sirs
gleams of light which tended to dispel barbarity
and ignorance.

Bu T these beneficial consequences of the Cru- Tl;cir i, 1ni-

fadcs took place slowly ; their influence upon the , 'p,l"
state of property, and consequently of power, in pct;.
the diflfrent kingdoms of Europe, was more im-
mediate as well as discernible. The nobles who
assumed the cross, and bound themselves to march
to the 1loly l.and, soon perceived that great illms
were ineccilry towards defraying the cxpences of

(iich

SECT. I. such a distant expedition, and enabling them to
-V'""'appear with suitable dignity at the head of their

vaifals. But the genius of the feudal system was
averse to the imposition of extraordinary taxes;
and fubjedts in that age were unaccustomed to
pay them. No expedient remained for levying
the fums requisite, but the sale of their poffefli-
ons. As men were inflamed with romantic ex-
pedtations of the splendid conquests which they
hoped to make in Asia, and pofleffed with such
zeal for recovering the Holy Land as swallowed
up every other passion, they relinquished their
ancient inheritances without any reluctance, and
for prices far below their value, that they might
rally forth as adventurers in quest of new fettle-
ments in unknown countries. The Monarchs of
the different kingdoms, none of whom had en-
gaged in the first Crusade, eagerly seized this
opportunity of annexing considerable territories
to their crowns at small expencea. Betides this,
several great barons who perished in the Holy
war, having left no heirs, their fiefs reverted of
course to their refpedive sovereigns, and by there
accefifons of property as well as power taken
from the one scale and thrown into the other,
the regal authority increased in proportion as that
of the aristocracy declined. The absence, too,
of many potent vassals, accustomed to controul
and give law to their fbvereigns, afforded them
an opportunity of extending their prerogative,
and of acquiring a degree of weight in the con-
ftitution which they did not formerly poiles.
To there circumstances, we may add, that as all
who assumed the cross, were taken under the im-
mediate protection of the church, and its heavi-
eft anathemas were denounced againit such as
should diilquiet or annoy tliote who had devoted

a Willelm. Malin(b. Guibert. Abbas. ap. Bongarl. vol. i.

thcm-

themselves to this service; the private quarrels SECT. I.
and hostilities which banished tranquillity from a -"
feudal kingdom were suspended or extinguished;
a more general and steady administration ofjuf-
tice began to be introduced, and ome advances
were made towards the establishment of regular
government in the several kingdoms of Europe b
[0].

THE commercial effects of the Crusades were Their com-

not less considerable than those which I have al-fae,."
ready mentioned. The first armies under the
flandard of the cross which Peter the hermit and
Godfrey of Bouillon led through Germany and
Hungary to Constantinople, suffered so much by
the length of the march, as well as the fierceness
of the barbarous people who inhabited those
countries, that it deterred others from taking the
fame route; so that rather than encounter so ma-
ny dangers, they chore to go by sea. Venice, Ge-
noa, and Pisa furnifhecd the transports on which
they embarked. The fum which there cities re-
ceived merely for freight from such numerous ar-
mies, was immense'. This, however, was but
a small part of what they gained by the expediti-
ons to the Holy Land; the Crusaders contraded
with them, for military flores and provisions;
their fleets kept on the coast as the army advan-
ced by land; and supplying them with whatever
was wanting, engrossed all the profits of that
lucrative branch of commerce. The success
which attended the arms of the Crusaders was
productive of advantages still more permanent.
There are charters yet extant, containing grants

h Du Cange Gloffar. voc. Crucefignatus. Guib. Abbas.
ap. Bongarl vol. i. 480, 482. .

[0] NOTE XIV.
d Muratori Antiquit. Italic. medii aevi, vol. ii. 905,

to

29

SE CT. I. to the Venetians, Pifans, and Genoese of the moss
L-',"extenfive immunities in the several settlements

which the Christians made in Asia. All the com-
modities which they imported or exported are
thereby exempted from every imposition; the
property of entire fiburbs in ome of the mari-
* time towns, and of large streets and houses in

others, is vested in them; and all questions arif-
ing among persons fettled within their precincts,
or who traded under their protection, are ap-
pointed to be tried by their own laws and by
judges of their own appointmentc. When the
Crusaders seized Constantinople, and placed one
of their own number on the Imperial throne, the
Italian ifates were likewise gainers by that event.
The Venetians who had planned the enterprize,
and took a considerable part in carrying it into
execution, did not neglet to secure to themselves
the chief advantages redounding from its success.
They made themselves masters of part of the
ancient Peleponnefus in Greece, together with
some of the most fertile islands in the Archipela-
go. Many valuable branches of the commerce,
which formerly centered in Constantinople, were
tranferred to Venice, Genoa or Pisa. Thus a
succession of events occasioned by the Holy war,
opened various sources, from which wealth flow-
ed in such abundance into these cities f, as ena-
bled them, in concurrence with another inftituti-
on which shall be immediately mentioned, to fc-
cure their own liberty and independence.

The eta- 1I. THE institution to which I alluded was the
blifh of forming of cities into communities, corporations,
ties avour- or bodies politick, and granting them the privi.
'ble rto lege of municipal jurisdiction, which contributed
and order.

e Murat. ibid. 906, &c.
f Villchaliouin hilt. de Conflant. fous I'Enipcrcurs Fran-
cois, 105, &c.

mnor,

more, perhaps, than any other cause, to intro- SECT. I.
duce regular government, police and arts, and '-'
to diffuse them over Europe. The feudal go-
vernment had degenerated into a fyltem of op-
prefiion. The usurpations of the nobles were
become unbounded and intolerable: they had
reduced the great body of the people into a fiate
of actual servitude: the condition of those digni-
sied with the name of freemen, was often little
preferable to that of the other. Nor was filch
oppression the portion of those alone who dwelt
in the country, and were employed in cultivating
the estate of their master. The cities and villa- The ancient
ges held of some great lord, on whom they de-,i f c-
pended for protection, and were no less fubje&
to his arbitrary jurifdidion. The inhabitants
were deprived of the natural, and most unalien-
able rights of humanity. They could not dispose
of the effets which their own industry had ac-
quired, either by a latter will, or by any deed
executed during their life g. They had no right
to appoint guardians for their children, during
their minority. They were not permitted to
marry without purchasing the content of the lord
on whom they depended h. If once they had
commenced a law suit, they durst not terminate
it by an accommodation, because that would
have deprived the lord in whose court they plead-
ed, of the perquisites due to him on pafling fen-
tence'. Services of various kinds, no less dif-
graceful than oppreflive, were exacted from them
without mercy or moderation. The spirit of in-
duftry was choaked in some cities by absurd re-
gulations, and in others by unreasonable exafti-

g Dacherii Spiceleg. tom. xi. 374, 375. edit. in 4to. Or-
donnancesdes Roisde France, torn. . 204. No. 2. 6.

h Ordonnances des Rois de France, tom. i. p. 22. torm.

iii. 203. No. i. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. iv. p. 20. Dacher.
Spicel. vol. xi. 325, 341.

Dacher. Spice;. vol. ix. 182.

ons:

SECT. I. ons: nor would the narrow and oppressive rmax-

3'; ims of a military aristocracy have permitted it

ever to rife to any degree of height or vigour k.

The free- BUT as soon as the cities of Italy began to
dao of ci- turn their attention towards commerce, and to
ties firfN e-
fablibed. conceive some idea of the advantages which they
in Italy. might derive from it, they became impatient to

shake off the yoke of their insolent lords, and
to establish among themselves such a free and
equal government as would render property fe-
cure, and industry flourishing. The German
Emperors, especially those of the Franconian and
Suabian lines, as the feat of their government
was far distant from Italy, possessed a feeble and
imperfecljurifdition in that country. Their per-
petual quarrels either with the Popes or with their
own turbulent vassals diverted their attention
from the interior police of Italy, and gave con-
ftant employment to their arms. These circum-
fiances encouraged the inhabitants of some of the
Italian cities, towards the beginning of the ele-
venth century, to assume new privileges, to unite
together more closely, and to form themselves
into bodies politick governed by laws eflablifhed
by common content '. The rights, which many
cities acquired by bold or fortunate usurpations,
others purchased from the Emperors, who deem-
ed themselves gainers when they received large
fums for immunities which they were no longer
able to withhold; and some cities obtained them
gratuitously from the generosity or facility of
the Princes on whom they depended. The
great increase of wealth which the Crusades
brought into Italy, occasioned a new kind of
fermentation and aivity in the minds of the

k M. l'Abbe Mably obfervat. fur 'hist. de France, tom.
ii. p. 2. 96.

z Murat. Antiqu. Ial. vol. iv. p. 5.

people,

people, and excited such a general paflion for SECT. .
liberty and independence, that before the con -' '
clufion of the last Crusade all the considerable
cities in that country had either purchased or
had extorted large immunities from the Empe-
rors [P].

THIS innovation was not long known in Italy Is intro-

·. . , . . t?

, . _a d uced into

before it made its way into France. Louis theFrance and
Gross, in order to create some power that mightinto other
counterbalance those potent vassals who con-otEulope.
trouled, or gave law to the crown, first adopted A. D. i o8
the plan of conferring new privileges on the
towns situated within his own domaine. These
privileges were called charters of community, by
which he enfranchised the inhabitants, abolish-
ed all marks of servitude, and formed them in-
to corporations or bodies politick, to be govern-
ed by a council and magistrates of their own
nomination. These magistrates had the right of
adminifiring justice within their own precincts,
of levying taxes, of embodying and training to
arms the militia of the town, which took the
field when required by the sovereign, under the
command of officers appointed by the commu-
nity. The great barons imitated the example
of their monarch, and granted like immunities
to the towns within their territories. They had
wafted such great fums in their expeditions to
the Holy Land, that they were eager to lay hold
on this new expedient for raising money, by
the sale of there charters of liberty. Though
the institution of communities was as repug-
nant to their maxims of policy, as it was adverlt
to their power, tey disregarded remote confe-
quences, in order to obtain present relief. In
lels than two centuries fcrvitudt was abolishcd
in most of the towns in France, and they be-

[PJ NOT E XV.
VoL. . D CaTon;

I 'rJ villages without jurifdidtion or privileges [ Q_.

Much about the fame period, the great cities in
Germany began to acquire like immunities, and
laid the foundation of their present liberty and
independence [R]. The practice spread quick-
ly over Europe, and was adopted in Germany,
Spain, England, Scotland, and all the other
feudal kingdoms [S].

Its happy THE good effets of this new intfitution were
effects upon. . ·
the condit- immediately felt, and its influence on govern-
onofthe inment as well as manners was no less extensive

habita; than salutary. A great body of the people was

released from servitude, and from all the arbitra-
ry and grievous impositions to which that wretch-
ed condition had fubjeted them. Towns, upon
acquiring the right of community, became o
many little republicks, governed by known and
equal laws; and liberty was deemed such an e-
fential and charateriftic part in their conftituti-
on, that if any slave took refuge in one of them,
and resided there during a year without being
claimed, he was instantly declared a freeman, and
admitted as a member of the community q.

Upon the As one part of the people owed their liberty
power of to the erection of communities, another was in-
the nobili-
ty; debted to them for their security. Such had

been the state of Europe during several centu-.
ries, that felf-prefervation obliged every man to
court the patronage of tome powerful baron,
and in times of danger his castle was the place
to which all resorted for safety. But towns fur-
rounded with walls, whose inhabitants were re-

[QJ NOTE XVI. [R] NOTE XVII.

[S] NOTE XVIII.

q Statut. Humberti Bellojoci. Dacher. Spicel. vol. ix. 182,
i85. Charta Conit. Forenf. ibid. 193.

gularly

A VIEW OF THE
54

gularly trained to arms, and bound by interest, SECT. I.
as well as by the most solemn engagements, re-'"~
ciprocally to defend each other, afforded a more
commodious and secure retreat. The nobles be-
gan to be confidered as of less import nce, when
they ceased to be the sole guardians to whom
the people could look up for protection againif
violence.

IF the nobility suffered some diminution ofUpon the

pcwer of

their credit and power by the privileges granted ur,,own;
to the cities, the crown acquired an incre ife of
both. A there were no regular troops kept on
foot in any of the feudal kingdoms, the Monarch
could bri-g no army into the field but what w is
composed of soldiers furnished by the crown-
vassals, always jealous of the regal uthority,
and often in rebellion agairft it; nor had he any
funds for carryi g on the publick service, but
such as they granted him with a very sparing
hand. But when the members of communities
were permitted to bear rms, and were trained
to the use of there, this in some degree supplied
the first defect, ad gave the crown the command
of a body of men independent of its great vas-
fals. The att. chment of the cities to their fove-
reigns, whom they refpeded as the first au-
thors of their liberties, and whom they were
obliged to court as the protetors f their im-
munities against the domineering spirit of the
nobles, contributed somewhat towards removing
the second evil, as it frequently engaged them
to grant the crown such supplies of money as
added new force to government'.

THE cquifition of liberty made such a hap-Uporn he

~. _ ~

_ . . - '

..,~ .i~ , incicafeo)
py change in the condition of all the membersi ,,dniuy.

r Ordon. des Ruis de France, ton. i. 602, 785. ton. ii.
3 8, 422.

D 2 of

SECT. 1. of communities, as routed them from that flu-
%'-v- pidity and inaction into which they had been

funk by the wretchedness of their former slate.
The spirit of industry revived. Commerce be-
came an object of attention, and began to flou-
rifh. Population increased. Independence was
eft blifhed; and wealth flowed into cities which
had long been the feat of poverty and oppreffi-
on. Wealth was accompanied by its usual at-
tendants, ostentation and luxury; and though
the former was inelegant and cumberrome, and
the latter indelicate, they led gradually to
greater refinement in manners, and in the ha-
bits of life. Together with this improvement
in manners, a more regular species of govern-
ment and police was introduced. As cities grew
to be more populous, and te occasions of inter-
course among men increased, statutes and re-
gulations multiplied of course, and all became
sensible that their common safety depended on
observing them with exatnefs, and on punishing
such as violated them, with promptitude and ri-
gour. Laws and subordination, as well as po-
lifhed manners, took their rife in cities, and dif-
fused themselves insensibly through the reft of
the society.

The nhabi- IIl. The inhabitants of cities having obtained
tants of ci-
tiesacquire personal freedom and municipal jurifdidion,
political soon acquired civil liberty and political power.
power as
nembersof It was a fundamental principle in the feudal sys-
the confi- tem of policy, that no freeman could be go-

verned or taxed unless by his own content. In
consequence of this, the vaflals of every baron
were called to his court, in which they establish-
ed by mutual content filch regulations as they
deemed most beneficial to their small society,
and granted their superior such supplies of mo-
ney as were proportionable to their abilities, or

to

to his wants. The barons themselves, confor- SCT. I.
mably to the f me maxim, were admitted into'-'-
the supreme aflembly of the nation, and concur-
red with the sovereign in enacting laws, or in im-
posing taxes. As the superior lord, according
to the original plan of feudal policy, retained
the direct property of those lands which he
granted, in temporary possession, to his vassals,
the law, even after fiefs became hereditary, frill
supposed this original practice to subsist, and a
baron continued to be co;fidered as the guar-
dian of all who resided within his territories.
The great council of each nation, whether dif-
tinguifhed by the name of a parliament, a diet,
the Cortes, or the flates general, was composed
entirely of filch barons and dignified eccle-
fiafticks, as held immediately of the crown.
Towns, whether situated within the royal do-
maine, or on the lands of a subjet, depended
for protedtion on the lord of whom they held.
They had no legal name, no political existence,
which could entitle them to be admitted into
the legislative assembly, or could give them any
authority there. But as soon as they were en-
franchised, and formed into Bodies Corporate,
they became legal and independent members of
the constitution, and acquired all the rights es-
fential to freemen. Amongst there, the most
valuable, was the privilege of a decisive voice
in enacting laws, and in granting fbfidies. It
was natural for cities, 'accustomed to a form of
municipal government, according to which no
regulation could be established, and no money
could be raised without their own consent, to
cl im this privilege. The wealth, the power,
and consideration which they acquired on re-
covering their liberty, added weight to their
claim; and favourable events happened, or for-
tunate conjunctures occurred in the different

D 3 kingdoms

SECT. I. kingdoms of Europe, which facilitated or for-
'"" 'warded their obtaining possession of this impor-

tant right. In England, one of the first countries
in which the representatives of boroughs were ad-
mitted into the great council of the nation, the
A. D. s65 bardns who took arms against Henry III. fun-

moned them to attend parliament in order to add
greater popularity to their party, and to strength-
en the barrier against the encroachment of re-
gal power. In France, Philip the Fair, a Monarch
no lets sagacious than enterprizing, cofidered
them as iiftruments which might be employed
with equal advantage to extend the royal prero-
gative, to counterbalance the exorbitant power of
the nobles, and to facilitate the imposition of new
taxes. With these views, he introduced the de-
puties of such towns as were formed into com-
munities into the tatcs general of the nation ". In
the Empire, the wealth and immunities of the
Imperial cities placed them on a level with the
most considerable members of the Germanic bo-
dy. Coi)fcious of their own power and dignity,
A. ). 93.they pretended to the privilege of forming a fe-

parate bench in the diet; and made good their
pretelifion'.

The happy BuT in what way soever the representatives of
:, , p0t cities first gained a place in the legislature, that
gove n- event had great influence on the form and geni-
ment- us of government. It tempered the rigour of

ariftocratical oppression, with a poper mixture
of popular liberty; It secured to the great body
of the p-,ple, who had formerly no reprefenta-
tives, active and powerful guardians of their
rights and privileges: It established an interme-
diate power between the King and nobles, to
which each had recourse alternately, and which

' Pafqiier Rchcrchcs de a France, p. 8 i. edit. Par. 633.
Pictte Abicg6 de I'iltoirc & droit dt'Allenagne, p. 408,
451.

at
38

at some times opposed the usurpations of the for-SE CT. I.
mer, on other occasions checked the encroach- C
ments of the latter. As loon as the reprefenta-
tives of communities gained any degree of cre-
dit and influence in the legislature, the spirit of
laws became different from what it had formerly
been; it flowed from new principles; it was di-
rected towards new objects; equality, order,
the publick good, and the redress of grievances,
were phrases and ideas brought into use, and
which grew to be familiar in the statutes and
jurisprudence of the European nations. Almost
all the efforts in favour of liberty in every coun-
try of Europe have been made by this new
power in the legislature. In proportion as it rose
to consideration and influence, the severity of
the ariftocratical spirit decreased; and the pri-
vileges of the people became gradually more
extensive as the ancient and exorbitant jurifdic-
tion of the nobles was abridged [T].

IV. THE inhabitants of towns having beenThe people

declared free by the charters of communities, berty by en
that part of the people which resided in thefranchilc-
country, and was employed in agriculture, be-ent
gan to recover liberty by enfranchisement. Du-
ring the rigour of feudal government, as hath
been already observed,. the great body of the
lower people was reduced to servitude. They
were slaves fixed to the foil which they cultiva-
ted, and together with it were transferred from
one proprietor to another, by ale, or by convey-
ance. The spirit of feudal policy did not favour
the cnfranchifement of that order of men. It
was an established maxim that no vaflal could le-
gally diminish the value of a fief, to the detriment
of the lord from whom he had received it. In
consequence of this, manumiflion by the autho-

[T] NOTE XIX.

1 D4 rity

SECT. I. rity of the immediate master was not valid; and
-'"--,-unless it was confirmed by the superior lord of

whom he held, slaves of this species did not ac-
quire a corpleat right to their liberty. Thus it
became necetary to ascend through all the gra-
dations of feudal holding to the King, the lord
Paramount X. A form of procedure so tedious
and troublc-orne discouraged the practice of ma-
numiflion. Domestic or personal slaves often
obtained liberty from the humanity or benefi-
cence of their mailers, to whom they belonged
in absolute property. The condition of slaves
fixed to the foil was much more unalterable.

The rro- BUT the freedom and independence which one
ti. gsa if part of the people had obtained by the institution
ihi. of communities, inspired the other with the most

ardent delire of acquiring the fame privileges;
and their superiors, sensible of the benefits which
they themselves had derived from former concef-
lions, were less unwilling to gratify them by the
grant of new immunities. The enfranchisement
of slaves became more frequent; and the Mo-
narchs of France prompted by neceflity, no less
than by their inclination to reduce the power of

r, , the nobles,cndeavoured torender it general. Louis
. ;ii. X. and his brother Philip iied ordonnances, de-

claring, "That as all men were by nature free-
born, and as their kingdom was called the king-
dlom of Franks, they determined that it should be
so in reality as well as in name; therefore they ap-
pointed that enfranchifcments hould e granted
throughout the whole kingdom, upon just and
realonable conditions '." These edids were carri-
td into inmcmdiate execution within the royal do-
il.iiC.. The example of their fbvereigns, toge-
!li 1r \ ih the ex p-ctation of the considerable Cfuns

I'.liliii.cn d(e St. Louis, liv. ii. cl. 34. Ordon.
!(',,, i . k1,). oItsw. (ic).

7 () }} tion.
t i. . c.: , 653.

whiclh
40

which they might raise by this expedient, led ma-'SECT. 1.
ny of the nobles to set their dependents at liberty; ---
and servitude was gradually abolished in almost
every province of the kingdom [U]. In Italy, the
establishment of republican government in their
great cities, the genius and maxims of which
were xtremely different from those of the feudal
policy, together with the ideas of equality which
the progress of commerce had rendered familiar,
gradually introduced the practice of enfranchi-
sing the ancient predial slaves. In Come provin-
ces of Germany, the persons who had been sub-
jet to this species of bondage, were released;
in others, the rigour of their state was mitiga-
ted. In England, as the spirit of liberty gained
ground, the very name and idea of personal ser-
vitude, without any formal interposition of the
legislature to prohibit it, was totally banished.

THE effeEts of such a remarkable change in Theee',a

the condition of o great a part of the people, hsimpr',e
could not fail of being considerable and exteni-mnt of so-
five. The husbandman, matter of his own in-'"i'
duftry, and secure of reaping for himself the
fruits of his labour, became the farmer of the
fame fields where he had formerly been compel-
led to toil for the benefit of another. The odi-
ous names of mafier and of slave, the mofi mor-
tifying and depreflingof all diftintions to human
nature, were abolished. New profpets opened,
and new incitements to ingenuity and enterprize
presented themselves, to those who were emanci-
pated. The expectation of bettering their for-
tune, as well as that of railing themlclves to a
more honourable condition, concurred in calling
forth their activity and genius; and a numerous
clafi of men, who formerly had no political ex-
iftence, alid were employed merely as inflru-

[U] NO'TE XX.

enCIlts

SECT. I. mentsof labour, became ufefulcitizens, and con-
't' tributed towards augmenting the force or riches

of the society, which adopted them as members.

UTh intro- V. THE various expedients which were em-
mrreegu-ployed in order to introduce a more regular,
la adini- equal, ard vigorous administration of justice,
justice, con-contributed greatly towards the improvement of
thrbuteso society. W hat was the particular mode of dif-
ment of o- pensing justice in the several barbarous nations
ciOly. which over-ran the Roman Empire, and took

possession of its different provinces, cannot now
be determined with certainty. We may conclude
from the form of government established among
them, as well as from their ideas concerning the
nature of society, that the authority of the ma-
giftrate was extremely limited, and the indepen-
dence of individuals proportionably great. Hifto-
ry and records, as far as they reach back, justify
this conclusion, and represent the ideas and exer-
cife of justice in ll the countries of Europe, as
little different from those which muff take place
in a state of nature. To maintain the order and
tranquillity of society by the regular execution of
known laws; to inflict vengeance on crimes de-
ftrudive of the peace and safety of individuals,
by a prosecution carried on in the name, and by
the authority of the community; to confider
the punishment of criminals as a public example
to deter others from violating the laws; were ob
jeds of government little underitood in theory,
and less regarded in praCtice. The magistrate
could scarce be said to hold the sword of justice;
it was left in the hands of private persons. Re-
fentment was almost the sole motive for profecu-
ting crimes; and to gratify that paflion, wasthe
end and rule in punishing them. He who susser-
ed the wrong, was the only person who had a
right to pursue the aggreflbr, and to exact or to

remit

remit the punishment. From a fytem of judici- SECT. I.
al procedure, so crude and defective as seems V
to be scarce compatible with the subsistence of
civil society, disorder and anarchy flowed. Su-
perftition concurred with this ignorance concern-
ing the nature of government, in obftrueing the
administration of justice, or in rendering it ca-
pricious and unequal. To provide remedies for
there evils, so as to give a more regular course to
jutice, was, during several centuries, one great
object of political wisdom. The regulations for
this purpose, may be reduced to three general
heads: to explain there, and to point out the
manner in which they operated is an important
article in the history of society among the nati-
ons of Europe.

i. THE first considerable ftep towards efta-This effea-

blifhing an equal administration of juflice, wasliYing the
the abolishment of the right which individualspraiice of
claimed of waging war with each other, in theirpriate wa.
own name, and by their own authority. To re-
pel injuries, and to revenge wrongs, is no less
natural to man than to cultivate friendship; and original
while society remains in its most simple tlate, the ideasofme
former is confidered as a perfbnal right no lefsj^utce.
unalienable than the latter. Nor do men in this
situation deem that they have a title to redress
their own wrongs alone; they are touched with
the injuries of those with whom they are conned-
ed, or in whose honour they are interested; and
are no less prompt to avenge them. The fa-
vage, how imperfectly soever he may compre-
hend the principles of political union, feels warm-
ly the entiments of social affection, and the ob-
ligations arising from the ties of blood. On the
appearance of an injury or affront offered to his
family or tribe, he kindles into rage, and purfiies
the authors of it with the keenest resentment.

He

SECT. I. He confiders it as cowardly to expect redress from

'r^'any arm but his own, and as infamous to give

up to another the right of determining what re-
paration he should accept, or with what ven-
geance he should reft satisfied.

Thefc lead THE maxims and practice of all uncivilized
to the prac-
tice of pri nations, with refpec to the prosecution and pu-
ate war. nifhment of offenders, particularly those of the

ancient Germans, and other Barbarians who in-
vaded the Roman empire, are perfecly confor-
mable to these ideasa. While they retained their
native simplicity of manners, and continued to
be divided into small tribes or societies, the de-
fests in this imperfect system of criminalj urifpru-
dence (if it merits that name) were less sensibly
felt. When they came to fettle in the extensive
provinces which they had conquered, and to form
themselves into great monarchies; when new
objects of ambition presenting themselves, in-
creased both the number and the violence of their
dissensions, they ought to have adopted new
maxims concerning the redrefsof injuries, and to
have regulated by general and equal laws, that
which they formerly left to be directed by the
caprice of private paflion. But fierce and haugh-
ty chieftai: s, accustomed to avenge themselves
on such as had injured them, did not think of
relirquifhing a right which they confidered as a
privilege of their order, and a mark of their in-
dependence. Laws enforced by the authority of
Princes and Magistrates who possessed little pow-
tr, commnanded no great degree of rcvcrcnce.
The adminiitration of justice among rude illite-
rate people, was not so accurate or decisive, or uni-
form, as to induce men to submit implicitly to its
determinations. Every offended baron buckled on

" Tacit. de MIor. German, cap. z2. Veil. Paterc. lib. ii.
c. 11S.

his armour, and fought redress at the head of hisS.cT. r.
vassals. His adveriary met him in like hostile'-'-'
array. Neither of them appealed to impotent
laws which could afford them no protection.
Neither of them would submit points, in which
their passions were warmly interefled, to the
flow determination of a judicial enquiry. Both
trusted to their swords for the decision of the
contest. The kindred and dependants of the
aggressor, as well as of the defender, were in-
volved il the quarrel. They had not even the
liberty of remaining neutral. Such as refu-
fed to at in concert with the party to which
they belonged, were not only exposed to infamy,
but fubjeded to legal penalties.

THE different kingdoms of Europe were torn The perni-

and afflicted, during several centuries, by intef- cOuS effe
tine wars, excited by private animofities, and
carried on with all the rage natural to men of
fierce manners, and of violent passions. The
estate of every baron was a kind of independent
territory, disjoined from those around it, and
the hostilities between them were perpetual. The
evil became so inveterate and deep rooted, that
the form and laws of private war were ascertain-
ed, and regulations concerning it made a part in
the system of jurisprudence b, in the fame man-
ner as if this pracice had been founded in ome
natural right of humanity, or in the original
conffitution of civil society.

So great was the disorder, and such the cala- v;tti'u me-

thods ern-

mities which these perpetual hoflilities occ i;liu- pl,,yed in
ed, that various efforts were made to wrest fromol "r to a-
the nobles this pernicious privilege which they

b Beaunanoir Confitunes de eauvoifis, ch. 59, et les
notes de Thauiatliere, p. 447.

claimed.

SRCT. I. claimed. It was the interest of every sovereign

-'v` to abolish a practice which almost annihilated his

authority. Charlemagne prohibited it by an ex-
press law, as an invention of the devil to destroy
the order and happiness of focietyc; but the
reign of one Monarch, however vigorous and ac-
live, was too short to extirpate a custom o firmly
established. Instead of enforcing this prohibiti-
on, his feeble successors durst venture on nothing
more than to apply palliatives. They declared
it unlawful for any person to commence war,
until he had ent a formal defiance to the kindred
and dependants of his adversary; they ordained
that, after the commission of the trespass or crime
which gave rife to a private war, forty daysmuft
elapse before the person injured hould attack the
vassals of his adversary; they enjoined all per-
sons to suspend their private animofities, and to
cease from hostilities when the king was engaged
in any war against the enemies of the nation.
The church co-operated with the civil magif-
trate, and interposed its authority in order to
extirpate a practice so repugnant to the spirit of
Christianity. Various councils issued decrees, pro-
hibiting all private wars; and denounced the hea-
vieft anathemas against such as hould disturb
the tranquillity of society, by claiming or exer-
cifing that barbarous right. The aid of religion
was called in to combat and subdue the ferocity
of the times. The Almighty was said to have
manifested, by visions and revelations to different
persons, his disapprobation of that spirit of re-
venge, which armed one part of his creatures
against the other. Men were required, in the
name of God, to heath their swords, and to re-
member the sacred ties which united them as
Christians, and as members of the fame society.
But this juncion of civil and ecclesiastic autho-

' Capitul. A. D. 8o0. Edit. Baluz. Vol. i. p. 37 .

rity,
46

rity, though strengthened by every thing most SECT. I.
apt to alarm and to over-awe the credulous fpi- '
rit of those ages, produced no other effect than
tome temporary suspensions of hostilities, and a
cessation from war on certain days and seasons
consecrated to the more olemn adts of devotion.
The nobles continued to affcrt this dangerous pri-
vilege; they refused to obey some of the laws
calculated to annul or circumscribe it; they e-
luded others; they petitioned; they remonftra-
ted; they struggled for the right of private war
as the highest and most honourable diftintion of
their order. Even so late as the fourteenth cen-
tury, we find the nobles in several provinces of
France contending for their ancient method of
terminating their differences by the sword, in pre-
ference to that of submitting them to the decifi-
on of any judge. The final abolition of this prac-
tice in that kingdom, and the other countries in
which it prevailed, is not to be ascribed so much
to the force of statutes and decrees, as to the
gradual increase of the royal authority, and to
the imperceptible progress of juster sentiments
concerning government, order, and public fecu-
rity [X].

z. THE prohibition of the form of trial byju- The prohi-

dicial combat, was another considerable ftep to- byjii-
wards the introduction of such regular governl- combat,
ment as secured publick order and private tran-,th'm-en
quillity. As the right of private war left many of the admi-
the quarrels among individuals to be decided, likejui.e f
those between nations, by arms; the form of tri-
al by judicial combat, which was established in
every country of Europe, banished equity from
courts of justice, and rendered chance or force
the arbiier of their determinations. In civilized

[X] NOTE XXI.

nations,

47

SECT. I. nations, all tranfadions of any importance are
.7usin -concluded in writing. The exhibition of the
Defeas in c in
the judicial deed or instrument is full evidence of the fact,
proceedings and ascertains with precision what each party has
die ages. tipulated to perform. But among a rude people,

when the arts of reading and writing were such
uncommon attainments, that to be a mafler of
either, intitled a person to the appellation of a
clerk or learned man, scarce any thing.was com-
mitted to writing but treaties between Princes,
their grants and charters to their fubjeds, or such
tranfadtions between private parties as were of
extraordinary consequence, or had an extensive
effect. The greater part of affairs in common
life and business were carried on by verbal con-
trats or promises. This, in many civil questions,
not only made it difficult to bring proof sufficient
to eablifh any claim, but encouraged falsehood
and fraud, by rendering them extremely easy.
Even in criminal cafes, where a particular fact
muff be ascertained, or an accusation be difpro-
ved, the nature and effedt of legal evidence was
little understood by barbarous nations. To define
with accuracy that species of evidence which a
court had reason to expet; to determine when
it ought to insist on positive proof, and when it
should be satisfied with a proof from circum-
stances; to compare the testimony of discordant
witnesses; and to fix the degree of credit due to
each; were discussions too intricate and subtile for
the jurisprudence of ignorant ages. In order to
avoid encumbering themselves with these, a more
simple form of procedure was introduced into
courts as well civil as criminal. In all cafes,
where the notoriety of the fad did not furnilh the
clearest and must direc evidence, the person
accused, or he against whom an ation was
brought, was called legally, or offered volunta-

rily
48

vily to purge himself by oath; and upon his de- SEC. I.
daring his innocence, he was instantly acquit-- ''"
ted . This absurd practice effectually creened
guilt and fraud from detection or punishment,
by rendering the temptation to perjury so pow-
erful, that it was not easy to resist it. The per-
nicious effects of it were sensibly felt; and in
order to guard against them, the laws ordained
that oaths hould be administered with great so-
lemnity, and accompanied with every circum-
stance which could inspire religious reverence,
or fiperftitious terror . This, however, pro.-
ved a feeble remedy: these ceremonious rites
becar.e familiar, and their impreflion on the
imagination gradually diminished; men who
could venture to disregard truth, were not apt
to startle at the folemnities of an oath. Their
observation of this, put legislators upon devising
a new expedient for rendering the purgation by
oath more certain and fatisfadory. They requi-
red the person accused to appear with a certain
number of freemen, his neighbours or relations,
who corroborated the oath which he took, by
swearing that they believed all that he had ut-
tered to be true. These were called Conpurg'ators,
and their number varied according to the impor-
tance of the subject in dispute, or the nature of
the crime with which a person was charged . In
oIme cafes, the concurrence of no less than three
hundred of these auxiliary witnesses was requisite
to acquit the person accuedh. But even this de-
vice was found to be ineffectual. It was a point
of honour with every man in Europe, d ing fe
veral ages, not to delert the chief on vwhol! he

eI.cg. Bgund. Tit. 8, & 4. Leg. Aleian. Tit. 89

I.eg lBaiwal T'lit. 8. § . -. S&c. ' DL)u C ('.,,t.l(;h ll,.
voc. uramrnlitm, vol. iii. p. 16i7. Edit. hcd,ict. t' DL
C(,lnie, ibid. vol. iii. p. 1 59. h Sp lin, i l (.iiolIr. vou .
.f/JiihO. Gregoi. 'fulo Hil.

[ li ,li. i
. . C .

VoL. I. E depended,

'-"'ties of blood conneted him. Whoever then

was bold enough to violate the laws, was sure
of devoted adherents, willing to abet, and eager
to serve him in whatever manner he required.
The formality of calling Compurgators, proved
an apparent, not a real security, against false-
hood and perjury; and the sentences of courts,
while they continued to refer every point in
question to the oath of the defendant, became
so flagrantly iniquitous as excited universal in-
dignation against this method of procedure .

Thifeien- SENSIBLE of these defects, but strangers to
troduced
the pra&ice the manner of correcting hem, or of introdu-
,f appealing cing a more proper form, our ancestors, as an
o hean: infallible method of discovering truth, and of

guarding against deception, appealed to Heaven,
and referred every point in dispute to be deter-
mined, as they imagined, by the decisions of un-
erring wisdom and impartial justice. The per-
son accused, in order to prove his innocence,
submitted, in ome cafes, to trial, by plunging
his arm in boiling water; by lifting a red hot
ilon with his naked hand; by walking bare-foot
over burning plough-shares; or by other expe-
Particularlyriments equally perilous and formidable. On

ibtcial. other occasions, he challenged his accuser to

fight him i single combat. All these various
forms of trial were conducted with many devout
ceremonies; the ministers of religion were em-
ployed, the Almighty was called upon to interpose
for the manifestation of guilt, and for the pro-
tection of innocence; and whoever escaped un-
hurt, or came off victorious, was pronounced
to be acquitted by the Judgment of God .

i Leg. Langobard. lib. ii. tit. 55. § 34.
k Murat. Diilfietatio de judiciis Dei. Anticust. Italic.
vol. iii. p. 6iz.

AMONG
5o

A VIEW OF THE

AMONG all the whimsical and absurd inftituti SECT. 1.

ons which owe their existence to the weakness.' '
of human reason, this, which submitted quefti-dua,, of
(ins that affectcd the pr,:perty, the reputation, 'h ,rle.'dc
and the lives of men, to the determination ofthc hip rli-
chance, or of bodily ifrength and address, ap-t ic:'!
pears to be the !mos extravagant and prepofte-
rous. There wre circumstances, however,
wl!ich led the nations of Europe to confider this
cq;;ivocca mode of dccidinrg any point in con tt.f,
as a dirt t appeal to heaven, and a ccrtain me-
thod of diicoverrig its will. As men arc unable
to comprehend the manner in which the Al-
mighty carries on the government of the uni-
verll, by equal, fixed, and general laws, they
are apt to imagine t!at in every cafe which th!ir
paflions or interest rnder imporant in their own
eyes, the Supreme Ruler of all ought visibly to
display his power, in vindicating innocence and
punishing vice. It requires no inconsiderable
degree of science and pllilofophy to correct this
popilar error. But the sentiments prevalent
in Europe, during the dark ages, instead of cor-
recting, strengthened it. Religion, for several
centuries, consisted chiefly in believing the le-
gendary history of those faints whose names
crowd and disgrace the Romish calendar. The
fabulous tales concerning their miracles, had
b,-en declared authentic by the bulls of Popes,
and the decrees of councils; they made the
great subjeCt of the inftlrutions which the
clergy offered to the people, and were re-
ceived by them with implicit credulity and
admiration. By there, men were accuitoincd
to believe that the established laws o!f nature
might be violated on the mofl frivolous occa-
sions, and were taught to look rather for par-
ticular and extraordinary ads of power under
the divine adminifitation, than to contcmplat:
the rcgll'r' piogrutfs a.d execution of a g.r:.ral

.E 2 pli.

SECT. I. plan. One superstition prepared the way for ano-
<v ther; and whoever believed that the Supreme

Being had interposed miraculously on those tri-
vial occasions mentioned in legends, could not
but expe& his intervention in matters of greater
importance, when solemnly referred to his decision.

And like- WITH this fuperititious opinion, the martial
wie by spirit of Europe, during the middle ages, con-
tialtpirit. curred in establishing the mode of trial byjudi-

cial combat. To be ready to maintain with his
sword whatever his lips had uttered, was the first
maxim of honour with every gentleman. To as-
fert their own rights by force of arms, to inflit
vengeance on those who had injured or affronted
them, were the diftination and pride of high fpi-
rited nobles. The form of trial by combat co-
inciding with this maxim, flattered and gratified
there palions. Every man was the guardian of
his own honour, and of his own life; the jus-
tice of his cause, as well as his future reputation,
depended on his own courage and prowess. This
mode of decision was confidered, accordingly,
as one of the happiest efforts of wife policy; and
as soon as it was introduced, all the forms of trial
by fire or water, and other superstitious expe-
riments, fell into disuse, or were employed only
in controversies between persons of inferior
rank. The trial by combat was authorised over
all Europe, and received in every country with
equal fatisfation. Not only questions concerning
uncertain or contested fats, but general and ab-
ftract points in law were determined by the iflue
of a combat; and the latter was deemed a me-
thod of discovering truth more liberal as well as
more fatisfaiótory, than that by examination and
argument. Not only might parties, whose minds
were exasperatcd by the eagerness and the hofti-
lity of opposition, defy their alltagonift, and re-

quire

quire him to make good his charge, or to prove SE CT. I.
his innocence, with his sword; but witnesses,'-"'
who had no interest in the issue of the question,
though called to declare the truth by laws which
ought to have afforded them protetion, were
equally exposed to the danger of a challenge,
and equally bound to assert the veracity of their
evidence by dint of arms. To complete the ab-
furdities of this military jurisprudence, even the
characer of ajudge was not sacred from its vio-
lence. Any one of the parties might interrupt
a judge when about to deliver his opinion;
might accuse him of iniquity and corruption in
the most reproachful terms, and throwing down
his gauntlet, might challenge him to defend his
integrity in the field; nor could he, without in-
famy, refuse to accept the defiance, or decline
to enter the lifts against such an adversary,

THUS the form of trial by combat, like other Ii becor.c.

abuses, spread gradually, and extended to allunvr""'"
persons and almost to all cafes. Ecclesiastics, wo-
men, minors, superannuated and infirm persons,
who could not with decency orjuftice be com-
pelled to take arms, and to maintain their own
cause, were obliged to produce champions, whom
they engaged by affetion or rewards, to fight
their battles. The folemnities of a judicial com-
bat were such as were natural in an ation, which
was confidered both as a formal appeal to God,
and as the final decision of questions of the high-
eft moment. Every circumstance relating to
them was regulated by the edicts of Princes,
and explained in the comments of lawyers, with
a minute and even superstitious accuracy. Skill
in there laws and rites was the only science of
which warlike nobles boasted, or which they
were ambitious to attain'.

E3 By

See a curious discourse concerning the laws of judicial

combat, by Thomas of Woodllock, Duke of Gloucester,
uncle to Richard II, in Spelnlan's Gloffar. voc. Camtus.

T~ r' proceding, both in civil and criminal quetions,
ciou eicrt, was entirely perverted. Force usurped the place
0' i' of equity in courts of judicature, and julice was

banished from her proper mansion. Discern-
mcnt, learning, integrity, were qualities less ne-
ceffary to a judge than bodily strength, and dex-
terity in the use of arms. Daring courag, and
iuperior vigour or address, were of more moment
towards fcuring the favourable issue of a flit,
than the equity of a caule, or the clearre-s of the
evidence. Men, of courfc, applied themselves
to cultivate the talents which they found to be
of greatest utility. As firength of body and ad-
drcis in arms were no less requitite in those lifts
wiich they were obliged to enter in d fence of
their private rights, than in the field of battle,
where they met the enemies of their country, it
became the great objeEt of education, as well as
the chif employment in life, to acquire these
martial acconlplifhments. The adminiifration
of juftic, ifiead of accustoming men to litecn
to the voice of equity, or to reverence the deci-
sions of law, adc. d to the ferocity of their man-
c:rs, atdi tauight them to confider force as the
great arbitie of right and wrong.

v,. u : e

'Iniisr.i pernicious eff'cls of the trial by comn.

i,,a',, " ;t wv. re (i obvious, that they did not altoge-
ti. ir.c- tlier efcapc the view of the unobfrvig age in

wlhich it vwa;s itrcdticed. The clergy, fron the
beginning, remor.ftrated against it as repugnant
to tle irit Criait Cri y, and lubvei fivc. ofjuf-
tice a (, order '. But the maxims a;:d palliols
v/liil1h favured it, had taken such old of the
mni;ds of nic, that they disregarded admoniti-
orns al c ;fu:cs, which, on other occasions,
wxvuld have ft:luck them witl terror. The evil

'L DL C;ull, (G:iiar. voc. Duellurn, vol. ii. p. 1675.

A VIEW OF TH
54

was too great and inveterate to yield to that re- SECT. I.
medy, and continuing to encreafe, the civil pow- "-'-
er at length found it necessary to interpose. Con-
fcious, however, of their own limited authority,
monarchs proceeded with caution, and their first
attempt to restrain, or to set any bounds to this
practice, were extremely feeble. One of the
earliest restrictions of this practice which occurs
in the history of Europe, is that of Henry I. of
England. It extended no farther than to pro-
hibit the trial by combat in questions concerning
property of small value ". Louis VII. of France
imitated his example, and issued an edid to the
fame effect . St. Louis, whose ideas as a legis-
lator, were far superior to those of his age, en-
deavoured to introduce a more perfect jurifpru-
dence, and to substitute the trial by evidence, in
place of that by combat. But his regulations,
with refpeEt to this, were confined to his own
domains; for the great vassals of the crown, pof-
sessed such independent authority, and were o
fondly attached to the ancient practice, that he
durst not venture to extend it to the whole king-
dom. Some barons voluntarily adopted his re-
gulations. The spirit of courts ofjuftice became
averse to the mode of decision by combat, and
discouraged it on every occasion. The nobles,
neverthelets, thought it so honourable to depend
for the security of their lives and fortunes on
their own courage alone, and contended with so
much vehemence for the preservation of this fa-
vourite privilege of their order, that the fuccef-
fors of St. Louis, unable to oppose, and afraid
of offending such powerful fubjets, were obliged
not only to tolerate, but to authorise the practice
which he had attempted to abolith P. In other
countries of Europe, efforts equally zealous were

'" BrulfflI Ufagc des Fief. vol. ii. p. 962. Ordon. tonl.
i. p. 6. P Ordon. tonm. i. p. 328, 390, 435.

E 4 employed

StS,.' T. employed to maintain the established custom;
'-"' aid similar concessions were extorted from their

refpestive sovereigns. It continued, however,
to be an object of policy with every monarch of
abilities or vigour, to explode the trial by com-
bat; and various edicts were issued for this pur-
pose. But the observation wlich was made con-
cerning the right of private war, is equally ap-
plicable to the mode of trial under review. No
custom, how absurd soever it may be, if it has
fubfifecd long, or derives its force from the man-
ners and prejudices of the age in which it pre-
vails, was ever abolished by the bare promulga-
tion of laws and statutes. The sentiments of the
people must change, or tome new power fuffici-
ent to counteract it must be introduced. Such a
change, accordingly, took place in Europe, as
science gradually increased, and society advan-
ced towards more perfect order. In proportion
as the prerogative of Princes extended, and
came to acquire new force, a power, interested
in fuppre.ilg every practice favourable to the
independence of the nobles, was introduced.
The struggle, nevertheless, subsisted for several
centuries; sometimes the new regulations and
ideas seemed to gain ground; sometimes anci-
ent haLits recurred; and though, upon the
whole, the tri 1 by combat went more and more
inrt difile, yet inflances of it occur, as late as
the fixtecnth century, in the hittory both of
France and of England. In proportion, as it de-
clilned, the regular admniliftration of justice was
rcftor.ld, the procccdings of courts were directed
by known laws, the fludy of these became an
object of attention to judges, and the people of
ELurop' .advanced fait towards civility, when this
great caule of the ferocity of their manners was
rt:mov:d [YJ.

[Y] NOTL XXII.

3. Bv
56

3. BY authorizing the right of appeal from theScT. I.

courts of the Barons to those of the King, and'-,"'
fubjedting the decisions of the former to the re-lege ot ap,
view of the latter, a new ftep, not less confidera- o"igh
ble than these which I have already mentioned, cours of
was taken towards establishing the regular, con-atbh"e
fiftent, and vigorous administration of justice. great im-
Among all the encroachments of the feudal no-in thee ai.
bles on the prerogative of their Monarchs, their niltation of
usurping the administration of justice with fu-u"R'C"'
preme authority, both in civil and criminal causes,
within the precincs of their own estates, was the
most singular. In other nations, fubjeds have
contended with their Princes, and have endea-
voured to extend their own power and privileges;
but in, the history of their firuggles and pretenfi-
ons, we discover nothing similar to this right
which the feudal barons claimed, and acquired.
It muff have been something peculiar in their ge- origin of
nius and manners that suggested this idea, and hnd up"eme
prompted them to insist on such a claim. Amongpendent ju-
the rude people who conquered the various pro- th nobility,
vinces of the Roman Empire, and established new
kingdoms there, the paflion of resentment, too
impetuous to bear controul, was permitted to re-
main almost unrestrained by the authority of
laws. The person offended, as has been observed,
retained not only the right of prosecuting but of
puniflhing his adversary. To him it belonged to
inflict itch vengeance as satiated his rage, or to
accept of such fatisfation as appeared it. But
while fierce barbarians continued to be the sole
judges in their own cause, their enmities were
implacable and immortal; they let no bounds
either to the degree of their vengeance, or to the
duration of their refcntment. The excesses which
this occasioned, proved lo deftrutive of peace
and order in bociety, as forced them to think of
fotne lemedy. At first, arbiters iiiterpofed, and

by

SECT. I. by persuasion or intreaty prevailed on the party
'----offended to accept of a fine or composition from

the aggrefolr, and to drop all farther prosecution.
But as fbmifflon to persons who had no legal or
magisterial authority, was altogether voluntary,
it became necessary to eablifh judges with
power sufficient to enforce their own decisions.
The leader whom they were accustomed to fol-
low and to obey, whose courage they refpeded,
and in whose integrity they placed confidence,
was the person to whom a martial people natural-
ly committed this important prerogative. Every
chieftain was the commander of his tribe in war,
and their judge in peace. Every baron led his
vassals to the field, and administered jufftice to
them in his hall. Their high-fpirited dependants
would not have recognized any other authority,
or have submitted to any other jurifdiion. But
in times of turbulence and violence, the exercise
of this new funtion was attended not only with
trouble, but with danger. No person could as-
fume the characer of a judge, if he did not pof-
fess power sufficient to protet the one party from
the violence of private revenge, and to compel
the other to accept of such reparation as he en-
joined. In consideration of the extraordinary es-
forts which this office required, judges, betides
the fine which they appointed to be paid as a com-
penfation to the person or family who had been
injured, levied an additional fum as a recompense
for their own labour; and in all the feudal king-
doms the latter was as precisely ascertained, and
as regularly exadted, as the former.

The extent THUS, by the natural operation of circum-
ser of this fances peculiar to the manners or political slate
Plivilege. of the feudal nations, separate and territorial jurif-

didions came not only to be eflablilhed in every

king-

kingdom, but were established in such away, thatScTr. I.
the interest of the barons concurred with their am- -v--
bition in maintainingand extending them. It was
not merely a point of honour with the feudal no-
bles to dispense justice to their vassals; but from
the exercise of that power arose one capital
branch of their revenue; and the emoluments of
their courts were frequently the main support of
their dignity. It was with infinite zeal that they
afiered and defended this high privilege of their
order. By this institution, however, every king-
dom in Europe was split into as many separate
principalities as it contained powerful barons.
Their vassals, whether in peace or in war, were
scarce sensible of any authority, but that of their
superior lord. They felt themselves fubje to
no other command. They were amenable to no
other jurifdidion. The ties which linked toge-
ther these smaller confederacies became clofc and
firm; the bonds of public union relaxed, or were
dissolved. The nobles strained their invention
in devising regulations that tended to ascertain
and perpetuate this diftintion. In order to
guard against any appearance of subordination
in their courts to those of the crown, they con-
strained their monarchs to prohibit the royal
judges from entering their territories, or from
claiming any jurifdiEtion there; and if, either
through mistake, or from the spirit of encroach-
ment, any royal judge ventured to extend his au-
thority to the vassals of a baron, they might plead
their right of exemption, and the lord of whom
they held could not only rescue them out of his
hands, but was entitled to legal reparation for the
injury and affront offered to him. The jurifdic-
tion of the royal j udg s scarce reached beyond the
narrow limits of the King's denelnes. Inflead of
a regular gradation of courts, all acknowledging
the authority of the fame general laws, and look-
irg up to tlhee as the guides of their dccifions,

there

59

SECT. I. there were in every feudal kingdom a thousand
'--~V independent tribunals, the proceedings of which

were directed by local customs and contraditory
forms. The collision ofjurifdiction between these
numerous courts, often retarded the execution of
justice: The variety and caprice of their modes
of procedure must have for ever kept the admi-
niftration of it from attaining any degree of
uniformity or perfection.

EApedicn s ALL the monarchs of Europe perceived these
empliyed in encroachmentson theirj urifdiction, and bore them
order to li-
mit orabo- with impatience. But the usurpations of the no-
ifh it. bles were so firmly established, and the danger of

endeavouri ng to overturn them by open force was
so manifest, that they were obliged to remain fa-
tisfied with attempts to undermine them. Various
expedients were employed for this purpose; each
of which merit attention, as they mark the pro-
grefs of law and equity in the several kingdoms of
Europe. At first, Princes endeavoured to circum-
scribe the jurifdiAion of the barons, by permit-
ting them to take cognizance only of smaller of-
fences, reserving those of greater moment, under
the appellation of Pleas of the Crown, and Royal
Causes, to be tried in the King's courts. This
affected only the barons of inferior note; the
more powerful nobles scorned such a distinction,
and not only claimed unlimited jurifdition, but
obliged their sovereigns to grant them charters,
conveying or recognizingthis privilege in the most
ample form. The attempt,. nevertheless, was
productive of rome good consequences, and pav-
ed the way for more. It turned the attention of
men towards a jurisdiction diftind from that of
the baron whose vassals they were; it accustomed
them to the pretensions of superiority which the
crown claimed over territorial judges; and taught
themn, when opprefid by their own fiuperior lord,

to
60

to look up to their sovereign as their protecor.SECT. I.
This facilitated the introduction of appeals, by' -'
which Princes brought the decisions of the baron's
courts under the review of the royal judges.
While trial by combat subsisted in full vigour, no
point decided according to that mode, could be
brought under the review of another court. It
had. been referred to the judgment of God; the
issue of battle had declared his will; and it would
have been impious to have called in queflion the
equity of the divine decision. But as oon as
that barbarous custom began to fall into disuse,
Princes encouraged the vfals of the barons to
sue for redress, by appealing to the royal courts.
The progress, however, of this practice, was flow
and gradual. The firit inflances of appeals were
on account of the delay, or the refusal of juflice
in the baron's court; and as these were counte-
nanced by the ideas of subordination in the feudal
constitution, the nobles allowed them to be intro-
duced without much opposition. But when there
were followed by appeals on account of the in-
justice or iniquity of the sentence, the nobles then
began to be sensible, that if this innovation be-
came general, the shadow of power alone would
remain in their hands, and all real authority and
jurifdition would centre in those courts which
poffefled the right of review. They inflantly
took the alarm, remonstrated against the encroach-
ment, and contended boldly for their ancient pri-
vileges. But the monarchs in the different king-
doms of Europe pursued their plan with steadiness
and prudence. Though forced to fiifpend their
operations, on some occasions, and seemingly to
yield when any formidable confederacy of their
vaflals united against them, they resumed their
measures as soon as they observed the nobles to be
remits or feeble, and pushed them with vigour.
They appointed the royal courts, which originally

verec

6i

SEcT. I. were ambulatory, and irregular with refpe to
'-""v" their times of meeting, to be held in a fixed place,

and at Rtated seasons They were solicitous to
name judges of more distinguished abilities than
such as prcfidu1 in the courts of the barons.
They added dignity to their character, and fplen-
dor to their aifemblies. They laboured to render
their forms regular, and their decrees confiltent.
Suchjudicatories became, of course, the obj-cts
of public confidence as well as veneration. Th:
people, relinquishing the partial tribunals of thei-
lords, were eager to bring every subjet of contest
under the more equal and discerning eye of tholf
whom their sovereign had chosen to givejudgmen t
in his name. Thus Kings became once more the
heads of the community, and the dispensers ofjui-
tice to their fubedts. The barons, in some king-
doms, ceased to exercise their right ofjurifdidtion,
because it funk into contempt; in others, it was
circumscribed by such regulations as rendered it
innocent, or it was entirely abolished by express
flatutes. Thus the adminiitration of justice ta-
king its rife from one source, and following one
direction, held its course in every itate with more
uniformity, and with greater force [Z].

The regula- VI. The forms and maxims of the canon law,
anol law which were become universally refpedtable.from
promote a their authority in the spiritual courts, contributed
more per-
fed admini.not a little towards thef improvements in jurif-
fration. prudence which I have enumerated. If the canon

law be confidered politically, either as a fteni
framed on purpose to afift the clergy in usurping
powers and jurifdietion no less repugnant to the
nature f their function, than inconsistent with
the order of government; or as the chief inftru-
mcnt in eflablifhing the dominion of the Popes
which lhook the throne, and endangered the liber-
ties of cvery kingdom in Europe, we muff pro-

[Z] NOTE XXilI.

n11lOCC
62

nounce it one of the most formidable engines ever s E T. I.
formed against the happiness of civil society. But'"- '
if we contemplate it merely as a code of laws re-
speding the rights and property of individuals,
and attend only to the civil effects of its decisions
concerning these, we must view it in a different,
and a much more favourable light. In ages ofThe pro-

r

. . . * n

s * grefs of ec-

ignorance and credulity, the ministers of religion cefiaftical
are the objects of fuperflitious veneration. Whenrfururpatio-
the barbarians who over-ran the Empire first em-
braced the Christian faith, they found the clergy
in possession of considerable power; and they
naturally transferred to these new guides the pro-
found fubmiflion and reverence which they were
accustomed to yield to the priests of that religion
which they had forsaken. They deemed their
persons to be as sacred as their function; and
would have confidered it as impious to fubjedt
them to the profane jurifdition of the laity.
The clergy were not blind to the advantages
which the weakness of mankind afforded them.
They eflablifhed courts, in which every queflion
relating to their own character, their funtion,
or their property, was tried. They pleaded, and
obtained an almoff total exemption from the au-
thority of civil judges. Upon different pretexts,
and by a multiplicity of artifices, they commu-
nicated this privilege to so many persons, and
extended their jurifdidion to fich a variety of
cafes, that the greater part of those affairs which
give rife to contest and litigation, was drawn un-
der the cognizance of the piritual courts.

BUT in order to dispose the laity to fiffer tlhefe T"' plan

usurpations without murmuring or opposition, it'A1 irilf-
was necessary to convince them, that the admini- prI"ance
ffration of justice would be rendered more per- " plr'
tect by the tftablilhment of this newjuriiditionl. th:t in Ihe
This was not a difficult undertaking, at the pe-C

riod

SECT. I. riod when the clergy carried on their encroach-
v- 'ments with the greatest success. That scanty

portion of science which served to guide men in
the ages of darkness, was wholly engrossed by the
clergy. They alone were accustomed to read, to
enquire, and to reason. Whatever knowledge of
ancient jurisprudence had been preserved, either
by tradition, or in such books as had escaped the
deftrutive rage of barbarians, was poffelfed only
by them Upon the maxims of that excellent
system, they founded a code of laws consonant
to the great principles of equity. Being directed
by fixed and known rules, the forms of their
courts were ascertained, and their decisions be-
came uniform and consistent. Nor did they want
authority sufficient to enforce their sentences.
Excommunication and other ecclesiastical cen-
fures, were punishments more formidable than
any that,civil judges could inflit in support of
their decrees.

The good IT is not furprizing, then, that ecclesiastical ju-
cffe&s of
imitating rifprudence should become such an objeEt of ad-
and adopt- miration and refpedt; that exemption from civil

jurifdidtion was courted as a privilege, and con-
ferred as a reward. It is not furprizing, that even
to rude people, the maxims of the canon law
should appear more equal andjuft than that ill-
digeftedjurifprudencewhich direEted all proceed
ings in the civil courts. According to the latter.
the differences between contending barons were
terminated, as in a state of nature, by the sword;
according to the former, every matter was sub-
jeted to the decision of laws. The one, by per-
mitting judicial combats, left chance and force
to be arbiters of right or wrong, of truth or false-
hood; the other, passed judgment with refpet to
these by the maxims of equity, and the testimony
of witnefies. Any error or iniquity in a sentence

pro-

pronounced by a baron to whom feudal jurifdicti- CT. I.
on belonged, was irremediable, because originally" ~
it was subjet to the review of no superior tribu-
nal; the ecclesiastical law established a regular
gradation of courts, through all which a cause
might be carried by appeal, until it was determin-
ed by that authority which was held to be fu-
preme in the church. Thus the genius and prin-
ciples of the canon law prepared men for ap-
proving these three great alterations in the feudal
jurisprudence which I have mentioned. But it
was not with refpe to there points alone that
the canon law suggested improvements benefi-
cial to society. Many of the regulations, now
deemed the barriers of personal security, or the
safe-guards of private property, are contrary to
the spirit, and repugnant to the maxims of the
civil jurisprudence, known in Europe during fe-
veral centuries, and were borrowed from the rules
and praftice of the ecclesiastical courts. By ob-
serving the wisdom and equity of the decisions in
these courts, men began to perceive the necefli-
ty eitherof deserting the martial tribunals of the
barons, or of attempting to reform them [AA].

VII. THE revival of the knowledge and study The e,"'i

of the Roman law, co-operated with the caulesan, ti,
which I have mentioned, in introducing morecn",ibutt
just and liberal ideas concerning the nature ofideas"l
government, and the administration of jufiice.ernilg jul-
Among the calamities which the devastations of nd
the barbarians who broke in upon the Empire
brought upon mankind, one of the greatest was
their overturning the system of Roman juripru-
dence, the noblest monument of the wildom of
that great people, formed to subdue and to go-
vern the world. The laws and regulations of a T1e rir-

·.~~~ .W..~~~~~

cunfltiinc
civilized community, were altogether repugnantfim ',ih

[AA] NOTE XXIV. the Rolm.l

,,r , -5 ilaw fell into
VOL. I. IF tO oblivu.

SecT. I. to the manners and ideas of these fierce invaders.

'
- They had respect to objects, of which a rude

people had no conception; and were adapted to
a itate of society with which they were entirely
unacquainted. For this reason, wherever they
fettled, the Romanjurifprudence oon funk into
oblivion, and lay buried for' ome centuries under
the load of those institutions which the inhabitants
of Europe dignified with the name of laws. But
towards themiddle of the twelfth century, a copy
of Justinian's Pandets was accidentally disco-

circumfran-vered in Italy. By that time, the state of society
evouredhe was o far advanced, and the ideas of men so
revival of it. much enlarged and improved by the occurrences

of several centuries, dbring which they had con-
tinued in political union, that they were struck
with admiration of a system which their ancef-
tors could not comprehend. Though they had
not hitherto attained such a degree of refinement,
as to catch from the ancients a relish for true
philosophy, or speculative science; though they
were still insensible to the beauty and elegance of
classical composition; they were sufficiently quali-
sied to judgewith refpec to the merit of their sys-
tem of laws, in which all the points most interest-
ing to mankind, and the chief objects of their at-
tention in every age, were fettled with discern-
ment, precision and equity. All men of letters
studied this new science with eagerness; and
within a few years after the discovery of the Pan-
dects, professors of civil law were appointed, who
taught it publickly in most countries of Europe.

The eftesaS THE effects of having such a perfect model
of this upon
the ideas ofto fudy and to imitate were oon manifest.
men, iand Men, as oon as they were acquainted with fixed
lation of and general laws, perceived -the advantage of
justice. them, and became impatient to ascertain the

principles and forms by which judges hould re-

gulate
66

gulate their decisions. Such was the ardourSEC''- I.
with which they carried on an undertaking of "
so great importance to society, that before the
close of the twelfth century, the feudal law was
reduced into a regular fyffem; the code of ca-
non-law was enlarged and methodized; and the
loose uncertain customs of different provinces or
kingdoms, were collected and arranged with an
order and accuracy acquired from the knowledge
of Roman jurisprudence. In ome countries of
Europe the Roman law was adopted as fubfidia-
ry to their own municipal law; and all cafes to
which the latter did not extend, were decided
according tojlhe principles of the former. In
others, the maxims as well as forms of Roman
jurisprudence mingled imperceptibly with the
laws of the country, and had a powerful, though
less sensible, influence, in improving and per-
secting them [BB].

THESE various improvements in the fyftemFrom all

of jurisprudence, and adminiitration of justice,' t'h , ie
occasioned a change in manners of great import- in Fro:'ii-
ance, and of extensive effect. They gave rife°"'
to a diftintion of professions, they obliged men
to cultivate different talents, and to aim at dif-
ferent accomplishments, in order to qualify
themselves for the various departments and
funtions which became necessary in focietyr.
Among uncivilized nations, there is but one
profefhon honourable, that of arms. All the
ingenuity and vigour of the human mind are ex-
erted in acquiring military skill, or address.
The functions of peace are few and simple;
and require no particular course of education or
tfudy, as a preparation for discharging them.

[lIB] NOTE XXV.

Dr. Ferguson's Elray on the hitory of Civil Society,
part. iv. let. .

This

67
F2

68

A VIEW OF THE

SECT. . This was the ffate of Europe during several cent-
'-"v turies. Every gentleman, born a soldier, scorned

any other occupation; he was taught no science
but that of war; even his exercises and pastimes
were feats of martial prowess. Nor did thejudi-
cial character, which persons of noble birth were
alone entitled to assume, demand any degree of
knowledge beyond that which such untutored
soldiers poeifed. To recolled a few traditiona-
ry customs which time had confirmed, and ren-
dered refpe&able; to mark out the lifts of bat-
tle with due formality; to observe the iflue of
the combat; and to pronounce whether it had
been conducted according to the'laws of arms;
included every thing that a baron who ated as
a judge, found it necessary to underfand.

,he trhitl Bu T when the forms of legal proceedingswere
Ic:c.y. fixed, when the rules of decision were committed

to writing, and collected into a body, law became
a science, the knowledge of which required a re-
gular course of study, together with long atten-
tion to the practice of courts. Martial and illi-
terate nobles, had neither leisure nor inclination
to undertake a talk so laborious, as well as so so-
reign from all the occupations which they deem-
cd entertaining, or suitable to their rank. They
gradually relinquished their places in courts of
jufticc, where their ignorance exposed them to
contempt. They became weary of attending to
the dilcuilion of cafes, which grew too intricate
lor them to comprehend. Not only the judicial
determination of points which were the subject
of controversy, but the conduct of all legal bufi-
ness and tranfations was committed to persons
trained by previous fludy and application to the
knowledge of law. An order of men to whom
their fellow-citizens had daily recourse for advice,
and to whom they looked up for decision in their

molt

most important concerns, naturallyacquired con-SE CT. .
fideration and influence in society. They were
advanced to honours which had been confidered
as the peculiar rewards of military virtue. They
were entrusted with offices of the highell dignity,
and most extensive power. Thus, another pro-
session than that of arms, came to be introduced
among the laity, and was reputed honourabl-.
The funEtions of civil life were attended to. The
talents requisite for discharging them were culi-
vated. A new road was opened to wealth and
eminence. The arts and virtues of peace were
placed in their proper rank, and received theif
due recompense [CC].

VIII. WHILE improvements so important witll ,he frit,

refpet to the state of society, and the adminif ''itj,;: .
tration of justice, gradually made progress in Eu ,,urr ,
rope, sentiments more liberal and generous had !'n"':'.
begun to animate the nobles. These were in-tCicuu,
spired by the spirit of Chivalry, which, though""'""
confidered, commonly, as a wild intlitution,
the effect of caprice and the source of extrava-
gance, arose naturally from thle slate of society
at that period, and had a very serious influence
in refining the manners of the European nations.
The feudal state was a state of p.'rpetual war, ra-o,; irn ;1,
pine, and anarchy; during which the weak and'hi alr'.
unarmed were exposed every moment to infilts
or injuries. The power of the lovcrign vas too
limited to prevent tlietf wrongs; and the admii-
nifiration of jutice too fccble to rcdrcf tl]hem.
There was fearce any protction againfl violence
and opprellion, but wvlat the valour and g'tc-
rofity of private perlins aflbrdcd. The f'.tiic fpi
rit of enterprize which had prompted to many
gentlemen to take arms in defencet of the op-
pressed pilgrims in Palestine, incited lothers to

[CC] NOTE XXVI.

F 3 declarc

69

SECT. I. This was the ifate of Europe during several cerl-
'-"turies. Every gentleman, born a soldier, scorned

any other occupation; he was taught no science
but that of war; even his exercises and pastimes
were feats of martial prowess. Nor did thejudi-
cial character, which persons of noble birth were
alone entitled to assume, demand any degree of
knowledge beyond that which such untutored
soldiers poftiffed. To recolled a few traditiona-
ry customs which time had confirmed, and ren-
dered refpetable; to mark out the lifts of bat-
tle with due formality; to observe the issue of
the combat; and to pronounce whether it had
been conducted according to the'laws of arms;
included every thing that a baron who ated as
a judge, found it necessary to underfand.

.he cth's Bu T when the forms of legal proceedings were
ICC.Ci. fixed, when the rules of deci ion were committed

to writing, and collected into a body, law became
a science, the knowledge of which required a re-
gular course of fudy, together with long atten-
tion to the practice of courts. Martial and illi-
terate nobles, had neither leisure nor inclination
to undertake a task so laborious, as well as so so-
reign from all the occupations which they deem-
ed entertaining, or fitable to their rank. They
gradually relinquished their places in courts of
ijufice, where their ignorance exposed them to
contempt. They became weary of attending to
the difcuflion of cafes, which grew too intricate
for them to comprehend. Not only thejudicial
determination of points which were the subjed
of controversy, but the conduct of all legal bufi-
ness and tranfadtions was committed to persons
trained by previous fudy and application to the
knowledge of law. An order of men to whom
their fellow-citizens had daily recourse for advice,
and to whom they looked up for decision in their

mol

most important concerns, naturallyacquired con-SE CT. I.
fideration and influence in society. They were""'
advanced to honours which had been confidered
as the peculiar rewards of military virtue. They
were entrusted withoffices of the highell dignity,
and most extensive power. Thus, another pro-
session than that of arms, came to be introduced
among the laity, and was reputed honourabl.
The funEtions of civil life were attended to. The
talents requisite for discharging them were culti-
vated. A new road was opened to wealth and
eminence. The arts and virtues of peace were
placed in their proper rank, and received their
due recompense [CC].

VIII. WHILE improvements so important witlh lT fIr.ir

refpet to the itate of society, and the adminifi"t ch
tration of justice, gradually made progress in Eu niurr IIral
rope, sentiments more liberal and generous had ' n"'"m'
begun to animate the nobles. These were in-s~cruu,
spired by the spirit of Chivalry, which, though"m ""L
confidered, commonly, as a wild institution,
the effect of caprice and the source of extrava-
gance, arose naturally from the slate of society
at that period, and had a very serious influence
in refining the manners of the European nations.
The feudal state was a ifate of p-rpetual war, ra-o,; :n ji
pine, and anarchy; during which the weak and di llr,.
unarmed were exposed every moment to infiits
or injuries. The power of the lovcrcign wvas too
limited to prevent thelfe wrongs; and the admi-
nifiration of jufice too feeble to rcdrcf them.
There was scarce any proteclion gainl violclncc
and opprellion, but wlat the valour anld gnlt-
rofity of private perlins aflOrded. Te i ine fpi
rit of enterprize which had promptcd so many
gentlemen to take arms in defence cf the op-
pressed pilgrims in Palefline, incited others to

[CC] NO'TE XXVI.

F; 3 declarc

69

SECT. I. declare themselves the patrons and avengers of
"'" injured innocence at home. When the final re-

duction of the Holy Land under the dominion of
Infidels put an end to these foreign expeditions,
the latter was the only employment left for the
activity and courage of adventurers. To check
the insolence of overgrown oppreflbrs; to succour
the diflreffed; to rescue the helpless from cap-
tivity; to protet, or to avenge women, orphans,
and ecclefiafiics, who could not bear arms in
their own defence; to redress wrongs and to re-
move grievances; were deemed ads of the
highest prowess and merit. Valour, humanity,
courtesy, justice, honour, were the charaderif-
tic qualities of chivalry. To these were added
religion, which mingled itself with every passion
and institution during the middle ages, and by
infusing a large proportion of enthusiastic zeal,
gave them such force, as carried them to roman-
tic excess. Men were trained to knighthood by
a long previous discipline; they were admitted
into the order by folemnities no less devout than
pompous; every person of noble birth courted
that honour; it was deemed a diffinction fupe-
rior to royalty; and monarchs were proud to re-
ceive it from the hands of private gentlemen.

Its beneici- THIS singular inititution, in which valour,
al cit'. gallantry, and religion, were so firangely blend-

ed, was wonderfully adapted to the taste and ge-
nius of martial nobles; and its effcts were soon
visible in their manners. War was carried on
with less ferocity, when humanity care to be
deemed the ornament of knighthood no less than
courage. More gentle and polished manners
were introduced, when courtesy was recommend-
ed as the most amiable of knightly virtues.
Violence and oppression decreased, when it was
reckonecd meritorious to check and to ptinifl

them.

them. A scrupulous adherence to truth, withSEcT. I.
the most religious attention to fulfil every engage-
ment, became the distinguishing characteristic of
a gentleman, because chivalry was regarded as
the school of honour, and inculcated the most de-
licate sensibility with refpet to that point. The
admiration of these qualities, together with the
high distinctions and prerogatives conferred on
knighthood in every part of Europe, inspired
persons of noble birth on ome occasions with a
species of military fanaticism, and led them to
extravagant enterprizes. But they imprinted deep-
ly in their inds the principles of generosity and
honour. These were strengthened by every
thing that can affect the senses, or touch the heart.
The wild exploits of those romantic knights who
sallied forth in quest of adventures, are well
known, and have been treated with proper ridi-
cule. The political and permanent effedts of the
spirit of chivalry have been less observed. Per-
haps, the humanity which accompanies all the
operations of war, the refinements of gallantry,
and the point of honour, the three chief circum-
itances which distinguish modern from ancient
manners, may be acribed in a great measure to
this whimsical inflitution, seemingly of little be-
nefit to mankind. The fentirnents which chival-
ry inspired, had a wonderful influence on man-
ners and conduct, during tle twelfth, thirteenth,
fourteenth, and fifteenth centuries. They were
so deeply rooted, that they continued to operate
after the vigour and reputation of the inftitutiii
itself began to decline. Some confidcrablc tranf-
ations recorded in the iollowvilg hiflory, re-
femble the adventurous exploits of chivalry, ra-
ther than the well regulated operations of flond
policy. Some of the mofi minnl t pcrlbil.gf$,
whose charate.rs will be delineated, w\re ftilcrr-
ly tinctured with tllis romantic Ipirit. lraicis [.
was ambitious to diftingiitili lhill'1 by all the

4 q(lalitics

7I

SECT. I. qualities of an accomplished knight, and endea-
\--.-'^voured to imitate the enterprizing genius of chi-

valry in war, as well as its pomp and courtesy du-
ring peace. The fame which he acquired by
these splendid actions, so far dazzled his more
temperate rival, that he departed on ome occa-
lions from his. usual prudence and moderation,
and emulated Fr n is in deeds of prowess, or of
gallantry [DD].

The pro- .IX. THF, progress of science and the cultiva-
ence hL tion of literature, had considerable effect il chan-
great influ- ging the manners of the European nations, and
manners andintroducing that civility and refinement by which
charaaei ofthey are now distinguished. At the time when
men' their Empire was overturned, the Romans,

though they had loft that correct taste which has
rendered the productions of their ancestors the
standards of excellence, and models for imitation
to succeeding ages, still preserved their love of
letters, and cultivated the arts with great ardour.

IJgorancc ofBut rude barbarians were so far from being struck
:a, ,de, with any admiration of these unknown accom-

plifhments,'that they despised them. They were
not arrived at that state of society, in which those
faculties of the human mind, that have beauty
and elegance for their objects, begin to unfold
themselves. They were strangers to all those
wants and desires which are the parents of inge-
nious invention; and as they did not comprehend
either the merit or utility of the Roman arts, they
destroyed the monuments of them, with industry
not inferior to that with which their posterity have
since studied to preserve or to recover them. The
convulsions occasioned by their settlement in the
Empire; the frequent as well asviolent revolutiol:s
in every kingdom which they eft blilhed; toge-
ther with the interior defects in the form of go-
vernment which they introduced; banilhed fecu-

[DD] NOTE XXVII.

rity
7.-

rity and leisure; prevented the growth of tate, or SECT. I.
the culture of science; and kept Europe, duringl"'-"V
several centuries, in that state of ignorance which
has been already described. But the events and
inititutions which I have enumerated, produced
great alterations in society. As oon s their
operation, in restoring liberty and independence
to one part of the community, began to be felt;
as Coon as they began to communicate to all the
members of society some taite of the advantages
arising from commerce, from public order, and
from personal security, the human mind be-
came conscious of powers which it did not for-
merly perceive, and fond of occupations or pur-
suits of which it was formerly incapable. To-
wards the beginning of the twelfth century, we
discern the firif symptoms of its awakening from
that lethargy in which it had long been funk,
and observe it turning with curiosity and atten-
tion towards new objects.

THE first literary efforts, however, of teherflli-

European nations in the middle ages, were ex- forts i di.
tremely ill-directed. Among nations, as wellraed, and

the cause.s

as individuals, the powers of imagination attain of his.
tome degree of vigour before the intellecual fa-
culties are much exercised in speculative or ab-
ftrad disquisition. Men are poets bfore they
are philosophers. They feel with fntfibility, and
describe with force, when they have made but
little progress in investigation or reasoning. The
age of Homer and of Hesiod long preceded that
o Thales, or of Socrates. But, unhappily for li-
terature, our ancestors deviating from this course
which nature points out, plunged at once into the
depths of abstruse and metaplyfical inquiry,
They had been converted to the Chrillian faith,
soon after they fettled in their new conquells.
Blut they did i.ut receive it pure. The prcfulmp-

tionl

73

11
^ tive doctrines of Christianity, the theories of a

vain philosophy, that attempted to penetrate in-
to mysteries, and to decide questions which the
limited faculties of the human mind are una-
ble to comprehend, or to resolve. These over-
curious speculations were incorporated with the
system of religion, and came to be confidered
as the most eential part of it. As soon, then,
as curiosity prompted men to enquire and to
reason, there were the fubjeds which firit pre-
sented themselves, and engaged their attention.
The scholastic theology, with its infinite train
of bold disquisitions, and subtile diftindions
concerning points which are not the object of
human reason, was the first production of the
spirit of enquiry after it began to resume rome
degree of activity and vigour in Europe. It was
not this circumstance alone that gave such a
wrong turn to the minds of men, when they be-
gan again to exercise talents which they had so
long negleted. Most of the persons who at-
tempted to revive literature in the'twelfth and
thirteenth centuries, had received inftrudion, or
derived their principles of science from the Greeks
in the eastern Empire, or from the Arabians in
Spain and Africa. Both these people, acute and
inquisitive to excess, corrupted those sciences
which they cultivated. The former rendered
theology a system of peculative refinement, or
of endless controversy. The latter communi-
cated to philosophy a spirit of metaphysical and
frivolous subtlety. Misled by these guides, the
perlbns who first applied to cience were involved
in a maze of intricate inquiries. Instead of al-
lowing their fancy to take its natural range, and
to produce such works of invention as might have
improved their taste, and refined their senti-
ments; instead of cultivating those arts which

embellilhed

A VIEW OF THE
74

embellished human life, and render it comforta- ScT. I.
ble; they were fettered by authority, they were'V"
led astray by example, and wafted the whole
force of their genius in speculations as unavail-
ing as they were difficult.

BUT fruitless and ill-direted as these fpecula- They had

tions were, their novelty rouzed, and their bold- conrderable
ness interested the human mind. The ardoureffea't
with which men pursued these uninviting lludies,
was astonishing. Genuine philosophy was never
cultivated, in any enlightened age, with greater
zeal. Schools, upon the model of these inftitu-
ted by Charlemagne, were opened in every ca-
thedral, and almost in every monastery of note.
Colleges and universities were erected, and
formed into communities or corporations go-
verned by their own laws, and invested with fe-
parate and extensive jurifdiAion over their own
members. A regular course of studies was
planned. Privileges of great value were confer-
red on masters and scholars. Academical titles
and honours of various kinds were invented, as
a recompense for both. Nor was it in the schools
alone that superiority in science led to reputation
and authority; it became the obje&t of refpet in
life, and advanced such as acquired it to a rank
of no inconsiderable eminence. Allured by all
there advantages, an incredible number of ftu-
dents resorted to these new feats of learning, and
crowded with eagerness into that new path which
was opened to fame and difRinC&ion.

BUT how considerable soever there first efforts A circum-

may appear, there was one circumstance which which pre-
prevented the effects of them from being as ex-vC"ned thaci
tensive as they ought to have been. All the lan- etcnive.
guages in Europe, during the period under re-
view, were barbarous. They were destitute of
elegance, of force, and even of perspicuity.

No

SECT. I. No attempt had been hitherto made to improve

"- ~or to polish them. The Latin tongue was con-

fecrated by the church to religion. Custom, with
authority scarce less sacred, had appropriated it
to literature. All the sciences cultivated in the
tvelfth and thirteenth centuries, were taught in
Latin. All books with refpet to them were
written in that language. To have treated of
any important subjed in a modern language,
would have been deemed a degradation of it.
This confined science within a very narrow circle.
The learned alone were admitted into the temple
of knowledge; the gate was hut against all o-
thers, who were allowed to remain involved in
their former darknef and ignorance,

Its infl- BUT though science was thus prevented, du.
manncrs ring several ages, from diffusing itself through so-
merits at- ciety, and its influence was circumscribed; the

iio progress of it may be mentioned, nevertheless,

among the great causes which contributed to in-
troduce a change of manners into Europe.
That ardent, though ill-judged spirit of enquiry
which I have described, occasioned a fermenta-
tion of mind which put ingenuity and invention
in motion, and gave them vigour. It led men
into a new employment of their faculties, which
they found to be agreeable as well as interesting,
It accustomed them to exercises and occupations
which tended to soften their manners, and to
give them forne relifl for thole gentle virtues,
which are peculiar to nations among whom fci-
ence hath been cultivated with success [EE].

The pro- X. TIi progress of commerce had confide-
, mrce rable influence in polishing the manners of the
hll gat European nations, and in leading them to order,
influience on
m,,n,,r! equal laws, and humanity. The wants of men,
anm.! .ov :n-
mrn ,, rEE1 NOTE. XXVIII

in
76

L ---, , 1 .,- , * . X-- ' ...

in the original and molt simple Rtate of society, SeCT. I.
are so few, and their desires so limited, that they--v"'
reft contented with the natural productions of
their climate and foil, or with what they can add
to these by their own rude industry. They have
no superfluities to dispose of, and few necessities
that demand a supply. Every little community
subsisting on its own domeftick flock, and satis-
fled with it, is either unacquainted with the states
around it, or at variance with them. Society Low ntt
and manners mufft be considerably improved,mfei:Cm,
and many provisions must be made for publicthe middle
order and personal security, before a liberal in-gs"'
tercourfe can take place between different nati-
ons. We find, accordingly, that the first effed
of the settlement of the barbarians in the Em-
pire, was to divide those nations which the Ro-
man power had united. Europe was broken in-
to many separate communities. The commu-
nication between these divided states ceased al-
most totally during several centuries. Navigati-
on was dangerous in/feas infested by pirates; nor
could itrangers trust to a friendly reception in the
ports of uncivilized nations. Even between dil-
tant parts of the fame kingdom, the intercourie
was rare and difficult. The lawleis rapine of
banditti, together with the avowed exactions of
the nobles, scarce leis formidable and opprellive,
rendered a journey of any length a perilous en-
terprize. Fixed to the lpot in which they relided,
the greater' part of the inhabitants of Europe
loft, in a great measure, the knowledge of re-
mote regions, and were unacquainted with their
names, their situations, their climates, and their
commodities.

VARIOUS causes, contributed to revive the fpi-caurs, ot

tit of commerce, and to renew in tfme degree" "'
the intercourse between different nations. The

Italians

77

SECT. I. Italians, by their conne&tion with Conflantinople
-v'aand other cities of the Greek empire, preserved

in their own country some relish for the precious
commodities, and curious manufactures of the
East. They communicated rome knowledge of
these to the countries contiguous to Italy. This
commerce, however, was extremely limited, nor
was the intercourse considerable which it occafi-
oned between different nations. The Crusade,
by leading multitudes from every corner of Eu-
rope into Asia, opened a more extensive commu-
nication between the East and Weft, which sub-
sifted for two centuries; and though the object
of there expeditions was conquest and not com-
merce; though the issue of them proved as un-
fortunate, as the motives for undertaking them
were wild and enthusiastic, their commercial es-
sets, as hath been hewn, were both beneficial
and permanent. During the continuance of the
Crusades, the great cities in Italy and in other
countries of Europe acquired liberty, and toge-
ther with it such privileges as rendered them re-
fpedable and independent communities. Thus,
in every slate there was formed a new order of
citizens, to whom commerce presented itself as
their proper object, and opened to them a certain
path to wealth and dignity. Soon after the close
of the Holy war, the mariner's compats was in-
vented, which, by rendering navigation more fe-
cure as well as more adventurous, facilitated the
communication between remote nations, and
brought them nearer to each other.

Fiirft mn THE Italian States, during the fame period,
the talia. eftablifhled a regular commerce with the East in

the ports of Egypt, and drew from thence all
the rich products of the Indies. They intro-
duced into their own territories manufactures of
various kinds, and carried them on wiith great

ingceuity

ingenuity and vigour. They attempted newSEcT. I.
arts; and transplanted from warmer climates, to -,v
which they had been hitherto deemed peculiar,
several natural productions which now furnish
the materials of a lucrative and extended com-
merce. All there commodities, whether import-
ed from Asia, or produced by their own kill, they
disposed of to great advantage among the other
people of Europe, who, began to acquire ome
taste of elegance unknown to their ancestors, or
despised by them. During the twelfth and thir-
teenth centuries, the commerce of Europe was'
almost entirely in the hands of the Italians, more
commonly known in those ages by the name of
Lombards. Companies or societies of Lombard
merchants fettled in' every different kingdom.
They were taken under the immediate protec-
tion of the several governments. They enjoyed
extensive privileges and immunities. The ope-
ration of the ancient barbarous laws concerning
strangers was suspended with refpeEt to them.
They became the carriers, the manufacturers,
and the bankers of all Europe.

WHILE the Italians, in the south of Europe, Then n

cultivated trade with such indutry and success ,,

ml, o

the commercial spirit awakened in the north,tick.
towards the middle of the thirteenth century.
As the nations around the Baltick were, at that
time, extremely barbarous, and infested that sea
with their piracies, this obliged the cities of Lu-
beck and Hamburgh, oon after they began to
open sbme trade with there people, to enter into
a league of mutual defence. They derived uch
advantages from this union, that other towns
acceded to their confederacy, and, in a short
time, eighty of the most considerable cities scat-
tered through those vast countries which stretch

from

79

SECT. I. from the bottom of the Baltick to Cologne on
^'"""'the Rhine, joined in the famous Hanfeatick

league, which became so formidable, that its al-
liance was courted, and its enmity was dreaded
by the greatest monarchs. The members of this
powerful afociation formed the first fyftematick
plan of commerce known in the middle ages,
and conduded it by common laws enacted in
their general assemblies. They supplied the reft
of Europe with naval flores, and pitched on
different towns, the most eminent of which was
Bruges in Slanders, where they established fta-
ples in which their commerce was regularly car-
ried on. Thither the Lombards brought the pro-
duetions of India, together with the manufac-
tures of Italy, and exchanged them for the more
bulky, but not less useful commodities of the
North. The Hanfeatick merchants disposed of
the cargoes which they received from the Lom-
bards, in the ports of the Baltick, or carried
them up the great rivers into the interior parts
of Germany.

Commerce THIS regular intercourse opened between the
grfs inthe North and South of Europe, made them sensible
Nether- of their mutual wants, and created such new

and vast demands for commodities of every
kind, that it excited among the inhabitants of
the Netherlands a more vigorous spirit in carry-
ing on the two great manut:adures of wool and
flax, which seem to have been considerable in
that country as far back as the age of Charle-
magie. As Bruges became the centre of corn
munication between the Lombard and Hanfe-
atick merchants, the Flemings traded with both
in that city to Inch extent as well as advantage,
as spread among them a general habit of in-
duttry, which long rendered Slanders and the

adjaccnt
80

adjacent provinces the most opulent, the mossi SECT. I.
populous, and best cultivated countries in Eu- '
rope.

STRUCK with the flourifning state of these And inEng-

provinces, of which he discerned the truecaufe, land,
Edward Ill. of England, endeavoured to excite
a spirit of induifry among his own fbjeds, who,
blind to the advantages of their situation, and ig-
norant of the source from which opulence was
destined to flow into their country, totally ne-
gledted commerce, and did not even attempt
those manufacdures. the materials of which they
furnished to foreigners. By alluring Flemilh ar-
tifans to fettle in his dominions, as well as by ma-
ny wife laws for the encouragement and regulati-
on of trade, he gave a beginning to the woollen
manufactures of England, and irfl turned the
adive and enterprizing genius of his people to-
wards those arts which have raied the Englifl to
the higherf rank among commercial nations.

THIS increase of commerce, and ofintercourfe The benfR-

between nations, how inconsiderable soever it ci5lffir
may appear in relpedt of their rapid and exten-
five progress during the lafl and prelent age,
leems vast, when we compare it with the fiate
of both in Europe previous to the twelfth cen-
tury. It did not fail of producing great effects.
Commerce tends to wear off thoie prejtJices
which maintain diflindioii ad animosity be-
tween nations. It softens and polihes tle manner;
of mcn. It unites them, by one of the frongcf o(
all ties, the desire of supplying their niutual
wants. It difpofiis them to peace, by eiltblilli-
ing in every tate n order of citizens bound
by their intctref to be the g'uardialis of public-
tranquillity. As (boo i ll' the *miciial lpiri;

\h r.. I. i

( T' :
I

SCT. I. begins to acquire vigour, and to gain an afcen.

dant in any society, we discover a new genius in
its policy, its alliances, its wars, and its negotia-
tipns. Conspicuous proofs of tis occur in the
history of the Italian States, of the Hanfeatick
league, and the cities of the Netherlands during
the period under review. In proportion as com-
merce made its way into the different countries
of Europe, they successively turned their attenti-
on to those objects, and adopted those manners,
which occupy and diftinguih poliihed nati-
ons [FS].

[FS] NOTE XXIX.

A VIEW

## SECTION II. View of the Progress of Society in Europe, with respect to the command of the national force requisite in foreign operations.

A
VI EW

OF T IE
PROGRESS OF SOCIETY

IN
E U R O P E,

FROM THE
SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,

TO THE
BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

SECTION II.

I'iew of' be Progress of Society in Europe, wih re.
fpef to the command of the national force requi-
site in foreign operaions.

U C H are the events and inifitutions, which SECT. I1.
S by their powerful operation contributed, -v"-

State of lb-

gradually,to introduce more regular government ciety greatly
and more polished manners into the vaiious nati- improvc at
ons of Europe. When we survey the state of nitg of thce
society, or the charadler of individuals, at the tite^th
opening of the fifteenth century, and then turn
back to view the condition of both at the time

G z when

SECT. II. when the barbarous tribes which overturned the
~'--' Roman power compleated their settlement in

their new conquers, the progress which mankind
had made towards order and refinement will ap-
pear immense.

Stilldcfec- GOVERNMENT, however, was fRill far from
tive with having attained that state, in which extensive mo-
thpe co t narchies a with united vigour, or carry on
mand of the great undertakingswith perseverance and success.
national
force. Small tribes or communities, even in their rudest

itate, may operate in concert, and exert their
utmost force. They are excited to at not by
the diflant objeEts, and subtile speculations,
which interest or affeet men in polished ocieies,
but by their present feelings. The insults of an
enemy kindle resentment; the success of a rival
tribe awakens emulation ; there paflions ccmmu-
rnicate from breast to breast, and all the mem-
bers of the community, with united ardour,
rush into the field in order to gratify their re-
venge, or to acquire diflinion. But in widely
ex tended ftates.fuch as the great kingdoms of
Europe at the beginning of the fifteenth century,
where there is little intercourse between the dil-
tant members of the community, and where
every great enterprize requires previous concert
and long preparation, nothing can route and call
forth their united strength, but the absolute
command of a Despot, or the powerful influence
of regular policy. Of the former the vast Em-
pires in the Eafi are an example; the irresistible
mandate of the Sovereign reaches the most re-
mote provinces of his dominions, and compels
whatever number of his fubjeds he is pleaie-d to
flmmon, to follow his standard. The king-
doms of Europe, in the present age, are an in-
flance of the latter; the Prince, by the less vio-
lent, but no less effedtual operation of laws

and

and a well regulated government, is enabled to SECT. II.
avail himself of the whole force of his state, and
to employ it in enterprizes which require ftrenu.
ous and persevering efforts,

BuT, at the opening of the fifteenth century, The power

of Monarchs

the political constitution in all the kingdoms of vrylimited.
Europe was very different from either of there
flates of government. The several monarchs,
though they had somewhat enlarged the boun-
laries of prerogative by successful encroachments
on the immunities and privileges of the nobility,
\vcre poteffed of an authority extremely limited.
The laws and interior police of kingdoms,
though much improved by the various events
and regulations which I have enumerated, were
fill feeble and imperfect. In every country, a
numerous body of nobles, fiill formidable not-
withflanding the various expedients employed to
depress them, watched all the motions of their
sovereign with a jealous attention, which set
bounds to his ambition, and either prevented his
forming schemes of extensive enterprize, or
t!warted the execution of them.

THE ordinary revenues of every Prince were Their rev:.

1,) extremely small as to be inadequate to any "US l:"'".
great undertaking. He depended for extraor-
dinary supplies on the good will of his fubjets,
who granted them often with a re.ludant and
always with a sparing hland.

As the revenues of Princes were inconfidera- Their ar-
!)le, the armies which they could bring into the r 'unlit

rie ~lllC3 WLICIILICYu~luU111 II

li . for conqifl..

!,eld were unfit for long and effedua;l ervice.
Instead of being able to employ. troops trained
'to flill in arms, and to military subordination,
by regular discipline, Monarchs were obliged

G 3 to

SECT. Ir. to depend on such forces as their vaflals conduct-

-'-'3 ed to their standard in consequence of their mili-

tary tenures. There, as they were bound to re-
main under arms only for a short time, could
not march far from their usual place ofrefidence,
and being more attached to the lord of whom
they held, than to the Sovereign whom they ser-
ved, were often as much disposed to counteract
as to forward his schemes. Nor were they, even
if they had been more fuibjet to the command
of the manarch, proper instruments to carry into
execution any great and arduous enterprize.
The strength of an army formed either for con-
quest or defence lies in infantry. To the flabili-
ty and discipline of their legions, consisting chief-
ly of infantry, the Romans during the times of
the republick were indebted for all their vito-
ries; and when their descendants, forgetting the
institutions which had led them to universal do.
minion, so far altered their military system as to
place their principal confidence in a numerous
cavalry, the undisciplined impetuosity of the bar-
barous nations who fought mofly on foot, was
sufficient, as I have already observed, to over-
come them. These nations oon after they set-
tled in their new conquests, uninftruded by the
fatal error of the Romans, relinquished the cuf-
toms of their ancestors and converted the chief
force of their armies into cavalry. Among the
Romans this change was occasioned by the effe-
mrinacy of their troops, who could not endure
the fatigues of service, which their more virtu-
ous and hardy ancestors sustained with ease. A-
mong the people who ellablifhed the new mo-
narchies into which Europe was divided, this
innovation in military discipline seems to have
flowed from the pride of the nobles, who scorning
to mingle with persons of inferior rank, aimed at

heing

being distinguished from them in the field, as SECT.II.
well as during peace. The inRtitution of chival- -
ry, and the frequency of Tournaments, in which
knights, in complete armour, entered the lifts on
horseback with extraordinary splendour, display-
ing amazing address, and force, and valour,
brought cavalry into fill greater eteem. The
fondness for that service encreafed to such a de-
gree, that, during the thirteenth and fourteenth
centuries, the armies of Europe were compoed
almost entirely ofcavalry. No gentleman would
appear in the field but on horseback. To serve
in any other manner he would have deemed de-
rogatory to his rank. The cavalry, by way of
distinction, was called, The battle, and on it
alone depended the fate of every action. The
infantry, collected from the dregs and refute of
the people, ill armed and worse disciplined,
was of no account.

As there circumstances rendered the operati- Theyarein-

ons of particular kingdoms lets considerable and frPmlg ny
less vigorous, so they long kept the Princes of general or
Europe from giving such attention to the schemes plcnof p.-
and tranfadions of their neighbours, as led them ratio.
to form any regular fyfRem of publick security.
They prevented them from uniting in confedera-
cy, or from aing with concert, in order to es
tablifh such a distribution and balance of power,
as hould hinder any slate from rising to a fuiperi-
ority, which might endanger the general liberty
and independence, During several centuries,
the nations of Europe appear to have confidered
themselves as separate ocieties, (carce conneced
together by any common interest, and little con-
cerned in each other's affairs or operations. An
cxtenfive commerce did not afford them an op-
portunity of observing and penetrating into the

G 4 schemes

87

SECT.II. fchemesofevery different state. They had not

ambassadors residing constantly in every court to
watch and give early intelligence of all its moti-
ons. The expectation of remote advantages, or
the prospect of distant and contingent evils were
not sufficient to excite nations to take arms.
They only, who were within the sphere of imme-
diate danger, and unavoidably exposed to injury
or insult, thought themfe!ves interefled in any
contest, or bound to take precautions for their
own safety.

Theywere 'WHOEVER records the tranfadions of any of
need with the moi e considerable European fRates during the
ach other. two last centuries, muff write the history of Eu-

rope. Its various kingdoms, throughout that pe-
riod, have been formed into one great system, so
closely united, that each holding a determinate
station, the operations of one are so felt by all, as
to influence their counsels and regulate their mea-
fures. But previous to the fifteenth century, un-
less when vicinity of territory rendered he occa-
sions of discord frequent and unavoidable, or
when national emulation fomented orembittered
the spirit of hostility, the affairs of different coun-
tries are seldom interwoven. In each kingdom of
Europe great events and revolutions happened,
which the other powers beheld with the fame in-
difference as if they had been uninterested pec-
tators, to whom the effect of these tranfaions
could never extend.

Aconfirma- DURING theviolent firuggles between France
','l1,,thrla and England, and notwithstanding the alarming
1i-, oi progress which was made towards rendering one

i 1'ric the mailer of both these kingdoms, hard-

ly o..e meaflre which can be conlidered as the
result of a sagacious and prudentpolicy, was form-

cId
88

ed in order to guard against an event so fatal to SECT. It.
Europe. The Dukes of Burgundy and Bretagne, V '
whom their situation would not permit to remain
neutral, engaged, it is true, in the contest; but
they more frequently took the part to which their
passions prompted them, than that which a just
discernment of the danger which threatened
themselves and the tranquillity of Europe should
have pointed out. The other Princes, seemingly
unaffeded by the alternate successes of the con-
tending parties, left them to decide the quarrel,
or interposed only by feeble and ineffectual ne-
gotiations.

NOTWITHSTANDING the perpetual hostilities From thofa

of Spain,

in which the various kingdoms of Spain were
engaged during several centuries, and the fuccef-
five occurrenceswhich visibly tended to unite that,
part of the continent into one great monarchy,
the Princes of Europe scarce took a single ftep,
which discovers that they gave any attention to
that important event. They permitted a power
to arise imperceptibly, and to acquire strength
there, which soon became formidable to all its
neighbours.

AMIDST the violent convulsions with which From thorf

the spirit of domination in the See of Rome, and ofGermany.
the turbulent ambition of the German nobles,
agitated the Empire, neither the authority of the
Popes, seconded by all their artifices and in-
trigues, nor the solicitations of the Emperors,
could induce any of the powerful monarchs in
Europe to engage in their quarrel, or to avail
themselves of many favourable opportunitiesof
interpoling with effeit and advantage,

89

SECT. I. THIS amazing inactivity, during tranfasdions
'This inai- so interesting, is not to be imputed to any inca-
viryoccafi- pacity of discerning their political consequences.

yXd bc'e The power ofjudging with sagacity, and of ad-
Itate of go. ing with vigour, is the portion of men in every

vrnmn, age. The Monarchs who reigned in the diffe-

rent kingdoms of Europe during several centu.
ri.s were not blind .to their particular interest,
negligent of the publick afety, or strangers to
the method of securing both. If they did not
adopt that Lalutary fy Ptem, which teaches modern
politicians to take the alarm at the prospect of
distant dangers, which prompts them to check
the fit ft encroachments of any formidable power,
and which renders each state the guardian, in
ftme degree, of the rights and independence of
all its neighbours, this was owing entirely to the
ynperfedions and dibrdcrs in the civil govern-
ment ot each country, which made it impoflible
for sovereigns to at tuitably to those ideas which
the poflure of affairs, and their own observation
muff have flggefled.

Events iap- BUT during the coiufe of the fifteenth centu-
:'lti. atl ry, valious events happened, which, by giving
.,*'~rlr, Princes more entire colmmand of the force in
,h'Cicl^ ns their refpe61ive dominionis, rendered their ope-

na
tsos`.- - rations more vigorous and extensive. In conle-
,l',l' quence of this, the affairs of different kingdoms

becoming more frequently as well as more inti-
mately connected, they were gradually accultomr
ed to at in concert and confederacy, and were
infenlibly prepared for forming a system of poli-
cy, in order to eflablilh or to preserve such a ba-
lance of power as was most consistent with the
gcneral lecurity. It was during the reign of
Charles the fifth, that the ideas, on which this
jyilrem is founded, firfl came to be fully under-
iic.lu, It was then, that thc maxims by which it

iafs
9o

has been uniformly maintained since that era SECT. II.
were universally adopted. On this account, a
view of the causes and events which contributed
to establish a plan of policy more salutary and ex-
tensive than any that has taken place in the con-
dut of human affairs, is not only a necessary in-
troduc6ion to the following work, but is a capital
object in the history of Europe.

THE firfl event, that occasioned any confidera- The fir of

ble alteration in the arrangement of affairs in Eu- the deprv-
rope, was the annexation of the extensive territo- ingtheEng-

lil of their

rics, which England possessed on the continent, territories
to the crown of France. While the English were on the con'
matters offeveral of the most fertile and opulent
provinces in France, and a great part of its moil
martial inhabitants were bound to follow their
standard, their monarchs confidered themselves
rather as the rivals, than as the vassals of the fove-
reign of whom they held. The Kings of France,
circumscribed and thwarted in their schemes and
operations by an adversary no less jealous than
formidable, durst not venture upon any enter-
prize of importance or of difficulty. The English
were always at hand, ready to oppose them.They
disputed even their right to their crown, and be-
ing able to penetrate, with ease, into the heart of
the kingdom, could arm against them thole very
hands which ought to have been employed in
their defence. Timid counsels, and feeble effrts
were natural to monarchs in such a situation.
France, difinembered and over-awed, could not
attain its proper station in the fyfteni of Europe.
But the deathof HenryV.of England, happily for
France, and not unfortunately for his own coun-
try, delivered the French from the calamity of
having a foreign master feated on their throne.
The weakness of a long minority, the dissensions

in

SECT. II. in the Englilh court, together with the unfleady
t'V-'^ and languid conduct which these occasioned, as-

forded the French a favourable opportunity of
recovering the territories which they had loft.
The native valourof the nobility of France height-
ened to an enthufiatlick confidence, bya supposed
interposition of heaven in their behalf; conducted
in the field by skilful leaders; and direCted in the
cabinet by a prudent monarch; was exerted with
filch vigour and success, during this favourable
juncture, as not only wrested from the English
their new conquefls, but stript them of their an-
cient pofeflions, and reduced them within the
narrow precincts of Calais, and its petty territory.

The cfect As soon as fb many considerable provinces were
of this on
increasing re-united to their dominions, the Kings of France,
thepowerof conscious of this acquisition of strength, began
the French
monarchy. to form bolder schemes of interior policy, as well

as of foreign operations. They immediately be-
came formidable to their neighbours, who began
to fix their attention on their meafires and moti-
ons, theimportanceofwhichthey fully perceived.
From this aera, France, possessed of the advanta-
ges which it derives from the situation and conti-
guity of its territories, as well as from the num-
ber and valour of its people, role to new influence
in Europe, and was the first power in a condition
to give alarm to thejealoufy or fears of the Rtatcs
around it.

On the fte NOR was France indebted for this increase of
of the mill-
tary tfrc in mportance merely to the re-union of the provin-
hlic n:ioi. ces which had been torn from it. A circumflance

attended the recovery of there, which, though
lets considerable, and lels observed, contributed
not a little to give additional vigour and decitiont
to all the efforts of that monarchy. During theob-
itinate frbngles between France and England, al!

the

the defects of the military system under the feu- SICT. II,
dal government were sensibly felt. A warof long
continuance languifhed,when carriedon by troops
bound and accustomed to keep the field only for
a few weeks. Armies, composed chiefly of hea-
vy armed cavalry, were unfit either for the at-
tack or the defence of the many towns and caf-
ties, which it became neceflary to guard or to re-
duce. In order to obtain such permanent and es-
fedive force, as became requisite during there
lengthened contests, the Kings of France took in-
to their pay considerable bands of mercenary fol-
diers, levied sometimes among their own subj ets,
and sometimes in foreign countries. But as the
feudal policy provided no sufficient fund for fucl
extraordinary ervice, there adventurers were dif-
miffed at the close of every campaign, or upon
any profpeft of accommodation; and having been
littleaccuitomed tothereflraintsofdifcipline,they
frequently turned their arms against the country
which they had been hired todefend, and desolated
it with no lets cruelty than its foreign enemies.

A BODY of troops kept contfantly on foot, and It occaflons
regularly trained to military fibordination,would the intro-

dusion of

have supplied whatwas wanting in the feudal con- handing ar-
ftitution, and have furnished Princes with the ''i"
means of executing enterprizes, to which they
were then unequal. Such an establishment, how-
ever, was so repugnant to the genius of feudal
policy, and sI incompatible with the privileges
and pretensions of the nobles, that during several
centuries no monarch was either ft bold, or so
powerful, as to venture on any fep towairds in-
troducing it. At last, Charles VI. availing hinm-
felfof the reputation which hle had acquired by
his fuccefles againtl the English, and taking ad-
vantage of the impreflions of terror which such a
formidable enemy a;1 left upon tlIe nlicds ol

I is

I '^ durst not attempt. Under pretence of keeping a4-

ways on foot a force sufficient to defend the king-
dom against any sudden invasion of the English,
A. D. 1445. he,.at the time when he disbanded his other

troops, retained under arms a body of nine thou-
sand cavalry, and of sixteen thousand infantry.
He appropriated funds for the regular payment
of these; he stationed them in different places of
the kingdom, according to his pleasure ; and ap-
pointed the officers, who commanded and difci-
plined them. The prime nobility courted this
service, in which they were taught to depend on
their overeign, to execute his orders, and to look
up to him as thejudge and rewarder of their me-
rit. The feudal militia, composed of the vassals
whom the nobles could call out to follow their
flandard, as it was in no degree comparable to a
body of boldiers regularly trained to war, funk
gi adually in reputation. The strength of armies
came to be estimated only by the number of di-
ciplined men which they contained. In less than
a century, the nobles and their military tenants,
though sometimes urm moned to the field, accord-
ing to ancient form,were confidered asan incum-
brance upon the troops with which they ated;
and were viewed with contempt by soldiers ac-
cuflomed to the vigorous and Hfeady operations
of regular service.
The effics THUS the regulations of Charles the seventh,

f th by establishing the sirs sanding army known in

Europe, occasioned an important revolution in its
affairs and policy. By depriving the nobles of
that diretion of the military force of the slate,
which had raised them to such high authority and
importance, it gave a deep wound to the feudal
aristocracy, in that part where its power seemed
to be most complete.

FRANCE,

A VIEW OF THE
94

FRANCE, by forming this body of regular SECT.I.

troops, at a time when there was carce a fqua- '"r
dron or company kept in constant pay in any other
part of Europe, acquired such advantages, either
for attack or defence, over its neighbours, that
felf-prefervation made it necessary for them toimi-
tate its example. Mercenary troops were intro-
duced into all the considerable kingdoms on the
continent. They gradually became the only mili-
tary force that was employed or trusted. It has
long been the chief objet of policy to increase
and to support them, and the great aim of Prin-
ces or ministers to discredit and to annihilate all
other means of national ativity or defence.

As the Kings of France got the start of other The mo-

powers in effablifhing in their dominions a mili- ,arch: o
tary force, which enabled them to carry on so- couraged to
reign operations, with more vigour, and to great- Cxg"la their

operatioiCou preroative

er extent, so they were the first who effetually
broke the feudal aristocracy, and humbled the
great vasals of the crown, who by their exorbi-
tant power had long circumcribed the royal pre-
rogative within very narrow limits, and had ren-
dered all the efforts of the monarchs of Europe
inconsiderable. Many thingsconcurred to under-
mine, gradually, the power of the feudal arifto-
cracy in France. The wealth and property of the
nobility were greatly impaired during the long
wars, which the kingdom was obliged to main-
tain with the Englilh. The extraordinary zeal
with which they exerted themselves in defence of
their country against its ancient enemies, exhaust-
ed the fortunes of some great families. As al-
most every province in the kingdom was, in its
turn, the fear of war, the lands of others were
exposed to the depredations of the enemy, were
ravaged by the mercenary troops which their
sovereigns hired occasionally, but could not pay,

or

SECT. II. or were desolated with rage still more destructive

L'tV- ' by the peasants, in their different infurredions.

At the fame time, the necessities of government
having forced their Kings upon the desperate ex-
pedient of making great and sudden alterations
in-the current coin of the kingdom, the fines,
quit-rents, and other payments, fixed by ancient
custom, funk much in value, and the revenues
of a fief were reduced far below the fum which
it had once yielded. During their contests with
the English, in which a generous nobility courted
every fation where danger appeared, or honour
could be gained, many families of note became
extinct, and their fiefs were reunited to the
crown. Other fiefs, in a long course of years, fell
to female heirs, and were divided among them;
were diminished by profiufe donations to the
church, or were broken and split by the fuccef-
sion of remote collateral heirs a.

The pro- ENCOURAGED by these manifest symptoms of
grefsof the decline in that body which he wished to depress,
royal power
under Charles VII. during the first interval of peace
Charles VI. with England, made several efforts towards efta-

blifhing the regal prerogativeon the ruins of the
aristocracy. But his obligations to the nobles
were so many, as well as recent, and their ser-
vices in recovering the kingdom so splendid, as
made it necessary for him to proceed with mode-
ration and caution. Such, however, was the au-
thority which the crown had acquired by the pro-
grefs of its arms againfl the English, and so
much was the power of the nobility diminished,
that, without any opposition, he soon made inno-
vations of great conlequence in the constitution.
He not only established that formidable body of
regular troops, which has been mentioned, but
he was the firif monarch of France, who, by
a Boulainvillicr Hiftoir de Government de France, Lettre x ii.

his

his royal edit, without the concurrence of the SECT. I.
States-general of thekingdom, levied an extraor- A. . 440.
dinary iubfidy on his people. He prevailed like-
wiei with his fuibjects, to render several taxes
perpetual, which had formerly been imposed oc-
cafionally, and exacted during a hort time. By
means of all there, he acquired such an increase
of power, and extended his prerogative so far
beyond its ancient limits, that, from being the
moir dependant Prince who has ever fat upon
the throne of France, he came to poflefs, du-
ring the latter years of his reign, a degree of
authority which none of his predecessors had en-
joyed for several ages b

THAT plan of humbling the nobility which Under

Charles formed, his on Louis XI. carried on Lous X
with a bolder spirit, and with greater success.
Louis was formed by nature to be a tyrant; and
at whatever period he had been called to ascend
the throne, his reign must have abounded with
schemes to oppress his people, and to render his
own power absolute. Subtle, unfeeling, cruel
a firanger to every principle of integrity, and
regardless of decency, he scorned all the reifraints
which a sense of honour, or the desire of fame,
impose even on ambitious men. Sagacious, at
the fame time, to discern his true interest, and
influenced by that alone, he was capable of pur-
suing it with a persevering induitry, and of ad-
hering to it with a systematic spirit from which
no objea could divert, and no danger could de.
ter him.

THE maxims of his adminitfration were as Hum-a.
profound as they were fatal to the privileges of Zumbig

the nobiity,

b Hiftoire de France par Velly & Villaret, tom. xv. 331,

&c. 389. tom. xvi. 324. Variations de la Monarchic Fran-
coife, tom. iii. 162.

VOL. 1. H the

SECT.II the nobility. He filled all the departments of
. .-v.. government with new men, and often with per

sons, whom he called from the lowest as well as
most despised funtions in life, and raised at plea-
sure to stations of great power or trust. These
were his only confidents, whom he consulted in
forming his plans, and to whom he committed
the execution of them: While the nobles, accuf-
tomed to be the companions, the favourites, and
the ministers of their sovereigns, were treated
with such studied and mortifying neglect, that if
they would not submit to follow a court, in which
they appeared without any shadow of their anci-
ent power, they were obliged to retire to their
castles, where they remained unemployed and
forgotten. Not satisfied with having rendered
the nobles of less consideration, by taking out of
their hands the sole direction of affairs, Louis ad.
ded insult to negle&; and by violating their most
valuable privileges, endeavoured to degrade the
order, and to reduce the members of it to the
fame level withother fubjedts. Persons of the high-
eft rank among them, if o bold as to oppose his
(chemes, or so unfortunate as to awaken the jea-
lbufy of his capricious temper, were prosecuted
with rigour, from which all who belonged to the
order of nobles had hitherto been exempt; they
were tried by judges who had no right to take
cognizance of their actions; and were fubjeted
to torture, or condemned to an infamous death,
without regard to their birth or condition. The
people, accufomred to fee the blood of the most
illustrious personages shed by the hands of the
common executioner, to behold them fliut up in
dungeons, and carried about in cages of iron, be-
gan to view the nobility with less reverence than
formerly, and looked up with terror to the royal
authority, which seemed to have humbled or an-
nihilated every other power in the kingdom.

AT

AT the fame time, Louis, being afraid that SECT. II.

opposition might rouze the nobles, whom the ri- siv
gour of his government had intimidated, or that dincthcm.
lelf-prefervarion might teach them, at last, to
unite, dexterously scattered among them the feeds
of discord; and industriously fomented those anci-
ent animofities between the great families, which
the spirit ofjealoufy and emulation, natural to the
feudal government, had originally kindled and
flill kept alive. To accomplish this, all the arts
of intrigue, all the mysteries and refinements of
his fraudulent policy were employed, and with
such success, that at a jundure which required
the mrft strenuous efforts, as well as the most per-
sect union, the nobles never acted, except during
one hort sally of resentment at the beginning of
his reign, either with vigour or with concert.

As he stripped the nobility of their privileges, Headdsto
he added to the power and prerogative of the the numbr

of sanding

crown. In order to have at command such a bo- forc..
dy of Ibldiers as might be sufficient to crush any
force that his disaffected fubjets could draw to-
gether, he not only kept on foot the regular
troops which his father had raised, but took in-
to his pay fix thousand Swiss, the best disciplined
and most formidable infantry, at that time in Eu-
rope'. From thejealoufy natural to tyrants, he
confided in there foreign mercenaries, as the most
devoted instruments of oppreflion, and the most
faithful guardians of the power which he had ac-
quired.

GREATr funds were requisite, not only to de- ne aug.

fray the expence of this additional establishment, "'n:c,, of
but to supply the sims employed in the various thc crown.
enterprizes which the refflefs activity of his geni-

c Mem. de Comines, tom. i. 367. Dan. Hist. de la Milice
FrancQife, tom. i. 182.

H 2

u5

SrCT. II. US prompted him to undertake. But the prero-
,.- . gative that his father had afftimed of levying tax-

es, without the concurrence of the flates-general,
which he was careful not only to retain but ex-
tend, enabled him to provide in some measure
for the increasing charges of government.

Hisaddrefs WHAT his prerogative, enlarged as it was,
in anag- could not furnish, his address procured. He
cmbly of was the sirs monarch in Europe who discovered
theetates. the method of managing thoe great assemblies,

in which the feudal policy had vested the power
of graninig subsidies and of imposing taxes. He
firit taught other Princes the fatal art of begin-
ning their attack on publick liberty, by corrupt-
ing the source from which it should flow. By ex-
erting all his power and address in influencing the
election of representatives, by bribing or overaw-
ing the members, and by various-changes which
he artfully made in the form of their deliberati-
ons, Louis acquired such entire direAion of these
assemblies, that, from being the vigilant guardi-
ans of the privileges and property of the people,
he rendered them tamely subservient, in promo-
ting the most odious measures of his reign d. As
no power remained to set bounds to hisexations,
he not only continued all the taxes imposed by
his father, but made immense additions to them,
which amounted to a um that appeared astonish-
ing to his contemporaries e.*

d Mem. de Comin. tom. i. 136. Chron. Scandal. ibid.
tom. ii. p. 71.

c Mem. dcComin. ton. i. 334.
* Charles VII. levied taxes to the amount of ix,oo,ono

francs; Louis XI. raised 4,700,000. The former had in
pay 9ooo cavalry, and 6,ooo infantry. The latter aug-
nented the cavalry to 15,000, and the infantry to 25,000.
Mem de Comines, i. 384. During the latter years of his
reign, lie kept the greater part of these encamped in one
placc, and ready to march on the fliorted warning. Ibid.38 1.

NoR
100

NOR was it the power alone or wealth of the SEcr. E.

crown that Louis increaed; he extended its ter- He enla
ritories by acquisitions of various kinds. He got the bounds
pofteflion of Koufillon by purchase; Provence rrench mo,
was conveyed to him by the will of Charles de narchy.
Anjou; and upon the death of Charles the Bold,
he seized with a frong hand Burgundy and Ar-
tois, which had belonged to that Prince. Thus,
during the course of a ingle reign, France was
formed intoone compat kingdom,and the steady
unrelenting policy of Louis XI. not only subdued
the haughty spirit of the feudal nobles, but efta-
blifhed a species of government, scarce less abfo-
lute, or less terrible, than eastern despotism.

BUT fatal as his administration was to, the li- Byall thefC

berties of his fubjets, the authority which he ghoFrench
acquired, the resources of which he became ma- rendered

more avo

fler, and his freedom from restraint both in con- and enter.
certing his plans and in executing them, render- prizing.
ed his reign active and enterprizing. Louis nego-
tiated in all the courts of Europe; he observed
the motions of all his neighbours; he engaged,
either as principal, or as an auxiliary, in every
great tranfadion ; his resolutions were prompt;
his operations vigorous; and upon every emer-
gence he could call forth into ation the whole
force of his kingdom. From the era of his reign,
intfead of the feeble efforts of monarchs fettered
and circumscribed by ajealous nobility, theKings
of France, more masters at home, have exerted
themselves more abroad, have formed more ex-
tensive schemes of foreign conquests, and have
carried on war with a spirit and vigour long una
known in Europe.

THE example which Louis set was too inviting Steptakr
not to be imitated by other Princes. Henry VII, towjrds,

tending th
a soon, as he was feated on the throne of Eng- ower sof't

H 3 land Crown. il

H land~~~~~~~~ EAog1411j,

SECT. II. land, formed the plan of enlarging his own pre-
Ly3^- rogative, by breaking the power of the nobility.

The circumstances under which he undertook to
execute it, were less favourable than those under
which Charles VII. had made the fame attempt;
and the spirit with which he conducted it, was
very different from that of Louis Xl. Charles,
by the success of his arms againlf the English, by
the merit of having expelled them out of so ma-
ny provinces, had ellablifhed himself o firmly in
the confidence of his people, as encouraged him
to make bold encroachments on the ancient con-
flitution. The daring genius of Louis broke
through every barrier, and endeavoured to over-
turn or to remove everyobitacle that flood in his
way. But Henry held the sceptre by a disputed
title; a popular facion was ready every moment
to take arms against him; and after long civil
wars, during which the nobility had often dif-
played their power in creatingand depofingKings,
he felt that the regal authority had been so much
relaxed, and that he entered into possession of a
prerogative so much abridged, as made it necef-
fary to carry on his measures deliberately, and
without any violent exertion. He endeavoured to
undermine that formidable firuture, which he
durfl not attack with open force. His schemes,
though cautious and flow in their operation, were
prudent, and productive in the end of great es-
fees. By his laws, permitting the barons to break
the entails of their eflates, and to expose them to
sale; by his regulations to prevent the nobility
from keeping in their service those numerous
bands of retainers, which rcndcred them formi-
dable, and turbulent; by encouraging populati-
on, agriculture and commerce; by securing to
his fubjeds, during a long reign, the enjoyment
of the bleflings which flow from the arts of
peace; by accufloming them to an dmiliftration

of
I02

of government, under which the laws were exe- SCT. II.
cuted with steadiness and vigour; he made im- '"
perceptibly such alterations in the English confti-
tution, that he transmitted to his successor autho-
rity so extensive, as rendered him one of the
most absolute Monarchs in Europe, and capable
of the greatest and most vigorous efforts.

IN Spain, the union of all its crowns by the And in

marriage of Ferdinand and Isabella; the glory Spar.
that they acquired by the conquest of Granada,
which brought the odious dominion of the Moors
to a period; the command of the great armies
which it had been neceflary to keep conifantly on
foot, in order to accomplish this; the wifdoin
and steadiness of their adminiftraion; and the
address with which they availed themselves of
every incident to humble the nobility, and to ex.
tend their own prerogative, conspired in raising
these monarchs to such eminence and authority,
as none of their predecessors had ever enjoyed.
Though several causes, which hall be explained
in another place, prevented their attaining the
fame extensive powers with the Kings of France
and England, and preserved the feudal conftitu-
tion in Spain longer entire, their great abilities
Iupplied the defets of their prerogative, and im-
proved with such dexterity all the advantages
which they poffefied, that Ferdinand carried on
all his foreign operations, which were very ex-
tensive, with extraordinary vigour and effet.

WHILE thee Princes were thus enlarging the Events ap.

boundaries of prerogative, and taking such steps lddi,'ie
towards rendering their kingdoms capable of a- verAl mo-
ing with union and with force, events occurred, erthe new
which called them forth to exert the new powers pov.re

Hir~~ *9~~ * which they
H 4 which had acqui

red.

SET. II., which they had acquired. These engaged them

C"T^' in such a series of enterprizes and negotiations,

that the affairs of all the considerable nations in
Europe came to be insensibly interwoven with
each other; and a great political system was
gradually formed, which grew to be an object
of universal attention.

The silt of TH E firll event which merits notice, on ac-
tafthe"vents countof its influence in producing this change in
was the marriageof the llate of Europe, was the marriage of the
hftheh:f daughter of Charles the Bold, the sole heiress
ofiurgundy. of the house of Burgundy. For some years be-

fore her father's death, he had been confidered
as the apparent successor to his territories, and
Charles had made proposals of marrying her to
several different Princes, with a view of alluring
them, by that offer, to favour the schemes which
his restless ambition was continually forming.

The impor- THIS rendered the alliance with her an object
totheftate of general attention ; and all the advantages of
of Europe. acquiring poffeflion of her territories, the most

opulent at that time and best cultivated of any on
this fide of the Alps, were perfectly underiRood.

A. D. 477. As oon, then, as the untimely death of Charles
Jlury 5. opened the fucceflion, the eyes of all the Princes

in Europe were turned towards Mary, and they
felt themselves deeply interefled in the choice
which he was about to make of the person, on
whom he would bellow that rich inheritance.

vics ot, Louis XI. from whose kingdom several of the
tlixpct provinces which she poifffied had been difmem-
o ,. bered, and whose dominions itretched along the

frontier of her territories, had every inducement
to court her alliance. He had, likewie, a good

title

title to expect the favourable reception of any rea- SET. II
fonable proporfion he should make,with refpe& to
the disposal of a Princess, who was the vassal of
his crown, and descended from the royal blood of
France. There were only two propositions, how-
ever, which he could make with propriety. The
one was the marriage of the Dauphin, the other
that of the Count of Angouleme, a Prince of the
blood, with the heiress of Burgundy. By the
former, he would have annexed all her territo-
ries to his crown, and have rendered France at
once the most refpetable monarchy in Europe.
But the great disparity of age between the two
parties, Mary being twenty, and the Dauphin on-
ly eight years old; the avowed resolution of the
Flemings, not to choose a master poffefled of
such power as might enable him to form schemes
dangerous to their liberties; together with their
dread of falling under the odious and oppreflive
government of Louis, were obstacles in the way
of executing this plan, which it was vain to think
of surmounting. By the latter, the accomplilh-
ment of which might have been attained with
ease, Mary having discovered rome inclination to
a match with the Count of Angouleme f, Louis
would have prevented the dominions of the house
of Burgundy from being conveyed to a rival pow-
er, and in return for such a splendid establishment
for the Count of Angouleme, he must have ob-
tained, or would have extorted from him con-
cellions highly beneficial to the crown of France.
But Louis had been accustomed so long to the in-
tricacies of a crooked and infiduous policy, that
he could not be satisfied with what was obvious
and limple; and was so fond of artifice andrefine-
ment, that he came to confider there as his ulti-
mate ohjea, not as the means only of conducting
affairs. From this principle, no lets than front

i Mcm. dc CoMinc, i. 358.

his

Io5

SECTr I. his unwillingness to aggrandize any of his own

C^>^ fubjets, or from his desire of opprefling the

house of Burgundy, which he hated, he neglet-
ed the course which a Prince less able and artful
would have taken, and followed one more suited
to his own genius.

Thefinglar HE proposed to render himelf mafter,by force
hcO^wed°h of arms, ofthofe provinces, which Mary held of

the crown of France, and even to push his con-
quefls into her other territories, while he amused
herwith insisting continually on the impraaticable
match with the Dauphin. In prosecuting this plan,
he displayed wonderful talents and industry, and
exhibited such scenes of treachery, falsehood and
cruelty, as are amazing even in the history of
LouisXI. Immediately upon the death of Charles,
he put his troops in motion,and advanced towards
the Netherlands. He corrupted the leading men
in the provinces of Burgundy and Artois, and fe-
duced them to desert their fovereig. He got
admiflion into some of the frontier towns by bri-
bing the governors; the gates of others were
opened to him in consequence of his intrigues
with the inhabitants. He negotiated with Mary;
and, in order to render her odious to her subjects,
he betrayed to them her most important secrets.
He carried on a private correspondence with the
two nminifters whom the chiefly trusted, and then
communicated the letters which he had received
from them to the states of Flanders,who,enraged
at their perfidy, brought them immediately to
trial, tortured them with most extreme cruelty,
and, unmoved by the tears and intreaties of their
sovereign, who knew and approved of all that
the miniflers had done, they beheaded them in
her pretence .

t Mern. de Comincs, liv. v. cll. 15. p. 309, &c.

WHILr

WHILE Louis, by this conduct, unworthy ofa SECTr.I.

great monarch, was securing the possession of Bur-The aC
gundy, Artois, and the towns on the Somme, the of this, the
Rates of Slanders carried on a negotiation with M'irmlia
the Emperor Frederick III and concluded a trea- with the

. heiret of

ty of marriage between their sovereign and his Burndy.
son Maximilian, Archduke of Aufiria. The il- A.. 1477-
lufnrious birth of that Prince, as well as the high
dignity of which he had the prospect, rendered
the alliance honourable for Mary, while, from
the difRance of his hereditary territories, and the
scantiness of his revenues, his power was so in-
considerable as did not excite the jealousy or
fear of the Flemings.

TH US Louis, by the caprice of his temper, and The influ-

r ence of that

the excess of his refinements, put the house ofC, the fate
Auflria in poffeflion of this noble inheritance. By of E0opc.
this acquifition,the foundation of the future gran-
deur of Charles V. was laid; and he became ma-
fter of those territories, which enabled him to
carry on his molt formidable and decisive ope-
rations against France. Thus, too, the fame mo-
narch who first united the interior force of France,
and established it on fich a footing as to render
it formidable to the reft of Europe, contributed,
far contrary to his intention, to raise up a rival
power,which, during two centuries, has thwarted
the measures, opp)fed the arms, and checked
the progress of his fuccetfors.

TH E next event ofconfequence in the fifteenth Tic next

century, was the expedition of Charles VIII. into Cetrbl
Italy. Thisoccafioned revolutions no less memo- thc invafio,

' Italy y

rable; produced alterations,which were more im- ch-rIcsvI.
mediately perceived, both in the military and A..* 14().
political system ; rouzed the iates of Europe to
bolder efforts; and blended their affairs and in-
terests more closely together. The mild admini-

ftration

107

SECT. II. ration of Charles, a weak but generous Prince,

fCy eems to have revived the spirit and genius of the

Themotives . i * i
of tbis. French nation, which the rigid despotism of his

father had depressed, and almost extinguished.
The ardour for military service, natural to the
French nobility, returned, and their young mo-
narch was impatient to diflinguifh his reign by
some splendid enterprize. While he was uncer.
tain towards whatquarter he should turn his arms,
the solicitations and intrigues of an Italian politi.
cian, no less infamous on account of his crimes,
than eminent for his abilities, determined his
choice. Ludovico Sforza, having formed the de-
sign of deposing his nephew the duke of Milan,
and of placing himfelfon the ducal throne,was so
much afraid of a combination of the Italian pow-
ers to thwart this measure, and to fiipport the in-
jured Prince, with whom most of them were con.
neted by blood or alliance, that he saw the ne-
ceffity of securing the aid of rome able protector.
The King of France was the person to whom he
applied.; and without disclosing to him his own
intentions,, he laboured to prevail with him to
march into Italy, at the head of a powerful army,
in order to seize the crown of Naples, to which
he had pretensions as heir of the house of Anjou.
The right to that kingdom, claimed by the An-
gevin family, had been conveyed. to LouisXI. by
Charles of Anjou, count of Maine and Provence.
But that sagacious monarch, though he took im-
mediate poffeflion of those territories of which
Charles was really mailer, totally difiegarded his
ideal title to a kingdom,over which anotherPrince
reigned intranquillity; and uniformly declined in-
volving himself in the labyrinth of Italian poli-
ticks. His on, more adventurous, or more in-
considerate, embarked eagerly in this enterprize
and contemning all the remonstrances of his most

experienced

experienced counsellors, prepared to carry it on SECT. I
with the utmost vigour.

CH A R LES wanted not power equal to such a great Hi rerour.
undertaking. His father had transmitted to hin- e for thi,
such an ample prerogative, as gave him the en- e iz.
tire command of his kingdom. He himself had
added considerably to the extent of his domini-
ons, by his prudent marriage with the heires
of Bretagne, which rendered him master of
that province, the last of the great fiefs that re-
mained to be annexed to the crown. He soon
assembled forces which he thought sufficient;
and so impatient was he to enter on his career
as a conqueror, that sacrificing what was real,
for what was chimerical, he restored Roufillon to
Ferdinand, and gave up part of his father's ac-
quifitions in Artois to Maximilian, with a view
of inducing there Princes not to molest France,
while he was carrying on his operations in Italy.'

BuT so different were the efforts of the States H;srrepara

of Europe in the fifteenth century, from those tions for i.
which we shall behold in the course of this hiflo-
ry, that the army, with which Charles under-
took this great enterprize, did not exceed twenty
thousand men. The train of artillery, however,
the ammunition, and warlike fores of every kind
provided for its use, were o great as to bear
Ibme resemblance to the immense apparatus of
modern war .

WHEN the French entered Italy, theymet with ts uccc4,
nothing able to resist them. The Italian powers
thaving remained, during a long period, undi-
fturbed by the invasion of any foreign enemy,
had formed a system with refpe&t to their affairs,

Mezeray Hist. torn. ii. 777.

both

o10

SECT. II. both in peace and war, peculiar to themselves.
"v' In order to adjust the interests, and balance the

power of the different flates into which Italy was
divided, they were engaged in perpetual and end-
less negotiations with each other, which they con-
du&ed with all the subtlety of a refining and de-
ceitful policy. Their contests in the field, when
they had recourse to arms, were decided in mock
battles, by innocent and bloodless victories. Upon
the first appearance of the danger which now im-
pended, they had recourse to the arts which they
had fudied, and employed their utmost skill in
intrigue in order to avert it. But this proving
ineffectual, their effeminate mercenaries, the only
military force that remained in the country, be-
ing fit only for the parade of service, were terri-
sied at the aspect of real war, and shrunk at its
approach. The impetuosity of the French va-
lour appeared to them irresistible. Florence, Pi..
fa, and Rome opened their gates as the French
army advanced. The profpe& of this dreadful
invasion ifruck one king of Naples with such pa.
nic terror, that he died (if we may believe hifto-
rians) of the fright. Another abdicated his throne
from the fame pufilanimous spirit. A third fled
out of his dominions, as ibon as the enemy ap-
peared on the Neapolitan frontiers. Charles, as-
ter marching thither friom the bottom of theAlps,
with as much rapidity, and almost as little oppo-
fition, as if he had been on a progress through
his own dominions, took quiet poleflion of the
throne of Naples, and intimidated or gave lay:
to every power in Italy.

Its efcals, SUCH was the conclusion of this expedition,
Pilrtivicnar which must be confidered as the first great exer-
totefyftcm tion of those new powers which the Princes of
concerningh
abnlance f Europe had acquired, and now began to exercise.
power. Its
110

Its effets were no less considerable than its fuc- SECT. II.
cess had been astonishing. The Italians, unable -
to refilt the impression of the enemy which broke
in upon them, permitted him to hold on his
course undisturbed. They quickly perceived that
no single power, which they could rouze to acti-
on, was an equal match for a monarch, who ruled
over filch extensive territories, and was at the
head of such a martial people ; but that a confe-
deracy might accomplish what the separate mem-
bers of it durst not attempt. To this expedient,
the only one that remained to deliver or to pre-
serve them from the yoke, they had recourse.
While Charles inconsiderately walled his time at
Naples, in festivals and triumphs on account of
his past successes, or was fondly dreaming of fu-
ture conquefs in the East, to the empire of which
he now aspired, they formed against him a pow-
erful combination of almost all the Italian states,
fipported by the Emperor Maximilian, and Ser-
dinand King of Aragon. The union of so many
powers, who filfpended or forgot all their parti-
cular animofities, that they might act with con-
cert against an enemy who had become formida-
ble to them all, awakened Charles from his
thoughtless ecurity. He saw now no prospect of
safety but in returning to France. An army of
thirty thousand men, assembled by the allies, was
ready to obttruc his march; and though the
French, with a daring courage, which more than
counterbalanced their inferiority in number,
broke through that great body, and gained a
victory, which opened to their monarch a safe
paflage into his own territories, he was stripped
of all his conquests in Italy in as short a time as
it had cofl him to acquire theln; and the poli-
tical systen in that country reitmed the fame ap-
pearance as before his invlfiol.

TaH

I1t

SECT. II. THE sudden and decisive effe&tofthis confede-
._--- racy seems to have inffruted the Princes and
co rcs the flatefmen of Italy as much, as the irruption of
great objct the French had disconcerted and alarmed them.
fir in Italy, They had now extended to the affairs of Europe,
urot L.n the maxims of that political science which had

hitherto been applied only to regulate the opera-
tions of the petty fiates in their own country.
They had dicovered the method of preventing
any monarch from riling to fiich a degree of pow-
er, as was inconsistent with the general liberty;
and had manifested the importance of attending
to that great secret in modern policy, the prefer-
vation of a proper difiribution of power among
all the members of the system into which the
hates of Europe are formed. During all the wars
of which Italy now became the theatre, and
amidfl the hostile operations which the impru-
dence of Louis XII. and the ambition of Ferdi-
nand of Arragon, carried on in that country,with
little interruption, from the close of the fifteenth
century, to that period at which the subsequent
history commences, the maintaining a proper ba.
lance of power between the contending parties
became the great objed of attention to the states-
men of Italy. Nor was the idea confined to thenl.
Self-prefervation taught other powers to adopt it.
It grew to be fashionable and univerSal. From
this era we can trace the progress of that in-
tercourfe between nations, which had linked the
powers of Europe so closely together; and can
discern the operations of that provident policy.
which, during peace, guards against remote ani
contingent dangers; which, in war, hath pre-
vented rapid and deftrustive conquefis.

The wars in THS was not the only effet of the operations
Italy render , .
(laldngar- which the great powers of Europe carried on in
mies gene- Italy. They contributed to render such a clhang':
ral,

.;s the French had begun to make in the state of SECT-IL
their troops, general; and obliged all the Prin- " -
ces, who appeared on this new theatre of ation,
to eftabliih the military force of their kingdoms
on the fame footing with that of France. When
the feat of war came to be remote from the coun-
tries which maintained the contefl, the service
of the feudal vaflals ceased to be of any use; and
the neceflity of employing troops regularly train-
ed to arms, and kept in constant pay, came at
once to be evident. When Charles marched in-
to Italy, his cavalry was entirely composed of
those companies of Gendarmes, embodied by
Charles VII. and continued by Louis XL his in-
fantry consisted partly of Swiss, hired of the
cantons, and partly of Gascons, armed and difci.
plined after the Swiss model. To these Louis
XII. added a body of Germans, well known in
the wars of Italy by the name of the Black Bands.
But neither of there monarchs made any account
of the feudal militia, or ever had recourse to
that military force which they might have com-
manded, in virtue of the ancient institutions in
their kingdom Maximilian and Ferdinand, as
soon as they began to at in Italy, employed the
fame instruments, and trufled the execution of
their plans entirely to mercenary troops.

THIS innovation in the military system was Tchthe

quickly followed by another, which the custom th ,,perior
of employing Swiss in the Italian wars, was the impor nc

of inltntry

occasion of introducing. The arms and difci-in war.
pline of the Swiss were different from tliofe oso-
ther European nations. During their long and
violent struggles in defence of their liberties a-
gainfl the house of Aullria, whole armies like
those of other considerable Princes, consisted
chiefly of heavy armed cavalry, the Swif found
that their poverty, and the small number of gen-
tlemen residing in their country, at that time

VOL. I 1 balrcn

SECT. II. barren and uncultivated, put it out of their powu

er to bring into the field any body of horse capa-
ble of facing the enemy. Neceflity compelled
them toplace all their confidence in infantry; and
inorder to render it capable of withstanding the
shock of cavalry, they gave the soldiers breast-
plates and helmetsas defensive armour; together
with long spears, halberts, and heavy swords as
weapons of offence. They formed them into
large battalions, ranged in deep and close array,
so as to present on every fide a formidable front
to the enemy h The men at arms could make
no impression on the solid ftrengthof such a body.
It repulsed the Austrians in all their attempts to
conquer Swifferland. It broke the Burgundian
Gendarmerie, which was scarce inferior to that
of France, either in number or reputation: And
when first called to at in Italy, it bore down by
its irrefiRfible force every enemy that attempted
to oppose it. These repeated proofs of the deci-
five effect of infantry, exhibited on fich confpi-
cuous occasions, restored that ervice to reputa-
tion, and gradually re-established the opinion,
which had been long exploded, of its superior im-
portance in the operations of war. But the glory
which the Swiss had acquired, having inspired
them with such high ideas of their own prowess
and consequence, as rendered them mutinous and
insolent, the Princes who employed them became
weary of depending on the caprice of foreign
mercenaries, and began to turn their attention to-
wards the improvement of their national infantry.

aitiOnI can. THE German powers having the command
bhied in of men, whom nature has endowed with that
(;itmany. ieady courage, and persevering strength, which

forms them to be soldiers, oon modelled their
troops in such a manner, that they vied with the
Swiss both in discipline and valour.

h Machiavel Art of War, ii. chap. ii. p. 451.

THE French monarchs, though more slowly, SECT. I.

and with greater difficulty, accustomed the im- n^
petuous spirit of their people to subordination and
discipline; and were at such pains to render their
national infantry refpetable, that as early as the
reign of Louis XII. several gentlemen of high
rank had to far abandoned their ancient ideas, as
to condescend to enter into that service i.

THE Spaniards, whose situation made it diffi- Inspin,

cult to employ any other than their own national
troops, in the southern parts of Italy, which was
the chief scene of their operations in that country,
not only adopted the Swiss discipline, but impro-
ved upon it, by mingling a proper number of fol-
diers armed with heavy muskets in their battali-
ons ; and thus formed that famous body of infan-
try, which, during a century and a half, was the
admiration and terror of all Europe. The Itali-
an states gradually diminished the number of
their cavalry, and, in imitation of their more
powerful neighbours, brought the strength of
their armies to consist in foot soldiers. From this
period the nations of Europe have carried on war
with forces more adapted to every species offer-
vice, more capable of aing in every country,
and better fitted both for making conquests, and
for preserving them.

As their efforts in Italy led the people of Eu- The tlian

rope to these improvements in the art of war, w'arnoca-
they gave them likewiile the first idea of the ex- crcafe of
pence which accompanies great and continued o- trhepubli
perations, and accustomed them to the bitrden of Europe.
tlhofi impositions, which are necessary for sup-
porting them. While the feudal policy iiibfifted
in full vigour, while armies were composcd of
milita y vallals called forth to attack tome neigh-

i Braotome, tom. x. p. 18. Mem. de Fleuranges, 143.

I 2 bouring

SET. II. bouring power, and to perform, in a hort cam-
.'* .' paign, the services which they owed to their so-

vereign, the expence of war was extremely mo-
derate. A mall subsidy enabled a Prince to be-
gin and to finiih his greatest operations. But
when Italy became the theatre on which the pow-
ers of Europe contended for superiority, the
preparations requisite for fich a diflant expediti-
on, the pay of armies kept conflantly on foot,
their fubfiance in a foreign country, the sieges
to be undertaken, and the towns to be defend-
ed, swelled the charges of war immensely, and
by creating demands unknown in less aive
times, multiplied taxes in every kingdom.
The progress of ambition, however, was so ra-
pid, and Princes extended their operations o
fast, that it was impofiible at first to establish
funds proportional to the increase of expence
which there occasioned. When Charles VIII.
invaded Naples, the fums requisite for carrying
on that enterprize so far exceeded those which
France had been accustomed to contribute, that
before he reached the frontiers of Italy, his
treasury was exhausted, and the domeflick re-
sources, of which his extensive prerogative gave
him the command, were at an end. As he
durst not venture to lay any new inpofltion on
his people, oppressed already with the weight of
unusual burdens; the only expedient that re-
mained was, to borrow of the Genoese as much
money as would enable him to continue his
march. But he could not obtain the um that
was requisite, without consenting to pay annual-
ly the exorbitant interest of forty-two livres for
every hundred that he received k. We may
observe the fame disproportion between the es-
forts and revenues of other Princes, his contenm
poraries. From this period, taxes went on in-

k Mem. dc Cvmnines, lib. vii. c, 5. p. 440.

creasing

creating; and during the reign of Charles V. SeT.Ir.
such ums were levied in every itate, as would .-
have appeared prodigious at the close of the sis-
teenth century, and gradually prepared the way
for the more exorbitant exactions ofmodern times.

THE las tranfa&ion, previous to the reign of The league

Charles V. that merits attention on account of anofth i
its influence upon the state of Europe, is the ortantoc-
league of Cambray. To humble the republick Currc.
of Venice, and to divide its territories, was the
objec of all the powers who united in this con-
federacy. The civil conflitution of Venice,
established on a firm basis, had suffered no con-
fiderable alteration for several centuries; during
which, the slate conducted its affairs by maxims
of policy no less prudent than vigorous, and ad-
hered to there, with an uniform confiflent spirit,
which gave that commonwealth great advantage
over other fates, whose views and measures,
changed as often as the form. of their govern-
ment, or the persons who administered it: By
there unintermitted exertions of wildom and va-.
lour, the Venetians enlarged the dominions of
their commonwealth, until it became the moif
considerable power in Italy. While their exten-
five commerce, the useful and curious manu-
fatures which they carried on, together with
their monopoly of the precious commodities of
the East, rendered. Venice the most opulent
slate in Europe.

THEIR power was the objet ofterror to their The ,n.

Italian neighbours. Their wealth was viewed teot it
with envy by the greatest monarchs, who could
not vie with their private citizens in the magni-
ficence of their buildings, in the richnels of
their dress and furniture, or in splendor and ele-
gance of living. Julius II. whose ambition

Recliani oratio apu4 Qoldafltuu in polit. Imperial. p. 980.

I wa

SECT. II. was superior, and his abilities equal, to those of
_.-'"^ any Pontiff who ever fat on the Papal throne,

formed the idea of this league against the Vene-
tians, and endeavoured, by applying to these
paflions which I have mentioned, to persuade o-
ther Princes tojoin in it. By working upon the
tears of the Italian powers, and upon the ava.
rice of the monarchs beyoi.d the Alps, he induced
them, in concurrence with other causes, which
it is not my province to explain, to form against
these haughty republicans one of the most ex-
tensive confederacies Europe had ever beheld.

The rapid THE Emperor, the King of France, the
Phgffee- King of Aragon, the Pope, were principals in
ates. the league of Cambray, to which almost all the

Princes of Italy acceded, the least considerable
of them hoping for some share in the spoils of a
flare, which they already deemed to be devoted
to destruction. The Venetians might have di-
verted this storm, or have broken its force; but
with a presumptuous ra'hnefs, to which there is
nothing similar in the course of their history, they
waited its approach. The impetu)us valour of
the French rendered ineffectual all their precau-
tions for the safety of the republick; and the fa-
tal battle of Ghiarradadda entirely ruined the ar-
my, on which they relied for defence Julius
seized all the towns which they held in the eccle-
fiaitical territories. Ferdinand re-annexed the
towns of which they had got poffefion on the
coast of Calabria, to his Neapolitan domini'ons.
Maximilian, at the head of a powerful army,
advanced towards Venice on the one fide. The
French pushed their conqcrefts on the other.
TheVenetians, surrounded 'by'fTu many enemies,
and left without one ally, fnk from the height
of presumption to the depths of despair; aban-
doned all their territories on the continent;

and
I I8

and hut themselves up in their capital, as their SECT. II
last refuge, and the only place which they hoped --~
to preserve.

THIS rapid success, however, proved fatal to the Division
confederacy. The members of it, united while arifcs'mong
engaged in seizing their prey, began to feel their
ancientjealoufy and animofities revive, as ofon as
they had a profped of dividing it. When the Ve-
netiansobferved thefefymptoms of alienation and
distrust, a ray of hope broke in upon them; the
spirit natural to their councils returned; they re-
lumed such wisdom and firmness, as made Come
atonement for their former imprudence and de-
jeaion; they recovered part of the territory which
they had loft; they appeased the pope and Ser-
dinand by well-timed conceflions in their favour;
and at length dissolved the confederacy, which
had brought their commonwealth to the brink of
ruin.

JULIUS, elated with beholding the effets of a New objeat

league which he himself had planned, and ima- o'fthcnrpli
gining that nothing was too arduous for him to bition.
undertake, conceived the idea of expelling every
foreign power out of Italy, and bent all the force
of his mind towards executing a scheme so well
fited to his vast and enterprizing genius. He di-
reced his first attack against the French, who, on
many accounts, were more odious to the Italians,
than any of the foreigners who had acquired do-
minion in their country. By his. ativity and ad-
dress, he prevailed on most of the powers, who
had joined in the league of Cambray, to turn
their arms against the King of France, their for-
mer ally; and engaged Henry VIII. who had late-
ly ascended the throne of England, to favour their
operations by invading France. Louis XII. resist
ed all the efforts of this formidable and unexpect

I 4 ed

SECT. II. ed confederacy,with undaunted fortitude. Hotti-
.-V lities were carri d on, during several campaigns,

in Italy, n the frontiers of Spain, and in Picardy,
with alt, rnate iccefs Exhaufled, at length, by
the variety aswell as extent of his operations; un-
able to withstand a confederacy which brought a-
gainfthim Cuperior force, conducted with wisdom,
and afting with perseverance; he found it necef-
fary toconclude (eparate treaties of peace with his
enemi,-s; and the war terminated with the los of
every thingwhich the French had acquired in Ita-
ly, except the catfle of Milan, and a few incon-
fideiable towns in that dutchy.

By this the THE various negotiations carried on duringthis
aong the bul period, and the different combinations form-
European ed among powers hitherto little conneted with
~eecs:. each other, greatly increased that intercourse be-

tween the nations of Europe, which I have men-
tioned as one effect of the events in the fifteenth
century. While the greatness of the objects at
which they aimed, the distant expeditions which
they undertook, as well as the length and obili-
nacy of the contests in which they engaged, obli-
ged them to exert themselves with a vigour and
perseverance unknown in the preceding ages.

They are THOSE adive fceneswhich the followingHilo-
prpared for ry will exhibit, and the variety and importance of
ons of he thoe tranfations which distinguish the period to
sixteenth which it extends, are not to be ascribed solely to
" tury. the ambition, to the abilities, or to the rivallhip

of Charles V. and of Francis I. The kingdoms
of Europe had arrived at such a degree of im-
provement in the internal administration of go-
vernment, and Princes had acquired such com-
mand of the national force which was to be exert-
ed in foreign wars, that they were in a condition
to enlarge the sphere of their operations, and to

incrcac

increase the vigour of their efforts. Their con- SECT. II.
tests in Italy, which led them first to try the ex- -
tent of the power that they had acquired, gave
rife to so many opposite claims and pretensions,
excited such a spirit of discord and rivalfhip be-
tween nations, and laid the foundation osso many
quarrels, as could not fail of producing extraor-
dinary convulsions in Europe; and the sixteenth
century opened with the certain profped of its
abounding in great and interefling events.

A VIEW

## SECTION III. View of the political Constitution of the principal States in Europe, at the Commencement of the sixteenth Century.

A
VIE W

OF THE
PROGRESS OF SOCIETY

IN
EUROPE,

FROM THE
SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,

TO THE
BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY,

SECTION III.
View of the political Conf/ituion of the principal

States in Europe, at the Commencement of the fix-
teenth Century.

SCT. III. A V I N C thus enumerated the principal
,.--v --o causes and events, the influence of which
Aconsidert- extended to all the Rfates in Europe, and contri-
it variety
in thecon- buted eithertoimprove their internal government
the dissert and police, or to enlarge the sphere of their aFi-
nationsof vity, and to augment their national force; no-

"uropc. thing remains, in order to prepare my readers for

entering with fill information upon perusing the

History

History of the Reign of Charles V. but to give ScTr.m.
Come view of the particular conititution and form
of civil government, in each of the nations which
acted any considerable part during that period.
While there institutions and occurrences, which I
have mentioned, formed the people of Europe to
resemble each other, and conducted them from
barbarism to refinement, in the fame path, and
with almoff equal steps, there were other circum-
stances which occasioned a difference in their po-
litical establishments, and gave rife to those pecu-
liar modes of government, which have produced
such variety in the character and genius of nati-
ons.

IT is no less necessary to become acquainted Neceffaryt

with the latter, than to have contemplated the for- ,xptai te,
mer. The view which I have exhibited of the when

Charles V.

causes and events, whose influence was universal, ,began hi
will enable my readers to account for the furpri- reign.
zing resemblance amongthe nations of Europe in
their interior police, and foreign operations. But,
without a diftint knowledge of the peculiar form
and genius of theircivil government, a great part
of their tranfadions must appear altogether my-
fterious and inexplicable. The historians of par-
ticularStates,as they feldomextended tlhirviews
farther than to the amusement or iftrudion of
their fellow-citizens, by whom they might pre-
fume that all domeflick customs and institutions
were perfectly understood, have often negleCted
to descend into such details with refpe-t to thee,
as are fifficient to convey to foreigners full light
and infoi mationconcernilngtheoccurrences which
they relate. But a history, which comprehends
the tranrafions of so many different countries,
would be extremely imperfect, without a previ-
ousfurcy of teir conflitution and political tlate.
It i= from his knowledge of thelic, that the reader

imuit

SecT. IlI. mufdraw those principles, which wiltenable him

to judge with discernment, and to decide with
certainty concerning the conduct of nations.

A MINUTE detail, however, of the peculiar

forms and regulations in every country, would
lead to deductions ofimmcafurable length. To
sketch out the great lines which distinguish and
characterize each government, is all that the na-
ture of my present work will admit of, and all
that is necessary to illuifrate the events which it
records.

TheState AT the opening of the sixteenth century, the
of Italy. political face of Italy was extremely different from

that of any other part of Europe. Irflead of those
extensive monarchies, which occupied the reft of
the continent, that delightful country was parcel-
led out.among many fnmall fates, each of which
poffefled sovereign and independent jurisdiction.
The only monarchy in Italy was that of Naples.
The dominion of the Popes was of a peculiar fpe-
cies, to which there is nothing similar either in an-
cient or modern times. In Venice and Florence,
a republican form of government was established.
Milan was fuibje to sovereigns, who hadaffumed
no higher title than that of Dukes.

rTe Paraf THE Pope was the firfl of there powers in dig-
ti'ghflt in nity, and not the least considerable by the extent
:ur,Fc. of his territories. In the primitive church, the

jurifdiftion of bihops was equal and co-ordinate.
They derived, perhaps, rome degree of confide.
ration from the dignity of the See in which they
presided. They poffelled, however, no real au-
thority or pre-eminence, but what they acquired
by fuperiorabilities,or fuperiorfanctity. As Rome
had () long been the feat of Empire, and capital

of
124

of the world, its bishops were on that acount en- SCT. II.
titled to refpedt; they received it; but during ^'~ '
several ages they claimed and received nothing progresof
more. From there humble beginnings, they ad- e'pa
vanced with such an adventurous and well-diret-
ed ambition, that they eftablilhed a spiritual do-
minion over the minds and sentiments of men, to
which all Europe submitted with implicit obedi-
ence. Their claim of univerfaljurifdiaion, as
heads of the church, and their pretensions to in-
fallibility in their decisions, as filcceffors of St.
Peter, are as chimerical, as they are repugnant
to the geniusof the Christian religion. But on these
foundations, the superstition and credulity of man-
kind enabled them to ered an amazing super-
ftruure. In all ecclefiafiical controversies, their
decisions were received as the infallible oraclesof
truth. Nor was the plenitude of their power con-
fined to these alone; they dethroned monarchs;
difpoed of crowns; absolved fubjeEts from the
obedience due to their sovereigns ; and laid king-
doms under interdicts. There was not a ifate in
Europe which had not been disquieted by their
imibition. There was not a throne which they
had not shaken ; nor a Prince, who did not trem-
ble at their power.

NOTHING was wanting to render this Empire Thetcrri:o
absolute, and to establish it on the ruins of'all ci- ries of th

Popsinaid-

vil authority, but that the Popes Ihould have pol- quate to Lup
fefed such a degree of temporal power, as was prr tiiri
sufficient to second and enforce their spiritual de- rfdiaiou.
crees. Happily for mankind, while their fpiri-
tualjurifdidion was most extensive, anid at its
greatest height, their temporal property wias ex-
tremely limited. They were powerful Pontiffs,
formidable at a diffance; but they were petty
Princesw ithout any considerable domeifick force.
They had early endeavoured, indeed, to acquire

territory

SEcT.II. territory by arts, similar to those which they had

c-*v3 employed in extending theirjurifdidion. Under

pretence of a donation from Contantine, and of
another from Charlemagne or his father Pepin,
they attempted to take possession of Come towns
adjacent to Rome. But there donations were sic-
titious, and availed them little. The benefati-
ons, for which they were indebted to the credu-
lity of the Norman adventurers, who conquered
Naples, and to the fuperltition of the counters
Matilda, were real, and added ample domains to
thb Holy See.

Theirau- BUT the power of the Popes did not increase in
thit n proportion to the extent of territory which they
territories had acquired. In the dominions annexed to the
lititely Holy See, as well as in those subjet to other Prin-

ces in Italy, the sovereign of a state was far from
having the command of the force which it con-
tained. During the turbulence and confusion of
the middle ages, the powerful nobility or leaders
of popular factions in Italy, had seized the govern-
ment of different towns; and after strengthening
their fortifications, and taking a body of merce-
naries into pay, they et up for independence
The territory which the church had gained, was
filled with such petty tyrants, who left the Pope
hardly the hadow of dominion.

It was cir- As there usurpations almost annihilated thePapal
cumfsribed bytheabi power in the greater part of the towns fubje to
ton ofthe the church, the Roman barons frequently di-
ro.an b- puted the authority of the Popes, even in Rome

itself. In the twelfth century, an opinion began
to be propagated " That as the funation of ec-
clefiafticks was purely spiritual, they ought to pof-
fess no property, and to claim no temporaljuril-
dition ; but, according to the laudable example
of theirpredecefors in the primitive churcb,fhould

flu fil:
I26

fibfif wholly upon their tithes, or upon the vo- SECT. III.
luntary oblations of the people ." This doctrine " '
being addressed to men,who had beheld the scan-
dalous manner in which the avarice and ambition
of the clergy had prompted them to contend for
wealth, and to exercise power, they liflened to it
with fond attention. The Roman barons,who had
felt most sensibly the rigour of ecclesiastical op-
preflion, adopted these sentiments with such ar-
dour, that they et themselves inflantly to hake
off the yoke. They endeavoured to restore ome A.D. D.43,
image of their ancient liberty, by reviving the in-
ititution of the Roman senate, in which they vest-
ed upreme authority ; committing the executive
power rometimes to one chief senator, sometimes
to two, and sometimes to a magistrate dignified
with the name of The Patrician The Popes ex-
erted themselves with vigour, in order to check
this fatal encroachment on theirjurifdiction. One
of them, finding all his endeavours ineffectual,
was so much mortified, that extreme grief cut
short his days. Another, having ventured to at-
tack the senators at the head of some armed men,
was mortally wounded in the fray b. During a
considerable period, the power of the Popes, be-
fore which the'greateft monarchs in Europe trem-
bled, was circumscribed within such narrow li-
mits in their own capital, that they durst scarce
exert any at of authority without the pcrmiffion
and concurrence of the senate.

ENCROACHMENTS were made upon the Papal And by ti

authority, not only by the usurpations of the Ro- turhblnce
man nobility, but by the mutinous spirit of the mrn pople,
people. During seventy years of the fourteenth from

A. D. 3o8.
century, the Popes fixed their residence in Avig- to

a Otto Frifingenfis de Geftis Frider. Inp. lib. ii. cap. 20.
b Otto Friling. Chron. lib. vii. cap. 27, 31. Il. de Gcft.
'r'd. lib. i.c. 27. Muiratori Annali d' Italia, vol. ix. 39g,4o4.

non.

SECT. .Il non. The inhabitants of Rome, accustomed to

C-'-' confider themfelvesas the descendants of the peo.

pie who had conquered the world, and had given
laws to it, were too high-fpirited to fiubmit with
patience to the delegated authority of those per-
sons, to whom the Popes committed the govern-
ment of the city. On many occasions, they op.
pored the execution of the Papal mandates, and
on the slightest appearance of innovation or op-
preflion, they were ready to take arms in defence
of their own immunities. Towards the middle of
the fourteenth century, being infligated byNico-
las Rienzo, a man of low birth and a seditious
spirit, but of popular eloquence, and an enterpri-
zing ambition, they drove all the nobility out of
the city,eftablifhed a democratical form ofgovern-
ment, elected RienzoTribune of the people,and
invested him with extensive authority. But though
the frantick proceedings of the tribune soon over-
turned this new system; though the government
of Rome was reinflated in its ancient form; yet
every fresh attack contributed to weaken the pa-
paljurifdiction; and the turbulenceof the people
concurred with the spirit of independence among
the nobility, to circumscribe it within very nar-
row bounds c. Gregory VII. and other domineer-
ingPontiffs,accomplifhed those great things which
rendered them so formidable to the Emperors
with whom they contended, not by the force of
their arms, or by the extent of their power, but
by the dread of their spiritual censures, and by the
effect of their intrigues, which excited rivals, and
called forth enemies against every Prince, whom
they wished to depress or to destroy.

c Historic Fiorentine de Giov. Villani, lib. xii. c. 89, 104.

ap. Murat. Script. Rerum Ital. vol. xiii. Vita de Cola di Ri-
cnzo. ap. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. iii. p. 399, &c. Hist. de
Nic. Ricnzy, par M. dce oifpreaux, p. 91, .

MA N
128

MIAkYattempts were made by the Popes, not SicT. Ir.

only to humble these usurpers, who lorded it A-~S
over Ihe cities in the ecclesiastical slate, but to vi.andjuli-
break .the: turbulent Cpirit of the Roman people. uli".rael
These were long unsuccessful. At last Alexan- confiderabl,
der VI. with a policy no less artful than flagitious, Princcs
subdued and extirpated most ofthem, and ren-
dered the Popes masters of their own dominions;
The enterprizing ambition of Julius II. added
conquests of no inconsiderable value to the patri-;
mony of St. Peter. Thus the Popes, by degrees,
became powerfill temporal Princes. Thteir ter-
ritories, in the age of Charles V. were of greater
extent than at present; their country was better
cultivated, and more populous; and as they
drew large contributions from every part of Eu-
rope, their revenues far exceeded, those of the
neighbouring powers, and rendered them capa-
ble of more sudden and vigorous efforts.

TH E genius of the Papal government, how- efa i

ever, was better adapted to the exercise offpiri- thenatureof
tual dominion, than of temporal. power. With en1ai'
respect to the former, all its maxims were steady
and invariable. Every new Pontiff adopted the
plan of his predeceflor. By education and habit
Ecclesiastics were so formed, that the character
of the individual was funk in that of the profefli-
on; and the paflions of the man were sacrificed
to the interest and honour of the order. The
hands which held the reins of administration
might change; but the spirit which conducted
them was always the fame. While the measures
of other governments fluduated, and the objects
at which they aimed varied, the church kept
one end in view; and tothis unrelaxing conflancy
of pursuit, it was indebted for its filccets in the
boldeli attempts ever made by human ambi-
tio!. .

Vot.. .

K

P,UT

STr. IM. BUT in their civil administration, the Popes

G"¥' followed no such uniform or consistent plan.

There, as in other governments, the charater,
the passions, and the interests of the person who
had the supreme dire&tion ofaffairs, occasioned a
Variation both in objects and meafilres. As few
Prelates reached the fummitofecclefiaftical dig ni-
ty, until they were far advanced in life, a change
of nafters was more frequent in the Papal domi-
nions than in other states, and the political system
was, of course, less stable and permanent. Every
Pope was eager to make the most of the short
period, during which he had the profpe6t of en-
joying power, in order to aggrandize his family,
and to attain his private ends; and it was often
the first business of his fucceflor to undo all that
he had done, and to overturn what he had efta-
blifhed.

As ecclefiafticks were trained to pacifick arts,

and early initiated in the mysteries ofthat policy,
by which the court of Rome extended or sup-
ported its spiritual dominion, the Popes wereapt
to condut their temporal affairs with the fame
spirit; and in all their measures were more ready
to employ the refinements of intrigue, than the
force of arms. It was in the Papal court that ad-
dress and subtlety in negotiation first became a
science; and during the sixteenth century, Rome
was confidered as the chool in which it could be
belt acquired.

As the decorum of their ecclesiastical chara&er
prevented the Popes from placing themselves at
the head of their armies,or taking the command,
in person, of the military force in their domini-
ons, they were afraid to arm their fubjets and
in all theiroperations, whether offensive or defen-
five, they trusted entirely to percenary troops.

As

As their power and dominions could not de- SECT. III.

scend to their posterity, the Popes were less oli- -'"
citous than other Princes to form or to encourage
schemes of publick utility and improvement.
Their tenure was only for a short life; present
advantage was all that they attended to; to
squeeze and to amass, not to melliorate, was their
objec They erected, perhaps, ome work of
ostentation, to remain as a monument of their
Pontificate; they found it neceflary, at some
times, to eftablilh useful inflitutions, in order to
sooth and silence the turbulentpopulace of Rome;
but plans of general benefit to their fubjeds, and
framed with a view to futurity, were rarely ob.
jects of attention in the Papal policy. The patri-
mony of St. Peter was worse governed than any
part of Europe; and though a generous Pontiff
might suspend for a little, or counter-ac the es-
sects of those vices which are peculiar to the ad-
ministration of ecclefiafiicks; the disease not on-
ly remained incurable, but has even gone on in-
creasing from age to age; and the decline of the
state has kept pace with its progress.

ONE circumstance, farther, concerning the The Pope,

Papal government, is to singular, as to merit at- advantgem
tention. As the spiritual supremacy and tempo. from the
ral power were united in one perbon, and uni- their 'iritu.
formly aided each other in their operations, they al and tem-
became so blended together, that it was difficult rity a
to separate them, even in imagination. The po-
tentates who found it necessary to oppose the
meafiures which the Popes pursued as temporal
Princes, could.not divefl themfelvesof the reve-
rence which they imagined to be due to them as
heads of the church, and vicars of Jesus Chris.
It was with reluctance that they could be brought
to a rupture with them; they were avcrfe to pulh
their operations againit them to extremity ; they

K 2 ililened

SECT. III. lifened eagerly to the fire overtures of accom.
SU~v-, modation, and were willing to procure it almost

upon any terms. Their concioufiels of this en-
couraged the enterprizing ontiffs, who filled the
Papal throne about the beginning of the sixteenth
cehtury, to engage in sc;en;es seemingly the
most extravagant. They trusted, that if their
temporal power was not lufficient to carry them
through with tuccefs, the refped paid to their
spiritual dignity would enable them to extricate
themselves with facility and with honour d. But
when Popes came to take part more frequently in
tle contests amo:ng Princes, and to engage as
principals or auxiliaries in every war kindled in
Europe, this veneration for their sacred charac-
ter began to abate; and striking iifances will
occur in the following hiltory, of its being al-
rmoft totally extinct.

Constitution Or all the Italian powers, the republick of
oftherepub- enice, next to the 'ope, was most conneted
lick of Ve-
nice, with
its rife and d The manner in n hich Louis XII. of France undertook
progrcis. and carried on war againitJulius II. remarkably llulirates this

observation. Louis lolemnly confuiled the clergy of France,
whether it was lawfui to tak: aims againl a ope, vlho
hadwvantonly kindled ar in Eurp., and whom neither the
faith of treaties, nor gratitude for favours received, nor the
decorum of his character, could reltrain from the moi vio-
lent actions, to which the lutt of power prompts ainbitious
Princcs. Though his clergy authorized the war, yet Annle
of Bretagne, his Queen, entertained iruples itlli itcgj to
the lawfulness of it. 'The iKing himfilt, from fmce linper-
ftition of the fame kind, carricd it on faintly; and, upon eve-
ry frefl advantage, rclewed hIis propolitions of peace. Mc-
zeray, Hilt. de 'iance, fol. edit, 16S5. tom. i. -;52. I lll
produce another proof of this reverence for the Papal clla:,lc-
ter fiill more tlhiknlg. Guicciardini, themefit sagacious, pcr-
hap3, of all modern historians, and tile boldest in painting tilhe
vices and ambition of the Popes, rprefents the death of
Migliau, a bpanilh oflicer, who was killed during tie siege of
Naples, as a pulinflmceit inflidcd o him by heaven, on ac-
count of his having oppofsd the setting of ClementVJ I. at li-
berty. Guic.Hitoiad'Itulia,Gencv. 1645.vol.ii.lib. 18.r.167.

wvith

with the reft of Europe. The rife of that corn. SECT. I[
monwealth, during the inroads of the Huns in
the fifth century; the singular situation of its
capital in the small isles of the Adriatick gulf;
and the more singular form of its civil conftitu-
tion, are generally known. If we view the
Venetian government as calculated for the order
of nobles alone, its institutions are so excellent;
the deliberative, legislative and executive pow-
ers are so admirably diltributed and adjusted,
that it muff be regarded as a perfect model of
political wisdom. But if we confider it as form-
ed for a ,umerols body of people fubje to its
jurisdiction, it will appear a rigid and partial
ariftoccacy, which lodges all power in the hands
of a few members of the commuity, while it
degrades and oppresses the reft.

THE spirit of government, in a common- DefeEtsin

wealth of this species, was, of course, timid its'gov'i-
and jealous. The Venetian nobles distrusted cularlywith
their own fubjeds, and were afraid of allowing rffiatr"',t
them the use of arms. They encouraged among pcraiions.
them the arts of industry and commerce; they
employed them in manufactures and in naviga-
tion; but never admitted them into the troops
which the slate kept in its pay. The military
force of the republick consisted entirely of foreign
mercenaries. The command of there was never
trusted to noble Venetians, left they flould ac-
quire such influence over the army, as might
endanger the publick liberty ; or become accuf-
tomed to the exercile of luch power, as would
make them unwilling to return to the condition
of private citizens. A oldier of fortune was
placed at the head of the armies of the common-
wealth; and to obtain that honour, was the
great object of the Italian Cbndoititri, or leaders
of bands, who, in the fifteenth and sixteenth

K 3 centuries,

SlCT. III. centuries, made a trade of war, and raised and
*"r" ~ hired out soldiers to different flates. But the

fame suspicious policy, which induced them to
employ thee adventurers, prevented their pla-
cing entire confidence in them. Two noblemen,
appointed by the senate, accompanied their ar-
niv when it took the field, with the appellation
of Proveditori, and like the field-deputies of the
Dutch republick in later times, observed all the
motions of the general, and checked and con-
trouled him in all his operations.

A REPUBLICK, with such civil and military

institutions, was not formed to make conquefls.
While its filbjets were disarmed, and its nobles
excluded from military command, it carried on
its warlike enterprizes with great disadvantage.
This ought to have taught the Venetians to
make felf-prefervation, and the enjoyment of
domeftick security, the objets of their policy.
But republicks are apt to be seduced by the ipirit
of ambition, as well as Princes. When the
Venetians so far forgot the interior defects In
their government, as to aim at extensive con-
quefis, the fatal blow, which they received in
the war excited by the league of Cambray, con-
vinced them of the imprudence and danger of
making violent efforts, in opposition to the geni-
us and tendency of their contitution.

,.:,,il, IT is not, however, by its military, but by
!'iitul"t. its naval and commercial power, that the im-

portance of the Venetian commonwealth must
be eflimated. In the latter, the real force and
nerves of the slate consisted. The jealousy of
government did not extend to this department.
Nothing was apprehended from this quarter,
il.a: could prove formidable to liberty. The
finate nrcuraged the nobles to trade, and to

feivce

serve on board the fleet. They became mer- Scr. II.
chants and admirals..They encreafed the wealth ''
of their country by their industry. They added
to its dominions, by the valour with which they
conducted its naval armaments.

THE Venetian commerce was an inexhaustible The cate

source of opulence. All the nations in Europe de- orfi con
pended upon them, not only for the commodities mc
of the East, but for various manufactures fabri-
cated by them alone, or finished with a dexterity
and elegance unknown in other countries. From
this extensive commerce, the state derived such
immense supplies, as concealed these vices in its
constitution, which I have mentioned; and en.
abled it to keep on foot fiuch armies, as were not
only an over-match for the force which any of its
neighbours could bring into the field, but were
sufficient to contend, for some time,with the pow-
erful monarchs beyond the Alps. During its
struggles with the Princes united against it by the
league of Cambray, the republick levied ums
which, even in the present age, would be deem-
ed considerable; and while the King of France
paid the exorbitant interest which I have menti.
oned for the money advanced to him, and the
Emperor eager to borrow, but destitute of credit,
was known by the name of Maximilian the Money.
less, the Venetians raised whatever fums they
pleased, at the moderate premium of five in the
hundred '.

THE conflitution of Florence was perfectly the The confti-

reverse of that of Venice. It partook as much of tution of
the democratical turbulence and licentiou hess, as
the other ofariftdcratical rigour. Florence, how-
ever, was a commercial, not a military democra-

e Hist. de la ligue faite a Cambray par M. 'Abb le Bus.
lib. v. Sandi. Storia Civil Vencziana, lib. viii. c. 6.p.89 ,&c.

K4

cy.

SECT.I cy. The nature of its institutions were favour-

- able to commerce, and the-genius of the people

was turned towards it The vat wealth which
the family ofMr.ic: had acquired by trade; ad-
ded to the mag,,lficence, the generosity; and the
virtue of the first Cosmo, gave him filchl an alccn-
dant over the afftaions as well as the councils of
his countrymen, that though the forms of. p,)pu-
lar govenment were preserved, though the va-
rious departmentsof adminiflration w erefilled by
magiftr. .es diflinguifc-d by the ancient names,
and elected in the usual manner, he was in reality
the head of tl-' tomnonwealth, and in the ftati-
on of a private citizen he poeffrd supreme autho-
rity. Cofno transmitted a considerable degree
of this power to his descendants; and durino the
greater p-it of the fifteenth century, the political
slate of Florence was extremely singular. The
appearance of republican government fubfilted,
the people were paflionately attached to it, and on
some occasions contended warmly for their privi-
leges, and yet they permitted a single family to
aume a direction of their affairls, almost as abfo-
lute as if it had been formerly invested with fove-
reign power. Thejealoufy of the Medici concur-
red with the commercial spirit of the Florentines,
in putting the military force of the republick up-
on the sarre footing with that.of the other Italian
ilates. The troops, which the Florentines em-
ployed in their wais, consisted almost entirely of
lmercenary soldiers, furnished by the Condottieri, or
leaders of bands, whom they took into their pay.

·T. cnft- IN the kingdom of Naples, to which the fove-
.l, kin;om reignty or the.ifland of Sicily was annexed, the
'rNarkt.. feudal government was established in the lamne

form, and with the fime defects, as in the other
nations of Europe. The frequent and violent
rcvolutiors which happeped in that monarchy,

had

had considerably increased there defecs, and SeC?.III.
rendered them more intolerable. The fuccef- '
sion to the crown of Naples had been o often in-
terrupted or altered, and so many Princes of so-
reign blood had taken possession of the throne,
that the Neapolitan nobility had loft, in a great
measure, that attachment to the family of their
sovereigns, as well as that reverence for their per-
sons, which, in other feudal kingdoms, contri-
buted to set Jome bounds to the encroachments of
the barons upon the royal prerogative and power.
At the fame time, the different pretenders to the
crown, bring obliged to court the baronswho ad-
hered to them, and on whose support they de-
pended for the fiuccefs of their claims, they aug-
mented their privileges by liberal concellions, and
connived at their boldest usurpations. Even when
feated on the throne, it wasdangerous for aPrince,
who held his sceptre by a disputed title, to ven-
ture on any ftep towards extending his own pow-
er, or circumscribing that of the nobles.

FROM all theft causes, the kingdom of Naples

was the molt turbulent of any in Europe, and the
authority of its Monarchs the least extensive.
'lhough Ferdinand 1. who began his reign in the
ytar one thousand four hundred and fixty-eight,
attempted to break the power of the aristocracy;
though his son Alfonso, that he might crush it at
once by cutting off the lcactrr of greater repu-
tation and influence among theNeaplitan barons,
ventured to commit one f the mos pcrfi;.ius
and cruel actions recorded in hiflory ; the order A.D. 4s,.
ofnobleswas neverthcltel more cxalperitcd than
hurbled by the blow . 'Ihe relenLmerit which
thcfc outrages excited was so violent, and the
power of the malecontent nobles was till ob flr-

f Giannone, book xx\iii. chap. 2. vol. ii. p. 410, &c.

mi(lable,

SICT. III. midable, that to there may be ascribed, in a great
S~
degree, the ease and rapidity with which Charles

V11. conquered the kingdom of Naples g.

Stae of he THE event that gave rife to the violent contests
drpuncOh- concerning the fucceflion to the crown of Naples
igh: ot and Sicily,which brought so many calamities up-
tron,.° on these kingdoms, happened in the thirteenth

century. Upon the death of the Emperor Fre-
derick II. Manfred his natural son apiring to the
A.D. 1a4. Neapolitan throne, murdered (if we may believe

contemporary historians) his brother the Empe-
ror Conrad, and by that crime obtained poffefion
of ith. The Popes, from their implacable en-
mity to the house of Swabia, not only refused to
recognize Manfred's title, but endeavoured to
excite against him ome rival capable of wrefling
the sceptre out of his hand. Charles Count of
Anjou, the brother of St. Louis King of France,
undertook this; and he received from the Popes,
the investiture of the kingdom of Naples and Si-
cily as a fief held of the holy See. The Count
of Anjou's efforts were crowned with success;
Manfred fell in battle; and he took possession of
the vacant throne. But soon after, Charles filllied
the glory which he had acquired, by the injuflice
and cruelty with which lhe put to death, by the
handsof the executioner,Conradin,the lafl Prince
of the house of Swabia, and the rightful heir of
the Neapolitan crown. Thatgallantyoung Prince
afterted his title, to the last, with a courage,
worthy of a better fate. On the scaffold, he de-
clared Peter, at that time Prince, and oon after
King of Aragon, who had married Manfred's

g Giannone, ibid. p. 414.
h Struv. corp. lift. Germ. i. 481. Giannone, book xviii.
ch. 5.

only

only daughter, his heir; and throwing his glove SECT. III
among the people, he entreated that it might be 3
carried to Peter as the symbol by which he con-
veyed all his rights to him i. The desire of a-
venging the insult offered to royalty by the death
ofConradin concurred with ambition, in prompt-
ing Peter to take arms in support of the title,
which he had acquired. From that period,during
almost two centuries, the houres of Aragon and
Anjou contended for the crown ofNaples. Amidst
a fucceflion of revolutions more rapid, as well as
of crimes more atrocious, than what occur in the
history of almost any other kingdom, Monarchs
sometimes of the Aragonefe line, and sometimes
of the Angevin were feated on the throne. At
length the Princes of the house of Aragon obtain- A. D. 1434.
ed such firm pofleflion of this long-difputed inhe-
ritance, that they transmitted it quietly to a ba-
flard branch of their family k.

THE race of the Angevin Kings, however, was Pretensions
not extinct; nor had they relinquished their titl. of the
to the Neapolitan crown. The count of Maine Spanish mo-
and Provence, the heir of this family, conveyed n'rth
all his rights and pretensions to Louis XI. and to
his successors. Charles VIII. as I have already re- A. D. 1494.
lated, crowed the Alps at the head of a powerfill
army in order to prosecute his claim with a de-
gree of vigour far superior to that, which the
Princes from whom he derived it, had been ca-
pable of exerting The rapid progress of his
arms in Italy, as well as the short time during
which he enjoyed the fruits of hisfilccefs, are well
known. Frederick the heir of tle illegitimate
branch of the Aragonefe family, soon recovered

i Giannonc, book xix. ch. 4 § ,.
k Giannone, book xxvi. ch. .

SecT. IIr. the throne of which Charles had difpofteffed him

'o I.olisXll.and Ferdinand ofAragon united againIft

this Prince, whom both, though for different
reasons, confidered as an usurper, and agreed to
A. D. rsox. divide his dominions between them. Frederick,

unable to resist the combined Monarchs, each of
wh(om was far his superior in power, resigned Iis
sceptre. Louis and Ferdinand, though they had
concurred in making the conqutft, differed about
the division of it; and from allies became ene-
mies. But Gonfalvo de Cordova, partly by the
exertion of such military talents as gave him a
jluft title to the appellation of the Great CGipta'n,
which the Spanish hiflorians have bestowed upon
him; and partly by such shameless and frequent
violations of the most olemn engagements, as
leave an indelible slain on his memory; stripped
the French of all that they possessed in the Nea-
politan dominions, and secured the peaceable pof.
feflion of them to his matter. .. These, together
with his other kingdoms, Ferdinand trannmitted
to his grandson Charles V. whose right to pofels
them, if not altogether uncontrovertible, seems,
at leaf, to be as well founded as that, which the
Kings of France set in opposition to it .

Stateofthe THERE is nothing in the political conflitution,
dutchy of or interior government of the dutchy of Milan so
Milan. andl
the right of remarkable, as to require a particular xplanari-
fuccelonto on. But as the rght of succession to that fertile

province was the cause or the pretext of almoff
all the wars carried on in Italy during the reign
of Charles V. it is neccffary to trace thele dif-
putes to their source, and to enquire into the pre.
tcnfions of the various competitors.

1 Droids des Rois de Prance au Royaume de Sicilc. Mem.
dc Comin. edit. de Frdcloy, ton. iv. part ii. p. 5.

DURIN CG

DU RING the long and fierce contests excited in SECT. III.

Italy by the viol,-nce of rhe Guelfand Ghibelline ,-,-
factions, the familv of Visconti rose to great emi- progref of
nence among their fellow-citizens of Milan. As cthe dilput
the Vicn ti had adhered uniformly to the Ghibel- tlhis.
line or Imperial interest, they, by way of recom- A. D. 354.
penfe, received, from one Emperor, the dignity
of perpetual vicars of the Empire in Italy -.They
were created by another, Dukes of Milan, and
together with that title, the poffeflion of the city A.D.139s5
and its territories, was bestowed upon them as an
hereditary fiefn. John King of France, among
other expedients for raising money, which the ca-
lamities of his reign obliged him to employ, con-
descended to give one of his daughters in mar-
riage to John Galeazzo Visconti the firit Duke of
Milan, from whom he had received considerable
fums. Valentine Visconti one of the children of
this marriage married her cousin, Louis Duke of
Orleans,,he only brother of Charles VI. In their
marriage contract which the Pope confirmed, it
was ftipu!ated that, upon failure of heirs-male in
thefamily of Visconti, the dutchy of Milan should
defce nd to the posterity of Valentineand the Duke
of Orleans. That event took place. In the year
one thousand four hundred and forty-feven,Philip
Maria the last Prince of the ducal family of Vis-
coati died. Various competitors pretended to the
lilccellion. Charles Duke of Orleans pleaded his
right to it, founded on the marriage-contraa of
his mother Valentine Visconti. Alfonlb King of
Naples claimed it in confequcnce of a will made
by Philip Maria in his favour. The Emperor
contended that upon the extinction of male issue
in the family of Visconti the fief returned to the

m Petrarch epift. ap. Struv. corp. i. 625.
o Leibnit.cod.jur. gent. diploin. vol. i. 257.

superior

r4'1

SiCT. III. flperior Lord, and ought to be re-annexed to the
'v^- ' Empire. The people of Milan smitten with that

love of liberty which prevailed among the Italian
States, declared against the dominion of any ma-
ller,andeftablifhed a republican form of govern-
ment.

B T during the ifruggle among so many com-

petitors, the prize for which they contended was
seized by one from whom none of them appre.
hended any danger. Francis Sforza, the natural
son of Jacomuzzo Sforza, whom his courage and
abilities had elevated from the rank of a peasant
to be one of the most eminent and powerful of
the Italian Condottieri, having succeeded his father
in the command of the adventurers who followed
his flandard, had married a natural daughter of
the last Duke of Milan. Upon this shadow of a
title Francis founded his pretensions to the dut-
chy, which he supported with such talents and
valour as placed him at last on the ducal throne.
The virtues as well as abilities with which he go-
verned, inducing his fubjets to forget the de-
sects in his title, he transmitted his dominions
quietly to his son; from whom they descended
to his grandson. He was murdered by his grand
uncle Ludovico, surnamed the Moor, who took
poffefion of the dutchy; and his right to it was
confirmed by the investiture oftheEmperorMax-
imilian in the year one thousand four hundred
and ninety-four °.

o Ripalm. hist. Mediol. lib. vi. 654. ap. Struv. corp. i.
930. Du Mont Corps Diplom. tom. iii.

Lou Is

Louts XI. who took pleasure in depressing the SECT. .

Princes of the blood, and who admired the po-
litical abilities of Francis Sforza, would not per-
mit the Duke of Orleans to take any fRep in pro-
fecution of his right to the dutchy of Milan. Lu-
dovico the Moor kept up such a close connecion
with Charles VIII. that during the greater part
of his reign, the claim of the family of Orleans
continued to lie dormant. But when the crown
of France devolved to Louis XII. Duke of Or-
leans, he inflantly asserted the rights of his fami-
ly with the ardour which it was natural to expe&.
Ludovico Sforza, incapable of contending with
such a rival, was dripped of all his dominions in
the space of a few days. The King, clad in the
ducal robes, entered Milan in triumph; and soon
after, Ludovico having been betrayed by theSwifs
in his pay, was ent a prisoner into France, and
thut up in the castle of Loches, where he lay un-
pitied during the remainder of his days. In con-
sequence of oneof the singular revolutions which
occur so frequently in the hiffory of the Milanese,
his fonMaximilian Sforza was placed on the ducal
throne, of which he kept poffellion during the
reign of Louis XII. His successor Francis . was A.D. 15,.
too high-fpirited and enterprizing tamely to relin-
quifh his title. As oon as he was feated upon
the throne, he prepared to invade the Milanee ;
and his right of fucceflion to it, appears from this
detail, to have been not only more natural but
morejufl than that of any other competitor.

IT is unnecefftry to enter into any detail with

refped to theformof government in Genoa, Par-
ma, Modena, and the other inferior States of Ita-
ly. Their names, irdeed, will often occur in the
following hiflory. But the power of these States

themlfl ves

2-"- depended little upon their own efforts; and the

frequent revolutions which they underwent, were
brought about by the operations of the Princes
wvho attacked or defended them, rather than by
any thing peculiar in their internal constitution.

The confi- OF the great kingdoms on this fide of the
tution and
government Alps, Spain is one of the most considerable; and
of Spain. as it was the hereditary domain of Charles V. as

well as the chief source of his power and wealth,
a diftina knowledge of its political conflitution
is of capital importance towards understanding
the tranfadions of his reign.

Conquered THE Vandals and Goths, who overturned the
by te Van- Roman power in Spain, established aform of go-

vernment in that country, and brought in customs
and laws perfectly similar to those which .were
introduced into the reft of Europe, by the other
victorious tribes which acquired settlements there.
For rome time, society advanced, among the new
inhabitants of Spain, by the fame fieps, and
seemed to hold the fame course, as in other Eu-
A. D. 71. ropean nations. To this progress, a sudden flop

was put by the invasions of the SaracensorMoors.

and by the The Gothscould not withiland the efforts of their
Moors. enthufiaftick valour, which subdued Spain, with

the fame impetuous rapidity that diflinguiflies all
the operations of their arms. The conquerors
introduced into the country in which they ettled
the Mahometan religion, the Arabick language,
the manne s of the East, together with that taste
for the arts, and that love of elegance and fplen-
dour, which the Caliphs had begun to cultivate
among their fubjeds.

SUCH

A VIEW OF THE
144.

SUCH. dotiic nobfes; as difdaied to fubnmitSecT. ilr.

to the M6ooriffi yoke, fed for refuge to the inac- Chri-
ce/iible mountains of Atiurias, and comforted nsgradali-
themselves with enjoying there the exercise of oyrcover.
the Christian religion, and with maintaining the Spain.
authority of their ancient laws. Being joined
by many of the boldest and mos warlike among
their countrymen, they sallied out upon the ad-
jacent settlements of the Moors, in small parties;
and making short excursions, were satisfied with
plunder and revenge, without thinking of con-
quest. By degrees, their strength increased,
their views enlarged, a regular government was
effablifhed among them, and they began to aim
at extending their territories. While they
pufhedon their attacks with the unremitting ar-
dour excited by zeal for religion, by the desire
of vengeance, and by the hope of rescuing their
country from oppreflion; while they conducted
their operations with the courage natural to men
who had no other occupation but war, and who
were serangers to all the arts which corrupt or
enfeeble the mind, the Moors gradually loft ma-
ny of the advantages, to which they had been
indebted for their first success. They threw off
all dependance on the Caliphs *; they neglet-
ed to preserve a close connection with their
countrymen in Africa; their Empire in Spain
was split into many small kingdoms; together
with the arts' which they cultivated, the luxury
to which these gave rife, relaxed, in ome mea-
sure, tle force of their military institutions, and
abated' the vigour of their warlike spirit. The
Moors, however, continued still to be a gallant
people, and pofleffed great resources. Accord-
ing to tlie'magnificent -file of the Spanish hifto-
rians, eight centuries of almost uninterrupted

VOL . L war
'Jot. Sim.AiTemannus Hisaor. ItaL Scriptores.Vol. iii. p. 135.

*-v"' depended little upon their own efforts; and the

frequent revolutions which they underwent, were
brought about by the operations of the Princes
w.ho attacked or defended them, rather than by
any thing peculiar in their internal conflitution.

The confi- OF the great kingdoms on this fide of the
tution and
government Alps, Spain is one of the most considerable; and
of Spain. as it was the hereditary domain of Charles V. as

well as the chief source of his power and wealth,
a diftinE knowledge of its political constitution
is of capital importance towards understanding
the tranfadions of his reign.

Conquered THE Vandals and Goths, who overturned the
by the Van- Roman power in Spain, established a form of go-

dai, vernment in thatcountry, and brought in customs

and laws perfecly similar to those which were
introduced into the reft of Europe, by the other
viaorious tribes which acquired settlements there.
For some time, society advanced, among the new
inhabitants of Spain, by the fame Rteps, and
seemed to hold the fame course, as in other Eu-
A. D. 71. ropean nations. To this progress, a sudden flop

was put by the invasions of the SaracensorMoors.

and by the The Gothscould not withstand the efforts of their
Moors. enthufiaftick valour, which subdued Spain, with

the fame impetuous rapidity that distinguishes all
the operations of their arms. The conquerors
introduced into the country in which they ettled
the Mahometan religion, the Arabick language,
the manne s of the East, together with that tafle
for the arts, and that love of elegance and fplen-
dour, which the Caliphs had begun to cultivate
among their fubjeds.

SucIH

A VIEWY OF THE
144

SUCH & ici nobles; as disdained to fubmitSecT. IIf.

to the Poorifhi oke, fled for refuge to the inac- r h, '
cefi:b e mountains of Asturias, and comforted ,nsgraduai-
themselves with enjoying there the exercise of recover.
the Chifian religion, and with maintaining the Spain.
authority of their ancient laws. Being joined
by many of the boldefl and most warlike among
their countrymen, they sallied' out upon the ad-
jacent fettlementsof the Moors, in small parties;
and.making short excursions, were satisfied with
plunder and revenge, without thinking of con-
quest. By degrees, their strength increased,
their views enlarged, a regular government was
effablifhed among them, and they began to aim
at extending their territories. While they
pufhedon their attacks with the unremitting ar-
dour excited by zeal for religion, by the desire
of vengeance, and by the hope of rescuing their
country from oppreflion; while they conducted
their operations with the courage natural to men
who had no other occupation but war, and who
were flrangers to all the arts which corrupt or
enfeeble the mind, the Moors gradually loft ma-
ny of the advantages, to which they had been
indebted for their first success. They threw off
all dependance on the Caliphs *; they neglet-
ed to preserve a close connection with their
countrymen in Africa; their Empire in Spain
was split into many small kingdoms; together
with the arts which they cultivated, the luxury
to which these gave rife, relaxed, in some mea-
sure, the force of their military infitutions, and
abated the vigour of their warlike spirit. The
Moors, however, continued still to be a gallant
people, and poflesed great resources. Accord-
ing to the magnificent tile of the Spanish hifto-
rians, eight centuries of almost uninterrupted

VOL; I. L war
* JOs. Simi).AITmannus Hi flor. ItaL Scr;ptores. Vol. iii. p. 35.

SEcT. ill. war elapsed, and three thousand .even hundred

v-' battles were fought before the last of the Moor-
'49' ifh kingdoms in Spain submitted to the Christian

arms.

The union As the Christians made their conquests upon
of its vri, the Mahometans at various periods, and under
our king-
doms. different leaders, each formed the territory

which he had wrested from the common enemy,
into an independent State. Spain was divided
into as many separate kingdoms, as it contained
provinces, and in each city of note, a petty
Monarch established his throne, and aflumed all
the ensigns of royalty. In a series of years,
however, by the usual events of intermarriages,
or legal fucceflion, or conquests, all these inferi-
or principalities were annexed to the more pow-
erful kingdoms of Castile and of Aragon, and at
length by the fortunate marriage of Ferdinand
and Isabella, the former the hereditary Mo-
narch of Aragon, and the latter raised to the
throne of Castile by the affection of her fubjets,
s,48. all the Spanish crowns were united, and descend-

ed in the tame line.
Their anci- From this period, the political constitution of

laP,", Spain began to assume a regular and uniform

preserved appearance; the genius of government may be
amidit all

ied-,eulu- delineated, and the progress of its laws and
tions; manners may be treated with certainty. Not-

withstanding the singular revolution which had
happened in Spain, and the peculiarity of its
fate, its being so long fubjeted to the Mahome-
tan yoke, the customs introduced by the Van-
dals and Goths had taken Ifch deep root, .m.d
were so thoroughly incorporated with the frame
of its government, that in every province which
the Christians recovered from the Moors, we
find the condition of individuals, as well as he

p.lili a!

political constitution, nearly the fame as in ScrT. Ilr.
other nations of Europe. Lands were held by hi"'
the fame tenure; justice was dispensed in theders their
fame form; the fame privileges were claimed by ttge i
the nobility; and the fame power exercised by imilarto
the Cortes, or general assembly of the king- that of-
dom. Several circumstances contributed to fe- of Europe.
cure this permanence of the feudal inftitutionsin
Spain, notwithstanding the conqueff of the
Moors, which seemed to have overturned them.
Such of the Spaniards, as preserved. their inde-
pendence, adhered to their ancient customs, not
only from attachment to them, but out of anti-
pathy to the Moors, to whose ideas concerning
property and government these customs were so
totally repugnant. Even among the Christians,
who submitted to the Moorish conquerors, and
consented to become their fubjets, ancient cuf-
toms were not entirely abolished. They were
permitted to retain their religion; their laws
concerning private property; their forms ofad-
ministering justice; and their mode of levying
taxes. The followers of Mahomet are the only
enthusiasts, who have united the spirit of tolera-
tion with zeal for making proselytes, and who,
at the fame time that they took arms to propa-
gate the doctrine of their prophet, permitted
such as would not embrace it to adhere to
their own tenets and to praAife their own
rites. To this peculiarity in the genius of the
Mahometan religion, as well as to the desire
of the Moors to reconcile the Christians to their
yoke, it was owing that the ancient manners and
laws in Spain survived the violent Ihock of a
conquest, and continued to subsist, notwith-
standing the introduion of a new religion and
a new form of government into that country. It
is obvious from all these particulars, that the
Christians must have found it extremely easy to

L 2 re-eRLab!i 1

SecT. III. re-cethblifh manners and government on their
^--.'" - ancient foundations, in those provinces of Spain,

which they wiefed successively from the Moors.
A Confideyable part of the people retained such a
fondness for the cftoms, and such g reverence
for the laws of their ancestors, that they wished
to fee them restored with full authority, and
were not only willing but eager to observe the
former, and to recognize the authority of the
latter.

Certain Fe- BUT though the feudal form of government,
thueir iti, with all the institutions that charaterize it, was
tution and thus preserved entire in Castile and Aragon, as
laws. well as in all the kingdoms which depended on

there crowns, there were certain peculiarities in
their political confiitutions which distinguish
them from those of any other country in Europe.

The prero- The regal prerogative, extremely limited in eve-
liitedand ry feudal kingdom, was circumfribed, in Spain,
the immu- within such narrow bounds, as reduced the pow-
peoplemore er of the sovereign almot to nothing. The
extensive. privileges of the nobility were vast in.proportion,

and extended so far as to border on abfolite in-
dependence. The immunities of the cities
were gTeat, they poffieffed considerable influence
in tle Cortes or supreme aflemblies of the nati.
ons, and they aspired at obtainingmore; Such
a state of Society, in which the political machine
was so ill adjusted, and the several members of
the legislature so impropsrly balanced, produced
interior disorders in the kingdoms of Spain,
which rose beyond the pitch of turbulence and
anarchy, usual under the feudal government.
The whole tenor of the Spanish hiftory,confirms
the truth of this observation; and when the mu-
tinous spirit, to which the genius of their policy
gave birth and vigour, was not reirained and
overawed by the immediate dread of thie-Moor-

ifh

ifh arms, it broke out into more frequent infur- ScT. II.
recions against the government of their Princes, ---
as well as rnoe outrageous insults on their dig-
nity, than occur in the annals of any other cotin-
try. These were accompanied at some times
wvith more liberal sentiments concerning the
rights of the people, at other times with more
ele.ated notions concerning the privileges of the
nobles, than were common in other nations.

IN the principality of Catalonia, which was nfaces of

annexed to the kingdom of Aragon, the impati- ti's.
ence of the people to obtain the redress of their
grievances having prormpted them to take
arms against their sovereign John II, they, by a A. D. 46%.
folern deed, recalled the oath of alleigance
which they had sworn to him, declared him and
his posterity to be unworthy of the throne P, and
endeavoured to establish a republican, form of
government, in order to secure the perpetual
enjoyment of that iberty, after which they afpi-
red, . Nearly about the fanme period, the in-
dignation of the Castilian nobility against the
weak and flagitious adminiftra-tionof Henry IV.
having;led them to combine against him, they
arrogated as one of the privileges belonging to
their order, the right of tryingand ofpaffing fen-
tence on their sovereign. That the exercise of
this power rmight- be as public and solemn,. as
the pretension to it was bold,. they frummoned, A. D. 1465.
all the nobility of their party to meet. at Avilay
a. spacious theatre was erected in a plain with-
out. the walls of. the town, an image represent-

L 3 ing

P Ziuita Anales de Arng. torn. iv. 113, 115, &c.
! Ferreras hilt. d'Efpagne, tom. vii. p. 92. P. Orleans

revol. d'Efpagne, tomn. ii.

i . L.

. . Marinzus Siculus
de reb. Hifpan.podScbotilfcrip. HirpanC v1. 429.

SY CT. II1. ing the King, was feated on a throne clad in
'~v~' royal robes, with a crown on its head, a sceptre

in its hand, and the sword of justice by its fide.
The accusation against the King was read, and
the sentence of deposition was pronounced, in
presence of a numerous assembly. At the close
of the first article of the charge, the archbishop
of Toledo'advarced, and tore the crown from
the head of the image; at the close of the second,
the Conde c. Placentia snatched the sword of
justice from its ide; at the iclofe of the third,
the Conde de Benevente wrested the sceptre from
its hand; at tll close of the last, Don Diego
Lopez de Stuniga tumbled it headlong from the
throne. At the fame iitant, Don Alfonlb,
Henry's brother, was proclaimed King of Caf-
tile and Leon in his stead .

THE most daring leaders of faction would

not have ventured on these measures, nor have
conducted them with such publick ceremony, if
the sentiments of the people concerning the roy-
al dignity, had not been so formed by the laws
and policy, to which they were accustomed
both in Castile and Aragon, as prepared them
to approve of such extraordinary proceedings,
or to acquiesce in them.

The confli. IN Aragon, the form of government was mo-
governmentnarchical, but the genius and maxims of it
of Aragon. were purely republican. The Kings, who were

long elective, retained only the shadow of pow-
er; the real exercise of it was in the Cortes or
parliament of the kingdom. This supreme as-
fembly was composed of four different arms or

'members.
'T Marian. hit. lib, xxiii. c. 9.

members. The nobility of the first rank. The SECr. Ill.
Equestrian order, or nobility of the second class. '- "
The representatives of the cities and towns,
whose right to a place in the Cortes, if we may
give credit to the historians of Aragon, was coe-
val with the constitution. Theecclefiatlical or-
der, composed of the dignitaries of the church,
together with the representatives of the inferior
clergy . No law could pass in this assembly
without the assent of every tingle member
who had a right to vote . Without the permif-
sion of the Cortes, no tax could be imposed; no
war could be declared; no peace concluded; no
money could be coined; nor any alteration be
made in the current specie . The power of
reviewing the proceedings of all inferior courts,
the privilege of infpeting every department of
adminifiration, and the right of redrefling all
grievances belonged to the Cortes. Nor did
those who conceived themselves to be aggrieved
address the Cortes in the humble tone of fupp!i-
cants, and petition for redress; they demanded
it as the birth-right of free-men, and required
the guardians of their liberty to decide with re-
fpedt to the points which they laid before them x.
This sovereign court was held, during several
centuries, every year; but, in confequenceofa
regulation introduced about the beginning of the
fourteenth century, it was convened from that
period only once in two years. After it was as-
fembled, the King had no right to prorogue or
diflblve it without its own content; and the fef-
sion continued forty days .

L 4 NOT

, Forma de celebrar Cortes en Aragon. porGeron. artcl.

Martel. ibid. p. 2.
" Hier. Blanca comment. rcr. Aragon. ap. Schot. script.
Hitpan. vol. iii. p. 750.

x Martel. Forma de celebr p. a.
l Hier, Blanca colmment. 763.

SECT. III. NoT satisfied with having erecte there harri-
fs nd ers against the encroachments of the royal prero-
iFdiion gative, nor willing to rely for the preservation
zthe Jufti- their liberties on the vigilance and authority

of an assembly, similar to the diets, Rates gene-
ral, and parliaments, in which the other feudal
nations placed so much confidence, the Arago-
pefe had recourse to an institution peculiar to
themselves, and eleced a uf#iza or supreme
judge. This magitfrate, whose office bore some
resemblance to that of the Ephori in ancient
Sparta, ated as the'guardian of the people, and
the comptroller of the Prince. The person of
the Juftiza was sacred, and his power and jurif-
di'ion almost unbounded. He was the supreme
interpreter of the laws. Not only inferior jud-
ges, but the Kings themselves were bound to
consult him in every doubtful cafe, and to re-
ceive his responses' with implicit deference.
An appeal lay to him from the royal judges, as
well as from those appointed by the barons
within their refpe&ive territories.' Even when
no appeal was made to him, he could interpose
by his own authority, prohibit the ordinary
judge to proceed, take immediate cognizance of
the cause himself, and remove the party accused
to the ManifTifation or prison of the state, to
which no person had access but by his perrifli-
on. His power was exerted with no less vigour
and effect in superintending the administration of
government, than in regulating the course of
justice. It was the prerogative of the Juftiza to
infpe& the conduct of the king. He had a title
to review all the royal proclamations and pa-
tents, and to declare whether or not they were
agreeable to law, and ought to be carried into

execution.

Blanca has prfterved two responses of the Juftiza to

James II. who reigned towards the clofl of the thiitcenth
century, Blanca 748.

execution. He, by his sole authority, could Sect. Il.
exclude any of the King's ministers from the "
conduct of affairs, and call them to answer for
their mal-administration. He himself was ac-
countable to the Cortes alone, for the manner in
which he discharged the duties of this high of-
fice, and performed funCtions of the greatest im-
poztance that could be committed to a sub-
jeet . [GG]

IT is evident from a bare enumeration of the he renl

privileges of the Aragonefe Cortes, as well as ured
of the rights belonging to the Juftiza, that a within nr-
very small portion of power remained in the row inm"1
hands of the King. The Aragonefe seem to
have been solicitous that their Monarchs should
know and feel this state of impotence, to which
they were reduced. Even in swearing allegi.
ance to their sovereign, an at which ought, na-
turally, to be accompanied with professions of
submission and refpet, they devised an oath, in,
such a form, as to remind him of his depen-
lance on his fubjets. " We," said the Jufti-
za to the King in name of his high-fpirited
barons, " who are each of us as good, and who
are altogether more powerful than you, promise
obedience to your government, if you maintain
our rights and liberties; but if not, not." Con-
formnbly to this oath, they established it as a
fundamental article in their constitution, that if
the King should violate their rights and privile-,
ges, it was lawful for the people to disclaim him
as their sovereign, and to elect another in his
place . The attachment of the Aragonef to
this singular constitution of government, was ex-
treme, and their respect for it approached to

superstitious

z Hier. Blanca Comment. p. 747-755.
[GG] NOTE XXX. Hicr. laica Comment 7o.

SECT. II. fiupeftitious veneration [HH]. In the pream-
--v--- ble to one of their laws, they declare that such

was the barrenness of their country, and the po-
verty of the inhabitants, that if it were not on
accourt of the liberties by which they were dif-
tinguifhed from other nations, the people would
abandon it, and go in quest of a settlement to
some more fruitful region b.

Conflituton IN Caflile, there were not such peculiarities
elt ofe in the form of government, as to establish any

Cii remarkable difiintion between it, and that of

the other European nations. The executive
part of government was committed to the King,
but with a prerogative extremely limited. The
legislative authority resided in the Cortes, which
wVs composed of the nobility, the dignified ec-
c!eiiaflicks, and the representatives of the cities.
The assembly of the Cortes in Castile was very
ancient, and seems to have been coeval with the
conflitution. The members of the three diffe-
rent orders, who had a right of suffrage, met
in one place, and deliberated as one collective
body ; the decisions of which were regulated by
the sentiments of the majority. The right of
imposing taxes, of enacting laws, and of redief-
sing grievances belonged to this assembly; apd
in order to secure the assent of the King to such
tfatutes and regulations, as were deemed faluta-
ry or beneficial to the kingdom, it was usual in
the Cortes, to take no ftep towards granting mo-
ney, until all business relative to the publick
welfare was concluded. The representatives of
cities seem to have obtained a feat very eaily in
the Cortes of Castile, and soon acquired iuch

influence
[HH] NO T E XXXI. Hier. Blanca Com p. 751.

influence and redit, as were very uncommon, ScT. 11.
at a period when the splendour and pre-emi- 'vV
nenceof the nobility had eclipsed or annihilated
all other orders of men. The number of mem-
bers from cities bore such a proportion to that of
the whole collecive body, as rendered them ex-
tremely respectable in the Cortes Ill]. The de-
gree of consideration, which they poffehed in
the state, may be estimated by one event. Up-
on the death of John I, a council of regency was A. D. 390.
appointed to govern the kingdom during the mi--
nority of his son. It was composed of an equal
number of noblemen, and of deputies chosen
by the cities; the latter were admitted to the
fame rank, and invested with the fame powers,
as prelates and grandees of the first order c. But
though the members of communities in Castile
were elevated above the condition wherein they
were placed in other kingdoms of Europe;
though they had attained to such political im-
portance, that even the proud and jealous spirit
of the feudal aristocracy could not exclude them
from some hare of government; yet the nobles,
riotwithftanding these acquisitions of' the com-
mons, continued to assert the privileges of their
order, in opposition to the crown, in a tone ex-
tremely high. There was not any body of no-
bility in Europe more distinguished for indepen-
dence of spirit, haughtiness of deportment, and
bold pretensions, than that of Caitilt. The
history of that monarchy affords the most f'rik-
ing examples of the vigilance with which they
observed, and of the vigour with which they op-
posed every scheme of their Kings, 'that tended
to encroach on their jurifdiiol:, to diminish
their dignity, or to abridge their power. Even
in their odinary intercourse with their Mo-

narchs,
[11] NOTE XXXIL

c Mrin. hiat, lib. S. c. 5.

Sr CT. III. narchs, they preserved such a oonfcioufnefs of
_-Vy-, their rank, that the nobles of the first order

claimed it as a privilege to be covered in the
royal presence, and approached their sovereigns
rather as equals than as fubjets.

THE conflitution of the subordinate monar-

chies, which depended on the crowns of Castile
and Aragon, nearly resembled that of the king-
dom to which they were annexed. In all of
them, the dignity and independence of the no-
bles were great; the immunities and power of
the cities were considerable.

various AN attentive observation of the singular fitua-
,'^cfathe tion of Spain, as well as of the various events
thoriy of which occurred there, from the i-nvasion of the
MssPIT Moors to the union of its kingdoms under Ser-

dinand and Ilsbella,- will discover those causes,
to which all the peculiarities in its political con-
flitution, that. have pointed out, ought to be
ascribed.

As the provinces of Spain were wrested. from

the Mahometans gradually and with difficulty,
the nobles, who followed the tfandard of any
eminent leader in there wars, conquered not for
him alone, but for themflves. They claimed
a share in the lands which their valour hadL torn
from the enemy,, and their prosperity and, pow-
er increascd, i proportion as theterritory of the
Prince extended,

Du RtNiQ their perpetual wars with the. Moors,

the Monarchs of Spain depended, so much on
their nobles, tat it became necessary to conci-
liate their good will; by uccefive grants of new

honours

honours and privileges. By the time that any SCT. 111.
Prince could establish his dominion in a conquer- "^
ed province, the greater part of the property
was parcelled out by him among his barons, with
fuchjurifdi6tion and immunities as raised them
almost to sovereign power.

AT the fame time, the kingdoms ereced in Co

many different corners of Spain were extremely
inconsiderable. The petty Monarch was but lit-
tle elevated above his nobles. They, feeling
themselves to be almost his equals, ated as such.
The Kings of such limited domains could nei-
ther command much refpeA, nor possess great
power; and noblemen, o nearly on the fame
level, could not look up to them with that reve-
rence, with which the sovereigns of the great
monarchies in Europe were viewed by their sub-
jeCs [KK].

THESE circumstances concurred in exalting

the nobility, and in deprefling the royal autho-
rity; there were others, which raised the cities
in Spain to consideration and power.

As the open country, during the wars with the

Moors, was perpetually exposed to the excurfi-
ons of the enemy, with whom no peace or truce
was o permanent as to prove any lasting fecu-
rity, felf-prefervation obliged persons of all ranks
to fix their residence in places of strength. The
cafles of the barons, which, in other countries,
afforded a commodious retreat from the depre-
dations of banditti, or from the transient vio-
lence of any. interior commotion, were unable

to
'KK] NOTE XXXIII.

SETr. ITl. to refiff an enemy whose operations were condu&t
' v-" ed with regular and persevering vigour. Cities,

in which great numbers united for their mutual
defence, were the only places to which people
could retire with any profpet of safety. To
this was owing the rapid growth of those cities in
Spain of which the Christians recovered poffeffi-
on. All who fled from the Moorish yoke resort-
ed to them, as to an asylum; and there, the
greater part of those, who took the field against
the Mahometans, established their families.

EACI- of these cities, during a longer or hort-

er course of years, was the capital of a little
slate, and enjoyed all the advantages, which ac-
celerate the increase of inhabitants in every place
that is the feat of government.

THE number of cities in Spain, at the begin-

ning of the fifteenth century, was considerable,
and they were peopled far beyond the proportion
which was common in other parts of Europe,
except in Italy and the Low-Countries. The
Moors had introduced manufactures into there
cities, while under their dominion. The Chri-
sians, who, by intermixture with them, had
learned their arts, continued to cultivate these.
The trade offeveral of the Spanish towns appears
to have been considerable, and the spirit of
commerce continued to preserve the number
of their inhabitants, as the sense of danger had
filft induced them to crowd together.

As the Spanish cities were populous, many of

the inhabitants were of a rank superior to those
v.ho rcfidcd in towns in other countries of Eu-

rop:,

rope. That cause, which contributed chiefly to SECT. 1l1.
their population, affected equally persons of ^v
every condition, who flocked thither promifcu-
oufly, in order to find shelter, or in hopes of
making a fRand there against the eemy, with
greater advantage than in any other station. The
persons elected as their representatives in the
Cortes by the cities, or promoted to offices of
trust and dignity in the government of the com-
munity, were often, as will appear from tranf-
ations which I hall hereafter relate, of such
considerable rank in the kingdom, as reflzeted
lufire on their conftitueats, and on the Rations
wherein they were placed.

As it was impofible to carry on a continual

war against the Moors, without some other mili-
tary force, than that which the barons were
obliged to bring into the field, in consequence
of the feudal tenures, it became necessary to have
some troops, particularly a body of light cavalry,
in constant pay. It was one of the privileges of
the nobles, that their lands were exempt from
the burden of taxes. The charge of supporting
the troops requisite for the publick safety, fell
wholly upon the cities; and their Kings, bing
obliged frequently to apply to them for aid,
found it necessary to gain their favour by concef-
sions, which extended their immunities, and ad-
ded to their wealth and power.

WHEN the influence of all these circumfran-

ces, pculiar to Spain, is added to the general
and corrmmon caues, which cntribhitjd to ag-
grandize cities in other countri.s of E:!rope, this
will fully account for the extelfive p i ileges

v I:ich

SEci. 11I. which they acquired, as well as the xtraordi-
bov- nary consideration to which they attained, in all

the Spanish kingdoms ILL].

MeCuresof B these exorbitant privileges of the nobility,
drficlin, and this unusual power of the cities in Spain, the
order to e- royal prerogative was hemmed in on every hand,
tend their
power, and reduced within very narrow bounds. Senfi-
particularly ble of this, and impatient of such restraint, dif-
ndrand ferent Monarchs endeavoured, at variousjunc-
fabclla. tures, to enlarge their own jurifdiEion, and to

circumscribe that of their fubjets. Their pow-
er, however, or their abilities were so unequal
to the undertaking, that their efforts were attend-
ed with little success. But when Ferdinand and
Isabella found themselves at the head of all the
united kingdoms of Spain, and delivered from
the danger and interruption of domeflick Wars,
they were not only in a condition to resume, but
were able to prosecute with advantage, the
schemes of extending the prerogative, which
their ancestors had attempted in vain. Ferdi-
nand's profound sagacity in concerting his mea-
fures, his persevering industry in conducting
them, and his uncommon address in carrying
them into execution, fitted' him admirably for
an undertaking which required all thee talents.

rerdinind's As the overgrown power, and high pretenfi-
difei ent
,tihmes for ons of the nobility were what the Monarchs of
biid:ing Spain felt most sensibly, and bore with the
r ^'Tr,1" greatest ipatience, the great object of Ferdi-
I,"werofthe nand's policy was to reduce there within more
nobilit. moderate bounds. Under various pretexts,

ibmetimes by violence, more frequently in con-
fiquence of decrees obtained in the courts of law,

he
[LL] NOTE XXXIV.

he wrested from the barons a great part of the SECT. II.
lands which had been granted to them by the '"
inconsiderate bounty of former Monarchs, par-
ticularly during the feeble and profuse reign of
his predeceflor Henry IV. He did not give the
entire conduct of affairs to persons of noble birth,
who were accustomed to occupy every department
of importance in peace or in war, as if it had been
a privilege peculiar to their order, to be employ-
ed as the sole counsellors and ministers of the
crown. He often transacted bufiners of great
consequence without their intervention, and com-
mitted many offices of power and trust to new
men, devoted to his interest d. He introduced a
degree of fiate dignity into his court, which being
unknown in Spain, while it remained split into
many small kingoms, taught the nobles to ap-
proach their sovereign with more ceremony, and
gradually rendered him the objet of greater de-
ference and refpet.

THE annexing the masterships of the three Particui'r-
military orders of St. Jago, Calatrava, and Al- byn ae

0

"`'r '~" ` mXJr ng the

cantara, to the crown, was another expedient, grand'ma-
by which Ferdinand greatly augmented the reve- rn'hpeef
nue and power of the Kings of Spain. These ,ordrs to
orders were instituted in imitation of those of "hcr"'
the Knights Templars and of St. John of Jeru-
faler, on purpose to wage perpetual war with
the Mahometans, and to protec the pilgrims
vho visited Compoltella, or other places of emi-
nent fantity in Spain. The zeal and super-
flition of the ages, in which they were founded,
prompted persons of every rank to bestow luch
liberal donations on these holy warriors, that, in
a short time, they engrossed a considerable share
in the property and wealth of the kingdom. The

d Zurita anales de Arag. tom. vi. p. 2.

master-
VOL. I.

M

SzCT. .: miaftzf:lips of hefe orders came to be tations
>3--*. of the greatest power and opulence to which a

Spanish nobleman could be adanced. There
high dignities were in the disposal of the Knights
of the Order, and placed the persons on whom
tfey conferred them almost on a level with their
sovereign [MM]. Ferdinand, unwilling that
the nobility, whom be confidered as already too
formidable, should derive filch additional credit
and influence form poffefling the government of
t-hee wealthy fraternities, was solicitous to wrest
it out of their hands, and to vest i in the crown.

A. D. 1476, His measures for accomplishing this, were wifely
d 493. planned, and executed with vigour . By ad-

dress, by pomifes, and by threats, he prevailed
on the Knights of each Order to place Iabella
and him at the head of it. Innocent VIII. and
Alexander VI. gave this election the faneion of
papal authority '; and subsequent Pontiffs ren-
dered the annexation of there masterships to the
crown perpetual.

And by cir- WHILE Ferdinand, by this measure, dimi-
cumfcti*b nifhed the power and influence of the npbility,
iig theja-
rifdiaion of and added new lustre or authority to. the crown,
the nobility. he was taking other important fleps with a

view to the fame object. The sovereign jurif-
diction which the feudal barons exercised with-
in their own territoris, was the pride and di-
ftin'tion of their order. To have invaded
openly a privilege which they prized so highly,
and in defence of which they would have run so
eagerly to arms, was a measure too daring for a
Prince of Ferdinand's cautious temper. He took

[MM] NOTE XXXV
e Marian. hist. lib. xxv c. .
f Zurita anales tom. v. p. 22 Elii Anton. Nebriflenfis

reruii a Ferdinand & Elizabe geltarum decades ii. apud
Schot. script. Hifpan. i. 86o.

advantage,

advantage, however, of an opportunity which the Sicr. Il
tace of his kingdoms and the spirit of his people V
presented him, in order to undermine what hb
durst mot assault. The inceflant depredations of
the Moors, the want of difoipline among the
troops which were employed to oppose them, the
frequent civil wars between the crown and the no-
bility, as well as the undifcerning rage with which
the barons carried on their private wars with each
other, filled all the provinces of Spain with dif-
order. Rapine, outrage, and murder, became so
comaon, as not only to interrutpt commerce, but
in a great measure to suspend a1 intercourse be.
tween one place and another. That security and
proteifon which men expe& from entering into
civil fciety, cased almoff totally. nterior order
and police, while the feudal ifitutions remained
in vigour, were fe little objeea 'of attention, an
the. adminiftratios ofjuftice was ia eClemely fe'
ble,-that it waid have been vain'.trliiv expec&6
rdlief from the established laws, or the ordinary'
j,udges; But .he evil becarhfid imvwlerable, andl
the inhabitanct of cities, who wdre the chief f--a
fiers,. grew so ipatient of this!r aarchy, thatl
felf-prefervation forced them to)he,recourfe tn
an extraordinarr remedy. A bout the rnidtee of 6o,.
the thirteenth century, he cities in the kingdom)
ofAragon, and after their example those in Castile,
formed themselves' into an afiociation, diffin-
guifhed by the' name of the Holy Brothtrhod.
They exa&ed a certaincontribution from eachiof
the aflociated towns; they levied a confiderab!a
body of trocps, in order to prote&t travellers, and'
to pursue criminalsi; they appointed judges, who
opened'their courts' in various parts of the king-
dom. Whoever was guilty of murder, robbery,
or of any a that. violated the publick peace,,
and. was sizd! by, the troops, of the Brotberhood,.
was carried before their own judges, who, with-

M , out

SecT.IT. Oiit paying any regard to the exclusive and fove.
'-^t'reign jurifdidion which the lord of the place

might claim, tried and condemned the criminals.
By means of this, the prompt and impartial ad-
tfiniftration of jutilice was rtftored; and together
with it, internal tranquillity a;d order began to
return. The nobles alone murmured at this fa-
lutary institution. They complained of it as an
encroachment on one of their moit valuable pri-
vileges. They remonstratcd against it in ar high
tone; and, on tome occasions, refused to grant
any aid to the crown, unless it were abolished.
Ferdinand, however, was sensible not only of the
good effets of the Holy Brotherhood with re-
spect to the police of his kingdoms, but perceiv-
ed its tendency to abridge, and at length to anni-
hilate the territorial jurifdition of the nobility.
Hecountenanced the institution on every occasion.
He supported it with the whole force of royal au-
thority; and besides the expedients employed
by him in common with the other monarchs of
Europe, he availed himself of this institution,
which was peculiar to his kingdom, in order to
limit and abolifh'that independent jurifdidion of
the nobility, which was no les inconiftent with
the authority of the Prince, than with the order
of society [NN].

Notwith- -BUT though Ferdinand by these measures
fhndingha considerably enlarged the boundaries of prero-
government gative, and acquired a degree of influence and
extremey power far beyond what any of his predecffors had
free. enjoyed, yet the limitations of the royal autho-

rity, and the barriers against its encroachments,
continued to be many and firong. The spirit of
liberty was vigorous among the people of Spain
the spirit of independence was high among the
nobility; and though the love of glory, peculiar

[rN] NOTE XXXVI.

to

to the Spaniardsin-every period of their history, SECT. IlI.
prompted themnto Tupport Ferdinand with zeal ~
in his foreign operatioos, and to afford him such
aid as enabled-himn not only to undertake but to
execute great enterprizes; he rtigned over his
fubjets with ajurifdiCtion less extensive than that
of any of the great monarchs in Europe It will
appear from many paafiges in the following hifto-
ry, that, during a considerable part of the reign
of his successor Charles V. the prerogative of the
Spanish crown was equally circumscribed.

THE ancient government and laws in France c,,nitu-

so nearly resembled thole of the other feudal tondgo-
kingdoms, that such a detail with refped to them of Fiance.
as was necessary, in order to convey ome idea of
the nature and effeds of the peculiar inflitutions
which took place in Spain, would be superfluous.
In the view which I have exhibited of the means
by which the French monarchs acquired such
full command ofthe national force of their king-
dom,.as enabled them to engage in extelfive
fchetmes of foreign operation, I have already
pointed out the great steps by which they ad-
vanced towards a more ample poffelfion of poli
tical :power, and a more uncontrouled exercise
of their royal prerogative. All that now remains
is to take notice of such particulars 'in the coniti-
turion of France, 'as serve either to diftingtilh it
from that of other countries, or tend to throw
any light on the tranfiftions of that period to
which'the following history extends.

'UNPER the French monarchs of the first race, Pr,,er,
the royal prerogative was very inconsiderable. 'Ar','li,:'
The General Assemblies of the nation, which met uni,.'r tie
annually at stated le;afons, extended their autho- Ki, g.
rity to every department of government. The
power ds elecing kings, of enacting laws, of re-

M 3 drcslling

SE cr . dfefling grievances, of pafring judgment in the
- - lat14 resort, with refped to every perfcn and to

every cause, and of conferring donations on the
Prince, resided in this great convention of the
Under the nation. Under the feeond race of Kings, not-

veithftanding the power and splendour which the
conquefis of Charlemagne added to the crown,
the general afletrblies of the iations continAed
to poflefs extensive authority. , The right of de-
termining which of the royal family hbould be
placed on the throne was vested in them. . The
monarchs elected by their suffrage were accu-
tomed regularly to call and to consult them with
refpec to every affair of importance to the. fate,
and without their content: no.'law was pafred,
and no new tax was levied.
Under the BUT, by the time that Hugh Capet, the.fa-

tr ther of the third race of Kings, took. potffeion

of the throne of France, fach changes had hap-
pened in the. political state of the kingdom, as
considerably affected the power and jurifdiOion
of the general aembly of the nation. The
royal authority in the hands of the degenerate
posterity of Charlemagne, had dwindled into in-
significance and contempt. Every considerable
proprietor of land had formed his territory into
a barony, almost independent of! the sovereign.
The dukes or governors of provinces, the counts
or governors of towns and frall. diflrids, and
the great officers of the crown, had rendered
there dignities, originally granted only during
pleasure or for life, hereditary in their families.
Each of these had usurped all the rights which
hitherto had been deemed the diftindions of
royalty, particularly the privileges of dispensing
jutlice within their own domains, of coining mo-
ney, and of waging war. Every difrit was go-
verned by local customs, acknowledged a di-

flin&

tind lord5 and pursued a separate itereft. The SECT. III
formality of doing homage to their sovereign ~'
was almost the only ad of fubjeCion which
haughty barons would perform, end that bound
them no farther than they were willing to ac.
knowledge its obligation [OO.].

IN a kingdom broken into so many indepen- The pwer

dent baronies, hardly any common principle of neral As-
union remained; and the general assembly in its emrbly leis

confider-

deliberations could scarce confider the nation as abe and
forming one body, or etablifh common regula- cxtentive.
tions to be of equal force in every part. With-
in the immediate domains of the crown the King
might publilh laws, and they were obeyed, be-
cause there he was acknowledged as the only
lord. But if he had aimed at rendering these ge-
neral, that would have alarmed the barons as an
encroachment upon the independence of their
jurifdiion. The barons, with no less care, avoid-
ed the enacting of general laws, beeaufe the exe-
cution of them must have been vested in the
King, and wuld have enlarged that paramount
power which was the object of their jealouCy.
Thus, under the descendants of Hugh Capet,
the States General (for that was the naime by
which the supreme assembly of the French nation
canme then to be distinguished) loft their legifla-
tive authority, pr at leat entirely relilquiifhed
the exercise of it. Fronm that period, the juri-
diCtion of the States General extended no farther
than to the imposition of new axes, the d:ter-
mination of questions with refpet to the tight
of fucceflion to the crown, the fettling of the
regency when the preceding monarch had nt
fixed it by his will, and the prefcnting ren(,n-
ftrathces enumerating the grievances of which
the nation wtihed to obtain redrefi.

[oo] NOTE XXXVI.

M 4 As,

SECT. III. As, during several centuries, the monarchs of
"'-^-' Europe seldom demanded extraordinary subsidies

of their fubjets, and the other events which re-
quired the interposition of the States, rarely oc.
curred, their meetings in France were not f.e-
quent. They were summoned occasionally by
their Kings, when compelled by their wants or
by their fears to have recourse to their aid ; but
they did not, like the Diet in Germany, the
Cortes in Spain, or the Parliament in England,
form an essential member of the constitution, the
regular exertion of whose powers was requisite
to give vigour and order to government.

The crown WHEN the States of France ceased to exercise
begins to legislative authority, the Kings began to assume
acquire le-
gifi.ve it. They ventured at first- on ats of legislation
authority, with great reserve; and after taking every pre-

caution that could prevent their fubjets from be-
ing alarmed at the exercise of a new power. They
did not at once issue their ordinances in a tone
of authority and command. They treated with
their fubjeds; they pointed out what was belt;
and allured them to comply with it. By de-
grees, however, as the prerogative of the crown
extended, and as the supreme jurifdieion of the
royal courts came to be established, the Kings of
France assumed more openly the stile and autho-
rity of law-givers, and before the beginning of
the fifteenth century, the complete legislative
power was vested in them [PP].

and the HAVING fcured this important acquisition,
p]wntrf the steps that led to the right of imposing
evvy;ng
tx s. taxes were rendered few and easy. The peo-

ple, accuflomed to fee their overcigns, by their
sole authority, issue ordinances which regulat-
ed points of the greatest consequence with re-
fpedt to the property of their fubjeds, were not

[PPJ NOTE XXXVII.

ala;-med

aiarmed when they were required, by the royal SEcT.Ill.
edits, to contribute certain fums towards ftup'---
plying the exigencies of government, and car-
rying forward the measures of the nation. When
Charles VII. and Louis XI. first ventured to ex-
ercife this new power, in the manner which I
have already described, the gradual increase of
the royal authority had so imperceptibly prepar-
ed the minds of the people of France for this
innovation, that it excited no commotion in the
kingdom, and seems scarce to have given rife to
any murmur or complaint.

WH EN the Kings of France had thus engrof- Cevern-
fed every power which can be exerted in govern- mret of

France be-

ment; when the right of making laws, of levy- comes pure-
ing money, of keeping an army of mercenaries iY mo" -
in conltant pay, of declaring war and of con-
cluding peace centered in the crown, the confti-
tution of the kingdom, which, under the first
race of Kings, was nearly democratical, which,
under the second race, became an ariflocracy,
terminated, under the third race, in a pure mo-
narchy. Every thing that tended to preserve the
appearance, or revive the memory of the ancient
mixed government, seems from that period to
have been induflrioufly avoided. During the
long and aive reign of Francis I. the variety as
well as extent of whore operations obliged him
to lay many heavy impositions on his fubjets,
the States General of France were not once as-
fembled, nor were the people once allowed to ex-
ert the power of taxihg thenfelves, which, ac-
cording to the original ideas of feudal govern-
ment, was a right ffential to every fiee-man.

Two things, however, remained, which The exer-

moderated the exercise of the regal preroga- 'if'"r"-
tive, and restrained it within such bounds ntrinci by

t:he pivi-
as lege of tle

nobility.

169

SecT III. as preserved the conflitution of France from de-

c-t3 ' generating into mere despotism. The .rights and

privileges claimed by the nobility must be confi-
dered as one barrier againif the absolute domi-
nion of the crown. Though the nobles of
France had loft that political power which was
vested in their order as a body, they still retain-
ed the personal rights and pre-eminence which
they d6rived from their rank, They preserved a
consciousness of elevation above other classes of
citizens; an exemption from burdens to which
they were ubjet&; a contempt of the occupations
in which they were engaged; the privilege of
assuming ensigns that indicated their dignity; a
title to be treated with a certain degree of defe-
rence during peace; and a claim to various di-
itin&ions when in the field. Many of these pre-
tensions were not founded on the words of ita.
tutes, or derived from positive laws; they were
defined and ascertained by the maxims of honour,
a title more delicate, but no less sacred. These
rights, established and proteted by a principle
equally vigilant in guarding, and intrepid in de-
fending them, are to the Sovereign himself ob-
jeds of refpct and veneration. Wherever they
fland in its way, the royal prerogative is bound-
ed. The violence of a Despot may exterminate
such an order of men; but as long as it subsists,
and its ideas of personal diftinedion remain entire,
the power of the Prince has limits e.

As in France, the body of nobility was very

numerous, and retained an high sense of their
own pre-eminence, to this we may ascribe, in a
great rneafure, the mode of exercising the royal
prerogative which peculiarly distinguishes the go-
vernment of that kingdom, An intermediate

r Dcs Efprita des Loix, liv. ii. .. 4. Dr. Ferguson's
Ettay on the Hill. of Civil Society, part i. fee. o.

order was placed between the Monarch and his SCT. 11.
other fubjtes, and in every ad of authority it --
became necessary to attend to its privileges, and
not only to guard against any real violation of
thee, but to avoid any suspicion of its being pof-
fible that they might be violated. Thus a species
of government was eflablifhed in France, un-
known in the ancient world, that of a monarchy,
in which the power of the sovereign, though un-
confiined by any legal or confitutional retraint,
has certain bounds set o it by the ideas which
one class of his fubjeds entertain concerning their
own dignity.

THE jurifdicion of the Parliaments of France, And by the

particularly that of Paris, was the other barrier jurifdiion
which served to confine the exercise of the royal li^mentt:
prerogative within certain limits. The parlia- particularly

that of P-

ment of Paris was originally the court of the ris.
Kings of France, to which they committed the
supreme adminillration ofjuftice within theirown
domains, as well as the power of deciding with
refpec to all cafes brought before it by appeals
from the courts of the barons. When the time
and place of its meeting were fixed, when not
only the form of its procedure, but the principles
on which it decided, were rendered regular and
oonfltent, when every cause of importance wag
finally determined there, and when the people
became accufomed to retort thither at to the fu-
preme temple ofjuftice, the parliament of Paris
rose to high eflimation in the kingdom, its mem-
bers acquired dignity, and its decrees were rubmit-
ted to,with deference. The Kings ofFrance,when
they firfl btgan to assume the legislative powet, in
order to reconcile the minds of their people to
this new exertion of prerogative, produced their
ediCls and ordinances in the parliament of Paris,
that they might be approved of and regifsered

there,

SECT. Ill. there, before they were published and declared to
'---»- be of authority in the kingdom. During the

intervals between the meetings of the States Ge-
neral of the kingdom, or under those reigns when
the States General were not assembled, the Mo-
narchs of France were accustomed to consult the
parliament of Paris with refped to the mofl ar-
duous affairs of government, and frequently re-
gulated their conduct by its advice, in declaring
war, in concluding peace, and in other tranf-
adtions of public concern. Thus there was
erected in the kingdom a tribunal which became
the great depository of the laws, and by the
uniform tenor of its decrees it established prin-
ciples of justice and forms of proceeding which
were confidered as o sacred, that even the ove-
reign power of the Monarch durst not venture
to disregard or to violate them. The members
of this illu'strious body, though they neither pof-
fess legislative authority, nor can be confidered
as the representatives of the people, have availed
themselves of the reputation and influence which
they had acquired among their countrymen, in
order to make. a fsand to the utmost of their abi-
lity againfl <very unprecedented and exorbitant
exertion of the prerogative. In every period of
the French history, they have merited the praile
of being the virtuous hut feeble guardians of the
rights and privileges of the nation [QJQ].

c.nfiliuti. THE kingdom extends to the confines of the
,",nrgetrf German Empire, from which Charles V. derived
theO(rman his title of highest dignity. In explaining th'e poli-
' ''c. ticalconltitution of this vast and complex body at

the beginning of the sixteenth century, I hall
avoid entering into such a detail as would in-
volve my readers in that inextricable labyrinth,

[ QQJ NOTE XXXIX.

which

which it frmed by the multiplicity of its tribu- SCT. 11.
nals, the number of its members, their interfer- '-'
ing rights, and by the endless difcuflions or re-
finements of the public lawyers of Germany with
refpedt to all thele.

THE empire of Charlemagne was a flrudure Itsflte un-

erected in so short a time that it could not be mage and
permanent. Under his immediate successor it his dtren
began to totter; and it Coon fell to pieces. The dans.
crown of Germany was separated for ever from
that of France, and the descendants of Charle-
magne eftablifled two great monarchies so fituat-
ed as to give rife to a perpetual rivalfhip and en-
mity between them. But the Princes of the race
of Charlemagne who were placed on the Impe-
rial throne, were not altogether Co degenerate, as
those of the fame family who reigned in France.
In the hands of the former the royal authority
retained ome vigour, and the nobles of Germany,
though poffeifed of extensive privileges as well
as ample territories, did not so early attain inde-
pendence. The great offices of the crown con-
tinued to be at the disposal of the sovereign,
and during a long period, fiefs remained in
their, original slate, without becoming heredita-
ry and perpetual in the families to which they
had been granted.

AT length the German branch of the fa- Othrr i-

mily of Charlemagne became extinet, and his li eare
feeble descendants who reigned in France had ihe mp,
funk into such contempt, that the Germans,' ''al ig
without looking towards them, exercised the
right inherent in a free people; and in a ge-
neral affenbly of the nation elected Conrad A. L,. 91.
Count of Franconia Emperor. After him Henry
of Saxony, and his descendants the three Othos,
were placed, in fuccefflon, on the Imperial throne,

by

SECT. III. by the suffrages of heircotariymen. The exten.
<-^' five territories of the Saxon Emperors, their emi-

nent abilities andenterprizinggenius not only add-
ed new vigour o the Imperial dignity, but aifed
A. D. 951. it to higher power and pre-eminence. Otho the

Great marched at the head of a numerous army
into Italy, and after the example of Charlemagne,
gave law to that country. Every power there
recognized his authority. He created Popes and
deposed them by his overeign mandate. He- an-
nexed the kingdom of Italy to the German Em-
pire. Elated with his success, he assumed the
title of Caesar Augulfus hb and a prince born
in the heart of Germany pretended to be the fuc-
ceffor of the Emperors of ancient Rome, and
claimed a right to the fame power and: prerogative.

The Ger- BUT while the Emperors, by means of these
rya^nuire new titles, and new dominions, gradually a-
independent quired additional power and plendour, the no-
and fove- bility of Germany went on at the fame time ex-
reign au-
thority. tending their privileges and jurifdi&tion. The

situation of affairs was favourable to their at-
tempts. The vigour which Chartemagne had
given to government quickly relaxed. The
inability of rome of his successors was such, as
would have encouraged vassals left enterprizing
than the nobles of that age, to have claimed
new rights and to have assumed new powers.
The civil wars in which other Emperors were
engaged, obliged them to pay perpetual court to
their fubjecs on whose iupport tlhey depended,
and not only to connive at their usurpations, but
to permit and even to authorise them. Fiefs
became gradually hereditary. Theylwere tranf-
mitted not only in the diireft, but i the collateral
line. The investiture of them was demanded not

h Annalifia Samo, &c, a Struv. Corp. vol. L pi 4.6.

only

only by male but by female heirs. Every baron SECT. UI.
began to exercise sovereign jurii'ion within '
his own domains and the Dukes and Counts
of Germany took wide teps towards rendering
their territories diftind and independent States'.
The Saxon Emperors observed their progress, The Cer-
and were aware of its tendency. But as they ,an ecie-
could not hope to humble vasals already grown d to the
too potent, unless they had turned their whole fame pow-
(orce as well as attention to that enterprize,'
and as they were extremely intent on their ex-
peditions into Italy, which they could not under-
take without the concurrence of their nobles,
they were olicitous not to alarm them by any
dire&C attack on their privileges and juritdidi-
ons. They aimed, however, at undermining
their power, and inconsiderately bestowed addi-
tional territories, and accumulated new honours
on the clergy, in hopes that this order might
serve as a counterpoise to that of the nobility in
any future fitruggle .

THE unhappy effects of this fatal error in Te fatal
policy were quickly felt. Under the empe- efF' of

aggrandiz-

rors of the Franconian and Swabian lines, ing the
whom the Germans by their voluntary eletion clergy.
placed on the Imperial throne, a new face of ' ''
things appeared, and a scene was exhibited in
Germany, which astonished all Christendom at
that time, and which in the present age ap-
pears almost incredible. The Popes, hitherto
dependant on the Emperors, and indebted
for their power as well as dignity to their bene-
ficence and protedion, began to claim a fu-
perior jurifdition; and in virtue of authority
which they pretended to derive from heaven,

i Pfeffel. abrege, p. 120, 15z. Lib. Faudor. tit r.
k PficffL abrreg, p t54e.

tried,

SECT. III tried, condemned, excommunicated and deposed
'-v-' ttheir former masters. Nor is this to be confider-

ed merely as a frantic ally of passion in a pontiff
intoxicated with high ideas concerning the ex-
tent of priestly domination, and the plenitude
of papal power. Gregory VII. was able as well
as daring. His presumption and violence were
accompanied with political discernment and saga-
city. He had observed that the Princes and
nobles of Germany, had acquired such confider-
able territories and such extenfivejurifdiEion as
rendered them not only formidable to the Empe-
rors, but disposed them to favour any attempt
to circumscribe their power. He foresaw that
the ecclesiastics of Germany, raised almoff to
a level with its Princes, were ready to support
any person who would stand forth as the protec-
tor of their privileges and independence. With
both of these Gregory negooiated, and had fe-
cured many devoted adherents among them, be-
fore he ventured to enter the lifts against the head
of the Empire.

The con- HE began his rupture with Henry IV. upon a
tisbhe pretext that was popular and plausible. He com-
Popes and plained of the venality and corruption with which
Emperot, the Emperor had granted the invefliture of be-
sequences nefices to ecclesiastics. He contended that this
of thef. right belonged to him as head of the church; he

required Henry to confine himself within the
bounds of his civiljurifdidion, and to abstain
for the future from such sacrilegious encroach-
ments on his spiritual dominion. All the cen-
fures of the church were denounced againRt
Henry, because he refused to relinquish those
powers which his predecessors had uniformly
exercised. The most considerable of the German
Princes and ecclesiastics were excited to take
arms against him. His mother, his wife, his

sons

sons were wrought upon to disregard all the ties SeCT. III.
of blood as well as of duty, and to join the par- ' "
ty of his enemies k. Such were the successful
arts with which the court of Rome inflamed the
fuperRitious zeal and conducted the factious spirit
of the Germans and Italians, that an Emperor,
distinguished not only for many virtues, but
pofieffed of considerable talents, was at length
obliged to appear as a supplicant at the gate of
the castle in which the Pope resided, and to fland
there, three days, barefooted, in the depth of
winter, imploring a pardon, which at length he A. D. 1077.
obtained with difficulty RR].

THIS at of humiliation degraded the Impe-

rial dignity. Nor was the depression only mo
mentary. The contest between Gregory and
Henry gave rife to the two great factions of the
Guelfs and Ghibellines; the former of which
supporting the pretensions of the Popes, and the
latter defending the rights of the Emperor, kept
Germany and Italy in perpetual agitation during
three centuries. A regular system for hum-
bling the Emperors and cireumfcribing their
power was formed, and adhered to uniformly
throughout that period. The Popes, the free The mpe.
States in Italy, the nobility and ecclefiafticks of ial uthori.
Germany, were all interested in its success and tdeciilnes
notwithstanding the return of ome hort inter.
vals of vigour, under the administration of a
few able Emperors, the Imperial authority con.
tinued to decline. During the anarchy of the A D. D.56.
long interregnum subsequent to the death of
William of Holland, it dwindled down to no-
thing. Rodulph of Hapsburg, the founder A. . i,73.
of the house of Austria, and who sirs opened
the way to its future grandeur, was at hngth

k Annal. German. ap. Struv . p. 325.
[RR]N OT E XL.
VOL. I. N ekcted

S cr. ls. elected Emperor, not that he might re-establish
'"'~ and extend the Imperial authority, but because

his territories and influence were o inconfidera-
ble as not to excite the jealousy of the German
Princes, who were willing to preserve the forms
of a constitution, the power and vigour of which
they had destroyed. Several of his successors
were placed on the Imperial throne from the
fame motive; and almost every remaining pre-
rogative was wrested out of the hands of feeble
Princes unable to exercise or to defend them.

A total DURING this period of turbulence and confu-
chngein sion the constitution of the Germanick body un-
the political
constitution derwent a total change. The ancient names of
of the Em- courts and magistrates, together with the origi-

nal forms and appearance of policy were pre-
served; but such new privileges andjurifdiitions
were assumed, and o many various rights efta-
blifhed, that the fame species of government no
longer subsisted. The Princes, the great nobi-
lity, the dignified eeccefiafticks, the free cities
had taken advantage of the interregnum, which
I have mentioned, to establish or to extend their
usurpations. They claimed and exercised the
right of governing their refpeitive territories
with full sovereignty. They acknowledged no
superior with relpet to any point, relative to
the interior administration and police of their
domains. They enacted laws, imposed taxes,
coined money, declared war, concluded peace,
and exerted every prerogative peculiar to inde-
pendent States. The ideas of order and politi-
cal union which had formed the various pro-
vinces of Germany into one body were en-
tirely loft; and the ociety must have di(folv-
ed, if the forms of feudal subordination had not
preserved such an appearance of connection or

dependance
178

dependance among the various members of the Sc? III.
community, as pieferved it from falling to pieces. --

THIS bond of union, however, was extreme- Expedients

ly feeble; and no principle remained in the Ger- for puttoin
man constitution of sufficient force to maintain this ate of
public order, and hardly to ascertain perfonal*"nchy
security. From the acceflion of Rodulph of
Hapiburgh, to the reign of Maximilian, the im-
mediate predecefor of Charles V. the Empire
felt every calamity which -a state must endure
when the authority of government is o much
relaxed as to have loft all vigour. The causes
of dissention among that valt number of mem-
bers which comproed the Germanick body, were
infinite and unavoidable. These gave rife to
perpetual private wars, carried on with all the
violence of resentment when unrestrained by
superior authority. Rapine, outrage, exactions,
became universal. Commerce was interrupted,
industry suspended and every part of Germany
resembled a country which an enemy had plun-
dered and laid desolate 1. The variety of expe-
dients employed with a view to restore order and
tranquillity, prove that the grievances occasion-
ed by this fate of anarchy had grown intolerable.
Arbiters were appointed to terminate the diffe-
rences among the several states. The cities unit-
ed in a league, the object of which was to check
the rapine and extortions of the nobility. The
nobility formed confederacies, on purpose to
maintain tranquillity among their own order.
Germany was divided into several Circles, in
each of which a provincial and partialjurifdidion
was established, to supply the placaof a publick
and common tribunal m.

I See above, page 45 and note xxi. Datt. de pace publi-
cA imper p. zS, no. 3p. P 28, no. 6. p. 3, no. 11.

I Datt. pafim. Struv. Corp. His. i. 51o, &c.

N a Bur

SZCT.III. BUT all these remedies were so fruitless, that

v...~ they served only to demonstrate the violence of

ly by the In- that anarchy which prevailed, and the inefficacy
thit eOri. of the means employed to corret it. At length
*1 Chambe.'Maximilian, by instituting the Imperial chamber,
A. D. 4'$. a tribunal composed of judges named partly by

the emperor, partly by the several States, and
vested with authority to decide finally concerning
all differences among the members of the Ger-
manick body, re-established publick order in the
A. D. t511. Empire. A few years after, by giving a new

form to the Aulick council, which takes cogni.
zance of all feudal causes, and such as belong
to the Emperor's immediate jurisdiction, he re-
stored ome degree of vigour to the Imperial
authority.

Atthe be- BUT notwithstanding the salutary effets of
ginning of a t
the ix- these regulations and improvements, the political
teenth cn- conflitution of the German Empire, at the corn-
tury, the
Empire an mencement of the period of which I propose to
afrociation write the history, was of a species so peculiar, as
of overeign
tater. not to resemble perfectly any form of govern-

ment known either in the ancient or modern
world. It was a complex body, formed by the
afociation of several States, each of which pof-
selfed overeign and independentjurifdiion with-
in its own territories. Of all the members which
composed this united body, the Emperor was the
head. In his name all decrees and regulations
with refpet to points of common concern, were
iflued; and to him the power of carrying them
into execution was committed. But this ap-
pearance of monarchical power in the Emperor
was more than counterbalanced by the influ-
ence and authority of the Princes and States
of the Empire in every a of adminiftrati-
on. No law extending to the whole body
could pass, no resolution that asseted the ge-
neral interest could be taken, without the ap-

probation

probation of the Diet of the Empire. In this ar- StiT. fII.
Qmbly, every sovereign Prince and State of the V
Germanick body had a right to be present, to de.
liberate, and to vote. The decrees or Recesses of
the Diet were the laws of the Empire, which the
Emperor was bound to ratify and enforce.

UNDER this aspec the constitution of the Peculiri-

Empire appears a regular confederacy, similar to ,nture of
the Achan league in ancient Greece, or to that this aIToci*
of the united Provinces and of the Swiss can-tion.
tons in modern times. But if viewed in another
light, firiking peculiarities in its political tate
present themselves. The Germanick body was
not formed by the union of members altogether
difind and independent. All the Princes and
States joined in this association, were originally
subjea to the Emperors, and acknowledged them
as sovereigns. Besides this, they originally held
their lands as Imperial fiefs, and in consequence
of this tenure owed the Emperors all those ser-
vices which feudal vassals are bound to perform
to their liege lord. But though this political sub-
jedion was entirely at an end, and the influence
of the feudal relation much diminished, the an-
cient forms and inflitutions introduced when the
Emperors governed Germany with authority, not
inferior to that which the other monarchs of Eu-
rope possessed, fill remained. Thus an oppofi-
tion was eflablilhed between the genius of the
government, and the forms of adminiitration in
the German Empire. The former confidered the
Emperor only as the head of a confederacy, the
members of which, by their voluntary choice,
have raised him to that dignity; the latter seemed
to imply, that he is really invested with overeign
power. By this circumstance, such principles of T'c drcaj
hostility and discord were interwoven in the frame ittin of

N a of teErpir

SECT II. of the Germanick body, as affected each of its
-- members, rendering their interior union incom.

plete, and their external efforts feeble and irre.
gular. The effecs of this ice or dilbrder inhe-
rent in the constitution of the Empire are so con.
fiderahle, that, without attending to them, it is
impoflible to comprehend many tranfadions in
the reign of Charles V. or to form just ideas con-
cerning the genius of the German gov ernment.

Ar;ing THP Emperors of Germany, at the beginning
frm the of the sixteenth century, were diflinguifhed by
power of the molt pompous titles, and by such ensigns of
p'ror,; dignity as intimated their authority to be luperior

to that of all other monarchs. The greatest
Princes of the empire attended and served them
on Come occasions, as the officers of their houf-
hold. They exercised prerogatives which no
other sovereign ever claimed They retained
pretensions to all the extenive powers which
their predecessors had enjoyed in any former age.
But at the fame tim', instead of poffiefing that
ample domain wh ch had belonged to the ancient
Emperors of G, rmany, and which stretched from
Balil to ( olcgne, along brth banks of the Rhine ",
they were ilrlpt of all territorial property, and
'had not a fi!igle city, a tingle castle, a single foot
of land, that peitained to them as heads of the
Empire. As 'their domain was alienated, their
tfated revenues were reduced almost to nothing;
and the extraordinary aids which on a few oc-
carions they obtained, were granted paringly,
and paid with reluctance. She Princes and
States of the Empire, though they seemed to
recognize the Imperial authority, were fubjets
only in name, each of them pofClfing a complete
municipal jurifdition within the precincts of his
own territories.

n ePfcfes Abrege &c. p. 241.

FiPOM

FROM this ill-compa6ted frame of govern- SCT.III.

ment, eets that were unavoidable resulted.""
The Emperors, dazzled with the splendour ofnature of
their titles, and the exterior signs of vail autho. their title

and pretea.

ricy, were apt to imagine themselves to be the sons.
real sovereigns of Germany, and were led to
aim continually at recovering the exercise of those
powers and prerogatives which the forms of the
constitution eemed to vest in them, and which
their predecessors Charlemagne and the Otho's
had atually enjoyed. The Princes and States,
aware of the nature as well as extent of their pre-
tensions, were perpetually on their guard, in or-
der to watch all the motions of the Imperial
court, and to cirLumfcribe its power within limits
still more narrow. The Emperors, in support
of their claims, appealed to ancient forms and
institutions, which the States held to be obsolete.
The tates founded their rights on recent prac-
tice and modern privileges, which the Emperors
confidered as usurpations.

THIS jealousy of the Imperial authority, toge- Prom the

ther with the opposition between it and the rights mietin
of the States, encreafed conliderably from the were e&-
time that the Emperors were elected, not by the d.
collective body of German nobles, but by a few
Princes of chief dignity. During a long period,
all the members of the Germanic body assem-
bled, and made choice of the person whom, they
appointed to be their head. But amidst the vio-
lence and anarchy which prevailed for several
centuries in the Empire, seven Princes who pof-
fcUed the moit extensive territories, and who
had obtained a hereditary title to the great of-
sices of the Stap, acquired the exclusive pri-
vilege of nominating the Emperor. This right
was confirmed to them by the Golden Bull;
the mode of exercising it was ascertained, and
they wei.e dignified with the appellation of Elec-

N 4 tors.

SECT. II. tors. The nobility and free-cities being thus
'v--' stripped of a privilege which they had once en-

joyed, were less connected with a Prince, towards
whose elevation they had not contributed by their
suffrages, and came to be more apprehensive of
his authority. The Eletors, by their extensive
power, anl the distinguishing privileges which
they pofleffed, became formidable to the Em-
perors, with whom they were placed almost on
a level in several adts ofjurifdition. Thus the
introduction of the Eletoral college into the Em
pire, and the authority which it acquired, instead
of diminishing, contributed to ftrehgthen the
principles of hostility and discord in the Germa-
nick constitution.

prom th. TiHs E were further augmented by the various
different and repugnant forms of civil policy in the several
forms of
government States which composed the Germanick body. It
eftahbiined is no eafv matter to render the union ps inde-
in th, States
whichcom- pendent States perse& and entire, even when the
lsed thck genmus and forms ,f their refpecive governments
Germaaick
body, happen to be altogether imilar. But in the

Gtrman Empire, which was a confederacy of
Princes, of Ecclefiaflicks, and of free-cities, it
was impoflible that they could incorporate
thoroughly. The free-cities were small repub-
licks, in which the maxims and spirit peculiar
to that species of government prevailed. The
Princes and nobles to whom fupremejurifdition
belonged, possessed a fort of monarchical power
within theii own territories, and the forms of
their interior adminifiration nearly resembled
those of the great feudal kingdoms. The inte-
refts, the ideas, the obje6ts of States so differently
constituted, cannot be the fame. Nor could their
common deliberations be carried on with the
fame firit, while the love of liberty and attenti-
on to commerce were the reigning principles in
the cities; and ardour for military glory, together

with
184

with the desire of power, were the governingSzcT. l.
passions of the Princes and nobility.

THE secular and ecclesiastical members of the From the

Empire were as little fitted for union as the free- opposition
cities and the nobility. Vast territories were an- the secular
nexed to several ot the German bifhopricks and and iccle-
abbeys, and the dignified ecclesiastics held fme members.
of the highest offices in the Empire by hereditary
right. The younger sons of noblemen of the
second order, who had devoted themselves to the
church, were commonly promoted to there fta-
tions of eminence and power; and it was no small
mortification to the Princes and great nobility to
fee persons raised from an inferior rank to the
fame level with themselves, or even exalted to
superior dignity. The education of these church-
men, the genius of their profeflion, and their
connetion with the court of Rome, rendered
their character as well as interest different from
those of the other members of the Germanic
body, with whom they were called to a in
concert. Thus another source of jealousy and
variance was opened, which ought not to be
overlooked when we are Searching into the na-
ture of the German constitution.

To all there causes of dissention may be added From the

uneual di-

one more, arising from the unequal distribution rution of
of power and wealth among the States of the wealth nd
Empire. The electors, and other nobles of the mongth
highet rank, not only possessed sovereign jurif. members.
diation, but governed such extensive, populous,
and rich countries, as rendered them great
Princes. Many of the other members, though
they enjoyed all the rights of sovereignty, ruled
over such petty domains, that their real power
bore no proportion to this high prerogative. A
well compated and vigorous confederacy could

not

Stcr. IT, not be formed of such diflimilar states. The
^--" weaker were jealous, timid.and unable either to

assert or to defend their juit privileges. The
more powerful were apt to assume and to be-
come opprcffive. The EleEtors and Emperors
endeavoured by turns to extend their own autho-
rity, by encroaching on the rights of these fee-
ble members of the Germanic body; and they,
over-awed or corrupted, tamely gave up their
privileges, or m0eaaly favoured the defigas formed
againfl them SSI.

All these AFTER cntemplating all there principles of
German c disunion and opposition in the conflitution of the
bodyincapa- German Empire, it will be easy to account for
ble th tng the want of concord and uniformity, conspicuous
and vigour. in its councils and proceedings. That flw, dila-

tory, distrustful and irresolute spirit, which cha-
raderizes all its deliberations, will appear natural
in a body, thejundion of whose members was
so incompleat, the different parts of which were
held together by such feeble ties, and set at va.
riance by such powerful motives. But the Em-
pire of Germany, nevertheless, comprehended
countries of such vast extent, and was inhabited
by such a martial and hardy race of men, that
when the abilities of an Emperor, or zeal for any
common cause, could rouze this unwieldy body
to put forth its strength, it ated with irrefilible
force. In the following history we shall find, that
as the measures on which Charles V. was moR
intent, were often thwarted or rendered abortive
by the spirit ofjealoufy and division peculiar tothe
Germanic constitution; o it was by the influence
which he acquired over the Prince, f the Empire,
and by engaging them t co-operate with him,
that he was enabled to make Ibme of the greatest
efforts which diftinguifl his reign.

[SS, NOTE XLI.

THE.

THa Turkish history is so blended, during the SCT. III.

reign of Charles V. with that of the great nations ws
in Europe, and the Ottoman Porte interposed o 'ruki go.-
often, and with such decisive influence, in the wars vecrment.
and negotiations of the Christian Princes, that
some pres ious account of the state of government
in that great Empire, is no les nectffary for the
information of my readers, than there views of
the confitution of other kingdoms which I have
already exhibited to them.

IT has been the fate of the more southern and ts origi.

fertile parts of Asia, at different periods, to be
conquered by that warlike and hardy raceof men,
who inhabit the vast country known to the an-
cients by the name of Scythia, and among the
moderns by that of Tartary One tribe of these
people, called Turks or Turcomans, extended its
conquests, under various leaders, and during 'e
veral centuries, from the ihore of the Caspian to
the firaits of the Dardanelles. Towards the middle
of the fifteenth century, these formidable con-
querors took Constantinople by florm, and efta-
bliihed the feat of their government in that Im-
perial city. Greece, Moldavia, Walachia, and
the other provinces of the ancient kingdoms of
Thrace and Macedonia, together with part of
Hungary, were fubjeted to their power.

BUT though the feat of the Turkilh govern- Its derpotic

ment was fixed in Europe, and the Sultans ob- genus.
tained polfeflion of such extensive dominions in
that quarter of the globe, thegenius of their policy
was purely Asiatic, and may be properly termed
a defpotilm, in contradiftintion to these monar-
chical and republican forms of government which
we have been hitherto contemplating. The u-
preme power was vested in Sultans of the Otto-
man race, that blood being deemed so sacred,

that

SECT. II. that no other was thought worthy of the throne.
SVc From this elevation, there sovereigns could look

down, and behold all their fubjets reduced to the
fame level before them. The maxims of Tur-
kish policy admit not any of those inflitutions,
which, in other countries, limit the exercise, or
moderate the rigour of monarchical power. No
great court with conflitutional and permanentju-
rifditon to interpose both in the enacment and
execution of laws. No body of hereditary no-
bles, whose sense of their own pre-eminence,
whose consciousness of what is due to their rank
and character, whose jealousy of their privileges
circumscribe the authority of the Prince, and
serve not only as a barrier against the excesses of
his caprice, but Rfand as an intermediate order
between him and the people. Under the Turkilh
government, the political condition of every sub-
jed is equal. To be employed in the service of
the Sultan, is the only circumRtance that confers
diftinaion. Even this diftindion is annexed so
closely to the flations in which persons serve, that
it is scarce communicated to those who are placed
in them. The higheftdignity in the Empire does
not give any rank or pre-eminence to the family
of him who enjoys it. As every man, before he
is raised to any station of authority, must go
through the preparatory discipline of a long and
servile obedience o, the moment he is deprived of
power, he and his posterity return to the fame
condition with other fubjefts, and fink back into
obscurity. It is the diftinguilhing and odious cha-
raaeriftic of the Eastern despotism, that anni-
hilates all other ranks of men, in order to exalt
the monarch ; that it leaves nothing to the for-
mer, while it gives every thing to the latter; that
it end; avours to fix in the minds of those who are

O State of the Turki(h Empire.-ty Rycaut, p. 25.

subjet
i88

fubje to it, the idea of no relation between men, SICT. III.
but that of a master and of a slave, the former ' _
destined to command and to punish, the latter
formed to tremble and to obey [TT].

BUT as there are circumstances which fre Power of

quently obfru& or defeat the salutary effects of limite
the best regulated governments, there are others religion;
which contribute to mitigate the evils of the
most vicious forms of policy. There can, in-
deed, be no constitutional restraints on the will
of a Prince in a despotic government; but there
may be such as are accidental. Absolute as the
Turkish Sultans are, they feel themselves cir-
cumfcribed both by religion, the principle on
which their authority is founded p, and by the
army, the infrument which they must employ
in order to maintain it. Wherever religion in-
terpofes, the will of the Sovereign must submit
to its decrees. When the Koran hath prescribed
any religious rite; hath enjoined any moral duty;
or hath confirmed, by its fan&ion, any political
maxim, the command of the Sultan cannot over-
turn that which an higher authority hath efta-
blifhed. The chief reftriótion, however, on the
will of the Sultans, is impoed by the military
power. An armed force must surround the and by te
throne of every Despot, to maintain his autho- military.
rity, and to execute his commands. As the
Turks extended their empire over nations,
which they did not exterminate, but reduce to
fubjedion, they found it necessary to render their
military establishment numerous and formidable.
Amurath, their third Sultan, in order to form Orgi6nothe
a body of devoted troops, that might serve A.D. :362.
as the immediate guards of his person and dig-
nity, appointed his officers to seize annually, as
the Imperial property, the fifth part of the

[TT] NOTE XLII. P Rycaut, p. 8.

youth

Sacr. m. youth taken in war. These, after being inftru&ted

in the Mahometan religion, inured to obedience by
severe discipline, and trained to warlike exercises,
were formed into a body. diltinguilhed by the
name of anizaries, or new soldiers. Every fen-
timent which cnthufiafm can inspire, every mark
of diftintion that the favour of the Prince could
confer, were employed in order to animate this
body with martial ardour, and with a cnnfciouf-
ness of its own pre-eminence q. The Janizaries
soon became the chief strength and pride of the
Ottoman armies; and by their number as well
as reputation, were diftinguilhed above all the
troops, whose duty it was to attend on the per-
son of the Sultans [UL].

Their vt THUS, as the supreme power in every society
iMquence in 15possessed by thofewho have arms in their hands,
the Turkilh
overnment. this formidable body of soldiers, defined to be the

instruments of enlarging the Sultan's authority,
acquired, at the fame time, the means of con-
trouling it. The Janizaries in Constantinople, like
the Pratorian bands in ancient Rome, quickly
perceived all the advantages which they derived
from being flationed in the capital; from their
union under one ttandard; and from being ma-
fters of the person of the Prince. The Sultans
became no les fenfibleof their influence and im-
portance. The Capiculy, or soldiery of the Porte,
was the only power in the Empire that a Sultan
or his Vifier had reason to dread. To preserve
the fidelity and attachment of the Janizaries, was
the great art of government, and the principal
object of attention in the policy of the Otto-
man court. Under a monarch, whose abilities
and vigour of mind fit him for command,
they are obfcquious inltruments; execute what-

q Prince Cantemir's Hiflory of the Othman EmnEi e, p. 87.
[UU] NO E XLIil.

ever

ever he enjoins; and render his power irresistible. SECT. IIJ.
Under feeble Princes, or such as are unfortunate, -
they become turbulent and mutinous; assume the
tone of Masters; degrade and exalt Sultans at
pleasure; and teach those to tremble, on whose
nod, at other times, life or death depend.

FROM Mahomet II. who took Constantinople, Progrersof

the Turks

to Solyman, who began his reign a few months towardsdo.
after Charles V. was placed on the Imperialminion.
throne, a fuccefflion of illustrious Princes ruled
over the Turkith Empire. By their great abi-
lities, they kept their lubjeds of every order,
military as well as civil, fubmiflive to govern-
ment; and had the absolute command of what-
ever force their vast Empire was able to exert.
Solyman, in particular, who is known to the
Chriitians chiefly as a conqueror, but is cele-
brated in the Turkish annals as the great law-
giver who established order and police in their
Empire, governed during his long reign with
no less authority than wisdom. He divided his
dominions into several diftrits;. he appointed
the number of soldiers which each should furnish;
he appropriated a certain proportion of the
lands in every province for their maintenance ;
he regulated, with a minute accuracy, every
thing relative to their discipline, their arms, and
the nature of their service. He put the finances
of the Empire into an orderly train of admini-
ftration ; and though the taxes in the Turkish
dominions, as well as in the other despotic mo-
narchies of the East, are far from being confi-
derabe, he supplied that defet by an attentive
and revere economy.

ioly. Advantages

Non was it only under such Sultans as Soly- dhich they

man, whose talents were no less adapted to pre- poff'fred
serve interior order, than to conduct the ope- chritian
rations of war, that the Turkilh Empire engaged pohler in

with cientury
with century.

Sicr. In. with advantage in its contcfts with the Christian
-vt .iftates. The long fucceflion of able Princes,

which I have mentioned, had given such vigour
and firmness to the Ottoman government, that
t seems to have attained, during the sixteenth
century, the highest degree of perfection of
which its constitution was capable. Whereas
the great monarchies in Chrftendom were still
far from that state, which could enable them
to aA with a full exertion of their force. Be-
fides this, the Turkish troops in that age pof-
fetled every advantage which arises from fupe-
riority in military discipline. At the time when
Solyman began his reign, the Janizaries had
been embodied near a century and a half, and
during that long period the severity of their mi-
litary discipline had in no degree relaxed. The
soldiers drawn from the provinces of the Em-
pire had been kept almost continually under
arms, in the various wars which the Sultans had
carried on with hardly any interval of peace.
Against troops thus trained and accustomed to
service, the forces of the Christian powers took
the field with great disadvantage. The most
intelligent as well as impartial authors of the
sixteenth century, acknowledge and lament the
superior attainments of the Turks in the military
art [XX]. The success which uniformly attend-
ed their arms in all their wars, demonstrates the
jutnefs of this observation. The Christian ar,
mies did not acquire that superiority over the
Turks, which they now possess, until the long
establishment of flanding forces had improved
military discipline among the former; and until
various causes and events, which it is not my
province to explain, had corrupted or abolished
their ancient warlike institutions among the
latter.

[XX] NOTE XLIV.

PROOFS

PROOF

S

AND
ILLUSTRATIONS.

0
Vo. I,

# PROOFS AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

PROOFS

AND
I L LUSTRAT ION S.

NOTE I. SECT. I. p. 2. [A].

H E consternation of the Britons, when
invaded by the Pits and Caledonians
after the Roman legions were called

out of the island, may give ome idea of the
degree of debasement to which the human mind
was reduced by long ervitude under the Ro-
mans. In their upplicatory letter to Aetius,
which they call the groans of Britain, " We
know not (fay they) which way to turn us.
The barbarians drive us to the sea; and the ea
forces us back on the barbarians; between which
we have only the choice of two deaths, either
to be swallowed up by the waves, or to be
butchered by the sword." Hiftor. Gildae. ap.
Gale. Hilt. Britan. Script. p. 6.-One can scarce
believe this dastardly race, to be the defcen-
dants of that gallant people, who repulsed Caesar,
and defended their liberty o long against the
Roman arms.

NOTE II. SECT. I. p. 4. [B].

THE barbarous nations were not only illite-

rate, but regarded literature with contempt.
They found the inhabitants of all the provinces
of the Empire funk in effeminacy, and averse to

0 2 w.r.

war, Such chafader was the objet of scorn
to an high-fpirited and gallant race of men.
" When we would brand an enemy," fays
Liutprandus, " with disgraceful and contume-
lious appellations, we call him a Roman; hoc
'solo, id eft Romani nomine, quicquid ignobilita-
tis4 quicquid tirniditatis, quicqtid avaritia,
quicquid lIuxtrie, quicquid mendacii, immo
quicquid vitiorum eft comprehendentes." Li-
utprandi Legario apud Murat. Scriptor. Italic.
vol. ii. pars. i. p. 481. This degeneracy of
manners, illiterate barbarians imputed to their
love of learning. Even after they fettled in the
countties which they had conquered, they
w6uld not permit their children to be inftruted
in any science; " for, (said they), inftrudion
in the sciences tends to corrupt, enervate, and
deprefi the mind and he who has been accuf-
tomed to tremble under the rbd of a pedagogue,
will never look oh a sword tr spear with an un-
daunted eye." Procop. de bellb Gother. lib. i.
p. 4. ap. Script. Byz. vol. i. A cbnfiderable
lumber of years elapsed, befbre nations If rude,
and so unwilling to learn, could produce hifto-
rians capable of recording their traifaCtiont, or
of dfcribing their manners and institutions.
By that time, all mem6ry of their ancient con-
ditibn was loft, and no mbnument remained to
guide the ir rft writers to any certain know-
l'edtge of it. If one expects to receive any fa-
tisfatory account of the manners and laws of
the Goths, Lombards, or Franks, during their
residence in those countries where they were ori-
ginally feated, from Jornandes, Paulus Warne-
fridus, or Gregory of Tours, the earliest and
mroft authentick historians of these people, he
will be miserably disappointed. Whatever im-
perfet view has been conveyed to us of their
ancient state, we owe ot to their own writers,
but to the Greek and Roman historians.

NOTE

NOTE III. SECT. I p. 5. [C.

'A CIRCUMSTANCp related by Prifcus in his

history of the embafly to Attila, King of the
Huns, gives a itriking view of the enthufiaftick'
pafnion for war, which prevailed among the bar-
barous nations. When the entertainment to
which that fierce conqueror admitted the Ro-
ian arnbafadors was ended, two Scythians ad-
vanced towards Attila, and recited'a poem in
whicfithey celebrated his vitories, and milita-
ry virtues. All the Huns fixed their eyes with
attention on the bards. Some seered to be de-
lighted with the verses; others, remembering
their own battles and exploits, exulted with joy;
while those who were become feeble through
age, buri out into tears, bewailing the decay
6f ,heir vigour, and the state of inadtivity in
which they were noiw obliged to remain. Ex4
cerpta ex hifforia Prifci Rhetoris ap. Byzant.
Hi'or. Script. edit. Venef. v. i. p. 45.

NOTE. IV. SECT. . p. II. [D].

A REMARKABLE confirmation of both pasts

of this reasoning occurs in the history of Eng-
land.. The Saxons carried on the conquest of
that country with the fame deftrutive spirit,
which distinguished the other barbarous atia,
Theancient inhabitants of Britain were either pc-r
termimated; r forcedto take shelter among'th
mountains of Wales; or reducedinto erviit4;
The Saxon goxvernment, lws, mahner$ and 1ri
guge were of acnfpquence introduced into Bri
tain; and weae fo.perfe&tly eftablhied, that
memory of the; nftitutions previous t their
eonqaeft was abolished. The very rverfe.'
this happened in a subsequent revolution.,: .
single vitory placed William the Norman on

0 3 the

the throne of England. The Saxon inhabitants
though oppressed, were not exterminated.
William employed the utmost efforts of his
power and policy to make his new fubjets con-
form in every thing to the Norman standard;
but without success. The Saxons, though van-
quifhed, were far more numerous than their
conquerors; when they began to incorporate,
their laws and manners gradually gained ground.
The Norman institutions were unpopular and
odious; many of them fell into disuse; and in
the English constitution and language, at this
day, many eflential parts are manifestly of Sax-
on, not of Norman extract.

NOTE V. SECT. I. p. II, [E].

PRocoPIus, the historian, declines, from a

principle of benevolence, to give any particular
detail of the cruelties of the Goths; " Left, fays
he, I should transmit a monument and example
of inhumanity to succeeding ages." Proc. de
bello Goth. lib. iii. cap. Io. ap. Byz. Script. vol.
i. x26. But as the change, which I have point-
ed out as a consequence of the settlement of the
barbarous nations in the countries formerly sub-
jeC to the Roman Empire, could not have taken
place, if the greater part of the ancient inhabi-
tants had not been extirpated, an event of such
importance and influence merits a more particu-
lar illuftrationr. This will justify me for ex-
hibiting some part of that melancholy fpedacle,
over which humanity prompted Procopius to
draw a veil. I hall not, however, di'guft
my readers by a long detail; but reft satis-
fled with colle&ing some instances of the de-
vaftations made by two of the many nations,
which fettled in the Empire. The Vandals

,- , were

were the firit of the barbariads who.invaded
Spain. It was one of the richest nd moit po-
pulous of the Roman Provinces; the inhabitants
had been distinguished for courage, and. had de-
fended their liberty againif the arms of Rome,
with greater obstinacy, and during a longet
course of years, than any nation-in Europe. But
so entirely were they enervated by their subjec-
tion to the Romans, that the Vandals who en-
tered the kingdom A. D. 409: compleated the
conquest of it with such rapidity, that in the
year 4 I, there barbarians divided it among
them by casting lots. The defolatibn occasioned
by their invasion is thus described: by-datius an
eye witness. " The barbarians wafted, every
thing with hostile cruelty. The pifilence was
no less deftrutive. A dreadful famine raged, to
such a degree, that the living were c6nftrained to
feed on the dead bodies of their fellow citizens;
and all there terrible plagues desolated at once
the unhappy kingdoms." Idatii Chron. ap. Bi-
blioth. Patrum. vol. vii. p. I 3 3. edit. Lugd, 677,
The Goths having attacked the Vandals in their
new settlements, a fierce war ensued; the coun-
try was plundered by both parties;. the cities
which at first escaped were laid in ashes, and the
inhabitants exposed to susser every thing that the
wanton cruelty of barbarians could inflit. Ida,
tius describes there, ibid. p. 1235. b. 236. c. f
A similar account of their devastations is given
by Ifidorus Hifpalenfis, and the contemporary
writers. Ifid. Chron. ap. Grot. hist. Goth. 73;.
From Spain the Vandals passed over to Africa,
A. D. 428. Africa was, next to Egypt, the
nioft fertile of the Roman provinces. It was
one of the granaries of the Empire, and is call-
ed by an ancient writer, the foul of the comr-.
monwtalth. Though the army with which
they invaded it, did not exceed 30,ooo fight-

0 4 ing

iig ma,dieybecariie Ahbf6ute rmaflers of the
p~v"iwihb. eidtlian tto' years. A cntempo-

ry aitiorgives a dreadful a.count of theAha-
votk which; they made."' They found a pro-
vince wbl cultivatedi' and enjoying plenty, th¢
beauty of hewhole sartiL- They carried their
deftrudiv& rmsinto every crner of it; they
difpeopled it by their devastations; exterminat-
ig evy thing vith fire andfword. They did
ni fipar thr e

t vinas,:-and fruit trees, that

thofe-to wiom Cves arid-inacceflible mountains
had Lfforded-aretreat, might find no nourish-
tient of any kind. Thtir hostile rage could not
be faiawdi':ahd there was no place exempted
from tiffetU of it. ..They tortured their pri-
foners witlh i mdof exqilifite cruelty, that they
mightfoertefroiA thin a discovery of their hidden
tf'iurS,: The more they discovered, the more
they pe~ . and the moir .implac.ble they
hbere.- teitier the i nfiritires of age nor of
set ;, eit . edignity bfnohiity, nor the fanc-
tiy 6f thftattrdoral office, could mitigate their
fury;; but 'triheJmore iltufrious; their 'p'ifoners
weie, the niotrbarbaroufly:they infuhetd them;
The ptblick. buikings w.hich refilled, the vio-
lenoe bs the flamnes they levelled with.the ground.
They kefrti,.any citie without an inhabitant.
When eb approached any fortified placs, which
their undisciplined army couki not reduce,. they
gathered togetrer a mruliitude of prifoncrs, and
putri/g ;them tothe:fwordi left their bodies un-
baied, that the iftench. of the carcailes might
oblig the garrison to' ban8on it." Vitoor
Vtenfis de ptertfcutio,':Africana. ap. ibl. Pa-
trna. vl. viii. p. 666; 'St.' Auguftin 'an A-
fican, bndt a 'tentenpo ary author, gi vs fimi.
Ittr defeli4tdnti of :their .cruelties, opera v. x.
'p. 372. edit. 6't 6. -About an hundred years
after the fettletmnt of the' Vandals in, Aica,
Belisarius attacked atiddipoflefed them. Pro-

copius,

copius, a contemporary historian, describes the
devastation which thatwaroccafioned. " Afri-
ca, fays he, was so entirely difpeopled, that one
might travel several days in it without meeting
one man; and it is no exaggeration to fay, that
in the course of the war five millions of persons
perished." Proc. hist. Arcana cap. 8. ap. Byz.
Script. vol. i. 3 .5. - I have dwelt longer upon
the calamities of this province, because they are
aefcribed not only by contemporary authors, but
by eye-witnefes. The present state of Africa
confirms their testimony. Many of the most
flourishing and populous cities with which it was
filled; were so entirely ruined, that no vefligs
remain to point out where they were situated.
That fertile territory which sustained the Roman
Empire lies in a great measure uncultivated; and
that province, which Viaor in his barbarous
Latin caled Speciofjtas totius terreflorntis, is now
the retreat of pirates and banditti.

WHIt.* the Vandals laid waste one part of the

Ermpire, the Huns deolated the reft of it. Ofali
the barbarous tribes they were the fiercest and
nmot formidable. Ammianus Marcellinus a co)n-
temporary author, and one of the best of the la-
ter historians, gives an account of their policy
and manners. They nearly resemble those ot
the Scytlians described by the ancients, and of
the Tartars known to the moderns- In tome
parts of their character, and in feveial of their
customs, they resemble the savages in nortia
America. Their passion for war and ation was
extreme. " As in polished societies (fays Am-
mianus) ease and tranquillity are courted, they
delight in war and dangers. He, who falls in
battle is reckoned happy. They who die of old
age or of disease are deemed infamous. They

boast,

boast, with the utmost exultation, of the num-
ber of enemies whom they have slain, and as
the molt glorious of all ornaments, they fasten
the scalps of those who have fallen by their
hand to the trappings of their horses." Ammian.
Marc. lib. xxxi. p. 477. edit. Gronov. Lugd.
I 693.- Their incursions into the Empire be-
gan in the fourth century; and the Romans,
though no firangers, by that time, to the effedts
of barbarous rage, were aAonifhed at the cruelty
of their devastations. Thrace, Pannonia, and
Illyricum were the countries which they first laid
desolate. As they had no thoughts of fettling in
Europe, their inroads were frequent, and Proco-
pius computes that in each of these, at a medi-
um, two hundred thousand persons perilhed or
were carried offas slaves. Procop. hilt. Arcan.
ap. Byz. script. vol. i. 316. Thrace, the belt
cultivated province in that quarter of the Empire,
was converted into a desert, and when Prifcus
accompanied the ambassadors ent to Attila,
there were no inhabitants in ome of the cities,
but a few miserable people who had taken shelter
among the ruins of the churches; and the fields
were covered with the bones of those who had
fallen by the sword. Prifcus ap. Byz. Script. vol.
i. 34. Attia became King of the Huns, A. D.
434. He is one of the greatest and molt enter-
prizing conquerors mentioned in history. He
extended his Empire over all the vast countries,
comprehended under the general names of Scy-
thia and Germany in the ancient division of the
world. While he was .arrying on his wars
against the barbarous nations, he kept the Roman
Empire under perpetual apprehensions, and ex-
torted vast ubfidies from the ttirrid and effemi-
nate monarchs who governed it. In the year 45 .
he entered Gaul, at the head of an army compot;
ed of all the various nations which he had sub-

dued.

dued. It was more numerous than any with
which the barbarians had hitherto invaded the
Empire. The devastations which he committed
were horrible; not only the open country, but
the most flourishing cities were desolated. The
extent and cruelty of his devastations are defcrib-
ed by Salvianus de Gubernat. Dei. edit. Baluz.
Par. 1669. p. 39, &c. and by Idatius ubi supra
p. 235. Aetius put a flop to his progress in that
country by the famous battle of Chalons, in which
(if we may believe the historians of that age) three
hundred thousand persons perished. Idat. ibid.
Jornandes de rebus Geticis ap. Grot. hilt. Gothor.
p. 67I, Amft. I665. But next year he resolved
to attack the centre of the Empire, and marching
into Italy, wafted it with rage, inflamed by the
sense of his late disgrace. What Italy suffered by
the Huns exceeded all the calamities which the
preceding incursions of the barbarians had brought
upon it. Conringius has collected several passages
from the ancient historians, which prove that the
devastations committed by the Vandals and Huns
in the countries situated on the banks of the
Rhine, were no less cruel and fatal to the human
race. Exercitatio de urbibus Germanise. Opera,
vol. i. 489. But it is endless, it is hocking to fol-
low thee destroyers of mankind through fb many
scenes of horror, and to contemplate the havock
which they made of the human species.

BUT the state in which Italy appears to have

been, during several ages, after the barbarous
,nations fettled in it, is the most decisive proof
of the cruelty as well as extent of their de-
vaftations. Whenever any country is thinly
inhabited, trees and shrubs spring up in the
uncultivated fields, and spreading by degrees

form

form large forests; by the overflowing of rivers,
and the tfagnating of waters, other parts of it
are converted into lakes and marhes. Ancient
Italy, the feat of the Roman elegance and luxu-
ry, was cultivated to the highest pitch. But
so effetually did the devaltations of the barba-
rians defroy all the effecEs of their industry and
cultivation, that in the eighth century Italy ap-
pears to have been covered with forests and
marshes of vaif extent. Muratori enters into
a long detail concerning the situation and limits
of these; and proves by the most authentick
evidence, that great tracts of territory, in all
the different provinces of Italy, were either over-
run with wood, or laid under water. Nor did
there occupy parts of the country naturally bar-
ren or of little value, but were spread over di-
itricts, which ancient writers represent as ex-
tremelyfertile, and which at present are highly
cultivated. Muratori antiquitates Ltlicae rnedii
avi dissert. xxi. v. ii. p. 149, 53, &c. , Afrong
proof of this occurs i a description of the city
of Modena, by an author of the tenth century.
Murat. cript. Rerum Italic. vol. ii, ,pars. ii.
p. 69I. The fate of deifoladion in other coun-
tries of Europe seems to have been the fame.
In many of the most early charters now extant,
the lands granted to monagteries or to private
persons, are diftirnguifhed intp such as are cul-
tivated or inhabited, and such as were eremni,
desolate. In many jnftaces, lands are granted
to persons because they, had taken thenm from
the defrt, a refmno, anl had cultivatd and
planted tbhen with inhaitantr. This appears
from a, charter of Charlemagne, published by
Eckhart de rebus Francia Orientalis. vol. ii. p.
8S4, and from many charters of his fuccefrs
quoted by Du Cange voc. Eremus.

MURATORI

MURATORI adds, that during the eighth and

ninth centuries, Italy was greatly infested by
wolves and other wild beasts; another mark of
its being deffitute of inhabitants. Murat. Antiq.
vol. ii. p. 63. Thus Italy, the pride of the
ancient world for its fertility and cultivation,
was reduced to the state of a country newly
peopled, and rendered habitable.

I AM sensible, not only that ome of the de-

scriptions of the devastations which I have
quoted, may be exaggerated, but that the bar-
barous tribes proceeded in different manners, in
making their new ettlements. Some of them
seemed to be bent on exterminating the ancient
inhabitants; others were more disposed to incor-
porate with them. It is not my province either
to enquire into the causes which occasioned this
variety in the condut of the conquerors, or to
describe the state of those countries where the
ancient inhabitants were treated most mildly.
The fads which I have produced are sufficient
to prove that the deftrudion of the human fpe-
cies, occasioned by their hostile invasions of the
northern nations, and their subsequent fettle-
ments, was much greater than the generality
of writers eem to imagine.

NOTE VI. SECT. I. p. 13. [F].

I HAVE observed, Note II. that our only cer-

tain information concerning the ancient state of
the barbarous nations muff be derived from the
Greek and Roman writers. Happily an account
of the institutions and customs of one people, to
which those of all the reft seem to have been in
a great measure similar, has been transmitted to
us by two authors, the most capable, perhaps,
that ever wrote, of observing them with pro-
found discernment, and of decribing them with
propriety and force. The reader muff per-

ceive

205

ceive that I have Caesar and Tacitus in my eye.
The former gives a hort acount of the ancient
Germans in a few chapters of the sixth book of
his commentaries: The latter wrote a treatise
expressly on that subjea. These are the most
precious and instructive monuments of antiquity
to the present inhabitants of Europe. From
them we learn,

I. THAT the state of Society among the

ancient Germans, was of the rudest and most
simple form. They subsisted entirely by hunt-
ing or by pasturage. Caef. lib. vi. c. zi. They
neglected agriculture, and lived chiefly on milk,
cheese, and flesh. Ibid. c. 22. Tacitus agrees
with him in most of there points; de morib.
Germ.-c. 14, 5, 23. The Goths were equally
negligent of agriculture. Prif. Rhet. ap. Byz.
Script. v. i. p. 3. B. Society was in the fame
slate among the Huns, who disdained to culti-
vate the earth, or to touch a plough. Amm.
Marcel. lib. xxxi. p. 475. The fame manners
took place among the Alans; ibid. p. 477.
While society remains in this simple state, men
by uniting together scarce relinquish any portion
of theirnatural independance. Accordingly we are
informed, 2. That the authority of civil govern-
ment wasextremely limited among the Germans.
During times of peace they had no common or
fixed magistrate, but the chief men of every
diftrit dispensed justice, and accommodated dif-
ferences. Caf. ibid. c. 23. Their Kings had
not absolute or unbounded power; their autlin-
rity consistcd rather in the privilege of advising,
than in the power of commanding. Matters of
small consequence were determined by the chief
men; affairs of importance by the whole com-
munity. Tacit. c. 7, ii. The Huns, in like
manner, deliberated in common concerning every
business of moment to the society; and were noi

filbjcdt

subjet to the rigour of regal authority. Amm.
Marcel. lib. xxxi. p. 474. 3. Every individual
among the ancient Germans was left at liberty to
choose whether he would take part inany military
enterprize which was proposed; there seems to
have been no obligation to engage in it imposed
on him by publick authority. " When any of
the chief men proposes any expedition, such as
approve of the cause and of the leader rife up,
and declare their intention of following him; and
those who do not fulfil this engagement, are con-
fidered as deserters and traitors, and are looked
upon as infamous." Cf. ibid. c. 23. Tacitus
plainly points at the fame custom, though in terms
more obscure. Tacit. c. I . 4. As every indivi-
dual was so independant, and master in so great a
degree of his own actions, it became, of confe-
quence, the great object of every person among
the Germans who aimed at being a leader, to
gain adherents, and attach them to his person
and interest. These adherents Caesar calls An-
'baali and Clientes, i. e. retainers or clients; Taci-
tus, Comites, or companions. The chief diftinc-
tion and power of the leaders, consisted in being
attended by a numerous band of chosen youth.
This was their pride as well as ornament during
peace, and their defence in war. The favour
of there retainers the leaders gained or preserved
by presents of armour, and of horses; or by
the profuse, though inelegant hospitality, with
which they entertained them. Tacit. c. 14, 15.
5. Another consequence of the personal liberty
and independance which the Germans retained.
even after they united in society, was their cir-
cumfcribing the criminal jurifdition of the ma-
giftrate within very narrow limits, and their
not only claiming but exercising almost all the
rights of private resentment and revenge. Their
magistrates had not the power either ofimprifon-
ing, or of inflicting any corporal punishment on a

free

207

free man. Tacit. c. 7. Every person was ob-
liged to avenge the wrOngs which his parents or
friends had sustained. Their enmities were he-
reditary, but not irreconcileable. Even murder
was compensated by payihg a certain number of
cattle. Tac. c. 21. A part of the fine went to
the King, or state, a part to the person who
had been injured, or to his kindred. Ibid. c. 2.

THESE particulars concerning the inifitutions

and manners of the Germans, though well
known to every person conversant in ancient
literature, I have thought proper to arrange in
this order, and to lay before such of my readers
as may be less acquainted with these fats, both
hecaufe they confirm the account which I have
given of the tate of the barbarous nations, and
tend to illustrate all the observations that I hall
have occasion to make concerning the various
changes in their government and customs. The
laws and customs introduced by the barbarous
nations into their new settlements, are the best
commentary on the writings of Cefar and Ta-
citus; and their observations are the best key
to a perfect knowledge of these laws and customs.

ONE circumstance with refpe& to the teftimo-

nies of Cefar and Tacitus concerning the Ger-
mans, merits attention. Caesar wrote his brief
account of their manners more than an hundred
years before Tacitus composed his treatise de mo-
ribus Germanorum. An hundred years make a
considerable period in the progress of national
manners,efpecially if, during thattime, those peo-
ple who are rude and unpolifhed have had much
communication with more civilized fates. This
was the care with the Germans. Their intercourse
with the Romans began whenCaefar crossed the
Rhine, and increased prodigiofly during the

interval
208

interval between that event and the time when
Tacitus flourished. Besides this, there was a
considerable difference between the state of focie-
ty among the different tribes of Germans. The
Suiones were so much improved, that they began
to be corrupted. Tac. cap. 44. The Fenni were so
barbarous, that it is wonderful how they were
able to subsist. Ibid. cap. 46. Whoever under-
takes to describe the manners of the Germans,
or to found any political theory upon the state
of society among them, ought carefully to attend
to both there circumstances.

BEFORE I quit this subjed, it may not be im-

proper to observe, that though fucceflive altera-
tions in their institutions, together with the gra-
dual progress of refinement, have made an entire
change in the manners of the various people, who
conquered the Roman Empire, there is till one
race of men nearly in the fame political situation
with that in which they were when they firfl
fettled in their new conquests: I mean the vari-
ous tribes and nations of Savages in North Ame-
rica. It cannot then be confidered either as a
digreflion, or as an improper indulgence of cu-
riofity to enquire, whether this similarity in their
political state has occasioned any resemblance
between their character and manners. If the
likeness turns out to be striking, it is a stronger
proof that a just account has been given of the
ancient inhabitants of Europe, than the teltimony
even of Cafar or of Tacitus.

i. The Americans subsist chiefly by hunting

and fishing. Some tribes neglet agriculture en-
tirely. Among those who cultivate rome small
spot near their huts, that, together with all
works of labour, is performed by the wonmen.
P. Charlevoix Journal Hiftorique d'un Voyage de
..'Amerique 4°. Par. 1744. p. 334. In such

VOL. I. P a state

209

a state of society, the commom wants of men be-
ing few,. and their mutual dependence upon each
other fmal,. their union is extremely imperfect
and feeble, and they continue to enjoy their natu-
ral liberty almost unimpaired. It is the first idea
of an American, that every man is born free and
independent, and that no power on earth hath any
right to diminish or circumscribe his natural liber-
ty. There is scarce any appearance of fubordina-
tion either in civil or domestic government. Every
one does what he pleases. A father and mother
with their children, live like persons whom chance
has brought together,and whom no common bond
unites. Their manner of educating their children
is suitable to this principle. They never chastise
or punish them, even during their infancy. As
they advance in years, they allow them to be en-
tirely masters of their own actions, and responsible
to no body. Id. p. 272, 273.- 2. The power
of their civil magistrates is extremely limited.
Among most of their tribes, the Sachem or chief
is elective. A council of old men is chosen to
assist him, without whose advice he determines
no affair of importance. The Sachems neither
possess nor claim any great degree of authority.
They propose and intreat rather than command.
The obedience of their people is altogether vo-
luntary. Id. p. 266, 268. - 3. They engage in
any military enterprize, not from constraint, but
choice. When war is resolved, a chief arises,
and offers himself to be the leader. They who
are willing (for they compel no person) stand up
one after another, and sing their war song. But if
after this, any of these should refuse to follow the
leader, to whom they have engaged, his life would
be in danger, and he would be confidered as the
most infamous of all men. Id. p. 217, 218. - 4.
Such as engage to follow any leader, expet to be
treated by him with great attention and refped;
and he is obliged to make them presents of confi-

derable

derable value. Id. p. 218.- 5. Among the Ame-
ricans, the magistrate has scarce any criminaljurif-
diction. Id. p. 272. Upon receiving any injury, the
person or family offended may inflict what pu-
nifhment they please on the person who was the
author of it. Id. p. 274. Their resentment and
desire of vengeance are excessive and implacable.
Time can neither extinguish or abate it. It is the
chief inheritance parents leave to their children;
it is transmitted from generation to generation,
until an occasion be found of satisfying it. Id. p.
309. Sometimes, however, the offended party is
appeared. A compensation is paid for a murder
that has been committed. The relations of the
deceased receive it; and it consists most common-
ly of a captive taken in war, who being fubftitut-
ed in place of the person who was murdered, as-
fumes his name, and is adopted into his family.
Id. p. 274. The resemblance holds in many other
particulars. It is sufficient for my purpose to have
pointed out the similarity of those great features
which distinguish and characterize both people
Bochart, and other phiollogifts of the last century,
who, with more erudition than science, endea-
voured to trace the migrations of various nations,
and who were apt, upon the slightest appearance
of resemblance, to find- an affinity between na-
tions far removed from each other, and to con-
clude that they were descended from the fame
ancestors, would hardly have failed, on viewing
such an amazing similarity, to pronounce with
confidence, " That the Germans and Americans
must be the fame people." But a philosopher will
satisfy himself with observing, " That the cha-
racters of nations depends on the state of society
in which they live, and on the political institutions
established among them; and that the human
mind, whenever it is placed in the fame situation,
will, in ages the most distant, and in countries the

P 2 most

most remote, assume the fame form, and be di-
ftinguifhed by the fame manners.

I MAVY pushed the comparit>n between the

Germans and Americans no farther than was ne-
eeilary for the illuifration of my subjet. I do
not pretend that the state of society in the two
countries was perfecly similar. Many of the Ger-
man tribes were more civilized than the Ameri-
fans. Some of them were not unacquainted with
agriculture; almost all of thembad flocks of tame
cattle, and depended for the chief part of their
subsistence upon these. Most of the American
tribes subsist by hunting, and are in a ruder and
more simple state than the ancient Germans.
The resemblance, however, between their con-
dition is greater perhaps than any that we know
between two races of men, and this has produced
a furprizing similarity of manners.

NOTE VII. SECTI. . 13. [G].

THE booty gained by an army belonged to an

army. The King himself had no part of it but
what he acquired by lot. A remarkable instance
of this occurs in the history of the Franks. The
army ofClovis, the founder of the French mo-
narchy, having plundered a church, carried off,
among other sacred utenfils,avafe of extraordina-
ry size and beauty. The bishop ent deputies to
Clovis, beseeching him to restore the vase, that it
might be again employed in the sacred services
to which it had been consecrated. Clovis desired
the deputies to follow him to Soissons, as their
booty was to be divided in that place, and promif-
ed that. if the lot hould give him the disposal of
the vase, he would grant what the bishop desired.
When he came to Soissons, and all the booty was
placed in one great heap in the middle of the
army, Clovis intreated, that before making the
division, they would give him that vase over and

above

above his share. All appeared willing to gratify
the King, and to comply with his requefl, when
a fierce and haughty soldier lifted up his battle-
axe, and striking the vase with the utmost vio-
lence, cried out with a loud voice, " You fhail
receive nothing here but that to which the lot
gives you a right." Gregor. Turon. Hifto..
Francorum. lib. ii. c. 27. p. 70. Par. 6Io.

NOTE VIII. SECT.I. p. 15. [H].

THE history of the establishment and progress

of the feudal system, is an interesting objec to all
the nations of Europe. In ome countries, their
jurisprudence and laws are still in a great mea-
sure feudal. In others, many forms and praci.
ces established by.euftom, or founded on fatutes,
took their rife from the feudal law, and cannot
be understood without attending to the ideas pe-
culiar to it. Several authors of the highest re-
putation for' genius and erudition, have endea-
voured to iliuftrate this subjet, but they have
left many parts of it obscure I hall endeavour
to trace, with precision, the progress and variation
of ideas cornerning property in land among the
barbarous nations; and shall attempt to point
out the causes which introduced there changes,
as well as the effects which followed upon them.
Property in land seems to have gone through four
fucceflive changes among the people who fettled
in the various provinces of the Roman Empire.

I. WHILE the barbarous nations remained in

their original countries, they had no fixed pro-
perty in land, and no certain limits to their pof-
feflions. After feeding their flocks in one diftrit,
they removed with them, their wives and families,
tO another; and abandoned that likewise in a short
time. They were not, in consequence of this im-
perfea species of property, brought under any
pOsitive or formal obligation to serve the com-

P 3 munity;

munity; all their services were purely voluntary.
Every individual was at liberty to choose how far
he would contribute towards carrying on any mi-
litary enterprize. If he followed a leader in any
expedition, it was from attachment, not from a
sense of obligation. The clearest proof of this
has been produced in note VI. While property
continued in this state, we can discover nothi.g
that bears any resemblance to a feudal tenure,
or to the fubordinationand military service which
the feudal system introduced.

II. Upon fettling in the countries which they

subdued, the viAorious army divided the con-
quered lands. That portion which fell to every
soldier, he seized as a recompense' due to his va-
lour, as a settlement acquired by his own sword.
He took poffeflion of it as a freeman in full
property. He enjoyed it during his own life,
and could dispose of it at .pleasu.re, or transmit it
as an inheritance to his children. Thus property
in land became fixed. It was at the fame time
allodial, i. e. the pofeffor had the entire right of
property and dominion; he held of no overeign
or superior lord, to whom he was bound to do
homage, and perform service. But as there new
proprietors were in some danger (as has been ob-
served in' the text) of being disturbed by the re-
mainder of the ancient inhabitants, and in still
greater danger of being attacked by barbarians
as fierce and rapacious as themselves, they saw
the necessity of coming under obligations to de-
fend the community, more explicit than those to
which they had been fubjeat in their original
habitations. On this account, immediately up-
on their fixing in their new settlements, every
freeman became bound to take arms in de-
fence of the community, and if he refused
or neglected so to do, was liable to a con-

fiderable

fiderable penalty. I do not mean that any coi'
tract of this kind was formally concluded, o;
mutually ratified by any legal solemnity. It
was, like the other compacts which hold society
together, established by tacit consent; and their
mutual security and preservation made it the in-
terest of all to recognize its authority, and to en-
force the observation of it. We can trace back
this new obligation on the proprietors of land to
a very early period in the history of the Franks.
Chilperic, who began his reign A. D. 562, ex-
ated a fine, bannosjufit exigi, from certain per-
sons who had refused to accompany him in an
expedition. Gregor. Turon. lib. v. c. 26. p.
211. Childibert, who began his reign A. D.
576, proceeded in the fame manner against others
who had been guilty of a like crime. Id. lib.
vii. c. 42. p. 342. Charlemagne ordained, that
every freeman who possessed five manfi, i. e. fix,
ty acres of land, in property, should march in per-
son against the enemy. Capitul. A. D. 807.
Louis le Debonnaire, A. D. 85, granted lands
to certain Spaniards who fled from the Saracens,
and allowed them to fettle in his territories, on
condition that they hoitld serve in the army like
other free men. Capitul. vol. i. p. 500. By land
poffefled in property, which is mentioned in the
law of Charlemagne, we are to underitand, ac-
cording to the stile of that age, allodial land.;
allodes and proprietas, alodum and proprium being
words perfectly fynonimous. Du Cange voce
Alodis. The clearest proof of the diftinEtion
between allodial and beneficiary possession, is
contained in two charters published by Muratori,
by which it appears that a person might possess
one part of his estate as allodial which he could
disposed of at pleafur¢, the other as a bene-
ficium, of which he had only the ufufrut,
the. property returning to the superior Lord
on his demise. Antiq. Ital. medii aevi, vol. i. p.

P 4 559,

251

559, 565. The fame diftindion is pointed out
in a Capitulare of Charlemagne, A. D. 812. edit.
Baluz. vol. i. p. 49I. In the curious testament
of count Everard, who married a daughter of
Louis le Debonnaire, by which he disposes of
his vast estate among his children, he diftin-
guifhes between what he possessed proprietate, and
what he held beneficio, and it appears that tle
greater part was allodial. A. D. 837. Aub.
Miraei Opera Diplomatica, Lovaa. 1723. Vol.
p. 9.

IN the fame manner Liber bmi is commonly

opposed to fMaffus or vaffallus; the former de-
notes an allodial proprietor, the latter one who
held of a Superior. Thefefre men were under
an obligation to. serve the state; and this duty
was confidered as so sacred, that free men were
prohibited from entering into holy orders unless
they had obtained the content of the sovereign.
The reason given for this in the statute is remark-
able, "' For we are informed that some do so,
not so much out of devotion, as in order to avoid
that military service which they are bound to
perform. Capitul. lib. i. §. 114. If upon be-
ing summoned into the field, any free man re-
fused to obey, a full Herebannum, i. e. a fine of
sixty cro~ns, was to be exacted from him ac-
cording to the law of the Franks." Capit.
Car. magn. ap. Leg. Longob. lib. i. tit. 14. §.
13. p. 539. 'This expreflion, according to the
law of the Franks, seems to imply that both
the obligation to serve, and the penalty on those
who disregarded it, were coival with the laws
made by the Franks at their first settlement
in Gaul. This fine was levied with uch ri-
gour, " That if any person was insolvent, he
was reduced to servitude, and continued in that

iate

state until such. time as his labour should amount
to the value of the her-ebannum." Ibid. The
Emperor Lotharius rendered the penalty itill
more evere; and if any person poffelfing such
an extent of property as made it incumbent on
him to take the field in person refused to obey
the summons, all his goods were declared to be
forfeited, and he himself might be punifled with
banishment. Mlurat. Script. Ital. vol. i. pars
II. P. 153.

III. PROPERTY in land having thus become

fixed and fubjeEt to military service, another
change was introduced, though slowly, and ftep
by flep. We learn from Tacitus that the chief
men among the Germans endeavoured to attach
to their persons and interests certain adherents,
whom he calls Comites. These fought under
their fandard, and followed them in all their en-
terprizes. The fame custom continued among
them,in their new settlements, and those attached
or devoted followers were calledfideles, antrufi-
ones, bomines in trufe Dominica & leudes. Ta-
citus informs us, that the rank of a Comes was
deemed honourable; De morib. Germ. c. 13.
The composition, which is the standard by which
we mufl judge of the rank and condition of
persons in the middle ages, paid for the murder
of one in trufle Dominica, was triple to that paid
for the murder of a freeman. Leg. Salicor.
Tit. 44. §. . & . While the Germans re-
mained in their own country they courted the
favour of there Comites by prelents of arms and
horses, and by hospitality. See note VI. While
they had no fixed property in land, there were
the only gifts that they could bestow, and the
only reward which their followers desired. But
upon their fettling in the countries which they
conquered, and when the value of property
came to be understood among them, instead

of

of these flight presents, the Kings and chieftains
bestowed a more substantial recompense in land
on their adherents. These grants were called
Beneficia, because they were gratuitous donations;
'and honores, because they were regarded asmarks
of diftintion. What were the services origi-
nally exacted in return for these beneficia cannot
be determined with absolute precision; because
there are no records so ancient. When allodial
poffeflions were first rendered feudal, they were
not, at once, fubjeted to the feudal services.
The transition here, as in all other changes of
importance, was gradual. As the great objec
of a feudal vassal was to obtain protecion, when
allodial proprietors first consented to become
vassals of any powerful leader, they continued to
retain as much of their ancient independance as
was consistent with that new relation. The ho-
mage which they did to the superior of whom
they chose to hold, was called bomagium planum,
and bound them to nothing more than fidelity,
but without any obligation either of military fir-
vice, or attendance in the courts of their superior.
.Of this homagium planum some traces, though
.obscure, may still be discovered. Bruffel, torn.
i. p. .97. Among the ancient writs published by
D. D. De Vic & Vaifette .hist. de Langued.
are a great many which they call homagia.
They seem to be an intermediate ftep between the
homagium planum mentioned by Bruffel, and
the engagement to perform compleat feudal ser-
vice. 'The one party promises protection, and
grants certain cafles.or lands, the other engages
to defend the person of the granter, and to
aflfit him' likewise in defending his property as
often as he hall be fprmmbned to dofo. But
these engagements are accompanied with none
of the feudal formalities, and no mention is made
of any of the feudal services. They appear

rather

rather to be a mutual contra& between equals,
than the engagement of a vassal to perform ser-
vices to a superior Lord. Preuves de 1' hilt. de
Lang. tom. ii. 173. & passim. As oon as men
were accustomed to these, the other feudal ser-
vices were gradually introduced. M. de Mon-
tefquieu confiders thee beneficia as fiefs, which
originally fubjeaed those who held them to
military service. L'efpr. des Loix, 1. xxx. c. 3. &
j 6. M. L'abbe de Mably contends that such as
held these were at first fubjeaed to no other ser-
vice than what was.incumbent on every free man.
Observations furl'hiftoire de France, vol. i. 356.
But upon comparing their proofs and reasonings
and conjetures, it seems to be evident, that as
every free man, in consequence of his allodial
property, was bound to serve the community
under a severe penalty, no good reason can be
afligned for conferring these beneficia, if they
did not subjed such as received them, to some
new obligation. Why should a King have strip-
ped himself of his domain, if he had not expect-
ed, that, by parcelling it out, he might acquire
a right to services to which he had formerly no
title? We may then warrantably conclude,
*" That as allodial property fubjeaed those who
possessed it to serve the community, o beneficia
fubjeted such as held them, to personal service
and fidelity to him from whom they received
these lands." These beneficia were granted ori-
ginally only during pleasure. No circumstance
relating to the cuitoms of the middle ages is
better ascertained than this; and innumerable
proofs of it might be added to these produced
in L'efprit des Loix, 1. xxx. c. 6. and by Dt
Cange voc. beneficiuzm & feudu.

rV. 3uT

219

IV. Bt the poffeflion of benefices did not

continue long in this fiate. A precarious tenure
during pleasure was not suffi.cient to satisfy and
attach those who held it to their superior Lord,
they soon obtained theconfirmation of their bene-
sices during life. Feudor. lib. tit. i. Du Cange
produces everal quotaiorrn from ancient char-
tersand chronicles in proof of this; Gloss. voc.
Beneficium. After this it was easy to obtain or
extort charters rendering beneficia hereditary,
sirs in the direct line, then in the collateral,
and at last in the female line. Leg. Longob. lib.
.iii. tit. 8. Du Cange, voc.Beheficium.

IT is no easy matter to fix the precise time

when each of these changes took place. M.
I'Ab. Mably conjetiures with some probability,
that Charles Martel first introduced the prac-
tice of graming benefriia for life: Obfervat.
tcrn. i. p. r63, z.6o; and that Louis le Debon-
naite was among the sirs .who rendered them
hereditary, is evident from the authorities to
which he refers, Id. 429. Mabillon however
has publified a placiturn of Louis le Debon-
naire, A. D. 86o. by which it appears that
he still continued to grant: foiei benefiia only
during life. De re Diplolratica, lib. vi. p. 353.
In the year 889, Odo King of France granted
lands to Ricboda fideli ftaynre beneficiario &
frudtuario during hiswr life; and if he hould
die, and a son were born to him, that right
was to continue during the life of his son.
Mabillon ut supra, p. 556. This was an in-
termledite ftep btwden fiefs merely during
Jife, and fiefi hereditury to perpetuity. While
beneficia continued under their filft form,
and were held only during pleasure, he who

granted

granted them not only exercised the Domi-
nium or prerogative of superior Lord; but he re-
tained the property, giving his vassal only the
ufitfrut. But under the latter form, when they
.became hereditary, although feudal lawyers con-
tinued to define a beneficium agreeably to its
original nature, the property was in effect taken
out of the hands of the superior Lord, and lodg-
ed in those of the vassal. As soon as the reci-
procal advantages of the feudal mode of tenure
came to be understood by superiors as well as
vassals, that species of holding became so agree-
able to both, that not only lands, but casual rents,
'uch as the profits of a toll, the fare paid at ser-
ries, &c. the salaries or perquisites of offices, and
even pensions themselves, were granted and held
as fiefs; and military service was promised and
exacted on account of these. Morice Mem. pour
fervir de preuves a 'hist. de Bretagne, tom. ii.
p. 78, 690. Brufiel, tom. i. p. 41. Howabfurd
soever it may seem to grant or to hold such pre-
carious and casual property as a fief; there are
instances of feudal tenures till more singular.
The profits arising from the mafies said at an al-
tar were properly an ecclesiastical revenue, belong-
ing to the clergy of the church or monastery
which performed that duty, but these were
sometimes seized by the powerful barons. In
order to ascertain their right to them, they held
them as fiefs of the church, and parcelled them
out in the fame manner as other property to
their fub-vaffals. Bouquet. recueil des hist. vol.
x. p. 238, 480. The fame spirit of encroach-
ment which rendered fiefs hereditary, led the
nobles to extort from their sovereigns heredi-
tary grants of offices. Many of the great offices
of the crown became hereditary in most of the
kingdoms in Europe, and so conscious were

monarchs

monarchs of this spirit of usurpation among the
nobility, and so folicitousto guard against it, that,
on some occasions, they obliged the persons whom
they promoted to any office of dignity, to grant
an obligation that neither they, nor their heirs,
should claim it as belonging to them by heredi-
tary right. A remarkable instance of this is
produced, Mem. de l'Acad. des Infcript. torn.
xxx. p. 595. Another occurs in the Thefaur.
annecdot. published by Martene & Durand. vol. i.
p. 873.-This revolution in property occasion-
ed a change corresponding to it in political go-
vernment; the great vafials of the crown, as they
acquired such extensive poffeflions, usurped a
proportional degree of power, depressed the ju-
rifdition of the crown, and trampled on the pri-
vileges of the people. It is on account of this
connection, that the tracing the progress of feu-
dal property becomes an objet of attention in
hiflory; for upon discovering in what slate pro
perty was at any particular period, we may de-
termine with precision what was the degree of
power possessed by the King or by the nobility
at that juncture.

ONE circumitance more, with refpest to the

changes which property underwent, deserves at-
tention. I have hewn that when the various
tribes of barbarians divided their conquests in the
fifth and sixth centuries, the property which they
acquired was allodial; but in several parts of Eu-
rope property had become almoit entirely feudal
by the beginning of the tenth century. The
former species of property seems to be o much
better and more desirable than the latter, that
such a change appears surprising, especially
when we are informed that allodial property
was frequently converted into feudal, b a vo-

ulltarv

luntary deed of the poflefor, The riotives
which determined them to a choi'e so repugnant
to the ideas of modern times cbncerning pro-
perty, have been investigated and explained by
M. de Montesquieu with his usual. discernment
and accuracy, lib. xxxi. c. 8. The most con-
fiderable is that of which we have an hint in
Lambertus Ardenfis, an ancient writer quoted
by Du Cange, voce Alodis. In those times of
anarchy and disorder which became general
in Europe after the death of Charlemagne;
when there was scarce any union among the
different members of the community; and
individuals were exposed, single and undefend-
ed by government, to rapine and oppreflion,
it became necessary for every man to have a
powerful protedor, under whose banner he
might range himself, and obtain security against
enemies, whom he could not singly oppose.
For this reason he relinquished his allodial in-
dependance, and fubjeted himself to the feudal
services, that he might find safety under the
patronage of some refpetable superior. In
Come parts of Europe, this change from allodial
to feudal property became so general, that he
who poffefned land had no longer any liberty of
choice left. He was obliged to recognize some
liege Lord, and to hold of him. Thus Beau-
manoir informs us, that in the counties of Cler-
mont and Beauvois, if the Lord or Count dif-
covered any lands within his jurifdidion, for
which no service was performed, and which
paid to him no tax or custom, he might instant-
ly seize it as his own; for, fays he, according
to our custom no man can hold allodial proper-
ty. Couft. ch. 24. p. 123. Upon the fame
principle is founded a maxim, which has at
length become general in the law of France,
Nul terre fans Seigneur. In other provinces of
France allodial property seems to have remained

longer

longer unalienated, and to have been more
highly valued. A vast number of charters con-
taining grants, or files, or exchanges of allodial
lands in the province of Languedoc are pub-
lfhed, Hilt. gener. de Langued, par D. D. De
Vic & Vaifette, tom. ii. During the ninth,
tenth, and greater part of the eleventh century,
the property in that province seems to have
been entirely allodial; and scarce any mention
of feudal tenures occurs in the deeds of that
country. The state of property, during theft
centuries, seems to have been perfectly similar
in Catalonia, and the country of Roussillon, as
appears from the original charters published in
the appendix to Petr. de la Marca's treatise de
Marca five limite Hifpanico. Allodial property
seems to have continued in the Low-Countries,
to a period still later. During the eleventh,
twelfth, and thirteenth centuries, this species
appears to have been of considerable extent.
Miraei opera Diplom. vol. i. p. 34, 74, 75, 8 ,
817, 296, 842, 847, 578. Some vestiges of al-
lodial property appear there as late as the four-
teenth century. Ibid. 21 8. The notions of men
with refpeot to property, vary according to the
diversity of their underitandings, and the ca-
price of their passions. At the fame time that
some persons were fond of relinquishing allodial
property, in order to hold it by feudal tenure,
others seem to have been solicitous to convert
their fiefs into allodial property. An instance
of this occurs in a charter of Louis le Debon-
naire, published by Eckha'di, commentaii (t.
rebus Francia Orientalis, vol. ii. p. 885. Ao-
ther occurs in the year 299. Reliquie M;SS
omnis avi, by Ludlwig, vol. i. p. 209. anl evei
one as late as tle year 1 337. ibid vol. vii p. 40
The fame thing took place in the Low-Co- l nt is
Miraei oper. I: 52.

1*.

IN tracing there various revolutions of pro-

perty,' I have hitherto chiefly confined myself to
what happened in France, because the ancient
monuments of that nation have either been more
carefully preserved, or have been more clearly
illustrated than those of any people in Europe.

IN Italy, the fame revolutions happened in

property, and succeeded each other in the fame
order. There is ome ground, however, for
conjecturing that allodial property continued
longer in estimation among the Italians, than
among the French. It appears that many of
the charters granted by the Emperors in the
ninth century conveyed an allodial right to land.
Murat. antiq med. aevi. v. i. p. 575, &c. But
in the eleventh century, we find some examples
of persons who resigned their allodial property,
and received it back as a feudal tenure. Ib.
p. 6o, &c. Muratori observes, that the word
feudum, which came to be substituted in place
of beneficium, does not occur in any authentic
charter previous to the eleventh century. Id.
594. A charter of King Robert of France,
A. D. ioo8, is the earliest deed in which I have
met with the word feudum. Bouquet recueil des
hiftoriens de Gaule & de la France, tom. x. p.
593. b. This word occurs indeed in an edit,
A. D. 790, published by Bruffel, vol. i. p. 77.
But the authenticity of that deed has been called
in question, and perhaps the frequent use of the
wordfeudum in it, is an additional reason for doing
so. The account which I have given of the na-
ture both of allodial and feudal polfeflions receives
some confirmation from the etymology of the
words themselves. Alode or allodium is com-
pounded of the German particle an and lot,

VOL. I. Q i. e.

r. e. land obtained by lot. Wachteri Gloflar.
Germanicum, voc, Allodium, p. 35. It appears
from the authorities produced by him and by
Diu Cange, voc. Jors, that the northern nations
diVided the lands which they had conquered in
this manner. Feodum is compounded of od pof-
session or estate, and feo wages, pay; intimating
that it was stipendiary and granted as a recom-
penfe for service. Wachterus ibid. voc. feodum,
p. 441.

THE progress of the feudal system among the

German was perfeEtly similar to that which we
have traced in France. But as the Emperors
of Germany, especially after the Imperial crown
passed from the descendants of Charlemagne
to the house of Saxony, were far superior to the
contemporary Monarchs of France, in abilities,
the Imperial vassals did not aspire so early to in-
dependance, nor did they so oon obtain the
privilege of pofeffing their benefices by heredi-
tary right. Conrad II. on the Salic, was the first
Emperor, according to the compilers of the
Libri Feudorum, who rendered fiefs hereditary.
Lib. i. tit. i; Conrad began his reign A. D.
t24. Ldovicus Pius, under whose reign,
grants of hereditary fiefs were frequent in France,
succeeded his father, A. ). 84. Not only
was this innovation so much later in being in-
troduced among the vassals of the German Em-
perors, but even after Conrad had established it,
the law continued favourable to the ancient prac-
tice, and unless the charter of the vassal bore ex-
prefly that the fief descended to his heirs, it
was presumed to be granted only during life.
Lib. feud. ibid. Even after the alteration made
by Conrad, it was not uncommon in Germany
to grant fiefs only for life; a charter of this

kind

kind occurs as late as the year 376. Charta
ap. Boehmer. Princip. Jur. feud. p. 361. The
tranfmiflion of fiefs to collateral and female heirs,
took place very slowly among the Germans.
There is extant a charter, A. D. 2zo. convey-
ing the right of fuccefion to females, but it is
granted as an extraordinary mark of favour,
and in reward of uncommon services. Boehmer.
ibid. p. 365. In Germany, as well as in France
and Italy, a considerable part of the lands con-
tinued to be allodial long after the feudal mode
of tenure was introduced. It appears from the
Codex Diplomaticus Monafterii Buch, that a
great part of the lands in the marquisate of
Mifnia was still allodial as late as the thirteenth
century. No 3, 36, 37, 46, &c. ap. Scrip-
tores hist. German. cura Schoetgenii & Krey-
figii. Altenb. 1755. vol. ii. 183, &c. Allodial
property seems to have been common in another
diftriEt of the fame province during the fame
period. Reliquia Diplomatica Sanctimonial
Beutiz. Ne I7, 36, 58. ibid. 374, &c.

NOTE IX. SECT. I. p. 16.

As I hall, in another note, have occasion to

represent the condition of that part of the people
who dwelt in cities, I will confine myself in this
to confider the state of the inhabitants of the
country. The persons employed in cultivating
the ground during the ages under review may
be divided into three classes: I. Servi or slaves.
This seems to have been the most numerous
class, and consisted either of captives taken in
war, or of persons the property in whom was
acquired in some one of the various methods
enumerated by Du Cange, voc. fervus. v. 6.
p. 447. The wretched condition of this nume-

Q2 rQou

227

rous race of men will appear from several cir-
cumilances. . Their masters had absolute do-
minion over their persons, They had the power
of punihing their slaves capitally, without the
irterventionof anyjudge, This dangerous right
they poffefled not only in the more early periods,
when their manners were fierce, but it conti-
nued as late as the twelfth century, oach. Pot-
giefferus de ftatu fervorum. Lerngov. 17,36. 4to.
lib. ii. cap. i. §. 4, to, 13, 24. Even after this
jurifdidtion of masters came to be restrained, the
life of a slave was deemed to be of so little value,
that a very flight comperlfation attoned for tak-
ing it away. Idem, lib. iii. c. 6. If matiers had
power over the lives of their slaves, it is evi-
dent that almost no bounds would be set to the
rigour of the punilhments which they might
infliEt upon them. The Codes of ancient laws
prescribed punishments for the crimes of slaves
different from those which were inflicted on free
men. The latter paid only a fine or compen-
fation, the former were fubjeted to corporat
puniffments. The cruelty of these was in
many initances exceflive. Slaves, on very flight
occasions, might be put to the rack on question.
The laws with refped to these points are to
be found in Potgiefferus, lib. iii. cap. 7. 2. If
the dominion of maiters over the lives and per-
sons of their slaves was thus extensive, it was
no les To over their actions and property. They
were not originally permitted to marry. Male
and female slaves were allowed and even encou-
raged to cohabit together. But this union was
not confidered as a marriage, it was called con-
tubermum, not nuptiie or matrimonium. Potgieff.
lib. ii. c. z. §. i. This notion was so much
established, that during several centuries after the
barbarous nations embraced the Christian reli-
gion, slaves who lived as husband and wife, were

not
22

not joined together by any religious ceremony,
and did not receive the nuptial benediction from
a priest. Ibid. §. i o, i . When this conjunc-
tion between slaves came to be confidered as
a lawful marriage, they were not permitted to
marry without the content of their master, and
such as ventured to do so without obtaining that,
were punished with great severity, and some-
times were put to death. Potgieff- ibid. §. z2,
&c. Gregor. Turon. hiftor. lib. v. c. 3. When
the mnanners of the European nations became
more gentle, and their ideas more liberal, saves
who married without their master's content,
were fubjeted only to a fine. Potgieff ibid. §. 20.
Du Cange Gloss voc. Forifmaritagium. 3. All
the children of slaves, were in the fame condi-
tion with their parents, and became the pro-
perty of the master. Du Cange Gloft voc.fervus,
vol. 6. p. 450. Murat. antiq. Ital. vol. i. p. 766.
4. Slaves were so entirely the property of their
masters, that they could fell them at pleasure.
While domeftick slavery continued, the property
in a slave was fold in the fame manner with
that which a person had in any other moveable.
Afterwards slaves became adfcripti gleba, and
were conveyed by sale together with the farm
or estate to which they belonged. Potgiefferus
has collected the laws and charters which illus-
trate this well-known circumstance in the con-
dition of slaves. Lib. ii. c. 4. 5. Slaves had a
title to nothing but fubfiftance and cloaths from
their master; all the profits of their labour ac-
crued to him. If a master, from indulgence,
gave his slaves any peculium or fixed allowance
for their fubfiftance, they had no right of pro-
perty in what they saved out of that. All that
they accumulated belonged to their master.
Potgieft lib. ii. c. io. Murat. antiq. Ital. vol. i.
p. 768. Du Cange, voc.fervus, vol. vi. p. 45I,

(Q3 Conformably

229

Conformably to the fame principle, all the effects
of saves belonged to their master at their death,
and they could not dispose of them by testa-
ment. Potgiefl lib. ii. c. i.i. 6. Slaves were
diftinguithed from free men by a peculiar dress.
Among all the barbarous nations, long hair
was a mark of dignity and of freedom, slaves
were for that reason obliged to have their
heads; and by this distinction, how indifferent
soever it may be in its own nature, they were
reminded every moment of the inferiority of
their condition. Potgieff. lib. iii. c. 4. For the
fame reaoin it was enacted in the laws of almost
all the nations of Europe, that no slave should
be admitted to give evidence against a free man
in a court of justice. Du Cahge, voc. fervs,
vol. vi. p. 451. Potgieff. lib. iii. c. 3.

2. Villani. They were likewise adcriptiglebs

or villa, from which they derived their name,
and were transferable along with it. Du Cange,
voc. vtllanus. ut in this they differed from
slaves, that they paid a fixed rent to their ma-
fter for the land which they cultivated, and after
paying that, all the fruits of their labour and
industry belonged to themselves in property.
This diftinaion is marked by Piere de Fontaine's
Confeil. Vie de St. Louis par Joinville, p. 19.
edit. de Du Cange. Several cafes decided agree-
ably to this principle are mentioned by Murat.
Ibid. p. 773.

3. THE last class of persons employed in

agriculture were free men. These are diflin-
guifhed by various names among the writers
of the middle ages, Arimanni, eonditionales, ori-
ginarii, tributales, &c. These seem to have
been persons who poEeff'ed some small allo-
dial property of their own, and besides that,

cultivated

cultivated ome farm belonging to their more
wealthy neighbours, for which they paid a fixed
.rent; and bound themselves likewise to perform
several small services in prato vel in meffe, in ara-
tura vel in vinea, such as ploughing a certain
,quantity of their landlord's ground, affiting him
in harvest and vintage work, &c. The clearelt
proof of this may be found in Muratori, v. i. p:
712. and in Du Cange under the refpe&ive words
abovementioned. I have not been able to discover
whether there arimanni, &c. were removable at
pleasure, or held their farms by lease for a certain
number of years. The former, if we may judge
from the genius and maxims of the age, seems to
be most probable. These persons, however, were
confidered as free men in the mioft honourable
sense of the word; they enjoyed all the privileges
.of that condition, and were even called to serve in
war; an honour to whichno slave was admitted.
Murat. Antiq. vol. i. p. 743. vol. ii. p. 446. This
account of the condition of these three different
classes of persons, will enable the reader to apprei
hend the full force of an argument which I shall
.produce in confirmation of what I have said in the
text concerning the wretched fate of the people.
Notwithstanding the immense difference between
the first of these classes and the third, such was the
spirit of tyranny which prevailed among the great
proprietors of land, and so various their opportu-
nitiesof opprefling thofewho were fettled on their
eltates, and of rendering their condition intoler-
able, that many freemen, in despair, renounced
their liberty, and voluntarily surrendered them-
selves as slaves to their powerful maters. This
they did, in order that their masters might be.
come more immediately interested to afford them
protecion, together with the means of subsisting
themselves and their families. The forms of such
a surrender, or bnoxiatio, as it was then called,
are preserved by Marculfus, lib. ii. c. 28; and

Q.4 by

.230

by the anonymous collector of formul published
by Bignon, c. 6. together with Marculfus. In
both, the reason for the obnoxiatio, is the wretch-
ed and indigent condition of the person whogives
up his liberty. It was still more common for
freemen to surrender their liberty to bishops or
abbots, that they might partake of the security
which the vassals and slaves of churches and mo-
nafteries enjoyed, in consequence of the fuperfli-
tious veneration paid to the faint under whose
immediate protection they were supposed to be
taken. DuCange, voc. oblatus, vol. iv. p. 1286.
That condition must have been miserable indeed,
which could induce a freeman voluntarily to re-
nounce his liberty, and to give up himself as a
,slave to the disposal of another. The number of
slaves in all the nations of Europe was prodigious.
The greater part of the inferior class of people
in France were reduced to this fIate, at the com-
mencement of the third race of Kings. L'efpr.
des Loix, liv. xxx. c. x . The fame was the cafe
in England, Brady Pref, to Gen.Hift. Many cu-
.rious fats with refpec to the ancient stato of vil-
lains or slaves in England, are published in obfer-
vations on the.ftatutes, cliefly the more ancient,
2d edit. p. 244.

NOTE X. SECT. I.p. 19.

INNUMERABLE proofs of this might be pro-

duced. Many charters granted by persons of
the highet. rank are preserved, from which it
appears that they could not subscribe their
name. It was usual for persons who could not
write, to make the sign 'of the cross in confir-
mation of a charter. Several of these remain,
where Kings and persons of great eminence
affix Jignlum crucis manu propria pro ignoratione
literarum. Du Cange,voc. Cru,'vol. iii .

p. 1191.

From this is derived the phrase of signing inflead
of subscribing a paper. In the ninth century,

Herbaud

Herbaud Comes Palatii, though fupremejudge of
the Empire by virtue of his office, could not sub-
scribe his name. Nouveau Traite de Diploma-
tique par deux Benedictins, 4to. tom. ii. p. 422.
.So late as the fourteenth century, Du Guefclin,
constable of France, the greatest man in the slate,
and one of the greatest men of his age, could
neither read nor write. St. Palaye Memoires fur
1'ancienne Chevalerie, t. ii. p. 8. Nor was this
ignorance confined to laymen; the greater part
of the clergy was not many degrees superior to
them in science. Many dignified ecclefiaficks
could not subscribe the canons of those councils,
in which they fat as members. Nouv. Trait6
de diplom. tom. ii. p. 424. One of the quefti-
ons appointed by the canons to be put to persons
who were candidates for orders was this, " Whe-
ther they could read the gospels and epistles, and
explain the sense of them, at least literally?"
ReginoPrumienfisap. Bruck. Hist. Philof. v. iii.
p. 63I. Alfred the Great complained, that from
the Humber to the Thames there was not a priefl
who understood the liturgy in his mother tongue,
or who could translate the easiest piece of Latin;
and that from the Thames to the ea, the eccle-
fiafticks were still more ignorant. Aerus de
rebus geftis Alfredi, ap. Camdeni. Anglica, &c.
p. 25. The ignorance of the clergy is quaintly
described by an author of the dark ages. " Po-
tius dediti gulae quam Gloffae; potius colligunt
libras quam legunt libros; libentius intuentur
Martham quam Marcum; malunt legere in Sal-
mone quam in Solomone. Alanus de art. Pre-
dicat. ap. Lebeuf. Dissert. tom. ii. p. 21. To the
obvious causes of such universal ignorance arising
from the fate of government and manners, from
the seventh to the eleventh century, we may add
the scarcity of books, and the difficulty of ren-
dering them more common during that period.
The Romans wrote their books either on parch-

pent

ment or on paper made of the Egyptian papyrus.
The latter being the cheapest, was of course the
most commonly used. But after the Saracens
conquered Egypt in the seventh century, the com-
munication between that country and the people
fettled in Italy or in other parts of Europe, was al-
most entirely broke off, and the papyrus was no
longer in use among them. They were obliged,
on that account, to write all their books upon
parchment, and as the price of that was high,
books became extremely rare and of great value.
We may judge of the scarcity of the materials
for writing them from one circumifance. There
still remain several manuscripts of the eighth,
ninth, and following centuries, wrote on parch-
ment, from which some former writing had been
erased, in order to substitute a new composition ix
its place. In this manner, it is probable, that fe-
veral works of the ancients perished. A book of
Livy or of Tacitus might be erased, to make
room for the legendary tale of a faint, or the fu-
perftitious prayers of a missal. Murat. Antiq. Ital.
v. iii. p. 833. P. de Montfaucon affirms, that
the greater part of the manuscripts on parchment
which he has seen, those of an ancient date except-
ed, are written on parchment from which some
former treatise had been erased. Mem. de
L'Acad. des infcript. tom. ix. p. 325. As the
want of materials for writing, is one reason why so
many of the works of the ancients have perished,
it accounts likewise for the small number ofma-
nufcripts of any kind, previous to the eleventh
century,when they began to multiply from a cause
which shall be mentioned. Hist. Liter. de France,
tom. vi. p. 6. Many circumstances prove the
scarcity of books during these ages. Private per-
sons seldom possessed any books whatever. Even
monasterics ofconfiderable note had onlyonemif-
fal. Murat. Antiq. v. ix. p. 789. Lupus, abbot of
Ferrieres, in a letter to the Pope, A. D. 855, be-

feeches
Z34

feecheshimto lend him a copy of Cicero de Oratore
and Quintilian's Institutions, "for,." fays he, " al-
though we have parts of those books, there is no
compleat copy of them in all France. Murat.
Ant. v. iii. p. 835. The price of books became
lb h'gh, that perfozs of a moderate fortune could
not afford to purchase them. The countess of An-
jou paid for a copy of the Homilies of Haimon,
biihop of Halberftadt, two hundred heep, five
quarters of wheat, and the fame quantity of rye
and millet. Hiftoire Literaire deFrance pardesRe-
ligieux Beneditins, tom. vii. p. 3. Even so late as
the year 147I, when Louis XI. borrowed the
works of Rafis, the Arabian physician, from the
faculty of medicine in Paris, he not only deposited
as a pledge a considerable quantity of plate, but
was obliged to procure a nobleman to join with
him as surety in a deed, binding himself under a
great forfeiture to restore it. Gabr. Naude Addit. a
l'hiftoire de Louys XI. par Comines. edit. de Fref-
noy, tom. iv. p. 28 I. Many curious circumstances
with respect to the extravagant price of books il
the middle ages, ae collected by that industrious
compiler, to whom I refer such of my read rs as
deem this small branch of literary hiftoryan obj ec
of curiosity. When any person made a present of
a book to a church or a monastery, in which were
the only libraries during thee ages, it was deemed
a donative of such value, that he offered it on the
altar pro remedio anima fua, in order to obtain the
forgiveness of his fins. Murat. vol. iii. p. 836.
Hist. Liter. de France, t. vi. p. 6. Nouv. Trait.
du Diplomat. par deux Beneditins, 4to. tom. i. p.
481. In the eleventh century, the at of making
paper in the manner now become universal, was
invented; by means of that not only the number
of manuscripts increased, but the study of then
sciences was wonderfully facilitated. Murat. ib.
p. 871 , The invention of the art of making pa-
per, and the invention of the art of printing, are

two

two considerable events in literary history. It is
remarkable that the former preceded the first
dawning of letters and improvement in know-
ledge towards the close of the eleventh century;
the latter uihered in the light which pread over
Europe at the aera of the Reformation.

NOTE XI. SE.CT. I. p. 19.

ALL the religious maxims and practices of the

dark ages are a proof of this. I shall produce one
remarkable testimony in confirmation of it, from
an author canonized by the church of Rome, St.
Eloy or Egidius, bishop of Noyon, in the seventh
century. "' e is a good Christian who comes
frequently to church4 who presents the oblation
which is offered to God upon the altar; who doth
not taste of the fruits of his own induifry until
he has consecrated a part of them to God; who,
when the holy festival shall approach, lives
chaftly even with his own wife during several
days, that with a safe conscience he may draw
near to the altar of God; and who, in the last
place, can repeat the Creed and the Lord'sPrayer.
Redeem then your fouls from deftruEtion while
you have the means in your power; offer pre-
sents and tythes to churchmen; come more fre-
quently to church; humbly implore the patronage
of the faints; for if you observe these things, you
may come with security in the day to the tribu-
nal of the eternal Judge, and fay, "Give to us,
o Lord, for we have given unto thee." Da-
cherii Specilegium Veter. Script. v. ii. p. 94.
The learned and judicious translator of Dr. Mo-
flleim's Ecclesiastical History, from one of whose
additional notes I have borrowed this paflage,
Subjoins a very proper reflection; " We fee here
a large and ample description of a good Chris-
tian, in which there is not the least mention

of

of the love of God, resignation to his will, obe-
dience to his laws, or of justice, benevolence,
and charity towards men." Mofh. Eccles. Hist.
v. i. p. 324.

NOTE XII. SECT. I. p. 20:

IT is no inconsiderable misfortune to the

church of Rome, whose doctrine of infallibility
renders all such infttutions and ceremonies as
have been once universally received, immutable
and everlasting, that he must continue to ob-
serve in enlightned times, those rites which were
introduced during the ages of darkness and
credulity. What delighted and edified the latter,
must disgust and hock the former. Many of
these rites appear manifestly to have been intro-
duced by a superstition of the lowest and most
illiberal species. Many of them were borrowed,
with little variation, from thereligiousceremonies
established among the ancient Heathens. Some
were so ridiculous, that if every age did not fur-
nifh instances of the fascinating influence of super-
ftition, as well as of the whimsical forms which
it assumes, it must appear incredible that they
should ever be received or tolerated. In several
churches of France, they celebrated a festival in
commemoration of the Virgin Mary's flight into
Egypt. It was called the feast of the Ass. A
young girl richly dressed, with a child in her
arms, was set upon an ass superbly caparisoned.
The ass was led to the altar in solemn proceflion.
High Mars was said with great pomp. The ass
was taught to kneel at proper places; a hymn
no less childish than impious was sung in his
praise: And when the ceremony was ended,
the priest, instead of the usual words with which
he dismissed the people, brayed three times
like an ass; and the people, instead of their

usual

usual response, We bless the Lord, brayed three
times in the fame manner. Du Cange, voc.
Feffum. v. iii. p. 424. This ridiculous ceremo-
ny was not, like the feflival of fools, and ome
other pageants of those ages, a mere farcical
entertainment exhibited in a church, and min-
gled, as was then the custom, with an imitation
of some religious rites; it was an at of devoti-
on, performed by the ministers of religion,
and by the authority of the church. However,
as this pradtice did not prevail universally in
the Catholic church, its absurdity contributed
at last to abolish it.

NOTE XIII. SECT. I. p. 25.

As there is no event in the history of man-

kind more singular than that of the Crusades,
every circumstance that tends to explain or to
ive any rational account of this extraordinary
renzy of the human mind is interesting.
have asserted in the text, that the minds of men
were prepared gradually for the amazing effort
which they made in consequence of the exhor-
tations of Peter the hermit, by several occur-
rences previous to his time. A more particu-
lar detail of this curious and obscure part of
history, may perhaps appear to ome of my
readers to be of importance. That the end of
the world was expected about the close of the
tenth and beginning of the eleventh century; and
that this occasioned a general alarm, is evident
from the authors to whom I refer in the text.
This belief was io universal and so strong, that it
mingled itself with their civil tranfations. Many
charters in the latter part of the tenth century
begin in this manner: "Apropinquante mundi
termino," &c. As the end of the world is now at
hand, and by various calamities and judgments
the signs of its approach are now manifeff. Hifn

dc

de Langued. par D. D. de Vic Vaifette, tom.
ii. Preuves, p. 86, 89, go, 117, 158,' &c.
One effect of this was, that a great number of
pilgrims resorted to Jerusalem, with a resolution
to die there, or to wait the coming of the Lord;
Kings, Earls, Marquiffes, Bishops, and even a
great number'of women, besides persons of infe-
rior rank flocked to the Holy Land. Glaber. Ro-
dulph. Hist. chez Bouquet Recueil, tom. x. p.
50, 52. Another hifftorian mentions a vast ca-
valcade of pilgrims who accompanied the count
of Angouleme to Jerusalem in the year o026.
Chronic. Ademari, ibid. p. I62. These pilgrims
filled Europe with lamentable accounts of the
tate of Christians in the Holy Land. Willerm.
Tyr. Hist. ap. Gest. Dei per Franc. vol. ii. p.
636. Guibert. Abbat. Hist. ibid. vol. i. p. 476.
Besides this, it was usual for many of the Chris-
tian inhabitants of Jerusalem, as well as of other
cities in the East, to travel as mendicants through
Europe; and by describing the wretched condi-
tion of the professors of the Christian faith under
the dominion of Infidels, to extort charity, and
to excite zealous persons to make ome attempt
in order to deliver them from oppreflion. Bal-
drici. Archiepifcopi Hiftor. ap. Gefta Dei, &c.
vol. i. p. 86. In the year 986, Gerbet, archbi-
thop of Ravenna, afterwards Pope Silvefter II.
addressed a letter to all Christians in the name
of the church of Jerusalem. It is eloquent and
pathetic, and contains a formal exhortation to
take arms against the Pagan oppressors, in order
to rescue the holy City from their yoke. Ger-
berti Epiftolae ap. Bouquet Recueil, tom. x. p.
426. In consequence of this spirited call,
ome subjects of the republick of Pisa equipped a
fleet, and invaded the territories of the Mahome-
tans in Syria. Murat. Script. Rer. Italic. vol. iii. p.
400. The alarm was taken in the East, and
an opinion prevailed. A. D. olo, that all the

forces

forces of Christendom were to unite, in order to
drive the Mahometans out of Palestine. Chror'.
Ademari ap. Bouquet, tom. x. p. 152. It is evi-
dentfrom all there particulars, that the ideas
.which led the Crusaders to undertake their wild
enterprizewere gradually formed; fothat the uni-
versal concourse to the standard of the cross when
ereEted by Urban II. will appear less fuprifing.

IF the various circumstances which I have

enumerated in this note, as well as in the hifto-
ry, are sufficient to account for the ardour with
which such vast numbers engaged in such a dan-
gerous undertaking, the extensive privileges and
immunities granted to those who assumed the
cross, serve to account for the long continuance
of this spirit in Europe. i. They were exempt-
ed from prosecutions on account of debt during
the time of their being engaged in this holy
service. Du Cange, voc. Crucis privilegium, v,
ii. p. I94.- 2. They were exempted from
paying interest for the money which they had
borrowed. Ibid.- 3. They were exempted
either entirely, or at least during a certain time,
from the payment of taxes. Ibid. Ordonances
des Rois de France, tom. i. p. 33.- 4. They
migh alienate their lands without the content of
the superior lord of whom they held. Ib. 5.
Their persons and effects were taken under the
protection of St. Peter, and the anathemas of the
church were denounced against all who should
molest them, or carry on any quarrel or hofti-
lity against them, during their absence, on ac-
count of the holy war. Du Cange, Ib. Guibertus
Abbas ap. Bongarf. i. p. 480, 482.-6. Thev
enjoyed all the privileges of Ecclefiafticks, and
were not bound to plead in any civil court, but.
were declared fubjedt to the spiritual jurifdition
alone. Du Cange, Ib. Ordon. des R',is, tonm. i.

p. 4.

p. 34, 174.-7. They obtained a plenary remif-
lion of all their fins, and the gates of heaven
"were set open to them, without requiring any
proof of their penitence, but their engaging in
this expedition, and thus gratifying their favou-
rite paiiion, the love of war. Guibert. Abbas. p.
480. When we behold the civil and ecclesiastical
power s vying with each other,and straining their
i.vention in order to devile expedients for en-
couraging and addi:ig strength to the spirit of
fupelifliion, can we be fuprized that it should
b-.come so general as to render it infamous, and
a mark of cowardice to decline engaging in the
holy war? Willerm. Tyrienfis ap. Bongarf.
vol ii. p. 641. The hifories of the Crusades
written by modern authors, who are apt to sub-
ftitute the id.:-s and maxims of their own age
in the place of those which influenced the per-
lons uhotle actions they attempt to relate,, cop-
vey a very imperfedt notion of the spirit at that
time predominant in Europe. The original his-
torians, who.were animated themselves with the
fame paflions which poffefled their contempora-
ries, exhibit to usa more striking picture of the
times and manners'which they describe. The
enttuliaftic rapture with which they account for
the effedts of tle Pope's difcotirfe in the council
of Clermont; the exultation with which they
mention the numbers who devoted themnfelves
to this holy warfare; the confidence with which
they rely'on the divine protecion; the ecstasy of
joy with which they describe their taking poef-
sion of the holy city, will enable us to conceive
in some degree the extravagance of that zeal
which agitated the minds of men with such vio-
lence, and will suggest as many singular reflecti-
ons to a philosopher, as any occLrrence in the
history of m .ankind. It is unneceflary to fe-
le' the particular paffagcs in the several hifto-
rians which confirm this obferiatrin. But left

Vor.. I. R thei

24!

these authors may be fufpeEted of adorning their
narrative with any exaggerated description, I
shall appeal to one of the leaders who conduEt-
ed the enterprize. There is extant a letter
from Stephen, the earl of Chartres and Blois,
to Adela his wife, in which he gives her an ac-
count of the progress of the Crusaders. He
describes the Crusaders as the chosen army of
Christ, as the servants and soldiers of God, as
men who marched under the immediate protec-
tion of the Almighty, being conducted by his
hand to viftory and conquest. He speaks of
the Turks as accursed, sacrilegious, and de-
voted by heaven to destruction; and when he
mentions the soldiers in the Christian army who
had died, or were killed, he is confident that
their fouls were admitted directly into the joys
of Paradise. Dacherii Specilegium, vol. iv.
p 257.

THE expence of conducting numerous bodies

of men from Europe to Asia, mufl have been
excessive, and the difficulty of raising the necef-
fary umrs muff have been proportionally great,
during ages when the publick revenues in eve-
ry nation of Europe were extremely small.
Some account is preserved of the expedients em-
ployed by Humbert I. Dauphin of Vienne, in
order to levy the money requisite towards equip-
ping him for the Crusade, A. D. 1346. These
*Ifhall mention, as they tend to shew the confi-
derable influence which the Crusades had, both
on the state of property and of civil govern-
ment. i. He exposed sale part of his do-
mains; and as the price was destined for such a
sacred service, he obtained the consent of the
French King, of whom there lands were held,
ratifying the alienation. Hilt. de Dauphin', tom.
i. 332, 335.-2. He issued a proclamation,
in which he promised to grant new privileges to

the

the nobles, as well as new immunities to the
cities and towns, in his territories, in confidera-
tion of certain fums which they were instantly
to pay on that account. Ibid. tom. ii. p. 512.
Many of the charters of community, which I
shall mention in another note, were obtained in
this manner. - 3. He exacted a contribution
towards defraying the charges of the expedition
from all his fubjeas, whether ecclefiafticks or
laymen, who did not accompany him in person
to the East. Ibid. tom. i. p. 335.-4. He ap-
propriated a considerable part of his usual reve-
nues for the support of the troops to be employ-
ed in this service; Ibid. tom. ii. p. 518.-5.
He exated considerable fums not only of the
Jews fettled in his dominions, but also of the
Lombards and other bankers who had fixed
their residence there. Ibid. tom. i. p. 338. tom.
ii. 5z8. Notwithstanding the variety of these
resources, the Dauphin was involved in such ex-
pence by this expedition, that on his return he
was obliged to make new demands on his sub-
jests, and to pillage the Jews by fresh exacions.
Ibid. tom. i. p. 344, 347. When the count de
Foix engaged in the firit Crusade, he raised the
money neceflary for defraying the expences of
that expedition, by alienating part of his terri-
tories. Hist. de Langued. par D. D. de Vic &
Vaifette, tom. ii. p. 287. In like manner Bald-
win, count of Hainault, mortgaged or fold part
of his dominions to the bishop of Liege. A. D.
1096. Du Mont Corps Diplomatique, tom. i.
p. 59. At a later period, Baldwin Count of
Namur fold part of his estate to a monastery,
when he intended to assume the cross. A. D
1239. Miraei oper. i. 33.

NOTE XIV. SECT. I. p. 29.

THE usual method of forming an opinion con-
cerning the comparative state of manners in

R z two

243

two different nations, is by attending to the
facts which historians relate concerning each of
them. Various pafages might be fele&ed from
they Byzantin historians, describing the splendor
and magnificence of the Greek Empire. P. de
Montfaucon has produced from the writings of
St. Chrysostom a very full account of the ele-
gance and luxury of the Greeks in his age.
That father in his sermons enters into such de-
tails concerning the manners and customs of his
contemporaries, as appear strange in discourses
from the pulpit. P. de Montfaucon has colleet-
ed there descriptions, and ranged them under
different heads. The court of the more early
Greek Emperors seems to have resembled those
of Eastern monarchs, both in magnificence and
in corruption of manners. The Emperors in
the eleventh century, though inferior in power,
did not yield to them in ostentation and fplen-
dor. Memoires de 'Acad. des Infcript. tom.
xx. p. 197.-But we may decide concerning the
comparative state of manners in the Eastern
Empire, and among the nations in the weft of
Europe by another method, which, if not more
certain, is at least more friking. As Conftan-
tinople was the place of rendezvous for all the
armies of the crusaders, this brought together
the people, of the east and weft, as to one great
interview. There are extant several contempo-
rary authors, both among the Greeks and Latins,
who were witnesses of this singular congress of
people formerly strangers, in a great measure,
to each other. They describe with simplicity
and candour, the impreflion which that new
fpeacle made upon their own minds. This
may be confidered as the rmot lively and jufl
piture of the real character and manners of each
people. When the Greeks speak of the Franks,
they describe them as barbarians, fierce, illi-
terate, impetuous and savage. They affune

a tone
244

a tone of superiority, as a more poli'shed peo-
ple, acquainted with the arts both of govern-
ment and of elegance, of which the others were
ignorant. It is thus Anna Comnena describes
the manners of the Latins, Alexias, p. 224. 231.
237. ap. Byz. Script. vol. xi. She always treats
them with contempt as a rude people, the very
mention of whole names was sufficient to conta-
minate the beauty and elegance of history, p.
229. Nicetas Choniatas inveighs against them
with frill more violence, and gives an account
of their ferocity and devastations, in terms not
unlike those which preceding historians had em-
ployed in describing the incursions of the Goths
and Vandals. Nicet. Chon. ap. Byz. Script. vol.
iii. p. 302, &c. But, on the other, hand, the
Latin historians were struck with aftoniihment
at the magnificence, wealth, and elegance which
they discovered in the Eastern empire. " 0
what a vast city is Constantinople (exclaims
Fulcherius Carrotenfis, when he sirs beheld it)
and how beautiful! How many monasteries are
there in it, and how many palaces built with
wonderful art! How many manufactures are
there in the city amazing to behold! It would
be aftonilhing to relate how it abounds with all
good things, with gold, silver, and stuffs of va-
rious kinds; for every hour ships arrive in its
port laden with all things neceffar) for the use
of man. Fulcher. ap. Bongarf. vol. i. p. 386.
Willermus Archbishop of Tyre, the most intel-
ligent historian of the crusades, takes frequent
occasion to describe the elegance and splendour
of the court of Constantinople, and adds, that
what they observed there exceeded any idea
which they could have formed of it, noftrarum
enim rerum niodum & dignitatem excedunt,
Willerm. Tyr. ap. Bong. vol. ii. p. 657. 664.
Guntherus, a French monk, who wrote a history
of the conqlieft of Constantinople by the cru-

R 3 faders

faders in the thirteenth century, speaks of the
magnificence of that city in the fame tone of
admiration, "Stru'turam autem Edificiorum
in corpore civitatis, in eccleflis videlicit, & tur-
ribus, & in domibus magnatorum, vix ullus vel
defcribere poteft, vel credere defcribenti, nifi
qui ea oculata fide cognoverit." His. ConRan-
tinop. ap. Canifii Letiones Antiquas. fol. Antw.
1725. vol. iv. p. 14. Geoffrey deVillehardouin,
a nobleman of high rank, and accustomed to
all the magnificence then known in the weft,
describes, in similar terms, the aftofiifhment and
admiration of such of his fellow soldiers who be-
held ConRfantinople for the first time: " They
could not have believed, fays he, that there was
a city so beautiful and rich 'in the whole world.
When they viewed its high walls, its .ofty
towers, its rich palaces, its superb churches, all
appeared so great that they could have formed
no conception of this sovereign city, unless they
had seen it with their own eyes." Hiftoire de la
Conquete de Conitant. p. 49. From these un-
disguised representations of their own feelings,
it is evident, that to the Greeks, the Latins ap-
'peared to be a race of rude, unpoliflied barba-
rians; whereas the latter, how much foeve they
might contemn the unwarlike'charader of the
former, could not help regarding them as far fu-
perior to themselves in elegance and arts. -That
*the state of government and manners was much
more improved in Italy than in the other coun-
tries of Europe is evident not only from the fa&i
recorded in history, but it appears that the more
intelligent leaders of the crusaders were itruck
with the difference. Jacobus de Vitriaco, a French
historian of the holy war, makes an elaborate
panegyrick on the character and manners of the
Italians. He views them as a more polished peo-
ple, and particularly celebrates them for their
love of liberty and civil wisdom; in confiliis cir-

curmfpe.l,

cumfpedi, in re fua publica procuranda diligen-
tes & ftudiofi; fibi in pofterum providentes;
aliis fubjici renuentes; ante omnia libertatem
fibi defendentes; ub uno quem eligunt capita-
neo, communitate fuae jura & inftituta dictantes,
& fimiliter observantes. Hiftor. Hierofol. ap.
Gefta Dei per Francos, vol. ii. p. o85.

NOTE XV. SECT. I. p. 33.

THE different steps taken by the cities of Ita-

ly in order to extend their power and dominion
are remarkable. As oon as their liberties were
eRiablifhed, and they began to feel their own
importance, they endeavoured to render them-
selves masters of the territory round their walls.
Under the Romans, when cities enjoyed muni-
cipal privileges and jurifdidion, the circum-
jacent lands belonged to each town, and were
the property of the community. But as it was
not the genius of the feudal policy to encourage
.cities, or to hew any regard for their possessions
and immunities, there lands had been seized,
and shared among the conquerors. The barons
to whom they were granted, ereted their castles
almost at the gates of the city, and exercised
their jurisdiction there. Under pretence of re-
covering their ancient property, many of the
cities in Italy attacked these troublesome neigh-
bours, and difpoffeffing them, annexed their ter-
ritories to the communities, and made thereby a
considerable addition to their power. Several
inflances of this occur in the eleventh, and be-
ginning of the twelfth centuries. Murat. antiq.
tal. vol. iv. p. 159, &c. Their ambition in-
creasing together with their power, they after-
wards attacked several barons situated at a great-
er distance from them, and obliged there to en-
gage that they should become members of their

R 4 community;

community; that they hould take the oath of
fidelity to their magistrates; that they should
subjea their lands to all burdens and taxes irn-
posed by common content; that they hold de-
fend the community against all its enemies;' and
that they should reside within the city during a
certain specified time in each year. Murat. ibid.
163. This fubjeetion of the nobility to the
municipal government established in cities, be-
came almost universal, and was often extremely
grievous to persons accustomed to confider them-
selves as independent. Otto Frifingenfis thus de-
scribes the state of Italy under Frederick I. " The
cities so much affect liberty, and are so solicitous
to avoid the insolence of power, that almost all
of them have thrown off every other authority,
and are governed by their own magistrates. In-
fomuch that all that country is now filled with
free cities, each of which have compelled their
bishops to reside within their walls, and there is
scarce any nobleman, how great soever his power
may be, who is not subjet to the laws and go-
vernment of some city. De Geifis Frider. I. Imp.
lib. ii. c. 3. . 453. In another place he ob-
serves of the Marquis of Montserrat that he was
amoft the only Italian baron, who had prelfrvcd
his independence, and had not become fubje to
the laws of any city. Sec also Muratori Antichi-
ta Eftenfi, vol. i. p. 4 1, 412. That late into
which some of the nobles were comp lled to en-
ter, others embraced from choice. They obfer-
ved that high degree of security as well as of
credit and estimation which the growing wealth
and dominion of the great communities procured
to all the members of them. They were desirous
to partake of these, and to put themselves under
such powerful protection. With this view they
voluntarily became citizens of the towns in which
their lands were most contiguous, and abandoning

their
248

their ancient castles, took up theirrefidence in the
cities at least during part of the year. Several
deeds are still extant, by which some of the most
illustrious families in Italy are associated as citi-
zens of different cities. Murat. ib. p. 65, &c.
A charter by which Atto de Macerata is admit-
ted as a citizen of Olino, A. D. I198. in the
Marcha di Ancona, is Rtill extant. In this he fli-
pulates, that he will acknowledge himself to be
a burgess of that community; that he will, to
the utmost of his power, promote its honour and
welfare; that he will obey its magistrates; that
he will enter into no league with its enemies;
that he will reside in the town during two months
in every year, or for a longer time if required
by the magistrates. The community, on the
other hand, take him, his family, and friends,
under their protection, and engage to defend
him againit every enemy. Fr. Ant. Zacharias
Anecdota medii aevi. Aug. Taurm. 1755. fol.
p. 66. This privilege was deemed o impor-
tant, that not only laymen, but ecclefiafticks of
the highest rank, condescended to be adopted
as members of the great communities, in hopes
of enjoying the safety and dignity which that
conferred. Murat. ib. 179. Before the infti-
tution of communities, persons of noble birth
had no other residence but their caffles. They
kept their petty courts there; and the cities
were deserted, having hardly any inhabitants,
but slaves or perlons of low condition. But in
consequence of the practice which I have mcn-
rioned, cities not only became more populous,
but were filled with inhabitants of better rank;
and a custom, which frill fibfifis in Italy, was
then introduced, that all families of distinction
reside more constantly in the great towns, than
is usual in other parts of Europe. As cities
acquired new consideration and dignity by
the accession of iich citizens, they became

more

249

more solicitous to preserve their liberty and
independence. The Emperors, as overeigns,
had anciently a palace in almost every great ci-
ty of Italy; when they visited that country they
were accustomed to refi4e in there, and the
troops which accompanied them were quartered
in the houses of the citizens. This the citi-
zens confidered both asignominious and dange-
rous. They tould not help confidering it as re-
ceiving a master and an enemy within their
walls. They laboured therefore to get free of
this fubjetion. Some cities prevailed on the Em-
,perors to engage that they hould never enter
their gates, but take up their residence without
the walls: Chart. Hen. IV. Murat. ib. p. 24.
Others obtained the imperial license to pull
down the palace situated within their liberties,
on condition that they built another in the sub-
urbs for the reception of the Emperor. Chart.
Hen. IV. Murat. ib. p. 25. These various en-
croachments of the Italian cities alarmed the Em-
perors, and put them on schemes for re-eftab-
lifhing the Imperial jurifdition over them on its
ancient footing. Frederick Barbarofla engaged in
this enterprize with great ardour. The free ci-
ties of Italy joined together in a general league,
and Rfood on their defence; and after a long
contest, carried on with alternate success, a so-
lemn treaty of peace was concluded at Confance,
A. D. I I83. by which all the privileges and im-
munities granted by former Emperors to the
principal cities in Italy were confirmed and rati-
sied. Murat. dissert. XLVIII. This treaty of
Conflance was confidered as such an important
article in the jurisprudence of the middle ages,
that it is usually publithed together with the Li-
bri Feudorum at the end of the Corpus Juris
Civilis. The treaty secured privileges of great
importance to the confederate cities, and though
4t reserved a considerable degree of authority and

jurifdidion

jurifdition to the Empire, yet the cities perfever-
ed with such vigour in their efforts in order to
extend their immunities, and the conjunctures in
which they made them were so favourable, that,
before the conclusion of the thirteenth century,
most of the great cities in Italy had haken off
all marks of fubjeEtion to the Empire, and were
become independent sovereign republics. It is
not requisite that I should trace the various Reps
by which they advanced to this high degree of
power o fatal to the Empire, and so beneficial
to the cause of liberty in Italy. Muratori with
his usual industry has colleeted many original
papers which illustrate this curious and little
known part ofhiftory. Murat. Antiq. Ital. Dif-
fert. L. See also Jo Bapt. Villanovae hist. Laudis
Pompeii five Lodi in Grev. Thef. Antiquit. Ital.
vol. iii. p. 888.

NOTE XVI. SECT. I. p. 34.

L o N G before the inffitution of communities

in France, charters of immunity or Franchise
were granted to ome towns and villages by the
lords on whom they depended. But these are
very different from such as became common in
the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. They did
not eret these towns into corporations; they
did not establish a municipal government; they
did not grant them the privilege of bearing arms.
They contained nothing more than a manumif-
sion of the inhabitants from the yoke of fervi-
tude; an exemption from certain services which
were oppressive and ignominious; and the eftab-
lifhment of a fixed tax or rent which they were
to pay to their Lord in place ofimpofitions which
he could formerly lay upon them at pleasure.
Two charters of this kind to two villages in the
country of Roufillan, one A. D. 974. the other

A. D.

A. D. Io25, are still extant. Petr. de Marca Mar-
ca, five limes Hifpanicus. app. p. gog. o038.
Such concefflons, it is probable, were not un-
known in other parts of Europe, and may he
confidered as a ftep towards the more exinfive
privileges conferred by Louis the Gross on the
towns within hisdomains. The communities in
France never aspired to the fame independence
with those in Italy. They acquired new privi-
leges, and immunities, but the right of fove-
reignty remain entire to the King or baron with-
in whose territories the refpestive cities were si-
tuated, and from whom they received the char-
ter of their freedom. A great number of these
charters granted both by the Kings of France,
and by their great vassals, are published by M.
D'Achery in his Specilegium, and many are
found in the collection of the Ordonnances des
Rois de France. These convey a very firiking
representation of the wretched condition of ci-
ties previous to the institution of communities,
when they were subjet to thejudges appointed
by the superior lords of whom they held, and had
scarce any other law but their will. Each con-
ceflion in there charters muff be confidered as a
grant of some new privilege which the people did
not formerly enjoy, and each regulation as a me-
thod of redreiling some grievance under which
they formerly labourd. The charters of com-
munities contain likewise the firll expedients
employed for the introduction of equal laws, and
regular government. On both there accounts
they merit particular attention, and therefore
instead of referring my readers to the many bulky
volumes in which they are scattered, I shall give
them a view of Come of the most important ar-
ticles in thefi charters ranged under two general
heads. I. Such as refpet personal safety. II.
Such as respect the security of property.

I. DURING

I. DURING that state of turbulence and dif-

order which the corruption of the feudal govern-
ment introduced into Europe, personal safety was
the chief object of every individual; and as the
great military barons alone were able to give sus-
ficient protection to their vassals, this was one
great source of their power and authority. But,
by the inflitution of communities, effecual pro-
vision was made for the safety of individuals in-
dependent of the nobles. For, . the fundamen-
tal article in every charter was, that all the mem-
bers of it bound themselves by oath to assist, defend,
and'ftand by each other against all aggressors,
and that they should not susser any person to in-
jure, distress, or molest, any of their fellow ci-
tizens. D'Acher. Spicel. x. 642. xi. 34i, &c.-
2. Whoever resided in any town which was made
free, was obliged under a severe penalty to ac-
cede to the community, and to take part in the
mutual defence of its members. D'Acher. Spic.
xi. 344. -3. The communities had the privilege
of carrying arms; of making war on their pri-
vate enemies; and of executing by military force
any sentence which their magistrates pronoun-
ced. D'Ach. Spicel. x. 643, 644. xi. 343.--
4. The practice of making fatisfaaioa bya pecu-
niary compensation for murder, afault, or other
a&s of violence, most inconsistent with the or-
der of society, and the safety of individuals, was
abolished, and such as committed these crimes
were punished capitally, or with rigour adequate
to their guilt. D'Ach. xi. 362. Mirei opera Di-
plomatica, i. 292.-5. No member of a commu-
nity was bound tojuftify or defend himself by
battle, or combat, but if he was charged with
any crime, he could he convited only by the
evidence of witnesses, and the regular course of
legal proceedings. Miraus, ibid. D'Ach. xi.
375, 349. Ordon. tom. iii. 265.-- 6. If any

man

253

man fufpedted himself to be in danger from the
malice or enmity of another, upon his making
oath to that effect before a magiitrate, the per-
son fufpeted was bound under a evere penalty
to give security for his peaceable behaviour.
D'Ach. xi. 346. This is the fame species of fe-
curity which is still known in Scotland under the
name of Lawburrows. In France it was first in-
troduced among the inhabitants of communities,
and having been found to contribute confidera-
bly towards personal safety, it was extended to
all the other members of the society. Eftablif-
semens de St. Louis, liv. i. cap. 28. ap. Du
Cange vie de St. Louis, p. 5.

II. THE provisions in the charters ofcommu-

nities concerning the security of property are
not less considerable than those refpe&ing perfo-
nal safety. By the ancient law of France no per-
son could be arrested or confined in prison on
account of any private debt. Ordon. des Rois
de France, tom. i. p. 72, 80. If any person was
arrested upon any pretext, but his having been
guilty of a capital crime, it was lawful to rescue
him out of the hands of the officers who had
seized him. Ordon. iii. p. 17. Freedom from ar-
reft on account of debt seems likewise to have
been enjoyed in other countries. Gudenus Syl-
loge Diplom. 473. In society, while it remained
in its rudest and most simple form, debt seems to
have been confidered as an obligation merely
personal. Men had made ome progress towards
refinement before creditors acquired a right of
seizing the property of their debtors in order to
recover payment. The expedients for this
purpose were all introduced originally in
communities, and we can trace the gra-
dual progress of them. . The simplest and
most obvious species of security was, that

the

the person who fold any commodity hould re-
ceive a pledge from him who bought it, which
he restored upon receiving payment. Of this
cuflom there are vestiges in several charters of
community. D'Ach. ix. 185. xi. 377.-2.
When no pledge was given, and the debtor be-
came refractory or insolvent, the creditor was
allowed to seize his effects with a strong hand,
and by his private authority; the citizens of
Paris are warranted by the royal mandate, " ut
ubicumque, et quocumque modo poterunt, tan-
turn capiant, unde pecuniam fibi debitam inte-
gre & penarie habeant, & inde fibi invicem ad-
jutores exiftant." Ordon. &c. tom. i. p. 6.
This rude practice, suitable only to the violence
of a state of nature, was tolerated longer than
one can conceive to be pofiible in any society,
where laws and order were at all known. The
ordonnance authorizing it was ifiued, A. D. I 34,
and that which corrects the law, and prohibits
creditors from seizing the effects of their debtors,
unless by a warrant from a magistrate, and un-
der his inspection, was not published until the
year 135 . Ordon. tom. ii. 438. It is probable,
however, that men were taught, by observing
the disorders which the former mode of pro
ceeding occasioned, to correc it in pratice long
before a remedy was provided by a law to that
effect.. Every discerning reader will apply this
observation to many other customs and practices
which I have mentioned. New cuftomi are not
always to be ascribed to the laws which autho-
rize them. These statutes only give a legal
fantion to such things, as the experience of
mankind has previously found to be proper and
beneficial. -3. As soon as the interposition of the
magistrate became requisite, regular provision
was made for attaching or distraining the move-
able effects of a debtor; and if his moveables
were not sufficient to discharge the debt, his

immovable

immovable property, or estate in land, was li-
able to the fame distress, and was fold for the
benefit of his creditor. ' D'Ach. ix. p. 184, 18 5.
xi. p. 348, 380. As this regulation afforded the
* most compleat security to the creditor, it was
confidered as so severe, that humanity pointed
out several limitations in the execution of it.
Creditors were prohibited from ieizing the wear-
ing apparel of their debtors, their beds, the
door of their house, their inftrunents of hus-
bandry, &c. D'Ach. ix. 184. xi. 377. Upon
the fame principles, when the power of distrain-
ing effets became more general, the horse and
arms of a gentlertan could not be seized. D'Ach.
ix. 1 8; ' As hunting was the favourite amuse-
ment of martial nobles, the-Emperor'Lodovicus
Pius- prohibited the sizing of a hawk, on ac-
count of any composition or debt. Capitul.
lib.'i. t i. But if the debtor had no other
moveables; even these privileged articles might
be seized.- 4. In order to render the security of
property compeat within a community, every
person who was admitted a members of it, was
obliged t: buy or bui4 a house, oTr to purchase
lands, rthim its precihts, or at lkat to bring
intd the town a confiderible portion of his move-
ables'per qus jtjritiari pvffi, si quid fort i eum
querele evenerit. D'Acdh'. 26. Ordon. i. 367.
Libertates S. Georgii de lfperanchia. Hiss. de
Dauphine, tom. i.. 'p.-6. - 5. hat' fecrity
might I* as perfec' as poTible; in 'some towns,
the members of the community seem to have
been bound for each other. D Ach. 'x. 644. -
6. All questions with refpe&t to properry, were
tried within the community by magistrates and
judges, which the citizens elected or appointed.
Therr decisions were,; rrte'equal and sirsed, than
the sentences which depended on the capricious
and arbitrary will of a batrn, who thought him-

self
256

elf superior to all laws. D'Ach. x. 644, 646.
xi. 344. & paflim. Ordon. iii. 204.-7. No
member of a community could be burdened by
any arbitrary tax; for the superior lord who
granted the charter of community, accepted of
a fixed census or duty in lieu of all demands.
Ordon. t. iii. 204. Libertates de Calma. Hist.
de Dauphine, tom. i. p. 19. Libert. St. Georgii
de Efperanchia, ibid. p. z6. Nor could the
members of a community be diftrefed by an
unequal imposition of the fum to be levied on
the community. Regulations. are inserted in
the charters of some communities concerning
the method of determining the quota of any tax
to be levied on each inhabitant. D'Ach. xi.
350, 365. St. Louis published an ordonnance
concerning this matter, which extended to all
the communities. Ordon. t. i. 186. These re-
gulations are extremely favourable to liberty, as
they vest the power of proportioning the taxes
in a certain number of citizens chosen out of
each parish, who were bound by solemn oath to
decideaccording to iuftice.-Tha the more per-
feEt security of property was one great object of
those who iniituted communities, we learn, not
only from the nature of the thing, but from the
express words of several charters, of which I
shall only mention that granted by Alienor,
Queen of England and Dutchess ofGuienne to
the community of Poitiers, " ut ftua propria me-
lius defendere pofint, & magis integre cufto-
dire," Du Cange voc. Comnmuia, v. ii. p. 863
-Such are come of the capital regulations efta-
blifhed in communities during the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries. These may be confidered
as the firit rudiments of law and order, and
contributed greatly to introduce regular govern-
ment among all the members of society. As
soon as communities were instituted, high fen-
timents of liberty began to appear. When

VOL. 1 S Humbert,

Humbert, lord of Beaujeu, upon granting a
charter of community to the town of Belleville,
exaaed of the inhabitants an oath of fidelity to
himself and successors, they Stipulated, on their
part, that he should swear to maintain their fran-
chifes and liberties; and for their greater fecu-
rity, they obliged him to bring twenty gentle-
men to take the fame oath, and to be bound to-
gether with him. D'Ach. ix. 183. In the fame
manner, the lord of Moirens in Dauphine pro-
duced a certain number of perfbns as his sureties
for the observation of the articles, contained in
the charter of community to that town. These
were bound to surrender themselves prisoners to
the inhabitants of Moirens, if their liege lord
should violate any of their franchises, and they
promised to remain in custody until he hould
grant them redress. Hist. de Dauphine, tom. i.
p. 17. If the mayor or chief magistrate of a
town did any injury to a citizen, he was obliged
*to give security for his appearance in judgment,
inthe fame manner as a private person; and if
call, was liable to the fame penalty. D'Ach.
ix. 83. These are ideas of equality uncommon
in the feudal times. Communities were so fa-
vourable to freedom, that they were distinguish-
ed by the name of Libertates. Du Cange, v. ii.
p. 863. hey were at first extremely odious to
the nobles,' who foresaw what a check they must
prove to their power and domination. Guibert
Abbot of Noyent calls them execrable inven-
tions, by which, contrary to law and justice,
slaves withdrew themselves from that obedience
,which they owed to their maters. Du Cange,
ib. 862. The zeal with which ome of the nobles
.and powerful ecclefiafticks opposed the eta-
blifhrrient of communities, and endeavoured to
circunfcribe their privileges, was extraordinary.
A striking inflance of this occurs in the conteits
between the archbishop of Reims, and the inha-

bitants

bitants of that community. It was the chief
business of every archbishop, during * confider-
able time, to abridge the rights and jurifdition
of the community; and the great objet of the
citizens, especially when the fee was vacant, to
maintain, to recover, and to extend their jurif-
diftion. Hiftoire civile & politique de la ville
de Reims par M. Anquetil, o0m. i. p. 287, &c.

THE observations which I have made concern-

ing the tate of cities, and the condition of their
inhabitants, are confirmed by innumerable pas-
fages in the historians and laws of the middle
ages. It is not improbable, however, that some
cities of the firit order were in a better state,
and enjoyed a superior degree of liberty. Un-
der the Roman government, the municipal go-
vernment eftablifled in cities was extremely fa-
vourable to liberty. The jurifdition of the
senate in each corporation, and the'privileges of
the citizens, were both extensive. There is
reason to believe, that some of the greater cities
which escaped the deftrutive rage of the bar-
barous nations, still retained theirancient form
of government, at least in a great measure.
They were governed by'a council of citizens,
and by magiitrates whom they them eeles eleted.
Very strong presumptions in favour of this opi-
nion, are produced by M. 'Abbe De Bos. Hilt.
Crit. dela Mon. Franc. tom. i. p. r8, &c. tom.
ii. p. 524. edit. 1742. It appears'from rome of
the charters of communities to cities, granted in
the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, that they
only confirm the privileges poffefhed by the i-
habitants, previous to the eftablifhmnent of the
community. D'Acher. Specileg. vol xi. p. 345.
Other cities claimed their privileges as having
pofeffed them without interruption from the
times of the Romans. Hilt. Crit. de la Mon.
Franc. tom. ii. p. 333. But the number of

S 2 cities

cities which enjoyed such immunities was so
small, asin no degree to diminish the force of
my conclusions in the text.

NOTE XVII. SECT. . P.34.

HAVING given a full account ofthe eftablifl-

ment, as well as effets of communities in Italy
and France, it will be necessary to enquire with
some attention, into the progress of cities and of
municipal government in Germany. The an-
cient Germans had no cities. Even in their ham-
lets or villages, they did not build their houses
contiguous to each other. Tac. de Mor, Germ.
cap. 6. They confidered it as a badge of ser-
vitude, to be obliged to dwell in a city surround-
ed with walls. When one of their tribes had
shaken off the Roman yoke, their countrymen
required of them, as an evidence of their having
recovered liberty, to demolish te walls of a
town which the Romans had built in their coun-
try. Even he fiercest animals, said they, lose
their spirit and courage when they are confined.
Tac. Hiflor. lib. iv. c. 64. The Romans built
fevera, cities of note on the banks of the Rhine.
But in all the vast countries from that river to
the coasts of the Baltick, there was hardly one
city previous to the ninth century of the Chris-
tian aera. Conringius Exercitatio de Urbibus
Germaniae Oper. vol. i. § 25 27, 3, &c. He-
ineccius differs from Conringius with refpe to
this. But even after allowing to his arguments
and authorities their utmost force, they prove
only, that there were a few places in those ex-
tensive regions, on which some historians have
bestowed tienameof townsh Elem. Jur. German.
lib. i. § io2. Under Charlemagne, and the Em-
perors of his family, as the political slate of Ger-
many began to improve, several cities were found-

ed,
a6o

ed, and men became accuflomed to associate and
to live togetherin one place. Charlemagne found-
ed two archbifhopricks and nine bifhopricks in
the moit confiderablealns of Germany. Aub.
Mirei Opera Diplon vol. i. p. i6. His
fucceflors increased number of these; and
as the bishops fixed their residence in these cities
and performed religious funcions there, that in-
duced many people to fettle in them, Conring.
ibid. § 48. But Henry, firnamed the Fowler,
who began his reign A. D. 920, must be con-
fidered as the great founder of the cities in Ger-
many. The Empire was at that time infested
by the incursions of the Hungarians and other
barbarous people. In order to oppose them,
Henry encouraged his fubjees to fettle in cities
which he.furrounded with walls and towers. He
enjoined or perfiaded a certain .proportion of the
nobility to fix their residence in the towns, and
thus rendered the condition of citizens more ho-
nourable than it had been formerly. Wittikin-
dus Annal. lib. i. ap. Conring. § 82. From this
period the number of cities continued to en-
crease, and they became more populous and
more wealthy. But cities were still destitute of
municipal liberty orjurifdition. Such of them
as were situated in the Imperial demesnes, were
fubjedt to the Emperors, and their Comites, Mifi,
and other judges presided in them, and difpen-
fed justice. Towns situated on the estate of a
baron, were part of his fief, and he or his offi-
cers exercised a similar jurifti&ion in them.
Conring. ibid. § 73, 74. Heinec. Elem. Jur.
Germ. lib. i. § 104. The Germans borrowed
the institution of communities from the Italians.
Knipfchildius Tratatus Politico. Hist. urid.
de Civitatum Imperialum Juribus, vol. i. lib. i.
cap. 5. N. 23. Frederick Barbarofla was the
first Emperor who, from the fame political con-
fideration that influenced Lewis the Gross, mul-

S 3 tiplied

.6s

cities which enjoyed such immunities was so
small, asin no degree to diminish the force of
my conclusions in the text.

NOTE XVII. SECc T.. p.34-

HAVING given a full account of he eftablifl-

ment, as well as effects of communities in Italy
and France, it will be necessary to enquire with
some attention, into the progress of cities and of
municipal government in Germany. The an-
cient Germans had no cities. Even in their ham-
lets or villages, they did not buwd- their houses
contiguous to each other. Tac. de Mor. Germ.
cap. 6. They confidered it as a badge of ser-
vitude, to be obliged to dwell in a city surround-
ed with walls. When one of their tribes had
shaken off the Roman yoke, their countrymen
required of them, as an evidence of their having
recovered liberty, to demolish te walls of a
town which the Romans had built in their coun-
try. Even the fiercest animals, said they, lose
their spirit ands courage when they are confined.
Tac. Hiftor. lib. iv. c. 64. The Romans built
feveralcities of note on the banks of the Rhine.
But in all the vafl countries from that river to
the coasts of the Baltick, there was hardly one
city previous to the ninth century of the Chris-
tian ara. Conringius Exercitatio de Urbibus
Germaniae Oper. vol. . § 25, 27, 3, &c. He-
ineccius differs from Conringius with refpet to
this. But even after allowing to his arguments
and authorities their utmost force, they prove
only, that there were a few places in those ex-
tensive regions, on which some hifsorians have
beftowedtienameof townsi Elem. Jur. German.
lib. i. § o02. Under Charlemagne, and the Em-
perors of his family, as the political state of Ger-
many began to improve several citieswere found-

ed,
a6o

ed, and men became accustomed to associate and
to live togetherin one place. Charlemagne found-
ed two archbifhopricks and nine bifhopricks in
the most considerable rns of Germany. Aub.
Mirti Opera Diplonvl l vol. i. p. 6. His
successors increased ftnumber of these; and
as the bishops fixed their residence in these cities
and performed religious funcions there, that in-
duced many people to fettle in them. Conring.
ibid. § 48. But Henry, firnamed the Fowler,
who began his reign A. D. 920, must be con-
fidered as the great founder of the cities in Ger-
many. The Empire was at that time infested
by the incursions of the Hungarians and other
barbarous people. In order to oppose them,
Henry encouraged his fubjets to fettle in cities
which he-furrounded with walls and towers. He
enjoined or persuaded a certain .proportion of the
nobility to fix their residence in the towns, and
thus rendered the condition of citizens more ho-
nourable than it had been formerly. Wittikin-
dus Annal. lib. i. ap. Conring. § 82. From this
period the number of cities continued to en-
crease, and they became more populous and
more wealthy. But cities were still destitute of
municipal liberty orjurifdi&ion. Such of them
as were situated in the Imperial demesnes, were
iubje& to the Emperors, and their Comites, M ,ffi
and other judges presided in them, and difpen-
fed justice. Towns situated on the estate of a
baron, were part of his fief, and he or his offi-
cers exercised a similar jurifi&ion in them.
Conring. ibid. § 73, 74. Heinec. Elem. Jur.
Germ. lib. i. § o04. The Germans borrowed
the inffitution of communities from the Italians.
Knipfchildius Tradtatus ?olitico. Hist. urid.
de Civitatum Imperialum uribus, vol. i. lib. i.
cap. 5 N. . 23. Frederick Barbarofla was the
first Emperor who, from the fame political con-
fideration that influenced Lewis the Gross, mul-

S 3 tiplied

tiplied communities in order to abridge the pow-
er of the nobles. Pfeffel 'Abrege de l'Hiftoire
& du Droit Publique d'Allemagne, 4to. p. 297.
From the reign of He the Fowler, to the
time when the Gern ies acquired full pof-
session of their immunsFt various circumfsan-
ces contributed to their increase. The eftab-
lifhment of bifhopricks (already mentioned) and
the building of cathedrals, naturally induced
many people to fettle there. It became the cuf-
tom to hold councils and courts ofjudicature of
every kind, ecclesiastical as well as civil, in cities.
In the eleventh century, many saves were en-
franchised, the greater part of which fettled in
cities. Several mines were discovered and
wrought in different provinces, which drew toge-
ther such a concourse of people, as gave rife to
several cities. Conring. § 105. The cities began
in the thirteenth century to form leagues for
their mutual defence, and for reprefing the difor-
ders occasioned by the private wars among the
barons, as well as by their exactions. This
rendered the condition of the inhabitants of ci-
ties more secure than that of any order of men,
and allured many to become members of their
communities. Conring. § 94. There were in-
habitants.of three different ranks in the towls
of Germany. The nobles, or familiae, the citi-
zens, or liberi, and the artizans who were slaves,
or homines ptoprii. Knipfchild. lib. ii. cap. 9.
N". 13. Henry V. who began his reign A. D.
I xo6, infranchifed the slaves who were artisans
or inhabitants in'feveral towns, and gave them
the rank of citizens, or liberi. Pfeffel, p. 254.
Knipfch. lib. ii. c. 29. N. 113, 19. Though
the cities in Germany did not acquire liberty so
early as those in France, they extended their pri-
vileges much farther.' All the Imperial and free
cities, the number of which is considerable, ac-
quired the full right of being immediate by

which
26z

which term, in the German jurisprudence, we are
to understand, that they are fubjeEt to the Em-
pire alone, and pollers within their own pre-
cinEts all the rights of compleat and indepen-
dent sovereignty. The various privileges of the
Imperial cities, the great guardians of the Ger-
manic liberties, are innumerated .by Knipfchild,
lib. ii. The great articles are generally known,
and it would be improper to enter into any dil-
quifition concerning minute particulars.

NOTE XVIII. SECT. I. p. 34.

THE Spanish historians are almost entirely fit

lent concerning the origin and progress of com-
munities in that kingdom; so that I cannot fix
with any degree of certainty the time and man-
ner of their first introduction there. It appears,
however, from Mariana, voL ii. p. 22. fol.
Hagae 1736, that in the year 1350, eighteen ci-
ties had obtained a feat in the Cortes of Castile.
From the account which shall be given of their
constitution and pretensions, Sed. III. of this vo-
lume, it is evident that their privileges and form
of government were the fame with those of the
other feudal corporations; and this, as well as
the perfect similarity of political institutions and
tranfations in all the feudal kingdoms, may lead
us to conclude, that communities were intro-
duced there in the fame manner, and proba-
bly about the fame time, as in the other nati-
ons of Europe. In Aragon, as I hall have oc-
cafion to observe in a subsequent note, cities
seem early to have acquired extensive immuni-
ties, together with a liare in the legislature.
In the year i i8, the citizens of Saragofla
had not only attained political liberty, but they
were declared to be of equal rank with the no-

S 4 bles

2~33

0

bles of the second class; and many other im-
munities, unknown to persons in their rank
of life in other parts of Europe, were confer-
red upon them. Zurita Anales de Aragon,
tom. i, p. 44. In England, the eftabliffhment
of communities or corporations was posterior
to the Conquest. The pracice was borrowed
from France, and the privileges granted by
the crown were perfectly similar to those which
I have enumerated. But as this part of history
is well known to most of my readers, I hall,
without entering into any critical or minute dif-
cuffion, refer them to authors who have fully
illustrated this interesting point in the English
history. Brady's Treatise of Boroughs. Madox
Firma Burgi, chap. i. set. ix. Hume's History
of England, vol. i, append, i. and ii. It is not
improbable that ome of the towns in England
were formed into corporations, under the Saxon
Kings, and that the charters granted by the
Kings of the Norman race were not charters of
enfranchisement' from a itate of slavery, but a
confirmation of privileges which 'they already
enjoyed. See Lord Lyttleton's History of Hen-
ry II. vol. ii. p. 317. The English cities,
however, were very inconsiderable in the
twelfth century. A clear proof of this occurs
in the history to which I last referred. Sitz-
ftephen, a contemporary author, gives a defcrip-
tion of the city of London in the reign of Hen-
ry'II. and the terms in which he speaks of
its trade, its wealth, and the splendour of its
inhabitants, would suggest no inadequate idea
of its state at present, when it is the greatest
and most opulent city of Europe. But all ideas
of grandeur and magnificence are merely com-
parative. It appears from a contemporary
author, Peter of Blois, archdeacon of London,
who had good opportunity of being well in-

formed
264

formed, that this city, of which Fitzftephen
gives such a pompous account, contained no
more than forty thousand inhabitants. Ibid.
315, 3I,6. The other cities were small in prot.
portion, and in no condition to extort any ex-
tensive privileges. That the constitution of the
boroughs in Scotland, in many circumstances,
resembled that of the towns in France and Eng-
land, is manifest from the Leges Burgorum an-
nexed to the Regiam Majeftatem.

NJOTE XIX. SECT. I. . 39.

SOON after the introduction of the third estate

into the national council, the spirit of liberty
which that excited in France began to produce
conspicuous effees. In several provinces of
France, the nobility and communities formed
aflciations, whereby they bound 'themselves to
defend their rights and privileges against the
formidable and arbitrary proceedings of the
King. The count de Boulainvilliers has pre-
served a copy of one of these associations, da-
ted in the year I314, twelve years after the
admission of the deputies from towns into the
States General. Hiftoire de l'ancien gou-
vernement de la France, tom. ii. p. 94. The
vigour with which the people aferted and pre-
pared to maintain their rights, obliged their
sovereigns to refpe& them. Six years after this
alfociatioh, Philip the Long iftued a write of fum-
mons, to the Community of Narbonne, in the
following terms: " Philip, by the Grace, &c.
to our well-beloved, &c. As we desire with
all our heart, and above all other things, to
govern our kingdom and people in peace and
tranquillity, by the help of God: and to re-
form our aid kingdom in so far as it stands
in need thereof, for the public good, and
'or the benefit of our subje&s, who in times pail

have

265

have been aggrieved and oppressed in diver'e
manners by the malice of sundry persons, as we
have learned by common report, as well as by
the information of good men worthy of credit,
and we having determined in our council which
we have called to meet in our good city, &c.
to give redress to the utmost of our power, by
all ways and means poflible, according to rea-
son and jutice, and willing that this should be
done with solemnity and deliberation by the ad-
vice of the prelates, barons, and good towns of
our realm, and particularly of you, and that it
should be transacted agreeably to the will of
God, and for the good of our people, therefore
we command," &c. ,Mably, obfervat. ii. App.
p. 386. I shall allow these to be only the formal
words of a public and legal stile, but the ideas
are singular, and much more liberal and enlarged
than one could expet in that age. A popular
monarch of Great Britain could hardly address
himself to parliament, in terms more favoura-
ble to publick liberty. There occurs in the His-
tory of France a striking inflance of the progress
.which the principles of liberty had made in that
kingdom, and of the influence which the depu-
ties of towns had acquired in the States General.
During the calamities in which the war with
England, and the captivity of King John, had
involved France, the States General made a bold
effort to extend their own privileges and juril-
,dition. The regulations established by the
States held A. D. 1355, concerning the mode
of levying taxes, the administration of which
they veiled not in the crown, but in com-
missioners appointed by the States; concern-
ing the coining of money; concerning the re-
dress of the grievance of purveyance; con-
cerning the regular administration of justice;
are much more suitable to the genius of a re-
publican government than that of a feudal

monarchy.
56

monarchy. This.curious statute is published,
Ordon. t. iii. p. 19. Such ashavenotanopportu-
nity to consult that large collection will find an a-
bridgment of it, Hist. de France par Villaret,
tom. ix. p. 30. or in Hiftoire de Boulainv. tom.
ii. 2 3. The French hiltorians represent the bi-
shop of Laon, and Marcel Provot of the mer-
chants of Paris, who had the chief direction of
this assembly, as seditious tribunes, violent, in-
terested, ambitious, and aiming at innovations
subversive of the constitution and government of
their country. That may have been the cafe,
but there men posiesed the confidence of the peo-
ple; and the measures which they proposed as
the most popular and acceptable, plainly prove
that the spirit of liberty had spread wonderfully,
and that the ideas which then prevailed in France
concerning government were extremely liberal.
The States general held at Paris A. D. 355,
confided of about eight hundred members, and
above one half of these were deputies from towns.
M. Secouffe Pref. a Qrdon. tom. iii. p. 48. It
appears that in all the different assemblies of the
States, held during the reign of John, the re-
presentatives of towns had great influence, and
in every refped the third State was confidered
as co-ordinate and equal to either of the other
two. Ibid. passim. These spirited efforts werc
made in France long before the House of Com-
mons in England acquired any considerable in-
fluence in the legislature. As the feudal system
was carried to its utmost height in France sooner
than in England, so it began to decline sooner
in the former than in the latter kingdom. In
England, almost all attempts to establish or to
extend the liberty of the people have been fuc-
elfsful; in France they have proved unfortunate.
What were the accidental events, or political
causes which occasioned this difference, it is not
my present business to enquire.

NOTE

NOTE XX. SECT. I. p.41.

IN a former note, NO. VIII. I have enquired

into the condition of that part of the people
which was employed in agriculture, and have re-
presented the various hardships and calamities
of their situation. When charters of liberty and
manumiflion were granted to such persons, they
contained four concessions corresponding to the
four capital grievances to which men in a state
of servitude are subject. i. The right of difpo-
sing of their persons by sale or grant was relin-
quifhed. 2. Power was given to them of con-
veying their property and effects by will or any
other legal deed. Or if they happened to die in-
teflate, it was provided that their property
should go to their lawful heirs in the fame man-
ner as the property of other persons. 3. The
services and taxes which they owed to their fu-
perior or liege Lord, which were formerly arbi-
trary and imposed at pleasure, are precisely as-
certained. 4. They are allowed the privilege
of marrying whatever person they chose, as for-
merly they could contrast no marriage without
their Lord's permission, and with no person but
one of his slaves. All there particulars are found
united in the charter granted Habitatoribus
Montis-Britonis. A. D. 1376. Hist. de Dau-
phine, tom. i. p. 81. Many circumfiances con-
curred with those which I have mentioned in
the text in procuring them deliverance from that
wretched state. The gentle spirit of the Chris-
tian religion, together with the doctrines which
it teaches, concerning the original equality of
mankind, as well as the impartial eye with
which the Almighty regards men of every con-
dition, and admits them to a participation of his
benefits, are inconliftent with servitude. But in
this, as in many other instances, considerations

of
268

of interest, and the maxims of false policy, led
men to a condut inconsistent with their princi-
ples. They were so sensible, however, of the
inconsistency, that to set their fellow Christians
at liberty from servitude was deemed an at of
piety highly meritorious and acceptable to hea-
ven. The humane spirit of the Christian religion
struggled with the maxims and manners of
the world, and contributed more than any other
circumstance to introduce the pratice of manu-
miflion. When Pope Gregory the Great, who
flourished toward the end of the sixth century,
granted liberty to ome of his slaves, he gives
this reason for it, " Cum redemptor nofter,
totius conditor naturae, ad hoc propitiatus hu-
manam carnem voluerit affumere, ut divinitatis
fuae gratia, dirempto (quo tenebamur captivi)
vinculo, pritinae nos retitueret libertati; falu-
briter agiter, si homines, quos ab initio liberos
natura protulit, & jus gentium jugo fubftituit
fervitutis, in ea, qua nati fuerant, manumitten-
tis beneficio libertate reddantur." Gregor. Magn.
ap. Potgiefl lib. 4. c. . § 3. Several laws or
charters founded on reasons similar to this,
are produced by the fame author. According-
ly a great part of the charters of manumission
previous to the reign of Louis X. are granted
pro amore dei, pro remedio anime, & pro mer-
cede animae. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. i. p.
849, 850. Du Cange, voc. manumfio. The
formality of manumifion was executed in a
church, as a religious solemnity. The person
to be set free was led round the great altar with
a torch in his hand, he took hold of the horns
of the altar, and there the olemn words confer-
ring liberty were pronounced. Du Cange, lb.
vol. iv. p. 467. I hall transcribe a part of a char-
ter of manumiflion granted A. D. 56; both
as it contains a full account of the ceremonies
used in this form of manumission, and as a fpe-

cimen

cimen of the imperfect knowledge of the Latin
tongue in that barbarous age. It is granted
by Willa the widow of Hugo the Duke and
Marquis, in favour of Cleriza one of her slaves.
" Et ideo nos Domine Wille inclite cometiffe-li-
hera et abfolvo te Cleriza filia Uberto-pro ti-
more omnipotentis dei, & remedio luminarie ani-
me bone memorie quondam supra fcripto Domini
Ugo glorioffiffimo, ut quando ilium Dominus de
hac vita migrare, jufferit, pars iniqua non abeat
poteftatem ullam, fed anguelus Domini noitri
Jesu Chrifti colocare dignitur ilium inter fanos
diledos suos; & beatus Petrus princips apofto-
lorum, qui habed poteftatem omnium animarum
ligandi et abfolvendi, ut ipfi abfolvat animae ejus
de peccatis fui, et aperiad ilium janua paradifi;
pro eadem'vero rationi, in mano mite te Benzo
prefbiter, ut vadat tecum in, ecclesia fanti Bar-
tholomei apoftoli; traad te: tribus vicibus circa
altare ipfius ecclefiae cum creo apprehenfum in
manibus tuis & manibus fiuis; deinde exite am-
bulate in via quadrubio, ubi quatuor vie fe de-
viduntur. Statimq; pra remedio luminarie ani-
me bone memorie quondam supra fcripto Domi-
-ni Ugo, et ipfi prefbiter Benzo fecit onnia, &
dixit, Ecce quatuor vie1 ite et ambulate in qua-
cunq; partem tibi placuerit, tam sic supra fcripta
Cleriza, qua.'nofque tui: heredes, qui ab ac ho-
ra in antea nati, vel procrtati fuerit ntriulq;
fexus, &c." Murat. ib. p. 853. Many other
charters might have been feleded, which in
point of grammar or style, are in no wife fuperi-
or to this. Manumission was frequently granted
on death-bed or by latter-will. As the minds of
men are at that time awakened to sentiments of
humanity and piety, these deeds proceeded from
religious motives, and are granted pto redempti-
one animna, in order to obtain acceptance with
God. Du Cange ubi supra, p. 470. & voc.fervus,

vol

vol. vi. p. 45i. Another method of obtaining
liberty was by entering into holy orders, or
taking the vow in a monastery. This was per-
mitted for ome time; but o many slaves es-
caped, by this means, out of the hands of their
matters, that th. practice was afterwards re-
strained, and at lafl prohibited by the laws of
almost all the nations of Europe. Murat. ib.
p. 842. Conformably to the fame principles,
Princes, on the birth of a son, or upon any
other agreeable event, appointed a certain num-
ber of slaves to be enfranchised, as a testimony
of their gratitude to God for that benefit. Mar-
culfi Form. lib. i. cap. 39. There are several
forms of manumiliion published by Marculfus,
and all of them are founded on religious confi-
derations, in order to procure the favour of God,
or to obtain the forgiveness of their fins. Lib.
ii. c. 23, 33, 34, edit. Ealuz. The fame ob-
servation holds with refped to the other collec-
tions of Formulae annexed to Marculfus. As
sentiments of religion induced some to grant li-
berty to their fellow Christians who groaned
under the yoke of servitude; so mistaken ideas
concerning devotion led others to relinquish
their liberty. When a person conceived an ex-
traordinary refpet for the faint who was the pa-
tron of any church or monastery in which he
was accustomed to attend religious worship, it
was not unusual among men poffefled with an
excess of superstitious reverence, to give up
themselves and their posterity to be slaves of the
faint. Mabillon. de re Diplomat. lib. vi. 632.
The oblati or voluntary slaves of churches or
monasteries were very numerous, and may be
divided into three different classes. The first
were such as put themselves and effects under
the protection of a particular church or monas-
tery, binding themselves to defend its privileges
and property against every aggreflor. These

were

271

were prompted to do so, not merely by devo-
tion, but in order to obtain that security which
arose from the protection of the church. They
were rather vassals than slaves, and formetimes
persons of noble birth found it prudent to secure
the protection of the church in this manner.
Persons of the second class bound themselves to
pay an annual tax or quit-rent out of their estates
to .a church or monaRery. Befideg this, they
sometimes engaged to perform certain services
They were called cenfuales, The last class con-
sifted of such as atually renounced their liberty,
and became slaves in the fria and proper sense
of the word. These were called ministeriales,
and enslaved their bodies, as some of the char-
ters bear, that they might procure the liberty
of their fouls, Potgiefferus de ftatu fervorum,
lib. i. cap. i. § 6, 7. How zealous the clergy
were to encourage the opinions which led to this
practice will appear from a clause in a charter
by which one gives up himsel as a slave to a
monastery, " Cum fit omni carnali ingenuitate
generofius extremum quodcumq; Dei fervitium,
scilicet quod terrena nobilitas multos plerumq;
vitiorum servos facit, fervitus veroChrifti no-
biles virtutibus reddit, nemo autem fani capitis
virtutibus vitia comparaverit, claret pro certc
eum effe generofiorem, qui fe Dei fervitio pra-
buerit proniorem. Qod ego Ragnaldus intelli-
gens, &c." Another author fays, Eligens ma-
giseffe fervus Dei quam libertus faculi, firmitei
credens & fciens, quod fervire Deo, regnare eft,
fummaque ingenuitas fit in qua fervitus com-
parabatur Chrifti, &c. Du Cange, voc. olatus
vol. iv. p. 1286, 1287. It does not appear
that the enfranchisement of slaves was a frequent
practice while the feudal system preserved its vi
gour. On the contrary, there were laws whicl
set bounds to this practice as detrimental tt
society. Potgieff. lib. iv. c. . § 6. The infe

rio

tior order of men owed the recovery of their
liberty to the decline of that ariftocratical po-
licy, which lodged the most extensive power in
the hands of a few members of the society, and
depressed all the reft. When Louis X. issued his
ordonance, several slaves had been so long ac-
customed to servitude, and their minds were so
much debated by that unhappy situation, that
they refused to accept of the liberty which was
offered them. D'Ach. Spicel. v. xi. p. 387.
Long after the reign of Louis X. everal of the
French nobility continued to assert their ancient
dominion over their slaves. It appears from an
ordonance of the famous Bertrand de Guefclin
Constable of France, that the custom of en-
franchising them was confidered as a pernicious
innovation. Morice Mem. pour fervir des preuves
a l'hift. de Bret. tom. ii. p. oo. In some in-
fiances when the praediaI slaves were declared
to be freemen, they were frill bound to per-
form certain services to their ancient maifers;
and were kept in a fate different from other
subjects, being reftri&ed either from purchasing
land, or becoming members of a community
within the precincts of the manor to which
they formerly belonged. Martene & Durand.
Thefaur. Anecdot. vol. i. p. 914. This, how-
ever, seems not to have been common. -There
is no general law for the manumiflion of slaves
in the Statute-book of England similar to that
which has been quoted from the ordonances of
the Kings of France. Though the genius of the
English confritution seems early to have favour-
ed personal liberty, personal ervitude, never-
thelefs, continued long in England in some par-
ticular places. In the year 1514, we find a charter
of Henry VIII. enfranchising two slaves belonging
to one of his manors. Rym.Foeder.vol.xiii. p. 470.
As late as the year 1574, there is a commission

Vol. I. T from

from Queen Elizabeth with refpet to the manu-
miflions of crtain bondmen belonging to her.
lRymer. ip Obfervat. on the ifatutes, &ec p. 2t.

NOTE XXt. SECT. L P. 47.

THERE is no custom in the middle ages more

singular than that of private war. It is a right
of so great importance, and prevailed founiver-
sally, that the regulations concerning it make a
considerable figure in the system of laws during
the middle ages. M de Montesquieu, who has
unravelled so many intricate points in feudal ju-
riprudence, and thrown light on o many cuf-
toms formerly obscure and unintelligible, was
no.t led by his fubje& to confider this. I shall
therefore give a more minute account of the
cuftor. and regulations which directed a prac.
tice so contrary to the present ideas of eivili-
ze4 nations concerning government and order.
I. Amongg the ancient Germans, as well as other
nations in a funilar state of society, the right of
avengrng iinuries was a private and personal
right, eercifed by force of arms, withoutany
erence-to aen umpire, or any appeal to a ma-
gifrae for dc4ifio. Theclearcft proofs of this
were pro iced Note VI.-2. This practice sub-
si.td, ampng r{he barbrous nations after their
Iettlement in the- provincesof the Empire which
they conquered4 and as the causes of diffenti-
on aongg- them multiplied, their family feuds
and privatewars became morefrequent. Proofs
of this occur in their early historians. Greg.
Turon. hist. lib. vii. c. 2. lib. viii. c. i8, lib. x.
c. 27. and likewise in the codes of their laws.
It was not only allowable for the relations to
avenge the injuries of their family, but it was
incumbent on them. Thus by the laws of the
Angli and Werini, ad quemcunque hereditas
terrae pervenerit, ad ilium veftis bellica id ett

lorica

lorica & ultio proximi, & folatio leudis, debet
pertinere. tit. vi. §. 5. ap. Lindermbr. Iieg. Salic;
tit. 63. Leg. Longob. lib. ii. tit. 14. §. Io.-
3. None but gentlemen, or persons of noble
birth, had the right of private war. All dif-
putes among slaves, villani, the inhabitants of
towns, and freemen of inferior condition, were
decided in the courts of justice. All disputes
between gentlemen and persons of inferior rank
were terminated in the fame manner. The
right of private war supposed nobility of birth,
and equality of rank in the contending par-
ties. Beaumanoir Couftumes de Beauv. ch. lix.
p. 300. Ordon. des Rois de France, tom.
ii. 395. § xvii. 508. § xv. &c. The digni-
sied ecclefiafticks likewise claimed and exer-
cifed the right of private war; but as it was
not altogether decent for them to prosecute'
quarrels in person, advocati or vidames were
chosen by the several monasteries and bishop-
ricks.. These were commonly men of high'
rank and reputation, who became the pro-
teEtors of the churches and convents by whom
they were elected; espoused their quarrels, and
fought their battles; armis omnia quar erant ec-
clefiae viriliter defendebant, et vigilanter prote-
gebant. Bruffel Usage des fiefs, tom. i. p. 144.
Du Cange voc. advocatus. On many occasions,
the martial ideas to which ecclefiafticks of no-
ble birth were accustomed, made therh forget
the pacifick spirit of their profeflion, and led
them into the field in person at the head of their
vassals, flamma, ferro, cede, poffefliones ec-
clefiarum prelati defendebant." Guido Abbas
ap. Du Cange. Ib. p. 179.-- 4. It was not
every injury or trespass that gave a gentleman a
title to make war upon his adversary. Atrocious
ads of violence, insults and affronts publickly
committed, were legal and permitted motives
for taking arms against the authors 'of therr.
Such crimes as are now punished capitally in ci-

T 2 vilized

vilized nations,- at that time justified private hof-
tilities. Beauman. ch. lix. Du Cange Dissert.
xxix. fur Joinville, p. 3 3 . But though the aveng-
ing of injuries was the only motive that could
legally authorize a private war, yet disputes con-
cerning civil property, often gave rife to hoftili-
ties, and were terminated by the sword. Du
Cange Dissert. p. 332.-- 5. All persons present
when any quarrel arose, or any at of violence
was committed; were included in the war
which it occasioned, for it was supposed to be
impossible for any man in such a situation, to re-
main neutral, without taking fide with one or
other of the contending parties, Beauman. p.
300o.-6. All the kindred of the two principals
in the war were included in it, and obliged to
espouse the quarrel of the chieftain with whom
they were connected. Du Cange, ib. 332. This
was founded on the maxim of the ancient Ger-
mans, " fufcipere tam inimicitias feu patris, feu
propinqui, quam amicitias, neceffe eft;" a
maxim natural to all rude and ftmple nations,
among which the form of society, and political
union ffrengthens such a sentiment. The me-
thod of ascertaining the degree of affinity which
obliged a person to take part in the quarrel of
a kinsman was curious. While the church pro-
hibited the marriage of persons within the seventh
degree of affinity, the vengeance of private war
extended as far as this absurd prohibition, and
all who had such a remote connetion with any
t of the principals were involved in the alami-

ties of war. But when the church relaxed some-
what of its rigour, and did not extend its pro-
hibition of marrying beyond the fourth degree
of affinity, the fame reftridion took place in the
'condut of private war. Beauman. 303. Du
Cange Dissert. 333.---7. A private war could
not be carried on between two full brothers,
because both have the fame common kindred,
and consequently neither have any persons bound

to
276

to stand by him against the other, in the con-
test; but two brothers of the half blood might
wage war, because each of them has a diftind
kindred. Beauman. p. 299.-8. The vaflals of
each principal in any private war were involved
in the contest, because by the feudal maxims
they were bound to take arms in defence of the
chieftain of whom they held, and to assist him
'in every quarrel. As soon, therefore, as the feu-
·dal tenures were introduced, and this artifical
connession was established between vaflals and
the baron of whom they held, vassals came to
be confidered as in the fame state with relati-
ons. Beauman. 303.-9. Private wars were very
frequent for several centuries. Nothin- contri-
buted more to increase those diforders.ifi govern-
.ment, and that ferocity of manners which redu-
ced the nations.of Europe to that wretched state
which distinguished the period of history which
I am reviewing. Nothing was such an obstacle
to the introduction of a regular adminiitration
.ofjuftice. Nothing could more effedually dif-
.courageinduftry, or retard the progress and cul-
tivation of the arts of peace. Private wars were
carried on with all the deftru&ive rage, which is to
be dreaded from violent resentment when arm-
ed with force, and authorised by law. It ap-
pears from the laws prohibiting or restraining the
exercise of private hostilities, that the invasion
of the moit barbarous enemy could not be nrore
desolating to a country, or more fatal to its in-
habitants, than those intestine wars. Ordon. t.
i. p. 701. tom ii. 395, 408, 507, &c. The con-
temporary historians describe the excefes com-
mitted in prosecution of these quarrels, in such
terms, as excite astonishment and horror. I ha!l.
mention only one paflage from the history of
the Holy war, by Guibert, Abbot of Nogent
"'Erat eotempore maximis ad invicem hoftilita-
tibus, totius Francorum regni facta turbatios
crebra ubiq; latrocinia, viarum obfeflio: audie-
bantur passim, immo fiebant incendia infinita;

T 3 nulli,

nullis paeter sola & indomita cupiditate existen-
tibus caufisextruebantur praelia; & ut brevi to-
tum claudam, quicquid obtutibus cupidorum
ftqbjacebat, nufquamattendendo cujus effet, pra-
da patebat. Gefta Dei per Francos, vol. i. p. 482.

HA-VING thus collected the chief regulations

which custom had established concerning the
right and exercise of private war, I hall enume-
rate in chronological order the various expedi-
ents employed to abolish or restrain this fatal
custom. . The first expedient employed by the
civil magistrate in order to set some bounds to
the violence of private revenge, was the fixing by
law the fine or composition to be paid for each
different crime. The injured person was original-
ly.the sole judge concerning the nature of the
wrong which he had fuffered,'the degree of ven-
geance which he 'fould exact, as well as the
rpecies of atonement or reparation with which
he hbuld reft satisfied. Resentment became of
course as implacable as it was fierce. It was often
a point of honour -not to.forgive, nor to be re-
oonciled. This made it necefary to fix those
compositions which make o great a figure in
the laws of barbarous nations. The nature of
crimes and offences was estimated by the magif-
trate, and the fum due to the person offended
was ascertained with a minute, and often a
whimsical accuracy. Rotharis, the legilator of
the Lombards, who reigned about the middle of
the seventh century, dilcovers his intention both
in ascertaining the composition to be paid by
the offender, and in increasing its value; it is,
fays he, that the enmity may be extinguished,
the prosecution may cease, and peace may
be restored. Leg. Langob. lib. i. tit. 7. § 1o.
:-.2. About the beginning of the ninth
century, Charlemagne struck at the root of
the evil, and enaded, " That when any
person had been guilty of a crime, or had
committed an outrage, e lheuld immediate-
ly submit to the pance' which the church im-

posed,
z78

posed, and offer to pay the cornpfition which
the law prescribed; and if the injured person or
his kindred should refuse to accept of this, and
presume to avenge themselves by force of arms,
their lands and properties hould e forfeited.
Capitul. A. D. 802. edit. Baluz. vol. i. 37.--
?. But in this, as well as in other regulations,
the genius of Charlemagne advanced before the
spirit of his age. The ideas of his contempo-
raries concerning regular government were tot
imperfea, and their manners too fierce to sub.
mit to this law. Private wars, with all the cala-
mities which they occasioned, became hmore fre-
quent than ever after the death of that great
monarch. His fccefforswere unable to restrain
them. The church found it necessary to inter-
pose. The most early of these interpositions
now extant, is towards the end of the tenth
century. In the year 990, feverat Bithops in
the south of France assembled, and published
various regulations, in order to set ome bounds
to the violence and frequency of private wars;
if any person within their dioceffes should ven-
ture to transgress, they ordained that he should
be excluded from all Chriflian privileges during
his life, and be denied Christian burial after his
death.. Du Meet Corps Diplomatique, ton. i.
p. 4,.: These, however, were only partial re-
tnediess and therefore a council was held at Li-
moges, A. D.. 994. The bodies of the faints,
according to the custom of those ages, were car-
rted; thither; andl by these sacred relicks men
were exhorted to lay down their arms, to extin-
guifhi theif aninaiofities and, to £wear that they
would not for the future violate the publick
pele by their private hftilities. Bouquet Re-
cueit des Hiitor, vol . . 49, 1.47. Several
othe.counncips ifftued- derees to the fame effet.
DuaCage WDirt.. 34 .-4 But the authority of
councils, how venrable foevet mi those ages,
w ta sufficient t, abolia a cuft6ni which flat-

T 4 tered

tered the pride of the nobles, and gratified their
favourite passions. The evil grew so intolerable,
that it became necessary to employ supernatural
means for suppressing it. A bishop of Aqui-
.taine, A. D. I032, pretended that an angel had
appeared to him, and brought him a writing
from heaven, enjoining men to cease from their
hostilities, and to be reconciled to each other.
It was during a season of public calamity that he
published this revelation. The minds of men
were disposed to receive such pious impressions;
and willing to perform any thing in order to
avert the wrath of heaven. A general peace,
and ceflation from hostilities took place, and
continued for seven years; and a resolution was
formed that no man should in times to come at-
tack or molet his adversaries during the seasons
set apart for celebrating the great festivals of the
church,' or from the evening of Thursday in
each week to the morning of Monday in the
week ensuing, the intervening days being con-
fidered as particulaily holy, our Lord's Paflion
having happened .on one.of these days, and his
Refurreetion 0W another. A change in the dif-
positions of men o fildden, and which produced
a resolution o unexpedted, was confidered as mi-
raculous; and the reipite from hostilities which
followed upon it, was called The ruce of God.
Glaber. Rodulphus Hiftor. lib, v. ap. Bouquet.
vol. x. p. 5'9. This, from being a regulation
orconcert in .one kingdom,'became a general
law in Christendom, and was confirmed by the
authority of the Pope, and the violators were
fubjeted to the penalty of excommunication.
Corpus Jur. Canon. Decretal. lib. i. tit. 34. c. I.
Du Cange Gloffar. voc. Treug4. An a& of the
council of Toulujes in Rouflillon, A. D. o041,
containing all the stipulations. required by the
truce of God, is published by Dom de.Vic &
Dom Vaiflette Hit. de Languedoc, tom. ii.
Preuves, p. 206. A ceflation from hostilities

during

during three compleat daysin every week, al-
lowed such a considerable space for the passions
of the antagonists to cool, and for the people to
enjoy a respite from the calamities of war, as well
as to take measures for their own security, that,
if this truce of God had been exatly observed, it
mufft have gone far towards, putting an end to
private wars. This, however, seems not to have
been the cafe,; the nobles, disregarding the
truce, prosecuted their quarrels without inter-
ruption as formerly. Qua nimirum tempeftate,
universe provinciae adeo devaftationis continue
importunitate inquietantur, ut ne iss, pro ob-
fervatione divina pacis, .profefl'a facramenta cuf-
todiantur. Abbas Ufpergenfis apud Datt. de
pace imperii publica, p. 3. No. 35. The vio-
lent spirit of the nobility could not be restrained
by any engagements. The complaints of this
were frequent; and bilhops in order to compel
them to renew their vows and promises ofceafing
from their private wars, were obliged to enjoin
their clergy to suspend the performance of divine
iervice, and the exercise of any religious function
within the . parishes of such as were refractory
and obstinate. Hilt. de Langued. par. D. D. de
Vic & Vaifette, tom. ii. Preuves, p. 1i8.--5.
The people, eager to obtain relief from their sus-
ferings, called in a secon'd time a pretended re-
.velation to their aid. Towards the end of the
twelfth century, a carpenter in Guienne gave
out that Jesus Christ together with the blefled
Virgin had appeared to him, and having com-
mnanded him to exhort mankind to peace, had
given him, as a proof of his mifnion, an image
of the Virgin holding her Ton in her arms, with
this inscription, Lamb of God, who takeft away
the fins of the world, give us peace. This low
fanatick addrefled himself to an ignorant age,
prone to credit what was marvellous. He was
received as an inspired meflenger of God. Many
prelates and barons assembled at Puy, and took

.a

28l

an oath, not only to make peace with all their
own enemies, but to, attack such as refffed to lay
down their arms, and to be reconciled to their
enemies. They frmed an association for this
purpose, and afumed the honourable name of
sbe Brotherhood of (od. Rbertus de Monte
Michaele ap. M. de Lauriere Pref; torn. i. Ordon.
p. 29. But the influence of this superstitious.
terror or devotion was not of long continuance.

6. The e ivil magiftrrt was obliged to exert

hie authority in order t check a custom which
threatened he dobtution of government.. Phi-
ip Augustus as some iaagne or St. Loui as
is more probable, pitblifled an ord:onance, A. D.
z 24, prohibiting any person to commence hof-
tilities agai.nf the friends and vafah of his ad-
verfary, until forty days after the commiflion of
the crime or ffence which gave rirfe to the quar-
rel, declaring, that if any man presumed to
transgress this statute,, he houd be confidered
as guilty of a breach of publick peace, and be
tried and punished by the judge ordinary as a
trait¢. Odpn. tom. . p. 56. . This.was called
it Royal2' ruce and afforded time for the vio-.
lence of resen.tment to subside, as well as leisure
fbt the good: offices of such as were witting to
eompofe the difference. The happy effets of
this reguliation seem to have been considerable,
;fwe mayjiudge fto: the solicitude of succeed-
ing monarchs to enforce it. -7. In order to re-
strain! the exerci'se of' priivat2 war fsS farther,
Philip. the Fair, towards the close of the fame
century, . D. 1.296, publi:shed. an ordonance
coprmandiog all' private hoftilitiesto cease, while
he was engaged in war against the enemies of
the ftte..Ordon. tom. i. p. 328, 39o> Thisregula-
tisn, which seems to healipft effentiato the ex-
itnce and preservation offociety,, was often re-
newed by his fueccfors, and; being enfrcd. by the
reglp authority, proved a corfiderabb check to
*ie deftrfive contefs of the nobles. Both there

regulations,

regulations, introduced first in France, were a-
dopted by the other nations in Europe.- 8. The
evil, however, was o inveterate, that it did not
yield to all these remedies. No sooner was pub-
lick peace established in any kingdom, than the
barons renewed their private hostilities. They
not only struggled to maintain this pernicious
right, but to secure the exercise of it without any
restraint. Upon the death of Philip the Fair,
the nobles of different provinces in France form-
ed associations, and presented remonstrances to
his successor, demanding the repeal of several
laws, by which he had abridged the privileges
of their order. Among there, the right of pri-
vate war is always mentioned as one of the most
valuable; and they claim, that the restraint im-
posed by the truce of God, the royal truce, as
well as that arising from the ordonance of the
year 1296, should be taken off. In some in-
stances, the two sons of Philip who mounted the
throne successively eluded their demands; in o-
thers, they were obliged to make concessions.
Ordon, tom. i. p. 551,557, 56, 573. The or-
donances to which I here refer, are of such length
that I cannot insert them, but they are extreme-
ly curious, and may be peculiarly inifructive to
an English reader, as they throw considerable
light on that period of English hiffory in which
the attempts to circumscribe the regal preroga-
tive were carried on, not by the people struggling
for liberty, but by the nobles contending for
power. It is not necessary to produce any evi-
dence of the continuance and frequency of pri-
vate wars under the fuccefrors of Philip the Fair.
-- 9. A pradtie somewhat similar to the roy-
al truce was introduced, in order to strengthen
and extend it. Bonds of atfurance, or mutual
security, were demanded from the parties at va-
riance, by which they obliged themfelvos to ab-
stain from all hostilities, either during a time
mentioned in the Bond, or forever, and became

-subjed

fubjeat to heavy penalties, if they violated this
obligation. These bonds were sometimes grant-
ed voluntarily, but more frequently exacted by
the authority of the civil magistrate. Upon a
petition from the party who felt himself weakest,
-the magistrate summoned his adversary to ap-
pear in court, and obliged him to give a bond of
.aflurance. If, after that, he committed any far-
ther hostilities, he became subjed to all the pe-
nalties oftreafon. This restraint on-private war
was known in the age of St. Louis. Eftablifle-
mens, Lv. i. c. 28. It was frequent in Bretagne,
.and what is very remarkable, such bonds of as-
furance weregiven mutually between vassals and
the lord of whom they held. Oliver de Clifton
.grants one to the Duke of Bretagne, his Sovereign.
Morice Mem. pour fervir de preuves a Vhift. de
Bret. tom. i. p. 846. ii. p. 37r. Many examples
ofbonds of assurance in other provincesof France
are collected by Bruflel. tom. ii. p. 856. The
nobles of Burgundy remonstrated against this
praAice, and obtained exemption from it as an
encroachment on the privileges.of their order.
Ordon. torn. i. p. 558. This mode offecurity
was filftintroducedin cities, and the good effets
of it having been felt there, was extended to the
nobles. See Note XVI.- o. The calamities oc-
.cafioncd by private wars, became at some times
-so intolerable, that the nobles entered into vo-
luntary afociations, binding themselves to refer
all matters in dispute, whether concerning civil
property, or points of honour, to the determi-
nation of the majority of the aflociates. Morice
Mem. pour fervir de preuves 1'hist. de Bret.
tom. ii. p. 728. -- i J. But ai these expedients
proving ineffedual, Charles VI. A. D. 14I3, if-
sued an ordonance exprefly prohibiting private
wars on any pretext whatsoever, wjth power to
thejudge ordinary to compel all persons to com-
ply with this injunacion, and to punish such as
Thould prove refractory or disobedient, by im-

prisoning

prisoning their persons, seizing their goods, and
appointing the officers ofjuftice, Mangeurs
Gafieurs, to live at free quarters on their estate.
If those who were disobedient to this edict could
not be personally arrested, he appointed their
friends and vassals to be seized, and detained un-
til they gave surety for keeping the peace, and
he abolished all laws, customs, or privileges
which might be pleaded in opposition to this or--
donance. Ordon. torn. x. p. 38. How flow is
the progress of reason and of civil order! Regu-
lations which to us appear so equitable, obvious,
and simple, required the efforts of civil and ec-
clefiaftical authority, during several centuries,
to introduce and etablih them. Even posterior
to this period, Louis XI. was obliged to abolish
private wars in Dauphine, by a particular edidt,
A. D. 1451. D Cange dissert. p. 348.

THrs note would swell to a disproportional

bulk, ifI hould attempt to enquire with the
fame minute attention into the progress of this
pernicious custom in the other countries of Eu-
rope, In England, the ideas of the Saxons con-
cerning personal revenge, the right of private
wars, and the composition due to the party of-
fended, seem to have been much the fame with
those which prevailed on the continent. The
law of Ina de Vindicantibus, in the eighth centu-
ry, Lamb. p. 3; those of Edmund in the tenth
century, de homicidio, Lamb. p. 72. & de inimi-
citiis, p. 76; and those of Edward the Confessor,
in the eleventh century, de temporibus & diebus
pacis, or Treuga Dei, Lamb. p. 26, are per-
fetly similar to the ordonances of the French
Kings their contemporaries. The laws of Ed-
ward, de pace regis, are fill more explicit than
those of the French Monarchs, and by several
provisions in them, discover that a more perfet
police was established in England at that period.
Lambard. p. 128. fol. verf. Even after the con-

quest,

quest, private wars, and the regulations for pret
venting them, were not altogether unknown, as
appears from Madox Formulare Anglicanum,
No. CXLV. and from the extracts from Domes-
day Book, published by Gale Scriptores hist. Bri-
tan. p. 759, 777. The well known clause in
the form of an English indiament, which, as an
aggravation of the criminal's guilt, mentions his
having aflaulted a person, who was in the peace
of God and of the King, seems to be borrowed
from the Treuga or Pax Dei and the Pax Regis
which I have explained. But after the conquest,
the mention of private wars among the nobility,
occurs more rarely in the English hiflory, than
in that of any other European nation, and no
laws concerning them are to be found in the bo-
dy of their statutes. Such a change in their own
manners, and such a variation from those of
their neighbours is remarkable. Is it to be a-
fcribed to the extraordinary power which Wil-
liam the Norman acquired by right of conquest,
and transmitted to his successors, which render-
ed the execution of justice more vigorous and
decisive, and the jurifdi&ion of the King's court
more: extensive than under the monarchs on the
continent ? Ors was it owing to the settlement
of the Normans in England, who having never
adopted the practice of private war in their own
country, abolished it in the kingdom which they
conquered ? It is asserted in an OrdonanceofJohn
King of France, that in all times past, persons of
every rank in Normandy have been prohibited
to wage war, and the pra&tice has been deemed
unlawful. Ordon tom. ii. p. 407. If this fad were
certain, it would go far towards explaining
the peculiarity which I have mentioned. But
as there are some Englitf A&s of Parliament,
which, according, to the remark of the learned
author of the Obfirvations on the Statutes, chief-
ly the more ancient which recite falfhoods, it
may be added, that this is not peculiar to
the laws of that country. Notwithstanding the

positive

pofitive:afertion contained in this publick la
of Fraace there is good reason or confidering
it as a statute which recites a falnhood. ThiS
however, is not the place or difcufling that point.
It is an inquiry not nw~rthy the curiosity of
an English antiquarian.

I Castile, the pernicious practice of private'

war prevailed, and was authorised by the cuf-
toms and law of the kingdom Lege Tauri.
tit. 76. cum commentario Anton. olome2ii, p.
551. As the Castilian nobles were no less tur-
bulent than powerful, their quarrels and hofti-
lities involved their country in many calamitie.
Innumerable proofs of this occur in Mariana.
In Aragon, the right of private revenge was like-
wife authorised by laws exercised- in its, full
extent, and accompanied with the ame unhap-
py consequences. Hieron. Blanca Comment. de
rebus Arag. ap. Schotti. fHsan. illuftrat. vol,
iii, p. 733. Lex Jacobi I. A. D. 1247. Fueros
& Obfervancias del Reynt de Aragon, lib. ix.

t82. Several confederacies between the Kings

of Aragon and their nobles, for the restoring of
peace, founded on the truce of God, are ill
extant. Petr. de Marca. Marca fivi Limes His-
panic. App. 303, 1388, I428. Asearlyasthe
year t165, we find a combination of.the King
and court of Aragon, in order to abolish the
right of private war, and to punith those who
presumed to claim that privilege. Anales de
Aragon pr Zurita, vol. i. p. 73. But the evil
was so inveterate, that Charles V. A. D. t1t1,
was obliged to publish a law, enforcing all for-
mer regulations tending to suppress this pra&ice.
Fueros & Obfervanc. lib. ix. 183. b,

T.HZ Lombards, and other northern nations

who fettled in Italy, introduced the fame maxims
concernipg the right of revenge in that country
and thefre were followd by the. fare effefs. As
the progress of:the evil was, perfetly fimilat to
what happened in France) the expedients em-

ployed

ployed to check its career, or to extirpate it
finally, resembled those which I have enume-
rated. Murat. Ant. Ital. vol. ii. p. 306.

IN Germany, the disorders and calamities oc-

cafioned by the right of private war, were greater
and more intolerable than in any other country
of Europe. The Imperial authority was so
much haken and enfeebled by the violence of
the civil wars, excited by the contests between
the Popes and the Emperors of the Franconian
and Suabian lines, that not only the nobility but
the cities acquired almost independent power,
and scorned all subordination and obedience to
the laws. The frequency of these faide or pri-
vate wars, are often mentioned in the German
annals, and the fatal effects of them are mods
pathetically described, Datt. de pace Imper. pub.
lib. i. cap. v. n. 3o. & passim. The Germans
early adopted the Treuga Dei, which was first
established in France. This, however, proved
but a temporary and ineffectual remedy. The
disorders multiplied so fast, and grew so enor-
mous, that they threatened the dissolution of
society, and compelled the Germans to have re-
course to the only remedy of the evil, viz. an
absolute prohibition of private wars. The Em-
peror William published his edict to this pur-
pose, A. D. 255, an hundred and sixty years
previous to the ordonance of Charles VI. in
France. Datt. lib. i. cap. 4. n°. 20. But neither
he nor his successors had authority to secure the
observance of it. This gave rife to a practice
in Germany, which conveys to us a striking idea
both of the intolerable calamities occasioned by
private wars, and of the feebleness of govern-
ment during the twelfth and thirteenth centu-
ries. The cities and nobles entered into alli-
ances and afociations, by which they bound
themselves to maintain the public peace, and
to make war on such as hould violate it. This

was

was the origin of the league of the Rhine, of
Suabia, and of iany smaller confederacies dlf-
tinguifhed by various names. The rife and be-
neficial effects of these aoflciations are traced by
Datt with great accuracy. Whatever degree of
publick peace or of regular administration was
prefered in the Empire fronr the beginning of
the twelfth century to the close of the fifteenth,
Germany owes to' these leagues. 'During that
period, political oder, refpe for the laws, to-
gether with the equal adminiration ofjuftice
made considerable progress in Germany. But
the final and pepetual abolition of the right of
private war was not accomplifhed'until A. ).
1495. The Imperial authority was by that time
more firmly stablished, the ideas of men with
refped to governmnent and subordination were
become more ji. That brbarous and per-
nicious privilege which the nbles had o long
poffeied, was declared to be incomnpatible with
the happiness and existence of society- In order
to terminate any differences which might arise
:among the various numbers of the Germanick
body, the Imperial chamber was instituted with
supreme jurifdition, to judge without appeal
in every question brought before it. That court
has fifbfiited since that period, forming a very
refpeEtable tribunal, of efential importance in
the German constitution. Datt, lib. iii. iv. v.
Pfeffel abrege de l'Hiftoire du Droit, 8c. p. 556.

N T E XXII. SECT . p. 56. [Y]

IT would be tedious and of little use to cnu-

merate the various modes of appealing to the
justice of God, which superstition introduced
during the ages of ignorance. I hall mention
only one, because we have an account of it in a
placitum or trial in the prefenFe of Charle-
magne, from which we may learn theimperfet

VOL. I. UT manner

09

manner in which justice was administered eve'i
.'during his reign. In the year 775,. a contest
arose between the bishop of Paris and the abbot
of St. Denys, concerning the property of a small
abbey. Each of them exhibited deeds and re-
cords, in order-to prove the right to be in them.
Instead of trying the authenticity, or conidering
the import of these, the point was referred to
the judicium crucis. Each- produced a pero!,,
who, during the celebration of mas, stood be-
fore the cross with his arms expanded; and he
;whose representative first became weary, and
altered his posture, loft the cause. The perfo.
·employed by the bilhop on this occasion, had lei,
strength or less spirit than his adversary, and tht
question was decided in favour of the abbot
Mabillon de re Diplomat. lib. vi. p. 498. If a
Prince so enlightened as Charlemagne counte-
,nanced such an absurd mode of decision, it is no
wonder that other monarchs hould tolerate it so
long. M. de Montesquieu has treated of the
.-trial by judicial combat at considerable length.
The two talents which distinguish that illuftri-
ous author, industry in tracing all the circum-
flances of ancient and obscure institutions, and
sagacity in penetrating into the causes and prin-
-.ciples which contributed to establish them, are
'equally conspicuous in his observations on this
subjet. To these I refer the reader, as they
-contain most of the principles by which I have
endeavoured to explain this pratice; De 1' E-
sprit des Loix, lib. xxviii. It seems to be pro-
bable from the remarks of M. de Montesquieu,
as well as from the facts produced by Muratori,
tom. iii. Ditfert. xxxviii. that the appeals to the
- justice of God by the experiments with fire and
water, &c. were practised by the people who
fettled in the different provinces of the Roman
Empire? before they had recourse to the judicial
combat. The judicial combat, however, was
the most ancient mode of terminating any con

troverf

troverfy among the barbarous nations iin their
original ettlements. This is evident frotm Vei-
ieius Paterculus, lib. ii. c. i 8. who informs us,
that all questions which were decided among
the Romans by legal trial, were terminated a-
mong the Germans by arms. The fame thling
appears in the ancient laws and customs of the
Swedes, quoted by Jo. 0. Stiernhook de Jure
Suenonum & Gothorum vetufto. 4to. Holmia,
i682. lib. i. c. . It' is probable, that when the
various tribes which invaded the Empire were
converted to Christianity, the repugnance of the
custom of allowing judicial combats to the pre-
ceptsof religior, was so glaring, that, for rome
time, it was abolished, and by degrees, several
circumstances which. I have mentioned, led
them to resume it.;

IT, seems .lkewise to be probable from a law

quoted by Stiernhook in the treatise which I have
mentioned, that the judicial combat was origi-
naly permitted, in order to determine points
refpeting the perfanaf charater or reputation
of individuats, and Was afterwards extended not
only to criminal cafes, but.to questions concern-
ing property. The words of the law are,'" if
any man shall fay to another these reproachful
words, ", you' are. not a rian equal to other
men," or, you'have not the heart of a man;"
and the other fhallreply, " I am a man as good
as you," let them meet oi the highway. If
he who firif gave offence appear, and the person
ff'ended absent himself, let the latter be deem-
ed worse than he was called; let him not be ad-
mitted to give evidence in j udgment, either for
man or woman, and let him not have the privi-
lege of making a testament. If the person of-
fended appear, and he who gave offence be ab-
sent, let him call upon the other thrice with a
loud voice, and make a mark upon the earth, and
then let him who absented himself, be deemed

1.T 2 infamous,

291

infamous, because he uttered words which he
durst not fEpport. If both hall appear proper-
ly armed, and the perion offended shall fall in
the combat, let a half compensation be paid for
his death. But if 'the person who gave the of-
fente (hall fall, let i't be imputed to his own rash-
ness. The petulance of his tongue hath been
fatal to him. Let him lie in the field without
any compensation being demandedfor his death."
Lx Uplandica ap; Stiern. p. 76. Martial peo-
ple were extremely delicate with refpet to every
thing that affeced their reputation as soldiers.
By the laws of the Salians, if any man called
another a are, or accused him of having left
his shield in the field of battle, he was ordained
to pay a large fine. Leg. Sal. tit. xxxii. § 4. 6.
By the law of the Lombards, if any one called
another arga, i. e. a good for nothing fellow,
ie. might immediately challenge him to combat.
Leg. Longob. lib. i tit. v. § . By the law of
the alians, if one called another cenitus, a term
of reproach equivalent to arga, the fine which
he was bound to pay was very high. Tit.
xxxii § r. Paulus Diaconus relates the violent
impression wl this reproachful expreflion
rade upon one of his countrymen, and the fatal
effeds with which it was attended. De Geftis
Longobard. lix vi. c. 24. Thus the ideas con-
cerning the point of honour, which we are apt
to confider as a modern refinement, as well as
the pracice of duelling, to which it gave rife,
are derived from the notions of our ancestors,
while in a state of society very little improved.

As M. de Montesquieu's view of this filbjeCt

did not lead him to confider every circumstance
eilative to judicial combats, I shall mention
fomne particular .fads neceflary 'for the illuftra-
tion of what I have said with refpet to them.
A remarkable infance occurs of the decision of

an
292

an abftrad point of law by combat. A quef-
tion arose in the tenth century concerning the
rgrt of representation, which was not then fix-
ed, though now universally eftabliihed in every
part of Europe. It was a matter of doubt
and dispute (faith the historian) whether the sons
of a son ought to be reckoned among the chil-
dren of the family, and succeed equally with
their uncles, if their father happened to 'die
while their grandfather was alive. An assembly
was called to deliberate on this point, and it
was the general opinion, that it ought .to be re.-
mitted to the examination and decision of judges.
But-the Emperor following a beter coufe, and
desirous of dealing honourably with his people
and nobles, appointed the matter to be decided
by battle between two champions. He who ap-
peared in behalf of the right of children to re,
present their deceased father, was vitorious,
and it was eftablified by a perpetual decree,
that they should hereafter hare in the inheri;
.tance together with their uncles. Wittickindus
Corbeins, ib. Annal. ap. M. de Lauriere Pref,
.Ordon. vol. i. p. xxxii. If we,,ean suppose the
caprice of folly to lead men to any action more
extravagant than this, of fettling a point in law
by combat, it must be that of referring the truth
or fafelehQod ofa religious opinion, to be decid-
ed in the fame manner. To the disgrace of
human reason, ;it has been capable even of this
extravagance. A question was agitated in Spain
in the eleventh century, whether the Mularabie
Liturgy and ritual which had been used in the
churches of Spain, or that approved of by the
See of Rome, which differed in many particu-
lars from the other, contained the form of worr
ihip most acceptable to the Deity. The Spani,
ards contended zealously for the ritual of their
ancestors. The popes urged them to receive that
to which they had given their infallible.fandion.

U 3 A violent

A violent contest arose. The nobles proposed to
decide the controversy by the sword. The king
approved of this method of decision. Two
knights in compleat armour entered the lifts.
John Ruys de Matanca, the champion of the
Mufarabic ILiturgy, was vitiorious. But the
.Queen and Archbiffop of Toledo, who favour-
ed the other form, insisted on having the matter
Submitted o another trial, and had interest
enough to prevail in a request, iconfiftent with
the laws of combat, which beii-g confidered as
an appeal to God, the decision ought to have
been acquiesced in as final. A great fire was
kindled. A copy of each Liturgy was cast into
the flames, t was agreed that the book which
ftoodib proof, and remained untouched, should
be received in all the churches of Spain. The
Mufarabic Liturgy triumphed likewise in this
trial, and if we may believe Roderigo de Tole-
do, remained unhurt by the fire, when the other
was reduced to ashes. The Q.ieen and Arch-
bishop had power or art fifficient to elude this
decision altb, and the use of the Mufarabic form
of devotion wvas permitted only in certain
churches. A determination no less extraordi-
nary, than the whole tranfadion. Rodr, de To-
ledo, quoted by P. Orleans, Hist. de Revol.
d'Efpagne, ton. i. p. 217. Mariana, lib. i. c.
18., vol, i. p.. 78.-A remarkable proof of the
general use of trial by combat, and of the prae-
diledion for that mode of d4cifion occurs in the
laws of the Lornbards. It was a custom in the
middle ages, that any perfpn inight choose the
law to which he wpuld be fubjeeted; and by the
prescriptions of that law he was obliged to regu-
late his tranfations, without bengound to com-
ply with any practice authorized by other codes
of law. Persons who had fubjefted temfelves to
the Roman law, ,nd adhered to the ancientjurif-

'
' ' prudence,
294

prudence, as far as any knowledge of it was re-
tained in those ages of ignorance, were exempt-
ed from paying any regard to the forms of pro-
ceedings etablifhed by the laws of the Burgun,
dians, Lombards, and other barbarous people.
But the Emperor Otho, in direct contradiction
to this received maxim, ordained, " That all per-
sons, under whatever law they lived, even al-
though it were the Roman law, hould be bound
to conform to the edicts concerning the trial by'
combat." Leg. Longob. lib. ii. tit. 55. § 38.
While the judicial combat fubfifled, proof by
charters, contracts, or other deeds, became inef-
fectual; and even this species of evidence, cal-
culated to render the proceedings of courts cer-
tain and decisive, was eluded. When a charter
or other instrument was produced by one of the
parties, his opponent might challenge it, affirm
that it was false and forged, and offer to prove
this by combat. Leg. Longob. ib. § 34. It is
true, that among the reasons enumerated by
Beaumanoir, on account of which judges might
refute to permit a trial by combat, one is, " If
the point in contest can be clearly proved or as-
certained by other evidence." Couft. de Beauv.
cl. .63. p. 323. But that regulation removed the
evil only a single ftep. For the party who sus-
peCted that a witness was about to depose in a
manner unfavourable to his cause, might accuse
him of being suborned, give him the lie, and
challenge him to combat; if the witness was van-
quifhed in battle, no other evidence was admit-
ted, and the party by whom he was summoned
to appear loft his cause. Leg. Baivar. tit. 16. § 2.
Leg. Burgund. tit. 45. Beauman. ch. 61. p. 315.
The reason given for obliging a witness to accept
of a defiance, and to defend himself by combat,
is remarkable, and contains the fame idea which
is still the foundation of what is called the point
of honour; " for it is just, that if any one as-

U 4 firms

firms that he perfectly knows the truth of any
thing, and offers to give oath upon it, that he
should not hesitate to maintain the veracity of
his affirmation in combat," Leg. Burgund. tit. 45.

THAT the trial by judicial combat was eta-

blifhed in every, country of Europe, is a fast well
known, and requires no proof. That this mode
of decisions was frequent, appears not only from
the codes of ancient laws which established it,
but from the earliest writers concerning the
practice of law in the different nations of Eu-
rope. They treat of this custom at great length;
they enumerate the regulationsconcerning itwith
minute accuracy. and explain them with much
solicitude. It mfade a capital and extensive ar-
ticle in jurisprudence. There is not any one
subject in their system of law which Beaumanoir,
Defontaines, or the compilers of the Affifes de
Jerufa!em seem to have confidered as of greater
importance; and none on which they have be-
tlowed so much attention. The fame obfervati-
on will hold with refped to the early authors of
other nations. It-appears from Madox, that trials
of this kind were so frequent in England, that
fines, paid on these occafins, made no inconfi-
derable branch of the King's revenue. Hist. of
the Excheq. vol. i. p. 349. A very curious ac-
count of a judicial combat between Mefire Ro-
bert de Beaumanoir, and Mefire Pierre Tourne-
mine, in pretence of the duke of Bretagne, A. D.
1385, is publified by Maurice Mern. pour ser-
vir de preilves a 'hiRf. de Bretagne, torn. ii. p.
498. All the formalities oberved in such ex-
traordinary proceedings are there described more
minutely, than in any ancient monument which
I have had an opportunity of confidering. Tour-
nemine was accused by Beaumanoir of having
murdered his brother. The former was van-

. quified,

.<uifihed, but was saved from being hanged upon
the spot, by the generous interceflion .of his an-
tagonift. A good account of the origin of the
laws concerning judicial combat, is published in
the history of Pavia, by Bernardo Sacci, lib. ix.
c. 8. in.Graev. Thee Antiquit. Ital. vol. iii. 743.

THi s mode of trial was so acceptable, that ec-

clefiafticks, notwithitanding the prohibitions of
the church, .were conflrained not only to con-
nive at the practice, but to authorize it. A re-
markable inflance of this is.produced by Pafquier
Recherches, lib. iv. ch. i. p. 350. The abbot
Wittikindus, whose words I have produced in
this note, confidered the determination of a
point in law by combat, as the best and most ho-
nourable mode of decision. In the year 978, a
judicial combat was fought in the pretence of
the Emperor Henry. The archbishop Alde-
bert advised him to terminate a contest which
had arisen between two noblemen of his court,
by this mode of decision. The vanquished com-
batant, though a person of high rank, was be-
headed on the spot. Chronic. Ditmari Epifc,
Merfb. chez Bouquet Recueil des Hist. tom. x.
p. 2 . Questions concerning the property of
churches and monasteries, were decided by corm-
hat. In the year 961, a controversy concern-
ing the church of St. Medard, whether it.belong-
ed to the abbey of Beaulieu, was terminated by
judicial combat. Bouquet Recueil des Hist. tom.
ix. p. 729. Ibid. p. 612, &c. The Emperor
Henry I. declares, that his law authorising ttie
pracice of judicial combats, was enacted witl
content and applause of' many faithful bishops.
Ibid. p. 23i. So remarkably did the rmartial
ideas of those ages prevail over 'the genius and
maxims of the canon law, which in other inftan-
ces had such credit ari authority with ecclesias-
ticks. A judicial combatwas appointed in Spain,
by Charles V. A. D. z522. The combatants

fought

297-

fought in the Emperor's presence, and the bat-
tle was condueted with all the rites prescribed
by the ancient laws of chivalry. The whole
t;aniadion is deferibed at great length by Pon-
tus Heuterus Rer. Auftriac. lib. viii. c. 7. p. 205.

THE last initance which occurs in the history

of France, of a judicial combat authorised by
the magistrate, was the famous one between M.
Jarnac and M. de la Chaiftaignerie, A. D. 547.
A trial by combat was appointed in England,
A. D. 57. under the infpetion of the judges
in the court of common pleas; and though it
was not carried to the fame extremity with the
former, queen Elizabeth having interposed her
authority, and enjoined the parties to compound
the matter, yet in order to preserve their ho-
nour, the lifts were marked out, and all the
forms previous to the combat were observed
with much ceremony. Spelm. Glofl. voc.
Campus, p. IO3. In the year 631, a judicial
combat was appointed between Donald Lord
Rea, and David Ramfav, Efq; by the authority
of the Lord high Constable, and Earl Marshal
of E:gland; but that quarrel likewise terminat-
ed without blood$ied, being accommodated by
Charles I. Another instance occurs seven years
later. Rufhworth in oblervations on the Sta-
tutes, &c. p. 266.

NOTRE XIII. SECT. I. p. 62. [Z].
THE text contains the great outlines which

mark the course of private and publicjulrifdition
in the several nations of Europe, I shall here
follow more .minutely the various steps of this
progress, a,s the matter is curious and important
enough to merit this attention. The payment
of a fine by way of fatisfaclion to the per-
obn or family injured, was the first device of
a rude people, in order to check the ca-
reer of private resentment, and to extinguish
thofefidft, or deadly feuds which were pro-

fecuted

fecuted among them with the utmost violence.
This cufom may be traced back to the ancient
Germans. Tacit. de Morib, Ger. c, 21. and pre-
vailed among other uncivilized nations. Many
examples of this are colleted by the the ingenious
and learned author of Hiftorjcal Law-Traas,
vol. i. p. 41. These fines were ascertained and
levied in three different manners. At first they
were fettled by voluntary agreement between
the parties at variance. When their rage began
to subside, and they fejt the.bad effecs of their
continuing in enmity, they came to terms of con-
cord, and the fatisfadion made was called a com-
poftion, implying that it was fixed by mutual
content. De 1'Esprit des Loix, lib. xxx. c. 19.
It is apparent from ome of the more ancient
codes of laws, that when theje were compiled,
matters still remained in that firnple state. In
certain cafes, the person who had committed an
offence was left expIofed to the resentment of
those whom he had injured, until he should re-
cover their favour, quoquo modo potuerit. Lex
Frifion. tit. i . § i. The next mode of levying
these fines was by the sentence of arbiters. An
arbiter is called, in the Regiam majeftatem, ami-
cabilis compositor, lib. . c. 4. §. IO. He could
estimate the degree of offence with more impar-
tiality than the parties interested, and determine
with greater equity what fatisfation ought to
be demanded. It is difficult to bring an authen-
tic proof of a custom previous to the records
preserved in any nation of Europe. But one
of the Formulae Andegavenfes compiled in the
sixth century, seems to allude to a tranfaai-
on carried on not by the authority of ajudge,
but by the mediation of arbiters. Bouquet ]e-
cueil des H or. tor. iv. p. 566. But as an ar-
biter wanted authority to enforce his decisions,
judges were appointed with compulsive power
Io oblige both parties to acquiesce in their decifi-
pns, Previous to this last ftep, the expedient of

paying

paying compositions was an imperfet remedy a-
gainft the pernicious effects of private resentment.
As oon as this important change was introdu-
ced, the magistrate, putting himself in place of
the person injured, ascertained the composition
with which he ought to reft satisfied. Every
poflible injury that could occur in the course of
human ociety, was confidered and etimated,
and the compositions due to the person aggrieved
were fixed with fiich minute attention as disco-
vers, in most cafes, amazing discernment and
delicacy, in some instances, unaccountable ca-
price. Besides the composition payable to the
private party, a certain firm, called afredum,
.was paid to the King or slate, as Tacitus ex-
presses it, or to the fifcus, in the language of the
barbarous laws. Some authors, blending the
refined ideas of modern policy with their reason-
ings concerning ancient tranfadions, have ima-
gined that the fredum was a. compensation due to
the community, on account of the violation of the
.public peace. But it is manifestly the price
paid to the magistrate for the protection which
he afforded against the violence of resentment.
The enading of this was a considerable ftep tor
wards improvement in criminal jurisprudence.
,n fame of the more ancient codes of laws, the
freda are altogether omitted, or so seldom men-
tioned, that it is evident they were but little
known. In the latter codes the fredum is as pre-
.cifely Cpecified as the composition. In common
cafes it was equal to the third part of the com-
position. Capittl. vol. i. p. 52. In some extraor-
dinary cafes, where it was more difficult to pro-
tft the person who had committed violence,
the fredum was augmented. Capitul. vol. i. p,
515. These freda made a considerable branch
in the revenues of the barons; and wherever ter-
ritorial jurifdiion was granted, the royaljudges
were prohibited from levying any freda. In ex-
plaining the nature of the fredum, have follow-
ed4, in a great meafuye, the opinion of M. de Mon-

tefquieu,

tefquieu, though I know that several learned an-
tiquarians have taken the word in a different
sense. De I'Efprit des Loix, b. xxx. c. 20,
&c, The great obje of judges was to compel
the one party to give, and the other to accept
the fatisfalion prescribed. They multiplied re-
gulations to this purpose, and enforced them by
grievous penalties. Leg. Longob. ib. i. tit. 9.
§ 34. lb. tit. 37. § , 2. Capitul, vol i. p. 371.
§ 22. The person who received a composition
was obliged to cease from all farther hostility
and to confirm his reconciliation with the adverse
party by an oath. Leg Longob. lib. i. tit. 9
§ 8. As an additional and more permanent
evidence of reconciliation, he was required to
grant a bond of security to the peron from
whom he received a composition, absolving him
from a!l farther prosecution. Marculfus and
the other collectors of ancient writs have pre-
served several different forms of such bonds.
Marc. lit ir. § r8. append. § 23. Form. Sir-
mondicae, § 39. The Letters of Slanes, known
mi the law of Scotland; are perfectly frmilar to
these bonds of security. By the letters of Slanes,
the heirs and relations ofa person who had been
murdered, bound temfe'ves, in consideration
of an Afythent or composition paid 'to them,
to forgive; pass over, and for ever forget, and
in oblivion iter all rancour, malice, revenge,
preudice, grudge and resentment, that they
have or may conceive againt the aggreffo or his
pofterty, for the crime which he had commit-
ted, and discharge him of all action, civil or
crintinal, against him or his estate, for now and
ever.. Sytem of Stiles by Dalfas of St. Martin's,
p. 862. In the ancient form of letters of Slanes,
the private party ndt only forgives and forgets,
but pardons and grams remission of the crime.
This'praice, Dallas, reasoning according to
the principles of his; own age, confiders as an.
encroachment on the rights of sovereignty, as
none, fays hre, could pardon a criminal but the

king

king. Ibid. But in early and rude times, the
punishment, and the pardon of criminals, were
all deeds of the private person who was injured.
Madox has published two writs, one in the
reign of Edward I.. the other in the reign
of Edward III. by which private persons grant
a release or pardon of all trespasses, felonies,
robberiess and murders committed. Pormul.
Anglican. No. 702, 'o5. In the last of these
initruments, rome regard seems to be p'aid to the
rights of the overeign, for the pardon is granted
en quant que en nous et. Even after the autho-
rity of the magifrate is interposed in punishing
criminals, the punishment of criminals is long
confidered chiefly as a gratification to the re-
fentment of the perrons who have been injured.
In Persia a nmurderer is fill delivered to the re-
lations of the person whom he has slain, who
put him to death with their own hands. . If they
refute to accept of a 'urn of money ,as a com-
penfation, the sovereign, absolute as he;is, can-
not pardon the murderer.. Taverniei's Voy-
ages, book v. c. 5 and o. By a law in the
kingdom of Aragon .as. late as the year 1-564,
the punishment of one condemned to death can-
not be mitigated but by content of 'the parties
who have been injured. Fueros & Obfer-
vancias del Reyno de Aragon, p. 24. 6.

IF, after all the engagements tb cease from

enmity, which I have mentioned, any:: person
renewed hostilities, and was guilty of any vio-
lence, either towards the person from whom he
had received a composition, or towards his rela-
tions and'heirs, this was deemed a most heinous
crime,. and punished with extraordinary.rigour.
It was an act of dire& rebellion agaift the au-
thority of the magiitrate, and was repreIed by
the interposition of ali'his power. Leg, Longob.
lib. i. tit. 9. § 8, 34. Capit. vol. i. p. 7 . § 22.
Thus the avenging of injuries was taken out of
private ;hands, a legal composition was eftdblifh-
ed, andl peace and amity were restored under

the
3'G2

the. infpetion, and by the authority-ofa judge.
It is evident, that at the time when the barba-
rians fettled in the provinces of the Roman
Empire, they had fixedjudges established among
them with compulsive authority. Persons vest-
ed with this charater are mentioned by the
earliest historians.. Du Cange, voc. 7dices. The
right of territorial juridiEcion was not altogether
an usurpation of the feudal barons. There is
good reason to befi'eve that the powerful leaders
who seized different diftridts of the countri-s
which they corqlueed,, ad kept poieffion of'
them. as allodial prperty, affimed at the farn
tirme the right of ju.rididtion, and exercised it
within their own, territories. This lur.ifdi(tion
was supreme, and extended to al causes. The
claareft proofs of this are produced by M. Bou-
qut, Le Droit publique de France eclairci,
&c, tog. i.p. zo6, &c.- Theprivilege ofjudg-
ing his own vaffiIs, appears to have ,been origi-
nally a right inh'rent in every baron who held a
fief.. As far back as the archives of nations can
condudt-us.with any certainty, we find the jurif-
di6tion and fief united. One of the earliest
chartes to a layman which I have met with, is
that of Ludovicus Pius, A;,D. 84. And it con-
tains the right of territorial jurifdition, in the
most express and extensive terms. Capitul. vol.
ii. p. 40$5. There are many charters to churches
and monasteries of more early date, containing
grants of similar jurifdition, and prohibiting
any royal judge to enter the territories of those
churches or monasteries, or to perform any at
of judicial authority there. Bouquet Recueil
des Hist. tom. iv. p. 628, 631, 633. tom. v. p
703, 7Io, 752, 462. Muratori has published
many very ancient charters containing the ifme
immunities. Antiq. Ital.Difsert. lxx. In mofl.
of theCe deeds, the exacting of Freda is particu-
larly prohibited, which {hews that they conlti-
tuted a valuable part of the publick revenue at
that juncture. The expence of obtaining a fen-

tence

tence in a ourt of justice during the middle
ages was f6 onfiderable, that this circumstance
alone was fifficient tcr render men unwilling to
decide any contest in judicial form. It appears
from a charter in the thirteenth centbry, that
the baron who had the right ofjuftice, received
the fifth part of the value of every subjet, the
property of which was tried and determined in
his court. If, after the commencement of a law-
suit, the parties terminated the contet in an ami-
cable manner, or by arbitration, they were ne-
verthelefs bound to pay the fifth part of the sub-
je& contested to the court before which the suit
had been brought. Hilt, de Dauphine. Geneve,
1722, tom. i; p. 22. Similar to this is a regula-
tion in the charter of liberty granted to the town
of Friburg, A. D. 1 20. If two of the citizens
shall quarrel, and if one of thehm hal complain
to the superior Lord or t his judge, and after
commencing tie suit shall be privately reconciled
to his adve'fary; the judge, if he does ot ap-
prove of this reconciliation, may compel him to
insist in his aw-fuit; and all who were present
at the reconciliation fiall forfeit the favour of the
superior Iord. Hiftoria Zarirgo Badenfis. Auc-
tor. Jo. Dan. Schoepflinus. Carolfr. 1765. 4t0.
vol. v. p. 55;

WHAT was the extent of that jurifditioa

which those who held fiefs possessed originally,
we cannot now determine with certainty. It is
evident that, during the disorders which prevail-
ed in every kingdom of Europe, the great vas-
fals took advantage of the feebleness of their
Monarchs, and enlarged their jurifdi&ions to the
utmost. As early as the tenth century, the more
powerful barons had usurped the right of deciding
all causes, whether civilor criminal. They had ac-
quired the High Juflice as well as the Low, Eftabl,
de St. Louis, lib. i. c. 24, 25. Their fentenceswere
final, and there lay no appeal from them to any
superior court. Several striking instances of this

are
. 3o4

are collected by BrufTel. Traite des Fiefs, liv.
i.i C. I, 12, 13. Not satisfied with this, the
more potent barons got their territories ereced
into Regalities, with almost every royal preroga-
tive and jurisdiction. Instantes of these were
frequent in France, Bruft ib. In Scotland, where
the power of the feudal nobles became exorbi-
tant, they were very n lmerous. HiftoricalLaw
'frads, vol. i. trat. vi. Even in England, though
the authory of the Norman Ki;igs circumfcrib-
ed the jurisdiction of the barons more than in
any feudal kingdom, several counties palatine
were erected, into which the king's judges could
not enter, and no writ could come in the King's
name, until it received the eal of the county
palatine. Spelman. GlofI. voc. Comites Palatini;
Blackstone's Commentaries on the Laws of Eng-
land, vol. iii. p. 78. These lords of regalities
had a.right to claim or rescue their vassals from
the King's judges if they aumed anyjurifdiai-
on over them, Bruffel ubi supra. In the law of
Scoland this privilege was termed the right of
repledging; and the frequency of it not only in-
terrupted the course of justice, but gave rife to
grea disorders in the exercise of it. Hist. Law
Trads, ib. The jurisdiction of the counties pa-
latine was productive of like inconveniencies in
England,

THE remedies provided by Princesagainft

the. !ld effects of these usurpations were various,
and.gradually applied. Under Charlemagne.and
his immediate descendants, the regal preroga-
tive fgill retained great vigour, and the Duces,
Comites, ;and Mifi Dominici, the former of whom
were ordinary and fixed judges, the latter ex--
traordinary and itinerant judges, in the differena
provines of their extensive dominions, exercised
a jurifdidion co-ordinate with the. barons in
rome cafes,. and superior to them in others. Du

VOL. I. X Cange

Cange voc. Dux, Comites & Aiff. Murat. An-
tiq. Dissert. viii. & ix. But under the feeble race
of Monarchs who facceeded them, the authori-
ty of the royal judges declined, and the barons
usurped that unlimited jurifdi&ion which has
been described. Louis VI. of France attempt-
ed to revive the function of the Mi Dominici
under the title of yuges des Exempts, but the
barons were become too powerful to bear such
an encroachment on their jurifdidion, and he
was obliged to desist from employing them. He-
naut. Abreg6 Chron. tom. ii. p. 730. His fuc-
ceffors (as has been observed) had recourse to
expedients less alarming. The appeal de defaute
deDroit, or on account of the refusal ofjuftice,
was the first which was attended with any confi-
derable effect. According to the maxims of
feudal law, if a baron had not as many vassals
as enabled him to try by their peers, the parties
who offered to plead in his court, or if he delay-
ed or refused to proceed in the trial, the cause
might be carried, by appeal, to the court of the
superior lord of whom the baron held, and tried
there. De I'EfpritdesLoix, liv. xxviii. c. 28.
Du Cange voc. defelus Yuftitie. The number
of Peers or afteflors in the courts of Barons was
frequently very considerable. It appears from
a criminal trial in the court of the viscount de
Lautrec, A. D. 1299, that upwards of two hun-
dred persons were present, and aifted in the
trial, and voted in passing judgment. Hist. de
Langued. par D. D. De Vie. & Vaifette, tom. iv.
Preuves, p. 114.. As the right ofjurifdi&ion
had been usurped by many inconsiderable ba-
rons, they were often unable to hold courts.
This gave frequent occasions to such appeals,
and rendered the practice familiar. By degrees,
such appeals began to be taken from the courts
of the more powerful barons, and it is evident,

from

from a decision recorded by Brufnfel, that the
royal judges were willing to give countenance to
any pretext for them. Traite des Fiefs, tom. i.
p. 235, 261. This species of appeal had less
effect in abridging the jurifdistion of the nobles,
than the appeal on account of the injustice of
the £entence. When the feudal monarchs were
powerful, and their judges posesed extensive
authority, such appeals seem to have been fre-
quent. Capitul. vol. i. p. 175, r8o; and they
were made in a manner suitable to the rudeness
of a simple age. The persons aggrieved resorted
to the palace of their sovereign, and with out-
cries and loud noise called to him for redress.
Capitul. lib. iii. c. 59. Chronic. Lawterber-
gienfe ap. Mencken.' Script. German. vol. ii. p.
284. b. In the kingdom of Aragoti, the appeals
to the utiza or supreme judge were taken in
such a form as supposed the appellant to be.in
immediate danger of death, or of some violent
outrage; he rushed into the presence of thejudge
crying with a loud voice, Avi, Avi, Fuerza, Fu-
erza, thus imploring (as it were) the instant in-
terpofition of that supreme judge in order to
save him. Hier. Blanca Comment. de rebus Ara-
gon. ap. Script. Hispanic. Piftorii, vol. iii. p.
753. The abolition of the trial by combat fa-
cilitated the revival of appeals of this kind.
The effets of this subordination which appeals
eflablifhed, in introducing attention, equity, and
corfifency of decision into courts ofjudicature,
were oon conspicuous; and almost all caues of
importance. were carried to be finally determi-
ned in the King's courts. Bruflel, tom. i. 252.
Various circumstances which contributed 'to-
wards the intr6dcdtion and frequency of such
appeals are nunierated. De l'Efprit des Loix,
liv. xxviii. c. i7. Nothing, however, was of such
effect as the attention which monarchs gave to
the constitution and dignity of their courts of

X justice.

juifice. It Wi the ancient cuftomn for .the.feu-
dal monarc-shto prfide themselves in-their cur-ts,
and to adnniftei juftce in person.

: Mculf,

iib., i. §;25. Murat, Dissert. xxxi. Charlenagre,
*whilst he was. de(ing, used to call parties into
his presence,- ap-d having heard and confidered
the subjet oflitigation, gave judgment concern-
ing it. Eginlartus vita Caroli mnagni cited by
Madox Hist. of Exchequer, vol. i.. p. 9 !.. ' This
could not fail of rendering their courts refpecia-
b.e. St. Louis, who incouraged to the utmost
the prasice of-appeals, revived this ancient cuf-
torn, and admiiliftred justice in person with all
the.-ncient, simplicity. ". I have often seen the
tiit," fay$ Joinville, " ft under the Ihade of an
oak in the wood of Vip.cnneg, when all, who
had any complaint, freely approached him. At
other times. he gave ordertlsto spread a carpet in
:garden, d:feating hinielf upon it, heardthbe
cauifes tla, wereebrought before him." Hft.. de
.' Louis,. p. 13, edit. 176.. Princes of inferi-
or rank, wlho-poffffed the right ofjutice, feme-
times difpeaied :it. in person,; and- perfiftedin
their tribunals. Two indt-ance of this c.ur
with refpet !to tle Dauphines of Vienne. :!.i...
de Dauphine,;to. ,. i. p. I8. rom. ii. p. 257. But
as Kings and Princes could n-t decide every
cause in person, nor bring them all to be deter-
fined in the fame court; they, appointed Baills,
with a right.of.juifdidtion, i,n ,d(fferent dilrits
of their kingdom.. These poffle !powers some-
what similar to those of the ancient. Cornites. It
was towards the end of the, twelfth century,
and beginning of the thirteenth,-that this oflice
was first inftituted;in France. ,:rUfl liv. ii. c.
85. When thp King had a cort^ftablifed in
different quartere of his dominions this invited his
fEu'jets to have recourse to it. It was the pri-
yvte interest of te Baillis, as w( as an objCt of
public policy, to extend their jurildition. They

took
3o8

took advantage of every defet& in the rights of
the barons, and 6f every error ir their proceed-
ings, to remnove caufes'out of their courts,' hnd
to bring them under their own cognizanc.
There was a diMinCtion in the feudal law, and
an'extremely ancient one, between the highjuf-
tice'and the low. Capitul. 3. A' D. 812. §'4.
A: D. 815. § 3. Eftabl. de St. Louis, liv. i.- .
40, Many barons possessed the latterjurifditi-
on who had no title'to the former. The former
included the right of trying crimes-of every
kind, even'the highet; the latter was confined
to petty trespasses. This furnlfied endless pre-
texts for obruftlng, restraining and reviewing
the proceedings inthe baron courts. Ordbn. 1'.
457. § 25. 45. §' 9.-A regulation of greater
importance f'cceeded the infitufion of Baills.
The King's Ifupreme court or parliament was
rendered fixed as to the place, and constant as
to the time f its. meetings. In France, as well
as in the other feudal kingdoms, theKing's court
ofjuffice was originally amblatory, followed
the person of the monarch, and was held only
during some of the great festivals. Philip Au-
guftus, A. D. 1305. rendered it sedentary at
Paris, and cdntinued its'terms duting the greater
part of the year. Pafquier Recherches, liv. ii.
c. 2 and 3, cc. Ordon. tom. i. p. 366. § 6e.
He and his successors vested extensive powers-in
that court; they granted the meinbersof it fe-
veral privileges and diftinaions which it woukl
be tedious to enumerate. Pafquier, ib. Velly
hist. de France; tom. vii. p. 307. Persons emi-
nent for integrity and skill in'law were appoint-
ed judges there.' lb. By degrees the final deci-
son of all causes of importance was brought ii-
to the 'parliament of Paris, and the other par-
liaments which adminiftred justice in the King's
n4me, in different provinces of the kingdom.

'

'

"X

'
' "This

This jurisdiction,: however, the parliament ,ofPa-
ris acquired very slowly, and the great vassals
;of;thecrown made violent efforts in order to ob-
ftruet the attempts of this parliament to extend
its authority. Towards the close of the thir-
tecnth century, Philip the fair was obliged to
prohibit his parliament from taking. cognisance
of certain appeals brought into it from the
courts of the Count of Bretagne, and to recog-
nife his right of supreme and final jurifdiEtion.
Memoirs pour fervir de Preuves.a 1' Hiftoire de
Bretagne, par Morice, tom. i. p. 1037, 1074.
Charles, VI.; at the end of the following century
was obligedto confirm the rights of the Dukes
of Bretagne in more ample form,. Ibid, tomr. i.
p. 580, 5t8. So violent was the opposition of
the barons to this right of appeal,which they con-
fidered as fatal. to their privileges and power,
that the authors of the Encyclosedic have menti-
oned several instances in which barons put to
death, or mutilated, or confiscated the goods
of such as ventured to appeal from the senten-
ces pronounced in their courts, to the parlia-
ment of Paris, tom, xii. Art. Parlement, p. 25.

THE progress ofjurifdicion in the other feu-

dal kingdoms was in a great measure imilar to
that which we have traced in France. In Eng-
land, the territorial jurifdidion of the barons
was both ancient and, extensive. Leg. Edw.
Cons. No 5 and 9, After the Norman conquest
it became more ftritly feudal; and it is evident
from fats recorded in the English history, as well
as from the institution of counties Palatine,
which I have already mentioned, that the ufur-
pations of the nobles in England w-t not in-
ferior to those of their contemporaries on the
continent. The fame expedients were employ-
ed to cireumfcribe or abolish those dangerous
juriitions. William the Conqueror efta

blifhed

blifhed a constant court in the hall of his palace;
from which the four courts now entrusted with
the administration of jutice in England took
their rife. Henry II. divided his kingdom into
fix circuits, and ent itinerant judges to hold
their courts in them at stated eafons. Black-
flone's Commentaries on the Laws of England,
vol. iii. 57. Justices of peace were appointed in
every county by subsequent monarchs; to whose
jurifdition the people gradually had recourse in
many civil causes. The privileges of the Coun-
ties Palatine were gradually limited; with re-
sped to some points they were abolished; and
the administration of justice was brought into
the King's courts, or before judges of his ap-
pointment. The several steps taken for this
purpose are enumerated in Dalrymple's History
of Feudal Property, chap. vii

IN Scotland, the usurpations of the nobility

were more exorbitant than in any other feudal
kingdom. The progress of their encroachments,
and the methods taken by the crown to limit or
abolish their territorial and independent jurif-
dictions, both which I had occasion to confider
and explain in a former work, differed very
little from those of which I have now given the
detail. History of Scotland, vol. i. p. 45.

I SHOULD perplex myself and my readers in

the labyrinth of German jurisprudence, were I
to attempt to delineate the progress of jurifdic-
tion in the Empire, with a minute accuracy. It
is sufficient to observe, that the authority which
the Aulick council and Imperial chamber now
poflefs, took its rife from the fame abuse of ter-
ritorialjuifdicon, and was acquired in the
fame manner that the royal courts attained in-
fluence in other countries. All the important
fads with refpeA to both there particulars, may

X 4 %

be found in Phil. Datt. de pace publica Imperii,
lib. iv. The capital articles are pointed out in
Pfeffel Abrege de-l'Hiftoire & Droit publique
d'Allemagne, p. 556, 58i; and in Trait dv
broit publique de l'Empire par M. le Coq. de
Villeray. Both the two last treatises are of great
authority, having been composed under the eye
of M. Schoepflin of Strafburgh, one of the ab': ft
publick lawyers in Germany.

NOTE XXIV. SECT. I. p. 65. [AA].

IT is not easy to fix with precision the period

at which Ecclefiafticks firfl began to claim ex-
emption from the civil urifdietion. It is cer-
tan, that during the early and purest ages of
the church, they pretended to no fich immu-
nity. The authority of the civil magistrate ex-
tended to all persons, and to all causes. This
fat has not only been clearly established by
Protestant authors, but is admitted by many
Roman Catholicks of eminence, and particular-
ly by the writers in defence of the liberties of the
.Gallican church. There are several original
papers published by Muratori, which hew that
in the ninth and tenth centuries, causes of the
greatest importance relatirg to ecclefiaftick
were still determined by civil judges. Antic.
Ital. vol. v. Dissert. Ixx. Ecclefialticks did not
shake off all at once their filbhjetion to civil
courts. This privilege, like thti,' other ufurpa-
tions, was gained slowly, and ftep by ftep.
This exemption seems at first to have been mere-
ly an at of complaisance, flowing from venera-
tion for their character. Thus from a charter
of Charlemagne in favour of the church of
Mans, A. D. 796, to which M. 'Abbe de Soy
refers in his Notice de Diplomes, tom. i. p. 201,
that monarch directs hisjudges, if any difference

hould

should ari'e between the administrators of the
revenues of that church and any person what-
ever, not to summon the administrators to ap-
pear in ralo publico; but first of all to meet
with them, and to endeavour to accommodate
the diff'erence in an amicable manner. This in-.
dulgerce was in process of time improved into
a legal exemption; which was founded on the
fame superstitious refped of the laity for the
clerical charatter and function. A remarkable
instance of this occurs in a charter of Frederick
Barbarossa, A. D. 72, to the monastery of
Altenburg. He grants them judicium non tan-
tum fanguinolentis plagae, fed vita & mortis;
he prohibits any of the royal judges from dif-
turbing their jurifdition; and the reason which
he gives for this ample concession is, nam quo-
rum, ex Dei gratia, ratione divini minifterii onus
leve es, & jugum suave; nos penitusnolumus
illius oppreflionis contumelia, vel manu Laica
fatigari. Mencken. Script. rer. Germ. vol. iii.
p. 1067.

IT is not necessary for illustrating what is con-

tained in the text, that I should describe the
manner in which the code of the canon law was
compiled, and shew that the doctrines in it most
favourable to the power of the clergy, are found-
ed on ignorance, or supported by fraud and
forgery. The reader will find a full account of
there in Gerard. Van Maftricht, Hiftoria Juris
Ecclefiaftici, & in Science de Government par
M. Real, tom. vii. c. I. & 3. § 2, 3, &c. The
history of the progress and extent of ecclefiafti-
caljurifdition, with an account of the arts which
the clergy employed, in order to draw causes of
every kind into the spiritual courts, is no less
curious, and would throw a great light upon
many of the customs and inflitutions of the dark
ages; but it is likewise foreign from the present

subjet.

fibjet. Du Cange in his Glossary, voc. Curia
Chriftianitatis, has collected most of the causes
with refpet to which the clergy arrogated an
exclusive jurifdition, and refers to the authors
or original papers, which confirm his obferva-
tions. Giannone in his Civil History of Naples,
lib. xix. § 3. has ranged there under proper
heads, and scrutinizes the pretensions of the
church with his usual boldness and discernment.
M. Fleury observes, that the clergy multiplied
at fch a rate, the pretexts for extending the
authority of the spiritual courts, that it was in
their power to withdraw every person and every
cause from thej urifdition of the civil magistrate.
Hist. Eccles. tom. xix. Disc. Prelim. 16. But
how ill founded soever the jurifdi&tion of the
clergy may be, or whatever might be the abuses
to which their manner of exercising it gave rife,
the principles and forms of their jurisprudence
were far more perfect, than that which was
known in thte civil courts. It is probable, that
ccclefiaticks never submitted, during any period
of the middle ages, to the laws contained in
the codes of the barbarous nations, but were
governed entirely by the Roman law. They
regulated all their tranfadtions by fch of itb
maxims as were preserved by tradition, or were
contained in the Theodosian code, and other
books extant among them This we learn from
a custom which prevailed universally in those
ages. Every person was permitted to choose a-
mong the various codes of laws then in force,
that to which he was willing to conform. In
any tranfaion of importance, it was usual for
the persons contraing to mention the law to
which they submi.tted, that it might be known
how any controversy that ihould arise between
them was to be decidedL innumerable proofs
of this occur in the charters of the middle ages.
lut the clergy confidered it as such a valuable

privilege
P14

privilege of their order to be governed by the
Roman law, that when any person entered into
holy orders, it was usual for him to renounce
the laws to which he had been formerly fubje,
and to declare that he now iubmitted to the
Roman law. Conftat me Johannem clericumi
filium quondam Verandi, qui profeffus fum, ex
natione mea, lege vivere Langobardorum, fed
tamen, pro honore ecclefiaftico, lege nunc vi-
deor vivere Romana. ChartaA.D. I072. Fa-
rulfus presbyter qui profefrus fum, more facer-
dotii mei, lege vivere Romana. Charta, A. D.
1075. Muratori Antichita Eftenfi. vol, i. p. 78.

THE code of the canon law began to be com-

piled early in the ninth century. Mem. de
'Acad. des Infcript. tom. xviii. p. 346, &c. It
was above two centuries after that before any col-
letion was made of those customs, which were
the rule ofjudgment in the courts of the barons.
Spiritual judges decided, of course, according
to written and known laws; Lay judges, left
without any fixed guide, were directed by loose
traditionary customs. But besides this general
advantage of the canon law, its forms and princi-
ples were more consonant to reason, and more
favourable to the equitable decision of every
point in controversy, than those which prevailed
in lay courts. It appears from Notes XXI. and
XXII. concerning private wars, and the trial by
combat, that the whole spirit of.;clefiaftical
jurisprudence was adverse to these sanguinary
customs which were deftruEtive of justice; and
the whole force of ecclesiastical authority was
exerted to abolish them, and to substitute trials
by law and evidence in their room. Almost all
the forms in lay courts which contribute to efta-
blifh, and continue to preserve order in judicial
roceedings, are borrowed from the canon law.
leury Inflit. du droit canon. part iii. c. 6. p. 52.
St. Louis i.l his Eftablifemens confirms many of

his

his new regulations concerning property, and
the administration ofjuftice, by the authority of
the canon law, from which he borrowed them.
Thus, for inflance, the firit hint of attaching
moveables for the recovery of a debt, was taken
f'rom the canon law. Eftabl.. liv. ii. c. 2 and 40.
And likewise the ceflio bonorum, by a person
who was insolvent. Ibid. In the fame manner,
he established new regulations with refpe&t to
the effects of persons dying inteflate, liv. i. c. 89.
These and many other salutary regulations, the
Canonists borrowed from the Roman law. Ma-
ny other examples might be produced of more
perfeCt jurisprudence in the canon law than was
known in lay courts. For that reason it was
deemed an high privilege to be subjet to ecclefi-
afticaljurifdition. Among the many immunities,
by which men were alluded to engage in the
dangerous expeditions for the recovery of the
Holy Land, one of the most' considerable was
the declaring those who took the Cross to be sub-
jest only to the fpirilual courts. See note XIII.
and Du Cange, voc. crucis privilegia.

NOTE XXV. ScT. I. p. 67. [BB].

TH.H rapidity with which the knowledge and

study of the Roman law spread over Europe, is
amazing. The copy of the Pandects was found
a.r Amalphi, A. D. 1137. Irnerius opened a
college of civil law at Bologne a few years after.
Giann. Hist. book xi. c. 2. It began to be taught
as a part of academical learning in different parts
of France before the middle of the century.
Vaccarius gave leCtures on the civil law at Ox-
ford as early as the year I147. A regular sys-
tem of feudal law, formed plainly in imitation of
the Roman code, was compnfed by two Milanese
lawyers about the year 15So. Gratian pblifh-

ed
3x6

ed the code of canon law, with large additio:ns
and emendations, about the fame time. The
earliest collection of these customs, which served
as the rules of decision in the courts ofjuftice, is
the A4lifes de erufletn. They were compiled,
as the preamble informs us, in te3 'year o109,
and are called Jus Confuetudinarium quo re,:-
batur regnum orientale. Willerm. Tyr. lib.
xix. c. 2. But peculiar circumstances were the
occasion of this early compilation. The viEtori-
ous Crusaders fettled as a colony in a foreign
country, and adventurers from all the different
nations of Europe composed this new fqciety. It
was necefary on that account to ascertain the
laws and customs which were to' regulate
the tranfations of business, and the adminiilia-
tion of justice among them. But there was at
that time no collection of customs, and no at-
tempt to render law fixed in any country of Eu-
rope.. The first undertaking of that kind was
by Glanville, Lord Chief Justice of England, in
his Tradatus de Legibus & Confuetudinibus
Anglia, composed about the year x 181. The
Regiam Majeflatiem in Scotland, ascribed to Da-
vid I. Seems to be an imitation, and a servile one
of Glanville. Pierre de Fontaines, who tells us
that he was the first who had attempted fich a
work in France, composed his Confe, which
contains an account of the customs of the coun-
try of Vermandois, in .the reign of St. Louis,
which began, A. D. 226. Beaunanoir, the
author of the Coufumes de eauvoifis, lived about
the fame time. The Eftabliffemens of St. Louis,
containing a large colletion of the customs
which prevailed within the royal domains, were
publihed by the authority of that monarch. As
soon as mne became acquainted with the advan-
tages of having written customs and laws to
which :they could have recourse on every occa-
sion, the method of collecting them became

comrnn.

commmon. Charles VII. of France, by an ordo-
nance, A.D. 1453; appointed the customary
laws in every province of France to be collected
.and arranged. Velly and Villaret, Hiftoire,
torn. xvi. p. 113. is fuccefior, Louis XI. re-
newed the injuntion. But this salutary under-'
taking hath never been fully executed, and the
French jurisprudence remains more obscure and
uncertain than if these prudent regulations of
their monarch had taken effect. A pratice
was established in the middle ages, which affords
the clearest proof that judges while they had no
other rule to direEt their decrees but unwritten
and traditionary customs, were often at a loss
how to find out the fa&s and principles, accord-
ing to which they were bound to decide. They
were obliged in dubious cafes to call a certain
number of old men, and to lay the cafe before
them, that they might inform them whatwas
the praAice or cuftom.with regard to the point.
This was called Enquefte par tourbe. Du Cange,
toc. 7urba. The effects of the revival of the
Roman jurisprudence have been explained by
M. de Montesquieu, liv. xxviii. c. 42. and by Mr.
Hume, Hist. of England, vol. ii. p. 441. I have
adopted many of their ideas. Who can pretend
to review any fbject which such writers have
confidered, without receiving from them light
and information ? At tie fame time I am con-
vinced that' the knowvedge of the Roman law
was not so entirely loft in Europe during the
middle ages, as is commronly believed. My sub-
jeet does not require'fit to examine this point.
Many striking facts with regard to it are collet-
ed by Donato Antonio D'Afti Dall' Ufoe auto-
rita della ragione civile nelle provincie!dell' Im-
perio Occidentale. Nap; 175I. 2voI, 9vo.

THAT the divil law is intimately cdrnne&ed

with the municipaljurifprudence in feveial coun-
tries of Europe, is a fact so well: known, that

. . * it

it needs no illufiration. Even in England, where
the Common law is supposed to form a system
perfectly distinct from the Roman code, and al-
though those who apply in that country to the
study of the Common law boast, with affectation,
of this diftinftion, it is evident that many of the
ideas and maxims of the civil law are incorpo-
rated into the Englifhjurifprudence. This is well
illustrated by the ingenious and learned author
of Observations on the Statutes, chiefly the more
ancient. d edit. p. 66.

NOTE XXVI. SECT. I. p. 69. [CC].
THE whole history of the middle ages makes

it evident that war was the sole profefion of gen-
tlemen, and the only subjed attended to in their
education. Even after ome change in manners
began to take place, and the civil arts of life had
acquired some reputation, the ancient ideas with
respect to the accomplishments necessary for a
person of noble birth, continued long in force.
In the Memoires de Fleuranges, p. 9, &c. we
have an account of the youthful exercises and
occupations of Francis I. and they are altogether
martial and athletic. That father of letters owed
his rliff for them, not to education, but to his
own good sense, and good taste. The manners of
the superior order of ecclesiastics during the mid-
dle ages, furnish the itrongeft proof that the dif-
tintion of profeflions was scarce known in Eu-
rope. The functions and character of the clergy
are obviously very different from those of lay-
men; and among the inferior orders of church-
men, this constituted a diftint charater, fepa-
rate from that f their citizens. But the digni-
sied ecclesiastics, who were frequently of noble
birth, were above such a distinction; they re-
tained the idea of what belonged to them as gen-
tlemen, and in spite of the decrees of Popes, or
the canons of councils, they bore arms, led their

vafalls

vafials to the field, and fought at their head in
battle. Among them the priesthood was scarce
a separate profession; the military accomplish-
ments which they thought essential to them as
'gentlemen, were cultivated; the theological
fcicnce, and pacific virtues suitable to their pi-
ritual function, were neglected and despised.

As fbon as the science of law became a labo-

rious ifudy, and the practice of it a separate pro-
feflion, such as rose to eminence in it obtained
honours formerly appropriated to soldiers.
K ighthood was the most illustrious mark of
ailtindion during several ages, and conferred
privileges to which rank or birth alone were not
entitled. To this high dignity persons eminent
for their knowledge of law were advanced,, and
by that, were placed on a level with those whom
their military talents had rendered conspicuous.
Miles uflitie, Miles Literatus became common
titles. Matthew Paris mentions such knights as
early as A. D. I25I. If a judge 'attained a cer-
tain rank in the courts of justice, that alone
gave him a right to the honour. of knighthood.
Pafquier Recherches, liv. I. . 6. p. 130o. Dif-
fertations hiftoriques fur la Chevalerie jpai Ho-
nore de Sainte Marie, p. 164,& & A profefion
which led. to offices that ennobled such s-held
them, grew into credit, and the people of Eu-
rope became accustomed to fee men rife to emi-
nence by civil as well as military talents.

NOTE XXVII. SECT. I. p. 72. [DD].

THE chief intention of these notes, was to

bring at once under the view of my readers,
such facts and circumstances as tend to illustrate
or confirm what is contained in that part of the
history to which they refer. When these lay
scattered in many different authors, and were
taken from books not generally known, or which

it
320

it would be disagreeable to consult, I thought.it
would be of advantage to colled them toguther.
But when every thing necessary for the proof or
illuflration of my narrative or reafoaing; may
be found in any one book which is genrally
known, or deserves to be so, I shall satisfy ny-
self with referring to it. This is the cafe with
.refped to Chivalry. Almofs every fad : ,'.ic .
have mentioned in the text, together with ma. '
other curious and instructive particulars, co:-
cerning this singular institution, may be sou:d
in Memoires fur l'ancienne Chevalerie confidere
comme un eftabli.Tement politique & militaii-,
par. M. de la Curne de St Palaye.
NOTE XXVIII. SECT. III. p. 76. EE].
THE subjed of.my enquiries does not call mr

to write a history of the progress of fcienee. The
fads and observations which I have produced
are fuffiient to illustrate the effedcs of its pro-
grefs upon manners and the state of society.
While cience was altogether extind in the wef-
tern parts of Europe, it was cultivated in Con-
,ftantinople and other parts of the Grecian Em-
pire. But the subtile genius of the Greel:s
turned almost entirely to theological disputation.
The Latins borrowed that spirit from them, and
many of the controversies which frill occupy,
and divide Theologians, took their rife among
the Greeks, from whom the .other Europeans dt-
rived a considerable part of their knowledge. S e
the testimony of AE!.eas Sylvius ap. Coringium
de antiq. academicis, p. 43.. Hiftoire litcraire
de France, tom.. vii. p. 13, &c. tom. ix. .
xI5, &c. Soon after the Empire of the Calipils
was etablifhed in the East, some illustrious
princes arose among them, who encourag.:d
science. But when the Arabians turned th.:ir
attention to the literature cultivated by th , i-
cient Greeks and Romans, the chaste and cor-
redt taste of their works of genius app'ared fii-
gid, and unanimated to a people of a more warm

VOL. I. Y imagination.

imaginatio-. It was impossible for them to ad-
mire the poets and historians of Athens, or f
Rome. But they were sensible of the merit of
.their philosophers. The operations of the intel-
left are more fixed and uniform than those of
the fancy or taste. Truth makes an impreffior
nearly the fame in every place; the ideas of
what is beautiful, elegant, or sublime, vary in
different climates. The Arabians, though they
neglected Homer, translated the most eminent
of the Greek philosophers into their own lan-
guage; and, guided by their precepts and dif-
coveries, applied themselves with great ardour to
the study of geometry, astronomy, medicine,
dialecics and metaphysics. In the three former
they made considerable and useful improvements,
which have contributed not a little to advance
those sciences to that high degree of perfection
which they have attained. In the two latter,
they chose Aristotle for their guide, and refining
on the subtle and diftinguifhirlg spirit which cha-
racterizes his philosophy, they rendered it alto-
gether frivolous or unintelligible. The schools
established in the East for teaching and culti-
vating there sciences, were in high reputation.
They communicated their love offcience to their
countrymen, who conquered Aia and Spain;
and the schools iftituted there were little infe-
rior in fame to those in the Eait. Many of the
persons who difi guifllel themselves by their
proficiency in fcince in the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries, were educated among the Arabians.
Bruckerns collcSts many iflanccs of this, Hiftor.
Philof v. iii. p. 68j, &c. Almoff all the men
eminent for fcitnce during several centuries,
wele inftrutced in the sciences by the Arabians.
The first knowledge of the Aristotelian philofo-
phy in the middle ages, was acquired by tran-
flations of his works out of the Arabick. The
Arabian crnmmentators were deemed the most
(kilful and authentic guides in the fludy of his
fvfttm. Conring. antiq acad. Dif. iii. p.

9,

95, &c. Supplem. p. 241, &c. n!urat. anti-
quit. Ital. vol. iii. p. 932, &c. From them the
Schoolmcinderived the genius and principles of
their philofoplhy, which contributed o much to
retard the proarefs of true science.

THE establishment of Colleges or Universities

is a remarkable ara inliterary history. The schools
in cathedrals and monasteries confined themselves
chiefly to the teaching of grammar. There were
only one or two masters employed in that office.
But in colleges, profefors wer appointed to
teach all the different parts of science. The time
that ought to be allotted to the study of each was
ascertained. A regular form of trying the pro-
ficiency of students was prescribed; and acade-
mical titles and honours were conferred on such
as acquitted themselves with approbation. A
good account of the origin and nature of there is
given by Seb. Bacmeifterus Antiquitates Rofto-
chienfes, five, Hiftoria Urbis & Academiae Rof-
toch. ap. Monumenta inedita Rer. Germ. per E.
J. de Weftphalen, vol. iii. p. 781. Lips. I743.
The first obscure mention of there academical
degrees in the University of Paris, (from which
the other universities in Europe have borrowed
most of their customs and institutions) occurs,
A. D. 215. Crevier hilt. de 1'univ. de Paris,
tom. i. p. 296, &c. They were completely efta-
bliihed, A. D. 23 . Ib. 248. It is unnecessary
to enumerate the several privileges to which
bachelors, masters, and doctors were entitled.
One circurlnitance is sufficient to demonstrate the
high degree of estimation in which they wvere
held. Doctois in the different faculties contend-
td with knights for the precedence, and the dif-
pite was terminated in many instances by ad-
vancing the former to the dignity of knighthood,
the high prerogatives of which I have mentioned.
It was even aflerted, that a doctor had a right
to that title without creation. Bartolus taught
----dodtorem aualiter regentem in jure civili

Y z per

per decennium effici militem ipso fato. Honorc
de St. Marie Diflert. p. 65. This was called
Chevalerie de letures, and the persons advanced
to that dignity, milites Clerici. These new era-
blifhments for education, together with the ex-
traordinary honours conferred on learned men,
greatly encreafed the number of scholars. In
the year 262, there were ten thousand students
in the university of Bologna; and it appears from
the history of that university, that law was the
only science taught in it at that time. In the
year .R40, there were thirty thousand in the
university of Oxford. Speed's Chron. ap. An-
derfon's Chronol. Dedution of Commerce, vol.
i. p. 172. In the fame century, ten thousand
person.s voted in a question agitated in the uni-
verfity of paris; and as graduates alone were ad-
mitted t that privilege, the number of students
must have been vastly great. Velly Hist. de
France, torn. xi. p. 147. There were indeed few
universities in Europe at that time; but such a
number of students may neverthelefi be produ-
ed as a proof of the extraordinary ardour with
which men turned to the study of science in
those ages; it hows likewise that they already
began to confider other profellions than that of
a boldier as honourable and useful.
N 0 T E XXIX. SECT. III. p. 82. [FFj

THE grat variety of subje&s which I have

endeavoilrd to illutrate, and the extent of this
upon whic'i I now enter, will justify my adopt-
ing the words of MI. de Montesquieu, when he
begins to treat of commerce. " The subje&t

which follows would require to be dificffed
" more at large; but the nature of this work

F does not permit it. Iwifh to glide on a tran-
" quil stream but I am hurried along by a

torrent."
MANY proofs occur in history of the little in-
tcrcourfe between nations during themiddle ages.

Toward,

Towards the close of the tenth century, Count
B-uchard intendiing to found a monastery at St.
'iaur des Fosses, near Paris, applied to an ab-
b:-t of Clugny in Burgundy, famous for his fanc-
ti y, intreating him to conduct the monks thither.
The language in which h addressed that holy
man is singular: He tells him, that he had un-
dertaken the labour of such a great journey; that
he was fatigued with the length of it, therefore
hoped to obtain his request, and that his journey
into such a distant country should not be in vain.
The answer of the abbot is frill more extraordi-
nary: He refused to comply with his desire, as
it would be extremely fatiguing to go along with
him into a strange and unknown region. Vita
Burchardi venerabiles Comitis ap. Bouquet Rec.
des Hist. vol. x. p. 35I. Even so late as the be-
ginning of the twelfth century, the monks of
Ferrieres in the diocese of Sens did not know that
there was such a city as Tournay in Slanders;
and the monks of St. Martin of Tournay were
equally unacquainted with the situation of Ser-
rieres. A tranfation in which they were both
concerned, made it necessary for them to have
some intercourse. The mutual interest of both
monasteries prompted each to find out the situ-
ation of the other. After a long search, which
is particularly described, the discovery was made
by accident. Herimannus Abbas de Reftaura-
tione St. Martini Tornacenfis ap. Dacher. Spicel.
vol. xii. p. 400. The ignorance of the middle
ages with relped to the situation and geography
of remote countries was frill more remarkable.
The most ancient geographical chart which now
remains as a monument of the state of that fci-
ence in Europe during the middle ages, is
found in a manulcript of the Chronique de St
Denys. There the three parts of the earth then
known are so represented, that Jerusalem is pla-
ced in the middle of the globe, and Alexandria
appears to be as near to it as Nazareth. Mem.

Y 3 d

325

de l'Acad. des Belles Lettres, tom xvi. p. 185.
There seem to have been no iills or houses of
entertainment for the reccption of travellers dur-
ing the middle ages. Murat. Atiq. Ital. vol.
iii. p. 58r, &c. This is a proof ofthe little i-
tercourfe which took place between different na-
tions. Among people whose manners are simple,
and who are seldom visited by strangers, hofpi-
tality is a virtue of the first raiik. This duty of
hospitality was so neceialiy i that state of foci-
ety which took place dlrig he middle ages,
that it was not confidered as one of those virtues
which men may practile or riot, according to
the temper of their minds, and the generosity
of their hearts. Hospitality was enforced by fta-
tutes, and those who neglected this duty were
liable to punishment. Qicumque hofpiti veni-
enti leaum, aut focum negaverit, trium felido-
rum inlatione multetur, Leg. Burgund. tit.
xxxviii. § i. Si quis homini aliquo pergenti in
itinere mansionem vetaverit fexaginta folidos
componat in publico. Capitul.lib.vi. § 82. This
increase of the penalty, at a period so long after
that in which the laws of the Burgundians were
published, and when the state of society was
much improved, is very remarkable. Other laws
of the fame purport are collected by Jo. Fred.
Polac. Syftema Jurifprud. Germanica, Lips 1733
p. 75. The laws of the Sclavi were more rigorous
than any that he mentiors; they ordained, " that
the moveables of an inholpitable person fould be
confiscated, and his house burnt." They were e-
ven o solicitous for the entertainment of ftran-
gers," that they permitted the landlord to fleal for
the support of his guest." Quod nodn furatus
fueris, eras appone hofpitibus. Rerum Meclebur-
gicar. lib. viii. a Mat. Jo. Beehr. Lipfl 175r. p
50. In consequence of these laws or of that ftatc
of society which made it proper to enatt thecn,
hofpitalityabounded, whilethc intercourse among
men was inconsiderable, and securcd the flranger

a kind
326

a kind reception under every roof where he chose
to take helter. This, too, proves clearly, that
the intercourse among men was rare, for as soon
as this increased, what was a pleasure became
a burden, and the entertaining of travellers was
converted into a branch of commerce.

Eut the laws of the middle ages afford a proof

fill more convincing of the small intercourse be-
tveen different nations. The gnius of the
Feudal system, as well as the spirit of jealousy
which always accompanies ignorance, joined in
discouraging firangers from fettling in any coun-
try. If a person removed from one province in
a kingdom to another, he was bound within a
year and a day, to acknowledge himfelfthe vas-
ial of the baron in whose estate he fettled; if he
neglected to do so, he became liable to a penalty;
and if at his death he negleted to leave a cer-
tain legacy to the baron within whose territories
he resided, all his goods were confiscated. The
hardships imposed on foreigners fettling in a
strange country, were still more intolerable. In
more early times, the superior lord of any ter-
ritory, in which a foreigner fettled, might seize
his person, and reduce him to servitude. Very
striking instances of this occur in the history of
the middle ages. The cruel depredations of the
Normans in the ninth century, obliged many
inhabitants of the maritime provinces of France,
to fly into the interior parts of the kingdom.
But instead of being received with that humanity
to which their wretched condition entitled them,
they were reduced to a state of servitude. Both
the civil and ecclesiastical powers found it
necefary to interpose, in order to put a stop to
this barbarous practice. Potgieller. de Statu
Servor. lib. i. c. . § 16. In other countries, the
laws permitted the inhabitants of the maritime
provinces, to reduce flch as were hipwrecked
on their coast, to servitude. Ibid. § 17. This

Y 4 barbarous

327

balbarous custom prevailed in other countries of
Europe. The practice of seizing the goods of
persons who had been fhipwrccked, and of con-
4lcating as the property of the lord on whose'
manor they were thrown, seems to have been
universal. De Weftphalen Monum. inedita
Rer. Germ. vol. iv. p. 907, &c. et Du Cange,
voc. Lmanumn. Beehr. Rer. Mecleb. lib. p. 512.
Among the ancient Welsh, three forts of per-
1',s, a madman, a tranger, and a leper, might
b kiild with impunity. Leges Hoel Dda,
quoted in Obfervat. on the Statutes, chiefly the
more acient, p. 22. M. de Lauriere produces
several ancient deeds which prove, that in diffe-
rent provinces of France, strangers became the
slaves of the lord on whose lands they fettled.
Gloflaire du Droit Francois, Art. Aubaine, p. 92.
Beaumanoir fays, " that there are several places
in France, in which, if a stranger fixes his refi-
dence for a year and day, he becomes the slave
of the lord of the manor. Couft. de Beauv. ch.
45. p. 254. But as a pratice so contrary to hu-
manity could not subsist, the superior lords found
it neceflary to ret satisfied with levying certain
annual taxes from aliens, by imposing upon them
fcme extraordinary duties or services. But when
ary stranger died, he could not convey his effets
by a will; and all his real as well as personal
cflate fell to the king, or to the lord of the ba-
rioy, to the exclusion of his natural heirs. This
is tlmd in France Droit d'Aubaine. Pref. de
.aulier. Ordon. tom. i. p. 15. Bruffel. tom. ii.
a. 944. Du Cange, voc. Aibani. Pafquier Re-
clerchcs, p. 367. This practice of confiscating
the effects of strangers upon their death was very
a.ncient. It is mentioned, though very obscure-
!', in a law of Charlemagne, A. D. 813. Capi-
til. Biluz. p. 507. § 5. Not only persons who
were born in a foreign country were subjeA to the
Droit d'Aubaine, but even uch as removed from
one diocese to another, or from the lands of one

baron

baron to another. Bruffel. vol. ii. p. 947, 949.
It is scarce pollible to conceive any law more
unfavourable to the intercourse between nations.
Something similar to it, however, mav be found
in the ancient laws of every kingdom in Europ-.
With refped to Italy, fee Murat. Ant. vol. ii.
p. 14. It is no small disgrace to the French jurif-
prudence, that this barbarous, inhofpilable cuf-
tom, should till remain in a nation so highly
civilized.

Tfr confusion and orage which abounded

under a feeble form of government, incapablo
of frami-g or executing salutary laws, rendered
the communication btween the different pro-
vinces of the fame kingdom' extremely dange-
rous. It appears from a etter of Lupus, abbot
of Ferrieres, in the ninth century, that the high-
ways were so much infested by banditti, that it
was necessary for travellers to forrt themselves
into companies or caravans, that they might be
safe from the aftaults of robbers. Bouquet Re-
cueil des Hist. vol. vii. 515. The numerous re-
gulations published by Charles the Bald in the
fame century, discover the frequency of these
disorders; and such as of violence were be-
come o common, that by many they were hardly
confidered as criminal; and for this reason, the
inferior judges called Centenarii, were required
to take an oath, that they would neither cm-
mit any robbery themselves, nor protet such as
were guilty of that crime. Capitul. edit. Baluz.
vol. ii. p. 63, 68. The historians of the ninth
and tenth centuries give pathetic descriptions of
there disorders. Some remarkable passages to
this purpose are collected by Mat. Jo. Beehr Rer.
Mecleb. lib. viii. p. 603. They became so fre-
quent and audacious, that the authority of the
civil magistrate was unable to repress them. The
ecclefiaitical jurisdiction was called in to aid it.
Councils were held with great olemnity, the
bodies of the faints were brought thither, and in

pretence

presence of their sacred reliques, anathemas w ere
denounced againit robbers, and other violators of
the publick peace. Bouquet Recueil des Hist,
.to. X. p. 360, 43I, 5;6. One of these forms
of excommunication itfued A. D. 988, is still
pre-'rvcd, and is o singular, and composed with
eloquence offuch a peculiar kind, that it will not
perhaps appear unworthy of a place here. After
the usual introdudtion, and mentioning the out-
rage which gave occasion to the anathema, it runs
thus, l" Obtencbrefcant occuli veftri, qui concu-
piverunt; arefcant manus, quae rapuerunt; de-
bilitentur omnia membra, qua adjuverunt. Sem-
per laboretis, nec requiem inveniatis, fru&tuque
veftri laboris privemini. Formidetis, & paveatis,
a facie perfequentis, & non perfequentis hoftis,
ut tabefcendo deficiatis. Sit portio veftra cum
Juda traditore Domini, in terra mortis et tene-
brarum; donec corda veftra ad fatisfadcionem
plenam convertantur.- Ne ceffent a vobis hae
malidiaiones, fcelerum veftrorum perfecutrices,
quamdiu permanebitis in peccato pervafionis.
Amen. Fiat, Fiat." Bouquet. Ib. p. 517.

WITH refpe&t to the progress of commerce

which I have described, p. 78, &c. it may be ob-
served that the Italian states carried on some com-
merce with the cities of the Greek empire, as
early as the age of Charlemagne, and imported
into their own country the rich commodities of
the east. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. ii. p. 882. In
the tenth century, the Venetians had opened a
trade with Alexandria in Egypt. Ibid. The in-
habitants of Amalphi and Pisa had likewise ex-
tended their trade to the fame ports. Murat. Ib.
p. 884, 885. The effects of the Crusades in in-
creasing the wealth and comjnerce of the Italian
fates, and particularly that which they carried
on with the East, I have explained page 29th
of this volume. They not only imported the
Indian commodities from the East, but eftablifl-
ed manufactures of curious fabric in their own

country.
330

country. Several of these are elmerated by
Mvluratori in his Dissertations concerning the arts
and the weaving of the middle ages. Antiq.
Ital. vol. ii. p. 349, 399. They m:tde great pro-
grefs particularly in the manufact:le oflilk,wlhich
had long been peculiar to the eal'fr-:l :rovinccs
of Asia. Silk stuffs were of fcui high price in
ancient Rome, that only a few p--:'tbs of the
first rank were able to purchaf> rt'::. Und&r
Aurelian, A. D. 270, a pound of ;ik was equal
in value to a pound of gold. A!it t t alnc) fila
penfentur. Libra enim auri tune libra ferici suit.
Vopifcus in Aureliano. Juftiiian, in the sixth
century, introduced the art of reari g silk-worms
into Greece, which rendered the commodity
somewhat more plentiful, though frill it was of
such great value, as to remain an article of lux-
ury or magnificence, reserved only for perons of
the first order, or for publick folemnities. Ro-
ger I. King of Sicily, about the year I 130, car-
ried off a number of artificers in the silk trade
from Athens, and fettling them in Palermo, in-
troduced the culture of silk into his kliigdom,
from which it was commun icated to other parts
of Italy. Gianon. Hist. of Naples, b. xi. c. 7.
This seems to have rendered silk so common,
that about the middle of the fourteenth cn:ury,
a thousand citizens of Genoa app:ar.-d in one
procession clad in silk robes. Suglr is likewise :L
production of the East. Some plt:iis of: th! fit
gar cane were brought from Asia; ad the firit
attempt to cultivate them in Sicily was mllad
about the middle of the twelfth celltury. Froml
thence they were transplanted int,) the fiiblilci
provinces of Spain. From Spain clhey vwere car-
ried to the Canary and Madeira iiles, and ai
length into the new world. Ludovico Gui''.cia.-
dini, in enumerating the goods impurted intc,
Antwerp, about the year 1560, mcntilio:s tih
sugar which they received from Spain and Portu
galas a considerable article. He defcrib s that a:

tlh

331

the product of the Madeira and Canary ii : s.
Defcritt. de Paefi BaT, p. 180, 18i. Th*- it-
gar cane was either not introduced into th' Weift-
Indies at that time, or the cilkivation of it was
not To confiderabe as to filrnifh an article i com-
fnerce. In the middle ages, though far vwas
not raised in such quantities, or emrploy,-d fir o
many purposes, as to bacome one of tl-e con-
mon neceflaries of life, it app ars to have baCn a
considerable article in the con:, rce of te Ita-
iian states.

THESE various commodities with wh;ich the

Italians furnished the other nations of Enrope,
procured them a favourable reception i: every
kingdom. They were eftabliflied in Fra-ce in
the thirteenth century with most exte-five im-
munities. They not only obtained every indul-
gence favourable to their commerce, but per-
bonal right and privileges were granted to them,
which the natives of the kingdom did not enjoy.
Ordon. tor. iv. p. 668. By a special proviso,
they were exempted from the droit d'aubaine.
Ibid. p. 670. As the Lombards engrossed the
trade of every kingdom in which they fettled,
they became matters of its cash. Money of course
was in their hands not only a sign of the value of
their commodities, but became an object of
commerce itself. They dealt largely as bankers.
In an ordonance, A. D. 295, we find them ti-
led mercatores and campfores. They carried on this
as well as other branches of their commerce with
somewhat of that rapacious spirit which is natu-
ral to monopolizers, who are not reitrained by
the concurrence of rivals. An absurd opinion,
which prevailed in the middle ages, was, how
ever, in some measure, the cause of thir exor-
bitant demands, and may be pleaded in apology
for them. Commerce cannot be carried on with
advantage unless the persons who lend a fumr are
allowed a certain premium for the ufc of their
monev, and a a compensation for the risk which

they
33z

they run in permitting another to traffick with
tlir fitock. This premium is fixed by law in
all commercial countries, and is called the legal
interest of money. But the Fathers of the church
prepofleroufly applied the prohibitions of usury
in scripture to the payment of legal interest, and
condemned it as a fin. The fchoolmen, misled
by Aristotle, whose sentiments they followed im-
plicity, and without examination, adopted the
fame error, and enforced it. Blackstone's Com-
rnentaries on the laws of England, vol. ii. p. 455.
Thus the Lombards found themselves engaged
i a traffic which was deemed criminal and
oiious. They were liable to punishment if de-
tetted. They were not satisfied, therefore, with
that moderate premium, which they might have
claimed, if their trade had been open and autho-
rifed by law. They exacted a fum proportional
to the danger and infamy of a discovery. Ac-
cordingly, we find that it was usual for them to
demand twenty per cent. for the use of money in
the thirteenth century. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol.
i. p. 893. About the beginning of that century,
the countess of Slanders was obliged to borrow
money in order to pay her husband's ranibm.
0'ie procured the urn requifite,either from Italian
rmrchants or from Jews. The lowest interest
which she paid to them, was above twenty per
cent. and ome of them exated near thirty.
Martene and Durand. Thefaur. Anecdotorum.
1 ol. i. p. 886. In the fourteenth century, A. D.
i; i i, Philip IV. fixed the interest which might
he legally exaaed in the fairs of Champagne at
twe.ty per cent. Ordonan. tom. i. p. 484. The
interef of money in Aragon was somewhat low-
er. James I. A. D. 1242. fixed it by law at
eighteen per cent. Petr. de Marca. Marca five
Limes Hifpan. app. 1433. As late as the year
1490, it appears that the interest of money in

Placentia,

Pl2contia, was at the rate of forty per cent. This
is the more extraordinary, bcaufe at that time
t!'e commerce of the talian States was become
c, nfiderable. Memorie Storiche de Piacenza,
torm. viii. p. 104. Piac. 176o. It appears from
Lud. G'iiccinrdini, that Charles V. had fixed the
rate of intnl-cft in his dominions in the Low-
Countries at twelve per cent. and at the time
v-hen he wrote about the year 1560, it was not
uncommon to excaft more than that fuim. He
complains of this as exorbitant, and points out
i s ad efifes both on agriculture and commerce.
Defcritt. di Paefi Banfi, p. 172. This high in-
terest of money, is alone a proof that the profits
on commerce were exorbitant.-The Lombards
were likewise eflablifhed in England, in the thir-
teenth century, and a considerable fireet in the
city of London still bears their name. They
enoyd great privileges, and carried on an ex-
tensive commerce, particularly as bankers. See
Anderson's Chronol. Dedution, vol. i. p. 137,
i 6o, 204, 2.31, where the statutes or other au-
thorities, which confirm this, are quoted. But
the cief mart for Italian commodities was at
Binuc?. Navigation was then so imperfect, that

y:. 3

( .; ,^ .vce the Baltick and Mediterranean

^m'd r.t be p-rform.d in one summer. For
ti.t r,:-. -,:, a mingazine or florehoufe half way
hb','wrci: te commercial cities in the north, and
t'- :, T., Italy,became neceliaTry. Bruges was pitch-
,d upon as thc noft convenient station. That
c!,oice i 1rt ccic!.d( vai: wealth into thcLow-Collll-
ti:s. Brl!'s was It once the staple for Englifll
wonl; 'for the woollen and linen manufadturts
of th: Ne ::therlands; for the naval itores, and
other ;ilky (cmm iiies of the north; and for
the Inciain eOrnlronditics, as well as domeflick
.prod ct ions i nport.d by the Italian States.
Thie cextcnt cif its commerce in India goods

with
.34

with Venice alone appears from one faA. In the
year 318, five Venetian galeailes laden with
Indian commodities arrived at Bruges, in order
to dispose of their cargoes at the Fair. L. Guic.
Defcritt di Paefi Ballh, p. 174. Galeaflfs were
vessels of very considerable burden. It was
the greatest emporium in all Europe. Many
proofs of this occur in the hiltorians and records
of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. Blt
instead of multiplying quotations, I shall refer
my readers to Anderfoi, vol. i. p. 12, 137, 213,
246, &c. The nature of this work prevents
me from entering into any long details, but there
are ome detached facts, which give an high
idea of the wealth both of the Flemiih and Ita-
lian commercial states. The Duke of Brabant
contracted his daughter to the Black Prince, son
of Edward III. of England, A. D. 339, and
gave her a portion which would amount to
three hundred thousand pounds of our present
money. Rymer's Federa, vol. v. p. i 13. ohn
Galeazzo Visconti, Duke of Milan, concluded a
treaty of marriage between his daughter and
Lionel Duke of Clarence, Edward's third son,
A. D. 367. and granted her a portion equal to
two hundred thousand pounds of our prefenr mo-
ney. Rymer Faeder. vol. vi. p. 547. Thele ex-
orbitant frums so far exceeding what was then
granted by the most powerful monarchs, and
which appear extraordinary even in the present
age, when the wealth of Europe is o much in-
crcafed, muff have arisen from the riches which
flowed into there countries from their extensive
and lucrative commerce. The first source of
wealth to the towns situated on the Baltick tea,
seems to have been the herring fiflery; the shoals
of herring frequenting at that time the coast of
Sweden and Denmark, in the fame manner as
they now resort to the Britiih coaffts. The es-

fe s

.35

sets of this fishery are thus described by an au-
thor of the thirteenth century. The Danes, fays
he, who were formerly clad in the poor garb of
sailors, are now cloathed in scarlet, purple and
fine linen. For they abound with wealth flowing
from their annual fifhexy on the coast of Scho-
nen; so that all nations resort to them, bringing
their gold, silver and precious commodities, that
they may purchafo herrings, which the divi:ne
bounty bestows upon them. Arnoldus Lube-
cnfis ap. Conring. de Urbid. German. § 87.

THE Hanfeatick league is the most powerful

commercial confederacy known in history. Its
origin towards the close of the twelfth century,
and the objedts of its union, are described by
Knipfcildt Tradatus Hiftorico-Politico Juridicus
de Juribus Civitat. Imper. lib. i. cap. 4. Ander-
son has mentioned the chief fads with refpet to
their commercial progress, the extent of the pri-
vileges which they obtained in different countries,
their successful wars with several monarchs, as
well as the spirit and zeal with which they con-
tended for those liberties and rights, without
which it is impossible to carry on commerce to
advantage. The vigorous efforts of a society
attentive only to commercial objeds, could not
fail of diffusing over Europe new and more lib:-
ral ideas concerning justice and order wherever
they fettled.

IN England the prc,refs of commerce was

extremely flow; and the caufcs of this are ob-
vious. During the Saxon heptarchy, England,
split into many petty kingdoms, which were
perpetually at variance with each other, exposed
to the fierce incursions of the Danes, and other
northern pirates., and funk in barbarity and ig-
r.orarce, vws in no condition to cultivate crm-
*nrict', or to purfute any ft: in of ufefTil and f-

humi' y

lutary policy. When a better profpe& began
to open by the union of the kingdom under one
monarch, the Norman conquest took place. This
occasioned uch a violent shock, and such a fud-
den and total revolution of property, that the
nation did not recover from it during several
reigns. By the time that the conflitution began
to acquire ome stability, and the English had so
incorporated with their conquerors as to become
one people, thenation engaged with no less ardour
than imprudence in support of their monarch's
pretensions to the crown of France, and long
wafted its vigour and genius in its wild efforts
to conquer that kingdom. When by ill success,
and repeated difappointtnents, a period was at
last put to this fatal frenzy, and the nation be-
ginning to enjoy some repose, had leisure to
breathe and to gather new strength, the deftruc-
tive wars between the houses of York and Lan-
caster broke out, and involved the kingdom in
the worst of all calamities. Thus, besides the
common obftru&ions of commerce occasioned
by the nature of the feudal government, and the
state of manners during the middle ages, its
progress in England was retarded by peculiar
causes. Such a fucceflion of events adverse to
the commercial spirit was sufficient to have
checked its growth, although every other cir-
cumftance had favoured it. The English were
accordingly one of the last nations in Europe
who availed themselves of their natural con-
mercial advantages. Before the reignof Edward
III. all the wool of England, except a small
quantity wrought into coarse cloths for home
confilmption, was fold to the Flemings or Lom-
bards, and manufactured by them. Though
Edward, A. D. 326, began to allure some of
the Flemish weavers to fettle in England, it was
long before the Englifl were capable offabricat-

Vo. I. Z ing

ing cloth for foreign markets, and the export of
unwrought wool still continued to be the chief
article of their commerce. Anderson passim. -
All foreign commodities were brought into Eng-
land by the Lombard or Hanfeatick merchants.
The English ports were frequented by ships both
from the north and south of Europe, and they
tamely allowed foreigners to reap all the profits
arising from the supply of their wants. The first
commercial treaty of England on record, is that
with Haquin King of Norway, A. D. 1217.
Anders. vol. i. p. Io8. But they did not venture
to trade in their own hips to the Baltick until
the beginning of the fourteenth century. Ib.
151. It was after the middle of the fifteenth
before they ent any ship into the Mediterranean.
Ib. p. 177. Nor was it long before this period
that their vessels visited the ports of Spain or
Portugal. But though I have pointed out the
flow progress of the English commerce, as a
fa& little attended to, and yet meriting confide-
ration; the concourse of foreigners to the ports
of England, together with the communication
among all the different countries in Europe,
which went on increasing from the beginning of
the twelfth century, is sufficient to jutify all
the observations and reasonings in the text con-
cerning the influence of commerce on the state
of manners, and of society.

NOTE XXX. SECT. III. p. 153.

I HAVE not been ableto discover the precise

manner in which the Jufliza was appointed.
Among the claims of the junta or union formed
againfl James 1. A. D. 1264, this was one; that
the King should not nominate any person to be

Juftiza

Jufliza without the content or approbation of the
rcos-hombres or nobles. Zurita Anales de Ara-
gon, vol. i. p. 80. But the King in hisanfwer
to their remonstrance asserts, " that it was eta-
blifhed by immemorial practice, and was con-
formable to the laws of the kingdom, that the
King, in virtue of his royal prerogative, named
the Juftiza. Zurita, Ibid. 81. Blanca, 656.
From another passage in Zurita, it appears that
while the Aragonefe enjoyed the privilege of the
union, i. e. the power of confederating against
their overeign as often as they conceived that he
had violated any of their rights and immunities,
the Juftiza was not only nominated by the King,
but held his office during his pleasure. Nor was
this practice attended with any bad effets, as
the privilege of the union was a sufficient and es-
fectual check to any abuse of the royal preroga-
tive. But when the privilege of the union was
abolished as dangerous to the order and peace
of society, it was agreed that the Juftiza
ihould continue in office during life. Several
Kings, however, attempted to remove the Jufti-
zas who were obnoxious to them, and they some-
times succeeded in the attempt. In order to
guard against this encroachment, which would
have destroyed the intention of the institution,
and have rendered the Juftiza the dependant
and tool of the crown, instead of the guardian
of the people, a law was enacted in the Cortes,
A. D. 1442, ordaining that the Juftiza hould
continue in office during life, and liould not be
removed from it unless by the authority of the
Cortes. Fueros & Obfervancia del Reyno de
Arag. lib. i. p. 22. By formerlaws the person
of the Juftiza had been declared sacred, and he
was relponfible only to the Cortes. Ibid. p. 1x5. b.
Zurita and Blanca, who both published their
lhiitorics, while the Juftiza of Aragon retained
the full exercise of his privileges and juiifdicion,

Z 2 have

339

have neglected to explain several circumstances
with regard to the office of that refpetable ma-
giftrate, because they addrefled their works to
their countrymen, who were well acquainted
with every particular concerning the funcions
of a judge, to whom they looked up as to the
guardian of their liberties. It is in vain to con-
lult the later historians of Spain, about any
point, with refpet to which the excellent hifto-
rians whom I have named are silent. The an-
cient constitution of their country was overturn-
ed, and despotism, established on the ruin of its
liberties, when the writers of this and the pre-
ceding century composed their histories, and on
that account they had little curiosity to know
the nature of those institutions to which their
ancestors owed the enjoyment of freedom, or
they were afraid to describe them with much ac-
curacy. The spirit with which Mariana, his con-
tinuator Miniana, and Ferreras, write their his-
tories, is very different from that of the two
historians of Aragon, from whom I have taken
my account of the constitution of that kingdom.

Two circumstances concerning the Juftiza,

besides those which I have mentioned in the
text, are worthy ofobfervation, i. None of the
ricos-hombres, or noblemen of the first order,
could be appointed Juftiza. He was taken out
of the second class or cavalleros, who answer
nearly to gentlemen or commoners in Great-
Britain. Fueros & Obfervanc. del Reyno, &c.
lib. i. p. z2. b. The reason was. By the laws
of Aragon, the ricos-hombres were not subjea
to capital punishment; but as it was necef-
(ary for the security of liberty, that the Juftiza
should be accountable for the manner in which
he executed the high trust reposed in him, it
was a powerful restraint upon him to know that

lih

he was liable to be punished with the utmost ri-
gour. Blanca, p. 657, 756. Zurita, tom. ii.
229. Fueros & Obfervanc. lib. ix. p. 182. b.
183. It appears too from many passages in Zu-
rita, that the Juftiza was appointed to check the
domineering and oppressive spirit of the nobles,
as well as to set bounds to the power of the mo-
narch, and therefore he was chosen from an or-
der of citizens equally interelted in opposing
both.

2. A MAGISTRATE possessed of such vafl

powers as the Juftiza, might have exercised them
in a manner pernicious to the state, if he himself
had been subjet to no controul. A conftitu-
:tional remedy, however, was provided againit
this danger. Seventeen persons were chosen by
lot in each meeting of the Cortes. These form-
ed a tribunal called the court of inquisition into
the offi'ceof Juftiza. This court met at three
stated termein each year. Every person had li-
berty of con1lainihig to it of any inquiry or ne-
-glet of duty i the Juftiza, or in the inferior
judges, who acdd i- his name. The Jftiza
and his deputies were called to answer for their
conduet. The members of the court paifed
sentence by ballot. They might punish by de-
gradation, confiscation of. goods, or even with
death. The law which ereAed this court, and
regulated the forms of its procedure, was enact-
-ed A. D. 1461. Zurita Anales, iv. o02. Blanca
Comment. Rer. Aragon. 770. Previous to this
period, inquiry was made into the condud of
the Juitiza, though not with the fame formality.
He was from the first infritution of the office
fihbject to the review of the Cortes. The con-
slant dread of such an impartial and severe in-
quiry into his behaviour, was a powerfil motive
to the vigilant and faithful discharge of his dty.

Z 3 A remarkable

A remarkable instance of the authority of the
Juftiza when opposed to that of the King, occurs
in the year 386. By the constitution of Ara-
gon, the eldest son or heir apparent of the crown
possessed considerable power and jurifdition in
the kingdom. Fueros & Obfervanc. del Reyno
de Arag. lib. . p. 6. Peter IV. instigated by
a second wife, attempted to deprive his son of
this, and enjoined his subjes to yield him no
obedience. The Prince immediately applied to
the Juftiza; c" the safe guard and defence, fays
Zurita, against all violence and oppression."
The Juftiza granted him the firmo de derecho,
the effect of which was, that upon his giving
surety to appear in judgment, he could not be
deprived of any immunity or privilege which
he poffefred, but in consequence of a legal trial
before the Juftiza, and of a sentence pronounced
by him. This was published throughout the
kingdom, and notwithstanding the proclamation
in contradiction to this which had bW- issued by
the King, the Prince continued in the exercise
of all his rights, and his authority was univer-
sally recognized. Zurita Anales de Aragon,
tom. ii. 385.

NOTE XXXI. SECT. III. p. 54.

I H AVE been induced, by the concurring tef-

timony of many refpedable authors, to mention
this as the constitutional form of the oath of al-
legiance, which the Aragonefe swore to their So-
vereigns. I must acknowledge, however, that
I have not found this singular oath in any Spa-
nith author whom I have had an opportunity to
consult. It is mentioned neither by Zurita, nor
Blanca, nor Argenfola, nor Sayas, who were all
historiographers appointed by the Cortes of Aia-
gon to record the tranfations of the kingdom.
All these writers possess a merit, which is verv

Vrl' e
342

rare among historians. They are extremely ac-
curate in tracing the progress of the laws and'
constitution oftheir country. Their silence with
refped to this, creates some suspicion concerning
the genuineness of the oath. But as it is men-
tioned by so many authors, who produce the an-
cient Spanish words in which it is expressed, it
is probable that they have taken it from some
writer of credit, whose works have not fallen
into my hands. The spirit of the oath is per-
fetly agreeable to the genius of the Aragonefe
constitution.

THE privilege of Union which I mentioned

in the preceding note, and alluded to in the next,
is indeed one of the most singular which could
take place in a regular government, and the
oath that I have mentioned exprefles nothing
more than this conititutional privilege entitled
the Aragonefe to perform. If the King or his
ministers violated any of the laws or immunities
of the Aragorefe, and did not grant immediate
redress in consequence of their representations
and remonstrances, the nobles of the first rank,
or Ricos-hombres de natura, & de mendl, the
equestrian order, or the nobility of the second
class, called Hidalgos & Infanciones, together
with the magistrates of cities, might either in
the cortes, or in a voluntary assembly, join in
union, and binding themselves by mutual oaths
and the exchange of hostages to b faithful to
each other, they might require the King, in the
name and by the authority of his body corporate,
to grant them redress. If the King refused to
comply with their request, or took arms in or-
der to oppose them, they might, in virtue of the
privilege of union, instantly withdraw their al-
legiance from the King, refute to acknowledge
him as their Sovereign, and proceed to elect
another Monarch; nor did they incur any guilt,

Z 4 or

or become liable to any prosecution on that ac-
count. Blanca Corn. Rer. Arag. 66 , 669. This
union did not resemble the confederacies in other
feudal kingdoms. It was a constitutional affo-
ciation, which pretended to legal privileges,
which iflued its mandates under a common feal,
and proceeded in all its operations by regular
and ascertained forms. This- dangerous right
was not only claimed, bu exercised. In the year
1287, the Aragonefe formed an union in oppo,
fition to Alfonso III. and obliged the King not
only to comply with their demands, but to ra-
tify a privilege so fatal to the power of the crown.
rurita Anale4, ton. i.p. p322. In the year
I347, an union was formed against Peter IV.
with equal success, and a new ratification of the
privilege was extorted. Zurita, tom. ii. p. 202.
But soon after, the King having defeated the
leaders of the union in battle, the privilege of
union was finally abrogated in the Cortes, ard all
the laws or records which contained any confir-
mation of it, were cancelled or destroyed. The
King, in pretence of the Cortes, called for the
at whereby he had ratified the union, and hav-
ing wounded his hand with his poniard, he held:
it above the record, " That privilege, fays he,
" which has been so fatal to the kingdom, and
"so injurious to royalty, should be effaced
"with the blood of a King." Zurita, tom. ii
p. 229. The law abolishing the union is pub-
lifhed. Fueros & Obfervanc. lib. ix. p. 178.
From that period the Juftiza became the confti-
tutional guardian of publick liberty, and his
power and jurisdiction occasioned none of those
violent convulsions which the tumultuary privi-
lege of the union was apt to produce. The con-
ftitution of Aragon, however, still remained ex-
tremely free. One source of this liberty was
from the early admiflion of the representatives
of cities into the Cortes. It feemsprobable, from

Zurita,
344

Zurita, that burgesses we're constituent members
of the Cortes from its first institution. He men-
tions a meeting of Cortes, A. D. 1133, in which
the procurdores de las ciudades y villas were pre-
sent. Tom. i. p. 5i. This is the confkitutional
language in which their pretence is declared in
the Cortes, after the journals of that court were
regularly kept. It is probable, that an historian
so accurate as Zurita, would not have used these
words, if he had not taken them from some au-
thentick record. It was more than a century
after this period before the representatives of ci-
ties formed a conflituent part in the supreme as-
femblies of the other European nations. The
free spirit of the Aragonefe government is con-
fpicuous in many particulars. The Cortes not
only opposed the attempts of their Kings to in-
crease their revenue, or to extend their preroga-
tive, but they claimed right and exercised powers
which will appear extraordinary even in a coun-
try accustomed to the enjoyment of liberty. In
the year 1286, the Cortes claimed the privilege
of naming the members of the King's council
and the officers of his houlhold, and they seem
to have obtained it for some time. Zurita, tom.
i. p. 303, 307. It was the privilege of the
Cortes to name the Officers who commanded the
troops raised by their authority. This teems to
be evident from a patfage in Zurita. When the
Cortes, in the year 503o, railed a body of troops
to be employed in Italy, it palled an aft empow-
ering the King to name the officers who flould
command them, Zurita, tom. v. p. 274; which
plainly implies that, without this warrant, it did
not belong to him in virtue of his prerogative.
In the Fueros & Obfervancias del reyno de Ara-
gon, two general declarations of the rights and
privileges of the Aragonee are pblifhed; the
one in the reign of Pcdro I. A. D. 128^, the

other

345

other in that of James II. A. D. 1325. They
are of such length, that I cannot insert them;
but it is evident from there, that not only the
privileges of the nobility, but the rights of the
people, personal as well as political, were, at
that period, more extensive, and better under-
stood than any kingdom in Europe. Lib. i. p.
7, 9. The oath by which the King bound him-
self to observe those rights and liberties of the
people, was very olemn. Ibid. p. i4. b. & p.
5. The Cortes of Aragon discovered not only
the jealousy and vigilance, which are peculiar to
free fates, in guarding the essential parts of the
constitution, but they were scrupulously atten-
tive to observe the most minute forms and cere-
monies to which they were accustomed. Accord-
ing to the established laws and customs of Ara-
gon, no foreigner had liberty to enter the hall
in which the Cortes assembled. Ferdinand, in
the year 1481, appointed his Queen, Isabella,
regent of the kingdom, while he was absent
during the course of the campaign. The law
required that a regent hould take the oath of
fidelity in pretence of the Cortes; but as Ifa-
bella was a foreigner, before she could be ad-
mitted, the Cortes thought it necessary to pass
an at authorizing the ferjeant-porter to open
the door of the hall, and to allow her to enter;
" so attentive were they, fays Zurita, to observe
" their laws and forms, even such as may seem
" most minute." Tom. iv. p. 313.

TIE. Aragonefe were no les solicitous to fe-

cure the personal rights of individuals, than to
maintain the freedom of the constitution; and
the spirit of their statutes with refpet to both
was equally liberal. Two fadts relative to this
matter merit observation. By an express ftatlte
il the year I325, it was declared to be unlawful

to
346

to put any native Aragonefe to the torture. If
he could not be convicted by the testimony of
witnesses, he was instantly absolved. Zurita,
tom. ii. p. 66. Zurita records the regulation
with the fatisfation natural to an historian, when
he contemplates the humanity of his country-
men. He compares the laws of Aragon to thoti:
of Rome, as both exempted citizens and free-
men from such ignominious and cruel treatment,
and had recourse to it only in the trial of llaves-
Zurita had reason to bestow such an encomium
on the laws of his country. Torture was at that
time permitted by the laws of every other nation
in Europe. Even in England, from which the
mild spirit of legislation has long banished it,
torture was not, at that time, unknown. Ob-
servations on the Statutes, chiefly the more ai-
cient, &c. p. 66.

THE other fact hows, that the fame spirit

which influenced the legislature, prevailed among
the people. In the year 485, the religious eal
of Ferdinand and Isabella, prompted them to in-
troduce the inquisition into Aragon. Though
the Aragonefe were no less superstitiously attach-
ed, than the other Spaniards, to the Roman Ca-
tholick faith, and no less desirous to root out the
feeds of error and of!herefy which the Jews and
Moors had scattered, yet they took arms againf
the inquiitors, murdered the chief inquisitor,
and long opposed the eltabliThment of that tri-
bunal. The rrafon which they gave for their
condut, was, that the rood. of trial in the i-
quifition, was inconsistent with liberty. The
criminal was not confronted with the witnetfs,
he was not acquainted with what they deposed
against him, he was libjer'd to torture, and
the goods of persons condemned were confiscated.
Zurita Anales, tom. iv. p. 341.

347

THE form of Government in the kingdom of

Valencia, and principality of Catalonia, which
were annexed to the crown of Aragon, was like-
wife extremely favourable to liberty. The Va-
lencians enjoyed the privilege of union in the
lame manner with the Aragonefe. But they had
no magifirate resembling the Juftiza. The Ca-
talonians were no less jealous of their liberties
than the two other nations, and no less bold in
asserting them. But it is not neceifary for illus-
trating the following history, to enter into any
farther detail concerning the peculiarities in the
conflitution of there kingdoms.

NOTE XXXII. SECT. III. p. I55.

I HAVE searched in vain among the historians

of Castile, for such information as might enable
me to trace the progress of laws and government
in Castile, or to explain the nature of the con-
ftitution with the fame degree of accuracy,
wherewith I have described the political state of
Aragon. It is manifet, not only from the hifto-
rians ds Castile, but from its ancient laws, par-
ticularly theFueroJuzgo, that its monarchs were
·originally elecive. Ley 2, 5, 8. They were
chosen by the bishops, the nobility, and the
people, ibid. It appears from the fame vene-
rable code of laws, that the prerogative of the
,Castilian monarchs was extremely limited. Vil-
-laldiego in his commentary on these laws, pro-
duces'many fads and authorities in confirma-
-tion of both there particulars. Dr. Geddes, who
was well acquainted with Spanilh literature,
complains that he could find no author who gave
a diftint account of the Cortes, or slpreme al
fembly of the nation, or who described the man.
ner in which it was held, or mentioned the pre-
cife number of members who had a right to lit
in it. He produces, however, from Cil (;n1-

z !!.

zales d'Avila, who published a history of Henry
II. the writ of summons to the town of Abula,
requiring it to choose representatives to appear in
the Cortes which he called to meet A. D. 390.
From this we learn, that Prelates, Dukes, Mar-
quiffes, the masters of the three military orders,
Condes and Riccos-hombres were required to
attend. These composed the bodies of ecclefi-
afticks and nobles, which formed two members
of the legislature. The cities which ent mem-
bers to that meeting of the Cortes, were forty-
eight. The number of representatives (for the
cities had right to choose more or fewer, accor-
ding to their refpetive dignity) amounted to an
hundred and twenty-five. Geddes Mifcellane-
ous Trats, vol. i. 33 r. Zurita having occasion
to mention the Cortes which Ferdinand held at
Toro, A. D. 1505, in order to secure to himself
the government of Castile after the death of Ira-
bella, records with his usual accuracy, the names
of the members present, and of the cities which
they represented. From that lift it appears,
that only eighteen cities had deputies in this
assembly. Anales de Aragon, torn. vi. p. 3.
What was the occasion of this great inequality,
in the number of cities represented in there two
meetings of the Cortes, I-am unable to explain.

NO T E XXXIII. SECT. III. p. 157.

A GREAT part of the territory in Spain was

engrolfed by the nobility. L. Marinaeus Sicu-
Ins, who composed his treatise de Rebus His-
paniz during the reign of CharlesV. gives a
catalogue of the Spanilh nobility, together with
the yearly rent of their estates. According to
his account, which he affirms was as accurate as
the nature of the subject would admit, the um

total

total of the annual revenue of their lands amount-
ed to one million four hundred and eighty-two
thousand ducats. If we make allowance for the
vafl difference in the value of money in the sis-
teenth century, from that which it now bears,
and confider that the catalogue of Marinaeus in-
cludes only the itulados, or nobility, whole
families were distinguished by some honorary
title, their wealth muff appear very great. L.
Marinaus ap. Schotti Scriptores Hifpan. vol. i.
p. ,23. The Commons of Castile, in their con-
tests with the crown, which I hall hereafter
relate, complain of the extensive property of the
nobility, as extremely pernicious to the king-
dom. In one of their manifeffo's they afert,
that from Valladolid to St. Jago in Galicia,
which was an hundred leagues, the crown did
not possess more than three villages. All the
reft belonging to the nobility, and could be sub-
jeded to no publick burden. Sandov. Vida del
Emperor. Carl. V. vol. i. p. 422. It appears
fiom the testimony of authors quoted by Bova-
dilla, that these vast poffelions were bestowed
upon the Ricos-hombres, hidalgos, and cavalleros
by the Kings of Castile, in reward for the aflif-
tance which they had received from them in
expelling the Moors.' They likewise obtained,
by the fame means, a considerable influence in
the cities, many of which anciently dpended
upoln the nobility. Politica para Corregidores.
Amb. 1750. fol. vol. i. 440, 442.

NOTE XXXIV. SECT. r.

II . 6. 6.

I H AVr been able to di cover nothing certain,

as I obfervecl Note XVIII. with respect to the
origin of communitics or free cities in Spiiln
It is prubable, that as loon as these were recover-

(,:

ed from the Moors, the inhabitants who fixed
their residence in them, being persons of dif-
tindion and credit, had all the privileges of
municipal government and jurisdiction, confer-
red upon them. Many striking proofs occur of
the splendour, wealth, and power of the Spanilh
cities. Hieronymus Paulus wrote a description
of Barcelona in the year 49 I, and compares the
dimensions of the town to that of Naples, and
the elegance of its buildings, the variety of its
manufactures, and the extent of its commerce
to Florence. Hieron. Paulus ap. Schottum. Script.
Hifp. ii. 844. Marinaus describes Toledo as a
large and populous city. A great number of
its inhabitants were persons of quality, and ofil-
luftrious rank. Its commerce was great. It
applied particularly to the manufactures of silk
and wool; and the number of inhabitants em-
ployed in these two branches of trade, amounted
nearly to ten thousand. Marin. ubi supr. p.
308. I know no city, fays he, that I would pre-
ser to Valladolid for elegance and splendour.
Ibid. p. 312. We may form rome estimate of
its populousness from the following circumftan-
ces. The citizens took arms in the year 5 6,
in order to oppose a- measure concerted by car-
dinal Ximenes, and they mustered in the city,
and in the territory which belonged to it, thirty
thousand fighting men. Sandov. Vida del Em-
per. Carl. V. tom. i. p. 8 . The manufactures
carried on in the towns of Spain, were not in-
tended merely for home consumption, they were
exported to foreign countries, and that com-
merce was a considerable source of wealth to the
inhabitants. The maritime laws of Barcelona
are the foundation of mercantile jurisprudence
in modern times, as the Leges Rlodiae were
among the ancients. All the commercial states
in Italy adopted thefc laws, and regulated their
trade according to them. Sndi Storia Civile

Veneziana3,

Veneziana, Vol. ii. 865. It appears from feve.
;al ordonances of the Kings of France, that the
merchants of Aragon and Cattile were received
on the fame footing, and admitted to the fame
privileges with those of Italy. Ordonances des
Roys, &c. tom. ii. p. 135. iii. 66, 504, 635.
Cities in such a flouriihing state became a re-
fpeEtable part of the society, and were entitled
to a considerable hare in the legislature. The
magifirates of Barcelona aspired to the highest
honour a Spanish subjed can enjoy, that-of be-
ing covered in the presence of their sovereign,
and of being treated as grandees of the kingdom.
Origin de la dignidad de Grande de Castilla por
Don Alonfo Carillo. Madr. 657. p. 8.

NOTE XXXV. SECT. III. p. I62.

THE military order of St. Jago, the moif ho-

nourable and opulent of the three Spanish orders,
v.as inflituted about the year 1170. The bull
of confirmation by Alexander III. is dated A. D.
1176. At that time a considerable part of
Spain was subject to the Moors, and the whole
country much exposed to the depredations, not
only of the enemy, but of banditti. It is no
wonder, then, that an inititution, the object of
which was to oppose the enemies of the Christian
faith, and to restrain and punish those who dif-
turbed the publick peace, should be extremely
popular, and meet with general encouragement.
Thle wealth and power of the order became so
great, that one historian fays, that the Grand
Master of St. Jago was the person, in Spain, of
greatest power and dignity next to the King. EI.
Anton. Nebriffenfis, ap. Schott. Scrip. Hifp. i
81 z. Another observes, that the order pJf-
ielled every thing in Castile that a King would

rnmuo

most desire to obtain. Zurita Anales, v. 22.
The knights took the vows of obedience, of po-
verty, and of conjugal chaffity. By the former
they were bound implicitly to obey the com-
mands of their grand matter. The order could
bring into the field a thousand men at arms. IEl.
Ant. Nebref. p. 8 3. If these men at arms were
accompanied as was usual in that age, this was
a formidable body of cavalry. There belonged
to this order eighty-four commanderies, and two
hundred priories and other bznefices. Differta-
tions fur la Chevalerie par Hon. de St. Marie, p.
262. It is easy to fee how formidable to his
sovereign the command of these troops, the ad-
ministration of such revenues, and the disposal
of so many offices, must have rendered a subjet.
The other two orders, though inferior to that
of St. Jago in power and wealth, were never-
thelefs very considerable. When the conquest
of Granada deprived the knights of St. Jago of
those enemies against whom their zeal was origi-
nally directed, fuperitition found out a new ob-
jet, in defence of which they engaged to em-
ploy their courage. To their usual oath, they
added the following clause: " We swear to be-
lieve, to maintain, and to contend in publick
and in private, that the Virgin Mary, the mo-
ther of God, our Lady, was conceived without
the ifain of original fin." This singular additi-
on was made about the middle of the seventeenth
century. Honors de St. Marie Difertations,
&c. p. 263.

NOTE XXXVI. SECT. III. p. 164.

I HA V r frequcntly had occasion to take notice

of the defeats in police during the middle ages,
occasioned by the feebleness of government, and
the want of proper subordination among the dif-
ferent ranks of men. I have obfi-rved i a or-

Vol.. I. A a met

rher note, that this greatly interrupted the
intercourse between nations, and even be-
tween different places in the fame kingdom.
The description which the Spanish hiOtorians
give of the frequency of rapine, murder, and
every aft of violence, in all the provinces of
Spain, are amazing, and pefent to us the idea
of society but little removed from the disorder
and turbulence of that 'which has been called a
state of nature. Zurita Anales de Arag. i. 75.

JEl. Ant. Nebriffenfis rer. a Ferdin. geftar. Hist.
ap. Schottum II. 849. Though the excess of these
disorders rendered the institution of the Santa Her-
mandad necessary, great care was taken at sirs to
avoid giving any offence or alarm to the nobility.
The jurifdition of the judges of the Hermandad
was expressly confined to crimes that violated
the publick peace. All other offences were left
to the cognizance of the ordinary judges. If a
person was guilty of the most notorious perjury,
in any trial before a judge of the Hermandad, he
could not punish him, but was obliged to remit
the cafe to the ordinary judge of the place. Com-
mentaria in Regias Hifpan. Conflitut. per Alph.
de Azevedo, pars v. p. 22o, &c. fol. Duaci,
1612. Notwithstanding there reftritions, the
Barons were sensible how much the Hermandad
would encroach on their jurisdiction. In Castile,
fene opposition was made.to the inflitution; but
Ferdinand had the address to obtain the content
of the Constable to the introdution of the Her-
mandad into that part of the kingdom where his
estate lay; and by that means, as well as the
popularity of the institution, he surmounted eve-
ry obstacle that stood inits way. l. Ant. Ne-
briffen. 851. In Aragon, the Nobles combined
against it with greater pirit; and Ferdinand,
though hfe supported it with vigour, was obliged
to make some concessions in order to reconcile
them. Zurita A'hles de Arag. iv. 356. The

power
354

,power and revenue of the Hermandad in Castile
.seems to have been very great. Ferdinand, when
.preparing forthe war against the Moors of Gra-
nada, required of the:Hermandad to .furnilh him
-sixteen thousand beafs of burden, together with
eight thousand men to conduEt them, and he ob-
tained what he demanded. El. Ant. Nebriff
88r. The Hermandad has been found to be of
so much use in preserving peace, and restraining
or detecting crimes, that it is still continued in
Spain, although it be no longer necessary either
for moderating the power of the nobility, or ex-
tending that of the crown.

NOTE XXXVII. SECT. III. p. 67.

NOTHING is more common among Antiquari-

ans, and there is not a more copious source of
error, than to decide concerning the inflitutions
and manners of pafl ages, by the forms and
ideas which prevail in their own times. Th.e
French lawyers in the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries having found their sovereigns in posses-
sion ofabfolute power, seem to think it a duty
incumbent on them, to maintain that such un-
bounded authority belonged to the crown in eve-
ry period of their monarchy. " The govern-
ment of France, fays M. de Real very gravely,
is purely monarchical at this day, as it was from
the beginning. Our Kings were absolute origi-
nally as they are at present." Science du Gou-
vernement, tom. ii. p. 31. It is impoflible, how-
ever, to conceive two flates of civil society nore
unlike to each other, than that of the French
nation under Clovis, and that under Louis XV.
It is evident from the codes of laws of the vari-
ous tribes which fettled in Gaul and the countries
adjacnt to it, as well as from the hiilory of
Gregory of Tours, and other early annalilts, that

A a 2 among

among all there people the form of government
was extremely rude and simple, and that they
had scarce begun to acquire the first rudiments
of that order and police which are necessary in.
extensive societies. The King or leader had the
command of soldiers or companions, who fol-
lowed his itandard from choice, not by con-
ftraint. I have produced the clearest evidence
of this, Note VI. An event related by Gregory
of Tours, lib iv. c. I4, affords the most itrik-
ing proof of the dependance of the early French
Kings on the sentiments and inclinations of their
people. Chlothaire I. having marched at the head
of his army, in the year 553, against the Saxons,
that people, intimidated at MIs approach, sued for
peace, and offered to pay a large fum to the of-
fended monarch. Chlothaire was willing to close
with what they proposed. But his army insist-
ed to be led forth to battle. The King employ-
ed all his eloquence to persuade them to accept
of what the Saxons were ready to pay. The Sax-
ons, in order to foodt them, increased their ori-
ginal offer. The-King renewed his solicitations:
But the army enraged, rushed upon the King,
tore his tent in pieces, dragged him out of it,
and would have slain him on the spot, if he had
not consented to lead them instantly againit the
enemy.

IF the early monarchs of France poffefled such

limited authority, even while at the head of their
army, their prerogative during peace will be
found to be still more confined. They ascended
the throne not by any hereditary right, but in
consequence of the ele&tion of their fubjeets. In
order to avoid an unnecessary number of qiuotati-
ons, I refer my readers to Hottomanni Franco-
galli:, cap. vi. p. 47. edit. 1573, where they will

siid

find the fulled proof of this from Gregory of
Tours, Amoinus, and the most authentick his-
torians of the Merovingian Kings. The effet
of this election was not to invest them with
absolute power. Whatever related to the ge-
neral welfare of the nation, was submitted to
publick deliberation, and determined by the
suffrage of the people, in the annual assem
blies called Les Champs de Mars, and Les
Champs de Mai. These aflemblies were called
Champs, because, according to the custom of all
the barbarous nations, they were held in the-
open air, in some plain capable of containing the
vast number of persons who had a right to be
present. Jo. Jac. Sorberus de Comitiis veterum
Germanorum. vol. i. § 19, &c. They were de-
nominated Champs de Mars and de Mai, from
the Months in which they were held. Every.
free man seems to have had a right to be present
in these assemblies. Sorberus, ibid. § 33, &c.
The ancient annals of the Franks describe the
persons who were present in the assembly held
A. D. 788, in these words: In placito Ingelhei-
menfi conveniunt. pontifices, majores, minores,
jicerdotes,reguli, duces; comites, prefecti, cives,
oppidani. Apud Sorber. § 304. There every
thing that concerned the happiness of tleir-
country, fays an ancient historian, every thing:
- that could be of benefit to the Franks was con-

fidered, and enjoined. Fredegarius ap. D.
Cange Gloffar. voc. Campus Martii. Chlothari-
us II. describes the business, and acknowledges
the authority of these afemblies. They are call-
ed, fays he, that whatever relate3 to the com-
mon iafety may be confidered and resolved by
common deliberation and whatever they de-
termine, to that I will conform. Amoinus ide
Gest, Franc. lib. iv. c. i. ap. Bouquet Recueil. iii.
ii 6. The statutory clauses, or words of legi-
flative authority in the decrees illed in thc'e
ialeliblie, run not in ilte name of the K ig alonle,

A a t "We

u' We have treatedays Childebert, in a decree
A. D. 5 2, in the assembly of March, together
with our Nobles, concerning some affairs, nmd we
now publish the conclusion, that it niay come
to the knowledge.of all.'.' Childeb. Decret. ap.
Bouquet Recueil des Hiftor. torn. iv. p. . We
have agreed together with our vassals. Ibid. § 2.
It is agreed in the assembly in which we were all
united. Ibid. . The Salic laws, the most
venerable monument of French jurisprudence,
were enafted in the fame manner. Ditaverunt
Salicam legem proceres ipfius gentis, qui tunc
temporis apud earn erant Retores. Sunt au-
ter ele&i de phiribus viri quatuor--..qui per
tres Mallos convenientes, omnes caufarum ori-
gines follicite difcurrendo, tra&antes de fingulis
judicium decreverunt hoc modo. Praef. Leg.
Salic. ap. Bouquet. Ibid. p. 122. Hocdecreturri
eft pud regem & principes ejus, & apud
cunaum populum chriftianum, qui infra regnum
Merwingorum confftunt. Ibid. p. I24. Nay,
even in their charters, the Kings of the first race
are careful to specify that they were granted with
the consent of their vaals. Ego Childebertus
Rex uni cum confenfu & voluntate Francorum,
&c. A. D. 58. Bouquet, ibid. 622. Chlotha-
rius III. unh cum patr bus noftris epifcopis, opti-
matibus, caeterifque p latii noftri miniftris, A. D.
664. Ibid. 648. De confenfu fidelium noitro-
rum. Mably Obferv. tom. i. p. 239. The hifto-
rians likewise describe the functions of the King
in the national assemblies in such terms, as imply
that his authority there was extremely small,
and that every thing depended on the court it-
self. Ipfe Rex (fays the authors of Annales
Francorurm, fpeackingofthe field of March) fede-
bat in fella regia, cilcumftante exercitu, praci-
piebatque is, die illo, quicquid a Francis decre-
turn erat. Bouquet Recueil, tom. ii. p. 647.

THAT.

THAT the general assemblies exercised fu-

preme jurifdidion over all persons, and with re-
lpet to all causes, is so evident as to ifand in
need of no proof. The trial of Brunehaut. A. D.
6i 3, how unjust soever the sentence against her
may be, as related by Fredegarius, Chron. cap.
42. Bouquet,. ibid. 430. is in itself sufficient
proof of this. The. notorious violence and ini-
quity of the sentence serve to demonfirate the
extent of jurifdition which this assembly pof-
felled, as a Prince so sanguinary as Chlothaire II.
thought the fantion of its authority would be
fifficient to justify his rigorous treatment of the
mother and grandmother of so many Kings.

WITH refpea to conferring donatives on the

Prince, we may observe that among nations
whose manners and political institutions are fim-
ple, the publick, as well as individuals, having
few wants, they are unacquainted with taxes,
and free uncivilized tribes disdain to submit to
any ifated imposition. This was remarkably the
cafe of the Germans, and of all the various peo-
ple that issued from that country. Tacitus pro-
nounces two tribes not to be of German origin,
because they fuibmitted to pay taxes. De Mo-
rib. Germ. c. 43; and speaking of another tribe
according to the ideas prevalent in Germany, he
fays, " they were not degraded by the impofi-
tion of taxes." Ibid. c. 29. Upon their fettle-
ment in Gaul, we may conclude that while elat-
ed with the confcioufiefs of victory, they would
not renounce the high-fpirited ideas of their an-
ceifors, or voluntarily submit to a burden which
they regarded as a badge of servitude. The
evidence of the earliest records and historians
justify this conclusion. M. de Montesquieu in
the twelfth and subsequent chapters of the thir-
teenth book of l'Efprit des Loix, and M. de

A a 4 Mably.

Mably Obfervat. fur l'Hif. de France, tom. i.
p. 247. have investigated this fa& with great at-
tention, and have proved clearly that the pro-
perty of no free-man among the Franks was
subjed to any fated tax. That.the state re-
quired nothing from persons of this rank but
military service at their own expence, and that
they should ertertain the King in their houses
when he was upon any progress through his do-
minions, or his officers when sent on any public
employment, furnishing them with carriages and
hories. Monarchs fubfifed almost entirely up-
on the revenues of their own domains, and up-
on the perquisites arising from the adminiftra-
tiol of jultice, together with a few small fines
and forfeitures exated from thofewho had been
guilty of certain trefpafles. It is foreign from
my fubjeet to enumerate these. The reader
may find themn in Obfervat. de M. de Mably,
vol i. p. 67.

WHEN any extraordinary aid was granted by

free-ren to their sovereign it was purely volun-
tary. In the annual aTfembly of March or May
it was the custom to make the King a present of
money, of horses or arms, or of some other
thing of value. This was an ancient cuflcm,
and derived from their ancestors the Germans.
Mos eft civitatibus, ultro ac viritim conferri
principibus vel armentorum vel frugum, quod
pro honore acceptlm, etiam neceffitatibus filb-
venit. Tacit. de Mor. Germ. c. 15. These
gifts, if we may form a judgment concerning
them from the general terms in which they are
mentioned by the ancient historians, were con-
fiderable, and made no small part of the royal
revenue. Many pafiges to this purpose are pro-
duced by M. du Cange, Dissert. iv. fur Join-
ville, 15 . Sometimes a conquered people fpe-
cified the gift which they bound tlemfelves

to

to pay annually, and it was exacted as a debt if
they failed. Annales Metenfes, ap. Du Cange,
ibid. p. 55. It is probable that the firit ftep to-
wards taxation was to ascertain the value of
these gifts which were originally gratuitous, and
to compel the people to pay the fum at which
they were rated. Still, however, some memory
of their original was preserved, and the aids
granted to monarchs in all the kingdoms of Eu-
rope were termed benevolences or free-gifts.

THE Kings of the second race in France were

raised 1o the throne by the election of the peo-
ple. Pepinus Rex pius, (fays an author who
wrote a few years after the tranfaaion which he
records) per authoritatem Papae, & unetionem
fanti chrifmatis, & elelionem omnium Fran-
corum in regni folio fublimatus ell. Claufula
de Pepini confecratione ap. Bouq. Recueil des
Hiftor. tom. v. p. 9. At the fame time, as the
chief men of the nation had transferred the crown
from one family to another, an oath was exatt-
ed of them that they hould maintain on the
throne the family which they had now pro-
moted; ut nunquam de alterius lumbis regem
in aevo prfafumant eligere. Ibid. p. 10. This
oath the nation faithfully observed during a con-
fiderable space of time. The posterity of Pe-
pin kept poffeflion of the throne; but with rei-
pee to the manner of dividing their dominions
among their children, Princes were obligcd to
consult the general afembly of the nation. lThis
Pepin himself, A. D. 768, appointed his two
sons, Charles and Carlomannus, to reign as joint;
fovereignsi but he did this, na cum conicsnii
Francorum & procerum lforum fru & cpilc-.
porum, before whom he laid the matter in th ir
general assembly. Conventuls apud lan:tirin
Dionyfium, Capitular. vol. i. p. 187. 'rlls d(Il,-

;;ato;:

ration the French confirmed in a subsequent as-
fembly, which was called upon the death of Pe-
pin; for, as Eginhart relates, they not only ap-
pointed them K ings, but by their authority they
retulated the limits of their refpecive territo-
ries. Vita Car. Magni ap. Bouquet Recueil, tom.
v. p. go. In the fame manner, it was by the
Atuthorirv of the supreme assemblies that any dif-
pute which arose among the descendants of the
royal family was determined. Charlemagne re-
cognizes this important part of theirjurifdiEtion,
and confirms it in his charter concerning the
partition of his dominions; for he appoints,
that, in cafe of any uncertainty with refpet to
the right of the several competitors, he whom
the people shall choose, shall succeed to the
crown. Capitular. vol. i. p. 442.

UNDER the second race of Kings, theaffem-

bly of the nation, distinguished by the name of
Conventus, Malli, Placita, were regularly as-
fembled once a year at leaf, and frequently
twice in the year. One of the most valuable
monuments of the history of France is the trea-
tife of Hincmarus, archbishop of Rheims, de
6rdine Palatii. He died A. D. 882. only sixty-
eight years after Charlemagne, and he relates
in that short discourse the fasts which were com-
muricated to hirh by Adalhardus, a minister
and confident of Charlemagne. From him we
learn, that this great monarch never failed to
hold the general assembly of his fubjets every
year. In quo placito generalitas univerforum
majorum tam clericorum quam laicorum conve-
niebat. Hincm. oper. edit. Sirmondi, vol. ii.
C. 29. p. 211. In these assemblies, matters which
related to the general safety and fate of the
kingdom were always difcufled, before they en-
tered upon any private or less important bufi-
ness. Ibid. c. 33. p. 2 3. His immediate filc-

ceffibis

eeflors imitated his example, and tranfafted n6
affair of importance without the advice of their
great council.

UNDER the second race of Kings, the genius of

the French government continued to be in a good
measure democratical. The nobles, the digni-
sied ecclesiastics, and the great officers of th
crown, were not the only members of the na-
tional council; the people, or the whole body of
free-men, either in person, or by their reprefen-
tatives, had a right to be present in it. Hiic-
marus, in describing the manner of holding the
general assemblies, fays, that if the weather was
favourable, they met in the open air, but, if
otherwise, they had different apartments allotted
to them, so that the dignified clergy were fcpa-
rated from the laity, and the comites vel hjui-
modi principes fibimet honorificabiliter a catera
multitudine fegre garentur. Ibid. c. 35. p.
114. Agobardus, archbishop of Lyons, thus
describes a national council in the year 83,
wherein he was present. Qi ubique conventus
extitit ex reverentiffimis epiicopis, & mag;iP-
centiffimis viris illuftribus, collegio quoque ab-
batum & comitum, promifcuaeque atatis &
dignitatis populo. The ccerera inuiltitil, of
Hincmarus is the fame with the pgpiilus of \Ao-
bardus, and both describe the inferior ordlr '.f
freemen, the fame who were afterwards k')owv,
in France by the name of the third effate, ad
in England by the name of commons. T'-1-
people, as well as the members of higher dig'.i-
ty, were admitted to a share of the leiill;tit e
power. Thus, by a law, A. D. 803, it is ordi:ned
" that the question shall be put to the peop!e
with refpeEt to every new law, and if they fhlll
Pgreeto it,they thall confirm it by their fignatulre."
Capit. vol. i. p. 394. There are two capitu!l ia
which convey to us a full Idea of the part ., hich
the people had in the adminifltation of goverr.-

1iscLt.

ment. When they felt tie weight of any grie-
alace, they had a right to petition the fove-
reign for rediefs. One of there petitions, in
which thev delire that ecclefiafficks might be
exemnped from bearing arms, arid from serving
in perifn against the enemy, is still extant. It
is addreied to Charlemagne, A. D. 803, and
expressed in such terms as could have been used
only by men conscious of liberty, and of the
xternfive piivileges which they possessed. They
conclude with requiring him to grant their de-
Ir.a;d, if he withed that they should any longer
continue faithfis fbjects to him. That great
monarch, instead of being offended or furprized
at the boldness of their petition, received it in
a irret gracious manner, and ignified his wil-
ingnefs to conmly with it. But sensible that he
himself did not poffels legislative authority, he
prcmifes to lay the matter before the next gene-
ral afeimbly, that such things as were of com-
mon conccrn ro all might be there confidered
and eflablihed by common content. Capitul.
terno. i. p. 405-409. As the p--ople by their
petitions brought matters to be proposed in the
general altembly, we learn from another capitu-
lare the form in which they were approved there,
and enacted as laws. The propositions were
}-ad aloud, and then the people were required
to declare whether they aentcd to them or not.
They signified their aent by crying three times,
" e are satisfied," and then the capitulare was
confirmed by the subscription of the monarch,
the clergy and the chief men of the laity.
Capitul. torn . ip. 627. A. D. 822. It leems
probable from a capitulare of Carolus CalvNs,
A. D. 851, that ihe iovereign could not refitfi
his aiient to what was ro)polfd and eflablilh-
ed by his fubljedts in the general aflembly.
Titi. ix. C6. pitul. vol. ii. p. 47. It is un-
neccfnary to nnultiply (quotatiois concerning the

legillative

legifiative power of the national assembly of
France under the second race, or concerning its
rights to determine with regard to peace and
war. The~uniform style of the Capitularia is
an abundant confirmation of the former. The
reader who desires any farther information with
respect to the latter, may consult Les Origines
ou 1'Ancien Gouvernement de la France, tom.
iii. p. 87, &c. What has been said with refpel
to the admission of the people or their reprefin-
tatives in the supreme assembly merits attention
not only in tracing the progress of the French
government, but on ccount of the light which
it throws upon a firhilar question agitated in
England, concerning the time when the com-
mons became part of the legislative body in that
kingdom.

NOTE XXXVIII. SECT. III. p. 68.

THAT important change which the conftil-

tion of France underwent, when the legislative
power was transferred from the great council of
the nation to the King, has been explained by
the French antiquarians with less care, than they
bestow in illustrating other events in their hifto-
ry. For that reason I have endeavoured with
the greater attention to trace the iteps which
led to this memorable revolution. I (hall here
add some particulars which tend farther to illus-
trate it. The Leges Salicae, the Leges Burgun-
dionum, and other codes publilhed by the Icve-
ral tribes which fettled in Gaul, were general
laws extending to every person, to every pro-
vince and district where their authority was ac-
knowledged. But they seem to have bcome
obsolete; and the realbn of their fallingi into dii-
use is very obvious. Almost the whole proper-
ty of the nation was allodiail wvhen the te laws
were framed. Bt wheln the fe:udal i:;lituti)o:s

b, i nt *e

became general, and gave rife ,to an infinite va-
riety of questions peculiar to that fpeeies of te-
nure, the ancient codes were of no use in decid-
irg with regard to these,- because they could not
contain regulations applicable to cafes which did
not exist at the time when they were compiled.
This considerable change in the nature of proper-
ty made it neceflary to publish the new regulati-
ons contained in the Capitularia. Many of these,
as is evident from the perusal of them, were ge-
neral laws extending to the whole French nation,
in the general assembly in which they were
enacted. The weakness of the greater part of the
monarchs of the second race, and the disorder
into which the nation was thrown by the depre-
dations of the Normans, encouraged the barons
to usurp an independent power formerly un-
known in France. The nature and extent of
that jurisdiction which they assumed, I have for-
merly confidered. The political union of the
kingdom was at an end, its ancient constitution
was dissolved, and only a feudal relation subsist-
ed between the King and his vassals. The regal
jurisdiction extended no further than the domains
of the crown. Under the last Kings of the fe-
cord race, there were reduced almofl to nothing.
Under the firt Kings of the third race, they
comprehended little more than the patrimonial
(late of Hugh Capet, which he annexed to the
crown. Even with this accetfion, they conti-
ued to be very narrow. Velly. Hist. de France,
Tor,. iii. p. 32. Many of the most considerable
provinces of France did not at sirss acknowledge
1-Ligh Capet as a lawful Monarch. There are
i'i!l extant ilveral charters, granted during the
si:lt Tycars of his reign, with this remarkable
c:!ause in the frm of dating the charter; " Dco

r irIna;lte, reg, exp.ctante," reg ante domi-
io i,.ilru Jcifu Chrifro, Francis autem contra

il1t

jus regnum ufurpante Ugone rege. Bouquet
Recueil, tom. x. p. 544. A monarch whose
title was thus openly disputed, was not in a con-
dition to assert the royal jurifdiaion, or to limit
that of the barons.

ALL these circumstances rendered it easy for

the barons to usurp the rights of royalty within
their own territories. The capitularia be-
came no less obsolete than the ancient laws; local
customs were every where introduced, and be-
came the sole rule by which all civil tranfadtios
were conducted, and all causes were tried. The
wonderful ignorance, which became general in
France, during the ninth and tenth centuries,
contributed to the introduction of customary
law. Few persons, except ecclesiastics, could
read; and as it was not poflible for them to have
recourse to written laws, either as their guide in
business, or their rule in adminiftring justice,
the customary law universally prevailed.

DURING this period, the general afembly of

the nation seems not to have been called, nor to
have once exerted its legislative authority. Lo-
cal customs regulated and decided every thing.
A striking proof of this occurs in tracing the pro-
grefs of the French jurifprud nce. The last of
the Capitularia collected by M. Baluze, was iiTu-
ed in the year 92I, by Charles the Simple. An
hundered and thirty years l.ipfd from that pe-
riod to the publication of the first ordonance of
the Kings of the third race, contained in the
great collection of M. Lauriere, and the first or-
donance which appears to b: an at of legill.tion
extending to the whole kingdom is that of Philip
Augustus, A. D. 90. Ordon. tom.. i. p.
18. During that long period of one hundred

and

and sixty nine years, all tranfations were diret-
ed by local customs, and no addition was made
to the ftatutary law of France. The ordonances,
previous to the reign of Philip Augustus, con-
tain regulations, the authority of which did not
extend beyond the King's domains.

VARIOUS intances occur of the caution with

which the Kings of France ventured at firit to
exercise legislative authority. M. 'Ab. de Ma-
bly produces an ordonance of Philip Augustus,
A. D. i 206, concerning the Jews, who, in that
age, were in some measure the property of the
lord in whose territories they resided. But it is
not so much an act of royal power, as a treaty of
the King with the countess of Champagne, and
the comte de Dampierre; and the regulations
in it seem to be established not by his authority,
but by their content. Obfervat. fur 'hist. de
France, ii. p. 355. In the fame manner an or-
donance of Louis VIII. concerning the Jews, A.
D. I223, is a contract between the King and his
nobles, with respect to their manner of treating
that unhappy race of men. Ordon. tom. i. p. 47.
The Eftabliflemens of St. Louis, though well
adapted to serve as general laws to the whole
kingdom, were not published as such, but only
as a complete code of customary law, to be of
authority within the King's domains. The wis-
dom, the equity and the order conspicuous in
that code of St. Louis, procured it a favourable
rectption throughout the kingdom. The vene-
ration due to the virtues and good intentions of
its author, contributed not a little to reconcile
the nation to that legislative authority, which the
Kit'g began to alumnc. Soon after his time, the
idea of the King's pofTefling fpreme legislative
power became common. If, lays Beanmanoir,
the King makes any eablilhment fpcci.lly for

his

his 0tin domain, the barons may nevertheless
adhere to their ancient cuftdrmi' but if the efta-
blifhmert be general, it shall be current througlr-
oult the whole kingdom, and we ought to believe
that such efiablifhments are made with mature
delibertioh, and for the general good. Cout. de
Beauvoifis, c. 48. p. 2z6. Though the Kings
of the third race did not call the general assem-
bly of the nation, during the long period frori
Hugh Capet to Philip the Fair, yet they feein
to have consulted the bishops and barons who
happened to *te present in their court, with re-
fpet to any new law which they published. Ex-
atnples of this occur, Ordon. tom. i. p. 3 & 5.
The practice feelris to have continued as late as
the reign of St. Louis, when the legiifative au-
thority of the crown was well established. Or.
don. tom. i. p. 58. A. D. 1 246. This attention
paid to the barons facilitated the King's acquir,
ing such full poffefion of the legislative power,
as enabled them afterwards to exercise it with-
out observing that formality.

THE afferrtblies, distinguished by the fname of

the States General, were first called, A. D. 1302,
and were held occasionally from that period to the
year 1614, firice which time they have not been
summoned. These were very different from the
ancient affeeblies of the French nation under
the Kings of the first and second race. There
is no point with refpet to which the French an-
tiquarians are more generally agreed, than in
maintaining that the States General had no sus-
frage in the patsing of laws, and possessed no
proper jurifdidion. The whole tenor of the
French history confirms this opinion. The form
of proceeding in the States Geneial was this:
The King addressed himself to the whole body
assembled in one place, and laid before them the
affiirs on account of which he had funioned

Vor.. B. . b them.

them. The deputies of each of the three orders,
of nobles, of clergy, and of the third estate, met
apart, and prepared their cahier or memorial,
containing their answer to the propositions which
Ead been made to them, together with the re-
presentations which they thought proper to lay
before the King. These answers and reprefen-
tations were confidered by the King in his coun-
cil, and generally gave rife to an ordonance.
These ordonances were not addressed to the three
efiates in common. Sometimes the King addref-
ed an ordonance to each of the estates in parti-
cular. Sometimes he mentioned the assembly
of the three estates. Sometimes mention is made
only of the afflembly of that estate to which the
ordonance is addressed. Sometimes no mention
at all is made of the aflembly of estates, which
suggested the propriety of enacting the law. Pre-
face au tom. iii. des Ordon. p. xx. Thus the
States General had only the privilege ofadvifing
and remonstrating; the legislative authority re-
fided in the King alone.

N O T E XXXIX. SECT. III. p. 172.

IF the parliament of Paris be confidered only

as the supreme court ofjuftice, every thing re-
lative to its origin and jurifdition is clear and
obvious. It is the ancient court of the King's
palace, new-modelled, rendered sedentary, and
invested with an extensive and afcertainedjurif-
diftion. The power of this court, while em-
ployed in this part of its funtions, is not the
obiect of present consideration. The pretenfi-
oils of the parliament to controul the exercise of
the legilative authority, and its claim of a right
to interpole with refped to publick affairs and
the political administration of the kingdom,
lead to inquiries attended with greater difli-
culty. As the officers and members of the

parliamt nl

parliament of Paris were anciently nominat-
ed by the King, were paid by him, and on fe-
veral occasions were removed by him at
pleasure (Chroniq. Scandaleufe de Louis XI.
chez les Mem. de Comines, tor. ii. p. 51. Edit,
de M. Lenglet de Frefioy), they cannot be con-
fidered as reprefentalives of the people, nor
could they claim any share in the legislative
powver as acting in their name. We must search
for some other source of this high privilege. The
parliament was originally composed of the most
eminent persons in the kingdom. The peers of
France, ecclefiafticks of the highest order, and
noblemen of illustrious birth were members of
it, to whom were added some clerks and coun-
fellors learned in the laws. Pafquier Recher-
ches, p. 44, &c. Encyclopedie, tom. xii. Art.
Parlement, p. 3, 5. A court thus constituted,
was properly a committee of the States General
of the kingdom, and was composed of there
barons and fideles, whom the Kings of France
were accufomced to consult with regard to every
at ofjurifdition or legifiative authority. It was
natural, therefore, during the intervals between
the meetings of the States General, or during
those periods when that assembly was not call-
ed, to consult the parliament, to lay matters of
publick concern before it, and to obtain its ap-
probation and concurrence, before any ordo-
nance was publishcd, to which the popl were
required to conform. 2. Uder the second race
of Kings, every new law was reduced into pro-
per form by the Chancellor of the kingdom,
was proposed by him to the people, and when
enadted, was committed to him to be kept a-
mong the publick records, that he might give
authentick copies of it to all who should demand
them. Hincm. d ord. p.ilat. c. 6. Capitul.
Car. Calv. tit. xiv. § i. tit. xxxiii. The Chan-
cellor presided in the parliament of Paris at its

Bb 2 fit

first institution. Encyclopedie, tom. iii. art.
Chancelier, p. 88. It was therefore natural for
the King to continue to employ him in his an-
cient funcions of framing, taking into his cuf-
tody, and publishing the ordonances which were
iflued. To an ancient copy of the Capitularia
of Charlemagne, the following words are ub-
joined. Anno tertio Clementiflimi domini noftri
Caroli Augufti, sub ipso anno, haec fata Capi-
tula funt, 8 confignata Stephano comiti, ut hec
manifeffa faceret Parifiis mallo publico, & illa
legere faceret coram Scabineis, quod ita & fecit,
& omnes in uno confenferunt, quodi ipfi volu.
iffent obfervare ufque in pofferum, etiam omnes
Scabinei, Epifcopi, Abbates, Comites, manu pro-
pria fubter fignaverunt. Bouquet Recueil. tom.
v. p. 663. Mallus signifies not only the pub-
lick assembly of the nation, but the court ofjuf-
tice held by the comes, or mifus dominicus.
Scabini were the judges, or the aefliors of the
judges in that court. Here then seems to be a
very early instance, not only of laws being pub-
lifhed in a court of justice, but of their being
verified or confirmed by the subscription of the
judges. If this was the common pracice, it na-
turally introduced the verifying of edits in the
parliament of Paris. But this conjecture I pro-
pose with that diffidence, which I have felt in
all my reasonings concerning the laws and infti-
tutions of foreign nations. 3. This supreme
court of justice in France was dignified with the
appellation of parliament, the name by which
the general assembly of the nation was diftin-
guifhed towards the close of the second race of
Kings; and men, both in reasoning and in con-
dut, are wonderfully influenced by the fimila-
rity of names. The preserving the ancitint
names of the magifirates, eftablifled while re-
publican governmmnt subsisted in Rome, enabled
AugftLus and his lucceflors to affi m~ new pow-

C1",.

ers, with less observation, and greater ease.
The bestowing the fame name in France upon
two courts, which were extremely different, con-
tributed not a little to confound their jurifdition
and functions.

ALL these circumnfances concurred in leading

the Kings of France to avail themselves of the
parliament of Paris, as the instrument of recon-
ciling the people to their exercise of legillative
authority. The French, accustomed to fee all
new laws examined and authorized before they
were published, did not sufficiently distinguish
between the effect of performing this in the na-
tional assembly, or in a court appointed by the
King. But as that court was composed of re-
fpedable members, and well skilled in the laws
of their country, when any new edit received
its fan&ion, that was sufficient to dispose the
people to implicit submission.

WHEN the practice of verifying and regier-

ing the royal edits in the parliament of Paris
became common, the parliament contended, that
this was necessary in order to give them legal
authority. It was eablifhed as a fundamental
maxim in French jurisprudence, that no law
could be published in any other manner; that
without this formality, no edi& or ordonance
could have any effect; that the people were not
bound to obey it, and ought not to confider it
as an edit or ordonance until it was verified in
the supreme court, after free deliberation. Roche-
flavin des Parlemens de France, 4to. Gen. x62I,
p. 921. The parliament, at different times,
hath with great fortitude and integrity, opposed
the will of their sovereigns, and notwithftand-
ing their repeated and peremptory requisitions
and commands, hath refused to verify and pub-

Bb 3 lilh

lifh such edicts, as it conceived to be oppresive
to the people, or subversive of the conttitution
of.the kingdom. Roche-flavin reckons that be-
tween the year 562, and the year 589, the
parliament refused to verify more than a hun-
dred edits of the Kings. Ibid. 925. Many in-
stances of the spirit and confiancy, with which
the parliaments of France opposed pernicious
laws, and asserted their own p ivileges, are enu-
merated by Limneus Notitiae Regni Franciae,
lib. i. c. 9. p. 224.

Bu r the power of the'parliament to maintain

and defend this privilege, bore no proportion to
its importance, or to the courage with which
its members asserted it. V' n any monarch
was determined that an edict hould b carried
into execution, and found the parliament in-
flexibly resolved not to verify or publilh it, he
could easily fpply this defect by the plenitude
of his regal power. He repaired to the parlia-
ment in person, he took pofleffon of his feat of
justice, and commanded the edict to be read,
verified, registered, and published in his pre-
fence. Then, according to another maxim of
French law, the King hirnelf being present,
neither the parliament, nor any magistrate what-
ever, can exercise any authority, or perform any
functii. Advenie'.te Principe, ccffat magiftra-
tus. Roche-flavin. Ibid. p. 928, 929. Ency-
clcpedie, tom. ix. Art. Lit de fiJice, p. 581.
P, ,che-flavin mentions several initances of Kings
who actually exerted this prerogative, so fatal to
the reftiue of the rights and liberties, tranf-
mitted to the French by their ancestors. Pas-
quier produces ome instances of the fame kind.
Rech. p. 6 . Limnaeus enumerates many
others, which the lehgth to which this note has
swelled, prevents me from inserting at length,

though

thiough hey tend greatly to illustrate this im-
portant rticle in the French history, p. 245.
Thus by an exertion of prerogative, which,
though violent, seems to be constitutional, and
isjuitified by innumerable precedents, all the
efforts of the parliament to limit and controul
the King's legislative authority, are rendered in-
efedual

I HAVE not attempted to explain the coniti-

tiltion or jurisdiction ofany parliament in France,
but that of Paris. All of them are formed upon
the model of that most ancient and refpetable
trbunal, and all my observations concerning it
will apply with full force to them.

NOTE XL. SECT. III. P. 177.

THE humiliating posture, in which a great

Emperor implored absolution, is an event so fin-
gular, that the words in which Gregory him-
self describes it, merit a place here, and convey
a striking picture of the arrogance of that Pon-
tiff. Per triduum, ante portam caftri, depofito
omni regio cultu, miferabiliter, utpote difcalcea-
tus, & laneisindutus, perfiftens, non piiuscum
multo fletu apoftolicae miferationis auxilium, &
consolationem implorari deftitit, quam omnes
qui ibi aderant, & ad quos rumor ille pervenit,
ad tantam pietatem, & compaffionis mifericor-
diam movit, ut pro eo multis precibus & lacri-
mis intercedentes, omnes quidem infolitam
noftrae mentis duritiem mirarentur; nonnulli ve-
ro in nobis non, apoftolica fedis gravitater, fed
quasi tyrannica feritatis crudelitatem effe clama-
rent. Epift. Gregor. ap. Memorie della Contefa

B b 4 Matilda

375

Matilda da Fran. Mar. Fiorentini. Lucca. 1756,
vol, i. p. 74.

NOTE XLI. SCT. III. p. I86.

As I have endeavoured in the history to trace

the various fleps ii. the progress fs the conitu-
tion of the Empire, and to explain the peculia,
rities in its policy vety fully, it is not necelary
to add much by way of iuftration. What ap4
pears to be of any importance I shall range un-,
der distinct heads.

i. WITH refpe& to tle power, jurifdition.

and revenue of the Emperors. A very just idea
of there may be formed by attending to the
view which Pfeffel gives of the rights of the
Emperors at two different periods. The first
a; the close of the Saxon race, A. D. Io24.
T'hese, according to his enumeration, were the
'tight of.conferring all the great ecelefiaftica be-
irfices in Germany; of receiving the revenues
of them during a vacancy; of Mort-main, or
of succeeding t the effets of ecclefiaficks who
died inteifate. The right of confirming or of
annulling the elecions of the Popes. The right
of af'embling councils, and of appointing them
to decide concerning the affairs of the church.
The right of conferring the title of King upont
their vas(als. The right of granting vacant fiefs.
The right of receiving the revenues of the Em-,
pire, whether arising from the Imperial do-
mains, from imposts and tolls, from gold or
silver mines, from the tales paid by the Jews,
or from forfeitures. The right of governing
Itajy as its proper sovereigns. The right of
erecing free cities, and of establishing fais in
them. The right of afrcmbling the diets of

the

thl Empire, and of fixing the time of their du.,
ration. The right of coining money, and of con-
ferring that privilege on the flates of the Em-
pire. The right of adminiftring both high and
low justice within the territories of the different
flates. Abrege, p. 6o. The other period is at
the extinction of the Emperors of the families
of Luxemburg, and Bavaria, A. D. 1437. Ac-
cording to the fame author the Imperial preroga-
tives at that time were, the right of conferring
all dignities and titles, except the privilege of
being a state of the Empire. The right oPre-
ces primarie or of appointing once during their
reign a dignitary in each chapter or religious
house. The right of granting dispensations with
tefpet to the age of majority. The right of
erecting cities, and of conferring the privilege of
coining money. The right of calling the meet-
ings of the diet, and of presiding in them.
Abreg, &c. p 507. It were easy to show that
M. Pfeffel is well founded in all these affertiors,
and to confirm them by the teflimony of tho
most refpedable authors. In the one period tha
Emperors appear as mighty sovereigns with ex-
tensive prerogatives; in the other as the heads of
a confederacy with very limited powers.

THE revenues of the Emperors decreased fill

more than their authority. The early Empe-
rors, and particularly those of the Saxon line,
betides their vast patrimonial or hereditary ter-
ritories, possessed an extensive domain both il
Italy and Germany which belonged to them aa
Emperors. Italy belonged to the Emperors as
their proper kingdom, and the revcnuei which
they drew from it were very considerable. TL
first alienatipns of the Imperial revenue were
made in this country. The Italian cries haviWg
acquired wealth, and aspiring at ind:pcnd&;; ,

p : Uc:;óLa

377.

purchaftd their liberty from different Emperors,
Ias have observed Note XV. The fums which
they paid, and the Emperors with whom they
concludced there bargains, are mentioned by
Cafp. Klockius de JErario. Norimb. 167 . v. 85,
&c. Charles IV. and his son Wenceslaus diffipa-
ted all that remained of the Italian branch of
the domain. The German domain lay chiefly
upon the banks of the Rhine, and was under
the government of the Counts Palatine. It is
not easy to mark out the boundaries, or to efti-
nate the value of this ancient domain, which
has been so long incorporated with the territories
of different Princes. Some hints with refpet
to it may be found in the glossary of Speidelius
which he has intituled Speculum Juridico-Philo-
logico-politico-Hiftoricum Obfervationum, &c.
Norimb. 1673. vol. i. 679. 1045. a more full
account of it is given by Klockius de 2Erario, p.
84. Besides this, the Emperors possessed confi-
derable diftrits of land lying intermixed with
the eitates ofthe Dukes and barons. They were
accustomed to visit these frequently, and drew
from them what was sufficient to support their
court during the time of their residence. An-
nali~f, ap. Struv. tom. i. 6 i. A great part of
these were seized by the nobles during the long
interregnum, or during the wars occasioned by
the contest between the Emperors and the
court of Rome. At the fame time that such in-
croachments were made on the fixed or territo-
rial property of the Emperors, they were rob-
bed almost entirely of their casual revenues.
The Princes and barons appropriating to them-
fclves taxes and duties of every kind, which had
uflally been paid to them. Pfeffel Abrege, p. 374.
The profuse and inconfidcrate ambition of
Charles IV. squandered whatever remained of the
Jinperial revenues after so many defalcations.

He,

He, in the year 1376, in order to prevail with
the eletors to choose his son Wenceslaus King of
the Romans, promised each of them a hundred
thousand crowns. But being unable to pay so
large a fum, and eager to secure the election to
his son, he alienated to the three ecclesiastical
Electors, and to the Count Palatine, such coun.
tries as still belonged to the Imperial domain on
the banks of the Rhine, and likewise made over
to them all the taxes and tolls then levied by the
Emperors in that diftrit. Trithemius, and the
author of the Chronicle of Magdeburgh, enume-
rate the territories and taxes which were thus
alienated, and represent this as the last and fatal
blow to the Imperial authority. Struv. Corp.
vol. i. p. 437. From that period, the shreds of
the ancient revenues pofleffed by the Emperors
have been so inconsiderable, that in the opinion
of Speidelius, all that they yield would be f
far from defraying the expence of supporting
their houlhold, that they wofuid not pay the
charge of maintaining tie posts eftablilhed in the
Empire. Speidelii Speculum, &c. vol. i. p.
680. These funds, inconsiderable as they were,
continued to decrease. Granvelle, the miniftcr
of Charles V. asserted in the year 546, in pre-
fence of several of the German Princes, that his
master drew no money at all from the Empire.
Sleid. History of the Reformation. Lond. 16.9.
p. 372. The fame is the cafe at present. Traite
de droit Publique de l'Empire par M. le Coq
de Villeray, p. 55. From the reign of Charlcs
IV. whom Maximilian called the pest of the Em-
pire, the Emperors have depended entirely on
their hereditary dominions, as the only source
of their power and even of their subsistence.

2. THE ancient mode of eleEting the Empe-
rors, and the various changes which it u.d r-

w.^At

went, require ome illustration. The Imperial
crown, as well as those of molt nonarchies in
Europe, were originally attained by election.
An opinion long prevailed among the antiquaries
and publick lawyers of Germany, that the right
of choofing the Emperors was vested in the arch-
bishops of Mentz, Cologne and Treves, the
King of Bohemia, the Duke of Saxony, the Mar-
quis of Brandenburgh, and the Count Palatine
of the Rhine, by an edi&t of Otho III. confirm-
ed by Gregory V. about the year 996. But the
whole tenor of history contradicts this opinion,
It appears that from the earliest period in the
history of Germany, the person who was to
reign over all, was elected by the suffrage of all.
Thus Conrad I. was elected by all the people of
the Franks, fay some annalists; by all the prin-
ces and chief men, fay others; by all the nation,
fay others. See their words, Struv. Corp. 21.
Conringius de German. Imper. Repub. Acroama-
ta Sex. Ebroduni 1654. p. 103. In the year
1024, posterior to the supposed regulations of
Otho III. Conrad II. was elected by all the chief
men, and his election was approved and con-
firmed by the people. Struv. Corp. 284. At
the elecion of Lotharius II. A. D. 125, sixty
thousand persons of all ranks were present. He
was named by the chief men, and their nomina-
tion was approved by the people. Struv. ibid.
p. 357. The first author who mentions the seven
Electors is Martinus Polonus, who flourished in
the reign of FrederickII. which ended A.D. 250.
We find that in all the ancient elecctions to which
I have referred, the Princes of greatest power and
authority were allowed by their countrymen
to name the prfon whom they wiihed to
appoint Emperor, and the people approved
or disapproved of theit nomination. This

privilege

privilege of voting first is called by the Ger-
man lawyers the right of Prtaxation. Psef-
fel Abrege, p. 316. This was the first origin of
the exclusive right which the Eletors acquired.
The Ele&ors possessed the most extensive terri-
tories of any Princes in the Empire; all the
great offices of the Rfate were in their hands by
hereditary right; as soon as they obtained or en-
grossed so much influence in the election, as to
be allowed the right of prataxation, it became
unneceflary for the inferior ecclefiafticks and ba-
rons to attend, when they had no other funtion
but that of confirming the deed of there more
powerful Princes, by their assent. During times
of turbulence, they could not retort to the place
of election, without a numerous retinue of arm-
ed vasals, the expence of which they were ob-
liged to defray out of their own revenues. The
rights of the seven Eletors were supported by
all the descendants and allies of their powerful
families, who shared in the splendor and influ-
ence, which they enjoyed by this distinguishing
privilege. fessel. Abrege, p. 36. The seven
Eletors were confidered as the representatives
of all the orders, which composed the highest
class of German nobility. There were three
archbishops, chancellors of the three great di-
ftrids into which the Empire was anciently di-
vided; one King; one Duke; one Marquis;
and one Count. All these circumitances contri-
buted to render the introdution of this confi-
derable innovation into the constitution of the
Germanick body, extremely easy. Every thing
of importance, relating to this branch of the
political state of the Empire, is well illustrated
by Onuphrius Panvinius an Augustinian Monk
of Verona, who lived in the reign of Charles V
His treatise, if we make some allowance for that

partiai! y

partiality which he expresses in favour of tile
powers which the Popes claimed in the Empire,
has the merit of being one of the first works in
which a controverted point in history is examined
with critical precision, and with a proper atten-
tion to that evidence which is derived from re-
cords, or the tetfimony of contemporary hifto-
rians. It is inserted by Goldaftus in his Politica
Imperialia, p. 2.

As the Electors have ngrofled the sole right

of choofing the Emperors, they have assumed
likewise that of deposing them. This high
power the Eletors have not only presumed to
claim, but have ventured, in more than one in-
fance, to exercise. In the year 1298, a part
of the Electors deposed Adolphus of Nassau and
fabftituted Albert of Austria in his place. The
reasons on which they sotmd their sentence,
show that this deed flowed from' faaious, not
from publick-fpirited motives. Struv. Corp. vol. i.
p. 540. In the first year of the fifteenth century,
the Electors deposed Wenceslaus, and placed
the Imperial crown on the head of Rupert Elec-
tor Palatine. The a& of deposition is frill ex-
tant. GoldafRi Conflit. vol. i. p. 379. It is pro-
nounced in the name and by the authority of
the Electors, and confirmed by several prelates
and barons of the Empire, who were present.
These exertions of the electoral power demon-
firate that the Imperial authority was funk very
low.

THE other privileges of the elecors, and the

rights of the electoral college are explained by
the writers on the publick law in Germany.

3. WitH refpe& to the diets or general as-
femb!izs of the Empire, it woul . be nceirary,

if

if my objet were to write a particular history
of Germany, to enter into a minute detail, con-
cerning the forms of assembling it, the persons
who have right to be present, their division into
several Colleges or Benches, the objects of their
deliberation, the mode in which they carry on
their debates or give their suffrages, and the
authority of their decrees or recesses. But in a
general history it is sufficient to observe, that,
originally, the diets of the Empire were per-
fectly the fame with the aflemblies of March
and of May, held by the Kings of France.
They met, at least, once a year. Every free-
man had a right to be present. They were
assemblies, in which a monarch deliberated
with his fubjets, concerning their common in-
terest. Arumaeus de comitiis Rom. German.
Imperii, 4to. Jena. 660, cap. 7. No. zo,
&c. But when the Princes, dignified ecclesias-
tics, and barons, acquired territorial and inde-
pendent jurifdiaion, the diet became an assem-
bly of the separate states, which formed the con-
federacy of which the Emperor was head.
While the conltitution of the Empire remained
in its primitive form, attendance on the diets
was a duty, like the other services due from
feudal fubjets to their sovereign, which the
members were bound to perform in person;
and if any member who had a right to be pre-
sent in the diet neglected to attend in person,
he not only loft his vote, but was liable to aai
heavy penalty. Arumaeus de Comit. c. 5. No.
40. Whereas, from the time that the members
of the diet became independent states, the right
of suffrage was annexed to the territory or dig-
nity, not to the person. The members, if they
could not, or would not attend in perlbn, might
fnid their deputies, as Piinces fend ambafladors,

and

and they were entitled to exercise all the rights
belonging t their conffituents. Ibid. No. 42,
46, 4. By degrees, and upon the famie prin-
ciple of confidering the diet as an ffeiembly of
independent states, in which each confederate
had the right of suffrage, if any member pof-
fefled more than one of thdfe states or charac-
ters which entitled to a feat in the diet, he was
allowed a proportional number of suffrages.
Pfeffel. Abrege 622. From the fame cause the
Imperial cities; as oon as they became free, and
acquired supreme and independent jurifdidion
within their own territories, were received as
members of the diet. The powers of the diet
extend to every thing relative to the common
concern of the Germanick body, or that can in-
terest or assea it as a confederacy. The diet
takes no cognizance of the interior admini-
ftration in the different States, unless that
happens to disturb or threaten the general
safety.

4. WITH refpet to the Imperial chamber, the

jurisdiction of which has been the great source
of order and tranquillity in Germany, it is ne-
ceflary to observe, that this court was instituted
in order to put an end to the calamities occasion-
ed by private wars in Germany, I have al-
ready traced the rife and progress of this prac-
tice, and pointed out its pernicious effeEts as
fully as their extcnfive influence during the
middle ages merited. In Germany, private
wars seem to have been more frequent and
productive of worse consequences than in the
other countries of Europe. There are ob-
vious reasons for this. The nobility of Ger-
rany were extremely numerous, ar.d the caulfc

of

of their dissention multiplied in proportion. The
territorial jurifdi&ion which the German nobles
acquired, was more compleat than that profefed
by their order in other nations. They became,
in reality, independent powers, and they claim-
ed all the privileges of that character. The long
interregnum accustomed them to an uncon-
trouled license, and led them to forget that
subordination which ie necefary in order to main-
tain publick tranquillity. At the time when the
other monarchs of Europe began to acquire
such an increase of power and revenues, as ad-
ded new force to their government, the autho-
rity and revenues of the Emperors continued
gradually to decline. The diets of the Empire,
which alone had authority to judge between such
mighty barons, and power to enforce its decifi-
ons, met very seldom. Conring. Acroamata, p.
234. The diets when they did assemble were
often composed of several thousand members,
Chronic. Constant. ap. Struv. Corp. i. p. 546,
and were mere tumultuary aifemblies, ill qualified
to decide concerning any question of right. The
session of the diets continued only two or three
days; Pfeffel Abreg6, p. 244, so that they had
no time to hear or discuss any cause that was in
the smallest degree intricate. Thus Germany
was left, in some measure, without any court of
judicature, capable ofreprefling the evils of pri-
vate war.

ALL the expedients which were employed in

other countries of Europe in order to restrain
this practice, and which I have described Note
XXI. were tried in Germany with little effect.
The confederacies of the nobles and of the cities,
and the division of Germany into various circles,

VOL. I. C c which

which I mentioned in that Note, were found
likewise insufficient. As a last remedy, the Ger-
mans had recourse to arbiters whom they called
Auftregs. The barons and states in different
parts of Germany joined in conventions, by
which they bound themselves to refer all contro-
verfies, that might arise between them, to the de-
termination of theduftrege, and to fubtit to their
fintences as final. These arbiters are named
sometimes in the treaty of convention, an instance
of which occurs in Ludewig Reliquae Manufcr.
omnis evi, vol. ii. 212. sometimes they were
chosen by mutual content.; sometimes they were
appointed by neutral persons; and sometimes
the choice was left to be decided by -lot. Datt.
de Pace publica Imperii, lib. i. cap. 27. No 60,
8te. Speidelius Speculum, &c. voc. Aufirag. p.
95. Upon the itrodution of this pra&ice, the
public tribunals of justice beame, in a great
measure, useless, and were almost entirely de-
ferted.

IN order to re-establish the authority of go-

vernment, Maximilian instituted the Imperial
chamber, at the period which I have mentioned.
This tribunal consisted originally of a president,
who was always a nobleman of the first order,
and of fifteen judges. The president was ap-
pointed by the mperor, and thejudges, partly
by him, and partly by the States, according to
forms which it is unnecelary to describe. A firn
was imptfed, with their own content, on the
States of the Empire, for paying the salaries of
thejudges, and officers in this court. The Im-
perial chamber was established first at Francfort
on the Maine. During the reign of Charles V.
it was removed to Spires, arid continued in that
city above a century and ahalf. It is now fixed

at

at Wetzlar. Ti court takes cogaizaaie of i
queftios concerning civil right between the
States of the Empire, and paffesjudgment in the
last retort, and without appeal. To it belongs,
likewift, the privilege of judging itl criminal
causes, which may be considered as conneced
with the preservation of the publick peace. Psef-
fel Abrege, 560.

ALL causes relating to points of feudal- right

or jurifdition, together with such as refpedt thi
territories, which hold of the Empire in Italy,
belong properly to tihejurifditiorr.of the Aulick
council. This tribunal was formed upon the
mddel of the ancient court of the paJace inftitut
ed. by the Emperors of Germany; It depended
hot upon the States of the Empire; but upon
the Emperor; he having the right.of appoint-
ing at pleafurd all the judges of-whom:it is com-
posed. Maximilian, in order t procute ome
compensation for the diminution:of his authority,
by the powers veited in the Imperial chamber,
prevailed on the diet, A. D. 512. to give its
consent to the establishment of the Aulick coun
cil. Since that time, it has been a great object
of policy in the court of Vienna-to extend theju
rifdiftion, and support the authority of the Au-
lick council, and to circumscribe and weaken
those of the Imperial chamber. The tedious
forms and dilatory proceedings of the Imperial
chamber have furnished the Emperors with pre
texts for doing so. Lites Spira, according to
the witticism of a German lawyer, spirant, fed
nunquam exfpirant. Such delays are unavoida,
ble in a court composed of members named by
States, jealous of each other. Whereas the
judges of the Aulick council, depending in one
mafedrn and being responsible to him alone, are

C c 2 more

i7S

more vigorous and decisive. Puffendorf. de Sta-
tu Imper. German. cap. v. § zo. Pfeffel Abreg6,
P. 581.

N O T E XLII. SE C T. III. p. 89.

THE description which I have given of the

Turkish government is conformable to the ac-
counts of the most intelligent travellers who
have visited that Empire. The count de Mar-
figli, in his treatise concerning the military state
of the Turki(h Empire, ch. vi. and the Author
of observations on the religion, laws, govern-
ment and manners of the Turks, published at
London 1768, vol. i. p. 8I. differ from other
writers: who'have described the political confiitu-
tion of that powerful monarchy. As they had
opportunity,' during their long residence in Tur-
key, to observe the order and ftice confpicu-
ous in several departments of admiriiftration,
they seem unwilling to admit that it should be
denominated a despotism. But when the form of
government in any .6ouftry is:reprefented to be
defpotick, this does not suppose that the power
of the monarch'is continually exerted in acts of
violence,- injustice and cruelty. Under govern-
ment of every species, unlefi when some fran-
tick tyrant happens to hold' the' sceptre, the or-
dinary administration muff be conformable to
the principles of justice, and if.'not active in
promoting the welfare of the people, cannot cer-
tainly have their deftruCion for its obje&t. A
state, in which the fovereigii possesses the abfo-
lute command of a vast. military force,. together
with the disposal of an: extensive revenue; in
which the people have no privileges, and no part
either immediate or remote in legislation; in
which there is no body of hereditary nobility,

jealous

jealous of their own rights and diftintions, to
stand as an intermediate order between the
Prince and the people, cannot be diftinguihed
by any name but that of a despotism. The. re-
ftraints, however, which I have mentioned, arif-
ing from the Capiculy, and from religion, are
powerful. But they are not such as change the
nature or denomination of the government.
When a defpotick Prince employs an armed
force to support his authority, he commits the
supreme power to their hands. The Praetorian
bands in Rome, dethroned, murdered, and ex-
alted Princes, in the fame wanton manner with
the soldiery of the Porte at Constantinople. But
notwithstanding this, the Roman Emperors have
been confidered by all political writers as posses-
sing defpotick power.

N O T E XLIII. SECT. III. p. 190.

THE institution, the discipline, and privileges

of the Janizaries are described by all the authors
who give any account of the Turkish govern-
ment. The manner in which enthusiasm was
employed in order to inspire them with courage
is thus related by Prince Cantemir, " When
Amurath I. had formed them into a body, he
sent them to Haji Bektafh a Turkish Saint, fa-
mous for his miracles and prophecies, desiring
him to give them a banner, to pray to God for
their success, and to give them a name. The
faint, when they appeared in his pretence, put
the sleeve of his gown upon one of their heads,
and fays, Let them be called Tengicberi. Let
their countenance be ever bright, their hands
vitorious, their fword.keen, let their spear al-

C c ways

ways hang over the heads of their enemies, and
where-ever the5y go, may they return with a ffin-
ing face. , Hifory of the Ottoman Empire, p.
-38. The nmnber of Janizaries, at the first in-

itution of the body, was not considerable. Un-
der Solyman, in the Year 152i, they amounted
to twelve thous~nd. Since that time their num-
ber has greatly increased, Marfigli, Etat. &c.
ch I6. p. 68.; Though Solyman possessed such
abilitiesand authority as to reitrain this formida-
ble body within the bounds of obedience, yet
-its tendency to limit the power of the Sultans
was, even in that age, foreseen by sagacious ob-
servers. .Nicolas Daulphinois, who accompa-
nied M. d'Aramon ambaflador from Henry II.
of France to Solyman, published an account of
his Travels, in which he describes and celebrates
the discipline of the Janizaries, but at the fame
time predicts that they would, one day, become
formidable to their masters, and at the fame
part at Contantinople, as the Praetorian bands
had done at Rome. Collefion of Voyages from
the Earl of Oxford's Library, vol. i. p. 599.

NOTE XLIV. SECT. II. p. 192.

SOLYMAN the Magnificent, to whom the

Turkifih historians have given the firname of
Cami, or inftiitutor of rules, first brought the
finances and military establishment of the Tur-
kilh Empire into a regular form. He divided the
military force into the Capicuty or soldiery of the
Porte, which was properly the sfanding army,
and Sarmtaclyvor soldiers appointed to guard the
frontiers. The chief firength of the latter con-
fited of those who held .Timariots and Ziams.

These

These were portions of land granted to certain
perons for life, in much the fame manneras the
military fiefs among the nations of Europe, in
return for which military service was performed.
Solyman, in his Canun Name or book of regula-
tions, fixed with great accuracy the extent of
these lands in each province of his Empire, ap-
pointed the precise number of soldiers each per-
son who held a Timariot or a Ziam should bring
into the field, and established the pay which they
should receive while engaged in service. Count
Marfigli and Sir Paul Rycaut have given extrats
from this book of regulations, and it appears
that the ordinary establishment of the Turkish
army exceeded an hundred and fifty thousand
men. When there are added to the soldiery of
the Porte, they formed a military power which
vaitly exceeded what any Christian State could
command. Marfigli Etat Militaire, &c. p. 36.
Rycaut's itate of the Ottoman Empire, book iii.
ch. 2. As Solyman, during his aive reign,
was engaged so conitantly in war, that histroops
were always in the field, the Serrataculy became
almost equal to the Janizaries themselves in dif-
cipline and valour.

IT is not furprizing, then, that the authors

of the sixteenth century hould represent the
Turks as far superior to the Christians, both in
the knowledge and in the practice of the art of
war. Guicciardini informs us, that the Italians
learned the art of fortifying towns from the
Turks. Hiftor. lib. xv. p. 266. Bufbequius,
who was ambassador from Ferdinand to Soly-
man, and who had opportunity to observe the
state both of the Christian and Turkish armies,
published a discourse concerning the best manner
of carrying on war against the Turks, in which

Cc4 he

39i

he points out at great length the immense ad-
vantages which the infidels pofleffed with refpet
to discipline, and military improvements of eve-
ry kind. Bufbequii opera edit. Elzevir. p. 393,
&c. The Testimony of other authors might
be added, if the matter were, in any degree,
doubtful.

BEFORE I conclude there Proofs and Illuftrati-

ons, I ought to explain the reason of two omiffi-
onsin them; one of which it is necessary to men-
tion on my own account, the other to obviate
an objection to this part of the work.

IN all my inquiries and disquisitions concern-

ing the progress of government, manners, lite-
rature and commerce during the middle ages, as
well as in my delineations of the political confti-
tution of the different States of Europe at the
opening of the sixteenth century, I have not once
mentioned M. de Voltaire, who, in his Effayfur
l'hijoire generale, has reviewed the fame period,
and has treated of all these fubjeds. This does
not proceed from inattention to the works of that
extraordinary man, whose genius, no less enter-
prizing than universal, has attempted almost eve-
ry different species of literary composition. In
many of there he excels. In all, if he had left
religion untouched, he is inftruEtive and agree-
able. But as he seldom imitates the example of
modern historians in citing the authors from
whom they derived their information, I could
not, with propriety, appeal to his authority in
confirmation of any doubtful or unknown sac.
I have often, however, followed him as my
guide in these researches; and he has not only

pointed
39z

pointed out the fads with refped to which it
was of importance to inquire, but the conclufi-
ons which it was proper to draw from them. If
he had, at the fame time, mentioned the books
which relate these particulars, a great part of
my labour would have been unnecessary, and
many of his readers, who now confider him only
as an entertaining and lively writer, would find
that he is a learned and well-informed historian.

As to the other omifion; every intelligent

reader must have observed, that I have not en-
tered, either in the historical part of this volume,
or in the Proofs and Illustrations, into the fame
detail with refped to the ancient laws and cuf-
toms of the British kingdoms, as concerning those
of the other European nations. As the capital
facts with regard to the progress of government
and manners in their own country are known to
most of my readers, such a detail appeared to
me to be less essential. Such facts and obferva-
tions, however, as were necessary towards com-
pleating my design in this part of the work, I
have mentioned under the different articles which
are the fubjets of my disquisitions. The state
of government, in all the nations of Europe,
having been nearly the fame during several ages,
nothing can tend more to illustrate the progress
of the English constitution, than a careful inqui-
ry into the laws and customs of the kingdoms
on the continent. This source of information
has been too much neglected by the English an-
tiquarians and lawyers. Filled with admiration
of that happy constitution now established in
Great Britain, they have been more attentive to
its forms and principles, than to the condition
and ideas of remote times, which, in almost every

particular,

particular, differ from the present. While en-
gaged in perusing the laws, charters, and early
higtorians of the continental kingdoms, I have
often been led to think that an attempt to illus-
trate the progress of the English jurisprudence
and policy, by a comparison with those of other
kingdoms in a similar situation, would be of
great utility, and might throw much light on
some points which are now obscure, and decide
others, which have been log controverted.

V^s^

. D X.

# INDEX TO THE FIRST VOLUME.

I N

D

E

X

T 0O ' H E

FIRST VOLUME.
AFRICA, the Ihocking devastations

made there by the Vandals, 99.
Alanus, his charater of the clergy in

his time, 133.
Alfred the Great, his complaint of the

ignorance of the clergy, 233.
Allodial porfeflion of land, explained,

114. How such poleflion became
subject to military service, ib. Dif-
tinguifhed from beneficiary tenures,

i 5. How converted into feudal te-
nures, ia.
Allodium, the etymology of that word,

1;5. Ammianau, his charafter of the Huns,

t01, 206.
Amurath, Sultan, the body of Janiza-

ries formed by him, 190.
Anathema, form of that denounced a-

gainft robbers during the middle age,
33O.
Arabia, the ancient Greek philosophy

cultivated there, while loft in Europe,
311, Note xxviii. The progref of
philosophy from thence to Europe,
311.
rargo, rife of the kingdom of, 146.
Its union with Caflile, ib. The con-
Ititution and form of its government,
15o. The privileges of its Cortes,
1l1. Office and jurifdiifton of the

Jufthla, 152. The regal power very
confined, S53. Form of the alle-
giance swore to the Kings of, ib. The
power of the nobility to controul the
regal power, 344. Their privilege of
union taken away by Peter IV. ib.
The eftablilhmeot of the inquisition
opposed there, 347.
Armies, flanding, the rife of, traced, 91.

By what means they became more
general in Europe, .
Arms, the profefion of, the most ho-

nourable, in uncivilized nations, 67.
dAs, an account of the ancient Romish

feast of, z37, Note xii.
Afsm6biel, legislative, how formed, 36.

asmblies, general, of France, their
power under the firit race of Kings,
165. Under the second and third,
166. At what period they loft their
legifiative authority, 167.
A.ril, King of the HunS, account of

his reception of the Roman arbafa-
dors, 197, Note iii. orme account of
his conquests, 2ot.
Avila, an afrembly of Castilian nobles

there, folernnly try and depose Henry
IV. their King, 149,

Aujfri, the house of, by whom fouond
ed, ?.

Blillit,

B
DBillis, in the old French law, their of-

fice explained, 308.
Balance of power, the first rife of, in

Europe, I .' The progress of, 1a .
Baltic, the first source of wealth, to the

towns situated on that sea, 335.
Barrelona, its trade, riches, and privile-

gesat the close of the fifteenth centu-
ry, 351.
Barons, their independence, and mutual

hostilities, under the feudal system, 16.
how affeced by the franchifement of
cities, 34. Acquire a participation in
legifative government, 36. Their pri-
vate wars for redress of personal inju-
ries, 44. Methods employed to abo-
lilh these contentions, 46. Origin of
their supreme and independent jurif-
diQion, 57. The bad effets resulting
from there privileges, 58. The Reps
taken by princes to reduce their courts,
60. Hw obliged to relinquish their
judicial prerogatives, 68. Of Italy,
fubjeaed tomunicipallaws,247. Note
xv. Their right ofterritorial jurifdic-
tion explained, 303. Their emolu-
ments from causes decided in their
courts, 304.
Benefrce, under the feudal system, a his-

toryof, ! 7. When they became he-
reditary, ao0.
Books, an enquiry into the materials of

the ancient ones, 33. The loss of
old manuscripts accounted for, 34.
The great prices they fold for in anci-
ent times, 35.
Boroughs, representatives of, how intro-

duced into national councils, 37.
Britons ancient, their distress and dejec-

tion when deserted by the Romans'and
harraffed by the Picts and Caledonians,
t95, Note i.
Brotherbood of God, an account of that

association for extingui(hing private
wars, 82.
Bruges, how it became the chief mart

foritallan commodities during the mid-
dle ages, 334.
Burgundy, Mary heirefe of, the import-

ance with which her choice in a hus-
band was confidered by all Europe,
104. Thetreacherousviews of Lewis
Xl. of France toward her, o6. Is
married to the Archduke Maximilian,
107. The influence of this match on
the itate of Europe, ib.

C
Cfar, his account of the ancient Ger-

mans, ompared with that ofTaqitus,
106.

Camnray, treaty of, its object, i7.

The confederacy dissolved, 19.

Canso Law, an inquiry into, 6a. Pro-

grefs of ecclesiastical usurpations, 63.
The Maxims of, more equitable than
the civil court of the middle ages, 64.
Caflile, rife ofthe kingdom of, 146. Its

union with Aragon, ib. ItsKing Hen-
ry IV. solemnly tried and deposed in an
assembly of the nobles, 49. The
constitution and government of that
kingdom, 154. A history of the Cortes
of, and its privileges, ib. he king-
dom originally elective, 348, Note
xxxii.
Catalonia, the spirited behaviour of the

people there in defence of their rights,
againf their King John II. of Aragon,
149. Cenfiales, a species of the Oblati, or vo-

luntary nlaves, the obligations they en-
tered into described, 272.

Cintnrarii, or inferior judges in the mid-

dle ages, the extraordinary oath requi-
redfrom them, 329.
Champs de Mars, and de Mai, account

of those affembliesof the ancientGauls,
357- Charlemagne, his law to prevent private

wars for redress of personal injuries,
46, 78. State ofGermany under his
descendants, 173.
Charles IV. Emperor, diflipates the Im-

perial domains, 378.
Charles V. Emperor, an emulator of the

heroic condua of his rival, Francis 1.
72. His future grandeur founded on
the marriage of the Archduke Maxi-
milian with the heiress of Burgundy,
107.
Charles VII. of France, the first who in-

troduced standing armies in Europe,
93. His successful extension ofthe re-
gal prerogative, 96.
Charles VIII. of France, his character,

lo8. How induced to invade Italy, ib.
His resources and preparations for this
enterprize, o09. His rapid fucels,
i o. A combination of the Italian
states formed against him, ils.
forced to return back to France, ib
The diRreffed late of his revenues by
this expedition, 116.
Charleioix, his account of the North A-

merican Indians, made use of in a com-
parison between them and the ancient
Germans, 209.
Charters, of immunity or franchise, an

inquiry into the nature of those grant-
ed by the barons of France to the
towns under their jurifdi4tions, a51.
Note xvi. Of communities, granted

*' t,?

by the Kings of France, how they like pratice obtains all over'Europe,
tendedtocftablifhregulargovernment, 34. The salutary effets of these in-
33, 251. titutions, ib. The low Rate of, du-
Ckivalry, the origin of, 69. Its benefi- ring the middle ages, 77. Causes

cial effects on human manners, 70. contributing to its revival, ib. Pro-
The enthufialm of, difiinguifhed from moted by the Henfeatic league, 79. Is
its salutary conlequence, 71. cultivated in the Netherlands, 8. Is
Clriflianity, corrupted whenfirfl brought introduced intoEnglandby Edward llI.

into Europe, 73. Its influence in free- 81. The beneficial conlequences re-
ing mankind fiom the bondage of the fulting from the revival of, 81 The
feudal policy, 268, Note xx. early cultivation of, in Italy, 330.
Circle of Germany, the occasion of their Common lae, the sirs compilation of,

being sorned, 79. made inEngland by Lord ChiefJutlice

Citie, the ancient itate ot, under the feu- Glanville, 317.

dal plicy, 31. The freedom of, Cemmuvitie; lee Charter, Cilies, Cam-
where firlt established, 32. Charters merre, and Corporations.
of community, why granted in France Comnera, Anne, her charater of the
by Louis le Gross, 33. Obtain the like Crusaders, 245.
all over Europe, 34. Acquire politi- Cepaf", marinel's, when invented, and
cal consideration, 36. its influence on the extension of com-
Clergy, the progress of their usurpations, merce, 78.

63. Their plan ofjurifprudence more Csmpsfftion for pei fonal injuries, the mo-
perseEt than that of the civil courts in tives for eftblithing, 78. The cu'-
the middle ages, 64. The great igno- tom of, deduced from the practice of
rance of, in the early feudal time of the ancient Germans, 99.
Europe, 33. Cempurgators, introduced asevidence in
Clerica, slave to Willa, widow of Duke the jurisprudence of the middle ages,

Hugo, extrat from the charter of ma- 49.
nuniflion, granted to her, 70. Cond ttieri, in the Italian policy, what,
Clermont, council of, resolves on the holy 133.

war, 4. See eter the hermit, and Conrad, count of Franconia, how he ob-
Crvfades. tained election to the empire, 173.
Clataire I. instance of the small authority Conradis, the last rightful heir to the

he had over his army, 356. crown of Naples of he house of Swa-
Clotharius II. his account of the popular bia, his unhappy fate, 138.

assemblies mong'the ancient Gauls, Coanlante, treaty of, between the Em-
357. perorFrederic Barbarossa, and the free

Cslvir, the founder of the French monar- cities of Italy, s5o.

chy, unable to retain a sacred vase ta- Con#iantinopl/, its flourilhing ate at the
ken by his army, from beingdiftributed time of the Crusades, 6. When sirs
by l-t among the relt of the plunder, taken by the Turks, 187. The Cru-
li., Note vii. faders how looked upon there, 144.
C!lleges, the first establishment of, in Eu- The account given of this city by the

rope, 33. Latin Writeri, 145.
Cmnbat, judicial, the prohibition of, an C/nfilittirrs, popular, how formed, 36.

improvement in the adminiflration of Cordova, Gonfalvo de, secureS the crown
justice, 47. The foundation and uni- of Naples to Ferdinand of Aragon,
verfality of this mode of trial, 5. 140.
The pernicious effets of, 54. Various Crprltions, and bodies politic, the efta-
expedients for abolishing this pratlice, blifhmento of, how far favourable to
55. The ancient wedifh law of, fr the improvement of manners, 30
words otreprbach, 19t. Pofitiv evi- The privileges of, where firt claimed,
dence, or points of proof, rendered in- 31. Charters of community, why
effe6tual by it, g95. This mode of tri- granted by Louis le Gtols in France,
al authorized by the ecclefiaflic, 197. 33. The inRfitution of, obtains all over
The last infancea of, in the hiftoricsof Europe, 34. Their cffects, ib.
France and England, 98. Corte of Aragon, its conflitution and
Commerce, the spirit ofcrufading how far privileges, 151, 34.-

favourable to, at that early period, 9. Crrte: of Castile, a hisory of, and an ac-
The firt eftabli(hment offree corpora- count of its constitution and privileges,
tionn, 3. Charters of community why 154 The vigilance with which it
granted by Louis le Gross, 33. The guarded

guarded its privileges against the en-
croachments of the regal power, X 5.
Cru/fad,the sirs motives of undertaking,

a%. The enthusiastic zeal with which
they were undertaken, 13. FirR pro-
moted by Peter the hermit, 14. The
success of them, 15. The confequen-
ces resulting from them, i. Their es-
sets on manners, 6. On property,
17. How advantageous to the enlarge-
ment of the regal power of the Europe-
an princes, a8. The commercial es-
sets of, 9, 78. The universal frenzy
for engaging in there expeditions ac-
counted for, 138, Note xiii. The pri-
vileges granted to those who engaged
in them, 40. Stephen earl of Char-
tres and Blois, his account of them,
241. The expences of conduing them,
how raised, ib. Chracter given of the
Crusaders by the Greek writers, 144.

D
Dfbt,the first hint of attaching moveables

for the recovery of, derived from the
canon law, 316.
Debrorj, how confidered in the rude and

simple Rate of society, 254.

Diets of Germany ,some account of, 383.
DIAers, in the different faculties, dilpute

precedence with knights, 33.

E
Ecclrfiiicaljurifprudence, more perfect

in its plan than the civil courts of the
middle ages, 64.
Ecclefiafrics, when, and by what degrees

they claimed exemption fror civilju-
rifdiction, 31z. Military talents cul-
tivated and exercised by those of the
middle ages, 319.
Edwvard 11. of England, his endeavours

to introduce commel:ce into his king-
dom, 8 .
Elefers of Germany, the rife of their pri-

vileges, 183.
Elfy, St. his definition or description of a

good christian, 36, Note xi.
Em oerrs of Germany, an inquiry into

their power, jurifdition, and revenue,
376, Note xli. The ancient mode of
electing them, 380.
England, a frnmary view of the contets

between, and lFrance, 88. The confe-
quences of its losing its continental pof-
sessions, 91. The power of the crown
how extended, oa. See Hriry VII.
VWhy so many marks of Saxon usages
and languagers,incomparifon with those
of the Normans, to be found in, 197,
Note IV. When corporations began to
be eltabliflied in, 164. Inntsncel of the
long continuance of personal servitude
there, 173. Inquiry into the Saxon

TO THE

lawa for putting an end to private war,
a8S. The caufea of the fpeedydecline
of private wars there proposed to the
researches of Antiquarians, z86. The
last inflances of judicial combat record-
ed in the history of, 198. The territo-
rial jurifdition of the batons now abo-
lifled, 310. Cause of the flow pro-
grefs of commerce there, 336. The
first commercial treaty entered into
by, 348.
Evidrncc,the imperfeA nature of that ad-

mitted in law proceedings during the
middle ages, 48. Rendered ineftctual
by the judicial combat, 195.

Errope, the alterations in, by the con-

quert of the Romans, . The im-
provements the nations of, received in
exchange for their liberties, ib. Its
disadvantages under this change of cir-
cumlftaces, ib. Inquiry into the sup-
posed populounefsof the ancient north-
ern nations, 4. The ravage desolation
exercised by the Coths, Vandals, and
Huns, 9. The universal change occa-
sioned by their irruptionsandconquells,
10. The first rudiments of the present
policy of, to be deduced from this pe-
riod, t. Origin of the feudal fyltem,
13. See Feudalfyfitm. The general
barbarimr introduced with this policy,
18. At what time government and
manners began to improve, it. The
caules and events which contributed to
this improvement, %A. See CrwJades,
Corpcrations, People. The miseries oc-
cafioned by private wars in, 45. Me-
thods taken to suppress them, 46. Ju-
dicial combats prohibited, 47. The de-
fe&s ofjudicial proceedings in the mid-
dle ages, 48. The influence of super-
flition in there proceedings, 50. The
origin of the independent territorialju-
ritdilion of the barons, 57. The bad
consequences of their judicial power,
58. The Reps taken by princes to a-
bolifh their courts, 60. An inquiry in-
,to the canon law, 6. Revival ot the
Roman law, 66. Effoets of the p! it
of chivalry, 69. How improved by the
prng Iefsof science and cultivation of ii-
terature, 71. Christianity corrupted
when firll received in, 73. Scholallic
theology the firit ohjeft of learning in,
74. Low state of commerce in, during
the middle ages, 77. Commerce re-
vives in lthly, 78. Is promoted by the
JHnftatic league, 79. Is cultivated in
the Netherlands, 80. The effcte of
the progress of commerce,on the polish-
ing of manners, 81. The effets of
the marriage of the heiress of Burgundy

with

with the archduke Maximilian on the
lare of, 107. By what means s(and-
ing forces become general in, 12z.
Confeqaences of the league of Cam-
bray to, 117. A view of the political
conltitution of the several lates of, at
the commencement of the sixteenth
century, 121. Italy, 14. The pa-
pacy, ib. Venice, 132. Florence, 135.
Naples, 136. Milan, 140. Spain, 144.
France, 1,65. Germany, 171. Turkey,
187. Instances ofthe final intercourse
among nations in the middle ages,
3t5

F
FPeosu*, the etymology of that word,

116.

Fiefi, under the feudal system, a history

of, 17. When they became heredi-
tary, 100.

FerdiKdhd, King of Aragon, unites the

Spanifl monarchy,by his marriage with
Isabella of Castile, 146. His schemes
to exalt the regal power, 6o. Re-
fumes former grants of land from his
barons, 161. Unites to the crown the
grand mafterlhips of the three military
orders, sb. Why he patronized the as-
fociation called the Hsly brotherhbod,
against the barons, 164.
Feudal system, the origin of, deduced,

13. The primary obje& of this policy,
14. Its deficiencies for interior govern-
ment, 1 5 Tenures of land, how efta-
blifhed under, ib. The rife of intestine
discord. among the barons under, 16.
The servile state of the people, ib.
The weak authority of the King, ib.
Its influence on the external operations
of war, 17. The general extinction of
all arts and ciences affefted by, 18.
Its operation on religion, 19. Its in-
fluence on the chara&cer of the human
mind, zo. At what time government
and manners began to be improved, I.
The causes and events which contribu-
ted to this improvement, iz. See Cru-
/aid. The ancient Rate of cities un-
der, 31. The frame of national coun-
cils under this policy, 36. How altered
by the plrogrelAf of civil liberty, 37. An
inquil y into the adminilration of jus-
ti e under, 41. Private war, 43. Judi-
cial combat, 47. The independent ju-
rifdisions of the barons, 7. The dif-
tinction between free men and vassals
under, i16. Ilow strangers were con-
fidered and treated under, 37.

Fitzfiehns, observations on his account

of the state of London, at the time of
Heilry 11. 64.

Slanders. See Nt hterladis.
Florence, a view of the constitution of,

at the commencement of the fixteent&
century, 35. The influence acquired
by Cosmo di Medici, 136.
France, by what means the towns in,

first obtained charters of community,
33. Ordinances of Louis X. and his
Brother Philip in favour of civil liber-
ty, 40. Methods employed to fapprefs
private wars, 46. St. Louis attempts
to discountenance judicial combat, 55.
A view of the contets between, and
England, 88. The conlequences of
its recovering its provinces from Eng-
land, 91. The monarchy of, how
strengthened by this event, eI. The
rife of tlanding forces in, 93. The re-
gal prerogative ftreagthened by this
measure, 95. The extension of the
regal prerogative vigorouly pursued by
Louis XI. 97. See Louis XI. The
effes of the invasion of Italy by
Charles VIII. 1o8. See Charles VIII.
National infantry etablifhed in, 15.
League of Cambray formed againf the
Venetians, 118. Battle of Ghiarta-
dadda, ib. An inquiry into its ancient
government and laws, 165. The
power of the general assemblies under
the first race of Kings, ib. Under the
second and third, 166. The regal
power confined to the King's own do-
mains, 167. When the general assem-
bly or tates general, lorf their legifa-
tive authority, ib. When the Kings
began to aflert their leginative power,
168. When the government of, be-
came purely monarchical, 169. The
regal power nevertheless reflrained by
the privileges of the nobility, 170. An
inquiry into the jurifdidion of its par-
liaments, particularly that of Paris,
i1. How the allodial property of
land there was altered into feudal, Za3.
The'prbgrefs of liberty in thatkingdom
traced, a65. Note xix. The at-
tempts to eflablif liberty there unfuc-
cefsful, 67. The la ilance ofju-
dicial combat recorded inthe hiftoryof,
198. The present government of,
compared with that of ancient Gaut,
355. Note xxxvii. The States-gene-
ral, when firR assembled, 369.
Frarcis I. of Prance, his charater influ-

enced by the spirit of chivalry, 71. 1I
emulated by the Emperor Charles V.

71. Frederick BarbarofTa, Emperor, the free
cities of Italy unite againf him, 250.
Treaty of Contance with them, sb.

Wil

Was the first who granted privileges
to the cities in Germany, 61.
Frtdum, in the ancient German usages

explained, 300.
Fretsre,,how distinguished from vffals,

under the feudal policy, 16, 130.
Why often induced to surrender their
freedom and become slaves, 131.
Fulebhriua Carnotenfis, his character of

the city of Contantinople, 45.

G
Gaul, how allodial property of land was

changed into feudal, there, 213. The
government of, compared with that of
modern France, 335. Note xxxvii.
The small authority the kings of, en-
joyed over their armies, illustrated in
an anecdote of Clotaire . 36. Ac-
count of the popular afremblies, of,
357. The salic laws how enacted,
358. Were not subjec to taxation,
3C9. See France.
G.cffrey dt Villehardwie, his account of

the Magnificence of Constantinople, at
the time when taken by the Crufa-
ders, 146.
Cermsan, ancient, an account of'their

fages and way of life, 206. Their
method of engaging in war, 107. A
comparison between them and the
North American ndians, l09. Why
they had no cities, 60. Note xvii.
The pracice of compounding for per-
fonal injuries by fines, deduced from
their usages, 99.
Germany, little interested in foreign con-

cerns at the beginning of the fifteenth
century, 89. National infantry efta-
blifhed in, 114. Statiof, under Char-
lemagne and his cefcendants, 173.
Conrad, count of Franconia, chosen
Emperor, ib. His luccefTors in the
Imperial dignity, i. How the npbili-
ty of, acquired independent overeign
authority, 174. The fatal effects of
aggrandizing the clergy in, 175. The
contests between the Emperor enry
IV. and Poe Gregory VII. 176. Rile
of the factions of Guelfs and Ghihe-
lines, 77. Decline of the Imperial
authority, ib. The House of Aultria,
by whom founded, ib. A total change
in the political constitution of the Em-
pire, 178. The (tate of anarchy in
which it continued to the time of
Maximilianthe immediate predecessor
of Charles V, 17. Divided into cir-
cles, ib. The Imperial chamber intli-
tuted, 180o. The Aulic council re-
sormed, ib. A view of its political
ccnftitution at the commencement of

the ensuing history, it. Its defects
pointed out, 181. The imperial dig-
nity and power compared, 182. Elec-
tion of the emperors, 83. The re-
pugnant forms of civil policy in the fe-
veralStates of, 184. The opposition
between the secular and ecclesiastical
members of, 185. The united body
hence incapable of acting with vigour,
a86. When cities first began to be
built in, 160. Note xvii. When the
cities of, firl acquired municipal pri-
vileges, 61. The artizans of, when
infranchifed, 62z. Immediate citiesin
the Germanjurifprudence, what, 263.
The great calamities occasioned there
by private wars, 88. Origin of the
league of the Rhine, ib. When pri-
vate wars were finally abolifled there,
%89. Inquiry into the power, jurif-
dition and revenue of its Emperors,
376. Note xli. The ancient mode of
electing the Emperors, 380. Account
of the diets, 383.

Ghibeline. See Guelfi.
Ghiarradadda, the battle of, fatal to the

Venetians, 118.

Glanville, Lord Chief Justice, the first

who compiled a body of common law,
in all Europe, 317.
Gethb, Vandals, and Huns, over-run the

Roman empire, and precipitate its
downtall, 3. The ate of the coun-
tries from whence they issued, 4. The
motives of their first excursion', 5.
How they came to fettle in the coun-
tries they c nquered, 6. A compari-
son drawn between them and the Ro-
mans, at the period of their irruption.,
8. Compared with the native Ameri-
cans, 9. The defblations they oca-
sioned in Europe, ib. The universal
change made by them in the slate of
Europe, io. The principles on which
they made their settlementS, 1. 0-
rigin of the teudal system, 13. See
Feudal SftieP. An inquiry into the
administration of justice among, 41.
Their private wars, 43. Deltroy the
monuments of the Roman arts, 71.
Their contempt of the Romans, and
hatred of their arts, 196. Note ii.
Their aversion to literature, ib. No
authentic account of their origin, or
ancient hiftoiy existing, ib.
Gosvernent, bow limited by the feudal

policy, 6. The effet of the Cru-
fades on, a8. How affected by the in-
franchifement of cities, 35. Legilla-
tive assemblies how formed, 36. Pri-
vate wars deftrutive to the authority
of, 46. Methods mployed to abolilh

this

this hostile mode of redrefling injuries,
ib. How effeaed by the supreme in-
dependent jurifdiC&ions of the barons,
58. The steps toward abolishing them,
60. The origin and growth of royal
courts of justice, b. How influenced
by the revival of science and literature,
76. A view of, at the beginning of
the fifteenth century, 84. The power
of Monarchs then very limited, 85.
Their revenues small, ib. Their ar-
mies unfit for conquest, ib. The
Princes hence incapable of extensive
plans of operation, 87. The kingdoms
very little conneced with each other,
88. How the efforts of, from this pe-
riod became more powerful and exten-
five, 90. The consequences of Eng-
land losing its provinces in France, 91.
The schemes of Louis XI. of France
to extend the regal power, 97. See
LouI XI. The power of the English
crown enlarged, loz. See Henry VII.
As also that of Spain, 103. How the
use of anding armies became general,
iti. A view of the political conlti-
tution of the several tfates of Europe,
at the commencement of the sixteenth
century, 114. In what reflects the
charters of communities granted by
the Kings of France, tended to intro-
duce a regular form of, 53.

9reece, the breeding offilk worms, when

introduced there, 331.
Greek Emperors, their magnificence at

Constantinople, 244.
Gregory of Tours, remarks on the state

of Europe during the period ot which
he wrote the hittory, zi.
Gregory the Great, Pope, his reason for

granting liberty to his laves, 69.
Gregory VII. Pope, the foundation of

his coatelts with Henry IV. Emperor
of Germany, 176. The mean fubmif-
sion he extorted fiom Henry, 177.
His own account ot this affair, 375.
Gudfe, and Ghibelines, rife of those

factions in Germany, 177.
Guirciardmr, the historian, instance of

his fuperltitious reverence for Pope
Clement VII. 131. Note.
GuNtherus, a Monk, his charaaer of

Conftantipolle, at the lime when taken
by the Cruladers, 145.

H.

laptfetic league, when formed, and its
influence on the extension of com-
merce, 79, 336.

Ilenry IV. of Callile, solemnly tried and

deposed by an assembly of Cailian
noble, 149.
JIinry IV. Emperor of Germany, the

humiliating Rate to which he was
reduced by Pope Gregoly VII. 176,
375. Note xl.
VOL. I.

O L U ME.
Henry VII. of England, his situation at

his accefilon to the crown, oz. Ena-
bles his barons to break their entails
apd fell their estates, ib. Prohibits his
barons keeping retainers, b. Encou-
rages agriculture and commerce, ib.
Herebannun, the nature of thisfine under

the feudal policy, explained, 216.
Hermandad, Santa, account of that in-

Ritution, 354.
Hiflry, the most calamitous period of,

pointed out, 10.
Holy Brotherhood, an association in Spain

under that name, on what occasion
formed, 163.
Holy Land, the original inducements of

the Christians to rescue it from the
hands of the Infidels, az. See Crusader,
and Peter the Hermit.
Honour, points of, the ancient Swedish

law for determining, 291.
HoJpitality, enforced by itatutes during

the middle ages, 316.
Huns, instance of their enthusiastic paflion

for war, 97. Note iii. Some account
of their policy and manners, 1zo, o06.
See Goths.

1.

Janizarier, origin, and formidable nature

of those troops, 189.
Imperial chamber of Germany, inlli

tuted, 180. The occasion of its in-
flitution, 384.
Indians, North American, a comparison

drawn between them and the ancient
Germans, 2o9.
Indiltjry, the spirit of, how excited by

the iniiarichilement of cities, 35.
Infantry, the advantages of, beyond ca-

valry, taught to the reft of Europe by
the Swiss, :14. National bodies of,
ctlablifhed in Germany, ib. In France
and Spain, 115.

Inheritance, and right of representation

between orphan grandsons and their
uncles, how decided in the tenth cen-
tury, 93.
Intirfr of money, the neceflity of ad-

mitting in a commercial iew, 332.
Prepofterouly condemned by the
churchmen of the middle ages, 333
The caule hence, of the xorbilant
exaction!, of lhe Lombard bankers, b.
Italy, when the Cities of them began to

form themrelves into bodies politic, 3z.
Commerce firll improved there, and
the realons of it, 7t . Tlhe revolutions
in Europe ocranioned by the iafion
of, by Chaile. VIII. of France, 107.
The fIate of, at te ilme of this inva-
filou, oo}. The rapid fuccef, of Charles,

0o. A coiml)atioi n of the State

o!, dives ('harlc. tot of, and give-
birth o ite balancec ol power in

) d Lurlpe,

Europe, itr. The political fitua-
t'inh of, at the commencement of
the sixteenth century,"' 24. The
papacy, ib. Venice, 13z. lorence,
135 ' Naples, 136. Milan, 14o.
Evidences' of the defolaiion made
there by the northern invaders 'of
the Roman Empire; 103.' "Hb the
cities of,' obtained their municipal
privileges, 247. Note xv. State of,
under Frederick I. 248. Treaty of
ConRfance between the free cities of,
and the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa,
250.

judgment of God, modes of acquittal

by, in the law proceedings during the
middle ages, 50, 89. Note xxii.

7udicium Cruc,' method of trial by, a9o.
/ulius II. Pope, forms a confederacy,

agaiqft the Venetians at 'Cambray,
18. Seizes part of the Venetian ter-
ritories, ib. The confederacy difTolved,

19. Turns his schemes againf France,
and England, ib.
7urfprudence, ecclesiastical, more perfect

in its plan, than the civil courts of the
middle ages, 46. See Law.
ufiitce, an inquiry into the administration

of, under the feudal policy, 42. The
steps towards the improvement of, as
civil liberty advanced, 43. Redress
chiefly pursued by private wars, 44.
Methods taken to suppress private
wars, 46. Judicial combats prohibited,
47. The defects of judicial proceed;
ings in the middle ages, 48. Compur-
gators, the nature of that kind of evi-
dence, 49. Methods of trial by ordeal,
or acquittal by Judgment of God, 50.
Origin of the supreme independent ju-
rirdifions of the feudal barons, 57.
The extent and bad effects of their
privileges, 58. The fleps taken by
monarchs to reduce the barons courts,
6o. The growth of royal courts of
jufice, 61. Inquiry into the canon
law, 62. How improved by the revi-
val of the Roman law, 66. When the
adminiltration of, bccame difinEt
profeflion, 68.
u/jliza, or supreme judge of Aragon,

his office and privileges 15. An In-
quiry by whom this officer was ele6ced,
339. Who was eligible to this office,
340. Nature of the tribunal appointed
to controul his adminifiration, 341.
Inltance of his extensive power, 341.

K.
King, his power how circumscribed by

the barons, under the feudal sysem,
16. By what mews the Crufadca

tended to enlarge the regal authority,
28.

Kora, its influence in checking the Sul-
tans of the Ottoman empire, 189.

L.
Land, how held at the establishment of

the feu'dal system, 15. 'See Feudal
Land, the property of, how confidered by

the ancient barbarous nations, 213.
Note viii. Allodial poffeflion of,' x-
plained, 214. The proprietors how
ubjeted to military service, 215.
Allodial and beneficiary poTfefflon
diltinguiThed, ib. Allodial property
why generally converted into feudal,
222.
Law, when the study of it became a

diRin& employment, 68.
Law, Canon, an inquiry into, 6. The

maxims of, rmore equitable than the
civil courts of the middle ages, 64.
When first compiled, 3 5.

Law, Roman, how it funk into oblivion,

'6. Circumfiances which favoured
the revival of it, 66. Its effects in im-
proving the administration of justice,
ib. ts rapid spread over Europe, 316
Note xxv.
Lawburrcrs, in the Scottilh law, ex-

plained, 254.
Liberty, civil, the rife and progress of,

traced, 3.' How favoured by the or-
donances of Louis X. of France, and
his brother Philip, 40. The spirit of,
bow excited in France, 265. Note xix.
The particulars included in the char-
ters of, granted to huibandmen, 68.
Note xx. The influence of the Chris-
tian religion in extending, ib. The
several opportunities of obtaining, 28o.
Limoges, council of, its endeavours to

extinguish private wars, 279.
Literature, the cultivation of, greatly

instrumental incivilizingthe nations of
Europe, 7. Why the first efforts of,
ill direted, 73. The good effects ne-
verthelefa of the spirit of inquiry ex-
erted, 75. How checked in its pro-
grefs, b Its influence on manners
and government, 76.
Liturgy, the preference between the

Mufarabic, and Romish, how acer-
tained in Spain, 294.
Lombards, the first bankers in Europe,

332. The motive of their exacting
exorbitant interest, 333.
London, its flourilhing Ltate at the time

of Henry II. 64.

Louis le Cross, of France, his induce-
mcats to grant privileges to towns

within

Athint hri oS.

dinioh, 3. See

Cbartr:.
ti*t, St. the gret ittetroi6l he paid to

the adrmniftration ofiultice, in appeal*
4wicli cate bfore hKmi 30',
Ltuir X. of Fra`'ie, hli ordonances in

favour of civil liberty, 46.
ti, Xt. of Prance, his charaer, 97.

His schemes for depreffingte nobitity,
ib. Sows diviioqs among them, 99.
'Tncreafes the tianding forces, ib. En-
Uarges the reven'es' of the crow%, b.
His addrefi in overruliqg the aflernbly
of Rates, iso. Extends the bound4 of
ihe French monarchy, Jl6. The
activity of his external operations, ib.
His treicherous baseness toward the
heiress of Burgundy, O5. Th'e es-
sects of his conduót, o17.
Louis XII. his hesitation in carrying on

war against the Pope, 132. Note.
AfTeris his righit to the dutchy of
Milan, ind retains Ludovico Sforza in
piifon, 143.

M.
Manfred, his Rruggles for the crown of

Naples, 138.

.Mankind, the molt cala'mitous period in
· the history of, pointed out, 1o.
.ltnners, the barbarity of, under the

feudal eitablih'tnents, after the over-
throw of the Roman' emiiire, 18.
'When they began to impiove, 21.
EffeCts of the Crusades on, a5. How
improved by the infranchifement of'
Cities, 36. IHow improved by the
ere&ion of royal courts of justice, in
opposition to the barorls courts, 6.
Effe&ts of the revival' of te Roman
law on, 6. The beneficial tendency
of the spirit of chivalry on, 6. How
inftuenced by the progrFfs of fcicnce,
72, 76. How polilhed by the revival
of commerce, 81.
Manumijffon, particulars included in the

charters of, granted' to h uthandmen
or slaves, 68. Note x. The form
of, 269.
Maximilian, archduke of Aultria, mar-

ried to ary heiress of Burgundy, 107.
The influence of' this match on the
Rlate of Europe, ,b.
Maxrmilian, Emperor, intitutes the Im-

peril chamber, 180. Reforms the
Aulc council, ib.
AMeci, Ctofmo di, the first of the name,

the infueice he acquired i Florence,

ian, the slate of the dtchy of, at
tle commencement of the sixteenth
Century, 140. Rife and progref of
the difputcs concerning the fut:ccfion
C:', 141 ,

O L t ME.
Mind, ti t!Etinm a o
view ot; 4lnger the

firR. edabihtient d te, feiudal policy
in Europe, ,o. The r a f' itlt ulti-
mate deprefio, and commencem'enc
of i(s imrfvpemreit, 2, .The progre
of ts operations, before the full exer-
tion of it, 73.
Mmifirierjales, class oi te Oblati, or

voluntary saves, the pious motives of
the obligations the Ptered into, 172.
Morws, make a conquer of Sien, 44.

S. , wrat m'ans weakened during their
eft lilhmre't there, 45s. Reriarks on
their conduct wn Spain, 147.
ItfIfiial privieges, how oani'ed by

the cities of Italy, 247. Note xv. Se-
cured to them by the treaty of Con-
stance, gSq. The favourite state of,
under the Roman government, 259.
Naples, a view of the constitution of

that kingdom, at the commencement
of the fxteenth century, 136. The
tprbulent unsettled state of that king-
dom, 137. State of th'edifputescon-
cerning the fucceflion to the crown of,
138. The pretensions of the French
and Spanish monarchs to the crown of,
139.,
Ndrbonne, community of, preamble to

the writ of summons of Philip the

ong, to the, 265. Note xix.
NaSiga!ion, proof of the imperfect (tate

of, during the middle ages, 334.

Netherla'd, a vigorous prosecution of

the manufaLtures f hemp and Aax
there, on the revival of conmerce in
Europe, 80.
Ndrmans, why so few traces of their

uifages and language, to be found in
Eigland, in compariton 'ith those of
the Saxons, 167. Note iv.

0.
Oblati, or voluntary aves, the classes of,

specified, 7,

Ordeal, methods of trial by, during. the

milidl ages, 50. The influence of
superstition in ditating thefc means.
Otto Frifingentis, his account of the f(ate

pfltaly under 'rederic I. z48.
Ottomani empire, the origin, an4J' refroptic

nature of, 187. Beconmc, t;ormid4ble
to the Chrilli pcr, 191.

P.

Papary. ee Popedln.
Paper, when firit made of the present

materials, , : .

Prri, ah iiiq i,' into tie prcr'minrnc
jaili. licull of its pAliarnout over the

L' d < I:her

other parliaments of France, 171.
Its origin traced, 370. Note Xxxix.
The royal edicts registered by, before
admitted to be laws, 373.
Parliaments, or legislative assemblies,

how formed uinder the feudal policy,
36. How altered by the progress of
civil-liberty, 37.
People, their wretched servile state under

the feudal system, 16, 39. Released
from their favifh state by the infran-
chifement of cities, 34. How they
obtained a representation in national
councils, 36. Those who lived in the
country and cultivated the ground, an
inquiry into their condition under the
feudal policy, z17. Note lx.

Peria, murder, how punished there, 302.
Peter the Hermit, excites the European

Princes to undertake the Holy War,
14.
Peter IV. King of Aragon, defeats the

leaders of the Aragonefe union, and
destroys the privilege of these afocia-
tions, 344.

Philip the Long, preamble to his writ of

summons to the community of Nar-
bonne, 65. Note xix.
Phitlofphy, cultivated by the Arabians,

when loft in Europe, 311. Note xxviii.
Its progress from them into Europe,
322.
Pigrimages to the Holy Land, when firfc

undertaken, at. See Crusades, and
Peter the Hermit.
Placentia, council of, the Holy war

resolved on by, 4. See Peter the
Hermit, and Crusades.
Plunder, how divided among the ancient

northern nations, 13. Illustrated in an
anecdote of Clovis, a1.l Note vii.
Popedom, the highest dignity in Europe

at the commencement of the sixteenth
century, 114. Origin and progress of
the papal power, 15 . The territories
of the Popes unequal to the support of
their fpiritualjurildiclion, ib. Their
authority in their own territories ex-
tremely limited, 116. The check they
received from the Roman barons, i.
Nicolas Rienzo ltempts to establish a
democratical government in Rome,
and to destroy the papal jurifdicion,
1a8. The papal authority considerably
strengthened by the Popes Alexander
VI. and Julius II. 119. See Julius II.
The permanent nature of ecclesiastical
dominion, ib. The civil adminisfration
of, not uniform or confitent, 130.
Rome the school of political intrigue
during the sixteenth century, ib. The
advantages derived from the union of

,TO THE

spiritual and temporal authority, 131.
A view of the contests between the
Popes and the Emperors of Germany,
176. Poploufnefi of the ancient northern na.

tions, an inquiry into, 4.
Prifeis, extract from his account of the

Roman embassy to Attilla King of the
Runs, 197. Note iii.
Procopims, his account of the cruel deva-

stations made by the irruption of the
northern nations, 198. Note v. 201,

021.
Property, the poffeflion of, how ecured

by the French chartersof communities,
.54. Proveditori, in the Venetian policy,

their office, 134.

R.
Religion, how corrupted by the northern

nations eftablfhed in Europe under the
feudal policy, 9. Its influence in
freeing mankind from the feudal fervi-
tude, 68.
Repledging, the right of, in the law of

Scotland, explained, 305.

Reproach, words of, the ancient Swedish

law offatisfaftion for, z91.
Revenues, royal, very small under the

feudal policy, 85. By what means in-
creared, 115.

Rhine, origin and intention of the league

of, 88.
Rienzso Nicholas, endeavours to rescue

Rome from the papal authority, and
establish a democratical form of govern-
ment there, 1i8.
Robber, the anathema pronounced

against them during the middle ages,
3z9.
Radulph of Haplburgh, how he attained

eletion to the Empire of Germany,
177.
Romans, an inquiry into those advantages

which enabled them to conquer the reft
of Europe, . The improvements
they communicated in return for their
conquests, ib. The dfadvantages the
provinces laboured under, from their
dominion, ib. Their Empire over-
turned by the irruption of the barbarous
nations, 3. The concurrent caufesof
their ruin, 6. A comparison drawn
between them and the northern nations,
8. All the civil arts eltablifhed by them
obliterated, 8. The monument of
their arts industriously deffroyed by
their barbarour invaders, 72.

Rome, papal. See l'Popdom.
Reyal truce, an account of, 282.

Salic

S.
Sale laws, the manner in which they

were enaced, 358.
Saxons, why so many traces of their

laws, language and cufloms to be found
in England, 197. Note iv. Inquiry into
their laws for putting an end to private
wars, 285.
acience, the revival and progress of, how

farinltrumental in civilizing the nations
of Europe, 72. A summary view of
the revival and progress of, in Europe,
321. Notexxviii.
Sforza, Francis, the foundation of his

pretensions to the dutchy of Milan,
142. Is murdered by his uncle Lu-
dovico, ib.

-- Ludovico, his private views in

engaging Charles VIII. of France to
invade Italy, so8. See Charles VIII.
Murdershis nephew Francis, and seizes
Milan, 142. Is firipped of his domi-
nions by Louis XII. of France, and
dies in prison, 143.
Shipwrechs, the right, lords of manors

claim to, whence derived, 328.
Silk, the rarity of, and the high price it

bore in ancient Rome, remarked, 331.
The breeding of silk worms, when in-
troduced into Greece, ib.
Slanes, letters of, in the law of Scotland,

what, 301.

Slaves under the feudal policy, their

wretched late, 226. Oblati, or vo-
luntary slaves, the several classes of,
271.
Socetey, civil, the rude Rate of, under the

feudal establishments after the downfall
of the Roman Empire, 18. The in-
fluence of the Crusades on, 25. How
improved by the establishment of mu-
nicipal communities, 30. The effe&ts
the infranchifements of the people had
on, 41. Private wars how deftrutive
to, 4. These intestine hostilities,
howfuppreffed, 46. Theadminifiration
of jutice improved by the prohibition
ofjudicial combats, 47. The growth
of royal courts ofjuftice, in opposition
to the barons courts, 60. How ad-
vanced by the revival of the Roman
law, 65. The effcts of the spirit of
chivalry in improving, 69. The revival
of commerce and its influences, 78.

Solyman, Sultan, his characer, 191.
Spain, a summary view of its situation,

at the commencement of the fixtccnth
century, 89. The power of the crown
of, how extended by Ferdinand, 103.
National infantry ectablifhed in, 5.
Is conquered by the Vandals, 144. and

after by the Moors, i. The empire
of the Moors in, how weakened, 145.
Rife of the kingdoms of Castile and
Aragon, 146. Their union into the
Spanish monarchy, ib. The ancient
customs still retained amidst all its re-
volutions, ib. Peculiarities in itscon-
flitution and laws remarked, 148. See
Ara£gn and Castile. Various causes
which contributed to limit the regal
power in, 156. The cities of, how
they attained their consideration and
power, 157. The schemes of Ferdi-
nand and Isabella, to exalt the regal
power, 160. The grand masterships,
of the three orders, annexed to the
crown, 16r. The aflociation of the
Hoy Brotherhood, on what occasion
formed, 163. The tendency of this
afrociation to abridge the territorial
jurifdi&ions of the barons, 164. The
cruel devastations made by the Vandals,
in the invasion of that province, 199.
When the cities of, acquired municipal
privileges, 263. Note xviii. The long
continuance of the practice of private
wars there, 287. The total annual
revenue of the nobility, in the time of
Charles V. 350. An inquiry into the
origin of communities or free cities
in, 351.

St. ago, the military order of, when and

on what occasion instituted, 352. Note
xxxv.

Standing armies. See Armier.
States general of France, caues which

rendered their authority imperfet,
167. When they loft their legislative
authority, ib. When first assembled,
369. The form of proceeding in them,
ib.
Stephen, earl of Chartres and Blois, his

account of the progress of the Cru-
faders, 242.
Stiernko:k, his account of the ancient

Swedilh law of fatisfacaion for words
of reproach, 291.
Strangers, in what light confidered, and

how treated during the middle ages,
and under the feudal policy, 327.
Sugar canes, when first brought from Aia

into Europe. and thence carried to
America, 331.
Sultanr, Turkiffi, their derflotic power,

188. How nevertheless limited, 189.
Superfliticn, its influence in tile legal

proceedings during the middle ages,
5'.

Swlls, the fipcrior discipline of their

troops, in the fifteenth century, 113.
Teach other nations the advantages of
infantry over cavalry, 114.

'Taitus

T.
facitus, bis account of the ancient Ger-

mans compared with that of Cafar,
%o6.
funures, feudal, the origin of, S5. See

Feudal Sylem, and Land.
Theology, fcholafic, the firt literary

pursuits at the revival of learning in
Europe, 74.

Trce of God, an account of, 80.
T#rky, origin of, its government, 187.

the despotic genius of thie government,
ib. No hereditary nobility in, 188.
The authority of the Sultans, how
checked, 89. Origin of the Janiza-
ries, ib. Becomes formidable to the
Chtifian Princes, 92.

V.
Va#dals, their cruel devaflations in the

invasion of Spain, 199. The havock
made by them in Africea oo. See
Gotbs.
Ygaalt under the feudal fytlem, a view

of their avilh condition, 16, 39.
How they obtained infranchifement,
40. How anciently distinguished from
freemen, 216. Their wretched state
under their feudal matters, z26.
Note ix.
fenice, the long duration of its civil con-

llitution, and its flouri(hing Rate at the
time of the league of Cambray, 117.
Its polfeffions dismembered by the con-
federates, 118. Dissolves the confe-
deracy, 119. Its rife and progress,
13z. Defets in its constitution, 133.
The excellency of its naval inRfitutions,
134. Its extensive commerce, 135.
rifconti, rife of the family of, in Milan,

141.
Union of the Aragonefe nobles to con-

troul the undue exercise of regal
power, explained, 343 This privi-
lege abrogated by Peter IV. 344. -t

,'. -

Uivterfties, the irR eftabliftment of, it

Europe, 323.

War, a compirifon between the inanriet

of carrying on, by barbarous and by
civilized nations, 9. How rendered
feeble in its operations by the feudal
policy, 17. The profession of arms,
the moll honourable i uncivilized na-
tions, 67. The rife of ifanding armies
traced, 9. By what means anding
forces becamegeneral, sil. Thefu-
periority of infantry in, how taught,
.13.
Wars, private, for redrefing personal in-

juries, under the feudal policy, an in-
quiry into, 43. Methods taken to
aboli(h this hostile pratice, 46. Judicial
combat prohibited, 4. Inquiry into
the sources of these customs, 74.
Note xxi. Who intitled to the,privi-
leges of eercifing, ib. On what occa-
sions undertaken, 275. Wh'o included,
or bound to engage in there disputes,
216. Who excluded from undertaking,
i. The cruel manner of prosecuting
them, 277 A chronological account
of the expedients made ue of, to sup-
press them, z78. ruce of God,.an
account of, it. Brotherhood of God,
an account of, z18. Ryal truce, what,
ib. Saxon laws of England, for put-
ting an end to them, 85. The ob-
finate attachment of the Spaniards to
this praEtice, 87. The calamities
occasioned in Germany by, 88.

WVl/b, ancient, strangers killed with im-

punity by them, 38.
Villa, widow of duke Hugo, extraft

from her charter of manumission
granted to Cleriza, one of her saves,
270.
tallermut, archbishop of Tyre, his at-
count of Conllantinople, 245.
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
