T E
HIS

TOR

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

VOL. I1L

Y

THE
HIS

TORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.
PRINCIPAL of the University of EDINBURGH,

and HISTORIOGRAPHER to His MAJFSTY

for SCOTLAND.

V OL. III.
D U B L

I N;
Printed for W. and W. SMITH, A. LEATLEY , G.

FAULKNER, S. POWELL, P, WILSON, J. EXSHAW,
H. SAUNDERS, W. WHITESTONE, W. SLEATER,
L. FLIN, B. GRIERSON, E. LYNCH, D. CHAM-
BERLAINE. J. POTTS, J. HOEY, jun. J. WILLIAMS,
J. MITCHELL, W. COLLES, J. MILLIKEN, C. IN-
GRAM, and J. PORTER. M,DCC,LXIX,

# BOOK VII.

THE
H I S T O R Y

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BO O K vir.
HT HE calamities which the Emperor fuf'-Boo vIn.

sered in his unfortunate enterprize a-k-v--'
gainit Algiers were great; and the. ac- Ren4 of

count of these, which augmented in proportion.hoaiitiesby
as it spread at a greater distance from the scene hiotivea,
of his disasters, encouraged Francis to. begin hoffor it.
tilities, on which he had been for' some time re-
solved. But he did not think itprudent, to proi
duce as the motives of this resolution, eitler his
ancient pretensions to the dutcly o£ Milan, or tlie
Emperor's difingenuity in violating'his repeated
promises with regard to the restitution of that
country. The former might lhae beei a good

VOL. 1II. B reafol

BooK vn. reason against concluding the truce of Nice, but

was none for breaking it; the latter could not be
urged without exposing his own credulity as much
as the Emperor's want of integrity. A violent
and unwarrantable. acion of one of the Impe-
rial generals furnished him with a reason to jufri-
fy his taking arms, which was of greater weight
than either of these, and such as would have rouz-
ed him, if he had been as desirous of peace, as
he was eager for war. Francis, by signing the
treaty of truce at Nice, without consulting Soly-
man, gave (as he foresaw) great offence to that
haughty Monarch, who confidered an alliance
with him as an honour of which a Christian
prince had cause to be proud. The French King's
friendly interview with the Emperor in Provence,
followed by such extraordinary appearances of
union aid confidence as accompanied Charles's
reception in France, induced the Sultan to fufpeEt
that the two rivals had at last forgotten their an-
cient enmity, in order that they might form such
a general confederacy against the Ottoman power,
as had been long wilhed for in Christendom and
often attempted in vain. Charles with his usual
art, endeavoured to confirm and ltrengthen there
suspicions, by inftruding his emiflaries at Con-
ftantinople as well as in those courts with which
Solyman held any intelligence, to represent the
concord between him and Francis to be so entire,
that their sentiments, views and purCuits, would
be the fame for the future'. It was not with-
out difficulty that Francis effaced these im-
preflions; but the address of Rincon, the French
ambassador at the Porte, together with the ma-
nifeft advantage of carrying on hostilities against
the house of Austria in concert with France,

a Mem. de Ribicr. tow. i . p.50.

prev~iled

prevailed at length on the Sultan to enter into aBOO° vII.
closer conjunction with Francis than ever. Rin-,-,'
con returned into France, in order to communi-
cate to his master a scheme of the Sultan's for
gaining the concurrence of the Venetians in
their operations against the common enemy.
Solyman having lately concluded a peace with
that republic, to which the mediation of Francis,
and the good-offices of Rincon had greatly con-
tributed, thought it not impossible to allure the
senate by such advantages, as, together with the
example of the French Monarch, might over Themurder
balance any scruples arising either from decency bs adoshi
or caution that could operate on the other fide. pretext for
Francis, warmly approving of this measure, dif-this'
patched Rincon back to Constantinople, and di-
recting him to go by Venice along with Fergofo a
Genoele exile whom he appointed his ambassador
to that republic, empowered them to negociate
the matter with the senate, to whom Solyman had
tent an envoy for the fame purpose b. The mar-
quifs del Guafto, governor of the Milanese, an
officer of great abilities, but capable of attempt-
ing and executing the most atrocious actions, got
intelligence of the motions and destination of
there ambassadors. As he knew how much his
master wished to discover the intentions of the
French King, and of what consequence it was to
retard the execution of his measures, he employ-
ed tome soldiers belonging to the garrison of Pa-
via to lie in wait for Rincon and Fergofo as they
failed down the Po, who murdered them and most
of their attendants and seized their papers. Up-
on receiving an account of this barbarous outrage,
committed, during the subsistence of truce, against
persons held sacred by the most uncivilized nati-
ons, Francis's grief for the unhappy fate of two

b Hist. de Venet. de Putata, iv. 125.

B 2 servants

Io," vI. servants whom he loved and trufed, his uneafi-
'"54- ness at the interruption of his schemes by their

death, and every other paflion were swallowed up
and loft in the indignation which this infilt on
the honour of his crown excited. He exclaimed
loudly against Guaffo, who, hnaving drawn upon
himself all the infamy of affaflination without
making any discovery of importance, as the am-
baffadors had left their inftrutions and other pa-
pers of consequence behind them, now boldly
denied his being accessary in any wife to the
crime. He sent an ambassador to the Emperor
to demand suitable reparation for an indignity,
which no prince, how inconsiderable soever or
pusillanimous, could tamely endure: And when
Charles, impatient at that time to set out on his
African expedition, endeavoured to put him off
with an evasive answer, he appealed to all the
courts in Europe, setting forth the heinousness
of the injury, the spirit of moderation with
which he had applied for redress, and the ini-
quity of the Emperor in disregarding this just
request.

NOTWITHSTANDING the confidence with which

Guafto asserted his own innocence, the accufati-
ons of the French gained greater credit than all
his protestations; and Bellay, the French com-
mander in Piedmont, procured, at length, by
his induflry and address, such a minute detail of
the tranfadtions, with the tcftimiony of so ma-
ny of the parties concerned, as amcu:lted alinoft
to a legal proof of the marquis's guilt. In con-
sequence of this opinion of the pnblick, confirm-
ed by such strong evidence, Francis's complaints
were universally allowed to be well founded, and
the steps lie took towards renewing hostilities

were

were ascribed not merely to ambition or refent-Boo' viL
ment, but to the unavoidable necellity of vindi-

n -.
eating the honour of his crown'.

BUT how just soever Francis might esteem his

own cause, he did not trust so much to that, as
to neglect the proper precautions for gaining
other allies besides the Sultan, by whose aid he might
counterbalance the Emperor's superior power.
But his negociations to this effec were attend-
ed with very little success. Henry VIII. more
and more bent upon schemes against Scotland,
which he knew would at once dissolve his union
with France, was inclinable rather to take part
with the Emperor than to contribute in any de-
gree towards favouring the operations against
him. The Pope adhered inviolably to his antient
system of neutrality. The Venetians, notwith-
standing Solyman's follicitations, imitated the
Pope's example. The Germans, satisfied with
the religious liberty which they enjoyed found
it more their interest to gratify than to irritate
the Emperor; so that the Kings of Denmark and
Sweden, who on this occasion were firfl drawn in
to interest themselves in the quarrels of the more
potent Monarchs of the south, and the duke of
Cleves, who had a dispute with the Emperor
about the possession of Gueldres, were the only
confederates Francis secured. But the domini-
ons of the two former lay at such a distance, and
the power of the latter was so inconsiderable, that
he gained little by their alliance.

FRANCIS, however, supplied all defecs by hisPrncis'

aw t. indultr} in
own activity. Being afflited at this time with a preparir,

obr war.
c Billay, 367, &c. Jovii Hifl. lib. 40. 268.

B 3 distemper,

BooK VII. ditlemper, the effect of his irregular pleasures,

,54. and which prevented his pursuing them with

the fame licentious indulgence, he applied to
business with more than his usual industry. The
fame cause which occasioned this extraordinary
attention to his affairs, rendered him morose and
dissatisfied with the ministers whom he had hi-
therto employed. This accidental peevishness of
temper being sharpened by reflecting on the falle
steps into which he had lately been betrayed, and
the intults to which he had been exposed, some of
those in whom he had hitherto placed the greatest
confidence felt the effects of this change in his
temper, and were deprived of their offices. At
last he disgraced Montmorency himself, who had
long direEted affairs as well civil as military with
all the authority of a minister no less beloved
than trusted by his master; and Francis being
fond of shewing that the fall of such a powerful
favourite did not affect the vigour or prudence of
his administration, this was a new motive to re-
double his diligence in preparing to open the war
by some splendid and extraordinary effort.

154e . FRANCIS accordingly brought into thefield five

He brings
ive armies armies. One to aci in Luxembourg under the duke
into the of Orleans, accompanied by the duke of Lorraine

as his inflruetor in the art of war. Another com-
manded by the dauphin marched towards the
frontiers of Spain. A third led by Van Roffein
the marshal of Guelders, and composed chiefly of
the troops of Cleves, had Brabant allotted for the
theatre of its operations. A fourth, of which the
duke of Vendome was general, hovered on the bor-
ders of Slanders. The last, conlifting of the forces
cantoned in Piedmont, was destined for the admi-
ral Annibaut. The dauphin and his brother were
appointed to command where the chief exertion
was intended, and the greatest honour to be reaped ;,

the

the army of the former amounted to forty thou-Boor VI.
sand, that of the latter to thirty thousand men. 1542.
Nothing appears more furprizing than that Francis
did not pour with there numerous and irresistible
armies into the Milanese, which had lb long been
the object of his withes as well as enterprizes,
and that he should chute rather to turn almost
his whole strength into another diretion, and
towards new conquefis. But the remembrance
of the disasters which he had met with in his
former expeditions into Italy, together with the
difficulty of supporting a war carried on at fich
a distance from his own dominions, had gradu-
ally abated his violent inclination to obtain foot-
ing in that country, and made him willing to try
the fortune of his arms in another quarter. At
the fame time he expeted to make filch a power-
ful impreflion on the frontier of Spain, where
there were few towns of any flrength, and no ar-
my assembled to oppose him, as might enable
him to recover possession of the county of Rou-
fillon lately dismembered from the French crown,
before Charles could bring into the field any force
able to obstruct his progress. The neceflity of
supporting his ally the duke of Cleves, and the
hope of drawing a considerable body of soldiers
out of Germany by his means, determined him
to at with vigour in the Low-Countries.

THE dauphin and duke of Orleans opened June

the campaign much about the fame time, the ,t0,"
former laying siege to Perpignan the capital of
Roufillon, and the latter entering Luxembourg.
The duke of Orleans pushed his operations with
the greatest rapidity and success, one town falling
after another, untill no place in that large durchy
remained in the Emperor's hands but Thionville.
Nor could he have tailed of over-running the ad-

jacent

Boo: VII. jacent provinces with the fame ease, if he had

4. not voluntarily flopt Ihort in this career of \iceo-

ry. But a report prevailing that the Emperor had
determined to hazard a battle in order to save
Perpignan, on a sudden the duke, prompted by
youthful ardour, or moved, perhaps, by jealousy
of his brother, whom he both envied and hated,
abandoned his own conquests, and hastened to.
wards Roufillon in order to divide with him the
glory of the vidtory.

ON his departure rome of his troops were dif-

banded, others deserted their colours, and the reft,
cantoned in the towns which lie had taken, re-
mained inactive. By this conduct, which leaves
a dishonourable imputation either on his under-
standing or his heart, or on both, he not only re-
nounced whatever he could have hoped from such
a promising opening of the campaign, but gave
the enemy an opportunity of recovering, before
the end of summer, all the conquests which he had
gained. 0: the Spanish frontier, the Emperor
was not so inconsiderate as to venture on a battle
the loss of which might have endangered his
kingdom. Perpignan, though poorly fortified,
and brifltly attacked, having been largely supplied
with ammunition and provisions by the vigilance
of Doria d, was defended so long and ol vigorously
by the duke of Alva, the perlcvering obflinacy
of whose temper fitted him admirably for such
service, that at last the French, after a siege of
three months, wafted by dilfcaks, repulled il
several aifaults, and despairing of i'uccefs, relin-
quifhed the undertaking, and retired into their
own country". Thus all Francis's mighty pre-
parations, either from lome defea in his own
d Sigonii Vita A, Dorix, p. I s91. Sandov. Ilift. tol,
i; 3' 5

conduit,

konduct, or from the fiperior power and pru.-Boo,: vn.
dence of his rival, produced no efflcts that bore''"'
any proportion to his expence and efforts, or such
ias gratified, in any degree, his own hopes, or an-
tIwered the expectation of Europe. The only solid
iadvantage of the campaign was the acquisition of
a few towns in Piedmont, which Bllay gained
rather by stratagem and address, than by the
; force of his arms.

MEANWHILE the Emperor and Francis, though 543

iboth considerably exhausted by such great but in-Preparati-

decisive efforts, discovering no abatement of thei: ther cam-
. mutual animosity, employed all their attention, pign.

tried every expedient, and turned themselves to-
wards every quarter, in order to acquire new al-
j lies, together with such a reinforcement of fi-rengti

as would give them the superiority in the enfuil:g
campaign. Charles, taking advantage of the ter-
§ ror and resentment of the Spaniards, upon the
: sudden invasion of their country, prevailed on the
: Cortes of the several kingdoms to grant him sub-

tfidies with a more liberal hand than usual. At the
; fame time, he borrowed a large fum from John

King of Portugal, putting him in poflfefion by
way of security for his being repayed, of the
Molucca isles in the East Indies, with thle gainful

ji commerce of precious spices, which that fequ.f-
i tered corner of the globe yields. Not satisfied

with this, lie negociated a marriage between Phi-
lip his only son, now in his sixteenth year, and
Mary daughter of that Monarch, with whom her
father, the most opulent prince in Europe, gave
a large dower; and having likewise persuaded the
Cortes of Arragon and Valencia to recognize Phi-
f Sandov. Hi-t. i. 31. Bellay, 387, &c, Ferrcr. 9. 237.

lip

Boo, VII. lip as the heir of these crowns, he obtained from

,s43 them the donative ufial on such occasions 3. There

extraordinary supplies enabled him to make such
additions to his forces in Spain, that he could de-
tach a great body into the Low-countries, and yet
reserve as many as were sufficient for the defence
of the kingdom. Having thus provided for the
security of Spain and committed the government
My. of it to his son, he failed for Italy, in his way to

Germany. But how attentive soever to raise the
funds for carrying on the war, or eager to grasp
at any new expedient for that purpose, he was not
so inconsiderate as to accept of the overture which
Paul, knowing his necessities, artfully threw out
to him. That ambitious Pontiff, no less fagaci-
ous to discern, than watchful to seize opportuni-
ties of aggrandizing his family, follicited him to
grant Odavio his grandchild, whom the Empe-
ror had admitted to the honour of being his son-
in-law, the investiture of the dutchy of Milan, in
return for which he promised such a vast fum of
money as would have gone far towards supplying
his present exigencies. But Charles, as well from
unwvillingnefs to alienate a province of so much
value, as from disgust at the Pope, who had hi-
therto reftufed to join in the war againfl Francis,
rejeded the proposal. His diffatisfation with
Paul at that juncture was so great, that he even
refifed to approve his alienating Parma and Pla-
centia from the patrimony of St. Peter, and set-
tling them on his own son and grandson as a fief
to be held of the Holy fee. As no other expe-
dient for raising money among the Italian flates
remained, he consented to withdraw the garrisons
which he had hitherto kept in the citadels of Flo-
rence and Leghorn, in consideration for which,

* Fcrrcras, 9. 238. 241. Jovii Hit. lib. 42. z98. 6.

he

ihe received a large grefent from Cosmo de Medi- BooK VI.
pci, who by this means secured his own indepen- ,543
idance and got pofleilion of two forts, which were
Ljufly called the fetters of Tuscany b.

BUT Charles, while he seemed to have turned The Empe-

hlis whole attention towards raising the iums ne- crio neg
ceflary for defraying the expences of the year, had vath Henry
not been negligent of objeCts more distant, though
|no less important, and had concluded a league
offensive and defensive with Henry VIII, from
which he derived in the end, greater advantage
than from all his other preparations. Several
flight circumstances, which have already been
mentioned, had begun to alienate the affections
of that Monarch from Francis his present ally,
! and new incidents of greater moment had occur-
? red to increase his disgust and animosity. Henry, Henry's

desirous of establishing an uniformity in religion "Ptur""''h

s in Great Britain, as well as fond of making pro-Scotland.
i felytes to his own opinions, had formed a scheme

of persuading his nephew the King of Scotland
to renounce the Pope's supremacy, and to adopt
t the fame system of reformation which he had in-
;i troduced into England. This measure he pursued

with his usual eagerness and impetuosity, making
such advantageous overtures to James, whom he
confidered as not over fcrupuloufny attached to any
religious tenets, that he scarce doubted of success.
His propofitons were accordingly received in such
a manner that he flattered himself with having
gained his point. But the Scottish ecclesiastics,
foreseeing the ruin of the church to be the confe-
quence of the King's union with England; and

h Adriani Iftoria i. 195. Sleid. 3 2. Jovii Hilt. lib. 43.
p. 301. Vita di Cos. Medici di Baldini, p. 34.

the

Boot Vli. the partizans of France, no less convinced that it
X''., would put an end to the influence of that crown

upon the publick councils of Scotland, combined
together, and by their insinuations defeated Henry's
scheme at the very moment when he expected it
to have taken effeSt. Too halughty to brook such
a disappointment, which he imputed as much to
the arts of the French as to the levity of the Scot-
tifh Monarch, he took arms againif Scotland,
threatening to rubdue the kingdom, since he could
not gain the friendship of its King. At the fame
time, his resentment at Francis quickened his
negociations with the Emperor, an alliance with
whom he was now as forward to accept as the
other could be to offer it. During this war with
Scotland, and before the conclusion of his nego-
ciations with Charles, James V. died, leaving his
crown to Mary his only daughter, an infant a few
days old. Upon this event, Henry altered at once
his whole fyfRem with regard to Scotland, and
abandoning all thoughts of conquering it, aimed
at what was more advantageous as well as practi-
cable, an union with that kingdom by a marriage
between Edward his only son and the young
Queen. But here, too, he apprehended a vigorous
opposition from the French faction in Scotland,
which began to beflir itself in order to thwart the
measure. The neceflity of crushing this party
among the Scots, and of preventing Francis from
furnishing them with any effectual aid, confirmed
Henry's resolution of breaking with France, and
pushed him on to put a finishing hand to the
treaty of confederacy with the Emperor.

Febri:.iry JN this league were contained first of all, arri-
s r. Alli.
icL ,c- cles for fecuri.g their future amity and mutual
iwccn defence; then were enumerated the demands
*ndiknry. which they were rcrpeetively to make upon Fran-

cis;

is; and the plan of their proceedings was fixed, BoK V"I
he should refuse to grant them fatisfation. They ,c .
greed to require, that Francis should not only re-
ounce his alliance with Solyman, which had been
he source of infinite calamities to Christendom,
ut also that he should make reparation for the da-
ages which that unnatural union had occasioned;
hat he Ihould restore Burgundy to the Emperor;
hat he (hould desist immediately from hostilities,
nd leave Charles at leisure to oppose the common
nemy of the Christian faith; and that he ihould im-
ediately pay the fums due to Henry, or put some
owns in his hands as security to that effect. If,
Within forty days, he did not comply with these
demands, they then engaged to invade France each
ith twenty thousand foot and five thousand horse,
nd not to lay down their arms until they had re-
overed Burgundy, together with the towns on the
Somme, for the Emperor, and Normandy and
Guienne, or even the whole realm of France, for
Henrys. Their heralds, accordingly, set out with
these haughty requisitions; but not being permit-
ted to enter France could not perform their com-
miflion, and the two Monarchs held themselves
·fully entitled to execute whatever was stipulated
in their treaty.

FRANCIS on his part was no less diligent in pre- Fracis'

paring for the approaching campaign. Having '.'a
early observed the symptoms of Henry's difguftmasu.
Aand alienation, and finding all his endeavours to
tooth and reconcile him ineffectual, he knew his
temper too well not to expec that open hostilities
would quickly follow upon this cessation of friend-
ship. For this reason he redoubled his endeavours
to obtain from Solyman such aid as might coun-
: terbalance the great acceflion of frength which the

1 Rym. xiv. 768. Herb. 238.
VOL. III. C Emperor

BooK'VII. Emperor would receive by his alliance with Eng-

,- 3, land. In order to supply the place of his two ambaf-

fadors murdered by Guafto, he sent as his envoy
firfl to Venice, and then to Constantinople, Paulin,
a captain of foot, a man of a daring active spirit, and
on account of there qualities thought worthy of this
service, to which he was recommended by Bellay,
who had trained him to the arts of negociation,
and made trial of his talents and address on feve-
ral occasions. Nor did he belie the opinion con-
ceived of his courage and abilities. Hastening to
Constantinople, without regarding the dangers to
which he was exposed, he urged his master's de-
mands with such boldness, and availed himself of
every circumstance with such dexterity, that he re-
moved all the Sultan's own difficulties. He filen-
ced likewise some of the Bassas, who either swayed
by opinion, or having been gained by the Emperor,
whole emissaries had made their way even into that
court, had declared in the Divan against acting in
concert with France'. At last he obtained orders
for Barbarossa to fail with a powerful fleet, and to
regulate all his operations by the directions of the
French King. Francis was not equally successful
in his attempts to gain the princes of the Empire.
The extraordinary rigour with which he thought it
necessary to punish such of his fubjeEts as had em-
braced the protestant opinions, in order to give
some notable evidence of his own zeal for theCa-
tholick faith, and to wipe off the imputations to
which he was liable from his confederacy with the
Turks, placed an insuperable barrier between him
and such of the Germans as interest and inclinati-
on would have prompted most readily to join him I.
His chief advantage, however, over the Emperor

k Sandov. Hiflor. tom. ii. 346. Jovii Hlllt. lib. 41. 285,
&c. 30, &cr. Blntome. Secck. lib. iii. 403.

he

lie derived on this; as on other occasions, from theol"'o vI.
contiguity of his dominions, as well as from the 543
extent of the royal authority in France, which ex-
empted him from all the delays and disappoint-
ments unavoidable wherever popular assemblies
provide for the expences of government by occa-
fional and frugal fiJbfidies. Hence his domeftick
preparations were always carried on with vigour,
and rapidity, while those of the Emperor, unless
when quickened by'fome foreign ftpply, or fCome
temporary expedient, were to the last degree flow
and dilatory.

LONG before any army was in readiness to op-operatioas

pose him, Francis took the field in the Low-Coun-C1 the

Lo, ,

tries, againfl: which he turned the whole weightof
the war. He made himself mafter.ofLandrecy,
which he determined to keep as the key to the
whole province of Hainault; and ordered itto be
fortified with great care. Turning from thence to
the right, he entered the dutchy of Luxembourg,
and found it in the fame defenceless state as in the
former year. Meanwhile, the Emperor,- having
drawn together an army composed of all the diffe-
rent nations subje.t to.his government, entered the
territories of the Duke of Cleves, on whom he had
vowed to inflict exemplary vengeance. This prince,
whose conduct and fituatidn were-fimilar to that
of Robert de la Mark in the first war between
Charles and Francis, resembled him likewise in
his fate. Unable witlihis feeble army, to face the
Emperor, who advanced at tlie head:oF'forty-four
thousand men, he retired at his approach; and
the Imperialists being at liberty to aa as they rhi: -np?::
pleated, immediately inverted Duren. Thatr.ltC oC'
town, though gallantly defended, was won by thc Duuhy
afiault, all the inhabitants put to the sword, andQ ' cl,.s
the place itielf reduced to ashes. This dreadful

C 2 example

BooiC Vn.: example of severity firuck the people of the coun.

try with such general terror, that all the other
towns, even such as were capable of resistance, sent
their keys to the Emperor; and before a body of
French detached to his afliftance could come up,
the duke himself was obliged to make his fubmif-
lion to Charles in the mofi abject manner. Be-
ing admitted into the Imperial prelence, he kneel-
-ed together whith eight of his principal fibjeds,
and implored mercy. The Emperor allowed him
to remain in that ignominious posture, and eying
him with an haughty and implacable look, with-
out deigning to answer a tingle word, remitted
him to his minifrers. The conditions, however,
which they prescribed were not so rigorous as he
'had reason t.o have expected after such a reception.

Septem- J4e w.as obliged. to renounce his alliance with
br 7. France and Denmark; to resign all his pretensions

.to the dutchy of Gueldres; to enter into perpe-
:tual amity with the Emperor and King of the Ro-
mans. In return for which all his hereditary do-
minions were restored, except two towns which
the Emperor kept as pledges of his fidelity during
the continuance of the war, and he was re-infeated
in his privileges as a prince of the Empire. Not
long after Charles, as a proof of the sincerity of
his reconcilement, gave him in marriage one of
thle daughters of his brother Ferdinand "'.

BtCiege, HAVING this chastised the presumption of the
l.andrecy. Dul e of Cleves, detached one of his allies from

Francis, and added to his dominions in the Low-
Countries a conliderable province which lay con-
tiguous to them, Charles advanced towards Hai-
nault, and laid liege to Landrecy. There, as the

li Hkarei. Annal, Brabant, t. . 68. Rccucil des Traitez,
t. ii. 226.

first fruits of his alliance with Henry, he was join- Boo1c VII.
ed by fix thousand English underSir John Wallop. "'3
The garrison, consisting of veteran troops com-
manded by de la Lande and Deffe, two officers of
reputation, made a vigorous resistance. Francis
approached with all his forces to relieve the place;
Charles covered the siege; both were determined
to hazard an engagement; and all Europe expet-
ed to fee this contest, which had continued so
long, decided atlaft by a battle between two great
armies led by them in person. But the ground
which separated their two camps was such, as put
thedifadvantage manifestly on his fide who should
venture to attack, and neither of them chose to
run that rifque: amidst a variety of movements,
in order to draw the enemy into this snare, or to
avoid it themselves, Francis, with admirable con-
duat, and equal good fortune, threw first a supply
of fresh troops, and then a convoy of provisions
into the town, so that the Emperor, despairing of
success, withdrew into winter quarters" in order
to preserve his army from being entirely ruined by
the rigour of the season.

MEANWHILE, Solyman fulfilled his engage-November.

ments to the French King with great punctuality. Slymem in-
He himself marched into Hungary with a nume- gary,
rous army, and as the princes of the Empire made
no great effort to save a country which Charles, by
employing his whole force against Francis, seemed
willing to sacrifice, there was no appearance of any
body of troops to oppose his progress. He befieg-
ed one after another, Quinque Ecclesia, Alba and
Gran, the three most considerable towns in the
kingdom, ofwhich Ferdinand kept poffellion. The
first was taken by storm; the other two furren-

& Bellay, 405, &c.

C3

dered;

B6o Vli. dered; and the whole kingdom, a finall cornerex-
,~'~ 3 cepted, was fubjeted to the Turkish yoke °. About
Barbarossa's the fame time, Barbarossa failed with a fleet of an
descent on
Italy. hundred and ten gallies, and coasting along the

shore of Calabria, made a descent at Rheggio
which he plundered and burnt; and advancing
from thence to the mouth of the Tiber he fiopt
there to water. The citizens of Rome, ignorant
of his destination, and filled with terror, began to
fly with such general precipitation, that the city
would have been left deferred, if they had not re-
fumed courage upon letters from Polin the French
envoy, afluring them that no violence or injury
would be offered by the Turks to any state in al-
liance with the King his master . From OfLia
Barbarossa failed to Marseilles, and being joined by
the French fleet with a body of land forces on
board under the count d'Enguien, a gallant young
prince of the house of Bourbon, they directed their
course towards Nice, the Cole retreat of the unfor-
tunate duke of Savoy. There to the astonishment
Augun 1o. and scandal of all Chriflendom, the Lilies of France

and Crescent of Mahomet appeared in conjunction
against the fortress on which the Cross of Savoy
was displayed. The town, however, was bravely
defended againfl their combined force by Mont-
fort a Savoyard gentleman, who flood a general
aflault, and repulsed ihe enemy with great loss,
before he retired into the castle. That fort fitua-
ted upon a rock, on which the artillery made no
imprefiion, and which could' not be undermined,
he held out so long, that Doria had time to ap-
proach with his fleer, and the marquis del Guafto
em to march with a body of troops from Milan. Up-

on intelligence of this, the French and Turks raif-
ed the ficgeq: and Francis had not even the coi-

o Illuanhaff. Hiftor. Hung. 1. 15. i67.
P Jovii -Hil. 1. 43. 304, &c. Pallavic. 160.
Guichenon hilioirc deSavoyc, t. i. p. 65 . Bellay, 425. &c.

folation

folation of success, to render the infamy, which ° Vi.
he drew on himself by calling in such an auxilia- ,543.
ry, more tolerable.

FROM the small progress of either party during Preparati,

this campaign, it was obvious to what a lengthnev am-
the war might be drawn out between two princes, Paig
whole power was so equally ballanced, and who
by their own talents or activity, could so vary and
multiply their resources. The trial they had now
made of each others strength might have taught
them the imprudence of perfitting in a war, where-
in there was greater appearance of their diftrefling
their own dominions than of conquering those of
their adversary, and should have disposed both to
wish for peace. If Charles and Francis had been
influenced by considerations of interest or prudence
alone, this, without doubt, must have been the
manner in which they would have reasoned, but
the personal animosity, which mingled itself in
all their quarrels, had grown to be so violent and
implacable, that for the pleasure of gratifying it,
they disregarded every thing else; and were infi-
nitely more follicitous how to hurt their enemy,
than how to secure what would be of advantage
to themelves. No sooner then did the season force
them to suspend hostilities, than, without paying
any attention to the Pope's repeated endeavours or
paternal exhortations to re-eftablifl peace, they
began to provide for the operations of the next
year with new vigour, and an activity increasing
with their hatred. Charles turned his chief atten-
tion towards gaining the princes of the Empire,
and endeavouring to rouze the formidable but
unweildy strength of the Germanick body againlt
Francis. In order to underfland the propriety ^f;ir of
of the steps which he took for that purpose, it crm'y.

is

Boor VI. is necessary to review the chief tranfations in that

743. country since the diet of Ratisbon in the year one

thousand five hundred and forty one.

Mauriee of MUCH about the time that aflembly broke up,
Sednfa- uMaurice succeeded his father Henry in the go-
ther. vernment of that part of Saxony which belonged

to the Albertine branch of the Saxon family.
This young prince, then only in his twentieth year,
had, even at that early period, begun to discover
the great talents which qualified him for ading
iuch a distinguished part ib the affairs of Germa-
ny. As Soon as he entered upon the administration
he itruck out into such a new and singular path,
as shewed that he aimed, from the beginning, at

The views something great and uncommon. Though zeal-
and condu"t
of this oufly attached to the Protestant opinions both
young from education and principle, he refused to accede
Prine, to the league of Smalkalde, being determined, as

he said, to maintain the purity of religion which
was the original object of that confederacy, but
not to entangle himself in the political interests or
combinations to which it had given rife. At the
fame time, foreseeing a rupture between Charles
and the confederates of Smalkalde, and perceiving
which of them was most likely to prevail in the
contest, initead of thatjealoufy and diftrult which
the other Protetfants exprefled of all the Empe-
ror's designs, he affeEted to place in him an un-
bounded confidence; and courted h'is favour with
the utmost afiduity. When the other protestants,
in the year fifteen hundred and forty two, either
declined assisting Ferdinand in Hungary, or afford-
ed him reluctant and feeble aid, Maurice march-
ed thither in person, and rendered himself con-
fpicuous by his zeal and courage. From the fame
motive, he had led to the Emperor's allitance, dur-

ing

ing the former campaign abodyof hisown troops ;BOOK v.
and the gracefulness of his person, his dexterity in 543.
all military exercises, together with his intrepidity
which courted and delighted in dangers, did not
distinguish him more in the field, than his great
abilities and insinuating address won upon the Em-
peror's confidence and favour '. While by this
conduct, which appeared extraordinary to those
who held the fame opinions with him concerning
religion, Maurice endeavoured to pay court to the
Emperor, he began to discover some degree ofjea-
lousy of his cousin the Elector of Saxony. This,
which proved in the sequel so fatal to the Eletor,
had almost occasioned an open rupture between
them; and soon after Maurice's accession to the
government, they both took arms with equal rage,
upon account of a dispute about the right ofjurif-
diction over a paltry town situated on the Mol-
daw. They were prevented, however, from com-
ing to blows by the mediation of the Landgrave
of Hesse, whose daughter Maurice had. married,
as well as by the powerful and authoritative ad-
monitions of Luther'.

M E A N W H I L E the Pope, though extremely The Pope

1 · ·^

.

' ',. " i »-«

c, dpropofes to

irritated at the Emperor's conceflions to the Pro holdagene-
teffants in the diet of Ratisbon, was f, warmlyra council
follicited on all hands, by such as were most de-'
voutly attached to the fee of Rome, no leTs than
by those whose fidelity or designs he fufpeEted,
to fimmon a general council, that he found
it impoflible to avoid any longer calling that
assembly. The impatience for its meeting, and
the expectations of great effects from its decisions
ieemed to grow in proportion to the difficulty of
obtaining it. He flill adhered, however, to his
original refolutin of holding it in some town of

' Sleid. 317. Seck. 1. iii. 371, 386, 428.
* Slcid. 292. Seck. 1, iii. 403.

Italy,

22 THE REIGN OF THE
Boor VIn. Italy, where, by the number of ecclefiafticks, re-

, ntainers to his court, and depending on his favour,

who could repair to it without difficulty or expence,
he might influence and even direct all its proceed-
ings. This proposition, though often rejected by
the Germans, he itftruded his nuncio to the diet
March 3. held at Spires, in the year one thousand five hun-

dred and forty two to renew once more; and if
he found it gave no greater fatisfadion than for-
merly, he empowered him, as a last conceflion,
to propose for the place of meeting, Trent a city
in the Tyrol, fubjeca to the King of the Romans,
and situated on the confines between Germany
and Italy. The Catholick princes in the diet, as-
ter giving it as their opinion that the council
might have been held with greater advantage in
Ratisbon, Cologne, or some of the great cities in
the Empire, approved of the place which the Pope
had named. The Protestants unanimously ex-
pressed their diflatisfaction, declaring that they
would pay no regard to a council held without the
precinCts of the Empire, called by the Pope's au-
thority, and in which he assumed the right of pre-
fiding'.

May 1z. THE Pope, without taking any notice of their
S,54.o objections, published the bull of intimation, nam-
it to meet ed three cardinals to preside as his legates, and ap-

pointed them to repair to Trent before the first of
November, the day he had fixed for opening the
council. But if Paul had desired the meeting of a
council as fincerelyas he pretended, he would not
have pitched on such an improper time for callingit.
Instead of that general union and tranquillity, with-
out which the deliberations of a council could nei-
ther be conducted with security, norattended with

Sleid. 291. Seck. 1. iii. 283.

authority,

authority, such a fierce war was just kindled be- Boot vit.
tween the Emperor and Francis, as rendered it-""3
imnpoflible for the ecclefiafticks from many parts
of Europe to retort thither in safety. The legates,
accordingly, remained several months at Trent
without any persons appearing, except a few pre-
lates from the ecclesiastical itate; upon which theeobliged to
Pope, in order to avoid the ridicule and c)ontemptproroguedit.
which this drew upon him from the enemies of
the church, recalled them and piurogued the
council "

UNHAPPILY for the authority of the Papal fee,TheEmper-
at the very time that the German Proreftantso°rcurtsthe

t-

- ,

* Protestants.

took every occasion of pouring contempt upon it,
the Emperor and King of the Romans found it
necessary not only to connive at their conduct, but
to court their favour by repeated acts of indul-
gence. In the fame diet of Spires, wherein they
had protested in the most difrefpetful terms a-
gainit assembling a council at Trent, Ferdinand
who depended on their aid for the defence of Hun-
gary, not only permitted that protestation to be
inserted in the records of the diet, but renewed
in their favour all the Emperor's conceflions at
Ratisbon, adding to them whatever they could
demand for their farther security. Among other
particulars, he granted a suspension of a decree
of the Imperial chamber against the city of Gof-
lar, one ofthole which had entered into the league
of Smalkalde, on account of its having fiized the
ecclefiattical revenues within its domains, and en-
joined Henry duke of Brunswick to desist from
his attempts to carry that decree into execution.
But Henry, a furious bigot, and no lcfs obitinate
than rafl in all his undertakings, continuing to

, F. Paul p. 97. Slcid. 296.

disquiet

BOOK VII. disquiet the people of Goflar by his incursions,

,L-- the Eleetor of Saxony and Landgrave of Hesse,

Theirvigo- that they might not susser any member of the
cedings. Smalkaldick body to be oppressed, assembled their

forces, declared war in form againit Henry, and
in the space of a few weeks stript him intirely of
his dominions, and drove him as a wretched ex-
ile to take refuge in the court of Bavaria. By
this aft of vengeance, no less revere than sudden,
they filled all Germany with dread of their pow-
er, and the confederates of Smalkalde appeared,
by this first effort of their arms, to be as prompt
as capable to protect those who had joined their
association .

EMBOLDENED by so many conceflions in their

favour, as well as by the progress which their opi-
nions daily made, the princes of the league of
Smalkalde took a solemn protest against the Im-
perial chamber, and declined its jurifdidion for
the future, because that court had not been visited
or reformed according to the decree of Ratisbon,
and continued to discover a most indecent partia-
lity in all its proceedings. Not long after this,
they ventured a ftep farther, and protesting against
the recess of a diet held at Nuremberg, which

April 13. provided for the defence of Hungary, refuted to
'543. furnish their contingent for that purpose, unless

the Imperial chamber were reformed, and full fe-
curity granted them in every point with regard to
religion y.
Diet at SUCH were the lengths to which the Protestants

r544. had proceeded, and such their confidence in their

x Sleid. 296. Commemoratio fuccinaa caufarun Belli,

&c. a Smalcadicis contra Henr. Brunfw. ab iifdem edita; ap.
Scardium. Tom. ii. 307.

r Sleid. 304, 307. Seck. 1. iii. 404, 416.

own

own power, when the Emperor returned from the BooK VIl.
Ldw-Countries, to hold a diet, which he had fum--"'"
moned to meet at Spires. The refpet due to the
Emperor, as well as the importance of the affairs
which were to be laid before it, rendered this as-
fembly extremely full. All the Eledors, a great
number of princes ecclesiastical and secular, with
the deputies of most of the cities were present.
Charles soon perceived that this was not a time to
offend the jealous spirit of the Protestants, by as-
serting in any high tone the authority and doc-
trines of the church, or by abridging in the final-
left article, the liberty which they now enjoyed;
but that, on the contrary, if he expected any sup-
port from them, or wifled to preserve Germany
from intestine disorders while he was engaged in
a foreign war, he muit sooth them by new con-
ceflions, and a more ample extension of their re-
ligious privileges. He began, accordingly, with
courting the Elector of Saxony and Landgrave
of Hesse, the heads of the Protestant party, and
by giving up some things in their favour, and
granting liberal promises with regard to others,
he secured himself from any danger of opposition
on their part. Having ascertained this capitalTheEmper.
point, he then ventured to address the diet with tr I'4iits

its aid a.

greater freedom. He began by representing hisgainlt
own zeal, and unwearied efforts with regard to".'"".
two things most eflential to Christendom, the pro-
curing of a general council in order to compose
the religious dissensions which had unhappily ari-
fen in Germany, and the providing some proper
means for checking the formidable progress of
the Turkilh arms. But that his pious endeavours
had been entirely defeated by the unjustifiable
ambition of the French King, who having wan-
tonly kindled the flame of war in Europe, which
had been so lately extinguished by the truce of
Nice, rendered it impollible for the fathers of the

church

BooK VII. church to afemble in council, or to deliberate

1-54.sWith security; and obliged him to employ those

forces in his own defence, which with greater satis-
faCtion to himself, as well as more honour toChrif-
tendom, he would have turned againfR the Infidels.
That Francis not thinking it enough to have called
him off from opposing the Infidels, had, with unex-
ampled impiety, invited them into the heart of
Christendom, and joining his arms to theirs, had
openly attacked the Duke of Savoy a member of
the Empire. That Barbarofia's fleet was now in
one of the ports of France, waiting only the return
of spring to carry terror and desolation to the coast
of some Christian state. That in such a situation
it was folly to think of distant expeditions againif
the Turk, or of marching to oppose his armies in
Hungary, while such a powerful ally received him
into the centre of Europe, and gave him footing
there. That prudence dictated to oppose, first of
all, the nearest and moid imminent danger, and by
humbling the power of France, to deprive Soly-
man of the advantages, which: he derived from
the unnatural confederacy formed between him
and a Monarch, who still arrogated the name of
Mops Christian. That, in truth, a waragainft the
French King and the Sultan ought to be co!;fidered
as the fame thing; and that every advantage gain-
ed over the former, was a revere and sensible blow
to the latter. That, therefore, lie now demanded
their aid againif Francis,.jQt merely as an enemy
of the Germanick body, ,?r of him who was it
head, but as an avowed ally of the Ir.tldcls, and n
publick enemy to the Christian name.

IN order to give greater weight to this violen!

invective of the Emperor, the King of the Ro
mans stood up, and related the rapid conquests ol
the Sultan in Hungary, occasioned, as lie fitid, b)
the fatal neceflity imposed on his brother of em

ploying

iploying his arms against France; and the ambaf-B°o' v11
ifadors of Savoy gave a detail of Barbarossa's ope-
irations at Nice, and of the ravages which he had
icommitted on that coalt. All there, added to the
general indignation which Francis's unprecedented
union with the Turks excited in Europe, made
such an impression on the diet as the Emperor
wihed, and disposed most of the members to
grant him such effectual aid as he had demanded.
The ambafliadors Francis had sent to explain the
motives of his conduct, were not permitted to
enter the bounds of the Empire; and the apology
which they published for their master, vindicating
his alliance with Solyman, by examples drawn from
scripture, and the practice of Christian princes,
was little regarded by men, irritated already or
prejudiced against him to such a degree, as to be
incapable of allowing their proper weight to any
arguments in his behalf.

SUCH being the favourable disposition of theHisvaft

Germans, Charles perceived that nothing could onocer°os
now obftrud his gaining all that he aimed at, but gain the
the fears and jealousies of the Proteflants, which Prote"at"'
he determined to quiet by granting every thing,
that the utmofl follicitude of these paflions could
desire for the Security of their religion. With
this view, he consented to a recess, whereby all
the rigorous edicts hitherto issued against the Pro-
teftants were uifpended; a council either general
or national to be assembled in Germany was de-
clared necessary in order to re-eftablifl peace
in tie church; until one of these flould be held,
(which the Emperor undertook to bring about
as son as poflible) the free and publick exer-

f· ,f the Pioteitant religion was authorized;
i'. mnpcial chamber was to give no molefta-

tion

BooK VII. tion to the Protestants; and when the term, for
X-"'""which the present judges in that court were elec-

ted, should expire, persons duely qualified were
then to be admitted as members, without any

And grant- diftindion on account of religion. In return for
ed by the
di t.e theie extraordinary ats of indulgence, the Protef-

tants concurred, with the other members of the
diet, in declaring war against Francis in the name
of the Enpire; in voting the Emperor a body of
twenty-rtcrr thousand foot, and four thousand
horse, to be r ainiained at the publick expence
for fix months, and to be employed against France;
and at the fame time the diet imposed a poll-tax
to be levied throughout all Germany on every
person without exception, for the support of the
war against the Turks.

Charles's CHARLES, while he gave the greatest attention
negociationt
with Den- to the minute and intricate detail of particulars
mark and necessary towards conducting the deliberations of
Eng"d. a numerous and divided assembly to fiuch a fuc-

cefsful period, negociated a separate peace with
the King of Denmark, who, though he had hither-
to performed nothing considerable in consequence
of his alliance with Francis, had it in his power,
however, to make a formidable diversion in favour
of that monarch . At the fame time, he did not
negleA proper applications to the King of Eng-
land, in order to rouze him to more vigorous es-
forts against their common enemy. Little, in-
deed, was wanting to accomplish this; for fich
events had happened in Scotland as inflamed
Henry to the moR violent pitch of resentment
against Francis. Having concluded with the par-
liament of Scotland a treaty of marriage between

2 Dumont Corps Diploin. t. iv. p. ii. p. 374.

his

his son and their young Queen, by which he reck- Boo VII.
oned himself secure of effecting the union of the z 54 '
two kingdoms, which had been long desired, and
often attempted without success by his predecef-
fors, Mary of Guise the Queen mother, cardinal
Beatoun, and other partizans of France, found
means not only to break off the match, but to
alienate the Scottish nation entirely from the friend-
(hip of England, and to strengthen its antient at-
tachment to France. Henry, however, did not a-
bandon an object of so much importance. As
the humbling of Francis, besides the pleasure of
taking revenge upon an enemy who had difap-
pointed a favourite mearure, appeared the most
effeEual method of bringing the Scots to accept
once more of the treaty which they had rejected,
he was so fond of this scheme, that he was ready
to second whatever the Emperor could propose to
be attempted against that monarch. The plan,
accordingly, which they concerted, was such as,
if it had been punctually executed, mutt have
ruined France in the first place, and would have
augmented so prodigiously the Emperor's power
and territories as might in the end have proved fa-
tal to the liberties of Europe. They agreed to
invade France each with an army of twenty-five
thousand men, and, without losing time in befieg-
ing the frontier towns, to advance directly to-
wards the interior provinces, and to join their
forces near Parisa.

MEAN W HILE, Francis fl:od alone in opposition The French
to all the enemies that Charles was muttering a- take the

* Idel in Pied-

gainft him. Solyman was the only ally who had mont.
not deserted him; but the afliftance he received
from him had rendered him io odious all Chris-

to

Herbert 245. Bcllav, 448.
VOL. IIl. D tendom,

BooK VIi. tendom, that he resolved rather to forego all thl

4,,advantages of his friendship, than to become, oi

that account, the objec of general horror and de.
teftation. For this reason, he dismissed Barba.
roffa as soon as winter was over, who after rava-
ging the coasts of Naples and TuCcany returned
to Constantinople. As Francis could not hope to
equal the forces of his rival, he endeavoured to
supply that defect by dispatch, which was more in
his power, and to get the start of him in taking

nver ca- the field. Early in the spring the count d' En-
rinan. guien invested Carignan, a town in Piedmont,

which the marquis de Guafto the Imperial gene-
ral having furprized the former year confidered as
of so much importance, that he had fortified it at
great expence. The count pulhed the liege with
such vigour, that Guafto, fond of his own con-
quest, and feeing no other way of saving it froml
falling into the hands of the French, resolved to
hazard a battle in order to relieve it. He began

Tile mpe- 'his march from Milan for this purpose, and as he
marchtore-was at no pains to conceal his intention, it was
leve it. oon known in the French camp. Enguien, a gal-

lant and enterprizing young man, wished palfion-
ately to try the fortune of a battle; his troops de-
fired it with no lets ardour; but the peremptory
injundtion of the King not to venture a general
engagement, flowing from a prudent attention to
the present situation of affairs, as well as from the
remembrance of former dilafters, tied up his
hands. Unwilling, however, to abandon Carig-
nan, when it was just ready to yield, and eager
to cdiflinguifh his command by some memorable
aftion, he dispatched Monluc to court in order to
lay before the King the advantages of fighting
the enemy, and the hopes which he had of vido-
ry. The King referred the matter to the coun-
cil; all the miniflers declared, one after another,
against fighting, and supported their sentiments

by

tby reasons extremely plausible. While they were B1-i.
delivering their opinions, Monluc, who was per- .544
Imitted to be present, discovered such visible and
'extravagant symptoms of impatience to speak, as
iwell as such diffatisfadion with what he heard,
ithat Francis, diverted with his appearance, called
:on him to declare what he could offer in reply to
.sentiments which seemed to be as just as they were
sgeneral. Upon this, Monluc, a plain but spirited
sflldier, and of known courage, represented the
'good condition of the troops, their eagerness to
imeet the enemy in the field, their confidence in
/their officers, together with the everlasting infamy
which the declining of a battle would bring on
;the French arms; and urged his arguments with
such lively impetuosity, and such a flow of milita-
ry eloquence, as gained over to his opinion, not
only the King, naturally fond of daring actions,
but several of the council. Francis catching the
fame enthufiafir which had animated his troops,
: suddenly started up, and having lifted his hands
. to heaven, and implored the divine ptotedion and

aid, he then addresied himself to Monluc, " Go,
iays he, return to Piedmont, and fight in the name
of God ."

No sooner was it known that the King had giv- Botle b

en Enguien leave to fight the Imperialists, thanCe o
tlchi was the martial ardour of the gallant and
high spit ited gentlemen of that age, that the
court was quite deserted, every person desirous of
reputation, or capable of fcrvice, hurrying to Pi-
edmont in order to ihare, as volu:teels, in the
danger and glory of the aLcion. Encoui aged by
the arrival of so many brave officers, Enguien im-
mediately prepared for battle, nor did Guaifo dc-

Mernoires de Mlonluc.

D ? dine

BooK vn. cine the combat. The number of cavalry \'wa

!- 44 almost equal, but the Imperial infantry exceeded

the French by at least ten thousand men. They
April i. met near Cerifoles, in an open plain, which afford.

ed to neither any advantage of ground, and both
had filll time to form their army in proper order.
Thle shock was such as might have been expected
between veteran troops, violent and obstinate. The
French cavalry running to the charge with their
uflal vivacity bore down every thing that oppo.
fed them, but on the other hand, the fteddy and
disciplined valour of the Spanish infantry having
forced the body which they encountered to give
way, victory remained in fufpence, ready to de.
dare for which ever general could make the bell
iufe of that critical moment. Guafto, engaged in
that part of his army which was thrown into dif(
order, and afraid of falling into the hands of the
French whose vengeance he dreaded on account
of the murder of Rincon and Fregofo, loft his
pretence of mind, and forgot to order a large bo.
dy of reserve to advance; whereas Enguien, with
admirable courage and equal condu't, supported,
at the head of his gens d'armes, such of his bat-
talions as began to yield; and at the fame time
he ordered the Swiss in his service, who had been:
victorious wherever they fought, to fall upon the
Spaniards. This motion proved decifve. All
that followed was confusion and slaughter. Tile
marquis de Guaflo wounded in the thigh, escaped
only by the swiftness of his horse. The victorv
of the French was complete, ten tionlfand of thc
Imperialifls being slain, and a conliderable num-
ber, with all their tents, baggage and artillery,
[akcn. On the part of the conquerors, their joy
was without allay, a few only being killed, and
amlnog there no officer of diftindion b.

1 Hcellay, 429, &c. Memoires de Monluc. Jovii hill 1.
44, 1. 327. (,

Tms

THIS splendid acion, besides the reputation 11 v,.

with which it was attended, delivered France from 544.
an imminent danger, as it ruined the army Xwill Effeaot'it
which Guafto had intended to invade the country
between the Rhofne and Saone, where there were
neither fortified towns nor regular forces to op-
pose his progress. But it was not in Francis's
power to pursue the victory with such vigour as to
reap the advantages which it might have yielded;
for tho' the Milanese remained now almost de-
fenceless; though the inhabitants, who had long
murmured under the rigour of the Imperial go-
vernment, were ready to throw off the yoke;
though Enguien, flushed with success, urged the
King to seize this happy opportunity of recover-
ing a country, the acquisition of which had been
long his favourite objeat; yet as the Emperor and
King of England were preparing to break in up-
on the opposite frontier of France with such si-
perior force, it became necessary to sacrifice all
thoughts of conquest to the publick safety, and
to recal twelve thousand of Enguien's best troops
to be employed in defence of the kingdom. En-
guien's subsequent operations were, of confe-
quence, so languid and inconsiderable, that the
reduction of Carignan and rome other towns in
Piedmont, was all he gained by his great victory
at Cerifoles .

THE Emperor, as usual, was late in taking the operations
field, but he appeared, towards the beginning ofin "'ht Lt,

J,~ "- ~"-I'*'' . „ ""' o" "ó""""ó "' Countrie-

June, at the head of an army more numerous,
and better appointed than any which he had hi-
therto led against France. It amounted almost to
fifty thousand men, and part of it having reduced
Luxembourg and tome other towns in the Ne-
therlands, before he himlilf joined it, he now

c Bellay, 438, &c.

D 2 marched

Boot V1n. marched with the whole towards the frontiersof

,'- "

" Champagne. Charles, according to his agree-
June. ment with the King of England, ought to have

advanced diretly towards Paris; and the dauphin,
who commanded the only army to which Prancis
trusted for the security of his dominions, was in
no condition to oppose him. But the success with
which the French had defended Provence in the
year one thousand five hundred and thirty-fix, had
taught them the most effectual method of diftref-
sing an invading enemy. Champagne, a country
abounding more in vines than corn, was incapa-
ble of maintaining a great army, and before the
Emperor's approach, whatever could be of any
use to him had been carried off or destroyed. This
rendered it necessary for him to be master of some
places of strength, in order to secure the convoys
on which alone he now perceived that he must
depend for subsistence; and he found the frontier
towns tb ill provided for defence, that he hoped it
would not be a work either of much time or dif-
ficulty to reduce them. Accordingly Ligny and
Commercy, which he first attacked, surrendered

TheEnmpr-after a short refitance. He then invested Sr. Di-
Diner. 'ier, which, though it commanded an important
July 8. pass on the Marne, was destitute of every thing

necessary for sustaining a siege. But the count
de Sancerre and M. de la Lande, who had ac-
quired fich reputation by the defence of Lan-
drecy, generously thrcw themselves into the
town, and undertook to hold it out to the lafl
extremity. The Emperor soon found how ca-
pable they were of making good their promise,
and that hi: could not expect to take the town
without besieging it in form. L'his accord-
ingly lie undertook; and as it weas his nature
never to abandon any enterprize in which he

had

|tad once engaged, he persisted in it with an in- Boot vlt.
;considerate obstinacy. 544

THE King of England's preparations for theHenryVIII.

campaign were compleat long before the Emper- ' "

Bo-

or's; but as he did not chufe, on the one hand,
to encounter alone the whole power of France,
and was unwilling, on the other, that his troops
;should remain unative, he took that opportunity
of chatRifing the Scots, by fending his fleet, to-
gether with a considerable part of his infantry,
under the earl of Hertford, to invade their coun-
try. Hertford executed his commiflion with vi-
gour, plundered and burnt Edinburgh atnd Leith,
laid waste the adjacent country, and reimbarked
his men with such dispatch, that they joined their
sovereign soon after his landing in France. When July 14.
Henry arrived in that kingdom, he found the
Emperor engaged in the liege of St. Difier; an
ambassador, however, whom he sent to congra-
tulate the Englifl Monarch on his safe arrival
on the continent, follicited him to march in terms
of the treaty directly to Paris. But Charles had set
his ally such an illexample of fulfilling the conditi-
ons of their confederacy with exatnefs, that Hen-
ry, observing him employ his time and forces in
taking towns for his own behoof, saw no reason
why he Ihould not attempt the reduction of
some places that lay conveniently for himself.
Without paying any regard to the Emperor's re-
monstrances, he immediately inverted Bologne,
and commanded the Duke of Norfolk to pre&s
the siege of Montreuil, which had been begun
before his arrival, by a body of Flemings, in con-
iunction with some Englifi troops. While Charles
and Henry Ihewed such attention each to lhi,
own interest, they both nt-gleced the common
cause; and, instead of the union and confidence.
requisite towards conducting the great plan they

had

Boo, vn. had formed, they early discovered a mutual jea'
k'-`'° Joufy of each other, which, by degrees, begot

distrust, and ended in open hatredd.

Callant de- MEANWHILE, Francis had, with unwearied in-
fence of st. dufry, drawn together an army capable, as well
Difier' from the number as from the valour of the troops,

of making head against the enemy. But the dau-
phin, who still ated as general, prudently declin.
ing a battle, the loss of which would have endan-
gered the kingdom, satisfied himself with harraf-
sing the Emperor with his light troops, cutting off
his convoys, and laying waste the country around
him. Though extremely distressed by these o-
perations, Charles still pressed the siege of St. Di-
sier, which Sancerre defended with astonishing for-
titude and condudt. He fRood repeated aflaults,
repulsing the enemy in them all; and undifmay-
ed even by the death of the brave de la Lande,
who was killed by a cannon ball, he continued to
shew the fame bold countenance and obstinate re-
solution. At the end of five weeks, he was still
capable of holding out some time longer, when
an artifice of Granvelle's induced him to furren-
der. That crafty politician, having intercepted
the key to the cypher which the Duke of Guise
used in communicating intelligence to Sancerre,
forged a letter in his name authorizing Sancerre
to capitulate, as the King, though highly satisfied
with his behaviour, thought it imprudent to ha-
zard a battle for his relief. This letter he con-
veyed into the town in a manner which could
raise no suspicion, and the governor fell into the
snare. Even then, he obtained such honourable
conditions as his gallant defence merited, and
among others a ceflation of hotilities for eight

d Herbert.

clays,

days, at the expiration of which he bound himself Boo VI.
to open the gates, if Francis, during that time, did 544
not attack the Imperial army, and throw fresh
troops into the towne. Thus Sancerre, by de-
taining the Emperor fu long before an inconfider-
able place, afforded his sovereign fill time to as-
femble all his forces, and, what rarely falls to an
officer in such an inferior command, acquired the
glory of having saved his country.

As soon as St. Difier surrendered, the EmperorAuguta,7.
advanced into the heart of Champagne, but San-TheEmper-

orpenetratey

cerre's obstinate resistance had damped his sanguine int"othe
hopes of penetrating to Paris, and led him seriously heart of
to reflect on what he might expect before towns of
greater flrength, and defended by more numerous
garrisons. At the fame time, the procuring sub-
fiffence for his army was attended with great diffi-
culty, which increased in proportion as he withdrew
from his own frontier. He had loft a great
number of his best troops in the siege of St.
Difier, and many fell daily in ikirmifhes, which
it was not in his power to avoid, though they
wafted his army insensibly, without leading
to any decisive action. The season advan-
ced apace, and he had not yet the command
either of a sufficient extent of territory, or of any
such considerable town as rendered it safe to winter
in the enemies country. Great arrears too, were
due to his soldiers, who were upon the point of
mutinying for their pay, while he knew not from
what finds to satisfy them. All there confiderati-
ons induced him to lissen to the overtures of peace
which a Spanilh Dominican, the confessor of his
filler the Queen of France, had secretly made to
his con'eflbr, a monk of the fame order. In

nrantome, tom. vi. 489.

consequence

bool VI. consequence of this, plenipotentiaries were named

s144. on both fides, and began their conferences in

Chaufl6, a small village near Chalons. At the fame
time, Charles, either from a desire of making one
great final effort against France, or merely to gain
a pretext for deserting his ally and concluding a
separate peace, Cent an ambafiador formally to re-
quire Henry, according to the stipulation in their
treaty, to advance towards Paris. While he ex-
peded a return from him, and waited the issue of
the conferences at Chauffl, he continued to march
forward, though in the utmost distress from fcarci-
ty of provisions. But at last, by a fortunate mo-
tion on his part, or through tome neglect or trea-
chery on that of the French, he furprized first Es-
pernay and then Chateau Thierry, in both which
were considerable magazines. No sooner was it
known that there towns, the latter of which is not
two days march from Paris, were in the hands of
the enemy, than that great capital, defenceless,
and susceptible of any violent alarm in proportion
to its greatness, was filled with consternation.
The inhabitants, as if the Emperor had been al-
ready at their gates, fled in the wildest confusion
and despair, many fending their wives and children
down the Seine to Rouen, others to Orleans, and
the towns upon the Loire. Francis himself, more
affliAed with this, than with any other event dur-
ing his reign, and sensible as well of the triumph
his rival would enjoy in insulting his capital, as of
the danger to which the kingdom was exposed,
could not refrain, in the first emotion of his fur-
prize and sorrow, from crying out, " How dear, 0
my God, do I pay for this crown, which I thought
thou hadst granted me freel'." But recovering in
a moment from this sudden rally of peevishness and

f Brantome, tom. 6. 381.

impatience,

impatience, he devoutly added, "Thy will, how- Boo VII.
ever, be done;" and proceeded to iflue the necef- ,-5
fary orders for opposing the enemy with his ufial
composure and presence of nind. The dauphin
detached eight thousand men to Paris, which re-
vived the courage of the affrighted citizens; he
threw a strong garrison into Meaux, and by a for-
ced march got into Ferte, between the Imperia-
lifts and the capital.

UPON this, the Emperor who began again toobliged to

feel the want of provisions, perceiving that theretire.
dauphin still prudently declined a battle, and not
daring to attack his camp with forces so much
f(attered and reduced by hard service, turned fud-
denly to the right, and began to fall back towards
Soissons. Having about ths time received Henry's
answer whereby he refused to abandon the sieges
of Bologne and Montreuil, of both which he ex-
peeted every moment to get pofleffion, he thought
himself absolved from all obligations of adhering
to the treaty with him, and at full liberty to con-
fult his own interest in what manner soever he
pleased. He consented, therefore, to renew the
conference, which the furprize of Efpernay had
broke off. To conclude a peace between tWO Peacebe-
princes, one of whom greatly desired, and thetawndFr
other greatly needed it, did not require a long ne- concluded
gociation. It was signed at Crefpy, a fmrall3'tcrer"'
town near Meaux, on the eighteenth of Septem-
ber. The chief articles of it were, That all the
conquests which either party had made since the
truce of Nice shall be restored; that the Emperor
shall give in marriage to the Duke of Orleans, ei.
ther his own eldest daughter, or the second daugh-
ter of his brother Ferdinand; that if he choTe to
belfow on him his own daughter, he shall fettle on
her all the provinces of the Low-Countries, to be

erected

Boot VIn. ere&ed into an independent slate, which Ihall de-

"-'scend to the male issue of the marriage; that if he

determined to give his niece, he (hall, with her,
grant him the investiture of Milan and its depen-
dencies; that he shall within four months declare
which of there two princefles he had pitched upon,
and fiffil the respective conditions upon the con-
summation of the marriage, which shall take place
within a year from the date of the treaty; that as
soon as the Duke of Orleans is put in poifeflion ei-
ther of the Low-Countries or of Milan, Francis
shall restore to the Duke of Savoy all that he now
possesses of his territories, except Pignerol and
Montmilian; that Francis shall renounce all pre-
tensions to the kingdom of Naples, or to the fove-
reignty of Slanders and Artois, and Charles shall
give up his claim to the dutchy of Burgundy and
county of Charolois; that Francis (hall give no aid
to the exiled Kingof Navarre; that both Monarchs
shall join in making war upon the Turk, towards
which the King (hall furnish, when required by the
Emperor and Empire, fix hundred men at arms,
and ten thousand foots.

Motives of BESIDES the immediate motives to this peace
concluding arising from the distress of his army through want

of provisions; from the difficulty of retreating out
of France; and the impoflibility of securing win-
ter quarters there; the Emperor was influenced by
other considerations, more distant, indeed, but not
less weighty. The Pope was offended to a great
degree, as well at his conceflions to theProteftants
in the late diet, as at his consenting to call a coun-
cil, and to admit of publick disputations in Ger-

g Recueil des Traitez, t. i. 227. Belius de caufis Pacis
Crepiac. in A'tis Erudit. LIps. 1763.

many

many with a view of determining the doctrines in BoKo vl.
controversy; and confidering both these steps as ,44.
sacrilegious encroachments on the jurifdiaion as
well as privileges of the Holy fee, he had addref-
fed to him a remonstrance rather than a letter on
this fubjeEt, written with such acrimony of lan-
guage, and in a stile of such high authority, as disco-
vered more of an intention to draw on a quarrel
than of a desire to reclaim him. This ill humour
was not a little enflamed by the Emperor's league
with Henry, which being contracted with an he-
retick, excommunicated by the apostolic fee, ap-
peared to the Pope a profane alliance, and was not
less dreaded by him, than that of Francis with
Solyman. Paul's Ton and grandson, highly in-
cenfed at the Emperor for having refused to grati-
fy them with regard to the alienation of Parma
and Placentia, contributed by their inflfions to
four and disgust him still more. To all which
was added the powerful operation of the flattery
and promises which Francis incessantly employed
to gain him. Though from his desire of main-
taining a neutrality, the Pope had hitherto sup-
pressed his own resentment, had eluded the arti-
sices of his own family, and resifted the follicitati-
ons of the French King, it was not safe to rely
much on the fteddinefs of a man whom his pafli-
ons, his friends, and his interest combined to (hake.
The union of the Pope with France, Charles well
knew would instantly expose his dominions in
Italy to be attacked. The Venetians he foresaw,
would probably follow the example of a Pon-
tiff, who was confide red as a model of political
wi;dni among the Italians; and thus at a junc-
ture when he lfelt himelf icarce equal to the bur-
tden i' the present war, he would be overwhelmed
vie.h teL weight of a new confederacy against iim b.

F. Paul, loo. Pallavic, 163.

At

Boo VI. At the fame time, the Turks, almost unresisted,

154,, made such progress in Hungary, reducing town

after town, that they approached near to the con-
fines of the Auffrian provincesI. Above all these,
the extraordinary progrels of the Protestant doc-
trines in Germany, and the dangerous combina-
tion into which the Princes of that profeflion had
entered, called for his immediate attention. Al-
most one half of Germany had revolted from the
established church; the fidelity of the reft was
much shaken; the nobility of Austria had demand-
ed of Ferdinand the free exercise of religion k; the
Bohemians, among whom some feeds of the doc-
trines of Huss still remained, openly favoured the
new opinions; the archbilhop of Cologne, with a
zeal rare among ecclefiafticks, had begun the re-
formation of his diocese; nor was it possible, unless
some timely and effectual check were given to the
spirit of innovation, to foresee where it would end.
He himself had been a witness, in the late diet, to
the preremptory and decisive tone which the Pro-
teftants had now assumed; and had seen how,
from confidence in their number and union, they
had forgotten the humble stile of their first peti-
tions, having grown to such boldness as openly to
defpile the Pope, and to shew no great reverence
for the Imperial dignity itself. If, therefore, he
wiflied to maintain either the ancient religion, or
his own authority, and would not chufe to dwin-
dle into a mere nominal head of the Empire, tome
vigorous effort was requisite, which could not be
made during a war that required the greatest ex-
ertion of his firength against a foreign and power-
ful enemy.

S UC H being the Emperor's inducements to

peace, he had the address to frame the treaty
of Crefpy so as to promote all the ends which he

Jfluanhlafii.Hift. Hung. 177. k SJitl. 285.

had

had in view. By coming to an agreement with BooK VI
Francis, he took from the Pope all profpet of ad- ,.
vantage in courting the friendship of that Mo-
narch in preference to his. By the proviso with
regard to a war with the Turks, he not only de-
prived Solyman of a powerful ally, but turned the
arms of that ally against him. By a private arti-
cle, not inserted in the treaty that it might not
raise any unseasonable alarm, he agreed with Fran-
cis that both (hould exert all their influence and
power in order to procure a general council, to
aftert its authority, and to exterminate the protef-
tant heresy out of their dominions. This cut off
all hopes of assistance which the confederates of
Smalkalde might expect from the French King';
and left their follicitations, or his jealousy of an
ancient rival, should hereafter tempt Francis to for-
get this engagement, he left him embarrassed with
a war against England, which would put it out of
his power to take any part in the affairs of Ger-
many.

HENRY, pofleffed at all times with an high idea War co-

of his own power and importance, felt, in the most nu" be.
sensible manner, the neglect with which the Em-France
peror had treated him in concluding a reparatel,,d .
peace. But the situation of his affairs was such as
somewhat alleviated the mortification which this
occasioned. For though he was obliged to recal
the Duke of Norfolk from the siege of Montreuil,
because the Flemish troops received orders toscptm.lI4.
retire, Bologne had surrendered before the ne-
gociations at Crefpy were brought to an ilffe.
While elated with vanity on account of this con-
quest, and inflamed with indignation against
the Emperor, the ambassadors whom Francis

Seck. 1. ii. 496.

sent

noor VII. rent to make overtures of Peace found him too

,4 arrogant to grant what was moderate or equi-

table. His demands were indeed extravagant,
and made in the tone of a conqueror; that Fran-
cis should renounce his alliance with Scotland,
and not only pay up the arrears of former debts,
but reimburse the money which he had expended
in the present war. Francis though sincerely de-
firous of peace, and willing to yield a great deal
in order to obtain it, being now free from the
pressure of the Imperial arms, rejected these igno-
minious propositions with disdain; and Henry
departing for England, hostilities continued be-
tween the two nationsre.

The dau- THE treaty of peace, how acceptable soever
hin ds atif-to the people of France, whom it delivered ?from
the peace of the dread of an enemy who had penetrated into
Crefpy. the heart of the kingdom, was loudly complained

of by the dauphin. He confidered it as a mani-
fest proof of the King his father's extraordinary
partiality towards his younger brother, now Duke
of Orleans, and complained that from his eager-
ness to gain an eftablilhment for a favourite ton,
he had sacrificed the honour of the kingdom, and
renounced the most antient and valuable rights
of the crown. But as he durst not venture to of-
fend the King by refuting to ratify it, though ex-
tremely desirous at the lame time of securing to
himself the privilege of reclaiming what was now
alienated so much to his detriment, he secretly
protested, in ptefence of rome of lis adherents,
against the whole tranfaation; and declared what-
ever he shotld be obliged to do in order to con-
firm it, null in itself, and void of all obligation.
The parliament of Thouloufe, probably by the

Menm. de Ribicr, t. i. p. 72. Herbert, 244.

instigation

nfligation of his partizans, did the fame n. But Boo VII.
Francis, highly pleased as well with having deli- ,544.
vered his fubjets from the miseries of an invafi-
on, as with the profped of acquiring an indepen-
dent settlement for his son at no greater price than
the renouncing conquests to which he had nojuft
claim; titles which had hitherto proved the source
of expence or disasters to the nation; and rights
grown to be obsolete and of no value; ratified the
treaty with great joy. Charles, within the time
prescribed by the treaty, declared his intention of
giving Ferdinand's daughter in marriage to the
D',ke of Orleans, together with the dutchy of
Milan as her dowry*. Every circumstance seem-
ed to promise the continuance of peace. The
Emperor, cruelly affliCted with the gout, appear-
ed to be in no condition to undertake any enter-
prize where great activity was requilite, or much
fatigue to be endured. He himself felt this, or
wished at least that it should be believed; add
being so much disabled by this excruciating dif-
temper, when a French ambafiador followed him
to Brussels in order to be present at his ratification
of the treaty of peace, that it was with the utmost
difficulty he signed his name, he observed, that
there was no great danger of his violating these
articles, as a hand that could icarce hold a pen,
was little able to brandish a lance.

THE violence of his disease confined the Em-TheEmper-

or's themea

peror several months in Brussels, and was the ap- with ircpe
parent caute of putting off the execution of theto-rman: .
vast schemes which he had formed in order to
humble the Protestant party in Germany. But
there were other reasons for this delay. For, how

" Recueil de Traitez, t. ii. 235, 238. * Recuei
de Traitez, t. ii. 238.

VOL. III. E preva-

Boo V. prevalent soever the motives were which determi

,544.1 ned him to undertake this enterprize, the nature

of that great body which he was about to attack,
as well as the situation of his own affairs, madeil
necessary to deliberate long, to proceed with cau.
tion, and not to throw aside too suddenly the vei
under which he had hitherto concealed his real
sentiments and schemes. He was sensible that the
Protestants, conscious of their own strength, but
under continual apprehensions of his designs, had
all the boldness of a powerful party, and all thi
jealousy of a feeble facion; and were no lefd
quick-fighted to discern the first appearance o
danger, than ready to take arms in order to repe
,it. At the fame time, he continued involved ir
a Turkish war; and though, in order to deliver
himself from this incumbrance, le had determi'
ned to fend an envoy to the Porte with most ad
vantageous and even fubmiflive overtures of peace,
the resolutions of that haughty court were so un.
certain, that before there were known it would
have been the height of imprudence to have
kindled the flames of civil war in his own domi
nions.

'The Pope UPON this account, he appeared diffatisfiec
,geer a with a bull issued by the Pope immediately after
council to the peace of Crefpy, summoning the council to
meet at
Trett. assemble at Trent early next spring, and exhort
Novcm,. 1. ing all Christian Princes to embrace the opportu

nity that the present happy interval of tranquillilt
afforded them, of fuppreiing those herefies whicr
threatened to subvert whatever was sacred or ve.
nerable among Chriflians. But after such 1
flight expreflion of dislike as was neceflary in or,
der to cover his designs, he determined to count
tenance the council, which might become no in.
considerable initrument towards accomplihling his
projects, and therefore not only appointed amball

lnad

fadors to appear there. in his name, but ordered Boo, VII.
the ecclefiafticks in his dominions to attend at the ,' .
time prefixed .

SUCH were the Emperor's views, when the lm- .54s.

perial diet, after several prorogations, was openedwot,
at Worms. The Protestants, who enjoyed the March 24.
free exercise of their religion by. a very precarious
tenure, having no other security for it than the re-
cess of the last diet, which was to continue in
force only until the meeting of a council, wished
earnestly to establish that important privilege up-
on some firmer basis, and.to hold it by a perpetu-
al not a temporary title. But, instead of offering
them any additional security,' Ferdinand opened
the diet with observing, that there were two points,
chiefly, which required consideration, the profect-
tion of the war against the Turks, and the:fate
of religion' that the former'.was the most urgent,
as Solyman, after conquering.'thie' greatest part of
Hungary, was now ready to fall upon the Austrian
provinces: that the Emper6r, who, from the be-
ginning of iis. reign, had neglected no opportuni-
ty of annoying this formidable.enemy, and with
the hazard of his own person . had refifed. lis at-
tacks, being..animated still with the fame zeal,
had now consented to ftop:fhort in the career of
his fucceifs against France, that,. in conjiindion
with his antient rival, he might turn his arms with
greater vigour againit the .common adversa'ry of
the Christian., faith; that it becainie all the mem-
bers of the Empire to second these pious endea-
vours of its head; that, therefore, they 'oughr,
without delay,'to vote hiri such effedual aid as
both their duty and their interest called upon them
to furnilh;, that the controversies about religion

P F. Paul, 104.

E 2 were

'TooK vii. were if intricate, and of such diffi'cult difcuflion,

-'e? ibs to give n6 hope of its being poflible to bring

Ferdinand them at present to any final issue; hiat by perse
Cermns toverance and repeated follicitations the Emperor
ackuow- -had at length prevailed on thePope to call a coun.

nció cil , Fib whiich they had so often wished and peti

iioned; that the tinme appoinited for its meeting
'aas how come, and both parties ought to wait for
iits dcrees, and fibihi'it to theti as the decisions of
she ti niverfal church.'

TkHE popiifh'rerbtbers of the diet received this

decla'rtion Withi geiat 'applause, and signified their
eitiHe 'acqtliMendce' in every particular which it
corftained. The Pioteftants 'eXpressed great fur.
prize aat propbotiion's, which werie'fo manifestly re.
p'· atiJ ónt to .ih recess of the formier diet; they
-iitited that thie 4deftions with re'gard to religion,
as fiirtin digiity'and-'importance, ought to comle
sirit' inder deliberation; ithat alaringir as the pro-
'gtes 6f the Tdiks was to all Girmaiiiy, the fecu.
rtg 'the free'ex'ercife 'of their re-lgian touched
ithrif1 ill miteone!iirly, nor coild they prosecute
a a'lbzih war with ifirit, while 'fllicitous and con-
'er 'er about their dor'eftic trahquillity; that if
the latter were once rendered firm and permanent,
'they wotuld concur With their countrymen in pulh.
in''ithe former, 'and yield to rbite' of' them in ac-
tivity' r zeal. 'But if the dan'ger frbom the Turk-
ifh l mnis was inrid&ed'fo immine&ii, alnot tb admit
offuch 'a delay:as'would be eci'fibined by an im-
mnediate 'eaminrati6h of the cbtitrdvelied points
in religion, they required 'that a: diet ihould be
infinffiy ap pintedl, to which the fi^l:'Tertlement
6f their teligi'ous'dispute's shotld: be referreid ;'and
Aldst 'i thle niean tifie the d&ree' ,6f she former
diet concerning religion should be explained in a
point which they deemied eflential. By the re-

ce'ss

ess of Spires it was provided, that they should ^v"11.
njoy unmolested the public exercife'of their re- ,54.
igion, until the meeting of a legal council; but
s the Pope had now called a council, to which
erdinand had required them to fubmir, they be-
an to suspect that their adversaries might take
advantage of an ambiguity in the terms of the
reces, and pretending that the event therein men-
tioned had taken place, might pronounce them to
be no longer entitled to the fame indulgence. In
order to guard against this interpretation, they,re-
i newed their former remonstrances against a coun-
cil called to meet without the bounds of the Em-
pire, summoned by the Pope's authority, and in
which he aflumed the right of presiding; and de-
clared that, notwithstanding the convocation of
any such illegal atfembly, they still held the recess
of the late diet to be in full force.

AT other junctures, when the Emperor thought Emperor ar-

it of advantage to sooth and gain the Protestantes, Wr.
he had devised expedients for giving them satis-
fation with regard to demands seemingly more
extravagant; but his views at present being very
different, Ferdinand by his command adhered in-
flexibly to his first propositions, and would make
no conceflions which had the most remote tenden-
cy to throw discredit on the council, or to weak-
en its authority. The Protestants, on their part,
were no less inflexible; and after much time spent
in fruitless endeavours to convince each other, they
came to no conclusion. Nor did the pretence of
the Emperor, who upon his recovery arrived atMay iS.
Worms, contribute in any degree to render the
Protestants more compliant. Fully convinced that
they were maintaining the cause of God and of
truth, they (hewed themselves superior to the al-
lurements of interest, or the suggestions qs fear;
and in proportion as the Emperor redoubled his

E follicitations,

Boo_ V. follicitations, or discovered his designs, their bold

1,4S ness teems to have increased. At last they openl

The proter-declared, that they would not even deign to vin
claim an dicate their tenets in pretence of a council, afiem
connefion bled not to examine, but to condemn them; ant
with the
council of that they would pay no regard to an assembly hek
Trent. under the influence of a Pope, who had already

precluded himself from all title to a& as a judge,
by his having tfigmatized their opinions with the
name of heresy, and denounced against them the
heaviest censures, which, in the plenitude of hi'
usurped power, he could inflitq.

Condua of WHILE the Protestants, with such union as well
Maurice of
Saxony in as firmness, reje&ed all intercourse with the coun.
this diet. cil,and refused their assent to the Imperial demands

in refpea to the Turkish war, Maurice of Saxony
alone shewed an inclination to gratify the Empe-
ror with regard to both. Though he professed
an inviolable regard for the Protestant religion,
le assumed an appearance of moderation peculiar
to himself, by which he confirmed the favourable
sentiments that the Emperor already entertained
of him, and gradually paved the way for executing
the ambitious designs which always occupied his
adive and enterprizing mind ,. His example, how-
ever, had little influence upon such as agreed with
him in their religious opinions; and Charles per-
ceived that he could not hope either to procure
present aid from the Protestants against the Turks,
or to quiet their fears and jealousies on account of
their religion. But as his schemes were not yet
ripe for execution, nor his preparations so far ad-
vanced that he could force their compliance, or
punish their obstinacy, he artfully concealed his own
intentions; and that he might augment their fecu-
Auguif 4. rity, he appointed a diet to be held at Ratiflon ear-

ly next year, in order to adjust what was now left

9 Sleid. 343, &c. Seck. iii. 543, &c. Thuan. Hiflor. lib.
ii. p. 56. See. iii. 571.

undeter-

undetermined; and'previous to it, he agreed that a BOOK V.
certain number of divines of each party should ,545.
meet, in order to confer upon the points in dif-
pute'.

B U T how far soever this appearance of a de-The proter-

fire to maintain the present tranquillity mighttants begin
have imposed upon the Protestants, the Emperortefir.e,&nr
was incapable of such uniform and thorough dif-or.
simulation, as to hide altogether from their view
thedangerous designs which he was meditating
against them. Herman count de Wied, Arch-
bishop and Elector of Cologne, a prelate confpi-
cuous for his virtue and primitive simplicity of
manners, though not more distinguished for learn-
ing than the other descendants of noble families,
who in that age possessed most of the great bene-
sices in Germany, having become a proselyte to
the doctrines of the Reformers, had begun in the
year one thousand five hundred and forty-three,
with the afliftance of Melanathon and Bucer, to
abolish the ancient superstition in his diocese, and
to introduce in its place the rites eftablifled a-
mong the Protestants. But the canons of his ca-
thedral who were not possessed with the fame fpi-
rit of innovation, and who foresaw how fatal the
levelling genius of the new feet would prove to
their dignity and wealth, oppoled, from the be-
ginning, this unprecedented enterprize of their
Archbishop with all the zeal flowing from revc-
rence for old institutions, heightened by concern
for their own interest. This opposition, which the
Archbishop confidered only as a new argnment to
demonstrate the neceflity of a reformation, nei-
ther shook his resolution nor slackened his ardour
in prosecuting his plan. The canons, perceiving
all their endeavours to check his career to be in-

* Sleid. 351.

elfcctual,

BOK V11. effectual, solemnly protested against his proceed-

154, ings, and appealed for redress to the Pope and

Emperor, the former as his ecclesiastical, the lat.
ter as his civil superior. This appeal being laid
before the Emperor, during his residence in
Worms, he took the canons of Cologne under
his immediate protection; enjoined them to pro-
ceed with rigour against all who revolted from
the eftablilhed church; prohibited the Archbi-
shop to make any innovation in his diocese; and
summoned him to appear at Brussels within thirty
days, to answer the accusations which should be
preferred against him'.

To this clear evidence of his hostile intentions

against the Protestant party, Charles added other
proofs still more explicit. In his hereditary do-
minions of the Low-Countries, he persecuted all
who were fufpeded of Lutheranifm with unrelent-
ing vigour. As Toon as he arrived at Worms, he
silenced the Protestant preachers in that city. He
allowed an Italian monk to inveigh against the
Lutherans from the pulpit of his chapel, and to
call upon him, as he regarded the favour of God,
to exterminate that pestilent heresy. He dif-
patched the embafly, which has been already men-
tioned, to Constantinople, with overtures of peace,
that he might be free from any apprehensions of
danger or interruption from that quarter. Nor
did any of there steps, or their dangerous tenden-
cy, escape the jealous observation of the Protef-
tants, or fail to alarm their fears, and to excite
their follicitude for the safety of their fed.

rtath of MEANWHILE Charles's good fortune which pre-
the Duke of
Orean. dominated on all occasions over that of his rival

Francis, extricated him out of a difficulty, from

t Sleid. 310, 340, 351. Seckend, iii, 443, 553.

which,

which, with all his sagacity and address, he would Bool vl-
have found it no easy matter to have difentang- 1545.
led himelf. Just about the time when the Duke
of Orleans (hould have received Ferdinand'sSep' 8
daughter in marriage, and together with her the
poffeflion of the Milanese, he died ofapeftilential
fever. By thisevent, the Emperor was freed from
the necessity of giving up an important province
into the hands of an enemy, or from the indecency
of violating a recent and solemn engagement,
which must have occasioned an immediate rup-
ture with France. He affected, however, to ex-
press great sorrow for the untimely death of a
young prince, who was to have been so nearly
allied to him; but he carefully avoided entering
into any fresh discussions concerning the Milanese,
and would not liften to a proposal which came
from Francis of new modelling the treaty of Cref-
py, Co as to make him Come reparation for the
advantages which he had loft by the demise of
his son. In the more acive and vigorous part
of Francis's reign, a declaration of war would
have been the certain and instantaneous confe-
quence of such a flat refusal to comply with a de-
mand seemingly Co equitable; but the declining
state of his own health, the exhausted condition
of his kingdoms, together with the burden of the
war against England, obliged him, at present to
dissemble his resentment, and to put off thoughts
of revenge to some other juncure. In confe-
quence of this event, the unfortunate Duke of Sa-
voy loft all hope of obtaining the restitution of
his territories; and the rights or claims relinquish-
ed by the treaty of Crefpy, returned in full force to
the crown of France, to serve as pretexts for fu-
ture wars'.

UPON the first intelligence of the Duke of Or-
leans's death, theconfederatesof Smalkalde flatter-

BalcariiComment. 769. Paruta. Hist Venct. iv.p. 177.

ed

BOD VnT. ed themselves that the efential alterations which it
' .,occasioned could scarce fail of producing a rupture,
The Pope which would prove the means of their safety. But
grants the
dutchie of they were not more disappointed with regard to
rarma nd this, than in their expectations from an event
,sron. t° which seemed to be the certain prelude of a quar-

rel between the Emperor and the Pope. Paul,
whose passion for aggrandizing his family, increaf-
ed as he advanced in years, and as he saw the
dignity and power which they derived immediate-
ly from him becoming more precarious, finding
that he could not bring the Emperor to approve
of his ambitious schemes, ventured, though at the
rifque of incurring his dilplealure, to grant his son
Peter Lewis the investiture of Parma and Placentia.
At a time when a great part of Europe inveighed
openly against the corrupt manners and exorbitant
power of Ecclesiastics, and when a council was
summoned to reform the disorders in the church,
this indecent grant of such a principality to a son
of whose illegitimate birth the Pope ought to have
been ashamed, and whose licentious morals all
good men detested, gave general offence. Some
Cardinals in the Imperial interest remonfirated
against such an unbecoming alienation of the pa-
trimony of the church; the Spanish ambassador
would not be present at the solemnity of his en-
feofment; and the Emperor preremptorily refu-
fed, upon pretext that there cities were part of the
Milanefeftate, to confirm the deed of investiture
But both the Emperor and Pope being intent up-
on one common object in Germany, sacrificed
their particular paflions to that public cause, and
suppressed the emotions of jealousy or resentment
which were rising on this occasion, that they might
jointly pursue what each esteemed of greater im-
portance '.

Paruta, Hist. Venet. iv. 178. Pallavii 180.

ABOUT

ABOUT this time the peace of Germany wasBO°° VIL

disturbed by a violent but short eruption of Henry ,.5-
Duke of Brunswick. This Prince, though ftillHenry of
stript of his dominions, which the Emperor held kindles a
in sequestration, until his differences with the con-warin Ger-
federates of Smalkalde should be adjusted, poffef-ma"ny
fed however so much credit in Germany-that he
undertook to raise for the French King a confi-
derable body of troops to be employed in the war
against England. The money stipulated for this
purpose was duly advanced by Francis; the troops
were levied; but Henry, instead of leading them
towards France, suddenly entered his own domi-
nions at their head, in hopes of recovering them
before any army could be aflembled to oppose him.
The confederates were not more furprized at this
unexpected attack, then the King of France was as-
tonifhed at a mean thievish fraud so unbecoming
the claracter of a Prince. But the Landgrave of
Hesse, with incredible expedition, collected as ma-
ny men as put a stop to the progress of Henry's
undisciplined forces, and being joined by his son-
in-law Maurice, and some of the troops of the
Elector of Saxony, he gained such advantages over
Henry, who was rash and bold in forming his
schemes, but feeble and undetermined in execu-
ting them, as obliged him to disband his army,
and to surrender himlelf together with his eldest
son priforiers at dilcretion. He was kept in close
confinement, until a new reverse of affairs pro-
cured him liberty Y.

As this defeat of Henry's wild enterprize ad- ,i4t
ded new reputation to the arms of the Proteftlants, T'h Reo,-

mation ol

the reformation of the Palatinate brought a great the Palatl-
acceflion of strength to their party. Frederick, a""
who succeeded his brother Lewis in that Electorate,

Y Sleid. 352. Scck. iii. 567.

had

BooK ViT. had long been fufpeded of a secret propensity to

„"'""the dotrines of the Reformers, which, upon his

acceflion to the principality, he openly manifest-
ed. But as he expected that something effedual
towards a general and legal eltablifhment of reli-
gion would be the fruit of so many diets, confe-
rences, and negociations, he did not, at first, at-
tempt any public innovation in his dominions.
Finding all there iflie in nothing, he thought him-

I,,. se.
fel called, at length, to countenance by his autho-

rity the system which he approved of, and to gra-
tify the withes of his fubjets, who by their inter-
course with the Protestant states had universally
imbibed their opinions. As the warmth and im-
petuofity which accompanied the spirit of Refor-
mation in its first efforts had somewhat abated,
this change was made with great order and regu-
larity; the ancient rights were abolished, and new
forms introduced without any ad of violence, or
symptom of discontent. Though Frederick adopt-
ed the religious system of the Protestants, he imi-
tated the example of Maurice, and did not accede
to the league of Smalkaldez.

The eouicil A Few weeks before this revolution in the Pa-

ilenmbles at
Trent. latinate, the general council was opened with the

accustomed folemnities at Trent. The eyes of the
Catholick flates were turned with much expecta-
tion towards an assembly, which all had confider-
ed as a natural and adequate remedy for the dif-
orders of the church when they first broke out,
though many were afraid that it was now too late
to hope for great benefit from it, when the mala-
dy, by being suffered to make progress during
twenty eight years, had become inveterate, and
grown to such extreme violence. The Pope by

Sleid. 356. Seck. I. iii. 616.

his

his last bull of convocation, had appointed the first .B" vl
meeting to be held in March. But his views and 46.
those of the Emperor were To different, that al-
most the whole year was spent in negociations.
Charles, who foresaw that the rigorous decrees of
the council againfi the Protestants would soon
drive them, in felf-defence as well as from resent-
ment, to some desperate extreme, laboured to put
off its meeting until his warlike preparations were
so far advanced, that he might be in a condition
to second its decisions by the force of his arms.
The Pope, who had early Cent to Trent the le-
gates who were to preside in his name, knowing
to what contempt it would expose his authority,
and whtt ftfpicions it would beget of his intenti-
ons, if'the fathers of the council should remain in
a state of inastivity, when the .church was in such
danger as to require their immediate:and vigorous
interposition, insisted either upon translating the
council to fomle city in Italy, or upon suspending
its proceedings at that juncture, or upon authori-
sing it to 'begin its deliberations immediately.
The Emperor rejeted the two former as equally
offensive to the Germans of every denomination,
but finding it irpoflible to elude the latter, he
proposed tlat the council fiould begin with re-
forming the disorders in the church, !before it pro-
ceeded to examine or define articles of Faith.
This was the very thing which the court of Rome
dreaded mnoi, and which had prompted it to em-
ploy so many artifices in order to prevent the
meeting of such a dangerous judicatory. Paul,
though more compliant than some of his prede-
ceffrs with regard to calling a council, was no less
jealous than they had been of its jurifdidion, and
law what matter of triumph such a method of.pro-
ceeding would afford the heretics. IHe apprehend-
ed consequences not only humbling but fatal to

the

Boo VII. the papal fee, if the council came to confider an

4.J inquest into abuses as their only business; or if in-

ferior prelates were allowed to gratify their own
envy and peevishness by prescribing rules to those
who were exalted above them in dignity and
power. Without listening, therefore, to this infi-
dious proposal of the Emperor, he inftruted his
legates to open the council.

Jan. r8. THE first feflion was spent in matters of form.
in cee In a subsequent one, it was agreed that the fram-

ing of a confeflion of faith, containing all the arti-
cles which the church required its members to be-
lieve, ought to be the first and principal business of
the council; but that at the fame time, it should
give attention to what was neceflary towards the
reformation of manners and discipline. From this
first symptom of the spirit with which the council
was animated, from the high tone of authority
which the legates who presided in it afiumed,and
from the implicit deference with which most of
the members followed their directions, the Protef-
tants conjectured with ease what decisions they
might expect. It astonished them, however, to
fee forty prelates, (for no greater number was yet
aflembled) assume authority as representatives of
the universal church, and proceed to determine the
most important points of doarine in its name.
Sensible of this indecency, as well as.os the ridi-
cule with which it might be attended, the council
advanced slowly in its deliberations, and all its
proceedings were for some time languishing and
feeble a. As soon as the confederates of Smalkaldc
received information of the opening of the coun-
cil, they published a long manifesto containing
a renewal of their protest against its meeting, to-
gether with the reasons which induced them to

F1. Paul. 12o, &c. Pallavic. p. i8o. &c.

dlecline

decline its jurifdi'tionsb. The Pope and Em-BooK VIL
peror, meanwhile, were so little follicitous to quick-''"~'
en or add vigour to its operations, as plainly dif-
covered that some object of greater importance
occupied and interested them.

THE Protestants, as they were not inattentiveApprehen-

or unconcerned fpedators of their motions, enter-f°ns Of he
tained every day more violent suspicions of their
intentions, and received intelligence from differ-
ent quarters of the machinations carrying on a-
gainfl them. The King of England informed
them, that the Emperor having long resolved to
exterminate their opinions, would not fail to em-
ploy this interval of tranquillity which he low en-
joyed, as the most favourable junaure for carry-
ing his design into execution. The merchants of
Augsburg, which was at that time a city of ex-
tensive trade, received advice by means of their
correspondents in Italy, among whom were rome
who secretly favoured the Protestant caufec, that
a dangerous confederacy againfi it was forming
between the Pope and Emperor. In confirmation
of this, they heard from the Low-Countries that
Charles had issued orders, though with every pre-
caution which could keep the meafilre concealed,
.for rairing troops both there and in other parts of
his dominions. Such a variety of information,
corroborating all that their own jealousy or ob-
lervation led them to apprehend, left the Protef-
tants little reason to doubt of the Emperor's hof-
tile intentions. Under this impreflion, the depu-Their deli
ties of the confederates of Smalkalde affembledb'"ato"'
at Frankfort, and by communicating their intelli-
gence and sentiments to each other, reciprocally
heightened their sense of the impending danger.
But their union was not such as their situation re-

b Seckend, I. iii. 6o0, &c. o Seck. 1. iii. 579.

quired,

BoK VIl. quired, or the preparations of their enemies ren-
'--'dered necessary. Their league had now subsisted

54 ten years. Among so many members whole terri-

tories were intermingled with each other, and who,
according to the custom of Germany, had created
an infinite variety of mutual rights and claims by
intermarriages, alliances, and contracts of differ-
ent kinds, fribjets ofjealoufy and discord had un-
avoidably arisen. Some of the confederates, be-
ing connected with the Duke of Brunswick, were
highly difgutted with the Landgrave, on account
of the rigour with which he had treated that ralh
but unfortunate Prince. Others taxed the Eledtor
of Saxony and Landgrave, the heads of the league,
with having involved the members in unnecessary
andexorbitant expences by their profuseness or want
of oeconomy. The views, likewise, of these two
great Princes, who, by their superior power and
authority, influenced and direced the whole
body, being extremely different, rendered all its
motions languid, at a time when the utmost vi-
gour and dispatch were requisite. The Landgrave,
of a violent and enterprizing temper, but not for-
getful, amidst his zeal for religion, of the ufiual
maxims of human policy, insisted that the danger
which threatened them, being manifest and una-
voidable, they (hould have recourse to the most
effectual expedient for securing their own safety,
by courting the protection of the Kings of France
and England, or by joining in alliance with the
proteftantcantons of Swifferland, fiom whom they
might expeCt such powerful and prelent afliftance
as their situation demanded. The Elector on the
other hand, with the most upright intentions of
any Prince in that age, and with talents which
might have qualified him abundantly for the
administration of government in any tranquil
period, was poffefled with such superstitious vene-
ration for all the parts of the Lutheran fyftern

and

and such bigotted attachmient to all its tenets, ascOQ .vl.
made him averse to an union with those who dif-~'"'
sered from him in any article of faith, and render-
ed him very incapable of undertaking its defence
in times of difficulty and danger. He seemed to
think, that the concerns of religion were to be re-
gulated entirely by principles anld.;maxims dif-
ferent from those which apply to'tlbe common as-
fairs of life; and being Ifvaed too iucllc by the
opinions of Luther \'ho \vas inot only a stranger to
the rules of political conduc, b!)t :despised them;
he often discovered an uncomplyingr :pirit which
proved of the greatest detriment to.the cause that
he wifled to support, Influenced, on tfhis (ccafio:,
by the severe and rigid notions of that Reformer,
lie refused to er.ter into a)ny confederacy w-ith
Francis, because he was a persecutor of the truth;
or to follicit tlhe.friendfhip of Henry,. because he
was no less impiotos and profane than the Pope
himself; or even to join in alliance with the Swiss,
because they differed fror him in several eifential
articles of faith. This dissention, about a point of
such consequence, produced its naniual effctts.
Each iecretly censured and reproached the other.
The Landgrave confidired the EledCor as fettered
by narrow prejudices unworthy of a Prince called
to ac¢: !a chief part in a fcerie of such, inmportance.
Tlhe:l lector fufpei.dd: lrim of loose principles and
ambitious views, whichh,orirefpdnide iUI with the
lficrid caule in Wlhiih-.tiley were engaged. Bijt
thoughl the ElecCor's scruples prevlted ti their lini(-
ly application flonfortigt aid; and..tlleijealoury (r
(d.i(cointent of tlie;othei pfinces defieatddt propoiitl
for ren'ewing thcir. Origitfl confcdeqcy,' he tecrll
during which it Wfas .L continue: ii fortce.heing (o:
the point of expiring; yet the fenie of their con'
tnon:dhtaer indiaed.-:tmni to agree witl' rcgiard to
:VOL. II. F othcz

°oo vn. other points, particularly that they would never
,54. acknowledge the assembly at Trent as a lawful

council, nor susser the Archbilhop of Cologne tc
be oppressed on account of the steps which he hac
taken towards the reformation of his dioceses.

The nego- THE Landgrave, meanwhile, defirolls of pene.
ciationswithtrating to the bottom of the Emperor's intentions
or. Epe wrote to Granvelle, whom he knew to be tho

roughly acquainted with all his master's schemes
informing him of the several particulars whic
raised the suspicions of the Pioteftants, and beg
ging an explicit declaration of what they had tc
fear or to hope. Granvelle, in return, affurec
them that the intelligence which they had receiv
ed of the Emperor's military preparations waj
exaggerated, and all their suspicions destitute o
foundation; that, though in order to guard hi'
frontiers againf any insult of the French or Eng.
lifl, he had commanded a small body of men te
be raised in the Low-Countries, he was as follici
itois as ever to maintain: tranquillity in Germa
ny,

BUT the Emperor's actions did not cor.ref;ponc

:with these profeflions. For, instead of appointing
men of known moderation and 'a pacific temper t(
'appear in defence of the Cathilie idoctrines 'at ;th
conference which Jhad been agreed on, he'mad,
choice of fierce bigots; aitached to their own sys
tern with a blind obftinacg, which rendered al
hope of reconbilement defperlhte. Malvenda,
Spanish divine,''who took: the condudt of the de
bate on the part of the Catholic% managed it witi
all the fubtld dexterity of a fcholaftic.nietaphyfi
< Seck. I, iii!566, 579, 613. Slcidh 355T a Sleid: 35(

i . . ian

cian, more studious to perplex his adversaries than BooK V".
to convince them, and more intent on palliating ,46.
error than on discovering truth. The Protestants
filled with indignation, as well at his sophistry as
at some regulations which the Emperor endea-
voured to impose on the di(putants, broke off the
conference abruptly, being fully;,convinced of the
Emperor's having had nothing in view but to
amuse them, and to gain time for ripening his
own schemes .

F Sleid. 358. Seck. 1. iii. 6ao.

THE

# BOOK VIII.

THE
HI S TORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

B O O K VIII.

Boo, viII.IT HILE appearances of danger daily en.

ó-- -

l VV creased, and the tempest which had been

Dcai fio long a gathering was ready to break forth in
.uther. all its violence against the Protestant church, Lu-

tildr!;ws saved, by a seasonable death, from feel-
ing or beholding its destructive rage. Having gone,
though in a declining state of health, and dur-
ing a rigorous season, to his native city of Eyfle-
ben, in order to compose, by his authority, a dif-
fention among the counts of Mansfield, he was
,,b. ,8. seized with a violent inflammation in his flomach,

which in a few days put an end to his life, in
the fixty-third year of his age. As he was

raised
1_ _ ____: · _

raised up by providence to be the author of one of oo: VIll.
the greatest and most interesting revolutions re- ,546.
corded in history, there is not any person perhaps
whole characer has been drawn with fich oppo-
site colours. In his own age, one party, struck
with horror and inflamed with rage, when they
saw with what a daring hand be overturned every
thing which they held to be .sacred, or valued as
beneficial, imputed to him not only all the defecs
and vices of a man, but the qualities of a daemon.
The other, warmed with admiration and grati-
tude, which they thought be merited as the ref-
torer of light and liberty to the Christian church,
ascribed to him perfetions above the condition of
humanity, and viewed all his actions with a vene,
ration bordering on that which should be paid
only to those who are guided by the immediate
inspiration of heaven. It is his own conduct, not His charc.
the undiftinguifhing censure or the exaggerated"e'
praife'of his contemporaries, which ought to regu-
late the opinions of the present age concerning hir.
Zeal for what he regarded as truth, undaunted
intrepidity to maintain it, abilities both natural
and acquired to defend it, and unwearied industry
to propagate it, are virtues which (hine so confpi-
cuoufly in every pa t of his behaviour, that
even his enemies mull allow him to have ppf-
fcfled them in an eminent degree. To these may
be added with equal justice, such purity and even
austerity of manners, as became one who assumed
the character of a Reformer; such s.anctity of life
as suited the doctrine which he delivered; and
such perftdt dilintereflednefs as affords no flight
presumption of his sincerity. Superior to all fel-
fish considerations, a itranger to the elegancies of
life, and despising its pleasures, he left the ho-
nours and emoluments of the church to his difci-
pies, remaining satisfied himfllf in his original
state of professor in the university, and patlor of

F 3 tle

eK VI vthe the town of Wittemberg, with the moderate ap

. pointments annexed to these offices. His extraor

dinary qualities were allayed with no inconfider.
able mixture of human frailty and human pafli
ons. These, however, were of fuich a nature, thai
they cannot be imputed to malevolence or cor.
ruption of heart, but seem to have taken their rife
from the fame source with many of his virtues,
his mind forcible and vehement in all its opera.
tions, rouzed by great objects, or agitated by vio-
lent passions, broke out, on many occasions, with
an impetuosity which aftonilhes men of feeble;
spirits, or filch as are placed in a more tranquil
situation. By carrying some praise-worthy difpo-
fitions to excess, he bordered sometimes on what
was culpable, and was often betrayed into ations
which exposed him to censure. His confidence
that his own opinions were well founded, ap-
proached to arrogance; his courage in aflerting
them, to rashness; his firmness in adhering to
them, to obstinacy; and his zeal in confuting his
adversaries, to rage and scurrility. Accustomed
himself to confider every thing as Subordinate to
truth, he expected the fame deference for it from
other men; and without making any allowances
for their timidity or prejudices, he poured forth
against those, who disappointed him in this parti-
cular, a torrent of invetive mingled with con-
tempt. Regardless of any diftintion of rank or
charater when his doctrines were attacked, he
chastised all his adversaries, indiftriminately, witli
the fame rough hand; neither thei royal dignity
of Henry VIII. nor the eminent learning and abi-
ties of Erasmus, screened them from the fame
gross abuse with which he treated Tetzel or
Eccius.

Bu T there indecencies of which Luther was guil-
ty, must not be imputed wholly to the violence of

his

his temper. They ought to be charged in part on BOOK VII
the manners of the age. Among a rude people, ,
unacquainted with those maxims, which, by put-
ting continual restraint on the passions of indivi-
duals, have polished society and rendered it agree-
able, difpures of every kind were managed with
hear, and strong emotions were uttered in their
natural language, without reserve or delicacy. At
the fame time, the works of learned men were all
c.)mpo(ed in Latin, and they were not only autho-
rized, by the example of eminent writers in that
language, to use their antagonists with the most il-
liberal scurrility; but, in a dead tongue, indecen-
cies of every kind appear less shocking than in a .
living language, whose idioms and phrases seem
gross, because they are familiar.

IN palling judgment upon the characers of

men, we ought to try them by the principles and
maxims of their own age, not by those of another.
For, although virtue and vice are at all times the
fame, manners and customs vary continually. Some
parts of Luther's behaviour, which to us appear
most culpable, gave no disgust to his contempora-
ries. It was even by some of those qualities,
which we are now apt to blame, that he was fitted
for accomplishing the great woi k which he under-
took. To rouze mankind, when funk in ignorance
or superstition, and to encounter the rage of bi-
gotry, armed with power, required the utmost ve-
hemence of zeal, and a temper daring to excels.
A gentle call would neither have reached, nor
have excited those to whom it was addrefred. A
lpirir, more amiable, but less vigorous than Lu-
ther's, would have shrunk back from the dangers,
which he braved and surmounted. Towards the
close of Luther's life, though without any per-

ceptible

Boot VIII. ceptible declension of his zeal or abilities, tile in-

^ firmities of his temper increased upon him, so that

he grew daily more peevish, more irascible, and
more impatient of contradietion. Having lived
to be witness of his own amazing fticcefs; to fee
a great part of Europe embrace his docrines; and
to (hake the foundation of the Papal throne, be-
fore which the mightieil Monarchs had trembled,
he discovered, on lome occasions, symptoms of va-
nity and felf-applaufe. He must have been in-
deed more than man, if, upon contemplating all
that he actually accompliihed, he had never felt
any sentiment of this kind rising in his breafR .

SOME time before his death he felt his strength

declining, his conflitution being worn out by a
prodigious multiplicity of bulinefs, added to the
labour of di(charging his miniflerial function with
unremitting diligence, to the fatigue of conflant
fludy, betides tile composition of works as volt-
minous as if he had enjoyed uninterrupted leisure
and retirement. His natural intrepidity did not
forsake him at the approach of death; his last
conversation with his friends was concerning the

* A remarkable inflance of this, as well as of a certain

singularity and elevation of sentiment, is found in his LatI
Will. Though the effet&s which he had to bequeath were
very inconsiderable, he thought it necessary to make a Testa-
mient, but scorned to frame it with the usual legal formalities.
Notus fum, fays he, in ccelo, in terra, & in inferno, & auto-
ritatenm ad hoc sufficientem habco, ut inihi soli credatur, curn
)eus mili, honini licet damnabili, ct iuilserabili peccatori, ex
paterna mifericordia Evangelium fili ffii cediderit, dederitque
ut in eo verax & fidelis tuerim, ita ut multi in mundo illud
per me acceperint, & me pro Dofcore veritatis agnoverinr.
Ipreto banno Papa, Cefaris, Regunl, Principum & facerdo-
tum, immo omniuin dmnionum odio. Qlidni, igitur, ad dif-
pofitioneml hanc, in re exigua, fufliciat, li adfit manus mea
reflinonium, & dici pollit, hiec fcripfit D. Martinus Luther,
Notarius Dii, & testis Evangelii ejus. erck. 1. iii. p. 651.

lappinels

happiness reserved for good men in a future world,Boo° VIII.
of which he spoke with the fervour and delight ,-.
natural to one who expeted and wished to enter
soon upon the enjoyment of it'. The account of
his death filled the Roman Catholic party with
txceflive as well as indecent joy, and damped the
spirits of all his followers neither party fiffici-
ently confidering that his dodrines were now so
firmly rooted, as to be in a condition to flourish
independent of the hand which first had planted
them. His funeral was celebrated by order of
the EleCtor of Saxony with extraordinary pomp.
He left several children by his wife Catharine Bore,
who survived him; towards the end of the last
century, there were in Saxony some of his defren-
dents in decent and honourable ftationsb.

THE Emperor, meanwhile, pursued the plan ofThelrnPr'-

dissimulation with which he had set out, employ-vours to a-
ing every art to amuse the Protestants, and todm"ufeil"nd

5 deceive the

quiet their fears and jealousies. For this purpose Protefants.
he contrived to have an interview with the Land-
grave of Hesse, the most aftive of all the confe-
derates, and the most suspicious of his defigns.Malrcl8-
To him he made such warm profeflions of his
concern for the happiness of Germany, and of his
aversion to all violent mealilres; he denied, in
lich express terms, his having entered into any
league, or having begun any military preparations
which should give cause of alarm to the Protef-
tants, as seem to have dispelled all the Land-
grave's doubts and apprehensions, and sent him
away fully satisfied of his pacific intentions. This
artifice was of great advantage, and eflfeO.ually an..

Sleid. 362. Seek. lib. iii. 632, &c. b Seck.
I. iii. 651.

fwercd

Book vi." fwered the purpose for which it was intended.

1; The Landgrave upon his leaving Spires, where

he had been admitted to this interview, went to
Worms, where the Smalkaldic confederates were
afRembled, and gave them such a flattering repre-
fenration of the Emperor's favourable disposition
towards them, that they, too apt, as well from the
temper of the German nation as from the genius
of all great aflociations or bodies of men, to be
flow, and dilatory, and undecifive in their deli-
berations, thought there was no neceflity of tak-
ing any immediate measures against danger, which
appeared to be distant or imaginary'.

Proceedings SUCH events, however, loon occurred, as flag-
cil ageinfngered the credit which the Protestants had given
theProtef- to the Emperor's declarations. The council of
tants. Trent, though fiill composed of a frnall number

of Italian and Spanish prelates, without a single
deputy from many of the kingdoms which it as-
fumed the right of binding by its decrees, being
ashamed of its long inactivity, proceeded now to
fettle articles of the greatest importance. Hav-
ing begun with examining the firfl and chief point
in controversy between the church of Rome and
the Reformers, concerning the rule which fhouid
be held supreme or decilive in matters of faith,
Aprl 8- the council, by its infallible authority, determi-

ned, " That the books to which the designation
of Apecryphal hath been given, are of equal au-
thority with those which were receive-d by the
Jews and primitive Christians into t;e filcrcd
canon; that the traditions handed down from
the apostolic age, and prteerved in the church,
are entitled to as much regard as the doctrines

c Sleid. Hilt. 367, 373.

and precepts which the inspired authors have00oo VUIl
committed to writing; that the Latin translation '546.
of the Scriptures, made or revised by St. Jerome,
and known by the name of the Vulgate tranflati-
on, should be read in churches, and appealed to
in the schools as authentic and canonical. Against
all who disclaimed the truth of these tenets, ana-
themas were denounced in the name and by the
authority of the Holy Ghost. The decision of
these points, which undermined the main pillar
of the Lutheran system, was a plain warning to
the Protestants what judgment they might expect
when the council (hould have leisure to take into
consideration the particular and subordinate arti-
cles of their Creed d.

THIS discovery of the council's readiness to

condemn their opinions, was soon followed by a
striking instance of the Pope's resolution to pu-
nifh such as embraced them. The appeal of the
canons of Cologne against their Archbiihop hav-
ing been carried to Rome, Paul eagerly seized on
that opportunity, both of displaying tie extent
of his own authority, and of teaching the Ger-
man ecclesiastics the danger of revolting from the
established church. As no person appeared in
behalf of the Archbishop, he ; as held to be con-
vited of the crime of heresy, and a Papal bull^APil 6.
was issued, depriving him of his ecclefiaflical
dignity, inflicting on him the sentence of excom-
munication, and absolving his fubjed.s from the
oath of allegiance which they had taken to him
as their civil superior. The countenance which
he had given to the Lutheran heresy was the on-
ly crime imputed to him, as well as the only rea-
ion afligned to justify the extraordinary rigour of

F. Paul. 141. Pallav. 2o6.

this

Book VnI. this decree. The Protestants could scarce believe

54. that Paul, how zealous foevcr to defend the efta-

blilhed fyflem, or to humble thole who invaded
it, would have ventured to proceed to such extre-
mities against a Prince and Eledor of the Empire,
without having previously secured fich powerful
protedtion as would render his cenfilre something
more than an impotent and despicable rally of
resentment. They were of course deeply alarm-
ed at this sentence against the Archbishop, confi-
dering it as a sure indication of the malevolent
intentions not only of the Pope, but of the Em-
peror, againif the whole party .

Charles a- UPON this fi'efh revival of their fears, with such
bo tnce violence as is natural to men rouzed from a false
hostilities security, and conscious of their having been de-
against the
Protsn,,ts. ceived, Charles saw that it was now necelfary to

throw aside the veil, and to declare openly what
part he determined to act. By a long series of
artifice and fallacy, he had gained To much time,
that his measures, though not altogether ripe for
execution, were greatly matured. The Pope, by
his proceedings against the Elector of Cologne,
as well as by the decree of the council, had pre-
cipitated matters into such a firuation, as rendered
a breach between the Emperor and the Protestants
almost unavoidable. Charles had no choice left
him but either to take part wilh them in over-
turning what the See of Rome had determined,
or to lupport the authority of the church openly

iNegh"ciae by force of arms. Nor did the Pope think it

with the
Pope. enough to have brought the Emperor under a ne-

cefliity of ading; he prefled him to begin his ope-
rations, by promising to second him with such vigour
as could scarce fail of securing his s'uccess. Tranf
ported by his zeal against heresy, he forgot all the

c Sleid.354. F. Paul, 155. Pallavic. 224.

prudent

prud'eet and cautious mixsims of the Papal See,with #ot vni.
regard to the danger of extending the imperial ,;s
authority beyond due bounds, and in order to
crorfh the Lttlherans, he was willing to contribute
towavrds raising up a rhafter that might prove for-
midable -to himself as well as to the reft of Italy.

BUT betides the certain expectation of afiiftance Concludes a

from the Pope, Charles was now secure from any lr',c' wth
danger of interruption to his designs by tlheTurk-
ilh arms. His negociations at the Porte, which
he had earied on with great afiduity since the
peace of Crefpy, were on the point of being ter-
minated in such a manner as he desired. Soly-
man, partly in compliance with the French King,
who, in order to avoid the disagreeable obligation
of joinri.i.g the Emperor against his ancient ally,
laboured with great zeal to bring about an accom-
modation between them 5 and partly from its be-
ing necessary to turn his arms towards the east,
where the Persians threatened to invade his domi-
nions, consented without difficulty to a truce for
five years,3 The Ghief article of it was, that each
should retain pofieflion of what he now held in
Hungary; and Ferdinand as a sacrifice to the pride
of the Sultan, lubmitted to pay an annual tribute
of fifty thousand crowns.

BrT it wa" upon the aid and cotleurrence ofGains Mau-

the Germatns themrelves that the Emperot felied rice and
with the griateft cotrfidece. The Germanic bo- , of 'er-P
dy, he kflew, was of fueh va'st ftrenrgth, as to be many.
invineibe'f f it were united, and that it was on-
ly by eiipleyigti its own force that he could
hope to '6uiltte it. Happily for hini, the uni-
on of dthe fveveal rtmembet ih thit great sys-
tetm wax 'Ti feeble, the whdle framei was Of
loosely eCdipiAted, *aid its dlfferent parts
tended 1s violently tswardo separation from
Iftuanhaffii Hist Hung. 180. Mer. de Ribier, tom. i. 582.

each

Bo.,K VIi. each other, that it was almost impossible for it, on
'""-'any important emergence, to join in a general or vi-

gorous effort. In the present junaure, the sources
of discord were as many, and as various as had been
known on any occasion. The Roman Catholics,
animated with a 'zeal in defence of their religion
proportional to the fierceness with which it had
been attacked, were eager to second any attempt
to humble those innovators, who had overturned
it in many provinces, and endangered it in more.
John and Albert of Brandenburg, as well as feve-
ral other Princes, incensed at the haughtiness and
rigour with which the Duke of Brunswick had
been treated by the confederates of Smalkalde,
were impatient to rescue him, and to be revenged
on them. Charles obferved,with fatisfadion, the
working of these paflions in their minds, and
counting on them as sure auxiliaries whenever he
should think it proper to ad, he found it, mean-
while, more necessary to moderate than to in-
flame their' rage.

Holds a diet SUCH was the situation of affairsi such the dif-
so Ratislon. '

cernment with which the Emperor foresaw and
provided for every event, when the diet of the
Empire met at Ratisbon. Many of the Roman
Catholic members appeared there in person, but
mors of the confederates of Smalkalde, under pre-
tence of their being unable to bear the expence
occasioned by the late unneceflary frequency of
fich afuemblies, rent only deputies. Theirjealoufy
of the Emperor, and apprehensions that violence,
perhaps, might be employed in order to force
their approbation of what he should propose in
the diet, was the true cause of their abfcnce.
The speech with which the Emperor opened the
diet was extremely artful. After profefling, in
in common form, his regard for the prosperity of

the

the Germanic body, and declaring that in orderB°00 V11.
to bestow his whole attention upon the re-establish- i46.
ment of its order and tranquillity, he had at pre-
sent abandoned all other cares, rejeCed the molt
prefling foliicitations of his other subjects to reside
among them, and postponed affairs of the great-
ell importance; he took notice, with lome isdig-
nation, that his disinterested example had not been
imitated; many members of chief confidcration
having neglected to attend an assembly to which
he had repaired with such manifest irconveni-
ence to himself. He then mentioned their un-
happy di'flenfions about religion; lamented the ill
success of his past endeavours to compose them;
complained of the abrupt dissolution of the late
conference, and craved their advice with regard
to the belt and most effectual method of restoring
union to the churches of Germany, together with
that happy agreement in articles of faith, which
their ancestors had found to be of no less advan-
tage to their civil interest, than becoming their
Christian profession.

BY this gracious and popular method of con-

fulting the members of the diet, rather than of
obtruding upon them' any opinion of his own, be-
fides the appearance of great moderation, and the
merit of paying much refpeat to their judgment,
the Emperor dextroufly avoided discovering his
own sentiments, and reserved to himself, as his
only part, that of carrying into execution what
they Ihould recommend. Nor was he leTs secure
of fich a decision as, he wished for by referring it
whbll 'to themselves. The Roman Catholic mem-
bers; prompted by their own zeal, or prepared by
his intrigues,joined immediately in representing
*that hthe! authority of the council now met at
Trent ought to be fidal in all matters of contro-

verfy;

i*t Vil. verfy ; that all Chrifians (hould submit to its de.

,4 ,crees 'as the infallible rule of their faith; and
therefore they besought him to exert the power,
with which he was invested by the Almighty, in
protecting that assembly, and in compelling the
Protestants to acquiesce in its determinations.
The Protestants, on the other hand, presented a
memorial, in which, after repeating their objecti.
ons tó the council of Trent, they proposed, as the
only effieeual method of deciding the points in
dispute, that either a free general council Ihould
be assembled in Germany, or a national council of
the Empire should be called, or a felete number
of divines should be appointed out of each party
to examine and define articles of faith; they men-
tioned the recesses offeveral diets favourable to
this proposition, and which gave them hope of ter-
minating all their differences in this amicable man-
ner; they rnow conjured the Emperor not to de-
part from his former plan, and by offering vio-
lence to their consciences to.brihg calamities upon
Germany, the very thought of which mrit fill
every lover of his country with horror. The Em-
peror receiving: this paper, wv:ith a contemnpttibus
smile, paid no. farther regard to it. Having al-
ready taken his final refoitidn, and perceiving
that nothing but force coild compel them to ac-
quiefce in it, lie dispatched the-Cardinal of Trent
June ,. to Rome, in order to condlude an alliance with

the Pope, the terms of which were already agreed
on; he commanded a body of troops, levied on
purpose ih the Low-Countries, to advangcetbwards
Germany . h .ga've comrniijons td Ieveral of-
ficers sot riifing men in different parts of'the Em-
pire; he warned John and Albert of Brandenburg,
that now was. the! proper tifie; of eweiting; them-
selves, in order to refbau, thieir ally,. Henry obf
Brunswick, from. cptivity:. . ::

r Sleid. 374. Seck. iii. 658.

ALI,

ALL these things could not be tranfated Book vI.

without the observation and knowledge of the 6.
Protestants. The secret was now in many The Pro-
hands; under whatever veil of artifice or secrecy t^ntd
the Emperor fill affected to conceal his designs,
his officers kept no such mysterious reserve, and
his allies and fubjeds spoke out his intentions
plainly. Alarmed with reports of this kind,
from every quarter, as well as with the prepa-
rations of war which they saw begun, the de-
puties of the confederates demanded audience
of the Emperor, and in the name of their ma-
fters, required to know whether there military
preparations were carried on by his command,
and for what end, and against what enemy.
To a question put in such a tone, and at a time
when fads were become too notorious to be de-
nied, it was necessary to give an explicit answer.
He owned the orders which he had issued, and
profefling his purpose not to molest any on ac-
count of religion who should ad as dutiful sub-
jeds, declared that he had nothing in view but
to maintain the rights and prerogatives of the
Imperial dignity, and by punishing some sac-
tious members to preserve the ancient conftitu-
tion of the Empire from being impaired or dif-
solved by their irregular or licentious conduct.
Though the Emperor did not name the per-
sons whom he charged with such high crimes,
and destined to be the objects of his vengeance,
it was obvious that he had the Elecor of Saxony
and Landgrave of Hesse in view. Their depu-
ties, confidering what he had said, as a plain
declaration of his hoffile intentions, immedi-
ately retired from Ratisbon (a).

THE Cardinal of Trent found it no difficult The Em.;e

ror's treaty

matter to treat with the Pope, who having at wih Y
length brought the Emperor to adopt that plan t'e'

VOL. III. F which

(a) Slcid. 376.

BookVIii. which he had long recommended, assented with

s46, eagerness to every article that he proposed. The
July z6. league was signed a few days after the Cardi.

nal's arrival at Rome. The pernicious herefies
which abounded in Germany, the obstinacy of
the Proteltants in rejeting the holy council
assembled at Trent, and the necessity of main-
taining found doctrine together with good order
in the church, are mentioned as the motives
of this union between the contracting parties.
In order to check the growth of these evils,
and to punish such as had impiously contributed
to spread them, the Emperor, having long and
without success made trial of gentler remedies,
engaged instantly to take the field with a fiuffi-
cient army, that he might compel by force all
who disowned the council, or had apostatized
fiom the religion of their forefathers, to return
into the bosom of the church, and to submit
with due obedience to the Holy See. He like-
wife bound himself not to conclude a peace with
them during fix months without the Pope's
consent, nor without afligning him his flare in
any conquest which flhould be made upon them;
and that even after that period he should not
agree to any accommodation which might be
detrimental to the church or the interest of reli-
gion. On his part, the Pope stipulated to de-
pofite a large rum in the bank of Venice to-
wards defraying the expence of the war; to
maintain at his own charge, during the space of
fix months, twelve thousand foot, and five hun-
dred horse ; to grant the Emperor for one year
half of the eccleiaflical revenues throughout
Spain; to authorize him by a bull to alienate as
much of the lands belonging to religious houses
in that country, as would amonint to the fum of
five hundred thou!and crowns; and to employ
not only fliiritual censures but military force

againit

o.'r

against any Prince who should attempt to inter- Book VII.
rupt or defeat the execution of this treaty (b). z6.

NOTWITHSTANDING the explicit terms in Endeavour,

itill to con-

which the extirpation of heresy was declared to ceal his
be the objeet of the war which was to follow itmthn'
upon this treaty, Charles still endeavoured to Protcrants.
persuade the Germans that he had no design to
abridge their religious liberty, but that he aimed
only at vindicating his own authority, and re-
prefling the insolence of those who had en-
croached upon it. With this view, he wrote
circular letters, in the fame itrain with his an-
fwer to the deputies at Ratisbon, to most of the
free cities, and to several of the Princes who
had embraced the Protestant doctrines. In the'e
he complained loudly, but in general terms, of
the contempt into which the Imperial dignity
had fallen, and of the prelumptuous as well as
disorderly behaviour of some members of the
Empire. He declared he now took arms, not
in a religious but in a civil quarrel; not to op-
press those who continued to behave as quiet
and dutiful fubjets, but.to humble the arro-
gance of such as had thrown off all sense of that
ftbordination in which they were placed under
him as head of the Germanic body. Gross as
this deception was, and manifest as it might
have appeared to all who confidered the Empe-
ror's conduld with attention, it became neceflary
for him to make trial of its effed ; and fich
was the confidence and dexterity with which he
employed it, that he derived the most solid ad-
vantages from this artifice. If he had avowed
at once an intention of overturning the Protest-
ant church, and of reducing all Germany under
its ancient (late of filbjec'ion to the Papal See,
none of the cities or Princes who had embraced

1' 2 the
( i) S1citCi.3 . Pallav. z255. DUiin ont Corps Diplon. Ii.

Bcok VIII. the new opinions could have remained reutral

s54, aafter such a declaration, far less could they have

ventured to affill the Emperor in such an enter-
prize. Whereas by concealing, and even dif-
claiming any intention of that kind, he not
only saved himself from the danger of being
overwhelmed by a general confederacy of all
the Protestant flates, but he furnished the timid
with an excuse for continuing inaftive, and the
designing or interested with a pretext for join-
ing him without exposing themselves to the in-
famy of abandoning their own principles, or
having an active hand in suppressing them. At
the fame time the Emperor well knew that if he
were enabled, by their aflifance, to break the
power of the Elector of Saxony and Landgrave,
he might afterwards prescribe what terms he
pleased to the feeble remairs of a party without
union or leaders, who would then regret, too
late, their miflaken confidence in him, and their
inconsiderate desertion of their associates.
The rope THE Pope, by a sudden and unforeseen dif-

°'I~S7 play of his zeal, had well nigh disconcerted

this plan which the Emperor had formed with
so much care and art. Proud of having been
the author of such a formidable confederacy
against the Lutheran heresy, and happy in
thinking that the glory of extirpating it was re-
served for his Pontificate, he publifled the ar-
ticles of his league with the Emperor as a proof
of their pious intention, as well as of the extra-
ordinary efforts which he himself was about to
make for maintaining the faith in its purity.
Not satisfied with this, he soon after ifnued a
bull containing mofl liberal promises of indul-
gence to all who (hould engage in this holy en-
terprize, together with warm exhortations to
such as could not bear a part in it themselves,

to
i.

to increase the fervour 6f their prayers, and the Book VIIL
severity of their mortifications, that they might -,'
draw down the blefling of heaven upon those
who undertook it (c). Nor was it zeal alone
which pushed the Pope to make declarations so
inconsistent with the account which the Emperor
himself gave of his motives for taking arms.
He was much scandalized at Charles's diffimu-
lation in such a cause; at his seeming to be
ashamed of owning his zeal for the church; and
at his endeavours to make that pass for a politi-
cal contest, which he ought to have gloried in
as a war which had no other object than the de-
fence of religion, With as much solicitude,
therefore, as the Emperor laboured to disguise
the purpose of the confederacy, did the Pope
endeavour to publish their real plan, in order
that they might come at once to a rupture with
the Proteltants, that all hope of reconcilement
might be cut off, and that Charles might be
under fewer temptations, and have it less in his
power than at present, to betray the interests of
the church by an accommodation beneficial to
himself (d).

TnE Emperor, though not a little offended at

the Pope's indiscretion or malice in making this
discovery, continued boldly to pursue his own
plan, and to affcrt his intentions to be no other
than what he had originally avowed. Several of
the Protestant itates, whom he had previously
gained, thought themselves justified in Come
measure, by his declarations, for abandoning their
associates, and even for giving afiftance to him.

BUT these artifices did not impose on the VTh'cprep

rinons of'

greater and founder part of the Protestant con- the p'roclr-
federates.They clearly perceived it to be againlIti , ,

F 3 the acfcnyc.

(c) PDu Mout Corps Diplorn.
(d) F. Paul, 188. Thuan. Hilt. i. 61.

Book VII. the reformed religion that the Emperor had

4 taken arms, and that not only the fuppreflion

of it, but the extinction of the German liberties,
would be the certain consequence of his obtain-
ing such an entire superiority as would enable
him to execute his schemes in their full extent,
They determined, therefore, to prepare for their
own defence, and neither to renounce those re-
ligious truths, to the knowledge of which they
had attained by means To wonderful, nor to
abandon those civil rights which had been tranf-
mitted to them by their ancestors. In order to
give the necessary direEtions for this purpose,
their deputies met at Ulm, soon after their ab-
rupt departure from Ratisbon. Their delibera-
tions were now condueted with such vigour and
unanimity, as the imminent danger which threa-
tened them required. The contingent of troops,
which each of the confederates was to furnish
having been fixed by the original treaty of uni-
on, orders were given for bringing them imme-
diately into the field. IBeing sensible, at last,
lhat through the narrow prejudices of tome of
their members, and the imprudent security of
others, they had neglected too long to strengthen
themselves by foreign alliances, they now ap-
plied with great earnestness to the Venetians and
Swiss.

Tiihy fol:cit To the former, they represented the Empe-
LC v~,l- ror's intention of overturning the present fyltem
lls·. of Germany, and of railing himself to alfolute

power in that country by means of foreign force
furnithed by the Pope; they warned them how
fatal this event would prove to the liberties of
Italy, and that by fiflering Charles to acquire
unlimited authority in the one country, they
would fbon feel his dominion to be no less
despotic in the other; they besought them,
therefore, not to grant a passage through their

territo-

territories to those troops, which ought to be BockVIII.
treated as common enemies, because by fubdu- Ny
ing Germany they prepared chains for the reft
of Europe. These refletions had not escaped
the sagacity of those wife republicans. They
had communicated their sentiments to the Pope,
and had endeavoured to divert him from an al-
liance which tended to render irresistible the
power of a potentate, whose ambition he already
knew to he boundless But they had found Paul
so eager in the prosecution of his own plan, that
he disregarded all their remonstrances (e). They
would do nothing more towards preventing the
dangers which they foresaw; and in return to
the application from the confederates of Smal-
kalde, informed them, that they could not ob-
Itrut the march of the Pope's troops through
an open country, but by levying an army strong
enough to face them in the field, and that this
would draw upon themselves the whole weight
of his as well as of the Emperor's indignation.
For the fame reason they declined lending a fum
of money, which the Elector of Saxony and
Landgrave proposed to borrow of them, towards
carrying on the war (f).

THEIR demands upon the Swiss were not Ofthcswii.

confined to the obltruCting of tle entrance of
foreigners into Germany; they required of them,
as the nearest neighbours, and clofelt allies of
the Empire, to interpose with their wonted vi-
gour for the preservation of its Liberties, and not
to stand as inaftive fpedators, while their bre -
thren were oppressed and enslaved. But with
what zeal soever the reformed cantons might
have been disposed to. aft when the cause of the
Reformatiou was in danger, the Helvetic body

F 4 was

(r) Adriani Iftoria di fioi tempi, liv. v. p, 332.
(f) Sleil. 381. Paprta Iftor. Venet. tom. iv. 184.

Lambertus Hortelfius de bello Germanico apud Scardilin,
ol. ii. i. 547.

Book vII. was so divided with regard to religion, as ren-
VVY dered it unsafe for the Protestants to take any

1546. flep without consulting their associates; and

among them the emissaries of the Pope and
Emperor had such influence, that a resolution ol
maintaining an exad neutrality between the con-
tending parties, was the utmost which could be
procured (g).

orFranc;sI. BE!NG disappointed in both these applications,
Vai n'y they not long after had recourse to the Kings of

France and England ; the approach of danger
either overcoming the Eletor of Saxony's fcru-
ples, or obliging him to yield to the importuni-
ties of his confederates. The situation of the
two Monarchs flattered them with hopes of fuc-
cess. Hostilities between them had continued
for Come time after the peace of Crefpy. But
becoming weary at laat of a war, attended with
no glory or advantage to either, they had lately
terminated all their differences by a peace con-
cluded at Campe near Ardres. Francis having
with great difficulty procured his allies, the Scots,
to be included in the treaty, in return for that
concefion he engaged to pay a great rum, which
Henry demanded as due to him on several ac-
counts, and he left Bologne in the hands of the
Engliih as a pledge for his faithful performance
of that article. But though the re-eftablilhment
of peace seemed to leave the two Monarchs at
liberty to turn their attention towards Germany,
lb unfortunate were the Protestants, that they
derived no immediate advantage from this cir-
cumflarce. Henry appeared unwilling to enter
into any alliance with them, but on such con-
ditions as would render him not only the head,
but the fuprerne director of their league ; a pre-
eminence which, as the bonds of union or inte-
reft between them were but feeble, and as he dif-
sered from them so widely in his religious senti-

ments,
(g) Sklid. 392.

ments, they had no inclination to admit (b. Book vXI.
Francis, more powerfully inclined by political '"'V
considerations to furnish them with afliftance, '
found his kingdom so much exhausted by a
long war, and was so much afraid of irritating
the Pope by entering into close union with ex-
communicated Heretics, that he durst not un-
dertake the proteAion of the Smalkaldic league.
By this ill-timed caution, or superstitious defe-
rence to scruples, to which at other times he
was not much addicted, he loft the most promi-
sing opportunity of mortifying and diftrefling his
rival, which presented itself during his whole
reign.

BUT, notwithstanding their ill success in their Protelant,
negociations with foreign courts, the confede- takethefi

Cl12.-,> with a great

rates found no difficulty at home, in bringing a army.
sufficient force into the field. Germany aboun-
ded at that time in inhabitants; the feudal in-
ftitutions subsisted in full force, and enabled the
nobles to call out their numerous vassals, and to
put them in motion on the shortest warning;
the martial spirit of the Germans, not broken or
enervated by the introduction of commerce and
arts, had acquired additional vigour during the
continual wars in which they had been employ-
ed, for half a century, either in the pay of the
Emperors, or Kings of France. Upon every
opportunity of entering into service, they were
accustomed to run eagerly to arms; and to every
standard that was ere&ed, voluntiers flocked
from all quarters (i). Zeal seconded, on this
occasion, their native ardour. Men, on whom
the dotrines of the Reformation had made that
deep impression which accompanies truth when
first discovered, prepared to maintain it with
proportional vigour; and among a warlike

people,
(h) Rymcr xv. 93. Herbert, z58. (i) Seck. l. iii. 16,.

Boo VIII. people, it appeared infamous to remain inactive,
V/o'wx when the detence of religion was the motive for

"54ó taking arms. Accident combined with all these

circumstances in facilitating the levy of soldiers
among the confederates. A considerable num-
ber of Germans in the pay of France, being
difmilfed by the King on the profpeat of peace
with England, joined in a body the flandard of
the Proteltants (k). By filch a concurrence of
causes, they were enabled to assemble in a few
weeks an army composed of seventy thousand
foot and fifteen thousand horse; provided with
a train of an hundred and twenty cannon, eight
hundred ammunition waggons, eight thousand
beasts of burden, and fix thousand pioneers (1).
Nor was this army, one of the most numerous,
and undoubtedly the best appointed of any which
had been levied in Europe during that century,
raised by the united effort of the whole Protest-
ant body. The EleEor of Saxony, the Land-
grave of Hesse, the Duke of Wurtemberg, the
Princes of Anhault, and the Imperial cities of
Augsburg, Ulm, and Strafburg, were the only
powers which contributed towards this great ar-
malnent: The Elecors of Cologne, of Bran-
denbourg, and the Count Palatine, overawed by
the Emperor's threats, or deceived by his pro-
feflions, remained neuter. John marquis of
Brandenburg Bareith, and Albert of Branden-
burg Anfpach, though both early converts to
Luthcranilm, entered openly into the Emperor's
clrvice, under pretext of having obtained his
ploiiife for the security of the Proteitant reli-
gion ; and Maurice of Saxony soon followed
their example.

Tfcinequca- THE immcnfe number of their trcops, as
!ity of' the
/mrtror', well as the amazing rapidity wherewith they
forcec to t 1
theirs. lu

(A) Thnan. 1, i. 68. (1) Tlihan. I i iol.. . Iti vi(i ab

Avil;i& Ziriga Conimeiltabrbrtim dc hl. Germ. lib. Duo
Aliw. 150,. .
mo p. 13, a.

had assembled them, astonished the Emperor, k VIII.
and filled him with the molt disquieting appre- , J
henfions. He was, indeed, in no condition to
resist such a mighty force. Shut up in Ratisbon,
a town of no great strength, whose inhabitants,
being mostly Lutherans, would have been more
ready to betray than to afilt him, with only
three thousand Spanish foot, whom he had call-
ed from the fiontiers of Hungary, and about
five thousand Germans who had joined him
from different parts of the Empire, he mulf
have been overwhelmed by the approach offuch
a numerous army, which he could not fight, nor
even hope to retreat from it in safety. The
Pope's troops, though in full march to his relief,
had scarce reached the frontiers of Germany; the
forces which he expected from the Low Coun-
tries had not yet begun to move, and were even
far from being complete (in). His situation,
however, called for more immediate succour,
nor did it seem practicable for him to wait for
fich distant auxiliaries, with whom hisjunction
ias so precarious.

BUT it happened fortunately for Charles, that They im-

the confederates did not avail themselves of the leoc.,Y
advantage which lay so full in their view. In i"2 of
civil wars, the first fleps are commonly taken ,
with much timidity and hesitation. Men are
solicitous, at that time, to put on the semblance
of moderation and equity; they strive to gain
partizans by teeming to adhere ftriLtly to known
forms; nor can they be brouglt, at once, to vio.
late those established institutions, which in times
of tranquility they have been accustomed to re-
verence ; hence their proceedings are often fee-
ble or dilatory when they ought to be most vi-
gorous and decisive. Influenced by these con-
fiderations, which happily for the peace of so-

ciety,
(m) Skid. 389. Avila, 8, a.

Book VII. ciety, operate powerfully on the human mind,
'óv' the confederates could not think of throwing off

that allegiance which they regularly owed to
the head of the Empire, of turning their arms
against him without one solemn appeal nore to
his candour, and the impartialjudgment of their
Juiy 15. fellow fubjets. For this purpose, they address-

ed a letter to the Emperor, and a manifesto to
all the inhabitants of Germany. The tenor of
both was the fame. They represented their own
conduct with regard to civil affairs ns dutiful
and fubmitive; they mentioned the inviolable
union in which they had lived with the Empe-
ror, as well as the many and recent marks of
his good-will and gratitude wherewithal they had
been honoured; they aferted religion to be the
sole cause of the violence which the Emperor
now meditated against them; and in proof of
this adduced many arguments to convince those
who were so weak as to be deceived by the arti-
sices with which he endeavoured to cover his real
intentions; they declared their own resolution
to rifque every thing in maintenance of their re-
ligious rights, and foretold the dissolution of the
German conflitution, if the Emperor should
finally prevail againit them (n).

The Empc- BUT Charles, though in such a perilous fitua-
ror puts tion as might have inspired him with moderate
them under .
tihe ban of sentiments, appeared as inflexible and haughty
tihL mpirce as if his affairs had been in the most profpe-

rous hlate. His only reply to the address and
J!n'y 0. manifesto of the Proteflants, was to publish the

ban of the Empire against the Elecor of Saxony
and Landgrave of Helfe, their leaders, and
against all who should dare to assist them. By
this sentence, the ultimate and molt rigorous
one which the German jurisprudence has pro-

v ided
(n) Skid. 381:

_ . _

vided for the punishment of traitors, or enemies Book VaI.
to their country, they were declared rebels and sI-
outlaws, and deprived of every privilege which
they enjoyed as members of the Germanic body;
their goods were confiscated; their fubjets ab-
solved from their oath of allegiance; and it be-
came not only lawful but meritorious to invade
their territories. The nobles, and free cities,
who framed or perfected the constitution of the
German government, had not been so negligent
of their own safety and privileges as to trust the
Emperor with this formidable jurisdiction. The
authority of a diet of the empire ought to have
been interposed before any-of its members
could be put under the ban. But Charles over-
looked that formality, well knowing that, if his
arms were crowned with success, there would
remain none who would have either power or
courage to call in question what he had done (u).
The Emperor, however, did not found his fen-
tence against the Elector and Landgrave on
their revolt from the established church, or their
conduct with regard to religion; lie affeAed to
aflign for it reasons purely civil, and these too
expressed in such general and ambiguous terms,
without specifying the nature or circumstances
of their guilt, as rendered it more like an adt of
despotic power, than of a legal and limited ju-
rifdiition. Nor was it altogether from choice,
or to conceal his intentions that Charles had re-
course to the ambiguity of general expressions,
he durst not mention too particularly the causes
of his sentence, as every aCtion which he could
have charged upon the Elecor and Landgrave
as a crime, might have been employed with
equal jutlice to condemn such of the Protestants
whom he Rill pretended to confider as faithful

fubjecds,

(u) Slcid. 386. Du Mont Corps Diplom. iv. p. 11. 314.
Pfcffel Hist. Abrcgd du Droit. Publ. 68. 736. 151.

Book VIII. ftbjects, and whom it would have been extreme.
,-v"ó ly imprudent to alarm or diguft.

They de- THE confederates, now perceiving all hopes
against of accommodation to be at an end, had only to
Charles. chufe whether they would submit without re-

serve to the Emperor's will, or proceed to open
hostilities. Nor did they want public spirit and
resolution to make the proper choice. A few
days after the ban of the Empire was published,
they according to the custom of that age, sent a
herald to the imperial camp with a solemn de-
claration of war against Charles, to whom they
no longer gave any other title than that of pre.
tended Emperor, and renounced all allegiance,
homage or duty he might claim, or they had
hirherto yielded to him. But previous to this
formality, part of their troops had begun to aft.

Their fit The command of a considerable body of troops
operations, raised by the city of Augsburg having been

given to Sebastian Schertel, a soldier of fortune,
who by the booty he had got when the Impe-
rialifts plundered Rome, together with the me-
rit of long service, had acquired wealth and au-
thority, which placed him on a level with the
chief of the German nobles; that gallant vete-
ran resolved before he joined the main body of
the confederates, to attempt something suitable
to his former fame, and to the expectation of
his countrymen. As the Pope's forces were
hastening towards Tyrol, in order to penetrate
into Germany, by the narrow passes through the
mountains which run across that country, he
advanced thither with the utimot rapidity, and
seized Ehrenberg and, Cuffitein, two strong
cartles which commanded the principal defiles.
Without flopping a moment, he continued his
march towards Inlfpruck, by getting pofleflion
of which he would have obliged the Italians to
flop Ilort, and with a small body of men could
have rcliiicd all the efforts of the greatefl ar-

mics.

mies. CafRlealto, the governor of Trent, know- Book VIl.
ing what a fatal blow this would be to the Em- 146.
peror, all whose designs must have proved abor-
tive if his Italian auxiliaries had been intercept-
ed, raised a few troops with the utmost dispatch,
and threw himself into the town. Schertel,
however, did not abandon the enterprize, and
was preparing to attack the place, when the
intelligence of the approach of the Italians, and
an order from the EleEtor and Landgrave ob-
liged him to defilt. By his retreat the passes
were left open, and the Italians entered Ger-
many without any opposition, but from the
garrisons that Schertel had placed in Ehrenberg
and Cuffilein, which having no hopes of being
relieved, were not long in surrendering (x) *

Non was the recalling of Schertel the only an ill con-

error of which the confederates were guilty.duc'.
As the supreme command of their army was
committed, in terms of the league of Smalkalde,
to the Eledtor of Saxony and Landgrave of
Hesse with equal authority, all the inconveni-
encies ariling from a divided and co-ordinate
jurifdition, which is always of fatal consequence
in the operations of war, were immediately felt.

The

(x) Seckend. lib. ii. 70. Adriani Iftoria di fuoi tempi,
lib. 335.

* Seckendorf, the industrious author of the Commen-

tarius Apologcticus de Lutheraiino, whom I have ft
long and safely followed as my.giide ill German affairs,
was descended from Schertel. With the care and follicituide
of a German, who was himself of noble birth, Seckendorf
has publinied a long digreflion concerning his anceitor,
calculated chiefly to llew how Schertel was ennobled, and
his posterity allied to many of the molt ancient families in
the Empire. Among other curious particulars, he gives
ns an account of his wealth, the chief folurce of whiich
was the plunder he got at Rome. His landed eltate was
fold by his grandsons for fix hundred thoulland florins.
By this we may form tome idea of the riches anmaffld by
the (.Condotliri, or commanders of mercenary bands in that
age At the taking of Rome, Schertel was only a captaiu,
Scckcnd. .
li ii. 73.

look vII. The Elector, though intrepid in his own person

s`I to excess, and moD ardently zealous in the cause,

was flow in deliberating, uncertain as well as
irresolute in his determinations, and constantly
preferred measures which were cautious and
safe, to fiuch as were bold and decisive. The
Landgrave, of a more active and enterprizing
nature, formed all his resolutions with promp.
titude, wished to execute them with spirit, and
uniformly preferred filch schemes as tended to
bring the contest to a speedy issue. Thus their
maxims, with regard to the conduc of the
war, differed as widely as those by which they
were influenced in preparing for it. Such per-
petual contrariety in their fentimens gave rife,
imperceptibly, to jealousy and the spirit of con-
tention. These multiplied the diffienfions flow-
ing from the incompatibility of their natural
temper, and rendered them more violent. The
other members of the league, confidering them.
selves as independant, and subjea to the Elector
and Landgrave, only in consequence of a vo-
luntary confederacy, did not long retain a pro-
per veneration for commanders, who proceed-
ed with so little unanimity; and the numerous
army of the Proteltants, like a vaif machine
whose parts are all cpmpated, and which is
destitute of any power sufficient to move and
regulate the whole, acted with no consistency,
vigour or effect.

The Pope's THE Emperor, who was afraid that, by re-
thprr maining at Ratisbon, he would render it impof-

fible for the Pope's forces to join him, having
boldly advanced to Landlhut on the Ifer, the
confederates loft some days in deliberating whe.
ther it was proper to follow him into the ter-
ritories of the Duke of Bavaria, a neutral prince.
When at last they surmounted that scruple, and
began to move towards his camp, they suddenly

abandoned

abandoned the design, and hastened to attack BockvIr.
Rlatifbon, in which town Charles could leave z5
only a small garrison. Meanwhile the Papal
troops, amounting fully to that number which
Paul had stipulated to furnish, reached Land.
(hut, and were followed by fix thousand Spa-
niards of the veteran bands stationed in Naples.
The confederates, after Schertel's spirited but
fruitful expedition, seem to have permitted these
forces to advance unmolested to the place of
rendezvous, without any attempt to attack
either them or the Emperor separately, or to
prevent their jundtion (x). The Imperial army
amounted now to thirty-fix thousand men, and
was (till more formidable by the defcipline and
valour of the troops, than by their number.
Avila, commander of Alcantara, who had been
present in all the wars carried on by Charles,
and had served in the armies which gained the
memorable victory at Pavia, which conquered
Tunis, and invaded France, gives this the pre-
ference to any martial force he had ever seen
assembled (y). OEtavio Farnese, the Pope's
grandson, aflifled by the ablest officers formed
in the long wars between Charles and Francis,
commanded the Italian auxiliaries. His bro-
ther the Cardinal Farnese, accompanied him, as
Papal legate; and in order to give the war the
appearance of a religious enterprize, he plo-
posed to march at the head of the army, with
a cross carried before him, and to publish in-
dulgences wherever he came to all who should
give them any affiltance, as had anciently been
the practice in the Cruzades against the In-
fidels. But this the Emperor ftricly prohibit-
ed, as inconsistent with all the declarations which
he had made to the Germans of his own party;
and the legate perceiving, to his aflonifllment,
that the exerife ol the Protestant religion, the

(x) Adriani Iitoria di fiioi tempi, lib. 4. 340.
(y) Avila, 8.
VOL. 11I. G extirpation

Book VIII. extirpation of which he confidered as the sole

J3 ^ objet of the war, was publickly permitted in

the Imperial camp, soon returned in disgust to
Italy (z).

THE arrival of there troops enabled the Em.

peror to fend such a reinforcement to the gar-
rifon of Ratisbon, that the confederates relin-
qui(hing all hopes of reducing that town, march-
ed towards Ingoldftadt on the Danube, near to
which Charles was now encamped. Meanwhile
they exclaimed loudly against the Emperor's
notorious violation of the laws and constitution
of the Empire, in having called in foreigners
to lay waste Germany, and to oppress its li.
berties. As in that' age, the dominion of the
Roman See was so odious to the Protestants,
that the name of the Pope was sufficient to in.
spire them with horror at any enterprize which
he countenanced, and toraife in their minds
the blackest suspicions, it came to be univer-
sally believed among them, that Paul, not fa-
tisfied with attacking them openly by force of
arms, had dispersed his emissaries all over Ger.
many to set on fire their towns and magazines,
and to poison the wells and fountains of water,
Nor did this rumour spread only among the
vulgar, being extravagant as well as frightful
enough to make a deep impression on their
credulity; even the leaders of the party, blind.
ed by their prejudices, published a declaration,
in which they accused the Pope of having erm
ployed these Anticiriftian and diabolical arts
againtt them (a). These sentiments of the con.
federates wereconfirmed, in some measure, by
the behaviour of the Papal troops, who, thinking
nothing too rigorous towards Heretics anathe.
matized by the church, were guilty of great ex
cefes in the Lutheran territories, and aggra.

vated

(a) Sleid. 399.
C!) F. PC111. ]ox.

vated the calamities of war, by mingling with itBook VII.
all the cruelty of bigotted zeal. ^x546

THE first operations in the field, however, The confe-

did not correspond with the violence of those darn" td-
paflions which animated individuals. The Em- -arJs the
peror had prudently taken the resolution of,"mper
avoiding an action with an enemy so far fupe-
ror in number (b), especially as he foresaw
that nothing could keep a body composed of so
many and such diflimilar members from falling,
to pieces, but the pressing to attack it with an
inconsiderate precipitancy. The confederates,
though it was no less evident to them that every
moment's delay was pernicious, were frill pre-
vented by the weakness or division of their lea-
ders from exerting that vigour, with which their
situation, as well as the ardour of their soldiers,
ought to have inspired them. On their arrival Aug. 29,
at lngoldltadt, they found the Emperor in a
camp not remarkable for strength, and fur-
rounded only by a flight entrenchment. Be-
fore the camp lay a plain of such extent, as as-
forded sufficient space for drawing out their
whole army, and bringing it to aft at once.
Every consideration should have determined
them to have seized this opportunity of attack-
ing the Emperor; and their vail superiority in
numbers, the eagerness of their troops, together
with the flability of the German infantry in
pitched battles, afforded them the molt proba-
ble expectation of victory. The Landgrave,
urged this with great warmth, declaring, that if
the sole command were vested in him, he
would terminate the war on that occasion, and
decide by one general acion the fate of the two
paities. But the Elector, reflecting on the va-
lour and discipline of the enemies forces, ani-
mated by the pretence of the Emperor, and con-

(b) Avila, 78. a.

G -

dueted

Book vI'm. duped by the best officers of the age, would not
ó-ve^ venture upon ant action, which he thought to be

so doubtful, as the attacking such a body of ve-
terans on ground which they themselves had
chosen, and while covered by fortifications
which, though imperfeCt, would afford them no
small advantage in the combat. Notwith-
htanding his hesitation and remonstrances, it
was agreed, to advance towards the enemies
camp in battle array, in order to make trial
whether by that insult, and by a furious can-
nonade which they began, they could draw the

The rEmp- Imperialists out of their works. But the Em-
ror declines
a battle. peror had too much sagacity to fall into this

snare. He adhered to his own system with in-
flexible conflancy; and drawing up his soldiers
behind their trenches, that they might be ready
to receive the confederates if they should ven-
ture upon an aflault, calmly waited their ap-
proach, and carefully restrained his own men
from any excursions or skirmishes that might
bring on an engagement. Meanwhile, he rode
along the lines, and addrefling the troops of
the different nations in their own language, en-
couraged them by the chearfulnefs of his voice
and countenance; he exposed himself in places
of the greatelt danger, and amidst the warmest
fire of the enemies artillery, the most nume-
rous that had hitherto been brought into the
field by any army. Rouzed by his exam le,
not a man quitted his ranks; it was thought in-
famous to discover any symptom of fear \v, I n
the Emperor appeared to intrepid; and the
meanest soldier plainly perceived, that their de-
clining the combat at present was not the es-
feet of timidity in their general, but tile reltlt
of a well weighed caution. The confcderates,
after firing tfevral hours on the Imperialills,
with more noifc and terror thian execution, lee-
ing no priofIpCt of alluring them to fight nil
equal terms, rctired to their owvn camp. 'f11

Il mpcrcr

Emperor employed the night with such dili-B ook VI.
gence in strengthening his works, that the con- '46-
federates, returning the canonade next day,
found that, though they had now been willing
to venture upon such a bold experiment, the
opportunity of making an attack with advantage
was loft (c).

AFTER such a discovery from their own fee- TheFlmifh

troops join

blenefs and irresolution, and of the prudence as Ghempjorr
well as firmness of the Emperor's conduct, the
confederates turned their whole attention to-
wards preventing the arrival of a powerful rein-
forcement of ten thousand foot, and four thou-
sand horse, which the count de Buren was bring-
ing to the Emperor from the Low-Countries.
But though that general had to traverse such an
extent of country; though his route lay thro'
the territories of several states warmly disposed
to favour the confederates; though they were
apprized of his approach, and by their vast fu-
periority in numbers might easily have detach-
ed a force sufficient to overpower him, he ad-
vanced with such rapidity, and by such well
concerted movements, while they opposed him
with such remissness, and so little military ikill,
that he conducted this body to the Imperial
camp without any lois (d).

AFTER the arrival of the Flemings, in whom sept. o0.

he placed great confidence, the Emperor alter-
ed, in some degree, his plan of operations, and
began to a& more upon the offensive, though he
frill avoided a battle with the utmost induitry.
He made himself master of Neubuirg, Dillingen,
and Donawert on the Danube; of Nordlingen,

(0) Sleid, 395, 397. Avila 27. a. Lamb. Hortens, ap.
Leard. li.

(d) Sleid 403.

Book vII. and several other towns, situated on the mod

ó"^T considerable streams that fall into that mighty

4 river. By this he got the command of a great

extent of country, though not without being
obliged to engage in leveral encounters, of which
the success was various, nor without the mofi
imminent danger oftener than once of being

State orbothdrawn irnio a battle. In this manner the whole
armlcs. autumn was spent; neither party gained any re-

markable superiority over the other, and nothing
was yet done towards bringing the war to a pe-
riod. The Emperor had often foretold, with
confidence, that discord and the want of money
would compel the confederates to disperse that
unwieldy body, which they had neither abilities
to guide, nor funds to support (e); but though
he waited with impatience for the accomplish-
ment of his prediction, there was no profped of
that event being at hand. Meanwhile, he him-
self began to susser from the want of forage and
provisions; even the Catholic provinces being
so much incensed at the introduction of so-
reigners into the Empire, that they supplied
them with reluCtance, while the camp of the
confederates abounded with a profusion of all
necessaries, which the zeal of their friends in
the adjacent countries furnished with the ut-
most liberality and good-will. Great numbers
of the Italians and Spaniards, unaccustomed to
the climate or food of Germany, were become
unfit for service through sickness (f). Confi-
derable arrears were now due to the troops,
who had i'arce received any money from the
beginning of the campaign; the Emperor, ex-
periencing on this as well as on former occa-
sions, that his jurifdition was more extensive

than

(e) Be11i Sfalaii Commcntarins Gr.xco fermone

f.l-ipttus a Jiil. . ('.imcrario ap. iclrhin, ol. il..
P. 47 .

(/') C'.crar, a. p
F 1rcher. 4g3.

than his revenues, and that the former enabled Book vnlL
him to assemble a greater number of soldiers, "4,
than the latter were sufficient to pay. Upon
all these accounts, he found it difficult to keep
his army in the field; some of his ablest gene-
rals, and even the duke of Alva himself, perse-
vering and obfiinate as he usually was in the
prosecution of every measure, advising him to
disperse his troops into winter-quarters. But
as the arguments urged against any plan which
he had 'adopted, rarely made much impreiflon
upon the Emperor, he paid no regard to their
opinion, and determined to continue his efforts
in order to weary out the confederates; being
well assured that if he could once oblige them
to separate, there was little probability of their
uniting again in a body (g). Still, however, it
remained a doubtful point, whether his fleadi.
ness was most likely to fail, or their zeal to be
exhausted. It was (till uncertain which party,
by firfi dividing its forces, would give the
superiority to the other; when an unexpected
event decided the contest, and occasioned a fa-
tal reverse in the affairs of the confederates.

MAURIcE of Saxony having, by the artsThefchema

which have already been described, insinuated of Maurice
himself into the Emperor's confidence, no sooner of Saxony
saw hostilities ready to break out between him
and the confederates of Smalkalde, than vast
profpeLts of ambition began to open upon him.
That portion of Saxony, which descended to
him from his ancestors, was far from satisfying
his aspiring mind; and he perceived with plea-
sure the approach of civil war, as amidst the re-
volutions or convulsions which it occasions, op-
portunities which at other times are fought in
vain, of acquiring new power as well as add&-
tional dignity, present themflves to an enter-

(X) Thuan. 83.

U 4,

prizing

Book VIII. prizing spirit. As he was thoroughly acquaint-

.v',. ed with the state of the two contending parties,

and the qualities of their leaders, he did not he-
fitate long in determining on which fide the
greatest advantages ,were to be expeced.-
Having revolved all these things in his own
mind, and having taken his final resolution of
joining the Emperor, he prudently determined
to declare early in his favour; that, by the me-
rit of this, he might acquire a title to a pro-

His league portional recompence. With this view, he had
with theE- repaired to Ratisbon in the month of May, un-

der pretext of attending the diet; and after
many conferences with Charles or his ministers,
concluded, though with the most mysterious
secrecy, a treaty in which he engaged to con-
cur in assisting the Emperor as a faithful sub-
jet; and Charles, in return, stipulated to bellow
on him all the spoils of the Eletor of Saxony,
his dignities as well as territories (h). History
scarce records any treaty which can be confi-
dered as a more manifest violation of thofejuft
principles which ought to iufluence human ac-
tions. Maurice, a professed Protestant, at a
time when the belief of religion, as well as zeal
for it inrerefts, took firong possession of every
mind, binds himself to contribute his assistance
towards carrying on a war, which had mani-
feftly no other obje&t than the extirpation of
the Protestant dotrines. He engages to take
arms against his father-in.law, and to Dtrip his
nearelf relation of his honours and dominions.
He joins a dubious friend against a known be-
nefator, to whom his obligations were both
great and recent. Nor was the prince who
ventured upon all this, one of those audacious
politicians, who, provided they can accomplish
their ends, and secure their interest, disregard
avowedly the most sacred obligations, and glory
in contemning whatever is honourable or de-

cent.

(1) Harac. Annal. Barbant. vol. i. 628, Struvii Corp.
0o.8». Thian. 4.

cent. Maurice's conduct, if the whole muff be Book VII.
ascribed to policy, was more artful and maf-.,.
terly; he executed his plan in all its parts, and
yet endeavoured to preserve, in every flep which
he took, the appearance of what was fair, and
virtuous, and laudable. It is probable from
his subsequent behaviour, that with regard to
the Protestant religion at least, his intentions
were upright, that he fondly trufled to the Em-
peror's promises for its security, but that, ac-
cording to the fate of all who refine too much
in policy, and who tread in dark and crooked
paths, in attempting to deceive others, he him-
self was, in some degree, deceived.

His first care, however was to keep these en- Hi artfices

gagements with the Emperor clolely concealed in order t,
and so perfect a master was he in the art of inteion.s
dissimulation, that the confederates, notwith-
handing his declining all connections with them,
and his remarkable assiduity in paying court to
the Emperor, seemed to have entertained no sus-
picion of his designs. Even the ElecLtor of Sax-
ony, when he marched at the beginning of the
campaign to join his associates, committed his
dominions to his proteAtion, which Maurice,
with an insidious appearance of friendship, rea-
dily undertook (i). But scarce had the Eletor
taken the field, when Maurice began to consult
privately with the King of the Romans how to
invade those very territories, with the defence
of which he was entruited. Soon after, the Em-
peror sent him a copy of the Imperial ban de-
nounced against the Elector and Landgrave.
As he was next heir to the former, and parti-
cularly interested in preventing strangers from
getting his dominions into their possession,
Charles required him, not only for his own
fake, but upon the allegiance and duty which

he
(i) StruviiCorp. 1046.

he owed to the head of the Empire, instantly
to seize and detain in his hands the forfeited
estates of the EleiEor; warning him, at the fame
time, that if he neglected to obey there con-
mands, he should be held as accessary to the
crimes of his kinsman, and be liable to the
fame punishment (k).

THIS artifice, which it is probable Maurice

himfelt fuggeited, was employed by him in order
that his condud towards the EleAor might
see!n a matter of necessity but not of choice, an
ad of obedience to his superior, rather than a
voluntary invasion of the rights of his kinsman
and ally. But in order to give some more fpe-
cious appearance to this thin veil with which
he endeavoured to cover his ambition, he had
called together, soon after his return from Ra-
tiibon, the flates of his country; and represent-
ing to them that a civil war between the Em-
peror and confederates of Smalkalde was now
become unavoidable, delired their.advice with
regard to the part he should at in that event.
They being prepared, no doubt, and tutored
before-hand, as well as desirous of gratifying
their Prince, whom they both esteemed and lov-
ed, gave such counsel as they knew would be
most agreeable; advising him to offer his me-
diation towards reconciling the contending par-
ties; but if that were rejeced, and he could
obtain proper security for the Protestant reli-
gion, they delivered it as their opinion that he
ought, in all other points, to yield obedience to
the Emperor. Upon receiving the Imperial
rescript, together with the ban againfl the Elec-
tor and Landgrave, he fummened the flates of
his country a second time; he laid before them
the orders which he had received, and the pu-
nifhment with which he was threatened in cafe

of
(A) Sleld. 39Y. Thuall. 84.

of disobedience; he acquainted them that the Book Vll.
confederates had refused to admit of his medi- IS4·
ation, and that the Emperor had given him the
most fatisfatory declarations with regard to
religion; he mentioned his own interest in fe-
curing poffefion of the elecoral dominions, to.
gether with the danger of allowing strangers to
obtain an eftablifhnrent in Saxony; and upon
the whole, as the point under deliberation ref-
petted his fubjets no less than himself, he de-
fired to know their sentiments how he should
iteer in that difficult and arduous conjuncure.
The flates, no less obsequious and complaisant,
than formerly, relying on the Emperor's pro-
mites as a perfec security for their religion, pro-
posed that, before he had recourse to more vio.
lent methods, they would write to the EleCtor,
exhorting him, as the best means of appearing
the Emperor, and of preventing his dominions
from being seized by foreign or hostile powers,
to give his content that Maurice ihould take
possession of them quietly and without oppofi-
tion. Maurice himself seconded their argu-
ments in a letter to the Landgrave, his father-
in-law. Such an extravagant proposition was
rejected with the scorn and indignation which it
deserved. The Landgrave, in return to Maurice,
taxed him with his treachery and ingratitude to-
wards a kinsman to whom he was so deeply in-
debted; he treated with contempt his affecta-
tion of executing the Imperial ban, which he
could not but know to be altogether void, by
the unconstitutional and arbitrary manner in
which it had been issued; he besought him, not
to susser himself to be so far blinded by ambition,
as to forget the obligations of honour and friend-
flip, or to betray the Protestant religion, the
extirpation of which out of Germany, even by
the acknowledgment of the Pope himnfelf, was
the great objec of the present war (1).

BUT
(/) Slid. 40S, &c. ThUian. l;. Camerar 484.

look VII. BUT Maurice had proceeded too far to be

CV' diverted from pursuing his plan by reproaches
r546.

He iivades or arguments. Nothing now remained but to
res of theexecute with vigour, what he had hitherto carri-
Elcaor ofed on by artifice and dissimulation. Nor was
So""ny. his boldness in ation inferior to his subtilty in
Novembtr contrivance, Having assembled about twelve

thousand men, he suddenly invaded one part of
the electoral provinces, while Ferdinand with an
army composed of Bohemians and Hungarians,
over-ran the other. Maurice, in two sharp en-
counters, defeated the troops which the Elector
had left to guard his country; and improving
there advantages to the utmost, made himself
matter of the whole Eletorate, except Wittem-
berg, Gotha and Eisenach, which being places
ofconfiderable flrength, and defended by fuffici-
ent garrisons, refuted to open their gates. The
news of these rapid conquests soon reached the
Imperial and confederate camps. In the former,
their satisfaction with an event, which it was
foreseen would be productive of the most im-
portant consequences, was expressed by every
poflible demonstration of joy. The latter was
filled with aflonifhment and terror. The name
of Maurice was mentioned with execration, as
an apostate from religion, a betrayer of the
German liberty, and a contemner of the most fa-
cred and natural ties. Every thing that the
rage or invention of the party could suggest, in
order to blacken and render him odious; invec-
tives, satires and lampoons, the furious declama-
tions of their preachers, together with the rude
wit of their authors, were all employed against
him. While he, truiting to the arts which he
had so long practiCed, as if his actions could have
admitted of any serious jultification, published
a manifesto, containing the fame frivolous rea-
sons for his conduct, which he had formerly al-
ledged in the meeting of his states, and in his
letter to the Landglave (im).

TlUs
(n:) Skid, 409, 410 o.

THE Elecor, upon the first intelligence of BookVIT,

Maurice's motions, proposed to return home 'ó
with his troops for the defence of Saxony But Th- confe-
the deputies of the league, assembled at Ulm, rtures of
prevailed on him, at that time, to remain with acommo-

dation to the

the army, and to prefer the success of the corn- Emperor;
mon cause before the security of his own domi-
nions. At length the sufferings and complaints
of his fubjets increased so much, that he di'co-
vered the utmost impatience to set out, in order
to rescue them from the oppression of Maurice,
and from the cruelty of the Hungarians, who
having been accustomed to that licentious and
merciless species of war which was thought law-
ful against the Turks, committed, wherever they
came, the wildest aLts of rapine and violence.
This desire of the Elector's was so natural and
so warmly urged, that the deputies at Ulm, tho'
fully sensible of the unhappy consequences of
dividing their army, durst not refuse their con-
sent, how unwilling soever to grant it. In this
perplexity, they repaired to the camp of the
confederates at Giengen on the Brenz, in order
to consult their conitituents. Nor were they
less at a loss what to determine in this pressing
emergence. But, after having confidered feri-
oufly the open desertion of some of their allies;
the scandalous lukewarmness of others who had
hitherto contributed nothing towards the war;
the intolerable load which had fallen, of confe-
quence, upon such members as were most zeal-
ous for the cause, or molt faithful to their en-
gagements; the ill success of all their endeavours
to obtain foreign aid; the unusual length of the
campaign; the rigour of the season; together
with the great number of soldiers, and even of-
ficers, who had, on that account, quitted the
service ; they concluded that nothing could save
them, but either the bringing the conreft to the
immediate decision of a battle by attacking the

imperial

Book vIIr. Imperial army, or an accommodation of all their
^c^" differences with Charles by a treaty. Such was

the despondency and dejeAion which now op-
pressed the party, that of there two they chole
what was most feeble and unmanly, empowering
a minister of the EleAor of Brandenburg to pro-
pound overtures of peace in their name to the
Emperor.

which he No sooner did Charles perceive this haughty
rcjcas. confederacy, which had so lately threatened to

drive him out of Germany, condescending to
make the first advances towards an agreement,
than concluding their spirit to be gone, or their
union to be broken, he immediately assumed
the tone of a conqueror; and as if they had been
already at his mercy, would not hear of a nego-
ciation, but upon condition of the Eletor of
Saxony's consenting previously to give up him-
self and his dominions absolutely to his difpo-
fal (a). As nothing more intolerable or igno-
minious could have been prescribed, even in the
worlt situation of their affairs, it is no wonder
this proposition was rejected by a party, humbled
and disconcerted rather than subdued. But tho'
they refused to submit tamely to the Emperor's
will, they wanted spirit to pursue the only plan
which could have preserved their independence;
and forgetting that it was the union of their
troops in one body which had hitherto rendered
the confederacy formidable, and had more than
once obliged the Imperialists to think of quitting
the field; they inconsiderately abandoned that
advantage, which, in spite of the diversion in

The troops Saxony, would fRill have kept the Emperor in
of the co"-awe ; and yielding to the Elector's intreaties,
federacy
fcparat conrented to his proposal of dividing the army.

Nine
(a) Hortentins ap. Scard. ii. 485:

Nine thousand men were left in the dutchy of Book vrl.
Wurtemberg, in order to protect that province, s4'v
as well as the free cities of Upper Germany; a
considerable body marched with the Eledor to-
wards Saxony; but the greater part returned
with their refpedive leaders into their own coun-
tries, and were dispersed there (b).

THE moment the troops separated, the con- Almo al

federacy ceased to be the object of terror; and thememberst
the members of it, who while they composed federacy
part of a great body had felt but little anxiety submit -I

.i .

* '

* i i * i - the E.mpe-

about their own security, began to tremble when ror.
they refleted that they now flood exposed singly
to the whole weight of the Emperor's vengeance.
Charles did not allow them leisure to recover
from their coniternation, or to form any new
schemes of union. As soon as the confederates
began to retire, he put his army in motion, and
though it was now the depth of winter, he re-
solved to keep the field, in order to make the
modi of that favourable juncture for which he
had waited so long. Some small towns in which
the enemy had left garrisons immediately open-
ed their gates. Norlingen, Rotenberg and Hall,
Imperial cities, submitted soon after. Though
Charles could not prevent the Elecor from le-
vying, as he retreated, large contributions upon
the archbishop of Mentz, the abbot of Fulda,
and other ecclefiafticks (c), this was more than
balanced by the flbmiffion of Ulm, one of the
chief cities of Suabia, highly distinguished by
its zeal for the Smalkaldic league. As soon as
an example was set of deserting the common
cause, the reft ot the members became instantly
impatient to follow it, and seemed afraid lellt
others, by getting the start of them in returning

to

(c) Thuan. 88.
(b) Slcid. 411.

BookVIIl. to their duty, should, on that account, obtain
-,5-. more favourable terms. The EleEor Palatine,

a weak Prince, who, notwithsfanding his pro-
sessions of neutrality, had, very prepofleroufly,
sent to the confederates four hundred horse, a
body so inconsiderable as to be scarce any addi-
tion to their strength, but great enough to ren-
der him guilty in the eyes of the Emperor, made
his acknowledgements in the most abjet man-
ner. The inhabitants of Augsburg, shaken by
so many instances of apoftacy, expelled the
brave Schertel out of their city, and accepted
such conditions as the Emperor was pleated to
grant them.

THE Duke of Wurcemberg, though among

the first who had offered to fubnit, was obliged
to sue for pardon on his knees, and even after
this mortifying humiliation obtained it with dif-
'547. ficulty (d). Memmingen, and other free cities

in the circle of Suabia, being now abandoned
by all their former alfociates, found it necessary
to provide for their own safety by throwing
themselves on the Emperor's mercy. Strafburg
and Franckfort on the Maine, cities far remote
from the feat of danger, discovered no greater
fteddinefs than those which lay more exposed.
Thus, a confederacy, lately so powerful as to
shake the Imperial throne, fell to pieces and
was dissolved in the space of a few weeks; scarce
any member of that formidable combination
now remaining in arms, but the Eledor and
Landgrave, whom the Emperor, having from
the beginning marked out as the victimns of his

The r;gor- vengeance, was at no pains to reconcile. Nor
t.n impof- did he grant thofc who submitted to him a gene-
c, by the rous and unconditional pardon. Conscious of
mpcror. his own superiority, he treated them both with

haughtinels and rigour. All the Princes in per-

son,
(d) Merm. de Ribicr, tom. i. 589.

son, and the cities, by their deputies, wereBook VI"
compelled to implore mercy in the humble pof- "17.-
ture of supplicants. As the Emperor laboured
under great difficulties from the want of money,
he imposed heavy fines upon them, which ho
levied with molt rapacious exa&nefs. The
Duke of Wurtemberg paid three hundred thou-
sand crowns; the city of Augsburg an hundred
and fifty thousand; Ulm an hundred thousand;
Frankfort eighty thousand; Memmingen fifty
thousand; and the reft in proportion to their
abilities, or their different degrees of guilt.
They were obliged, besides, to renounce the
league of Stnalkalde; to furnish afliflance, if re-
quired, towards executing the Imperial ban
against the Elecor and Landgrave; to give up
their artillery and warlike stores to the Empe-
ror; to admit garrisons into their principal cities
and places of strength; and in this disarmed and
dependent situation, to expe& the final award
which the Emperor should think proper to pro-
nounce when the war came to an issue (a). But,
amidst the great variety of articles dicated by
Charles on this occasion, he, in conformity to
his original plan, took care that nothing relat-
ing to religion should be inserted, and to such a
degree were the confederates humbled or over-
awed, that, forgetting the zeal which had so
long animated them, they were solicitous only
about their safety, without venturing to insist
on a point, the mention of which they saw him
avoiding with so much industry. The inhabi-
tants of Memmingen alone made some feeble es-
forts to procure a promise of protection in the
exercise of their religion, but were checked so
severely by the Emperor's minilters, that they
inflantly fell from their demand.

VOL. Ill, H THi

(a) Slcid. 411, &c. Thuan. lib. iv. p. 125. Mem.de
Ribicr, tom. i. 606.

Book viI. THE Elector of Cologne, whom, notwith.

i^4. frtarding the sentence of excommunication if.

sued against him by the Pope, Charles had hi-
therto allowed to remain in poffelfion of the
archiepiscopal fee, being now required by the
Emperor to submit to the censures of the church,
this virtuous and difinterefled prelate, unwilling
to expose his fubjeas on his account, to the
miseries of war, voluntarily refigred that high
Jan..2;. dignity. With a moderation becoming his age

and character, he chore to enjoy truth together
with the exercise of his religion in the retirement
of a private life, rather than to disturb society
by engaging in a doubtful and violent firuggle
in order to retain his office (b).

TheEle&or MEANWHILE the Elector of Saxony reached
.axony,and the frontiers of his country. As Maurice could
recoverspoi-affemble no force equal to the army which ac-
leffion of' it. * . i *

companied him, he, in a (hort time, not only
recovered possession of his own territories, but
over-ran Mifnia, and dtripped his rival of all
that belonged to him except )refden and Leipfic,
which being towns of some firength could not
be suddenly reduced. Maurice, obliged to quit
the field, and to shut himself up in his capital,
dispatched courier after courier to the Emperor,
representing his dangerous situation, and solicit-
ing him with the most earnest importunity to
march immediately to his relief. But Charles,
busy at that time in prescribing terms to fiuch
members of the league as were daily returning
to their allegiance, thought it sufficient to detach
Albert Marquis of Brandenburg-Anfpach with
three thousand men to his afliflance. Albert,
though an enterprizing and active officer, allow-
ed himnfelfto be furprized by the Elector, who
killed many of his troops, dispersed the remain-

der,
(b) Sleid. 418. Thliall lib. iv. 128.

der, and took him prisoner (c). Maurice con- Book VIII.
tinued as much exposed as formerly; and if his z57
enemy had known how to improve the opportu-
nity which presented itself, his ruin mult have
been immediate and unavoidable. But the
Elector, no less flow and dilatory when invested
with the role command, than he had been for-
merly when joined in authority with a partner,
never gave any proof of military activity but in
this enterprize against Albert. Instead of
marching directly towards Maurice, whom the
defeat of his ally had greatly alarmed, he incon-
fiderately listened to overtures of accommoda-
tion, which his artful antagonist proposed with
no other intention than to amuse him, and to
flacken the vigour of his operations.

SUCH, indeed, was the posture of the Em-The tmpe

peror's affairs that he could not march inflantly ror prevcnt-

' , d..-

„ ,. ,, ,-, ,. , „ *' ed from

to the relief of his ally Soon after the fepa- attacking
ration of the confederate army, he, in order to the rleaor
ease himself of the burden of maintaining a fu- garave.d
perfluous number of troops, had dismissed the
the count of Buren with his Flemings (d), ima-
gining that the Spaniards and Germans, toge-
ther with the papal forces, would be fully tuffi-
cient to crush any degree of vigour that yet re-
mained among the members of the league. But
Paul, growing wife too late, began now to dif-
cover the imprudence of that measure, from
which the more Lagacious Venetians had endea-
voured in vain to dissuade him. The rapid
progress of the Imperial arms, and the ease with
which they had broken a combination that ap-
peared so firm and powerful, opened at length
his eyes, made him forget at once all the ad-

H 2 vantages

(o) Avila 99. 6. Mem. e( Ribier, tom. i. 620.
(d) Avila 8j. 6. Memn. de Ribier, tom. i. 592.

Book Wvr. vantages which he had expected from such a
I.^, 'compleat trirmph over heresy, and placed, in

the Rronget iig ht, his own impolitic conduct,
in having contributed towards acquiring for
Charles such an immense increase of power, as
would enable him, after oppressing the liberties
of Germany, to give law with absolute authority
to all the diates of Italy. The moment he per.
ceived his error, he endeavoured to correct it.
Without giving the Emperor any warning of his
intention, he ordered Farnese, his grandson, to

The Pope return inftaantly to Italy with all the troops un-
roecalpshis der his command, and at the fame time recalled

the licence which he had granted Charles, of
appropriating, to his own use, a large share of
the church-lands in Spain. He was not defli-
tute of.pretences.to justify this. abrupt desertion
of his ally. The term of fix months, during
which the stipulations in their treaty were to
continue in force, was now expired ; the league,
in oppo'iition to which their alliance had been
framed, seemed to be entirely diflipated; Charles,
in all his negociations with the Princes and
cities which had submitted to his will, had
neither consulted the Pope, nor had allotted him
any part of the conquests which he had made,
nor had communicated to him any share in the
vast contributions that he had raised. He had
not even made any provision for the fuppreflion
of heresy, or the re-establishment ofthe catholic
religion, which were Paul's chief inducements
to bestow the treasures of the church so liberally
in carrying on the war. These colours, how
specious soever, did not conceal from the Em-
peror that secret jealousy which was the true
motive of the Pope's conduct. But, as Paul's
orders with regard to the march of his troops
were no less peremptory than unexpected, it
was impoflible to prevent their retreat. Charles
exclaimed loudly against this treachery, in aban-

doning

doning him so unseasonably, while he was pro.-3BOk VL'
fecuting a war undertaken in compliance with 47
his earnest solicitations, and from which, if fuc-
cefsful, so much honour and advantage would
redound to the church. To complaints he ad-
ded threats and expostulations. But Paul re-
mained inflexible; his troops continued their
march towards the eccdeiaftical slate; and in
an elaborate memorial, intended as an apology
for his behaviour, he discovered new and more
manifest symptoms of alienation from the Em-
peror, together with a deep-rooted terror of his
power (e). Charles weakened by the withdraw-
ing of so great a body from his army, which
was already much diminished by the number of
garrisons that he had been obliged to throw into
the towns which had capitulated, found it ne-
ceffary to recruit his forces by new levies, be-
fore he could venture to march in person to-
wards Saxony.

THE fame and splendor of his success could A conrpi-

not have failed of attracting such multitudes of racYn ,h
soldiers into his service from all the extenfivegovcrnmct
territories now fubje& to his authority, as muft'°^"C""'
have soon put him in a condition of taking the
field against the Elector; but the sudden and
violent eruption of a conspiracy at Genoa, as
well as the great revolutions which that event,
extremely mysterious in its first appearances,
seemed to portend, obliged him to avoid entan-
gling himself in new operations in Germany,
before he had fully discovered its source and
tendency. The form of government which had
been established in Genoa, at the time when
Andrew Doria reltored liberty to his country,
though calculated to obliterate the memory of

H 3 former
(c) F. Paul. 208. Pallavic. par. ii. p. 5. Thluan. 126,

Book VnII. former diffenfionsand received at firfl with eager

-," approbation, did not, after a trial of near twenty

years, give universal fatisfation to there turbu-
lent and faaious republicans. As the entire ad-
ministration of affairs was now lodged in a cer-
tain number of noble families, many, envying
them that pre-eminence, wished for the reltitu-

Tfh th obe tion of a popular government, to which they
fpiracors. had been accustomed; and though all reveren-

ced the disinterested virtue of Doria, and admi-
red his talents, not a few were jealous of that
ascendant which he had acquired in all the coun-
cils of the commonwealth. His age, however,
his moderation, and love of liberty, afforded
ample security to his countrymen that he would
not abuse his power, nor stain the close of his
days by attempting to overturn that fabrick,
which it had been the labour and pride of his life
to erea. But that authority and influence,
which in his hands were innocent, they easily
saw would prove deltrutive, if usurped by any
citizen of greater ambition, or less virtue. A
citizen of this dangerous charater had actually
formed such pretensions, and with rome profpet
of success. Giannetino Doria, whom his grand
uncle Andrew destined to be the heir of his pri-
vate fortune, aimed likewise at being his fuccef-
for in power. His temper haughty, insolent,
and overbearing to such a degree as would scarce
have been tolerated in one born to reign, was
altogether insupportable in the citizen of a free
state; and the more sagacious among the Geno-
efe already feared and hated him as the enemy
of those liberties for which they were indebted
to his uncle. While Andrew himself, blinded
by that violent and undifcerning affection which
persons in advanced age often contract for the
younger members of their family, set no bounds
to the indulgence with which he treated him;

seeming

seeming less solicitous to secure and perpetuate Book VII.
the freedom of the commonwealth, than to ag- 1s7M
grandize that undeferving kinsman.

BUT whatever suspicion of Doria's designs,

or whatever diffatisfadion with the system of
adminifiration in the commonwealth, there cir-
cumfiances might have occasioned, they would
have ended, it is probable, in nothing more
than murmurings and complaints, if John Le-
wis Fiefco, count of Lavagna, observing this riercocount
growing disgust, had not been encouraged by it ofLavagna
to attempt one of the boldest actions recorded the conpi-
in history. That young nobleman, the richeft"y'
and most illustrious subjet in the republick,
possessed, in an eminent degree, all the quali-
ties which win upon the human heart, which
command respect, or secure attachment. He
was graceful and majestic in his person; mag-
nificent to profusion - of a generosity that pre-
vented the wiihes of his friends, and exceeded
the expectations of strangers; of an insinuating
address, gentle manners and a flowing affability,
But under the appearance of these virtues, which
seemed to form him for enjoying and adorning
civil life, he concealed all the dispositions which
mark men out for taking the lead in the most
dangerous and dark conspiracies ; an insatiable
and restless ambition, a courage un acquainted
with fear, and a mind that disdained fubordina-
tion. Such a temper could ill brook that station
of inferiority, wherein he was placed in the re-
publick; and as he envied the power which the
elder Doria had acquired, he was filled with in-
dignation at the thoughts of its descending,
like an hereditary polleflion, to Giannetino.
These various paflions, preying with violence

H 4 o

Book VII. on his turbulent and aspiring mind, determined

,'5' him to attempt overturning that domination to

which he could not submit.

In'--. 's AT first he thought of an alliance with Fran-
tions of the cis, and even proposed it to the French ambaf-
conspirators. fador at Rome, as the most effe&ual means of

accomplishing this; and after expelling Doria
together with the Imperial faction by his afift-
ance, he resolved to put the publick once more
under the protection of that Monarch, hoping
in return for that service to be entrusted with
the principal ihare in the adminiltration of go.
vernment. But having communicated his
scheme to a few chosen confidents, from whom
he kept nothing secret, Verrina, the chief of
them, a man of desperate fortune, capable alike
of advising and of executing the most audacious
deeds, remonstrated with earnestness against the
folly of exposing himself to the most imminent
danger, while he allowed another to reap all the
fruits of his success; and exhorted him warmly
to aim himself at that pre-eminence in his
country, to which he was destined by his illus-
trious birth, was called by the voice of his fel-
low citizens, and would be raised by the zeal
of his friends. This discourse opened such vast
profpeEs to Fiefco, and so suitable to his genius,
that abandoning his own plan, he eagerly
adopted that of Verrina. The other persons pre-
sent, though sensible of the hazardous nature of
the undertaking, did not chufe to condemn
what their patron had so warmly approved. It
was inltantly resolved, in this dark cabal, to
assassinate the two Dorias as well as the princi-
pal persons of their party, to overturn the
etlablifled fyllem of government, and to place
Fiel:co on the ducal throne of Genoa. Time,
hlowcver, and preparations were requifitc to

ripen

ripen such a design for execution ; and while he Bookvlr.
was employed in carrying on these, Fiefco k-oro
made it his chief care to guard against every
thing that might betray his secret, or create sus-
picion. The disguise he assumed was of all
others the moit impenetrable. He seemed to
be abandoned entirely to pleasure and difTipa-
tion. A perpetual gaiety, diversified by the
pursuit of all the amusements becoming his age
and rank, engrossed, in appearance, the whole
of his time and thoughts. But amidst this
hurry of dissipation, he prosecuted his plan with
the molt cool attention, neither retarding the
design by a timid hesitation, nor precipitating
the execution by an excess of impatience. He
continued his correspondence with the French
ambafador at Rome, though without commu-
nicating to him his real intentions, that by his
means he might secure the protection of the
French arms, if hereafter he should find it ne-
cetfary to call them to his aid. He entered into
a close confederacy withFarnefe Duke of Parma,
who being disgusted with the Emperor for re-
futing to grant him the investiture of that dut-
chy, was eager to promote any measure that
tended to diminish his influence in Italy, or to
ruin a family so implicitly devoted to him as
that of Doria. Being sensible that in a mari-
time state, the acquisition of naval power was
what he ought chiefly to aim at, he purchased
four galleys from the Pope, who probably was
not unacquainted with the design which he had
formed, and did not disapprove of it. Under
colour of fitting out one of there gallies to fail
on a cruise againit the Turks, he not only as-
fembled a good number of his own vassals, but
engaged in his service many bold adventurers,
whom the truce between the Emperor and Soly-
man had deprived of their usual occupation and
subsistence.

WHILK

WookvlI. WHILE Fiefco was taking these important
%`V^"/ ifteps, he preserved so admirably his usual ap-

pearance of being devoted intirely to pleasure
and amusement, and paid court with such art-
ful address to the two Dorias, as imposed not
only on the generous and unfufpicious mind of
Andrew, but deceived Giannetino, who confci-
ous of his own criminal intentions, was more
apt to distrust the designs of others. So many
instruments being now prepared, nothing re-
mained but to strike the blow. Various consul-
tations were held by Fiefco with his confidants,
in order to fettle the manner of doing it with
the greatest certainty and effet. At firit, they
proposed to murder the Dorias and their chief
adherents, during the celebration of high mass
in the principal church; but as Andrew was of-
ten absent from these religious folemnities, on
account of his great age, that design was laid
aside. It was then concerted that Fiefco should
invite the uncle and nephew, with all their
friends whom he had marked out as vitims, to
his house; where it would be easy to cut them
off at once without danger or resistance ; but
as Giannetino was obliged to leave the town on
the day which they had chosen, it became ne-
ceffary likewise to alter this plan. They at last
determined to attempt by open force, what
they found difficult to effect by stratagem, and
fixed on the night between the second and
third of January, for the execution of their en-
terprize. The timle was chosen with great pro-
priety; for as the Doge of the former year was
to quit his oflicc, according to custom, on the
first of the month, and his successor could not
be eleEted sooner than the fourth, the republick
remained during that interval in a fort of anar-
chy, and Fiefco might with less violence take
possesSion of the vacant dignity.

THE

THE morning of that day Fiefco employed Book VIIr

in visiting his friends, pafling some hours among 1,7.
them with a ipirit as gay and unembarraffed as Theconfpi-
at other times. Towards evening he paid court fSmbe w
to the Dorias with his usual marks of refpet, execute
and surveying their countenance and behaviour their pla
with the attention natural in his situation, was
happy to observe the perfeac security in which
they remained, without the least foresight or
dread of that storm which had been so long a
gathering, and was now ready to burst over
their heads. From their palace he hastened to
his own, which stood by itself in the middle of
a !arge court, surrounded by a high wall. The
gates had been set open in the morning, and
all persons, without distinction, were allowed to
enter, but strong guards posted within the
court suffered no one to return. Verrina mean-
while, and a few persons trusted with the secret
of the conspiracy, after conducting Fiefco's vas-
fals, as well as the crews of his gallies into the
palace in small bodies, with as little noise as
poflible, dispersed themselves through the city,
and in the name of their patron, invited to an
entertainment the principal citizens whom they
knew to be disgusted with the adminittration of
the Dorias, and to have both inclination and
courage to attempt a change in the govern-
ment. Of the vast number ol persons who now
filled the palace, a few only knew for what pur-
pose they were assembled, the relt aftonifled at
finding instead of the preparations for a teaft,
a court crouded with armed men, and apart-
ments filled with the instruments of war, gazed
on each other with a mixture of impatience,
curiosity and terror.

WHILE their minds were in this state of sus- Fiefco's ex.

penfe and agitation, Fietco appeared. With a tthcm.
look full of alacrity and confidence he address-
ed himself to the persons of chief diltinAion,

telling

Book VIIL telling them, that they were not now called to

-
47 partake of the pleasure of an entertainment, but

to join in a deed of valour, which would lead
them to liberty and immortal renown. He set
before their eyes the exorbitant as well as into-
lerable authority of the elder Doria, which the
ambition of Giannetino, and the partiality of the
Emperor to a family more devoted to him than
to their country, was about to enlarge and r6
render perpetual. This unrighteous domina-
tion, continued he, you have it now in your
your power to subvert, and to establish the
freedom of your country on a firm bais. The
tyrants muff be cut off. I have taken the molt
effectual measures for this purpose. My affoci-
ates are numerous. I can depend on allies and
protestors if necessary. Happily the tyrants are
as secure as I have been provident. Their in-
solent contempt of their countrymen, has ba-
ni(hed the suspicion and timidity which usually
render the guilty quick-fighted to discern, as
well as sagacious to guard againfl the vengeance
which they deserve. They will now feel the
blow, before they fufpet any hostile hand to
be nigh. Let us then rally forth, that we may
deliver our country by one generous effort, al-
most unaccompanied with danger, and certain
of success. These words, uttered with that ir-
resistible fervour which animates the mind when
rouzed by great objects, made the desired im-
prelflon on the audience. Fiefco's vassals, rea-
dy to execute whatever their master should
command, received his discourse with a murmur
of applause. To many whose fortunes were
desperate, the licence and confusion of an infur-
retion afforded an agreeable profpet. Those of
higher rank and more virtuous sentiments,
durst not discover the furprize or horror with
which they were struck at the proposal of an
enterprize so unexpected and atrocious; as each
imagined the other to be in the secret of the

conspiracy,

conspiracy, and saw himself surrounded by per- Pook v11.
sons who waited only a signal from their leader '
to perpetrate the greatest crime. With one
voice then all applauded, or feigned to applaud,
the undertaking.

HAVING thus fixed and encouraged his afro- Hi inter-

ciates, before he gave them his last orders, he vie with
hastened for a moment to the apartment of hishis Wf'
wife, a lady of the noble house of Cibo, whom
he loved with tender affecion, and whose beau-
ty and virtue rendered her worthy of his love.
The noise of the armed men who crowded the
court and palace, having long before this reach-
ed her ears, she concluded rome hazardous en-
terprize to be in hand, and she trembled for
her husband. He found her in all the anguish
of uncertainty and fear; and as it was now im-
poflible to keep his design concealed, he inform-
ed her of what he had undertaken. The prof-
pet of a scene so full of horror as well as dan-
ger, compleated her agony; and foreboding im-
mediately in her mind the fatal issue of it, she
endeavoured, by her tears, her entreaties, and
her despair, to divert him from his purpose.
Fiefco, after trying in vain to tooth and to in-
spire her with hope, broke from a situation into
which an excess of tenderness had unwarily fe-
duced him, though it could not shake his refo-
lution. " Farewel, cried he, as he quitted her
apartment, you shall either never fee me more,
or you (hall behold to-morrow every thing in
Genoa subject to your power.':

As soon as he rejoined his companions, he al- Theyattack

lotted each his proper fiation; some were ap-'thc"'iy
pointed to assault and seize the different gates
of the city; rome to make themselves masters
of the different fireets or places of strength:
Fiefco reserved for himself the attack of' he har-
bour where Doria's gallies were laid u , as the

poSt

Book VIII. pol: of chief importance, and of greatest darit
Vo^/. ger. It was now midnight, and the citizens
'1547 slept in the security of peace, when this band

of conspirators, numerous, desperate and well
armed rushed out to execute their plan. They
furprized without relftance rome of the gates.
They got poffeflion of others after a sharp con-
flii with the soldiers on guard. Verrina, with
the galley that had been fitted out against the
Turks, blocked up the mouth of the Darfena or
little harbour where Doria's fleet lay. All pof-
fibility of escape being by this precaution cut
off, when Fiefco attempted to enter the gailies
from the fllore to which they were made fast,
as they were unrigged and disarmed, having no
crew on board but the slaves chained to the
oar, they were in no condition to make refif-
tance. Every quarter of the city was now fill-
ed with noise and tumult, all the fireets re-
founding with the cry of Fiefco and liberty. At
that name, so popular and beloved, many of
the lower rank took arms, and joined the con-
fpirators. The nobles and partizans of the arif-
tocracy, astonished or affrighted, (hut the gates
of their houses, and thought of nothing but fe-
curing them from pillage. At lall, the noise
excited by this scene of violence and confusion,
reached the palace of Doria; Giannetino started
immediately from his bed, and imagining that
it was occasioned by some mutiny among the
sailors, rushed out with a few attendants, and
hurried towards the harbour. The gate of St.
Thomas, through which he had to pass, was al-
ready in the poffefion of the conspirators, who,
the moment he entered, fell upon him with the
tutmoft fury, and murdered him upon the spot.
The fame must have been the fate of the elder
Doria, if Jerome de Fiefco had executed his
brother's plan, and had proceeded immediately
to attack him in his palace; but he, from the

fordid

fordid consideration of preventing its being BookVIL
plundered amidst the confusion, having forbid 1sr4
his followers to advance. Andrew got intelli-
gence of his nephew's death, as well as of his
own danger; and mounting on horseback, sav-
ed himself by flight. Meanwhile, a few sena-
tors had the courage to afTemble in the palace
of the republick (y). At first, some of the most
daring among them attempted to rally the scat-
tered soldiers, and to attack a body of the con-
fpirators; but being repulsed with loss, all
agreed that nothing now remained, but to
treat with the party which seemed to be irrefif-
tible. Deputies were accordingly sent to learn
of Fiefco what were the conceflions with which
he would be satisfied, or rather to submit to
whatever terms he Ihould please to prescribe.

BUT by this time Fiefco, with whom they Canue of

were empowered to negociate, was no more.their mi-
Jufl as he was going to leave the harbour, where
every thing had succeeded to his wish, that he
might join his vitorious companions, he heard
some extraordinary uproar on board the Admi-
ral galley. Alarmed at the noise, and fearing
that the slaves might break their chains, and
overpower his associates, he ran thither; but
the plank which reached from the shore to the
vessel happening to overturn, he fell into the
tea, whilst he hurried forward too precipitately.
Being loaded with heavy armour, he fink to
the bottom, and perished in the very moment
when he mult have taken full polfelion of
every thing that his ambitious heart could de-
fire. Verinna was the first who discovered this
fatal accident, and foreseeing, at once, all its
consequences, concealed it with the utmost iin-
duftry from every one but a fev leaders of the
conspiracy. Nor was it difficult. amidst the
darkneis and confusion of the night, to have

kept
(y) II palazza dclla de Signoria,.

lookVIII, kept it secret, until a treaty with the senators
.V" should have put the city in the power of the

'547' the conspirators. All their hopes of this were

disconcerted by the imprudence of Jerome Si-
efco, who, when the deputies of the senate en-
quired for his brother, the count of Lavagna,
that they might make their proporals to him,
replied with a childish vanity, "1 am now the
only person to whom that title belongs, and
with me you must treat." These words dif-
covered both to his friends and enemies what
had happened, and made the impreflion that
might have been expeted upon both. The
deputies, encouraged by this event, the only
one which could occasion such a sudden revo.
lution as might turn to their advantage, affurn-
ed instantly, with admirable presence of mind,
a new tone, suitable to the change in their cir-
cumflances, and made high demands. While
they endeavoured to gain time by protrating
the negociation, the reft of the senators were
busy in assembling their partizans, and forming
a body capable of defending the palace of the
republick. On the other hand the conspirators
allonifhed at the death of a man whom they
adored and trusted, and placing no confidence in
Jerome, a giddy youth, felt their courage die
away, and their arms fall from their hands.
lihat profound and amazing secrecy with
which the conspiracy had been concerted, and
whic'i had contributed hitherto so much to
its fuiccefs, proved now the chief cause of its
mifc;irriage, The leader was gone, the greater
part of tho(e who a(ted under him, knew not
his confidants, and were (trangers to the object
at which he aimed. There was no person
amoing them whole authority or abilities en-
titled him to affiime Ficfco's place, or to finilh
ls plan; after having loft the spirit which ani-
mated it, life and activity desertcd the whole
body. Many of the conspirators withdrew to

their

their houses, hoping that amidst the darkness of Book VII.
the night they had pased unobserved, and might '- ,'7
remain unknown. Others fought for safety by
a timely retreat; and before break of day, all
of them fled with precipitation from a city,
which, but a few hours before, was ready to ac-
knowledge them as masters.

NEXT morning every thing was quiet inTranquilli-

,Genoa; not an enemy was to be seen; few ty re-efta-
marks of the violence of the former night ap- Gnoa.
peared, the conspirators having conducted their
enterprize with more noise than bloodshed, and
gained all their advantages by furprize, rather
than by force of arms. Towards evening
Andrew Doria returned to the city, being met
by all the inhabitants, who received him with ac-
clamations of joy. Though the disgrace as well
as danger of the preceding night, were fresh in
his mind, and the mangled body of his kinsman
frill before his eyes, such was his moderation
and magnanimity, that the decree issued by the
senate againit the conspirators, did not exceed
thatjuft measure offeverity which was requisite
for the support of government, and was dictated
neither by the violence of resentment, nor the
rancour of revenge (z). *

AFTER taking the neceflary precautions for The Empe-
preventing the flame, which was now so happily rTtl iarnmeJ

fpiracy.

(z) Thuan. 93. Sigonii vita Andrea Doria, 1i96. La

Conjuration de Comte de Fiefiqie par Cardin. de Retz.
Adriani Iltoria, lib. vi. 369. Folietae Conjuratio Jo. Lud.
Fiefci ap. Grxv.'The: Ital. . 883.

* It is remarkable, that Cardinal de Retz compored, at

the age of eighteen, a history of this conspiracy, contain-
ing iuch a discovery of his admiration of Fiefco and his
enterprize, that it is not furprizing that a minister, so jea-
lous and dilcerning as Richlicie, fliould be led by the peru-
fal of it to prcdict the turbulent and dangerous spirit of
that young Ecclcliaftik. Mer. d e Rtz, tom.. i. p. 13.
VOL. Ill. I extinguished

Book VIil. extinguished, from breaking out anew, the first

.'Lr care of the senate was to fend an ambassador to

the Emperor to give him a particular detail of
what had happened, and to beg his afliftance
-towards the reduction of Montobbio, a firong
fort on the hereditary eflate of the Fiefci, in
which Jerome had Ihut himself up. Charles
was no less alarmed than astonished at an event
so strange and unexpeeted. He could not be-
lieve that Fiefco, how bold or adventurous foe*
ver, durst have attempted such an enterprize,
;but on foreign suggestion, and from hope of
foreign aid. Being informed that the Duke of
Parma was well acquainted with the plan of
,the conspirators, he immediately supposed that
the Pope could not be ignorant of a measure,
which his ton had countenanced. Proceeding
from this to a farther conjecture, which Paul's
cautious maxims of policy in other instances,
rendered extremely probable, he concluded
that the French King mutt have known and
approved of the design ;and he began to appre-
hend that this spark might again kindle the
flame of war which had raged to long in Italy.

S6,pendshisAs he had drained his Italian territories of
operation;
n Gcrmany. troops on account of the German war, he was

altogether unprovided for resisting any hostile
attack in that country; and on the first ap-
pearance of danger he mull have detached
thither the greatelt part of its forces for its de-
fence. In this situation of affairs, it would not
have been altogether imprudent in the Emperor
to have advanced in person against the Eletor,
until he should learn with rome degree of cer-
tainty whethr such a scene were not about to
open in Italy, as might put it out of his power
to keep the field with an army fuflicient to op-
pose him.

THE

# BOOK IX.

T.H E,. .
HIS T ORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V..

BOOK IX.

H E Emperor's dread of the hostile inten- Book IX.

1 tions of the Pope ahd French King did 1 547
not proceed' from any imagiftary or ill-grounded Francis iC-
suspicion. ' Paul had already given the ftrongeit i.,pcror.
proofs both of hisjealoufy and enmity. Charles pow: .'nd
could not hope, that Francis, after a rivalfhip
of so long continuance, would behold the great
advantages which he had gained over the con-
federate Protestants, without feeliing his ancient
emulation revive. He was not deceived in this
conjeiure. Francis had observed the rapid
progress of his arms with deep concern, and
though prevented hitherto, by circumstanceS
which have been mentioned, from interposing
in order to check them, he was now convinced
that, if he did not make some extraordinary'and

1 2 tirnly

2o<ok lx timely effort, Charles must acquire such a de-
h -I gree of power as would enable him to give law

to the reft of Europe. This apprehension,
which did not take its rife from the envy of
rivallhip alone, but was entertained by the wisest
politicians of the-age, fiugefted vaiious expedi-
ents which might serve to retard the course of
the Emperor's victories, and to form by degrees
such a combination against him as might put a
flop to his dangerous career.

w a thes WITH this view, Francis inltructed his emit.
Pioteftanrs; saries in Germany to employ all their address

in order to revive the courage of the confede-
rates, and to prevent thenm from submitting to
the Emperor. He made liberal offers of his
affiflance, and entering into a close correfpon-
dence with the Eleftor and L.andgrave, whom
he knew to be the molt zealous as well as the
molt powerful of the whole body, he used every
argument, and proposed every advantage which
could either confirm their dread of the Empe.
ror's deigns, or determine them not to imitate
the inconsiderate credulity of their associates in
giving up their religion and liberties to his dif-
pofal. While he took this step towards conti-
nuing the civil war which raged in Germany,
he endeavoured, likewise, to itir up foreign,
enemies against the Emperor. He solicited So-

withSory. lyman to seize this favourable opportunity of
'A; invading Hungary, which had been drained of

all the troops necessary for its defence, in order
to form the army againfi the confederates of
Smalkalde. He exhorted the Pope to repair,
by a vigorous and seasonable effort, the error of
which he had been guilty in contributing to
raise the Emperor to fich a formidable height

Wtlnth of power. Finding Paul, both from the con-
vectialni. fcioufnefs of his own mitfake, and his dread of

its consequences, abundantly disposed to liften
to his exhortations, he availed himself of this

favourable

favourable diCpfition which the Pontiff began'Book Ix
to discover, as an argument to gain the Ven'e- ,s"
tians. He:endeavoured ,to convince them that'
nothing coud' save Italy, and even Europe from.
oppreflion and servitude, but their joining the
Pope and' im in giving the first beginning to a
general confederacy in order to humble that am-
bitious potentate, whom they had all equal rea-
son to dread.

HA V ING set on foot these negociations in,the With the

southern courts, he turned his attention' next King" of
towards thoie in the north. of Europe. As the and"Enga.
King of Denmarkc had particular' reasons td be
offended with the Emperor, Francis imagined'
that he would not be backward to approve of
the league which he had- piojeaed; and left
considerations of caution or prudence should re-:
strain him from joining in it, h.-attempted' to
overcome these, by offerini'g. him the young
Queen of Scots in marriage toj his son (a). .'As'
the ministers who governed England in the
name of Edward VI, had openplydeclared' thiem-
selves converts to the opirions of the Refornmers,
as soon as it became safe 6poin Henry's death to,
lay aside that disguise wliicl 'his unforgiving bi-
gotry had forced them to 'affme Francis 'flat
tered himself that their zeal would ilot allow
them to remain inactive fpe.tators' of'the over-.
throw and deftrudtion of those who'proftffed thi
fame faith withl themselves ; and he hoped that
notwithftandingthe struggles of'fation incident
to a minority,, and the profpe. of an approach-
ing rupture with the Scots,. he might prevail
on them likewise to take':part in the common
cause (b). . .

WHILE 'Fran;cis employed such variety of ex-

pedients, an'd exerted himself' with such extra-
ordinary aSivi{y, to rouze the different afates of

'' I 3 Europe
(a) Mer. de Rib. i. 600, 606. (O) Mem, do Riib i. 6 5.

Bokx. ,,Eurot p against his rival, he didk not negleft

,547'. what depended .h, himself alone, ..
. Ie levied

. . troops in. all parts of his domi'nnions . he collec-

ted .'mni'tary stores; lie. contra.ted with the
Swiss. cant'ons for a considerable body of men;
she put his finances in admirable oQrde;, le re-
minted considerable fums'to' the kletor and
ELandgrave; and took. all tie other Reps neceffa-
rytowaras comniierrcing hdftilites on' the shortest
warning, and with proper vigour (c).

The get O TPRATIQN .'0 cornplihcatd, and which re-
armed. 'uqiired the put!tng 10i many iLnf!nlents in mo-

tionf did .riot e.cape. tlh E'mjiperor's.obfervation,
Ie w'as soon inborrned 6f Fiancis'. intrigues in
the siveral cirrts,, as vell; as of. his doniellic
prepratirolh, and, 'fepfible hbow fatal an inter-
riuptin a, foreignwar.wQuld prove' to his defgns
in. (ermny Fe tremnbled at, the profpet of
That evenit.' T.he dalnger, howeyver,i appeared
tr.hirm a. s unayolidale. as it, W(as great. He.
knew tle m.fain able,-and wel pdireled. ambi-
t'ion ,o. 'Soly.mrn, -and 'tat. Se 'alw.ays chore
the fai
if for egmihi, his military enterprizes

ith, Kprud'ence equa {io the vatour 'tl] whicli

lie con'lted' h'ern, Tt.l!e Pope',a'is he had good
re'ason to :believe,, wanit'ed not pretexts to jtlltify

ra rupttire, por inclinali'ons to .t;gin hostilities..

He had' alraidy mrlaje' fme dif`ove -'of i js, fen,
tientts,r e xpreflng, a Joy altogether unbe,
cring' the; head of tile churchb, iwn irceiving
ani accornt oQf tihe adyiantage wtirhthe Elector
of'Sax'ony had gaiie'd over Albert o' Branden-
lirg;,and as, he'was now fecureoffihdc;ii in the

eriechKin, an' ay of fuffijenF npowe to Tup

port him, he wa t no pains to conlice v

ie vlo-

lence and extent of his enmity (d). The.Vene-
tians. Charles was .well afilred, had long ob-
feiredl the growthi. ' lia power 'ith je'oulfy
wIhih aded tohes itiatations ap rornifes ,Of

), , .* R?, *,"* 2 :. * r-) MC. i*^ " * *Frair ce,a

(s. Ies.. 63,7.
().Mere. do Rib. i, S5. (d) Mcee..& ji. tom, i. 63,7.

France might at last quicken their flow counfels:,.Bok iX.
and overcome their natural caution. The Danes v.
and English, it was evident, had both peculiar
reason to be disgusted, as well as strong motives
to adt againlr him. But above all, he dreaded
the active emulation of Francis himflif, whom
he confidered as the foul and mover of any cons
federacy that could be formed again(t him and
as that Monarch had afforded protection to Vert
rina, who failed directly to Marseilles upon the
miscarriage of Fiefco's conspiracy, Charles ex-
peted every moment the commencement of
those hostile operations in Italy, of which he
conceived the infurredtion in Genoa to have been
only the prelude.

BUT while he remained in this fiate of sus- Entertain,

penfe and solicitude, there was dne circumstance hop dfrom
which afforded him some profpe¢t of escaping ing fate of
the danger. The French King's health began heal,''
to decline. A disease, the effect of his intem-
perance and inconsiderate pursuit of pleasure,
preyed gradually on his constitution. The pre.
parations of war, as well as the negociations
in the different courts, began to languish, toe
ether with the Monarch, who gave spirit to
both. The Genoese, during that interval, re- March.
duced Montobbio, took Jerome Fiefco prisoner,
#nd putting him together with his chief adhe.
rents to death, extinguished all remains of the
conspiracy. Several of the Imperial cities in
Germany, despairing of timely alliftance from
France, Submitted to the Emperor. Even the
Landgrave seemed disposed to abandon the
EleOor, and to bring matters to a speedy ac-
commodation, on such terms as he could ob.
tain. In the rmean time, Charles waited with
impatience the issue of a distemper, which was
to decide whether he must relinquish all other
schemes, in order to prepare for resisting a corn-
binatiqn of the greater part of Europe againrt

I ' h'i

Book IX. him, or whether he might proceed to invade

CIv SSaxony, without interruption or fear of danger.
1547.

THE good fortune, so remarkably propitious

to his family, that some historians have called it
the Star of the House of Aiijria, did not desert

Death of him on this occasion. Francis died at Ram.
Francis, and bouillet, on the last day of March, in the fifty.
refle&ions thirty-i
on his cha- third year of his age, and the thirty-third of his
raner d reign. During twenty-eight years of that time,
withcharlis.an avowed rivalfhip fubfilted between him and

the Emperor, which involved not only their own
dominions, but the greater part of Europe in
wars, prdfecuted with more violent animosity,
and drawn out [to a greater length, than had
been known in any former period. Many cir-
cumRfances contributed to both. Their animo.
fity was founded in opposition of interest,
heightened by personal emulation, and exafpe.
rated not only by mutual injuries, but by reci.
procal insults. At the fame time, whatever ad.
.vantage one seemed to possess towards gaining
the ascendant, was wonderfully ballanced by
some favourable circumstance, peculiar to the
other. The Emperor's dominions were ofgreat
extent, the French King's lay more compat;
Francis governed his kingdom with absolute
power; that of Charles was limited, hut he sup-
plied the want of authority by address; the
troops of the former were more impetuous ant
enterprizing.; those of the latter better difciplin-
ed, and more'patient of fatigue. The talents
and abilities of the two Monarchs were as dif-
ferent as the advantages which they poffelfed,
and contributed no less to prolong the contest
between them. Francis took his resolutions
suddenly, prosecuted them at firfR with warmth,
and pushed them inco execution with a molt ad-
ventrous courage; but being deflitute of the
perseverance necessary to surmount difficulties,

he

he often abandoned his designs, or relaxed the Book IX.
vigour of pursuit, from impatience, and some- 1s7.
times from levity. Charles deliberated long,
and determined with coolness; but, having
once fixed his plan, he adhered to it with inflex-
ible obstinacy, and neither danger nor difcou-
ragement could turn him aside from the execu-
tion of it. The success of their enterprizes was
altogether as different as their characters, and
was uniformly influenced by them. Francis,
by his impetuous activity, often disconcerted
the Emperor's best laid schemes; Charles, by a
more calm but steady prosecution of his de-
signs, checked the rapidity of his rival's career,
and baffled or repulsed his most vigorous efforts.
The former, at the opening of a war or of a
carpaign, broke in upon his enemy with the
violence of a torrent, and carried all: before him;
the latter, waiting until he saw the force of
his rival begin to abate, recovered in the end
not only all that he had loft, but made new ac-
quifitions. Few of the French Monarch's at-
tempts towards conquest, whatever promising
aspea they might wear at first, were conducted
to an happy iflue; many of the Emperor's en.
terprizes, even after they appeared desperate
and impracticable, terminated' in the molt prof-
perous manner. Francis was dazzled with the
splendour of an undertaking; Charles was al-
lured by the profped of its turning to his ad-'
vantage. The degree, however, of their com-
parative merit and reputation, has not been fix-
ed either by a fri&t scrutiny into their abilities
for government, or by an impartial confidera-
tion of the greatness and success of their under-
takings; and Francis is one of those Monarchs
who occupies a higher rank in the temple of
fame, than either his talents or performances in-
title him to hold. This pre-eminence he owed
to many different circumstances. The fuperio.
rity which Charles acquired by the victory of
Pavia, and which from that period he preserved

through

ook Ix. through the remainder of his reign, Was so maR
%d-V^" nifeft, that Francis's struggle againt his exor.

,47- bitant and growing dominion was viewed by

mos of the other powers, not only with the
partiality which naturally arises for those who
gallantly maintain an unequal contest, but with
the favour due to one who ;was resisting a com-
mon enemy, and endeavouring to set bounds to
a Monarch equally formidable to them all. The
characers of Princes, too, especially among
their contemporaries, depend not only upon
their talents for government, but upon their
qualities as men. Francis, notwithianding the
many errors conspicuous in his foreign policy
and domestic administration, was nevertheless
humane, beneficent, generous. He possessed
dignity without pride; affability free from mean-
ness; and courtesy exempt from deceit. All
who had atcefs to him, and no man of merit
was ever denied that privilege, refpeted and
loved him. Captivated with his personal quali.
ties, his fubjeas forgot his :defec<ts as a Monarch,
and admiring him as the mod accomplished and
amiable gentlemant in his dominions, they never
murmuredat aós of male-adminifiration, which
in a Prince of less engaging difpolitions, would
have been deemed unpardonable. This admi-
ration, however, must have been temporary only,
and would have died away with the courtiers
who bestowed it; the illusion arising from his
private virtues mau have ceased, and posterity
would have judged of his public condut with
its ufilal impartiality; but another circumftante
prevented this, and his name hath been tranf-
mitted to posterity with increasing reputation,
Science and the arts had, at that time, made
little progress in Franed. They were, just
beginning to advance beyofnd the limits of
Italy, where they had: revived, and which'

had

had hitherto been their only feat. Francis Booxkl
took- them immediately under his protec- ,
tion,. and vied with Leo himself, in the zeal
and munificence .wlth which he encouraged
them.. He invited learned inen to his court, he
convered . with them familiarly, he employed
them .in business, he raised them to offices of
dignity, and honoured them with his confidence.
That race of men, not more prone to complain
when.denied the refpeat to which they fancy
themselves entitled, than apt to be pleased when
treated' with the.diftincion which they confider
as their due, thought they could not exceed in
gratitude to fCuch a benefactor, and strained their
invention, and employed all their ingenuity in
panegyric.; Succeeding authors, warmed with
their, descriptions of Francis's bounty, adopted
their encrmiiums, and refined upon them. The
appellation of Father of Letters beltowed upon
Franci, ,h'atht rendered his memory facred-among
hiflorians, ,and they seem to have regarded it as
a fort of, impiety to uncover his infirmities, or
to point out his defe&s. Thus Francis, not-
withstanding his inferior abilities, and want of
success, hatfh more than. equalled the fame of
Charles. ..'.The virtues which- he possessed as a
man, have entitled him to greater admiration
and praiCe, than have been beetowed upon the
extenfive'genius and fortunate arts of a more ca-
pable, but iei amiable rival.

BY his, death, a considerable change was made Efl's of

in.the Rtate of. Europe. Charles, grown old in dFrth
the arts 'a government and command, had now
to coitend .only with younger Monarchs, who
could. not be regarded. as an equal match for
him,. iuio, had flood ,the encounter with
Henry y.I. and Francis I. and come off with
honour in all there diffefent contets. By this
event, h .was eased of all his disquietude,
and was happy to.find that he might begin

with

Book ix with safety those operations against the Elecor

'7~. of Saxony, which he had hitherto beein obliged

to suspend. He knew' the abilities of Henry II.
who had just mounted 'the throne of France, to
be greatly inferior to those of his father; and
foresaw that he would be so much occupied for
oIme tim'e in displacing the late King's minis-
ters, whom he hated, and in gratifying the am.
bitious demands of' his'own favourites, that he
had notbing to dread, either'from'his-p'erfonal
efforts, or from any confederacy which this un-
experienced Prince' could form. ''

Charles BUT as it was uncertain how long fiuch an in.
ain chthe terval of security iight continue, Charles de-
Bector of terriined instantly to improve it;' and as" oon
S"lony. as he heard of Francis's dermife, he: began his
April 13. march from Egra on the borders. of:Bohemia.

But the departure of the Papal tro6'p,'.together
with the retreat of the Flemings, had so much
diminished his army, that sixteen thousand men
were all he could assemble. 'With:this inconfi-
derable body he set out on an expedition, the
event of which was to decide what degree of
authority' lie hould poflefs from that period
in Germany: but as this little army confit-
ed chiefly of the veteran Spanish and Italian
bands, he did not, in trusting to them, commit
much to the decision of chance, and even with
so finall a force he had reason to entertain the
molt sanguine hopes of success. The Eletor,
it is true, had levied an army greatly superior
in number; but neither the experience and dif-
cipline of his troops, nor the abilities of his of-
ficers, were to be compared with those of the
Emperor. The Eledor, besides, had already
been guilty of an error, which deprived' him of
all the advantage which he might have derived
from his superiority in number, and was alone
sufficient to have occasioned his 'ruin. In-
tead of keeping his forces united, detached

one
i

one great body towards the frontiers of Bohe- Book. IX.
mia, in order to facilitate his juncion with the ',,
malecontents of that kingdom, and cantoned a
considerable part of what remained in different
places of Saxony, where he expeLed the Em-
peror would make the sirs impreflion, vainly
imagining that there open towns, with imfall
garrisons, might be rendered tenable against an
enemy.

TH£. Emperor entered the southern frontier Progref of

of Saxony, and attacked Altorf upon the Ellfer. his armie.
The folly of the measure which the Eledor had
taken was immediately seen, the troops polled
in that town furreridering without resistance;
and those in all the other places between that
and the Elbe, either imitated their example,
or fled as the Imperialifis approached. Charles,
that they might not recover from the panic with
which they seemed to be itruck, advanced with-
out losing a moment. The Elecor, who had
fixed his head quarters at Meissen, continued in
his wonted slate of fluctuation and uncertainty.
He even became, more undetermined in pro-
portion as the danger grew near and called for
prompt and decisive resolutions. Sometimes he
acted, as if he had resolved to defend the banks
of the Elbe, and to hazard a battle with the
enemy, as soon as the detachments which lie
had called were able to join him. At other
times, he abandoned this as rash and perilous,
seeming to adopt the more prudent counsels of
those who advised him to endeavour at protract-
ing the war, and for that end to retire under the
fortifications of Wittemberg, where the Imperia-
liss could not attack him without manifefl difad.
vantage, and where he might wait, in safety, for
the succours which he expe.ted from Meck-
lenburgh, Pomerania, and the Protestant cities
on the Baltic. Without fixing upon either of

these

Book Ix there plans, he broke down the bridgR at Meissen
£547, and marched along the east bank of the E']be to

Muhlberg. There he deliberated anew, and
after much hesitation, adopted one of these mid-
die schemes, which are always acceptable to
feeble minds incapable of deciding.' He left a
detachment at Muhlberg to oppose the Impe-
rialifts, if they should attempt to pass at that
place, and advancing a few miles with his main
body, encamped there in expecation of the
event, according to which he proposed to regu-
late his subsequent motions.
pair the CHARLES, meanwhile, pushing forward in-

ceffantly, arrived the evening of the trenty-third
of April on the banks of the Elbe opposite td
Muhlberg. The river, at that place, was three
hundred paces in breadth, above four feet in
depth, its current rapid, and the bank possessed
by the Saxons was higher than that which he
occupied. Undismayed, however, by all these
obstacles, he called together his general officers,
and without alking their opinions, communi-
cated to them his intention of attempting next
morning to force his passage over the river, and
to attack the enemy wherever he could come
up with them. They all expreffled their aflo-
nifhment at such a bold resolution, and even
the Duke of Alva, though naturally daring and
impetuous, and Maurice of Saxony, notwith-
standing his impatience to crush his rival the
Elecor, remonstrated earnefsly againRt it. But
the Emperor, confiding in his own judgment,
or good fortune, paid no regard to their argu-
ments, and gave the orders neceflary for exe-
cuting his design.

EARLY in the morning, a body of Spanibh

and Italian foot marched towards the river, and
began an inceflant fire upon the enemy. The

long

long heavy muskets used in that age, did execu- Book IX.
tion on the opposite bank, and many of the fol- 57.
diers, hurried on by a martial ardour in order
to get nearer the enemy, rushed into the stream,
and advancing breast high, fired with a more
certain aim, and with greater effe&t. Under co-
ver of their fire, a bridge of boats was begun to
be laid for the infantry; and a peasant having
undertaken to conduct the cavalry through the
river by a ford with which he was well acquaint-
ed, they also were put in motion. The Saxons
posted in Muhlberg endeavoured to obstruct
these operations, by a brific fire from a bat-
tery, which they had ereced; but as a thick fog
covered all the low grounds upon the river, they
could not take aim with any certainty, and the
Imperialists suffered very little; at the fame
time the Saxons being much galled by the Spa-
niards and Italians, they set on fire some boats
which had been collected near the village, and
prepared to retire. The Imperialists perceiving
this, ten Spanish soldiers instantly Itript them-
selves, and holding their swords with their teeth,
swam across the river, put to flight such of the
Saxons as ventured to oppose them, saved fromn
the flames as many boats as were sufficient to
complete their own bridge, and by this spirited
and successful action, encouraged their compa-
nions no less than they intimidated the enemy.

BY this time, the cavalry, each trooper hav-

ing a foot soldier behind him, began to enter
the river, the light horse marching in the front,
followed by the men at arms, whom the Em-
peror led in person, mounted on a Spanilh
horse, dressed in a sumptuous habit, and carry-
ing a javelin in his hand. Such a numerous
body struggling through a great river, in which

according

Bok. x. according to the directions of their guide they

were obliged to make several turns, Sometimes
7' treading on a firm bottom, sometimes swim-

ming, presented to their companions, whom they
left behind, a fpetacle equally magnificent and
intereiting (d). Their courage, at last, fur-
mounted every obstacle, no man betraying any
symptom of fear, when. the Emperor shared in
the danger no less than the meanelt soldier. The
moment that they reached the opposite fide,
Charles, without waiting the arrival of the reft
of the infantry, advanced towards the Saxons
with the troops which had passed along with
him, who fluihed with their good fortune, and
despising an enemy who had neglected to op-
pose them, when it might have been done with
such advantage, made no account of their fupe-
rior numbers, and marched on as to a certain
victory.

n1 condA& DURING all there operations, which neceffa-
of the Elec- .1
otr. rily consumed much time, the Elector remain-

ed inactive in his camp; and from an infatua-
tion which appears to be so amazing, that the
belt informed historians impute it to the trea-
cherous arts of his generals, who deceived him
by false intelligence, he would not believe that
the Emperrr had passed the river or could be
so near at hand (e). Being convinced, at last,
of his fatal miiiake, by the concurring tefimony
of eye witnesses, he gave orders for retreating to-
wards Wittemberg. But a German army en-
cumbered, as ufuial, with baggage and artillery,
could not be put suddenly in motion. They
had scarce begun to march when the light
troops of the enemy came in view, and the
Eleetor saw an engagement to be unavoidable.

As

(d) Avila, 1 5. a.
(c) Camerar. ap. Frcher. iii. 493. Struv. corp. hilt.
Germ. 1 047, 1049.

As he was no less bold in action than irrefolue Book IX.
in council, he made the difpolition for battle' ,?
with the greatest pretence ot mind, and in the Battle or
most proper manner, taking advantage of a great Mulhauf.n-
forest to cover his wings, so as to prevent his
being surrounded by the enemies cavalry, which
were far more numerous than his own. The
Emperor, likewise, ranged his men in order as
they came up, and riding along the ranks, ex-
horted them with few but efficacious -words to
do their duty. It was with a very different fpiric
that the two armies advanced to the charge.
As the day, which had hitherto been dark and
cloudy, happened to clear up at that moment,
this accidental circumstance made an impreflion
on the differrt parties corresponding to the
tone of their minds; the Sagons, furprized and
disheartened, felt pain at being exposed fully to
the view of the enemy; the Imperialists, being
now secure that the Pro.eftant forces could not
escape from theam, rejoiced at the return of fun-
(hine as a certain presage of victory. The Chock
of battle would not have been long or doubtful,
if the personal courage which the Eletor dif-
played, together with the activity whic he ex-
erted from the moment that the approach of
the enemy rendered an engagement certain, and
cut off all polfibility of hesitation, had not re-
vived in some degree the spirit of his troops.
They repulsed the Hungarian light horse who
began the attack, and received with firmness the
men at arms who next advanced to the charge;
bug as there were the flower of the Imperial
army, were commanded by experienced Pffi-
cers, and fought unlder the Emnperor's eye, the
Saxons Coon began to give way, and the light
troops rallying at the fame time and falling on
their flanks, the flight became general. A finall
body of chosen soldiers, among whom the Elec- The Elec-
tor had foughtl in person, Rill continued to de. tor defteJ

iVOL. II. ' and pi takec
VOL. 111. K tendprilone.

Book IX. find themselves, and endeavoured to save their
'V'. imafter by retiring into the forest; but being

7 Surrounded on every fide, the Elecor, wounded

in the face, exha'uftle with fatigue, and perceiv-
ing all resistance to be vain, surrendered him-
fel f prisoner. He was conduAed immediately
towards the Emperor, whom he found just re-
turiedl from the pursuit, flanding on the field of
battle ii the full exultation of success, and re-
ceiving the congtatulations of his officers, upon
this compleat victory obtained by his valour
and condutt. Even in such an unfortunate and
humbling situation, the Eledor's behaviour was
equally magnanimous and decent. Sensible of
his condition, he approached his conqueror
without any of the fullennelf or pride, which
would have been improper in a captive; and
conscious of his own dignity, he descended to no
mean fubmiflion, unbecoming the high station
w1 rh hich he held among the German Princes.

receptio,,^ " The fortune of war, said he, has made me
bythe Lem-your prisoner, moss gracious Emperor, and I
pcror' hope to be treated"-Here, Charles harlhly in.

terrupted him. " And am I then, at last, ac-
knowledged to be Emperor; Charles of Ghent
was the only title you lately allowed me. You
flall be treated as you deserve." At there
words, he turned from him abruptly, with an
haughty air. To this cruel repulse, the King of
the Romans added reproaches In his own name,
using exprellions still more ungenerous and in.
fulting. The Elector made no reply; but, with
an unaltered countenance, which discovered
neither aftonifhmeht nor dejection, accompa-
nied the Spanilh soldiers appointed to guard
him (f).

(f) Sleid. . 4his26. u. a. 136. Hortenflls de Bcllo

German. ap. Scard. vol. ii. 498. Dcfcript. pulgli. MIl-
berg. ibid. p. Sog. P. lieutcer. Rer. Auftr. lib. xii. c. i3.
p. 298.

THIS decisive vicory coi the Imperialifls BooklX.

only fifty men. Twelve hundred of the Saxons VV
were killed chiefly in the pursuit, and a great Charls'
number taken prisoners. About four hundred prgr',f hs-
kept in a body, and escaped to Wittemberg, to- tory.
gether with the ele&oral Prince, who had like-
wife been wounded in the acion. After retting
two days on the field of battle, partly to refresh
his army, and partly. to receive the deputies
of the adjacent towns, which were impatient to
secure his protecion by submitting to his will,
the Emperor began to move towards Wittem-
berg, that he might terminate the war at once,
by the reduLion of that city. The unfortunate
Eletor was carried along in a fort of triumph,
and exposed every where, as a captive, to his
.own fubjecls; a fpeEtacle extremely afflicting
to them who both honoured and loved him;
though the insult was so far from subduing his
firm spirit, that it did not even ruffle the
wonted tranquillity and composure of his
mind.

As Wittemberg, the residence, in that age, Incfhwit.

of the Electoral branch of the Saxon family, was temberg.
one of the strongest cities in Germany, and
would not be taken, if properly defended, with-
out great difficulty, the Emperor marched thi-
ther with the utmost dispatch, hoping that
while the consternation occasioned by his victory
.was still recent, the inhabitants might imitate
the example-of their countrymen, and submit to
his power, as fbon as he appeared before their
walls. But Sybilla of Cleves, the Elector's wife.
a woman no less distinguished by her abilities
than her virtue, instead of abandoning herself to
tears and lamentation upon her husband's mis-
for' une, endeavoured, by her example as well as
exhortation, to animate the citizens ; and she

K 2 inlpired

Book X. inspired them with such resolution, that, when
'v^'"' summoned to surrender, they returned a vigo-

rous answer, warning the Emperor to behave
towards their sovereign with the refpe&t due
to his rank, as they were determined to treat Al-
bert of Brandenburg, who was flill a prisoner,
precisely in the fame manner that he treated
him. The spirit of the inhabitants, no less than
the strength of the city, feetned now to render a
siege in form neceirary. After such a signal vic-
tory it would have been disgraceful not to have
undertaken it, though at the fame time the Em-
peror was desitute of every thing requisite for
carrying it on. But Maurice removed all diffi-
culties, byengaging to furniih provisions, artil-
lery~ ammunition, pioneers, and whatever else
should be needed. Trufiing to this, Charles
gave orders to open the trenches before the
town. It quickly appeared, that Maurice's
eagerness to reduce the capital,of those domini-
ons, which he expected as hi' reward for taking
arms against his kinsman, and deserting the
Proteltant cause, had led him to promise what
exceeded his power to perform, A battering
train was, indeed, carried safely down the Elbe
from Dresden to Wittemberg; but as Maurice
had no sufficient force to preserve a secure com-
munication between his territories, and the
camp of the beliegers, Count Mansfeldt, who
commanded a body of electoral troops, clefroy-
ed a convoy ofprovifions and military stores,
and dispersed a band of pioneers destined for
the service of the Imperialitls. This put a flop
to the progress of the liege, and convinced the
Eimperor that as he could not rely on Maurice's
promises, recourse ought to be had to rome
more expeditious as well ns more certain me-
thod of getting poffeflion of the town.

THr,

THE unfortunate Elector was in his hands, BbOlkI

and he was ungenerous and hard-hearted ,47
enough to take advantage of this, in order to The Empe-
make an experiment whether he might not nustrgt
bring about his design, by working upon the ment of he
tenderness of a wife for her husband, or upon ycaor
the piety of children towards their parent.
With this view he summoned Sybilla a second
time to open the gates, letting her know that if
she again refused to comply, the Elecor should
answer with his head for her obstinacy. TQ
convince her that this was knot an empty
threat, he brought his prisoner to an immedi-
ate trial. The proceedings against him were
as irregular, as the stratagem was barbarous.
lnftead of consulting the ftatcs of the Empire,
or remitting the cause to any court, which ac-
cording to the German conltitution might have
legally taken cognizance of the Eleetor's crime,
he fubjeted the greatest prince in the Empire
to the jurifdition of a court-martial composed
of Spani(h and Italian officers, and in which
the unrelenting Duke of Alva, a fit instrument
for any at of violence, presided. This itrange May ro.
tribunal founded its charge upon the ban of
the Empire which had been issued against the
the prisoner, a sentence pronounced by the sole
authority of the Emperor, and destitute of every
legal formality which could render it valid i
but presuming him to be thereby manifestly
conviced of treason and rebellion, the court-
martial condemned him to susser death by be-
ing beheaded. This decree was intimated to
the Eletor while anusing himself in playing at
Chefs with Ernest of Brunswick his fellow-pri-
soner. He paused for a moment, tho' withoQt The Ele.-
any symptom either of furprize or terror; and t' ma-
after taking notice of the irregularity as well as
injultice of the Emperor's proceedings: " It
is easy, continued he, to comprehend his scheme.

1 3 I nuG

Book IX. I must die, because Wittemberg will not furren-
vcv^ der; and I shall lay down my life with pleasure,

if, by that sacrifice, 1 can preserve the; dignity
of my house, and tranfinit to my poflerity the
inheritance which belongs to them. Would to
God, that this'fentence may not effet my wife
and children more than it intimidates me! and
that they, for the fake of adding a few days to
a life already too long, may not renounce ho-
nours and territories which they were born to
possess (g)" He then turned to his antagonill,
whom he challenged to continue the game.
He played with his usual attention and ingentu-
ity, and having beat Erneit, expressed all the fa-
tisfaftion which is. commonly felt on gaining
filch vitories. After this he withdrew to his
own apartment, that he might employ the reft
of his time in such religious exercises as were
proper in his situation (b.

'The dilrers IT was not w.ith the fame indifference, or
f his' f- compotire, that the account of the Electors

danger was received at Wittemberg. Sybilla,
who had supported with such undaunted forti-
tude her hulband's misfortunes, while Ihe ima-
gined that they could reach no farther. than to
diminilh his power or territories, felt all her re-
flution fail the moment his life was threaten-
ed. Sollicitous to save that, fle despised every
other consideration; and was willing to make
any sacrifice in order to appease an incensed
conqueror. At the fame time, the Duke of
Cleves, the Elector of Brandenburg, and
Maurice, to none of whom Charles had commu-
nicated the true motives of his violent proceed-
ings against the Eleotor, interceded warmly with
himn tj: fire his life. The firfi was prompted to
do to merely by compallion for his siser, and

regard
( ) 'I h ti; 1). 1.  1 z .

(h) Strilvili cqrpus lo50.

regard for his brother-in-law. The two other Book L-
dreaded the universal teproach that. they would
incur, if, after having boaled so often of the
ample security which the Emperor had prormrif
ed them with respect to their religion, the first
effet of their union with him should be the
public execution of a Prince, who was juflly
held in reverence as the most zealous protedtor
of the Protestant cause. Maurice, in particular,
foresaw that he mutt becorme the object of de-
tellation to the Saxons, and could never hope
to govern them with tranquillity, if he were
conlidered by them as acceflary to the death of
his nearest kinsman, in order that he might ob-
tain pofellion of his dominions.

WHILE they, from fuich various motives, fol- His trcsty

licited Charles, with the molt earnefd im.portu- bythc.hich
nity, not to execute the sentence, Sybilla, and he cfrrcn-
the reft of the Elector's family, conjured him by eat,,r,..
letters as well as melengers to scruple at no
concessions that would extricate him out of the
present danger, and deliver them from their
fears and anguifl on his account. The Empe-
ror, perceiving that the expedient which he had
tried began to produce the effect he intended,
fell by degrees from his former rigour, and al-
lowed himself to soften into proinifes of clemen-
cy and forgiveness, if the Elector would shew
himself worthy of his favour by submitting to
reasonable terms. The Elector, on whom the
conlideration of what he migt ftffer himself
had made no imprelliQn, was melted by the
tears of a wife whomn he loved, and could not
retife the entreaties of his family. In compli- ,lay ,9.
ance with their repeated follicitations, he agreed
to articles of accommodation, which he would
otherwise have rejected with disdain. The
chief of them were, that he (hould resign the
tiectoral dignity, as well for himself as for his

K 4 pollelity,

Book I. poflerity, into the Emperor's hands, to be dif-

>'5 posed of entirely at his pleasure ; that he (hould

intlantly put the Imperial troops in poffelion of
the cities of Wittemburg and Gotha; that he
should set Albert of Brandenburg at liberty
without ransom ; that he should submit to the
decrees of the Imperial chamber, and acquiesce
in whatever reformation the Emperor should
make in the conflitution of that court; that he
ihould renounce all leagues against the Empe-
ror or King of the Romans, and enter into no
alliance for the future, in which they were not
comprehended. In return for these important
conctflions, the Emperor promised not only to
spare his life, but to fettle on him and his pof.
terity the city of Gotha and its territories, toge-
ther with an annual pension of fifty thousand
florins, payable out of the revenues of the elec-

nd remains torate; and likewise to grant him a fum in ready
ariibncr. money to be applied towards the discharge of

his debts. Even these articles of grace were
clogged with the mortifying condition of his re-
maining the Emperor's prisoner during the reft
of his life (i). To the whole, Charles had sub-
joined, that he should submit to the decrees of
the Pope and council with regard to the contro-
verted points in religion; but the Elecor, tlo'
he had been persuaded to sacrifice all the objets
which men commonly hold to be the dearest
and molt valuable, was inflexible with regard to
this point; and neither threats nor intreaties
could prevail to make him renounce what he
deemed to be truth, or perfiladed him to at
in opposition to the diAates of his conscience.
lMarirce As soon as the Saxon garrison marched out of

p pot-

jo.In ofr Wittemberg, the Emperor fulfilled his engage-
thr E cdo- ments to Mlvaurice; and in reward for his merit
ral dumi-
Alion. in having deserted the Proteltant cause, and

having

(i) lcid. 427. Thuan. i. 142. Du Mont Corps Dip,
lon. iv. p. 11. j3:.

having contributed with such success towards the BO-. Ix.
dissolution of the Smalkaldic league, he gave ,T 7
him pofleflion of that city, together with all the
other towns in the eleLorate. It was not with-
out relucance, however, that he made such a
sacrifice; the extraordinary success of his arms
had begun to operate, in its usual manner, up-
on his ambitious mind, fuggetling new and valt
projefts for the aggrandizement of his family,
towards the accomplishment of which the re-
taining of Saxony would have been of the ut-
most consequence. But as this scheme was not
then ripe for execution, he durst not yet venture
to lifclofe it; nor would it have been either
safe or prudent to have offended Maurice, at
that juncure, by such a manifelt violation of
all the promises, which had reduced him to
abandon his natural allies.

TH E Landgrave, Maurice's father-in-law, was Negociti-

Itill in arms; and though now left alone toon with'the
maintain the Protestant cause, was neither a Land
feeble nor contemptible enemy. His dominions
were of considerable extent; his fubjedts ani-
mated with zeal for the Reformation; and if he
could have held the Imperialists at bay for a
ihort time, he had much to hope from a party
whose strength was till unbroken, whose union
as well as vigour might return, and which had
reason to depend, with certainty, on being es-
feEtually supported by the King of France. The
Landgrave thought not of any thing so bold or
adventurous; but being seized with the fame
consternation which had taken poffeflidn of his
afrociates, he was intent, only, how to procure
favourable terms from the Emperor, whom he
viewed as a conqueror, to whose will there was
a neceflity of submitting. Maurice encouraged
this tame and pacific spirit, by magnifying, on
the one hand, the Emperor's power; by boalt-

ing,

Boo1xk X ing, on the other, of his own interell with his

i)^^ victorious ally; and by representing the advan-
1547.

tageous conditions which he could not fail of
obtaining by his interceflion for a friend, whom
he was tb follicitous to save. Sometimes, the Land-
grave was induced to place such unbounded con-
fidence in his promises, that he was impatient to
bring matters to a final accommodation. On
other occasions, the Emperor's exorbitant am-
bition, restrained neither by the scruples of de.
cency, nor the maxims ofjuftice, together with
the recent and shocking proof which he had gi-
ven of this in the cruel and and oppreflive treat-
ment of the Elector of Saxony, came so full
into his thoughts, and made such a lively im-
preflion on them, that he broke off abruptly
the negociations which he had begun seeming
to be convinced that it was more prudent to de-
pend for safety on his own arms, than to confide
in Charles's generosity. But this bold refolu-
tion, which despair had fuggelted to an impatient
spirit, fiettcd by difappointmnents, was not of
long continuance. Upon a more deliberate fur-
vey of the enemy's power, and his own weak-
ness, his doubts and fears returned upon hin,
and together with them the fpir it of.neociating,
and the desire of accommodation.
Trle ondi- MAURICE, and the Elecor of Brandenburg,

",' " aec as mediators between him and the Empe.

thllc ppc- ror; and after all that the former had vaunted
or". of his influence, the conditions prescribed to the

Landgrave were extremely rigorous. The arti-
cles with rcegard to his renouncing the league of
Sm alkaldc, a.cknowledging theEEmperor's autho-
rity, and lubmittini to the decrees of the Imnpe-
rial chamber, were the famie a.hich had been
imp)osed on the Electoi of Saxony. Besides
these, he was required to furrcnder his pcrfbn
and territories to the Emperor l to ilmplore for
pardon on his knees; to pay an hundred and

fifty

fifty thousand crowns towards defraying the ex- Book. IX.
pences of the war; to demolifl the fortifications ,s4.
of all the towns in his dominions except one; to
oblige the garrilon which he placed in'it to take
an oath of fidelity to the Emperor; to allow a
free passage through his territories to the Impe-
rial troops as often as it lhall be demanded to
deliver up all his artillery and ammunition to
the Emperor; to set at liberty, without ransom,
Henry of Brunswick, together with the other
prisoners he had taken during the war; and nei-
ther to take arms himself, for the future, nor to
to permit any of his fubjets to serve against the
Emperor or his allies (a).

THE Landgrave ratified these articles, though To which

with the utmost reluctance, as they containedherubmi"'
no stipulation with regard to the manner in
which he was to be treated, and left him entirely
at the Emperor's mercy. Necessity, however,
compelled him to give his assent. Charles, who
had assumed the haughty and imperious tone of a
conqueror, ever since the reduction of Saxony, in-
lifted on an unconditional fubmiflion, and would
permit nothing to be added to the termis which
he had prescribed. that could in any degree limit
the fulness of his power, or restrain him from
behaving as he saw meet towards a Prince whom
he regarded as absolutely at his difiofal. But
though he would not vouchsafe to negociate
with the Landgrave, on such a footing of equali-
ty, as to susser any article to be inserted among
those which he had dictated to him, that could
be confidered as a formal flipulation for the fe-
curity and freedom of his person ; he, or his
ministers in his name, gave the Elector of Bran-
denburg and Maurice such full satisfaction with
regard to this point, that they assured the Land-
grave that Charles would behave to him in the

fame
(a) Slcid. 430. Thialli. 1. iv. 146.

Bok sL. fame way that he had done to the Duke of Wur.

r temberg, andwould allow him, as soon as he

had made his fubmiflion, to return to his own
territories. Upon finding the Landgrave to be
ftillpofleffed with his former suspicions of the
Emperor's intentions, and unwilling to trust ver-
bal or ambiguous declarations, in a matter of
such eflential concern as his own liberty, they
tent him a bond signed by them both, containing
the most solemn obligations, that if any violence
whatsoever were offered to his person, during
his interview with the Emperor, they would
instantly surrender themselves to his sons, and
remain in their hands to be treated by them in
the fame manner as the Emperor should treat
him (b).

Henrpairs THIS, together with the indispensable obliga-
phal co. tion of performing what was contained in the ar-

tides of which he had accepted, removed his
doubts and scruples, or made it necessary to get
over them. He repaired, for that purpose, to
the Imperial camp at Hall in Saxony, where a
circumstance occurred which revived his fufpici-
ons and increased his fears, Jus as he was about
to enter the chamber of pretence, in order to
make his public fubmiflion to the Emperor, a
copy of the articles which he had approved of
was put into his hands, in order that he might
ratify them anew. Upon perusing them, he
perceived that the Imperial ministers had added
two new articles; one importing, that if any
dispute should arise concerning the meaning of
the former conditions, the Emperor should have
the right of putting what interpretation upon
them he thought molt reasonable; the other,
that the Landgrave was bound to submit impli-
citly to the decisions of the council of Trent.
This unworthy artifice, calculated to furprize

him
(0) Du Mont Corps Diplom. iv. p. ii, 336.

him into an approbation of articles, to which he Bo6k Ix
had not the molt distant idea of assenting, by -V4<.
presenting them to him at a time when his mind
was engrossed and disquieted with the thoughts
of that humbling ceremony which he had to
perform, filled the Landgrave with indignation,
and made him fly out into all those violent ex-
preflions of rage to which his temper was prone.
With some difficulty, the Elecor of Branden-
burg and Maurice prevailed at length on the
Emperor's ministers to drop the former article
as unjust, and to explain the latter in such a
manner, that he could agree to it, without
openly renouncing the Protestant religion.

THIS obflacle being surmounted, the Land- The man-
grave was impatient to finish a ceremony which, ntrinwhich

i the Emc, or

how mortifying soever, had been declared ne- received
ceffary towards his obtaining pardon. The him
Emperor was feated on a magnificent throne,
with all the ensigns of his dignity, surrounded
by a numerous train of the Princes of the Em-
pire, among whom was Henry of Brunswick,
lately the Landgrave's prisoner, and now, by
a sudden reverse of fortune, a, fpeaator of his
humiliation. The Landgrave was introduced
with great solemnity, and advancing towards
the throne, fell upon his knees, His chancel-
lor, who walked behind him, immediately read,
by his malter's command, a paper which con-
tained an humble confellion of the crime where-
of he had been guilty; an acknowledgment that
he had merited on that account the most severe
punifliment; an absolute resignation ofhimfelf
and his dominions to be difpoled of at the Em-
peror's pleasure; a fubmiflive petition for par-
don, his hopes of which were founded entirely
on the Emperor's clemency; and it concluded,
with promises of behaving, for the future, like
a subject, whose principles of loyalty and obe-
dience would be confirmed, and would even de-
rive new force from the sentiments of gratitude

which

Rook IX which mutt hereafter fill and animate his heart,
1vs- While the chancellor was reading this abject de.

claration, the eyes of all the fpe'ators were fix-
ed .on the unfortunate Landgrave; few could
behold a Prince, to powerful as well as high-fpi-
rited, suing for mercy in the poflure of a sup-
pliant, without being touched with commifera.
tion, and perceiving serious reflections arile in
their minds upon the instability and emptiness
of human grandeur. The Emperor viewed the
whole tranfation with an haughty, unfeeling
composure; and preserving a profound silence
himself, made a sign to one of his secretaries to
read his answer; the tenor of which was, That
though he might have jutfly inflilCed on him the
grievous punilhment which his crimes deserved,
yet, prompted by his own generoiity, moved by
the Solicitations of several Princes in behalf of
the Landgrave, and influenced by his peniten-
tial acknowledgments, he would not deal with
him according to the rigour ofjuftice, and would
fubjeIt him to no penalty which was not fpeci-
sied in the articles that he had already fubfcrib-
ed. The moment the secretary had finished,
Charles turned away abruptly without deigning
to give the unhappy suppliant any sign of com-
palsion or reconcilement. He did not even de-
fire him to rile from his knees; which the Land-
grave having ventured to do unbidden, advanced
towards the Emperor with an intention to kits
his hand, flattering himself, that his guilt being
now fully expiated, he might presume to take
that liberty. But the ElecRor of Brandenburg
perceiving that this familiarity would be offen-
live to the Emperor, interposed, and desired the
Landgrave to go along with him and Maurice
to the Duke of Alva's apartments in the cattle.

I4-I was received and entertained by that

nobleman with the refpedl and courtefv due to
luch a guest. But, alter fuipper, while he was
engaged in play, the Duke took the EleSlor

and

and Maurice aside, and communicated to them Book IX
the Emperor's orders' that the Landgrave muift f
remain a prisoner in that place under the cuffo- He i de-
dy of a Spanish guard. As they had not hither- prioner.
to entertained the most distant fillpicion of the
Emperor's sincerity and reditude of intention,
their furprize was exceflive, and their indigna-
tion not inferior to it,' on discovering how great-
ly they had been deceived themselves, and how
infamously abused in having been made the in-
ftruments of deceiving and ruining their friend.
They had recourse to complaints, to arguments
and to intreaties, in order to have themselves
from that disgrace, and to extricate him out of
the wretched situation into which he had been
betrayed by too great confidence in them. But
the Duke of Alva remained inflexible, and p!ead-
ed the necelfity of executing the Emperor's
commands. By this time it grew late, and the
Landgrave, who knew nothing of what had
passed, nor dreaded the snare in which he was
entangled, prepared for departing, when the
fatal orders were intimated to him. He was
struck dumb at first with astonishment, but after
being silent a few moments, he broke out into all
the violent expressions which horror at injuflice
accompanied with fraud naturally fuggefrs. He
complained, he expoftulated, he exclaimed;
ibmetimcs inveighing against the Emperor's ar-
tifices as unworthy of a great and generous
Prince; sometimes cenfiring the credulity of his
friends in trufling to Charles's insidious promi-
fes; sometimes charging them with meannes's in
tfooping to lend their afliltance towards the exe-
cution of such a perfidious and dilhonourable
scheme; and in the end lie required them to re-
mcmbcr their engagements to his children, and
inflantly to fulfil them. They, after giving way
for a little to the torrent of his pailion, solemnly
afterted their own innocence and upright inten-
tion in the whole tranlltf'.ion, and encouragec
hini to hopc, that as l;o1n s they i'iw the Empe-

rolr,

Book IX. ror, they would obtain redress of an injury, which
^57. affected their own honour, no lets than it did

his liberty. At the fame time, in order to sooth
his rage and impatience, Maurice remained with
him during the night, in the apartment where
he was confined (d).

Thelleltor NEXT morning, the Eledor and Maurice ap.
bfrglnd plied jointly to the Emperor, representing the
Mcaurice fo-infamy to which they would be exposed through.
so thain out Germany, if the Landgrave were detained

-hmy. in custody; that they would not have advised,

nor would he himself have consented to an inter-
view, if they had fufpeAed that the loss of his
liberty was to be the consequence of his fubmif-
sion; that they were bound to procure his re-
lease, having plighted their faith to that effet,
and engaged their olwn persons as sureties for his.
Charles listened to their earnest remonstrances
with the utmost coolness. He now flood no
longer in need of their services, and they had the
mortification to find that their former obfequi-
oufnefs was forgotten, and little regard paid to
their intercefllion. He was ignorant, he told
them, of their particular or private tranfaóions
with the Landgrave, nor was his conduct to be
regulated by these; though he knew well what
he himself had promised, which was not that the
Landgrave should be exempt from all restraint,
but that he should not be kept a prisoner
during life (e). Having said this with a pe-
remptory and decisive tone, he put an end to

the

(d) Slrid. 433. Thuan. 1. iv. 147. Struv. corp. hist.
Genrm. ii. 10q2.

(e) According to several historians of great name, the

ELiperor, in his treaty with the Landgrave, ftipuated that
he would not detain hlim in any prison. But in executiJlg
the deed, which was written in the German tongue, the Im
perial ministers fraudulently fiubfituted the word ewigr
inftcad of tiniger, and thuns the treaty in place ot a
promise that he should not be detained in any prison,
contained only an engagement that he tlould not be

detained

the conference; and they feeing no probability,Booz IX.
at that time, of making any ,ipre:fion upon thev"~
Emperor, ywho feenred to haye taken.his refolu. i547.
tion deliberately, and to be obftirqately bent 'n
abhering to it, 5were obliged to acquaint the un-
fortunate prisoner With the ill success of their en,
deavours in his behalf. This difappoin tment lihrey
him into a nesv and more violent trianfport of rae,
so that to prevvent his proceeding to some deipe,
rate extremity, the EleAr an4 Maurice promnifed
that they Would not quit the Etn:peror, until, by
the frequency and fervour of their ,inportunity,
they had extorted his consent ;td set :him ifree.
They accordingly renewed,their solicitations a
few days aft.erw ardsb,ut found Charles nopre
haughty and, intra.dable than before, and were
warned that if they touched again upon a sub-
jea so difiagleeablei, and with regard to w,hich
he had determined to hear nothing farther, he
would intantly give orders to convey the pri-
soner into Spain. Afraid of hurting the Land-
grave by an officious or ill-timed zeal to serve
him, they not only dcfifted, but left the courtr
and as they.did not choose to meet the fir fiallies
of the Landgrave's rage upon his learning the
cause of their departure, they informed him of it
by a letter, whereip they, exhorted him to fulfil
all that he had promised to the Emperot, as the
most certain means of procuring a speedy release.
detained in perpetual. iinprifonment. But authors erhinent for
hitorical kno wledge nd clitical accuracy have called in' quef-
tion the tcuth of this connmnon fory. The silence of Sleidan
with regard to it, as well as its not being mentioned in the va-
rious memolials which he has pullilhed concerning the Land-
grave's iiiiprifolmerit, greatly tavour this opinion. But as fe-
veral books which contain the'information necessary towards
dilcufirig this point, with accuracy, are written in the German
language, which I do not undrdrand, I cannot pretend to cn-
quire into this matter' with the fame accuracy, with which I
have endeavoured to fettle fome'other controverted fiats that
have occurred in the cdurfe of this hiilory. :See Struv. Corp.
'05az. Mpoleim's. Eclcf. HliR, vol. ii. p. t61, 56a. Engl, Edit.
YVo. 111, L WHAT VE

Boox IX. WHATEVER violent emotions their abandon
"'-'~ " iiig his cause in this manner occasioned, his im

' 547 . patience to recover liberty made him follow their

H4s ,mpati---
ence underadvice. He paid the fum which had been im.
reraint. posed on him, ordered his fortresses to be razed,

and renounced all alliances that could give of.
fence. This prompt compliance with the will
of the conqueror produced no effect. He was frill
guarded with the fame vigilant severity; and be-
ing. carried about, with the degraded Elector of
Saxony, wherever the Emperor went, their dif-
grace and his triumph was each day renewed.
'The fortitude and equanimity, with which the
Elector bore these repeated insults, were not more
remarkable than the Landgrave's fretfilnefs and
impatience. His aftive impetuous mind could ill
brook restraint; and reflection upon the shameful
artifices by which he had been decoyed into that
situation, as well as indignation at the injustice
with which he was still detained in it, drove him
often to the wildest excefles of passion.

The rigour Tnr people of the different cities, to whom
of ,he Em- Charles thus wantonly exposed these illustrious
peror's ex- .r

. -

aftions in prioners as a public spectacle, were feniibly
cermny. touched with such an insult offered to the Ger-

manic body, and murmured loudly at this inde-
cent treatment of two of its greatest Princes.
They had soon other causes of complaint, and
such as affeAed them more nearly. Charles pro-
ceeded to add oppreflion to insult, and arrogating
to himself all the rights of a conqueror, exerciscd
them with the utmost rigour. He ordered his
troops to seize the artillery and military stores
belonging to such as had been members of the
Smalkaldic league, and having collcted upwards
of five hundred pieces of cannon, a great num-
ber in that age, he sent part of them into the
Low-Countries, part into Italy, and part into

Spain,
if8

Spain, in order to spread by this means the fameBooK IX.
of his fuccels, and that they might serve as mo-'
numents of his having subdued a nation, hitherto '547.
deemed invincible. He then levied, by his sole
authority, large tums as well upon those who
had served him with fidelity during the war, as
upon such as had been in arms againit him; upon
the former, as their contingent towards a war,
which having been undertaken, as he pretended,
for the common benefit, ought to be carried on
at the common charge; upon the latter, as a fine
by way of punishment for their rebellion. By
there exations he amarled above one million fix
hundred thousand crowns, a fum which appeared
prodigious in the sixteenth century. But so ge-
neral was the consternation which had seized the
Germans upon his rapid success, and such their
dread of his victorious troops, that all implicitly
obeyed his commands; though, at the fame time,
thele extraordinary stretches of power greatly a-
larmed a people, jealous of their privileges, and
habituated during several ages to confider the Im-
perial authority as neither extensive nor formida-
lle. This discontent and resentment, how indus-
trioufly soever they concealed them, became uni-
versal; and the more there passions were restrained
and kept down for the present, the more likely
vere they to burt out soon with additional vio-
lcnce.

WIIILE Clharics gave law to the Germans likeFerdinand's

a conquered people, Ferdinand treated his sub- e"'icrch-
JtCets in Bohemia with frill greater rigour. '1 hatbetiesof
kingdom poflfled privileges and immunities as1n anlub°
extensive as those of any nation in which the feu-jctls.
dal infliturions were eftablifihcd. The prerogative
of their Kiags was extremely limited, and the
crown itself elecive. Ferdinand, when placed on
the throne, had confirmed their liberties with e-
vcry solemnity prcfcribed by their cxccfeive folli-

L z citudc

Irg

BOOK X. citude for the security of a conflitution of go

-v'""yernmenr to which they were extremely attached
'547. He loon began, however, to be weary of a jurifl

diction so much circumscribed, and to defpilfe
fceptrc which he could not transmit to his pofte
rity; and notwithstanding all his former engage.
ments, he attcnipted to overturn the conftitutinr
from its foundations ; that instead of an elctive
kingdom he might render it hereditary. But the
Bohemians feetned resolved not to relinquilh,
tamely, privileges which they had long enjoyed.
At the fame time, many of them having embrac-
cd the doarines of the Reformers, the feeds of
which John Huss and Jerome of Prague had
planted in their country about the beginning of
the preceding century, the desire of acquiring re-
ligious liberty mingled itself with their zeal for
their civil rights; and these two kindred paflions
heightening, as usual, each other's force, preci-
pitated them immediately into violent mealures.
They had not only refused to serve their tbve-
reign against the confederates of Smalkalde, but
having entered into a close alliance with the E-
leor of Saxony, they bound themselves, by a
.foletnn aflociation, to defend their ancient con-
ftitution i and to persist, until they ihould ob-
tain such additional grants as they thought ne-
ceifTry towards pfelc&ing the prefcnt model of
their government, or rendering it more perma-
nent. They chose Caspar Phlug, a nobleman of
diflincrion, to be their general ; and levied an
army of thirty thousand men to enforce their pe-
titions. But either from the weakners of their
leader, or firom the dii'nfions in a great un-
wieldy body, which having united hatily, was
not thoroughly compadted, or from Come other
unknown cause, the subsequent operations of the
Bohemians bore no proportion to the zeal and ar-
dour with which they took their first refolut;ons.
They fuffcrcd themfclvcs to be amuled so lo11g

with

with negociations and overtures of different kinds, BOOR IX.
that before they could enter Saxony, the battle-v'"9
of Muhlberg was fought, the Eleeor deprived '547.
of his dignity and territories, the Landgrave con-
fined to close custody, and the league of Smal-
kalde entirely diffiptred. The fame dread of the
Emperor's power which had seized the reft of the
Germans, reached them. As soon as their so-
vereign approached with a body of Imperial
troops, they instantly difperled, thinking of no-
thing but how to atone for their pall guilt, and
to acquire some hope of forgiveness, by a prompt
fubmitiion. But Ferdinand, who entered his do-
minions full of that implacable resentment which
inflames Monarchs whose authority has been de-
spifcd, was not to be mollified by the late repen-
tdnce and involuntary return of rebellious sub-
jets to their duty. He even heard, unmoved,
the intreaties and tears of the citizens of Prague;
who appeared b"fore him in the pture of sup-
pliants, and implored for mercy. The sentence
which he pronounced against them was rigorous
to extremity; he abolished many of their privi-
leges, he abridged others, and new modelled
the constitution according to his pleasure. He
punished many of thole who had been motl ac-
tive in forming the late association against him
with death, and still a greater number with con-
fifcation of their goods, or pepetual banishment.
He obliged all his fubjets, of every conditions
to give up their arms to be deposited in forts
where he planted garrisons; and after disarming his.
people, he loaded them with new and exorbi-
bant taxes. Thus, by an ill condu&ed and un-
successful effort to extend their privileges, the
Bohemians not only enlarged the sphere of the
royal prerogative which they intended to have
circumscribed, but they almost annihilated those
liberties which they aimed at eftablilhing on a
hroader and more secure foundation n.
Sleid. 408, 419, 4j4. Thuan. 1. iv. 119, o50. Struv.Corp. iL

L 3 'HE

BooK IX; THE Emperor, having now humbled, and, a!
.v'-r he imagined, subdued the independent and ftuh.

t 547- born fplrit of the Germans by the terror of arm!

Diet held at
Augfblrg. and the rigour of punishment, held a diet ai

Augsburg, in order to compose finally the con.
troverfies with regard to religion, which had so
long disturbed the Empire. He durlt not, how-
ever, trust the determination of a matter so in.
tereting to the free suffrage of the Germans,
broken as their minds now were to subjection.
He entered the city at the head of his Spanifli
troops, and assigned them quarters there. The
reft of his foldlers he cantoned in the adjacent
villages ; so that the members of the diet, while
they carried on their deliberations, were fur-
rounded by the fame army which had overcome
their countrymen. Immediately after his public
entry, Charles gave a proof of the violence with
which he intended to proceed. He took posses-
sion by force of the cathedral together with one
of the principal churches; and his priests hav-
ing, by various ceremonies,. purified them from
the pollution with which they supposcd the un-
hallowed ministrations of the Proteflants to have
defiled them, they re-established with great pomp
the rites of the lomith worihip o.

The Empe- THE concourse of members to this diet was
te exhorts extraordinary; the importance of the affairs con-
them to rub- extraorinary
mit to the cerning which it was to deliberate, and the fear
eneral of giving offence to the Emperor by an absence

which lay open to mifconitrution, brought to-
gether almolt all the Princes, nobles and repre-
tentatives of cities who had right to fit in that
aflembly. The Emperor, in the Ipeech wich
which he opened the meeting, called their at-
tention immediately to the point, which seemed
chiefly to merit it. Having mentioned the fatal

o Sleid. 435, 437. eff

eff cts
616

effects of the religious difenfions which had ari- BOOK IX.
fel in Germany, and taken notice of his own un-~'"v" .
wearied endeavours to procure a general coun- '547.
cil, which alone could provide a remedy ade-
quate to there evils, he exhorted them to recog-
nize its authority, and to fiand to the award of
an assembly, to which they had originally ap.
pealed, as having the sole right of judgment in
she cafe.

BUT the council, to which Charles wifhedVrious, 'e

them to refer all their controversies, had, by thisthecounci.
time, undergone a violent change. The fear and
jealousy, with which the Emperor's first success
against the confederates of Smalkalde had infpir.
ed the Pope, continued to encreafe. Not fatisfi-
ed with attempting to retard the progress of the
Imperial arms, by the sudden recal of his troops,
Paul began to confider the Emperor as an enemy,
the weight of whose power he muff soon feel,
and against whom he could not be too haity in,
taking precautions. He foresaw that the imme-
diate effect of the Emperor's acquiring abfoluteC
power in Germany, would be to. render him en-s
tirely master of all the decisions of the council,
if it should continue to meet in Trent. It was
dangerous to allow a Monarch, so ambitious, to
get the command of this formidable engine,
which he might employ at pleasure to limit or
overturn the Papal authority. As the only me-
thod of preventing this, he determined to tranf-
late the council to Come city more immediately
under his own jurifdition, and at a greater dif-
tance from the terror of the Emperor's arms, or
the reach of his influence. An incident fortunate-
ly occurred which gave this measure the appear-
ance of being necessary. One or two of the fa-
thers of the council, together with tome of their
d.omcfics, happening to die suddenly, the phyfi-

L 4 cians,

BOK IX. cians, d ceiveaby:th symptoms, ot suborned by

'^th~'ea ' g

Pope's legates, pronouinced the difteniper to
,547- bUe inifeious and pestilential. Somie of the pre-

lates,; ifrick with a panic, retiried others were
impatient to be gone;, and after a fliort cohi'ulta

March ti. tion; the 'council was trahflated to Bologna, a
fTrran fl ty

ed it je& to the Pope. All the bishops in the
toBologna. fnpirrial interetft, warmly opposed this rcf6luti.

on, as taken without neceflity, and founded ont
false or frivolous pretexts. All the Spanish pre.
lates, and molt of the Neapolitan, by the Empe-
ror's express com'miand, remained at Trent; the
re',' to the number of thirty.four 'accompanying
the: egates to Bologna. Thus a fchrfmi commen-
ocd, in that veryv aflembly which haad been called
to hie'al the divifioiis of Chri'tendom; the fathers
of Bologna inveighiint agaitift those who staid at
Trent, as contumacious and' reglrdl'efs of the
Pope's authority ;'. while the others'accufed them
of bti'ng so far intimid'ated by; the feats of ima-
ginary danger, as to remove to a pla:e where
theilr confultatioiis could prove of no service to-
w'ard's' re-'ftabllirig' peace acnd order in Ger-
rianhr p. .

Symptoms T it E Emperor, at the fame time, employed
betdweethc '' h1is interei to procure the return cif the coun-
Pope and cil to Trent. tBut Paul, who highly applauded
Emperor. his own fagacit' in having taken a Itep which

put it out or Charles's power to dcquire the di-
recion of thai aifembly, paid no ieg;ard to a re-
quel, the obje& of which wass so eitremelry opb-
viou. The summer was codiidmed in'fiutlefs
negociations with reFpeA to this poiri, the im-
portunity of the one and the 6obftiracy of the o-
ther daily increhfi'ng. At last an event happened
Wvhich widened the breach irreparably, and r'en-
dered the Pope utterly averse 'rrom liltening to
any' propofil tihat came from the Emperor.

P F, Paul, 248, &c.

Charles,

Charles, as' has been already observed, had foBoo IX.
violetitly exasperated Peter Lewis Farnese, the'"- "
Pope's L(ls, by rfufing to grant him the invefli- '547'
ture of Parma and Placentia, that he had w.,tch-
ed ever since that time with all the vigilance of
resentment for an opportunity of revenging that
injury. He had endeavoured to precipitate his
father into open hostilities against the Emperor,
and had earnefly follicited the King of France
to invade Italy. His hatred and refentmenr ex-
tended to all th'ose whom' he knew that the Enm-
peror favoured; he persecuted Gonzaga, gover-
nor of Milan, with ill offices, and had encourag-
ed Fiefco ini his attempt upon the life of Andrew
Doria, because both Gonzaga and Doria possessed
a great degree of the Emperor's efteern and con-
fidence. His malevolence and secret intrigues
were not unknown to the Emperor, who could
not be more desirous to take vengeance on him,
than Gonzaga and Doria were to be employed as
his initrutnerits in inflicting it. Farnese, by the
profligacy of his life, and by enormities of every
kind, equal to those committed by the worfl ty-
rants who have disgraced human nature, had ren-
dered himself so odious, that they thought any
violence whatever might be attempted against
him. They soon found among his own fubjedts,
persons who were eager, and even deemed it
meritorious to lend their hands in such a service.
As he, animated with the jealousy which usually
pofTefes petty fovercigns, had employed all the
cruelty and fiaud, whereby they endeavour to
supply their defe&t of power, in order to humble
and extirpate the nobility subjet to his govern- The Lonnfi-
ment, five noblemen of the greatest diftinl&ionpope'orsa.
in Placentia, combined to avenge the injuries,
which they themselves had fufered, as well as
those which he had offered to their order. They
formed their plan in conjuntion with Gonzaga;
but it remains uncertain whether he originally

fuggelted

Boo IX. fuggefied the scheme to them, or only approved
~-'v"of what they proposed, and co-operated in car-
1547 rying it on. They concerted all the previous

fleps with such foresight, condu&ed their in-
trigues with such secrecy, and displayed such
courage in the execution of their design, that it
may be ranked among the moit audacious deeds
sept. to. of that nature mentioned in history. One body

of the conipirators furprized, at mid-day, the
gates of the citadel of Placentia where Farnese
resided, overpowered his guards, and murdered
him. Another party of them made themselves
masters of the town, and called upon their fel-
low-citizens to take arms, in order to reaffume
their liberty. The multitude ran towards the
citadel, from which three great guns, a signal
concerted with Gonzaga, had been fired; and
before they could guess the cause or the authors.
of the tumult, they saw the lifeless body of the
tyrant hanging by the heels from one of the win-
dows of the citadel. But so universally detefta-
able had he become, that not one expressed any
sentiment of concern at such a fad reverse of for-
tune, or of indignation at this ignominious treat-
ment of a sovereign Prince. The exultation at
the success of the conspiracy was general, and all
applauded the ators in it, as the deliverers of
their country. The body was tumbled into the
diLch that surrounded the citadel, and exposed
to the inlults of the rabble; the reft of the citi-
zens returned to their usual occupations, as if no-
thing extraordinary had happened,

The Impe- B E F o R E next morning, a body of troops ar-
lke ocr. riving from the frontiers of the Milancfe, where
sion ot ra- they had been pofied in expe&ation of the event,

"' took poffefion of the city in the Emperor's name,

and rtinltated the inhabitants in the pofcffion of
their ancient privileges. Parma, which the Im-
perialilts attempted likewilfe to furprize, was f.v-

cd

ed by the vigilance and fidelity of the officcrsBooK IX.
whom Farnese had intruded with the command --
of the garrison. The death of a son whom, not- 1547.
withtianding his infamous vices, Paul loved with
an excess of parental tenderness, overwhelmed
him with the deepest afliction; and the loss of a
cirv, of such consequence as Placentia, greatly
embittered his sorrow. He accuscd Gonzaga, in
open consistory, of having committed a cruel
murder in order to prepare the way for an unjult
usurpation, and immediately demanded of the
Emperor satisfaction for both for the former,
by the punishment of Gonzaga; for the latter,
by the restitution of Placentia to his grandlon
Otavio, its rightful owner. But Charles, who,
lather than quit a prize of such value, was will-
ing to expose himlelf to the imputation of being
accessary to the crime which had given an op-
portunity of seizing it, and to bear the infamy of
defrauding his own fon-in-law of the inheritance
which belonged to him, eluded all his follicita-
tions, and determined to keep poifeflion of the
city together with its territories q.

T' H s resolution, flowing fiom an ambition so The rope
rapacious, as to be restrained by no confiderati-"" She~

alliance ot

on either of decency or justice, transported theche prench
Plope so far beyond his usual moderation and cau. Kdic,,-
lion, that he was eager to take arms againit thea'i.
Emperor in order to be avenged on the murder-
ers of his son, and to recover the inheritance
wvrcfted from his family. Conscious, however,
of his own inability to contend with such an ene-
my, he warmly follicited the French King and
the republick of Venice to join in an offensive
league against Charles. But Henry was intent at

1 F. Paul. 257. Pallavic. 41, 42. Thuan. iv. 156. Mmn. de
Ribier. 59, 67. Natalia Comitis Ililtor. lib. iii p. 64

that

Boos IX. that time on other objects. His ancient allies the
',-'--" Scots, ha ing been defeated by the English in

!547. one of the greatest battles ever fought between

there two rival nations, he was about to fend a
numerous body of veteran troops into that coun-
try, as well to preserve it from being conquered,
as to gain the acquisition of a new kingdom to
the French monarchy, by marrying his son the
Dauphin to the young Queen of Scotland. An
undertaking accompanied with such manifest ad-
vantages, the success of which appeared to be so
certain, was not to be relinquished for the remote
profpec of benefit from ah alliance depending
upon the precarious life of a Pope of fourfcorc,
who had nothing at heart but the gratification
of his own private resentment. Instead, there-
fore, of ruffing headlong into the alliance pro-
poted, Henry amused the Pope with such gene-
ral profeflions and promises, as might keep him
from any thoughts of endeavouring to accom-
modate his differences with the Emperor, but at
the fame time avoided any such engagement as
might occasion an immediate rupture between
Charles and himself, or precipitate him into a
war for which he was not prepared. The Vene-
tians, though much alarmed at feeing Placentia
in the hands of the Imperialists, imitated the wary
condu& of the French King, which resembled so
nearly the spirit with which they themselves
usually carried on their negociationsr.

The diet of B u T, though the Pope found that it was not
Aetutolign his power to light up immediately the flames
thcetu,nofOf war, he did not forget the injuries, which he
thle counil was obliged for the present to endure, relent-

ment fettled deeper in his mind, and became
more rancorous in proportion as he felt the dif-
ficulty of gratifying it. It was, while these fen.

r Mein. de Ribier. ii. 63, 7r, 78, 85, 95. Paruta Iftor.
t!i Venez. 199, 203. Thuan. iv. 160.

timcnts

timents of enmity were in full force, and the de- BOOK IX.
lire of vengeance at its height, that the diet of'""'
Augsburg, by the Emperor's command, petiri- '547'
oned the Pope, in name of the whole Germanic
body, to enjoin the prelates who had retired to
Bologna, to return again to Trent, and to renew
their deliberations in that place. Charles had
been at great pains in bringing the members to
join in this request. Having observed a confi-
derable variety of sentiments among the Protef-
tants with respeCt to the fubmitilon which he had
required to the decrees of the council, some of
them being altogether intratable, while others
were ready to acknowledge its right ofjurifdic-
tion upon certain conditions, he employed all his
addrels in order to gain or to divide them. He
threatened and over-awed the Ele&or Palatine,
a weak Prince, and obnoxious to vengeance on
account of the afliftance which he had given to
the confederates of Smalkalde. The hope of pro-
curing liberty for the Landgrave, together with
the formal confirmation of his own ele&oral dig-
nity, overcame Maurice's scruples, or prevented
him from opposing what he knew would be a-
greeable to the Emperor. The Elecor of Bran-
denburgh, less influenced by religious zeal than
any Prince of that age, was eafilv induced to imi-
tate their example in assenting to all that the
Emperor required. The deputies of the cities re-
mained (fill to be brought over; they were more
tenacious of their principles, and though every
thing that could operate either on their hopes or
tears was tried, the utmolt that they would pro-
mile was to acknowledge the jurifdi&tion of the
council, if cffecual provision were made for fc-
curing the divines of all parties free access to
that alembly, with entire liberty of debate; and
if all points in controversy were decided accord-
ing to scripture and the usage of the primitive

church.

BooK IX.church. But wheni the memorial containing this
'-r-'declaration was presented to the Emperor, he

547. ventured to put in practice a very extraordinary

artifice. Without reading the paper, or taking
any notice of the conditions on which they had
oa. 29. intifted, he seemed to take it for granted that

they had complied with his demand, and gave
thanks to the deputies for their full and unre-
lerved fubmiflion to the decrees of the council.
The deputies, though aftoniffed at what they
had heard, did not attempt to set him right, both
parties being better pleated that the matter fliould
remain under this itate of ambiguity, than to
push for an explanation, which must have occa-
lioned a dispute, and would have led, perhaps,
to a rupture s.
The rore HAVING obtained this seeming submission of

tlUnade the diet to the authority of the council, Charles

employed tl nt as an argument to enforce their
petition for its return to Trent. But the Pope,
trom the fatisla&tion of mortifying the Emperor,
:is well as from his own avetrion to what was de-
rnanded, resolved, without hesitation, that this
petition flould be rejc&ed; though in order to
:.void the imputation of being influenced wholly
Ily iefentmcnt, he had the address to throw it
i;pon the fathers at Bologna, to put a dire&t nc-

.iative upon the request. He referred to their
consideration the petition of the diet, and they,
ieady to confirm by their afitnt whatever the le-
gates were pleased to dictate, declared that tlhe
-I . 0o. council could not, in confiitence with it. digni-

ty, return to Trenr, unless the prelates who by
remaining there, had difovered a lihilinatick
fpirir, would firfl repair to Bologna, and j )in
their brethren ; and that, even after their junc-
tion, the council could not rcnew its conlulta-

. Pgul, 259. S1iu, ld. 440. Thuan. ton. i. 155.

tions

tions with any prospect of benefit to the church,BOOK IX.
if the Germans did not prove their intention ots-"'
obeying its future decrees to be sincere, by yield- '547'
ing immediate obedience to those which it had
already pafled t.

T rI r s answer was communicated to the Em- T'e Empe-
peror by the Pope, who at the fame time exhort-aaiPtt ,h,
ed him to comply with demands that appeared council of
to be so reasonable. But Charles was better ac-B"`gna
quainted with the duplicity of the Pope's cha-
rater than to be deceived by such a gross arti-
fice; he knew that the prelates of Bologna durst
utter no sentiment but what Paul inspired ; and,
therefore, overlooking them as mere instruments
in the hand of another, he confidered their reply
as a full discovery of the Pope's intentions. As
he could no longer hope to acquire such an as-
cendant in the council as to render it subservient
to his own plan, he saw it to be necessary that
Paul should not have it in his power to turn a-
gainft him the authority of so venerable an as-
lembly. In order to prevent this, he sent two 1548.
Spanish lawyers to Bologna, who, in the pretence January 16.
of the legates, protested, That the translation of
the council to that place had been unnecesSary,
and founded on false or frivolous pretexts ; that
while it continued to meet there, it ought to be
deemed an unlawful find schismatical conventi-
cle ; that all its decisions ought of course to be
held as null and invalid ; and that as the Pope,
together with the corrupt ccclefiaftics who de-
pended on him, had abandoned the care of the
church, the Emperor, as its prote6tor, would
employ all the power which God had committed
to him, in order to prelerve it from those cala-
mities with which it was threatened. A few Jan. 13.
days after, the Imperial ambaflador at Rome de-

r F. Paul, 25o. Pallav. ii 49.

mandcd

iooc IX. manded an audience of the Pope, and in presence
-"~ of all the Cardinals as well as foreign minilters

.548. protested againfl the prloceedings of the prelatesat

Bologna, in terms equally halfh and difrefpedfulu;
The Empe- IT was not long before Charles proceeded to

'oiPe"ae carry these threats, which greatly alarmed both

serve as hthe Pope and council at Bologna, into execution.
'ileomf faiyt He let the diet know the ill success of his en-

deavours to.procu.re a favourable answer to their
petitions, and that the pope, equally regardlels
of their entreaties, and ;of his services to the
church, had refused to gratify them by allowing
the council to meet again at Trent; that, though
all hope of holding this afltembly in a place where
they might look for frieedom of debate and judg-
ment, was not to be givn up, the profpet of
it was, at present, diltant and uncertain: that,
in the mean time, Germany was torn in pieces
by religious dissensions, the purity of the faith
corrupted, and the minds of the people difqui-
eted with a multiplicity of new opinions and
controvcrfies formerly unknoiwn among Chrilhi-
ans ; that, moved by the .duty which he owed
to them as their sovereign, and to the Church as
its protc&or, he had enmployed some divines, of
known abilities and lcarning, to prepare a fyltem
of do&rine, to which all ihould conform until
a council, fuch.as they w.ishcd for, could be con-
vocatcd. This fyltcm was compiled by Ptlug,
Helding and Ag'icol:;, of whom the two former
were dignitaries in the Romilh church, but re-
markable for their pacific and healing isirit ; the
lallt was a Proreltant divine, fuilpcdcd, n.t with-
.ut reason, of:having been gained by bribes sndl
promises, to betray or mislead his party on tlis
.occasion. The articlcs. prelcnted to the diet ol

u F. Paul, 264. Pallav. . Sleiid. 4, 6. Goldaii Conftit,
Imperial, i. 56A.

Ratisbo!3

Ratisbon in the year one thousand five hundred BOOK IX.
and forty-one, in order to reconcile the contenrd-"'-'
ing parties, served as a model for the present '54
work. But as the Emperor's situation was much
changed since that time, and he found it no long-
er necessary to manage the Protestants with the
lame delicacy as at that junture, the concessions
in their favour were not now so numerous, nor
did they extend to points of so much consequence.
The treatise contained a compleat system of the-
ology, conformable in almost every article to the
tenets of the Romish church, though exprefled,
for the most part, in the softest words, or in
Scriptural phrases, or in terms of studied ambi-
guity. Every doctrine, however, peculiar to
Popery, was retained; and all the rites, which
the Protestants condemned as inventions of men
introduced into the worship of God, were en-
joined. With regard to two points only, some
relaxation of their rigour was granted, and some
latitude in practice admitted. Such ecclesiastics
as had married, and would not put away their
wives, were allowed, nevertheless, to perform
all the functions of their sacred office; and those
provinces which had been accustomed to par-
take of the cup, as well as of the bread in the fa-
crament of the Lord's Supper, were still indulg-
ed the privilege of receiving both. Even these
were declared to be concelions for the fake of
peace, and granted only for a season, in compli-
ance with the weakness or prejudices of their
countrymen x.

Tl s system of doctrine, known afterwards by This, wllic

1 , . -

· ·

*

i '

* * iW»8 cllied

the name of the Interim, because it contained thelncterivn,
temporary regulations which were to continuehe lays be-

fore the diet.
May If.

x F. Paul, 270. Pallay. ii. 60. Sleid 453, 457. Struv. Corp.
1054. Goldaft. Confit, Iinper. i. 518.

VOL. 111, M no

BooK IX.no longer in force than until a free general coun-
-v-'cil could be held, the Emperor presented to the

'548' diet with a pompous declaration of his sincere in-

tention to re-eltablifh tranquillity and order in
the ch.urch, as well as of his hopes that their a-
dopting these regulations would contribute great.
ly to bring about that desirable event. It was
read, in presence, according to form. As soon
as it was finished the archbishop of Mentz, pre.
sident of the elecoral college, rose up hastily,
and having thanked the Emperor for his unwea-
ried and pious endeavours in order to restore
peace to the church, he, in name of the dier,
signified their approbation of the fyRcem of doc-c
trine which he had. prepared, together with their
resolution of confolrming to it in every particu-
lar. The whole aflembl.y was amazed at a de-
claratiAon.fo unprecedented and unconstitutional,
as well as at the El.ector's presumption in pre-
tending to deliver the sense of the diet, upon a
point, which had not hitherto been the subjet
of confultation.or debate. But not one member
had the courage to contradict what the Ele&or

and extorts lhad said:;, fomebeing overawed by. fears, others
btio, f
itP remaining silent through complaisance. The Em-

peror heTd the archbilhop's declaration to be a
fi4Il, constitutional ratification of the Interim, and
prepared to enforce the observance of it, as a de-
cree ps the Empire .

New and DURING this diet, the wife and children of
,li'i', the Landgrave, warmly seconded by Maurice of
foitheLand-Saxony, endeavoured to interest the members in
gt'ty.' 1 behalf of that unhappy Prince, who lill lan-

g.uiihed in confinement. But Charles, who did
not chufe to be brought under the necessity of
rejecting any requeflt that came fiom such a re-
fpedable body, in order to prevent their reprc-
fentatives, laid before the diet an account of his
iranifacions with the Landgrave, together with

y Sleid 460. F. Paul, 73. Pallav. 63.

the

the motives which had at first induced him toBooK IX.
detain that Prince in custody, and which ren-"--ve'
dered it prudent, as he alledged, to keep him '48
fill under restraint. It was no easy matter to
give any good reason for an acion, incapable of
being justified. But he thought the most frivo.
lous pretexts might be produced in an afembly
willing to be deceived, and afraid of nothing so
much as to discover that iv saw his conduc in
its true colours. His account of his own con-
du& was accordingly admitted to be fully satis-
faiory, and after some feeble intreaties that he
would extend his clemency to his unfortunate
prisoner, the Landgrave's concerns were no more
mentioned z.

IN order to counterbalance the unfavourable

impression which this inflexible rigour might
leave in their minds, Charles, as a proof that his
gratitude was no less permanent and unchange-
able than his resentment, invested Maurice, in the
elecEoral dignity, with all the legal formalities.
The ceremony was performed, with extraordi-
nary pomp, in an open court, so near the apart-
ment in which the degraded Ele&or was kept a
prisoner, that he could view it from his windows.
Even this insult did not ruffle his usual tranquil-
lity; and turning his eyes that way, he beheld
a prosperous rival receiving those ensigns of dig-
nity of which he had been stripped, without ut-
tering one sentiment unbecoming the fortitude
which he had preserved amidfi all his calamitiesa.

IMMEDIATELY after the difolution of the'rheinterim
diet, the Emperor ordered the Interim to be pub- equally dif-

,/ /.1 approved of

lilhed in the German as well as Latin language.by Protef-
It met with the usual reception of conciliatingat6 nand

z Sleid. 441.

TThuin. Hist. lib. v. 1 76. Struv. Corp. lo 4. nvefitutra Mau-
zitii a Mammctano Lucemburgo delcripta ap. Scardium ii. So8.

M 2. chIcmc

BooK IX. schemes vhen proposed to men heated with diC
'-,V - putation ; both parties declaimed against it with

5S49S equal violence. The Protestants condemned it

as a fyltem containing the groffefi errors of Po-
pery, disguised with To little art, that it could
impose only on the molt ignorant, or on those
who by wilfully shutting their eyes favoured the
deception. The Papists inveighed against it, as
a work, in which some dotrines of the church
were impiously given up, others meanly con-
cealed, and all of them delivered in terms calcu-
lated rather to deceive the unwary, than to in-
ftru& the ignorant, or to reclaim those who were
enemies to the truth. While the Lutheran di-
vines fiercely attacked it, on one hand, the ge-
neral of the Dominicans with no less vehemence
impugned it, on the other. But at Rome, as
soon as the contents of the Interim came to be
known, the indignation of the courtiers and ec-
clefiaflics rose to the greatefl height. They ex-
claimed against the Emperor's profane encroach-
ment on the sacerdotal function, in presuming,
with the concurrence of an assembly of laymen,
to define articles of faith, and to regulate modes
of worship. They compared this ra/h deed to
that of Uzzah, who, with an unhallowed hand,
had touched the ark of God ; or to the bold at-
tempts of those Emperors, who had rendered
their memory detestable, by endeavouring to mo-
dcl the Christian church according to their plea-
sure. They even affeced to find out a refem-
blance between the Emperor's conduc and that
of Henry V111. and expressed their fear of his
imitating the example of that Monarch, by u-
furping the title as well as jurifdition belonging
to the head of the church. All therefore, con-
tended, with one voice, that as the foundations of
ccclefiaflical authority were now shaken, and the
whole fabric ready to be overturned by a new
enemy some powerful method of defence must

bc

be provided, and a vigorous refinlance must beBooK IX.
made, at the beginning, before he grew too for- '-.-
midable to be opposed. t48,

THE Pope, whose judgment was improved byThe sent;-

longer experience in great tranfadions, as wellmP'°es th
as by a more extensive observation of human af-regard to it.
fairs, viewed the matter with more acute dif-
cernment, and derived comfort from the very
circumtlance which filled them with apprehen-
lion. He was aflonmlhed, that a Prince of such
superior sagacity as the Emperor. Ihould be so
intoxicated with a single victory, as to imagine
that he might give law to mankind, and decide
even in thole matters, with regard to which they
are most impatient of dominion. He saw that,
by joining any one of the contending parties in
Germany, Charles might have had it in his pow-
er to have oppressed the other, but that the pre-
fumption of iuccefs had now inspired him with
the vain thought of his being able to domineer
over both , he foretold that a fyttem, which all
attacked, and none defended, could not be of
long duration; and that, for this reason, there
was no need of his interposing in order to haften
its fall ; for as soon as the powerful hand which
now upheld it was withdrawn, it would fink of
Its own accord, and be forgotten for ever b.

THE Emperor, fond of his own plan, adheredThe Emp-.

to his relolution of carrying it into full executi-rcormenice
on. But though the Ele&or Palatine, the Elec with the In-
tor of Brandenlurg, and Maurice, influenced byteim"
the fame considerations as formerly, leemed rea-
dy to yield implicit obedience to whatever he
ihould enjoin, he met not every where with a
like obsequious fubmiflion. John Marquis of
Brandenburg Anfpach, although he had taken

b Sleid. 468, F. Paul, 27 1, 277. Pallav. ii. 64.

M ; part

BOOK IX. part with great zeal in the war against the con.

- 'federates of Smalkalde, refused to renounce doc-
.548. trines which he held to be sacred, and remind.

ing the Emperor of the repeated promises which
he had given his Proteflant allies of allowing them
the free exercise of their religion, he claimed, in
consequence of these, to be exempted fiom rc-
ceiving the Interim. Some other Princes, also,
ventured to mention the fame scruples, and to
plead the fame indulgence. But on this, as on
other trying occasions, the firmness of the Elec-
tor of Saxony was most distinguished, and me-
rited the highest praise. Charles, well knowing
the authority of his example with all the Protel-
tant party, laboured, with the utmost earnest-
ness, to gain his approbation of the Interim, and
by employing sometimes promises of setting him
at liberty, sometimes threats of treating him
with greater harshness, attempted alternately to
work upon his hopes and fears. But he was,
alike, regardless of both. After having declared
his fixed belief in the dotrines of the reformati-
on, " I cannot now, said he, in my old age, a-
bandon the principles, for which I early con-
tended nor, in order to procure freedom during
a few declining years, will 1 betray that good
cause, on account of which I have suffered so
much, and am still willing to susser. Better for
me to enjoy, in this solitude, the esteem of vir-
tuous men, together with the approbation of my
own confciencc, than to return into the world,
with the imputation and guilt of apoflacy, to
disgrace and embitter the remainder of my days."
By this magnanimous resolution, he set his coun-
trymen a pattern of conduct, so very different
fiom that which the Emperor wished to have
exhibited to them, that it drew upon him fresh
marks of his indignation. The rigour of his con-
finement was increased ; the number of his ser-
vants abridged; the Lutheran clergymen who

had

had hitherto been permitted to attend him, were BooK IX.
dismissed; and even the books of devotion, '
which had been his chief consolation during a 1548
tedious imprisonment, were taken from him c.
The Landgrave of Hefe, his companion in mil-
fortune, did not maintain the fame constancy.
His patience and fortitude were both so much
exhausted by the length of his confinement, that
willing to purchase freedom at any price, he
wrote to the Emperor, offering not only to ap-
prove of the Interim, but to yield an unreserved
fubmiflion to his will in every other particular.
But Charles who knew, that what course soever
the Landgrave might hold, neither his example
nor authority would prevail on his children or
fubjecs to receive the Interim, paid no regard
to his offers. He was kept confined as ftritly
as ever; and while he suffered the cruel mortifi-
cation of having his condu& set in contrast to
that of the Elector, he derived not the smallest
benefit from the mean ftep which exposed him
to such deserved censure d.

B u T it was in the Imperial cities that Charles The free cd

met with the mopt violent opposition to the In ti Ntggle
terim. These small common-wealths, the citizensceiving the
of which were accultomed to liberty and ilde-l"'teri'
pendence, had embraced the dotrines of the Re-
formation when first published with remarkable
eagerness; the bold spirit of innovation being pe-
culiarly suited to the genius of free government.
Among them, the Protestant teachers had made
the greatest number of proselytes. The molt
eminent divines of the party were fettled there as
pastors. By having the direction of the schools
and other seminaries of learning, they had trained
up difeiples as well intlru&ed in the articles of
their faith, as zealous to defend them. Such per-

Slcid. 462. d Sleid. 46z.

M 4

sons

BooK IX. sons were not to be guided by example, or sway.
-Y ed by authority, but having been taught to exa-
1548. mine and to decide in matters of controversy,

thought that they were both qualified and enti-
tled to judge for themselves. As loon as the con-
tents of the Interim were known, they, with one
voice, joined in refusing to admit it. Strasburg,
Conitance, Bremen, Magdeburgh, together with
many other towns of less note, presented remon.
ftrances to the Emperor, setting forth the irre.
gular and unconstitutional manner in which the
Interim had been enaced, and befecching him
not to offer such violence to their consciences,
as to require their assent to a form of dotrine and
worship, which appeared to them repugnant to
the expreis precepts of the divine law. But
Charles, having prevailed on so many Princes of
the Empire to approve of his new model, was
not much moved by the representations of there
cities, which how formidable soever they might
have proved if they could have been formed into
one body, lay To remote from each other, that it
was easy to oppress them separately, before it
was possible for them to unite.

Compelled I order to accomplJfh this, the Emperor saw
to fubibitit to be requisite that his measures Ihould be vi-

gorous, and executed with such rapidity as to al-
sow no time for concerting any common plan of
opposition. Having laid down this maxim as the
rule of his proceedings, his first attempt was up-
on the city of Augsburg, which, though over-
awed by the presence of the Spanih troops, he
knew to be as much dissatisfied with the Interim
as any in the Empire. He ordered one body of
there troops to seize the gates; he posted the reft
in different quarters of the city and assembling
Aug. 3. all the burgescs in the town, he, by his sole ab-

solute

solute authority, published a decree abolifhingBooK IX.;
their present form of government, dissolving all "- '
their corporations and fraternities, and nominat- '548.
ing a small number of persons, in whom he vef-
ted for the future the right of administration.
Each of the persons, thus chosen, took an oath
to observe the Interim. An at of power, so un-
precedented as well as arbitrary, which excluded
the body of the inhabitants from any share in the
government of their own community, and sub-
jeced them to men who had no other merit than
their servile devotion to the ltmperor's will, gave
general difgut;, but as they durit not venture
upon reftGance, they were obliged to submit in
lilencee. From Augsburg, in which he left a
garrison, he proceeded to Ulm, and new modell-
ing its government with the fame violent hand,
he seized such of their pastors as refused to sub-
scribe the Interim, committed them to prison,
and ap his departure carried them along with him
in chains f. By this severity, he not only secured
the reception of the Interim in two of the molt
powerful cities, but gave warning to the reft
what such as continued refraaory had to expe&.
The effe&t of the example was as great as he
could have wished, and many towns, in order to
save themelves from the like vengeance, found
it necessary to comply with what he enjoined.
This obedience, extorted by the rigour of au-
thority, produced no change in the sentiments of
the Germans, and extended no farther than to
make them conform so far to the letter of the law,
as was barely sufficient to screen them from pun-
ifiment. Their preachers accompanied thole ce-
remonies, the observation of which the Interim
prescribed, with such an explication of their ten-
dency, as served rather to confirm than to rc-

c Sleid. 469.

f Slcid. 472.

move

Boor IX. move the scruples of their hearers with regard to

L'-^ them. The people, many of whom had grown
1548. up to mature years since the establishment of the

reformed religion, and had been accustomed to
no other form of publick worship, beheld the
pompous pageantry of the popish service with
contempt or horor; and in molt places the Ro-
mifh ecclefiaticks who returned to take poflefli-
on of their churches could scarce be prot-ted
from insult, or their minifirations from interrup.
tion. Thus, notwithstanding the apparent com-
pliance of so many cities, the inhabitants being
accuffomed to freedom, fubmitted-with reluc-
tance to the power which now opprefled them,
Their understanding as well as inclination revol-
ted againif the dodrines and rites imposed on
them; and though, for the present, they con-
cealed their indignation and resentment, it was
evident that there paflions could not always be
kept under restraint, but would break out at last
in effeas proportional to their violenceg.

The Pope C 1i A R L E S, meanwhile, highly pleased with
difrmirresth haviing bended the flubborn spirit of the Ger-
Council as-
fembled at mans to such general submission, departed for the
3ologna. Low-Countries, fully determined to compel the

cities, which still flood out, to receive the In-
terim. He carried his two prisoners the Ele&or
of Saxony and Landgrave of Hefle along with
him, either because he durst not leave them be-
hind him in Germany, or because he wished to
give his countrymen the Flemings this illustrious
proof of the success of his arms, and the extent
of his power. Before Charles arrived at Bruflels
Spt. '7. he was informed that the Pope's legates at Bo

g Mem. de Ribicr. ii. s 18. Sleid. 491.

lognA

logna had dismissed the council by an indefiniteBooi IX.
prorogation, and that the prelates assembled there -v-
had returned to their refpecive countries. Ne- 1548'
ceflity had driven the Pope into this measure. By
the feceflion of those who had voted against the
translation, together with the departure of others,.
who grew weary of continuing in a place where
they were not suffered to proceed to business,
so few and such inconsiderable members remain-
ed, that the pompous appellation of a General
Council could not, with decency, be bestowed
any longer upon them. Paul had no choice but
to dissolve an assembly which was become the
obje& of contempt, and exhibited to all Christ-
endom a most glaring proof of the impotence of
the Romish fee. But unavoidable as the measure
was, it lay open to be unfavourably interpreted,
and had the appearance of withdrawing the re.
medy at the very time when those for whose re-
covery it was provided, were prevailed on to ac-
knowledge its virtue, and to make trial of its
effe&. Charles did not fail to put this conftruc-
tion on his condu&; and by an artful compari-
son of his own efforts to suppress heresy, with
Paul's scandalous inattention to a point so effen-
tial, he endeavoured to render the Pontiff odious
to all zealous Catholicks. At the fime time, he
commanded the Prelates of his facion to remain
at Trent, that the Council might still appear to
have a being, and might be ready, whenever it
was thought expedient, to resume its deliberati-
ons for the good of the church h.

T H E motive of Charles's journey to the Low-The Empe-
Countries, besides gratifying his favourite passion` [reneivhe

h· son Phi-

of travelling from one p.art of his dominions tolip in the
another, was to receive Philip his only son, who l-coun-

tries.
Ii Pallav. p, 1i. 72.

BooK IX. was now in the twenty-firit year of his age, and
'"v 'whom he had called thither, not only that he
'548 might be recognized by the States of the Ne-

therlands as heir apparent, but in order to facili'
tate the execution of a vast scheme, the objeft
of which, and the reception it met with, ihall be
hereafter explained. Philip, having left the go-
vernment of Spain to Maximilian, Ferdinand's
eldelt son, to whom the Emperor had given the
Princess Mary his daughter in marriage, embark-
ed for Italy attended by a numerous retinue of
Spanilh nobles'. The tquadron which cfcorted
him, was commanded by Andrew Doria, who,
notwithtlanding his advanced age, infifled on the
honour of performing, in person, the fame duty
to the son, which he had often discharged to.
N'ovem. 25. ards the father. He landed safely at Genoai

from thence he went to Milan, and proceeding
through Germany, arrived at the Imperial court

p'549 in Brussels. The States of Brabant in the firfl
Arpil i.

place, and those of the other provinces in their
order, acknowledged his right of fucccfliin in
common form, and he took the customary oath
to preserve all their privileges inviolate k. In all
the towns of the Low-Countries through which
Philip pasTed he was received with extraordinary
pomp. Nothing that could cxprefs the refpef
of the people, or contribute to his amusement
was neglc&ed, pageants, tournaments, and pub-
lic Ipe&acles of every kind were exhibited witn
that expensive magnificence which commercial
nations display, when, on any occasion, they de-
part from their usual maxims of frugality. But
a;midit these scenes of festivity and plcaf'ure
Philip's natural feveriry of temper was dilcerni-
blc. Youth itself could not render him agreea-
ble, nor his being a candidate for power form
him to courtcfy. He maintained a haughty roe-

i Ochoa, Carolea, 36z. k Harmi. annal. Brabant. 65..

icl've

EMPEROR CHARLES V. 18'

serve in his behaviour, and discovered such mani- Book IX.
felt partiality towards his Spanish attendants, to- "'-'
gether with such an avowed preference to the 1548.
manners of their country, as highly disgusted the
Flemings, and gave rife to that antipathy, which
afterwards occasioned a revolution so fatal to him
in that part of his dominions i.

CH A R L ES was long detained in the Nether-
lands by a violent attack of the gout, which re-
turned upon him so frequently, and with such
increasing violence, that it had broken to a great
degree the vigour of his conltitution. He, ne-
verthelefs, did not intermit his endeavours, to
enforce the Interim. The inhabitants of Straf-
bourg after a long struggle, found it necessary to
give obedience; those of Conllance, who had
taken arms in their own defence, were compel-
led by force not only to conform to the Interim,
but to renounce their privileges as a free city, to
do homage to Ferdinand as Archduke of Austria,
and as his vassals to admit an Austrian governor
and garrison '. Magdeburg, Bremen, Hamburg,
and Lubeck were the only Imperial cities of note
that fill continued refractory.

i Mrm. de Ribier ii. 29. L'Evefaue Mern. de Card. Gran-
velle, i. 2 1.

' Sleid. 474, 491.

THE F

# BOOK X.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

B O O K X.

BOOK X. T H I I, E Charles laboured, with such un-
---'"-' VV wearicd industry, to overcome the oblti
i 549. n.lcy of the Protestants, the effects of his fteadi-

':,,pape"nefs in the execution of his plan were rendered

ainn the less confidcrable by his rupture with the Pope,
Empror. which daily increascd. The firm resolution which

the L.rmperor feermed to have taken againfl rc-
floring Placcntia, together with his repeated cn-
croachments on the ecclefialtical jurifldi&tion,
both by the regulations contained in the Interim,
and by his attempt to re-assemble a council at
Trcnt, cxafpcratcd Paul to the utmost, who
with the wcakncfs incident to old age grew more

attached

attached to his family, and more jealous of his l30OK X.
authority, as he advanced in years. Pushed on'4
by these paflions, he made new efforts to draw '549
the French King into an alliance againct the Em-
peror a. But finding that Monarch, notwith-
standing his hereditary enmity to Charles, and
dread of his growing power, as unwilling as
formerly to involve himself in immediate hoftili-
ties, he was obliged to contract his views, and
to think of preventing future encroachments,
since it was not in his power to inflict vengeance
on account of those which were past. For this
purpose, he determined to recall his grant of
Parma and Placentia, and after declaring them to
be re-annexed to the holy fee, to indemnify Oc-
tavio by a new establishment in the ecclesiastical
state. By this expedient, he hoped to gain two
points of no small consequence; the security of
Parma, first of all, as the Emperor would be
cautious of invading the patrimony of the church,
though he might seize without scruple a town
belonging to the house of Farnese; and in the
next place, some chance of recovering Placentia,
at his follicitations to that effect might decently
be urged with greater importunity, and would in-
fallibly be attended with more weight, when he
was confidered not as pleading the cause of his
family, but as an advocate for the interest of the
church, But while Paul was priding himself in
this device, as a happy refinement in policy, Oc"
tavio an ambitious and high Ipirited young man,
who could not bear with patience to be spoilcd
of one half of his territories by the rapacioufneis
of his father-in.law, and to be deprived of the
other by the artifices of his grand-father, took
measures in order to prevent the execution of a
plan fatal to his interelf. He set out secretly

a Mem. de Ribicr. ii. 230.

from

BOOK X. from Rome, and having first endeavoured to fur-
-- -' prize Parma, which attempt was frultrated by
'549. the fidelity of the governor to whom the Pope

had entrulted the defence of the town, he made
overtures to the Emperor of renouncing all con-
nction with the Pope, and depending entirely
on him for his future fortune. This unexpected
defe&tion of one of the Pope's own family to an
enemy whom he hated, irritated, almost to mad-
nets, a mind peevish with old age; and there
was no degree of severity to which Paul might
not have proceeded against a grandson whom he
reproached as an unnatural apofLate. But happily
for O&avio, death prevented his carrying into
execution the harsh resolutions which he had
taken with refpe& to him, and put an end to his
pontificate in the sixteenth year of his adminil-
tration, and the eighty second of his age*.

As

* Amonn many initances of the credulity or weakncfs of historians

in attributing the death of illufirious personages to extraordinary
causes, this is one. Almost all the historians of the sixteenth century
affirn that the death of Paul III. was occasioned by the violent patl
Lions which the behaviour of his grandson excited; that being inform-
ed while he was airing himself in one of his gardens near Rome, of
Oftavio's attempt on Parma, as well as of his negociations with the
Emperor by means of Gonzaga, he fainted away, continued tome
hours in a swoon, then fevered, and died within three days. This
is the account given of it by Thauanus, lib. vi. ls . Adriani fIlor.
di fuoi tempi, lib. vii. 480. and by Father Paul, 280. Even cardi-
nal Pallavicini, better informed than any writer with regard to the
events which happened in the papal court, and when not warped by
prejudice or system, more accurate in relating them, agrees with their
narrative in its chief circumstances. Pallav. b. ii. 74. Paruta, who
wrote his hiltory by command of the senate of Venice, relates it in
the flme manner. Hiflories Venez. vol. iv. 112. But there was no
occasion to learch for any extraordinary cauie to account for the tdalli
of an old man of eighty two. There icnains an authentick account
of this event, in which we find none of thele marvellous circumftanccs
of which the hilloiai3 are ib fund. The cardinal of Ferr:l a, ,who

was

As this event had been long expe&ed, there was BooK X.
an extraordinary concourse of Cardinalsat Rome; v
and the various competitors having had time to 55°
form their parties, and to concert their measures,
their ambition and intrigues protratfed the con-
clave to a great length. The Imperial and French
factions strove, with emulation, to promote one
of their own number, and had, by turns, the
prospect of success. But as Paul during a long
Pontificate had raised many to the purple, and
those chiefly persons of eminent abilities as well
as zealously devoted to his family, Cardinal Far-
nefe had the command of a powerful and united

*as entrusted with the affairs of France at the Court of Rome, and
M. D' Urfe, Henry's ambassador in ordinary there, wrote an ac-
count to that Monarch of the affair of Parma, and of the Pope's
death. By these it appears, that Otavio's attempt to furprize Parma
was made on the twentieth of October; that next day in the evening,
and not while he was airing himielfin the gardens of Monte-Cavallo,
the Pope received intelligence of what he had done i that he was
seized with such a transport of passion, and cried so bitterly that his
voice was heard in several apartments of the palace; that next day,
however, he was so well as to give an audience to the Cardinal of
Ferrara, and to go through business of different kinds ; that O&avio
wrote a letter to the Pope, not to Cardinal Farnese his brother, inti-
mating his resolution of throwing himself into the arms of the Em-
peror; that the Pope received this on the twenty-firft without any
new symptoms of emotion, and returned an answer to it; that on the
twenty-fecond of October, the day on which the Cardinal of Ser-
rara's letter is dated, the Pope was in his usual State of health. Mem.
de Ribier. ii. 247. By a letter of M. D'Urfe, Nov. 5. it appears
that the Pope was in such good health, that on the third of that
month he had celebrated the anniversary of his coronation with the
usual tolemnities. Ibidem z51. By another letter from the fame per-
son, we learn that on the sixth of November a catarrh or defluxion
fell down on the Pope's lungs, with such dangerous symptoms that
his life was immediately despaired of, Ibid. 25z. And by a third
letter, we are informed that he died November the tenth. In none
of these letters is his death imputed to any extraordinary cause. It
appears that more than twenty days clapsed between Otavio's at-
tempt on Parma and the death of his grandfather, and that the di-
lIase was the natural effcil of old age, not one of those occasioned by
violence of pafion.

VOL. 111.

squadron.,.
N

BooK X.fquadron, by whose address and firmness he ex.
'-- aelted to the Papal throne the Cardinal de Monte,

'er5 whom Paul had employed as his principal legate

The eleci- in the council of Trent, and trusted with his
onofjuiiUmolt secret intentions. He aflumed the name of

Julius 11. and in order to express his gratitude
towards his benefa&or, the firit ad of his admi-
niftration was to put OEtavio Farnese in pofleflion
of Parma. When he was told of the injury
which he did the Holy See by alienating a ter-
ritory of such value, he briskly replied, " that
he would rather be a poor Pope, with the repu-
tation of a gentleman, than a rich one, with the
infamy of having forgotten the obligations con-
ferred upon him, and the promises which he had
madeb." But all the lustre of this candour or
generosity he quickly effaced by an a&tion most

His charac-fhockingly indecent. According to an ancient
terandcon-and established practice, every Pope upon his

eleE&ion claims the privilege of betlowing, on
whom he pleafes,the Cardinal's hat which falls to
be disposed of by his being vested with the triple
crown. Julius, to the affonifhment of the sacred
college, conferred this mark of diftindion, toge-
ther with ample ecclesiastical revenues, and the
right of bearing his name and arms, upon one
Innocent, a youth of sixteen, born of obscure
parents, and known by the name of the Ape,
from his having been entrusted with the care of
an animal of that Ipecies, in the Cardinal di
Monte's family. Such a proffitution of the high-
eli dignity in the church would have given of-
fence, even in those dark periods, when the cre-
dulous fuperiftiion of the people emboldened ec-
clcfiatics to venture on the most flagrant viola-
tions of decorum. But in an enlightened age,
when by the progress of knowledge and philo-
sophy the obligations of duty and decency were
better understood, when a blind veneration for

b Mern. de Ribicr.

the

the Pontifical character was every where abated,BoolK X'
and one half of Christendom in open rebellion"-'"
against the Papal See, this a&ion was viewed with '55a.
horror. Rome was immediately filled with li-
bels and pasquinades, which imputed the Pope's
extravagant regard tor such an unworthy objecE
to the most criminal passions. The Protestants
exclaimed againit the absurdities of supposing
that the infallible spirit of divine truth could
dwell in a breast so impure, and called more
loudly, than ever, and with greater appearance
ofjuftice, for the immediate and thorough Rc-
formation of a church, the Head of which was a
disgrace to the Chriflian name c. The reft of the
Pope's condu& was of a piece with this firit fpe-
cimen of his dispositions. Having now reached
the summit of ecclesiastical ambition, he seemed
eager to indemnify himself, by an unrestrained
indulgence of his desires, for the felf-denial or
dissimulation which he had thought it prudent to
pra&ise while in a Subordinate Itation. He be-
came careless, to so great a degree, of all serious
business, that he could seldom be brought to
attend to it, but in cafes of extreme neceflity ,
and giving up himself to amusements and diffipa-
tion of every kind, he imitated the luxurious
elegance of Leo, rather than the revere virtue of
Adrian, the latter of which it was necessary to
display, in contending with a sect which derived
great credit from the rigid and auftcre manners of
its teachers d.

TIE Pope, how ready soever to fulfil his en- His views

pgagemencs to the family of Farnese, difcoveredandprcedt
no inclination to observe the oath, which each fpea to the
Cardinal had taken when he entered the con-oi^.
clave, that if the choice should fall on him, he
sVould immediately call the council to re-affume

c Sleid. 49z. F. Paul, zSi. Pallav. ii. 76. Thuan, lib. vi. ai5.
¥ FP. Pul, ibid.

N .

at

BOOK X.its deliberations. Julius knew, by experience,
-'/-~'how difficult it was to confine such a body of
'550. men within the narrow limits which it was the

interest of the church ot Rome to prescribe; and
how easily the zeal of tome members, the rash-
ness of others, or the fuggeilions of the Princes
on whom they dcpen.ed, might precipitate a
popular and ungovernable assembly into forbid-
den inquiries, as well as dangerous decisions. He
wished, for these reasons, to have eluded the ob-
ligation of his oath, and gave an ambiguous an-
iwer to the first proposals, which were made to
him by the Emperor, with regard to that matter.
But as Charles, either from his natural obstinacy
in adhering to the measures which he had once
adopted, or from the mere pride of accomplish-
ing what was held to be almoit impossible, per-
sifted in his resolution of forcing the ProtIefants
to return into the bosom of the church: As he
had persuaded himself that the authoritative de-
eifions of the council might be employed with
efficacy in combating their prejudices ; and in
consequence of that persuasion, follicited ear-
neftly that a new bull of convocation might be
iflhed, the Pope could not, with decency, reject
that request. When Julius found that he could
not prevent the calling of a council, he endea-
voured to take the merit of having procured the
meeting of an assembly, which was the objec of
such general desire and expectation. A congre-
gatirn of Cardinals, to whom he referred the
confidcration of what was ncccflarv for reltoring
peace to the church, recommended, by his di-
]'ction, the speedy convocation of a council, as
the moil cfl'etual expedient for that purpose»
and as the new herelies raged with the greatest
violence in Germany, they proposed Trent as the
place of its meeting, that by a near infpe&ion of
th evil, the remedy might be applied with great-
er difceinmcnt and cclrtainty of fiuiccs. TIhe

Pope

pope warmly approved this advice, which heBoox X.
himself had dictated, and sent nuncios to the'-'-
Imperial and French courts, in order to make '550'
known his intentions e.

MEANWHILE, the Emperor had summoned aA diet at

Augsburg to

new diet to meet at Augsburg, in order to enforceenforce ,he
the observation of the Interim, and to procure aInterim.
more authentic at of the Empire, acknowledg-
ing the jurifitjiion of the council, as well as an
explicit promise of conforming to its decrees.
He appeared there in person, together with his June 25.
son the Prince of Spain. Few of the Eie&tors
were present, bit all sent deputies in their name.
Charles, notwithitanling the despotic authority
with which he had given law in the Empire dur-
ing two years, knew that the spirit of indepen-
dence among the Germans was not entirely lub-
dued, and for that reason took care to over-awe
the diet by a confidera1,le body of Spanilh troops
which escorted him thither. The firit point,
submitted to the consideration of the diet, was
the neceffiry of holding a council. All the Popish
members agreed, without difficulty, that the
meeting of that assembly should be renewed at
Trcnt, and promised an implicit acquiescence in
its decrees. The Protellants, intimidated and
disunited, mufl have followed their example, and
the resolution of the diet have proved unani-
mous, if Maurice of Saxon) had not begun at
this time to disclose new intention., and to acd a
part very different from that which he had so
long aflumcd.

B Y an artful diflimulation of his own fenti-Maurice i-
ments; by address i in pying court to the Em- degn,' fa

"J """"' M'' ~"l"b designs a-
peror i and by the leeming zeal with which hegiina the

Emp';ror.
e F. Paul, z81. Pallav. ii. 77.

N I forwarded

BooK X. forwarded all his ambitious schemes, Maurice
Sv"-' had raised himfelfto the Ele&toral dignity and
'55s- having added the dominions of the elder branch

of the Saxon family to his own, was become the
most powerful Prince in Germany. But his long
and intimate union with the Emperor had afford-
ed him many opportunities of observing narrowly
the dangerous tendency of his schemes. He saw
the yoke that was preparing for his country;
and from the rapid as well as formidable progress
of the Imperial power, was convinced that but
a few Iteps more remained to be taken, in order
to render Charles as absolute a Monarch in Ger-
many, as he had become in Spain. The more
eminent the condition was to which he himself
had been exalted, the more follicitous did he na-
turally become to maintain all its rights and pri-
vileges, and the more did he dread the thoughts
of descending from the rank of a Prince almost
independent, to that of a vassal subje&t to the
will of a matter. At the fame time, he perceived
that Charles, initead of allowing liberty of con-
science, the promise of which had allured several
Protellant Princes to afflift him in the war againil
the confederates of Smalkalde, was bent on ex-
acting a rigid conformity to the do&trines and
rites of the Romish church. As he, notwith-
standing all the compliances which he had made
from motives of intereit, or an excess of confi-
dence in the Emperor, was sincerely attached to
the Lutheran tenets, he determined not to be a
tame spectator of the overthrow of a fyftcm whicl
he believed to be founded in truth.

the poliii- THIS resolution, flowing from the love of
^,ic^ liberty, or zeal for religion, was strengthened by
ncedhim. political and interested considerations. In that

elevated tfation, in which Maurice was now
placed, new and more extensive profpees opened
to his view. His rank and power entitled him

to

to be the head of the Protestants in the Empire.Boor X.
His predecelfor, the degraded Elector, with in-c'-"-
ferior abilities, and territories less considerable, '55s0
had acquired such an ascendant over the councils
of the party; and Maurice neither wanted dif-
cernment to fee the advantage of this pre-emi-
nence, nor ambition to aim at attaining it. But
he found himself in a Situation which rendered
the attempt no less difficult, than the object of
it was important. On the one hand, the connec-
tion which he had formed with the Emperor
was so intimate, that he could scarce hope to
take any ftep which tended to dissolve it, with-
out alarming his jealousy, and drawing on him-
self the whole weight of that power, which had
crushed the grearest confederacy ever formed in
Germany. On the other hand, the calamities
which he had brought on the Protestant party
were so recent and so great, that it seemed almost
impossible to regain their confidence, or to rally
and re-animate a body of men, after himself had
been the chief infirument in breaking their union
and vigour. These considerations were sufficient
to have discouraged any person of a spirit less
adventurous than Maurice's. But to him the
grandeur and vastness of the enterprizes were al-
lurements and he boldly resolved on measures,
of which a genius of an inferior order could have
conceived no idea, or would have trembled at
the thoughts of the danger which attended the
execution of them.

His paflions concurred with his intcreft inThepaifiono

confirming this resolution ; and the refcntmnt ophi edco-
excited by an injury, which he suddenly feltwith es
added new force to the motives for opposing the
Emperor, which found policy fuggeited. Mau-
rice, by his authority, had prevailed on the Land-
grave of Hefle to put his person in the Emperor's

N 4 power,

BOOK X.power, and had obtained a promise from the
.-v-' Imperial ministers that he should not be detained

550. a prisoner. This had been violated in the manner

already related. The unhappy Landgrave ex-
claimed as loudly against his fon-in-law as againll
Charles. The Princes of Hesse required him in-
ccflantly to fulfil his engagements to their father,
who had loft his liberty by trusting to him; and
all Germany suspeCted him of having betrayed,
to an implacable enemy, the friend whom he
was molt bound to protect. Roused by thele fol-
licitations and reproaches, as well as prompted
by duty and affeition to his father-in-law, Mau-
rice had employed not only entreaties but remon-
ftrances in order to procure his release. All there
Charles had disregarded ; and the shame of hav-
ing been first deceived and then flighted by a
Prince whom he had served with zeal and success,
which merited a very different return, made luch
a deep impreilion on Maurice, that he waited
with impatience for an opportunity of being re-
venged.

The caution THE utmost caution as well as delicacy were
ith whichrequifite in taking every frep towards this end
hecarries as he had to guard, on the one hand, againit
chemet. giving a premature alarm to the Emperor; while,

on the other, something considerable and explicit
was necessary to be done, in order to regain the
confidence of the Protestant party. Maurice had
accordingly applied all his powers of address and
difimulation to attain both these points. As he
knew Charles to be inflexible with regard to the
fubmiflion which he required to the Interim, he
did not hesitate one moment whether he fhoulld
cftablifh that form of dotrine and worship in his
dominions. But being sensible how odious it
was to his fubjcas, inflead of violently impoling
it on them by the mere terror of authority, as

had

had been done in other parts of Germany, he BooK X.
endeavoured to render their obedience a volun- `-,~
tary deed of their own. For this purpose, h He' rces
had afiembled the clergy of his country at Leip-the Interim
sick, and had laid the Interim before them, to--' Saxony.
gether with the reasons which made it nece(fary
to conform to it. He had gained some of them
by promises, others he had wrought upon by
threats, and all were intimidated by the rigour
with which obedience to the Interim was ex-
torted in the neighbouring provinces. Even
Melanthon, whose merit of every kind entitled
him to the first place among the Proteitant di-
vines, being now deprived of the manly counsels
of Luther, which were wont to inspire him with
fortitude, and to preserve him tfeady amidst the
storms and dangers that threatened the church,
was seduced into unwarrantable conceflions, by
the timidity of his temper, his fond desire of
peace, and his exceflive cownplaifance towards
persons of high rank. By his arguments and au-
thority, no less than by Maurice's arts, the as-
fembly was prevailed on to declare, that in points
which were purely indifferent, obedience was due
to the commands of a lawful superior. Founding
upon this maxim, no less uncontrovertible in the-
ory, than dangerous when carried into practice,
efpccially in religious matters, they proceeded
to class, among the number of things indifferent,
several doctrines, which Luther had pointed out
as gross and pernicious errors in the Romish
creed, as well as many of those rites which dif-
tinguiihed the Reformed from the Popifi wor-
flip, and by consequence, they exhorted their
people to comply with the Emperor's injunti-
ons concerning thcfe particulars f.

f Sleid. 481. 48S. J. Laur. Mofhemii Inftitutionum Hilft
Ecclesiastic¢, lib. iv. Helift. 1755. 4to. p. 748.

BOOK X. BY this dextrous condut, the introducti,
--v-'on of the Interim excited none of those violent
1550 convulsions in Saxony, which it occasioned in

fefioes of other provinces. But though the Saxons Sub-
eal for themitted, the more zealous Lutherans exclaimed
lProtefsant
religion. against Melanahon and his associates, as faire

brethren, who were either so wicked as to apof-
tatize si om the truth altogether; or so artful as
to betray it by subtle diflin&ions ; or so feeble-
spirited as to give it up from pusillanimity and
criminal complailance to a Prince, capable of
sacrificing to his political interest, that which he
himfelt regarded as most sacred. Maurice, be-
ing conscious what a colour of probability his
palt condu& gave to these accusations, as well
as afraid of loing entirely the confidence of the
Protestants, iflued a declaration containing pro-
feflions of his zealous attachment to the Reform-
ed religion, and of his resolution to guard againil
all the errors or encroachments of the Papal feec.

At the ame HAVING gone so far in order to remove the
thme' m fears and jealousies of the Proteltants, he found
peror. it necessary to efface the impression which such

a declaration might make on the Emperor. For.
that purpose, he not only renewed his professions
of an inviolable adherence to his alliance with
him, but as the city of Magdeburg still persisted
in rejecling the Interim, he undertook to reduce
it to obedience, and instantly set about levying
the troops to be employed in that service. This
damped all the hopes which the Protestants be-
gun to conceive of Maurice, in consequence of
his declaration, and left them more than ever at
a loss to gucls at his real intentions. Their
former suspicion and difruft of him revived, and
the divines of Magdeburg filled Germany with.

g Sleid. 485.

writings

writings in which they represented him as theBooK X.
most formidable enemy of the Protestant religi--
on, who treacherously assumed an appearance of 'S° '
zeal for its interest, that he might more effetu-
ally execute his schemes for its destruction.

THrs charge, rupported by the evidence of re-Proters

cent fa&s, as well as by his present dubious con again"f the
duEt, gained such universal credit, that Mauriceproceeding
was obliged to take a vigorous ftep in his ownl"' te""
vindication. As soon as the re-atembling of the
council at Trent was proposed in the diet, his
ambafladors protested that their master would not
acknowledge its authority, unless all the points
which had been already decided there were re-
viewed, and confidered as entire; unless the Pro-
teftant divines had a full hearing granted them,
and were allowed a decisive voice in the council;
and unless the Pope renounced his pretensions to
preside in the council, engaged to submit to its
decrees, and absolved the bishops from their oath
of obedience, that they might deliver their fen-
timents with greater freedom. These demands,
which were higher than any that the Reformers
had ventured to make, even when the zeal of
their party was warmed, or their affairs molt
prosperous, counterbalanced, in some degree, the
effet of Maurice's preparations againit Magde-
burg, and kept the Protestants in fufperife with
regard to his designs. At the fame time, he had
address enough to represent this part of his con-
du&t in such a light to the Emperor, that it gave
him no offence, and occasioned no interruption
of the firida confidence which fubfifled between
them. What the pretexts were which he em-
ployed in order to give such a bold declaration
an innocent appearance, the contemporary hifto-
rians have not explained; that thev imposed upon
Charles is certain, for he tisil continued to

profecutc

Booi X. prosecute his plan as well concerning the Interim
%'"~as the council, with the fame ardour and to

'5° place the fame confidence in Maurice, with re-

gard to the execution of both.

Thediet re- THE Pope's resolution concerning the council
ivke toar not being yet known at Augsburg, the chief bu-
on the city finess of the diet was to enforce the observation
of Magde- of the Interim. As the senate of Magdeburg,

notwithstanding various endeavours to frighten
or to iooth them into compliance, not only per-
fevered obilinately in their opposition to the In-
terim, but began to Arengthen the fortifications
of their city, and to levy troops in their own
defence, Charles required of the diet that they
would aflift him in quelling this audacious rebel-
lion against a decree of the Empire. Had the
members of the diet been left to a& agreeably to
their own inclination, this demand would have
been rejeted without hesitation. All the Ger-
mans who favoured, in any degree, the new
opinions in religion, and many who were influ-
enced by no other consideration than jealousy of
the Emperor's growing power, regarded this es?
fort of the citizens of Magdeburg, as a noble
sand for the liberties of their country. Even
such as had not resolution to exert the fame spirit,
admired the gallantry of their enterprize, and
wiifed it fuccels. But the presence of the Spa-
nifh troops, together with the dread of the Em-
peror's difplealure, over-awed those who were
prcfent in the diet to such a degree, that with-
out venturing to utter their own fentimcnts,
they tamely ratified, by their votes, whatever
the Emperor was pleased to prescribe. The ri-
gorous decrees, which Charles had illued by his
own authority against the Magdeburgers, were
confirmed i a resolution was taken to raise troops
in order to beficge the city in form and persons
were named to fix the contingent in men or

mon1ey

money to be furnished by each itate. At the boOi X.
fame time, the diet petitioned that Maurice'v--'
might be entrusted with the command of thatp 155.
army, to which Charles gave his consent with Mauricege.
great alacrity, and with high encomiums uponnerl-
the wisdom of the choice which they had madeh.
As Maurice condu&ed all his schemes with pro-
found and impenetrable secrecy, it is probable
that he took no ftep avowedly in order to obtain
this charge. The recommendation of his coun-
try-men was either purely accidental, or flowed
from the opinion generally entertained of his
great abilities; and neither the diet had any fore-
fight, nor the Emperor any dread of the confe-
quences which followed upon this nomination.
Maurice accepted without lefitation the trust
committed to him, instantly discerning the im-
portant advantages which he might derive from it.

M E A NW H I L E, Julius, in preparing the bull The councii

for the convocation of the council, observed all ummoned
those tedious forms which the court of RomebleatTrenk
can employ, with so much dexterity, to retard
any disagreeable measure. At last it was publish- December)
ed, and the council summoned to meet at Trent
on the first day of the ensuing month of May.
As he knew that many of the Germans reje&ed
or disputed the authority and jurifdi&ion which
the Papal fee claims with refpetc to general coun-
cils, he took care, in the preamble of the bull,
to afterr, in the itrongeft terms, his own right,
not only to call and preside in that aflembly but
to dire& its proceedings; nor would he soften
these expreflions, in any degree, notwithitanding
the repeated follicitarions of the Emperor, who
foresaw what offence they would give, and what
conftru&ion might be put on them. They were
confured, accordingly, with great fcvcrity, by

1 Sleid. 503, 51X.

£evcral

BOOK X. several members of the diet, but whatever difgufb
-L ,-or suspicion they excited, filch absolute directi-

1551' on of all their deliberations had the Emperor ac-
Feb. 13. quired, that he procured a recess in which the

authority of the council was recognized, and de-
clared to be the proper remedy for the evils
which at that time afflited the church; all the
Princes and fiates of the Empire, such as had
made innovations in religion, as well as those
who adhered to the system of their forefathers,
were required to fend their representatives to the
council; the Emperor engaged to grant a safe
condu& to such as demanded it, and to secure
them an impartial hearing in the council; he
promised to fix his residence in some city of the
Empire, in the neighbourhood of Trent, that he
might protec the members of the council by his
presence, and take care that, by conduting their
deliberations agreeable to scripture and the doc-
trine of the fathers, they might bring them to a
desirable issue. In this recess, the observation of
the Interim was more ftri&ly enjoined than ever,
and the Emperor threatened all who had hither-
to negle&ed or refused to conform to it, with
the severest effe&s of his vengeance, if they per.
fitted in their disobedience i.

Another D U R I N G the meeting of this diet, a new at.
tfe:pttotempt was made in order to procure liberty to
procure the the Landgrave. That Prince, no-wise reconcil-
Lbndgrave ed by time to his situation; grew every day more

impatient of restraint. Having often applied to
Maurice and the Elector of Brandenburg, who
took every occasion of folliciting the Emperor in
his behalf, though without any effect, he now
commanded his sons to summon them, with le-
gal formality, to perform what was contained in
the bond they had granted him, by furrcndering

Sleid. 512. Thuan. lib. vi. 233. GoldafliConftit.Impe-
xiilcs, vol. ii. 340.

themselves to be treated with the fame rigour as BOOK X.
the Emperor had used him. This furnished them"-v'.
with a fresh pretext for renewing their applica- '551
tion to the Emperor, together with an additi-
onal argument to enforce it. Charles firmly refolv-
ed not to grant their request; though at the
fame time being extremely desirous to get rid of
their inceflant importunity, he endeavoured to
prevail on the Landgrave to give up the obliga-
tion which he had received from the two Elec-
tors. But that Prince refuting to part with a fe-
curity which he deemed essential to his safety,
the Emperor boldly cut the knot which he could
not untie; and by a public deed annulled the
bond which Maurice and the Ele&or of Bran-
denburg had granted, absolving them from all
their engagements to the Landgrave. No pre-
tension to a power so pernicious to focietv as
that of abrogating at pleasure the most sacred
laws of honour, and most formal obligations of
public faith, had hitherto been formed by any
but the Roman Pontiffs, who, in consequence of
their claim of infallibility, arrogate the right of
dispensing with precepts and duties of every kind.
All Germany was filled with astonishment,
when Charles assumed the fame prerogative. The
state of subjection, to which the Empire was re-
duced, appeared to be more rigorous as well as
intolerable than that of the molt wretched and
enslaved nations, if the Emperor by an arbitrary
decree might cancel those solemn contracts,
which are the foundation of that mutual confi-
dence whereby men are held together in social
union. The Landgrave himself now gave up all
hopes of recovering his liberty by the Emperor's
consent, and endeavoured to procure it by his own
address. But the plan which he had formed to
deceive his guards being discovered, such of his
attendants as he had gained to favour his escape

were

booK X. were put to death, and he was confined in the

-'---' citadel of Mechlin more closely than ever k.

1551.

Charles's ANOTHEIL tranfasion was carried on during
plan of po-tils diet, with refpe: to an affair more nearly
curing the t

'' w ca e

Imperial interesting to the Emperorand which

occasioneu

crown for likewifi a general alarm among the Princes of
ip. f the Empire. Charles, though formed with ta-

lents which fitted him for conceiving and con-
ducting great designs, was not capable, as has'
been obierved, of bearing extraordinary success.
Its operation on his mind was to violent and in-
toxicating, that it elevated him beyond what was
moderate or attainable, and turned his whole at-
tention to the pursuit of vast but chimerical ob-
jeats. Such had been the effe& of his vi&ory
over the confederates of Smalkalde. He did nor
long reft satisfied with the substantial and cer-
tain advantages which were the result of that
event, but despising these, as poor or inconfi-
derable fruits of such great success, he had aimed
at bringing all Germany to an uniformity in re-
ligion, and at rendering the Imperial power de-
fpotic. These were obje&s extremely splendid,
it mutt be acknowledged, and alluring to an
ambitious mind ; the pursuit of them, however,
was attended with manifest danger, and the at-
tainment of them very precarious. But the Iteps
which he had already taken towards them being
accompanied with such success, his imagina-
tion, warmed with contemplating this vail de-
sign, overlooked or dclpiled all difficulties. As
he conceived the execution of his plan to be cer-
tain, he began to be follicitous how he might
render the poflcflion of such an inportant acqui-
fition perpetual in his family, by tranlinitting the
German Empire, as well as the kingdoms of
Spain, and his dominions in Italy and the Low-

k Sklid. 504. Thuan. 1. vi. 234, 235.

Countriesq,

Countries, to. his son. Having long revolvedBoo X.'
this flattering idea in his mind, without commu-'-v"
nicating it,. even to those ministers' \whom he 551'
molt trusted, he had called Philip Qut"of Spain,
in hopes that his presence would faclitate the
carrying forward the scheme.

GREAT obilacles, however, and such as would The obfa.
have deterred any ambition less accustomed tocle8 itha.
overcome difficulties, were to be furmounted.way.
He had in the year one thousand five hundred
and thirty imprudently assisted in procuring his
brother Ferdinand the dignity of King o the
Romans, and there was no probability that.this
Prince, who was fill in the prime of life, and
had a son grown up to the years of manhood,
would relinquish, in favour of his nephew, the
near profpet of the Imperial throne, which
Charles's infirmitics and declining tIate of health
opened to him. This did not deter the Emperor
from venturing to make the proposition and
when Ferdinand, notwithstanding his profound
reverence for his brother, and obsequious sub-
miflion to his will in other instances, rejceted it
in a peremptory tone, he was not discouraged
by one repulse. He renewed his applications to
him by his sifter, Mary Queen of Hungary and
Bohemia, and who, by her great abilities, tem-
pered with extreme gentleness of disposition, had
acquired an extraordinary influence over both
the brothers. She entered warmly into a mea-
sure, which tended so manifestly to aggrandize
the house of Austria ; and flattering herlelf that
fle could tempt Ferdinand to renounce the re-
vcrfionary possession of the Imperial dignity for
nn immediate cltablifhment, fle assured him that
the Emperor, by way of compensation for his
giving up his chance of fucceflion, would in-
itantly bestow upon him territories of very con-
VoL. III. 0 fiderablc

Booi X fiaerabie valiie, and pointed out in particular

' -'r.thore of the Duke of Wurtemberg, which might
i'55' be conficated upon different pretexts. But Ser-

iiiiaitd iwas iore amibitious than to be persuaded,
by her addi-efs or iritreaties, to approve ds a plan,
which would have degraded him frofin the high-
eft rank among the Monarchs of Europe to that
of a subordinate and depehdant Prince. He was
: the faiin time, tnore attached to his children
than to fruirate, by a rash conceflion, all the
high hopes in profpe&t of which they had been
educated.

His endea- .NOTW1ITiTSTANDIN the imrnoveable firmness
o °'"""*r- which Ferdinarid discovered, the Emperor did
rountthete. ..

riot abandon his scheme. He flattered himself
that lie might attain the.objeic in view by ano-
ther channel, and that it was not ihnpoflible to
prevail on the Eletolrs to cancel their former
choice of Ferdinand, 'oI at least to ele& Philip
a second king of the Romans, substituting him
as next in hicceflion to his uncle. With this
view he took Philip along with him to the diet,
that the Germans might hive an opportunity to
observe and become acquainted with the Prince,
in behalf of whom he courted their interest; and
he himfelt emiployed all the arts of address or in-
finuation to gain the Elcators, and to prepare
them for lending a favourable ear to the propo-
fal. But no sooner did he venture upon menti-
oning it to them, than they, at orice, saw and
trembled at the consequences with which it
would be attended. They had long felt all the
inconveniences of having placed at the head of
the Empire, a Prince whose power and domini-
ons were so extensive; if they should now re-
peat the folly, and continue the Imperial crown,
like an hereditary dignity, in the fame family,
they foresaw that they would give the son an op-
portunity of carrying on that lyflem of opprcf-

sion,

fi0n, which the father had begun; and would Boox X:
put it in his power to overturn whatever wash'"'
yet left entire in the ancient and venerable fabric '551'
of the German constitution.

THE chara&ter of the Prince, in whose favourPhilip'sch.-
this extraordinary proposition was made, ren- gr'eeabl to
dered it fill less agreeable. Philip, though pof-the Cer.
fefled with an insatiable desire of power, was amans.
Rtranger to all the arts of conciliating good-will.
Haughty, reserved and revere, he, initead of
gaining new friends, disgusted the ancient and
motl devoted partizans of the Austrian interest.
He scorned to take the trouble of acquiring the
language of the country, to the government of
which he aspired ; nor would he condescend to
pay the Germans the compliment of accommo-
dating himself, during his residence among them,
to tbleir manners and customs. He allowed the
Ele&tors and most illustrious Princes in Germany
to remain in his pretence uncovered, affecting a
stately and distant demeanour, which the greatest
of the German Emperors, and even Charles him-
self, amidst the pride of power and vitorv, had
never assumed i. On the other hand, Ferdinand,
from the time of his arrival in Germany, had
studied to render himself acceptable to the peo-
ple, by a conformity to their manners, which
leemed to flow from choice ; and his son Maxi-
milian, who was born in Germany, possessed in
an eminent degree, such amiable qualities, as ren-
dered him the darling of his countrymen, and
induced them to look forward to his elecion as
a moll defrable event. Their esteem and assec-
tion for him fortified the refblution which obund
policy had figgefted ; and determined the Ger-
mans to prefer the popular virtues of Ferdinand

1 Frediman And re Zulich Differtatio politico-Hiftorica de
Navis politicis Caroli V. Lips. 1706. 41t. p. 21.

0 z an4

BOOK X. and his son, to the stubborn aulterity of Philip
'--~-' which interest could not soften, nor ambition
char5e' ob teach him to disguise. All the Electors, the ec-
liged to ,e-clefiatical as well as secular, concurred in ex.
linquish this prcfling such ttrong disapprobation of the mea.

utre, that Charles, notwithlianding the relutance
with which he gave up any point, was obliged
to drop! the scheme as impra&cicable. By his un.
seasonable perseverance in pushing it, he not only
filled the Germans with new jealousy of his am-
bitious designs, but laid the foundation of rival.
ship and dil:cord in the Auflrian family, and
forced his brother Ferdinand, in felf-defence, to
court the elecors, particularly Maurice of Sax-
ony, and to form luch connections with them,
as cut off all protpect of renewing the propolal
with success. Philip, foured by his disappoint-
menrt, was sent back to Spain, to be called thence
when any new scheme of ambition lhould ren-
der his presence neccffary m.

The Pope H A I N G relinquished this pl;i of domeflic
rnd fEmpe'-ambition which had long occupied and engrofled
design to re-him, Charles imagined that he would now have
mcoer Pala cirure to turn all his attention towards his grand
ccntin. scheme of eflablifhing uniformity of religion in

the Empire, by forcing all the contending par-
tics to acquiesce in the decisions of the council
of Trcnt. But such was the extent of his domi-
nioons, the varity of conne&ions in which this
entangled him, and the multiplicity of events to
which these gave rile, as leldom allowed him to
apply his whole force to any one oljec&. 'he
machine which he had to condua was lo great
and complicated, that an unforefcen i rregularity
or ohflrution in one of the inferior wheels, of-
ten dilconcerted the moti n of the whole, and

tn SIJid. 505. Thusn. 180, 238. Memoir, de Ribier, ii. 219,
a81, 314. Adriani Iftor. lib. viii. 507, 5z0.

disappointcd

disappointed him of the most considerable effectsBoox X.
which he expected. Such an unlooked-for oc-
currence happened at this junAure, and created 155'
new obstacles to the execution of his schemes
with regard to religion. Julius 111. though he
had confirmed O&avio Farnese in the pofleffion
of.the dutchy of Parma, during the firit effufi-
ons of joy and gratitude on his promotion to the
Papal throne, soon began to repent of his own
g.nerofity, and to be apprehensive of confe-
quences which either he aid not foresee, or had
disregarded while the fenie of his obligations to
the family of Farnese was recent. The Emperor
flill retained Placentia in his hands, and had not
relinquished his pretensions to P:arma as a fief of
the Empire. Gonzaga, the governor of Milan,
having, by the part which he took in the murder
of the late Duke Peter Ludovico, offered an in-
fult to the family of Farnese, which he knew
could never be forgiven, had for that reason
vowed its dellrudion ; and emp)oye4d all the in-
fluence, which his great abilities as well as long
services gave him with the Emperor, in periuad-
ing him to seize Parma by force of arms. Char-
les, in compliance with his follicitations, and
that he might gratify his own desire of annexing
Parma to the Milanese, lifened to the propofdl
and Gonzaga, ready to take encouragement
from the slightest appearance of approbation, be-
gan to aflemble troops, and to make other prc-
parations fqr the egecution of his scheme.

OCTAVIO, who saw the impending danger, OavioFr-

i

nele count

found it ncceftary for his own safety to increafethealdiionce
the garrison of his clpiral, and to levy foldieisof '"Fce.
for defending the relt of the country. But as the
expence of luch an effort far exceeded his scanty
revenues, he represented his situation to the Pope,
and implored that protecion and afliltance which
ivas due to him as a vasal of the church. The

O 3 Imperial

BooK X.Imperial minister, however, had already pre,
'--v---occupied the Pope's ear; and by discoursing con.
.55'· tinually concerning the danger of giving offence

to the Emperor, as well as the imprudence oi
Supporting Otavio in an usurpation so detrimen,
tal to the Holy See, had totally alienated him
from the family of Farnese. Odtavio's rcmon.
france and petition met, of consequence, with
a cold reception ; and he, dcfpairing of any as.
fiftance fiom Julius, began to look round for
protetion from some other quarter. Henry 11,
of France was the only Prince powerful enough
to afford him this prote&ion, and fortunately he
was now in a situation which allowed him to un.
dertake it. He had brought his tranfa&ions with
the two British kingdoms, which had hitherto
diverted his attention from the affairs of the con.
tinent, to such an issue as he desired. This he
had effected partly by the vigour of his arms,
partly by his dexterity in taking advantage of the
political fations which raged in both kingdoms,
and rendered the counsels of the Scots violent
and precipitate, and the operations of the :Eng.
lifh feeble and unsteady. He had procured fiom
the English favourable conditions of peace for
his allies the Scots ; he had prevailed on the no-
hles of Scotland not only to affiance their young
Queen to his son the Dauphin, but even to fend
her into France that she might be educated un-
der his eye ; and had recovered Boulogne toge-
ther with its dependancies which had been col.
quercd by Henry VIII.

His league HAVING gained points osso much consequence
i.th H''nYto his crown, and disengaged himself with fucll

honour from the burden of supporting the Scots,
and maintaining a war againit l.ngland, Henry
was now at fuill cifiuree to purfuc the meafurcs
which his hereditary ical: uy of the Emperor's
powcr naturally fuggcitcd. He'liltcncJ, accord-

ingly,

ngly, to the first overtures which O&taviq Far-BooK X4
aele made him ; and embracing eagerly an op- '-B'- -
porrunity of recovering footing in Italy, he in- '55'
itntly concluded a treaty, in which he promised
to espouse his cause, and to furnish him with all
the afflitance which he desired. This tranfa&ion
could not be long kept secret from the Pope,
who foreseeing the calamities which must follow
if war were rekindled so near the ecclesiastical
fate, immediately imfued monitory letters, re-
quiring Ocavio to relinquih his new alliance.
Upon his refusal to comply with the requisition,
lie soon after pronounced his fief to be forfeited,
and declared war against him as a disobedient
and rebellious vassal. But as he could not hope,
with his own forces alone, to subdue O&avio
while supported by such a powerful ally as the
King of France, he had recourse to the Empe-
ror, who being extremely follicitous to prevent
the establishment of the French in Parma, order-
ed Gonzaga to second Julius with all his troops.
Thus the French took the field as the allies Ofoccafons
Oftavio the Imperialifs as the prote&tors ofte renew

1

* 1

1 *r 1 of hoatiiities

the Holy See and hostilities commenced b0e- between
tween them, while Charles and Henry them Charles and
selves still assEted to give out that they would .ny
adhere inviolably to the peace of Crefpy. The
war of Parma was not distinguished by any me-
morable event. Many small rencounters happen-
ed with alternate success i the French ravaged
part of the ecclefiaflical territories , the Imperi-
alifs laid waste the Parmesan ; and the latter as-
ter having begun to besiege Parma in form, were
obliged to abandon the enterprizc with disgrace".

BUT the motions and alarm which this war,Retards the

or the preparation for it, occasioned in Italy, pr.e -e'ucinf
vented most of the Italian prelates from repair-

n Adriani Iltor. lib. viii. 505, 514, 524. Sleid. 5(3. Paruta,

p, 220. Lettere del Caro fcritte al nome del Card. Farnece,
tom. ii. p. ii, &c.

04

ing

BooK X.ing to Trent on the first of May, the day ap.
'-~'v pointed for re-aflembling the council; and though
1551' the Papal legate and nuncios resorted thither,

they were obliged to adjourn to-the first of Sep.
tember, hoping such a number might then as.
femble, that they might with decency begin their
deliberations. At that time, about sixty pre-
lates, mostlv from the ecclcfialtical ltate or from

Henry pro-Spain, together with a few Germans, convenedo.
te:c againfThe fefion was opened with the accuflomed for-

t malities, and the fathers were about to proceed
to business, when the abbot of Bellozane appear-
ed, and presenting letters of credence as ambaf-
fador from the French King, demanded audi.
ence. Having obtained it, he protested in Hen.
ry's name against an assembly called at such an
improper jun&ure, when a war, wantonly kin-
died by the Pope, made it impossible for the de-
puties from the Gallican church to resort to Trent
in safety, or to deliberate concerning articles of
faith and discipline with the requisite tranquilli-
ty ; he declared that his master did not acknow-
ledge this to be a general oecumenick council;
but must confider and would treat it as a pirti-
cular and partial convention P. The legate as-
feted to despise this protest and the prelates
proceeded, notwithstanding, to examine and de-
cide the great points in controversy concerning
the sacrament of the Lord's Supper, penance,
and extreme unction. This mcafure of the French
Monarch, however, gave a deep wound to the
credit of the council, at the very commencement
of its deliberations. The Germans could not pay
much regard to an aflembly, whose authority
the, second Prince in Chriltendom had formally
disclaimed, or feel any great reverence for the
decisions of a few men, who arrogated to them.
selves all the rights belonging to the reprefenta-
tives of the church univcrfa , a title to which
they had such poor pretensions.
* F. Paul. a68. p Sleid. 5 8. Thuan. 28z. F. Paul. 301.

THE

TrE Emperor, nevertheless, was straining hisBoGs X

authority to the utmost, in order to establish'-
the reputation and jurifdition of the council. He 155''
had prevailed on the three ecclesiastical Elec-violence of
tors, the prelates of greatest power and dignity the Empe-
in the church next to the Pope, to repair thitherceediigs 1-
in person. He had obliged several German bi-.aint the
{hops of inferior rank to go to Trent themsel.ves,
or to fend their proxies. He granted 'an Impe-
riai safe condu&t to the ambafladors nominated by
the bIletor of Brandenburg, the duke of Wur-
temberg, and other Proteitant itates, to attend
the council; and exhorted them to fend their
divines thither, in order to propound, explain
and defend their do&rine.' At the fame time, his
zeal anticipated the decrees of the council ; and
as if tthe Protestant doctrines had already been
condemned, he took large steps towards exter-
minating them.' With this intention, he called
together the ministers of Augsburg ; and after
interrogating them concerning several contro-
verted points, enjoined them to teach nothing
with refpet to there, contrary to the tenets of
the Romiih church. Upon their declining to
comply with a requisition so contrary to the dic-
tates of their conlciences, he commanded them
to leave the town in three days, without rcveal-
ing to any person the cause of their banishment;
he prohibited them to preach for the future in
any of the countries fubje& to the Imperial ju-
rildi&ion i and obliged them to take an oath
that they would punctually obey there injun&i-
ons. They were not the only victims to his zeal.
The Proteltant clergy, in moit of the cities in
the circle of Swabia, were ejected with the Cfmc
violence ; and in many places, such magiltrates
as had ditinguified themselves by their attach-
ment to the new opinions, were difmited with
the motl abrupt irregularity, and their offices
filled, in consequence of the Emperor's arbitrary

appointment,

BooK X.appointment, with the moll bigotred of their ad.
v-'-"verfaries. The Reformed worship was almost
Js51 entirely suppressed throughout that extensive

province. The ancient and fundamenral privi.
leges of the free cities were violated. The peo-
ple were compelled to attend the miniltration of
priess, whom they regarded with horror as ido-
laters ; and to lubmit to the jurisdiction of ma-
gifirates, whom they detested as usurpers q.

His endea- T E Emperor, after this discovery, which
v"urs'tfP-was more explicit than any that he had hitherto
ounil. made, of his intention to subvert the German

contitution, as well as to extirpate the Protef-
tant religion, set outt for Infpruck in the Tyrol.
November. He fixed his residence in that city, as by its si-

tuation in the neighbourhood of Trent, and on
the confines of Italy, it appeared a commodious
station, whence he might infpe& the operations
of the council, and observe the progress of the
war in the Parmesan, without losing fight of the
occurrences that might happen in Germany .

·the fiegeof DDURING these tranfaations,the iege ofMagde.
Magde·bu rg was carried on with various success. At

the time when Charles proscribed the citizens of
Magdeburg, and put them under the ban of the
Empire, he had exhorted and even enjoined all
the neighbouring flates to take arms against
them, as rebels and common enemies. Encour-
aged by his exhortations as well as promises,
George of Mecklenburg, a younger brother of
the reigning Duke, an a&ive and ambitious Prince,
colleced a considerable number of those soldiers
of fortune who had accompanied Henry of Brunf-
wick in all his wild entcrprizes and though a
zealous Lutheran himself, invaded the territories
of the Magleburgers, hoping that, by the merit

i Slcid. 516, 528. Thuan. 276. t Sleid. 329.

of

of this service, he might procure some part of 1oor X.
their domains to be allotted to him as an efta- -v-
blifhment. The citizens, unaccustomed as yet '551-
to endure patiently the calamities of war, could
not be reflrained from rallying out in order to
save their lands from being laid waste. They at-
tacked the duke of Mecklenburg with more
courage than condu&, and were repulsed with
great slaughter. But as they were animated with
that unconquerable spirit, which flows from zeal
for religion co-operating with the love of civil
liberty, far from being disheartened by their mif-
fortune, they prepared to defend themselves with
vigour. Many of the veteran soldiers who had
served in the long wars between the Emperor
and King of France, crowding to their standards
under able and experienced officers, they acquir-
ed military skill by degrees, and added all the
advantages of that to the efforts of undaunted
courage. The duke of Mecklenburg, notwith-
standing the severe blow which he had given
the Magdeburgers, not daring to invest a town
firongly fortified, and defended by such a garri-
son, continued to ravage the open country.

As the hopes of booty drew many adventurers Mauic

to his camp, Maurice of Saxony began to betake the
jealous of the power which he poflfeed by being oaiay °o
at the head of fiuch a numerous body, and march- whicciarri-
ing towards Magdeburg with his own troops,cege.
aifumed the fuprcme command of the whole ar-
my, an honour to which his high rank and great
abilities, as well as the nomination of the diet,
gave him an indisputable title. With this united
force he invested the town, and began the siege
in form ; claiming great merit with the Emperor
on that account, as, from his zeal to execute
the Imperial decree, he was exposing himself
once more to the cenfurcs and maledictions of
the party with which he agreed in religious fcn-

tlmcnts.

BooK X. timents. But the approaches to the town went

-~"'on slowly ; the garrison interrupted the besiegers
'551 by frequent sallies, in one of which the duke of

Mecklenburgh was taken prisoner, levelled part
of their works, and cut off the soldiers in their
advanced polls. W hile the citizens of Magde-
burg, animated by the difeourfes of their pastors,
and the soldiers encouraged by the example of
their officers, endured all the hardships of a siege
without murmuring, and defended themselves
with the fame ardour which they had at firit dif-
covered; the troops of the besiegers aRed witl
extreme remiflnefs, repining at every thing they
suffered in a service which they djfliked. They
broke out, more than once, intq open mutiny,
demanding the arrears of their pay, which, as the
Germans contributed with great reluctance to-
wards defraying the expences of this war, a-
mounted to a considerable fum . NMaurice, too,
had particular motives, though such as he durst
not avow at that jun&ure, which induced him
not to push the siege with vigour, and made
him chufe rather to continue at the head of an
army exposed to all the imputations which his
dilatory proceedings drew upon him, than to
precipitate a conquest which might have brought
him some acceflion of reputation, but would have
rendered it necelIary to disband his forces.

The city AT last, the inhabitants of the town beginning
furrendei to fufffer di(trefs from want of provisions, and
to Maurice, .. . A

Maurice, finding it impoflible to protract matters
any longer without' filling the Emperor with
such suspicions as might have disconcerted all his
meafiircs, he concluded a treaty of capitulation
with the city upon the following conditions

I Thuan. 277. Sleid. 514.

tlat

that the Magdeburgers should humbly imploreRooK x.
pardon of the Emperor; that they should not for"-- ,'
the future take arms, or enter into any alliance 155'1
againtl the house of Austria; that they should ove 3
submit to the authority of the Imperial chamber
that they should conform to the decree of the
diet at Augsburg with rcfped to religion; that
the new fortifications added to the town should
be demolished; that they ihould p.iy a fine of
fifty thousand crowns, deliver up twelve pieces
of ordnance to the Emperor, and let the Duke of
Mecklenburgh together with their other prison-
ers at liberty without ransom. Next day their
garrison marched our, and Maurice took pofefli-
en of the town with great military pomp.

B E F O R E the terms of capitulation were set- Maurice's

tied, Maurice had held many conferences withy ie^wsat thi
Albert count Mansfeldt, who had the chief com-
mand in Magdeburg, and with count Heideck,
an oficer who had served with great reputation
in the army of the league of Sinalkalde, whom
the Emperor had proscribed on account of his
zeal for that cause, and whom Maurice had, not-
withfianding, secretly engaged in his service,
and admitted into the mult intimate confidence.
To them he communicated a scheme, which he
had long revolved in his mind, for procuring li-
bertv to his father-in law the Landgrave, for
vindicating the privileges of the Germanic body,
and setting bounds to the dangerous encroach-
ments of the Imperial power. Having consulted
with them about the measures which might be
neceflary for fIcuring the luccefs of such an ar-
duous enterprize, he gave Mansfeldt secret affur-
ances that the fortifications of Magdeburg should
not be dellroyed, and that the inhabitants should
neither be ditfurbcd in the exercise of their re-
ligin, nor be deprived of any of their anticnt
immunities. In order to engage Maurice more

thoroughly

BooK X. thoroughly from considerations of interest to ful-
'- -'fil these engagements, the senate of Magdeburg
'551' eleted him their Burgrave, a dignity which had

formerly belonged to the ele&toral house of Sax-
ony, and which entitled him to a very ample ju-
rifdi&ion not only in the city but in its depen-
dcncies '.

The advan- T H:us the citizens of Magdeburg, after en-
riederom during a siege of twelve months, and struggling
his negocia-for their liberties religious and civil with an in-
thi Magn vincible fortitude worthy of the caufc in which
burgers. it was exerted,. had at lait the good fortune to

conclude a treaty which left them in a better
condition than the reft of their countrymen,
whom their timidity or want of publick spirit
had betrayed into fich mean submissions to the
Emperor. But while a great part of Germany
applauded the gallant condu& of the Magde-
burgers, and rejoiced in their having escaped the
dcefitu&ion with which they had been threatened,
a11 admired Maurice's address in the condu& of
his negociation with them, as well as the dexte-
rity with which he converted every event to his
own advantage. They saw, with amazement,
that after having afflicted the Magdeburgers dur-
ing many months with all the calamities of war,
he was at last, by their voluntary elecion, vested
with supreme authority in that city which he
had so lately bcficged; that after having been so
long the obje& of their invcfives arid satire as
an apostate, and an enemy to the religion which
he plrofeffed ; they seemed now to place unbound-
ed confidence in his zeal and good will . At the
fame time, the publick articles in the treaty of

t Sleid. 528. Tlhlun. 276. Obfidionis Magdeburgici def-
criptio [er beballt Beflelmcierutui: ap. Scard. ii. 518.

. Atnoldi vita Maurit. npud Mcnikn, ii. 1227.

capitulation

capitulation were 1f peifeatly conformable toBooK X.
those which the Emperor had granted to the o-'9
ther Protestant cities, and Maurice took such '55'
care to magnify his merit in having reduced a
place which had defended itself with so much
6bftinacy, that Charles, far from fufpe&ing any
thing fraudulent or collusive in the terms of ac-
commodation, ratified them without hesitation,
and absolved the Magdeburgers from the fen-
tence of ban which had been denounced agaift
them.

T HE only point that now remained to em His expedi-
barrafs Maurice was how to keep togethi c tli "eorkee

.lng an arm.y

veteran troops which had served under him, asonfoot.
well as those which had been employed in the
defence of the town. For this, too, he found
an expedient with singular art and felicit y. His
schemes against the Emperor were not yet so
fully ripened, that he durst venture to dilclofe
them, and proceed openly to carry tchmr into
execution. The winter was approaching, which
made it impossible to take the field immediately.
He was afraid that it would give a premature
alarm to the Emperor, if he should retain luch
a confidcrable body in his pay until the season of
a&ion returned in the spring. As foan then as
Magdeburg opened its gates, he sent home his
Saxon subje&s, whom he could command to take
arms and re-assemble on the shortest warning, to
their own habitations; and at the fame time, pay-
ing part of the arrears due to the mercenary
troops, who had followed his standard, as well
as to the soldiers who had served in the garrison,
he absolved them from their rcfpelivc oaths of
fidelity, and disbanded them. But the moment
he gave them their dilcharge, George Duke of
Mecklenburg, who was now ser at liberty, of-
sercd to take thcm into his Icrvice, and to become

surety

0BK X fiurety for the payment of what was still owing
---'- to them. As Iuch adventurers were accustomed
55SL often to change masters, they inflantly accepted

the offer. Thus, these troops were kept united,
and ready to march wherever Maurice should call
them, while the Emperor, deceived by this ar-
tifice, and imagining that the Duke of Mecklen-
burg had hired them with an intention to assert,
by force of arms, his claim to a part of his bro-
ther's territories, suffered it to pass without ob-
fcrvation, as if it had been a matter of no con.
sequence '.
His iddrefs H A V I NG ventured to take these fleps which

hiscel were of so much consequence towards the exe-

,tctions cution of his fchenies, Maurice, that he might
EWpto. divert the Emperor from observing their tenden.

cy too narrowly, and prevent the suspicions
which that must have excited, saw the neceffiry
of employing some new artifice in order to en-
gage his attention, and to confirm him inr his
present fecuritv. As he knew that the chief ob-
jec of the Emperor's follicitude at this juncture,
was how he might prevail with the Protestant
States of Germany to recognize the authority
of the council of Trent, and to fend thither am-
baffadors in their own name, as well as deputies
from their respective churches, he took hold of
this predominating palion in order to amuse and
to deceive him. He affe&ed a wonderful zeal to
gratify Charles in what he desired with regard to
this matter; he nominated ambassadors, whom
lie impowered to attend the council; he made
choice of Mlelanchrhon and some of the moll
eminent among his brethren to prepare a confcf-

x Thuan. 278. Struv. corp. hist. Gwn. 1o6.., Arnoldi
itra Mlauritii apud Menkcn, ii. 1227.

sion of faith, and to lay it before that aflembly. BooK Xc
After his example, and probably in consequence --.
of his follicitations, the Duke of Wurtemberg, '51-
the city of Strasburg, and other Protestant States
appointed ambassadors and divines to attend the
council. They all applied to the Emperor for
his fafe-condu&c, which they obtained in the most
ample form. This was deemed sufficient for the
fccurity of the ambassadors, and they proceeded
accordingly on their journey; but a separate safe-
condu&t from the council itself, was demanded
for the Protestant divines. The fate of John
Huss and Jerome of Prague, whom the council
of Contance, in the preceding century, had con-
demned to the flames without regarding the Im-
perial fafe-conduc which had been granted
them, rendered this precaution prudent and ne-
ceffary. But as the Pope was no less unwilling
that the Protestants lhould be admitted to an
hearing in the council, than the Emperor had
been eager in bringing them t) demand it, the
legate by promises and threats prevailed on the
fathers of the council to decline ifsu!lg a safe-
condut in the fame form with that which the
council of Basil had granted to the followers of
Huss. The Protestants, on their part insisted
upon the council's copying the precise words 'of
that instrument. The Imperial ambalfadors in-
terpofed in order to obtain what would satisfy
them. Alterations in the form of the writ were
proposed; expedients were suggested; protests
and counter proteuls were taken the legate to-
gether with his afTociates laboured to gain their
point by artifice and chicane the Protestants ad-
eicrd to theirs with firmness and obflinacy. An
account of every thing that pafled in Trent was
transmittcd to the Emperor at lnfpruck, who,
attempting from an cxcefs of zeal, or of confi-
dcncc in his own addreis, to reconcile the con-
tending parties, was inv:.lvcd in a labyrinth of

VOL. I.
ll, inextri

BOOK X.:inextricable negociations. By means of this
'-,":- however, Maurice gained all that he had in
'55. view; the Emperor's time was wholly engrofled,

and his attention diverted; while he had leisure
to mature his schemes, to carry on his intrigues,
and to finish his preparations before he threw off
the mask, and struck the blow which he had so
long meditated z

The affairs B U T previous to the history of Maurice's ope-
ofHungary. raions, some account must be given of a new

revolution in Hungary, which contributed not
a little towards their producing such extraordi-
nary effe&s. When Solyman, in the year i41r,
by a itratagem, which suited the base and infidi-
ous policy of a petty usurper, rather than the
magnanimity of a mighty conqueror, deprived
the young King of Hungary of the dominions
which his father had left him, he had granted
that unfortunate Prince the country of Tranfyl-
vania, a province of his paternal kingdom. 1 he
government of this, together with the care of
educating the young King, for he fill allowed
him to retain that title-though he had rendered
it only an empty name, he committed to the
Queen and Martinuzzi bilhop of Waradin,
xwhom the late King hi'd appointed his sons guar-
dians and regents of his dominions, at a time
v:hen thole offices ere of greater importance.
This co ordinare jurildiftion occasioned the fame
dificntions In a finall principality as it would have
excited in a great kinlgd,; i an ambitious young
Queenl, co(niious of hei capacity for governing,
and an high (piritcd prclate, contending wlho
fl'ould cngrofs t!e greatest Tliare in the adnii-
nill ration. Each had their partizans among the
nobles, but as Martilnzzi, by his great talents,

2 Sleid. 26, 529. F. Paul. 323,338. Thuan, 286.

began

began to acquire the acfendant, Isabella turned nooK X.
his own arts against him, and courted the pro-'--V'"
reaion of the Turks. '551.

T H E neighbouring bafhas, jealous of theMartinuzz
biihop's power as well as abilities, readily pro- """o'"fer
mifed her the aid which lhe demanded,'and would pretensions
soon have obliged Martinuzzi to have given upthatkin
to her the sole direction of affairs, if his ambiti-
on, fertile in expedients, had not fuggeffed to
him a new measure, and one that tended not on-
ly to preserve but to enlarge his authority. Hav-
ing concluded an agreement with the Queen, by
the mediation of some of the nobles who were
follicitous to save their country from the cala-
mities of a civil war, he secretly dispatched one
of his confidents to Vienna, and entered into a
negotiation with Ferdinand. As it was no diffi-
cult matter to persuade Ferdinand that the fame
man whose enmity and intrigues had driven him
out of a great part of his Hungarian dom.nions,
might, upon a reconciliation, become equally
instrumental in recovering them, he listened
eagerly to the first overtures of an union with
that prelate. Martinuzzi allured him by such
profpe&s of advantage, and engaged, with so
much confidence, that he would prevail on the
mod powerful of the Hungarian nobles to take
arms in his favour, that Ferdinand, notwithfl-and-
ing his truce with Solyman, agreed to invade
Transylvania. The command of the troops def-
tined for that service, confilling of veteran Spa-
nifh and German soldiers, was given to Caftaldo
Marquis de Piadena, an officer formed by the
famous Marquis de Pescara, whom he strongly
resembled both in his cnterprizirrng genius for
civil business, and in his great knowledge in the
art of war. This army, more formidable by the
difciplinc of the soldiers, and the abilities of the

P z general,

BoOr X. general, than by its number, was powerfully fe.
'-v-' conded by Martinuzzi and his faction among the

'5'SS Hungarians. As the Turkish Bafhas, the Sultan

himself being at the head of his army on the fron-
tiers of Persia, could not afford the Queen such
immediate or effecual affiflance as the exigency
of her affairs required, ihe quickly loft all hopes
of being able to retain any longer the authority
which she possessed as regent, and even began to
despair of her son's safety.

MA TI N Uz z i did not susser his favourable

of his mea- opportunity of accomplishing his own designs to
fures. pas unimproved, and ventured, while ihe was

in this slate of dejeetion, to lay before her a pro-
pofal, which at any other time, ihe would have
rejec&ed with disdain. He represented how im-
possible it was for her to resist Ferdinand's vic-
torious arms; that even if the Turks ihould ena-
ble her to make head against them, she would be
far from changing her condition to the better,
and could not confider them as deliverers but as
matters to whose commands she mull submit; he
conjured her, therefore, as she regarded her own
dignity, the safety of her son, or the security of
Christendom, rather to give up Transylvania to
Ferdinand, and to make over to him her son's
title to the crown of Hungary, than to allow
both to be usurped by the inveterate enemy of
the C(hrillian faith. At the fame time, he pro-
miled her, in Ferdinand's name, a compensation
for herself, as well as for her son, suitable to
their rank, and proportional to the value of what
they were to sacrifice. Isabella, deserted by some
of her adherents, diltrufting others, destitute of
friends, and fuirounded by Caftaldo's and Mar-
tinuzzi's troops, subscribed, though with a re-
lu&ant hand, thcfe hard conditions. Upon this,

flie

(he surrendered such places of f rength as wereBooK X.
gtill in her poffeflion, the gave up all the ensigns --v
of royalty, particularly a crown of gold, which, '551'
as the Hungarians believed, had descended from
heaven, and conferred on him who wore it an
undoubted right to the throne. As she could
not bear to remain a private person, in a country
where the once enjoyed sovereign power, she
instantly set out with her son for Silesia, in or-
der to take poffeflion of the principalities of Op-
pelen and Ratibor, the invetiture of which Ser-
dinand had engaged to grant her son, and like-
wife to bestow one of his daughters upon him in
mnarriage.

UPON the resignation of the young King,Appo;ined
Martinuzzi, and after his example the reft of theegvnor of

that part of

Transylvanian grandees, swore allegiance to Fer-Hungpa
dinand; who, in order to teitify his gratefulY'%h was
sense of the zeal as well as success with whichFerdinand.
that prelate had served him, affected to diflin-
guifh him by every poflible mark of favour and
confidence. He appointed him governor of Tran-
fylvania, with almost unlimited authority; he
ordered Caftaldo to pay the greatest deference to
his opinion and commands i he encreafed his re-
venues, which were already very great, by new
appointments; he nominated him archbiihop of
Gran, and prevailed on the Pope to raise him to
the dignity of a Cardinal. All this ostentation
of good-will, however, was void of sincerity,
and calculated to,conceal sentiments the motl
perfectly its reverse. Ferdinand dreaded Mar-
tinuzzi's abilities ; diltrufted his fidelity; and
foresaw, that as his extensive authority enabled
him to check any attempt towards circumfcrib-
ing or abolihing the extensive privileges which
the Hungarian nobles poffefled, he would stand
forth, on every occasion, the guardian of the li-

P 3 berties

BooK X.berties of his country, rather than at the part ol
?--',' a viceroy devoted to the will of his sovereign.

1551.

Ferdinand FOR this reason, he secretly gave it in charge
beginsto to Caftaldo, to watch his motions, to guard a-
form designs b "

'1
againlt him.gainft his designs, and to thwart his measures.

But Martinuzzi, either because he did not per-
ceive that Caflaldo was placed as a spy on his
adions, or because he delpifed Ferdinand's infi-
dious arts, assumed the diretion of the war a-
gainft the Turks with his usual tone of authoriy,
and conduted it with great magnanimity, and
no less success. He recovered tome places of
which the Infidels had taken possession , he ren-
dered their attempts to reduce others abortive;
and eftibhfhcd Ferdinand's authority.not only in
Transylvania, but in the Bannat of Temelwar,
and several of the countries adjacent. In carry-
iilg on these operations, he often differed in fen-
timents iiom Caftaldo and his officers, and treat-
ed the Turkilh prisoners with a degree of hu,
manity, and even of generosity, which Caaaldo
loudly condemned. This was represented at Vi-
enna as an artful method of courting the friend-
ship of the Infidels, ti:at, by fccuripg their pro-
te&ion, he might shake cff all dependance upon
the sovereign whom he now acknowledged.
Though Matrtinuzzi, in juflification of his own
condu&, contended that it was impolitic to cx-
afperate, by unneccfflary severities, an enemy
prone to revenge, Callaldo's accusations gained
credit with Ferdinand, prepofleflid already against
Mlartinuzzi, and je;ilous of every thing that could
endanger his authority ill Hungary, in propor-
tion as he knew it to be precarious and ill efla-
blilhed. Thee suspicions, Caftaldo confirmed
and ftrcngthened, by the intelligence which he
transmitted continually to his confidents at Vi-
enna. By mifi'rcprcrfenting what was innocent, and
putting the worst conttrulion on what seemcd

dubious

dubious in Martinuzzi's conduat; by imputing BooK x.
to him designs which he never formed, and'-/
charging him with actions of which he was not 1551'
guilty he at last convinced Ferdinand, that, in
order to preserve his Hungarian crown, he muet
cut off that ambitious prelate. But Ferdinand,
foreseeing that it would be dangerous to proceed
in the regular course of law against a fubjct of
such exorbitant power, as enabled him to set his
sovereign at defiance, determined to employ vio-
lence in order to obtain that fatisfa&tion, which
the laws were too feeble to afford him.

HE issued his orders accordingly to Caltaldo He;s affaf-

who willingly undertook that infamous service. finaed by
Having communicated the design to some Ita- mand.
ian and Spanish officers whom he could trust,
and concerted with them the plan of executing
it; they entered Martinuzzi's apartment, early Dec. Is.
one morning, under pretence of prelenting ro
him some dispatches which were to be sent off
immediately to Vienna; and while he perused a
paper with attention, one of their number struck
him with his poniard in the throat. The blow
was not mortal Martinuzzi Itarted up with the
intrepidity natural to him, and grappling the as-
faflin, threw him to the ground ; but the other
conspirators rulhing in, an old man, unarmed,
and alone, could not long fuitain such an unequal
conflit, but funk under the wounds which he
received from so many hands. The dread of the
foreign troops reltrained theTranfylvanians from
rising n arms in order to take vengeance on the
murderers of a prelate who had long been the ob-
jet of their love as well as veneration. They The effe
spoke of the deed, however, with horror and exe- 'l,:hi°o.'
cration, and exclaimed against Fcrdinand, whom
neither gratitude for recent and important ser-
vices, nor reverence for a charat&er confidered as
sacrcd and inviolable among Chriltians, could rc-

P 4 ltrain

.ooK .X. ifrain from shedding the blood of a man, whofr
--'ontly crime was attachment to his native coun-

5 try. The nobles, detesting the jealous as well as

cruel policy of a court, which, upon uncertain
and improbable surmises, had given up a person
no less conspicuous for his merit than his rank,
to be butchered by affaffllins, either retired to
their own estates, or if they continued with the
Aultrian army, grew cold to the service. The
Turks, encouraged by the death of an enemy
whose abilities they knew and dreaded, prepared
to renew holtilities early in the spring; and in-
stead of the security which Ferdinand had ex-
peced from the removal of Martinuzzi, it was
evident that his territories in Hungary were a-
bout to be attacked with greater vigour, and de-
fended with less zeal than ever a.

Maurice MEA N H I L E, Maurice having almost
court the finished his intrigues and preparations, was on
protection oftheFrenchthe point of declaring his intentions openly, and
King- of taking the field against the Emperor. His first

care, after he came to this resolution, was to dif-
claim that narrow and bigotted maxim of the
confederates of Smalkalde, which had led them
toihun all conne&ion with foreigners. He had
observed how fatal this had been to their cause;
and inflrutled by their error, he was as eager to
court the protection of Henry II, as they had
been follicitous to prevent the interposition of
Francis I. Happily for him he found Henry in
a disposition to liftec to the first overture on his
parr, and in a situation which enabled him to
bring the whole force of the French monarchy
into a&tion. Henry had long observed the pro-

r Sleid. 535 Thuan. lib. ix. 309, &c. IRtuanhafli Hits.
Reg. Hungarici lib. xvi. 189, &c. Mem. de Ribier. ii. 871.
Natalis Comitis Hifloria, lib. iv. 84, &c.

glrc[
v

grefs of the Emperor's arms with jealousy, and BooK X,
wished to distinguish himself by trying his strength '" '
against the fame enemy, whom it had been the '55''
glory of his father's reign to oppose. He had
laid hold on the first opportunity in his power of
thwarting the Emperor's designs, by taking the
Duke of Parma under his protection ; and hofti-
lities were already begun, not only in that dut-
chy, but in Piedmont. Having terminated the
war with England by a peace, no less advantage-
ous to himfielf than honourable for his allies the
Scots, the restless and enterprizing courage of
his nobles was impatient to display itself on rome
theatre of aaion more conspicuous than the pet-
ty operations in Parma or Piedmont afforded
them.

JOHN DE FIESSE, bishop of Bayonne, whomHi, treat

with him.

Henry had sent into Germany, under pretence
of hiring troops to be employed in Italy, was
empowered to conclude a treaty in form with
Maurice and his associates. As it would have
been very indecent in a King of France to have
undertaken the defence of the Protestant church,
the intcrefts of religion, how much soever they
might be affected by the treaty, were not once
mentioned in any of the articles. Religious con-
cerns they pretended to commit entirely to the
disposition of divine providence ; the only mo-
tives assigned for their present confederacy against
Charles were to procure the Landgrave liberty,
and to prevent the fubvcrfion of the ancient con-
ftitution and laws of the German Empire. In
order to accompli{h there ends, it was agreed,
that all the cont-ra&ing parties fhlould, at the
fame time, declarn war againlt the Emperor ;
that neither peace :or truce flhould be made but
by common confin:, nor without including each
of the confederates that, in order to guard a-
gainft the inconvcnincics of anarchy, or of pre-

tenlions

10ooK X. tensions to joint command, Maurice should he

"" acknowledged as head of the German confede.
i551' rates, with absolute authority in all military as.

fairs; that Maurice and his associates should bring
into the field seven thousand horse, with a pro-
portionable number of infantry ; that towards
the subsistence of this army, during the three
sirss months of the war, Henry should contribute
two hundred and forty thousand crowns, and as-
terwards sixty thousand crowns a month, as long
as they continued in arms ; that Henry should
attack the Emperor on the tide of Lorrain with
a powerful army ; that if it were found requisite
to ele& a new Emperor, such a person ihould be
nominated as shall be agreeable to the King of
France b. This treaty was concluded on the fifth
of October, Come time before Magdeburg fur-
rendered, and the preparatory negociations were
conduted with such profound secrecy, that of
all the Princes who afterwards acceded to it,
Maurice communicated what he was carrying on
to two only, John Albert, the reigning duke of
Mecklenburg, and William of Hesse, the Land-
grave's eldest son. The league itself was no less
anxiously concealed, and with such fortunate
care, that no rumour concerning it reached the
cars of the Emperor or his miniffers, nor do they
seem to have conceived the molt distant suspicion
of such a tranfaaion.
sliicits the AT the fame time Maurice, with a follicitude

'vlf ofwhich was careful to draw rome acceflion of
England. Itrength from every quarter, applied to Edward

VI. of England, and requested a subsidy of four
hund cd tlioufand crowns for the support of a con-

b Recueil des Traitez, tom. ii. 258. Thuan. lib. viii. 279.

federacy

federacy formed in defence of the Protestant re-BooOK X:
ligion. But the faCtions which prevailed in the'""-'
English court during the minority of that Prince, 155l'
and which deprived both the councils and arms
of the nation of their wonted vigbur, left the
Engliih ministers neither time or inclination to
attend to foreign affairs, and prevented Maurice's
obtaining that aid, which their zeal for the Re-
formation would have prompted them to grant
him c.

MAURICE, however, having secured the pro-Demmdna
te¢tion of such a powerful Monarch as Henry Il.that the
proceeded with great confidence, but with equalLandgrave

equai- l tiould be let

caution, to execute his plan. As he judged itatliberty.
neceflary to make one effort more, in order to
obtain the Emperor's content that the Landgrave
Should be set at liberty, he sent a solemn embassy,
in his own name, and in that of the Eletor ofDecember,
Brandenburg, to Infpruck. After resuming, at
great length, all the fads and arguments upon
which they founded their claim, and represent-
ing, in the ftrongeit terms, the peculiar engage-
ments which bound them to be so assiduous in
their follicitations, they renewed the request in
behalf of the unfortunate prisoner, which they
had so often preferred in vain. The Eletor Pa-
latine, the Duke of Wurtemberg, the Dukes of
Mecklenburg, the Duke of Deuxponts, the Mar-
quis of Brandenburg Bareith, and the Marquis
of Baden, by their ambassadors, concurred with
them in their suit. Letters were likewise deli-
vered to the fame effet fiom the King of Den-
mark, the Duke of Bavaria, and the Dukes of
Lunenburg. Even the King of the Romans,
moved with compaflion towards the Landgrave

c Burnet's Hist. of the Reform. vol. ii. Append. 37.

in

BooK X.in his wretched situation, or influenced, perhaps
-y-'"-'by a secret jealo.usy of his brother's power and
1551' designs, which since his attempt to alter the or-

der of fucceflion in the Empire, he had come to
view with other eyes, and dreaded to a great de.
gree, joined in this application.

B u T Charles, constant to his own system,

with regard to the Landgrave, eluded a demand
urged by such powerful interceflors; and having
declared that he would communicate his refolu-
tion concerning the matter to Maurice as soon as
he arrived at Infpruck, where he was every day
expeded, he did not deign to descend into any
more particular explication of his intentionsd.
This application, though of no benefit to the
Landgrave, was of great advantage to Maurice.
It fcrved to justify his subsequent proceedings,
and to demonstrate the necessity of employing
arms in order to extort that equitable conceflion,
which his mediation or intreaty could not obtain.
It was of use, too, to confirm the Emperor in
his security, as both the solemnity of the appli-
cation, and the follicitude with which so many
Princes were drawn in to enforce it, led him to
conclude, that Maurice placed all his hopes of
reforing the Landgrave to liberty, in gaining
his conlent to ditnil; him.

1552, MAU rICE employed nrtifices till more refined

crtinues totO conceal his machinations, to amuse the Em-
anuli the percr and to gain time. He affected to be more
Emperor. iollicitous Ihan: ever to find out tonme expedient

for removing tle difficulties with regard to the
safe condut for tic Protestant divines appointed
to attend the council, fb that they might repair

d Sleid. 531. Thuan. lib. viii. 8o.

thither

thither with safety. His ambassadors at TrentBoOK X.
had frequent conferences concerning this matter,'"
with the imperial ambassadors in that city, and 5ssz
laid open their sentiments to them with the ap-
pearance of the most unreserved confidence. He
was willing, at last, to have it believed, that he
thought all differences with respect to this pre-
liminary article were on the point of being ad-
justed ; and in order to give credit to this opi-
nion, he commanded Malanfthon together with
his brethren to set out on their journey to Trent.
At the fame time, he held a close correspondence
with the Imperial court at Infpruck, and renew-
ed on every occasion his professions of fidelity
and attachment to the Emperor. He talked con-
tinually of his intention of going to Infpruck in
person; he ordered a house to be hired for him
in that city, and to be fitted up with the greatest
dispatch for his reception e.

BUT, profoundly skilled as Maurice was inTheEmpe;

the arts of deceit, and impenetrable as he thought :rocoin
the veil to be under which he concealed his de-fufpicions
signs, there were several things in his conduct.°n erni5
which alarmed the Emperor amidst his fecurity,ons.
and tempted him frequently to fufpe& that he
was meditating fomcthing extraordinary. As
there suspicions took their rife from circumstances
inconsiderable in themfelvce, or of an ambiguous
as well as uncertain nature, they were more than
counterbalanced by Maurice's address; and the
Emperor would not, lightly, give up his confi-
dence in a man, whom he had once trusted and
loaded with favours. One particular alone seem-
ed to be of such consequence, that he thought
it neccfary to demand an explanation with re-
gard to it. The troops, which George of Meck-

c Arnoldi vita Maurit. ap. Menken, ii. 1229.

lenburg

BOOK X. lenburg had taken into pay after the capitulation
'--r0of Magdeburg, having fixed their quarters in

1552. Thuringia, lived at discretion on the lands of the

rich ccclefiaftics in their neighbourhood. Their
licence and rapaciousness were intolerable. Such
as felt or dreaded their exactions, complained
loudly to the Emperor, and represented them as
a body of men kept in rcadinefs for some defpe-
rate enterprize. But Maurice, partly by exten-
uating the enormities of which they had been
guilty, partly by reprefcnting the impoflibility
of disbanding there troops, or of keeping them
to regular discipline, unless the arrears still due
to them by the Emperor were paid, either re-
moved the apprehensions which this had occafi-
oned, or as Charles was not in a condition to fa-
tisfy the demands of these soldiers, obliged him
to be silent with regard to the matter f

Maurice T ii E time of action was now approaching.
ir.aison. Maurice had privately dispatched Albert of Bran-

denburg to Paris, in order to confirm his league
with Henry, and to haften the march of the
French army. He had taken measures to bring
his own subje&s together on the first summons;
he had provided for the security of Saxony while
he should be absent with the army; and he held
the troops in Thuringia, on which he chiefly
depended, ready to advance on a moment's
warning. All these complicated operations were
carried on without being discovered by the court
at Infpruck, and the Emper;or remained there in.
pcrfe& tranquillity, busied entirely in counter-
ating the intrigues of the Pope's legate at Trent,
and in fettling the conditions on which the Pro-
teltant divines flhould be admitted into the coun-
cil, as if there had not been any tranfation of
greater moment in agitation.

f Sleid, 549 Thluan. 339,

T HI S credulous fecuriry in a Prince, whofelBooK X.
sagacity in observing the conduct of all around'-""
him, commonly led him to an excess ofdiftruft, '552
may seem unaccountable, and has been imputed
to infatuation. But besides the exquisite addrefsCia'cu-
with which Maurice concealed his intentions,which con-
two circumfiances contributed to the delusion. treced the
The gout returned upon Charles Coon after his mperor,
arrival at Infpruck, with an encreafe of violence;
and his constitution being broken by such fre-
quent attacks, he was seldom able to exert his
natural vigour of mind, or to confider affairs
with his usual vigilance and penetration; and
Granvelle, bishop of Arras. his prime minister,
though one of the most subtle statesmen of that,
or perhaps of any age, was on this occasion the
dupe of his own craft. He entertained such an
high opinion of his own abilities, and held the
political talents of the Germans in such con-
tempt, that he despised all the intimations given
him concerning Maurice's secret machinations,
or the dangerous designs which he was carrying
on. When the Duke of Alva, whole dark ful-and lh;
picious mind harboured many doubts concerning minifels
the Eledor's sincerity, proposed calling hini im-
mediately to court to anfiver for his condu&, he
replied with great scorn, that these apprehenfi-
ons were groundless, and that a drunken Ger-
man head was too gross to form any scheme
which he could not cafily penetrate and baffle.
Nor did he afTumc this peremptory tone merely
from confidence in his own difc-ernmcnt; he had
bribed two of Maurice's minilters, and received
from them frequent and minute information con-
cerning all their mailer's motions. But through
this very channel, by which he expected to gain
acccfs to all Maurice's counsels, and even to his
thoughts, luch intelligence was conveyed to him
as compleated his deception. Maurice fortunately

difcovecd

BOOK X.difcovered the correspondence of the two trai.

tors with Granvelle, and instead of punishing them
1552. for their crime, he dexterously availed himfelfof

their fraud, and turned his own arts againit the
bishop. He affe&ed to treat these ministers with
greater confidence than ever3 he admitted them
to his consultations, and seemed to lay open his
heart to them; and taking care all the while to
let them be acquainted with nothing but what it
was his interest ihould be known, they transmit.
ted to Infpruck such accounts as poflcefed Gran.
velle with a firm belief of his sincerity and good
intentions g. The Emperorhimfelf, in the fulness
of security, was so little moved by a memorial,
in name of the ecclesiastical Ele&tors, admonish-
ing him to be on his guard against Maurice, that
he made light of this intelligence; and his answer
to them abounds with declarations of his entire
and confident reliance on the fidelity as well as
attachment of that Prince h.

Makurice A T last Maurice's preparations were com-
;eld againftpleated, and he had the fatisfa&ion to find that
the Empe- his intrigues and designs were still unknown.

But, though now ready to take the field, he did
not lav aside the arts which he had hitherto em-
ployed; and by one piece of craft more, he de-
ceived his enemies a few days longer. He gave
out, that he was about to begin that journey to
]nfpruck of which he had so often talked, and he
took one of the minietcrs whom Granvelle had
bribed to attend him thither. After travelling
poss a few stages, he pretended to be indisposed
by the fatigue of the journey, and dispatching the
fufpeted miniftcr to make his apology to the
Emperor for this delay, and to assure him that he
would be at lnfpruck within a few days; as
soon as this spy on his aftions was gone, he
mounted on horfcback, rode full speed to-
wards Thuringia, joined his army which

$ Melvil. Memoirs, fol. cdit. p..
p. h Sid 535.

lamountcd

amounted to twenty thousand foot and five BOOK X.
thousand horse, and put it immediately in mo-
tion *.

AT the fame time he published a manifesto Publishes

a Manifesto

containing his reasons for taking arms. These juftifyinghi
were three in number; That he might secure condua.
the Proteitant religion, which was threatened
with immediate deitrution; That he might
maintain the constitution and laws of the Em-
pire, and save Germany from being fubjeated to
the domination of an absolute monarch; That
he might deliver the Landgrave of Hesse from
the miseries of a long and unjust imprisonment.
By the first, he rouzed all the favourers of the
Reformation, a party formidable by their zeal
as well as numbers, and rendered desperate by
oppression. By the second, he interested all the
friends of liberty, Catholicks as well as Pro-
teftants, and made it their interest to unite with
him in aflerting the rights and privileges com-
mon to both. The third, betides the glory
which he acquired by his zeal to fulfil his en-
gagements to the unhappy prisoner, was become
a cause of general concern, not only from the
compaflion which the Landgrave's sufferings ex-
cited, but from indignation at the injustice and
rigour of the Emperor's proceedings againit him.
Together with Maurice's manifesto, another
appeared in the name of Albert, Marquis of
Brandenburgh Culmbach, who had joined him
with a body of adventurers whom he had drawn
together. The fame grievances which Maurice
had pointed out are mentioned in it, but with

* Melv. Mem. p. 13. These circumRtances, concerning the
Saxon miniflers whom Granvelle had bribed, are not menti-
oned by the German historians; but, as Sir James Melvil
received his information from the Eletor Palatine, and as
they are perfecly agreeable to the reft of Maurice'a condut,
they may be confidered as authentick,

VOL. III. Q g.

BoOK X. an excess of virulence and animosity, fuitableto
<"-r"- the character of the prince in whose name it was

'552Z published.

He is - THE King of France added to these a mani-
powerfully 1 ing
upprtedby fefto in his own name; in which, after taking
the French notice ofthe ancient alliance between the French
King. and German nations, born descended from the

fame ancestors; and after mentioning the appli-
cations, which, in consequence of this, some
of the most illuifrious among the German Prin-
ces had made to him for his protetion; he de-
clared that he now took arms to re-establish the
ancient constitution of' the Empire, to deliver
some of its princes from captivity, and to secure
the privileges and independence of all the mem-
bers of the Germanick body. In this manifesto,
Henry assumed the extraordinary title of Pro-
teltor of the Liberties of Germany, and of its
captive Princes; and there was engraved on
it a cap, the ancient symbol of freedom, pla-
ced between two daggers, in order to intimate
to the Germans, that this blessing was to be ac-
quired and secured by force of arms *.

Msurice'6 MAURICE had now a.very different part to
operations cpb
in the field. at, but his flexible genius was capable of ac-

commodating itself to every situation. The
moment he took arms, he was as bold and en-
terprizing.in the field, as he had been cautious
and crafty in the cabinet. He advanced by
rapid marches towards the Upper Germany.
All the towns in his way opened their gates to
him. He reinflated the magistrates whom the
Emperor had depof;d, and gave poffeilion of
the churches to the Protestant minifRers whom
he had ejeted. He direeted his march to AugC-
burg, and as the Imperial garrison which was

* Sleid. 49. Thuan, lib, X. 339, Mcm. de Rtibier. ii. 37'.

too

too inconsiderable to think of defending it, re- Boori X.
tired immediately, he took pofleffion of that
great city, and made the fame changes there Apri .
as in the towns through which he had pafled.

No words can express the Emperor's astonish- The Em-

ment and conifternation at events so unexpec- Pen',ef-
ted. He saw a great number of the German and diftrfs.
Princes in arms against him, and the reft ei-
ther ready to join them, or wishing fucefs to
their enterprize. He beheld a powerful Monarch
united with them in close league, seconding
their operations in person at the head of a for-
midable army, while he, through negligence
and credulity; which exposed him no less to
scorn than to danger, had neither made, nor was
in condition to make, any effetual provision
either for crushing his rebellious fubjets, or re-
sifting the invasion of the foreign enemy. Part
of his Spanish troops had been ordered into
Hungary against the Turks; the reft had
marched back to Italy upon occasion of the war
in the dutchy of Parma. The bands of veteran
Germans had been difmifled, because he was
not able to pay them; or had entered into
Maurice's service after the siege of Magdeburg
and he remained at Infpruck with a body of fol-
diers scarce ifrong enough to guard his own
person. His treasury was much exhausted, as
his army was reduced. He had received no
remittances for some time from the new world.
He had forfeited all credit with the merchants
of Genoa and Venice, who refused to lend him
money, tho' tempted by the offer of exorbitant
interest. Thus, Charles, though undoubtedly
the most considerable potentate in Christendom,
and capable of exerting the greatest strength, (as
his power, though violently attacked, was still

sleid, S55. Thuan: 34m.

Qn, nnimpaired,)

BooK X. unimpaired,) found himself in a situation which

V-^" rendered him unable to make such a sudden
552' and vigorous effort as the junture required, and

was necessary to have saved him from the pre-
sent danger.

Endea- IN this situation, he placed all his hopes on
tmesbyga negociating; the only resource of those who
negociati- are conscious of their own weakness. But think-
on' ing it in consistent with his dignity to make the

first advances to subjects who were in arms
against him, he avoided that indecorum by em-
ploying the mediation of his brother Ferdi-
nand. Maurice, confiding in his own talents to
condudt any negociation in such a manner as to
derive advantage from it, and hoping that by
the appearance of facility in hearkening to the
first overture of accommodation, he might
amuse the Emperor and tempt him to flacken
the activity with which he was now preparing
to defend himself, readily agreed to an inter-
view with Ferdinand in the town of Lintz in
Austria: and having left his army to proceed on
its march under the command of the Duke of
Mecklenburg, he repaired thither.

Progrers THE King of France puncually fulfilled his
ofthe engagement to his allies. He took the field
French Ar-
my. early with a numerous and well appointed ar-

my, and marching directly into Lorrain, Toul
and Verdun opened their gates at his approach.
His forces appeared next before Metz, and that
city, by a fraudulent ftratagorn of the Coiftable
Montmorency, who havigi ob';ained pe imiliion
to pass through it with a small guard, introdu-
ced as many troops as were sufficient to over-
power the garrison, was likewise seized without
bloodflhed. Henry made his entry into all these
towns with great pomp; he obliged the inhabi-
tants to swear allegiance to him, and annex''d
thlfe important conquell s to the French Mo-

narchy.

archy. He left a strong garrison in Metz. From BooK X'
thence he advanced towards Alsace, in order
to attempt new conquests, to which the success 552'
that had hitherto attended his arms invited him*.

THE conference at Lintz did not produce The Ne-

any accommodation. Maurice, when he con- between the
sented to it, seems to have had nothing in Emperor
view but to amuse the Emperor; for he made rice, of 8o
such demands both in behalf of his confederates, Effe.
and their ally the French King, as he knew
would not be accepted by a prince, too haughty
tofubmit, at once, to conditions dictated by an
enemy. But, how firmly soever Maurice adhered,
during the negociation, to the interests of his affo-
ciates, or how steadily soever he kept in view
the objects which had induced him to take arms,
he often professed a strong inclination to termi-
nate the differences with the Emperor in an ami-
cable manner. Encouraged by this appearance
of a pacifick disposition, Ferdinand proposed a
second interview at Paffau, on the twenty-fixth of
May, and that a truce should commence on that
day, and continue to the tenth of June, in or-
der to give them leisure for adjusting all the
points in dispute.

UPON this, Maurice rejoined his army on the advManue'

ninth of May, which had now advanced to Gun- wards ins-
delfingen. He put his troops in motion next pnk.
morning; and as sixteen days yet remained for
action before the commencement of the truce,
he resolved, during that period, to venture up-
on an enterprize, the success of which would be
so decisive, as would render the negociations at
Paifau extremely short, and entitle him to treat
upon his own terms. He foresaw that the prof-
pet of a cessation of arms, which was to take
place so soon, together with the opinion of his

* Thuan. 349.

Q0 eareineftn

Boo.K X. earnestness to re-establish peace, with which he
"'r' had artfully amused Ferdinand, could not fail

1552- of inspiring the emperor with such false hopes,

that he would naturally become remiss, and re-
lapse into some degree of that security, which
had already been so fatal to him. Relying on
this conjeEture, he marched direCtly towards Ins-
pruck, and advanced with the most rapid moti-
on that could be given to so great a body of
troops. On the eighteenth he arrived at Fieflen, a
pofl of great consequence, at the entrance into
the Tyrolefe. There he found a body of eight
hundred men, whom the emperor had assembled,
strongly entrenched, in order to oppose his pro-
grefs. He attacked them instantly with such vi-
olence and impetuosity, that they abandoned
their lines precipitately, and falling back on a
second bodypofted near Ruten, communicated
to those troops, the pannick terror with which
they themselves had been seized, so that they
likewise took to flight after a feeble refifiance.

Takes ELATED with this success, which exceeded
the cale his mot sanguine hopes, Maurice passed on to
bcrgh. Ehrenbergh, a castle situated on an high and

steep precipice, which commanded the only pals
through the mountains. As this fort had been
surrendered to the Protestants, at the beginning
of the Smalkaldic war, because the garrison was
then too weak to defend it, the Emperor, fenfi-
ble of its importance, had taken care, at this
juncture, to throw into it a body of troops sus-
ficient to maintain it against the greareft army.
But a fllepherd, in purfiing a goat which had
strayed from his flock, having discovered an un-
known path, by which it was poflible to ascend
to the top of the rock, came with his seasonable
piece of intelligence to Maurice. A finall band
of chosen soldiers, under the command of George
of Mecklenburgh, was instantly ordered to fol-

low

low this guide. They set out in the evening, BOOK X.
and clambering up the rugged track with infi- '~
nite fatigue as well as danger, they reached the 1552.
summit unperceived; and at an hour which had
been concerted, when Maurice began the assault
on the one fide of the castle, they appeared on
the other, ready to scale the walls, which were
feeble in that place, because it had been hither-
to deemed inaccessible. The garrison, struck
with terror at the fight of an enemy on a quarter
where they had thought themselves perfectly
secure, immediately threw down their arms.
Maurice, almost without Lloodthed, and, which
was of greater consequence to him, without loss
of time, took possession of a place, the reduction
of which might have retarded him long, and
have required the utmost efforts of his valour
and skill .

MAURICE was now only two days march A mutiny.

from Infpruck, and without losing a moment he troops re-
ordered his infantry to advance thither, having tar^dhis
left his cavalry, which was unserviceable in that
mountainous country, at Fieffen, to guard the
mouth of the pass. He proposed to advance with
such rapidity as to anticipate any accounts of the
loss ofEhrenbergh, and to furprize the Emperor
together with his attendants in an open town in-
capable of defence. Butjuft as his troops began
to move, a battalion of mercenaries mutinicd,
declaring that they would not stir until they
had received the gratuity, which, accord-
ing to the custom of that age, they claimed as
the recompence due to them for having taken a
place by assault. It was with great difficulty, as
well as danger, and not without rome confidera-
ble loss of time, that Maurice quieted this in-

* Arnoldi vita Maurit. 123..

Q04 furredion,

Bo OK X. furrestion, and prevailed on the soldiers to follow

'--. him to a place where he promised them such
552' rich booty as would be an ample reward for all

their services.

TheEm- To the delay ocafioned by this unforeseen
eror flies accident, the Emperor owed his safety. He was
from ins- informed of the approaching danger late in the
pruck. evening, and knowing that nothing could save

him but a speedy flight, he inifantly left In-
fpruck, without regarding the darkness of the
night, or the violence of the rain which happened
to fall at that time; and, notwithstanding his
being so much debilitated by the gout, that he
could bear no motion but that of a litter, he tra-
velled by the light of torches, taking his way o-
ver the Alps, by roads almoff impaflible. His
courtiers and attendants followed him with equal
precipitation, some of them on such horses as
they could hafily procure, many of them on
foot, and all in the utmost confusion. In this
miserable plight, very unlike the pomp with
which Charles had appeared during the five pre-
ceding years as the conqueror of Germany, he
arrived at length with his dejedted train at Vil-
lach in Carinthia, and scarce thought himself
secure even in that remote inacceflible corner.

Maurice
enters tlat MAURICE entered Infpruck a few hours as
tow,. ter the Emperor and his attendants had left it;

and, enraged that the prey should escape out of
his hands when he was just ready to seize it, he
putifued them some miles; but finding it impof-
lible to overtake persons, to whom their fear
gave speed, he returned to the town, and aban-
doned all the Emperor's baggage and thatof his
minillers to be plundered by the soldiers; while
he preserved untouched every thing belonging
to the King of the Romans, either because he
had formed some friendly connecion with

that

that Prince, or because he wished to have it Beor X,
believed that such a connection subsisted be- "'
tween them. As there now remained only
three days to the commencement of the truce,
(with such nicety had Maurice calculated his
operations) he set out for Paffau, that he might
meet Ferdinand on the day appointed.

BEFORE Charles left Infpruck, he withdrew Theem-

the guards placed on the degraded Elector of theoleor
Saxony, whom, during five years, he had car- of Saxony
ried about with him as a prisoner; and set him t liberty.
entrirely at liberty, either with an intention to
embarafs Maurice by letting loose a rival, who
might dispute his title to his dominions and dig-
nity, or from a sense of the indecency of de-
taining him a prisoner, while he himself run
the rifque of being deprived of his own liber-
ty. But that Prince, feeing no way of efcap-
ing, but that which the Emperor took, and ab-
horring thethoughts of falling into the hands
of a kinsman, whom he justly confidered as
the author of all his misfortunes, chore rather
to accompany Charles in his flight, and to ex-
pet the final decision of his fate from the
treaty which was now approaching.

THIs was not the only effee whichMau- The

rice's operations produced. It was no sooner TuennT °f
known at Trent that he had taken Arms, than breaks upin
a general consternation had seized the fathers geanation.
of the council. The German prelates imme-
diately returned home, that they might provide
for the safety of their territories. The reft
were extremely impatient tucbe gone; and the
legate, who had hitherto disappointed all the
endeavours of the Imperial ambassadors to pro-
cure for the Protestant divines an audience in
the council, laid hold with joy on such a plau-
fible pretext for difinifling an assembly, which

lihe

BooK X. he had found it so difficult to govern. In a
'--v' congregation held on the twenty-eighth ofApril,

155z· a decree was ifiued for proroguing the council

during two years, and appointing it to meet at
the expiration of that time, if peace were then
re-established in Europe*. This prorogation,
however, continued no less than ten years ; and
its proceedings, when re-assembled in the year
one thousand five hundred and fixty-two, fall
not within the period prescribed to this history.

Theef THE convocation of this assembly had been
decrees. so passionately desired by all the flates and Prin-

ces in Christendom, who, from the wisdom and
piety of prelates representing the whole body of
the faithful, expeCted some charitable and effi-
cacious endeavours towards composing the dif-
fenfions which unhapily had arisen in the church.
But the several popes, by whose authority it was
called, had other objects in view; and, exerting
all their power or policy to attain there, acquired,
by the abilities as well as address of their legates,
by the ignorance of many of the prelates, and
by the servility of the indigent Italian bishops,
such influence in the council, that they dictated all
its decrees, and framed them, not with an inten-
tion to reitore unity and concord to the church,
but to eflablifl their own dominion, or to con-
firm these tenets, upon which they imagined that
dominion to be founded, DoEtrines, which had
hitherto been admitted upon the credit of tra-
dition alone, and received with rome latitude of
interpretation, were defined with a scrupulous
nicety, and confirmed by the fandion of autho-
rity. Rites, which had formerly been observed
only in deference to cuitom supposed to be an-
cient, were cftablifhed by the decrees of the
church, and declared to be eflential parts of its

*F. Paul, 353.

worship

worship. The breach, instead of being closed, BOOK X.
was widened, and made irreparable. In place'-'-
of any attempt to reconcile the contending par- 1
ties, a line was drawn with such itudied accu-
racy, as ascertained and marked out the diftinEti-
on between them. This fill serves to keep them
at a distance; and must, without some signal in-
terpofition of divine Providence, render the fe-
paration perpetual.

OUR knowledge of the proceedings of this as- characterof

fembly is derived from three different authors. the hiltori.
Father Paul of Venice wrote his history of the anocthil
Council of Trent, while the memory of what
had pafled there was recent, and some who had
been members of it were still alive. He has ex-
posed the intrigues and artifices by which it was
conducted, with a freedom and severity which
have given a deep wound to the credit and repu-
tation of the council. He has described its de-
liberations, and explained its decrees, with such
perspicuity and depth ofthought, with such va-
rious erudition and such force ofreafon, as have
justly entitled his work to be placed among the
most admired historical compositions. About
half a century thereafter, the JefuitPallavicini
published his history of the council, in oppfition
to that of Father Paul, and, by employing all the
force of an acute and refining genius to invali-
date the credit, orto confilte thereafonings, of his
antagonist, he labours to prove, by artful apolo-
gies for the proceedings of the council, and sub-
tile interpretations of its decrees, that it delibe-
rated with impartiality, and decided with judg-
ment as well as candour. Vargas, a Spanish
dofor of laws, who was appointed to attend the
Imperial ambafiadors at Trent, Cent the bishop
of Arra sa regular account of thl tranfadtions
there, explaining all the arts which the Legate
employed to influence, or over-awe the council.

His

BooK X. His letters have been published, in which he in-
.*g~'. veighs against the Papal court with that afperi-

55a. ty of censure, which was natural to a man whose

situation enabled him to observe its arts thorough-
ly, and who was obliged to exert all his atten-
tion and talents in order to disappoint them.
But, whichsoever of these authors an intelligent
person takes for his guide, in forming a judg-
ment concerning the spirit of the council, he
muff discover so much ambition as well as arti-
fice among some of the members, so much ig-
norance and corruption among others; he mufft
observe such a large infusion of human policy and
pafions, but such a scanty portion of that fim-
plicity of heart, fantity of manners, and love
of truth, which alone qualify men to determine
what doctrines are worthy of God, and what
worship is acceptable to him, that he will find
it no easy matter to believe, that any extraor-
dinary influence of the Holy Ghost hovered over
this assembly, and di&ated its decrees,

The WHILE Maurice was employed in negocia-
French en- ting with the King of the Romans at Lintz, or in
furprize making war on the Emperor in the Tyrol, the
Stralburgh. Irench King had advanced into Alsace as far as

Strafburgh; and having demanded leave of the
Senate to march through the city, he hoped that
by repeating the fame fraud which he had
practised atMetz, he might render himself maf-
ter of the place, and by that means secure a
passage over the Rhine into the heart of Germa-
ny. But the Strafburghers, inflruted and put
on their guard by the credulity and misfortune
of their neighbours, shut their gates; and hav-
ing assembled a garif'on of five thousand soldiers,
prepared their fortifications, razed the houses
in their suburbs, and determined to defend them-
selves to the utmost. At the fame time they
sent a deputation of their moss rctijpdable citi-

zens

zens to the King, in order to divert him from BooS X.
making any hostile attempt upon them. The .v
Electors of Treves and Cologn, the Duke of
Cleves, and other Princes in the neighbourhood,
interposed in their behalf; beseeching Henry
that he would not forget so soon the title which
he had generously assumed; and, instead of be-
ing the Diliverer of Germany, become its Op-
pressor. The Swiss cantons seconded them with
zeal, folliciting Henry to spare a city which had
long been connected with their community in
friendship and alliance.

POWERFUL as this united interceflion was, But with-

it would not have prevailed on Henry to forego out fUCCef
a prize of so much value, if he had been in a
condition to have seized it. But, in that age, the
method offubfifting numerous armies at a distance
from the frontiers of their own country, was
imperfectly understood, and neither the revenues
of Princes, nor their experience in the art of war,
were equal to the great and complicated efforts
which such an undertaking required. The
French, though not far removed from their own
country, began already to susser for want of pro-
visions, and had no sufficient magazines collec-
ted to support them during a siege, which muff
necessarily have been of great length*. At the
fame time, the Queen of Hungary, governefsof
the Low-Countries, had assembled a confidera-
ble body of troops, which, under the command
of Martin de Roffem, laid waste Champagne, and
threatened the adjacent provinces of France.
These concurring circumstances obliged the
King, though with reluctance, to abandon the
enterprize. But being willing to acquire some
merit with his allies, by this retreat which he
could not avoid, he pretended to the Swiss that
he had taken the resolution merely in compli-
ance with their requcfit; and then, after giv-
*Thuan. 351, 352, - Slied. 557, Brantone, tomr, vii. 39.

ing

Book X. ing orders that all the horses in his arrmy

v'- Ifhould be led to drink in the Rhine, as a proof
's55' of his having pushed his conquests so far, he

marched back towards Champagne.

twions of WHILE the French King and the main army
Albert of of the confederates were thus employed; Albert
burgh. of Brandenburgh was entrusted with the com-

mand of a separate body of eight thousand men,
consisting chiefly of mercenaries who had resort-
ed to his standard, rather from the hope of plun-
der, than the expetation of regular pay. That
Prince, feeing himself at the head of such a
number ofdefperate adventurers ready to follow
whereverhe should lead them, soon began to dif-
dain a state of subordination, and to form such
vast schemes of aggrandizing himself, as seldom
occur, even to ambitious minds, unless when
civil war or violent factions rouze them to bold
exertions, by alluring them with immediate
hopes of success. Full ofthefe aspiring thoughts,
Albert made war in a manner very different
from the other confederates. He endeavoured
to spread the terror of his arms by the rapidity of
his motions, as well as the extent and rigour of
his devaffations; he exacted contributions where-
ver he came, in order to amass such a fum of
money, as would put it in his power to keep his
army together; he laboured to get poflefion of
Nurembergh, Ulme, or some other of the free
cities in Upper Germany, in which, as a capi-
tal, he might fix the feat of his power. But, find-
ing thelf cities on their guard, and in a conditi-
on to resist his attacks, he turned all his
rage againfl the popish ecclefiafticks, whose
territories he plundered with such wanton and
merciless barbarity, as gave them a very un-
favourable imprellion of the spirit of that refor-
mation in religion, with zeal for which he
pretended to be animated. The bishops

of

of Bambergh and Wurzburg, by their fituati- BOOK X.
on, lay particularly exposed to his ravages; he -
obliged the former to transfer to him, in pro- '55
perty, almost one half of his extensive diocese;
and compelled the latter to advance an immense
fum, in order to save his country from ruin and
desolation. During all these wild rallies, Albert
paid no regard either to Maurice's orders, whose
commands, as Generalissimo of the league, he had
engaged to obey, or to the remonftranres of the
other confederates; and manifestly discovered
that he attended only to his own private emolu-
ment, without any follicitude about the common
cause, or the general objects which had induced
them to take arms *.

MEANWHILE, Maurice having ordered his Thenegoci-

army to march back into Bavaria, and having teats
published a proclamation enjoining the Lutheran Pafau.
clergy and inftru tors of youth, to resume the ex-
ercife of their functions in all the cities, schools,
and universities, from which they had been ejec-
ted, met Ferdinand at Paffau on the twenty-
sixth day of May. As matters of the greatest
consequence to the future peace and indepen-
dance of the Empire were to be fettled in this
congress, the eyes of all Germany were fixed
upon it. Besides Ferdinand and the Imperial
ambassadors, the Duke of Bavaria, the bishops of
Saltzburgh, and Aichftadt, the ministers of all
the Eletors, together with deputies from most
of the considerable Princes and free cities, re-
forted to Palfau. Maurice, in name of his ailb-
ciates, and the King of the Remins, as the Em-
peror's representative, opened the negociation.
The Princes who were present, together with the
deputies of such as were absent, acted as inter-
celfors or mediators between them.

Skid. 561. T'huan. 357.

M A 1It 1 CEz

BooK X.
--v MAURICE, in a longdifcourfe, explained the
Theterms motives of his own conduct. After having enu-
which Mau- merated all the unconstitutional and oppressive

e pro. aCts of the Emperor's adminifiration, he, agree-

ably to the manifesto which he had published
when he took arms againfl him, limited his de-
mands to three articles. That the Landgrave of
Hesse should be immediately set at liberty;
That the grievances in the civil government of
the Empire should be redressed; and that the
Proteflants should be allowed the publick exer-
cife of their religion without molestation. Ferdi-
nand and the Imperial ambassadors discovering
their unwiilingnefs to gratify him wirh regard
to all these points, the mediators wrote a joint
lettet to the Emperor, beseeching him to deliver
Germany from the calamities of a civil War, by
giving such fatisfacion to Maurice and his par-
ty as might induce them to lay down their arms
and at the fame time they prevailed upon Mau-
rice to grant a prolongation of the truce for a
short time, during which they undertook to pro-
cure the Emperor's final answer to his demands,

Power- THIs request was presented to the Emperor
fully iup- in the name of all the princes of the Empire,
ported by
the Prines Popish as well as Protestant, in the name of such
ofrheem- as had lent a hand to forward his ambitious

schemes, as well as of those who had viewed the
progress of his power with jealousy and dread.
The uncommon and cordial unanimity with
which they concurred at this junture, in enforc-
ing Maurice's demands, and in recomm'nding
peace, flowed fiom different causes. Such as
were most attached to the Roman catholick
church could not help observing that the Protef-
tant confederates were at the head of a nume-
rous army, while the Emperor was bltjuft be-
ginning to provide for his own defence. They

foresaw

foresaw that great efforts would be required of Boo X.
them, and would be necefiary on their part, in '
order to cope with enemies, who had been al- Ia5
lowed to get the flart so far, and to attain such
formidable power. Experience had taught
them, that the fiuit of all these efforts would be
reaped by the Emperor alone, and the more
compleat any victory proved which they should
gain, the faster would they bind their own set-
ters and render them the more intolerable. These
considerations made them cautious how they
contributed a second time, by their indiscreet
zeal, to put the Emperor in possession of power
which would be fatalto the liberties of their
country. Notwithstanding the implacable
fierceness of the spirit of bigotry in that age,
they chore rather that the Protestants should ac-
quire that security for their religion which they
demanded, than, by assisting Charles to oppress
them, to give such additional force to the Impe-
rial prerogative, as would overturn the confti-
tution of the Empire. To all there considerations,
the dread of feeing Germany laid waste by a
civil war added new force. Many itates of the
Empire already felt the deftruEtive rage of Al-
bert's arms, others dreaded it, and all wished
for an accommodation between the Emperorand
Maurice, which they hoped would save them
from that cruel scourge.

SUCH were the reasons that induced so many Thr motives

. v,'t, „wlich in-

Princes, notwithstanding the variety of their fluenccd the
political intelefts, and the opposition in their 1e- Emeror

thibj UnG-

ligious sentiments, to unite in recommending to ture.
to the emperor an acommodation with Maurice,
not orly as a salutary, but as a necessary mea-
sure. The motives which prompted Charles to
desire it were not fewer or of lcfs weight. He
was perfectly sensible of the advantage which
the confederates had acquired through his own

VOL. IIl. R negligence;

Boox X. negligence; and he now felt the insufficiency
'v-'" of his own resources to oppose them. His Spa-

I$S". nifh fuibjets, disgusted at his long absence, and

weary of endless wars, which were of no benefit
to their country, refused to furnish him any
considerable supply either of men or money; and
although he might hope by his address or impor-
tunity to draw from them at last more effectual
aid; that, he knew, was too distant to be of
any service in the present exigency of his affairs.
His treasury was drained; his veteran forces
were dispersed, or disbanded, and he could not
depend much either on the fidelity or courage
of the new levied soldiers whom he was collec-
ting. There was no hope of repeating with fuc-
cess the fame artifices' which had weakened and
ruined the Smalkaldic league. As the end at
which'he aimed was now known, he could no
longer employ the specious pretexts, which had
formerly concealed his ambitious designs. Every
Prince inGermany was alarmed and on his guard;
and it was vain to think of blinding them a fe-
cond time to such a degree, as to make one part
of them iriftruments to enslave the other. The
spirit of a confederacy, whereof Maurice was the
head, experience had taught him to be very
different from that of the league qs Smalkalde;
and from what he had already felt, he had no
reason to flatter himself that its counsels would
be as irresolute, or its efforts as timid and feeble.
If he should resolve on continuing the war, he
might lay his account that the most confidera-
ble states in Germany would take part in it a-
gainft him; and a dubious neutrality was tile
utmost he could expect from the reft. While
the confederates found full employment for his
arms in one quarter, the King of France would
seize the favourable opportunity, and pufl
on his operations in another, with ahlnoit

certain

certain success. That Monaich had already made BOOK X.
conquests in the Empire, which he wasi.no less
eager to recover, than impatient to be revenged 15
on him for aiding his malecontent fubjeats. Tho'
Henry had now retired from the banks of the
Rhine, he had only varied the scene of hoftili-
ties, having invaded the Low-Countries with all
his forces. The Turks, roused by the follicita-
tions of the French King, as well as stimulated
by resentment against Ferdinand for having vi-
olated the truce in Hungary, had prepared a
powerful fleet to ravage the coasts of Naples and
Sicily, which he had left almost defenceless, by
calling thence the greatest part of the regular
troops to join the army which he was now as-
fembling.

FERDINAND, who went in person to Villach, Ferdinand
in order to lay before the Emperor the result of z ealous

promote an

the conferences at Paffau, had likewise reasons accommo-
peculiar to himself for desiring an accommoda- daton.
tion. These prompted him to second, with the
greatest earnestness, the arguments which the
Princes, assembled there, had employed in re-
commending it. Hehad observed, not without fe-
cret fatisfadion, the fatal blow which had been
given to the despotic power, which his brother
had usurped in the Empire. He was extremely
follicitous to prevent Charles from recovering
what he had loft, as he foresaw that he would
immediately resume with fresh eagerness, and
a better chance of success, his favourite scheme
of transmitting that power to his son by exclud-
ing him from the right of fucceflion to the Impe-
rial throne. OP this account, he was willing to
contribute towards circumscribing the Imperial
authority, in order to render his own possession
of it certain. Besides, Solyman, exasperated at
the loss of Transylvania, and still more at the
fraudulent arts by which it had been seized,

R 2 had

BOOK X. had ordered into thefield an army of an hun-
'"I dred thousand men, which having defeated a

1552. great body of Ferdinand's troops, and taken fe-

veral places of importance, threatened not on-
ly to complete the conquest of the, province, but
to drive him out of that part of Hungary which
was still subjet to his jurifdi&ion. He was un-
able to resist such a mighty enemy; his brother,
while engaged in a domestic war, could afford
him no aid; and he could not even hope to draw
from Germany the contingent either of troops or
money, usually furnished to repel the invasions
of the Infidels. Maurice, having observed
Ferdinand's perplexity, with regard to this
last point, had offered, if peace were re-efta-
blifhed on a secure foundation, that he would
march in person with his troops into Hungary to
his assistance. Such was the effect of this well-
timed proposal, that Ferdinand, destitute of eve-
ry other profpeat of relief, became the most zea-
lous advocate the confederates could have cho-
fen to urge their claims, and there was scarce
any thing that they could have demanded which
he would not have chosen to grant, rather than
to have retarded a pacification, to which he trust-
ed as the only means of saving his Hungarian
crown. .

Circum- WHEN so many causes conspired in rendering
whic re. al accommodation elegible, it might have been
tard it. expected that it would have immediately taken

place. But the inflexibility of the Emperor's
temper, together with his unwillingness to re-
linquifl, at once, objects which he had long pur-
sued with fuich earnestness and afliduity, coun-
terbalanced, for some time, the force of all the
motives which disposed him to peace, and not
only put that event at a distance, but seemed
to render it uncertain. Wlen Maurice's de-
malds, together with the letter of the media

tors

tors at Paffau, were presented to him, heperemp- Boox X.
torily refused to redress the grievances which
were pointed out, nor would he agree to any fti- 552
pulation for the immediate security of the Pro-
teftant religion, but proppfed referring both these
to the determination of a future diet. On his
part, he required that instant reparation should
be made to all who, during the present war, had
suffered either by the licentiousness of the con-
federate troops, or tile aftions of their leaders.

MAURICE, who was well acquainted with the Maurice's
Emperor's arts, immediately concluded that he vigorous

operations

had nothing in view in these overtures but to a- facilitate it.
muse and deceive; and therefore, without liften-
ing to Ferdinand's intreaties, he left Paffau ab-
rutply, and joining his troops, which were en-
camped at Mergentheim, a city in Franconia,
belonging to the knights of the Teutonic order,
he put them in motion, and renewed hostilities.
As three thousand men in the Emperor's pay had
thrown themselves into Frankfort on the Maine,
and might from thence infest the neighbouring
country of Hesse, lie marched towards that city, July 17.
and laid siege to it in form. The briskness of this
enterprize, and the vigour with which Maurice
carried on his approaches against the town, gave
such an alarm to the Emperor, as disposed him to
lend a more favourable ear to Ferdinand's argu-
ments in behalf of an accommodation. Firm. and
haughty as his nature was, he found it necessary
to bend, and signified his willingness to make con-
ceflnons on his part, if Maurice, in return, would
abate somewhat of the rigour of his demands.
Ferdinand, as soon as he perceived that he began
to yield, did not desist from his importunities,
until he prevailed on him to declare what was
the utmoit that he would grant for the security
of the confedrates. HIaving gained this difficult
point, he instantly dispatched a mcil'enger to

R $ Mauricc's

BOOK X. Maurice's camp, and importing to him the Em-

v- peror's final resolution, conjured him not to
1552. frustrate his endeavours for the re-eftablilhment

of peace; or, by an unseasonable obstinacy on his
fide, to disappoint the wishes of all Germany
for that salutary event.

Maurice de MAURICE, notwithstanding the prosperous si-
firous fan tuation of his affairs, was strongly inclined to
dacom".o lifen to his advice. The Emperor, though over-

reached and furprized, had now begun to assem-
ble troops, and how flow soever his motions
might be, while the first effets of his confterna-
tion remained, he was sensible that Charles must
at last aft with vigour proportional to the ex-
tent of his power and territories, and lead into
Germany an army formidable by its numbers,
and frill more by the terror of his name, as well
as the remembrance of his past victories. He
could scarce hope that a confederacy, composed
of so many members, would continue to operate
with sufficient union and perseverance to resist
the consistent and well directed efforts of an
army, at the absolute disposal of a leader accuf-
tomed to command and to conquer. He felt al-
ready, although he had not hitherto experienced
the shock of any adverse event, that he was the
head of a disjointed body. He saw from the ex-
ample of Albert of Brandenburgh, how difficult
it would be, with all his address and credit, to
prevent any particular member from detaching
himself from the whole, and how impoflible to
recal him to his proper rank and subordination.
This filled him with apprehensions for the com-
mon cause. Another consideration gave him no
less disquiet with regard to his own particular
interests. By setting at liberty the degraded
Eleaor, and by repealing the a&t depriving him
of his hereditary honotrs and dominions, the

Emperor

Emperor had it in his power to wound him in BooK X.
the most sensible part. The efforts of a Prince -V
beloved by his ancient fubjefts, and revered by 552'
all the Protestant party, in order to recover what
had been unjustly taken from him, could scarce
have failed of exciting commotions in Saxony,
which would endanger all that he had acquired at
the expence of so much dissimulation and arti-
fice. It was no less in the Emperor's power to
render vain all the follicitations of the confede-
rates in behalf of the Landgrave. He had only
to add one aCt of violence more to the injustice
and rigour with which he had already treated
him; and he had accordingly threatened the sons
of that unfortunate Prince, that if they persisted
in their present enterprize, inifead of feeing their
father reffored to liberty, they should hear of
his having suffered the punishment which his re
bellion had merited*.

HAVING deliberated upon all these points The peace

with his aflociates, Maurice thought it more ofReligion
prudent to accept of the conditions offered, affau.
though less advantageous than those he had pro-
posed, than again to commit all to the doubtful
iflue of war s.. He repaired forthwith to Paffla,
and signed the treaty of peace; of which the
chief articles were, That before the twelfth day
of August, the confederates shall lay down their
arms, and disband their forces; That on or be-
fore that day theLandgrave shall be set atl iberty,
and conveyed in safety to his castle of Rhein-
fels; That a diet shall be held within fix months,
in order to deliberate concerning the most proper
and effectual method of preventing for the future
all disputes and dissentions about religion; That,
Sleid. 571. Sleid. Hit. 563, &c. Thuan. lib. x, 359, &c.

R . in

BOOK X. in the mean time, neither the Emperor nor any
J'l'~ other Prince, shall, upon any pretext whatever

o offer any injury or violence to such as adhered to
the confeflion of Augsburg, but allow them to en-
joy the free and undisturbed exercise of their re-
ligion; That the Protestants, in return, shall not
molest the Catholicks either in the exercise of
their ecclesiastical jurifdition, or in performing
their religious ceremonies; That the Imperial
chamber shall administer justice impartially to
persons of both parties, and Protestants be ad-
mitted indiscriminately with the Catholicks to fit
judges in that court; That if the next diet should
not be able to terminate the disputes with regard
to religion, the stipulations in the present treaty
in behalf of the Protestants, shall continue for
ever in full force and vigour; That none of the
confederates shall be liable to any action on ac-
count of what had happened during the course of
the war; That the consideration of those en-
croachments which had been made, as Maurice
pretended, upon the conflitution and liberties of
the Empire, shall be remitted to the approaching
diet; That Albert of Brandenburgh ihall be
comprehended in the treaty, provided he (hall
accede to it, and disband his forces before the
twelfth of August .

Refieaions SeCH was the memorable treaty of Paffau,
upon this
peace, and that overturned the vast fabric, in ereating which
upon the Charles had employed so many years, and had
conduO: of
Mluricc. exerted the utmost of his power and policy;

which annulled all his regulations with regard to
religion; defeated all his hopes of rendering
the Imperial authority absolute and hereditary
in his family; and eftablilhed the Protestant

* Recucil des Traitez, ii, 26i.

church,

church, which had hitherto subsisted precarious- Boo X.
ly in Germany, through connivance, or by ex-
pedients, upon a firm and secure bails. Mau-
rice reaped all the glory of having concerted and
compleated this unexpe&ed revolution. It is a
singular circumitance, that the Reformation
should be indebted for its security and full efta-
blifhment in Germany, to the fame hand which
had formerly brought it to the brink of deftlrc.
tion, and that both events should have been ac-
complifhed by the fame arts of dissimulation.
The ends, however, which Maurice had in view,
at these different junctures, seem to have been
more attended to than the means by which they
attained them; and he was now as universally
extolled for his zeal and publick spirit, as he
had lately been condemned for his indifference
and interested policy. It is no less worthy of
observation, that the French King, a monarch
zealous for the Catholick faith, should, at the
very time he was persecuting his own Protestant
subjeCts with all the fierceness of bigotry, em-
ploy his power in order to protet and maintain
the Reformation in the Empire; and that the
league for this purpose, which proved so fatal
to the Romish church, should be negociated and
signed by a Roman catholick bishop. So won-
derfully doth the wisdom of God superintend
and regulate the caprice of human paflions, and
render them subservient towards the accamplifh-
ment of his own purposes!

LITTLE attention was paid to the interests of littleatten.

the FrenchKing during the negociations at Paffau. hc predth
Maurice and his associates, having gained what King inthis
they had in view, discovered no great follicitude rc y.
about an ally, whom, perhaps, they reckoned
to be over-paid, by his acquisitions in Lorrain,
for the afliftance whicli he had given them. A

short

BooK X. short clause, which they procured to be inserted
<lJ ^ in the treaty, importing that the King of France

. might communicate to there confederates his

particular pretensions or causes of Phoffility,
which they would lay before the Emperor, was
the only sign that they gave of their remember-
ing how much they had been indebted to him for
their success. Henry experienced the fame
treatment, which every Prince who lends his
aid to the authors of a civil war may expet.
As soon as the rage of faction began to subsid ,
and any prospect of accommodation began to
open, his services were forgotten, a'd his affo-
ciates made a merit with their sbvereign, of the
ingratitude with which they abandoned their
protector. But how much soever Henry might
be enraged at the perfidy of his allies, or at
the impatience with which they hastened to
make their peace with the Emperor at his ex-
pence, he was perfeEtly sensible that it was more
his interest to keep well with the Germanicl
body, than to resent the indignities offered him
by any particular members of it. For that
reason he dismissed the hostages which he had
received from Maurice and his associates, and
affected to talk in the fame ifrain, as formerly,
concerning his zeal for maintaining the ancient
constitution and liberties of the Empire.

THE

# BOOK XI.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
R E I GN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK XI.

A S soon as the treaty of Paflau was signed, Boo XI.
iA Maurice, in consequence of his engage- - j
ments with Ferdinand, marched into Hungary 155z.
at the head of twenty thousand men. But the Aug. 3.

Maurice

vast superiority of the Turkifl armies, the fre- marches in-
quent mutinies, both of the Spanilh and Ger- t Hungary
man soldiers, occasioned by their want of pay, Turks.
together with the dissentions between Maurice
and Caftaldo, who was piqued at beingobliged to
resign the chief command to him, prevented his
performing any thing in that country worthy of
his former fame, or of great benefit to the King
of the Romans*

Iftuanhaffi Hist. Hungar. 228. Thuan. lib, x. 37i.

WHaEN

Boor XI. WHEN Maurice set out for Hungary, the

`I`' Prince of Hesse parted from him with the forces
'The Lnd- under his command, and marched back into his
grave of own country, that he might be ready to receive
Hesse, re-
covers his his father upon his return, and give up to him
liberty the reins of government which he had held du-

ring his absence. But fortune was not yet wea-
ry of persecuting the Landgrave. A battalion
of mercenary troops, which had been in the pay
of Hesse, being seduced by Reifenberg their co-
lonel, a soldier offortune, and ready to engage
in any enterprize, secretly withdrew from the
young Prince as he was marching homewards,
and joined Albert of Brandenburgh, who flill
continued in arms againfl the Emperor, refuilng
to be included in the treaty of Paffau. Unhap-
pily for the Landgrave, an account of this reach-
ed the Netherlands, just as hewasdifmiffed from
the citadel of Mechlin where he had been con-
fined, but before lie had got beyond the fron-
tiers of that country. The Queen of Hungary,
who governed there in her brother'sn ame, in-
cenfed at such an open violation of the treaty to
which he owed his liberty, commanded him to
be arrested, and committed him again to the
custody of the fame Spanish captain who had
guarded him for five years with such severe vi-
gilence. Philip beheld all the horrors of his im-
priforment renewed, and his spirits subsiding in
the fame proportion as they had risen during
the short interval in which he had enjoyed liber-
ty, he funk into despair, and believed himself
to be doomed to perpetual captivity. But the
matter being explained to the Emperor's full fa-
tisfadtion, that the revolt of Reifenberg's merce-
naries could be imputed neither to the Landgrave
nor to his son, lie gave orders for his release;
and Philip at last obtained the liberty for which

lihe

he so long languished *. But though he recover- BooK XI.
ed his freedom, and was reinstated in his domi- -
nions, his sufferings seem to have broken the '5
vigour, and to have extinguished the acivity of
his mind: From being the boldest as well as
most enterprizing Prince in the Empire, he be-
came the most timid and cautious, and passed
the remainder of his days in a pacific indolence.

THE degraded Elecor of Saxony likewise pro- Likewao

cured his liberty in consequence of the treaty of of Saxony.
Paffau. The Emperor having been obliged to
relinquish all his schemes for extirpating the Pro-
tefiant religion, had no longer any motive for
detaining him a prisoner; and being extremely
follicitous, at that juncture, to recover the con-
fidence and good will of the Germans, whose
assistance was essential to the success of the en-
terprize which he meditated againit the King of
France, he, among other expedients for that
purpose, thought of releasing from imprison-
ment a Prince whose merit entitled him no less
to esteem, than his filfferings rendered him the
object of compaflion. John Frederick took pof-
session accordingly of that part of his territories
which had been reserved for him, when Maurice
was inverted with the Electoral dignity. As he
contiinmed Lo display in this situation, the fame
virtuous magnanimity, frr which he had been
conspicuous in a more prosperous and splendid
state, and which he had retained amidst all his
sufferings, he lived several years in that high re-
putation to which he had so jullt a title.

THE loss of Metz, Toul alid Verdun, The Empe-

had made a deep impreflion on the Empe- 'tokmkea
ror. Accustomed to terminate all his operations (war upo
against France with advantage to himself, he France.

* Sicid, 573. Bclarii Conzijent. 834.

thought

BOK XL thought that it nearly concerned his honour not

-~ --- to allow Henry the superiority in this war, or to
r55- susser his own adminifiration to be fained with

the infamy of having permitted territories of
such consequence t6 be dismembered from the
Empire. This was no less a point of interest
than of honour. As the frontier of Champagne
was more naked, and lay more exposed than
that of any province in France, he had frequent-
ly, during his wars with that kingdom, made
inroads upon it with great success and effet;
but if Henry were allowed to retain his late con-
quefis, France would gain such a formidable
barrier on that fide, as to be altogether secure,
where formerly she had been the weakest. On
the other hand, the Emperor had now loft as
much, in point of security, as France had
acquired, and being stripped of the defence
which those cities afforded it, lay open to be
invaded on a quarter, where all the towns ha-
ving been hitherto confidered as interior, and re-
mote fromany enemy,were but slightly fortified.
These considerations determined Charles to at-
tempt recovering the three towns of which Hen-
ry had made himfelfmafter; and the preparati-
ons which he made against Maurice and his
associates enabled him to carry his resolution
into immediate execution.

is preplar- As soon, then, as the peace was concluded
thib lulplor. at Paffau, he left his inglorious retreat at Villach,

and advanced to Augsburg at the head of a con-
fiderable body of Germans which he had levied,
together with all the troops which he had
drawn out of Italy and Spain. To therf he
added several battalions, which having been
in the pay cfthe confederates, entered into.his ser-
vice when difmilied by them; and lie prevailed
likewise on rome of the Princes of the Empire to
join him with their vasals. In order to conceal

the

the destination of this formidable army, and to BooK X.
gaurd against alarming the French so as to put
them on preparing for their defence, he gave
out that he was to march forthwith into Hun-
gary, in order to second Maurice in his opera-
tions against the Infidels. When he began to
advance towards the Rhine, and could no lon-
ger employ that pretext, he tried a new arti-
fice, and spread a report that he was marching
in order to chastise Albert of Brandenburg,
whose cruel exadtions in that part of the Empire
called loudly for his interposition to check them.

BUT the French having grown acquainted, The ieo
at laRs, with arts by which they had been so the French

for the de-

often deceived, viewed all Charles's motions fnce of
with distrust. Henry immediately guessed the Metz.
true object of his vast preparations, and resolved
to defend the important conquests which he had
gained with vigour equal to that with which
they were about to be attacked. As heforefaw
that the whole weight of the war would be tur-
ned against Metz, the fate of which would de-
cide that of Toul and Verdun, he nominated
Francis of Lorrain Duke of Guise to take the The Duke
command in that city during the siege, the issue appointed
of which would equally asset the honour and Governorof

the town.

interest of his country. His choice could not
have fallen upon any perlon more worthy of
that trust. The Duke of Guise posseTsed, in a
high degree, all the qualities of courage, fagaci-
ty, and pretence of mind, which render men
eminent in military command. He was largely
endowed with that magnanimity of foul which
delights in bold enterprizes, and aspires to fame
by splendid and extraordinary actions. He re-
paired with joy to the dangerous itation afligned
him, as to a theatre on which he might display
his great qualities under the immediate eye of
his countrymen all ready to applaud him. The

martial

BOOK XI. martial genius of the French nobility in that

L-^- age, which confidered it as the greatest reproach
1552. to remain inactive, when there was any oppor-

tunity of signalizing their courage, prompted
great numbers to follow a leader who was the
darling as well as the pattern of all that courted
military fame. Several Princes of the blood,
many noblemen of the highest rank, and all
the young officers who could obtain the King's
permiflion, entered Metz as voluntiers. By
their presence they added spirit to the garrison,
and enabled the Duke of Guise to employ on
every emergency persons eager to distinguish
themselves, and fit to conduct any service.

Preparesfor BUT with whatever alacrity the Duke of
for a vigo- Guise undertook the defence of Metz, he found
snce. every thing, upon his arrival there, in such a

situation, as might have induced any person of
lets intrepid courage to despair of defending it
with success. The city was of great extent.
with large suburbs; the walls were in many
places feeble and without ramparts; the ditch
narrow; and the old towers, which projected
instead of bastions, were at too great distance
from each other to defend the space between
them. For all there defects he endeavoured to
provide the belt remedy, which the time would
permit. He ordered the fiburbs, without spa-
ring the monasteries or churches, not even that
of St. Arnulph, in which several Kings of France
had been buried, to be levelled with the ground;
but in order to guard against the imputation of
impiety, to which such a violation of so many
iacred edifices, as well as of the ashes of the
dead might expose him, he executed this with
much religious ceremony. Having ordered all
the holy vestments and utcnfils, together with
the bones of the Kings, and other persons depo-
fited in th ce churches to be removed, they were

carried

carried in folermn iproceflion to a church within BooK XI.
the walls, he himself walking before them un-
covered, with a torch in his hand. He then 52
pulled down such houses as ,stood near the walls,
cleared and enlarged the ditch, repaired the
ruifoils fortifications, and erected new ones. As
it was necessary that all there works should be
finished with the utmost expedition, he laboured
at them with his own hands: the officers and
voluntiers imitated his example, and the soldiers
submitted with chearfunnefs to the most revere
fatigues, when they saw that their superiors did
not decline to bear a part in these together with
them. At the fame time he compelled all use-
less persons to leave the place; he filled the
magazines with provisions and military itores;
burnt the mills; and destroyed the corn and
forage for several miles round the town. Such
were his popular talents, as well as his arts of
acquiring an ascendant over the minds of men,
that the citizens seconded him with no less ar-
dour than the soldiers; and every other paflion
being swallowed up in the zeal to repulse the
enemy, with which he inspired them, they be-
held the ruin of their estates, together, with the
havock, which he made among their publick and
private buildings, without any emotion of re-
fentment *.

MEANTIE r the Emperor, having collected Chane, ad-

all his forces, continued his march towards Metz. vances to-
As he pased through the cities on the Rhine, he Mtc:.
saw the dismal effecs of that licentious and
wasteful war which Albert had carried on in there
parts. Upon his approach, that Prince, though
at the head of twenty thousand men, withdrew
into Lorrain, as if he had intended to join the

* Thuin. xi. 387.
VOL. III. S French

BoOK XI. French King, whose arms he had quartered

5rJ with his own in all his standards and ensigns. Al-
552' bert was not in a condition to cope with the Im.

perial troops, which amounted at least to sixty
thousand men, forming one of the most nume-
rous and best appointed armies that had been
brought into the field, during that age, in any of
the wars among the Christian Princes.

Inveftthe THE chief command under the Emperor,
towns, was committed to the Duke of Alva, aflifted by

the Marquis de Marignano, together with the
most experienced of the Italian and Spanish ge-
nerals. As it was towards the end of Otober,
there intelligent officers represented the great
danger of beginning, at such an advanced season,
a siege which could not fail to prove very tedi-
ous. But Charles adhered to his own opinion
with his usual obitinacy, and being confident
that he had made such preparations, and taken
COh l9 such precautions, as would ensure success, he or-

dered the city to be invested. As soon as the
Duke of Alva appeared, a large body of the
French sallied out and attacked his van guard
with great vigour, put it in confusion, and
killed or took prisoners a considerable num-
ber of men. By this early specimen, which
they gave of the conduc of their officers, as
well as the valour of their troops, they shewed
the Ihnperialifts what an enemy they had to en-
counter, and how dear every advantage muif
colt them. The place, however, was com-
pleatly invested, the trenches were opened, and
the other works begun.

Both parties
gain Albert THE attention both of the besiegers and be-
oraurncn- fieged was turned for some time towards Albert
burgle. of Brandenburgh, and they strove with emulation

*Natal. Comitis. Hist. 127.

which

which should gain that Prince, who still hovered BooK XI.
in the neighbourhood, fludtuating in all the un-
certainty of irresolution, natural to a man, who. 552.
being swayed by no principle, was allured dif-
ferent ways by contrary views of interefl. The
French tempted him with offers extremely be-
neficial; the Imperialists scrupled at no promise
which they thought would make an impreflion
upon him. After much hesitation, he was gain-
ed by the Emperor, from whom he expected to
receive advantages, which were both more im-
mediate and more permanent. As the French
King, who began to fufpe&t his intentions, had
appointed a body of troops under the Duke of
Aumale, brother to the Duke of Guise, to
watch his motions, Albert fell upon them unex-
peCtedly, with such vigour, that he routed them Nov. 4,
entirely, killed many of the officers, wounded
Aumale himself, and took him prisoner. Imme-
diately after this victory, he marched in triumph
to Metz, andjoined his army to that of the Em-
peror. Charles, in reward for this service, and
the great acceflion of strength which he brought
him, granted Albert a pardon, in form, of past
offences, and confirmed him in the possession of
the territories which he had violently usurped
during the war ?.

THE Duke of Guise, though deeply asseted The illsnt

behaviour

with his brother's misfortune, did not remit, in oftheDuke
any degree, the vigour with which he defended the of uire

and hi. §V-

town. He harraffed the besiegers by frequent rion.
rallies, in which his officers were so eager to dif-
tinguifl themselves, that his authority, being
scarce sufficient to restrain the impetuosity of
their courage, he was obliged at different times
to shut the gates and to conceal the keys, in or-
der to prevent the Princes of the blood, and no-
blemen of the first rank, from exposing them-

t Slcid 575. Thuan. lib. xi. 389. 392.

S 2 selves

Bo it . selves to danger in every rally, He repaired in
'i'^' the night what the enemy's artillery had beat

55 down during the day, or erected behind the ruin-

ed works, new fortifications of almost equal
strength. The Imperialists, on their part,
pushed on the attack with great spirit, and car-
ried forward, at once, approaches againfl dif-
ferent parts of the town. But the art of attack-
ing fortified places was not then arrived at that
degree of perfection, to which it was carried to-
wards the close of the sixteenth century, during
the long war in the Netherlands. The besiegers,
after the unwearied labour of many weeks,
found that they had made 'but little progress;
and although their batteries had made breaches
in different places, they saw, to their astonish-
ment,works suddenly appear, in demolishing
which their fatigues and dangers would be renew-
ed. The Emperor, enraged at the obstinate re
finfance which his army met with, left Thion-
ville, where he had been confined by a violent
fit of the gout, and though frill so infirm that he
was obliged to be carried in a litter, he repaired
Nq': a. to the camp ; that by his presence he might ani-

mate the soldiers, and urge on the attack with
greater spirit. Upon his arrival, new batteries
were erected, and new efforts made with redou-
bled ardour.

Tbe Mirci BT, by this time, the winter had set in with
ofthe W . great rigour ; the camp was alternately deluged

with rain, or covered with snow; at the fame
time, provisions were become extremely scarce,
as the body of French cavalry which hovered in
the neighbourhood, often interrupted the con-
yoys, or rendered their arrival difficult and un-
certain. Diseases began to spread among the
foldiern, especially among the Italians and Spa-
niards, unaccuitomedto such inclement weather
great numbers were disabled from serving, and
minny died. At length, such breaches were made

as

as seemed practicable, and the Emperor resolved B. oa XI.
to hazard a general alfault, in spite of all the 'v
remonitrances of his generals concerning theimt ^n '
prudence of attacking a numerous garrison, conr
ducted and animated by the mos gallant of the
French nobility, with an army weakened by
diseases, and difheartned with ill fuecefs. The
Duke of Guise, fufpeding his intentions, fromvi
the extraordinary hurry which he observed in
theenemy's camp, ordered all his troops to their
refpedive posts. They appeared immediately
on the wall, and behind the breaches, with
fuich a determined countenance, so eager for
the combat, and so well prepared to give the
assailants a warm reception, that the Imperi-;
aliffs, iniftead of advancing to the charge, when
the word of command was given, flood moti-
onlefi, in a timid dejeted silence. The En-
peror, perceiving that he could, not trust troops
whose spirits were so much broken, retired a-
bruptly to his quarters, complaining that he was
now deserted by his soldiers, who deserved no
longer the name of men *.

DEEPLY as this behaviour of his troops motti- The Evtnpe-.

for changel

fledand affheted him, Charles would not hear of the method
abandoning the siege, though he saw the neceffi- of 'ttat.
ty of changing the method of attack. He sus-
pended the fury of his batteries, and proposed
to proceed by the more secure but tedious mer
thod of sapping. But as it still continued to rain
or to snow almost incessantly, such as were em,
ployed in this service endured incredible hard-
ships; and the diuke of Guise, whose indutiry
was not inferior to his valour, discovering
all their mines, counterworked them, and
prevented their effet. At last, Gharlos,
finding it impossible to contend any longer

* Thu;n. 397.
S 3

witl

BoOK XI. -with the rigour of the season, and with enemies,
'v' whom he could neither overpower by force, nor

55'. ftubdue by art, while at the fame time a conta-

gious distemper raged among his troops, and
cut offdaily great numbers of his officers as well
as soldiers, yielded to the follicitations of his
generals, who conjured him tofave the remains
'of his army by a timely retreat; " Fortune,"
fays he, " I now perceive, resembles other fe-
males, and chutes to confer her favours on young
men, while Ihe forsakes those who are advanced
in years."

Dec. 6. . UPON this, he gave orders immediately to
raifeeto raise the siege, and submitted to the disgrace of
siege. abandoning the enterprize, after having conti-

nued fifty3fix days before the town, during
which time he had loft upwards of thirty thou-
sand men, who died of diseases, or were killed
-by the enemy. The duke of Guise, as soon as
he perceived the intention of the Imperialists,
took measures to prevent their retiring unmolef-
ted, and sent out several bodies, both of cavalry
and infantry, to infest their rear, to pick up
itragglers, and to fieze every opportunity of at-
tacking them with advantage. Such was the
confusion with which they made their retreat,
that the French might have annoyed them in the

Ruin of the most cruel manner. But when they sallied out, a
Imperial fpedacle presented itself to their view, which
army, and
humanityof extinguilhed at once all hostile rage, and mel-
the French. ted them into tenderness and compafion. The

Imperial camp was filled with the. tick and woun-
ded, with the dead and the dying. In all the
different roads by which the army retired, num-
bers, were found, who having made an effort be-
yond their strength to escape, were left, when
they could go no farther, to perish without aflil-
tance. This they ireceivcd from their e-
nemies, and were ndebted to them for all

the

the kind offices which their friends had not BooK XI.
the power to perform. The duke of Guise im- 3
mediately ordered proper refrelhments for such 55
as were dying of hunger; he appointed surgeons
to attend the sick and wounded; he removed
such as could bear it into the adjacent villages;
and those who would have suffered by being car-
ried so far, he admitted into the hospitals which
he had fitted up in the city for his own soldiers.
As soon as they recovered, he sent them home,
under an escort of soldiers, and with money to
bear their charges. By these ats of humanity,
which were uncommon in that age, when war
was carried on with greater rancour and ferocity
than at present, the duke of Guise compleated
the fame which he had acquired by his gallant
and successful defence of Metz, and engaged
those whom he had vanquished to vie with his
own countrymen in extolling his name*.

To these calamities in Germany, were added Badfituation
such unfortunate events in Italy, as rendered this of the Em-

peror's

the most difaifrous year in the Emperor's life. affairs in
During his residence at Villach, Charles had Italy
applied to Cosmo de Medici for the loan of two
hundred thousand crowns. But his credit, at
that time, was so low, that, in order to obtain
this inconsiderable fum, he was obliged to put
him in pofeflion of the principality of Piombino,
and, by giving up that, he loft the footing which
he had hitherto maintained in Tuscany, and en-
abled Cosmo to aflume, for the future, the tone
and deportment of a Prince altogether inde-
pendant. Much about the time that his indi-
gence constrained him to part with this valuable

* Sleid. 57. Thuan. lib. xi. 389, &c. Pete Daniel,

HiR. de France, tomn. iii. 392. Pere Daniel's account of
this siege is taken from the journal of the Sieur de Salignac,
who was present. Natal. Comit. Hiftor. 129.

territory,
S4

BooK XL. territory, he loft-Sienaj which was of fill great-

er- consequence, through the ill condut. of Don

'52. Diego de Mendbza*:

The rot SIENA, like-molt of the great cities in Italy,

The revolt ,. . -
of Sicna. had long enjoyed:a republican government, un-

der the proteltion of the Empire; but being
torn in pieces by the diflentions between the
nobles and the people-, which divided all the
commonwealtts, the fhation of the people, which
gained the: serindants befitlght tle tEmperor to
become the giardian o(- the admihiftration
which they Ih d- efiablifhed, and admitted into
their city a afiall: body' of Spanish soldiers,
whom:he had:fett to countenance the execution
of the laws, arid topreferve trantquillity among
them. The diredtiOn-of- these troops was given
to Mendoza, at-that tiime ambassador for the
Emperor-at Rome, who persuaded the credu-
lous multitude, that it was necessary, for their
feeurity against any future attempt of the no-
bles, to allow him-to build a citadel in Siena;
and as he flattered himself that by means of this
fortress he-might render the Emperor master of
the city, he pufhed-on the works with all poffi-
ble dispatch. ' tlt he threw off the maik too
soon. Before the fortifications were compleated,
he began to indulge his natural haughtiness and
severity of temper, and to treat the citizens
with great insolence. At the fame time, the fol-
diers in. garrison being paid as irregularly as the
Emperor's troops usually were, lived almost at
discretion upon the inhabitants, and were guilty
of many ads of licence and oppreflion.

The Sinefe THESE injuries awakened the Sienefe to a
court the . ...
ifitancc of sense of their danger. As they saw the necef-
FrInec. fity of egerting themlelves, while tile unfinified

* Thuan. lib. xi. 376.

fortific;ations

fortifications of the citadel left them any hopes' BooK XL
of success, they applied to the French ambafla- ''
dor at Rome, who readily promised them his
malter's protection and afliftance. At the fame
time, forgetting their domestic animofities when
such a mortal blow was aimed at the liberty and
existence of the republick, they sent agents to
the exiled nobles, and invited them to concur
with them in saving their country from the ser-
vitude with which-it was threatened. As there
was not a moment to lore, measures were con-
certed speedily, but with-great prudence; and
were executed with equal vigour. The ci-
tizens:rofe suddenly in arms; tlie exiles flocked
into the town from different parts with all their
partizans, and what troops they could draw to-
gether; and several bodies. of mercenaries in
the pay of France appeared to support them.
The Spaniards, tho' furprized, and much infe-
rior in.number, defended themselves with great
courage; but feeing no profpea of relief, and
having no hopes of maintaining their station long
in a half-finifhed fortress, they soon gave it up.
The Sienefe, with the utmost alacrity, levelled
it with the ground, that no monument might
remain of that odious ftruture, which had been
raised in order to enslave them. At the fame
time renouncing all connection with the Empe-
ror, they sent ambafladors to the King of France
as the restorer of- their liberty, and to intreat
that he would secure to them the perpetual en-
joyment of that blefling by continuing his pro-
teEtion to their republick.

To there misfortunes, one still more fatal had Descent of
almost succeeded. The revere adminifiration the Turks

in the king
dom of

1 Pecci Memoric de Siena, vol. iii. p. 230, 261. Thuan. Naples.

375, 377, &c. Puta. llu . l. enct. 267. Menl. de Ri-
bier, 424, &c.

of

Boo XI of Don Pedro de Toledo, viceroy of Naples,

1552· having filled that kingdom with murmuring and

difaffedion, the Prince of Salerno, the head of
the malecontents, had fled to the court of
France, where all who bore ill-will to the Em-
peror or his ministers, were sure of finding pro-
tecdion and affidtance. That nobleman, in the
usual itile of exiles, boasting much of his par-
tizans, and of his great influence with them,
prevailed on Henry to think of invading Na-
ples, from expedtation of being joined by all
thole with whom the Prince of Salerno held cor-
refpondence, or who were diflatisfied with To-
ledo's government. But though the first hint
of this enterprize was suggested by the Prince
of Salerno, Henry did not chufe that its fuc-
cess should entirely depend upon his being able
to fulfil the promises which he had made. He
applied for aid to Solyman, whom he courted,
after his father's example, as his most vigorous
auxiliary against the Emperor, and follicited
him to second his operations by fending a pow-
erfuil fleet into the Mediterranean. It was not
difficult to obtain what he requested of the Sul-
tan, who, at this time, was highly incensed
against the house of Austria, on account of
their proceedings in Hungary. He ordered an
hundred and fifty ships to be equipped, that they
might fail towards the coast of Naples, at whate-
ver time Henry should name, and might co-
operate with the French troops in their attempts
upon that kingdom. The command of this fleet
was given to the corsair Dragut, an officer train-
ed up under Barbarossa, and scarce inferior to
his matter in courage, in talents, or in good for-
tune. He appeared on the coast of Calabria. at
the time which had been agreed on, landed at fe-
veral places, plundered and burnt several villa-
ges; and at last casting anchor in the bay of
Naples, filled that city with conflernation. But

as

as the French fleet, detained by some accident, BooK XI.
which the contemporary historians have not ex- 5r
plained, did not join the Turks according to
concert, they, after waiting twenty days, with-
out hearing any thing of it, set fail for Conftan-
tinople, and thus delivered the viceroy of Na-
ples from the terror of an invasion, which he
was in no condition to have resifted *.

As the French had never given so revere a T53-

check to the Emperor in any former campaign, ror renpbil
they expressed immoderate joy at the success of affeated
their arms. Charles himself, accustomed to a fate of his
long series of prosperity, felt the blow most fen- affir,
sibly, and retired from Metz into the Low-
Countries, much dejeced with the cruel reverse
of fortune which asseted him in his declining
age, when the violence of the gout had increa-
fed to such a pitch, as entirely broke the vigour
of his constitution, and rendered him peevish,
difficult of access, and often incapable of apply-
ing to business. But whenever he enjoyed any
interval of ease, all his thoughts were bent upon
revenge; and he deliberated, with the utmost
follicitude, concerning the most proper means
of annoying France, and of effacing the stain
which had obscured the reputation and glory of
his arms. All the schemes concerning Germany,
which had engrofled him so long, being difcon-
certed by the peace of Paflui, the affairs of the
Empire became only secondary objeds of at-
tention; and enmity to France was the predo-
minant paflion which chiefly occupied his mind.

THE turbulent ambition of Albert of Bran- The violent

proct edings

denburgh excited violent commotions, which ofAlbeit of
disturbed the Empire during this year. That B"an(le"-
Prince's troops having fliared in the calamities

* Thuan. 375, 380. Mel. de Ribier, ii. 403. Gianenc.

of

BootsXJ of the siege of Metz, were greatly reduced in
'-
, mnumber.. But the Emperor, prompted by gra-

titude for his. difinguifhed services on that oc-
eafion,.or perhaps with a secret view of fomen-
t-ing divifians among the Princes of the Empire,
having paid up all the money due to him, he
was enabled, by that fium, to hire so many of
the soldiers, dismissed from the Imperial
army, that he was soon at the head of a body
of men as numerous as ever. The bishops
of'Bamherg and Wurtzburg having follicited the
Imperial chamber to annul, by its authority, the
iniquitous conditions which Albert had com-
pelled them to sign, that court unanimously
finding all their engagements with him to be void
in their own nature, because they had been ex-
torted by force; enjoined Albert to renounce all
claim to the performance of them; and exhor-
ted all the Princes of the Empire, if he' should
persist in fucl an unjust demand, to take arms
against him, as a disturber of the publick tran-
quillity. To this decision, Albert opposed the
confirmation of his tranfaftions with the two
prelates, which the Emperor had. granted him
as the reward of his having joined the Imperial
army at Metz; and in order to intimidate his
antagonists, and to convince them of his refolu-
tion not to relinquish his pretensions, he put his
troops in motion, that he might secure the ter-
ritory in question. Various endeavours were
employed, and many expedients proposed, in
order to prevent the kindling a new war in Ger-
many. But the fame warmth of temper which
rendered Albert turbulent and enterprizing, in-
spiring him with the most sanguine hopes of
flccefs, even in his wildest undertalk ings, he dif-
dainfully rejeted all reasonable overtures of
accommodation.

'Te is'bny UPON this, the Imperial chimber issued its

the mlcri. decree against him, and required the Elecor of
sl Chlamnber, Saxon y,

Saxony, together with several other Princes men- Book Xl.
tioned by name, to .take arms in order to carry v".
it into execution. Maurice and those associated 1553
with him were not unwilling to undertake this
service. They were extremely follicitous to
maintain publick order, by supporting the au
thority of the Imperial chamber, and saw the
neceflity of giving a timely check to the ufurpa-
tions of an ambitious Prince who had no princi-
ple of action but regard to his own interest, and
no motive to direst him but the imptife of un-
governable passions. They had good reason to
fufpeft that the Emperor encouraged Albert in
his extravagant and irregular proceedings, and
secretly afforded him afliftance, that, by raising
him up to rival Maurice in power, he might, in
any future broil, make use of his afliftance to
counterbalance and controul the authority which
the other had acquired in the Empire*.

THESE considerations united the most power- April 2.

fulPrinces in Germany in a league-againfl Albert, A coedr
of which Maurice was declared generalissimo. againt him,
This formidable confederacy, however, wrought hMauic
no change in Albert's sentiments; but as he was head.
knew that he could not resist so many Princes,
if he should allow them time to aflemble their
forces, he endeavoured, by his ativity, to de-
prive them of all the advantage which they
might derive from their united power and num-
bers; and, for that reason, marched direcly a-
gainft Maurice, the enemy whom he dreaded
most. It was happy for the allies, that the con-
dud of their affairs was committed to a Prince
of such abilities. He, by his authority and ex-
ample, had inspired them with vigour, and hav-
ing carried on their preparations with a degree
of rapidity, of which confederate bodies are

* Sleid. 585 Mem. de Ribier. ii. 442. Arnoldi. vita Mau-
Pi, ap. Menken. ii. 1242.

seldom

BooK XI. seldom capable, he was in condition to face
'.." Albert before he could make any considerable

553- progress.
He attacks THEIR armies, which were nearly equal in

number, each consisting of twenty-four thou-
sand men, met at Sieverhaufen in the dutchy of
Lunenburgh; and the violent animosity against
each other, which possessed the two leaders, did
not susser them to continue long inactive. The
July 9. troops, inflamed with the fame hofRile rage,

marched fiercely to the combat; they fought
with the greatest obstinacy; and as both gene-
rals were capable of availing thernfelves of eve-
ry favourable occurrence, the battle remained
long doubtful, each gaining ground upon the
other alternately. At last victory declared for
nd tfert Maurice, who was superior in cavalry, and Al-

bert's army fled in confusion, leaving four thou-
sand dead in the field, and their camp, baggage
and artillery, in the hands of the conquerors.
The allies bought their victory dear, their beit
troops suffered greatly, two sons of the Duke
of Brunswick, a Duke of Lunenburgh, and
many other persons of diftination, were among

But is killed the number of the slain *. But all these were
inthe barle. soon forgotten, for Maurice himself, as he led

up to a second charge0 a body of horse which
had been broken, received a wound with apiftol
bullet in the belly, of which he died two days
after the battle, in the thirty-fecond year of his
age, and in the sixth after his attaining the elec-
toral dignity.

* Hifioria pugne infelicis inter Maurit, & Albert. Thom.

Wintzero audore apud Scard. ii. 559. Sleid. 583. Ruf-
Celli epiftres aux Princes 154. Arnoldi vita Maurit. 1245.

OF all the perfonages'who have appeared in Boor XI.

the history of this aftive age, when great oc- `-
currences, and sudden revolutions, called forth Hisl' hr
extraordinary talents to view, and afforded ter.
them full opportunity to display themselves,
Maurice may justly be confidered as the moit
remarkable. If his exorbitant ambition, his
profound dissimulation, and his unwarrantable
usurpation of his kinsman's honours and domi-
nions exclude him from being praised as a virtu-
ous man; his prudence in concerting his mea-
fures, his vigour in executing them, and the
uniform success with which they were attended,
entitle him to the appellation of a great Prince.
At an age, when impetuosity of spirit common-
ly predominates over political wisdom, when
the highest efforts even of a genius of the firit
order is to fix on a bold scheme, and to exe-
cute it with promptitude and courage, he form-
ed and conducted an intricate plan of policy,
which deceived the most artful Monarch in Eu-
rope. At the veryjunture when the Emperor
had attained almost unlimited despotism, Mau-
rice, with power seemingly inadequate to such
an undertaking, compelled him to relinquish all
his usurpations, and eftabliflied, not only the re-
ligious, but civil, liberties of Germany on such
foundations, as have hitherto remained unshaken.
Although at one period of his life, his condu&t
excited thejealoufy of theProteftants, andat ano-
tller drew on him the resentment of the Roman
Cotholicks, such was his masterly address, that
he was the only Prince of the age, who in any
degree possessed the confidence of both, and
whom both lamented as the most able as well as
faithful guardian of the conflitution and laws of
his couintry.

283

Boo: XI.
_ 0v,«j CTHE oonfternatidn which Maurice's'death oc-
1553. cafioned amonghis troops, prevented them from

A making the proper improvement of the victory

tinne the which they had ,gained. Albert, wh6fe ative
war. courage,. ndprofife liberality, renderdd him the

darling offuch military adventurers as were lit-
tle follicitous about the jnirice of his catfe, soon
re-assembled his broken forces, and made fresh
levies, with such ficcefs, that he was quickly at
the head of fifteen thotfand men, and renewed
his depredations with additional fury. But
Henry of Brunswick, having taken the command
of the allied troops, defeated him in a second
Sept. 12 battle, scarce less bloody than the former. E-

ven then his courage did not fink, nor were his
resources exhaflled. He made several efforts,
and some of them very vigorous, to retrieve his
affairs: but, being laid under the ban of the Em-
pire by the Imperial chamber; being driven by
degrees out of all his hereditary territories, as
well as those which he had usurped; being for-
faken by many of his officers, and overpowered

He is driven by the number of his enemies, he fled for refuge
out of Ger- .
many. into France. After having been, for a confide

table time, the terror and scourge of Germany,
he lingered out a few years in an indigent and
dependant itate of exile, the miseries of which
his reftkfs and arrogant spirit endured with the

Jan. 12. most indignant impatience. Upon his death
A557. without iffie, his territories, which had been

seized by the Princes who took arms against him,
were restored, by a decree of the Emperor, to
his collateral heirs of the house of Branden-
burgh *.

Maurice'. MAURICr, having left only one daughter,
br.luier Au- who was afterwards married tor William, Prince
guflus sic-
ceedi hkim in of Orange, by whom the had a son, who
thei clh',lol 1l
dignity. *Slcit. 592. 594. 599. Stiuv. Corp. hilt. Germ. o075.

bore

bore his grandfather's name, and inherited the BoK XI.
great talents for which he was conspicuous, .a a v
violent dispute arbfe concerning the fucceflionr 1553
to his honours and territories. John Frederick;
the degraded Eletor, claimned.the eletoral
dignity, and that; part of his patrimonial
eftatej of which he had been violently stripped
after the Smalkaldio war. Augustus, Maurice's
only brother, pleaded his right not- only to the
hereditary poffeflions of their family, but- to
the electoral dignity and to the territories which
Maurice had acquired, As A.ugustus was a
Prince of considerable abilities,: asi well as of
great candour and gentlenefs:'of manners, the
States of Saxony, forgetting the merits and
sufferings of their former master, declared
warmly in his favour. His pretensions were
powerfully supported by the King of Denmark
whose daughter he had married, and zealously
espoused by the King of the Romans out of
regard to Maurice's memory. .The degraded
E-leaor, though secretly favoured by his anci-
ent enemy the Emperor, was at last obliged to
relinquish his claim, upon obtaining a small
addition to the territories which had been allot-
ted to him, together with a itipulation, fecu-
ring to his family the eventual fucceflion, upon
a failure of male heirs in the Albertine line. That
unfortunate but magnanimous Prince died next
year, soon after ratifying this treaty of agree-
mnent; and the electoral dignity is still possessed
by the descendants of Augustus t.

DURING these tranfations in Germany, war HoAUiteina
was carried on in the Low-Countries with con- th Low-

Cuntlics.

fiderable vigour. The Emperor, impatient to
efface the stain which his ignominious repulse at
Metz left upon his military reputation, had an

+ Sleid. 587. Thuan, 409. Struv. Corp. his. Germ.

T

army
VOL. III.

B:oiXt, arnmy' eariy' ih the field, and laid; siege to Te-
'''.ou, an,,.e Though the town wasof such import-

5$3 anc,';th1t; 1itrnjpis used to call it one ofthe two

pillows!on' whiei a King: of. Ffance might sleep,
vfiithfecitrity,; the foticatioris a n ¢re ii disrepair:
Hfiry, trufting.to what- had happened at Metz,
thought4nothingmore was!neceftary to render- all
the- effortss of. the enemy abortive,, thaii to rein-
frce the- garrison with' a considerable nurmber
of he' young nbbilitt. But d'Effe, a veteran:
ofl-er.e who commanded' thenim being, killed,
and the Imlierialifts plfhing the siege with great
vigour ahd. perfeveriane, the place was, taken
by. affatnlt That it might not fall again into the
June 21 h&nds of the French, Charles ordered not only;

the fortificatioh's but. the towr to be rafed, and'
the inhabitants to be difpefed: in the adjacent
cities. Elated. with this success, the Imperialists
immediately inveftied Hefdin,, which;, though.
defended with great bravery, was likewise ta-
keniby aflault,. and. such of the garrison as efca-
ped.the. sword were made prifohners. The Em-
perot' entrufied the condu& of this siege to
Eitan'tiel.Philibert of Savoy Prince of Piedmont,
who, on that occasion, gave the first display of
hi& great. talents: for military command, which
foon-entitled him to be ranked among the first
gendt'ls- of that age, and facilitated his re-efta-
blifhment in his:hereditary dominions, the grea-
terpart of which having been over-run by Francis
in ;lisexpeditions into Italy,, were tillr occupied
by Henry *.

Ttiltr THE loss ofthefe towns, together with so
ofthe r mlt many ptrfons of diltindtion, either killed or
quiet'the taken by the enemy, was no inconsiderable cala-
FrenchKing. mityfobFrance) andHenry felt it very sensibly;

* Thunn. 411. Hfarxi Annales Brabant, 669.

but

but he was fill more mortifiedat the Emperw'@lgoBol-XI.
having assumed his wonted- superiority in the "
field so faon after the blow at Metz, which the
French had representtd asfatal to his-power. He-
was'afliamed, too, of hisown remiffnefsand ex-
celive security at the. opening of the campaign;.
and, in order to repair that error, he afrembled-
a numerous army, and: led it into the Low-
Countries,

ROUZED at the approach-of such aformidable!
eremy, Charles left lruffels, where he had: bert
shut up so closely during seven months, that it
came to be believed in- many parts of Europe
that he was dead; and- though he was so much
debilitated by the: gout that he could scarce
bear the motion of a litter, he' hastened to join.
his army. The eyes of all Europe were turned,
with expe&tation toward,-thefe mighty and exaf-
perated rivals,, between whom' ai decisive battle
was now thought unavoidable. But' Charles
having: prudently declined to hazard, a general
engagement, and; the violence of the autumnal
rains rendering, it impossible for the French to-
undertake any siege; they. retired' without ha-
ving performed: any thing! suitable to the great
preparations which they had made *.

THE Imperial aims did' not make the fame mhet-

progress' in Italy. The narrowriefs of the Em- fwuced~ is
peror's finances seldom allowed him to at, with;ItJy'
vigour in two different places at the fame time;
and ihaving exerted! himself to the utmost inor-
der to make a great effort in the Low-Countriesi
his operations on the othe, fide of the AlpsI
were proportionally: feeble. The viceroy oft

* Harmus 672. Thuan. 414.

Naples,
T 2

BdooKXl. Naples, in conjun&ion with Cosmo di Medici,
'"i ' who was greatly alarmed at the introduction of

553: French troops into Siena, endeavoured to be-

come master of that city. But instead of redu-
cing the Sienefe, the Imperialists were obliged
to retire abruptly in order to defend their own
country, upon the appearance of the Turkish
fleet, which threatned the coaftof Naples; and
the French not only established themselves more
firmly in Tuscany, but, by the assistance of the
Turks, conquered a great part of the island of
Corsica, subjet, at that time, to the Genoese *.

THE affairs of the house of Austria declined
nd in no less in Hungary during the course of this

year. As the troops which Ferdinand kept in
Transylvania received their pay very irregular-
ly, they lived almost at discretion upon the in-
habitants; and their insolence and rapaciousness
greatly disgusted all ranks of men, and aliena.
ted them from their new sovereign, who, instead
of protecting, plundered his fubjedts. Their in-
dignation at this, added to their desire of re-
venging Martinuzzi's death, wrought so much
upon a turbulent nobility, impatient of injury,
and upon a fierce people, prone tochange, that
they were ripe for a revolt. At that very Junc-
ture, their late Queen Isabella, together with
.her son, appeared in Transylvania. Her ambi-
tious mind could not bear the solitude and inac-
tivity of a private life, and repenting quickly of
the ceflion which fie had made of the crown, in
the year one thousand five hundred and fifty-
one, ihe left the place of her retreat, hoping that
the!'diffatisfaction of the Hungarians with the
Aiafarian government, would prompt them to re-
cognize once more her son's right to the crown.

,. '
W .

* Thuan. 417.

Some

Some noblemen of great eminence declared irm- Boot XL
mediately in his favonr. The Bashaw of Belgrade, '
by Solyman's order, espoused his cause in op- 3
position to Ferdinand; the Spanihi and German
soldiers, initead of advancing against the ene-
my, mutinied for Want of pay, declaring that
they would march back to Vienna; so that
Caftaldo, their general, was obliged to abandon
Transylvania to Isabella and the Turks, and to Ferdinand
place himself at the head of the mutiniers, that obgd to
by his authority he might restrain them from Tranylva-
plundering the Austrian territories, through a'
which they paSed t.

FERDINAND'S attention was turned so entire- Solyman',

ly towards the affairs of Germany, and his domneice
treasures so much exhausted by his late efforts
in Hungary, that he made no attempt to reco-
ver this valuable province, although a favoura-
ble opportunity for that purpose presented itself,
as Solyman was then engaged in a war with
Persia, and involved besides in domeftick cala-
mities which engrossed and disturbed his mind.
Solyman, though distinguished, by many ac-
complifhments, from the other Ottoman Prin-
ces, had all the paflions peculiar to that violent
and haughty race. He was jealous of his autho-
rity, sudden and furious in his anger, and sus-
ceptible of all that rage of love, which reigns
in the East, and often produces the willdeft and
most tragical effects. His favourite mifirefs
was a Circaflian slave, of exquisite beauty, who The trgical
bore him a Son called Muftapha, whom, both on so, Mufa-
account of his birth-right and merit, he destined pha.
to be the heir of his crown. Roxalana, a Ruf-
fian captive, Coon supplanted the Circailian, and
gained the Sultan's heart. Having the address to
retain the conquest which (he had made, file kept
poffeflion of his love without any rival for many

f TIuan. 430.

T 3 years,

!Bo4oSP.. diring which, he brought. him .feveal fons.and
l-HI" ,One daughter. .All.thehappinefs, however, which
f~3' Jhe derived from the unbounded,fway that Ibe

had-acquired over-amonarch, whom one half of
.the worltdrevered or- dreaded, was .embittered
biy pelpetual refe&ion&.on Muftapha's accession
.to the throne, .and the certain death of her sons,
-,ho the foresaw would be immediately sacrificed,
according; to the barbarous jealousy of Turkilh
.loliqy,, to the iffety of the new Ermperor. By
.dweellin.g continualLy )on this melancholy idea,
'she same gradually ,to view Muftapha as the
enemy of her children, and to hate him with
more than a step-mother's ill-will. This
.prompted her towimh his deftrudion, in order to
ifecurxefor.one:ofher.own sons the throne which
-was deltinrd for him. Nor did thewant either
mnbition to attempt such a high enterprize, or
.thearts requifite{for carrying. it into execution.

i~Haviig; prevailed on the Sultan- togive her only
;daughter in marriage to,Ruftan the Grand Vi.
-sier, -bhe' di(clofed her scheme to that crafty mi-
aitfer, JwhQ,, perceiving that it was his own inte-
reft t co--perate.-with her, readily promised his
;fliftance ,towardsaggrandizing that branch of
the royal line, to whlich.he.was now so nearly
,allied.

*As, oonas,Roxalana had concerted her inea-

, fures with this able.confident, she began to as-
'fe& a, wonderful zeall for the Mahometan religi-
-on, to ,whidc Solyman was superstitiously at-
tached, ,and proposed to found and endow a roy-
.1 :Mosque, a work of great expence, but deem-
ed:by the Turks meritorious in 'the highest de-
jgree. The Mufti, whom ne consulted approved
much of her pious intention; but, having been
rgained andiri infruted by Ruflan, told her that
, he being a slave could derive no benefit her-
self from that holy deed, for all the- merit of

it

jt.wauld;accrue;to -Solyman, -the imafteirwhlof Be6eoX
property fhie..was. ,Upon this she fe6ed to 4be
overwhelmed-with sorrow, and. to finkkintio.ie L53.
deepeftmelancholy, .as if she had beend ifgt~e
.with life and all its enjoyments.' ol-ymaia,- h
was absent with. the army, 'being informed-of
this dejetion of mind, and of :the-caufe from
which it proceeded, discovered all the follici-
-tude of a lover to remove it, and by a writing
under hishand declared her afree wmnanl. Ri:~-
-alana having -gained this point, proceeded--to
.build the .Mosque, and re-aflumted -her hifuial
chearfulnefs and gaiety of spirit. But whe.nSo-
lyman, on his ret.urn to Conftantiibople fentfih
,eunuch, according to the cuftemof'the feraglib,
.to bring her to partake of-hisbed,-she, feeting-
ly with deep regret, but in the-mbft perermpif-
:ry.manner, declined to to follow the leuinch,
-declaring -that ,what had-been an honour to-hgr
while a slave, -became a crime, as fe- was -nowa
:free woman,. and that she would not involve el-
,ther.the .:Sultan orlierfelf in the guiilt tiatmu:
ibe contraited.by ,fuch-an open violation of the
law of -their prophet. -Solyman, whose paffioii
cthis difficulty, *as well as the -asseted. delicacy
,w.hich gave rife. to it, heightened and inflameid,
-had recourse immediately to the. Mufti for hiis
direction. , He,-replied, agreeably to the Koran,
that Roxalana's scruples were well founded,,but
added, artfully, in words which Rufan had
taught him.to uie, that it was in the Sultan's
power to remove there difficulties, by efpqufing
'her as his lawful wife. The amorous mrniareJ
closed eagerly -with, the proposal, and foleinnly
married-her according tothe form of the 'Mah6o.
metgn-ritual;: though, by doing so, he disregarded
-a maxim of policy whieh the pride 0f the'Otto-
*man bloed-haad taught.all he: Sultans fice Ba-
jazet I. to confider as invi6lahle. From
·his time, none -of -the Turkinh monarclis
.had married, because, when he was van-

T 4 quilhed

BOOK XI. quifled and, taken prisoner by Tamerlane;
'-".' his -wife -had beeniabufed with barbarous info-

5S3. lence by the Tartars. -That rno similar calamity

might subjet Ithe Ottoman family to the like
,disgrace, the :ultans admitted.none to their bed
but slaves, whose dilhonour could. not bring any
such stain upon their house.

BUT. the ,more uncommon the ftep was, the

more it,convinced Roxalana of.the unbounded
influence which she had acquired over the Sul-
tan's heart .and emboldened her. to prosecute,
with greater, hope:.of success, the scheme that
,she had formed in order to destroy Muftapha.
This young Prince having been intruRed by his
father, according to the pra&tice.of the Sultans
.in that .age,' with the government of several dif-
ferent provinies,! was at that time invested with
theadminiftration in Diarbequir, the ancient Me-
Iopotamia,. whichSolyman had wrested from the
Persians, and added to his empire. In all these
different commands, .Muftapha had conducted
.liimfelf with. such cautious prudence as could
give no offence to his father, though, at the fame
,time, he governed with so much moderation as
well asjuftice, and displayed such valour and
generosity as rendered him equally the favou-
rite of the people and the darling of the soldiery.

THERE was no room to lay any folly or vice

to his charge, thatcould impair the high opini-
on which his father entertained of him. Roxa-
lana's malevolence was more refined; Ihe turned
his virtues against him, and made use of thele as
engines for his'detrudtion. She often mention-
ed, in Solyman's prilence, the splendid quali-
o ties of his ion; file celebrated his courage, his

liberality,, his popular arts, with malicious and
,exaggerated prailf. As so.o! as she perceiv-
ed that the Sultan heard there encomi-

t111u)

urns, which were often repeated, with BooK XL
uneasiness; that suspicion of his son began to k-W-~$
mingle itself with his former esteem of him; 553
and that by degrees he came to view him with
jealousy and fear, she introduced, as by acci-
dent, some discourse concerning the rebellion of
his father Selim against Bajazet his grandfather;
(he took notice of the bravery of the vateran
troops under Muftapha's command, and-of the
neighbourhood of Diarbequir to the territories of
the Persian Sophi, Solyman's mortal enemy.
By these arts, whatever remained of paternal
tenderness was entirely extingnifhed, and such
paffilons were kindled in his breast, as gave all
Roxalana's malignant suggestions the colour not
only of probability but truth. A deep-rooted
hatred succeeded, now, to his suspicions and
fear of Muftapha. He appointed spies to ob-
serve and report all his words and actions; he
watched and stood on his guard against him as
his molt dangerous enemy.

HAVING thus alienated the Sultan's heart
from Muftapha, Roxalana ventured upon ano-
ther ftep, and entreated Solyman to allow her
own sons the liberty of appearing at court, hop-
ing that, by gaining access to their father, they
might, by their good qualities and dutiful de-
portment, insinuate themselves into that place in
his affections, which Muftapha had formerly
held; and, though what she demanded was
contrary to the practice of the Ottoman family
in that age, the uxorious monarch granted
her request. To all these female intrigues
Ruftan added an artifice still more subtle,
which compleated th Sultan's delusion,
and heightened his jealousy and fear. He
wrote to the Bashaws of the provinces adja-
cent to Diarbequir, initrudting them to fend
him regular intelligence of Muftapha's pro-

ceedings

.Rog XI. ,ccedings in his government, and to each of then
/ ; .-vs he gave ap private hint, flowing, in appearane,

3.- frpm his zeal for their interest, that nothingwould

,be m.re lacceptable. to the Sultan, than to receive
fagvo.urable accounts of a son, whom he destined
.tofiuftain.the.glory of the Ottoman name. The

aflhaws, ignorant of his fraudulent intention,
,an :eager to;pay court to their sovereign at such
.aneafyprice, filled their letters with. studied but
fiatP al aegyricks of Muftapha, representing him
asiaP.rjn~eworthly to fiicceed such an illustrious
Ifther,, and,as endow.ed with talents which might
,enable him to.emulate, perhaps to equal his fame.
:There letters .were industriously shewn to Soly-
man,,at the.feafons when it was known that they
wiopld.make the deepest impression. Every ex-
;preflion in recommendation of his son wounded
him, to, the heart; he fufpeAed his principal of-
ficers of beingready to favour the:lift.defpe-
rate,attempts, of ,a Prince whom they .were bs
fond to praise; and fancying that'he fawt thlem
already aflaulting his throne with rebellious arms,
he, determined, while it was yet in, is. pwer,
.to ,anticipate the blow, and to fecavre his .on
..safety by his son's death.

.FOR this purpose,, though under,pretence of

.renewing the .war against Persia, 'he 9rdered
,Rutlan to march towards Diarbequir at the head
.of a numerous army, and to rid him of a.fon
.whose life he deemed inconfiftepnt with hjs own
,safety. But that crafty minifter.did nQt choose
tto be loaded with the odium of having execu-
.ted this cruel order. As soon as he arrived in
Syria he wrote to Solyman, that the, danger
was so. imminent as cglled for his immediate
,presence; that. the camp was full of!Muftaphla's
emilFaries; that. many of the foldiers.were cor-
:r.upted; that the affections, of all leaned to-
wards . nim ; that he discove.red a, negociation

which

which had been carried on.with the Sophi ofBoot XI.
Persia, in order to marry Muflapha with one of '
his daughters; that he already felt.both his ta- 53
lents and his-authority to be inadequate to the
exigencies of such an arduous conjuncture, that
the Sultan alone had sagacity to discern what
resolution should be taken in those circumftan-
ces, and power to carry that resolution into exe-
cution.

THIS charge of courting the friendship of the

Sophi, Roxalana and Ruffan had reserved as the
last and most envenomed of all their calumnies.
It operated with the violence which, they expec-
ted from Solyman's inveterate abhorrence of the
Persians, and threw him into the wildest tran-
sports of rage. He set out instantly for Syria,
and hastened thither with all the precipitation
and impatience of fear and revenge. As soon as
he joined his army near Aleppo, .and had con-
certed measures with Ruftan, he sent a Chiaus or
messenger of the court to his son, requiring him
to repair immediately to his pretence. Muftapha,
tho' no firanger to his step-mother's machinati-
ons, or to Ruftan's. malice, or to his father's vio-
lent temper, yet relying on his, innocence, and
hoping to discredit the accusations of his ene-
mies by the promptitude of his obedience, fol-
lowed the messenger without delay to Aleppo.
The moment he arrived in the camp, he.was in-
troduced into the Sultan!s tent. As he entered
it, he observed nothing, that could give him any
alarm; no additional croud of attendants, no
.body of armed guards, but the fame order and
silence which always reign in the Sultan's apart-
.ments, In a few minutes, however, several
-mutes appeared, at the fight of whom Mufta-
pha, knowing what was his doom, cried with a
lond voice, " Lo, my death !" and attempted

to

BoK "XI. to fly. The mutes rushed forward to seize him,
^"JY he resifted and firuggled, demanding with the

'553 utmost earnellnefs to fee the Sultan; and de-

spa r, together with the hope of finding protec-
tion from the soldiers, if he could escape out of
the tent, animated him with such extraordinary
frength, that, for rome time, he baffled all the
efforts of the executioners. Solyman was with-
in hearing of his son's cries, as well as of the
noise which the struggle occasioned. Impatient
of this delay of his revenge, and struck with
terror at the thought of Muftapha's escaping,
he drew aside the curtain which divided the tent,
and thrusting in his head, darted a fierce look
towards the mutes, and with wild and threaten-
ing gestures seemed to chide them for sloth and
timidity. At fight of his father's furious and
unrelenting countenance, Muftapha's Itrength
failed, and his courage forsook him; the mutes
fastened the bow-string about his neck, and in
a moment put and end to his life.

THE dead body was exposed before the Sul-

tan's tent. The soldiers gathered round it, and
contemplating that mournful object with afto-
nifhment, and sorrow, and indignation, were
ready, if a leader had not been wanting, to have
broke into the wildest excesses of rage. After
giving vent to the firit expreflions of their grief,
they retired each man to his tent, and fhlttii'g
themselves up, bewailed in secret the cruel fate
of their favourite; nor was there one of them
who talted food or even water during the re-
mainder of that day. Next morning, the fame
solitude and silence reigned in the camp and
Solyman, being afraid that some dreadful storm
would follow this fullen calm, in oder to appcafe
the enraged soldiers, deprived Ruttan of the
feals, ordered him to leave the camp, and raised

Achmet,

Achmet, a gallant officer much beloved in the Boo K XI.
army, to the dignity of V ilier. This change, A'
however, was made in concert with Ruftan 5
himself; that crafty minister suggesting it as
the only expedient which could save himself or
his master. But within a few months, when the
resentment of the soldiers began to subside, and
the name of Muftapha to be forgotten, Achmet
was strangled by the Sultan's command, and
Ruflan re-inflated in the. office of Vifier. To-
gether with his former power, he reaffumed the
plan for exterminating the race of Muftapha
which he had concerted with Roxalana; and, as
they were afraid that an only son whom Mufta-
pha had left, might grow up to avenge his death,
they redoubled their acivity, and, by employing
the fame arts against him which they had prac-
tifed against his father, they inspired Solyman
with the fame fears, and prevailed on him to
issue orders for putting to death that young in-
nocent Prince. These orders were executed,
with barbarous zeal, by an eunuch, who was
dispatched to Bursa, the place were the Prince
resided; and no rival was left to dispute the Ot-
toman throne with the sons of Roxalana *.

SUCH a tragical scene, productive of so deep Charles pro-

distress, seldom occurs but in the history of the riage be-
great monarchies of the East, where the force tween hi,
of the climate works up and sublimes all the ry of Eng-
paflions of the human mind into the greatest fu- land.
ry, and the absolute power of sovereigns enables
them to aCt with uncontrouled violence; but
while it pafled in the court of Solyman and en-
gaged his whole attention, Charles was pursuing
with the utmost ardour a new scheme for aggran-

* Augerii ,Gifenii Bufbequii Legationis Turcica EpiRol; iv.
Franc. 1615 . 37. Thuan. lib. 12. p. 43z. Mem. de Ribicr,
ji. 457. Mauroceni hiftor, Venetr, lib. vii, p. 69.

dizing

BooK XIt diinghis family Aboutt'Hirs' time, Edward the
--v-, sixth of Eiygland; after a- short reign, in which
I5:3 he displayed such- virtues- as filled' his fubjeEts

with fiaguine hopes of being- happy under
his government, and made them bear with.pa-
tiehce alt that they fuffered:from-the weaknefsi
the difeitiorts; and the ambition of tliemlniiters
who- afliumedt the admiftkation. during his: mino-
tiry, was' seized' with a lingering distemper
which threatened his life. The Emperor no
fooner'received' an account of this, than his am-
bitidn, always attentive to- seize every opportu-
nity' of aequiring' at increase' of power or
of territories to his son, suggested the
thought, of adding England' to, his other kingL
dbis, By the marriage'of Philip with the Prin-
cess Mary; the heir of Edward's crown. Be-
irg apprehensive, however, that his son, who
was then in Spain, might decline a- match with
a Princess in her thirty-eighth year, and:eleven
years older than himself*;. Charles determined,
notwithstanding Iris own age and'infirmities, to
make offer ofhirmfelf a huffiand to.his cousin.

T°o whh . BUT though Mary was so' far advanced! in
Philip gives'
hicon- years, and destitute of every charm, either of
sent. person or of nmanners, that could. win affediodn,

or command esteem,. Pliilip, without hesitation,
gave His cbrifent to- fie match proposed' by his
father, and'was willing;. according to' the ufuial
maxim of Princes; ro sacrifice His inclination to
his ambitison. In order tb insure success, the
Emperor, even before- Edward's death, began
to take ftlch feps as mighr facilitate it. Upon
Edwards drheife, lNfry mounted tlie throne of
England'; the pretensilons of tfie lady Jane Gray

' Palav. ids. Concil.l TrM, v! ii: c. '13. p'. ISb'

proving

proving as unfortunate, a- they'were ill found- Bobo IXL
ed t. Charles sent immediately a pompous em- 'k--= '
bafly to London, to congratulate Mary- on her' 1553
acceflion to the throne, and to propoofe the alli-
ance with his son. The Q(een, dazzled&with the het'
profpe& of marrying the heirof the greatef o Mro Msy',tl
narch in Europe; fond of uniting mhore closely- f h^ En
with her mother's family, to which-fhe had been- grd to it.
always warmly attached; and eager to: secure:
the powerful- aid- which fihe' knew wouldbe ne-,
ceflary towardaicarr-ying on-her- favourite scheme'
of re-establishing the Romish religion: in En-
gland, liftened-in the most favoureble. manner'
to the- popofal, Among her fubje&ts,- it met
with a very different reteption; Philip; it was
well known,g contended for all-the tenets'of the
church of Rome with a sanguinary- zeal, which,
exceeded, the- measure even of Spaniflh bigotry:
this-alarmed all the numerous partiznris- of the'
Reformation. The Caftiliati haughtinesss and,
reserve were far from being; acceptable to the
English,. who, having several, times seen their
throne occupied by' those who were born sub,-
jeets, had-become accuftomedto an uncereimo-
nious and familiar intercourse with, their fove-
reigns. They could not think, without the
utmoft-uneafinefs, of admitting a foreign.Prince
to that influence in their councils, which the
hulband of their Queen'would naturally possess.
They dreaded, both from Philip's over-bearing
temper, and from the maxims of the Spanilh
monarchy which he had imbibed, that he would
infuse ideas into the Queen's- mind, dangerous
to the liberties of the nation, and would intro-
duce foreign troopeaid money into the kingdomi
to aflift her in'any, attempt against them.

+ Carte's hifti of Bnoland, iii. 287,

.Fu i,).

BOoKXI FULL of these apprehensions, the house of
t-v- Commons, though in that age extremely obfe-
The hou5 e quious to the will of their Monarchs, presented
of Com- a warm address against the Spanish match; ma-
monrate ny pamphlets were published, representing the
sgainftit. dangerous consequences of the alliance with

Spain, and describing Philip's bigotry and arro
gance in the mofl odious colours. But Mary, in-
flexible in all her resolutions, paid no regard to
the remonstrances of her Commons, or to the
sentiments of the people. The Emperor, having
secured, by various arts, the ministers whom
the trusted most, they approved warmly of the
match, and large films were remitted by him
in order to gain the reft of the council. Cardinal
Pole, whom the Pope, immediately upon Mary's
accession, had dispatched as his legate into Eng-
land, in order to reconcile his native country to
the fee of Rome, was detained by the Empe-
ror's command at Dillinghen, in Germany, left
by his presence he should thwart Philip's preten-
sions, and employ his interest in favour of his
kinsman Courtnay Earl of Devonshire, whom
the English ardently wished their sovereign to
chufe for a husband *.

MEANWHILE, the negociation was carried

riage treaty forward with the greatest rapidity, the Empe-
concludLd. ror agreeing, without hesitation, to every arti-

cle in favour of England which Mary's ministers
either represented as necessary to soothe the
people and reconcile them to the match, or that
was suggested by their own fearsaand jealouf(r
of a foreign master. The chief articles were,

5 54. that Philip, during his rrarriag wth the Q2een,
Jan. 12. lould bear the title of Kingot England, but thl

entire administration of affairs, as well as the

» Calt, iii, 288.

li,lc

sole disposal of all revenues, offices, and bene- BooK XI.
sices should remain with the Queen; that the ~
heirs of the marriage should, together with the '54
crown of England, inherit the dutchy of Bur-
gundy and the Low-Countries; that if Prince
Charles, Philip's only son by a former marriage,
flould die without issue, his children by the
Queen, whether male or female, should succeed
to the crown of Spain and all the Emperor's
hereditary dominions; that before the confum-
mation of the marriage, Philip should swear
solemnly that he would retain no domeftick who
was not a subjet of the Queen, and would
bring no foreigners into the kingdom that
might give umbrage to the English; that he
would make no alteration in the constitution or
laws of England; that he would not carry the
Queen, or any of the children born of this mar-
riage, out of the kingdom; that if the Qgeen
should die before him without issue, he should
leave the crown to the lawful heir, without
claiming any right of administration whatever;
that England should not, in consequence of this
marriage, be engaged in any war subsisting be-
tween France and Spain; and that the alliance
between France and England should remain in
full force t.

BUT this treaty, though both the Emperor Difsontent

and Mary's ministers employed their utmofi ad- hefionP of
dress in framing it so as to please the English, the Engi-f.
was far from quieting their fears andjealoufies.
They saw that words and promises were a feeble
security against the encroachments of an ambi-
tious Prince, who, as soon as he got poffeflion of
the power and advantages which the Queen's
t Ryner's Sicd. vol. xv, 377. 393. Mem. de Rib:er, ii. 498.

VOL. Ill,

U

Iuflbancl

BooK XIhufband must necessarily enjoy, could easily
~'"T's evade any of the articles that either limited his

$154 authority, or obftruded his schemes. They

were convinced that, the more favourable the
conditions of the present treaty were to England,
the more Philip would be tempted to violate
them; and they dreaded that England, like
Naples, Milan, and the other countries annex-
ed to the Spanish crown, would soon feel the
intolerable weight of its oppreflive domination,
and be conitrained, as these had been, to waste
its wealth and vigour in wars wherein it had no
interest, and from which it could derive no ad-

Wyat'sin- vantage. There Sentiments prevailed so gene-
urreaion. rally; that every part of the kingdom was filled

with discontent at the match, and with indignati-
on against the advisers of it. Sir Thomas Wyat,
a gentleman of some note, and of good inten-
tions towards the publick, took advantage of
this, and routed the inhabitants of Kent to arms,
in order to save their country from a foreign
yoke. Such numbers retorted in a short time to
his tfandard; he marched to London with such
rapidity; and the Queen was so utterly unpro-
vided for defence, that the aspet of affairs was
extremely threatening, and if any nobleman of
diftinetion had joined the malecontents, or had
Wyat pofleffed talents equal, in any degree, to
the boldness of his enterprize, the infurretion
must have proved fatal to Mary's power. But
all his measures were concerted with so little
prudence, and executed with such irresolution,
that many of his followers forsook him; the
reft were dispersed by an handful of men; and
he himfelfwas taken prisoner, without having
made any effort worthy of the cause that he
had undertaken, or suitable to the ardour
with which he engaged in it. He suffered the pu-
niflment due to his rashness and rebellion.
The Queen's authority was confirmed and ir-

crealed

created by her success in defeating this inconfi- Boog XI.
derate attempt to abridge it. The lady Jane 'V
Gray, whose title the ambition of her relations
had set up in opposition to the Queen's, was,
notwithstanding her youth and innocence,
brought to the scaffold. The lady Elizabeth,
the Queen's sifter, was observed with the most
jealous attention. The treaty of marriage was
ratified by the parliament.

PHILIP landed in England, with a magnifi- The mar-

cent retinue, celebrated his nuptials with great bragted.
solemnity, and though he could not lay aside
his natural severity and pride, or assume graci-
ous and popular manners, he endeavoured to
conciliate the favour of the English nobility by
his extraordinary liberality. In cafe that should
fail of acquiring him such influence in the go-
vernment of the kingdom, as he aimed at ob-
taining, the Emperor kept a body of twelve
thousand men on the coast of Slanders, in rea-
diness to embark for England, and to support
him in all his enterprizes.

EMBOLDENED by all there favourable circum- Mary's

stances, Mary pursued the scheme of extirpating overftureth
the Protestant religion out of her dominions, Proeftant
with the most precipitant zeal. The laws of Englnd.
Edward the sixth in favour of the Reformation
were repealed; the protestant clergy ejected;
all the forms and rites of the Popish worship were
re-efl-ablilhed; the nation was solemnly absolved
from the guilt which it had contraced during
the period of its apoftacy, and was publickly
reconciled to the church of Rome, by cardinal
Pole, who, immediately after the Queen's mar-
riage was permitted to continue his journey to
England, and to exercise his legantine funti-

U 2 ons

Boos XI. ons with the most ample power. Not'fatisfied
'"~V - with having overturned the Proteltant church,

554. and having eftabliflhed her own system on its

ruins, Mary insisted that all her fuibjeds shou!d
conform to the fame mode of worship which she
preferred; Should profess their faith in the
fame creed which she had approved; and abjure
every practice or opinion that was deemed re-
pugnant to either of their. Powers, altogether
unknown in the English conflitution were, veiled
in certain persons appointed to take cognizance
of heresy, and they proceeded to exercise them
with more than inquisitorial severity. The prof-
ped of danger, however, did not intimidate
the teachers of the Proteffant doctrines, who
believed that they were contending for truths
of the utmost consequence to the happiness of
mankind. They boldly avowed their lenti-
ments, and were condemned to that cruel death
which the church of Rome reserves for its ene-
nemies. This mhocking punishment was in-
slided with that barbarity which the rancour of
false zeal alone can inspire. The English, who
are inferior in humanity to no people in Europe,
and remarkable for the mildness of their publick
executions, beheld, with astonishment and hor-
ror, persons who had filled the moif refpeftable
flations in their church, and who were venera-
ble on account of their age, their piety and their
literature, condemned to endure torments, to
which even the most atrocious criminals were
not fubjeted.

The ob- THIS extreme rigour did not accomplilh the
which he end at which Mary aimed. The patience and
had tofur- fortitude with which thefc martyrs for the Re-
ront'. formation submitted to their fufirlring, the

heroick contempt of death exprcffed by persons
of every rank, and age, and tex, confirmed

main

many more in the Protestant faith, than the BoolK XI.
threats of their enraged persecutors could fright- J
en into apoftacy. The business offuch as were '554.
entrusted with trying of hereticks grew upon
them, and appeared to be as endless as it was
odious. The Queen's ablest ministers became
sensible how impolitick as well as dangerous it
was to irritate the people, by the frequent spec-
tacle of publick executions, which they detest-
ed both as unjust and cruel. Even Philip was
so thoroughly convinced of her having run to
an excess of rigour, that, on this occasion, he as-
fumed a part to which he was little accustomed,
becoming an advocate for moderation and le-
nity.

BuT, notwithstanding this attempt to ingra- TheEangi&i

tiate himself with the English, they discovered jpel o
a conftantjealoufy and distrust of all his intenti-
ons; and when some members, who had been
gained by the court, ventured to move in the
house of Commons that the nation ought to aflift
the Emperor, the Queen's father-in-law, in his
war against France, the proposal was reje&ted
with general diffatisfaftion. A motion which
was made, that the parliament should give its
consent that Philip might be publickly crowned
as the Queen's husband, met with such a cold
reception, that it was instantly withdrawn t.

MEANWHILE, the King of France had ob- TheFrench

served the progress of the Emperor's negociation enat tmh
in England with much uneasiness. The great ac- match be-
ceflion of territories as well as reputation which lip" d MP.

ry.

Godwin's Annals of Q Mary ap. Kennett. v. ii, p, 329.
Burnet's hilt. of Refor. ii. 298. 305.

t Carte's hit. of England. iii. 314

U 2

his

BooK Xl. his enemy would acquire by the marriage of

' his son with the Queen of such a powerful king-
554. dom was obvious and formidable. He easily

foresaw that the English, notwithstanding all
their fears and precautions, would be soon
drawn in to take part in the quarrels on the
continent, and be compelled to at in fubfervi-
ency to the Emperor's ambitious schemes. For
this reason, Henry had given it in charge to his
ambassador at the court of London, to employ
all his address in order to defeat or retard the
treaty of marriage; and as there was not, at
that time, any Prince of the blood in France,
whom he could propose to the Queen as a hus-
band, he inftrudted him to co-operate with such
of the English as wished their sovereign to marry
one of her own fubjeAs. But the Queen's ar-
dour and precipitation, in closing with the first
overtures in favour of Philip, having rendered
all his endeavours ineffectual, Henry was so far
from thinking it prudent to give any aid to the
Engliih malecontents, though earnestly follicited
by Wyat and their other leaders, who tempted
him to take them under his protection, by offers
of great advantage to France, that he command-
ed his ambassador to congratulate the Queen in
the warmest terms upon the fuppreflion of the
insurrection.

tions aprp^ But, notwithstanding there external profefli-
vigorus ons, he dreaded so much the consequence of
m 4PDi.' this alliance, which more than compensated

for all that the Emperor had loft in Germany,
that he determined to carry on his military ope-
rations both in the Low-Countries, apd in Italy,
with extraordinary vigour, in order that he
might compel Charles to accept of an equitable
peace, before his daughter-in-law could fur-
mount the aversion of her fubjets to a war on
the cotinent, and prevail on them to aflift the

Emperor

Emperor either with money or troops. For this BOOK XI.
purpose, he exerted himself to the utmost in -
order to have a numerous army early assembled 'S54
on the frontiers of the Netherlands, and while
one part of it laid waste the open country of
Artois, the main body, under the Constable
Montmorency, advanced towards the provinces
of Liege and Hainaut by the forest of Ardennes.

THE campaign was opened with the siege of The pro.
Mariemburgh, a town which the Queen of gref of bhi
Hungary, the governess of the Low-Countries, r
had fortified at great expence; but, being def-
ditute of a sufficient garrison, it surrendered in
fix days. Henry, elated with this success, put June 28.
himself at the head of his army, and investing
Bouvines, took it by assault, after a short re-
fiftance. With equal facility he became master
of Dinant; and then, turning to the left, bent
his march towards the province of Artois. The
vast rums which the Emperor had remitted into The Vtmpt

ror little

England, had so exhausted his treasury, as to able to ob.
render his preparations, at this juncture, flower tru it.
and more dilatory than usual. He had no body
of troops to make head against the French at
their first entrance into his territories; and tho'
he drew together all the forces in the country,
in the utmost hurry, and gave the command of
them to Emanuel Philibert of Savoy, they were
in no condition to face an enemy so far superior
in number. The Prince of Savoy, however,
by his activity and good conduct, made up for
his want of troops. By watching all the mo-
tions of the French at a distance, and by chufing
his own posts with such (kill as put it out of
their power either to form any siege of confe-
quence or to attack him, he obliged them to fall
back for want of subsistence towards their own
frontiers, after having burnt all the open towns,
and having plundered the country through

U 4 which

BoOK XI. which they marched with a cruelty and licence

more becoming a body of light troops than a

'554 royal army led by a great monarch.

The French BUT Henry, that he might not dismiss his
invest Rcn-

. army, without attempting tome conqueff ade-

quate to the vass preparations, as well as fan-
guine hopes with which he had opened the cam-
paign, inveffed Renti, a place deemed in that
age of great importance, as, by its situation on
the confines of Artois and Boulonnais, it co-
vered the former province, and proteted the
parties which had made incursions into the latter.
The town, which was firongly fortified and pro-
vided with a numerous garrison, made a gal-
lant defence; but being warmly pressed by a
powerful army, it must soon have yielded. The
Emperor, who at that time enjoyed a short in-
terval of ease fiom the gout, was so follicitous
to save it, that, although he could bear no other
motion but that of a litter, he instantly put him-
self at the head of his army, which having re-
ceived several reinforcements was now strong
enough to approach the enemy. The French
were eager to decide by a battle, what fhoul(i
be the fate of Renti, and expeced it from the
Emperor's arrival in the camp; but Charles a-
voided it with great industry, and as he had no-
thing in view but to save the town, he hoped to
accomplish that, without exposing himself to the
consequences of such a dangerous and doubtful
event.

An a&ion NOTWITHSTANDING all his precautions, a
between the
two armies. dispute, about a post which both armies endea-
AJv. '13 voured to seize, brought on an engagement

which proved almost general. The Duke of
Guise, who commanded the wing of the French
which stood the brunt of the combat, displayed

valour

valour and conduct worthy of the defender of Boo K XI.
Metz; the Imperialists, after an obstinate ifrug- - '
gle, were repulsed; the French remained maf- '554
ters of the post in dispute; and if the Constable,
either from his natural caution and slowness, or
from unwillingness to support a rival whom he
hated, had not delayed bringing up the main
body to second the impreflion which Guise had
made, the rout of the enemy must have been
complete. The Emperor, notwithstanding the
lots which he had sustained, continued in the
fame camp; and the French, being straiten-
ed for provisions, and finding it impossible to car-
ry on the siege in the face of an hostile army,
quitted their intrenchments. They retired o-
penly, courting the enemy to approach, ra-
ther than shunning an engagement.

BUT Charles, having gained his end, susser- rhnlftsin

ed them to march off unmolested. As soon as vade Pic-
his trroops entered their own country, Henry rdy.
threw garrisons into the frontier towns, and dif-
miffed the reft of the army. This encouraged
the Imperialists to push forward with a confide-
rable body of troops into Picardy, and by lay-
ing waite the country with fire and sword, they
endeavoured to revenge themselves for the ra-
vages which the French had committed in Hai-
nault and Artois t. But as they were not able
to reduce any place of importance, they gain-
ed nothing more than the enemy had done by
this cruel and inglorious method of carrying on
the war.

MEANWHILP, the arms of France were still Affirs o

more unsuccessful in Italy. The footing which ltly.
the French had acquired in Siena occasioned
much uneasiness to Cosmo di Medici, the most

t Thuan. 460, &c. I-Iarai Ann. Brab. 674.

sagacious

Boon XI. sagacious and enterprizing of all the Italian Prin-

V ces. He dreaded the neighbourhood of a pow-
I 545 erful people, to whom all who favoured the an-

cient republican government in Florence would
have recourse, as to their natural protetor a-
gainft that absolute authority which the Emperor
had enabled him to usurp; he knew how odious

d he was to the French, on account of his at-

Medici's tachment to the Imperial party; and he fore-
schemes saw that if they were permi tted to gather strength
with regard
to siea. in Siena, Tuscany would soon feel the effects

of their resentment. For these reasons, he
wished with the utmost follicitude for the ex-
pulfion of the French out of the Sienefe, before
they had time to establish themselves thorough-
ly in the country, or to receive such reinforce-
ments from France as would render it dangerous
to attack them. As this, however, was pro-
perly the Emperor's business, who was called
by his interest as well as honour to dislodge there
formidable intruders into the heart of his do-
minions, Cosmo laboured to throw the whole
burden of the enterprize on him; and on that
account had given no assistance, during the for-
mer campaign, but by advancing some small
fums of money towards payment of the Impe-
rial troops.

He negoci- BUT as the defence of the Netherlands en-
teE whe. grossed all the Emperor's attention, and his re-
she Empe.
ror. mittances into England had drained his treaiury,

it was obvious that his operations in Italy would
be extremely feeble; and Cosmo plainly per-
ceived that, if he himself did not take part o-
penly in the war, and ad with vigour, the
French would scarce meet any annoyance. As
his situation rendered this resolution neceflary
and unavoidable, his next care was to execute
it in such a manner, that he might derive fiom
it some other advantage, beside that of driving

the

the French out of his neighbourhood. With this BOOK Xl-
view, he dispatched an envoy to Charles, and of- ''T1
sered to declare war against France, and to re- '554
duce Siena at his own charges, on condition that
he should be repaid whatever he should expend
in the enterprize, and be permitted to retain all
his conquests until his demands were fully fa-
tisfied. Charles, to whom, at this junCture, the
war against Siena was an intolerable burden, and
who had neither expedient nor resource that
could enable him to carry it on with proper vi-
gour, closed gladly with this overture; and
Cosmo, well acquainted with the low itate of
the Imperial finaces, flattered himself that the
Emperor, finding it impossible to re-imburse him,
would susser him to keep quiet poffeflion of
whatever places he should conquer .

FULL of there hopes, he made great prepa- Enters into

rations for war, and as the French King had ,rncith
turned the strength of his arms againit the Ne-
therlands, he did not despair of assembling flch
a body of men, as would prove more than a sus-
ficient match for any force which he could bring
into the field in Italy. He endeavoured to ob-
tain afliftance from the Pope, or at least to fe-
cure his remaining neutral, by giving one of
his daughters to that Pontiff's nephew. He at-
tempted to detach the Duke of Orsini, whose
family had been long attached to the French
party, from his ancient confederates, by bestow-
ing on him another of his daughters; and, what
was of greater consequence than either of there,
he engaged John James Medecino, Marquis of Gives the

command ol

Marignano, to take the command of his army t. his army to
This officer, from a very low condition in life, Medecino

* Adriani Iftoria de fuoi tempi, vol. i. 66a.
· Adriani Iftoria, vol. i. p. 663.

had

BooK XI. had raied himself, through all the ranks of ser-
'"'^- vice, to high command, and had displayed ta-

554 tlents and acquired reputation in war, which en-

tiled him to be placed on a level with the greatest
generals of that martial age. Having attained
a station of eminence so disproportionate to his
birth, he laboured with a fond follicitude to
conceal his original ohfcurity, by giving out that
he was descended of the family of Medici, to
which honour the cafilal resemblance of his
name was his only pretension. Cosmo, happy
that he could gratify him at such an easy rate,
flattered his vanity in this point, acknowledged
him as a relation, and permitted him to assume
the arms of his family: Medicino, eager to
serve the head of that family, of which he now
confidered himself as a branch, applied with
wonderful zeal and afliduity to raise troops; and
as, during his long service, he had acquired great
credit with the leaders of those mercenay bands,
which forced the strength of Italian armies, he
engaged the mofft eminent of them to follow
Cosmo's flandard.

P"etrStd To oppose this able general, and the formi-
with the dable army which he had assembled, the King
^oe Fnalhf of France made choice of Peter Strozzi, a Flo-
.imy il. rentine nobleman, who had long resided in
'ly.' France, as an exile, and who had risen by his

merit to high repultation and command in the
army. He was the son of Philip Strozzi, who,
in the year one thousand five hundred and thir-
ty-feven, had concurred with filch ardour in the
attempt to expel the finmily of Medici out of
Florence, and to -r-eflablifli the ancient repub-
lican form of government; and who had pe-
riflcd in the undertakilg. The son inherited
the implacnble aversion to the Medici, as well
as the fame entlufiatlick zeal for the liberty of
Florence, which had animated his father, whose

death

death he was impatient to revenge. Henry flat- BOOK XI.
tered himself that his army would make rapid '-v
progress under ageneral, whole zeal to promote '554
his interest was routed and seconded by such
powerful pallions; especially as he had allotted
him, for the scene of aftion, his native country,
in which he had many powerful partizans ready
to facilitate all his operations.

BUT how specious soever the motives might The impr-

appear which induced Henry to make this choice, enceoftha
it proved fatal to the interests of France in Italy.
Cosmo, as Loon as he heard that the mortal ene-
my of his family was appointed to take the
command in Tuscany, concluded that the King
of France aimed at something more than the
protection of the Sienefe, and saw the neceflity
of making extraordinary efforts, not merely to
reduce Siena, but to save himself from deftruc-
tion *. At the fame time, the Cardinal of Ser-
rara, who had the entire direction of the French
affairs in Italy, confidered Strozzi as a formi-
dable rival in power; and, in order to prevent
him from acquiring any increase of authority
from success, he was extremely remiss in sup-
plying him either with money to pay his troops,
or with provisions to support them. Strozzi him-
seif, blinded by his resentment against the Me-
dici, pushed on his operations with impetuosity
of revenge, rather than with the caution and
prudence becoming a great general.

AT firit, however, he attacked several towns The bLatle

in.the territories of Florence, with filch vigour,
as obliged Medicino, in order to check his
progress, to withdraw the greater part of
his army from Siena, which he had invested
before Strozzi's arrival in Italy. As Cfomo

* Pecci Memnoric di Siena, vol. iv. p. 13, &c.

iiftained

EooKXI.£fuftained the whole burden of military ope-
1'v" rations, the expence of which muff have
t554. exhausted his revenues, neither the viceroy

of Naples nor governor of Milon were in
condition to afford him any aid; and as the
troops which Medecino had left in the camp be-
fore Siena could attempt nothing against it du-
ring his absence; it was Strozzi's business to
have protracted the war, and to have transferred
the feat of it into the territories of Florence; but
the hope of ruining the enemy with one decisive
blow, precipitated him into a general engage-
ug 3' ment not far from Marciano. The armies were

nearly equal in number; but a body of Italian
cavalry, in which Strozzi placed great confidence,

n which the having fled, either thro' the treachery or cowar-
French are dice of the officers who commanded it, without
defeated. making any refifance, the infantry remained

exposed to the attacks of all Medecino's troops.
Encouraged, however, by Strozzi's pretence
and example, who, after receiving a dangerous
wound in endeavouring to rally the cavalry,
placed himself at the head of the infantry; and
manifested an admirable prefenceof mind, as well
as extraordinary valour, they flood their ground
with great firmness, and repulsed such of the e-
nemy as ventured to approach them. But there
gallant troops, being surrounded at last on every
fide, and torn in pieces by a battery of cannon
which Medecino brought to bear upon them, the
Florentine cavalry broke in on their flanks, and
a general rout ensued. Strozzi, faint with the
loss of blood, and deeply affected with the fa-
tal consequences of his own raflnefs, found the
itmoft difficuly in making his escape with a
handful of men.*

Pecci Memorie della Siena, vol. iv. p. 157.

ME DECINO

MEDECINO returned immediately to the siege BooK XL

of Siena with his vitorious troops, and as Stroz- -' -
zi could not, after the utmost efforts of aftivity, Me'dic54
coiled as many m n as to form the appearance befegu
of a regular army, he had leisure to carry on sieC
his approaches against the town without moles-
tation. But the Sienefe, instead of finking into hchjas

gallantly

despair upon this cruel disappointment of their defended by
onl\ hope of obtaining relief, prepared to de- the cdizean
fend themselves to the utmost extremity, with
that undaunted fortitude, which the love of li-
berty alone can inspire. This generous refolu-
tion was warmly seconded by Monluc, who com-
manded the French garrison in the town. The
ative and enterprizing courage which he had
displayed on many occasions had procured him
this command; and as he had ambition which a-
spired at the highest military dignities, without
any pretensions to attain them but what he could
derive from merit, he determined to distinguish
his defence of Siena by extraordinary efforts of
valour and perseverance. For this purpose, he,
with unwearied industry, repaired and strength-
ened the fortifications; he trained the citizens to
the use of arms, and accustomed them to go
thro' the fatigues and dangers of service in com-
mon with the soldiers; and as the enemy were
extremely ftrid in guarding all the avenues to
the city, he hufblii(dv, the provisions in the ma-
gazines with the most parsimonious ceconomy,
and prevailed on tlhe soldiers, as well as the citi-
zens, to reitrid themselves to a very moderate
daily allowance for their fibliftence. Medeci-
no, though his army was not numerous enough
to florm the town by open force, ventured twice
to assault it by furprize, but he was received
each time with so much spirit, and repulsed with
such loss, as discouragcd him from repeating the
attempt, and left him no hopes of reducing the
town but by famine.

WITH

BOOK XI. WITH this view, he fortified his own camp
'--v ' with great care, occupied all the posts of

'd554 strength round the place, and having entirely

Medicino
converts the cut off the besieged from any communication
blckade. with the adjacent country, he waited patiently

until necessity should compel them to open their
gates. But the enthufiaftick zeal of the citizens
for liberty, made them despise the inconvenien-
cies occasioned by scarcity of provisions, and
even supported them long under all the mise-
ries of famine; Monluc, by his eaxmple and ex-
hortations, taught his soldiers to vie with them
in patience and abstinence; and it was not un-
til they had with flood afiege of ten months, un-
til they had eaten up all the horses, dogs, and
other animals in the place, and were reduced
555, almost to their last morsel of bread, that they

proposed a capitulation. Even then, they de,
manded honourable terms; and as Cosmo,
though no stranger to the extremity of their
condition, was afraid that despair might prompt
them to venture upon some wild enterprize, he
immediately granted them conditions more fa-
vourable than they could have expected.

April 22. THE capitulation was made in the Emperor's
bhle td name, who engaged to take the republick of
famine to Siena under the protection of the Empire; he
capitulate. promised to maintain the ancient liberties of the

city, to allow the magistrates the full exercise
of their former authority, to secure the citizens
in the undisturbed poffeflion of their privileges
and property; he granted an ample and unli-
mited pardon to all who hlad born arms against
him; he reserved to himself the right of placing
a garrison in the town, but engaged not to re-
build the citadel without the consent of the citi-
zens. Monluc and his French garrison were al-
lowed to march out with all the honours of war.

MEDECI No

MEDECINO observed the articles of capitula- BOOK XI.
tion, so far as depended on him with great ex- L-
afnefs. No violence or insult whatever was of- 55
sered to the inhabitants, and the French garrison
was received with all the refpet due to its fpi-
ri and bravery. But many of the citizens sus- M"nyofthe
peCting from the extraordinary facility with which tire to
they had obtained such favourable conditions, Mont6-AI-
that the Emperor, as well as Cosmo, would take'"
the first opportunity of violating them, and dif-
daining to possess a precarious liberty, which de-
pended on the will of another, abandoned the
place of their nativity, and accompanied the
French to Monte-Alcinor, Porto Ercoie, and o-
ther small towns in the territory of the republic.
They effablifhed in Monti-Alcino the fame mo-
del of government to which they had been ac-
cuflomrd at Siena, and appointing magistrates and eflablifn
vith the fame titles andjurifdiction, solaced them- free go-

ve/nment
selves with this image of their ancient liberty. there.

THE fears of the Sienefe concerning the fate Hardfipsto
ns their country were not imaginary, or theirwhichthe

r>

r** r i - - i citizens of

frifpicion of the Emperor and Cosmo ill-founded; Siena were
for no sooner had the Imperial troops taken po- fabjeaed.
fefiion of the town, than Cosmo, without regard-
ing the articles of capitulation, not only displaced
the magistrates who were in office, and nomina-
ted new ones devoted to his interest, but com-
manded all the citizens to deliver up their arnm
to perions whom he appointed to receive them.
They ifubmirted to the former from ncceflity,
though with all the relutance and regret which
menc accultomed to liberty feel in obeying the
fils commands of a matter. They did not yield
the fame tame obedience to the latter; and ma-
ny persons of diflintion, rather than degrade
themselves, by llrrendering their arms, from the

VOL. III. X rank

317

Boor Xl. rank of freemen to the condition of slaves, flee

_^u.-- to their countrymen at Monte-Alcino, and cho(r

to endure all the hardships, and encounter all
the dangers which they had reason to exped in
that new fiation, where they had fixed the feat
of their republick.

Cotoo at-
tacks those COSMO, not reckoning himlelf secure while
who hsd-re- fiuch numbers of implacable and defperare ene-

mies were fettled in his neighbourhood, and re-
tained any degree of power, follicited Medicino
to attack them in their different places of retreat,
before they had time to recruit their ftrenoth
and spirits, after the many calamities which they
had suffered. He prevailed on him, though his
army was much weakened by hard duty during
the siege of Siena, to invest Porto Ercole; and
the fortifications being both flight and incum-
pleat, the besieged were loon compelled to open
June 13. their gates. An unexpected order which Mede-

cino received from the Emperor to detach the
greater part of his troops into Piedmont, pre-
vented farther operations, and permitted the Sie-
nefe exiles to reside for some time undisturbed in
Mont-Alcino. But their unhappy countrymen
who remained at Siena, were not yet at the end
of their sufferings; for the Emperor instead of
adhering to the articles of capitulation, granted
his Ton Philip the investiture of that city and all
its dependencies; and Francis de Toledo, in the
name of their new master, proceeded to fettle
the civil and military government, treated them
like a conquered people, and fubjeded them to
the Spanish yoke, without paying any regard
whatever to their privileges or eflablifhed forms
of policy ".

e Sleid. 617. Thuan. lib. xv. 526. 537, Joan. Carnerarii

adnot. rer. pracipuarnlm ab anno 1go ad i 561 ap Freherum,
vol. iii. p. 564. Pecci Memmorie dell a Siena, iv. 164, &c.

THE

THE Imperial army in Piedmont had been so BOOK XI.
feeble, for bome time, and its commanders so in- '-v
aftive that the emperor, in order to give vigor operatons
to his operations in that quarter, found it necef- inPiedmont.
jiry not only to call off Medecino's troops from
Tulcany, while in the career of conquest, but
to employ in Piedmont a general of such repu-
tation and abilities, as might counterbalance the
great military talents of the Marechal Briffac,
who vas at the head of the French forces in that
country.

HE pitched on the duke of Alva for that pur- Charlesap.
pol ; but it was as much the effect of a court pDointthe

Duke ofAl-

intrigue, as of his opinion of the Duke's merit, va genera-
which led him to this choice. Alva had long at- lifimo there
tended Philip with the utmost alliduity, and had
endeavoured to work himself into his confidence
by all the inlinuating arts of which his haughty
and inflexible nature was capable. As he nearly
rclembled that Prince in many features of his cha-
rader, he began to gain much of his good-will.
Ruy Gomez de Silva, Philip's favourite, who
dreaded the progress which this formidable rival
made in his malter's affections, had the address
to prevail with the Emperor to name Alva to
this command The duke, though sensible that
he owed this diftinstion to the malicious arts of
aa enemy, who had no other aim than to remove
him at a distance from court, was of such punCti-
lious honour, that he would not decline a com-
mand that appeared dangerous and difficult, but,
at the fame time, so haughty that he would not
accept of it but on his own terms, insisting on be-
ing appointed the Emperor's Vicar General in
Italy, with the iiupreme military command in all
the Imperial and Spanilh territories in that coun-
try. Charles granted all his demands; and he

X 2 took

319

BOOK XI. took poffeflion of his new dignity with almost

, 555 unlimited authority.

His opera. HIS first operations, however, \ ere neither
tions there
inconfider- proportioned to his former reputation and the ex-
able. tensive powers with which he was invefled, nor

did they come up to the Emperor's expectations,
Briffac had under his command an army which,
though inferior in number to the Imperialists,
was composed of chosen troops, which having
grown old in service in that country, where every
town was fortified, and every cafile capable of
being defended, were perfectly acquainted with
the manner of carrying on war there. By their
valour, and his own good conduct, Briflac not
only defeated all the attempts of the Imperialists,
but added new conqueffts to the territories of
which he was formerly master. Alva, after ha-
ving boafled, with his usual arrogance, that he
would drive the French out of Piedmont in a
few weeks, was obliged to retire into winter quar-
ters, with the ignominy of being unable to pre-
serve entire that part of the country of which
the Emperor had hitherto kept poffeflion f.

As the operations of this campaign in Pied-

mont were indecisive, those in the Netherlands
were inconsiderable, neither the Emperor nor
King of France being able to bring into the field
an army strong enough to undertake any enter-

Aconfpira- prize of moment. But what Charles wanted in
Metz to th force, he endeavoured to supply by a bold firata-
imperialists. gem, the success of which would have been equal

to that of the most vigorous campaign. During
the siege of Metz, Leonard Father Guardian of
a convent of Franciscans in'that city had, by his
attachment to the French interest, insinuated him-

f Thuan. lib. xv. 529. Guichenon Hist. de Savoyc, tom.
i. 679.ls

self

self far into the esteem and favour of the duke of BOOK XI.
Guise. Being a man of an active and intriguing .y
spirit, he had been extremely useful both in 555
animating the inhabitants to fuflain with patience'
all the hardships of the siege, and in procuring
intelligence of the enemies designs and motions.
The merit of there important services, together
with the warm recommendations of the Duke of
Guise, secured him such high confidence with
Vielleville, who was appointed governor of Metz,
when Guise left the town, that he was permitted
to converse or correspond with whatever persons
he chore, and nothing that he did created any
filfpicion. This monk, from the levity natural
to bold and projecting adventurers; or from re-
fentment againfl the French, who had not be-
fRowed on him such rewards as he thought due
to his own merit or tempted, by the unlimi-
ted confidence which was placed in him, to ima-
gine that he might carry on and accomplish any
icheme with perfed security ; formed a design of
betraying Metz to the Imperialists.

HE communicated his intentions to the Queen- The plan of
dowager of Hungary, who governed the Low- i
Countries in name of her brother. She appro-
ving, without any scruple, an at of treachery,
from which the Emperor might derive such fig-
nal advantage, aflifted the Father Guardian in
concerting the most proper plan for ensuring its
filccefs. They agreed that the Father Guardian
should endeavour to gain the monks of his con-
vent to concur in promoting the design; that he
flould introduce into the convent a certain num-
ber of chosen soldiers, disguised in the habit of
friars; that when every thing was ripe for exe-
cution, the governor of Thionville rhould march
towards Metz in the night with a considerable
body of troops, and attempt to scale the ram-

X 3 parts;

BooK XI. parts; that while the garrison was employed in
' -7.7 resisting the alsailants, the monks should set fire

to the town in different places; that the soldiers
who lay concealed Ihould rally out of the convent,
and attack those who defended the ramparts in
the rear. Amidst the univerlal terror and con-
fusion, which events lo unexpected would occafi-
on, it was not doubted but that the Imperiallifts
might become masters of the town. As a re-
compence for this service the Father Guardian
flipulated that he should be appointed bifflop of
Metz, and ample rewards were promiled to fi'ch
of his monks as should be most active in co-o c-
rating with him.
ts progress. THE Father Guardian accomplished lwhat h

had undertaken to perform with great fec-ecy
and dispatch. By his authority and arguments,
as well as by the profped of wealth or honours
which he set before his monks, he prevailed (on
all us them to enter into the conspiracy. He in-
troduced into the convent, as many lbldiers ;s
wero thought fufficienr, without being fufpntctl.
The governor of Thionville, apprised in due
time of the design, had af.cmbled a proetr num-
ber of troops for executing it; and the Inoment
approached, which probably would have wrfticd
from Henry the most imnportant of all his ci-
quests.
dircovercd. BUT happily for France, on the very day tl:it

was fixed for striking the blow, Viellevillc, :an
able and vigilant officer, received inforn ;ti)n
from a spy whom he entertained at Thionii!le,
that certain Franciscan friars reibrted frequently
thither, and were admitted to many private col-
ferences with the governor, who was carrying
on preparations fir tome military enterpiiz witcl

gre;t

great dispatch, but with a nmof myflerious fe- Boo XI.
crecy. This was sufficient to awaken Vielleville's "'
suspicions. Without communicating the&e to any
person, he instantly visited the convent of Fran-
cifcans; detected the soldiers who were conceal-
ed there; and frced them to ditcover as much
as they knew concerning the nature of the enter-
prize. The Father Guardian, who had gone to
Thionville that he might put the last hand to his
machinations, was seized at the gate as he re-
turned; and he, in order to save himself from
the rack, revealed all the circumstances of the
consp)iracy.

VIELLEVILLr not satisfied with having seized A body of

the traitors, and having frustrated their schemes, d,.featcd.
was follicitous to take advantage of the diocove-
ries which he had made, so as to be revenged
on the Imperialists. For this purpose he march-
ed out with the belt troops in his garrison, and
placing these in ambuih near the road, by which
the Father Guardian had informed him that the
governor of Thionville would approach Metz,
he fell upon the Imperialists with great fury, as
they advanced in perfect security, without sus-
pecting any danger to be near. Confounded at
this tudden attack, by an enemy whom they ex-
pedted to furprize, they made little resistance;
and a great part of the troops employed in this
iervice, among which were many perbons of dif-
tintion, was killed or taken prisoners. Before
next morning, Viclleville returned to Metz in tri-
um ph.

No resolution was taken for (ome time con- The confpi-

cerning the fate of the Father Guardian and his ''°i.p'
monks, the framers and conductors of' this dan-
gerous conspiracy. Regard for the honour of a
body so numerous and refpedeablc as the Francis-

X 4. cans,

BOOK XI. cans, and unwillingness to afford a subjet of tri-
Lv* - umph to the enemies of the Romish church by
'555' their disgrace, seem to have occasioned this de-

lay. But at length, the necessity of inflicting ex-
emplary punifhmnent upon them, in order to de-
ter others from venturing to commit the fame
crime, became so evident, that orders were if-
sued to proceed to their trial. Their guilt was
made apparent by the clearest evidence; and
sentence of death was passed upon the Father
Guardian together with twenty monks. On the
evening previous to the day fixed for their execu-
tion, the jailor took them out of the dungeons in
which they had hitherto been confined separately,
and shut them all up in one great room, that
they might confess their fins one to another, and
join together in preparing for a future slate. But
as soon as they were left alone, instead of em-
ploying themselves in the religious exercises suit-
able to their condition, they began to reproach
the Father Guardian, and four of the senior
monks who had been motl a&ive in seducing
them, for their inordinate ambition, which had
brought such misery on them, and such disgrace
upon their order. From reproaches they pr<:-
ceeded to curses and execrations, and at lafi, ill
a frenzy of rage and de(pair, they fell upon them
with such violence, that they murdered the S.i-
ther Guardian on the spot, and so disabled t c
other four, that it became neccilary to carry
them next morning in a cart, together with tlih
dead body of the Father Guardian to the place
of execution. Six of the youngefl were pardoln-
ed, the reft suffered the punifllmcnt which tlhir
crime merited g.

g Thuan. lib. xv. p. 522. Belcar. Corn. Rer. Gal. 8S6.

Menioircs du Marech. Viellevillc, par M. Charloix, tom. iii
p. 249, &c. p. 347. Par. 1757.

TIIOUGI-

TF.OUGH both parties, exhausted by the length BOOK T.

of the war, carried it on in this languishing manner, ,
neither of them shewe-d any disposition to liften to xA f'r, ti
overtures of peace. Cardinal Pole indeed labour- j:;... '",,
ed with all the zeal becoming his piety and huni a- i:'ltl t.
nity, to re-establish concord among the Princes of ''"
Christendom. He had not only perfliaded his mif-
trefs, the Qceen of England, to enter warmly into
his sentiments and to offer her mediation to the
contending powers, but had prevailed both on the
EmFeror and Kirg of France to find their plenipo-
tentiaries to a village between Gravelines and Ar-
dres. He himself, together with Gardiner bishop
of \Wirchefter repaired thither in order to preside
as mediators in the conferences, which were to be
held for adjuftir.g all the points in difference. But
though both the monarchs committed this negoci-
ation to those minilfers, in whom they placed the
greatest confidence, it was soon evident that they
came together with no sincere desire of accommo-
dation. Each proposed articles so extravagant that M^,. ;.
they could have no hopes of their being accepted.
Pole, after exerting, in vain, all his zeal, address
and invention, in order to persuade them to relin-
quill such extravagant demands, and to content
to the substitution of more equal conditions, be-
came sensible of the folly of wafting time, in at-
tempting to reconcile those, whom their obstinacy
reltdered irreconcileable, broke off the conference,
a:id returled into England h

DURING these tranfaclions in other parts of Eu- '.ri;, i

r(!e, Germany enjoyed luch profound tranquillity, t;l' .ll'
as tafioded the diet full tlifture to deliberate, and
to eifablifh proper regulations concerning a point

'1 luan., lib. xv. p. 523. Mem. dc Ribier, ton, ii. p.
613.

of

325

HOOK XI. of the greatest consequence to the internal peace
v' '
o of the Empire. By the treaty of Paflau in one

1'55 thousand five hundred and fifty-two, it had been

referred to the next diet of the Empire to con-
firm and perfect the plan of religious pacification,
which was there agreed upon. The terror
and confusion with which the violent commotions
excited by Albert of Brandenburgh had filled the
Empire, as well as the constant attention which
Ferdinand was obliged to give to the affairs of
Hungary, had hitherto prevented the holding a
diet, though it had been summoned soon after
the conclusion of the treaty, to meet at Augf-
burg.

BUT as a diet was now neceflary on many ac-

niet h 1 at counts, Ferdinand about the beginning of this
^Aug:ib,, year had repaired to Augsburg. Though few of
narn.i' the Princes were present either in person or by
ipth il it. their deputies, he opened the assembly by a speech,

in which lie proposed the termination of the dif-
fentioi-s, to which the new tenets and controversies
with regard to religion had given rife, not only as
the first and great bulinefs of the diet, but as the
point wehich both the Emperor and he had moil at
heart. He represented the innumerable obstacles
which the Emperor had to surmount before he
could procure the convocation of a general council,
;Is well as the fatal accidents which had for
some time retarded, and had at last suspended
the consultations of that assembly. He obfcrved
that experience had already taught them how
vain it was to expect any remedy for evils,
which demanded immediate redress, from a ge-
neral council, the assembling of which would
either be prevented, or its deliberations be inter-
rupted by the dissentions and hostilities of the
Princes of Chriftlendom; That a national council
in Germany, which, as tome imagined, might be

cal.

called with greater ease, and deliberate with more BOOK xr.
perfet f curity, was an assembly of an unprece- ,55
dented nature, the jurifdition of which was un-
certain in its extent, and the form of its pro-
ceedings undefined; That in his opinion there re-
mained but one method for composing their un-
happy differences, which though it had been often
tried without success, might yet prove effc&tlal if
it were attempted with a better and more pacific
spirit than had appeared on former occasions, and
that was to choose a few men of learning, abilities
and moderation, who by discussing the disputed
articles in an amicable conference, might explain
them in such a manner as to bring the contending
parties either to unite in sentiment, or to differ
with charity.

THIS speech being printed in common form, and suI;i: .."

i o - ' and s1 *

'a

n ,'.

dispersed over the Empire, revived the fears and th i'lh. ;.
jealousies of the Protestants ; Ferdinand, they ob- t"Lt"
served With much furprize, had not once mention-
ed, in his address to the diet, the treaty of Paflau,
the stipulations in which they confidered as the
great security of their religious liberty. The fils-
picions to which this gave rife were confirmed by
the accounts which they daily received of the ex-
treme rigor with which Ferdinand treated their
Protestant brethren in his hereditary dominions,
and as it was natural to confider his actions as the
surest indication of his intentions, this diminilihed
their confidence in thole pompous profeilions of
moderation or of zeal for the re-eftablilhmelnt of
concord, to which his practice was lo iuterly re-
pugnant.

THE arrival of the Cardinal Morone, whom l'lcl'ti,,-

the Pope had appointed to attend the diet as his it., ...1
nuncio, compleated their conviction, and left them "t I a ",":iu
no room to doubt that fume dangerous machinati- 'oplIe ti I.c

odiet.ct

BOOK XI. on was forming againfl the peace or safety of the
`--- Proteffant church. Julius elated with the unex-

pected return of the English nation from apoftacy,
began to flatter himself that the spirit of mutiny
aid revolt having now spent its force, the happy
period was come when the church might resume its
ancient authority, and he obeyed by the people
with the fame tame fubmiflion as formerly. Full
of there hopes, he had sent Morone to Augsburg
vwith instructions to employ his eloquence in order
to excite the Germans to imitate the laudable exam-
pie of the Englilh, and his political address in order
to prevent any decree of the diet to the detriment
of the catholick faith. As Morone inherited from
his father, the chancellor of Milan, uncommon
talents for ncgociation and intrigue, he could scarce
have failed of embarrafling the measures of the
Protestants in the diet or of defeating whatever they
aimed at obtaining in it for their farther security.

,', ,a^1 BUT an unforeseen event delivered them from
. all the danger which they had reason to apprehend

from Morone's pretence. Julius, by abandoning
himself to pleasures and amusements no less unbe-
coling his age than his charater, having con-
trakted such habits of diflipation, that any serious
occupation, especially if attended with difficulty,
becane an intolerable burden to him, had long
rcfifted the follicitations of his nephew to hold a
conliftory, because he expected there a violent op-
position to his schemes in favour of that young
man. But when all the pretexts which he could
intvent for eluding his request were exhausted,
and at the fame time his indolent aversion to bufi-
ncfs continued to grow upon him, he feigned in-
dilpolition rather than yield to his nephew's im-
portunity; and that he might give the deceit a
greater colour of probability, he not only confined

hlim-
328

himself to his apartrrent, but changed his usual BooK XI.
diet and manner of life. By persisting too long
in aating this ridiculous part, he contracted a real 5
disease, of which he died in a few days, leaving
his infamous minion the Cardinal de Monte to lMr;'^
bear his name, and to disgrace the dignity which
he had conferred upon him '. As soon as Msorone t!h: nrio
heard of his death, he set out abruptly from it'l.!; "
Augsburg, where he had resided only a few days,
that he might be present at the election of a new
Pontiff.

ONE cause of their suspicions and fears being r':F"iR.ni,'

thus removed, the Protestants soon became fenfi- \w .'; t
ble that their conjectures concerning Ferdinand's Ptt' lltI,
intentions, how plausible soever, were ill-founded,
and that he had no thoughts of violating the arti-
cles favourable to them in the treaty of Paflau.
Charles, from the time that Maurice had defeated
all his schemes in the Empire, and overturned the
great system of religious and civil despotism, which
he had almost established there, gave little atten-
tion to the internal government of Germany, and
permitted his brother to pursue whatever measures
he judged most salutary and expedient. Ferdi-
nand, less ambitious and enterprizing than the
Emperor, instead of resuming a plan, which he,
with power and resources so far superior, had failed
of accomplishing, endeavoured to attach the Prin-
ces of the Empire to his family by an adminiilra-
tion uniformly moderate and equitable. To this
he gave, at present, particular attention, becauie
his situation at this juncture rendered it necefatry
to court their favour and support with more than
uflial afliduity.

Onuphr. Panvinius de vitis Pontificum. p. 320. Tihuan.
lib. xv. 517.

CHARLES

BOOK X[. CHARLES had again resumed his favourite pro-

"-''"'je ft of acquiring the Imperial crown for his for

Chares5 had Philip, which the ill reception it had met witl'
rerumei his when first propoled had obliged him to intermit,
plan ofal-
teringthe but had not persuaded him to relinquish. This
Iuc.effioe led him warmly to renew his requests to his bro-
.iu;ire. ther that he would accept of some compensation

for his prior right of fucceflion, and sacrifice that
to the grandeur of the house of Austria. Ferdi-
nand who was as little disposed, as formerly, to
give such an extraordinary proof of felf-denial,
being sensible that, in order to defeat this scheme,
not only the most inflexible firmness on his part,
but a vigorous declaration from the Princes of the
Empire in behalf of his title, were requisite; was
willing to purchase their favour by gratifying them
in every point that they deemed interesting or
eifential.

The Turks ON the other hand, the Turks, after having
wcre ready wrested from him great part of his Hungarian ter-
to invarde
Hungary. ritories, were ready to attack the provinces itill

subjet to his authority with a formidable army,
againif which he could bring no equal force into
the field, unless the diet should grant him imme-
diate and extraordinary aid. For this he could
not hope if the internal peace of the Empire were
not established on a foundation solid in itself, and
which should appear, even to the Protestants, so
secure and so permanent, as might not only allow
them to engage in a distant war with safety, but
encourage them to adt with vigour.

He i alarm- A STrI taken by the Protestants themfrilvcs, a
;,(l t forne short time after the opening of the diet, rendered
lltcp taken

.'y th: him still more cautious of giving them any new
I'2otcltatts. cause of offence. As Coon as the publication of

Ferdinand's speech created the fears and suspicions
which have been mentioned, the Eledors of Sax-

ony

ony and Brandenburgh, together with the Land- BOOK XI.
grave of Hesse, met at Naumburgh, and renew- 1-~
ing the ancient treaty of confraternity which had 55
long united their families, they added to it a new
article, by which the contracting parties bound
themselves to adhere to the confession of Augsburg,
and to maintain the doctrine which it contained in
their refpestive dominions k

FERDINAND, influenced by all there confidera- Feldiand

tions, employed his utmost address in conducting p',,,moe an
the deliberations of the diet so as not to excite the al;""m.
jealousy of a party on whose friiendfhip he depend-
ed, and whose enmity, as they had not only taken
the alarm, but had begun to prepare for their de-
fence, he had so much reason to dread. The
members of the diet readily agreed to Ferdinand's
proposal of taking the state of religion into conli-
deration, previous to any other business. But, as
soon as they entered upon it, both parties dilco-
vered all the zeal and animosity which a subjet lb
interesting naturally engenders, and which the ran-
cour of controversy, together with the violence of
civil war, had inflamed to the highest pitch.

THE Protestants contended that the security Tlen-rcten-

sions ot mhe

which they claimed in consequence of the treaty of Ctioli,, k.
Paffau should extend, without limitation, to all a't"' Prte1-
who had hitherto embraced the doctrine of Lu-
ther, or who thould hereafter embrace it. The
Catholics, having first of all asserted the Pope's
right as the supreme and final judge with refpest
to all articles of faith, insisted that the toleration
granted, by the treaty of PalEau, to fich as had

k Chytrsi Saxonia, 480.

adopted

BooK Xl. adopted the new opinions; which, on account of
'-tv - the present situation of the Empire, and for the

1555 fake of peace, they were willing to confirm;

should not be extended either to those cities which
had conformed to the Interim, or to such ecclefi-
aftics as should for the future apostatize from the
church of Rome. It was no easy matter to re-
concile fich opposite pretensions, which were sup-
ported, on each fide, by the most elaborate argu-
ments, and the greatest acrimony of expreflion,
that the ablities or zeal of theologians long exer-
cifed in disputation could suggest. Ferdinand,
however, by his address and perseverance; by
softening tome things on each fide; by putting a
favourable meaning upon others; by representing
inceflantly the neceflity as well as the advantages
of concord; and by threatening on some occasions,
when all other considerations were disregarded, to
difiolve the diet, brought them at length to a con-
clufion in which they all agreed.

Sept, 5. CONFORMABLY to this a recess was framed,
The peace
of re:ig, approved of, and publiflied with the usual forma-
cltdl lincI. lities. The following are the chief articles which

it contained. That such Princes and cities as have
declared their approbation of the Confeflion of
Aufburg, shall be permitted to profess the doarine
and exercise the worship which it authorises with-
out interruption or molestation from the Emperor,
the King of the Romans, or any power or perlon
whatsoever; That the Protestants on their part, fhnll
give no disquiet to the Princes and States who ad-
here to the tenets and rites of the Church of Rome;
That, for the future, no attempt shall be madd.
towards terminating religious differences, but by
the gentle and pacifick methods of persuasion andl
conference; That the Popish ecclesiastics flall

claim

claim no spiritual jurifdiion in such states as re- BoOK XI.
ceive the confeflion of Augsburg; That such as
had seized the benefices or revenues ot the church,
previous to the treaty of Paffau, shall retain pof-
session of them, and be liable to no prosecution in
the imperial chamber on that account ; That the
supreme civil power in every state shall have
right to establish what form of dotrine and wor-
ihip it shall deem proper, and if any of its sub-
jets refuse to conform to there, shall permit them
to remove with all their effecs wherever they
please; That if any prelate or ecclesiastic (hall
hereafter abandon the Romish religion, he shall
inflantly relinquish his diocese or benefice, and it
shall be lawful for those in whom the right of no-
mination is veited, to proceed immediately to an
eletion, as if the office were vacant by death or
translation, and toappoint a successor of undoubted
attachment to the ancient system .

SUCH are the capital articles in this famous Re- Refle&ions
cess, which is the basis of religious peace in Ger- o the pro-

grefs of tile

many, and the bond of union among its various principlebof
states, the sentiments of which are to extremely toleration.
different with refpet to points the most interest-
ing and important. In our age and nation, to
which the idea of Toleration is familiar, and its
beneficial effects well known, it may seem strange
that a method of terminating their dissentions, lo
suitable to the mild and charitable ipirit of the
Christian religion, did not sooner occur to the
contending parties. But an expedient, which,
how salutary soever it might be, was repugnant
to the sentiments and practice of Christians during
many ages, did not lie obviotu to discovery.
Among the ancient heathens, all whose deities
were local and tutelary, diversity of sentiment

I Sleid. 6zo. F. Paul, 368. Pallav. P. il. 161.
V L. 1. Y concerning

BOOK XI. concerning the objea or rights of religious wor.
.'-vS, Illhip seems to have been no source of animosity,

because the acknowledging veneration to be due
to any one God, did not apply denial of the exif-
tence or the power of any other God ; nor were
the modes and rites of worlhip established in one
country incompatible with those which other na.
tions approved of and observed. Thus the errors
in their system of theology were of such a nature
as to be productive of concord, and notwithftand.
ing the amazing number of their deities, as well
as the infinite variety of their ceremonies, a foci-
able and tolerating spirit fubiifted almost univer-
rally in the pagan world.

BUT when the Christian revelation declared one

Supreme Being to be the sole object of religious
veneration, prescribed the form of worship mofl
acceptable to him, whoever admitted the truth it
held, of consequence, every other mode of reli-
gion to be absurd arid impious. Hence the zeal
of the first converts to the Christian faith in propa-
gating its doctrines, and the ardour with which
they laboured to overturn every other form of
worship. They employed, however, for this pur-
pose no methods but such as suited the nature of
religion. By the force of powerful arguments,
they convinced the understandings of men ; by
the charms of superior virtue, they allured and
captivated their hearts. At length the civil pow-
er declared in favour of Christianity, and though
numbers, imitating the example of their superiors,
crouded into the church, many still adhered to
their ancient superstitions. Enraged at their ob-
ftinacy, the ministers of religion, whose zeal was
still unabated, though their sanctity and virtue
were much diminished, forgot so far the nature
of heir own million, and of the arguments which

they

they ought to have employed, that they armed BooK XI
the Imperial power against there unhappy men, "` -
and as they could not persuade, they tried to
compel them to believe.

AT the fame time, controversies concerning

articles of faith multiplied, from various causes,
among christians themselves, and the fame unhal-
lowed weapons which had first been used against
the enemies of their religion, were turned against
each other. Every zealous disputant endeavour-
ed to interest the civil magistrate in his cause, and
each in his turn employed the secular arm to
crush or to exterminate his opponents. Not long
after, the bishops of Rome put in their claim to
infallibility in explaining articles of faith, and de-
ciding points in controversy, and bold as the pre-
tension was, they by their artifices and perfeve-
rance, imposed on the credulity of mankind, and
brought them to recognize it. To doubt or to
deny any dotrine to which there unerring inftruc-
tors had given the sanction of their approbation,
was held to be not only a resisting of truth, but
an aft of rebellion against their sacred authority;
and the secular power, of which by various arts
they had acquired the absolute direction, was in-
ftantly employed to avenge both.

THUS Europe had been accustomed, during

many centuries, to fee speculative opinions pro-
pagated or defended by force; the charity and
mutual forbearance which Christianity recom-
mends with so much warmth were forgotten, the
sacred rights of conscience and of private judg-
ment were unheard of, and not only the idea of
toleration, but even the word itself, in the sense
now affixed to it, was unknown. A right to
extirpate error by force was universally allowed
to be the prerogative of those who pofletled the

Y 2 knowledge

BOOK XI. knowledge of trnth, and as each party of Chris-
^'--1 tians believed that they had got pofleflion of this

555' invaluable attainment, they all claimed and exer-

cifed, as far as they were able, the rights which
it was (uppofed to convey. The Roman catholics,
as their system refted on the decisions of an infal-
lible judge, never doubted that truth was on their
fide, and openly called on the civil power to re-
pel the impious and heretical innovators who
had riten up againif it. The Protefants, no less
confident that their doctrine was well founded,
required, with equal ardour, the Princes of their
party to check fuchl as prelumed to impugn or to
oppose it. Luther, Calvin, Cranmer, Knox, the
founders of the reformed church in their refpec-
tive countries, inflicted, as far as they had power
and opportunity, the fame punishments which
were denounced against their own disciples by the
church of Rome,. on fich as called in question
any article in their creeds. To their followers,
and perhaps to their opponents, it would have
appeared a symptom of diffidence in the goodners
of their cause, or an acknowledgment that it was
not well founded, if they had not employed in its
defence all those means which it was luppofed
truth had a right to employ.

IT was towards the close of the seventeenth

century, before Toleration, under its present
form, was admitted first into, the republic of the
United Provinces, and from thence introduced
into England. Long experience of the calamities
of mutual persecution, the influence of free go-
vernment, thelight and humanity acquired by the
progress of fcielce, together with the prudence
and authority of the civil magistrate, were all
requilite in order to eflablifh a regulation, so re-
pugnant to the ideas which all the different feds
had adopted from miflakcn conceptions concern-

iig

ing the nature of religion and the rights of truth, BooK XI.
or which all of them had derived from the erro-
neous maxims established by the church of '55'
Rome.

THE recess of Augsburg, it is evident, was Advanta-
founded on no (uch liberal and enlarged initi- gesof the

religioui

ments concerning freedom of religious inquiry or peace to the
the nature of toleration. It was nothing more Lutherans
than a scheme of pacification, which political
considerations alone had fuggefled to the contend-
ing parties, and regard for their mutual tranqui-
lity and safety had rendered necessary. Of this
there can be no stronger proof than an article in
the recess itself, by which the benefits of the pa-
cification are declared to extend only to the Ca-
tholics on the one fide, and to such as adhered to
the Confeflion of Augsburg on the other. The
followers of Zuinglius and Calvin remained, in
consequence of that exclusion, without any pro-
tection from the rigour of the laws denounced
against heretics. Nor did they obtain any legal
security, until the treaty of Westphalia, near a
century after this period, provided that they
should be admitted to enjoy, in as ample man-
ner as the Lutherans, all the advantages and pro-
tetion which the recess of Augsburg affords.

BUT if the followers of Luther were highly And to toh

pleased with the security which they acquired by holi
this recess, such as adhered to the ancient fylemn
had no less reason to be satisfied with that article
in it, which preserved entire to the Roman ca-
tholick church the benefices of fulch eccleli-
afticks as (hould hereafter renounce its doetrines.
This article, known in Germany by the name
of the Ecleieaftical RcJervalion, was manifestly lo
conformable to the idea and to the rights of an

Y 2 cflablilhed

BooK XI. established church ; and it appeared so equitable
X-V--- to prevent revenues, which had been originally

5sss. appropriated for the maintenance of persons at-

tached to a certain system, from being alienated
to any other purpose, that the protestants, though
they foresaw its consequences, were obliged to
relinquilh their opposition to it. As the Roman
catholick Princes of the Empire have taken care
to fee this article exactly observed in every cafe
where there was an opportunity of putting it in
execution, it has proved the great barrier of the
Romish church in Germany against the Reforma-
tion; and as from this period the fame tempta-
tion of interest did not allure ecclefiafticks to ret
linquifh the established system, there have been
few of that order, who have loved truth with
such disinterested and ardent affection, as to aban-
don for its fake the rich benefices which they
had in poffeflion.

M"icltud DUR ING the fitting of the diet, Marcellus Cer.
IL ele&ed
Pope, April vino, Cardinal of Santa Croce, was elected Pope
9g in room of Julius. He, in imitation of Adrian,

did not change his name on being exalted to the
Papal Chair. As he equalled that Pontiff in pu-
Her char rity of intention, and excelled him much in the

arts of government, and still more in knowledge
of the state and genius of the papal court as he
had capacity to discern what reformation it need-
ed, as well as what it could bear, such regulati-
ons were expeted from his virtue and wisdom,
as would have removed many of its grossest and
most flagrant corruptions, and have contributed
towards reconciling to the church, such as from
indignation at there enormities had abandoned its
communion. But this excellent Pontiff was only
shewn to the church and immediately snatched
Hie death. away. The confinement in the conclave had

impaired his health, and the fatigue of tedious

ceremonies

ceremonies upon his accession,. together with too Boo Xl.
intense and anxious application of mind to the 'k--
schemes of improvement which he meditated, '555s
exhausted so entirely the vigour of his feeble con-
ftitution, that he sickened on the twelfth, and di-
ed on the twentieth day after his election m.

ALL the refinements in artifice and intrigue, The .Iei.-

peculiar to conclaves, were displayed in that o f Paul
which was held for electing a fucceflor to Marcel- 'V
lus; the Cardinals of the Imperial and French
fadions labouring, with equal ardour, to gain
the necessary number of suffrages for one of their
own party. But, after a struggle of no long du-
ration, though conducted with all the warmth
and eagerness natural to men contending for so
great an objedt, they united in chufing John Pe- Mzy 13.
tar Caraffa the eldest member of the sacred col-
lege and the son of Count Montorio, a nobleman
of an illustrious family in the kingdom of Naples.
The address and influence of Cardinal Farnese
who favoured his pretensions, Caraffa's own mE-
rit, and perhaps his great age, which toothed all
the disappointed candidates with the nearer pro-
fpea of a new vacancy, concurred in bringing
about this speedy union of suffrages. In order to
teltify his reipedt for the memory of Paul III. by
whom he had been created Cardinal, and his
gratitude to the family of Farnese, he assumed
the name of Paul IV.

THE choice of a prelate of such a singular cha- Hi ,rire Ind

racter, and who had long held a course extreme- charaetr.
ly different from that which usually led to the
dignity now conferred upon him, filled the Itali-
ans, who had nearest access to observe his man-

a Thuan. 51o. F. Paul, 365. Onupk. Pauvin. gsi, &c.

nets

BooK XI. ners anddeportment, with aftonirhment, and

5" ` 'kept them in fufpenie and solicitude with regard
Iss55 to his future condut. Paul, though born in a

rank of life which, without any other merit, might
have secured to him the highest ecclesiastical
preferments, had from his early years applied to
study with all the assiduity of a man, who had
nothing but his personal accomplishments to ren-
der him confpiucous. By means of this he not
only acquired profound skill in fcholaftick theolo-
gy, but added to that a considerable knowledge
of the learned languages and of polite literature,
the study of which had been lately revived in Ita-
ly, and was pursued at this time with great ar-
dour. His mind, however, naturally gloomy
and severe, was more formed to imbibe the four
spirit of the former, than to receive any degree
of elegance or liberality of sentiment from the
latter; so that he acquired rather the qualities
and passions of a recluse ecclefiaflick, than the
talents necessary for the conduct of great affairs,
Accordingly, when he entered into orders, al-
though several rich benefices were betlowed on
him, and he was early employed as nuncio in
different courts, he soon became disgusted with
that coutrie of life, and languilhed to be in a situ-
ation more suited to his taste and temper. With
this view he resigned at once all his ecclesiastical
preferments, and having inltituted an order of
regular priests, whom he denominated Theatines,
fiom the name of the archbifhoprick which he
had held, he associated himself as a member of
their fraternity, conformed to all the rigorous
rules to which he had fubjecled them, and pre-
ferred the filitud¢ of a monalick life, with the
honour of being the founder of a new order,
to all the valn objects which the court of Rome
presented to his ambition.

IN this retreat he remained for many years, un- BOOK XI.

til Paul III induced by the fame of his fantity -
and knowledge called him to Rome, in order to 5
consult with him concerning the measures which
might be most proper and effectual for the sup-
preflng of heresy, and re establishing the an-
cient authority of the church. Having thus al-
lured him f.omr his solitude, the Pope, partly by
his intreaties, and partly by his authority, pre-
vailed on him to accept of a Cardinal's hat, to re-
assume the benefices which he had resigned, and
to return again into the usual path of ecclesiastical
ambition which he teemed to have relinquished.
But, during two fucceflive Pontificates, under the
firit of which the court of Rome was the most art-
ful and interested, and under the second the molt
diflolute of any in Europe, Caraffa retained his
monastic austerity. He was an avowed and bitter
enemy not only of all innovation in opinion, but of
every irregularity in pratice; he was the chief in-
ftrument in establishing the formidable and odi-
ous tribunal of the Inquisition in the papal terri-
tories; he appeared a violent advocate on all oc-
cafion. for the jurisdiction and discipline of the
church, and a severe censurer of every meafiire
which seemed to flow from motives of policy or
iltereft, rather than from zeal for the honour of
the ecclesiastical order, and the dignity of the Ho-
ly See. Under a prelate of fich a character, the
Roman courtiers expected a severe and violent
Pontificate, during which the principles of found
policy would be sacrificed to the narrow prejudi-
ces of prifitly zeal ; while the people of Rome
were appiehenfive of feeing the fordid and fbrbid-
ding rigour of monaltick manners fubftitultedti
place of the gaiety or magnificence to which they
had long been accustomed in the papal court.
These apprehensions Paul was extremely folici- 'he fira
tous to remove. At his first entrance on the ad- telps5f his

. . . atdminillra-
ministration tion.

BooK XI. ministration he laid aside that austerity which had
'-V3 hitherto diftinguifled his person and family, and

' when the master of his houfhold inquired in what

manner he would chute to live, he haughtily re-
plied, " as becomes a great Prince." He order-
ed the ceremony of his coronation to be con-
ducted with more than usual magnificence ; and
endeavoured to render himself popular by several
aas of liberality and indulgence towards the in.
habitants of Rome".

The excers His natural severity of temper, however,
tachmentto would have soon returned upon him, and would
his nephews have jutified the conjectures of the courtiers,

and the fears of the people, if he had not, imme-
diately after his election, called to Rome two of
his nephews, sons of his brother the Count of
Montorio. The eldest he promoted to be gover.
nor of Rome, the youngest who had hitherto
served as a soldier of fortune in the armies of Spain
or France, and whose disposition as well as man-
ners were still more foreign from the clerical
character than his profession, he created a Cardi-
nal, and appointed him legate of Bologna, the fe-
cond office in power and dignity which a Pope can
bestow. These marks of favour, no less sudden
than extravagant, he accompanied with the most
unbounded confidence and attachment, and for-
getting all his former severe maxims, he seemed
to have no other objet than the aggrandizing of

Their am- his nephews. Their ambition, unfortunately for
bitious pro- Paul, was too aspiring to be satisfied with any

moderate acquisition. They had seen the family
of Medici raised by the interefi of the Popes of
that house to supreme power in Tuscany ; Paul
III. had by his abilities and address secured the
dutchies of Parma and Placentia to the family of

a Platina, p. 327. CaftaldoVitadi Paolo IV. Rom 161a.
P. 70. Farnese

Farnese. They aimed at Come establishment for BOOK XM.
themselves, no less considerable and independant;
and as they could not expec that the Pope would 5S5
carry his indulgence towards them so far as to
secularize any part of the patrimony of the church,
they had no profpet of attaining what they wish-
ed, but by dismembering the Imperial dominions
in Italy, in hopes of seizing Come portion of
them. This alone would have been to them a
sufficient reason for rowing the feeds of discord
between their uncle and the Emperor.

BUT Cardinal Caraffa, had, besides, private Reasons of

reasons which filled him with hatred and enmity theirdifgutt
to the Emperor. While he served in the Spanish Emperor.
troops he had not received such marks of honour
and diftintion as he thought due to his birth
and merit. Disgusted with this ill-ufage, he had
abruptly quitted the Imperial service, and enter-
ing into that of France; he had not only met
with such a reception as soothed his vanity, and
attached him to the French interest, but by con-
trading an intimate friendship with Strozzi, who
commanded the French army in Tuscany, he
had imbibed a mortal antipathy to the Emperor
as the great enemy to the liberty and indepen-
dence of the Italian states. Nor was the Pope
himself indisposed to receive impreflions unfa-
vourable to the Emperor. The opposition given
to his election by the Cardinals of the Imperial sac-
tion left in his mind deep resentment, which was
heightened by the remembrance of ancient inju-
ries from Charles or his ministers.

OF this his nephews took advantage, and em- They cu-

ployed various devices, in order to exasperate deinurt
him beyond a poflibility of reconciliation. They Pope fiom
aggravated every circumstance which could be th" "'l
deemed any indicauion of ihe Emperor's diffatis-

facion

BooK XI. faction with his promotion; they read to him
v_---, "
an intercepted letter in which Charles taxed

55s5- the Cardinals of his party with negligence or in-

capacity in not having defeated Paul's election:
They pretended, at one time, to have discovered
a conspiracy formed by the Imperial minister and
Cofio de Medici against the Pope's life; they
alarmed him, at another, with accounts of a plot
for assassinating themselves. By these artifices,
they kept his mind, which was naturally violent
and become suspicious from old age, in luch per-
petual agitation, as precipitated him into mea-
fures, which otherwile he would have been the
first person to condemn °. He seized rome of the
Cardinals who were most attached to the Empe-
ror, and confined them in the castle of St. An-
gelo; he persecuted the Colonnas and other Ro-
man barons, the ancient retainers to the Imperial
fation, with the utmost severity; and discover-
ing on all occasions his distrust, fear, or hatred
of the Emperor, he began at last to court the
friendship of the French King, and seemed wil-
ling to throw himself absolutely upon him for
support and protecion.

Inducc him THIS was the very point to which his nephews
ite Ki,g, wifled to bring him as most favourable to their
o l;rance. ambitious schemes; and as the accomplishment

of these depended on their uncle's life, whose ad-
vanced age did not admit of losing a moment
unneceflarily in negotiations, instead of treating
at lecond hand with the French ambafladot at
Rome, they prevailed on the Pope to dispatch a
perfln of confidence directly to the court of
France with such overtures on his part as they
hoped would not be rejedted. He proposed an

c Ripamontii Hill. Patria, lib. iii. 1146. Ap. Grev.
Thef. vol. ii. Mem. de Ribier. ii. 615. Adriani Iftor. i. 906.

alliance

alliance offetfive and defensive between Henry Book Xr-
and the Pope; that they should attack the dutchy -
of Tuscany and the kingdom of Naples with 5
their united forces; and if their arms should prove
ficcefsful, that the ancient republican form of go-
vernment should be re-established in the former,
and the investiture of the latter should be gran-
ted to one of the French King's sons, after refer-
ving a certain territory which should be annexed
to the patrimony of the church, together with
an independent and princely establishment for
each of the Pope's nephews.

THE King, allured by there specious proje&s, Contibte

gave a mo(t favourable audience to the envoy. rency opo-
But when the matter was proposed in council, the fes he alli-
conltable Montmorency, whose natural caution thePoe.
and aversion to daring enterprizes increased with
age and experience, remonstrated with great
vehemence against the alliance. He put Henry
in mind how fatal every expedition into Italy had
been to France during three fuccefiive reigns,
and if such an enterprize had proved too great
for the nation even when its strength and sinan-
ces were entire, there was no reason to hope for
fitccefs, if it thould be attempted now when both
were exhausted by extraordinary efforts during
wars, which had lasted, with little interruption,
almost half a century. He represented the ma-
nifeft imprudence of entering into engagements
with a Pope of fourscore, as any system which
refted on no better foundation than his life must
be extremely precarious, and upon the event of
his death, which could r:ot be distant, the face of
things together with the inclination of the Italian
States mufi instantly change, and the whole weight
of the war be left upon the King alone. To
theli considerations he added the near profpet
which they now had of a final accommodation

with

BOOK XI. with the Emperor who having taken the resolution
» -v-J of retiring from the world, wished to transmit his

'55' kingdoms in peace to his son; and he concluded

with representing the absolute certainty of draw-
ing the arms of England upon France, if it
should appear that the re-establishment of tran.
quility in Europe was prevented by the ambition
of its Monarch.

The Duke THESE arguments, weighty in themselves, and
of Guise fa-
,ours si. urged by a minister of great authority, would

probably have determined the King to decline any
conneEton with the PoSe. But the Duke of
Guise and his brother the Cardinal of Lorrain,
who delighted no less in bold and dangerous un-
dertakings than Montmorency shunned them, de-
clared warmly for an alliance with the Pope.
The cardinal expeted to be entrusted with the
conduct of the negociations in the court of Rome
to which this alliance would give rife ; the duke
laid his account with obtaining the command of
the army which would be appointed to invade
Naples; and confidering themselves as already in
there stations, vati projects opened to their aspiring
and unbounded ambition. Their credit, toge-
ther with the influence of the King's mistress,
the famous Diana of t'oitiers, who was, at that
time entirely devoted to the interest of the fami-
ly of Guise, more than counterbalanced all Mont-
morency's prudent remonitrances, and prevailed
on an inconsiderate Prince to liften to the over-
tures of the Pope's envoy.

cari/nal.f THE cardinal of Lorrain, as he had expected,
Lorrain lent
touegociate was immediately lent to Rome with full powers to
with the conclude the treaty, and to concert measures for

carrying it into execution. Meanwhile, the Pope,
either from reflecting on the danger and uncertain
issue of all military operations, or through the

address

address of the Imperial ambassador who had been BooK Xl.
at great pains to sooth him, had not only begun ,'"'-
to lose much of the ardour with which he had set
on foot the negociation with France, but even dif-
covered great unwillingness to continue it. In
order to rouse him from this fit of despondency,
and to rekindle his former rage, his nephews had
recourse to the arts which they had already prac-
tifed with so much success. They alarmed him
with new representations of the Emperor's hostile
intentions, with fresh accounts which they had
received of threats uttered against him by the
Imperial ministers, and with new discoveries which
they pretended to have made ofconfpiracies form-
ed, andjuft ready to take effect against his life.

BUT there artifices, having been formerly tried, Paul e-

would not have operated a second time with the proceeding
fame force, nor have made the impression which of the diet

of Augf&

they wished, if Paul had not been excited by an barg.
offence of that kind which he was leaft.able to
bear. He received advice of the recess of the
diet of Augsburg, and of the toleration which
was thereby granted to the Protestants, and this
threw him at once into such transports of passion
againit the Emperor and King of the Romans,
as carried him headlong into all the violent mea-
fures of his nephews. Full of high ideas with re-
sped to the papal prerogative, and animated
with the fiercest zeal against heresy, he confider-
ed the liberty of deciding concerning religious
matters, which had been aluumed by an assembly
composed partly of laymen, as a presumptuous
and unpardonable encroachment on that jurifdic-
tion which belonged to him alone; and regarded
the indulgence which had been given to the Pro-
teftants as an impious adt of that power which the
diet had usurped He complained loudly of both
to the Imperial ambassador. He insisted that the

recess

BOOK XI. recess of the diet should immediately be declared
-"v"' illegal and void. He threatened the Emperor

555 and King of the Romans, in cafe they should ei-

ther refute or delay to gratify him in this particu.
lar, with the feverelt effects of his vengeance.
He talked in a tone of authority and command
which might have suited a pontiff of the twelfth
century, when a papal decree was sufficient to have
shaken or to have overturned the throne of the
greatest Monarch, but which was altogether im-
proper in that age, especially when addressed to the
minister of a Prince who had so often made Pon-
tiffs more formidable feel the weight of his power.
The ambassador, however, heard all his extrava-
gant propositions and menaces, with much pati-
ence, and endeavoured to tooth him by putting
him in mind of the extreme distress to which the
Emperor was reduced at Infpruck, of the en-
gagements which he had come under to the Pro-
teftants in order to extricate hirnmelf, of the ne-
ceffity of fulfilling there, and of accommodating
his conduct to the situation of his affairs. But
weighty as these considerations were, they made
no imprellion on the mind of the haughty and bi-
gotted pontiff, who instantly replied, that he
would absolve him by his apoflolick authority
from the obligation of there engagements, and
even command him not to perform them; that
in carrying on the cause of God and of the church,
no regard ought to be had to the maxims of
worldly prudence and policy, and that the ill fuc-
cess of the Emperor's Ichemcs in Germany might
julfly be deemed a mark of the divine dif'tleafure
against him, on account of his having paid little
attention to the former, while he regulated his
conduc entirely by the latter. Haviing said this,
he turned from the amballador abruptly without
waiting for a reply.

I-ls
348

His nephews took care to applaud and cherish BOOK XI.
these sentiments, and easily wrought up his arro- --
gant mind, fraught with all the monkish ideas '5's
concerning tle extent of the papal supremacy, to And exrpc-
such a pitch of resentment against the house of nhics.
Austria, and to such an high opinion of his own
power, that he talked continually of his being tle
successor of those who had deposed Kings and
Emperors; that he was exalted as head over them
all, and would trample such as opposed him un-
der his feet. In this disposition, the cardinal of Drem r- .
Lorrain found the Pope, and easily perfiade-d him Coenludat
to sign a treaty, which had for its objest, the ruin France.
of a Prince against whom he was so highly exaf-
perated. The stipulations in the treaty were
much the fame as had been proposed by the Pope's
envoy at Paris; and it was agreed to keep the
whole tranfadcion secret until their united forces
should be ready to take the field P.

DURING the negotiation of this treaty at Rome rTle ',.re-

and Paris, an event happened which seemed to t ,,efign his
render the fears which had given rife to it vain, heClltiv

j···U i' ·~" .'~ LV 1~ VUIII~ dominiti.~.

and the operations which were to follow upon it
unncceffary. This was the Emperor's resignation
of his hereditary dominions to his son Philip; to-
gether with his resolution to withdraw entirely
from any concern in business or the affairs of this
world, in order that lhe might spend the remain-
der of his days in retirement and solitude. Though
it requires neither deep reflection nor extraordina-
ry discernment to dillover that the slate of royal-
ty is not exempt from cares and difappoillntment
though most of thlt'c1 who are exalted to a throne
find lolicitude, and ifuticty, and disgust to be their
perpetual attendants in mllat envied pre-eminence;

P Pallav. lib. 13. p 163. F. Pu.l 36;. Thuan, lib. xv.
525. lib. xvi. 54o. IVclnl, de Ribier. ii eC9, &c.

VO L. III. Z Vet

349

BOOK Xl.yet, to descend voluntarily from the supreme to a
I'V"-fubordinate station, and to relinquish the pofeflion

' of power in order to attain the enjoyment of hap-

piness, seems to be an effort too great for the hu-
man mind. Several instances, indeed, occur in
history of Monarchs who have quitted a throne,
and have ended their days in retirement. But they
were either weak Princes who took this resolution
rashly, and repented of it as soon as it was taken;
or unfortunate Princes from whose hands some
strong rival had wrested their sceptre, and com-
pelled them to descend with reluctance into a pri-
vate station. Dioclefian is perhaps the only Prince
capable of holding the reins of government, who
ever resigned them from deliberate choice, and
who continued during many years to enjoy the
tranquility of retirement without fetching one pe-
nitent igih, or casting back one look of desire,
towards the power or dignity which he had aban-
doned.

The mo- No wonder, then, that Charles's resignation
tives of this
relignation. should fill all Europe with astonishment, and give

rife, both among his contemporaries, and among
the historians of that period, to various conjec-
tures concerning the motives, which determined a
Prince, whose ruling paflion had been uniformly
the love of power, at the age of fifty-fix, when
objects of ambition operate with full force on the
mind, and are pursued with the greatest ardour,
to take a resolution so singular and unexpeced.
But while many authors have imputed it to mo-
tives so frivolous and fantastical, as can hardly be
supposed to influence any reasonable mind; while
others have imagined it to be the result of tome
profound scheme of policy; hiltorians more intel-
ligent, and better informed, neither ascribe it to
caprice, nor search for mysterious secrets of state,
where simple and obvious causes will fully account

for

for the Emperor's condut. Charles had been at- BaooR XL
tacked early in life with the gout, and notwith-
ftlnding all the precautions of the most (kilful 5-
physicians in his time, the violence of the diftem-
per encreafed as he advanced in age, and the fits
became every year more frequent, as well as more
intolerable. Not only was the vigour of his con-
fiturion broken, but the faculties of his mind
were impaired by the excruciating torments which
he endured, During the continuance of the fits,
he was altogether incapable of applying to bufi-
ness, and even when they began to abate, as it
was only at intervals that he could attend to what
was serious, he gave up the greatest part of his
time to trifling and even childish occupations,
which served to relieve or to amuse his mind, en-
feebled and worn out with excess of pain. Under
these circnmiftances, the conduct of such affairs as
occurred, of course, in governing so many king-
doms was a burden more than sufficient; but to
push forward and compleat the vast schemes,
which the ambition of his more active years had
formed, or to keep in view and carry on the fame
great system of policy, extending to every nation
in Europe, and connected with the operations of
every different court, were tasks, which far ex-
ceeded his strength, and oppressed and overwhelm-
ed his mind. As he had been long accustomed
to view the business of every department, whether
civil, or military, or ecclesiastical, with his own
eyes, and to decide concerning it according to his
own ideas; it gave him the utmoff pain, when he
felt his infirmities encreafe so fast upon him, that
he was obliged to commit the conduct of all as-
fairs to his ministers. He imputed every misfor-
tune which besel him, and every miscarriage that
happened, even when the former was unavoidable,
and the latter accidental, to his inability to take
the infpedtion of business himlelf. He com-

Z a plained

THE REIGN OF THE

BOOK Xl. plained of his hard fortune, in being opposed, in
<-- -' his declining years, to a rival, who was in the full

155S' vigour of life, and that while Henry could take

and execute all his resolutions in person, he Ihould
now be reduced, both in council and in action, to
rely on the abilities of other men. Having thus
grown old before.his time, he wifely judged it
more decent to conceal his infirmities in some soli-
tude, than to expose them any longer to the pub-
lick eye; and prudently determined not to forfeit
the fame, or lose the acquisitions of his better
years, by struggling, with a vain obitinacy, to re-
tain the reins of government, when he was ;no
longer able to hold them with steadiness, or to
guide them with address *

' Dom Levefque in his memoirs of cardinal Granvelle

gives a reason for the Emperor's resignation, which, as I re-
collee, is not mentioned by any other historian He fays,
that the Emperor having ceded the government of the king.
dom of Naples and the dutchy of Milan to his son, upon his
marriage with the Queen of England; Philip, notwithftand-
ing the advice and entreaties of his father, removed all the
ministers and officers in those countries, and appointed crea-
tures of his own, to fill the places which they held. That
he aspired openly, and with little delicacy, to obtain a Ihart
in the administration of affairs, in the Low-Countries. That
he endeavoured to thwart the Emperor's meafiures, and to li-
mit his authority, behaving tow::rds himi sometimes with in-
attention, and sometimes with haughtiness. That Charles
finding that he must either yield to his Con, or openly contend
with him, in order to avoid these, which were both disagree-
able and mortifying to a father, he took the resolution of re,
signing his crowns, and of retiring from the wollId, vol i.
p. 24, &c. Donm Levefque derived his inforinatiorl concern-
ing these curious facts, which he relates very briefly,, from
the omiginal papers of cardinal Granvelle hut as that vail
collection of papers, one of the most valuable historical lo10
numlelnts of the (ixteenth century, and which could not fail of
throwing imuch light on the transactions of Charles V, thoughl
preserved and arranged by M. L'Abbe Boizot of Befancon,
is not published, 1 cannot determine what degree of credit
lhould be given to this account of Charles's resignation. 1 have
lierefore taken no notice of it in relating this event.

BUIT

BUT though Charles had revolved this scheme BOOK XI.
in his mind for several years, and had communi- -
cated it to his fillers the dowager Queens of France Circu5mn an.
and Hungary, who not only approved of his in- ces which
tention, but offered to accompany him to what- dad it.
ever place of retreat he should choose; several
things had hitherto prevented his carrying it into
execution. He could not think of loading his son
with the government of so many kingdoms, un-
til he should attain such maturity of age, and of
abilities, as would enable him to sustain that
weighty burden; but as Philip had now reached
his twenty-eighth year, and had been early accuf-
tomed to business, for which he discovered both
inclination and capacity, it can hardly be imputed
to the partiality of paternal affeEion, that his
fcmples with regard to this point, were entirely
removed ; and that he thought he might, without
further hesitation or delay, place him on the throne
which he was about to abandon. His mother's
situation had been another obftru6tion in his way.
For although she had continued almost fifty years
in confinement, and under the fame disorder of
mind which concern for her husband's death had
brought upon her, yet the government of Spain,
was still vefled in her jointly with the Emperor;
her name was inserted together with his, in all
the public writs iflued in that kingdom; and such
was the fond attachment of the Spaniards to her,
that they would probably have scrupled to recog-
nize Philip as their sovereign, unless she had con-
sented to assume him as her partner on the throne.
Her utter incapacity for business rendered it im-
poflible to obtain this. But her death, which hap-
pened this year, removed this difficulty; and as
-harles, upon that event, became sole Monarch
of Spain, it left the fucceflion open to his son.
The war with France had likewise been a reason
for retaining the adminifiration of affairs in his own

Z 3 hand,

BooK XI. hand, as he was extremely solicitous to have ter
*-5 v- minated it, that he might have given up his king

doms to his son in peace with all the world. Bul
as Henry had discovered no disposition to cloti
with any of his overtures, and had even rejeded
proposals of peace, which were equal and mode-
rate, in a tone, that feem!d to indicate a fixed
purpose of continuing holfilities, he saw that it
was vain to wait longer in expeEtation of an event,
which, how desirable soever, was altogther un.
certain.

lithiesith- As this, then, appeared to be the proper junc-
which he ture for executing the scheme which he had long
pxecLted it. meditated, Charles resolved to resign his kingdoms

to his son, with a solemnity, suitable to the im-
portance of the tranfation, and to perform this
last a& of sovereignty, with such formal pomp,
as might leave a lasting impreflion on the minds
not only of his fubjets but of his fucceflor,
With this view he called Philip out of England,
where the peevish temper of his Queen, which
increased with her despair of having issue, render.
ed him extremely unhappy, and the jealousy of
the English left him no hopes of obtaining the di-
reEion of their affairs. Having afiembled the states
of the Low-Countries at Brussels, on the twenty-
fifth of Oaober, he feated himself, for the last
time, in the chair of state, on one fide of which
was placed his son, and on the other his fifler the
Queen of Hungary regent of the Netherlands,
with a splendid retinue of the grandees of Spain
and princes of the Empire flanding behind him.
The president of the council of Slanders, by his
command, explained in a few words his intention
in calling this extraordinary meeting of the States.
He then read the instrument of resignation by
which Charles surrendered to his Ton Philip all his
territories, jurifdidion, and authority in the Low-
Countries, absolving his fubjeds there from their

oath

oath of allegiance to him, which he required themn BQoK XIr
to transfer to Philip his lawful heir, and to serve '" '
him with the fame loyalty and zeal that they had 555.
manifested, during so a long a course of years, in
support of his government.

CHARLES then rose from his feat, and leaning on
the shoulder of the Prince of Orange, because he
was unable to itand without support, he addressed
himself to the audience, and from a paper which
he held in his hand, in order to aflift his memory,
he recounted, with dignity, but without oftenta-
tion, all the great things which he had undertaken
and performed since the commencement of his ad-
ministration. He observed, that from the seven-
teenth year of his age, he had dedicated all his
thoughts and attention to publick objets, refer-
ving no portion of his time for the indulgence of
his ease, and very little for the enjoyment of pri-
vate pleasure; that either in a pacifick or holtile
manner, he had visited Germany nine times, Spain
fix times, France four times, Italy seven times, the
Low-Countries ten times, England; twice, Africa as
often, and had made eleven voyages by sea; that
while his health permitted him to discharge his du-
ty, and the vigour of his constitution was equal,
in any degree, to the arduous office of governing
fiich extensive dominions, he had never shunned
labour, nor repined under fatigue; that now when
his health was broken, and his vigour exhausted by
the rage of an incurable distemper, his growing in-
fillitiles admonilhed him to retire, nor was he so
find of reigning, as to retain the sceptre in an im-
potent hand, which was no longer able to protect
his fubje.ts, or to render them happy; that instead
of a sovereign worn out with diseases, and scarce
half alive, he gave them one in the prime of life,
accufltomed already to govern, and who added to
the vigour of youth all the attention and sagacity of
maturer years; that, if during the course of a long

Z 4 act

BooK Xlradminiftration, he had committed any material er-

ror in government, or if under the pressure and
amidfl the attention which he had been obliged
to give to To many and great affairs, he had either
neglected or injured any of his fubjeEts, he now
implored their forgiveness; that, for his part, he
flhould ever retain a grateful sense of their fidelity
and attachment, and would carry the remembrance
of it along with him to the place of his retreat, as
his sweetest consolation, as well as the best reward
for all his services, and in his last prayers to Al-
mighty God would pour forth his ardent wishes
for their welfare.

THEN turning towards Philip, who fell on his

knees and kifled his father's hand, " If, fays he, I
had left you by my death this rich inheritance, to
which I have made such large additions, some re-
gard would have been justly due to my memory on
that account; but now when I voluntarily resign
to you what I might have still retained, I may well
expect the warmest expreflions of thanks on your
part. With these, however, I dispense, and shall
confider your concern for the welfare of your sub-
jets, and your love of them, as the best and most
acceptable testimony of your gratitude to me. It
is in your power, by a wife and virtuous admini-
ftration, to justify the extraordinary proof which
I give this day of my paternal affedtion, and to
demonstrate that you are worthy of the confidence
which 1 repose in you Preserve an inviolable re-
gard for religion ; maintain the Catholick faith in
its purity ; let the laws of your country be sacred
in your eyes; encroach not on the rights and pri.
vileges of your people; and if the time shall ever
come, when you llall wifl to enjoy the tranquil-
lity of private life, may.you have a son endowed
with such qualities, that you can resign your fcep-
tre to him, with as much satisfaCtion, as I give up
nmine to you,"

As soon as Charles had finished this long address BooK XI.

to his fubjets and to their new sovereign, he funk '"'"
into the chair, exhausted and ready to faint with 55
the fatigue of such an extraordinary effort. Du-
ring his difcourle, the whole audience melted in-
to tears, some from admiration of his magnani-
mity, others softened by the expressions of ten-
dcrnefs towards his Ton, and of love to'his people;
and all were affeEted with the deepest sorrow at
losing a sovereign, who had distinguished the
Netherlands, his native country, with particular
marks of his regard and attachment.

PHILIP then arose from his knees, and after

returning thanks to his father, with a low and
fiblnifive voice, for the royal gift which is unex-
ampled bounty had bestowed upon him, he ad-
drefled the assembly of the flates, and regretting
his inability to speak the Flemish language with
such facility as to express what he felt on this in-
teresting occasion, as well as what he owed to
his good fubjets in the Netherlands, he begged
that they would allow Granvelle bishop of Arras,
to deliver what he had given him in charge to
speak in his name. Granvelle, in a longdifcourfe,
expatiated on the zeal with which Philip was ani-
mated for the good of his fubjets, on his refolu-
tion to devote all his time and talents to the pro-
moting of their happiness, and on his intention to
imitate his father's example in diflinguilhing the
Netherlands with peculiar marks of his regard.
Macs, a lawyer of great eloquence, replied, in
name of the States, with large profellions of their
fidelity and affetion to their new sovereign.

'HEN Mary, Queen dowager of Hungary,

resigned the regency, with which Ihe had been
entrusted by her brother during the (pace of twen-
ty-five years. Next day Philip, in pretence of
the States, took the uflial oaths to maintain the

rights

Boos XI. rights and privileges of his fubjedts; and all the
'- V. a members,, in their own name, and in that of their
anusy 6. conlituents, swore allegiance to him s.

A FEW weeks thereafter, Charles, in an assem-

bly no less splendid, and with a ceremonial equally
pompous, resigned to his son the crowns of Spain,
with all their territories depending on them, both
in the old.and in the new world. Of all these vas
possessions, he reserved nothing for himself but
an annual pension of an hundred thousand crowns,
to defray the charges of his family, and to afford
him a small fum for ads of beneficence and
charity r.

As

' Godleveus Relatio Abdicationis Car. V. ap. GoldaR. Po-
lit. Imper. p. 377. Strada de Bello Belgico, lib i. p. 5.

' The Emperor's resignation is anrevent not only of such im-

portance, bur of such a nature, that the precise date of it,
one would expec, Ihould have been ascertained by historians
with the greater accuracy. There is, however, an amazing
and unaccountable diverity among them with regard to this
point. All agree that the deed by which Charles transferred
to his son his dominions in the Netherlands, bears date at Bruf-
fels the z5th of Ocober. Sandoval fixes on the 28thof Oc-
tober-as the day on which the ceremony of resignation happen-
ed, and he was present at the tranfation, vol. ii. p. 592.
Godleveus who publihed a treatise de Abdicatione Caroli V.
fixes the publick ceremony. as well as the date of the inftru-
ment of resignation on the 2 5th. Pere Barre, I know not on
what authority, fixes it on the 24th of November. Hilt.
D'Alem. viii. 9-6. Herrera agrees with Godleveus in fenri-
ment, ton. i, 1 55. as likewise does Pallavicini, whose autho-
rity with refpec to dates, and.every thing, where a minute ac-
curacy is requisite, isos great weight. Hist. lib. xvi p. 168,
Historians differ no less with regard to the day on which
Charles resigned the crown of Spain to his son. According to
M. de Thou, it was a month after his having resigned his lo-
ininions in the Netherlands, i. e. about the 25th of Novenu.
ber, Thuan. lib. 16. p. 571. According to Sandoval it was
on the j6th January 1556, Sand. ii. 603. Antonio di Vera
agrees with hil,l Epitome del Vida del Car. V. p. 1o. Ac-
cording to Pallavicini it was on the i7th. Pal. lib. xvi. p. 168.
and with him Herrera agrees, Vidn del D. Felipc, tom. i. p.
3jj. But Ferreras fixes it on the firR day of January, HiR.

Gcner.
358

As he had fixed on a place of retreat in Spain, Boo, XI.

hoping that the dryness of the air and warmth of "^
the climate in that country might mnitigate the Refoives to
violence of his disease, which had been much en- fix his reGf
created by the moisture of the air and the rigour spai..
of the winters in the Netherlands, he was ex-
tremely impatient to embark for that kingdom,
and to dilengage himself entirely from business,
which he found to be impossible while he remained
in Brussels. But his physicians remonstrated foobligedt.
strongly againit his venturing to Tea atthatcold and remain for

ot . -

1ome time

boifferous leaton of the year, that he colnented, in the Ne.
though with relutance, to put off his voyage for therlands.
some months.

BY yielding to their intreaties, he had the satis- Promotel

fation, before he left the Low-countries, of ta- the negoi.
king a considerable ftep towards a peace withpeace.
France, which he ardently wished for, not only on
his son's account, but that he might have the
merit, when quitting the world, of re-establishing
that tranquillity in Europe, which he had banish-
ed out of it almost from the time that he assumed
the administration of affairs. Some time previ.
ous to his resignation, commiflioners had been
appointed by him and by the French King, in or-
der to treat of an exchange of prisoners. In their

conferences

Gener. tom. ix. p. 37 1. M de Beaucaire supposes the refigna-
tion of the crown of Spain to have been executed a few days
after the resignation of the Netherlands, Corn. de Reb. Gall
p. 879. It is remarkable that in the treaty of truce, at Vau-
celles, though Charles had made over all his dominions to his
son fonme weeks previous to the conclusion of it, all the ftipu-
lations are in the Emperor's name, and Philip is only designed
King of England and Naples. It is certain Philip was not
proclaimed Kilng of Castile, &c. at Valladolid sooner than the
24th of March. Sandov. ii. p 606, and previous to that ce-
remony, he did not chute, it would seem, to affiume the title
of King of any of his Spanish Kingdoms, or to perform any
al of royal jurifdi&ion. In a deed annexed to the treaty of
truce, dated April t9th, he affuimes the title of King of Caf-
tile, &c. in the usual stile of the Spanilh monarchs in than
age. Corps Dipl. toni. iv. Appcnd. p. 85.

BooK XI. conferences at the abbey of Vaucelles, near
'-Cr Cambray, an expedient was accidentally propoled

155'. for terminating hostilities betwixt the contending

monarchs, by a long truce, during the fubfidance
of which, and without discussing their refpctive
claims, each should retain what was in his polTelli-
on. Charles, sensible how much his kingdoms
were exhausted by the expensive and almoll con-
tinual wars in which his ambition had engaged
him, and eager to gain for his Ton a short inter.
val of peace, that he might establish himself firmly
on his throne, declared warmly for closing with
the overture, though manifestly dishonourable as
well as disadvantageous; and such was the refpedt
due to his wisdom and experience, that Philip,
notwithstanding his unwillingness to purchale
peace by such conceflions, did not presume to urge
his opinion in opposition to that of his father.

A trace HENRY could not have hesitated one moment
tolclu(led. about giving his content to a truce on such condi-

tions, as would leave him in quiet poffeflion of
the greater part of the Duke cf Savoy's domini-
ons, together with the important conquest which
he had made on the German frontier. But it was
no easy matter to reconcile such a ftep with the
engagements that he had come under to the Pope,
in his late treaty with him. The Conflable
Montmorency, however, represented in such a
striking light, the imprudence of sacrificing the
true interests of his kingdom to there rash obliga-
tions, and took such advantage of the absence of
the Cardinal of Lorraine, who had seduced the
King into his alliance with the Caraffas, that
Henry, naturally fluctuating and unsteady, and
apt to be influenced by the advice lafl given him,
5;ti rL. authorized his ambafladors to sign a treaty of

truce with the Emperor for five years, on the
terms which had been proposed. But that he
might not seem to have altogether forgotten his

ally

ally the Pope, who he foresaw would be highly BOOx XI'
exasperated, he, in order to sooth him, took care ó~
that he should be exprefly included in the truce. 55

TH E Count of Lalain repaired to Blois, and Ratified by

the Admiral Coligny to Brullels, the former to be both mo-
prelent when the King of France, and the latter narchs
when the Emperor and his son, ratified the trea-
ty and bound themselves by oath to observe it T
Whlen an account of the conferences at Vaucelles, aftonifhe-
and of the conditions of truce which had been ament and
proposed there, were first carried to Rome, itd'ltr""'
gave the Pope no manner of disquiet. He trust-
ed so much to the honour of the French monarch,
that he would not allow hirnfelf to think that
Henry could forget so soon, or violate so shame-
fully, all the stipulations in his league with him.
I-le had such an high opinion of the Emperor's
wisdom, that he made no doubt of his refusing
his content to a truce on such unequal terms; and
on both there accounts he confidently pronounced
that this like many preceding negociations, would
terminate in nothing. But later and more certain
intelligence soon convinced him that in political
affairs no reasoning is more fallacious, than, be-
cause an event is improbable, to conclude that it
will not happen. The sudden and unexpected
conclusion of the truce filled Paul with astonish-
ment and terror. The Cardinal of Lorrain durst
not encounter that storm of indignation, to which
he knew he should be exposed fiom the haughty
Pontiff, who had so good reason to be incensed;

'Mem. de Ribier. ii. 626. Corps Diplom. tom iv. App. 81.
'One of Admiral Coligny's attendants, who wrote to the

court of France an account of what happened while they re-
fided at Brussels, takes notice, as an instance of Philip's impo-
litenefs, that he received the Frcnch ambassador in an apart-
ment hung with tapestry, which represented the battle of Pa-
via, the manner in which Francis 1. was taken prisoner, his
voyage to Spain, with all the circunmtances of his captivity and
imlprifonimeit at Madrid. Mem. de Ribicr, ii. 634.

but

BooK XI. but departing abruptly from Rome, he left to the
R"v' Cardinal Tournon the difficult task of attempting

to sooth Paul and his nephews. They were fully
sensible of the perilous situation in which they
now flood. By their engagements with France,
which were no longer secret, they had highly irri-
tated Philip. They dreaded the violence of his
implacable temper. The Duke of Alva, a mi-
nifter, fitted as well by his abilities as by the fe.
verity of his nature, for executing all Philip's ri-
gorous schemes, had advanced from Milan to
Naples, and began to assemble troops on the
frontiers of the Ecclesiastical State. While they,
if deserted by France, must not only relinquish
all the hopes of dominion and Sovereignty to
which their ambition aspired, but remain exposed
to the resentment of the Spanilh monarch, with-
out one ally to protect them againIt an enemy
with whom they were so little able to contend.

He at. UNDER thefecircumftances, Paul had recourse
tempts to
rekindle the to the arts of negociation and intrigue, of which
war. the Papal court knows well how to avail itself in

order to ward off any calamity threatened by an
enemy superior in power. He affeced to approve
highly of the truce, as an happy expedient for
putting a stop to the effusion of Christian blood.
He expressed his warmest wiibes that it might
prove the forerunner of a definitive peace. He ex-
horted the rival Princes to embrace this favoura-
ble opportunity of setting on foot a negociation
for that purpose, and offered, as their common
father, to be mediator between them. Under
this pretext, he appointed Cardinal Rebiba his
nuncio to the court of Brussels, and his nephew
Cardinal Caraffa to that of Paris. The publick
inftrueions given to both were the fame; that
they should use their utmost endeavours to pre-
vail with the two monarchs to accet of the Pope's

mediation,

mediation, that by means of it, peace might be Boos XL
re established, and meaftres might be taken for 'ó
assembling a general council. But under this fpe-
cious appearance of zeal for attaining obje&s so
desirable in themrelves, and so becoming his fa-
cred character to pursue, Paul concealed very
different intentions. Caraffa, besides his publick
inftrudions, received a private commission to fol-
licit the French King to renounce the treaty of
truce, and to renew his engagements with the
Holy See, and he was impowered to spare neither
entreaties, nor promises, nor bribes, in order to
gain that point. This, both the uncle and the
nephew confidered as the real end of the embassy;
while the other served to amuse the vulgar, or to
deceive the Emperor and his son. The Cardinal, Iath Mar.
accordingly, set out inflantly for Paris, and tra-
velled with the greatest expedition, while Rebiba
was detained some weeks at Rome; and when it
became necessary for him to begin his journey,
he received secret orders to protract it as much
as poflible, that the issue of Caraffa's negociation
might be known before he flould reach BruiTels,
and according to that, proper diretions might
be given to him with regard to the tone which he
Lhould assume, in treating with the Emperor and
his son u.

CARAFFA made his entry into Paris with ex- H neg

traordinary pomp i and having presented a confe ations for
crated sword to Henry as the protetor, on whose that pur-
aid the Pope relied in the present exigency, he por.
besought him not to disregard the entreaties of a
parent in distress, but to employ that weapon
which he gave him in his defence. This he re-
presented not only as a duty of filial piety, but as
an aft of justice. As the Pope, from confidence

u Pallay. lib. xiii. p. 169. Burnet Hil. of Reform. ii.
Ap. 309.

in

Boot XI. in the afliftance and fipport which his late treaty
'-.-.- with France entitled him to expea, had taken

1556. such steps as had irritated the King of Spain, he

conjured Henry not to susser Paul and his family
to be crushed under the weight of that resentment
which they had drawn on themselves merely by
their attachment to France. Together with this
argument addressed to his generosity, he employ-
ed another which he hoped would work on his am-
bition. He affirmed that now was the time,
when, with the most certain prospeCt of success,
lie might attack Philip's dominions in Italy; that
the flower of the veteran Spanish bands had pe-
rifhed in the wars of Hungary, Germany, and
the Low-countries; that the Emperor had left
his son an exhausted treafiury, and kingdoms
drained of men ; that he had no longer to contend
with the abilities, the experience, and good for-
tune of Charles, but with a monarch scarce feated
on his throne, unpractised in command, odious
to many of the Italian states, and dreaded by all;
that the Pope, who had already levied soldiers,
would bring a considerable army into the field.
which when joined by a sufficient number of
French troops, might by one brisk and sudden
effort, drive the Spaniards out of Naples, and
add to the crown of France a kingdom, the con-
quest of which had been the great object of all
his predeceflors during half a century, and the
chief motive of all their expeditions into Italy.

their ,f- EVERY word Caraffa spoke made a deed im-
feva. preflion on Henry; cnfcious, on the one hand,
July 3 ' that the Pope had juif cause to reproach him with

not having consulted the laws either of generosity
or of decency, when he renounced his league
with him, and had agreed to the truce of
Vaucelles; and eager, on the other hand, not
only to diftinguifl his reign by a conquest,

which
364

which three former monarchs had attempted Boot xrL
without success, but likewise to acquire an efta-
blilhment of such dignity and value for one of 15s
his sons. Reverence, however, for the oath, by
which he had so lately confirmed the truce of
Vaucelles; the extreme old age of the Pope,
whose death might occasion an intire revolution
in the political system of Italy; together with
the representations of Montmorency, who repeat-
ed all the arguments that he had used against the
firit league wilh Paul, and pointed out the great
and immediate advantages which France derived
from the truce; kept Henry for rome time in sus-
pence, and might poflibly have outweighed all
Caraffa's arguments. But the Cardinal was not
such a novice in the arts of intrigue and negocia-
tion, as not to have expedients ready for remov-
ing or surmounting all these obstacles. To ob-
viate the king's scruple with regard to his oath,
he produced powers from the Pope to absolve him
from the obligation of it. By way of security
against any danger which he might apprehend
from the Pope's death, he engaged that his uncle
would make such a nomination of Cardinals, as
should give Henry the absolute command of the
next elecion, and enable him to place in the Pa-
pal chair a person entirely devoted to his interest.

IN order to counterbalance the effeCt of the

Constable's opinion and influence, he employed
not only the active talents of the Duke of Guise,
and the eloquence of his brother the Cardinal of
Lorrain, but the addrefsof the Qieen, aided by
the more powerful arts of Diana of Poitiers, who,
unfortunately for France, co-operated with Ca-
tharine in this point, though she took pleafue,
on almost every other occasion, to thwart and
mortify her. They, by their united solicitations,
easily swayed the King, who leaned of his own

VO L. 11. A a accord

BObK' XI. iccord to that fide, towards wvhich they wished
^'" '.iimn to enclihe.' All Molitnorency's prudent re.

55 f nionftrahtces weir disregarded ; te nuncio abfol

. ved Henry from 1iis oath ;'and be signed a new
Jly 31 lelaTue iith the Pope, which rekiindled the flame

of war bdth :in 'Italy and in the Low-Countlies,

The Pope's 'As s6on l as Panl was ihformed by his nephew
violent pr. - th at tliee was a failr profpet of :his fucceding in
ceedings
against this negoiatQiin, he di patched a rmeffegerafter the
Philip pun'cio R-ebb: a, wiLh -orders to return to Rome,

without priceidiing to B3:lrtle'1.' As it was now
no 'longer neceffiry to preserve that tone of mo.
deration, which 'fTiited the charatler of a media-
tor, ahd which 1e :had affeeted ytqafiume, or to
put Iany farther 'reftaiint' upon his reeitnment
againt Philip, he boldly th-rew off the maif, and
took such violent ifeeps as rendered a rupture un-
-'voidable, -tle seized and impl'{foned the Spa.
:inih ervoy at his coulrt ~He excommtlnicated
the Collonna's ; and having deprived Mirk An-
tonio, the 1iead of that .family, of the dukedom
of Paliana', lie :granted rhat dignity, together
with the territory annexed to it, to his nephew
the 'Count of Montorio. 'He ordered a legal in-
bformatibn to be presented -in :the confifltoy of
*Cardinals agailfft Philip, setting forth that he,
notwithstanding the fidelity and allegiance due by
him td t he Holy See, of which lie held the crown
of NNaples, had not only afforded a retreat in his
dominions to the Colonna's, whom the Pope had
excommunicated and declared rebels, but had
'furnished them with arms, and was ready, in
conjundion with them, to inVade the Ecclefiafti-
cal.State in an hoflile manner; that such condudt
in a vaflal was to be deemed treason against
'his liege lord, the punilhment of which was
the forfeiture of his lief. 'Jpon this the conlif-
torial advocate requested the Pope to take cog-

nizance

nizance of the cause, and to appoint a day for BooK X.
hearing of it, when he would make good every '-v'
article of the charge, and expe6t from his justice 1556
that sentence which the heinousness of Philip's
crimes merited. Paul, whose pride was highly
flattered with the idea of trying and pafling
judgment on so great a King, assented to h s re-
quef ; and as if it had been no leis easy to ex- July 17.
ecute than to pronounce sentence, declared that
he would consult with the Cardinals concerning
the formalities requisite in condudting the trial .

BUT while Paul allowed his pride and resent- Philip's fu-

ment to drive him on with such headlong impe- pertitious
tuofity, Philip discovered an amazing moderation
on his part. He had been taught by the Spanish
ecclefiafticks who had the charge of his educati-
on, a profound veneration for the Holy See.
This sentiment, which had been early infused,
grew up with him as he advanced in years, and
took full possession of his mind, which was na-
turally thoughtful, serious, and prone to super-
ftition. When he foresaw a rupture with the
Pope approaching, he had such violent scruples
with refpec to the lawfulness of taking arms
against the Vicegerent of Christ, and the com-
mon father of all Christians, that he consulted
some Spanish divines upon that point. Though
they, with the usual dexterity of casuists in ac-
commodating their responses to the circumftan-
ces of those who apply to them for direction, as-
fured him that, after employing prayers and re-
monstrances in order to bring the Pope to reason,
he had full right, both by the laws of nature and
of Christianity, not only to defend himfelfwhen
attacked, but to begin hostilities, if that were

x Pallav. lib. xiii. 171.

judged
Aa a

BOOK XI. judged the most proper expedient, for prevent.

ó"v3 ing the effeEts of Paul's violence and injutnice:

Yet Philip fill deliberated and delayed, confi.
dering it as a most cruel misfortune, that his ad-
minifration (hould open with an attack on a
person, whose sacred function and charater he
so highly refpeded Y.

The Duke AT last the Duke of Alva, who, in compli,
of Alva
takeb the ance with his master's scruples, had continued to
field again: negociate long after he mhould have begun to a&,
the Pope. finding Paul inexorable, and that every overture

of peace, and every appearance of hesitation on
se. 5. his part encreafed the Pontiff's natural arrogance,

took the field and entered the ecclesiastical terri-
tories. His army did not exceed twelve thousand
men, but it was composed 6f veteran soldiers,
and commanded chiefly by those Roman barons,
whom Paul's violence had driven into exile.
The valour of the troops, and the animosity of
their leaders who fought in their own quarrel,
and to recover their own estates, supplied the
want of numbers. As none of the French forces
were yet arrived, Alva Soon became matter of the
Compagna Romana; tome cities being furren.
dered through the cowardice of the garrisons,
which confifed of raw soldiers, ill disciplined,
and worse commanded; the gates of others being
opened by the inhabitants, who were eager to
receive back their ancient masters. Alva, that
he might not be taxed with impiety in seizing the
patrimony of the church, took poffelion of the
towns which capitulated, in the name of the col-
lege of cardinals, to which, or to the Pope that
should be chosen to succeed Paul, he declared
that he would immediately restore them.

Y Ferrer. His. de Efpagne ix. 373. Herrera, i. 308.

THE
368

THE rapid progress of the Spaniards, whose BooK XI.
light troops made inroads to the gates of Rome, '-;
filled that city with consternation; and Paul, A truce be.
though inflexible and undaunted himself, wastweenthe
obliged to give way so far to the fears and folici- Phopip.
tations of the Cardinals, as to fend deputies to
Alva in order to propose a celfation of arms. The
Pope yielded the more readily, as he was fenfi-
ble of a double advantage which might be deriv-
ed from obtaining that point. It would deliver
the inhabitants of Rome from their present ter-
ror, and would afford time for the arrival of the
succours which he expected from France. Nor
was Alva unwilling to close with the overture,
both as he knew how desirous his matter was to
terminate a war, which he had undertaken with
relutance, and as his army was so much weaken-
ed by garrisoning the great number of towns
which he had reduced, that it was scarce in a
condition to keep the field without fresh recruits.
A truce was accordingly concluded first for ten, Nao. 19.
and afterwards for forty days, during which, va-
rious schemes of peace was proposed, and perpe-
tual negociations were carried on, but with no
sincerity on the part of the Pope. The return
of his nephew the cardinal to Rome, the receipt
of a considerable fum remitted by the King of
France, the arrival of one body of French troops,
together with the expetation of others which
had begun their march, rendered him more ar-
rogant than ever, and banished all thoughts from
his mind, but thol of war aad revenge .

Pallav. lib. xiii. 177. Thuan. lib. xvii. 588. Mere.
Re Ribier, ii. 664.

THE
Aa 3

# BOOK XII.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V

BOOK XII.
BOOK XII. Wl T H IL E these operations or intrigues kept

BOK

J VV the Pope and Philip busy and attentive,

chiarle5 the Emperor dilentangled himself finally from all
new at- the affairs of this world, and set out for the place
lter the Of his retreat. He had hitherto retained the Im-
fuccefrion of perial dignity not from any unwillingness to relin-
thi Empire qui f it, for after having resigned the real and

extensive authority that he enjoyed in his heredi-
tary dominions, to part with the limited and of-
ten ideal jurifdidtion, which belongs to an elec-
tive crown, was no great sacrifice. His fol.
motive for delay was to gain a few months, foi
making one trial more, in order to accomplilh
his favourite scheme in behalf of his son. Al
the very time Charles seemed to be most
sensible of the vanity of worldly grandeur, and

when

when he appeared. to be quitting it not only with B~OK XII.
indifference, but with contempt, the vast fchemres "
of ambition, which had so long occupied and en 3-
grossed his mind, still kept pofflefion of it. He
could not think of leaving his son,: anong the
Princes of Europe, in a rank: inferior to that
which he himself had held. As he bad, form
years before, made a fruitless attempt to fscure
the Imperial crown to Philip, that by uniting it
to the kingdoms of Spain, and tihe dominions of
the houie of Burgundy, he might pot it. in his
power to prosecute, with a better profped of ifuc-
cess, those great plans, which his own infirmities
had obliged him to abandon, he was still unwil-
ling to relinquish this flattering projec as chime-
rical or unattainable.

NOTWITHSTANDING the repulse which he Which

had formerly met with from his brother Ferdi- Poves u;
nand, he renewed his follicitations with fresh im-
portunity, and during the summer, had tried
every art, and employed every argument, which
he thought could induce him to quit the Imperi-
al throne to Philip, and to accept of the invefti-
tire of Ibme province, either in Italy, or in the
Low-( ountries, as an equivalent'. But Ferdi-
nand, who was ft firm and inflexible with regard
to this point, that he had paid no regard to the
solicitations of the Emperor, even when they
were enforced with all the weight of authority,
which accompanies fuprerne power, received the
overture, that now came from him in the fituati-
on to which he had descended, with greater in-
difference, and would not deign to liften to it.
Charles, ashamed of his own credulity in having

a Aimbaflodes des Noaillem, tom. v. 356.

imagined
Aa 4.

BooK XIl. imagined that he might accomplish that now,

"'L" which he had attempted formerly without success

desisted finally from his scheme. He then re
signed the government of the Empire, and hav
ing transferred all his claims of obedience ant
allegiance from the Germanick body, to his bro.
August 27ther the King of the Romans, he executed a deed

to that effect, with all the formalities, requisite
in such an important tranfafion. The initru.
ment of resignation he committed to William
Prince of Orange, and impowered him to lay it
before the college of electors b

Charles rets NOTHING now remained to detain Charles
spainr from that retreat for which he languished.

Every thing having been prepared Come time
for his voyage, he set out for Zuitburg in
Zealand, where the fleet had orders to rendez.
vous. In his way thither he passed through
Ghent, and after {topping there a few days,
to indulge that tender and pleasant melancholy,
which arises in the mind of every man in the de-
cline of life, on visiting the place of his nativi-
ty, and viewing the scenes and objects familiar
to him in his early youth. he pursued his jour-
ney accompanied by his son Philip, his daughter
the archdutchefs, his filters the dowager Queens
of France and Hungary, Maximilian his fon-in-
law, and a numerous retinue of the Flemish no-
bility. Before he went on board, he dismissed
them, with marks of his attention or regard;
and taking leave of Philip with all the tendel-
ness of a father who embraced his son for the
last time, he set fail on the seventeenth of
September under convoy of a large fleet

b Goldaft. ConRfit. Imper. pars i. 576.

of

of Spanish, Flemish and English ships. He de- Boot XII.
dined a prefling invitation, from the Queen of '""
England, to land in some part of her dominions,
in order to refresh himself, and that she might
have the comfort of feeing him once more. It
cannot surely, said he, be agreeable to a Queen to
receive a visit from a father-in-law, who is now
nothing more than a private gentleman.

His voyage was prosperous and agreeable, and Hisrrival

he arrived at Laredo in Biscay on the eleventh day tond tcer
after he left Zealand. As soon as he landed, he
fell prostrate on the ground; and confidering him-
self now as dead to the world, he kissed the earth,
and said, " Naked came I out of my mother's
womb, and naked I now return to thee, thou
common mother of mankind." From Laredo he
pursued his journey to Burgos, carried by his at-
tendants sometimes in a chair, and sometimes in a
horse litter, suffering exquisite pain at every ftep,
and advancing with the greatest difficulty. Some
of the Spanish nobility repaired to Burgos in order
to pay court to him, but they were so few in
number, and their attendance was so negligent,
that Charles observed it, and felt, for the first
time, that he was no longer a Monarch. Accuf-
tomed from his early youth to the dutiful and
officious respeCt with which those who possess fove-
reign power are attended, he had received it with
the credulity common to Princes, and was weak
enough to be mortified, when he now discovered,
that he had been indebted to his fortune, for
much of that obsequious regard, which he had
fondly thought was paid to his personal quali-
ties. But though he might have soon learned
to forget the levity of his fubjeds, or to have
despised their neglet, he was more deeply as-
flited with his son's ingratitude, who, forget-
ting already how much he owed to his father's

bounty

Boo XII. bounty, obliged him to remain some weeks at

- '-V- tBurgos,

before he paid him the firif moiety of that
'56.' small pension, which was all that he had reserved

of so many kingdoms. As without this fimn,
Charles could not dismiss his domefticks with such
rewards as their services merited, or his generosity
had destined for them, he could not help expref-
sing both surprise and diffatisfadion b. At last the
money was paid, and Charles having difmiiTed a
great number of his domefticks, whose attendance
he thought would be superfluous or cumbersome
in his retirement, he proceeded to Valladolid.
There he took a last and tender leave of his two
sifters, whom he would not permit to accompany
him to his solitude, though they entreated it with
tears, not only that they might have the confola-
tion of contributing by their attendance and care
to mitigate or to sooth his sufferings, but that they
might reap inftruetion and benefit by joining with
him in those pious exercises, to which he had con-
fecrated the remainder of his days.

The place FROM Valladolid he continued his journey to
t-ts r . Plazencia in Estremadura. He had pafled through

that city a great many years before, and having
been struck at that time with the delightful fitua-
tion of the monastery of St. Jufius belonging to
the order of St. Jerome, not many miles distant
from that place, he had then observed to some of
his attendants, that this was a spot to which Dio-
clefian might have retired with pleasure. The
impreflion had remained so strong on his mind,
that he pitched on it as the place of his retreat,
It was feated in a vale of no great extent, water-
ed by a small brook, and surrounded by riling
grounds, covered with lofty trees; both from the
nature of the foil, and temperature of the climate,
it was esteemed the most healthful and delicious

situ-
b Strada de Bello Belg. lib. i. 9.

situation ifi Spain. Some months before his refig- BoeK XII
nation he had sent an architect thither, to add a .-.V
new apartment to the monastery, for his accom-
modation; but he gave .ftrid orders that the stile
of the building should be such as suited his pre-
sent itation, rather than his former dignity. It
consisted only of fix rooms, four of them in the
form of Friars cells, with naked walls; and the
other two, each twenty feet square, were hung
with brown cloth, and furnished in the most fim-
ple manner. They were all level with the ground;
with a door on one fide into a garden, of which
Charles himself had given the plan, and had filled
it with various plants, which he proposed to culti-
vate with his own hands. On the other fide it
communicated with the chapel of the monastery,
in which he was to perform his devotions. Into 1757.
this humble retreat, scarce fuTifcient for the cor- Feb. 4.
sortable accommodation of a private gentleman,
did Charles enter, with twelve domefticks only.
He buried there, in solitude and silence, his gran-
deur, his ambition, together with all those vast
projees, which, during half a century, had alarm-
ed and agitated Europe, filling every kingdom in
it, by turns, with the terror of his arms, and the
dread of being fubjedled to his power c.

THE contrail between Charles's condudt, and Contral be-

that of the Pope at thisjunittre, was so obvious, behviou,, of
that it struck even the most careless observers; Charles and
nor was the comparison which they made much to the Pope.
Paul's advantage. The former, a conqueror,
born to reign, long accustomed to the splendor
which accompanies supreme power, and to those
busy and interesting scenes in which an active
ambition had engaged him, quitted the world,
at an early period of life, that he might close the

eve-
'Sandov. ii, 607 & Zuniga. ilo. Thuan. lib. xviii. 609.

BooK XII. evening of his days in tranquility, and secure some

'^ interval for fober thought, and serious recollection.
ss$' The latter, a priest, who had passed the early part

of his life in the shade of the schools, and in the
fRudy of the speculative sciences, who was seem-
ingly so detached from the world, that he had
shut himself up for many years in the solitude of a
cloifler, and who was not raised to the Papal
throne until he had reached the extremity of old
age, discovered at once all the impetuosity of
youthful ambition, and engaged in vast schemes,
in order to accomplish which, he scrupled not to
scatter the feeds of discord and to kindle the
flames of war in every corner of Europe. But
Paul, regardless of the opinion and censures of
mankind, held on his own course with his wonted
arrogance and violence. These, although they
seemed already to have exceeded all bounds, rose
to still a greater height, upon the arrival of the
duke of Guise in Italy.

The duke of THAT which the two Princes of Lorrain fore-
Guise leadh
the French saw and desired, had happened. The duke of
army into Guise was entrusted with the command of the
ltaly. army appointed to march to the Pope's afliftance.

It consisted of twenty thousand men, of the best
troops in the service of France. So high was the
Duke's reputation, and such the general expeda-
tion of beholding some extraordinary exertion of
his courage and abilities in a war, into which he
had precipitated his country, chiefly with the de-
sign of gaining a field where he might display his
own talents, that many of the French nobility, who
had no command in the troops employed, accom-
panied him as volunteers. This army pafied the
Alps in a rigorous season, and advanced towards
Rome, without any opposition from the Spani-
ards, who, as they were not strong enough to a&
in different parts, had collected all their forces in

0~* ~~0one

one body on the frontiers of Naples, for the de- Boot XII.
fence of that kingdom. i- _-

EMBOLDENED by the approach of the French, The Pope

the Pope let loose all the fury of his resentment i 's hof-
against Philip, which, notwithstanding the natu- asginft Phi-
ral violence of his temper, prudential confidera- lip
tions had hitherto obliged him to keep under
some refiraint. He named commissioners, whom
he impowered to pass judgment in the suit,
which the consistorial advocate had commenced
against Philip, in order to prove that he had for-
feited the crown of Naples, by taking arms
againfi the Holy See, ot which he was a vassal. February
He recalled all the nuncios resident in the courts
of Charles V. of Philip, or of any of their allies.pril
This was levelled chiefly against Cardinal Pole, 9
the Papal legate in the court of England, whose
great merit, in having contributed so successfully
to reconcile that kingdom to the church of Rome,
together with the expectation of farther services
that he might perform, was not sufficient to screen
him from the resentment which he had incurred
by his zealous endeavours to re-eftablifi peace
between the house of Austria and France. He
commanded an addition to be made to the ana-
themas annually denounced against the enemies
of the church on Maunday-Thurfday, whereby
he inflicted the censure of excommunication on
the authors of the late invasion of the ecclefiafti-
cal territories, whatever their rank or dignity
might be; and, in consequence of this, the usual
prayers for the Emperor were omitted next day
in the Pope's chapel d.

BUT while the Pope indulged himself in there

wild and childish sallies of rage, he either neglec-
ted, or it exceeded his power, to take such mea-

surfs
c Pal. lib..xiii. 180. Mcm. dc Ribier, ii. 678.

BooKXII. fures as would have rendered his resentment real.
C'-," ly formidable, and fatal to his enemies. For,
His miitary when the duke of Guise entered Rome, where he
p,.~atios was received with a triumphal pomp, which
i'de'at. would have been more suitable if he had been

returning from having terminated tihe war with
glory, than when he was going to begin it with
a doubtiftil chance of fuccels, he found none of
the preparations for war in such forwardness as
Caraffa had promised, or he had expected. The
Papal troops were far inferior in number to the
quota stipulated; no magazines iufficient for their
fubfiftance were formed; nor was money for pay
ing them provided. The Venetians, agreeably
to that cautious maxim which the misfortunes of
their state had first led them to adopt, and which
was now become a fundamental principle in their
policy, declared their resolution to preserve an ex-
ac netrtality, without taking any part in the
quarrels of Princes so far their ftiperiors in power.
The other Italian states were either openly united
in league with Philip, or secretly wished fuccels
to his- arms againit a Pontiff, whose inconsiderate
ambition had rendered Italy once more the feat of

war.

Duke of THE dduke of Guise perceived that the whole
Guife'sope. weight of the war would devolve on him; and
rations. became 4esnlible, though too late, how imprudent

it is to rely, in the execution of great enterprizes,
on die aid of feeble allies. Pushed on, however,
by the Pope's impatience for action, as well as
by his own desire of performing fiomething of
what he had so confidently undertaken, he march-
ed towards Naples, and began his operations. But
April 3. the fitccels of these fell far lbort of his fo)rmer re-

putation, of what the world expctded, and ot what
he hinmfelf had promifld. He opened the cam-
paign with the siege of Civetclla, a1 town ofl Ime

importance

importance on the Neapolitan frontier. But the Boor Xl.
obftihacy with which the Spaniih governor defen- ..
ded it, baffled all the impetuous efforts of the 'S7
French valour, and obliged Guise, after a siege
of three weeks, to retire from the town with dif-
grace. He endeavoured to wipe off that stain, by
advancing boldly towards the duke of Alva's
camp, and offering him battle. But that prudent
commander, sensible of all the advantages of
handing on the defensive before an invading ene-
my, declined an engagement, and kept within
his entrenchments; and adhering to his plan with
the fleadinefs of a Castilian, eluded with great ad-
dress all Guise's stratagems, to draw him into ac-
tion'. Meanwhile, sickness wafted the French
army violent dissensions had arisen between
Guise and the commander of the Pope's forces;
the Spaniards renewed their incursions into the ec-
clefiaftical state;' the Pope, when he found, in-
flead of the conquests and triumphs which he had
fondly expe&ed, that he could not secure his own
territories from depredation, murmured, com-
plained, and began to talk of peace. The duke
of Guise, mortified to the last degree with having
adted such an inglorious part, not only follicited
his court either to reinforce his army, or to recal
him, but urged Paul to fulfil his engagements;
and called on Cardinal Caraffa, Sometimes with
reproaches, and sometimes with threats, to make
good these magnificent promires, from a ra(h con-
fidence in which he had advised his master to re-
nounce the truce of Vaucelles, and to join in
league with the Pope f.

BUT while the French affairs in Italy were in Hofiliiie,

this wretched situation, an unexpected event cout,i,,.
happened in the Low-Countries, which called the
duke of Guile from a station wherein he could

acquire

Herrera vida de Felipe, 181. f Thuan, lib. xxviii. 614.
Palav. lib. xiii. 181. Burn. ii. app. 317.

BooK XII. acquire no honour, to the most dignified and im-
·v p portant charge which could be committed to a

'55- subjet. As soon as the French had discovered

their purpose of violating the truce of Vaucelles,
not only by fending an army into Italy, but by
attempting to furprize rome of the frontier towns
in Slanders, Philip, though willing to have avoid-
ed a rupture, determined to prosecute the war
with fuich spirit, as should make his enemies fen-
fible, that his father had not erred, when hejudg-
ed him to be To capable of government, that he
had given up the reins into his hands. As he
knew that Htenry had been at great expence in
fitting out the army under the duke of Guise, and
that his treasury was hardly able to answer the ex-
orbitant and endless demands of a distant war,
he foresaw that all his operations in the Low-
Countries must, of consequence, be feeble, and
be confidered only as secondary to those in Italy.
For that reason, he prudently resolved to make
his principal effort in that place where he expec-
ted the French to be weakest, and to bend his
chief force againit that quarter where they would
feel a blow most sensibly. With this view, he as-
fembled in the Low-Countries an army of about
fifty thousand men, the Flemings serving him on
this occasion with that active zeal, which 'ubjedts
are wont to exert in obeying the commands of a
new sovereign. But Philip, cautious and provident,
even at that early period of life, did not reft all his
hopes of success on that formidable force alone.

Philp en- HB had been labouring for rome time to
deavours to engage the English to espouse his quarrel; and
engage Egland in though it was manifetly the interelt of that
the war, kingdom to maintain a ftriat neutrality, and

the people themselves were sensible of the
advantages which they derived from it; though he
knew how odious his nanme was to the English, and

how
380

how averse they would be to co-operate with him BOOK XII.
ill any measure, he nevertheless did not despair '
ofaccomplilhing his point. He relied on the as- 157
feclion wherewith the Queen doated on him,
which was 1o violent, that even his coldness and
negled had not extinguished it; he knew her im-
plicit reverence for his opinion, and her fond de-
lire of gratifying him in every particular. That
he might work on these with greater facility, and
more certain success, he set out for England.
The Queen who, during her husband's absence,
had languished in perpetual dejection, resumed
fresh spirits on his arrival; and without paying
the least attention either to the interest or to the
inclinations of her people, entered warmly into
a!l his Ichemes. In vain did her privy-council
remonstrate against the imprudence as well as
danger of involving the nation in an unnecessary
war; in vain did they put her in mind of the so-
lemn treaties of peace fubrifling between England
and France, which the conduct of that nation
had afforded her no pretext to violate. Mary,
soothed by Philip's carelfes, or intimidated by
the threats which his ascendant over her embol-
dened him at some times to throw out, was deaf
to every thing that could be urged in opposition
to his sentiments, and infifed with the greatelt
vehemence on an immediate declaration of war
against France. The council, though all Phi-
lip's address and Mary's authority were employ-
ed to gain or over-awe them, struggled long,
and yielded at last, not from convidkion, but mere-
ly from deference to the will of their sovereign.
War was declared against France, the only one June o'
perhaps againfl that kingdom into which the En-
glifh ever entered with reluctance. As Mary
knew the aversion of the nation to this meafirc,
she durst not call a parliament in order to raise
money for carrying on the war. She supplied

VOL. 111. Bb this

BOOK XII. this want, however, by a firain of prerogative;

L'-''' and levied large fums on her fubjeds by her own
5S7' authority. This enabled her to afWemble a fuffi.

cient body of troops, and to fend eight thousand
men under the conduct of the earl of Pembroke
to join Philip's army g.

Operations PHILIP, who was not ambitious of military
of Philip's
army in the glory, gave the command of his army to Emanu-
Low-Coun- el Philibert, duke of Savoy, and fixed his own

residence at Cambray, that he might be at hand
to-receive the earliest intelligence of his motions,
and to aid him with his counsels. The duke open-
ed the campaign with a maflerly stroke of ad-
dress, which juitified Philip's choice, and disco-
vered filch a superiority of genius over the French
generals, as almost ensured success in his fubie.
quent operations. He appointed the general ren-
dezvous of his troops at a place considerably dit:
tant from the country which he defined to be the
scene of action; and having kept the enemy in
fiufpence for a good time with regard to his inten-
tions, he at last deceived them so effedually by
the variety of his marches and counter marches,
that they concluded that he meant to bend all his
force against the province, of Champagne, and
would attempt to penetrate into the kingdom on
that fide. In consequence of this opinion, they
drew all their strength towards that quarter, and
reinforcing the garrisons there, left the towns on
other parts of the frontier destitute of troops fuif
ficient to defend them.
nQv'e sSt. EMANUEL, as soon as he perceived that this

feint had its 'full effect, turned filddenly to the
right, advanced by rapid marches into Picardy,
and fending his cavalry, in which he was extreme-
ly strong, before him, inverted St. Quintin. This

was
C Carte iii. 337.

tvag a town deemed in that age of considerable BOOK XII.
flrength, and of great importance, as there were %-
few fortified cities between it and Paris. The 557
fortifications, however, had been much neglec-
ted, the garrifbn weakened by draughts Tent to-
wards Champagne, did not amount to a fifth
part of the number requisite for its defence; and
the governor, though a brave officer, was nei-
ther of rank, nor authority, equal to the com-
mand in a place of so much consequence, befie-
ged by filch a formidable army. A few days
mutt have put the Duke of Savoy in poffeflion
of the town, if the admiral de Coligny, who
thought it concerned his honour to attempt fa-
ving a place of such importance to his country,
and which lay within his jurisdiction as governor
of Picardy, had not taken the gallant resolution
of throwing himself into it, with such a body of
men as he could collea of a sudden. This resolution
he executed with great intrepidity, and confide-
ring the nature of the enterprize, with no con-
temptible success; for though one half of his
small body was cut off, he, with the other, broke
through the enemy, and entered the town. The
unexpeted arrival of an officer of such high rank
and reputation, and who had exposed himself
to such danger in order to join them, in-
spired the desponding garrison with cottrage.
Every thing that the admiral's great (kill and ex-
perience in the art of war could suggest, for an-
noying the enemy, or defending the town, was
attempted; and the citizens as well as the garri-
son seconding his zeal with equal ardour, seemed
to be determined that they would hold out to'the
last, and sacrifice themselves in order to save their
country h.

h Thuan. lib. xix. 647.

Bba

BooK XII.. THE Duke of Savoy, whom the English in.

1~7-. der the Earl of Pembroke, joined about this

The 'Irench time, pushed on the siege with the greatest vi.
t"ore Our gour. An army so numerous, and so well fuppli-
the town. ed with every thing requisite, carried on its ap.

proaches with great advantage against a garrison
which was still lb feeble that it durst seldom ven-
ture to dilturb or retard the enemies operations
by rallies. The admiral, sensible of the approach-
ing danger and unable to avert it, acquainted his
uncle the conflable Montmorency, who had the
command of the French army, with his fituati-
on, and pointed out to him a method by which
he might throw relief into the town. The con-
flable, follicitous to save a town, the loss of which
would open a passage for the enemy into the heart
of France; and eager to extricate his nephew
out of that perilous situation, in which zeal for
the publick had engaged him; resolved, though
aware of the danger, to attempt what he delired.
With this view he marched from La Fere to-
wards St. Qgintin at the head of his army,
which was not by one half so numerous as that
of the enemy, and having given the command of
a body of chosen men to Coligny's brother Dan-
delot who was colonel general of the French in-
fantry, he ordered him to force his way into the
town by that avenue which the admiral had re-
presented as molt practicable, while he himself
with the mean army would give the alarm to the
enemies camp on the oppofire fide, and endea-
vour to draw all their attention towards that quar-
August io. ter. Dandelot executed his orders with greater

intrepidity than conduct. His soldiers rushed on
with such headlong impetuosity, that though it
broke the firR body of the enemy which food in
their way, it threw themselves into the utmost
confusion; and being attacked by fresh troops
which closed in upon them on every fide, the

greater

greater part of them were cut in pieces, Dande- BooK XII.
lot, with about five hundred of the most adven- -"-
trous, and most fortunate, making good his en- 557
trance into the town.

MEANWHILE the Conflable, in executing his The battle
part of the plan, advanced so near the camp offS .'"'i
the besiegers, as rendered it impoflible to retreat
with safety in the face of an enemy so much fu-
perior in number. The Duke of Savoy instant-
ly perceived Montmorency's error, and prepa-
red, with the presence of mind and abilities of a
great general, to avail himself of it. He drew
up his army in order of battle, with the greatest
expedition, and watching the moment when the
French began to file off towards La Fere, he de-
tached all his cavalry under the command of the
count of Egmont to fall on their rear, while lie,
at the head of his infantry, advanced to support
him. The French retired at first in perfect or-
der, and with a good countenance; but when
they law Egmont draw near with his formidable
body of cavalry, the ihock of which they were
conlcious that they could not withstand, the pro-
f tPedof imminent danger, added to distrust of
their general, whose imprudence every soldier
now perceived, firuck them with general confter-
nation. They began insensibly to quicken their
pace, and thole in the rear began to press tl vio-
lently on such as were before them, that in a
Ihort time their march resembled a flight rather
than a retreat. Egmont, ob(frving their confufi-
oa, charged them with the greaterf firy, and in
a moment all their C(enf(drmerie, the pride and
strength of the French armies in that nge, gave
way and fled with precipitation. The infantry, Trtal.err,
however, whom the conflable, by his prclenle nr ,hll
and authority, kept to their cololrs, Hill cnn- L"'n
tiloud their retrear, until the 'nenmy brought

B b 3 flluc

BOOK XII. rome pieces of cannon to bear upon their centre,
'"-v"" which threw them into such disorder, that the ca-

L 557 valry renewing their attack, broke in, and the

rout became universal. About four thousand of
the French fell in the field, and among those the
Duke of Anguyen a Prince of the blood, toge-
ther with fixhundred gentlemen. The Conflable,
as Coon as he perceived the fortune of the day to
be irretrievable, rushed into the thickest of the
enemy, with a resolution not to survive the cala-
mity, which his ill-conduct had brought upon his
country; but having received a dangerous wound,
and being wased with the loft of blood, he was
surrounded by some Flemish officers, to whom he
was known, who prote&ed him from the violence
of the soldiers, and obliged him to Surrender. Be.
fides the constable, the Dukes of Montpenlier
and Longueville, the Marechal St. Andre, many
officers of difninCtion, three hundred gentlemen,
and near four thousand private soldiers were taken
prisoners. All the colours belonging to the in-
fantry, all the ammunition, and all the cannon,
two pieces excepted, fell into the enemies hands.
The vicorious army did not lose above fourscore
men1

he firstef- THIS battle, no less fatal to France than the
.sea of it. ancient vitories of Crefy and Agincourt, gained

by the English on the fame frontier, bore a more
near resemblance to these, in the suddenness of
the rout ; in the rashness of the commander in
chief; in the number of persons of note slain or
taken; and in the small loss sustained by the
enemy. It filled France with equal confler-
nation. Many inhabitants of Paris with the fame
precipitancy and trepidation, as if the enemy

T Thuan. 6$o. Harai Annal. Brabant. ii. 692. Herrera,
29:.

had been already at their gates, quitted the city, Boot XII.
and retired into the interior provinces. The -"'
King, by his pretence and exhortations, endeavour- 5i
ed to console and to animate such as remained,
and applying himself with the greatest diligence
to repair the ruinous fortifications of the city,
prepared to defend it against the attack which he
instantly expected. But happily for France, Phi-
lip's caution, together with the intrepid firmness
of the Admiral de Coligny not only saved the ca-
pital from the danger to which it was exposed,
but gained the nation a short interval, during
which the people recovered from the terror and
dejection occasioned by a blow no less revere than
u;expeced, and Henry had leisure to take mea-
fures for the publick security with the spirit which
became the lovereign of a powerful and martial
people.

PHILIP, immediately after the battle, visited hilip re

the camp at St. Quintin, where he was received pairs to his
with all the exultation of military triumph; and""Y'
such were his transports of joy on account of an
event, which threw To mucn lustre on the begin-
n!ing of his reign, that they softened his severe
and haughty temper, into an unusual flow of
courtesy. When the Duke of Savoy approached,
a;id was kneeling to kits his hands, he caught
him in his arms, and embracing him with
warmth, ' It becomes me, fays he, rather to kifs
your hands, which have gained me such a glori-
uus and almuft bluodlefs victory.'

As soon as the rejoicings and congratulations liiri dclite-
on Philip's arrival were over, a council of ni ,ar'i' "'th

i»' i]G11 Of

*ctniogn cnt-

"as held in order to determine how they might proticutin
improve their victory to the belt advantage. The "r Lhc ar.
])uke of Savoy, fcconded by several of the ablest

B b 4 officers

BOOK XII. officers formed under Charles V. infifled that they

--v should immediately relinquish the siege of St.
ss557 Quintin, the reduction of which was now an ob-

jed below their attention, and advance direftly
towards Paris; that as there were neither troops
to oppose, nor any town of ltrength to retard
their march, they might reach that capital while
under the full impreflion of the atfonifhlnentand
terror occasioned by the rout of the army, and
take possession of it without resistance. But Phi.
lip, left adventrous or more prudent than his ge
nerals, preferred a moderate but certain advan-
tage, to an enterp:ize of greater splendour, but
of more doubtful (uccefs. He represented to the
council the infinite resources of a kingdom so
powerful as France; the great number as well
as martial spirit of its nobles ; their attachment
to their sovereign ; the valt advantages with which
they could carry on war in their own territories;
and the unavoidable deftruaion, which must be
the consequence of their penetrating too rashly
into the enemy's country, before they had fe-
cured such a communication with their own, as
might render a retreat safe, if upon any difafte
rous event that Ihould become necessary. On all
there accounts, he advised the continuance of the
siege, and his generals acquiesced the more readi-
ly in his opinion, as they made no doubt of being
matters of the town in a few days, a loss of time
of so little consequence in the execution of their
plan, that they might easily repair it by their
subsequent activity '.

st. Quintin THE weakness of the fortifications, and the
efendedaby small number of the garrison, which could
Admirale e r fr r
:o!igny, no longer hope either for reinforcement, or

J pckcar. Commentar. di Reb. Gallic. go1.

relief
388

relief, seemed to authorise this calculation ofBooKXII.
Philip's generals. But, in making it, they did J
not attend fllfficiently to the character of Ad-
miral de Coligny, who commanded in the town.
A courage unditmayed and undifconcerted amidit
the greatest dangers, an invention fruitful in re-
foluces, a genius which rouzed and seemed to ac-
quire new force upon every disaster, a talent of
governing the minds of men, together with a ca-
pacity of maintaining his ascendant over them
even under circumstances the most adverse and
diffrefsful, were qualities which Coligny posses-
fed in a degree luperior to any general'of that
age. These qualities were peculiarly adapted to
the flation in which he was now placed; and as
he knew the infinite importance to his country of
every hour which he could gain at this juncture,
he exerted himself to the utmost in contriving
how to protract the siege, and to detain the ene-
my from attempting any enterprize more dange-
rous to France. Such were the perseverance and which is to.
ikill with which he conducted the defence, and ken by as-
such the fortitude and patience with which he ani-
mated the garrison, that though the Spaniards,
the Flemings, and the English, carried on the
attack with all the ardour which national emulati-
on inspires, he held out the town seventeen days.
He was taken- prisoner, at last, on the breach, Augu2l 7.
overpowered by the superior number of the ene-
my.

HENRY availed himself, with the utmost aci- Heury's
vity, of the interval which the Admiral's well- m'eaursfor'

the defence

timed obstinacy had afforded him. He appoint- of hisking-
ed officers to collect the Icattered remains of do".
the constable's army ; he issued orders for le-
vying soldiers in every part of the kingdom
he commanded the ban and arriere ban of the
frontier provinces inflantly to take the field, and

to

Boo0 XII. to join the Duke of Nevers at Laon in Picardy;

C'-" he recalled the greater part of the veteran troops

which served under the Marechal Briflac at Pied-
mont; he sent courier after courier to the Duke
of Guise, requiring him, together with all his ar-
my, to return instantly for the defence of their
country; he dispatched one envoy to the Grand
Seignior, to follicit the afliftance of his fleet, and
the loan of a film of money; he lent another in-
to Scotland, to incite the Scots to invade the
north of England, that by drawing Mary's at-
tention to that quarter, he might prevent her
from reinforcing her troops which served under
Philip. These efforts of the king were warmly
seconded by the zeal of his fubjedts. The city
of Paris granted him a free gift of three hundred
thousand livres. The other great towns imitated
the liberality of the capital, and contributed in
proportion. Several noblemen of diftintion en-
gaged to garrilbn and to defend at their own ex-
pence the towns which lay most exposed to beat
tacked by the enemy. Nor was this general con-
cern for the publick confined to communitisi
alone, or to those in the higher sphere of life, but
diffusing itself among persons of every rank, each
individual seemed disposed to afl with as much
vigour as if the honour of the King, and the fate-
ty of the state had depended on his personal es-
torts ".

'The aoory PH I L P, who was no stranger either to the pru-
f :il'""u dent measures taken by the French monarch fir
i, f frw the security of his dominions, or to the slrilt
,',,,,l,',, with which his subjects prepared to defend them-
" .L selves, perceived, when it was too late, that he

had lofl an opportunity which could never be re-
called, and that it was now vain to think of pe-
netrating into the heart of France.- He aban-

m Mel, de Ribier, ii. 701. 703.

doned,

doned, therefore, without much relu.tance, a BooK XI.
scheme which was too bold and hazardous to be '-^
perfectly agreeable to his cautious temper ; and 155
employed his army, during the remainder of the
campaign, in the sieges of Ham and Catelet. Of
there, he Toon became master; and the reduc-
tion of there two petty towns, together with the
acquisition of St. Q/intin, were all the advanta-
ges which he derived from one of the most deci-
five victories gained in that century. Philip him-
self, however, continued in high exultation, on
account of his success; and as all his passions were
tinged with superstition, he, in memory of the
battle of St. Quintin, which had been fought on
the day consecrated to St. Laurence, vowed to
build a church, a monastery, and a palace sacr.d
to that faint and martyr. Before the expiration
of the year, he laid the foundation of an edifice,
in which all there were united, at the Escurial in
the neighbourhood of Madrid; and the fame
principle, which dictated the vow, directed the
building. But the plan of the work was so form-
ed as to resemble a gridiron, which, according to
the legendary tale, had been the instrument of
St. Laurence's martyrdom. Notwithstanding the
vast and expensive schemes, in which his restless
ambition involved him, Philip continued the
building with such perseverance for twenty-two
years, and reserved such vast thins for this monu-
ment of his piety and vanity, that the monarchs
of Spain are indebted to him for a royal refi-
dence, which though not the most elegant, iscer-
tainly the most sumptuous and magnificent of
any in Europe*.

THE first account of that fatal blow which the Til, Fnch,

French had received at St. QOintin was carried to army rcall-
Rome by the courier whom Henry had sent totly.

* Colnlcnr Annales d'Efpngnc, torn. ii. p. 136.

recall

BooK XII, to join the Duke of Nevers at Laon in Picardy

L'"-- he recalled the greater part of the veteran troops
15575 which served under the Marechal Brif.ac at Pied-

mont; he sent courier after courier to the Duke
of Guise, requiring him, together with all his ar-
my, to return instantly for the defence of their
country; he dispatched one envoy to the Grand
Seignior, to follicit the afliftance of his fleet, and
the loan of a fum of money; he sent another in-
to Scotland, to incite the Scots to invade the
north of England, that by drawing Mary's at-
tention to that quarter, he might prevent her
from reinforcing her troops which served under
Philip. These efforts of the king were warmly
seconded by the zeal of his subjeCts. The city
of Paris granted him a free gift of three hundred
thousand livres. The other great towns imitated
the liberality of the capital, and contributed in
proportion. Several noblemen of diftintion en-
gaged to garrilbn and to defend at their own ex-
pence the towns which lay most exposed to be at
racked by the enemy. Nor was this general con-
cern for the publick confined to communities
alone, or to those in the higher sphere of life, but
diflufing itself among persons of every rank, each
individual teemed disposed to act with as much
vigour as if the honour of the King, and the faile-
ty of the state had depended on his personal cf-
forts m.

The ,i,;lory PH I Ll P, who was no stranger either to the pru-
ti l,,, c-dent measures taken by the French monarch for
tin .. fw the security of his dominions, or to the lIpirit
,1L,,'Il',ui, with which his illbjeCts prepared to defend thcmn-
*:C . £selves, perceived, when it was too late, that he

had loft an opportunity which could never be re-
called, and that it was now vain to think of pe-
netrating into the heart of France. lie aban-

'" Meni. dc Ribier, ii. 701. 703.

doned,

doned, therefore, without much relucance, a BooK XI.
scheme which was too bold and hazardous to be --v
perfectly agreeable to his cautious temper ; and 1557
employed his army, during the remainder of the
campaign, in the sieges of Ham and Catelet. Of
there, he soon became master; and the reduc-
tion of there two petty towns, together with the
acquilition of St. Qkintin, were all the advanta-
ges which he derived from one of the most deci-
five victories gained in that century. Philip him-
self, however, continued in high exultation, on
account of his success; and as all his paflions were
tinged with superstition, he, in memory of the
battle of St. Quintin, which had been fought on
the day consecrated to St. Laurence, vowed to
build a church, a monastery, and a palace sacred
to that faint and martyr. Before the expiration
ot the year, he laid the foundation of an edifice,
in which all there were united, at the Elcurial in
the neighbourhood of Madrid; and the fame
principle, which dictated the vow, directed the
building. But the plan of the work was so form-
ed as to resemble a gridiron, which, according to
the legendary tale, had been the infsrument of
St. Laurence's martyrdom. Notwithstanding the
vast and expensive schemes, in which his restless
ambition involved him, Philip continued the
building with such perseverance for twenty-two
years, and reserved fiuch vast liins i-or this monu-
ment of his piety and vanity, that the monarchs
oft Spain are indebted to him for a royal refi-
dence, which though not the moss elegant, is cer-
tainly the most i tmptuous and magnificent of
any in Europe*.

TH-. first account of that fatal blow which the'rtleFin,, d

French had received at St. QOintin was carried to nr-,ylall-
R)ome by the courier whom Henry had tent to;,ly "'

* ColiIcn:tr Anniiles dl'[Efpgnc, toin. ii. p. 136.

recall

BOK XII. recall the Duke of Guise. As Paul, even with
' .- the assistance of his French anxiliaries, had scarce

557- been able to check the progress of the Spanish

arms, he foresaw that as soon as he was deprived
of their protection, his territories mufl- be over-
run in a moment. He remonitrated therefore
with the greatest violence against the departure
of the French army, reproaching the Dake of
Guile for his ill conduct, which had brought him
into fiuch an unhappy situation ; and complaining
of the King for deserting him so ungenerously
under such circumstances. Guise's orders, how-
ever, were peremptory. Paul, inflexible as he
was, found it necessary to accommodate his con-
duct to the exigency of his affairs, and to employ
the mediation of the Venetians, and of Cosmo
di Medici in order to obtain peace. Philip, who
had been forced unwillingly to a rupture with
the Pope, and who, even while success crowned
his arms, doubted so much thejuftice of his own
cause, that he had made frequent overtures of
pacification, listened eagerly to the first propolals
of this nature from Paul, and dilcovered filch
moderation in his demands as could scarce have
been expeted from a Prince elated with victory.

A trrit, of THE Duke of Alva on the part of Philip, and

r'
( '- the Cardinal Caraffa in the name of his uncle, met

I . ct n rthe
a',,.dt at Cavi, and both being equally disposed to peace,

. they, after a short conference, terminated the

war by a treaty on the following terms: That
Paul thou!d renounce his league with France, and
maintain for the future such a neuti-aitv as be-
came the comnmon father of Christendom ; That
Philip should instantly restore all the towns of the
ecclefiaflical territory of which he had taken pof-
lesson; That the claims of the CaralTa's, to the
dutchy of l'aliano, and other demenlies of the
Colonna's flould be reF.rrded to the decision ol

the

the republick of Venice; that the Duke of Al- BOOK Xll.
va (hould repair in person to Rome, and after '-
asking pardon of Paul in his own name, and in
that of his master, for having invaded the patri-
mony of the church, should receive the Pope's
absolution from that crime. Thus Paul, through
Philip's fcrttpulous timidity, finished an unprof-
perous war without any detriment to the Papal
See. The conqueror appeared humble, and ac-
knowledged his error ; while he who had been
vanquished retained his usual haughtiness, and
was treated with every mark of ftiperiority .
The Duke of Alva, in terms of the treaty, re-
paired to Rome, and in the polture of a suppl-
cant, kifled the feet, and implored the forgive-
ness of that very person, whom his arms had re-
duced to the last extremity. Such was the super-
ftitious veneration of the Spaniards for the papal
character, that Alva, though perhaps the proudelt
man of the age, and accustomed from his infan-
cy to a familiar intercourse with Princes, acknow-
ledged that when he approached the Pope, he
was so much overawed, that his voice failed, and
his presence of mind forsook him °.

BUT though this war, which at its commence- Philip re-

ment threatened mighty revolutions, was brought cntia'
to an end without occasioning any alteration in oaRvio
thote States, which were its immediate ohjedt, it1 ""Far'
produced effeEts of considerable consequence in
other parts of Italy. As Philip was extremely
solicitous to terminate his quarrel with Paul as
speedily as pollible, he was willing to make any
sacrifice in order to gain those Princes, who, by
joining their troops to the papal and French ar,
my, might have prolonged the war. With this

"Pnllav. lib. xiii. 183. F. Pnul. 3go. Hcrrera, vol. i. 310.
* Palla. lib xiii. 185. Suminonte Iftoriadi Napoli, iv. 286.

view

BOOK XII. view, he entered into a negotiation with Odavir
Y ~ Farnese, Duke of Parma, and in order to fedctic

;7 him from his alliance with France, he restored

to him the city of Placentia with the territory de-
pending on it, which Charles V. having seized in
the year one thousand five hundred and forty-
seven, had kept from that time in his poffellion,
and had tranimitted together with his other do-
minions to Philip.

Cosmo di THis flep made such a discovery of Philip's
Medici's character and views to Cosmo di Medici, the
mfeafurc mofl sagacious and provident of all the Italian
for obtain-
ing Siena. Princes, that he conceived hopes of accomplilh-

ing his favourite scheme of adding Siena and its
territories to his dominions in Tulcany. As his
success in this attempt depended entirely on the
delicacy of address with which it was conduCted,
he employed all the refinements of policy in the
negociation which he set on foot for this purpose.
He began with soliciting Philip, whose treasury he
knew to be entirely drained by the expence of
the war,. to repay the great tums which he had
advanced to the Emperor during the siege of Sie-
na. When Philip endeavoured to elude a de-
mand which he was unable to Satisfy, he affecAed
to be extremely disquieted, and making no secret
of his dilguft, inftlrtcted his ambassador at Rome
to open a negotiation with the Pope, which feerm-
ed to be the effec of it. The amballador exe-
cuted his commiflion with such dexterity, that
Paul, imagining Cofilo to be entirely alienated
from the Spanilh interest, proposed to him an al-
liance with France, which fllould be cemented
.by the marriage of his eldest son to one of Hen-
ry's daughters. Cosmo received the overture
with such apparent satisfaction, and with so ma-
ny professions of gratitude for the high honour of
which he had the profpeOt, that not only the

Poie's

Pope's ministers, but the French envoy at Rome gooK Xlr.
talked confidently, and with little reserve, of the'le'
acceflion of that important ally, as a matter cer- 5
tain and decided. The account of this was
quickly carried to Philip; and Cosmo, who fore-
tiw how much it would alarm him, had dif-
patched his nephew Ludovico de Toledo into the
Netherlands, that he might be at hand to observe
and take advantage of his consternation, before
the first impreflion which it made should in any
degree abate. Cosmo was extremely fortunate
in the choice of the instrument whom he em-
ployed. Toledo waited, with patience, until he
discovered with certainty, that Philip had recei-
ved Ilich intelligence of his uncle's negotiations
at Rome, as mufft have filled his fifpicious mind
with fear and jealousy ; and then craving an au-
dience, he required payment of the money which
had been borrowed by the Emperor, in the molt
earnest and peremptory terms. In urging that
point, he artfully threw out several dark hints
and ambiguous declarations, concerning the ex-
tremities to whichCofmo might bedriven by a re-
fiflal of this just demand, as well as by other grie-
vances of which he had good reason to complain.

PHILIP, aftonifled at an address in such a strain, Their fc-

from a Prince so far his inferior as the Duke of"''
lTufcany, and comparing what he now heard with
the information which he had received from Italy,
immediately concluded that Cosmo had ventured
toaffume this bold and unusual tone on the profpet
of his union with France. In order to prevent
the Pope and Henry from acquiring an ally, who
by his abilities and the situation of his dominions
would have added both reputation and strength
to their confederacy, he offered to grant Coimo
the investiture of Siena, if he would content to

accept

BOOK XII. accept of this, as an equivalent for the fums due

< to him, and engage to furnish a body of troopsto-
7157' wards the defence of Philip's territories in Italy,

against any power who ihould attack them. As
soon as Cosmo had brought Philip to this, which
was the object of all his artifices and intrigues, he
did not protract the negociation by any unnecef-
fary delay, or any excess of refinement, but
closed eagerly with the proposal, and Philip, in
spite of the remonltrances of his ablest couullfl-
lors, signed a treaty with him to that effect P.

As no Prince was ever more tenacious of his

rights than Philip, or less willing to relinquift any
territory which he possessed, by what tenure lb-
ever he held it, there unnufual concellions to the
Dukes of Parma and Tuscany, by which he wan-
tonly gave up countries, in acquiring or defend-
ing which, his father had employed many years,
and wafted much blood and treasure, cannot be
accounted for from any motive, but his (uper-
flitious desire of extricating himself out of the
war which he had been forced to wage againfl
the Pope. By there treaties, however, the ba-
lance of power among the Italian flates was
poized with greater equality, and rendered lets
variable than it had been since it received the sirs:
violent shock from the invasion of Charles VIII. of
France. From this period Italy ceased to be the
great theatre, on which the monarchs of Spain,
France, and Germany, contended for power or
for fame. Their dissentions aud hostilities were
nevertheless as frequent and as violent as ever;
but being excited by new objecs, they stained
other regions of Europe with blood, and render-
ed them, in their turn, miserable by the deval-
tations of war.

P Thuan. lib. xviii. 624. Horrera, i. 263. 275. Palav.
lib. 3iii. 180.

THE Duke of Guise left Rome on the fame BooKXII.
day that his adversary the Duke of Alva made

!557.

his ignominious submissions to the Pope. He sept. 79.
wasreceived in France as the guardian angel The Duke
of the kingdom. His late ill success in Italy rception i
seemed to be forgotten, while his former fervi- France.
ces, particularly his defence of Metz, were re-
counted with exaggerated praise; and he was
welcomed in every city through which he pas-
fed, as the restorer of publick security, who, as-
tar having set bounds by his condu& and valour
to the victorious arms of Charles V. returned
now at the call of his country, to check the for-
midable progress of Philip's power. The re-
ception which he met with from Henry was no
less cordial and honourable. New titles were
invented, and new dignities created in order
to distinguish him. He was appointed lieute-
nant-general in chief both within and without
the kingdom, with a jurifdiation almost unlimit-
ted, and hardly inferior to that which was poilef-
fed by the king himself. Thus, through the
singular felicity which attended the Princes of
Lorrain, the miscarriage of their own schemes
contributed to aggrandize them. The calami-
ties of his country, and the ill conduEt of his
rival the Constable, exalted the Duke of Guise
to a height of dignity and power, which he
could not have expected to attain by the moit
fortunate and most compleat success of his own
ambitious projects.

THE Duke of Guise, eager toperform rome- Takes the

thing suitable to the high expectations of his command of
countrymen, and that he might justify the ex- 'he amy.
traordinary confidence which the King had re-
posed in him, ordered all the troops, which
could be got together, to assemble at Campiegne.
Though the winter was well advanced, and had
set in with extreme rigour, he placed himself

VOL. III. C c at

BposKXIlat their head, and took the field. By Henry's
q[:~ a&vity and the zeal of his fubjets, so many fol-

'557' diers had been raised in the kingdom, and such

considerable reinforcements had been drawn
from Germany and Swifferland, as formedan
army refpedtable even in the eyes of a vitori-
ous enemy. Philip, alarmed at feeing it put in
motion at such an uncommon season, began to
tremble for his new conquests, particularly St.
Quintin, the fortifications of which were hi-
therto but imperfectly repaired.

He invests BUT theDuke of Guise meditated a more
Calais.

1558. important enterprize; and after amusing the e-
January n.n my with threatening ficceflively different

towns on the frontiers of Slanders, he turned
suddenly to the left and invested Calais with his
whole army. Calais had been taken by the
English under Edward III. and was the fruit of
that monarch's glorious vicory at Cressy. Be-
ing the only place that they retained of their
ancient and extensive territories in France, and
which opened to them, at all times, an easy
and secure passage into the heart of that king-
dom, their keeping poffeflion of it toothed the
pride of the one nation as much as it mortified
the vanity of the other. Its situation was natu-
rally so strong, and its fortifications deemed to
impregnable, that no monarch of France, how
adventurous soever, had' been bold enough to
attack it. Even when the domeftick strength
of England was broken and exhausted by the
bloody wars between the houses of York and
Lancaster, and its attention entirely diverted
fiom foreign objeCs, Calais had remained un-
disturbed and unthreatened. Mary and her
council, composcd chiefly of Eccleliaificks, un-
acquainted with military affairs, and whole
whole attention was turned towards extirpating
heresy out of the kingdom, had not only ne-

glected

gleted to take any precautions for the safety of Boo sXU.
this important place, but seemed to think thaRt the s'
reputation of its strength alone was fujficient for 'l
its security. Full of this opinion, they ventured,
even after the declaration of war, to continue a
practice which the low state of the Queen's si-
nances had introduced in times of peace. As
the country adjacent to Calais was overflowed
during the winter, and the marihes around it
became impassable, except by one avenue, which
the forts of St. Agatha and Newnhambridge
commanded, it had been the custom of the En-
glifh to dismiss the greater part of the garrison
towards the end of autumn, and to replace it in
the spring. In vain did Lord Wentworth, the Its defence.
governor of Calais, remonstrate againit this ill- less tte.
timed parsimony, and represent the poflibility
of his being attacked suddenly, while he had
not troops sufficient to man the works The
privy council treated these remonftrances'with
scorn, as if they had flowed 'from the timidity or
the rapaciousness of the governor; and some of
them, with that confidence which is the compa-
nion of ignorance, boasted that they would de-
fend Calais with their white rods against any ene-
my who should approach it during winter*. In
vain did Philip, who had pased through Calais
as he returned from England to the Netherlands,
warn the Queen of the danger to which itwas ex-
posed; and acquainting ih:r. with what was ne-
ceflary for its security, rser to riinforc, the.gar-
rifon during winter with a detahlmelnt of his
own troops. Mary's counsellors, though obfc-
quious to her in ail points wherein religion was
concerned, diflrufted, as much as the reft of
their countrymen, every proposition that came
from her husband; and fiufpeted ,tlis to be an
artifice of Philip's, in order to gain the com-

Carte. iii. 345.
Cc 2 mand

BOOK'XII. mand'of the town,' they negleced his intld-

iJ ligence, declined his offer, and left Calais with

58 less than a fourth of the men requisite for its de-

fence.

cuire push- IT was his knowledge of this, which encou-
withe viggeo ragedthe Duke of Guise to venture onn an enter-

prize, that furprized his own countrymen no
less than his enemies. As he knew that its ilc-
cess depended on conducting his operations with
such rapidity, as would afford the Englilh no
time for throwing relief into the town by sea,
and prevent Philip from giving him any inter-
ruption by land, he pushed the attack with a
degree of vigour little known in carrying on
sieges, during that age. H. drove the English
from Fort St. Agatha at the firfi aiiault; obliged
them to abandon the fort of Newnhambridge,
after defending it three days; took the castle
which commanded the harbour by florm; and,
on the eighth day after he appeared before Calais
compelled the governor, whose feeble garrison,
which did not exceed five hundred men, was
worn out with the fatigue of fuiraining so many

Take the attacks, and defending such extensive works, to
town, sign a capitulation.

THE Duke of Guile, without allowing the

Engiifh.time to recover from the conflernation
occasioned by this blow, immediately inveRted
Guifnes, the garrison of whlich, though more
numerous, defended itfclfwith leis vigour, and
after ftandingonc briflk afliilt, flrrendered the
town. The cattle of H:anes was abandoned by
the troops potted there, without waiting the ap-
proach of the enemy.

THius,

THUS, in a few days, during the depth of BooKXII.

wilter, and at a time when the fatal battle of "'" '
St. Qintin had si depressed the sanguine spirit The fplen-
of the French, that their utmost aim was to pro- dor and es-

,, , . ~ ' *

. , , . r rsea of these

te3t their own .c!nntry, without dreaming of conquests.
making conquests on the enemy; the enter-
prizing valour of one man drove the English
out of Calais, after they had held it two hun-
dred and ten years, and deprived them of every
foot of land in a kingdom, where their domini-
ons had been once so extensive. This exploit,
at the Famne time that it gave an high idea of
the power and refcources of France to all Eu-
rope, set the Duke of Guise, in the opinion of
his countrymen, far above all the generals of
the age. They celebrated his conquests with
immoderate transports of joy; while the En-
glifh gave vent to all the pallions, which animate
a high-fpirited people, when any great national
calamity is manifestly owing to the ill conduct
of their rulers. Mary and her ministers, for-
merly-odious, were now contemptible in their
eyes. All the terrors of her severe and arbitra-
ry administration could not restrain them from
uttering execrations and threats against those
who, having wontonly involved the nation in a
quarrel wherein it was nowise interested, had, by
their negligence or incapacity, brought irrepara-
ble disgrace on their country, and loft the most
valuable poffeflion belonging to the English
crown.

Tie French King imitated the conduct of its

former conquecror, Edward III. with regard to
Calais, He commanded all the English inhabi-
tants to quit the town, and, giving their houses
to his own fubjets, whom he allured to fettle
there by granting them various immunities, he
left a numerous garrison, under an experienced
governor, for their defence. After this, his

C c 3 victorious

BsdoKXIi. vitorious army went into quarters of refresh-
<"''~ rinent, and the usual ination of winter returned.

Feb. 24, MEANWHILE Ferdinand assembled the col-
Charles's Iege of Elecors at Frankfort, in order to lay
of the Ia - before them the deed whereby Charles V. had
peral resigned t,-e Imperial crowl, and transferred it

crwn hirh.:' This he had hitherto delayed, on ac-

cou'nt of some difficulties which had occurred
conce'rning the formalities requisite in supplying
a vadcancy occasioned by an event, to which there
was'nb parallel in the annals of the Empire.
There being at length adjusted, the Prince of
Orange executed the commiflion with which he
had' been entrusted by Charles; the Eletors ac-
cepted of his resignation i declared Ferdinand
his lawful successor; and put him in possession of
all the ensigns of the Imperial dignity.

The Pope B:UT when the new Emperor sent Gufman, his
refues to chancellor, ,to acquaint the Pope with this tranf-
ldge Ferdi- ation, to testify his reverence towards the Ho-
nanda Enm- ly See, and'to signify that, according to form,
peror. hie would Toon dispatch an ambassador extraor-

dinary to treat with his holiness concerning his
coronation; Patil, whom neither experience nor
disappointments could teach to bring down his
lofty ideas'of the papal prerogative to such a
rloderate standard as suited the genius of the
timnes, refused to admit the envoy into his pre-
fence, and declared all the proceedings at Frank-
fort irregular and invalid. He, contended that
the Pope, as the vicegerent of christ, was en-
trusted with the keys both of celcftial and ter-
reftrial goverriment; that fiom him the Impc-
rial'j.urirdiatioi was derived; that though his
pred&cefors had aithorized the Electors to chufe
aii Emtpror, whom the Holy See confirmed,

this

this privilege was ponrfined to those cafes when a BooxXII.
vacancy was ocafioned by death; that the in- ,, .
Arurhent of Charles's resignation had been pre- I
sented in an improper court, as it belonged to
the Pope alobe to rejet or to accept of it, and
to nominate a person to supply his place; that,
setting aside all these objections, Ferdinand's
eletioi laboured under two defecs, which alone
were fuincient to render it void, for the Protef-
tant Electors had been admitted to vote, tho',
by their apoftacy from the catholick faith, they
had forfeited that and every other privilege of
the elecoral office; that Ferdinand, by ratify-
ing the conceffiors of several Diets in favour of
hereticks, had rendered himself unworthy of
the Imperial dignity, which was inflituted for
the protection, not for the deftruation of the
church. But, after thundering out these exra-
vagant maxims, he added, with an appearance of
condescension, that if Ferdinand would renounce
all title to the Imperial' crown, founded on the
election at Frankfort, make professions of repen-
tance for his past conduct, and supplicate him,
wvithl due humility, to confirm Charles's refigna-
tion, as well as his atlumption to the Emipre, he

i'ght expect every markof favour from his pater-
nal clemency and goodness. Gufman, though he
had laid his account with considerable difficulties
in his negociatioh wi'th the Pope, little expected
that he would' hve revived these antiquated and
wild pretensions, which aftonilfed him so much
that he scarce knew in what tone he ought to
reply. He prudently declined entering into any
controversy concerning the nature or extent of
the papal jurifdi'tion, and, confining himself to
the political considerations, which should deter-
mine the Pope to recognize an Emperor alrea-
dy in poffeflon, he endeavoured to place these
in such a light, as he imagined could
scarce fail to firike Paul, if he were not

Cc4 alto-

BooKXIT. altogether blind to his own interest. Philip

seconded Gufman's arguments with great ear-
1558 neftnefs, by an ambassador whom he sent to

Rome of purpose, and besought the Pope to
desist from claims so unseasonable, as might not
only irritate and alarm Ferdinand and the Prin-
ces of the Empire, but furnish the enemies of
the Holy See with a new. reason for representing
its jurifdiftion as incompatible with the rights
of Princes, and subversive of all civil authority.
But Paul, who deemed it a crime to attend any
consideration suggested by human prudence or
policy, when he thought himself called to as-
fert the prerogatives of the Papal See, remained
inflexible; and, during his pontificate, Ferdi-
nand was not acknowledged as Emperor by the
court of Rome *.

Henry en-
deavurs to WHILE Henry was preparing for the ap-
excit. the proaching campaign, he received accounts of
Scuts agains[
England. the issue of his negociations in Scotland. Long

experience having at last taught the Scots the
imprudence of involving their country in every
quarrel between France and England, neither
the follicitations of his ambassador, nor the ad-
dress and authority of the Queen-regent, could
prevail on them to take arms against a kingdom,
with which they were at peace. On this occa-
sion, the ardor of a martial nobility and of a tur-
bulent people, was restrained by regard for the
publick interest and tranquillity, which, in for-
mer deliberations of this kind, had been seldom
attended to, by a nation always prone to rush in-
to every new war. But though the Scots adhe-
red with steadiness to their pacific fyftcm, they
were extremely ready to gratify the French

*Godleveus de Abdicat. Car. V. ap. Gold. polit. Imp.
39a. Palav. lib. xiii. 189. Ribier. ii. 746. 759.

King

King in another particular, which he had given BoonXII.
in charge to his ambassador.

5 58.

THE young Queen of Scots had been aflian- Marriage of

ced to the Dauphin, in the year one thousand theDauphia
five hundred and forty-eight, and having been Qtien' he
educated since that time in the court of France, Scots.
Ihe had grown up to be the most amiable, and
one of the most accomplished Princeties in that
age. Henry demanded the content of her sub-
jets to the celebration of the marriage, and
a parliament which was held for that pur-
pose, appointed eight commissioners to re-
present the whole body of the nation at that
solemnity, with power to sign such deeds as
might be requisite before itwas concluded.
In fettling the articles of the marriage, the
Scots took all the precautions, that prudence April 14.
could dictate, in order to preserve the liberty
and independence of their country; while the
French used every art to secure to the Dauphin
the conduct of affairs during the Queen's life,
and the succession of the crown on the event of
her demise. The marriage was celebrated with
pomp, suitable to the dignity of the parties, and
the nagnificence 'of a court, at that time, the
moit splendid in Europe f. Thus Henry, in the
course of a few months, had the glory of re-
covering an important pofeflion which ancient-
ly belonged to the crown of France, and of
adding to it the acquisition of a new kingdom.
By this event, too, the Duke of Guise acquired
new consideration and importance; the marriage
of his niece to the apparent heir of the crown,
railing him so far beyond the condition of
other fubjccts, as seemcd to render the credit he
had gained by his great actions, no less perma-
nent than it was extensive.

t Keith's history of Scotland, p. 73. Append. 13. Corps
Diplom. v. 21.

WHEN

BooKXII. WHEN the campaign opened, soon after the
'"'"' Dauphin's marriage, the Duke of Guise was
I'5c ,- placed at the head of the army with the fame
p;i'oien- unlimited powers as formerly. Henry hid re-

ceived such liberal supplies from his fubjeds,
that the troops under his command were both
numerous and well appointed; while Philip,
exhausted by the extraordinary efforts of
the preceding year, had been obliged to
difriifs so fmany of his forces during the win-
ter, that he could not bring an army into the
field capable of making head against him. The
Duke of Guise did not lose the favourable op-
portunity which his superiority afforded him.
He inveffted Thionville in the dutchy of Luxem-
burg, one of the strongest towns on the frontier
of the Netherlands, and of great importance to
France by its neighbourhood to Metz; and,
notwithstanding the obstinate valour with which
De 22. it was defended, he forced it to capitulate after

a siege of three weeks*.

TheFrench Bur the success of this enterprize, which it
Seray dat was expeted would lead to other conquests, was
Gravelines. more than counterbalanced by an event that

happened in another part of the Low-Countries,
The Marechal de Termes, governor of Calais,
having penetrated into slanders without oppo-
fiti6n, invested Dunkirk with an army of fonr-
teen thousand men, and took it by storm on the
fifth day of the siege. From that he advanced
towards Nieuport, which must have soon fallen
into his hands, if the approach of the Count of
Egmont with a superior army had not made it
prudent to retreat. The French troops were
so much encumbered with the booty which
they had got at Dunkirk, or by ravaging
the open' country, that they moved slowly;

* Thuan. lib. xx. 69o.
406

and Egmont, who had left his heavy baggage BOOKXII.
and artillery behind him, marched with such ra-
pidity, that he came up with them near Grave-
lines, and attacked them with the utmost im-
petuofity. De Termes, who had the choice of
the ground, having posted his troops to advan-
tage in the angle formed by the mouth of the
river Aa and the Tea, received him with great
firmness. Victory remained for some time in
suspense, the desperate valour of the French,
who foresaw the unavoidable deftruftion that
muff follow upon a rout in an enemy's country,
counterbalancing the superior number of the
Flemings, when one of those accidents, to which
human prudence does not extend, decided the
contest in favour of the latter. A squadron of
Engliffh hips of war, which was cruizing on
thecoaft, being drawn by the noise of the firing
towards the place of engagement, entered the
river Aa, and turned its great guns againIf the
right wing of the French, with such effect as
immediately broke that body, and spread terror
and confusion through their whole army. The
Flemings, to whom assistance, so unexpeced
and so seasonable, gave fresh spirit, redoubling
their efforts, that they might not lose the ad-
vantage which fortune had presented them, or
give the enemy time to recover from their con-
fternation, the rout of the French soon became
universal. Near two thousand were killed on
the spot; a greater number fell by the hands of
the p afants, who, in revenge for the cruelty
with which their country had been plundered,
pursued the fugitives and massacred them with-
out mercy ; the reft were taken prisoners, toge-
ther with de Termes their general, and many
oficers of diftindtion t.

t Thuan. lib. xx. 69,4.

HIS

B0oo XII.

L'c TlHis signal vicory, for which the Count of

ThrSe Duke Egmoit was afterwards so ill requited by Philip,
iGuife op- obliged the Duke of Guise to relinquish all other
p',sed to the o
v-oro-ious schemes, and to haften towards the frontier of
aerny. Picardy, that he might oppose the progress of

the enemy there. This dilafler reflected new
luflre on his reputation, and once more turned
the eyes of his countrymen towards him, as the
only general on whose arms vidtory always at-
tended, and in whose condue as well as good
fortune, they could confide in every danger.
Henry reinforced Guise's army with so many
troops, drawn from the adjacent garrisons, that
it soon amounted to forty thousand men. Thac
of the enemy, after the juncion of Egmont
with the Duke of Savoy, was not inferior in
number. They encamped at the distance cf a
few leagucs from one anotler; and each mo-
narch having joined his respective army, it
was expeced that, after the viciflitudes of good
and bad fhccefs during this and the former cam-
paign, a decisive battle would at last deter-
mine which of the rivals liould take the afcen-
dant for the future, and give law to Europe. But
though both had it in their power, neither of
them discovercd any inclination to-bring the de-
cifion of a point of fucll importance to depend
upon the uncertain and fortuitous ifiue of tingle
battle. The fatal engagements at St. Qgintin
and Gravelines were too recent to be soon for-
gotten, and the profpcd of encountering the
fame troops, commanded by the fllme generals,
who had twice triumphed ovcr his arms, infpi-
red Henry with a degree of caution which was
not conmmon to him. Pliilip, of a genius averse
to bold operations in war, naturally leaned to
calti:Is incnafulrc, anld would hazard nothilng
againfl a general, to fortunate and fucefs-
ful as the Duke of Guifi. Both monarchs,

as

as if by agreement, flood on the defensive, and BooKXU.
fortifying their camps carefully, avoided every '
skirmish or rencounter that might bring on a 155
general engagement.

WHILE the armies continued in this ination,
peace began to be mentioned in each camp, and
both Henry and Philip discovered an inclinati-
on to liften to any overture that tended to re-
establish it. The kingdoms of France and
Spain had been engaged during half a century
in almost continual wars, carried on at a great
expence and productive of no considerable ad-
vantage to either. Exhausted by extraordinary
and unceasing efforts, which far exceeded those
to which the nations of Europe had been accuf-
tomed before the rivalfhip between Charles V.
and Francis I. both nations longed to much for
an interval of repose, in order to recruit their
strength, that their sovereigns drew from them
with difficulty the supplies necessary for carry-
ing on hostilities. The private inclinations of
both the Kings concurred with those of their
people. Philip was prompted to wifli for peace
by his fond desire of returning to Spain. Ac-
customed from his infancy to the climate and
manners of that country, he was attached to it
with such extreme predilecion, that lie was utn-
happy in any other part of his dominions. But
as he could not either with decency or safety
quit the Low-Countries, and venture on a
voyage toSpain, during the continuance of war,
the prospect of a pacification which would put it
in his power to execute this favourite ilheme,
was highly acceptable. Henry was no lcts dc-
firous of being delivered from the burlden and
avocations of war, rhia hie night have eillFre
to turn all his attention, and b=,nid the whole
fOrce of his govern:n-nt towards lupplreiling the

opinions

BooKXII. opinions of the Reformers, which were spread.

1558. ing with such rapidity in -Paris and other great

5 towns of France, that they began to grow for-

midable to the eftabliihed church.

An intrigue BESIDES these publick and avowed confide-
in he court rations, arising from thtePtate of the two hoflile
ofFancefa-.
cilitates it. kingdoms, or from the wilhes of their relpec-

tive monarchs, there was a secret intrigue car-
ried on in the court of France, which contribu-
ted as much as either of the other, to haften
and to facilitate the negociation of a peace.
The Constable Montmorency, during his cap-
tivity, beheld the rapid success and growing
favour of the Duke of Guise, with the envious
solicitude of a rival. Every advantage gained
by him, he confidered as a fresh wound to his
own reputation, and he knew with what male-
volent address it would be improved, to diminish
his credit with the King, and to augment that
of the Duke of Guise. These arts, he was a-
fraid, might, bydegrees, work on the easy and
ductile mind of Henry, so as to efface all re-
mains of his ancient affection towards him
But he could not discover any remedy for this,
unless he were allowed to return home, that he
might try whether, by his pretence, he could
defeat the artifices of his enemies, and revive
those warm and tender sentiments which had
long attached Henry to him, with a confidence
so entire, as resembled rather the cordiality of
private friendship, than the cold and selfish con-
nedtion between a monarch and one of his cour-
tiers. While Montmorency was forming fchenies
and wishes forhisreturn to France with much anx-
iety of mind, but with little hope of success, an
unexpected incident prepared the way for it. The
Cardinal of Lorrain, who had (haredwith his bro-
ther in the King's favour, and participated of the
power w.hich that conferred, did not bear proflpe-

Iit)

rity with the fame discretion as the Duke of Boo. Xt.
Guise. Intoxicated with their good fortune, he ':'
forgot how much they had been indebted for L8s
their present elevation to their connexions with
the Duchess of Valentinois, and vainly ascribed
all to the extraordinary merit of their family.
This led him not only to negleat his benefac-
trefs, but to thwart her schemes, and to talk
with a farcaftick liberty of her character and
person. That singular woman, who, if we may
believe contemporary writers, retained the
beauty and charms of youth at the age of three-
score, and on whom it is certain that Henry still
doated with all the fondness of love, felt this
injury with sensibility, and set herself with ea-
gernefs to revenge it. As there was no method
of supplanting the Princes of Lorrain so effec-
tually, as by a coalition of interests with the
Constable, ihe proposed the marriage of her
grand-daughter with one of his sons, as the bond
of their future union, and Montmorency readi-
ly gave his content to the match. Having thus
cemented their alliance, the duchess employed
all her influence with the King in order to con-
firm his inclinations towards peace, and to in-
duce him to take the steps necessary for attain-
ing it. She insinuated that any overture of that
kind would come with great propriety from the
Constable, and if committed to the conduct of
hisprudence, could hardly fail of success.

HENRY, long accustomed to devolve all as- Henry con-

fairs of importance on the Constable, and need- goiattiho
ing only this encouragement to return to his an- Montmo-
cient habits, wrote to him immediately with his ren"y
luial familiarity and affection, impowering him,
:tt the fame time, to take the first opportunity of
founding Philip and his ministers with regard to
peace. Montmorency made his application to
Philip by the motl proper channel. He opened

himself

BooKXII. opinions of the Reformers, which were spread.
''-v- ing with such rapidity in Paris and other great

3558. towns of France, that they began to grow for-

midable to the eftablilhed church.

An intrigue BESIDES these publick and avowed confide-
in the cort rations, arising from the slate of the two hoflile
of Fance fa-
cilitates it. kingdoms, or from the wiihes of their relpec-

tive monarchs, there was a secret intrigue car-
ried on in the court of France, which contribu-
ted as much as either of the other, to haften
and to facilitate the negociation of a peace.
The Constable Montmorency, during his cap-
tivity, beheld the rapid success and growing
favour of the Duke of Guise, with the envious
solicitude of a rival. Every advantage gained
by him, he confidered as a frelh wound to his
own reputation, and he knew with what male-
volent address it would be improved, to diminish
his credit with the King, and to augment that
of the Duke of Guise. These arts, he was a-
fraid, might, bydegrees, work on the easy and
ductile mind of Henry, so as to efface all re-
mains of his ancient affection towards him
But he could not discover any remedy for this,
unless he were allowed to return home, that he
might try whether, by his presence, he could
defeat the artifices of his enemies, and revive
those warm and tender sentiments which had
long attached Henry to him, with a confidence
so entire, as resembled rather the cordiality of
private friendship, than the cold and selfish con-
neEtion between a monarch and one of his cour-
tiers. While Montmorency was forming fchenles
and wishes forhisreturn to France with much anx-
iety of mind, but with little hope of success, an
unexpected incident prepared the way for it. T'he
Cardinal of Lorrain, who had lharedwvith his bro-
ther in the King's favour, and participated of the
power v.'hich that conferred, did not bear protlic

rilt)

rity with the fame discretion as the Duke of Boor XI.
Guise. Intoxicated with their good fortune, he -"Y'e
forgot how much they had been indebted for 'a5
their present elevation to their connexions with
the Duchess of Valentinois, and vainly ascribed
all to the extraordinary merit of their family.
This led him not only to neglect his benefac-
trefs, but to thwart her schemes, and to talk
with a farcaftick liberty of her character and
person. That singular woman, who, if we may
believe contemporary writers, retained the
beauty and charms of youth at the age of three-
score, and on whom it is certain that Henry still
doated with all the fondness of love, felt this
injury with sensibility, and set herself with ea-
gernefs to revenge it. As there was no method
of supplanting the Princes of Lorrain so effec-
tually, as by a coalition of interests with the
Conitable, she proposed the marriage of her
grand-daughter with one of his sons, as the bond
of their future union, and Montmorency readi-
ly gave his content to the match. Having thus
cemented their alliance, the duchess employed
all her influence with the King in order to con-
firm his inclinations towards peace, and to in-
duce him to take the steps neceflary for attain-
ing it. She insinuated that any overture of that
kind would come with great propriety from the
Constable, and if committed to the conduct of
hisprudence, could hardly fail of success.

HENRY, long accufftomed to devolve all as- Hcnylcom-

fairs of importance on the Constable, and need- gt^^atiho
ing only this encouragement to return to his an- MoMmo-
cient habits, wrote to him immediately with his rtncy'
uftal familiarity and affection, impowering him,
;rt the fame time, to take the first opportunity of
lbunding Philip and his ministers with regard to
peace. Montmorency made his application to
Philip by the most proper channel. He opened

himielf

BooKXII.himfelf to the Duke of Savoy, who, notwith-
.,- .. standing the height of preferment to which he

S558. had been raised, and the military glory which

he had acquired in the Spanish' service, was
weary of remaining in exile, and languished to
return into his dominions. As there was no prof-
peat of his recovering possession of these by force
of arms, he confidered a definitive treaty of
peace between France and Spain, as the only
event by which he could hope to obtain reftitu-
tion. Being no firanger to Philip's private wish-
es with regard to peace, he easily prevailed on
him not only to discover a disposition on his part
towards accommodation, but to permit Mont-
morency to return, on his parole, to France,
that he might confirm his own sovereign in his
pacifick sentiments. Henry received the Con-
flable with the most flattering marks of regard;
absence, instead of having abated or extinguish-
ed his friendship, seemed to have given it new
ardour; and he assumed, from the moment of
his appearance in court, a higher place, if pofli-
ble, in his affeEtion, and a more perfect afcen-
dant over his mind, than ever. The Cardinal of
Lorrain and Duke of Guise, prudently gave way
to a tide of favour too strong for them to oppose,
and confining themselves to their proper depart-
ments, permitted, without any struggle, the
Constable and Duchess of Valentinois to direct
publick affairs at their pleasure. They soon
prevailed on the King to nominate plenipotenti-
aries to treat of peace. Philip did the fame.
The abbey of Ccrcamp was fixed on as the place
of congrcfs; and all military operations were
immediately terminated by a suspension of
arms.

WHILE there preliminary steps were taking

towards a treaty which retfored tranquility to
Europe, Charles V. whliof ambition had io long

difluiiricdl

disturbed it, ended his days in the monaitry of BooKXI.
St. Julius. When Charles entered this retreat, ' 7
lie formed such a plan of life for himself, as
would have suited the condition of a private
gentleman of a moderate fortune. His table
was neat but plain ; his domefticks few; his in-
tercourfe with them familiar; all the cumber-
some and ceremonious forms of attendance 6n
his person were entirely abolifhed,as deftrutive
of that social ease and tranquillity which he court-
ed in order to sooth the remainder of his days.
As the mildness of the climate, together with
his deliverance from the burdens and cares of
government procured him at firif, a considerable
remiflion from the acute pains with which he
had been long tormented, he enjoyed, perhaps,
more complete satisfaction in this humble soli-
tude, than all his grandeur had ever yielded
him. The ambitious thoughts and proje&ts
which had so long engrossed and disquieted him,
were quite effaced from his mind: Far from ta-
king any part in the political tranfa&ions of the
Princes of Europe, he restrained his curiosity
even from any inquiry concerning them; and
he seemed to view the bury scene which he had
abandoned with all the contempt and indiffe-
rence arising from his thorough experience of
its vanity, as well as from the pleasing reflec-
tion of having disentangled himself from its
cares.

His ainufe-

OTHER amusements, and other objeAs now ment, sinin

occupied him. Sometimes he cultivated the retreat.
plants in his garden with his own hands; some-
times he rode out to the neighbouring wood on
a little horse, the only one that he kept, attended
by a single servant on foot. When his infirmi-
ties confined him to his apartment, which of-
ten happened, and deprived him of there more

-lrivc recreatios:,;, ie either admitted a few gen-
Vo.. 1I,. D d tlemenc

BooKXII: tlemren who refidednear themonaftry to visit him,

'~ and entertained them familiarly at his table; or
t~1y5 he employed himself in fludying the principles

and informing curious works of mechanism, of
which he had always been remarkably fond,
and to which his genius was peculiarly turned.
With this view he had engaged Turriano, one
of the mos ingenious artists of that age, to ac-
company him in his retreat. He laboured toge-
ther with him in framing models of the most
useful machines,. as well as in making experi-
ments with regard to their respeCtive powers,
and it was not seldom that the ideas of the mo-
narch assisted or perfeded the inventions of the
artist. He relieved his mind, at intervals, with
flighter and more fantaflick works of mecha-
nifn, in fashioning: puppets, which by the itruc-
ture of internal springs, mimicked the gestures
and actions of men, to the no small astonish-
ment of the ignorant monks, who beholding
movements, which they could not comprehend,
sometimes distrusted their own senses, and some-
times. fufpeted Charles and Turriano of b,-ing
in compact with invisible powers. He was par-
ticularly curious with regard to the conftruti-
on of clocks and watches, and having found,
after repeated trials, that he could not bring
any two of them to go exactly alike, he reflected,
it.is said, with a mixture of fiirprize and regret
on his own folly, in having bestowed so much
time and labour on the more vain attempt of
bringing mankind to a precise uniformity of
sentiment concerning the intricate and myfte-
rious doctrines of religion.

His more BUT in what manner soever Charles disposed
serious oc- of the reft of his time, he constantly reserved a
cuptuion. considerable portion of it for religious ex-

ercifes. He regularly attended divine ser-

vice

vice in the chapel of the monaftry, every BooUXII.
morning and evening, he took great pleasure
in reading books of devotion, particularly the
works of St. Augustine and St. Bernard; and
conversed much with his confessor, and the pri-
or of the monafry on pious subje&s. Thus did
Charles pass the first year of his retreat, in a
manner not unbecoming a man perfectly difen-
gaged from the affairs of the present life, and
ilanding on the confines of a future world ei-
therin innocent amusements, which toothed his
pains, and relieved a mind worn out with excefl
five application to business or in devout occupa-
tions, which he deemed necessary in preparing
for another state.

BUT about fix months before his death, the Trh.caufeS

gout, after a longer intermission than usual, re- of hatea
turned with a proprtional increase of violence.
His shattered constitution had scarce vigour
enough remaining to withstand such a shock. It
enfeebled his mind as much as his body, and
from that period we scarce discern any traces of
that found and masculine underitanding, which
distinguished Charles among his contemporaries.
An illiberal and timid superstition depressed his
spirit. He had no relilh for amusements of any
kind. He endeavoured to conform, in his man-
ner of living, to all the rigour of monaftick au-
fterity. He desired no other society than that
of monks, and was almost continually employed
with them in chanting the hymns in the Milfal.
As an expiation for his fins, he gave himself the
discipline in secret with such severity, that the
whip of cords which he employed as the inftru-
ment of his punilhment, was found after his de-
ceare tinged with his blood. Nor was he fatisfi-
ed with there ads of mortification, which, howe-
vert evere, were not unexampled. The timo-
Jo0us a;rd diflruftful solicitude which always ac-

D d .2 companies

BooxXII. companies fuperilition frill continued to dif.
'--v-. quiet him, and depreciating all that he had done,

'558. prompted him to aim at something extraordina-

ry, at some new and singular act of piety that
would display his zeal, and merit the favour of
heaven. The aft on which he fixed was as wild
and uncommon, as any that fuperltition ever
figgftled to a weak and disordered fancy. He
resolved to celebrate his own obsequies before
his death. He ordered his tomb to be erected
in the chapel of the monaftry. His domeflicks
marched thither in funeral proceflion, with black
tapers in their hands. He hlimfelf followed in
his shroud. He was laid in his coffin, with much
solemnity. The service for the dead was chant-
ed, and Charles j.ine.1 in the prayers which
were offered up for tlhe reft of his foul, ming-
ling Iiis tears with those which his attendants
ffled, as if they had been celebrating a real fune-
ral. The ceremony close with sprinkling holy
water on the coffin in the ulial form, and all the
afiitants retiring, the doors of the chapel were
lhut. Then Charles arose out of the coffin and
withdrew to his apartment, full of these awful
fintiments, which such a singular solemnity was
calculated to inspire. But eith-r the fatiguing
length of the ceremony, or the irnprcflion which
this image of death lefton hismind affected him
so much, that the next day lie was seized with a
fever. His feeble frame cou!d not long refill i:s
violence, and he expired or. the twrnt'-f!il i oc
September, after a life of fifty-eight years, fix
mRonths, and twenty-five days.

* Strada de BellQ Belg. lib. i. p. i. Thuan. 723. Sandov.

ii. 609, &c. Miniana Contii. Maariann;, vol. iv. 216. Vcray
Zuniia vida de Carlos, p. ill.

.1. ''A.L

As Charles was the first prince of the age in BooXIi.

rankland dignity, the part which he ated, whe- ,--v-
thlr we confider the greatness, the variety, or Hisch'a-
the success of his und rtakings, was the most rater.
conspicuous. It is from an attentive observation
of his conduEt, not from the exaggerated prai-
fes of the Spanilh historians, or the undiftin-
guifhing censure of the Freichi, that a just idea
of Charles's genius and abilities is to be collec-
ted. He poieffsed qualities so peculiar, as
strongly mark his charader, and not only dif-
tinguifh him from the Princes who were his con-
temporaries, bur account for that superiority
over them which he so long maintained. In
forming his schemes, le was, by nature, as
well as by habit, cautious and considerate. Born
with talents, which unfolded themselves slowly,
and were late in attaining maturity, he was ac-
cuffomed to ponder every fubjeat that demanded
his confidera ion with a careful and deliberate
attention. He bent the whole force of his mind
towards it, and dwelling upon it with a serious
application, undiverted by pleasure, and hard-
ly relaxed by any amusement, he revolved it,
in silence in his own breast. He then communi-
cated the matter to his miniffers, and after hear-
ing their opinions, took his resolution with a
decisive firmness, which seldom follows such
flow consultations. In fonfequence of this, Char-
les's measures, instead of resembling the deful-
tory and irregular rallies of Henry VIII. or
Francis I. had the apperance of a consistent
system, in which all parts were arranged, the
effeats were foreseen, and the accidents were
provided for. His promptitude in execution
was no less remarkable than his patience in deli-
beration. He consulted with phlegm, but he
acted with vigour; and did not discover grea-
ter sagacity in his choice of the measures which it
Was proper to pursue, than fertility of genius

Dd 3 in

:BooxXlI. in finding out the means for rendering his pur-

suit of them successful. Though he had natu-
5 58 rally so little of the martial turn, that during the

most' ardent and bustling period of life, lie re-
mained in the cabinet inactive, yet when he
chore at length to appear at the head of his ar-
mies, his mind was so formed for vigorous
exertions in every direction, that he acquired
filch knowledge in the art of war, and such ta-
lents for command, as rendered him equal in re-
putation and success to the mft able generals of
the age. But Charles possessed, in the most
eminent degree, the science which is of greatest
importance to a monarch, that of knowing men,
and of adapting their talents to the various de-
partments which he allotted to them. From
the death of Chievres to the end of his reign, he
employed no general in the field, no minister
in the cabinet, no ambassador to a foreign court,
no governor of a province, whose abilities were
inadequate to the trust which he reposed in them.
Though destitute of that bewitching affability
·of manners, which gained Francis the hearts of
all who approached his person, he was no firan-
ger to the virtues which secure fidelity and at-
tachment. He placed unbounded confidence in
his generals; he rewarded their services with
;munificence; he neither envied their fame, nor
discovered anyjealoufy of their power. Almost
all the generals who conducted his armies may
be .placed on a level with those illustrious perfo-
nages, who have attained the highest eminence
of military glory; and his advantages over his
rivals are to be ascribed so mamifeftly to the fu-
perior abilities of the commanders whom he set
in oppofitioa To Ithem, that this night seem to
detract in frome degree, from his own merit, if
the talent of digcovering and employing fich
in/truments were not the most undoubtedlpproof
'of a capaoity for government,

THERE

THERE were, nevertheless, defedts in his po- BooXtIi.

litical character which muff considerably abate '
the admiration due to his extraordinary talents. -I558
Charles's ambition was insatiable; and though
there feerns to be no foundation for an opini-
on ;prevatent in his own age, that he had form-
ed the chimerical projet of establishing an uni-
versal monarchy in Europe, it is certain that his
desire of being distinguished as a conqueror in-
volved him in continual wars, which exhausted
and oppressed his fubjeds, and left him little
.leisure for giving attention to the interior police
and improvement of his kingdoms, the great
objects of every Prince who mrakes the happiness
of his people the end of his government. Char-
les, at a very early period of life, having added
the Imperial crown to the kingdoms of Spain,
and to the hereditary dominions of the houses
of Austria and Burgundy, this opened to him
such a vast field of enterprize, and engaged
him in schemes so complicated as well as ardu-
ous, that feeling his power to be unequal to the
execution of these, he had often recourse to low
artifices unbecoming his superior talents, and
sometimes ventured on such deviations from in-
tegrity as were :dishonourable in a great Prince.
'His insidious and fraudulent policy appeared
more conspicuous, and was rendered more odi-
ous, by a comparison with the open and unde-
signing charaderof his contemporaries FrancistI.
and Henry VIII. This difference, though occa-
sioned chiefly by the diversity of their tempers,
must be ascribed, in some degree to such an op-
position in the principles of their political con-
duat as affords Come excuse for this defe6t in
Charles's behaviour, though it cannot serve as a
juitification of it. Francis and, 1enry seldom
acted but from the limpulfe of their paflions, and
rnfhed headlong towards the object in view.
Charles's measures being the result of cool re-

D d 4 flection,

BooKXII. flec(ion, were disposed into a regular system,

,-,"- and carried on upon a concerted plan. Persons

'8. who aa in the former manner naturally pursue

the end in view without assuming any disguise,
or displaying much address. Such as hold the
latter course are apt, in forming as well as in
executing their designs, to employ such re-
finements, as always lead to artifice in condud
and.often degenerate into deceit.

THE circumitances transmitted to us, with

refpeA to Charles's private deportment and cha-
raeter, are fewer and less interesting, than
might have been expected, from the great num-
ber of authors who have undertaking to write
an account of his life. Theie are not the object
of.tliis hitfory, which aims at representing the
tranfacions of the reign of Charles V. not at
delineating his private virtues or defects.

Conference MEANWHILE the plenipotentiaries of France,
in order to Spain and England continued their conferences
pece.' at: Cercamp; and though each of them, with

the usual art of negociators, made at first very
high demands in name of their refpetive courts,
yet as the were all equally desirous of peace,
they would lave consented reciprocally to fiich
abatements and refiricions of their claims as
nuft have removed every obstacle to an accom-
m:odation. The death of Charles V.. was a new
motive with Philip to haften the conclusion of a
treaty, as it increased his impatience for return-
ing into Spain, where there was now no person
greater or more illufiridus than himself. But in
spite of the concurring wilhes of. all the parties
interefled, an event happened which occasioned
an unavoidable delay in their negociations.
About a month after the opening of the confc-
tences at Cercamp, Mary of England ended

,.,1i her

her short and inglorious reign, and Elizabeth BooKXII.
her sifter was immediately proclaimed Queen 'L*'
by the Engliih with universal joy. As the pow- Nov. 5'
ers of the English plenipotentiaries expired on Death of
the death of their mistress, they could not pro- England.
ceed until they received a commiflion and in-
ffrudions from their new sovereign.

HENRY and Philip beheld Elizabeth's elevati- Henry and

Philip court

on to the throne with equal follicitude. As du- Elizabeth'
ring Mary's jealous adminifftration, under the her fucccf-
mofi difficult circumstances, and in a situation
extremelydelicate, she had conduted herself
with prudence and address far exceeding her
years, they had conceived an high idea of her abi-
lities, and already formed expectationsof a reign
very different from that of her sifter. Equally
sensible of the importance of gaining her favour,
both monarchs set themselves with emulation to
court it, and employed every art in order to
insinuate themselves into her confidence. Each
of them had something meritorious, with regard
to Elizabeth, to plead in his own behalf. Hen-
ry had offered her a retreat in his dominions, if
the dread of her sifter's violence should force her
to fly for safety out of England. Philip had, by
his powerful intercession, prevented Mary from
proceeding to the moss fatal extremities against
her. Each of them endeavoured now, to avail
himfelfof the circumstances in his favour. Hen-
ry wrote to Elizabeth soon after her acceifion
with the warmest expreflions of regard and
friendihip. Hereprefented the war which had un-
happily been kindled between their kingdoms,
not as a national quarrel, but as the effect of Ma-
ry's blind partiality to her huiband and fond
compliance with all his wishes. He entrea-
ted her to disengage herself from an alliance
which had proved so unfortunate to En-

gland,

Boo&XIL gland, and to consent to a separate peace with
..v" him, withoute mingling her interests with those

5 of $pain, from which they ought now to be al-

together disjoined. FPhilip, on the other hand,
unwilling to lose his connedion with England,
the imrportance of which during a rupture with
France he had so recently experianced, not only
vied with Henry in declarations of esteem for
Elizabeth, and in ,profefions of his resolution to
cuiltivate the ,tridtel amity with her, but in or-
-der to confirm and perpetuate their union, he
offered:himfelf to her in marriage, and under-
took to procure a dispensation from the Pope to
thateffed.

tEnfieh's EirZABi'TH, weighed the proposals of the two
'brair'n Monarchs attentively, ald with that provident
ig her con- discernment of her true interest which m/as con-
a,.' fpicutott in all her deliberations. She gave some

encouragement to Henry's overture of .a fepa-
rate negociation, because it opened a channel of
'correspondence with France, which she might
ind to be of great advantage, if Philip should
niot-difcover sufficient zeal and follicitude forfecu-
ring to her proper terms in t'he joint :treaty. But
she ventured:on this with tlhe utmost reserve and
caution, that she might not alarm Philip's fifpi-
cious temper, and lose an ally in .attempting to
gain an enemy °. Herry himself, by an unpar-
donable ad of indiscretion, -prevented her from
carrying her intercourse with;him to fucha length
asómight have offended or alienated Philip. At
the very time he was courting Elizabeth's friend-
ship with the greatest assiduity, he yielded with
an inconsiderate facility to the follicitations of
the Princes of Lorlain, and allowed his daugh-

* Sorbes i. p. 4.

ter-

ter-in-law the Queen of Scots to assume the ti- gooKXII.
tile and arms of England. This ill-timed pre- ---r.
tension, the source of many calamities to the
unfortnate Queen of Scots, extinguished at
once all the confidence that might have grown
between Henry and Elizabeth, and left in its
place diftrufl, resentment and antipathy. Eliza-
beth found that she must unite her interests
closely withPhilip's, and expect peace only from
negociations carried on in conjunction with himt.

As (he had granted a commission, immediate- She .

ly after her accession, to the fame plenipotenti- powersfer
aries whom her fifler had employed, (he now amb^fado
inftruted them to at in every point in concert peace.
with the plenipotentiaries of Spain, and to take
no Rsep until they had previously consulted with
theme. But tho' ihe deemed it prudent to as-
fume this appearance of confidence in the Spa-
nilh Monarch, Ihe knew precisely how far to
carry it; and discovered no inclination to accept
of that extraordinary proposal of marriage which
Philip had made to her. The English had ex-
pressed so openly the detestation of her sifter's
choice of him, that it would have been highly
imprudent to have exasperated them by renew-
ing that odious alliance. She was too well ac-
quainted with Philip's harsh imperious temper,
to think of him for a husband. Nor could she
admit a dispensation from the Pope to be fuffi-
cient to authorize her marrying him, without
condemning her father's divorce from Catherine
of Aragon, and acknowleding of consequence

t Strype's. Annals of the Reformation, i. 1 . Carte's Hist.
of Eng. vol. iii. p. 375. t Sorbes full view, i. i. 37. 40o.

that

BookXIJ. that her mother's marriage was null and hlr

S^ oown birth illegitimate. But tho' Ihe determined
55 not to yield to Philip's addreflts, the situation

of her affairs rendered it dangerous to rejet
them; she returned her answer, therefore, in
terms which were evasiVe, but so tempered with
refpedt, that, tho' they gave him no reason to b2
Secure of filcctcs, they did not altogether ex-
tinguifll his hopes.

Negoacati- BY this artifice, as well as by the prudence
os1 at Ca- o
teau-Cam- with which ihe concealed her sentiments and in-
brefis. tensions concerning religion, for tome time after

her acceflion, he so far gained upon Philip, that
he warmly cfpoufed her interest in the conferen-

15s9. ces which were renewed at Cercamp, and after-
February 6. wards removed to Cateau-Chambrefis. A defi-

nitive treaty, which was to adjust the claims
and pretensions of so many Princes, required
the examination of such a variety of intricate
points, and led to such infi.uite and minute de-
tails, as drew out the negociations to a great
length. But the Constable Montmorency ex-
erted himself with such indefatigable zeal and
indufiry, repairing alternately to the courts of
Paris and Brufels, in order to obviate or re-
move every difficulty, that all points in dispute
were adjuficd,.at length, in such a maner, as to
give entire .fatisfad-ion, in every particular, to
Henry and Philip; and the last hand was ready
to be put to the treaty between them.

Difficultie THE claims of England remained as the on-
with i(gaid ly obRacle to retard it. Elizabeth demandcd
claim, of the reflitutiOun o(f C:lais, in the rmofl perempto-
Lciland. ry tone, as an cnfleti:1i condition of her conten-

ting to peace; -lenry refuscd to give ulp that
important conqu'ft-; and both feerned to have
taken their resolution with unalterable firmncfs.
Philip warmly fuipported Elizabeth's pretensions

to

to Calais, not merely from a principle of equi- BooKXII,
ty towards the English nation, that he might '"
appear to have contributed to their recovering
what they had loft by espousing his cause; nor
.!;rly with a view of soothing Elizabeth by this
;.-;,-ftarion of zeal for her interest; but in
,'..;:- ?;. render France less formidable, by fe-
.:, -: ; ,', i-r antlent enemy this easy access in-
,r ? n .1;r t

.-,f the kingdom. The earnestness,

h!, '. c.i, ,. :i which he seconded the arguments
of il;-. .i iifh plenipotentiaries, soon began to
rc-i ':. !)u:iig the course of the negociation,
Elie:. !rih, wlho now felt herself firmly feated on
thli throne, began to take such open and vigo-
lros mencfurcs not only for overturning all that
her fiftG had done in favour of popery, but
for cftablifliing the protestant church on a firm
foundation, as eonvinced Philip that his hopes of
an union with her had been from the beginning
vain, and were now desperate. From that pe-
riod, his interpositions in her favour became
more cold and formal, flowing merely from re-
gard to decorum, or frnm the consideration of
remote political interests. Elizabeth, having
reason to expeEt such an alteration in his con-
duct, quickly p.rceived it. But as nothing
would have been of greater detriment to her peo-
ple, or more i Iconfiftent with her frhemees of
donm,-fick adminiration, than the continuance
of a war with France, The saw the neceflity of
Fmimiirting to such conditions as the situation of
fhir affairs impotfed, and that she must lay her
,ccount with bei;:g dctcrted by an ally who was
fi'w united to her by a very feeble tie, if fie
'lid not fpcedily reduc': her demands to what
v Ls moderate and attainable. She accordingly
'.Iv, new initrndio:ns to her anbaitrdors; and
· ': lip's plcnipotn!ti:iri -s a'ing as mediators be-

tween
1 . , ..

Boo'iXI. tween the1l rench and them , an expedient was
'-** fallen on, which justified, in foime degree, Eli-

1559: zabeth's. departing from the rigour of her first

demand with regard to Calais. All lesser arti-
cles were fettled without much difcuflion or de-
lay. Philip, that he might not appear to have
abandoned the English, insisted that the treaty
between Henry and Elizabeth should be con-
cluded in form, before that between the French
monarch and him. The one was signed on the
second day of April, the other on the day fol-
lowing.

Articles of THE treaty of peace between France and
ece be- England contained no articles of real impor-
France and tance, but that which respected Calais. It was
England. stipulated that the King of France lhould retain

possession of that town, with all its dependen-
cies, during eight years; that, at the expirati-
on of that term, he should restore it to En-
gland; that in cafe of non-performance, he
ffould forfeit five hundred thousand crowns,
for the payment of which fum, seven or eight
wealthy merchants, who were not his fubjeAts,
should grant'fecurity; that five persons of dif-
tin6tion should be given as hostages till that
security were provided; that, although the for-
feit of five hundred thousand crowns should be
paid, the right of England to Calais should still
remain entire, in the fame manner as if the
term of eight years were expired; that the
King and Queen of Scotland should be included
in the treaty ; that if they, or the French King,
fliould violate the peace by any hostile action,
Henry Ihould be obliged instantly to restore
Catais; that on the other hand, if any breach
of the treaty proceeded from Elizabeth, then
Henry and the King and Qieen of Scots were
absolved from all the engagements which they
had come under by this treaty.

* Fo'llcs i. S9 N

NOTWIT 1"-

NOTWITHSTANDING the studied: attention BoorXIL
with which so many precautions were taken, it ' '
is evident that Henry did not intend the refti- Th^leV
tution of Calais, nor is it probable that Eliza- ofboth pr-
beth expected it. It was hardly possible that she tpe to
could, maintain, during the course of eight years, aere.
such perseEt concord both with France and Scot-
land, as not to afford Henry some pretext for
alledging that she had violated the treaty. But
even if that term ihould elapse without any
ground for complaint, Henry might then chufe
to pay the furm fipulated, and Elizabeth had no
method of aflerting her right but by force of
arms. However, by throwing the articles in
the treaty with regard to Calais into this form,
Elizabeth satisfied her fubjeets of every denomi-
nation; she gave men of discernment a striking
proof of her address, in palliating what she could
not prevent; and amtufed the multitude, to
whom the final surrender of a place of such im-
portance would have appeared altogether infa-
mous, with the profpet of recovering in a short
tire that favourite possession.

THE expedient which Montmorency employ- An expA-
ed, in order to facilitate the conclusion of e"t whid"

promotes

peace between France and Spain, was the nego- peace be-
ciating two treaties of marriage, one between ewe i
Elizabeth, Henry's eldest daughter, and Phi- Spain.
lip, who supplanted his son, the unfortunate
Dol) Carlos, to whom that Princess had teen
promised in the former conferences at Cercamp,
the other between Margaret, Henry's only sis-
ter, and the duke of S:tvoy. For feeble as the
ties of blood often are among Princes, or how
little soever they may regard them when pufled
on to at by motives of ambition, they assume
on other occaiions the appearance of being so
far influenced by these domeftick affTetions, as
to employ them to jullify measures and conce-

sions

BooKXII.fions which they find to be necessary, but know

to be impolitic or dilhonourable. Such was the
9' use Henry made of the two marriages to which

he gave his consent. Having secured an ho::oln-
rable establishment for his sifter and his daugh-
ter, he, in consideration of there, granted terms
both to Philip and the duke of Savoy, of which
he would not, on any other account, have ven-
tured to approve.

The terms THE principal articles in the treaty between
tionaciica- France and Spain were, That a sincere and per-

petual amity should be eftahlifhed between the
two crowns and their respective allies; that the
two monarchs should labour in concert to pro-
cure the convocation of a general council, in
order to check the progress of heresy, and re-
store unity and concord to the Ciftian church;
that all conquests made by either party, on this
fide of the Alps, since the commencement of the
war in one thousand five hundred and fifty-one,
should be mutually restorcd that the dutchy
of Savoy, the principality of Piedmont, the
country of Brefle, and all tle other . territories
formerly subjee to the dukes of Savoy, shot:ld
bc restored to Emanuel Philibeit, immediately
after the celebration of his m.o;-iage with Marga-
ret of France, the towns of Turin, Q!iers, Pig-
nerol, Chivaz and Villanova exctpted, of which
Henry should keep pofleiTioin until his claims on
t!:ha Prince, in riglit of Iris grand-mother,
fliould be heard and decided in course of lawx
that as lorg as H-I'nry i'.taincl'd thcfe places in
};is hands, Philip PfloulCd be . t li rty to l '".'p g,'-
ri.,ms in the tl,,\vns of Vercelli an(d Alli; thait
the ;Fench King (hould iimm-diately ev::c:!.;
:ill ihe placrs vwhich he hld in Tulifcluy ;!.' '
Sicni fc, and r n1ounce all fiture pr,-t. li,: '
to tlhcrn ; tl.atl c Ihc(oud ric( ore tlc 'i;!'e ; .'; f
M1nltf;lrrat to th dukc of MeIa ltl; toj ii:.. iJt,
l .'

; .:, . ,g

receive the Genoese into favour, and give up to BooXlI.
them the towns which he had conquered in the
island of Corsica; that none of the Princes or 15
Rates, to whom these ceflions were made, ihould
call their fubjets to account for any part of
their conduct while under the dominion of their
enemies, but should bury all past tranfadions
in oblivion. The Pope, the Emperor, the Kings
of Denmark, Sweden, Poland, Portugal, the
King and Queen of Scots, and almost every
Prince and state in Cqriftendom, were compre-
hended in this pacification as the allies either of
Henry or of Philip *.

THUS, by this famous treaty, peace was re- Which

eflablifhed in Europe. All the causes of discord tranquillity
which had To long embroiled the powerful mo- in Europe.
narchs of France and Spain, which had tranf-
mitted hereditary quarrels and wars from Char-
les to Philip, and from Francis to Henry, fee-
med to be wholly removed, or finally termina-
ted: The French alone complained of the une-
qual conditions of a treaty, into which an am-
bitious minister, in order to recover his liberty,
and an artful mistress, that she might gratify
her resentment, had reduced their too easy mo-
narch. They exclaimed loudly against the
folly of giving up to the enemies of France, an
an hundred and eighty-nine fortified places. in
the Low-Countries or in Italy, in return for
the three insignificant towns of St. Quintin,
Ham and Catelet. They confidered it as an
indelible slain upou the glory of the nation, to
renounce in one day territories so extensive, and
so capable of being defended, that the enemy
could not have hoped to wrest them out of their
hands, after many years of victory and success.

* Recueil doe Traitez, t. ii. 287
VQL. IIL,

E e

BUT

60o SIs. Bt T lHenry, witihot regarding the sentiments
^- - of his people, or being moved by the remoni-
Ther59 frances of his council, Iatified: the treaty, and
peace be- exiected with great fidelity whatever he had!
Prance and tipul'aed to perform. The duke' of Savoy re-
Spain. P'a'ied' with a numerous retintue to Paris, in

order to celebtate his marriage with Ienry's
fitter. 'Th ke

d e of Alva WaS sent to the fame

capital,: at the htad' of a fplehdid ei4bafiy, to
dfpoufe .liz'ableth in name of hiS matter.
T'hey, were received withi eXttraordiriay magni-

Death of fiscetie by thle French' Cotit. Amid'fl the re-
Henry.
July to. joicings and festivities on that' ccafion, Henry's

days were cut short by a singular and tragical
accident. sis son, Francis If. a Prince uinder
a'ge, of a feeble con'fitiVttion'# and of a' mind flill
w eaker, succeeded him. Sooti after, Pairlend-
ed his violent asi'd ir'perious Pontificate, at en-
miity wit'Ih i .l the world, and difguCed even
with his own. niephlews. They, perfeuted: by
Plilfip, and deserted by the succeeding Pope,
whom they had' raised by thei'r inflience to. the
Papa'l throne, were condemned to the ptinifh-
ment Which the-ir cri fies and ambitioni had merit-
ed, and their death was as infanmtos, as their
lives had been' criminal. Thus all the petfon-
ages, who had long fufiaihed the principal cha-
raters on the.great theatre of Euope, difaip-
peared about the faime time. A mnore known
period-of hitlory opens at this aera; other ators
appear on the stage, with different views and
diferett paflions; new contests arose, and neW
fiheriies of ambition occupied and disquieted
rTian'kin d.

A eneral tJPON reviewing the tranfations of any active
he wholes period, in the hiflory of civilized nations, the
,criod. cha. hgs which are accomplished appear wonder-

fully disproportioned to the eflbrts which have
been exerted. Conquifts ate never very exten-
fiv or rapid, but among nations, whose pro-
grefs in improvement is extremen y unequal.

When

When Alexander the Great, at the head, of a .ltBYonX.
gallant people, of simple manners,; and formed'a"- ~
to war by admirable military infituttions, in-
vaded a state funk in luxury, and- enervated' by
exceflive refinement; when Genchiicran and
Tamerlane, with their armies.of hardy barbari'-
ans, poured in upon nations, enfeebled by the
climate in which they lived, or by the arts and
commerce which they cultivated, they,¢ like a
torrent, swept every thing before them, firb-
duing kingdoms and provinces in as fhofi fpae
of time, as was requisite to march through
them. But when nations are in a similar fta ie,
and keep peace with each other in, their advances
towards refinement, they are not extfed to
the calamity of sudden conquest. Their atqrui'-
fitions of knowledge, their progress in the art
of war, their political sagacity arid- address, are
nearly equal. The fate of states in- this fitua-
tion, depends not on a iingle battle. Their in-
ternal resources are many and various. Nor are
they themselves alone interested in their own
safety, or active in their own defeniee. Other
states interpbfe, and balance any tempbrary ad-
vantage which either party may have acquired.
After the fiercest and most lengthened contest,
all the rival nations dre exhaufled, none are
conquered. At length a peace is concluded,
which re-inifates each iri poffeflion of almost the
aime power, and the fame territories.
SUCH was the state of Europe during the reign The nations

of Europe

of Charles V. No Prince was so much superior in a fimiiar
to the reft in power, as to render his efforts ir-t durng
resistible, and his cotquefts easy. No nation conury.
had made progress in improvement so far be-
yond its neighbours, as to have acquired a very
manifest pre-eminence. Each itate derived-fonte
advantage, or was subject to' forih inconveni-
ence, from its situation or its climare. esac
was diflinguilhed by bomething peculiar in the

e e genius

BooxXII. genius of its people, or the confsitution of its go

vernment. - But the advantages pofeffed by one,
were counterballanced by circumstances favour-
able to others; and this prevented any from at-
taining such superiority as might have been fatal
to all. The nations of Europe in that age, as
in the present, were like one great family; there
were some featurescommon to all, which fixed
a resemblance; there were certain peculiarities
conspicuous in each, which marked a diftinti-
on. But there was not among them that wide
diversity of character and of genius which, in
almost every.period of hiltory, hath exalted the
Europeans above the inhabitants of the other
quarters of the globe, and seems to have deftin-
ed the one to rule, and the other to obey.

A remarka-
ble change BUT though the near resemblance and equa-
in the state
of Europe, lity in improvement among the different nations
duighe of Europe, prevented the reign of Charles V.
Charles from being distinguished by such sudden and

extensive conquests, as occur in rome other pe-
riods of history, yet, during the course of his
administration, all the considerable flates in
Europe suffered a remarkable change in their
political situation, and felt the influence of
events, which have not hitherto spent their force,
but fRill continue to operate in a greater or in a
less degree. It was during his reign, and in
consequence of the perpetual efforts to which his
enterprizing ambition rouzed them, that the
different kingdoms of Europe acquired internal
vigour, that they discerned the resources of
which they were possesed, that they came both
to feel their.own strength, and to know how to
render it formidable to others. It was during
his reign, too, that the different kingdoms of
Europe, formerly single and disjoined, became
so thoroughly acquainted, and so intimately
.connected with each other, as to form one great

poli-

political system, in which each took a station, BooxXlI.
wherein it has remained since that time with less
variation, than could have been expeted after
the events of two active centuries.

The pro-

THE progress, however, and acquisitions of grefs of the

the house of Austria, were not only greater houfeof
than those of any other power, but more dif- ri.
cernible and conspicuous. I have already enu-
merated the vast territories which descended to
Charles from his Austrian, Burgundian, and
Spanish ancestors*. To there he himfelfadded
the Imperial dignity; and, as if all this had been
too little, the bounds of the universe were ex-
tended, and a new world fubjeted to his corn
mand. Upon his resignation, the Burgundian
provinces, and the Spaniff kingdoms with their
dependencies, both in the old and new worlds,
devolved to Philip. But Charles transmitted
his dominions to his son, in a condition very
different from that in which he had received
them. They were augmented by the accession
of new provinces; they were habituated to obey
an administration which was no less vigorous
than steady; they were accustomed to expensive
and persevering efforts, which, though necef-
fary in the contests between civilized nations,
had been little known in Europe before the fix-
teenth century. The provinces of Friesland,
Utrecht and Overyfel, which he acquired by
purchase from their former proprietors, and the
dutchy of Gelders, of which he made himself
matier, partly by force of arms, and partly by
the arts of negociation, were additions of great
value to his Burgundian dominions. Ferdinand
and Isabella had transmitted to him all the pro-
vinces of Spain, from the bottom of the Pyr-
enees to the frontiers of Portugal; but as he

Vol. ii. p. z.
Ee 3

main.

BooKXIH. maintained a perpetual peace with that king-

v'V- ' dorn, amidst the various efforts of his enterpri-

zing ambition, he made no acquisition of terri-
tory in that quarter.

Particularly CHAR-LE:S had gained, however, a vat ac-
io Spai ceflion of power in this part of his dominions.

By this fiuccefs in the war with the commons of
Castile., he exalted the regal prerogative on the
ruins of the privileges of the people. Though
he-allowed the name of the Cortes to remain,
antihe formality of holding it to be continued,
he reduced its authority and jurifdidtion to no-
thing, and modelled it in fich a menner, that
it became rather a junto of the servants of the
crown, Than -an assembly of the representatives
Oif' he people. One member of the conftituti-
on beirig thus 'lopped off, it was impossible but
that the oiher hmuit feel the stroke, and susser
by it. The fupprefion of the popular power
rendered the arifocratical less formidable. The
grandees, prompted by the warlike fpitit of the
age, or allured by the honours which they en-
joyedin a court, exhausted their fortunes in mi-
litary -service, or in attending on the person of
their Prince. They did not dread, perhaps did
tot observe, the dangerous progress of the royal
authority, which leaving them the vain diftinc-
*ron aofbeing covered in pretence of their fove-
reign, Rfripped them by degrees of that real
-power wlich they possesed while they formed
bne body, and acted in concert with the people.
Sharess's fuceefs in abolishing the privileges of
1'he.ommons, and in breaking the power of the
-nobles of Caf.ile, encouraged Philip to invade
-ie liberties of Aragon, which were fill more
eltenfivF. The Cgflilians, accustomed to fiub-
je&ion therrfelves, aflifed in imposing the
yoke on their more happy and independant
neighbours. The will of the Sovereign be-
-aamte the supreme law in all the kingdoms of

Spai n

Spain; ,aad Princes who were not checked in Boo.XI.
their plans by the jealoutfy of the people,, nor
controuled in the executirg them by the ,power
of the nobles, could both aim at great objects
and call forth the whole strength of .the mo-
narchy in order to attain them.

As Charles, by.extending the regal preroga- palrs of

tive, rendered the monarchs of Spain ,masters at Europe.
·flome, he added ,new qiguity and power to their
crown by his foreign.acguitions. He £eeured
to Spain the quiet pofeffion ,of the kingdom
of Naples, which Ferdinand had usurped
by firaud, and held with difficulty. He
united the dutchy of Milan, one of the most
fertile and populous provinces in Italy, to the
Spanish crown; and left his successors, even
without taking their other territories into the
account, the mofl considerable Princes jin that
country, which had been long the theatre of
contention to the great powers of Europe, and
in which they had struggled with emigilation to
obtain thle fuperiordity. When ,the French, in
consequence of the treaty of Cateau-Canbrelis,
withdrew their forces out of Italy, and finally
relinquished all their schemes of conquest on
that fide of the Alps, the Spanish doninions
there rose in importance, and enabled
.their Kings, as long as the monarchy re-
tained any degree of vigour, to preserve the
chief sway in 41 thc tranfaaions of that coun-
try. But whatever acceflion either of interior au-
thority or of foreign dominion Charles gained for
the monarchs of Spain in Europe, it was inconfi-
deratle when compared with his acquisitions in
the new world. He added, tlere, not provinces,
but empires to his crown. He conquered terri-
tories offuch immen fe etent; he di&oyvered fudi
inexhautible veins of weailth, and opend fich
boundlef, prospe&s of every kind, gs must Slave
rouzed and called forth to acion his successor, tho'

E e 4 his

BooKXIIhis ambition had been much less ardent than
(-3 ~ Philip's, and must have rendered him not only

enterprizing but formidable.

Progrefe of WHILE the elder branch of the Austrian fa-
the German
branch o mily rose to such pre-eminence in Spain, the
the houfc of younger, of which Ferdinand was the head,

A grew to be considerable in Germany. The an-

cient hereditary dominions of the house of Au-
firia in Germany, united to the kingdoms of
Hungary and Bohemia, which Ferdinand had
acquired by marriage, formed a refpeftable
power, and when the Imperial dignity was added
to there, Ferdinand possessed territories more
extensive than had belonged to any Prince,
Charles V. excepted, who had been at the head
of the Empire during several ages. Fortunate-
ly for Europe, the disgust which Philip concei-
ved, on account of Ferdinand's refusing to relin-
quifh the Imperial crown in his favour, not
only prevented for some time the feperate mem-
bers of the house of AuRtria from aAing in con-
cert, but occasioned a visible alienation and ri-
val ship. By degrees, however, regard to the
interest of their family extinguished this impoli-
tic animosity. The confidence which was na-
tural returned; the aggrandizing of the house
of Austria became the common object of all their
schemes ; they gave and received assistance alter-
nately towards the execution of them; and
each derived consideration and importance fiom
the other's success. A family so great and so
aspiring became the general object of jealousy
and terror. All the power as well as policy of
Europe were exerted during a century, in order
to check and humble it, Nothing can give a
more striking idea of the ascendant which it had
acquired, and of the terror which it had inspired,
than that after its vigour was spent with extraor-
dinary exertions of its strength, after Spain

was

was become only the shadow of a great name, BooxXII.
and its monarchs were funk into debility and ' '
dotage, the haufe of Austria still continued to
be formidable. The nations of Europe had so
often felt its fuperiour power, and had been so
conifantly employed in guarding against it, that
the dread of it became a kind of political habit,
the influence of which remained when the causes,
which had formed it, ceased to exist.

WHILE the house of Austria went on with Acquisition

such success in enlarging its dominions, France of tFeKn,
made no considerable acquisition of new teritory. during the
All its schemes of conquest in Italy had proved reign of
abortive; it had hitherto obtained no establish-
ment ofconfequence in the new world; and as-
ter the continued and vigorous efforts of four
successive reigns, the confines of the kingdom
were much the fame as Louis XI. had left them
But though France made not such large strides
towards dominion as the house of Austria, it
continued to advance by steps which were more
secure, because they were gradual and less ob-
served. The conquest of Calais put it out of
the power of the English to invade France but at
their utmost peril, and delivered the French
from the dread of their ancient enemies, who,
previous to that event, could at any time pene-
trate into the kingdom by that avenue, and
thereby retard or defeat the execution of their
belt concerted enterprizes against any foreign
power. The important acquisition of Metz co-
vered that part of their frontier which formerly
was most feeble, and lay most exposed to insult.
France, from the time of its obtaining these ad-
ditional securities against external invasion, must
be deemed the mot powerful kingdom in Europe,
and is more fortunately situated than any on the
continent either for conquests or defence. From
the confines of Artois to the bottam of the

Pyrenees,

ioiX. Pryienees, rnid frorn thelrri'tifi channel to:the
'-"'' froxtiers .of Savoy And the .coaf of the Medi-

terranean, its territojis ay eomrpast and unmin-
gled.wvith those f any other power. Severall of
the considerable pryvinces, hicih, by thleir hav-
ing been long fubjelt to the .great v!atffas of the
crown, who ,were oftsen at varianace or at war
wi.th their mnater, ha d ntrfteedl a pip-rit of in-
dependence, were now accinoIed to recognize
and to obey one sovereign. As they became
remnbers ;of the fame m~ archy, they assumed
the -fee timen ts of liat body in to w-hi eh they were
incQrporated, and.co-opexated with zeal towards
promoting its inteireft and honour. The power
and infitiace .wrested fron itbe nobles were sei-
zed by the crown. The people were not admit-
ted to share in these spoils; they gained no new
priyvilege; (they acquired no additional weight in
the legislator. it was aot for -the fake.of the peo-
,ple, but in order .to eexte4 their own preroga-
tive, that the nmoaarchs of France had laboured
to humble their great vaffall. Satisfied with
having brought them under entir e subjection to
the crown, dtey discovered no follicitude to free
the people from their ancient dependance on the
nobles of whom. tdey held.

Enables A M.ONARCH, at the head of a kingdom thus
them to as- united at home and secure from obroad, was
hiher ati- entitled to form great designs, because he felt
on among himself in a condition to exec.ute thema. The
of Erope. foreign wars whbich lhad continued with little in-

terruption from the accellion of Charles VIII.
had not only cheritfled and augmented the mar-
tial genius ,of the nation, but by inuring the
itroop :during the .corlfe of long (ervice to the
faiigu.es .of war, and accustoming them to obe-
.dience, had added the force of dicfipline to
their natural order. A gallant and a&ive body
of nobles who confidered tliemfnelves .a idle and

useless,

useless, unless when they were in the field; who BooKxXII.
were scarce acquainted with any pastime or ex- '
ercife but what was military; and who knew
no road to power, or fame, or wealth, but war,
would not have suffered their sovereign to remain
long in inaction. The people, little acquainted
with the arts of peace, and always ready to take
arms at the command of their superiors, were
accufftomed by the vast expence of long wars,
carried on in distant countries, to bear impofiti-
ons, which, how inconsiderable soever they may
seem if estimated by the exorbitant rate of mo-
dern actions, appear immense when compared
with the fums levied in France, or in any other
country of Europe, previous to the reign of Louis
XI. As all the members of which the Rfate was
composed were thus impatient for action, and ca-
pable of great efforts, the schemes and operations
of France must have been no lets formidable to
Europe than those of Spain. The superior ad-
vantages of its situation, the contiguity and com-
padnefs of its territories, together with the pe-
culiar state of its political constitution at that
junture muff have rendered its interprizes still
more alarming and more decisive. The King
possessed such a degree of power as gave him
the entire command of his fubjeas; the people
were strangers to those occupations and habits
of life which render men averse towar, or unfit
for it; and the nobles, tho' reduced to fubordi-
nation neceflry in a regular government, fill
retained the high undaunted spirit which was the
effect of their ancient independence. The vigour
of the Feudal times remained, their anarchy was
at an end; and the Kings of France could avail
thernfelves of the martial ardour which that fin-
gular inititution had kindled or kept alive,
without being exposed to any of the dangers or
inconveniencies which are inseparable from it
when in intire force.

A KINGDOM

°rooxX.' A KINGDOM in such a state is, perhaps, ca-

circu,- pable of greater military efforts, than at any
Aances other period in its progress. But how formi-
which pre-.
vented the dable f foeer or atal to the other nations of
immediate Europe, the power of such a monarchy might
«eas of
therpower have been, the civil wars which broke out in

France, saved them at that juncture from feel-
ing its effecs. These wars, of which religion
was the pretext and ambition the cause; where-
in great abilities were displayed by the leaders
of the different factions, and little conduc or
firmness were manifested by the crown under a
fucceflion of weak Princes, kept France occu-
pied and embroiled for half a century. During
these commotions, the internal strength of the
kingdom was much wafted, and such a spirit of
anarchy was spread among the nobles, to whom
rebellion was familiar, and the restraint of laws
unknown, that a considerable interval became
requisite, not only for recruiting the internal
vigour of the nation, but for re-establishing the
authority of the Prince; so that it was long be-
fore France could turn her whole attention to-
wards foreign tranfadions, or at with her pro-
per force in foreign wars. It was long before
the rose to that ascendant in Europe, which she
has maintained since the administration of Car-
dinal Richlieu, and which the situation as well
as extent of the kingdom, the nature of her go-
vernment, and the character of her people,
entitle her to maintain.

Progrel of.
England WHILE tie kingdoms on the continent grew
with refpea .
<o it inte- into power and consequence, England likewise
Mior ftte. made considerable progress towards regular go-

vernment and interior strength. Henry VIII.
probably without intention, and certainly with-
out any confifent plan, of which his nature was
incapable, ptirfued the scheme of deprelling

the

the nobility, which the policy of his father BooK XI
Henry VII. had begun. The pride and caprice L'
of his temper led him to employ chiefly new
men in the administration of affairs, because he
found them most obsequious, or least fcrupu-
lous; and he not only conferred on these such
plenitude of power, but exalted them to such
pre-eminence in dignity, as mortified and de-
graded the ancient nobility. By the alienation
or sale of the church lands, which were difli-
pated with a profusion not inferior to the rapa-
cioufnefs with which they had been seized, as
well as by the privilege granted by the ancient
landholders of felling their estates, or disposing
of them by will, an immense property, for-
merly locked up, being brought into circulati-
on, put the spirit of industry and commerce in
motion, and gave it some considerable degree
of vigour. The road to power and to opulence
became open to persons of every condition. A
sudden and exceflfive flow of wealth from the
Weft Indies proved fatal to industry in Spain;
a moderate accefion in England to the fum in
circulation gave life to conmerce, awakened the
ingenuity of the nation, and excited it to use-
ful enterprize. In France, what the nobles loft
the crown gained. In England, the commons
were gainers as well as the King. Power and
influence accompanied of course the property
which they acquired. They rose to confidera-
tion among their fellow fubjeds; they began to
feel their own importance; and extending their
influence in the legislative body gradually, and
often when neither they themselves nor others
foresaw all the effect of their claims and pre-
tensions, they at last attained that high authority,
to which the British constitution is indebted for
the existence, and must owe the preservation of
its liberty. At the Innl' r i;ne that the Englifl
constitution advanced towards perfetion, fe-

veral

boocxXi veral inftineesbrought on a change in the ancient
' v-' rfyftem with refped to foreign powers, and intfo-

duced another more beneficial to the nation. By
di;feairming the ihpremacy and jurifdition of
the Papal See, considerable furis were saved to
the nation, of which it liad been annually drain-
cd,! by remittances to Rome for difpen rations and
indulgences, or in order to defray the expence
of pilgrimages into foreign countries *, or by
payment of annates, first fruits, and a thousand
other taxes-which' that artful and rapacious court
levied on the credulity of mankind. The idea
of a jurifdidion different from- the civil power,
and claiming not only to be independant but
superior to it, a wild solecism in government,
apt not only to- perplex and disquiet weak minds,
but tending diretly to disturb society, was
finally abolished. Government became more
simple as well as more refpedable, when no rank
or charater exempted any person from being
amenable to the fame courts, from being tried
by the fame judges, and from being acquitted
or condemned by the fame laws.

with ref- BY the loss of Calais the Englilh were exclu-
pea' o the ded from the continent. All schemes for invading
affairs of
the conti- France became of course as chimerical as they

ant.' had formerly been pernicious. They views of the

EngJifh were confined, firfl by neceflity, and
afterwards from choice, within their own island.
That rage for conquert which had poffefied
the nation during many centuries, and waft-
ed its strength in perpetual and fruitless wars,

* The loss which the nation fuftaind by most of there ar-

ticles is obvious, and must have been great. Even that by
pilgrimages was not inconsiderable. In the year 1428, li-
cence was obtained by no fewer than 916 persons to visit the
llsine of St. James ofCompoftella in Spain. Rymer, vol. x. p.
In 1434, the number of pilgrims to the fame place was 2460.
Ibid. p. . h1 1445, they werg t oo. vol. xi p.

at

at lerigth eeafed. Those ative fpikits whiich 1!o6X4fE
had kinown- andi Ollowed no' profession but war F
fought for ocetpatiatif in' the artsof peace, and
tieir counry beAefitad a r*xuih IU y the one as
it hade&lffered:by the ther. The nation exhauf-
ted bI freqrient expeditfion to, the continent,
recruited, and acquired new strength; and' wher
rouzed by any extraordinary exigency to take
part in foreign opperationts, the vigour of its
efforts were propovfionally great, becaiife they
were only oecafionaw a*id of a fliorn continuance.

T'tE fame pincil'e which? had led England with rs-

to adopt this netw fyftlv withY regard to the pea to Scot-
powers on the continent occasioned a change in
its plan of condua witlh refe& to Scoflanrd, the
onfy foreign state, with whicr, on account of
its fiti-ation iin t-he fame island, the Ehglifi had
such a elbfe conned-ion am d:emanded their perpe-
tual attention. Instead' of prosecuting the anci-
ent scheme of conquering thatt kingdom, which
the nature of the country, defended by a brave
and hardy people, rendered dangerous if not
nnp'raiicable; it appeaied: more eligible to en-
deavour at obtaining such influence it Scotland
as. might exempt Engl'and from, arry danger or
dilfijtet frotit that qiarter. The national pover-
ty of the Seots, togetfler with the violence and
anirofi'ty of tlheir factions reilered, the execu-
tion of this plern easy to a; people far superior to
them rin wealth! Theivt popular leaders were
gained; the mriniflets and favourites of the crown
Were comrrtpted; and such abfollbte diretion of
their councils acquired, as rendered the opera-
tions of flhe onae kingdom dependant in a great
measure on the sovereign of the other. Such per-
feet external fecirity added tso the interior ad
vantages vwhich England now poflired, must soon

hlit'C

Boor xnI. have raised it to new consideration and impor-

tance; the long reign of Elizabeth, equally
conspicuous for wisdom, for steadiness, and for
vigour, accelerated its progress, and carried it
with greater rapidity towards that elevated fta-
tion which it hath since held among the powers
of Europe.

Changes in
the political DURING the period in which the political
sRate of the
secondary state of the great kingdoms underwent such
pour in changes, revolutions of considerable importance

happened in that of the fecundary or inferior
powers. Those in the Papal court are most ob-
vious, and of more extensive consequence.

The mol IN the Preliminry Book, I have mentioned the
coniderable rife of that fpirirual jurifdiftion which the
revolution
of the x Popes claim as Vicars of Jesus Christ, and have
teenth cen- traced the progress of that authority which they
tury in the ine
court of possess as temporal Princes*. There was
Rome. nothing previous to the reign of Charles V.

that tended to circumscribe or to moderate their
authority, but science and philosophy, which
began to revive and to be cultivated The pro-
grefs of there, however, was still inconsiderable;
they always operate slowly; and it is long be-
fore their influence reaches the people, or can
produce any sensible effea upon them. They
may perhaps gradually, and in a long course of
years, undermine and shake an established fyitem
of false religion, but there is no inifance of their
having overturned one. The battery is too
feeble to demolish those fabricks which super-
ftition raises on deep foundations, and can
strengthen with the most consummate art.

*Vol. 1, p. 124.

I.JTHER

LUTHER had attacked thePapal supremacy with BO6KXIL.

other weapons, and witli an irhpetuofity more for- "h'"'-ee
midable. The time and manner of his attack revoltagainf
concurred with a multitude of circumrfances, the ,1onrine
which have been explained, in giving him- imme- ofo;ne,and
diate success. The charm which had bou:d man- ftho Per.
kind for so many ages was broken at once. The
human mind, which had continued long as tame
and passive, as if it had been formed to believe
whatever was taught, and to bear whatever was
imposed, roused of a sudden and became inquifi-
tive, mutinous, and dildainful of the yoke to
which it had hitherto submitted. That wonderful
ferment and agitation of mind, which, at this dif-
tance of time, appears unaccountable or is coi-
demned as extravagant, was so general, that it must
have been excited by causes which were natural
and of powerful efficacy. The Kingdoms of Den-
mark, Sweden, England and Scotland, and almof:
one half of Germany threw off their allegiance to
the Pope, abolished his jurisdiction within their ter-
ritories, and gave. the fantion of law to modes of
discipline and systems of docrine which were not
only independant of his power, but, hostile to it.
Nor was this spirit of innovation confined to those
countries which openly revolted from the Pope; it
spread through all Europe, and broke out in every
part of it with various degrees of violence. It pe-
netrated early into France and made progress apace.
The number of converts to the opinions of the
leformers was so great, their zeal so enterprizing,
and the abilities of their leaders so diftinguillfed,
that they ibon ventured to contend for superiority
with the eftablifled church, and were rometimes
on the point of obtaining it. In all the provinces
of Germany, which continued to acknowledge the
Papal supremacy, as well as in the Low Countries,
the Protestant docrines were secretly taught, and

VOL. II. .F f had

BooKXI. had gained so many proselytes, that they were ripe
-' " for revolts and were restrained merely by the dread

of their rulers from imitating the example of their
neighbours, and aflerting their independance.
Even in Spain and in Italy, symptoms of the fame
disposition to shake off the yoke appeared. The
pretensions of the Pope to infallible knowledge and
supreme power were treated by many persons of
eminent learning and abilities with such scorn, or
impugned with such vehemence, that the most vi.
gilant attention of the civil magifirate, the highest
firains of pontifical authority, and all the rigour of
the inquisitorial jurifdition were requisite to check
and extinguish it.

This abrid- THE defection of Co many opulent and powerful
ted the ex- kingdoms from the Papal See, was a fatal blow to
tent of the .
Pope's do- its grandeur and power. It abridged the dominions
minions, of the Popes in extent, it diminished their reve-

nues, and left them fewer rewards to beflow on the
ecclefiafticks of various denominations, attached
to them by vows of obedience as well as by ties of
interest, and whom they employed as instruments
to establish or support their usurpations in every
part of Europe. The countries too which now
disclaimed their authority, were those which for-
merly had been most devoted to it. The empire
of superstition differs from every other species of
dominion; its power is often greatest, and most
implicitly obeyed in the provinces most remote
from the feat of government; while such as are
situated nearer to that are more apt to discern the
artifices by which it is upheld, or the impostures
on which it is founded. The personal frailties or
vices of the Popes, the errors as well as corruption
of their administration, the ambition, venality and
deceit which reigned in their court, fell immedi-
ately under the observation of the Italians, and

could

could not fail of diminilling that refpet which be- BOOKXIL.
gets filbmiflion. But in Germany, England, and '""
the more remote countries, there were either alto-
gether unknown, or being only known by report,
made a fliglter inmprellion. Their veneration for
the Papal dignity increased with their distance from
Rome; ind that, added to their gross ignorance,
rendered them equally credulous and pallive. In
tracing the progress of the Papal domination, the
boldest and most successful instances of encroach-
ment are to be found in Germany and other coun-
tries distant from Italy. In these its impositions
were heaviest, and its exactions the most rapa-
cious; so that in estimating the diminution of
power which the court of Rome suffered in confe-
quence of the Reformation, not only the number
but the character of the people who revolted, not
only the great extent of tefrirory, but the extraor-
dinary obsequiousness of the subjects which it loft,
must be taken into the account.

NOR was it only by this defection of so many and obliged

kingdoms and flates which it occasioned, that the hemg the
Reformation contributed to diminish the power offpiritoftheir
the Roman Pontiffs. It obliged them to adopt a go07vnmeDt.
different system of conduct towards the nations
which continued to recognize their jurisdiCtion, and
to govern them by new maxims and with a milder
spirit. The Reformation taught them, by a fatal
example, what they lIem not before to have appre-
hended, that the credulity and patience of man-
kind might be overburdened and exhausted. They
became afraid of venturing on any such exertion
of their authority as might alarm or exasperate
iheir subjects, and excite them to a new revolt.
They saw a rival church established in many
countries of Europe, the members of which were
on the watch to observe any errors in their admini-

F f tration,

BooKXII. ftration, and eager to expose them. They were
'^ ifenfible that the opinions adverse to their power

and usurpations were not confined to their enemies
alone, but had spread even among the people who
liill adhered to them. Upon all these accounts, it
was no longer poflible to lead and to govern their
flock in the fame manner as in those dark and
quiet ages, when faith was implicit, when fubmif-
lion was unreserved% and all tamely followed and
obeyed the voice of their shepherd. From the
-era of the Reformation, the Popes have ruled ra-
ther by address and management than by authority.
The stile of their decrees is the fame, but the es-
fed of them is very different. Those Bulls and
InterdiCts which, before the Reformation, made
the greatest Princes tremble, have since that period
been disregarded or despised by the most inconfi-
derable. Those bold decisions and acts of jurif-
diEtion which, during many ages, not only passed
uncenfured, but were revered as the awards of a
sacred tribunal, would, since Luther's appearance,
be treated by one part of Europe as the effeEt of
folly or arrogance, and be detested by the other
as impious and unjust. The Popes, in their ad-
ministration, have been obliged not only to accom-
modate themselves to the notions of their adhe-
rents, but to pay some regard to the prejudices
of their enemies. They seldom venture to claim
new powers, or even to insist obstinately on their
ancient prerogatives, left they should irritate the
former ; they carefully avoid every measure that
may either excile the indignation or draw on them
the derifiun of the latter. The policy of the court
of Rome has become as cautious, circumspect,
and timid, as it was once adventurous and vio-
lent; and though their pretensions to infallibiiity,
on which all their authority is founded, does not al-
low them to renounce any jurilsiltiion which they

have

have at any time claimed or exercised, they findBooKxII.
it expedient to uffier many of their prerogatives to
lie dormant, and not to expose thenfelves by ill-
timed attempts towards reviving there, to the
rifque oflofing that remainder of power which they
till enjoy. Before the sixteenth century, the Popes
were the movers and direcors in every confidera-
ble enterprize; they were at the head of every
great alliance; and being confidered as arbiters
of the affairs of Christendom, the court of Rome
was the centre of political negociation and in-
trigue. From that time, the greatest operations
in Europe have been carried on independant of
them; they have funk almost to a level with the
other petty Princes of Italy; they continue to claim,
though they dare not exercise, the fame spiritual
jurifdition, but scarce retain any shadow of the
temporal power which they anciently po.effted.

BUT how fatal soever the Reformation may have The Refor.

been to the power of the Popes, it contributed to n.lit

..n-

improve the church of Rome both in science and in improve the
morals. The desire of equalling the reformers in culi'hboath
those talents which had procured them respeCt; anddmor!l.
the necellity of acquiring the knowledge requisite
for defending their own tenets, or refuting the ar-
guments of their opponents; together with the
emulation natural between two rival churches, en-
gaged the Roman Catholic clergy to apply them-
selves to the study of useful science, which they
cultivated with filch afliduity and success, that they
have gradually become as eminent in literature, as
they were in tome periods infamous for ignorance.
The fame principle occasioned a change no lets con-
fiderable in the manners of the clergy of the Ro-
mifl church. Various causes which have former-
ly Leen enumerated, had concurred in introducing

F f 3 great

BooKXTI. great irregularity, and even dissolution of manners

r----' among the Popish clergy. Luther and his adhe-

rents began their attack on the church with such
vehement invecives againtt these, that in order to
remove the scandal, and silence their declamations,
greater decei.cy ofconduct became necessary. The
Reformers themselves were so eminent not only for
the purity but even austerity of their manners, and
had acquired such reputation among the people on
that account, that the Roman Catholick Clergy must
have soon loft all credit, if they had not endeavour-
ed to conform in some measure to their Rfandard.
They knew that all their acions fell under the fe-
vere inspection of the Protestants, whom enmity
and emulation prompted to observe every vice, or
even impropriety in their conduct; to censure them
without indulgence, and to expose them without
mercy. This rendered them, of course, not only
cautious to avoid such enormities as might give
offence, but fludious to acquire the virtues that
might merit praise. In Spain and Portugal, where
the tyrannical jurifdition of the Inquisition crushed
the Protestant faith as soon as it appeared, the fpi-
rit of Popery continues invariable; science has
made small progress, and the character of ecclefi-
aftics has undergone little change. But in those
countries where the members of the two churches
have mingled freely with each other, or have car-
ried on any considerable intercourse, either com-
mercial or literary, an extraordinary alteration in
the ideas as well as in the morals of the Popilh ec-
clefiatlics, is manifest. In France, the manners of
the Dignitaries and secular clergy have become de-
cent and extemplary in an high degree. Many of
them have been distinguished for all the accom-
pliflmcents and virtues which can adorn their pro-
feflion; andti dilr greatly from their predeccfiolr'

befo re

before the Reformation, both in their maxims and BoKXII.
in their condut. -.

NOR has the influence of the Reformation been The effeas

felt only by the inferior members of the Roman i extend
Catholick Church; it has extended to the See ofraaerof the
Rome, to the sovereign Pontiffs themselves. Vio-P1esthem
lations of decorum, and even trespasses against
morality, which palsed without censure in those
ages, when neither the power of the Popes, nor
the veneration of the people for their character,
had any bounds; when there was no hostile eye to
observe the errors in their conduct, and no adver-
saries zealous to inveigh against them; would be
liable now to the severest animadversion, and ex-
cite general indignation or horror. Instead of ri-
valling the courts of temporal Princes in gaiety,
and furpafling them in licentioufiefs, the Popes
have fludied to assume manners more severe and
more suitable to their ecclesiastical character. The
chair of St. Peter hath not been polluted, during
two centuries, by any Pontiff that resembled Alex-
ander VI. or several of his predeceflbrs, who were
a disgrace to religion and to human nature. Through-
out this long succession of Popes, a wonderful
decorum of conduct, compared with that of pre-
ceding ages, is observable. Many of them have
been conspicuous for the virtues becoming their
high flation; and by their humanity, their love of
literature, and their moderation, have made some
attonement to mankind for the crimes of their
predecessors. Thus the beneficial influences of
the Reformation have been more extensive than
they appear on a superficial view; and this great
division in the Christian church hath contributed,
in tome measure, to encreafe purity of manners,
to diffife icience, and to inspire humanity. Hifto-
ry recites such a number of flocking events, occa-

sioned

BooKxrI.fioned by religious dissensions, that it must afford

L'^^^particular fatisfadion to traceany one salutary or

beneficial effeat to that source, from which so ma-
ny fatal calamities have flowed.

State of the THE republick of Venice which, at the begin-
republick of ning of the sixteenth century, had appeared so for-
Venice. midable, that almost all the potentates of Eu-

rope united in a confederacy for its defirudion,
declined gradually from its ancient power and
splendour, The Venetians not only loft a great
part of their territory in the war excited by the
league of Cambray, but the revenues as well as vi-
gour of the slate were exhausted by their ex;raor-
dinary and long continued efforts in their own de-
fence; and that commerce by which they had ac-
quired their wealth and power began to decay,
without any hopes of its reviving. All the fatal
consequences to their republick, which the saga-
city of the Venetian senate foresaw on the first dif.
covery of a passage to the Eaft-Indies by the Cape
of Good Hope, tools place. Their endeavours to
prevent the Portuguese from eftabliflingthemfelves
in the Eaft-Indies, not only by exciting the Sol-
dans of Egypt and the Ottoman monarchs to turn
their arms against such dangerous intruders, but
by affording secret aid to the Infidels in order to
insure their success z, proved ineffectual. The
activity and valour of the Portuguese surmounted
every obstacle, and obtained fnch firm footing in
that fertile country, as secured to them large pofl
feflions, together with influence still more exten-
five. Lisbon, instead of Venice, became the
flaple for the precious commodities of the East.
The Venetians, after having possessed for ma-
ny years the monopoly of that beneficial com-
merce, had the mortification to be excluded fronr

x Freher. Script. Rer. German. vol. ii. 5z9.

#inmost any share in it. The discoveries of the BooKXI.
Spaniards in the western world, proved no less fatal ~
to inferior branches of their commerce. The ori-
ginal defeCts which were formerly pointed out
in the constitution of the Venetian republick
continued, and the disadvantages with whichit un-
dertook any great enterprize, increased rather than
diminished. The sources from which it derived its
extraordinary riches and power being dried up, the
interior vigour of the state declined, and of course,
rendered its external operations less formida-
ble. Long before the middle of the fix-
teenth century, Venice ceased to be one of the
principal powers in Europe, and became a fecon-
dary and subaltern state. But as the senate had the
address to conceal its diminution of power, under
the veil of moderation and caution ; as it made no
rash effort that could discover its impotence; as
the symptoms of political decay in states are not soon
observed, and are feldom'fo apparent to their
neighbours as to occasion any sudden alteration in
their conduct towards them, Venice continued
long to be confidered and refpeted. She was
treated not according to her present condition, but
according to the rank which she had formerly
held. Charles, as well as the monarchs of France
his rivals, courted her afliftance with emulation
and follicitude in all their enterprizes. Even down
to the close of the century, Venice remained not
only an object of attention, but a considerable feat
of political negociation and intrigue.-

THAT authority which the firl Cosmo de Me- ofTufcagy.

dici, and Lawrence, hisgrandfon, had acquired in
the republick of Florence by their beneficence and
abilities, inspired their descendants with the ambi-
tion of uffirping the sovereignty in their country,
and paved their way towards it. Charles placed
Alexander de Medici at the head of the republick, A.D. r539.
and to the natural interest and power of the family

added

Book XtI added, the weight and credit of the Irfiperial proieec
_-L' tion. Ofthefe, his successor Cosmo, firnamed the

Great,.availe/ himself; and establishing his supreme
authrit.y on the ruins of the ancient republican
eoniitution,. he transmitted that, together with
the title of Grand Duke of TuCcany, to his defcen-
dants. Their dominions were composed of the
territories which had belonged to the three corn.
monwealths of Florence, Pisa, and Siena, and
formed one of the most refpe'table of the Italian
fates.

Ofthedukea THE. dukes ofS avoy, during the former port of
*fSavoy. the. sixteenth century, poffefIed territories which

were not considerable either for extent or value ;.
and the French, having seized the greater part of
them,. obliged the reigning duke to retire for safety
to the strong fortress of Nicei where he Ihut him.
felfup for several years; while his son,, the Prince
of Piedmont, endeavoured to better his fortune,
by fetving as an adventurer in the armies of Spain.
The peace of Cateau Cambrefis. restored to him
his paternal dominions, As: these are environed
on: every hand by powerful neighbours, all whose
motions. the dukes of Savoy must observe with the
greatef attention, in order not only to guard against
the, danger of being furprized and overpowered,
but that they may chufe their fide with discern-
ment in those quarrels wherein it is impossible for
them to avoid taking part, this peculiarity in their
situation seems to have had no inconsiderable in-
fluence on their charadter. By rouzing them to
perpetual attention, by keeping their ingenuity al-
ways on. the t'retch, and engaging them in almost
Continual ation, it hath formed a race of Princes
more. fagaious in discovering their true interest,
more decilive in. their relolutions,. and more
dextrous in availing themlelves of every oc-
curren.ce which presented itself,, than any per-

haps

haps that can be singled out in the history of man- Bo.oXtr.
kind. By gradual acquisitions the Dukes of Savoy --'
have added to their territories as well as to their
own importance ; and aspiring at length to regal
dignity, which they obtained about half a century
ago, they hold no inconsiderable rank among the
monarchs of Europe.

THE territories which now form the republick o'ti;r.::it-

of the united Netherlands, were loft during the Prlv'""'"
first part of the sixteenth century, among the nu-c
merous provinces subjet to the house of Austria;
and were then so inconsiderable, that hardly one
opportunity of mentioning them hath occurred in
all the busy period of this hiilory. But soon as-
ter the peace of Cateau Cambrefis, the vio!ent and
bigoted maxims of Philip's government, carried
into execution with unrelenting vigour by the duke
of Alva, exasperated the free-people of the Low-
Countries to such a degree, that they threw off the
Spanifhyoke, and asserted their ancient liberties
and laws. These they defended with a perfever-
ing valour, which occupied the arms of Spain du-
ring half a century, exhausted the vigour, ruined
the reputation of that monarcihy, and at lafc con-
firained their ancient masters to recognize and to
treat with them as a free independent slate. This
state founded on liberty, and reared by industry
and crconomy, had grown into reputation, even
while firuggling for its existence. But when peace
and security allowed it to enlarge its views, and to
extend its commerce, it rose to be one of the most
respectable as well as enterprizing powers in Eu-
rope.

T i-i tranfations of the kingdoms in the North

ofEnlrope, have been seldom attended to in the
courts: f this history.

RUSSIA

BOOK Xt. RUSSIA remained buried in that barbarism and

C-y w obscurity, from which it was called about the be-

ginning of the present century, by the creative ge-
OfRui. nius of Peter the Great, who made his country

known and formidable to the reft of Europe.

OfDenmark IN Denmark and Sweden, during the reign of
andSweden. Charles V. great revolutions happened in their con-

ftitutions, civil as well as ecclesiastical. In the
former kingdom, a tyrant being degraded from
the throne and expelled the country, a new Prince
was called by the voice of the people to assume the
reigns of government. In the latter, a fierce peo-
ple, rouzed to arms by injuries and oppreflion;
shook off the Danish yoke, and conferred the re-
gal dignity on its deliverer, Gustavus Ericfoni who
had all the virtuesofa hero and of a patriot. Den-
mark, exhausted by foreign wars, or weakened by
the dissensions between the King and the nobles,
became incapable of fitch efforts as were requisite
in order to recover the ascendant which it had long
possessed in the North of Europe. Sweden, as soon
as it was freed from the dominion of strangers, be-
gan to recruit its strength, and required-in a short
time such interior vigour, that it became the firit
kingdom in the North. Early in the subsequent
century, it rose to such a high rank among the
powers of Europe, that it had the chief merit both
in forming and conducing that powerful league;
which proteeed not only the Protellant religion,
but the liberties of Germany against the bigotry anda
ambition of the houi: of Austria.

1 iNDEX,

# INDEX TO THE SECOND AND THIRD VOLUMES.

;I

N

D E

x

TO T H E

SECOND AND THIRD VOLUMES.
N. B. The Roman numerals dired to the volume, and the figures

to the page.

A.
AB SO L UTIO N, the form of that

used by father Tetzel in Ger.

many, II. So.

Adorii, the faaion of, assist the Impe-

rial general Colonna in the reduaion
of Genoa, II. 149.

Adrian of Utrecht, made preceptor to

Charles V. under William de Croy,
lord of Chievres, II. 1t. His cha-
*raaer, az. Seat by Charles with
power to .afume the regency of Caf-
tile on the death of his grandfather,
'7. His claim admitted by Cardi-
nal Ximenes, and executed in con-
juncion, ib. Authorized by Charles
to hold the cortes of Valencia, which
refules to assemble before him, 63.
Made viceroy of Castile on the de-
parture of Charles for Germany, 66.
His eledtion remonstrated against by
the Caflilians, ib. Is choren Pope,
145;. Retrofpea of his condudt in
Spain during the absence of Charles,
'57. Sends Ronquillo to reduce the
Segoeians, who rapulfe him, it.
Sends Fonseca to besiege the city,
who is repaired by the inhabitants of
Medina del Campo, l1S, Apolo-
Egies for Ponfeca's condut to the
VoL. Ill

people, 59. Recal Fonseca and
dififtife his troops, ib. His autho-
rity difclaimend by the Holy'Junta,
161. Deprived of power by them,
163. His ill reception on his 'rrival
at Rome, on being chorea .to the Pa-
pacy, 187. Retores the territories
acquired by his predecessor, 188.
Labours to snite the contending
powers of Europe, ib. Publilfies a
bull for three years truce among
them, 189. Accedes to the league
aeainft the French King, sop. Hio
death, 197. The sentiments and
behaviour of the people on that oc-
cation, ib. A retrofpeA of his con-
dut towards the Reformers, to6.
His brief to the diet at Nuremburgh,
o07. Receives a lift of grievances
from the diet, tzo. His condut to
the Reformers, how fteemed at
Rome, 211.

Afrira, the Spanilh troops sent by Car-

dinal Ximenes againt Barbarossa,
defeated there, II. 36.
Ailtu-Mortes, interview between the

Emperor Charles and Francis, there,
II. 414.
Aix ai Cbatllt, the Emperor Charles

C g crowna

crowned there, II. 77. Ferdinand
his brot.lc#rowned Iing of the Ro-
mans thje 334. ( %

Alarcon, ona Ferdinand, Flancis I. of

France, taken prisoner at the battle
of Pavia, committed to his custody,
II. 129. Conduts Francis to Spain,
238. Delivers up Francis in purfu-
alce of the treaty of Madrid, 214.
Is sent ambaffldor to Eiancisito rd-
quire the fulfilment of his treaty,
268. Pope Clement VII. taken pri-
toner by the Imperialist, is com-
mitted to his custody, 287.

Albany, John Stuart duke of, com-
.w s Jrthq- PRrrsin K Igrr ie~ t lj.

rfeYl eo.ersee Wa pleAl#. .

Albert, of Brandenburgh, grand master

of the Teutonic Order, becomes a
convert to the doctrines of Luther,
II. z63. Obtains ofSigifmund King
of Poland the investiture ot Prussia,
:*- erBCejiói.toal,.du.ch,';'6.4.1: Is put'

uriter the ban of the empire, ib.
His family fixed in the inheritaricieof
Prussia, ib. Commands a body of
troops in behalf of Maurice of Sax-
ony, but endeavours to assert an in-
dependency, III. 50o. Defeats and
takes. the Duke.d'Aumale .rjoer,

*t"" wntBj o sth ~Emperor'r a .t z

'l sbnemrnded by fihe Im.peial carm-
lbe'r-foe r is demands on thkbJIlhopEs of

eti*imer)iianid aior'tt ; }ó

i z8 A

I 'eag'e frmed agawinlthimE,zPj. Is
defe'atedl'iy 'Mjmricei a.,i.. Is again
diere'ad byb Henr'9^Pf Bruinfwick,
2,4', Isl dryen out poiCermajy and
* dies'i¢r mecile,'il.' yitebritgtriesa re-
'lo'red to his collatcr'al asrs, (.

Al1be*t, .L~essor <if Mewtz,bt 'psubljca-

tioti

'o f 'idulgences. In Germany,

' cornmitetd t''hir,' II. 80.

tAxa.tiefV .l 'ope. renmari'ks on the
podhfiate.of, I.I. Ica, .

A1etanradc dr eidii. See Mini ci.
i;ise ii rdw 'if' w3s frezcd by Barbar-

tct, 11 '3,6e. Is seized by the biio-
tliro'f he i m. name, on the death
ofi'h'e forimer, 3i66. Ig taken"uider
the'cp'robteLion of the Porte,, lb. Is
gY,verned by Haflcn Aga in the ab-
finlc oi.Birbyr roffa, 47t. Is befieg-
ed by thlc Emperor Charlce V. 474.
Charles folce'd to rc-imi3ark by bad
Wcaithcr, 478.
Aflra/ciht B'srotlier of Mulcy Hafccn

King, ofTulia, foliiitr the protefion
of'B'arbar'roli againftJliim, II. 367.

atls treacherous t'eatment by Bar-
3a»rei'o, 3(8.

TO THE
.4]va, Dulke of adheres,.to Perdinand

of Arago4fAih his difphte with the
Archdukt'Plilip concerning the r-.
geacy of Castile, II. 9. Forces the
Dauphin to abandon the siege ofPer.
pignan, III. 8. Presides at the
court-martial which condemns the
ElcEtor of Saxony to death. 145
Detains the Landgrave prisoner by
tHe) nEmelor's order, t55. Com-
mands under the Emperor, the armr
dellined againftFrance, 270. Is ap-
pointed commander in chief in Pied.
mont, 319. Enters the Ecclelialli.
cal territories and feiesa the parq.
paea ena,3d Co'ldes I
-true' wi th the Pope, 3. 1NXe'g0.
ciates a peace between Philip and
the Pope, with Cardinal Carafla,
392. Goes to Rome to atk pardon
of the Pope ser his holtilities, 393.
Is rent to Paris in the naPqe of lhili
to efpodfCthe:Priniicfs EWiabeth,43o.

dmtr/torf, a nobleman of Holland, as-

fociated by Charles V. with Cardi.
nal Ximenes, in the regency of Caf-
tile, II. 34.
Anabaptifs, the origin of that set de.

duced, II. 348. Their principal te-
nets, 349. Their fettlemeat at
Mntitfer,s'3. Chtraheerar'of"their
P. prii;pa, lea4ers.zA. iTlheyfiWe'te
city of Munfler, 351, .Thpy ela-
bli4;iewfornF oftgovernmm ntthe ere,
t1/..Cbpyfiipcoid Ijing,.353i . Their
licentious pra.'icee, ib . .AngoSufede-
racy.,gf, the:German Pripcs formed
agai'l fJAb'ni, 3S6. Are- bpckaded
in Miunter by the bilhop,v 3?7. The
city t'alen and gre4t inlughrter.made
of .tiem,m 35S.,:,Thbeir King.put, t
death; 35.. Charaaer .of she. feti
Finc'tat ptriod, i6. Se. Matl!bia
ad, .Beclfl. So*-
AMg&iria, his authority cited. in proof

of the extorijons of the Plemilh mi-
niftq.r of Charles V. II. ,45.

lAnba/j, Prince of, avows the opinidn!

of Martin Luther, 1i. %o6.

Anna:t to thb court of Rt,tle, what,

I1; 13.. -

,ragal hovrw Ferdinand becme prn-

felied of that kingdom, 11. z. The
corteg.ou, .a;knl)wledges the Arch-
duke Philip'$ tisul to tle cr:own, 3.
Aptient enmity between this king-
dom and Ciltil-, 7. Navarrb added
to this crown by the arts of Ferdi.
nanld 1i9. Arrival of Charles V.
46. The cortes not allowed to al-
liluble in hi name, ib. Thc refrac-

tory

ib' behtiavillr-' ds tHC Ar4gohians;
b: They rerfe' retlituai'or of the

' kingdom of Na'asrre;'7. Don J'ohn

Larduza apphinted re'gen)t on the de-
parture of Cha'les fbt'(eerrhii'y', 66.
Who cohipofe'thet'ifturbance's there,
i84' The moderation' of Charles
tbWlartds the infiurgehtt: on his'arrival
ir Spain, 18óT. S be Spain.'

.Adrt-e, an iinterview t'ker' between

Francis I. and Henry VltrI of Eng-
lanid, II. 5.

AfJriai, Charles foni of Philip and Jo-

an la, acknowlidged Prince of, by
the Cortes of Calile, Ii. 14.

Au'bu5;rg, a diet cailed tliePet by Charles

V: II. 3z8. His public''entry into
that city, 329.: Thei6hnAfeffion of
faith nanied frorn 'thib cit;y, drawn
'tp by Melanc'thon, 3g:. Resolute
behaviour cf 'the' prot'aelahfPr'i.ces
at,' 336. Its forrrti' f- goernrient
iiolently altered, ilnd iren'dered rub.
mnifitve to' th e ih Eiperp' 8'i.' The
diet reaffembiled t'tfre;, i'g-. the
diet takes part' with "t -EiriiiEeror
aiainft the city of Mal'igtde rg, Zo'.
Il feited by lMaurii&':f ,Saony,.238.
Another diet at"'opene-d: by Ferdi-
nand; 326. Cardinal l:orboe attends
the diet as the'Pope's iinncio, 3Z7.
Motone departs 'ori the Poe's' deih,
r y ;g' Recess of the-die't on the sub-
jea of religion;-3.3.i Remarks on
* this recess, 337. TIe diet again' as-

feritbled there; (11: z6i. Is intimi-
dtted'by. being furrouide'd'h with t
Emnperor's Spairai tro'ops, ilb. The
Emperor re-eltlab)ilhre; the Romish
worft'ip, in the chrrche'sof, b; The
diet; by the Emperor's order, peii-
tions the Pope fbr th. return of the
'ooiancil to Trerit' i6'. A'fyllem of

' ih'eolgy laid before'the diet by the
Emrpernr/, 174: Th'e iachbiflop, of
Menta, declares, withbut authiority;
the-diet's acc.ptance of it, 174.

.vil;, a cnventlon of the malecon-

tents. in' Spain heli there, 11. i6o.
A cons deracy terimed the Holv Jun-
ta, forired the'(; 16i. Which dii-
clairnis the authority of Adrian, ib.
Th'e Holy Junta reriioved to Torde-
fillas, 16iz. See uiiO.

Aufiria, by what means th'e house of,

bec'atnc o formidable in Germany,
il. 189. The cXtraordinary aCqui-
fitioni'oftbe house of, in the person
of'the Emperor Charles V. 111. 433,
436.

'BadriYj;' H;iruc, his· rife! to tbe king-

d 'dris of Algiers and'Tuii1s;: I '36.
Def eais' the Spiaiifh' tr06ops sent a-
gaioft him bjy Cardinal'Xilienes, ib.
His' arentlg, 364. ' Confmeicea
pil;ate. ith 'ist b'tother H.ayradin, ib.
'HqW Jhe acquird' pdoffdfioin'of Al--
'giers -.365. -'i4fefts thl' 'iakfts of
Sp.s'in';"i : ,s' reqd'^Iceril:l's;.SLdkilled

,by 'C'bo resrthe S8Ahifi"'gv:l.hor of

:' dr!n,.'»// :," r:

,a**
Bai:bariff , HIayradiinl roth'. ti' ' the

foie'r.iof theifame' aihth'ta/es pof-
feffiafi' of Al1ierb onó'hlisf: brother's
de:tW' Ir. 36ó. P.it' his' d3isrnio'd«
,* dtied' the' protedtioi: btf ltHe'Grand

Sigriibr; 'i; Obtaiis' the :tfmrtiand
bs ihe Turkiihfledet,ib i-ls fttache-
.ro is treatmedt ds Al'idfcid, -btrther
to thi' Kidg of Tuh'nis; '308i' Seizes

:' Tunis; 3't9. Exthds bii' 'iepreda-

tions' y. fe:, ib. ' Ptrepa'rei resist

* tire -Eriperbr'sarmniFet'-againift/him,
' -jT'l.": Goletta and' his fleet taken,

(7,2. Iie defeated by'Charles, 374.
"Tunis'itiken 37i'; Silakes adefcent
on- Hfly; III. 18.' Bdrhs Rheggio,
ib.. B.esieges Nice in'.coionEtnion
with' the French, 'b't 'is forced to
'etire, ib. Is dllrmifed by-Fraicis, 30.
Bar&PaY a fumrnary view of the revo-

lutioid:of, II. 363. Its diviSion into
iiiaitendant kingdomft, ib; Rifeof the
' piratical States, 364: See Blirbaroja.
Barcelpna, the publick entty f the Em-

'peror Charles V. into that'city as its
''nflt, 'II 310o. Th'e treities of

Charles with the Italian Sta'tes; pu-
,bliflled there, 314. ! .'
BadS*i'd, chevalier, his charactier If.

135; Hls 'gllant defene 'of- Mezi-
ete; bBfCeied by the.Itperialilt; ib.
Obliger therhi to rif 'the iege, ib.
His noble behavioi': aIt Iis death,
20t.. Hi retfecful fuih'era, 204.

Selltjy, M. hic erroneous i'cou'u t of the

ed.cation' of' Charles V. correted,
i."' z'i; NIlr. HiA. aceuhit 6f the
difttfrbtd retreat of the Emperor
CharletsV. from his invafiofiof Pro-
vence; '. 403.

Bibti, ia' trantion of, undirtaken by

Mahrtin Luther, and' hts Iftts idn
openpihg the eyes of the people, 11.

* zoS- ..

Bircicta, battte of, betwceen .Colonnl

and Marechal Lattrec, II.' 147

Becold or Beukcls,iJohn, ajourneyman

taylor, becomcs i leader of the Ana-
baptiftR at Munftr, II. 3S0. Stua

O g ceod

eeeds Matthias -in the diretion c
their affair,, 353. His enthufifticl
extravagancea, ib. Is chosen King
354. Marries fourteen wives, 355
Beheads one of them, 357. Is pu
to a cruel death at the taking o
Munster, .358. See./aubapt'ifi.,
iohenmi,,. the.,- Archduke Ferdinani
chosen King bs, II. '89. F erdinan.
encr-oach6e, Q.. the liberties of 'the
'Bobmians,- II, t6o. The .Refor
mation'introdiced by Join iHu ian
Jerome of prague, ib. Raise an ar.
my to no ur pole, ib. Is closely con-
finedin ihe citadel of Mechlio, 0o4

BonSemi'nst admiral of Francef appointed

tomo mmand the invasion of Milan.
,II.. .g5,. His charater, ib. En.
ibles Colonna .to defend the city ol
Milan by his imprudent delay, 196.
'orced -to abandon the Milanefe,ao2.
Is wounded and his aimy defeated
by the Imperialilts, 203.' Stirr.laes
Francis to. an invasion of.the .Mian-
efe, s19. Advises Francis to besiege
Pavia 'zai. Advises him to give
battle to Bourbon, who advanced to
ili- relief of Pavia, ,z6. Is killed
at the battie of Pavia, 2i7.

Bslgrai an.;iterview between the Em-

peror Charles V'. and Pope Clement
VILthere, II. 3ZI. Another meet-
ing between them there, 339.

Bsffer, sent by Francis !. King- of

'France, t .negociate a peace with
Charles V. II. 38.

B'uillon, Robert de la Marck, .lord of,

declares war against the Emperor
Charles, at the instigation of Francis,
II. 134. Is ordered by Francis to
ditband his troops. ib. His territories
reduced by the Emperor, 1s3.
'sulgats, besieged by Henry VIII. of

England, II.. ji . Taken, 43.

Bgurbon,, Cliirles Duke of, his charac-

ter, II. 319. The causes of his dif-
content wiihFrancis, I.ib.',Hisduch-
ess diep, 19z. Rejeas the advances
of Lquife the King's mother,' 'i His
estate sequestered by her intrigues,
t93. Negociates secretly wilh the
'Emperor, ib. Is included in treaty
between. tbe Emperor and Henry
VflI. of England, lb. Is taxed by
the King with betraying him, which
he denie:, 194. Ercapes to Italy,
Js5. pire6t tlhe. measure of the
lihpJal army Milder Lancoy, aIt.

*1~~~~~~~~~~

if Defeats the.French on the banks of
k the Sedia,. ioj. Infigaies Charles
, to an invalion of France, a21. . Ad-

vances to the relief of Pavia, 224.

t DefeatsFrancis and takes him pri.
as soner, 227. Hastens to Madlid to

secure his own interests on the inter.
view between Charles and Francis
240. His kind reception by Charles,
e 247. Obtains a grant of the dutchy

of Milai, and ;s made general of the
Imperial army, 248. Obliges Sforza
to surrender Milan, 271. Is forced
to oppress. the Milanese to satisfy his
troops mutinying for pay, 276. Set
Morone at liberty, and makes him his
, confident, ib. Appoints Leyva go-

vernor of Milan, and advances to in-
F vade the Pope's territories, 278. His

di'appointeo troops mutiny, ib. He
determines to plunder Rome, 28a.
Arrives at Rome and aflaults it, 284.
Is killed, lb.

Brandenburgh, Eleaor of, avows the

opinions of Luther, II. 206.

--- - Albert of. See Albert.
Bruges, a: league concluded there be-

tween the Emperor and Henry VilI.
of England, against France, II. 137.

Brunrfwick, Duke of, avows the opinions

of Luther, I1. 206.
<---- Henry Duke of, driven from

his dominions by the Protestant
Princes of the league of Smalkalde,
III. 24. Raises men for Francis,
but employs them to recover his own
dominions, S. Is takenprifoner,ib.

Bude, iege ps, by Ferdinand King of

the Romans, 11. 468. Is treache-
roully leized by Sultan Solyman, 469.

C.

Cajetan, Cardinal, the Pope's legate in

Germany, appointed to examine the
dolrineb of Martin Luther, 1I. 88.
RequiresLuther peremptorily to re-
tlraCt his erraro, ib. Requires the
Eleaor of. Saxony to surrender or
ba::ifh'Luther, 90.- His condus jus-
tirled, 91.

Calai:, an meffeaual congress there be-

tween the Emperor and Francis, un-
der the mediation of Henry VIII. II.
136. The careles manner in which
it was guarded in the reign of Mary
Queen of fingland, 398. Inuffec-
tual remorftrances of Philip, and
Lord Wentworth the governor, con-

ccrnion

concerning its defenceless ifate, 399. ly vete'd in Ferdinand, Phi.ip and
Is invelled and taken by the Duke of Joanna, by the treaty of Salamanca,
Guise, 400. The Englilb inhabitants xi. Declares against Ferdinand, 1z,
turned out, 401. Sftpulations con- The regency of, rcfigned -by Philip
cerning, in the treaty of Chateau to Ferdiiand, 13. Philip and Joannit
Cambrefis,426. acknowledged King and Queen by

Camirbay, articles of the peace conclu- the Cortes, 4. Death of Philip, ib.

ded there; between the Emperor The perplexity of the Catilians on
Charles, and Francis of France, II. Joanna's incapacity for government,
3 5. Remarks on this treaty, 316. ib. Ferdinand gains the regency and.

Campr, peace of, between Henry VIII. the good will of the Castilians by his

and Francis III. 84. Pr-uderit adm'niftration, 18. Oran

Campeggio, Cardinal, made legate from and other places in Barbary annexed

Pope Clement VII. to the second di- to this Kingdom by Ximenes, ib. Xi-
et at Nuremberg, II. a12. Pub- menes'appointed regent by Ferdi-
lifhes articles for reforming the infe- nand'e will, until the arrival of Char.
rior clergy, 1z3. Advises Charles to lesV. 25. Charles £f'umes the re-
rigorous measures against the Pro- gal title, 28.Ximenes procures its ac-
telfanSs, 331. knowledgement, a9. The nobility de-

Capitulation of the Germanick body, pressed by Ximenes, 30. The gran-

signed by Charles V. and prescribed dees mutiny against Ximenes, 31.
to all his fucceTors, II. 60. The mutiny suppressed, ib. Ximenes

Caraffa, Cardinal, his precipitate elec- resumes the grants made by Fe di-

tion, III. 342. Is appointed legate. nand to the nobles 32. The boldre-
to Bologna, ib. Reafoes of his dif- p!yof Ximenes to the discontented
gust with the Emperor, 343. Per- nobles, 33. Other associates in the
fundes the Pope to follicit an alliance regency appoirited with Ximenes at
with France against the Emperor, the instigation of the Flemish cour-
344. 346, 348. His infiduous com- tiers, 34. Ximenes dies, 42. Charles,
miflion to the court of France, 363. acknowledged King by the Cortes,'
His public entry into Paris, ib. Ex- on his arrival, with a reservation in
horts Henry to break his truce with favour of his mother Joanna, 43.
the Emperor, 364. Absolves Henry The Caltilians receive unfavourable
from his cath, 366. Negociates a impreflions of him, 44. Difgufed by'
peace between the Pope and Philip, his partiality to his Flemish minister',
with the Duke d'Alva, 39i. The fate ib. Sauvage made chancellor, ib.
of him and his brother. on the death William de Croy, appointed arch-
of Pope Paul, 430. hifhop of T,,ledo, 45. The principal

Carlofladiut, imbibes the Opinions of cities confederate and c.mplain of

Martin Luther, at Wittemburg, II. their grievances, 47. The Cl rg) of,
97. His intemperate zeal, 204. Aw- refuse to levy the tenth of benefices
edby the reproofs of Luther. z05. granted by the Pope to Charles V.

Carignan, b(fieged by the count d'En- 62. Intertli&:l , bub the interdi& ta.

guitn, and defended by the marquis ken off, by Chjr'es's application, ib.
de (naflo, 111 30. Guafto defeated An infureaion there, 64. llureale
in a pitched battle, 32. The town of difaffcQicn, 6;. Cardinal Adri-
taken, 33 an ap,-intled rerent, on the depar-

Calaldo, Marquis of Piadeno. See Pia- ture of Char eh fur Gernoai.y, 66.

deno. The views anil pretenfioru of the

Caflile, how lf.bella became possessed c:mrmonos, in ithilr i.iurrcionr. 159.

of that kingdom, 11. a. The Arch- The confede.acy called thlI IHnl) Jun.
duke Phi!ip's title acknowlidged by ta formed. 160. The rt.ccedings
the Cortes of that kingdi.m, 3. lla- of hv lch arc carried on in tih nanic
bella dies and leaves her uhnband of Q.cen Joanna. 1i;. z. Iecei, cir-
Perdinand of Aragon, regent, 6. Per- cula:oi\ lett-rF Irnm Cl.a, Ii for e
dinand resigns the crown of, ib. Per- infurgects to lay (don tleir arm.,
dinand acknowlcedged regent by the with promifesof iaidon, 164. The
Cone', 7. Enmity lbetweeen1 tihi no11le underttaec to iuplpres the in-
kingdom and Aragoil, b. The pan- fu g nts, 16i. Rti 'e an anmy) againfl
ticular liliike r.s the C(afili;ns to thenm under the Conidedr H-l'a., 170.
Ferdinand, ib. The i igenry of, joint- Hero (lcts pofli on of'Juannal, 171.

* C g 3 Expedicnt,

.Expgdiets by which ;theyrifeimr . traty,I,,$: , .

rLie in: pain, 40.

pey for their troops, r.7. t .Uinsl - H :g ftratrefu! tietntofent of Xi esn,
ling to proceed to extremitiei with 42. HisPd4bli.c,eatry:intoVajladolid,
'the Junt,'ik, The army of th Jun- 43. ksiackjpwledgcd King by the
ta routed and Padilla exteut!ed, ;i 7-7. Cortes, wiQovotelhim a' free gift, ib.
Diffolutiqn of the Jupta, y97. TIe the aftilians receive .unfavourable
noderation of Chi4es towird the jn- . impreflionp ps hjm, 45. Dissult them
' furgnts on his arrival i ain RaipJ6. by his. irtlaUty .o' his Plerlbh mi-
HIe cquiirei the love .of t.He afti)i- nilter ,.

. $etb.S ut for Aragiq, 45,

ans, 187. Seespi. ai. '

. Sends.his brothrr Ferdinandl to visit

Catberite of ArIgpn, is'diyorced fr&.n -their kigr.nidtather

Maximjiian, ib.

Henry 'VYTI. of England, '.;' 347. Cannotairemlle.the Coites.of Ara-
PDie Pa, 4o V. n Philgon.hsIowr. of ,

47. e 46. The op-

Cerrire a Boriai, a nun, flies from pofienti msdp brj that iabembl to

her cloiter, e ndbe .arries Martijnl,-h. dear,

m lii b. 'oRefues he apprin
taHenry l. 6 e. rcation oto ancis I. for reti ution of

~Cath~rine Mesdiii. See MEISI». the kiqgdonm of

. ia varre ib. Ne.

Cwvi, peace cohchipdd »her.e betreen gleis the renonRrance ostbheCaati-

Pope Papl, 1V. and Philip IJ. of lians, 47. D'eath of the Emperor
Spai,, 111. 392. .Maximilian, 48. View of the pre-

Csrcamp, negociations for peace entersd sent ttate of Europe, ib. How Maxi-

into there between Ph ilipi. fSpio, milian was obflruated in fecyring the
and Henry 1I. of Franc;, .1JJ, 41; Empire to hixn, 49. Fraocis 1. if-
Alo. Th negoQiations removed to pires to the 'Imperial .crown, ib.
Chatetu Carn'brefie, 414. See 'Cba- Circiimianci 'fa*vourable.to the pe-
teau 'Cam'rbrle/. teunfions .of (J.oles, so. The Swiss

C.'aracero of men, rules for of!snaig Fantons epoufeiis c.ufe, 53; A'ppre-

a proper 'eflimk.e of them, 1:1. 67. henfioss atnd.condui4 of Pope teo X.
'Applied to Itheeafe of Luther, ib. on the occaf,'n, *4. Afembling of

Cbarles lI.'Eniperor of Germany, his she diet at FrnUort, 56. Frederibk

observations 'on the manners of tl;e Ditke of Saxony refuses the offer ot
clergy, in his letter to the Archbi- the 'Empire and votes for him, 57.
shop of Mentza II. 104. N2te. ' And refuf.s, the prefeilts offered by

Charles V. Emperor, his dlecent and his ambassadors,':8; Concurring cir-

birth, II. I. How he came to i.- cumflaces which favoured bis ele&Li-
herit such extensive dominions, ib. on, ib. His ele'iaion, 59: Signs and
Acknowledged Prince of Austrias, confirms thecapitulation of the Ger-
by the Cortes of Caflife, 14. His manick body', 6Q.'The eletion noti.
father Philip dies, ib. Jealousy and sied to him, ib. Assumes the title of
hatred of his grandfather Ferdinand Majely, ib. Accpts the imperialdig-
toward him, 19. Left heir to his do- nity offered by the count Palatine
nin'ons go. Death of Ferdinad. ambassador from the Electors, 62.
Li. His education committed to Wil- The clergy ofCaftile refuse the tenth
lirm de Croy, qord of Chievres, ib. of benefices granted him by the Pope,
Adtian of Utrecht appointed to be ib. Procures the interdict the kingdom
his preceptor, ib. The sirss opening of is laid under for refusal, to be taken
his character, a'. Assumes the go- off, it. Elpowers' cardinal Adrian
gerrnment of Slanders and attends to to hold the tortesof Valencia,63. The
bulinces, 23. Sends Cardinal Adrian nobles refuse to assemble wilhout his
to be regent of Caltile, who' exe- presence, ib. Authoriles the infur-
cutes it jointly with Ximenes, 17. gents there to continue in arms, ib.
Assumes the regal title, S2. His'ti- Summons the Cortes of Castile to
tie admitted with difficulty by the meet in Galicia, 64. Narrowly es-
Callilipn nobility, 29. Persuaded to capes with his Flemifl miniaers
add associate regents to Xiimnes, 34. from an inrurrcelion on that account,
His Flemnilh court corrupted by the 65. Obtaini a donitive from the
ivarice of Chievrer, 36. Perruaded Cortes, 66. Prepares to leave Spain,
by Ximenes to vilit Spain, but how and appoints regents, ib. Embarks, i.
that journey is jetradcd, 37. The pre- Motives ofthil journey, 67. Rife of
sent hate of his affiirs, il. Concludes the rivallhip between him and Fran-
a peace at Noyen with Francis 1. of cis I. ib. Cou ts the favour of Hen-
France, and the conditions of the ry 'III, of England and his miniflcr

cardinal

cardifial Wolfey, 73. :Vifitr :Hdry at
. over, 7'4;. Promises Wolfey 'his in-:
terel,'for. the papacyj 7'g -'Has'a fe-
cpnsd intervitw with'-Heiir'y t GPave-
lines, Q'6 ..-Offers to 'fu'bSrit'his diffe-
reaces'with' rradeis to'Henri's arbi-
tration, ib. .His' magnificent' corona-
tion at Aix-ia- Ciapelle, 7'6. Calls a
die at Worms,' to .heck sh'e refor-
mers, 7y. -Causes which hihdeie'd his
efpbfing the party 'of Maritin Luther,
lit. G"rants Luther 'a 'afe- cob-duet
to the diet of -Worrmsis, 'i. 'Ah edia
publithed againfl hithi.ib. His em-
birrilfment at this tifme;,- i6. Con-
cludes an lliance with the Poipe; 130.
The -coriditio s of the ireatjy- ib.
Derth of his minilefei Chivres'ailid its
advadtage 'to him, ril . inva;ion of
Navirre by Francis, 13i.: The French
driven;but, and their general L'Es-
parre.taken prisoner, .i33': War de-
clared against him by Robert.de la
Marck, lord of Bouillon, whborava-
ges Luxemburg, 134. Redunces Bou-
illon,- and invades France,' i3 '. His
dertiands at the congr'ess: at Calais,
436. Hasan interview with cardinal
Wolfey at Bruges, and cronclud's a
league with Henry VlM. ;'against
Prance;, i 3. Pope Led 'dedareis for
him agtiinf France, i40. The French
driven out of Milan, i43, 14 V. 'Viits
England in his passage- i'Spaii, i 50.
Cultivates thegood will''i cardinal
Wolfey, and creates the Earl'bfSur-
rey his high admiral, -ib. 'rahts the
island of Malta, to the Knights of St.
John, expelled from Rhodes by So-
lyman the magnificent, $ 53. Arrives
in Srain, 154. A retrofpea of his
proceedings in relation to the infur-
reclions in Spain, 163. Issues circula-
tory letters for the Insurgents to lay
down their arms, with promires of
pardon, 164. His prudent moderati-
on toward the insurgents, on his ar-
rival in Spain, iB6. Acquires the
love of the Calilians, 187. Enrter4
into a league with Charles Duke of
Bourbon, 193. Why he did notcen-
deavour to get Wolfey eleted Pope,
198. Invades Guienne and Burgundy
but without success, too. His troops
in Milan mutiny for want of.{ ay, but
are pacified by Morone, loz; Un-
dertakes an invasion of Provence, a I 5.
Ordesi Pe'cara to befiegeMarfailles,
2 6.' Pelcara obliged' to retire, 217.
I)ifcon'certed by the French over-
rupitlg the Milanese again, a2o.

uI

The Tevenues of, lapleiibottiaged
to raise itoney; ii. His, troplb de-
featcFria'ii and: rake hirm 'lrioner
at, thebatle of Pavia;'28' 1is as-
fetffd.,mederatioi a't r6ceivflg the
newd, 'ai ',A vails'hinifelf'dfr ' trea-
4ty 'concluded betweefi''Ltnnoij and
Pope;Cleetint, but refi[es.to 'fatify
'it,,' i3Y.'! His army in'PvisaIittiny,
and' .areirdbliged to be. dif'baded,
tj6. His deliberatio'rie oli th~ipro-
per intip'rovernent '6f hi; diiadfinta-
egCIf is. Hiiipropofitionas 't-fPFrancia
237.. A'fteir mnany delays glanci 'Sfor-
Ma, the inveftureoof Milan, 4io.'.Mo-
rines'lntrigsses betraie-lfo'hin by
Percari,; 243.. ,OrdCers' Pefira to
contifnue his 'nedo'tcatiohl' vtith'Mo-
rone ''"44. .Hs ,Hi '

rigiori' tat ment

of'Frntsisj 14'5. Visits Fisncis,'246.
His'.liii-d rf'e'ption of 'Flfe Du'ke of
Boi.rbon,"247,1 GrantS' Botrbon the
durchy of Milan, and: appo6its ' him
general iri'chi'T of 'the: -ipertial ar-
my :iere,; 1i8. Pruitlefl:'rie'gociati-
ons;'fo'r the'delivery odf Franici's, ib.
Treaity ot Madrid, with Frhnci-, 50o.
Delivers lpf Frahcis, z24;. 'Marries
Ifabelli-df Po'rtigal, ib. An'alliance
formred against him'at Cognad, '266.
Sends'arribafradors to Fraficis to re-
quire the fulfiliment of the treaty of
Madrid, '68. Prep'res for wiar?:ainft
Francis, '.so. The Pope redutctd to
an a'ccoi'miodation- with hinm, 274;
Theexhaufted' fateof Ahs fnahces,
275-' His troops under'Bburbon' dif-
tressed and mutinous for.want ofp.iy,
ib. Bourbon aflaults Rome, and is
slain 'but the city takenl, i84. The
Prince of Orange general on dour-
bon's death, takes the castle of St.
Anelo, aind the Pope prisoner, 687.
The Enperor'i conduct on that oc-
cafion, 288. His distentions with the
Pope, how far'favourable to 'thc re-
formation, '29o His inRtluEtiods to
the Dietat Spires, ib. His manilefto
azaifin the Pope, and letter 'to the
cardinal, 'ig. France and England
league against him, 294. Is refused
supplies by the'Cortes of Caltile 29.
Delivers the Pope for a rahform, 199.
His overtuies to Henry 'and Francis,
300. Their declaration- of war
againRi him, 301. Is chillenged by
Francis to tingle combat, ib. :An-
drew Doria revolts trom Francs to
him, 308. His forces defeat theFrench
in Italy, 310. 312. His motive#
for desiring an accommodation, 313.
6 4 Ceucludes,

Coseludes a separate treaty with the
,Pope, 3z4. Terms of the peace.of
Cambray concluded with Francis, by
the mediation of Margaret of Aunria
and Louise of France, 31 .. Remarks
.on the advantages gained by him in
this treaty, and on his conduct of the
war, 316. Visits Italy, 320. His
policy on his publick entry into Bar-
celona, ib. Has an interview with
the Pope at Bologna, 3lt. Motives
for his moderation in Italy,. i,. His
treaties with the States of; 311. Is
crowned King of Lombardy and Em-
peror of the Romans, a 3*4., Sum-
mons a diet at Spires to confider the
state of religion, 315. ,' His delibera-
tions with the Popes refpeaing the
expediency of calling a general coun-
cil, 317. Appoints, a diet atAugf-
burg, 328. Makes a. publick entry
into that city, 329, .Hisendeavours
to check the reformatios, ;ib. -Refo-
lute behaviour of the .protestant
Princes toward him, 330. .Hiis-fevere
decree against the Protestants, 331.
Propofced his brother Ferdinand to
be elected King ofthe Romans, 331.
Is opposed by the Protefttnts. 333.
Obtains his electron,334. Isdefiious
of an accommodation with the Prote-
slants, 336. Concludes treaty with
them at Nuremburg, 337. Raises
an army to oppose the Turks under
Solyrran, and obliges h.iim to retire,
,338. Has another interview with
the Pope, and rreffes him to call a
general council, 339. Procures a
league of the Italian States to secure
the peace of Italy, 341. . Arrives at
Barcelona, 342. His endeavours to
prevent the negociations and meeting
between the Pope and Francis, 344.
Undertakes to expel Barbarossa from
Tunit, and reltore Mu'ey Hafcen,
370. Lands in Africa, tind besieges
Goletta, 371. Takes. Goletta, and
seises Barbsrofla's fleet, 273. De-
feats Barbarof'a and tkes: Tunis,
374. Rellores Muley Hafcen, and
:the tliqaty between them, 376. The
glory acquired by this enterprice, and
the delivery of the Chrillian captives,
377, S Seizes the duclhy of Milan on
the death of Francis Sforza 389.
Hin policy with regard to it, ii. Pre-
,pares for war with Francis, 390.
H's inveflive Igainft Fralcis at Rome
before the Pcpe in council, 391. Re-
mark' on this trannfaclon, 394. In-
v- vad France, 395. Enters' Iovence
..,tnd finds it defo!atll 400. BHli gcs

Marfeilleae.nd Aries, 4r0. His miler
able retreat from Provence, 4o3. Hi
invasion of Picardy defeated, 404. I
accused of poisoning the dauphin, 405
Improbability of its truth, i. Hi
conjetuote concerning the dauphin'
death, 406. Slanders invaded bi
Francis, 407. A suspension of arml
in Slanders, how negociated, 408,
A truce in Piedmont, 4g9. · Motives
to these truces, ib. Negociation for
peace With Francis, 412. Concludes
a truce for ten years at Nice, 413.
Remarks on the war, ib. His inter.
view with Francis, 414. Courts the
friendlhip of Henry VIII. of England,
410. Indulges the Protestant Princes,
4Sl. Q. iets the apprehenfionsofthe
Catholick league, 41$. His troops
mutiny, 427. Assembles the Cortes of
CaRfile, 428. DefRroys the ancient
conRitutin of the Cortes, 429. la-
fance of the haughty spirit of the
Spanilh grandees, 430. Defiresper.
miflion of Francis to paTs through
France to the Netherlands, 438. His
reception in France, 439. His rigo.
rous treatment of Ghent, 442. Re-
fus.s to. fulfil his engagements to
.Francis .443, Appoints a friendly
conference .between a deputation of
Catholick and Protestant divines be.
fore the diet at Ratiibon, 462. Re-
fult cfi this conference, 464. Grants
a private;exemption from oppreflions
to the Protestants, 465. Undertakes
toredyce.Algiers, 427. Is nearbe.
ing cast away by a violent ftrnm, 474.
Lands near Algiers, ib. His fLldiers
exposed to a violent trmpeft and rain,
47g. His fleet (hattered, 476. His
fortitude under there disasters, 478.
Leaves his enterprize and embarks
again, ib. Is ditlrelTed with another
form at sea, 479. Takes advantage
of the French invafron of Spain, to
obtain subsidies from the Cortes, III.
9. His treaty with Portugal, ib.
Conclrdes a league with Henry VIII.
II. Particulars of the treaty, t.
Over-runs Cleves, and his barbarous
treatment of the town ot Duren, 15.
his behaviour to the Duke of Cleve,
16. Besieges Landrecy, ib. jIjoin-
ed by an English detachment, 17.
Is forced to retire, ib. Courts the
favgur of the Proteflants, 23. His
negocistions with the Proteflants at
the diet of Spires, 25. Procures
the concurrence of the diet in a mwr
againlt Francis, 8a. Negociates a fe-

parai c

parate peice with the King of Den-
mark, ib. Invades Champagne, and in-
vades St. Difiere, 34. Want of con-
cert between his operations and those of
Henry, who now invades France, 36.
Obtains St. Difiere by artifice, ib. His
distresses and happy movements, 38.
Concludes a separate peace with Francis,
39. His motives to this peace, 40. His
advantages by this treaty, 42. Obliges
himself by a private article to exter-
minate the Protestant heresy, 43. Is
cruelly afflicted with the gout, 45. Diet
at Worms, 47. Arrives at Worms and
alters his condut towards the Protef-
tants, 49. His condu& on the death of
the Duke of Orleans, 53. His diflimu-
lation to the Landgrave of Hesse, 69.
Concludes a truce with Solyman, 73.
Holds a diet at Ratisbon, 74. His de-
claration to the Protestant deputies, 77.
His treaty with the Pope, concluded by
the cardinal of Trent, ib. His circular
letter to the Protestant members of the
Germanick body, 79. The Protestants
levy an army against him, 86. Is un-
prepared against them, 87. Puts them
under the ban of the Empire, 88. The
Protestants declare war against him, 9o.
Marches to join the troops sent by the
Pope, 92. Farnese the Pope's legate
returns in disgust, 94. His prudent de-
clenfion of an ation with the Protef-
tants, 96, Is joined by his Flemish
troops, 97. Proposals of peace made
by the Protestants, o6. Their army
dilierfe, ib His rigorous treatment of
the Protestant Princes, 1o8. Difmif(es
part of his army, ill. The Pope re-
cals his troops, ita. His refletion on
Fielco'i infurreetion at Genoa, 116. Is
alarmed at the hostile preparations of
Francis, 130. Death of Francis, 131.
A parallel drawn between him and FRan-
cis, ib. Consequences of Francis's
death to him, 135. Marches againfl
the Ele&or of Saxony, 136. Palecs the
Elbe, 138. Defeats the Saxon army,
t'41. Takes the Eleaol' pliloner, 1.z.
His hainli reception of him, ib. Invelts
Wittemberg, 143. Condemns the Elec-
tor to death, by a court-martial, 1.15.
The Elector by treaty furrendcrs the
eleforate, 148. The hb:rfl terms im-
pol'td by him on the Landgrave of Htffc,
i50o; His haughty reception of the
Landgrsve, 153. Detains him priloncr,

154. Seizes the warlike stores of the
league, 158. His cruel exactions, 59.
Assembles a diet at Augiburg, 162. In-
timidates the diet by his Spanifl troops,
ib. Re-establishes the Romifil worship
in the churches of Augiburg; ib. Seizes
Placentia, 166. Orders the diet to peti.
tion the Pope for the return of the couni-
cil to Trent, 169. Protests against the
councilof Bologna, 171. Causes a sys-
term f faith to be prepared for Germany,
7t. ' Lays it before the diet, 174. The
Interim opposed, 178. And rejeted by
the Imperial cities, 179. Reduces'the
city of Augsburg to submission 18sr.
Repeats the fame violence at Ulm, ib.
Carries the Eledor and Landgrave with
him into the Low-Countries, 1 83. Pro-
cures his son Philip to be recognized by
the States of the Netherlands, 184;
Eftablifhesthe Interim there, 185. Re-
assembles the diet at Augiburg, under
the influence of his Spaniil troops, 193.
The city of Magdeburg refuses to admit
the Interim and prepares for resistance;
zoo. Appoints Maurice Ele6tor of Sax-
ony to reduce it, ib. Promises to pro-
tect the Protestants at the council of
Trent, 202. Arbitrarily releaser Mau-
rice and the Ele&or of Brandenburg,
from their engagements to the Landgrave
for the recovery of his liberty, 203. En-
deavours to secure the Empire for his fCn
Philip, 205. His brother Ferdinand re-
fuses to sign his pretensions, ib. Besieges
Parma, hut is repulsed, ait. Proceeds
rigorously against the Proteflant%, 213.
Endeavours to support the council of
Trent, 2 1 I. Puts MagneburZ under the
ban of the Empire, ib. Ablblv-e the
city, 219. Is involved in disputes be-
tween the council and the Protestant de-
puties, concerning their safe condu&t,
2%I. Begins to fufpe&l Maurice of laxo-
OV, 233. Circumfances which contri-
buted to deceive him with regard to
Maurice, 135. Maurice takes the sisld
agRailf him, 237. Maurice feconlded by
Henry ll. of Prance, 238. His diflt.fd
and cnnllernation, 239. An ineffeut il
ne.o.iation with Maurice, 540. Flis
fi-.m Inlinuck, 244. Rel- ail. the llec-
tor of Sasony, 45;. Is Iolicited to fa-
ti4'f the ldemands of Mao:ice, 2sl. His
prCfent difficulties, i23. Refili.r. any
dirlt compliance with the lem..ind of
Maurice, 256. Is difpled to yield by

the

the progrefd ofMaurice's operations, ;z7.
Makes a peace with Miurice at Paiau,
s9. Refletions on this treaty, 60o.
Turns his arms againlt France, i'66.
'Lays siege to Metz, 70. 'Is joined by
Albert of Brandenburgh, 71'. His,army
distressed by the vigilance of the Duke of
Guise, 272. Railes the siege add re-
tires in a Ihattered condition, 274. Cos-
mo di Medici asserts his :independency
againf him, '75. Siena revolts againit
him, 276. Is dejected at his bad fuc-
cess, 179. Takes Terrouane. and de-
molilhes' it 86. Takes Hefdin, ib.
Proposes his Con Philip as a huiband to
Mary Queen of England, 299a The ar-
ticles of the marriage, 300. Marches to
oppose tre French operation, 301. Is
defeated by Henry, 309. Invades Pi-
Cardy, ib. Grants Siena, subdued by
Cosmo di Medici to his ion Philip, 318.
A diet at Augsburg opened by Ferdinand,
325. Leaves the interior administration
of Germany to Ferdinand, 319. Applies
again to Ferdinand to resign his preten-
fios of fucceflion to Philip, but is re-
fured, 330. Recess of the diet of Aug-
lburg on the subjea of religion, 332. A
treaty concluded between Pope Paul IV.
and Henry II. of France againt him,
349. Refgns his hereditary dominions
to his son Philip, ib. His motives for
retirement,, 350: Had long meditated
this resignation, 353. The ceremony of
this deed, 354. His speech on the occa-
sion, 355. Reigns also the dominions
of Spain, 358. His intended retirement
into Spain retarded, 359. A truce for
five years concluded with France, 360.
Endeavours in vain to secure the Imperial
crown for Philip, 370. Resigns the Im-
perial crown to Ferdinand, 371. Sets
out for Spain, ib. His arrival and recep-
tion in Spain, 373. Is diltreffed by his
son's ungrateful negled in paying his
pension, 374. Fix's his retreat in the
monaitery of St. Jufus in Plazencia, ib.
The situation of this monafteiy, and his
apartments, defclibed, 375. Contrast
between the conduCt of Charles and the
Pope, ib. Hia manner of life in his re-
treat, 413. His death precipitated by
his monaftick feveritiec, 415. Celebrates
his own funeral, 416. Diet, ib. His
charaCter, 417. A leview of the state of
Europe during hin reign, 431. His re-
quifitions to the crown of Spain,
435.

Chateau Cpais#r/i, ,the conferenceI gr

peace .etween Philip 11. of SpAin,
and tieiry i1. of Prance, removed tbi-
ther from Ceicanip, 11i. 424. The
peace .retarded by thbe emand of Eliz-
abeth "of Engand for restitution of Ca-
lais, ib, P'articulars of he' treaty sign-
ed there between England and France,
426. "Terms of the pacification be-
tween Philip and Henry, 428.

Cheregalt, nuncio from the Pqpe t the

diet at Nuremburgh, his inftrutjins,
II 207. Opposes the aRfembling a ge-
neral council, a28.

Chievres, William de Croy, lord of, .p-

pointed by Maximilian to superintend
the education of his grandibn Charles
II. at. Adrian of Utrecht made pre-
ceptor under him, ib. His diretion of
the Rudies of Charles, 23. His avarice
corrupts the Flemiih court of Charles,
36. Negotiates a peace with France,
38. Endeavours to prevent a.n inter-
view between Charles and imenees,
39. Attends Charles to Spain, 40.
His ascendancy ever Charles, 44. His
extortions, ib His death and the
supposed caures of it, 130.

Chrtfiia#s, primitive, why averse to the

principles of toleration, 11I. 334.

Clement VII. pope, hiseleCtion, II, g97.

His character, i6. Grants Cardinal
Wolfey a Iegantine commiflion in Eng-
land for life, 198. Refuses to accede
to the league against Francis, 201.
Labours .to accommodate the diffe-
rences between the contending parties,
ib. His proceeding* with rega'd to
the Reformers, a1i. Concludes a
treaty of neutrality with Francis, 223.
Enters into a separate treaty with
Charles after the battle of Pavia,. and
the consequences of it, 234. Joins in
an alliance with Prancis Sforza, and
the Venetians, against the Emperor,
266. Absolves Francis from his oath
to observe the treaty of Madrid, 267.
Cardinal Colonna seizes Rome, and in-
verts him in the cafle of St. Angelo,
274. Is forced to an accommodation
with the Imperialists, ib. His revenge
againfi the Colonna family, 277. In-
vades Naples, ib. His territories .ip-
vaded by Bourbon, and his perplexity
on the occasion, 279. Concludes a
treaty with Lannoy viceroy of Naples,
80o. His coniternation on poprbon's
motions towards Rome, 283. Rome
taken, and himielf bcfieged in the

csfle

caffle of St. Angelo, a28,. Sur
renders himinelf prifongr, 187. The
Florentines revolt againtl him, 294.
Pays 'barlea a ranfoim tor his liberty,
wit hthdr flipultions, 299, Makee
his escape from confinemeint, 3co.
Writes a:ietter of thanks to Lautrc,
ib. Is jealous ds the intentions of
.Francis, and negociates with Ciarles,
306 His motives and ftepa towards
an accommodation, 313. Concludes
a Ceparate treaty with Charles, 314.
His interview with the Emperor at
Bologna, 321. Crowns Charles King
of Lombardy and Emperor of the Ro-
mana, 314, His representations to
the Emperor againf calling a .general
council, 318 Has another interview
with Charles at Bologna, and the dif-
ficulties raised by him to the calling a
general council, 339. Agrees to a
league of the Italian States for the
peace of Italy, 341. His :interview
and treaty with Francis, 344. Mar-
ries Catharine di Medici to the Duke
of 'Orleans, 345. His protra6tion of
the affair of the divorce solicited by
Henry VIII. il. Reveries Craimer's
ientence of divorce, under penalty of
excommunication, 346. Henry re-
nounces hi, supremacy, ib. His death,
347. Refleltions on his Pontificate, ib.

Clergy, Romish, remarks on the irmmo-

raf lives of, and how they contributed
to the progrefe of the Reformation, II.
103. 'he facility with which they
obtained pardons, 104. Their ufur-
pations in Germany, during the dif-
putes concerning inveftitpres, so6.
Their other opportunities of aggran-
dizing themselves there, ic7. Their
personal immunities, ib. Their en-
croachments on the laity, lo8. The
dreadful effects of spiritual censures,
o19. Their devices to Ifcure their
ufurpationa, lo. The united effct
of all these circumflances, 14. Op-
pone the advancement of learning in
Germany, 117.

Plcvei, invaded and over-run by the Em-

peror Charles V. Il1. 15. Cruel
treatment of Duren, ib. Humiliat-
ing lubmiffion of the Duke, 16.

Cpippertdolitg, a leader of the Anabap-

tills at Munfler, an account of, II.
351 354. See AnabaptitRi.

Cognac, an alliance formed there against

Charles V. by the Pope, the Vene-
tians, the Duke of Milan, and Fran-
cis I. II. 166.

Coligni, admiral, governor of Picardy,

defends St. Quintin againit the Spanilh
general Emanuel Phillibert Duke of
Savoy, 11. 383. His brother D'An-
delot defeated in an endeavour to join
the garrison, 384. But D'Andelot
enters the town, 385. His character,
389. The town taken by assault, and
himself taken prisoner, ib.

Cologne, Ferdinand King of Hungary and

Bohemia, brother to the Emperor
Charles V. eleced King of the Ro-
mans by the college of Ele&ors there,
1. 334.

-- Herman, count de Wied, arch-

bishop ard elector of,.inclines-to the
Reformation, and is opposed by his
canons, who appeal to the Emperor
and Pope, III S; Is deprived. nd
excommunicated, .7r. Refigne, s.o.

Colonna, Cardinal Pompeo, his charafter,

and rivalflip with Pope Clement V11,
11. 273.' Seizes Rome;, nd int'ets
hhe Pope in the'cafe of tSt. Angelo,
!74. Is degraded, and the reft f. the
family excommunicated by the P4pe,
77. Is prevailed on by the-Pope
when prisoner with the Imperialists,
to solicit his delivery, 299.

--' Prosper, the Italian general, his

character, II. 141. Appointed ro
command the troops in the invasion of
Milan, i. Drives the French out of
Milan, 143. His army how weaken-
ed at the death of Pope Leo X. 144s
Defeats Marechal de Lautrec at Bi-
cocca, 147. Reduces Genoa, 149.
The bad llate of his troops when the
French invade Milan, 196. Is en-
abled to defend the city by the ill con-
duct of Bonnivet the French com-
mander, ib. Dies, and is succeedad
by Lanoy, to i.

Conchi/lo, an Aragonian gentleman, em-

ployed by Ferdinand of Aragon, to
obtain Joanna's consent to his regency
of Castile, II. 9. Thrown into a
dungeon by the Archduke Philip, ib.

Confrffon of Atugburg, drawn up by

Mrlanchon, 11. 329.

Coftiance, the privileges of that city

taken away by the Emperor Charloe
V. for disobedience to the lateriei,
111. 185.

Crfairs of Barbary, an acc unt of the

rife of, 11. 364. See Igitrs,Barbarofa.

Cortes of Aragon, acknowledges the

Archduke Philip's title to the crown,
11. 3. Not allowed to afTemble in
the name of Charles V. Their op-

position

poition to his desires, ib. Is pre-
vailed on by the Emperor to recognize
his Ion Philip as fuccefor to that king-
dom. I111 . See Spain.·

Cortes of Castile, acknowledges the Arch-

duke Philip's title to the crown, II.
3. Is prevailed on to acknowledge
Ferdinand regent, accord ng to Ifa-
bella's will, 7. Acknowledges Philip
and Joanna King and Queen of Cal-
tile, and their bon Charles, Prince of
ARurias, 14. Decla'es Charles King,
and votes him a free gift, 43. Sum-
moned by Charles to meet at Cor-
poftella in Galicia, 64. Tumultuary
proceedings thereupon, t. A dona-
tive voted, 66. Loses all its influ-
ence by the difollution of the Holy
Junta, 18a. Its backwardness to
grant supplies for the Emperor's wars
in Italy, 2795 Refuses his prefling
solicitations for a supply, 298. Assem-
bled at Toledo to grant supplies to the
Emperor, 428. The remonstrances
of, 4219 The ancient conffitution of,
fibverted by Charles, ib. See Spain.
_-- of Valencia, prevailed on by the
Emperor Charles V. to acknowledge
his son Philip fucceflor to that king-
dom, III. 9. See Spain.
Cortona, Cardinal di, governor of Flo-

rence for the Pope, expelled by the
Florentines, on the Pope's captivity,
II. 194.

Coime di Medici. See Medici.
Cra'nmer, archbilhop of Canterbury, an-

nuls the marriage of Henry VIII. with
Catharine of Aragen, v hich was re-
fured to Henry by the Pope, II. 345.
His sentence reversed by the Pope, 346.
Crefpy, peace of, between the Emperor

and Francis, 111 39.

Croy, William de, nephew to Chievres,

made archbiflop of Toledo, by Charles
V. II. 45 Dies, 181.

D

f'dlbert, John, expelled from hiaking-
dom of Navaire by Ferdinand of Ara-
gon, II. 19. Invades Navarre, but is
defeated by Cardinal Ximenes, 35.

P'Alernbert, M. his oblier ations orn the

order of Jesuits, 11. 456. Note.

p'/antlot, brother to Coligni, is de-

feated by the Duke of Saxony, in an
endeavnui to fiuccour St. Quintin, III.
384. But enter the town with the
ftlgitives, 3t5. The town taken by
alfault, 389.

Dauibpin of France, eldest son of Franci

I. is delivered up with the Duke of
Orleans, to the Emperor Charles V.
in exchange for his father, as holtage
for the performance of the treaty of
Madrid, i54. His' death imputed to
poison, 405. The most probable cause
of it, 406.
- late Duke of Orleans, second
son of Francis I. commands an army
and invades Spain, III. 1. Is forced
to abandon the siege of Perpignan, 8.
Is dissatisfied at the peace of Crelpy,
44. Makes a secret protestation a-
gainft it, ib.

i--- of France, son of Henry II. con-

tra6ed to Mary the young Queen of
Scotland, III. 168. 'Is married to
her, 405.

Denmark, a lumnmary view of the revo.

lutions in, during the sixteenth cen-
tury, III. 456.

- King of, joins the ProteRtant

league at Smalkalde, 11. 414.

DeRetzs Cardinal, writes a history of

Fiefo's conspiracy, while a youth, III.
125. Note. ~

Diana of Poitiers, mistress to Henry II.

of France, aflifts the Guises in per-
fuading Henry to an alliance with
Pope Paul IV against the Emperor,
III. 346. Induces Henry to break
the treaty of VauceHes, 365. Mar-
ries her grandaughter to one of Mont-
morency's sons, 411. Joins Mont-
morency againf the Ou:ses, ib.

Doria, Andrew, aflills Lautrec in sub-

duing Genoa, II. 296. Conquers and
kills Moncada in a sea engagement
before the harbour of Naples, 305.
His charater, 307. Isdifguled with
the behaviour of the French, ib. Re-
volts to the Emperor, 308. Opens
to Naples a communication by sea, ib.
Rescues Genoa from the French, 310.
Restores the government of, to the
citizens, 311. The refpe& paid to
his memory, 31,. Attends lth'e Il-
peror Charles in his dilafirous expedi-
tion againfi Algiers, 473. His partial
fondness for his kinliman Giannetino,
III. 114. His narrow escape in la-
vagno's insurrection, 1l. Returns an
Lavagno's death, aldt the dlilpcfion of
his party, i15. See Genoa and Lavagno.
- Giannetino, his charaler, III 114.

Is murdered by Lavagno's conliira-
tors, ill.
Dower, an interview there hItwren Henlr

VIII. and the Emperor Charles V.
11. 74.

Dragut

Draut aporfair, commands the Turkish

fleet which ravages the coafts'of Na-
ples, III. 278.

Du Prat, chancellor of France, his cha-

racter, II. 192. Commences a law
suit againlt Charles Duke of Bourbon,
for his estate,' at the infligation of
Louise the King's mother, ib.

Duelling, the cufltro of, how rendered

general, II. 303. It influence on
manners, 304.
DPren in Cleves, taken by the Emperor

Charles V. the inhabitants put to the
sword, and the town burnt, III. 15.

E

Ecciua, an adversary of Luther's, holds a

publick disputation with him at Leip-
fie, on the validity of the Papal autho-
rity, t1. 94.

Ecclejiaftitil censures of the Romnilh

church, the dreadful effets of, II. io9.
--
- R Reservation, in the recess of
the diet of Augiburg, remarks on, II.

linburgh, plundered and burnt by the

earl of Hertford, III. 35.
Edlward VI. of England, his characer,

I, 295.

Egront, count of, commands the cavalry

at the battle of St. Quintin, and puts
Montmorency's troops to flight, III.
385. Engages Marelhal de Termes,
and defeats him by the casual arrival
of an English squadron, 407.

F ypt, how and by whom added to the

Ottoman Empire, II. 50.
Ehrenburg, the cattle of, taken by Mau-

rice of Saxony, III. 242.
Eignort, a fation in Geneva so termed,

an account of, II. 386.

Elizabeth filser of Mary, her acceflion to

the crown of England, III. 421. Her
character, ib. Is addressed by Philip
of Spain, and Henry of Prance, for
marriage, ib. Her prudent conduct
between them, 42z. How determined
sgainft Henry, 413. Her motives for
rejecting Philip, ib. Returns Philip
an evasive answer, 424. Demands re-
flitution of Calais at the conferences
at Chateau CambrefiF, ib. Eflahlifhes
the Protellant religion in England,
415. Treaty between her and Henry
fisned at Chateau Cambrefis, .46.
Emnatnuel Phillibeit, Duke of Savoy.

See Sasvy.

England, by what means that kingdom

was freed fir;n the papal finpriemicy,
and received the dotrines of the Retbr-

mation, II. 346. Mary Queen of,
married to' Prince'Philip, son of the
Emperor Claries V. contrary to the
sense of the nation, IllI. 300. The
marriage ratified by parliament, 303.
Is reliul'antly engaged by Philip, nowt
King of Spain, in the war against
France, 381. Mary levies money by
her prerogative' to carry on the war,
381. Calais taken by the Duke of
Guise, 400. Gsiffnes and Hames
taken, ib: Death of Mary and ac-
cefllon ofElizabeth, 411. ThePro-
tettant teligion eftablithed byElizabeth,
415. Treaty with France sighed at
Chateau Cambrefis, 426. Its interior
(trength how increased by the caiduEt
of Henry VII. 440. Its power no
longer fruitleflly wafted on the conti-
nent, 442. Alteration of its conduct
toward Scotland, 443.

Enguicn, the count de. besieges Carig-

nan, III: 30 Desires of Francis, per-
miflion'to engage Guato, 31, De-
feats Guafto in a pitched battle, 32.

Erard de la Mark, ambassador of Charles

V. to the diet of Frankfort, his'pri-
vate motives for thwarting the preten-
sions of Francis I. of France, to the
Imperial crown, II. 58. Signs the ca-
pitulation of the.Germanick body, on
behalf of Charles, 60.

Erafmnus, some account of, II. 118.

Preceded Luther in his censures agginft
the Romilh church, ib. Concurs withI
him in his intentions of reformation,
119. Motives which checked him in
this, ib.

Escurial, palace of, built by Philip II. in

memory of the battle of St. Quintin,
III. 391.

Europe, a (hort view of the ltate of, at

the death of the Emperor Maximilian,
II. 48. The contemporary monarchs
of, all iiluftrious, at the time of Charles
V 77. The method of carrying on
war in, how improved beyond the prac-
tice of earlier ages, 1I. 199. The fen-
timents of, on Charles's treatment of
the Pope, 291. A review oifthe ltate
of, during the reign of the Emperor
Charles V. III. 431. The remarkable
change in, at this period, 431. How
afYeaed by the'revolt of Luther againl;
the church of Rome, 445.

Eutenmi, Ki:g of Algiers, engages Bar.

baroira in his service, and is murdered
by him, 1I. 363.

t cermmrnlitatn

EiOHcmmmnieatihoin the RorisflI church, ' Interiew between him ipd'Phil;ip;

tle'original' inititution '6s.an4d the ib. Is abfedt, at Naples, v.hen Phi
use made of it, II. iog, lip died, 17. Returns' and gains

- F' with the regency ofCaffile, the good

laraeft, Alexander, 'hiq' unanimous will of the natives by. his prudrnt
eletion to the Papacy; i, 347. See adninifration, t8: Acquires by
Pa#ul, III.... .'' . . diihoilourable means the kingdom of

C'' ardinal, th cc'rpiniee the troops Navarre, 19. HoW sie deftrbye'hls

-' fnt by the Pope to the Emperor, 'co'ilitutlon, ib. Enrdeavours to ex
aarif'tl the army,'o'f the' Protestant' clude'l'is grdndltne Charles ftom his
leggpe, 111. 93. ieturn.) disgusted, Spanifli succession, 20. Alters his

- *4. -L'eias ,the 'roops honie again will in favour of Charles; ib. Dies,
,by:I.the Popes' order, tlz2. Contri- 2. . Review of his adminiltiatior,
.' 'itis' to the eli4jon ds Cardinal di 24. Ximenesappointed by his will,
* *onoteto th'ePsapcy C lo, . ' regent of Catlife, until the arrival

,'-,- Qaayio, grS roi of Pope Paul ofChales V. 2$.
III. eideavouirs to' firpije Parma, Fcrdindndifecond son. ofPbilip Arch-
'.,ll.;i tetrs into treaty with the Em- duke' of Austria born, 1.; 5. Left

erqri, -I1. 188,.. Ij"co','irmed in regent of Aragon, by his grandfather

'Farma, by Julius.'Il .9. Pro-' Ferdinand, to. This, revoked by a
cures an- alliaice witil France, t I. filbfequeqt will, by Vhich he obtains
Is sattacked by the Imperiajlls, but only a pension, it. Discontented
(uccifsfuly pr'pt eaed by the French, with his disappointment, lie is taken
it'. ' tPlacentia:: 'Rerd' o him by

r·tfpreo Midrid under the eye of Cardinal

Phlip. I. of Spain, 394. Ximenes, ia. Sent by Charles V.

- . Peter Le vis', riatural fn, of to visit their grandfather Maximilian,

Pope.Paul III. obtains of his sither 45. Is ele&ed King of Hungary and
'the ditchies of Parma and Placentia, Bohemia, 289. Signs a deed called
II1. 54. His charater, 165. Is the Reverse, ib. The Emperor en-
afafllinated, 166; deavours to get him eleAed King of

FtrdinanJ, King of Aragqn, how he the Romans, 33z. He is oppored by

.acquired his kingdoms, 11. 2. In- the Protcflants, 333. Is crowned
'vites. his daughter Joinna,' and her King ofthe Romans, 334. Formss
hiiuflhand, Philip Archdyl.e of Aufria, confederacy against' the Analaptifl
..toSpain, 3... Becqmee jealous of at Munlter, 356. OppPsfes the ref-

.

hlip, ib. Carries on:lhis war with toration of Ulric Dike of Wurtem.
France vigorously, notwithstanding berg 360. Recognizes his title and
: Philip's treaty with Lewis, 5. His coanclpude a treaty with him, ib. His

Queen lfabellt dies, ,n4 leaves him kingdom of Hungary wrelled from
regent of Castile, uinder reftriaion,. hirn by, John Zapol Scaepius, 466.
6. Refigne the kingdom of Caltile, p3efiges tl;e jousg King Stephen aRd
and is acknowledged, regent by the his mpther in liuda, but is defeated
Cortes, ib. Hi. char61ser, 7. Hisu by the Turks, 465. 'His, mean ,f-
Mnaxims of eovcrnmert, odious to the sers of submission to the Porte, ib
Castilians, 'b. Required by Philip w.hich are rejeced,. 470. Courti
to resign his regency, 8.' Joanna' the favour of the Proteflants, Ill.
letter of conrent prpcircdr by him, 13. Openi the diet at Worms, 47.
intercepted by Philip, and herfelfcon- Requires it to I'ubmit to the deifti-
fined, 9. Is deserted by the Calilian o... of the council ot Trent, 48. A.
nobility ib. Detel llnes to exclude gres to pay a tribte to

eolyman

his daughter from the fucceflion .vy ftr Hungary, 73. Encr6.ches on
marrying, ab. Marrics Germannc the libtities of Bohemia, 159 His
d Foix neicetoLewin Xl.of Face, rigoruN treatment of Prague, 161.
,l. A treaty between him and Phi- tilarma thc Bohemians, il. Olr
lip at Salamanca, by which the re- tains l,. fovereigilty of the city of
gency of Cafile is jointly veiled in Conftancc, 185. Invades Tranlyl!
them, and Joanna, ib. Prevails on vani* bv invitation of Marlinrzzli
Hepry VlI; of England 'to detain i3. O btains the resignation of
Philip for three months, when driven Tranfylvnia from Queen Ifabelli,
on that coast, 1. The Caftilianals 5. Ollers Martinuzzi to be alffaf
declare against him, ib. Rcfignsthe linated, ,z7. Entcrs into negocition
-egency of Callile by treaty, 13. W4t

* idthj Maurice, on behalf.of th4e Em- Frasr;c.i; Klng of France, concludes a
, pewtr,-Si. His motive..for:promot- . peace..with Charlei.V. and the c6ndi-
iig the .Emperor's agreeing with Mau- tins 'of' tie treaty, II;. 38- Sends a
.rice, i55. .Isabella. and bhr son Ste- fruitlefriembaffy to Charles for the
* pken, re¢over poffefio of'Trannfylva- .reftittion. 6fNavarre to'the you.ng

hiia,-,a89.. Opens a.diet at!Augftiirg, King,;46, Arpires to the Imperial
and.excite fufpicionsin-the:Protetlants, crown at'the death of Maximilian,-49.
· 26.-. The. Emperorleave -the'inter. Reafona by which he supported his
. nrladminitration'afoGermn affairs to pretensions, 50. Remarks on the
hirm, 39; ..Is again applied td: by. the equipages of his ambaffadora- to' the

..'Emperor.to. refigni his prete'nsions of German' States, 51. His' pretension
;flcctffiob.,to. Philip,!but refure.,: 330. adopted by:the yenetians,.:3., Lores
. Endeavours therefore to gain thefriend- the eleaion, 5. ' ife of t.-riivafhip
. hi .ofthe.:diet, 331. Again-'refufes betweenhim and Charles, '7. Courts

the- iEnmeror's. folicititiohis, 371. the-favotr-:of Cardinal Wolfey,-73,
Charles., iefigns the Imperialrcrown to Promises 'Wolfey his interest for the
himi, 371i. Afermbles. the:.coltege of Paptcy, 7Si: Has an interviewvwith
Eleedors at Fiahkfort, which acknow- Henry VIII. of England, ib. :'Wrftlea
*. edgia~ him: Emperor .of Germiny, with- Henry and throws him,;'ib.
406. '?l e Pope'refufes )to' acknow- Ntre. 'His 'advantages over Charues,
ledgehijm; ib; '

. :.. , at: the cornefricernent of 'hoffilitie

fradol.gpvernment, aivi'ew of,: as it between. thefn,' "i7 Concludes/an
-. exiatedain'Spain, II: i59: . .

.. ':' alliance with the Pope, liti :Invades

Fitfco, Countof Lavagna.:i;Seel.laagna. arid 'reduees Navarre, in'tlhe name

.-"--=Jeronme,"englgses in -his bro- Henry D'Albert, son of John, thpfor-
:ther's cnfipiracy, and fails in-fecuring mer King, 132. The Frentch dlrive
Andrew :Doria; l2t. His iniprudent out by the irmprudence of L'Lfparre
, anity on his .brother's death, 1r4. their general, who is taken prisoner
.Bhinta himself up in a foron'hi s fate, by the Spianards, 133. Retakes Mou.
126: It reduced and' putto death, son from the Imperialists, '3g. In-
b31. . ',' vades the 'Low Countriet, bUt lores

Filansrdr.' See NtlherIai . .d : - the opportunities of fuccefr:by impru-
a".renc,' ;the. inhabitants ofr revolt a- dence, ib. Rejeas the' demands of
-gainhl:Pope Clement.VlI. .on the-news Charles at the congress at Calais. 137
of his captivity, and recover their li- A league concluded between Charles

. beity- I;, 294. Areedaced to sub- and Henry VII. against him, ib.: His

jecion-to Alexander di M1edici, by the imprudent appointment of the. Mare-
Eminperor,;z23. Alexander di Medici, chal de Poix to the government of Mi-
Duke:ofi: affaffinattd by his kinfiman Lo- lan, 139. 'De Foix attacks Reggio,
rdn.io, 4i6 .Cofmno di Medici,' advanced but is repulsed by the governor 'G.ic-
to:the sovereignty, 417..' Cemo, sup- eiardini the historian, r4o. The Pope
: ported by :the Empefor,. defeats the declares against him, ib.' HI-s embar-
partizahs of-Lorenzo, 48. ' Co'mo raffmrnts on the invafiori of' ilan,
affeots hi .independency on- thd Em- 141. His mother seizes the imoer
peror, III 27j. ' appointed for payment of the Milanere
Fei'cfla, Antonio de, commander in troops, ib. Milan taken, 'and the
chieEofrthe forces in Spain; ordered by French driven out, 143. Levies a bo-
Cardinal Adrian to besiege the infur- dy of Swiss, 146. Who infilt on giv.
Rents ii Segovia, II. 157. Is denied ing a'precipitate battle to the rmperia-
liberty.of taking military fRores, by the lifts, which:is loft, 47. War declared
inhabitants of Medina del Campo, ib. againIt him by Henry VIII. r49. Hie
Attacks, ahd almofl burns the whole expedients to supply his treafiry, 'b.
town, ;58. Is repuired, ib. His The plan pursued by him to.refit the
house at Valladolid burnt, ib. incursions of the English, i ' . Picardy

France, the acquisition of that kingdom, invaded by Henry, ib. The Venetians

during the reign of the Emperor league with the Emperor against him,
Charles V. III. 437, The charEaer 189. To-which Pope Adrian accedea,
of the people of, 438. The good i90o His expeditious. movement a-
consequcnces of the civil wars in that gainrt the Milanese, ib. Disconcerted
kingdom to the reft of Europe, 440. by

bT the Duke of Boltrbon'tl c pi cy, trec in Italy, g9. His reply to the
i. Taxes him with. betraying his Emrperr overturet 301. Declares
cruse, which Bourbon deni, 194. - war paaifR him and chtalege him to
Bourbon efcipes to Italy :da Francis single combat, 302. Treats Andrew
returns, t9S. Appoints the admiral Doris ill, who revolt* from him to the
Bonnivet to command againot the Mi- Emperor, 308. His army, under Sar
hnefe, ib. Picardy invaded by the luces, driven out of Italys 3o0. His
Dukeof Suffolk, who ic,driven back, troops.'in Milan routed, 3st. His
oo00. Repultes the invasion of Guienre endeavours toward an accommodation,
and Burgundy by Charles, ib. His uc- 33. . Termsofthe peace ofCanbrsy,
cesiful close of the campaign, i6. His concluded by the mediation of his mo-
prudent care to disappoint the Imperia- ther Louise and Mnrgaret of Austria,
lilts in their invalion qs Provence, a16. 31. Remarka on thefacrifice made
Aiembrles an army, which caufet the by him in this treaty, and on his con-
Imperialits to retire from Marseilles, du t.ofthe war, 316. Legues secret.
2!7. Determines to invade the Mila- ly 'with the Protetant Princes, 334.
nnel, a 8. Appoints hiro th( Louise His mniefures to elude the treaty of
regent during his abfeoce, tlf- En- Cambray, 341. His negociations with
tera Milan, and takes poi~eite.f the the Pope, 343. His interview and
city, jb. Advised by bNtiSit to be- treaty with the Pope, 344. Gives the
siege Pavia, a t. Hia.vigbwsaattacks Duke of Orleans in marriage to Caths.
on Pavia, 2z2. Concludes a treaty rine di Medici, 345. Negociates a
of neutrality with Pope Clement, 23. treaty with Francis Sforza, Duke of
Hiaimprudent invasion of Naples, 224. Milan, 379. Hi envoy Merveille exe-
Refolvp by Bonnivet'ó advice to attack cuted at Milan for murder, i. Is dif-
Bourbon's army, advanced to the relief appointed in his endeavoura t negoci-
of Pvia, 226. Is routed at the battle ate alliances against the Emperor, 380.
of Pavia.t7. Is takenpriloner, 2Z8. Invites Melanahon to Pari, 381. Evi.
Is sept to the castle of Pizzitchitone dences his zeal for the Romish religion,
under the custody of Don Ferdinand 38. ..Cause of his quarrel with the
Alarcon, 229. Refufea the propofiti- Duke of Savoy, 384. * Seizer the
ons made to him by Charles, 37. Duke's territories, 385. His prcten.
Is carried to Spain on his delre of a sions to the dutchy of Milan, on the
perornal interview with Charles, 238. death of Francis Sforza, 389. The
Is rigorously treated in Spain, 245. Emperor's iovective agaioft him before
Fall dangerously ill, i. Is visited by the Pope in counsel, 391. Is invaded
Charles, 246. Resolves to resign his by Charles, 395. Hi prudent plan of
kingdor', 249. Is delivered from his defence, 398. Joins the army under
captivity by the treaty of Madrid, ao. Montmorency, 401. Death of the
His secret proteflations against the va- Dauphin, 45S. Obtains a decree of
lidity of this treaty, 25 . Marries the parliament of Paris againR the Em.
the Queen of Portugal. ib. Recovers peror, 406. Invades the Low Coun-
his liberty, and the Dauphin and the trien 407. A suspension of arms in
Puke.of Orleans delivered up hoages Slanders, and how negociated, 408.
to Charles for the performance of the A truce in Piedmont, 409. Motives
treaty of Madrid, 154. Writes a let. to there truce, ib. Concludes an nal
terofacknowledgementtoHenry VIII. liance with Solyman the Magnificent,
of England, 264. His reply to the Im- 410. Negociations for a peace with
perial ambaffdors, 26;. Enters into the Emperor, 412. Concludes a truce
a league with the Pope, the Venetians for ten years at Nice, 413. Refletions
and Sfortn, againi Charles, 66. Is on the war, 'ó. His interview with
abfilved from his oath to observe the Charles, 414. Marries Mary of Guise
treaty of Madrid, 167. His behaviour to James V. of Scotland, 410. Re.
to the Emperor's second ambaffy, Z69. fuses the offerr of the deputies of
Is difriritcL by his former ill success, Ghent, 436. Informs Charles of
17o. Enterm into a treaty with Hen y the offer made by them, 437. Grnts
VIII. of England against the Emperor, the Emperor leave to pafi throu'h
194. 8uccefea f his general La-. :lianscc tu t(h Netherlandil 439

Hit

Mic reception of the Eeror, 440. kl
deceived by the Empeor in refpe8 to
Milan, 443. Hii abaffndor to the
Porte, "icoa, murdered by the InA-
peril governor of the Milanese, ill
3. Prepes to relent the injury, 4.
Atta Sthe Emperor with five anrie,
6. Ei f4rt tteenpts rendered tbor-
tive y the _iprnfenc of the Duke
of Or esi, . Renews his egocisti-
oa> with Saltan Solyma, 14 Invands
the Low Countriel, i. Forces the
Eanprer to raise the siege of Lndrecy,
I7. Difmiffe B!rarodT, 30. Gives
the count d' Engsie peumlion to en.
gge Guafto, 31. Rlieves Psris in
danger of being surprised by the Em-
perr, 39. Agr. toa $ fp tepeace
with Praci, ia. i enry' hghty
retun to his overtur of pece, .44.
Death of the Dke of Orlens, 53.
Peace of Campc, 84. Perceive, a ne-
cefity of chering the Emperor's »m3-
bitiol defiges, i8. Sons a general
leapue IgainR him, ib. Dies, 13z.
His life and charsker funnarily com-
pared with thole fChrle, ib. Con-
sequences of his detb, 135.
tranrci II. his Iaceion to the crown of

France, ad cbrer, III. 430.

Frasnfirt, the diet of, alfabled for the

choice of an Emperr at the deth of
Maximilian, 11. if. N ae enad views
afthe Ele~lAr, t*. The Empire of-
sered to Predeick of Sxony, b.
Who reKje it, with his resfons, 7.
Chufie Chrles V. Emperor, 59g. is
coafirnmtion of the Germnick privi-
leges required and areed to, 60. City
of, embr*ccr the reforsed religiop, II.
zo6. The college or Eleators flemhbkd
there by Ferdrineg,who is acknowledg-
ed Emperor of Cernoy, III. 401.

ftrrdricR Duke of Saxony, af*tlembles

with the other Eleftors st the diet of
FrnLsfort, tp cbiuT an Emperor, 1!.
£6. The Empirp offered to him, il.
Rejea it, tnd voter for Charles V. 7.
Restsel the prelntD of the Spanish »m-
bhffadors, 5i. This difiaterefed be-
haviour confirmed by the testimony of
hilforiana, ib. Nret. Chules Martin
Luther philofophicol professor at his
univetlty of Wittqmberg, 8). Encou-
reges Iluther in his oppofitiop to indul-
gence, 8I. Proters him grinR( Ca-
Jetsn, 9p. Clufel Luther to be feiced
at hi, return frogn the diet of Worm.,

Vl.. 111.

gnd conceab him at Wartbur, 14.
Dies, 63.

FrouJi, the French anal4dpr to Venice,

mrdred by the l4arquie del GOaft,
the Imperial governor of the Minedie,
11.1 . ' .

Frl/JPr&, George, a Cermun noble

man, obme account ofa he join t;he
rray of Chrles V. 1. 1.7s.

Gerald of the JeNts, an iqqiry into

his office and decfptik authority, IU.
448.

GeCra4, account of its revolt agiaf

the Duke of Savoy, U. 3$6.

Gtsa, reduced by Lautrec, the French

general, IL. a2s. The French ende-
v-r to prejqdiee i tr irae I favour ss
Savon, 307. Is refced from the
French by Andrew IPri, to. The
government of, settld4. tlh . dismt'r-
efiedefC of Dori, 311. The honour
paid to porii's me~ory 311.
Is visited by the Emperor, 31s.
A rcheme formed to overtun the con-
fiitution of, by Fifco, count of Lavag-
no, 111 6. 6 He' (femble his Id-
herents, 119. The conspirators filly
forth from Lacagno's palace, ma.
Deputier feat to know Lavagno'e terms,
.t3. Lavagno drgwned, 1. The i-
furr~eioa ruined by tbe imprudence
of his brother Jerome Fiefco, t14.
The coafpiraton difperre, i. Jerome
reduced and put to detth, 13.

Grmoailad, oa association in Valencia,

to termed, on what occa(on formed,
11. 18z. Refuse to lay down their
arms, ib. Their refentient levelled
at the nobility, who raise an army a-
Eainft them, 183. Defest the nobles
in several aaions, 84. But are rout-
ed and dirperred by them, ib.

Germany, (ate of, at the death of the

Emperor Maximilian, 11. 48. Charles
V. of Spain, and Francis I. of France,
form pretensions to the Imperial crown,
49. Their refpelive reasons offered
in favour of their claims, 50, 1.
Views and interef th

o other Eu-

ropean States in relatioo to the com-
petitors, 5%. Henry VIII. of Englanl,
*lvmnces a claim, 53. But i di cou-
raed from prosecuting it, 54, How
the Papacy was likely to be Rifetfed
in the choice of an Emperor, ib. Ad-
vice of Pope .eo, X. to the Cerpsn
* IU h Plince.,

princet, 5. 'Opening of the diet at
rankfort, b. In whom the election
of an Emperor is veiled, 56. Viewi
ds the Eleclor,' ib. The Empire of-
sered to Frederick ds Saiony, i'. 'Who
rejets it, and his rearons, 57. Charles
V. chosen,' 9. The'capittilation ofthe
Cermanick privileges cnfirmed by
lim, 6o. '

Charles sets out for, 66.

Charles crowned at Aix la Chapelle,
76. Commencemneit of the Refoima-
tion there, by 'Martin Luther, 78.
Treatiment of'thi bull of excommn-
nicatioapublifhed against Luther, 96.
·the: ufurptios' of the clergy there,
during the'difptec 'cohceissing invefti-
tures, i'6.' - "' e clergy of, 'moftry
foreigners, i o. The 'beAefices of,
hominated by 'the Pope, ii.' The
expedient of the Emperors for restrain-
fag this'power of the Pope, ineffectual,
1 z. The gteat progress of Luther's
doctrines in, 'I. zo6. Grievances of
the peasants, 25. . Insurrection in
Suabia, 2. The memorial'6s their
grievances,' 257. The insurrection
quelled; '58; '; Another infqrreaion
in Thuringia, ib. -How the house of
Austria becatne so formidable in, 289.
Proceedings relating to the Reforma-
tion'there, 2'0.' Great progress of
the Reformation there, 324; Ferdi-
nand King of Hungary and Bohemia;
brother -to Charles V: eleCled King'of
the Romans, 334. The Protestant 're-
ligion established in Paxony, 427. The
Protestant religion eltablifhed in the
Palatinate, 1I. 56. The league of
Smalkalde raise an army against the
emperor, 86. Are put under the bah
of the Empire, 88. The Proteflant
army dispersed, lo6. The Interim en-
forced by the Emperor, 180. ' Maurice
of Saxony raises an army, and declares
in favourof the Protefants, A37. Mau-
rice favoured even by the Catholick
Princes, and why, 152. Treaty of
Paffau, between the Emperor and Mau-
rice of Saxony, 259. Truce between
the Emperor and Henry of France, 360.
Charles resigns the Imperial crown to
his brother Ferdinand, 372.
uhecnt, an infurrcaion there, II. 431.
The prctenfioni of the citizens, 432.
Form a confederacy against the Queen-
dowager of Hungary, their governefc,
433. Their deputies to the Emperor,
how treated by him, ib. 'Offer to fuib-
1nit to France, 434. Is reduced by
Chirles, 44t.

Ghibeline fitiona, in Italy, a view of, HI

172. ,,

Girsn, Don Pedro de, appointed to the

comriand of the atmy of the Holy
Junta, II. 170. Refigna his conmii:
sion and Padilla rellaced, 172.

Goletta in Africa, taken by the Emperor

CharlesV. II. 37 . Gonzaga, the Im-
perial governor 'f Milin, procures
Cardinal Farnese to be affaflinated, and
takes possession of Pliacetia for the Eni-
peror, Ill. 166. Prepares to seize
Parma, io9. Is reuulfed by the
French, ti. L .i

Granaelle, Cardinal, his artifice to pre-

vail on the count de 'Sancerre to fur-
render St. Difiere to the Emperor, Ill.
36. Ehdeavours to lull the Protefiani
into security with regard to the Em-
peror's conduOf toward them, 6z. Is
commiflioned by Philip to address the
affemoly at the Emperor's refignstion
of his hereditary dominions, 357'

Gravelines, an interview 'thete between

'the Emperor Charses V. and Henry
VIII. of England, II. 7i.

Gropper, canon of Cologne, is appointed

a manager of the Protestant and Ca-
tholick conferences before the diet at
Ratisbon, II. 462. ' Writes a treatise
to comppofe the differences 'between
them,' ib. The sentiments of both
parties on this work, 4.3:

Granada, archbishop' of, riefident of the

council of Caftil, 'his impruderit ad-
vice to Cardinal Adrian, relating to the
infurre&ion in Segooia, II. 157.

Guaflo, the Marquis 'del, appointed go-

vernor of Milan, by the Emperor, 11.
404. ProcuresRiRhcon'the French arn-
baffador to the Porte, to be murdered
on his journey thither, II1. 3. De.
fends Carignan against the French, 30.
Defeated by d'Enguien in a pitched
battle, 32.

Guiaciardini, his account of the publicr

' ton of Indulgences contradiced, 11 86.
Defends Reggio againlt the French,
140. Repulses an attack upon Parma,
by the Frehch, r4S. His fentlments
of the Pope's treaty with Lannoy vice-
roy of Naples, '8o.

Guise, Francis of Lorrain, Duke of, is

made governor of Metz by Henry II.
of France, 1i. 167. His chaa&cter,
ib. Prepares to defend it againf the
Pmperer, a68. His brotherd'Aumale
taken prisoner by the Imperialists, 271'
The Emperor ,aifc the siege, 74,
« Hii

His humane treatment of the diltrefed -
and sick Uermans lett bebild, ih. Per-
ltades Henry to an alliance Witb Pope
paul IV. 346; Marches with troops
into Italy, 376. Is unable to effet
any thing, 377. Is recalled frorr Italy
atter the dereat of St. Quintin, 393.
Hisl reception in France, 397. Takes
the field againit Philip, 3d,' Invelts
and takes Calais from the angillh, 400.
Takes aJlb Guilhes and. Hmmes, tb.
1 .akes Thionville in Luxembourg, 406.
Guef', Mary or, married to James Vi of

Scotland, 11. 410. Frultrates the. in-
tended marriage between her daughter
Mary, and prince Edward of England,
IlI. 29.

Gurk, Cardinal de, why he fayoured the

election of Charles V. to the Imperial
crown, I. 58. Signs the capitulation
of the Germanick body onibehalt of
Chailes, 60.

(uJYwan chancellor to the EtmperorFerdi-

nao', is lent to Pope Paul.V. to noti-
fy the cle6lio1, who refules to lee him,
ll1! 40 ' '

Hamburgh, city of, embraces the re-

termed religion, 1. o.6.

Fl/rf, the conde de, appointed to com-

mand the army ot the Castilian nobles
against the Holy Junta, 1I: 17 ., At-
tacks Tordefillas, adi.gets poffeffio of
.Queen Joanna, ib. kouts.the army
of the junta, and takes Padilla pfifoner,
who is executed, 177. :' ,; ':
laJ cen .Aga, deputy governor of Algiers,

his piracies againSt the Chrillian ltates,
11. 472. Is besieged in Algiers by the
Emperor Charles V. 474. Makes a
fuccefsfpl Ially, 47 5. The imperor
torcetp-y bad'weatiler to return back
again,: 478. ,

llaritadin, a potter's son of Lelbon, comr

miences pirate, 11. 364. Soe Blrba-
r a.Yt. . .
'raltbenj, ancient, why the priniples of
mutual toleration were generally ad-
mitted among them, !i1. 334.
leldo vice chancellor to Charles V. at-

tends the Pope's nuncio to Smalkalde,
II. 4tz. Forms a Catholick leagae in
uppofition to the Protellant one,'4z4.
Ilelry II. King ot France, his motives fur

deilining an alliance with Pope Paul
111. againit the Emperor, 111. 168.
Procures for Scotland a peace with
Englsnd, 21o. The young Qneen
tavly, contracted to the Dauphin, an4

sent to France for education, i.' ERa
ters into an allia ce with Oiavio Far-
nefe Duke of Parma, 2l.. Protests
againit die council of Trent, '1a.
Makes alliance with Mauiice 'Elector
of' Saxony, 229.' Secondi' ihe opera-
tions of Maulice, i38K. .His army
inarches and seizes Meti, 24o. At-
tempts to furprize Strafburgh, a48.
Is ftrrgly''f61icited t6' fare it, 249,
Returs,'20o. The Emperor prepares
for war against him, 26j.' Infiigites
the Turks to invade Naples,; 78.
'Teriroanc taken and' dermoliihed. by
Charles, i 86. Hefdin taken, i,.' ILeads
an army into the Low-Cdiritries ggainft
charles '287. Endeavoutrs' to obl'ttfi
the marriage of Mary of England with
Philip of Spain, 3c6. The progress of
'iis 'arms' against 'the Ecimperor. 307.
Engages Charles, 309. 'eiret,..i
Cofrio di Medic,; D fuke ore'ice,
mgkes war against iim, 3r1 , Appointc
Pet*e Strbozz commandsr of.ris amny
in Italy, 12. Strozi defeaty 4.
Sien'a ak'en, 16' P$

P pp l'

i V.

inakes' dvertures to: a l]ajrc¢' xwith
iim'againt cihe Emperor,345s' · Mnt-
jnotencl's' arguments ;agaiwt iF ialli-
ance, b Is .persuaded J ;jifec
to accept'its 34d. Ses

D te'C4nal

of Lorrain with po'eirs to incie. it,
ii. 'Thte rope gns' thi, teat;,^48.
A'truce'for five years concslded with
the Emperor, 360." I's'horted-by
Cardinal Caffa, to'break j3e. truce,
363. IS ablolve, from his oatasnd
concludes i new treaty witl, t ,be Pope
366.' Sends':the Dukq 'of.'.uiCe ilat
Italy, 378. -thf e Cosiatile 'ontme'
rency defe4ted'd and taken .prroer at
St. Qoindtit.'Ss Hinrrprepares for
the defence ds Paris, 38,. ' '* Qin
tin taken by affaultt 89, ' olletsais
troops and nregociate [fr' ffillnce,.
His kind: recepti-n- of tr.':?uke,.of
Guise, 39?.',allis tkeg;; bj Cuife,
40o0. Imtpowers Mohtfidrincy to-ne-
gociate peace with ilip, 41. Hon.
ours hirm highly on his'returs to Friace,
412. ' Wrtes to" Queen Elizabeth,
with proposal' of marriage, 4 1. How
he failed in bis suit, 422. His dauglh
ier sr'riucd to Philip, and his filler to
the Duke of Savoy, 427. Term., of
she treaty of Chateau Cambrefil, 4.8.
The marriage of his fiter and daughter
celebrated with great pomp, 340. His
death, ii.

'i-t gl
nh t a

Hfinr

Htr1y .VIi, ,.f.Epngnd, detais the qrh-

.-ale Philip':inhd his duchels wyhea dri-
ven on his coast, three months at the
.inligation' f Ferdinand, l;. .'
vasryeti ' of ngland, fepds an ambfra-
dor to Gerriany to propore his claims to
' te itmperiat crown, 11.' 53 bj dif-
ct'uraed from his petentons, and takes
'to part'vfith the other competitors, 54.
'tis peir-xrl character and political in-
flbenee in Europe, 70. Entirely gSid-
ed by Crdinral Wollfy, 72. Receives
Si'vilt from the Emperor Charles V.
'4. Goes over to France to visit'
fiineis, 7'. WreRles with Francis,

and it thrown by him, ib. Nqte. Has
itnother interview with Charles at Gra-
'veines, 76. Charles offers to submit
lis'diferences with Francis t. his arbi-
trition, ib. Publishes a treatise onthe
'Sevtn Sacraments. againf Martin Lu-
'ther, ra. Obtains of the Pope the
'tflre of De/ender ss ibe Faie, ;16.
'Tftes ptrt *ith Charles against Fran-
'ii, rat. Sends Wolfey to necociate
' 1a¢4ottmdidation between the Em-
petroi nda taircis, V36 Concludes a
'tiije' wltth Charles igainft Francis,

i i., 'Hi avowed realons for this
freity,- His private motives, 138.
!*:li'res star againf Prancis, 149. Is
' teCi by Charles. rd6. Makes de-

ifitt UpIon the coaRf.os fr.nce, ib.
Adv~lees with an ary into Picardy,
r ;t.' Obliged to retire by the Duke
- etltedome, i'. Enters ihto a treaty

hih thfe Emperor and Charles Duke of

'"Btrban, 193. How he raised supplies
IbrM h( wxrs beyond the grants of his
arlittoent, r99g. ' Snds the Duke of
Mffolk t6 invade Picerdy, 'ho pene-
trates airnof to Paris, but is driren
hkak, loo. Engates to aiift Charles

Ai'ttn invaDon ,of Provence, 215.

Caufll of his not rupporting the Impe-
riill R't17 . Effeats or the battle of
Plti, and captivity of Francis on him,
tf. 'Prticulars of his Cmbaffy to
Charlet, 233. Concludet.a defensive
alliance with France, 239. Is declared
prtlteior Of the league of Cognac

rainft tht Emperor, 267. Hia mo.
(ives for afflting the Pope against the
EItmeror, 293. nters into a league
ithA Pamneis, and renounces the Eng-
llfS claim to the crown of France, 194.
Deelares War against the Em.
potr, 30o. Concludes a truce with

the govefrls of the Low Coun.
ttieq -3 6 Projects his divorce
fhorwsCathnrineof Aragon, 3gl. Mo.
tives which. wihheld the. Pepe from
granting it, 319. Acquielces in the
peae of Csabray, 31o. Send sup.
ply of morey to the Protestant league
in Germany, 336. Procures his mar-
riage to be annulled by Cranmer, arch.
bilhep of Canterbury, 345. The di.
vorce reversed by the Pope under pe-
nalty of ex<emmnnication, 346. Re-
nounces the Papal supremacy, i. Re-
suess to acknowledge any council called
by the Pope, 362. Opposes James V.
of Scotland marrying Mary of Guise,
420. His disgusts with Francis and in-
tercourfe with the Emperor, ib. Con-
cludes a league with Charles, III. r.
Makes war with Scotland, s . Parti-
cularsaof his treaty with Charles, ib.
Invades France and invests Boulogne,
35. Refuses the Emperor's plan of
operatiohN 39. Is deserted by the Em-
peror, 43. Takes Boulogne, ib, His
haughty proposals to Francis, 44.
Peace of Campe, 84. Is succeeded
by his fn Edward VI. 129. A review
of his policy, 441.

Hertford, earl of, plunders and burns

Edinburgh, IU. 3;. Joins Henry after,
in his invasions of France, ió.

&eJ, the Landgrave of, procures the re-

foration of his kinsman, Ulric Duke
of Wartemberg, II. 3jo. His views
compared with those of the Ele&or of
Saxony, 111 6e. The Emperor's de-
ceitful prfeffions to him, 69. Quiets
the ajprehenfions of the ProteRant
league with regard to the Emperor, 70.
Is appointed joint commander of the
army of the league with the Elelor
of Saeony, 91. Their cheraters com-
pared, 92. Urges an attack of the
Emperor, but is opposed by the Elec-
teo, 9p. His letter to Maurice Duke
of Saxony. 103. The army of the
slaes difierfe, to6. Is reduced to
accept harh terms fom Charles, 15o.
His humiliating reception by the Em-
peror, 53. Is detained in confine-
meat, 15;. His offers of fubmifion
fighted by'the Emperor, 179. Ii
carried by the Emperor with him into
the Netherlands, 83. Renews his
endeavour# for liberty, 103. Charles
relecaos arbitrarily the Eledorof Brin-
denbug,n and Maurice, from their en-

a gngementS

gagements to him, o03. Obtains &is
libertyby the treaty of Pafiau, 59.
Is arrested by the QOeen of Hungary,
but freed by the Emperor, 264. The
effe6ts of his confinement on him. 265.

Hiuter#s, his account of Lewis XII.

ihewn to contradict the relations given
by Bellay and other French historians
of the education of Charles V. II. 1.
Note.
Isrlj 7ita. fSee 7tta.
ERm Lag#c:, agepin the Emperor Char-

les V. Formed at Cogmc, under the
protection of Henry VI11. of England,
II. 266.

//oru, a potter's Ton of Lebos, com-

mences pirate, with his brother Hay-
radia, II. 364. See Barbar a.

Hangarj, is divided by Solyman the

Magnificent, nd its King Lewis II.
killed II. a88. His successes, and.the
number of prisoners carried away, 89.
The.archduke Ferdinand eleCted King
of together with Bohemia, ib. John
Zapol Scaepius wrelts it from Ferdi-
nand, 466. Stephen fucceedb on the
death.of his father John, 467. .Islrea-
cherouty seized by Solyman, 469. See
latbeUe, and Martianazi.

I

7amer V. of Scotland, leYis troops to

aflift Francis.in Provence, but his in-
tenfionfruftrated, II. 419. His ne-
gociations for marriage with Francis's
daughter, ib. Marries Mary of Guile,
420. Dies, and leaves Mary .his in-
sant daughter to succeed him, 111. 12.
See Mary.
efSuits, the order of by whom founded,
II. 132. Charater of that order, ib.
Character of Ignatio Loyola their
founder, 445. The order confirmed
by the Pope, 446. An examination
into the confitution of the order, ib.
Office and power of their general,
448. The rapid progress of the order,
451. Engage in trade, and eftablilh
an empire in South America, 453.
Bad tendency of .the order, 454. Are
refpanfible for most of the pernicious
effects of Popery, since their inltitu-
tion, 45. Advar tages resulting from
their intitutien, i/. Civilize the na-
tivveof Paraguay, 457. Their precau-
tions 'for the independency of their
empire there, 458. How the parti-
culars of their goverwnent and.inftitu-

Hh

tion came to be disclosed, 459. Sium
mary of their character, 461.

Idulngelnce, in the Romi(h Churoh, the

do.riae of, explained, II. 79. By
whom firIf invented, it. Martin Lu.
ther preaches against them, 83. Write
against them to Albert e&etor of
Mentz, 84. A bull iulled.in favpur
of, 92. The tale of, oppefed.in Swit-
zerland by 2uinglius, 94.

Ilfaatads, -Duke of, his haugty resent-

ment of a casual blow on his horse, 31.
430. s .proteted by the coantable of
.Cafrle,43I.

JInso r, a yomun domelic of cardinal

di Monte, obtains his Cardinal's at,
on his election to the pagcy, l1. t1g.

Interim, a systet of theology so salied,

prepared by order of the i ~erpr
Charles V. for the use of Oermany,
HI. 172. Is disapproved ns, both by
Protestants aad'Papifts, 17. .

Inef'iturro, usurpations of the tonml

cloEgyin Germany, dining, the .dif-
pates between the Eriprors -and
Pop es,-concerning, ll. 106.

7oanna, daughter of Ferdintnd, and mo.

ther of Charles V. visits Spain with
her hufibnd Philip Archduke of A.s-
Itria, U. 3. Is liightedby. her handa
4. .ercharater, ib. Is absuptly left
jn Spain by her hldband, ib.. Sinks ,iato
.melancholy on .the ccdallon, and ia
delivered of her second In Ferdinand,
,5. Her letter of conlent to her fa-
ther's regency of Catile intercepted,
and herself confied,, 9. Made jint
regent of CaRile with Ferdinand and
Philip by the treaty of Salamanca, 1r.
Sets out for Spain with Philip, are
driven on the coaR of Eraland and de-
tained three mnths by Henry VII. 12.
Acknowledged Queentby the Cortes,
.14. Her tenderness toher huiband in
his fickners, and extraordinary attach-
ment to his'body when dead, ib, Is
incapable of gfvernment, 1,5. Her foa
Charles aflirmes the crown, 28. The
Cortes acknowledge her frn King,
with a refervationl in hel.favout, 44.
Her reception of Pndilla the chief of
the Spanilh malccntcnt,, 161. rhe
Holy Junta removed to Tordefillas the
placeof her rrfidlerce, 161. Relapies
into.her brmer mlmancholy, ib. The
proceedings of the Holy Junta car-
ried on in htr name, ib. Is seized by
the Conde de Haro 171. Dier, after
near fifty year con6inement, 1Il. 5.5;
3

'ikn Zapol Scaepius, by the affftance o

Sultan Solyman. eftablilhie hiifelf' i
the kingdom'of Hungary, I.. 466
Leaves the kingdom to his Son Stephen
467. See Hungary, Ifablla, an
Martiniazzi.

Ifablla; 'daughter of John I.; of'Caftile

and wife of Ferdinand King of Ara
goi, her hiltory, I. 2; Her concern
at the archduke Philip4s treatment ol
' her datighter Joanna, 4; Her death

anid chiracer, 6. Appoidts Ferdinand
regent'of Castile tnder reftricions. ib.

-- daughter to Sigismund iCing ol

Polantl, married to JohnKing of Hun-
gary, II. 467. Her charater, ib. Is
tieacherodfly carried with her infant
son into Tranfylfania by Sultan Soly-
mnin, 469. The goverriient of this
province and the education of her son
commiitted to her jointly with Marti.
.nua, Ill. 1l2. Is jealous of Marti-
nuzii's influene; and courts theTurki'
' '3. Is prcvniled on to resign Tran-
fylvania to Ferdi'and, 224. Retires to
Silesia, zla. Recovers pofefflion of
- 'Trhatiivaii,.' 28g.
,-- of Portugal, ifiarried to the

' tmp'ernr Charles V. II. 2 4.
itly, codiequeiices of the league be-

tween Pope Leo X. and the Emperor
Charles V. to, 1. t39.: The cha-
rafters of the Italians, Spaniards and
Frenth,-contrafed, lb. State of, at
'ihe accession of Clement' Vl. to

the Piaty, 201. VieWs of the Ita-
lian States with refpedt to' the Empe-
tor and Francis on the expulsion of
the French from Genoa and the Mi-
lanere, 4. " Their dpprehenfions on
the battle of Pavia and ciptivity of
P rancis, 2j4. The principal Stites,
join in the Holy league against the
Em 'ieror, 'i6 Are difgufled at the
tir'|dtief o Francis, 27z. A viewof
the' tiibGfinu fadion, ii. Sentiments
ps the Stites of, on the peace of Cam-
'irsy,3i'." 'Is visited by the Emperor
*Charles, 32a. The motives cf his mo-
deration toward the States of, 32g.
A league among the tates of, formed
by Charles, 341. Placentia granted to
Otavio Farnese by Philip II. of Spain,
11. 94. The Inveftitue of Siena giv-
en by Philip to Colmo di Medlci, 306.
The consequence of there grants, i*.

'unta, Holy, a view of the confedela

cy in Spain, so termed, 11 160. The
authority of Adrian disclaimed by, i i.

':r oi-. H

f Reiovied to tordefilas wvhere OQeah
n Joamni resided, t6a. Their peoceed-
* ngs carried on in the mamre' f Joan-

na, 162. Rec-ives letters fror Char.
les t' lay down their arms, with pro.
milesof Pardon, 164. Remoriftrance
of grievances drawn up by, b; The
- particulars of this remontrance, 16,

Remarks on the spirit of it, ;t67 Are
f intimidated from presenting it to Char-
les, i69. Propose to deprive Charles
of his royalty during the life of Jo-
anna, iA. Take the field, 170o Cha-
racter of their irmy, i. Th OQeen
seized by the Conde de Haro, 1?.
How they obtained Money to fpport
their army, 172. Loe time in nego.
ciating with the nobles, 73 Propore
to make their peace with Charles at
the expence of the nobles, 7. Their
irrefelute condu, i Their army de-
feated by Haro, and Padilla taken
prioner, l. Padilla executed, tn

i letters to his wife, and the c

of Toledo, 17. The ruin of the
confederacy, 199.
trilt Poprei obfervatiins on the pon-
tificateof, II. 10z.

- Ill. Pope his charaster, II1. 0go

Bestows his Cardinal's hat infa-
moufly, ib. Is averse to the calling a
council, 192. Summons one at Trent,
tg3. Alferts his fopreme authority
peremptorily in the btill for it, 201
Repents confirming Odavio Farnese ii
Parma, 109. Requires Oaavio to re-
Jinquith his alliance with France, a 1.
The manner of his death, 328.

La Chnu, a "lemifl gntleman, afrocia.

ted by Charles V. with a Cardinal Xi-
menes in the regency of Castile, II.
34. Landrecy, siee of, by the Eiperor

Charles V I. t6 Is abandoned by
him, 17.

Lanny, mortgages the revenues of Na-

ples, to supply the Exigences of the
Emperor, II. o20. Francis firredlers
imlenilf prisoner to him at the banle
of Pavia, 228. His cautious dilpo-
fal of him, 229. Delivers him up in
purfiance of the treaty of Madrid,
and receives the Duke of Orleans and
the Dauphin, as hAllages in exchange,
254. Is Cent amlballador to FIran;is
to require his fulfilmeit of the treaty
of, a68. Concludes a treaty witRh ti

PopCe

Pope, 80o. Marches to join the Im- eff, at the inftanceof Charler, ib. His
perialifts at Rome, wei ee the troops condu& on the profpec of. war; be-
refuse to obey him, z25. twcen Charles and Frapcis, 69. Situ-
ianuza, donJohn de, made Viceroy of atiqn of the Papaicy at his acceflion,
Aragon, on the departure of. Charles and his views of policy ,7 j. His in-
V, for Germany, II. 66. Composes attention to Martin Luther's Contrp-
the dffturbances there, i 84. verfy with the Domiinieaps, concerning

Lavagna, John Lewis Fiefco, count of, indulgences, 87. Is instigated against

his charater, IIL 11 5. Meditates sub- him, and frimmons him to P'ome, ib.
verting. the government of Genoa, Desires the Elector of Saxony not to
1S6 His.. preparations, 117. His protec;him. ib. Is prevailed on to
artful method of affenibling his adhe- permit Luther's doarines to be exami-
rents, 119. His exhortation to them, ped in Germany, 84. Cardinal Caje-
nio. His interview with his wife, tan appointedto tryhjm, ib. Ifues
iz . Sallies forth, 1zz. Andrew Do- a bull in favour of indulgences, 92. A
ria escapes, i3., Deputies sent to fufpenfionof proceedings against Lu.
know his terms, ib. Is drowned, ib. ther, andwhy, 93. Publilhes a bull
His brother's vanity ruins their design, of. excommunicaton against him, 95.
124. See Fiefco. ,The political viewS of his condu, be-

Lautrecr, Odet de Foix, marechal de, tween Charles and Francis, 1 8.

the French governor of Milan, his Concludes a treaty with Francis, 129,
characer, II. 139. Alienates the as Concludes a treaty also withi Char-
feAions Qs the Milanese from the les, ib. The conditions of thetreaty
French ib. .Invests Reggio,, but is with Charles, 139. Its conCequencea
repulsed by Guicciardini the hiftoriaq to Italy, 139.. Is disappointed in a
then governor, 140. I .excomniuni- scheme formed by Merone, chancellor
cated by the Pope, lb. The money for of Milan, for .attacking that dutchy,
paying his troops, seized by Louise of 140. .Ecommunicates Marechal de
Savoy, 1 41. is left by his Swiss troops Foix for .his attack of Reggio, and
142. Is driven out of the Milanese declares against France, ib. Takes a
territories. 143. A new body of Swiss body of Swiss into payj. 141. The
under him insist en giving battle to the French driven out ps the Milanese;
IyaperialiRts, who defeat him,. 147. 1.43. .He diet, 144. The spirit of
The Swiss leave him, 148. Retires theconfederacy brokenbyhis death, ib.
into Francewith the 'efidue of his L',/plarre,. oix de, .. commands; the
troops, ib. Delivers up the Dauphin French troops in Navarre for Henry
and Duke of Orleans; in exchange D'Albert, II. .131. Reduces that
for Prancis i. as holtages for the per- kingdom, ib. , is imprudent progrefe
formance of the treaty of. Madrid, into Catile, 133, Is. taken prisoner

54. Is appointed generaliflimoofthe by, the .Spaniards .and the French
the league againlt the Emperor, 296. driven oft.of Navarre, i, .
Mis successes in Italy, 297. Motives ear, father, forms a scheme to be.
which withheld him from. subduing traying. Met~ to the Imperialists, II1;
the Milanese, ib.. Obliges the Prince 3x1.. Introduces soldiers clad like fri-
of Orange to retire to Naples, 30o. ar, 311. Is detected, 313. Is mur-
Blockades Naples, 305.. His army , dered b his monk, 314.
wafted, and himself killed by the pefti- Ltrwf¢ia, Don, his account of the mo-
, lence, 309. tives which induced the . Emperor,
Learning, thf revival of, favonrable. to Charles V. te resign hieihreditary do-
. the reformation of religion, II. 116. . minions,. 111. 352. N9te.
tf^ipi, a public disputation held there by Le£is II. Kingof. Hungary and Bohe-
Martin Luther, and Eccits, on the mia, his charaster, II. 1.88. Is.in*
validity of the,Papal authority, II. 94. vded ind killed by Solyrman the Map
tro X Pope of Rome, his charater, II. nificent,.ib..
54. His apprehenfien on the Elei- --XII. King of Prance, recivel ho-
en of an Erperor of Germany, at the mage of the Archduke Philip, for the
death of Maximilian, ib. His ioun- earldom of Flinders II1, 3. Con,
il to the Germna -Princce, 55. dudes a treaty with him, while at

'rants Charles V. a tenth of all eccle- war. with Ferdinand of Aragpn, 5.

*ntical besefices in CatRile, 6%. Lays Befows his neice Germaine de Foix,
aftile undr an interdift but takes it on Si hiaad, ad coaclllud pcc

t h4d'
, a

with him, lb. Lores the cohfideanc
Philip on that occasion, ti. N1
.Befto*s his eldest daughter, alreas
'bethroithed to Charles V. on accou
of Angduleme, ib.
LTrya, Aitosio de, defends Pavia si

the'Emperor againlt Francis, I. l21
His vigorous defence, a22. Sallies ot
at the battle of Pavia, and contribute
to the de'eat of Francis, z17. Is leI
overnor of Milan by the Duke c
* Borbon, 278. Defeats the force
tthere, 3. Is appointed generaliffi

o of the Italian League, 341. Di

.rts the operations of the invasion o
'France, uider the Emperor, 395
Dies, 403.

Literature, its obligations 'to the erdei

of Jesuits, II. 456.
irtncss di Medici. See Medici.
Zti/fe of Sa&voy, mother of Francis I.

'of Ffance, her'charaler, II. 141. 'Her
rtioteves forfeizing the money appoint-
d for payrent of marechal Lautrec's
trdops, i.. Caufeof her aversion to
1Te houre of Boubon, 191. Her ad-
xobces towards a marriage with Char-
les uke of Bourbon, rejeted bythim,
r92. Determines to ruin him, ib.
Rnfigateks a law-suit ag"infl hum, for
his estates, b. 'Goes tb'diffande Fran-
cis from his intended invaflon of the
Milnefe, who will not wait for her,
tr8. Is appointed regent darihg his
abfnce : it9. Her prudent eoadua
s the defClttof Pavia, and captivity
of her sion Fraici; , 231. Cbncludes a
defensive dalliace with Henry VIII.
3.9. RtdFfie the treatyof Madrid
forthe recovery of her fon'i liberty,
253. Undertakes, with Margaret of
Savoy, to acomrmodate the differences
between the Emperor and Francis,
314. Articles of the peace of Cam-
bray, 3 5.

lIyvla, Ignatio, commands the caflleof

Pampeluna in Navarre, and is wounded
, its defece, II. 13z. His ithufi-
Adick turn of mind, i6. The
founder of Yhe society of Jefuite, ib.
Prevails on the Pope to eflhlih 'the
orler,'i46. An examination into the
constitution of the order, ib. Office
and power of the general, 448. The
rapil pregrers of 'the order, 45 . See
,/ ?Jtits,

.errain, Cirdinal of, persuade* Henry

II. of Fiance, to .cept the offered
allitace 'with Pope Paul, IV. 'nd is sent
to Rome to ntgociate it, 111. 946.

of His imprudent behaviour toward the
te Duchess of Valentinis, 41 1.
ly Luntenrbu, Duke of, avows the opini.
at onsof Luthei, II. 206.

rLthbr, Martint the happy consequences

or of the opinions propagated by him, 11.
. 78. Attacks Indulgences, 8t. His
It birth and education; ib. Chosen phi.
.s lofophical professor at the University of
ft Wittemberg, 83. Inveighs against
of the publishers of Indulgences, i. Writes
s to Albert Ele&or of Mentz, against

them, 84. Composes theses against
Indulgences, ib. Is supported bythe
f Auguinians and encouraged by Fre.

derick Eletor of Saxony, ib. Is urn.
moned to Rome by Pope Leo, 87. Ob-
tains of the Pope leave to have his
docrines examined in Germany, 88.
Appears before Cardinal Cajttan *t
Augftmrgh, ib. Hisrefolute replyto
theperemptory order of Cajetan, to
retrat his principles, 89, Withdraws
s from Auglburg, and appeals from the
Pope ill-informed, to the Pope when
better informed concerning him, ib.
Appeals to a general council, 92. The
death of Maximilian, how offervice to
him, 93. Qeftions the Papal autho.
nty in a public -disputation, 94 His
opinions condemned by theuniverfities
es C6logne and Louvain, ib. A bull
of excommunication publilhed against
him, 95 Pronounces the Pope to be
Antichrit, and 'burns the bull, 96.
Refie&ions on the conduct of the
ccurt of Rome toward him, 97. Re.
fledcions on his condunt, 99. Causes
which contributed to fhvour his oppofi.
tion to the church of Rome, 1o. Par-
ticularly to the art of Printing, 15.
And the revival of learning, 16. He
is summoned to appear at the diet of
Worms,s z. A 1ife condut granted
him thither, ib. His reception there,
ib. Refuses to retrat his opinions,
123. Depart., ib. An edit publilh-
ed againlt him, ib. He is seized and
concealed atWartburg, 114. Progref
of hij doirines, ib. The university
of Paris publilhes a decree against him,
S2 . Wrote 'against by Henry VIII.
of England, ib Answers both, li6.
Withdraws from his retreat to check
the ineonfiderate zeal of Carloladius,
0oS. Undertakes a trnnlation ofthe bi-
ble, i» His dotrines avowed byleveral
of theCetnan Princes, to6. His mode-
rate aid pnrudnt condudt, a6a. Marries
Cathariae Borla, a nun, iS. The

.grett
- V . Ad

great progress of his doctrines among
the Germanick States, 314. En-
courages the Protestants dispirited by
the Emperor's decree against him,
331. His concern at the practices of
the Anabaptifta at Muniter, 356. Is
invited to Leipfick, by Henry Duke
of Saxony, 4;7, His opinion of Crop-
per's treatise to upite the Protestants
and Catholicks, 463. Dies, 1II. 64.
Summary of his charater, 65. Ex-
trat fromi his last will, 68. Note.
See Prt flanti. A view of the ex-
traordinary effects of his revolt from
the church of Rome, on that court,
and on Europe in general, 445.

Lexemktnrg, invaded by Robert de la

Mlrck, lord of Bouillon, II. 134.
Ipbded and over-run by the Duke of
Orleans, III. 7 is again invaded by
Francis, 5.

M

Madrt!, treaty of, br-:werrn the Em-

peror Charles V. nr.i hic prisoner
Francis I. King oF I;:ne ce, . 256.
Sentiments of the. pu'liik w ith regard
to this t:eatv, z5 .
^fagdebrrg, the city o', rcifres to admit
the Interin enfrccd by Charles V.
and prepares for defcfcce, III. 200.
Maurice Eleqor of Saxony appointed
to reduce it, 20!. I. put under the
ban of the Empire, 1l4. The ter-
ritories of, invaded by George of
Mecklenburg, ib. The inhabitants
defeated in a sally, 1 5. Maurice of
Saxony arrives and besieges the city,
216. Surrenders, ib. The senate
ele&s Maurice their burgrave, 218.

Mahraed, Kingof Tunis, hiltory of his

sons, II. 367.

Majorca, an insurrection there, II. 185.

Which is quelled with difficulty, ib.
The moderation of Charles toward
the insurgents, on his arrival in Spain,
186.

Majefly, the appellation of, afTumed by

Charles V. on his ele&ion to the Im-
perial crown, and taken by all the
other monarchs of Europe, 11. 61.

Malines, council of, an account of, II.

Malta', the island of, granted by the

Emperor Charles V. to the knights of
St. John, expelled from Rhodes by
the Turks, 1. 153.

Mama/luRe, extirpated'by Sultan Selim

I! n. go.
WManrmriluie, a facion in Geneva, so
telrrted, some accountof, II1 386.

*

Meanrel, Don John, Ferdinand's amba.

fador at the Imperial court, pays his
court to the Archduke Philip on
Queen Isabella's death, 11. 8. Inter-
cepts Joanna's letter of consent to
Ferdinand's regency of Cfltile, 9.
Negociates a treaty between Ferdi-
nand and Philip, is. Declares for
Maximilian's regency on Philip's
death, 16. Is made Imperial am-
baffador at Rome, and concludes an
alliance between Charles V. and Leo
X. 139. Theconditions of the treaty,
ib. Procures Adrian of Utrecht to
be elected Pope, 146.

Marcel/us II. Pope, his charatcer, III.

338. Dies, 339.

Marciano, battle of, between Peter

Strozzi, and the marquis de Marig-
nano, II. 314.
Margaret of Auflria, and Dowagerof

Savoy, aunt to Charles V. undertakes
with Louise, mother of Francis I. of
France, to accommodate the differ-
ences between those two monarchs, II.
314. Articles of the peace of Cam-
bray, 315.

Marignano, marquis of, appointed com-

mander of the-Florentine army, ating
against the French, III. 311. De-
feats the French army under Peter
Strozzi, 314. Lays siege to Siena,
3 5. Converts the siege into a block-
ade, 316. Sienafurrenders, ib. Re-
duces Porto Ercole, 318. His troops'
ordered into Piedmont by the Empe-
ror, ib.

Marck, Robert de I1, lord of Beuillon,

declares war against the Emperor
Charles V. II. 134. Ravages Lux-
emburg with French troops, ib. Is
commanded to disband hi, troops by
Francis, ib. His territories reduced
by the Emperor, 135.

Mar/filles, besieged by the Imperialifs,

II. 1t6. Relcued by Francis, 217.
Interview and treaty there between
the Pope and Francis, 344.

Martinusai, bilhop of Waradin, is ap-

pointed guardian to Stephen, King of
Hungary. 1. 467. His character, ib.
Solicits tile fliftance of Sultan Soly-
man againll Ferdinand, 468. Solyman
seizes the kingdom, 469. Is appoint-
ed to the government of Tranfylvanii
and the education of the young King,
jointly with the Queen,l l.iat, Nego-
ciate! witl Ferdinand, a23. Prevails
on the Queen to resign Tranfilvsnia
to Ferdinand, 224. Is appointed
governor of Trsanl'lvania, and made

a Ca-

Cairdinal, l.5 Is aaflafinated by Auglburg, 175. Becomes dinatisficd

Ferdinand'a order; 127. with the Emperor, 194. His motives

Martyr, Peter, his idithority cited in to discontent explained, 195. His

proof of the extortiona of the Flemilh addreR and cautibn in his conduta
miniteti of Charles V. II. 45 ig6 Enforcec the Interim in his ter-
ary of Burgundy, contraaeo to Lewis iitories, 17. Makes; neverthelels;
XII. of Fracise, bt marnrd to the profefions of his attachmeht to the
Emperor MaXimilian, IL . Reformation, 198. Undertakes to

Mary of England, her acteflien, ll. reduce Magde',hrg to submit to the

298. Receives ptoporals from the Interim, ib. Protets igainft the
Emperor Charles V. of marrying his countilof Trent; i9. Is commifr
on Philip, 299. The English averse soned by theEmperor to reduce Mag-
to this union, ib. The house of com- deburg, 2o. Joins Oeorge of Meck-
mons remonRtrates tgainft the match, lenburg before Magdeburgh, 215,
300. The articles of marriage, ib. Thecitycapitulates; 2z6. Begins to
The marriage ratified by parliament, intrigue with count Mansfeldt, z 7
nd compleated, 303. Re-eflablifhes Is eleEted Biirgrave of Magdebu'rg,
the Romilh religion, ib. Persecutes 218. Difmifres his troops; 9. His
the Reformers, 304. Invites Charles address in amising the Emperor, 22o
to England on his resignation and pas- Makes an alliance with Henry 1 of
sage to Spain, whichhe declines, 373. France, to make war on the Empe'
Is engaged by Philip to assist him in ror, 12. Makes a formal requisition
his war agairift Prance, 38 . Levies f the Landgrave's liberty, 23 . Joins
money by her Prerogative to carry ort His troops and publishes a sanifefto,
the warj 382. Her negle*t in the 237. Takes polTeffion of Auglburg
security of Calais; 398. Calais in- and other cities, a38. An ineffeausl
veIed and taken by theDuke of Guile negociation with Charles, 240. De-
400. Dies, 41 i. feats i body of the Emperor's troopc,
Mriy, daughter of Jimes V. of Scot-' a42. Takes the catle of Ehrenbsrg,

land, succeeds to the croWn an irfant, ib. Is retarded by a mutiny in his
III. 1. Is contraced to te Dauphin troops, 243. Enters Infpruck, and
of Since, 168. Is edutated at the narrowly mitles taking Charles, 244.
.court 'of France, a10, 405. The A negociation between him and Fel-
marriage compleated, i. Afrumes- dinand, 251. Besieges Frankfort on
the title and arm of Englind oh the the Maine, 257. His inducements to
death of Mary 43. an accommodation; 258. Signs a
--Mattria, John, a baker, becoines a treity with the Emperor at Paffal,

leader of the Anabaptiflr, at Munfler 2559. Refleaionls ohhiscondua in this
1I. 350. Seizes the city and eftablifles war, 26o. Marches into Hungary to
a new form ofgovernment there, 35 1. oppose the Turks, 26. Is placed at
Repulses the binflop of Munfler, 353. the head of the league againfl Albert
Is killed, i6. See Bocold and Ana- of Brandenburg, 28s. Defeats Al-
baptij. bert, but is killed in the battle, nas.

Maurice, duke of Saxohy, his motives His chara6ter, 283. Is succeeded by

for not acceding to the Protestant his brother Augustus, 284.
leagueofSmalkalde, Ill. no. Marches MAaximnlra, Emperor of Germnny,
tothe affiflance of Ferdihand in Hun- claims the regency of Calile on his
gary, ib. His difference iWith his son Philip's deatl, il. x6. Is frp-
uncletheeleeqor, lb. Hiscondu& at ported in his claim by Don John
the diet of Worms, 50. Joins the Manuel, ib. Loses it, 8. Obtains
Emperor against the Protestants, 86. the government of the Low-Countrics
Hismotives, oo. His infidiouscon- by the death of Philip, 21. Ap-
duCt toward the Elecor, o0i. Seize points \Villiam dc Croy, lord of
the ele6torate of Saxony, 04. Saxony Chievres, to fuperinteid the educatio,
recovered by the Elector, o. His of his grandlon Charle::, ib. Con-
ineffetlual endeavours to reduce Wit- cludes a peace with France and Vcnice,
temberg for the Emperor, 144. Ob- 39. Die, 48. State of Europe at thi!
tains possession of the Ele6torate, 148. pcrid, ib. His endeavours to feclir.
I formally lavelted at the diet of the Imperial crown to his grandlbl

* Charles, 49. How obftruacd, ib.

McrflcnbirSb,

crsAllenburgh, George of, invades the
territories of Magdeburg for the Em-
peror, III. 14. Deleats the Mag-
deburghers, who sally out on him,
215. Is joined by Maurice of Sax-
ony, who aftumes the supreme com-
mand, ib.

Medicino, John James. See lAtarignano.
Medici, Alexander, restored to the

dominions of Florence, by the Em-
peror Charles, II. 323. Is affafli-
nated, 415.

Medici, Cardinal de, eleeled Pope,

and assum.es the title of Clement
VII. II. 97 See Clement VII.
JMedici, Cathaiine di, is married to

the duke of Orleans, II. 345. Is
conjecured, by the Emperor Charles
V. to have poisoned the Dauphin,
406.
JMedici, Cosmo de, made duke of Flo-

rence, I. 417. Is supported by the
Emperor, and defeats the partizans
of Lorenzo, 418. Asserts his inde-
pendency against the Emperor, III.
275. Of'ers to reduce Siena for the
Emperor, 311. Enters into a war
with France, ib. See MIarignano.
His address in procuring the invefti-
ture of Siena from Philip II. of Spain,
394. It is granted to him, 396.
ledici, Lorenzo de, assassinates his
kinsman Alexander 11. 416. Flies,
417. Attempts to cppofe Cefmo,
but is defeated, 418.
tMedinia del Campo, the inhabitants of,
refuse to let Fonseca take the mili-
tary stores there, for the fege of the
inlurgent in Segovia, II. 157. The
town almost burnt by Fonseca, 158.
The inhabitants repulse him, ib.
Surrenders after the battle of Villa-
lar, and diflolution of the Holy Jun-
ta, 179.
Mtelavlhon, imbibes the opinion of

Martin Luther, 11. 97. Is employ-
ed to draw up a confession of faith
by the Protefiant Princes at the diet
of Auglburg, 329, Is deje&ed by
the Emperor's decree' agiinll the
Protestants1 but comforted by Lu-
ther, 331. Is invited to Paris by
Francis; 381. His conference with
Eckius; 462. Is prevailed on to
favour the Interim enforced by the
Emperor,. II.l 197.

Meloi, Cade' de', made viceroy of

Valencsia o the departure ofCharles
V for Germany, 11. 66. Appoint-
ed to command the troops of the
notables igainft the Germanada,
£84. Defeated by them in fcversl

aflions, ib. Destroys the afTociatio.;
ib.
Mfentz, alchbifhop cf, artfully declares

before the Emperor, the diet of
Augibouig's acceptance of the Init-e
rim, without being authorized by
it, III. 174.

Merveille, a Milanese gentleman em-

ployed as envoy from Francis I. to
Francis Sforza, duke of Milan, his
fate, 11. 379.

Metes, seized by Montmorrncy the

French general, IlI. 240. The-duke
of Guise made governor of, 267.
Is besieged by the Emperor, 270.
The Emprror desists, and retires in
a dirreffed condition, 274. A scheme
formed by father Leonard to betnay
the city to the Imperialifs, 3zi.
The conspiracy detected by the go-
vernor, 323. Leonard murdered by
his monks, and his associates exe-
cuted, 324.
.Mezieret, in France, besieged by the

Imperialists, II. 135. Gallant de-
fence of, by the chevalier Bayard, ik.
The siege raised, ib.

Milan, marechal de Foix appointed to

be the French governor of, II. 139.
His charaaer, ib. The Milanese
alienated from the French by his op-
rreflions, ib. Invaded by the eccle-
fiallical troops under Prosper Colon-
na, r41. The French driven out,
143. Oppresseo by the Imperial
troops, 188. Invaded by the French,
t95. Who are driven out by Co-
lonna, 196. The Imperial troops
there mutiny for pay, but are ap-
peased by Moron6, 202. Abandond
by the French, ib. Over-run again
by Francis, who seizes the city, 219.
The French retire on news of the
battle of Pavia, 228. The invefli-
ture of, granted to Sforza, 240.
Taken from him and granted to the
duke of Bourbon, 248. Difordera
committed by the Imperial troops
there, 266. Opprtflive naeifures of
Bourbon tofupply his mutinous troops,
276. The French forces there de-
feated by Antonio de Leyva, 312.
Is again granted by the Emperor to
Storza, 322. Death of Sforza, 388.
The pretensions of Francis to that
dutchy, 389. Is seized by the Em-
pe or, ib. The marquis del Ouafto
appointed governor, 404.

Mobcz, battle of, between Solytan

the Mognificent, and the Hungari.
ans, 11. a88.

Manaflic orders, enquiry into the fun-

damental principles of, 11. 447.
Peculiar conltitution of the order of
Jefulits, ib.

Mcnrcad, Don Hugo di, the Imperial

ambassador at Rome, his intrigues
with Cardinal Colonna gainft Pope
Clemeqt II.173. Reduces the Pope
to an accommodation, 274. Is de-
feated aod killed by Andrew Doria
in a naval engagement before the
harbour of Naples, 305.
lJSfsba, is tent by the count d'l'oguien

to Francis for permiflion to give battle
to the Marquis de Guoeo, Ill. 30.
Obtains his suit by his spirited argu-
ments, 31. Commands in Siena,
when befleged by the Marquis de
Marignano, III. 315. His vigorous
defence, ib. Is reduced by famine,
and capitulateh, 316.
Mfn#te Alcino, numbers of the citizens

of Siena retire thither after the re-
duotion of that city by the Floren-
tines, and eftablili a free govern-
ment there, III. 317.

Ioentecaculi, count of, acrufed and tor-

tured for poisoning the Dauphin,
charges the Emperor with intigating
it, II. 405.
Mstntisrency, Marerchal, hi chsranter,

1I. 399. Francis adopts his plan for
resisting the Emperor, and commits
the execution to hin, ib. Hi.pre-
cautions, ib. His troopsdefpile his
conduc, 40!. Observations on bis
operations, 403. Is disgraced, Ill.
6. Conduas the army of Henry II.
to join Maurice of Saxony,and lfires
Metz, 240. Dissuades Henry from
acoeptirg the offered alliance with
Pope Paul IV. 345. Commandsthe
French army againlt the Duke of
Savoy, 384. Detaches ,'Andelot
to relieve St. Quintin, ib. ELpofes
himself imprudently to an action,
and is defeated, 385. Is taken pri-
soner, 386. Nognciates a peace be-
tween Philip and Henry, 411. Re-
turns to France, and is highly honour-
ed by Henry, 41 . His tfliduiy in
forwarding the aegociations, 4X4.
His expedient for promoting thetreaty
of Chateau Cambrefif, 417.
Mentrpligr, a fruitlcl conference held

there,for the reftirution of thelking-
dom of l'avarre, 1. 47.
'Morene, Jerom, chancellor of MilaQ,

liu chartl, er, .11 . Itclire« from
the French redtions ia Milan to
' ljanci .Sf',rza, iS. Hil ,iotrygeu

how rendered abortive, t40. Quiets
the mutiny of the Imperial troop in
Milan, II. aca. I* difgulted with
the behaviourof Charles, a23. In-
trigues against the Emperor with
Pcfcara, 41. Is betrayed to the
Emperor by Pescara, 243. Is ar.
refed at his visit to Pescara, 244.
is set at liberty by the duke of Boar-
bon, and becomes his cofiden, 276.
Merfi# Prance, taken by the Imperi-

liRts, I. 135. Retaken byFrancis,iS.

MulhaSfen, battleof, between the Em-

peror Charles V. and the Eleltor of
Saxony, III. 141.

Mdrly Hafcen, king of Tunic, his in-

human treatment of his father and
brothers, II. 367. Is expelled by
Barbarossa, 369. Engages the Em-
peror Charles V. toreRltre him, 37e.
Is etablifhed again by-the surrender
of Tunis, 375. His treaty with
Charles, 376.

Murcer, Thomans, a disciple of Luther

opposes him with fanatical notions, 11.
5s9. Heads the infurreACion of the
pealaits in Thuringia, a60. His
extravagant cfhemes, ib. Is defeated
and put to death, 6 1.
uJnietr, the first settlement of the
Anabaptists in that city, II. 350o.
The city seized by them, 35 . They
establish a new form of government
there, i. As called Mount Sion, 352.
The biWhop of, repuied by them,
353. Is blockaded -by the bifiop,

6 The city take, 358. See

Murder, the price of composition for,

by the Rom;lh clergy, 11. 'oS.

Mufafqph, the declared heir to Sultan

Solymorn the Magnificent, is invefied
with the adminiftrtion of Diarbe-
quir, 111. 2a2. His father rendered
jealou of ht. popularity, by the arts
of -oxlana, a98. Is Arangled by
his fsther'5 order, 9 6. His only
son murdered, e9,.
.Nplir, the revenucs of, mortgaged by

Laanoy to fupplythe Emperor in his
exiygecies, U. ao. Invaded by the
;grcarh undert r Duke of Albany,
214. Invaded fby Pope Clement
'VII a7 Treatqfbtwnen the Pope
and Lannoy vioRy ps, aIo The
Prince of Orrile retrts thither
rbefore Lutree, 304. Ii btckLded
by .Ltutrec, 3.S. m engagement
inctbe.hbaaer of, ~Mw An drew

Doti,

Doria and Moncada, ib. Causes
which disappointed the French ope-
rations gainft, 306. Doria revolts,
and opens the communication by sea
again, 308. Opprelfed by the Spanish
viceroy Don Pedro de Toledo, be-
comes difaffe4led to the Emperor
Charley V. 11. 177. Is harafled by
a Turkilh fleet, 178.

Naoa", count of, invades Bouillon at

the head of the Imperialist, II. 135.
Invades France, takes Moufon, and
besieges Meziers, but is repulred, ib.

Navarre, the kingdom of, unjustly ac-

quired by Ferdinand of Aragon, II.
19. D'Alberr's invasion of, defeated
by Cardinal Ximene, 3;. Its cafles
difmantled,except Pampeluni, wh;ch
Ximenes ftrengbheqs, ib. Invaded
by Francis 1. in the name of He ry
D'Alhert, 132. Reduced by L'Es-
parre, the French general, 133. The
French driven out by the Spalniars,
and L'Efparre taken prilbner, ib.

NetherlandL, the government of, firRf

assumed by Charles V. II. a3 The
Flemings averse to Charles's going
to Spain, 39. Invaded by Francis 1.
king of France, 135. A truce con.
cluded with, by Henry VIII. of Eng-
land, 306. Invaded by Francis again,
407. A fufpenlion of arms there,
408. An infurreftio at Ghent, 435.
See Gbaet. Is once more invaded by
Francia, 111. i5. Resigned by the
Emperor to his Con Philip, 354. A
review of the alteratioas in, during
the fxteenth century, 45S.

Nie, a truce for ten years concluded

there between the Emperor and Fran-
cis, 413. Besieged by the French
and 1 urks, III 18.
VSye, treaty of, between Charles V.

and Francis 1. of France, II. 38.
The terms of, neglected by Charles,
68.
Vyremtburgb, the cty of, embraces the

reformed religion, II. ao6. Diet of,
particulars of Pope Adrian's brief
to, refpeEting the reformers, zoy.
The reply to, tol. 'r, pocs a ge-
aerel council, i. Present!; a lift of
(rievances to the Popt, 1c. The
reeefs, or edict, of, ato. ThiN diet
of great advan:age to the reformers,
i&. Proceedings of a second diet
there, 11a. Rece of ite diet, 13.
An accommudation agreed to there,
between the Emperor Charles V.
end the Proteftante 337.

ay, 0d pIc in Brbry .
Oras, *ad othe plhc# in Barbary all

nexed to the crown ot Cagile, by
Ximenes, II. 18.

Orange, Phillibert de Chalons, prince

of, general of the Imperial army oa
the death of the duke of Bourbot,
takes the calfle of St. Angelo, and
Pope Clement VII. prisoner, 11. e87.
Retires to Naples on the approach of
Lautrec, 304. Take, his successor
the marquis de Saluces, prisoner at
Averfa, 309.

Orkleas, duke of, delivered up to the

Emperor Charles V. with the Dau-
phin, as hofltages for the performance
of the treaty of Madrid, II. 154.
Is married to Catharine di Medici,
345. Becomes Dauphin by the death
of his brother, 405. Sec Dauphin.

-D uke of, brother to the for-

mer, commands the arry appointed
by Francis I. for the iavafion of Lux*
embourg, III. 7. Is prompted by
envy to abandon hi, conlqueft, and
join his brother the Dauphin in Rou-
fillon, 8. Die, 53.
pachber, Donna Maria, wife to Don

John de Padillo, her artful scheme
to raise money to supply the army of
the Holy Junta, II. 171. Her hus-
band taken pr.foner and executed,
»77. His letter to her, 178. Raises
forces to revenge his death, 180. I
reduced and retiree to Portugal, 8.18

Padilla, Don John de, his, family and

charater, II. g5. Heads the irfur-
retion at Toledo, ib. Routs the
troop under Ronquillo, 157. Calla
aconvention of the malcontents at
Avila, 160 Forms the confederacy
called the Holy Junta, 161. Dif-
claims Adrian's authority, ib. Gets
possession of Qgeen Joanna, ib. Re-
moves the Holy Junta to Tordefillaa,
the place of her refidnce, 16a. Sent
with troops to Valladolid, and de-
privet Adrian of all power of govern-
ment, 163. Is fuperleded in the
command of the army of the Junta,
by Don Pedro de Giron, 170. Is ap.
pointed commander at the resignation
of Giron, 171. His army supplied
with money by an expedient of his
wife, 173. Besieges Toerelobaton,
i75. Taker and plunders it, i. Con-
cludes a truce with the nobles, ib.
Is wounded and taken prifeger in an
ation with the coade de Haso, 177.
Is put to death, ió. Hik letter to his
eife, 1 78. Hia letter to the ity of
Toledo, i.

Puluaeilut,

INDEX

satatlsoate, the Reformation eflablilhed
there by the Eleaor Frederick, Ill.

56. %alatine, count, ambassador from the
diet at Francfort, brings Charles V.
the offer of the Imperial crown,
which he accepts, II. 6a.
'ampel/una, castle of, in Navarre, its

fortifications firengthened by Cardi-
nal X.mene, II. 35. Taken by
L'Efi'arres the French general for
Henry D'Albret, 133, Retaken by
the French, ib.
Papacy, hbw liable to be affeCted by

the difpofhl of the Inpekial"crown,
II. S4.
Paraguay, a sovereignty eflablilhed

there, 'by the ordtr of Jesuits, II.
453. The inhabitants of, civilized
by them, 457. Precautions'rfed by
the Jesuits to preserve the indepen-
dency of their empire there, 458.

FariJ, a decree publiflied by the uni-

verfity of, against Martin Luther the
Reformer, II. 1a5. A decree of
the parliament of, published against
the Emperor Charles VY -4 6,
armna, the dutchy of, confirrhed to
OaavioaFarnefe, by Pope Julius I!I.
III. o09. Is attacked 'by:the Impe-
iialifts and fuccel'sfully proteaed by
the'French, a21.
Pafa.u, a treaty concluded there be-

tween the Emperor Cnailes V. and
Maurice of Sdxony, I11. i59 Re-
fle&iods on this pe.ce, apnd the con-
dlu of Maurice, 260.

pawvia, lefiegtd by IrancisIl. ofgrance,

'

. 221. Vigorously defendedby An-
tonio de Leyva, 2.2. Battle of,,be-
tween Francis and the Duke of Bonr-
bon, 2'6. The Iprierial' troops in
that city mutiny, 235.
PnPul.II Pop(, eledle., 11. 347. His

character, ib. Proposes a general
council to be held at Mantua, 362.
Negociates perlonally between the
Emperor and Franlcis, 412. Iflue a
hbll for a cnincil at Mantua, 421.
Prorogues and transfers it to Vicena,
423. A partial reformation of abufrs
by, ib. Summons the council of
Trent, Ill. a2. Prorogues it, 23.
Summons it again, 46. Granti; the
dutchies of Parma and Placentia to
his illegitimate son, 54. Deprives
and excommunicates the eleaoral
bithqp of Cologne, 71. Preffct the
Emperor to declare against the Pro-
teftantl, 72. Concludes an alliance
with him againlt the Protcflants, '78.
Indiscreetly puhlifliec thii treaty, 8o.
His troops join the I.mprcor, 93.

TO T. HE

Recals them, ill. Removes the
council from Trent to Bologna, 164.
Refuses the Emperor's request to
carry the council back to Trent, ib.
His rerentment against the Emnperor
for the nurder of his son Cardinal
Farnese, 167. Is petitioned by the
diet of Augfbaurg for the return of
the council to Trent, 169. Elides
the complying with this requell, 17o.
His sentiments of the Interia pub-
lithel by Charles, 177. DifmilTus
the council of Bologna, 182. An;-
nexes Parma and Pl'centia, to tha
Holy See, 187. Dies, 188. The
manner of his death inquired into, ib.

Paul IV. Pope, ele&ed, 1I. 339. Hi%

character and history, 340. Iounds
the order of Theatines, ib. Is the
principal occalion of eftablilhing the
inquisition in the Papal territori-,
341. Lays aside his aullerity on hir
election, 342. His partiality to his
n(-phews, ib. Is alienated from the
Emperor by his nephews, 344.
Makes overtures to ah alliance with
France, 345. Is enraged by the re-
cess of the diet of Augsburg, 347.
Si5ns a treaty with France, 348. Is
included in the truce for five years,
concluded between the Emperor ani
Henry, 360. His insidious artifics
to defeat this-trtce, 362. ' Aboflves
Henry fiom his oath, and conclud i
a new treaty with him, 366. His
violent 'poceedings agiinlt Philip,
now King of Spain, 376. The Cam-
pagna Romana seized by the Duke
d'Alva, 368. Concludes a truce
with Alva, 369 Contrail between
his conduct and'that of' Charles, 375.
Renews his hollilities againll Philip,
377. Is unprovided for military opt.
rations, 378. Is reduced to make
peace with Philip, by the recalof
the Duke of Guise after the defeat of
St QOintin, '391. Receives an ant
baffador from the Emperor Ferdinanil
to notify his cleeion,' but refuses to
fee him or to acknowledge the Em-
peror, 402. Dies, 430.

Paulin, a French' officer, sent ambaffa-

dor from Francis I. to Sultan Soly-
man, 1il. 14. His successful ntgo.
ciations at the Porte, ib,

PemobroAt, earl of, sent by Queen Mary

of lrigland'with a body of men to
join thle Spianlh army in the Low
Countries, 38:.

Perpignan, the capital ns Roufilillon

belieged by the Dauphin of Fra»cec
111. 7. The siege raised, 8.

PtIfrara,

prfcara, marquis de, takes Milan by

alfault, II. 143. Drives Bonnivet
back to France, io3. His generous
care of the chevalier Bayard, i*.
Commands in the invasion of Pro-
vence, 2 16. Oefeges Marseilles, ib.
His army retires towards Italy, on
the appearance of the French troops,
i17. Refigna Milan to the French,
a ig. Prevails on his Spani(h troops
not to murmur at preferit for their
pay, 22o. Contributes to the defeat
of Francis atthe battle of Pavia, zZ7.
Is difguRfed at Francis being taken to
Spain, without his concurrence, 24o.
His refentmeant inflamed by Morone,
241. Betrays Morone's designs to
the Emperor, 243. Arrests MP-
rone, 144. Dies, 248.

fhilip, Archduke of AutIria, and fa-

ther of Charles V. visits Spain, with
his wife Jonnna, II. 3. Does ho-
mage by the way to Lewis XII. of
France for the earldom of Slanders,
ib.. His title to the crown acknpw-
lelged by the Cortes, ib. Is disgust-
ed with the formality of the Spanish
court. ib.' Ferdinand becomesjea-
jous of his power, ri. Slights his
wife, 4. His abrupt departure from
Spain, ib. PalTes through France,
and enters into a treaty with Lewis,
5. His sentiments on Ferdinand's
obtaining the regency ofCaflile, 8.
Requires Ferdinand to retire to Ara-
gon, and resigns his regency of Caf-
tile, ib. The regency of Castile
veiled jointly in him. Ferdinand and
Joanna, by the treaty ot Salamanca,
il. Sets out for Spain, and is dri-
ven on the coafl of England,
where he isdetained three nmoaths
by Henry VII. i.. Arrives at Co-
runna, ib. The Castilian nobility
declareopenly for him, ib. Ferdi-
nand resigns the regency ofCaftile to
him, 13. Interview between them,
ib. Acknowledged King of Cafiil4
by the Cortes, 14. Dies, ib. Jo-
anna's extraordinary conduct in re-
gard to hisbody, 15. Sce osannla.

Jfilip, Prince, foi to the Emperor

Charles V. his right of fucceflion
recognized by the Cortes of Aragon
and Valencia, III. 9. Is acknow-
ledged by the States of the Nether-
lands, 184. His deportment dif-
gults the Flemings, i85. His cha-
racter, 207. Is married to Mary
Queen of England. 300, 303 The
E:nglilh parliament jealous of him,
305. His father resigns his he-
reditary dominions to him, 349.
1* .alled by his father out of Eng-

land, 354. The ceremony of invert..
ing him, ib. His father's address to
him, 356. Commissions cardinal
Granville to addiels the assembly in
his name, 357. Mary Queen-dow-
ager of Hungary resigns her regen-
cy, ib. The dominions of Spain re-
signed to him, 358. His unpolitenefis
to the French Ambafrador Coligni,
361. Note. The Pope's violent pro-
ceedings against him, 366. His
scruples concerning commencing hof-
tilities against the Pope, 367. His
ungrateful neglea in paying his fa-
ther's penion, 374. The Pope re-
pews hostilities against him, 377.'
Affemhles an army in the Low Coun-
tries againfl France, 380. Goes o-
ver to England to engage that king-
dom in the war, 381. Visits the
camp at St. Quintin, after the vic-
tory, 387. Opposes the scheme of
penetrating to Paris, and orders the
siege of St. Quintin to be profecut-
ed, 388. St. Quintin taken by al-
fault, 389. The small advantages
he reaped by these successes, 390.
Builds the Escurial in memory of
the battle of St. Quintin, 391.
Concludes a peace with the Pope,
39a. Reftore6Placentia to Otlavio
Farnese, 394. Grants the invefti-
ture of Siena to Cosmo di Medici,
396. Enters into negociations for
peace with his prisoner Montmorea-
cy, 411. Death of Queen Mary,
421. Addresses her fuccefllorEliza.
beth for marriage, ib. Elizabeth's
motives for rejecing binr, 4z3. He
evasive anfwerto him, 414. Sup-
plants his Con Don Carlos and mar
ries Henry's daughter Elizabeth,
427. Articles of the treaty of Cha-
teau Cambrcfis, 4z8.
Phililibrt, Emmanuel, Duke (of Sa-

voy, See Savy.
'biillipino, nephew to Andrew Doria,

defeats Moncada, in a lea engage-
ment before tile harbour of Naples,
I1. 305.
Pialiena, marquis de, invades Tran-

lylvania for Ferdinand, I1I. 223.
Misrepresents Cardinal Martinuzai
to Ferdinand, andobtainb a commir.
sion to affaflinatehim, 227. Is forc-
ed to abandon Transylvania, 189.
Picardy, invaded by. Henry VIII. II.

si5. Henry forced by tLe Duke de
Vendome to retire, ib. Invaded
again under the Duke of Siffolk.
noo. Who penetrates aimoR to Pa-
ris but is driven back, i;. Ineffcau-
ul invasion by the ImperialiRs, 404.

PlaE ntia,

trlaetie, the dutchy of, granted tog-

ther with that of Parma by Pope Paul
III. to his natural son, Cardinal Far-'
«efe, II. 54. Farnese, aflaflinated
there, 166. Is taken poffefion of by
the Imperial troops, ib. Restored to
Otavio Farnese, by Philip II. of Spain,
394.

Pole, Cardinal, arrives in England with a

legantine commifiion, 11. 304. Eo-
deavours to mediate a peace betweeni
the Emperor and the King of France,
without fuiccef, 315. Is recalled from
the court of England, by Pope Paul
Iv. 377.

Printin, its elfeft on theprogrffs of the

Reformation, 11. 5g.

Pragan, its privileges abriged by Perdi-

naad King of Bohemia, IIl. 161.
Prete/aorts, the derivationof the name,

II 327. Of whon they originally con-
silted, ib. A severe decree publilhed
againlt them by the Emperor, 331.
They enter into a league, 331. See
Si;;-tlalds. Renew their league, and
apply to Francij King of France, and
Henry VIII. of England, for proteli-
on, 334- Are secretly encouraged by
Francis, ib. Receive a supply of mo-
ney from Henry, 336. Terms of the
pacification agreed to between them
and the Emperor at Nuremburg, 337.
.Afift the Emperor against the Turks,
338. Theiregeciations with the Pope,
relative to a general council, 340. Re-
new the league of Smalkalde for ten
·-year, 36a. The motives for refusing
to aflift the King of France against the
Emperor, 3 8. Refule to acknowledge
the council funmmoned by the Pope at
Mantua, 42. A conference between
their principal divines and a deputation
of Catholieks, at Ratilbon, 462. This
conference how rendered fruitleft, 464.
Obtain a private grant from Charles in
their favour, 465. Drive the Duke of
Brunswick from his dominions, Ill. 14.
All rigorous edi&a against them sus-
pended by a recess of the diet of Spires,
17. Their remonltrances to Ferdinand
at the diet of Warms, 48. Their in-
flexible adherence to the recess of
Spires, 49. DifeJdrn all connLion
with the council of Trent, o0. Are
firclnthened by the acctfon of Prede-
tick ElcItor Paatinc, S6. Are alarm-
ed at the prqeeediWgs of the Emperor,
~9. T1y The Emperor leigues with
the Pope against them, 78. Prce

TO THE

pare to resist the Emperar, 8. Levy
an army, 86. The operations of the
army diftra6ed by the joint comman-
ders; 9a. The army dispersed, xo6.
The Eletor of Saxony reduced, 142.
The landgrave deceived by treaty and
confined, 154. The Emperor' cruel
treatmentofthem, i58. The Interim,
a system of theology recommended by
the Emperor to the diet at Augiburg,
174. Are promised protedtion by the
Emperor at the council of Trent, tot.
The Emperor proceeds rigorously a-
gainft them, 213. Their deputies ob.
tain a fate-conduCt from the Emperor,
but are refuted by the council, 2ai.
Maurice of Saxony raises an army in
their caure, 237. See Malrice. Trea-
ty of Palfau, a59. The Protefant
Princes again unite to Rrengthen the
Protestant interest, 33 . Recess of the
diet of Augsburg on the fubje&tof reli-
gion, 331. Why originally averse to
the principles of toleration, 336.

Pravesot, is laid waste by the marefchal

Montmorency on the approach of the
Emperor Charles V. II. 399. Is en-
tered by the Emperor, 400. The dif-
attrous retreat of the Emperor from,
403.

Prica, when conquered by the Teuto-

nick order, II. 263. Is ereoted into a
dutchy, and finally into a kingdom,
and enjoyed by the house of Branden-
burgh, z64.

R

Rati/tn, a conference between a depu-

tation of Protetant and Catholick di-
vines, before the Emperor and diet
there, II. 462. This conference how
rendered fruitless, 464. A diet open-
ed there by the Emperor, III. 74.
The Catholic members of, afrert the
authority of the council of Trent, 75.
The ProteRants present a memorial a-
gaiaft it, 76. The Proteflant depu-
ties retire, 77.

Retfrumaticn, in religion, the rife of, ex-

plained, 11. 78. The diet at Worms
called by Charles V. to cheek the pro-
grefs of it, i. Account of Mar-
til Luther, the Reformer, 8g. Be.
ginning of it In Switzerland ,y Zuingli-
us, 94. State of in Germany, at the
arrival of Charles V. '97. Refletion
on the conduct of the court of Rome
toward Luther, ii, And on lIu-
thlc't conduct, 99. Inquiry into

the

into the causes which contributed to
the progress of, s11. Observations on
the pontificate of Alexander VI. and
Julius II. o10. The immoral lives of
the Romish clergy, 103. The progress
of, favoured by the invention of print-
ing, 1 5. And the revival of learn-
ing, 116. The great progress of, in
Germany, 206. Advantages derived
to, from the diet at Nuremburgh, 10.
Its tendency in favour of civil liberty,
a58. The dissensions between the
Emperor and the Pope, favourable to,
290. The great spread of, among the
German Princes, 324. The consef-
sion of Auglburg drawn up by Melanc-
thon, 329. Causes which led to that
of Englald, 345. The excesses it
gave rife to, 348. See Proteilants,
Maurice, and Smalkalde Is eRablifh-
ed in Saxony, 427. The great alter-
ation occasioned by, in the court of
Rome, II. 445. Contributed to im-
prove both the morals and learning of
the Romilh church, 449.

Riggie, invested by the French, who are

repulsed by the governor Guicciardini
the hifftorian, 11. 140.

Remonfirance of grievances drawn up by

the Holy Junta, the particulars of,
II. 165. Remarks on, 167.

Reverse, a deed so called, signed by the

arch-duke Ferdinand on being eleted
King of Bohemia, II. 289.

Rheggio, plundered and burnt by Barba-

roffa, Ill. 18.

Rhodes, the island of, besieged by Soly-

man the Magnificent, II. 152. Taken
by him, 153. The island of Malta
granted to the knights of, by the Em-
peror Charles V. ib.

kichlieu, Cardinal, his remarks on De

Retz's history of Fiefco's conspiracy,
111. 1s5. Note.

Rincon, the French ambassador at the

Porte, the motives of his return to
France, III. a. Is murdered in his
journey back to Contantinople, by or-
der of the Imperial governor of the
Milanese, 3.

Rerme, reflecions on the condut of the

court of, refpe6ling the proceedings
against Martin Luther, 11. 98. The
exorbitant wealth of the church of,
previous to the Reformation, 106.
Venality of 113. How it drained
other countries of their wealth, ib.
The city seized by Cardinal Coloirna,
and Pope Clement VII. besieged in the

VOL. III.

cattle of St. Angelo, 274. The city
taken by the Imperialists, and Bour-
bon killed, 285. Is plundered, 286.
The great revolution in the court of,
during the sixteenth century, I1. 444.
How affected by the revolt of Luther,
445. The spirit of its government
changed by, 447.
Ronquil., sent by Cardinal Adrian with

troops to suppress the infurreaion in
Segovia, II. 157. Is routed by them,
ib.
Rovere, Francesco Maria de, restored to

his dutchy of Urbino, by Pope Adrian,
II. i88.
Roxalana, a Ruffian captive becomes the

favourite mistress of Sultan Solyman
the Magnificent, II. 289. Her only
daughter married to Ruftan the Grand
Vizier, 290. Procures herself to be
declared a free woman by the Sultan,
291. Is formally married to him, ib.
Renders Solyman jealous of the virtues
of his Ton Muftapha, 292. Muftapha
irangled, a96.
Ruflan, Grand Vifier to Solyman the

Magnificent, is married to his daughter
by Roxalana, III. 290. Enters into
Roxalana's scheme to ruin Solyman's
son Muftapha, ib. Is sent with an
army to deltroy him, 294. Draws
Solyman to the army by false reports,
295.

S

Salamanca, treaty of, between Ferdinand

of Aragon, and his fon-in-law Philip,
II. A1.

Salerno, Prince of, heads the difaffeted

Neapolitans, against the oppreflions of
the viceroy Don Pedro de Toledo, 1II.
278. Solicits aid from Henry II. of
France, who infligates the Turks to
invade Naples, ib.

Salurcs, marquis de, succeeds Lautrec in

the command of the French army be-
fore Naples, II. 3e9. Retires to
Aveifa, where he is taken prisoner by
the Prince of Orange, ib. Betrays hie
charge in Piedmont, 397.

Sarcerre, count de, defends St. Difiere,

against the Emperor Charles, 111. 34.
Is deceived into a surrender by the Car-
dinal Granvclle, 36.

Saurage, a Fleming, made chancellor of

Castile by Charles, on the death of
Ximcnes, 11. 44. Hie extortions ib.

Sauos, is fortified, and its harbour clear-

ed by the French lo favour its rivallhip
with Genoa, II. 307.

I i Savy,

ad'-vy, i view of the (tate of, during the
' fixteeiith century, 11I. 454.

- 'Charles Duke of, marries Bea-
trix of Portugal, siser to the Emperor
Charles V. II. 384. The cause of
Francis's displeasure against him, ib.
His territories overrun by the French
troops, 385. Geneva recovers its li-
berty, 386. His situation by the truce
at Nice, between the Emperor and
Francis, 414. Is besieged at Nice,
by the French and Turks, 111. 18.

--- EEmmanuel Phillibert Duke of,

appointed by Philip of Spain to com-
mand his army in the Low Countries,
38z. Invests St. Quintin, ib. De-
feats D'Andetot in an endeavour to
join the garrifesn 384. But does
not hinder him from entering the
town, 385: Defeats the Constable
Montmerency, and .taies him pri-
soner, ib. Is graciously visited in the
camp by Philip, 387. Takes St.
Quintin by assault, 389. Afilts Mont-
morency in negociating peace between
Philip and. Henry, 41%. Marries Hen-
ry's fiter Elizabeth, 427. 430.

Saxony, Eletor of, appointed joint com-

mander of the army of the Protestant
league, with the landgrave of Hesse,
111. 9i. Their charasers compared,
92. Oppoles the Landgrave's inten-
tion of giving battle to the Emperor,
95. His Ele&orate seized by Maurice,
104. The army of the league dif-
perse, 1o6. Recovers Saxony, 110.
Is amused by Maurice with a negocia-
tion, 1 i. Railies an-armv to defend
himself against the Errperor, 1 6.
Is irrelblu'e in his mealures, 137.
Charle. paTses the Elbe, 138. Is at-
tacked by the Imperialifr, 14r. Is
taken plillner and harfily received by
the Emlperor, 141. Is condemned to
death by a colrt martial, 145. His
relolution on the ocscaion, 146 Is
induced by regard to his family to fur-
render his electorate, 148. Refuses
the Emperor's defi' e of his approving
the Intrtin, t78. The rigolr of his
continemcnt inc eanfd, lb. Is canied
by ihe Emperor with him into the Ne-
therlads, 183. Is ielealtd by the Em-
peror ,nl Maurice taking arms agiinlt
h}im, but chutes to continue with the
Emperor, 45. Ohtains his liburty
after tlhe treaty of Palau, a65.

. .-George Duke ol, an enemy to

the Reformarion, 11. 416. His death
an advalntage to the Reformation, ib.

The Protestant religioin efablihed b.
Henry Duke of, 417. Henry is fuc
ceeded by his son Maurice, 111. o0
His motives for not acceding to the
league of Smalkalde, ib. Marche
to the affillance of Ferdinand in Hun.
gary, ib. Joins the Emperor againf
the Protestants, 86. ioo. See Mau.
rice.

Schertel, Seb'tiain, a commander in the

army of the Protestant league, his
vigorous commencement es hofilities
11 go0. I injudiciously recalled, g.
Is expelled from Auglburg on the dil-
perfion of the Proteflant army, 108.

Scrotiad, James V. of, married to Mary

of Guifr, duchefs-dowager of Longle-
ville, 11. 420. Death of James and
accefion of his infant daughter Mary,
III. 2z. Mary contraced to the
Dauphin of France, 168. The mar-
riage celebrated, 405. Mary alTumes
the title and arms of England on the
death of Mary of England, 423. In-
cluded in the treaty of Chateau Cam-
brefis, 426. Alteration in the conduct
of England toward, 443.

Sess in religion, reflecions on the origin

of, II. 348.

Segovia, an infurreaion there, on account

of their representative Tordefillas vot-
ing for the donative to Charles V. II.
55. He is killed by the populace,
r56. The insurgents there defeat
Ronquillo, sent to suppress them by
Cardinal Adrian, 157. Surrenders al-
ter the battle of Villalar, 179.
Selim II. Sultan, extirpates the Mama-

nlkeF, and adds Egypt and Syria to
his empire, 11. 50 Coi.fidered as for-
midable to the European powers, ib.

Sforia obtains of Charles V. the invefli-

ture of Milan, 11. 240. Forfeits the
dutchy, by his intrigues with Morone
a.44. Joins in a league againrl Chare',
for the recovery of Milan, 266. 1,
forced to surrender Milan to tihe Im-
pIerialirs, e71. Obtains again of tile
Emperor the invefliturc of Milan, 3A2.
Enters into a private treaty with
Francis, 379. Merveilla F ancia's en-

lov cxecaLed for murder, ib. Dies,
388

Siena, the inhibitants of, implore the

afliliance of the Emperor Charle; V.
t. delend them ngainlt their nobles,
Ill. 276. The Imperial troops endea-
vour to enslave them, ib. Regail
poflificnr of thir city, 177. Repulli

*an

tn attack of the Germans, z88. Is
besieged by the marquis de Marignano,
315. The commander Monluc re-
paifes the assaults vigorously, ib. The
town reduced by famine, 316. Num-
bers of the citizens retire, and etab-
lilh a free government at Monte Al-
Fino, 317. The remaining citizens S
oppressed, ib. And flock to Monte
Alcino, 318. Is granted by the Em-
peror to his Ion Philip, ib. The in-
veRfiture given by Philip to Cosmo
di Medici, 396.

Sieterhaifen, battle of, between Maurice

of Saxony, and Albert of Branden-
burgh, III. 281.

Sios, Cardinal of, his fchemefor weaken-

ing the French army in the Milanese,
II. 143. Leaves the Imperial army
to attend the conclave on the death of
Leo X. 144.

Smalkalde, the Protestants enter into a

league there, for their mutual support,
1I. 33z. The league renewed at a
second meeting there, 334. The
league of renewed for ten years, 361.
A manifesto, refuting to acknowledge
a counsel called by the Pope, 412.
The king of Denmark joins the league,
4z4. The Princes of, protest against
the authority of the Imperial chamber,
and the recess of the diet at Nurem-
burgh, III. 24. Publilh a manifesto
against the proceedings of the council
of Trent, 58. Are alarmed at the
proceedings of the Emperor, 59. A
want of unity among the members,
60. The views of the Eletor of Sa-
xony, and the Landgrave, explained,
i. Appear at the diet of Ratilbon by
leputies, 74. Their deputies protelt
against the council of Trent, 76.
Their deputies alarmed at the Empe-
ror's proceedings and declarations,
leave the diet, 77. The Emperor
leagues with the Pope against them,
78. Prepare torefilt the Emperor, 8z.
Are dirlppointed in their application
to the Venetians and Swiss, 83. As
allb with Henry VIII. and Francis, 84.
Alfemble a large army, 86. Are put
under the ban of the Empire, 88. De-
clare war against the Emperor, 90.
Hoflilities begun by Schertel, ib.
They recall him, 91. The Elector of
Saxony and Landgrave of Hesse appoiat-
edl joint commanders of their army, ib.
The charactersof the. two command-
era compared, 9g. Their operations
diltraged by this joint command, ib.

Cannonade the Emperor's camp, 99.
Make overtures of peace to the Em-
peror, lo6. Their army disperse, tb.
The EleEtor of Saxony reduced, 1.42.
The Landgrave deceived and confined,
154. Their warlike tores seized
by the Emperor, 158. See Maurice.
alj~man the Magnificent,' acfends the
Ottoman throne, II. 77. Invades
Hungary and takes Belgrade,
g15. Takes the island of Rhodes,
ib. Defeats the Hungarians at Mo-
hacz, a88. His successes, and the
number of prisoners he carried away,
289. Besieges Vienna, 31z. Enters
Hungaryagain with a vast army, but
is forced to retire by the Emperor
Charles, 338. Takes Barbarossa the
pirate under his protection, 366. Con-
cludes an alliance with Francis King
of France, 410. Prepares to invade
Naples, ib. Protects Stephen King of
Hungary, and defeats Ferdinand, 468.
Seizes Hungary for himielf, 469.
Over-runs Hungary again, in fulfill-
ment of his treaty with Francis, II.
17. Concludes a truce with the Em-
peror, 73. Loses Trinfylvania, 225.
Ravages the coasts of Italy, 255, 278.
Carries a mighty army into Hungary,
256. Re-eltablifhes Isabella and her
son in Transylvania, 289. His vio-
lent attachment to his concubine
Roxalana, ib. Is prevailed on to de-
clare her a free woman, 19I. For-
mally marries her, ib. Is rendered
jealous of the virtues of his son Mufta-
pha's by the arts of Roxalana, 293.
Orders him to be (irangled, 296. Or-
ders the murder ofMultapha's fon,t97.
Spain, the (Rate of, at the death of

Ferdinand of Aragon, 11. 23. Charles
King of, aspires to the Imperial crown
on the death of Maximilian, '49.
Is eleted Emperor, 59. Refleaions
of the Spaniards on that event, 61,
Charles appoints viceroys, and departs
for Germany, 66. Infurre&ions there,
155. A view of the feudal system in,
159. An account of the confederacy,
termed the Holy Junta, 160. Causes
which prevented an union of the mal-
contents in the refpedive provinces,
185. The moderation of Charles to-
ward them on his arrival, 186. In-
(lance of the haughty spirit of the
grandees, 430. Is invaded by the
Dauphin, III. 7. The dominions of,
resigned by Charles to his Con Philip,

,I i X 358.

358. The arrival of Charle, and hit
reception there, 373. The place of
hia retreat described, 374 The regal
power in, how enlarged by Charles,
434. The foreign acquisitions added
to, 435. SeeAragon, Care ile, Galicia,
Valencia, Corter, Germahada, and Ho-
ly Junta.

Spires, diet of, its proceedings relative

to the Reformation, 11. 290. Ano-
ther diet called there by the Emperor,
315. Another diet at, 111. 25. Re-
cess of, in favour of the Protestants,27.

Spiritual censures of the Romilh church,

the dreadful effects of, II. o9g.
St. Difter, in Champagne, invested by the

Emperor, 111. 34. Is obtained by the
artifice of cardinal Granvelle, 36.

St. Juaftis, monastery of, in Plazencia, is

chosen. by the Emperor Charles V.
for his retreat after his refign.ttion, III.
374. His situation dercribed, 375.
His apartments, ib.

St. gintia, invelted by the Spanilh

troops, and defended by admiral Co-
ligni, 11. 383. D'Andelot defeated
iA an endeavour to join the garrison,
384. But enters the town, 385.
Montmorency defeated by the duke of
Savoy, ib. The town taken by aflault
389.

Strcazi, Peter, some account of, 111.

31z. Is intrulted with the command
of the French army in Italy, 3 3.
Is defeated by the marquis de Marig-
nano, 3 4.

Suabia, an infurreaion of the peasants

against the nobles there, 11. 256.
They publifli a memorial of their
grievances, a57. The insurgents dif-
perfed, %5S. The Protestant religion
suppressed there by the Emperor
'harles V, III. 213.

Sufflk, duke of, invades Picardy, pene-

trates almolt to Paris, but is driven
back, II. to..

Surrey, earl of, created high admiral to

the Emperor Charles V. II. l ;o.
Obliged to retire out of Picardy by the
duke de Vendome, 15 1.
r.n'dcn, a fumnmay view of the revo-

lutions in, during the fixtc:nth cen-
ttiy, III. 456.

i..Ol/a;rl/A d, the cantons of, erpoul'c the

prelenlions of ('hal ,l. V. to the Iml-
perial crwn, 11 5j, CInnentr-
iTent of thel R fC'it ,.lticrl tlhere I'y
Zulinglilr, 9.1. IThe icguillitil und, r
v,,h theyv hie 'it hir Ir,.pt, I4i.
'l'ie p ,'l<[)tilJl' battle, iflilletd I'll h
! ;, tr,, H l., .i.!. l...iut ,i, .. , .. 7.

Syria, how and by whom added to the
Ottoman Empire, II. 50.

T

Termes, marerchal de, governor of Ca-

lais, takes Dunkirk by dorm, IIf.
4e6. Engages the count of Egmont,
and is defeated by the accidental ar-
rival of an English squadron on the
coaf, 407. Is taken prisoner, ib.

Terrouane, taken and demolilhed by the

Emperor Charles V. 11. 286.

Ttetl, a Dominican friar, his Ihameful

conduct in the f.le of Indulgences in
Germany, II. 80. His form of ab-
solution, and recommendation of the
virtues of Indulgences in Germany, ib.
Note. His debauched course of life,
81. PublisheE these against Luther, 85.

Teutonic order, a characer of, II, 263.

Conquer the province of Pruflia, ib.
Their grand master Albert made duke
of Pruflia, 164.

Theatines, the order of, by whom found-

ed, II1. 340.

Thionville, in Luxembourg, taken by the

duke of Guile, III. 4o6.

Thuringia, an infurre&ion of the pea-

sants there, againit the nobility, II.
258. The fanatical notions inspired
into them by Thomas Muncer, 26c.
Their disorderly army defeated, 26i.

Toledo, infurrefion in, at the departure

of Charles V. for Germany, 11. 66,
155. The cathedral of, Rripped of
its riches to support the army of the
Holy Junta, 173. Padillo's letter to,
at his execution, 178. Is inlligated
to continue in arms by Padillo's wife,
iSo. Is reduced, 18t.

Toledc, Ludovico de, nephew to Cosmo

di Medici lent by his uncle to neg-
ciate with Philip II. of Spain for the
invertiture of Siena, 11. 395.

Toledo, Don Pedro de, viceroy of Naples,

oppresses the Neapolitans, III. 178.
And occalions the Turks to ravage the
coafis of Naples, ib.

'oleration, rtfleaions on the progress of,

in Germany, 111. 333. Why muu-
ally allowed among the ancient Hea-
tlens, 334. How the primitive
Chrillians became avcrle to, ib.

Tmeo -ri, Paul. a Franciscan monk, arch-

hifliop of Golocza, is made general
of the Hungarian army againlt Sly'-
minn the Magnificent, and is defeated
by him, It. a88.

':rlefil/as, the rcidence of Queen Joan-
na, the confcdeacy of malcontenrt

callrd

called the Holy Junta, removed thither,
II. 16z. The Queen taken there by
the conde de Haro, 171.

Torde.illas, one of the representatives of

Segovia, killed by the populace for vo-
ting the donatfve to Charles V. at the
Cortes assembled in Galicia, II. 155

Transyl'vania, is surrendered to Ferdinand

King of the Romans, by Queen Isabella,
III. zig.

Tremoxille, La, drives the Englilh under

the duke of Suffolk out of Picardy, II.
2oo.

Trent, the'council of, summoned, III. 21.

Prorogued, 13. Again summoned, 46.
Is opened, 56. Declares the apocry-
phal Scriptures canonical, 70. ERa-
blifhes the authority of the church tra-
ditions, 71. The council, on rumours
of an infetion in the city, is translated
to Bologna, 164. Henry II. of France
protests against the council, 2 l. The
council breaks up on the approach of
Maurice of Saxony, 245. Historical
remarks on this council, 246. Cha-
ra6ers of its historians, 247.

Trtnt, cardinal of, sent by the Emperor

Charles V. to conclude an alliance with
the Pope, III. 76. The nature of this
treaty, 78.

Tunis, the means of its coming under the

power of Barbarossa, traced, II. 367.
The Emperor and other ChriRian
powers unite to expel Barbarossa, and
restore Muley Harcen, 370. Is taken
by the Emperor, 375. Muley Hafcen
restored, and his treaty with Charles,
376·

TuJcany, a review of the Rfate of, during
the sixteenth century, Ill. 453.

V

Valencia, an infurreation in, 1I. 6z. The

people there greatly opprefTed by the
nobles, 63. The nobles refute to as-
femble the Cortes except the King is
present, ib. Charles auihorifes the
people to continue in arms, ib. They
expel the nobles, 64. Associate under
the Germanada, and appoint their own
magistrates, ib. Don Diego de Men-
dora, Conde de Melito, appointed re-
gent, on the departure of Charles for
Germany, 66. The Germanada refute
to lay down their alms, 18z. Defeat
the nobles in leveral ations, 184.
Are at length routed by the conde de
Mellto, ib. Thre inleration of Charles
toward the infuigcnts oil his arrivail,
186.

Valentinois, dutchefe of; fee Diana of

Poitiers.

Valladolid, the firR public entry of Charles

V. to that city, 11. 43. The inhabi.
tants rife, burn Fonseca's house, and
fortify the town, II. 158. Surrenders
after the battle of Valalar, and difolu.
tion of the Holy Junta, 179.
Vaucelles, treaty of, between Charles

V. and Henry II. of France, III. 359.
Vendlme, duke of, his plan of operations

in opposing the progress of the invasion
of Picardy by Henry VIII. II. 51s.
Obliges him to retire, ib.

Venice, the republic of, incline in favour

of the pretensions of Francis I. of
France, to the Imperial crown, II. 53.
Their views and apprehensions on the
approaching rupture between the Em-
peror Charles V. and Francis, 69.
Leagues with the Emperor against
Francis, 189. A final accommodation
between, and the Emperor, 3a1. Re-
fuses to enter into the league of the
Italian tates, formed by the Emperor,
341. A review of the state of that
republic during the sixteenth century,
III. 452.
Verrina, the confident of the count of

Lavagno, encourages him in his scheme
of overturning the government of Ge-
noa, III. 1 6. Is protected by Franci
on the ruin of that conspiracy, 131.

Viellecille, the French governor of Metz,

dete&s father Leonard's conspiracy to
betray the city to the Imperiaiilts, III.
311. Executes the conspirators, 314.
Vienna, is besieged by Sultan Solyman the

Magnificent, II. 312.

Villalar, battle of, between Padilla, and

the conde de Haro, II. 176.

Fillena, marquis de, his spirited reply to

the request of the Emperor to lodge
Bourbon in his palace, II. 247.

Usn, the government of that city violently

altered, and its reformed ministers car-
ried away in chains, by the Emperor
Charles V. Ill. 181.

United Provinces, of the Netherlands, a

brief view of their revolt againf the
dominion of Spain, Il. 45 5.

Urbino, restored by Pope Adrian to Fran-
cefco Maria de Rovere, II. 188.

W

1Vallop, Sir John, joins the Emperor

Charles V. at the ficge of Landrecy,
with a body of F.nglilh troops, III. 17.

W/ar, the method of carrying on in Eu-
r'pe, how improved at this period from

the

theprat'rce of earlier ages, II. :99.
General refletions on the viciflitudes
of, 11I. 430.

WPart6urg, Martin Luther concealed

there by the Eletorof Saxony, 1. T24.

iFerrtvortb, lord, governor of Calais, re-

monftrates in vain with the Englihf
privy council to provide for its security,
111. 399. Is attacked by the duke of
Guise, and forced to capitulate, 400.

fVitteMtnbrg, invested by the Emperor

Charles V. and defended by Sybilla of
Cleves, wife to the Elector of Saxony,
III. 143.
otlfey, cardinal, his rife, charater, and
infilenceover Henry VIII, of England,
II. az. Receives a penlion from Fran-
cis I. of Prance, 73. And from the
Emperor Charles V. ib. Detached
from the Flench interest by the latter,
74; Inclines Henry to join the Em-
peror against Francis, ta7. Sent by
Henry to Calais, to negociate an accom-
modiation between the Emperor and
Francie, 136. Has an interview with
Charles at Bruges, and concludes a
league with him on the part of Henry,
against France, 137. Meditates re-
venge against Charles on his second
disappointment of the Papacy by the
alection of Clement VII. 198. Obtains
of Clement a legantine commifion in
England for life, 198. Negociates a
league with Francis against the Em-
peror, »94.

W/mrr, a diet called there by Charles V.

to check the progress of the Reformers,
II. 77. Proceedings of, tir. Martin
Luther cited before it, r78. Refuses
to retrst his opinions, 123. An edi&
publilhed against him, ib. Diet at,
opened, II1. 47.

Wftrtemberg, Ulric duke of, why ex-

pelled his dominions, 11. 359. Recovers
his dominions by the aliftance of Fran-
cis King of France, and receives the
Protestant religion, 360.

Wyat, Sir Thomas, raises an infurre&ion

in Kent againt Queen Mary of ;ng-
land, on account of the Spanish match,

1. 301. Is subdued and punished,
lb.

Xi[ncsi, archbilhop of Toledo, adheres
to Ferdipand of Aragon, in his dilpute

E X e.

with the archduke Philip concerning
the regency of Castile, 11. 9. Efpotifes
Ferdinand's claim to the regency of Caf-
tile on Philip's death, 17. ConquersO-
ran, and other places in Barbary, for the
crown of Castile, 18. Appointed re-
gent of CaRile, by Ferdinand's will,
until the arrival of Charles V. in Spain,
25. His rife and charater, ib. Admits
the claim to the regency of cardinal
Adrian, sent with that commiflion by
Charles, and executes it jointly with
him, 27. Takes the infant Don Ser-
dinand to Madrid under his own eye,
ib. Procures Charles, who assumed
the regal title, to be acknowledged by
the Chriiian nobility, 29. Schemes
to extend the regal prerogative, ib.
Depresses the nobility, 30. Frees the
King from the feudal limitations, and
establishes a regal army to check the
barons, 31. Suppresses a mutiny headed
by the grandees, ib. Relames the
grants of Ferdinand to his nobles, 32.
His prudent application of the revenue,
ib. His bold assertion of his authority
to the discontented nobles, 33. Other
aflociates in the regency appointed at
the instigation of the Flemish cour-
tiers, 34. Retains the superior ma-
nagement, ib. Defeats John D'Albert's
invasion of Navarre, 35. Dismantles
all the cafles there, except Pampeluna,
which he strengthens, ib. The troops
sent by him against Barbarossa defeated,
and his equanimity on that occasion,
36. Alarmed at the corruption of the
Flemifl court, he persuades Charles to
visit Spain, 37. Falls tick on his jonr-
ney to meet Charles at his arrival, 41.
His letter of council to Charles, ib.
Requests an interview, ib. The in-
gratitude of Charles to him, 41. His
death, ib. His charaiter, ib. Rever-
rence paid to his memory by the Spa-
niardsi 43.

Z

Zamora, biflop *f, raises a regiment of

priests to defend Tordefillas, for the
Holy Junta, which is forced by tlih
conde de Haro, II. 171.

ZuingliuI, attacks the sale of Indulgencice

at Zurich in Switzerland, 11. 94.
F
