THE
HISTORY

OF
SCOTLAND

DURING THE REIGNS OF
QUEEN MARY and of KING JAMES VI.

TILL
His AccEssIOr to the Crown of ENGLAND.

W IT II A
REVIEW of theSCOTTISH HISTORY Irevious to that Period;

And an APPENDI. containing OoIGINAL PAPERS.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON,'D..D.

PRINCIPAl OF THE VNILrRsITY Or EDINIVRGtu AND

YISTORIOGIRAPHS TO HIS MAIESTr FOR SCOTLAND.

A N EW EDIT I O
WITH EMENDATIONS AND ADDITIONS.

O L. II.

BASIL:
Printed and fold by J. J. TO U It N Z I S .

M DCCXCI.

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK IV.

HISTORY

0
SCOTLAND

1 O 0 K 1Vi,

As the day appointed for the meeting. o Par-. o i
liament approached, Mary and her Ministers were Iv.
employed in deliberating concerning the course '65.

Mary's de

which it was mos proper to, hold with regard to liberations
the exiled nobles. Many motives prompted her concerning
to set no bounds to the rigor of justice. The th ,,blx.
malecontents had labored to defeat a scheme,
which her interest conspired with her passions in
rendering dear to her; they were the leaders of a
party, whose friendlhip the had been obliged to
court, while she held their principles in abhor-
rence; and they were firmly attached to a-rival,
whom the had good reason both to fear and to hate,

But, on the other hand, several weighty con.
fiderations might be urged. The noblemen whose
fate was in rufpenfe, were among the most power-
ful fubjeas in the kingdomi their wealth great,
their connexions extensive, and their adherents

VOL. II. B

t ~iS numerons. They were now at mercy, the oB.
it, jcds of'compallion, and suing for pardon with

' the molt humble fubmiflion.

In those circumRoances, an aa of clemency

"would exalt the Queen's chara&er, and appear no
less fplndid among foreigners, than acceptable to
be'owvn fubjets. Mary herself, though highly
inccnfed, was not inexorable; but the King's rage
was implacable and unrelenting. They were so-
licited in behalf of the fugitives from various
quarters. Morton, Ruthven, Maitland, and all
who had been members of the Congregation, were
not forgetful of their ancient union with Murray,
and his fellow-fufferers, nor negletful of their
safety, which they deemed of great importance
to the kingdom. Melvil, who at that time pof.
sessed the Queen's confidence, seconded their ho,
licitations. And Murray, having Rlooped so low
as to court Rizio, that favorite, who was de.
firous of securing his protection againlt the King,
whose displeasure he had lately incurred, seconded
the intercessions of his other friends with the
whole of his influence '. The interposition of
Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, who had lately been
Eliztbeth's Ambafiador in Scotland, in behalf of
the exiles, was of more weight than all these, and
attended with more success. Throgmorton, out
of enmity to Cecil, had embarked deeply in all
the intrigues which were carried on at the Eng.
lih court, in order to undermine the power and
credit of that minister. He espouscd, for this

' Melv. sa2.

reason, the cause of the Scottish Queen, towards BOOK
whose title and pretensions the other was known Iv.
to bear little favor; and ventured, in the present 1566.
critical jundure, to write a letter to Mary, con-
taining the most salutary advices with regard to
her conduct. He recommended the pardoning
of the Earl of Murray, and his associates, as a
measure no less prudent than popular. " An
action of this nature, fays he, the pure effec of
your Majesty's generosity, will spread the fame of
yourlenity and moderation, and engage the Englihf
to look towards your accession to their throne,
not only without prejudice, but with desire. By
the fame means, a perfect harmony will be reftor.
ed among your own subjects, who, if any rupture
lhould happen with England, will serve you with
that grateful zeal, which your clemency cannot
fail of inspiring ' ".

These prudent remonstrances of Throgmorton, She troly
to which his reputation for wisdom, and known to tiru
attachment to the Queen, added great authority, clem,,*.
made a deep impression on her spirit. Her cour-
tiers cultivated this happy disposition, and pre.
vailed on her, notwithstanding the King's in-
flexible temper, to sacrifice her own private re.
fentment to the interceflion of her fubjets, and
the wishes of her friends '. With this view, the
Parliament, which had been called to meet on the
fourth of February, was prorogued to the seventh
of April'; and in the mean time, fle was busy in

lelv. 11 9. Id. ia5.
Good. vol. i. 224.

Ba

B o confidering the manner and form in which lte

iv. fiould extend her favor to the Lords who were

t under disgrace.

idiet~r Though Mary discovered, 6n this occaion, a
fo^tio. nmind naturally prone to humanity, and capable
b» tbe rol- of forgiving, she wanted firrtnets, however, to

"ia of refi the influence, *hich was fataly employed

rNsece, and
bs zeu foi to disappoint the effets of this amiable difpofi.
rotS. tion. About this time, and at no great distance

fronreach other, two envoys arrived from the
'L'b, -. French King. The former Was intrusted with

matters of mere ceremony alone; he congratulated
the Queen on her marriage, and invested the King
with the ensigns of the order of St. Michael. The
inftrudions of the latter related to matters of
more importance, and produced greater effe&s '.

An interview between Charles IX and his

Sifter the Queen of Spain had been often pro.
posed; and after many obstacles aifing from the
oppolition of political interest , was at lar ap.
pointed at Bayonne. Catherine of Medicis ac;
companied her son; the Duke of Alva attended
his Mistress. Amidst the scenes of public pomp
and pleasure, which seemed to be the sole occu-
pation of both courts, a scheme was formed, and
mearures concerted, for exterminating the Hu.
gonots in France, the Protestants in the Low
Countries, and for suppressing the Reformation
throughout all Europe'. The adive policy ol
Pope Pius IV. and the zeal of the Cardinal a

Keith, 125. Appcnd. 167.
' Thuan. lib. )7.

Lorrain, confirmed and encouraged difpofitiots B,O o K
so suitable to the genius of the Ropmil religion, Iv.
and so beneficial to their own order. I$6s.

It was an. account of this holy league which
the second French envoy brought to Mary, con-
juring her, at the, fatpe time, in the name of the
King of France and the, Cardinal. of Lorraio,
not to restore the leaders of the ProteRfants in
her kingdom to power and favor, at the very
time when the Catholic Princes were combined to
dtftroy that set in all.the countries of Europe '.

Popery is a species of fNlfe religion, remark-
able for the fIrong poflelfion it takes of the heart.
Contrived by men of deep infight in the human
charader, and. improved by, the, experience and
observation of, many,fucceffive ages; it arrived at
lal to a degrce..of perfecion, which no. former
system of superstition had ever, attained.. There
is no power.in ,the understanding. and no passion
in the heart, to which it. does not present obje&t,
ad(.pted to rouse, and to intereR.thegn. Neither
the love of pleafurq, which, at,that time, pre-
vailed in the court, of France, nor the pursuits of
ambition which occupied the court of Spain, had
secured them fromthe dominion of bigotry. Lay-
men and courtiers were agitated with that furious.
and unmerciful zeal which is commonly confi-
dered as peculiar to ecclesiastics; and Kings andi
Miniters thought themselves bound, in con-
kience, to extirpate the Protestant dotrine. Mary
berfelf was deeply tindured with. all the precj.
' Melv. 126.

B'~

B 00 K dices of Popery; a passionate attachment to that

Iv. superstition is visible in every part of her char.
»6€ adter, and runs through all the scenes of her life:

She was devoted, too, with the utmof fubrnit
sion to the Princes of Lorrain, her uncles; and
had been accustomed, from her infancy, to liften
to all their advices with a filial refped. The
profpec of restoring the public exercise of her
own religion, the pleasure of complying with
her uncles, and the hopes of gratifying the
French Monarch, whom the present situation of
her affairs in England made it necessary to court,
counterbalanced all the prudent considerations
which bad formerly weighed with her. She in.
ftantly joined the confederacy, which had been
formed for the deftrudion of the Protestants, and
altered the whole plan of her conduct with regard
to Murray and his adherents '.

To this fatal resolution may be imputed all the

subsequent calamities of Mary's life. Ever finct
her return into Scotland, fortune may be said
to have been propitious to her, rather than
adverse; and if her prosperity did not rife tc
any great height, it had, however, suffered nc
considerable interruption. A thick and fettlec
cloud of adversity, with few gleams of hope, an(
none of real enjoyment, covers the remainder o
her days.

The effects of the new fyRtem, which Mary ha

adopted, were soon visible. The time of the pt
rogation of Parliament was shortened; and by

See Append. No a.

new proclamation , the twelfth es March,. w as o o K
fixed for its meeting '. Mary resolved, without IV.
any further delay, to proceed to the attaindr., of. 'I
the rebel Lords, and, at the fame time, deter- A Parl"-
mined to take some fleps towards the re-efta. to atainr
blifhment of the Romilh religion in Scotland '. the exii,
The Lords of the Articles were chosen, as usual a de'
to prepare the business which was to come before
the Parliament. They were all perfoos in whom
the Queen could confide, and bent to promote
her designs. The ruin of, M rray and his party

Keith, )26.

"It is not on the authority of Knox alone, that we charge

the Queen with the design of re-ctablifhing the Roman Ca-
tholic religion, or at leaif of exempting the, profeTors of it
from the rigor of those penal laws to which they were sub.
jecled. He, indeed, asserts that the altars, which liould have
been erected in. the church of St Giles were already pro.
vided, 394. i. Mary herself, in. a letter to the Archbilhop
of Glasgow, her Ambassador in France, acknowledges, " that
in that Parliament she intended to have done some good,
with refpedt to. restoring the old religion ". Keith, ;; i.
2. The Spiritual Lords, i. e. the Popilh eccleliaftics, had, by
her authority, resumed their ancient place in that assembly.
Ibid. 3. She had joined the confederacy at Bayonne. Keith.
Append. 167. 4. She allowed mass to be celebrated in dif-
ferent parts of the kingdom, ibid; and declared that she
would have mass free for all men who would heat it. Good.
vol. i. 274. s. Blackwood, who was furnished by the Arch-
bilhop of Glasgow with materials for writing his Martyre di
Marie, affirms that the Queen intended to have procured, il
this Parliament, if not the re-establishment of the Catholic
religion, at least something for the ease of Catholics. Jebb,
vol. ii. 204.

B4

B o o x seemed now inevitable, and the danger of the

IV. Reformed Church imminent, when an event un.
as6. expededly happened, which saved both. If we

regard either the barbarity of that age, when,
such acs of violence were common, or the mean
condition of the unhappy person who luffered,

, P,,. the event is little remarkable; but if we reflec
*·atvby upon the circumstances with which it was at.
b Icfia tended, or upon the consequences which followed
lizio. it, it appears extremely memorable; and the rife and

progress of it deserve to be traced with great care,

Darn.To hrs Darnly's external accomplilhments had excit.
'he Q0"" ' ed that sudden and violent paflion which raised

him to the throne. But the qualities of his
mind corresponded ill with the beauty of his
person. Of a weak understanding, and with.
out experience, conceited, at the fame time of
his own abilities, and ascribing his extraordinary
success entirely to his diftinguilhed merit. All
the Queen's favor made no impression on such
a temper. All her gentleness could not bridle
his imperious and ungovernable spirit. All her
attention to place about him persons capable
of direding his condudt, could not preserve him
from ralh and imprudent acions ". Fond of all
the amusements, and even prone to all the vice!
of youth, he became, by degrees, careless of
her person, and a firanger to her company. T(
a woman, and a Queen, such behaviour waa
intolerable. The lower she had ilooped in order

" Good. vol. i. 122.

to raise him, his behaviour appeared the more B OO K
ungenerous and criminal: and in proportion to Iv.
the strength of her first affecion, was the vio. isc6.
lence with which her disappointed passion now
operated. A few months after the marriage,
their domestic quarrels began to be observed.
The extravagance of Darnly's ambition gave rife
to these. Instead of being satisfied with a liare
in the adminiflration of government, or with the
title of King, which Mary, by an unprecedented
flretch of power, had conferred on himi, he de-
manded the Crown Matrimonial with most in,
solent importunity ". Though Mary alledged that
this gift was beyond her power, and tha.t the au.
thority of Parliament mulf be interposed to be-
flow it, he wanted either understanding to com.
prehend, or temper to admit, so just a defence;
and often renewed and urged his request.

Rizio, whom the King had at first taken into. Sln-t
great confidence, did not humor him in these l'RiC"
follies. By this he incurred Henry's difpleafilre; Vfit.
and as it was impossible for Mary to behave to-
wards her. husband with the fame affection which
diltinguifhed the first and happy days of their
union, he imputed this coldness, not to his own
behaviour, which had so well merited it, but to
the insinuations of Rizio. Alary's own conduct
confirmed and strengthened there suspicions. She

"Keith, 29. Id. App. i6(. g68. Knox, 404. Theeagernefs
ofthe King to obtain the Cromn Matrimnonial is not surprising,
shenthe extent ofthe powers which that title conveyed, as ex-
plained in the text and note, vol. i. p. 164, is taken into con-
deration.

e o 0 , treated: this stranger with a familiarity, and ad.

VY. mitted him to a lhare in her confidence, to which
s5. neither his first condition, nor the office The bad

lately bellowed on him, gave him any title. He
was perpetually in her presence, intermeddled in
every bufines, and, together with a few favorites
was the companion of all her private amusements
The haughty spirit of Darnly could not bear the
intrusion of such an upstart; and impatient of any
delay, and unrestrained by any scruple, he iotanly
resolved to get rid of him by violence.

iiziolhu- At the fame time, another design, which took
fri rt its rife from very different motives, was carrying
the. ,ii on against the life of Rizio. Morton, Ruthven,
"ebitL Lindsay, and Maitland, were the contrivers of it.

In all former commotions they had been ftricly
united with Murray, though in the late infur.
redion they had deserted him, for various reasons.
Morton was nearly allied to the family of Angus,
and, during the minority of the present Earl, aded
as chief of the name of Douglas. Ruthven was
married to the King's aunt. Lindsay's wife wa
of the fame blood. All these had warmly con-
curred with the Queen in promoting a marriige
which did so much honor to the house of Doe
glas, and naturally expected, that, under a KIinD
of their own blood, the chief management ct
affairs would be committed to them. Maitland,
with his usual sagacity, foresaw that Murray's op
position to the match would prove dangerous ai:l
ineffectual; but whoever ruled at court, he hopetl,
by his dexterity and talents, to render himlfl

necessary and of importance. They were all equally B o 0O
disappointed in their expecations. The King's I.
headstrong temper rendered him incapable of ad- sit.
vice. The Queen could not help distrusting men
who had been so long and so intimately connected
with Murray, and gave herself up entirely to such
Counsellors as complied with all her inclinations.
The return of that nobleman and his followers
was therefore the only event which could restore
Morton, Maitland, and their associates to their
former ascendant over the Queen's councils. For
this reason, nothing could be more mortifying to
them, than the resolution which Mary had taken
to treat the exiles with rigor. This they imputed
to Rizio, who, after he'had engaged to aid Murray
with all his interest, was now the most aCive
instrument in promoting the measures which were
concerted for the ruin of that nobleman. This
officious zeal completed the disgust which they had
conceived against him, and inspired them with
thoughts of vengeance in no wife suitable tojuftice,
to humanity, or to their own dignity.

While they were ruminating upon their scheme, Th'e con.
the King communicated his resolution to be I'" in or.
avenged of Rizio to Lord Ruthven, and im- ,dr him.
plored his affifance, and that of his friends, to.
wards the execution of this design. Nothing
could be more acceptable to them than this over-
ture. They saw at once all the advantages they
would reap, by the concurrence of such an affo.
ciate. Their own private revenge upon Rizio
"ould pass, they hoped, for an acd of obedience

X 0 o l to the king; and they did not despair of obtaining

Iv. the restoration of their banifbed friends, and fecur.
s., kity for the Proteflant religion, as the price of their

compliance with his will.

But as Henry was no left fickle than rafhl, they

hesitated for.fome time, and determined to advance
no farther, without taking every possible precaution
for their own safety. They did not, in the mean
time, susser the King's resentment to abate. Morton,
who was inferior to no man of that intriguing age
in all the arts of insinuation and address, took
the young Prince under his management. He
wrought upon his ruling pafion, ambition to obtain
the Matrironial Crown. He represented Rizlo's
credit with the Queen to be the chief and only
obftack to his success in that demand; This minion.
alone, he said, pofeffed her confidence; and out of
complaisance to him, her tubjefs, her nobility,
and even her husband, were excluded from any par.
ticipation of her secret councils. Under the appear-
ance of a confidence merely political, he insinuated,
and the King perhaps believed, that a familiarity
of a quite different and very criminal nature mihit
be conceakd ". Such various and- complicattd

" Of all our hitorians, Buchanan alone avowedly accufis
lary of a criminal love for Rizio, 4o. 344. Knox liglid;
insinuates that such a furpicion was entertained, ;9i. Mlcl
vil, in a conversation with the Queen, intimates that he '.its
afraid her familiarity with Rizio might be liable to mifcon
ftrufion, alo. The King himself seems, both by Mel:il''
account, and by his expostulation with the Queen, »hiQ
Ruthven mentions, to have given credit to theft fufpicior

pflifons raged in the Kimg's bosom with the utmost i o o
fury. He became mote impatient than ever of any iv.
delay, and even threatened to firike the intended a66,
blow with his Own hand. At last, preliminaries were
fettled on both fides, and articles for their mutual
fcctrity agreed upon. The King engaged to prevent
the attainder of the banihbed Lards, to consent to
their return into Scotland, to obtain for them an
ample remission of all their crimes, and totupport to
the utmost of his power, the religion which was
now eRablilled in the kingdom. On their parts,
they undertook to procure the Crown Matrimonial
for Henry, to secure his right of succession, if the
Melv. 1i7. Keith. Appernd. ri;, 124. That.theKing's fil.
p;cions were strong, is likewise evident from the paper pub,
lilhed Append. N°. XV. But, in opposition to these fufpi-
cions, and they are nothing more, we may observe that Rau.
let, the Queen's French Secretary, was dismissed front her
service, and Rizio advanced to that oftfie in December 1 d 4.
Keith, a6g. It was in conrequence of this preferment, that
he acquired his great credit *itb the Queen. Melv. Io7,
l)arnly arrived in Scotland about two months after. Keith,
269. The Queen immediately conceived for him a paflion
which had all the symptoms of genuine arid violent love,
Rizio aided this palfion, and promoted the marriage with all
lis interest, Melv. i s . During fomie months after the mari
riage, the Queen's fondners for Darnly continued. She soon
proved with child. From this enumeration of circumstances,
it appears almost i;npoffible that the Queen, unless we suppose
her to have been a woman utterly abandoned, could carry on
any criminal intrigue with Rizio. But the silence of Randolph,
(I'e English Resident, a man abundantly ready to mentiori,
adi to aggravate Mary's faults, and who does not once infinuare
tl a her confidence in Rizio concealed any thing criminal, is
in iticil a fuffirient vindication of her innocence.

OO K Queen should die before him, and to defend that
Iv. right to the uttermost, against whatever person Ibould
as«. presume to dispute it; and if either Rizio, or any

other person, Should happen to be killed in profecut.
ing of the design, the King promised to acknow.
ledge himself to be the author of the enterprise,
and to protect those who were embarked in it".

.rtr~te Nothing now remained but to concert the

in tmh plan of operation, to chufe the adors, and to a.
Qe',s sign them their parts in perpetrating this deteRable
Panlam crime. Every circumstance here paints and cha.

rafterizes the manners and men of that age, and
fills us with horror at both. The place chosen
for committing such a deed, was the Queen's bed.
chamber. Though Mary was now in the sixth
month of her pregnancy, and though Rizio might
have been seized elsewhere without any difficulty,
the King pitched upon this place, that he might
enjoy the malicious pleasure of reproaching Rizio
with his crimes before the Queen's face. The
Earl of Morton, the Lord High Chancellor of
the kingdom, undertook to direct an enterprise,
carried on in defiance of all the laws of which
he was bound to be the guardian. The Lord
Ruthven, who had been confined to his bed for
three months, by a very dangerous distemper, and
who was fill so feeble that he could hardly walk,
or bear the weight of his own armour, was in.
truRed with the executive part; and while he
bimfelf needed to be supported by two men, he

"Good. vol. i. 266.

came abroad to commit a murder in the presence B o o K
of his Sovereign. iv.

On the ninth of March, Morton entered the court tis.
of the palace with a hundred and sixty men; and
without noise, or meeting with any resistance;
flizd all the gates. While 'the Queen was at supper
with the Countels of Argyll, Ritio, and a few
domestics, the King suddenly entered the apartment
by a private passage. At his back was Ruthven,
clad in complete armour, and with that ghastly and
horrid look which long sickness hail given him. Three
or four of his most trufy accomplices followed him.
Such an unuTual appearance alarmed those who were
present. Rizio instantly apprehended that he was
the victim at whom the blow was aimed; and in
the utmost consternation retired behind the Queen,
of whom he laid hold, hoping that the reverence
due to her person might prove some proteaion to
him. The conspirators had proceeded too far to be
restrained by any consideration of that kind. Num-
bers of armed men rulhed into the chamber. Ruthven
drew his dagger, and with a furious mien and voice,
commanded Rizio to leave a place of which he was
unworthy, and which he had occupied too long.
Mary employed tears, and, intreaties, and threat.
enings, to save her favorite. But, notwithstanding
all there, he was torn from her by violence, and
before he could be dragged through the next apart-
ment, the rage of his enemies put an end to his
life, piercing his body with fifty-fix wounds".

See Appendix, N'. IL

B o0K Athol,Huntly, Bothwell, and other c6nfidntsot

Iv. the Queen who had apartments in the palace, were
s. a alarmed at the uproar, aad filled with the utmost

terror on their own account; but either no violence
was intended againf them, or the conspirators durst
not shed the noblest blood in the kingdom, in the
fame illegal manner with which they had ventured
to take the life of a stranger. Some of them were
dismissed, and others made their escape.

Tble caao, The conTpirators, in the mean time, kept poleflion
,Q` of the palace, and guarded the Queen with the

utmost care. A proclamation was published by the
King, prohibiting the parliament to meet on the day
appointed; and mealures were taken by him for
preventing any tumult in the city ". Murray, Ro.
thes, and their followers being informed of every
Rep taken against Rizio, arrived at Edinburgh next
evening. Murrayw as graciously received both by the
King and Queen: by the former, on accountof the
articles which had been agreed upon between them;
by the latter, because The hoped to prevail oh him,
by gentle treatment, not to take part with the
murderers of Rizio. Their powers Ihe Rill felt,
and dreaded; and the insult which they had offered
to her authority, and even to her person, so far
exceeded any crime /he could impute to Murray,
that in hopes of wreaking her vengeance on them,
the became extremely willing to be reconciled ta
him. The obligations, however, which Mlurra
lay under to men who had hazarded their live

" Keith, Append. sid.

On

on his account, engaged him to labor for their B 0 K
safety. The Queen, who scarce had the liberty of lv-
choice left, was persuaded to admit Morton and 166
Ruthven into her presence, and to grant them
the promise of pardon in whatever terms they should
deem necessary for their own security.

The King, meanwhile, flood astonished at the But the
boldness and success of his own enterprise, and ins the

King, and

uncertain what course to hold. The Queen ob- makes her
frved his irresolution, and availed herself of it. e'pe.
She employed all her art to disengage him from
his new associates. His consciousness of the insult
which he had offered to so illuRlrious a benefac.
trefs, inspired him with uncommon facility and
complaisance. In spite of all the warnings he re-
ceived to distrust the Queen's artifices, Ihe prevail-
ed on him to dismiss the guards which the con-
fpirators had placed on her person; and that fame
night he made his escape along with her, attended
by three persons only, and retired to Dunbar.
The scheme of their flight had been communicated March xi.
to Huntly and Bothwell, and they were quickly
joined by them, and several other of the nobles
Bothwell's estate lay in that corner of the kingdom,
and his followers crowded to their Chief in such
numbers, as soon enabled the Queen to set the
power of the conspirators at defiance.

This sudden flight filled them with inexpref. is recon.

fible conRernation. They had obtained a promire exiled the
of pardon; and it now appeared from the Queen's hi,.
conduct, that nothing more was intended by this
promise than to amuse them, and to gain time.
VOL. II. C

B o O They ventured, however, to demand the accom.

Iv. plifibment of it; but their messenger was detained
1s6 a prisoner, and the Queen advancing towards

Edinburgh, at the head of eight thousand men,
talked in the highest Rrain of resentment and re.
venge. She had the address, at the fame time, to
separate Murray and his associates from the con.
fpirators against izio. Sensible that the union
of there parties would form a confederacy, which
might prove formidable to the Crown, Ihe expref.
fed great willingness to receive the former into
favor; towards the latter (he declared herself in.

Mtn 1,9. exorable. Murray and his followers were no les
The o-L 'wiillingtoaccept a pardon, on her terms. The con.

,ut o

aP"y fpirators against Rizio, deprived of every resource,
hia Ibglu. and incapable of resistance, fled precipitately to

Newcaflle, having thus changed ituations with
Murray and his party, who left that place a few
days before.

No man so remarkable for wisdom, and even

for cunning, as the Earl of Morton, ever en-
gaged in a more unfortunate enterprise. Desert.
ed basely by the King, who now denied his know.
ledge of the conspiracy, by public proclamations,
and abandoned ungenerously by Murray and his
party ", he was obliged to fly from his native coun
try, to resign the highest office, and to part with
one of the molt opulent fortunes in the kingdom.

On her return to Edinburgh, Mary began to
proceed against those concerned in the murder of

" Melv. i3e.

Rizio, with the utmost rigor of law. But, in Boo t
praif of her clemency, it must be observed, that Iv.
only two persons, and these of no considerable s66.
rank, suffered for this crime ".

In this conspiracy there is one circumfance,
which, though somewhat detached, deserves not
to be forgotten. In the confederacy between the
King and the conspirators, the real intention of
which was affaflination, the preserving of the Re-
formed Church is, nevertheless, one of the most
considerable articles; and the fame men who were
preparing to violate one of the first duties of mo-
rality, affected the highest regard for religion.
History relates these extravagances of the human
mind, without pretending to justify, or even to
account for them; and regulating her own opinions
by the eternal and immutable laws of justice and
of virtue, points out such inconsistencies, as sea-
tures of the age which lhe describes, and records
them for the inftrudion of ages to come.

As this is the second instance of deliberate as- An acount
fil(nation which has occurred, and as we bhall Fthe f"'

ouency of

hereafter meet with many other instances of the sraimn.-
Lfme crime, the causes which gave rife to a prac- tion in

that age.

:ice so Ihocking to humanity, deserve our parti-
cular attention. Resentment is, for obvious and
wife reasons, one of the firongeft paflions in the
human mind. The natural demand of this pas
sion is, that the person who feels the injury thould
himself inflict the vengeance due on that account.
The permitting this, however, would have been

Keith, Appendix, i;o. 134.

Ca

a o O K deftrudive to society; and punishment would have

Iv. known no bounds, either in severity or in dura.
16M tion. For this reason , in the very infancy of the

social Rate, the sword was taken out of private
hands, and committed to the Magistrate. But at
firrf, while laws aimed at restraining, they really
strengthened the principle of revenge. The earlief
and most simple punlhment for crimes was reta.
liation; the offender forfeited limb for limb, and
life for life. The payment of a compensation to
the person injured, succeeded to the rigor of the
former infitution. In both these, the gratification
of private revenge was the object of law; and he
who suffered the wrong, was the only person who
had a right to pursue, to exat, or to remit the
puniflment. While laws allowed such full scope
to the revenge of one party, the interests of the
other were not negleted. If the evidence of his
guilt did not amount to a full proof, or if he rec-
koned himself to be unjufly accused, the person
to whom a crime was imputed had a right to'chal
lenge his adversary to single combat, and, on ob-
taining the victory, vindicated his own honor.
In almost every ceofiderable cause, whether civil
or criminal, arms were appealed to, in defence,
either of the innocence, or the property of the par.
ties. Justice had seldom occasion to use her balance;
the sword alone decided every contest. The pai.
sion of revenge was nourilhed by all there means,
and grew, by daily indulgence, to be incredibly
strong. Mankind became habituated to blood,
not only in times of war, but of peace; and from

t

this, as well as other causes, contracted an amaz. B o o K
ing ferocity of temper and of manners. This fero. iv.
city, however, made it necessary to discourage s64.
the trial by combat; to abolish the payment of
compensations in criminal cafes; and to think of
some milder method of terminating disputes con-
cerning civil rights. The punishment for crimes
became more severe, and the regulations concern-
ing property more fixed; but the Princes, whose
province it was to inflict the one, and to enforce
the other, pofleffed little power. Great offenders
despised their authority; smaller ones sheltered them-
selves under the jurisdiction of those from whose pro-
tedion they expected impunity. The administration
of justice was extremely feeble and dilatory. An
attempt to punish the crimes of a Chieftain, or even
of his vassals, often excited rebellions and civil
wars. To nobles, haughty and independent, among
whom the causes of discord were many and una-
voidable, -who were quick in discerning an in-
jury, and impatient to revenge it; who deemed
it infamous to submit to an enemy, and cowardly
to forgive him; who confidered the right of pu.
ninling those who had injured them, as a privi.
lege of their order, and a mark of independence;
such flow proceedings were extremely unfatisfac-
tory. The blood of their adversary was, in their
opinion, the only thing which could waflh away
an affront; where that was not (hed, their revenge
was disappointed, their courage became fufpeted,
and a Rain was left on their honor. That vengeance,
which the important hand of the Magistrate could not

C3

a o o x inflid, their own could easily execute. Under go

IV. vernments so feeble, men assumed, as in a Rate of
*1M nature, the right of judging, and redrefling their

own wrongs; and thus aflaflination, a crime of all
others the most deftrudive to society, came not only
to be allowed, but to be reckoned honorable.

The history of Europe, during the fourteenth

and fifteenth centuries, abounds with detestable
instances of this crime. It prevailed chiefly among
the French and Scots, between whom there was a
clote intercourse at that time, and a surprising refem.
blance in their national characers. In one thousand
four hundred and seven, the bnly brother of the
King of France was murdered publicly in the freets
ofParis; and so far was this horrible acion from meet-
ing with proper punisfment, that an eminent lawyer
was allowed to plead in defence of it before the
Pees of France, and avowedly to maintain the law.
fulness of assassination. In one thousand four hun-
dred and seventeen, it required all the eloquence
and authority of the famous Gerfon, to prevail on
the Council of Conltance to condemn this pro.
position, " That there are some cafes in which a.
faination is a virtue more meritorious in a Knight
than in a Squire, and more meritorious in a King
than in a Knight"." The number of eminent per.
ions who were murdered in France and Scotland, on
tccount either of private, or political, or religious
quarrels, during the fifteenth and fixtecnth centuries,
is almof incredible. Even after those causes, which

" L'Enfant, Hil. Cone. de Conft.

first gave rife to this barbarous pracice, were re. n o O
moved; after the jurifdiclion of MagiRrates, and Iv.
the authority of laws, were better eftablilhed, and 156ó.
become more universal; after the progress of learn-
ing and philosophy had polished the manners, and
humanized the minds of men, this crime continued
in some degree. It was towards the close of the
seventeenth century before it disappeared in France.
The additional vigor which the royal authority ac-
quired by the acceflion of James V to the throne of
England, seems to have put a stop to it in Scotland.

'he influence, however, of any national cuf
tom, both on the undertanding and on the heart,
and how far it may go towards perverting or ex-
tinguilhing moral principles of the greatest im-
portance, is remarkable. The authors of those
ages have perfectly imbibed the sentiments of
their cotemporaries, with regard to aifafilation;
and they, who had leisure to reflet, and to judge,
appear to be no more shocked at this crime, than
the persons who committed it during the heat
and impetuosity of passion. Buchanan describes
the murder of Cardinal Beatoun, and of Rizio,
without exprefling those feelings which are na-
tural to a man, or that indignation which became
a historian ". Knox, whose mind was fierce
and more unpolifhed, relates the death of Bca.
toun and of the Duke of Guise, not only without
censure, but with the utmofl exultation". On
the other hand, the Bilhop of Ross mentions the

Buchan. 29g. 145.
Knox, 134.

C4

1OOK aflaffination of the Earl of Murray, with some

Iv. degree of applause ". Blackwood dwells upon it
2*5& with the moRs indecent triumph, and ascribes it

diredly to the hand of God ". Lord Ruthven,
the principal attor in the conspiracy against Rizio,
wrote an account of it some short time before
his own death, and in all his long narrative there
is not one expreflion of regret, or one symptom
of compundion, for a crime no less dilbonorable
than barbarous ". Morton, equally guilty of the
fame crime, entertained the fame sentiments con.
cerning it; and in his last moments, neither he
himself, nor the Ministers who attended him, seem
to have confidered it as an adion which called for
repentance; even then he talks of David' slaughter as
coolly as if it had been an innocent or commendable
deed ". The vices of another age aRonihf and ihock
us; the vices of our qwn become familiar, and
excite little horror". I return from this digrellion
to the course of the history.

" Anders.. .- g. Jebb, 2. 26;. " Keith,
Append. 119. ' Crawf. Mem. Append.

' In the sirs accounts of Rizio's murder sent to Eng-

land, there seem to have been mingled (as is usual inrdeat-
ing extraordinary events) some circumstances, which after.
wards appeared to be false: among others, that a Friar,
named Blatc, had been lain at the fame time with Rizio.
Parkhurt Bilhop of Norwich, in communicatingthis intelligence
to his correfpoudent Bullinger; an eminent Reformed Divine
es Zurich, expreites no condemnation of the murder ofRizio,
and exuirs over the fuppoCed death of the Friar, in terms
xhich, in our times, will appear as shocking a they

The charm, which had at first attached the BOo X
Queen to Darnly, and held them for some time Iv.
in a happy union, was now entirely dissolved, 16s.
and love no longer covering his follies and vices Te Quen'
with its friendly veil, they appeared to Mary in hatred to
their full dimension and deformity ". Though Iarnlyin.
Henry publilhed a proclamation, disclaiming any
knowledge of the conspiracy against Rizio, the
Queen was fully convinced, that he was not
only accessary to the contrivance, but to the conm
million of that odious crime ". That very power
which, with liberal and unfufpicious fondness%
she had conferred upon him, he had employed
to insult her authority, to limit her prerogative,
and to endanger her person. Such an outrage,
it was impossible any woman could bear or forL
give. Cold civilities, secret difrut , frequent
quarrels, succeeded to their former transports of
affecion and confidence. The Queen's favors
were no longer conveyed through his hands.
The crowd of expe&ants ceased to court his
patronage, which they found to avail so little.
Among the nobles, some dreaded his furious
temper, others complained of his perfidious-
ness; and all of them despised the weakness
of his understanding, and the inconstancy of
his heart. The people themselves observed some
are puerile: " Fraterculus quidam, nomine Black, Papist-
rum antefignanus, eodem tempore in aula occiditur: Sic niger
hic nebulo, nigra quoque morte peremptus, invitus nigrum flu.
bito derccndit in Orcum ". Burn. Hil. of Reform. iii App. 360.

See Appendix, No. II.' "' Keith, So.

0o o parts of his condu&, which little suited the dig.
Iv. nity of a King. -Addided to drunkenness, be.

. yond what the manners of that age could bear, and

indulging irregular paflions, which even the ii.
centioufnefs of youth could not excuse, he, by his
indecent behaviour, provoked the Queen to the ut
most; and the pailions which it occasioned, often
forced tears from her eyes, both in public and in
private ". Her aversion for him increased every
day, and could be no longer concealed. He was
often absent from court, appeared there with
little splendor, and was trusted with no power.
Avoided equally by those who endeavoured to
please the Queen, who favored Morton and his
associates, or who adhered to the house of Ha.
milton; be was left almost alone in a negleded
and unpitied solitude '.

Tlr, or About this time a new favorite grew into great
Botbwdrs credit with the Queen, and soon gained an ascend.

ant over her heart, which encouraged his enter.
prifing genius to form designs that proved fatal to
bimfelf, and the occasion of all Mary's subsequent
misfortunes. This was James Hepburn, Earl of
Bothwell, the head of an ancient family, and, by
his extensive poffeflions and numerous vassals, one
of the most powerful noblemen in the kingdom.
Even in that turbulent age, when so many vas
projects were laid open to an aspiring mind, and
invited it to acion, no man's ambition was more
daring than Bothtwelrs, or had recourse to bolder

.th, ..p· . M l. ,c.

or more singular expedients for obtaining power". 3 o O K
When almolf every person of diftindion in the iv,
kingdom, whether Papist or Protestant, had joined Is6s.
the Congregation in opposing the dangerous en-
croachments of the French upon the liberties of
the nation, he, though an avowed Protestant, ad.
hered to the Queen Regent, and acted with vi.
gor on her fide. The success which attended the
arms of the Congregation having obliged him to
retire into France, he was taken into the Queen's
service, and continued with her till the time of
her return into Scotland ". From that period,
every ftep of his condut towards Mary was re-
markably dutiful; and amidst all the lhiftings of
facion, we scarcely ever find him holding any
course which could be offensive to her. When
Murray's proceedings with regard to her marriage
gave umbrage to the Queen, fle recalled Both-
well from that banishment into which Ibe had with
relutance driven him, and confidered his zeal and

' The enterprising spirit of Bothwell was so conspicuous

as to procure him several marks of distinction during his re-
fidence in France. Hardwicke's State Papers, i. 4;t
Throkmorton, the English Ambassador at Paris, and one of
the molt sagacious Minilfers employed by Elizabeth, points
him out as a person who was to be dreaded and observed.
" The Earl of Bothwell, fays he in a letter, Nov. 28, i 60.
is departed to return into Scotland, and hath made boast
that he will do great things, and live in Scotland in despite
of all men. He is a glorious, ralh, and hazardous, young man;
and therefore it were meet that his adversaries should both
have an eye to him, and also keep him short ". Ibid. p. 149.
' Anderr. 1. 90.

3 0 0o abilities as the most powerful supports of her au.

IV. thority. When the conspirators against Rizio
1as. seized her person, he became the chief intrument

of recovering her liberty, and served her, on that
occasion, with so much fidelity and fuccefi, as
made the deepest impreffon on her mind, and
greatly increased the confidence which she had hi.
therto placed in him ". Her gratitude loaded him
with marks of her bounty; she raised him to offices
of profit and of trust, and tranfaded no matter of
importance without his advice ". By complaisance
and assiduity, he confirmed and fortified these dif
positions of the Queen in his favor, and inen.
Lbly paved the way towards that vast projed,
which his immoderate ambition had perhaps al.
ready conceived, and which, in spite of many
difficulties, and at the expense of many crimes,
he at last accomplished.

The hour of the Queen's delivery now ap.

proached. As her palace was defended only by a
Bender guard, it seemed imprudent to expole her
person, at this time, to the insults {he might sus
ser in a kingdom torn by fadions, and prone to
mutiny. For this reason, the Privy Council ad.
vised the Qpeen to fix her residence in the cafle
of Edinburgh, the strongest fortress in the king.
dom, and the moBt proper place for the security
of hbe person ". In order to render this security
more perfet, Mary labored to extinguiih the do.
meRic feuds which divided some of the principal

" Anders. . 92, 93 Mel. Ji.; Knox, 196
"Keith, 335.

nobles. Murray and Argyll were exasperated B 0 O K
againfl Huntly and Bothwell, by reciprocal and Iv.
repeated injuries. The Queen, by her authority Iss.
and intreaties, effected a reconcilement among
them, and drew from them a promise to bury
their discords in evcrlafting oblivion. This re-
concilement Mary had so much at heart, that lhe
made it the condition on which The again received
Mlurray into favor ".

On the nineteenth of June, Mary was delivered Birth or
of her only son James, a Prince whose birth was Jmts VI1
happy for the whole ifand, and unfortunate to
her alone. His acceflion to the throne of Eng-
land united the two divided kingdoms in one
mighty monarchy, and established the power of Great
Britain on a firm foundation. While fie, torn ear-
ly from her son by the cruelty of her fate, was
never allowed to indulge those tender paflions, nor
to taste those joys which fill the heart of a mother.

Melvil was instantly dispatched to London with
an account of this event. It struck Elizabeth,
at firt, in a sensible manner; and the advantage
and superiority which her rival had acquired.by
the birth of a son, forced tears from her eyes. But
before Melvil was admitted to audience, she
had so far recovered the command of herself, as
to receive him not only with decency, but with
excellive cheerfulness ; and willingly accepted
the invitation which Mary gave her, to hand
godmother to her son ".

As Mary loved splendor and magnificence, she
"Keith, 36. Append. 16. " Mclv. 138.

o o K resolved to celebrate the baptism of the young
Iv. Prince with great pomp; and for that purpose
gis. sent invitations of the fame kind to the French

King; and to the Duke of Savoy, the uncle of
her former husband.

Th. Qen The Queen, on her recovery, discovered no
cotimet to change in her sentiments with refped to the
'ttDaiy King" The death of Rizio, and the counte.
fane u nance he had given to an ation so insolent and
-01** uunjuftifiable, were still fresh in her memory. She

was frequently pensive and dejeted ". Though
Henry. sometimes attended at court, and accom.
panied her in her progresses through different parts
of the kingdom, he met with little reverence
from the nobles, while Mary treated him with the
greatest reserve, and did not fuffcr him to poffcf
any authority . .The breach between them be.
came every day more apparent ". Attempts were
made towards a reconcilement, particularly by
Catelnau the French Ambassador; but after
such a violent rupture, it was found no caly
matter to bind' the nuptial knot a-new; and
though he prevailed on the King and Queen
to pats two nights together ", we may, with
great probability, pronounce this appearance of
union, to which CaRlelnau trusted, not to have
been sincere; we know with certainty that it
was not lasting.

Bothwell , all this while, was the Queen's
prime confident. Without his participation no

"See Append. No. IV. " Ibid. ira. Keith, ;o.
Melh. i3t. " Keith, Append. a69 .' Ibid. <69

business was concluded, and no favor bestowed. B o O K
Together with this ascendant over her councils, Iv.
Bothwell, if we may believe the contemporary Hs66.

Her attach.

historians, acquired no less sway over her heart. mn, to
But, at what precise time this ambitious Lord first Bothwlli
allowed the sentiments of a lover to occupy the inc're
place of that duty and respect which a subject
owes his Sovereign; or when Mary, instead of
gratitude for his faithful services, felt a pallion of
another nature rising in her bosom, it is no easy
matter to determine. Such delicate transitions of
pafions can be discerned only by those who are
admitted near the persons of the parties, and who
can view the secret workings of the heart withr
calm and acute observation. Neither Knox nor
Buchanan enjoyed these advantages. Their hum.
ble station allowed them only a distant access to
the Queen and her favorite. And the ardor of
their zeal, and the violence of their prejudices,
rendered their opinions rash, precipitate, and in-
accurate. It is by the effects of this reciprocal
padlion, rather than by their accounts of it, that
subsequent historians can judge of its reality.

Adventurous as Bothwell's project to gain the
Queen may appear, it was formed and carried on
under very favorable circumltances. Mary was
young, gay, and affable. She possessed great fen.
fibility of temper, and was capable of the utmost
tenderness of affection. She had placed her love
on a very unworthy object, who requited it with
ingratitude, and treated her with neglect, with
insolence, and with brutality. All these Ihe felt,

o O K and resented. In this situation, the attention and
Iv. complaisance of a man, who had vindicated her
s"& authority, and protedcd her person; who entered

into all her views, who soothed all her pafions,
who watched and improved every opportunity of
insinuating his design, and recommending his
palfion ', could hardly fail of making impreflion
on a heart of such a frame as Mary's.

Ie Mat The haughty spirit of Darnly, nursed up in

`", to flattery, and accustomed to command, could not
la. bear the contempt under which he had now

fallen, and the fate of insignificance to which he
saw himself reduced. Rut in a country where be
was universally hated or despised, he could never
hope to form a party, which would second any
attempt he might make to recover power. He
addressed himself, therefore, to the Pope, and to
the Kings of France and Spain, with many pro.
feflions of his own zeal for the Catholic religion,
and with bitter complaints against the Queen, for
neglecing to promote that interest ": And soon
after, he took a resolution, equally wild and
desperate, of embarking on board a lhip which,
he provided, and of flying into foreign parts.
I is almost impofible to form any fatisfadory
conjecture concerning the motives which influence
a capricious and irregular mind. He hoped,
perhaps, to recommend himself to the Catholic
Princes on the continent by his zeal for religion,
and that they would employ their iatereft towards

' AnderC s. 93, 94.

Kox, 399.

rein

reinstating him in the possession of that power which n 0 o K
he had loft. Perhaps, he expected nothing more iv.
than the comfort of hiding the disgrace under which s166.
he was now fallen, among strangers, who had
never been witnesses of his former prosperity.

He communicated the dcfig to the French His capri.

Amb.iflador Le Croc, and to his father the Earl citisi beha
of Lenox. They both endeavoured to dissuade
him from it, but without success. Lenox, who
seems, as well as his son, to have loft the Queen's
confidence, and who, about this time, was fel-
dom at court, ilnftantly communicated the matter
to her by a letter. Henry, who had refused to
accompany the Queen from Stirling to Edin.
burgh, was likewise absent from court. He ar-
rived there, however, on the fame day she re-
ceived the account of his intended flight. But
he was more than usually wayward and peevilh;
and scrupling to enter the palace unless certain
Loids who attended the Queen were dismissed,
Mlary was obliged to meet him without the gates.
At las he suffered her to conduct him into her
own apartment. She endeavoured to draw from
him the reasons of the strange resolution which
he had taken, and to divert him from it. In
spite however of all her arguments and intreaties,
he remained silent and inflexible. Next day the
Privy Council, by her direction, expoftulated
with him on the fame head. He perCifted, not.
withtganding, in his sullenness and obstinacy;
and neither deigned to explain the motives of his
conduct, nor signified any intention of altering
VOL. I1. D

a o o i it. As he left the apartment, he turned towards

Iv. the Queen, and told her, that she Ihould not fee
a". his face again for a long time. A few days after,

be wrote to Mary, and mentioned two things as
grounds of his difgut. She herself, he said, no
longer admitted him into any confidence, and had
deprived him of all power; and the nobles, after
her example, treated him with open neglef, to
that be appeared in every place without the dignity
and splendor of a King.

Nothing could be more mortifying to Mary,

,unt than this intended flight of the King's, which
LoeuM would have spread the infamy of their domeflic

quarrel all over Europe. Compafion for a Mo.
narch who would then appear to be forced into
exile by her neglet and ill usage, might have
disposed mankind to entertain sentiments con.
cerning the causes of their discord, little to her
advantage. In order, therefore, to prepolfels the
minds of her allies, and to screen her reputation from
any censure with which Darnly might endeavour
to load it, the Privy Council transmitted a narra.
tive of this whole tranfadion, both to the King
and to the Queen Mother of France. It is drawn
with great art, and sets Mary's condud in the
amos favorable point of light ".

About this time the licence of the borderers

called for redress; and Mary resolving to hold a
court of jufice at Jedburgh, the inhabitants of
several adjacent counties were summoned to attend

·* Keith, 345. W3.

their Sovereign in arms, according to cuflom '. BO0 I
Bothwell was, at that time, Lieutenant or Warden Iv.
of all the marches, an office among the most im- 156s
portant in the kingdom; and though usually divided
into three diftind governments, bellowed by the
Queen's favor upon him alone. In order to display his
own valor and acivity in the discharge of this trust,
he attempted tofeize a gangof banditti, who, lurking
among the marahes of Liddefdale, infetled the reft
of the country. But while he was laying hold upon
one of those difperadoes, he was wounded by October u.
him in several places, so that his followers were
obliged to carry him to hermitage castle. Mary
inltantly flew thither, with an impatience which
has been confidered as marking the anxiety of a
lover, but little suited the dignity of a Queen .

' Keith, ;;g. Good. vol. i. to2.

"The diRlance between Jedburgh and Hernitage is eighteen

Scottish miles, through a country almost impassable. The season
of the year was far advanced. Bothwell seems to have been
wounded in a scuffle, occasioned by the derpair of a single man,
rather than any open inCurrecion of the borderers. It does not
appear that the Queen was attended thither by any considerable
train. liad any military operation been necellary, as is sup.
rpoed. Good. vol. i. 1o4. it would have been extremely im..
proper to rifle the Queen's person in an expedition againfl
thieves. As Coon as the Queen found Bothwell to be in no
danger, file inliantly returned, and after this we hear no more
of the ir.urredion, nor have we any proof that the rioters
took refuge in England. As there is no farther evidence with
refpel to the motives of this extraordinary journey, the
reader mut judge what degree of credit is due to Knox and
Buchanan, who ascribe it to the Queen's love of Bothwell.

Da

o o K Finding that Bothwell was threatened with no
iv. dangerous symptom, The returned that fame day
166. to Jedburgh. The fatigue of such a journey, ad.

ded to the anguish of mind she had suffered on
Bothwell's account, threw her next morning into a
violent fever'. Her life was despaired of, but
her youth, and the vigor of her constitution, re.
sifted the malignity of her difeale. During the
continuance of the Queen's illness, the King, who
Novemb.s. resided at Stirling, never came near Jedburgh";

and when he afterwards thought fit to make his
appearance there, he met with such a cold recep.
tion, as did not encourage him to make any long
stay '. Mary soon recovered strength enough to
return along the eastern borders to Dunbar.

While she resided in this place, her attention

was turned towards England. Elizabeth, not-
withRfanding her promise, and even proclamations
to the contrary, not only allowed, but encouraged
IMorton and his associates to remain in England".
Alary, on the other hand, afforded her protection
to several English fugitives. Each Queen watched
the motions of the other with a jealous attention,
and secretly countenanced the practices which
were carrying on to disturb the administration of
her rival.

The Elgti For this purpose. Mary's Ambafador, Robert
p'atlrMt Mlelvil, and her other emissaries, were extremely
r' preten. adive and successful. We may impute, in a
tions to the

u Keith, I, 352. " Ibid. Append. tM.
' Knox, 400. " Cald. vol. ii p. 15

good degree, to their intrigues, that ipirit which B o O K
appeared in the Parliament of England, and which Iv.
raised a florm that threatened Elizabeth's domestic '16.
tranquillity more than any other event of her reign,
and required all her art and dexterity to allay it.

Elizabeth had now reigned eight: years with.

out discovering the leaf intention to marry. A
violent diltemper, with which ale had lately been
seized, having endangered her life, and alarmed
the nation with the profpedt of all those calamities
which are occasioned by a disputed and dubious
fuccefiion; a motion was made, and eagerly lif-
tened to in both houses, for addrefling the Queen,
to provide against any such danger in times,,to
come, either by signifying her own resolution to
marry, or by consenting to an act, eftablilhing
the order of fuccefilon to the Crown '. Her
love to her subjects, her duty to the public, her
concern for posterity, it was asserted, not only
called upon, but obliged her to take one of there
fleps. The insuperable aversion which fle bad
all along discovered for marriage, made it -im-
probable that she would chufe the former; and
if fie complied with the latter request, no title to
the Crown could , with any color of justice, be
set in opposition to that of the Scottilh Queen.
Elizabeth was sagacious enough to fee the re-
moteft consequences of this motion, and observed
them with the greatest anxiety. Mary, by re-
fusing so often to ratify the treaty of Edinburgh,

"D'Ewes Journ. of Parl. 1io.

D3

00o x had plainly intimated a design of embracing the fir

,v promising opportunity for prosecuting her right
,ss. to the Englith Crown; and by her secret negocia.

tions, Ihe had gained many to favor her title".
All the Roman Catholics ardently witbed for her
fuccefion. Her gentleness and humanity had re.
moved many of those apprehensions which the
Protestants entertained on account of her religion.
The court-fadion, which envied the power of
Cecil, and endeavoured to wrest the administration
out of his hands, advanced the pretensions of the
Scottith Queen in opposition to him. The union of
the two kingdoms was a desirable objed to all
wife men in both nations; and the birth of the
young Prince was a security for the continuance
of this blefling. and gave hopes of its perpetuity.

Eliuatt's Under these circumfIances, and while the aa-
. .a d tion was in such a temper, a parliamentary decla
cuMt. ration of Mary's title would have been highly de.

trimental to Elizabeth. The present unfetded
Rate of the fucceflion left much in ber power.
Her resentment alone might have gone far to.
wards excluding any of the competitors from the
Crown; and the dread of this had hitherto re.
tirained and overawed the ambition of the Scot.
tifl Queen. But if this check Ihould be removed
by the legal acknowledgment of her title, Mary
would be more at liberty to pursue her dangerous
designs, and to ad without fear or reserve. Her
partisans were already meditating scheme for

" Melv. ;6.

inlfurresdions in different parts of the kingdom '"; B O O
and an adt of Parliament, recognising the rights Iv.
of that Princess, whose pretensions they favored, i5s6.
would have been nothing less than a signal to
arms; and notwithstanding Elizabeth's just title
to the affections of her fubjeds, might have
flaken and endangered her throne.

While this matter remained in suspense in both Mar en.
houses an account of it was transmitted to Mary improv"e th
by Melvil her Ambassador. As {he did not want ororounity.
advocates for her right, even among those who
were near Elizabeth's person, she endeavoured to
cultivate the disposition which appeared towards
fettling the right of succession in her favor, by a
letter to the Privy Counsellors of England. She ex'
pretled in it a grateful sense of Elizabeth's friendship,
which Ihe ascribes chiefly to their good offices with
their Sovereign in her behalf. She declared her
resolution to live in perpetual amity with England,
without urging or pursuing her claim upon the
Crown, any farther than should be agreeable to the
Queen. But, at the fame time, as her right of fuc-
ceflion was undoubted, Ihe hoped it would be exa-
mined with candor, and judged of with impartiality.
The nobles who attended her, wrote to the Englilh
Privy Council in the fame Rrain ". Mary artfully
gave there letters the air of being nothing more
than a declaration of her own, and of her fubjedts
gratitude towards Elizabeth. But as the could not
be ignorant of the jealousy and fear with which

" Meltv . ". Keith, ,. Append. 1 6.

D4

o o Elizabeth observed the proceedings of Parliament,
v. a flep so uncommon as this, of one Prince's
n6. entering into public correspondence with the Privy

Counsellors of another, could not be otherwise
contirued than as taken with an intention to
encourage the spirit which had already been raised
among the English. In this light it seems to have
appeared to Elizabetb berfelf ". But the difpo.
fition of her people rendering it necetfary to treat
IVlary's person with great decency, and her tide
with much regard, Ibe mentioned it to her only
in the softest language.

iizabeth Nothing, however, could be a more cruel mor.
eth .d tification to a Princess of Elizabeth's characer, than
r~iaet. the temper which both houses of Parliament dif.

covered on this occasion. She bent all her policy
to defeat or elude the motion. After allowing the
first heat of their zeal to evaporate, he :called into
her presence a certain number of each house. She
soothed and carefled them; she threatened and
promised; she remitted subsidies which were due;
and refused those which were offered; and in the
end prevailed to have this formidable motion put
off for that fefRion. Happily for her, the condud
of the Scottilb Queen, and the misfortunes which
besel her. prevented the revival of such a motion
in any future Parliament ".

Mean time, in order to preserve the reputation
of impartiality, and that ibe might not drive

"' Keith, ;c7. " D'Ewes, Joun, so4-l10.

Camd. ;99. Mely. li Haynes, 44.
*

Mlary into any desperate measure, {ie committed B o o t
to the Tower one Thornton, who had publilhed Iv.
Something derogatory to the right of the Scottilh I6s.
line"; and signified her displeasure againlt a Mem-
ber of the House of Commons, who seemed, by
some words in a speech, to glance at Mary ".

Amidst all her other cares, Mary was ever so. an extra-
licitous to promote the interest of that rejigion o,'a,;i'ep
which The profeffd. The re-establishment of the favorof
Komilh doctrine seems to have been her favorite Popey.
pallion; and though the design was concealed with
care, and conduced with caution, lhe pursued it
with a persevering zeal. At this time, she ventured
to lay aside somewhat of her usual reserve; and
the aid which she expeced from the Popilh Princes,
who had engaged in the league of Bayonne, en-
couraged her to take a ftep, which, if we con-
fider the temper of the nation, appears to be ex-
tremely bold. Having formerly held a secret cor.
refpondence with the court of Rome, The now
resolved to allow a Nuncio from the Pope publicly
to enter her dominions. Cardinal Laurea, at that
time Bilhop of Mondovi, was the person on whom
Pius V. conferred this office, and along with him
he sent the Queen a present of twenty thousand
crowns ". It is not the characer of the Papal court
to open its treasury. upon distant or imaginary
hopes. The business of the Nuncio in Scotland
could be no other, than to attempt a reconciliation

Camd. 401.
Hdynes, 449.
Vita Card. Laur. ap. Burn. vol. iii. p. 3ts.

o0 0 K of that kingdom to the Romilh fee. Thus Mary
IV. berfelf understood it; and in her answer to a letter
*Is. which hie received from the Pope, after expref.

sing her grateful sense of his paternal care and liberal.
ity, Fbe promires that She would bend her Whole
Rtrength towards the re-eltablifhment and propaga.
tion of the Catholic faith; that she would receive
the Nuncio with every possible demoniration of
refiped, and concur, with the utmost vigor, in
all his designs towards promoting the honor of God,
and restoring peace to the kingdom; that FIe would
celcbrate the baptism of the Prince according to the
ceremonies which the Romilh ritual prescribes,
hoping that her fubjeas would be taught, by this
example, again to reverence the sacraments of the
church, which they had so long treated with con.
tempt; and that (be would be careful to instil early
into her son the principles of a sincere love and
attachment to the Catholic faith ". But though
the Nuncio was already arrived at Paris, and
had sent over one of his attendants with part of
the money, the Queen did not think the junc.
ture proper for his reception. Elizabeth was pre.
paring to fend a magnificent embalfy into Scot.
land, against the time of the Prince's baptism,
and as it would have been improper to offend
her, The wifely contrived, under various pretences,
to detain Laurea at Paris ". The convulsions
into which the kingdom was thrown soon after,

Coazi Vita Maria ap. Jebb, voL ii. p. r.
"Keith, Append. 's{.

made it impossible for him to pursue his journey n o o K
any farther. IV.

At the very time that Mary was secretly car- s66.
rying o; these negociations for subverting the Re-
formed Church, Ihe did not scruple publicly to
employ her authority towards obtaining for its
Ministers a more certain and comfortable subsist
ence ". During this year, The issued several pro-
clamations and acts of council for that purpose,
and readily approved of every scheme which was
proposed for the more effectual payment of their
stipends. This part of her conduct does little ho-
nor to Mary's integrity: and though justified by
the example of Princes, who often reckon false-
hood and deceit among the necessary arts of govern-
ment, and even authorized by the pernicious
casuistry of the Roman Church, which transfers
breach of faith to heretics from the lift of crimes to
that'of duties, such dissimulation, however, must
be numbered among those blemishes which never
tain a truly great and generous charader.
As neither the French nor Piedmontefe Am- December.

Her averfloe

baffadors were yet arrived, the baptism of the for the King
Prince was put off from time to time. Mean exceire.
while Mary fixed her residence at Craigmillar'.
Such a retirement, perhaps, suited the present
temper of her mind, and induced her to prefer
it before her own palace of Holy-rood-houfe. Her
aversion for the King grew every day more con-
firmed, and was become altogether incurable.
" Keith, S6i, S62. Knox, 401. "' Keith 355.

J

BOOK A deep melancholy succeeded to that gaiety of

I1. spirit which was natural to her. The ralhnefs
16ó. and levity of her own choice, and the King's in.

gratitude and obstinacy, filled her with lbame and
with despair. A variety of paflions preyed at
once on a mind, all whose sensations were cxqui.
site, and all its emotions Rrong, and often extorted
from her, the las wihl of the unfortunate, that
life itself might come to an end ".

But as the Earl of Bedford, and the Count de

Brienne, the Engli(h and French Ambassadors, whom
the had long expected, arrived about this time,
Mary was obliged to suppress what passed in her
bosom, and to set out for Stirling, in order to ce-
lebrate the baptism of her son. Bedford was attend.
ed by a numerous and splendid train, and brought
presents from Elizabeth, suitable to her own dig.
nity, and the refped with which (he affefte, at
that time, to treat the Queen of Scots. Great
preparations had been made by Mary, and the
magnificence displayed by her on this occasion,
exceeded whatever had been formerly known in
Dnc '17. Scotland. The ceremony itself was performed

according to the rites of the Romish Church. But
neither Bedford, nor any of the Scottilh nobles
who professed the ProteRfant religion, entered with-
in the gates of the chapel ". The spirit of that
age, firm and uncomplying, would not, upon
any inducement, condescend to witnets an adion
which it deemed idolatrous.

" Keith, Pref. rii.
" Keith, t6o.

Henry's behaviour, at this junture, perfetly B O 0 K
discovers the excess of his caprice, as well as of IV
his folly. He chore to reside at Stirling, but con- ,«.
fined himself to his own apartment; and as the The King'r

*pricious

Queen diftrulted every nobleman who ventured to behaviour
converse with him, he was left in absolute soli- at the hap-

tirm of the

tude. Nothing could 'be more singular, or was Price.
less expeted, than his chufing to appear in a
manner that both publilhed the contempt under
which he had fallen, and, by exposing the Queen's
domestic unhappiness to the observation of so
many foreigners, looked like a sIep taken on pur-
pose to mortify and to offend her. VMary felt this
insult sensibly; and notwithbtanding all her efforts
to assume the gaiety which suited the occasion,
and which was necessary for the polite reception
of her guests, he was sometimes obliged to retire,
in order to be at liberty to indulge her sorrow,
and give vent to her tears ". The King fill per-
sifted in his design of retiring into foreign parts,
and daily threatened to put it in execution ".

" Keith, Pref. vii.
"Camden affirms, 40o, that Bedford was commanded

by Elizabeth not to give Darnly the title of King. As this was
an indignity, not to be borne, either by Mary or her husband,
it hlth been ifierted to be the cause of the King's absence from
the ceremony of his son's baptirm. Keith , ;60. Good. 1 19.
But, i. No such thing is to be found among Bedford's inftruc.
tions, the original of which till remains. Keith, s 6. 2. Bed.
ford's advice to the Queen by Melvil is utterly inconfiRent
with Camden's allertion. Melv. is;. Melvil's account is
confirmed by Elizabeth's infirudions to Sir Henry Norris,
"here she affirms that Ihe commanded Bedford to employ
bis belt offices towards reconciling Mary to her husband

o o t The ceremony of witnefling the Prince's bap.
iv. tifm was not the sole bufinees of Bedford's embafly.
<-6. His inftru&ions contained on overture, which ought

lizabeth to have gone fartowards extinguilhing thofejealou.
^ r. as tfies which had so long subsisted between the two
·u'de a Queens. The treaty of Edinburgh, which has been so
wit.~ ofen mentioned, was the principal occasion of thee.

The spirit, however, which had risen to such a height
in the late Parliament, the power of the party which
favored the Scottilh Queen's title, the number and
activity of her agents in different parts of the
which The had attempted to no purpole. Digges's Compl.
Ambaf P. a;. A paper published Append. N. V. proves
the fame thing.. . Le Croc, the French Resident men.
tions the King's absence, but without giving that reason for
it, whkih has been founded on Camden's words, though,
if that had been the real one, it is hardly possible to conceive
that he fhoull have neglected to mention it. Le Crods sirs
letter is dated December 2, fame time prior to the arrival of
the Earl of Bedford in Scotland; and when his inftrntions,
either public or secret, could hardly be known. Le Croc
plainly supposes that the discord between the King and
Queen was the cause of his absence from the baptism, and
his account of this matter is that which I have followed,
Keith, Pref. vii. 4. He informs his court, that on account
of the difference betwixt the King and the Queen, hehad
refused to hold any further correspondence with the former,
though he appears, in many iniances, to have been his grat
confident Ibid. 5. As the King was not prerent at the
baptism, he seems to have been excluded from any Ihare
in the ordinary administration ofbufinefs. Two ads of Privy
Council, one on the 2oth, and the other on the iftoof
December, are found in Keith, U6z. They both run in
the Queen's name alone. The King seems not to hare
been present. This could not be owing to Elizabeths in.
st~udios to Bedford.

kiogdom, alarmed Elizabeth, and induced her to B o o K
forego any advantage, which the ambiguous and iv.
artful expreflions in that treaty might afford her. 566.
Nothing was now demanded of Mary, but to re-
nounce any title to the crown of England during
Elizabeth's life, and the lives of her posterity;
who, on the other hand, engaged to take no Rep
which might prove injurious to Mlary's claim upon
the fuccefion ".

Mary could, not, with decency, reject a pro.
position so equitable; she infifed, however, that
Elizabeth flould order the right upon which [he
claimed, to be legally examined, and publicly re-
cognised, and particularly that the testament of
HenryVIII. whereby he had excluded the descend-
ants of his eldelt filter the Queen of Scotland, from
the place due to them in the order of succession,
might be produced, and confidered by the Englifli
nobility. Mary's Ministers had credulously em.
braced an opinion, that this testament, which they
so jufly conceived to be injurious to their mistress,
was a mere forgery; and on different occasions
had urged Elizabeth to produce it. Mary would
have suffered considerably by gaining this point.
The original testament is Rill extant, and not the
leaR doubt can be entertained of its genuineness and
authenticity. But it was not Elizabeth's intention
to weaken or to set aside the title of the house of
Stewart. She aimed at nothing more, than to keep
the question concerning the succession perplexed and .
" Keith, ; 6.

B o o I undecided, and by industriously eluding this requet,

vl. she did real fervicc to Mary's cause '.
1i66. A few days after the baptifmi of the Prince,

M]orton and all the other conspirators against Ri.
zio obtained their pardon, and leave to return into
Scotland. Mary, who had hitherto continued in.
exorable to every intreaty in their behalf, yielded
at last to the solicitations of Bothwell". He could
hope for no success in those bold designs on which
his ambition resolved to venture, without draw.
ing aid from every quarter. By procuring a favor
for Morton and his associates, of which they had
good reason to despair, he expeded to secure a
band of faithful and determined adherents.

The King still remained at Stirling, in solitude,

and under contempt. His.impatience in this fit.
ation, together with the alarm given him, by the
rumor of a design to seize his person, and confine
him to prison ", was the occasion of his leaving
that place in an abrupt manner, and retiring to
his father at Glasgow.

JUe 2s. Two assemblies of the church were held during
DecAM. s. this year. New complaints were made, and upon
,cheiL good grounds, of the poverty and contempt un-

der which the Protestant clergy were suffered to
languilb. Penurious as the allotment for their
subsistence was, they had not received the least
part of what was due for the preceding year".

" Rymer, Iv. p. xlo. Keith, 3S8. ;6v. Note (c)
nurdin, ;68.

" Good. vc,;i. x4o.Mlv. s . " Kith, Ptf. vii
Ibid. 562.

Nothing

Nothing less than a zeal, ready to endure and to B o K
susser every thing for a good cause, could have Iv.
persuaded men to adhere to a church, so indigent 566.
and so neglected. The extraordinary expenses,
occasioned by the Prince's baptism, had exhauRed
the Qneen's treasury, and the fums appropriated
for the filbfiftence of the clergy were diverted into
other channels. The Queen was therefore obliged
to prevent the just remonstrances of the assembly,
by falling on some new method for the relief of
the church. Some symptoms of liberality, some
firetch towards munificence, might have been
expected in an aflignment which was made with an
intention of soothing and silencing the clergy. But
both the Queen and the nobles held faR the riches
of the church which they had seized. A fum,
which, at the highest computation, can hardly be
reckoned equal to nine thousand pounds sterling",
was deemed sufficient for the maintenance of a'
whole national church, by men who had lately
seen single monasteries possessed of revenues far
superior in value.

The ecclesiastics in that age bore the grievances
which affeced themselves alone with astonishing
patience; but wherever the reformed religion was
threatened, they were extremely apt to be alarmed,
and to proclaim, in the loudest manner, their
apprehensions of danger. A just occasion of this
kind was given them, a short time before the meet-
ing of the assembly. The usurped and oppressive

"Keith, 562.
VOL. II. E

o o jurifdidion of the spiritual courts had been abolilhed
Iv. by the Parliament in the year one thousand five
Iass. hundred and sixty, and Commiffaries were ap.

pointed to hear and determine the causes which
formerly came under their cognizance ". Among
the few ads of that Parliament to which Mary had
paid any regard, this was one. She had confirmed
the. authority of the Commiffaries, and had given
them infiructions for directing their proceedings",
which are till of great authority, in that court.
From the time of their first appointment, these
judges had continued in the uninterrupted exercise
of their function, when of a sudden the Queen
issued a proclamation, restoring the Archbilhop of
St. Andrew's to his ancient jurifdidion, and depriv.
ing the Commiffaries of all authority ".

A motive, which cannot be justified, rendered

the Queen not unwilling to venture upon this rafb
adion. She had been contriving, for some time,
bow to re-establish die Popilh religion; and the
feftorjig the ancient ecclesiastics to their former
jurifdidion, seemed to be a considerable Rep towards
that end. The motive which prompted Bothwell,
to whole influence over the Queen this adion mu/t
be chiefly imputed", was fill more crimial. His
nterprifing ambition had already formed that bold
design, which he soon after put in execution; and
the use which we Ihall hereafter find him making
of that authority, which the Popifli ecclesiastic
regained, dikcovers the reasons of his present condud,

" Keith, x z. "Id. 2si. " Knox, 4o3.
" Id. ibid.

in contributing to revive their power. The Protest- B 0 O K
ant clergy were not unconcerned fpedators of an Iv.
event which threatened their religion with unavoid- "66
able deftrudion; but as they despaired of obtaining
the proper remedy from the Queen herself, they
addrefled a remonstrance to the whole body of the
Proteltant nobility, full of that ardent zeal for
religion, which the danger to which it was exposed
at that time, seemed to require ". What effects this
vehement exhortation might have produced, we
have no opportunity of judging, the attention of
the nation being quickly turned towards events
of another, and more tragical nature.

Immediately upon the King's leaving Stirling, The King
and before he could reach Glasgow, he was seized G' lgk at
with a dangerous distemper. The symptoms which xs6.
attended it were violent and unusual, and in that
age it was commonly imputed to the effets of
poison ". It is impoflible, amidst the contraditions
of hillorians, to decide with certainty concerning
its nature, or its cause ". His life was in the utmost

Keith, 567. " Melv. I;4. Knox, 4or.
Buchanan and Knox are positive that the King had been

poisoned. They mention the black and putrid pustules which
broke out all over his body. Buchanan adds, that Abernethy
the King's physician plainly declared that poison was the cause
ofthefe symptoms, and that the. Queen refused to allow her
own physician to attend him. 'Buch. ;49. Knox, 401. 2.
lilackwood, Caufin. &c. Jebb, vol. ii. 59. 24. assert, thatthe
fmallpux was the disease with which the King was seized. He
is called a Pockisb man in the Queen's letter. Good. vol. ii. X .
The reason given by 'reneb Paris for lodging the King at the
Kid; of Field, viz. left the young Prince lhould catch the

Ei

B 0 OK danger; but after languishing for some weeks, the

Iv. vigor of his constitution surmounted the malignity
,*"s. of the difeale.
iesi0~ by Mary's neglec of the King on this occasion,

wxvas equal to that with which he bad tteated her
during her illness at Jedburgh. She no longer felt
that warmth of conjugal affetion which prompts to
fympatby, and delights in all those tender offices
which sooth and alleviate sickness and pain. At this
jundure, fbe did not even put on the appearance of
this paflion. Notwithstanding the King's danger,
ihe amused herself with excursions to different part
of the country, and suffered near a month to elaptf
before lhe visited him at Glasgow. By that time, the
violence of the diffemper was over, and the King,
though weak and languilfing, was out of all danger.

re b»,,c' The breach between Mary and her hulband was
betw . not occasioned by any of those flight disgusts which
r^ylem interrupt the domestic union, without dissolving it

altogether. Almost all the paflions,,which operate
with greatest violence on a female mind, and drive
inftion if he flaid in the palace, seems to favor this opinion.
Anders vol. ii. 191. Carte mentions it as'a proof of Mar's
tenderness to her husband, that though the never had'the
finallpox herself, she ventured to attend him, vol. iii. 46.
This, if it had been true, would have afforded a good prectcae
for not viiting him sooner; but Mary had the smallpox inhet
infancy. Sadler's Leters, p. ; lo. An additional proof of thi
is produced from a poem of AdrianTumebus, by the publilha
of ancient Sconifh poems, p. o08. ;. Bishop Lefley afrms
that the King's disease was the French pox. Keith, ;64
Note (). Inthat age, this disease was esteemed so contagioous
that persons infteed with it were removed without the wai
ns cities.

it to the molf dangerous extremes, concurred in B OOK
raising and fomenting this unhappy quarrel. Ingra. Iv.
titude for the favors Ihe had bellowed, contempt "6r.
of her person , violations of the marriage-vow,
encroachments on her power, conspiracies against
her favorites, jealousy, insolence, and obstinacy,
were the injuries of which Mary had great reason
to complain. She felt them with the utmost fenfi-
bility; and added to the anguish of disappointed
love, they produced those symptoms of despair
which we have already described. Her resentment
against the King seems not to have abated from the
time of his leaving Stirling. In a letter written
with her own hand to her Ambassador in France,
on the day before /he set out for Glasgow, no
tokens of sudden reconcilement appear. On the jan.ea
contrary, lhe mentions, with some bitterness, the
King's ingratitude, the jealousy with which he
observed her actions, and the inclination he dif-
covered to disturb her government, and at the
fame time talks of all his attempts with the
utmost scorn ".

After this discovery of Mary's sentiments, at virnt te

the time of her departure from Edinbbrgh to ing at
Glasgow, a visit to the King, which had been Glaow.
negleced when his situation rendered it molf
neceffiry, appears singular, and it could hardly
be expected that any thing but marks of jealousy
and distrust should appear in such an interview.
This, however, was far from being the cafe; ihe
"Keith, Pref. viii.

E3

B 0 0
O not only visited Henry, but, by all her words and

IV. actions, endeavoured to express an uncommon
5$5. affetdon for him: And though this made impression

on the credulous spirit of her hulband, no kle
flexible, on some occasions, than obstinate on
others; yet, to those who are acquainted with the
human heart, and who know how seldom and
how slowly such wounds in domestic happints
are healed, this sudden transition will appear with
a very suspicious air, and will be confidered by
them as the effed of artifice.

Err di. But it is not on suspicion alone, that Mary is
hiiWo.~ charged with diflimulation in this part of her con.

dud Two of her famous letters to Bothwell were
written during her flay at Glasgow, and fully lay
open this scene of iniquity. He had so far succeeded
in his ambitious and criminal dcfign, as to gain an
absolute ascendant over the Queen; and in a fitua.
tion such as Mary's, merit not so conspicuous,
services of far inferior importance, and addreft much
less insinuating than Bothwell's, may be supposed to
fecal imperceptibly on a female heart, and entirely
to overcome it. Unhappily, among those in the
higher ranks of life, scruples with regard to con
jugal fidelity are, often, neither many, nor strong
Nor did the manners of that court in which Maq
had been educated, contribute to increase or t
fortify them. The amorous turn of Francis I. an,
Henry II. the wildness of the military charade
in that age, and the liberty of appearing in all con
panies, which began to be allowed to women, wh
had not yet acquired that delicacy of sentiment, an

thole polifled manners, which alone can render BOOK
this liberty innocent, had introduced, among the Iv.
French, a licentiousness of morals that rofi to an ts«7.
aflonifling height. Such examples, which were
familiar to Mary from her infancy, could hardly
fail of diminifling that horror of vice which is
natural to a virtuous mind. The King's behaviour
would render the first approach of forbidden senti.
ments less /hocking; resentment, and disappointed
love, would be apt to represent whatever soothed
her revenge, as justifiable on that account; and so
many concurring causes might, almoRf impercepti-
bly, kindle a new paflion in her heart.

But whatever opinion we may form with regard The modvra
to the rife and progress of this paflion, the letters fit.
themselves breathe all the ardor and tenderness of
love. The affecion which Mary there expresses for
Bothwell, fully accounts for every subsequent part
of her conduct; which, without admitting this
circumstance, appears altogether mysterious, incon-
fiftent, and inexplicable. That reconcilement with
her hufand, of which , if we allow it to be
genuine, it is impollible to give any plausible
Iacount, is discovered, by the Queen's own con-
fcflion, to have been mere artifice and deceit. As
her averrion for her hulband, and the suspicious
attention with which she observed his condut,
became universally known, her ears were officiously
filled, as is usual in such cafes, with grbundlefs or
aggravated accounts of his adions. By some (he
was told, that the King intended to seize the
person of the Prince his son, and in his name to

E4

o0 K ulurp the government; by others she was assured,
IV. that he resolved infiantly to leave the kingdom;
ui7. that a veffcl was hired for this purpose, and lay in

the river Clyde ready to receive him". The last
was what Mary chiefly dreaded. Henry's retiring
into a foreign country mufl have been highly
dilbonorable to the Queen, and would have
entirely disconcerted Bothwell's measures. While
he resided at Glasgow, at a distance from her, and
in that part of the kingdom where the interest of
his family was greatet, he might, with more faci.
lity, accomplish his designs. In order, therefore, to
prevent his executing any such wild scheme, it
was necessary to bring him to some place where
he would be more immediately under her own

preaic an eye. For this purpose, The first employed all her
him to o' art to regain his confidence, and then proposed to

remove him to the neighbourhood of Edinburgh,
under pretence, that there he would have easier
accef< to the advice of physicians, and that The
herrelf could attend him without being absent from
her son ". The King was weak enough to fuffcr
himself to be persuaded; and being fill feeble,
and incapable of bearing fatigue, was carried in a
litter to Edinburgh.

The place prepared for his reception was a

house belonging to the Provost of a collegiate
church, called Kirk of Field. It Rood almof
upon the fame spot where the house belonging to
the Principal of the university now Rtands. Such

" Keith, Pref. iii. " Good. voL i. 8.

a situation, on a rising ground, and at that time B 0 o K
in an open field, had all the advantages of health- Iv.
ful air to recommend it; but, on the other hand, 116r.
the solitude of the place rendered it extremely
proper for the commission of that crime, with a
view to which, it seems manifefily to have been
chofcn.

Mary continued to attend the King with the e; inr.
moftafliduous care. She seldom was absent from him deced tlere
through the day; hbe slept two nights in the cham.
ber under his apartment. She heaped on him so
many marks of tenderness and confidence, as, in
a great measure, quieted those suspicions which
had so long disturbed him. But while he was fondly
indulging in dreams of the return of his former
happiness, he flood on the very brink of deftruc.
tion. On Sunday the ninth of February, about
eleven at night, the Queen left the Kirk of Field,
in order to be present at a malk in the palace.
At two next morning, the house in which the
King lay was blown up with gunpowder. The
noise and shock, which this sudden explosion oc-
cafioned, alarmed the whole city. The inhabitants
ran to the place whence it came. The dead body
of the King, with that of a servant who slept in
the fame room, were found lying in an adjacent
garden, without the city-wall, untouched by fire,
and with no bruise or mark of violence.

Such was the unhappy fate of Henry Stewart Hcislcu
Lold Darnly, in the twenty-firlf year of his age. t,.
The indulgence of fortune, and his owp external
accomplishments, without any other merit, had

BooK raised him to an height of dignity of which he

:v. was altogether unworthy. By his folly and in.
:s5r. gratitude, he los the heart of a woman who

doated on him to diftradion. His insolence and
inconstancy alienated from him such of the nobles
as had contributed molt zealously towards his
elevation. His levity and caprice exposed him
to the scorn of the people, who once revered
him as the descendant of their ancient Kings and
heroes. Had he died a natural death, his end
would have been unlamented, and his memory
have been forgotten; but the cruel circumstances
of his murder, and the lhameful remissness
in negleding to avenge it, have made his name
to be remembered with' regret, and have rendered
him the object of pity, to' which he had other.
wife no title.
Boe,,n Every one's imagination was at work to guef

1dt*

. who had contrived and executed this execrable

Suets rar.

~ ofr deed. The suspicion fell, with almost a general
tn muran. content, on Bothwell "; and some reflections were

thrown out, as if the Queen herself were no
stranger to the crime. Of Bothwell's guilt there
remains the fullest evidence that the nature of the
adtion will admit. The Queen's known sentiment
with regard to her husband, gave a great ap
pearance of probability to the imputation wilt
which Ibe was loaded".

" Mel. r(;. Anders. vol. ii. ls6.
' See Dissertation concerning the murder of Henry Danrr
and the gcnuinenels of Mary's letters to BothwelL Append

I

Two (lays after the murder, a proclamation was B o O K
issued by the Queen, offering a considerable reward iv.
to any person who flould discover those who z17.
had been guilty of fuich a horrid and detestable
crime "; and though Bothwell was now one of the
greatest fubjedcs in the kingdom , formidable on
account of his own power, and proteted by the
Queen's favor, it was impoflible to suppress the
sentiments and indignation of the people. Papers
were affixed to the most public places of the city,
accusing him of the murder, and naming his accom-
plices; pictures appeared to the fLme purpose, and
voices were heard in the middle of thle night, charg.
ing him with that barbarous action. But the authors
of these rumors did not confine their accusations
to Botlhwell alone; they insinuated that the Queen
lierfclf was accessary to the crime ". This bold ac-
cufation, which so direcly attacked Mary's re-
putation, drew the attention of her council; and
by engaging them in an inquiry after the authors
of these libels, diverted them from searching for
the murderers of the King ". It could scarce be
expeced that Mary herself would be extremely
solicitous to discover those who had rid her of a
hufland , whom flie had so violently hated. It was
Bothwell's interest, who had the supreme direc-
tion of this, as well as of all other affairs, to
flfle and suppress whatever evidence Ihould be
offtrcd, .nd to cover, if possible, the whole tranf-
acion under the veil of darkness and of silence.

'Anders. vol i. 36. Id. vol. ii. t6.
' Id. vol. i. 38.

nOOK Some inquiry, however, was made, and some

Iv. persons called before the council; but the exam.
s7. nation was conducted with the most indecent remis.

ness, and in such a manner as to let in no light
upon that scene of guilt ".

It was not her own subjes alone who fufpeded

Mary of having been acceflary to this unnatural
crime; nor did an opinion, so diihonorable to her
character, owe its rife and progress to the jealousy
and malice of her faaious nobles. The report of
the manner and circumstances of the King's murder
spread quickly over all Europe, and, even in that
age, which was accustomed to deeds of violence,
it excited universal horror. As her unhappy breach
with her hulband had long been matter of public
discourse, the first conjecures which were formed
with regard to his death, were extremely to her
disadvantage. Her friends, at a loss what apology
to offer for her condu&t, called on her to prosecute
the murderers with the utmost diligence, and ex.
pected that the rigor of her proceedings would prove
the best and fullelt vindication of her innocence ".

Ksc.aia Lenox, at the fame time, incited Mary tovenge.

Bth"e Kg' ance with incessant importunity. This nobleman
murer. had shared in his son's disgrace, and being treated

by Mary with neglea, usually resided at a difance
from court. Roused, however, by an event no
less fbocking to the heart of a father, than fatl
to all his schemes of ambition, he ventured tc
rsh. it. write to the Queen, and to offer his advia

AndeC voL iv. partii. 167, 16. " Keith, Prif.

with refped to the moR effectual method for dif. B 0 0 K
covering and conviding thole who had so cruelly iv.
deprived him of a son, and her of a husband, *i67.
He urged her to prosecute those who were guilty
with vigor, and to bring them to a speedy trial;
he declared his own suspicion of Bothwell, and of
those who were named as his accomplices; he
required that, out of regard to decency, and in
order to encourage evidence to appear against
them, the persons accused of such an atrocious
crime fllould be committed to cuRody, or at leat
excluded from her court and presence"

Mary was then at Seaton, whither The had re-
tired after the burial of the King, whose body
was deposited among the Monarchs of Scotland,
in a private but decent manner '. The former
part of the Earl's demand could not, on any pre-
tence, be eluded; and it was resolved to bring
Bothwell immediately to trial. But, instead of
confining him to any prison, Mary admitted him ar,,,
into all her councils, and allowed a person, uni- tinuet to
verfally reputed the murderer of her hulband, to' aort hir.
enjoy all the security, the dignity, and the power
of a favorite '. The offices which Bothwell al-
ready possessed, gave him the command of all the
south of Scotland. The catle of Edinburgh,
however, was a place of so much consequence
that he wilhed earnestly to have it in his own
power. The Queen, in order to prevail on the
Earl of Mar to surrender it, consented to put Mar,.h

Keith, 396. " Anders. voL i. a2.
Id. ibid. 4o, &t.

B o o K the person of the young Prince in his hands, and

lv immediately bestowed the government of that
1s67. important fortress upon Bothwell ". So many steps

in her conduct, inconfifent with all the rules of
prudence and of decency, mutl be imputed to an
excess either of folly. or of love. Mary's known
charater fully vindicates her from the former;of
the latter, many and friking proofs soon appeared.

iT&,, o. No diret evidence had yet appeared against
his a Bothwell; but as time might bring to light the

circumltances of a crime in which so many ac.
complices were concerned, it was of great im.
portance to hurry over the trial, while nothing
more than general suspicions, and -uncertain fur.

iifes, could be produced by his accusers. For

this reason, in a meeting of Privy Council held
on the twenty.eighth of March, the twelfth of
April was appointed for the day.of trial. Though
the law allowed, and the mariner in.which cri.
minal causes were carried on in that age required,
a much longer interval, it appears, from several
circumstances, that this Ihort space was ccl.
fiderably contrated, and that Lenox had onl'
eleven days warning to prepare for accusing a
person, so far superior to himfilf, both in power
and in favor ". No man could be less in a condition

A nderE vol. L Pref. 64. Keith, ;79.
The ad of Privy Council, appointing the day of arBa

wdl's trial, bears date March the agth, which happened on i
Thqrfday. Anders vol. i. o. The Queen's warrant to thl
wefftngerz, impowering them to rummon Lenox to be prefcnt
is dated on the 29th. Anders. vol. it. 97. lie was fummnWa

to contend with an antagonist who was thus sup. BOO K
ported. Though Lenox's paternal estate had been ly
restored to him, when he was recalled into Scot. I567.
land, it seems to have been considerably impaired
during his banilhment. His vassals, while he resided
in England, had been accustomed to some degree
of independence, and he had not recovered that
ascendant over them, which a feudal chief usually
polteffed. He had no reason to expect the concur-
rence of any of those factions into which the nobles
were divided. During the short period of his son's
prosperity, he had taken such steps as gave rife to
an open breach with Murray and all his adherents.
The partisans of the house of Hamilton were
his hereditary and mortal enemies. Huntly was
linked in the closest confederacy with Bothwell;
and thus, to the disgrace of the nation, Lenox
stood alone in a cause, where both honor 'and

by public proclamation at the Cross of Edinburgh on the fame
day. Ibid. ioo. He was summoned at his dwelling-houres in
Glasgow and Dumbarton the ;oth of March, the Ift and ad
days of April. Ibid. Ior. He was summoned at Perth, April
if. Ibid. o12. Though Lenox resided at that time forty
miles from Edinburgh, the citation might hare been given
him sooner. Such an unnecessary delay affords Come cause
for suspicion. It is true, Mary, in her letter, March a4th,
invited Lenox to come to Edinburgh the ensuing week;
this gave him warning some days sooner, that Ihe intended
to bring on the trial without delay. But the precise time
could not be legally or certainly known to Lenox sooner
than ten or twelve days before the day on which he was
required to appear. By the law and pratice of Scotland, at
that time, parties were summoned, incases of treaon,
forty days previous to the trial.

gooK humanity called so loudly on his countrymen to

Iv. second him.
1t67. It is remarkable too, that Bothwell himfelfwal

present, and fat as a member in that meeting of
Privy Council, which gave direcions with regard
to the time and manner of his trial; and he dill
enjoyed not only full liberty, but was received
into the Queen's presence with the fame diftinguilb.
ed familiarity as formerly ".

UL.X mn Nothing could be a more cruel disappointment
*d 'si to the wilhes and resentment of a father, than such

a premature trial; every tep towards which eemed
to be taken by directions from the person who
was himself accused of the crime, and calculated
on purpose to conceal rather than to detec his guilt.
Lenox foresaw what would be the issue of this
mock inquiry, and with how little safety to him.
self; or success to his cause, he could venture to
appear on the day prefixed. In his former letters,
though under exprelfions the mot refpetful, some
symptoms of his distrusting the Queen may be dig
covered. He spoke out now in plain: language.
He complained of the injury done him, by
hurrying on the trial with such illegal precipitation.
He represented once more the indecency of allow.
ing Bothwell, not only to enjoy personal liberty,
but to retain his former influence over her councils
He again required her, as lie regarded her own ho.
nor, to give some evidence of her sincerity in profecut
ing the murder, by confining the person whowas, on

* AndetC volg
L $o. s2.

good

good grounds, fufpeced to be the author of it; and, n o o X
till that were done, he signified his own resolution not Iv.
to be present at a trial, the manner and circumltan. isw.
ces of which were so irregular and unfatisfadory ".

He seems, however, to have expelced little A so
success from this application to Mary; and there- thi, purpor
fore, at the fame time, besought Elizabeth to to Eliz.
interpose, in order to obtain such a delay as he bth.
demanded ". Nothing can be a fronger proof
how violently he fufpeted the one Queen, than
his submitting to implore the aid of the other,
who had treated his son with the utmost con.
tempt., and himself and family with the greatest
rigor. Elizabeth, who was never unwilling to
interpose in the affairs of Scotland, wrote in.
ftantly to Mary, advised her to delay the trial for
some time, and urged, in such strong terms, the
fame arguments which Lenox had used, as might
have convinced her to what an unfavorable con-
firudion her conduct would be liable, if she per-
fiRled in her present method of proceeding "'.

Neither her intreaties, however, nor those of Th tril
Lenox, could prevail to have the trial put off. proceeds;
On the day appointed, Bothwell appeared, but
with such a formidable retinue, that it would
have been dangerous to condemn, and impossible
to punilh hiln. Besides a numerous body of his.
friends and vassals assembled, according to cuf-
tom, from different parts of the kingdom, he
was attended by a band of hired soldiers, who

" Anders. vol. i. (2. " Good. vol. ii. 3a.
" Anders. Pref. 60. See Appendix, No. VI.
VOL. 11. F

Boo0 marched with flying colors along the streets of

I. Edinburgh ''. A court of justice was held with
I*67. the accustomed formalities. An indidment was

presented against Bothwell, and Lenox was
called upon to make good his accuL£tion. In his
name appeared Robert Cunningham, one of his
dependants. He excused his Malter's absence,
on account of the shortness of the time, which
prevented his al'embling his friends and vassals,
without whose afiflance he could not, with
safety , venture to set himself in opposition to
such a powerful antagonist. For this reason, he
desired the court to flop proceeding, and pro.
tested, that any sentence which sbould be pased
at that time, ought to be deemed illegal and void.
Bothwell, on the other hand, inifted that the
court should instantly proceed to trial. One of Le-
nox's own letters, in which he craved of the Queen
to prosecute the murderers without delay, was pro.
duced. Cunningham's objedions were over.ruled;
and the jury, confiting of Peers and Barons of the
first rank, found Bothwell not guilty of the crime.

iBonhwen i No person appeared as an accuser, not a single
cqittttL witness was examined, nor any evidence prodos

ced against him. The jury, under these circum
Rances, could do nothing else but acquit him.
Their verdict, however, was far from gratifying
the withes, or fikncing the murmurs of the
people. Every circumstance in the trial gave
grounds for suspicion, and excited indignation;
and the judgment pronounced, instead of being a

'" Ander vol. i. I3.

proof of Bothwell's innocence, was efleemed an Bo0 o
argument of his guilt. Pasquinades and libels were Iv.
affixed to different places, expressing the sentiments is'r.
of the public with the utmost virulence of language.

The jury themselves seem to have been aware
of the censure to which their proceedings would
be exposed; and, at the fame time that they
returned their verdict acquitting Bothwell, the
Earl of Caithness protested, in their name, that
no crime should be imputed to them on that ac-
count, because no accuser had appeared, and no
proof was brought of the indictment. He took
notice, likewise, that the ninth instead of the
tenth of February was mentioned in the indic-
ment, as the day on which the murder had been
committed: A circumflance which discovers the
extreme inaccuracy of those who prepared the
indiCtment; and at a time when men were difpo.
fed, and not without reason, to be suspicious of
every thing, this small matter contributed to con.
firm and to increase their fufpicians ''.

Even Bothwell himself did not rely on the judge.
ment which he had obtained in his favor, as a full
vindication of his innocence. Immediately after his
acquittal, he, in compliance with a custom which
was not then obsolete, publilhed a writing, in which
he offered to fight, in single combat, any Gentleman
of good fame, who should presume to accuse him
of being accessary to the murder of the King.

,lary, however, continued to treat him as if
"' nothw. Trial, Anders. vol. ii. 97, &c.

F7

o o h be had been cleared by the most unexceptionable
Iv. and fatisfadory evidence. The ascendant he had
ss7. gained over her heart, as well as over her coun.

cils, was more visible than ever; and Lenox,
who could not exped that his own person would
be safe in a country where the murderer of his son
had been absolved, without regard to justice;
and loaded with honors , in contempt of decen.
cy; fled with precipitation towards England'".

A Parui- Two days after the trial, a Parliament was
-at b, held, at the opening of which the Queen diftin.

'* e guilhed Bothwell, by appointing him to cary

the sceptre before her '". Mofl of the ads pased
in this Assembly were calculated on purpose to
strengthen his party, and to promote his designs.
He obtained the ratification of all the poffeflions
and honors which the partiality of the Queen
had conferred upon him; and the ad to that
effeC contained the frongeft declarations of his
faithful services to the Crown in all times pal.
The surrender of the caRtle of Edinburgh by
Mar was confirmed. The law of attainder against
Huntly was repealed, and he and his adherents
were restored to the estates and honors of their
ancestors. Several of those who had been on the jury
which acquitted Bothwell, obtained ratifications
of the grants made in their favor; and as pal
quinades daily multiplied, a law passed, whereby
those, into whose hands any paper of that kinW

'" Keith, 78, Note (d.)
" Id. ibid.

fell, were commanded instantly to destroy it; BOOK
and if, through their neglec , it should be al. IV.
lowed to spread, they were fubjeeed to a capital rii6.
punishment, in.the fame manner as if they had
been the original authors "'.
But the absolute dominion which Bothwell Remarkable

law in fa.

had acquired over Mary's mind, appeared in the vorofth,
clearest manner, by an a& in favor of the Pro. Reform.
teftant religion, to which, at this time, The gave "
her assent. Mary's attachment to the Romish
faith was uniform and superstitious; he .had
never laid aside the design, nor loft the hopes of
eftoring it. She had, of late, come under new
engagements to that purpose, and, in confe.
quence of these, had ventured upon some steps
more public and vigorous than any she 'had for-
merly taken. But though none of these cir-
cumRtances were unknown to Bothwell, there
were powerful motives which prompted him, at
this juncture, to conciliate the good-will of the
ProteRants, by exerting himself in order to pro-
cure for them some additional security in the
exercise of their religion. That which they en-
joyed at present, was very precarious, being
founded entirely on the royal proclamation if-
sued loon after the arrival of the Queen in Scot-
land, which, in express terms, was declared to
be only a temporary regulation. From that
period, neither the solicitations of the General
Assemblies of the Church, nor the intreaties of
her people, could extort from Mary any concef-
'' Keith, 380.

F3

1 00K sion in favor of the Protestant religion, ml

Iv. which the profelTors might reft with greater con.
i,67. fidence. This, however, by the more powerful

influence of Bothwell, they now obtained. An
ad was pafied in this Parliament, repealing al
the laws, canon, civil, and municipal, adverse to
the Reformed religion, and exempting such u
bad embraced it from the penalties to whick
they might have been fubjeded by these laws,
either on-account of their past conduc or prcknt
profession; declaring, at the fame time, that their
persons, eltates, honors, and benefices, wsm
taken under public protection against every court,
civil or ecclesiastical, that might attempt to
molest them on account of their religious fepti
ments Thus the ProteRants, instead of holding
their sacred rights by no better tenure than a
declaration of royal indulgence, which might be
revoked at pleasure, obtained legal and parlia.
mentary protecion in the exercise of their re.
ligion. By prevailing on the Queen to assent to
this law, Bothwell seems to have flattered him.
*fel that he would acquire such merit both with
the clergy and with the people , as might indut
them to favor his ambitious schemes, and to
connive at what he had done, or might do, it
order to accomplilf them. The Proteflants, ac
cordingly, though this aft was far from amount
ing to a legal establishment of the Reformet
faith, seem to have confidered it as an additions
fckrity of such importance, that it was pub
lilbed among the laws enacted in a Parliamen

held towards the close of this year s under very B o o
different leaders ". Iv.

Every ftep taken by Bothwell had hitherto s67.
been attended with all the success which his most othi,,n

prevails on

I am indebted to the accuracy of Sir David Dalrymple, the noble

for pointing out (Remarks on the History of Scotland , ch. 9.) mn l
a considerable error into which I had fallen with respect to as , hoi
this ad, by fuppoling it to be so favorable to the dotrine band to the
of the Reformation, that the Parliament which met Dec. l, SQueen
could substitute nothing stronger or more explicit in its
place, and thought it sufficient to ratify it word for word.
This error I have now corrected; but after connidering the
at with particular attention, though I am satisfied that it
neither ellabliflied the Reformed-religion as the religion of
the fRate, nor abolished Popery, yet it granted such new and
legal security to the Proteflants, as was deemed, in that age,
an acquisition of great value. The framers of the law seem
ma'iifecly to have viewed it in that light; after reciting " that
the Queen, since her arrival, had attempted nothing contrary
to the Irate of religion, which Ihe found publicly and univer-
sally landing, on which account she was moR worthy to be
served, honored, and obeyed, &c." - the at goes on, " that
as Ihe intends to continue the fame goodness and government
in all times coming, the profefTors ofthe religion aforehid may
and ihall have occi(ion to praise God for her happy and gracious
governmen:, &c.: aid to the effect that the profelTors of the
religion aforesaid may allure themselves to be in full surety
thereof, and of their lands, lives, &c. and may with the better
will jeopard and hazard their lives, and goods in her High.
ness's service, against all enemies to her, and to the common-
well of this realm, &c. therefore our Sovereign, with the ad-
vice of the whole estates in Parliament, &c. : then follow
th lfatutory clauses mentioned in the text. The intention
of palling the ad is apparent, and it is drawn with great art.
Ihis art is peculiarly manifest in the concluding clause. In
her firit proclamation the Queen had declared, that it Ihould
continue in force only until lhe Ihould take final order con.

F4

sOOK sanguine winhes could expec& He had entirely

Iv. gained the Queen's heart; the murder of the
167. King 'had excited no public commotion; he had

been acquitted by bis peers of any (hare in that
crime; and their decision had been, in some fort,
ratified in Parliament. But in a kingdom where
the regal authority was so extremely limited, and
the power of the nobles so formidable, he durst
not venture on the last ation, towards which all
cerning religion with the advice of Parliament In this a
the intention of taking further order conceming religion h
mentioned, probably with a view to pkafe the Queen; bt
it is worded with such studied dexterity, that the p~otio
granted by this hw is no longer to be regarded as temporary,
or depending upon the Queen's taking such final order. Pal
I K. Ja. VI. c. ) . In the fame light of an important a.
quifition of security to the Reformed religion, this a is r.
prefnted by the Privy Council in a proclmaton ifued May
2;, 1567. Keith, 7r. Mary's principal adherents, ins
paper subscribed by them Sept. 2, i 568, declare, that ihe,
a by the advice of the three eflates, had satisfied the defre
of the whole nobility in an ad concerning all the points of
religion passed in the Parliament held April 67. " Goodal,
ii. ;17. The fame is aferted to be th-intention and eff
of this ad in another public paper in the"car 5r70. Hayna,
621. From confidering all these particulars, one need not
wonder that a law "anent calling (as its title bear), an.
nulling, and abrogating of all laws, ats, and contitutions,
canone, civile, aud municipal, with other confitutions, con
trare to the religion now profeflit within the realme, "con
firmed by the royal assent of the Queen, should be publilfed
among the statutes securing the Proteflant religion. We
find accordingly, in a very rare edition of the ats of Pardi.
ment, imprintit at Edinburgh by Robert Lekprevik, printarto
the King's Majeftie, 6 day of April i 56g, the ad of April 19
inserted among the ads of the Regent's Parliament in Decembue

his ambitious projects tended, 'without their ap- B 0
probation. In order to secure this, he, immediately Iv.
after the dissolution of Parliament, invited all the "r.
nobles who were present' to an entertainment. April
Having filled the house with his friends and de.
pendants, and surrounded it with armed men ",
he opened to the company his intention of mar.
rying the Queen, whosel content, he told them,
he had already obtained; and demanded their ap-
probation of this match, which, he said, was no
less acceptable to their Sovereign , than honorable
to himself "'. Huntly and Seaton, who.were privy
to all Bothwell's schemes, and promoted them with -
the utmost zeal; the Popilh ecclesiastics, who
were absolutely devoted to the Queen, and ready
to tooth all her paflions, instantly declared their
fatisfadion with what he had proposed. The reft,
who dreaded the exorbitant power which Bothwell
had acquired, and observed the Queen's growing
afiflion towards him in all her acions, were wil.
ling to make a merit of yielding to a measure which
they could neither oppofe-nor defeat. Some few
were confounded and enraged. But, in the end,
Bothwell, partly by promises and flattery, partly
by terror and force, prevailed on all who were
present to subscribe a paper, which leaves a deeper
slain than any occurrence in that age, on the honor
and character of the nation.

This paper contained the strongest declarations
of Bothwell's innocence, and the most ample
"' Good. vol. ii. 141. "' Anders vol. i. 94.

B o o K acknowledgment of his good services to the king.

Iv. dom. If any future accusation Ihould be brought
nr. against him, on account of the King's murder, the

subscribers promised to (land by him as one man,
and to hazard their lives and fortunes in his defence.
They recommended him to the Queen as the moi
proper person the could chufe for a hulband; aad
if she Ihould condescend to beRow on him that
mark of her regard, they undertook to promote
the marriage, and tojoin him with all theirforces
in opposing any person who endeavoured to obftrud
it '. Among the fubicribers of this paper, w
find some who were the Queen's chief confidents,
others who were firangers to her councils, and ob
noxious to her displeasure; some who faithfully ad.
hered to her through all the viciflitudes of her for.
tune, and others who became the principal authors
of her sufferings; some passionately attached to the
Romith superstition, and others zealous advocates
for the Protefant faith '. No common interest can
be supposed to have united men of such opposite
principles and parties, in recommending to thei
Sovereign a ftep so injurious to her honor, and k
fatal to her peace. This strange coalition was the
ffled of much artiEce, and mutl be confidered a!
the boldest and molt masterly stroke of Bothwell'
address. It is observable, that amidst all the alterca
tions and mutual reproaches of the two partie
which arore in the kingdom, this unworthy tranfa
tion is seldom mentioned. Conscious oni both fides

'' Andetf. vol. i. 17. '" Keith, 382.

that in this particular their condud could ill bear B o o K
examination, and woqld redound little to their IV.
fame, they always touch upon it unwillingly, and IcS4,
with a tender hand, seeming desirous that it should
remain in darkness, or be buried in oblivion. But
as so many persons, who, both at that time, and
ever after, polfeffed, the Queen's favor, subscribed
this paper, the [fupicion becomes strong, that Both-
well's ambitious ..qpes were neither unknown
to Mary., nor disapproved by her ".

"' Of all the different fyfemn with regard to this tran facion,

that of Camden seems to be the least accdrate, and the wort
founded. He fuppo(es that Bothwell was bated by Murray,
DbIrton, &c. who had been his associates in the murder of the
King, and that they now wanted to ruin him. He affirms, at
the fame time, that the subscriptions to thIs paper were ob-
tained by them out of fear that Bothwell might fink in his
hopes, and betray the whole bloody Secret, 404. But belides
the absurdity of fuppoling that any man's enemies would
contribute towards railing him to such high dignity, on the
uncertain hopes of being able afterwards to deprive him of
it; beides the impolfibility of accomplifhifig such a mar.
riage, if it had been either unknown to the Queen, or dlb.
greeable to her; we may observe that this supposition is de.
iroyed hy the direst teltimony of the Queen herself, who
afcrihes the content of the nobles to Bothwell's artifices, wbo
ptrchalji it bygividngthem to nnderftind that we wer coQrtf#t
thl,e'rjith. Anders. vol. i. 94. 99. It would have been no
finill advantage to Mary, if she could hare repreftnted thq
consent of the noh!es to have been their own voluntary deed.
It is ill more frurprifing to find Lefly ascribing this paper to
Alurray and his fation. Anders. vol. i. 26. The Biflop
himrelf was one of the perons- who Pubfcribed it. Keith, 8 .
The King's commiflioners, at the conference held 'at York
i F6, pretended that none of the nobles, except the Earl of
Hunry, would subscribe this paper till a warrant from the

0 o o There suspicions are confirmed by the morftdire
Iv. proof Melvil, at that time, enjoyed a confi
*7* derable ihare in her favor. He, as well as his bro.

ther, kept a secret correspondence in England with
those who favored her pretensions to that Crown.
The rumor of her intended marriage with Bothwell
having spread early in that kingdom, excited uni.
vCral indignation; and Melvil received a kter
from thence, which represented, in the ftronge
terms, what would be the fatal effects of such na
imprudent ftep. He put this letter into the QueI's
hands, and enforced it with the utmost warotb.
She not only disregarded there remonstrances, but
communicated the matter to Bothwell; and Mel.
vil, in order to save his life, was obliged to fly
from court, whither he durfR not return till the
Ears rage began to abate "'. At the fame time,

Queen was produced, by which they were allowed to do o:
this warrant they had in their custody, and exhibited. Andert
ol. iv. part. a. s. This differs from Buchanan's acc6unt, who
fppofes that ill the nobles present subscribed the pper on
the Irgt, and that next day they obtained the approbioonof
what they had done, by way of fecuriy to themselves, ;.

" Melv. 5s6. According to Melvil, LordHerries like

wife remofnated aginft the marriage, and conjured the
Queen, on his knees, to lay aide all thoughts offuch a d
honorable aliance, z 6. But it has been observed, tatHer.
ries is one of the nobles who fubcribed the bond, April 19.
Keith, ;;. z. That he is one of the witnes to the mr
riage articles between the Queen and Bothwell, May 4.
Good. vol. ii 61. ;. That he fat in council wih Bothwell
May 17. Keith, ;86. But this remonstrance of LordHerri
againf the marriage happened before those made by Mdlvi

Elizabeth warned Mary of the danger and infamy to a 6o K
which she would expose herself, by such an indecent Iv.
choice; but an advice from her met with still less tIz.
regard "'.

Three days after the rising of Parliament, Mary Botwell
went from Edinburgh to Stirling, in order to visit 'raies the
the Prince her son. Bothwell had now brought his force to
schemes to full maturity, and every precaution being Dulb"r.
taken which could render it safe to enter on the last
and decisive ftep, the natural impetuosity of his
spirit did not susser him to deliberate any longer.
Under pretence of an expedition againt the freeboot-
ers on the borders, he assembled his followers; and
marching out of Edinburgh with a thousand horse,
turned suddenly towards Linlithgow, met the Aril e4.
Queen on her return near that place, dispersed her
fender train without refitance, seized on her person,
and conduced her, together with a few of her cour.
tiers, as a prisoner to his castle of Dunbar. She ex-
pressed neither surprise, nor terror, nor indignation,
at such an outrage committed on her person, and

himself, x57. Melvil's remonstrance must have happened
some time before the meeting of Parliament; for after of.
fending Bothwell, he retired from :ourt; he allowed his rage
time to subside, and had again joined the Queen, when she
was seized, April 24. 1s8. The time which must have
elapsed, by this account of the matter, was perhaps sufficient
to have gained Herries from being an opposer to become a
promoter of the marriage. Perhaps Melvil may have com-
mitted some mistake with regard to this sac, so far as relates
toLord Herries. He could not well be n~faken iwith regard
to what himself did.

A' Anders. vol. i. Zo6.

a
0 0 x such an insult offered to bet authority, but seemed
IV. to yield without truggle or regret "'. Melvil was,
IT . at that time, one of her attendants; and the

officer by whom he was seized, informed him, that
nothing was done without the Queen's own con.

aent ". If we may rely on the letters publifled
in Mary's name, the scheme had been communi.
cated to her, and every fep towards it was taken
with her participation and advice "'.

Both the Queen and Bothwell thought it of

advantage to employ this appearance of violence.
It afforded her a decent excuse for her condud;
and while Ihe could plead that it was owing toforte
rather than choice, she hoped that her reputation,
among foreigners at least, would escape without
censure, or be exposed to less reproach Bothwell
could not help distrusting all the methods which
had hitherto been used, for vindicating him from
any concern in the murder of the King. Something
was Rill wanting for his security, and for quieting
his guilty fears. This was a pardon under the
Great Seal. By the laws of Scotland, the mos
heinous crime muff be mentioned by name in a
pardon, and then all lelfer offences are deemed to
be included under the general cfaufe, and alU oth
cimnes whatfoevr "'. To seize the person of the
Prince, is high treason; and'othwell hoped, thai
a pardon obtained for this would extend to ever
thing of which he had been accused "'.

"' Keith, S;. I Mely. ri8. "'Good. od.ii.?.
" Parl. 6 Jac. 1V. c. 62. " Anders. vol. iv. part. i. 6

Bothwell, having now got the Queen's person B o K
into his hands, it would have been unbecoming Iv.
either a politician or a man of gallantry to have 157.
delayed consummating his schemes. The first ftep fro, vli
towards this was to have his marriage with Lady own wife
Jane Gordon, the Earl of Huntly's siser, dissolved.
In order to accomplilb that, in a manner confiRent
with the ideas of the Queen on one hand, and
with the sentiments of his countrymen on the other,
two different processes became necessary. One
founded on the maxims of the Canon law, the
other accommodated to. the tenets of the Reformed
Church. Bothwell, accordingly, commenced a suit,
in his own name, in the spiritual court of the Arch.
bihop of St. Andrew's, the jurisdiCtion of which
the (ueen had restored, by a special commission
granted for this purpofc, and pleaded, that Lady April a
Jane and himself being cousins within the prohibited
degrees, and having married without a papal dif-
penfation,. their union was null from the begin.
ning"'. At the fame time, he prevailed with

"' In her own time, it was urged as an aggravation of the

Queen's guilt, that she gave her consent to marry the huC.
band of another woman; and the charge has been often re.
peated since. But, according to lary's own ideas, confo.
nant to the principles of her religion, the marriage of Both-
well with Lady Jane Gordon was unlawful and void, and she
confidered them as living together not in the hallowed bonds
of matrimony, but in a tate of criminal intercourse. Both.
well's addresses, which fruck her Protestant subje&s, not
only as indecent but flagitious, could not appear in the fame
light to her; and this may be pleaded in extenuation of the

o0OK Lady Jane to apply to the Protetlant court of
Iv. Commiffaries for a divorce, on account of his
ss6. having been guilty of adultery. The influence

of Bothwell was of equal weight in both courts.
In the course of four days, with the fame indecent
and suspicious precipitancy, the one declared the
marri;ge to be illegal and null, the other pro.
nounced a sentence of divorce ".

While this infamous transaction was carrying on,

the Queen resided at Dunbar; detained as a prisoner,
-a n. but treated with the greatest refpe& Soon after

Bothwell, with a numerous train of his dependants,
conduted her to Edinburgh; but, instead of lodging
her in the palace of Holyrood-houfe, he conveyed
her to the castle, of which be was governor. The
discontent of the nation rendered this precaution
neceflary. In a house unfortified, and of efy
access, the Queen might have been rescued without
difficulty out of his hands. In a place of firengt,
The was secured from all the attempts of his enemies.

One fnall difficulty fill remained to be fur.

mounted. As the Queen was kept in a fort of

cime imputed to her of having litened to them But it l
not exempt her from the charge of great imprudence in thb
unfortunate ftep. Mary was well acquainted with the ideas o
ber fubjedts, and knew what they would think of her giving ea
for a moment to the courtlhip of a man lately married under he
own eye, in the church of her palace. Appendix, N' VIL
Every confidration should have restrained her from formin
di union, which to her people must have appeared odious ad
ihocking. Remarks on the History of Scotland, p. 199, &c.
'" AnderC i. 1. Append. N . VII.

captivity

captivity by Bothwell, a marriage concluded in that B 0 o o
condition might be imputed to force, and be held Iv.
invalid. In order to obviate this, Mary appeared ISct.
in the Court of Seflion, and, in presence of the
Chancellor, and other judges, and several of the
nobility, declared that The was now at full liberty,
and though Bothwell's violence in seizing her per-
son had, at first, excited her indignation, yet his
refpeciful behaviour since that time, had not only
appeared her rcfentment, but determined her to
ralfe him to higher honors"'.

What these were, soon became public. The title o marrled te
of Duke of Orkney was conferred upon Bothwell;
and on the'fifteenth of May, his marriage with the
Queen, which had so long been the object of his
vinlles, and the motive of his crimes, was folem-
nized. The ceremony was performed in public,
according to the rites of the Proteltant Church, by
Adam Bothwell bilhop of Orkney, one of the few
Prelates who had embraced the Reformation, and
on the fame day was celebrated in private, accord.
Ilg to the forms prescribed by the PopilT religion "'.

lie boldness with which Craig, the Minister who
wva commanded to publilh the bans, teltified againfl
the design; the small number of the nobles, who
aere present at the marriage; and the fullen and
difiefpeeful silence of the people, when the Queen
appeared in public; were manifest symptoms of the
violent and general diffatisfaftion of her own subje&s.
The refusal ofDu Croc, the French ambassador, to

" And. i. 87. 'Id. J36. ii. 276.
VOL. II. G

B o oK be present at the nuptial ceremony or entertain.

Iv. ment, discovers the sentiments of her allies, with
Ir67. regard to this part of her condua; and although

every other ation in Mary's life could be justified
by the rules of prudence, or reconciled to the prin.
ciples of virtue, this fatal marriage would remain an
incdnteilible proof of her raIhnefs, if not of herguilt

Mary's first care was to offer some apology for

her conduct, to the courts of France and England.
The inftrudions to her ambalfadors fill remain,
and are drawn by a masterly hand. But under all
the artificial and faire coloring the employs, it is
easy to discover not only that many of the feps (he
had taken were unjustifiable, but that the berfelf
was conscious that they could not be justified"'.

The title of King was the only thing which was

not befowed upon-Bothwell. NotwithRanding her
attachment to him, Mlary remembered the.incon.
veniencies which had arisen from the raih advance.
ment of her former hulband to that honor. She
agreed, however, that he Ihould sign, in token of
consent, all the public writs issued in her name".
But though the Queen withheld from him the
title of King, he polfel ed, neverthelfs, regal
power in its full extent. The Queen's person was
in his hands; (he was surrounded more, cloely
than ever by his creatures; none of his fubjeds
could obtain audience without his permifflion; and,
unles in his own pretence, none but his confidents

' And. i. 89.
"' Good. ii 60.

were permitted to converse with her "'. The B O 0
Siottil l Monarchs were accustomed to live among iv.
their folbjeds as Fathers or as equals, without 157.
diftrult, and with little slate; armed guards Itand-
ing at the doors of the royal apartment, difficulty
of access, distance and retirement, were things
unknown, and unpopular.

These precautions were necessary for securing Endmeaours
to Bothwell the power which he had acquired. abt', f
But, without being master of the person of the the Princes
young Prince, lie eifeemed all that he had gained pI'r'o
to be precarious and uncertain. The Queen had
committed her son to the care of the Earl of Mar.
The fidelity and loyalty of that nobleman were
too well known to expeCt that he would be willing
to put the Prince into the hands of the man who
wa\ so violently fufpeded of having murdered his
f.ther. Bothwell, however, labored to get the
P'rice into his power, with an anxiety which
gave rife to the blackest suspicions. All his address,
.. well as authority, were employed to persuade,
o0 to force Alar into a compliance with his
dcinailis '". And it is no flight proof, both of the
Iiimnfe, and dexterity of that nobleman, that he
pl'ferred a life of so much importance to the
;ation, from being in the power of a man, whom
leIr or ambition might have prompted to violent
attCmpts against it.

The eyes of the neighbouring nations were fixed, Generalin.
at that time, upon the great events which had digio

which the-
Queen's con.
' And. i. 16. ,l" Melv. i6o. Buch. 36r. doa"ecitr.

G 2

o0o happened in Scotland during three months. A King
iv. murdered with the utmoR cruelty, in the prime
1i67. of his days, and in his capital city; the person

fu(pe&ed of that odious crime suffered not only
to appear publicly in every place, but admitted
into the presence of the Queen, diftinguilhed by
her favor, and intruRed with the chief diredion of
her affairs; fubjeCed to a trial which was carried
on with most flamelefs partiality, and acquitted
by a sentence, which served only to confirm the
suspicions of his guilt; divorced from his wife,
on pretences frivolous, or indecent; and after all
this, instead of meeting with the ignominy due
to his actions, or the punilbment merited by his
crimes, permitted openly, and without opposition,
to marry a Queen, the wife of the Prince whom
he had affaflinated, and the guardian of those laws
which he had been guilty of violating. Such a
quick fucceflion of incidents, so singular and lo
detelable, in the space of three months, is not to
be found in any other history. They left, in the
opinion of foreigners, a mark of infamy on the
charadter of the nation. The Scots were held in
abhorrence all over Europe; they durst hardly
appear any where in public; and after suffering
so many atrocious deeds to pass with impunity,
they were univerfaily reproached as men void of
courage, or of humanity, as equally regardlefi of
the reputation of their Queen, and the honor of
their country "'.

"' Anders. vol. i. 128. 134. eldv. 16J. See Appcdi,
N'. VIIll

These reproaches roused the nobles, who had B o o K
been hitherto amused by Bothwell's artifices, or Iv.
intimidated by his power. The manner in which 'i67.
he exercised the authority which he had acquired, The 'nble
his repeated attempts to become maler of the againif her
Prince's person , together with some ralh threaten- and Both.
ings against him, which he let fall "', added to the,
violence and promptitude of their resolutions. A
conliderable body of them assembled at Stirling,
and entered into an association for the defence of
the Prince's person. Argyll, Athol, Mar, Morton,
Glencairn, Home, Lindsay, Boyd, Murray of
Tullibardin, Kirkaldy of Grange, and Maitland the
Secretary, were the heads of this confederacy"'.
Stewart Earl of Athol was remarkable for an
uniform and bigotted attachment to popery; but
his indignation on account of the murder of the
King, to whom he was nearly allied, and his
zeal for the safety of the Prince, overcame, on
this occasion, all considerations of religion, and
united him with the molt zealous Protestants.
Several of the other nobles aced, without question,
from a laudable concern for the safety of the
Prince, and the honor of their country. But the
spirit which some of them discovered during the
subsequent revolutions, leaves little room to doubt,
that ambition or resentment were the real motives
of their condud; and that, on many occasions,
while they were pursuing ends just and necessary,
they were aduated by principles and passions alto.
gether unjustifiable.
"' Melv. i6i. "' Keith, 394.

G3

B00 K The first accounts of this league filled the Queen

iv. and Bothwell with great consternation. They were
1s67. no frangers to the sentiments of the nation, with

refpec to their conduet; and though their marriage
had not met with public opposition, they knew
that it had not been carried on without the secret
drltift and murmurings of all ranks of men. They
foresaw the violence with which this indignation
would burst out, after having been so long sup.
May :s. preired; and in order to prepare for the form, Mary

issued a proclamation, requiring her fubjeds to take
arms, and to attend her hulband by a day appointed.
At the fame time, she publilhed a fort of manifeflo,
in which Ihe labored to vindicate her government
from those imputations with which it had been
loaded, and employed the frongeft terms to expreó
her concern for the safety and welfare of the Prino
her son. Neither of these produced any considerable
effe& Her proclamation was ill obeyed, and her
manifesto met with little credit"'

Tr Qi q The confederate Lords carried on their prepara
ad Both- tions with no less activity, and with much mor
to D . success. Among a warlike people, men of so mud

power and popularity found it an easy matter t
raise an army. They were ready to march bcfor
the Oueen and Bothwell were in a condition t
resist them. The cafle of Edinburgh was the plac
whither the Queen ought naturally to have retired
and there her person might have been perfedl
safe. But the confederates had fallen on means I

'' Keith, ;87. 395 , 96.

flhke, or corrupt the fidelity of Sir James Balfour, BOO K
the deputy governor, and Bothwell durst not iv.
conrmit to him such an important trult. He con. i'6.
(ducied the Queen to the caflle of Borthwick, and June 3.
on the appearance of Lord Home, with a body of
lit followers, before that place, he fled with pre-
cipitation to Dunbar, and was followed by the
QUreen lifguifed in men's clothes. 1 he confederates
advalce(d towards Edinburgh, where Huntly en-
deavonred, in vain, to animate the inhabitants to
defend the town against them. They-entered with-
out opposition, and were inflantly joined by many
of the citizens, whose zeal became the firmest sup-
port of their cause '.

In order to set their own conduct in the most
favorable light, and to rouse the public indignation
againfR Bothwell, the nobles publilhed a declara-
tion of the motives which had induced them to
take arms. All Bothwell's past crimes were enume-
rated , all his wicked intentions displayed and
aggravated, and every true Scotsman was called
upon to join them in avenging the one, and in
preventing the other"'.

Meanwhile, Bothwell assembled his forces at

Dunbar, and as he had many dependants in that
corner, he soon gathered such strength, that he
ventured to advance towards the confederates.
Their troops were not numerous; the suddenness
and secrecy of their enterprise gave their friends
at a distance no time to join them; and as it does

U" Keith, 198. ' Anders vol. i. 2Rg.

G4

o o K not appear that they were supported either with
Iv. money or fed with hopes by the Queen of England,
ts¶r. they could not have kept long in a body. But on

the other hand, Bothwell durst not rilk a delay "'.
His army followed him with reluctance in this
quarrel, and served him with no cordial affecion;
so that his only hope of success was in surprising
the enemy, or in flriking the blow before his own
troops had leisure to recollect themselves, or to
imbibe the fame unfavorable opinion of his acions,
which had spread over the reft of the nation.
There motives determined the Queen to, march
forward, with an inconsiderate and fatal speed.
Tne o~t On the first intelligence of her approach, the

·

aig.r i confederates advanced to meet her. They found
t her forces drawn up almost on the fame ground

which the English had occupied before the battle
of Pinkie. The numbers on both fides were nearly
equal; but there was no equality in point of
discipline. The Queen's army confided chiefly of
a multitude, hastily assembled, without courage or
experience in war. The troops of the confederates
were composed of Gentlemen of rank and reputa.
tion, followed by their most trusty dependants,
who were no less brave than zealous t'.

_,__ Le Croc the French Ambassador, who was in
uodation the field, labored, by negociating both with the
Wt'tPi. Queen and the nobles, to put an end to the quarrel

without the effusion of blood. He represented t(
the confederates the Queen's inclinations toward

"' Keith, 40o. '" Cald. vol. ii. 4s I 49,

peace, and her willingness to pardon the offen- B o o K
ces which they had committed. Morton re- Iv.
plied with warm;th, that they had taken arms not 1567.
against the Queen, but against the murderer of
her huflbnd; and if he were given up to jultice,
or banished from her presence, {he should find
them ready to yield the obedience which is due
from fubjedts to their Sovereign. Glencairn added,
that they did not come to ask pardon for any
offence, but to punish those who had offended.
Such haughty answers convinced the ambassador,
that his mediation would be ineffectual, and that
their paflions were too high to allow them to liften
to any pacific propositions, or to think of retreat-
ing after having proceeded so far".

The Queen's army was poRfed to advantage,
on a rising ground. The confederates advanced
to the attack resolutely, but slowly, and with the
caution which was natural on that unhappy field.
Her troops were alarmed at their approach , and
discovered no inclination to fight. Mary endea-
voured to animate them; she wept, The threat-
ened, The reproached them with cowardice, but
all in vain. A few of Bothwell's immediate at-
tendants were eager for the encounter; the reft
flood wavering and irresolute, and some began to
fleal out of the field, Bothwell attempted to in-
spirit them, by offering to decide -the quarrel,
and to vindicate his own innocence in single
combat with any of his adversaries. Kirkaldy of
Grange, Murray of Tullibardin, and Lord Lindsay
"' Keith , 40,

B 0 0 K contended for the honor of entering the liss againlt

Iv. him. But this challenge proved to be a mere
>s67. bravade. Either the consciousness of guilt deprived

Bothwell of his wonted courage, or the Queen,
by her authority, sorbad the combat "'

After the symptoms of fear discovered by her

followers, Mary would have been inexcusable,
had Ihe hazarded a battle. To have retreated in
the face of an enemy, who had already surrounded
the hill on which Ihe stood, with part of their
cavalry, was utterly impracticable. In this situation,
The was under the cruel nectflity of putting herself
into the hands of those fubjecds who had taken
arms againR her. She demanded an interview with
Kirkaldy, a brave and generous man, who corn
manded an advanced body of the enemy. He,
with the consent and in the name of the leaders of
the party, promised that, on condition she would
dismiss Bothwell from her presence , and govern
the kingdom by the advice of her nobles, they
would honor and obey her as their Sovereign"'.
soti,,n During this parley, Bothwell took his latl fare.

tli o
" well of the Queen, and rode off the field with a

few followers. This dismal reverse happened exadly
one month after that marriage which had cost him
so many crimes to accomplilh, and which leave
so foul a stain on Mary's memory.

Mmr tr. As soon as Bothwell retired, Mary surrenderet
sA" dc's to
Cte oble to Kirkaldy, who conduded her toward the con

federate army, 'the leaders of which received he

"' Cald. vol. ii. o. "' Good. voL i. 164. Melv. 16s

with much refpedt; and Morton, in their name, 0 O K
made ample profeflions of their future loyalty and Iv.
obedience "'. But lhe was treated by the common i567.
soldiers with the utmost insolence and indignity.
As file marched along, they poured upon her all
the opprobrious names, which are bellowed only
on the lowelt and most iiffamous criminals. Where-
ever Ihe turned her eyes, they held up before
her a flandard, on which was painted the dead
body of the late King, stretched on the ground,
and the young Prince kneeling before it, and utter.
ing thAfc words, "Judge and revenge mEv cause,
" 0 Lord !" Mary turned with horror from such
a hmocking fight. She began already to feel the
wretched condition to which a captive Prince is
reduced. She uttered the mol bitter complaints,
file melted into tears, and could hardly be kept
from finking to the ground. The confederates
conducted her towards Edinburgh; and in spite
of many delays, and after looking, with the fond-
ness and credulity natural to the unfortunate, for
some extraordinary relief, ihe arrived there. The
llreets were covered with multitudes, whom zeal
o0 curiosity had drawn together, to behold such
anl iuufual scene. The Queen, worn out with
fatigue, covered with dull, and bedewed with tears,
was exposed as a fpecacle to her own fubjeds,
and led to the Provost's house. NotwithRanding
all her arguments and intreaties, the fame standard
Vras carried before her, and the fame insults and
"' Good. vol. ii. 16s.

oo0 t reproaches repeated "'. A woman, young, beau.
IV. tilul, and in distress, is naturally the objet of con.
ssi7. pafllion. The comparison of their present misery

with their former splendor, usually softens us in
favor of illustrious sufferers. But the people beheld
the deplorable situation of their Sovereign with
insensibility; and so strong was their perfuafon of
herguilt, and so great the violence of theirindigna.
tion, that the sufferings of their Queen did not, in
any degree, mitigate their resentment, or procure
her that sympathy, which is seldom denied to
unfortunate Princes. :

"'Mclv. a66. Buch. ;64.

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK V.

THE
H I STORY

OF
SCOTLAND.

B 0 K V.

THE confederate Lords had proceeded to such B 0 o 1
extremities againlt their Sovereign, that it now v.
became almost impdffible for them either to flop iss6.
flort, or to pursue a course less violent. Many Deliberations
of the nobles had refused to concur with them in concerning
their enterprise; others openly condemned it. A the 2Oeeo.
fmiall circumRtance might abate that indignation
with which the multitude were, at present, ani-
mated against the Queen, and deprive them of
that popular applause which was the chief founda-
tion of their power. These considerations inclined
some of them to treat the Queen with great
lenity.

But, on the other hand, Mary's affeaion for
Bothwell continued as violent as ever; she obfti.
nately refused to hearken to any proposal for dif-
solving their marriage, and determined not to

B 0 0 K abandon a man, for whose love she had already

v. sacrificed so much '. If they should allow her to
iss:. recover the supreme power, the first exertion of it

would be to recal Bothwell; and they had reason,
both from his resentment, from her condud, and
from their own, to expec the feveref effecrs of
her vengeance. These considerations surmounted
every other motive; and reckoning themselves
absolved, by Mary's incurable attachment to Both.
well, from the engagements which they had comae
under when she yielded herself a prisoner, they,
without regarding the duty which they owed her
as their Queen, and without consulting the ref
of the nobles, carried her next evening, under a

Tey is. strong guard, to the castle of Lochlevin, and
prfoó her'
'Ls..'. signed a warrant to William Douglas the owner

of it, to detain her as a prisoner. This castle is
situated in a small island, in the middle of a lake.
Douglas, to whom it belonged, was a near rela.
tion of Morton's, and had married the Earl of
Murray's mother. In this place, under frict custody,
with a few attendants, and fubjeced to the intults
of a haughty woman, who boasted daily of being
the lawful wife of James V. Mary suffered all the
rigor and miseries of captivity '.

Immediately after the Queen's imprisonment,

the confederates were at the utmost pains to
strengthen their party; they entered into new
bonds of association; they assumed the title of
Lords of the fcret Council, and without any other

Keith, 419. 446. .Melv. 167. See Append. N. IX.
· Keih, 40o. Note (b).

right, arrogated to themselves the whole regal B 00 K
authority. One of their first acts of power was to v.
search the city of Edinburgh for such as had been 's6r.
concerned in the murder of the King. This mow
of zeal gained reputation to themselves, and threw
an oblique reflection on the Queen for her remiss.
nels. Several fufpeded persons were seized. Cap-
tain Blackadder and three others were condemned
and executed. But no discovery of importance
was made. If we believe some historians, they
were convicted by sufficient evidence. If we give
credit to others, their sentence was unjust, and
they denied, with their last breath, any knowledge
of the crime for which they suffered '.

An unexpected accident, however, put into the
hands of Mary's enemies what they deemed the
fuller evidence of her guilt. Bothwell having left
in the castle of Edinburgh a cakret, containing
several sonnets and letters written with the Queen's
own hand; he now sent one of his confidents to
bring to him this' precious depofite. But as his
melfenger returned, he was intercepted, and the
caflkt seized by Morton 4. The contents of it were
always produced by the party, as the molf ample
juilfiication of their own conduct, and to these
they continually appealed as the moR urfanfwerable
proof of their not having loaded their Sovereign
with the imputation of imaginary crimes '.

Cald. vol. ii. L . Crawf. Meem. . -
Anders vol. ii. g9. Good. vol. ii. 90.
'See Dissertation at the end of the Hiftry.

00 K But the confederates, notwithstanding their
v. extraordinary success, were still far from being
I167. perfedly at cafe. That so small a part of the nobles

Se o' Ihould pretend to dispose of the person of their
* ou. Sovereign, or to assume the authority which be

longed to her, without the concurrence of the
reft, appeared to many of that body to be unpre-
cedented and prefuniptuous. Several of these Were
now assembled at Hamilton, in ordet to deliberate
what course they should bold in this difficult
conjundure. The confederates made fotne attempts
towards a coalition with them, but without esfd.
They employed the mediation of the Assembly of
the Church, to draw them to a personal interview.
at Edinburgh, but with no better success. That
party, however, though its numbers were fonrmi
dable, and the power of its leaders great, Coon
loft reputation by the want of unanimity and vi-
gor; all its consultations evaporated in murmurs
and complaints, and no scheme was concerted
for obftruding the progress of the confederates'.

Eliza~ There appeared Come profped of danger from
ItTr-i another quarter. This great revolution in Scot

land had been carried on without any aid from
Elizabeth, and even without her knowledge'.
Though Ihe was far from being displeascd at
feeing the affairs of that kingdom embroiled, or
a rival, whom Ihe hated, reduced to diftrefc; Lhe
neither wilhed that it Ihould be in the power of
the one facion entirely to suppress the other, nor

Keith, 4o7.

could

could Ihe view the fleps taken by the confederates B 0 OK
without great offence. Notwithstanding the po, v.
pular maxims by which lhe governed her owa rs67
fubjecs, her notions of royal prerogative were
very exalted. The confederates had, in her opi.
nion, encroached on the authority of their Sove.
reign. which they had no right to control, and
had offered violence to her person, which it was
their duty to esteem sacred. They had ect a dan.
gerouc example to other fubjeats, and Mary's cause
became the common cause of Princes '. If ever
Elizabeth was influenced with regard to the afairs
of Scotland by the feelings of her heart, rather
than by considerations of intereR, it was on this
occasion. Mary, in her present condition, de-
graded from her throne, and covered with the
infamy attending an accusation of such atrocious
crimes, could be, no longer, the object of Eliza-
beth's jealousy, either as a woman, or as a Queen.
Sympathy with a Sovereign in distress seems, for
a moment, to have touched a heart not very sus-
ceptible of tender sentiments; and, while these
were yet warm, she dispatched Throkmorton into Jun 3,
Scotland, with power to negociate both with the
Queen and with the confederates. In his in. '
ftrutions there appears a remarkable solicitude
for Mary's liberty, and even for her reputation;
and the terms upon which (he proposed to re-
eftablilh concord between the Queen and her
fubjeds, appear to be so reasonable and well di.
gested, as might have ensured the safety and hap.

' Keith, j12. 41s.
VOL. IL H

00o pines of both. Zealous as Throkmorton was to
V. accomplish this, all his endeavours and addres
11s7. proved ineffeaual. He found not only the con.

federate nobles, but the nation in general, so far
alienated from the Queen, and so much offended
with the indecent precipitancy of her marriage
with the reputed murderer of her former hufhaid,
as to be incapable of listening to any proposition
in her favor.

During the fate of anarchy, occasioned by the

imprisonment of the Queen, and the dissolution
of the established government, which afforded
such ample scope for political speculation, four
different schemes had been proposed for the set.
dement of the nation. One, that Mary ihould
be replaced upon the throne, but under vaios
and ftrid limitations. The second, that lK
Ihould resign the crown to her son, and retiring
out of the kingdom, should reside, during the re
mainder of her days, either in England or in
France. The third, that Mary should be brought
to public trial for her crimes, and after con
vidion, of which no doubt was entertained,
mhould be kept in perpetual imprisonment. TI
fourth, that after trial and condemnation, capia
punifiment should be inflicted upon her. Throk
morton, though disposed as well by his own in
clination, as in conformity to the spirit of hi
inftrutions, to view matters in the light 0mo
favorable to Mary, informed his Court, that thi
milder schemes, recommended by Maitland alone
would undoubtedly be reprobated, and one of th
more rigorous carried into execution.

In juRification of this rigor, the confederates BooK
maintained that Mary's affetion for Bothwell v.
was still uri.bated, and openly avowed by her; zs6r.
that Ihe rejefed with disdain every proposal for
dissolving their marriage; and declared , that ihe
would forego every comfort, and endure any ex-
tremity, rather than give her consent to that mea-
sure. While these were her sentiments, they con-
tended, that concern for the public welfare, as
well as attention to their own safety, rendered it
necessary to put it out of the Queen's power to
restore a daring man, exasperated by recent inju-
ries, to his former Ration, which mull needs
prove fatal to both. Notwithstanding their soli.
citude to conciliate the good-will of Elizabeth,
they foresaw clearly what would be the effeft, at
this juncure, of Trokmorton's interposition in
behalf of the Queen, and that The, elated with
the profped of protection, would refuse to liftea
to the overtures which they were about to make
to her. For this reason they peremptorily de-
nied Throkmorton access to their prisoner; and
what propositions he made to them in her behalf
they either refused or eluded '.

Meanwhile they deliberated with the utmoRt somt of
anxiety, concerning the settlement of the nation, the onfe.
and the future disposal of the Queen's person. der", o.
Elizabeth, ohferving that Trokmorton made no
progress in his negociations with them, and that
they would liften to none of his demands in Mary's
favor, turned towards that party of the nobles

'Keith, 417. 427.

H 2

o o K who were aflembled at Hamilton, incited them
v. to take arms in order to relrore their Queen to
v47. liberty, and promised to assist them in such an at.

tempt to the utmost of her power `. But they
discovered no greater union and vigor than for.
merly, and, behaving like men who had given up
all concern either for their Queen or their coun,
try, tamely allowed an inconsiderable part of
their body, whether we confider it with rerped to
ndmbers or to power, to fettle the government
of the kingdom, and to dispose of the Queen's
person at plafure. Many consultations were held,
and various opinions arose with regard to eac of
these. Some seemed desirous of adhering to the
plan on which the confederacy was at first formed;
and after punilhing the murderers of the King,
and diflolving the marriage with Bothwell; after
providing for the safety of the young Prince, and
the security of the Protestant religion; they pro.
posed to re-eftablilh the Queen in the poflflion
of her legal authority. The success with which
their arms had been accompanied, inspired othes
with bolder and more desperate thoughts, and no.
thing less would satisfy them than the trial, the
condemnation, and punilhment of the Queen her-
self, as the principal conspirator against the life of
her hulband, and the safety of her son ": the for.
mer was Maitland's system , and breathed too
much of a pacific and moderate spirit , to be
agreeable to the temper or wilbes of the party.
The latter was recommended by the clergy, and

See Appendix, N.X. " Keith, 420, 421,422. (S2.

warmly adopted by many .laics; but the nobles 1 o K
durfl not, or would not venture on such an un- v.
precedented and audacious. deed ". a 57

Both parties agreed at last upon a scheme, They olig
neither so moderate as the one, nor so daring as the Queen
the other. Mary was to be persuaded or forced to tO', regn th
resign the Crown; the young Prince was to be
proclaimed King, and the, Earl of Murray was
to be appointed to govern, the kingdom, during
his minority, with the name and authority of
Regent. With regard to the Queen's own per-
son, nothing was determined. It seems to have
been the intention of the confederates to keep
her in perpetual imprisonment; but in order to
intimidate herself, and to overawe her partisans,
they Rill reserved to themselves the power of pro.
ceeding to more violent extremes.

It was obvious to foresee difficulties in the exe-
cution of this plan. Mary was young, ambitious,
high.fpirited, and accustomed to command. To
induce her to acknowledge her own incapacity for
governing, to renounce the dignity and power
which Die was born to enjoy, to become depend.
ant to her own fubjeas, to consent to her own
bondage, and to invest those persons whom the
confidered as the authors of all her calamities
with that honor and authority of which lhe her-
self was stripped, were points hard to be gained.

" The intention of putting the Queen to death seems to
have been carried on by some of her subje&s: at this time we
often find Elizabeth boasting that Mary owed her life to her in.
terpofition. Digges's CompL Amb. 14, &c. See Append. No. V.

H3
*

O O K These, however, the confederates attempted,
v. and they did not want means to insure fuccef.
5I'w Mary had endured, for several weeks, all the hard.

hbips and terror of a prison; no profpe&t of liberty
appeared; none of her fubjeds bad either taken
arms, or so much as solicited her relief "; noper.
son, in whom Ihe could confide, was admitted into
her pretence; even the Ambassadors of the French
King, and Queen of England, were refused ac.
cess to her. In this solitary state, without a coun.
fllor or a friend, under the pressure of diftrs
and the apprehension of danger, it was natural for
a woman to hearken almost to any overtures. The
confederates took advantage of her condition and
of her fears They employed Lord Lindsay, the
fierceRf zealot in the party, to communicate their
scheme to the Queen, and to obtain her fubfcrip.
tion to those papers which were neceflary for ren.
dering it effetual He executed his commilfion
with haribneLc and brutality. Certain death was
before Mary's eyes if lTe refused to comply with
his demands. At the fame time Ihe was in.
formed by Sir Robert Melvil, in name of Athol,
Maitland, and Kirkaldy, the persons among the
confederates who were most attentive to her in.
tcreft, that a resignation extorted by fear, and
granted during her imprisonment, was void in
law, and might be revoked as soon as The reco
vered liberty. Tbrokmorton, by a note which he
found means of conveying to her, fuggeRed the
fame thing ". Deference to their opinion, as

" Keith, 4*2. " Id. ibid Note (b.) Melv. z69.

well as concern for her own safety, obliged her B o o K
to yield to every thing which was required, and v.
to sign all the papers which Lindsay presented to 167
her. By one of these, she resigned the Crown,
renounced all lhare in the government of the
kingdom, and consented to the coronation of the
young King. By another, Ihe appointed the Julyn.
Earl of Murray Regent, and conferred upon him
all the powers and privileges of that high office.
By a third, The fubfticuted some other noblemen
in Murray's place, if he should refuse the ho-
nor which was defgned for him. Mary, when
fie subscribed these deeds, was bathed in tears;
and while the gave away, as it were with her
own hands, the sceptre which Ihe had swayed so
long, Ihe felt a pang of grief and indignation,
one of the severest, perhaps, which can touch the
human heart '.

The confederates endeavoured to give this Jams vl.
resignation all the weight and validity in their dw Mutmd
power, by proceeding without delay to crown choren Re.
the young Prince. The ceremony was performed EIt"
at Stirling, on the twenty-ninth of July, with
much solemnity, in presence of all the nobles of
the party, a considerable number of lesser barons,
and a great assembly of the people. From that
time, all public writs were issued, and the go-
vernment carried on in name of James V1 ".
No revolution so great was ever effected with
more ease, or by means so unequal to the end. In
a warlike age, and in less time than two months,
" Kith, 40. Craf. Mem. . 38 "Keith, 437.

H4

· 0 0 K a part of the nobles, who neither possessed the

v. chief power, nor the greatest wealth in the nation,
IS*?. and who never brought three thousand men into

the field, seized, imprisoned, and dethroned their
Qneen, and without liedding a single drop of blood,
set her son, an infant of a year old, on the throne.

uaerbi.gs During this rapid progress of the confederates,
of both the eyes of all the nation were turned on them

wibh aftoniihment; and various and contradidor
opinions were formed concerning the extraordi
nary steps which they had taken.

Even under the ariftocratical form of govern.

ment, which prevails in Scotland, said the fa.
vorers of the Queen, and notwithstanding the
exorbitant privileges of the nobles, the Prince
poIfefles confiderble power, and his person is
treated with great veneration. No encroachments
should be made on the former, and no injury
offered to the latter, but in cafes where the li-
berty and happiness of the nation cannot b, fe.
cured by any other means. Such cafes seldom
exist, and it belongs not to any part, but to the
whole, or at lear to a majority of the society, to
judge of their existence. By what action could
it be pretended that Mlairy had invaded the rights
or property of her fubjtcas, or what scheme had
the formed against the liberty and constitution of
the kingdom ? Were fears, and suspicions, and
furmif s, enough to just y the imprisoning and
the deposing a Qt;cen, to whom the Crown de-
fended flom so long a race of Monarchs ? The
principal author of whatever was reckoned cul-

pable in her condut, was now driven from her BOOK
prcferce. The murderers of the King might have v.
been brought to condign punishment, the safety 's.
of the Prince have been secured, and the ProtefRant
religion have been eltablifhed, without wrefling
the ceptre out of her hands, or condemning her
to perpetual imprisonment. Whatever right a free
Parliament might have had to proceed to such a
rigorous conclusion, or whatever name its deter-
minations might have merited, a sentence of this
nature, passed by a (mall part of the nobility,
without acknowledging or consulting the reft of
the nation, must be deemed a rebellion against the
government, and a conspiracy against the person of
their Sovereign.

The partisans of the confederates reasoned very
differently. It is evident,. said they, that Mary
either previously gave consent to the King's mur-
der, or did afterwards approve of that horrid
a&fio. Her attachment to Bothwell, the powers
and honors with which fie loaded him, the man.
ner in which The suffered his trial to be carried on,
and the indecent speed with which iTe married a
man, fained with so many crimes, raise firong sus-
picions of the former, and put the latter beyond
all doubt. To have suffered the supreme powerto
continue in the hands of an ambitious man, capable
of the molt atrocious and desperate actions, would
have been disgraceful to the nation; dishonorable
to the Queen, and dangerous to the Prince. Re-
courfc was, therefore, had to arms. The Queen
had been compelled to abandon a hulband, so un-

o o worthy of herself. But her affetion toward hi
v. still continuing unabated; her indignation againi
sr7. the authors of this separation being visible, and

often expressed in the ftrongelt terms; they, by
restoring her to her ancient authority, would have
armed her with power to destroy themlfves, have
enabled her to recal Bothwell, and have afforded
her an opportunity of pursuing schemes fatal to
the nation with greater eagerness, and with moe
success. Nothing, therefore, remained, but.by one
bold adion to deliver themselves and their coun
try from all future fears. The expedient they had
chosen was no less refpedful to the royal blood,
than necefary for the public safety. While one
Prince was set aside as incapable Aof governing,
the Crown was placed on his head who was the
undoubted representative of their ancient Kins.

Whatever opinion poterity may form on com.

paring the arguments of the two contending partie,
whatever sentiments we may entertain concern.
ing the jufice or necefity of that course which
the confederates held, it cannot be denied that
their conduct, so far as regarded themselves, was
extremely prudent Other expedients, less rigorous
towards Mary, might have been found for fettliu
the nation; but, after the injuries which theybad
already afforded the Queen, there was nonie
effedual for securing their own safety, or perp
tuating their own power.

To a great part of the nation, the condudt o

the confederates appeared hot only wife, but just
The King's accefion to the throne was ever)

where proclaimed, and his authority submitted to B o 0 K
without opposition. Though several of the nobles v.
were still assembled at Hamilton, and seemed to ISt'
be entering into sone combination against his go.
vernment, an association for supporting it was
formed, and signed by so many persons of power
and influence throughout the nation, as entirely
discouraged the attempt ".

The return of the Earl of Murray, about this Murny ar..
time, added Rrength to the party, and gave it a oumetht
regular and finished form. Soon after the murder
of the King, this nobleman had retired into France,
upon what pretence historians do not mention.
During his residence there, he had held a close
correspondence with the chiefs of the confederacy,
and, at their desire, he now returned. He seemed,
at firt, unwilling to accept the office of Regent.
This hesitation cannot be ascribed to the scruples
either of diffidence or of duty. Murray wanted
neither the abilities nor the ambition which enti-
tled him to aspire to this high dignity. He had
received the sirs accounts of his promotion with
the utmost fatisfadtion; but by appearing to continue
for some days in suspense, he gained time to view
with attention the ground on which he was to ac;
to balance the strength and resources of the two
contending facions, and to examine whether the
foundation on which his future fame and success
must reft, were found and firm.

Before he declared his final resolution, he
waited on Mary at Lochlevin. This visit, to a

Anders. vol ii. 31.,

o o sifter, and a Queen, in a prison, from which he
v. bad neither any intention to relieve her, nor to
1567 mnitigate the rigor of her confinement, may be

mentioned among the circumstances which dit
cover the great want of delicacy and refinemnt
in that age. Murray, who was naturally rough
and uncourtly in his manner ", expofRulated so
warmly with the Queen concerning her paR coon
dud, and charged her faults so home upon her,
that Mary, who had flattered herself with more
gentle and brotherly treatment from him, melted
into tears, and abandoned herself entirely to de.
fpair ". This interview, from which Murray ould
reap no political advantage, and wherein he di
covered a spirit so severe and unrelenting, may be
reckoned among the most bitter circumfance& ig
Mary's life, and is certainly one of the most n.
justifiable fieps in his condu&

Soon after his return from Lochlevin, Murray
A~h ti. accepted the office of regent, and began to ad in

that character without opposition.

_at of Amidst so many great and unexpeded events, the
B3tkIL fate of Bothwell, the chief cause of them all, hath

been almost forgotten. After his flight from the
confecerates, he lurked for some time among his
varffas in the neighbourhood of Dunbar. Butfinding
it impoffibe for him to make bead, in that country,
against his enemies, or even to secure himfelffroa
their pursuit, he fled for lhelter to his kinsman the
Blhop of Murray; and when he, overawed by the

Keith, 96. " Ibid. 4, 446.

confederates, was obliged to abandon him, he n ooK
retired to the Orkney Illes. Hunted from place to v.
place, deserted by his friends, and accompanied 157.
by a few retainers, as desperate as himself, he
fuffcred at once the miseries of infamy and of
want. His indigence forced him upon a course which
added to his infamy. He armed a few small hlips,
which had accompanied him from Dunbar, and
attacking every vessel which fell in his way, en-
deavoured to procure subsistence for himself and
his followers by piracy. Kirkaldy and Murray of
Tullibardin were lent out against him by the con-
federates; and surprising him while he rode at
anchor, scattered his small fleet, took a part of it,
and obliged him to fly with a single ship towards
Norway. On that coast, he fell in with a vessel
richly laden, and immediately attacked it; the
Norwegians failed with armed boats to its aflift.
ance, and after a desperate fight, Bothwell and
al his crew were taken prisoners. His name and
quality were both unknown, and he was treated
at first with all the indignity and rigor which the
odious crime of piracy merited. His real charater
was soon discovered, and though it saved him
from the infamous death to which his associates
were condemned, it could neither procure him
liberty, nor mitigate the hardships of his imprison.
ment. He languilhed ten years in this unhappy
condition; melancholy and despair deprived him
of reason, and at laR he ended his days, unpitied
by his countrymen, and unafifted by trangers ".
" Melv. 168.

Boo K Few men ever accomplilbed their ambitious po

v. jeas by worse means, or reaped from them kd
isr. fatisfadion. The early part of his life was reRlel

and enterprising, full of danger and of vicilfitudes
His enjoyment of the grandeur, to which beat
tained by so many crimes, was extremely lhort
imbittered by much anxiety, and disquieted bi
many fears. In his latter years, he fufered th
most intolerable calamities to which the wretched
are subjea, and from which persons who have
moved in so high a sphere are commonly exempted
«a Tf The good effecds of Murray's acceflion to tb

e

mnian Regency were quickly felt. The party forming foi
t· - the Queen was weak, irresolute, and disunited

and no soonet was the government of the king
dom in the hands of a man so remarkable bot
sot his abilities and popularity, than the nobles
of whom it was composed, loft all hopes of gin
ing ground, and began to treat separately witi
the Regent. So many of them were brought t
acknowledge the King's authority, that scarce any
appearance of opposition to the eftablilbed govern
ment was left in the kingdom. Had they adhered
to the Queen with any firrtnefs, it is probable,
from Elizabeth's disposition at that time, that It
would have afforded them such aflifance as migh
have enabled them to face their enemies in the
field. But there appeared so little vigor or har
mony in their councils, that Ihe was discouraged
from espousing their cause; and the Regent,
taking advantage of their situation, obliged then
to submit to his government, without grantin

any terms, either to themselves or to the Book
Queen . v.

The Regent was no lets successful in his attempt Is7r.
to get into his hands the places of strength in
the kingdom. Balfour, the deputy governor, fur.
rendered the castle of Edinburgh; and as the reward
of his treachery, in deserting Bothwell his patron,
obtained terms of great advantage to himself. The
Governor of Dunbar, who discovered greater
fidelity, was soon forced to capitulate; some other
small forts surrendered without resistance.

This face of tranquillity in the nation encou. A Parlit
raged the Regent to call a meeting of Parliament. :at,"
Nothing was wanting to confirm the King's au.
thority, and the proceedings of the confederates,
except the approbation of this supreme court;
and after the success which had attended all their
measures, there could be little doubt of obtaining
it The numbers that resorted, to an Assembly
which was called to deliberate on matters of so
much importance, were great. The meeting was
opened with the utmost solemnity, and all its
ds passed with much unanimity. Many, how.
ever, of the Lords who had discovered the warmef
attachment to the Queen, were present. But
they had made their peace with the Regent.
Argyll, Huntly, and Herries acknowledged,
openly in Parliament, that their behaviour to-
wards the King had been undutiful and crimi.
nal ". Their compliance, in this manner, with
"Keith, 447. 4o. 46(.

AnderC voL iv. sa . See Apendix, N*. XI.

0o0 the measures of the Regent's party, wa 'eithet
v. the condition on which they were admitted into
6s7. favor, or intended as a proof of the sincerity of

their reconcilement.

Cedi, The Parliament granted every thing the conk.
~idh of derates could demand, either for the safety of their
tc co.a. own persons, or the security of that form of gop

a vernment which they had efitblifhed in the king.

dom. Mary's resignation of the Crown was accept.
ed, and declared to be valid. The King's author.
ity, and Murray's eledion, were recognised and
confirmed. The imprisoning the Queen, and all the
other proceedings of the cenfederates, were pro.
nounced lawful. The letters which Mary had
written to Bothwell were produced, and he was
declared to be accessary to the murder of the King"'
At the fame time, all the ads of Parliament of the
year one thousand five hundred and sixty, in favor
of the Protestant religion, were publicly ratified;
new statutes to the fame purpose were enadd;
and nothing that could contribute to root out the
remains of Popery, or to encourage the growth
of the Reformation, was neglected.

It is observable, however, that the fame par.

fimoniouc spirit prevailed in this Parliament, as
in that of the year one tboufand five hundred and
sixty. The Protestant clergy, notwithfanding
many discouragements, and their extreme po
verty, -had, for seven years, performed all reli
gious offices in the kingdom. .The expedients

a" Good. oL fl 6. L
ndc vol. iL o&

fallen

fallen upon for their subsistence had hitherto proved B o o x
ineffedual, or were intended to be so. But not- v.
withstanding their known indigence, and the zist.
warm remontfrances of the Assembly of the church,
which met this year, the Parliament did niothing
more for their relief, than prescribe some new
regulations concerning the payment of the thirds
of benefices, which did not produce any con-
fiderable change in the situation of the clergy.

A few days after the dissolution of Parliament, 5s6.
four of Bothwell's dependants were convicted of J"u.,"
being guilty of the King's nmurder, and suffered
death as traitors. Their Qonfeflions brought to light
many circumstances relative to the manner of corn-
miting that barbarous crime, but they' were per.
sons of low rank, and seem not to have been
admitted into the secrets of the conspiracy'*. '

Notwithstanding the universal fubmiflion to the
Regent's authority, there Rill aboundid in- the
kingdom many secret murmurs and cabals. The
partisans of the house of Hamilton reckoned
Murray's promotion an injury to the Duke of
Chatelherault, who, as if Prince, of the blood,
bad, in their opinion, an undoubted right to be
Regent. The length and rigor of Mary's sus-
strings began to move many to commiserate her
cafe. All who leaned to the ancient opinions' in
religion dreaded the effects of Murray's zeal
And he, though his abilities were great, did not
possess the talents requisite for soothing the rage

'* Anders. vol. ii. 16.
VOL. 1I. I

OOK or removing the jealousies of the different fa

v. tions. By insinuation, or address, he might hai
Ms5. gained or softened many who had opposed him

but he was a stranger to these gentle arts. H
virtues were severe; and his deportment toward
his equals, especially after his elevation to the Re
gency, distant and haughty. This behaviouro
fended some of the nobles, and alarmed other
The Queen's fadion, which' had been so auGi
dispersed, began again to gather and tounite, an
was secretly favored by some who had hithert
_ealoufly concurred with the confederates ".

Nil "Such was the favorable disposition of the natio
:.es 4. towaird the Queen, when Ihe recovered her libertn
kvi. in a manner no left surprising to her friends, tba

uinexp'ed by her enemies. Several attempts ha
been' made to procure her an opportunity of efcap
ing, which some unforeseen accident, or the vig
lance oftier keepers, had hitherto disappointed. A
last, Mary employed all her art to gain Georg
Douglas her keeper's brother, a youth of eigteec
' As her manners were naturally affable and infinuai

ing, hfe treated him with the most flattering diftino
tion; mfe even allowed him to entertain the mol
ambitious hopes, by letting fall some expressions, a
if Ihe would chufe him for her hulband ". At hi
age, and in such circumstances, it was impoflible ta
refill fnch a temptation. He yielded, and drew
others into the plot. On Sunday the second o
' May; while his brother fat at supper, and the ttll

" Mlelv. 179. " Keith, 469. 481. Note.

f the family were retired to their devotions, one BOO
of his accomplices found means to steal the keys v.
out of his brother's chamber, and opening the gates lsse
to the Queen and one of her maids, locked them
behind her, and then threw the keys into the lake.
lMary ran with precipitation to the boat which
was prepared for her, and on reaching the ihore,
was received with the utmost joy, by Douglas,
Lord Seaton, and Sir James Hamilton, who, with
a few attendants , waited for her. She inftanly
mounted on horseback, and rode full speed towards
Niddrie, Lord Seaton's feat in Weft-Lothian. She
arrived there that night, without being pursued
or interrupted. After halting three hours, Ihe set
out for Hamilton; and travelling at the fame paces
ihe reached it next morning,

On the first news of Mary's escape, her friends, Arrves at
whom, in their present disposition, a much fnialler "a"eton.

and saire, a

arcinent would have roused, ran to arms. In a nammua
few days, her court was filled with a great and "mt.
fplenl'id train of nobles, accompanied by such
numbers of followers, as formed an army above
ftx thousand frong. In their presence Ihe de.
dared that the resignation of the Crown and the
I oter deeds which Ihe had. igned during het itti
prilonmeiat, were extorted from her by fear, Sir
Robert Mlldvil confirmed her declaration; and
on that, as well as on other accounts, a council
of the nobles and chief men of her party pros
nouoiccd all these transactions void and illegal.
Athe .lmnc time, an afrociation was formed for Mayr.
'l: defence of her person and authority, and

0 o K subscribed by nine Earls, nine Bihfops, eighteen
V. Lords, and many gentlemen of diflindion"
aisr Among them we find several who had been prefen

in the lat Parliament, and who had signed dhe
counter-affociation in defence of the King's govern
ment; but such sudden changes were then f(
common, as to be no matter of reproach.

Crau~ At the time when the Queen made her escape
styesb the Regent was at Glasgow, holding a court of
arms. p jufice. An event so contrary to their expe&

tions, and so fatal to their schemes, gave a grel
ihock to his adherents. Many of them appeared
wavering and irresolute ; others began to cany
on private negociations with the Queen; and
some openly revolted to her fide. In so difficuk
a junture, where his own fame, and the being
of the party depended on his choice, the Regent'
most faithful associates were divided in opinioa
Some advised him to retire, without los of time,
to Stirling. The Queen's army was already
irong, and only eight miles distant; the a&
jacent country was full of the friends and de
pendants of the house of Hamilton, and otha
Lords of the Queen's faction; Glasgow was a
large and unfortified town; his own train cmn
sifted of no greater number than was usual i
times of peace; all these reasons pleaded for a
retreat. But on the other hand, arguments wee
urged of no inconsiderable weight The citiae
of Glasgow were well affeeed to the cause; thb

Keith, 47S.

valals of Glencairn, Lenox, and Semple, lay B o o
near at hand, and were both numerous and full v.
of zeal; succours might arrive from other parts lss.
of the kingdom in a few days; in war, success
depends upon reputation, as much as upon
numbers; reputation is gained or loft by the
first fep one takes; in his circumstances, a re-
treat would be attended with all the ignominy of
a flight, and would at once dispirit his friends,
and inspire his enemies with boldness. In such His lrudeat
dangerous exigencies as this, the superiority of i"nt.
Murray's genius appeared, and enabled him both
to chufe with wisdom and to ad with vigor.
He declared against retreating, and fixed his
head.quarters at Glasgow. And while he amused
the Queen for some days, by pretending to hearken
to some overtures, which lhe. made for accom-
modating their differences, be was employed, with
the utmost industry, in'drawing together his ad-
herents from different parts of the kingdom. He
was soon in a condition to take the field; and
though far inferior to the enemy in number, he
confided so much in the valor of his troops and the
experience of his officers, that he broke off the
ncgociation, and determined to hazard a battle".

At the fame time, the Queen's generals had MaT Is.
commanded her army to move. Their intention
was, to conduct her to Dunbarton-caftle, a place
of great strength, which the Regent had not been
able to wrest out of the hands of Lord Fleming
" Buchan. 369.

I 3

o o1 the governor; but if the enemy Ihould endeavour
v. to interrupt their march, they resolved not to
msq. decline an engagement. In Mary's situation, no

resolution could be more imprudent. A part
only of her forces was assembled. Huntly, Ogil.
vie, and the northern clans were soon expected;
her sufferings had removed or diminished the
prejudices of many among her fubjedts; the
address with which fle surmounted the danger
that obfruded her escape, dazzled and interested
the people; the sudden confluence of so many
nobles added lufire to her cause; hIe might as.
furedly depend on the friendfbip and countenance
of France; Ihe had reason to expect the protedfion
of England; her enemies could not poflihly look
for support from that quarter. She had much to
hope from pursuing flow and cautious measures;
they had every thing to fear.

Bat Mary, whose hopes were naturally fan.

guine, and her passions impetuous, was so elevated
-by her sudden transition from the depth of distress,
to such an unusual appearance of prosperity, that
.he never doubted of success. Her army, which
was almoR double to the enemy in number, con-
fiRed chiefly of the Hamiltons and their de.
pendants. Of these the Archbiflop of St. An.
drew's had the chief diredion, and hoped, by a
vitory, not only to crulh Murray, the ancient
enemy of his house, but to get the person of the
Queen into his hands, and to oblige her either to
marry one of the Duke's sons, or at leat to com-
mit the chief direction of her affairs to himfelt

His ambition proved fatal to the Queen, to him. B o o K
self, and to his family . v.

Mary's imprudence, in resolving to fight, was 's6s.

not greater th:m the ill conduct of her generals in Lanefitt.
the battle. Between the two armies, and on the
road towards Dunbarton, there was an eminence
called Langfide Hill. This the Regent had the
precaution to seize, and porled his troops in a small
village, and among some gardens and inclofures
adjacent. In this advantageous situation be waited
the approach of the enemy, whose superiority in
cavalry could be of no benefit to them on such
broken ground. The Hamiltons, who composed
the vanguard, ran so eagerly to the attack, that
they put themselves out of breath, and left the
main battle far behind. The encounter of the spear-
men was fierce and desperate; but as the forces of
the Hamiltons were exposed, on the one flank, to a
continued fire from a body of mufqueteers, attacked
on the other by the Regent's most choice troops,
and not supported by the reft of the Queen's army, The Queen'
they were soon obliged to give ground, and the featd.t
rout immediately became universal. Few vidories,
in a civil war, and among a fierce people, have
been pursued with less violence, or attended with
less bloodshed. Three hundred fell in the field:
In the flight almost none were killed. The Regent
and his principal officers rode about, beseeching
the soldiers to spare their countrymen. The
number of prisoners was great, and among them
" Anders. vol. iv. ;2. Melv. z8S.

14

B o o X many persons of diftinaion. The Regent marched

v. back to Glasgow, and returned public thanks
t1s. to God for this great, and, on his fide, almoR

bloodless victory '"
HifehL During the engagement, Mary flood on a bill,

at no great distance, and beheld all that palsed in
the field, with such emotions of mind as are not
easily defcnbed. When The saw the army, which
was her last hope, thrown into irretrievable con.
fusion, her spirit, which all her pall misfor.
tunes had not been able entirely to subdue, funk
altogether. In the utmoR consternation, she be.
gan her flight, and so lively were her impreffons
of fear, that fbe never closed her eyes till dhe
reached the. abbey of Dundrenan in Galloway, full
sixty Scottish miles from the place of battle ".

These revolutions in Mary's fortune had been

no lcfs rapid 'than singular. In the short space of
eleven days, bie had been a prisoner at the mercy
of her mos inveterate enemies; she had seen a
powerful army under her command, and a nu.
merous train of nobles at her devotion: And now
Ihe was obliged to fly, in the utmost danger of her
life, and to lurk, with a few attendants, in a corner
of her kingdom. Not thinking herself safe, even
in that retreat; her fears impelled her to an action,
the most unadvised, as well as the moR unfortunate
in her whole life. This was her retiring into Eng.
land, a ftep, which, on many accounts, ought to
have appeared to her ralh and dangerous.

' Keith, 477. " Id. 4 1.

Before Mary's arrival in Scotland, mutual BOOK

diflruft and jealoufie. had arisen between her and v.
Elizabeth. All their subsequent tranfaaions had "'g.
contributed to exasperate and inflame these pas- ., 'r,,gino
sions. She had endeavoured, by secret negociations England.
and intrigues, to dilturb the tranquillity of Eliza-
beth's government, and to advance her own pre.
tenlions to the English Crown. Elizabeth, who
pofteffed great power, and acted with left reserve,
had openly supported Mary's rebellious fubledts,
and fomented all the dissensions and troubles in
which her reign had been involved. The maxims
of policy still authorised that Queen to pursue the
fame course; as by keeping Scotland in confusion,
(he effecually secured the peace of her own king-
dom. The Regent, after his victory, had marched
to Edinburgh, and not knowing what course the
Queen had taken, it was several days before he
thought of pursuing her ". She might have been
concealed in that retired corner, among fubjeds
devoted to her interest, until her party, which was
dispersed rather than broken by the late defeat,
fliould gather such strength that she could again
appear with fafsty at their head. There was not
any danger, which The ought not to have run,
rather than throw herself into the hands of an
enemy, from whom ITe had already suffered so
many injuries, and who was prompted, both by
inclination and by interest, to renew them.

But, on the other hand, during Mary's

confinement, Elizabeth had declared against the
"Crawf Me. .9.

B o o x proceedings of her fubjeds, and solicited for bet

v. liberty, with a warmth which had all the appearance

* of sincerity. She had invited her to take refuge in

England, and had promised to meet her in person,
and to give her such a reception as was due to a
Queen and an ally ". Whatever apprehension
Elizabeth might entertain of Mary's designs while
tbe had power in her hands, the was, at present,
the obje, not of fear, but of pity; and to take
advantage of her situation, would be both ungener.
ous and inhuman. The horrors of a prison were
frelh in Mary's memory, and if she Ihould fall a
second time into the hands of her fubjets, there
was no injury to which the presumption of success
might not embolden them to proceed. To attempt
escaping into France, was dangerous; and, in her
situation, almost impossible; nor could the bear the
thoughts of appearing as an exile and a fugitive
in that kingdom where the had once enjoyed all
the splendor of a Queen. England remained her
only asylum; and, in spite of the intreaties of Lord

ner~tiou Herries, Fleming, and her other attendants, who
m criik. conjured her, even on their knees, not to confide

in Elizabeth's promises or generosity, her infatua.
tion was invincible, and the resolved to fly thither.
Herries, by her command, wrote to Lowther the
deputy-gove nor of Carlisle, to know what recep.
tion he would give her; and, before his answer
could return, her fear and impatience were so great,
wi r' that Ihe got into a filter.boat, and with about twenty

" Camb. 489. Anders vol. iv. 99. 2oe. Murdin, 369.

attendants, landed at Wirkington in Cumberland, o o
and thence Ihe was conduced with many marks v.
of refped to Carlile ". I s6

As soon as Mary arrived in England, she wrote Elizibetl,
a long letter to the Queen, representing, in the dliberatc
firongeft terms, the injuries which Ihe had suffered themanner
from her own fubjeds, and imploring that pity and of treatin
afliflance which her present situation demanded r.
An event so extraordinary, and the conduct which
might be proper in consequence of it, drew the
attention, and employed the thoughts, of Elizabeth
and her council. If their deliberations had been
influenced by considerations of jutlice or generosity
alone, they would not have found them long or
intricate. A Queen, vanquilhed by her own sub-
jeas, and threatened by them with the loss of her
liberty, or of her life, had fled from their violence,
and thrown herself into the arms of her nearest
neighbour and ally, from whom ihe had received
repeated assurances of friendship and proteaion.
These circumstances entitled her to refpeat and to
compaflion, and required that Ihe Lhould either be
restored to her own kingdom, or at lealt be left at
full liberty to seek aid from any other quarter. But
with Elizabeth and her counsellors, the question
was not, what was most jull or generous, but what
was molf beneficial to herself, and to the Englilh
nation. Three different resolutions might have been
taken, with regard to the Queen of Scots. To re.
inRate her in her throne, was one; to allow her to
" Keith, 48j. Aoderf. o iv. a. " Id. 29.

o oK retire into France, was another; to detain her in
'. England, was a third. Each of these drew confe
'*$s quences after it, of the utmost importance, which

were examined, as appears from papers fill ex.
tant", with that minute accuracy which Eliza
beth's Ministers employed in all their consultations
upon affairs of moment.

To restore Mary to the full exercise of the royal

authority in Scotland, they observed, would render
her more powerful than ever. The nobles who
were most firmly attached to the English interef
would quickly feel the utmost weight of her relent.
ment. As the gratitude of Princes is seldom frong
or lasting, regard to her own interest might soon
efface the memory of her obligations to Elizabeth,
and prompt her to renew the alliance of the Scpttilh
nation with France, and revive her own preten.
sions to the Englilb Crown. Nor was it poflible to
fetter and circumscribe the Scottish Queen, by any
conditions that would prevent these dangers. Her
party in Scotland was numerous and powerful Her
return, even without any support from England,
would inspire her friends with new zeal and courage;
a single vicory might give them the fuperrioty,
which they had loft by a single defeat, and render
Mary a more formidable rival than ever to Eliza
beth.

The dangers arising from suffering Mary to return

into France, were no less obvious. The French
King could not refuse his afliftance towards restoring

' AnderC voL iv. 34. 99. o02.

his fifler and ally to her throne. Elizabeth would, B o OK
once more, fee a foreign army in the island, over. v.
awing the Scots, and ready to enter her kingdom; are.
and if the commotions in France, on account of
religion, were fettled, the Princes of Lorrain
might resume their ambitious projets, and the
united forces of France and Scotland might invade
England, where it is weakest and molt defenceless.

Nothing therefore remained but to detain her Rertbln t
in England; and to permit her either to live at dtin her
liberty there, or to confine her in a prison. The
former was a dangerous experiment. Her court
would become a place of resort to all the Roman
Catholics, to the diaffgeed, and to the lovers of
innovation. Though Elizabeth asseted to repre.
feat Mary's pretensions to the English Crown as
altogether extravagant and ill-founded, The was
not ignorant that they did not appear in that
light to the nation, and that many thought them
preferable even to her own title. If the activity of
her emissaries had gained her so many abettors,
her own personal influence was much more to be
dreaded; her beauty, her address, her sufferings,
by the admiration and pity which they would
excite, could not fail of making many converts
to her party".

It was indeed to be apprehended, that the treating
Mary as a prisoner would excite universal indigna-
tion against Elizabeth, and that by this unexampled
severity towards a Queen, who implored, and to
" Andra vol i. S6. 6a.

oot K whom Ie had promised her proteClion, the wbuld
V. forfeit the praise of justice and humanity, which
Iss. was hitherto due to her administration. But the

Englilh Monarchs were often so solicitous to secure
their kingdom against the Scots, as to be little
scrupulous about the means which they employed
for that purpose. Henry IV. had seized the heir of
the Crown of Scotland, who was forced, by the
violence of a storm, to take refuge in one of the
ports of his kingdom; and, in contempt of the
rights of hospitality, without regarding his tender
age, or the tears and intreaties of his father,
detained him a prisoner for many years. This
icion, though detested by posterity, Elizabeth
resolved now to imitate. Her virtue was not more
proof than that of Henry had been, against the
'temptations of interest; and the possession of a
present advantage was preferred to the profped of
future fame. The fatisfadion which ihe felt in
mortifying a rival, whose beauty and accomplilh-
ments Ihe envied, had,' perhaps, do less influence
than political considerations, in bringing her to
this resolution. But, at the fame time, in order to
screen herself from the censure which this condud
merited, and to make her treatment of the Scottibi
Queen look like the effect of necessity, rather than
of choice, The determined to affume'the appear-
ance of concern for her interest, and of deep fympa.
thy with her sufferings.
Ma, o. With this view, [he instantly ;dispatched Lord

Scroope warden of the weft marches, and Sir
Francts Knollys her viccchanabedaio, to the Queen

of Scots, with letters full of expressions of kindness B o o i
and condolence. But, at the fame time, they had v.
private inftrutions to watch all her motions, and 1568.
to take care that the should not escape into her own
kingdom " On their arrival, Mary demanded a Mary i,.
perlonal interview with the Queen, that Ihe might nnldadnltb
lay before her the injuries which fie had suffered, Eibi,",bh°'
and receive from her those friendly offices which /he preence.
had been encouraged to expect. They answered,
that it was with reluca'nce admilifon into the pre.
fece of their Sovereign was at present denied her';
that while Ihe lay under the imputation of a crime
so horrid as the murder of her hulband, their mistress,
to whom he was so nearly allied, could nor, with.
out bringing a stain upon her own reputation, admit
her into her pretence; but as loon as she had
cleared herself from that aspersion, they promised
her a reception suitable to her dignity, and aid
proportioned to her diRrefs ".

Nothing could be more artful than this pretence; She offr, t,
and it was the occasion of leading the Queen of vn',te her
Scots into the snare in which Elizabeth and her
Mlinifters wished to entangle her. Mary expressed
the utmoRt surprise at this unexpected manner of
evading her request; but as Ihe could not believe
so many profeflions of friendship to be void of
sincerity, Ihe frankly offered to submit her cause
to the cognizance of Elizabeth, and undertook to
produce such proofs of her own innocence, and
of the falthood of the accusations brought against
" Anders. vol. iv, 36. 70 . 9a. ' Ibid. vol. iv. 8. s$.

B o ox her, as {hould fully remove the scruples, and satisfy

v. the delicacy of the Englifl Queen. This was the
int6 very point to which Elizabeth labored to bring

tki, aJai. the matter. In consequence of this appeal of the
oge tiis Scottiff Queen, {he now confidered herself as the

umpire between her and her fubjeds, and forcaw
that (he would have it entirely in her own power
to protrad the inquiry to any length, and to
perplex and involve it in endless difficulties. In the
mean time, The was furnished with a plausible reason
for keeping her at a distance from court, and for
refuGng to contribute towards replacing her on
the throne. As Mary's conduct had been extremely
incautious, and the presumptions of her guilt were
many and firong, it was not impofible her sub.
je&s might make good their charge against her;
.and if this mhould be the result of the inquiry,
1he would, thenceforth, cease to be the objed
of regard or of companion, and the treating her
with coldness and negled would merit little cen.
hue. In a matter so dark and mysterious, there
was no probability that Mary could bring proofs
of her innocence, so incontefted, as to render
the condud of the Englilh Queen altogether
culpable; and, perhaps, impatience under rctiat,
suspicion of Elizabeth's partiality, or the difcovety
of her artifices, might engage, Mary in fuhb
cabals, as would justify the using her with greater
rigor.

Elizabeth early perceived many advantages

which would arise from an inquiry into the con-
duct of the Scottih Queen, carried on under her

direfion.

direc'ion. There was some danger, however, that 0o O
Mlary might discover her secret intentions too V.
soon, and by receding from the offer which The a"6
had mJde, endeavour to disappoint them. But
even in that event, Ihe determined not to drop
the inquiry, and had thought of several different
expedients for carrying it on. The Countess of
Lenox , convinced that Mary was accessary to
the murder of her son, and thirfling for that venge-
ance which it was natural for a mother to de-
mand, had implored Elizabeth's justice, and soli.
cited her, with many tears, in her own name,
and in her hulband's, to bring the Scottish Queen
to a trial for that crime ". The parents of the
unhappy Prince had a just right to prefer this
accusation; nor could The, who was their nearef
kinswoman, be condemned for listening to so
equitable a demand. B.fides , as the Scottilh
nobles openly accused IMiary of the fame crime,
and pretended to be able to confirm their charge
by sufficient proof, it would be no difficult matter
to prevail on them to petition the Queen of Eng-
land to take cognizance of their proceedings
against their Sovereign; and it was the opinion
of the Englih council, that it would be reason-
able to comply with the request ". At the fame
time, the obsolete claim of the superiority of
England over Scotland began to be talked of;
and, on that account, it was pretended that the
decision of the contest between Mary and her
fubjecs belonged of right to Elizabeth ". But

"Camd. 4 2. Haynes,469. " And. vol. i. part . .37. "Ibid.
VOL. 11. K

B0 o though Elizabeth revolved all there expedients in

v. her mind, and kept them in reserve to be made ue
n<I. of as occasion might require, The wished that the

inquiry into Mary's conduft Ihould appear to be
undertaken purely in compliance with her own de.
mand, and in order to vindicate her innocence; and
so long as that appearance could be preserved, none
of the other expedients were to be employed

When Mary consented to submit her cause to

Elizabeth, Ihe was far from fufpedling that any bad
consequences could follow, or that any dangerous
pretensions could be founded on her offer. She
cxpeRed that Elizabeth herself would receive and
examine her defences "; fle meant to confider her
as an equal, for whose fatisfadion The was willing
to explain any part of her conduat that was liable
to censure, not to acknowledge her as a superior,
before whom the was bound to plead her cause.
But Elizabeth put a very different sense on Mary's
offer. She confidered herself as chosen to be judge
in the controversy between the Scottifl Queen and
her fubjets, and began to aa in that capacity
She proposed to appoint commiflioners to hear tbh
pleadings of both parties, and wrote to the Re
gent of Scotland to impower proper persons t(
appear before them, in his name, and to produo
what he could alledge in vindication of his pro
ceedings againlt his Sovereign.

Mrieatll Mary had, hitherto, relied with unaccountabl
offsaded at
Elizab*h't credulity on Elizabeth's profeflions of regard, an
woadct. cxpe'ted that so many kind speeches would, i

"Anders. vol. iv. 1o.

last, be accompanied with some suitable ations. B o Oa
But this proposal entirely undeceived her. She v.
plainly perceived the artifice of Elizabeth's con. -aw'
dud, and saw what a diminution it would be to
her own honor, to appear on a level with her re-
bellious fubjedts, and to stand together with them
at the bar of a superior and a' judge. She re.
traded the offer which she had made, and which
had been perverted to a purpose so contrary to her
intention. She demanded, with more earnelcnefs
than ever, to be admitted into Elizabeth's pre.
fence; and wrote to her in a strain very different
from what The had formerly used, and which JUI"' 1
fully discovers the grief and indignation that
preyed on her heart. " In my present situation,"
fays hce, " I neither will nor can reply to the
a accusations of my fubjees. I am ready, of my
u own accord , and out of friendship to you, to
" latisfy your scruples, and to vindicate my own
"conduCt. My fubjeds are not my equals; nor

will 1, by submitting my cause to a judicial
trial, acknowledge them to be so. I fled into
"your arms, as into those of my nearest relation
"and most perfect friend. I did you honor, as
"I imagined, in chufing you, preferably to any

other Prince, to be the restorer of an injured
" Queen. Was it ever known that a Prince was
" blamed for hearing, in person, the complaints
" of those who appealed to his justice, against
' the false accusations of their enemies ? You
"admitted into your presence my bastard bro.
ther, who had been guilty of rebellion; and

K2

O 0 a you deny me that honor ! God forbid that I
V . should be the occasion of bringing any Rain
ilus. upon your reputation! I expeded that your

manner of treating me would have added lustre

a to it. Suffer me either to implore the aid of
" other Princes, whose delicacy on this head will
g be less, and their resentment of my wrongs
a greater; or let me receive, from your hands
a that afliftance, which it becomes you, more
B than any other Prince, to grant; and by that
' benefit bind me to yourself in the indiffolubk
" ties of gratitude "."

Jae 0. This letter somewhat disconcerted Elizabeth's
Elinuzatb plan, but did not divert her from the prosecution

a"un.",' of it. She laid the matter before the Privy Coun.

cil, and it was there determined, notwithRtanding
the intreaties and remonRrances of the Scottilh
Queen, to go on with the inquiry into her con.
dud, and until that were finilbed, it was agreed
that Elizabeth could not, confifently with her
own honor, or with the safety of her government,
either give her the assistance which the demanded,
or permit her to retire out of the kingdom. Left
the Ihould have an opportunity of escaping, while
lhe resided to near Scotland , it was thought ad.
vifable to remove her to some place at a greater
distance from the borders ".

romei.p While the Englilh court was occupied in there
f the R. deliberations, the Regent did not negled to iim.
geit miOn
the c .s prove the vidory at Langfide. That event was
aa~t. of the utmost importance to him. It not only

drove the Queen herself out of the kingdom, but

" AnderC voL iv. part i. 94. " Id. Ibid. o12.

left her adherents dispersed, and without a leader, B o o K
at his mercy. He seemed resolved, at first, to v.
proceed again1t them with the utmolt rigor. Six i6es.
persons of some diflindion, who had been taken
prisoners in the battle, were tried and condemned
to death, as rebels against the King's government.
They were led to the place of execution, .but by
the powerful interceflion of Knox they obtained
a pardon. Hamilton of Bothwellhaugh was one
of the number, who lived to give both the Regent
and Knox reason to repent of this commendable
ad of lenity ".

Soon after, the Regent marched with an army,
consisting of four thousand horse and one thousand
foot, towards the weR borders. The nobles in
this part. of the kingdom were all the Queen's
adherents; but as they had not force sufficient to
obftrud his progress, he must either have obliged
them to submit to the King, or would have laid
waRe their lands with fire and sword. But Eli-
zabeth, whose interest it was to keep Scotland in
confusion, by preserving the balance between the
two parties, and who was endeavouring to sooth
the Scottiil Queen by gentle treatment, inter-
posed at her desire. After keeping the field two
weeks, the Regent, in compliance to the Engliih
Ambassadors, dismissed his forces; and an expe.
dition, which might have proved fatal to his op-
ponents, ended with a few ads of severity ".

The resolution of the English Privy Council Mary cnied
with regard to Mary's person, was soon carried to Bolon.
" Cald. vol. ii. 99. " Ibid.

K3

B 00 into execution, and, without regarding her re.

as. monstrances or complaints, the was conduced to
Jl '3 Bolton, a cafme of Lord Scroop's, on the bor.

ders of Yorklbire ". In this place, her corre
fpondence with her friends in Scotland became
more difficult, and any profpedc of making her
escape was entirely cut off. She now felt herfell
to be entirely in Elizabeth's power, and though
treated as yet with the respeCt due to a Queen,
her real condition was that of a prisoner. Mary
knew what it was to be deprived of liberty, and
dreaded it as the worst of all evils. While the
remembrance of her late imprisonment was fill
lively, and the terror of a new one filled her
mind, Elizabeth thought it a proper juncture to
renew her former proposition, that she would fug
ser the Regent and his adherents to be called into
England, and consent to their being heard in de.
fence of their own conduct She declared it to
be far from her intention to claim any right ol
judging between Mary and her fubjcts, or ol
degrading her so far as to require that the Ibouki
answer to their accusations. On the contrary
Murray and his associates were summoned to ap
pear, in order to justify their conduct in treatinl
their Sovereign so harshly, and to vindicate then
selves from those crimes with which (he hai
charged them. On her part, Elizabeth promied
whatever Thould be the issue of this inquiry, t
employ all her power and influence towards r
placing Mary on her throne, under a few'imit

' ad. vol. i. s4. See Appendix, No XIL

tions, by no means unreasonable. Mary, de- B o o K
ceived by this seeming attention to her dignity as v.
a Queen; soothed, on one hand, by a promise ,Ag,,
more flattering than any which hfe had hitherto an inquiry
received from Elizabeth, and urged, on the other, bemradeint
by the feelings which were natural on being con-
duled into a more interior part of England, and
kept there in more rigorous confinement, com-
plied at length with what Elizabeth required, and
promised to fend commifioners to the conferences
appointed to be held at York".

In order to persuade Elizabeth that fIe desired Her dlimmn.
nothing so much as to render the union between raindwith
them as close as possible, (he ihowed a disposition ligion.
to relax somewhat in one point; with regard to
which, during all her pafl and subsequent misfor.
tunes, (he was uniformly inflexible. She expressed
a great veneration for the liturgy of the Church
of England; /he was often present at religious
worlhip, according to the rites of the Reformed
Church; made choice of a ProteRfant clergyman
to be her chaplain; heard him preach against the
errors of Popery with attention and seeming plea.
sure; and discovered all the symptoms of an ap.
proaching conversion ". Such was Mary's known
and bigotted attachment to the Popish religion,
that it is impossible to believe her sincere in this
part of her conduc; nor can any thing mark
more firongly the wretchedness of her condition,

' Anders. iv. part. i. p. X , 1 2,&c. 109, &c. Haynes, 468,
&c. State Trials, Edit. Hargrave, i. go.

Anders. vol. iv. part i. x . Haynes, o09. See Appendix,
N'. XlII.

K4

o o K and the excef. of her fears, than that they betrayed
v. her into dilnimulation, in a matter concerning which
iss. her fentihnents were, atall other times, scrupulously

delicate.

ALeft s. At this time the Regent called a Parliament, in
A Palita order to proceed to the forfeiture of those who
Sodu.. refused to acknowledge the King's authority. The

Queen's adherents were alarmed, and Argyll and
Huntly, whom Mary had appointed her lieutenants
the one in the south, and the other in the north,
of Scotland, began to assemble forces to obftrud
this meeting. Compassion for the Queen, and envy
at thorf who governed in the King's name, had
added so much strength to the party, that the
Regent would have found it difficult to withstand its
effort, But a' Mary had submitted her cause to Eliza
beth. le could not refuse, at her desire, to command
her friends to lay down their arms, and to waitpati.
entlv until matters were brought to a decision in
England By procuring this cessation of arms, Eliza.
beth afforded as fealonable relief to the Regent's
facion as fie had formerly given to the Queen's".

The Regent, however, would not consent, even

at Elizabeth's request, to put off the meeting of
Parliament ". But we may ascribe to her influ-
ence, as well as to the eloquence of Maitland,
vho labored to prevent the one half of his coun-
trymen from exterminating the other, any ap-
pearances of moderation which this Parliament
discovered in its proceedings. The most violent

" Anders. vol. iv. 12s. "See Appendix, N. XIV.

opponents of the King's government were for- BOOK
feited; the reft were allowed Rill to hope for v.
favor. w!cL

No sooner did the Queen of Scots submit her Elizabth

cause to her rival, than Elizabeth required the Re- reqniresthe
gent to fend to York deputies properly instruded defedhi
for vindicating his conduct, in presence of her corn. conduit.
milffoners It war not without hesitation and anxiety
that the Regent consented to this measure. His
authority was already cflablifbed in Scotland, and
confirmed by Parliament. To stiffer its validity
now to be called in queflion, and fubjeded to a
foreign jurifdition, was extremely mortifying. To
accuse his Sovereign before frangers, the ancient
enemies of the Scottilh name, was an odious tal.
To fail in this accusation was dangerous; to fuc-
ceed in it was disgraceful. But the strength of the
adverse faction daily increased. He dreaded the in-
terpofition of the French King in its behalf. In
his situation, and in a matter which Elizabeth bad
so much at heart, her commands were neither to
be disputed nor disobeyed ".

The necessity of repairing in person to York, Both the
added to the ignominy of the ftep which he was Queen an

h, rppoint

obliged to take. All his associates declined the commilin.
officc; they were unwilling to expose themselves "'
to the odium and danger with which it was easy
to foresee that the discharge of it would be at-
tended, unless he himself consented to share these
in common with them. The Earl of Morton, sprt. sa

Buch. 3 7. " Buch. 372. See Append. No. XV.

oOK Bothwell Bilbop of Orkney, Pitcairn Commen.
v. dator of Dunfermling, and Lord Lindsay, were
"*a. joined with him in commiflion. Macgill of Ran.

" keilor, and Balnaves of Hallhill, two eminent

Civilians, George Buchanan, Murray's faithful ad.
herent, a man whole genius did honor to the age,
Maitland, and several others, were appointed to
attend them as afliftants. Maitland owed this dit.
tindion to the Regent's fear, rather than to his
affedion. He had warmly remonRrated againRf
this measure. He wihled his country to continue
in friendlhip with England, but not to become
dependant on that nation. He was desirous of
re-eftablilbing the Queen in some degree of power,
not inconsistent with that which the King possessed;
and the Regent could not, with safety, leave
behind him a man, whose views were so contrary
to his own, and who, by his superior abilities,
had acquired an influence in the nation, equal to
that which others derived from the antiquity and
power of their families ".

Mary impowered Lefly Bilhop of Rots, Lord

LivingfRon, Lord Boyd, Lord Herries, Gavin Ha.
milton Commendator of Kilwinning , Sir John
Gordon of Lochinvar, and Sir James Cockburn
of Skirling, to appear in her name "

Elizabeth nominated Thomas Howard Duke

of Norfolk, Thomas Ratcliff Earl of Suffex, and
Sir Ralph Sadler, her Commififoners to hear both
parties.

s Bach. 17t. Anders. vol. iv. 35. Melv. s1. 18S.
' Ander£ vol iv. 3;.

The fourth of OAober was the day fixed for B o o K

opening the Conference. The great abilities of the v.
deputies on both fides, the dignity of the judges ri6s.
before whom they were to appear, the high rank The Co,-
of the persons whose cause was to be heard, and otk.
the importance of the points in dispute, rendered
the whole tranfadion no less illustrious than it
was singular. The situation in which Elizabeth
appeared, on this occasion, trikes us with an air
of magnificence. Her rival, an independent Queen,
and the heir of an ancient race of Monarchs, was
a prisoner in her hands, and appeared, by her
Ambafladors, before her tribunal. The Regent of
Scotland, who represented the majesty, and pofl
sessed the authority of a King, stood in person at
her bar. And the fate of a kingdom, whose power
her ancestors had often dreaded, but could never
subdue, was now at her disposal.

The views, however, with which the several vin of
parties consented to this Conference, and the issue ther4i"
to which they expected to bring it, were extremely
different.

Mary's chief obje& was the recovering her

former authority. This induced her to consent to
a measure against which she had long struggled.
Elizabeth's promises gave her ground for enter-
taining hopes of being restored to her kingdom;
in order to which, The would have willingly
made many coaceffions to the King's party; and
the influence of the Englilh Queen, as well as
her own impatience under her present fiwadton,

i 0 K might have led her to many more ". The Re.

v. gent aimed at nothing but securing Elizabeth's
I1ó3 protection to his party, and seems not to have

had the molt distant thoughts of coming to any
composition with Mary. Elizabeth's views were
more various, and her schemes more intricate. She
seemed to be full of concern for Mary's honor,
and solicitous that The Ihould wipe off the aspersions
which blemified her charater. This she pretended
to be the intention of the Conference; amusing
Mary, and eluding the solicitations of the French
and Spanilh Ambassadors in her behalf, by repeated
promises of aflifting her, as soon as Ihe could ven.
ture to do so, without bringing disgrace upon her.
self. But, under this veil of friendlbip and gene.
rofity, Elizabeth concealed sentiments of a different
nature. She expeded that the Regent would accuse
Mary of being accessary to the murder of her
hulband. She encouraged him, as far as decency
would permit, to take this desperate fRep ". And
as this accusation might terminate in two different
ways, The had concerted measures for her future
condudt suitable to each of these. If the charge
against Mary should appear to be well founded,
she resolved to pronounce her unworthy of wear.
ing a Crown, and to declare that hIe would never
burden her own conscience with the guilt of an
action so detestable as the restoring her to her
kingdom . If it flould happen, that what her

Anders. vol. iv. part ii. ;. Good. voL ii. ;7.

" Ibid. II. 4. Haynes, 487.
"Anders. vol. i. part ii. ii.

accusers alledged did not amount to a proof of B 0 0K
guilt, but only of mal-administration, she deter. v.
mined to set on foot a treaty for restoring her, 6ss.
but on such conditions as would render her here.
after dependant not only upon England, but upon
her own fubjeds *'. As every ftep in the progrets
of the Conference, as well as the final result of
it, was in Elizabeth's own power, she would fill
be at liberty to chufe which of these courses Ihe
would hold; or if there appeared to be any danger
or inconveniency in pursuing either of them, she
might protract the whole cause by endless delays,
and involve it in inextricable perplexity.

The Conference, however, was opened with comPlgat
much solemnity. But the very first ftep disco. Queen's
vered it to be Elizabeth's intention to inflame, commiflmo
rather than to extinguish the dissensions and ani. ,h,',-tt
mofities among the Scots. No endeavours were
used to reconcile the contending parties, or to
mollify the fierceneTs of their hatred, by bringing
the Queen to offer pardon for what was past, or
her fubjets to promise more dutiful obedience
for the future. On the contrary, Mary's corn- o.oobr.
miflioners were permitted to prefer a complaint
against the Regent and his party, containing an
enumeration of their treasonable ations, of their
sizing her person by force of arms, committing
her to prison, compelling her to resign the
Crown, and making use of her son's name to co-
lor their usurpation of the whole royal authority;
"AnderC voL iv. part ii. 16.

BooK and of all these enormities they required such

v. speedy and cffedual redress, as the injuries of one
*ssa Queen demanded from the justice of another ".

It was then expected that the Regent would

have disclosed all the circumstances of that un.
natural crime to which he pretended the Queen
had been accessary, and would have produced
evidence in support of his charge. But far from
accusing Mary, the Regent did not even answer
the complaints brought against himself. He disco.
vered a relutance at undertaking that office, and
started many doubts and scruples, with regard to
which he demanded to be resolved by Elizabeth
herself ". His reserve and hesitation were no less
surprising to the greater part of the English comn
mifioners than to his own associates. They knew
that he could not vindicate his own conduc
without charging the murder upon the Queen,
and he had not hitherto flown any extraordinary
delicacy on that bead. An intrigue, however,
had been secretly carried on, since his arrival at
York, which explains this mystery.
imbif~ d The Duke of Norfolk was, at that time, the

~, wit most powerful and mos popular man in England.

His wife was lately dead; and he began already
to form a projed, which be afterwards more
openly avowed, of mounting the throne of Scot.
land, by a marriage with the Queen of Scots.
He saw the infamy which would be the confe.
quence of a public accusation against Mary, and
how prejudicial it might be to her prctenfions to

'z And~ vol i. pat a. pa. '.
Harnes, 47S.

the Englilh fuccelIion. In order to save her from B o

o

this cruel mortification, he applied to Maitland, v.
and expressed his afonilhment at feeing a man of 16s3.
so much reputation for wisdom, concurring with
the Regent in a measure so diflonorable to them.
selves, to their Queen, and to their country; sub.
mitting the public tranfadions of the nation to the
judgment of foreigners; and publishing the ignominy,
and exposing the faults of their Sovereign, which
they were bound, in good policy, as well as in
duty, to conceal and to cover. It was easy for
lMaitland, whose sentiments were the fame with
the Duke's, to vindicate his own conduct. He as.
fured him, that he had employed all his credit to
dissuade his countrymen from this measure; and
would till contribute, to the utmoftof his power,
to divert them from it. This encouraged Norfolk
to communicate the matter to the Regent. He
repeated and enforced the fame arguments which
be had used with Maitland. He warned him of
the danger to which he must expose himself by
such a violent adion as the public accusation of
his Sovereign. Mary would never forgive a man,
who had endeavoured to fix such a brand of infamy
on her characer. If Ihe ever recovered any degree
of power, his deftrudion would be inevitable,
and he would jutly merit it at her hands. Nor
would Elizabeth screen him from this, by a pub.
lic approbation of his conduct. For whatever
evidence of Mary's guilt he might produce the
was resolved to give no definitive sentence in the
aufe. Let him only demand that, the matter

10OOK Ihould be brought to decision immediately after

v. hearing the proof, and he would be fully convinced
aL. how falf and insidious her intentions were, and,

by consequence, how improper it would be for
him to appear as the accuser of his own Sove.
reign ". 1 he candor which Norfolk seemed to dif.
cover in these remonAtrances, as well as the truth
which they contained, made a deep impreflion on
the Regent. He daily received the firongeR affur.
ances of Mary's willingness to be reconciled to him,
if he abstained from accusing her of such an odious
crime, together with the denunciations of her ir.
reconcileable hatred, if he acted a contrary part ".
All these considerations concurred in determining
him to alter his purpose, and to make trial of the
expedient which the Duke had suggested.
-get_ , He demanded, therefore, to be informed, be.

fore he proceeded farther, whether the Englilh
commiffloners were empowered to declare the
Queen guilty, by a judicial ad; whether they
would promise to pas, sentence, without delay;
whether the Queen fIbuld be kept under such
restraint, as to prevent her from disturbing the
government now efltablilbed in Scotland; and
whether Elizabeth, if The approved of the pro-
ceedings of the King's party, would engage to
proted it for the future ". The paper containing
these demands was signed by himself alone,

" Melv. 187. Haynes, 57i.
' Anders. vol. iv. part ii. 77. Good. vol. ii. 157.
See Append. N'. XVI.

" Ander voL iv. part ii. 55. State Trials, i. 9', &c.

without

without communicating it to any of his attendants, 11 o a
except Maitland and Melvil". But left So many v.
precautions Ihould excite any suspicion of their as"
proceeding, from some consciousness of defed in
the evidence which he had to produce agailft his
Sovereign, Murray empowered Lethington, Mack.
gill, and Buchanan, to wait upon the Duke of
Norfolk, the Earl of Suffex, and Sir Ralph Sadler,
and to lay before them, not in their public cbarac.
ter as commissioners, but as private persons, Mary's
letters to Bothwell, her sonnets, and all the other
papers upon which were founded the charge of her
being accessory to the murder of the King, and to
declare that this confidential communication was
made to them, with a view to learn whether.the
Queen of England would confider this evidence as
fuffcient to eftablifl the truth of the accusation.
Nothing could he more natural than the Regent's
solicitude, to know on what footing he stood. To
have ventured on a ftep so uncommon and danger.
oun, as the accusing his Sovereign, without previ.
oully ascertaining that he might take it with safety,
would have been unpardonable imprudence. But
Elizabeth, who did not exped that he would have
moved any such difficulty, had not empowered her
commiflioners to give him that fati.fadion which
he demanded. It became necessary to transmit the
articles to herself, and by the light in which Norfolk
placed them, it is easy to fee that he wilsed that
they Thould make no flight impreflion on Elizabeth

Anders vol. iv. part. ii. 6. Melv. 190.'
VOL. II. L

OO K and her minsters. a Think not the Scots, said Ie,
v. a over.fcrupulous or precise. Let us view their
ns. £ condud as we would with our own to be viewed

in a like situation. The game they play is deep;
their etates, their lives, their honor are at stake.
a It is now in their own power to be reconciled

to their Queen, or to offend her irrecoverably;
and in a matter osso much importance the utmot
degree of caution is not excessive"."
While the Englilb commiflioners waited for

fuller inftrudions with regard to the, Regent's
demands, he gave in an answer to the complaint
which had been offered in name of the Scottilb
Queen. It was expressed in terms perfedly con.
formable to the system which he had at that time
adopted. It contained no insinuation of the Queen's
being accessory to the murder of her hulband; the
bitterness of style peculiar to the age was confider.
ably abated; and though he pleaded, that the
infamy of the marriage with Bothwell, made it
necessary to take arms in order to dissolve it;
though Mary's attachment to a man so odious
justified the keeping her for some time under
restraint; yet nothing more was laid on these fab.
jeAs than was barely requisite in his own defence.
The Queen's commiflioners did not fail to-reply".
oa. 7. But while the article with regard to the murder

remained untouched, these were only (kirmilies
at a diflance, of no consequence towards ending
the contest, and were little regarded by Elizabeth
or her commissioners.

"AnderC vol. iv. 77. "'d. vol iv. part ii. 64. 8

The conference had, hitherto, been conducted B o'o X
in a manner which disappointed Elizabeth's views, v.
and produced none of these difcoveries'which ile ss.
had expected. The distance between York and enceremotei
London. and the necessity of consulting her upon toWtemi.
every difficulty which occurred, consumed much "'
time. Norlolk's negociation with the Scottilh Re-
gent, however secretly carried on, was not, in all
probability, unknown to a princess so remarkable
for her sagacity in penetrating the designs of
her enemies, and feeing through their deepest
schemes ". Instead, therefore; of returning any
answer to the Regent's demands, Ihe resolved to
remove the conference to Westminster, and to
appoint new commissioners, in whom (he could
more absolutely confide.- Both the Queen of Scots
and the Regent were brought, without difficulty,
to approve of this resolution ".

We often find Mary boasting of the superiority in
argument obtained by her commissioners during
the conference at York, and how, by the strength
of their reasons, they confounded her adversaries,
and silenced all their cavils". The dispute Rsod,
at that time, on a footing which rendered her
victory not only apparent, but easy. Her participa.
tion of the guilt of the King's murder was the
circumstance upon which her fubjets ought to
have refted, as a jultification of their violent

"Good. vol. ii. t6o. Anders. vol iii. 24

Haynes, 4r4. Ander. vol. iv. 94.
Good. vol i. 18. 84. 35o.

La

o o proceedings againit her; and while they iodultri.
v. oufy avoided mentioning that, her cause gained
116r as much as that of her adversaries loft by fuppre.

sing this capital argument.

Elizabeth resolved that Mary Ihould not enjoy

the fame advanage in the conference to be held
at Westminster. She deliberated with the utmost
anxiety, how fle might overcome the Regent's
fcuples, and persuade him to accuse the QUeCo.
She confidered of the most proper method for
bringing Mary's commifioners.to answer such an
accusation; and as Ihe foresaw that the promises
with which it was necelfary to allure the Regent,
and which it was impofible to conceal from the
Scottith Queen, would naturally exasperate her to
a great degree, Ihe determined to guard her more
parrowly than ever; and though Lord Scroop had
given her no reason to distrust his vigilance or
fidelity, yet because he was the Duke of Norfolk's
brother-in-law, she thought it proper to remove
the Queen as soon as possible to Tuthbury in
$taffordlhire, and commit her to the keeping of
the Earl of Shrewlbury, to whom that catle
belonged "

Mar's r rpi Mary began to fufpet the design of this second
<ti o.fiEa- conference; and notwithstanding the fatisfaoion
tiom. the expressed at feeing her cause taken more immc
Ootkt 21. diately under the Queen's own eye ", he framed her

inftruAions to her commilfloners in such a manner,
as to avoid being brought under the neceflity ol

Haynes, 478. " AnderC voL iv. partiL9.

answering the accusation of her subje&s, if they I 0 0 K
should be so desperate as to exhibit one against v.
her ". These suspicions were soon confirmed by a W*.
circumflance extremely mortifyirig. The Regent
having arrived at London, in order to be present
at the conference, was immediately admitted into
Elizabeth's presence, and received by her, not only
with refpe, but with affedion. This Mary justly
confidered as an open declaration of that Queen's
partiality towards her advterfarie. . I the firt N'ovem. z.
emotions of her resentment, she wrote to her comn. c"sla'i

perronalau.o'

miflioners, and commanded them to complain, in dience of
the presence of the Englilh noble*, and before the Elizabeth.
ambassadors of foreign Princes, of the usage fhd
had hitherto met with, and the additional injuries
which she had reafoti to apprehend. Her rebellious
subjects were allowed access to the Queen, she
was excluded from her presence; they enjoyed full
liberty, Ihe languished under a long imprisonment;
they were encouraged to accuse her, in defending
herself [he labored under every disadvantage. For
these reasons she once more renewed her demand,
of being admitted into the Queen's presence; and
if that were denied, Ihe initruded them to declare,
that file recalled the consent which fie had given
to the conference at Westminster, and protested,
that whatever was done there, should be held to
be null and invalid".

This, perhaps, was the most prudent resolution
]lary could have taken. The pretences on which
" Good. vol. ii 349. " Id. voii. 184.

L3

o1 o0x fihe declined the conference were plausible, and the
v. junlure for offering them well chosen. But either
*s dthe Queen's letter did not reach her commiffllone

.in due time, or they suffered themselves to be
deceived by Elizabeth's, profeflions of regard for
their Milfrefs, and consented to.the opening of
the conference ".
Sw. ss. To the commissioners who had appeared in-her

name at York, Elizabeth now added Sir Nichola
Bacon, Keeper of the Great Seal,. the Earls of
Arundel and Leicester, Lord-Clinton, and Sir
William Cecil ". The difficulties which obtruded
the proceedings at York were quickly removed. A
latisfying answer was given to the Regent's de.
mands; nor was be so much ,disposed to hefitatc,
and raise objetions, as formerly. His negociation
with Norfolk had been discovered to Morton by
fame of Mary's attendants, and he had commuoi.
cated it to Cecil". His personal safety, .as well as
the continuance of his power, depended on Eliza
beth. By favoring Mary, hfe might at any time
ruin him, and by a question which the artfully
started, concerning the person who had a right, by
the law of Scotland, to govern the kingdom dyring
, a minority, the let him fee, that even without
restoring the Queen, it was an easy matter for
her to deprive him of the supreme diretion of
affairs ". These considerations, which were power.
fully seconded by most of his attendants, at klgth

A tnder vol. iii. ii. " Id. vol. iv. partii. 99.
" Melv. 191. ' Haynes, 484,

determined the Regent to produce. his .accusation B 0 0
against the Queen. v.

He endeavoured to lessen the obloquy with s68s.

which he wasfenfible this acion would be attended, The eeIlet
by protelting, that it was with the utmost reluRt- Queen ofbe.
ance be undertook this disagreeable task; that his ing actelfoy
party had long suffered their conduct to be mif- band's muar
construed, and had borne the worst imputations der.
in filencc, rather than expose the crimes of their
Sovereign to the eyes of firangers; but. that now
the insolence and importunity of the adverse faRion
forced them to publilh, what they had hitherto,
though with loss to themselves, endeavoured to
conceal". These pretexts are decent.; and the
considerations, which be mentions, had, during
some time, a real influence upon the conduct of
the party; but since the meeting of Parliament
held in December, they.had discovered so little
delicacy and reserve with refpetl to the Queen's
adions, as renders it impossible to give credit to
those studied professions. The Regent and his
afllociates were drawn, it is plain, partly by the
necellity of their affairs, and partly.by Elizabeth's
artifices, into a situation where no liberty of choice
was left to them; and they were obliged either to
acknowledge themselves to be guilty of rebellion,
or to charge Mary with having been accessory to
the commission of murder.

The accusation itself was conceived in the

firongeft terms. Mary was charged, not only with
"Anders. vol iv. part. ii. zi$.

L4

o o K having consented to the murder, but with being
v. accessory to the contrivance and execution of it
W"1 Bothwell, it was pretended, had been screened

from the pursuits of justice by her favor; and fbe
had formed designs no less dangerous to the life
of the young Prince, than subversive of the libet.
ties and constitution of the kingdom. If any of
these crimes mould be denied, an offer was made
to produce the most ample and undoubted evidence
in confirmation of the charge".
Nov. :X. At the next meeting of the commillioners, the

Earl of Lenox appeared before them; and after
bewailing the tragical and unnatural murder of
his son, be implored Elizabeth's justice against the
Queen of Scots, whom he accused, upon oath,
of being the author of that crime, and produced
papers, which, as he pretended, would make good
what be alledged. The entrance of a new ador
on the stage, so opportunely, and at a junture fa
critical, can scarce be imputed t6 chance. This
contrivance was manifestly Elizabeth's, in order to
increase, by this additional accufation,'the infamy
of the Scottifb Queen ".
Her Oir. Mary's commifiloners expressed the utmost fur.

.firwrfer' prise and indignation at the Regent's presumption,
Dam. 4. in loading the Queen with calumnies, which,

as they affirmed, fle had so little merited. But,
instead of attempting to vindicate her honor,
by a reply to the charge, they had recourse to
an article in their inftruaions, which they had

' Anders. vol. iv. part ii. g9. " Id. ibiJ. i2.

formerly neglected to mention in its proper place. B 0 o I
They demanded an audience of Elizabeth; and v.
having renewed their Mistress's request, of a per. sssl.
fonalinterview, they pr6tefed, if that were denied
her, againf all the future proceedings of the commis-
fioners ". A protestation of this nature, offered just
at the critical time when such a bold accusation had
been preferred against Mary, and when the proofs
in support of it were ready to be examined, gave
reason to fufpet that /he dreaded the event of that
examination. This suspicion received the strongest
confirmation from another circumstance; Ross and
Herries, before they were introduced to Elizabeth,
in order to make this protestation, privately ac-
quainted Leicester and Cecil, that as their Miftrels
had, from the beginning, discovered an inclination
towards bringing the differences between herself and
her fubjefts to an amicable accommodation, so Ihe '
was fill desirous, notwithstanding the Regent's
audacious accusation, that they 1hould be terminated
in that manner ".

Such moderation seems hardly to be compatible
with the strong resentment which calumniated
innocence naturally feels; or with that eagerness
to vindicate itself, which it always discovers. In
alary's situation, an offer so ill-timed mult be con.
fidered as a confeflion of the weakness of her cause.
The known character of her commiflioners exempts
them from the imputation of folly, or the suspicion

" Anderson, vol. iv. part. ii. I3. I$8, &c.
" Ibid. 14. Cabbala, 1s7.

oo0 0 of treachery. Some secret conviction, that the
v. conduc of their Mistress could not bear so. ftri
*e. a scrutiny as must be made into it, if they Should

reply to the accusation preferred iry Murray against
her, seems to be the mos probable motive of this
imprudent propoal, by which they endeavoured
to avoid it.
a~ 4. It appeared in this light to Elizabeth, and afforded

her a pretence for rejeding it. She reprefentedto
·Mary's commissioners, that, in the present junc-
ture, nothing could be so dilbonorable to their
Mistress, as an accommodation; and that the matter
would seem to be huddled up in this manner,
merely to suppress discoveries, and to hide her
ibame; nor was it poflible that she could be ad.
nitted, with any decency, into her presence, while
fie lay under the infamy of such a public accusation.

Upon this repulfc, Mary's commissioners with'

drew; and as they had declined answering, there
seemed now to be no further reason for the Regent's
producing the proofs in support of his charge. But
without getting there into her hands, Elizabeth's
schemes were incomplete; and her artifice for this
purpose was as mean, but as successful, as any Ihe
had hitherto employed. She commanded her coa.
miflioners to testify her indignation and displeasure
at the Regent's presumption, in forgetting so far the
duty of a subjed, as to accuse his Sovereign of such
.atrocious crimes. He, in order to regain the good
opinion offuch a powerful protetrefs, offered to (how
that his. accusations were not malicious, nor ill-
grounded. Then were produced and lubmitted

to the infpelion of the English corrmnilfioners, the B o0 K
ads of the Scottifl Parliament in confirmation of v.
the Regent's authority, and of the Queen's refigna. .-s.
tion; the confessions of the persons executed for
the King's murder; and the fatal calket which
contained the letters, sonnets, and contracts, that
have been already mentioned.

As soon as Elizabeth got these into her poffeflion, Eligabeth
The laid them before her Privy Council, to which treats Mar
{he joined, on this occasion, several noblemen of rigor.
the greatest eminence in her kingdom; in order ltct-. is.
that they might have an opportunity of confidering
the mode in which an inquiry of such public im.
portance had been hitherto conduced, as well as
the amount of the evidence now brought against a
person who claimed a preferable right of fucceflion
to the Engli(h crown. In this refpetable assembly
all the proceedings in the conferences at York and
WVefminfer were reviewed, and the evidence pro.
duced by the Regent of Scotland against his Sove.
reign was examined with attention. In particular,
the letters and other papers laid to be written by
the Queen of Scots, were carefully compared " for
the manner of writing and orthography," with a
variety of letters which Elizabeth had received at
different times from the Scottish Queen; and, as
the result of a most accurate colledion, the members
of the Privy Council, and .noblemen conjoined
with them, declared that no difference between
these could be discovered ". Elizabeth, having

"Anderson, vol. iv. partii. 170, &c.

Boon efablilied a fad so unfavorable to her rival,

V.. began to lay aside the expreffiens of friendihip and

refrpeC which hIe had hitherto used in all her letten
to the Scottish Queen. She now wrote to her in fedi
terms, as if the presumptions of her guilt had
amounted to certainty; the blamed her for refuting
to vindicate herself from an accusation which could
not be left unanswered, without a manifest injury
to her cbaracter; and plainly intimated, that rilets
that were done, no change would be made in her
present situation ". She hoped that fich a discovery
of her sentiments would intimidate Mary, who was
hardly recovered from the hfock of the Regents
attack on her reputation, and force her to confini
her resignation of the Crown, to ratify Murray's
authority as Regent, and to consent that both bet.
self and her fonl fould reside in England, under
Englifl proteaion. This scheme Elizabeth had
much at heart; the proposed it both to Mary and to
her commiflioners, and neglected no argument, nor
artifice, that could poflibly recommend it. Mary
saw how fatal this would prove to her reputation,
to her pretensions, and even to her personal safety.
She rejected it without befitation. " Death, said Lhe,
" is less dreadful than such an ignominious tep.
a Rather than give away, with my own hands,
* the Crown which descended to me from my

ancestors, I will part with life; but the last word
B I utter, {hall be those of a Queen of Scotland"."

" Anders. voL iv. part ii. 179. 18;. Good. vol. ii. 26o.
" Haynes, 497. See App. N. XVII. Good. volii. 74. o01.

At the fame time Ihe seems to have been fen. B oo K

fible how open her reputation lay to censure, while v.
file fiffered such a public accusation to remain mSa.
unanswered; and though the conference was now
dilffolved, the empowered her commissioners to pre.
sent a reply to the allegations of her enemies, in
which Ihe denied, in the fIrongeft terms, the crimes
imputed to her; and recriminated upon the Regent Deocmb.; 4.
and his party, by accusing them of having divifed
and executed the murder of the King ". The
Regent and his associates asserted their innocence
with great warmth. Mary continued to infit on a
personal interview, a condition which The knew
would never be granted ". Elizabeth urged her
to vindicate her own honor. But it is evidentfrom
the delays, the evasions, and subterfuges, to which
both Queens had recourse by turns, that Mary
av6ided, and Elizabeth did not desire to make
any further progress in the inquiry.
The Regent was now impatient to return into 1s69.

Feb. %.

Scotland, where his adversaries were endeavour. Difmifrse
ing, in his absence, to raise some commotions. the Regent
Before he set out, he was called into the Privy withot i.
Council, to receive a final declaration of Eliza. proving or
beth's sentiments. Cecil acquainted him, in her condemning
name, that on one hand nothing had been ob. his onduc
jeede to his conduct, which Ihe could reckon
detrimental to his honor, or inconsistent with
his duty; nor had he, on the other hand, pro.
duced any thing against his Sovereign, on which
"Good. ii. 2gs. "Ibid. .81 Cabbala, 1.7.

oo 0 K The could found an unfavorable opinion of her
v. adions; and for this reason, the resolved to leave
str all the affairs of Scotland precisely in the fame

situation in which lTe had found them at the be.
ginning of the conference. The Queen's commit.
fioners were dismissed much in the fame manner".

After the attention of both nations had been

fixed so earneRly on this conference upwards of
four months, such a conclusion of the whole ap.
pears, at sirs fight, trifling and ridiculous. No.
thing, however, could be more favorable to

utftCr~ Elizabeth's future schemes. Notwithstanding her
s~. fecming impartiality, loe had no thoughts of con.

tinuing neuter; nor was Ibe at any loss on whom
to bestow her protection. Before the Regentleft
London, the supplied him with a considerable fun
of money, and engaged to support the Kings
authority to the utmost of her power ". Mary,
by her own condudt, fortified this resolution.
Enraged at the repeated infRances of Elizabeth's
artifice and deceit, which Ihe had discovered
during the progrefR of the conference, and det
npairing of ever obtaining any succour from her,
The endeavoured to rouse her own adherents in
Scotland to arms, by imputing such designs to
Elizabeth and Murray, as could not fail to in.
spire every Scotchman with indignation. Mor.
ray, The pretended, had agreed to convey the
Prince her son into England; to surrender to
Elizabeth the places of greatest strength in the

"Good.i ii 5 1113 . "l Ibid. a1. Carte, iii. 47?.

kingdom; and to acknowledge the dependence of B o o x
the Scottith upon the Englilh nation. in return for v.
this, Murray was to be declared the lawful heir of a69p.
the Crown of Scotland; and, at the fame time, the
question with regard to the English fuccelIion was
to be decided in favor of the Earl of Hartford, who
had promised to marry one of Cecil's daughters. An
account of these wild and chimerical projects was
spread indultrioufy among the Scots. Elizabeth,
perceiving it was calculated of purpose to bring her
government into difreputation, labored to destroy
its effects, by a counter-proclamation, and became
more disgusted than ever with the Scottish Queen ".

The Regent, on his return, found the kingdom Ebrk of
in the utmost tranquillity. But the rage of the Mary's a
Queen's adherents, which had been suspended in inutaim.
expectation that the conference in England would
terminate to her advantage, was now ready to
break out with all the violence of civil war.
They were encouraged, too, by the appearance
of a leader, whose high quality and pretensions
entitled him to great authority in the nation.
This was the Duke of Chatelherault, who had
resided for some years in France, and was now
sent over by that court, with a small supply of
money, in hopes that the presence of the first no
bleman in the kingdom would strengthen the
Queens party. Elizabeth had detained him in
England, for some months, under various pre.
tences, but was obliged at lalf to susser him to

"Haynes, soo. Sol. See Append. N'. XVIII

0oo K proceed on his journey. Before his departure,
v. Mary invested him with the high dignity of her
s69. Lieutenant General in Scotland , together with

Fch 2'. the fantastic title of her adopted father.
His yigo, The Regent did not give him time to form his
bt,, her party into any regular body. He assembled ad
pr. army, with his usual expedition, and marched to

Glasgow. The followers of Argyll and Huntly,
who composed the chief part of the Queen's fadion,
being feated in corners of the kingdom very diflant
from each other, and many of the Duke's depend.
ants having been killed or taken in the battle of
Langfide, the spirit and strength of his adherents
were totally broken, and an accommodation with
the Regent was the only thing which could prevent
the delruAion of his elate and vassals. This was
effeted without difficulty, and on no unreasonable
terms. The Duke promised to acknowledge the
authority both of the King and of the Regent; and
to claim no jurifdicion in confequeoce of the
cormitllon which be bad received from the
Queen. The Regent bound himself to repeal the
ad which had passed for attainting several of the
Queen's adherents; to reflore all who would fob-
mit to the King's government, to the poffeffiou
of their etates and honors; and to hold a Con-
vention, wherein all the differences between the
two parties Ihould be fettled by mutual confeat
The Duke gave holtages for his faithful perform.
ance of the treaty; and, in token of their fiice.
rity, he and Lord Herries accompanied the Re.
gent to Stirling, and visited the young King.

The

The Regent set at liberty the prisoners taken at B O O
Langlidc ". V.

Argyl arid Huntly refuted to be included in this 1x6,.
treity. A secret negociation was carrying on in
Engl.an, in favor of the captive Queen, witi so
much success, that her affairs began to wear a better
aspec, and her return into her own kingdom seemed
to be an event not very distant. The French King
had lately obtained such advantages over the uin
gonots, that the extincion of that party appeared
to be inevitable, and France, by recovering do.
medic tranquillity, would be no longer prevented
from proteting her friends in Britain. These .sir
cumflances not only influenced Argyll and Huntly,
but made so deep an impreflionon the Duke, that
he appeared to be wavering and irresolute., and
plainly discovered that he wilhed to evade. the na.
complinfinent of the treaty. The Regent saw the
danger of allowing the Duke to Ihake himfelfloofe,
in this manner, from his engagements; and instantly
formed a resolution equally bold and politic... He
commanded his guards to seize Chatelherault in:his
own house in Edinburgh, whither he had come
in order to attend the Convention agreed upon;
and, regardless either of his dignity as the first
nobleman in the kingdom, and next heir to the
Crown, or of the promises of personal security, on
which he had relied, committed him and Lord
Herries prisoners to the caftie of ' ;inburgh ". A
blow so fatal and unexpected dilpinted the party.

"Cabala, x16. Crawf. Mem. zo6. Ibid, inl.
Vlel. :o.L
VOL. IL M

a 00 K Argyll submitted to the King's government, and

v. made his peace with the Regent on very easy
ra9. terms; and Huntly, being left alone, was at las
April *6. obliged to lay down his arms.
j2i, :s. Soon after, Lord Boyd returned into Scotland,
A prporfl and brought letters to the Regent, both from the
u^n r- Englilh and Scottilb Queens. A convention was
jitteL held at Perth, in order to confider them. Eliza.

beth's letter contained three different proposals
with regard to Mary; that she should either be
restored to the full pofleffion of her former author.
itv; or be admitted to reign jointly with the
King her son; or at least be allowed to reside in
Scotland, in some decent retirement, without any
{hare in the administration of government. Thef
bvertures were extorted by the importunity of Fe.
nelon the French Ambassador, and have some ap
pearance of being favorable to the captive Queen.
They were, however, perfealy suitable to Eliza
beth's general system with regard to Scottilb affairs
Among propositions so unequal and difproporti
onate,' he easily saw where the choice would fall
The two former were rejected; and long delays
mud neceflarily have intervened, and many diffi
culties have arisen, before every circumstance rela
tive to the last could be finally adjusted ".

Mary, in her letter, demanded that her mar

riage with Bothwell should be reviewed by th
proper judges, and if found invalid, Thould b
dissolved by a legal sentence of divorce. lh

" Spotfw. o30.

fatnl marriage was the principal source of all the B o
calim.itires ne h'ad endured for two years; a di - v.
vlrcc was the only thing which could repair the s'5s.
iniurics her reputation had suffered by that ftep.
It was her interest to have proposed it early, and
it i not easy to account for her long silence with
r(f)ect to this point. Her particular motive for Worfolk's

fbheme for

proporing it, at this time, began to be so well m,,arrtin
knowI1, that the demand was rejeaed by the Con. the (ienO
veunon of estates ". They imputed it not so much of Scot.
to any abhorrence of Bothwell, as to her eagerness
to conclude a marriage with the Duke of Norfolk.

1 his marriage was the object of that secret ne-
tociation in England, which we have already men-
tioned. The fertile and projeting genius of
i\laitland firfl conceived this scheme. During
the Conference at York , he communicated it to
the Duke himself, and to the Rilhop of Ross.
The former readily closed with a scheme so flat-
tering to his ambition. The latter confidered it
as a probable device for restoring his Miflrefs to
lliberty, and replacing her on her throne. Nor
was Mary, with whom Norfolk held a corre-
fpondence by means of his sifter, Lady Scroop,
averse from a measure, which would have re.
florrl her to her kingdom with so much fplen.
dor". The sudden removal of the Conference

" SponfTv. 2 1. In a Privy Council, held July o, i 69, this
demiad was confidered; and, of fifty-one members present,
oll fcvln ioted to comply with the Queen's request. Re.
tords Pnrv. Counc. AIS. in the Lyon Office, p. 148.
"Camd. 419. Haynes, (73. State Trials, i. 73.

Ma

o or from York to Weflminftcr suspended, but did
v. . not break off this intrigue. Maitland and Robs
ais were still the Duke's prompters, and his agents,

and many letters and love-tokens were exchanged
between him and the Queen of Scots.

Coana it But as he could not hope, that under an ad.
. ti ministration so vigilant as Elizabeth's, such an

intrigue could be kept long concealed, he attempted
to deceive her by the appearance of openness and
candor, an artifice which seldom fails of success.
He mentioned to her the rumor which was spread
of his marriage with the Scottifi Queen; he corn.
plained of it as a groundless calumny; and dif
claimed all thoughts of that kind, with many ex.
pressions full of contempt both for Mary's charater
and dominions. Jealous as Elizabeth was of every
thing relative to the Queen of Scots , fle seems
to have credited these professions ". But, inflead
of discontinuing the negociation, he renewed it
with greater vigor, and admitted into it new aflo.
ciates. Among there was the Regent of Scotland.
He had given great offence to Norfolk, by his public
accusation of the Queen, in breach of the concert
into which he had entered at York. He was then
ready to return into Scotland. The influence of the
Duke, in the North of England, was great. The
Earls of Northumberland and Westmorland, The
moR powerful noblemen in that part of the king.
dom, threatened to revenge upon the Regent the
injuries which he had done his Sovereign. Murray,

" Haynes, 574. 'State Trials, 1. 79, 80.

in order to fccure a fife return into Scotland, ad. B o o K
tdrefred himself to Norfolk, and after some apology v.
fr his p.ift conduct, he inlinuated that the Duke's IS69
fcicme of mirrying the Queen his filler was no
les acceptable to him, than benelicial to both
kingdoms; and that he would concur with the
utmolt ardor in promoting so defirtable an event".
Noifolk heard him with the credulity natural to
those who are pallinnaitely bent upon any dqfign.
He wrote to the two Earls to deffit from any
hostile attempt against Murray: and to that he
owed his paflfge through the Northern counties
without diflurbance.

Encouraged by his success in gaining the Regent, Gtils hbe
he next attempted to draw the Englifl nobles to Co'"net ot

the English

approve his design. The nation began to defpairof noblts.
Hilzabeth's marrying. Herjealoufy kept the question
with regard to the right of fucceflion undecided.
The memory of the civil wars, which had desolated
En 2and for more than a century, on account of the
disputed titles of the houses of York and Lancafler,
w, frill recent. Almost all the ancient nobility had
periflcd, and the nation itself had been brought to
the brink ofdeftrution in that unhappy contest. The
Scottifl Queen, though her right of fuccefflion was
gener3lly held to be undoubted, might meet with
formidable competitors. She might marry a foreign
and a Popifl Prince, and bring both liberty and
reigion into danger. But, by marrying her to an
Eegliliman, a zealous Protestant, the most powerful

"Andcrf. iii. 34.

M3

Bso 0 and most univcrfAlly beloved as all the nobles, an

v. effetual remedy seemed to be provided againf all
1569. these evils. The greater part of the Peers, either

dircdly or tacitly, approved of it, as a salutary
piolrje The Earls of Arundel, Pembroke, Lei.
cefter, and Lord Lumley, subscribed a letter to
the S:ottilh Queen, written with Leicester's hand,
in which they warmly recommended the match,
but infitled, by way of preliminary, on Mary's
promise, that (he should attempt nothing, in con.
fcquence of her pretensions to the English Crown,
prejudicial to Flizabeth, or to her poterity; that
flit fbh uld consent to a league, offensive and defen.
five, betwten the two kingdoms; that Ibe bhould
confirm the present establishment of religion in
Scotland; and receive into favor such of her sub.
jecs as had appeared in arms against her. Upon
hir agreeing to the marriage, and ratifying these
articlks, they engaged that the English nobles
would not only concur in restoring her immediately
to her own throne, but in securing to her that of
England in reversion. Mary readily contented to
all there proposals, except the second, with regard
to which (he demanded some time for confuking
her ancient ally the French King . '.

'he whole of this negociation was industriously

concealed from Elizabeth. Her jealousy of the
Scottif i Queen was well known, nor could it be
expeced that fie would willingly come into a
measure, which tended so visibly to save the

"' Anders. vol. iii. Sr. Camd. 420.

reputation, and to increase the power of her rival. Bu o K
But, in a matter of so much consequence to the v.
nation, the taking a few steps without her know- S6s
ledge could hardly be reckoned criminal; and while
eery person concerned, even Mary and Norfolk
tlhemfelves, declared that nothing flould be con-
cluded without obtaining her consent, the duty
and allegiance of fubjedts seemed to be fully. pre.
served. The greater part of the nobles regarded the
matter in this light. Those who conducted the
intrigue, had farther and more dangerous views.
They saw the advantages which Mary would
obtain by this treaty, to be present and certain; and
the execution of the promises which The came under,
to be difiant and uncertain. T'hey had early com-
municated their scheme to the Kings of France and
Spain, and obtained their approbation '. A treaty
concerning which they consulted foreign Princes,
while they concealed it from their own Sovereign,
could not be deemed innocent. They hoped,
however, that the union of such a number of the
chief persons in the kingdom would render it
necessary for Elizabeth to comply; they flattered
themselves that a combination so firong would
be altogether irresistible; and such was their
confidence of success, that when a plan was con-
certed in the North of England for rescuing
PNary out of the hands of her keepers, Norfolk,
who was afraid that if she recovered her liberty,
her sentiments in his favor might change, used

'l Anders. vol. iii. 6;.

M4

BOOK all his interest to dissuade the conspirators from

V. attempting it".
Is9. In this situation did the affair remain, when Lord

Boyd arrived from England; and, besides the
letters which he produced publicly, brought others
in cyphers from Norfolk and Trokmorton to the
Regent, and to Maitland. These were full of the
molt sanguine hopes. All the nobles of England
concurred, laid they, in favoring the design. Every
preliminary was adjusted; nor was it possible that
a scheme so deep laid, conducted with so much
art, and supported both by power and by numbers,
could miscarry, or be defeated in the execution.
Nothing now was wanting, but the concluding
ceremony. It depended on the Regent to haften
that, by procuring a sentence of divorce, which
would remove the only obstacle that flood in the
way. This was expeced of his promise to Nor.
folk; and if he regarded either his interest or his
fame, or even his safety, he would not fail to
fulfil these engagements '.

But the Regent was now in very different cir.

cumftances from those which had formerly in.
duced him to asset an approbation of Norfolk's
schemes. He saw that the downfal of his own
power muff be the first consequence of the Duke's
success; and if the Queen, who confidered him
as the chief author of all her misfortunes, Ihould
recover her ancient authority, he could never

" Camd. $:o. Haynes, $zo. SpotC. 2;o. See
Arr!nd. N*. XIX.

expect faor, nor scarce hope for impunity. No B o oK
wonder he declined a Itep so fatal to himself, and v.
which would have eltablilhed the grandeur of 'r69.
another on the ruins of his own. This refusal oc-
cafioned a delay. But, as every other circumstance
was fettled, the Bilhop of Ross, in name of his
lMinrefs, and the Duke, in person, declared, in
pretence of the French Ambassador, their mutual
consent to the marriage, and a contrac to this
purpore was signed, and intrusted to the keeping
of the Ambassador '°.
1 he intrigue was now in so many hands, that Augur,3.

Flizabeth

it could not long remain a secret. It began to be dircovert the
wliifpered at court; and Elizabeth calling the Dke's de.
Duke into her presence , expressed the utmost sg,a
indignation at his condu&t, and charged him to lay
aside all thoughts of prosecuting such a dangerous
design. Soon after Leicefler, who perhaps had coun-
tenanced the projec with no other intention, revealed
all the circumstances of it to the Queen. Pembroke,
Arundel, Lumley, and Throkmorton, were confined
and examined. Mary was watched more narrowly
than ever; and Hastings Earl of Huntingdon, who
pretended to dispute with the Scottifl Queen her right
to the succession, being joined in commiflion with
Shrewfhlry, rendered her imprisonment more into-
lerable, by the excess of his violence and rigor "
TheScottifh Regen, threatened with Eizabeth's dif-
pleafurc, meanly betrayed the Duke; put his letters
into her hands; and furnilhed all the intelligence in
"'Carte, vol. iii. 486. ' Haynes, z, a6. 5)o. S)2.

B 0 0 his power ". The Duke himself retired first to

v. Howard-Houfe, and then, in contempt of the fum.
16t. moln to appear before the Privy Council, fled to

his feat in Nnrfolk. Intimidated by the imprison.
ment of his associates; coldly received by his friends
in that county; unprepared for a rebellion; and
unwilling perhaps to rebel; he hesitated for some
days, and at last obeyed a second call, and re.
SL s. paired to Windsor. He was first kept as a prisoner

in a private house, and then sent to the Tower.
After being confined there upwards of nine months,
he was released upon his humble fubmifflon to
Elizabeth, giving her a promise, on his allegiance,
to hold no farther correspondence '.ith the Queen
of Scots '". During the progress of Norfolk's
negociations, the Queen's partisans in Scotland,
who made no doubt of their ifluing in her refto
ration to the throne, with an increase of authority,

Manud were wonderfully elevated. Maitland was the foul
i^plrote° of that party, and the person whose ativity and

Lt. ability the Regent chiefly dreaded. He had laid

the plan of that intrigue which had kindled such
combustion in England. He continued to so-
ment the spirit of difaffedion in Scotland, and
had seduced from the Regent Lord Home,
Kirkaldy, and several of his former associates.
While he enjoyed liberty, the Regent could not
reckon his own power secure. For this reason,
having by an artifice allured Maitland to Stir.
ling, he employed Captain Crawfurd, one of his

" See Append. No. XX. '" Haynes, 525. $97.

creatures, to accuse him of being accessory to the B o o t
rntur(!cr of the King; and under that pretence he v.
v.i ,,rrelied and carried as a prisoner to Edinburgh. 1"69.
he would (oon have been brought to trial, but
wv,L faLed by the frielndflip of Kirkaldy, Governor
of the cafle, who, by pretending a warrant for
th t purpose from the Regent, got him out of the
hands of the person to whose care he was committed,
and codudled him into the castle, which from that
time was entirely under M.litland's command "'.
'he los. of a pl.ce of so much importance, and
the defection of a man so eminent for military Ikill as
Kirkaldv, brought the Regent into some difreputa.
tion, for which, however, the fuccefi of his ally
Eliz.lbeth, about this time, abundantly compensated.

The intrigue carried on for restoring the Scot- A ,btllias
tilh Queen to liberty having been discovered, and "ai""f Eli
difippointed, an attempt was made, to the fame arys d.
purpose, by force of arms; but the issue of it herens.
was not more fortunate. The Earls of Nor-
thumberland and WeRmorland, though little
diftinguifled by their personal abilities, were
two of the most ancient and powerful of the
Eighlflt Peers. Their eltates in the northern
counties were great, and they possessed that in-
tlucce over the inhabitants, which was heredi.
tary in the popular and martial families of Percy
and of Nevil.. They were both attached to the
Popifli religion, and discontented with the court,
where new men and a new system prevailed.

'" Spotfw. 2 2.

B o o x Ever since Mary's arrival in England, they had

v. warmly espoused her interest, and zeal for Popery;
5S09. opposition to the court, and commiseration of her

sufferings, had engaged them in different plots for
her relief. NotwithRanding the vigilance of her
keepers, they held a close correspondence with
her, and communicated to her all their designs "'.
They were privy to Norfolk's schemes; but the
caution with which he proceeded did not suit their
ardor and impetuosity. The liberty of the Scottisb
Queen was not their sole object They aimed at
bringing about a' change in the religion, and a
revolution in the government of the kingdom.
For this reason they filicited the aid of the King
of Spain, the avowed and zealous patron of Popery
in that age. Nothing could be more delightful to
the restless spirit of Philip, or more necessary
towards facilitating his schemes in the Netherlands,
than the involving England in the confusion and
miseries of a civil war. The Duke of Alva, by
his direction, encouraged the two Earls, and pro.
mifed, as soon as they either took the field with
their forces, or surprised any place of strength, or
rescued the Queen of Scots, that he would sup.
ply them both with money and a firong body of
troops. La Mothe, the Governor of Dunkirk,
in the disguise of a sailor, founded the ports
where it would the most proper to land. And
Chiapini Vitelli, one of Alva's ablest officers, was
dispatched into England, on pretence of fettling

"' Haynes, s9(. Murdin, 44. 62, &c.

some commercial differences between the two na- B 9 K
tions; but in reality, that the rebels might be,fure v.
of a leader of experience, as soon as they ventured "65.
to take arms

The conduct of this negociation occasioned Deeated.
many meetings and messages between the two
Earls. Elizabeth was informed of these; and
though fle furpeded nothing of their real design,
she concluded that they were among the number
of Norto'k's confidents. They were summoned,
for this reason, to repair to court. Conscious of
guilt, and afraid of discovery, they delayed giving
obedience. A second, and more peremptory order
wa, iffied. This they could not decline, without
shaking off their allegiance; and as no time was No.. 9:
left for deliberation, they instantly ereaed their
standard againfl their sovereign. The re-eftablifiing
the Catholic religion; the fettling the order of fuc-
cellinn to the Crown; the defence of the ancient
nobility; were the motives which they alledged to
justify their rebellion '". Many of the lower people
flocked to them with such arms as they could pro-
cure; and had the capacity of the leaders been, in
any degree, equal to the enterprise, it mull have
soon grown to be extremely formidable. Elizabeth
aced with prudence and vigor; and was served
by her fubjeds with fidelity and ardor. On
the first rumor of an infurredion, Mary was re-
moved to Coventry, a place of strength, which

"Carte, vol. iii. 4R9, 490. Camd. 421.
' StrYpe, vol.. i. 47.

o 0O could not be taken without a regular siege; a
v. detachment of the rebels, which was sent to
rwrc rcfcue her, returned without success. Ir ops

were assembled in diffetent parts of the kingdom;
as they advanced, the malecontents retired. In
their retreat their numbers dwindle. away, and their
spirits funk Despair and uncertainty whither to
diret their flight, kept together for some time a small
body of them among the mountains of Noithumber.
land; but they were at length obliged to disperse
and the chiefs took refuge among the Scottilh
D. it. borderers. The two Earls, together with the

Countess of Northumberland, wandering for some
days in the wares of Liddifdale, were plundered
by the banditti, exposed to the rigor of the season,
and left destitute of the necessaries of life. Weft.
morland was concealed by Scot of Buccleugh
and Ker of Fernihcrft, and afterwards conveyed
into the Netherlands. Northumberland was seized
by the Regent, who had marched with some
troops towards the borders, to prevent any in-
preflion the rebels might make on those mutinous
provinces "'.

c~di ac Amidst so many surprising events, the affairs
him of the church, for two years, have almost escaped

our notice. Its general Assemblies were held
regularly; but no business of much importance
employed their attention. As the number of
the Protestant clergy daily increased, the de-
ficiency of the funds, set apart for their

' Cabala, 171. Camd. 422.

fubfiltence, became greater, and was more sensibly B o o
felt. Many efforts were made towards recovering v.
the ancient patrimony of the church, or at least as ars9.
much of it as was possesed by the Popish incumbents,
a race of men, whowere, now, not only useless,
but burdensome to the nation. But though the
manner in which the Regent received tbead dresses
and complaints of the General Assemblies, was very
different from that to which they had been accuftoni-
ed, no effedual remedy was provided; and while
they luffered intolerable opprefflon, and groaned
under extreme poverty, fair words, and liberal
promises, were all they were able to obtain '".

Elizabeth now began to be weary of keeping ro.
such a prisoner as the Queen of Scots. During reoibeth

resolves to

the former year, the tranquillity of her govern give up
ment had been disturbed, sirs by a secret combi. Marytote
nation of some of her nobles, then by the rebel. BX v"
lion of others; and The often declared, not with-
out reason, that Mary was the hidden cause of
both. Many of her own fubjeds favored, or
pitied the captive Queen; the Roman Catholic
Princes on the continent were warmly interested
in her cause. The detaining 'her any longer in
England, Ihe foresaw, would be made the pretext
or occasion of perpetual cabals and infurredlions
among the former; and might expose her to the
hostile attempts of the latter. She resolved, there-
fore, to give up Mary into the hands of the Re.
gent, after stipulating with him, not only that her

sII Cald vol, ii. 8o, &nt

j 00 K days piould not be cut Ihort, either by a judicial

v. sentence or by secret violence, but that Ibe Ihould
zro7 be treated in a manner suited to her rank; and,

in order to secure his observance of this, Ihe re.
quired that fix of the chief noblemen in the
kingdom fliould be sent into England as hof
tages "'. With refpet to the safe custody of the
Queen, lhe relied on Murray's vigilance, whose
ecurity, no less than her own, depended on pre.
venting Mary from re-afcending the throne. The
negociation for this purpose was carried some
length, when it was discovered by the vigilance
of the Bilhop of Ross, who, together with the
French and Spanish Ambassadors, remontratcd
againlt the infamy of such an action;; and repre.
kented the surrendering the Queen to her rebellious
fubjeds, to be the fame thing, as if Elizabeth flould,
by her own authority, condemn her to instant death.
This procured a delay; and the murderof the Regent
prevented the revival of that dcfign "'.

s.th Hamilton of Bothwellhaugh :was the person
M*.d're. who committed this barbarous acion. He had

been condemned to death soon after the battle of
Langfide, as we have already related, and owed
his life to the Regent's clemency.. But part of
his estate had been beflowed upon one of the
Regent's favorites, who seized his house, and
turned out his wife naked, in a cold night, into
the open fields, where, before net morning, g!e

" Haynes, 524. "' Carte, voL . 491. o1dAnL
tóL iii. S4.

became

became furiously mad. This injury made a deeper B o o K
iniprellinn upon him than the benefit which he v.
h.id received, and from that moment he vowe4d *so.
to be revenged upon the Regent. Party. rage
filengthened and inflamed his private refentmenr.
His klifmen the Hamiltons applauded the enter.
prise. The maxims of that age juflified the molt
desperate course which he could take to obtain
vengeance. He followed the Regent for some time,
and watched for an opportunity to ftike the
blow. He resolved at lal to wait till his enemy
flould arrive at Linlthgow, through which he
was to pass in his way from Stirling to Edinburgh.
He took his fland in a wooden gallery, which
had a window towards the fireet; spread a feather-
bed on the floor, to hinder the noise of his feet
from being heard; hung up a black cloth behind
him, that his shadow might not be observed
from without; and after all this preparation;,
calmly expected the Regent's approach, who had
lodged during the night in a part of the town not
fir diflant. Some indiftind information o, the
danger which threatened him had been conveyed
to the Regent, and he paid so much regard to it,
that he resolved to return by the fame gate through
which he had entered; and to fetch a compass
round the town. But as the crowd about the
gate was great, and he himself unacquainted with
fear, he proceeded directly along the freet; and
the throng of the people obliging him to move
very slowly, gave the affaflfn time to take so
true an aim, that he lhot him with a finglo

VOL. 11. N

-B OoK bullet through the lower part of his belly,'and

T. killed the horse of a gentleman who rode on his

' other fide. -His followers instantly endeavoured to

break into the house whence the blow had come,
but they found the door frongly barricaded; and
before it could be forced open, Hamilton had
mounted a fleet horse, which pfood ready for
him at a back-paffage, and was got far beyond
their reach. The Regent died the fame night of
his wound "'

His cr. 'There is no person, in that age, about whom
tar 'historians have been more divided, or whose

charader has been drawn with such opposite
'colors. Personal intrepidity, military fill, saga.
city and vigor'in the administration of civil assais,
are virtues, which even his enemies allow him to
tave poffefled in an eminent degree. His moral
qualities are more dubious, and ought neither to
bti praised, nor censured, without great reserve,
and many diflindions. In a fierce age, he was
capable of using victory with humanity, and
'of treating the vanquished with moderation. A
'patron of learning, which, among martial nobles,
'was either unknown, or despised. Zealous for
religion, to a degree which diftinguilled him,
'even at a time when profeflions of that kind
were not uncommon. His confidence in his
friends was extreme, and inferior only to his
liberality towards them, which knew no bound&

"' Bucban. 185. Crawf. Mem. 124. Cabala, 171.

A disinterested paflion for the liberty of his coun- B 0 0 K
try, prompted him to oppose the pernicious v.
fvRem, whikh the Princes of Lorrain had obliged soo.
the (uteei mother to purfle. On Mary's return
into Scotland, he served her with a zeal and
affecion, to which he sacrificed the friendship
of those who were most attached to his person.
Btrt, on the other hand, his ambition was immo.
derate; and events happened that opened to
hinm val projecs, which allured his enterprising
genius, and led him to adions inconsistent with
the duty of a subjet. His treatment of the
Qecn , to whose bounty he was so much
indebted, was unbrotherly and ungrateful. The
dependence on Elizabeth, under which he brought
Scotl.nd, was disgraceful to the nation. He
deceived and betrayed Norfolk with a baseness
unworthy of a man of honor. His elevation to
filch unexpected dignity inspired him with new
pallions, with haughtiness and reserve;' and in-
flad of his natural manner, which was blunt
and open, he affeated the arts of dilfimulation
and refinement. Fond, towards the end of his
life, of flattery, and impatient of advice, his
creatures, by soothing his vanity, led him astray,
while his ancient friends Rood at a distance,
and predicted his approaching fall. But, amidst
the turbulence and confusion of that factious
period, he dispensed justice with so much impar-
tiality, he repressed the licentious borderers
with so much courage, and eitablified such

N»

0o o K uncommon order and tranquillity in the Country,
v. that his administration was extremely popular,
itm and be Iwas long and affedionately remembered

among the commons, by the name of the God
Syas"

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK VI.

THE
HISTORY

o r
SCOTLAN D.

BOOK VI.

THE unexpeded blow, by which the Regent
was cut off, struck the King's party with the BOOK
utmost consternation. Elizabeth bewailed his death VL
as the most fatal disaster which could have befallen "70.

Disordm

her kingdom; and was inconsolable to a degree ociaoand
that little suited her dignity. Mary's adherents by the Re.
exulted, as if, now, her reforation were not t"t' death.
only certain, but near at hand. The infamy of
the crime naturally fell on those who expressed
fiich indecent joy at the commifion of it; and as
the affallin made his escape on a horse which
belonged to Lord Claud Hamilton, and fled
diretdly to Hamilton, where he was received in
triumph, it was concluded that the Regent had
fllen a sacrifice to the resentment of the Queen's
party, rather than to the revenge of a private
man. On the day after the murder, Scot of
Buccleugh, and Ker of Ferniherft, both zealous
abettors of the Queen's cause, entered England
il a hostile manner, and plundered and burnt the
country, the inhabitants of which expected no

N3

a 0 0 x such outrage. If the Regent had been alive, they

vi. would scarce have venturel o, such an irregular
"*s. incursion, nor could it well have happened so

soon after his death, unless they had been privy
to the crime.

This was not the only irregularity to which the

anarchy that followed the Regent's death gave
occasion During such general confusion, men
hoped for universal Impunity, and broke out into
excesses of every kind. As it was impossible to
restrain these, without a fettled form of govern.
ment,; a Convention of the nobles was held, in

Stru tak.c order to deliberate concerning the election of a
t,.ia. Regent. The Queen's adherents refused to be
another present at the meeting, and protested against its
Feb. t, proceedings. The King's own party was irresolute,

and divided in opinion. Maitland, whom Kirkaldy
had set at liberty, and who obtained from the
nobles then assembled a declaration acquitting him
of the crime which had been laid. to his charge,
endeavoured to bring about a coalition of the two
parties, by proposing to admit the Queen to the
joint administration of government with her ton.
Elizabeth adhering to her ancient system with
regard to Sccttiub affairs, labored, notwichftanding
the solicitations of Mary's friends ', to multiply,
and to perpetuate the factions, which tore in
pieces the kingdom. Randolph, whom she dif.
patched into Scotland on the firfl news of the
Regent's death, and who was her usual agenl

See Appendix, N'. XXI.

for filch services, found all parties so exasperated B o o
by mutual injuries, and so full of irreconcileable vl.
rancor, that it cost him little trouble to inflame 170.
their animosity The Convention broke up without
coming to any agreement; and a new meeting,
to which the nobles of all parties were invited,
was appointed on the first of May '.

Meanwhile, Maitland and Kirkaldy, who still A coalition
continued to acknowledge the K'ing's authority, of parie

attempted

were at the utmost pains to restore some degree of in vain.
harmony among their countrymen. They procured
for this purpose, an amicable conference among
the leaders of the two fadions. But while the one
demanded the restoration of the Queen, as the
only thing which could re-establish the public
tranquillity; while the other esteemed the King's
authority to be so sacred, that it was, on no
account, to be called in question or impaired; and
neither of them would recede in the least point
from their opinions, they separated without any
profped of concord. Both were rendered more
averse from reconcilement, by the hope of foreign
aid. An envoy arrived from France with promises
of powerful succour to the Queen's adherents; and
as the civil wars in that kingdom seemed to be
on the point of terminating in peace, it was
expected that Charles would soon be at liberty to
fulfil what he promised. On the other hand, the
Earl of Suffex was assembling a powerful army
on the borders, and its operations could not
'Crawf. Mem. x;i. Calderw. ii. 17.

N4

j o0 fail of adding spirit and strength to the Kin'i

vI. party '
t-". Though the attempt towards a coalition of the

i'r, t* . fsdip ns proved ineffctual, it contributed some.
·ofe utrbc. what to moderate, or suspend their rage; but

they soon began to al with their usual violence.
Morton. the most vigilant and able leader on the
King's fide, solicited Elizabeth to interpose, with.
out dtlay, for the safety of a party, so devoted
to her interelt, and which flood so much in need
Fipl :1. of her afiftance. Tlhe Chiefs of the Queen's fation,

assembling at Linlithgow, marched thence to
Edinburgh; and Kirkaidy, who was both Gover.
nor of the Castle and Provost of the town, pre.
vailed on the citizens, though with some difficulty,
to admit them within the gates. Together with
Kirkaldy, the Earl of Athole, and Maitland, ac.
ceded almost openly to their party; and the Duke
and Lord Herries. having recovered liberty by
Kirkaldy's favor, resumed the places which they
had formerly held in their councils. Fncouraged
by the acquisition of persons, so illustrious by
their birth, or so eminent for their abilities, they
publilhed a proclamation, declaring their intention
to support the Queen's authority, and seemed
resolved not to leave the city before the meeting
of the approaching Convention, in which, by
their numbers and influence, they did not doubt
of securing a majority of voices on their fide .

' Crawf Mem. *14. S E V
Ibid. 17. Calderw. i. 176. tt

i!.',.~ I,:

At the fame time, they had formed a design of B 0 0
kindling a war between the two kingdoms. If they vl
could engage them in hostilities, and revive their ',7

*j * *. .i , ~

i Endeavour

ancient emulation and antipathy, they hoped, not to iavul.e
only to dissolve a confederacy of great advantage the nation im
to the King's cause, but to reconcile their country- .',,wawit
men to the Queen. Elizabeth's natural and most
dangerous rival. With this view, they had, imme-
diately after the murder of the Regent, prompted
Scot and Ker to comrmence hoflilities, and had
since instigated them to continue and extend their
depredations. As Elizabeth foreraw, on the one
hand, the dangerous consequences of rendering this
a national quarrel; and resolved, on the other,
not to susser such an insult on her government to
pdfi with impunity; lhe issued a proclamation,
declaring that Ihe imputed the outrages which had
been committed on the borders, riot to the Scottiib
nation, but to a few desperate and ill- designing
persons; that-, with the former, (he was resolved
to maintain an inviolable friendfbip, whereas the
duty which The owed to her own fubjets obliged
her to chastise the licentiousness of the latter'.
Suffex and Scroop, accordingly, entered Scotland,
the one on the east, the other on the weft borders,
and laid waste the adjacent countries with fire and
sword'. Fame magnified the number and progress
of their troops, and Mary's adherents, not think-
ing themselves safe in Edinburgh, the inhabitants
whereof were ill affeded to their cause, retired to

Calderw. ii. 81. Cabala, 74.

B O K Linlithgow. There, by a public proclamation,

vs. they asserted the Queen's authority, and sorbad
3" -. giving obedience to any, but the Duke, or the

Earls of Argyll and Huntly, whom (he had confti.
tuted her Lieutenants in the kingdom.

Riat p" The nobles who continued faithful to the King,
St"LE ' though considerably weaker.ed by the defecion of

May L so many of their friends, assembled at Edinburgh

on the day appointed. They issued a counter.
proclamation, declaring fych as appeared for the
Queen, enemies of their country; and charging
them with the murder both of the late King and
of the Regent. They could not, however, presume
so much on their own strength as to venture
either to eled a Regent, or to take the field against
the Queen's party; but the afliftance which they
received from Elizabeth, enabled them to do both.
By her order, Sir William Drury marched into
Scotland, with a thousand foot and three hundred
horse; the King's adherents joined him with a
considerable body of troops: and advancing towards
Glasgow, where the adverse party had already
begun hostilities by attacking the castle, they
forced them to retire, plundered the neighbouring
country, which belonged to'the Hamiltons, and,
after seizing some of their castles, and rafing
others, returned to Edinburgh.

sim4 otf Under Drury's protection, the Earl of Lenox

E'izabetb's
cord. with returned into Scotland. It was natural to commit
eprd to the government of the kingdom to him, during
&tBL the minority of his grandson. His illustrious birth,

and alliance with the royal family of England, as

well as of Scotland, rendered him worthy of that Bo o !
honor. His refentmelnt againlt Mary being impla- vl.
cable, and his estate lying in England. and'his '570.
family residing there, Elizabeth confidered him as
a man who, both from inclination and from interest,
would at in concert with her, and ardently
wished that he mightfucceed Murray in the office
of Regent But, on many accounts, ffe did not
think it prudent to discover her own fenriments,
or to favor his pretensions too openly. The civil
wars in France, which had been excited by a
pretended zeal for religion. and carried on with a
tiercenefs that dlid it real dishonor, appeared now
to be on the point of coming to an issue; and
after fieddling the best blood, and walling the
richest provinces in the kingdom, both parties
dfired peace with an ardor that facilitated the
negociations which were carrying on for that pur.
pose. Charles IX. was known to be a passionate
admirer of Mary's beauty. Nor could he, in
honor, susser a Queer? of France, and the mos
ancient ally of his crown, to languilh in her pre.
sent cruel situation, without attempting to procure
her relief. He had, hitherto, been obliged to
satisfy himself with remonstrating, by his ambaffa.
dors, against the indignity with which Ihe had
been treated. But if he were once at full liberty
to puifue his inclinations, Elizabeth would have
every thing to dread from the impetuosity of his
temper, and the power of his arms. It therefore
became necessary for her to aft with some reserve,
and not to appear, avowedly, to countenance

o ox the choice of a Regent, in contempt of Mary's
vl. authority. The jealousy and prejudices of the
ass. Scots required no less management. Had the openly

supported Lenox's claim; had she recommended
him to the Convention, as the candidate of whom
{be approved; this might have roused the inde.
pendent spirit of the nobles, and by too plain a
discovery of her intention, the might have defeated
its fucce&s For there reasons, The hesitated long,
and returned ambiguous answers to all the mefllges
which the received from the King's party. A more
explicit declaration of her sentiments was at las
obtained, and an event of an extraordinary nature
seems to have been the occasion of it. Pope Pius V.
having issued a bull, whereby he excommunicated
Elizabeth, deprived her of her kingdom, and
absolved her fubjeds from their oath of allegiance,
Felton, an Englihiman, had the boldness to fix
it on the gates of the Bilhop of London's palace.
In former ages, a Pope, moved by his own
ambition, or pride, or bigotry, denounced this
fatal sentence against the moRs powerful monarchs;
but as the authority of the court of Rome was
now lets regarded, its proceedings were more
cautious; and it was only when they were roused
by some powerful Prince, that the thunders of
the church were ever beard. Elizabeth, therefore,
imputed this ftep, which the Pope bad taken, to
a combination of the Roman Catholic Princes
against her, and fufpeted that some plot was
formed in favor of the Scottilb Queen. In that
event, The knew that the safety of her own kingdom

depended on preserving her influence in Scotland; B O O X
and in order to ftrengthcn this, she renewed her vl.
promises of protecting the King's adherents, en. 'a 7
couraged them to proceed to the eletion of a
Regent, and even ventured to point out the Earl
of Lenox, as the person who had the belt title.
That honor was accordingly conferred upon him,
in a Convention of the whole party, held on the
12th of July'.

The Regent's first care was to prevent the meet- Le.ox *ite
ing of the Parliament, which the Queen's party ed BeR',
had summoned to convene at Linlithgow. Having.
effeded that, he marched against the Ea(l of
Buntly, Mary's Lieutenant in the North, anmd
forced the garrison which he had placed in Brechin,
to surrender at discretion. Soon after, he made
himself master of some other carles. Emboldened
by this successful beginning of his adminiRfration,
as well as by the appearance of a considerable
army, with which the Earl of Suffex hovered on
the borders, he deprived Maitland of his office of
Secretary, and proclaimed him, the Duke, Huntly,
and other leaders of the Queen's party, traitors
and enemies of their country '.

In this desperate Situation of their affairs, the Marye'sde.
Queen's adherents had recourse to the King of rte t goei
Spain', with whom Mary had held a close corre. spai.
fpondence ever since her confinement in England.

Spotwf 4.

240. Cald.ii. s86. See Appnd. N'. XXI.

Crawf. Mem. s59. Cald. ii 195.
'See Append. N. XXIII.

0 o They prevailed on the Duke of Alva to fend two
vT. of his officers to take a view of the country, and

to examine its coasts and harbours; and obtained
from him a small supply of money and arms, which
were sent to the Earl of Huntly ". But this aid,
so disproportionate to their exigencies, would have

miabets availed them littler lThey were indebted for their
PtoCp~ safety to a treaty. which Elizabeth was carrying.
treaty of a,.
commoda. on, under color of relloring the captive Queen to
tber,,, her throne. The first steps in this negociation had
^ 7bje. been t.,ken in the month of May; but hitherto

Jittle progress was made in it The peace concluded
between the Roman Catholics and Hugonots in
lrancc, and her apprehensions chat Charles would
iaterpofe with vigor in behalf of his fifter.in-law,
quickened Elizabeth's motions. She affedted totreat
her prisoner with more indulgence, she liftenedmore'
graciously to the solicitations of foreign ambafia.
dors in her favor, and seemed fully determined
to replace her on the throne of her ancestors. As
a proof of her fmcerity, she labored to procure a
cessation of arms between the two contending
fai)aons in Scotland. Lenox elated with die
good fortune which had hitherto attended his
administration; and flatt-ring himself with an easy
triumph over enemies whose estates were wafied,'
and their forces dispirited1, refused. for fomc'time,
to come into this measure. It was not f4fe so'
him, however. to dispute the will of his protedc
rcel; A cessation of bofiilites during two moati

AnderC iii. t22. Crawf. Mam. i3.

to commence on the third of September, was B 0 0t
agreed upon; and, being renewed from time to vl.
time, it continued till the first of April next year". "170

Soon after, Elizabeth dispatched Cecil and Sir
Walter Mildmay to the Queen of Scots. The dignity
of these ambassadors, the former her prime Minis-
ter, the latter Chancellor of the Exchequer, and
one of her ablest counsellors, convinced all parties
that the negociation was serious, and that the hour
of Mary's liberty was ndw approaching. The pro-
positions which they made to her, were advan.
tageous to Elizabeth, but such as a Prince; in
Mary's situation, had reason to expec. The ratifi-
cation of the treaty of Edinburgh; the renouncing
any pretensions to the Englifl Crown, during
Elizabeth's own life, or that of her posterity; the
adhering to the alliance between the two king-
doms; the pardoning her fubjeas who bad taken
arms against her; and her promising to hold no
correspondence, and to countenance no enterprise,
that might disturb Elizabeth's government; were
among the chief articles. By way of security for
the accomplishment of these, they demanded that
some persons of rank Ihould be given as holtages,
that the Prince her son lhould reside in England,
and that a few castles on the borders flould be put
into Elizabeth's hands. To some of these propofi.
tions Mary contented; some The endeavoured to
mitigate; and others The attempted to. evade. In
the mean time, the transmitted copies of them to

S Spotfw. 243.

X o o the Pope, to the Kings of France and Spain, and

t.. to the Duke of Alva. She insinuated, that with
s17. out some timely and vigorous interposition in he

behalf, Ife would be obliged to accept of these
hard conditions, and to purchale liberty at any
price. But the Pope was a difant and feeble ally,
and by his great efforts at this time against the
Turks, his treasury 'was entirely exhaufled. Char.
les had already begun to meditate that confpiray
against the Hugonots, wbich marks bis reign with
such infamy; and it required much eIifure, and
perse~ tranquillity, to bring that execrable plan
to maturity. Philip was employed in fitting oul
that fleet which acquired so much renown to the
Chiftian arms, by the victory over the infidc
at Lepanto; the Moors in Spain threatened an
infurredion. and his fubjeds in the Netherlands,
provoked by much oppreclion and many ipdigni
ties, were breaking out into open rebtlion. Al
of them, for these different reasons, advised Mary,
without depending on their aid, to conclude tb
treaty on the bes terms Ibe could procure".
Ek~ktba Mary, accordingly. consented to many ol

i*af i. Elizabeth's demands, and difcovcred a facility ol

* .-duct
,i it. difpoftion, which promised ill, further counc

sons. But no conceilon Ihe could have made,
would have atisfied Elizabeth, who, in spite 1
.her repeated professions of sincerity to foreigi
-anbadors, and notwithftandin the foleniIl

Ander£ vol. iii. t9, a2o.

with

with which (ie carried on the treaty, had no other X o o
obhict il it. than to amuse Mary's allies, and to vr.
gun time ". After having so long treated a Qbeen, si7a
who fled to her for refuge, in so ungenerous a
manner, Nle could not now dismiss her with safety.
Under all the disadvantages of a rigorous confine.
menr, Mlary had found means to excite commotions
in k.ngland, which were extremely formidable.
What dcfperate effefts of her just resentment might
be expected, if she were set at liberty, and recovered
her former power ? What engagements could bind
her, not to revenge the wrongs which The had sus-
sered. nor to take advantage of the favorable con-
junctures that might present themselves? Was it
poflible for her to give such security for her be-
haviour, in tinmes to come, as might remove all
Iifpicions and fears ? And was there not good
cause to conclude, that no future benefits could
ever obliterate the memory of pafl injuries ? It was
thus Elizabeth reasoned; though Ihe continued to
aft as if her views had been entirely different. She
appointed seven of her privy counsellors to be
commiflioners for fettling the articles of the
treaty; and, as Mary had already named the
Bilhops of Ross and Galloway, and Lord Leving.
Roni, for her ambassadors, fle required the Regent
to impower proper persons to appear in behalf of
the King. The Earl of Morton, Pitcairn abbot arm
of Dunfermling, and Sir James Macgill were the
persons chosen by the Regent. They prepared

" nigges, Compl. Amb. ?g.
VOL. II. 0

g o 0 K for their journey as slowly as Elizabeth herself could

vi. have wibfed. At length they arrived at London,
7'I. and met the commifloners of the two Queens.
etbr. 1I. Mary's ambafladors discovered the firongef in.

clination to comply with every thing that would
remove the obstacles which flood in the way ol
their miRrers's liberty. But when Morton and hit
aflociates were called upon to vindicate their con.
dua, and to explain the sentiments of their party,
they began, in juftificatioir of their treatment ol
the Queen, to advance such maxims concerning
the limited powers of Princes, and the naturl
right of fubjeds to resist and to control them,
as were extremely shocking to Elizabeth, whos
notions of regal prerogative, as has been formerly
observed, were very exalted. With regard to the
authority which the King nowpoflelfed, thej
declared that they neither had, nor could poflibl)
receive inftrudcions, to content to any treaty, that
tended to subvert, or even to impair it in the leaf
degree ". Nothing could be more trifling anc
ridiculous, than such a reply from the commil
fioners of the King of Scots to the Queen of Eng
land. His party depended absolutely on her pro
tedion, her hand had feated him on the throne
and to her power he owed the continuance of hi
reign. With the utmost ease she could have brough
them to hold very different language; and what
ever conditions fie might have thought fit to pr(
scribe, they would have had no other choice bu

" Cald. ii. 234. Digges,. x. Ilayncs, 5:3, 524.

to flbmit. This declaration, however, Ihe affected n o 0 K
to confider as an insuperable difficulty; and finding vl.
that there was no reason to dread any danger from rsr.
the French King, who had not discovered that ruIefs.'
eag.ernef in support of Mary, which was expetded;
the reply made by Morton furnifled her with a
pretence for putting a flop to the negociation, until tarch -4,
the Regent (hould fend ambassadors with more
ample powers. Thus, after being amused for ten
months with the hopes of liberty, the unhappy
Queen of Scots remained under arifter custody
than ever, and without any profped of escaping
from it; while those fubjeds, who still adhered to
her, were exposed , without ally or protetor, tb
the raze of enemies, whom their success in this
ncgociation rendered Rill more insolent".

On the day after the expiration of the truce, Ditnhrnrit
vhich had been observed with little exatnefs on " "` r-'r
either fi.le, Captain Crawford of Jordan-hill, a Regent.
gillant and enterprising officer, performed a service
of great importance to the Regent, by fiurprifing
the castle of Dunbarton. This was the only fortified
place in the kingdom, of which the Queen had
kept poffefion, ever since the commencement of the
civil wars. Its situation on the top of a high and
almost inaccessible rock, which rifes in the middle
ofa plain, rendered it extremely strong, and, in
the opinion of that age, impregnable; as it com-
manded the river Clyde, it was of great consequence,
and was deemed the most proper place in the kingdom

And. iii. 91, etc.

04

3 o o K for landing any foreign troops that might cometo

vi. Mary's aid. The strength of the place rendered
1571. Lord Fleming, the governor, more secure than he

ought to have been, confidering its importance.
A soldier, who had served in the garrison, and
had been difgufled by some ill usage, proposed the
scheme to the Regent, endeavoured to demonstrate
that it was pracicable, and offered himself to go
the foremost man on the enterprise. It was thought
prudent to risk any danger for so great a prize.
Scaling-ladders, and whatever else might be nece.
fary, were prepared with the utmot secrecy and
dispatch. All the avenues to the castle were seized,
that no intelligence of the design might reach the
governor. Towards evening, Crawford marched
from Glasgow, with a small but determined band.
By midnight, they arrived at the bottom of the
rock. The moon was set, and the lky, which
hitherto had been extremely clear, was covered
with a thick fog. It was where the rock was highest,
that the assailants made their attempt, because in
that place there were few sentinels, and they
hoped to find them leaf alert. The firRf ladder was
scarcely fixed, when the weight and eagernels of
those who mounted, brought it to the ground.
None of the alfailants were hurt by the fall, and
none of the garrison alarmed at the noise. Their
guide and Crawford scrambled up the rock, and
fatened the ladder to the roots of a tree which
grew in a deft. This place they all reached with
the utmost difficulty, but were Rill at a great
distance from the foot of the wall. Their ladde

was made salt a second time; but in the middle of B o o x
the ascent, they met with an unforeseen difficulty. VI.
One of their companions was seized with some 1
sudden fit, and clung, seemingly without life, to
the ladder. All were at a stand. It was impoflible
to pass him. To tumble him headlong was cruel;
and might occasion a discovery. But Crawford's
presence of mind did not forsake him. He ordered
the soldier to be bound fast to the ladder, that he
might not fall when the fit was over: and turning
the other fide of the ladder, they mounted, with
cafe, over his belly. Day now began to break,
and there still remained a high wall to scale; but
after surmounting so many great difficulties, this
was soon accomplilhed. A sentry observed the first
man who appeared on the parapet, and had just
time to give the alarm, before he was knocked
on the head. The officers and soldiers of the
garrison ran out naked, unarmed, and more folici-
tous about their own safety, than capable of mak-
ing reftRance. The assailants rulbed forwards, with
repeated shouts, and with the utmost fury; took
polilelion of the magazine; seized the cannon; and
turned them against their enemies. Lord Fleming
got into a small boat, and fled all alone into Ar-
gylehlire. Crawford, in reward of his valorand good
conduct, remained malfer of the castle; and as he did
not lose a single man in the enterprise, he enjoyed his
success with unmixed pleasure. Lady Fleming, Verac
the French Envoy, and Hamilton Archbilhop of St.
Andrews, were theprifoners of greatest diftinsion",

' Buch. 94.

03

o o x Verac's cbaracer proteced him from the usage
vi. which he merited by his acivity in stirring up
Mi71. enemies against the King. The Regent treated the

Arnhbiib.o lady with great politeness and humanity Buta
drewr' put very different fate awaited the Archbilhop; he was
todeuh b carried under a firong guard to Stirling; and as
:"' he had formerly been attainted by aA of Parliament,

he was, without any formal trial, condemned to
be hanged; and on the fourth day after he was
taken, the sentence was executed An attempt was
made to convict him of being accessary to the
murder both of the King and Regent, but thtf
accusations were supported by no proof. Our
historians observe, that he was the first Bilbop in
Scotland who died by the hands of the executioner.
The high offices he had enjoyed, both in church
and Rate, ought to have exempted him froma
punilhment inflicted only on the lowet criminals
But his zeal for the Queen, his abilities, and his
profeflion, rendered him odious and formidable to
the King's adherents. Lenox hated him as the
person by whose counsels the reputation and power
of the house of Hamilton were supported. Party
rage, and personal enmity, diaated that indecent
sentence, for which some color was fought, by
imputing to him such odious crimes ".

irttal, The loss of Dunbarton, and the severe treat
dMtends tht ment of the Archbilhop . perplexed no less than
E'dibrh they enraged the Queen's party; and hofilitie
in the were renewed with all the fierceness which difap
ieta. pointment and indignation can inspire. Kirkaldy

" Spotfw, 2jp.

!

who, during the truce, had taken care to increase B o o x
the number of his garrison, and to provide every vl
thing necefary for his defence, iflued a proclamation zsi.
declaring Lenox's authority to be unlawful and
uforped; commanded all who favored his cause
to leave the town within fix hours; seized the arms
belonging to the citizens; planted a battery on the
fleeple of St Giles's, repaired the walls, and fortified
the gates of the city; and, though the affetions
of the inhabitants leaned a different way, held out
the metropolis against the Regent. The Duke,
Huntly, Home, Herries, and other chiefs of that
fa&ion, repaired to Edinburgh with their followers;
and having received a finall fum of money, and
some ammunition from France, formed no con-
temptible army within the walls. On the other fide,
Nlorton seized Leith, and fortified it; and the
Regent joined him with a conliderable body of
men. While the armies lay so near each other,
daily skirmishes happened, and with various fuc-
cess. The Queen's party was not Rrong enough
to take the field against the Regent, nor was his
superiority so great as to undertake the fieye of
the castle, or of the town ".

Some time before Edinburgh fell into the hands Both par.
of his enemies, the Regent had summoned a par- ti"chol"

parliallnuu.

liament to meet in that place. In order to pre- May 14.
vent any objedcion against the lawfulness of the
meeting, the members obeyed the proclamation
as exadly as possible; and assembled in a house
"Cald, ii. 2;3, etc.

04

0B K at the head of the Canongate, which, though
vL. without the walls, lies within the liberties of the
ss71. city. Kirkaldy exerted himself to the utmolt to

interrupt their meeting; but they were so firongly
guarded. that all efforts were vain. They paled
an ad attainting Mlaitland and a few others, and
then adjourned to the 28tth of Augul".

The other party, in order that their proceed.

ings might be countenanced by the fame. how of
legal authority, held a meeting of parliament soon
after. There was produced in this assembly a decla.
ration by the Queen, of the invalidity of that deed
whereby hne had resigned the Crown, and con-
sented to the coronation of her son. Conformable to
this declaration, an ad wa, passed, pronouncing the
resignation to have been extorted by fear; to be null
in itself, and in all its consequences; and enjoining
all good fubjeds to acknowledge the Queen alone to
be their lawful Sovereign, and to support those who
aced in her name. The present eftablilbment of the
Protestant religion was confirmed by another Ratute;
and, in imitation of the adverse party, a new
meeting was appointed on the 26th of Augulf".

fMirbnle Meanwhile. all the miseries of civil war defo.
coadino Orlated the kingdom. Fellow-citizens, friends, bro.
dom ther.s took different fides, and ranged themselves

under the Randards of the contending facions,
In every county, and almost in every town and
village, A'.,/'s men and Qeen's mm were names ol
diftondioo. Political hatred dissolved all natural

" Crawf. Mem. 177. "Id. Ibid.

ties, and extinguished the reciporal good-will and BOOK
contidence which hold mankind together in society. Vt
Religious zeal mingled itself which these civil '17I
dijftltilons, and contributed not a little to heighten
anwl to inflme them.

]'he factions which divided the kingdom were, State of
in appearance, only two. But, in both there, there I't,"aO
were pirflns with views and principles so different
fromn each other, that they ought to be diftinguifled.
With fhme, considerations of religion were pre-
dominant, and they either adhered to the Queen,
because they hoped, by her means, to re-establish
Popery, or they defended the King's authority, as
the belt support of the Protestant faith. Among
these the opposition was violent and irreconcileable.
Others were influenced by political motives only,
or allured by views of interest; the Regent aimed
at uniting there, and did not despair of gaining,
by gentle arts, many of Mary's adherents to ac-
knowledge the King's authority. Maitland and
Kirkaldy had formed the fame design of a coalition,
but on such terms, that the Queen might be
reltored to some share in the government, and the
kinglom (hake off its dependence upon England.
I\lorton, the ablest, the most ambitious, and the
moRl powerful man of the King's party, held a
particular course; and moving only as he was
prompted by the court of England, thwarted every
rneafure that tended towards a reconcilement of
the factions; and as he served Elizabeth with much
fidelity, he derived both power and credit from
her avowed protetion.

0oo0 The time appointed by both parties for the
vl. meeting of their parliaments now approached.
t15-. Only three peers and two bislops appeared in that

which was held in the Queen's name at Edinburgh.
But, contemptible as their numbers were, they
palled an at for attainting upwards of two hundred
of the adverse fadion. The meeting at Stirling
was numerous and splendid. The Regent had
prevailed on the Earls of Argyll, Eglinton, Caflis,
and Lord Boyd, to acknowledge the King's author.
ity. The three Earls were among-the moftRpower.
ful noblemen in the kingdom, and had hitherto
been zealous in the Queen's cause. Lord.Boyd
had been one of Mary's commiflioners at York
and Westminster, and, since that time, had been
admitted into all her mos secret councils. But,
during that turbulent period, the condut ol
individuals, as well as the principles of facions,
varied so often, that the sense of honor, a chief
preservative of confifence in character, was entirely
loft; and, without any regard to decorum, men
suddenly abandoned one party, and adopted all
the violent paflions of the other. The defetion,
however, of so many persons of diftindion not
only weakened the Queen's party, but added
reputation to her adversaries.

-K Iog's After the example of the parliament at Edin
"I fr," burgh, that at Stirling began with framing a&c
srlirng. against the opposite faction. But in the midst ol

all the security, which confidence in their own
numbers, or distance from danger could inspire,
they were awakened, early on the morning ao

September third by the /houts of the enemy in Bo o
the heart of the town. In a moment the houses Vl.
of every person of diftindion were surrounded, s 7*
and before they knew what to think of so Rrange SPt
an event, the Regent, the Earls of Argyll, Morton,
Glencairn, Caflils, Eglinton, Montrose, Buchan,
the Lords Sempil, Cathcart, Ogilvie, were all made
prisoners, and mounted behind troopers, who were
ready to carry them to Edinburgh. Kirkaldy was
the author of this daring enterprise; and if he had
not been induced by the ill-timed solicitude of his
friends about his safety, not to hazard his own
pelfon in conducting it, that day might have ter-
minated the contest between the two fadions, and
have restored peace to his country. By his direction,
four hundred men, under the command of Huntly,
Lord Claud Hamilton, and Scot of Buccleugh, set
out from Edinburgh, and, the better to conceal
their design, marched towards the south. But they
loon wheeled to the right, and horses having been
provided for the infantry, rode firaight to Stirling.
By four in the morning, they arrived there; not
one sentry was posted on the walls, not a single man
was awake about the place. They met with no
refifance from any person whom they attempted to
seize, except Morton. lie defending his house with
obtinate valor, they were obliged to set it on fire,
and he did not surrender till forced out of it by
the flames. In performing this, some time was
consumed; and the private men, unaccustomed to
regular discipline, left their colors, and began
to rifle the houses and Shops of the citizens. The

3oot noise and uproar in the town reached the caBle.
VI. The Earl of Mar rallied out with thirty soldiers;

7 fired brilkly upon the enemy, of whom almost none

but the officers kept together in a body. The
townsmen took arms to affif their governor; X
sudden panic struck the assailants; some fled, some
surrendered tbemfelves to their own prisoners; and
had not the borderers, who followed Scot, prevent-
ed a purfiit, by carrying off all the horses within
the place, not a man would have escaped. If the
Regent had not unfortunately been killed, the los
on the King's fide would have been as inconsiderable,
as the alarm was great. Think on the Archbishop of
St. Andrcw', was the word among the Queen's

he sr. soldiers; and Lenox fell a sacrifice to his memory.
" ' 'e The officer, to whom he surrendered, endeavouring

to protet him, loft his own life in his defence.
He was slain, according to the general opinion, by
command of Lord Claud Hamilton. Kirkaldy had
the glory of concerting this plan with great secrecy
and prudence; but Morton's fortunate obstinacy,
and the want of discipline among his own troops,
deprived him of success, the only thing wanting
to render this equal to the most applauded military
enterprifcs of the kind ".

Mar ,~, . As so many of the nobles were assembled, they
Rese"n proceeded, without delay, to the election of a Re.

gent. Argyll, Morton, and Mar, were candidates
for the office. Mar was chosen by a majority of
voices. Amidst all the fierce dissensions which

" Melv. 226. Craw. . 0M . o4.

had prevailed so long in Scotland, he had diftin. B 0 0 k.
guilhed himself by his moderation, his humanity, vt.
and his diintereftednefs. As his power was far 17.
inferior to Argyll's, and his abilities not so great
as Morton's, he was, for these reasons, less for.
midable to the other nobles. His merit, too, in.
having so lately rescued the leaders of the party.
from imminent deftruaion, contributed not a little
to his preferment.

While these things were carrying on in Scotland,. Proceedinp
the tranfations in England were no less interesting in 'ngla4
to Mary, and fill' more fatal to her cause. The, awl,
parliament of that kingdom, which met in April,
pafled an ad, by which it was declared to be high
treason to claim any right to the Crown during.
the life of the Queen; to affirm that the title of
any other person was better than hers, or to maintain:
that the parliament had not power to fettle and to.
limit the order of fucceflion. This remarkable statute
was intended not ohl for the security of their own
Sovereign, but to curb the reflefs and intriguing,
spirit of the Scottish Queen, and her adherents ".

At this time, a treaty of marriage between Mairag
Elizabeth and the Duke of Anjou, the French o*g^"ated'

between iU.

Kings brother, was well advanced. Both courts zabth and
teemed to desire it with equal ardor, and gave the DUeof
out, with the utmoR confidence, that it could Anjo
not fail of taking place. Neither of them, how.
ever, wished it success; and they encouraged it
for no other end, but becaue it served to covte
" Camd. 436.

r o o or to promote their particular designs. The whole

vI. policy of Catherine of Medicis was bent toward
"7?L the accomplifflment of her dcteRable projea for

the deftml;on of the Hugonot chiefs; and by
orrying on a negociation for the marriage of her son
with a Princeis who was juflly esteemed the prote;'
trefs of that party, by yielding some things in point
of religion, and by discovering an indifference with
regard to others, she hoped to amuse all the ProteR.
ants in Europe, and to lull asleep thejealoufyeven of
the Hugonots themselves. Elizabeth flattered hetdelf
with reaping advantages of another kind. During
the dependence of the negociation, the French could
not with decency give any open afliflance to the
Scottilh Queen; if they conceived any hopes of f.
cess in the treaty of marriage, theyiwould, of course,
interest themselves but coldly in her concerns; Mary
berfelf must be dejeded at losing an ally, whoii te
bad hitherto reckoned her most powerful protedor;
and by interrupting her correspondence with Franme,
one source, at lealt, of the cabals' and intiuues
which disturbed the kingdom, wouldbe Ropt.. Both
Queens succeeded in their schemes Catherlde's
artifices imposed on Elizabeth, and blinded tbe
Hugonots. '1 be French discovered the utmost indif.
ference about the interest of the Scottilh Queen;
and Mary, confidering that court as really united
with her rival, turned for protection, with more
eagerness than ever, towards the King of Spain".
Philip, whose dark and thoughtful mind delighted

Digges, 148. 4S. Camd. 4;4.

in the mystery of intrigue, had held a secret corre. B o o g
fpondence with Mary, for some time, by means vi.
of the Bishop of Ross, and had supplied both herself ,i7r.
and her adherents in Scotland with small fums of orfo"lk's

eorfpiracy

money. Ridolphi, a Florentine gentleman, who i, fv,,r
resided at London under the characer of a banker, of 'lary
and who acted privately as an agent for the Pope,
was the person whom the Bilhop intruRed with this
negociation. Mary thought it neceffiry, likewise,
to communicate the secret to the Duke of Norfolk,
whom Elizabeth had lately ieftored to liberty, upon
his solemn promise to have no further intercourse
with the Queen of Scots. This promise, however,
he regarded so little, that he continued to keep a
conlfant correspondence with the captive Queen;
while file labored to nourilh his ambitious hopes,
and to strengthen his amorous attachment by letters
written in the fondest caressing irain. Some of these
he must have received at the very time when he
made that solemn promise of holding no farther
intercourse with her, in consequence of which
Elizabeth restored him to liberty. Mary, fill con.
fidering him as her future hulband, took no Rep in
ally matter of moment without his advice. She
early communicated to him her negociations
with Ridolphi; and in a long letter; which she
wrote to him in cyphers ', after complaining of
the baseness with which the French court had
abandoned her interest, fte declared her intention

" laynes, ;97, (98. Hard. State.Papers, i. )o;,
ic. Dieges, Complete Ambaf. 147.

l0 0 K of imploring the afliflance of the Spaniflh Monarcd,

VI. which was now her only resource; and recommend.
11.7 ed Ridolphi to his confidence, as a person capable

both of explaining and advancing the scheme. The
Duke commanded Hickford, his secretary, to
decypher, and then to burn this letter; but whe
ther he had been already gained by the court, ot
resolved at that time to betray his master, he
disobeyed the latter part of the order, and bid
the letter, together with other treasonable papers,
under the Duke's own bed.

Ridolphi, in a conference with Norfolk, omit.

ted none of those arguments, and spared none of
thife promises, which are the usual incentives to
rebellion. The Pope, he told him, had a great
fum in readiness to bellow in so good a caue.
The Duke of Alva had undertaken to land ten
thousand men not far from London. The Ca.
tholics to a man would rife in arms. Many of
the nobles were ripe for a revolt, and wanted only
a leader. Half the nation had turned their eyes
towards him, and called on him to revenge the
umerited injuries which he himself had suffered;
and to rescue an unfortunate Queen, who offered
him her hand, and her crown, as the reward ol
his success. Norfolk approved of the design, and
though he refused to give Ridolphi any letter of
credit, allowed him to ufehis name in negociating
with the Pope and Alva ". The Bilhop of Rols,
who, from the violence of his temper, and

a Andes. iii. I61.

impatience

patience to procure relief for his mistress, was apt a o o
to rin into rash and desperate designs, advifed'the vi.
Dlike to assemble secretly a few of his followers, Ir.
and at once to seize Elizabeth's person. But this
the Duke rejected as a scheme equally wild and
ihzardous. Meanwhile, the English court had Dirfcoeredbt

Elkiabeth.

received some imperfet information of the plot, Auguta.
by intercepting one of Ridolphi's agents; and anl
accident happened, which brought t6 light all the
circumltances of it. The Duke had employed Hick.
ford to transmit to Lord Herries, fonme money,
which was to be distributed among Mary's friends
in Scotland. A person not in the secret was intrufed
with conveying it to the borders, and he, fufped-
ing it from the weight to be gold, whereas he had
been told that it was silver, carried it direAly to
the Privy Council. The Duke, his domestics, and
all who were privy, or could be fufpeted of being
privy to the design, were taken into cultody.
Never did the accomplices in a conspiracy discover Sept. r;
lefI firmness, or servants betray an indulgent mailer
with greater baseness. Every one confessed the
whole of what he knew. Hickford gave direcions
how to find the papers which he had hidden. The
Duke himself, relying at first on the fidelity of his
allociates, and believing all dangerous papers to
have been destroyed, confidently asserted his own
innocence; but when their depositions and the
papers themselves were produced, atlonilhed at
their treachery, he acknowledged his guilt, and
implored the Queen's mercy. His offence was too
heinous, and too often repeated, to obtain pardon;

VOL. . P

noo and Elizabeth thought it necessary to deter he

VI. fubjets, by his punishment, from holding corre
117,. fpondence with the Queen of Scots, or her emil

farics. Being tried by his Peers, he was founc
guilty of high treason, and, after several delays
fuflered death for the crime ".

The discovery of this conspiracy produced manj

effeds, extremely detrimental to Mary's interest
The Bilhop of Ross, who appeared by the confe
sion of all concerned, to be the prime mover in
every cabal against Elizabeth, was taken into
cuRody, his papers searched, himself committed to
the Tower, treated with the utmost rigor, threat
ened with capital punilhment. and, after a long
confinement, set at liberty, on condition that he
flould leave the kingdom. Mary was not only
deprived of a servant, equally eminent for his zeal
and his abilities, but was denied from that time the
privilege of having an ambalfdor at the Englilh
court. The Spanish ambassador, whom the power
and dignity of the prince he represented exempted
from foch insults as Ross had suffered, was corn
manded to leave England ". As there was now the
clearest evidence that Mary, from resentment ol
the wrongs Ihe had filffered, and impatience of the
captivity in which she was held, would not scruple
to engage in the most hostile and desperate enterpri
fes againR the eflablilhed government and religion,
ie began to be regarded as a public enemy, and
was kept under a frider guard than formerly, the

Anders ii. 149. State Trials, i8. " Digg., is .

number of her domestics abridged, and no person B o o t
permitted to fee her, but in presence of her vl.

keepers · "".

At the fame time, Elizabeth, foreseeing the torm zizisbethad.
which was gathering on the continent against her cate O^Pe,
kingdom, began to with that tranquillity were Quen'
restored in Scotland; and irritated by Mary's late pam.
attempt against her government, (he determined to
aft, without disguise or ambiguity, in favor of the
King's party. This resolution {he intimated to the
leaders of both fations. Mary, she told them, oct. s.
had held such a criminal correspondence with her
avowed enemies, and had excited such dangerous
conspiracies both against her crown and her life,
that fle would henceforth confider her as unwor.
thy of protection, and would never consent to
reltore her to liberty, far less to replace her on
her throne. She exhorted them, therefore, to unite
in acknowledging the King's authority. She pro.
mifed to procure by her mediation equitable terms
for those who had hitherto opposed it But if they
fill continued refractory, the threatened to employ
het utmollt power to compel them to submit".
Though this declaration did not produce an im.
mediate effct; though hostilities continued in the
neighbourhood of Edinburgh; though Huntly's
brother, Sir Adam Gordon, by his bravery and
good conduct, had routed the King's adherents in
the North in many encounters; yet such an explicit
d;Icovery of Elizabeth's sentiments contributed not
" Strpc, Ann. ii. So. ' See Append. N'. XXIV,

Pa

B o o a little to animate one party, and to depress th

vL spirit and hopes of the other".
172. As Morton, who commanded the Regent's for.

Udilitin
,aried a ces, lay at Leith, and Kirkaldy still held out the
btnree town and castle of Edinburgh, scarce a day passed
tk*- without a flirmifl; and while both avoided an)

decisive adtion, they harassed each other by attack
ing fmrll parties, beating up quarters, and inter.
cepting convoys. These operations, though littd
memorable in themselves, kept the passions ol
both fations in perpetual exercise and agitation,
and wrought them up, at las, to a degree ol
fury, which rendered them regardless not only ol
the laws of war, but of the principles of humanity
Nor was it in the field alone, and during the heal
of combat, that this implacable rage appeared;
both parties hanged the prisoners they took, ol
whatever rank or quality, without mercy, and
without trial. Great numbers suffered in this (hock
ing manner; the unhappy vidims were led, by
fifties at a time, to execution; and it was not till
both fides had smarted severely, that they difcon.
tinued this barbarous pracice, so reproachful to
the cbarader of the nation". Meanwhile, those in
the town and castle, though they had received a
fopply of money from the Duke of Alva", begat
to susser for want of provisions. As Morton had
destroyed all the mills in the neighbourhood of the
city, and had planted small garrisons in all the houfc

* Cald. ii 289. 294. Strype, ii. 76.
" Craw Mem. 218. .
2 Cald. i. a45

of strength around it; scarcity daily increased. At B 0.0 K
las all the miseries of famine were felt, and they vl,
muR have been soon reduced to such extremities 1572.
as would have forced them to capitulate, if the
Englilh and French ambassadors had not procured
a suspension of hostilities between the two par.
ties".

Though the negociation for a marriage between Lenagebe.
Elizabeth and the Duke of Anjou had been fruitless, twe^ £Ee.
both Charles and /he were desirous of concluding a France.
defensive alliance between the two Crowns. He
confidered such a treaty, not only as the beRf device
for blinding the Protestants, against whom the con-
fpiracy was now almost ripe for execution; but as
a good precaution, likewise, against the dangerous
consequences to which that atrocious measure might
expose him. Elizabeth, 'who had hitherto reigned
without a single ally, now saw her kingdom so
threatened with intestine commotions, or exposcd
to invasions from abroad, that iTe was extremely
Solicitous to secure the assistance of so powerful a
neighbour. The difficulties arising from the situation
of the Scottish Queen, were the chief occasions of
any delay. Charles demanded some terms of advan-
tage for Mary and her party. Elizabeth refused to
liften to any proposition of that kind. Her obstinacy
overcame the faint efforts of the French Monarch.
Mlary's name was not so much as mentioned in the
treaty; and with regard to Scottili affairs, a Ahort
article was inserted, in general and ambiguous
" Cald. ii. 346.

P3

3 o o K terms, to this purpose, a That the parties contrad.

Vr. ing {hall make no innovations in Scotland, nor
'I
7 susser any firanger to enter, and to foment the

fadions there; but it fhail be lawful for the Queen
of England to chastise, by force of arms, those
Scots who lhall continue to harbour the Englili
rebels now in Scotland '" In consequence of this
treaty, France and England affected to at in
concert with regard to Scotland, and Le Croc,
and Sir William Drury, appeared there, in name
of their refpedive Sovereigns. By their mediation,
a truce for two months was agreed upon, and
during that time conferences were to be held
between the leaders of the opposite fadions, in
order toaccommodate their differences, and restore
peace to the kingdom. This truce afforded a
seasonable interval of tranquillity to the Queen's
adherents in the South; but in the North it proved
fatal to her interest. Sir Adam Gordon had flill
maintained his reputation and superiority there.
Several parties, under different officers, were sent
against him. Some of them he attacked in the
field; against others he employed stratagem; and
as his courage and condud were equal, none of
his enterprises failed of success. He made war,
too, with the humanity which became so gallant
a man, and gained ground by that, no less than
by the terror of his arms. If he had not been
obliged, by the truce, to suspend his operations,
he would, in all probability, have brought that

" Diggcs, 70o. i9r. Camd. 444.

part of the kingdom to submit entirely to the B O K,
Queen's authority ". VI.
Notwithstanding Gordon's bravery and fuecefs, "7:;

Proceedings

Alary's interest was on the decline, not only in in Engand
her own kingdom, but among the Englib. No-. apinf Mary.
thing could be more offensive to that nation, jealous
of foreigners, and terrified at the profped of the
Spanilh yoke, than her negociations with the Duke
of Alva. The parliament, which met in May;
proceeded against her as the most dangerous enemy
of the kingdom; and after a solemn conference
between the Lords and Commons, both houses
agreed in bringing in a bill to declare her guilty
of high treason. and to deprive her of all right of
fucceflion to the Crown. This great caule, as it
was then called, occupied them during the whole
session, and was carried on with much unanimity.
Elizabeth, though She applauded their zeal, and
approved greatly of the course they were taking,
was satisfied with ihowing Mary what the might
expet from the resentment of the nation; but as
lhe did not yet think it time to proceed to the
most violent extremity against her, The prorogued
the parliament ".

These severe proceedings of the English parlia- The Frentsl
ment were not more mortifying to Mary, than the ,tgl icl
coldness and negled of her allies the French. The
Duke of Montmorency, indeed, who came over
to ratify the league with Elizabeth, made a (how of
interesting himself in favor of the Scottilb Queen;
" Crawf. Mem. " D'Ewes Journ. so6, &c.

P4

J o0 but, instead of soliciting for her liberty, or her

vL refloration to her throne, all that he demanded
s>m. was a flight mitigation of the rigor of her impri.

fonment Even tbiq small request, he urged with so
little warmth or importunity, that no regard wa
paid to it ".

T aesma The alliance with France afforded Elizabeth
r" Y'* much fatisfadtion, and she expeded from it a great

jncreafe of security. She now turned her whole
attention towards Scotland, where the animofities
of the two factions were fill so high, and so many
interfering interests to be adjusted, that a general
pacification seemed to be at a great distance. But
while lhe labored to bring them to some agreement,
an event happened which filled a great part of
Europe with aftnnilbment and with horror. This
was the massacre of Paris; an attempt to which
there is no parallel in the history of mankind,
either for the long train of craft and difiimulagion
with which it was contrived, or for the cruelty
and barbarity with which it was carried into
execution. By the moR solemn promises of safety
and of favor, the leaders of the Protestants were
drawn to court; and though doomed to deltruc-
tion, they were received with caresses, loaded with
honors, and treated, for seven months, with every
poflible mark of familiarity and of confidence. In
Aat m. the midst of their security, the warrant for their

deftrution was issued by their Sovereign, on whole
word they had relied; and, in obedience to it,

" Jebb, iL s52.

their countrymen, their fellow.citizens, and com. B oO g
panions, imbrued their hands in their blood. Ten vi.
thousand Protestants, without distinction of age, 1x7.
or sex, or condition, were murdered in Paris alone.
The fame barbarous orders were sent to other parts
of the kingdom, and a like carnage ensued. This
deed, which no Popilh writer, in the present age,
mentions without detestation, was, at the time,
applauded in Spain; and at Rome solemn thanks.
rivings were offered to God for its success But
among the Protestants, it excited incredible horror;
a finking piaure of which is drawn by the French
Ambaffidor at the court of England, in his account
of his first audience after the massacre. " A gloomy
forrnw, fays he, fat on every face: silence, as in
the dead of night, reigned through all the chambers
of the royal apartment; the ladies and courtiers
were ranged on each fide, all clad in deep mourn-
ing, and as I passed through them, not one be-
flowed on me a civil look, or made the leaR return
to my salutes ".

But horror was not the only passion with which oetrimetal
this event inspired the Protestants; it filled them to Man''

intattt.

with fear. 1 hey confidered it as the prelude to
some greater blow, and believed, not without
much probability, that all the Popilh Princes had
conspired the deftrudion of their fe. This opi-
nion was of no small disservice to Mary's affairs
in Scotland. Many of her adherents were Pro-
teflants; and, though they wilhedherreltoration,
" Carte, iii S22.

o o Ot were not willing, on that account, to facrisce the
vi. faith which they profelfed. They dreaded her
a7i. attachment to a religion, which allowed its vo.

taries to violate the moR solemn engagements,
and prompted them to perpetrate the most bar.
barons crimes. A general confederacy of the
Protestants seemed to them the only thing that
could uphold the Reformation against the league
which was formed to overturn it. Nor could the
present eftabliffiment of religion be long maintained
in Britain, but by a ftrit union with Elizabeth,
and by the concurrence of both nations, in espousing
the defence of it, as a common cause ".

Encouraged by this general difpoftion to place

confidence in her, Elizabeth resumed a scheme
which Ihe had formed during the regency of the
Earl of Murray, of fending Mary as a prisoner into
Scotland. But her sentiments and situation were
now very different from what they had been during
her negociation with Murray. Her animosity
againRf the Queen of Scots was greatly augmented,
by recent experience of her inclination as well as
power not only to disturb the tranquillity of her
reign, but to wreR from her the crown; the party
in Scotland favorable to Mary, was almoR entirely
broken; there was no reason to dread any danger
from France, which Rill continued to court her
friendliip. She aimed, accordingly, at something
very different from that which The had in view
three years before. Then The discovered a laudable

" Digges, 44+. 267.

solicitude not only for the safety of Mary's life, o ox
but for securing to her, treatment suited to her vt.
rank. Now bhe required, as an express condition, tl%.
that, immediately after Mary's arrival in Scotland,
fie ihould be brought to public trial; and having
no doubt that sentence would be passed according
to her deserts, tie infilted that, for the good of
both kingdoms, it Ihould be executed without
delay ". No tranifation, perhaps, in Elizabeth's
reign, merits more severe censure. Eager to cut
short the days of a rival, the objec both of her
hatred and dread, and no less anxious to avoid the
blame to which such a deed of violence might
expose her, fle labored, with timid and ungenerous
artifice, to transfer the odium of it from herself to
Mary's own fubjets. The Earl of Mar, happily
for the honor of his country, had more virtue than
to liften to such an ignominious proposal; and
Elizabeth did not venture to renew it.

While Ihe was engaged in pursuing this in. ThbRetti
fidious measure, the Regent was more honorably "ueavoun
employed in endeavouring to negociate a general both pah
peace among his countrymen. As he labored 'ti
for this purpose with the utmost zeal, and the
adverse faction placed entire confidence in his
integrity, his endeavours could hardly have failed
of being successful. Maitland and Kirkaldy came
so near to an agreement with him, that scarce any
thing remained, except the formality of signing
the treaty. But Morton had not forgotten the
" Murdin, 22zz.

BO K disappointment be met with in his pretensions to

VL the Regency; his abilities, his wealth, and 'the
zsr. patronage of the court of England, gave him

greater sway with the party, than even the Regent
bimfelf; and he took pleasure in thwarting every
measure pursued by him. He was afraid that, if
Maitland and his aflociates recovered any fbare in
the administration, his own influence would be
considerably diminilbed; and the Regent, by their
means, would regain that ascendant which belonged
to his station. With him concurred all those who
were in possession of the lands which belonged to
any of the Queen's party. His ambition, and
their avarice, frustrated the Regent's pious inten.
tions, and retarded a bleifing so necessary to the
kingdom, as the eflablifibment of peace ".
Hkiati. Such a discovery of the felfilTnefs and ambition

which reigned among his party, made a deep im.
pression on the Regent, who loved his country,
and wilhed for peace with much ardor. This
inward grief broke his spirit, and by degrees
brought on a fettled melancholy, that ended in a
distemper, of which he died on the twenty-ninth
of Oaober. He was, perhaps, the only person
in the kingdom who could have enjoyed the
office of Regent without envy, and have left it
without loss of reputation. NotwithRanding their
mutual animofities, both fafions acknowledged
bis views to be honorable, and his integrity to be
uncorrupted ".

' Melv. 2;t. Crawf. Men. 2;. " Id. 24r.

No competitor now appeared againfR Morton. B 0 0 K
The Queen of England powerfully supported his vr.
claim, and notwithstanding the fears of the people, is7z.
and the jealousy of the nobles, he was eleded Mh"nrR.
Regent; the fourth, who, in the space of five gent.
years, had held that dangerous office. Novem.

As the truce had been prolonged to the first of
January, this gave him an opportunity of continuing
the negociations with the opposite party, which
had been set on foot by his predecessor. They
produced no effeets, however, till the beginning
of the next year.

Before we proceed to these, some events, hitherto
untouched, deserve our notice.

The Earl of Northumberland, who had been
kept prisoner in Lochlevin ever since his flight
into Scotland in the year one thousand five hundred
and fixty.nine, was given up to Lord Hunfdon,
governor of Berwick; and being carried to York,
suffered there the punishment of his rebellion. The
King's party were so sensible of their dependence on
Elizabeth's protection, that it was scarcely poflible
for them to refuse putting into her hands a person
who had taken up arms againt her. But as a fum of
money was paid on that account, and lhared between
Morton and Douglas of Lochlevin, the former of
whom, during his exile in England, had been much
indebted to Northumberland's friendship, the aban-
doning this unhappy nobleman, in such a manner,
to certain deltruEtion, was universally condemned as
a most ungrateful and mercenary adcion 4.
"Crawf. Mem. 5. 22. Camd. 44S.

0oo0 This year was remarkable for a considerable
vl. innovation in the government of the Church. Soon
s71- after the Keformatioa, the Poplib bishops had been

Agin. of
·,c.-A. confirmed by law in poffeflion of part of their

benefices; but the spiritual jurifdition, which
belonged to their order, was exercised by fuperin.
tendants, though with more moderate authority.
On the death of the Archbilbop of St. Andrews,
Morton obtained from the Crown a grant of the
temporalities of that fee. But as it was thought
indecent for a layman to hold a benefice to which
the cure of fouls was annexed, he procured Douglas,
rector of the Univcrfity of St. Andrews, to be
chosen Archbillop; and allotting him afiwallpenfion
out of the revenues of the fee, retained the remainder
in his own hands. The nobles, who saw the advan.
ages they might reap from such a practice, sup.
ported him in the execution of his plan. It gave
great offence, however, to the clergy, who,
inflead of perpetuating an order whole name and
power was odious to them, wified that the revenues
which had belonged to it might be employed in
supplying such parihbes as were Rill unprovided
with fttled pallors. But, on the one hand, it
would have been rahb in the Clergy to have irritated
too much noblemen, on whom the very exiRence
of the Protestant Church in Scotland depended;
and NMorton, on the other, conduded his fchmeo
with such dexterity, and managed them with so
muchart, that it was, at las, agreed, ina convention
composed of the leading men among the Clergy,
together with a committee of privy council,

" that the name and office of Archbilhop, and B o o K
Biflop, flould be continued during the King's , v.
minority, and these dignities be conferrel upon i172
the bell qualified among the P'oteftant Ministers;
uut that, with regard to their spiritual jurifdiclions,
they (hould be subjed to the general assembly of
the Church. The rules to be observed in their
eletion; and the persons who were to supply the
place, and enjoy the privileges, which belonged
to the Dean and Chapter in times of Popery, were
likewise particularly specified ". The whole being
laid before the General Assembly, after some excep-
tionsto the name of Ar/ibishn;i, Dean, Ch/pt'r, &c.
and a proteltation that it fliould be confidered only
as a temporary constitution, until one more perfet
could be introduced, it obtained the approbation of
thatcourt ". Even Knox, who was prevented from
attending the Assembly by the ill state of his health,
though he declaimed loudly againlt the fimoniacal
padion to which Douglas owed his preferment,
and blamed the nomination of a person worn
out with age and infirmities, to an office which
required unimpaired vigor both of body and
mind, seems not to have condemned the proceed.
ins of the Convention; and, in a letter to the
Afembly, approved of some of their regulations
with refpecl to the election of Bilhops, as worthy
ofbeing carefully observed ". In consequence of
the Assembly's consent to the plan agreed upon
in the Convention, Douglas was installed in his
office, and at the fame time, an Archbilhop of
"~la~ld.ii "1oi. "Id. 4. bee AppendixN*.XXV,

o O Glasgow, and a Bilhop of Dunkeld, were chofre
vi. from among the Protestant Clergy. They wer
'572. all adnitted to the place in Parliament, which

belonged to the ecclesiastical order. But, in
imitation of the example set by Morton such
bargains were made with them by different noble.
men, as gave them poffeflion only of a very small
part of the revenues belonging to their fees "

Kr. 17. Soon after the dissolution of this Assembly,
D"",h d Knox, the prime instrument of spreading and
Kxam. eftahlilhing the Reformed religion in Scotland,

ended his life, in the fixty-feventh year of hi
age. Zeal, intrepidity, difintereftednels, were
virtues which he poreffed in an eminent degree
He was acquainted, too, with the learning cult.
vated among divines in that age; and excelled
in that species of eloquence which is calculated
to rouse and to inflame ". His maxims, however,

" Spotr 261.
' A striking description of that species of eloquence O

which Knox was distinguished, is given by one of his contemt
poraries, 1. James Melville, Minister of Anftruther. "But
of all the benefites I had that year [ I g ?.t ], was the coming
of that mol notible prophet and apostle of our nation, Mr John
Knox, to St. Andrews, who, by the fation of the Queei
occupying the castle and town of Edinburgh, was compelled
to remove therefra with a number of the belt, and chufed tC
come to St. Andrews. I heard him teach there the prophecit
of Daniel that summer and the winter following. I had my pel
and little buik, and took away sic things as I could comprehend
In the opening of his text, he was moderat the space of hal
an hour; but when he entered to application, he made im
so to gnue [thrill] and tremble, that I could not hald b
pen to write.- He was very weak. 1 aw him everyday of hi

were

were often too severe, and the impetuosity of his B oo
temper exceflive. Rigid and uncomplying himself, vr.
he Ihowed no indulgence to the infirmities of others. 1572.
(eg.rf!It fs of the diftinlions of rank and character,
he uttrrcd his admonitions with an acrimony and
vehemence, more apt to irritate than to reclaim.
This often betrayed him into indecent and undutiful
expreflions with refpea to the Queen's person and
condudt. Those very qualities, however, which
now render his character less amiable, fitted him to
be the inltrument of Providence for advancing the
Reformation among a ierce people, and enabled
him to face dangers, and to surmount oppoCition,
from which a person of a more gentle spirit would
have been apt to flrink back. By an unwearied
application to study and to business, as well as by
the frequency and fervor of his public discourses,
he had worn out a constitution naturally robust.
During a lingering illness, he discovered the ut-
most fortitude; and met the approaches of death
with a magnanimity inseparable from his cha.
adter. He was conltantly employed in ads of

doctrine go u#it E slowly] and fair, with a furring of marticks
about his neck, a flaff in the one hand, and good godlie
Richart Ballanden holding him up by the oxter [under the arm]
from the abbey to the parish kirk; and he the said Richart and
another servant lifted him up to the pulpit, where he behoved
to lean at his firt entrie; but e're he was done with his sermon,
he ws so active and vigorous, that he was like to ding the
pulpit in blads beat the pulpit to pieces], and fly out of it.
1S. Life of Mr. James Melville, belonging to Mr. Paton of
thlCultom.houfe, Edinburgh, p. 14. a1.

VOL. II. Q

B 0 OK devotion, and comforted himself with thofc pro.

v1. fpe& of immortality, which not only preserve
1173. good men from desponding, but fill them with

exultation in their last moments. The Earl of
Morton, who was present at his funeral, pro.
nounced his eulogium in a few words, the more
bonorable for Knox as they came from one
whom he had often censured with peculiar severity,
" There lies He, who never feared the face of

man.

-:5.. Though Morton did not desire peace from
To ,ntt such generous motives as the former Regent, he

~t.'e's labored, however, in good earnest to eftablifl
r."- it. The public confusions and calamities, to

which he owed his power and importance when
he was only the second person in the nation,
were extremely detrimental to him, now that he
was raised to be the first. While so many of the
nobles continued in arms against him, his author.
ity as Regent was partial, feeble, and preca.
rious. Elizabeth was no less desirous of extin
guilhing the flame which Ibe had kindled and
kept so long alive in Scotland '. She had disco.
vered the alliance with France, from which fle
had expeced such advantages, to be no founda.
tion of security. Though appearances offriend.
fbip still subsisted between her and that court,
and Charles daily renewed his protestations of

' Spots. 266. Cald. ii. 27;.
o Digges, 299.

inviolable adherence to the treaty, The was con- BO (I
vi,;ccil, by a fatal example, how little The ought Vl.
to rely on the promises or oath of that perfidious x573.
lonairch. Her ambassador warned her that
the hrench held secret correspondence with Mary's
adherents in Scotland, and encouraged them in
their obstinacy ". The Duke of Alva carried on
hi< intrigues in that kingdom with lefq disguise.
She was persuaded that they would embrace the
firtA serene interval, which the commotions in
France and in the Netherlands would allow
them, and openly attempt to land a body of men
in Scotland. She resolved, therefore, to prevent
their getting any footing in the island, and to cut
off all their hopes of finding any assistance there,
by uniting the two parties.
The situation of Mary's adherents enabled the Hi over.

tures re-

Regent to carry on his negociations with them to )ete, by
great advantage. They were now divided into aaitland
two fations. At the head of the one, were Cha- adKi"'
telheriut and Huntly. Maitland and Kirkaldy
were the leaders of the other. Their high rank,
threr exteunive property, and the numbers of their
followers, rendered the former considerable. The
latter were indebted for their importance to their
perfonl;l abilities, and to the strength of the castle
o'lidinburgh, which was in their pofelfion. The
Regent had no intention to comprehend both in
the fame treaty; but as he dreaded that the
" D;gges, s96. 312.

'.

10OK Queen's party, if it remained entire, would be

VI. able to thwart and embarrass his adminifiration,
7t*l bhe resolved to divide and weaken it, by a separate

negociation. He made the sirs overture to Kirk.
aldy and his associates, and endeavoured to renew
the negociation with them, which, during the life
of his predecessor, had been broken off by his
own artifices. But Kirkaldy knew Morton's
views, and system of government, to be very
different from those of the former Regent. Miit.
land confidered him as a personal and implacable
enemy. They received repeated assurances of
protection from France; and though the siege of
Rochelle employed the French arms at that time;
the fame hopes, which had so often deceived the
party, fill amused them, and they expeced that
the obstinacy of the Hugonots would soon be
subdued, and that Charles would then be at
liberty to ad with vigor in Scotland. Mean.
while, a supply of money was sent, and if the
castle could be held out till Whitfunday, effec
tual aid was promised ". Maitland's genius de-
lighted in forming schemes that were dangerous;
and Kirkaldy possessed the intrepidity necessary
for putting them in execution. The castle, they
knew, was so situated, that it might defy all the
Regent's power. Elizabeth, they hoped, would
not violate the treaty with France, by fending
forces to his affifance; and if the French Ihould

" Digges, 314.

be able to land any considerable body of men, it Boo K
might be poflible to deliver the Queen from cap- vl.
tivity, or at least to balance the influence of France s5a.
and England in such a manner, as to rescue Scot.
land from the dishonorable dependence upon the
latter, under which it had fallen. This splendid,
but chimerical projed, they preferred to the
friendllhip of Morton. They encouraged the
negociation, however, because it served to gain
time; they proposed, for the fame purpose, that
the whole of the Queen's party should be com-
prehended in it, and that Kirkaldy thould retain
thecommand of the catle fix months after the treaty
was signed. His interest prompted the Regent to
reject the former; his penetration discovered the
danger of complying with the latter; and all hopes
of accommodation vanished ".
As soon as the truce expired, Kirkaldy began to
fire on the city of Edinburgh, which by the return
of the inhabitants whom he had expelled, was
devoted as zealously as ever to the King's cause.
But as the Regent had now set on foot a treaty
with Chatelherault and Huntly, the cessation of
arms Rill continued with them.

They were less scrupulous than the other party, Acrepted by
and listened eagerly to his overtures. The Duke Chatelhe.
was naturally unsteady, and the approach of old aul'and
age increased his irresolution, and aversion to ac-
tion. The miseries of civil discord had affliced
Scotland almost five years, a length of time far
" Melv. 2z5, &c.

0.3

BOOK beyond the duration of any former contest. The

vl. war, inllead of doing service, had been detri.
1573. mental to the Queen; and more ruinous than any

foreign invasion to the kingdom. In prosecuting
it, neither party had gained much honor; both
bad suffered great lolTes; and had exhausted their
own cRates, in wafting those of their adversaries.
The commons were in the utmost mifety, and
longed :rdently for a peace, which might ter.
minate this frultlefs but deftruetive quarrel.

Artic'. or A great ftep was taken towards this desirable
tb r.I"y. event. by the treaty concluded at Perth, between

the Regent on one hand, and Chatelherault and
Huntly on the other, under the mediation of Kil.
legrew, Elizabeth's Ambassador ". The chief
artides in it were there; that all the parties corn.
prehended in the treaty should declare their ap.
probation of the Reformed religion, now eltab.
lilbed in the kingdom; that they should submit
to the King's government, and own Morton's
authority as Regent; that they (hould acknow-
ledge every thing done in opposition to the King,
fioce his coronation, to be illegal; that on both
fides the prisoners who had been taken flould be
set at liberty, and the eflates which had been
forfeited fbould be reltored to their proper owners;
that the ad of attainder passed againIt the
Queen's adherents fliould be repealed, and
indemnity granted for all the crimes of which

'° See Append. N. XXVI.

they had been guilty since the fifteenth of June, B o o
one thousand five hundred and fixty-feven; and vi.
that the treaty ihould be ratified by the common '57-
consent of both parties in parliament ".

Kirkaldy, though abandoned by his alfociates, Siegeofthe
who neither discovered solicitude nor made provi. Ediiburgh.
sion for his safety, did not lose courage, nor en-
tertain any thoughts of accommodation ". Though
all Scotland had now submitted to the King, he
fill resolved to defend the castle in the Queen's-
name; and to wait the arrival of the promifeq
succours. The Regent was in want of every thing
necessary for carrying on a siege. But Elizabeth,
who determined, at any rate, to bring the dissensions
in Scotland to a period, before the French could
find leisure to take part in the quarrel, soon afforded
him sufficient supplies. Sir William Drury marched

Crawf. Mlem. 25r.

" Melvil, whose brother, Sir Robert, was one of those who
joined with Kirkaldy in the defence of the castle, and who was
himl'elfRfrongly attached to their party, asserts that Kirkaldy
offered to accept of any reasonable terms of composition , but
that all his offers were rejected by the Regent. Melv. 240.
lut as Elizabeth was, at that time, extremely desirous of re-
foring peace in Scotland, and her Ambassador Killegrew, as
sell as the Earl of Rothes, used their utmolt endeavours to
persuade Kirkaldy to accede to the treaty of Perth , it seems
more credible to impute the continuance of hostilities to
Kirlaldy's obltinacy, his distrust of Morton, or his hope of
foreign aid, than to any other cause.

That this was really the cafe, is evident from the positive
telimonyofSpotfw. 269, 270. Camd. 448. Johnft. Hist.
1, 4 Digges, 14. Crawford's account agrees, in the main,
sith theirs, Mem. 263.

04

o o K into Scotland with fifteen hundred foot, and a con.
vl. fiderahle train of artillery. The Regent joined him
7w-1. with all his forces; and trenches were opened, and
ApdLs. approaches regularly carried on againIt the caRlte,

Kirkaldy, though discouraged by the lots of a great
fnum of money, remitted to him from France, and
which fell into the Regent's hands through the treae
chery of Sir James Balfour, the most corrupt man ol
that age. defended hirrfelfwith bravery, augmented
by despair. Three-and-thirty days be refited all the
efforts of the Scotch and English, who puhled on
their attacks with courage, and with emulation.
Nor did he demand a parly, till the fortifications were
battered down, and one of the wells in the cafle
dried up, and the other choaked with rubbih. Even
then, his spirit was unfubdued, and he determined
rather to fall gloriously behind the lat intrenchment,
than to yield to his inveterate enemies. But his
garrison was not animated with the fame heroic or
desperate resolution, and, rising in a mutiny, forced
May. 2,. him to capirulate. He surrendered himself to Drury,

who promised, in the name of his milfrefs, that
he /hould be favorably treated. Together with
him, James Kirkaldy his brother, Lord Home,
Mditland, Sir Robert Melvil, a few citizens of
Edinburgh, and about one hundred and sixty
folliers, were made prisoners "..

Several of the officers, who had been kept in pay

during the war, prevailed on their men to accom-
pany them into the Low-countries, and entering

" Cal. iL 408. Melv. 240. Crawf. Mem. 265.

into the service of the States, added, by their oo0
gallant behaviour, to the reputation for military vl.
virtue, which has always been the charatleriltic 1S73.
of the Scottish nation.

Thus by the treaty with Chatelheraultand Huntly, Review oflthe
And the surrender of the cafle, the civil wars in 'thpateo
Scotland were brought to a period. When we
revlew the state of the nation, and compare the
firength of the two fations, Mary's partisans
among the nobles appear, manifestly, to have been
superior both in numbers and in power. But these
advantages were more than counterbalanced by
others, which their antagonists enjoyed. Political
abilities, military {kill, and all the talents which
times of action form, or call forth, appeared chiefly
on the King's fide. Nor could their enemies boast
of any man, who equalled the intrepidity of Mur.
nri, tempered with wisdom; the profound sagacity
of Morton; the subtle genius, and insinuating
addrref of Maitland; or the successful valor of
Kir;ldy; all of which were, at first, employed in
lying the foundations of the King's authbrity. On
the one fide, measures were concerted with pru.
dence, and executed with vigor; on the other,
their resolutions were ral), and their conduct feeble.
Ihe people, animated with zeal for religion, and
prompted by indignation against the Queen, warmly
supported the King's cause. The Clergy threw the
whole weight of their popularity into the fame
Icale. By means of these, as well as by the power.
ful interposition of England, the King's government
was finally eftablilhed. Mary loft even that (hadow

O K of sovereignty, which, amidst all her fuffrings,
TL Ihe had hitherto retained among part of her own
"*7 fubjeds. As The was no longer permitted to have

an Ambassador at the court of England, the only
mark of dignity which ihe had, for some time,
enjoyed there, {he must henceforth be confidered
as an exile stripped of all the ensigns of royalty;
guarded with anxiety in the one kingdom, and
totally deserted or forgotten in the other.
KiM*e~ t Kirkaldy and his associates remained in Drury's

custody , and were treated by him with great
humanity, until the Queen of England, whose
prisoners they were, should determine their fate.
Morton insisted that they Ihould susser the punilb.
ment due to their rebellion and obfiinacy; and
declared that, so long as they were allowed to
live, he did not reckon his own person or authority
secure; and Elizabeth, without regarding Drury's
honor, or his promises in her name, gave them up
to the Regent's disposal. He first confined them to
separate prisons; and, soon after, with Elizabeth's
Lupa 3. consent, condemned Kirkaldy, and his brother, to

be hanged at the cross of Edinburgh. Maitland,
who did not expet to be treated more favorably,
prevented the ignominy of a public execution, by
a voluntary death, and "ended his days," fays
Melvil, " after the old Roman fathion"."

While the Regent was wreaking his vengeance

on the remains of her party in Scotland, Mary,
incapable of affording them any relief, bewailed

" Mckl. 242.

their misfortunes in the solitude of her prison. At B o o C
the fame time, her health began to be much VI.
impaired by confinement, and want of exercise. 1573.
At the entreaty of the French Ambassador, Lord
Shrewfl)ury her keeper was permitted to carry her
to Buxton wells, not far from Tuthbury, the place
of her imprisonment. Cecil, who lately had been
created B.ron of Burleigh, and Lord High Trea.
fircr of hnglind, happened to be there at the
fime time. l hough no minister ever entered more
warmly into the views of a Sovereign, or gave
frong,'r proofs of his fidelity and attachment, than
this great man, yet such was Elizabeth's distrust
of every person who approached the Queen of
Scots, that her suspicions, in consequence of this
interview, seem to have extended even to him;
and, while Mary jufily reckoned him her most
d,.ngerous enemy, he found some difficulty in per-
funding his own mistress that he was not partial
to that unhappy Queen ".

The Duke of Alva was this year recalled from
the government of the Netherlands, where his
haughty and oppreflive adminiflration roused a
spirit, in attempting to subdue which, Spain ex-
hauftld its treasures, ruined its armies, and loft
its glory. Requefens, who succeeded him, was of
a milder temper, and of a less enterprising genius.
This event delivered Elizabeth from the perpetual
dif'uietude. occasioned by Alva's negociations with
the Scottish Queen, and his zeal for her interest.
s Strype, ii. 248. 288.

l o 0 K Though the kingdom was now fettled in pro

vi. found peace, many of the evils which accompany
"i7. civil war were ft1ll felt. The restraints of law,

dmi.ti. which, in times of public confusion, are littl
,i.. ema regarded even by civilized nations, were totally
E*L ddefpifed by a fierce people, unaccultomed to I

regular adminiRration of justice. The disorders in
every corner of the kingdom were become intoler.
able; and, under the protection of the one or the
other facion, crimes of every kind were committed
with impunity. The Regent set himself to redref
these, and, by his industry and vigor, order and
security were re-eftablilhed in the kingdom. But he
loft the reputation due to this important service,
by the avarice, which he discovered, in performn
ing it; and his own exacions became more perni.
cious to the nation than all the irregularities which
le refrained ". Spies and informers were every
where employed; the remembrance of old offences
was revived; imaginary crimes were invented;
petty trespasses were aggravated; and delinquents
were forced to compound for their lives, by the
payment of exorbitant fines. At the fame time,
the current coin was debased ", licences were fold

See Append. N'. XXVII.
The corruption of the coin, during Morton's adminif.

tration, was very great. Although the quantity of current
money coined out of a pound of bullion, was gradually
increased by former princes; the standard or fineness suffertd
little alteration, and the mixture of alloy was nearly the
fame with what is now used. But Morton mixed a fourth
part of alloy with every pound of silver, and funk, by
consequence, the value of coin in proportion. In the yer

for carrying on prohibited branches of commerce, B o o kt
unufnal taxes were imposed on commodities; and all vI.
the refinements in oppression, from which nations Sre.
so imperfectly polilhed as the Scots are usually
exempted, were put in practice. None of these
were complained of more loudly, or with greater
reason, than his injustice towards the Church.
The thirds of benefices, out of which the Clergy
received their subsistence, had always been slowly
and irregularly paid to collecors, appointed by
the General Assembly; and, during the civil wars,
no payment could be obtained in several parts
of the kingdom. Under color of redressing this
grievance, and upon a promise of alligning every
Alinifter a flipend within his own parifi, the
Regent extorted from the Church the thirds to
which they had right by law. But the Clergy,
inflead of reaping any advantage from this altera-
tion, found that payments became more irregular
and dilatory than ever. One Minister was com.
monly burdened with the care of four or five
palishes, a pitiful salary was allotted him, and the
Regent's insatiable avarice seized on the reft of
the fund ".

The death of Charles IX. which happened this
year, was a new misfortune to the Scottili Queen.
Henry IlI. who succeeded him, had not the fame

ligR, all the money coined by him was called in, and
appointed to be recoined. The fandard was restored to the
iame purity as formerly. Ruddim. Pref. to AnderC Diplon.
P. ,4.

Crawf. Mer. 273. Spets a73. Cad. ii. 4So . 4i7.

0 o K attachment to her person; and his jealousy of thl
vl. house of Guise, and obsequiousness to the Oueei
"7' l Mother, greatly alienated him from her interft.

7 he death of the Duke of Chatelherault muf

likewise be confidered as some loss to Mary. A
the Parliament had frequently declared him nex
heir to the Crown, this entitled him to great refpee
among his countrymen, and enabled him, mor
than any other person in the kingdom, to counter
balance the Regent's power.

Soon after, at one of the fuual interviews betwee:

the wardens of the Scottlib and Englifb marches
a scuffle happened, in which the English wer
worsted; a few killed on the spot; and Sir Jame
I'orrefter, the warden, with several gentlemen wli
attended him, taken prisoners. But tbth Elizabed
and the Regent were too sensible of the advantage
which resulted from the good underfIanding that
subsisted between the two kingdoms, to allow
this flight accident to interrupt it.

_Attmts *,! The domestic tranquillity of the kingdom was it
*e CIlrg some danger of being disturbed by another cause
Sl^tt 'Though the persons raised to the dignity of Bilhop$
ricr. possessed very small revenues, and a very moderate

degree of power, the Clergy, to whom the Regent
and all his measures were become extremely odious
began to be jealous of that order. Knowing thai
corruptions fleal into the Church gradually, under
honorable names, and upon decent pretences, they
were afraid that, from such small beginning,, the
hierarchy might grow in time, to be as powerfu
and oppressive as ever. 'T he chief author of theft

fufpcilons was Mr. Andrew Melvil, a man, diftin. B o o s
,uilhed by his uncommon erudition, by the severity n.
of his manners, and the intrepidity of his mind. 1'57s
But, bred up in the retirement of a college, he
was unacquainted with the arts of life; and being
more attentive to the ends which he pursued,
than to the means which he employed for promot.
ing them, he often defeated laudable designs, by
the impetuosity and imprudence with which he
carried them on. A queltion was moved by him
in the allembly, " whether the office of Bilhop, as
now exercised in the kingdom, were agreeable to
the word of God " In the ecclesiastical judica.
tories, continual complaints were made of the
Bihops for neglet of duty, many of which their
known remissness too well justified. The Biflop
of Dunkeld, being accused of dilapidating his
benefice, was found guilty by the assembly. The
Regent, instead of checking, connived at these
disputes about ecclesiastical government, as they
diverted the zeal of the Clergy from attending to
his daily encroachments on the patrimony of the
Church ".

The weight of the Regent's oppressive adminif- Is7s.
tration had, hitherto, fallen chiefly on those in H i"rriOft
the lower and middle rank; but he began now to nobleg.
take such lfeps, as convinced the nobles, that
teir dignity would not long exempt them from
feling the effects of his power. An accident,
Which was a frequent cause of dissension among
"3 Cald, AFeablieb , 1574, See. Johni. HiA if.

B o 0 K the Scottifl nobles, occasioned a difference betweer

vl. the Earls of Argyll and Athol. A vassal of the
7al& former had made some depredations on the lands

of the latter. Athol took arms to punilh the offen
der; Argyll, to protect him; and this ignoble
quarrel they were ready to decide in the field
when the Regent, by interposing his authority
obliged them to disband their forces. Both of them
bad been guilty of irregularities, which, thougi
common, were contrary to the letter of the law
Of these the Regent took advantage, and resolvcd
to found on them a charge of treason. This defigi
was revealed to the Earls by one of Morton'
retainers. The common danger, to which they were
exposed, compelled them to forget old quarrels
and to unite in a close confederacy, for thti
mutual defence. Their jundCion rendered ther
formidable; they despised the summons which th
Regent gave them to appear before a court c
justice; and he was obliged to desist from any
further prosecution. But the injury he intended
made a deep imprefion on their minds, and drew
upon him severe vengeance '.

Nor was he more successful in an attempt

which he made, to load Lord Claud Hamilto
with the guilt of having formed a conspiracy
against his life. Though those, who were suppose
to be his accomplices, were seized, and tortured
no evidence of any thing criminal appeared
but', on the contrary, many circumftancl

" Crawf Mem. 2a8.

discovered

discovered his innocence, as well as the Regent's B oo K'
ferret views,. in imputing to him such an odious vr.
design i. *wvr.

h'Ie Scottish Nobles, who were almost equal They nrn

No their Mlonarchs in power, and treated by them towards tile
with much distinction, observed these arbitrary Rnlg.
proceeldings of a Regent with the utmost indig-
nation. The people, who, under a form of go-
vernment extremely simple, had been little ac-
c:llonmcd to the burden of taxes, complained
lotudly of the Regent's rapacity. And all began
to turn their eyes towards the young King, from
whom they expeted the redress of all their griev-
aces, and the return of a more gentle and more
equal adminitfration.

James was now in the twelfth year of his age. James,'
The Queen, soon after his birth, had committed education
him to the care of the Earl of Mar, and during the tion.
civil wars he had resided securely in the cafile of
Stirling. Alexander Erfcine, that nobleman's brother,
had the chief direction of his education. Under him,
thefimous Buchanan acted as preceptor, together
wih three other masters, the most eminent the nation'
aforded for skill in thofefciences which were deemed
necefrary for a prince. As the young King Ihowed an
uncommon pafilon for learning, and made great
prigrefs in it; the Scots fancied that they already
dilcovercd in him, all those virtues which the fondness
orcredulity of fubjecs usually ascribe to princes dur.
githeir minority. Butas James was till far from that

"Crawf. Mem. 287.
V'u. 11. R

o o K age at which the law permitted him to fiTume th
vl. reins of government, the Regent did not fufficientl
MY. attend to the sentiment of the people, nor refled

how naturally these prejudices in his favor migh
encourage the King to anticipate that period. H
not only neglected to secure the friendlhipofthofe
who were about the King's person, and whb
pofeffed his ear, but had even exasperated some o
them byperfonal injuries. Their resentment concur

tk r. rpi red with the ambition of others, in infusing into'th
oi3f th King early suspicions of Morton's power and designs
Dows. A King, they told him, had often reason to fear

seldom to love, a Regent. Prompted by ambition
and by interest, he would endeavour to keep the
Prince in perpetual infancy, at a distance from
his fubjecs, and unacquainted with business. A
finall degree of vigor, however, was fufficien
to break the yoke. Subjecs naturally reverence
their Sovereign, and become impatient of the
temporary and delegated jurifdition of a Regent
Morton had governed with a rigor, unknown to
the ancient Monarchs of Scotland. The natior
groaned under his oppressions; and would wcl
come the first profped of a milder administration
At present the King's name was hardly mentioned
in Scotland, his friends were without influence
and his favorites without honor. But one effor
would discover Morton's power to be as feeble,
as it was arbitrary. The fame attempt would pui
himself in possession of his just authority, and refcu
the nation frora intolerable tyranny. If he did no

regard his own rights as a King, let him liften, B o O
at leaf, to the cries of his people ". VI.

These suggestions made a deep impreflion on the s7.
young King, who was trained up in an opinion that formed a.
he was born to command. His approbation of the ga.,ii the
design, however, was of small consequence, without Rg.ct'.
the concurrence of the nobles. The Earls of Argyll
and Athol, two of the molt powerful of that body,
were animated with implacable resentment against
the Regent. To them the Cabal in Stirling castle
communicated the plot which was on foot; and they
entering warmly into it, Alexander Erskine, who,
since the death of his brother, and during the
minority of his nephew, had the command of that
fort, and the custody of the King's person, admitted
them secretly into the King's presence. They gave
him the fame account of the misery of his sub-
jeds, under the Regent's arbitrary adminiftra-
tion; they complained loudly of the injustice
with which themselves had been treated, and be-
fought the King, as the only means for redrefing
the grievances of the nation, to call a council of
all the nobles. James consented, and letters were
i(luad, in his name, for that purpose; but the two
Earls took care that they Ihould be fcnt only to
loch as were known to bear no good will to
Mlorton ".

The number of these was, however, so confi-
derable, that, on the day appointed, far the
rcater part of the nobles assembled at Stirling;
1 Meldil. 249. " Spots. 279.

R

1 o oK and so highly were they incensed against Morton

VI. that although, on receiving intelligence of Argyl
r7S. and Athols interview with the King, be had made;

b feint as if he would resign the Regency, they advise

the King, without regarding this offer, to depriv
him of his office, and to take the administration c
government into his own hands. Lord Glamis th
Chancellor, and Herries, were appointed to fignif
thisrefolution to Morton, who was, atthattime

He nfiEs in Dalkeith, his usual place of residence. Nothinl
stit. * could equal the joy with which this unexpecde

resolution filled the nation, but the surprise occasionei
by the seeming alacrity with which the Regent de
scended from so high a fation. He neither wantc
sagacity to foresee the danger of resigning, no
inclination to keep poffeflion of an office, for th
expiration of which the law had fixed so distant;
term. Butall the sources, whence the facion ofwbic
he was head, derived their strength, had eithe
failed, or now supplied his adversaries with th
means of humbling him. The Commons, th
city of Edinburgh, the Clergy, were all totall:
alienated from him, by his multiplied opprel
sions. Elizabeth, having lately bound herself b
treaty, to fend a considerable body of troops ti
the afliftance of the inhabitants of the Nethel
lands, who were struggling for liberty, had litt
leisure to attend to the affairs of Scotland; an
as fle had nothing to dread from France, i
whose councils the Princes of Lorrain had not,;
that time, much influence, she was not difpleafec
perhaps, at the birth of new factions in tt

kingdom. Even those nobles, who had long B o o
been joined with Morton in facion, or whom he vI.
had attachtd to his person by benefits, Glamis, Tse.
Lindsay, Ruthven, Pitcairn the secretary, Mur.
ray of 'Tillibardin Comptroller, all deserted his
falling fortunes, and appeared in the council at
Stirling. So many concurring circumstances
convinced Morton of his own weakness, and
determined him to give way to a torrent, which
was too impetuous to be rcfifted. He attended March it
the Chancellor and Herries to Edinburgh; was
present when the King's acceptance of the go.
vernment was proclaimed; and, in the pretence
of the people, surrendered to the King ill the
authority to which he had any claim in virtue of
his office. This ceremony was accompanied with
such excessive joy and acclamations of the mul-
titude, as added, no doubt, to the anguish which
an ambitious spirit must feel when compelled to
renounce supreme power; and convinced Mortot
how entirely he had loft the affedtions of his coun
trymen. He obtained, however, from the King,
an adt, containing the approbation of every thing
done by him in the exercise of his office, aind a
pardon, in the most ample form that his fear or
caution could devise, of all past offences, crimes,
and treasons. The nobles, who adhered tb the
King, bound themselves, under a great penalty,
to procure the ratification of this ad, in the first
parliament ".
" Spot 278. Crawf.Mem. 289. Cald. ii 52a.

R3

X o o x A council of twelve Peers was appointed to affia

VL the King in the administration of affairs. Morton,
'78. deserted by his own party, and unable to struggle
tDwI"tch with the fation, which governed abfolutelyatcourt,
t* .dOtMm retired to one of his feats, and seemed to enjoy the
oftea, tranquillity, and to be occupied only in the amue.

ments, of a country life. His mind, however, was
deeply disquieted with all the uneasy reflections
which accompany disappointed ambition, and intent
on fcbemes for recovering his former grandeur. Even
in this retreat, which the people called the Lion's-en,
his wealth and abilities rendered him formidable;
and the new Counsellors were so imprudent as to
rouse him, by the precipitancy with which they
hastened to strip him of all the remains of power.
They required him to surrender the castle of
Edinburgh, which was fill in his poffefion. He
refuted at firit to do so, and began to prepare for
its defence; but the citizens of Edinburgh having
taken arms, and repulsed part of the garrison,
which was sent out to guard a convoy of provi.
sIons, he was obliged to give up that important
fortress, without refitance. This encouraged hit
advcefaries to call a parliament to meet at Edin.
burgh, and to multiply their demands upon him,
in such a manner, as convinced him that nothing
kles than his utter ruin would latisfy their inve.
terate hatred.
..Their power and popularity, however, began
already to decline. The Chancellor, the ablet
and most moderate man in the party, having.been
killed a- Stirling, in an accidental rencounter

between his followers and those of the Earl of
Crawford; Athol, who was appointed his successor vl.
in that high office, tile Earls of Eglinton, Cathnefs, Is»s.
and Lord Ogilvie, all the prime favorites at court,
were either avowed Papists, or fufpeded of leaning
to theopinions of that sec. In an age, when the return
of popery was so much and fojuflly dreaded, this
gave universal alarm. As Morton had always
treated the Papists with rigor,this unseasonable favor
toperfonsofthat religion made all zealous Protestants
remember that circumstance in his administration
with great praise ".

Alorton, to whom none of there particulars were Rernme his
unknown, thought this the properjundure for setting formr a.
to work the instruments which he had been preparing. hy.
Having gained the confidence of the Earl of Mar,
and of the Countess his mother, he infinuatedto
them, that Alexander Erfkire had formed a plot to
deprive his nephew of the government of Stirling
cafile, and the custody of the King's person; and
easily induced an ambitious woman, and a youth of
twenty, to employ force to prevent this supposed
injury. The Earl repairing suddenly to Stirling, and
being admitted, as usual, into the castle with his
attendants, seized the gates early in the morning, and
turnedout his Uncle, who dreaded no danger from April ad
his hands. The soldiers of the garrison submitted to
him as their governor, and, with little danger and
noeffufion of blood, he became makler both of tho
bing's person, and of the fortress '.
" Spotr 28. ' Cald. ii. 5a,

R4

3 o o K An event so unexpeded occasioned great con:

vi. Reernation Though Morton's hand did not appear
n7s. in the execution, he was universally believed to be

theauthor of the attempt. The new Counsellors saw
it to be necessary. for their own safety, to change
their measures, and, instead of pursuing him with
such implacaMle relentment, to enter into termsof
accommodation with an adversary, still focapable
of creating them trouble. Four were named, on each
fide, to adjust their differences. They met not far
from Dalkeith; and when they had brought matters
near a conctlfion, Morton, who was too sagacious
not to improve the advantage which their security
and their attention to the treaty afforded him, set out
Ma z4. in the night-time for Stirling, and having gained

Murray of Tillibardin, Mar's uncle, was admit.
ted by him into the castle; and managing matters
there with his usual dexterity, be soon had more
entirely the command of the fort, than the Earl
himself He was likewise admitted to a feat ia
the privy council, and acquired as complete an
as endant in it ".

As the time appointed for the meeting of par.

liament at Edinburgh now approached, this gave
him some anxiety. He was afraid of conducing
the young King to a city, whole inhabitants were
so much at the devotion- of the adverse fadtion.
He was no less unwilling to leave James behind
at Stirling. In order to avoid this dilemma,
he issued a proclamation, in the King's names

"'Cald. ii. ;t6.

chang;ig the place of meeting from Edinburgh to B o o k
Stirling castle. This Athol and his party represented Vl.
as a Rep altogether unconstitutional. The King, 1¶78.
said they, is Morton's prisoner; the pretended
coulfcllors are his slaves; a parliament, to which
all the nobles may repair without fear, and where
they may deliberate with freedom, is absolutely
neceffcry for fettling the nation, after disorders of
such long continuance. But in an assembly. called
contrary to all form, held within the walls of a
garrison, and overawed by armed men, what
safety could members expet ? what liberty could
prevail in debate? or what benefit result to the
public? The parliament met, however, on the day July 15.
appointed, and, notwithstanding the protestation
of the Earl of Montrose and Lord Lindsay, in
name of their party, proceeded to business. The
King's acceptance of the government was confirmed;
the ad granted to Morton, for his fectrity, rati.
sied; some regulations, with regard to the numbers
and authority of the privy council, were agreed
upon; and a pension for life granted to the Coun.
tefs of Mar, who had been so inflrumental in
bringing about the late revolution".
Meanwhile, Argyll, Athol, and their followers, Argyll and

. Athol take

took arms, upon the specious pretence of rescuing arso tagn
the King from captivity, and the kingdom from him.
npprefrion. James himself, impatient of the servitude
in wvhich he was held, by a man whom he had
long been taught to hate, secretly encouraged their
" Cald. ii. 547. Parl. q Jac. VI.

1 0 o K enterprise; though, at the fame time, he wa

vI. obliged not only to disavow them in public, but

i to levy forces against them, and even to declare,

by proclamation, that he was perfectly free from
any constraint, either upon his person, or his will.
Both fides quickly took the field. Argyll and
Athol were at the bead of seven thousand men;
4lFa I. the Earl of Angus, Morton's nephew, met them

with an army five thousand strong; neither party,
however, was eager to engage. Morton diftruted
the fidelity of his own troops. The two Earls were
sensible that a single victory, however complete,
would not be decisive; and as they were in no
condition to undertake the siege of Stirling catle,
where the King was kept, their firength would
soon be exhausted, while Morton's own wealth,
and the patronage of the Queen of England, might
furnllh him with endless resources. By the media.
tion of Bowes, whom Elizabeth had sent into
Scotland to negociate an accommodation between

lnibe.th e the two factions, a treaty was concluded, in confe
acow"',da. quence of which, Argyll and Athol were admitted
tio, betwet into the King's pretence; some of their party were

added to the Privy Council; and a Convention
of nobles called, in order to bring all remaining
differences to an amicable issue ".

As soon as James assumed the government into his

own hands, he dispatched the Abbot of Dunferm.
ling to inform Elizabeth of that event; to offer to
renew the alliance between the two kingdoms; and

"Crawf. tlem. 0o7.

to demand poffeflion of the estate, which had lately B o o *
fallen to him by the death of his grandmother, the VI.
Countess of Lenox. That Lady's second son had 157'
left one daughter, Arabella Stewart, who was born
in England. And as the chief objection against the
pretensions of the Scottifli line to the Crown of
England, was that maxim of Englifli law, which
excludes aliens from any right of inheritance within
the kingdom, Elizabeth, by granting this demand,
would have established a precedent in James's
favor, that might have been deemed decisive,
with regard to a point, which it had been her
:onfiant care to keep undecided. Without susser.
ing this delicate question to be tried, or allowing
any new light to be thrown on that, which she
confidered as the great mystery of her reign, she
commanded Lord Burleigh, Master of the Wards,
to sequester the rents of the estate; and by this
method of proceeding, gave the Scottill King
early warning how necessary it would be to court
her favor, if ever he hoped for success in claims
of greater importance, but equally liable to be
controverted ".

After many delays, and with much difficulty, 57i.
the contending nobles were at lalt brought to
some agreement. But it was followed by a tragical
event. Morton, in token of reconcilement, having
invited the leaders of the opposite party to a great
entertainment, Athol the Chancellor was, foot April4.
after, taken ill, and died within a few days. The

' Camd. 461,

a o o x symptoms and violence of the disease gave rife to

VL strong suspicions of his being poisoned; and though
*s79* the pbyficians, who opened his body, differed in

opinion as to the cause of the distemper, the Cban.
cellor's relations publicly accused Morton of that
odious crime. The advantage which visibly accrued
to him, by the removal of a man of great abilities,
and averse from all his measures, was sufficient proof
of his guilt to the people, who are ever fond of
imputing the death of eminent persons to extra-
ordinary causes ".

Mott,, in The office of Chancellor was beltowed upon
'rpT' Ai Argyll, whom this preferment reconciled, in a
the raily of great measure, to Morton's administration. He had
Hamil to. now recovered all the authority he possessed during

his Regency, and had entirely broken, or baffled,
the power and cabals of his enemies. None of the
great families remained to be the objeds of his jea.
lousy, or to obftrudt his designs, but that of Hamil.
ton The Earl of Arran, the eldest brother, had
never recovered the {hock which he received from
the ill success of his paflion for the Queen, and had
now altogether loft his reason. Lord John, the
second brother, was in poffeflion of the family elate.
Lord Claud was Commendator of Paisley; both
of them young men, ambitious, and enterprising.
Morton dreaded their influence in the kingdom; the
courtiers hoped to share their spoils among them;
and as all Princes naturally view their successors
with jealousy and hatred, it was easy to inflk

" Spotw. 3;6.

there passions into the mind of the young King. B o 0 K
A pretence was at hand to juRify the most violent vI.
proceedings. The pardon, Ripulated in the treaty 579
of Perth, did not extend to such as were accessary
to the murder of the Regents Murray or Lenox.
Lord John and his brother were suspected of being
the authors of both these crimes, and had been
included in a general act of attainder on that
account. Without summoning them to trial, or
examining a single witness to prove the charge,
this attainder was now thought sufficient to sub.
je& them to all the penalties which they would
have incurred by being formally convicted. The
Earls of Morton, Mar, and Eglinton, together
with the Lords Ruthven, Boyd, and Cathcart,
received a commillion to seize their persons and
efates. On a few hours warning, a considerable
body of troops was ready, and marched towards
Hamilton in hostile array. Happily the two brothers
made their escape, though with great difficulty.
But their lands were conficated; the castles of
Hamilton and Draffan besieged; those who de.
fended them punilhed. The Earl of Arran, though
incapable, from his situation, of committing any
crime, was involved, by a shameful abuse of law,
in the common ruin of his family; and as if he,'
too, could have been guilty of rebellion, he was
confined a close prisoner. These proceedings, so
contrary to the fundamental principles of justice,
were all ratified in the subsequent parliament "

Crawf. em. 3e . . SpQotw. o06,

o o 0r About this time Mary sent, by Naue her fecre
VL tary a letter to her son, together with some jewels
Cis of value, and a veR embroidered with her own

bands. But as {he gave him only the title of Prince
of Scotland, the messenger was difmifed, without
being admitted into his presence".

Though Elizabeth had, at this time, no particular

reason to fear any attempt of the Popilh Princes
in Mary's favor, ibe till continued to guard her
with the fame anxious care. The acquisition of
Portugal, on the one hand, and the defence of the
Netherlands, on the other, fully employed the
councils and arms of Spain. France, torn in pieces
by intefline commotions, and under a weak and
capricious Prince, despised and distrusted by his
own fubjeds, was in no condition to disturb its

Tc~istic~ neighbours. Elizabeth had long amused that court
+ormart m t by carrying on a treaty of marriage with the Duke

eth nUd" of Alencon, the King's brother. But whether, at

bte Duke o the age of forty-five, fie really intended to marry
Aie'Uon. a Prince of twenty? whether the pleasure of being

flattered and courted, made her liften to the addref-
fes of so young a lover, whom she allowed to
visit her at two different times, and treated with
the moR diltinguilhing refpe& ? or whether confi-
derations of interest predominated in this, as well
as in every other transaCtion of her reign, are
problems in history which we are not concerned to
resolve. During the progress of this negociation,
which was drawn out to an extraordinary length,

" Craw£ Mlc. 314

'lary could expedt no affiflance from the French B 0 t
court, and seems to have held little correspondence vi.
with it; and there was no period in her reign, 7*9.
wherein Elizabeth enjoyed more perfedt security.

Morton seems at this time to have been equally Two favori.
secure; but his security was not so well founded. tes gain an
He had weathered out one storm, had crufled his ,c,^n,.
adversaries, and was again in poffeflion of the sole
direction of affairs. But as the King was now of
an age when the character and dispositions of the
mind begin to unfold themselves, and to become
vifble, the smallest attention to these might have
convinced him, that there was reason to expec
new and more dangerous attacks on his power.
James early discovered that exceflive attachment
to favorites, which accompanied him through his
whole life. This paflion, which naturally arises
from inexperience, and youthful warmth of heart,
was, at his age, far from being culpable; nor
could it well be expected that the choice of the
objets, on whom he placed his affedions, Ihould
be made with great ckill. The most considerable
of them was Efme Stewart, a native of France,
and son of a second brother of the Earl of Lenox.
He was difringuilhed by the title of Lord D'Aubigne,
anellate in France, which descended to him from
his anccftors, on whom it had been conferred, in
reward of their valor and services to the French
Crown. He arrived in Scotland about this time, on sept. ,
purpofc to demand the eRate and title of Lenox, to
wihich he pretended a legal right. He was received,
at firl, by the King with the refped due to so

OO K near a relation. The gracefulness of his person;
VI. the elegance of his dress, and his courtly behavi,
157s. our, made a great impression on James, who, even

in his more mature years, was little able to reifil
there frivolous charms; and his affection flowed
with its usual rapidity and profusion. Within a
few days after Stewart's appearance at court, he
was created Lord Aberbrothock, soon after Earl,
and then Duke of Lenox, Governor of Dunbarton
castle, Captain of the guard, sirs Lord of the
bed-chamber, and Lord High Chamberlain. At
the fame time, and without any of the envy oa
emulation which is usual among candidates foi
favor, Captain James Stewart, the second son ol
Lord Ochiltree, grew into great confidence Bul
notwithlfanding this union, Lenox and Captain
Stewart were petfons of very opposite characers
The former was naturally gentle, humane, candid,
but unacquainted with the Rlate of the country,
and milled, or misinformed by those whom he
trusted; not unworthy to be the companion ol
the young King in his amusements, but utterly
disqualified for ading as a MiniRfer in directing his
affairs. The latter was remarkable for all the vice!
which render a man formidable to his country!
and a pernicious counsellor to his Prince; noi
did he possel any one virtue to counterbalance
these vices, unless dexterity in conduting his owr
designs, and an enterprising courage, superior t
the sense of danger, may pars by that name
UnrefRrained by religion, regardless of decency
and undismayed by opposition, he aimed at object

seemingly

feem;ngly unattainable; but under a Prince void BO o K
f cxpcrintlce, and blind to all the dcfed of those vl.
who hJd gained his favor, his audacity was fuccefe- 157».
fhl, anil honors, wealth, and power, were the
reward of his crimes.

o,)th the favorites concurred in employing their rheyiabnrto

vio1le adldref to undermine Morton's cr dit, which in" trn. e
I.,ne obltruded their fuil poffelliot of power. As i'hu '.
James had been bred up with an aversion for that
,loblenan, who endeavoured rather to maintain
the authority of a tutor, than to a& with the
obfcquiotltfief of a minister, they found it no
difficult matter to accomplish their design Morton, October 17.
who could no longer keep the King fbut up
within the walls of Stirling caRle, having called a
parliament to meet at Edinburgh, brought him
thither. James made his entry into the capital with
great solemnity; the citizens received him with the
loudefl acclamations of joy, and with many expert
five pageants, according to the mode of that age.
Alter a long period of thirty seven years, during

ihtch, Scotland had been fubjeced to the dele-
pted power of Regents, or to the feeble govern-
ment of a woman; after having suffered all the
milries of civil war, and felt the insolence of foreign
arm:es, the nation rejoiced to fee the sceptre once
more in the hands of a King. Fond even of that fha.
dow of authority, which a Prince of fifteen could
polfl;, the Scots flattered themselves, that union,
crder, and tranquillity would now be restored to the
ki'onm. James opened the parliament with extra-
0rillull-y pomp, but nothing remarkable passed in it.
VOL. 11. S
[

B OO K These demonfirations, however, of the people's

VI. love and attachment to their Sovereign, encou.
i18o. raged the favorites to continue their insinuations

againIf Morton; and as the King now resided in
the palace of Holy-rood-houfe. to which all his
fubjeds had access, the cabal against the Earl grew
daily stronger, and the intrigue, which occasioned
his fall, ripened gradually.

Mmrtone.dea Morton began to be fcnfible of his danger, and
eo to pe- endeavoured to put a flop to the career of Lenox's

preferment, by representing him as a formidable
enemy to the Reformed religion, a secret agent
in favor of Popery, and a known emissary of the
house of Guise. I[he clergy, apt to believe every
rumor of this kind, spread the alarm among the
people. But Lenox, either out of complaisance to
his mailer, or convinced by the arguments of
some learned Divines, whom the King appointed
to infirud him in the principles of the Protefant
religion, publicly renounced the errors of Popery,
in the Church of St. Giles, and declared himself
a member of the Church of Scotland, by signing
her Confeflion of Faith. This, though it did not
remove all suspicions, nor silence some zealous
preachers, abated, in a great degree, the force of
the accusation ".

On the other hand, a rumor prevailed that

nlorton was preparing to seize the King's perfol,
and to carry him into England. Whether despair
of maintaining his power by any other means,

" Crawf. Mem. 319. SpotC ;S8.

had driven him to make any overture of that kind B o o K
to the lntlihl court, or whether it was a calumny vl.
inc'teld by his adversaries to render him odious, x8o.

lannot now be determined with certainty. As he
decllaed at his death that such a design had never
entered into his thoughts, the latter seems to be
moli probable. It afforded a pretence, however, for
reviving the office of Lord Chamberlain, which
had been for some time disused. That honor was
conferred on Lenox. Alexander Erskine, Morton's
capital enemy, was his deputy; they had under
them a band of gentlemen, who were appointed
conitantly to attend the King, and to guard his
person ".

Morton was not ignorant of what his enemies Elizabeth i.
intended to insinuate byfuch unusual precautions for 'erP",f'r i
the King's safety; and as his last resource, applied
to Elizabeth, whose protection had often flood him
in Itead in his greatest difficulties. In consequence
of this application, Bowes her Envoy accused Lenox
of practices against the peace of the two kingdoms,
and insisted, in her name, that he should instantly
bhremoved from the Privy Council. Such an unpre.
cedented demand was confidered by the Counsel-
or, . a a affront to the King, and an encroachment
on the independence of the kingdom. They affected
to call in question the Envoy's powers, and upon
ihat pretence refused him farther audience; and
he retiring in disgust, and without taking leave,
Sir Alexander Home was sent to expoltulate with
' Cranf. Mcm. 320.

i~~~~~~~~

B O 0 X Elizabeth on the subjed. After the treatment which

vi. her Envoy had received , Elizabeth thought it
sso. below her dignity to admit Home into her presence.

Buricigh, to whom he was commanded to impart
his commilffon, reproached him with his mailer's
ingratitude towards a benefaarefs, who had placed
the Crown on'his head, and required him to advise
the King to beware of sacrificing the friendfbip of
so necelfary an ally to the giddy humors of a young
man, without experience, and strongly fufpeded
of principles, and attachments, incompatible with
the happiness of the Scottifli nation.

:aorton ac. This accusation of Lenox hastened, in all proba.
c 4 ot the bility, Morton's fall. The aA of indemnity, which
It rg.b he had obtained when he resigned the Regency,

was worded with such scrupulous exatneLs, as
almolt screened him from any legal prosecution.
The murder of the late King was the only crime
which could not, with decency, be inserted in a
pardon granted by his son. Here Mlorton Rill lay
open to the penalties of the law; and Captain
Stewart, who Ihunned no acion, however defpe.
rate, if it led to power or to favor, entered the
council chamber while the King and nobles were
allembled, and falling on his knees, accused Morton
Dem. ;o. of being accefLiry, or according to the language of

the Scottifi law, art and pait, in the conspiracy
against the life of his MlajeRy's father, and offered,
under the usual penalties, to verify this charge by
legal evidence. Morton, who was present, heard
this accifation with tirmnefs; and replied with a
disdainful smile, proceeding either from contempt

of the infamous characer of his accuser, or from B o K
cofieintifnefs of his own innocence, " that his vi.
known zeal in punishing those who were fufpeO.ed sso.
of liat deteflable crime, might well exempt hinmelf
frlmn any suspicion of being accessary to it; never.
thelfs, lie would cheerfully submit to a trial,
either in that place, or in any other court; and
doubted not but his own innocence, and the malice
of his enemies, would then appear in the clearest
lieht." Stewart, who was still on his knees, began
to inquire how he would reconcile his bellowing
so many honors on Archibald Douglas, whom he
ccrtiinly knew to be one of the murderers, with
his pretended zeal againlt that crime. Morton was
ready to answer. But the King commanded both
to be removed. The Earl was confined, first of Isr.
all, to his own house, and then committed to the January .
ralfle of Edinburgh, of which Alexander Erikine
was Governor; and as if it had not been a sufficient
indignity to subjet him to the power of one of
his enemies, he was, soon after, carried to
Dunbarton, of which Lenox had the command.
A warrant was likewise issued for apprehending Jan. i,.
Archib:ld Douglas; but he, having received
timely intelligence of the approaching danger, fled
ial;o lingland ".

The Earl of Angus, who imputed these violent
proceedings not to hatred againlt Morton alone,
hut to the ancient enmity between the houses of
Stewart and of Douglas, and who believed that
"Crawf. Mem. 323.

S3

B o O K a conspiracy was now formed for the defirudin

vl. of all who bore that name, was ready to tak
Is1s. arms in order to rescue his kinsman. But Morto

absolutely sorbad any such attempt, and declare
that he would rather susser ten thousand deaths
than bring an imputation upon his own charade
by seeming to decline a trial ".

Elizbeth', Elizabeth did not fail to interpose, with warmtd

ueanits ini behalf of a man who had contributed so muc

onlrder 1to rve
him. to preserve her influence over Scotland. The lat

transactions in that kingdom had given her grea
uneasiness The power which Lenox had acquire
independent of her was dangerous; the treatmer
her Ambafladors had met with differed greatly frot
the refpecd with which the Scots were in use t
receive her Aliniflers; and the attack now mad
on horton fully convinced her that there was a
intention to sow the feeds of discord between th
two nations, and to seduce James into a new allianc
with France, or into a marriage with some Popil
Princess. Full of there apprehensions, she ordcre
a considerable body of troops to be assembled o
the borders of Scotland, and dispatched Randolp
as her Ambassador into that kingdom. He addrelfe
himftlf not only to James, and to his council, bt
to a convention of eflates, met at that time. H
bgan with enumerating the extraordinary benefi
which Elizabeth had conferred on the Scottii
nation: That without demanding a tingle foot
laud for herself, without encroaching on the libcrti

" Johift.4.64. Spo.fw. i.

of tie kingdom in the smallest article, The had, at B o oK
the cxpenfe of the blood of her fubjeds, and the vi.
trcafures of her Crown, rescued the Scots from 1581.
the dominion of France, eftablifled among them
true religion, and put them in poffellion of their
ancient rights: That from the beginning of civil
liiffcnfions in the kingdom, Ihe had proteced those
who espoused the King's cause, and by her assistance
alone, the Crown had been preierved on his head,
and all the attempts of the adverse faCtion baffled:
That an union, unknown to their ancestors, but
equally beneficial to both kingdoms, had fubfited
for a long period of years; and though so many
Popinl Princes had combined to disturb this happy
slate of things, her care, and their constancy, had
hitherto defeated all these efforts: That the had
observed, of late, an unusual coldness, diftruR,
and estrangement in the Scottish Council, which
fle could impute to none but to Lenox, a subjeCt
of France, a retainer to the house of Guise, bred
up in the errors of Popery, and fill fufpeced of
favoring that fuperfition. Not satisfied with having
mounted so fast to an uncommon height of power,
which he exercised with all the ralhnefs of youth,
and all the ignorance of a stranger; nor thinking
it enough to have deprived the Earl of Morton
of the authority due to his abilities and experience,
he had conspired the ruin of that nobleman, who
had often exposed his life in the King's cause,
who had contributed more than any other subjed
to place him on the throne, to refitl the encroach-
ments of Popery, and to preserve the union between

S4

0 oK the two kingdoms. If any zeal for religion remained
vl. among the nobles in Scotland, if they wibhed for
S I. the continuance of amity with England, if they

valued the privileges of their own order, be
called upon them, in the name of his Miftrets,
to remove such a pernicious counsellor as Lenox
from the presence of the young King, to rescue
]lorton out of the hands of his avowed enemy,
and secure to him the benefit of a fair and impartial
trial: And if force were necessary towards accom.
plilhing a design f salutary to the King and king.
dom, he promised them the protetion of his
Iliflrcf, in the enterprise, and whatever afliftance
they flhuld demand either of men or money ".

But tbefe extraordinary remonfirances, accomr

panied with such an unusual appeal from the King
to his fubjeds, were not the only means employed
by Hlizabeth in favor of Morton, and against
Lenox. She persuaded the Prince of Orange to
fend an agent into Scotland, and under color of
complimenting James on account of the valor
which many of his fubjeds had displayed in the
service of the States, to enter into a long detail of
the reftlcfs enterprises of the Popish Princes against
the Protestant Keligion; to beseech him to adhere
inviolably to the alliance with England, the only
barrier which secured his kingdom against their
dangerous cabals; and above all things, to distrust
the insinuations of those who endeavoured to
weaken or to dissolve that union between the

Cald. iii 6. Strype, ii. 62.

Britif nat;ons, which all the Protestants in Europe B o o K
bl ld with so much pleasure ". VI.
Jimes's Counlellors were too intent upon the Is8I.

Jamer de.

deljirtlion of their enemy to liften to these remon. rmines to
fir.lnces 1 he officious interpofirion of the Prince of proceed a.
Or.ine, the h.ulghty tone of Elizabeth's message, gaina him.
and her avowed attempt to excite fubjets to rebel
agyinft their Sovereign, were confidered as unexam-
pled iinflts on the majesty and independence of a
crowned head. A general and evasive answer was
given to Randolph James prepared toaffert his own
dignity with spirit. All those fufpeded of favoring
IMorton were turned out of office, some of them
wvcrereequired to surrender themfelvec prisoners; the
men capable of bearingarms throughout the kingdom
were commanded to be in readiness to take the field;
and troops were levied, and polled on the borders.
'he English Ambassador, finding that neither the
public manifello which he had delivered to the
Convention, nor his private cabals with the nobles,
could excite them to arms, fled in the night-time out
of Scotland, where libels againfi him had been daily
publflied, and even attempts made upon his life.
In both kingdoms every thing wore a h.ollile
asped. But Elizabeth, though file wilbed to
h.ile intimidated the Scottilh King by her prepa-
rations, had no inclination to enter into a war with
him, and the troops on the borders, which had
given such umbrage, were soon dispersed ".

Cald. iii. 9. See Appendix, N'. XXVII.
Cra\ss. Mem. ;28. Stype, ii. App. zt;.

B o o x The greater solicitude Elizabeth discovered for

vi. Morton's safety, the more eagerly did his enemies
*151. drive on their schemes for his deRtrudion. Captain

Stewart, his accuser, was firRf appointed Tutor to
the Earl of Arran, and soon after both the title and
estate of his unhappy ward, to which he advanced
some frivolous claim, were conferred upon him.
The new-made Peer was commanded to conduit
Morton from Dunbarton to Edinburgh; and, by
that choice, the Earl was not only warned what
fate be might exped, but had the cruel mortification
of feeing his deadly enemy already loaded with
honors, in reward of the malice with which hc
bad contributed to his ruin.

Be h tred The records of the Court of JuJfciary at this
ud CB period are loft The account which our historians

give of Morton's trial is inaccurate and unfatif
factory. The proceedings against him seem tc
have been carried on with violence. During the
trial, great bodies of armed men were drawn uS
in different parts of the city. The jury wa!
composed of the Earl's known enemies; a.n
though he challenged several of them, his objec
tions were over-ruled. After a Ihort consultation
his Peers found him guilty of concealing, and o
being art and part in the conspiracy againRt thi
life of the late King. The first part of the ver
did did not surprise him, but he twice repeatet
the words art and part with some vehemence, am
added, " God knows it is not so." The doom
which the law decrees against a Traitor, was pro
nounced. The King, however, remitted the cruw

an;d ignominious part of the sentence, and appointed BOO K
thuat he Ihould susser death next day, by being vl.

beheaded". i's.

During that awful interval, Mortdn porfeffed the His death.
utmolt composure of mind. He flipped cheerfully;
slept a part of the night in his usual manner, and
employed the reft of his time in religious conferences,
and in ats of devotion, with some Ministers of the
city. The Clergyman who attended him, dealtfreely
with his conscience, and pressed his crimes home
upon him What he confessed with regard to the
crime for which he suffered, is remarkable, and
supplies, in some measure, the imperfecion of our
records. He acknowledged, that on his return from
England after the death of Rizio, Bothwell had
informed him of the conspiracy against the King,
which the Queen, as he told him, knew of and ap-
proved; that he solicited him to concur in the execu-
tion ofit, which, at that time, he absolutely declined;
that soon after, Bothwell himself, and Archibald
Douglas, in his name, renewingtheirfolicitationsto
the fame purpose, he had required a warrant under
the (.ueen's hand, authorising the attempt, and as
that had never been produced, he had refused to be
any farther concerned in the matter." But," continued
he, " as I neither consented to this treasonable at,
' nor assisted in the committing of it, so it was impof
"fible for me to reveal, or to prevent it. To whom
could 1 make the discovery ? The Queen was the

Spotr. ; r4. Johnft. 6¢. Crawf. Mem. 332. Cald. iii. 45.
Araot's Crimin. Trials, 388.

0K O author of the enterprise. Darnly was such a
nI. * changeling, that no secret could be safely corn.
i. a municated to him. Huntly and Bothwell, who

a bore the chief sway in the kingdom, were them.

selves the perpetrators of the crime. " These

circumstances, it muftbeconfetfed, gofomelength
towards extenuating Morton's guilt; and though his
apology for the favor he had shown to Archibald
Douglas, whom he knew to be one of the confpira.
tors, be far less fatisfalory, no uneasy reflecions
seem to have disquieted his own mind on that
account". When his keepers told him that the guards
were attending, and all things in readiness, " I praise
a my God, "said he, " I am ready likewise." Aran
commanded these guards; and even in those moments,
when the most implacable hatred is apt torelent, the
malice of his enemies could not forbear this insult. Ohi
the scaffold, his behaviour was calm; his countenance
and voice unaltered; and after some time spent in
devotion, he suffered death with the intrepidity which
became the name of Douglas. His head was placed
on the public goal of Edinburgh; and his body, after
lying till fon-let on the scaffold, covered with a
beggarly cloak, was carried by common porters to
the usual burial.place of criminals. None of his friends
durf accompany it to the grave, or discover their
gratitude and refpe& by any symptoms of sorrow ".

Odious cen Arran, no less profligate in private life, than
&a o'f audacious in his public conduct, soon after drew

Crawf. Mem. App. iii.
" Crawf. Mcm. 31. Spotfw. r34.

the attention of his countrymen, by his infamous B OO
marriage with the Countess of March. Before he vl.
grew into favor at court, he had been often entertain- "11.
ed in her hulband's house, and without regarding
the laws of hospitality or of gratitude, carried on a
criminal intrigue with the wife of his benefactor, a
woman young and beautiful, but, according to the
description of a cotemporary Hiltorian, " intolerable
in all the imperfections incident to her sex." Impatient
of any restraint upon their mutual desires, they, with
equal ardor, wifled to avow their union publicly,
and to legitimate, by a marriage, the offspring of
their unlawful paflion. The Countess petitioned to
be divorced from her hulband, for a reason which
no modelt woman will ever plead. The judges,
over-awed by Arran, passed sentence without delay.
This infamous scene was concluded by a marriage, July A
solemnized with great pomp, and beheld by all ranks
of men with the utmost horror ".
A Parliament was held this year, at the open. oaob. *
ing of which some disputes arose between Arran
and the Earl now created Duke of Lenox. Arran,
haughty by nature, and pufled on by his wife's
ambition, began to affect an equality with the
Duke, under whose protetion he had hitherto
been contented to place himself. After various
attempts to form a party in the council against
Lenox, he found him fixed so firmly in the
King's affetions, that it was impossible to flake
him, and rather than lore all interest at court,
" Spotfwv. 31.

o K from which he was banishtd, he made the moR
vI. humble fubmiiflons to the favorite, and again
usL. recovered his former credit. This rupture con.

tributed, however, to render the Duke fill more
odious to the nation. During the continuance of
it, Arran affected to court the clergy, pretended
an extraordinary zeal for the Protestant religion, and
labored to confirm the suspicions, which were
enttrtained of his rival, as an emissary of the house
of Guise, and a favorer of Popery. As he was
supposed to be acquainted with the Duke's moR
secret designs, calumnies were litened to with
greater credit than was due to his character. To this
rivallhip between Lenox and Arran, during the
continuance of which, each endeavoured to conciliate
the good will of the clergy, we must ascribe several
acs of this parliament uncommonly favorable to the
Church, particularly one, which abolished the
practice, introduced by AMorton, of appointing but
one minister to several parifles.

EciEI.Ri No notice hath been taken for several years ol
ca ~ . EcclefiaRical affairs. While the civil government

underwent so many extraordinary revolutions, the
Church was not free from convulsions. Twt
objects, chiefly, engrossed the attention of the
Clergy. The one was the forming a system o
discipline, or Ecclesiastical polity. After loi'l
labor, and many difficulties, this system was a
last brought to some degree of perfcetion Th
Assembly solemnly approved of it, and appointc
it to be laid before the Privy Council. in order t4
obtain the ratification of it in Parliament. Bu

\Morton, during his adminiflration, and those who, n o o K
after his fall, governed the King, were equally vl.
unwilling to fee it carried into execution; and by s115
farting difficulties, and throwing in objecions,
prevented it from receiving a legal fandion. The
othtr point in view was the abolition of the
Epifcop.il order. The Bilhops were so devoted to
the King, to whom they owed their promotion,
that the fundtion itself was by some reckoned
dangerous to civil liberty. Being allowed a feat in
Parliament, and diftinguilhed by titles of honor,
these not only occasioned many avocations from
theirfpititual employments, but soon rendered their
charader and manners extremely different from those
of the Clergy in that age. The nobles viewed their
power with jealousy; the populace confidered their
lives as profane, and both wilhed their downfal
with equal ardor. The personal emulation between
Melvil and Adamson, a man of learning, and
eminent for his popular eloquence, who was promot-
ed, on the death of Douglas, to be Archbilhop of
St. Andrew's, mingled itself with the paflions on
each fide, and heightened them. Attacks were made,
in every assembly, on the order of Bilhops; their
privileges were gradually circumscribed; and at
lift an at was passed, declaring the office of
Bilhops, at it was then exercised within the realm,
to have neither foundation nor warrant in the
word of God; and requiring, under pain of ex-
communication, all who now possessed that office,
infantly to resign it, and to abstain from preach.
ing or administering the fawaments, until they

B o 0 Ihould receive permiflion from the General Assembly.

vl. The court did not acquiesce in this decree. A
s15L. vacancy happening soon after in the fee of Glasgow,

M-ontgomtry miniler at Stirling, a man vain,
fickle, presumptuous, and more apt, by the
blemilbes in his character, to have alienated the
people from an order already beloved, than to
reconcile them to one which was the objet of their
hatred, made an infamous fimoniacal bargain with
Lenox, and on his recommendation was chosen
Archbilhop. The Prelbytery of Stirling, of
which he was a member, the Prelbytery of Glasgow,
whither he was to be translated, the General As
fembly, vied with each other in prosecuting him
. on that account. In order to screen Montgomery,

James made trial both of gentle and of rigorous
mneaures, and both were equally ineffectual. The
General Assembly was jult ready to pronounce
againRf him the sentence of excommunication, when
a Herald enteted, and commanded them, in the
King's name, and under pain of rebellion, to flop
further proceedings. Even this injundion they
despised; and though Montgomery, by his tears,
and seeming penitence, procured a flort respite,
the sentence was at last issued by their appointment,
and publilhed in all the churches throughout the
kingdom.

The firmnef. of the Clergy in a collective body was

not greater than the boldnef. of some individu
als, particularly of the Ministers of Edinburgh.
They inveighed daily against the corrupuons
in the adminifration, and, with the freedom

of

of speech admitted into the pulpit in that age, B o

0 K

named Lenox and Arran as the chief authors of vi.
the griesatces under which the church and kingdom 1s8a.
grodned. T'he courtiers, in their turn, complained
to the King of the insolent and seditious spirit of
the Clergy. In order to check the boldness of their
discourses, James ilfued a proclamation, command.
ing Dury, one of the most popular MiniRers, not
only to leave the town, but to abRain from preach.
ingin any other place. Dury complained to thejudi-
catories of this encroachment upon the immunities
of his office. They approved of the docrine which
he had delivered; and he determined to disregard
the royal proclamation. But the magistrates being
determined to compel him to leave the city, accord.
ing to the King's orders, he was obliged to abandon
his charge, after protesting publicly, at the cross
of Edinburgh, againf the violence which was put
upon him. The people accompanied him to the
gates with tears and lamentations; and the Clergy
denounced the vengeance of Heaven against the
authors of this outrage ",

In this perilous situation stood the Church; the
authority of its judicatories called in question, and
the liberty of the pulpit refrained, when a suddea
revolution of the civil government procured them
unexpected relief.

The two favorites, by their ascendant over the ni, faivt
King, possessed uncontrouled power in the king- '"nte the
dom, a.d exercised it with the utmost wantonness. ,7p1
p, a

meaturgl,

" Cald. Affemb. s$76-i-j82. Spotfw. 2T7 , &c.
VOL. II. T

B OO James usually resided at Dalkeith, or Kinneil, the

VI. feats of Lenox and of Arran, and was attended by
5s8:. such company, and employed in such amusements,

as did not suit his dignity. The services of those
who had contributed molt to place the Crown on
his head, were but little remembered. Many who
had opposed him with the greatest virulence
enjoyed the rewards and honors to which the
others were entitled. Exalted notions of regal
prerogative, utterly inconsistent with the conRfitu
tion of Scotland, being inltilled by his favorite
into the mind of the young Monarch, unfortun
ately made, at that early age, a deep impreffio;
there, and became the source of almolR all hi
subsequent errors in the government of both king
doms ". Courts of juRfice were held in almost ever
county, the proprietors of land were called befon
them, and upon the slightest negled of any of thi
numerous forms, which are peculiar to feudal hold
ings, they were fined with unusual and intolerabli
rigor. The Lord Chamberlain revived the obfolet
jurifdidion of his office over the Boroughs, ant
they were fubjeded to exactions no less grievous
A delign seemed, likewise, to have been former
to exasperate Elizabeth, and to dissolve the allianc
with her, which all good Protestants esteemed th
chief security of their religion in Scotland. A clof
correspondence was carried on between the Kin
and his mother, and considerable progress mad
towards uniting their titles to the Crown, byfuc

" Cald. 'iii. IS.

a treaty of association, as Maitland had projected; B o O K
which could not fail of endangering or diminilh. vi.
in; hew aiti'nrity, and must have proved fdtal Is81.
to rhole who had acted against her with greatest
vigor .

All there circumstances irritated the impatient The nobles
spirit of the Scottish nobles, who resolved to c.p^,.
tolerate no longer the insolence of the two mini.
ons, or to (land by, while their presumption and
inexperience ruined both the King and kingdom.
Elizabeth, who, during the administration of
the four Regents, had the entire direction of the
affairs of Scotland, felt herself deprived of all
influence in that kingdom ever since the death
of Morton, and was ready to countenance any
attempt to rescue the King out of the hands of
favorites, who were leading him into measures so
repugnant to all her views. The Earls of Mar
and Glencairn, Lord Ruthven, lately created
Earl of Gowrie, Lord Lindsay, Lord Boyd, the
Tutor of Glamis, the eldest son of Lord Oliphant,
with several Barons and gentlemen of diftintion,
entered into a combination for that purpose; and
as changes in adminifRration , which, among
polilhed nations, are brought about slowly and
silently, by artifice and intrigue, were in that
rude age effeced suddenly and by violence, the
King's situation, and the security of the favorites,
encouraged the confpiraors to have immediate
recourse to force.
"Cald. iii. x .

oox James, after having resided for some time in
vl. Athol, where he enjoyed his favorite amusement of
ls. hunting, was now returning towards Edinburgh,

Seze the
R,-tPf,, with a small train. He was invited to Ruthven
a ittah. castle, which lay in his way, and as he fufpeded

no danger, he went thither in hopes of farther sport.
_ani a. The multitude of strangers whom he found there

gave him some uneasiness; and as those who were
in the secret arrived every moment from different
parts, the appearance of so many new faces increaf.
ed his fears. He concealed his uneasiness, how-
ever, with the utmost care; and next morning
prepared for the field, expecting to find there some
opportunity of making his escape. But jull as he
was ready to depart, the Nobles entered his bed.
chamber in a body, and presented a memorial against
the illegal and oppreflive actions of his two favori.
tes, whom they represented as most dangerous
enemies to the religion and liberties of the nation.
James, though he received this remonstrance with
the complaisance which was necessary in his present
situation, was extremely impatient to be gone; but
as he approached the door of his apartment, the
Tutor of Glamis rudely flopped him. The Kimg
complained, expoftulated, threatened, and finding
all these without effec, burfi into tears: " Ne
matter, " said Glamis fiercely, " better childret
weep'than bearded men " These words made a
deep imprefion on the King's mind, and wer
never forgotten. 1 he conspirators, without regard
ing his tears or indignation, difiniffed such of hi
followers as they fiufpeced; allowed none bu

personS of their own party to have access to him; B o o K
anl though they treated him with great refpedt, VI.
guarded his peifon with the utmost care. This 1S82.
enterprise is usually called, by our historians, The
raid of Rutlzlln ".

Lenox and Arran were aftonilhed to the lalt Commit
decree at an event so unexpected, and so fatal to Arran
their power. The former endeavoured, but without
success, to excite the inhabitants; of Edinburgh to
take arms in order to refcuc their Sovereign from
captivity. The latter, with his usual impetuosity,
mounted on horseback the moment he heard what
had befallen the King, and with a few followers,
rode towards Ruthven catle; and as a considerable
body of the conrpirators, under the command of
thc Earl of Mar, lay in his way ready to.oppofe
him, he separated himself from his companions, and
with two attendants arrived at the gate of the castle.
At the fight of a man so odious to his country,
the indignation of the conspirators role, and inltant
death inuf have been the punishment of his rash-
nest, if the friendfliip of Gowrie, or rome other
catife not explained by our historians, had n't saved
a life so pernicious to the kingdom. He was con-
fited, however, to the castle of Stirling, without
being admitted into the King's presence.
The King, though really the prisoner of his Command

Lenox to

own fubjeds, with whole condud he could not tvtlYe,
help discovering many symptoms of disgust, was kingdom.
obliged to publilh a proclamation, signifying his
"Cald. iii. x34. Spotfwi.t . Mcl. Mv. ;7.

T3

BO O approbation of their enterprise, declaring that he

vi. was at furl liberty, without anyreftraint or violence
1Ms. offered to his person; and forbidding any attempt

against those concerned in the Raid of Ruthoen, under
apla :s. pretence of rescuing him out of their hands. At

the fame time, he commanded Lenox to leave
Scotland before the twentieth of September".

Theborpir Soon after, Sir George Carey, and Robert
ton roout. Bowes, arrived as ambassadors from Elizabeth.
·mnced by
E'^izeh. 'The pretext of their embalfy was to inquire after

the King's safety; to encourage and countenance
the conspirators was the real motive of it By
their interceflion, the Earl of Angus, who, ever
since the death of his uncle Morton, had lived in
exile, obtained leave to return. And the accefion
of a nobleman so powerful and so popular (trength
ened the fation ".

Lenox, whose amiable and gentle qualities had

procured him many friends, and who received
private aslurances that the King's favor towards
him was in no degree abated, seemed resolved,
at firt, to pay no regard to a command extorted
by violence, and no less disagreeable to James,
than it was rigorous with regard to himself. But
the power of his enemies, who were maflers of
the King's person, who were secretly supported by
Elizabeth, and openly applauded by the Clergy,
deterred him from any enterprise, the success of
which was dubious, and the danger certain, both
to himself and to his Sovereign. He put off the

,' Cald.i iii. s. :!8. "Id. Ibid. 152.

time of his departure, however, by various artifi- BOOK,
c,. in expetation either that James might make vl.
h! efc.;pe from the conspirators, or that fortune l1az.
mihel present some more favorable opportunity of
taking arms for his relief.

On the other hand, the conspirators were ex. Their con-
tremely solicitous not only to secure the approbation duct ap"rov.
of their countrymen , but to obtain some legal Assembly a
fandion of their enterprise. For this purpose they aconventios
publihled a long declaration, containing the motives of
which had induced them to venture on such an
irregular Rep, and endeavoured to heighten the
public indignation against the favorites, by repre-
senting, in the strongest colors, their inexperience
and insolence, their contempt of the nobles, their
violation of the privileges of the Church, and their
oppreflion of the people. They obliged the King,
who could not with safety refuse any of their
demands, to grant them a remilfion in the most
ample form; and not satisfied with that, they ap.
plied to the Assembly of the Church, and easily
procured an ad, declaring, " that they had done Oct. .
good and acceptable service to God, to their Sover-
eign, and to their native country;" and requiring
all sincere Protestants to concur with them in carry-
ing forward such a laudable enterprise. In order to
add the greater weight to this ac, every Minister
was enjoined to read it, in hisown pulpit, and to
inflict the censures of the Church on those who set
themselves in opposition to so good a cause. A
Convention of estates assembled a few days after,
palled an ad to the fame effect, and granted full

T4

Wr o indemnity to the conspirators for every thing they

VI. had done ".
"r:. James was conduced by them, first to Stirling,
nau.f sim and afterwards to the palace of Holy.rood.houfe;
scotlu. and though he was received-every where with the

external marks of refped due to his dignity, his
motions were carefully observed, and he was under
a restraint no less ftrit than at the firR moment
when he was seized by the conspirators. Lenox,
after eluding many commands to depart out of the
kingdom, was at las obliged to begin his journey.
He lingered, however, for some time, in the neigh.
bcurhood of Edinburgh, as if he had fill intended
to make some effort towards restoring the King to
liberty. But either from the gentleness of his own
disposition, averse to bloodibed and the disorders
of civil war, or from some other cause unknown
D. 30. to us, he abandoned the design, and set out for

France, by the way of England. The King iffuedthe
order for his departure with no less reluctance, than
the Duke obeyed it; and both mourned a fepara.
tion, which neither of them had power to prevent
Soon after his arrival in France, the fatigue of the
journey, or the anguilh of his mind, threw him
into a fever. In his last moments he discovered
such a firm adherence to the Proteflant faith, as
fully vindicates his memory from the imputation ol
an attachment to Popery, with which he had been
uncharitably loaded in Scoland ". As he wai
the earliest, and belt beloved, he was, perhaps,

' Cald. iiL 177 187. 200. Spotfw. 323.
IL 3z4. Cald. iii. 17a.

the mot deserving, though not the moR able, of all iB o OK
Jlaes'S favorites. The warmth and tenderness of his VI.
ilalter's affeition for him was not abated by death i8e.
iifclf. By many adCs of kindness and genernfity
towards his poflerity, the King not only did great
honor to the memory of Lenox, but let his own
charader in one of its most favorable points of view.

The success of the conspiracy, which deprived Mairy'
James of liberty, made great noise over all Eu :iebt^,
rope; and at last reached the ears of Mary in the ton.
prison to which Ihe was confined. As her own
experience had taught her what injuries a captive
Prince is exposed to susser; and as many of those
who were now concerned in the enterprise against
her son, were the fame persons whom she con.
fidered as the chief authors of her own misfortunes,
it was natural for the tenderness of a mother to
apprehend that the fame calamities were ready to
fall on his head; and such a profpec did not fail
of adding to the distress and horror of her own
situation. In the anguish of her heart, she wrote
tn Elizabeth, complaining in the bitterest terms
of the unprecedented rigor with which Ihe her-
self had been treated, and beseeching her not to
abandon her son to the mercy of his rebellious
futbjects; nor permit him to be involved in the
Lame misfortunes under which Ihe had so long
groailic(. The peculiar vigor and acrimony of
fiyle, for which this letter is remarkable, discover
botr the high spirit of the Scottilh Queen, un-
fublued by her sufferings, and the violence of her
indignation at Elizabeth's artifices and severity.

B 0 0 K But it was illadapted to gain the end Tfe had inview,

VL and accordingly it neither procured any mitigation

of the rigor of her own confinement, nor any inter.
position in favor of the King ".

Ins: Henry IIL who, though he feared and hated the
mbai&s Princes of Guise, was often obliged to court their
So Fruce favor, interposed with warmth, in order to extricate
i 'L. James out of the hands of a party so entirely devoted

to the Englilh interest. He commanded M. de la
Motte Fenelon, his ambalfador at the court
of England, to repair to Edinburgh, and to
contribute his utmost endeavours towards placing
James in a situation more suitable to his dignity.
As Elizabeth could not, with decency, refuse him
liberty to execute this commiflion, The appointed
Davison to attend him into Scotland as her Envoy,
under color of concurring with him in the negocia.
tion, but in reality to be a spy upon his motions,
and to obftrut his success. James, whole title to the
Crown had not hitherto been recognised by any ol
the Princes on the continent, was extremely fond
of such an honorable embassy from the French
Monarch; and, on that account, as well as for the
fake of the errand on which he came, received Fe
Ta.?. nelon with great refpet. The nobles, in whose

power the King was, did not relish this interposition
of the French court, which had long loft its ancient
influence over the affairs of Scotland. The Clergy
were alarmed at the danger to which religion
would be exposed, if the Princes of Guile lhould

" Camd. 489

recover any ascendant over the public councils. BOOK
'rhough the King tried every method for restraining vl.
them within the bountd( of decency, they declaimed I1s3.
ag:linft the court of France, against the Princes of
Guise, againf the ,mbaffador, against entering into
any alliance with such notorious persecutors of the
Church of God, with a vehemence which no regular
government would now tolerate, but which was
then extremely common. The Ambaffjdor, watched
by Davison, distrusted by the nobles, and exposed
to the infilts of the Clergy and of the people, returned
into England without procuring any change in the
King's situation, or receiving any answer to a
proposal which he made, that the government Ihould
be carried on in the joint names of James and the
Queen his mother ".

Meanwhile, James, though he dissembled with Jame et.
great art, became every day more uneasy under his capei ot,
confinement; his uneasiness rendered him continually of the con.
attentive to find out a proper opportunity for making flpi'tor"
bisefcape; and to this attention he at last owed his
liberty, which the King of France was not able, nor
the(2ueen of England willing, to procure for him.
As the conspirators had forced Lenox out of the king-
dom, and kept Arran at a distance from court, they
grew secure; and imagining that time had reconciled
the King to them, and to his situation, they watched
him with little care. Some occasions ofdifcord had
anfen among themselves; and the French Ambassador,

" Cald. iii. 2o. Spotfw. 324. Murdin, 372, &C.
See Append. NI. XXIX.

a o o x by fomenting these during the time of his residence

vs. in Scotland, had weakened the union, in which
Ss3. alone theitfafety confifed". Colonel William Stew.

art. the commander of the band of gentlemen who
guarded the King's person, being gained by James,
had rhe principal merit in the scheme for restoring
JKw 27. his Master to liberty. Under pretence of paying a

visit to the Earl of March his grind uncle, James
was permitted to go from Falkland to St. Andrew's
That he might not create any suspicion, he lodged
at first in an open defenceless house in the town,
but pretending a curiosity to fee the castle, no sooner
was he entered with some of his attendants whom
he could truR, than Colonel Stewart commanded
the gates to be shut, and excluded all the reft of his
train. Next morning the Earls of Argyll, Huntly,
Crawford, Montrose, Rothes, with others to whom
the secret had been communicated, entered the
town with their fo!lowers; and though Mar, with
several of the leaders of the faction, appeared in
arms, they found themselves so far out-numbered,
that it was in vain to think of recovering poffci
sion of the King's person, which had been in their
power somewhat longer than ten months. James
was naturally of so soft and ductile a temper, that
those who were near his person commonly made a
deep impression on his heart, which was formed to
be under the sway of favorites. As he remained
implacable and unreconciled to the conspirators,
during so long a time, and at a period of life when

"' Gamd 482.

resentments are rather violent than laling, they must o o K
ether have improved the opportunities of iniinuat. vs.
n thlemfilves into favor with little dexterity, or 143.
the indigndtiont with which this first itnfult to his
person and authority filled him, must have been
vtry great.

His joy at his escape was youthful and excessive. Rersivr,
He resolved, however, by the advice of Sir James hw v.r, to
A\lelvil, and his wisest counfel!'ri, to aft with the w;th modera
utnmot moderation. Having called into his presence tiJ'
the leaders of both factions, the neighbouring gentry,
the deputies of the adjacent boroughs, the Ministers,
and the heads of colleges, he declared, that although
he had been held under retlraint for some time by
violence, he would not impute that as a crime to any
man, but, without remembering the irregularities
which had been so frequent during his minority,
would pals a general ac of oblivion, and govern all
his fubjeets with undiflinguilhing and equal assec-
tion. As an evidence of his sincerity he visited the
Earl of Gowrie at Ruthven castle, and granted him
a full pardon of any guilt he had contracted, by
the crime committed in that very place,"'.

But James did not adhere long to this prudent But Arran
and moderate plan. His former f.vorite, ..,e Earl ,endiht"is
of Arran, had been permitted for frme time to over him,
reside at Kinneil, one of his country feats. As soon
as the King felt himself at liberty. his love for
him began to revive, and he expressed a strong
desire to fee him. The courtiers violently opposed
'" Ilelv. 27a.

X o O x the return of a minion, whole insolent and over

vi. bearing temper they dreaded. as much as the natio
aI. deteflcd his crimes. Jame,, however, continued hi

importunity, and promising thathe lhouldcontinu
with him no longer than one day, they were oblige
to yield. 1 hi, interview rekindled ancient affedinn
the King forgot his promise; Arran regained hi
ascendant over him; and within a few days resume
the exercise of power, with all the arrogance of a
undeferving favorite, and all the rashness peculls
to himself '".

uad d The first effed of his influence was a proclamatio
Ki, . with regard to those concerned in the RaidofRuthiA
fb. They were required to acknowledge their crime i

the humblest manner; and the King promised to gra
them a full pardon, provided their future condui
were such as did not oblige him to remember pa
miscarriages. The tenor of this proclamation wa
extremely different from the aa of oblivion which th
conspirators had been encouraged toexpet. Nordi
any of them reckon it safe to rely on a promise clogge
with such an equivocalcondition, and granted by
young Prince under the dominion of a minister voi
of faith, regardlefC of decency, and transported b
the desire of revenge even beyond the usual ferocit
of his temper. Many of the leaders, who had a
first appeared openly at court, retired to their ow
bouses; and, forefeeiig the dangerous storm whic
was gathering, began to look out for a retreat i
foreign countries'"

a' Mlv. 374. Id. 278. Spodtfw. 26. Cald. ii 13

Elizabeth, who had all along protected the con. so o t
fpirators, was extremely disgusted with measures vl.
which tended so visibly to their deftrudion,and wrote 1 s*.'
to the King a harih and haughty letter, reproach- Slizabeth's
ing him in a fyle very uncommon among Prin- in bhalf of
ces, with breach of faith in recalling Arran to court, the coita.
and with imprudence in proceeding so rigorously aulgn 7
againf his belt and most faithful fubjets. James, with
a becoming dignity, replied, that promises extorted
by violence, and conditions yielded out of fear, were
no longer binding, when these were removed; that
itbelonged to him alone to chufe what ministers he
would employ in his service; and that though he
resolved to treat the conspirators at Ruthven with
the utmost clemency, it was necessary, for the sup-
port of his authority, that such an insult on his
person thould not pass altogether uncenfured "'.

Elizabeth's letter was quickly followed by Wal- sept. I;
fingham her secretary, whom ife appointed her h "fmbf.
Amballador to James, and who appeared at the ry into scos
Scotti/h court with a splendor and magnificence lud.
well calculated to please and dazzle a young Prince.
Walsingham was admitted to several conferences
with James himself, in which be insisted on the
fame topics contained in the letter, and the King
repeated his former answers.

After suffering several indignities from the arro-
gance of Arran and his creatures, he returned to
England, without concluding any new treaty with
the King. Walsingham was, next to Burleigh, the
"' Melt. 279.

O O Minister on whom the chief weight of the Englilh
vi. administration relfed; and when a person of his
*103. rank slept so far out of the ordinary road of bufi.

nes, as to undertake a long journey in his old age,
and under a declining Rate of health, some afair
of consequence was supposed to be the caule, or
some important event was expected to be the effed
of this measure. But as nothing conspicuous either
occasioned, or followed this embassy, it is probable
that Elizabeth had no other intention in employ.
ing this sagacious Minister, than to discover, wit
cxadnefs, the capacity and disposition of the Scot.
til King, who was now arrived at a time of life,
when, with some degree of certainty, conjedures
might be formed concerning his charater and future
condud. As James possessed talents of that kind,
which make a better figure in conversation than
in adion, be gained a great deal by this interview
with the English secretary, who, notwithflanding
the cold reception which he met with, gave such
an advantageous representation of his abilities, as
determined Elizabeth to treat him, henceforward,
with greater decency and refpe&."'.

Elizabeth's eagerefs to protec the confpiratori

rendered James more violent in his proceedings
against them. As they had all refused to accept
of pardon upon the terms which he had offered,
they were required, by a new proclamation,
to surrender thenfelves prisoners. The Earl of
Angus alone complied; the reft either fled into

' ' lv. a29. Cald. ii. s(. Jebb, ii. 56.

England,

Fogland, or obtained the King's licence to retire B o o
into foreign parts. A Convention ofeflates was held, vl.
the members of which, deceived by an unworthy 1583.
atilice of Arran's, declared those concerned in the Dece" . 17.
l;;il of Ritt.ven to have been guilty of high tredfon;
appointed the act palsed last year, approving of
their conidlut, to be expunged out of the records;
anal elng;.ged to support the King in prosecuting
t:e flgiti'ves with the utmost rigor of law.

The conspirators, though far from having done
any thing that was unconimon in a barbarous age,
alnily mnutinotli nobles, and under an unsettled
ft.le of government, must be acknowledged to
hlue been guilty of an ad of treason against their
Sovereign; and James, who confidered their con.
dud in this light, had good reason to boast of his
clemency, when he offered to pardon them upon
their confessing their crime. But, on the other hand,
it must be allowed that, after the King's voluntary
promise of a general oblivion, they had some reason
to compli.ni of breach of faith, and, without the
most unpardonable imprudence, could not have
put their lives in Arran's power.

The interest of the Church was considerably 1s54.
afftced by there contrary revolutions. While the faorthecn.
conspirators kept poffesiion of power, the Clergy rpiratorsan

irritate thl

not only recovered, but extended their privileges. itlch
A, they had formerly declared the hierarchy to be
unlawful, they took some bold measures towards
exttrminating the fpifcopil order out of the
Churic; and it was owing more to Adamson's
dexterity in perplexing and lengthening out the

VOL. 11. V

00 t procees for that purpose, than to their own wan,

lv of zeal, that they did not deprive, and perhaps
'3s excommunicate all the Bishops in Scotland. When

the King recovered his liberty, things put on a
very different asped. The favor bestowed upon
Arran, the enemy of every thing decent and sacred,
and the rigorous prosecution of those nobles who
had been the mos zealous defenders of the Protelt
ant cause, were confidered as sure presages of
the approaching ruin of the Church. The Clergy
could not conceal their apprehensions, nor view
this impending danger in silence. Dury, who had
been refored to his office as one of the Miniflen
of Edinburgh, openly applauded the Raid of Ruth
,vn in the pulpit, at which the King was to enraged,
that, notwithltanding some symptoms of his sub.
million, he commanded him to resign his charge
in the city. Mr. Andrew Melvil, being funmoned
before the Privy Council to answer for the dorine
which he had uttered in a sermon at St. Andrew's,
and accused of comparing the present grievances
of the nation with those under James 11I. and ol
intimating obliquely that they ought to be redressed
in the fame manner, thought it incumbent on him
to behave with greater firmness. He declined the
jurisdiction of a Civil court, in a cause which
he maintained to be purely Ecclesiastical; the
Pretbytery, of which he was a member, had, as
he contended, the sole right to call him to account
for words spoken in the pulpit; and neither the
King nor council could judge, in the firt inltance,
of the dotrine delivered by Preachers, without

violating the immunities of the Church. This B o O X
cx,,ipion from civil jurifdlition was a privilege vl.
vlihh the Popilh Ecclesiastics, admirable judges ts84.
of whatevrr contributed to increase the lulire or
power of their body, had long strugglcd for, and
had at Lift obtained If the faine plea had now
been admitted, the Proteft.nt cirrgy would have
become independent on the civil Mlagiftrate; and
an orller of men extremely ufcful to society while
they inculcate those duties which tend to promote
it, happiness and tranquillity, might have become
no lesS pernicious, by teaching, without fear or
control, the mofl dangerous principles, or by
exciting their hearers to the most desperate and
lawless adions. The King, jealous to excess of his
prerogative, was alarmed at this daring encroach.
ment on it; and as Melvil, by his learning and
zeal, had acquired the reputation and authority of
head of the party, he resolved to punilh him with
the rigor which that pre-eminence rendered necef-
iry, and to discourage, by a timely severity, the
revival of such a dangerous claim. Mlvil, however,
avoided his rage, by flying into England; and the
pulpits rcfoundrd with complaints that the King hadc
extinuiilied the light of learning in the kingdom,
and d'prived the Church of the ablest and molt
faithful guardian of its liberties and discipline"'.

Ihefe violent declamations of the Clergy against
the measures of the court were extremely acceptable
to the people. ' he conspirators, though driven
"' Spotfw. 33o. Cald. iii 304.

Va

0 o o K out of the kingdom, fill possessed great influence
vL there; and as they had every thing to fear fron
isn. the relentment of a young Prince, irritated b'y th

furious counfrls of Arran, they never ceased solicit
ing their adherents to take arms in their defence
Gowrie, the only person among them who hai
Submitted to the King, and accepted of a pardon
soon repented of a ftep which loft him the esteen
of one party, without gaining the confidence of
the other; and, after suffering many mortifications
from the King's neglcd, and the haughtinets o
Arran, he was at last commanded to leave Scot
land, and to reside in France. While he waited a
Dundee for an opportunity to embark, he was
informed that the Earls of Angus, Mar, and the
Tutor of Glamis, had concerted a scheme for
surprising the castle of Stirling. In his situation
little perfualion was necelfary to draw him to
engage in it. Under various pretexts, he put of
his voyage, and lay ready to take arms on the day
fixed by the conspirators for the execution of their
enterprise. His lingering so long at Dundee, with
out any apparent reason, awakened the suspicion
of the court, proved fatal to himself, and difap
pointed the success of the conspiracy. Colone
William Stewart surrounded the house where he
lodged with a body of soldiers, and, in spite o
his refitance, took him prisoner. Two days after
Angus, Ml1ar, and Glamis, seized the castle o
Stirling, and erecting their standard there, publihed
a manifesto, declaring that they took arms for no
other reason but to remove from the King's pefeonc

a minion who had acquired power by the molt B oO t
unworthy actions, and who exercised it with the VI.
moR nmtolerible insolence. The account ofGowrie's 1584.
imprisonment firuck a damp upon their spirits. They
imputed it to treachery on his part, and suspeCted,
that as he had formerly deserted, he had now
betrayed them. At the fame time, Elizabeth having
negleded to supply them, in due time, with a fum
of money, which she had promised to them, and
their friends and vaIfals coming in slowly, they
appeared irresolute and disheartened; and as the
King, who adted with great vigor, advanced to-
wards them at the head of twenty thousand men,
they fled precipitately towards England, and with
dliliculty made their escape ". This ralh and feeble
attempt produced such effects as usually follow
disappointed conspiracies. It not only hurt the cause
for which it was undertaken, but added strength
and reputation to the King; confirmed Arran's
power; and enabled them to pursue their measures
with more boldness, and greater success. Gowrie
was the firRf vidim of their resentment. After a
very informal trial, a jury of Peers found him guilty
of treason, and he was publicly beheaded at Stirling.

To humble the Churoh was the King's next May:.
Rtep. But as it became necessary, for this purpose, APa'rliament
to call in the aid of the legislative authority, a
Parliament was hastily summoned: and while so
many of the nobles were banished out of the

'" Home's Hilt. of the House of Dougl. 376. Spotfw. 33o.
Calderw, iii 324, &c.

V3

BOO kingdom, or forbidden to appear in the King's

vT, presence; while Arran's haughtiness kept some at
ss5. a distance, and intimidated others; the meeting

confited only of those who were absolutely at the

soey laws devotion of the court. In order to conceal the laws
C~ag. which were framing from the knowledge of the

Clergy, the Lords of the Articles were fworm to
secrecy; and when some of the Ministers, who
either fufpe&ed, or were informed of the danger,
deputed one of their number to declare their appre.
benfions to the King, he was seized at the palace.
gate, and carried to a distant prison. Others,
attempting to enter the Parliament-houfe, were
e refused admittance"'; and such laws were palled,

as totally overturned the constitution and discipline.
of the Church. The refuting to acknowledge the
jurifdidion of the Privy Council; the pretending an
exemption from the authority of the civil courts;
the attempting to diminilh the rights and privileges
of any of the three estates in parliament, were de.
dared to be high treason. The holding assemblies,
whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, without the King's
permission or appointment; the uttering, either pri.
vately or publicly, in sermons or in declamations,
any false and fcandalous'reports against the King,
his ancestors, or ministers, were pronounced capital
crimes"'

When there laws were published at the crols

of Edinburgh, according to the ancient culom,
iMr. Robert Pont, Miniller of St. Cuthbert's, and
"7 Cali iii. ;6. "' ParL 8 Jac. VI.

one of the Lords of Seflion, solemnly protested B o 0 X
ae.inft them, in the name of his brethren, because Vl.
they had been passed without the knowledge or 'sq.
coilfcit of the Church. Ever since the Reformation,
the pulpits and ecclesiastical judicatories had both
beet elteemed sacred. In the former, the Clergy
had been accustomed to censure, and admonilh with
unbounded liberty. In the latter, they exercised
an uncontrouled and independent jurifdiaion. The
blow was now aimed at both these privileges. These
new statutes were calculated to render churchmen
as inconsiderable as they were indigent; and as the
avarice of the nobles had stripped them of the wealth,
the King's ambition was about to deprive them
of the power which once belonged to their order.
No wonder the alarm was universal, and the com.
plaints loud. All the Ministers of Edinburgh for.
sook their charge, and fled into England. The
most eminent Clergymen throughout the kingdom
imitated their example. Desolation and aftonilhment
appeared in every part of the Scottish Church; the
people bewailed the loss of Pallors, whom they
efleemed; and full of conflernation at an event so
unexpedled, openly expressed their rage againfl
Arran, and began to fufpetd the King himself to
be an enemy to the Reformed Religion "'.

' Spotfw. '33.

V4

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK VII.

THE
HISTORY

0 F
SCO T L AN D.

BOOK VII.
Bo o K W HTLE Scotland was toro by inteltine fadions,

vn1. Elizabeth was alarmed with the rumor of a projeei
's54. in agitation for fettirg Mary at liberty. Francis

t'isrofp. Trokmorton, a Chelhire gentleman, was fufpeded
ac agaft of being deeply concerned in the defigo, and on
Elixkc. that suspicion he was taken into custody. Among

his papers were found two lifts, one of the prin.
cipal harbours in the kingdom, with an account
of their situation, and of the depth of water in
each; the other, of all the eminent Roman Catho.
lics in England. This circumstance confirmed the
suspicion againfl him, and some dark and desperate
conspiracy was supposed just ready to break out
At firt he boldly avowed his innocence, and
declared that the two papers were forged by the
Queen's Aliniflers, in order to intimidate or insnare
him ; and he even endured the ralk with the
utmcft fortitude. But being brought a second
time to the place of torture, his resolution failed

him, and he not only acknowledged that he had B o o t
held a secret correspondence with the Queen of vii.
Scots, but discovered a design that was formed 1584
to invade England. The Duke of Guise, he said,
undertook to furnilh troops, and to conduct
the enterprise. The Pope and King of Spain
were to supply the money necessary for carrying
it on; all the Englilh exiles were eager to take
arms; many of the Catholics at home would be
ready to join them at their landing; Mendoza,
the Spanish Ambassador, who was the life of the
conpiracy, spared no pains in fomenting the spirit
of dfaffedion among the English, or in haflening
the preparations on the Continent; and by his
command, he made the two liss, the copies whereof
had been found in his poffeflion. This confeflion
he retraded at his trial; returned to it again after
sentence was pafled upon him; and retracted it
once more at the place of execution '.

To us in the prefcnt age, who are alifted in
forming our opinion of this matter by the light
which time and history have thrown upon the
designs and characters of the Princes of Guise,
many circumstances of Throkmorton's confelcion
appear to be extremely remote from truth, or
even from probability. The Duke of Guise was,
at that juncture, far from being in a situation to
undertake foreign conquests. Without either power
or otfice at court; hated by the King, and perse-
culed by the favorites, he had no leisure for any

Hullinglhead, 170o.

o 0 K thnoghts of disturbing the quiet of neighbouring
vii. fitrc; his vast and ambitious mind was wholly

4 o-cupied in lIving tLe loundation of that famous

league, lb:c flhook the throne of France. But
at the time ms, Elizabeth deteded this con.
fp;racy, the close union between the house of
Guise and Philip was remarkable to all Europe;
and as their great enterprise againfl Henry ill
wa; not vet diflofed, as they endeavoured to
conceal that under their threatenings to invade
England. rhrokmorton's discovery appeared to
be extremely probable; and Elizabeth, who knew
how ardently all the parues mentioned by him
wilhed her downfal, thought that lbe could not

Doirs cf guard her kingdom with too much care. lhe

or's« adhe. indiscreet zeal of the Englih exiles increased her
ELzaktL fears. Not satisfied with incessant outcries against

her severity towards the Scottilh Queen, and her
cruel persecution of her catholic subje&s, not
thinking it enough that one Pope had threatened
her with the sentence of excommunication, and
another had adually pronounced it, they now
began to disperse books and writings, in which
they endeavoured to persuade their disciples, that
it would be a meritorious adion to take away
her life; they openly exhorted the maids of honor
to treat her as Judith did Holofernes, and, by
such an illustrious deed, to render their own names
honorable and sacred in the church throughout all
future ages'. For all these rea'ms, Elzabeth not

Camd. 497.

only inflicted the punilhment of a traitor on Trok. B 0 0 t
morton, but commanded the Spanilh ambafTador vn.
ioftantly to leave England; and that lhe night be 1"4
in no danger of being attacked within 'the island,
she determined to use her utmost efforts, in order
to recover that influence over the Scottilh councils,
which The had for some time entirely loft.

There were three different methods, by which She ende.
Elizabeth might hope to accomplish this; either Yurs to ae.
by furnilhing such effedual aid to the banilhed .ibiutjCe li
nobles, as would enable them to resume the chief Scotland.
direction of affairs; or by entering into such a aby gra'n
treaty with Mary, as might intimidate her son,
who being now accustomed to govern, would be
apt to agree to any terms rather than resign the
sceptre, or admit an associate in the throne; or by
gaining the Earl of Arran, to secure the diredion
of the King his mailer. The lafi was not only
the easiest and fpeedieft, but moR likely to be
fuccefful. T'his Elizabeth resolved to pursue; but
without laying the other two altogether aside.
With this view The sent Davison, one of her
principal secretaries, a-man of abilities and address,
into Scotland. A Minister so venal as Arran, hated
by his own countrymen, and holding his power
by the most precarious of all tenures, the favor
of a young Prince, accepted Elizabeth's offers
without hesitation, and deemed the acquisition of
er protecion to be the most solid foundation of
his own greatness. Soon after he consented to an Angut. ;3.
Interview with Lord Hunfdon the Governor of
Brwick, and being honored with the pompous

B O O K title of Lieutenant General for the King, he appealed

vii. at the place appointed with a splendid train. In
'(s4- Hun;don'. presence he renewed his promises of an

inviolable and faithful attachment to the Englifl
interest. and assured him that James Ihould enter into
no negociation which might tend to interrupt the
peace between the two kingdoms; and as Elizabet
began to entertain the fame fears and jealousies con.
cerning the King's marriage, which' had formerly
disquieted her with regard to his mother's, he under
took to prevent James from listening to any over.
ture of that kind, until he had previously obtained
the Queen of Plngland's consent '.

Scme o. The banilbed Lords and their adherents soon feli
^a.A t* n the effedts of Arran's friendship with England. Ai
ba.isd Elizabeth had permitted them to take refuge in her
Lot. dominions, and several of her Ministers were ol

opinion that The ought to employ her arms in defenc
of their cause, the fear of this was the only thing
which reitrained James and his favorite, from pro
ceeding to such extremities againlt them, as might
have excited the pity or indignation of the Englil,
and have prompted them to exert themselves with
Apl. :L. vigor in their behalf. But every apprebenion of this

kind being now removed, they ventured to call
parliament, in which an ad was passed, attainting
Angus, Mar, Glamis, and a great number of thei
followers. Their etates devolved to the Crown
and according to the practice of the Scottilb Mo
narchs, who were obliged to reward the fadio

Cald. iii. 491. Melv. ;.1 . See Append. N. XXX.

which adhered to them, by dividing with it the n o o K
spoils of the vanquilhed, James dealt out the greater v l.
part of these to Arran and his affoci.ites '. 184.

Nor was the treatment of the Clergy less rigorous. ,,,n th
All RMinillcis, readers, and professors in Colleges Clirgy.
were enjoined to subscribe, within forty days, a
piper testifying their approbation of the laws con.
cernlill the Church enatediin la.It parliament Many,
orel.lved or corrupted by the Court, yielded obe-
dience; others flood out. The flipends of the latter
were fcqueftered, some of the more active com-
mitred to pFlfon, and numbers compelled to fly the
klngdomn. I lose who complied, fell under the
suspicion of acting from mercenary or ambitious
notlies. Those who fufflred acquired high reputa.
tion, by giving such convincing evidence of their
firmnef and sincerity. The judicatories of the
Church were almost entirely fuppreflfd. In some
places, scarce as many Ministers remained, as to
perform the duties of religious worship; they soon
funk in reputation among the people, and being pro.
hibited not only from difcourfng of public affairs,
but obliged, by the jealousy of the administration,
to frame every sentiment and expression in such a
manner, as to give the court no offence, their sermons
were deemed languid, insipid, and contemptible;
and it became the general opinion, that together
with the molt virtuous of the nobles, and the molf
faithful of the Clergy, the power and vigor of re.
ligion were now banilhed out of the kingdom '.
'Cald. iii. 527. 'bid.iii. 589.

o o t Meanwhile, Elizabeth was carrying on one ofthofe
vii. fruitless negociations with the Queen of Scots, which
S'1 it had become almost matter of form to renew every

year. They served not only to amtife that unhappy
Princess with some profped of liberty; but furnisled
an apology for eluding the solicitations of foreign
powers in her behalf; and were of use to overawe
James, by fbowing him that Ihe could, at any time,
set free a dangerous rival to dispute his authority.
These treaties The suffered to proceed to what length
he pleased, and never wanted a pretence for breaking
them off, when they became no longer necelfary. The
treaty now on foot was not, perhaps, more sincere
than many which preceded it; the reasons, how.
ever, which rendered it ineffehual were far from
being frivolous.

eormo . As Crichton a Jesuit was failing from Slanders
{s*psS E towards Scotland, the hIip on board of which he
rsat. was a pafenger happened to be chased by pirates,

who, in that age, often infested the narrow seas.
Crichton, in great confusion, tore in pieces some
papers in his custody, and threw them away; but,
by a very extraordinary accident, the wind blew
them back into the bhip, and they were immedi.
ately taken up by rome of the passengers, who
carried them to Wade, the Clerk of the privy
council. He, with great industry and patince,
joined them together, and they were found to
contain the account of a plot said to have been
formed by the King of Spain, and the Duke of Guise,
for invading England. The people were not yet
recovered from the fear and anxiety occasioned by

the conspiracy in which Throkmorton had been B o o K
egaged, and as his discoveries appeared now to he 1:.
connrmed by additional evidence, not only all their '118
former apprehenlions recurred, but the conflerna.
tion became general and exctffive. As all the din.
ger, with which England had been threatened for
some years, flowed either immediately from Mary
herrelf, or from such as made use of her name to
junify infurrecdions and conspiracies, this gradually
dimmniln:d the compassion due to her situation, and
the Engliil, instead of pitying, began to fear and to
hate her. Elizabeth, under whole wife and pacific
reign the English enjoyed tranquillity, and had
opened sources of wealth unknown to their ancestors,
was extremely beloved by all her people; and re-
gard to her safety, not less than to their own in-
terest, animated them against the Scottifli Queen.
In order to discourage her adherents, it was Ocaoli,,
thought necessary to convince them, by some tio, .n'..
public deed, of the attachment of the Englilh to rotion to
their own Sovereign, and that any attempt against lar
her life would prove fatal to her rival. With this
view, an Association was framed, the fubcribers of October ts.
which bound themselves by the mot solemn oaths,
to defend the Queen against all her enemies,
"foreign and domestic; and if violence Ihould

hbe offered to her life, in order to favor the
'title of any pretender to the Crown, they not
only engaged never to allow or acknowledge
'the person or persons by whom, or for whom,
'such a detestable adt hould be committed, but
'vowed, in the presence of the eternal God, to

r n n a prosecute such person orperfons to the death, and
TVI. " topurfue them, with their utmot vengeance, to
15a4. " their utter overthrow and extirpation '." Persons

of all ranks subscribed this combination with the
greatef eagernets and unanimity '.

wlicd Mary confidered this combination, not only as
md t- an avowed design to exclude her from all right of

succession, but as the certain and immediate fore.
runner of her deflrucion. In order to avert tbis, lbe
made such feeble efforts as were fill in her power,
and sent NauC her secretary to court, with offers of
more entire resignation to the will of Elizabeth, in
every point, which had been the occasion of their
long enmity, than all her sufferings hitherto bad been
abletoextort'. But whether Mary adhered inflexibly
to her privileges as an independent Sovereign, or
yielding to the neceflity of her situation, endeavour.
ed, by concelions, to sooth her rival, ae was
equally unfuccefiful. Her firmnces was imputed to
obstinacy, or to the secret hope of foreign aflitance;
her conceflions were either believed to be insincere,
or to flow from the fear of some imminent danger.
Her present willingness, however, to comply with
any terms was so great, that Walsingham warmly
urged his miitrefs to come to a final agreement
with her'. But Elizabeth was persuaded, thatit
was the spirit raised by the association which had
rendered her so paflive and compliant. She always
imagined that there was something mysterious

Stte Trials, 1. 1z:. ' Camd. 499.
'Id. ibid. ' SeeAppendix, N.XXXI.

and

and deceitful in all Mary's adions, and fufpeded a o o
her of carrying on a dangerous corr(fpondence with vii.
the Englilh Catholics, both within and without the Is*4
kingdom. Nor were her suspicions altogether void
of foundation. Mary had, about this time, writ-
tell a letter to Sir Francis Inglefield, urging him to
haifen the execution of what (he calls the Gicatplotor
pDfqnment, without hesitating on account of any
danger in which it might involve herlife, which ibe
would most willingly part with, if, by that sacrifice,
Ihe could procure relief for so great a number of the
opprefled children of the Church '. Inftead,:therefore, - she is treat
of hearkening to the overtures which the Scottifb edlwit

greater ri.

Queen made, or granting any mitigation of the gor.
hardships of which fTe complained, Elizabeth re-
solved to take her out of the hands of the Earl of
Shrewsbury, and to appoint Sir Amias Paulet and
Sir Drue Drury to be her keepers, Shrewsbury
had discharged his trust with great fidelity, during
fifteen years, but, at the fame time, had treated
Mlary with gentleness and refpedt, and had always
(weetened harlh commands by the humanity with
which he put them in execution. The fame po-
litenefs was not to be expected from men of an
inferior rank, whose severe vigilance, perhaps,
was their chief recommendation to that employ.
ment, and the only merit by which they could
pretend to gain favor or preferment ".

As James was no less eager, than ever, to de. Graya ew
prive the banished Nobles of Elizabeth's protection, s "vor, of

the ingl's.

" Strype, iii. 246. " Camd. o.
VOL. IL X

B OOK K he appointed the MaRer of Gray his Ambassador

Vl!. to the court of England, and intrusted him with the
its. conduct of a negociation for that purpose. For this

honor he was indebted to the envy and jealousy
of the Earl of Arran. Gray possessed all-the talents
of a Courtier; a graceful person, an insinuating
address, boundless ambition, and a refRlef and
intriguing spirit. During his residence in France,
he had been admitted into the most intimate fami.
liarity with the Duke of Guise, and, in order to
gain his favor, had renounced the Protestant Reli.
gion, and professed the utmost zeal for the captive
Queen, who carried on a secret correspondence
with him, from which the expeded great advan.
ages. On his return into Scotland, he paid court to
James with extraordinary assiduity, and his acconm
pli/hments did not fail to make their usual impreflion
on the King's heart. Arran, who had introduced
him, began quickly to dread his growing favor;
and flattering himself, that absence would efface
any sentiments of tenderness from the mind of a
young Prince, pointed him out, by his malicious
praises, as the most proper person in the kingdom,
for an embassy of such importance; and contributed
to raise him to that high dignity, in order to haltea
his fall. Elizabeth, who had an admirable dexterity
in discovering the proper instruments for carrying
on her designs, endeavoured, by caresses, and by
presents, to secure Gray to her interest The former
flattered his vanity, which was great; the latter
supplied his profuseness, which was till greater
He abandoned himself without reserve to Elizabeth's

direction, and not only undertook to retain the B OOK
Kim;l under the influence of England, but ated as vil.
a spy upon the Scottihf Queen, and betrayed to "ts.4
her rival every secret that he could draw from her
by his high pretensions of zeal in her service ".

Gray's credit with the Englilh court was ex. Uis intrrct

tremely galling to the banished nobles. Elizabeth no wVth ,t,
longer thought of employing her power to restore Englijd.
thet; ie found it easier to govern Scotland by
corrupting the King's favorites; and, in compliance
with Gray's solicitations, hfe commanded the exiles Decetl. it.
to leave the north of England, and to remove into
the heart of the kingdom. This rendered it difficult
tor them to hold any correspondence with their
partifins in Scotland, and almotf impoflible to
rctur thither without her permiflion. Gray, by
gaii:ing a point which James had so much at heart,
rin'tted himself more firmly than ever in his favor;
and by acquiring greater reputation, became capa-
ble of [erving Elizabeth with greater success".
Arran had now possessed, for some time, all the tsh.

Arralls cot.

power, the riches, and the honors, that his immo- raption an
derate ambition could desire, or the fondness of a inroitlcec
Plince, who set no limits to his liberality towards
his favorites, could bellow. The office of Lord
Chancellor, the highest and most important in the
kingdom, was conferred upon him, even during
the life of the Earl of Argyll, who ficceeded Athol
in that dignity "; and the public beheld, with

Strype, iii. tos. Melv. 116,

A i Cald. iii. 64,
" 'raws. Ofic. of State, App. 447.

Xa

B O K astonishment and indignation, a man educated as a

vii: soldier of fortune, ignorant of law, and a contein.
Is8s. ner of justice, appointed to preside in parliament,

in the privy council, in the court of feflion, and
intruded with the supreme disposal of the property
of his fellow-fubjeds. He was, at, the fame time,
governor of the catles of Stirling and Edinburgh,
the two principal forts in Scotland; Provost of
the city of Edinburgh; and as if by all these
accumulated dignities his merits were not fuffici.
ently recompenfed, he had been created Lieutenant
General over the whole kingdom. No person was
admitted into the King's presence without his per.
milfion; no favor could be obtained but by his
mediation. James, occupied with youthful amuse.
ments, devolved upon him the whole regal
authority. Such unmerited elevation increased his
natural arrogance, and rendered it intolerable. He
was no longer content with the condition of a
fiubjedt, but pretended to derive his pedigree from
Murdo Duke of Albany; and boasted, openly, that
his title to the Crown was preferable to that of
the King himself. But, together with these thoughts
of royalty, he retained the meanness suitable to
his primitive indigence. His venality as a judge
was scandalous, and was exceeded only by that of
his wife, who, in defiance of decency, made herself
a party in almost every question which came to be
decided, employed her influence to corrupt or to
overawe the judges, and almost openly dictated
their decisions ". His rapaciousness as a Minister
" Cald. iii. i. Staggering State of the Scots Stateien, 7.

,as innfitiable. Not satisfied with the revenues of B O O K
so many offices; with the estate and honors which vii.
belonged to the family of Hamilton; or with the siss.
reater part of Gowrie's lands, which had fallen
to his Iluare, he grasped at the poffeflions of several
of the nobles. He required Lord Maxwell to ex-
change part of his estate, for the forfeited lands
of Kinneil; and because he was unwilling to quit
an ancient inheritance for a poffeflion so precari.
ous, he lirred up against him his hereditary rival,
the Laird of Johnflton, and involved that corner
of the kingdom in a civil war. lie committed to
prifnn the Earl of Athol, Lord Home, and the
Maflcr of Caffils; the first, because he would not
divorce his wife, the daughter of the Earl of Gowrie,
and entail his estate on him; the second, because
he was unwilling to part with some lands adjacent
to one of Arran's ellates; and the third, for refuting
to lend him money. His spies and informers filled
the whole country, and intruded themselves into
every company. The nearest neighbours distrusted
and feared each other. All familiar society was at
an end. Even the common intercourses of humanity
were interrupted, no man knowing in whom to
confide, or where to utter his Complaints. There
is not perhaps in history an example of a Minister
so universally detestable to a nation, or who more
juRly deserved its detestation ".

Arran, notwithstanding, regardless of the senti-
ments, and delpifing the murmurs of the people,
"Spotfw. 337, 338.

X3

a o K gave a looCe to his natural temper, and proceeded

vll. to ats Rill more violent. David Home of Argaty,
*45s. and Patrick his brother, having received letters from

one of the banilhed Lords, about private business,
were condemned and put to death, for holding
correspondence with rebels. Cunninghame of
Drumwhafel, and Douglas Mains, two gentlemen
of honor and reputation, were accused of having
conspired, with the exiled nobles, to seize the
King's person. A single witness only appeared; the
evidence they produced of their innocence was
unanswerable; their accuser himself not long after
acknowledged that he had been suborned by Arran;
and all men believed the charge against them to be
re ,. groundless: They were found guilty, notwithftand.

ing, and suffered the death of traitors".

P.m'co.rpi. About the fame time that these gentlemen were
,.,'^,a punilhed for a pretended conspiracy, Elizabeth's

life was endangered by a real one. Parry, a Dodor
of laws, and a Member of the House of Commons,
a man vain and fantastic, but of a resolute spirit,
had lately been reconciled to the Church of Rome;
and fraught with the zeal of a new convert, he
offered to demonfirate the sincerity of his attach.
ment to the religion which he had embraced, by
killing Elizabeth. Cardinal Allen had publilied a
book, to prove the murder of an excommunicated
Prince to be not only lawful, but a meritorious
adion. The Pope's Nuncio at Venice, the Jesuits
both there and at Paris, the Engli(h exiles, all

'7 Sporfw. 318. Cald iii. 794,

approvedof the design. The ope himfilfexhorted B 0 0 t
him to persevere; and grantd him, for his encou- vlI.
rgeinent, a plenary indulgee, and remission of t's
hs fins. Cardinal di Como wrot to him a letter
to the fame purpose. But though he often got
acccfs to the Queen , fear, or some remaining
sense of duty, refrained him from perpetrating
the crime. Happily, his intention was at las dif-
covered by Nevil, the only person in England to
shom he had communicated it; and he himself March ^.
hlving voluntarily confefed his guilt, he suffered
the pilnilncment which it deserved ".

These repeated conspiracies against their Sover- A revere fn
tein awakened the indignation of. the Englifb t', "WhiEh
parliament, and produced a very extraordinary to Mll..
liatute, which, in the end, proved fatal to the
Qccn of Scots. By this law the affociatoon in
defence of Elizabeth's life was ratified, and it was
further enadc'd, " That if any rebellion Thall be
' excited in the kingdom, or any thing attempted
"to the hurt of her Majelty's person, by or for
" any person pretending a title to the Crown, the
OQueen fl3ll empower twenty-four persons, by
" a commitlon under the Great Seal, to examine
"into, and pass sentence upon such offences; and
a after judgment given , a proclamation Ihall be
"iffied, declaring the persons whom they find
"guilty, excluded from any right to the Crown;

and hcr ilajefty's fubjcds may lawfully pursue
e very one of them to the death, with all thei

u S'ate Trials, vol .

i .
1.

X4

Bo o K " aiders and abettors: And if any design againit the

vii. c life of the Queen take efled, the persons, by or
sLi. " for whom such a detestable ad is executed, and

( their ifuels, being in any wife assenting or privy
" to the fame. flall be disabled for ever from pre.
a tending to the Crown. and be pursued to death
v in the like manner". " This ad was plainly le.
veiled at the Queen of Scots; and whether we
confider it as a voluntary expression of the zeal
and concern of the nation for Elizabeth's safety, or
whether we impute it to the influence which that
artful Princess preserved over her parliaments, it is
no easy matter to reconcile it with the general prin.
ciples of juflice or humanity. Mary was thereby
rendered accountable not only for her own adiions,
but for those of others; in consequence of which,
The ilight forfeit her right of fuccelfion, and even
her life itself.

Thriporwith Mary justly confidered this ad as a warning to
wirbh sht prepare for the woift extremities. Elizabeth's mini[.
~;idt. ters, it is probable, had resolved, by this time, to take

away her life; and suffered books to be publilbed,
in order to persuade the nation, that this cruel and
unprecedented measure was not only necessary, but
just ". Even that short period of her days which re.
mained, they rendered uncomfortable, by every hard-
flsip and indigniry which it was in their power to in.
fl;c Almof ail her servants were diCmiffed, (he was
treated no longer with the refped due to a Queen;
and though the rigor of seventeen years imprison.
ment had broken her conflitution, file was confined

" State Trials, vol i. iz;. " Strype, iii. 299.

to two ruinous chambers, scarcely habitable, even in B o K
the middle of fuimmer, by reason ofcolrf. Notwith. vil.
flanding the scantiness of her revenue, she had been '1i.
accustomed to distribute regularly some alms among
he poor in the villnage adjoining to the castle. Paulet
now refilfed her liberty to perform this pious and
hmmane office. which had afforded her great confola.
tion. amidif her own fiufferings. The castle in which
fie resided was converted into a common prison;
and a young man futfpedted of Popery, was confined
there, and treated tunder her eye with such rigor,
that he died of the ill ufige. She often complained to
llizabrnh of thele mulriplied injuries, and expoftulat-
td as became a woman and a Queen; but as no
political reason now obliged that Princess to amuse
her any longer with fallacious hopes, far from
granting heranyredrefs, Ihe did not even deign to
give her any answer. The King of France, closely
allied to Elizabeth, on whom he depended for
aflillance againrt his rebellious fubjeds, was afraid
ofefpoufing Mary's cause with any warmth; and all
solicitations in her behalf were feeble, formal, and
inefficacious. But Caftlenau, the French Ambassador,
whose compafion and zeal for the unhappy Queen
supplied the defeCts in his inftrutions, remon-
firated with such vigor against the indignities to
which fle was exposed, that, by his importunity,
he prevailed at length to have her removed to
Tuthbury; though the was confined, the greater
part of another winter, in her present wretched
habitation ".
" Jebb. v. ii. $76-598g

i o o Neither the infolts ofherenemies, nor theneglect

vii. of her friends, made such an impreflion on Mary, as
are. gthe ingratitude of her son. James had hitherto treated

A bra,:h
betwen his mother with filial respect, and had even enteied
nary and into negociations with her, which gave umbrage to
h'" fox Elizabeth. But as it was not her interest that this good

correspondence fbould continue, Gray, who, on
his return into Scotland, found his favor with the
King greatly increased by the success of his embafy,
persuaded him to write a harIh and undutiful letter to
his mother, in which he expressly refused toacknow.
ledge her to be Queen of Scotland, or to confider
his affairs as connected, in any wife, with hers
This cruel requital of her maternal tendernels
overwhelmed Mary with sorrow and despair.
Mach u. a \yas it for this," said ile, in a letter to the

a French Ambassador, " that I have endured so
: much, in order to preserve for him the inherit.
" ance, to which I have a just right? I am far
" from envying his authority in Scotland. I
a desire no power there; nor with to set my foot
" in that kingdom, if it were not for the pleasure
" of once embracing a son, whom I have hitherto
c loved with too tender affetion. Whatever be
C either enjoys or expects, he derived it from me.
" From him I never received afliftance, supply, or
a benefit of any kind. Let not my allies treat him
· any longer as a King; he holds that dignity by
v my consent; and if a speedy repentance do not
a appease my just resentment, I will load him with

a parent's curse, and surrender my Crown, with
0
A1 my pretensions, to one who will receive them

a with gratitude, and defend them with vigor "." B o o C
The love which James bore to his mother, whom vil.
helhadl never known, and whom he had been early iss
aught to confider as one of the most abandoned
persons of her sex, cannot be supposed ever to have
b.en ardent; and he did not now take any pains
to regain her favor. But whether her indignation at
his undutiful behaviour, added to her bigoted
attachment to Popery, prompted Mary at any time
othinik seriously ofdifinheriting herfon; or whether
thefr threatenings were uttered in a sudden sally of
diLppointed affection, it is now no easy matter to
determine. Some papers which are still extant seem
to render the former not improbable ".

Cares of another kind, and no less di'quieting, nnaernu,
occtpied Elizabeth's thoughts. The calm which iIo,1th
fle had long enjoyed, seemed now to be at an end;
and such storms were gathering in every quarter,
as filled her with just alarm. All the neighbouring
nations had undergone revolutions extremely to her
disadvantage. The great qualities which Henry III.
had displayed in his youth, and which raised the
expedations of his fubjeds so high, vanifled on his
afccnding the throne; and his acquiring supreme
power seems not only to have corrupted his heart,
but to have impaired his understanding. He soon loft
the esteem and affection of the nation; and a life
divided between the aufterities of a superstitious
devotion, and the extravagancies of the most

M' Mrdin, 66. Jebb,ii. stx. See Append. N'. XXXII
See Append. N*. XXXIII,

oo0 difTolute debauchery, rendered him as contemptibl
vii. as he was odious on account of his rapacioufneds
11I8. his profusion, and the fondness with which be

doated on many unworthy minions. On the death
of his only brother, those sentiments of the people
burfi out with violence. Henry had no children,
and though but thirty-two years of age, the fuc
ceflion of the Crown was already confidered as
open. The King of Navarre, a diltant descendant
of the royal family, but the undoubted heir to the

fm the Crown, was a zealous Protestant. The profped ol
-t~a-f an event so fatal to their religion,'as his ascending

the throne of France, alarmed all the Catholics in
Europe, and the Duke of Guise, countenanced by
the Pope, and aided by the King of Spain, appeared
as the defender of the Romilh faith, and the assertet
of the Cardinal of Bourbon's right to .the Crown,
In order to unite the party, a bond of confederacy
was formed, diftinguitbed by the name ofthe Hol
Leagu. All ranks of men joined in it with emu.
lation. The spirit spread with the irrefiflible ra.
pidity which was natural to religious paflions in
that age. The dfrrudion of the Reformation, not
only in France, but all over Europe, seemed to be
the objec and with of the whole party; and the
Duke of Guise, the head of this mighty and zeal.
ous body, acquired authority in the kingdom, far
superior to that which the King himself possessed.

fom the Philip 1I. by the conquest of Portugal, had greatly
pSoerof increased the naval power of Spain, and had at laRs

u'ilipi. reduced under his dominion all that portion of the

Continent, which lies beyond the Pyrenean

nountains, and which Naturefeemstohave destined BOO K
to form one great monarchy. William, Prince of Vli.
Orange, who firt encouraged the inhabitants of "18.s
the Netherlands to assert their liberties, and whole
wisdom and valor formed and proteced the rising
commonwealth, had fallen by the hands of an aflffin.
The superior genius of the Prince of Parma had
riven an entire turn to the fate of the war in the
Low Countries; all his enterprises, concerted with
consummate Ikill, and executed with equal bravery,
had been attended with success; and the Dutch,
reduced to the last extremity, were on the point
of falling under the dominion of their ancient master.
None of those circumrtances, to which Eliza. Hr wire
beth had hitherto owed her security, existed any rodu.
longer. She could derive no advantage from the
jealousy which had fubfiRed between France and
Spain; Philip, by means of his confederacy with
the Duke of Guise, had an equal sway in the coun-
cils of both kingdoms. The Hugonots were
unable to contend with the power of the League;
ind little could be expeled from any diversion
they might create. Nor was it probable that the
Netherlands could long employ the arms, or divide
he firength, of Spain. In this situation of the
fairs of Europe, it became necessary for Elizabeth
D form a new plan of conduct; and her wildom
n forming it was not greater than the vigor with
rhich The carried it on. The measures, moRft
citable to her natural temper, and which The had
itherto pursued, were cautious and safe; those
itich Ihe now adopted, were enterprising and

Bo o hazardous. She preferred peace, but was notafraid

VIL of war; and was capable, when compelled b!
a1SS. necessity, not only of defending herself with spirit,

but of attacking her enemies with a boldness hbicl
averted danger frem her own dominions. She
immediately furnilhed the Hugonots with a cons
derablefupply in money. She carried on a private
negociation with Henry III. who, though compelled
to join the League, hated the leaders of it, and
wiiehd for their deftrudtion. She openly undertook
the protedion of the Dutch commonwealth ,and feni
a powerful army to its afiftance. She endeavoured
to form a general confederacy of the Proteltan

Rerolmto Princes, in opposition to the Popifi League. She
r'" bld determined to proceed with the utmost rigor againl

i. tbe the Queen of Scots, whose sufferings and rigbh
>K"i afforded her enemies a specious pretence for ii

vading her dominions. She resolved to redouble
her endeavours, in order to effedt a closer union
with Scotland, and to extend and perpetuate hei
influence over the councils of that nation.

She found it po difficult matter to induce mol

of the Scottish courtiers to promote all her designs
Gray, Sir John Maitland, who had been advanced
to the office of Secretary, which his brother for
merly held, Sir Lewic Bellenden, the Justice Clerk,
who had succeeded Gray as the King's resident al
London, were the persons in whom Ihe chiefly
confided. In order to direct and quicken theil
Ma :99. motions, The dispatched Sir Edward Wotton along

with Bellenrlen into Scotland. This man was gay,
well-bred, and enteraining; he excelled in aL

the exercises for which James had a passion; and B o o K
amused the young King by relating the adventures vil.
which he had met with, and the observations he sr-
had made, during a long residence in foreign
countries; but' under the veil of these superficial
qualities, he concealed a dangerous and intriguing
spirit. He soon grew into high favor with James,
andt while he was seemingly attentive only to pleasure,
and diversions, he acquired influence over the public
councils, to a degree which was indecent for a
franger to poTfefs ".

Nothing, however, could be more'acceptable to Propores
the nation, than the proposal he made of a firia le'age".ith
alliance between the two kingdoms, in defence of
the Reformed Religion. The rapid and alarming
progrcfs of the Popifi League seemed to call on all
Protellant Princes to unite for the preservation of
their common faith. James embraced the overture July :,.
with warmth, and a Convention of estates empowered
him to conclude such a treaty, and engaged to ratify
it in parliament ". The alacrity with which James
concurred in this measure must not be wholly ascribed
tither to his own zeal, or to Wotton's address; it
was owing in part to Elizabeth's liberality. As a
mark of her motherly affection for the young King,
Ife fettled on him an annual pension of five thousand
pouond(; the fame fum which her father had al.
lotted her before file ascended the throne. This
tircumllnce, which she took care to mention,
rendered a fum, which in that age was far from
" lelv. 7. " SPotfWW. 339.

a o o t being inconiderable, a very acceptable present to

Vii. the King, whose revenues, during a long minority,
r8es. bad been al.roft totally dissipated ".

undemiman But the chief object of Wotton's intrigues, was
Au's to ruin Arran. While a milion so odious to the

nation continued to govern the King, his afilRance
could be of little advantage to Elizabeth. And
though Arran,even since his interview with Hundon,
bad appeared extremely for her interell, The could
place no great confidence in a man whose condud was
so capricious and irregular, and who, notwithbtand.
ing his protestations to the contrary, fill continued
a secret correspondence both with Mary and with
the Duke of Guife.The banirhed [Lords were attached
to England from affedion, as well as principle, and
were the only persons among the Scots whom, in
any dangerous exigency, (he could thoroughly trul
Before Bellenden left London, they had been
summoned thither, under color of vindicating
themselves from his accusations, but, in reality,
to concert with him the mot proper measures sot
restoring them to their country. Wotton pursued
this plan, and endeavoured to ripen it for exe
cution; and it was greatly facilitated by an evenl
neither uncommon nor considerable. Sir John
Forster, and Ker of Ferniherft, the Englilt and
ScottiDl wardens of the middle marches, havinj
met, according to the custom of the borders
about midfimmer, a fray arose, and Lord Ruffl
the Earl of Bedford's eldest son, happened to bi

" Cal iii. ow.

killed.

killed. This scuffle was purely accidental, but B o o K
I|z.,bcth chose to confider it as a design formed vii.
by Ker, at the instigation of Arran, to involve the IsS.
two kingdoms in war. She infifled that both Ihould
be tdlivered up to her; and though James eluded
that demand, he was obliged to confine Arran in
St. Xndrew's, and Ker in Aberdeen. During his Affinsthe
ablence from court, Wotton and his associates banihet
carried on their intrigues without interruption. By
their advice, the banilhed nobles endeavoured to
accommnodate their differences with Lord John and
LordClaud, the Duke of Chatelherault's two sons,
whom Morton's violence had driven out of the
kingdom. Their common sufferings, and common oa. i.
interelt, induced both parties to bury in oblivion the
ancient discord which had subsisted between the
houses of Hamilton and Douglas. By Elizabeth's
permifflon, they returned in a body to the borders
of Scotland. Arran, who had again recovered
favor, insisted on putting the kingdom in a pof-
ture of defence. But Gray, Bellenden, and Mait.
land secretly thwarted all his measures. Some
necessary orders they prevented from being issued;
others they rendered ineffectual, by the manner of
I xecution; and all of them were obeyed slowly, and
with reluctance ".
Wotton's fertile brain was, at the fame time,
big with another and more dangerous plot. He
had contrived to seize the King, and to carry him
byforce into England. But the design was happily

ISpotfv. 40o.
VL. IT. Y

B o o K discovered; and, in order to avoid the punilhmenl

vll. his treachery merited, he departed without takins

8ss. leave ".

rTheyren, Meanwhile the banilied Lords hastened th(

lads a execution of their enterprise; and as their friend
*iereou and vasals were now ready to join them, they en.
itedt t tered Scotland. Wherever they came, they were

welcomed as the deliverers of their country, and the
mos fervent prayers were addressed to Heaven for the
success of their arms. They advanced, without lofinS
a moment, towards Stirling, at the head often thou.
sand men. The King, though he had assemblcd an
army superior in number, could pot venture to mcet
them in the field, with troops whose loyalty was
extremely dubious, and who, at bes, were far from
being hearty in the cause; nor was either the town
or castle provided for a siege. The gates, however,
of both were ihut, and the nobles encamped at St
]vb. =. Ninian's. That fame night they surprised the town

or more probably it was betrayed into their hands
and Arran, who had undertaken to defendit, wa
obliged to save himself by a precipitate flight. Next
morning,they invested the castle, in which there wern
not provisions for twenty-four hours; and James was
necessitated immediately to hearken to terms o
accommodation. They were not so elated wid
success, as to urge extravagant demands, nor was
the King unwilling to make every reasonable con
cession. They obtained a pardon in the mos
ample form, of all the offences which they has

" Mel. j1(.

committed; the principal forts in the kingdom BOO
were by way of security, put into their hands; vii.
Crawfort(, ilontrofe, and Colonel Stewart were Ibs.
enlloved from the King's presence; and a parlia.
met was called, in order to eflablilh tranquillity
in the nation '.

Though a great majority in this parliament A p.ri.
conlRed of the confederate nobles and their ad- ment
herrcts, they were far from discovering a vindictive Dec. o.
firnt. Satisfied with procuring an ad, restoring them
to their ancient honors and eRfates, and ratifying the
padlon granted by the King, they seemed willing to
forget all pas errors in the adminiRfration, and spared
Jjmes the mortification of feeing his Vlinifters brand.
ed wih any public note of infamy. Arran alone,
dcprivi'd of all his honors, stripped of his borrowed
lpoil;, and declared an enemy to his country by
publicproclamation, funk back into obscurity, and
mul, henceforth, be mentioned by his primitive
tile of Captain James Stewart. As he had been,
during his unmerited prosperity, the object of the
hatred and indignation of his countrymen, they
beheld hi fall without pity, nor did all his sufferings
mitleate their resentment in the leafl degree.
The Clergy were the only body of men who cirar.
obtained no redress of their grievances by this re- ai"'
volution. The confederate nobles had. all along,
aleded to be confidered as guardians of the privi.
kt*s and dif:ipline of the Church. In all their
manifetos they had declared their resolution to
' Cald. iii. 795.

y»

S o o x restore these, and by that popular pretence had gain.

vii. ed many friends. It was now natural to exped some
Isss. fruit of these promises, and some returns of gra.

titude towards many of the most eminent preach.
ers who had suffered in their cause, and who
demanded the repeal of the laws passed the preceding
year. The King, however, was resolute to maintain
these laws in full authority; and as the nobles were
extremely solicitous not to disgust him, by infilling
on any disagreeable request, the claims of the Church
in this, as well as in many former instances, were
sacrificed to the interest of the laity. The Minitlers
gave vent to their indignation in the pulpit, and their
impatience under the disappointment broke out in
some expreflions extremely difrefpetful even
towards the King himself '.
ic. The Archbilhop of St. Andrew's, too, felt the

effects of their anger. The Provincial Synod of
Fife summoned him to appear, and to answer for
his contempt of the decrees of former Assemblies,
in presuming to exercise the function of a Bilbop.
Though he refused to acknowledge the jurifdic.
tion of the court, and appealed from it to the
King, a sentence of excommunication, equally in-
decent and irregular, was pronounced against him.
Adamson, with no less indecency, thundered his
arcliepifcopal excommunication against Melvil,
and some others of his opponents.
April . Soon after, a General Assembly wa« held, in

which the King, with some difficulty, obtained an

' Spodfw. 141.

a&, permitting the name and office of Bishop fill B o o K
to continue in the Church. The power of the order, VII.
however, was considerably retrenched. The exercise 1586.
ofrlifcipline,and the irifpedion of the life and docrine
ofthe Clergy, were committed to Preffyteries, in
which Bishops should be allowed no other pre-
eminence, but that of presiding as perpetual modera-
tors. They themselves were declared to be fubjedt,
in the fame manner as other pastors, to the jurifdilion
of the General Assembly. As the discussion of the
Archbinlop's appeal might have kindled unusual
heats in the Assembly, that affair was terminated
by a compromise. He renounced any claim of
supremacy over the Church, and promised to de-
mean himself suitably to the character of a Bishop,
as decribed by St. Paul. The Assembly, with-
out examining the foundations of the sentence of
excommunication, declared that it Ihould be held
of no cited, and restored him to all the privileges
which he enjoyed before it was pronounced. Not-
withlanding the extraordinary tenderness Ihown
for the honor of the fynod, and the delicacy and
refpef with which its jurifdition was treated,
several members were so zealous as to protest
azainft this decision "

The court of Scotland was now filled with per- A league
Ions so warmly attached to Elizabeth, that the wi"h En
league between the two kingdoms, which had been cluadd.
propored lat year, met with no interruption, but
from D'Efeval the French envoy. James himself

Cald. iii. 894. Spotfw. 346.

Y3

B oo K firfi offered to renew the negociation. Elizabeth did
vII. not susser such a favorable opportunity to flip, and
list. instantly dispatched Randolph to conclude a treaty,
jiJ a. vwhich fle so much desired. The danger to which the

Protestant religion was exposed, by the late combi.
nation of the Popifl powers for its deftrution, and
the neceflity ofa striA confederacy among those who
had embraced the Reformation, in order to obfltruf
their pernicious designs, were mentioned as the
foundation of the league. The chief articles in it
were, that both parties should bind themselves to
defend the Evangelic Religion; that the league
Should be offensive and defensive againR all who iball
endeavour to disturb the exercise of religion in either
kingdom; that if one of the two parties be invaded,
the other, notwithstanding any former alliance,
should not, directly or indirectly, afift the invader;
that if England be invaded in any part remote from
Scotland, James Ihould afift the Queen with two
thousand horse and five thousand foot; that if the
enemy landed or approached within sixty miles of
Scotland, the King (hould take the field with his
whole forces, in the fame manner as he would do in
defence of his own kingdom. Elizabeth, in return,
undertook to a& in defence of Scotland, if it should
be invaded. At the fame time she assured the King
that no ftep Ihould be taken, which might dero.
gate in any degree from his pretensions to the
English Crown ". Elizabeth expressed great a.
tisfadion with a treaty, which rendered Scotland

'" Spotfw. 351.

n useful ally, inflead of a dangerous neighbour, and BOOK
affordedhera degree offecurity onthat fide, which Tli.
1lli eranceflors had aimed at, but none of them had 1s86i
been able to obtain. Zeal for religion, together with
the blellings ofpeace,which both kingdoms had enjoy)
ed during a considerable period, had so far abated the
violence of national antipathy, that the King's con-
duc! was universally acceptable to his own people ".

The acquittal of Archibald Douglas, at this time,
exposed James to much and deserved censure. This
man was deeply engaged in the conspiracy against the
life of the King his father. Both Morton and Binny
oneofhis own fcrvants, who suffered for thatcrime,
had accused him of being present at the murder". He
bad escaped pnnifhment by flying into England, and
Jameshad often required Elizabeth to deliver up a
person so unworthy of her protection. He now
obtained a licence, from the King himself, to return
into Scottand; and after undergoing a mock-trial,
calculated to conceal, rather than to detedt his
guilt, he was not only taken into favor by the
King, but sent back to the court of England, with
the honorable charader of his ambassador, James
was now of such an age, that his youth and inex-
perience cannot be pleaded in excuse for this indecent
tranhadion. It muff be imputed to the exceflive
facility of his temper, which often led him togratify
his courtiers at the expense of his own dignity and
reputation ".

" Camld. i ;. See Append. N'. XXXIV. Arnot
Crim.Tri.lls, 7, &e. " Spotfw. 348. Cald. iii. 917.

Y4

BOOK Not long after, the inconsiderate affetion of th

V t. English Catholics towards M.irv, and their Implaca
irsr ble rcfentment against Elizabeth, gave rif, to
biat.ou' confpirJcy which proved fatal to the one Queen
cofpircy left an indelible stain on the reputation of the other
bot . and presented a fpedacle to Europe, of which ther

had been hitherto no example in the history o
mankind.

Dodor Gifford, Gilbert Giffort, and Hodgson

prierf educated in the seminary at Rheims, ha(
adopted an extravagant and epthufiaftic notion, tha
the Bull of Pius V. against Elizabeth was didate(
immediately by the Holy GhoR. This wild opinioi
they instilled into Savage, an officerin the Spanif
army, noted for his furious zeal and daring courage
and persuaded him that no service could be so accept
able to Heaven, as to take away thelife of an excom
municated Heretic. Savage, eager to obtain thi
A.ril :i crown of martyrdom, bound himself by a folemi

vow to kill Elizabeth. Ballard, a pragmatical pries
of that feminarv. had at that time come over t(
Paris, and foiicited M'lendoza, the Spanilh am
ball;dor there, to procure an invasion of Eng
land, while the affairs of the league were f(
prosperous, and the kingdom left naked by fend
ing so many of the Queen's bell troops into thi
Netherlands. Paget and the English exiles de
monfirated the fruijcffnefs 6f such an attempt
unless Plizabeth were firt cut off, or the invader
secured of a powerful concurrence on their land
ing. If it could be hoped that either of the[
events would happen, effetual aid was promised

and in the mean time Ballard was sent back to B o OK
renew his intrigues. VII.

lie communicated his designs to Anthony Babing- 1t86.
tol, a young gentleman in Derbyihire, of a large *a

;

fortune, and many amiable qualities, who having
contracted, during his residence in France, a fami-
liarity with the Archbilhop of Glasgow, had been
recommended by him to the Queen of Scots. He
concurred with Paget, in confidering the death of
Elizabeth as a necessary preliminary to any invasion.
Ballard gave him hopes that an end would soon
be put to her days, and imparted to him Savage's
vow, who was now in London waiting for an
opportunity to strike the blow. But Babington
thought the attempt of too much importance, to
rely on a tingle hand for the execution of it, and
proposed that five resolute gentlemen Ihould be
joined with Savage, in an enterprise, the success
of which was the foundation of all their hopes.
He offered to find out persons willing to under-
take the service, whose honor, secrecy, and courage
they might faiely trust. He accordingly opened
the matter to Edward Windsor, Thomas Salisbury,
Charles Tilney, Chidioc Tichbourne, Robert Gage,
John Travers, Robert Barnwell,. John Charnock,
Henry Dun, John Jones, and Robert Polly, all of
them, except Polly, whose buflling forward zeal
introduced him into their society, gentlemen of
good families, united together in the bonds of
priv.ate fricndfllip, strengthened by the more power-
ful tie of religious zeal. Many consultations were Jos,,
held; their plan of operations was at last fettled;

B 0 0 K and their different parts aflgned. Babington him.

vlq. self was appointed to rescue the Queen of Scotc;
ls". Salisbury, with some others, undertook to excite

The Cch-me several counties to take arms; the murder of the
of he c..rpi-

t Queen, the molt dangerous and important service

of all, fell to Tichbourne and Savage, with four
associates. So totally had their bigoted prejudices
extinguilbed the principles of honor, and the senti.
ments of humanity suitable to their rank, that, with.
out scruple or compuncion, they undertook an
action which is viewed with horror, even when
committed by the meanest and most profligate of
mankind. This attempt, on the contrary, appeared
to them no less honorable than it was desperate;
and in order to perpetuate the memory of it, they
had a picure drawn containing the portraits of the
fix affafins, with that of Babington in the middle,
and a motto intimating that they were jointly
embarked in some hazardous design.

ircowered hy The conspirators, as appears by this wanton and
WVdrigham. imprudent inflance of vanity, seem to have thought

a discovery scarcely pofuble, and neither diflruRled
the fidelity of their companions, nor doubted the
success of their undertaking. But while they be.
lieved that their machinations were carried on with
the molt profound and impenetrable secrecy, every
ftep they took was fully known to Walsingham.
Polly was one of his spies, and had entered into
the conspiracy with no other design than to betray
his associates. Gilbert Gifford too, having been
sent over to England to quicken the motions of
the conspirators, had been gained by Walsingham,

and gave him sure intelligence of all their projeds. B o o K
'lhat vigilant Minister immediately imparted the vil.
discoveries which he had made to Elizabeth; and "st.
without communicating the matter to any other
of the Counsellors, they agreed, in order to
underfltlnd the plot more perfectly, to wait until
it waq ripened into some form, and brought near
the point of execution.

At last, Elizabeth thought it dangerous and The are
criminal to expose her own life, and to tempt puihd":.
Providence any farther. Ballard, the prime mover AuguRt 4.
in the whole conspiracy, was arrested. His affoci-
ates, disconcerted and firuck with aflonilhment,
endeavoured to save themselves by flight. But,
within a few days, all of them, except Windsor,
were; seized in different places of the kingdom,
and committed to the Tower. Though they had
undertaken the part, they wanted the firm and
determined spirit of affaflins; and', influenced by
fear or by hope, at once confessed all that they
knew. The indignation of the people, and their
impatience to revenge such an execrable combina-
tion against the life of their Sovereign, haftcned
their trial, and all of them suffered the death of
traitors".
Thus far Elizabeth's conduct may be pronounced stpt. :o0

blary is accur.

both prudent and laudable, nor can The be accused ed uh ein an
of violating any law of humanity, or of taking accomplicein

the confpi.

any precautions beyond what were necessary for ,ray.
her own safety. But a tragical scene followed, with
" Camd. i;t. State Trials, vol i. Ile.

0o o regard to which posterity will pals a very different
VIL judgment.
M"" FThe frantic zeal of a few rash young men accounts

sufficiently for all the wild and wicked designs
which they had formed. But this was not the light
in which Elizabeth and her Ministers chose to
place the conspiracy. They wished to persuade the
nation, that Babington and his associates lhould be
confidered merely as instruments employed by the
Queen of Scots, the real though secret author of
so many attempts against the life of Elizabeth, and
the peace of her kingdoms. They produced letters,
which they ascribed to her, in support of this
charge. These, as they gave out, had come into
their bands by the following singular and mysterious
method of conveyance. Gifford, on his return into
England, had been trusted by some of the exiles
with letters to Mary; but in order to make a trial
of his fidelity and address, they were only blank
papers made up in that form. These being safely
delivered by him, he was afterwards employed
without farther scruple. Walsingham having found
means to gain this man, he, by the permiflion of
that Minister and the connivance of Paulet, bribed
a tradefinan in the neighbourhood of Chartley,
whither Mary had been conveyed, who deposited
the letters in a hole in the wall of the caflle,
covered with a loose stone. Thence they were
taken by the Queen, and in the fame manner her
answers returned. All these were carried to Walfing.
ham, opened by him, decyphered, fealed again so
dexterously that the fraud could not be perceived,

and then transmitted to the persons to whom they B oo oK
were directed. Two letters to Babington, with vlI.
feversl to Mendoza, Paget, Englefield, and the 1sas.
Ewglifh fugitives, were procured by this artifice. It
was given out, that in these letters Mary approved
of the conspiracy, and even of the assassination; that
she dircded them to proceed with the utmost
circumfpe&ion, and not to take arms until foreign
auxiliaries were ready to join them; that Ihe recom.
mended the Earl of Arundel, his brothers, and the
young Farl of Northumberland, as proper persons
to condut and to add reputation to their enterprise;
that she advised them, if possible, to excite at the
fame time some commotion in Ireland; and above
all, besought them to concert with care the means
of her own escape, suggesting to them several ex.
pedients for that purpose.
All there circumstances were opened at the trial The indigna;

tioa of the

of the conspirators; and while the nation was under Eiglih
the influence of those terrors which the association agailni hci
had raised, and the late danger had augmented, ° ,h,,
they were believed without hesitation or inquiry,
and spread a general alarm. Mary's zeal for her
religion was well known; and in that age, examples
of the violent and sanguinary spirit which it inspired
vere numerous. All the cabals against the peace
of tb. kingdom for many years had been carried
on in her name; and it now appears evidently,
said the English, that the safety of the one Queen
is incompatible with that of the other. Why then,
added they, should the tranquillity of England be
sacrificed for the fake of a stranger ? Why is a life

o o i so dear to the nation exposed to the repeated
vil. assaults of an exasperated rival? The cafe supposed
's8. in the association has now happened, the sacred

person of our Sovereign has been threatened, and
why Ihould not an injured people execute that
just vengeance which they had vowed ?

Eirthta No sentiments could be more agreeable than theft

CfoID to Elizabeth and her Ministers. They themselves
the .od had at firlt propagated them among the people,
exrmitie and they now served both as an apology and a

r motive for their proceeding to such extremities

against the Scottilb Queen as they bad long medi.
tated. The more numerous the injuries were which
Elizabeth had heaped on Mary, the more fhc
feared and hated that unhappy Queen, and came
at las to be persuaded that there could be no
other security for her own life, but the death ol
her rival. Burleigh and Walsingham had promoted
so zealously all her measures with regard to Scot
tifh affairs; and had acted, with so little reserve,
in opposition to Mary, that they had reason to
dread the most violent effecs of her resentment, ii
ever Ihe should mount the throne of England. From
this additional consideration they endeavoured,
with the utmost earnestness, to hinder an event so
fatal to themselves, by confirming their Mistress's
fear and hatred of the Scottili Queen.

Herdoner- Meanwhile, Mary was guarded with ur.ufual
"''s, si: . vigilance, and great care was taken to keep her

ignorant of the discovery of the conspiracy. Sir
Thomas Gorges was at last sent from court to
acquaint her both of it, and of the imputation

with which Ahe was loaded as accessary to that B o K
crime; and he surprised her with the account just vli.
Ja Ihe had got on horseback to ride out along 15S6.
with her keepers. She was firuck with alfonilh.
mnt, and would have returned to her apartment,
but fIe was not permitted; and in her absence,
her private closet was broke open, her cabinet and
pipers were seized, fealed, and sent up to court.
lier principal domestics too were arrested, and
committed to different keepers. Naue and Curie,
her two secretaries, the one a native of France,
the other of Scotland, were carried prisoners to
London. All the money in her custody, amount-
ing to little more than two thousand pounds, was
secured ". And after leading her about, for some
days, from one gentleman's house to another, lhe
3as conveyed to Fotheringay, a strong castle in
Northamptonlhire "

No farther evidence could now be expected Deiberates

aginft Mary, and nothing remained but to decide ohemethodof
what flould be her fate. With regard to this, proceeding.
Elizabeth, and those Ministers in whom Ihe chiefly
confided, seem to have taken their resolution; but
there was fill great variety of sentiments among
her other Counfcllors. Some thought it sufficient
to dismiss all Mary's attendants, and to keep her
under such close restraint, as would cut off all
poflniility of corresponding with the enemies of
the kingdom; and as her constitution, broken by
long contineme.ic, and her spirit dejeded with to
" See Appendix, N. XXXV. " Camd. 517.

BOO K many cares, could not long support such an addi.

vii. tional load, the Queen and nation would soon be
s1U. delivered from all their fears. But though it might

be easy to secure Mary's own person, it was impoffi.
fible to diminish the reverence which the Roman
Catholics had for her name, or to extinguilh the
compassion with which they viewed her sufferings;
while such sentiments continued, infurredions and
invasions would never be wanting for her relief, and
the only effec of any new rigor would be to render
there attempts more frequent and more dangerous.
For this reason the expedient was rejected.
DtrmiK A public and legal trial, though the molt unexam.

he pled, was judged the most unexceptionable method

of proceeding; and it had, at the fame time, a
semblance of justice, accompanied with an air of
dignity. It was in vain to search the ancient records
for any statute or precedent to justify such an
uncommon fRep, as the trial of a foreign Prince,
who had not entered the kingdom in arms, but had
fled thither for refuge. The proceedings against her
were founded on the aft of last Parliament, and
by applying it in this manner, the intention of
those who had framed that severe statute became
more apparent ".

Elizabeth resolved that no circumstance of pomp

or solemnity should be wanting, which could
render this tranfadtion such as became the dignity
of the person to be tried. She appointed, by a
commillion under the great feal, forty persons,

!' Camd. 5s9. Johns. Hifit t13.

the

the moRilluirious in the kingdom by their birth or o o K
offices, together with five of the judges, to hear nil.
and decide this great cause. Many difficulties were is.
larted by the lawyers about the name and title
by which Mary lhould be arraigned; and while the
ciretials of justice were so grossly violated, the
empty forms of it were the objects of their care.
They at length agreed that fie mhould be styled
i Rlary, daughter and heir of James V. late King
"of Scots, commonly called Queen of Scots, and
, Dowager of France'."
After the many indignities which she had lately
fufered, Mary could no longer doubt but that her
dellruclion was determined. She expected, every
moment, to end her days by poison, or by some
ofthofe secret means usually employed against captive
Princes. Left the malice of her enemies, at the fame
time that it deprived her of life, lhould endeavour
likewise to biaft her reputation, the wrote to the
Duke of Guise, and vindicated herself, in the
Itrongeft terms, from the imputation of encouraging
orof beingacceffary totheconfpiracy for assassinating
Elizabeth ". In the solitude of her prison, the
firnge resolution of bringing her to a public trial
had not reached her ears, nor did the idea of any
thing so unprecedented, and so repugnant to regal
Majclty, once enter into her thoughts.
On the eleventh of October, the Commiflioners Theti,, lat
appointed by Elizabeth arrived at Fotheringay. FotnuIpr.
Next morning they delivered a letter from thei;

Strype, ii. 362. ' Jebb, ii. 2R.
Vol.. II. Z

0oo Sovereign to Mary, in which, after the bittereR
VIi. reproaches and accusations, Ihe informed her,
aslS that regard for the happiness of the nation had,

at last, rendered it necessary to make a public
inquiry into her conduc, and therefore required
her, as Ihe had lived so long under the protedion
of the laws of England, to submit now to the trial,
which they ordained to be taken of her crimes

M re. Mary, though surprised at this message, was neitbhe
f*"w appalled at the danger, nor unmindful of herown

dignity. She protested, in the most solemn manne,
that Ihe was innocent of the crime laid to ha
charge, and had never countenanced any attempi
against the life of the Queen of England; but, a
the fame time, refused to acknowledge the jurit
diction of her commifioners. " I came into thi

kingdom, " said Ihe," an independent Sovereign

B to implore the Queen's afiftance, not to subjed
a myself to her authority. Nor is my spirit so broke
" by its paR misfortunes, or so intimidated b]

present dangers, as to sloop to any thing unbe

a coming the Majesty of a crowned head, or tha
a will disgrace the ancestors from whom I an

decended, and the son to whom I hall leave nm

a throne. If I must be tried, Princes alone can b
" my Peers. The Queen of England's fubje&
" however noble their birth may be, are of a rani
" inferior to mine. Ever since my arrival in thi
a kingdom, I have been confined as a prisoner
" Its laws never afforded me any protection. Le
g them not now be perverted, in order to tak
a away my life."

The Commiflioners employed arguments and B 0 0
entreaties to overcome Mary's resolution. They vll.
even threatened to proceed according to the forms 1ss6.
of law, and to pass sentence against her on account
of her contumacy in refusing to plead; Ihe perfiltef,
however, for two days to decline their jurifdidion.
An argument used by Hatton, the Vice-Chamber.
lain, at last prevailed. He told her, that, by
avoiding a trial, Ihe injured her own reputation,
and deprived herself of the only opportunity of
setting her innocence in a clear light; and that
nothing would be more agreeable to them, or more
acceptable to the Queen their Miflrefs, than to be
convinced, by undoubted evidence, that The had
been unjustly loaded with foul aspersions.

No wonder pretexts so plausible should impose Conrents
on the unwary Queen, or that lhe, unassisted, at do'

so.

that time, by any friend or counsellor, Ihould not
be able to detet and elude all the artifices of Eli.
zabeth's ablest Ministers. In a situation equally
melancholy, and under circumstances nearly fimi.
lar, her grandson, Charles I. refused, with the
utmost firmness, to acknowledge the usurped ju-
fifdicion of the High Court of Justice; and pof.
terity has approved his conduct, as suitable to the
dignity of a King. If Mary was less conRtant in
her resolution, it mull be imputed solely to her
anxious desire of vindicating her own honor.
At her appearance before the Judges, who were oct. Y4i
feated in the great hall of the caRle, where they
received her with much ceremony, lTe took care
toproteft, that, by condefpending to hear and to

Z 2

u o o give an answer to the accusations which fIould be

v11. brought against her, fie neither acknowledged
isil the jurididion of the court, nor admitted of the

validity and justice of those acts by wbich they
pretended to try her.

The Chancellor, by a counter-proteftation, en.

deavoured to vindicate the authority of the court.

he acc. Then 4lizabeth's Attorney and Solicitor opened
s.ao a. the charge against her, with all the circumflances
pitl t of the late conspiracy. Copies of Mary's letters to

Alendoza, Babington, Englefield, and Pagetwere
produced, Babington'sconfeflion, those of Ballard,
Savage, and the other conspirators, together'with
the declarations of Naue and Curie her secretaries,
were read, and the whole ranged in the most
specious order, which the art of the lawyers could
devise, and heightened by every color their clo,
quence could add.

Mary listened to their harangues attentisely,

and without emotion. But at the mention of the
Earl of Arundel's name, who was then confined
in the Tower, she brcke out into this tender and
generous exclamation: "Alas! how much has the
U noble House of Howard suffered for my fake!"
H dtfetnc. When the Queen's counsel had finimfed, Mary

flood up, and with great magnanimity, and equa
prefenct of mind, began her defence... She bewailed
the unlappioef, of her own situation, that afteri
captivity of ninRtecn years, during which ihe ha'
suffered treatment no Iefs cruel than unmerited,
Ihe was at last loaded with an accusation, whicl
tended not only to rob her of her right of fuccefion

jnd to deprive her of life itself, but to transmit her B oK
!awe witlh infamy to future ages: That, without vil.
regarding the sacred rights of Sovereignty, Rle was Ifs.
,ow fnbjeccd to laws framed againlt private per-
folnI though an anointed (2ueen, commanded to
.ppear before the tribunal of fubjeds; and , like a
common criminal, her honor exposed to the pe.
tulant tongues of lawyers, capable of wresting
her words, and of misrepresenting her actions:
That, even in this dilhonorable situation, fle
was denied the privileges usually granted to cri.
minals, and obliged to undertake her own de-
lence, without the presence of any friend with
whom to advise, without the aid of counsel, and
without the use of her own papers.

She then proceeded to the particular articles in
theaccufation. She abfolutcly denied any corre-
lpondence with Babington or Ballard: Copies
only of her pretended letters to them were pro-
duced; though nothing less than her hand-writing
or subscription was sufficient to convict her of such
an odious crime: No proof could be brought that
theletters were delivered into her hands, or that
any answer was returned by her direction: The
confellions of wretches condemned and executed for
uich a detellable action, were of little weight; fear
or hope might extort from them many things
inconfifent with truth, nor ought the honor of a
Queen to be Rained by such vile testimony. The
declaration of her secretaries was not more conclu-
five: Promises and threats might easily overcome
tht rTolution of two strangers; in order to fcrecn

Z3

30 OK themselves, they might throw the blame on her;

vii. but they could discover nothing to her prejudice,
S"S5. without violating, in the first place, the oath of

fidelity which they had sworn to her; and their
perjury, in one inflance, rendered them unworthy
of credit in another: The letters to the Spanifl
Ambassador were either nothing more than copies,
or contained only what was perfetly innocent:
' I have often," continued (he, "made such efforts
" for the recovery of my liberty, as are natural toa
" human creature. Convinced, by the fad experi.

ence of so many years, that it was vain to expet

" it from the justice or generosity of the Queen
a of England, I have frequently solicited foreign
O Princes, and called upon all my friends to employ
a their whole interest for my relie I have, like.
" wife, endeavoured to procure for the Englilh

Catholics some mitigation of the rigor with which
they are now treated; and if I could hope, by
" my death, to deliver them from oppression, I

am willing to die for their fake. I wiTh, how.
ever, to imitate the example of EfRher, not of

" Judith, and would rather make interceflion for
" my people, than shed the blood of the meanef
" creature, in order to save them. I have often

checked the intemperate zeal of my adherents,
" when either the severity of their own perse.

cutions, or indignation at the unheard-of injuries

" which I have endured, were apt to precipitate
" them into violent councils. I have even warned
" the (ueen of dangers to which there harlb pro.
" ceedings exposed berfelf. And worn out, as I

· now am, with cares and sufferings, the profpet B0 K
s ofa Crown is not so inviting, thatllhould ruin v1I.
" niv foul in order to obtain it. I am no stranger 15"*
"to the feelings of humanity, nor unacquainted
"itlh the duties of religion, and abhor the detelt-
' able crine of affaflination, as equally repugnant

to both. And, if ever I have given consent by-
'"my words, or even by my thoughts, to any
* attempt against the life of the Queen of England,
" far from declining the judgment of men, I shall
" not even pray for the mercy of God "."
Two different days did Mary appear before the
judges, and in every part of her behaviour main-
tained the magnanimity of a Queen, tempered
with the gentleness and modelty of a woman.

The Commifioners, by Elizabeth's express sentence a.
command, adjourned, without pronouncing any gainRher
sentence, to the Star-Chamber in Westminster.
When assembled in that place, Naue and Curie
were brought into court, and confirmed their
former declaration upon oath; and after review-
ing all their proceedings, the Commissioners
unanimously declared Mary " To be accessary
"to Babington's conspiracy, and to have ima-
"gined diverse matters, tending to the hurt,
"death, and deftrudion of Elizabeth, contrary
a to the express words of the Ratute, made for

the security of the Queen's life 4".
It is no easy matter to determine whether the Irrtgulli.
injustice in appointing this trial, or the irregu- tiesin the
larity in conducting it, were greatest and moR ti.
"Camd. szo, &c. " ld. 52

7 4

0
oO flagrant. By what right did Elizabeth claim authority
VIL over an independent Queen ? Was Mary bound to
»Sr' comply with the laws of a foreign kingdom ? How

could the fubjecs of another Prince become her
judges ? or if such an insult on royalty were allowed,
ought not the common forms of justice to have
been observed? If the testimony of Babington
and his affociateswere so explicit, why did notEliza
beth spare them for a few weeks, and, by confront.
ing them with Mary, overwhelm her with the full
convition of her crimes? Naue and Curie were
both alive, wherefore did not they appear at
Fotheringay, and for what reason were they pro.
duced in the Star-Chamber, where Mary was not
present to hear what they deposed ? Was this
suspicious evidence enough to condemn a Queen!
Ought the meaner criminal to have been found
guilty upon such feeble and inconclusive proofs?

It was not, however, on the evidence pro.

duced at her trial, that the sentence againit
AMary was founded. That served as a pretence to
jnftify, but was not the cause of the violent Reps
taken by Elizabeth and her Ministers towards her
defiruAion; and was employed to give some ap
pearance of justice to what was the offspring of
jealousy and fear. The nation, blinded with re.
fentment againif Mary, and solicitous to secure
the life of its own Sovereign from every danger,
observed no irregularities in the proceedings, and
attended to no defets in the proof, but grasped
at suspicions and probabilities, as if they had bena
irrefragable demonstrations.

The parliament met a few days after sentence BOOK
vas pronounced against Mary. In that illustrious VIL
allembly more temper and discernment, than are to 14s8.
be found among the people, might have been ex. ,The,,, Pim
pecled. Both Lords and Commons, however, were tha rntenoe.
equally under the dominion of popular prejudices
and piflions. and the fame excesses of zeal or of fear,
which prevailed in the nation are apparent in all
their proceedings. They entered with impatience
upon an inquiry into the conspiracy, and the danger
which threatened the Queen's life as well as the peace
of the kingdom. All the papers which had been
produced at Fotheringay, were laid before them;
and after many violent invetives against the Queen
of Scots, both Houses, unanimously, ratified the
proceedings of the Commissioners by whom Ihe had
been tried, and declared the sentence against her to
be jufl and well founded. Not satisfied with this, and dem"and

-

, , .. .< <* i /\ *L theexecudlob

they presented a joint address to the Queen, be- of it.
feeching her, as she regarded her own safety, the
preservation of the Protestant religion, the welfare
and wifics of her people, to publish the sentence;
and without farther delay to inflict on a rival, no
Iefs irreclaimable than dangerous, the punishment
which Ihe had merited by so many crimes. This
request, ditated by fears unworthy of that great
Assembly, was enforced by reasons still more un-
worthy. They were drawn not from justice, but
from conveniency. The most rigorous confinement,
itwas pretended, could not curb Mary's intriguing
spirit; her address was found, by long experience,
to be an overmatch for the vigilance and jealousy

3 0
B O of all her keepers: The severest penal laws could
Vi. not restrain her adherents, who, while they believed

* her person to be sacred, would despise any danger

to which themselves alone were exposed: Several
foreign Princes were ready to second their attempts,
and waited only a proper opportunity for invading
the kingdom, and aflerting the Scottilb Queen's
title to the Crown. Her life, they contended, was,
for these reasons, incompatible with Elizabeth's safe.
ty; and if she were spared out of a false clemency,
the Queen's person, the religion and liberties of the
kingdom, could not be one moment secure. Necef.
fity required that Ibe lbould be sacrificed in order
to preserve there; and to prove this sacrifice to
be no less just than neceflary, several examples in
history were produced, and many texts of scripture
quoted; but both the one and the other were
misapplied, and diltorted from their true meaning.

mfhbe*~ ' Nothing, however, could be more acceptable to
aa-taos-. Elizabeth, than an address in this (train. It extri.

cated her out of a situation extremely embarrassing;
and without depriving her of the power of sparing,
it enabled her to punilh her rival with less appear.
ance of blame. If she chose the former, the whole
honor would redound to her own clemency. If
the determined on the latter, whatever was rigor.
ous might now seem to be extorted by the solicit
ations of her people, rather than to flow from
her own inclination. Her answer, however, was
in a ftylc which The often used, ambiguous and
evasive, under the appearance of openness and
candor; full of such profellions of regard for her

people, as served to heighten their loyalty; of B 0 0 K
such complaints of Mary's ingratitude, as were vil.
calculated to excite their indignation; and of such .Isa.
i,;lnuations that her own life was in danger, as
could not fail to keep alive their fears. In the end,
fne belfought them to save her the infamy and the
plai of delivering up a Queen, her nearest kinf-
woman, to punishment; and to confider whether
it might not fill be possible to provide for the
public security, without forcing her to imbrue her
hands in royal blood.

The. uue meaning of this reply was easily under.
flood. T'le Lords and Commons renewed their
former requelt, with additional importunity, which
was far from being either unexpected or oflenfive.
Elizabeth did not return any answer more explicit;
and having obtained such a public sanCtion of her
proceedings, there was no longer any reason for
protracting this scene of diflimulation; there was
even some danger that her feigned difficulties
might at las be treated as real ones; fle therefore
adjourned the parliament, and reserved in her own
hands the sole disposal of her rival's fate ".

All the Princes in Europe observed the proceed France inte.
ings againt Mary with aflonifhment and horror, ir alfolr
and even Henry III. notwithstanding his known Mar.
averGion t the house of Guise, was obliged to inter.
pose in her behalf, and to appear in defence of the
common rights of royalty. Aubefpine his resident
Ambalfador, and Bellievre, who was sent with an
"Camd. . . D'Ewes, 375.

0 OO K extraordinary commission to the famepurpofe, inter
vii. ceded for Mary with great appearance of warmth,
"is& They employed all the arguments which the cause
OyT 14 naturally suggested; they pleaded from jultice,

from generosity, and humanity; they intermingled
reproaches and threats. But to all these Elizabeth
continued deaf and inexorable; and having received
some intimation of Henry's real unconcern about
the fate of the Scottilb Queen, and knowing his
antipathy to all the race of Guise, the truRfed, that
these loud remonstrances would be followed by
no violent resentment ".
Ja.~ dn. She paid no greater regard to the folicitatiom

is, kae of the Scottilh King, which, as they were urged
lM. with greater sincerity, merited more. attention.

Though her commiflioners had been extremely
careful to sooth James, by publilhing a declaration
that their sentence against Mary did, in no degree,
derogate from his honor, or invalidate any title
which he formerly pofeffed; he beheld the indigni.
ties, to ;which his mother bad been exposed, with
filial concern, and with the sentiments which be.
came a King. The pride of the Scottilh nation was
routed, by the insult offered to the blood of their
Monarchs, and called upon him to employ the
mos vigorous efforts, in order to prevent or to
revenge the Queen's death.

At firR, he could hardly believe that Elizabeth

would venture upon an ation so unprecedented,
which tended so visibly to render the persons of

"Camd. 531.

frillces Icfs sacred in the eyes of the people, and BOOK
which degraded the regal dignity, of which, at vIt.
other times, she was so remarkably jealous. But 1'55
as soon as the extraordinary steps which Ihe took
dicovered her intention, he dispatched Sir William
Kcith to London; who, together with Douglas
his Ambassador in ordinary, remonstrated, in the
strongest terms, against the injury done to an inde-
peildent queen, in subjecting her to be tried like
a private person, and by laws to which Ile owed
no obedience; and besought Elizabeth not to add
to this injury, by suffering a sentence unjust ili
itself, as well as dishonorable to the King of Scots,
to be put into execution ".

Elizabeth returning no answer to these remon-
firances of his ambassadors, James wrote to her with
his own hand, complaining in the bitterest terms
of her conduct, not without threats that both his
duty and his honor would oblige him to renounce
her friendship, and to act as became a son when
called to revenge his mother's wrongs '. At the
fame time he assembled the nobles, who promised
to Rand by him in so good a cause. He appointed
ambassadors to France, Spain, and Denmark, in
order to implore the aid of these courts; and took
other fReps towards executing his threats with vigor.
The high firain of his letter enraged Elizabeth to
such a degree, that Ihe was ready to dismiss his
ambassadors without any reply. But his prepara.
tions alarmed and embarrassed her Ministers, and

" SeeAppendix, N'. XXXVI. Murdin, 573, &c. Bich,
Mans. : 2. *~ Birch, ltei. i. ·2.

0 K at their intreaty fle returned a soft and evasive
Vll. answer, promising to liften to any overture from
sas. the King, that tended to his mother's safety; and

to suspend the execution of the sentence, until the
arrival of new ambafadors from Scotland".

:Deb. c. Meanwhile, Ihe commanded the sentence against
TVk tec Mary to be publilied, and forgot not to inform
,ui~d. the people, that this was extorted from her by the

repeated entreaty of both houses of Parliament
At the fame time she dispatched Lord Buckhurft
and Beale to acquaint Mary with tbe'fentence,
and how importunately the nation demanded the
execution of it; and though she had not hitherto
yielded to there solicitations, The advised her to
prepare for an event which might become necifary
for securing the Protestant religion, as well as quiet.
ing the minds of the people. Mary received the
mefiage not only without symptoms of fear, but
with expressions of triumph. " No wonder, laid
T fie, the Englilh flould now third for the blood

oa f a foreign Prince, they have often offered
violence to their own Monarchs. But after so

a many sufferings, death comes to me as a wel
a come deliverer. I am proud to think that my
a life is deemed of importailce to the Catholic
c religion, and as a martyr for it I am now willing
a to die"."

Skeb trua After the publication of the sentence, Mary was
· ,SiK' sTripped of every remaining mark of royalty. The

canopy of Rate in her apartment was pulled down;
Paulet entered her chamber, and approached her

' Spotfw. as . Cald. iv. .S " Camd. S28. Jebb, 291.

person without any ceremony; and even appeared B o o
covered in her presence. Shocked with these indig. vll.
nities, and offended at this gross familiarity, to 1186.
which Ihe had never been accustomed, Mary once Detmtb.is.
more complained to Elizabeth; and at the fame
time, as her last request, entreated that the would
permit her servants to carry her dead body into
France, to be laid among her ancestors in hallowed
ground; that some of her domestics might be present
at her death, to bear witness of her innocence, and
firm adherence to the Catholic faith; that all her
servants might be suffered to leave the kingdom,
and to enjoy those small legacies which the should
betow on them, as testimonies of her affection; and
that, in the mean time, her almoner, or some other
Catholic Priest, might be allowed to attend her,
and to alfifi her in preparing for an eternal world.
She besought her, in the name of Jesus, by the
foul and memory of Henry VII. their common
progenitor, by their near consanguinity, and the
royal dignity with which they were both invested,
to gratify her in there particulars, and to indulge
her f far as to signify her compliance by a letter
under her own hand. Whether Mary's letter was
ever delivered to Elizabeth is uncertain. No anfwcr
was returned, and no regard paid to her request.
She was offered a Protestant Bilhop or Dean to
attend her. Them the rejected, and without any
clergyman to dired her devotions, The prepared, in
great tranquillity, for the approach of death, which
Ihe now believed to be at no great distance '
" Camnd. 58. jcbb , i. asp

o o s James, without lofinga moment, sent new amball.
vil. dors to London. There were the Ma.ter of Gray,
's7.- and Sir Robert Melvil. In order to remove Elim.

i,1,~ . beth's fears, they offered that their Mafler would
t in

1 hr become bound that no confpiraey lhould be under.
Jm~ XI. taken againf her person, or the peace of the kingdom,

with Mary's consent; and for the faithful perform.
ance of this, would deliver tome of the moR conli.
derable of the Scottifl nobles as hostages. If this
were not thought sufficient, they proposed that
Maary Ibould resign all her rights and preteufions
to her son, from whom nothing injurious to the
Protestant religion, or inconsistent witfi Elizabeth's
safety, could be feared. 1 he fornper proposal Eliza
beth rejeaed as insecure; the latter, as dangerous
The Ambalfadors were then inftru ed to talk in
higher tone; and Melvil executed the, commitlipo
with fidelity and with zeal. Rut G. ,:-tb hisfual
perfidy, deceived his MaRer, who rusted him with
a negociation of so much importancerand betrayed
the Queen whom he was employ.d to save. He
encouraged and urged Elizabeth, to execute.tbe
sentence against her rival. He oftea repeated the
old proverbial sentence,!" Tie dead cannot bite.'
And whatever Ihould happen, he updertook to
pacify the King's rage, or at least to prevent any
violent effects of his resentment ".
i~tin Elizabeth, meanwhile, discovered all the fymp.

- toms of the most violent agitation and disquietude

of mind. She Ibunned society,. he was often

" Spots,. ;j2. Murdin, s. Se Append. . XXXV

found

found in a melancholy and muring posture, and BOO K
repeating with much emphasis these sentences which vil.
lhe borrowed froin some of the devices then in 1587
vogue; Autfer aut feri; ne feriare, feri. Much,
no doubt, of this apparent uneasiness must be im.
puted to dissimulation; it was impoflible, however,
thata Princess, naturally so cautious as Elizabeth,
iould venture on an action, which might expose
her memory to infamy, and her life and kingdom to
danger, without reflecding deeply, and hesitating
long. The people waited her determination in sus-
penfe and anxiety; and left their fear or their zeal
hould subside, rumors of danger were artfully
invented, and propagated with the utmost industry;
Aubefpine, the French Ambassador, was accused of
having suborned an aflalin to murder the Queen.
The Spanilh fleet was laid by some to be already
arrived at Milford-haven. Others affirmed that the
Duke of Guise had landed with a firong army in
Suflex. Now, it was reported that the Northern
counties were up in arms; next day, that the Scots
had entered England with all their forces; and a con.
fpiracy, it was whispered, was on foot for seizing
theQueen, and burning the city. The panic grew
every day more violent; and the people, aftonilbed
and enraged, called for the execution of the fen-
tenceagainft Mary, as the only thing which could.
reltore tranquillity to the kingdom ".

While there sentiments prevailed among her sub- Wartfot
jecs, Elizabeth thought Ihe might safely venture to rr', ex.

cution igp.

"Camd. $3H, *34. i.tya i.
VOL. IL Aa

o o x frike the blow, which The had so long meditated
vii. She commanded Davison, one of the secretaries of
153l state, to bring to her the fatal warrant; and her

behaviour on that occasion plainly fisowed that it i
not to humanity that we must ascribe her forbearance
hitherto. At the very moment Iie wasfigningthe
writ which gave up a woman, a Queen, and her own
nearest relation, into the hands of the executioner,
iBc was capable of jesting." Go," fays Ihe to Davifoo,
* and tell Walsingham what I have now done, though
I am afraid he will die for grief when he hears it "
Her chief anxiety was how to secure the advantage
which would arise from Mary's death, without
appearing to have given her content to a deed b
odious. She often hinted to Paulet and Drury, a
well as to some other courtiers, that now was the
time to discover the sincerity of their concern for her
safety, and that (be expeaed their zeal would ex.
tricate her out of her present perplexity. But they
were wife enough to seem not to understand he
meaning. Even after the warrant was signed, si
commanded a letter to be written to Paulet, in Ies
ambiguous terms, complaining of his remiffeds in
sparing so long the life of her capital enemy, and
begging him to remember atlaft what was incumbent
on him as an affectionate subjed, as well as what he
wis bound to do by the oath of association, and to
deliver his Sovereign from continual fear and danger,
by hfortening the days of his prisoner. Paulet, though
rigorous and harlh, and often brutal in the dilf
charge of what he thought his duty, as Mary's
keeper, was nevertheless a man of honor and

integrity. He rejected the proposal with disdain; B o
tandlamenting that he Ihould ever have been deemed VII.
capable of ading the part of an assassin, he declared assr.
that the Queen might dispose of his life at her
pleasure, but that he would never fain his own
honor, nor leave an everlaPfing mark of infamy on
his poferity, by lending his hand to perpetrate so
foul a crime. On the receipt of this answer, Eliza.
beth became extremely peevish; and calling him a
dainty and precise fellow, who would promise much,
but perform nothing, fte proposed to employ one
Wlingfield, who had both courage and inclination
to frike the blow ". But Davison remonstrating
againR this, as a deed dilhonorable in itself, and of
dangerous example, the again declared herintention
that the sentence pronounced by the commifioners
Ihould be executed according to law; and as he had
already signed the warrant , le begged that no farther
application might be made to her on that head. By
this the privy counsellors thought themselves fuffi.
ciently authorised to proceed; and prompted, as they
pretended, by zeal for the Queen's safety, or inRfigat.
ed, as is more probable, by the apprehension of the
danger to which they would themselves be exposed,
ifthe life of the Queen of Scots were spared, they
agembled in the Council Chamber; and by a letter
under all their hands, empowered the Earls of
Strewlbury and Kent, together with the High Sheriff
ofthe county, to fee the sentence pufin execution ".

Biogr. Britan. Article Davison.
Cand. 34. Strype, iii. 366. 364.

Aa

X 00 X On Tuesday the seventh of February, the tw

vii. Earls arrived at Fotheringay, and demanded accci
isO7. to the Queen, read in her presence the warant t
asior execution, and required her to prepare to die net
ruh . morning. Mary heard them to the end without

emotion, and crossing herself in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghof,
O That foul," said Ihe, " is not worthy the joyp
of Heaven, which repines because the body moll
endure the stroke of the executioner; and tboug
I did not exped that the Queen of England would
set the first example of violating the sacred person td
a Sovereign Prince, I willingly submit to that
which Providence has decreed to be my lot. And
laying her hand on a Bible, which happened to k
near her, The solemnly protested that hfe was inno
cent of that conspiracy which Babington had carrid
on against Elizabeth's life ". She then mentioned
the requests contained in her letter to Elizabeth,
but obtained no fatisfadory answer. She entreatd
with particular earnestness, that now in her ht
moments her Almoner might be suffered to attend
her, and that (he might enjoy the consolation d
those pious inflitutions prescribed by her religion
Even this favor, which is usually granted to th
vilest criminal, was absolutely denied.

Her attendants, during this conversation, wen

bathed in tears, and though overawed by the psi
fence of the iwo Earls, with difficulty fupprefd
their anguilh; but no sooner did Kentand Shtcwrlbl

" Jebb, ui. ;o.

itldraw, than they ran to their Mifrefs, and B o K
bturl out into the most passionate exprelions of VII.
tndernefs and sorrow. lary, however, not only 1ss7.
retained perfea coripofure of mind herself, but
endeavoured to moderate their excessive grief; and
falling on her knees, with all her domeflics round
her, Ihe thanked Heaven that her fufferirigs were
now so near an end, and prayed that fie might be
enabled to endure what still remained with decency
and with fortitude. The greater part of the evening
Ie employed in fettling her worldly affairs. She
wrote her testament with her own hand. Her money,
herjewels, and her clothes, The difiributed among
her fervanto, according to their rank or merit. She
wrote a flort letter to the King of France, and
another to the Duke of Guise, full of tender but
magnanimous sentiments, and recommended her
foul to their prayers, and her afflicted servants to
their protecion. At supper, she eat temperately,
asufual, and converted not oniy with ease, but
with cheerfulness; Ihe drank to every one ofher ser-
vants, and asked their forgiveness, if ever she had
filed in any part of her duty towards them. At her
wonted time the went to bed, and sept calmly a
few hours. Early in the morning the retired into
her closet, and employed a considerable time in
devotion. At eight o'clock the High Sheriff and
his officers entered her chamber, and found her
Rill kneeling at the altar. She immediately tarted
up, and with a majestic mien, and a countenance
undismayed, and even cheerful, advanced towards
the place of execution, leaning on two of Paulet's

AAa3

1 o 0 K attendants. She was dressed in a mourning habit,

vii. but with an elegance and splendor which Ihe had
1'5" long laid aside, except on a few festival days. An

Agnus Dei hung by a pomander chain at her neck;
her beads at her girdle; and in her hand the
carried a crucifix of ivory. At the bottom of the
fairs the two Earls, attended by several gentlemen
from the neighbouring counties, received her;
and there Sir Andrew Melvil., the Mater of her
Hourbold, who had been secluded for sone
weeks from her presence. was permitted to take
his last farewel. At the fight of a Mitrefs whom
he tenderly loved, in such a situation, he melted
into tears; and as he was bewailing her condition,
and complaining of his own hard fate in being
appointed to carry the account of such a mournful
event into Scotland, Mary replied, "Weepnot,
good Melvil, there is at present greater cause for
rejoicing. Thou shalt this day fee Mary Stewart
delivered from all her cares, and such an end put
to her tedious sufferings, as Ihe has long exp8ede
Bear witness that I die constant in my religion;
firm in myfidelity towards Scotland; and unchang
ed in my affetion to France. Commend me to
my son. Tell him I have done nothing injurious
to his kingdom, to his honor, or to his rights;
and God forgive all those who have thirsted,
without cause, for my blood, "

With inmch difficulty, and after many entrea

ties, The prevailed on the two Earls to allow Mel
vil, together with three of her men servants, and
two of her maids, to attend her to the scaffold. It

was ereAed in the fame hall where hfe had been B o ,
tried, raised a little above the floor, and covered, vii.
as well as a chair, the cuhlion, and block, with '157.
black cloth. Mary mounted the Reps with alacrity,
beheld all this apparatus of death with an unaltered
countenance, and figaing herself with the cross, she
fat down in the chair. Beale read the warrant for
execution with a loud voice, to which he listened
with a careless air, and like one occupied in other
thoughts. Then the Dean of Peterborough began a
devout discourse, suitable to her present condition,
and offered up prayers to Heaven in her behalf;
but Ihe declared that The could not in conscience
hearken to the one, nor join with the other; and
kneeling down, repeated a Latin prayer. When
the Dean had finilhed his devotions, she, with an
audible voice, and in the Englilh tongue, recom.
mended unto God the affliced Rate of the Church,
and prayed for prosperity to her son, and for a
long life and peaceable reign to Elizabeth. She
declared that ihe hoped for mercy only through
the death of Christ, at the foot of whose image
ie now willingly Ihed her blood; and lifting up,
and killing the crucifix, fie thus addressed it, "As
thy arms, 0 Jesus, were extended on the Cross;
lo with the outstretched arms of thy mercy receive
me, and forgive my fins."
She then prepared for the block, by taking off her
veil, and upper garments; and one of the execution-
ers rudely endeavouring to aflift, he gently checked
him, and said, with a finile, that The had not been
accustomed to undress before so many fpedators,

Aa4

B 0 K nor to be served by such valets. With calm but
v I. undaunted fortitude, 1he laid her neck on the block;
as37. and while one executioner held her hands, the

other, at the second froke, cut off her head, which
falling out of its attire, discovered her hair already
grown quite grey with cares and sorrows. 'he
executioner held it up still freaming with blood,
and the Dean crying out, a So perilh all Quee
Elizabeth's enemies," the Earl of Kent alone an.
fwered Amen. The reft of the fpedators continoed
silent, and drowned in tears; being incapable, at
that moment, of any other sentiments but tbo
of pity or admiration ".

snti~t Such was the tragical death of Mary Queen c
e*hia ,us Scots, after a life of fortyfour years and two
ae. months, almoRt nineteen years of which Ihe pased

in captivity. The political parties which were formed
in the kingdom, during her reign, have fubfircd
under various denominations, ever since that tim
The rancor, with which they were at firt ani.
mated, bath descended to succeeding ages, and thei
prejudices, as well as their rage, have been perp
tuated, and even augmented. Among hiftoria,
who were under the dominion of all these passions
and who have either ascribed to her every virtuos
and amiable quality, or have imputed to her all te
vices, of which the human heart is susceptible, we
search in vain for Mary's real chara4er. She neither
merited the exaggerated praises of the one, nor the
undiftioguilhing censure of the other.

"Camid. 14. Spotfw. ;;. Jebb, ii. oo. Stryp,iii
I8J. See Appendix, N. X.YXVIl.

To all the charms of beauty, and the utmolt B o K
elegance of external form, (he added those accom- vii.
pliflhments, which render their impreflion irresistible. 1s87.
Polite, affable, insinuating, sprightly, and capable HtraMAt.
of speaking and of writing with equal ease and
dignity. Sudden, however, and violent in all her
attachments; because her heart was warm and un-
suspicious. Impatient of contradition; because The
had been accustomed from her infancy to be treated
as a Queen. No stranger, on some occasions, to
difimulation; which, in that perfidious court where
le received her education, was reckoned among
the necessary arts of government. Not insensible of
flattery, or unconscious of that pleasure, with which
almoll every woman beholds the influence of her
own beauty. Formed with the qualities which we
love, not with the talents that we admire; lhe was an
agreeable woman, rather than an illustrious Queen.
The vivacity of her spirit not sufficiently tempered
with found judgment, and the warmth of her heart,
which was not, at all times, under the restraint of
discretion, betrayed her both intqerrfrs, and into
crimes. To fay that The was always unfortunate,
will not account for that long and ahno!t uninter-
rupted fucceflion of calamities which besel her; we
mult likewise add, that Ihe was often imprudent.
Her paflion for Darnly was rash, youthful, and
excellive; and though the sudden transition to
the opposite extreme was the natural effed of her
ill.requited love, and of his ingratitude, insolence,
and brutality; yet neither these, nor Bothwelrs
artful address and important services, can justify

o o x her attachment to that nobleman. Even the man
vII. ners of the age, licentious as they were, are n(
"A. apology for this unhappy passion; nor can theq

induce us to look on that tragical and infamow
scene which followed upon it with lels abhorrence
Humanity will draw a veil over this part of he
charater which it cannot approve, and may, pa
haps, prompt some to impute some of her adioni
to her situation, more than to her dispositions
and to lament the unhappiness of the former, rathe
than accuse the perverseness of the latter. Mary'i
lffferings exceed, both in degree and in duration,
those tragical difirelfes which fancy has feigned
to excite sorrow and commiseration; and while we
survey them, we are apt altogether to forget ha
frailties, we think of her faults with less indigna
tion, and approve of our tears, as if they wen
shed for a person who had attained much nearm
to pure virtue.

With regard to the Queen's person, a circumflance

not to be omitted in writing the history of a female
reign, all contemporary authors agree in ascribing
to Mary the utmost beauty of countenance, and
elegance of fbape, of which the human form is
capable. Her hair was black, though, according to
the fashion of that age, Ihefrequently wore borrowed
locks, and of different colors. Her eyes were a
dark grey; her complexion was exquisitely fine;
and her hands and arms remarkably delicate, both
as to fIape and color. Her stature was of a height
that rose to the majestic. She danced, lhe walked,
and rode with equal grace. Her tafe for mOfic wav

juR, and fie both sung and played upon the lute a o O K
with uncommon Ikill. Towards the end of her life, vll.
long confinement, and the coldness of the houses "
in which fle had been imprisoned, brought on a
rheumatism, which often deprived her of the use
of her limbs. No man, fays Brantome, ever beheld
her person without admiration and love, or will
read her history without sorrow.

None of her women were suffered to come near
her dead body, which was carried into a room
adjoining to the place of execution, where it lay, for
some days, covered with a coarse cloth torn from a
billiard table. The block, the scaffold, the aprons
of the executioners, and every thing stained with
her blood, were reduced to alhes. Not long after,
Elizabeth appointed her body to be buried in the
Cathedral of Peterborough with royal magnificence.
But this vulgar artifice was employed in vain; the
pageantry of a pompous funeral did not efface the
memory of those injuries which laid Mary in her
grave. James, soon after his accession to the Eng-
liLt throne, ordered her body to be removed to
UWelminfer- abbey, and to be deposited among
the Monarchs of England.

Elizabeth affected to receive the accounts of Elizabeth rs

Mary's death with the mofl violent emotions of fmct' M^'
surprise and of concern. Sighs, tears, lamentations death.
and mourning, were all employed to display the
reality and greatness of her sorrow. Evident marks
of dillimulation and artifice may be traced through
every period of Elizabeth's proceedings against
the life of the Scottish Queen. The commission for

o0 0 bringing Mary to a public trial was seemingly
VIL extorted from her by the entreaties of her privy
s*r. counsellors. She delayed publilhing the sentence

against her till the was twice solicited by both
Houses of Parliament. Nor did (he sign the warrant
for execution without the utmost apparent relud.
ance. One [cene more of the boldest and molf solemn
deceit remained to be exhibited. She undertook to
make the world believe that Mary had been put to
death without her knowledge, and againt her will.
Davison, who neither fufpetded her intention, nor
his own danger, was her instrument in carrying on
this artifice, and fell a vi&im to it.

It was his duty, as Secretary of State, to lay

before her the warrant for execution, in order to
be signed; and, by her command, he carried it to
the Great Seal. She pretended, however, that Abe
had charged him not to communicate what The had
done to any person, nor to susser the warrant to go
out of his bands, without her express permiflon;

at, in contempt of this order, he had not only

-*vaLed the matter to several of her Ministers, but
had, in concert with them, assembled her Privy
Counselors, by whom, without her content or
knowledge, the warrant was issued, and the Earls
of Sbrewibury and Kent empowered to put it in
execution. Though Davison denied all this, and
with circumstances which bear the strongest marks
of truth and credibility ; though it can scarcely
be conceived that her Privy Council, composed of
the persons in whom lhe most confided, of her
Ministers and favorites, would afferble within the

walls of her palace, and venture to transact a matter B O O X
of so much importance, without her privity, and vI.
contrary to her inclination; yet so far did Ihe carry 187.
her difimu!ation, that, with all the signs of difplea-
sure and of rage, {he banished most of her Coun-
fellors out of her presence; and treated Burleigh,
in particular, so harihly, and with Such marks of
difguRl, that he gave up himself for loft, and in the
deepeR affliction wrote to the Queen, begging leave
to resign all his places,.that he might retire to his
own estate. Davison bhe instantly deprived of his
office, and committed him a close prisoner to the
Tower. He was soon after brought to a solemn My«
trial in the Star Chamber, condemned to pay a
fine of ten thousand pounds, and to be imprisoned
during the Queen's pleasure. He languilbed several
years in confinement, and never recovered any
degree of favor or of power. As her jealousy and
fear had bereaved the Queen of Scots of life, in
order to palliate this part of her conduct Elizabeth
made no scruple of sacrificing the reputation and
happiness of one of the most virtuous and able men
in her kingdom ".
This solemn farce, for it deserves no better name, Elinbeth
furnilhed Elizabeth, however, with an apology to tdode"ou
the King of Scots. As the profpet of his mother's Ahw,
danger had excited the King's filial care and concern,
the account of her death filled him with grief and
resentment. His fubjcets felt the dilhonor done to
him, and to the nation. In order to sooth both,

" Camd . 16. Strype, iii 37o. See Append. N.XXXU
Cabala, 229, &c.

0 0 Kl Elizabeth inflantly dispatched Robert Carey, one
Vii. of Lord Hunfdon's sons, with a letter exprefling
»s67. her extreme affliAion on account of that miferabe

accident, which, as Ihe pretended, had happenedlr
contrary to her appointment or intention. Jama
would not permit her meflenger to enter Scotland;
and with fotne difficulty received a memorial
which he sent from Berwick. It contained the tak
concerning Davison, dressed up with all the cr.
cumftances which tended to exculpate Elizabeth,
and to throw the whole blame on his ralhneh 0t
treachery. Such a defence gave little fatisfadioe,
and was confidered as mockery added to iofult;
and many of the nobles, as well as the King,
breathed nothing but revenge. Elizabeth was e
tremely solicitous to pacify them, and Ibe wantec
neither able instruments, nor plausible reasons, is
order to accomplish this. Leicester wrote to t
King, and Walsingham to Secretary Maitand
They represented the certain deRruftion to whi
James would expose himself, if, with the forces d
Scotland alone, 'he flould venture to attacks
kingdom so far superior in power; that the hiRtl
of past ages, as well as his mother's fad experiern
might convince him, that nothing could be mn
dangerous, or deceitful, than dependance on forig
aid; that the King of France would never wifi u
fee the British kingdoms united under one Monatr
nor contribute to invell a Prince so nearly allied u
the House of Guise with such formidable powet
'that Philip might be a more adive ally, but woul
certainly prove a more dangerous one, and, uno

pretence of affifing him, would assert his own BOO
light to the Englifl Crown, which he already vii.
began openly to claim; that the fame statute, on 17.
which the sentence of death against his mother
had been founded, would justify the excluding
him from the fuccefllion to the Crown; that the
English, naturally averse from the dominion of
firingers, would not fail, if exasperated by his
hofilities, to apply it in that manner; that Eliza-
beth was disposed to repair the wrongs which the
mother had suffered, by her tenderness and affection
towards the son; and that, by engaging in a
fruidefs war, he would deprive himself of a noble
inheritance, which, by cultivating her friendihip,
he mufl infallibly obtain. These representations,
added to the consciousness of his own weakness,
to the smallness of his revenues, to the mutinous .
spirit of some of the nobles, to the dubious fidelity
of others, and to the influence of that fation
which was entirely at Elizabeth's devotion, con-
vinced James that a war with England, however
jul, would in the present juncture be altogether
impolitical. All these considerations induced him to
isle his resentment; to appear satisfied with the
punishment inflited on Davison; and to preserve
ll the semblances of friendship with the Englifl
ourt". in this manner did the cloud which threat-
red such a storm pass away. IMlary's death, like
hat of a common criminal, remained unavenged
y any Prince; and whatever infamy Elizabeth
"Spotfw. 363, Cald. ir. 3, x4. Strpe, si. 377.

0o0 o might incur, she was exposed to no new dang
VII. on that account
r1s7. Mary's death, however, proved fatal to the Mast

tD f a, of Gray, and loft him the King's favor, whichb
ufeiy. had for some time possessed. He was become

odious to the nation as favorites, who acquire pow(
without merit, and exercise it without difcretiox
usually are. The treacherous part which he had a&
during his late embafly, was no secret, and fille
James, who at length came to the knowledge (
it, with aftoniibment. The courtiers observed th
symptoms of di~luR arising in the King's mind, h
enemies seized the opportunity, and Sir Willia
Stewart, in revenge of the perfidy with which Gra
h '- had betrayed his brother Captain James, publidc

accused him before a Convention of nobles, wn
onlyof havingcontributed, by his advice and fugge
tions, to take away the life of the Queen, butc
holding correspondence with Popilh Princes,
order to Cubvert the religion eftabliled in the kinj
dom. Gray, unsupported by the King, deserted b
all, and conscious of his own guilt, made a feebl
defence. He was condemned to perpetual banif
ment, a punishment very unequal to his crime
But the King was unwilling to abandon one, whon
he had once favored so highly, to the rigor ofjufice
and Lord Hamilton, his near relation, and the othe
nobles who bad lately returned from exile, it
gratitude for the zeal with which he bad fervet
them, interceded warmly in his behalt

Having thus accomplilhed the deftrucion ofon0
of his enemies, Captain James Stcwart thought th

juncture

janCure favorable for prosecuting his revenge on a o o K
them all. He singled out Secretary Maitland, the viA.
moR eminent both for abilities and enmity to him; xsS.
and offered to prove that he was no less accessary
than Gray to the Queen's death, and had even
formed a design of delivering up the King himself
into the hands of the English. But time and absence
bad, in a great measure, extinguilhed the King's
affection for a minion who so little deserved it.
All the courtiers combined against him as a com-
mon enemy; and, instead of gaining his point,
he had the mortification to fee the office of Cban-
cellar conferred upon Maitland, who, together
with that dignity, enjoyed all the power and
influence of a prime minister.

In the Assembly of the Church, which met this
year, the fame hatred to the order of Biflops, and
the fame jealousy and fear of their encroachments,
appeared. But as the King was now of.full age,
and a parliament was summoned on that occasion,
the Clergy remained satisfied with appointing some
of their number to represent their grievances to
that court, from which great things were expected.
Previous to this meeting of Parliament, James The Ring
attempted a work worthy of a King. The deadly attempts to

unite the

studs which subsisted between many of the great nobles.
hmilies, and which were transmitted from one
generation to another, weakened the strength of
te kingdom; contributed, more than any other
circumlsance, to preserve a fierce and barbarous
Ipirit among the nobles: and proved the occasion
rfmany diffters to themselves, and to their country.
VOL. I. 1 b

a o o z After many preparatory negociations, he invite

Vil. the contending parties to a royal entertainment i
utr. the palace of Holy-rood.houfe; and partly by hi

authority, partly by his entreaties, obtained thei
proinife to bury their dissensions in perpetual obli
vion. From thence he conduaed them, in folemi
proceflion, through the Rreets of Edinburgh, march
ing by pairs, each hand in hand with his enemy
A collation of wine and sweetmeats was prepare
at the public Crof, and there they drank to eacl
other, with all the signs of reciprocal forgivenet
and of future friendlhip. The people, who wen
present at a fpedacle so unusual, conceived thi
most foguine hopes of feeing concord and tan
quillity eftablilbed in every part of the kingdom
and testificd their fatisfadion by repeated acclama
tions ". Unhappily the effeds of this reconciliatio
were not correspondent either to the pious cndea
vours of the King, or the fond wilhes of t1
people.

The first care of the parliament was the fecurit)

of the Protestant religion. All the laws passed ii
its favor, since the Reformation, were ratified
and a new and severe one was enaded againf
seminary Priests and Jesuits, whose refllefs induftR
in making proselytes brought many of them int
Scotland about this time. Two ads of this pat
liament deserve more particular notice, on accoun
of the confiquences with which they were fol
lowed

" Spotfir. 1(4. Cald. 1V. i;.

The one refpeeed the lands of the Church. As a o0 K
the public revenues were not sufficient for defraying vit.
the King's ordinary charges; as the administration itr7.
of he government became more complicated and natlon ofn
Wore expensive ; as James was naturally profuse, ;hurbhland,.
and a stranger to economy; it was necessary, on
all these accounts, to provide some fund propor-
tioned to his exigencies. But no considerable fum
could be levied on the Commons, who did not
¢ejoy the benefit of an extensive commerce. The
nobles were unaccustomed to bear the burden of
heavy taxes. The revenues of the Church were
the only source whence a proper supply could be
drawn. Notwithrtanding all the depredations of the
laity lince the Reformation, and the various devices
which they had employed to seize the Church.lands,
some considerable portion of them remained fill
unalienated, and were held either by the Bilhops
who possessed the benefices, or were granted to lay.
men during pleasure. All these lands were, in this
parliament, annexed, by one general law ", to the
Crown, and the King was empowered to apply the
rents of them to his own use. The tithes alone
were reserved for the maintenance of the persons
who served the cure, and the principal manfion-houfe,
with a few acres of land, by way of glebe, allotted
for their residence. By this great acceflion of pro.
perty, it is natural to conclude that the King muff
have acquired a vast increase of power, and the
influence of the nobles have suffered a proportional

"Earl. i Jac. VI. c. 29.

Bb

B O O K diminution. The very reverse of this seems, bo0

vni. ever, to have been the cafe. Almost all grants
1187. Church-lands, prior to this at, were thereby cot

firmed; and titles, which were formerly reckons
precarious, derived from thence the fanfion o
parliamentary authority. James was likewise authoi
ifed, during a limited time, to make new alien
tions; and such was the facility of his temper, evt
ready to yield to the solicitations of his servant
and to gratify their most extravagant demands, thi
not only during the time limited, but througbou
his whole reign, he was continually employed i
bellowing, and his parliament in ratifying gran
of this kind to his nobles; hence little. advanta
accrued to the Crown from that which might ha
been so valuable an addition to its revenues. Tb
Bilhops, however, were great sufferers by the la
But at this juncture neither the King nor his Mini
ters were solicitous about the interests of an ord&
of men, odious to the people, and persecuted b
the Clergy. Their enemies promoted the lah wil
the utmost zeal. The profpec of Iharing in thd
spoils induced all parties to content to it; and afa
a ftep so fatal to the wealth and power of the digp
fled Clergy, it was no difficult matter to introduc
that change in the government of the Church whil
soon after took place ".

rltfltres I The change which the other Statute producedi
admittedisto the civil constitution was no less remarkable. UnI
bytewrt. the Feudal system, every Freeholder or vasal of t
i,"'. Crown had a right to be present in Parliament. Thl

" Spotfw. 365.

FreehollOlrs were, originally, few in number, but no o x

ffcffed of great and extensive property. By vii.
ecrees, these vast poffeflions were divided by the its.
proprietors thcmfelves, or parcelled out by the
Prince, or split by other accidents. The number of
Feeholders became greater, and their condition
aore unequal: betides the ancient Barons, who
preferred their estates and their power unimpaired,
there arose another order, whose rights were the
aime, though their wealth and influence were far
infrior. But, in rude ages when the art of govern-
nret wa3 extremely imperfet, when parliaments
ere fcldom assembled, and deliberated on matters
itle intereting to a martial'people, few of the Lesser
bron' took their feats, and the whole parliamentary
urifdicion was exercised by the Greater Barons, in
onijuntion with the Ecclesiastical order. James I.
ond of imitating the forms of the English conftitu.
ion, to which he had been long accustomed, and
iefirous of providing a counterpoise to the power of
ihe great nobles, procured an a& in the year one
thoufjnd four hundred and twenty.feven, difpen-
ing with the personal attendance of the Lesser Barons,
ird empowering those in each county to chufe two
Comrr.ifioners to rcprefent them in Parliament. This
awx, like many other regulations of that wife Prince,
iroduced little effect. All the King's vassals conti.
rued, as formerly, possessed of a right to be present
n Palliment; but, unless in some extraordinary
oijuldluies, the Greater Barons alone attended.
lut, by means of the Reformation, the constitution
ad undergone a great change. The ariftocratical

Bb3

1n o power of the nobles had been much increased, anl

vil. the influence of the Ecclesiastical order, which th
a7a- Crown usually employed to check their usurp;

tions, and tp balance their authority. had diminilhei
in proportion. Many of the Abbies and Prioric
had been ereted into temporal peerages; and ti
Proteflant Biflops, an indigent race of men, an
odious to the nation, were far from poffelling thd
weight and credit which their predecessors derivei
rom their own exorbitant wealth, and the supec
ftitious reverence of the people. In this situation
the King bad recourse to the expedient employee
by James L and obtained a law reviving th
Aatute of one thousand four hundred and twenty
seven; and from that time the Commons of Scot
land have sent their reprefentativ's to parliament
An aa, which tended so visibly to abridge theil
authority, did not pass without opposition fron
many of the nobles. But as the King had a righl
to fummoa the Lelfer Barons to attend in person
others were apprchenfive of feeing the house filled
with a multitude of his dependants, and contented
the more willingly to a law which laid them undei
the reftriclion of appearing only by their repre
.entatives.

1Tst. The year one thousand five hundred and ciglity

·r t , eigha t began with an universal expectation through,
rmado. out all Europe, that it was to be diftinguilhid

by wouderful events and revolutions. Several
afrologers, according to the accounts of contce
porary biltoriarL, badt prediced this; and the
fiuauoo of affaiis in the two principal kingdoms

of Europe was such, that a sagacious observer, BOO l
without any supernatural intelligence, might have vil.
hazarded the predition, and have forefcen the 118. '
approach offome grand crisis. In France, it was
evidecnt from the aftonilhing progress of the league,
conduded by a leader whose ambition was restrain-
ed by no scruples, and whose genius had hitherto
surmounted all difficulties; as well as from the
timid, variable, and impolitic councils of Henry 111.
that either that Monarch must submit to abandon
the throne, of which he was unworthy; or by
some sudden and daring blow cut off his formi-
dable rival. Accordingly, in the beginning of the
year, the Duke of Guise droie his Master out of
his capital city, and forced him to conclude a
peace, which left him only the shadow of royalty;
and before the year expired, he himself fell a vidtim
to the resentment and fear of Henry, and to his
own security. In Spain, the operations were such
a, promircd something fill more uncommon. Dur-
ing three years, Philip had employed all the power
of his European dominions, and exhausted the
treasures of the Indies, in vast preparations for war.
A fleet, the greatest that had ever appeared in the
nean, was ready to fail from Lisbon, and a nu-
merous land.army was assembled to embark on
board of it. Its destination was still unknown,
though many circumfrances made it probable that
the blow was aimed, in the first place, against
,gl.hno. Elizabeth had long given secret aid
to the revolted provinces in the Low Countries,
and now openly afforded them her protection. A

Bb4

B O 0 x numerous body of her troops was in their service

viz. the Earl of Leicefer commanded their armies; fln
sha had great sway in the civil government of thi

Republic; and some of its molt :onfiderable town,
were ir. her poffeflion. Her fleets had insulted thl
coasts f Spain, intercepted the galleons from thi
Weft Indies, and threatened the colonies there
Roused by so many injuries, allured by views o
ambition, and animated by a superstitious zeal 0so
propagating the Romilh religion, Philip resolved
not only to invade, but to conquer England, tt
which his descent from the honfe of LancaRfer, and
the donation of Pope Sixtus V. gave him, in hi
own opinion, a double title.

Coaduct of Elizabeth saw the dabger approach, and prepared
tJhmt "o to encounter it. The measures for the defence ol
t_·at o0Ci
,o.. her kingdom were concerted and carried on with

the wisdom and vigor which diftinguilfed her reign.
Her chief care was to secure the friendfbip of the
King of Scots. She had treated the Queen his mother
with a rigor unknown among Princes; she had often
used himself harshly, and with contempt; and
though be bad hitherto prudently suppressed his
rcfentment of there injuries, she did not believe it
to be altogether extinguilbed, and was afraid that,
in her prtfent situation, it might burst out with a
fatal violence. Philip, fenfiblc bow much an
alliance with Scotland would facilitate his enter.
pri.-. courted James with the utmost afiduity. He
excited him to revenge his Mother's wrong; he
flattered him with the hopes of Iharing his con-
quests; and offered him in marriage his daughter

the Infanta Isabella. At the fame time, Scotland B o K
wvarmed with priests, his emissaries, who seduced vil.
tome of the nobles to Popery, and corrupted others 8.
with bribes and promises. Huntly, Errol, Crawford,
were the heads of a facion, which openly espoused
the interest of Spain. Lord Maxwell, arriving from
that court, began to assemble his followers, and to
take arms, that he might be ready to join the
Spaniards. In order to counterbalance all these,
Elizabeth made the warmest profeflions of friend.
flil to the King; and Alhby, her Ambassador,
entertained him with magnificent hopes and promi-
fes. He assured him that his right of fucceflion to
the Crown should be publicly acknowledged in
England; that he should be created a Duke in
that kingdom; that he ihould be admitted to some
flare in the government; and receive a confider-
,b!e pe::fion annually. James, it is probable, was
too well acquainted with Elizabeth's arts, to rely
entirely on these promises. But he understood his
own interest in the prefentjundure, and pursued it
wirh much steadiness. He rejected an alliance with
Spain, as dangerous. He refused to admit into his
prf:nce an ambaffdor from the Pope. He seized
Colonel Semple, an agent of the Prince of Parma.
He drove many of the seminary Priests out of the
kin.dom. He marched suddenly to Dumfries, dif-
perfed Maxwell's followers, and took him prisoner.
In a Convention of the nobles he declared his
re[nlution to adhere inviolably to the league with
Eigliand; and, without listening to the fuggefions
ol revenge, determined to aft in concert with

100 K Elizabeth, againr the common enemy of the Pro.

VIL teftant faith. He put the kingdom in a poture of
w"I' defence, and levied troops to obftrud the landing

of the Spaniards. He offered to fend an army to
Elizabeth's afliftance, and told her Ambassador, that
he expeced no other favor from the King of Spain,
but that which Polyphemus bad promised to Ulysses,
that when he had devoured all his companions, he
would make him his last morsel".

A *ithual The zeal of the people, on this occasion, was not
_',¶"'' inferior to that of the King; and the extraordinary
Iigai. danger, with which they were threatened, fuggefied

to them an extraordinary expedient for their security.
A bond was framed for the maintenance of true
religion, as well as the defence of the King's per.
son and government, in opposition to all enemies,
foreign and domestic. This contained a confellion
of the Protestant faith, a particular renunciation of
the errors of Popery, and the mos solemn promises,
in the name, and through the Rrength of God, of
adhering to each other in supporting the former,
and contending against the latter, to the utmost of
their power ". The King, the Nobles, the Clergy and
the people subscribed with equal alacrity. Strange or
uncommon as such a combination may now appear,
many circumstances contributed, at that ti.e, to
recommend it, and to render the idea familiar to
the Scots. When roused by any extraordinary event,
or alarmed by any public danger, the people of

" Camd. (44 Johnft. i9. Spotfw. ;69.
" Dunlop's Colleet of Conss ol. l. ii. o8.

Israel were accustomed to' bind themselves, by a 1 o oK
solemn covenant, to adhere to that religion which 7ll.
the Almighty had eftablilbed among them; this 'L$
the Scots confidered as a sacred precedent, which
it became them to imitate. In that age no confider.
able enterprise was undertaken in Scotland, with.
out a bond of mutual defence, which all concerned
reckoned necelfary for their security. The form of
this religious confederacy is plainly borrowed from
those political ones, of which so many infances
have occurred; the articles, stipulations, and pecu-
liar modes of exprellion, are exactly the fame in
both. Almost all the considerable Popish Princes
were then joined in a league for extirpating the
Reformed Religion, and nothing could be more
natural, or seemed more efficacious, than to enter
into a counter-affociation, in order to oppose the
progress of that formidable conspiracy. To these
caulfs did the Covenant, which is become so famous
in hiflory, owe its origin. It was renewed at
different times during the reign of James '. It
was revived with great solemnity, though with
considerable alterations, in the year one thousand
fix hundred and thirty-eight. It was adopted by
the lEnglifh in the year one thousand fix hundred
and forty-three, and enforced by the civil and eccle.
fiafical authority of both kingdoms. Thepolitical
purposes to which it was then made subservient,
and the violent and unconstitutional measures which
it was then employed to promote, it is not our
plovince to explain. But at the jundure in which it

Cald. iv. 129.

BOO K was firR introduced, we may pronounce it to

viI. have been a prudent and laudable device for the
ss.m defence of the religion and liberties of the nation,

nor were the terms in which it was conceived,
other than might have been expected from men
alarmed with the impending danger of Popery,
and threatened with an invasion by the most bigoted
and most powerful Prince in Europe.

Philip's eagerness to conquer England did cot

inspire him either with the vigor or dispatch necel
fary to ensure the success of so mighty an enterprise.
His fleet, which ought to have failed in April, did
not enter the Englilh channel till the middle of July.
It hovered many days on the coast, in expetation
of being joined by the Prince of Parma, who was
blocked up in the ports of Slanders by a Dutch

Toe Aaado squadron. Continual disasters pursued the Spani.
W oL tt* aards during that time; successive storms and battles,

which are well known, conspired with their own
ill conduc to disappoint their enterprise. And, by
the blefling of Providence, which watched with
remarkable care over the Proteflant Religion and
the liberties of Britain, the Englilh valor scattered
and destroyed the Armado, on which Philip had
arrogantly beflowed the name of Invincible. After
being driven out of the English seas, their Ihatttred
ships were forced to fleer their course towards
Spain, round Scotland and Ireland. Many of them
suffered shipwreck on these dangerous and unknown
coasts. Though James kept his fubjeas under arms,
to watch the motions of the Spaniards, and to pre.
vent their landing in a hostile manner, he received

with great humanity seven hundred who were BO K
forced alhore by a tempest, and after supplying vII.
them with necessaries, permitted them to return isi.
into their own country.

On the retreat of the Spaniards, Elizabeth sent
an ambassador to congratulate with James, and to
compliment him on the firmness and generosity he
had discovered during a conjuncture so dangerous.
But none of Alhby's promises were any longer
remembered; that Minister was even accused of
having exceeded his powers, by his too liberal
ofters; and conscious of his own fallhood, or
alhamed of being disowned by his court, he with-
drew secretly out of Scotland ".

Philip, convinced by fatal experience of his own Isa9.
raflnefs in attempting the conquest of England, by Phil'p intri;

gues ian Sco.

a naval armament, equipped at so great a distance, land.
and fubjeded, in all its operations, to the delays,
and dangers, and uncertainties, arising from seas and
winds, resolved to make his attack in another form,
and to adopt the plan which the Princes of Lorrain
had long meditated, of invading England through
Scotland. A body of his troops, he imagined, might
be easily wafted over from the Low Countries to
that kingdom, and if they could once obtain footing,
or procure affifance there, the frontier of England
was open and defenceless, and the northern counties
full of Roman Catholics, who would receive them
with open arms. Meanwhile, a descent might be
threatened on the southern coast, which would divide

Johnft. 1J4. Camd. S48. Murdin, 635. 788.

oo the Englilf army, diftrad their councils, and
vu. throw the whole kingdom into terrible convulsions
"*. In order to prepare the way for the execution of

this design, he remitted a considerable fum of
money to Bruce, a seminary. priest in iScotland,
and employed him, together with Hay, Creigh.
too, and Tyrie, Scottili Jcfuits, to gain over as
many persons of diftindion as poflfible to his in.

Pisko. teret. Zeal for Popery, and the artful insinuations
f,, f,,nof these emissaries, induced several noblemen to
the Ki. favor a meafurc which tended so manifeltly to the

defruction of their country. Huntly, though the
King had lately given him in marriage the daughter
of his favorite the Duke of Lenox, continued
warmly attached to the Romilh Church. Crawford
and Errol were animated with the zeal of new
converts. They all engaged in a correspondence
with the Prince of Parma, and, in their letters to
him, offered their service to the King of Spain, and
undertook, with the aid of fix thousand men, to
reader him master of Scotland, and to bring so
many of their vassals into the field, that he leould
be able to enter England with a numerous army.
Francis Stewart, grandson of James V. ", whom
the King had created Earl of Bothwell, though
influenced by no motive of religion, for he fill
adhered to the Protestant faith, was prompted
merely by caprice, and the refleffnefs of his nature,
to join in this treasonable correspondence.

" He was the son of John Prior, of Coldingham, one
of Jmes' natural children.

All these letters were intercepted in England. B O
Elizabeth, alarmed at the danger which threatened vll.
her own kingdom, sent them immediately to the 's89.
King, and reproaching him with his former lenity Feb.7.
towards the Popilh party, called upon him to check
this formidable conspiracy by a proper severity. But The Kingr
James, though firmly attached to the Protestant maims,
religion, though profoundly versed in the theological to peoy.
controversies between the Reformers and the Church
of Rome, though he had employed himself, at that
early period of life, in writing a Commentary on
the Revelations, in which he labored to prove the
Pope to be Antichrist, had nevertheless adopted,
already, those maxims concerning the treatment of
the Roman Catholics, to which he adhered through
the reft of his life. The Roman Catholics were at
that time a powerful and acive party in England;
they were far from being an inconsiderable fatdioa
in his own kingdom. The Pope and King of Spain
were ready to take part in all their machinations,
and to second every effort of their bigotry. The
opposition of such a body to his fucceflion to the
Crown of England, added to the iaverfenefs of
the English from the government of strangers,
might create him many difficulties. In order to
avoid these, he thought it neceflary to sooth, ra.
ther than to irritate the Roman Catholics, and to
reconcile them to his fuccefion, by the hopes of
gentler treatment, and some mitigation of the
rigor of those laws, which were now in force
against them. This attempt to gain one party by
promises of indulgence and adt of cdmeacy,

B o o K while he adhered with all the obfinacy of a diP

vet. putant to the doctrines and tenets of the other,
1ss9. has given an air of mystery, and even of contra.

didion, to this part of the King's charater. The
Papiits, with the credulity of a fed struggling to
obtain power, believed his heart to be wholly
theirs; and the Protestants, with the jealousy in.
separable from thole who are already in possession
of power, viewed every at of lenity as a mark
of indifference, or a symptom of apoftacy. In
order to please both, James often aimed at an
exceflive refinement, mingled with diflimulation,
in which he imagined the perfedion of govern.
mert and of king-craft to conift.

,, œexC His behaviour on this occasion was agreeable to

i-"e ki these general maxims. Notwithstanding the solicit.
§iaats. ations of the Queen of England, enforced by the

zealous remonstrances of his own Clergy, a fbort
imprisonment was the only punilhment he infiiced
upon Huntly and his afrociates. But he soon had
reason to repent an at of clemency so inconsistent
with the dignity of government. The first uifewhich
the conspirators made of their liberty, was to
assemble their followers, and, under pretence of
removing Chancellor Maitland, an able Minister,
but warmly devoted to the Englilh interest, from
the King's councils and presence, they attempted to
seize James himself. This attempt being defeated,
partly by Maitland's vigilance, and partly by their
own illcoodut, they were forced to retire to the
North, where they openly erected the standard of
rebellion. But as the King's government was not

generally

generally unpopular, or his ministers odious, their B o o R
ownl v.if.is joined them slowly, and discovered no vii.
ze.l in the cause. The King, in person, advancing s'09.
adinft them with such forces as he could suddenly
levy, they durst not rely so much on the fidelity
of tie troops, which, though superior in number,
followed them with relucance, as to hazard a battle;
butfuffcring them to disperse, they surrendered to the
King, and threw themselves on his mercy. Huntly,
Errol, Crawford, and Bothwell, were all brought
toa public trial. Repeated ads of treason were easily
proved againl them. The King., however, did not
permit any sentence to be pronounced; and, after
keeping them a few months in confinement, he
took occasion, amidst the public festivity and
rejoicings at the approach of his marriage, to set
them at liberty "

As James was the only descendant of the ancient The Iing',
llonarchs of Scotland, in the direct line; as all with'a ne
hopes of uniting the crowns of the two kingdoms ot UDemaLk.
would have expired with him; as the Earl of Arran,
the prefuimptive heir to the throne, was lunatic;
the King's marriage was, on all these accounts, an
event which the nation wihed for with the utmost
ardor. le himself was no less desirous of accomplish.
ing it; and had made overtures, for that purpose,
to the eldest daughter of Frederick 11. King of
Denmark. But Elizabeth, jealous of every thing
that would render the accession of the house of
Stewart more acceptable to the Enghlh, endeavoured

" Spotfw. 17. Cald. iv. xe3--i o.
VOL. 1. C c

O OK to perplex James, in the fame manner be had don
vsi. Mary, and employed as many artifices to defeat
Ia8s. to retard his marriage. His miniRers, gained by

bribes and promises, seconded her intention; an(
though several different ambassadors were sent fron
Scotland to Denmark, they produced power f(
limited, or insisted on conditions so extravagant
that Frederick could not believe the King to be ii
earnef; and fufpeding that there was some defigi
to deceive or amuse him, gave his daughter ir
marriage to the Duke of Brunswick. Not dil
couraged by this disappointment, which he im
puted entirely to the conduc of his own minifens
James made addresses to the Princess Anne, Fre
derick's second daughter. Though Elizabeth eadea
voured to divert him from this, by recommending
Catherine the King of Navarre's sifter, as a mor
advantageous match; though hle prevailed on the
privy council of Scotland to declare againf the
alliance with Denmark, he perfited in his choice
and despairing of overcoming the obstinacy of hil
own ministers in any other manner, he secretld
encouraged the citizens of Edinburgh to take arms
They threatened to tear in pieces the Chancellor,
whom they accused as the person whole artifice.
had hitherto disappointed the withes of the King,
and the expectations of his people. In confequena
of this, the Earl Marefchal was sent into Denmark
at the head of a splendid embalfy. He receivec
ample powers and instructions, drawn with tbh
King's own hand. The marriage articles wen
quickly agreed upon, and the young Queen f

fail towards Scotland. James made great preparations B o o x
for her reception; and waited her landing with all vii.
the impatience of a lover; when the unwelcome '8s.
account arrived, that a violent tempet had arilen,
which drove back her fleet to Norway, in a
condition so shattered, that there was little hope
of its putting again to sea before the spring. This
unexpected disappointment he felt with the utmost
sensibility. He inflantly fitted out fomehflips, and,
without communicating his intention to any of his
council, failed in person, attended by the Chan.
cellor, several noblemen, and a train of three hun-
dred persons, in quest of his bride. He arrived oa. au
fafly in a small harbour near Upflo, where the
Queen then resided. There the marriage was folem. Nor. s-.
nized, and as it would have been rash to truRf
those boisterous seas in the winter season, James
accepted the invitation of the court of Denmark,
and repairing to Copenhagen, passed several months
there, amidfl continual feasting and amusements,
in which both the Queen and himself had great
dehght ".

No event in the King's life appears to be a
wlder deviation from his general character, than
this fidden sally. His son Charles I. was capable
of that excessive admiration of the other sex, which
arnifs from great sensibility of heart, heightened
bveleranice of taste; and the romantic air of his
journey to Spain suited such a disposition. But
lames was not susceptible of any refined gallantry,
" Ielvil, 352. Spotfw, 377. Murdin, 637.

0oo and always expressed that contempt for'the fenmal
il. character which a pedantic erudition, unacquaintcl
sb. with politeness, is apt to inspire. He'as exafpera

ed, however, and rendered impatient by the man'
obstacles which bad been laid in his way. H
was anxious to secure the political advantage
which he expected from marriage; and fearin
that a delay might afford Elizabeth, and his ow
ministers, an opportunity of thwarting him by neo
intrigues, he suddenly took the resolution of pn
venting them, by a voyage from which he exped&
to return in a few weeks. The nation seered t
applaud his conduct, and to be pleased with thi
appearance of amorous ardor in a young Prina
Notwithstanding his absence so long beyond th
time he expected, the nobles, the clergy and th
people vied with one another in loyalty and oh
dience; and no period in the King's reign wa
more remarkable for tranquillity, or more fre
from any eruption of those facions, which
often disturbed the kingdom.

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
