HISTORE OF THE REIGN

OF THE

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

VOL. II.

JFRG1~DTISPJECE.

pJtr

'AU~ s~or

45itz~unc ~~u~~u~~u~~uu~uu~uu /

-Pic~~ln1 l4:g C1~C Dr~rSmd

THE

HISTORY OF THE REIGN

OF THE

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.

PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH1

HISTORIOGRAPHER TO HIS MAJESTY

FOR SCOTLAND,

AND MEMBER OF THE ROYAL ACADEMY OF

HISTORY AT MADRID.

THE NINTH EDITION.

IN FOUR VOLUMES.

VOL. II.

LONDON:

PRINTED FOR T. CADELL JUN. AND W. DAVIES

(SUCCESSORS TO MR. CADELL) IN THE STRANDj

AND E. BALFOUR, EDINBURGH.

1798.

# BOOK I.

HIS O RTY OF 'TILE REIGN

OF THE

EMIEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK I.

C H ARELEs V. was born at Ghent on the

j twenty-fourth day of February, in the year

one thousand five hundred. His father, Philip
the Handsome, archduke of Austria, was the son
of the emperor Maximilian, and of Mary, the
only child of Charles the Bold, the last prince of
the house of Burgundy. His mother, Joanna,
was the second daughter of Ferdinand king of
Aragon, and of Isabella queen of Castile.

A long train of fortunate events had opened

the way fcr this young prince to the inheritance
of more extensive dominions, than any European
monarch, lince Charlemagne, had poffeffed. Each
of his ancefors had acquired kingdoms or pro-
vinces, towards which their profped of fuccefiion
was extremely remote. The rich poffeffions of
Mary of Burgundy had been destined for another
family, (he having been contraded by her father
to the only son of Louis XI. of France; but
that capricious monarch, indulging his hatred

VOL. 11.

I to

to her family, chose rather to firip her of part of
her territories by force, than to secure the whole
by marriage; and by this mifcondua, fatal to
his posterity, he threw all the Netherlands and
Franche ComtC into the hands of a rival. Isabella,
the daughter of John II. of Castile, far from
having any profpe& of that noble inheritance
which she transmitted to her grandson, passed the
early part of her life in obscurity and indigence.
But the Caftilians, exasperated against her bro-
ther Henry IV. an ill-advifed and vicious prince,
publicly charged him with impotence, and his
queen with adultery. Upon his demise, rejeding
Joanna, whom Henry had uniforinly, and even
on his death-bed, owned to be his lawful daugh-
ter, and whom an assembly of the fdates had ac-
knowledged to be the heir of his kingdom, they
obliged her to retire into Portugal, and placed
Isabella ori the throne of Castile. Ferdinand
owed the crown of Aragon to the unexpeded
death of his elder brother, and acquired the king-
doms of Naples and Sicily by violating the faith
of treaties, and disregarding the ties of blood.
To all these kingdoms, Christopher Columbus,
by an effort of genius and of intrepidity, the boldest
and most fuccefsful that is recorded in the annals
of mankind, added a new world, the wealth of
which became one considerable source of the
power and grandeur of the Spanish monarchs.

Don John, the only son of Ferdinand and Ifa-

bella, and their eldeRt daughter, the queen of Por-
tugal, being cut off, without issue, in the flower
of youth, all their hopes centered in Joanna and
her posterity. But as her husband, the archduke,
was a Riranger to the Spaniards, it was thought

expedient

expedient to invite him into Spain, that by re-
siding among them, he might accustom himself
to their laws and manners; and it was expeaked
that the Cortes, or assembly of slates, whose
authority was then so great in Spain, that no
title to the crown was reckoned valid unless it
received their fanAion, would acknowledge his
right of fucceflion, together with that of the
infanta, his wife. Philip and Joanna, passing
through France in their way to Spain [x0oz],
were entertained in that kingdom with the ut-
modt magnificence. The archduke did homage
to Louis XII. for the earldom of Slanders, and
took his feat as a peer of the realm in the par-
liament of Paris. They were received in Spain
with every mark of honour that the parental as-
fedion of Ferdinand and Isabella, or the refpe&
of their fubjeds, could devise; and their title to
the crown was soon after acknowledged by the
Cortes of both kingdoms.

But amidit these outward appearances of fatif-

fation and joy, some secret uneasiness preyed
upon the mind of each of these princes. The
dtately and reserved ceremonial of the Spanish
court was so burdensome to Philip, a prince,
young, gay, affable, fond of society and of plea-
sure, that he soon began to express a desire of
returning to his native country, the manners of
which were more suited to his temper. Ferdi-
nand, observing the declining health of his queen,
with whose life he knew that his right to the
government of Castile mudl cease, easily foresaw,
that a prince of Philip's disposition, and who
already discovered an extreme impatience to reign,
would never consent to his retaining any degree

n a of

of this diminution of his power awakened the jea-
l0ufy of that ambitious monarch.

Isabella beheld, with the sentiments natural

to a mother, the indifference and neglec with
which the archduke treated her daughter, who
was destitute of those beauties of perion, as well
as those accomplishments of mind, which fix the
affeacions of a husband. Her underfitanding,
always weak, was often disordered. She doated
on Philip with such an excess of childish and in-
discreet fondness, as excited disgust rather than
affeaion. Her jealousy, for which her hufband's
behaviour gave her too much cause, was propor-
tioned to her love, and often broke out in the
molt extravagant ations. Isabella, though fen-
fible of her defeAs, could not help pitying her
condition, which was soon rendered altogether
deplorable, by the archduke's abrupt resolution
of setting out in the middle of winter for Flan-
ders, and of leaving her in Spain. Isabella in-
treated him not to abandon his wife to grief
and melancholy, which might prove fatal to her,
as ihe was near the time of her delivery. Joanna
conjured him to put off his journey for three days
only, that the might have the pleasure of cele-
brating the festival of Christmas in his company.
Ferdinand, after representing the imprudence of
his leaving Spain, before he had time to become
acquainted with the genius, or to gain the affec-
tions of the people, who were one day to be his
fubjeAs, besought him, at least, not to pass
through France, with which kingdom he was
then at open war. Philip, without regarding
either the diaates of humanity, or the maxims

of prudence, persisted in his purpose; and on the
twenty-fecond of December set out for the Low
Countries, by the way of France a.

From the moment of his departure, Joanna

funk into a deep and sullen melancholy b, and
while (he was in that situation bore Ferdinand
her second son, for whom the power of his bro-
ther Charles afterwards procured the kingdoms
of Hungary and Bohemia, and to whom he at
ladt tranumitted the imperial sceptre. Joanna was
the only person in Spain who discovered no joy
at the birth of this prince. Insensible to that,
as well as to every other pleasure, ffe was wholly
occupied with the thoughts of returning to her
husband; nor did the, in any degree, recover
tranquillity of mind, until (he arrived at Brussels
next year c [5Io4].

Philip, in passing through France, had an in-

terview with Louis XII., and signed a treaty
with him, by which he hoped that all the differ-
ences between France and Spain would have been
finally terminated. But 'Ferdinand, whose as-
fairs, at that time, were extremely prosperous in
Italy, where the superior genius of Gonfalvo de
Cordova, the great captain, triumphed on every
occasion over the arms of France, did not pay
the leadt regard to what his fon-in-law had con-
cluded, and carried on hostilities with greater
ardour than ever.

From this time Philip seems not to have taken

any part in the affairs of Spain, waiting in quiet

a Petri Martyris Anglerii Epiftolh, 250. 253.
b Id. Epiff. z55.
c Mariana, lib. 27. c. It. 14. Flechier Vie de Ximen.

B3 till

ihould open the way to one of their thrones.
The latter of these events was not far distant.
The untimely death of her son and eldest daugh-
ter had made a deep impreflion on the mind of
Isabella; and as (he could derive but little con-
folation for the losses which (he had fiutained
either from her daughter Joanna, whose infirmi-
ties daily increased, or from her fon-in-law, who
no longer preserved even the appearance of a de-
cent refpea towards that unhappy princess, her
spirits and health began gradually to decline,
and after languishing some months, (he died at
Medina del Campo on the twenty-fixth of No-
vember one thousand five hundred and four.
She was no less eminent for virtue than for wis..
dom; and/whether we confider her behaviour as
a queen, as a wife, or as a mother, (he is jufdly
entitled to the high encomiums bellowed upon
her by the Spanish hifforians d*

A few weeks before her death, (he made her

last will, and being convinced of Joanna's inca-
pacity to affuime the reins of government into
her own hands, and having no inclination to com-
mit them to Philip, with whose condua (he was
extremely diffatisfied, (he appointed Ferdinand
regent or adminifdrator of the affairs of Castile
until her grandson Charles (hould attain the age
of twenty. She bequeathed to Ferdinand like-
wife one half of the revenues which (hould arise
from the Indies, together with the grand master-
ihips of the three military orders; dignities,
which rendered the person who poffeffed them
almost independent, and which Isabella had, for

a P. Mart. Ep. 279. that

The signed a deed so favourable to Ferdinand, she
obliged him to swear that he would not, by a fe-
cond marriage, or by any other means, endeavour
to deprive Joanna or her posterity of their right
of succession to any of his kingdoms .

Immediately upon the queen's death, Ferdi-

nand resigned the title of king of Caffile, and
iffied orders to proclaim Joanna and Philip the
sovereigns of that kingdom. But, at the fame
time, he alfumed the charader of regent, in con-
sequence of Ifabella's teRfament; and not long
after he prevailed on the Cortes of Castile to ac-
knowledge his right to that office [s505]. This,
however, he did not procure without difficulty,
nor without discovering fulch symptoms of alie-
nation and disgust among the Caftilians as filled
him with great uneasiness. The union of Castile
and Aragon, for almost thirty years, had not so
entirely extirpated the ancient and hereditary
enmity which subsisted between the natives of
these kingdoms, that the Castilian pride could
submit, without murmuring, to the government
of a king of Aragon. Ferdinand's own cha-
rader, with which the Caftilians were well ac-
quainted, was far from rendering his authority
desirable. Suspicious, discerning, severe, and
partimonious, he was accustomed to observe the
modt minute a&ions of his fubjefts with a jealous
attention, and to reward their higheRt services
with little liberality; and they were now deprived
of Isabella, whose gentle qualities, and partiality

e P. Martyr. Ep. 277. Mar. Hit,. lib. zS. c. II. Ser-

reras Hil. Gener. d'Efpagne, tom. viii. a63.

f Mar. Hilt. lib. zt. c. se.

to her Castilian fubjeas, often tempered his aufte-
rity, or rendered it tolerable. The maxims of
his government were especially odious to the
grandees; for that artful prince, sensible of the
dangerous privileges conferred upon them by the
feudal institutions, had endeavoured to curb their
exorbitant powerS, by extending the royal jurif-
diaion, by proteding their injured vassals, by in-
creasing the immunities of cities, and by other
measures equally prudent. From all these causes,
a formidable party among the Caitilians united
against Ferdinand, and though the persons who
composed it had not hitherto taken any public
step in opposition to him, he plainly saw, that
upon the least encouragement from their new
king, they would proceed to the most violent ex-
tremities.

There was no less agitation in the Netherlands,

upon receiving the accounts of Ifabella's death,
and of Ferdinand's having assumed the govern-
ment of Castile. Philip was not of a temper
tamely, to fuffer himself to be supplanted by the
ambition of his father-in-law. If Joanna's infir-
mities, and the nonage of Charles, rendered them
incapable of government, he, as a husband, was
the proper guardian of his wife, and, as a father,
the natural tutor of his son. Nor was it fufficient
to oppose to these juR rights, and to the incli-
nation of the people of Caflile, the authority of
a testament, the genuineness of which was per-
haps doubtful, and its contents to him appeared
certainly to be iniquitous. A keener edge was
added to Philip's resentment, and new vlgour in-
fused into his councils by the arrival of Don John

& Marian. lib. 2S. c, 12.

Manuel.

Manuel. He was Ferdinand's ambassador at the
Imperiai court, but upon the fsrt notice of Ifa-
bella's death repaired to Bruffeis, flattering him-
feilf, that under a young and liberal prince, he
might attain to power and honours, which he
could never have expeaed in the service of an
old and frugnal master. -le had early paid court
to Philip during his residence in Spain, with such
assiduity as entirely gained his confidence; and
having been trained to buiinefs under Ferdinand,
could oppose his schemes with equal abilities, and
with arts not inferior to those for which that
monarch was dihtinguifhed h.

By the advice of Manuel, ambassadors vere

dispatched to require Ferdinand to retire into
Aragon, and to resign the government of Castile
to those persons whom Philip (hould entrust with
it, until his own arrival in that kingdom. Such
of the Castilian nobles as had discovered any dif-
fatisfadion with Ferdinand's adminifhration, were
encouraged by every method to oppose it. At
the fame time a treaty was concluded with Louis
XII. by which Philip flattered himself, that he
had secured the friendship and afliftance of that
monarch.

Meanwhile, Ferdinand employed all the arts

of address and policy, in order to retain the power
of which he had got poffelion. By means of
Conchillos, an Aragonian gentleman, he entered
into a private negotiation with Joanna, and pree
vailed on that weak princess to confirm, by her
authority, his right to the regency. But this
intrigue did not escape the penetrating eye of
Don John Manuel; Joanna's letter of consent

b Zsriua Annales de Ar.agon, tom. vi. p. ta.

was

was intercepted; Conchillos was thrown into a
dungeon; she herself confined to an apartment
in the palace, and all her Spanish domeftics fe-
eluded from her presence i

The mortification which the discovery of this

intrigue occasioned to Ferdinand was much in-
creased by his observing the progress which Phi-
lip's emissaries made in Cafile. Some of the
nobles retired to their castles; others to the
towns in which they had influence: they formed
themselves into confederacies, and began to as-
femble their vassals. Ferdinand's court was almost
totally deserted; not a person of diftinaion but
Ximenes, archbishop of Toledo, the duke of
Alva, and the marquis of Denia, remaining there;
while the houses of Philip's ambassadors were
daily crowded with noblemen of the highest rank.

Exasperated at this universal defeaion, and

mortified perhaps with feeing all his schemes de-
seated by a younger politician, Ferdinand re-
solved, ins defiance of the law of nature, and of
decency, to deprive his daughter and her pofte-
rity of the crown of Castile, rather than renounce
the regency of that kingdom. His plan for ac-
coinplifhing this was no less bold, than the inten-
tion itself was wicked. He demanded in mar-
riage Joanna, the supposed daughter of Henry
IV., on the belief of whole illegitimacy Ifabella's
right to the crown of Castile was founded: and
by reviving the claim of this princess, in oppofi-
tion to which he himself had formerly led armies
and fought battles, he hoped once more to get
poffefrion of the throne of that kingdom. But
Emanuel, king of Portugal, in whole dominions

i P. Mart. Ep. z87. Zurita Annales, vi. p. 54.

Joanna

Joanna resided, at that time having maried one
of Ferdinand's daughters by Isabella, refused his
consent to that unnatural match; and the un-
happy princess herself, having loft all relish for
the objeFis of ambition, by being long immured
in a convent, discovered no less aversion to it k

- The resources, however, of Ferdinand's ambi-
tion were not exhausted. Upon meeting with a
repulse in Portugal, he turned towards France,
and fought in marriage Germain de Foix, a
daughter of the viscount of Narbonne, and of
Mary, the sifter of Louis XII. The war which
that monarch had carried on againit Ferdinand
in Naples, had been so unfortunate, that he lif-
tened with joy to a proposal, which furnished
him with an honourable pretence for concluding
peace: and though no prince was ever more re-
markable than Ferdinand for making all his pas-
flons bend to the maxims of interest, or become
fiuhfervient to the purposes of ambition, yet so
vehement was his resentment againit his fon-in-
law, that the desire of gratifying it rendered him
regardless of every other consideration. In order
to be revnged of Philip, by detaching Louis
from his interest, and in order to gain a chance
of excluding him from his hereditary throne of
Aragon, and the dominions annexed to it, he
was ready once more to divide Spain into separate
kingdoms, though the union of these was the
great glory of his reign, and had been the chief
objea of his ambition; he consented to restore
the Neapolitan nobles of the French fadion to
their poffeffions and honours; and submitted to

k Sandov. Hill. of Civil Wars in Castile. Lou, 1655* P. 5.

Zurita Annales de Aragon, tom. vi, p. z13. h

.the

the ridicule of marrying, in an advanced age, a
princess of eighteen '.

The conelafion of this match, which deprived

Philip of his only ally, and threatened him with
the loss of so many kingdoms, gave him a dread-
ful alarm, and convinced Don John Manuel that
there was now a neceflity of taking other mea-
fures with regard to the affairs of Spain m. He
accordingly infiruded the Flemish ambassadors,
in the court of Spain, to testify the firong desire
which their master had of terminating all differ-
ences between him and Ferdinand in an amicable
manaer, and his willingness to consent to any
conditions that would rc-eitabiih thle friendship
which ought to fusbflft between a father and a.
Lon-in-law. Ferdinand, though he had made and
broken more treaties than any prince of any age,
was apt to confide so far in the sincerity of other
Inen, or to depend so much upon his own address
and their weakness, as to be always extremely
fond of a negotiation. IIe lilcned with eager-
ness to these declarations, and soon concluded a
treaty at Salamanca [Nov. 24] ; in which it was
ftpulated, that the government of Castile (hould
be carried on in the joint names of Joanna, of
Ferdinand, and of Philip; and that the revenues
of the crown, as well as the right of conferring
offices, should be shared between Ferdinand and
Philip, by an equal division n.

s506.] Nothing, however, was farther from

Philip's thoughts than to observe this treaty. His

1 P. Mart. Ep. 290. 292. Mariana, lib. 28. c. i6, 17.
in P. Mart. Ep. 293.
a Zurita Annales de Aragon, vT 19. P. Mart. Ep.

293, 29j. sole

dinand, and to prevent him from taking any
measures for obitruaing his voyage into Spain..
It had that effea. Ferdinand, sagacious as he
was, did not for some time fufpe& his design;
and though when he perceived it, he prevailed
on the king of France not only to remonfirate
againdt the archduke's journey, but to threaten
hostilities if he should undertake it; though he
solicited the duke of Gueldres to attack his son-
in-law's dominions in the Low-Countries, Philip
and his consort nevertheless set fail with a nume-
rous fleet, and a good body of land forces. They
were obliged, by a violent tempest, to take lhel-
ter in England, where Henry VII., in compliance
with Ferdinand's folicitations, detained them up-
wards of three months o; at ladt they were per-
mitted to depart, and after a more prosperous
voyage, they arrived in safety at Corunna in Ga-
licia [April 28], nor durit Ferdinand attempt,
as he had once intended, to oppose their landing
by force of arms.

The Castilian nobles, who had been obliged

hitherto to conceal or to dissemble their senti.
ments, now declared openly in favour of Philip.
From every corner of the kingdom, persons of
the highest rank, with numerous retinues of their
vassals, repaired to their new sovereign. The
treaty of Salamanca was universally condemned,
and all agreed to exclude from the government
of Castile a' prince, who, by consenting to disjoin
Aragon and Naples from that crown, discovered
so little concern for its true interests.. Ferdinand,
meanwhile, abandoned by almost all the Caftilians,

L Ferrer. Hi 5d.ifeon. rted

roL. nI, c difconcertedi

ther he ihould peaceably relinquish his power, or
take arms in order to maintain it, earneffly soli-
cited an interview with his fon-in-law, who, by
the advice of Manuel, studiously avoided it.
Convinced, at last, by feeing the number and zeal
of Philip's adherents daily increase, that it was
vain to think of resisting such a torrent, Ferdi-
nand consented, by treaty, to resign the regency
of Castile into the hands of Philip [June 27], to
retire into his hereditary dominions of Aragon,
and to reft satisfied with the mafterfhips of the
military orders, and that {hare of the revenue of
the Indies, which Isabella had bequeathed to him.
Though an interview between the princes was
no longer necessary, it was agreed to on both
sides from motives of decency. Philip repaired
'to the place appointed, with a splendid retinue
of Castilian nobles, and a considerable body of
armed men. Ferdinand appeared without any
pomp, attended by a few followers mounted on
mules, and unarmed. On that oceafion 1Don
John Manuel had the pleasure of displaying be-
fore the monarch, whom he had deserted, the ex
tensive influence which he had acquired over his
new master: while Ferdinand fuffered, in pre-
fence of his former ftlbjeC~s, the two most cruel
mortifications which an artful and ambitious
prince can feel; being at once over-reached in
conduA, and firipped of power.P.

Not long after [July], he retired into Aragon -

and hoping that some favourable accident would
soon open. the way for his return into Caitile,

P Zcrita Annales de Arag. vi. 64. Mar. lib. a8. c. 19,

so. P. Mart. Ep. ;04, joc, &re.

he took care to protelt, though with great fe-
crecy, that the treaty concluded with his fon-in-
law, being extorted by force, ought to be deemed
void of all obligation u.

Philip took poffeifion of his new authority with

a youthful joy. The unhappy Joanna, from
whom he derived it, remained, during all these
contests, under the dominion of a deep melan-
choly; she was seldom allowed to appear in pub-
lic; her father, though he had often desired it,
was refused access to her; and Philip's chief
object was to prevail on 'the Cortes to declare
her incapable of government, that an undivided
power might be lodged in his hands, until his
Lon should attain to full age. But such was the
partial attachment of the Caftilians to their na-
tive princess, that though Manuel had the address
to gain some members of the Cortes assembled
at Valladolid, and others were willing to gratify
their new fovercign in his first requeff, the great'
hody of the representatives refused their consent
to a declaration which they thought so injurious
to the blood of their monarchs r. They were
unanimous, however, in acknowledging Joanna
and Philip, queen and king of Castile, and their
Lon Charles prince of Asturias.

This was almost the only memorable event du-

ring Philip's adminifrration. A fever put an
end to his life in the twenty-eighth year of his
age [Sept. .25, 506], when he had not enjoyed
the regal dignity, which he had been so eager to
obtain, full three months S.

q Zurita Annales de Arag. vi. p. 68. Ferrer. HIss. viii.

290. r Zarita Annales de Arag. vi. p. 75. "s Marian.
IOb. 28. e. 23.

c > The

The whole royal authority in Castile ought of

course to have devolved upon Joanna. But the
ihock occasioned by a disaster so unexpeaed as
the death of her husband, completed the disorder
of her underitanding, and her incapacity for go.
vernment. During all the time of Philip's sick.
ness, no intreaty could prevail on her, though in
the sixth month of her pregnancy, to leave him
for a moment. When he expired, however, (he
did not (hed one tear, or utter a single groan.
Her grief was silent and fettled. She continued
to watch the dead body with the fame tenderness
and attention as if it had been alive t; and though
at last (he permitted it to be buried, (he soon re.
moved it from the tomb to her own apartment.
There it was laid upon a bed of state, in a rplen-
did dress: and having heard from some monk a
legendary tale of a king who revived after he had
been dead fourteen years, (he kept her eyes almost
constantly fixed on the body, waiting for the
happy moment of its return to life. Nor was
this capricious affeaion for her dead husband less
tinakured with jealousy, than that which (he had
born to him while alive. She did not permit
any of her female attendants to approach the bed
on which his corpse was laid; . (he would not
fuffer any woman who did not belong to her fa-
mily to enter the apartment; and rather than
grant that privilege to a midwife, though a very
aged one had been chosen on purpose, (he bore
the princess Catharine without any other assistance
than that of her own domeitics ".

a P. Mart. Ep* 3r6.
a Mar. Hit. lib. 29. C. 3 &5. P. Mart. Ep. 318 324.

32 332.wom

A woman in such a state of mind was little

capable of governing a great kingdom; and
Joanna, who made it her sole employment to be-
wail the loss, and to pray for the foul of her hus-
band, would have thought her attention to pub-
lic affairs an impious neglea of those duties which
(he owed to him. But though (he declined as-
fuming the adminiffration herself, yet by a itrange
caprice of jealousy, (he refused to commit it to
any other person; and no intreaty of her fubjeds
could persuade her to name a regent, or even to
sign such papers as were necessary for the execu-
tion of justice, and the security of the kingdom.

The death of Philip threw the Caftilians into

the greatest perplexity. It was neceifary to ap-
pointaregent, both on accountof Joanna's frenzy,
and the infancy of her son; and as there was not
among the nobles any person so eminently diftin-
guifhed, either by superiority in rank or abilities,
as to be called by the public voice to that high
office, all naturally turned their eyes either towards
Ferdinand, or towards the emperor Maximilian.
The former claimed that dignity as administrator
for his daughter, and by virtue of the testament
of Isabella; the latter thought himself the legal
guardian of his grandson, whom, on account of
his mother's infirmity, he already considered as
king of Castile. Such of the nobility as had
lately been most aaive in compelling Ferdinand
to resign the government of the kingdom, trem-
bled at the thoughts of his being refored so soon
to his former dignity. They dreaded the return
of a monarch, not apt to forgive, and who, to
those defeds with which they were already ac-
quainted, added that refeutment which the re-

c 3 membrance

membrance of their behaviour, and refiedion
upon his own disgrace, must naturally have ex-
cited. Though none of these objeAions lay
against Maximilian, he was a fUranger to the laws
and manners of Caflile; he had not either troops
or money to support his pretensions; nor could
his claim be admitted without a public declara-
tion of Joanna's incapacity for government, an
indignity to which, notwithitanding the notoriety
of her diitemper, the delicacy of the Caftilians
could not bear the thoughts of fubjeAing her.

iDon John Manuel, however, and a few of the

nobles, who considered themifelves as most ob-
noxious to Ferdinand's displeasure, declared for
Maximilian, and offered to support his claim with
all their interest. Maximilian, always enterprising
and deciiive in council, though feeble and dilatory
in execution, eagerly embraced the offer. But
a series of ineffeaual negotiations was the only
consequence of this tranfation. The emperor,
as usual, asserted his rights in a high firain, pro-
mifed a great deal, and perforn:ed nothing 'x.

A few days before the death of Philip, Ferdi-

nand had set out for Naples, that, by his own
presence, he might put an end, with greater de.
cency, to the viceroyalty of the great captain,
whose important services, and cautious conduA,
did not screen him from the suspicions of his jea-
lous master. Though an account of his 1on-isn-
law's death reached him at Porto-fino, in the
territories of Genoa, he was so solicitous to dif-
cover the secret intrigues which he supposed the
great captain to have been carrying on, and to
diablifh his own authority on a firm foundation
s Mariaina, Iib. z9. c. 7. Zurica Annales de Arsg. vi. 9m

in the Neapolitan dominions, by removing him
from the supreme command there, that rather
than discontinue his voyage, he chose to leave
Castile in a date of anarchy, and even to rifque,
by this delay, his obtaining poffeflion of the go-
vernment of that kingdom Y.

Nothing but the great abilities and prudent

condua of his adherents could have prevented
the bad effeas of this absence. At the head of
these was Ximenes, archbilhop of Toledo, who,
though he had been raised to that dignity by
Isabella, contrary to the inclination of Ferdinand,
and though he could have no expedation of en-
joying much power under the adminidration of
a master little disposed to didtinguifh him by ex-
traordinary marks of attention, was nevertheless
so difintereded as to prefer the welfare of his
country before his own grandeur, and to declare,
that Cadile could never be so happily governed
as by a prince, whom long experience had ren-
dered thoroughly acquainted with its true inte s
red. The zeal of Ximenes to bring over his
countrymen to this opinion, induced him to
lay aside somewhat of his usual auderity and
haughtiness. He condefended, on this oc-
cafion, to court the difaffeaed nobles, and em-
ployed address, as well as arguments, to persuade
them. Ferdinand seconded his endeavours with
great art; and by conceflions to some of the
grandees, by promises to others, and by letters
full of complailance to all, he gained many of his
modt violent opponents z. Though many cabals

' Zurita Annales de Arag. vi, p. 85.
z Id. p. 87. 94. Io0.

were

were formed, and fume commotions were excited,
yet when Ferdinand, after having fettled the as-
fairs of Naples,arrivedinCaftile [Aug.21, I507],
he entered upon the administration without op-
position. The prudence with which he exercised
his authority in that kingdom, equalled the good
fortune by which he had recovered it. By a mo-
derate, but fleady adminifiration, free from par-
tiality and from resentment, he entirely recon-
ciled the Caftilians to his person, and secured to
them, during the remainder of his life, as much
domestic tranquillity as was consistent with the
genius of the feudal government, which still sub-
Jiited among them in full vigour a.

Nor was the preservation of tranquillity ;n his

hereditary kinudoms, the only obligation which
the archduke Charles owed to the wife regency
of his grandfather; it was his good fortune, du-
ring that period, to have very important addi-
tions made to the dominions over which he was
to reign. On the coast of Barbary, Oran, and
other conquests of no finall value, were annexed
to the crown of Castile by Cardinal Ximenes,
who, with a spirit very uncommon in a monk,
led in person a numnerous army againit the Moors
of that country [C509]; and, with a generosity
and magnificence itill more singular, defrayed
the whole expence of the expedition out of his
own revenues b. In Europe, Ferdinand, under
pretences no lefs'frivolous than unjust, as well as
by, artifices the most ihameful and treacherous,
expelled John d'Albret, the lawful sovereign,
from tile throne of Navarre; and, seizing on

a Marian3, lib. 19. c. in. b 1d, Jib. 29. c. r8.

3 that

that kingdom, extended the limits of the Spanish
monarchy from the Pyrenees on the one hand,
to the frontiers of Portugal on the other'.

It was not, however, the desire of aggrandiz-

ing the archduke, which influenced Ferdinand in
this, or in any other of his aaions. He was
more apt to confider that young prince as a rival,
who might one day wrest out of his hands the
government of Castile, than as a grandson, for
whose interest he was entrusted with the admini-
firation. This jealousy soon begot aiverfion, and
even hatred, the symptoms of which he was at
no pains to conceal. Hence proceeded his im-
moderate joy when his young queen was deliver-
ed of a son [5509], whose life would have de-
prived Charles of the crowns ofAragon, Naples,
Sicily, and Sardinia; and upon the untimely
death of that prince, he discovered, for the fame
reason, an excessive solicitude to have other
children. This impatience hastened, in all pro-
bability, the accession of Charles to the crown
of Spain. Ferdinand, in order to procure a blef-
sing, of which, from his advanced age, and the in-
temperance of his youth, he could have little
profpe&, had recourse to his physicians [s513],
and by their prefeription took one of those po-
tions, which are supposed to add vigour to the
constitution, though they more frequently prove
fatal to it. This was its effea on a frame so fee-
ble and exhausted as that of Ferdinand; for
though he survived a violent disorder which it at
first occafsoned, it brought on such an habitual
languor and dejeAion of mind, as rendered him
averse from any serious attention to public affairs,

c Mar. lib. 30. c. IIz, Iz. 19. Z4.

and

and fond of frivolous amusements, on which he
had not hitherto bellowed much time ". Though
he now despaired of having any son of his own,
his jealousy of the archduke did not abate, nor
could he help viewing him with that averflion
which princes often bear to their successors. In
order to gratify this unnatural passion, he made
a will [1i'51, appointing princeFerdinand, who,
having been born and educated in Spain, was much
beloved by the Spaniards, to be regent of all his
kingdoms, until the arrival of the archduke his
brother; and by the fame deed he fettled upon
him the grand-mafterfhip of the three military
orders. The former of these grants might have
put it in the power of the young prince to have
disputed the throne with his brother; the latter
would, in any event, have rendered him almost
independent of him.

Ferdinand retained to the last that jealous love

of power, which was so remarkable through his
whole life. Unwilling even at the approach of
death to admit a thought of relinquilhing any
portion of his authority, he removed continually
from place to place, in order to fly from his dif-
temper, or to forget it. Though his strength
declined every day, none of his attendants durit
mention his condition; nor would he admit his
father confeffor, who thought such silence crimi-
nal and unchristian, into his presence.. At last
the danger became so imminent, that it could be
no longer concealed. Ferdinand received the in-
timation with a decent fortitude; and touched,
perhaps, with compundion at the injustice which

d Zurita Annales de Arag. vi. p. 347. P. Mart. Ep.

S3'. Argenfola Annales de Aragon, lib. i. p. 4. he

he had done his grandson, or influenced by the
honelt remonitrances of Carvajal, Zapata, and
Vargas, his moit ancient and faithful counsellors,
who represented to him, that by investing prince
Ferdinand with the regency, he would infallibly
entail a civil war on the two brothers, and by
beftowing on him the grand-mafterfhip of the
military orders, would f rip the crown of its no-
bless ornament and chief itrength, he consented
to alter his will with refpe& to both these parti-
culars. By a new deed he left Charles the sole
heir of all his dominions [Is 6], and allotted to
prince Ferdinand, initead of that throne of which
he thought himself almost fccure, an inconfider-
able establishment of fifty thousand ducats a
year e. He died a few hours after signing this
w~ill, on the twenty-third day of January, one
thousand five hundred and sixteen.

Charles, to whom such a noble inheritance de-

fcended by his death, was near the full age of
sixteen. He had hitherto resided in the Low-
Countries, his paternal dominions. Margaret of
Aultria, his aunt, and Margaret of York, the
fifler of Edward IV. of England, and widow of
Charles the Bold, two princesses of great virtue
and abilities, had the care of forming his early
youth. Upon the death of his father, the Fle-
mings committed the government of the Low-
Counitries to his grandfather, the emperor Maxi-.
milian, with the name rather than the authority
of regent . Maximilian made choice of William

e Mar. Hilr. lib. 30. c. ult. Zuriha Annales de Arag.

vI 401. P. Mart. Ep. 565, 566. Argenfola Annales de
Arag. lib. i. p. Ir.

f Pontius Heuterue Rerum Autriacsrtm, lib. xv. Lov.
A19. lib. diic

c. z. p. i.

de Croy lord of Chievres to fisperintend the edu-
cation of the young prince his grandson g. That
nobleman poffeffed, in an eminent degree, the
talents which fitted him for such an important office,

E The French hiliorians, upon the authority of M. de

Bellay, Mem. p. at. have unanimounly asserted, that Phi-
lip, by his lafi will, having appointed the king of France to
have the diredlion of his fon's education, Louis XII. with a
difinterefitednefs fiuitable to the confidence reposed in him,
named Chievres for that office. Even the prefsdent Henaut
has adopted this opinion. Abreg; Chron. A. D. 1507.
Varillas, in his uSual manner, pretends to have seen Philip's
teflament. Prac. de L'Education des Princes, p. 16. But the
Spanish, German, and Flemilh hiltorians concur in contra-
diaing this assertion of the French authors. It appears
from Heutetus, a contemporary Flemiih hiltorian of great
authority, that Louis XII. by confroting to the marriage of
Germaine de Foix with Ferdinand, had lolt much of that
confidence which Philip once placed in him; that this dif-
gust was increased by the French king's giving in marriage to
the count of Angoul~me his eldeil daughter, whom he had
formerly betrothed to Chiarles; Hester. Rer. Auffr. lib. v.
151: That the French, a short time before Philip's death,
had violated the peace which fublifted between them and the
Flemings, and Philip had complained of this injury, and was
ready to resent it. Heuter, ibid. All these circumitances
render it improbable that Philip, who made his will a few
days before he died, Heuter. p. Iaz. fBould commit the edu-
cation of his son to Louis XII. In confirmation of these
plausible conjedtures, positive teffimony can be produced. It
appears from -euterus, that Philip, when he set out for
Spain, had entrudted Chievres both with the care of his fon's
education, and with the government of his dominions in the
Low-Countries. Heuter. lib. vii. p. 553. That an attempt
was made, soon after Philip's death, to have the emperor
Maximilian appointed regent, during the minority of his
grandson; but this being opposed, Chievres seems to have
continued to discharge both the offices which Philip had com-
mitted to him. Heut. ibid. 15g. 155. That in the begin-
ning of the year r5o8, the Flemings invited Maximilian to
accept of the regency, to which he conented, and appointed

his

fidelity. Under Chievres, Adrian of Utrecht
afted as preceptor. This preferment, which open-
ed his way to the highest dignities an ecclesiastic
can attain, he owed not to his birth, for that was
extremely mean; nor to his interest, for he was
a fitranger to the arts of a court: but to the opi-
nion which his countrymen entertained of his
learning. He was indeed no inconsiderable pro-
ficient in those frivolous sciences, which, during
several centuries, afifmed the name of philofo-
phy, and had published a commentary, which
was highly e{teemed, upon The Book of Sentences,
a famous trearife of Petrus Lombardus, conlider-
ed at that time as the flandard system of me-
taphyfical theology. But whatever admiration
these procured him in an illiterate age, it was
soon found that a man accustomed to the retire-
ment of a college, unacquainted with the world,
and without any tinture of taste or elegance,
was by no means qualified for rendering fience
agreeable to a young prince. Charles, accord-
ingly, discovered an early aversion to learning,
and an excessive fondness for those violent and
martial exercises, to excel in which was the chief
pride, and almost the only fludy of persons of
rank in that age. Chievres encouraged this

his daughter, Margaret, together with a council of Flemings,
to exercie tbe fopreme authority, when he himfeilf ihould, at
any time, be abhent. He likewise named Chievres as govern-
or, and Adlian of Utrecht as preceptor to his son. Heut.
ibid. 155. 157. What 1-leuterus relates with.refpe& to this
matter is contirmrd by Moringus in Vita Adriani apud Ana-
betaa Cafp. Eurmanni de Adriano, cap. ,o. by hariandus
Chronic Brabant. ibid. p. 25. and by Hasus Annal. Bgab.,
vl ii. 5zo, &c.

vOL. II. l taste,

tate, either from a desire of gaining his pupil
by indulgence, or from too flight an opinion of
the advantages of literary accomplishments h He
infiruated him, however, with great care in the
arts of government; he made him Rudy the his-
tory not only of his own kingdoms, but of those
with which they were conneAed; he accuffomed
him, from the time of his assuming the govern-
ment of Slanders in the year one thousand five
hundred and fifteen, to attend to business; he
persuaded him to peruse all papers relating to
public affairs; to be present at the deliberations
of his privy-counfellors, and to propose to them
himself those matters, concerning which he re-
quired their opinion 1. From such an education,
Charles contraaed habits of gravity and recol-
leaion which scarcely suited his time of life.
The fir't openings of his genius did not indicate
that fuperionty which its maturer age display-
ed k. He did not discover in his youth the irm-
petuofsty of spirit which commonly ulhers in an
a&ive and enterprising manhood. Nor did his
early obsequiousness to Chievres, and his other
favourites, promise that capacious and decisive
judgment, which afterwards dire&ed the affairs
of one half of Europe. But his fubjeds, dazzled
with the external accomplishments of a graceful
figure and manly address, and viewing his cha-
ra~+er with that partiality which is always fhewa
to princes during their youth, entertained fan-

h Jovil Vita Adrijni, p. 9r. Struvii Corpus HIss. Germ.

ii. 967. P. Heurer. Rer. Auftr. lib. vil. c. 3. p. 557.

5 Memoires de Bellay, Svo. Par. :573. p. 51. P. Heuter.

lib. viii. c. i. p. P't.

k P. Martyr, Ep. 569. 65 .

guinm

guine hopes of his adding luifre to those crowns
which descended to him by the death of Ferdi-
nand.

The kingdoms of Spain, as is evident from

the view which I have given of their political
conifitution, were at that time in a situation
which required an administration no less vigorous
than prudent. The feudal inflitutions, which
had been introduced into all its different pro-
vinces by the Goths, the Suevi, and the Van-
dals, subsisted in great force. The nobles, who
were powerful and warlike, had long poffeffed all
the exorbitant privileges which these institutions
veiled in their order. The cities in Spain were
more numerous and more considerable, than the
genius of feudal government, naturally unfavour-
able to commerce and to regular police, seemed
to admit. The personal rights, and political
influence, which the inhabitants of these cities
had acquired, were extensive. The royal prero.
gative, circurmfcribed by the privileges of the no-
bility, and by the pretensions of the people, was
confined within very narrow limits. Under such
a form of government, the principles of discord
were many; the bond of union was extremely
feeble; and Spain felt not only all the inconve-
niences occasioned by the defeats in the feudal
system, but was exposed to disorders arising from
the peculiarities in its own constitution.

During the long administration of Ferdinand,

no internal commotion, it is true, had arisen in
Spain. His superior abilities had enabled him
to restrain the turbulence of the nobles, and to
moderate the jealousy of the commons. By the
wisdom of his domestic government, by the fa-

D 2 gacity

gacity with which he conduaed his foreign ope-
rations, and by the high opinion that his sub-
jeas entertained of both, he had preserved among
them a degree of tranquillity, greater than was
natural to a conifitution, in which the feeds of
discord and disorder were so copiously mingled.
But, by the death of Ferdinand, these refiraints
were at once withdrawn; and fadion and dif-
content, from being long repressed, were ready
to break out with fiercer animosity.

In order to prevent these evils, Ferdinand had

in his lafd will taken a modt prudent precaution,
by appointing cardinal Ximenes, archbishop of
Toledo, to be sole regent of Caitile, until the ar-
rival of his grandson in Spain. The singular
charaaer of this man, and the extraordinary
qualities which marked him out for that office at
such a junaure, merit a particular description.
He was descended of an honourable, not of a
wealthy family; and the circumitances of his pa-
rents, as well as his own inclinations, having de-
termined him to enter into the church, he early
obtained benefices of great value, and which
placed him in the way of the highest preferment.
All these, however, he renounced at once; and
after undergoing a very severe noviciate, assumed
the habit of St. Francis in a monadery of Obfer-
vantine friars, one of the modt rigid orders in
the Romish church. There he soon became
eminent for his uncommon auderity of manners,
and for those excesses of fuperfditious devotion,
which are the proper charaderidtics of the monas-
tic life. But notwithidanding these extrava-
gances, to which weak and enthufiadeic minds
alone are usually prone, his underdianding, natu-

rally

vigour, and acquired him such great authority in
his own order, as raised him to be their provin-
cial. His reputation for fanAity soon procured
him the office of father-confeffor to queen Ifa-
beila, which he accepted with the utmost reluc-
tance. He preserved in a court the fame aufteri-
ty of manners which had distinguished him in the
cloister. He continued to make all his journies
on foot; he fuibfited only upon alms; his aAs
of mortification were as severe as ever, and his
penances as rigorous. Isabella, pleased with her
choice, conferred on him, not long after, the
archbishopric of Toledo, which, next to the pa-
pacy, is the richest dignity in the church of
Rome. This honour he declined with a firm-
ness, which nothing but the authoritative in-
junaion of the pope was able to overcome. Nor
did this height of promotion change his manners.
Though obliged to display in public that magni-
ficence which became his fiation, he himself re-
tained his monastic feveity. Under his ponti-
fical robes he constantly wore the coarse frock of
St. Francis, the rents in which he ufcd to patch
with his own hands. He at no time used linen;
but was commonly clad in hair-cloth. He slept
always in his habit, most frequently on the
ground, or on boards, rarely in a bed. He did
not tafle any of the delicacies which appeared at
his table, but satisfied himself with that simple
diet which the rule of his order preferibed'.
Notwithitanding these peculiarities, so opposite
to the manners of the world, he poffeffed a tho-

1 Hiftoire de I'adminiftration du Card. Ximen. par Mich.

Baudier, 4t0. 3635. P. 13. P 3 rough

rough knowledge of its affairs; and no sooner
was he called by his itation, and by the high
opinion which Ferdinand and Isabella entertain-
ed of him, to take a principal share in the admi-
nifration, than he displayed talents for business,
which rendered the fame of his wisdom equal to
that of his fanaity. His politichl condua, re-
markable for the boldness and originality of all
his plans, flowed from his real charader, and
partook both of its virtues and its defeas. His
extensive genius fuggefled to him fehemes vas
and magnificent. Conscious of the integrity of
his intentions, he pursued these with unremitting
and undaunted firmness. Accuflomed from his
early youth to mortify his own passions, he Ihew.
ed little indulgence towards those of other men.
Taught by his system of religion to check even
his most innocent desires, he was the enemy of
every thing to which he could affix the name of
elegance or pleasure. Though free from any sis-
picion of cruelty, he discovered, in all his com-
merce with the world, a severe inflexibility of
mind, and austerity of charader, peculiar to the
monadtic profeffion, and which can hardly be
conceived in a country where that is unknown.

Such was the man to whom Ferdinand com-

mitted the regency of Castile ; and though Xi-
menes was then near fourscore, and perfedly ac-
quainted with the labour and difficulty of the of-
fice, his natural intrepidity of mind, and zeal for
the public good, prompted him to accept of it
without hesitation. Adrian ofUtrecht, who had
been sent into Spain a few months before the
death of Ferdinand, produced full powers from
the archdthe to aflisme the name and authority

but such was the aversion of the Spaniards to the
government of a firanger, and so unequal the
abilities of the two competitors, that Adrian's
claim would at once have been rejeAed, if Xi-
menes himself, from complaisance to his new maf-
ter, had not consented to acknowledge him as
regent, and to carry on the government in con-
junaion with him. By this, however, Adrian
acquired a dignity merely nominal. Ximenes,
though he treated him with great decency, and
even refpea, retained the whole power in his
own hands "l

The cardinal's first care was to observe the

motions of the infant Don Ferdinand, who, hav-
ing been flattered with so near a profped of fn-
preme power, bore the disappointment of his
hopes with greater impatience than a prince at a
period of life so early could have been supposed
to feel. Ximenes, under pretence of providing
more effeaually for his safety, removed him from
Gaudaloupe, the place in which he had been
educated, to Madrid, where he fixed the refi-
deuce of the court. There he was under the
cardinal's own eye, and his condud, with that
of his domeftics, was watched with the utmost at-
tention ".

The first intelligence he received from the

Low-Countries, gave greater disquiet to the car-
dinal, and convinced him how difficult a talk it
would be to condud the affairs of an unexpe-

m Gometius de reb. gest. Ximenii, p. zSo. fol. Compl.

3569.

n Miniana Contin. Marianw, lib. 1. c. a. Baudier, Hist.

dA Ximeees, p. I18>

ricnced

unacquainted with the laws and manners of
Spain. No sooner did the account of Ferdi-
nand's death reach Brussels, than Charles, by
the advice of his Flemish minilers, resolved to
assume the title of king. By the laws of Spain,
the sole right to the crowns, both of Castile and
of Aragon, belonged to Joanna; and though
her infirmities disqualified her from governing,
this incapacity had not been declared by any public
ad of the Cortes in either kingdom: so that the
Spaniards considered this resolution, not only as
a dired violation of their privileges, but as an
unnatural usurpation in a son on the prerogatives
of a mother, towards whom, in her present un-
happy situation, he manifested a less delicate re-
gard than her fubjeds had always expressed .
The Flemish court, however, having prevailed
both on the pope and on the emperor to address
Jetters to Charles as king of Castile; the former
of whom, it was pretended, had a right, as head
of the church, and the latter, as head of the em-
pire, to confer this title; infrudions were sent
to Ximenes, to prevail on the Spaniards to ac-
knowledge it. Ximenes, though he had earnest-
ly remonfirated against the measure, as no less
unpopular than unnecessary, resolved to exert
pll his authbrity and credit in carrying it into ex,
ecution, and immediately assembled such of the
nobles as were then at court. What Charles re-
quired was laid before them; and when, instead
of complying with his demands, they began to
murmur againit such an unprecedented encroach-
ment on their privileges, and to talk high of the

? P. Mart. Ep. 36S.

rights

rights of Joanna, and their oath of allegiance to
her, Ximenes hastily interposed, and, with that
firm and decisive tone which was natural to him,
told them that they were not called now to deli-
berate, but to obey: that their sovereign did not
apply to them for advice, but expeted fubmif-
sion; and " this day," added he, " Charles ihall
be proclaimed king of Castile in Madrid; and the
reft of the cities, I doubt not, will follow its ex-
ample." On the spot he gave orders for that pur-
pofeP [Aprili 3]; andnotwithftandingthenovelty
of the praEtice, and the secret difcontents of many
persons of dizinaion, Charles's title was univer-
sally recognized. In Aragon, where the privi-
leges of the fubjea were more extensive, and the
abilities as well as authority of the archbishop of
Saragossa, whom Ferdinand had appointed re-
gent, were far inferior to those of Ximenes, the
Lame obfequionfnefs to the will of Charles did
not appear, nor was he acknowledged there un-
der any other charader but that of prince until
his arrival in Spain I.

Ximenes, though poffeffed only of delegated

power, which, from his advanced age, he could
not exped to enjoy long, assumed, together with
the charader of regent, all the ideas natural to a
monarch, and adopted schemes for extending the
regal authority, which he pursued with as much
intrepidity and ardour, as if he himself had been
to reap the advantages resulting from their fuc-
cefa. The exorbitant privilkges of the Castilian
nobles circumscribed the prerogative of the prince
within tSery narrow limits. These privileges the

p Gometius, p. i52, &c. Eaudier, Hilt. de Xirnen. p.

z:2. q P. Mart. Ep* 57Z.

from the crown, and determined to abridge them.
Dangerous as the attempt was, there were cir-
cumftances in his situation, which promifcd him
greater success than any king of Castile could
have expeaed. His ftrit and prudent ceconomy
of his archiepiscopal revenues furnished him with
more ready money than the crown could at any
time command; the fanaity of his manners, his
charity and munificence, rendered him the idol
of the people; and the nobles themselves, not
fufpeding any danger from him, did not observe
his motions with the fame jealous attention, as
they would have watched those of one of their
monarchs.

Immediately upon his accefion to the regency,

several of the nobles, fancying that the reins of
government would of consequence be somewhat
relaxed, began to assemble their vassals, and to
prosecute, by force of arms, private quarrels and
pretensions, which the authority of Ferdinand
had obliged them to dissemble, or to relinquish.
But Ximenes, who had taken into pay a good
body of troops, opposed and defeated all their
designs with unexpeded vigour and facility; and
though he did not treat the authors of these dif-
orders with any cruelty, he forced them to a6s
of submission, extremely mortifying to the haugh-
ty spirit of Caflilian grandees.

But while the cardinal's attacks were confined

to individuals, and every aa of rigour was jufti-
fled by the appearance of neceflity, founded (on
the forms ofjuioice, and tempered with a mixture
of lenity, there was fearcely room for jealousy or
complaint. It was not so with his next measure,

which,

nobility, gave a general alarm to the whole order.
By the feudal conititution, the military power
was lodged in the hands of the nobles, and men
of an inferior condition were called into the field
only as their vassals, and to follow their banners.
A king, with scanty revenues, and a limited pre-
rogative, depended on these potent barons, in all
his operations. It was with their forces he at-
tacked his enemies, and with them he defended
his kingdom. While at the head of troops at-
tached warmly to their own immediate lords, and
accustomed to obey no other commands, his au-
thority was precarious, and his efforts feeble.
From this fiate Ximenes resolved to deliver the
crown; and as mercenary standing armses were
unknown under the feudal government,and would
have been odious to a martial and generous peo-
ple, he issued a proclamation, commanding every
city in Caftileto enroll a certain number of its
burgesses, in order that they might be trained to
the use of arms on Sundays and holidays; he en-
gaged to provide officers to command them at
the public expence; and as an encouragement to
the private men, promised them an exemption
from all taxes and impositions. The frequent
incursions of the Moors from Africa, and the ne-
ceffity of having some force always ready to op-
pose them, furnished a plausible pretence for this
innovation. The objed really in view was to fe-
cure the king a body of troops independent of
his barons, and which might serve to counterba-
lance their powerr. The nobles were not flow
in perceiving what was his intention, and saw
r Minaans Coninnuatis Marian9, fol Hag. 1733. P. 3.

how

ed would accomplish his end; but as a measure
which had the pious appearance of resisting the
progrefa of the infidels was extremely popular,
and as any opposition to it, arising from their or-
der alone, would have been imputed wholly to
interested motives, they endeavoured to excite the
cities themselves to refuse obedience, and to in-
veigh against the proclamation as inconfafent
with their charters and privileges, In confe.
quence of their infligationa, Burgos, Valladolid,
and several other cities, rose in open mutiny.
Some of the grandees declared themselves their
prote61ors. Violent remonferances were present-
ed to the king. His Flemish counfeliors were
alarmed. Ximenes alone continued firm and un-
daunted ; and partly by terror, partly by entrea-
ty; by force in some inflances, and by forbear-
ance in others; he prevailed on all the refradory
cities to complys. During his adminjifration,
he continued to execute his plan with vigour;
but soon after his death it was entirely dropped.

His success in this scheme for reducing the

exorbitant power of the nobility, encouraged him
to attempt a diminution of their poffeffions,
which were no less exorbitant. During the con-
tefls and disorders inseparable from the feudal
government, the nobles, ever attentive to their
own interest, and taking advantage of the weak-
ness or difirefs of their monarchs, had seized
forse parts of the royal demefnes, obtained grants
of others, and having gradually wrefited almolt
the whole out of the hands of the prince, had
annexed them to their own eflates. The titles,

s P. Mart. yp. 556, &c. Gometius, p. z60, &c.

were extremely defetive; it was from some fuc-
cefsful usurpation, which the crown had been too
feeble to dispute, that many derived their only
claim to poffeffion. An inquiry carried back to
the origin of these encroachments, which were
almost cokval with the feudal system, was im-
pra&icable; and as it would have firipped every
nobleman in Spain of great part of his lands, it
must have excited a general revolt. Such a fitep
was too bold, even for the enterprising genius of
Ximenes. He confined himself to the reign of
Ferdinand; and beginning with the pensions
granted during that time, refused to make any
farther payment, because all right to them ex-
pired with his life. He then called to account
such as had acquired crown lands under the ad-
ministration of that monarch, and at once re-
fumed whatever lie had alienated. The effeas
of these revocations extended to many persons of
high rank; for though Ferdinand was a prince
of little generosity, yet he and Isabella having
been raised to the throne of Castile by a poxverful
fadion of the nobles, they were obliged to re-
ward the zeal of their adherents with great libe-
rality, and the royal demefues were their only
fund for that purpose. The addition made to
the revenue of the crown by these revocations,
together with his own frugal mconomy, enabled
Ximenes not only to discharge all the debts
which Ferdinand had left, and to remit confider-
able sums to Slanders, but to pay the officers of
his new militia, and to establish magazines not
only more numerous, but better furnished with
artillery, arms, and warlike flores, than Spain

VOL. 55.  had

dent and difinterefited application of these sums,
was a full apology to the people for the rigour
with which they were exaded.

The nobles, alarmed at these repeated attacks,

began to think of precautions for the safety of
their order. Many cabals were formed, loud
complaints were uttered, and desperate refolu-
tions taken; but before they proceeded to extre-
mities, they appointed some of their number to
examine the powers in consequence of which the
cardinal exercised ads of such high authority.
The admiral of Cafitle, the duke de Infantado,
and the Cond6 de Benevento, grandees of the
firit rank, were entrusted with this commilfion.
Ximenes received them with cold civility, and in
anfvwer to their demand, produced the testament
of Ferdinand by which he was appointed regent,
together with the ratification of that deed by
Charles. To both these they objeaed; and he
endeavoured to establish their validity. As the
conversation grew warm, he led them insensibly
towards a balcony, from which they had a view
o F a large body of troops under arms, and of a
formidable train of artillery. " Behold," says he,
pointing to these and raising his voice, "( the
powers which I have received from his Catholic
majesty. With these I govern Castile; and with
these I will govern it, until the king your maiter
and mine takes poffeflion of his kingdom '." A
declaration so bold and haughty silenced them,
and astonished their associates. To take arms
againit a man aware of his danger, and prepared

i Flechier Vie de Ximen. ii. 6co.
u Flech. ii. 555. Feraras, Hill. viii. 433.

-I

6f~lU321 -'tic-d~ ~ewstm~aLee

6 *r

didate. Ali thoughts of a general confederacy
againit the cardinal's administration were laid
aside; and except from some flight commotions,
excited by the private resentment of particular
noblemen, the tranquillity of Caflile fuffered no
interruption.

It was not only from the opposition of the

Spanish nobility that obitacles arose to the execu-
tion of the cardinal's schemes; he had a conflant
fitruggle to maintain with the Flemilh ministers,
who, presuming upon their favour with the young
king, aimed at direAing the affairs of Spain, as
well as those of their own country. Jealous of
the great abilities and independent spirit of Xi-
menes, they considered him rather as a rival who
might circumscribe their power, than as a mi-
niffer, who by his prudence and vigour was add-
ing to the grandeur and authority of their maiter.
Every complaint against his administration was
listened to with pleasure by the courtiers in the
Low-Countries. Unnecessary obifruftions were
thrown by their means in the way of all his mea-
fures; and though they could not, either with
decency or safety, deprive him of the office of
regent, they endeavoured to lessen his authority
by dividing it. They soon discovered that Adrian
of Utrecht, already joined with him in office, had
neither genius nor spirit fufficient to give the least
check to his proceedings; and therefore Charles,
by their advice, added to the commission of re-
gency La Chats, a Flemilh gentleman, and after-
wards Ameritorf, a nobleman of Holland; the
former distinguished for' his address, the latter
for his firmness. Ximenes, though no firanger

E 3 tQ

tiers, received these new associates with all the
external marks of diflinAion due to the office
with whicn they were inveied; but when they
came to enter upon business, he abated nothing of
that air of superiority with which he had treated
Adrian, and fdill retained the sole direaion of
affairs. The Spaniards, more averse, perhaps,than
any other people, to the government of fitrangers,
approved of all his efforts to preserve his own
authority., Even the nobles, influenced by this
national pafflion, and forgetting their jealousies
and difcontents, chose rather to fee the supreme
power in the hands of one of their countrymen,
whom they feared, than in those of foreigners,
whom they hated.

Ximenes, though engaged in such great schemes

of domestic policy, and embarrassed by the ar-
tifices and intrigues of the Flemish minilters, had
thehburden of two foreign wars to support. The
one was in Navarre, which was invaded by its
unfortunate monarch, John d'Albret, The
death of Ferdinand, the absence of Charles, the
discord and difaffeacion which reigned among
the Spanish nobles, seemed to present him with
a favourable opportunity of recovering his do-
minions. The cardinal's vigilance, however,
defeated a measure so well concerted. As he
foresaw the danger to which that kingdom might
be exposed, one of his firit aas of adminifcra-
lion was to order thither a considerable body of
troops. While the king was employed with one
part of his army in the siege of St. Jean Pied en
Port, Villalva, an officer of great experience and
courage, attacked the other by surprise, and cut

precipitation, and an end was put to the war x.
But as Navarre was filled at that time with towns
and cafiles slightly fortified, and weakly garri-
foned, which being unable to resist an enemy,
served duly to furnilh him with places of retreat;
Ximenes, always bold and decisive in his mea-
fures, ordered every one of these to be difman-
tied, except Pampeluna, the fortifications of
which he proposed to render very Uirong. To
this uncommon precaution Spain owes the
poffeffion of Navarre. The French, since that
period, have often entered, and have as often
overrun the open country; while they were ex-
posed to all the inconveniencies attending an
invading army, the Spaniards have easily drawn
troops from the neighbouring provinces to ops
pose them; and the French having no place of any
itrength to which they could retire, have been
obliged repeatedly to abandon their conqueR with
as much rapidity as they gained it.

The other war which he carried on in Africa,

againit the famous adventurer Horuc Barbarossa,
who, from a private corsair, raised himself, by
his singular valour and address, to be king of
Algiers and Tunis, was far from being equally
fiuefsful. The ill condua of the Spanish ge.
peral, and the rash valour of his troops, presented
Barbarossa with an easy viaory. Many perished
in the battle, more in the retreat, and the re-
mainder returned into Spain covered with infa-
my. The magnanimity, however, with which
the cardinal bore this disgrace, the only one he
experienced during his administration, added new

z P. Mart. Ep. 5o7

y iuftrv

temper under a disappointment, was not expeaed
from a man so remarkable for the eagerness and
impatience with which he urged on the execution
ns all his schemes.

This disaster was soon forgotten; while the

condua of the Flemish court proved the cause of
conflant uneasiness, not only to the cardinal,
but to the whole Spaniih nation. All the great
qualities of Chievres, the prime minister and fa-
vourite of the young king, were sullied with an
ignoble and sordid avarice. The acceflion of his
master to the crown of Spain, opened a new and
copious source for the gratification of this pas-
sion. During the time of Charles's residence in
Slanders, the whole tribe of pretenders to of-
fices or to favour resorted thither. They soon
discovered that, without the patronage of
Chievres, it was vain to hope for preferment;
nor did they want sagacity to find out the prop
per method of securing his protedion. Great
sums of money were drawn out of Spain. Every
thing was venal, and disposed of to the highest
bidder. After the example of Chierres, the
inferior Flemiih ministers engaged in this traffic,
which became as general and avowed, as it was
infamous ". The Spaniards were filled with rage
when they beheld offices of great importance to
the welfare of their coulitry, set to sale by
thrangers, unconcerned for its honour or its
happiness. Ximenes, difinterefied in this whole
administration, and a stranger, from his native
grandeur of mind, to the pafion of avarice,

Y Cometius, lib. vi. p. 579.
SMinaians3, Contin, I, i. c. 2.

inveighed

venality of the Flemings. He represented to
the king, in firong terms, the murmurs and
indignation which their behaviour excited among
a free and high-fpirited people, and besought him
to set out without loss of time for Spain, that,
by his presence, he might dissipate the clouds
which were gathering all over the kingdom a*

Charles was fully sensible that he had delayed

too long to take poffeffion of his dominions sn
Spain. Powerful obitacles, however, stood in
his way, and detained him in the Low-Countries.
The war which the league of Cambray had
kindled in Italy, 11ill fubfified; though during
its course, the armies of all the parties engaged
in it had changed their destination and their
objeds. France was now in alliance with Ve-
nice, which it had at firif combined to destroy.
Maximilian and Ferdinand had for some years
carried on hostilities against France, their original
ally,to the valour of whofc troops the confederacy
had been indebted in a great measure for its
success. Together with his kingdoms, Ferdinand
transmitted this war to his grandson; and there
was reason to expea that Maximilian, always
fond of new enterprises, would persuade the
young monarch to enter into it with ardour.
But the Flemings, who had long poffeffed an
extensive commerce, which, during the league of
Cambray, had grown to a great height upon the
ruins of the Venetian trade, dreaded a rupture
with France; and Chievres, sagacious to discern
the true interefc of his country, and not warped
on this occasion by his love of wealth, warmly

a P. !fart, Ep. 576 d declared

nation. Francis I. deititute of allies, and soli.
citous to secure his late conquests in Italy by a
treaty, listened with joy to the firit overtures of
accommodation. Chievres himself conduaed the
negotiation in the name of Charles. Gouffier
appeared as plenipotentiary for Francis. Each
of them had presided over the education of the
prince whom he represented. They had both
adopted the fame pacific fyfitem; and were equally
persuaded that the union of the two monarchs
was the happiest event for tlhemfelves, as well as
for their kingdoms. In such hands the negoti.
ation did not languish. A few days after open-
ing their conferences at Noyon, they concluded
a treaty of confederacy and mutual defence be.
tween the two monarchs LAug. 13, i5i6] ; the
chief articles in which were, that Francis ihould
give in marriage to Charles his eldest daughter,
the princess Louise, an infant of a year old, and
as her dowry, should make over to him all his
claims and pretensions upon the kingdom of Na-
ples; that, in consideration of Charles's being
already in poffefflion of Naples, he should, until
the accomplilhment of the marriage, pay an
hundred thousand crowns a year to the French
king; and the half of that fum annually, as
long as the princess had no children; that when
Charles Ihall arrive in Spain, the heirs of the
king of Navarre may represent to him their right
to that kingdom ; and if, after examining their
claim, he does not give them fatisfaltion, Francis
hall be at liberty to assist them with all his forcesh,

b e nard Recuel des Taites lon. ii. 61. Ths

cis, but obliged Maximilian, who was unable
alone to cope with the French and Venetians, to
enter into a treaty with those powers, which put
a final period to the bloody and tedious war that
the league ofCambrayhad occasioned. Europe
enjoyed a few years of universal tranquillity, and
was indebted for that blessing to two princes,
whole rivalihip and ambition kept it in perpetual
lifcord and agitation during the remainder of
their reigns.

By the treaty of Noyon, Charles secured a

safe passage into Spain. It was not, however,
'the intereit of his Flemish ministers, that he
should visit that kingdom soon. While he re-
4ided in Slanders, the revenues of the Spaniih
crown were spent there, and they engrossed,
without any competitors, all the effed1s of their
monarch's generosity; their country became the
feat of government, and all favours were dipenfed
by them. Of all these advantages they run the
rifque of feeing themselves deprived, from the
moment that their sovereign entered Spain.
The Spaniards would naturally assume the direc.
tion of their own affairs; the Low-Countries
would be considered only as a province of that
mighty monarchy; and they who now distributed
the favours of the prince to others, mufL then be
content to receive them from the hands of
ifrangers. But what Chievres chiefly wished to
avoid was, an interview between the king and
Ximenes. On the one hand, the wisdom, the
integrity, and the magnanimity of that prelate,
gave him a wonderful ascendant over the minds
of men; and it was extremely probable, that these

great

great qualities, added to the reverence due to his
age and office, would command the refpe6+ of a
young prince, who, capable of noble and gene.
rous sentiments himself, would, in proportion to
his admiration of the cardinal's virtues, lessen his
deference towards persons of another charader.
Or, on the other hand, if Charles should allow
his Flemiih favourites to retain all the influence
over his councils which they at present poffeffed,
it was easy to foresee that the cardinal would
remonfirate loudly against such an indignity to
the Spaniih nation, and vindicate the rights of
his country with the fame intrepidity and fuc.
cess, with which he had asserted the prerogatives
of the crown. For these reasons, all his Flemish
counsellors combined to retard his departure;
and Charles, unfufpicious, from want of experi-
ence, and fond of this native c~ountry, fuffered
himself to be unnecessarily detained in the Ne-
therlands a whole year after figniug the treaty
of Noyon.

5517.] The repeated entreaties of Ximenes,

the advice of his grandfather Maximilian, and
the impatient murmurs of his Spanish fubjeas,
prevailed on him at last to embark. He was at-
tended not only by Chievres, his prime miniffer,
but by a numerous and splendid train of the
Flemish nobles, fond of beholding the grandeur,
or of sharing in the bounty of their prince.
After a dangerous voyage, he landed at Villa
Viciofa, in the province of Asturias [Sept. 13],
and was received with such loud acclamations of
joy, as a new monarch, whose arrival was so ar-
dently desired, had reason to expea. The Spa.
nifh nobility resorted to th<ir sovereign from

all

nificence which the Flemings were unable to
emulate C.

Ximenes, who considered the presence of the

king as the greatest blessing to his dominions,
was advancing towards the coast, as fast as the
infirm Hate of his health would permit, in order
to receive him. During his regency, and not-
withfitanding his extreme old age, he had abated,
in no degree, the rigour or frequency of his mor-
tifications ; and to these he added such laborious
assiduity in business, as would have worn Out the
most youthful and vigorous constitution. Every
day he employed several hours in devotion; he
celebrated mass in person; he even allotted some
space for fudy. Notwithstanding these occu-
pations, he regularly attended the council; he
received and read all papers presented to him;
he didated letters and infiruaions; and took
under his infpeaion all bufsnefs, civil, ecciefi-.
aftical, or military. Every moment of his time
was filled up with some serious employment.
The only amusement in which he indulged him-
self, by way of relaxation after business, was to
canvals, with a few friars, and other divines,
fume intricate article in scholastic theology.
Wasted by such a course of life, the infirmities
of age daily grew upon him. On his journey,
a violent disorder seized him at B6s Equillos,
attended with uncommon symptoms, which his
followers considered as the effeA of poison d, but
could not agree whether the crime ought to be
imputed to the hatred of the Spanish nobles, or

c P. Mart. Ep. 599. 60o.
d Miniani, Contia. lib. i. c. 3.

cident obliging him to flop short, he wrote to
Charles, and with his usual boldness advised him,
to difmrifs all the ifrangers in his train, whose
numbers and credit gave offence already to the
Spaniards, and would ere long alienate the affec-
tions of the whole people. *At the fame time
he earnefily desired to have an interview with
the king, that he might inform him of the slate
of the nation, and the temper of his fubjets.
To prevent this, not only the Flemings, but the
Spanish grandees, employed all their address, and
industriously kept Charles at a diflance from
Aranda, the place to which the cardinal had re-
Inoved. Through their fuggeitions, every mea-
sure that he recommended was rejeaed; the
utmost care was taken to make him feel, and to
point out to the whole nation, that his power
was on the decline ; even in things purely trivial,
such a choice was always made, as was deemed
most difagrecable to him. Ximenes did not hear
this treatment with his usual fortitude of spirit.
Conscious of his own integrity and merit, hie
expedted a more gratefil return from a prince,
to whom he delivered a kingdom more flourilb-
ing than it had been in any former age, toge.
ther with authority more extensive and better
eitablitbed than the mofe illufirions of his an-
ceftors had ever poffeffed. He could nof, there-
fore, on many occasions, refrain from giving vent
to his indignation and complaimts. He lamented
the fate of his country, and foretold the cala-
mities which it would fuffer from the insolence,
the rapacioufneis, and ignorance of firangers.
While his mind was agitated by these passions,

be

after a few cold and formal exprefflons of re-
gard, he was allowed to retire to his diocese;
that after a life of such continued labour, he
might end his days in tranquillity. This message
proved fatal to Ximenes. His haughty mind,
it is probable, could not survive disgrace; per-
haps his generous heart could not bear the pro-
fpea of the misfortunes ready to fall on his
country. Whichsoever of these opinions we em-
brace, certain it is that he expired a few hours
after reading the letter e [Nov. 8]. The variety,
the grandeur, and the success of his schemes,
during a regency of only twenty months, leave
it doubtful, whether his sagacity in council, his
prudence in condua, or his boldness in execu-
tion, deserve the greatent praise. His reputation
is dill high in Spain, not only for wisdom, but
for fanAity; and he is the only prime minister
mentioned in history, whom his contemporaries
reverenced as a faint , and to whom the pdople
under his government ascribed the power of work-
ing miracles.

1558] Soon after the death of Ximenes,

Charles made his public entry, with great pomp,
into Valladolid, whither he had fumimoned the
Cortes of Castile. Though he assumed on all
occasions the name of king, that title had
never been acknowledged in the Cortes. The
Spaniards considering Joanna as poffeffed of the
sole right to the crown, and no example of a
fun's having enjoyed the title of king during the

e Marfollier, Vie de Ximeneu, p. 447. Gomerius,

ljib. vii. p. zo6, &c. Baudier, HiR. de Ximea, p. aoe.

f Flkchier, Vie de Xim;Pa ii. p. 746.
VOL. II. life

Cortes discovered all that ferupulous refpeA for
ancient forms, and that aversion to innovation,
which are conspicuous in popular assemblies.
The presence, however, of their prince, the ad
dress, the artifices, and the threats of his mini-
flers, prevailed on them at lad to proclaim him
king, in conjundion with his mother, whose
name they appointed to be placed before that of
her son, in all public aas. But when they made
this conceflion, they declared, that if, at any
future period, Joanna Lhould recover the exercile
of reason, the whole royal authority mhould
return into her hands. At the fame time, they
voted a free gift of fix hundred thousand ducats,
to be paid in three years, a fum more confider-
able than had ever been granted to any former
monarch g.

Notwithflanding this. obsequiousness of the,

Cortes to the will of the king, the modt violent
symptoms of diffatisfadion with his government
began to break out in the kingdom. Chievres
had acquired over the mind of the young mo-
narch the ascendant, not only of a tutor, but of
aparent. Charles seemed to have no sentiments
but those which his miniffer inspired, and fearce-
ly uttered a word but what he put into his
mouth. He was conflantly surrounded by Flem-
lngs; no person got access to him without their
permission; nor was any admitted to audience
but in their presence. As he ipoke the Spanish
language very imperfeily, his answers were al-
ways extremely fIho t, and often delivered with

g Miniana, Contin. lib. i. E. 3 P. Mart. Ep. 608.

Sandov. p. rz.

helitation.

of the Spaniards were led to believe, that he was
a prince of a flow and narrow genius. Some
pretended to discover a strong resemblance be-
tween him and his mother, and began to whisper
that his.capacity for government would never be
far superior to hers; and though they who had
the bedt opportunity of judging concerning his
charader, maintained, that notwithstanding such
unpromising appearances, he poffeffed a large
fund of knowledge, as well as of sagacity h; yet
all agreed in condemning his partiality towards
the Flemings, and his attachment to his favou-
rites, as unreasonable and immoderate. Unfor-
tunately for Charles, these favourites were un-
worthy of his confidence. To amass wealth
seems to have been their only aim: and as they
had reason to fear, that either their maiter's good
sense, or the indignation of the Spaniards, might
soon abridge their power, they hastened to im-
prove the present opportunity, and their avarice
was the more rapacious, because they expeaed
their authority to be of no long duration. All
honours, offices, and benefices, were either en-
grossed by the Flemings, or publicly fold by
them. Chievres, his wife, and Sauvage, whom
Charles, on the death of Ximenes, had impru-
<4ently raised to be chancellor of Castile, vied
with each other in all the refinements of extor-
tion and venality. Not only the Spanish hifto-
rians, who, from resentment, may be fufpeded
of exaggeration, but Peter Martyr Angleria, an
Italian, who resided at that time in the court of

h Sandoval, P. S3. P. Mart. Ep. 655.

a 2 Spain,

Spain, and who was under no temptation to de-
ceive the persons to whom his letters are addressed,
give a defeription which is .almost incredible, of
the insatiable and Shameless covetousness of the
Flemings. According to Angleria's calculation,
which he asserts to be extremely moderate, they
remitted into the Low-Countries, in the space of
ten months, no less a fum than a million and one
hundred thousand ducats. The nomination of
William de Croy, Chievres' nephew, a young
man not of canonical age, to the archbishopric of
Toledo, exasperated the Spaniards more than all
these exaations. They considered the elevation
of a fdranger to the head of their church, and to
the richest benefice in the kingdom, not only as
an injury, but as an insult to the whole nation;
both clergy and laity, the former from intereil,
the latter from indignation, joined in exclaiming
against iti.

Charles leaving Castile thus disgusted with

his adminjifration, set out for Saragossa, the
capital of Aragon, that he might be present in
the Cortes of that kingdom. On his way thi-
ther, he took leave of his brother Ferdinand,
whom he sent into Germany on the pretence of
visiting their grandfather, Maximilian, in his
old age. To this prudent precaution, Charles
owed the preservation of his Spanish domi-
nions.. IDuring the violent commotions which
arose there soon after this period, the Spani-
ards would infallibly have offered the crown to
a prince, who was the darling of the whole
nation; nor did Ferdinand want ambition,

SSandoval, z8-3> P. Mart. Ep. 608. 611. 613, 614.

622, 623. 639. Miniana, Contin. lib. i. c. 3. p. 8.

accept of the offer k.

The Aragonefe had not hitherto acknowledged

Charles as king, nor would they allow the Cortes
to be affenibled in his name, but in that of the
Juftiza, to whom, during an interregnum, this
privilege belonged'. The opposition Charles
had to druggle with in the Cortes of Aragon,
was inare violent and obstinate than that which
he had overcome in Castile; after long delays,
however, and with much difficulty, he persuaded
the members to confer on him the title of king,
in conjun&ion with his mother. At the fame
time he bound himself by that solemn oath, which
the Aragonefe exaded of their kings, never to
violate any of their rights or liberties. When a
donative was demanded, the members were ftll
more intradable; many months elapsed before
they would agree to grant Charles two hundred
thonfand ducats, and that fum they appropriated
so firirly for paying debts of the crown, which
had long been forgotten, that a very small part
of it came into the king's hands. What had
happened in Castile taught them caution, and
determined them rather to satisfy the claims of
their fellow-citizens, how obsolete soever, than
to furnish strangers the means of enriching them-
selves with the spoils of their country m.

During these proceedings of the Cortes, am-

baffadors arrived at Saragossa from Francis I. and
the young king of Navarre, demanding the refti-
tution of that kingdom in terms of the treaty of

I P. Mart. Ep. 6x9. Ferreras, vii. 460.
1 p. Mart. Ep. 605. m P. Mart. Ep. 655-634*

F 3 Noyon.

Noyon. But neither Charles, nor the Castilian
nobles whom he consulted on this occasion, disco-
vered any inclination to part with this acquisition.
A conference held soon after at Montpelier, in
order to bring this matter to an amicable issue,
was altogether fruitless; while the French urged
the injustice of the usurpation, the Spaniards were
attentive only to its importance ".

1519] From Aragon Charles proceeded to

Catalonia, where he waited as much time, en-
countered more difficulties, and gained less mo-
ney. The Flemings were now become so odious
in every province of Spain by their exaaions,
that the desire of mortifying them, and of difap-
pointing their avarice, augmented the jealousy
with which a free people usually condud their
deliberations.

The Caftilians, who had felt most sensibly the

weight and rigour of the oppressive schemes car-
ried on by the Flemings, resolved no longer to
vubmit with a tameness fatal to themselves, and
which rendered them the objeas of scorn to their
fellow fubjeas in the other kingdoms, of which
the Spaniih monarchy was composed. Segovia,
Toledo, Seville, and several other cities of the
first rank, entered into a confederacy for the de-
fence of their rights and privileges; and notwith.
fhanding the silence of the nobility, who, on this
occasion, discovered neither the public spirit,
nor the resolution, which became their order, the
confederates laid before the king a full view of
the slate of the kingdom, and of the mal-admi-
nifiration of his favourites. The preferment of

SP. Martyr, Ep. 605, 633 640.

firangers,

the increase of taxes, were the grievances of
which they chiefly complained; and of these they
demanded redress with that boldness which is na-
tural to a free people. These remonfirances,
presented at firr at Saragossa, and renewed as-
terwards at Barcelona, Charles treated with great
negle&. The confederacy, however, of these
cities, at this junaure, was the beginning of that
famous union among the commons of Catile,
which not long after threw the kingdom into fisch
violent convulsions as {hook the throne, and al-
most overturned the conRitution 0

Soon after Char-les's arrival at Barcelona, he

received the account of an event which interested
him much more than the murmurs of the Caf-
tilians, or the scruples of the Cortes of Catalonia.
This was the death of the emperor Maximilian
[Jan. 12]; an occurrence of small importance in
itfeif, for he was a prince conspicuous neither for
his virtues, nor his power, nor his abilities; but
rendered by its consequences more memorable
than any that had happened during several ages.
It broke that profound and universal peace which
then reigned in the Christian world; it excited a
rivalihip between two princes, which threw all
Europe into agitation, and kindled wars more
general, and of longer duration, than had hitherto
been known in modern times.

The revolutions occasioned by the expedition

of the French king, Charles VIII. into Italy,
had inspired the European princes with new
ideas concerning the importance of the Imperial

? P. Martyr, Ep. 630. Ferreras, viii. 464.

dignity.

dignity. The claims of the empire upon some
of the Italian fiates were numerous; its jurifdie.
tion over others was extensive; and though the
former had been almoit abandoned, and the latter
seldom exercised, under princes of slender abilities
and of little influence, it was obvious, that in the
hands of an emperor poffeffed of power or of ge-
nius, they might be employed as engines for
stretching his dominion over the greater part of
that country. Even Maximilian, feeble and un-
steady as his condud always was, had availed
himself ofthe imfinite pretensions of the empire,
and had reaped advantage from every war and
every negotiation in Italy during his reign.
These considerations, added to the dignity of the
flation, confeffedly the first among Christian
princes, and to the rights inherent in the office,
which, if exerted with vigour, were far from be-
ing inconsiderable, rendered the Imperial crown
more than ever an objea of ambition.

Not long before his death, Maximilian had dif-

covered great solicitude to preserve this dignity
in the Auirian family, and to procure the king
of Spain to be chosen his successor. But he himself
having never been crowned by the pope, a cere-
many deemed essential in that age, was considered
only as emperor elet. Though historians have
not attended to that diftinaion, neither the Ita-
lian nor German chancery bellowed any other
title upon him than that of king of the Romans;
and no example occurring in history of any perfon's
being chosen a successor to a king of the Romans,
the Germans, always tenacious of their forms,
and unwilling to confer upon Charles an office
for which their constitution knew no name, ob-

fbinately

point P.

By his death, this difficulty was at once re-

moved, and Charles openly aspired to that digni-
ty which his grandfather had attempted, with-
out success, to secure for him. At the fame
time, Francis I. a powerful rival, entered the
lifts againit him; and the attention of all Europe
was fixed upon this competition, no less illufdri-
ous from the high rank of the candidates, than
from the importance of the prize for which they
contended. Each of them urged his pretensions
with sanguine expetations, and with no unpro-
mifing profpe& of success. Charles considered
the Imperial crown as belonging to him of right,
from its long continuance in the Austrian line;
he' knew that none of the German princes pof-
sessed power or influence enough to appear as his
antagonist; he flattered himself, that no confider-
ation would induce the natives of Germany to
exalt any foreign prince to a dignity, which
during so many ages had been deemed peculiar
to their own nation; and least of all, that they
would confer this honour upon Francis I. the so-
vereign of a people whose genius, and laws, and
manners, differed so widely from those of the
Germans, that it was hardly possible to efiablirh
any cordial union between them; he trusted not
a little to the effea of Maximilian's negotiations,
wvhich, though they did not attain their end, had
prepared the minds of the Germans for his ele-

P GuiccLardini, ib. xili. p. i5. Hiss. Gener. d'Allemagne,

tar P. Balre, tom. viii. part s. p. tot7. P. Heuter. Rer.
.Aui4r. lib. vii. c. 17. 179. jib. viii. C. 2. p. I83.

vation

lied on as a chief recommendation, was the for-
tunate situation of his hereditary dominions in
Germany, which served as a natural barrier to
the empire againhi the encroachments of the
Turkish power. The conquests, the abilities,
and the ambition of Sultan Selim II. had spread
over Europe, at that time, a general and well-
founded alarm. By his vitories over the Mama.
lukes, and the extirpation of that gallant body
of men, he had not only added Egypt and Syria
to his empire, but had secured to it such a de.
gree of internal tranquillity, that he was ready to
turn against Christendom the whole force of his
arms, which nothing hitherto had been able to
resist. The most effetual expedient for flopping
the progress of this torrent, seemed to be the
eleaion of an emperor, poffeffed of extensive ter-
ritories in&that country, where its firfi impreflion
would be felt, and who, besides, could combat
this formidable enemy with all the forces of a
powerful monarchy, and with all the wealth fur.
nifhed by the mines of the new world, or the
commerce of the Low-Countries. These were
the arguments by which Charles publicly sup-
ported his claim; and to men of integrity and
refleaion, they appeared to be not only plausible
but convincing. He did not, however, trust the
success of his cause to these alone. Great fume
of money were remitted from Spain; all the re-
Jinements and artifice of negotiation were em-
ployed; and a considerable body of troops, kept
on foot, at that time, by the slates of the circle
of Suabia, was secretly taken into his pay. The
renal were gained by presents; the objeCtions of

the

some feeble princes were threatened and over-
awed q.

On the other hand, Francis supported his claim.

with equal eagerness, and no less confidence of
its being well founded. His emissaries contended
that it was now high time to convince the princes
of the house of Austria that the Imperial crown
was eleaive, and not hereditary; that other per-
sons might aspire to an honour which their arro-
gance had accustomed them to regard as the pro-
perty of their family; that it required a sovereign
ofmature judgment, and of approved abilities,
to hold the reins of government in a country
where such unknown opinions concerning reli-
gion had been published, as had thrown the minds
of men into an uncommon agitation, which
threatened the most violent effeas; that a young
prince, without experience, and who had hitherto
given no specimens of his genius for command,
was no fit match for Selim, a monarch grown old
in the art of war, and in the course of viaory;
whereas a king, who in his early youth had tri-
umphed over the valour and discipline of the
Swiss, till then reckoned invincible, would be an
antagonist not unworthy the conqueror of the
East; that the fire and impetuosity of the French
cavalry, added to the discipline and stability of
the German infantry, would form an army so ir-
resistible, that, inifead of waiting the approach of
the Ottoman forces, it might carry hostilities
into the heart of their dominions; that the elec-

q Guicc. lib. 13. 159. Sleidan, Hist. of the Reformat,

14.. Struvii Corp. Hist. German, ii. 97. Nst. oo.

tion

tion of Charles would be inconsistent with a fun.
damental. conflitution, by which the person who
holds the crown of Naples is excluded from as-
piring to the Imperial dignity; that his eleva-
tion to that honour would soon kindle a war in
Italy, on account of his pretensions to the duchy
of Milan, the effeas of which could not fail of
reaching the empire, and might prove fatal to
it '. But while the French ambassadors enlarged
upon these and other topics of the fame kind, in
all the courts of Germany, Francis, sensible of
the prejudices entertained againit him as a so-
reigner, unacquainted with the German language
or manners, endeavouredto overcome these, and
to gain the favour of the princes by immense
gifts, and by infinite promises. As the expedi.
tious method of transmitting money, and the de-
cent mode of conveying a bribe, by bills of ex-
change, were then little known, the French am-
baffadors travelled with a train of horses loaded
with treasure, an equipage not very honour-
able for that prince by whom they were em-
ployed, and infamous for those to whom they
were fents.

The other European princes could not remain

indifferent fpeAators of a contest, the decision
of which so nearly affeaed every one of them.
Their common interest ought naturally to have
formed a general combination, in order to difap-
point both competitors, and to prevent either of
them from obtaining such a pre-eminence in

rGucc. lib. 13. r60. Sleid. p. s6. Genr. Sabini de

Ele&. Car. V. Nifturia apud Scardii Script. Rer. German.
vol. ii. p. 4. a Memoires de Iadech. de Fleuranges,
p. 296.

power

power and dignity, as might prove dangerous to
the liberties of Europe. But the ideas with re-
fpe& to a proper didtribution and balance of
power were so lately introduced into the fyfitem
of Enropean policy, that they were not hitherto
objeds of fufficient attention. The passions of
some princes, the want of foresight in others,
and the fear of giving offence to the candidates,
hindered such a salutary union of the powers of
Europe, and rendered them either totally negli-
gent of the public safety, or kept them from ex-
erting themselves with vigour in its behalf.

The Swiss Cantons, though they dreaded the

elevation of either of the contending monarchs,
and though they wished to have seen some prince
whose dominions were less extensive, and whole
power was more moderate, seated on the Impe-
rial throne, were prompted, however, by their
hatred of the French nation, to give an open pre-
ference to the pretensions of Charles, while they
used their utmoil influence to fruitrate those of
Francis t

The Venetians easily discerned, that ht was the

interest of their republic to have both the rivals
set aside; but their jealousy of the house of Auf-
tria, whose ambition and neighbourhood had
been fatal to their grandeur, would not permit
them to ad up to their own ideas, and led them
haitily to give the fanAion of their approbation
to the claim of the French king.

It was equally the interest, and more in the

power of Henry VIII. of England, to prevent
either Francis or Charles from acquiring a dig-

t Sabinus, p. 6.

YOL. 1!. G nity

nity whkch would raise them so far above other
monarchs. But though Henry often boaited
that he held the balance of Europe in his hand,
he had neither the fready attention, the accuiate
Aifcernment, nor the difpaflionate. temper which
that delicate fundtion required. On this occa-
sion it mortified his vanity so much, to think that
he had not entered early into that noble compe.
tition which refleled such honour upon the two
antagonidts, that he took a resolution of sending
an ambassador into Germany, and of declaring
himself a candidate for the Imperial throne. The
ambassador, though loaded with caresses by the
German princes and the pope's nuncio, informed
his matter, that he could hope for no success in
a claim which he had been so late in preferring.
Henry, imputing his disappointment to that cir-
cumfiance alone, and soothed with this oftenta.
tious display of his own importance, seems to
have taken no farther part in the matter, either
by contributing to thwart both his rivals, or to
promote one of them U.

Leo X. a pontiff no less renowned for his po-

litical abilities, than for his love of the arts, was
the only prince of the age who observed the ro-
tions of the two contending monarchs with a
prudent attention, or who discovered a proper
solicitude for the public safety. The Imperial
and papal jurifdi~ion interfered in so many in-
frances, the complaints of usurpation were so nu-
merous on both sides, and the territories of the
church owed their security so little to their own
force, and so much to the weakncfs of the powers

5 Memoires de Fleuranres, 314. Herbert, Hilt. of

Henry VIII. around

the court of Rome as an emperor with extensive
dominions, or of enterpriting genius. Leo trem-
bled at the profpea of beholding the Imperial
crown placed on the head of the king of Spain
and of Naples, and the maiter of the new world;
aor was he less afraid of feeing a king of France,
who was duke of Milan and lord of Genoa, ex-
alted to that dignity. He foretold that the
dedion of either of them would be fatal to the
independence of the holy fee, to the peace of
Italy, and perhaps to the liberties of Europe.
FBut to oppose them with any profpea of success,
required address and caution in proportion to the
greatness of their power, and their opportunities
of taking revenge. Leo was defeEtive in neither.
He secretly exhorted the German princes to
place one of their own number on the Imperial
throne, which many of them were capable of
filling with honour. He put them in mind of
the constitution by which the kings of Naples
were for ever excluded from that dignity x. He
warmly exhorted the French king to persis in
his claim, not from any deiire that he lhould gain
his end, but as he foresaw that the Germans
would be more disposed to favour the king of
Spain, he hoped that Francis himself, when he
discovered his own chance of success to be defpe-
rate, would be flimulated by resentment and the
spirit of rivalfhip, to concur with all his intereit
in raising some third perfop to the head of the
empire; or, on the other hand, if Francis thould
make an unexpeied progress, he did not doubt

SGoldafli .Conflitutiones Imperiales. Francof. 1673.

vo1. i. 459.

cz but

motives to aAt the fame part; and thus, by a
prudent attention, the mutual jealousy of the two
rivals might be so dexterously managed, as to
disappoint both. But this scheme, the only one
which a prince in Leo's situation could adopt,
though concerted with great wisdom, was exe-
cuted with little diferetion. The French ambaf.
fadors in Germany fed -their maiter with vain
hopes; the pope's nuncio, being gained by them,
altogether forgot the infitru<Rions which he had
received; and Francis persevered so long and
with fiuch obstinacy in urging his own pretensions,
as rendered all Leo's measures abortive r.

Such were the hopes of the candidates, and the

views of the different princes, when the diet was
opened according to form at Frankfort [June t7l.
The right of choofsng an emperor had long been
veiled in seven great princes, distinguished by the
name of elelors, the origin of whose office, as
well as the nature and extent of their powers,
have already been explained. These were, at
that time, Albert of Brandenbnrgh, archbishop
of Mentz; Herman count de Wied, archbilhop
ofCologne; Richard de Greiffenklau, archbishop
of Triers; Lewis, king of Bohemia; Lewis,
count palatine of the Rhine; Frederic, duke of
Saxony; and Joachim I. marquis of Branden-
burgh. Notwvithftanding the artfil arguments
produced by the ambafladors of the two kings
in favour of their respective mailers, and in spite
of all their folicitations, intrigues, and presents,
the ele~ors did not forget that maxii on which
the liberty of the German conititution was

y Guicciar. lib. r3. z6s.

houghtt

of the Germanic body, which is a great republic
composed of hates almost independent, the firit
principle of patriotism is to depress and limit the
power of the emperor; and of this idea, so natu-
ral under such a form of g6vernment, a German
politician feldonm loses fight. No prince of con-
fiderable power, or extensive dominions, had for
some ages been raised to the Imperial throne.
To this prudent precaution many of the great
families in Germany owed the splendour and in-
dependence which they had acquired during that
period. To eled either of the contending mo-
narehs, would have been a gross violation of that
salutary maxim; would have given to the empire
a mailer inflead of an head; and would have re-
duced themselves from the rank of being aimoft
his equals, to the condition of his fubjeas.

Full of these ideas, all the elefors turned their

eyes towards Frederic, duke of Saxony, a prince
of such eminent virtue and abilities, as to be dif-
tioguifhed by the name of the Sage, and with one
voice they offered him the Imperial crown. He
was not dazzled with that obje&, which mo-
aarchs, so far superior to him in power, courted
with such eagerness; and after deliberating upon
the matter a short time, he rejeaed it with a
magnanimity and disinterestedness no less singular
than admirable. " Nothing," he observed,
" could be more impolitic, than an obitinate ad-
herence to a maxim which, though found and
just in many cafes, was not applicable to all. In
times of tranquillity (said he) we wish for an
emperor who has not power to invade our liber-
ties; times of danger demand one who is able to

a 3 secure

a gallant and viaorious monarch, are now affem.
bling. They are ready to pour in upon Ger-
many with a violence unknown in former ages.
New conjunaures call for new expedients. The
Imperial sceptre mufl be committed to some hand
more powerful than mine, or that of any other
German prince. We possess neither dominions,
nor revenues, nor authority, which enable us to
encounter such a formidable enemy. Recourse
must be had, in this exigency, to one of the rival
monarchs. Each of them can bring into the
held forces fufficient for our defence. But as
the king of Spain is of German extraaion; as
he is a member and prince of the empire by the
territories which descend to him from his grand-
father; as his dominions fitretch along that fron-
tier which lies molt exposed to the enemy; his
claim is preferable, in my opinion, to that of a
firanger to our language, to our blood, and to
our country; and therefore I give my vote to
confer on him the Imperial crown."

This opinion, didated by such uncommon ge-

nerofity, and supported by arguments so plausible,
made a deep impression on the eledors. The
king of Spain's ambassadors, sensible of the im.
portant service which rrederic had done their
mailer, sent him a considerable fum of money, as
the first token of that prince's gratitude. But
he who had greatness of mind to refuse a crown,
difdained to receive a bribe; and, upon their
entreating that at least he would permit them to
distribute part of that fum among his attendants,
he replied, That he could not prevent them from
accepting what ihould be offered, but whoever

took

morning from his service z.

No prince in Germany could now aspire to a

dignity, which Frederic had declined, for reasons
applicable to them all. It remained to make a
choice between the two great competitors. But
besides the prejudice in Charles's favour arising
from his birth, as well as the situation of his
German dominions, he owed not a little to the
abilities of the cardinal de Gu-k, and the zeal of
Erard de la Mark, bishop of Liege, two of his
ambassadors, who had condutned their negotia.
tions with more prudence and address than those
entrufied by the French king. The former,
who had long been the minister and favourite of
Maximilian, was well acquainted with the art of
managing the Germans; and the latter, having
been disappointed of a cardinal's hat by Francis,

s P. Daniel, an hifforian of conliderable name, seems to

call in quetion the truth of this account of Frederic's be-
haviour in refusing the Imperial crown, becasife it is not
mentioned by Georgius Sabinus in his Hillory of the Eledtion
and Coronation of Charles V. tom. iii. p. 63. But no
great flrees ought to be laid on an omission in a superficial
author, whose treatise, though dignified with the name of
1iflory, contains only such an account of the ceremonial of
Charles's eleaion, as is lifsylly published in Germany on
like occalions Scard. Rer. Germ. Script. v. ii. p. u. The
testimony of Erasmus, lib. 53. epilt. 4. and that of Sleidan,
p. iS. are express. Seckendorf, in his Commentarius Hii-
toricus & Apologeticus de Lutheranifmo, p. iza. has exa-
mined this fa& with his usual induifry, acd has eftabilihed
its truth by the moit undoubted evidence. To these testi-
monies which he has colleled, I may add the decisive one
of cardinal ajetan, the pope's legate at Frarkforr, in his
letter, July 5th, a5i9. Epifires au Princes, &c. recueilles
par Rufelli, tradu;tts par Belforeft. Par..1572. p. 60.

ems

employed all the malicious ingenuity with which
the desire of revenge inspires an ambitious mind,
in thwarting the measures of that monarch. The
Spanish party among the eledors daily gained
ground; and even the pope's nuncio, being con-
vinced that it was vain to make any farther op.
position, endeavoured to acquire some merit with
the future emperor, by offering voluntarily, in
the name of his maller, a dispensation to hold the
Imperial crown in conjunaion with that of Na-
ples'.

On the twenty-eighth day of June, five months

and ten days after the death of Maximilian, this
important contest, which had held all Europe in
fufpence, was decided. Six of the eledors had
already declared for the king of Spain; and the
archbishop of Triers, the only firm adherent to
the French interest, having at last joined his
brethren, Charles was, by the unanimous voice
of the eledoral college, raised to the Imperial
throne b.

But though the eledors consented, from va-

rious motives, to promote Charles to that high
Rlation, they discovered, at the fame time, great
jealousy of his extraordinary power, and endea-
voured, with the utmost solicitude, to provide
againit his encroaching on the privileges of the
Germanic body. It had long been the custom
to demand of every new emperor a confirmation
of these privileges, and to require a promise that
he would never violate them in any initance.

a Freheri Rer. German. Scriptores, vol. i1. 172. cur.

Stuivii Argent. 1717. Gianone Hist. of Naples, 2. 498.

b Jac. Aug. Thuan. lift. (ul Temporis, edit. Julkley1

1ib. 1. c. 9.

Whil

extent of territory, nor of genius, poffeffed the
Imperial throne, a general and verbal engagement
to this purpose was deemed ffificient fecuritv.
But under an emperor so powerful as Charles,
other precautions seemed necessary. A Caitol/a-
tion or claim of right was formed, in which the
privileges and immunities of the eledors, of the
princes of the empire, of the cities, and of every
other member of the Germanic body, are enume-
rated. This caritulation was immediately signed
by Charles's ambassadors in the name of their
mailer, and he himself, at his coronation, con-
firmed it in the moil solemn manner. Since that
period, the eletiors have continued to preferibe
the fame conditions to all his successors; and
the capitulation, or mutual contrast between the
emperor and his fubieas, is considered in Ger-
many as a Tirong barrier againd the progress of
the Imperial power, and as the great charter of
their lIbertiea, to which they often appeal C.

The important intelligence of this eleAion was

conveyed in nine days from Frankfort to Barce-
lona, where Charles was frill detained by the ob-
itinacy of the Catalonian Cortes, which had not
hitherto brought to an issue any of the affairs
which came before it. He received the account
with the joy natural to a young and aspiring
mind, on an acceflion of power and dignity whichi
raised him so far above the other princes of Eu-
rope. Then it was that thsofe vast profpeAs,
which allured him dnring his whole adminiflra-

C Pfeffel Abrigf de P'Hif. de Droit Publique d'Allemagne,
5to. Limnei Cap:tuiat. Imper. Epiftres des Princes par
Ktufcelli, p. 60.

tion,

date the formation, and are able to trace the gra.
dual progress, of a grand fyfitem of enterpriling
ambition, which renders the history of his reign
so worthy of attention.

A trivial circumstance first discovered the es-

feds of this great elevation upon the mind of
Charles. In all the public writs which he now
issued as king of Spain, he aflumed the title of
MajeJy, and required it from his fubjeis as a
mark of their refped. Before that time, all the
monarchs of Europe were satisfied with the ap-
pellation of Highness or Grace; but the vanity of
other courts soon led them to imitate the exam-
ple of the Spanish. The epithet of Majeity is
no longer a mark of pre-eminence. The moit
inconsiderable monarchs in Europe enjoy it, and
the arrogance of the greater potentates has ins
vented no higher denomination d.

The Spaniards were far from viewing the pro-

motion of their king to the Imperial throne with
the fame fatisfadion which he himself felt. To
be deprived of the presence of their sovereign,
and to be fubjeAed to the government of a vice-
roy and his council, a species of adminifdration
often oppressive, and always disagreeable, were
the immediate and necessary consequences of this
new dignity. To fee the blood of their country-
men shed in quarrels wherein the nation had no
concern; to behold its treasures waited in
supporting the splendour of a foreign title; to
be plunged in the chaos of Italian and German
politics, were effeds of this event almost as un-

d Miniana, Contin. Mar. p. 13. Ferreras, viii. 475.

5MIemoires Hi*t. de la Houfaie, tomr i. p* 53, c.

avoidable.

avoidable. From all these considerations, they
concluded, that nothing could have happened
more pernicious to the Spanish nation; and the
fortitude and public spirit of their ancestors,
who, in the Cortes of Castile, prohibited Al-
phonfo the Wife from leaving the kingdom, in
order to receive the Imperial crown, were often
mentionedwith the highest praise, and pronounced
to be extremely worthy of imitation at this junc-
ture e.

But Charles, without regarding the sentiments

or murmurs of his Spanilh fubjeas, accepted of
the Imperial dignity, which the count palatine,
at the head of a solemn embassy, offered him in
the name of the cleaors [November]; and de-
clared his intention of setting out soon for Ger-
many, in order to take poffeflion of it. This
was the more necessary, because, according to
the forms of the German constitution, he could
not, before the ceremony of a public coronation,
exercise any ad of jurifdition or authority f.

Their certain knowledge of this resolution aug-

mented so much the disgust of the Spaniards,
that a sullen and refradory spirit prevailed among
persons of all ranks. The pope having granted
the king the tenths of all ecclesiastical benefices
in Castile, to assist him in carrying on war with
greater vigour against the Turks, a convocation
of the clergy unanimously refused to levy that
fum, upon pretence that it ought never to be
exaded but at those times when Christendom
was adually invaded by the Infidels; and though

e Sandoval, i. p. 32. Miniana, Contin. p. i4.
f Sabinus, P. Bane, viii. 5o85.

L~eo,

Leo, in order to support hit authority, laid the
kingdom under an interdia, so little regard was
paid to a censure which was universally deemed
unjust, that Charles himself applied to have it
taken off. Thus the Spanish clergy, belides
their merit in opposing the ufurpations of the
pope, and disregarding the influence of the
crown, gained the exemption which they had
claimed 5.

The commotions which arose in the kingdom

of Valencia, annexed to the crown of Aragon,
were more formidable, and produced more dan-
gerous and laiding effeas. A feditions monk
having, by his sermons, excited the citizens of
Valencia, the capital city, to take arms, and to
punbih certain criminals in a tumultuary manner,
the people, pleased with this exercise of power,
and with such a difeovery of their own imnport-
ance, not only refused to lay down their arms,
but formed themselves into troops and com-
panies, that they might be regularly trained to
martial exercises. To obtain fume fecurityagainlt
the oppression of the grandees was the motive
of this association, and proved a powerful bond
of union; for as the ariftocratical privileges andin-
dependence were more complete in Valencia than
in any other of the Spanith kingdoms, the nobles,
being fearcely accountable for their condua to
any superior, treated the people not only as
vaifals, but as slaves. They were alarmed,
however, at the progress of this unexpeeed in-
furreaion, as it might encourage the people to
attempt shaking off the yoke altogether; but as

5 1'. Martyr, Ep. iz. Freras, viiiO. 473.

they

arms, it became necessary to have recourse to
the emperor, and to desire his permifhion to at-
tack them. [rfzo] At the fame time the
people made choice of deputies to represent
their grievances, and to implore the protcetion
of their sovereign. Happily for the latter, they
arrived at court when Charles was exasperated to
an high degree against the nobility. As he was
eager to visit Germany, where his presence be-
came every day more necessary, and as his Fie-
mifh courtiers were still more impatient to return
into their native country, that they might carry
thither the spoils which they had amassed in Caf-
tile, it was impofible for him to hold the Cortes
of Valencia in person. He had for that reason
empowered the cardinal Adrian to represent him
in that assembly, and in his name to receive their
oath of allegiance, to confirm their privileges
with the uifual folemnities, and to demand of
them a free gift. But the Valencian nobles, who
conlidered this measure as an indignity to their
country, which was no less entitled, thari his
other kingdoms, to the honour of their fove-
reign's presence, declared, that by the funda-
mental laws of the conilitution they could neither
acknowledge as king a person who was absent,
,nor grant him any subsidy; and to this declar-
ation they adhered with an haughty and inflexible
obstinacy. Charles, piqued by their behaviour,
decided in favour of the people, and rafkhy au-
thorized them to continue in arms. The depu-
ties returned in triumph, and were received by
their fellow-citizens as the deliverers of their
country. The insolence of themultitude increasing

vOL. U. w with

out of the city, committed the government to
magistrates of their own eletion, and entered
into an association distinguished by the name of
Germanada or Brotherhood, which proved the
source not only of the wildest disorders, but of
the most fatal calamities in that kingdom h.

Meanwhile, the kingdom of Castile was agi-

tated with no less violence. No sooner was the
emperor's intention to leave Spain made known,
than several cities of the firik rank resolved to
remonfitrate againit it, and to crave redress once
more of those grievances which they had for-
merly laid before him. Charles artfully avoided
admitting their deputies to audience; and as he
saw from this circumfitance how difficult it would
be, at this junaure, to reifrain the mutinous spirit
of the greater cities, he summoned the Cortes of
Castile to meet at Compoftella, a town in Galicia.
His only reason for calling that assembly, was
the hope of obtaining another donative; for as
his treasury had been exhausted in the fame pro-
portion that the riches of his miinifters increased,
he could not, without fume additional aid, ap-
pear in Germany with splendour suited to the
Imperial dignity. To appoint a meeting of the
Cortes in so remote a province, and to demand a
new subsidy before the time for paying the for-
mer was expired, were innovations of a moit
dangerous tendency; and among a people not
only jealous of their liberties, but accustomed to
supply the wants of their sovereigns with a very
frugal hand, excited an universal alarm. The

h P. Martyr, Ep, 65a. Fcrreras, viii. 476. 48C. magistrates

magistrates of Toledo remonstrated against both
these measures in a very high tone; the inhabit-
ants of Valladolid, who expeded that the Cortes
should have been held in that city, were so en.
raged, that they took arms in a tumultuary
manner; and if Charles, with his foreign coun-
fellors, had not fortunately made their escape
during a violent tempest, they would have
massacred all the Flemings, and have prevented
him from continuing his journey towards Com-

poftella. Every city through which he passed, petitioned
againit holding a Cortes in Galicia, a point with
regard to which Charles was inflexible. But
though the utmost influence had been exerted
by the ministers, in order to procure a choice of
representatives favourable to their designs, such
was the temper of the nation, that, at the open-
ing of the assembly [Aprilx], there appeared
among many of the members unusual symptoms
of ill-humour, which threatened a fierce oppo-
fition to all the measures of the court. No re-
prefentatives were sent by Toledo; for the lot,
according to which, by ancient custom, the elec-
tion was determined in that city, having fallen
upon two persons devoted to the Flemilh mi-
nifters, their fellow-citizens refused to grant them
a commiflion in the usual form, and in their itead
made choice of two deputies, whom they em-
powered to repair to Compoftella, and to pro-
test against the lawfulness of the Cortes assembled
there. The representatives of Salamanca refused
to take the usual oath of fidelity, unless Charles
consented to change the place of meeting. Those
ofTo o, Madrid, Cordova, and several other

uz places,

places, declared the demand of another donative
to beunprecedented, unconstitutional, and un.
necessary. All the arts, however, which in.
fluence popular assemblies, bribes, promises,
threats, and even force, were employed, in order
to gain members. The nobles, soothed by the
refpeAful assiduity with which Chievres and the
other Flemings paid court to them, or infRigated
by a mean jealousy of that spirit of independence
which they saw rising among the commons,
openly favoured the pretensions of the court, or
at the utmoit did not oppose them; and at lalt,
in contempt not only of the sentiments of the
nation, but of the ancient forms of the con-
ftitution, a majority voted to grant the donative
for which the emperor had applied'. Toge-
ther with this grant, the Cortes laid before
Charles a representation of those grievances
whereof his people complained, and in their
name craved redress; but he, having obtained
-from them all that he could exped, paid no
attention to this ill-timed petition, which it was
no longer dangerous to disregard kI

As nothing now retarded his embarkation, he

dilofed his intention with regard to the regency
of Castile during his absence, which he had hi.
therto kept secret, and nominated cardinal Adrian
to that office. The viceroyalty of Aragon he
conferred on Don John de Lanuza; that of Va-
lencia on Don Diego de Mendoza Condd de
Melito. The choice of the two latter was univer.
sally acceptable; but the advancement ofAdrian,

3 P. Martyr, Ep. 663. Sandova], p. 3", &c.
J Sandovalb . though

# BOOK II.

reputation among the Spaniards, animated the
Caltilians with new hatred against foreigners;
and even the nobles, who had so tamely fuffered
other inroads upon the conititution, felt the in-
dignity offered to their own order by his promo-
tion, and remonfitrated against it as illegal. But
Charles's desire of visiting Germany, as well as
the impatience of his ministers to leave Spain,
were now so much increased, that without attend-
ing to the murmurs of the Caftilians, or even
taking time to provide any remedy against an
infurreaion in Toledo, which at that time
threatened, and afterwards produced, most
formidable effeas, he failed from Corunna on
the twenty-fecond of May; and by setting out
so abruptly in quelt of a new crown, he endan-
gered a more important one of which he was
already in poffeffion'.

BOOI II.

NANY concurring circumltances not only called

Charles's thoughts towards the affairs of

Germany, but rendered his presence in that
country necessary. The eleaors grew impatient
of so long an interregnum; his hereditary do-
minions were disturbed by intestine commotions;
and the new opinions concerning religion made
such rapid progress as required the most serious
Fonfideration. But above all, the motions of the

P. Martyr, Ep. 670. Sandov. 86.

* 3 French

him, that it was necessary to take measures
for his own defence with no less speed than

vigour. When Charles and Francis entered the lifts as
candidates for the Imperial dignity, they con-
dueted their rivalfhip with many profeflions of
regard for each other, and with repeated. declar-
ations that they would not fuffer any tinture of
enmity to mingle itself with this honourable
emulation. " We both court the fame miftrefs,"
said Francis, with his usual vivacity; " each
ought to urge his suit with all the address of
which he is mailer; the most fortunate willpre-
vail, and the other muR reft contented a." But
though two young and high-fpirited princes,
and each of them animated with the hope of
fiuccefs, might be capable of forming such a ge-
nerous resolution, it was soon found that they
promised upon a moderation too refined and dif-
interefied for human nature. The preference
given to Charles in the fight of all Europe mor
tified Francis extremely, and inspired him with
all the paifions natural to disappointed ambition.
To this was owing the personal jealousy and
rivalfhip which subsisted between the two mo-
narchs during their whole reign; and the ran-
cour of these, augmented by a real opposition of
interest, which gave rife to many unavoidable
causes of discord, involved them in almost per-
petual hostilities. Charles had paid no regard
to the primfcipal article in the treaty of Noyon,
by refusing oftener than once to do justice to

ai Culca 1lb. zy. P zo, John

John d'Albret, the excluded monarch of Na-
varre, whom Francis was bound in honour, and
prompted by interest, to restore to his throne.
The French king had pretednions to the crown
of Naples, of which Ferdinand had deprived his
predecefior by a moit unjustifiable breach of
faith. The emperor might reclaim the dutchy
of Milan as a fief of the empire, which Francis
had seized, and fLtill kept in poffeffion, without
having received investiture of it from the em-
peror. Charles conlidered the dutchy of Bur-
gundy as the patrimonial domain of his an-
ceftors, wrefited from them by the unjust policy
of Louis XI. and observed with the greatest
jealousy the ftrid connedions which Francis had
formed with the duke of Gueldres, the hereditary
enemy of his family.

When the sources of discord were so many and

various, peace could be of no long continuance,
even between princes the most exempt from am-
bition or emulation. But as the shock between
two such mighty antagoniffs could not fail of
being extremely violent, they both discovered
no small solicitude about its consequences, and
took time not only to collea and to ponder
their own strength, and to compare it with that
of their adversary, but to secure the friendship or
assistance of the other European powers.

The pope had equal reason to dread the two

rivals, and saw that he who prevailed, would
become absolute maiter. If it had been in his
power to engage them in hostilities, without
rendering Lombardy the theatre of war, nothing
would have been more agreeable to him, than to
'fee them waste each other's strength in endless

quarrels.

quarrels. But this was impossible. Leo foresaw,
that on the firit rupture between the two mo-
narchs, the armies of France and Spain would
take the field in the Milanese; and while the
scene of their operations was so near, and the
fubjeEt for which they conitended so intereffing
to him, he could not long remain neuter. He
was obliged, therefore, to adapt his plan of con-
dua to his political situation. He courted and
soothed the emperor and king of France with
equal indufiry and address. Though warmly
solicited by each of them to espouse his cause,
he affomed all the appearances of entire impar
tiality, and attempted to conceal his real senti-
inents under that profound diflimulation which
seems to have been affeaed by most of the Italian
politicians in that age.

The views and interest of the Venetians were

not different from those of the pope; nor were
they less solicitous to prevent Italy from becom-
ing the feat of war, and their own republic
from being involved in the quarrel. But through
all Leo's artifices, and notwithifanding his high
pretensions to a perfet neutrality, it was visible
that he leaned towards the emperor, from whom
he had both more to fear and more to hope than
from Francis; and it was equally manifefl, that
if it became necessary to take a fide, the Vene-
tians would, from motives of the fame nature,
declare for the king of France. No considerable
assistance, however, was to be expeaed from the
Italian Rates, who were jealous to an extreme
degree of the.Tranfalpine powers, and careful to
preserve the balance even between them, unless
when they were seduced to violate this favourite

s maxim

some great advantage to themselves.

But the chief attention both of Charles and

of'Francis was employed in order to gain the
king of England, from whom each of them ex-
peaed assistance more effeanal, and afforded with
lefspolitical caution. HenryVIII. hadafcendedthe
throne of that kingdom in the year one thoufaud
live hundred and nine, with such circumstances
of advantage as promised a reign of diftinguifbed
felicity and splendour. The union in his person
of the two contending titles of York and Lan.
caffer; the alacrity and emulation with which
both fa&ions obeyed his commands, not only
enabled him to exert a degree of vigour and
authority in his domefftic government which none
of his predecessors could have safely assumed;
but permitted him to take a lhare in the affairs
of the continent, from which the attention of
the English had long been diverted by their un-
happy inteitine divisions. The great sums of
money which his father had amassed, rendered
him the modk wealthy prince in Europe. The
peace which had fabilfled under the cautious ad-
minifdration of that monarch, had been of sus-
ficient length to recruit the population of the
kingdom after the desolation of the civil wars,
but not so long as to enervate its spirit; and the
English, arhamed of having rendered their own
country so long a scene of discord and bloodshed,
were eager to display their valour in some foreign
war, and to revive the memory of the viAo-
ries gained on the continent by their ancestors.
Henry's own temper perfealy suited the date of
his kingdom, and the difpoiition of his fiubjedsi

Ambitious,

Ambitious, aaive, enterprising, and accom-
plifhed in all the martial exercises which in that
age formed a chief part in the education of per.
sons of noble birth, and inspired them with an
early love of war, he longed to engage in aaion,
and to signalize the beginning of his reign by
some remarkable exploit. An opportunity Loon
presented itself; and the viaory at Guinegate
[1513], together with the fuccefsful sieges of
Teroiienne and Tournay, though of little utility
to England, refleaed great lustre on its monarch,
and confirmed the idea which foreign princes
entertained of his power and consequence. So
many concurring causes, added to the happy
situation of his own dominionp, which lecured
them from foreign invasion; and to the fortunate
circumitance of his being in poffeffion of Calais,
which served not only as a key to France, but
opened an easy passage into the Netherlands,
rendered the king of England the natural
guardian of the liberties of Europe, and the
arbiter between the emperor and French mo-
narch. Henry himself was sensible of this fingu.
Tar advantage, and convinced, that, in order to
preserve the balance even, it was his office to
prevent either of the rivals from acquiring such
superiority of power as might be fatal to the
other, or formidable to the reff of Christendom.
But he was destitute of the penetration, and still
more of the temper, which such a delicate func-
tion required. Influenced by caprice, by vanity,
by resentment, by affeAion, he'was incapable of
forming any regular and extensive fyfitem of po-
licy, or of adhering to it with steadiness. His
measures seldom resulted from attention to the

general

general welfare, or from a deliberate regard to
his own interest, but were diaated by paffilons
which rendered him blind to both, and prevented
his gaining that ascendant in the affairs of Eu-
rope, or from reaping such advantages to him-
seif, as a prince of greater art, though with in-
ferior talents, might have easily secured.

All the impolitic fieps in Henry's adminifira-

tion muff not, however, be imputed to defeds
in his own charaaer; many of them were owing
to the violent passions and insatiable ambition
of his prime minifler and favourite cardinal Wol-
fey. This man, from one of the lowest ranks
in life, had risen to an height of power and dig.
nity, to which no Englith fubjed ever arrived;
and governed the haughty,prefumptuous, and un-
tradable spirit of Henry with absolute authority.
Great talents, and of very different kinds, fitted
him for the two opposite flations of minister, and
of favourite. His profound judgment, his un-
wearied indufiry, his thorough acquaintance with
the fate of the kingdom, his extensive know-
ledge of the views and interests of foreign courts,
qualified him for that uncontrolled direaion of
affairs with which he was entruffed. The ele-
gance of his manners, the gaiety of his con-
verfation, his insinuating address, his love of
magnificence, and his proficiency in those parts
of literature of which Henry was fond, gained
him the affedion and confidence of the young
monarch. Wolsey was far from employing this
vail and almost royal power, to promote either
the true interest of the nation, or the real
grandeur of his maiter. Rapacious at the fame
time, and profuse, he was isfatiable in desiring

wealth.

new honours with an eagerness unabated by his
former fiuccefs; and being rendered prefuinp.
tuous by his uncommon elevation, as well as by
the ascendant which he had gained over a prince,
who fearcely brooked advice from any other
person, he discovered in his whole demeanour
the most overbearing haughtiness and pride.
To these paffirons he himself sacrificed every
consideration; and whoever endeavoured to ob-
tain his favour, or that of his mnafler, found it
necessary to sooth and to gratify them.

As all the Itates of Europe fought Henry's

friendfnip at that time, all courted his miniler,
with incredible attention and obfequioufneb,
and firove by presents, by promises, or by flat-
tery, to work upon his avarice, his ambition, or
his pride b. Francis had, in the year one thou-
sand five hundred and eighteen, employed Bon-
nivet, admiral of France, one of his moR ac
complifhed and artful courtiers, to gain this
haughty prelate. He himself beitowved on him
every mark of refpefk and confidence. He con-
fulted him with regard to his mofd important
affairs, and received his responses with implicit
deference. By these arts, together with the
grant of a large pension, Francis attached the
cardinal to his interest, who persuaded his maf.
ter to surrender Tournay to France, to conclude
a treaty of marriage between his daughter the
princess Mary and the dauphin, and to consent
to a personal interview with the French king C.
From that time, the mod familiar intercourse
I Fiades's Life of Wolsey, s66. Rymer's Federa, xiii. 718.
s Herbert's Hiltof Henry VIII. 3. Rymer, xi'i. 624.

fubfiited

fible of the great value of Wolfey's friendship,
laboured to secure the continuance of it by every
poilible expression of regard, bellowing on him,
in all his letters, the honourable appellations of
Father, Tutor, and Governor.

Charles observed the progress of this union with

the utmost jealousy and concern. His near as-
finity to the king of England gave him fume
title to his friendihip; and soon after his accef-
lion to the throne of Castile, he had attempted
to ingratiate himself with Wolsey, by fettling
on him a penflon of three thousand livres. His
chief solicitude at present was to prevent the
intended interview with Francis, the effeas of
which upon tio young princes, whose hearts
were no less susceptible of friendship, than their
manners were capable of inspiring it, he ex-
tremely dreaded. But after many delays, occa-
fioned by difficulties with refpe& to the ceremo-
nial, and by the anxious precautions of both
courts for the safety of their refpedive sovereigns,
the time and place of meeting were at last fixed.
Messengers had been sent to different courts, in-
viting all comers, who were gentlemen, to enter
the lifts at tilt and tournament, against the two
monarchs and their knights. Both Francis and
Henry loved the splendour of these fpetacles too
well, and were too much delighted with the
graceful figure which they made on such occa-
lions, to forego the pleasure or glory which they
expe.ed from such a singular and brilliant alT-
fembly. Nor was the cardinal less fond of dif-
playing his own magnificence in the presence of
two courts, and of discovering to the two na-

VOL. 1I. 1 tions

tions the extent of his influence over both
their monarchs, Charles, finding it impossible
to r event the interview, endeavoured to difap.
point its cffeas5 and to pre-occupy the favour of
the Eogiflit monarch and his minigter by an aa of
comphiance dtill more flattering and more un-
common. Having failed from Corunna, as has
already been related, he Reered his course direaly
towards England, and relying wholly on Henry's
generosity for his own safety, landed at Dover
EMay 26thl. This unexpeAed visit surprised
the nation, Wolsey, however, was well acquainted
with the emperor's intention. A negociation,
unknown to the hifforians of that age, had been
carried on between him and the court of Spain;
this visit had been concerted; and Charles grant.
ed the cardinal, whom he calls' his most dear-
friend, an additional penfson of seven thousand
ducats d. Henry, who was then at Canterbury,
in his way to France, immediately dispatched
Wolsey to Dover, in order to welcome the em-
peror; and being highly pleased with an event
so soothing to his vanity, hastened to receive,
with suitable refpea, a guest who had placed in
him such unbounded confidence. Charles, to
whom time was precious, ifaid only four days in
England; but during that short space he had
the address, not only to give Henry favourable
impressions of his chasader and intentions, but
to detach Wolley entiely from the interest of
the French king. All the grandeur, the wealth,
and the power, which the cardinal poffeffed, did
not satisfy his ambitious mind, while there was

d Rymer, xiiW. 7i4.

one

ascend. The papal dignity ihad for some time
been the objea of his withes, and Francis, as
the most etffeual method of securing his friend-
ship, had promised to favour his pretensions, on
the firi vacancy, with all his interest. But as
the emperor's influence in the college of cardinals
was greatly superior to that of the French king,
Wolsey grasped eagerly at the offer which that
artful prince had made him, of exerting it vigor-
oufly in his behalf; and allured by this profped,
which, under the pontificate of Leo, frill in the
prime of his life, was a very diitant one, he en-
tered with warmth into all the emperor's schemes.
No treaty, however, was concluded at that time
between the two monarchs; but Henry, in re-
-turn for the honour which Charles had done
him, promised to vifst him in some place of the
Low-Countries, immediately after taking leave
of the French king.

His interview with that prince was in an open

plain between Guifnes and Andres [June 7th2,
where the two kings and their attendants dif-
played their magnificence with such emulation,
and profofe expence, as procured it the name of
the Field of the Cloth of Gold. Feats of chivalry,
parties of gallantry, together with such exercises
and pafimes as were in that age reckoned manly
or elegant, rather than serious business, occu-
pied both courts during eighteen days that they
continued together e. Whatever impreflion the

engaging

C The French and English historians describe the pomp of

this interview, and the various (peaacles, with great mi-

I 2 ntenefas,

engaging manners of Francis, or the liberal and
unfufpicious confidence with which he treated
Henry, made on the mind of that monarch,
was soon effaced by Wolfey's artifices, or by
an interview he had with the emperor at Grave.
lines [July so] ; which was condu~eed with less
pomp than that near Guifnes, but with greater
attention to what might be of political utility.

This alliduity, with which the two greatest

monarchs in Europe paid court to Henry, ap-
peared to him a plain acknowledgment that he
held the balance in his hands, and convinced him
of the junftnefs ofthe motto which he had chosen,
a That whoever he favoured would prevail." In
this opinion he was confirmed by an offer which
Charles made, of submitting any difference that
might arise between him and Francis to his sole
arbitration. Nothing could have the appearance
of greater candour and moderation, than the
choice of a judge who was reckoned the common

nutenefs. One circumfiance mentioned by the marechal de
Fieuranges, who was present, and which mull appear singular
in the present age, is commonly omitted. " After the tour.
nament," says he, " the French and English wreftlers made
their appearance, and wreflied In presence of the kings, and
the ladies; and as there were many flout wrefilers there, it
afforded excellent paflime; but as the king of France had
negleaed to bring any wrellers out of Biletagne, the Englilh
gained the prize.-After this, the kings of France and Eng-
land retired to a tent, where they drank together, and the
king of Eng'and, seizing the king of France by the collar,
said, "' My brodter, Imu/f screrfle mitrysaou," and endeavoured
once or twice to trip up his heels; but the king of France,
who is a dextrous wreitler, twifed him round, and threw
him on the earth with prodigious violence. The king of
England wanted to renew the combat, but was prevented."
~'Icmoirs de Fleuranges, izz. Paris, 1753. p. 329.

friend

attached Wolsey entirely to his interest, no pro-
pofal could be more insidious, nor, as appeared
by the sequel, more fatal to the French king .

Charles, notwithstanding his partial fondness

for the Netherlands, the place of his nativity,
made no long stay there; and after receiving the
homage and congratulations of his countrymen,
hastened to Aix-la-Chapelle, the place appointed
by the golden bull for the coronation of the
emperor. There, in presence of an assembly
more numerous and splendid than had appeared
on any former occasion, the crown of Charle-
magne was placed on his head [O. 23], with
all the pompous solemnity which the Germans
affed in their public ceremonies, and which they
deem essential to the dignity of their empire S.

Almost at the fame time Solyman the Magni-

ficent, one of the mout accomplished, enterprising,
and viAorious of the Turkish sultans, a conitant
and formidable rival to the emperor, ascended
the Ottoman throne. It was the peculiar glory
of that period to produce the most illuftriodts
monarchs, who have at any one time appeared
in Europe. Leo, Charles, Francis, Henry, and
Solyman, were each of them poffeffed of talents
which might have rendered any age, wherein
they happened to flourish, conspicuous. But
such a confiellation of great princes (hed uncom-
mon lufire on the sixteenth century. In every
contest, great power as well as great abilities were
set in opposition; the efforts of valour and con-

f Herbert, 37.
g Hartman. Mauri Relatio Coronat. Car. V. ap. Golaaf.

Fslit, Imwerial. Franc, 5614. fol. p. 264. 53du

exertion of the fame qualities on the other, not
only occalioned fuchs a variety of events as ren-
ders the history of that period intereRting, but
served to check the exorbitant progress of any of
those princes, and to prevent their attaining such
pre-eminence in power as would have been fatal
to the liberty and happiness of mankind.

The firR ad of the emperor's adminidration

was to appoint a diet of the empire to be held at
Worms on the sixth of January, one thousand
five hundred and twenty-one. In his circular
letters to the different princes he informed them,
that he had called this assembly in order to con-
cert with them the most proper measures for
checking the progress of those new and dangerous
opmions, which threatened to disturb the peace
of Germany, and to overturn the religion of their
ancestors.

Charles had in view the opinions which had

been proprgated by Luther and his disciples
fnce the year one thousand five hundred and
leventeen. As there led to that happy reforma-
tion in religion which rescued one part of Europe
from the papal yoke, nitigated its rigour in the
other, and produced a revolution in the fentiaents
of mankind, the greatest, as well as the moflt be-
neficial, that has happened since the publication
of Chri~lianity, not only the events wxhich at
first gave birth to such opinions, but the causes
which rendered their progress so rapid and fuc-
cefsful, deserve to be considered with minute at-
tention.

To overturn a fyferm of religious belief,

founded on ancient and deep-rooted prejudices, supported

supported by power, and defended with no less
art than induihry; to establish in its room doc-
trines of the most contrary genius and tendency;
and to accomplilh all this, not by external viom
lence or the force of arms; are operations which
historians, the leadt prone to credulity and super-
flition, aferibe to that Divine Providence which,
with infinite ease, can bring about events which
to human sagacity appear impossible. The inter-
position of Heaven, in favour of the Christian
religion at its firit publication, was manifefited
by miracles and prophecies wrought and uttered
in confirmation of it. Though none of the re-
formers poffeffed, or pretended to possess, these
supernatural gifts, yet that wonderful preparation
of circumstances which disposed the minds of
men for receiving their doarines, that singular
combination of causes which secured their fuc-
cess, and enabled men, destitute of power and of
policy, to triumph over those who employed
against them extraordinary efforts of both, may
be considered as no flight proof, that the fame
hand which planted the Christian religion, pro-
teded the reformed faith, and reared it, from
beginnings extremely feeble, to an amazing de-
gree of vigour and maturity.

It was from causes, seemingly fortuitous, and

from a source very inconsiderable, that all the
mighty effeas of the reformation flowed.
Leo X., when raised to the papal throne, found
the revenues of the church exhausted by the vait
projeas of his two ambitious predecessors, Alex-
ander VI. and Julius II. His own temper, na-
turally liberal and enterprising, rendered him in-
capable of that severe and patient economy which

the

contrary, his fEhemes for aggrandizing the fa.
mily of Medici, his love of splendour, his tasse
for pleasure, and his magnificence in rewarding
men of genius, involved him daily in new ex-
pences; in order to provide a fund for which,
he tried every device that the fertile invention of
priefits had fallen upon, to drain the credulous
munltitude of their wealth. Among others he
had recourse to a sale of Indu lences. According
to the doerine of the Romish church, all the
good works of the faints, over and above those
which were neccfary towards their own jullifica-
tion, are deposited, together with the infinite
merits of Jesus Christ, mo one inexhaustible trea-
fury. The keys of this were committed to St.
Peter, and to his successors the popes, who may
open it at pleasure, and by transferring a portion
of this superabundant merit to any particular
person, for a fum of money, may convey to him
either the pardon of his own fins, or a release for
any one, in whose happiness he is interefited, from
the pains of purgatory. Such indulgences were
firit invented in the eleventh century by Urban
II. as a recompence for those who went in person
upon the meritorious enterprise of conquering
the Holy Land. They were afterwards granted
to those who hired a soldier for that purpose;
and in process of time were befeowed on such as
gave money for accomplishing any pious work
enjoined by the pope h. Julius II. had bestowed
indulgences on all who contributed towards build-
ing the church of St. Peter at Rome; and as

*ifioey of the Council of Trent, by F. Puls, P. 4.

Leo

pensive fabric, his grant was founded on the fame
pretence .

The right of promulgating these indulgences

in Germany, together with a share in the profits
arising from the sale of them, was granted to
Albert, eleaor of Metz and archbishop of
Magdebnrg, who, as his chief agent for re-
tailing them in Saxony, employed Tetzel, a
D)ominican friar of licentious morals, but of an
aaive spirit, and remarkable for his noisy and
popular eloquence. He, affidted by the monks
of his order, executed the commifflon with great
zeal and success, but with little discretion or de-
cency; and though by magnifying excessively
the benefit of their indulgences k, and by difpof-

ing

i Palavic. Hilt. Cone. Trident. p. 4.
k As the form of these indulgences, and the benefits which

they were supposed to convey, are unknown in protestant
countries, and little underltood, at present, in several places
where the Roman catholic religion is efiablfhed, I have, for
the information of my readers, translated the uorm of abfolu-
tion used by Tetzel: " May our Lord Jesus Christ have
mercy upon thee, and absolve thee by the merits of his mout
holy passion. And I by his authority, that of his blessed
apoftls Peter and Paul, and of the molR holy pope, granted
and committed to me in these parts, do zbsolve thee, firit
from allecclrfafiical censures. in whatever manner they have
been incurred, and then from all thy fans, transgressions, and
exceftes, how enormous soever they may be, even from such
as are reserved for the cognizance of the holy fee, and as far
as the keys of the holy thurch extend, I remit to you all
puniibment which you deserve in purgatory on their account,
and I refinre you to the holy sacraments of the church, to the
unity of the faithful, and to thatinnocene and purity which
you poffhffed at baptism, To that when you die, the gates of
punithmint Ihall be ihut, and the gates of the paradise of de-

light

ing of them at a very low price, they carried on
for some time an extensive and lucrative traffic
among the credulous and the ignorant; the ex-
travagance of their assertions, as well as the ir-
regularities in their condud, came at last to oive
general offence. The princes and nobles were
irritated at feeing their vassals drained of so
much wealth, in order to replenikh the treasury

light thall be opened, and if you lhaul not die at present, this
grace shall remoin in full force when you are at the pointof
death. In the name of the Father, and of the Son, andof
the Holy Gholt " Seckend. Comment. lib. i. p. 14.

The terms in which Tetzel and his associates described the

benefits of indulgences, and the neceffaty ofpurchalung them,
are Co extravagant, that they appear to he almost incredible,
If any man (Ciud they) purchase iettersof indulgence, his loul
may reft secure with refped to its salvation. The fouls con-
fined in purgatory, for whose redemption indulgences are pur.
chased, as Coon as the money tinkles in the chehl, initantly
efrape from that place of torment, and atcend into heaven.
That the efficacy of indulgences was Co great, that the most
heinous fins, even if one dthould violate (which was impof-
lible) the Mother of God, would be remitted and expiated by
them, and the person be free both fiom punishment and guilt.
That this was the unspeakable gift of God, in order to recon.
rile men to himfeif. That the crofo ereded by the preachers
of indulgences, wis as eflicaciouo as the cross of Christ itlelf.
Lo l the heaeens are open; if you enter not now, when will
you enter ? For twelve pence you may redeem the foul of
your father out of purgatory; and are you To ungrateful that
you will not rescue your parent from torment l if you had
but one coat you ought to Itrip yourfelfin'antly, and fell it,
in order to purchase isuch benefits, &c. These, and many
such extravadant expreflions, are feleded out of Luther'I
works by Chemnitius, in his Examen Concilli Tridentini,
apud Herm. Vooder Hardt. Hilt. Liter. Reform. pors iv.
p. 6. TFhe fame aouhlor has publilhed several of Tetzel's dil-
cooaaes, whiich prove that these expreffsonswere neither fin-
pirt nor e~;cgerated. Ibid. p. 04.

delusion of the people, who being taught to rely,
for the pardon of their fins, on the Indulgences
which they purchased, did not think it incum-
bent on them either to ifudy the doArines taught
by genuine Christianity, or to pra&ise the duties
which it enjoins. Even the most unthinking
were shocked at the scandalous behaviour of
Tetzel and his associates, who often squandered
in drunkenness, gaming, and low debauchery,
those funms which were piously bellowed, in hopes
of obtaining eternal happiness; and all began to
with that some check were given to this com-
merce, no less detrimental to society than de-
fitruAive to religion.

Such was the favourable junaure, and so dif-

posed were the minds of his countrymen to listen
to his discourses, when Martin Luther first began
to call in question the efficacy of indulgences,
and to declaim againit the vicious lives and false
dodrines of the persons employed in promulgat-
ing them. Luther was a native of Eifleben in
Saxony, and though.born of poor parents, had
received a learned education, during the progress
of which he gave many indications of uncommon
vigour and acuteness of genius. His mind was
naturally susceptible of serious sentiments, and
tinaurcd with somewhat of that religious melan-
choly which delights in the solitude and devo-
tion of a monastic life. The death of a com-
panion killed by lightning at his fide, in a violent
thunder-florm, made such an impreflion on his
mind, as co-operated with his natural temper, in
inducing him to retire into a convent of Auguf-
tinian friars, where, without fuffering the in-

treaties

he thought his duty, to God, he assumed the
habit of that order. He soon acquired great
reputation, not only for piety, but for his love
of knowledge, and his unwearied application to
frudy. He had been taught the fcholaitic phi.
lofophy and theology which were then in vogue,
by very able maiters, and wanted not penetration
to comprehend all the niceties and diilindions
with which they abound; but his undertranding,
naturally found, and fuxperior to every thing fri-
volous, soon became difgulcd with those subtile
and uninfirutive feiences, and fought for some
more solid foundation of knowledge and of piety
in the holy feriptures. Having found a copy of
the Bible, which lay negleAed in the library of
his monastery, he abandoned all other pursuits,
and devoted himself to the frudy of it, with such
eagerness and aflidulty, as astonished the monks,
who were little accustomed to derive their theo-
logical nodonns from that source. The great
progress which he made in this uncommon course
of itudy, augmented so much the fame both of
his fanaity and of his learning, that Frederic,
elefor of Saxony, haviug founded an univerlity
at Wittemberg on the Elbe, the place of his re-
fidence, Luther was chosen firit to teach philo-
sophy, and afterwards theology there; and dif-
charged both offices in such a manner, that he
was deemed the chief ornament of that society.

While Luther was at the height of his repu-

tation and authority, Tetzel began to publish in-
dulgences in the neighbourhood of Wittemberg,
and to aferibe to them the fame imaginary
virtues which had, in other places, imposed on

the

not more enlightened than the other provinces
of Germany, Tetzel met with prodigious success
there. It was with the utmost concern that
Luther beheld the artifices of those who fold,
and the simplicity of those who bought indul-
gences. The opinions of Thomas Aquinas
and the other fchoolmen, on which the doctrine
of indulgences was founded, had alreadyloit much
of their authority with him; and the Scrip-
tures, which he began to confider as the
great standard of theological truth, afforded
no countenance to a pratice, equally sub-
verfive of faith and of morals. His warm
and impetuous temper did not fuffer him long
to* conceal such important discoveries, or to
continue a silent fpeaator of the delusion of his
countrymen. From the pulpit, in the great
church at Wittemberg, he inveighed bitterly
againit the irregularities and vices of the monks
who published indulgences ; he ventured to
examine the doArines which they taught, and
pointed out to the people the danger of relying
for salvation upon any other means than those
appointed by God in his word. The boldness and
noveltv of these opinions drew great attention,
and being recommended by the authority of
Luther's personal charaaer, and delivered with
a popular and persuasive eloquence, they made a
deep imprefion on his hearers. Encouraged by
the favourable reception of his doarines among
the people, he wrote to Albert, eledor of
Mentx and archbishop of Madgeburg, to whose
jurifdi&ion that part of Saxony was fubjeA, and
remondrated warmly against the false opinions,.

VOL. u. K aS

dulgences; but he found that prelate too deeply
interefled in their success to correA their abuses.
His next attempt was to gain the fuifrage of
men oflearning. For this purpose he published
ninety-five theses, containing his sentiments with
regard to indulgences. Thdef he proposed, not
as points fully e~tablifhed, or of undoubted cer-
tainty, but as fubjeds of inquiry and difputa-
tion; he appointed a day, on which the learned
were invited to impugn them, either in person
or by writing; to the whole he fubjoined folernn
proteRations of his high refpe& for the apostolic
fee, and of his implicit fubmiflion to its autho.
rity. No opponent appeared at the time pre-
fixed; the theses spread over Germany with
adonithing rapidity; they were read with the
greatest eagerness; and all admired the boldness
*of the man, who ;had ventured not only to call
in queRion the plenitude of papal power, but
to attack the Dominicans, armed with all the
terrors of inquisitorial authority .

The friars of St. AuguRine, Luther's own

order, though addidced with no lcfs obsequious-
ness than the other monadtic fraternities to the
papal fee, gave no check to the publication of
these uncommon opinions. Luther had, by his
piety and learning, acquired extraordinary au-
thority among his brethren; he profeffed the
highest regard for the authority of the pope;
his profeffions were at that time sincere; and as
a secret enmity, excited by interest or emulation,

I Lutheri Opera, Jena, s6s2, vol. i. prefat. 3. p.z. 66.

Hi. of Counc. of 'rient by F. Paul. p. 4. S-ekend. Com.
Apol, p. 16.

i~fubli

Romish church, the Auguftinians were highly
pleased with his inveatives againit the Domini-
cans, and hoped to fee them exposed to the
hatred and scorn of the people. Nor was his fove-
reign, the eleEtor of Saxony, the wisest prince at
that time in Germany, diffatisfied with this ob.
ftruaion which Luther threw in the way of the
publication of indulgences. He secretly encourag-
ed the attempt, and flattered himself that this dif.
pute among the ecclefiaftics themselves, might
give some check to the exa&ions of the court of
Rome, which the secular princes had long,
though without success, been endeavouring to
oppose.

Many zealous champions immediately arose

to defend opinions on which the wealth and
power of the church were founded, against Lu-
ther's attacks. In opposition to his theses,
Tetzel publiihed counter-thefes at Francfort on
the Oder; Eccius, a celebrated divine of Augf-
burg, endeavoured to refute Luther's notions;
and Prierias, a Dominican friar, master of the
sacred palace and Inquifitor-general,wrote against
him with all the virulence of a scholastic difput-
ant. But the manner in which they conduaed
the controversy did little service to their cause,
fLuther attgmpted to combat indulgences by
argjmeits founded in reason, or derived from
feripture; they produced nothing in support of
them, but the sentiment~s of fchoolmen, the con-
elunions of the canon law, and the decrees of
popes m. The decision of judges so partial and

SS. Paul, p, 6. Seckend. p. 40. Palavic. p. S.

a a interefttd,

mntereftled, did not satisfy the people, who began
to call in queflion the authority even of these
venerable guides, when they found thetn flanding
in dirdce opposition to the dictates of reason, and
the determinations of the divine laws ."

Meanwhile,

n Seckend. p. 30.
* Guicciardini has asserted two things with regard to the

firl promulgation of indulgences : x. That Leo beflowed a
gift of the profits arifiing from the sale of indulgences in
Saxony, and the adjacent provinces of Germany, upon his
filer Magdaien, the wife of Francelcetto Cibo, Guic. lib.
i3. 168. 2. That Arcemboldo, a Genoefeecclefiaitic, who
had been bred a merchant, and iill retained all the aflivity
and address of that profeflion, was appointed by her to colle&
the money which iouid be raised. F. Paul has followed shim
in both these particuiars, and adds, that the Auguitinians in
Saxony had been immemorially employed in preaching indul-
gences; but that Arcemboldo and his deputies, hoping to gain
more by committing this truR to the Dominicans, had made
their bargain with Tetzel, and that Luther was prompted at
firRi to oppose 'Tetzel and his affociatee, by a defure of taking
revenge for this injury offered to his order. F. Paul, p. 5.
AlmoR all bil-orians since their rime, popish as well as pro-
teftant, have, without examination, admitted these affections
to be true upon their authority. But notwithfianding the
concurring teltimony of two authors, so eminent both forex-
adnefs and veracIty, we may oblerve,

a. That Felix Contolori, who Learched the pontifical ar-

chives of purpote, could not find this pretendod grant to Lea's
fitser in any of those regihers where it mull necelfarily have
been recorded. Palar. p. 5.-z. That the profits arising from
indulgences in Saxony asd the adjacent countries, had been
granted not to Magdslen, bus to Albert, archbilhop of Mentz,
who had she sight of nocsinaring thole whs publbihed them.
Seek. p sa. Luth. Oper. i. peref. p. a. Palay. p. 6.-3-.
Thot Arcemboldo never had concern in the tublicatron of in.
dulgences in 'axony j his oiitria uas Slanders and the Upper
and Lower Rhine. Seek. i. 14. Patlo. p. 6.-4. That Lu-
tler and his adherents never mention this grant of Leo's to

his

trines which interefced all Germany, excited little
attention and no alarm in the court of Rome.
Leo, fond of elegant and refined pleasures, in-
tent upon great schemes of policy, a stranger to
theological controversies, and apt to despise them,
regarded with the utmost indifference the opera-
tions of an obscure friar, who, in the heart of
Germany, carried on a scholastic disputation in a
barbarous ifyle. Little did he apprehend, or
Luther himself dream, that the effeas of this
quarrel would be so fatal to the papal fee. Leo

his filler ; though a circumnffance of which they could hardly
have been ignorant, and which they would have been careful
not to fupprels.-5. The publication of indulgences in Gec-
many was not ufualJy committed to the Augultinians. The
promulgation of them, at three dilIhrent periods under Julius
II. was granted to the Fraocifcans ; the Dominicans had been
employed in the fume otfice a Ihort time before the present
period. Pahv. p 46.-6. The promulgationof those indul-
gences, which si t excited Luther's indignation, was entrulfed
to the archbilhop of Mentz, in conjunetion with the guardian
of the Franciscans; but the latter having declined accepting
of that truR, the sole right became veiled in the archbilhop.
PaIlY. 6. Seck. u6, u7.-7. Luther was not inftgated by his
superiors among the Augulinians to attack the Doominicans
their rivals, or to depreciate indolgences because they were
promulgated by them; his oppolition to tiheir opinions and
vices proceeded from more laudable motives. Seck. p. r .
3z. Lutheri Opera, a. p. 64. 6. 8. A diploma of indul-
gences is publilhed by Herm. Vonier Hardt, from which it
appears, that the name of the guardian of the Franciscans is
retained, together with that of the archbilhop, although the
former did not ast. Tihe limits of the country to which
their commidiono extended, viz. the diocese of Mentz, Mag-
deburg, Haiberitfdt, and the territories of the marquis of
Brandenburp, are mentioned in that diploma. Hilt. Litera-
na Reformat. tars iv. p. 54.

x 3 impute4

imputed the whole to monadtic enmity and emu-
lation, and seemed inclined not to interpose in
the contedt, but to allow the Augufdinians and
Dominicans to wrangle about the matter with
their usual animosity.

The folicitations, however, of Luther's adver-

faries, who were exasperated to an high degree
by the boldness and severity with which he ani-
madverted on their writings, together with the
surprising progrefa which his opinions made in
different parts of Germany, roused at lad the
attentipn of the court of Rome, and obliged Leo
to take measures for the security of the church
againi an attack that now appeared too serious
to be despised. For this end, he summoned Lu-
ther to appear at Rome jJuly iiS], within
sixty days, before the auditor of the chamber,
and the Inquifitor-general Prierias, who had
written againd him, whom he empowered jointly
to examine his doftrines, and to decide concern-
ing them. lie wvrote, at the fame time, to the
dleaor of Saxony, beseeching him not to pro-
tea a man whose heretical and prophane tetiets
were so shocking to pious ears; and enjoined
the provincial of the Augodimnians to check, by
his authority, the rathuefs of an arrogant monk,
which brought disgrace upon the order of St.
Augudine, and gave offence and diflurbance to
the whole church.

From the idrain of these letters, as well as

from the nomination of a judge so prejudiced and
partial as Prierias, Luther easily saw what fen-
tence he might exped at Rome. He disco-
vered, for that reason, the utmodt solicitude to
have his cause tried in Germany, and bEfore a

less

pniverfity of Wittemberg, anxious for the safety
of a man who did so much honour to their so-
ciety, wrote to the pope, and after employing
several pretexts to excule Luther from appearing
at Rome, intreated Leo to commit the examin-
ation of his doarines to fume persons of learn-
ing and authority in Germany. The eleSor
requefited the fame thing of the pope's legate at
the diet of Augsburg; and as Luther him feW,
who, at that time, was so far from having any
intention to difelain the papal authority, that he
did not even entertain the fmalieft fiifpicion con-
cerning its divine original, had written to Leo
a moR fubmifisve letter, promising an unreserved
compliance with his will, the pope gratified them
so far as to empower his legate in Germany, car-
dinal Cajetan, a Dominican, eminent for fcho-
laftic learning, and paliionately devoted to the
Roman fee, to hear and determine the cause.

Luther, though he had good reason to decline

a judge chosen among his avowed adversaries, did
not hieftate about appearing before Cajetan;
and having obtained the emperor's fafe-condua,
immediately repaired to Augsburg. The car.
dinal received him with decent refpe&, and en-
deavoured at firit to gain upon him hy gentle
treatment. The cardinal, relying on the fope.
riority of his own talents as a theologian, en-
tered into a formal dispute with Luther con-
cerning the doerines contained in his theses ".

But

* In the former editions I aifreted, upon the authority of

Father Paul, that Cajetan thouevh it hereath his dignity to
enter ipto anydifpute with Luther3 but M, EeufStbre, in

his

different, Cajetan appealing to papal deCrees,
and the opinions of fchoolmen, and Luther reit.
ing entirely on the authority of scripture, that
the contest was altogether fruitless. The car-
dinal relinquikhed the chara6der of a disputant,
and assuming that of judge, enjoined Luther, by
virtue of the apostolic powers with which he was
clothed, to retraa the errors which he had ut-
tered with regard to indulgences, and the nature
of faith; and to abitain, for the future, from
the publication of new and dangerous opinions.
Luther, fully persuaded of the truth of his own
tenets, and confirmed in the belief of them by
the approbation which they had met with
among persons conspicuous both for learning
and piety, was surprised at this abrupt mention
of a recantation, before any endeavours were used
to convince him that he was mistaken. He had
flattered hinifelf, that in a conference concerning
the points in dispute with a prelate of such dif-
tinguifhed abilities, he should be able to remove
many of those imputations with which the ig-
norance or malice of his antagonists had loaded
him; but the high tone of authority that the
cardinal assumed, extinguished at once all hopes
of this kind, and cut off every profpea of ad-
vantage from the interview. His native intre-
pidity of mind, however, did not desert him.
He declared with the utmost firmness, that he
could not, with a safe confEcience, renounce opi-
nions which he believed to be true; nor should

his Hiftoire de la Reformation, vol. i. p. Isr, &c. has fa-
tisfied me that I was mistaken. See also Seckend, lib. i.
p. 46, &c.

any

any consideration ever induce him to do what
would be so base in itself, and so offenfive to
God. At the fame time he continued to ex-
press no less reverence than formerly for the au-
thority of the apostolic fee ; he signified his
willingners to submit the whole controversy to
certain unirerfitics which he named, and pro-
mifed neither to write nor to preach concerning
indulgences for the future, provided his adver-
faries were likewise enjoined to be silent with
refped to them P. All these offers Cajetan dif-
regarded or rejeaed, and ffil1 insisted peremp-
torily on a simple recantation, threatening him
with ecclesiastical censures, and forbidding him
to appear again in his presence, unless he resolved
inflantly to comply with what he had required.
This haughty and violent manner of proceeding,
as well as other circumitances, gaive Luther's
friends such firong reasons to fufped, that even
the Imperial fafe-conduat would not be able to
protea him from the legate's power and re-
fentment, that they prevailed on him to with-
draw secretly from Augfhurg, and to return to
his own country. But before his departure,
according to a form of which there had been
some examples, he prepared [OAober 18] a
solemn appeal from the pope, ill-informed at
that time concerning his cause, to the pope,
when he mhould receive more full information
with refped to it 4.

Cajetan, enraged at Luther's abrupt retreat,

and at the publication -of his appeal, wrote to

aLuth. Oper. vol. i. p. i64. P Id. ibid. p. 169.
9 Sleid. Iilt. of Refourm. p. 7. Seckend. p 45. Luth.

Oper, i. .163 .

the

the cleaor of Saxony, complaining of both;
and requiring him, as he regarded the peace of
the church, or the authority of its head, either
to fend that seditious monk a prisoner to Rome,
or to banish him out of his territories. It was
not from theological considerations that Fre-
deric had hitherto countenanced Luther; he
seems to have been much a firanger to contro-
verfies of that kind, and to have been little in-
terefied in them. His protetion flowed almost
entirely, as hath been already observed, from
political motives, and was afforded with great
secrecy and caution. He had neither heard any
of Luther's difourfes, nor read any of his
books ; and though all Germany refounded
with his fame, he had never once admitted him
into his presence r. But upon this demand
which the cardinal made, it became necessary to
throw off somewhat of his former reserve. He
had been at great expence, and had beffowed
nuch attention on founding a new university,
an objed of considerable importance to every
German prince; and foreseeing how fatal a
blow the removal of Luther would be to its
reputation s, he, under various pretexts, and
with many profeflions of elleem for the cardinal,
as well as of reverence for the pope, not only
declined complying with either of his requells,
but openly discovered great concern for Luther's
safety t.

The inflexible rigour with which Cajetan in-

silted on a simple recantation, gave great offence

r Seckend. p. v'. Skcid, Hill. p. aa.
a Seckend. p. 59.
t Sii. HWit. p. so. Luth. Oper. i. 172.

been censured as imprudent, by several Popith
writers. But it was impossible for the legate to
a& another part. The judges before whom
Luther had been required to appear at Rome,
were so eager to display their zeal against his
er3rs, that, without waiting for the expiration
of the sixty days allowed him in the citation,
they had already condemned him as an heretic ".
Leo had, in several of his briefs and letters,
fligmatized him as a child of iniquity, and a
man given up to a reprobate fenfie. Nothing
less, therefore, than a recantation could save the
honour of the church, whole maxim it is, never
to abandon the smallest point that it has efta.
biifhed, and which is even precluded, by its pre-
tenflons to infallibility, from having it in its
power to do so.

Luther's situation at this time was such as

would have filled any other person with the
moid disquieting apprehensions. He could not
expe& that a prince, so prudent and cautious
as Frederic, would, on his account, let at de-
fiance the thunders of the church, and brave
the papal power, which had crushed some of the
modt powerful of the German emperors. He
knew what veneration was paid, in that age, to
ecclesiastical decilions; what terrors ecclefaf-
tical censures carried along with them, and hoav
eaily these might intimidate and shake a princq,
who was rather his protedor from policy, than
his disciple from conviation. If he should be
obliged to quit Saxony, he had no profpe@ of

" Luth. Oper. i. i6i.

any

any other asylum, and must Pand exposed to
whatever punifihment the rage or bigotry of
his enemies -could infliA. Though fenible of
his danger, he discovered no symptoms of timi.
dity or remissness, but continued to vindicate
his own condud and opinions, and to inveigh
againit those of his adversaries with more vehe.
mence than ever x.

But as every flep taken by the court of

Rome, particularly the irregular fentenrc by
which he had been Lo precipitately declared a
heretic, convinced Luther that Leo would Loon
proceed to the most violent measures againit
him, he had recourse to the only expedient in
his power, in order to prevent the eifed of the
papal censures. He appealed to a general coun-
cil, which he affirmed to be the representative
of the catholic church, and fhperior in power
to the pope, who, being a fallible man, might
err, as St. Peter, the most perfed of his prede-
ceffors, had erred Y.

It soon appeared, that Luther had not formed

railh conjeoares concerning the intentions of the
Romith church. A bull, of a date prior to his
appeal, was issued by the pope, in which he
magnifies the virtue and efficacy of indolgences,
in terms as extravagant as any of his predecef-
fors had ventured to use in the darkest ages;
and without applying such palliatives, or men-
tioning fLch conceflions, as a more enlightened
period, and the disposition in the minds of many
men at that junAure, seemed to call for, he
aequired all Christians to assent to what he deli-

x Seckend. p. 59.
Y Sleid. H-ist. Is. Luzh, Oper. L r79. vered

and fuhjeaed those who should hold or teach
any contrary opinion to the heaviest ecclesiastical
censures.

Among Luther's followers, this hull, which

they considered as an unjustifiable effort of the
pope, in order to preserve that rich branch of
his revenue which arose from indulgences, pro-
duced little effer. But, among the redt of his
countrymen, such a clear decilion of the fove-
reign pontiff againit him, and enforced by such
dreadful penalties, gruft have been attended
with consequences very fatal to his cause; if
these had not been prevented in a great measure
by the death of the emperor Maximilian [Ja-
nuary 17, 5519], whom both his principles and
his interest prompted to support the authority
of the holy fee. In consequence of this event,
the vicariat of that part of Germany which is
governed by the Saxon laws, devolved to the
eleaor of Saxony ; and under the (helter of his
friendly adminifiration, Luther not only enjoyed
tranquillity, but his opinions were fuffered, dur-
ing the inter-regnum which preceded Charles's-
lclion, to take root in different places, and to
grow up to some degree of strength and firmness.
At the fame time, as the eledion of an emperor
was a point more intereiting to Leo than a
theological -controversy, which he did not under-
stand, and of which he could not foresee the con-
sequences, he was so extremely solicitous not to
irritate a prince of fiuch considerable influence in
the eledoral college as Frederic, that he disco-
vered a great unwiilingnefs to pronounce the
sentence of excommunication against Luther,

VOL. II; a which

which his adversaries continually demanded with
the most clamorous importunity.

To these political views of the pope, as well

as to his natural aversion from severe measures,
was owing the suspension of any further pro-
ceedings against Luther for eighteen months.
Perpetual inegotiations, however, in order to
bring the matter to some amicable issue, were
carried on during that space. The manner in
which these were conduaed having given Luther
many opportunities of observing the corruption
of the court of Rome; its obstinacy in adhering
to efiablifhed errors; and its indifference about
truth, however clearly proposed, or strongly
proved, he began to utter some doubts with
regard to the divine original of the papal antho-
rity. A public disputation was held upon this
important question at Leipfsc, between Luther
and Eccius, one of his most learned and formi-
dable antagonists; but it was as fruitless and
indecisive as such scholastic combats usually
prove. Both parties boasted of having obtained
the viAory; both were confirmed in their own
opinions; and no progress was made towards
deciding the point in controversy 2.

Nor did this spirit of opposition to the doc-

trines and ufurpations of the Romith church
break out in Saxony alone; an attack no less
violent, and occasioned by the fame causes, was
made upon them about this time in Switzerland.
The Franciscans being entrusted with the pro-
mulgation of indulgences in that country, ex-
ccuted their commission with the fame indifcre-

a Luth. Oper. i t99. tion

Dominicans so odious in Germany. They pro-
ceeded, nevertheless, with uninterrupted success
till they arrived at Zurich. There Zuinglius, a
man not inferior to Luther himself in zeal and
intrepidity, ventured to oppose them; and be-
ing animated with a republican boldness, and
free from those refitraints which fubjeAion to the
will of a prince imposed on the German reformer,
he advanced with more daring and rapid iteps to
overturn the whole fabric of the established re-
ligion a. The appearance of such a vigorous
auxiliary, and the progress which he made,
was, at firit, matter of great joy to Luther. On
the other hand, the decrees of the universities of
Cologne and Louvain, which pronounced his
opinions to be erroneous, afforded great cause
of triumph to his adversaries.

But the undaunted spirit of Luther acquired

additional fortitude from every initance of oppo-
fition;. and pushing on his inquiries and attacks
from one doarine to another, he began to shake
the firmedt foundations on which the wealth or
power of the church were established. Leo
came at lait to be convinced, that all hopes of
reclaiming him by forbearance were vain; several
prelates of great wisdom exclaimed no less than
Luther's perfomial adversaries, againd the pope's
unprecedented lenity in permitting an incorrigible
heretic, who during three years had been endea-
vouring to subvert every thing sacred and vene-
rable, dill to remain within the bosom of the
chlurch; the dignity of the papal fee rendered

a Sleid. Hilf. 22. Seckend. 59.

L 4 the

the molt vigorous proceedings necessary; the
new emperor, it was hoped, would support its
authority; nor did it seem probable that the
eleaor of Saxony would so far forget his usual
caution, as to set himself in opposition to their
united power. The college of cardinals waS
often assembled, in order to prepare the sentence
with due deliberation, and the ablest canonilts
were consulted how it might be expressed with
unexceptionable formality. At last, on the
fifteenth of June, one thousand five hundred and
twenty, the bull, so fatal to the church of Rome,
was issued. Forty-one propositions, extraaed
out of Luther's works, are therein condemned
as heretical, scandalous, and offenfive to pious
ears; all persons are forbidden to read his writ-
ings, upon pain of excommunication; such as
had any of them in their custody are commanded
to commit them to the flames; he himself, if
he did not, in sixty days, publicly recant his
crrors, and burn his books, is pronounced an ob-
itinate heretic; is excommunicated, and' deli-
vered unto Satan for the deftruaion of his fielh;
and all secular princes are required, under pain
of incurring the fame cenfore, to seize his per-
son, that he might be punished as his crimes de-
served '.

The publication of this bull in Germany ex-

cited various paflions in different places. Lu-
ther's adversaries exulted, as if his party and
opinions had been crushed at once by such a de-
cifive blow. His followers, whose reverence for
the papal authority daily diminished, read Leo's

b Palavic. 27. Luth. Oper. i 423.

anathemas

In some cities, the people violently obifruffed
the promulgation of the bull; in others, the
persons who attempted to publish it were insult-
ed, and the bull itself was torn in pieces, and
trodden under foot C.

This sentence, which he had for some time

expeded, did ndt disconcert or intimidate Lu-
ther. After renewing his appeal to the general
council [Nov, 17], he publilhed remarks upon
the bull of excommunication; and being now
persuaded that Leo had been guilty both of
impiety and injustice in his proceedings against
him, he boldly declared the pope to be that
man of fin, or Antichift, whose appearance is
foretold in the New Testament; he declaimed
against his tyranny and ufurpations with greater
violence than ever; he exhorted all Christian
princes to ihake off such an ignominious yoke;
and boalted of his own happiness in being mark-
ed out as the objedt of ecclesiastical indignation,
because he had ventured to assert the liberty of
mankind. Nor did he confine his expreflions of
contempt for the papal power to words alone;
Leo having, in execution of the bull, appointed
Luther's books to be burnt at Rome, he, by
way of retaliation, assembled all the profeffors
and ifudents in the university of Wittemberg,
and with great pomp, in presence of a vafl mul-
titude of fpedators, cast the volumes of the ca-
non law, together with the bull of excommu-
nication, into the flames; and his example was
imitated in several cities of Germany. The

c Seckend. p. icE.

L 3 manne5

more offenfive than the adion itself. Having
colleAed from the canon law some of the moat
extravagant propositions with regard to the ple-
nitude and omnipotence of the papal power, as
well as the subordination of all secular jurifdic-
tion to the authority of the holy fee, he pub.
lifhed thele with a commentary, pointing out
the impiety of such tenets, and their evident
tendency to subvert all civil government d.

Such was the progress which Luther had

made, and fuech the slate of his party, when
Charles arrived in Germany. No secular prince
had hitherto embraced Luther's opinions; no
change in the ellablifhed forms of woribip had
been introduced, and no encroachments had been
made upon the poffeffions or jurifdiAion of the
clergy; neither party had yet proceeded to
adion; and the controversy, though conduaed
with great heat and passion on both sides, was
itill carried on with its proper weapons, with
theses, difputations, and replies. A deep im-
prefilon, however, was made upon the minds of
the people; their reverence for ancient institutions
and dodlrines was (haken; and the materials were
already scattered, which kindled into the com-
buflion that soon spread over all Germany. Stu-
dents crowded from every province of the empire
to Wittemberg ; and under Luther himself,
Melanethon, Carloladius, and bther malers then
reckoned eminent, imbibed opinions, which, on
their return, they propagated among their coun-
trymen, who liltened to them with that fond at-

d Luth. Oper. ii. 316.

tention,

novelty, naturally commands e.

During the course of these tranfaaions, the

court of Rome, though under the direAion of
one of its ablest pontiffs, neither formed its
(chemes with that profound sagacity, nor exe-
cuted them with that steady perseverance, which
had long rendered it the most perfed model of
political wisdom to the reft of Europe. When
Luther began to declaim against indulgences,
two different methods of treating him lay before
the pope; by adopting one of which, the at-
tempt, it is probable, might have been crushed,
and by the other it might have been rendered in-
nocent. If Luther's first departure from the
doarines of the church had inilantly drawn upon
him the weight of its censures, the dread of these
might have rciirained the eledor of Saxony from
proteding him, might have deterred the people
from listening to his discourses, or even might
have overawed Lutther himself; and his name,
like that of many good men before his time,
would now have been known to the world only
for his honest but ill-timed effort to corred the
corruptions of the Romilh church. On the other
hand, if the pope had early testified some difplea-
fore with the vices and excesses of the friars who
had been employed in publishing indulgences;
if he had forbidden the mentioning of contro-
verted points in discourses addressed to the
people; if he had enjoined the difputants on both
fide3 to be silent; if he had been careful not to
rifque the credit of the church, by defining ar-

c Seckend, 5i. ticles

tides which had hitherto been left undetermined;
Luther would, probably, have dopt ihort at his
firdt discoveries: he would not have been forced,
in felf-defence, to venture upon new ground,
and the whole controversy might possibly have
died away insensibly; or being confined entirely
to the schools, might have been carried on with
as little detriment to the peace and unity of the
Romish church, as that which the Francifeans
maintain with the Dominicans concerning the
immaculate conception, or that between the
Janfenids and Jesuits concerning the operations
of grace. But Leo, by flouuating between
these opposite fyfitems, and by embracing them
alternately, defeated the effeas ofboth. By an
improper exertion of authority, Luther was ex.
afperated, but not refrained. By a mistaken
exercise of lenity, time was given for his opinions
to spread, but no progress was made towards red
conciling him to the church; and even the fend
tence of excommunication, which at anothed
junaure might have been decisive, was delayed
so long, that it became at last fearcely an obje&
of terror.

Such a series of errors in the measures of a

court seldom chargeable with miflaking its own
true inrerefe, is not more afionifhing than the
wisdom which appeared in Luther's condud.
Though a perfeft firanger to the maxims of
worldly wisdom, and incapable, from the impe.
tuofity of his temper, of observing them, he was
led naturally, by the method in which he made
his discoveries, to carry on his operations in B
manner which contributed more to their success,
than if every itep he took had been preferibed by

the

the most artful policy. At the time when he
set himself tooppofe Tetzel, he was far from in-
tending that reformation which he afterwards
effeded; and would have trembled with horror
at the thoughts of what at last he gloried in ac-
complifhing. The knowledge of truth was not
poured into his mind all at once, by any special
revelation; he acquired it by indufiry and medi-
tation, and his progress, of consequence, was
gradual. The do&rines of popery are so closely
conneded, that the exposing of one error con.
duaed him naturally to the deteaion of others;
and all the parts of that artificial fabric were so
united together, that the pulling down of one
loosened the foundation of the redt, and rendered
it more easy to overturn them. In confuting
the extravagant tenets concerning indulgences,
he was obliged to inquire into the true cause of
our justification and acceptance with God. The
knowk~dge of that discovered to him by degrees
the inotility of pilgrimages and penances; the
vanity of relying on the intercession of faints;
the impiety of worflhipping them; the abuses of
auricular confeflion; and the imaginary exidtence
of purgatory. The detedion of so many errors
led him of course to confider the charater of the*
clergy who taught them; and their exorbitant
wealth, the severe injundion of celibacy, together
with the intolerable rigour of monafdic vows, ap-
peared to him the great sources of their corrup--
tion. From thence, it was hut one itep to call
in question the divine original of the papal
power, which authorized and supported such a
fyitem of errors. As -the unavoidable result of
the whole, he disclaimed the infallibility of the
rope, the decisions of fchoolmen, or any other

human

human authority, and appealed to the word of
God as the only feandard of theological truth.
To this gradual progress Luther owed his fuc.
cess. His hearers were not shocked at firit by
any proposition too repugnant to their ancient
prejudices, or too remote from effablifhed opi.
nmons. They were conduaed insensibly from
one do&rine to another. Their faith and con-
viaion were able to keep pace with his difcove-
ries. To the fame cause was owing the inatten-
tion, and even indifference, with which Leo
viewed Luther's first proceedings. A direftor
violent attack upon the authority of the church
would at once have drawn upon Luther the whole
weight of its vengeance; but as this was far
from his thoughts, as he continued long to pro-
fess great refped for the pope, and made re-
peated offers of fubmiflion to his decisions, there
seemed to be no reason for apprehending that he
would prove the author of any desperate revolt;
and he was fuffered to proceed itep by itep, in
undermining the conflitution of the church, until
the remedy applied at last came too late to pro-
duce any effea.

But whatever advantages Iuther's cause de-

rived, either from the mifiakes of his adversaries,
or from his own good condu&, the sudden pro.
grefs and firm establishment of his domrines must
not be ascribed to these alone. The fame corrup.
tions in the church of Rome which he condemned,
had been attacked long before his time. The fame
opinions which he now propagated, had been pub-
lifhed in different places, and were supported by
the fame arguments. Waldus in the twelfth
century, Wickliff in the fourteenth, and Huss
in the fifteenth, had inveighed against the errors

of popery with great boldness, and confuted
them with more ingenuity and learning than
could have been expeaed in those illiterate ages
in which they flourished. But all these prema-
ture attempts towards a reformation proved
abortive. Such feeble lights, incapable of dif-
pelling the darkness which then covered the
church, were soon extinguished; and though
the do&rines of these pious men produced some
effeas, and left some traces in the countries
where they taught, they were neither extenhive
nor considerable. Many powerful causes contri..
buted to facilitate Luther's progress, which
either did not exist, or did not operate with full
force in their days; and at that critical and ma-
ture junaure when he appeared, circumitances
of every kind concurred in rendering each fiep
that he took fuccefsful.

The long and scandalous schism which divided

the church during the latter part of the four-
teenth and the beginning of the fifteenth centu-
ries, had a great effe& in diminiihiug the vene-
ration with which the world had been accustomed
to view the papal dignity. Two or three con-
tending pontiffs roaming about Europe at a time;
fawning on the princes, whom they wanted to
gain; extorting large sums of money from the
countries which acknowledged their authority;
excommunicating their rivals, and cursing those
who adhered to them; discredited their preten-
fions to infallibility, and exposed both their per-
sons and their office to contempt. The laity, to
whom all parties appealed, came to learn that
some right of private judgment belonged to
them, and acquired the exercise of it so far as to

choose,

choose, among these infallible guides, whom
they would please to follow. The proceedings
of the councils of Confiance and Bafilfpread this'
difrefpefp for the Romish fee fill wider, and by
their bold exertion of authority in depoling and
eledting popes, taught men that there was in the
church a jurifdidion superior even.to the papal
power, which they had long belicved to be iu-

preme. The wound given on that occalion to the papal
authority was icarcely healed up, when the pon-
tificates of Alexander VI. and Julius II. both
able princes, but detefitable eccleiiaitics, raiffd
new scandal in Clhrifiendom. The profligate
morals of the former in private life; the fraud,
the injustice, and cruelty of his public adminilira-
tion, place him on a level with those tyrants,
whose deeds are the greatest reproach to hunman
nature. The latter, though a firanger to the
odious paffons which prompted his predecessor
to commit so many unnatural crimes, was under
the dominion of a restless and ungovernable am-
bition, that scorned all considerations of grati-
tude, of decency, or of justice, when they ob-
fitrufted the execution of his schemes. It was
hardly poflible to be filmly persuaded that the
infallible knowledge of a religion, whose chief
precepts are purity and humility, was depoiited
in the breasts of the profligate Alexander or the
overbearing Julius. The opinion of those who
exalted the authsority of a council above that of
the pope, spread wonderfully under their ponti.
ficates: and as the emperor and French kings,
who were alternately engaged in hoitilities with
those ative pontiffs, permitted and even encou-

3 raged

raged their fubjeas to expose their vices with all
the violence of inveaive and all the petulance of
ridicule, men's ears being accustomed to these,
were not shocked with the bold or ludicrous dif-
courses of Luther and his followers concerning
the papal dignity.

Nor were such excesses confined to the head of

the church alone. Many of the dignified clergy,
secular as wellas regular, being the younger sons
of noble families, who had assumed the ecclefiaf-
tical charaater for no other reason but that they
found in the church stations of great dignity and
affluence, were accuiomed totally to negled the
duties of their office, and indulged themselves
without reserve in all the vices to which great
wealth and idleness naturally give birth. Though
the inferior clergy were prevented by their po-
verty from imitating the expensive luxury of their
superiors, yet gross ignorance and low debauchery
rendered them as contemptible as the other were
odious f. The severe and unnatural law of celi-
bacy, to which both were equally fubjea, occa-
fioned such irregularities, that in several parts of
Europe the concubinage of priests was not only

f The corrupt slate of the church, prior to the Reform-

ation, is acknowledged by an author, who was both abun-
dantly able to judge concerning this matter, and who was
not over-forward to confefsit. " For some years (says Bel-
larmine) before the Lutheran and Calvinifrir herefies were
publiibed, there was not (as contemporary authors testify)
any severity in ecclefiaRical judicatories, any discipline with
regard to morals, any knowledge of sacred literature, any re-
verence for divine things; there was not almo't any religion
remaining." Bellarminus Concio xxviii. Oper. tom. vi.
col. a96. edit. Colon. 1617. apud Gesdefsi Hiit. Evan. Re-
novati, vol. i. p. 25.

vOL. II. 1v permit-

permitted but enjoined. The employing of a
remedy so contrary to the precepts of the Chris.
tian religion, is the ifrongeft proof that the
crimes it was intended to prevent were both nu-
merous and flagrant. Long before the sixteenth
century, many authors of great name and autho-
rity give such descriptions of the dissolute morals
of the clergy, as seem almost incredible in the
present age a. The voluptuous liees of ecclefi-
aftics occasioned great scandal, not only because
their manners were inconsistent with their sacred

S Centum Gravamina Nation. German. in Fafciculo Rer.

expetend. & fugiendarum, per Ortuinum Gratium, vol. i.
361. See innumerable passages to the fame purpose in the
appendix, or second volume, published by Edw. Brown.
See also Herm. vonder Hardt, Hist. Lit. Reform. pars iii.
and the vail colleftions of Walchius in his four volumes of
3tdonumenta Medit LEvi. Gutting. 1757.

The authors I have quoted enumerate the vices of the

clergy. When they ventured upon aaions manifefily crimi-
nal, we may conclude that they would be less scrupulous
wtth refpeat to the decorum of behaviourn Accordingly their
neglea of the decent condu& faitahie to their profeffion,
seems to have given great offence. In order to illuofrate this,
1 thall tranferibe one passage, becanfe it is taken not from
any author whole profeffed purpose it was to dercribe the im-
proper condu&t of the clergy ; and who, from prejudice or ar-
tifice, may be supposed to aggravate the charge againif them.
The emperor Charles IV. in a letter to the archbilhop of
Iblents, A. D. a359, exhoeting him to reform the difordersof
the clergy, thus expresses himfeif: " De Chrilli patrimonio,
ludos, haltiludia & torneamenta exercent; habitum milita.
rem cum prctextis aureis et argenteis geltant, et calceos mi.
litares; comam & barbam nutriunt, & nihil' quod ad vitam
& ordinem ecclefialhicum fpeaat, oflendunt. Militaribus fe
duntaxat & fecularibus aaibus, vita & moribus, in foae falu-
tis difpendium, & generale populi fcandalum, mmiftcent."
Coder Diplomaticus Anecdotorum, per Val. Ferd. Gude-
numa 4to. vol. iii. p. 435.

chlaraeer;

several of them raised from the lowerft fRations to
the greatest afluence, did not ihew the fame in.
dulgence to their excesses, as to those of persons
poffeiTed of hereditary wealth or grandeur; and
viewing their condition with more envy, they
censured their crimes with greater severity. No-
thing, therefore, could be more acceptable to
Luther's hearers, than the violence with which
he exclaimed against the immoralities of church.
men, and every person in his audience could,
from his own observation, confirm the truth of
his inve&ives.

The scandal of these crimes was greatly in-

creased by the facility with which such as com-
mitted them obtained pardon. In all the Euro-
pean kingdoms, the impotence of the civil magif.-
trate, under forms of government extremely
irregular and turbulent, made it necessary to
relax the rigour of juRice, and upon payment of
a certain fine or compofirion preferibed by law,
judges were accustomed to remit farther punish-
meot, even of the moit atrocious crimes. The
court of Rome, always attentive to the means of
augmenting its revenues, inmitated this pradice,
and, by a preposterous accommodation of it to
religious concerns, granted its pardons to such
transgressors as gave a fiim of money in order to
purchase them. As the idea of a composition
for crimes was then familiar, this strange traffic
was so far from ihocking mankind, that it soon
became general; and in order to prevent any im-
position in carrying it on, the officers of the
Roman chancery publifhcd a book, containing
the precise fum to be exaded for the pardon of

s 2 every

every particular fin. A deacon guilty of murder
was absolved for t'wenty crowns. A bishop or
abbot might affaffinate for three hundred livres.
Any ecclesiastic might violate his vows of chastity,
even with the molt aggravating circumitances,
for the third part of that fum. Even such ihock-
ing crimes, as occur seldom in human life, and
perhaps exilt only in the impure imagination of
a casuist, were taxed at a very moderate rate.
When a more regular and perfea mode of dif.
penfing jufLice came to be introduced into civil
courts, the praaice of paying a composition for
crimes went gradually into disuse; and mankind
having acquired more accurate notions concerning
religion and morality, the conditions on which
the court of Rome bellowed its pardons appeared
impious, and were considered as one great source
of ecclesiastical corruption ".

This degeneracy of manners among the clergy

might have been tolerated, perhaps, with greater
indulgence, if their exorbitant riches and power
had not enabled them, at the fame time, to en-
croach on the rights of every other order of
men. It is the genius of superstition, fond of
whatever is pompous or grand, to set no bounds
to its liberality towards persons whom it eiteems
sacred, and to think its expreflions of regard de.
feAive, unless it hath raised them to the height
of wealth and authority. Hence flowed the ex-
tensive revenues and jurifidialon poffeffed by the
church in every country of Europe, and which

h Fafickul. Rer. expet. & fug. L* 355. J. G. Schelhornil

Amenit. Literar. Francof. 17Z5. vol. ii. 369. Dition. de
Bayle, Artic. Banok & Tuppius. Taxa Cancellar. Roms.
az, edit. Francof. x65s. paflim.

were

undifcerning bounty they were at firdt derived.

The burden, however, of ecclesiastical op-

pression had fallen with such peculiar weight on
the Germans, as rendered them, though naturally
exempt from levity, and tenacious of their an-
cient customs, more inclinable than any people
in Eurone to liflen to those who called on them
to assert their liberty. During the long contests
between the popes and emperors concerning the
right of investiture, and the wars which these
occasioned, mout of the considerable German ec-
clefiaftica joined the papal fadion; and while
engaged in rebellion againfd the head of the em-
pire, they seized the Imperial domains and reve-
nues, and usurped the Imperial jurifdiiaion with-
in their own diocefes. Upon the re-efiablifhment
of tranquillity, they fill retained these uforp..
ations, as if by the length of an unjust poffeflion
they had acquired a legal right to them. The
emperors, too feeble to wrest them out of their
hands, were obliged to grant the clergy fiefs of
those ample territories, and they enjoyed all the
immunities as well as honours which belonged to
feudal barons. By means of these, many bishops
and abbots in Germany were not only ecclesial-
tics, but princes, and their charater and manners
partook more of the licence too frequent among
the latter, than of the fanaity which becamne
the former k

The unsettled fate of government in Germany,

and the frequent wars to which that country was
exposed, contributed in another manner towardB

i F. Paul, Hiflory of EcclefiafR. Beneficei, p. 107.

11 3 aggran-

aggrandising ecclefiaftics. The only property,
during those times of anarchy, which enjoyed
security from the opprefiion of the great, or the
ravages of war, was that which belonged to the
church. This was owing, not only to the great
reverence for the sacred charaaer prevalent in
those ages, but to a fuperititious dread of the
sentence of excommunication, which the clergy
were ready to denounce againif all who invaded
their poffeflions. Many observing this, made a
surrender of their lands to ecclefiaftics, and con-
fenting to hold them in fee of the church, ob.
tained as its vassals a degree of safety, which
without this device they were unable to procure.
By such an increase of the number of their
vassals, the power of ecclefiaftics received a real
and permanent augmentation; and as lands, held
in fee by the limited tenures common in those
ages, often returned to the persons on whom the
fefdepended, considerable additions were made
in this way to the property of the clergy I

The solicitude of the clergy in providing for

the safety of their own persons, was fcill greater
than that which they displayed in securing their
poffeffions; and their efforts to attain it were lill
more fuccefsful. As they were consecrated to
the priefily office with much outward solemnity;
were distinguished from the reft of mankind by a
peculiar garb and manner of life; and arrogated
to their order many privileges which do not be-
long to other Christians, they naturally became
the objeas of excellive veneration. As a super-

I F. Paul, Hicory of Eeclefias. Benefices, p. 66. Bou.

lainvillers, Etat de France, tom. i. I69. Lond. 1737.

I fitious

ings of a superior species to the profane laity,
whom it would be impious to try by the fame
laws, or to fubjeft to the fame punishments.
This exemption from civil jurifdiAion, granted
at firit to ecclefiaftics as a mark of refped, they
soon claimed as a point of right. This valuable
immunity of the priefihood is asserted, not only
in the decrees of popes and councils, but was
confirmed in the most ample form by many of
the greatest emperors . As long as the clerical
charader remained, the person of an ecclesiastic
was in some degree sacred; and unless he were
degraded from his office, the unhallowed hand
of the civil judge durst not touch him. But as
the power of degradation was lodged in the fpi-
ritual courts, the difficulty and expence of ob-
taining such a sentence, too often secured abfo-
lute impunity to offenders. Many assumed the
clerical charader for no other reason, than that
it might screen them from the punishment which
their aftions deserved ". The German nobles
complained loudly, that these anointed male,
fa&ors, as they called them ", seldom fuffered
capitally, even for the most atrocious crimes;
and their independence on the civil magistrate is
often mentioned in the remonifrances of the
diets, as a privilege equally pernicious to society,
and to the morals of the clergy.

While the clergy asserted the privileges of their

own order with so much zeal, they made conti.

I Goldafti Confitut. Imperial. Francof. 1673. vol. ii. 92.

107. m Rymer's Faede;a, vol, xiii. 53z.

a Centum Gravam. O 3'.

nual

nual encroachments upon those of the laity. All
causes relative to matrimony, to tefiaments, to
usury, to legitimacy of birth, as well as those
which concerned ecclefsaftical revenues, were
thought to be so conneded with religion, that
they could be tried only in the spiritual courts.
Not satisfied with this ample jurifdiAion, which
extended to one half of the fubjeas that give
rife to litigation among men, the clergy, with
wonderful indufiry, and by a thousand inven-
tions, endeavoured to draw all other canfes into
their own courts o. As they had engrossed almofl
thle whole learning known in the dark ages, the
spiritual judges were commonly so far superior in
knowledge and abilities to those employed in the
secular courts, that the people at first favoured
any firetch that was made to bring their affairs
under the cognizance of a judicature, on the de-
cifions of which they could rely with more per-
fess confidence than on those of the civil courts.
Thus the interest of the church, and the incihina-
tion of the people, concurring to chlde the ju-
rifdiaion of the lay-magifirate, soon reduced it
almost to nothing P. Dy means of this, vast
power accrued to ecclefiaftics, and no inconfider-
able addition was made to their revenue by the
sums paid in those ages to the persons who ad-
ministered justice.

The penalty by which the spiritual courts en-

forced their sentences, added great weight and
terror to their jurifdidion. The censure of ex-
communication was inflituted originally for pre-

0 Giannon& Hist. of Naples, book xix.  p
P Centum Gravanm 9. 56, 64. e

fervinga

offenders, whose impious tenets or profane lives
were a reproachto Christianity, might be cut off
from the society of the faithful: this ecclefiaftics
did not scruple to convert into an engine for pro-
moting their own power, and they infliaed it on
the molt frivolous occasions. Whoever despised
any of their decisions, even concerning civil mat-
ters, immediately incurred this dreadful censure,
which not only excluded them from all the pri-
vileges of a Chriffian, but deprived them of their
rights as men and citizens 5; and the dread of
this rendered even the molt fierce and turbulent
spirits obsequious to the authority of the church.

Nor did the clergy negle& the proper niethods

of preserving the wealth and power which they
had acquired with Luch indultry and address.
The poffeffions of the church, being consecrated
to God, were declared to be unalienable; so
that the funds of a society, which was daily
gaining, and could never lose, grew to be im-
mense. In Germany, it was computed that the
ecclefiafltics had got into their hands more than
one half of the national property '. In other
countries, the proportion varied; but the share
belonging to the church was every where prodi-
gious. These valt poffeflions were not fubjed to
the burdens imposed on the lands of the laity.
The German clergy were exempted by law from
all taxes S; and if, on any extraordinary emer-
gence, ecclefialtics were pleased to grant some

q Centum Gravam. d 34. r Ibid. j 28.
s Ibid. j 8. Goidafti Cont Imper. ii. 79. aol. Pfeffel

Hil. di Droit Publ. 350. 374.

aid

aid towards supplying the public exigencies,
this was considered as a free gift flowing from
their own generosity, which the civil magifirate
had no title to demand, far less to exaA. In
consequence of this firange solecism in govern-
ment, the laity in Germany had the mortification
to find themselves loaded with excessive impofi.
tions, because such as poffeffed the greatest pro.
perty were freed from any obligation to support
or to defend the state.

Grievous, however, as the exorbitant wealth

and numerous privileges of the clerical order were
to the other members of the Germanic body,
they would have reckoned it some mitigation of
the evil, if these had been poffeffed only by ec.
clefiaftics residing among themselves, who would
have been less apt to make an improper use of
their riches, or to exercise their rights with un-
becoming rigour. But the bishops of Rome
having early put in a claim, the boldest that ever
human ambition suggested, of being supreme and
infallible heads of the Christian church, they,
by their profound policy and unwearied perse-
verance, by their address in availing themselves
of every circumitance which occurred, by taking
advantage of the fuper{1ition of some princes, of
the neceflities of others, and of the credulity of
the people, at length established their preten.
lions, in opposition both to the interelt and com-
mon sense of mankind. Germany was the coun-
try which these ecclesiastical sovereigns governed
with most absolute authority. They excommu-
nicated and deposed some of its most illuitrious
emperors, and excited their fubjets, their mi,
nifters, and even their children, to take arms

against

continiually extended their own immunities, spoil-
ing the secular princes gradually of their most
valuable prerogatives, and the German church
felt all the rigour of that oppression which flows
from fubjeaion to foreign dominion, and foreign
exaaions.

The right of conferring benefices, which the

popes usurped during that period of confusion,
was an acquisition of great importance, and ex-
alted the ecclesiastical power upon the ruins of
the temporal. The emperors and other princes
of Germany had long been in poffeffion of this
right, which served to increase both their au-
thority and their revenue. But by wresting it
out of their hands, the popes were enabled to fill
the empire with their own creatures; they ac-
cu{iomed a great body of every prince's fubjeds
to depend, not upon him, but upon the Roman
fee; they bellowed upon strangers the richest
benefices in every country, and drained their
wealth to supply the luxury of a foreign court.
Even the patience of the most superstitious ages
could no longer bear such oppression; and so loud
and frequent were the complaints and murmurs
of the Germalns, that the popes, afraid of irri-
tating them too far, consented, contrary to their
usual praaice, to abate somewhat of their pre-
tenfdons, and to reft satisfied with the right of
nomination to such benefices as happened to fall
vacant during fix months in the year, leaving the
disposal of the remainder to the princes and other
legal patrons t.

t F. Faul, Hill. of Eccief. Benef. 204. Gold. Conflit.

Imper. i u8. 13ut

ents for eluding an agreement which put fitch
refiraints on its power. The pradice of referv.
ing certain benefices in every country to the
pope's immediate nomination, which had been
long known, and often complained of, was ex-
tended far beyond its ancient bounds. All the
benefices poffeffed by cardinals, or any of the
numerous officers in the Roman court; those
held by persons who happened to die at Rome,
or within forty miles of that city, on their
journey to or from it; such as became vacant by
translation, with many others, were included in
the number of reserved benefices; Julius II. and
Leo X. fitretching the matter to the utmost,
often collated to benefices where the right of re-
servation had not been declared, on pretence of
having mentally reserved this privilege to them-
selves. The right of reservation, however, even
with this extension, had certain limits, as it
could be exercised only where the benefice was
aaually vacant; and therefore, in order to ren-
der the exertion of papal power unbounded, ex-
pedatine graces, or mnandates nominating a person
to succeed to a benefice upon the firit vacancy
that (hould happen, were brought into use. By
means of these, Germany was filled with persons
who were servilely dependent on the court of
Rome, from which they had received such re-
verfionary grants; princes were defrauded, in a
great degree, of their prerogatives; the rights
of lay-patrons were pre-occupied, and rendered
almost entirely vain U.

u Centum Gravam. 0sa. Fdcic. Rer. expet. &Sc. 34*

Gold. Conft. Imper. i. 391. 404, 403. F. Paul, Hil. of
Eccl. Benef, 167. 199. The

powers were exercised, rendered them Rill more
odious and intolerable. The avarice and extor-
tion of the court of Rome were become excessive
almost to a proverb. The praaice of felling
benefices was so notorious, that no pains were
taken to conceal or to disguise it. Companies
of merchants openly purchased the benefices of
different difdrids in Germany from the pope's
ministers, and retailed them at an advanced
price x. Pious men beheld with deep regret
these fimoniacal tranfaaions, so unworthy the
ministers of a Christian church; while politicians
complained of the loss sustained by the export-
ation of so much wealth in that irreligious traffic.

The sums, indeed, which the court of Rome

drew, by its dated and legal impositions, from
all the countries acknowledging its authority,
were so considerable, that it is not ifrange that
princes, as well as their fubjeas, murmured
at the smallest addition made to them by un.
necessary or illicit means. Every ecclesiastical
person, upon his admission to his benefice, paid
annats, or one year's produce of his living, to
the pope; and as that tax was exaded with
great rigour, its amount was very great. To
this mull be added, the frequent demands made
by the popes of free gifts from the clergy, to-
gether with the extraordinary levies of tenths
upon ecclesiastical benefices, on pretence of ex-
peditions againit the Turks, seldom intended, or
carried into execution; and from the whole,
the vast proportion of the revenues of the church,

I Fakcic. Rer. expet. i. 359*

vOL.1. N which

estimated.

Such were the dissolute manners, the exorbi-

tant wealth, the enormous power and privileges
of the clergy, before the Reformation; such the
oppressive rigour of that dominion which the
popes had established over' the Christian world;
and such the sentiments concerning them that
prevailed in Germany at the beginning of the'
sixteenth century. Nor has this sketch been
copied from the controversial writers of that
age, who, in the heat of disputation, may be
fufpeaed of having exaggerated the errors, or
of having misrepresented the condud of that
church which they labonred to overturn; it is
formed upon more authentic evidence, upon the
memorials and remonftrances of the Imperial
diets, enuinerating the grievances under which
the empire groaned, in order to obtain the re
dress of them. Diffatisfadion muff have risen
to a great height among the people, when these
grave assemblies expressed themselves with that'
degree of acrimony which abounds in their re-
monstrances; and if they demanded the aboli-
tion of these enormities with so much vehe-
mence, the people, we may be assured, uttered
their sentiments and desires in bolder and more
virulent language.

To men thus prepared for thaking off the

yoke, Luther addressed himself with certainty
of success. As they had long felt its weight,
and had borne it with impatience, they liftened'
with joy to the first offer of procuring them de-
liverance. Hence proceeded the fond and eager
reception that his dodarines miet with, and the

rapidity

rapidity with which they spread over all the
provinces of Germany. Even the impetuosity
and fierceness of Luther's spirit, his confidence
in asserting his own opinions, and the arrogance
as well as contempt wherewith he treated all who
differed from him, which, in ages of greater
moderation and refinement, have been reckoned
defeds in the charaaer of that reformer, did
not appear excessive to his contemporaries, whose
minds were firongly agitated by those intereiing
controversies which he carried on, and who had
themselves endured the rigour of papal tyranny,
and seen the corruptions in the church against
which he exclaimed.

Nor were they offended at that gross scurrility

with which his polemical writings are filled, or
at the low buffoonery which he sometimes intro-
duces into his gravest discourses. No dispute
was managed in those rude times without a large
portion of the former; and the latter was com-
mon, even on the mouR solemn occasions, and
in treating the mod sacred fubjeAs. So far
were either of these from doing hurt to his cause5
that inveAive and ridicule had some effed, as
well as more laudable arguments, in exposing the
errors of popery, and in determining mankind
to abandon them.

Besides all these causes of Luther's rapid pro-

grefs, arising from the nature of his enterprise,
and the jundure at which he undertook it, he
reaped advantage from some foreign and adven-
titious circumstances, the beneficial influence of
which none of his forerunners in the fame course
had enjoyed. Among these may be reckoned
the invention of the art of printing, about half

N z a cen-

discovery, the facility of acquiring and of pro.
pagating knowledge was wonderfully increased,
and Luther's books, which must otherwise have
made their way slowly and with uncertainty into
distant countries, spread- at once all over Eu-
rope. Nor were they read only by the rich and
the learned, who alone had access to books be-
fore that invention; they got into the hands of
the people, who, upon this appeal to them as
judges, ventured to examine and to rejea many
doarines which they had formerly been required
to believe, without being taught to underitand
them.

The revival of learning at the fame period was

a circumifance extremely friendly to the Re-
formation. The Rudy of the ancient Greek and
Roman authors, by enlightening the human
mind with liberal and found knowledge, roused
it from that profound lethargy in which it had
been funk during several centuries. Mankind
seem, at that period, to have recovered the
powers of inquiring and of thinking for them-
selves, faculties of which they had long lofi the
use; and, fond of the acquisition, they exer-
cifed them with great boldness upon all fubjeas.
They were not now afraid of entering an uncom-
mon path, or of embracing a new opinion. No-
velty appears rather to have been a recommend-
ation of a doarine; and initead of being flartled
when the daring hand of Luther drew aside or
tore the veil which covered established errors,
the genius of the age applauded and aided the
attempt. Luther, though a firanger to elegance
in taRe or composition, zealously promoted the

cultivation

its being necessary to the right underfianding of
the feriptures, he himfeif had acquired confider-
able knowledge both in the Hebrew and Greek
tongues. Melandhon, and some other of his
disciples, were eminent proficients in the polite
arts; and as the fame ignorant monks who op--
pufed the introduftion of learning into Germany,
Let themselves with equal fierceness against Lu-
ther's opinions, and declared the good reception
of the latter to be the effed of the progress
which the former had made, the cause of karn-
ing and of the Reformation came to be confi-
dered as. closely conneaed with each other, and,
in every country, had the fame friends and the
fame enemies. This enabled the reformers to
carry on the contest at first with great superiority.
Erudition, indufiry, accuracy of sentiment, pu-
rity of composition, -even wit and raillery, were
almost wholly on their fide, and triumphed with
ease over illiterate monks, whose rude argu-
ments, expreifed in a perplexed and barbarous
flyle, were found infiuflicient for the defence of
a fyfiem, the errors, of which, all the art and in-
genuity of its later and more learned advocates
have not been able to palliate.

That bold spirit of inquiry, which the revival

of learning excited in Europe, was so favourable
to the Reformation, that Luther was aided in
his progress, and mankind were prepared to em-
brace his dofrines, by persons who did not wilt
foccefs to his undertaking. The greater part of
the ingenious men who applied to the fiudy of
ancient literature towards the close of the sis-
teenth century, and the beginning of the fin-

- 3 teenth,

haps no with, to overturn the established fyftexa
of religion, had discovered the absurdity of many
tenets and praaices authorized by the church,
and perceived the futility of those arguments by
which illiterate monks endeavoured to defend
them. Their contempt of these advocates for
the received errors, led them frequently to ex.
pose the opinions which they supported, and to
ridicule their ignorance with great freedom and
severity. By this, men were prepared for the
more serious attacks made upon them by Lu.
ther, and their reverence both for the doftrines
and persons againif whom he inveighed was con-
tiderably abated. This was particularly the
cafe in Germany. When the first attempts were
made to revive a taste for ancient learning in
that country, the ecclefiaftics there, who were
fill more ignorant than their brethren on the
other fide of the Alps, set themselves to oppose
its progress with more aaive zeal; and the pa-
trons of the new dtudies, in return, attacked
them with greater violence. In the writings of
Reiichlin, Hutten, and the other revivers of
learning in Germany, the corruptions of the
church tf Rome are censured with an acrimony
of style little inferior to that of Luther himfelfr.

From the fame cause proceeded the frequent

firiaures of Erasmus upon the errors of the
church, as well as upon the ignorance and vices
of the clergy. His reputation and authority
were so high in Europe, at the beginning of the

v Gerdefius H1I. Evang. Renoy. vol. i. p. 145. 157.

Seckend. lib. i. p. zo3. Vonder Hardt Hilt. Literar. Re.
form, pars ii.

sixteenth

such universal admiration, that the effe& of these
deserves to be mentioned as one of the circum-
Itances which contributed considerably towards
Luther's success. Erasmus, having been def-
tined for the church, and trained up in the
knowledge of ecclefiaffical literature, applied
himself more to theological inquiries than any
of the revivers of learning in that age. His
acute judgment and extensive erudition enabled
him to discover many errors, both in the dodrine
and worship of the Romiih church. Some of
these he confuted with great solidity of reasoning
and force of eloquence. Others he treated as
objeAs of ridicule, and turned againif them that
irresistible torrent of popular and satirical wit,
of which he had the command. There was
hardly any opinion or pradice of the Romish
church, which Luther endeavoured to reform,
but what had been previously animadverted upon
ty Erasmus, and had afforded him fubje& either
of censure or of raillery. Accordingly, when
Luther first began his attack upon the church,
Erasmus seemed to applaud his conduA; he
courted the friendship of several of his disciples
'and patrons, and condemned the behaviour and
spirit of his adversaries Z. He concurred openly
with him in inveighing againit the shoal divines,
as the teachers of a fyfiem equally unedifying and
obscure. He joined him in endeavouring to turn
the attention of men to the study of the holy
scriptures, as the only ilandard of religious
truth a.

a Seckend. Jib. L p; 40. 96.
a Vonder Hardt Hitor. Literar. Reform. pars i. Ger-

def. Hilt. Evang. Renov. i. 47.

Various

Erasmus from holding the fame course with
Luther. The natural timidity of his temper;
his want of that firength of mind which alone
can prompt a man to affime the charader ofa
reformer b ; his excessive deference for persons in
high flation; his dread of losing the pensions
and other emoluments, which their liberality had
conferred upon him; his extreme love of peace,
and hopes of reforming abuses gradually, and by
gentle methods, all concurred in determining him
not only to repress and to moderate the zeal
with which he had once been animated against
the errors of the church e, but to assume the
charader of a mediator between Luther and his
opponents. But though Erasmus soon began
to censure Luther as too daring and impetuous,
and was at lall prevailed upon to write againit
him, he must, neverihelefs, be considered as his
forerunner and auxiliary in this war upon the
church. He first feattered the feeds, which
Luther cherished and brought to maturity. His
raillery and oblique censures prepared the way
for Luther's invedives and more direa attacks.
In this light Erasmus appeared to the zealous
defenders of the Romilh church in his own

b Erasmus himfeif is candid enoogh to acknowledge this:

U Luther," says he, "' has given us many a whoiefome doc.
trine, and many a go-d counsel. I wilh he had not defeated
the effe61 of them by intolerable faults. ltut if he had w it-
ten every thing in the molt unexceptionable manner, I had
nm inclination to die for the fake of truth. Every man hath
not the courage requ;ite to make a martyr; aad I am
afraid that, if I were put to the trial, I Ihould imitate St.
Peter." Epift. Erafmi in Jortin's Life of Erafm. sal. i.
p. 273.

C Jortin's Life of Eralmus, vol. i. p. 258.

times.

every person conversant in the history of that

period. In this long enumeration of the circumfiances
which combined in favouring the progress of
Luther's opinions, or in weakening the resistance
of his adversaries, I have avoided entering into any
discussion of the theological doarines of popery,
and have not attempted to shew how repugnant
they are to the spirit of Christianity, and how
destitute of any foundation in reason, in the word
of God, or in the pradice of the primitive
church, leaving those topics entirely to ecclefiaf-
tical historians, to whose province they peculiarly
belong. But when we add the effea of these
religious considerations to the influence of poli-
tical causes, it is obvious that the united opera-
tion of both on the human mind must have been
sudden and irresistible. Though, to Luther's con-
temporaries, who were too near perhaps to the
scene, or too deeply interested in it, to trace the
causes with accuracy, or to examine them with
coolness, the rapidity with which his opinions
spread appeared to be so unaccountable, that some
of them imputed it to a certain uncommon and ma-
lignant position of the fiars, which scattered the
spirit of giddiness and innovation over the
world c it is evident, that the success of the
Reformation was the natural effe& of many pow-
erful causes prepared by peculiar providence,
and happily conspiring to that end. This at-
tempt to investigate these causes, and to throw

d Vonder Hardt Hil. Literar. Reform, pars i. p. a.
c JoviiHiftoria, Lut. 1553. fol. p. 134.

light

light on an event so fingulda and importact, will
not, perhaps, be -deemed an unnecessary digref-
fion.-I return from it to the course of the
history.

1521.] The diet at Worms conduAed its de-

liberations with that flow formality peculiar to
such assemblies. Much time was spent in elia-
blifhing some regulations with regard to the in-
ternal police of the empire. The jurifdiaion of
the Imperial chamber was confirmed, and the
forms of its proceeding rendered more fixed and
regular. A council of regency was appointed
to affifit Ferdinand in the government of the em-
pire during any occasional absence of the empe-
ror; which, from the extent of the emperor's
dominions, as well as the multiplicity of his
affairs, was an event that might be. frequently ex-
peaed f. The slate of religion was then taken
into consideration. There were not wanting
some plausible reasons which might have induced
Charles to have declared himself the protedor of
Luther's cause, or at least to have connived at its
progress. If he had poffeffed no other domi-
nions but those which belonged to him in Ger-
many, and no other crown befsdes the Imperial,
he might have been disposed, perhaps, to favour
a man, who asserted so boldly the privileges and
immunities for which the empire had firuggled
so long with the popes. But the vast and dan-
gerous schemes which Francis I. was forming
againit Charles, made it necessary for him to re-
gulate his condu& by views more extensive than

f Pont. -euter. Rer. Auftr. lib. viii. c. 5!. p. '95.

Pfeffd Abrige Chronol. P. t98. thlofe

prince; and it being of the utmost importance
to secure the pope's friendship, this determined
him to treat Luther with great severity, as the
most effeaual method of soothing Leo into a
concurrence with his measures. His eagerness
to accomplish this rendered him not unwilling to
gratify the papal legates in Germany, who in-
lifted that, without any delay or formal delibe-
ration, the diet ought to condemn a man whom
the pope had already excommunicated as an in-
corrigible heretic. Such an abrupt manner of
proceeding, however, being deemed unprece.
dented and unjust by the members of the diet,
they made a point of Luther's appearing in per-
son, and declaring whether he adhered or not to
those opinions which had drawn upon him the
centureg of the church . Not only the empe-
ror, but all the princes through whose territories
he had to pass, granted him a fafe-condda; and
Charles wrote to him at the fame time [March6],
requiring his immediate attendance on the diet,
and renewing his promises of proteaion from any
injury or violence h. Luther did not hesitate one
moment about yielding obedience, and set out
for Worms, attended by the herald who had
brought the emperor's letter and fafe-condu&.
While on his journey, many of his friends,
ivhom the fate of Huos under similar circum-
fiances, and notwithfRanding the fame security of
an imperial fafe-condu&, filled with solicitude,
advised and entreated him not to ruih wantonly
into the midst of danger. But Luther, superior

I I'. MIar'. Ep. 7a2. h Luth. Oper. ii. 415.

" I am lawfully called," said he, "s to appear in
that city, and thither will I go in the name of
the Lord, though as many devils, as there are
tiles on the houses, were there combined againit

me

The reception which he met with at Worms

was such as he might have reckoned a full re-
ward of all his labours, if vanity and the love of
applause had been the principles by which he
was influenced. Greater crowds aflembled to
behold him, than had-appeared at the emperor's
public entry; his apartments were daily filled
with princes and personages of the highelt rank k,
and he was treated with all the refpe& paid to
those who polfefs the power of direaing the un.
derifanding and sentiments of other men; an
homage, more sincere, as well as more flattering,
than any which pre-eminence in birth or condi-
tion can command. At his appearance before
the diet, he behaved with great decency, and
with equal firmness. He readily acknowledged
an excess of vehemence and acrimony in his con.
troverfial writings, but refused to retraa his
opinions, unless he were convinced of their false-
hood; or to confeut to their being tried by any
other rule than the word of God. When neither
threats nor entreaties could prevail on him to
depart from this resolution, fume of the ecclefi-
aftics proposed to imitate the example of the
council of Constance, and by punilhing the au-
thor of this pestilent heresy, who was now in

i Luth. Oper. ii. 421.
k Seckend. 156. Luth. Oper. ii. 414 t

their

fnch an evil. But the members of the diet re-
fusing to expose the German integrity to fresh
reproach by a second violation of public faith;
and Charles being no less unwilling to bring a
itain upon the beginning of his administration by
such an ignominious aaion,Luther was permitted
to depart in safety . A few days after he left
the city [April 26], a severe edia was published
in the emperor's name, and by authority of the
diet, depriving him, as an obitinate and excom-
municated criminal, of all the privileges which
he enjoyed as a fubje& of the empire, forbid-
ding any prince to harbour or protea him, and
requiring all to concur in seizing his person as
soon as the term specified in his fafe-condua
was expired m

But this rigorous decree had no considerable

cffe&, the execution of it beingprevented, partly
by the multiplicity of occupations, which the
commotions in Spain, together with the wars in
Italy and the Low Countries, created to the em-
peror; and partly by a prudent precaution em-
ployed by the eleaor of Saxony, Luther's faith-
ful and discerning patron. As Luther, on his
return from Worms, was passing near Altenfteins
in Thuringia, a number of horsemen in masks
ruihed suddenly out of a wood, where the eleaor
had appointed them to lie in wait for him, and
surrounding his company, carried him, after dif-
mifling allhis attendants, to Wartburg, a strong
caffle not far difitant. There the eleaor ordered

. F. Paul. Hifl. of Counc. p. 13. Seckend. i6o.
m Gold. Conit. Imperial. ii. 40S.

TOL. 11. 0, o Im

agreeable, but the place of his retreat was care-
fully concealed, until the fury of the present
ilorm against him began to abate, upon a change
in the political situation of Europe. In this
solitude, where he remained nine months, and
which he frequently called his Patmos, after the
name of that island to which the apostle John
was banished, he exerted his usual vigour and
indudry in defence of his doarines, or in con-
futation of his adversaries, publishing several
treatises, which revived the spirit of his fol-
lowers, astonished to a great degree, and dif.
heartened at the sudden disappearance of their
leader.

During his confinement, his opinions continu-

ed to gain ground, acquiring the ascendant in
almost every city in Saxony. At this time, the
Auguftinians of Wittemburg, with the approba-
tion of the university, and the connivance of the
eleAor, ventured upon the first flep towards an
alteration in the eftablithed foims of public wor-
ship, by abolishing the celebration of private
masses, and by giving the cup as well as the
bread to the laity in administering the sacrament
of the Lord's supper.

Whatever consolation the.courage and success

of his disciples, or the progress of his doarines
in his own country, afforded Luther in his re-
treat, he there received information of two events
which considerably damped his joy, as they seem-
ed to lay infoperable obihacles in the way of
propagating his principles, in the two mofd
powerful kingdoms of Europe. One was, a
solemn decree,condemning his opinions, published

by

at that time, the most refpe&able of the learned
societies in Europe. The other was the answer
written to his book concerning the Babyloniih
captivity by H-enry VIII. of England. That
monarch, having been educated under the eye of
a suspicious father, who, in order to prevent his
attending to business, kept him occupied in the
study of literature, still retained a greater love
of learning, and fitronger habits of application to
it, than are common among princes of so adive
a disposition and such violent passions.. Being
ambitious of acquiring glory of every kind, as
well as zealously attached to the Romilh church,
and highly exasperated against Luther, who had
treated Thomas Aquinas, his favourite author,
with great contempt, Henry did not think it
enough to exert his royal authority in opposing
the opinions of the reformer, but resolved like-
wife to combat them with scholastic weapons.
With this view he published his treatise on the
Seven Sacraments, which, though forgotten at
present, as books of controversy always are, when
the occasion that produced them is past, is not
destitute of polemical ingenuity and acuteness,
and was represented by the flattery of his cour-
tiers to be a work of such wonderful science
and learning, as exalted him no less above other
authors in merit, than he was diftingnifhed
among them by his rank. The pope, to whom
it was presented with the grcatcit formality in
full consistory, spoke of it in such terms, as if it
had been diftated by immediate inspiration; and
as a testimony of the gratitude of the church for
his extraordinary zeal, conferred on him the title

oz of

Henry soon forfeited in the opinion of those from
whom he derived it, and which is flill retained
by his successors, though the avowed enemies
of those opinions, by contending for which he
merited that honourable diftinaion. Luther,
who was not overawed, either by the authority
of the university, or the dignity of the mo-
narch, soon published his animadverfions on both,
in a flyle no less vehement and severe, than he
would have used in confuting his meanest an-
tagonift. This indecent boldness, inflead of
thocking his contemporaries, was considered by
them as a new proof of his undaunted spirit. A
controversy managed by difputants so illuifrious,
drew universal attention; and such was the con-
tagion of the spirit of innovation, diffufed through
Europe in that age, and so powerful the evidence
which accompanied the doarines of the reform.
ers on their firit publication, that, in spite of
both the civil and ecclesiastical powers combined
againPt them, they daily gained converts both in
France and in England.

How desirous soever the emperor might be to

put a flop to Luther's progress, he was often
obliged, during the diet at Worms, to turn his
thoughts to matters still more interesting, and
which demanded more immediate attention. A
war was ready to break out between him and the
French king in Navarre, in the Low Countries,
and in Italy; and it required either great address
to avert the danger, or timely and wife precau-
tions to refilt it. Every circumitance, at that
junaure, inclined Charles to prefer the former
measure. Spain was torn with intestine commo-

tions,

the assistance of any one ally. In the Low
Countries, his fubjeas trembled at the thoughts
of a rupture with France, the fatal effeAs of
which on their commerce they had often ex-
perienced. From these considerations, as well
as from the solicitude of Chievres, during his
whole administration, to maintain peace between
the two monarchs, proceeded the emperor's back-
wardnefs to commence hostilities. But Francis
and his ministers did not breathe the fame pa-
cific spirit. He easily foresaw that concord could
not long fubhift, where interest, emulation, and
ambition conspired to dissolve it; and he poffeff-
ed several advantages which flattered him with
the hopes of surprising his rival, and of overpower-
ing him before he could put himself in a posture
of defence. The French king's dominions, from
their compa& situation, from their fubjeaion to
the royal authority, from the genius of the peo-
ple, fond of war, and attached to their sovereign
by every tie of duty and affeaion, were more ca-
pable of a great or sudden effort, than the larger
but disunited territories of the emperor, in one
part of which the people were -in arms against
his ministers, and in all his prerogative was more
limited than that of his rival.

The only princes, in whose power it was to

have kept down, or to have extinguithed this
flame on its firit appearance, either negleaed to
exert themselves, or were aaive in kindling and
spreading it. Henry VIII. though he affeded
to assume the name of mediator, and both parties
made frequent appeals to him, had laid aside the
impartiality which suited that charader. Wol-

03 fey,

fey, by his artifices, had estranged him so en-
tirely from the French king, that he secretly
'fomented the discord which he ought to have
composed, and waited only for some decent
pretext to join his arms to those of the em-
peror n.

Leo's endeavours to excite discord between

the emperor and Francis were more avowed, and
had gkeater influence. Not only his duty, as the
common father of Christendom, but his interest
as an Italian potentate, called upon the pope to
at as the guardian of the public tranquillity,
and to avoid any measure that might overturn
the system, which, after much bloodshed, and
mnany negotiations, was now established in Italy.
Accordingly Leo, who initantly discerned the
propriety of this condua, had formed a scheme,
upon Charles's promotion to the Imperial dig-
nity, of rendering himself the umpire between
the rivals, by soothing them alternately, while
he entered into no close confederacy with either;
and a pontiff less ambitious and enterprising,
might have saved Europe from many calamities
by adhering to this plan. But this high-fpirited
prelate, who was still in the prime of life, longed
passionately to diftinguimh his pontificate by some
splendid aion. He was impatient to wath
away the infamy of having loft Parma and Pla-
centia, the acquisition of which refleaed so much
lustre on the adminifiration of his predecessor
Julius. He beheld, with the indignation natural
to Italians in that age, the dominion which the
Transalpine, or as they, in imitation of the Ro-

n Herbert. Fiddes's Life of Wolsey, 25S.

man

nations, had attained in Italy. He flattered him-
seif, that after assisting the one monarch to fitrip
the other of his poffeffions in that country, he
night find means of driving out the vidor in his
turn, and acquire the glory of refloring Italy to
the liberty and happiness which it had enjoyed
before the invasion of Charles VIII. when every
state was governed by its native princes, or its
own laws, and unacquainted with a foreign yoke.
Extravagant and chimerical as this projea may
seem, it was the favourite objea of almost every
Italian eminent for genius or enterprise during
greatpart of the sixteenth century. They vainly
hoped, that by superior skill in the artifices and
refinements of negotiation, they should be able
to baffle the efforts of nations, less polished in-
deed than themselves, but much more powerful
and warlike. So alluring was the profped of
this to Leo, that notwithitanding the gentleness
of his disposition, and his fondness for the plea-
fures of a refined and luxurious ease, he hastened
to disturb the peace of Europe, and to plunge
himself into a dangerous war, with an impetuo-
fity fearcely inferior to that of the turbulent and
martial Julius o.

It was in Leo's power, however, to choose

which of the monarchs he would take for his
confederate against the other. `Both of them
courted his friendship; he wavered for some time
between them, and at firit concluded an alliance
with Francis. The obje& of this treaty was
the conquest of Naples, which the confederates

* Guic. lib. zir. p. '73. agreed

agreed to divide between them. The pope, it
is probable, flattered himself, that the brilk and
ad.ive spirit of Francis, seconded by the fame
qualities in his fubjeas, would get the flart of
the flow and wary councils of the emperor, and
that they might over-run with ease this detach-
ed portion of his dominions, ill provided for de-
fence, and always the prey of every invader. But
whether the French king, by discovering too
openly his suspicion of Leo's sincerity, difap.
pointed these hopes; whether the treaty was
only an artifice of the pope's to cover the more
serious negotiations which he was carrying on
with Charles; whether he was enticed by the
profpea of reaping greater advantages from an
union with that prince; or whether he was
soothed by the zeal which Charles had mani-
fefied for the honour of the church in condemn-
ing Luther; certain it is, that he soon deserted
his new ally, and made overtures of friendship,
though with great secrecy, to the emperorp.
Don John Manuel, tihe fame man who had been
the favourite of Philip, and whose address had
disconcerted all Ferdinand's schemes, having been
delivered, upon the death of that monarch, from
the prison to which he had been confined, was
now the Imperial ambassador at Rome, and fully
capable of improving this favourable disposition
in the pope to his mailer's advantage q. To
him the condu& of this negotiation was entire-
ly committed; and being carefully concealed
oiom Chievres, whose aversion from a war with

P Guic, lib. xiv. p. 175. Mem. de Eellay, Par. 5573. P. 24.
q Jovii Vita Leonis, lIb. iv. p. 89.

France

to defeat it, an alliance between the pope and
emperor was quickly concluded r [May 8].
The chief articles in this treaty, which proved
the foundation of Charles's grandeur in Italy,
were, that the pope and'emperor ihould join
their forces to expel the French out of the Mi-
lanefe, the poffeffion of which (hould be granted
to Francis Sforza, a son of Ludovico the Moor,
who had resided at Trent since the time that his
brother Maximilian had been difpoffeffcd of his
dominions by the French king; that Parma and
Placentia should be restored to the church; that
the emperor should affifk the pope in conquering
Ferrara; that the annual tribute paid by the
kingdom of Naples to the Holy See Thould be
increased; that the emperor should take the fa-
mily of Medici under his prote&ion; that he
lhould grant to the cardinal of that name a peni
sion of ten thousand ducats upon the archbi-
lhopric of Toledo; and should fettle lands in the
kingdom of Naples to the fame value upon Alex-
ander the natural son of Lorenzo de Medici.

The tranfading an affair of such moment with-

ont his participation, appeared to Chievres so
decisive a proof of his having loft the ascendant
which he had hitherto maintained over the mind
of his pupil, that his chagrin on this account,
added to the melancholy with which he was over-
whelmed on taking a view of the many and un-
voidable calamities attending a war againit France,
is said to have ihortened his days S. But though

r Guic. I. xiv. 18z. Mem. de Bellay, P. 24. Du Mont,

Corps Diplom. tom. iv. suppl. p. 96.

' Belcsrii Comment. de Reb. Gallic, 413

this,

torians, fond of attributing every thing that be-
falls illustrious personages to extraordinary causes,
and of ascribing even their diseases and death to
the effeea of political passions, which are more apt
to disturb the enjoyment than to abridge the
period of life, it is certain that his death, at
this critical junaure, extinguished all hopes
of avoiding a rupture with France t. This
event, too, delivered Charles from a minister, to
whose authority he had been accustomed from
his infancy to submit with such implicit defe-
rence, as checked and deprefled his genius, and
retained him in a slate of pupilage, unbecoming
his years as well as his rank. But this reifraint
being removed, the native powers of his mind
were permitted to unfold themselves, and he be-
gan to display such great talents, both in coun-
cil and in aamion, as exceeded the hopes of his con-
temporariesu, and command the admiration of

posterity. While the pope and emperor were preparing,
in consequence of their secret alliance, to attack
Milan, hostilities commenced in another quarter.
The children of John d'Albret, king ofNavarre,
having often demanded the restitution of their
hereditary dominions, in terms of the treaty of
Noyon, and Charles having as often eluded their
requests upon very frivolous pretexts, Francis
thought himself authorized by that treaty to
assist the exiled family. The junaure appeared
extremely favourable for such an enterprise.
Charles was at a distance from that part of his

t P. Neuter. Rer. Auifriac. lib. vill, c. as. p. 197.
u P. Marc.EP.735. dominions ;

had been called away to quell the commotions
in Spain; the Spanith malecontents warmly so-
licited him to invade Navarre x, in which a con-
fiderable fadion was ready to declare for the
descendants of their ancient monarchs. But in
order to avoid, as much as poflible, giving of-
fence to the emperor or king of England, Francis
direaed forces to be levied, and the war to be
carried on, not in his own name, but in that of
Henry d'Albret. The condua of these troops
was committed to Andrew de Foia, de l'Efparre,
a young iobleman, whom, his near alliance to
the unfortunate king, whose battles he was
to fight, and what was frill more powerful,
the intereit of his sifter, Madame de Chateau-
Briand, Francis's favourite mistress, recommended
to that important trust, for which he had neither
talents nor experience. But as there was no
army in the field to oppose him, he became maf-
ter, in a few days, of the whole kingdom of Na-
varre, without meeting with any obitruaion but
from the citadel of Pampeluna. The additional
works to this fortress, begun by Ximenes, were
still unfinished; nor would its flight resistance
have deserved notice, if Ignatio Loyola, a Bis-
cayan gentleman, had not been dangerously
wounded in its defence. During the progress of
a lingering cure, Loyola happened to have no
other amusement than what he found in reading
the lives of the faints: the effed of this on his
mind, naturally enthusiastic but ambitious and
daring, was to inspire him with such a desire of

z P. Mart. Ep. 72z. emulating

the Romnifh church, as led him into the wildePt
and most extravagant adventures, which terminat-
ed at last in initituting the society ofJefuits, the
most political and best regulated of all the mo-
nastic orders, and from which mankind have deriv-
ed more advantages, and received greater injury,
than from any other of those religious frater-
nutles.

If, upon the redu&ion of Pampeluna, L'Ef.

parre had been satisfied with taking proper pre-
cautions for securing his conquest, the kingdom
of Navarre might still have remained annexed
to the crown of France, in reality, as well as in
title. But, pushed on by youthful ardour, and
encouraged by Francis, who was too apt to be
dazzled with success, he ventured to pass the
confines of Navarre, and to lay siege to Logrog.
uo, a small town in Caflile. This roused the
Caftilians, who had hitherto beheld the rapid
progress of his arms with great unconcern, and
the dissensions in that kingdom (of which a full
account shall be given) being almost composed,
both parties exerted themselves with emulation
in defence of their country; the one, that it might
efface the memory of past mifconduE by its pre-
sent zeal; the other, that it might add to the
merit of having subdued the emperor's rebellious
fubjeas, that of repulsing his foreign enemies.
The sudden advance of their troops, together
with the gallant defence made by the inha.
bitants of Logrogno, obliged the French ge-
neral to abandon his rash enterprise. The Spa.
nifh army, which increased every day, harassing
him during his retreat, he, initead of taking

shelter

ing the arrival of some troops which were march-
ing to join him, attacked the Spaniards, though
far superior to him in number, with great im-
petuofity, but with so little conduar, that his
forces were totally routed, he himself, together
with his principal officers, was taken prisoner,
and Spain recovered poffeflion of Navarre in itill
ihorter time than the French had spent in the
conquest of it Y.

While Francis endeavoured to justify his in-

vafion of Navarre, by carrying it on in the
name of Henry d'Albret, he had recourse to an
artifice much of the fame kind, in attacking
another part of the emperor's territories. Ro-
bert de la Mark, lord of the small but inde-
pendent territory of Bouillon, situated on the
frontiers of Luxembourg and Champagne, having
abandoned Charles's service on account of an
encroachment which the Aulic council had made
on his jurifdidion, and having thrown himself
upon France for proteaion, was easily perfuad-
ed, in the heat of his resentment, to fend a he-
rald to Worms, and to declare war against the
emperor in form. Such extravagant insolence
in a petty prince surprised Charles, and appeared
to him a certain proof of his having received pro-
mises of powerful support from the French king.
The jufitnefs of this conclusion soon became evi-
dent. Robert entered the duchy of Luxem-
bourg with troops levied in France, by the king's
connivance, though seemingly in contradition to
his orders, and after ravagmg the open country,

' Mem. deBelly, p. 21. P. Mart. Ep. 726.

VrL. nI. P laid

loudly, as a direaE violation of the peace subsisting
between the two crowns, and summoned Henry
VIII., in terms of the treaty concluded at Lon-
don in the year one thousand five hundred and
eighteen, to turn his arms again11 Francis as the
fird aggressor. Francis pretended that he was
not answerable for Robert's condu&, whose ar-
my fought under his. own ilandards, and in his
own quarrel; and affirmed, that, contrary to an
express prohibition, he had seduced some fubjees
of France into his service; but Henry paid so
little regard to this evasion, that the French king,
rather than irritate a prince whom he fiil hoped
to gain, commanded De la Mark to dilband his
troops Z.

The emperor, meanwhile, was assembling an

army to chaifife Robert's insolence. Twirenty
thousand men, under the count of Nassau, in-
vadedhis little territories, and in a few days be-
came maiters of every place in them but Sedan..
After making him feel so sensibly the weight of
his maiter's.indignation, Nassau advanced towards
the frontiers of France; and Charles, knowing
that he might presume so far on Henry's par-
tiality in his favour, as not to be overawed by the
fame fears which had refkrained Francis, ordered
his general to besiege Moufon. The cowardice
of the garrison having obliged the governor to
surrender almost without refitance, Nassau in-
veiled Mezieres, a place at that time of no con-
iiderable fitrength, but so advantageously situated,

a Mem. de Bellay, p. aa, &c. Meam. de Fleurange3,

p. 335g &c.

t
5 . that

might have penetrated into the heart of Cham;
pagne, in which there was hardly any other
town capable of obitruning its progress. Hap-
pily for France, its monarch, sensible of the im;
portance of this fortress, and of the danger to
which it was exposed, committed the defence of
it to the chevalier Bayard, distinguished among
his contemporaries by the appellation of The
knight without fear, and without reproach a. This
man, whose prowess in combat, whose pundilious
honour and formal gallantry, bear a nearer refem.
blance, than any thing recorded in history, to the
charaaer aferibed to the heroes of chivalry, pof-
sessed all the talents which form a great general.
These he had many occasions of exerting in the
defence of Mezieres ; partly by his valour, partly
by his conduct, he protrafed the liege to a great
length, and in the end obliged the Imperialists
to raise it, with disgrace and loss b. Francis,
at the head of a numerous army, soon retook
Moufon, and entering the Low Countries, made
several conquests of small importance.. -In the
neighbourhood of Valenciennes, through an ex-
cess of caution, an error with which he cannot
be often charged, he loft an opportunity of cut-
ting off the whole Imperial army C; and what
was still more unfortunate, he disgusted Charles
duke of Bourbon, high conitable of France, by
giving the command of the van to the duke
D'Alen9on, though this post of honour belong-
ed to Bourbon, as a prerogative of his oflce.

a Oeuvres de Brantome, tom. vi. 154.
t) Mem, deo ellay, p. 25, &c.
c P. Mart. Ep. 747. Mem deBelsay, 35.

2 During

During these operations in the field, a con-

grefs was held at Calais [Auguit] under the
mediation of Henry VIII. in order to bring all
differences to an amicable issue; and if the in-
tentions of the mediator had corresponded in any
degree to his profeffions, it could hardly have
failed of producing some good effea. But Henry
committed the sole management of the negoti-
ation, with unlimited powers, to Wolsey; and
this choice alone was fufficient to have rendered
it abortive. That prelate, bent on attaining the
papal crown, the great objea of his ambition,and
ready to sacrifice every thing in order to gain
the emperor's interest, was so little able to con.
ceal his partiality, that, if Francis had not been
well acquainted with his haughty and vindidive
temper, he would have declined his mediation.
Much time was spent in enquiring who had be-
gun hostilities, which Wolsey affeaed to repre-
sent as the, principal point; and by throwing the
blame of that on Francis, he hoped to justify,
by the treaty of London, any alliance into which
his master fbould enter with Charles. The con-
ditions on which hostilities might be terminated
came nest to be considered; but with regard to
these, the emperor's proposals were fich, as dif.
covered either that he was utterly averse to peace,
or that he knew Wolsey would approve of what-
ever terms ihould be offered in his name. He
demanded the restitution of the duchy of Bur-
gundy, a province, the poffeilion of which would
have given him access into the heart of France;
and required to be released from the homage due
to the crown of France for the counties of
Slanders and Artois, which none of his apcef-

tors

himself by the treaty of Noyon to renew. These
terms, to which an high-fpirited prince would
scarcely have listened, after the disasters of an
unfortunate war, Francis rejeaed with great
disdain; and Charles (hewing no inclination to
comply with the more equal and moderate
propositions of the French monarch, that he
lhould restore Navarre to its lawful prince, and
withdraw his troops frdm the siege of Tournay,
the congress broke up without any other effea
than that which attends unfuccefsful negotia-
tions, the exasperating of the parties whom it
was intended to reconcile .

During the continuance of the congress, Wol-

fey, on pretence that the emperor himself would
be more willing to make reasonable concessions
than his ministers, made an excursion to Bruges,
to meet that monarch. He was received by
Charles, who knew his vanity, with as much
refpe6t and magnificence as if he had been king
of England. But instead ofadvancing the treaty
of peace by this interview, Wolsey, in his mat-
ter's name, concluded a league with the emperor
against Francis; in which it was ifipulated, that
Charles (hould invade France on the lide of
Spain, and Henry in Picardy, each with an
army of forty thousand men; and that, in order
to strengthen their union, Charles (hould espouse
the princess Mary, Henry's only child, and the
apparent heir of his dominions e. Henry pro-
duced no better reasons for this measure, equally

d P.Mart. p. 739. Herbert.
C Rymer, Fuder. Eiii. Herbert.

P 3 unjulk

unjust and impolitic, than the article in the treaty
of London, by which he pretended that he was
bound to take arms againit the French king as the
first aggressor ; and the injury which he alleged
Francis had done him, in permitting the duke of
Albany, the head of a faEtion in Scotland,
which opposed the interest of England, to return
into that kingdom. He was influenced, how-
ever, by other considerations. The advantages
which accrued to his fubjeas from maintaining
an exaA neutrality, or the honour that resulted
to himself from aaing as the arbiter between
the contending princes, appeared to his youthful
imagination so inconsiderable, when compared
with the glory which might be reaped from
leading armies or conquering provinces, that he
determined to remain no longer in a slate ofin-
adivity. Having once taken this resolution,
his inducements to prefer an alliance with Charles
were obvious. He had no claim upon any part
of that prince's dominions, most of which were
so situated, that he could not attack them with-
out great difficulty and disadvantage; whereas
several maritime provinces of France had been
long in the hands of the English monarchs,
whose pretensions, even to the crown of that
kingdom, were not as yet altogether forgotten;
and the poffeflion of Calais not only gave him
cafy access into some of those provinces, but in
cafe of any disaster, afforded him a secure re-
treat. While Charles attacked France on one
frontier, Henry flattered himself that he should
find little resistance on the other, and that the
glory of re-annexing to the crown of England,
the ancient inheritance of its monarchs on the

continent

artfully encouraged these vain hopes, which led
his master into such measures as were moi foub.
servient to his own secret schemes; and the
English, whone hereditary animosity against the
French was apt to rekindle on every occasion,
did not disapprove of the martial spirit of their

sovereign. Meanwhile the league between the pope and
the emperor produced great effedts in Italy, and
rendered Lombardy the chief theatre of war.
There was, at that time, such contrariety be-
tween the charaaer of the French and the Ita-
lians, that the latter submitted to the govern-
ment of the former with greater impatience than
they expressed under the dominion of other so-
reigners. The phlegm of the Germans and
gravity of the Spaniards suited their jealous
temper and ceremonious manners better than the
French gaiety, too prone to gallantry, and too
little attentive to decorum. Lewis XII. how-
ever, by the equity and gentleness of his admi-
nifration, and by granting the Milanese more
extensive privileges than those they had enjoyed
under their native princes, had overcome, in a
great measure, their prejudices, and reconciled
them to the French government. Francis, on
recovering that duchy, did not imitate the ex-
ample of his predecessor. Though too generous
himself to oppress his people, his boundless con-
fidence in his favourites, and his negligence in
examining into the condua of those whom he
entrufled with power, emboldened them to ven-
ture upon many ads of oppreflion. The go-
vernment of Milan was committed by him to

Odet

brother of Madame de Chateau-Briand, an offi-
cer of great experience and reputation, but
haughty, imperious, rapacious, and incapable
either of listening to advice or of bearing
contradidion. His insolence and exaaions to-
tally alienated the affeaions of the Milanese from
France, drove many of the conjiderable citizens
into banijhment, and forced others to retire for
their own safety. Among the lait was Jerome
Moroni, vice-chancellor of Milan, a man whose
genius for intrigue and enterprise distinguished
him in an age and country, where violent sac-
tions, as well as frequent revolutions, affording
great scope for such talents, produced or called
them forth in great abundance. He repaired to
Francis Sforza, whose brother Maximilian he had
betrayed; and fulpeAing the pope's intention of
attacking the Milanese, although his treaty with
the emperor was not yet made public, he pro-
posed to Leo, in name of Sforza, a scheme for
fnirprifing several places in that duchy by means
of the exiles, who, from hatred to the French,
and from attachment to their former mailers,
were ready for any desperate enterprise. Leo
not only encouraged the attempt, but advanced
a considerable fum towards the execution of it;
and when, through unforeseen accidents, it failed
of success in every part, he allowed the exiles,
who had assembled in a body, to retire to Reg-
gio, which belonged at that time to the church.
The Marechal de Foix, who commanded at Mi-
lan in absence of his brother Lautrec, who was
then in France, tempted with the hopes of catch-
ing at once, as in a snare, all the avowed enemies

of

tured to march into the ecclesiastical territories
[June 24], and to invest Reggio. But the vigi-
lance and good condud of Guicciardini the hiT-
torian, governor of that place, obliged the French
general to abandon the enterprise with disgrace f.
Leo, on receiving this intelligence, with which
he was highly pleased, as it furnished him a de;
cent pretence for a rupture with France, imme-
diately assembled the confitory of cardinals.
After complaining bitterly of the hostile inten-
tions of the French king, and magnifying the
emperor's zeal for the church, of which he had
given a recent proof by his proceedings againit
Luther, he declared that he was condirained in
felf-defence, and as the only expedient for the
security of the ecclesiastical frate, to join his
arms to those of that prince. For this purpose
he now pretended to conclude a treaty with Don
John Manuel, although it had really been signed
some months before this time; and he publicly
excommunicated De Foix, as an impious invader
of St. Peter's patrimony.

Leo had already begun preparations for war,

by taking into pay a considerable body of Swiss;
but the Imperial troops advanced so slowly from
Naples and Germany, that it was the middle of
autumn before the army took the field under the
command of Prosper Colonha, the most eminent
of the Italian generals, whose extreme caution,
the effeft of long experience in the art of war,
was opposed with great propriety to the impe.
tuofity of the French. In the mean time, De

I Guit. lit,xiv. 18. Mem. deBellay, P. 3S, rc.

Yoix

Foix dispatched courier after courier to inforn
the king of the danger which was approaching.
Francis, whole forces were either employed in
the Low Countries, or assembling on the fron-
tiers of Spain, and who did not expecd so sudden
an attack in that quarter, sent ambassadors to
his allies the Swiss, to procure from them the
immediate levy of an additional body of troops;
and commanded Lautrec to repair forthwith to
his government. That general, who was well
acquainted with the great negle& of cconomy
in the adminifdration of the king's finances, and
who knew how much the troops in the Milanese
had already fuffered from the want of their pay,
refused to set out unless the fum of three hundred
thousand crowns was immediately put into his
hands. But the king, Louise of Savoy, his
mother, and Semblancy, the superintendent of
fmances, having promised, 'even with an oath,
that on his arrival at Milan he should find re.
mittances for the fum which he demanded;
upon the faith of this, he departed. Unhappily
for France, Louise, a woman deceitful, vindic-
tive, rapacious, and capable of sacrificing any
thing to the gratification of her pafifons, but
who had acquired an absolute afeendant over her
son by her maternal tenderness, her care of his
education, and her great abilities, was resolved
not to perform this promise. Lautrec having
incurred her displeasure by his haughtiness in
negleting to pay court to her, and by the free-
dom with which he had talked concering some
of her adventures in gallantry, she, in order to
deprive him of the honour which he might have
gained by a fuccefsful defence of the Milanese,

seized

tined for that service, and detained them for her
own use.

Lautrec, notwithRanding this cruel difap-

pointment, found means to assemble a confider-
able army, though far inferior in number to that
of the confederates. He adopted the plan of
defence most suitable to his situation, avoiding
a pitched battle with the greatest care, while he
harassed the enemy continually with his light
troops, beat up their quarters, intercepted their
convoys, and covered or relieved every place
which they attempted to attack. By this pru-
dent condudt, he not only retarded their pro-
grefs, but would have soon wearied out the pope,
who had hitherto defrayed almost the whole ex-
pence of the war, as the emperor, whose reve-
nues in Spain were difipated during the commo-
tions in that country, and who was obliged to
support a numnerous army in the Netherlands,
could not make any considerable remittances into
Italy. But an unforeseen accident disconcerted
all his measures, and occasioned a fatal reverse
in the French affairs. A body of twelve thou-
sand Swiss served in Lautrec's army under tise
banners of tlse republic, with which France was
in alliance. In consequence of a law, no less
political than humane, established among the
cantons, their troops were never hired out by
public authority to both the contending parties
in any war. This law, however, the love of
gain had sometimes eluded, and private persons
had been allowed to enlist in what service they
pleased, though not under the public banners,
but nndcr those of their particular oflicers. The

cardinal

cardinal of Sion, who still preserved his interest
among his countrymen, and his enmity to
France, having prevailed on them to connive at
a levy of this kind, twelve thousand Swiss, in.
fligated by him, joined the army of the confe-
derates. But the leaders in the cantons, when
they saw so many of their countrymen marching
under hostile ifandards, and 'ready to turn their
arms against each other, became so sensible of
the infamy to which they would be exposed by
permitting this, as well as the loss they might
fuffer, that they dispatched couriers, command-
ing their people to leave both armies, and to re-
turn forthwith into their own country. The
cardinal of Sion, however, had the address, by
corrupting the messengers appointed to carry
this order, to prevent it from being delivered to
the Swiss in the service of the confederates; but
being intimated in due form to those in the
French army, they, fatigued with the length of
the campaign, and murmuring for want of pay,
inflantly yielded obedience, in spite of Lautrec's
remonfirances and entreaties.

After the desertion of a body which formed

the fitrength of his army, Lautrec durit no
longer face the confederates. He retired to-
wards Milan, encamped on the banks of the
Adda, and placed his chief hopes of safety in
preventing the enemy from passing that river;
an expedient for defending a country so preca-
rious, that there are few inifances of its being
employed with success against any general of ex-
perience or abilities. Accordingly Colonna, not-
withfitanding Lautrec's vigilance and aaivity,
passed the Adda with little loss, and obliged him

to

which the confederates were preparing to be-
siege, when an unknown person, who never as-
terwards appeared either to boast of this service,
or to claim a reward for it, came from the city,
and acquainted Morone, that if the army would
advance that night, the Ghibelline or Imperial
fa6lion would put them in poffeflion of one of
the gates. Colonna, though no friend to rash
enterprises, allowed the marquis de Pescara to
advance with the Spanish infantry, and he him-
seif followed with the reft of his troops. About
the beginning of night, Pefeara arriving at the
Roman gate in the suburbs, surprised the soldiers
whom he found there; those pofied in the for-
tifications adjoining to it immediately fled; the
marquis seizing the works which they abandon-
ed, and pushing forward incefiantly, though
with no less caution than vigour, became mafler
of the city with little bloodshed, and almost
without resistance; the viaors being as much
astonished as the vanquished at the facility and
success of the attempt. Lautrec retired preci-
pitately towards the Venetian territories with
the remains of his (hattered army; the cities of
the Milanese, following the fate of the capital,
surrendered to the confederates; Parma apd
Placentia were united to the ecclefeaftical slate,
and of all their conquedts in Lombardy, only
the town of Cremona, the cafile of Milan, and
a few inconsiderable forts, remained in the hands
of the French .

S Guic. i. xiv. 190, &c. Mem. de Bellay, 42, &c. Ga.

leacil Capella de reb. gest. pro reftitut. Fran. Sfortih Com-
ment. ap. Scardium, vol. ii. i2o, &c.

VOL. II. 0 Lee

Leo received the accounts of this rapid fur.

cession of prosperous events with such transports
of joy, as brought on (if we may believe the
French hiflorians) a flight fever, which being
negleaed, occasioned his death on the second of
December, while he was dtill of a vigorous age,
and at the height of his glory. By this unex-
peaed accident, the spirit of the confederacy
was broken, and its operations suspended. The
cardinals of Sion and Medici left the army that
they might be present in the conclave; the Swiss
were recalled by their superiors; fume other
mercenaries disbanded for want of pay; and only
the Spaniards, and a few Germans in the em-
peror's service, remained to defend the Milanese.
But Lautrec, destitute both of men and of mo-
ney, was unable to improve this favourable op-
portunity in the manner which he would have
wished. [1522] The vigilance of Moroni,
and the good condud of Colonna, disappointed
his feeble attempts on the Milanese. Guicciar-
dini, by his address and valour, repulsed a bolder
and more dangerous attack which he made on
Parma h

Great discord prevailed in the conclave which

followed upon Leo's death, and all the arts na-
tural to men grown old in intrigue, when con-
tending for the highest prize an ecclesiastic can
obtain, were pra:ised. Wolfey's name, not-
withilanding all the emperor's magnificent pro-
mises to favour his pretensions, of which that
prelate did not fail to remind him, was hardlym
mentioned in the conclave. Julio cardinal de

h Guic. I.xiv. 214.

Medici,

than any other member of the sacred college for
his abilities, his wealth, and his experience in
tranfa~iing great affairs, had already secured sis-
teen voices, a number fufficient, according to the
forms of the conclave, to exclude any other can-
didate, though not to carry his own eleaion.
As he was dtill in the prime of life, all the aged
cardinals combined against him, without being
vnited in favour of any other person. While
these faaions were endeavouring to gain, to cor-
rupt, or to weary out each other, Medici and
his adherents voted one morning at the ferutiny,
which according to form was made every day,
for cardinal Adrian of Utrecht, who at that time
governed Spain in the emperor's name. This
they did merely to protra& time. But the ad-
verse party inflantly closing with them, to their
dwn amazement and that of all Europe, a
fbranger to Italy, unknown to the persons who
gave their fuffrgges in his favour, and unac-
quainted with the manners of the people,-or the
interest of the date, the government of which
they conferred upon hin, was unanimonfly raised
to the papal throne [January 9], at a junaure
so delicate and critical, as would have demanded
all the sagacity and experience of one of the mod.
able prelates in the sacred college. The cardi-
nals themselves,- unable to give a reason for this
drange choice, on account of which, as they
marched in proceflion from the conclave, they
wvere loaded with insults and curses by the Ro-
man people, aferibed it to an immediate impulse
of the Holy Ghost It may be imputed with
greater certainty to the influerwe of Doii John

Qz Manuel,

address and intrigues facilitated the eledion of
a person devoted to his mafter's service, from
gratitude, from interest, and from inclination i.

Beside the influence which Charles acquired

by Adrian's promotion, it threw great lustre on
his administration. To befto on his preceptor
such a noble recompence, and to place on the
papal throne one whom he had raised from ob-
fcurity, were ads of uncommon magnificence
and power. Francis observed, with the fenfi-
bility of a rival, the pre-eminence which the em-
peror was gaining, and resolved to exert himself
with fresh vigour, in order to wrest from him
his late conquets in Italy. The Swiss, that they
might make some reparation to the French king,
for having withdrawn their troops from his army
so unseasonably as to occasion the loss of the
Milanese, permitted him to levy ten thousand
men in the republic. Together with this rein-
forcement, Lautrec received from the king a
small fum of money, which enabled him once
more to take the field; and after seizing by
surprise, or force, several places in the Milanese,
to advance within a few miles of the capital.
The confederate army was in no condition to
obftrua his progrefsi; for though the inhabitants
of Milan, by the artifices of Morone, and by the
popular declamations of a monk whom he em-
ployed, were inflamed with such enthusiastic zeal
againit the French government, that they con-
fented to raise extraordinary contributions, Co-
lonna must soon have abandoned the advantageous

' Herm. Moringi Vira Hadriani, ap. Cafp. Burman. in

Anale&. de Hadr. p. 5,. Conclave tnadr. luid, p. 144, &c.

camp

camp which he had chosen at Bicocca, and
have difiniffed his troops for want of pay, if the
Swiss in the French service had not once more
extricated him out of his difficulties.

The insolence or caprice of those mercenariec

were often no less fatal to their friends, than
their valour and discipline were formidable to
their enemies. Having now served some months
without pay, of which they complained loudly,
a fum destined for their use was sent from France
under a convoy of horse; but Morone, whose
vigilant eye nothing escaped, posted a body of
troops in their way, so that the party which es-
corted the money durst not advance. On re-
ceiving intelligenee of this, the Swiss loft all pa-
tience, and officers as well as soldiers crowding
around Lautrec, threatened with one voice in-
Rantly to retire, if he did not either advance the
pay which was due, or promise to lead them next
morning to battle. In vain did Lautrec remon-
lirate against these demands, representing to them
the impossibility of the former, and the rashness
of the latter, which muit be attended with cer-
tain deftrudtion, as the enemy occupied a camp
naturally of great strength, and which by art
they had rendered almost inaccessible. The Swiss,
deaf to reason, and persuaded that their valour
was capable of surmounting every obstacle, re-
iaewed their demand with greater fierceness, of-
fering themselves to form the vanguard, and to
begin the attack. Lautrec, unable to overcome
their obstinacy, complied with their request, hop-
ing, perhaps, that some of those unforeseen ac-
cidents which so often determine the fate of
battles, might crown this rash enterprise with

43 undeserved

feats of a defeat could not be more fatal than
those which would certainly follow upon the
retreat of a body which composed one half of
his army.. Next morning [May] the Swiss
were early in the field, and marched with the
gieateft intrepidity against an enemy deeply en-
trenched on every fide, surrounded with artil-
lery, and prepared to receive them. As they
advanced, they sustained a furious cannonade
with great firmness, and without waiting for
their own artillery, ruffled impetuously upon the
intrenchments. But after incredible efforts of
valour, which were seconded with great spirit by
the French, having loft their bravest officers and
best soldiers, and finding that they could make
no imprefilon on the enemy's works, they founded
a retreat; leaving the field of battle, however,
like men repulsed, but not vanquished, in close
array, and without receiving any molefiation
from the enemy.

Next day, such as survived set out for their

own country; and Lautrec, despairing of being
able to make any farther resistance, retired into
France, after throwing garrisons into Cremona
and a few other places; all which, except the
citadel of Cremona, Colonna soon obliged to
surrender.

Genoa, however, and its territories, remaining

fubje& to France, still gave Francis considerable
footing in Italy, and made it easy for him to ex-
ecute any scheme for the recovery of the Mi-
lanefe. But Colonna, rendered enterprizing by
continual success, and excited by the folicitations
of the famion of the Adorni, the hereditary ene-

mies

of France poffeffed the chief authority in Genoa,
determined to attempt the reduaion of that
fdate; and accomplished it with amazing facility.
He became master of Genoa by an accident as
unexpeAed as that which had given him poffel-
sion of Milan; and almost without opposition or
bloodshed, the power of the Adorni, and the
authority of the emperor, were established in
Genoa k.

Such a cruel succession of misfortunes affeted

Francis with deep concern, which was not a little
augmented by the unexpeaed arrival of an Eng-
liih herald, who, in the name of his sovereign, de-
clared war in form againflFrance [May 29]. This
flep was taken in consequence of the treaty which
Wolsey had concluded with the emperor at
Bruges, and which had hitherto been kept fe-
cret. Francis, though he had reason to be fur-
prifed with this denunciation, after having been
at ftch pains to fuoth Henry and to gain his
minister, received the herald with great compo-
Lure and dignity'; and without abandoning any
of the fehemes which he was forming againd the
emperor, began vigorous preparations for reliRt-
ing this new enemy. His treasury, however,
being exhausted by the efforts which he had al-
ready made, as well as by the sums he expended
on his pleasures, he had recourse to extraordinary
expedients for supplying it. Several new offices
were created, and exposed to sale; the royal de-
mefnes were alienated; unusual taxes were im-

k Jovii Vita Ferdin. Davali, p. 344. Guic. l. xiv. 233.
' Journal de Louise de Savoie, p. o99. posed;

posed; and the tomb of St. Martin was flripped
of a rail of massive silver, with which Louis XI.
in one of his fits of devotion, had encircled it.
By means of these expedients he was enabled to
levy a considerable army, and to put the frontier
towns in a good posture of defence.

The emperor, meanwhile, was no less solicitous

to draw as much advantage as possible from the
acceflion of such a powerful ally; and the prof-
perous situation of his affairs, at this time, pera
mitting him to set out for Spain, where his pre-
fence was extremely necessary, he visited the
court of England in his way to that country.
He proposed by this interview not only to
fitrengthen the bonds of friendship which united
him with Henry, and to excite him to push the
war against France with vigour, but hoped to
remove any disgust or resentment that Wolsey
might have conceived on account of the mortify-
ing disappointment which he had met with in the
late conclave. His success exceeded his most
sanguine expedations ; and by his artful address,
during a residence of fix weeks in England, he
gained not only the king and the minister, but
the nation itself. Henry, whole vanity was fen-
sibly flattered by such a visit, as well as by the
itudied refpe& with which the emperor treated
him on every occasion, entered warmly into all
his schemes. The cardinal foreseeing, from
Adrian's age and infirmities, a sudden vacancy ia
the "papal fee, dissembled or forgot his resent-
ment; and as Charles, besides augmenting the
pensions which he had already fettled on him,
renewed his promise of favouring his pretensions
to the papacy, with all his intereit, he endeavour-

plifhment of the latter, by fresh services. The
nation, sharing in the glory of its monarch, and
pleased with the confidence which the emperor
placed in the English, by creating the earl of
Surrey his high-admiral, discovered no less in-
clination to commence hodtilities than Henry
himself.

In order to give Charles, before he left Eng-

hand, a proof of this general ardour, Surrey
failed with such forces as were ready, and ravaged
the coadts of Normandy. He then made a de-
scent on Bretagne, where he plundered and burnt
Morlaix, and some other places of less confe-
quence. After these flight excursions, attend-
ed with greater dishonour than damage to France,
he repaired to Calais, and took the command of
the principal army, confilling of sixteen thousand
men; with which, having joined the Flemish
troops under the Count de Buren, he advanced
into Picardy. The army which Francis had
assembled was far inferior in number to these
united bodies. But during the long wars between
the two nations, the French had discovered the
proper method of defending their country againit
the English. They had been taught by their
misfortunes to avoid a pitched battle with the
utmost care, and to endeavour, by throwing gar-
rifons into every place capable of resistance, by
watching all the enemy's motions, by intercept-
ing their convoys, attacking their advanced podts,
and harassing them continually with their nu-
merous cavalry, to ruin them with the length of
the war, or to beat them by piece-meal. This
plan the duke of Vendome, the French general

success; and not only prevented Surrey from
taking any town of importance, but obliged him
to retire with his army greatly reduced by fa-
tigue, by want of provilions, and by the loss
which it had fuflained in several unfuccefsful
fkirmithes.

Thus ended the second campaign, in a war the

most general that had hitherto been kindled in
Europe; and though Francis, by his mother's
ill-timed resentment, by the disgusting insolence
of his general, and the caprice ofthe mercenary
troops which he employed, had loft his con-
quests in Italy, yet all the powers combined
against him had not been able to make any
imprefilon on his hereditary dominions; and
wherever they either intended or attempted an
attack, he was well prepared to receive them.

While the Christian princes were thus wadting

each other's strength, Solyman the Magnificent
entered Hungary with a numerous army, and in-
vesting Belgrade, which was deemed the chief
ibarrier of that kingdom againt .the Turkilh
arms, soon forced it to surrender. Encouraged
by this success, he turned his viatorious arms
againdt the island of Rhodes, the feat, at that
time, of the knights of St. John ofJerufalem.
This small fiate he attacked with such a nu-.
merous army as the lords of Asia have been ac-
cuftomed in every age to bring into the field.
Two hundred thousand men, and a fleet of four
hundred fail, appeared against a town defended
by a garrison consisting of five thousand soldiers,.
and fix hundred knights, under the command of
Villiers de L'ITle Adam, the grand master, whose

wisdom

fIation at fich a dangerous jundure. No sooner
did he begin to fufpe. the destination of Soly.
man's vast armaments, than he dispatched mef-
fengers to all the Chriflian courts, imploring
their aid against the common enemy. But
though every prince in that age acknowledged
Rhodes to be the great bulwark of Christendom
in the east, and trusted to the gallantry of its
knights as the best security againit the progress
of the Ottoman arms; though Adrian, with a
zeal which became the head and father of the
church, exhorted the contending powers to for-
get their private quarrels, and, by uniting their
arms, to prevent the Infidels from destroying a
society which did honour to the Christian name;
yet so violent and implacable was the animosity
of both parties, that, regardless of the danger to
bhich they exposed all Europe, and unmoved by
the intreaties of the grand master, or the admo-
nitions of the pope, they fuffered Solyman to
carry on his operations against Rhodes without
disturbance. The grand master, after incredible
efforts of courage, of patience, and of military
conduA during a siege of fix months; after sus-
taming many assaults, and disputing every poll
with amazing obitinacy, was. obliged at last to
yield to numbers; and having obtained an ho.
nourable capitulation from the sultan, who ad-
mired and refpeaed his virtue, he fuirrendered
the town, which was reduced to a heap of rub-
hiuh, and destitute of every resource m. Charles

iv Fontanus de lello Rhodio, ap. Scard. Script. Rer.

German. vol. ii, p. 8S. P. Barre. Hist. d'Allem. tom. viii.
57.

and

# BOOK III.

and Francis, ashamed of having occasioned such
a loss to Chritendom by their ambitous contelts,
endeavoured to throw the blame of it on each
ether, while all Europe, with greater juflice, im-
puted it equally to both. The emperor, by way
of reparation, granted the knights of St. John
the small island of Malta, in which they fixed
their residence, retaining, though with less power
and splendour, their ancient spirit and implacable
enmity to the Infidels.

B OO K III.

(HARLES, having had the fatisfacion of feeing

hoflilities begun between France and Eng-

land, took leave of Henry, and arrived in Spain
on the seventeenth of June. He found that
country just beginning to recover order and
strength after the miseries of a civil war, to which
it had been exposed during his absence; an ac-
count of the rife. and progress of which, as it
was but little conneaed with the other events
which happened in Europe, hath been reserved
to this place.

No sooner was it known that the Cortes as.

fembled in Galicia had voted the emperor a free
gift, without obtaining the redress of any one
grievance, than it excited universal indignation.
The citizens ofToledo, who considered them-
selves, on account of the great privileges which
they enjoyed, as guardians of the liberties of the

Castilian

paid to the remonfirances of their deputies
againit that unconflitutional grant, took arms
with tumultuary violence [May s52o], and
seizing the gates of 'the city which were fortified,
attacked the alcazar, or cattle, which they soon
obliged the governor to surrender. Emboldened
by this ficcefs, they deprived of all authority
every person whom they fufpeAed of any at-
tachment to the court, established a popular
form of government, composed of deputies from
the several parishes in the city, and levied troops
in their own defence. The chief leader of the
people in these infurredions was Don John de
Padilla, the eldest son of the commendator of
Castile, a young nobleman of a generous temper,
of undaunted courage, and poffeffed of the ta-
lents as well as of the ambition which, in times
of civil discord, raise men to power and emi-
nence a

The resentment of the citizens of Segovia

produced effeas still more fatal. Tordefillas,
one of their representatives in the late Cortes,
had voted for the donative, and being a bold
and haughty man, ventured, upon his return, to
call together his fellow-citizens in the great
church, that he might give them, according to
custom, an account of his condua in that afiem-
bly. But the multitude, unable to bear his in-
folence, in attempting to justify what they
thought inexcusable, burit open the gates of the
church with the utmost fury, and seizing the
unhappy Tordefillas, dragged him through the

a Sandov. p. 77.

VOL. I. f tireets,

lireets, with a thousand curses and insults, to-
wards the place of public execution. In vain
did the dean and canons come forth in procef-
sion with the holy sacrament, in order to appease
their rage. In vain did the monks of those
monasteries by which they passed, conjure them
on their knees, to {pare his life, or at least to
allow him time to confess, and to receive abfo-
lotion of his fins. Without listening to the die-
tates either of humanity or religion, they cried
out, " That the hangman alone could absolve
such a traitor to his country ;" they then hurried
him along with greater violence ; and perceiving
that he had expired under their hands, they hung
him up with his head downwards on the comr-.
mon gibbet b. The iame spirit seized the in-
habitants of Burgos, Zamora, and several other
cities; and though their representatives, taking
warning from the fate of Tordefillas, had been
so wife as to save themselves by a timely flight,
they were burnt in effigy, their houses rafed to
the ground, and their effeEts consumed with fire;
and such was the horror which the people had
conceived against them, as betrayers of the public
liberty, that not one in those licentious multi-
tudes would touch any thing, however valuable,
which had belonged to them c.

Adrian, at that time regent of Spain, had

fearcely fixed the feat of his government at Val-
ladolid, when he was alarmed with an account
of these infurreEtions. He immediately affeem-
bled the privy council [June j, 1520], to deli.
berate concerning the proper method of sup.
pressing them. The counsellors differed in opi-
'9 P. Mart. Ep. 671. c Snrdov; 103. P. Mart. Ep. 674.

loon;

check this audacious spirit in its infancy by a
severe execution of justice; others advising to
treat with lenity a people who had some reason
to be incensed, and not to drive them beyond all
the bounds of duty by an ill-timed rigour. The
sentiments of the former being warmly supported
by the archbishop of Granada,. president of the
council, a person of great authority, but choleric
and impetuous, were approved by Adrian, whose
zeal to support his mauler's authority hurried
him into a measure, to which, from his natural
caution and timidity, he would otherwise have
been averse. He commanded Ronquillo, one of
the king's judges, to repair indantly to Segovia,
which had let the firul example of mutiny, and
to proceed against the delinquents according to
law i and left the people should be so outrageous
as to rejit his authority, a considerable body of
troops was appointed to attend him. The Se-
govians, foreseeing what they might expeft front
a judge so well known for his auitere and unfors-
giving temper, took arms with one consent, and
having mustered twelve thousand men, fhuttheir
gates againfE him. Roaquillo, enraged at this
insult, denounced them rebels and outlaws, and his
troops seizing all the avenues to the town, hoped
that it would soon be obliged to surrender for
want of provitions. The inhabitants, however,
defended themselves with vigour, and having re-
ceived a conliderable reinforcement from To-
ledo, under the command of Padilla, attacked
Ronquillo, and forced him to retire with the loss
of his baggage and military chef l.
d Sindov. aaz. P. Mart. Ep.679. Miniana,Contin. p. i';.

R 2 Upon

feca, whom the emperor had appointed com-
mander in chief of the forces in CaRile, to as-
femble an army, and to besiege Segovia in form.
But the inhabitants of Medina del Campo, where
cardinal Ximenes had established a vast magazine
of military stores, would not fuffer him to draw
from it a train of battering cannon, or to defiroy
their countrymen with those arms which had been
prepared againit the enemies of the kingdom.
Fonseca, who could not execute his orders with-
out artillery, determined to seize the magazine
by force; and the citizens sanding on their de-
fence, he assaulted the town with great brilk.
ness [Aug. 25] : but his troops were so warmly
received, that despairing of carrying the place,
he set fire to some of the houses, in hopes that
the citizens would abandon the walls, in order to
save their families and effefts. Inhtead of that,
the expedient to which he had recourse served
only to increase their fury, and he was repulsed
with great disgrace, while the flames, spreading
from fitreet to fireet, reduced to ashes almost the
whole town, one of the molt considerable at that
time in Spain, and the great mart for the manu-
faaures of Segovia and several other cities. As
the warehouses were then filled with goods for
the approaching fair, the loss was immense, and
was felt universally. This, added to the int-
prefiion which such a cruel ation made on a
people long unaccustomed to the horrors of civil
war, enraged the Caftilians almost to madness.
Fonfeea became the objedt of general hatred,
and was branded with the name of incendiary,
and enemy to his country. Even the citizens

had hitherto restrained, declared that they could
no longer remain inaAive fpe&ators of the sus,
ferings of their countrymen. Taking arms with
no less fury than the other cities, they burnt
Fonfeca's house to the ground, eleaed new ma-
giftrates, raised soldiers, appointed officers to
command them, and guarded their walls with as
much diligence as if an enemy had been ready
to attack them.

The cardinal, though virtuous and disinterest-

ed, and capable of governing the kingdom with
honour in times of tranquillity, poffeffed neither
the courage nor the sagacity necessary at such a
dangerous junaure. Finding himself unable to
check these outrages committed under his own
eye, he attempted to appease the people, by
protesting that Fonseca had exceeded his orders,
and had by his rash condud offended him, as
much as he had injured them. This condefcen-
dion, the effea of irresolution and timidity,
rendered the malecontents bolder and more in-
solent; and the cardinal having soon afterwards
recalled Fonseca, and difiniffed his troops, which
he could no longer afford to pay, as the treasury,
drained by the rapacioufuefs of the Flemish mi-
aifters, had received no fipply from the great
cities, which were all in arms, the people were
left at full liberty to ad without controul, and
fearcely any shadow of power remained in his
hands.

Nor were the proceedings of the commons

the effeas merely of popular and tumultuary
rage; they aimed at obtaining redress of their
political grievances, and an establishment of

a 3 public

public liberty on a secure basis, objeas worthy
of all the zeal which they discovered in contend-
ing for them. The feudal government in Spain
was at that time in a state more favourable to
liberty than in any other of the great European
kingdoms. This was owing chiefly to the num-
ber of great cities in that country, a circumitance
I have already taken notice of, and which con-
tributes more than any other to mitigate the
rigour of the feudal institutions, and to intro,
duce a more liberal and equal form of govern-
ment. The inhabitants of every city formed a
great corporation, with valuable immunities and
privileges; they were delivered from a slate of
fubjeaion and vassalage; they were admitted to
a considerable lhare in the legislature; they had
acquired the arts of induifry, without which cities
cannot fubfsft; they had accumulated wealth, by
engaging in commerce; and being free and inde-
pendent themselves, were ever ready to ad as
the guardians of the public freedom and inde-
pendence. The genius of the internal govern-
ment established among the inhabitants of cities,
which, even in countries where despotic power
prevails most, is democratical and republican,
rendered the idea of liberty familiar and dear to
them. Their representatives in the Cortes were
accustomed, with equal spirit, to check the en-
croachments of the king and the oppression of
the nobles. They endeavoured to extend the
privileges of their own order; they laboured to
lhake off the remaining incumbrances with which
the spirit of feudal policy, favourable only to
the nobles, had burdened them; and, conscious
of being one of the mos considerable orders in

the

powerful.

The present junaure appeared favourable for.

pushing any new claim. Their sovereign was
abhent from his dominions; by the ill condu&
of his ministers he had loft the esteem and affec-
tion of his fubjeAs ; the people, exasperated by
many injuries, had taken arms, though without
concert, almoR by general consent; they were
animated with rage capable of carrying them to
the modt violent extremes; the royal treafary
was exhausted; the kingdom destitute of troops;
and the government committed to a ifranger, of
great virtue indeed, but of abilities unequal to
such a truit. The first care of Padilla, and the
other popular leaders who observed and deter-
mined to improve these circumitances, was to
establish some form of union or association among
the malecontents, that they might a& with
greater regularity, and pursue one common end;
and as the different cities had been prompted to
take arms by the fame motives, and were accuf-
tomed to confider themselves as a diftina body
from the retd of the fubjeds, they did not find
this difficult. A general convention was ap-
pointed to be held at Avila. Deputies appeared
there in name of almost all the cities entitled to
have representatives in the Cortes. They all
bound themselves, by solemn oath, to live and
die in the service of the king, and in defence of
the privileges of their order; and assuming the
name of the holy Junta, or association, proceeded
to deliberate concerning the date of the na-
tion, and the proper method of redressing its
grievances. The firdt that naturally presented

itself,

itself, was the nomination of a foreigner to be
regent; this they declared with one voice to be
a violation of the fundamental laws of the king.
dom, and resolved to fend a deputation of their
members to Adrian, requiring him in their name
to lay aside all the ensigns of his office, and
to abhtain for the future from the exercise of
a jurifdiaion which they had pronounced ille;
gal e.

While they were preparng to execute this

bold resolution, Padilla accomplished an enter-
prise of the greatest advantage to the cause.
After relieving Segovia, he marched suddenly
to Tordefillas [Aug. 29], the place where the
unhappy queen Joanna had resided since the death
of her huiband, and being favoured by the in-
habitants, was aduritted into the town, and be-
came malter of her person, for the security of
which Adrian had negleded to take proper pre.
caution '. Padilla waited immediately upon the
queen, and accosting her with that profound re-
sped, which she exaaed from the few persons
whom she deigned to admit into her presence, ac-
quainted her at large with the miserable condition
of her Castilian fubjeas under the government
of her son, who being destitute of experience
himself,- permitted his foreign ministers to treat
them with foch rigour as had obliged them to
take arms in defence of the liberties of their
country. The queen, as if (he had been
awakened out of a lethargy, expressed great

e P. Mart. Ep. 69r.
t Vita deli' Imper. Carl. V. deli' Als. Ulloa, Ven. r109.

p. 67. Miniana, Contin. p. 17, astonish-

as the had never heard, until that moment, of
the death of her father, or known the fufferings
of her people, no blame could be imputed to her,
but that now Ihe would take care to provide a
fufficient remedy; and in the mean time, added
the, let it be your concern to do what is necessary
for the public welfare. Padilla, too eager in
forming a conclusion agreeable to his wiffes,
mistook this lucid interval of reason for a perse&
return of that faculty; and acquainting the Junta
with what had happened, adviled them to re-
move to Tordefillas, and to hold their meetings
in that place. This was infdantly done; but
though Joanna received very graciously an ad-
dress of the Junta, beseeching her to take upon
herself the government of the kingdom, and in
token of her compliance admitted all the depu-
ties to kiss her hand; though the was present
at a tournament held on that occasion, and seem-
ed highly satisfied with both these ceremonies,
which were conduaed with great magnificence
in order to please her, the soon rel'apfed into her
former melancholy and sullenness, and could
never be brought, by any arguments or entrea-
ties, to sign any one paper necessary for the
dispatch of business g.

The Junta, concealing as much as possible

this last circumifance, carried on all their deli-
berations in the name of Joanna; and as the
Cafithians, who idolized the memory of Isabella,
retained a wonderful attachment to her daughter,
no sooner was it known that she had confeuted

g Sandov. 164. P. Mart. Ep. 635, 686.

to

to assume the reins of government, than the
people expreifed the most universal and immode-
rate joy; and believing her recovery to be com-
plete, ascribed it to a miraculous interposition of
Heaven, in order to rescue their country from
the oppression of foreigners. The Junta, con-
fcious of the reputation and power which they
had acquired by seeming to ad under the royal
authority, were no longer satisfied with requiring
Adrian to resign the office of regent; they de.
tached Padilla to Valladolid with a considerable
body of troops, ordering him to seize such mem.
bers of the council as were ifill in that city, to
condua them to Tordefiilas, and to bring away
the seals of the kingdom, the public archives,
and treasury books. Padilla, who was received
by the citizens as the deliverer of his country, ex.
ecuted his commission with great exaatnefs;
permitting Adrian, however, still to reside at
Valladolid, though only as a private person, and
without any {hadow of power"
; The empergr, to whom frequent accounts of
these tranfadions were transmitted while he was
iull in Slanders, was sensible of his own impru-
dence and that of his ministers, in having despised
too long the murmurs and remonitrances of the
Caftilians. He beheld, with deep concern, a
kingdom, the most valuable of any he poffeffed,
and in which lay the strength and sinews of his
power, just ready to disown his authority, and
on the point of being plunged in all the miseries
of civil war. But though his presence might
have averted this calamity, he could not, at that

h Sandov. 174. P. Mart. Ep. 79,. time,

rial crown, and allowing the French king full
leisure to execute his ambitious schemes. The
only point now to be deliberated upon, was,
whether he ihould attempt to gain the malecon-
tents by indulgence and conceflions, or prepare
direaly to suppress them by force; and he re-
solved to make trial of the former, while, at the
fame time, if that ihould fail of success, he prel
pared for the latter. For this purpose, he issued
circular letters to all the cities of Caflile, exhort-
ing them in most gentle terms, and with affur-
ances of full pardon, to lay down their arms;
he promised such cities as had continued faith-
ful, not to exa& from them the subsidy granted
in the late Cortes, and offered the fame favour
to such as returned to their duty; he engaged
that no office (hould be conferred for the future
upon any but native Caftilians. On the other
hand, he wrote to the nobles, exciting them to
appear with vigour in defence of their own
rights, and those of the crown, againit the
exorbitant claims of the commons; he appointed
the high admiral Don Fadrique Enriquez, and
the high confiable of Castile, Don Inigo de
Velafco, two noblemen of great abilities as well
as influence, regents of the kingdom in con.
junaion with Adrian; and he gave them full
power and infitruions, if the obstinacy of the
malecontents should render it necessary, to vin.
dicate the royal authority by force of armsi.

These conceflions, which, at the time of his

leaving Spain, would have fully satisfied the

i P.Hester, Rer. Auftr. lib. viii. c. 6. p 1S.,

people,

people, came now too late to produce any es-
fed. The Junta, relying on the unanimity with
which the nation submitted to their authority,
elated with the success which hitherto had accom-
paniedall theirundertakings, and feeing no military
force colleded to defeat or obliruA their designs,
aimed at a more thorough reformation of politi-
cal abuses. They had been employed for fume
time in preparing a remonfitrance containing a
large enumeration, not only of the grievances of
which they craved redress, but of such new re-
gulations as they thought necessary for the fecu-
rity oftheirliberties. This remonfitrance, which
is divided into many articles relating to all the
different members of which the conilitution was
composed, as well as the various departments in
the adminifiration of government, fnrnifhes us
with more authentic evidence concerning the in-
tentions of the Junta, than can be drawn from
the testimony of the later Spanilh historians, who
lived in times when it became fashionable and
even necessary to represent the conduA of the
malecontents in the worst light, and as flowing
from the worit motives. After a long preamble
concerning the various calamities under which
the nation groaned, and the errors and corrup-
tion in government to which these were to be
imputed, they take notice of the exemplary pa-
tience wherewith the people had endured them,
until felf-prefernation, and the duty which they
owed to their, country, had obliged them to
assemble, in order to provide in a legal manner
for their own safety, and that of the conftitu-
tion: For this purpose, they demanded that the
king would be pleased to return to his Spanifb

2 dominions

monarchs had done; that he would not marry
but with consent of the Cortes; that if he ihould
be obliged at any time to leave the kingdom, it
(hall not be lawful to appoint any foreigner
to be regent; that the present nomination of
cardinal Adrian to that office (hall inflantly be
declared void; that he would not, at his return,
bring along with him any Flemings or other
fdrangers; that no foreign troops shall, on any
pretence whatever, be introduced into the king-
dom; that none but natives (hall be capable of
holding any office or benefice either in church or
(rate; that no foreigner (hall be naturalized;
that free quarters (hail not be granted to soldiers,
nor to the members of the king's household, for
any longer time than fix days, and that only
when the court is in a progress; that all the
taxes shall be reduced to the fame fiate they
were in at the death of queen Isabella; that all
alienations of the royal demefnes or revenues
since that queen's death (hall be resumed; that
all new offices created since that period shall be
abulibhed; that the fnbfidy granted by the.late
Cortes in Galicia (hall not be exaded; that in all
future Cortes each city fhail fend one represent-
ative of the clergy, one of the gentry, and one
of the commons, each to be eleelcd by his own
order; that the crown (hall not influence or di-
red any city with regard to the choice of its
representatives; that no member of the Cortes
(hall receive an office or pension from the king,
either for himself or for any of his family, under
pain of death, and confiscation of his goods;
that each city or community shall pay a com-

VOL. II. S petenu

tenance during his attendance on the Cortes;
that the Cortes (hall assemble once in three years
at least, whether funimoned by the king or not,
and Ihall then inquire into the observation of the
articles now agreed upon, and deliberate con.
cerning public affairs; that the rewards which
have been given or promised to any of the mem-
bers of the Cortes held in Galicia, shall be re-
voked ; that it (hall be declared a capital
crime to fend gold, silver, or jewels out of the
kingdom; that judges (hall have fixed salaries
afligned them, and (hall not receive any (hare of
the fines and forfeitures of persons condemned
by them; that no grant of the goods of persons
accused (hall be valid, if given before sentence
was pronounced againit them ; that all privileges
which the nobles have at any time obtained, to
the prejudice of the commons, (hall be revoked;
that the government of cities or towns (hall not
be put into the hands of noblemen; that the
poffefflions of the nobility (hall be fubjea to all
public taxes in the fame manner as those of the
commons; that an inquiry be made into the con-
dua of such as have been entrusted with the
management of the royal patrimony since the
acceflion of Ferdinand; and if the king do not
within thirty days appoint persons properly qua-
lified for that service, it (hall be lawful for the
Cortes to nominate them; that indulgences (hall
not be preached or dispersed in the kingdom
until the cause of publilhing them be examined
and approved of by the Cortes; that all the
money arising from the sale of indulgences (hall
be faithfully employed in carrying on war againit

I the

in their diocefes fix months in the year, (hall
forfeit their revenues during the time they are
abhent; that the ecclesiastical judges and their
officers (hall not exa& greater fees than those
which are paid in the secular courts; that the
present archbiflhop of Toledo, being a foreigner,
be compelled to refion that dignity, which (hall
be conferred upon a Lafiilian ; that the king shall
ratify and hold, as good service done to him and
to the kingdom, all the proceeding3 of the Junta,
and pardon any irregularities which the cities
may have committed from an excess of zeal in
a good cause: that he (hall promise and swear
in the most solemn manner to observe all these
articles, and on no occasion attempt either to
elude, or to repeal them; and that he shall ne-
ver solicit the pope or any other prelate to grant
him a dispensation or absolution from* this oath
and promise k.

Such were the chief articles presented by the

Junta to their sovereign. As the feudal inflitu-
tions in the several kingdoms of Europe were
originally the fame, the genius of those govern-
ments which arose from them bore a firong re-
semblance to each other, and the regulations
which the Caflilians attempted to establish on
this occasion, differ little from those which other
nations have laboured to procure, in their frrug-
gles with their monarchs for liberty. The griev-
ances complained of, and the remedies proposed
by the English commons in their contests with
the princes of the house of Stuart, particularly

k Sandov. o6. P. Mart. Ep, 686.

s 2 resemble

resemble those upon which the Junta now in-
filled. But the principles of liberty seem to have
been better underflood, at this period, by the
Caftilians, than by any other people in Europe;
they had acquired more liberal ideas with refped
to their own rights and privileges; they had
formed more bold and generous sentiments con-
cerning government; and discovered an extent
of political knowledge to which the Eng-
lifh themselves did not attain until more than
a century afterwards.

It is not improbable, however, that the spirit

of rtformation among the Caflilians, hitherto
unrefirained by authority, and emboldened by
success, became too impetuous, and prompted
the Junta to propose innovations which, by
alarming the other members of the confditution,
proved fatal to their cause. The nobles, who,
inRfead of obftruEting, had favoured or connived
at their proceedings, while they confined their
demands of redress to such grievances as had
been occasioned by the king's want of experi-
ence, and by the imprudence and rapaciousness
of his foreign ministers, were filled with indigna-
tion when the Junta began to touch the privi.
leges of their. order, and plainly saw that the
mneafures of the commons tended no less to break
-the power of the aristocracy, than to limit the
prerogatives of the crown. The resentment
which they had conceived on account of Adrian's
promotion to the regency, abated considerably
upon the emperor's raising the constable and ad-
mniral to joint power with him in that offce; and
as their pride and dignity were less hurt by sus-
fering the prince to possess an extensive preroga-

tive,

the people, they determined to give their fove-
reign the assistance which he had demanded of
them, and began to assemble their vassals for that

purpose. The Junta, meanwhile, expeaed with impa.
tience the emperor's answer to their remonstrance,
which they had appointed some of their number
to present. The members entrusted with this
commiflion set out immediately for Germany
[OEt. o], but having received at different
places certain intelligence from court, that they
could not venture to appear there without en-
dangering their lives, they ftopt {hort in their
journey, and acquainted the Junta of the in-
formation which had been given them'. This
excited such violent passions as transported the
whole party beyond all bounds of prudence or
of moderation. That a king of Cafile fhoufd
deny his fubjeas access into his presence, or re-
fuse to lillen to their humble petitions, was re-
prelented as an a& of tyranny so unprecedented
and intolerable, that nothing now remained but
with arms in their hands to drive away that ra-
venous band of foreigners which encompassed
the throne, who, after having devoured the
wealth of the kingdom, found it necessary to
prevent the cries of an injured people from
reaching the ears of their sovereign. Many in-
sifted warmly on approving a motion which had
formerly been made, for depriving Charles,
during the life of his mother, of the regal titles
and authority which had been too ralhly con-

I Sandov. 43.

s 3 ferred

total inability for government. Some proposed
to provide a proper person to aflift her in the ad-
ministration of public affairs, by marrying the
queen to the prince of Calabria, the heir of the
Aragonefe~ kings of Naples, who had been de-
tained in prison since the time that Fcrdinand
had difpoffeffed his ancestors of their crown.
All agreed, that, as the hopes of obtaining re-
dress and security, merely by presenting their
requefis to their fovereigon, had kept thehn too
long in a slate of inaafion, and prevented them
from taking advantage of the unanimity with
which the nation declareld in their favour, it
was now necessary to colilet their whole force,
and to exert themselves wirh vigour, in opposing
this fatal combination of the king and the no-
bility againid their liberties m

They soon took the field with twenty thou-

sand men. Violent disputes arofc cnnt~erning the
command of this army. Padilla, the darling of
the people and soldiers, was the only person
whom they thought worthy of this honour.
But Don Pedro de Giron, the cideft son of the
Condd de Uruena, a young nobleman of the firit
order, having lately joined the commons out of
private refontment againit the empeior, the re-
sped due to his birth, together with a secret
desire of disappointing Padilia, of whose popu.
larity many members of the junta had become
jealous, procured him the office of general [Nov.
73]; though he soon gave them a fatal proof
that he poiklifed neither the experience, the abi.

a P, Mart. Ep. 68S.

litiep4

Rtation required.

The regents, meanwhile, appoint'ed Riofeco as

the place of rendezvous for their troops, which,
though far inferior to those of the commons in
number, excelled them greatly in discipline and
in valour. They had drawn a considerable body
of regular and veteran infantry out of Navarre.
Their cavalry, which formed the chief strength
of their army, consisted mostly of gentlemen
accustomed to the military life, and animated
with the martial spirit peculiar to their order in
that age. The infantry of the Junta was formed
entirely of citizens and mechanics, little acquaint-
ed with the use of.arms. The small body of
cavalry which they had been able to raise was
composed of persons of ignoble birth, and per-
sea fitrangers to the service into which they en-
tered. The chara&ter of the generals differed
no less than that of their troops. The royalists
were commanded by the Conde de Haro, the
coritable's eldefR son, an officer of great experi-
ence and of difiinguifhed abilities.

Giron marched with his army diredly to Rio-

feco, and seizing the villages and passes around
it, hoped that the royalists would be obliged
either to surrender for want of provisions, or to
fight with disadvantage before all their troops
were assembled. But he had not the abilities, nor
his troops the patience and discipline necessary
for the execution of such a scheme. The Condd
de Harm found little difficulty in conduaing a
considerable reinforcement through all his poffs
into the town; andGiron, despairing of being able
to reduce it, advanced suddenly to Villa-panda, a

place

place belonging to the conifable, in which the
enemy had their chief magazine of provisions.
By this ill-judged motion, he left Tordefillas
open to the royalilts, whom the Cond6 de Haro
led thither in the night, with the utmost secrecy
and dispatch; and attacking the town [Dec.;],
in which Giron had left no other garrison than a
regiment of priests raised by the bishop of Za.
mora, he, by break of day, forced his way into
it after a desperate resistance, became mailer of
the queen's person, took prisoners many mem-
bers of the Junta, and recovered the great feal,
with the other ensigns of government.

By this fatal blow, the Junta loft all zthe re-

putation and authority which they had derived
from seeming to adt by the queen's commands;
such of the nobles as had hitherto been waver-
ig or undetermined in their choice, now joined
the regents with all their forces; and an uni-
versal poniternation seized the partizans of the
commons. This was much increased by the sus-
picions they began to entertain of Giron, whom
they loudly accused of having betrayed Torde-
fillas to the enemy; and though that charge
seems to have been destitute of foundation, the
success of the royalists being owing to Giron's
ill-condua rather than to his treachery, he so
entirely loft credit with his party, that he re.
signed his commiflion, and retired to one of his
cailles ".

Such members of the Junta as had efeaped

the enemy's hands at Tordeillas, fled to Valla.
dolid; and as it would have required long time

a MifellaneopuS Trafts by Dr. Mich. Geddes, vol. i 278*

by a new eleajon, they made choice among
themfeives of a small number of persons, to
whom they committed the fipreume direation of
affairs. Their army, which grew fironger every
day by tile arrival of troops from different parts
of the kingdom, marched likewise to Valladolid;
and Padilla being appointed commander in chief,
the spirits of the foldicry revived, and the whole
party, forgetting the late misfortune, continued
to express the fame ardent zeal for the liberties
of their country, and the fame impiacahle ani-
mofity against their oppressors.

What they flood most in need of, was money

to pay their troops. A great part of the cur-
rent coin had been carried out of the king-
dom by the Flemings; the slated taxes levied
in times of peace were inconsiderable; com-
merce of every kind being interrupted by the
war, the fum which it yielded decreased daily;
and the Junta were afraid of disgusting the peo-
ple by burdening them with new impositions, to
which, in that age, they were little accustomed.
But from this di~ficulty they were extricated by
Donna Maria Pacheco, Padilla's wife, a woman
of noble birth, of great abilities, of boundless
ambition, and animated with the most ardent
zeal in support of the cause of the Junta. She,
with a boldnefa fiuperior to those fuperifitious
fears wlhich often influence her sex, proposed to
seize all the rich and magnificent ornaments in
the cathedral of Toledo ; bht left that aaion, by
its appearance of impiety, might offend the peo-
ple, ihe and her retinue marched to the church in
solemn procelfion, in mourning habits, with tears

in

in their eyes, beating their breasts, and falling on
their knees, implored the pardon of the faints
whose shrines she was about to violate. Bythis ar-
tifice, which screened her from the imputation of
sacrilege, and persuaded the people that neceflity
and zeal for a good cause had confitrained her,
though with relutance, to venture upon this
aaion, Ihe firipped the cathedial of whatever
was valuable, and procured a considerable supply
of money for the Junta '. The regents, no less
at a loss how to maintain their troops, the reve-
nues of the crown having either been dissipated
by the Flermings, or seized by the commons, were
obliged to take the queen's jewels, together with
the plate belonging to the nobility, and apply
them to that purpose; and when those failed,
they obtained a small fism by way of loan from
the king of Portugal P.

The nobility discovered great unwillingness to

proceed to extremities with the Junta. They
were animated with no less hatred than the com.
mons against the Flemings; they approved much
of several articles in the remonstrance; they
thought the junaure favourable, not only for
sedrefling past grievances, but for rendering the
conilitution more perse& and secure by new re-
gulations; they were afraid, that while the two
orders, of which the legislature was composed,
waited each other's strength by mutual hoftili-
ties, the crown would rife to power on the ruin
or weakness of both, and encroach no less on
the independence of the nobles, than on the

o Sandov. 303. D;&. de Bayle, art. Padilla.
P P. Mart. Ep. 7i8e privileges

privileges of the commons. To this disposition
were owing the frequent overtures of peace
which the regents made to the Junta, and the
continual negotiations they carried on during
the progress of their military operations. Nor
were the terms which they offered unreasonable;
for on condition that the Junta would pass from
a few articles most subversive of the royal au-
thority, or inconfiifent with the rights of the nobi-
lity, they engaged to procure the emperor's con-
sent to their other demands, which if he, through
the influence of evil counsellors, should refuse,
several of the nobles promised to join with the
commons in their endeavours to extort it q. Such
divisions, however, prevailed among the members
of the Junta, as prevented their deliberating
calmly, or judging with prudence. Some of the
cities which had entered into the confederacy,
were filled with that mean jealousy and distrust
of each other, which rivalihip in commerce or in
grandeur is apt to inspire; the confdable, by his
influence and promises, had prevailed on the in-
habitants of Burgos to abandon the Junta, and
other noblemen had (haken the fidelity of some
of the lesser cities; no person had arisen among
the commons of such superior abilities or eleva-
tion of mind as to acquire the diretion of their
affairs; Padilla, their general, was a man of po.
pular qualities, but diftsfted for that reason by
those of highest rank who adhered to the Jun-
ta; the condut of Giron led the people to view,
with suspicion, every person of noble birth who
joined their party; so that the flrongeft marks

r P. Mars. Ep. 69g. 7s3. Geddes's Trsais, i. 261.

of

of genius, appeared in all their proceedings at
this time. After many consultations held con-
cerning the terms proposed by the regents, they
fuffered-themfelves to be so carried away by re-
fentment againit the nobility, that, rejeding all
thoeghts of accommodation, they threatened to
firip them of the crown lands, which they or
their ancefors had usurped, and to re-annex these
to the royal domain. Upon this preposterous
scheme, which would at once have annihilated
all the liberties for which they had been firug-
gling, by rendering the kings of Castile abfolite
and independent on their fubjeas, they were
so intent, that they now exclaimed with less
vehemence againit the exaaions of the foreign
ministers, than againif the exorbitant power and
wealth of the nobles, and seemed to hope that
they might make peace with Charles, by offering
to enrich him with their spoils.

The success which Padilla had met with in

several small encounters, and in reducing fonse
inconsiderable towns, helped to precipitate the
members of the Junta into this measure, filling
them with such confidence in the valour of
their troops, that they hoped for an cafy vidory
over the royalists. Padilla, that his army might
not remain inaAive while flushed with good for-
tune, laid siege to Torrelobaton, a place of
greater firength and importance than any that
he had hitherto ventured to attack, and which
was defended by a fufficient garrison; and
though the besieged made a desperate resistance,
and the admiral attempted to relieve them, he
took the town by itorm [March i, i53i], and

gave

gave it up to be plundered by his fuldiers. If
he had marched inttantly with his victorious ar-
my to Tordefillas, the head quarters of the royal-
idts, he could hardly have failed of making an
effedtual imprefiion on their troops, whom he
would have found in altoniihment at the briflk-
ness of his operations, and far from being of
fsifficient ffrength to give him battle. But the
fickleness and imprudence of the Junta prevented
his taking this flep. Incapable, like all popular
associations, either of carrying on war or of
making peace, they listened again to overtures of
accommodation, and even agreed to a Ihort sus-
pension of arms. This negotiation terminated
in nothing; but while it was carrying on, many of
Padilla's soldiers, unacquainted with the restraints
of discipline, went off with the booty which they
had got at Torrelobaton; and others, wearied
out by the unusual length of the campaign, de-
Lerted . The conkable too had leisure to as-
femble his forces at Burgos, and to prepare every
thing for taking the field; and as soon as the
truce expired, he effeaed a junaion with the
Condt de Hlaro, in spite of all Padilla's efforts to
prevent it.. They advanced immediately towards
Torrelobaton; and Padilla, finding the number
of his troops so diminithed that he durst not risk
a battle, attempted to retreat to Toro, which, if
he could have accomplished, the invasion of Na-
varre at that jundure by the French, and the
necessity which the regents must have been under
of detaching men to that kingdom, might have
Laved him from danger. But Haro, sensible how

r Sandov. 336i

VOL. II. T fatal

to escape, marched with such rapidity at the head
of his cavalry, that he came up with him near Vil.
lalar [April 23], and, without waiting for his in-
fantry, advanced to the attack. Padilla's army,
fatigued and difheartened by their precipitant re-
treat, which they could not distinguish from a
flight, happened at that time to be passing over a
ploughed hield, on which such a violent ram had
fallen, that the soldiers funk almost to the knees
at every fitep, and remained exposed to the fire of
some field-pieces which the royalists had brought
along with them. All these circumfitances so
disconcerted and intimidated raw soldiers, that
without facing the enemy, or making any resist.
ance, they fled in the utmost confusion. Padilh
exerted himself with extraordinary courage and
z ivity in order to rally them, though in vain;
fear rendering them deaf both to his threats and
intreaties: upon which, finding matters irretriev.
able, and resolving not to survive the dif.
grace of that day, and the ruin of his party, he
ruffed into the thickest of the enemy; but being
wounded and dismounted, he was taken prisoner.
His principal officers Thared the fame fate; the
common soldiers were allowed to depart unhurt,
the nobles being too generous to kill men who
threw down their arms'.

The resentment of his enemies did not fuffer

Padillato linger long in expedation of what should
befall him. Next day he was condemned to lose

s Sandov. 345, &c. P. Mart. Ep.720. Miniana, Con-

tin. p. 26. Epitome de la Vide y Hechos del Emper. Car.
los V. por D. Juan Anton. de Veraj Zuniga. 41o. Madr.
i627* P.19.

notoriety of the crime being supposed fufficient
to supersede the formality ofa legal process. He
was led inikantly to execution, together with Don
John Bravo, and Don Francis Maldonada, the
former commander of the Segovians, and the latter
of the troops of Salamanca. Padilla viewed the
approach of death with calm but undaunted for-
titude; and when Bravo, his fellow-fufferer, ex-
pressed some indignation at hearing himself pro-
laimed a traitor, he checked him, by observing,
r' That yesterday was the time to have displayed
the spirit of gentlemen, this day to die with the
meekness of Chriftians." Being permitted to
write to his wife and to the communityof Toledo,
the place of his nativity, he addressed the former
with a manly and virtuous tenderness, and the
latter with the exultation natural to one who
considered himself as a martyr for the liberties of
his country t. After this, he submitted quietly

to

t The flrain of there letters is fq eloquent and high fpieit.

ed, that T have translated them for the entertainment of my
readers.

2Te Letter of Don John Padilla to his Tjfe.

" SENORA,

ft Io your grief did not affli& me more than myown

death, I ihould deem myself perfe6tly happy. For the end
of life being certain to all men, the Almighty confers a
mark of diftinguiihing favour upon that person, for whom he
appoints a death such as mine, which, though lamented by
many, is nevertheless acceptable unto him. It would require
more time than I now have, to write any thing that could
afford you conlojation. That my enemies will not grant
me, nor do I with to delay the reception of that crown which
1 hope to enjoy. You may bewail your own loss, but not
my death, which, being so honourable, ought not to be 1a-

'r,. mented

to his fate. Most of the Spanilh hiflorians, ac-
cuftomed to ideas of government and of regal

tnented by any. My foul, for nothing else is left to me, I
bequeath to you. You will receive it, as the thing in this
world which you valied most. I do not write to my father
Pero Lopez, because I date not; for though I hate Ihewn
myself to be his son in daring to loft my life, I have not
been the heir of his good fortune. I will not attempt to
fay any thing more, that I may not tire the execationer,
who vaits for me, and that I may not excite a suspicion,
that, in order to prolong my lift, I lengthen out my letter.
My servant Sofia, an eye-wsitnefs, and to whom I have cos-
municated my mofb secret thoughts, will infoim you of what
I cannot now write; and thus I refc, expefing the intru-
ment of your grief1 and of my deliverance."

lio Letter to rhe City of Toledo.

" To thee, the crown of Spain, and the light of the whole

world, ftee from the time of the mighty Goths: to thee,
who, by Ihedding the blood of fIrangers, as well as thy own
blood, halt recovered libeitty for thyself and thy neighbour.
ing cities, thy. legitimate son, Juan de Padilia, gives inform-
ation, how by the blood of his body, thy ancient viaories
ate to be refreihed. If fate hath not permitted my adhions

- to be plactd among your'fuccefsful and ceiebrated exploits, the

fault hath been in my ill fortune, not in my good will. This
I requel of thee as of a mother, tn accept, since God hath
given me nothing more to lose for thy fake, than that which
I am now to selinquilh. I am more solicitous about thy
good opinion than about my own life. The fhiftings of
fortune, which never fltnds itill, are many. But this I fee
with infinite consolation, that 1, the leoat of thy children,
fuflhr death for thee; and that thou halt narfed at thy
breasts such as may take vengeance for my wrongs. Ma-
ny tongues will relate the manner of my death, of which
I am lb 1 ignorant, though I know it to be near. My end
will teliify what was my defare. My foul I recommend to
theeas to the patroness of Chritianity. Of my body I fay
nothing, for it is not mine, I can write nothing more, for
at this very moment I feel the knife at my throat, with
greater dread of thy displeasure, than apprehenoion of my
own pain." Sandgv. Hith vol, i. p. 47S.

power,

46ted, have been so eager to telify their difap-
probation of the cause in which he was engaged,
that they have negledied, or have been afraid to
do juffice to his virtues; and by blackening his
spemory, have endeavoured to deprive him of
that pity which is seldom denied to illufbrious
fufferers.

The vicory at Villalar proved as decisive as it

was complete. Valladolid, the most zealous of
all the associated cities, opened its gates imme-
diately to the conquerors, and being treated with
great clemency by the regents, Medini del Cam-
in, Segovia, and many other towns, followed its
example. This sudden dissolution of a confe-
deracy, formed not upon flight disgusts, or upon
trifling motives, into which the whole body of
the people had entered, and which had been
allowed time to acquire a considerable degree of
order and consistence by establishing a regular
plan ofgovernment, is the ifrongeft proof either
of the inability of its leaders, or of some secret
discord reigning among its members. Though
part of that army by which they had been sub.
dued was obliged, a few days after the battle, to
march towards Navarre, in order to check the
progress of the French in that kingdom, nothing
could prevail on the dejeaed commons of Caf-
tile to take arms again, and to embrace such a
favourable opportunity of acquiring those rights
and privileges for which they had appeared so
zealors. The city of Toledo alone, animated
by Donna Maria Pacheco, Padilla's widow, who,
infiead of bewailing her husband with a womanish
sorrow, prepared to revenge his death, and to

T 3 prosecute

prosecute that cause in defence of which he had
fuffered, must be excepted. Refpea for her sex,
or admiration for her courage and abilities, as
well as sympathy with her misfortunes, and ve-
neration for the memory of her hufhand, secured
her the fame ascendant over the people which he
had poffeifed. The prudence and vigour with
which ihe aded, justified that confidence they
placed in her. She wrote to the French general
in Navarre, encouraging him to invade Castile by
the offer of powerful afiltiance. She endeavoured
by her letters and emissaries to revive the spirit
and hopes of the other cities. She raised fol-
diers, and exaded a great fum from the clergy
belonging to the cathedral, in order to defray
the expence of keeping them on foot ". She
employed every artifice that could intercift or in-
flame the populace. For this purpose she or-
dered crucifixes to be used by her troops initead
of colours, as if they had been at war with the
infidels and enemies of religion; (he marched
through the fireets of Toledo with her son, a
young child, clad in deep mourning seated on a
mule, having a flandard carried before him, re-
presenting the manner of his father's execution X-
By all these means (he kept the minds of the
people in such perpetual agitation as prevented
their passions from fubhiding, and rendered them
insensible of the dangers to which they were ex-
posed, by standing alone in opposition to the
royal authority. While the army was employed
in Navarre, the regents were unable to atteinpt
the reduaion of Toledo by force; and all their

g p* Mart.Ep. 7257 X Sandov. 375.

endeavqurs,

credit with the people, or to gain her by large
promises and the folicitations of her brother the
Marquis de Mondeiar, proved ineffeaual. Upon
the expulsion of the French out of Navarre,
part of the army returned into Castile, and in-
vefited Toledo. Even this made no impression
on the intrepid and obitinate courage of Donna
Maria. She defended the town with vigour,
her troops in several sallies beat the royalifls, and
no progress was made towards reducing the
place, until the clergy, whom foe had highly of-
fended by invading their property, ceased to fiup-
port her. As soon as they received information
of the death of William de Croy, archbifihop of
Toledo, whose pofEnflion of that fee was their
chief grievance, and that the emperor had named
a Castilian to fiucceed him, they openly turned
againit her, and persuaded the peopie that (he
had acquired such influence over them by the
force of enchantments, that ftle was aflifted by a
familiar d~emon which attended her in the form
of a Negro-maid, and that by its suggestions (he
regulated every part of her condua Y. The cre-
dulous multitude, whdm their impatience of a
long blockade, and despair of obtaining fsuccours
either 'from the cities formerly in confederacy
with them, or from the French, rendered deisrous
of peace, took arms againfi her, and driving her
out of the city, fiurrendered it to the royalists
[OAober 26]. She retired to the citadel,
which (he defended with amazing fortitude four
inonths longer; and when reduced to the la1t

y P. Msrt. Ep. 7*7.

extremities;

extremities, the made her escape in difguilfe
[February so], and fled to Portugal, where she
had many relations Z.

Upon her flight, the citadel surrendered.

Tranquillity was re-efitablithed in Castile; and
this bold attempt of the commons, like all un-
fuccefsful infurreEtions, contributed to confirm
and extend the power of the crown, which it
was intended to moderate and abridge. .The
Cortes still continued to make a part of the Caf-
tilian confditution, and was summoned to meet
whenever the king flood in need of money; bst
initead of adhering to their ancient and cautioos
form of examining and redrefling public griey-
ances, before they proceeded to grant any supply,
the more courtly custom of voting a donative is
the firt place was introduced, and the sovereign
having obtained all that he wanted, never allowed
them to enter into any enquiry, or to attempt
any reformation injurious to his authority. The
privileges which the cities had enjoyed were
gradually circumscribed or aboliihed; their com-
merce began from this period to decline; and
becoming less wealthy and less populous, they
los that power and influence which they had
acquired in the Cortes.

While Castile was exposed to the calamities

of civil war, the kingdom of Valencia was torn
by intestine commotions frill more violent. The
association which had been formed in the city of
Valencia in the year one thousand five hundred
and twenty, and which was diftinguilhed by the
name of the Germanada, continued to fubift

s Sandov. 375. P. MIrt, Ep. 754. Ferrer. viii. 563.

after

members of it, upon pretext of defending the
coaots againd the descents of the corfairs of Bar-
bary, and under fandion of that permission which
Charles had rashly granted them, refofed to lay
down their arms. But as the grievances which
the Valencians aimed at redressing, proceeded
from the arrogance and exaAions of the nobi-
lity, rather than from any unwarrantable exer-
cife of the royal prerogative, their resentment
turned chiefly againd -the former. As soon as
they were allowed the use of arms, and became
conscious of their own firength, they grew im-
patient to take vengeance of their oppressors.
They drove the nobles out of most of the cities,
plundered their houses, wasted their lands, and
assaulted their caRles. They then proceeded to
tled thirteen persons, one from each company
of tradesmen established in Valencia, and com-
mitted the adminiRration of government to
them, under pretext that they would reform the
laws, edtablifh one uniform mode of dispensing
justice without partiality or regard to the diftinc-
tion of ranks, and thus restore men to some de-
gree of their original equality.

The nobles were obliged to take arms in self-

defence. Hoflilities began, and were carried on
with all the rancour with which resentment at
*opprefilon inspired the one party, and the idea
of insulted dignity animated the other. As no
person of honourable birth, or of liberal educa-
tibn, joined the Germanada, the councils as wdll
as troops of the confederacy were conduaed by
low mechanics, who acquired the confidence of
an enraged multitude chiefly by the fierceness of

their

ings. Among such men, the laws introduced in
civilized nations, in order to restrain or moderate
the violence of war, were unknown or despised;
and they run into the wildest excesses of cruelty
and outrage.

The emperor, occupied with fupprefling the in-

furreaion in Castile, which more immediately
threatened the subversion of his power and pre-
rogative, was unable to give much attention to
the tumults in Valencia, and left the nobility of
that kingdom to fight their own battles. His
viceroy, the Condd de Melito, had the supreme
command of the forces which the nobles raised
among the vassals. The Germanada carried on
the war during the years one thousand five hun-
dred and twenty and twenty-one, with a more
persevering courage than could have been ex-
peAed from a body so tumultuary, under the
condua of such leaders. They defeated the
nobility in several aaions, which, though not
considerable, were extremely sharp. They re-
pulsed them in their attempts to reduce different
towns. But the nobles, by their superior skill
in war, and at the head of troops more accuf.
tomed to service, gained the advantage in most
of the rencounters. At length they were joined
by a body of Castilian cavalry, which the regents
dispatched towards Valencia, soon after their
viaory over Padilla at Villalar, and by their
assistance the Valencian nobles acquired such fu-
periority that they entirely broke and ruined the
Germanada. The leaders of the party were put
to death almost without any formality of legal
trial, and fuffered such cruel punifhmxents as the

sense

to infli&. The government of Valencia was re-
established in its ancient form a.

In Aragon, violent symptoms of the fame fpi-

rIt of difaffeaion and sedition which reigned in
the other kingdoms of Spain, began to appear,
but by the prudent condua of the viceroy, Don
John de Lanufa, they were so far composed, as
to prevent their breaking out into any open in-
furreaion. But in the island of Majorca, an-
nexed to the crown of Aragon, the fame causes
which had excited the commotions in Valencia,
produced effcas no less violent. The people,
impatient of the hardships which they had en-
dured under the rigid jurifdidion of the no-
bility, took arms in a tumultuary manner
[March 59, 152s]; deposed their viceroy; drove
him out of the island; and massacred every gen-
tleman who was so unfortunate as to fall into
their hands. The obdinacy with which the
people of Majorca persisted in their rebellion,
was equal to the rage with which they began it.
Many and vigorous efforts were requisite in
order to reduce them to obedience; and tran-
quillity was re-established in every part of Spain,
before the Majorcans could be brought to sub-
mit to their sovereign b*

a Argenfola Annales de Aragon, cap. 75. 90. 99. I i.

Sayes Annales de Aragon, cap. 5. az, &c. P. Mart. Ep.
lib. xxxiii. & xxxiv. paflim. Ferrer. Hist. d'Efpagne, viii.
j4a. 564, &c.

b Argeofola Annales de Aragon, c. 113. Ferrer. Hilt.

viii. 542. Sayes Annales de Aragon, c. 7. 51. 14. 76. SI.
Ferreras Hist. d'Efpagne, viii. 579, &c. 609.

While

While the spirit of difaffeaion was so general

among the Spaniarde, and fa many causes con.
curred in precipitating them into such violent
sneafures in order to obtain the redrefa of their
grievances, it may appear Ptrange that the male-
contents in the different kingdoms ihould have
carried on their operations without any mutual
concert, or even any intescourfe with each other.
By uoliting their councils and arms, they might
have aCted both with greater force and with more
effed. The appearance of a national confede-
racy would have rendered it no less refpedable
among the people than formidable to the crown;
and the emperor, unable to resist such a com-
bination, mufR have complied with any terms
which the members of it (hould have thought
fit to prescribe. Many things, however, pre-
4ented the Spaniards from forming themselves
into one body, and pursuing common measures.
The people of the diflfrent kingdoms in Spain,
though they were become the fobjeas of the
famne sovereign, retained, in full force, their na-
tional antipathy to each other. The remern-
brance of their ancient rivalihip and hostilities
was hRil lively, and the sense of reciprocal injuries
so ibrong, as to prevent them from ating with
confidence and concert. Each nation chose ra-
ther to depend on its own efforts, and to main-
tain the druggle alone, than to implore the aid
of neighbours whom they diftrufled and hated.
At the fame time the forms of government in
the several kingdoms of Spain were so different,
and the grievances of which they complaaed,
as well as the alterations and amendmie:.nts in po-

licy

rious, that it was not easy to bring them to unite
in any common plan. To this disunion Charles
was indebted for the preservation of his Spanish
crowns; and while each of the kingdoms fol-
lowed separate measures, they were all obliged
at last to conform to the will of their sovereign.

The arrival of the emperor in Spain filled his

fubjeds who had been in arms against him with
deep apprehensions, from which he soon deli-
vered them by an aa of clemency no less pru-
dent than generous. After a rebellion so gene-
ral, fearcely twenty persons, among so many cri-
minals obnoxious to the law, had been punifhcd
capitally in Castile. Though ifrongly solicited
by his council, Charles refused to shed any more
blood by the hands of the executioner; and pub-
lilbed a general pardon [Odober 28], extending
to all crimes committed since the commence-
ment of the infurreaions, from which only four-
score persons were excepted. Even these he
seems to have named,'rather with an intention to
intimidate others, than from any inclination to
seize them ; for when an officious courtier offer-
ed to inform him where one of the mofl con-
fiderable among them was concealed, he avoided
it by a good-natured pleasantry; " Go," says
he, "( I have now no reason to be afraid of that
man, but he has fume cause to keep at a dif-
tance from me, 'and you would be better em-
ployed in telling him that I am here, than in ac-
quainting me with the place of his retreat C."'

c Sandov. 377, &c. Vida del Emper. Carlos, por Don

Juan Anton. de Vera y Zuniga, p. 30.

voL. I. U 1Y

By this appearance of magnanimity, as well as
by his care to avoid every thing which had dif-
gufied the Caftilians during his former residence
among them ; by his address in assuming their
manners, in speaking their language, and in com-
plying with all their humours and customs, he
acquired an ascendant over them which hardly
any of their native monarchs had ever attained,
and brought them to support him in all his en-
terprifes with a zeal and valour to which he owed
much of his success and grandeur d.

About the time that Charles landed in Spain,

Adrian set out for Italy to take poffeffion of his
new dignity. But though the Roman people
longed extremely for his arrival, they could not,
on his first appearance, conceal their surprise
and disappointment. After being accustomed
to the princely magnificence of Julius, and the
elegant splendour of Leo, they beheld with con-
tempt an old man of humble deportmeint, of au-
itere manners, an enemy to pomp, destitute of
taste in the arts, and unadorned with any of the
external accomplishments which the vulgar expeft
in those raised to eminent frations e. Nor did
his political views and maxims seem less fitrange
and astonishing to the pontifical ministers. He
acknowledged and bewailed the corruptions
which abounded in the church, as well as in the
court of Rome, and prepared to reform both;
he discovered no intention of aggrandizing his
family; he even scrupled at retaining such ter-

' UlloVita de Carlo V. p. Sy.

C Guic. i. xv. z38. Jovii Vita Adriani, Ys7. Bellefor.

Epitr, des Princ. 84.

ritories

by violence or fraud, rather than by any legal
title, and for that reason he invefited Francesco
Maria de Rover'e anew in the duchy of Urbino,
of which Leo had fitripped him, and surrendered
to the duke of Ferrara several places wrested
from him by the church f. To men little ha-
bituated to fee princes regulate their condu& by
the maxims of morality and the principles of jus-
tice, these aaions of the new pope appeared in-
conteitible proofs of his weakness or inexpe-
rience. Adrian, who was a perfea firanger to
the complex and intricate system of Italian po-
litics, and who could place no confidence in per-
sons whose subtle refinements in business suited
so ill with the natural simplicity and candour of
his own charaaer, being often embarrassed and
irresolute in his deliberations, the opinion of his
incapacity daily increased, until both his person
and government became objeas of ridicule
among his fubjeAs g.

Adrian, though devoted to the emperor, en-

deavoured to assume the impartiality which be-
came the common father of Christendom, and
laboured to reconcile the contending princes, in
order that they might unite in a league againit
Solyman, whose conquest of Rhodes rendered
him more formidable than ever to Europe h.
But this was an undertaking far beyond his
abilities. To examine such a variety of preten-
fions, to adjust such a number of interfering in-

f Guic. lib. xv. 240.
R jov. Vita Adr. sIIE P. Marl. Ep. 774. RITcelli

Lettres de Princ. vol. i. 97. 96. 101.

I Bellefor. Epitr. p. 86.

U 2 terefts,

tereits, to extinguish the palfions which ambi-
tion, emulation, and mutual injuries had kin-
died, to bring so many hoflile powers to
pursue the fame scheme with unanimity and vi-
gour, required not only uprightness of intention,
bnt great superiority both of underitanding and
address. The Italian dates were no Iefs desirous
of peace than the pope. The Imperial army
under Colonna was frill kept on foot; but as the
emperor's revenues in Spain, in Naples, and in
the Low Countries, were either exhaufled or
applied to some other purpose, it depended en-
tirely for pay and subsistence on the Italians.
.A great part of it was quartered in the ecclefi-
aftical date, and monthly contributions were
levied upon the Florentines, the Milanese, the
Genoese, and Lucchefe, by the viceroy of Na-
ples; and though all exclaimed againift such
oppression, and were impatient to be delivered
from it, the dread of worse consequences from
the rage of the army, or the resentment of the
emperor, obliged them to submit .

1523.] So much regard, however, was paid

to the pope's exhortations, and to a bull which
he issued, requiring all Christian princes to con-
sent to a truce for three years, that the Imperial,
the French, and English ambassadors at Rome,
were empowered by their refpedive courts to
treat of that matter; but while they wasted
their time in fruitless negotiations, their maf-
ters continued their preparations for war. The
Venetians, who had hitherto adhered with great
lirmners to their alliance with Francis, being

i Gaic. I.xyv. 233. now

desperate situation, entered into a league againit
him with the emperor [June 28] ; to which
Adrian, at the instigation of his countryman and
friend Charles de Lannoy, viceroy of Naples,
who persuaded him that the only obitacles to
peace arose from the ambition of the French
king, soon after acceded. The other Italian
slates followed their example; and Francis was
left without a single ally to resist the efforts of so
many enemies, whose armies threatened, and
whose territories encompassed, his dominions on
every fide k*

The dread of this powerful confederacy, it was

thought, would have obliged Francis to keep
wholly on the defensive, or at least have pre-
vented his entertaining any thoughts of march-
ing into Italy. But it was the charadler of
that prince, too apt to become remiss, and even
negligent on ordinary occasions, to roose at the
approach of danger, and not only to encounter
it with spirit and intrepidity, qualities which
never forsook him, but to provide against it with
diligence and industry. Before his enemies were
ready to execute any of their schemes, Francis
had assembled a numerous army. His authority
over his own fubjeds was far greater than that
which Charles or Henry poffeffed over theirs.
They depended on their diets, their Cortes, and
their parliaments, for money, which was usually
granted them in small sums, very slowly, and
with much reludance. The taxes he could im.
pose were more considerable, and levied with

k Guic. 1. xv. Z41. 148.

v 3 greater

greater dispatch; so that on this, as well as on
other occasions, he brought his armies into the
field while they were only devising ways and
means for raising theirs. Senfibie of this ad-
vantage, Francis hoped to disconcert all the em-
peror's schemes by marching in person into the
Milanese; and this bold measure, the more for-
midable because unexpeaed, could fcarceey have
failed of producing that effeA. But when the
vanguard of his army had already reached Lons,
and he himself was hastening after it with a fe-
cond division of his troops, the difEovery of a
domeRic conspiracy, which threatened the ruin
of the kingdom, obliged him to flop (hort, and
to alter his mseafures.

The authsor of this dangerous plot was Charles

duke of Bourbon, lord high conufable, whose
noile birth, vas fortune, and high office, raised
him to be the most powerful fubjea in France,
as his great talents, equally suited t.o the field or
the council, and his signal services to the crown,
rendered him the modt illufdrious and de-
serving. The near resemblance between the
king and him in many of their qualities, both
being fouid of war, and ambitious to excel in
manly exercises, as well as their equality in age,
and their proximity of blood, ought naturally to
have secured to him a considerable (hare in that
monarch's favour. But unhappily Louise, the
king's mother, had contraAed a violent aversion
to the house of Bourbon, for no better reason
than because Anne of Bretagne, the queen of
Louis the Twelfth, with whom (he lived in per-
petual enmity, had discovered a peculiar attach-
Inent -to that branch of thp royal fanily; and

had

any imprelion which his mother gave him, to
view all the conitabie's adions with a mean and
unbecoming jealousy. His diftinguilhed merit
at the battle of Marignano had not been fuffi.
ciently rewarded; he had been recalled from
the government of Milan upon very frivolous
pretences, and had met with a cold reception,
which his prudent conduA in that difficult Pta-
tion did not deserve; the payment of his pen-
fions had been flfpended without any good
cause; and during the campaign of one thou-
sand five hundred and twenty-one, the king, as
has already been related, had affronted him in
presence of the whole army, by giving the com-
mand of the van to the duke of Alen9on. The
constable, at fr-fl, bore these indignities with
greater moderation than could have been ex-
peded from an high-fpirited prince, conscious
of what was due to his rank and to his services.
Such a multiplicity of injuries, however, ex-
haufled his patience; and inspiring him with
thoughts of revenge, he retired from court, and
began to hold a secret correspondence with some
of the emperor's ministers.

About that time the duchess of Bourbon hap.

pened to die without leaving any children.
Louise, of a difuofition no less amorous than
vindidive, and itill susceptible of the tender pas-
Fions at the age of forty-fix, began to view the
confrable, a prince as amiable as he was accom-
plifhed, with other eyes; and notwithstanding
the great disparity of their years, she formed the
scheme of marrying him. Bourbon, who might
have expeAcd every thing to which an ambitious

mnind

woman who governed her son and the kingdom,
being incapable either of imitating the queen in
her sudden transition from hatred to love, or of
dissembling so meanly as to pretend affeeCion for
one who had persecuted him so long with un-
provoked malice, not only rejeaed the match,
but embittered his refusal by some severe raillery
on Louife's person and charaatr. She, finding
herself not only contemned but insulted, her dif.
appointed love turned into hatred, and since she
could not marry, the resolved to ruin Bourbon.

For this purpose the consulted with chancellor

Du Prat, a man who, by a base prostitution of
great talents and of superior skill in his profef-
sion, had risen to that high office. By his ad-
vice, a law-suit was commenced against the con.
lIable, for the whole estate belonging to the
house of Bourbon. Part of it was claimed in
the king's name, as having fallen to the crown;
part in that of Louise, as the nearest heir in
blood of the deceased duchess. Both these
claims were equally destitute of any foundation
in justice; but Louise, by her folicitations and
authority, and Du Prat, by employing all the
artifices and chicanery of law, prevailed on the
judges to order the eftatc to be sequestered.
This unjull decision drove the confiable to de-
fpair, and to measures which despair alone
could have didfated. He renewed his intrigues
in the Imperial court, and flattering himself that
the. injuries which he had fuffered would juflify
his having recourse to any means in order to ob-
tain revenge, he offered to transfer his allegiance
fiomhis natural sovereign to the emperor, and

to

as well as the king of England, to whsomthe fe-
cret was communicated 1, expeding prodigious
advantages from his revolt, were ready to receive
him with open arms, and spared neither promises
nor allurements which might help to confirm him
in his resolution. The emperor offered him in
marriage his fiffer Eleanor, the widow of the
king of Portugal, with an ample portion. He
was included as a principal in the treaty between
Charles and Henry. The counties of Provence
and IDauphin6 were to be fettled on him with
the title of king. The emperor engaged to
enter France by the Pyrenees; and Henry, sup-
ported by the Flemings, to invade Picardy;
while twelve thousand Germans, levied at.their
common charge, were to penetrate into Bur-
gundy, and to ad in concert with Bourbon, who
undertook to raise fix thousand men among his
friends and vassals in the heart of the kingdom.
The execution of this deep-laid and dangerous
plot was suspended, until the king should cross
the Alps with the only army capable of defend-
ing his dominions; and as he was far advanced
in his march for that purpose, France was on the
brink of defiruAion mi

Happily for that kingdom, a negotiation

which had now been carrying on for several
months, though conduded with the most pro-
found secrecy, and communicated only to a few
chosen confidents, could not altogether escape

1 Rymer's Fmeder. xiii. 7S4.

T Thuani Hilft lib, i. c. i0. Hicute:. Rer. Autr. lib.

viii. c. IS. p. o07*

the

numerous retainers, rendered more inquisitive
by finding that they were distrusted. Two of
these gave the king some intimation of a myfle.
rious correspondence between their mafler and
the count de Roeux, a Flemish nobleman of
great confidence with the emperor. Francis,
who could not bring himself to fufpe& that the
firit prince of the blood would be so base as to
betray the kingdom to its enemies, immediately
repaired to Moulines, where the constable was in
bed, feigning indisposition that he might not
be obliged to accompany the king into Italy,
and acquainted him of the intelligence which he
had received. Bourbon, with great solemnity,
and the moit imposing affeaation of ingenuity
and candour, asserted his own innocence; and
as his health, he said, was now more confirmed,
he promised to join the army within a few days.
Francis, open and candid himself, and too apt
to be deceived by the appearance of those virtues
in others, gave such credit to what he said, that
he refused to arrest him, although advised to
take that precaution by his wisest counsellors;
and, as if the danger had been over, he continued
his march towards Lyons. The constable set
out soon after [September], seemingly with an
intention to follow him; but turning suddenly
to the left, he crossed the Rhone, and after in-
finite fatigue and peril, efeaped all the parties
which the king, who became sensible too late
of his own credulity, sent out to intercept him,
and reached Italy in safety n.

n Mem. de Bellay, p. 64, &c. Pafquier Recherches de

la France, p. 4S.S

Francis

vent the bad effeas of the irreparable error
which he had committed. He put garrisons in
all the places of fitrength in the conitable's ter-
ritories. He seized all the gentlemen whom he
could fufpea of being his associates; and as he
had not hitherto discovered the whole extent of
the confpirator's schemes, nor knew how far the
infeaion had spread among his fubjeAs, he was
afraid that his absence might encourage them to
make some desperate attempt, and for that rea-
son relinquilhed his intention of leading his army
in person into Italy.

He did not, however, abandon his design on

the Milanese, but appointed admiral Bonnivet
to take the supreme command in his fPead, and
to march into that country with an army thirty
thousand firong. Bonnivet did not owe this
preferment to his abilities as a general; for of
all the talents requisite to form a great com-
mander, he poffeffed only personal courage, the
lowell and the molt common. But he was the
molt accomplished gentleman in the French
court, of agreeable manners and insinuating ad-
dress, and a sprightly conversation; and Francis, -
who lived in great familiarity with his courtiers,
was so charmed with these qualities, that he ho-
noured him, on all occasions, with the molt par-
tial and diitinguifhing marks of his favour. He
was, besides, the implacable enemy of Bourbon;
and as the king hardly knew whom to trult at
that junaure, he thought the chief command
could be lodged no where so safely as in his
hands.

Colonna,

of the Milanese, his own conquekt, was in no
condition to refit such a formidable army. He
was destitute of money fufficient to pay his
troops, which were reduced to a small number by
sickness or defertien, and had, for that reason,
been obliged to negle&t every precaution noceef
fary for the security of the country. The only
plan which he formed was to defend the passage
of the river Teflino against the French; and as
if he had forgotten how easily he himfeif had
disconcerted a similar scheme formed by Lautree,
he promised with great confidence on its being
effeatual. But in ipite of all his caution, it
succeeded no better with him than with Lautree.
Bonnivet passed the river without lofn, at a ford
which had been negleded, and the Imperialiis
retired to Milan, preparing to abandon the town
as soon as the French ihould appear before it.
By an unaccountable negligence, which Guic-
ciardini imputes to infatuation , Bonnivet did
not advance for three or four days, and loft the
opportunity with which Pis good fortune pre-
fented him. The citizens recovered from their
confiternation; Colonna, itill aftive at the age
of fourscore, and Morone, whose enmity to
France rendered him indefatigable, were em-
ployed night and day in repairing the fortifi-
cations, in amassing provisions, in colleding
troops from every quarter; and by the time the
French approached, had put the city in a condi-
tion to stand a siege. Bonnivet, after some fruit-
kfs attempts on the town, which harassed his

t Guice lib, xy. >54O

groops

troops more than the enemy, was obliged, by
the inclemency of the season, to retire into win-
ter quarters.

During these tranfaa~ons, pope Adrian died;

an event lo much to the fatisfaEtion of the Ro-
man people, whose hatred or contempt of him
augmented every day, that the night after his
decease they adorned the door of his chief phy-
fician's houfc with garlands, adding this inferip-
tion, TO THE DELIVERER OF HIS
COUNTRY P. The cardinal de Medici in.
flantly renewed his pretensions to the papal dig.
nity, and entered the conclave with high expec-
tations on his own part, and a general opinion
of the people that they would be fuccefsful.
But though supported by the Imperial faaion,
poffeffed of great personal interest, and capable
of all the artifices, refinements, and corruption,
which reign in those afiemblies, the obstinacy
and intrigues of his rivals protraded the conclave
to the unusual length of fifty days. The address
and perseverance of the cardinal at lafi surmount-
ed every obstacle. He was raised to the head of
the church [November 28], and affmlned the
government of it by the name of Clement VII.
'The choice was universally approved of. High
expedations were conceived of a pope, whoue
great talents, and long experience in business,
seemed to qualify him no less for defending the
spiritual interests of the church, exposed to im-
minent danger by the progress of Luther's opi-
nions, than for conduding.its political opera-
tions with the prudence requisite at such a diffi.

P Jovil Vit. Adr. 517.

VOL. iI. X cult

tages, rendered the ecclesiastical fdate more re-
fpeaable, by having in his hands the government
of Florence, together with the wealth of the fa-
mily of Medici s.

Cardinal Wolsey, not difheartened by the dif-

appointment of his ambitious views at the former
eleaion, had entertained more sanguine hopes of
success on this occasion. Henry wrote to the
emperor, reminding him of his engagements to
second the pretensions of his minister. Wolfe1
beftirred himself with aaivity suitable to the im-
portance of the prize for which he contended,
and inliruAed his agents at Rome to spare nei-
ther promises nor bribes in order to gain his end.
But Charles had either amused him with vain
hopes which he never intended to gratify, or he
judged it impolitic to oppose a candidate who
had such a profpe& of succeeding as Medici;
or perhaps the cardinals durit not venture to pro.
voke the people of Rome, while their indignation
against Adrian's memory was frill fresh, by pla-
cing another Ulira-montane on the papal throne.
Wolsey, after all his expeAations and endea-
rours, had the mortification to fee a pope elefted,
of such an age, and of so vigorous a conflitution,
that he could not derive much comfort to him-
seif from the chance of surviving him. This
second proof fully convinced Wolsey of the em-
peror's insincerity, and it excited in him all the
resentment which an haughty mind feels on be.
ing at once disappointed and deceived; and
though Clement endeavoured to soothe his vin-

9 Guic. i. xv. 263.

I diaive

be legate in England during life, with such
ample powers as veiled in him almost the whole
papal jurifdiaion in that kingdom, the injury
he had now received made such an impreflion as
entirely dissolved the tie which had united him
to Charles, and from that moment he meditated
revenge. It was necessary, however, to conceal
his intention from his mailer, and to finfpend the
execution of it, until, by a dexterous improve-
ment of the incidents which might occur, he
ihould be able gradually to alienate the king'S
affeaions from the emperor. For this reason,
he was so far from expressing any uneasiness on
account of the repulse which he had met with,
that he abounded on every occasion, private as
well as public, in declarations of his high fatif.
fadion with Clement's promotion '.

Henry had, during the campaign, fulfilled,

with great sincerity, whatever he was hound to
perform by the league againtl France, though
more slowly than he could have wiihed. His
thoughtless profusion, and total negled of eco-
nomy, reduced him often to great draits for
money. The operations of war were now car-
ried on in Europe in a manner very different
from that which had long prevailed. Indead of
armies suddenly assembled, which under diftina
chieftains followed their prince into the field
for a Ihort space, and served at their own colt,
troops were now levied at great charge, and re-
ceived regularly conliderable pay. Inflead of
impatience on both sides to bring every quarrel

r Fiddes's Life of Wolsey, 294, &-c. Herbert.

x E to

cided the fate of open countries, and allowed
the barons, together with their vassals, to re-
turn to their ordinary occupations; towns were
fortified with great art, and defended with much
obilinacy; war, from a very simple, became a
very intricate science; and campaigns grew of
course to be more tedious and less decisive. The
expence which these alterations in the military
fyitem necessarily created, appeared intolerable
to nations hitherto unaccustomed to the burden
of heavy taxes. Hence proceeded the frugal,
and even parsimonious spirit of the English par.
liaments in that age, which Henry, with all his
authority, was seldom able to overcome. The
commons, having refused at .this time to grant
him the supplies which he demanded, he had
recourse to the ample and almost unlimited pre.
rogative which the kings of England then pof-
sessed, and by a violent and unusual exertion of
it, raised the money he wanted. This, how-
ever, waited so much time, that it was late in
the season [Sept. 20] before his army, under the
duke of Suffolk, could take the field. Being
joined by a considerable body of Flemings, Sus.
folk marched into Picardy, and Francis, from his
extravagant eagerness to recover the Milanese,
having left that frontier almost unguarded, he
penetrated as far as the banks of the river Oyfe,
within eleven leagues of Paris, filling that capital
with consternation. But the arrival of some
troops detached by the king, who was skill at
Lyons; the ative gallantry of the French of,
licers, who allowed the allies no respite night or
* lay . therigoour of a most unnatural season, to-

gethef

gether with fearcity of provisions, compelle4
Suffolk to retire [November]; and La Tre-
nodille, who commanded in those parts, had
the glory not only of having checked the progress
of a formidable army with an handful of men,
but of driving them with ignominy out of the
French territories S

The emperor's attempts upon Burgundy and

Guienne were not more fortunate, though in both
these provinces Francis was equally unprepared
to refifF them. The condu& and valour of his
generals supplied his want of foresight; the
Germans, who made an irruption into one
of these provinces, and the Spaniards, who
attacked the other, were repulsed with great
disgrace.

Thus ended the year 1523, during which

Francis's good fortune and success had been
such as gave all Europe an high idea of his
power and resources. He had discovered and
difeoncerted a dangerous conspiracy, the author
of which he had driven into exile, almost without
an attendant; he had rendered abortive all the
schemes of the powerful confederacy formed
against him; he had proteaed his dominions
when attacked on three different sides; and
though his army in the Milanese had not made
such progress as might have been exphed from
its superiority to the enemy in number, he had
recovered, and frill kept poffeffion of, one half
of that dutchy.

1524.] The ensuing year opened with events

more difaidrous to France. Fontarabia was loit

8 Herbert. Mem. de Bellay, 73, &c.

Z3 by

by the cowardice or treachery of its governor
[Feb. 27]. In Italy, the allies resolved on an
early and vigorous effort, in order to difpofefs
Bonnivet of that part of the Milanese which lies
beyond the Tefino. Clement, who, under the
pontificates of Lea and Adrian, had discovered
an implacable enmity to France, began now to
view the power which the emperor was daily ac-
quiring in Italy, with so much jealousy, that he
refused to accede, as his predecessors had done,
to the league against Francis, and forgetting
private passions and animofities, laboured, with
the zeal which became his charaater, to bring
about a reconciliation among the contending
parties. But all his endeavours were ineffeaual;
a numerous army, to which each of the allies
furnished their contingent of troops, was as-
fembled at Milan by the beginning of March.
Lannoy, viceroy of Naples, took the command
of it upon Colonna's death, though the chief
direaion of military operations was comnmitted
to Bourbon and the Marquis de Pescara; the
latter the ablest and most enterprising of the
Imperial generals; the former inspired by his
resentment with new aaivity and invention, and
acquainted so thoroughly with the charaaers of
the French commanders, the genius of their
troops, and the lirength as well as weakness of
their armies, as to be of infinite service to the
party which he had joined. But all these ad-
vantages were nearly loft through the emperor's
inability to raise money fullicient for executing
the various and extensive plans which he had
formed. When his troops were commanded to
march, they mutinied against their leaders, de-

manding

some months; and disregarding both the menaces
and intreaties of their officers, threatened to
pillage the city of Milan, if they did not initantly
receive fatisfaEtion. Out of this difficulty the
generals of the allies were extricated by Morone,
who prevailing on his countrymen, over whom
his influence was prodigious, to advance the
fum that was requisite, the army took the
field t.

Bonnivet was deilitute of troops to oppose

this army, and still more of the talents which
could render him an equal match for its leaders.
After various movements and encounters, de-
(cribed with great accuracy by the contemporary
hifforians, a detail of which would now be
equally uninterelting and uninfirudive, he was
forced to abandon the strong camp in which he
had entrenched himself at Biagraffa. Soon after,
partly by his own mifcondua, partly by the ac-
tivity of the enemy, who harassed and ruined his
army by continual skirmishes, while they care-
fully declined a battle which he often offered
them; and partly by the caprice of 6000 Swiss,
who refused to join his army, though within a
day's march of it; he was reduced to the ne-
ceffity of attempting a retreat into France,
through the valley of Aofl. Juff as he arrived
on the banks of the Seffia, and began to pass that
river, Bourbon and Pefeara appeared with the
vanguard of the allies, and attacked his rear with
great fury. At the beginning of the charge,
Bonnivet, while exerting himself with much

a Guic. i. xv.: 67. Capella, i90. valour,

was obliged to quit the field; and the condu&
of the rear was committed to the chevalier
Bayard, who, though so much a ifranger to the
arts of a court that he never rose to the chief com.
anand, was always called, in times of real danger,
to the post of greatest difficulty and importance.
He put himself at the head of the men at arms,
and animating them by'his presence and example
to sustain the whole shock of the enemy's troops,
he gained time for the redt of his countrymen
to make good their retreat. But in this service
he received a wound which he immediately per-
ceived to be mortal, and being unable to con.
tinue any longeraon horseback, he ordered one
of his attendants to plate him under a tree,
with his face towards the enemy; then fixing
his eyes on the guard of his sword, which he
held up inflead of a cross, he addressed his
prayers to God, and in this posture, which be.
came his charader both as a soldier and as a
Christian, he camly waited the approach of
death. Bourbon, who led the foremost of the
enemy's troops, found him in this situation,
and expressed regret and pity at the fight.
" Pity not me," cried the high-fpirited chevalier,
" I die as a man of honour ought, in the dif-
charge of my duty: they indeed are objeas of
pity, who fight againdi their king, their country,
and their oath." The marquis de Pescara,
passing soon after, manifested his admiration of
Bayard's virtues, as well as his sorrow for his
fate, with the generosity of a gallant enemy;
and finding that he could not be removed with
safety from that spot, ordered a tent to be

pitched

pitched there, and appointed proper persons to
attend him. He died, notwithitanding their
care, as his ancefiors for several generations
had done, in the field of battle. Pefeara ordered
his body to be embalmed, and sent to his rela-
tions; and such was the refpea. paid to military
merit in that age, that the duke of Savoy com-
manded it to be received with royal honours in
all the cities of his dominions; in Dauphine,
Bayard's native country, the people of all ranks
came out in a solemn procession to meet it ".

Bonnivet led back the shattered remains of his

army into France; and in one short campaign,
Francis was flripped of all he had poffeffed in
Italy, and left without one ally in that country.

While the war, kindled by the emulation of

Charles and Francis, spread over so many coun-
tries of Europe, Germany enjoyed a profound
tranquillity, extremely favourable to the reform-
ation, which continued to make progress daily.
During Luther's confinement in his retreat at
Wartburg, Carloftadius, one of his disciples,
animated with the fame zeal, but pofkeffed of
less prudence and moderation than his master,
began to propagate wild and dangerous opinions,
chiefly among the lower people. Encouraged
by his exhortations, they rose in several villages
of Saxony, broke into the churches with tumul-
tuary violence, and threw down and destroyed
the images with which they were adorned.
Those irregular and outrageous proceedings were
so repugnant to all the elecdor's cautious maxims,

u Bellifor. Epinr. p. 73. Mem. de Bellay, 75. Oeuv.

de Brant. tomr. i. so8, Itc. P'fquier Recherches, p. 526.

that,

that, if they had not received a timely check,
they could hardly have failed of alienating from
the reformers a prince, no less jealous of his own
authority, than afraid of giving offence to the
emperor, and other patrons of the ancient opi-
nions. Luther, sensible of the danger, imme.
diately quitted his retreat, without waiting for
Frederic's permiflion, and returned to Wittem-
berg [March 6, 1522]. Happily for the re.
formation, the veneration for his person and
authority was dill so great, that his appearance
alone suppressed that spirit of extravagance
which began to seize his .party. Carloftadius
and his fanatical followers, druck dumb by
his rebukes, submitted at once, and declared
that they heard the voice of an angel, not of a
man X.

Before Luther left his retreat, he had begun

to translate the Bible into the German tongue,
an undertaking of no less difliculty than import-
ance, of which he was extremely fond, and for
which he was well qualified: he had a competent
knowledge of the originallanguages; a thorough
acquaintance with the dyle and fentimenes of the
inspired writers; and though his compositions
in Latin were rude and barbarous, he was rece
koned a great mailer of the purity of his mo.
ther tongue, and could express himself with all
the elegance of which it is capable. By his own
assiduous application, together with the assist-
ance of MelanAhon and several other of his dif-
ciples, he finiihed part of the New Tefiament
in the year 5522; and the publication of it

SSleid. Hit. 51, Seckend. 195.

proved

proved more fatal to the church of Rome, than
that of all his own works. It was read with
wonderful avidity and attention by persons of
every rank. They were astonished at discovering
how contrary the precepts of the Author of our
religion are, to the inventions of those priefis
who pretended to be his vicegerents; and having
now in their hand the rule of faith, they thought
themselves qualified, by` applying it, to judge of
the established opinions, and to pronounce when
they were conformable to the standard, or when
they departed from it. The great advantages
arising from Luther's translation of the Bible,
encouraged the advocates for reformation, in the
other countries of Europe, to imitate his exam-
ple, and to publish versions of the Scriptures in
their refpedive languages.

About this time, Nuremberg, Francfort,

Hamburg, and several other free cities in Ger-
many, of the firt rank, openly embraced the re-
formed religion, and by the authority of their
magifirates aboliflied the mass, and the other fu-
perititious rites of popery Y. The eledor of
Brandenburgh, the dukes of Brunswick and
Lunenburgh, and prince of Anhalt, became
avowed patrons of Luther's opinions, ind coun-
tenanced the preaching of them amdng their

fubjeds. The court of Rome beheld this growing de-
feftion with great concern; and Adrian's first
care after his arrival in Italy, had been to deli.
berate with the cardinals, concerning the proper
means of putting a flop to it. He was profoundly

V Seekend. 241. Chytrai Coatin. Krantzii, zo0.

flkilled

early celebrated on that account, he still retained
such an excessive admiration of the science to
which he was firit indebted for his reputation
and success in life, that he considered Luther's
inveaives against the fchoolmen, particularly
Thomas Aquinas, as little less than blasphemy.
All the tenets of that doaor appeared to him
so clear and irrefragable, that he supposed every
person who called in question or contradiecd
them, to be either blinded by ignorance, or to
be aaing in opposition to the conviaion of his
own mind: Of course, no pope was ever more
bigotted or inflexible with regard to points of
doarine than Adrian; he not only maintained
them as Leo had done, because they were ancient,
or because it was dangerous for the church to al-
low of innovations, but he adhered to them with
the zeal of a theologian, and with the tenacious-
ness of a disputant. At the fame time his own man-
ners being extremely simple, and uninfeded with
any of the vices which reigned in the court of
Rome, he was as sensible of its corruptions as
the reformers themselves, and viewed them with
no less indignation. The brief which he ad.
dressed to the diet of the empire assembled at
Nuremberg [November, 1522], and the inifruc.
tions which he gave Cheregato, the nuncio
'whom he sent thither, were framed agreeably to
these views. On the one hand, he condemned
Luther's opinions with more asperity and ran-
cour of expression than Leo had ever used; he
severely censured the princes of Germany for
fuffering him to spread his pernicious tenets, by

their

at Worms, and required them,'if Luther did
not initantly retraa his errors, to destroy him
with fire as a gangrened and incurable member,
in like manner as Dathan and Abiram had been
cut off by Moses, Ananias and Sapphira by
the apostles, and John Huss and Jerome of
Prague by their ancestors Z. On the other hand,
he with great candour, and in the molt explicit
terms, acknowledged the corruptions of the
Roman court to be the source from which had
flowed moit of the evils that the church now
felt or dreaded; he promised to exert all his
authority towards reforming these abuses, with
as much dispatch as the nature and inveteracy
of the disorders would admit; and he requefited
of them to give him their advice with regard to
the molt effeAual means of suppressing that
new heresy which had sprung up among them a.

The members of the diet, after praising the

pope's pious and laudable intentions, excused
themselves for not executing the edia of Worms,
by alleging that the prodigious increase of Lu-
ther's followers, as well as the aversion to the
court of Rome among their other fubjeas on ac-
count of its innumerable exaaions, rendered such
an attempt not only dangerous, but impossible.
They affirmed that the grievances of Germany,
which did not arise from imaginary injuries, but
from impositions no less real than intolerable,
as his holiness would learn from a catalogue of
them which they intended to lay before him,
called now for some new and efficacious remedy;
and, in their opinion, the only remedy adequate

s Falcic. Rer. expet. & fugicnd. 342. a Ibid. 345.

VOL. II. Y to

to the disease, or which afforded them any hopes
of feeing the church restored to soundness and
vigour, was a general council. Such a council,
therefore, they advised him, after obtaining the
emperor's consent, to assemble without delay, in
one of the great cities of Germany, that all who
had right to be present might deliberate with
freedom, and propose their opinions with such
boldness, as the dangerous situation of religion
at this jun6ture required b*

The nuncio, more artful than his master, and

better acquainted with the political views and in-
terefts of the Roman court, was dtartled at the
proposition of a council; and easily foresaw how
dangerous such an assembly might prove, at a
time when many openly denied the papal au-
thority, and the reverence and submission yield-
ed to it visibly declined among all. For that
reason he employed his utmost address in order to
prevail on the members of the diet to proceed
themselves with greater severity againdt the Lu-
theran heresy, and to relinquish their proposal
concerning a general council to be held in Ger-
many. They, perceiving the nuncio to be more
solicitous about the interedts of the Roman
court, than the tranquillity of the empire, or
purity of the church, remained inflexible, and
continued to prepare the catalogue of their
grievances to be presented to the pope C. The
nuncio, that he might not be the bearer of a
remonflrance so disagreeable to his court, left
Nuremberg abruptly, without taking leave of
the diet ".

i, Fadic. Rer. expet. & fuglend. 346.
c Ibid. 399. d Ibid. 376.

'IThe

fialics, although they gave no opposition, did
not think it decent to join with them, drew up
the lift (so famous in the German annals) of an
hundred grievances, which the empire imputed
to the imquitous dominion of the papal fee. This
lift contained grievances much of the fame nature
with that prepared under the reign of Maxi-
Inilian, It would be tedious to enumerate each
of them; they complained of the sums exaaed for
difpenfations, abfolutions, and indulgencies; of
the expence arising from the law-suits carried by
appeal to Rome; of the iinumerable abuses occa-
honed by reservations, commendams, and annates;
of the exemption from civil jurifdition which
the clergy had obtained ; of the arts by which
they brought all secular causes under the cog-
nizance of the ecclesiastical judges; of the in-
decent and profligate lives which not a few of
the clergy led; and of various other particulars,
many of which have already been mentioned
among the circumstances that contributed to the
favourable reception, or to the quick progress
of Luther's dodtrines. In the end they conclud-
ed, that if the holy fee did not speedily deliver
them from those intolerable burdens, they had
determined to endure them no longer, and would
employ the power and authority with which
God had entrusted them, in order to procure re-
liefe.

Instead of such severities against Luther and

his followers as the nuncio had recommended, the
recels or edia of the diet [March 6, 1523] con-

e Facic. Rer. expet. & fugiend. 354*

Y 2 tamed

men to wait with patience for the determinations
of the council which was to be assembled, and
in the mean time not to publish any new opinions
contrary to the established doarines of the
church; together with an admonition to all
preachers to abitain from matters of controversy
in their difeourfes to the people, and to confine
themselves to the plain and initruAive truths of
religion f.

The reformers derived great advantage from

the tranfaaions of this diet, as they afforded them
the fullest and most authentic evidence that gross
corruptions prevailed in the court of Rome, and
that the empire was loaded by the clergy with
insupportable burdens. With regard to the
former, they had now the testimony of the pope
himself, that their inveaives and accusations
were not malicious or ill-founded. As to the
latter, the representatives of the Germanic body,
in an assembly where the patrons of the new
opinions were far from being the most numerous
or powerful, had pointed out as the chief griev-
ances of the empire, those very pradices of the
Romith church againit which Luther and his
disciples were accustomed to declaim. Accord-
ingly, in all their controversial writings after
this period, they often appealed to Adrian's de-
claration, and to the hundred grievances, in con-
firmation of whatever they advanced concerning
the dissolute manners, or insatiable ambition and
rapaciousness, of the papal court.

At Rome, Adrian's conduac was considered as

p proof of the most childish simplicity and im.

r Fdrcic. Rer. expet. & fugiend. 348.

prudeoce.

prudence. Men trained up amidit the artifices
and corruptions of the papal court, and accuf-
tamed to judge of ations not by what was just,
but by what was useful, were astonished at a pon-
tiff, who, departing from the wife maxims of
his predecessors, acknowledged disorders which
he ought to have concealed; and forgetting his
own dignity, allied advice of those, to whom
he was entitled to preferibe. By such an excess
of impolitic sincerity, they were afraid that, in-
flead of reclaiming the enemies of the church,
he would render them more presumptuous,
and infiead of extinguishing heresy,. would
weaken the foundations of the papal power, or
flop the chief sources from which wealth flowed
into the church C. For this reason the cardinals
and other ecclefiaftics of greatest eminence in the
papal court induitrioufly opposed all his schemes
of reformation, and by throwing objedions and
difficulties in his way, endeavoured to retard or
to defeat the execution of them. Adrian, amaz.
ed, on the one hand, at the obtmnacy of the Lu-
therans, disgusted, on the other, with the man-
ners and maxims of the Italians, and finding
himself unable to corred either the one or the
other, often lamented his own situation, and
often looked back with pleasure on that period
Qs his life when he was only dean of Louvain, a
more humble but happier flation, in which little
was expeaed from him, and there was nothing
to frufirate his good intentions h.

Clement VII. his fucceffqr, excelled Adrian

as much in the arts of government, as he was

g F. Paul, t1If. of Counc. p. 28i Pallavic. HiWC. 583
h Josiii Vit. Adr. p. ri8.

Y 3 inferiot

of intention. He was animated not only with
the aversion which all popes naturally bear to a
council, but having gained his own eleaion by
means very uncanonical, he was .afraid of an
assembly that might fubje& it to a scrutiny
which it could not {land. He determined,
therefore, by every possible means to elude the
demands of the Germans, both with refpea to
the calling of a council, and reforming abuses
in the papal court, which the rashness and inca-
pacity of his predecessor had brought upon him.
For this purpose, he made choice of cardinal
Campeggio, an artful man, ofen entruited by his
predeceifors with negotiations of importance, as
his nuncio to the diet of the empire assembled
again at Nuremberg.

Campeggio, without taking any notice of

what had passed in the last meeting, exhort-
ed the diet [February], in a long discourse, to
execute the edi& of Worms with vigour, as the
only effeaual means of fupprefling Luther's doc-
trines. The diet, in return, desired to know the
pope's intentions concerning the council, and the
redress of the hundred grievances. The former,
the nuncio endeavoured to elude by general and
unmeaning declarations of the pope's resolution
to pursue such measures as would be for the
greatest good of the church. With regard to
the latter, as Adrian was dead before the cata.
logue of grievances reached Rome, and of con-
sequence it had not been regularly laid before
the present pope, Campeggio took advantage of
this circumstance to decline making any definitive
answer to them in Clement's name; though, at

the

of grievances contained many particulars ex-
tremely indecent and undutiful, and that the
publishing it by their own authority was highly
difrefpetful to the Roman fee. In the end, he
renewed his demand of their proceeding with
vigour againif Luther and his adherents. But
though an ambassador from the emperor, who
was at that time very solicitous to gain the pope,
warmly seconded the nuncio, wish many pro-
sessions of his mafter's zeal for the honour and
dignity of the papal fee, the r-eceJ's of the diet
[April 18] was conceived in terms of almofi
the fame import with the former, without enjoin-
ing any additional severity againfi Luther and his

party'. Before he left Germany, Campeggio, in order
to amuse and sooth the people, published certain
articles for the amendment of fame disorders and
abuses which prevailed among the inferior cler-
gy; but this partial reformation, which fell so
ftr short of the expedtations of the Lutherans,
and of the demands of the diet, gave no fatisfac-
tion, and produced little effe&. The nuncio,
with a cautious hand, tenderly lopped a few
branches; the Germans aimed a deeper blow,
and by striking at the root wished to exterminate
the evilk.

I Seckend. 86. Sleid. Hist. 6E. k Seckend. asz.

# BOOK IV.

BOOK IV.

T HE expufion of the French, both out of the

Milanese and the republic of Genoa, was

considered by the Italians as the termination of
the war between Charles and Francis; and as they
began immediately to be apprehensive of the em-
peror, when they saw no power remaining in
Italy capable either to controul or oppose him,
they longed ardently for the re-efitablifhrnent of
peace. Having procured the refloratiun of
Sforza to his paternal dominions, which had
been their chief motive for entering into confe-
deracy with Charles, they plainly difeovered
their intention to contribute no longer towards
increasing the emperor's superiority over his ri-
val, which was already become the objea of
their jealousy. The pope especially, whose na-
tural timidity increased his suspicions of Charles's
designs, endeavoured by his remonifrances to
inspire him with moderation and incline him to
peace.

But the emperor, intoxicated with success,

and urged on by his own ambition, no less than
by Bousbon's desire of revenge, contemned Cle-
inent's admonitions, and declared his resolution
of ordering his army to pass the Alps, and to ini
vade Provence, a part of his rival's dominions,
where, as he - least dreaded an attack, he was
least prepared to resist it. His molt experienced
minifers difiuaded him from undertaking such
an enterprize with afeeble army, and an exhaufled
treasury: but he relied so much on having ob-

tained

and on the hopes which Bourbon, with the con-
fidence and credulity natural to exiles, entertain-
ed of being joined by a numerous body of his
partizans as soon as the Imperial troops should
enter France, that he perfified obstinately in the
measure. Henry undertook to furnish an hundred
thousand ducats towards defraying the expence
of the expedition during the first month, and
had it in his choice either to continue the pay-
mnent of that fum monthly, or to invade Picardy
before the end of July with an army capable of
aaing with vigoulr. The emperor engaged to
attack Guienne at the fame time with a confider-
able body of men; and if these enterprises proved
fuccefsful, they agreed, that Bourbon, besides
the territories which he had loft, should be put
in poffefion of Provence, with the title of king,
and ihould do homage to Henry as the lawful
king of France, for his new dominions. Of all
the parts of this extensive but extravagant pro-
jed, the invasion of Provence was the only one
which was executed. For although Bourbon,
with a ferupulous delicacy, altogether unexpe&-
ed after the part which he had a&ed, positively
refused to acknowledge Henry's title to the
crown of France, and thereby absolved him
from any obligation to promote the enterprise,
Charles's eagerness to carry his own plan into
execution did not in any degree abate. The
army which he employed for that purpose
amounted only to eighteen thousand men; the
command of which was given to the Marquis
de Pefeara, with infiruaions tQ pay the greateff
deference to Bourbon's advice in all his opera-

tions4

fition, and entering Provence [Aug. 59], Iaid
siege to Marseilles. Bourbon had advised him
rather to march towards Lyons, in the neigh,
bourhood of which city his territories were situ-
ated, and where of course his influence was most
extensive; but the emperor was so desirous to get
poffeffion of a port, which would, at all times,
secure him an easy entrance into France, that by
his authority he over-ruled the conifable's opi,
nion, and diredted Pefeara to make the redudtion
of Marseilles his chief objea a.

Francis, who foresaw, but was unable to pre-

vent this attempt, took, the molt proper precaun
tions to defeat it. He laid waite the adjacent
country, in order to render.it more difficult for
the enemy to fubhift their army; he rafed the
suburbs of the city, firengthened its fortifications,
and threw into it a numerous garrison under the
command of brave and experienced officers. To
these, nine thousand of the citizens, whom their
dread of the Spanish yoke inspired with contempt
of danger, joined themselves; by their united
courage and induitry, all the efforts of Pefcara's
military {kill, and of Bourbon's aaivity and re,
venge, were rendered abortive. Francis, mean-
while, had leisure to assemble a powerful army
under the walls of Avignon, and no sooner be-
gan to advance towards Marfeillks, than the Irm-
perial troops, exhausted by the fatigues of ;
liege which had lafded forty days, weakened by
diseases, and almost deititute of provifians, retired
[Sept. I9] with precipitation towards Italy b*

a Gu.i. 1. xv. 273, &c. Mem. deBellay, p. 80.
b Guic. i. xv. 277. Ulloa Vita del Carlo V. p. 93-

Provence, either Charles or Henry had attacked
France in the manner which they had projeaed,
that kingdom must have been exposed to the
mofit imminent danger. But on this, as well as
on many other occasions, the emperor found that
the extent of his revenues was not adequate to
thesgreatnefs of his schemes, or the ardour of
his ambition; and the want of money obliged
him, though with much reluatance, to circum-
scribe his plan, and to leave part of it unexe-
cuted.' Henry, difgufled at Bourbon's refusing
to recognize his right to the crown of France;
alarmed at the motions of the Scots, whom the
folicitations of the French king had persuaded to
march towards the borders of England; and no
longer incited by his miniiter, who was become
extremely cool with regard to all the emperor's in-
terefts, took no measures to support an enterprise,
of which, as of all new undertakings, he had
been at first excessively fond c.

If the king of France had been satisfied with

having delivered his fubjeas from this formidable
invasion, if he had thought it enough to shew
all Europe the facility with which the internal
firength of his dominions enabled him to resist
the invasion of a foreign enemy, even when fe-
conded by the abilities and powerful efforts of a
rebellious fubjeft, the campaign, notwithhiand-
ing the loss of the Milanese, would have been
far from ending ingloriously. But Francis,
animated with courage more becoming a soldier,
;han a general; pushed on by ambition, enter

C Fiddu's Life of Wolsey, Appen!. NO 70, 7S, 70. prifing

prifing rather than considerate; and too apt to
be elated with success; was fond of every un-
dertaking that seemed bold and adventurous.
Such an undertaking, the situation of his affairs,
at that junAure, naturally presented to his viewt
He had under his command one of the most
powerful and best appointed armies France had
ever brought into the field, which he could not
think of disbanding without having employed it
in any adive service. The Imperial troops had
been obliged to retire almost ruined by hard
duty, and difheartened with ill success; the Mi-
lanefe had been left altogether without defence;
it was not impossible to reach that country before
Pefeara, with his shattered forces, could arrive
there; or if fear should add speed to their re-
treat, they were in no condition to make head
against his fresh and ~numerous troops; and
Milan would now, as in former infiances, submit
without resistance to a bold invader. These con-
fiderations, which were not destitute of plaufi-
bility, appeared to his sanguine temper to be
of the utmost weight. In vain did his wisest
ministers and generals represent to him the dan-
ger of taking the field at a season so far advan-
ced, with an army composed chiefly of Swiss and
Germans, to whose caprices he would be sub-
je9 in all his operations, and on whose fidelity
his safety must absolutely depend. In vain did
Louise of Savoy advance by hasty journies to-
wards Provence, that (he might exert all her au-
thority in dissuading her son from such a rash
enterprise. Francis disregarded the remonfiran-
ces of his fnbje6as; and that he might save him-
self the pain of an interview with his mother,

whose

began his march before her arrival; appointing
her, however, by way of atonement for that ne-
glea, to be regent of the kingdom during his
absence. Bonnivet, by his persuasions, contri-
buted not a little to confirm Francis in this re-
solution. That favourite, who ftrongiy resembled
his master in all the defearive parts of his cha-
raaer, was led, by his natural impetuosity,
warmly to approve of such an enterprise; and
being prompted besides by his impatience to re-
visit a Milanese lady, of whom he had been
deeply enamoured during his late expedition, he
is said, by his flattering descriptions of her beauty
and accomplilhments, to have inspired Francis,
who was extremely susceptible of such passions,
with an equal desire of feeing her d.

The French paifed the.Alps at Mount Cenis;

and as their success depended on dispatch, thcy
advanced with the greatest diligence. Pescara,
who had been obliged to take a longer and more
difficult route by Monaco and Final, was soon
informed of their intention; and being sensible
that nothing but the presence of his troops
could save the Milanese, marched with such ra-
pidity, that he reached Alva on the fame day
that the French army arrived at Vercelli. Francis,.
infitraed by Bonnivet's error in the former
campaign, advanced diredly towards Milan,
where the unexpeded approach of an enemy
so powerful occasioned such consternation and
disorder, that although Pefeara entered the city
with some of his best troops, he found that the

d Oeuvr. de Brant. tom. vi. 253 d

VOL. 15. Z defence

probability of success; and having thrown a
garrison into the citadel, retired through one
gate, while the French were admitted at an-
other e.

These brisk motions of the French monarch

disconcerted all the schemes of defence which
the Imperialists had formed. Never, indeed, did
generals attempt to oppose a formidable invasion
under. such circumitances of disadvantage.
Though Charles poffeifed dominions more ex-
tensive than any other prince in Europe, and
had, at this time, no other army but that which
was employed in Lombardy, which did not
amount to sixteen thousand men, his prerogative
in all his different states was so limited, and his
fubjedts, without whose consent he could raise
no taxes, discovered fueh unwillingness to burden
themselves with new or extraordinary impositions,
that even this small body of troops was in want
of pay, of ammunition, of provisions, and of
clothing. In such a situation, it requred all the
wisdom of Lannoy, the intrepidity of Pescara,
and the implacable resentment of Bourbon, to
preserve themfrom sinking under defpair,andtoin.
spire them with resolution to attempt, or sagacity
to discover, what was essential to their safety.
To the efforts of their genius, and the aaivity
of their zeal, the emperdr was more indebted
for the preservation of his Italian dominions than
to his own power. Lannoy, by mortgaging the
revenues of Naples, procured some money, which
was immediately applied towards providing the

e Mem. de Bellay, p. 8z. Gukc. 1 xv. z78.

army

army with whatever was most necessary f.
Pescara, who was beloved and almost adored by
the Spanish troops, exhorted them to (hew the
world, by their engaging to serve the emperor,
in that dangerous exigency, without making
any immediate demand of pay, that they were
animated with sentiments of honour very dif-.
ferent from those of mercenary soldiers; to
which proposition that gallant body of men,
with an unexampled generosity, gave their con-
sent . Bourbon having raised a considerable
fum, by pawning his jewels, set out for Germany,
where his influence was great,. that by his pre-
fence he might hasten the levying of troops for
the Imperial service h.

Francis, by a fatal error, allowed the emperor's

generals time to derive advantage from all these
operations. Initead of pursuing the enemy, who
retired to Lodi on the Adda, an untenable post,
which Pefeara had resolved to abandon on the
approach of the French, he, in complianee with
the opinion of Bonnivet, though contrary to
that of his other generals, laid siege to Pavia
on the Tefino [Od. z2] ; a town, indeed, of
great importance, the poffeffion of which would
have opened to him all the fertile country
lying on the banks of that river. But the for-
tifications of the place were strong; it was dan-
gerous to undertake a difficult siege at so late a
season; and the Imperial generals, sensible of its
consequence, had thrown into the town a garri-

f Guic. i. xv. aSo. S Jovii Vit. Davali, lib. xv.

p. 386. Sandov. vol. . 6ai. Ulloa Vita dell CarloV.
P. 94, &c. Vita deli Emper. Carlos V. per Vera y Zuniga,
P. 36. h Mem. de Bellay, p. 83.

Z2 foa

command ofAntonio de Leyva, an officer of
high rank, of great experience, of a patient but
enterprising courage, fertile inr resources, am-
bitious of distinguishing himself, and capable, for
that reason, as well as from his having been
long accuffomed both to obey and to command,
of fuiffering or performing any thing in order to
procure success.

Francis prosecuted the siege with obitLinacy

equal to the rashness with which he had under-
taken it. During three months, every thing
known to the engineers of that age, or that
could be effeaed by the valour of his troops,
was attempted, in order to reduce the place;
while Lannoy and Pescara, unable to obitrua
his operations, were obliged to remain in such
an ignominious state of inadion, that a pasquinade
was publilhed at Rome, offering a reward to any
person who could find the Imperial army, loft
in the monith ofOcober in the mountains between
France and Lombardy, and which had notbeen
heard of since that time'.

Leyva, well acquainted with the difficulties

under which his countrymen laboured, and the
impossibility of their facing, in the field, such a
powerful army.as formed the siege of Pavia,
placed his only hopes of safety in his own vigi-
lance and valour. The efforts of both were ex-
traordinary, and in proportion to the importance
of the place, with the defence of which he was
entrusted. He interrupted the approaches of
$te French by frequent and furious sallies. Be-

i Sandov. i, 608.

hini

ereted new works, which appeared to be scarcely
inferior in fitrength to the original fortifications.
He repulsed the besiegers in all their assaults;
and by his own example, brought not only the
garrison, but, the inhabitants, to bear the most
severe fatigues, and to encounter the greateit
dangers without murmuring. The rigour of the
season conspired with his endeavours in retarding
the progress of the French Francis attempting
to become master of the town, by diverting the
course of the Tefino, which is its chief defence
on one fide, a sudden inundation of the river
defrroyed, in one day, the labour of many weeks,
and swept away all the mounds which his army
had raised with infinite toil, as well as at great
expence k.

Notwithifanding the flow progress of the be-

fiegers, and the glory which Leyva acquired by
his gallant defence, it was not doubted but that
the town would at last be obliged to surrender.
The pope, who already considered the French.
arms as superior in Italy, became impatient to
(disengage himself from his connexions with the
emperorr of whose designs he was extremely
jealous, and to enter into terms of friendihip
with Francis. As Clement's timid and cautions
temper rendered him incapable of following the
bold plan which Leo had formed, of delivering
Italy from the yoke of both the rivals, he re-
turned to the more obvious and pra6ticable
scheme of employing the power of the one to
balance and to refdrain that of the other. For

k Guic. 1, xV.. 280, Ulloa Vita di Carlo V, p.9.

z3 this

at feeing the French king recover Milan, as he
hoped that the dread of such a neighbour would
be some check upon the emperor's ambition,
which no power in Italy was now able to con-
trol. He laboured hard to bring about a peace
that would secure Francis in the poffeffion of his
new conquests; and as Charles, who was always
inflexible in the prosecution of his schemes, re-
jeaed the proposition with disdain, and with
bitter exclamations againit the pope, by whose
persuasions, while cardinal de Medici, he had
been induced to invade the Milanese, Clement
immediately concluded a treaty of neutrality with
the king of France, in which the republic of
Florence was included i.

Francis having, by this tranfadion, deprived

the emperor of his two most powerful allies, and
at the fame time having secured a passage for his
own troops through their territories, formed a
scheme of attackingthe kingdom ofNaples,hoping
either to over-run that country, which was left
altogether without defence, or that at least such
an unexpeaed invasion would oblige the viceroy
to recal part of the Imperial army out of the
Milanese; for this purpose he ordered fix thou-
sand men to march under the command of John
Stuart duke ofAlbany. But Pefeara foreseeing
that the effed of this diversion would depend
entirely upon the operations of the armies in the
Milanese, persuaded Lannoy to disregard Alba-
ny's motions m, and to bend his whole force
against the king himself; so that Francis not

1 Guic. i. xv. 232. 285. 51 Ibid. 285.

only weakened his army very unseasonably by
this great detachment, but incurred the reproach
of engaging too rashly in chimerical and extrava-
gant projets.

By this time the garrison of Pavia was re-

duced to extremity; their ammunition and pro-
visions began to fail; the Germans, of whom it
was chiefly composed, having received no pay
for seven months", threatened to deliver the
town into the enemy's hands, and could hardly
be reltrained from mutiny by all Leyva's address
and authority. The Imperial generals, who
were no fitrangers to his situation, saw the ne-
ceffity of marching without loss of time to his re-
lief. [CSz2] This they had now in their power :
twelve thousand Germans, whom the zeal and.
ativity of Bourbon taught to move with unusual
rapidity, had entered Lombardy under his com-
mand, and rendered the Imperial army nearly
equal to that of the French, greatly diminiihed
by the absence of the body under Albany, as well
as by the fatigues of the siege, and the rigour of
the season. But the more their troops increased
in number, the more sensibly did the Imperialists
feel the ditrefs arising from want of money. Far
from having funds for paying a powerful army,
they had fearcely what was fufficient for defray-
ing the charges of conduaing their artillery, and
of carrying their ammunition and provisions.
The abilities of the generals, however, supplied
every defe&. By their own example, as well as
by magnificent promises in name of the emperor,
they prevailed on the troops of all the different

n Gcld. Polit. Imperial. 375* a nations

nations which compored their army, to take the
field without pay; they engaged to lead them
direaly towards the enemy; and flattered them
with the certain profpea of viatory, which would
at once enrich them with such royal spoils as
would be an ample reward for all their services.
Tire soldiers, sensible that, by quitting the army,
they would forfeit the great arrears due to them,
and eager to get poffeffion of the promised trea-
fures, demanded a battle with all the impatience
of adventurers who fight only for plunder .

The Imperial generals, without fuffering the

ardour of their troops to cool, advanced inime- -
diately towardthe French camp [Feb. 3]. On
the firit intelligence of their approach, Francis
called a council of war, to deliberate what course
he ought to take. All his officers of greatest
experience were unanimous in advising him to
retire, and to decline a battle with an enemy
who courted it from despair. The Imperialists,
they observed, would either be obliged in a few
weeks to disband an army, which they were un-
able to pay, and which they kept together only
by the hope ofplunder; or the soldiers, enraged
at the non-performance of the promises to which
T.hey had truited, would rife in some furious mu-
tiny, which would allow their generals to think
of nothing but their own safety: that, mean-
while, he might encamp in some strong post, and
waiting in safety the arrival of freib troops from
France and Switzerland, might, before the end
of spring, take poffefilion of all the Milanese,

0 Eryci Peuteas Hist. Cifalpinr, ap. Grevii Thec. An.

tiquit. Iral, iii. p 1570. 5179. without

to them, Bonnivet, whose defitny it was to give
counsels fatal to France during the whole cam-
paign, represented the ignominy that it would
refleft on their sovereign, if he thould abandon
a siege which he had prosecuted so long, or
turn his back before an enemy to whom he was
frill superior in number; and insisted on the
necessity of fighting the Imperialists rather than
relinqailh an undertaking, on the success of
which the king's future fame depended. -Un-
fortunately, Francis's notions of honour were
delicate to an excess that bordered on what was
romantic. Having often said that he would
take Pavia, or perish in the attempt, he thought
himself bound not to depart from that refolu-
tion; and rather than expose himself to the
slightest imputation, he chose to forego all the
advantages which were the certain consequences
of a retreat, and determined to wait for the
Imperialists before the walls of Pavia P.

The Imperial generals found the French so

fitrongly entrenched, that notwithstanding the
powerful motives which urged them on, they
hesitated long before they ventured to attack
them; but at last the necessities of the besieged,
and the murmurs of their own soldiers, obliged
them to put every thing to hazard. Never did
armies engage with greater ardour, or with an
higher opinion of the importance of the battle
which they were going to fight [Feb. 24] ;
never were troops more frongly animated with
emulation, national antipathy, mutual resent-

p Guic. 1. Lv. 29!.

ment,

ment, and all the passions which inspire obstinate
bravery. On the one hand, a gallant young
monarch, seconded by a generous nobility, and
followed by fubjedis to whose natural impetuo-
fity, indignation at the opposition which they
had encountered, added new force, contended for
vidory and honour. On the other fide, troops
more completely disciplined, and conduaed by
generals of greater abilities, fought from necefli-
ty, with courage heightened by despair. The
Imperialills, however, were unable to refill the
firit efforts of the French valour, and their
firmedt battalions began to give way. But the.
fortune of the day was quickly changed. The
Swiss in the service of France, unmindful of the
reputation of their country for fidelity and mar-
tial glory, abandoned their post in a cowardly
manner. Leyva, with his garrison, sallied out
and attacked the rear of the French, during the
heat of the adion, with such fury as threw it.
into confusion; and Pescara falling on their ca-
valry with the Imperial horse, among whom he had
prudently intermingled a considerable number of
Spanish foot, armed with the heavy muflkets then
in use, broke this formidable body by an unusual
method of attack, against which they were
wholly unprovided. The rout became universal;
and resistance ceased in almost every part, but
where the king was in person, who fought now,
not for fame or viaory, but for safety. Though
wounded in several places, and thrown from his
horse, which was killed under him, Francis de-
fended himself on foot with an heroic courage.
Many of his bravest officers gathering round him,
and endeavouring to save his life at the expence

of

-Fg. Z8

~~ 

-+~, .7

ISou~Rd~ -- ___ _ ___r~n-~l

~lr~ 2li~~f~g by, tGddt L~vrSor

Bonnivet, the author of this great calamity, who
alone died unlamented. The king, exhausted
with fatigue, and scarcely capable of farther re-
fiftance, was left almost alone, exposed to the
fury of fume Spanish soldiers, fitrangers to his
rank, and enraged at his obRinacy. At that
moment came up Pomperant, a French gentle.
man, who had entered together with Bourbon
into the emperor's service, and placing himself
by the fide of the monarch againit whom he had
rebelled, assisted in proteaing him from the vio-
lence of the soldiers; at the fame time beseech-
ing him to surrender to Bourbon, who was not
far difitant. Imminent as the danger was which
now surrounded Francis, he rejeded with indig-
nation the thoughts of an aAion which would
have afforded such matter of triumph to his trai-
terous fubjed; and calling for Lannoy, who
happened likewise to he near at hand, gave up
his sword to him; which he, kneeling to kiss the
king's hand, received with profound refpea;
and taking his own sword from his.fide, pre-
fented it to him, saying, That it did not be-
come so great a monarch to remain disarmed in
the presence of one of the enmperor's fubjeds q.

Ten thousand men fell on this day, one of the

most fatal France had ever seen. Among these
~were many noblemen of the highest diftindion,
who chose rather to perish than to turn their
backs with dishonour. Not a few were taken

q Guic. l. xv. a9. Oeuv. de Brant. vi. 355. Mem. de

Bellay, p. oo. Sandov. HifI. i. 638, &c. P. Mart. Ep.
809. Slo. Rufcelli Lettere de Principi, ii. p. 70. Ulloa
Vjta dell Carlo V. p. 98. o prisoners,

prisoners, of whom the moR illufrious was
Henry d'Albret, the unfortunate king of Na-
varre. A small body of the rear-guard made its
escape, under the command of the duke of
Alengon; the feeble garrifun of Milan, on the
lirit news of the defeat, retired without being
pursued, by another road; and in two weeks
after the battle, not a Frenchman remained in
Italy.

Lannoy, though he treated Francis with. all

the outward marks of honour due to his rank
and charader, guarded him with the utmost at-
tention. He was solicitous, not only to preveut
any poflibility of his escaping, hut afraid that
his own troops might seize his person, and des
tain it as the best security for the payment of
their arrears. In order to provide against both
tlhef dangers, he conduAed Francis, the day
after the battle, to the Perong caRle of Pizzi-
chitona near Cremona, committing him to the
custody of Don Ferdinand Alarcon, general of
the Spanish infantry, an officer of great bravery
and of triaC honour, but remarkable for that
severe and scrupulous vigilance which such a trust

required. Francis, who formed a judgment of the empe.
roy's dispositions by his own, was extremely de-
firous that Charles should be informed of his
lituation, fondly hoping that,. from his genero-
fity or sympathy, he should obtain speedy relief.
The Imperial generals were no less impatient to
give their sovereign an early account of the de-
cifive vicory which they had gained, and to re.
ceive his infiruaions with regard to their future
conduc. As the most certain and expeditious

2 method

that season of the year, was by land, Francis
gave the commendador Pennalofa, who was
charged with Lannoy's dispatches, a passport
to travel through France.

Charles received the account of this signal and

unexpeaed success that had crowned his arms,
with a moderation, which, if it had been real,
would have done hinm more honour than the
greatest vialory. Without uttering one word
expressive of exultation, or of intemperate joy,
he retired immediately into his chapel [Mar. to],
and having spent an hour in offering up his
thanksgivings to Heaven, returned to the pre-
fence-chamber, which by that time was filled
with grandees and foreign ambassadors, assembled
in order to congratulate him. He accepted of
their compliments with a modest deportment;
he lamented the misfortune of the captive king,
as a firiking example of the fad reverse of for-
tune, to which the most powerful monarchs are
fubjea; he forbad any public rejoicings, as in-
decent in a war. carried on among Christians,
reserving them until he should obtain a vidory
equally illufdrious over the Infidels; and seemed
to take pleasure in the advantage which he had
gained, only as it would prove the occasion of
restoring peace to Christendom r

Charles, however, had already begun to form

schemes in his own mind, which little suited
such external appearances. Ambition, not ge-
nerofity, was the ruling passion in his mind;
and the viaory at Pavia opened such new and

r Sandov. Hist. i 64?. Ulloa Vitadell CarloV. p. iro.

VOL. It. A unbounded

unbounded profpeds of gratifying it, as allured
him with irresistible force : but it being no easy
matter to execute the vast designs which he me-
ditated, he thought it necessary, while proper
measures were taking for that purpose, to affea
the greatest moderation, hoping under that veil
to conceal his real intentions from the other
princes of Europe.

Meanwhile, France was filled with confiern-

ation. The king himself had early transmitted
an account of the rout of Pavia, in a letter to
his mother, delivered by Pennalofa, which con
tained only these words, " Madam, all is lol,
except our honour." The officers who made
their escape, when they afrived from Italy,
brought fisch a melancholy detail of particulars
as made all ranks of men sensibly feel the great-
ness and extent of the calamity. France,
without its sovereign, without money in her
treasury, without an army, without generals to
command it, and encompassed on all sides by a
vidorious and aaive enemy, seemed to be on the
very brink of deftruaion. But on that occasion
the great abilities of Louise the regent saved the
kingdom, which the violence of her paflions had
more than once exposed to the greatest danger.
Instead of giving herself up to such lamentations
as were natural to a woman so remarkable for
her maternal tenderness, she discovered all the
foresight, and exerted all the aaivity of a con-
fummate politician. She assembled the nobles
at Lyons, and animated them by her example
1no less than by her words, with such zeal in de-
fence of their country, as its present situation
required. She colleaed the remains of the army

which

foners, paid the arrears, and put them in a con-
dition to take the field. She levied new troops,
provided for the security of the frontiers, and
raised sums fufficient for defraying these extra-
ordinary expences. Her chief care, however,
was to appease the resentment, or to gain the
friendship of the king of England; and from
that quarter, the firn ray of comfort broke in
upon the French.

Though Henry, in entering into alliances

with Charles or Francis, seldom followed any
regular or concerted plan of policy, but was in-
fluenced chiefly by the caprice of temporary pas-
fions, such occurrences often happened as recalled
his attention towards that equal balance of power
which it was necessary to keep between the two
contending potentates, the preservation of which
he always boasted to be his peculiar office. He
had expeaed that his union with the emperor
might afford him an opportunity of recovering
some part of those territories in France which
had belonged to his ancestors, and for the fake
of such an acquisition he did not scruple to give
his afliftance towards raising Charles to a con-
fiderable pre-eminence above Francis. He had
never dreamt, however, of any event so decisive
and so fatal as the viaory at Pavia, which seemed
not only to have broken, but to have annihilated
the power of one of the rivals; so that the pro-
fpeA of the sudden and entire revolution which
this would occasion in the political fyfiem, filed
him with the modt disquieting .apprehensions.
He saw all Europe in danger of being over-run
by an ambitious prince, to whose power there

AA2 now

now remained no counterpoise; and though he
himself might at fird be admitted, in quality of
an ally, to some share in the spoils of the captive
monarch, it was easy to difeern, that with re-
gard to the manner of making the partition, as
well as his security for keeping poffeifion of what
should be allotted him, he mufd absolutely de-
pend upon the will of a confederate, to whose
forces his own bore no proportion. He was
sensible, that if Charles were permitted to add
any considerable part of France to the vast do-
mInions of which he was already master, his
neighbourhood would be much more formidable
to England than that of the ancient French
kings; while, at the fame time, the proper ba-
lance on the continent, to which England owed
both its safety and importance, would be entirely
loft. Concern for the situation of the unhappy
monarch co-operated with these political con-
fiderations; his gallant behaviour in the battle
of Pavia had excited an high degree of admira-
tion, which never fails of augmenting sympathy;
and Henry, naturally susceptible of generous
sentiments, was fond of appearing as the deli-
verer of a vanquilhed enemy from a fdate of cap-
tivity. The passions of the English minister fe-
conded the inclinations of the monarch. Wolsey,
who had not forgotten the disappointment of his
hopes in two fucceflive conclaves, which he im-
puted chiefly to the emperor, thought this a
proper opportunity of taking revenge; and
Louise, courting the friendship of England
with such flattering fubmiflions as were no less
agreeable to the king than to the cardinal,
Henry gave her secret alfurances that he would

not

its present helpless ifate, and obliged her to pro-
mile that ihe would not consent to dismember the
kingdom, even in order to procure her fon's
liberty '.

But as Henry's conneaions with the emperor

made it necessary to a& in such a manner as to
save appearances, he ordered public rejoaicings
to be made in his dominions for the fnccefs of
the Imperial arms; and, as if 1 e had been eager
to seize the present opportunity of ruining the
French monarchy, he sent ambassadors to
Madrid, to congratulate with Charles upon his
viaory; to put him in mind, that he, as his ally,
engaged in one common cause, was entitled to
partake in the frnits of it; and to require that,
in compliance with the terms of their confede-
racy, he would invade Guienne with a powerful
army, in order to give him poffefion of that
province. At the fame time, he offered to fend
the princess Mary into Spain or the Low Coun-
tries, that she might be educated under the em-
peror's direaion, until the conclusion of the
marriage agreed on between them; and in return
for that mark of hisconfiden'ce, he infiued that
Francis should be delivered to him, in confe-
quence of that article in the treaty of Bruges,
whereby each of the contraaing parties was
bound to surrender all ufurpers to him whose
rights they had invaded. It was impossible
that Henry could expea that the emperor
would listen to these extravagant demands, which
it was neither his interest, nor in his power to

8 Mem. deBellay, 94. Guic.I. xvb 3iS. Herbert.

A A 3 grant.

grant. They appear evidently to have been
inade with no other intention than to furnish
him with a decent pretext for entering into
such engagements with France as the junaure
required t.

It was among the Italian f'ates, however, that

the viaory at Pavia occasioned the greateff alarm
and terror. That' balance of power on which
they relied for their security, and which it had
been the conftant' objed of all their negotiations
and refinements to maintain, was destroyed in a
moment. They were exposed by their situation
to feel the first effeas of the uncontrouled autho-
rity which Charles had acquired. They observed
many symptoms of a boundless ambition in that
young prince, and were sensible that, as emperor
or king of Naples, he might not only form dan-
gerous pretensions upon each of their territories,
but might invade them with great advantage.
They deliberated, therefore, with great folici-
tude concerning the means of raising such a force
as might obitrua his progress '. But their con-
fultations, conduaed with little union, and ex-
ecuted with less vigour, had no effeat. Clement,
instead of pursuing the meafuijes which he had
concerted with the Venetians for securing the li.
berty of Italy, was so intimidated by Lannoy's
threats, or overcome by his promises, that he
entered into a separate treaty [April a], binding
himself to advance a considerable fum to the em-
peror, in return for certain emoluments which he
was to receive from him. The money was in-

I Herbcrt, p. 64.

C Guoc. 1. xvi. 3o0. Rufcelli Lettere de Princ. ii. 74.

76, &c. Thuani Hilt. lib. i. c. II.

ftantly

ratify the treaty; and the pope remained exposed
at once to infamy and to ridicule: to the former,
because he had deserted the public cause for his
private interest; to the latter, because he had
been a loser by that unworthy adion X.

How dishonourable soever the artifice might

be which was employed in order to defraud the
pope of this fum, it came very seasonably into
the viceroy's hands, and put it in his power to
extricate himself out of an imminent danger.
Soon after the defeat of the French army, the
German troops, which had defended Pavia
with such meritorious courage and perseverance,
growing insolent upon the fame that they had
acquired, and impatient of relying any longer
on fruitless promises, with which they had been
so often amused, rendered themselves masters
of the town, with a resolution to keep poffeilion
of it as a security for the payment of their ar-
rears; and the red of the army discovered a
much fitronger inclination to assist, than to pu-
nifh the mutineers. By dividing among them
the money exaded from the pope, Lannoy
quieted the tumultuous Germans; but though
this satisfied* their present demands, he had so
little profpe& of being able to pay them or his
other forces regularly for the future, and was
under such continual apprehensions of their feiz-
ing the person of the captive king, that, not
long after, he was obliged to dismiss all the Ger-
mans and Italians in the Imperial service Y.

x Guic. 11b. xvi. 3o5. Mauroceni Hiftor. Venet. ap.

lIlorichi deli cofe Venez. V. S31. s36.

y Guic. i. xvi. p. 301.

Thus,

Thus, from a circumifancee that now appears
very singular, but arising naturally from the con-
ftitution of most European governments. in the
sixteenth century, while Charles was fufpeaed
by all his neighbours of aimingat universal mo.
narchy, and while he was really forming vast
proje&s of this kind, his revenues were so limit-
ed, that he could not keep on foot his viftori-
ous army, though it did not exceed twenty-four
thousand men.

During these tranfa&ions, Charles, whose

pretensions to moderation and difintc-reftednefs
were soon forgotten, deliberated, with the ut-
most solicitude, how he might derive the greateit
advantages from the misfortune of his adversary.
Some of his counsellors advised him to treat
Francis with the magnanimity that became a
viaorious prince, and, instead of taking advan-
tage of his situation, to impose rigorous condi-
tions, to dismiss him on such equal terms, as
would bind him for ever to his interest by the
ties of gratitude and affeaion, more forcible as
well as more permanent than any which could
be formed by extorted oaths and involuntary fti-
pulations. Such an exertion of generosity is
not, perhaps, to be expeted in the condua of
political affairs, and it was far too refined for
that prince to whom it was proposed. The
more obvious, but less splendid scheme, of en-
deavouring to make the utmost of Francis's ca-
lamity, had a greater number in the council to
recommend it, and suited better with the empe-
ror's genius. But though Charles adopted this
plan, he seems not to have executed it in the

1110f

great effort to penetrate into France with all the
forces of Spain and the Low Countries; inflead
of crushing the Italian slates before they reco-
vered from the consternation which the success
of his arms had occasioned, he had recourse to
the artifices of intrigue and negotiation. This
proceeded partly from neceflity, partly from the
natural disposition of his mind. The situation of
his finances at that time rendered it extremely
difficult to carry on any extraordinary arma-
ment; and he himself having never appeared at
the head of his armies, the command of which
he had hitherto committed to his generals, was
averse to bold and martial counsels, and truited
more to the arts with which he was acquainted.
He laid, besides, too much fitrefs upon the vic-
tory of Pavia, as if by that event the fitrength of
France had been annihilated, its resources ex-
haufled, and the kingdom itself, no less than
the person of its monarch, had been fubjeated to
his power.

Full of this opinion, he determined to set the

highest price upon Francis's freedom, and having
ordered the count de Roeux to visit the captive
king in his name, he infiruaed him to propose
the following articles as the conditions on which
he would grant him his liberty: that he ihould
restore Burgundy to the emperor, from whose
ancestors it had been unjufily wrested; that he
ihould surrender Provence and Dauphink, that
they might be ereded into an independent
kingdom for the conitable Bourbon; that he
(hould make full fatisfafiion to the king of
England for all his claims, and finally renounce the

preten-

pretensions of France to Naples, Milan, or any
other territory in Italy. When Francis, who
had hitherto flattered himself that he should be
treated by the emperor with the generosity be-
coming one great prince towards another, heard
these rigorous conditions, he was so transported
with indignation, that, drawing his dagger has-
tily, he cried out, " 'Twere better that a king
Ihould die thus." Alarcon, alarmed at his ve-
hemence, laid hold on his hand; but though he
soon recovered greater composure, he flill de-
clared, in the most solemn manner, that he
would rather remain a prisoner during life, than
purchase liberty by such ignominious concef-
1ionSz

This mortifying discovery of the emperor's

intentions greatly augmented Francis's chagrin
and impatience under his confinement, and must
have driven him to absolute despair, if he had not
laid hold of the only thing which could still ad-
minifler any comfort to him. He persuaded
himself, that the conditions which Roeux had
proposed did not flow origiiially from Charles
himself, but were diaated by the rigorous policy
of his Spanish council; and that therefore he
might hope, in one personal interview with him,
to do more towards hastening his own deliver-
ance, than could be effeaed by long negotia
tions passing through the subordinate hands of
his ministers. Relying on this supposition,
which proceeded from too favourable an opinion
of the emperor's charader, he offered to visit
him in Spain, and was willing to be carried

aM Mer. deBellay, 94. Ferreras Hit, ix. 43. thither

thither as a fpeaacle to that hanghty nation.
Lannoy employed all his address to confirm him
in these sentiments; and concerted with him in
secret the manner of executing this resolution.
Francis was so eager on a scheme which seemed
to open some profpe& of liberty, that he fur-
nilhed the galleys necessary for conveying him
to Spain, Charles being at this time unable to
fit out a squadron for that purpose. The vice-
roy, without communicating his intentions either
to Bourbon or Pescara, conduaed his prisoner
towards Genoa, under pretence of transporting
him by sea to Naples; though soon after they
set fail, he ordered the pilots to fleer direaly
for Spain; but the wind happening to carry
them near the French coast, the unfortunate
monarch had a full profpea of his own do-
minions, towards which he cast many a for-
rowful and desiring look. They landed, however,
in a few days at Barcelona, and soon after
Francis was lodged [Aug. 24],by the emperor's
command, in the Alcazar of Madrid, under the
care of the vigilant Alarcon, who guarded him
with as much circumfpedion as ever a*

A few days after Francis's arrival at Madrid,

and when he began to be sensible of his having
relied without foundation on the emperor's ge-
nerofity, Henry VIII. concluded a treaty with
the regent of France, which afforded him some
hope of liberty from another quarter. Henry's
extravagant demands had been received at Madrid
with that neglea which they deserved, and which

a Mem. de Bellay, 95. P. Mart. Ep. ult. Guic. lib.

xsi. 3Z3h

z he

he probably expeaed. Charles, intoxicated with
prosperity, no longer courted him in that re-
fpeaful and submissive manner which pleased his
haughty temper. Waoley, no less haughty than
his madter, was highly irritated at the emperor
discontinuing his wonted caresses and profeffions
of friendship to himfeif. These flight offences,
added to the weighty considerations formerly
mentioned, induced Henry to enterinto a defen.
five alliance with "Louife, in which all the dif-
ferences between him and her son were ad-
juded; at the fame time he engaged that he
would employ his bedl offices in order to procure
the deliverance of his new ally from a fdate of
captivity b*

While the open defeaion of such a powerful

confederate affeded Charles with deep concern,
a secret conspiracy was carrying on in Italy,
which threatened him with consequences still
more fatal. The refklefs and intriguing genius
of Morone, chancellor of Milan, gave rife to
this. His revenge had been amply gratified by
the expulsion of the French out of Italy, and
his vanity no less soothed by the re-ediablifhment
of Sforza, to whose interedt he had attached
himself in the dutchy of Milan. The delays,
however, and evasions of the Imperial court, in
granting Sforza the invedkiture of his new-ac-
quired territories, had long alarmed Moron&; these
were repeated so often, and with such apparent
artifice, as became a full proof to his suspicious
mind that the emperor intended to dirip his madter
of that rich country which he Ihad conquered in

b Herbert. Fiddes's Life of Wolley, 331h his

the pope and Venetians, no less jealous of his
designs than Morone, gave Sforza, at last, the
investiture which had been so long desired; the
charter was clogged with so many reservations,
and fubjeded him to such grievous burdens, as
rendered the duke of Milan a dependent on the
emperor, rather than a vassal of the empire, and
afforded him hardly any other security for his
poffeffions than the good pleasure of an ambi-
tious superior. Such an accession of power as
would have accrued from the addition of the
Milanese to the kingdom of Naples, was confi-
dered by Morone as fatal to the liberties of Italy,
no less than to his own importance. Full of
this idea he began to revolve in his mind the
possibility of rescuing Italy from the yoke of
foreigners; the darling scheme, as has been al-
ready observed, of the Italian politicians in that
age, and which it was the great obje& of their
ambition to accomplish. If to the glory of
having been the chief instrument of driving the
French out of Milan, he could add that of de-
livering Naples from the dominion of the Spa-
niards, he thought that nothing would be want.
Sng to complete his fame. His fertile genius
soon fuggefited to him a proje& for that purpose;
a difficult, indeed, and daring one, but for that
very reason more agreeable to his hold and ene
terprifing temper.

Bourbon and Pefeara were equally enraged at

Lannoy's carrying the French king into Spain
without their knowledge. The former, being
afraid that the two monarchs might, in his ab-
fence, conclude some treaty, in which his inte-

vOL. II I a reftS

Madrid, in order to guard againdt that danger.
The latter, on whom the command of the army
now devolved, was obliged to remain in Italy;
but in every company, he gave vent to his in-
dignation against the viceroy, in expressions full
of rancour and contempt; he accused him, in a
letter to the emperor, of cowardice in the time
of danger, and of insolence after viaory, towards
the obtaining of which he had contributed no-
thing either by his valour or his condud; nor
did he abitain from bitter complaints against the
emperor himself, who had not discovered, as he
imagined, a fufficient sense of his merit, nor be-
flowed any adequate reward on his services. It
was on this disgust of Pefeara, that Morone
founded his whole system. He knew the bound-
less ambition of his nature, the great extent of
his abilities in peace as well as war, and the in-
trepidity of his mind, capable alike of undertak-
ing and of executing the mos desperate deligns.
The cantonment of the Spanish troops on the
frontier of the Milanese gave occasion to many
interviews between him and Moronk, in which
the latter took care frequently to turn the con-
verfation to the tranfadions fnhbfequent to the
battle of Pavia, a fubjeEt upon which the mar-
quis always entered willingly and with paflion;
and Morone observing his refeotment to be uni-
formly violent, artfully pointed out and aggra-
vated every circumifance that could increale its
fury. He painted, in the firongeft colours, the
emperor's want of discernment, as well as of
gratitude, in preferring Lannoy to him, and in
allowing that presumptuous Fleming to dispose

of the captive king, without confiulting the man
to whose bravery and wisdom Charles was in-
debted for the glory of having a formidable rival
in his power. Having warmed him by such dif-
courses, he then began to insinuate, that now
was the time to be avenged for these insults,
and to acquire immortal renown as the deliverer
of his country from the oppreflion of ifrangers;
that the fates of Italy, weary of the ignomini-
ous and intolerable dominion of barbarians, were
at laht ready to combine in order to vindicate
their own independence; that their eyes were
fixed on him as the only leader whose genius
and good fortune could ensure the happy fuc-
cess of that noble enterprise; that the attempt
was no less praaicable than glorious, it being in
his power so to disperse the Spanish infantry, the
only body of the emperor's troops that remained
in Italy, through the villages of the Milanese,
that, in one night, they might be dehlroyed by
the people, who, having fuffered much by their
exadions and insolence, would gladly undertake
this service; that he might then, without oppo-
fition, take poffefflion of the throne of Naples,
the hation destined for him, and a reward not
unworthy the restorer of liberty to Italy; that
the pope, of whom that kingdom held, and
whose predecessors had disposed of it on many
former occalions, would willingly grant him the
tight of investiture; that the Venetians, the
Florentines, the duke of Milan, to whom he had
communicated the feheme, together with the
French, would be the guarantees of his right;
that the Neapolitans would naturally prefer the
government of one of their countrymen, whom

Ba2 they

they loved and admired, to that odious dominion
of fitrangers, to which they had been so long sub-
jeaed; and ithat the emperor, aftoniffed at a
blow so unexpeaed, would find that he had
neither troops nor money to resist such a power-
ful confederacy C.

Pescara, amazed at the boldness and extent of

the scheme, listened attentively to Moroni, but
with the countenance of a man loft in profound
and anxious thought. On the one hand, the in-
famy of betraying his sovereign, under whom he
bore such high command, deterred him from the
attempt; on the other, the profpeat of obtaining
a crown allured him to venture upon it. After
continuing a lhort space in suspense, the least
commendable motives, as is usual after such de-
liberations, prevailed, and ambition triumphed
over honour. In order, however, to throw a co.
lour of decency on his condua, he insisted that
some learned cafuifts should give their opinion,
" Whether it was lawful for a fubjed to take
arms against his immediate sovereign, in obedi-
ence to the lord paramount of whom the king-
dom itself was held ?" Such a resolution of the
cafe as he expeaed was soon obtained from the
divines and civilians both of Rome and Milan;
the negotiation went forward; and measures
seemed to be taking with great spirit for the
speedy execution of the design.

During this interval, Pefeara, either shocked

at the treachery of the aaion that he was going

c Guk. lib. xvi. 325. Jovii Vita Davali, p. 4s7. Oeuv.

de Brantome, iv. 17. Rufcelli Lettre de Pjinc. ii. 95.
Thuani Hilt. lib. i. c. sy. P. Heuter. Rer. Aulfr. lib. ix.
C. 3. p. 207.

to

to entertain thoughts of abandoning the engage-
mnents which he had come under. The indifpo-
lition of Sforza, who happened at that time to
be taken ill of a distemper which was thought
mortal, confirmed his resolution, and determined
him to make known the whole conspiracy to the
emperor, deeming it more prudent to expe&
the dutchy of Milan from him as the reward of
this discovery, than to aim at a kingdom to be
purchased by a series of crimes. This resolution,
however, proved the source of aAions hardly lefa
criminal and ignominious. The' emperor, who
had already received full information concerning
the conspiracy from other hands, seemed to be
highly pleased with Pefcara's fidelity, and com-
manded him to continue his intrigues for some
time with the pope and Sforza, both that he
might discover their intentions more fully, and
that he might be able to convia them of the
crime with greater certainty. Pescara, con-
fcious of guilt, as well as sensible how fuipicious
his long silence must have appeared at Madrid,
durst not decline that dithonourable office; and
was obliged to ad the meanest and most dif-
graceful of all parts, that of seducing with a
purpose to betray. Considering the abilities of
the persons with whom he had to deal, the part
was scarcely less difficult than base ; but he afted
it with such address, as to deceive even the pe-
netrating eye of Moroni, who relying with full
confidence on his sincerity, visited him at Novara,
in order to put the last hand to their machina-
tions. Pescara received him in an apartment
where Antonio de Leyva was placed behind the

B B 3 tapestry,

tapeifry, that he might overhear and bear wit-
ness to their conversation; as Moront was about
to take leave, that officer suddenly appeared,
and to his afronifhment arrefited him prisoner in
the emperor's name. He was conduaed to the
caille of Pavia ; and Pefecara, who had so lately
been his accomplice, had now the assurance to
interrogate him as his judge. At the fame time,
the emperor declared Sforza to have forfeited all
right to the dutchy of Milan, by his engaging
in a conspiracy against the sovereign of whom
he held; Pescara, by his command, seized on
every place in the Milanese, except the cafles of
Cremona and Milan, which the unfortunate duke
attempting to defend, were closely blockaded by
the Imperial troops d*

But though this unfuccefsful conspiracy, in-

fUead of fitripping the emperor of what he al-
ready poffeffed m Italy, contributed to extend
his dominions in that country, it fhewed him
the necessity of coming to some agreement with
the French king, unless he chose to draw on him-
self a confederacy of all Europe, which the pro-
grefs of his arms and his ambition, now as un-
disguised as it was boundless, filled with general
alarm. He had not hitherto treated Francis
with the generosity which that monarch expea-
ed, and hardly with the decency due to his
station. Initead of displaying the fentimentsbe-
coming a great prince, Charles, by his mode of
treating Francis, seems to have aaed with the
mercenary art of a corsair, who, by the rigor-

d Guc. lib. xvi. 329. Jovii Hi*t. 3. Capella, lib. v.

p. zoo.

ous

from them an higher price for their ransom.
The captive king was confined in an old eaftle,
under a keeper whose formal aufferity of man-
ners rendered his vigilance itill more difgufling.
He was allowed no exercise but that of riding
on a mule, surrounded with armed guards on
horseback. Charles, on pretence of its being
necessary to attend the Cortes assembled in To-
ledo, had gone to reside in that city, and sus-
fered several weeks to elapse without viliting
Francis, though he solicited an interview with
the most prefling and submissive importunity.
So many indignities made a deep imprefilon on
an high-fpirited prince; he began to lose all re-
lifh for his usual amusements; his natural gaiety
of temper forsook him; and after languilhing for
some time, he was seized with a dangerous fever,
during the violence of which he complained con-
ftantly of the unexpeaed and unprincely rigour
with which he had been treated, often exclaim-
ing, that now the emperor would have the Sa-
tisfa~rion of his dying a prisoner in his hands,
without having once deigned to fee his face.
The physicians, at last, despaired of his life, and
informed the emperor that they saw no hope of
his recovery, unless he were gatdfied with regard
to that point on which he seemed to be so
frongly bent. Charles, solicitous to preserve a
life with which all his profpeas of farther ad-
vantage from the vidory of Pavia must have
terminated, immediately consulted his ministers
concerning the course to be taken. In vaiq did
the chancellor Gattinara, the most able among
them, - represent to him the indecency of his

visiting

at liberty immediately upon equal terms; in vain
did he point out the infamy to which he would
be exposed, if avarice or ambition should prevail
on him to give the captive monarch this
mark of attention and sympathy, for which
humanity and generosity had pleaded so long
without effe&. The emperor, less delicate, or
less solicitous about reputation than his minister,
set out for Madrid to visit his prisoner [Sept.
2z]. The interview was short; Francis being
too weak to bear a long conversation, Charles
accosted him in terms full of affeaion and re-
fpe&, and gave him such promises of speedy de-
liverance and princely treatment, as would have
refleded the greatest honour upon him if they
had flowed from another source. Francis grasped
at them with the eagerness natural in his situ-
ation; and cheered with this gleam of hope, be-
gan to revive from that moment, recovering ra-
pidly his wonted health e.

He had soon the mortification to find, that

his confidence in the emperor was not better
founded than formerly. Charles returned in-
ftantly to Toledo ; all negotiations were carried
on by his ministers; and Francis was kept in as
fitria custody as ever. A new indignity, and
that very galling, was added to all those he had
already fuffered. Bourbon arriving in Spain about
this time, Charles, who had so long refused to visit
the king of France, received his rebellious fubjea
with the most fudied refped [Nov. 15]. He
met him without the gates of Toledo, embraced

a Guic. 1. xyl- 339* Sandovr, Hilt, . 6,6'5* himn

on his left hand, conduded him to his apartment.
These marks of honour to him, were so many
insults to the unfortunate monarch; which he
felt in a very sensible manne. It afforded him
some consolation, however, to observe, that the
sentiments of the Spaniards differed widely from
those of their sovereign. That generous people
detested Bourbon's crime. Notwithitanding his
great talents and important services, they shunned
all intercourse with him, to such a degree, that
Charles having desired the marquis de Villena to
permit Bourbon to reside in his palace while the
court remained in Toledo, he politely replied,
" That he could not refuse gratifying his fove-
reign in that requeft;" but added, with a Caf-
tilian dignity of mind, that the emperor must
not be surprised if, the moment the constable de-
parted, he should burn to the ground a house
which, having been polluted by the presence of a
traitor, became an unfit habitation for a man of
honour f.

Charles himfdlf, nevertheless, seemed to have

it much at heart to reward Bourbon's services in
a signal manner. But as he infiifted, in the firit
place, on the accomplishment of the emperor's
promise of giving him in marriage his sifter
Eleanora, quecn-dowager of Portugal, the honour
of which alliance had been one of his chief in-.
ducements to rebel igainit his lawful sovereign;
as Francis, in order to prevent such a dangerous
uiion, had offered, before he left Italy, to marry
that priucefs; and as Eleanora herself discovered

f Gulc. 1. xvi. 335*

an

an inclination rather to match with a powerful
monarch, than with his exiled fubjea; all these
interfering circumitances created great embarrass-
ment to Charles, and left him hardly any hope
of extricating himself with decency. But the
death of Pefeara, who, at the age of thirty-fix,
left behind him the reputation of being one of the
greatest generals and ablest politicians of that
century, happened opportunely at this junaure
[December] for his relief. By that event, the
command of the army in Italy became vacant,
and Charles, always fertile in resources, persuaded
Bourbon, who was in no condition to dispute
his will, to accept the office of general in chief
there, together with a grant of the dutchy of
Milan forfeited by Sforza ; and in return for these
to relinquith all hopes of marrying the queen of
Portugal g.

The chief obifacle that stood in the way of

Francis's liberty was the emperor's continuing to
insist so peremptorily on the restitution of Bur-
gundy, as a preliminary to that event. Francis
often declared, that he would never consent to
dismember his kingdom; and that, even if he
Ihould so far forget the duties of a monarch, as
to come to such a resolution, the fundamental
laws of the nation would prevent its taking es.
fe&. On his part, he was willing to make an
absolute ceflion to the emperor of all his pre-
tenflons in Italy and the Low Countries; he pro-
mifed to restore to Bourbon all his lands which
had been confiscated; he renewed his proposal of
marrying the emperor's sifter, the queen-dowager

g Sandoy.Hia.. oH6 eu. de Brant. iv. 249.

of

way of ransom for his own person. But all mu-
tual esteem and confidence between the two mo-
narchs were now entirely loft; there appeared,
on the one hand, a rapacious ambition, labouring
to avail itself of every favourable circumitance;
on the other, suspicion and resentment, standing
perpetually on their guard; so that the profpe&t
of bringing their negotiations to an issue seemed
to be far distant. The duchess of Alen9on, the
French king's fiffer, whom Charles permitted to
rifit her brother in his confinement, employed all
her address, in order to procure his liberty on
more reasonable terms. Henry of England inter-
posed his good offices to the fame purpose; but
both with so little fueceLs, that Francis in despair
took fudderfly the resolution of resigning his
crown, with all its rights and prerogatives, to his
son the dauphin, determined rather to end his
days in prison, than to purchase his freedom by
concessions unworthy of a king. The deed for
this purpose he signed with legal formality in
Madrid, empowering his fiffer to carry it into
France, that it might be regiflered in all the par-
liaments of the kingdom; and at the fame time
intimating his intention to the emperor, he de-
ilred him to name the place of his confinement,
and to aflign him a proper number of attendants
during the remainder of his days h.

This resolution of the French king had great

effed; Charles began to be sensible, that by
pushing rigour to excess he might defeat his own

h This paper is publihed in Memoires Hiftoriques, &e.

par M. PAbi Raynal, toAb. 1f. p. uIr. medfures ;

measures; and inficad of the vail advantages
which he hoped to draw from ransoming a power-
ful monarch, he might at lalt find in his hands a
prince without dominions or revenues. About
the fame time, one of the king of Navarre's do;
mefrics happened, by an extraordinary exertion
of fidelity, courage, and address, to procure his
mailer an opportunity of elcaping from the pri-
son in which he had been confined ever since the
battle of Pavia. This convinced the emperor,
that the most vigilant attention of his officers
might be eluded by the ingenuity or boldness of
Francis or his attendants, and one unlucky hour
might deprive him of all the advantages which
he had been so solicitous to obtain. By these
considerations, he was induced to abate some-
what of his former demands. On the other
hand, Francis's impatience under confinement
daily increased; and having received certain in-
telligence of a powerful league forming againit
his rival in Italy, he grew more compliant with
regard to concessions, truoling that, if he could
once obtain his liberty, he would soon be in a
condition to resume whatever he had jielded.

1526.] Such being the views and sentiments

of the two monarchs, the treaty which procured
Francis his liberty was signed at Madrid, on the
fourteenth of January one thousand five hundred
and twenty-fix. The article with regard to Bur-
gundy, which had hitherto created the greateit
difliculty, was compromised, Francis engaging to
reilore.that dutchpswith all its dependencies in
full sovereignty to the emperor; and Charles
consenting, that this reltitution Ihould not be
made until the king was set at liberty : in order

to

other conditions in the treaty, Francis agreed
that at the fame instant when he himself (hould
be released, he would deliver as hoflages to the
emperor, his eldeRt son the dauphin, his second
son the duke of Orleans, or in lieu of the latter,
twelve of his principal nobility, to be named by
Charles. The other articles swelled to a great
number, and, though not of such importance,
were extremely rigorous. Among these the most
remarkable were, that Francis should renounce
all his pretensions iir Italy; that he should dif-
claim any title which he had to the sovereignty of
Slanders and Artois ; that, within fix weeks after
his release, he should restore to Bourbon, and his
adherents, all their goods, moveable and immove-
able, and make them full reparation for the da-
mages which they had fuflained by the confifca-
tion of them; that he should use his interest with
.Henry d'Albret to relinquilh his pretensions to
the crown of Navarre, and should not for the fu-
ture assist him in any attempt to recover it;
that there should be established between the em-
peror and Francis a league of perpetual friend-
JhipL and confederacy, with a promise of mutual
affifiance in every cafe of neceflity; that, in cor-
roboration of this union, Francis should marry
the emperor's filter, the queen-dowager of Por-
tugal; that Francis should cause all the articles
of this treaty to be ratified by.the Rates, and
regiflered in the parliaments of his kingdom;
that, upon the emperor's receiving this ratifica-
tion, the hofitages Ihould be set at liberty; but
in their place, the duke of Angouleme, the
king's third foun, Ihould be delivered to Charles,

vOL. II. c c Lhat,

en the amity between the two monarchs, he
might be educated at the Imperial court; and
that if Francis did not, within the time limited,
fulfil the flipulations in the treaty, he should
promise, upon his honour and oath, to return
into Spain, and to surrender himself again a
prisoner to the emperor'.

By this treaty, Charles flattered himself that

he had not only effeaually humbled his rival,
but that he had taken such precautions as would
for ever prevent his re-attaining any formidable
degree of power. The opinion, which the wisest
politicians formed concerning it, was very differ.
ent; they could not persuade themselves that
Francis, after obtaining his liberty, would exe-
cute articles againit which he had firuggled so
long, and to which, notwithilanding all that he
felt during a long and rigorous confinement, he
had consented with the utmost reluaance. Am-
bition and resentment, they knew, would con-
spire in prompting him to violate the hard con-
ditions to whichhe had been conitrained to submit;
nor would arguments and casuistry be wanting to
represent that which was so manifestly advanta-
geous, to be necessary and just. If one part of
Francis's conduai had been known at that time,
this opinion might have been founded, not in
conjeaure, but in certainty. A few hours before
he signed the treaty, he assembled such of his
counsellors as were then at Madrid, and having
exased from them a solemn oath of feerecy, he

i Recuel des Trait. tom.1. xrz. Ulloa Vita del Car.

lo V. p. ioz. macd made

dishonourable arts, as well as unprincely rigour,
which the emperor had employed in order to en-
snare or intimidate him. For that reason, he
took a formal protest in the hands of notaries,
that his consent to the treaty should be considered
as an involuntary deed, and be deemed null and
void k. By this disingenuous artifice, for which
even the treatment that he had met with was no
apology, Francis endeavoured to satisfy his ho-
nour and conscience in signing the treaty, and
to provide at the fame time a pretext on which
to break it.

Great, meanwhile, were the outward demon-

Arations of love and confidence between the two
monarchs; they appeared often together in pub-
lic ; they frequently had long conferences in pri-
vate ; they travelled in the fame litter, and joined
in the fame amusements. But, amidit these signs
of peace and friendihip, the emperor lill har-
boured suspicion in his mind. Though the cere-
monies of the marriage between Francis and the
queen of Portugal were performed soon after the
conclusion of the treaty, Charles would not per-
mit him to consummate it until the return of the
ratification from France. Even then Francis was
pot allowed to be at fullliberty; his guards were
lill continued; though caressed as a brother-in-
law, he was fitll watched like a prisoner; and it
was obvious to attentive observers, that an union,
in the very beginning of which there might be
difeerned such symptoms of jealousy and dif-
trust, Fould not be cordial, or of long continu-
ance

'k Recrell des Trait. tom. i., p. 507. ' Guic. 1. xvi. 353.

cc About

About a month after the signing of the treaty,

the regent's ratification of it was brought from
France; and that wife princess, preferring, on
this occasion, the public good to domestic affec-
tion, informed her son, that, infitead of the
twelve noblemen named in the treaty, {he had
sent the duke of Orleans along with his brother
the dauphin to the frontier, as the kingdom
could fuffer nothing by the absence of a child,
but must be left almost incapable of defence, if
deprived of its ablest statesmen and most expe-
rienced generals, whom Charles had artfully in-
cluded in his nomination. At last Francis took
leave of the emperor, whose suspicion of the
king's sincerity increasing, as the time of putting
it to the proof approached, he endeavoured to
bind him still fafler by exading new promises,
which, after those. he had already made, the
French monarch was not flow to grant. He set
out from Madrid, a place which the remembrance
of many affiiaing circumstances rendered peculi-
arly odious to him, with the joy natural on such
an occasion, and began the long-wifhed-for
journey towards his own dominions. He was
escorted by a body of horse under the command
of Alarcon, who, as the king drew near the fron-
tiers of France, guarded him with more fcrupu-
lous exauneLs than ever. When he arrived at the
river Andaye, which separates the two kingdoms,
Lautrec appeared on the opposite bank with a
guard of horse equal in number to Alarcon's.
An empty bark was moored in the middle of the
fiream; the attendants drew up in order on the
opposite banks; at the fame initant, Lannoy
with eight gentlemen put off from the Spanilh,

and

French fide of the river; the former had the king
in his boat; the latter, the dauphin and duke of
Orleans; they met in the empty vessel; the ex-
change was made in a moment: Francis, after
a thort embrace of his children, leaped into Lau-
tree's boat, and reached the French Ihore. He
mounted at that inf{ant a Turkish horse, waived
his hand over his head, and with a joyful voice
crying aloud several times, " I am yet a king,"
galloped full speed to St. John de Luz, and
from thence to Bayonne. This event, no less
impatiently desired by the French nation than
by their monarch, happened on the eighteenth of
March, a year and twenty-two days after the fatal
battle of Pavia m.

Soon after the emperor had taken leave of

Francis, and permitted him to begin his journey
towards his own dominions, he set out for Seville,
in order to solemnize his marriage with Isabella,
the daughter of Emanuel, the late king of Por-
tugal, and the sifter of John III. who had fuc-
ceeded him in the throne of that kingdom. Ifa-
bella was a princess of uncommon beauty and
accomplishments; and as the Cortes, both in
Castile and Aragon, had warmly solicited their
sovereign to marry, the choice of a wife, so nearly
allied to the royal blood of both kingdoms, was
extremely acceptable to his fubjeAs. The Por-
tuguefe, fond of this new connediqn with the
first monarch in Christendom, granted him an
extraordinary dowry with Isabella, amounting to
nine hundred thousand crowns, a fum which,

m Sandov, Hist. i. 735. Guic, i. xvi. 355.

cc3 from

was of no small consequence to the emperor.
The marriage was celebrated [March sz] with
that splendour and gaiety which became a great
and youthful prince. Charles lived with Isabella
in perfea harmony, and treated her on all oc-
cafions with much diftinaion and regard ".

During these tranfaAions, Charles could hardly

give any attention to the affairs of Germany,
though it was torn in pieces by commotions,
which threatened the modt dangerous confe-
quences. By the feudal institutions, which dtill
fubfidted almodt unimpaired in the empire, the
property of lands was vested in the princes
and free barons. Their vassals held of them by
the fdri6tedt and modt limited tenures; while the
great body of the people was kept in a dtate
but little removed from absolute servitude. In
some places of Germany, people of the loweit
class were so entirely in the power of their maf-
ters, as to be fubjea to personal and domestic
slavery, the modt rigorous form of that wretched
fdate. In other provinces, particularly in Bohe-
mia and Lusatia, the peasants were bound to
remain on the lands to which they belonged, and
making part of the edtate, were transferred like
any other property from one hand to another.
Even in Suabia, and the countries on the banks
of the Rhine, where their condition was modt
tolerable, the peasants not only paid the full
rent of their farms to the landlord, but if they
chose either to change the place of their abode, or

n Ulloa Vita di Carlo V. p. s06. Belcarius Com. Rer.

Callic. p. 565. Spalatinus ap. Struv. CorE. Ilift. Germ.
ii. jo8s.

to

complifh what they desired, they were obliged to
purchase this privilege at a certain price. Be-
sides this, all grants of lands to peasants expired
at their death, without descending to their pof-
terity. Upon that event, the landlord had a
right to the bedt of their cattle, as well as of their
furniture; and their heirs, in order to obtain a
renewal of the grant, were obliged to pay large
tfums by way of fine. These exaaions, thouga
grievous, were born with patience, because they
were cufdomary and ancient: but when the
progress of elegance and luxury, as well as the
changes introduced into the art of war, came to
increase the expence of government, and made it
necessary for princes to levy occasional or dated
taxes on their fubjeAs, such impositions being
new, appeared intolerable; and in Germany, these
duties being laid chiefly upon beer, wine, and
other necessaries of life, affeaed the common
people in the mod sensible manner. The addi-
tion of such a load to their former burdens,
drove them to despair. It was to the valour
inspired by resentment againit impositions of
this kind that the Swiss owed the acquisition
of their liberty in the fourteenth century. The
fame cause had excited the peasants in several
other provinces of Germany to rebel againd their
superiors towards the end of the fifteenth and
beginning of the sixteenth centuries; and though
these infurreaions were not attended with like
success, they could not, however, be quelled
without much difficulty and bloodshed 0O

0 Seckend. lib. ii. p. a. 6.

By

overawed rather than subdued , and their griev-
ances multiplying continually, they ran to arms,
in the year one thousand five hundred and twenty-
fix, with the molt frantic rage. Their first ap-
pearance was near Ulm in Suabia. The peasants
in the adjacent country flocked to their standard
with the ardour and impatience natural to men,
who having groaned long under opprefflon, be-
held at last some profpea of deliverance; and the
contagion spreading from province to province,
reached almost every part of Germany. Where.
ever they came, they plundered the monasteries,
wasted the lands of their superiors, rafed their
caltles, and massacred without mercy all persons
of noble birth, who were so unhappy as to fall
into their hands P. Having intimidated their
oppressors, as they imagined, by the violence of
these proceedings, they began to confider what
would be the molt proper and effeAual method
of securing themselves for the future from their
tyrannical exadions. With this view, they drew
up and published a memorial, containing all their
demands, and declared, that while arms were in
their hands, they would either persuade or oblige
the nobles to give them full fatisfa&ion with re-
gard to these. The chief articles were, that
they might have liberty to choose their own pas.
tors; that they might be freed from the payment
of all tithes except those of corn; that they
might no longer be considered as the slaves or
bondmen of their superiors; that the liberty of

P Petr. Crinitus de Bello Ruficano, ap. Freher Script.

Rer. Germ. Argent. i7I7! vol. iii. p. Z43* hunting

great forests might not be regarded as private
property, but be open for the use of all; that
they might be delivered from the unusual burden
of taxes under which they laboured; that the
adminiRration of justice might be rendered less
rigorous and more impartial; that the encroach-
ments of the nobles upon meadows and commons
might be restrained 4.

Many of these demands were extremely rea-

fonable; and being urged by such formidable
numbers, thould have met with some redress.
But those unwieldy bodies, assembled in different
places, had neither union, nor condu&, nor vi-
gour. Being led by persons of the lowes rank,
without skill in war, or knowledge of what
was necessary for accomplilhing their designs;
all their exploits were diiinguifhed only by a
brutal and unmeaning fury. To oppose this,
the princes and nobles of Suabia and the Lower
Rhine raised such of their vassals as fitll continued
faithful, and attacking some of the mutineers with
open force, and others by surprise, cut to pieces
or dispersed all who infested those provinces; so
that the peasants, after ruining the open coun-
try, and loufng upwards of twenty thousand of
their associates in the field, were obliged to
return to their habitations with less hope than
ever of relief from their grievances r

These commotions happened at first in provin-

ces of Germany where Luther's opinions had

q Sleid. Hilt. p. go.
r Seckend. lib. ii. p. io. Petr. GoodalIus de Rulticano-

ruin Tumuitu inGermania, ap. Scard. Script. vol. ii. p.31,
&c.

made

by political causes, had no conneaion with the
difputcd points in religion. But the frenzy
reaching at last those countries in which the re-
formation was eflablifhed, derived new fbtength
from circumfiances peculiar to them, and rose
to a itill greater pitch of extravagance. The
reformation, wherever it was received, increased
that bold and innovating spirit to which it owed
its birth. Men who had the courage to over.
turn a system supported by every thing which can
command refpea or reverence, were not to be
iverawed by any authority, how great or vener-
able soever. After having been accustomed to
confider themselves as judges of the most im-
portant doarines in religion, to examine these
freely, and to rejea, without scruple, what ap.
peared to them erroneous, it was natural for
them to turn the fame daring and inquisitive eye
towards government, and to think of re&ifying
whatever disorders or imperfeaions were disco-
vered there. As religious abuses bad been re,
formed in several places without the permiflion
of the magifdrate, it was an easy transition to
attempt the redress of political grievances in the
fame manner.

No sooner, then, did the spirit of revolt break

out in Thuringia, a province fubjea to the elec-
tor of Saxony, the inhabitants of which were
snofitly converts to Lutheranifm, than it assumed
a new and more dangerous form. Thomas Mun-
cer, one of Luther's disciples, having established
himself in that country, had acquired a wonder-
ful afEcendant over the minds of the people. He
propagated among them the wildest and most en-

thufiadic

to inspire them with boldness, and lead them to
sedition. " Luther, he told them, had done
more hurt than service to religion. He had, in-
deed, rescued the church from the yoke of po-
pery, but his dodrines encouraged, and his life
set an example of, the utmost licentiousness of
manners. In order to avoid vice, (says he,) men
mull praaife perpetual mortification. They
mult put on a grave countenance, speak little,
wear a plain garb, and be serious in their whole
deportment. Such as prepare their hearts in
this manner, may exped that the Supreme Being
will dired all their steps, and by some visible
sign discover his will to them; if that illumin-
ation be at any time withheld, we may expoftu-
late with the Almighty, who deals with us so
harshly, and remind him of his promises. This
expostulation and anger will be highly acceptable
to God, and will at last prevail on him to guide
us with the fame unerring hand which conduaed
the patriarchs of old. Let us beware, however,
of offending him by our arrogance; but as all
men are equal in his eye, let them return to that
condition of equality in which he formed them,
and having all things in common, let them live
together like brethren, without any marks of
subordination or pre-eminence s."

Extravagant as these tenets were, they flat-

tered so many passions in the human heart, as to
make a deep impreflion. To aim at nothing
more than abridging the power of the nobility
was now considered as a trifling and partial re-

* Seckend. lib.ii. p. 23. Sleid.HIRf. p.m3. formation,

proposed to level every diitindion among man-
kind, and by abolishing property, to reduce them
to their natural state of equality, in which all
ihould receive their fubfiflence from one common
stock. Muncer assured them, that the design
was approved of by Heaven, and that the Al-
mighty had in a dream ascertained him of its
success. The peasants set about the execution of
it, not only with the rage which animated those
of their order in other parts of Germany, but
with the ardour which enthusiasm inspires.
They deposed the magiffrates in all the cities
of which they were mafrers, seized the lands of
the nobles, and obliged such of them as they got
into their hands to put on the dress commonly
worn by peasants, and infitad of their former
titles, to be satisfied with the appellation given
to people in the lowest class of life. Great num-
bers engaged in this wild undertaking; but Mun-
cer, their leader and their prophet, was destitute
of the abilities necessary for conduaing it. He
had all the extravagance, but not the courage,
which enthusiasts usually possess. It was with
difficulty he could be persuaded to take the field;
and though he soon drew together eight thou-
sand men, he fuffered himself to be surrounded
by a body of cavalry, under the command of the
cledor of Saxony, the landgrave of Hesse, and
duke of Brunswick. These princes, unwilling
to shed the blood of their deluded fubjeds, sent
a young nobleman to their camp, with the offer
of a general pardon, if they would immediately
lay down their arms, and deliver up the authors
of the sedition. Muncer, alarmed at this, began

I to

mence, exhorting them not to trust these de-
ceitful promises of their oppressors, nor to desert
the cause of God, and of Christian liberty.

But the sense of present danger making a

deeper impreflion on the peasants than his elo-
quence, confusion and terror were visible in every
face, when a rainbow, which was the emblem
that the mutineers had painted on their colours,
happening to appear in the clouds, Muncer, with
admirable presence of mind, laid hold of that in-
cident, and suddenly raising his eyes and hands
towards Heaven, "( Behold," cries he, with an
elevated voice, " the sign which God has given.
There is the pledge of your safety, and a token
that the wicked (hall be deftroyed." The fana-
tical multitude set up instantly a great (hout, as
if viaory had been certain; and passing in a
moment from one extreme to another, massa-
cred the unfortunate nobleman who had come
with the offer of pardon, and demanded to be
led towards the enemy. The princes,, enraged
at this (hocking violation of the laws of war, ad-
vanced with no less impetuosity, and began the
attack [May i51 ; but the behaviour of the pea-
fants in the combat was not such as might have
been expeaed either from their ferocity or con-
fidence of success; an undisciplined rabble was no
equal match for well-trained troops; above five
thousand were ilain in the field, almost without
making reifitance; the reft fled, and among the
foremost Muncer their general. He was taken
next day, and being condemned to such punish-
ments as his crimes had deserved, he fuffered them
with a poor and dastardly spirit. His death put

VOL. II. D D an

had filled Germany with such terror t; but the
enthusiastic notions which he had scattered were
not extirpated, and produced, not long after,
effeas more memorable, as well as more extra.

vagant. During these commotions, Luther ated with
exemplary prudence and moderation; like a com-
anon parent, solicitous about the welfare of both
parties, without sparing the faults or errors of
either. On the one hand, he addressed a moni-
tory discourse to the nobles, exhorting them to
treat their dependents with greater humanity and
indulgence. On the other, he severely censured
the seditious spirit of the peasants, advising them
not to murmur at hardships inseparable from their
condition, nor to seek for redref s by any but legal
mneans ".

Luther's famous marriage with Catharine a

Boria, a nun of a noble family, who, having
thrown off the veil, had fled from the cloister,
happened this year, and was far from meeting
with the fame approbation. Even his most de-
voted followers thought this itep indecent, at a
time when his country was involved in so many
calamities; while his enemies never mentioned it
with any softer appellation than that of incestuous
or profane. Luther himself was sensible of the
impression which it had made to his disadvantage;
but being satisfied with his own condud, he bore
the censure of his friends, and the reproaches of
his adversaries, with his usual fortitude x*

t Sleid. Hii* p. 84. Sackend. lib. ii. P. .I, Gnodalius

Tumult. Ruffican. 155.

U Sleid. Hilt. p. 87. X Seckend. Jib.11. p. ,J.

This

or, Frederic, eledor of Saxony; but the blow
was the less sensibly felt, as he was succeeded
by his brother John [May 9], a more avowed
and zealous, though less able patron of Luther
and his doarines.

Another event happened about the fame time,

which, as it occasioned a considerable change in
the fate of Germany, must be traced back to
its source. While the frenzy of the Crusades
poffeffed all Europe during the twelfth and thir-
teenth centuries, several orders of religious
knighthood were founded in defence of the
Christian faith again8t heathens and infidels.
Among these, the Teutonic order in Germany
was one of the most illuffrious, the knights of
which distinguished themselves greatly in all the
enterprises carried on in the Holy Land. Being
driven at last from their settlements in the east,,
they were obliged to return to their native
country. Their zeal and valour were too im-
petuous to remain long inaAive. They invaded,
on very flight pretences, the province of Pruflia,
the inhabitants of which were still idolaters; and
having completed the conqueRt of it about the
middle of the thirteeenth century, held it many
years as a fief depending on the crown of Po-
land. Fierce contests arose during this period,
between the grand masters of the order and the
kings of Poland; the former firuggling for in-
dependence, while the latter asserted their right of
sovereignty with great firmness. Albert, a
prince of the house of Brandenburgh, who was
le&red grand master in the year one thousand
five hundred and eleven, engaging keenly in this

i D 2 quarrel,

quarrel, maintained a long war with Sigismund
king of Poland; but having become an early
convert to Luther's doEtrines, this gradually
lessened his zeal for the interests of his fraternity,
so that he took the opportunity of the confusions
in the empire, and the absence of the emperor,
to conclude a treaty with Sigismund, greatly to
his own private emolument. By it, that part of
Prussia which belonged to the Teutonic order,
was ereaed into a secular and hereditary dutchy,
and the invefiiture of it granted to Albert, who,
in return, bound himnelf to do homage for it to
the kings of Poland as their vassal. Immediately
after this he made public profeffion of the re-
formed religion, and married a princess of Den-
mark. The Teutonic knights exclaimed so
loudly against the treachery of their grand master,
that he was put under the ban of the empire;
but he frill kept poffeflion of the province which
he had usurped, and transmitted it to his pofre-
rity. In process of time, this rich inheritance
fell to the ele~toral branch of the family, all de-
pendence on the crown of Poland was shaken
off, and the margraves of Brandenburgh, having
assumed the title of kings of Pruflia, have not
only risen to an equality with the first princes in
Germany, but take their rank among the great
monarchs of Europe 7.

Upon the return of the French king to his

dominions, the eyes of all the powers in Europe-
were fixed upon him, that, by observing his firit
motions, they might form a judgment concern-
ing his subsequent conduft. They were not

Y Sleid. Hilt. p. 98. Pfeffel Abrfgi de 1'Hilt. de Droit

Publ. p. 605j &c.

arrived at Bayonne, wrote to the king of Eng-
land, thanking him for the zeal and affe~rion
wherewith he had interposed in his favour, to
which he acknowledged that he owed the re-
covery of his liberty. Next day the emperor's
ambassadors demanded audience, and, in their
maffer's name, required him to issue such orders
as were necessary for carrying the treaty of Ma-
drid into immediate and full execution; he coldly
answered, that though, for his own part, he de-
termined religiously to perform all that he had
promised, the treaty contained so many articles
relative not to himself alone, but affeting the in-
terefts of the French monarchy, that he could not
take any farther flep without consulting the
slates of his kingdom, and that some time would
be necessary, in order to reconcile their minds
to the hard conditions which he had consented
to ratify z. This reply was considered as no
obfcire discovery of his being resolved to elude
the treaty; and the compliment paid to Henry
appeared a very proper itep towards securing the
assistance of that monarch in the war with the
emperor, to which such a resolution would cer-
tainly give rife. These circumitances, added to
the explicit declarations which Francis made in
secret to the ambassadors from several of the Ita-
lian powers, fully satisfied them that their conjec.
tures with regard to his condufl had been just,
and that, instead of intending to execute an un.
reasonable treaty, he was eager to seize the first
opportunity of revenging those injuries which had

r Mem. de Bellay, P. 97'

2 D 3 compelled

compelled him to feign an approbation of its
Even the doubts, and fears, and [cruples, which
used, on other occasions, to hold Clement in a
itate of uncertainty, were dissipated by Francis's
seeming impatience to break through all his en-
gagements with the emperor. The situation, in-
deed, of affairs in Italy at that time, did not
allow the pope to hesitate long. Sforza was fill
besieged by the Imperialifus in the castle of
Milan. That feeble prince, deprived now of
Morone's advice, and unprovided with every
thing necefiary for defence, found means to in-
form Clement and the Venetians, that he must
soon surrender if they did not come to his re-
lief. The Imperial troops, as they had received
no pay since the battle of Pavia, lived at difcre-
tion in the Milanese, levying such exorbitant
contributions in that dutchy, as amounted, if
we may rely on Guicciardini's calculation, to no
less a fum than five thousand ducats a day';
nor was it to be doubted but that the soldiers,
as soon as the cafile -should submit, would
choose to leave a ruined country which hardly
afforded them subsistence, that they might take
poffeffion of more comfortable quarters in the
fertile and untouched territories of the pope and
Venetians. The assistance of the French king
was the only thing which could either save
Sforza, or enable them to protea their own do-
minions from the insults of the Imperial troops.

For these reasons, the pope, the Venetians,

and duke of Milan, were equally impatient to
come to an agreement with Francis, who, on his

* GUIC. I. Xvilp 36rt

part,

part, was no less desirous of acquiring such a
considerable accession both of strength and repu-
tation as fitch a confederacy'would bring along
with it. The chief objeas of this alliance,
which was concluded at Cognac on the twenty-
second of May, though kept secret for some
time, were to oblige the emperor to set at liberty
the French king's sons, upon payment of a reason-
able ransom; and to re-efitablifh Sforza in the
quiet poffeflion of the Milanese. If Charles
should refuse either of these, the contraaing
parties bound themselves to bring into the field
an army of thirty-five thousand men, with which,
after driving the Spaniards out of the Milanese,
they would attack the kingdom of Naples.
The king of England was declared proteEdor of
this league, which they dignified with the name
of Holy, because the pope was at the head of it;
and in order to allure Henry more effeaually, a
principality in the kingdom of Naples, of thirty
thousand ducats yearly revenue, was to be fettled
on him; and lands to the value of ten thousand
ducats on Wolsey his favourite b.

No sooner was this league concluded, than

Clement, by the plenitude of his papal power,
absolved Francis from the oath which he had
taken to observe the treaty of Madrid C. This
right, how pernicious soever in its effeds, and
deitruoive of that integrity which is the basis of
all tranfaAions among men, was the natural con-
sequence of the powers which the popes arro-
gated as the infallible vicegerents of Christ upon

i' P. Heater. Rer. Aufr. lib. ix. c. 3. p. 217. Recuezl

des Trait. ii. 124.

C GolaR. Polit. Imperial. p. zoos. Pallav. HiR. p. 70.

earth.

rogative, they had often dispensed with obliga-
tions which were held sacred, the interest of some
men, and the credulity of others, led them to
imagine, that the decisions of a sovereign pontiff
authorised orjuflified aEtions which would, other-
wife, have been criminal and impious.

The discovery of Francis's intention to elude

the treaty of Madrid, filled the emperor with a
variety of disquieting thoughts. He had treated
an unfortunate prince in the most ungenerous
manner; he had displayed an insatiable ambition
in all his negotiations with his prisoner; he
knew what censures the former had drawn upon
him, and what apprehensions the latter had ex-
cited in every court of Europe; nor had he
reaped from the measures which he pursued,
any of those advantages which politicians are
apt to confider as an excuse for the most crimi-
nal condud, and a compensation for the fevereff
reproaches. Francis was now out of his hands,
and not one of all the mighty consequences,
which he had expedted from the treaty that set
him at liberty, was likely to take place. His
rashness in relying so far on his own judgment
as to trust to the sincerity of the French king,
in opposition to the sentiments of his wisest mi-
nifters, was now apparent: and he easily con-
jetured, that the fame confederacy, the dread
of which had induced him to set Francis at
liberty, would now be formed against him with
that gallant and incensed monarch at its head.
Self-condemnation and ihame on account of what
was past, with anxious apprehensions concerning
what might happen, were the necessary result of

these

these refle&ions on his own condud and situ-
ation. Charles, however, was naturally firm
and inflexible in all his measures. To have re-
ceded suddenly from any article in the treaty of
Madrid, would have been a plain confeffion of
imprudence, and a palpable symptom of fear;
he determined, therefore, that it was most suit-
able to his dignity, to insist, whatever might be
the consequences, on the fitri& execution of the
treaty, and particularly not to accept of any
thing which might be offered as an equivalent
for the reRitution of Burgundy d

In consequence of this resolution, he appoint-

ed Lannoy and Alarcon to repair, as his ambaf-
fadors, to the court of France, and formally to
summon the king, either to execute the treaty
with the sincerity that became him, or to return,
according to his oath, a prisoner to Madrid.
Instead of giving them an immediate answer,
Francis admitted the deputies of the states of
Burgundy to an audience in their presence.
They humbly represented to him, that he had
exceeded the powers vefied in a king of France,
when he consented to alienate their country
from the crown, the domains of which he was
bound by his coronation oath to preserve entire
and unimpaired. Francis, in return, thanked
them for their attachment to his crown, and in-
treated them, though very faintly, to remem-
ber the obligations which he lay under to fulfil
his engagements with the emperor. The depu-
ties, assuming an higher tone, declared, that
they would not obey commands which they con-

4 Guic. 1. xvii. 366.

fidered

them to the enemies of France, they had re-
solved to defebd themselves to the belt of their
power, with a firm purpose rather to perish than
submit to a foreign dominion. Upon which
Francis, turning towards the Imperial ambaffa-
dors, represented to them the impoflibility of
performing what he had undertaken, and offered,
in lieu of Burgundy, to pay the emperor two
millions of crowns. The viceroy and Alarcon,
who easily perceived, that the scene to which
they had been witnesses, was concerted between
the king and his fubjeAs in order to impose upon
them, signified to him their maiter's fixed refo-
lution not to depart in the smallest point from
the terms of the treaty, and withdrew e. Before
they left the kingdom, they had the mortifica-
tion to hear the holy league againit the emperor
publiihed with great solemnity [June is].

Charles no sooner received an account of thi3

confederacy than he exclaimed, in the molc pub-
lic manner, and in the harlheft terms, againit
Francis, as a prince void of faith and of honour.
He complained no less of Clement, whom he
solicited in vain to abandon his new allies; he ac-
cufed him of ingratitude; he taxed him with an
ambition unbecoming his charader; he threatened
him not only with all the vengeance which thepow-
er of an emperor can infiA, but, by appealing to a
general council, called up before his eyes all the
terrors arising from the authority of those affem-
blies so formidable to the papal fee. It was ne-
ceffary, however, to oppose something else than

S Belcar. Comment. de Reb. Gal, $73. Mem. de Bellay, 97.

reproaches

reproaches and threats to the powerful combi.
nation formed against him; and the emperor,
prompted by so many pailions, did not fail to
exert himfeif with unusual vigour, in order to
fend supplies, not only of men, but of money,
which was fill more needed, into Italy.

On the other hand, the efforts of the confede-

rates bore no proportion to that animosity againit
the emperor, with which they seemed to enter
into the holy leage. Francis, it was thought,
would have infused spirit and vigour into the
whole body. He had his loft honour to repair,
many injuries to revenge, and the flation among
the princes of Europe, from which he had fallen,
to recover. From all these powerful incite-
ments, added to the natural impetuosity of his
temper, a war more fierce and bloody than any
that he had hitherto made upon his rival, was
expeaed. But Francis had gone through such
a scene of distress, and the impression it had
made was flill so fresh in his memory, that he
was become diffident himself, difirufiful of for-
tune, and desirous of tranquillity. To procure
the release of his sons, and to avoid the reftitu-
tion of Burgundy by paying some reasonable
equivalent, were his chief objeas; and for the
fake of these, he would willingly have sacrificed
Sforza, and the liberties of Italy, to the empe-
ror. He flattered himself, that'the dread of the
confederacy which he had formed would of itself
induce Charles to listen to what was equitable;
and was afraid of employing any considerable
force for the relief of the Milanese, left his allies;
whom he had often found to be more attentive
to their own interest, than punaual in fulfilling

their

their engagements, {hould abandon him as soon
as the.. limperialifts were driven out of that coun-
try, and deprive his negotiations with the em-
peror of that weight which they derived from
his being at the head of a powerful league.  In
the mean time the cafile of Milan was pressed
more closely than ever, and Sforza was now re-
duced to the ladt extremity. The pope and
Venetians, trusting to Francis's concurrence,
commanded their troops to take the field, in
order to relieve him; and an army more than
fufficient for that service was soon formed. The
Milanese, passionately attached to their unfortu-
nate duke, afid no less exasperated againdt the
Imperialists, who had oppressed them so cruelly,
were ready to aid the confederates in all their
enterprises. But the duke d'Urbino, their ge-
neral, naturally flow and indecisive, and restrain-
ed, belides, by his ancient enmity to the family
of Medici, from taking any dtep that might ag-
grandize or add reputation to the pope f, loft
some opportunities of attacking the Imperialists
and railing the liege, and refused to improve
others. These delays gave Bourbon time to
bring up a reinforcement of fresh troops, and a
supply of money. He immediately took the
command of the army [July 24], and pulhed on
the siege with such vigour, as quickly obliged
Sforza to surrender, who retiring to Lodi, which
the confederates had surprised, left Bourbon in
full poffeflion of the red of the dutchy, the in-
vedtiture of which the emperor had promised
to grant him .

C Gulc. lib. xvii. 382. 8 Ibid. 376, &c.

The

which Francis had played, and to be sensible
that, notwithRanding all their address, and re-
finements in negotiation, which they boasted of
as talents peculiarly their own, they had for once
been over-reached in those very arts by a tramon-
tane prince. He had hitheito thrown almost the
whole burden of the war upon them, taking ad-
vantage of their efforts, in order to enforce the
proposals which he often renewed at the court
of Madrid for obtaining the liberty of his sons.
The pope and Venetians expoftulated and com-
plained ; butas they were not able to rouse
Francis from his inadivity, their own zeal and
rigour gradually abated, and Clement, having
already gone farther than his timidity usually
permitted him, began to accuse himself of rash-
nefa, and to relapse into his natural Rlate of doubt
and uncertainty.

All the emperor's motions depending on him-

felfalone, were more brisk and better concerted.
The narrowness of his revenues, indeed, did
not allow him to make any sudden or great
efort .in the field, but he abundantly supplied
that defea by his intrigues and negotiations.
The family of Colonna, the most powerful of
all the Roman barons, had adhered uniformly
to the Ghibeline or Imperial fafion, during
those fierce contentions between the popes and
emperors, which, for several ages, filled Italy
and Germany with discord and bloodihed.
Though the causes which at firdt gave birth to

S Rufclli Lettere de Principi, ii. 157, &c. I59, i60-I66.

vOL. II. Ea these

these deftruaive faaions existed no longer, and
the rage with which they had been animated was
in a great measure spent, the Colonnas still re-
tained their attachment to the Imperial interest,
and by placing themselves under the proteaion
of the emperors, secured the quiet poffeflion of
their own territories and privileges. The cardi.
nal Pompeo Colonna, a man of a turbulent and
ambitious temper, at that time the head of the
family, had long been Clement's rival, to whose
influence in the lat conclave he imputed the
disappointment of all his schemes for attaining
the papal dignity, of which, from his known
conneaion with the emperor, he thought him.
self secure. To an aspiring mind, this was an
injury too great to be forgiven; and though he
had dissembled his resentment so far as to vote
for Clement at his eledion, and to accept of
great offices in his court, he waited with the
utmost impatience for an opportunity of being
revenged. Don Hugo de Moncada, the Impe-
rial ambassador at Rome, who was no firanger
to these sentiments, easily persuaded him, that
now was the time, while all the papal troops
were employed in Lombardy, to attempt some-
thing, which would at once avenge his own
wrongs, and be of essential service to the empe.
ror his patron. The pope however, whose timi-
dity rendered him quick-fighted, was so atten.
tive to their operations, and began to be alarmed
so early, that he might have drawn together
troops fufficient to have disconcerted all Calonna's
measures. But MVoncada amused him so artfully
with negotiations, promises, and false intelli-
gence, that he lulled alleep all his suspicions,

and

and prevented his taking any of the precautions
necessary for his safety; and to the disgrace of
a prince poffeffed of great power, as well as re-
nowned for political wisdom, Colonna at the
head of three thousand men, seized one of the
gates of his capital, while he, imagining him-
seif to be in perse& security, was altogether un
prepared for resisting such a feeble enemy. The
inhabitants of Rome permitted Colonna's troops,
from whom they apprehended no injury, to ad-
vance without opposition [Sept. 29]; the pope's
guards were dispersed in a moment; and Clement
Jiimfelf, terrified at the danger, ashamed of his
own credulity, and deserted by almost every
person, fled with precipitation into the cafile of
St. Angelo, which was immediately invelted.
The palace of the Vatican, the church of St.
Peter, and the houses of the pope's miniffers
and servants, were plundered in the most licen-
tious manner,; the reft of the city was left un-
molefied. Clement, deflitute of every thing
necessary either for subsistence or defence, was
soon obliged to demand a capitulation; and
Moncada, being admitted into the cafile, pre-
feribed to him, with all the haughtiness of a con-
queror, conditions which it was not in his power
to rejea. The chief of these was, That Cle-
ment lhould not only grant a full pardon to the
Colonnas, but receive them into favour, and
immediately withdraw all the troops in his pay
from the army of the confederates in Lom-
bardy'.

i Jovil Vita Pomp. Colon. Guic. i. xvii. 407. Rufcelli

Lettere de Principi, i. p. 5o4.

E 2 -The

than of deposing Clement, and of placing Pom-
peo, their kinsman, in the vacant chair of St.
Peter, exclaimed loudly againit a treaty which
left them at the mercy of a pontiff juilty in-
cenfed against them. But Moncada, attentive
only to his mafter's interest, paid little regard
to their complaints,. and, by this fortunate
measure, broke entirely the power of the con-
federates.

While the army of the confederates fuffered

such a considerable diminution, the Imperialists
received two great reinforcements; one from
Spain, under the command of Lannoy and
Alarcon, which amounted to fux tboufand
men; the other was raised in the empire by
George Fronfperg, a German nobleman, who
having served in Italy with great reputation,
had acquired such influence and popularity,
that multitudes of his countrymen, fond on
every occasion of engaging in military enter-
prifes, and impatient at that jundure to escape
from the opprefiion which they felt in religious
as well as civil matters, crowded to his stand-
ard; so that, without any other gratuity than
the payment of a crown to each man, fourteen
thousand enlisted in his service. To these the
archduke Ferdinand added two thousand horse,
levied in the Austrian dominions. But although
the emperor had raised troops, he could not re-
mit the sums necessary for their support. His
ordinary revenues were exhausted, the credit of
princes, during the infancy of commerce, was
not extensive; and the Cortes of Castile, though
every art had been tried to gain them, and some

innovations

in order to secure their concurrence, perempto-
rily refused to grant Charles any extraordinary
supply k; so that the more his army increased in
number, the more were his generals embarrassed
and distressed. Bourbon, in particular, was in-
volved in such difficulties, that he stood in need
of all his address and courage in order to extri-
cate himself. Large sums were due to the Spanish
troops already in the Milanese, when Fronfperg
arrived with sixteen thousand hungry Germans,
deffitute of every thing. Both made their de-
mands with equal fierceness; the former claim-
ing their arrears, and the latter, the pay which
had been promised them on their entering Lom-
bardy. Bourbon was altogether incapable of
giving fatisfadion to either. In this situation,
he was confirained to commit ads of violence
extremely ihocking to his own nature, which
was generous and humane. He seized the prin-
cipal citizens of Milan, and by threats, and even
by torture, forced from them a considerable,
fum; he rifled the churches of all their plate
and ornaments; the inadequate supply which
these afforded, he difrributed among the soldiers,
with so many soothing expreilions of his sym-
pathy and affedion, that, though it fell far
lhort of the sums due to them, it appeased their
present murmurs.

Among other expedients for railing money,

Bourbon granted his life and liberty to Morone,
who having been kept in prison since his intrigue

k Sandov. L. 3'4. ' Ripamond. Hi&t. Mediol.

lib, ii. p. 717.

EE3 with

Spaniih judges empowered to try him. For
this remiffois he paid twenty thousand ducats;
and such were his singular talents, and the won-
derful ascendant which he always acquired over
the minds of those to whom he had access, that
in a few days, from being Bourbon's prisoner,
be became his prime confident, with whom he
consulted in all affairs of importance. To his
insinuations mudl be imputed the suspicions
which Bourbon began to entertain, that the
emperor had never intended to grant him the in-
vefditure of Milan, but had appointed Leyva,
and the other Spanish generals, rather to be
spies on his condua, than to co-operate heartily
towards the execution of his schemes. To him
likewise, as he dtill retained, at the age of four-
score, all the enterprising spirit of youth, may
be attributed the bold and unexpeaed measure
on which Bourbon soon after ventured m.

Such, indeed, were the exigencies of the Im-

perial troops in the Milanese, that it became in.
difpenfably necessary to take some immediate
diep for their relief. The arrears of the soldiers
increased daily; the emperor made no remittances
to his generals; and the utmoit rigour of mili-
tary extortion could draw nothing more from a
country entirely drained and ruined. In this
situation there was no choice left, but either to
disband the army, or to march for fubhfmdence
into the enemy's country. The territories of
the Venetians lay nearest at hand; but they,
with their usual foresight and prudence, had

m Guic, i. xvii. 479*.

taken

any insult. Nothing, therefore, remained but
to invade the dominions of the church, or of
the Florentines; and Clement had of late aaed
such a part as merited the severest vengeance
from the emperor. No sooner did the papal
troops return to Rome, after the infurreaion
of the Colonnas, than, without paying any re-
gard to the treaty with Moncada, he degraded
the cardinal Colonna, excommunicated the reft
of the family, seized their places of flrength, and
wasted their lands with all the cruelty which the
smart of a recent injury naturally excites. After
this, he turned his arms againit Naples, and, as
his operations were seconded by the French
fleet, he made some progress towards the con-
quest of that kingdom; the viceroy being no
less deflitute than the other Imperial generals
of the money reqnuifte for a vigorous defence ".

5527.] These proceedings of the pope jufti-

fled, in appearance, the measures which Bour-
bon's situation rendered necessary; and he set
about execoting them under such disadvantages,
as furnished the Uirongeft proof both of the de-
fpair to which he was reduced, and of the great-
ness of his abilities which were able to surmount
so many obfiacles. Having committed the go-
vernment of Milan to Leyva, whom he was not
unwilling to leave behind, he began his march
in the depth of winter [Jan. 30], at the head
of twenty-five thousand men, composed of na-
tions differing from each other in language and
manners; without money, without magazines,

Jovii VitaPomp, Colon. Guic. 1. xviii. 424.

without

without artillery, without carriages; in 1hort,
without any of those things which are necessary
to the smallest party, and which seem essential to
the existence and motions of a great army. His
rout lay through a country cut by rivers and
mountains, in which the roads were almost im-
pradicable; as an addition to his difficulties,
the enemy's army, superior to his own in num-
ber, was at hand to watch all his motions, and
to improve every advantage. But his troops,
impatient of their present hardships, and allured
by the hopes of immense booty, without confi-
dering how ill provided they were for a march,
followed him with great cheerfulness. His fird
scheme was to have made himself mailer of Pla-
centia, and to have gratified his soldiers with the
plunder of that city; but the- vigilance of the
confederate generals rendered the design abor-
tive; nor had he. better success in his projea for
the reduaiohn of Bologna, which was seasonably
supplied with as many troops as secured it from
the insults of an army which had neither artillery
nor ammunition. Having failed in both these
attempts to become maiter of some great city,
he was under a necessity of advancing. But he
had now been two months in the field; his
troops had fiffered every calamity that a long
march, together with the uncommon rigour of
the season, could bring upon men deflitute, of all
necessary accommodations in an enemy's country;
the magnificent promises to which they truffed,
had hitherto proved altogether vain; they saw
no profpe& of relief; their patience, tried to
the utmost, failed at last, and they broke out

into

attempted to restrain them, fell vidims to their
fury; Bourbon himself, not daring to appear
during the firif transports of their rage, was
obliged to fly secretly from his quarters But
this sudden ebullition of wrath began at last to
subside; when Bourbon, who poffeffed in a won-
derful degree the art of governing the minds of
soldiers, renewed his promises with more confi-
dence than formerly, and afflured them that they
would be soon accomplilhed. He endeavoured
to render their hardships more tolerable, by par.
taking of them himself; he fared no better than
the meanell centinel; he marched along with
them on foot; he joined them in singing their
camp ballads, in which, with high praises of his
valour, they mingled many itrokes of military
raillery on his poverty ; and wherever they came,
he allowed them, as a foretaste of what he had
promised, to plunder the adjacent villages at dif-
cretion. Encouraged by all these soothing arts,
they entirely forgot their fufferings and com-
plaints, and followed him with the fame implicit
confidence as formerly P.

Bourbon, meanwhile, carefully concealed his

intentions. Rome and Florence, not knowing
on.which the blow would fall, were held in the
most disquieting slate of fufpence. Clement,
equally solicitous for the safety of both, fluau-
ated in more than his usual uncertainty; and
while the rapid approach of danger called for
prompt and decisive measures, he spent the time

o Guic. 1. xvill. 434. Jov~iVit. Colon. I63.
P Oeuvres de Brant. vol. iv. p. 246, &c.

1n

taking resolutions, which, next day, his reftlels
mind, more sagacious in discerning than in oh-
viating difficulties, overturned, without being
able to fix on what should be fubfitituted in their
place. At one time he determined to unite
himself more closely than ever with his allies,
and to push on the war with vigour; at another,
he inclined to bring all differences to a final ac-
commodation by a treaty with Lannoy, who,
knowing his passion for negotiation, solicited
him incessantly with proposals for that purpose.
His timidity at length prevailed, and led him to
conclude an agreement with Lannoy tMar. 151,
of which the following were the chief articles:
That a suspension of arms fhouid take place be-
tween the Pontifical and Imperial troops for eight
months; That Clement should advance sixty
thousand crowns towards satisfying the demands
of the Imperial army; That the Colonnas
Thould be absolved from censure, and their
former dignities and poffeflions be restored to
them; That the viceroy ihould come to Rome,
and prevent Bourbon from approaching nearer
to that city, or to Florence q. On this hasty
treaty, which deprived him of all hopes of as-
fiftance from his allies, without affording him
any solid foundation of security, Clement relied
so firmly, that, like a man extricated at once
out of all difficulties, he was at perfedR cafe, and
in the fulness of his confidence disbanded all his
troops, except as many as were fufficient to
guard his own person. This amazing confidence

9 Guic. i. xvill. 436.

fearful and suspicious to excess, appeared so unac-
countable to Guicciardini, who, being at that
time the pontifical commiffary-general and re-
sident in the-confederate army, had great oppor-
tunities, as well as great abilities, for observing
how chimerical all his hopes were, that he im-
putes the pope's condua, at this junaure, wholly
to infatuation, which those who are doomed to
ruin cannot avoidr.

Lannoy, it would seem, intended to have exe-

cuted the treaty with great sincerity; and hav-
ing detached Clement from the confederacy,
wished to turn Bourbon's arms against the Ve-
netians, who, of all the powers at war with the
emperor, had exerted the greatest vigour. With
this view he detached a courier to Bourbon, in-
forming him of the suspension of arms, which,
in the name of their common master, he had
concluded with the pope. Bourbon had other
schemes, and he had prosecuted them now too
far to think of retreating. To have mentioned
a retreat to his soldiers would have been dan-
gerous; his command was independent on Lan-
noy; he was fond of mortifying a man whom
he had many reasons to hate: for these reasons,
without paying the least regard to the message,
he continued to ravage the ecclesiastical terri-
tories, and to advance towards Florence. Upon
this, all Clement's terror and anxiety returning
with new force, he had recourse to Lannoy, and
intreated and conjured him to put a flop to
Bourbon's progress. Lannoy accordingly let

t Guic. i. xviii. 446.

out

Bourbon's soldiers having got notice of the
truce, raged and threatened, demanding the ac-
complifhment of the promises to which they had
trusted; their general himfeif could hardly re-
itrain them; every person in Rome perceived
that nothing remained but to prepare for re-
)ifting a storm which it was now impossible to
dispel. Clement alone, relying on some ambi-
guous and deceitful profeffions which Bourbon
made of his inclination towards peace, funk
back into his former security S.

Bourbon, on his part, was far from being free

from solicitude. All his attempts on any place
of importance had hitherto miscarried; and Flo-
rence, towards which he had been approaching
for some time, was, by the arrival of the duke
d'Urbino's army, put in a condition to set his
power at defiance. As it now became necessary
to change his route, and to take inifantly some
new resolution, he fixed without hesitation on
one which was no less daring in itself, than it
was impious according to the opinion of that
age. This was to aifault and plunder Rome.
Many reasons, however, prompted him to it.
He was fond of thwarting Lannoy, who had
undertaken for the safety of that city; he ima-
gined that the emperor would be highly pleased
to fee Clement, the chief author of the league
against him, humbled; he flattered himself that,
by gratifying the rapacity of his soldiers with
such immenie booty, he would attach them for
ever to his interest; or (which is flill more pro-

s Guic. 1. iii. 437, &c. Mem. de Bellay, p. Ioo.

bable

of the power and fame which he would acquire
from the conquest of the firfr city in Christen-
dom, that he might lay the foundation of an
independent power; and that, after shaking off
all conneaion with the emperor, he might take
poffeffion of Naples, or of some of the Italian
states, in his own name t,

Whatever his motives were, he executed his

resolution with a rapidity equal to the boldness
with which he had formed it. His soldiers, now
that they had their prey full in view, complained
neither of fatigue, nor famine, nor want of pay.
No sooner did they begin to move from Tuscany
towards Rome, than the pope, sensible at lait
how fallacious the hopes had been on which he
reposed, fiarted from his security. But no time
now remained, even for a bold and decisive pon-
tiff to have taken proper measures, or to have
formed any effeaual plan of defence. Under
Clement's feeble condud, all was coniternation,
disorder, and irresolution. He colleded, how-
ever, such of his dilbanded soldiers as still re-
mained in the city; he armed the artificers of
Rome, and the footmen and train-bearers of the
cardinals; he repaired the breaches in the walls;
he began to erea new works; he excommuni-
cated4 Bourbon and all his troops, branding the
Germans with the name of Lutherans, and the
Spaniards with that of Moors ". Trussing to
these ineffeaual military preparations, or to his
spiritual arms, which were fill more despised by

a Brant, iv. 27. vi. 189. Belcarli Comment. 594.
u Seckend. lib. ii. p. 6S.
VOL. II. F F rapacious -

rapacious soldiers, he' seems to have laid aside his
natural timidity, and, contrary to the advice of
all his counsellors, determined to wait the ap-
proach of an enemy whom he might easily have
avoided by a timely retreat.

Bourbon, who saw the necelfity of dispatch,

now that his intentions were known, advanced
with such speed, that he gained several marches
on the duke d' Urbino's army, and encamped in
the plains of Rome on the evening of the fifth
of May. From thence he fhewed his soldiers
the palaces and churches of that city, into which,
as the capital of the Christian commonwealth,
the riches of all Europe had flowed during many
centuries, without having been once violated by
any hostile hand; and commanding them to re-
fresh themselves at night, as a preparation for the
assault next day, promised them, in reward of
their toils and valour, the poffeiflion of all the
treasures accumulated there.

Early in the morning, Bourbon, who had de-

termined to diitinguilh that day either by his
death or the success of his enterprise, appeared
at the head of his troops, clad in complete ar-
mour, above which he wore a veit of white tissue,
that he might be more conspicuous both to his
friends and to his enemies; and as all depended
on one bold impreflion, he led them instantly to
feale the walls. Three diftind bodies, one of
Germans, another of Spaniards, and the last of
Italians, the three different nations of whom the
army was composed, were appointed to this ser-
vice; a separate attack was assigned to each;
and the whole army advanced to support them
as occasion ihould require. A thick miff con-

I cealed

y~~rz.1l-51

Ur

~i~t'h~d Jfimek Ir~t l' Sn~~~od

the brink of the ditch which surrounded the fozb.
urbs; having planted their ladders in a moment,
each brigade rushed on to the assault with an
impetuosity heightened by national emulation.
They were received at firit with fortitude equal
to their own ; the Swiss in the pope's guards,
and the veteran soldiers who had been assembled,
fought with a courage becoming men to whom
the defence of the noblest city in the world was
entrusted. Bourbon's troops, notwithifanding
all their valour, gained no ground, and even be-
gan to give way; when their leader, perceiving
that on this critical moment the fate of the day
depended, leaped from his horse, pressed to the
front, snatched a fealirig ladder from a soldier,
planted it againit the wall, and began to mount
jt, encouraging his men with his voice and hand
to follow him. But at that very initant, a muf-
ket bullet from the ramparts pierced his groin
with a wound, which he immediately felt to be
mortal; but he retained so much presence of
mind as to desire those who were near him to
cover his body with a cloak, that his death might
not dilhearten his troops; and soon after he ex-
pired with a courage worthy of a better cause,
and which would have entitled him to the high-
et praise, if he had thus fallen in defence of his
country, not at the head of its enemies x.

This fatal event could not be concealed from

the army; the soldiers soon miffed their general,
whom they were accustomed to fee in every time

X Mem. de Bellay, so'. Guk. lib. xviii. p. 445, &c.

Oemv. de Brant. iv. 557, &c.

FS2 of

their loss, it animated them with new valour;
the name of Bourbon refounded along the line,
accompanied with the cry of blood and revenge.
The veterans who defended the walls were Loon
overpowered by numbers; the untrained body
of city recruits fled at the fight of danger, and
the enemy, with irresistible violence, rushed into
the town.

During the combat, Clement was employed

at the high altar of St. Peter's church in offering
up to Heaven unavailing prayers for viAory.
No sooner was he informed that his troops began
to give way, than he fled with precipitation;
and with an infatuation still more amazing than
any thing already mentioned, inflead of making
his efeape by the opposite gate, where there was
no enemy to oppose it, he shut himfeilf up, toge-
ther with thirteen cardinals, the foreign ambaf-
fadors, and many peifons of diftinaion, in the
caffle of St. Angelo, which, from his late mis-
fortune, he might have known to be an insecure
retreat. In his way from the Vatican to that
fortress, he saw his troops flying before an enemy
who pursued without giving quarter; he heard
the cries and lamentations of the Roman citizens,
and beheld the beginning of those calamities which
his own credulity and ill-condua had brought
upon his fubjeAs Y.

It is impossible to defEcribe, or even to imagine,

the misery and horror of that Lcene which fol-
lowed. Whatever a city taken by form can
dread from military rage, unrestrained by difci.

y Jov. Vit. Colon. 165. pline;

pline; whatever excesses the ferocity of the Ger-
mans, the avarice of the Spaniards, or the licen-
tioufnefs of the Italians could commit, these the
wretched .inhabitants were obliged to fuffer.
Churches, palaces, and the houses of private
persons, were plundered without diftinAion. No
- age, or charader, or sex, was exempt from injury.

Cardinals, nobles, priests, matrons, virgins, were
all the prey of soldiers, and at the mercy of men
deaf to the voice of humanity. Nor did these
outrages cease, as is usual in towns which are
carried by assault, when the first fury of the
storm was over; the Imperialists kept poffeffion
of Rome several months; and, during all that
time, the insolence and brutality of the soldiers
hardly abated. Their booty in ready money
alone amounted to a million of ducats; what
they raised by ransoms and exadions far exceeded
that fum. Rome, though taken several different
times by the northern nations who over-ran the
empire in the fifth and sixth centuries, was never
treated with so much cruelty by the barbarous
and heathen Huns, Vandals, or Goths, as now by
the bigotted fubjeas of a Catholic monarch z.

After Bourbon's death, the command of the

Imperial army devolved on Philibert de Chalons
prince of Orange,who with difficulty prevailed on
as many of his soldiers to desist from the pillage
as were necessary to invest the caffle of St. An-
gelo. Clement was immediately sensible of his

a Jov. Vit. Colon. a66. Guic. lib. xvii*. 440, &c.

Comment. de Capta Urbe Romne, ap. Scardium, i1. 23o.
Ulloa Vita deli Carlo V. p. Iao, &c. Giannone Hifi. of
Nap. 11. xxi C. 3. p. 507.

FS3 error

untenable fort. But as the Imperialists, scorn.
ing discipline, and intent only on plunder, pushed
the liege with little vigour, he did not despair of
holding out until the duke d'Urbino could come
to his relief. That general advanced at the head
of an army composed of Venetians, Florentines,
and Swiss, in the pay of France, of fufficient
fitrength to have delivered Clement from the
present danger. But d'Urbino, preferring the
indulgence of his hatred against the family of
Medici to tihe glory of delivering the capital of
Christendom, and the head of the church, pro.
nounced the enterprise to be too hazardous; and,
from an exquisite refinement is revenge, having
marched forward so far, that his army being seen
from the ramparts of St. Angelo, flattered the
pope with the profpe& of certain relief, he im-
mediately wheeled about and retired a. Cle-
ment, deprived of every resource, and reduced to
such extremity of famine as to feed on asses
.flelh b, was obliged to capitulate [June 6] on
such conditions as the conquerors were pleased
to preferibe. He agreed to pay four hundred
thousand ducats to the army; to surrender to
the emperor all the places of strength belonging
to the church; and, besides giving hostages, to
remain a prisoner himfeilf until the chief articles
were performed. He was committed to the
care of Alarcon, who, by his severe vigilance in
guarding Francis, had given full proof of his
being qualified for that office; and thus, by a
singular accident, the fame man had the custody

a Guic. i, rvLii.4go. b Jov. Vit. Colon. r67.

of

been made prisoners in Europe during feveral'

ages. The account of this extraordinary and uner-
peaed event was no less surprising than agreeable
to the emperor. But in order to conceal his
joy from his fubjeals, who were filled with hor-
ror at the success and crimes of their countrymen,
and to lessen the indignation of the reft of Eu-
rope, he declared that Rome had been assaulted
without any order from him. He wrote to all
the princes with whom he was in alliance, dif-
claiming his having had any knowledge of Bour-
bon's intention c. He put himself and court
into mourning; commanded the rejoicings which
had, been ordered for the birth of his son Philip
to be flopped; and employing an artifice no less
hypocritical than gross, he appointed prayers and
proceffions throughout all Spain for the recovery
of the pope's liberty, which, by an order to his
generals, he could have immediately granted
him d.

The good fortune of the house of Audria was

no less conspicuous in another part of Europe.
Solyman having invaded Hungary with an army
of three hundred thousand men, Lewis II. king
of that country and of Bohemia, a weak and
unexperienced prince, advanced raihly to meet'
him with a body of men which did not amount
to thirty thousand. With an imprudence itill
more unpardonable, he gave the command of'

c Rukcelli Lettere di Principt, U1. Z34.
d Sleid. 109. Sandov. i, Sazz Mautoc. HiRl Venety

lib. iii. z2.2

these

monk, archbishop of Golocza. This awkward
general, in the dress of his order, girt with its
cord, marched at the head of the troops; and,
hurried on by his own presumption, as well as
by the impetuosity of nobles who despised dan.
ger, but were impatient of long service, he
fought the fatal battle of Mohacz [August 29,
1526], in which the king, the flower of the
Hungarian nobility, and upwards of twenty
thousand men, fell the vidims of his folly and ill-
condua. Solyman, after his viaory, seized and
kept poffeffion of several towns of the greatest
{irength in the southern provinces of Hungary,
and, over-running the reft of the country, car-
ried near two hundred thousand persons jnto
captivity. As Lewis was the lass male of the
royal family of Jagellon, the archduke Ferdi-
nand claimed both his crowns. This claim was
founded on a double title; the one derived from
the ancient pretensions of the house of Austria
to both kingdoms; the other from the right of
his wife, the only sifter of the deceased monarch.
The feudal inflitutions, however, subsisted both
in Hungary and Bohemia in such vigour, and
the nobles poffeffed such extensive power, that
the crowns were still eleaive, and Ferdinand's
rights, if they had not been powerfully support-
ed, would have met with little regard. But his
own personal merit; the refpe& due to the bro-
ther of the greatest monarch in Christendom;
the neceflity of choosing a prince able to afford
his fubjeas some additional proteaion againit
the Turkish arms, which, as they had recently
felt their power, they greatly dreaded; toge."

ther

been married to the late king, overcame the pre-
judices which the Hungarians had conceived
againit the archduke as a foreigner; and though
a considerable party voted for the Vaywode of
Tranfilvania, at length secured Ferdinand the
throne of that kingdom. The dtates of Bohe-
mia imitated the example of their neighbour
kingdom; but in order to ascertain and secure
their own privileges, they obliged Ferdinand,
before his coronation, to subscribe a deed which
they termed a Reverse, declaring that he held
that crown not by any previous right, but by
their gratuitous and voluntary eleaion. By such
a vadl accession of territories, the hereditary pof-
feflion of which they secured in process of time
to their family, the princes of the house of Au-
nria attained that pre-eminence in power which
hath rendered them so formidable to the redt of
Germany e.

The dissensions between the pope and emperor

proved extremely favourable to the progress of
Lutheranifm. Charles, exasperated by Cle-
ment's condua, and fully employed in opposing
the league which he had formed againit him,
had little inclination, and less leisure, to take
any meafisres for suppressing the new opinions
in Germany. In a diet of the empire held at
Spires [June 25, i526], the dtate of religion
came to be considered; and all that the emperor
required of the princes was, that they would wait

e Steph. Broderick Procancelarii Hungar. Clades in Cam.

po Mohacz, ap. Scardium, ii. ziS. P. Barre Hitt. d'Alle-
magne, tom. viii. part i. p. 198.

patiently,

patiently, and without encouraging innovations,
for the meeting of a general council which he
had demanded of the pope. They, in return,
acknowledged the convocation of a council to
be the proper and regular step towards reforming
abuses in the church; but contended, that a na-
tional council held in Germany would be more
effeaual for that purpose than what he had pro.
posed. To his advice, concerning the difcou-
ragement of innovations, they paid so little re-
gard, that even during the meeting of the diet at
Spires, the divines who attended the eleaor of
Saxony and landgrave of Heffe-Caffel thither,
preached publicly, and adminiitered the sacra-
inents according to the rites of the reformed
church '. The emperor's own example embold-
ened the Germans to treat the papal authority
with little reverence. During the heat of his
resentment against Clement, he had publiihed a
long reply to an angry brief, which the pope
had intended as an apology for his own condua.
In this manifefo, the emperor, after having enu-
merated many initances of that pontiff's ingra.
titude, deceit, and ambition, all which he painted
in the strongest and most aggravated colours,
appealed from him to a general council. At the
fame time he wrote to the college of cardinals,
complaining of Clement's partiality and injustice;
and requiring them, if he refused or delayed to
call a council, to {hew their concern for the
peace of the Christian church, so shamefully ne-
gle&ed by its chief pastor, by summoning that
assembly m their own name 5. This manifesto,

I Sleid. 0o3.  Goldaft. Polit. Imper. p. 954.

little

Luther himself, was dispersed over Germany
zvith great industry, and being eagerly read by
.persons of every rank, did much more than coun-
terbalance the effe& of all Charles's declarations
against the new opinions.

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
