TIE / /

L,
liISTORY OF SCOTLAiND

bURING THE REIGNS OF
QOEEN MARY AND OF KING JAMES VI;

TILL
I-is Accession to the CROWN of ENGLAND,

' WIT U
A REVIEW of the SCOTTISH HISTORY

previous to that Period;

And an APPENDIX containing ORIGINAL PAPERS.

By WILLIAM ROBERI'SON, D.D.
PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OP EiDINBURCHI,

AND HISTORIOCRAPHER TO HIS MAJESTY

FOR SCOTLAND.
TI7E FITLEEA'T1I EDITION.

IN THREE VOLUMES,
With the AU'r 1OR's last Emendations and Additions.

VOL. Ill.

LONDON:

PRINTED FOR T. CADELL JUN. AND W. DAVIES
' (S1CCXSORS TO MRn CAZ.LL) IN T1HS STRAND,

I797.- /

,,J

# BOOK VIII.

T it r
IIISTOR2- OF SCOTLANI.,

BOOK VIIt.
590.] O N tile firt of May the king and

queen arrived at Leith, and wc;'e

icceived by their fuhbje''A vith every poffiile
x:prcffioll of joy. 'le folemninty of the q cn's
'pronatlon wa:; conducLed with great imag-i;[i'-
(,'ncee: but lb lov h}ad the. order of bhifiiL.p
fillen in the opii;onil of tlhe. ublic, that none of
!cmi were present ori that oocafion, and Mr.
Frhert Bruce, a prefl'ytemian. miniiler of great
iclputation, set the crown on'ler head, admini-
iic-red the sacred unEtion, and perforimed the
(nii:r customary cercliolles. ..

The zeal and success with wiic many of the

:le.rgy had contributed towards 'prclerivir'i, pe;:c
and order in thil kingdom during his albfcl;:e,
reconciled Janmes, in a great degrce, to thiir
p:rfons, and evern to tle prefbytcrian for.ll ut

o:,vernment. In prlefnce of an .;n,'ebhlv which
itact this year [Aug. 4], lie made high, enco-
'riiums on the difeipline ;s well as the rlEt ilic of
the church, proinifed to adhere inviolably to
both, and permitted the afleimbl. to frame such
acts as gradually abolified all the remains of
cpifcopal jurifdiEtion, and paved the way for
a full and. legal cftablifimnent oF the prefbyte.
ran model a

a Cald. iv. 204,
VOL. 111, 15'91'.

ll,)1'1 An cvenlt happleneld Ionl alft::, wili

nffodJcd the cl!ery nu iilall t :in:llp. A\-:!
Illop Ad;mflon, tihir ancient tol lonent,

i havl . :

falleln tlie- the king's di.plcai;le, Iavint;l bI e
di,'pr'ved of the revelsnuts , his (Ic in eclie:l-qincc
of tle a':1 of aInIcxalion, anid tbcini i':re'lt';
-viti ;iage. with poverty, and di'c;es, made tli
tmcnei.t i lifmlnffioll t the clergv, arnl idliverc' to,
the afienimbh a fornial recantation of all Lis ooi-
nlions conIiccringl chilrch government, whiclh \ai
been matter ' o offence t t he pref.vtcrians.
St;:rh a colifcflioll, from the molt learned petit!
of the cpiefopal order. was confidcred as a telii.
mionv vwhlich the fovc of trulth hlad :extorted from
an adverfarv 1'.

IMcanw\ ile, the kir<'s exceilve clemenlcy to-

1ards oftenders multir'iied crir.es of all kiind:.

aind encouraged flclh ats of violelce, as jlIought
lis g^overinmelnt minder contempt, andi prov\d fatal
t.o I Vof Lis ibijeds. Tile lhil'y of fiveral
yeari:. about tlis tune. is filled with accounts ot
the deadly quaircls between the grcat ftmilies,
uand of murders and afiafiiuations perpctrated in
the molt audacious manner, and with circunm-
flances of the utnmoll barharli. All the dcts's
in the feudal ariltocracy were now felt nmore
:sensibly, p)Ilhaps, thanl at an;y cvlter peritod in
tlhe hillor\- of Scotlanld, alld ulnilerfal licence alltl
anarchy prevailcd to a degree lcavrle confiltent
w\ith the prelervatio)n of fci,'ty : while tlhe king.
too gentle to punill, or too fceble to adt wiill
vigour, fidueved all tlhcf enormities to pass witl
il')pulity.

h ?rotfmw- 3RS. Cald. i»* »'»*

Eu

1 it thcnuigh jamcs connived at real crimes,

c
in !craft, whichl is common-!i an imaginary one,

,.:,sr\lcr d his attneltioi, and thlofe i ffplltc of it
flt ilhe whole w ciiht of lis althority. ManI
i'loin, nelithelr extremely old nor wrctchedly
; ,Ir. llhicl were uilnall lhcld to he certaiil in-
.; r,:.ions cf this crinie, hiut mailers of families,
i. , n s;m'on: ; of a decent rank, and in the middle

.iai' f life, were seizcd and tortured. Though
hil n ciniefliouns contained the most nbfurd and
i':crcdible circumftanccs, the king's prejudices,
!13tc of the clergy and of the people, conspired
:e Icliexvimg their extravagancies without hetita-
likn, and in punithing their persons without
.ecC'. Some of these unhappy sufferers accused
!,ilv.!well of having consulted them, in order
:, know the rimen of the king's death, and of
haviing enmloyed their art, to raise the flormi
wh;lil had ciidangcred the queen's life, and had
dctaincd James so long in Denmark. Upon this
evidence tlhat. noblcman was committed to prison.
Ilis turbulent and haughty spirit could neither
ilnlmnlit to the refilaint, nor brook fuchl an indig.
nity. -Iaving gained id keepers, he niade hin
icape, and impul til the acculiation to the arti-
sices of his enlley the chancellor, Iie affemnbled
hi: followers, ulnd'l' prelence of driving him from
Ille liu,'s eonncilh. Iyllc:. favomrcd )y some of
lI'i kinl'sl attlndantll he was :admiitted by a secret:
pI:l(la,^ un111k'r clo(ud of night, into the court of
(lie palace of I-lolyron)d-lhofi . He advanced
dio'pW tly tow.ilda the royal apartment, but hap-
pily befoi lic: enlitered, tile alarm was taken, and
llc doola 1nsit rl)ec. 271. Wlile he attempted
so. buril open lillne of them, and to fct fire to

AA s otiers,

to
t to tcisrapi=& he wkca~ -Q the ut-
.nstdisiu~-.cow iag hnz' bkt t the jr5zs
the night, zaa the pre-dphtzcy 'Whth wbiLl
* [j92. l He retthe tewzris the. m~Y =A~

kL-,- hia a

cVwa

a l n

, ts he th iR -,e biLa in&
kheI &A

uzi,

s e 2ng that _.i.r tis his

'

Telgsc, Ind 1' m hou iT' the e2a r of
Mtuina'r br.at it to theó r ant d Ck'w Mc-
ryhi-.![-M [:Feb. . "]. e' nMMidr CE z
"blt~n of lsch pmnii--g victuts 2nd rhe heir
of-~ t c~she t1EtPny Fh Cgof~C C~JCthe

iiz'J-~s-is:a!
;e ato;a Th *rtc~itizns ot~dhr-
* bury xe raei a tiked ae- a3M

wt- r~ j~-.aae9 b

yM uos ca-e o

Cee
rdpet hT kne~ g =iC & hLs i r atoap

Aiasuke Z--d idatenled 1aot Wtiith this Mit-
t strz pirit nt~Ed titas t it pr-adeat

to E~~si the city) U mixtia hLis r-eitnce

inx s£cc at s.

G w There HurAnd fur-

ieotet hi~rJ~t~dcji cn aed
thi a ~ig ohi's crme,- and the cbmorin
Of the e P!eo, Athe i-wear of the chunedlkir virw
-hot, e now c ouly ratet and the-
7Zia lnd- f, r the tZ f
to duksTe of

iitz+terh je ha iania.!, not

C.rC!Vp~ hiat x:m the flentence: hic such
an ~&kszs aa: lkn butk exm tedbu Y
~ni-- the iodit- of a pub~ic trialt

ci u

Ja~3s~3~

1~i~lJ~t

rmp
2 Ateu

P~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

r~"·js ~F~c~-ipa IP~S*k.

,~-r~i~-~ ~rd t -3~eo and thtnth tere hwk-
raio ths en& f thexy ree .

p-'- ~rh~
@t zh ~ wa~ well thnk3i. The

had bst ntc Of the. ulahic siiói 1w bit

!z1:~- ~Qtoy-, ct tht p Eh tct .
P3ti itU'a C re1

h tet in B the mn-rderers es
z3A J~e-E d Th~b.e dt hce -,tkemr hcm noie

hiJ5; ut wab'b, ~. edPu's to the neez.
SI= x tio waaipuPto tn 7 ex tvaun tt ' in the

~ Bithwefl si~U lurke in the

and~ h eina ieeretly fuppedi hy all

%, Ue~e ,' M' uland'3 , inlration war
3t'r- ME m to re-new 'his audadoils en'

si~ ~~s Eal i reafnas , was ex-
i~a4 i.F llinE tu, indala~ge ~te clergy in thei r

an~e~, ;ti~d nui e~ ~nte to ,a 1aw whereby

t~ a~s ost~ryx onE dJusd ti~e hundred~ and eighty-

but n=rciii ed op ,

ort he carried

h4 cOicnPl-,dsane lull and permiad tht
Fiuament to elbldh 't pteih.terian

eo' eru.-

ient, in is gener3 ~aslint, provinciln
Presslyberies, andi lMii fet'cns, o ith all the dif.
e Crust brxric es~of thesc idine and"
ia the waft ample danner. and

~iikiitjf-óf the n under the admi.

r~tsi~o Ok regent, hero whom they might
"ecxpecd tsh r!o& peial ravovr, Coula not

B3

obtain thle fanCion of law, in confirmation of
theilr mnl( of eclcfiaflieal government, No
rn cc w-;; ;vcr lcfs.difpofcd tihanJamnes to approve
a fyitCin, the republican genitus of which inspired
apaflton for litn rty extretnelyrepugnant to his cx-
altei notions of royal plerogative. Nor could any
alveiiion be Imo;e inveterate than his, to the aultere
and uncomipl inl chlaraA.er of the prefbytcrian
clergy inll t.l; atge ; who, more'nminent for zeal
tliaii ior policy, often contra.ifedl Ins opinions,
and cenflii-rd his co;nduit, with a frtedom equally
ofl'tnfiv to his do3cmatiflm :'s a theologial, and
to lis o, c a:s a 1ing. Hiis litnation, however,
olbligel hlim frequic:tly to conceal, or to diffcnml;,
his fenliments ; and as he often diiguited his sub-
ie:&s, vb indulging the popilli faction more thlan
they approved, he endeavoured to atone for this
by conceflions to the presbyterian clergy, more
liberal than le hin{ftlf would otherwise have
.:hcofen to i':ant eC

in this parliament, Bothwell and all lis adhe-

rents were attainted. But he soon made a new
;tttempt to fijze the king at Falkland; and
James, betrayed by some of his courtiers, and
feebly defended hy otThers, who wished well to
Bothwcll, as the chancellor's avowed enemy,
pwed his safety to the fidelity and vigilance ot
lir Robert Mclvil, and to tlhe irresolution of Both-
wcll's aftcilates .

Scarcely was this danger over, when the nation

was alarmed with the dilcovery of a new an4
more formidable conspiracy. George Ker, the
lord Newbattlc's brother, being seized as he was

1 Cald. iv. .485. zz. Syotfw. 3 S. £ Mclv.402.

.; * »'("4~~~~~~~cby

rc;:' to let fail fur Spain, many fufpicioeus
p';.t;,,' were found in lli: cullodv, and among
;silk':, tevcral b!alnks signcd by te ciarils of Angus,

!Ia;.tly-, ,ad Errol. By tlisi extraordinary pr.e

n;. :tion they hoped to (fcalpe any daircr of dif-

,' .-..r,.. ];iut Ier's rciol tion flrinking when

I: :! 1' V..a tltl;irCtneLd, he conllf:P..d that he was
(,:)lvcd lbv licCe nobilemen to carry on a ne-
'..-r.::i, \ \;Vitli the king of Spain ; that the
'i.,;ki l;' l'cl}ht'd *t' .itil tllcilr names vcere to be
''; id pl;o'.- Crichtin-i and lyrie; that thev wcrc
h:ii, 'Lcd t 1o offtr the faithflil f' rvice of the three
c.i;',. to tiha monl-arcli; a: ,d to lolicit hiim to land.
.,1 d\' hnt ii:s itroo>s, eitier in Galloway;v, or at
·'. o. oult i f Cir de, w\ita w\\l:ichi theyv underl ook,

,.:; ti'c irfi place, to citablilh the Roman catiholic

, :.gii-on in Scotland, and then to invade England
vi.nhi thec wholc forccs of the kingdoin. David
Iiratihanl of Fintrv, and liarclay of Ladyland,
\. hon he accuifed of be ing privy to the confpi-
,.:.v, were taken into cuitody, and confirmed
all t.he circumintalnccs of his couiftcion g.

1593.] Tlhe nation hihainlg been kept for some

;i;nc in continual terrol and agitation by so
many successive confpirceici:, the dilcovery of this
new danger completed the panic. All ranks of
men, as if the enemy had already ehen at their
gates, thought thlinifelves called upon to fitnd
'orth in defence of their countty. The miniftels
of Edinlbur1gh, without waiting for any warrant
,from the king, who happened at that time to
tW: absent fiom the capital, and without having

C Rkymr, xvi, x901

reccivc4

trIcccivode( a~i y ea n ni Lb on a.llc [lenibic ci a ccii-l

itg~~lc iev. liher io i

p ethe 111(1 of it:t o an t

comittiittedl hjm t th to

111 ; tllk'eXnnn

Ken, anti1( prepared it rillnhtldlteeiic Ito he Vhid
before the kipg1 colteenlitagl tue tlat e of tin(
mation, and the inecelsits of proseentinl tbc
confpilratos witl beciminii vi ronr·. jailcs,
tholigh jcaI~tis of

k CT ieEt r lulaii. on

u rh:

prerogtive, anid qkiiti~ed ii ii Lu it-, ( dA,wh
in~ll~;ltl ad i peCtitiknlling, fecmlled to pit-ft 1w to
hljii, foulld it ncdsat itlln tlilt tICiOce 01
the slI'ne no': only) to mdop t tu lat, lot '1
to d O

I l'aI*C Iut no v:

L;duat cli Iloin! 1 \Y il(inct

hirn to pairdon slich ii5 had 110en i'lll Gt of In odioii.
a trealtoT. 1i-c Isniimotttl tile Carl B ol 1ltiriiutls ant
V rrol t.o I tirl-trendl·er thi fen

m (ti to ll ice 1tJjmii. S*

Graldiail of Fintry, wh"lomn his piecis Or illtC~t
t be guilty tf treadin, lie cto~ntaandid to ht
p.tblicly dislteaded ad ;nitd cuing in to the noitl
;t thc hcrtl of nil arnly, the two atio, to
Gethecr wmith Angul!, wlt) had cleaped lont o
prisCO 1-C IC' l to tlit I i mointainll'. Ilk- placet
garriforns in tie calfitss which belonged to tihemn
compelled tl1 u r v udnd

I tl a i thii e Innorins in t'It
.Adjacent contitics, to 1htbl~it ihe a bond contail

dg, 1potefiioiis of their Wloyalty towards himn

wid oss their siinil adhserence to tile prottilan
faith ; anid the better to sc:euie tile traiiqnduliit'
ds that part otf the kingdom, cotillituted ill
carls of Athol avid Marifelial his licutenlant
litre h.

h Spot(w. 30Sm Cidd. iv. %I.

'Iain

H-I aving) 1'itithei t his c,\1dcitititt, JPnmMs e -
C1-·l('d to I IduholQ8h M h ], Where b1

Intor o ort Duil in. Ezbth
nodt 1

at tieO oVI s' oa a Coals)ii-nzy " In1Ch

I IC ~l~ii~rld s 110 let",oin'sbi to her uswn

t mrdoni11 thanlr tb Sscoi~and, ~CI epOaehl d JnnIC;
Ith h i, sHi I!cI'I n i'r.? anld ui~ i ,a

cd th.e psco1~a.ion 0.

clilpilrl, or tho dimi-ity of his owil .rowii, to
~~iiiiih this r~poaroi treaisll with rigun r; and if
I: could not. the

p d crsons, at Icaft to

' iilcate the c otatc:i, of ichl ctuacious rebcls.

bli0 wcLLkilledC(, iIowe\rI, tile 10100 cl. LthLL rc-

uillls, by interooding at ho {an a time inl be
halt of Botliwell, w\Yio, a..rit to hlo ttluaill
poliC)' ill i i, lactiois hit i~l~Ithe~t
Scottiflh liobic, (he had takcn undicr lher pro-
tedion. Jalmcs ribiolttely ic-ffcd to lilten) tu
anily interefijon ill favour of ones who hliad s
oftecl, and with in IsUch) omtutWcl, inlsulted buth.
Illinovcrtl1cnt and his pein. With regard to
I o pop iihi colipit atut:;, he d &chuid his reolutioen

it ho'li.b the bet ltcrn a to d) 1ho, hit , ncidtllrdt
a IiMiall in in1 of'01.1) fri I)1' 1/1 C 1 vIneh
lb 0. dill 1tt) i h Ipotl l of tili imllictl iI. ill wi icit

I'iilitllt app~l) i(, thlveWd 11o aliaii to gli ant.
.io , ol hoievevr, aild iptntyof' his owt
IktilIjO1ili olttl m

lin to call a p31uiatijiunt, ill

koldkic' to pal,'S n it aA (if attaillnder ;lgaifst thLe three
(.11±1. 111t bIehrc. it nict, Kci' imado his efeape
C'itt (of prisonl, and1(, on pretenlce that legal o-i-
d~nce Of their guilt, could not be produced,
)lI ii aug wzlt coile'h'ded ii4aitiit thein. Uicktti

himfclf was universally fuifplecd of having con-
trived this artilice, on purpofc to elude the rc-
q'uefls of the queen of England, and to difap-
point the wiflies of his own people ; and, there-
fore, in order to sooth the clergy, who exclaimed
loudly againfi his condu&, he gave way to the
passing of an as, which ordained such as oblti-
nately conterned the censures of the church to
be declared outlawsi.

. While the terror c:citec by the popifli con-
fpiracy poifflTcd the nation, the court had been
divided by two rival factions, which contended
for the chief direltion of affairs. At the head
of one was the chancellor, in whom the king
reposed entire confidence. For that very reason,
perhaps, he had fallen early under the quecn's
displeasure.. The duke of Lennox, the earl of
Athoi, lord Gchiltree, and all the name of
Stewart, (ipoufed her quarrel, and widened the
breach. .ame!s, fond no lets of domefiic tlan-
quiliity than of public peace, adlvifcd his lfvou-
rite to retire, for. fore time, in hopes that the
queen's refentmcnt would fubtide. But as lie
frood in need, il the lprcefint jilihtrce, of the
zfliftanrce of an able iiniiftcr, he had recalled him
to court. 'n order to prevenlt hlim from rccoveI-
ing his former power, tile Stewalt.s had recoOlrfe
to an cxpedictlit no lhis illegal than dclfpc rate.
-laving comblined with Bothweill , 1v. wa:; of the
fame name, they broullgt him back frcletly into
Scotlanld I[July' 24]; aini iifei!l, the gates of
tle pl;alce, introduced him into the royal apart-
1nent with a nuromrous train of armed followers,
$ Cad,. iv 343. Spottw. 393. Pail, J3 Jac, VI. c. 164.

Janmest;

annmes, though deserted by all his conrtiers, and
li)capatlle of refiltance, discovered more indigna-
!ioul thail fear; and reproaching then for their
:iclchery) called on the earl to finish his trea-
.,is, by l1pecing his sovereign to the heart.
itut Botlhwell fell on his knees, and imp!ored
'!:udon. The king was not in a condition to
refciue Iis demands. A few days after he signed.

:, capitulatio with tlis successful traitor, to
hvlloil he was really a prifolleri whereby, lhe
-'undt b(i'lilf to grant hilm a remilfion for all
'pals oitfliceL,:, and to procure the ratification of

il parliamlnt; and in the imean time to dif-

nils the cllalcelior- the m:;ller of Glanis, lord
--ome, and fir George Homne, fiom his cou)ncils
:1:1 p:rCfcnc. Botllivell, In his part) conlitidltd
:o remove fromn court, ruilOulh lie left there as
ii;l!y of his associates as le thought fuficicnt to
;revo:nt the return of the adverie fa&tion

3iut it was now no easy matter to keep tle

i.lnlg unde: the fame kind of bonlda;l,, to whichl
', haid lbeen often finljet during Iii.; mIlnority.

[le difctvcrcl so mlluch impatience to lihake off
fhi fetters, t:hat thole who had imnpofcd, duiit

not continue the ricilraint. They pci tmit'ed hint
to call a cUnvenltion of the nol!a.:l aSt Stirling, and
Io repair tltillher himfclf [Scpt.7]. All Ibtlhwell's
, i:.lies, and all v.who wer11 deiirous oi gaining
;!ti ]cll:;'s iavour by appearing to be so, obeyed
tile 1ft'lnllll)nl Thel prlOl.ounccd the insult of-
ir-ed to thle kigl's perfoin and author;ty to be
highl treafoui, and declared him absolved fiom
a:'.y obligation to obfi've conditions extorted by
ilrce, and which violated ib efnlntially his royal
prerogiativt. Jamens, Lowever, lill prof'ereld him

a pardon,

a pard6n, provirdd hle would tie Obr it as an ,;i(
ot Illercy, and pri-oii'tie to rlire o<tt of tie
'.kiligdoni. l'hele 'codito Bllo Bothwell rejectil
*with dikdai., anad b.11 lt.king hilt ell'oriee more ti
ai'nms, atteiiplted to surprise the; king ; but find.
ing himi on lins rguard, tied to the borders k.

Thle king's ardoulr agailll Bothlwell, colmparc,

wVitli his flowv and cVafive procccd(liiGs agaillfll thl'
pojilh lolds, occalioncid a gcnelranl dlil'gultll alnol
bis fublie.lis; and was imputed either to an ex.
ccflivt attaclihelnt to th e p'rfolls of tiofe. coil-
pilrator:;, or to a lerct partialitv towards tllher
opiniions; both which gave rife to no iinreaio-
ablkc ears. Tlie clrgy, as tlie immnediate t iar
diants of the protlclant religion, thought tle.i
selves bounld, in such a jun'tlll, to t;ke cxxira.
ordinary Ilcps for' its preservation. The provinl
cial fylnod of Fife happening to meet at that titm
[Sept. 25 ], a motion w\as made to excomllnn:
nicate all concerned in the late colifpilr'c a
.obftinatc and irrclamimablelL Ipapills; and thlontgl!
none of the contpirators rc:fided witltill t l Ie )onld:
o(f the fynod, or were ftilbji to its juilifditioii.
if;h wasv the zeal of the tieinCih(i,' tlat, ove,.
lookit:g this iregularit.y, thicy pronounced ;igv.inll!
.tileli the f rnre:ce oft xcotuoinlication, to whicl
tlle a't of I;il- ipadliincl: added newv terrors,
Lieft t:l.is lllould he ilmputed to a f'ew men, a,i
acco.untcd. the ci o a f;l all,. part ;of the churcli
deputies w\ere a.ppoin: ted to altiend thle adjacc
.iyvnods. and to.defire. ihcir approb;altio andl con
cu.rrel.:<: c :

Anl event lhppelned a few week.s after lwicl
i:l'rTcuf'tl ie Ipeoplle's fullfpicions of tlle king

' ' Calil iv, 326. S'oltfw. 39j.

,, A

A.s lie was marching on an eipedition agaili't the
lorderers, the three popifil earls comiing siid-
lenly into his prefefice [Odt. 17], offe'ed to
submit themselves to a legal trial; and James,
wvithout confimitting them to cuitody, appointed
a day fol thlat purpose. They ipepared to ap-

pear with a formidable train of their frie'ds and'
vaflials. But in the mean tinte flie clergy, to-

gether with many peers and baions, assembling'

;t Edinbu'rgh, remonltrated against the king's
extreme ind'ulg6ne withl great boldtiefs, and de-

manded ofhlirrit, according to th'e regular course
of jutlice, to coiriit to fute cuflody perfonr

chargCd ithi tile highelt ais of treason; who

could no: be brought to a legal trial, until they
&vele absolvcd' fi'om the cenfiues of thl church;
and to call a convention of efRates, to deliberate
colicerning the milthod of proceeding againff
them. At the faane time they offered to accom-
p;any hini in arms' to' the place of trial, left fuci'
iudacious and pbWerful cimilials fliould overaWe
justice, and diiate to the judges, to Whomn tley'
pretci.ded to' ftubMit. J'am'es, though eXiteemely
Dffei'ded, both with the irregularity of th'eir
proceedinigs, and' the pirfiunption ot their de-

mnands, found it expedient to put off the day of

irial, and to call a convention of eftateos, in ordcei
to quict tlhe fCals and jealoulies of the people.
By being huigiured: in this poiit, their 'fuipicidoh
began graduaii .,to abate, and tlih chu;i'cellotl
managedt the coii'vntiti so artfully, that lie 'im'.
Icf, togcrtheh' with a few othei' mniiibtrs,, werd
imipowvcred to pronounce a linal fceneicbe' tdnai

the conftpiratorsa After much delibration they

ordained [Not. z26, that' tlte'ttirc edarls and their
VOL. 1I1. c C ailbciat¢'

uarociates fltould be exempted from all further in.
quiry or prosecution, on account of tileir cotr-
refpondence with Spain ; that, before the firl day
of Feblruary, they (hould either fiibmit to the
church, and publicly renounce the errors of po-
pery, or remove out of tile kingdomL; that, be-
fore the firlt of January, they liould declare
which of these alternatives they would embrace;
that they (hould ;ind firety for their peaceable
demeanor for the future; and that if they failed
to signify their choice in due time, they fllould
lole the benetit of this act of abolition, and re,
main espofed to all the pains of law I.

1594.] By this lenitv towards the confpi'a-

tors, James incurred muich reproach, and gainedl
no advantage. Devoted to the popilh fupcrllition,
fubiiflive to all the diclatei of tieir pricits, and
lbuoyed up with hopes and pronifi:s of foreign
aid, the three earls refiuted to accept of the con-
ditions, and continued their trealonable corre-
fpondence with the court of Spain. A conven-
tion ofeftates [Jan. 18] pronounced them to have
forfeited the bencfit of the articles which wuee
offered; and the king required thlem, by pro.
clamation, to iilrnrnder theifelves to jultice.
The presence of the Englilh anbalfador contri-
buteld, ,perhaps, to the vigour of tbefle proceed-
ings. Elizabeth, ever attentive to Jamls'';
lOltions, and ilnputing his reludance to pun lli
the popifl lords to a lecret approbation of their
designs, had sent lord Zotiche to relprel nt, once
more, the danger to which he exposed hilmfclf,
'by this.falfe moderation; and to r!lquile him to

Cald', Iv.33t). .Sotfw. 397.

excrcifr

,-,rIte thiat rigioul which their crinmes, as well
k lc pir)lturi- f a'ltais, rendertd nccclairy.

loughll the tecps now taken by the king ilk'nccd

i ,imil:;,ini; on thalit head, yet Zouche, for-
E-titl ot Ilis charl.le ;is ;an alnb;]llnlor, entered
1,) pri.ate iicg0tl;tiltios mvth such of the Scot-
til i(l(lcs a:; ilifapprovcd of the king's nmcaflres,

id

,! lcld alillt ain open col fpondence witll
Bi,,;x>tll, vl;o, accoding to the ufial artifice
11' i;1ecolitents, pretended much solicitude for
)r .;,tlili the disorders of the comirionwcalth;
;.d cov'rc( d hlis own ambition with the specious
v;il of i' al againll those coullellors who
,.iir:;i:.cd the king from pursuing tlhe avowed
t;iinis; of the protcltant faith. Zonuche encou-
iagell him, iin the name of his niiiltrefs, to take
;irnls againllt his iovcreigin.

MIauilinwhlc, the king and the clergy were fill.

ed with mutual dillrutt of each other. They
.carc jealous, perhaps, to cxcefs, that James's
.:ll'ions ) leaned too muchl towards the popish
i:'tion ; lie futfpcct d them, without good rca-
Ion, of prompting Bothwell to rebellion, and
evel of flipplying himl with money for that put'-
pi)ot. Little iniligation, indeed, was wanting
to rouse fulch a turbulent spirit as Bothwell's to
:iy daring enterprise. He appeared suddenly
withiin a nlile of Edinburgh, at the head of four
hIlntredl horse. The pretecnces, by which Ihe
(lnleavoured to juitify this infurreclion, wvcre cx-
trenlcly popular; zeal for religioi, enlumty to
l)opery, concern for the king'a honour, and tso
lie lilberties of the nation. Jamnesa was totally
un'rovided for his own defence; he had no in-
fantry, and waa accompanied only with ;a few

c z Ihovic-

horfemcn of lord Home's train. In this extremity, r
he implored the aid of the citizens of Edlin.
burgh, and in order to encourage them to a, £
with zeal, he promised to proceed against the
popiih lords with the utmost rigour of law.
Animated by their miniilers, the citizens rin
cheerfully to their arms, and advanced, with the
king at their head, against Bothwell; but he,
nctwithftanding his success in putting to flight
lord Home, who had ralhly charged him with
a far inferior number of cavalry, retired to
Dalkeith without daring to attack the king. i
His followers abandoned him soon after, and
discouraged by so many successive difappoint.i
ments, could never afterwards be brought to
venture into the field. Hle betook himlelf to
his usual lurking-places in the north of England;
but Elizabeth, in compliance with the king's
remonstrances, obliged him to quit his retreat ".

No ftoncr was the king delivered from one dan.

ger, thau he was called to attend to another. The
popilh lords, in consequence of their negotiations
with Spain, received, in thie tring [April 3], a
supply of money from Philip. What bold de.
signs this might inlpire, it was no ealy matter
to conjeaure. From men under the dominion
of bigotry, and whom indulgence could not re-
claim, the molt desperate adions were to be
dreaded. The assembly of the church imimedi.
ately took the alarm ; remonltrated againit them
with more bitterness than ever ; and unanimously
ratified the sentence of excommunication pro.
nounced by the fynod of Fife. James hinfelf,

ma Spotfw. 403. Cald. iv. 359.

provoked

rovoked. by tltir oblfinacy and ingratitude, and
ifraid that his long forbearance would nut only
be grenerally difplcaing to his own fubjedts, but
ir:, rife to unfavourable suspicions among the
Englilh, exerted himself with unullual vigour.
IHe called a parliament [June 8]; laid before it
all the circumstances and aggravations of the
colufpiracy; and though there were but few
tnmmbers present, and ieveral of these connectedc
wvith the conspirators by blood or friendflhip, he
prevailed on them, by his influence and impor-
tunity, to pronounce the moll rigorous sentence
lwhich the law can inflid. They were declared
to be guilty of high treason, and their eitates
ni l(l honours forfeited. At the fame time,
ltatutes, more fevcre than ever, wecre enated
againit the profeflors of the popiih religion.

How to put this sentence in execution, was a

matter of great difficulty. Three powerful ba-
rons, cantoned in a part of the country of dif-
ficult access, surrounded with numerous vassals,
and ulpported by aid fiom a foreign prince,
were more than an overmatch for a Scottish
monarch. No intreaty could prevail on Eliza-
beth to advance the money, neceflary for defray.
;ig the expences of an expedition againlt them.
'lo attack them in person, with his own forces
alone, might have exposed James both to dift
,.nacc and to danger. He had recourse to the
,only expedient which remained in fitch a situa.
tion, for aiding the impotence of sovereign au-
thority; lie delegated his authority to the earl
us Argyll and lord Sorbes, the leaders of twp
clans at enmity with the conspirators; anil gave
themi a commission to invade their lauds, and to

c 3 seize

fei7;e the castles which belonged to them. Both.
well, notwithstanding all his high prctenfiQon of
zeal for the -ploteflant religion, having now
entered into a close confederacy with them, the
danger became every day more urgent. Argyll,
solicited by the king, and roused by the clergy,
took the field at the head of seven thousand menr
Huntly and Errol met him at Glenliviat, with an
army far inferior in number, but composed
chiefly of gentlemen of the low countries,
mounted on horseback, and who brought along
with them a train of field-pieces [O&. 3].
They encountered each other with all the fury
which hereditary enmity and ancient rivalfhip
add to undisciplined courage. But the High-
landers, disconcerted by the first discharge of the
cannon, to which they were little accuftomecd,
and unable to refiit the imprefion of cavalry,
were soon put to flight; and Argyil, a gallant
young man of eighteen, was carried by his
friends out of the field, weeping with indig-
nation at their disgrace, and calling on them
to stand, and to vindicate the honour of their
name ".

I595.] On the first intelligence of this defeat,

James, though obliged to pawn his jewels in
order to raise money °, aflembled a small body
of troops, and marched towards the North. He
was joined by the Irvines, Keiths, Leflys,
Forbeses, and other clans at enmity with Huntly
and' Errol, who having loft several of their prin-
cipal followers at Glenlivat, and others refluing
to bear arms against the king in pcrfon, were

I Cald. iv. 408. 0 gilclh, AMm. i. 186.

obligea
/

bliged to retire tp the mountains. James wafted
heir lands; put garrisons in some of their
afles; burnt others; and left the duke of
,enniox as his lieutenant in that part of the
ingdom, with a body of men sufficient to re-
irain them from gathering to any head there,
r from infesting tTie low country. Reduced at
aft to extreme diltrefs by the rigour of the
eafun, and the desertion of their followers,
they obtained the king's permission to go beyond
fras, and gave security that they should neither
retur without his licence, nor engage in any
nev intrigues against the protestant religion, or
the peace of the kingdom P.

By their exile, tranquillity was re-established

in the north of Scotland; and the firmness and
igour which James had displaycd in his last
roceedings againlt them, regained him, in a
grert degree, the confidence of his protestant

tubjefts. .But he funk in the fame proportion,
and for the fame xeafon, in the efteern of the
Romran catholics. They had asserted his
iuotlier's right to the crown of England with
so much warmth, that they could not, with any
decency, rejct his; and the indulgence with
whicih he aftected to treat the profcffors of the
|popilh religion inspired them with fuell hopes,
tliat they viewed his accession to the throne as no
ndefirrable event. But the rigour with which
t!h- king had lately pursued the conspirators, and
tile fcvere Itatutes against popery to which he
had given his consent, convinced'them now that
t!ilfc hopcs were vilionary; and they began to

P Spotfw. 404. Cald. 373, &c

lookl

look about in quest of some new fuccefl;il,
w-hose rights they might oppose to his. T'1:
papilfs who relided in England turned their ev,
towards the earl of Effex, whose generous nlinll,
though firmly established in the protestant faith,
abhorred the severities inflited in that age on
account of religious opinions. Those of tlhc
fame sect, who were in exile, formed a bold r
fchicme, and one more suitable to their fituatio.),
They advanced the claim of the infanta of Spain;
and Parsons the Jefnlit publifled a book,. i
which, by falfc quotations fiom hittory, by fa.
bulous genealogies, and absurd arguments, in.
termingled with bitter invedives agairlft the king
of Scots, lie endeavoured to prove the infantal:
title to the Englifl crown to be preferable to lis,
Philip, though involved already in a war boih
with France and Englald, and scarce able to dc.
fend the remains of the Burgundian provincce
against the Dutch commonwealth, eagerly
grasped at this airy projeLt. The dread of ,1
Spanifil pretender to tle crown, and the oppo.
fition which the papists began to form againf
the king's fucceflion, contributed not a little tn
remove the prejudices of the protestants, and to
prepare the way for that event.

Bothwell, whlofe name has been so often men.

tioned as the disturber of the king's tranquillity,
and of the peace of the kingdom, was now in a
wretched condition. Abandoned by tlhe qucle
of England, on account of his confederacy with
the popish lords ; excommunicated bythe church
for the fane reason ; and deserted, in his diftrcfs,
by his own followers; lie was obliged to fly foi
safety to France, and thence to Spain and Italy,

wlhe r.e

-ierc, after renouncing the plotcfant £faitl, lie
d mlany years an obfcur-c and indigent life, le-
auk.ible oilly for a low alnd infamous debauchery.

i'h king, though extremclv ready to sacrifice
ih ii rongeit refentinent to the flightelt ack.now,
cgilnents, could never be foftcned by his fib-
iilion, nor be induced to liftcn to any ilntrceiCion1
i his behalf q.
Tilis year the king loft chancellor Maitland, an
hle inillier, on whom he had longt devolved tile
hlole weight of public affairs. As James loved
in while alive, he wrote, in honour of his me-
no;, a copy of verses, which, when compared
ith the coipolitions of that age, are far fron)
,i in inelegantt r

Soon after his death, a considerable change
vas made in the adminiitration, At that time,
Ie antulla charges of government far exceeded
i.: king's revenues. The queen was fond of
xpeniive amusements. James hinmfelf vwas
ranger to ceconomy. Tt became necessary, for
1! there reasons, to levy the public revenues withi
reater order and rigour, and to huflband themi
vith more care. This important trutl was corn-
uitted to eight gentlemen of the law', vlho,
rin ther number, were called O7awviianl.. Thei
o\wqrs vested in them were ample, and alinot
lnlilitcd. The king bound himfAlf neither t?
(dd to their number, nor to supply any vacapcy
Ilat might happen, without theLr confenllt: anl

'1 Winw. Mrm. i. Spotfw. 4To. r Spotfw. 411.
e Alexander Seaton prefidert of the Seflion, Walter Stew-
rr commendator of Blantyre lord privy frnl, David Carnegy,
ol l.iindlhay, James Elphingflone, Thomas Hamilton, John
keic clerk regiltcr, and Peter Young clemofynar.

knowing

knowing the facility of his own temper, agreed
that no alienation of his revenue, no grant of a
pension, or order on the treafinry, flould be held
valid, unless it were ratified by the subscription
of five of the cotrmilfioners; all their ads and
decisions were declared to be of equal force with
the fentece of judges in civil courts; and ii
consequence of them, and without any other
warrant, any person might be arrested, or their
goods seized. Such extensive jurifdidtion, toge.
ther with the absolute disposal of the public mo.
ney, drew the whole executive part of govcrnl
ment into their hands. United among thenm
selves, they gradually undermined the reft of the
king's ministers, and seized on every lucrative o'
honourable office. [1596] The ancient servants
of the crown repined at being obliged to
quit their stations to new men. The favourites
and young courtiers murmured at feeing the
king's liberality stinted by their prescriptions,
And the clergy exclaimed against some of them
as known apollates to popery, and fufpeAed
others of secretly favouring it. They retained
their power, however, notwithstanding this ge-
neral combination againit them ; and they owed
it entirely to the order and cconomy which they
introduced into the administration of the financ,
by which the necefltry expcnces of government
were more ealily defrayed than in any other perio(l
of the king's reign t.

The rumour of va{l preparations which Philip

was said to be carrying on at this time, filled blntli
En glatd and Scotland with the dread of a new

t SPOt(W. 413. 435.

iimivioil.

inlafion. James took proper mearures for the
defence of his kingdom. But these did not
satisfy the zeal of the clergy, whose suspicions
of the king's sincerity began to revive; and as
be had permitted the wives of the banilhed peers
to levy the rents of their ecatcs, and to live in
tllhir houses, they charged him with rendering
the aft of forfeiture ineffectual, by supporting
t.ie avowed enemies of the protetlant faith The
alTmnlbly of the church took under confiderationl
tlie slate of the kingdonm March 24], and having
:i)piinted a day of public falling, tley solemnly
renewed the convenant by which the nation was
nound to adhere to the protestant faith, and to
{),fend it againflt all aggreflors. A committee,
conlitinig of the mofl eminent clergymen, and
of many barons and gentlemen of dillinftion,
v:aitcd on the king, and ladd before him a plan
for thie security of the kingdom, and the pre-
servation of religion. <. They urged him to ap.
l.ropriate the .etates of the banished lords as a
':;iil for the inaiitenance of soldiers; to take the
iltl ictl precautions for preventing the return of
i!cli turbulent fubje'ts into the country ; and to
puifluc all who were lfufptecied of bcing their ad-
I.ten-its itill the utinoit rigour.

Ntlhing could be more repugnant to the

kli;'s fchllnes, or more difagiceable to his in-
dli;.litonl, than thiee propolitiols. Averse,
till.oigh his whiole life, to any course where he
Vtxpticd( oppoition or danger; and fond of at-
t;liiiiiig his ends with the chlaiatder of mnodera-
tioon, and by tlhe arts of policy, le obfcrved with
ollncClIl tle Iprejudices againll him which were
growing anmong tlhe Roman catholics, and re.

solved

fl6ved to make some atonement for that part cf
his condilct which had drawn upon him her in-
dignation. Elizabetlh was now well advanced
in years; her life had lately been in danger; it'
dny popi(h competitor (hould arise to dispute his
ri'ht of fucceflion, a faction so powerful as that
oi the banillied lords might be extremely for-
midable ; and any dhvilion among his own filli.
jCits might prove fatal at a jundure which would
requiire thilr united and most vigorous efforts.
Initcad, therefore, of the additional severitics
which thle afi'mlbly proposcd, James had thoughtl
of mitigating the pulitlincnt which they had
allcady Iilfl'clcd. \nd as they were surroundid,
during their rcfidcnce in ioreign parts, by Philip's
cIniflaries; as resentment :night dispose them to
liflen more favourably than ever to their fug-
geftions; as despair miig-ht drive them to still
,i:orc atrocious aflons ; Ihe rvefolved to recall thenm,
under ccrtain conditions, into th ir native coin-
trv. Elourlaged by th'fe fintiments of tlhe
kill in thleir favour, of which they did not want
inteli:gence, and wearied already of the depend-
eut alnd anxious life of exiles, they ventured to
vrtn:rn secretly into Scotland. Soon after, they
prtffnted a petition to' the king, begging his
pennififon to reside at their own houics, and
,f'il er-g to give security for their peaceable and
duttiful behtaviour. James called a convention of
rtlatcs to deliberate on a matter of such im-
portance, and by their advice he granted tilh
petition.

The members of a committee, appointed lb

the last general aflmbty, as soon as they were
informed of tils, met at Edinburgh, and with

rg, a all

11 tle precipitancy of fear, and of zeal, took
*uch reollutions as they thought nece'rfary so the
afcty of the kingdom. They wrote circulat
ctters to all the prelbyteries in Scotlanld; they
.varned them of the approaching danger ; they
:xyllotcie them to itir tp th'. It eople to the de.
-nice of tlhir jtlt rights ; they commandedl l them
!o publifl,, in .ill their pulpits, the a;i. excommtnu
I;iating- the Ipopith lords; and enoinied them to
l.lv all thol \\lho w iere fifpe&ed of favouring
ropciry underl tile frmc cenflie Lvb a fuminary
,intcsce, c and without obfcrving the usual for-
rialitics of trial. As the danger ficmed too
prefling to wait for the itated ,meetings of the
;u(dicatories <f the church, they made choice of
ihe mol emilent c lelrgcw:ymenn ii, dificrent corllneu
ct the kiingdoim, appointed them to rcfide con-
l:;;'tlv at ldinburgh, and to meet every day with
tlii, milifiers of that city, lnder the inen of the
S:ar.;dir Covneli of the Chlluch, and vetled in tlis;
Il.d(y the fupremil; authority, by enjoiliilg it, in
ilitration of the ancient Roil:il form'i, to take care
iit!. the churclh Ihould reccive no detriment.

Th'lle pruccedings, no leis uiiconllitiutiontnl
tih.n upiirecedcdltcd, were ma inll siencroacl ments

tah tlh royal prerogative, and hold Reps towards

ol1lel rebellion. The king's condtud, however,
jallilicd in runic degree fucls excfle.s. His lelity
t,)wnard the papilts, so reji)lgnint to th le piinci]plea
of that age ; his pardoling tile confpiralors, not-
wtithlt;ltndli r epented promises to the contrry ;
tlhe rePpet.C he paid to lady luntly, wvllo was
attached to the Rominfi religion tno left thanl
h:er husband; his committing, thec care of his

vn.1. 11. 1) daughter,

daughter. the prilccfs Elizabcth, to lady L.-
vingitoni, who was inlfeted with the falme filper.
ititon; the contempt with which lie talked, on
all occasions, both of the lharacter of minilters,
and of their funtlion ; were cireunilances which
might have filled minds, not prone by nature t,
jcaloufy, with some tufpicions ; and might have
precipitated into rath councils those who were
far removed tiom intemperate zeal. But, how.
ever powerful the motives might be which ili-
1luenced the clergy, or however laudable the cml
they had in view, they conlduqed their neafure
with no addrcfs, and even with little prudence.
James discovered a firong inclination to avoid a
rupture with the church, and, jealous as he was
of his prerogative, would willingly have nma(l
many conceflions for thle lake of peace. By lis
commanad, lome of the privy counsellors had an
interview with the nmo-e moderate among the
cleigv, and inquired \whcther l-luntly an I his
anf)ciatcs might not, upon making proper ac-
knowledgments, be again received into the bofoll
of the church, and be exempted from any fur-.
ther pInilhmient on account of their past apoltacy
and treasons. They replied, that though the
gate of mercy itood always open for thlole who
Iepcnted and returned, yet as the'e noblemen
liad been guilty of idolatry, a crime del'rviig
death both by the law of God and of man, thl
civil magistrate could not legally grant them
a pardon ; and even thoughl the church lhould
absolve them, it was hisi duty to inili&t piinilh.
nment upon. them. This inlexibility in those
whlo werc reckoned the moll compliant ol

tin

:he order, filled the king wit h indignation, xwhicht
tic inl.prmlence and ol !inacy ci a private cckr
g'yT:.,,ui hcightened into ag^e.

Mr. ); Bvid Black, miniiler of St. Andrew's,

dllionr-ini in one of hii w rmonis. acc,(rdinir to
c nllm, con'clrnin' \the state of the nation, as-
!irm!(ld 1hat the kiilg had pernittcd the popifli
o01(:; l o retlurn into Scot tiud, and by that atiion
i.li (liico'cred t11 treachery of his own heart;
iat all kinhi. were the devil's children; thlat
Satan had now the guidance of the court; that
the queen of lEngland was an atheit ; th;lt the
idgcs were nifcrelants and bribers ; the nobility
c!rol irants ;and men of no religion ; and in his

'rai' - for the queen he used thele words, we

ulil t pray for her for ffathiona-fake, blt we have
ino cauifc, Iel will never do us good. James
c<lmlnnn idcd him to he summoned before the
Ii'vy council rNov. lo], to anfwcr for such
i1ditiols exlprefions; and the clergy, instead of
.il>;iadoniiing him to the punilllnent which filch a
picltlantt and criminal attack on his fliperiors
deft'vced, were so inpttident as to efpotf his
coi(i,, as if it had been the common one of tlie
vhIiol, or'der. The controversy concerling the
itimnunniti.s of the pulpit, andl the rights of the
cllergy to tertify again(t vic's of every kind, which

thad hecn agitated in one thousand live hundred
.Intl cighty-fti), was now revived. It was nre-
t.end(etl tha;, with retgrd to their faered fundton,
miniltcris Awere filbjea to the church alone ; that
it hclonged only to their eekellilticnl fui)erioir
to jutdge ol' tlie truth'or fialfelhood of' docrines
delivered in the pulpit; that if, upon any pretence

n z whatever,

w\hatever, the king ufiurped tlis julifdiCtion, hie-
clurch would, from that moment, fink under
servitude to the civil in.igiftat.e that, inltcad
of reproving vice with that hone{lt boldnflis whlih
had often becn of advantage to individuals, anl
fallutary to the kingdom, the clergy would lcarn
to flatter the paflipns of the prince, atnd to con.
live at tlie vices of others; that the king's eager-
nels to punilli the indifretion of a protettant
mnitiler, whil le ewas so ready to pardon the
crimes of popiih conflpiators, called on them
to fLand upon their guartd, and that now was the
time to contend for their privileges, and to pro
vent any encroachment on those rigllts, of whicii
the church had been in pofidtlion ever lilce the
reformation. Inflienced by thefc considerations,
the council of the churcl enjoined Black to de-
cline the jurilfidtion of the privy council. Prowu
of such all opportunity to display his zeal, lie
prselncted a paper to tlhat purpofc, and with the
utionot firmniefs restsed to plead, or to anifwvr
the queftious which were put to him. in order
9o add gr:eatcr ;weight to these proceedings, the
council of the church tranfinitted the tIdedinaturs
to all the presbyterics throughout the kingdom,
and cnjolned every minitter to hlt bficribe it in telti
nmony of his approbation.

James defended Jhis rightsl with no less vigour

than they were attacked. Sensible of the con-
tempt under whiich his authority muill fill, if the
clergy Ihould le pernitted publicly, and with
ilppiunity, to calumniate his nijililtcrs, and eveii
to censure himin ls; and knowilng, by former ex-
amples, wvhat unequal reparation for fich of-
fences he plight Vxpet from tlicjudicatories of

the

he cllrcih, he urged on the inquiry into Blick's
sondt, aund illbed a proclamation, commanding
hr members of the council of tlie church to leave

liditblln gh, anld to return to their Owvn parilies.
rl.- k, in fiead of fiulmitting, renewed his iciit-
irt','; and the members of the council, in de-
Iinc of the proclamation, declared, that as they
net by the authority of the church, obedience
o it was a duty flill more lacred than that which
thy owed to the king himself. 'The privy
couacil, not witllhanding Black's refusing to

il.,i, proceeded inl the trial and, after a iolcmn
ItiilIny, proi.ounecd himn guiltv of the crimles of
v iich llc hiac been accited ; but referred it to
iic kinl to appoint what punilhment he fllould
utir, r.

Meanwhile, many endeavours were used to
)inng matters to accomm odation. Alnmoft every
ii:; produced some new scheme of reconcilement;

hir; ilhough the king's fickleness, the olllintacy

ift the clergy, or the intrigues of the courtiers,
licy all proved inefi'cc&al. Both parties appealed
to the people, and hy reciprocal and exaggerated
aicc. nitiolns endeavoured to render eachl other
(dionis. Insolence, sedition, treason, were the
crimes with which James charged the clergy ;
lwhile lhey made the pulpits rleound with com-
ll;idts of his exceflive lenity towards papists, ;nd
of the Io kss, excellive rigour with whliclh le op-
ilefl'id the cltablifled cllurlch. Exasperated by
iltiir hold itvectiives, lie, at lafi, fenteniccd Black
to ictire Lteyond the river Spey, and to reside
thelre dnurilg his pleasure ; a lnd once mnore com-
ilandilng tile inie)eris of the fliading council to
i(p);art from Edinburgh, lhe required all the

u 3 ministers

mninilers in the kingdou. to fubfcrihc a bod!,
obliging thlcnrfClves to ftubmit, in the famle man.
ner as other fubjcls, to the jurifdilion of tlc
civil Courts iil maItters of a civil nature.

'This decisive mIIeafu' excited all the violci!;

pafiions which potl'Cls dlfapploinlied fatiions: alu j
deeds no less violent iilmtediately followed. 'l'l ,
mull be imputed in part. to the artificcs of fonm
courtiers, whl c\lexl:ed to reCal advantage froli
the calamities of their country, or who hoped
to Icffn the authority of tlhe Otavians, by .;.
gaging them in holtilties with the chiurh. ()l
one hand, they infoirmed the king that the ciii-
zens of Edinbml'gh were under arlrs every niglii,
and had planted a ltlr'ing guard routid the hourl
of their miniflers. Jamres, in ordcr to put a flop
to this iilmaginary insult on llis govtlrnenlt, iflcil
a proclamlation, commalding twent y-four of tle
principal citizensi to leave the town twithiln li
hours. On the other hand, they wrote to til
miniitrs,, adviling them to look to their owMn
fafcty, as 1untly had been feelrcily admitted to
an intcrvicw with the king, and had heen t';:
autholr of the ccvec )proclaination againll tlhe
citizens of Edinburgh u. They doubted no mnolt
tilc truth of this intelligence, than the king lihd
done of that \whlich he reccived, and fell ai
blindly into the fiiare. The letter came to their

1i Though matters were indlulrioufly aggrvated by pr

sons who widlid ih.thlr parties to purfuc violit nmr.rfreu,
neither of thclc irports w.s altogether dclitute ol' £oundat Oc.
As their minifiers \erce (ppoled to be in danger, fonme o l;u
ltnrc icalous citizcn~ haId detc nined to defend them by lorcz
ot'arms. Iirch. Meri. ii. 5so. Itintlyuhnll brcnprlvatcie
lI Ejintnlrgh, whcre he hla. an interview, if not with t!h
kin,, t lelt with kme of his iiniilteta. Uircll. Ibid. 13o.

lha...!

andlis jint as one of their number was going to

unont the pulpit. They rvfolved that lie should

eqi;lint the people of their danger [Dec. 171
nd lhe painted it with all the strong colours which
ien naturally employ in defcribiug -lny dreadfiu
i;d initlnt calamity. When the fernmin was,
vtir, he dtelrvd the nobles and gentlemen to
fii ',bhle in the Litle Cir chJ. The whole mull
s:tinIe, terrified at what they had heard,
<:cdcd :Ihithler; they promised and vowed to
;ilindi hy the clergy ; they drew up a petition to
ti- kiqn craving the redrcfs of thllfe grievances
of which 1he church complained, and befheehing;
iltil to delivcr them ftiom all futulre apprehenfinlls
of d hnge:r, hy removing fueh of his counifellols as
wV-tic k'1oxwn to be enemies of the protclttint re-
Ig"io'n>. Two peers, two gentlemen, two bur-

I-cfks, and two minitlers, were appointed to prc-

ir:nt it. The king happened to be in the great
hlll of tie 'olbooth, wlere the court of fTffion

i, fillting. The manner in which the petition
is dcliver'd, as well as its cointelts, offended

1li l. lie gave ;an hnugghly reply ; the peti-
*i ;..'fs inltilftd with wvarmlth ; and a promnilcuous
nmultitiode prefling into the room1, Jaines retircd
al,)ril)tly into another apartment, and conmmianded
the gates to be flint behind him. The dcputies
rctinrncd lo the multitude, who were ltill after-
bled, and to whom a minister had been reading.,
in tlhcir ahfence, the itory of Hamnan. Wlhen
tlhcv replorted that the king had refitfed to lifien
to their petitions, the chinuch was filled in a mo.
nient with noise, tlreatenings, .exeerttions, and
all the oultrage and coluifion of a popularl tu-
nult. Some calltd for their arms,; fime to bring

out

out the wicked Haman ; otlers cri::d, The frord
of the Lord and of Gideon ; and, rushing ou:
with the most furious impetuofitv, furrotnded
the Tolbooth, threatening the king himself, and
demanding forrn' of his counsellors, whom they
named, that they might tear them in piece..
The magistrates of the cit', partly by authority,
partly by force, endtavoured to quell the tumult;
the king attempted to sooth the malecotntents,
by promising to receive their petitions, when
presented in a rcg'ar mi.nriner; the minilters,
fenfiblc of their own raninef; in kindling such a
flame, seconded both ; and the rage of the po-
pulace fubflding as suddenly as it had arisen, they
all d:perfed, and the kinig returned to the pa-
lace; happy in having escaped from an infurreec-
tion, which, though the :itlantaneous and un-
concerted fefect of popular fury, had exposed
his life to imminent danger, and was confidered
by him as an unpardonable afront to his au-
thority .

As soon as he retired, the leaders of the male-

contents afiembled, in order to prepare their
petition. The pu!nifhmunt of the popilh lords;
the removal of those coinfellors who were sus-
peted of favouring their persons or opinions;
the repeal of all the late ats of council, fuib'vrfive
of the authority of the church ; together wlith
an aft approving the proceedings of the i1andil;g
council; were the chief of their demanlds. But
the king's indignation was ltill so high, that the
deputies chofcn for this plurpofe tlurtl not ven-
ture that night to prferint requelts u hich could
: Spotfw. 417, ;c. Cald. v. 54,&c. Birch, Mcm. ii. 35.

nelt

nt fail of kindling his rage anew. Before next
r.ornirng, James, with all his attendants, with-
crew to Linlithgow; the session, and other
c;urts of juilice, were required to leave a city
v:.lere it was no longer confilent either with
their safety or their dignity to remain; and the
noblemen and barons were commanded to return
to their own houses, and not to reassemble with-
lout the king's permission. The vigour with
vlich the king a&ed, itnuck a damp upon the
spirits of his adversaries. The citizens, sensible
l:ow much they would susser by his ablencc, and
.he removal of the courts of j.utice, repented
.h
; dy of their condutL The ministers alone
r Ilved to maintain the contest. They endea-

:i.:-c lto prevent the nobles from difperling;

they iniaamed the people by violent invetaive.s
zaaioll the king; they laboured to procure sub-
i:-ptions to an association for their mutual
derence; and conscious what lutre and power
the jun&ion of some of the greater nobles would
add to their cause, the minfiers of Edinburgh
..rote to lord Hamilton, that the people, moved
r'v the word of God, and provoked by the in.
jiries offered to the church, had taken arms;
tnat many of the nobles had determined to pro,
to&C the protestant religion, which owed its
ecitablifhment to the piety and valour of their
anceltors; that they wanted only a leader to

l.':ite them, and to inspire them with vigour;
that his zeal for the good caufc, no less than his
nulIt. birth, entitledhim to that honour: they
conjured him, therefore, not to d;sappoint theif
hii.es and wishes, nor to refuie the suffering
risurch that -aid which ihe so much needed.

Lord

1,ord HaIuillon, ililcad of cnlplying with :1t
leiire, carried the letter dlilctIl to tihe ki .
whom this new insult inlitatcd lo furih a delt'...
tillt hIc commlandld lhe it : Slill;t cs of ]'diiln'i;l--i:
ilaintlrI y to feizc their lliliiitcrs , as manitfell '1,
cendiarics, and e icoillr;b'rls of rebellion. 'T,
magistrates, in orditl to reglain the 1-ing's .tavolr,
were preparing to obey ; and the miiile, ^1l1
f;l\v no other ho)pe of tafety, fled towards .En.
land y,

1597.] T'his unrfuccfsfnl inlilrlecCionl, inlt cad

of overturnilln, cftalhliihcd the king's ;aulthoiiy.
Tliofe concclrncd iki it werC l conllout ded and diT-
terfed. 1''le relt of Jamcs's ifllijts, in o'-rl
to avoid ftlsi)icion, or to gain Ihis favour, cc!.-
tended who hllould be nolR forwlard to I(CCIl!
his venge-ance. A conventioll of cftats hciii
called [Jan.3], pronlounced thl e late infullTCeClii
to be high treason; ordained every mniillerto fuid.
scribe a declaration of his fubmiiion to the king's
jurifdid'ion, in all matters civil and t'iniina];
emnpowered magistrates to conmiiit, initantlv, in
priflon, anli minister, who, in hlis fermons,i flitlll
utter any indecent recfllEaiot oti tlie king's con-
duc ; prolibitld acnv eccTefialtical jditc:itory ;ta
meet without the kiilg's licetice l Conirmmnde
that no person rflioul be eleSted a InitgilR:ite oi
Edinblih.l fio tie fulture, wtithut thle ikin;'.
approbation; and that,' ill th' e mean time, tlr

rrefcnt magillratcs 'ho:uld Cdthcr 'dlil'ibver ;Iill
nsniil condigln ptllinulhllic nt on lite authdfs of tl':
late ti~nult, or thie Cltt ittelif lhoild btteijetrled
to all 'the lpinhati's of tihat trenTifl; le aftihn 7.

F Srofrw,.45S. Cald. v.
147.

Armnrld

ruincdl with the authority of those decreeg,

nrmce* rcfolved to crullh entirely tire mutinous
pit it of hiis fubjeds. As lre clergy had, hither.
to. derived tllhei chicf credit and i lrclngll from
the I.avour and zeal of t.le citizens ofl 'dlinblrgl,
i's firll care was to humible them. ThoughI the
is;ig;tlraltc; finminted to him in the Imiolt aibjcl9t
ti, is ; though they viridicalcd tilhclli:lvcs, and
hlicir fellow-. citizcns, firom tile Iolt dillant in-
t'ntlion of violatinRg his royal person or authority;
lziil, g after the t icitcl si rulltilly, no citrctl-
fl ill:cs llati could fix oil thim t.he furfpicinl of
pLcinecditated rtbcllio l;had Ibecn dilcovered;
lionIglh many of tle noblelc, andt fulie of the
-ilr)'y as fRill relainld any degrec of favour, in-
i'lr((cdcd in their bLehalf; neither ackowvlcdg-
[;its, n110 intclrceflionls, were of tlle Ical. a;ail .
'tIle king conlinued inexorable, thie city was
leclared tcrllave forfeited it.s; Iivilcrc's as a col-
tl;ltio)n Fchb. 28], and to be liable o all thle pe-
uh lics of treafoln. Thle capital of tlhe kingldom,
lil.nived of Inagilllrates, delertcd )y its inill: crs,
alii(lldonlid by the courts ol juli.ice, and pro-
frribied by the king, rmlainled il defolatiol aund
del pair. The courtiers even thlreatened to rali
tile city to the fIcul.darioon, ;and to erc t a pillar
v.l'lec it flood, as an cverlatliminr Ilmllutmcnt of
ill' lrilg's vcngcance, and of tlie guilt of its iin-
habit.Ilits. At lalt, in coIIplianeIe with Eliza-
bel il, who ilterpufed in t heir favour [Marcll 21 ],
and moved lby the contiiual solicitations of teic
noblcs, Jamne alfolvcd Ille citizens frorn tle pc..
3iiltie. of law, blbt at the fame time' le dlripped

Ceid, , v. 1.9.

them

them of their most important privileges; tll
were neither allowed to cleft their own maLi.
trates nor their own minitRers many nevw li;r.
dens were ilnpofed on them ; and a conlidcral)lc
fulm of money was exalted by way of peacc.
Offerinlg h.

James was, meanwhile, equally assiduous, a!d

no less fucceffiul, in circumscribing the jurif.
diftion of the church. Experience had difcoverri
that to attempt this, by a6ts of parliament, azl
fenternces of privy council, was both ineffe&tual
and odious. He had recoutfe now to an expe.
dient more artful, and better calculated for ol.
taining his end. The ecclefiafticaljudicatoriLt
were composed of many members; the majoriit
of the clergy were extremely indigent, and u:
provided of legal stipends; the ministers iii the
neighbourhood of Edinburgh, notwithitanding
the parity eltablifhed by the presbyterian govern.
ment, had assumed a leading in the church, which
filled their brethren with envy; every numerois
body of men is susceptible of sudden and'ltrollg
impreflions, and liable to be influenced, corrupt.
ed, or overawed. Induced by these conider.
ations, James thought it poflible to gain the
clergy, whom he had in vain attempted to subdue.
Proper agents were set to work all over the
kingdom; promises, flattery, and threats wvca
employed ; the usurpations of the brethren ncar
the capital were aggravated; the jealousy ol
their power, which was growing in the distal
provinces, was augmented ; and two differnt
general ilfemblies were held, in both which, not

b 'Spotfw.434. 444.

withltaidi:i

v i'hffanding the zeal anti boldness wherewith a
fLw leading clergymen defended tlh privileges of
the church, a mhajority declared in favour of'tllofe
incafilres which were agreeable to the king.
Many practices, which had continued lince the
'rcforn;ation, were condemned ; inany points of
·difciplinc, which had hitherto been reckoned
sacrcd and uncontroverted, were given up ; the
licence with which ministers difcolrfed of political
inattcls was rcltrained; the freedom with which
thcy inveighed againit particular persons was
cenfilred ; sentences of urmmary excoimnunica-
tioni were declared unlawfull; the convoking a
I[eneral afftmbly, without the king's perimiflion,
vi as prohibited; and the right of nominating
miiniftlrs to the principal towns was veiled in
lie crown. Thus, the clergy themnfilves fur-
rndc(red privileges which it would have been
'dangerous to invade, and voluntarily submitted
o a yoke more intolerable than any James would
have ventured to impose by force; while fucl as
*clntinued to oppose his measures, inftcad of their
[former popular topic of the king's violent en-
croachments on a jurifdicison which did not be-
lo)ng to him, were obliged to turh their outcries
Aigainll the corruptions of their own oidme.

13y the authority of these gcncral aflemblles,

the ipopiih earls were allowed'tb'make a public
recc.antatioll of their errors'; ;wore alifolved frohl
the fcltence of excommunicatiol 'i} antl received
into the bofoin of the church. Bfit, not many
years after, they relapsed into their fodrntl 'rror9,
c'l're agailn reconciled to 'the 'ctliti;'hof Rom'e,
and by their apdftaey jufliiied, in some degree,

c Spotifw433. Cald. v; 18. z33.
¥'OL; mI. E the

the fears and scruples of the clergy with regard
to their absolution.

The ministers of Edinburgh owed to the in-

tercefion of thele assemblies the liberty of re-
turning to their charges in the city. But this
liberty was clogged in such a manner as greatly
abridged their power. The city was divided
into diitini parishes; the number of ministers
doubled; persons on whose fidelity the king
could rely were fixed in the nesw parithes; and
these circumstances, added to the authority of
the late decrees of the church, contributed to
confirm that abfolutc dominion in eccleliaftical
affairs, which James poffefled during the rcmain-
der of his reign.

The king was so intent on new-modelling the

church, that the other tranfaEtions of this pc.
riod scarce deserve to be remembered. The Oc.
tavians, envied by the other courtiers, and split-
ting into fa&ions among themselves, resigned
their commiflion ; and the administration of tihe
revenue returning into its former channel, both
the king and the nation were deprived of the
benefit of their regular and frugal economy.

Towards the end of the year [Dec. 19], a

parliament was held in order to reitore Huntly
and his aflbciates to their estates and honours, by
repealing the aft of forfeiture pafied againflf tlemt
The authority of this supreme court was likewifc
employed to introduce a farther innovation illt
the church; but, conformable to th'e fjfile
which the king had now adopted, the mrotio
for this purpose took its rife from the clergythrn
selves. As the aft of general annexation, a
that establishing the prefbytcrian government, ha

reduce

reduced the few billops, who flill survived, to
Poverty and contempt; as those who possessed
the abbeys and priories were mere laymen, and
tnany of them tempolal peers, few or none of
the ecclefialfical order remained to vote in par-
]iamcnt, and, by means of that, the influence of
tle crown was confiderablydminiliflled there, and a
proper balance to the power and number of the no-
bles was wanting. But the prejudices which the ua.
tion had conceived againit the name and cliarater
of bishops were so violent, that James was oblig-
cd, with the utmost care, to avoid the appearance
ofa design to revive that order. [1598] He
pi:cvailed therefore on the commillion appointed
?y the last general aflembly to complain to the
arliament, that the church was the only body in
lie kiugdom dettitute of its representatives in that
upreme court, where it so nearly concerned every
rder to have some, who were bound to defend
ts rights ; and to crave that a competent number
)f the clergy Thould be admitted, according to
;Ciicllt custom, to a feat there. In compliance
vith this requelt, an at was passed, by which
liofe ministers, on whom the king ihould confer
lhe vacant bishoprics and abbeys, were entitled to
wvte in parliament; aind that the clergy might
onctcive no jealousy of any encroachment upon
he'r privileges, it was remitted to the general
fl'mbly, to determine what spiritual julifdiition
r aiuthority in the government of the church
hcfe perfors should poflefs d.
TlThc king, however, found it no easy matter
[o obtain the concurrence of the ecclefiaitical

a Spotfw.4$o, parl. i5thJac. VI. c. 235.

E 2 judica.

uj!dicalories, il} wh*ich the a&C of parliament inm
with a fierce opposition. Though the clert,
perceived how much ltlufre this ncw privilegc
would reflet upon their order; thongh thl.c
were not insensible of t.le great acccfioln of por.
fonal power and dignity, which many of thlir
would acquire, by bceing admitted into the isl.
preme council of the nation, their abhorrence il
epiflopacy was extreme ; and to that they facri.
siced every conlideration of interelt or ambition,
All the king's professions of regard for the
present constitution of the church did not col.
vince tlem of his fiuceriy ; all the devices that
could be invented for reltraining and circoum.
scribing the jirifdicEion of fchl as were to lkc
raiscd to this new honour, did not dimininl thei
jcaloufy and fear. Their own experience lhai
taugrht them, witl what insinuating progress thc
hiel-archy advances, and though admitted at firll
with moderate authority, and under fpeciotl
pretcnces, how rapidly it extends its dominion,
"( Varnifl over this scheme," said one of the
leading clergymen, " with what colours )you
' plcafe ; deck the intruder with the utmoll ai :
" under all this diluife, I fee' te iorns of II,
" mitre." 'lThe fame fentimnents prevailed amolng
many) of his brethren, anid induced them to rcjcc'
power and lihlours, witl} as iuch zeal as e\(r
thoif of their order courted them. Many, liow-
cver, were allured Iby the hopes of preferment;
the king himself and his miniilers employed tin,
fame arts which they had tried so luccfsftilly
la(t year ; and after long deb;ttes, and mitcl oS-
position, the general alremblv declared [Matchl"
that it was laiwful for mitutolar to accept ot a

f'a;

feat in parliament; that it would be highly bene-
ficial to the church to have its representatives
in that ifipreme court; and that fifty-one persons,
a nlumber nearly equal to that of the ecclcfialtics,
who were anciently called to parliament, should
hc chlofen from among the clergy for that pur-
pose. The manner of their election, together
with the powers to be vested in them, were left
undecided for the present, and furnilhed matter
of future deliberation c.

1 99.] As the profpecd of flcceeding to the

crolw of England drew nearer, James multiplied
prcc:Iutions in order to render it certain. As he
w.:; allied to many of the princes of Germany by
his marriage, he sent ambaffadolrsextraordinlary to
their several courts, in order to cxplain the jult-
icfs of his title to the Englilh throne, and to
dcfile their afliftance, if an) competitor should
;nifC to difplte his undoubted rights. These
irilnces readily acknowledged( the equity of his
claim ; but the aid which they could. afford him
was dillant and feeble. At the fame time, Ed.
ward Bruce, abbot of Kinlofs, his ambaflador at
lthe Englillt court, solicited Elizabeth, with the
utilnolt warmth, to recognize his title by some
lubllic deed, and to deliver her own fubjiefts from
Ihe calamitics which arc occasioned by an un-
cert;lil or d(isputcd fiiccc ion. But age hadt
l rcngthened all the passions whiich had hitherto
induced Elizabeth to keep this great qucltion
ohbcure and undecidd d; and a general and evalive
.nlwcie was all that James could obtain. As no
/i;prcelion could be made on the queen, the am.

E SPotfw. 450. Cald. v. 278.

E 3 baflidor

baffador was commanded to found the difpofitino
of her fubjcsts, and to try what progress he
could make in gaining them. Bruce possesscd
all the talents of fecrely, judgment, and address,
requifitc for conducing a negotiation no leIs
delicate than important. A miniller of this
charadter was entitled to the confidence of the
Englifli. Many of the highelt rank unbofomlcx
themielves to him without reserve, and gave hiln
repeated aflurances of their resolution to afl:'rt
his matter's right, in opposition to every pre.
telder f. As leveral pamphlets were dispersed,
at this time, in England, containing objections
to his title, James employed some learned men in
his kingdom to answer these cavillers, and to
explain the advantages which woul result to
both kingdoms by the union of the crowns.
These books were eagerly read, and contributctl
not a little to reconcile the Englith to that event.
A book publiflled this year by the king bimfelf,
produced an effect itill more favourable. It was
intitled Btfi/.coln Doro, and contained precepts
concerning the art of government, addrefl'ed to
prince Henry his son. lotwithftanding the great
alterations and refinements in nationaltaftc since
that time, we must allow this to be no contermp
tible pcrformance, and not to be inferior to llt
works of nmoil contemporary writers, either in
purity of flyle or juitneis ofcompofition. Even
the vain parade of erudition with which it
abounds, and which now difgufls us, raised the
admiration of that age ; and as it was frlled w ilh
tlwofe general rules which speculative autlors

f. Johlnft. 24 ,

ilcliui'

eliver for rendering a nation hlappy, a'd of
vhich James could discourse with grceat piauli-
ility, thougl4 often incapable of putting them
n pratice, the Englilh conceived an high opi-
ion of his abilities, and expeted an incrcafe of
ational honour and prosperity, lunder a prince
o profoundly fiilled in politics, and wlo gave
uilc a fpecimcn both qs hlis wisdom and of his
ove to his people R.

Tlhc queee of England's sentiments concerr-

|ig James were very different from those of her
fbjeFts. His excefie indulgence towards the
popifl lords; the ficility with which he pardon-
ed their repeated treasons ; his refloring Beaton,
the popifli archbifiop of Glasgow, who had fled
out of Scotland at the tine of the Reformation,
to the pofleffion of the teinporalities of that bene-
lice; the appointing him his ambassador at the
court of France ; tie applause he beitowed, in
the Balilicon Doron, on those who adhered to
tit queen lus mother; Elizabeth cpniidered as
fu maniy indications of a mind alienated from the
:!oteltait religion ; ;nd fufpeted that he would
sion revolt from the profefflion of it. Tlieif sus-
picioiis seemed to be fully confirmed by a dif-
covery which' came from the malter of Gray,
who rcfided at that time in Italy, and who, rather
thali suser his intriguing spirit to be idle, de-
nuained himself so far as to aLa as a spy for the
Englilh court. He coieveyed to Elizabeth the
copy of a lettpr, written by James to pope
Clenent VII1., ill whvlicl the king, after many
';:l)reflions of regard for that pontiff, and of gra..

8 Carmd, Spotfw. 457.

titllde

titude for his favours, declared his firm refolii
tion to treat the Roman catholics with indul.
gence; and, in order to render the intelcourfe
between the court of Rome and Scotland niore
fiequent and familiar, he solicited the pope to
promote Drummond, biflop of Vaifon, a Scott.
man, to the dignity of a cardinalh. Elizabeth,
who had received by another channel fnome
imperfe& intelligence of this correfpondencr.
iwas filled with just surprise, and immediatel.
dispatched Bowes into Scotland, to inquire more
fully into the truth of the matter, and to repro.dac
James for an aclion so unbecoming a proteflbi;
prince. He was altonilhed at the accufationi,
and with a confidence which nothing but the
consciousness of innocence could inspire, affirned
the whole to be a mere calumny, and the letter
itself to he forged by his enemies, on purpole to
bring his sincerity in religion to be fiufpeEled
Elphingfton the secretary of state denied the
matter with equal solemnity. It came, howevcr,
to be known by a very 'lingular accident, which
happened some years after, that the information
which Elizabeth had received was well founded,
though at the faime time the king's declaratiois
of his own innocence were perfetly confiftcnt
with truth. Cardinal Bellarmine, in a reply
which he publiflicd to a controversial trcatife, ol
which the king was tile author, accused himn (I
having abandoned the favourable sentiments
wvhich he hald once entertained of the Ronlll
catholic religion, and, as a proof of this, quotcd

h Cald. 333, Winw. Mem, vol. i. 37. 52.

letter tol nement VIII. It was impoflible
y longer to believe this to. be a fietion; and it
as a matter too delicate to be palled over
ithout ItriB inquiry. Jlinncs immediately ex-
nined Elphingllon, and his contiefiot ulnravelled
er wiole inyller-y. IHe acknowledg d that hoi
ad fliufiled in this letter among othecr papers,

chiclI he laid before thle king to be signed, whio,
llfpoting no fi;cli deccit, futbfcribed it together
ritl. the reft, and without knowing what it cons
lined; that hlie lai no other motive, lhowcvcr,
othis aftion, but zeal for his majest.y's ibrvice;
nd, by flattering the Roman catholics witl
mpecs of indulgence under the king's govern-
i.lli, lie imagined that he was paving the way
or his more easy acceflion to the Englifil throne.
ile privy council of England entertained very
ifferent fentimieits of the fecrctary's conductl .
n tleir opinion, not only the king's reputation
mad been expoled. to reproach, but his life to
ianger, by tlhi rall imposture; they even im-
inted thle gn-powder treason to the rage and
ilflapointlplent of the papiits, upon finding' that
hle hopes which this letter inspired were friultrat-
ed. 'he secretary was font a prisoner into Scot-
and, to be tried far high trealoin. His peerl
founl hitim guilty, but, by the queen's intcreel-
li)on, lie obtained a pardwl '.

According to the account of other hiltori;inn,

J;limes hlimfelf was no tlranger to this correrpolld-
i:ncc with the. pope; and, if ve belivve thenm,
Elphinglion, being itntimidated by the threalts it
the Englill councl, and dcceived by the arteii.cc
k State Trials, vdl. i. 4a9. Spotfw. 456. 507. Joh0ti. 44.4

of

of the earl of Punlbar, concealed some circuni
stances in his narrative of this tranfaftion, a!
fallified others; and at the expence of his ow\V
fame, and with the danger of his life, endej.
voured to draw a veil over this part of his maileli'
condutt 1.

But whether we impute the writing of th'i

letter.to the fccretary's officious zeal, or to the
king's command, it is certain, that, about this
time, James was at the utmoit pains to gain the
friendflip of the Roman catholic princes, as a
neccffary precaution towards facilitating hib ac.
cession to the English throne. Lord Home, wr!ho
,was himself a papist, was intrusted with a fecict
commission to the pope m; the archbilhop oi
Glafgov was an acive inffrument with thole of
his own religion . The pope expressed such
favourable sentiments both of the king, and of
his right to the crown of England, that Jan1Ci
thought himself bound, some years after, to ac
knowledge the pbligation in a public mannerl
Sir James Lindsay made great progress in gain,
ing the Englifll papiits to acknowlcdge his ma.
jerfy's title. Of all these intrigues Elizabeth
received obfeurc hints from different quarters
The more imperfectly lle knew, the more vio.
lently file fifpcEted the king's designs; and t!ic
natural jealousy of.her temper. increasing with
agc, fle obfcrved his conduEt with greater fili.
citudc than eecr.

' 6oo0. The queflons with regard to the elec.
tion and power of the reprefentativcs of the

I Cald. vol. v. :3. vi. 147.
11 M

Witnw m. .

Me .

vol ii 57 n Cald. vol. vl. 147.
, Cald. vol. v. 604.'

c*iI'cll

urch wele finally decided.this year by the gene-
Iaffembly, which met at Montrose [March 28].
hat place was chosen as most convenient for
e minilters of the north, among whom the
ng 's influence chiefly lay. Although great
nibers resorted from the northern provinces,
d the king employed his whole interest, and
c authority of his own presence, to gain a ma-
itv, the following regulations were with dif-
uliy agreed on. That the general affenbly
all recommend fix persons to every vacant
nefice, which gave a title to a feat in parlia-
! nt, out of whom the king should nominate
-e; that the person so lertld, after obtaining
is feat in parliament, shall neither propose, nor
nfent to any thing there, that may assec the
terest of the church, without fpccial iniftrutions
that purpose ; that he fhail be answerable for
is conduEt to every general assembly, and sub-
it to its censure, without appeal, upon pain of
l'a;ny and excommunication ; that he fliall dif-
lharse the duties of a pastor, in a particular
o!,mregation; that he fliall not usurp any cccle-
altical jrifdi&tion, filperior to that.of hli other
reihlen; that if the church inflic on him the
cinfre of deprivation, he llall thereby forfeit
is f:eat in parliament ;'that he flall annually rc-
n his commission to the general assembly,
hicli may be rcfior.to him, or not, aj the as-
nrbly, with the king s' tpprobatign, flall judge
noft expedient for the good of the churchP.
othing could be more repugnant to the idea of
iiscopal government, ;than these regulations,

P Spotfw. 453 457. Cald. vol. v. 36G.

It

It was not iln oiifecqueiice of rights derived frc:'
their oflice, but of poxiters conferred by i coin.
inifllon, thnt;tli etcblefiThitil peibfons wvcre to be
admitted to a feat in piarliaNiiilt; they were th:'
representatives, notth superiors, of the clit,.',
Deflitute of all ipiritual authority, even thli:,;
civil jiiifdi'lion was temp6orry. James, howcer,'
flattered himielf that they would soon be able i:
lhake off tlefe fetters, and grdutally acquir aii
the privileges which belonged to the epifcopl
order. The clergy dreaded the fame thing;
and of course he contended for the nominatioi
of these coiimiffioners, atld they opposed it, not
to much on account of the powers then vcefd
in them, as of tllofc to whiichi it was believd
llhey would foun attain q.

Duiring this fuilmmr the kingdoml'ejoyed

unufiial tranquillity. The clergy, after man
ltrungles, were brougt der eat

uld bjetaion

the popifi earls were restored to their estates al
Ihonomurs, by the authority of parliament, and
'with the consent of the church; the reft of tl:t
'nobles were at peace among themselves, and ob&.
'dient to the royal autlority; When, in the nidli
of this fecuritv, the king's life was exposed to
-the uirnoft danger, by a conspiracy altogchllr
'utiexpeEcd, and almnoit inexplicable. 'llt
,authors of it were John Ruthven, earl ol
'Gowrie, and his brother Alexanlder, the li'ni
:of that earl '-rho was beheaded in the year orH
thousand five hundred and eighlty.foilr. Natll
had adorned both these yoiing men, efpeciall;
*the elder brother, with many accoieplifliment!i

' Spotfw. 454.

tOI

which education had added its molt elegalt
iprovements. More learned than is oiual
ong perlfons of their rank; more religious
an is common at their age of life ; generons,
ave, popular; their countrymen, f1ar fiom
iinking them capable of any atroc;ous crime,
.nceived the molt sanguine hopes of their early
irtues. Notwithitanding all these noble quali-
ics, some unknown motive engaged them in a
or fpiracy, which, if we adhere to the account
ommonly received, must be tranfinitted to pof-
crity, as one of the molt wickcl, as well as one
f the worlt concerted, of which hillorv makes
v l i mention.
On' the fifth of Augudt, as the king, who re-
I(cd during the huntilng i;;:ifu in hi-s palace of
'alkLand, was going out to Ils' sport early il the
torning, he was accolled by Mr. Alexander
Rutiven, who, with an air of great iniportance,
olll the king, that the sveniln before he had
met an unknown man, of a fiflpiious afperr,
w\alkiln alone in a Iby-path, near his brother's
Ihtfe at Perth; and on blarc:!ilf r him, had
tfo:ild, under his; cloak, a pot tilled 'with a great
quanttity of foreign gold; that lie had immedi-
ately seized both him and his treafire, and with-
out communicating the matter to any person,
ll;id kept him confined and bound in a solitary
uifel:; and that he thought it his duty to im.
part fuir:l a singular event firlI of all to his
lialjclly. James immlediately fufpetied this un-
k;l,,oiu person to be a seminary prielt, fnpplied
wit li loreign coin, in order to excite nevw corn
motions in the kingdom ; and resolved to in.
povwer the magiltrates of Perth to call the pc:,rfou

VOL, i.
l iictore

before them, and inquire into all the circtill
flances of the itory. Rutlhvel violently oppoI'..'
this resolution, and with many arguments urgli
the king to ride dircely to Perth, and to C:.
anine the matter in person. Meanwhile tiil
chace began ; and james, notwithllanding l:,
paflion for that ainmfeiment, could pot help ri'.
minating upon the fhtangenllfs of the tale, :li;,
on Rutliven's importunity. At lait, he c;ie i
Irim, and promised, when tlhe sport was o'.,,
to f& out tor Perth. The chace, however, cu;.
tinned long ; and Ruttiven, who all the xwile
kept close by the king, was tlill urging hili :.
make hafle. At the death of the buck he w ouil
not allow James to Viav till a frefll horle v.,
brought him ; and oblfrving the duke of Lellw\
and the earl of Mar ipreparing to accompany tlih
king, lie intreated him. to (cuntermand the!:,
This Jamnts refuficd and thoughl Ruthlven's ii;.
patience and alxiety, as well as the appar!:
perturbation in lis Wwhole hehavtiour, raised son;:
iullicionls in his milnd ; yet his o1wn cilrioiitv,
iand Ruthven's folicitatio.i., prevailed on him t(i
set out for Perth. When within a mile of tlle
town, Ruthven rode forward to inform his blo.
ther of the king's arrival, though he had alrcady
difpathled two mciflengers for that purpose. :A
a little diltance fiom tie town, the earl, atteiil.
ed by fevcral of the citizens, met the king, hliu
lhad only twenty persons in llis train. No prep.l
rations were made for.the king's entcrtainment;
t'lc earl appeared peniive an>d emban'rfl'd, anl
waa at no pains to atone, by iis com'tely or
hospitality,' tor the bad fare with'wlVchIl he treatcd
Iis guellts. WVhen tve kiieg's repatwas ovl,'

lii(

/ ada

~~ O~S1'¶RACY. i
X~~~slw~~~iI~~Sd ds;

his attendants were led to dine in another room,
and he being left almolt alone,' Rutliren Whif-
pered him, that now was il.:'time to go to the
clamber where the nlknowrn' person wias"/ept
Ja!nes commanded him to bring fir Tlhomas Er-
ikine along with them; bhtt, infteai of that,
Ruthven ordered'hiln not to follosy and con-
dulcing the king up a' ftar-cafe, and then
throuig several apartiments, thed'oors of whiei
he locked behind:'him, led hiap at last Into a fmat
study, in which there tood a man cid .in ar-
mour, with.a sword and dagger by is fide. Tih
king, who expesed to have found on n

jifarmed

and bound, started at the fight, lail iniired if
this was the perfp/ ; but Ruthyen fnating tht
dagger from the girdle of the m.n'in aribur, anid
holding it to the king's brerft, " Rememnker?
said he; "hlow unjuitly my ftier uffr^e by

your comtand'; vyoi are noWy my Dif6ntr"
" submit to my disposal without refilani ii

outcry; or tliis dagger (iall aingatly av'eni
his blood.'' James expoftulated widih *u.u

ven, intreated, apd flattered hin. Tlhe m'ia
wvhom he found in the (Ludy ft6o.4, all lioe',Awhi
trembling, and dismayed, without courlag eitli1r
to aid tke king, or to second his' aiTe. r;
Ruthven .protested, that if the king irIied no
outcry, lus life lhould be safe ; and, rmoed by
some unknown reason, retired in order to call hit
brother, leaving to the man in armour the'care, ~
thtl kinl, whom lie bound by oath trot to make
atv noise lduring his absence.

While the klng was in this dangerpua fitua.

ation, his atteudanits growing iinpatrlet to knoie
u'vither kIe had retiredl,: ne f (Oowr¢ic'¥teeg cl

i'":', '

p 2 ' ' ' "
' tC &

tics entered the room haiilly, and told them tl-a
the king had jlltt rode away towards Falkland. Al\
of them ruflied out into the ilreet; and the eai,,
in the utmoil hurry, called for their horses. I;
by this time hi, brother had returned to the king,
and swearing that now there was no rcmned, 1;e
muff die, offered to bind his hands. Unarmed
as James was, he scorned to fiubmit to that in.
dignity; and closing with the aflaflin, a fierce
itruggle ensued. The man in armour flood, n
formerly, amazed and motionless; and the king
dragging Ruthven towards a window, which
dulrng his abflncc he had persuaded the perlon
with whom L.e was left to open, cried, with a w;ild
and affrighted voice, " Treason ! Treason ! Helip!
" I am nlurdered!' His attendants heard, and
knew the voice; and saw, at the window, a ha:;d
which grasped the king's neck with violence:
They flew v.ith precipitation to his aiffitancc.
Lennox and Mar, with the greater number, 1,11
pp the principal staircase, where they found all
the doors fliut, which they battered with the ut.
most fury, endeavouring to bihur them open.
But fir John Ramsey, entering by a back-iiir,
which led to the apaltnctt where the king w\;,
found the door open ; and r'ulhing upon Ruthiven,
who was frill tirugtgling with the king, ttruck hlin
twice with is ldagger, and tlrulil him townalrdi
the ilaircafe, wlhere firl Thomas Erfl.ine and iii
Hugh Ierrlls met, and killed him ; he crying
with his lall breath, '<' !ai ! I am not to bltime
" for this aDion." During this fcufile, the imat
who had been concealed tin tlie itudy efcapl)c
unobserved. Together with Ramsey, Erlkinc,
and Herries, one Wilfor,, a footnlan, entered thl

V00l/1

oom where the king was, and before they had
iiie to Ihut the door, Gowrie rushed in with a
rawii sword in each hand, followied'by seven of
is attendants well armed, and with a lopd. voice
hreatened them all with initant death. They
mmediatcly thrust the king into the'little ftudv,
ird shutting the door upon lim, encountered
lti ecarl. Notwitlhfanlding the inequality ds
tii.,mers, firJohn Ramsey pierced owrie through
hle heart, and lie fell down dead without uttering
w0ord; his followers liaving received several
tuouinds, immediately fled. 1 hree of tile king's
ifenders were likewise hurt in the coifliit. A
rcadful noise continued fill at the opposite door,
here many pelions laboured in vain to force a
rdilage; and the king being assured that they
CIrc Lelilx, Mar, and his other friends, it was
pened on the inside. They ran to the king,
vho!n they unexpectedly found safe, with tranf-
orts of congratulation , and he, fallinF on his
nIccs, with all his attendants around hiln, offered
oitnlrn thanks to God for such a wonderful de-
ivel-ance. The danger, however, was not yet
,cr. The inhabitants of the town, whose prp-
,It Gowrie was, and by whom he was extremely
cloved; hearing the fate of the two brothers, r4t
o their arms, and surrounded the houlf, -threat-

r!'lg rtvenge, with many insolent and oppro-

1iOuus ijeeclhes againlt the king. James eudea.
'oll ed to pacify the enraged multitude, by speak-
ng to them from the window; he admitted their

giltratcs into the house ; related to them all
he circumiftsnces of the fatt ; and, their fury
uiliding by degrees, they disperscd. On search.
ng the earl's pockets for papers that wig ht dif.

F 3 cover

cover his designs and accomplices, nothihg was
found but a small parchment bag, fill of magical
charaters and words of enchantment; and if we
may believe the account of the conspiracy puh.
lihed by the king, " whiie these were aboult
" him, the wound of whicl he died, bled not;
1' but as soon as they were taken away, the blood
" gushed out in great abundance." After all
the dangerous adventures of this busy day, the
king returned in the evening to Falkland, havi g
committed the dead bodies (f the two brothers to
the custody of the magiflrates of Perth.

Notwithitanding the minute detail which tli

king gave of all the circunitances of this co;;.
fpil acy agailft his life, the motives which indiiced
the two brothers to attempt an aftion so detrii.
able, the end they lhad in view, and the accom.
plices on whose aid they depetided, were altoge.
ther unknown. The words of Ruthven to tli
king gave some grounds to think that the delire
of revenging their father's death had infliiattl
them to this attempt. But, whatever injuries
their fatler had filfered, it is scarcely pro;balle
that they could impute them to the king, wholf
youth, as well as his subjection at that tine to
the violence ofa facSion, exempted lim from hIig
the objec of resentment, on account of atiios
which were not done by his command. J;iii':
had even endeavoured to repair the wrongs which
the fatle:r had suffered, by benefits to his cil.
dren anld Qowrie himnfef, sensible of his fav;lr,
had acknvowledged it with the warmclt expirf.
sions of gratitude. Tlhree of thl earl's atttld.
.lits, being convi(ted of affifling him in this
afldult on the king's servants, werc executed at

Pertli

Pert!h; but they could give no light into the
motives which had prompted their matler to an
adion so repugnant to these acknowledgments.
I)iligent search was made for the person concealed
ill the Itudy, and from him great difcovcries were
c::pcacdd. But Andrew. Hcndeifon, the earl's
ilcw-ard, who, upon a promise of pardon, con-
feli-d himself to be the man, was as much a
firanger to his matter's design as the-reft; and
thlogh placed in the itudy by Gowrie's com-
n- and, ie did not even know for what end that
:tati;on had been assigned him. The whole
trI.nfaltion remained as impenetrably dark as
rver; and the two brothers, it was concluded,
had concerted their scheme without either con-
sident or accomplice, with unexampled secrecy
.as well as wickedness.

An accident, no less strange than the other

circumntances of the story, and which happened
nine years after, discovered that this opinion,
hovcver plausible, was ill-founded; and that thi
twvo brothers had not carried on their machina-
tions all alone. One Sprot, a notary, having
k hifpered among several persons that he knew
forne secrets relating to Gowvri4's conspiracy, the
privy council thought the matter worthy of their
attention, and ordered him to be seized. His
collfeflion was partly voluntary, and partly forced
from him by tprtur,. According to his account,
JLogan of Reitallig, a gentleman of an opulent
foriune, but of dissolute morals, was privy to all
Gowric's intentions, and an accomplice in his
cirnes. Mr. Ruthven, he said, had fiequent in-
terviews with Logan, in order to concert the
pli;n of their operations; the earl had corre-

pondc4

ponded with him to the fame purpose; and onz
]Bour, Logan's confident, was trllted with tile
secret, and carried the letters between thern.
Both Logan and Bour were now dead. But
Sprot affirmed that he had read letters writt,;
both by Gowrie and Logan on that occafin:;
and in confirmation of his testimony, several ,f
Logan's letters, which a curiosity fatal to himfcri
had prompted Sprot to steal from among Bour's
papers, were produced r. These were coin.
pared, by the privy council, with papers of Lo.
gan's hand-writing, and the resemblance saT.
manifest. Persons of undoubted credit, and wLll
qualified to judge of the matter, examined them,
and fiore to their authenticity. Death iitf!f
did. not exempt Logan from prosecution ; Li
bones were dug up and tried for high treason,
and by a sentence, equally odious and illegal',

his

t Logan's letters were five in number; one to Boor, an.

other to Gowrie, and tlree of Ihem wi hout mny directi'n;
nor could Sprot diIcover the rame of 'he person to whom hty
wee witten. Logan g:ve him the appellation of Ri(br
ltonourah e. It aplpe.rs trem this, howeve', and from oiria
woids in the letter, C. om. q9 . that there were (fvrri elllr:s
privy to he conrpilacy. The die of thei firi. letter is July
iSth Mr. Rumnven' blad c,nmmnnicared il.e majtfr to 1 egan
only five days betore. Ibid. It app.ars fr m the origil
,'fimom of forfatl ure against Logan't heiis, \h\t Bour,lh ,ugh
he ha.d leters adldrelled to ,him w:h regarJ lo a contpiracy
equally dangerous and important, was so illiteratc tilat ie
culd not read. 6 Jacbus Bour, literatlum protfus it na3u,
diai Ge.,róii op-ra in legendis omniboa fciiptisai euwn minli
vel pertinentibus, u!ebarur." This is altogiether firange;
and.nothing hut the capricious charaler of Logan can ,c-
counr for his cEoning luch a confident.

* By the Roman law, persons guilty of the crime of high
treason might be trid even after dcath. 1his praflice was

adopted

is lands were forfeited, and his poPterity de-
cared infamous. Sprot was condemned to be
hanged for milpifion of treason. He adhered
to his confcffion to the last, and having promised,

adopted by the Scuts, without any limitation, Parl. 1540,
c. i)9. But the unlimited exercise of this power was soon
conceiveu tc be dangerous; and the crown was laid under
pr peOr re'rit-ions, by an a A. D. 1542, which has never
;-cn printed. The words of it are, 1 And because the said
h,,d ii. e. the lords of articles) think the said act (viz. in
; 1 ) too general, and prejudicial to the barons in the realm,
tilwefore Itatutes and ordains that the said a&t ihall have no
r lc. n time com:ng, but against the heirs of them that no-
L;iof!y commit or ihall commit lele m.jelty agai.:lt the
];in s peflon, again.i the realm for averting the fame, and
Ai, i'it them that ihall happen to betray the king's arm) alle-
n.i:y, and being notourly .;nown in their time: and the heirs
c; he;l persons to be called and judged within fire years
arfl the decedre of the said persons committers of the said
rinmes; and the said time being bypali, the said heirs never
to be pursued for the fame." 'The sentence againlt Iogan
v;ulated this liatute in two particulars. He was not notourly
kIo.nl during his life to be an accomplice in the crime for
v 'Iici l:e was tried i and his heir was called in queffion more
tilJ live years after h s death. It is remarkable that this
it.ilute fcems not to have been attended to in the parliament
um ich tbrfli'ed Logan. Another singular circumranee de-
':r;- notite. As it is a maxim ofjultice that no person can
L: tric in absence; and as lawyers are always tenacious of
t .. t.rm sis, and often absurd in thrir devices for preleiving
ti.m, they contrived thar, in any proctrf against a dead per-
fun hiis coipfe or bones flall be prefeincd at the bar. Ex-
ampl, of this occur frequently in the Scottili hiltory. After
tl, ,tile of Corrichie, the dead bod) of the earl of Huntly
%ta, pr-'ented in parliament, before sentence offoefaulture was
pl : untcd againff him. For tile Came reason the bodies of
(i;,'..ie and his brother were pref-rvcd, in order'that they
mnii,;l be prlduced in parliament. Logan's bone*, in coirn
plijaii rsith the fame rule, were dog up, llackcnz. Ci sin.
h::, Bokn i. Tit. (. § 2z.

on

on the scaffold, to give the fpeetators a si-gn in
oonfinnation of the truth of what he had d..
poled, he thrice clapped his hands after he \.,t
thrown off the ladder by the executioner .

r It appears that archbiflop Spotfwood was prefrnt at :it

execution of Sprot, Crom. is. and vet he feerns to i'i
gixen no credit to his discoveries. 'hl'mnanner in a hich bI
speaks of him is remarkable: " Whether or not I ihJul:
mention the arraignment and execution of George Sprox, shs
fuferted at Edinburgh, I am doubtful ; his confefli,.,
though voluntary and constant, carrying Imall probbdlit),
The man deposed, &c. It fecred to be a very filion, ani
a mete invention of thc man's own brain, for neither did he
ihew the letter, nor could any ~ile man think that CGwrit,
who went about the trcafon so secretly, would have comn o.
nicated the mnatter to fich a man as Logan was known to Ib."
p. soS. Spotfw od could not be ignorant of the folemniiy
with which Logan had been tried, and of the proof bro:iih
of the authenticity of his letters. He himlelf was probably
pielent in parliament at the tial. The earl of Dunar, of
whom he always speaks with the highefl refpeal was th
person who directed the process againit Logan. Such a [t.
remptoty declaration againit the truth of Sprot's evidette,
notwithltanding all thcfel circumflances, is surprising. Sr'
Thomas Hamilion, the king's advoca e at that time, and
alterwards earl of Hadington, represents the proof productd
at Logan's trial as extiemely convincing ; and in an omiginl
letter of his to the king, the a

z t Junle 1609, (in Bibl. Fa.

cult. Jurid,) after mentionirg the manner in which the tlt;
had been conducled, he thus goes on:

, Wlhen the iluob.tion of the funmmons was referred totht

l rds of artiLles votes, they found uniformly, all in Ort
voice, the said lummons to be so clearly proved, that thrl
ftremed to contend who lhould be able most zcaloully to e'.
prels the latisffalion of his heart, not only by the molt .ith!
words, but by ttars of joy; diverse of the belt ranlk 1o:.
effming, that that cwhereof they doubted .it'their enrry inlt tit
hIoulc was now fd maniflft, that they behoved to ellecm chrm
traitors who fti(uh any longer refule to declare thriiL alfft
erlolution of the truth of that trealbn."

Bit

Bi;t though it be thus unexpc&edly discovercd

that Gowric did not aa without iffociates, little
addirional light is thrown, by this discovery, on
the motives and intention of his conduit. It
appears alimoft incredible that two young men
of flclh diltinguiflled virtue flould revolt all at
olice fiom their duty, and attempt a crime so
;troc'ious, as the nlurder of their fovecing'. it
apitcars lIill more impirobable, that they Ihould
)ikvc concerted their undertaking with so little
firldight and prudence. If they intended that
th! deed fliould have remained concealed, they
could not have chosen a more improper scene
1.,:- e lxccuting it, than their own houle. If they
intended that IIcnlderfon (hould have struck the
Ilow, tley could not have pitched on a Ian more
delcitute of the colrage that mull direct the
;lai(l of an aflflin ; nor could they expet that
:c. unsolicited, and unacquainted with their pur-
,olc, would venture on fitch a dclperate attion.
f Rntlven meant to stab tlhe king with his own
land, why did he withdraw the dagger, after it
ias pointed at his breall ? How could he leave
Ihe king, after flch a plain de laration of his in-
ciltion ? Was it not prepocerous to commit
lini to the keeping of iuch a timid associate at
enderfon ? For what purpose did he walte
ine in binding' the lhands of an unarmed man,
liom he might ealily have dispatched with his
word ? I-ad Providence permitted them to
imnue their hands in the blood of their fove-
ci;li, what advantage could hlave accrued to
lhin by hik death ? and what Lblailit ol pjet'cti-
u09 could they have opposed to tlhe rigfi't of

5 'lu

his children u ? Inevitable and inifant venge;nce,
together with perpetual ifamny, were the onlj
confequclnces they could expert to follow fuclh i
crime.

On the other hand, it is impofTlble to btclic

that the king had formed any design againlt ti}
life of the two brothers. They had not incurlii
his indignation by any crime ; and were in no
degree the objces of his jealousy or hatred ;

u Tt has been aflerted, that, in consequence of the kcing'

death, the earl of Gowrie might have pretended to the cria
of England, aa the son of Dorothea Stewart, daughter oflori
Methven by Margaret of England, ho, after her divile
from the earl of Angus, took that nobleman si) hr liti;i
bulband. Buinet Hist. of his own Times. But thhi .i:.
tion is ill-founded. It appears, from undoubted cviilricc,
that lord Methven had only one child by queen M.lg:it;l
which died in its infancy, and Dorothea lady Ruthv'in ut
not the daughter of queen Margaret, but of Janet SircJlt,
lord Methvln's second wife, a daughter of John earl of Athl,
Crwf. Peer. 3i9. And though Gowric had really becn dr.
scended from the hlood-royal of England, the king a. thi;
tinme had a ofn and a daughter; and berides them, lady An.
bella Stewart, daughter of Charles earl of Lennox, hada .1 r
tcrable title to the crown of England.

x Sir Henry Neville, in a letter to fir Ralph Winwood,

imputes the death of the two i. others to a cause not ien,
tioned by any of our historians. " Out of Scotland we lre
that there is no good agrerment, but rather an open dill.
dence, betwixt the kiog and his wile, unal many are of opi
nion that the discovery of flimc affltlion between ihe .ind I'
earl of Gowrie's brother (who was killed with liln) wls tii
truet crufc and mxcive or that tragrdy." Winw. Mic
vol. i. ,74. WhtIhcitr the.following p)afages in Nichl;lfn'
letter be any confirlation of that fulpicion, 's'fubirittedl
the reader. In his letter, Srt;. 1, I60o, lihe mnetionsii
return of Gowrie'a two younger brothers i'itte' Setland, 1
adds, 'l The cuoming in of theft two, and the queen of Sty

'"d * '
/ t2.'

nor was lie of a spirit so sanguinary, or so noted
for rash and delierate valour, as to have at-
tempted to murder them in their own outfe,
where they were surrounded with many do-
nleltics, he only with a fiender and unarmed
train; where they could call to their affillance
the inhabitants of a city, at the devotion of
thleir family, while he was at a distance from
all aid; anld lealt of all wxould he have choife
for his aflcbiatea in such an enterprize, the earl
of Mar and the duke of Lennox, the former
concieted in close fiienduflip with the house of
Gowrie, and the latter married to one of the earl's
li ltrs.

Whichfoevcr of these opposite fyftcms we r'm-

brace; whether we impute the intention of mur-
der to Gowrie, or to the king ; iniluperable dif.
ficulties arise, and we are involved in dark-
ncfs, myltery, and contradictions. Perlhaps the
ifurce of tile whole confpilrcy oiight to be
fcarched for deeper, and by deriving it fiom a more

dcailiig withl them, atd fending away and furriifhing Mrs.
Beitrix [their filterJ with fiuc.h infornation a fir 1 homas
Irlkint has givcn, hath bred great suspicion in the king of
Scots lhat they come nnt in but upon lomne dangelou plot."
In another letter, January I, i6o3, " 'I le diy of writing
mv lalt, lMil. Bletrix luthlveft was brnught by tlle lady
I'iflcy, and Mil. of Angus, as one of. hcil gentle omen,
into the court in the evening, and Itoh ed inu a clh.mbel
ylepared for 'her'by the qucen's diretion, ll(re the queen
hal niuclL timt and eonfrrense with her. Or this the king
got notice, and flewed his dillike thereof to the queen, gently
reoproving her for it, and examining quietly of the qucin'a
fcrvainrl of the fame, aud ol otber mnateri thereunto beliong-
ing, with such dircrction and secrecy at requircs luch a mat.
Itt."

VOL. Ilt., 0 rcmote

remote cause, we may discover it to be lels cri.
minal.

To keep the king of Scots in continual 'e.

pendanc, was one great ol)jet of Elizabetl's
policy. In order to this, lhe sometimes fcout'll
'him, andi fomnetimes bribed his ministers .'nd
favouritts; and when ile failed of attaining hir
end by tlefe means, she encouraged the clergy
to render any administration which fie diftrutltd
unpopular, by decrying it, or stirred up son1e
'fation of the nobles to oppose and to overturn
'it. In that fierce age, men little acquainted
*with the arts of undermining a ministry by in.
trigue, had recourse to the ruder pra&ice of
rendering thelfelves matters of the king's
pcrfon, that they might thereby obtain the di.
rection of his councils. Those nobles, who
seized the king at the Raid of Ruthven, were
inltigated and supported by Elizaleth. Both.
"well, in all his wild attempts, enjoyed her pro.
teftion, and when they miscarried, he was fceeire
of a retreat in her dominions. The connexions
'which James had been forming of late with tlie
Roman catholic princes, his secret negotiations
in Englltud with her fubjetls, and the maxims
by which he governed his own kingdom, all
contributed to excite her jealousy. She dreaded
sonic great revolutioni in Scotland to be ap.
proaching, and it was her intcreft to prevent it.
The carl of Gowrie was, one of the mops pov:er.
ful of tle Scotti(h nobles, and dfceended from
anceltors avarimly attached to the; Englifl il.
terelt. le had adopted the fanme system, and
believcd the welfare of his countiry to be in.
,ftparably coQImncted with the fubfiltence of the

alliancc

alliance between the two kingdoms. During
is residence at Paris, he had contra&ed an inti-
nate friendflip with fir Henry Neville, the
qelen's ambassador there, and was recommended
by him to his court, as a person of whom great
fe might be madeY. Elizabeth received him,
as he passed through England, with diltinguifhied
marks of refpea and favour. From all these
circumstances a fifpicion may arise, that the
:lan of the. conlfpracy against the king was
ormed at that time, in concert wit.h her. Such
a suspicion prevailed in -that age, and from th5
etters of Nicholson, Elizabeth's agent in Scot-
land, it appears not to be destitute of foundation.

En Englilh ihip was obfcrved hovering for some
ime, in the mouth of the frith of Forth. The
arl's two younger brothers fled into England
fter the ill success of the conspiracy, ald were
rotected by Elizabeth. James himlelf, though
e prudently concealed it, took great umbrage
t her behaviour. None, however, of Elizabeth's
intrigues in Scotland tended to hurt the king's
perlon, but only to circumscribe his authority,
nd to thwart his schemes. His life was the
nreli safe-guard of her own, and restrained the
popifnl pretenders to her crown, and their abet-
tots, from desperate attempts, to which their
iplict.nce and higotrv might, otherzwifc, have
ngcd them on. To have encouraged. Gowrie
to murder Ilis sovereign; would, oil her pa't,
i;ve been an ad of the utinit. .iinpirdense.
Nor docs this seem to haveibeen the intention 'of'
tl two brothers. Mr. Ritthven, firlt of all, en.

,, Y Winw. i. 156,

. ;2 ' &cavoiirgC

deavoured to decoy the king to Perth without
any attendants. When these proved more nu.
merous than was espe&eed, the earl employed a
stratagem in order to separate them from the
king, by pretending that he had rode away te.
wards Falkland, and by calling hastily for their
horses, that they might follow him. By their
shutting James up, meanwhile, in a dilbrnt
corner of the house, and by attempting to bind
his hands, their design seems to have been rather
to seize than to aflaffinate him. Though
Gowrie had not collected his followers in such
numbers as to have been able to detain him long
a prisoner, in that part of the kingdom, by open
force, he might soon have been conveyed aboard
the Englilh lhip, which waited perhaps to receive
him, and he might have been landed at Salt
castle, a house ofLogan's, in which, according
to many obscure hints in his letters, forne ren.
dezvous of the conspirators was to be held
Amidst the surprise and terror, into which the
king must have been thrown by the violence
offered to him, it was extremely natural for hlin
to conclude that his life was fought. It was the
interest of all of his followers to confirm him in
this belief, and to magnify his danger, in orderto
add to the importance and merit 'of their own
services. Thus his fear, and their vanity, aided
by the credulity and wonder which the contem,
plation of any great and 'tragical event, when
riot fully undeillood, is apt to inspire, augrnetlt
ed the whole'"traifaition. Or 'tie ther, hands
the extravagance and improbability of the cir.
cuimitancea which were added, detrated firou
the credit of thvoe which reallyhappeed; and

cv¢11

evrn firnif;hd pretences for calling in quefion
the truth of the whole conspiracy.

The account of what had happened at Perth.

readied Edinburgh next morning. The privy
council commaldcd the minilters of that city in-
iiantly to alfeinble their people; and after relat-
ing to them the circunlltances of the conlfpiracy
fo'nred against the king's life, to return public
thanks to God, for the protedtion which he had
so vib3ly afforded him. lBut as the first acconits
transmitted to Edinburgh, written in a hurry,
and while the circumstances of the confp)'iacy
wv(re but imperftcily known, and the paflions

hicih it excited llrongly felt, were indiltin&,
ex:g;er;ated, and contradidtory, the inililers
aid hlold of tlis ; and though they offered to
ive public thanks to God for the king's faety,,
they refused to enter into any detail of pa;ticu-
ars, or to utter fiomt the chair of truth, what
pp;earrd to be still dubious and uncertain.
A fevw days after, the king returned to Ed;n-
tir^, ; and tlhough Galloway, the minister of
1'. on chalUel, made an hllUiangie to the people

t he: public cross, in which lie recited all tie

:irtnimtancecs of the .conspiracy; though iJaines
;,ti;feri, in tlhir hearing, COri;firml d hli aciOlnt;
i].,;tl hle commanded a nairative of the whole
';ad.taion to be publifiled; the minillers (if t.lhit
ity, at well as many of their brethren, ltill con.
irnd ill rehlilouus ;ud unconviilced. 'rleir high
'ein of Gowrie, their jealoufyiof every part of
he tilg's conduEt, added to foine fi'ls and inlly
nplmhaible, circumilanics in tile lmarrativr, itt
tnaly led t.he)p to fuifpect the whole, but gave
their suspicions an iir of credibility. But at

G 3 lengthl

length, the king, partly by arguments, pa\'tls
by threats, prevailed ori all of them, except Mr.
Robert Bruce, to own that they were con\,i ;',
of the truth of the coiilpiracy. He could be
brought no farther than to declare, that Ie re.
verenccd the king's account of the tranfai'tioi,
but could not sav that lie hiimfelf was perftind.d
of the truth of it. The scruples or obllinayv o1
a single man would have been little regar;dci;
but as the fame spirit of incredulity begall t
ipread among the people, the example of one ii
so high reputation for integrity and abilities, \w,
extremely dangerous. Thle king was at the un
molt pains to convince and to, gain Briuc, bui
finding it impoflible to remove his doubts, hI ,Ic
privcd him of his benllice, and after repeate(d d.
lays, and many attempts towards a reconcile
ment, banihed him the kingdom z.

Thle proceedilngs of parliament were not re

tarded by any Icruples of this fort. The I..di
bodies of the two brothers were produced tl.re,
accordiag to law; an indiament for high trrafuil
was l 'C ferred againtl them ; witnesses wcre cx
amined i; 'id, by an unanimous sentence, tlici
eliat.es and honours were forfeited; tie pudi;l.
ment due to traitors was inflicled on thel- (lea
bodies t' and, as if the punifliment hitherto in ii
did not cxpre!- fuilicient detettation of tlili
crliles, the parliament enacCed that the filiimnai
of Rutthven llould be abolilhed; and in ordlt t
preflve the memory of the king's miracul1oi
cfeape, and to declare the sense which the nativi
had of tle ilivine goodinefs, to all futurc ages

' Slotsw. 461, &c. Cald. v. 3S9, &c.

appointe

p.:;ointcd thle fifth of Augull to be observcd,
intatlly, as a day of ptlblic tl)aiikfgiving .

1601.] Thougl h Gowri's conspiracy occasion.
u a, sudden and great alaum it was tollowcd by

I1l

a . few weeks after the death of the twr brothers, the
i,;: i,"',)lihed a ,i@i'oarfc of thleir vii, and ra:, riurai corfpi'rry

i.,;: i 1Js. In the year 17 13 Gecrge earl of Cromartle
i: ,llcd aln ' Ilitlolical account of the confipiracy by the
il oft (;owvlic and Robert l.ngal of' Reltalrig, against

* hini James VI." He Leenm not to have fciecn the account
:itilt he king himiltclf had gircn of that matter, and bor-
,w tl;e wh;)le hiltorical part frtm Spoifvfood and other
,u¥-r,; but he has cxtrae.dl ficm

o tle pul'ic records the

I,,i lit ns of the witnrtftl; pIndiucrd by the k;i:,g's council,
,, tc- 1m r-ialke good tih charge algainft tlh; to brothers,
n, i. "!i their afbci.t.ul. From thc!s tv. treatises our
is,oi:'c d:r ot all the matei.al circuintlances of the conspiracy
,irrticd. The evidence which they contain, one would
,.cet to be authentic and decisive. An account of a fa&,
ih rec:nt, publilhed by royal authority, and the oriilnal
iprnfitins of peioibns examined in prelence of the highclt
,,nt in the nation, ought to convey a degre of evidence
l.lt nn r.ltaired in hiftotical Icljtions, and to exclude all rc-
nitn;in doubt and uncertainty. But as every thing with re-
I.,' : this tr.nlll C.io is dark and prollematical, the king's
cr.illt anl the depof'tiins of the vitneffrs liot only vary, but
tntridift each other in so many circumint.lices, tilat much
ilm is ttill Icft f.ir hesitation and hilolical fceplicfit. 'lihe
*'.liiroy if' Ilcideribil id the fullelt and noll inmportant, but
n j.. r:i lparticulJ4r the king's account and lii arc eoastra-
:i l.v. 1. Accordin ' to' the king's acc'ount, wil e' Mr.
,:t illl was hdltli:; thi dgi;ger t' hils brealt, 4' the fellow
i, 1.! f(luUy stood qb'lkir'g and trembling." Dilc. 17.
} lu t Ilc;diifou fays, thalt hr hinmflli writIiud the dagger our
fitM. R ulivcei's hands,: Dilc. i53. Crom. 50. Ilenderfori
ik,:r si bloafted to his wifi., that lie lad tlat day twice saved
11 1. ': fr.om beng labh'cd. Ofirc.54.' (ron. 53. II. The

ai, . fiilts that l-lendrrfon opened the window during Mr.
uliivcn's abfchcc.' Disc. Z3. Hcn'dcrfori dpofes tlht he

wa;

no coqfequences of iinpolrtsace ; and having b1t;
concerted by the. two brothers, either without a:;v
aflociates, or with fuci as were unknown, thi
danger was over, as ioon as discovered. Bi:

not

was only attempting to open it when Mr, Ruthven returnre
and that dlring the ttluggle between the king and him, hi
opened it. Dil. 53, . Cron. l5, 5. . Ill. If we mll
belieye the king the fellow in the fludy (tood, duing thi
Itruggle, behind thr cking's back, inactive and trembiingial
the time. Dil'c . 7. Hut Fenderfon affirms, that he in.itch
ed away the garter with which Mir. Ruthven attempted to
bild the king that he pulled b ck Mr. luthven's hand
while he was endeavouring to (top the king's mouth, and
that he ope ed the window. Disc. 54. Crorn S. 1. IV B
the king's account, Mr. Ruthven left him in the ftui';
and went away in order to meet. wi.h iis brolhur, and til
earl acae up the flairs for the fame purpose. Dife. z. in
derfon deposes, chat when Mr. Ruthven.left the king, "h
"' 'believes that lh did nt pass from the door." Crom. 5:
It is apparent both from the situation of the house, ,nd fr, m
other circumstances, that tihele couid qot possibly ha\i blec
any interview between the brothers at this time. Diec. a;.

HendersS;n was twice ex;amined, first t Falkland beior

the piivy council in AugS(t, and next at Edinburgh bcirl
the parliament in November. Not to mention foCe lei'r
variations between there dcppoitions, we ihall point out two
which are remarkable. In his firr deposition lr. Hender.
son relates the mol rpaterlal circumftince of the whole ii
there words: "¢ Mfr. Ruhvcn pulled out the deponent'
" dagger, and held the fame to his majeety's breast, saving
" Remaber you of nyffptJier' i murder; yor /Jball now ,ie }oi
" i: andojpintillg to his highness's heart, vith the dagger
" the deptoelt. thiew lbie 4pue out of Mi. Ruthven'i hands
"4 alndfwtOre that as God iouldjulIge hii foul, that if Mr
" Ruth vei hiad rt4ined the daggdr sn .hi(

hand the frpace

(' man mny/gr.f., !teps, hiewopid jve stricken the king to
" thehilt» ijtb it.'" pifc: 6z. Biut.at hit fqCopd exarmi
ut:on hetyrdm

fgnom this n two marterlcircumiftnce

First, the,wprds lt4 dttipe t t, t Mr.,Ruthven's nloits
Wihile he held'the dagger at ttc'king's brrp are, Sir, )l

e 'lyj

ot il)ITg after, a confpirlacv brotke out in Eng-
ain(l a(gaiit Elizabelth, whch, thchlt g the firlt
Iaigcr was inflantly dlifplcled, produced tragical
liccts, that rendered the close of that quecn',

1 ,:f be mny pri.:ner; rc,.ebrber on my father's death." Se.
ondly, when he threatened him with death, it was only to
eter him from making any notfe, " I-oldyour tngue, or 0b
E Clyfa,.u/hs/it'ie." a. In lIis lil't deposition, the words
f Mr. i tu;hven, when he r'turfiel to the clhamber where
e 1hid left the king, are, " T/ere is 1o ;cnriedy, by Codycru
" ;;a5,//jit." But in his second deposition, " By Cod there
i l, iernedy, and olfeled to bird his nrr.jefy's hinds."

Cr m .. j ie material words y;: n mtfl die are omitted.
The si ii deposition flrms plainly to intin.ate that it wae
}n ii en s inten'ion to murder the king. The ftcond'vould
clii u to c iclude that le had no other design than to de.
tanll im as a prisoner.

' here are iikewi;e fime remarkab'e contradi lions in the

tetim ities ot the other wineifes I. In the difc'iurfe pub-
lific:d by authority, it is l,,finuited that ! c tumult of the
nhblblaiit was ra fed against the king, and tl at it required
fonm .ret to ptcify diem. Dife. 32. 'lhe duke of Leilnox
or.ti nim thi, in hi. deposition. Crom. 41. An act of pr;vy
council fmmninitig hle magfllrates of Perth to aLfwer for
thit iot is !till exiant. And yet Andrew Roy, one of he
Ib Ili, of the town, deposes, that hr himself ta'fed the SeC.
ile, an.l that they took ainis in order to afift tlhe king.
Ctoin. 66. l. Henderfoln irpoi:s, that he gave an evasive
inlser to Mr. fohln Minerlief, who inquired whetre he had
bee, Illat morning, becaufc the earl had commnanded him
n.r t1 let any man know that he hadI been at Falkland.
Dil:. 54. Moncrief depotis to the fame purpose. Crom.
(4. And yet George Hay, afterwarts lord Kinnoul, and
tlhe clhicellor of Scotland, and Peter Hay, depose, that the
eni, in their prelrcnce, asked Hendeifon, " Whom he ftund
vilh the king at Falklandl ?" Cront. 70, 71. Which quef-
tiot (ifcns to prove that he did not aimn 't keeping that
journltict secret. In the Colhlttinn of Crirninal"'rialt, pub-
liiehd by Mr. Arnot in 1785, the evidenitce againht'the two
brotlhers has been confidcred with great attentiuno. P.
p o &c.

rcign

reign difinal and unhappy. As James was deep.
ly interelcdt in that eveit, it merits our particu.
iar notice.

The court of England was at this time divided

between two powerfil faftions, which contended
for tle filpreme dire&tion of affairs. The leader
of the one was Robert D'Evreux, earl of Eliex;
fir Robert Cecil, the son of lord treasurer Bur.
leigh, was at the head of the other. The former
was the mofi accomplished and the molt popular
of all the English nobles; brave, generous, as.
fable; though impetuous, yet willing to liften to
the counsels of those whom he loved; an avow.
ed, but not an implacable enemy; a friend no
less contant than warm; incapable of disguising
bis own fentimcnts, or of inifreprefenting thofl
of others; better fitted for a camp than for a
Court; of a genius that qualified him for the firlt
place in the administration, with a spirit which
fcorued the second as below his merit. He was
soon diflinguifhed by the queen, who, with a
profusion uncoinmon to her, conferred on him,
eyen in his earliell youth, tle highelt honoulrs
Nor did this diminifli the cfelem and affection of
his countrymen; but, by a rare felicity, lie was
at once the favourite of his sovereign, and the
darling of the people. Cecil, on the other h;lnd,
educated in a court, and trained under a falthcr
deeply ikilled in all its arts, was crafty, inflinuat
ing, induifrious; and though poflcfled of talects
which fitted him for the hightil offices, he did
not r;ly upon his merit alone for attaining them,
.but ayiiled himself of every advantage, wlich
his own address, or the miltakes of others, as.
forded him. Two such men were formed to be

rivald

rivals and enemies. Eflix despised tile aits of
Cecil as low and bale. To Cecil, the ea-l's mag-
·i;nimity appeared to be prefunrption and folly.
All the military men, except Raleigh, favoured
Eflix. hMolf of the courtiersI adhered to Cecil,
[.ihofe manners more nearly resemblcd their own.

As Elizabcth advanced in years, the itlriggle

ibt\vecn these fitcRions hectme more violent.
ElI'lx, in order to tirengthen hilmfelf, had early
courted the frindfliip of the king of Scots, for
whose right of fucceffiol he was a zealouis advo-
(ate, and held a close correspondence both vith
lmin and with his principal milifters. Cecil, de-
v.t.d to the queen alone, roft daily to new ho-
n(ours by the assiduity of Iis frvicces, and the pa.
icence with which he expectedl the reward of
thlie ; while tle earl's hitgh fpi'it and impetiucfi.
ty ionmetimes exposed ]lim to checks fiom a inifl
trefs, who, though pafti;Ml ill her afflction to-
ward him, could not calily beai ccntraditio'n,
ntl who conferred favours often iinwillingly,
and always florly. His own solicitations, how-
vt'r, fecondtdl maliciouily by:lisi elctniest Wlho
iflled to remove him at a distance from court,
advahced hlim to tile corimand of the arlhy ierl
loyed in Ireland againi Tyronne, aird t tlhe
iflice of lord lieutenant 6J that kingdon, ihit: a
ommifilon almoit unlimhitedt His fucecfi in
hat expedition did not equal eithelh Iliz oiwn pl
nilcs, or the expetations of Elizabith, rile
uecile, peev;ih firomi hIir difanppuintnment, and: et-
Ifpe;atetl agiilat ETffex by the artifices of his eite-
ils, wi-bte lli'.i Ia lluirn letter, fill of aeccifil-
ions and reproacdihs'. These ihis itpatientt fpiift
iBddinoti-lcia amnd, iii tilh firit tranifpolts of blh

rcentmenit,

rcfentment, i'e proposed to carry over a part 0
his army into England, and, by driving his ene
mies from the queen's presence, to reinltate him
self in favour and in power. lBut upon more nia
tnre thoughts he abandoned this ralh design. aid
setting fail with a ferv offiC'rs devoted to his pe
son, landed in t;nglaud, and potled diredti) t
court. Elizabeth received him without an
fvnptom either of afft&ion or of difple-alrie
jiy p'.opter compliances and a;cknowledgnmcl,
lie might have regained his former ascendant (ov
the queen. But he thought hinmlilf too deepli
injured to submit to thete. Elizabeth, on tói
other hand, determinced to subdue his hlauglit
temper; and though lier 'severity drew from hiil
the molt humble letters, Ihe confined him to tl
lord keeper's house, and appointed commiflonei
to try him, both for his conduc during his ge
verninent of Ireland, and for leaving that king
dom without her permission. By their fentclc
he was suspended from all his offices, except thi
of maiter of the horse, and continued a prifone
during the queen's pleasure. Satisfied with ham
ing nlortified his pride thull far, Elizabeth di
not susser the sentence to be recorded, and soo
after allowed him to retire to his own houfi
During there tranfafions, which occupiedl fevi
ral months, fsei: fluftuated between the aii
giance he owed to his fovercign, and the delir
of revenge; and formetines leaned to the oni
and fometitnes to the other. In one of the ii
tervals when the latter prevailed, he sent a niti
fetger into Scotland, to encourage the kingt
aflirt his own right to the fuccefflon by force (
arms, and to proliife that, besides tlh allillhs

the earl and all his friends in England, lord
ouintjoy now 'lord lieutenant of Ireland, would
i, hiim with five thousand men from that king..
in. But James did not choose to hazard thlc
ig a kingdom, of which he was just about to
tain poffelion, by a premature attempt to seize

Mountjoy, too, declined the entcrprife, and

rTex adopted more dutiful schemes; all thoughts
fambition appearing to be totally effaced out of
is mind. '
Ti;s moderation, which was merely the effcd of
ifgtnl and disappointment, was not of long con-
nlance ; and the queen, having not only re-
tfed to renew a lucrative grant which she had
inerly bettlowed,' but even to admit him into
cr preflice, that new injury drove a temper,
aturally impatient, and now much fretted, to
Ifolnte despair. His friends, inRfead of sooth-
i his rage, or reltraining his imnpetuofity, added
o bth by their imprudent and interelted zeal.
ftcr many anxious consultations, he determined
attempt to redress his wrongs by violence.
tt lbeing conscious how unpopular such an cn-
erprile would be, if it appeared to proceed fiom
otivcs of private revenge alone, he endeavour-
d to give it the semblance of public utility, by
ingling-the king of Scotland's interest with hil
wn. He wrote to James, that the faction
l'icli now predominated in the Englifli court
ad rcolved to support the pretensions of the In-
nta of Spain to the crown ; that the places of
hi grcatef importance in the kingdom were put

to the hands of his avowed enemies ; and that

ulelf; be sent ambassadors, without delay, to in-
t ol the immediate declaration of his right of
I'OL. 111. H juc.

succession, their measures were so well concerted,
that all his hopes would be desperate. Jamne,
who knew how disagreeable such a propo!al
would be to the queen of England, was not will.
ing rafily to expose himself to her displeasure.
Effex, nevertheless, blinded by resentment, ard
impatient for revenge, abandoned himself to thlie
passions,, and acted like a man guided by fraeny
or despair. With two or three hundred follo'.
ers incompletely armed, he attempted to assault
a throne the best eftablilhed in Europe. Sally.
ing at their head out of his own house, he called
on the citizens of London, if they either value!
his life, or wified to preserve the kingdom fron
the dominion of the Spaniards, to take ar'li,
and to follow his standard. He advanced to
wards the palace with an intention to drive Cec
and his faction out of the queen's presence, aad
to obtain a declaration of the Scottish king'
right of fiicceffion.'. But, though almost ador(t
by the citizens, not a man would join him in thi
wild enterprise. Dispirited by their indifference
deserted by some of his own attendants, and al
molt surrounded by the troops, which marclie
against him under different leaders into the city
he retreated to his own house; and without air
bold effort, suitable to his present condition, o
worthy of his former reputation for courage, 1
ftirrendered to his enemies.

As Joion as James heard of Essex's ill fucceCi

he appointed the earl of Mat, and Bruce, abbt
of Kinlols, to repair as his ambafladors to th
court of England. The formir of thife.was t

It Birch. Mcr. ii. 477,

perk

person by whose means Effex had carried on his
conrclp olldence with the king. He was a pas-
!i;,niLtc admirer of the earl's charater, and dif-
poscd to attempt every thing that could contri.
bute to his safety. Bruce, united in a close
frit'ndfhip wIith Mar, was ready to second him.
v;li equal zeal. Nor was the purpose of the
eli!!afl\; less friendly to Eflex, than the choice of
:is iti;a)lafidors; they were commanded to solicit,
in tile warmneiV manner, for the earl's life, and
if th!y found that the king, by avowing his
fricids, could either promote their designs, or
co:tlrbute to their safety, they were impowered
to lav aside all disguise, and to promise that he
,,1,ll put himself at their head, and claim what
was d(:e to him by force of armsc. But before
he alibafladors could reach London, Effex had
tffered the punishment which he merited by his
ciafo!. Perhaps the fear of their interposing,
n order to obtain his pardon, hastened his death.
Elizabeth continued, for some time, irresolute
ornccring his fate, and could not bring herself
o colligil into the hands of the executioner, a
mtl who had once pofl'efed her favour so entire-
y, without a painful truggle between her re.
entment againt his late mifcondutd, and her an.
icr affction towards him. The distress to.
lict'li hle was now reduced, tended naturally to
loicni the former, while it revived the latter with
lew tenderness; and the interclffion of one faith-
ill friend, who had interest with the queen, might
)erhaps have saved his life, and have procured him
rcuniflion, which, of herself, the was aflhamed to

C Johnit. aS9. Birch. Mem. ii. 510o.

H z grant.

grant. But this generous nobleman had at t!:;
lifme no filch friend. El.izabeth, solicited 1ii.
ceflanltly hy her miiilters, and offended with th!e
hiauightinllls of lEflex, who, as file imaigilcl,
fcorind to sue for pardon, at lait commanded the
sentence to be put in execution. No foonci .,v
the blow itbuck, than (lie repented of her i.v
raliniefs, and bewailed his death with the detpcit
sorrow. James always confidered him as (,ne
who had fallen a martyr to his fcrvice, and, after
his aceeffion to the Englifil throne, reflorcd his
son to his honours, as well as all his alltciatvs in
the confpirac)', and distinguished them witil liis
favour d.

The Scottihf ambassadors, finding that they

had arrived too late to execute the chief buliniii
committed to their charge, not only conceald
that part of their initru tions withthec utiutim
care; but congratulated the queen, in their
master's name, on her happy escape fiom fulh an
audacious conspiracy. Elizabeth, though no
itranger to the king's correspondence with Eslces,
or to that noblenma's intentions of afcitinig
James's right to the crown, was not willing that
these ilhould be known to the people, and, for
that reason, received the congratulations of tile
Scottifl ambaflitdors with all polfible marks ol
credit and good will ; and in order to footihJiaiio,
and to preserve the appearances of union bet\wcr
the two courts, increased the subsidy whicli Ikc
paid hin annually. The ambaflitdors retlid(
for fobmn time in ]-ngland, and were eminpllyid
iwith grcat success, in renewing and extendig

d Camil. Spotfw.464.

th.

the intrigues, which Bruce had formerly entered
into with tile Englifl nobles. As Elizabeth
advanced in years, the Englifl turned their eyes

olrel and more towards Scotland, and were eager
to prevent each other in courting the favour of
tlhir future monarclh. Assurances of attachment,
protlfcions of regard, and promiles of support,
were offered to James from every corner of the
kingdom. Cecil himself, perceiving what hopes
'(flex had founded on the friendflip of the Scot-
tlil king, and what advantages he.might have
icrive: d from it, thought it prudent to Itand no
long-cr at a diltance fiom a prince, who might so
loon become his malter. But being fenlible at
tlie lame time how dangerous fich an intercourse
n;il:,it prove, under a miflrefs naturally jealous,
uind \wvlofe jealousy grew itronger with old age;
tlholugh he entered into a correspondence with
limin, he carried it on with all the secrecy and
cantion necefla.ry in his iituation, and peculiar to
his clL;araecrl d. James having gained the man
wlolc opposition and influence he had hitherto
lchifly dreaded, waited, in p erfet feculity, till
tilat event h ould appen, w would open his
w\ay to the throne of England . It was with

d 'ee Pppend. No. 1.111.
e Dr iirch, in his lire if pri'ce Henry, p. "3. has gNien
fa:.Ie accoIunt of the myteill.us Imode in which this conil,-
fl'oiJniic'. was cl.iied on1, and how tin leticra were convl.rye

Ii, r L.indln t It i)ublin, and firin thence to Scotland. Not.

witlhtulainln the l;,lic;tiide which ( ecil rrpeatcedly discovers
lli.t hiis leterta fhiulld I: d(ellrnyrd as Ioon ;:s ihe king had
rlad them, a confiderbhle tiumlrer of them has been pre-
served, and publishrd hy fir David Dalrymple in the year 1776.
'I hey were written by lord Henry Howard, under the infpec.
ti,,ul if Cccil, in a fl)le aiHleedly (bl'cure. l'h whole cor-
itlj ,indcl]cc is mose curioua th;an inftlrutive.

1H3 some

some difficulty that lie restrained within proper
bounds his adherents in that kingdom, who, la-
bouring to diftinguifll themselves by that offi.
cious zeal, with which a prince, who has a near
prdofpe: of mounting the throne, is always
served, 'urged him to allow a motion to be made
inl piarliament for declaring his right of fucceflin
to the crown. James prudently discouraged that
deiign ; but it wa; with no small fatisfaftion that
he obfcrved the ascendant he was acquiring il
a court, the dictates of which he had beein ;
long obliged to obey ; and which had either pre.
fcribcd or thwarted every ftep he had taken duri;i
the whole course of his reign f.

r6o2.] Notwithltanding the violent flrugglit

of the political fatiions which divided the court,
and the fiequent revolutions which had happened
there, since the king first took the reins of go.
vernmcnt into his own hands, Scotland had cn.
joycd unusual tranquillity, being undisturbcd by
any foreign enemy, and siee from any intestine
comimotion of long continuance. During this
p'eriod, James endt-ivourcd to civilize the High-
lands and tle Isles, a part of his d9minions too
much negleEted bIy former monarchs, though the
r'efiormation of it was an ol)jeC't highly worthy of
thlir care. Ille long peace with England had as-
tord(ed an opportunity of fubduinlg the licentiusi
spirit of the bordcreis, and of rellraining'their de.
predations, often no less ruinous to tleir country.
men than to their enemies. The inhabitants of
the low coultry began, gradually, to forget the
use of arms, re;d to become attentive to the anta
t' peace. But the -Iiglllanders,' retaining tlhir

t Spotfw.,457. 47. Birch. McPe'ii, 514

Ixlnl~l

:.;atu:'al fierceness, averse from labour, and inured
to rapine, infested their more industrious neigh-
bolrs by their continual incursions. James, being
!i ;licitous not only to repress their inroads, but
to render them useful fubjefs g, had at different
times ellaLted many wife laws extremely conducive
to these ends. All landlords, or chiefs of plans,

Cere enjoined to permit no persons to reiide in
th'cil etates who could not find sufficient surety
for their good behaviour; they were required to
lake a lift of all suspicious persons under their
ijuifdiation, to bind themselves to deliver them
to juitice, and to indemnify those who fllould
siliclr by their robberies; and, in order to afcer-
tail the faithful performance of these articles,
thrl chiefs themselves were obliged to give holtages
to tile king, or to put pledges in his hands.
llree towns, which might serve as a retreat for
:he iilduftrious, and a nursery for arts and com-
r!l-ce, were appoiuted to be built in different
);its of the Highlands; one in Cantire, another
i Lochaber, and a third in the isle of Iewvis;
ied, in order to draw inhabitants thither, all the
r.ivilcges of royal boroughs were to be conferred
ipoln themr. Finding it, however, to be no easy
'atter to inspire the natives of those countries
.ill the love of indullry, a resolution was taken
:I plant among them colonies of people fiom the
ulre indttitrious counties. The firfl experiment
'as made in the isle of Lewis; and ao it was
lvarlt;geouly situated for the fillling trade, a
urce from which Scotland ouglht naturally to
:rive great wealth, the colony transportcd
ihcr was drawn out of Fife, the. inhabitants

g Bail. Dor. 139.

of

of which were well fiillkd in that branch of
commerce. But before they had remained there
long enough to manifest the good effets of this
institution, the islanders, enraged at feeing thir
country occupied by thofc intruders, took anms,
and furprililg them in the night-time, murdertd
fume of them, and compelled the reft to abanu!n:
the fettlcment. The king's attention being lo;on
after turned to other obje(s, we hear no in;i,
of this salutary project. Though James did ii,,
pursue the design with th at iteady applicatini
and perseverance, without which it is iml:i)fflh)!
to change the manners of a whole peoplc, Ik
had the glory, however, rot only of having liri:
conceived the thoughts,lbut of having firit pointed
out the proper method of introduciing the civil
arts of life into that part of the island .

003.] After having long enjoyed a good si;te us

health, the effti: of a found conititution, and tle
reward of unccomlron regularity and trinplcrace,
Elizabeth began this winter to feel iher vigourld.
crease,. and to be sensible of the ilfir miti":; ol ,iil
age. Having removed on a very llorny lny
fiom Wefimirl;er to Richmond [Jan. i3]
wvhithr file was impatient to retire, her crni
plaints increased. Shel had no formed fcver; hsl
pulse was good ; but lhe eat little, and onuli'ncl
sleep. Her diftempler feemted to procted inl:
a dep nmelancholy, whichl appeared both in lel
countenance and behaviour. She delighited ii
solitude, flie fat colnfiantly in the dark; and wa
often drowned in tears.

No sooner was the queen's indisposition known
,than petfons of all ranks, and of ull diffl'rcl

h piri.l i758 15574.,1597. Sotlrw, 468.

sucó

[LCt, and parties, redoubled their applications to
ie klilg of Scots, aid vied with each other in
profelfions of attachment to his person, and in
i:onlifes of filbnifliion to his government. Even
lul: of Elizabeth's own fe-vants, weary of the
Irlltr) of her reign, fond of novelty, impaticnt
to get rid of the burthen of gratitude for pait
l.:icits, and expeEting to (hare in the liberality
of a new prince, began to desert her: and ciowds
[>l people hurried towards Scotland, eager to pre-

.:co!ly the favour of the fuccefor, or afraid of

L it 1oo late in paying homage to him.
Meanwhile, the queen's difeaie increased, and
hr melancholy appeared to be fettled and in-
:'t';blce. Various conjictures were formed con-
:r ing the caulcs of a disorder, from which she
ltc:rs(d to be exempted by the natural cheerful-
ncl of her temper. Some imputed it to her be-
in forced, contrary to her inclination, to pardon
the carl of Tyronne, whose rebellion had for
slnmy years created her much trouble. Others
inliagined that it arose from observing the ingra-
titude of her courtiers, and the levity of her peo.
ple, wlo beheld her health declining with moit
idecent indifference, and looked forward to the
:cecilioi of the Scottifi king, with an ilmpatience
whicll they could not conceal. Tle nmol corn-
non opinion, at that time, and perhaps lthe most
pn)babl)el, wva, that it flowed from grief for the
'.l of Eflex. Slle retained an extraordinary
cgard for the memory of that unfortunate noble.
nan; and though Ihe often complailed of his
'I)lIinacy, seldom mentioned his name without
,axrsl. An accident happcned soon after her

I Birch. Mem. ii. 505.

retiring

retiring to Richmond, which revived her affediio
with new tenderness, and embittcred her sorrows.
The countess of Nottingham, being on her death.
bed, desircd to fee the queen, in order to rltc:;
fomcthing to her, w:ithout dilcovelriin which, 1!;:
could no' dlie in peace. When the queen can;
into her chamnber, she 'told her, that while Efli;
lay under sentence of death, lie was delil-ots i
imploring parl(on1 in the maniner which the qucni
herfclt had pireciibed, by returning a ring, whiciI
during thc height of his favour file had given him,
with a promile that if, in any future ditirefs, he
sent that back to her as a token, it should entitle
him to her protection ; that lady Scroop wa, tl.,
person he intended to employ in order to prefnt
it; that, by a nillake, it was pnt into her li.aln
initead of lady Scroop's; and that she lhavIil;
communicated the matter to her husband, one of
Eflcx's mofl implacablt enemies, he had foirbid
her cither to carry the ring to the qncen, or to
return it to the carl. The countess having thus
disclosed her secret, begged the queen's forgive.
ness: but Elizabcthl, who now saw both the
malice of the earl's enemies, and how unjuflly
fle had filfpeated hinm of inflexible Iobllnacy, Ic.
plied, " God may forgive you, but I never can;"
and left the room in great emotion k. From Iliat

Inomelnt,

k This anecdote concerning Elizabelh was sirs publitlld

by Oflbrne, hlMln. of Eliz. p. 3 i is confiltirce by tle tdIt;.
mony ot de NI1a.rier, Men). z6o. and by the traditional cv\.
dence of lady Elizabeth Sperlnrn, publilhed hy Dr. Birlh,
Negoc. Ie 6. Camden mentionl the queen's grief for Hl eIx'
death as one of the caules ol hIr melancholy. Some oiginl
papes remain, which piove that this was conmn ,niy belicved
at the time. Birch. Mcm. ii. 5o6. lillcx, howevr hid

hben

moment, her spirit funk entirely ; file could scarce
talte food; file refused all the medicines prelrribcd
by her physicians ; declaring that flie wifled to
die, and would live no lonlger. No intreaty
Col!d prevail on her to go to bed; flie at on
cuilions, durting ten days and nights, pensive and
silent, holding' her finger almolt continually inl
1hr mouth, with her eyes open, and fixed on the
gr,. lnd. The only thing to which she seemed
to give any attention, was the aas of devotion
performed in her apartment by the archbiliop of
Canterbury; and in these le joilned with great
appearance of iervour.. Waited, at lait, as well
h)r ainglifll of minld, as )b long abilnence, file
c;p'ired, without a tllugg-le, on Thursday the
twicty-fourth day of Marchi, in tile seventieth
year of her age, and in the forty-fifth of her

Foreiglners often accuse the Enlglifh of indif-

fc:ceel anld difrieflpiet towiards their princes. But
b.ci: lbeheaded two years before her death, and there seems to
l1re been no other reason, but tih.t which we have afligiled,
why he, forrlws ihould revive w;lh :i) much violence at si>
gr 't a dilance of time. As lhe death of the counters of
N triigllam happened abour a orrniglht before the queen's
death, the c,)incidernce of ttlie'e events, ogether with the
crher evidence mentioned, addd so imuch prohitllity to the

tloly related by Olbornc, as will entitle it to a place in his-
tiy. The only objiclion to the account we a.lve given of
Ehzabth's attaclhment to Eflix, lirilfe fiorn her grern age.
At the a;e of 68, tie amorous paiflions are commonly abun-
dliitly cool, nrnd tle violence ofall the panionc, cxcett one, ia
much .bhlted. But che foirce of this objefain is entirely re-
moc,,l by an author who has illultratcd many pafliges in the
Eitnlilh Ilistory, and adorned more. Cataluguc of Royal
md N bile Authors, Article Eflcx.
I t:.Inil. Birch. Merm, ii 50o6. Dirch, Negoc, 206.

withouit;

wnithout reason ; no people are more grateful than
they to those monarchs who merit their grati.
tude. The nances of Edward IIl. and I-Henmy \,
arc mentioned by the Englilh of this age \i:;h
the iame warmth as they were by thoc \cwhI
liared ini the bleflings and splendour of thi:
reigns. The memory of llizaheth is ltill adcrci
in England. lThe hilotria.s of that kingldo:,.
after celelrating her love of her people ; her i..
gacity il difeerning their true intcrett; her it;;-
dlnefs in purltiugl it; hler wisdom in the choic(
of her minitcrs ; the glol y flc acquired by ai n;
the tranquilllity (he cncurel to her fiibjeAs . ;.:a
ile inereafe of fame, of riches, and of cemn'mtrc
\lwichl were the fruits of all these; jultly tai:
iler amog; tile moil illuitious prilnces. E.\;
the defets in her eharatder, they observe, \\.;
not of a kind pernicious to her people. Ilei cx
ceflive frugality was not accompanied witxh ih
love of hoarding ; and tlough it prevented fo;r::
great Iundertakilgs, and relndered the fuicccfs
others incomplete, it introduced orconomiy i:A
lier administration, ;anid xmtinptcd the naition fitr'.
many burdens, mhich a monarch, mtre proti;cl
or more elterprifilg, must have inipofed. '1-1
slowness in rewardil, iil h erervanuts fomelinles iii.
colli-tgcd ufetful micit ; but it preented tlh 1111
iet'tx'illg from acqui'ing power and wealll, I1
v hieli llcey had lno title. Itcr extreme jealint !
of those printees who pretiended to ditilute l:i
light to tie crown, kd her to t;ake fitch pi'cl;u
t;ons, as tended no less to the public safety, tla
to hrr own ; and to con't the affeioins ot 1'
people, as tle flhmetl fiuppolrt of her threon
Sihll is the piciure whilch the Lnglifll dir;w\
tils tgreatl queen.

WUA-U'

W\hoever undertakes to write the hitiory of
sland, finds himftif obliged, frequently, to

'I,'\V her il a very difierent, and in a Icfs amiable
i)llht. tHer authority i;n :at kingdom, during
lic greater part of her reign, was little inferior
t, that which ihe poll'tfcd in her own. But
tlis authority, acquired at firll: by a service of
:cu.t Importance to the nation, fli cxercfed in a
lmaiincer extremely pernicious to its liappinefs. By
11i' inllldltry in foomentilng the rage of the two
contending faAions; by supplying the one with
partial aid ; by feeding the other with salic
iop's; by balancing thcir power so artfully, th at
chll of them iwas able to (liltrefs, and neitler of
them to lubdue the other ; fle rendered Scotland
lo:;), the feat of diflord, connfion, and blood-
flnd : and her craft and intrigues, effclilng what
the valour of her anceltors could not accomplifll,
reduccd that kingdom to a state of deicldanlce
n England. The maximls of policy, often little
coifoiilllt to those of morality, may, perhaps,
;;llil's this condut. But no apology can be
v!tircd for her behaviour to queen Mari; a scene
ot dilllmulation witlout neccllity; and of severity
berond example. In almolR all

a er other a.ion,

Eli' 'beth is the olbject of our hilrlclt admiira-
i(ni; in this we mhtiif allonv that Ihe not only laid
alidc the magnanimitywvlich beciiitlu: queen, but
tine cfelings natural to a woman.

Though Elizabeth would never permit the

qucllion concerning thle right of succession to the
crown to be determinecd in parliament ; nour du-
clare her own sentiments concernillg a point

hliclh Ille wifhled to remain an impenetrable myf-
aery; ihe had however, sornmd no deftgn of cx-
........ a t cludiju..

eluding the Scottilh king from an inheritance
which his title was undoubted. A short t;ilr
before her death, fle brlke the silence which 1;(
had so long preserved on that fubjett, and toi!

' 'Cecil and the lord admiral, " That her thre.oi
:"."' -vwas the throne of kings; that flie would have i..

- n:ean pcrfon to afeend it, and that her coulii

the king of Scots Ihiould be her ficceffor."
This lle confirmed on her death-bed. As focni
as she brcathed her last, the lords of the pil;,
council proclaimed James king of England. Al!
the int ignes carried on by foreigners in favrnou
of the Jlfanta, all the cabals formed within ihe
kingdom tl, support the titles of lady Arabelit
and the earl of Hartford, dilfppeared in a n ,.
./ nient; the nobles and people, furgetting ti-i;'

, ncilnt hostilities with Scotland, ind tlieir avci!"
/ ! for the dominioni of ilt'angers, tctificd the ir l:i'-

fadtio. with loudtr acclanmations than wcre li.:.i
at the accession of their 'native ;-i:ncc3. A'n:. .
this tumult of joy, a motion n.ade by a fcv' .:i-
' triots, who proposed to prcfcribe f ,om; condirt:'.
to the fuccefler, and to exist fr.,n i im tile :-
dref; of some grievances, hbi.oic tli.y c;:l(d i :.!
to the throne, was scarcely heard ; ;ar:d Cecil, '
:, tifling it, added to lis, flock of mcrit witll ':

e

' e malter. Sir-,Clirles Percy, brot;hr of I.
carl of North ml, '?irl;aid, and T'llolaa Siomn. ,:,
' the carl of Wiolccie's son, wert difpatcicdl ti

Scotland, wvith a letter. 1 tho kinl., signed 1' '!1
*' · , the peers iand privy ctitiill,l.lors thlcn ill Iondm

', f

' jnforrnii;g hnil of the q(icen's dcath, of hir ;cl
I..~, / cefflon to th. throne, o their cac to recognllzc

, .',lis title, and of thc.llivelihl applalfe with whlich

1 t' e lpl blic.priclamation of it had 'en auttlendr'l

' " v ,r

./: 'I

.l ; . ,, , 1i 1f:t , .
i ,)

They made the utmost haste to deliver this wel-
come message; but were prevented by the zeal
of fir Robert Carey, lord Hunfdon's youngest
son, who, setting out a few hours after Eliza-
beth's death, arrived at Edinburgh on Saturday
night, just as the king had gone to bed, He
was immediately admitted into the royal apart-
ment, and kneeling by the king's bed, acquainted
hlim with the death of Elizabeth, saluted him
lking of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland;
and as a token of the truth of the intelligence
vwhich he brought, presented him a ring, which
his sifter lady Scroop had taken from the queen's
finger after her death. James heard him with a
decent composure. But as Carey was only a
private meifengcr, the information which he
brought was not made public, and the king kept
!:.i apartment till the arrival of Percy and So-
iiicCct. Then his titles were solemnly pro-
clained; and his own flbjcts expressed no less
iy, than the Englilh, at this increase of his dig-
i;t'V. As his presence was abfolutcly necessary ii
IEgland, where the people were extremely im-
p:tient to fee their cnw iovereign, he prepared to
irt out for that kingdom without delay. He
?ppointed his queen to follow him withi i a few
,,.cLks. He committed the government of Scot-
l;nd to his privy council. lie intruiled the care
of his children to different noblemen. On the
8lntday before his departure, he repaired to tIle
chutrch us St. Giles, and after hearing a fenrnon,
i;i which the preacher displayed the greatness of
t!l divine goodetlesill railing him to the throne
of 'itch a powerful kingdom without oppoiition
o, b!oodflied, and exhorted him to express his

I 2 gratitude,

ratitune, by promoting, to thecutm'oat the hap.
finef and prosperity of his fubjctas, the king
rose up, and addrefing himself to the.i|o ple,
made many profcflions of unalterable.',afe&ion
towards them; promiscd to visit Scotlfitl'fre.
quently; assured them that his Scottiflhfubjet&s,
potwithftanding his absence; ihould feel tha he
was their native prince, no left than when he
resided among them; and might still trul. that
his ears should be always open to their petitions,
which he would answer with the alacfity',nd
love of a parent. His words were often inter.
xupted by the tears of the whole audience;
who, though they exulted at the king's prof.
perity, were melted into sorrow by these tender
'declarations .

On the fifth of April he began his journey,

with a splendid, but not a numerous train; and
next day he entered Berwick. Wherever he
tame, immense multitudes were assembled to
welcome him; and the principal persons in the
different counties through which he passed,, dil.
played all their wealth and magnificence in el-
tertainments prepared for him at their houses.
'EIinahcth had reigned so long in England, that
molt of her fubjec&s relmembered no other court
but hers, and their notions of the manners and
decorums luitable to a prince were formed upon
what they had observed there. It was natural
to'apply this (fandard to the behaviour and ac.'
;tions of their new monarch, and to compare hlil,
at firfl. light, with the queen, on whose throne
he was to be placed. James, whose manners

m Spotfw. 76.
! ' .-* \w,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~VT'

Po19JJI.

Ni·'
3~~.vr ~ ~ ~ ·/N(JY~~~~

~P~(nn~c~rl~IAE ~~~~S~~si,,rA d

..'cre extremely different from hers, fiffered by
the comparison. He had not that flowring affa-
bility, by which Elizabeth captivated the hcarts
of her people ; and, though cafy among a few
whom he loved, his indolence could not .bear the
fI'iirlue of rendering himifelf agreeatble to a mixcd
mhititidcl. He was no less a ilianger to that
dli'.inity with which Elizabeth temliered her fa-
m'iiarity. And, inll.cal of that well-juldged
fi'ui'v withl wliieh fhilc conferred titls of ho-
di, hli.e belloved thicn with an ull iitingilliing
,ifl;ion, that rei;dcredl. them no longiee marks
of (diliinion, or rewards of merit. Ilit these
iwere the reile&ionis of lthe few al.ne; the Inul-
tikllde continued tlc;ir acciamLtions ; and, amildit
ti..f, Janles entered ,ondon 'n tlhe 7th of May,
: t.,i t eok )paceable pofFrcfion of the throne of
E.;;i landl.

T'ius were united two lingdoms, divided

f;om tile enarli:f. accoililts of time, but destined,
1:- their iitunaton, to form one glreat monarchy.
Ib- tiis juncdtion of its whole native force, Great
bi;'tain lia.lt risen to an eminence and authority
in Europe, which England and Scotland, while
'frparate, could never Ihave attained.

ITle Scots had so lonngr con(idcr(:.thieir tno

iir;hli as inext heirs to the Englih throne, that
iley liad fiull leisure to reflet oni all the confe-
qi':n<ces of their lbeing advanced to that dignity.
Ilut, dziazl.ed wivll th!e glory of giving a sovereign
; their powerful cneiy, relying on the palti-
alih y of their native prince, nd in full expcea-
liol of sharing liberally in the wealth and honourr
whiich he would now be able to belltow, they at-
tended little to the moll: obvious confequencc of

13 that

*that great event, and rejoiced at his accession to
the throne of England, as if it had been no less
beneficial to the kingdom, than honourable to
the king. They soon had reason, however, to
adopt very different sentiments; and from that
period we may date a total alteration in the po,
litical conflitnt;on of Scotland.

The feudal ariitocracy, which had been flb.

verted in most nations of Europe by the policy
of their princes, or had been undermined by the
progress of commerce, frill subsisted with ful!
force in Scotland. Many causes had contributed
gradually to augment the power of the Scottitl
nobles; and even the reformation, which, ii;
every other country where it prevailed, added )o
the authority of the monarch, had increased tlldr
wealth and influence. A king possessed of a
small revenue, with a prerogative extremely
limited, and unfup;ortcrl by a itanding arnm,
could not exercise mucl a:thority over iuch po?
tent fubjecs. IHe wa obliged to govern by
expedients ; and the laws derived their force not
from his power to execute them, but from the
voluntary fulhmrflion of the nobles. But though
tll; pioduccd a species of government extremely
feeble and irregular; though Scotland, under
tih name, and with all the outward ensigns ol
a nonarchy, was really fuiljeCt to an aristocracy,
the people we-c not aitogetlher unhappy; and
cven in this wild form of a confiitution, tllre
were principles, which tended to their security
and advantage. 'The king, checked and over-
;wed by th( nobles, dlutft venture upon no adL
of arbitrarl powe

o l; Tl'h nobles¢ jealous of the
king, whtlec clainm and pretcnfiont i .w.'ec many,

though

tliough his power was small, were afraid of irri-
tating their dependents byunreafonable exactions,
and tempered the rigour of ariftocratical tyranny,
with a mildness' and equality to which it is
naturally a itranger. As long as the military
genius of the feudal government remained in
vigour, the vassals both of the crown and of the
baronswere generally not only free from oppression,
but were courted by their superiors, whose power
and importance were founded on their attach-
ment and love.

But, by his accession to the throne of Eng-

l:ti, James acquired such an immense accession
of wealth, of power, and of splendour-, that the
uobles, aftoniffied and intimidted, thought it
vain to struggle for privileges which thev werie
now unable to defend. Nor was it from fear
alone that they submitted to the yoke; James,
partial to his countrymen, and willing that they
lhould partake in his good fortune, loadid thciam
(rith richcs and honours; and the hope of his
favo'u concurred with the dread of his power,
in taming their fierce and independent spirits.
The will of the prince became the supreme law
in Scotland; and the nobles strove, with cmu-
Iation, who should moR. implicitly obey com-
ni;ildsl, which they had formerly been accustomed
t, contemn. Satisfied with laving fubjeed the
nmbles, to the crown, the king left them in full
lpu'rtfion of their ancient julifdicio6n over their
own vafihls. The extonfive rights', veilcd in a
fiuldal chief, became in their hands dreadful in-
llturecnts of oppreflon, and the.nlilitary ideas,
Oii which thefc rights were foulndod, being gra-
luahliy lot., or difregaelrded uotbiag remainedf to

currctt

corret or to mitigate the rigour with which they
were exercised. irle nobles, exhaufling their
fortunes by the expence of frequent attendance
upon the English court, and by attempts to
imitate the manners and luxury of their more
wealthy neitghbours, multiplied exaEtiont, upon
the people, who durst hardly utter conmplain'L,
which they knew would never reach the ear of
their sovereign, nor move him to grant them any
redress. From the union of the crowns to the
revolution in 1688, Scotland was placed in a
political situation, of all others the most fingullar
and the most unhappy; subjected at once ta.tlc
albolutc will of a monarch, and to the oppreflive
jurifidicion of an aristocracy, it suffered all the
iniferies peculiar to both these forms of govern.
nlent. Its kings were despotic ; its nobles were
slaves and tyrants; and the people groaned under
the rigorous domination of both.

During this period, the nobles, it is true,

made one effort to shake off the yoke, sand to
regain their ancient independency. After the
death of James, the Scottiflh nation was no longer
viewed by our monarchls with any partial afiec-
tion. Charles I. educated among the Euglilh,
discovered no peculiar attachment to the kingdoom
of which he was a native. The nobles, perceiv-
ing the sceptre to be now in hands less friendly,
and swayed by a prince with whom they ilad
little connexion, and over whofc councils li.y
.had little influence, no longer submitted with
*the fame implicit obedience. Provoked by fouit
encroachrnaits of the king 'on their order, iandi
apprehensive of others, the remains of their an-
clent spirit began-to appear. They compainctl

. nd

,nil remonifrated. The people being, at llth
ialne time, violently disgusted at the innovations
in religion, the nobles secretly heightened this
(lifgsit; and their artifices, together with the
ill-conducE of the court, raised such a spirit, that
the whole nation took arms againit their fove-
tcign, with an union and aimoty of which there
had formerly been no example. Charles brought
a3;ainft them the forces of England, and notwith-
Ilanding their own union, and the zeal of the
people, the nobles mull have funk in the struggle.
But the disaffection which was growing among
i:s Elglillt subjects, prevented the king from
atin: vwith vigour. A civil war broke out in
both kingdoms; and after many battles and
revolutions, which are well known, the Scottish
nobles, who firlt began the war, were involved
in the fame ruin with the throne. At the refto-
a.tion, Charles II. regained full pofldilion of the
ry;al prerogative in Scotland; and the nobles,

liife estates were waited, or their spirit broken,
i) the calamities to which they had been ex.
pf:d, \were less able and less willing than ever
to rerit the power of the crown. During his
reign, and that of James VII. the dictatcs of
the monarch were received in Scotland with most
al)jctt fiibmilioll. The poverty to which many
io the nobles were reduced, rendered them meaner
iv;, , and more intolerable tyrants than ever.
'lTi people, always neglected, were now odious,
idi(l loatded with every injury, on account of
tli:ir attachment to religious and political prin-
clples, extremely repugnant to those adopted by
!Ihcir pri'nces.

'1'hic

The revolution introduced other maxims intd

the government of Scotland. To increase the
authority of the prince, or to iecure tle privileges
of the nobles, had hitherto been lalmot tlhe sole
objet of our laws. The rights of the people
were hardly ever mentioned, were disregarded, or
unknown. Attention began, henceforward, to
be paid to the welfare of the people. By the
claim of right, their liberties were secured; a;d
the number of their representatives being il.
created, they gradually acquired new weight and
consideration in parliament. As they came to
enjoy more fecuiity and greater power, their
minds began to open, and to form more exten.
five plans of commerce, of industry, and of po.
lice. But the ariftocratical spirit, which !ill
predominated, together with many other acci.
dents, retarded the improvement and happiness
of the nation.

Another great event completed what the re.

volution had begun. The political power of the
nobles, already broken by the union of the two
crowns, was almott annihilated by the union of
the two kingdoms. Inltead of making a part,
as formerly, of the fopreme assembly of the na.
tion, inilead of bearing the most confiderablc
sway there, the peers of Scotland are admitted
into the Britifl parliament by their rcprefentativsa
only, and form but an ineoniderable part of or:c
of those bodies in which the legislative authority
is vt'ted. They themselves are excluded abio.
lutely from the house of commons, and even
their eldelS sons are not permitted to reprelint
their countrymen in that augult allimbly. Nol
Iavre their feudal privileges remained, to corn

peniIut

i.'tiiate for this extinction of their political au-
ti lrity. As commerce advanced in its progress,

T,:id rveirnmcni t attained nearer to perfedtion,

. :,. wcre insensibly cilcumfeiibed, and at lall,
! la;is no icls salutary. to the public than fatal

ih!i nobles, they have been almost totally ;bo-

I

. As the nobles were deprived of powcr,

ti-i, people acquired liberty. Exempted from
i.i-,,iis, to which they were formerly subject,
fc.v-iscd from oppression, to which they had
I
! :n long exposed, and adopted into a conftitu.
I ; .vhofe grenius and laws were more liberal
t!,,in tleir own, they have extended their com-
:nrc'-'Ci, refined their mannllers, made improvcments
j;: Ie clegancies of life, and cultivated the arts

i!'(i iciCiIn es.

I i n'a flrvey of the political tfatc of Scotland,
i,.!.; hi events uand their cauies have been men-
!;(ilt'i rather tlhan developed, enables us to point
,.;i *!iree a'nas, from each of which we may date
,;::; great alteration in one or other of the
:';-cc different members of which the fuipreme
..:;'lative all i:bly in our coniltitution is comin
p .'i;.l. At thelir acce'ri' to the throne of Eng-
.!!i, the kings of Scotland, once the Inoil limit-
ti!, became, in ;iu initant, the moit albtolute
p:';i.'.!'s in IEuropc, and exercile'd a despotic au-
:,,-ity , \vliic)i tlheir parliaments were unaiblce to
:'.I!mU]l, or their nobles to relifl. At the uniont
si tili' tvo kinlidoll:n the feudal ariftociacy,
.',;1 hiad flled lo many ages, and with

r'*'\ so exorbitant, vwas overturned, aid the

)ltoltifll notles blaving fturretdered rights and
Ir'e..lniellec: s pecul'iar to their order, reduced
'.,nliclves ts) a.condliito.n wlich is no longer the

terror

iterror and envy of other fubjjels. Since the unmin,
the common.s, anciently neglected by their kingrs
and seldom coirted by the nobles, have emerged
;nto dignity ; and, being admitted to a partici.
ptLtion of all the privileges which the Englilh
had purchased at the expence of so much hlo&d,
muit now be deemed a body not leis confiderahle
in the one kingdom, than they have long been
in the other.

The church felt the effeEts of the absolute

power which the king acquired by his accefior,;
and its revolutions, too, are worthy of notice,
James, during the latter years of his admiiillri.
tion in Scotland, had revived the name and ofice
of biffhops. But they possessed no ecclefiafticai
jurifliCtion or pre-eminencc ; their revenues v;cre
inconfidelrable, and they were scarcely diflin.
gilifled by any thing but by their feat in par.
liarnent, and by being the obje& of the:clergy's
jealousy, and the people's hatred' The kil.g,
delighted withl the fplendolu and authority which
the Englifl biflops elijoyed; and eager to effid
an union in the eccleaiaftical policy,; which he
had, in vain, attetipted(lin theicivil government
of the two kingdoms, :resolved to. bring both
churches to an exact conformity with cach othcer
Three 'Scotsmen were' confecrattd ,biihops iat
.Lolndon. From themththeir brethrien were com.
manded to receive orders. Cerenmiolies unknown
in Scotland w'cit inlpoledj and though the cler.
gy, lefi obfequioiusd thanl ihe noblesi boldly op.
posed these ihinovatiojll, Jaites, lotg lratilicd
and 'Well-filled 'il' the lass:d ofr'itiatming thel,
obtained ':st length' theiltIicom laoia(e. But
Charls I. a fupcrititiot 'pli PIllw unaquainted

. i ' * :... '

, '
* vwith

vith the genius of the Scots, imprudent and
precipitant in all the measures he purfiled in that
kingdom, pressing too eagerly the reccption of
the Englifl liturgy, and indiscreetly attemptinlg
a resumption of church lands, kindled the flam.s
of civil war ; and the people being left at liberty
to indulge their own wishes, the epi:opal churchi
was overturned, and the prefbvtcrian government
and difeipline were re-establishcd with new vi-
gour. Together with monarchy, epi'copacy wavs
rcttored in Scotland. A fonm of goverincent,
i, odious to the people, required force to upliold
it: and though not only the whohe rigour of
authority, but all the barbarity of pcrfeciution,
werc employed in its flpport, tlle averJion ,of t!t.
.,attiOn was infuirmountablr, and it fillficl, i with
dificulty. At the rcvolttion, the inclinations of
thci; eople were thought worthy the attention of
the legifature, the presbyterian government was
ag;in established, and, being ratified by the union,
is still maintained in the kingdom.

Nor did the influence of the accession extend

tol the civil and ecclefiattical conllitutions alon:;
the genius of the nation, its ta;te and fpiritj
things of a nature still more delicate, were fen°
sibly affeEted by that event. Wlen learnillg re-
vived in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, all
tlhe modern languages were in a fiatc extremely
b;.hIrrota, devoid of clegance, of vigour, and
evcn of perspicuity. No author thought of writ-
i"fg in languages so ill adapted to express and
emblellifh his ientirnents, or of crcEting a work
for immortality with such rude and perilhable ma-
trihls. As the fiirit, which prevailed at that
time, did not owe its rife to any original effort of
tli: human. mind, but was excited chiefly by ad.
POL. 11. K miration

miration of the ancients, which began then to
be itudied with attention in every part of Ea.
rope, their compositions were deemed not only
the Itandards of taste and of sentiment, but of
tyle ;' and even the languages in which they
wrote were thought to be peculiar, and alno;lt
consecrated to learning and the muses. 2\)t
only the manner of the ancients was imitated,
but their language was adopted : and, extrava-
gant as tllc attempt may appear to write in a dead
tongue, in which men were not accustomcd to
think, and whichl they could not speak, or evcl
pronounce, the fucccfs of it was allonifi;lg.
As they formed their flyle upon the purest m.o
dels; as they were uninfeded with those bar.
barifms, which the inaccuracy of familiar coi.
verfation, the affetation of courts, intercourse
with strangers, and a thousand other causes, in-
troduce into living languages ; many modilns
have attained to ia degree of elegance in thcir
Latin compofitiois, which the Romans then;.
selves fearce poffelfed beyond the limits of tihe
Augulltan age. While this was almofl the only
fpccics of composition, and all autlors, by uling
one common language, could be brought to a
nearer comparison, the Scottif writers were not
inferior to those of any other nation. The happy
genius of Buchanan, equally formed to excel in
prolf and in vcrfe, more various, more original,
and more eleigant, than tlat of almoll any otller
mtdern who writes in Latin, reflects, with regard
to this particular, the greatcit lustre on hi'
country.

But the labour attending the study of a dcad

tongne wvas irksome ; the unequal returnifor their
iiduftl' v which authors met withl who could hb

., * . -i "
* 'sl ^rta

read and admicrd only within the narrow circle
of the learned, was mortifying; and men, in-
Stead of wafting half their liws in learning the
language of the Romans, began to refine and to
p-,lifi their own. The modern tongues were
found to be susceptible of beauties and graces,
which if not equal to those of the ancient onts,
Were at least more attainable. The Italians hav-
ing firfl set the example, Latin was no longer
uiled in works of taile, it was confined to
Looks of science; and the politer nations have
1,aailihed it even from these. The Scots, we may
;rcilume, would have had no cause to regret this
change in the public taste, and would still have
been able to nmaintain seine equality with other
nations, in their pursuit of literary honour. The
Ergliih and Scottish languages, derived from
the fame iources, were, at the end of the fix-
teenth century, in a fate nearly similar, differing
fi-,m onc another somewhat in''orthography,
thotlgh not only the words, but the idioms, were
mirch the'fame. ' The letters of fevelal Scottifi.
flatcfmen of 'that age are not inferior in'elegance,
or in purity, 'to tlofe of the 'Englifll ministers
with 'wtibri they 'correfpbnded. James himself
was mattct -6f 'a 'fyle far fr6m' contemptible;
Ind by his 'ckamile and' encouragement, the
cottilh language inight have kept pace with the
Ergliih in ' reinicrh,'clit. Scotland might lave had
a; frics of'aiiithors in tsown, ah tell'a's'in' the
Latin ulaigl e, to boat'of; hafl the inprtive-
ments liatl[e, 'in' the its, 'ind.in' 'the'fcienccsr
wlhich spread over tle other polfied 'iati'ons
*f Ertdope,''"ivo'Uild:' ilot": have' 1csi-i' 'unknown
t1icrc. . .!....'

I'", , ' i .'!
. 'L' ' .'''f'

B.rut,

But, at the very time when other nations ivcre

beginning to d;op the use of Latin in works of
talte, and to make trial of the ftlength and corn.
pass of their own languages, Scotland ceased to
be a kingdom. The transports of joy, which
the acceflion at tirft occaiolned, were soon ovei:
and the Scots, being at once deprived of all the
objets that retinc or animate a people; of the
presence of their prince, of the concourie of no-
bles, of the fplcndour and elegance of a court,
an universal dejestion of tpirit seems to have
seized the nation. The court beitig withdrawn,
no domeltic standard of prop: iety a..d correnefs
of speech remained ; the few compulitions that
Scotland produced were tried by the Englifli
standard, and every word or phrase that varied
in the lealt fiom that, was condemned as bar-
barous; whereas, if the two nations had con-
tinued diftin&, each might have retained idioms
and forms of speech peculiar to itself; and
these, rendered fathionable by the example of a
court, and supported by the authority of writers
of reputation, might have been viewed in the
fame light with the varieties occalioned by the
different dialects in the Greek tongue; they even
might have been conlidered aa beauties; and, in
many cafeS, might have been used promifcu-
oully by the authors of both nations. But, by
the acceflion, the Englifli naturally became the
sole jiudgtl iand lawgivers in language, antd ie
jecied as folccilins, every form of speech to which
thcir ear w as not accultomned. Nor did the
Scots, while the intercourse between the two

nations

,:-!tiron was incontiidclrablc ", and ancient p)reju-
'ni.cs werc f{ill so violent as to prevecnt imitation,
rcoficf;s tlhe metals of refining- their own tongue
a;cc:rdlinlg to the purity of tlhe E'ngliih Itandard.
On the contrary, new corruptions flowed into
it from every different source. The clergy of
Scotland, in that age, were inore eriinelt for
p.It' thlan for learning ; and though there did'
llot u iife many authors among their, -et being
in poffefion of the privilege of difcourfinlg piib-
ii'ly to the people, and their fti-mcns bcing too
long, and perhaps too frequent, such hasty pro-.
(udtiolns could not be elegant, and many slovenly
and incorret modes of exprelTioln may be traced
back to that original. The p!l-adings of lawyers
rcrc equally loots and inaccurate, and that po:-
,:ffion ihaving furnished more authors, and the
tratters of which they treat mingling daily in
common disCourse and business, many of tfiofe
vicic:nt forms of fpecch, whlich are denoniinated
Scottictis, have been introduced by them into

1 A rernarkable proof of the little intercolm f between the

Inglfih and Scots Ihetboe the union of the crowns, ih to be
lo.lldirn two curi;'l pa;apers, one Fpibliflhed by I-laynes, the
rl.eFr by Strype. In the yrar 1567, Elizabeth conmniandcd
tl bilhop of Londoi to take a lurvey of all the llrailgclr
?ritlin the cities o!' London anJ Wefiminfier. By this rc-
Tore, tvlich is very rminute, it appcars that the whole number
'4' Scots. at 'that time wa. 58. Ilaynm', 4;5. A furvcy of
ilhe fqtme kipd was. made by fir Thnas Row, lor:l nia:nr,
J.D. 1 68.. The number of . cots had then incrcared to 8t .
lype, iv. Supplement, Nn. I. On the aiceffion of Jan's,
a confiderahle number of Sc rs, et'ptcially of the higher

t'I:ki i;ocrtCed to EnglJnd; but it was, nor till the union
'l,
, the intercourse between the two kinddoms becarnB

.- . K3 the

the language. Nor did either the language or
public taste receive any improvement in parlia-
ment, where a more liberal and mo.-e corre!t
eloquence might have been expeEted. .All .bli.
ieft was tranfaded there by the lords of articles,
and they were so servilely devoted to the court,
that few debates arose, and, prior to the revolu-
tionn none were conduced with the spirit aid
vigour natural to a popular assembly.

Thus during the whole seventeenth century,

the Engliflh were gradually refining their language
and their tale ; in Scotland the former was much
debated, and the latter almoit entirely loft. In
the beginning of that period, both nations were
emerging out of barbarity; -but the distance be.
tween them, which was then.incontiderable, bec
;came, before the end of it, immense. Even after
science had,once dawned upon.:them, the Scots
fermed to be linking back into ignorance and
obiullrity; and aftive and intelligent as they
naturally are, they continued, while other nations
were eager in the pursuit of fame and knowledge,
in a state of languor. This, however, mufl be
imputed to the uphappinces of their .political
situation, not to any defe. of genius; for no
sooner was the one removed ip any degree, than
the other began to display itself. The aft abo-
lilhing the power of the lords of articles, and
other salutary laws passed at the revolutiun,
having introduced freedom of debate into the
Scottifl parliament, eloquence, with all the nars
that accompany or perfet it, became imrmcdiate
obje¢ts of attention; and the example ci
Fletcher of Salton alone is sufficient to (hew
that the Scots' wre itill capable of generoui

ifentimncnt"

fientiments, and notwithstanding some peculiar
..:;orns, were able to exprcfs themselves with
cnlrgy, and vith elegance.

At length the unron having incorporated the
:vo nations, and rendered-them one people, the
iiflinEtions which had fitbfiled for many ages
gradually wear away; peculiarities disappear;
the fame manners prevail in both parts of the
fland; the fame authors are read and admired;
the fame entertainments are fiequented by the
elegant and polite; and the fame flandard of
tad., d

and of purity in language, is cftabliffied.

'The Scots, after being placed, during a whole
century, in a situation no less fatal to the liberty
tlian to the tafle and genius of the nation, were
;.' ,unce put in poffeflion of privileges morc valu-
able than those which their auceitors had for-
tinrly enjoyed; all every obtlru'tion that liad
r:;:aided their pursuit, or prevented their acqui-
ition of literary 1ame, was totally removed.

W
iio o lte

# A CRITICAL DISSERTATION CONCERNING The Murder of King HENRY, and the Genuineness of the QUEEN'S Letters to BOTHWELL.

A CRITICAL
DISSE R TATION

CONCERNING
T'e Mt'urder of King HENRY, and the

(;enuinenefs of the QOEEN'S Letters, to
BOTHWELL.

T is not my intention to engage in all the con-
.troverfies to which the murder of king Henr-,
rt the letters from queen Mary to Bothwvill,
Lave given rik ; far lss to appear as an adver-
{ary to any particular author, who hath treated
of them. To repeat, and to expose all the ill-
fov:,decd assertions with regard to these points,
I hich have flowed fiom inattention, from preju-
:c, from partiality, from malevolence, and
fron difllonefty, would be no less irksome to
m ivclf, than unacceptahle to n:oll of my readers.
All 1 p:opofc, is to assist others inl forming some
jud(linenit concerning the fia&s in dispute, by
il;tilr, ttie proofs produced on each lide, with
ns mncllh brcvity as the cafe will admit, and with
tl ir l c attention ai:d impartiality which I
lia.. cii deavoured to cxercife in examining other
Ci,:lroverted points in the Scottilh hiltory.

In order to account for the king's murder,

two different systems have been formed. The
otl fiupplufes Bothwell to have contrived and ex-
ticlted this crime. The other imputes it to the
earl; of Murray, Morton, and their party.

The

'The dccifion of.mal y contrpvertcd saCs in

hilftorl, is a mattcr rather of curiolity than ot'
use. They ftald detached; and whatever \we
determine with regard to them, the fabric of ltie
fiory remaits ulituched. But the faCt under
dispute in this place is a fundamental and
cfsential ole, and accordin, to the opinion
whicli an hlitoriln adopts with regard to it, hi
mull vary and dif!ofc the whle of his fubfcquent
narration. An ahiltorical fytlei may be tried ::
two different ways, whether it be conliitent with
pro'ablility, and whether it be supported by
proper evidence.

Those who charge the king's murder upon

Bothwell, argue in the following manner; ;:md
though their reasonings have been mentioi'd
already in different parts of the narrative, i: is
necefiary to repeat them here. Mary's loe fir
Darnly, fay they, was a fidden and youthful
pafion. The beauty of his person, set off by
some external frivolous accomplifnients, \;is
his chief merit, and gained her assertions. Ilis
capricious temper soon ralfcd in the queeu a
disgust, which broke out on difel'rent occaiolns,
His engaging in the conspiracy ngainit Rii.io,
converted this difgult into an antipathly, whlich
file was at no pains to conceal. This 1heai
Mwas, perhaps, in its own nature, irreparable;
the king certainlv wanted that art and condl-
feenfion which alone could have repaired it. It
widened .every day, and a deep, and feltled hatred
effaced all remaius of affe'ion., Bothwell ob.
fervotl this, and was prompted by, '.almition, and
perliaps by love, to found upon it .'a fchncle,
whiclh proved fatal both to the queen and to hi"rn

£fl

fli'. IIe had cerved Mary at different tirlncr.

iti'. fidelity and ftuccelf. HIe inilluated hilnf!f
i,,io licr favour, by address and by flattery.
I By degrees he gahied her heart. In order to
.;.a;tify his l ve, or at. last Ins aml)itic:n it was

l.,' .il iry to Pet rid of the king. Mary h;ld re-.

jcried tlle prpofia which, it. is said, had beec1
r.a!i: to her for obtail:ing a divorce. 'Thi. king
.i e quyally lia:cd by the parltifans of thle Ihule
of T-amiltoa, a conrfidlcrable party in the king-
dom ; )by Mlrrav, ole of the molt powerfill and
i[ptni;il pcrfons in Ins country ; by Morton alnd
h:s anfieiatli. wvoln ic head deceived, and whom
I',,!l;cll had bound to his iiterell by a recen(t
s,i, ir. Among the people I)arnly was flallcl
i.,der extreme colntcillt. lothwel l might
c':peit, for all these recfons, .hat the murdtr of
the kin;g would pass without any inquiry, ald
mrii;ht trull to Mary's love, and to his own
addrl-ii and good fortiine, for the accoinplifll-
iient of the reft of his wifichs. What Bothw-ll
('qcicted really came to pals. Mary, if not privy
Il rfelf to tile: detign, connived at an action whlicif
rid hler of a imlan whon ni lhe had fiuch good reafonl
to (let(l. A few months after the nmurder cf her
hlfland, Ilhe married lihe person who was both
fltpe'Ced andl accull;( of hatving pelpetrated tlht
,lihnu; crime.

Those who clarge tle guilt upon Murray and

T1r, party reason in this inailner,: Mil ray, they'
fia, \wa a man of boundless ambition. Not.
witlilaiFding the illegitimacy of his lirth, hle hl;,
tal:y formed a design of ufirping tih crowln.
()n tle iqecen's retiurln into Scotlandl, lie in-ln-
;iltt'd lhilflf into her favour, and yergriof.fd the

: hlole

whole power into his own hands. He set him.
felfagainfl every proposal of marriage which was
made to her, left his own chance of !'ucceedilg
to the crown should be destroyed. He hated
Darnly, and was no less hated by him. In order
to be revenged on him, he entered into a fuddui
friendship with Bothwell, his ancient and mortal
enemy. He encouraged him to affflinate
Henry, by giving him hopes of marrying tlh
queen. All this was done with a design to throw
upon the queen herself the imputation of being
accessary to the murder, and, under that pretext,
to dectroy Bothwell, to depoft and imprison her,
and to seize the sceptre which he had wrestcd
out of her hands.

Tihe former of these fyrtems has an air of pro-

batllity, is confitent with itlflf, and solves ap.
pearances. In the latter, some alTertions are
fall, some links are wanting in the chain, and
eil..s' appear, of which no sufficient cause is
produced. Murray, on the queen's return into
Scotland, served her with great fidelity, and by
his prudent administration rendered her so po-
pular, and so powerful, as enabled her with
cafe to quall a formidable infurredion raised by
the party of which he was the leader in the
year 1565. What motive could induce Murray
to murder a prince without capacity, without
followertr, without influence over the noble,;,
whom the queen, by her neglc&t, had reduced
to the lowelt Jtate of cntempt, and who, after
a long disgrace, had regained (according to the
most favourable filppofition) the precarious pof.
session of her favour bnly a few days before his
dcath ? Xt is difficult to conceive wvhat Murray

$ *had

lhad to fear from the king's life. It is still a
rnnle difficult matter to guess what he could

i,t;i by his death. If we suppose that the queen

llad no previous attachment to Bothwell, nothing
can appear more chimerical than a scheme to per-
fladc her to marry a man,. whose wife was irill
alive, and who was not only fufpeded, but ac-
cllcd, of murdering her former husband. But
that such a fchene flould really succeed is fiill
more extraordinary.-If Murray had infligated
Bothwell to commit the crime, or had himself
been accessary to the commifflion of it, what
hopes were there that Bothwell would silently
bear fiom a fellow-criminal all the prosecutions
vwhich he suffered, without ever retorting upon
hili the accusation, or revealing the whole scene
of iniquity ? An ancient and deadly feud had
fubfifled between Murray and Bothwell; the
qIueeni with difficulty had brought them to some
ternms of agreement. But is it probable that
Murray would choose an enemy, to whom he had
bet( so lately reconciled, for his confident in the
comn/iflion of 'filch an atrocious crime? Orj on
the other hand, would it ever enter into the ima-
gililtion of a wife nian, first to raise his rival to
tlpreme power, in hopes that afterwards lie
might render him odious, by accufilg him of
riimes which he had not conmmitted, and, in
Ncoilfqucnce of this unjitt charge, should be en-
alelhd to deprive him of that power ? The tnool
;ilvcnturous politician never hazarded such a dan-
gk:'ous experiment. 'hle nloft credulous folly
lever trusted fuich an uncertain clhance.

Ilow ftrongi soever thece general reasonings

ma:y appear to be, it is not upon them alone that
Vol. 111. L wC

whole power into his own hands. He set hni.
fe!fagainft every proposal of marriage which was
made to her, left his own chance of 'i-cceeding
to the crown should be destroyed. He hated
Darnh!, and was no less hated by him. In order
to be revenged on him, he entered into a sudden
friendship with Bothwell, his ancient and mortal
enemy. He encouraged him to affaflinate
Henry, by giving him hopes of marrying tlic
queen. All this wa.s done with a design to throw
upon the queen herself the imputation of being
accessary to the murder, and, lunder that pretext,
to deftrlo Bothwcell, to depose and inprifon her,
and to seize the sceptre which he had wrel.cd.
out of her hands.

Tile former of these systems has an air of pro-

bability, is co:fiitent twith itself, and solves ap.
pearances. In the latter, folne aiTertions are
falle, some links are wanting in the chain, and
eftfes' appear, of which no sufficient cause is
produced. Murray, on the queen's rcturn into
Scotland, served her with great fidelity, and by
his prudent admiiuit'ration rendered her so Io-
pular, and so powerful, as enabled her with
cafe to quash a formidable insurrection raised by
the party of which he was the leader in the
year i565. What motive could induce Murray
to murder a prince without capacity, without
followers, without influence over the noble:,
whom the queen, by her neglc&, had reduced
to the lowelt itate of c,,ntempt, and who, after
a long disgrace, had regained (according to tile
moit favourable fuppolit.ion) the precarious pof.
feflion of her favour only a few days before Iis
death? It is difficult to conceive lwhat Murray

$ had

;had to fear from the king's life. It is lill a
nmore difficult matter to guess what he could
a;.n by his death. If we suppose that the queen
lhad no previous attachment to Bothwell, nothing
can appear more chimerical than a scheme to per-
fuade her to marry a man, whose wife was lfill
aliv, and who was not only fufpcted, but ac-
cifcd, of murdering her former huffand. But
that such a scheme ihould really succeed is flill
more extraordilary.-If Murray had inltigated
Bothwell to commit the crime, or had himself
hten acceffarv to the commission of it, what
hopes were there that Bothwell would silently
lcau fiom a fellow-criminal all the prosecutions
·wvhi'cl he suffered, without ever retorting upon
hil the accusation, or revealing the whole scene
of iniquity ? An ancient and deadly feud had
fuhiitfed between Murray and Bothwell; the
rijccu with difficulty had brought them to some
t.rnms of agreement. But is it probable that
M:urray would choose an enemy, to whom he had
hlen so lately reconciled, for his confident in the
cornnmiilion of filch an atrocions crime ? Or; on
thr other hand, would it ever enter into the ima-
g;li.,ion of a wife man, first to raise his rival to
fiiprcme power, in hopes that afterwards lie
nmip-t render him odious, by accusing him of
crnmes which he had not comnlitted, atn, in
c(i)fr(lutcnce of this unjulstt charge, mhould be en-
;i i'd to deprive him of that power ? The mole
.Clvcntulous politician never hazarded such a dan-
f,:Tons experiment. The noflt credulous folly
:lcver truated fitch an uncertain chance.

Ihow strong foetver these general reasonings

:n:ly appear to be, it is not upon them alone that
VOL. III. L Wg;

we must decide, but according to the particular
evidence that is produced. This we now proceed
to examine..

That Bothwell was guilty of the king's mur-

der, appears, 1. From the concurring tcftimony
of all the contemporary historians. 2. From tlih
confeciion of those persons who suffered for afliil-
ilg at the commiflion of the crime, and who
entered into a minute detail of all its cilcutin
ilances. Anderf.'ii. 165. 3. From the acknow-
ledgment of Mary's own commniffioners, lwho
allow Bothwell to have been one of those wllo
were guilty of this crime. Good. ii. 13.
4. From the exprcfs teltimony of Lefly, biiflop
of Ross, to the fame efe t with the formtr.
Def. of Q. Mary's Hon. And. i. 76. Id.il;.
p. 31. 5. Morton, at his de.tlh, declared that
Bothwell had solicited him, at different time':,
to concur in the conspiracy formed againit the
life of the king; and that he was informed b)
Archibald Douglas, one of the confpiratois,
that Bothwell was present at the murder. Crax\ i'
Mem.cp.App. 4. The Ltter from D)ough,,
to tihe Cquecn, which I have published in the
Appendix, No. XLVII, confirms Morton's teili.
monVy. 6. Lord Herries promises, in his own
name, anld in the namne ot t ih nbl s who ad.
hered to the queen, that they would concur in
plnifshing Buthwell as the murderer of the king.
A ppend. No. XXIV.

The moil direet charge ever brought againtll

Mlurr;ay is in thlefg words of bifflop Lefly " 1
( it. Iunlllown," addrlefing hlimfcf to thc earl (,f
Murray, c" what the lord Hcrries faiid to yorr
' fithc openly, even at your own table, a few
* ' . " dt'';"

' dav3 after the murder was committed ? Did
" i; lsot charge you with the foreklowledge
:Q of the lame murder? Did he not, nulla cii-cz-
i Hine ifit, flatly and plainly burden you, that

riding in Fife, and coming with one of your
I mofl assured and trusty servants the fame day

W whereon you departed from Edinburgh, said
to him, among other talk, This night ere
morning lord Darnly flall lose his life ?" De-

i-nce of Q Mary, Ailderf. ii. 75. But the as-
s'rtion of a man so heated with fa&ion as Lefly,
nnlefs it were fipported by pr'per evidence, is
of little weight. The servant to whom Munray
is laid to have spoken these words, is not named;
nor the manner in which this secret conversation
was brought to light mentioned. Lord Herries
was one of the moil zealous advocates for Mary,
and it is remarkable that,in all his negotiation at
the court of England, lie never once repeatle
this accufition of lurray. In arifvetring the
challenge given him by lord Lildfay, Herries
l:td a fair opportunity of mentioning' Murray's
1; rowledge of the murder; but though lie openly
aiccufes of that crimL some of those who adhered
to Murray, he induflirioufly avoids any infinua-
llon againit Murray hirnfelf. Keith, Pref. xii.

[ary herrelf, in converfal.ion with fir Francis
K nolles, accused Morton and Maitland of being
privy to the murder, but does not mention Mur-
r:iy. And. iv. 55. When the bilfop of R.oss
iiild lord Hei-ries appeared before the Englilh
<,uncil> January 1 * 1569, they declared thcm-
(irves ready, in obedience to the queen's com-
;.;id, to accuse Murray and his alocJiates of
lu,,ing accelkry to the murder, but " they beitg

.. L 2' " lfto

" also required, whether they, or any of thlcai,
" as of themselves, would accuse the slid tearl

in special, or any of his adherents, or thougih:

" them guilty thereof;" they answered, "that
' they took God to witness that none of them
"< did ever know any thing of the conspiracy of
" that murder, or were in council and foreknow-
"ledge thereof; neither who were devisors, in.
" ventors, and executors of the fame, till it wv.,
" publicly ldifcovcred long thereafter by some of
" the assassins, who suffered death on that ac-
" count." Good. ii. 308. These words aie
taken out of a register kept by Ross and Herrits
themselves, and leem to be a dire&t confutation
of the bishop's afTertion.'

The earls of Huntly and Argyll, in their Pro.

teJation touc/jing the Murder of the King of Sccts,
after mentioning the conference at Cralgmillar
concerning a divorce, add, " So after these pre.
" miscs, the murder of the king following, we

judge in our confcicnces, and hold for :ertain

' and truth, that the earl of Murray and fecre
¢ tary Lethington were authors, inventors,
" counsellors, and causers of the fame murder,
( in what manner, or by whatsoever persons
t the famne was executed." Anders. iv. 188.
But, t. This is nothing more than the private opi-
nion or personal affirmation of thefc two noble;
men. 2. The conclusion wvhich they make has
no connction with the prcmifes on which they
found it. Because Murray proposed to obtain
for the queei a divorce from her hulband with
her own consent, it does not follow that ther:-
fore he committed the murder without her know'
ledge. 3. Huntly and Argyll were at that tinum

thel

tlie leaders of that party opposite to Murray, and
animated with all the rage of faction. 4. Both
of them were Murray's personal enemies.
Huntly, on account of the treatment which
Lis family and clan had received from that no-
bleman. Argyll was desirous of being divorced
from his wife, with whom he lived on no good
terms, Knox, 328. and by whom he had no
children. Crawf. Peer. g9. She was Murray's
livLer, and by his interest Argyll's design was
ohbfruded. Keith, 551. These circumstances
would go far towards invalidating a positive tef-
limony; they more than counterbalance an in-
determinate fifpicion. 5. It is altogether uncer-
tain whether Huntly and Argyll ever fubicribcd
this protestation. A copy offuch a protestation
as the queen thought would be of advantage to
lier cause, was transmitted to tlem by her;
Anders. iv. b. ii. 186. The protestation itself,
!ublifhed by Anderson, is taken from an unfub-
riribed copy with blanks for the date and place
of fiibfcribing. On hle back of this copy, there
is pasted, indeed, a paper, which Cecil has
marked " Answer of the earl of Murray to a
" writing of the earls of Huntly and Argyll."
Anders. 194, 195. But it can hardly be
deemed a reply to the above-mentioned protefla.
lion. Mlrray's aniwer beaus date at London#
January 19, x568. The queen's letter, in wlrich
the inclosed the copy of the protestation, bears
date at Boughton, Jan. 5, i568. Now it is scarce
to be fuppolcd that the copy would be sent
into Scotland, be subscribed by the two earls,
and be seen and answered by Murray within so
liort a time. Murray's reply feemns intended
only to prevent the imprefliou which the vague

- "L 3 and

and uncertain accusations of his enemies might
make in his absence. Cecil had got the original
of the queen's letter into his cufiody. Anders.
iv. i85. This naturally leads us to conjeturc
that the letter itself, together with the incloscd
protestation, were intercepted before they came
to the hands of Huntly and Argyll. Nor i;
this mere conjeEture alone. The letter to
Huntly, in which the protestation was inclosed,
is to be found; Cott. Lib. Cal. C. i. fol. 280,
and is an original fibfcribed by Mary, though
not written by her own hand, because fhe.feldom
chose to write in the English language. The
protestation is in the fame volume, fol. 282, and
is manifestly written by the fame person who
wrote the queen's letter. This teems to render
it highly probable that both were intercepted.
So that much has been founded on a paper nut.
fibfcribed by the two earls, and probably never
seen by them. Besides, this method which the
queen took of fending a copy to the two earls,
of what was proper for them to declare with re-
gard to a conference held in their own presence,
appears somewhat suspicious. It would have
been more natural, and not so liable to any mif-
interpretation, to have desired them to write the
molt exact account, which they could recolleii.
of what had passed at the conversation at Craig-
millar. 6. But even if all this reasoning fliould
be set aside, and the authenticity of the protefla-
tion should be admitted in its full extent, it may
still be a question, what degree of credit flould
be given to the assertion of the two earls, who
*ere not only prcfent in the firit parliament, held
by Murray as regent in December 1567, ill
whicl the one carried the fccptre, and the other

'~:.~~~ trdCthe

the sword of ifate, Spotfw. 214 but were both
members of the committee of lords of articles,
alid in that capacity assisted in framing all the ads
by which the queen was deprived of the crown,
and her son feated on the throne ; and in parti-
cular concurred in the aA by which it was de-
ciri-ed, that whatever had befallen the queen,
"was in her awin defailt, in fa far as, be divers
"lir previe letters written halelie with hir awin
"hand, and fend by hir to James fometyme

earle of Both well, cheif executootr of the said

"horrihill murthour, as weill befoir the com-
" mitting thairof as thairaftir: And lIe hir un-
"godlie and dithonourilbill proceeding to ane

pretendit marriage with him, fiddaindlie and

' iuprovifitlie thaireftir, it ih maift certane that
" che was previe, airt and pairt, of the atual

devise and deid of the foirnamit mnurthour of

"the king her lauchful hufand, and tlairfoir
" juftlie defirvis quhatfumever hes bene done to
" lir in ony tyme bygainc, or that fal be ufit
"towards hir, for the said cause." Anders. ii.

221..

The queen's commiflioners at the conferences
ill England accused Murray and his afrociates
fr laving murdered the king. Good. ii. 28.
But this charge is to be confidered as a recri-
rmination, extorted by the accusation preferred
a,:int the queen, and contains nothing more
tlan loose and general affirnations, without
descending to fnch particulhir circunitlances as
cither afcertai' their truth, or diflover their
falsehood. The fame accusation is repeated by
the nobles affimblcd at Dumbarton Sept. i568.

Good.

Good. ii. 359. And the fame obfrvation ina
be made conccrning it.

All the queen's advocates have cndeavoured tc

account for Murray's murdering of the king, bh
fuppoting that it was done on purpose that he
might have the pretence of dilturbing thl
queen's adminiltration, and thereby rendericns
ilTflkctual her general revocation of crown lands,
wvhich would have deprived him and his associate,
of the betl part of their efates. Lefly Def. ol
·Mary's Hon. p. 73. Anders. iv. part ii. 13c.
But whoever confiders the limited powers of a
Scottifl monarch, will fee that such a revocation
,could not be very formidable to the nobls.
Eve:ry king of Scotland began his reign witli
fich a revocation ; and as often as it was renew.
ed, the power of the nobles rendered it incf-
fedtual. The best vindication of Murray and
his party from this acculation, is that which
they presentcd to the queen of England, anl
which liatl never hitherto been puhllihed.
.Anlifers to tie Oje7ions and .Alletdgance of 't.

&/,'en, alledling the Earl of lMrray Lord R.-
gent, the Earl of Morion, IMarr, Glenr:airc,
lumc', Ruilhven, S'.. to haqvr been movied to
A./rmour, for that tbey abhorred atnd milght not
abire her cevocation of the A4liena/iion mnde of ler
Property.

It is tnfw\ered, that is alledged but [i e. weithl

'olt] all appeiaralce, and it appears God has be-
'reft tlhe lled(galce of all wit and good rcmrne-
brance, for thlir reafotns following ,
*.- I nilrimin,

imprinis, as to my lord regent, he never had

r o.>:ni(il to g'rulge thereat, in 're'fpe the queen
r,.-e him privy to the fame, and took resolution
iwiti him for the ex;ecution thereof, letting his
i,,',!lhip know Illc wniuld affTldly in the famine
e:;c pt all things ile iA.td g-i en to hinl, and ratefy
theli in the lext parliament as he did indeed;
::.dA for that cautie wiflld my lord to leave be-
hiild him mailer John Wood, to attend upon the
i;inec, to whom Ihe declared, that als well in that
;a< in all other her grants it flould be provided,
'ya of free will did promise and offer before ever
he demanded, as it came to pass without any lett
or impediment; for all was ratified by lher com-
mand, and hand write, at the parliament, but
[ic. w.ithout. any dilliculty.

Item as to my lord of Morton, he could not

grudge thereat quha never had of her property
worth twenty dollars that ever I kncew of.

Item the fame, may I fay of my lord Glen-

cairn.

Item the fame, I m'y fay of my lord Hume.
Item the fame, I may fay of my lord Ruth-

yen.

Item the fame, I may fay of my lord Lindsay.
Only my lord of .arr, had ane little tlling

ofl the property quilk alli\a was gladly and libe-
rally confirmed to him, in the said parliament
preceding a year; vwas never ane had any cause
of iiifcont.ent of that revocation, far lefbs to have
put their lives and heritage to lo open and n:.ai-
s'lt ane danger as they did for ici ane frivole
ca uIe.

Gyf ever any did make evill countenance, and
fluho any minicontentmcnt of the said revocation,

it

it was my lord of Argyll in fpeci!ll, quhla ip:
largely in the time of parliament thaira-;lllt ,-
the queen herself, and did complain of the i';:;:.
fell corruption of ane act of parlian;mnt p, '
upon her majeity's return, and fa did lcr
any revocation at that time; but tle armior:-
for revenge of the king's deid was not till tnw;
morths after, att quhat time there was no occa-
sion, riven thereof, nor never a man had mind
thereof.

I laving thus examined the evidence which ha3

been produced againit the earls of Murray and
Bothwell; we ffiall next proceed to inquilr
whether the queen herself was accessory to tll
murder of her husband.

No sooner was the violent death of Darnlv

known, than itrong suspicion arose, among
fiome of her fubjc cs, that MIary had giv;:
lier content to the commillion of that cimne.
And. ii. 156. We are informed, by her ownl
ambassador in France, the archbihlop of Cla:.
gow, that the sentiments of foreigners, o1
thlis lead, were no less unfavourable to ii'r.
Keith, Pref. ix. Many of her nobles louliy
accnfed her of that crime, and a great payl
of the nation, by supporting them, eerm to
have allowed the acculution to be well fould.d.

Sone crimes, however, ar' of such a natrll,

that they hardly admit of a pofitivc or direcl
proof. Deeds of darkness can seldom hi
brought perfeEtly to light. AWhere perlbns ain
accuscd not of being priciprtl, but only .
being acceitrics in the commillion of a crinlc;
not of having parpetratcd it tllchnfclvcs, bu

,!111

,l,1' of giving consent to the commifflon of it
b' othcrs; the proof becomes itill more dif-
fi'ilt: and unless when foine accomplice betrays
the secret, a proof by circumllances, or pre-
fiinptive evidence, is all that can be attained.

iEven in judicial trials, fuclh evidence is some-
:i!!cs held to be fuficient for condcmning cri-
rinals. The degree of conviftiorn which fich
evidence carries along with it, is often not infe-
rior to that which arises fiom positive teili-
ncvy ; and a conciurring series of circumiftances
fatisies the underitanding no less tlan the ex-
press declaration of witllefies.

Esidence of both these kinds has been pro.

d;lced againit Mary. VWe flall firit conlider
hilat which is founded upon circumitanies
ai]l, e.

Some of there suspicious cirlcinmlances prc-
ceied the king's death; others were fubilequent.
:. it. With regard to the former, we may oh-.
clave that the queen's violent love of Darnly
i;,; loon converted into an avcrlion to him no
Idc violent; and that his own ill conlduC and
tx.cfles of every kind, were fuclt, that if thely
did not jlltify, at least they account ftor this
fidde:n change of her dilfofition towards him.
'li rife and progress of this donmeflti riuptlire,
i have traced with great care in the hlillory, and
te the proofs of it which may be founld i papers,
pbLlifhed by other authors, I have added those

lotatincd in App. No. XVI. and XVI . Le
Croc, the French ambaflador, who vas an eye-
*itilefs of what he dcrccribjs, not onl)y relrefents
Lir avcrlion to Darnly to be extreme, but de.

clares

dares that there could be no hopes of a recon.
cilemint between them. [Dec. 12, 1566 ] "The
queen is in the hands of physicians, and I do as.
sure you is not at all well; and do believe the
principal part of her disease to confilt in deen
grief iid sorrow ; nor does it seem poflible to
make her forgct the fame. Still (he repeat;
these words, I couMld wih to be dead. You know
very well that the injury ihe has received is ex.
ceeding great, and her majesty will never forget
it.-T'o speak my mind freely to you, I don n;
expe&t, upon ie;eral accounts, any good under-
stand ng berween them [i. e. the king and queen],
unless God effe'tiually put to his hand.-[Dec.
y3] His bad deportment is incurable; nor can
there ever be any good expeted from him, for
several reasons, which I might tell you was I
prefcnt with you. I cannot pretend to foretell
how all may turn, but v will fay, that matteis
cannot subsist long as they are, without bei;i;
accompanied with sundry bad consequences."
Keith, Pref. vii. IHad Henry died a natir.al
death at this juntlilre, it must have be'en con-
fidertcd as a very fortunate event to the tee(n,
and as a seasonable. deliverance from a hufl:taid
whol had become altogether odious to her. Niw
as Henry wx.a murdered a few weeks afterward';,
and as nothing had happened to render ;he
queen's averlion to him les violent, the opinion
of those who confider Miary as the autlhor oi an
ecent which wnas manifeltly so agreeable to her,
will appe'tr- perhaps to fore of our rcdiders to be
neither unilnrttural nor over-refined. 1( we add lo
this, what hits been obfi:rvcd in the hiltory, th.tt

111

ir proportion to the incrcefe of Marv's hatred

a's her husband, Bothwcll fierls to havee made
*;,; refs in her favour, and that he became the
,hji>A not only of her confidence but her at-
tahlin:ent, that opinion acquires new firength.
It is easy to ,bfe:'ve many advantages which
!n':rht redound to Mary as well as to Bothwell
;-o n the king's dcath; but excepting them, no
pcrfon, and no party in tle kingdom, could de-
.;ye the least beneft from tlht event. Bohwcill,
,r,,)rdingly, mldcr-cd the king, a-id it was, in
t.t:it age, thought no unwarranted imputlatio on
, .:!'Ts charaEter, to fluppofe Lhiat she had con-
ilirad to the deed.

The iteps wlich the queen took after her

i!.h.band's death add llrength to that fiUppofition.
i. Mclvil, wlo was in Edinburgh at the time of
i king's death, affeits, tluat "every body sus-
p1-tid tlle earl of Bothwell; and tholc who

,i; '; speak freely to othc<r, said plainly that it
.l- h;," p. 155. 2. Mary having i{fued a pro-
c!:*latioll, on the l2th of February, offcirinf, a
,.W.,rd to any person who fliould dilcover tlofe
,,, had murdered her huftbaud; And. i. 36. a
i.P;:r in consequence of this was affixed to the
g;!::s of the Tolbooth, February 6, in which
Bothwell was named as the chief pe'rson guilty
of tlat crime, and the queen herself was aecuflc.
o having given her consent to it. And. ii. 156.
. Soon atter, February 2o, the earl of Lennox,
hilc king's fatheri, wrote to Mary, conjuring her,
Ly every motive, to prosecute the murderers,
wiLth the utmoit rigour. He plainly declared
i. own fufpieions of Bothwcll, and pointed out
a method of proceeding againlt him, and for
VOL. 11. M discovering

difcoveling tlie authors of that crime, no 1,t
obvious than equitable. I-Ie advised licr to Icize
and to commit to sure cuitody, Bothwell hiimlif!;
and fucli as were already named as his accon..
plices; to call an afl'embly of the nobles; to iil'.
a Iroclamation, initing Bothwell's accufcrs lt,
appear; and if, on that encouragement, no p'-,.
fun appeared to accuse them, to hold them as
innocent, and to dismiss them without farthIr
trial. And. i. 40. 4. Archbishop Beatoun, her
ambaflador in France, in a letter to Mary, March
9th, employs arguments of the utmost weight to
persuade her to profecutc the murderers with tlt.
greatest severity. " I can conclude iatliin5
(fays he) by quhat zour maieity writes to nm
zourfelf, that fen it has plelit God to conItcits
zow to make a rigorous vengeance thereof, thl
rather than it be not actually taine, it appears to
me better in this warld that ze had loit life ;and
all. - I afl your majeitie pardon, that I writ fa
far, for I can heir nathing to zour prejudife, but
I mar: [mnuft conlthaindly writ the famin, tlat
all may come to zour knawledge ; for the better
rcnmd:e may be put therto. Heir it is needfill
that ze forth flaw now rather than ever of be.
,fore, the greite vertue, magnanimnitie, and col-
lancc that God has grantit zow, be quli:is
grace, I hope ze lall overcome this most lhc\ie'
civic and delfpllir of tle committing tlherc'l,
and conierve tllhat reputation in all godlinetf, 'z
have colIquilt of lang, qullich can appear a VpayI
mair clearlie, than tlhat zon doic.k [Ciich] jullii:
that tl,. baill [whlole] world may declare zclr'
inioiicncc, and give tetimony forever of tliir
trealotn that hl;s commlitted (but [w'ithout] ji

ul

Jl God or man) so cruel and ungodly a murther,
qiillairof there is fa mei/le [much] ill spoken,
t'lat I am conitrainit to alk zou mercy, that nei-
tlher can I or will I make the relicarfal thereof,
: l;,:h is owr [too] odious. But alas ! madame,
.ll over Europe this day, there is na parpofe in
head fa frequent as of zour majeftie, and of
the present irate of zour realm, quhilk is in
the most part interpretit sinisterly." Keith,
l'ref. ix. . Elizabeth, as appears from Append.
No. XIX. urged the fame thing in firong terms.
6. The circumilances of the cafe itself, no lets
than these solicitations and remonthlances, called
for the utmost vigour in her proceedings. Her
huifband had been murdered in a cruel manner,
ilinoft in her own presence. Her fnbje&s were
filled with the utmolt hornor at the crime. Both-
well, one of her principal favourites, had been
ipublicly accused as the author of it. Refle.-
tlios, extremely dishonourable to herself, had
)been thrown out. If indignation, and the love
ot justice, did not prompt her to pursue the
murderers with ardour, decency, at lealt, and
concern for vindicating her own charader, should
have induced her to avoid any appearance of re-
miilhefs or want of zeal.

But instead of thisj Mary continued to discover,

il all her a&ions, the utimoll partiality townrlds
lBotliwell. On the xsth of February, five davs
after tle murder, file hcftowed on him the re.
vrrlion of the filperiorily of the taovn of L;itli,
lliclh, in the year 1565, Ihe had mortgaged. to
the citizens of ldinburglhi. This grant waw of
much importancc, as' it gave him not only the
ctomandof the principal port in the kingdom,

M 2 but

but a great ascendant over tlhe citizens of Edin..
burgh, 'who, wihed much.to kccp pofltclion of
it a. 2.i Bothwell being cxti;cminly, delirpus to ob-

. .;** .. , ' ,

, . tain
, Cosys is-m rek cr i;al ,in: the Charter-,oufc of tIe cty of Edi:-

burgh of an Ajigieation to t te ir'ft:r./i of the Jieri&,,ty f.
Leith by quceen7 Mry, tz o the earl if Botbovell.
Maria Dei gratia Regina Scotorum, omnibus prob;s Iomi.

nibus fuis ad .quos praielites lirer.e perveiirin't falutem. Si-
atis, quod no, ad imeemoriam reducentes multiplcx bonun
verum et fidele lervitium, non tanturn quondam noftr;e cha.
riffimae matri Maria Regina regni noRtri pro tempore in nof-
tra minoritate fa'tum et impenumr, verum etiam nobifinet
ipfis, tam intra partes Gallia- quam intrahoc noltrum regnum,
ad exteintonem nofiri honoris et autoritatis in punirione
furum,' nialefaflorum, et tranfgreitorltm infra idem, per
nollrun confirum confanguineuin et confiliarium Jacobum
conmitem Bothuile, dominuna Halis, Creighton,et Lildifdale,
magnum admirallum regni notlii, commiffioncm et onera-
tionem ad hunc effectum habentum, per quas ipfe fuum cor-
pus ct vitam in magno periculo pofuit; ac etiam, in perfor.
mation e et extentione noflri diai fervitii, fuam hereditatem,
supra fummam viginti milliurn mcrcarum hujus noflri regni,
alienavit ac laelit. Et nos cogitantcs quod, ex noRtra priici.
pali honore et devoria diaum noltium confifum confangui-
neum & confiliarium cum quodam accidente et gratitudine
recomnpenfarc' t gratificare incumbit qure nos commode fibi
concedere potcrimus, unde ipfe magis habiliP otnnibus affu-
turis tcmpoiribus efle poterit, ct ad hlijuffiodi performandum
in oninibus caufis leu tcvontibis: in recompciifitionem
quorum prteniflbrun, ac pro diverfis aliis noftrisrationabilibus
taufis ct confidelrationibiu nos mrvcntibus, Fecimnu, &c.
dictum Jacobunm comiteln Bothuile, &c. ac suos hilcedes
mafculos quofcunquenoflrosa leitltiios, &c. affignatos in et
ad 'litcr.a rtverfionis fadtas, &c. per Symollnen Preston de
codcm niiiitem, priepoficumr, balivos, confulcs, et commulni
tatcm hujus nofiri burgi de Edinburgh, pro feipfis ac fuis
fuccellrlribi, &c. nobis, nofirifquc heredibus, fuccefloribus,
et affignatis pro redemptione, &c. fuperioritatis totius vill:
dr Lcith,i &c. impignoratie per nos ditia prtepofito, &c. filb

reverfione

tlin the conmmand of the caftic of Edinburgh,
lhe queen, in order to prevail on the earlof Mar
: furretlder the government of it, offered to
,otmmit the young prince to lis cufiody. Mar
f,-llfented; and she initantly appointed 33othwell
i; v:ernor of the castle. And. i. Pref. 64.
ieith, 379. note (d). 3. The inquiry into the
rliirder, previons to Bothrell's trial, seems to
l ave been conduted with the utnmot remlfisTcfs,
Junchanan exclaims loudly against this. And.
ii. 24. Nor was it without reason tlhat ih did
f), as is evident from a ciecumftance in the affi-
rikit of Thomas Nelson, one of the kin-'s ser-
ia;tts, who was in the house when his master
wv,. murdered, and was dulg up alive out of the
ribb fh. Being examined o the Monday after
the king's death, " This d.ponar fchew that
B'likle had the key of tle cellare, and the qucenis
frr.'andis the keys of her flalmir. Qluhilk the
l;ird of Tillibardin liearing, said, Hald thair,
!i ;-e is ane gr-ound. Efter quhilk words fpokin,
ti ii left of, and procedit na farther in the inquifi-
t;,u." And. iv. p. 2. I67. Iad there bcen any
ittl ntion to search into the bottom of the matter,
a1 ,'lcumftance of so much importance merited

r. :fionc aienatae confilentis fummain decem millium mcr-
f.l::nm monicts pielrcri(!ta numnr,indum cr calculandum in
1 rclliali Cecclea de Edinburgh, super preemonicione qu.idri-
r1':,l dierun, u moris elc, veluti in diftis reverrfonis literis,
;ic. de data 8vo Oftob. 1565, &.c. ('The reit is form, and
co't.,insl a clause of abfohlte war.ndic:. ) IN cr JUs tKE
'I s mzIMONIUMt pr.efietribus magnum figillumn noltrum ap.
p["ni IccimuS. Apud Edinburgh, decimo quiato die menriia
::1 igarii, anno Domiini millclilno quilngcntcfimo foxagcfimo
:;i: , ct rcsni nouhi vicefimo quinto.

'rhc grcat feal entire.
AI 3 tlie

the molt careful inquiry. 4. Notwithilandi;,,
Lennox's repeated solicitations, notwithiltaiincdi;
the reasonableness of his demands, and the nL
ceffity of complying witl them, in order to ln.
courage any accuser to appear againif Botlwcll,
Ille not only refused to commit hinm to cuftodv,
or even to remove him from her presence and
councils; And. i. 42. 48. but by the grants
which we have mentioned, and by other circuni-
flanccs, discovered an increase of attachment :-
him. 5. She could not avoid bringing Both-
well to a public trial; but Ihe permitted him to
fit as a member in that meeting of the privy
council which directed his own trial; and the
trial itself was carried on with such unnecefiary
prccipitancy, and with so many cther suspicious
circumlnances, as render his acquittal rather ;in
argument of his guilt than a proof of his inno-
cence. These circumstances have all been men.
tioned at length in Book IV. and therefore are
not. repeated in this place. 6. Two days aft, r
tle trial, Mary gave a public proof of her reganl
for Bothwell, by appointing him to carry the
sceptre before her at the meeting of parliamuent.
Keith, 378. 7. In that parliament, Ihe granltl
him a ratification of all the great pofieflions aild
honours which flie had conferred upon him, ill
which was contined an ample enumeration (l
all the services he had performed. And. i. 11i.
8. Though Melvil, who forefaVt that *her a;l
tachnment to Bothwell would at length indlce
her to marry him, warned her of the infiamy
and daiger wlich would attend that acdion, lihe
not only difirgaided this salutary adlw)nitiol,
but difcovcred what had paflcd between them to

Bothwvll,

Bothuwll, which exposed Mdlvil to his resent-
Inent. Melv. 156. 9. Bothwell seized Mary as
flie returned from Stirling, April 24. If he had
done this without her knowledge and consent,
Inch lan insult could not have failed to have filled

eli with the molt violent indignation. But ac-
c,.!dilng to the account of an old MS. " The
f,ieicnly love was so highly contracted between
this grear. princess and her enormous subjet,
that there was no end thereof, (for it was con-
itantly esteemed by all men, that either of them
loved other carnally,) so that (he suffered patiently
to be led,.where the lover lift, and all the way
i-ither made obflacle, impediment, clamour, or
:.; ilance, as in such accidents use to be, or'that
ii!c might have done by her princely authority,
being accompanied with the inoble earl of Huntly
.nd secretary Maitland of Lethington." Keith,
3.33. Melvil, who was prefcelt, confirms this
:tacount, and tells us that the oliect'r, by whom
lce was seizcd, informed himl that nothing wlas
cone without the queen's consent. Melv. 158.
io. On the 12th of May, a few days before her
marriage, Mary declared that fle was then at
full liberty, and that though Bothwell hlad of-
i;fndcd her by seizing herperfon, fle was so much
l-!isfied with his dutiful behJavonr finc that
tine, and so indebted to hin for palt services,
tllat lihe not only fqrgave that offence, but rc-
Iflved to promote him to higher honours. And.
i. S7. i. Even after the confederate nobles
had driven Bothwell fiom the queen's presence,
and though the sav that lie was conlidered as
lhe murderer of her former hulffand by so great
;: part of her fibjeits, her aftf&tion did nlot in the

,,,tl.

leafl abate, and fie continued to exprcfs the mno
unalterable attachment to him. " I can percciv
(fa)s Sir N. Throkmortoi) that the rigour whi
which the queen i, kept, proceedeth by o!rd,
fiom these men, becanfe that the queen will nIl
by any means be induced to lend her'authority t,
profccute the murderer; nor will not content h1
any perfiiafion to ahandon the lord Bothwell fti
her husband, but avoweth confantly that Ihc w;1!
live and die with lin ; and faith, that if it war,
put to her choice to r-elincqilin her crown ati,
kingdom, or the lord Bothwell, she wouI.t leav
lier kingdom and dignity to go a simple damfce
with hlin, and that lhe will never content h;!at
lie shall fare worse, or have more harm
than herself." Append. No. XXII. In alli
their negotiatiqns with Throknmoton, the con-
federates mention this unalterable attachment of
the queen to Bothwell, as a flfficient reason for
rejeding his proposals of an accommodation willi
their sovereign. Keith, 419. 449. This aflcrtion
they renewed in the conferences at York. .1n-
derf. iv. part ii. p. 66. Murray, in hisinterview
with Mary in Lochlevin, charlged her with per-
fiting in her inordinate affedion to Bothwell.
Keith, 446. All these, however, may be con-
fidered merely as accufttions brouglht by lli
confederates, in order to vindicate their rigour
towards the queen. But Throkmorton, Vwho,
by his residence in Edinburgh, and by his inter-
course witlh the queen's partisans, as well as with
her enemies, had many opportunities ofdifcover-
ing whether or not Mary had expreflTd herself
in such ternms, and who wa; disposed to view
lher aftions in the nmot favourable light, appear;,

by

l)y tilc pafrage wvhich I h)ave (Iuoted f-om his
Icttcr of thie 14th of July, to, be erlfuaded that
thle confedcerates had not miifrepreetilcd hcr fetl
tnients. I-e had boon au opportunity of being
ejliined with greater ccrtaiuty in this opinion.
Although the confedcrates had refused Lim ac-
'ccs to the captive queen, he found means of
,oldinlg a secret correspondence with her, and
Cetdcavoured to perf.rade lcr to give Iler confcnt
to lavc her irnaiage wlith Bothwell difiolyed by
a icltence of divorce, as the mroll probable
r:cans of regairlning her liberty. She hath feint
,he word that fihe will in nowise conleint unto
tint, but rather die. Append. No. XXII.
L'I'zre is evidencc of the continuance of Mary's
;ila.elimnt itill more explicit. Lord Herries,
in tlhe parliament

. hcld the i5th of December

15067, acknowledged the queen's inordiinate as-
feclion to that wicked man, and that Ihe could
not be induced by perfualoni to leave him; and
'lat in fequeftelrilg her witliin LOCIh'ivi, the
'.t!etderates had done the dlut7y f nollemen.
*^p'P. No. XXIV. In the year 1571, a
m" ficrenFe 't helsd hy fomne depties firom a
\ril~xelutiol of cIergy wvith the duke of Cltatel-
Ir,',ault, fercctary 'aitland, jir James 13alfour,
alldl Kirkaldy; avtd an accoulnt of it. written by
lrh. Craig, one of tlhe mii[ters- of Edilnburgil,
ii extant in C'aldlervood MSS. glilt. ii. 244.
In prefenc of all thlefe perfos, moll of s.llom
eCe in .Ebdil.l. lhl Wllet the quCn1C ws taken at
(arbc.:r, Maitltiud, :wio. wits now an av;owcdl
IJrs.lw of , , .y, t cl arCs,. tit; On to]lt fame

m

lit 111' nlc. ,, 't~l~on8111 .
it, t Ic as 8boughll t lt l!dinbrglb, he hiulfelf

,, llhad

had offered, that if she would abandon Bothvcil,
hlc should have as thankful obcdience as v;er
file had lince the came to Scotland. But no
wife would (he consent to leave Bothwell. Ac-
cording to fir James Mclvil, the queen founi
means of writing a letter to Bothwell on tii
evening of that day, when she was co(udueed as
a prisoner to Edinlburgh, in which flhe declared
her affieion to him in the most tender expref-
lions, and her resolution never to abandon him.
'This lettcr, lie fays, was intercepted by the con.
federates, and determined them to confine Mary
in the caflle of Lochlevin. But as neither Bu-
chanan nor Knox, botl abundantly dilpofed to
avail themselves of every fadt and report that could
be employed in order to reprcfent Mary's con-
due as improper and criminal, mention this 1-t-
ter; and as the confederates themselves, in their
negotiations with Throkmorton, as well as in
their accufatiuns of'the queen before the Englifl
commiffloners at York and Weftmintler, maintain
the fame silence with regard to it, I am fatisficl
that Melvil, who wrote his memoirs for the in-
formation of his son in his o01( age, and long after
the events which he records happened, has lWei)
millaken with regard' to this particular. Fromn
this long 'enumeration of circumstances, wemnay,
without violence, draw the following conclulioi:
had Mary really been accelltry to he,' nuirdtr
of her husband; had Bothwell perpetrated the
crime with her consent, or at her command ; ;all
had lie intended to itifle the evidence againll
him, and to prevent the discovery of his gnilh,
(he could scarcely; have, taken. any other ile's

lth':,

!',an those which flie took, nor could her con-
i,!L have been more repugnant to all the max-
,, of prudence and of decency.

Tlhe pofilive evidence produced againll Mary

i,:;iy be clafltd under two heads.

i. The depolitions of s'ome persons who were

employed in committing the murder, particularly
,if Nicholas Hubert, who. in the writings of that
%;ic, is called ]French Par-is. This person, who
,:s I Botlhwell's servant, and inuch truiled by
him, was twice examinid, and the original of
one of his depositions, and a copy of the other,
;rc still extant. It is pletended that both these
are notorious forgeries. But they are remarkable
fri' a simplicity and niit/ wnicl it is iilinot
impoflible to imitate; they abound with a nuon-
ber of minute fats and particularitics, which the

ilft dextrous forger could not have easily as-
feinbled and conne&ed together with any ap-
pearance of probability; and they are filled with
circumitances, which can lcarcely be supposcd to
liaive entered the imagination of any man but one
of Paris's rankl and clarader. But, at the
f'rTne time, it ihuft be aciknowlsedede, tlat hi; de-
pulitions contain folne improbable circuillancs.
IIe seems to have been a foolilh talkative fellow;
tile fear of death, the violence of torture, and
ile delire of pleating thole in wiholf power he
was, tempted him, perhaps, to feign some cir-
iumll;aucea, and to exaggerate others. To fay
tllat some circumitanes in an atfidavit are im-
probable or fnlfe, is very different from faying
tlat the whole is forged. I fufped the former
ti be the cafe hltre ; but I fee no appearance of
t'i latter. Be that as it will, fnme of the moll Ina

t rial

terial fads iln Paris's affidavits reft upon his fnn-]
testimony ; and for that reason, I have not. in tll
Hifltry, nor flall I in this place, lay any ftrci
upon diem.

2. The letters said to be written by Mary ti

Bothwell. These have been frequently pub
lifled. The accident by which the queen':
enemies got them into their poffllfion, is relate.
il Book V. When the authenticity of any an
cient paper is dubious or contested, it may Ib
ascertained either by external or internal cvi
deuce. Both these have been produced in tin
present cafe.

I. External proofs of the genuineness of Ma.

ry's letters. I. Murray, and the nobles w-l'c
adhered to him, affirm upon their word aild io.
nour, that the letters were written with tlh
queen's own hand, with which they were well
acquainted. Good. ii. 64. 92. ?. The letter
were publicly produced in the parliament ot
Scotland, December 1567; and were so ftr
confidered as genuine, that they are mentioned
in the aEt againif Mary as one chief argument
of her guilt. Good, ii. 66, 67. 3. They wcrre
(hewn privately to the duke of Norfolk, th':
earl of Suffex, and fir Ralph Sadler, Elizabet'l,
cornmiffoners at York. In the account which
they gave of this matter to their nilftrefs, they
feern to confider the letters as genuine, and cx-
press no suspicion of any forgery; they parti.
cularly observe, " that the matter contained in
them is such, that it could hardly be invented
and deviled by any other than herself; for that
they discourse of some.things, which were un-
known to any other than to herself and Both-

well i

w-cll; and as it is hard to counterfeit so many,
!) the matter of them, and the manner how these
i.cn came by them, is such, as it feemeth that
God, in whose fight murder and bloodshed of
tle innocent is abominable, would not permit
the fame to be hid or concealed." Good. ii. 142.
They feeni to have made such an inpreffion on
the duke'of Norfolk, that in a subsequent letter
to Pembroke, Leicester, and Cecil, he has these
words: " If the matter lhall be thought as de-
tct;ble and rmanifc{t to you, as for ought we can
pcrceive it feemeth here to us." Good. ii. r54.
Nor did Norfolk declare these to be his senti-
rcents only in public official letters, he exprelied
himnflf in the fame manner to his moil confidential
friends. In a secret conference with the bishop
of Ross at York, the duke informed him, that
le had seen the letters, &c. which the regent
had to produce against the queen, whereby there
v.ould be such matter proved against her, as
vwould dilhonour her for ever. State Trials, Edi-
tion of -Hargravc, i. 91. Murdin, 52. The
hifhop of Ross, if lie had known the letters to be
a notorious forgery, mull have been naturally
led, in confcquelce of this declaration, to unde-
ceive the duke, and to expose the impollnre.
But instead of this, the duke, and lie, and Le-
tl1ington, after consulting togethcr, agreed, that
the biflop (hould write to Mary, tllhn at Bolton,
and inltlrut her to make fucl a1 propofll to
Elizabeth as might prevent the public production
of the letters and other evidence. ' State Trials,
i. 94. Murdin, 45. Indeed the whole of this
l:cret conference seems to imply, that Lething-
(on, Ross, and Norfolk were conscious of some
VOL. 111. N dcfett

defet in Mary's cause, and therefore exerted
all their ingenuity in order to avoid a public ac-
cufatioa. Murdin, 52, 53. To Banister, whom
the duke seems to have truited more entirel-
than any other of his servants, he expressed hi&n-
self in similar terms with respect to the qulee
of Scots. State Trials, i. 98. The words o(
B3anifler's evidende are remarkable: ' I confers
that I, waiting of my lord and master, when the
carl of Suffex and Mr. Chancellor of the dutclir
that now is, were in commiflion at York, dii
hear his grace fay, that upon examination of thl
mutter of the murder, it did appear that tlec
queen of Scots was guilty and privy to the mur-
der of lord Darnly, whereby I verily thougiht
that his grace /would never join in marriage wit!
her." Murdin, 134. Elizabethj in her infirtc.
tions to the earl of Shrewifbry and Beale i:,
1j83, asserts, that both the dlke and earl of
Arundel did declare to herself, that the prouf,
by the view of her letters, did fall out fu cihent
againil the queen of Scota; however, they were
after drawn to cover her fallts and pronounce
her innocency. MIS. Advoc. Iibrary. A. iii. 2S.
p. 314. from Cot. Lib. Calig. 9. 4. A inihr
imnpreflion was made upon other contcmpoD'ari's
of Mary by the produitiou of the letters, wh1'li
implies a full belief of their being genuine. Ce.
cil, in uJl correfpondenice witllh r Henry Nor-
ris, the Englifli ambassador ill France, relkt:
this tranfalioi in iterms which leave no room to
doubt with ref)edt to his own private opinion,
In his letter, IDecen. +lth, 1568, the very (ay
on which tle letters, &c. were laid before ilhe
meeting of privy counlfCllor3 and peers, lie in.

IorlIlS

fo-ms him, " That the regent was dri-en, for
hs defence, to disclose a full fardel of the natrghty
tlit.ter, tending to convince the queen as deviser
:'' the murther, and the earl of Bothwell as her
c:. :,itour;. and now the queen's party, so great,
:;lfe to make any answer, and prcfs that their
- i![ress may come in person to anfiwcr the mat-
i. hberfelf, before the queen's nijct-ly, which is
t:.,ught not fit to be grai;td nutil the 'great
r',.t of the marriage with her husband's mur-
t!lercr, and the evident charges, by letters of her
c.ivn, to be dcvifer of the murther, be fonewhat
r:;:ed ont or recovered ; for that as the matters
a,'L: exhibited- a'gainfl hei-, it is far unseemly for
.i;i prince, or for chaste cars, to be alno yed witlI
;h'c lilthy noie thereof; and yet, as being at
c.n:mmifioner, I must and vill forbear to pro-
ninice any thing herein certailly, though as a
private person I cannot but with horror ana
trembling t)ink tihereof." Cabala, 156. 5;.
From tire iorrcfpondence of Bowecs, the EngliflW
rcfilent in Scotland, with Walingh<m in tlhe
v;lr 15SIa, pulifihed' towards the clofl of this
J)iffertatiolT, it is iranifelt that both in England
:nd Scotland, both by Elizabeth and Jaines,
b,,h by the diuke of Lennox and earl of Gow-
r;', the letters were deemed to he genuine. The
ra',ernefs, on one Iide to obtain, rad toh the other
te keep, pofliflion of the ciket andl letters, itm-
pit.thlat this was the belief of'both. These

'tltilenits, of contempoariLes, whol were in a

lituation ro t.be thorough-ly inforned,.' nd, who
ti id abilities to judgea with difcernmcnt,: will,
il, theo.apinion of many of .my readers, fnr.tout-
Iv .iAh theorics, fuppoditions, and conjetiuves,

N Z formlcr

formed at the distance of two centuries. 6. Thl
letters were fubjeted to a solemn and judiciai
examination with reipef to their authenticitv,
as far as that could'be ascertained byrefemblainci
of charaAer and faihion of writing: 'for after tlic
conferences at York aid Weftmitfter .were finlir -
ed, Elizabeth, as I have related, assembled lit
privy. counsellors, and joining to them several o'
the most eminent noblemen in her kingdom, 1ti,
before them all.th..proceedihgs. against the Sc .
tifh.queen,l and-particularlyv ordered, that " thie
letters and writings exhibited by the regent, a;
the 'queen of Scot's letters and writings, thould
also be, flwed, and conference Si. e. comparlfin
thereof made in. their light, with the letters of the
said quecn's being extant,.and heretofore writtec
with her own hand, and sent. to the queen's nla-
jefty; wherelyF may be searched and examined
what, difference is betwixt them." Good. ii. 252.
They aflembled nccordingly,,at Hampton Court,
December 14 and 15, 1568; and, " The ori-
ginals of the letters fuipppfed to be written with
the queen of Scbti' -own hand, were then allo
presently produced. aid, pcritlcd; and, being
read, were duly conferred and compared, for'
the manner of writing, and faflion of. orthogra-
phy, with filldry' other letters long lince hercto-
fore written,. ;nd sent by tlie sli:d queen 'of Scots
to .thel queen's ,irlajdy. In collation whercof li:
differencewas found." Good.ii. 356. 7. Ma.r.
having writtenJ an apologetical letter for her:con-
du.t'to' thliq .cd.utefs of Lennox, July 10, t570 ,

1 Mary's letter has never reen 'pbliihed, indil'oui'ht to
have a place here, whece evidence oi all 'ides;is faitly pl-

; . J UL

i;te tranfinitted it to her husband then in Scot-
kind; and he returned to the countess the obL-
]e:{,ing answer: " Seeing you have remittit
»,) me, to anfwner the queen the ikng's mother's
.:'t.ers tent to you, what ,can T fay but that I do
r1t marvell to fee hir writ the best can for hir-
self, to fearme to purge her of that, quhairof
minyr befyde me are certainly perfuadit of the

d:cid. i" Madam, if the wrang and false reportis of re-
j-:lis, enemies weill knawn for traitouris to zow, and alace
c, nmuche trufled of me by zourc advice, had not so far
.'!;rcd you aganis im. innocency (and I mudt fay aganis
:,! kyendnefs, that zou h.ae not oneeie .3 it were condempnit
!;i' wralgfulie, but so hated nr, as fme wordis and opene
c.iueis hes tellifeit to all the war de, a man) set mitliklg in,
.o. aganis zour awn blude), 1 wold not have omittit thus
hi mIy dcwtie ia wryving to zow excusing me of those untrev
rep,:;tics made of mr. But hoping with Gndis grace and
t.ie to have my innocency ;naain to zow, as I trut it is.
a!rr.l;y to the nmil: pairt of all indifferent perlonis, 1 tlwche
it hilt not to trouble ou fior a tyme till that fich ai mitter is
mrivrd that tuichis us h.ylh, quhilk is the traniliportig zoutre
I:tJl foil, and my onelie child il rl;s countryy. I'o the ilu hilk
albeit 1 be never fa willing5 I wald be glaid to have zoule
Sal'yfe therein, as in all other thingis tuichling him I have
hin him, and God knawis with quhat danger to limr and me
t ihit; and of .ow he is defcepdit. 'io I merant not to forzet
ny dIcwtic to zow, in fchewin herein any unklynldcs to zow,
h
l Iunkynllie rha.t ever ze ihave delt wvih mli, hot will love
2"., a, mly awolt, and rrfper zow is my moder in law. And
fit ye pies to knaw faither of mn rynd in that :ind all nther
tltiatis betwixt us, ny amlbladtlo the bifl:op of Ross a1ll be
rr.lly to cotf.:r with zou. And so after my hairtlie con-
m, l:.siionris, remittinci me to my faide amballador, and sour
I'tlir confideratioun, I commit Zou to the prote&ion of
Al.iiigtty God, qllhoin I pray topreferve zou and my brother
C'1 Irles, and caus zou to knaw my p.airt better nor ze do.
Irll, Ch(aitlvortl this x of July 1 570.

To my Ladle Lennox Your natural grude Nice
rny noder in law. and tovinge dochrer."

'N 3 conltr;ny,

contrary, and I not only affurit by my aw;i
knawledge, but by her hand writ, the conf-ffionis
of men gone to the death, and uther infallibil
experience. It wull be lange tyme that is halib
to put a mattir so notorious in oblivioun, to inal
black quhyte, or innocency to appear qullair
tile contrary is fa weill knawin. The maiil in-
different, 1 trust, doubtis not of the equite of
zour and my catfie, and of the just occafioun of
our mylliking. Hir riclt dcwtie to zow and me,
being the parteis intercll, were hir trew confitf-
lioun and unfeyned repentance of that lanmeltabl)l
faet, odious for hir to be reportit, and fo'-rowfi:l
fur us to think of. God is jul}, and will ,not
in the end be abused.; but as he has manifletd(
the trewth, so will he punleile the iniquity."

ienntox's (Ori. Regis. of Lettcrs. In their public
papers, the quen's enemies may be fufpeated of
advancing what would be molt fubfervieiit to
their catife, not what wa: agrceable to trutll, or
what lowved from their own inward colvition.
But in a private letter to his own wie, Lcnlox
had no occalion to diiFemble; and it is plia,
that lie not only thought the queen guilty, lit
believed the authenticity of her letters to Botli-
wcll. 8. In oppolition to all these reafolls fol
believing the letter,, &c. to be authentic, llhe
condudt of the nobles colnfderated .ag'ainii Mia-
rv, iin not producing them dircOtly as evidence
againlt her, has been reprcfented as an ilreflra
gable proof of their being forged, Accotxling
to the account of the confederates themlnflvrs,
the calkct containing the letters was seized !v
them on the twentieth of June one.thoifand live
hundred and fixty-fcven i but the lirlt time that

tlic)

r:. v wcrc judicially statcd as evidence againlt
Illc' queen was in a meeting of the regent's privy
cot!icil, December fourth, and they afterwards
";:'.cd as the foundation of the ass made againil
l in the parliament held on the liftecnthi of the
i;.:nc month. If the letters had been genuine,
'; i contended, that the obtaining poffclfion of

I''t!ti mull have afforded such matter of triumph
the confederates, that they would inlfantly

l,,c proclained it to the whole world; and in
i,'- negotiations with the Englilh a'.d French
;ii'l;iters, or with such of their fellow-filbiet s as
c:indemned their proceedings, they would have
i';'!:ced, at once, every advocate for the queen,
lti exhibiting this con, ining proofof oher guilt.
Pi! in this rcafoning fufiicient attention is not
"id to the delicate and perilous situation of
tl:c confederates at that juncture. They had
t:;.en arms againit their fovcreign, had seized
!r i person at Carberry-hill, and had confined
iter a prisoner at Lochlevin. A considerable
i! :ber, howevcr, of their.fellow-fubjeas, headed
iba rome of the mofl powerful noblemen in the
iiugdom, was combined against them. This
cinbinlation, they soon perceived, they could not
ih ,c to break or to vanquifhl without aid either
i'riin France or England. In the former king-
(id"l, Mary's uncles, the duke of Guise and
c:'ililnal of Lorraln, were, at that period, all-
I;'ow'rfil, and the king, himself was devotedly
attached to her. If the confederates confined
l1b i views to the dilrolution of the marriage of
tli . queten with Bothwell, and to the exclusion
of hlim for ever froml her presence, they might
l() Ie, perhaps, to be countcnlanced by Cliarlea IX.

.Inr.l

and his ministers, who had sent an envoy init
Scotland of purpose to dissuade Mary from that
ill-fated match; Append. No. XX[I.; whereas
the loading her puiblicly with the imputation of
being accessary to the murder of her husband,
would be deemed fitch an inexpiable crime b7
the court of France, as must cut off every hope
of countenance or aid from that quarter. From
England, with which the principal confederatta
had been long and intimately conne&ed, they
had many reasons to expeft more effetual sup-
port; but to their aftonifliment, Elizabeth con-
demned their proceedings with asperity, warmly
cfpoufed the cause of the captive queen, and
was extremely solicitous to obtain her release
and restoration. Nor was this merely the only
one of the artifices which Elizabeth often em-
ployed in her tranfaEions with Scotland. Though
her moto sagacious ministers confidered it. as
the wifelt policy to support the confederate lords
rather than the queen of Scots, Elizabeth dil;
regarded their counsel c. Her high notions of

c This was the opinion of Throkmorton, as appears froim

an xrtraS} of his letter of July x ith, pubflfied in the Alpesd.
No. XXII. 'Ihe lame wele the lentiments of Cecil, in ,le
letterof Ao g. l9tn, 1567, to lir Henry Norris, Elizalrth'g
arnhallillor to France: ' You Ihall perceive," fays he, "' by
the queen's letter to you, at this ptefent, how earncfly !he
is bent in favoulr of the queen of Scots, and truly lince the
beginning the hath been gr'atly offended with the lords
and, ho.vfoee r her maje(ty might make her profit by beL iiiL:
with the lords in this a.tion, yet no counsel can flay her
maiefty from manif'efling her mifllking of them." Cabal:,
14., And in his letter of Sept. 3d, '" The queen's Ina-
jelly, our Iover,:gn, remainedi Itill oflended with the lordi
for the queen ; the xample moveth her." Ib. 141. l)igcg,
ComIp. Amb, 14.

royal

-',,al authority, and of the filbmifion due by
:.!i.:cts,, ihdu:cd h.er, on this o<cafion, to exert.
i"' rifffin behiLffpf%'Mry, riot only tvilh finceritv

wi.. 'lith zeal;i (lc ntgotiatted, Iel solicited, thc

! cateucd.' ' Silding the coplfederates inflexible,
- clideavour ed to ?procure Mary's rdelafe hy
- a:;s of that party in Scotland dwhich citinucd
L.t:ifih to nler, and ilfiruced Throk orton to
-;'.rri-)uilnd wiith the leaders of it, .and to make
;-rtln-es to that .eft. IIith, 45. App.
.'.o.% hX-I., She even cienifa r as to direct

ai' .an.baffador at Paris to concert measures with

:.te Frenchi k;ig Ihow, they,, by ticir joint efforts,
::J.!it perfiiade or compel the Scots to " ac-
!rn','Icdg-e the queen'her good sifter, to be, their
ri .re'ignladv, and (queen, and renounce thlir
*i ;dience to her son." Ie;th, 462, 3, 4. From
a'l there circumri-ances,' the ctiifderates had
(^ ery reason to apprelhend that Maly woulid soon
ciLain liberty, and by fomne accommodation.be
c!l ored to the wholc, or at ]eas3 to a conlcirid ble
',ortion1 of her authority as sovereign. In. that
' *:nt thiey forcfaw, that if they iouuld venture
' ;l:c!c1re .h(r publicly of a crimln for atrocious as
it nmurder of her hitfband, they niimis not only
i. excluded for ever from nowcr and favour but
i',,il an l hope of pCrfo(,a;'l lfety. On tfis. ac-
'Itrll, ticy lng, .coalfincd themierlvea to. that
';i:)ch was oligially decliired to be the reason
e' thleir takinc atrns; thel aveuting the-king's
Il:ath, the ,ditiblviyn the malt!lg, wjith .Ioth-

1,* ,l the

t ifljil'n.,tm fim .C;nligln ptuhjl'i.ent,

,r i)aiJfluilig hiin for ever.t fiom ihe :queen's prc-
t,,c.. Et aplcartL:from thc letters of Tlrok-
.,;orton, publilhcd 'bj Lilhop Keith, and in my

Appitdi.,

Apipendix, that his sagacity early difcoverd
that this would be the tenor of their ncontidi'.
In his letter from Edinburghl, dited July 14h,
he observes, that " they do not forget their , -n
peril conjoined with the danger of the priii.c,
but, as far as 1 perceive, they intend not ;i,
touch the queen either in furcty or in honour;
for they speak of her with i refpcc and revercnce,
and do affirm, as I do learn, that, the conditil,
aforelaid accompliflcd [i c. the separation fro;s
Bothwell], they will both put her to liberty, all4
ref'rore her to her ettate." Append. No.. XXIL.
IHis letter of Augult 22d, contains a declaratlon
made to him by Lethington, in name and ii
presence of his associates, " that tlhey nci..r
meant harmn neither to the queen's perfoa nor to
her honour-that they have been contente:d
hitherto to he condemned, as it were, of !il
princes, larangers, and, namely, of the qurtn
of England, being charged of grievous and ii.
famous titles, as to be noted rebels .traitoi;i,
seditious, ingrate, and cruel, all which tlihy
fuifer and bear upon their backs, hecaufe tli:y
will not juttify themselves, nor proceed in any
thing that may touch their sovereign's honour.
But in cafe they be with these deflllations c(n.
tinually opprenfi'ed, or .with tha force,. aid, and
practices of other princes, and nainely of the
queen of England, put in 4anger, or to an cx-
tremity,' they thall: be compellcd to dcalotlhr-
wife with thci queen. than they intendl,:or than
they desire.; , ftr,. added he,'you mayl, e ii're oe
will *not lose 'ouitllivC3 ,'htlvo .our lan1ds forfeited,
and. bc. reputed: re1bels through :the .orld,
fceing we ihlav the mneans to jullify ourfclvh:s."

Ac:citli,

Kcith, 448. From this view of the flippcry ground
oi which they Itood at that time, thcir conduct in
rot producing the letters fur several months, ap-
pears not only to have been prudent, but eflential
t, their own safety.

But, at a. fiubequent period, when the con-

fcderates found it necessary to have the form of
government, which they had eflabliflhed, con-
firmed by authority of parliament, a different
Mr.!le of proceeding became requisite. All that
hLad hitherto been done with relce& to the
q;:cen's difiniflion, the feating the young king
upon the throne, and the appdintincnt of a re-
ge1nt, was in reality nothing more than the deed
of private men. It required the exhibition of
inlne legal evidence to procure a conffiturional
a:t giving the fanaion of its approbation to
fielh violent measures, and.to obtain ' a perfcCt
law and security for all them that either by deed,
counsel, or subscription, had entered into that
cause since the beginning." Hayncs, 453.
This prevailed with the regent and his secret
counsel; after long deliberation, to agree to pro-
'a:ce all the evidence of which they were pof-
fclfed; and upon that produAion parliament
,airted the &as which were required. Such a
change had happened in the ibite of the kingdom
as mnduced the confederates to venture upon this
change in their condud. In June, a powerful
combination was forming againit.lthem, under
tilh leading of the Hamiltons. In .December,
:ilat combination was broken;. most of the mem-
blcrs of it had acknowledged the king as their
lawful sovereign, and had fiubmitted to the re-
gcnt's government. Huntly, Argyll, Herries,

the

ic mos powerful noblemen of that party, awer.
pr-eent in the parliament, and concurred in all
its a&s. Edinburgh, Dulnbar, Dunbarton, and
all the chief strong holds in the kingdom, were
now in the hands of the regent; the arms of
France had full occupation in its civil war with
the hugonots. The ardour of Elizabeth's zeal
in behalf of the captive queen seems to have
abated. A ftep that would have been follo\wed
with ruin to the confederates in June, was a!t
tended with little danger in December. From
this long deduftion it appears, that no proof of
the letters being forged can be drawn from th,
circumifance of their not having been produced
immediately -aftr the twentieth of June; h;t
though no public accusation was brought i!i-
ftantly against the queen, in consequence of
seizing the calcet, hints were given by the con-
federates, that they poffefled evidence fufficieilt
to conviEt her.. This is plainly implied in a letter
of Throkmorton, July 2izf, Keith, Pref. p. :ii.
and more clearly in the palfage which I have
quoted from his letter of August 22. In his
letter of July 25, the papers contained in the
casket are Itill more plainly pointed out. "..They
si. c. the confederates] fay, that they have as
apparent proof againlt her as may be, as wellUy
the testimony of her own hand-writing, which
they have recovered, as also by sufficient wit.
neffes.". Keith, 426.

II. With regard to the internal proofs of the

geniuinenies of the queen's letters to Bothwell,
we may observe, I. That whenever a paper is
forgedt with a particular intention, the eagernefi
of the forrer to eltablilh the point in view, hli

folici

. ..iidc to cut off all doubts and cavls, and tr.

i: ay;; appearance of uncertainty, fIldoin fail

of prompting him to use expreflions the Inoil ex-
i.;!it and full to his purpose. The passages
t. :led into ancient authors by heretics in dif-
i.:;it ages; the legendary miracles of the
{Rurnin faints; the supposititious deeds in their
llvn favour produced by nmonafteries; the false
:i)irt-ters of homage mentioned Vol. 1. p. 13. are
:n many proofs of this assertion. No maxim
i;c:nj to be more certain than this, that a
,ry'cr is often apt to prove too much, but
ilo ihm falls into the error of proving too little.
'i'l.: point whicll tle, queen's enemies had to
l:,,lifih was, " that as the earl of Bothwell was
.';; executor of the horrible and unworthy
m!i;irder perpetrated, &c. so was she of the fore-
I.,.w\ledge, counsel, dcvife, persuader, and conm
ri,;,ider of the said murder to be done." Good. ii;
.j>7. But of this there are only imperfelt hints,
.ilic,;rc intimations, and dark expreflions in thc
i,:icir, which, however convincing evidence they
I,:hit fuirnifli if found in realletters, bear no redlem;
I ilicc to that glare and fiperfluity of cvidence

.chi forgeries commonly contain. All the advo-
c--i for Mary's innocence in her own age, con
' "cd that there is nothing in the letters which can
!: ,c as a proof of her guilt. Lcefy, Blackwood,
T'Iuner, 3&c. abound with pafllgea to this pur-
p',lc; nor are the fcntiments of those in the pre-
I';t age diflirent. " Yet still it might have
Li n expected (fays one of her ablelt defenders)
:': t ifonme one or other of the points or articles
.he tl accusation hould be made out clearly by

IOL. 111. 0 the

the proof. But nothing of that is to be sec.;,
the present cafe. There is nothing in the lettirs
that could plainly flew the writer to have iLc
in the foreknowledge, counsel, or device of any
mm der, far less to have persuaded or co.nmandtd
it; and as little is there about maintailing or
jiftifying any murders." Good. i. 76. H.w
ill adviled were Mary's adversaries, to contr!;t
so much guilt, aud to pradtife so many artifics,
in order to forge letters, which are so ill contrived
for ellablifhing the colclulion they had in viw '
Had they been so bate as to have recourse to for.
gcry, is it not natural to think that they wouid
have produced something more explicit and d.
cifive ? 2. It is almost inpoffible to invent a lonn
narration of iiditious events, conlifling of variou~
minute particulars, and to conned these in fu&l
a manner with real faes, that no mark of fl-acud
flall appear. For this reason, flilful forgers
avoid any long detail of circumstances, especially
of foreign and superfluous ones, well knowing
that the more these are multiplied, the more are
the chances of detedion increased. Now Mary's
letters, especially the lirlt, are filled with a mul-
tiplicity of circumitances, extremely natural in a
real correipondence, but altogether foreign to the
purpose of the queen's enemies, and which it
would have been extreme folly to have inserted, if
they had been altogether imaginary, and without
foundation. 3. The truth and reality of several
circumiftances in the letters, and these, too, of
no very puhlic-nature, are confirmed by ut1.
doubted collateral evidence. Lett. i. Good. ii.
p. I. The queen is said to have met one of Lel-

Ilo '!

-,x's gentlemen, and to have had some converfa.
*t o) with hin. Thomas Crawford, who was the
p1.r!bo, appeared before Elizabeth's commission.
c:', and confirmed, upon oath, the truth of this
-i!rcumiftance. He likewise declared, that during
!,? queen's stay at Gaifgow, the king repeated
;. him, every night, whatever had passed through
lic d'iy between her majetly and him; and that
t:i account given of these conversations in the
i: l letter, is nearly the fame with what the king
. o!:llunicated to him. Good. ii. 245. Accoid-
ing to the fame letter there was much discourse
between the king and the queen concerning

)iymto, Hiegait, and Walcar. Good. ii. 8. Io, I t.

W\;,:'i this might be, was altogether unknown,
u:;;il a letter of Mary's, prefelved in the Scottish
c.jllcge at Paris, and published, Keith, Pref. vii.
diT;covered it to be an affair of so much import.
:.n-c as merited all tile attention she paid to it at
that time. It appears by a letter from the French
a:ilaatkdor that Mary was fubje&Etto a violent
pa;in in her iide. Keith, ibid. This'circumfiance
is nmentioned, Lett. 1. p. 30. ill a manner lo na-
tur.al as call scarcely belong to any but a genuine
pr'oilution. If we shall itill think it probable
to jFippofe that so many real circumstances isere
altililly introduced into the letters by the
firgers, in order to give an air of authenticity to
thil; prodution; it will hardly be polfible to
liold the fame opinion' concerning the following
parllticular. Before the queen began lier: firi
ltticr to Bothwell, (he, as tfual''aiong those

wli,. write long letters 'containinlg a variety of

fiiibjceis, made notes or memotrandutrrm of the par-
Iicllaius flxe wiflied to remember; hut as Ihe fat

o0 uy

up writing luring a great part of the niglt, n ::
after her attendants were ailcep, her paper failhi
her, .and the continued her letter upon the, ':1:
iheet-on which flhe had formerly made her r-.
moralnduiis. This lfe herself takes notice u,'.
and makes an apology for it: ' It is late; i
dcfirc never to cease from writing unto you, vc:
lnow, after the kissing of your hands, I will c;,i!
mny letter. Excuse my evil writing, and read it
twice over. Exeufe that thing that is ferilxli,
for I had na paper zefterday, qilhen I wraite ti::.
of the memorial." Good. ii. 28. Theife: i-
imorandumis fill appear in the middle of tli
ietter ; and what we have said seems naturally
to account for the manner how they might ti[I
their way into a real letter. It is scarce to be
!luppofed, however, that any forger would tli:;K
of placing memnorandums in the middle of a
letter, where, at firit iight, they make so :.i-
surd and so unnatural an appearance. B13ut it
any shall it ll carry their refinement to f.cli a;
length, as to fippofe that the forgers were o1
artful as to throw in this circunmlltace, in oiill
to prelt're the appearance of geni.inenef;, tlive
nimll at least allow that tile quccn's enemies, \x i,
employed thcfe focgers, could not be ignorant (,i
the deiign and meaning, of these Ihort notes a;ii
memnorandunms; hut we find them miill.al ,ig
tllhem so far as to imagine that they were t!,c
credit of /te.bearert, i. e. points conccrninlg wicli
the queen had given hin verbal inllufl i'lln.
Good. ii. 152. This they cannot plflihly lc;
for the queen herself writes witllifo Imuch cxac.l
uefs.conccrning the diflerent points in the wi.-
Inoraulduims that ithere was no neet of givill,,

;i11\

:,: credit or inltruaions to the bearer concern-
;them. The memorandums are indeed the
.rnilnrs of the letter. S. Mary, mentioning her
!rn,:erfation with thi king, about the affair o'-
; ivto. Hkigait, &c. fays, " The morne [i. e.
-' .'l.row] I will fpeik to him upon that
,it ;" and then adds, " As to the reft of
i\ ille Hiergait's, he confeffit it; but it was the
:.!i:ie [i. e, the morning] after my coming or

, did it." Good. ii. 9. This addition, which
:,I:!d not have been made till after the converfa-

1: happened, seems either to have been inserted

i, the queen into the body of the letter, or,
- laps, ihe having written it on the margin,
.'as taken thence into the text. 'If we fiup-
,:. the letter to be a real one, and written at
;icrlent times, as it plainly bears, this ci'-
::i;,ltance appears to be very natural; but no
iz r;n could have induced a forger to have ven-
t'ied upon filch an anachronifn, for which there
...; no neceflity. An addition perfeltly similar

this made to a genuine paper, may be found,

.Good. ii. 382.

But, on the other hand, Mary herself, and
lhe advocates for her innocence, have contended,
o:,,r thlfe letters were forged by her enemies, on
pislotiCe to blait her reputation, anid to jtftify
t1 1i- own rebellion. It is not neceflary to take
! lice of the arguments which were produced,
; her own age, in support of this opinion; the
(lilervations which we have already made, con-
tlill a fuill reply to them. An author, who has
iuiuilred into the affairs of that period with great
il.dintry, and who has acquired much knowledge
i t. iein, has publiflied (as he affirms) a demon-

0 3 ll;ttliou

flrt.ion of the forgery of Mary's letters. . 1
demonilration he founds upon evidence both ..
ternal and external. With regard to the sor-i,..
he observes, that the French copy of the queel'.
letters is plainly a translation of 13BUiclhna
Latin copy ; which Latin copy is ouiy a tr.'-
lation of the Scottish copy; anl, by c(:;i,
quence, the assertion of the queen's cnm.n: .
that ihe wrote them originally in French, i ;.'
togtlher groulidlers, and the whole letters ,.
gross forg-cries. He accounts for tlis filr-a
fucccflon of tranlsations, by fuppofinrg t.i:.
when tle forgery wa.l projtccd, no person cot:!.,
be found capable of writing originally in t1.(
1rencli language letters which would pais for t -
queen's; for that reafoin thcv were first cu!;
posed in Scottish ; but uniluckily the French i-
terpreter, as Ihe con.jeauires, did not underinl;,:.
that langunace ; and therefore Buchlanan trauilltjt,
theln into Latin, and from his Latin they w\v.
!e(ndered into French. Good. i. 79, So.

It is hardly ncceciflh to observe, that nl

proof whatever is produced of any of tlief fir
politions. The manners of the Scots, in t.h,
age, when almost every man of rank fpeni a
part of his youth in France, and the intercourfi
letwecn the two mations was great, render ;I
altogether improbable that so many conplicatt !
operations fiould be ncceffary in order to pr.-
cure a few letters to be written in the Frem.i
language.

But without insisting farther on this, we nmaly

obfcrve that all tils nuthor',s prcmifis may lbe
granted, and yet his conclusion will not foll)\sw,
unlei, hle likevife prove that the French letters,

zi':

I.*,' lnoew have them, are a true copy of those

',' l were produced by Murray and his party
, !,c ScoLtifh parliament, and at York and
"<iililer-. 1Buti this he has not attempted ;

if we attend to thehiiitlory of the letters,

'h an attempt, it is obvious, mull have been
:, (efsfill. Tle letters were firit.publi(hed at
. cild of Buchanan's .DI.cLSion. The firll edi-

,f tilis t:e'atife was in Latin, in which lin-
: . three of thl queen's letters were fubjoirled
': this IL.tin edition was printed A. D.

. Son after, a Scottish translation of it was

d.:,iiihcd, and at the end of it were printed,

i. i in Scottish, the three letters which had

:!i)-y appeared in Latin, and five other letters
.cottilh, which were not in the Latin edition.
. appeared a Fren'il translation of the De-
oui, and of fevcn of the letters ; this bears to

been printed at Edinburghi by Thomias

' , in, 1572. The name of the place, as
. tihe printer, is allowed by all parties to
!.; manlifel impoftule. Our aulhor, fiom
..'ving the day of the montli, fiom which
, ,riltilng i:; said to bave been iinilihd, has as-

i,: i[: thiat this edition was printed at London;

1i )

no ftlef!s caii be laid ilRon a d:te fo.)ll iii

.!' ',ok, where ivery other cilrcmnillanlce with
!";;c'd to the printing is allowed to be filfe.
":. '\kwood, who (next to Lelly) was tie beit
.;: :m:ed of all Mary's advocaltc: in that ;Ie,

lils that the French edition of tile Dete&iona
' publiflcd in France: "I1 [Buchanan] a
,i is adjoufl6 a cete declamiiarion un petit
i. (l du pretendu m:iriagc du duc de Norfolk
i la faiou de ionb proces, ch tout envoyh

aux

au. freres a la Rochelle, lefqnels voyants qtl';
pouvoit fervir a la cause, l'ont traduit .
Franlois, et iceluy fut iinpFimee a Edinb:cr,-,
c'eft a dire a la Rochelle, par Thomas Walt',.
nom apoftc et fait a plaiiir. Martyre de Ma:..
Jebb, ii. 256." The author of tle Innocencs
Jfarie goes farther, and names the French tran.!.
later of the Detection. " Et icelui preniereiil;-l:
compofc (comme il femble) par George Biuchia.
nan Efcoffoys, ct depuis traduit en-langue Fram.
eoife par un Hugonot, Poitcvin (advocat i,
vocation) Camuz, soy difant genti!homme, et in
de plus remarquez fediteuz de France. Jebb .
425. 443." The concutrring testimony of ti
contemporary authors, vhofe residence in Fraic,
afrorded them sufficient means of infonnatil,:"
mufft outweigh a ilight conicture. This Frrci:
translator does not pretend to publish the ori.niinal
French letters as written by the queen herself;
he exprcfsly declares that he tranfated them fi'in
the Latin. Good. i. 1o3. Had our author
tended to all these circumitances, lie might hli;
saved himself the labour of so manly criticifmi; ti)
prove that the present French copy of the lettcl's
is a translation from the Latin. The Frenmi
editor himself acknowledges it, and, so far as 1
know, no person ever denied it.

WYe may obfer'ce, that the French tranllnit'r

was so ignorant, as to affirm that Mary ii.
written thefc letters, partly inl Frencl, partly iii
Scottifil. Good. i. lo3. I:lad this tran(fali;,,
been liublifled at London by Cecil, or hald :L
been made by his direction, so gross an c<-ror
would not have been admitted into it. T';s
error, however, was owing to an odd circulll

tallcc,

.' ce. In the Scottilh translation of the De-
:,.:;ii, two or three sentences of the original
i:.'.'hl were prefixed to each letter, which
Iaking off with an &c. the Scottilh translation

th: ie whole letter followed. This method of

,i Iting translations was not uncommon in that
, F. °lhe French editor obfcrving this, fool-
;illv concluded that the letters had been written

.['1'' in French, partly in Scottith.
.if we carefully confider tllofe few French fen-

; C

i:is of each letter, which till rerain, a:ld ap-
' to them that species of ci.iticifm, by whlich
a,; lauthor has examined the whole, a clear proof
t iJ i a ife, that there was a French copy not tranf-
l'di from the Latin, but which was itself the
,;ilnal fi.om whichl bo th the Latin and Scottish.
i 1I been translated. This minute criticifin mufl
i'(:clfarily be disagreeable to many readers; but
1li.kily a few sentences only are to be examined,
, Ilch will render it extremely Ihort.

ii the firit letter, the French feutence prefixed

o it ends with there words, yfaiobitt )n. It is
,illn this expreClion, 'veu ce que pel tin corps jianr
, :., is by no means a tranilation of crum plane

.'ilrde et'm alique coryuis Jine cordec. The whole
! iltiice lhas; a spirit and elegance in tlhe Frenchl

h
i;c) neither tile Latin nor Scottilh have re-
t,.iiid. ';rfquexs n a tnlinie is not a translation of
.'.') t'tpr /ii tr'nmpor'; the Scottillh tL:iflation,
..l.l/t dentr-iilc, cKxpreffe.' thle fun'i of the
ti'lrcll more properly; tlor aLilielltlv quliltk fig-
*,:i ld until an well as durin'. .7,' n'afy pas t11t
: ,iiidlpr¢pox is not justly rendered nuquei contlu/er/il
j, '!,olmrin crumtn. qouam; the plirale utid in the
,1 rInclc copy is one peculiar to that language,

a;.l

and gives a more probable account of her ,,c
haviullr than the other. .'geant bien qu'il .',
fajioiit ion, is not a tranfllition of ut qljdi:.',,',:
id ;rl effe ex u/i. The French sentence prelixcd
to lett. 2. ends with apprentl-e. It is evident
that both the Latin and Scott;fh tranflatioll,
have omitted altogether these words, et oilej'.;a
j e s:e :is appret.'r. The I'rench sentence prc.
iixci to lett. 3. ends with prefil/r. ael' v i.5'
p/us ali' ' la haut is plainly no translation of / ,': ;'.i
il./ic mnoritajfii; the fenfi of tle French is hetter
exprefled by the Scotti!h, I have izali ,il.r,,
there up,. Again, Pour extfi','r voJre affaire i
very different from ad excz:fitlnam noJh-r; :',.''....
The five remaining letters never appeared ;!
Latin ; nor is thirc any proof of their being e': !:
translated into that language. Four of tliin.
however, are publiflied in French. This eniir,;
overturns our author's hypothelis concerning tlic
necessity of a translation into Latin.

In the Scottifih edition of the Detcfion the

whole Jn/:ct is printed in French as well as in
Scottillh. It is not poflible to believe that this!,
S .ottifll copy could be the original from which
the French was translated. The French confilis
of verses which have both meafire and rhinr:,
and which, in many pl;ces, are far fiom heing
inelegant. The Scottilh confifis of an c'uial
number of lines, but without mcafiire or rhliic.
Now no man could ever think of a thing so ah.
surd and imprafticable, as to require one to
translate a certain given numlher of lines in prloli
into an equal number of verses, where both nl ;l-
sure and rhiei were lo be observed. The Scot-
tinl, on the contrary, appears manifestly to be a

trains.

i':lnation of tile French; tle phrases, the
l;.irns, and many of the words are Frencl, and
,.. Scottilh. Bclides, the Scottifll tranllator
... in several inliances, nmiftaken the sense of
:iie French, and in many more exprefl:s
.:ce fenie imperfealy. IHad the fonuct beeic
:rbicd, this couil not have happened. The di-
recttrs of the fiaud would have underltcod their
'..': work. I lhall filtisfy inyflf with one ex-
;ni!;ple, in which there is a pruof of bollh Iy as-
2.:i-ioas. Stanza viii ver. 9.

Pour luyj'attendz toute bonne fortune,
Pour luy je veux garder fal.te et vie,
Pour luy tout vertu de flivre j'ay envie.

For him I attend all good fortune,
For him I will conserve helthe and lyse,
For him I desire to ensue courage.

/tendlI in the first line is not a Scottibh, but a

French phraf ; the two other lines do not ex-
p1rhl the sense of the French, and the lafl is ab-
,<!iltc nonferife.

The eighth letter was never tranifated into

frwllcli. It contains much refined mylticifmn
.ioullt devices, a folly of that age, of which Mary
w.'; very fond, as appears fiom several other
cilcumftances, particularly from a letter con-
cIe';!rin inprfis by D lrialnond of TIawvtlornl-
d, ,. If Mary's adverlariet forged her letters,
t:i'y were certainly employed very idly when
t!,y produced this.

iFroln these observations it fecms to be evident
t! he: there wag a French copy of Mary's letters,

of

of which thle Latin and Scottifhl were only tra
latioil;. Nthing now remains of this c..
but thll f,: ew fentenccs which are prelixed to '
Scottish tranllation. The French editor i;:
liold of tllcfe fentcnces, and tacked his o;.
translation to thCe, which, so far as it is i'
w ol-k, is a servile i;nd a very wretched tranflatri.a
of Fluchanan's Latin ; w-hereas, in thofc int:e
dultoly fentcnces, we have difcovcrcd ftr.:
marks of thiir being originals, and certain pron.
lhat they arc not tranllated from the Latin.

It is apparent, too, from con',paring

Latin and Scottih translations with thefi r.
tences, that the S otthih translator haI is, :'
perfetly attaiind tlhe ftiafe and spirit of 1':
French than the Latin. And as it appc;.
that the letters were very early translated in:,
Scottifi, Good. ii. 76. it is probable that ;-
chanan made his translation, not from i -
Trench, but from the Scottish copy. Wetir
nrecefllry, fevcral critical proofs of this ligi.
be produced. One that lias heen already nln.
tioned seems decifivc. Diu/ius illic motni si /
bears not the leall resemblance to j'ay vrcilie
t:,';l /la hLan ; but if, infl.iad of I wallit [i.
.;atchled] laniler tl.n'r up, we fitppofe that r'.-
clianan read 1 ¢wnilitA, &c. this mistake, ;i;1i,
vhiclh he migllt so cafily have fallen, accou! '
for tle error in Ilis tranllatioll.

Tlil'e criticifnms, however minute, appear ':

be wxell filunded. But whatever opit:io Imar 1,
formed concerning them, the other a-rglu:ll.l1,
witih rei-ard to the internal cvidence, remain in
full forc:.

10 '1'll

The external proofs of the forgery of the

queen's letters, which our author has produced,
aipear atfirftfight to be specious, but are not more
iol;d than'that which we liave already examinld.
These proofs may be claired under two hecads.
i. The erroneous and contradi&toly accounts
which are said to be given us the letters, upon
thic first judicial produEtion of them. In the
i:.rct council held Decem. 4, 1567, they are
dc cribed " as her privie letters written and fib-
,rr-:vit with her awin hand." Haynes, 454.
.J ood. ii. 6+. In the aft of parliament, paffecl
on the 15th of the fame month, they are de-
f(:rbihed as "' her privie letters writtin halelie with
iir awin hand." Good. ib. 67. This diversity
of defcriptiol l:as been confidered as a ttrong
prefinlnption of forgery. The manner in which
Mr. Hulme accounts for this is natural and plau.
1ible, vol. v. p. 498. And several ing-enious re-
ma:irks, tenlding to confirm his observations, are
madle in a pamphlet lately publithed, intitled,
Jli/srlcIancrozs Ren;artls on thlr Entquiry into tSdir Evi-
..'.;2e nagi i'il Alay i.t)n of Scot.r. To ;what they
a1;: , cbfervcd it may be added!, that the original
.t;t of it&rct council does riot nov' exilt; we have
!,l.y a copy of it found among Ceccl' papers,
:id tle tralnfcriber Ihs been! mnriif:ltly l ignoranlt,

! i, carclefs, that an atrluiinent founded entirely
iii;"i the fuppolition of his accuracy is of little
i :ec. Several errors intb whiclh le has fallen

aire e(nabled to point out, l;y comparing his
' i')' of the aFt of secret council with the a;t of

r:lliannlcnt pafled in consequence of it. The

torllr contlailqs a pettiioii to parliament ; in the
1l*ter tie, real petition is '·fumed verbatim, and

; ', 111. uP converted

converted into a law . in the copy, tle quee:;',
marriage with Bolhwell is called " a pri:ci,
marriage," which it certainly was not; so) ;
was celebrated, after proclamation of banns, i,
St. Giles's church three several days, and wilt!
public solemnity ; but ii the acs it is denoli.
nated " anc pretendit marriage," \;which is the
proper description of it according to the ideas cl
the party. In the copy, the queen is said ":
be so thrall and bhU,,y affectionat to the pri\.,;
appetite of that tyranl," which is nonfeniU, :it
in the aFt it is " lindly alTediionat." In tl
copy it is said, " all nobill and virtuous men atb-
horring their traine and company :" in the ;'1.
" thei tyrannic and companie," whicl is e:-
dently the true reading, as tlhe other has eit! .1
no meaning, or is a meie tautology. 2. Tli!
other proof of the forgery of the letters, ;i
founded upon the impossibility of reconciling til,
account, given of the time when, and the plahc
from which, the lettelrs are supposed to have be .i
written, with what is ccrtainly known concc:;!-
ing the queen's motions. Accorditi to tlie
paper published, Andcrf i.

ii .

269. which has ha ,:

called Murray'sl)iary, and which i; formed 1II1(!
the authority of tle letters, Mary fct out ft'm
Edinburgh to Glasg'ow, January 21, 1567 ; 11'
arrived tllcrc on thc 23d ; left that place on l;r.
27th ; nie, togetelr with the king, reilacihed I.l-
lithgow on the 2t;tlh, ilayed ill tiht town oir'i
on1e lliight, and retlrnlled to Edinbullrgh beforet i
end of tile montllh. B3tt, according to Mr. G-,l'-
all, the queen did not leave Eldilnburgh mil il
Fl'riday January 24.tl ; as nie Itayed a night. at
(:Cllendar, file could lnt reachl Glasgow fooler

tliuitl

i,:ii the evening of Saturday the z2th, and lhe
t,. :,illd to Linlithgow on Tlucfdaay the 2Sth.

cqifetlquence, tlie firlt letter, which hlippofes
: I 'ic.c: to have been at Icait four days in
;i' (o\v. as wtll as the second letter, which bears
:tc at Glasgow Sautrday morning, whereas fle
.1 not arrive there until the evening, mufl be
- reries. That the queen did not set out from

i..i11burgh sooner than the 24t.1 of January, is
c i.i:nt (as he contends) from the public records,

lJi:ch contain a Precept of a cofirtmation of a lif/-
,.. by James Boyd to Margaret Chalmers,
('.n:nted by the queen, on the 24th of January,
:.1 Edinburgh ; and likewise a letter of the queen's
l;t ,1 at Edinburgh on the fame day, appointing

.!iues Inglis taylor to the prince her son. That;

:-. king and queen had returned to Linlithgow
''1 tie z28th, appears fiom a deed, in which
^L.c appoint Andrew Ferrier keeper of their
p:l Ice there, dated at .Linlithgow, January 28.
C, od. i. 118.

lt't!i has been represented to be not only a

.:..i. cinig, but a legal proof of the forgery of
i, letters laid to be written by Mary; but how
:;:.; t tflls flort of this, will appear from the
.. ,,,\,wiltr, conl'idclatiolns:

i. It is evident, fiomn a declaration or consef.
*.'. ,i;:de by the billlop of Rofl, that beforet the
.d' ilccs at York, wirh lw r e opened inl the

I,;;,iing of Otdober 1568, Mary had, by an
*'icL out Maitlanld's, got into her hlands a copy

lolue ,letters which her fubjedl; acculed her

I ;li;.ill.; written to Bothl wll. Brown's Trial
,, tli DuJiike of Norfolk, 31. 36. It is highly
;..l;abll that the bilhop of Ross had seen tlhe

r 2 letters

letters before he wrote the defence of qua-,
Mary's honour in the year 1570. They weC
publihed to all the world, together with y'.
chanan's Detetion, A. D. 157 . Now, if til.,
had contained an error ib gross, and, at that
time, so obvious to discovery, as the fuppotfin
the queen to have pafied several days at G;la..
gow, while i.e was really at Edinburgh; hal
they contained a letter dated at Glasgow, Sa-.tu
day morning, though she did not arrive there till
the evening; is it possible that she herself, wh,
Jknew her own motions, or the able and zealous
advocates who appeared for her in that a.r,
fiould not have ptblifhed and exposed this cor.
t.raridcio,, and, by so doing, have blaffed at onc-
the credit of such an impo{lure ? In difquif.-
tions which are naturally abflrufe and intricca.,
the ingenuity of the latest author may difcov:r
many things whic h have escaped the attention,
or batlied the sagacity, of those who have for.
merly contfidcred the iame filbject. But when a
matter ns fa.ct lay so obvious to view, this cir.
curnmltlcc of its being muobferved by the qucer.
herself, or by any of hier adherents, is almnl' 2
deloni0rl:i(l;ion llat tllere is some iniftake or till
lacy in our authur's arguments. So far are ailv,
either of orii hitlorians, or of Mary's defend(rs,
ifon; callinur in q(dftioni the conlinon acciint
conccrlilg the time of the queen's setting nlou
to Glaio.)v,' and her !leturning froan it, that tllre
is not tile lati appearance of any differeit,:
arn.tilg them iwith regard to this point. l;1lt
.farther,
*2. Those papers in the public records, on
'hi;lih our author relts t(l proof of his alferti,,i

concr(.ir!t,;

conctCiing the queen's motions, are not the
E,;-gial3 luhfcribed by tile queen, but copies
i,;Iv, or tranflatioiis of copi:e of those originals.

r

i not naeccihry, nor would it be very eat y,
L re.lidcr this intelligible to persons unacquainted

ihi the forms of law in Scotland; but every

; .fl] nall (coiverfallt in bulinefs will understand
i l'

\ ien . lay tlhat the precept of conslrmation

,t tle life-rlnt to B'oyd is onlyl a Latin copy or
i c;: i a precept, v-whiclh v:-a seald with the
'!\;- fleal, on a wvarrant fiom the signet office,

','cLding on a iiollature wvlic( bure date at

E ii :lli'rih the 24th of lalnary ; and that the
;:.i il favour of James Inglis is the copy of a
I':::r, Icalid vitli tile privy ical, Fpoceeding on
;! l:aliitl rc wlic bore d;te at Edilllbrgh Ja-

!.2-. Iromn allo l tl;i we may argue with

i:.;,e degree of leaion, that a proof founded on
!:;lr's : llichl are so many remouvcs diitant from
iu (nrigii;ls, cannot but be very lame and un-
.' llill.

3. ,t that time all public papers were iffied

i the mname botli of tlie king and queen ; by
'.., tile kiig's lubfcription was no less requisite
) ;y ,paper than tile (queen's; and therefore
,iics the original iignatiilre be produced, in
-,-l,.r to acclrtail tile particular day when
nii of thecn ligicd, or to prove that it was

:ed only by one of them, the legal proof

l il]g; froni thele papers would be, that borlt
i ! 1: i:ng and queen iigned them at Ediuburgh on
1lce 24t11 of Janiary.

4. The dates of the warrants or precepts if-

f,.lt by the fovcreig!n in that age, seem to havc
i.rccl ii a great incafLire arbitrary, and aifixcdat the

} 3 plalfure

picafure of the writer; and of consequence, thi;e
dates were ftldom accurate, are often false, and
can never be relied upon. This abuse became lo
frequent, and was found to be so pernicious, th,:t
an act of parliament A. D. 1592, declared the si:.
ing a false date to a lignature to be high treason.

5. Therie still remain, in the public records, a

great number of )apers, which prove the neceffitv
of this law, as well as the fallacy of our autho,'s
arguments. And though it be no easy mnatt,:-,
at the distance of two centuries, to prove any
particular date to be false, yet filrprifing inftaccts
of this kind lhall bc produced. Nothing is more
certain from hiitory, than that the king was ;il
Glasgow 24th January 1567 ; and yet the rccori
of signatures from iS65 to 15i2, fol. I6th, cl .-
tains the copy of a lignature to Archibald Ed-
monllon, said to have been subscribed by our /
,vereigls, i. e. the king and cqueen, at Edinbil, ii
January 24, I567 ; so tha! if we vere to r'.ly in-
plicitly upon the dates in the records of thin
age, or to hold our author's .arrument to tic
good, it would prove that not only the qucc.r
but the king too, vas at EdinburgS l on the 24;)
of J:anlary.

It appears from an original letter of the bifloij

of Ross, that on the 25th of OCetocr56he ,
Mary lay at th;e point of death ; Keithl, AIp..
134 ; and yet a dccd is to be found in ihe publicl
records, which bears that it was signed by tltc
queen that iay. y

Privy fa]l, lib. 35. fol. S').
Ouditcr/.iny d

'. YI~~tlrllBolmdtll

'I N. B. Tn Comc of the early editions of this DifHlta;tioll

3n3lter iniltLict of the f.:ne nature with thofc whiclh go beture

, *". * . .
. ' , N1

Bothwell seized the queen as fie returned from

Stirling, April 24thl, 1567, and (according to
her owvn account) conduced her to Dunbar
'.itih all diligence. And. i. 95. But our au-
thor, relying on the dates of some papers which
-:; found in tlhe records, supposes that Bothwell
a'!owcd her to tfop at Edinburgh, and to tranf-
;ait l'iilefs there. Nothing can be more im.
p,',,iable than this fiuppofition. WTe may there-
fIre rank the date of the deed to W&righ/, Privy
i, , lib. 36. fol. 43. and which is mentioned
, oir author, vol. i. 124. among the intfances
,!r the false dates of papers which were iflited
* ille ordinary course of bufhiefs in that age.
' ,!- author has ntitaken the date of the other
,..,:- to Iorbcs, ibid. it is signed April i4thl
;.A! April 24th.

If there be any point agreed upon in Mary's
li:;r:ry, it. is, that Ihe remained at Dunbar from

n.!: time that Bothwell carried her thither, till

1IC-: returned to Edinburgh along withlhim in the
bIn!lling of May. Our author himself allows
til.i flie resided twelve days there, vol. i. 367.
I \v tllough there are deeds in the records which
i .' thllat tley were signcd by the queen at Dun:
,lhr during that time, yet there are others which
!':.tr that they were signed at Edinburgh ; e. g.
llI::rc is one at Edinburgh, April 27th. Privy feal,
ilb. 36. fol. 97 There are others said to be signed
.,1 I)unhar on that day. Lib. 31. Chart. No.524.

aJnd fullow was mentioned; but that, as has fincc been dif-
Co ,' i,:, was founded on a mistake of the perron employed to

.i1i the records, and is therefore omitted in this edition.

'I'l: ieafrning, however, in the Difrrtatido, gands Itill iq
Joo!, iiutwlthfialding this omiffioa,

r241

526. Ib. lib. 32. No. I54. 157. There are some
iigned at Durnbar April 28th. Others at Eiin.
burgh April 3oth, lib. 32. Chart. No. 492,
Others at Dunbar May ill. Id. ibid. No. ti
Thele different charters suppose the qutelenl
have made so many unknown, improbable, a-ll
inconsistent journeys, that they afford the clearf!t
demonllration that the dates in these rccolds
ought not to be depended on.

This becomes more evident from the date of

the charter laid to be signed April z7th, which
happened that year to be a Sunday, which \,ls
not, at that time, a day of bufineis il Scotlai:ii.
as appears from the books of Jferuit, then kept
by the lords of Selflon.

From this flhort review of our author's p!i't

of the forgery of the letters to Bothwell, it is
evident that his arguments are far from amouini-
ing to demonitration .

Another

c The uncertainty of any conclusion formed merely ion

the date of public papers in that age, especially with relpict
to the k:ng, is confilmed and illuflratcd by a difco).':y
wl:ich was mjde lateiy. Mr. lavidfon (to [whom I w..v
indfb,*id for much information when I conpiorfd tli:s
)lllerlation above thi ty ycats ago) has, in the loutfe of
li. intelligent refe.jrches into the antiquitics of his roi.ntllv
found an uriginal paper which mutt appear cumious to Scni.
ti(h antiquaries. Iluchanan aflerts, th;a on account of thI
king's frequent absence, occalioned by his dilipation aIIl
love of field sport,, a cachette, or stamp cut in meltal, w.s
srade, with wlich his name was affixid to public deed:,, .1
if he had been present. Hist. lib. xvii. p. 343. Edit. Ruddirn
Knox relates the fame thing, Hilt. p. 393. How irn!l.
this may havedivefled the Iting of thil consequence wlhil Iie
derived tron having his name conjoined with that of til:
'quecn in all public deeds, as the affszin i
of lij name w.;

thIcl'jc

Another argument against the genuneneefs of
'.!f[C letters is founded on the flyle and compofi,
tion, which are said to be altogether unworthy
,f the queen, and unlike her real produCtions,
it is plain, both from the great accuracy of comr
pr ition in moll of Mary's kItters, and even from
i.c £flicitude to write them in a fair hand, that
,ic ,dAlued herself on those accomplinlments, and
./as ,cirous of being esteemed an elegant writer,
I' t when she wrote at any time in a hurry, thenl
mri)n marks of inaccuracy appear. A remark-
abl.' inflance of this may be found in a paper
pui iifed Good. ii. 301. Mary's letters to
b, !lwell were written in the utnmol hurry; and
.: :nder all the disadvantages of a translation,
t'r ) are not destitute either of spirit or of energy,
i': manner in which the exprefles her love to
ii t)lvwell has been pronounced indecent and even
ihocking. But Mary's temper led her to warm
ecpreffions of her regard; those refinements of
dcli'cacy, which now appear in all the commerce

o t\ccn the sexes, were, in that age, but little

k::;vn, even among perlons of the iglheft rank,
Among the earl of Hardwicke's papers, there

t: :::v put entirely in the power ns the perron who Bvld the

.: ./ of the cachetrc, is mnanifcl'. The keeping of it, as

': i [ujchaiian and Knox affirm, was committed to Rizio.
. i.it- detender of queen Mary calls in question what they

i'i', and lcims to :onfider it as one of their afperfioris.

(; -.J.ll, vol. i. p. z3i. ''he truth of their afretioin, how-
i. , i n(ow fully citabliftied by the original deed which I

wnuu: ,mntiied. This I have seen andt caamined with at-
t' !in. It is now lodged by Mr. Davidson im the signet-

. In it, the filbfcripition of the king's name ha'; evi-
(ioilJ b)r.n made by a cacbrtte with trintcci's ink.

is a series of lettcrs from Mary to the dIln; ,'
Norfolk, copied from the Harlcian libra-,',
p. 37. b. 9. fol. 88. in which Mary declares lK-,
love to that nobleman in language which w,..,ii
now be reckoned extremely indelicate; Hard.
State Papers, i. 89, &c.

Some of Mary's letters to Bothwell -ci,

written before the mu-der of her hufland ; ifoin
of them after that event, and before her marri.i,
to Bothwell. Those which are prior to ti.
death of her husband abound with the fond,' I
expressions of her love to Bothwell, and excite
something more than a suspicion that their di--
miliarity had been extremely criminal. Wc i.,d
in them, too, some dark expressions, which ::r
enemies employed to prove that she wai .
itranger to the schemes which were forrnml
against ler husband's life. Of this kind arc
the following passages: " Alace ! I never dif:
favit ony body; but I remit me altogiddei i
zour will. Send me advertisement quhat 1 ,1i
do, and quhatfaever thing come thereof, I !;lil
obey zow. Advise to with zourfelf, gif ze ran
find out ony mair .f.cret inventioun by medicilc,
so; he ful. tak medicile and the bath at Cra{;i-
millar." Good.ii. 22. " See not hir (qnl..
fenzeit teiris fuld not be fia ieikle praifit aild
eftemit, as the trew ..:,d faithfull travelli; quiliii
I fultene for to merit hir place. For obtainill
of the qillil, agailis my natural, I betra is
thame that may inprifcele me. God for;:'.
me," &c. Ibid. 27. " I have walkit lI;tt,
thairiup, than I wald have done, gif it h:ad io:
been to draw fomethilg out of lini, qullilk tlii:

be: !'

hctrer will fchaw zow, quhilk is the fairest
,,,iumnodity that can be offerit to excuse zour
,!.ir'." Ibid. 32. From the letters posterior
ti tlc death of her husband, it is evident that
!;u scheme of Bothwell's fcizing Mary by force,
:,;!d carrying her along with him, was contrived
in coucert with herself, and with her approba-
* ;\?, f.

With

Tlhac letters of so much importance as those of Mary to

It iiwell Ihould have been entirely loft, appears to many al-
;..;inier unaccountable. After being produced in England
i,:! re Elizabeth's commiflioners, they were delivered back

them to the earl of Murray. Good. ii. 3 5. He fiems
. hivc kept them in his poflelfinn during life. After his
, 1, t;iey fell into the hands of Lennox his fuccefor, who
rc :,,-,d them to the earl of Morton. Good. ii. 91. Though

rt necefrarily connedted with any of the queftiuons

wh:ich gave occasion to this Differtatiun, it may perh..ps
:;'i(y tiie curiosity of some of my readers to inform them,

aj t, after a very diligent cfarch, which has lately been m.Ale,

.'; copy of Mary's letters to Bothwell can be found in any
ctI he public libraries in Great Britain. Tle only certain
hirtligence concerning them, since the time of their being
(d:livciel to Morton, was communicated by the accurate
D'. Biich.
1etraCt of the letters of Robert Powcs, Efq. ambafljdor

u.i que-n Elizabeth to the king of Scotland, wi;:ten to fir

! i.dcis Walsingham, secretary of fatr, from the origini
riiterV b:ok of Mr. Bowea's letters, frmn 15tlh of Augull
I iqZ, to 28th Septemlber i 58 , in the pflifliun of Chrilo
I!'cr Hunter, M. D. of Durlham.

x jSi, gth November, from Edinburgh.

Albeit I have been borne in hand, That the coltte where-

i.* were the originals of letters between the Scotti n queen znd
tl' r.rl of llothwell, had been delivered to sundry hands, and
t!i-reby was at prefiet wanting, and unknown wshere it relt..
·d, yet I have learned certainly by the prior ot' lufcardyne',

niicat

Witli refpe& to the sonnets, fir Davd Dalryrm
pie has proved clearly, that they mull have been

written

means, that hoth the coffer and also the writings are corr.t,
and now remain *ith ihe earl of Gowfie, who, I perc -ic,
wild be hardly intreated to make delivery to her majesty ac.
to Jding r, her majelty's desire.

This time paRl I have expended in searching where the cf.

f'r and writings were, wherein, without the help) of the |ri r,
I iflhuld have ftiund great difficulty ; now I will eflay Gb rie,
ard ot my success you ihall be lhortly advertised.

izth of November 153j, from Edinibur',

Because I had bolh Ieained, thattune casket and !eit ;l

menet . ed i nmy last, before these were come :o the pc:lti.!iin
of the cerl of Gowrie, and also found that no mcan n. :t
prevail to win the lame out of his hands without his own 1'l-
sent and privity; in which behalf i had employed fit i:.!:-
ments, that nevcrthelefs profited nothing therefi:re I a.;c: :
ed Co cflay himfi:lf, !etting him know that the said caflcc .t:;d
letters hloutl hl ve been brought to her miaj.fty 1'y tL i.Y 'fsr
and good means of good friends, promising to have ie!. !:,.
them to her rnajetty before they came i,;to his hJlnd anil ul-
tody, and know'ing that hedid bear th lie like affeion( , a!! 'A
ready to plealure her majefly in all ;hingd, and chielly in ':lr
that had been thus far tendeted to her majely, antid i hi'
thereby ihould be well accepted and with princ-ly tll:kr
,nd gratuity be requited to his comt'i.rt and contentmeni, 1
moved him that they niight be a present to be sent to l,. t il-
jcfty fromn him, and that I might casife the filnie to b c,;tvcV
ed to her majclly, adding hereunto fucit words JlAd ;lg..is ',
as migiht both air lap a hI)pe of librrality, and. all beit *eii'!
thle purpose. At the first he was loth to agrce that they 0^cc
in his potltflion; but I let him plainly Icnow that 1 was cel.tll
ly infoitned that they were ldelivered to him by Saindtris J[-
drin; wheleupon he pressed to know wlho dlil on inlfern nTe,
enquiring whether the sons of the earl of Morton had dlone i,
or no. I did not otlherwife in plain terms deny or ;anlf''
thereunto, but that he might think thathe had told me, astli
prior is ready to avouch, and wcll pleased that A ffall give ltitn

t(

: t'Ieii' after the murder of the king, and prior to
,B;a y'3 marriage with Bothwell. But as hardly any

part

a: !e the author thereof; after he had fad [though] all there
,ii: s were In his keeping (which he would neither grant nor
deny) yet he might not deliver them to any perfun without the
*onfents and privities, as well of the king, that had inteirel
',;erein, as also of the reft of the noblemen enterprisers of
the aflion against the king's mother, and 'hat would have
;' n kept as an evidence to warrant and make good that ac-
tio:. And albeit I replied, that their action in that part touch-
ing tle assignation of the crown to the king by his mother, had
*e:vedi such elfblilhment, confirmation, and lfrength, by acts
of railiament and other public authority and inftrumernrs, as
ari:' '-] jeould that cafe be suffered to come in debate or question
an.: such scrolls and papers ought to be fiewed for Ihe strength-
tning thereof, so as these might ell be left and be Iencel.:d
to he hands of heri majely, to whom they were deltined be-
fore they fell in his keeping ; yet he v ould noc be removed
or faishied i concluding, after much realonings, that the earl
cf ortlon, nor any other that had the charge and keeping
thereof, durfi at any time make delivery; and btcallfc it
w;s the fils time that I had moved him therein, and that he
v. I!d gladly both anlver her mojefly's good expetation in
'n, and also perform his duty oue to his favereign and affo-
ci.,ue in the action aforesaid ; therefore he would seek nut the
a .I cilket and letters, at his return to his house, which he
t,, ught Ihould be within a short time; and upon finding of
the fame, and better advice and confiderarionl had of the
tuic, he would give further answer. This relblution I hat
received as to the thing; and for the present I could not bet-
tre, leaving him to give her majalty fucl testimony of his
go(l will towards her, by his frank dealing herein, as she
my have caufi to confirm her highncffes good opiiion con-
ce;vr:d already of him, and be thereby drawn to greater good-
rieCs towards him. I ihall flill labour him both by mylelf
and also by all other means i but 1 greatly distrust the de-
filed fuccefa herein.

24th of November 1582, from Edinburgh.

For the recovery of the letters in the coffer, come to the
hrlids of the earl ofGowrie, I have lately moved himearneftly

'a, i. ( therein,

part of my narrative is founded upon w!.,' is
contained ill the sonnets, and as in this Di)il r.-

tiian

therein, letting him know the purpose of the Scottifl qsuet,
both giving out that the letters are counterfeited by lie, r:.
bels, and also seeking thereon to have them delivered :o t..
or defaced, and that the means which Ihe will make in -1I:
behalf shall be so great and effecual, as these writings ca!i,:t
be safely kept in that realm without dangerous offence utf !ii::
that hath the cullody theleof, neither shall he that is oC:c
known to have them be suffered to hold them in his 'I,:s.
1Herewith I have at large opened the perils likely to fail ; :h'
aCtion, and the parties therein, and particularly to himfl'c r'il
is now openly known to have the possession of these wri.its,
and I have lettin him fee what surety it ihall bring to thi i iJ
cause arnd all the parties therein, and to himself, that tete
,vritings may bc with fcrecy and good order committed to lt
keeping of her majesty, that will have them ready vwhrnfervt
any ulec llall be for them, and by her highnesses counrcnt. e
defend them and the parties from 'uch wrongful objetioirs i;
lhall be laid against them, offering at length to him, 'ia:i:
he be not fully latisfied herein, or doubt that the relt oi i;l
nfflciates shall not like of the delivery of them to her mrijellt
in this good manner, and for the interell rehearsed, .it: 1
shall readily, upon meeting and conference with them, :r
cure their assent in this part (a matter moie easy to osier J1,.
to perform) i and lafily, moving him that (for the iecr:cy
and benefit of the cause, and that her majesty's good aoplir.
towards liimfelf may le firmly fettled and confirmed b, I,:i
acccptable forwardness herein) he would, without ilxlid
scruple, fra.kly commit these writings to her majefly'q g! :
curody for the good uses received. After long debate I'- ro'
lulved, and said, that he would unfeignedly (hew and a. I
her majefly all the p!eafure that he might without olh;i:
to the king his fivercign, and prejudice to the allicia in
the action, and therefore he would lhrf make search anr. vie
'the said letters, and her,.in take advice what he might I'o ird
how far he might fattbfy and content her majefly; protii:ig
thereon to give more resolute answer i and he concluded li i-l,
alJat after e head found aid fetn tlh ws'itipgs, that ha niiil:

nos

K. lHEt'fY'S MURDER, &Cr 172

tion I have been constrained to dwell longer
upon minute and verbal criticisms, than' fay

not make delivery of them without the privity of the king.
Albeit I hlood along with him against his resolution in this
point, to acquaint the king with this matter before the letters
were in the liands of her majcfty, letting him fee that his.

doings there fiould admit great danger to the caule ; yet I
could not remove him from it. It may be that he meaneth
to put over the matter from himself to the king, upon fight

whereof I shall travel effectually to obtain the ling's consent,
that the letters may be committed to her majcfty's keeping,
thinking it more easy to prevail herein with the king, in' the

preoent love and affection that he beareth to her highness,
than to win any thing at the hands of the aflcciates in the
a1laon, whereof fume principal of them now come and remain
at the devotion of the Icing's mother; in this 1 shall frill call

on Gowrie, to search out the coffer, according to his piomife;
and as I lhlall find him minded to do tlierein, so shall I do my

belt and whole endeavour toeffe& the success to her majelty's

befl contentment.

ad December 15S2, from Edinburgh.

Because I saw a good opportunity offered to renew the
nmatter to the earl of Gowrie for recovery of the letters in the
coffer in his hands, therefore I put him in mind thereof;
whereupon he told me, that the duke of Lennox had fought

earneflly to have had those letter', and that the king did kcrow

where they were, so as they could not be delivered to her
majesty without the king's privity and consent, and he pre.

tended to be ftil lwilling to uleafure her majefly in the fame,
lo far as lie may with his duty, to the king and to the reSt of
the afllciates in that action ; but I greatly distrust to effec

this to her majefly's picafure, wherein, nevertheless, I hall

0o mny utmost endeavours.

Whether James VI. who put the earl of Cowrie to death,
A. 1). S584, and seized all his cffct's, took care to dellroy

hi mtother's letters, for whose honour he was at that tineo

exticincly zealous; whether they have pcrished by fcnme un-

knriwvn accident; or whether they may not liil remanin un.
vhf'rved nsinong the archives of lonse of our great ftmilics, it
is imipuoliLle to determine.

Qua lat

he interefling or agreeable to many of my
readers, I mall rePt fatisfied'with referring for in.
formation concerning every particular relative to
the sonnets, to RemarAs on the Hitfory of Scotland,
Chap. XI.

Having thus stated the proof on both fides;

having examined at so great a length the dif.
ferent systems with regard to the fads in con.
troverfy; it may be expeEted that I should now
pronounce sentence. In my opinion, there are
only two concluions, which can be drawn from
the fads which have been enumerated.

One, that Bothwell, prompted by his ambition

or love, encouraged by the queen's known aver-
sion to her hufiand, and presuming on her at.
tachment to himself, itruck the blow without
having concerted with her the manner or circum-
ltances of perpetrating that crime: That Mary,
inltead of testifying much indignation at the
deed, or discovering any resentment against Both.
well, who was accused of having committed it,
continued to load him with marks of her regard,
conduted his trial in such a manner as rendered
it impossible to discover his guilt, and soon after,
in opposition to all the maxims of decency ot of
prudence, voluntarily agreed to a marriage with
him, which every consideration fiould have in.
duced her to detest. By this vcrdi&, Mary is
not pronounced guilty of having contrived the
murder of her lufband, or even of having pre"
vioufly given her consent to 'his death ; but she
is not acquitted of having discovered her appro.
bation of the, deed, by ler behaviour towards
4im who Ywai the atbhor;pf it.

tr,..

The other conclusion is that which Murray
i:d his adherents laboured to establish, " That
a;imes, fometymme earl of Bothwile, was the
d!ic'fe executor of the horribill and unworthy
mri!tier, perpetrat in the person of umquhile king
HI:. iy of gude memory, fader to our foveraine
iid, and the qucenis lauchfuil husband ; fa was
si i of the foreknowledge, counfall, devise, per-
fi;aidar and command of the said murder to be

., ,." Good. ii. 207.
WaIich of these conclusions is most agreeable
: the evidence that has been produced, I leave
,. rca'ders to determine.

03

# APPENDIX.

A P P E N D I X,

No. I. (Vol. I. p. 207.)
A" MEMORIAL of certain points meet for

c-tloring the realm of SCOTLAND to tie
:irtient weale.
;!h Augeft 1559. Cotton. Lib. Ca!. B. x. '1. 17.

From a copy in fecetary Cccil' hld. J

'." rrRIM is it is to be noted, that the bhit worldly f(Ci-

city that Scotland can have, is ether to continue in
" pepetual peace with the l:ingdorn of Engl:.ld, or to

.. made one monarchy with England, as they both make
hut one illand, divided from the reft of the world.

if the firfl is fought, that is;, to bQ in perpctu:l peace

v.;th England, then must it ntcelfarily be provided, that
;c','land be not so subject to the appointments of France
is i; presently, which, heing an antient enemy to Eng-
1hnd, feeketh always to nakc'Scotland an inflriument, to
rxercife, thereby,their nialiceuponEngl:ild,and to make
a tlot(ool thereof to look over Sigland( as they may.

Therefore, when Scotland Ihall come into the hands

-if i mnere Scottiil man in blood, then may there be hope
:: tich accord ; but a. long at it isat the commandment
- tlhe French, there is no hope to have accord long be-
> lxt tlhee two realms.
Thereore feeing it is at the French king's crnmand-
nirnt by reason of his wife, it is to be confidered for
:th wrale of Scotland, that until the have children, and
dtring her absence out of the realm, the next heirs to
,lie crown, bcing the houfrc f the Hamiltons, fiouild

have

have regarsi hereto, and tu fee that neither the crown he
imposed no wal aed; and, on tlie othir llde, the nobility
and coiimon.l Iy Luglit to force that the laws and thl-
old cuftolsn ol the realm be not altered, neither that the
c ,untry he not impovertlhed by taxes, empreft, or nwv
inl:uos, after til manner of France; for provifiin
whetein, both hy the law of God and man, the Frenji
lting and his 'ltfe may be moved to reform their i,!-
govcinance of tlie land.

And for this purp.,' it were good that the nobility

and commons joined w (h the next heir of the crown, to
feelh due reform iion of such giear abuses as tend to th;
ruin of their cuunry, \vwlich mnult he done before the
Ficnch glow too {irong ad in'olent.

Flrlt, 'l'h: it niy he pirovided hy content of the thre,
tlatii ol thle land, Jhat the lald may be free from all
idol.iry like as hi.lland is; fr jullification whereof, if
any fre gcnera;l council mr:ay be had where the pope of
konei have not litr sea of judgment, they may offer to
fLew tli ll caui.: to be molt agreeable to Lhriit'a re-
ligin.

Next, To pr.vidc thai Scotland might be governed, in

all ules and oflii.cs, by the anticnt blood of the realn,
without either captains, licutenants, or soldiers, as all
orhet prince govLin Ihcir countries, and tfpecially that
the forts nigiht be in tle hands of mere Scottish men.

Thirdly, 'lha.t they might never be occasioned to enter

into wais againll England, except England (hould give
the fiflt caule to Scotland.

Fourthly, That n) nobleman of Scotland should re-

ceive pension of France, except it were whilt lie did
serve in France, tot otherwise thereby the French would
flioitly corrupt many to betray their own country.

Fifihly, That no office, abbey, living, or commodlty,

be given to any but mere Scottish men, by the aifent of
the three eflates of the realm.

Sixthly, That there be a council in Scotland appointed

in the qucen's abrcncc, to govern the whole realm, and
in those cafes not to be directed by the French.

Scventliy,

Seventhly, That it be by the said three etlates ap-

pointed how the queen's revenue of the realm shall be
c.:?ended, how much the queen fiall have for her por-
tion and estate during her absence, how much shall be
limited to the governance and defence of the realm, how
much yearly appointed to be kept in treasure.

In these, and such like points, if the French king and

the queen be found unwilling, and will withfland these
provisions for the weale of the land, then hath the three
D/lates of the realm authority, forthwith to intimate to
the said king and queen their humble requefls; and if
the fame be not effectually granted, then ;umbly they
may commit the governance thereof to the next heir of
tie crown, binding the fame also to observe the laws and
antient rights of the realm.

Finally, If the queen (hall be unwilling to this, as it

: ilkely Ihe will, in refpec of the greedy and tyranbucs
itiaion of France, then it is apparent that Almihty
i;o.l is pleased to transfer from her the rui--of the king.
;dcm for the weak of it, and this time must be used with
great circumfpe&ion, to avoid the decepts and trompe.
ties of the French.

And then may the realr of Scqtland confider, being

once made free, what me.hs may be devised by God's
goodness, to accord the trb reflshs,: to endure for time
t( come at the plcaruie of Almighty God, in whore
liands the hearts of all princes be.

No. II. (Vol. I. p. 216.)
A. letter of Maitland of Lctlington's, thus

direAed:
To my loving friend James. Be this delivered

at London.
acoth January 155960o. Cott. Lib. Cal. B.ix. From the

original in his osvn hand ]

I uND r s'rANn by the last letter I received from yow,
that difcoiuriog with zour countrymen upon the matter

okS

cf Scotland, and commoditeys may ensew to that realm
hereafter, giff ze presently atfi(t ws with zour forces, ze
find a nombre of the contrary advise, doubting that we
fal not at length be found trufly fiiends, nor mean to
conrynew in conflant arnetye, albeit we promise, but
9nly for avoyding the present danger make zou to serve
our turne, and after being delivered, becum enemies as
of before. For prose quhareof, they alledge things that
have palt betwixt ws heretofore, and a few prefump.
tiones tending to the fam end, all grounded upon mif.
trull; quhilks, at the first ficht, have some shewe of
appearance, gif men wey not the circumfiances of the
matter ; but gif they will confer the tyme past with the
present, confider the nature of this caus, and efate of
our contrye, I doubt not but judgment fal be able to
banish mistrust. And firfl, I wad wish ze (hould exa-
myne the causes off the old inmitye betwixt the real:ns
of England and Scotland, and quhat moved our ancef.
tours to enter into ligue with the Frenche ; quhilks LI/
our floreys and regifltres off antiquiteys appear to be
these. The princes of England, some tyme, alledging
a certain kynde of foveraintye over this realm ; some
tyme upon hye courage, or incited by incursions off our
boidoureres, and semblable occasions, mony tymeo en-
terprifed the conquelt of ws, and fa far furth priel it by
force off arnies, that we were dryven to great ex;rami-
teys, by hIss of our princes, our noblemen, and a goot
part of our cuntrey, fay that experience taught ws tl.at
our owne ftrcngth was fcarfe fittficient to withfland the
force of England. The i:ench zour auncient enemies,
confidering well how nature hlid fa placed ws in a
inand with zow, that n.i nation was able fa to annoye
Enigland as we being eneinyes, foucht to joine ws to
theym in ligue, tending by that meane to detourne zour
arnyes from the ilvalion of France, and occupy zow
n1 the defence ot zo70 country at hame, offering for that
effclt to heltowe some charges upon ws, and for coin-
pafling ons theyr purpOb, clioyfed a tyme to propone the
natter, qullhei tlie frfechcl mtemlory of injuris lately re-
Ectaed att ,cur hlands, was fa depely prented on our

hartes,

hartes, that all our myndes were occupied how to be
revenged, and armc ouirfefee with the po.var of a fora) lne
prince against zour enterprises thereafter.

This was the beginning off our confederacy with

France. At quhilk time, our chronicles maks mention,
that some off the wyfefl foresaw the peiril, and finall
frute should redound to us thereof at lenth: zit had
affeaion fa blinded jugemnent, that the aldvlr cos tl:h mail
tjrt overcame the best. The malft part cf all quairels
'ct'vi3xt ws since that tyme, at le;al quhen the provoca-
t:. n came on our fide, hes ever fallen out by thcyr pro-
curement rather than any one caus off our felvrs: and
ouhenfaever we brack the I eace, it come pat ly hy their
intyfements, partly to eschew the conquelt intended by
that realm. But now hes God's providence fa altered
the cafe, zea changed it to the plat contrary, that now
lces the Fienfche taken zour place, and we, off very
ijuement, becum defyrous to haie zou in theyr rowme.
()ur eyes are opened, we 'tfpy iow uncaietul they have
been of our weile at all tynmes, how they nlade ws ever
to serve theyr turne, drew us in maflt dalgerous weys
lor tleyre commodite, and neverllclefs wad not ftyck,
oft tymes, against the natour of the ligu,, to contrak
peace, leaving us in weyr. \\ e fae that tlhir support,
off late zeres, wes not granlit for any afitf&ion they bare
to ws, for pytie they h.,d off our e;ate, for i ecompenfe
of the lyke frienlfhip fcawin to thlcn in tyme off the r
;iflitiones, but for ambition, and infaici.bic cup.ditie to
rjcygne, and to mak Scotland ane accetnary to the crown
of Fiance. This was na friendly office, but mercenary,
craving hyre sarre exceeding the proporti n of thcyr
dtferving; a hale realm for the dleence of a part. We
fc theym manifeilly attempt the thing we fufpetled
off zow i we feared ze ment the conquest of Scotland,
and they are planely fallen to that work ; we hated zow
for doubt we had ze ment evill towards ws, and fall we
love theym, quhilks bearing the name off friends, go
about to bring ws in maift vile servitude ? Git by zour
i'icndly support at this tyme, ze fall declare that not only
,itck ze not the ruyne of our couptry, but will preserve

tho

the libertie thereof from conquest by flrangeares, Cf!.-
not the occasion of all inimite with zow, and ligue wtb
theym, be taken away ? The causes being removeil,
how fall the effetes remane ? The fear of'conquejf
made us to hate zou and love theym, the cais change4t,
quhen we tee theym planely attempt conquell, and zou
fchaw ws fiiendfiip, fall we not hate theym, and favolr
zow? Gif we have fchawne so great conflance, co,:-
tinuing za mony zeares in amity with theym, offquhome
we had fa small commodite, quhat fall move us :o
breake with zow, that off all nations may do ws greatest
plefoul ?

But ze will fay, this matter may he reconcyled and

then frends as off before. I think weill peace is the end
of all weyr, but off this ze may be assured, we will nevr
fa tar trull that rcconciliation, that we will be content '-
forgo the ametye f England, nor do any thing rmay bri;:;
ws in fufpicioi wVith zo'.. Giffwo wold at any tyire
to please theyni, break with zow, fiould we not, befydes
the lolfe of ellimation and discrediting off ourselfes, per-
petually expone our common 'weill to a maift manifel1
danger, and becum a prey to theyr tyranny ? Quhals aid
could we implore, being deftiture of zour friend(hip,
gif they off new wald attempt theyr former enterprifec?
Quhat nation myglit help ws giff they wall, or wald giti
they myght ? And it is lyke eneuch, they will not (ick
hc easter to tak theyr tyne off ws, quhen difplefour and
grudge lies taken dlepe rute on baith fydes, feeing am-
bition has so imlpyrit oweu tlieyr reason, that before we
had ever done any thing myght offend theym, but by
the contrary pleased them by right and wrang, they did
not flick tu attempte the fubverflon of our hale flatc. I
wald ze fliould not ecfeeme ws fa barayne, of jugcmrnn!,
that we cannot foresee nur awne perril ; or fa foolifchlc
that we will dot study by all gode means to entcrtaync
that thing may be our frfetye ; quhilk confiftts in all dle
relaying of zour friendthipa. [ pray zou confid'r in
like cafe, when, in the days of zour princes off maiit
noble memtory, king Henry theiVIIl. and king Edwa"r
the VI, ncatees were opened oft' anmtyc betwixt baith

rcalms

realms; was not at all tymes the difference of religion
the oncly flay they were not embraced ? Did nor the
craft of our clergy and power of theyr adherents subvert
*tie devises of the berter fort But now has God off
his mercy removed that block furth off the way ; now
is not theyr pracice lyke to tak place any mare, when
we are comme to a. conformity of doarine, and profes
che fame religion with zow, quhilk 1 take to be the
ftlayteft knot.of amitye can'be devised. Giffit may be
ailedged that some of our countrymen, at ony tyme,
violated theyr promis ? giff ze liss to way the circum-
tilnces, ze fall find the promis is rather brought on by
neceffite, after a great overthraw off our men, then
comme off fre will, and tending ever te our great in-
comoodite and decay off our haill.ftate, at leift fa taken.
But in this cafe, fall the preservation off our libertie be
i;dfcperably joined with the keping off promeffe, and the
violation off our fayth cast ws in raift miserable fervi-
tude. So'rhat giff neyther the fear off God, reverence
of man, rehigiori othe, promise, nor warldly honeltye
wes sufficient to bynd ws, yet fall the zeale ofour native
countrey, the maintenance off our own estate, the fafery
of our wyffes and childrene fiom slavery, comipell ws to
kcpe promise. I ani asured, it is trewly and sincerely
inl.nt on our part to continew in perpetual ametye with
z w; it fall be uttered by our proceedings. Giff zc
be $ defyrous of it as we ar, afful ances may be devyfed,
quharby all parteys will be gut of doubt. There be
r,:de meanes to do it, fit infnruments for the purpos,
tynme serves wcill, the inhabitants of baith realms wifl it,
(;od hes wrought in the people's hartes on bayth parties
a ertaine still agreement upon it, nevur did, at any
tynie, so mony thingS concurre at ones to lknyt it up,
til disposition of a few, quais harts are in Godis hands,
may mak tip the hale. 1 hope he quha hes begun hi;
wnrk, and mainteyned it quhile now, by the expetdation'
of man, fall perfyte it.

I pray zow, let not zour men dryve tyme in con-

fu:tation, quhether ze fall fuppurt ws or no. Seyng the
nlater fpeaketh for itself that z 'mon take upon zow
vOL, 1'1 , t She

the defence of our caus, giff ze have any reIpe. fom
zour awne weill. Their preparatives in France, and
levying of men in Germany, (quheyroff I am lately ad-
vertifed,) ar not altogidder ordeyned for, us, ze ar tiie
mark they Ihote at; they feke our realie, but for ane
entrey to zours. Giff they thould directly fchaw hof-
tilite to zow, they kna.v zo wald mak redy for the ni,
therefor they do, by indireft meanes, to blind zow, t!,.
thing they dare not as zit planely attemptc. Tihey
feme to invade us to th' end, that having assembled thcyr
hale forces fa nere zour bordours, they may unluk it to
attack zow: It is ane of their aid fetches, makinga
fchew to one place, to lyght on ane other. Remember
how covertly zour places about Boulougne were affaizeit,
and carried away, ze being in peace as now. How the
enterprise of Calais was fynely dissembled, I think ze
have not fa sone forgotten. Beware of the third, i.r-
vent theyr' policy by prudence. Giff ze fe not the ly;e
disposition presently in rheym, ze fe natlhing It is
groire ignorance to mifknaw, what all nations plai, 'y
fpeks off. Tak heed ze zay not hereafter, " Ha;d
wil i;" ane uncomely fenience to precede off a v. y)
man's mouth. That is onwares chanced on to zos',
quhilk zow commonly wiffed that this countrey niyt!i
be divorfed from the Frenlche, and is fa comme to pili
as was maift expedient for zow. For gifftby yot. itn-
tyfement we had taken the mater in hand, ze mnilt
have fufpefted we would have been untrully f:itn ,,
and na langer continued ftedfalte, then peril had a,-
peared But now, quhen offour self, we have conce v(l
the hatered, provoked by private injuries, and that tli,'y
evil dealings with ws he clfeirrved our ininityte. leI til
man dobte but they fall fynde ws enemnycs in ci n:il., tint
fa ungently hes demeyned our countrey, and at qui;ii
hands we can look for nathing but all cxtremitye, gil'
ever they may get the upper hand. Let not tins eC-.
sion, fa happely offered, escape zow. giff ze do, nes,-
lceing the present opportunitie, and hoping to lh.Ve
ever gode luk, comme fleaping upon zow,'it is to )
Eared zour enemye waxe so great and fa ,IranK, ti"1

afttrwar'ds

rfterwards quben ze wild, ze fall not be able to put him
d,.'vn. an.i then, to zour fraart, after the tyme zewill
. I-nowledge zour error. Ze have felt, by experience,

,:;.:t lharme conmch of ovcrfight, an' trulting to zour

friemlycs [romcie.t We offer zow the cccafion,

".;,i-ihy z.ur foTmier iofiCs may be repayred. Q.(hilk
, i' ae !, over fl tle, fuffiring ws to he overrun, quha

1i,c.., I pray zov.', fall Btay the Frcnfche, that they fall
,:rt invade zow in zowr own boundes, sick it is their

iti to reygne, that they can neither be content with
tilcvr so tune present, nio reft and befatisficd when they
n.yvr gode luck, but will frill follow on, having in theyr

'.nce brayne conccaved the image of fa great a conquest,
cnubat tiink ye fall be the end Is ther any of fa small
jleriment, that he doth not foresee already, that theyr
'a.l force fall then be bent against zow?

it fall not be amis, to confider in quhat cafe the

.;.rntclhe be presently. Theyr estate is not always fa
cilm at hame as every man thinketh And trewly it
..es not theyr great redines for weyr made theym to talc
this matter on hand, at this tyme, but rather a vayne
trutl in their awne policy, thinking to have found na
rLfit:lce, their opinion hes deceaved theym, and that

ainl.r them now amafed. The eliates off the empire

'a . I heaile) has futed reflitution off th' imierial towns
.!:'z, Toull, and Verdun, quhilk may grow to some
L ayres; and all thing is not a calme within their awne
r( 'i.!cy, the less fit they be prefrnrly for veyr, the
i :, 1 ,:,'rtune efleeme ye tle tirie for zow. Gif the
. .:: ccafion were offeredi to the Frenfche against zow,
*'". Ihowv glarly would they embrace it. Are ze not

l: h.nimed of ztlur sleuth, to spare theym that lies already

'. !..lilrel zour defRrution, giff theym wcie able ?

' ,ilhr with zour self quliilks is to be cloyfed ? To
w'yt ag:,init them out with zour lealine or within ?
('1 ,juliill 7e fleape, vwe fal be overthrowne, then fall
tli-y urot fayle to fute zou in zotir awne c,:unirey, and
,I; ws as a fote floi to ovelokke zow . But some will
'I', cilcrips, they nmtln eit not. It is fol) to think
:!', v aid not gift they were able, quliien before hant

. '
a!FY

they ilick not to gif zour armes, and ufibrpe the flyle
of zour crown. Then quhat difference there is to camp
within zowr awne bounds or without, it is manifefi.
Giff twa armyes ihould camp within zowr country, but
a moneth ; albeit ye receaved na other harme, zit Ihould
zour lolfe be greater, nor all the charge ze will nede to
bestow on our support will draw to. befydes the d,!'
honour.

Let not men, that eyther lack gode advise, or ar not

for particular rcfpeCts weill affeded to the caus, movs
zow to fubtrat: zour helping hand, by alleging thir.i
rot apparent, for that they be possible. It is not, I grant,
unpoffible that we may receave conditiones of peacr;
but I fee little liktlyhode that our ennemyes will offt:
ws fik as will remove all mftruft, and giff we wald have
accepted others, the mater had bene lang or now con.-
pounded. Let zow not be moved for that they terme
ws rebelles, and diffamcs our jufl querele with the name
of conspiracy against our foverayne. It is hir hyencs
right we manetayne. It is the liberty of hir reilm we
study to preserve with the hazard of our lyves. We
are not (God knaweth) comme to this poynt for wan-
tones, as men impatient of rewll, or willing to fchake
off the zoke of government, but ar drawne to it by nce.
ceffite, to avoyde the tyranny of firangeares, feaking to
defraude ws of lawful government. Giff we ihould
susser ftrangeares to plant tlientclffes peaceably in all the
lfrenthcs of our realme, fortify the feyportes, and mait
important places, as ane entre to a plain conquest, nowv
in the minoritie of our foverane, beyng furth of the
realme, Ihould we rot be thought oncareful off the com-
mon weill, bctrayeres of our native countrcy, and c:vi
fubjecs to hir majeltc ? Quhat other opinion could (cte
have off ws ? Might Ihe not justly hereafter call ws to
accompt, as negligent miniflered ? Giff firange.;res
Ihould he thus suffered to broke the clhef offices, be:are
the hail rewll, alter and pervert our lawes and lil,:rty
at theyr plefour; myght not the people eftecm our
noblemen unworthy the place of counfalouts ? We nitaln
na wyfc to fubtrak our obedience from our foveraanc, to

defraudl

Jekr,thd hir hyenes o;l her dew reverence, rents and re,
min.es off hir crowr. We reke narhing but that Scot-
1I:il! iay rem:ine, as or bcfore, a fre realme, rewlit by
htn' IIvclcs and hir ninilteres borne men of the fanm ; and
th. rthe fucceffuon oi the crown may temane wvith tlt
la wful blode

I wald not ze (ould not fa lyrtil eflenie the friendship

of Scotland, that ze iuged it not worthy to be embraced.
It rid be na (mall comnjodite for zow to be delivered
otf ihe annoyancii ot so neir a nyghtbour, quhais inimi.
itc may more trouble zow, then of any othcr nation
ai': it twyfs as pulffant, not lyeng dry n)ar;lc wilh zow.
;b:(vdts that fe fall not nede to feare lhe invasion off
arv plince lackyrg the commri dite to invade zow by
.it d, on out land Ccnlider quhat fuperfiuous charge
z heltowc en tile forti! carion and keeping cf Barwick:
thllilk ze may reduce to a meane fowme, having ws to
I:l.n!Cs Thie realme c ( Ileland being of natour a gode
: d fetrill countrey, by reason off the continewall un-
.uieitles and lak of pclicey, ze knaw to be rather a
bturthen unto zow than great advantage; and giff it
'2ere peaceable may be very commodious For pacifica.
rtn quhayroff, it is not unknowne ro zow quliat service
.:c are abill to do. Relulfe not theyr commnoiteys,
h:iide.. mony ma qulien they are offered. Qulilks al-

b d.'

1 lludy not to amplify antd dilate, yet is nia other

countrey able to offer zou the lyke, and are the latiler
r.' be emlbraced, for that zour aunceftlrs, by all meinecs,
iaill erncflly fited our amity, and yet it was not
ticyi hap to come by it. The mater hes almaift car- ~
iycel me beyond the boundes of a lattre, quharfor I will
l'ave to trouble zow after I have given you this note.
i w.sid wiss that ze and they that ar learned, fould rede
tl c twa former orations of Dcnolthenes, called Olyn-
tliiacc, and confydcre quhat counfall that wyfe oratour
i:.ve to the Athenians, his countrymen, in a lyke cafe;

tililik hes so great affinite with this cause of ours, that
t\ery word thrcof myglit be applyed to our purpos.
'Tihcr may ze learne of him quhat advise is to he fol-
lowed, when zour nyghtbours hous is on fyre, Thsl I

B 3 bid

hid zow heartily fareweill. From Sant Andrew's, the
2otl of January 1559.

No. III. (Vol. I. p. 224.)
Part of a letter from Tho. Randolph to Si;r

William Cccil, from the camp before Leith,
29th of April 1560.

[An Original in the Paper Office.]

I WILL only, for this time, dicfharge myself of my

promire to the earl of Huntley, who so defyreth to be
recommended to you, as one, who, with all his heart,
favourcth this cause, to the uttermost of his power.
Half the words that come out of his mouth were able to
persuade an unexperienced man to speak farther in his
behalf, than I dare he hold to write. 1 leave itto your
honour to judge of him, as of a man not unknown to
you, and will myself always measure my thoughts. as
he shall deserve to be spoken of. With much difficulty,
and great perfuafidn, he hath subscribed with the rett
of the lords tn join with them in this action whatfom-
ever he can invent to the furtherance of this cause, ce
hath promired to do with solemn protestation and many
words; he trufleth to adjoin many to this cause ; antd
faith surely that no man Ihall lie were he taketh part.
He hath this clay fuhlfcrbed a bond between England and
this nation: he faith, that there was never thing th.t
liked him better

No. IV. (Vol. I. p. 237.)
Randolph to Cecil, roth Augull 156o. From

Edinburgh.

[An Original in the Paper Office.]

SINcE the 9gth of July, at what time I wrote last to

your honour, I have heard of nothing worth the report-
ing. At this present it may please you tp know, that
the imof par; of the nobles are here arrived, as your ho-

33 1101o'

nouilr ilall receive their names in wvriting. The earl of
Huntly excufeth himself by an infirmity in his leg. His
lieurtnant lor this time is the lord of Lidington, chosen
speaker of the parliament, or harangue maker as these
rien term it. The firi day of their fitting in parlia.
nient will be on Thursday next. Hitherto as many as
iiave been present of the lords have communed and de-
vs d of certain heads then to be propounded, as, who
lshall be sent into France, who into England. It is
mnucih afier to find them than the other. It feemeth
alimol' to be resolved upon thal for Enhlnd the mailer
of M:ixwell, and laird of Lidington. For France Pit-
t.row and the julice clerk. Also thev have consulted
wicom they think imeetelt to name for the XXIV. of the
whicih lhe XII. councellors mufi be chosen. They in-
tend very fliortly to fend away Dingwall the herald into
i;,nze, with the names of those they (hall chufe; and
ilfo to require the king and queen's consent unto this
lprl:.iment. They have devised how to have the con-
t:,t witli England confirmed by a.ithurity of parlia-
nicnt; how also to have the articles of the agreement
biwecen them and their king and queen ratified. lThefe
'lites yet have only hben had in communication. For
,ic cnfirmatiori oa the contait with England I have no
!ouli: ; for that I hear many men very much like the
faire, as the carl-os Athol, the earl of Sutherland, tho
i. Glamis, who dined yetlerday with 1. James. The
lord James requested me this present day to bring the
coirli'.t unto him. I intend, alto, this day, to fpcak
itno tlhe 1. Cray, in our I Gray's name, for that he
plonlifed in my hearing to fubrcribe, and then presently
wouid have done it, if the contrat could have bern had.
l:ol the more afTurance against all inconvenients, I
wo,:li, besides that, that I tnft it fliall be ratified in
;1,: 1; Im:nt, that every nobleman in Scotland had put his
Ilril :and set his feal, which may always remain as a
nt"iable monument, tho' the at of parliameut be here.
*.'. (lifannulecd. If it might, therefore, sand with your
:lvice, thlat rhe lords might be written unto, now that
It,'y are lire present, to that cffcft, or tltat 1 might re-

ccive

ceive from your hon', Tome carnert charge to travel hl.r:
in, I doubt not but it would fervc to giod purpose. i
it might also be known with wlat fubfiantial and effec-
tious words or charge you desire to have it confirmed, T
think no great difficulty would be made. The earl mar-
shall has often been moved to fubfcrble, he ufeth mo dr-
lays than men judged he would. Iis son told mie x\.f.
terday, that he would (peak with n.e at leIsure, so (.ld
also Drumlanrick ; I know not to what purpose: I h':c
caused 1. James to be the earnifler with tlie . Marf-al,
for his authority's Tfke, when of late it was in confii-
tation by what means it might be wrought, that !,
amity between these two re:sims mniiht Ihe perptcl.
and among diverse men's opinion, one raid that ic i;n,;:
of no other, but by making them both one, and t!irt Ir
hope of that mo things wec done, than would oth.; ,.
have ever been granted; the earl of Argyll adviscd i;,,
earnettly to flick unto that, that he had promised. t'..
it flhou)d pass his power and all the crafty knaves of hi;
counsel, (I am bold to ufo unto your h. your o.vn
words,) to break so godly a purpose. This talk 1ii.{d
well th- assisters, howsomever it pleased liini to nl:.n:
it was spoken unto. The barons, who in time pa'i
have been of the prliament , had yefletday a conveln-
tion among thcmnelves in the church, in very honefi :;:r
quiet fort ; ihey thouliht it 0oc'-l to requite to be lll r;d
unto their antient lhberty, to have voice :n parlia:,intl.
'Iicy prifcneil fitat da.y a hill unto the lordi t.u th.i
efi'e, a copy wheieof Ihall he: se:t as soon as it .n n
had. It wai arnf crcl unto 'Itntly, and taken il ig'cod
jatrt. It was relfe.lrd unto the lords of the IartiJs,:
whVt:n t'(cy are clolfen, to resolve thereupon.----l.1o
f<l/ /ct c , ,,a , ,,, J, 1,' ,. , ',ri,,i, t,/e farificateio !

o/ )'.':-

/I,,, &c.--l-''lis cprefelt niornng viz. thile )il, I 11.
det.ilt d, thilt the Irlds inrtcndrd to be ai the parliami. ,
vwici e.lulcd le f rn(o,.nC har to nfay my letter, t(, kl
Wl'ht I couldl Iear or lc.n n woLrt the reporting unto !nIl
lhon. The loids, at ten oftll l clock, arffmbled thern-
selves at the palace, where the duke litth ; from wlhencc
tht:y dcp:rtlcd towai;t I thie Tol'a ootIh, as they w;etc in

3 (iil.;d ty.

dt- iiy. Each one being set in his feat, in such order
a, )our h. Ihall receive them in this scroll. The crown,
the mace, the sword, were laid in the queen's feat.
,!ilrcc being commanded, the 1. of Lidington began his
o!aiion. lie excused his insufficiency to occupy that

,

!e. He made a brief discourse of things past, and of
,;it neceflity men were forced unto for the defence of

c:.r country, what remedy and support it pleaf.d God

t (end them in the time of their necefiity, how much
;,c were bound heartily to acknowledge it, and to requite

H, He took away the pertuafion that was in many

:.eni's mind that lay back, that misdeemed other things
to be meant than was attempted He advised all estates
:, lay all particulars apart, and to bend themfelvcs
. iolly to the true service of God and of their country.
ic willed them to remember in what state it had been
·,) long time for lack of government, and exercise of
i'!titce. In the end, he exhorted them to mutual amity
and hearty friendflsip, and to live with one another as
members all of one body. - He prayed God long to
maintain this peace and amity with all princes, e peci-
ally betwixt the realms of England and Scotland, in the
frai of God, and so ended The clerk of register imme.
(lately flood up, and asked them to what matter they
would proceed: it was thought necessary, that the ar-
tic!ls ot the peace Ihould be confirmed with the common
.,on.nt, for that it was thought necessary to fend them
.-a;y with speed into France, and to receive the ratifica-
),n of them as soon as might be. The articles being
read, were immediately agreed unto: a day was ap-
1(,intedl to have certain of the nobles fubfciibe unto them,
tnd to put their feals, to be tent away by a herald, wvho
liall alto bring thel ratificationx again with hini, Tlhe
hbrni;, of whom I have above written, iequired an an-

ei'.x r to their request; fomewliat was (aid, unto the con-

tu y. The barons alledged for tlem cullom and autho-
'ity. It was in the end refoilved, that there should be
ch.ein fix to join with the lords of the articles, and that
thiey, after good advisement flould find it right and

necessary

receffary for the commonwealth, it fhculd be ra',r-
at this parliament for a pcrpe'ual law. The lords ---
ceeded immediately hereupon. to the chufing of 'he ;: .t
of the artirile. The orc.r is, that the lords si::: .
chufe the lemporal, and the tempral the spiritual, ,:;
the burgesses their own. There were chosen a, in :
other p;per I have written. This being done, the l, ,
departed and accompanied the duke, all as far a I'e
Bow, v(which is the gate going out of the high ft;ic:,
and many down into the palace where he licth
town all in arnour, the trumpets founding, and o tlcr
music such as the. have. Thu, miuch I report unto y-iir
honour of that I did hoth hear and fee Other filvmni.
ties have not been u.sed, saving in times long pait i:.
lords have had parliament robes, which are now ,.,
them wholly out of use.

The names of as many earls and lords fpiritua z:.,i
temporals as are assembled at this parliament.

The duke of Chatelherault.

Earts. Lords. Lords fpir'aql.

Arran. Erskine. St Andrew's.
Argyll. Ruthven. Dunkell.
Athole. Lindsey. Athens.
Crawvford. Somerville. Tle bishop of the llm-s.
Caffills. Cathcart, Ahbols and Plicr,.
ilarlhall. Hume. know not how mlivy.
Morton. Livingflon.
Glencairn, Innernetlh.
Sutlcerland. Boyd.
Caithness. Ogilvy.
]Kothcs. Flcming.
Monteith. Glainis.

Gray.
Ochil:rce.
Gordon.

*I hi:

The Lords of the Articles.

Barons elefld to be of

Sp;itaal. 'nemporal. the rticles.

A.hiens. The Duke. Maxwell.
!lhe;. Argyll. Tillihardine.
J.ard James. AI.lirftall. Cunninghamhead.
Arhroatli A'hole. Lochenvar.
:\twlottle. h[orton. Pittarow.
l.indoris. Clencairn. Lundy.
(C:wpar. Ruthven. Ten Provofls of the
Kinross. Erskine. chief towns, which
Kilwinning. Boyd. also are of the Ar-

Lindsay. tides.

'o tiit with the Subprior of St. Andrews, the whole
. ^6.

it vere too long for me to rehearse particularly the
,'i)(,fitin, and chiefly the affeeions of these men, that

:,~, at this time chosen lords of thc articles. May it
l.;.sfy your honr. for this time to know that, by the
'-o:lmon opinion of men, there was not a fubflantialler
,. :orle futffiient number of all forts of men chosen in
Sccla;nd there many years. nor of whom men had greater
ih,;e of good to ensue. This present morning, viz the
lo, i, the I. of Lidingion made me privy unto your letter;
iic ntecleth, as much as may be, to follow your ad-
;;c. Some hard points there are. He himlelf is dc-
;:c.:]ined not to go into France. He allegrtil many
ICAl;II, but fpeaketh lealt of that, that moveth him
t ::, vwicheI is Ihe rxainple of tlic lat, tlhat went on a
m .e': Iratefll mcfr.i-rc than hIe 1lall carry, and flood on
ol':; terms wilt rtIh ir prince than he doth, and yet your
!i.,;-'1 isnovtvetli wlait tlhe whole world judgclli.
P' ttioln of the Lcfcr Barons to tl-, Parliament,

heldc Au!i. 1560.

[l:icl' ftl in Randolph's lettcr to Cecil, 1jth Aug, 5ss6o.]

Mv lords, unto your lordships, humbly means and
'.'- ,., we the balins ant frcclholdcrs of this icilmn,

your

your brethren in Christ, That whereas the caures of truc
religion, and common well of this realm, are, in ri.
present parliament, to he treated, ordered, and Pi.,
blifhed, to the glory of God, and maintenance of it
common-wealth; and we being the greatest ntrmbcr i
proportion, where the said causes concern, and has beer
and yet are ready to bear the greatef part of the charge
thereuntil, as well in peace as in war, both with o0
bodies and with our goods; and feeing there is no piac
where we may do better service now than in genere
councils and parliaments, in giving our best advice an
reason, vote and councell for the furtherance thereo
for the maintenance of virtue and punishment of vice, a
use and cuflom had been of old by ancient aets of par
liament observed in this realm ; and whereby we uider
stand that we ought to be heard to reason and vote:
all causes concerning the commonwealth, as well i
councils as in parliaments; otherwise we think tha
whatfomever ordinances and flatutes be made conco n
ing us and our estate, we not being required and fuffere
to reason and vote at the making thereof, that t!
fame thould not oblige us to fland thereto. Theliefl;
itvill please your lordships to take consideration titr
of, and of the charge born, ard to be born by us, fine
we are willing to fe ve truly to the common well of tIl
realm, after our ellate, that ye will, in this present pa:
liament, and all counfells, Where the common well
the realm Is to be treated, take our advice, counfell, an
vote, 'o that, without the fame, your lordlhips wou
susser nothing to be passed and concluded in parliamcn
or councils afurefaid; and that all ads of parliannie
.made, in timrs past, concerning us for our place ant
<ltlate, and in our favour, be at this present parliantcl
confirmed, approved, and ratified, and at of parlialnic
made thereupon. And your lordflips aInwer hunib
befeecllcs.

Of the Jccqfs of bthis petition, the follcwing account it git

0y Raadolpi; Lett, to Cecil, 19 Aug. 1560. The ma
ters concluded and past by common consent on Saturd,
lalt, in fl¢h Lblemn fort asbe fit day that they aIfcil

;lte!

bflId, are there: First, that tle barons according to an
cidl .d of parliament, made in the time of James I. in
t;e year of God r427, (hall have free voice in parlia-
.ct, this ad palled without any contradiCion.

No. V. (Vol. I. p. 247.)
A Itter of Thomas Randolph, the Englifl refi-

idelt, to the right worshipful Sil WVilliam Cecil;
knt. principal secretary to the queen's majeity.

[9 Aug. 1561. Cott. Lib. B. to. so. 32.]

1 i, 'vE !eceived your honour's etters ot the firt of this

rmonth, written at Ofyes in E'ex ; and also a letter unto
the lord James, from his kinfrnan St. Come out of
i r.nce, in this they agree both that the queen of Scot-
:.id is nothing changed of her purpose in home coming.
i a-fure your honour that will be a flout adventure for a
rl-lk crafed woman, that may be doubted as well what
iiiy laippen unto her upon the seas, as also how heartily
flic may be received when she cometh to land of a great
lLnber, who are utterly persuaded thac Lhe intendeth
thtir utter ruin, come when frhe will; the preparenceis
vcr, fniall whensoever that fle artive, fearcely any man
c:.n be persuaded that (le hath any such thought in her
lid i I have thovn your lonour's letters unto the lord
janics, lord Morton, lord Lidington; they wilh, as your
hi nour doth, that nie might be tlayed yet for a space,
.i,1 if it were not for their obedience fake, some of them
ire not tho' they never saw her face. They travel
whn,t they can to prevent the wicked devices of there
mnifclicvous purpose of her miniflere, but I tear that that
will always be found that filij hujus fculi, they do what
rhey can to hand with the religion, and to maintain
:amity with their neighhours; they have also need to
look unto themselves, for their hazard is great, and that
they fee there is no remedy nor fafery lor themfrcves,
hut to rapore themselves upon the queen's majefly, our
fivereign's favour and (upport. Friends ;broad they

vO,., ln i lhave

have none, nor many in whom they may troul at home.
There are in mind thornly to try what they may be as-
fured it of the queen's majesty, and what they may
assuredly perform of that they intend to offer for tlhci
parries. This the queen of Scotland above all other things
doubteth; this fie feeketh by all means to prevent i
and hath caused St. Come, in her name, earnefily to
write to charge him that no such things be attempted
before her coming home i for that it is said, that tie,/
too already arrived here out of England for the purpof;,
what femblant fomevcr the noblemen do make, that tihe,'
are grieved with their queen's refusal, that comcth ll (
from their hearts. They intend to expostulate with r;i
hereupon. I have my answer ready enough for them.
If file thrust all Englishmen out of this country, I doubt
not but there vwil be some of her own that will bear :i
some kindness. Of me the (hall be quit, so soon as ii
pleafeth the queen's majefly my miftrefi. no longer t,;
use my service in this place. By such talk, as 1 have J
late had with the lord James and lord of Lidington, I
perceive that they are of mind that immediately of the
next convention, 1 Ihall repair towards you with their
determinations, and rcfolutions, in all purposes, wlherein
your honour's'advice is earneiily required, and shortly
looked for. 'Whatfomever I desire myffcf, I know my
will ought to be subjef unto the queen my fovereigln'
pleasure, but to content myself, would God I were so
happy as to serve her majefly in as mean a fiate as eveL
poor gentleman did,' to be quit of this place i not that I
co in my heart wax weary of her rmajefty's fervicr, bet
because my time and years iequire some place of more
repose and'quietnefs than 1 find In this'country. 'I doubt
also my inCufficience when other troubles in this country
arlie, or ought hiall be required of Ine t' tile advance-
ment of hlir'majulty's tervice, that either my will is not
able to cdmpafs,: or my credic'tufficlei t to ork to that
ecffe, "at perehaned' (hall be' li'ked for at''ty hincls.
As ydur honour hath b'eehia tihneins of nmy ontinuance
in this'rooin, To I triultthat I h'll find that Continual
favotrlat'ybdr hands, that df'ooli as it thall iland wit't

the

tiwd queen's majesty's pleasure, I may girc this place
unto sone far worthier than I am myself, and in the
ncan season, have my course direced by your good ad-
vIce lhow I may by my contrivance do tomen fuc service,
as may be agreeable to her majelly's will and pleasure.

These few words, I am bold to write unto your ho-
,our of myself. For the reft, where that is wished that
trhe lords will stoutly continue yet for one month, I as-
I,:re your honour that there is yet nothing omitted of
tleir old and accustomed manner of doing, and feeing
that they have brought that unto this point, and should
now. prevail, they were unworthy of their lives.

I find not that they are purposed so to leave the mat-

ter. I doubt more her money than I do her fair words;
and yet can I not conceive what great things can be
wrought with forty thousand crowns, and treasure of
he.r own here I know there is no sure or ready means to
get it. The lord of Lidington leaveth nothing at this
tine unwritten, that he thinketh may he able to satisfy
your defre, in knowledge of the precfnt (late of things
h're. Whatfomever cometh of that, he findeth it ever
b.!l. that the come not; but if (he do come, to let her

oninw, at the first, what (he thall find, which is due
obedience, and willing service, if (he embrace Christ, and
delire to live in peace with her neighbours By such
!er:t. r as you have 13ft received, your honour somewhat
u.lderlhandcth of Mr. Knox himfcif, and also of.others,
wljlt is determined, he himself to abide the utternmoft,
;ird other never to leave him until God have. takenhii
lii-, and thus together with what comfort fomever it:
will please you to give him by your letters, that tho:
qtl:en's majesty doth not utterly condemn him, or at
th:i leait in that point, that he is so fore charged with by
ils own queen, that her majetly will notrallow her
iloing I doubtnot but it will be a great comfort
nte') Iiml, and will contett many others t his daily
I:ly'r is for tl t il'ainrtenancea of unity with England,
.,nd that Goad will never £uffer mnen.to be so ungrate, as
ly any perruafoon to ri4n headlong unto the de(trudion of
thi1, thlt have saved their. lives, and retlored their

c aZ ~ country

country to liberty. I leave farther, at this time, t1
trouble your honouridefiringGod to fend such an amity
1erween tbefe two, rialms.that Gcod may be glorified to
them of this world.-At Edenburgh tlhe 9th o Augull
1S6 X - . . .

v. s __

No. VI., :, . . 7:).
A letter of Queen Elizabeth to <Ueen Mary =.

[16th of Aug. 156. i'aper-office, fiom a copy.]
To the right excellent, right high, and mighty princesse,

our right dear and well.beloved filler and cousin tile
queen of -Scotland.
nRIHT excellent, right high, and mighty princeie,

our right dear and right well-beloved fifler and couf-,
we greet you well. The. lord of St. Cofme brought
to us your letters, dated ihe 8th of this present at Ab-
beville, whereby ye signify, that although by theanfwer'
brought to you by monsieur Doyzell, ye might have had
occafin to have entered 'irto some doubt of our amity,
yet after certain purposes paled betwixt you and
our ambaftador, you would' assure us of your good
meaning to live with us in amity, and for your purpose
therein ye require us to give credit to the said St Cofinm,
We have thereunto thought good to answer as follov,..
eth: The fame St. Cofme 'hath mnade like declara;i'
unto us on your part, for your excuse in not ratifying
the treaty, as yourself made to our arnbaPafdor, and wce
have briefly ant'wered to every the fame point%, as he
can fl ew you: and if he (hall not so do, yet leaf in the
mean season you might be induced to think that your
reafors has satisfied us, fomerally vwe afrure you, that
to our requests your answer cannot be reputed for 1
fatisfaflion. Fcr we require no benefit of you, but that

a Thi is the complee:paper bs which that induflrioum mnd

in)partial collector, biflop Keith, las p6blihed a rraginert,
frotn litat Ire callI his Ihattcrcd vlM. 154. note (;a) S1 .

you

I ou will perform yourpromire whereunto you are bound
;y your feal and your hand, for the refusal whereof we
'ce no reason alledged can serve. Neither covet we any
tiing, but that which is in your own power'as queen of
.otiland, that which yourflif in words and speech doth
i...efs, that which your laIe husband's our good bro-
' er's ambafladors and you concluded, that which your
;'.vi nobillry and people were made privy unto, that
v. ilich indeed made peace and quietness betwixt us, yea
thai without which no perse& amiry can continue be-
twixt us, as if it be indifferently weighed, we doubt not
;;it yc) will perceive, allow, and accomplith. Neverthe-
.l>, perceiving, by the repolt of the bringer, that you
;', an furlhwith upon your coming home, to follow
,.rein the advice of your council in Scotlaad, we are
... ntent to suspend our conceipt of all unkindness, and do
.'h'ure you that we be fully resolvcd, upon this being
.tl formed, to unite a sure band of amity. and to live in
,,.li;hbourlhood with you as quietly, friendly, yea as as-
1f idly in the knot of friendlhip as we be in the knot of
nature and blood. And herein we be so earne!tly deter-
il:!?cd, that the world lhould fee if thecontrary hoould fol-
iv:i (which God forbid) the very occasion to be in you
.,nd not in us ; as thle ory witnerelh thlelike of the king
yotir flther, our uncle, with whom our father fought to
lihr'e knit a perpetual bond by inviting to come In this
re.lin to York, of which matter we know there remain
wi'h us, ard we think with you, sundry witnesses of
our father's earneit good meaning, and,of tlhe error
wvllreunlto divers evil councillors induced your father;
r fitn;lly where it feemeth that report had been .nade
unto you, that we had lent our admiral to the seas with
llr iiavy to impcche your palTage, both your servants
', well underfiand how false that is, knowing for a
t titli hat we have not any mote than two or three small
I,:liks upon 1he feaa, to apprehend certain pirates,.heing
tlirelro entreated, and almost conmpelled, by thl eatineft
cu':1;ailit of the ambalradurof our good brother the king
es Splain, made of certain Scottifhmen hlunting our
r':a .r; pirates, under pretence of letters of mrrque, o(

8 3 which

which matter alIr we earnefily require you, at )o:r
coming to your realme, to have some good confiderat)on,
and the rather for refpeC that ought to be betwixt yon
tealme and the countries of us, of France, of Spain, and
of the house of Burgundy. And so, right excellent,
right high and mighty princcls, we recommend us to
you with moss earnest request, not to negleft theft * v
Iriendly and sisterly offers of friendlhip, which, before
Cod, we mean and intend to accomplish. Given ur!v
our signet at Heyningham the ,6th of Augufi, in the
third year of our reign.

No. VII. (Vol. I. p. 289.)
A letter of Randolph to the right honourable :in'

William Cecil, knight, principal fccretay

: c,

the queen's majesty.
[ i Sth of May 56 3. Papr- office, from the original.
Or late, until the arrival of monsieur Le Croc, I had

nothing worth the writing unto your honour.-Bcetoic
his coming we had so little to think upon that we did
rothing but pass our time in feaffi, hanquetting, mati-
ing, and running at the ring, and Ouch like. He brcu;lit
with him such a number of letters, and such abundance
of news, that, for the space of three days, we gave cil-
selves to nothing else hut to reading of writings, :nll
hearing of tales, many so truly reported, that they might
be compared to any that ever Luciane did write de
veris narrationibus. Among all his tidings, for the mnrfl
airured, I fend this unto your honour as an undoulted
truth, which is, that the cardinal of Lorraine, at Ilii
being with the emperor, moved a marrIage hetWten his
yourkeft son, the' duke of Aftruche, and this queen
-wherein he hath so'far travelled, that it hath alrrady
come unto this point, that if fle find it good, the fail
duke will out' ofh'and f(t lhiifher 'is' amhalffdor, and
farther proceed to the c'onfdummation hcrcof; with ta

to Qconvcenisnt

crnvenient speed as may be; and to the intent her
mind may be the better known, Le Croc is sent unto
',-r with this rneflage from the cardinal, who hath pro.
milfd unto the emperor, to have word again before the
end of May;. and for this cause lte Croc is ready for
his departure, and his letters writing both day and night.
i;his queen being before advertised of his towardnefs,
iy many means hath fought far off, to know my lord of
Mur:r.y's mind herein, but would never to plainly deal

h.t!l ilim, that he could learn wat her meanieang is, or
l ..
fie is bent. She ufeth io man's counci. but only

il ., man's that lafi arrived, and assuredly until the 1. of
i..'.ngton's return, She will do what (he can to keep
..at secret; and because irefolution in his absence cannot
hc talken, the will, for this time, return Le Croc with
-, . -ft, to have longer time to devise; and after, with
:" ' oft speed she can, flie fully purpofeth to advertize

i: . 1 mean, her uncle the cardinal, of her mind.
lthis matter the'l. of Lidington is made privy. I

-r.l,.,v not whether by tome intelligence that he had
i,, iore his departure, or since his arrival in France, divers
Itir;es have palsed between her grace and him, whereof
;a much as it imported not, greatly the knowledge of,
*,s communicated to some, as much as was written in
' iller is kept unto themselves. Whether also the 1.
c! Lidington hath had conference with the Spanish am-
b,.rltdor in England of this matter or any like, I leave
it unto your honour's good means to get true knowledge
tilhl(coi. Guefles or furmizes, info gBry' matters, I
wc.ltd be loath to write for verities, This alto your
Iloaour may take for truth, Ilat tile enperor hath of-
st-"cl with his son, for this qgeen's dower, the county
.1: 1yroll, which is Raid to be worth 30ooo franks by
ycar. Of this,matter alto the rhingrave wrote a letter
.into this queen, out of France, not long since. This is
!ll that presently I can write unto your honour hereof;
,s I can come by farther knowledge, your honour (hall
b inlfoml . , ,

1 have recived your honoprl' writings by the Scot-
tifl tman that lag ca!ne ,ito thfee parts; h .brought

also

also letters unto this queen from the 1. of Lidingloin;
their date was old, and contained only the news if
France. I perceive divers ways, that Newhaven is s(.ic
closed, but I am not so ignorant of their nature, but hatt
I know ihey will fay as much as they dare do, I will
not fay as the proverb doth, ' canis timidus fortius h.
trat.' From lhence 1 do assure them, what means f,,rn.
ever they make, or how pitiful fomever their moine ,e,
they are like to receive but small comfort for all l;gir
long allie. We fland daily in doubt what friend!, p
we Ihall need ourself, except we put better order ur o
our n;ifruled papifls than yet we do, or know holw ic
bring to pars that we may be void of their comber.

To.morrow, the i Sth of this'inftant, the queen ri:.

parteth of this town, towards Edenburgh. If my Ih.p
be good, you (hall thoroughly hear some merry lidirs
of the bp. of St. Andrews; upon Wednesday next !.e
shall be arraigned, and five other priests. for their m.lilng
at EaRter last. Thus moll humbJy I take my leave i a
St. Andrews the 13th of May, Is63.

No. VIII. (Vol. I. p. 298.)
Letter of Randolph to the right honourabLle i

William Cecil, knight, principal secretary to
the queen's inajefly.
[loth of April 1563. Paper.office, from the original in i;:

his own hand.]

MAY it please your honour, the 7th of this inflant,

Rowlet, this queen's fccretary, arived here ; he repco-
eth very honefily of his good usage, he brought with
him many letters unto the queen that came out of
France, full of lamentation and sorrow. She received
from the queen-mother two letters, the one contained
only the rehearsal of her griefs, the other signify the
state of France as then it was, as in what fort things
were accorded, and what fa ther was intended for tile
appeasing of the discords there, not mifirufting but tha

if

if reason could not be had at the queen of England's
hands, but that the realm of France should find her ready
and wvlling to support and defend the right thereof; as
by friendship and old alliance between the two realms
he is bound.

How well there words do agree with her doings your

h'no ur can well confider, and by her'writings in this
frrt unto this queen, (which I alfure your honour is
true.) you may afluredly know, that nothing thall be
Icft undone of her part, that may move debate or;con-
trovcrfie between this queen and our sovereign.

it was much muted by the queen herself, how.thisnew.

kin!nefs came about, that at this time the received two
I)ns letters written all with her own hand, faying, all
the time since her return (he never received half so many
inmcs as were in one of the letters, which I can myself
tcii'fy by the queen's own faying, and other good as-
furance, where hitherto I have not been deceived. I can
2.so farther assure your honour, that this queen-hath
fa.el that she knoweth now, that the friendship of the
q)icen's majesty my sovereign may stand her more in
Ithad, than that of her good mother in France, and as
flc is desirous of them both, so will the not lore the one
fr the other. I may also farther assure your honour,
thrt whatfomevcr the occasion is; this queen hath
for;,wvlat in her heart that will burfl out in time, which
w'ill nmnifeft that rome unkindness hath passed between
tlitmi, that will not be easy forgotten In talk Cfme-
.ilrcs with myself, the faith that the queen motlher might
hali uIfed the matter otherwise than (he hath done, and
drli much doubt what ihall be the success of herr great
ic to govern alAne, in all things to have her will.
iurg.R then that presently they stand in fucl terms one
-.'if thile other, I tho't it better to, confrm.!erin thsat
'l'nr, (this queen ,ncan,e than to (pealsany word that
i!;ilt caufce her to con,cciY~F,;b jttc of,,)tl!e othr., *,Anl
y) I an) aifrred.l tbe qill reccive as friepdly letsea, ant

Is In.ny good w9,:ds, frogm,i;ja; q,u"en), as the ptcr,,dl(.

\''ite unto hiFr., Whlether tlhe queen .mr th, r wtll

Mfpe,.li
15yv thling unto the 1. of Lidington of that purpoft mhe

did

did write unto this queen of, I know not; but if she do,
I think it hard if your honour can get no favour thereof,
at his return, or I perchance by some means here. It
may perchance be written only by that queen, to try
what answer this queen will give, or underfland cwhat
mind the beareth unto the queen's majesty our fove tign.
The queen knoweth now that the earl Bothwell is ftnt
for to London. She caused a gentleman of hers to en.
quire the cause ; I answered that 1 knew none otihr,
but that his takers were in controversy who took hi;m,
and that it should be judged there. I know that fie
tbinketh much that he is not sent into Scotland It IS
yet greatly doubted that if he were here, he would be
reserved for an evil infirumeut. If the lord of Lidingtun
have not been plain with your honour herein, he is in
the wrong to those who are his friends here, but mol of
all to himself. There comes a vulture in this realm, if
ever that man come again into credit.

No. IX. (Vol. I. p. 306.)
The oration made by William Maitland of Lc.

thington, younger secretary for the time, in'
the parliament holden by our fovereigin lr:
king's mother, queen of this realm for ti.
time, the time of the rellitution of Umqiiic
Matthew earl of Lenox.
MY lords, and others here convened. Albeit, be thit

it has pleated her majei.y moltl graciounly tp utter untW
you, by her own imouth, ye mayhlave fufficiertly cun-
ceived the cause of .this your present alffmbly yet
having her majefty'a commandnent to fupjy my 1"l1
chancelloir' place, being pr;cently as ye (ge ,decc;acd,
I am willed to exprcfa the fame folpvwhatirmoic at
large. . . ,

Notour it is, how in lier hlighnefs's, minority, in proi

ecfs of foilaultour wat dcrgeed lor of
l tc'-.

I1 5,

,ox, for a certain offences alledged committed by him i
i, ccified in the dome and cenfement of parliament given
t!lcreupon; by reason whereof Ile has this long time
been exiled, adfd absent forth of his native country j
!iow grievous the fame has been unto him, it has well
jppeated by divers his suites, sundry ways brought unto
-!r majesty's knowledge, not only containing molt
i,uinl,l and clue fubmiflion, but always bearing witness
ot his good devotion to her majetty, his natural princess,
:.ir cirnelt afcEtion he had to her highness most humble
re-sicc, if it should please her majelly of her clemency

i., mnie him able to enjoy the benefit of a subje&t; many
r-'pccits might have moved her higtlefs favourably to in..
iml( to his request, as the anciency of his house, and
0!. liiaalie he bears, the honour he has to appertain to
/!.r majftly by affinity, by reason of my lady Margaret
'i.L :;ilanefs's aunt, and divers other his good confider-
,;;ons, as also the affeCfuous request of her good filler
tli- quccn's majesty of England, whose earnelt com-
r.:nrlarion was not of leaf moment, betides that of lher
u,(vn natural, her majefly has a certain inclination to
lity the decay of noble houses, and as we heard, by her
ovn leport, has a great deal more pleasure to be the in.
ftruument of the uphold, maintenance, and advancement
o. lie ancient blood, than to have matter miniflered of
the decay or overthrow of any good race. Upon this
irccafion, her majesty the more tenderly looked upon
his reqielt, and her good fifler the queen of England's
ifvourable letter, written for recommendation of his
.-luli, in consideration whereof not only has fie granted
unto him her letter of reilitution, by way of grace, but
"alif liccnfed him to pursue, by way of reduction, the
t'lrmdies provided by the law for ichl as think thcm-
'::i.cs grieved by any judgment, unorderly led, arid to
!1,:e tlie proccf reversed; for examination whereof, it
I l Ip'eafed her majesty presently to afremble yiu the
ilece cftatcs of this her realme, by whose advice, dell-
1 'lion, and decision at her m.ijefty's mind, to proceed
iit ward upon his complaints, as the merits of the daufe,
l1., of the realme, and prartice observed in such cafea,

wpl

wvill bear out. The fum of all your proceedings at this
time, being by that we have heard, thus as it \eir
pointed out, I might here end, if the matter we have in
hand gave me not occasion to fay a few more words, n,:
far different from the fame subject, wherein 1 would e::.
tend the circumstances more largely. If I feared not to
offend her highness, whose presence and modest natrte
abhors long speaking and adulation, and so will compel
me to speak such things, as may feern to tend to any
good and perfet point; and left it (hould be compted to
me. as that I were oblivious, if I Ihould omit to put
you in remembrance, in what part we may accept this,
and the like demonflrations of her gentill nature ; 'whri
gracious behaviour towards all her fubjets, in gen-rji,
may serve for a good proof of that felicity, we may Iluk
for under her happy government folong as it (hall i; eafc
God to grant her unto us; for a good harmony to be had
.in the common weill, the offices between the prince and
the fubjeas mull be reciproque; as by her majesty' pr!;-
dence we enjoy this present peace with all foreign na-
tions, and quietness among yourselves, in such fort,
that I think justly it may be affirmed Scotland. in no
man's age, that presently lives, was in greater trjn-
quillity ; so is it the duty of all us her loving fubjeEs to
acknowledge the fame as a most high benefit, procctd.
ing from the good government of her majesty, declaiing
ourselves thankful for the fame, and rendering to her
majesty such duo obedience, as a just prince may look
for at the hands of faithful and obedient fubjetts. 1
mean no forced nor unwilling obedience, which ! know
her nature does detest, but such as proceeds from lthe
contemplation of her modest kind of regiment, will for
love and duty fake produce the fruits thereof. A good
proof have we all in general had of her majesty's benig-
nity there three years, that she has lived in the govern-
ment over you, and many of you have largely tailed of
her large liberality and frank dealing; on the olrtt
part her highness has had large appearance of your duti-
ful obedience, so it becomes you to continue, as wO
have begun, in confderation of the many notable cxamn

jlre

pies of her clemency above others her good qualities,
and to abhor and detet all false bruites and rumours,
w.vhich are the mofA pestilent evils that can be in any com-
mon weill, and the sowers and inventors thereof. Then
may ve be well assured to have of her an most gracious
princcffe, and the mos faithful and loving fubtjees; and
so both the head and the members, being encouraged
to maintain the harmony and accord of the politic bodies,
v. hereof I made mention befote, as the glory thereof
l:;ill partly appertain to her majesty, so fiall no small
Iraiie and unfpeaka!-le commodity redound therethrough
.o 3you all universally her fubjtfls.

No. X. (Vol. I. p. 317.)
Tlle perils and troubles that may prcfently en-

iue, and( in time to come follow, to the
queen's majesty of England, and tlate of this
realm, upon the marriage of the queen of
Scots to the lord Darlcy.
FlRST, the minds of such as be affeeted to the queen

of Scots, either for herself or for the opinion of her pre-
tence to tlis crown, or for the desire to have change of
tie forme of religion in this realm, or for the difconten.
ration they have of the queen's majesty, or her fuccef-
flop, or of the succession of any other betide the queen
(t Scotts, flall be, by this marriage erected, comforted,
:jrnd induced to devise and labour how to bring their de.
lirs to pass and to make rome eflimate what persons
tlof are,, to the intent the quantity of the danger may
Mr weighed; the fame may be compafled in theoe forts
cither within the realme or without.

The sift are such as are fplcially devoted to the queen

of Scotts, or to. the. lord Darley, by bond of blood and
:tllianco t as.firfR,.all the houfr of Lorrain and Guise for
her part, and the earl of Lennox and hil wvife, all fucl
ir Scotland as be of.thcir blod,, and, have received dif-
VOL, 111, T pleafurts

pleasures by the duke of Chatelberault and the hAmil.
tons. The second are all manner of persons, both ip
this realme and other countries, that are devoted to hei
authority of Rome, and mislike of the religion now re.
ceived; and in these two forts are the substance of
them comprehended, that hlall take comfort in this
marriage.

Next therefore to be confidered what perils and
troubles these kind of men shall intend to this realm.

First, the general scope and mark of all their delites

is, and always (hall be, to bring the queen of Sconts to
have the royal crown of this realm; and therefore,
though the devilbrs may vary amongst themselves for
the compassing hereof, according to the accidents of thi
times, and according to the impediments which they tla;l
find by means of the queen's majesty's actions and :o-
vernmcnts, yet all their purposes, drifts, devises, anr,
prafices, (hall wholly and only tend to make the qi;erc
oi Scotts queen of this realm, and to deprive our fcve.
reign lady thereof; and in their proceedings, there are
two manners to be confidered, whereof the one is fir
,vorfe than the other ; the one is intended by them, tl:;t
either from malicious blindness in religion, or for ,atiu-
tal affection to the queen of Scotts, or the lord Di iley,
do persuade themselves that the said queen of Scotis hat,
presently more right to the crown than our foverci.an
lady the queen, of which fort be all their kindred on
both fides, and all such as are devoted to popery, either
in England, Scotland, Ireland, or elsewhere; the other
is meant by them, which, with less malice, are persuadcd
that the.queen of Scotts hath only. right to be the nest
heir to succeed the queoen'a, majesty and her ilfue, of
which fort few ale without the realm, hut hrie Vwithil,
and. yet of them, not so many as are of the contrary, and
from these two forts I(all. the puril, deyjvi(e, and, pratice,
proceed. From the first, which imagine the queit oi
Scotts to have perpetually right are to be looked foi
these perils, Firfi, is it to be doubted the devil will in.
set some of them to imagine the hurt of the life of out
dear fotereign lady, by such means as the devil siall fug

.,.{{

-*.ft to lem, although it is to be assuredly hoped, that
;iinighty God will, as he hath hitherto, graciously pro-
tedi and preserve her from such dangers? Secondly,
z?:-re will be attempted, by persuasions, by bruits, by
rumnours, and such like, to alienate tie minds of good
vl'jvAls fromr the queen's majesty, and to conciliate
..irn to the queeh of Scorts, and on this behalf the
:.ntiers and the north will be much solicited and la-
::r-d.' Thirdly, there will be attempted causes of some
*:iiutis and rebellions, cfpecially in the north toward
' ,,'iad, so as thereupon may follow some open enter-
:i! set by violence. Fourthly, there will be, by the
; queen's council and friend,, a new league made with
,.e, or Spain, that shall be offensive to this realm,
' a furtherance to their title. And as it is alto very
. y, that they will set a foot as many praflices as they

both upon the frontiers ind in Ireland, to occasion

i' (!ueen's majefly to increase and continue her charge
;,. .:!,y, to retain her from being mighty or potent, and

h* .

rie attempting of all there things, many devises will

' iim.igined' from time to time, and no negligence will
t''l .in appear.

rrom the second forr, wlhich mean no other favour to

ti:. queen of Scotts, but that (he should succeed in litle

·the ueen's majefly, is not much to he feared, but
;! ,t they will content themselves to fee not only the
tiecii' majefly not to marry, and so to impeach it,
bul t., hope, that the queen of Scotts (hall lhave issue,
witich they will think to be more pleafable to all men,
I, .:uiCe thereby the crowns of England and Scotland
f.lih lb united in one, and thereby the occasion of war

I,' ccafe; witlh which persuasion many people imay be
1 '!ticd, and abused to incline tlhemielvvl to the part 9f
t:, qurcuen of Scotts,
' l;e remedies against these perils,

T . tA Dupli-

A Dliplicat.
-A summary of the .conmiltation and advice gisve

by the lords and others of tle privy connCli,
collekted out of the sundry and several fpecetnch
of the said counsellor;.
[4th of June 1 565. Cott. LUb. Cal. B. o fol. 90o.]

Lord Keeper, Mr. Comptroller,
Lord Treasurer, Mr. Vice Chamberlain,

- Derby, Mr. Secretary,
Earls of Bedford, Cave

L .eiceieer, P'eer,

Lord Admiral, Mason.
Lord Chamberlain,

(Qeflions propounded were there two.

T. FIRST, what perils might ensue to the queen':

majesty, or this realm, of the marriage betwixt tii
queen of Scotts, and the lord Dainley.

2. What were meet to be done, to avoid-or remedy
the fame.

To the First.

The perils bein sundry, and very many, 4'ere reduced
by some counCellors into only one.

r. Firll, That'by :lis marriage, the rueen of Scott,

(being not married,) a'rleat number in this realm not of
the worst fhllje&s might he alienated in their minds
from their natural duties to her mqjefty,'to depend upon
the success of this marriage 6f Scotland, as a mean to
cfltalih the succession of hoth the crowns in the ilfte of
the fame atarri.gec, anil so favour all devifcg and Iid.-
tices, that 'fou'ld tend to the advanicmenit of the queen
ofS'otts.

2. Secondly, thit'cnnfidie'ing the chief funnlation ol

them, Zich uhilthered tie mar'le i c'f irD' t)atnIy,
was laid hpoii'tlic truit of f(ilcl 'al ii ' p'apis, as ih

<,1111

o:i!y meant left to reflore the religion of Rome, it was
plainly to be seen, that both in this realm and Scotland,
the papists would mofl favour, maintain, and fortify
this marriage of the lord Darnley, and would, for fur-
the-rance of fation in religion, devise all means and prac-
tices that could be within this realm, to dilftrb the estate
cf, the queen's majesty, and the peace of the realm, and
confequlently to archieve their purposes by force rather
tl: n fail. By sone other, there perils having indeed
e.',y branches, w-re reduced, though oumewhat other-
,,I,, into two fbrts, and these were in nature such as

ci:-v could not be easily fevered the one from the other,

i-ut ',,re knit and linked together, naturally for main.
t3.ni.g the one with the other. The firfl of these fort
of perrils was, that, by this marriage with the lord
DErnlky, there was a plain intention to further the pre-

cr.Ii, title of the queen of Scotts, not only to succeed

th" queen's majefly, as in her best amity (he had pro-
feo;id, hut that to occupy lhe queen's cftate, as when
-:e was in power, (he did manifelly declare.

'1 :e second was, that hereby the Romilh religion

fliould be erected, andincreafed daily in this realm, and
tilcc two were thus knit together, that the furtheranco
an' maintenance of the title flaid, in furthering of the
rl.:giii of Rome within this realm ; and in like manner
tiL furilirance of the fame religion flood by the title,
ior otlieivife the title hlt;l no foundation.

Proofs f lthe firfR.) And to prove that the intention
to advance the title to diflurb the queen's majesty must
needs ensue, was confidelcc that always the intention
ted will of any person is moil manifest, when their
crwcl is greatest, and contrary when power is (mall,
lier1 the inlention and will of every peifon is covered
"(l Icf ftcn. So as when the queen of Scotts power
v'.; greatest, by her marriage with tlie dauphin of

i.:in, lheing afterwards Frelnch kil)g, it mnanifefly ap-
:i,,1.l of ,hat minld she and all her friends were using
Msn n;lnifeily all the means ltat could be, devised to
''n" l and dirpoltlefs thc qilcen's majefly, (iri by
'";,; and p4blzlhiiig lhetfelf in all countries qucen of

T 3 England;

England ; by granting charters, patents, and commii.
lions, with that Rfyle, and with the arms of England,
both the French and, Scotts, wbich charters remain lil!
undefaced ; and to prosecute it with effect, it is known
what preparationsdf. war were made, ahd sent into
Scotland; and.what'other forces were affenihled ir so..
reign countries; yea, in what manner a fllameful peace
wvas made by the French with king-Philip to employ na
the forces of France to pursue all the matters by forct
which by God's providence and the queen's ma!.-i;
tontrary poswer,,were repelled ; and afterwards, by lier
husband's death, her fortune atd power bhing changed,
the intention' began to hide itself, and although by tilh
Scottish' queen's commiftaries,. an accord was made ;t
Edinbrotgh, to:reform all those titles, and claims, ari
pretences, yet to this day, by delays and cavillationi,
the ratification of that.treaty has been deferred. And
so now, as soon as Ihe (hall feel her power,' she will set
the fame again abroad, and.by confidering of such errors
as were committed in the first her friends and :iile;
will" amend 'the ame,;and proceed substantially to her
purpose. By some it was thought plainly, that the
peril was greater of this marriage with the lord Darnley,
being a fubje& of thi" realm;'than with the mightii!
prince abroad, for by thlsj. he being,of this realm, ani;
having for the cause of religion, and other re(pec.,
made a party here, (hould encreafe by force with dinii.
nutiol b's the pbwer of. the realm ; in that whatsoever
power hd could' make by.the facion of the papifi, and
other difconted persons here, (hould be as it were dedult.
ed but of the' power of this realm; and by he manrril:
'ofa fir;anRer, 'she could not.be arlured.of rny part hcrc;
fro s'by'this marlriage (he should have a portion of her own
power to' ferv her turn, and a small portion of ai'vci.
(aries it home iri our own bowvel,. always feeni mort
dangerous than treble the likedabroad,. whureof tlh cx.
aMples are iftot'ii own storics many. that foreign pn:',
'nevr rprevailtd!ih thisrealm, but .with t he lpl o fonit
at h'ome It vwas also remetinhered, that feeing howv lh.
fore this attempt of marriage, it is found, and manail'illy

[ton,

fcrn, that in every corner of the realm, tle fation that

olil favourethl tle Scottifl title, is grown (tout and bold,
ye? seen manifefllyin'this court, both in hall and coiam-
her, it could notsbe hut (except good heed were speedily
given to it) by this marriage, and by the praflice of the
h'iators thereof, the fame faaion would flortly encreafe,
and grow so great anid dahgerous, as the redrrfs thereof
*vould be aminoft defiesiate And to this purpose it was
r! mneinbered, how of late in peruting of the Cubfance of
'Iljuf ice of the peace, in all the countries of tih; realm,
Ccantily a third was found :flly assured to be triflted in
rhe ,natter of'religion,:upon which only firing the queen
Q; Scotts tite doth hang, and some doubt might be,
;'.t the friends of the eall of Lennox, and his had more

n:rivledge hereofthan was thought, and thereby made

avint now in Scotlard; and their party was so great in
Ergland as the queen's majefly durst not attempt to
tr'rary his marriage. And in this fort, was the funm
cf he perils declared, being notwitllfanding more largely
a.d plainly set out, and made so apparent by many sure
arguments, as no one of the council could deny them to
ht but many and very dangerous.

Second Quefiion.

The queflion of this consultation was what were meet

to he done to avoid these perils, or else to divert the-
so,,c thereof from hurting the realm ; wherein there
. ,c a great number of particular devises propounded,
aril vet the more part of them was reduced by some into
three heads.

r. The first thought neceflary by all persons, as the

oaly thing of th!e most moment and efficacy, to remedy
;ll these perils, and many others, and such as without
ii, Io other remedy could be found sufficient, and that
w.n to obtain that the queen's majesty would marry, and
in kc therein' nd Jong delay. ..

. . The second was, to advance, oftahli(h, and fortify

irlh e:d thie profelfon of religion I'botlh in Scotland and
in l:nglnd, sand to ditnin.fli) .wak, and fepble the
coI'Itl' ry, .. ,,,
r , .

3. The

3. The third was, to proceed on sundry things, either

to difappcint and break this intended marriage, or, at
the leaf(, thereby to procure the fame not to be so hurt-
ful to this realm, as otherwise it will be.

The first of these three hati no particular rights in it,

but an earnest and unfeigned desire and suite, with ;,il
huiblenefs, by prayer to Almigh y God, aid advice and
council to the queen's majefly, that fie would defer no
more time from marriage, whereby the good fubjees - f
the realmh might flay their hearts, to' depend ,upon ler
majesty, and the itTue of her body, with6ut which no
surety can be devised to ascer'tain any person of continu-
ance of their families or Ipoterities, to enjoy that which
otherwise flould come to them.

Second, concerning the matters of religion, wherein

both truth and policy wele joined together, had these
particulars.

First, whereas of late the adversaries of religton, in

the realm, have taken occafton to comfort and incrcai):
their faction, both in England: Scotland,' and abroad,
with a rumour and expetlation that the religion-nlall be
(hortly changed in this realm, by means that the bishops,
by the queen's najefly's commandmenit, have of late
dealt fireightly with f6Tme persons of good religion, be-
cauftc they- had forborn to'wear certain apparel, and futr'
like thlngs . being'more of form and'accidents, than o'
any fubflaneo, for thtt it is well known that'her majeuly
had no meanine to comfort the adversaries, but only to
maintain ah unitormiy as well in things extihnal, as in
the l'ubftance, nort yt liath any intention t6 make any
changeof the Irligi'in, as it is cflablifhed by laws. It
was thought by all men very neceefai y, for the fuppteffing
of the pride and arrogancy'of the atdverfaries, indirectly
herebye6 notify, ,by he' special letters to the two arch.
bilhops, tltat her former commandment was only to n.
tain anunm'fol iitly; and-not to give any occasion to *ny
perfonlto, iiisjil'dge'ol her majesly, in the change of any
part of. relligittri but.:that (le did 'detetwminc firitily to
nlaintain the soli th'oufhr'tecligieon as it was'itllatlilhCe

s and

l, i

,' '

'

,

. '

.

.
11 a1 d

in til fc points, sone also wiflged that it might please beh
ithci(i hops, that if they flould. fee that the adversarics
, nitinued in taling occasion to fortify their fareion, that
:it that cafe they ihould use a modcration therein, unril
:i: anext parFlament, at wvh4h time, some good, uni-
ir., ^nd deccnt Qrdeer might Ile devised, and eflablilh-
-, for such ceremonies, so as both uniformity and

-vi;y mlight be retained amongit tlhe clergy.

.'I second means was, that the quondarm biiLrops, irld

. :!i;r:b, which had refused to acknowledgc the queen's

i!.:;f y's power over them, accor4ing. to the law, and
": of late dispersed in the plaiue time to sundry
i:.css abroad, wliere it is lknown fl:ry ce:ale not to ad-

,!'7e their fation, might be returned to the tower, or
:mtie other prison, lwhere. they might not have foch
liirty to fcduce alnd.inveigle the qoeen's m.diglty's sub-

i'1, they d!aily do.

i'he third means was, that where the lbilhops do colm-

.i!:n tliat tlhey dare not execute the ecclefialtical laws,
ti) tile furtherance of religion, for fear of the premu-
inei wherewith the judges and lawyers of the realm,
) ;r not befl asseted in religion, do threaten then, and
in mu;), cafes let not to pinch and deface them, that
ij !n such cafes opened, some convenient authority
n,' ht he given them, from the, queen s majefy, to
:o l;niut diuring her pleasure.

!' hc fourth was, that there were daily lewd, injudi-
n'ujs and unlawfnl books in Engglill hbrouiht from be-
ond seas, and are boldly received, read, and kept, .and
rfli:ially in the North, seducing of great, numrbers, of
gr o! friijch, the like boldners whereof waS never sus-
.red in any other priucefs's time, that some fit'right
oul,:r might bh given to ;void tho fame, and that it
i;igh;t be confidered by the judges, what manner of
liime tih fame is, to maintain Such books, made di-
iecily againll her majefly's iptholity, and maintailing
a foieirln power, contrary to the lawa of the realm. r

rTle fifth wa, thalt where a'great number of monks,
fryars, and such lewd persons, are fled out of Scotland,

an*\

and do serve in England, especially in the North, as !!-
rates of churches, and all such of them as are not fornr,
honest and conformable, may be bani(hed out of riti
realm, for that it appeareth they do sow sedition in
the realm, in many places, and now will increase ;1 cir
doings.

The sixth, where sundry having ecclesiastical living,

are on the other fide the sea, and from thence main', ai
sedition in the realm ; that livings may be better lie-
flowed to the commodity of the realm, upon go.,d
fubjeas.

The seventh is, that the judges of the realm, lian-in

no small authority in this realm, in governance of '-i
property of the realm, might be fworr. to the quccr's
mrajeiy, according to the laws of the realm, ar.d ;;'
thereby they flould for conscience fakei maintain :ite
queen's majesty's authority.

The particulars of the third intention to break anl
avoid this marriaee. or to divert the perils.

First to break this marriage, confidering nothing i:I

likely do it, but force, or fear of lorce, it is thought by
fbme that these means following might occasion Llic
brc.ch of he marriage,

i. That the earl of Bedford repair to his charge.
2, That the works at Berwick he more advaince.!
3. That the garrison be: there increased.
4, That all the wardens put their frontiers in o:(.:
with speed, to be ready at an hour's warning.

5. That some noble person, as the duke of Norfoll:,

or the earl of Salop, or fucli other, be ftnt into 'ol;-
shire, to be lieutcnant-generld in the North.

6. 'That preparations be made, of a power, to be in

readiness to serve, either at Berwick, or to insaddc
Scotland.

7. That prefsntly Lady Lennox be committed to

Come place, wl:tie (le may be kept from giving or re-
ceiving of intelligence.

9. 'hat the earl of Lennox and his son may he sent
for, and required to be sent home by the queen of Sc:ot.

accordiS

srcording to the treaty; and if they shall not come,
thi: to denounce to the queen of Scots the breach of the
tr, ary, and thereupon to enter with hoflility ; by which
proceeding, hope is conceived (so the fame be done in
.ieeds and not in (hews) that the marriage will be
aveided, or at the leafi that it may be qualified from
rrany perils: and whatsoever is to be done herein, is to
be erecuted with speed, whilst The has a party in Scot-
,11 1 that favoureth not the marriage, and before any'
l:ague made by the queen of Scots with France or
?.' in.

Some other allows well of all these proceedings, saving
', proceeding to hoflility, but all do agree in the reft,
,ijr, illfo to there particularities following:

i,, That the earl's lands upon his refusal, or his son's

sprlllng), should be seized, and beflowed in gift or cuf-
only, as lhall please her majesty, upon good fubjeds,

'i. That all inanifeft favourers of the earl, in the

;,ir l;, or elsewhere, be inquired for, and that they be,
hy lundry means, well looked to..

ii. That enquiry be made in the North, who have

til. teward(hip of the queen s majesty's lands there, and
that no person, defervingmifiruft, be'fuffered to have
"orel nance or ruleof,any of her fubjeatsor lands'in the
Nirth, but only to retain their fees, and more trufty-per-
f '' liave rule of the fame people's lands.

i . Th.at all frequent pallages into this realm, 'to and

f;nr;i Scotland, be refIrained to all Scottifshmen, Taving
iuch as have fafe-conduat,or be especially recommended
firol Mr. Randolph, as favourers of the realm. ,'

14. That some intelligence be used -with such ,in

S.otland, as favour not the marriage, andi they com-
trrted from time to time. , : l ' I i

rS. That the queen's majefly's houthold,;chamber,
mld pensioners, be better seen unto, to avoid ~broadind
uwcm;ncly fpcech uscd by sundry against the ftat'. of tlih
r w.'tir , i, ' ' '

.,,,. ' !l t l';1" i i; "
(

16. That the youngcr son of the earl of Lonnox, AMr

Charcls, be rcmembcrcd to fume place vbhtere ht may
bt icltit comring. . e., * i i,,

.*,;, *

, ' i ,. .

.: i -- . o ^. *
..!.T hat

7. That confidering the facion and title ofthequc;.

,of Scotts lhath now of long time received great favour,
an;; continued, by the queen's majefly's favour herein to
tble queen of Scotts and her ministers, and the lady Ca-
tharine, whom the said queen of Scotts accompted !i; a
competitor unto her in pretence of title, it may please
the queen's majefly, by some exterior a&, to shew lome
remifi'on of her displeasure to the lady and to the eaid
of Hartford, that the queen of Scotts thereby may hnd
some change, and her friends put in doubt of fur'th!
proceeding therein.

18. That whosoever [hall be lieutenant in the North,
Sir Ralph Sadler may accompany him.

19. That with speed the realm of Ireland may be
committed to a new governor.

go. Finally, that there advices being confidered b;.

lier majesty, it may please her to choose which of ther.
ihe liketh, and to put them in execution in deeds, and
not to pass them over in consultations and speeches.

For it is to be allured, that her adversaries will u;c

all means to put their intention in execution. Some bI'
pralice, some by force, when time (hall serve, and in
time c.;n serve so well the queen's majesty to interrupt
the perils, as now at tih firit, before the queen oi Scitts
purpoles be fully fettled.

No. X. (Vol. I. p. 327.)
Randolph to the E;arlof Leicc{ter, from El;dI

burgli the 31 ft of July 1565.

[Cott. Lib. Cal. b. ix. fol. zx6. An original.]

MAY it pleale your lordlhip, I have received yo0t

lordlhip's letter by my fcrvant, fuflicient teflimony of
your lordtlip's favour towards me, whereof I thinl; my-
(elf always so assured, that what other miflhap foevcr
befal me, I have enough to comfort myfielf witlh;
though I have not at this time received neither accold-
ing to the need I flana, nor the necefity of the fcrvice

thil

t!,ait I am enmloyed in, I will rather pass it, as 1 may
with patience, than trouble your lordship to be further
litrer for me, when there is so little hope that any good
v.il be done for me. I doubt not but your lordship
iathl heard by such information as I have given from
hence, what the present slate of this ccuntry is, how
tlhi, queen is now become a married wife, and her hus-
hand, the self-same day of his marriage, made a 'ring.
in tbheir desires, hitherto, they have found so much to
;heir contentment, that if the reft succeed and prosper
,,ccordingly, they may think themselves much hap-
pier, than there is appearance that they alall be; so
i:.any discontented minds, so much miiiiking of the
rubje's to have these matters thus ordered, and in this
fort to be brought to pass I never heard of any marriage i
so little hope, so little comfort as men do talk was never
seen, at any time, when men should moi have (hewed
themselves to rejoice, if that consideration of her own ho-
nour and well of her country had been had as appertained
in so weighty a cafe. This is now their fear, the over-
throw of religion, the breach of amitie with the queen's
inajeity, and the deftruaion of as many of the nobility
as (he hath mifliking of, or that he liketh to pitch a
qurrel unto. To fee all these inconveniencys ap-
proaching, there are a good number that may sooner
lament with themselves, and complain to their ncigh-
Iurs, than be able to find remedie to help them, Come
;:.temnpt with all the force they have, but are too weak
to du any good, what is required otherways, or what
rieans there is made your lordflip knoweth ; what will
b. answered, or what will be done therein, we are in
great doubt, and though your intent be never so good
unto us, yet do we so much fear your delay, that our
ruin lhall prevent your support when council is once
talken. Nothing Ib needful, as speedy execution. Upon
tihe queen's majelty, we wholly depend, in her majesty's
h;ands it flandeth to Cave our lives, or to susser us to
pclilh ; greater honour her majecty cannot have, than
in that which lietlh in her majesty's power to do for
's; tile fums are not great, the numbers of men are
VOL. 11Al. ' not

not many thatwe desire ; many will dayly be found, tii,'
this will be some charge; men grow dayly, though, at
this time, I think her majesty flall lose but few; i],r
friends here being once taken away, where will her ml-
jefty find the like ; I speak least of that which I think
is most earnestly intended by this queen, and her hus-
band, when by him it was lately said, that he cared more
for the papifis in England, than he did for the protefnlntc
in Scotland; if therefore, his hopes. be so great in ti;e
papists of England, what may your lordship believe thiat
he thinketh of the proteflants there ; for his birth, fcr
his nurritour, for the honour he hath to be of kin !,J
the queen my mistress, if in preferring those that are L,'
queen's majelties worst fubjeas to those that are hli
best, he declareth what mind he beareth to the queen ,
majesty's self, any man may fay it is flendcrly rewarded;
and his duty evil forgotten i he would now seem to ce
indifferent tc both the religions, the to use her m fs,
and he to come sometimes to the preaching; they me: '
married with all the folemnities of the popilh tiin.,
saving that he heaid not the mass; his speech and talk
argueth his mind, and yet would he fain seem to tih:
world that he were of some religion i his words to all
men, againfi whom he conceiveth any displeasure how
unjufi soever it be, so proud and fpitfull, that rather
he feemeth a monarch of the world, than he that, nor
long since, we have seen and known 'the lord Danlry i
he looketh now for reverence of many that have little
will to give it him ; and some there are that do give it,
that think him little worth of it. All honour that may
be attributed unto any man by a wife, he hath it wholly
and fully; all praises that may be spoken of him, ht
lacketh not from herself; all dignities that the can in.
due him with, which are already given and grant-
ed ; no man pleafeth lier that contenteth not him ; ai,,
what may I fay more, the hath given over to him her
whole will, to be ruled and guided as himself best hlteth;
tie can as much prevail with him, in any thing that is
against his will, as your lordihip may with me to per-
fuade that 1 thould hang niyfelf i thit lat dignity out of

iliil,

hand to have been proclaimed king, the would have it
deferred until it were agreed by parliament, or he had
beer himself zi years of age, that things done in his
nsme might have the better authority. He would, in
no cafe, have it deferred one day, and either then or
never; whereupon this doubt is risen amongst our men
of law whether the being clad with a hurband, and her
lhuband not twenty one years, any thing without par-
liament can he of strength, that is done between them;
up.in Saturday at afternoon there matters were long in de.
bating. And before they were well resolved upon, at nine
;iours at night, by three heralds, at found of the trumpet
hjc was proclaimed king. This was the night before
rhe marriage , this day, Monday at twelve of the clock,
die lords all that were in the toun, were present at the
?roclaiming of him again, where no man said so much
as A.nen, saving his father, that cried out aloud God
fan'e his queen The manner of the marriage was in
t!hi fort, upon Sunday in the morning between five and
fix, lhe was conveyed by divers of her nobles to the
cli3psi; the had upon her back the great mourning
gown of black, with the great wide mourning hood, not
uilike unto that which lhe wore the doulfull day of the
burial of her husband : he was led into the chapell by the
.i -le of Lenox and Athol, and there was flI left untill her
iulbind came, who also was conveyed by the famo
lords, the minister priefls two, do there receive lhem,

b.:l hands are asked the third time, and an inllrumene

tken by a notour that no man (aid against them, or
allegird any cause why the marriage might not proceed.
'1' c words were spoken, the rings which were three,
tle middle a rich diamond, wele put upon her fin-
et: ; they kneel together, and many prayers said over
!!,nl, file tairitth out the mats, and he taketh a kits,
:and lecveth her there, and went to her chamber; whither
wihlin a space flle followerh and being required, aco
coiling to .the folemnily, to call off her cares and leave
irile those forrowfull garments, and give Ilerfelf toa
Ii;. e pleasant life, after Cflie pretty lefufall, more 1 be-
yie c for manicr fake than griefQf heatrt, (he fuff:'iid

U z ihett

them that flood by, every man that could approach, to
take out a pin, and so being committed to her ladies,
changed her garments, but went not to bed, to fignifie
to the world, that it was not lust that moved them to
marry, but only the necessity of her country, not, if
God will, long to leaveit destitute of an heir, Sufpi-
cious men, or such as are given of all things to make
the woift, would that it (hould be believed, that they
knew each other before that they came there; I would
not your lordship should so believe it, the likelihoods are
so great to the contrary, that if it were possible to fee
such an ait done, I would not believe it. After the mar-
riage followeth commonly great cheer and dancing;
to their dinner they were conveyed by the whole rn-
bility the trumpets found ; a largess cried; mony
throwvn about the house in great abundance, to such zs
were happy to get any part; they dine both at ont ta-
ble, (he upon the upper hand, there serve her these earls
Athole fewer, Morton carver, Craufoord cup-bearcr;
these serve him in like offices, earls Eglington, Caffils,
and Glencairn ; after dinner they danced a while, and
then retired themselves till the hour of supper; and as
they dined so do they sup, tome dancing there was, and
so they go to bed; of all this I have written to your lord
flhip I am not oculatus teflis, to this, but of the verity
your lordlhip shall not need to doubt, howsoever I camn
by it; I was sent for to have been at the fupier, but
like a currinl or uncourtly earle I refused to be thcen;
and yet that which your lord(hip may think might move
me much, to have had the fight of my mistress, of wonom
there eighteen days by jult account I got not a fight, 1
am ny lord taken by all that fort as a very evil person,
which in my heart I do well allow, and lIke of myfrll
the better, for yet can I not find either hones or gtred
that liketh their doings. I leave at this time further to
trouble your lordlhip, craving pardon for my lognl
silence, I have more ado than I am able to discharge, I
walk now more abroad by night than by day, and thet
day too little todifcltarge oiyfelfof that which I conccive,
or receive in the night. As your lorddlip, I am suer, i«

parL.'ler

pairt3aer of ruch letters as I write to Mr. Secretary, f,)
-hat 1 trust that he shall be to this. to save me of a little
dhbour, to write the tame again, most humbly I take my
iave at Edinburgh, the last day of July 1565.

No. XII. (Vol. I. p. 331.)
!,cltt:r of the Earl of Bedlford to the honourable

Sir Williiam Cecil, knt. her ntajdlly's prin-
ci.al secretary, and one of her highncfs's
pri"y counCil.
[zd us Sept. 1565. FPaper-office from the original.]
AFTER my hearty commendations, this day at noon

c., rain Brickwell came hither, who brought with him
tiie queen's majesty's letters containing her full refolu-
:! -, and pleasure for all things lie had in charge to
give information of, saving that for the aid of the lords
of the congregation there is nothing determined, or at
ite leaIt expressed in the fame letters, and for that par-
.i't received I this morning, a letter fuhfcribed by the
;,ike the earl of Murray, Glenearne, and others, craving
t. he holpen with 3oo harquburfyers out of this gar-
:son, for their better defencc. And albeit, I know
riiit well the goodness of their cause, and the queen's
Inajelty our sovereign's good will, and care towards
the m; and do also undurlland that it werevet y requisite
to haive them holpen, for that now their cause is to be in
this manner decided, and that it now flandeth upon
tlheit utter overthrow and undoing, since the queen's
prty is at the leafd 3ooo, and they net much above

0moo; betides that the queen hath harquebufyers, and

they have none, and do'yet want the power that the
eail of Arguyle (hould bring to thenm, who is not yet
joined with theirs; I have thereupon thought good to
p'liy you to be a means to learn her majefly's pleasure
In this behalf, what, and how, I flall answer them, or
,.tlcerwife deal in this matter, now at this their ex-

U 3 trenle

treme necessity. For, on the one fide, lyeth thereupon
their utter ruin and overthrow, and the miferahle sub.
version of religion there ; and, on the other fide, t.
adventure so great and weighty a matter as this i-
(albeit it be but of a few soldiers, for a small timt'
without good warraun'e, and thereby to bring, perad-
wenture, upon our heads some wilful warrs, and in iht
mean time to leave the place unfurnished, (having in the
whole but ?.oo) without any grant of new supply for
the fame.; and by that means alfb, to leave the marches
here the more subjef to invasion, while in the mean
season new helps are preparing; to this know not I
what to fay or how to do. And so much more I mar-
vel thereof, as that having so many times written touch-
ing this matter no refo!ute determination cometh. And
so between the writing, and looking for answer, the
occasion cannot pass, but must needs proceed and ha',c
success. God turn it to his glory; but surely all mtns
reason hath great cause to fear it. Such a push it is no.
come unto, as this little supply would do much good to
advance God's honour, to continue her ma.jefy's great
and careful memory of them, and to preserve a grica:
many noblemen and gentlemen. If it he not nov
helpen, it is gone for ever. Your good will and affi;c-
tiori that way I do nothing miflruft, and herein (hall
take' uch good advice as by any means I can. I re-
ceived fromn these lords two papers inclosed, the efifct
whereof hAll a'ppear unto you. For those matters that
captain Brickwell brought, I shall answer you by my
next, and herewith fend you two letters from Mr. Ran-
dolpli, both'iJeceived this day. By him you shall hear
that the protestants are retired from Edenborough, fur-
thet6 fs. Sol hope byor resolution for their aid fh.,l
come in'timel, If it'come with speed, for that they will
not nowl lo pirefetitly need them; and so with may
heatrty'ihahhak 'crmmit'you to God. From Berwic!c,
this td of Sept. r56- '

No. XIII. (Vo1. I. p. 33 .)
The Queen to the Earl of Bedford.

[12 SeCp. 565. Paper-offce.]

iUON the adverti'ements lately received frrim yotm,

:.;!, fuh other things as came also froi the lord Scrope
:, Thomas Randolph, and upon the whole matter
: confidered, we have thus determined. We will,
. .'i all the speed that we can, fend to yeu 3oon 1. to be

t!'it uscd. If you (hall certai,'ly underiland that the

r .I of Murtay hath such want ol iloncy, as the imptrejt-
.?7 to him of Icoo, . might :lndr him in tlead fur the
i ii) to defend himself, you fiall prelently let hiln
i.'.':iy to underlianu, that you w il, aa of yourself, let

h.

: hive so much, and so we wvill that you let him
1.-, in the most secret fort that, you can, whlin tile

C.: (

un shall come to yon, or if you can, by any

::, means, advance him some part tlereof beforc-

I...n

Tlie other 2000 1. you fhall.caufe to bje kept whole,

uifpent, if it be not that you (hall fee necel:tary cause
t lm nptre some part thereof to tile now nunbers of the
i.;m footmen and zoo horlemen or to the caithng out
.; wa.;es of such workmen, as by sickness, or ottlhr-

c, ought to be discharged. And where we pi2ceive,

, yo,ur sundry letters, the earnefl requelt of the said

' i: ' Murray and his associates, that they might have,
.'! 'h Icalt, 300 of our foldicrs, to aid them. And that
v',l also write, that rho' we would not command you
to :,ve them aid, yet if we would but wink rt your
',!;; herein, and seem to blame you for altcmpting
i.11 things, as you with the help of others flould bring
h irt, you doubt not but things would do wvll ; yout
;.,iJ; unietirtand for a truth, that we have no intention,
ir lrny refpeets, to maintain any other piinccs sub-
l'!', to take arms againit their sovereign i neither
.'il we willingly do any thing to give occ;iion to

i
i,: wars betwixt us and clha prince, whiclh las caused
*· o lotbear, hitlierto, to !ive you any power to let

tlheln

them be aided with any men. But now, confidering vw.

take it, that they are pursued, notwithstanding tih'ir
humble submission and offer to be ordered and tried h,
law and justice, which being refused to them, they are re-
tired to Dumfrefe, a place near our weft marches, as i,
feemeth there to defend themselves, and adding there-
unto the good intention that prefenrly the French kipn
pretendeth, by fending one of his to join with some rne
of ours, and jointly to treat with that queen, and to
induce her to forbear this manner of violent and ';-
gorous proceeding against her fubjeas, for which pur.
pose the French ambassador here with us has lately
written to that queen, whereof anfwcr is daily loc.ikt
for to the intent in the mean time the said lords flou'.,
not be oppressed and ruined for lack of some help 'o
defend them, we are content and do authorize, if ici
shall fee it necessary for their defence, to let them ':.
of your own adventure, and without notifying that you
have any diretion therein from us) to have the nuritiic
of 300 soldiers, to be taken, either in whole bands, or
to be drawn out of all your bands, as you (ha!! ice
catfe. And to cover the matter the better, you (hall find
these numbers to Carlisle, as to be laid there in garrison,
to defend that march, now in this time that such powtrs
are on the other part drawing to those frontiers, and fr,
fl om thence as you (hall fee cause to diret of, the firu
nrumbers, or any of them may most covertly repair to
the said lords, when you mfall expressly advertize, l:l;tt
you fend them that aid only for their defence, an'i not
therewith to make war against the queen, or to do an)
thing that may offend her person i wherein you fli.ll so
precisely deal with them, that they may perceive your
care to be fucfi as if it Ihould otherwise appear, your
danger should be so great as all the friends you lave
could not be able to save you towards us. And so we
assure you our conscience noveth us to charge you f(
to proceed with them ; for oiherwife than to prefcivc
them from ruin, we do not yield to give them aid of
money or men: and yet we would not that either o(
these were known to be our a., but rather to be covcrte!
with your own tdefie and attempt,

No. XIV. (Vol. II. p. s.)
Randolph to Cecil, from Edinburgh, 7th Feb.

1565-6.

[An original.]

Mh humble duty confidered; what to write of the

[I'cl'enr state of the country I am so uncertain, by reason
f the daily alterations of mens minds, that it maketl
mr much flower than otherwise I would. Wi'iin
tihee few days there was some good hope, that:th s'
queen would have (hewed some favour towards the lords,
ant that Robert Melvin should have returned unto them
with comfort upon some conditions. Since that tihe,
tltie are come out of France Clernau by land, and
Tilornetcn by sea; the one from the cardinal, the other
irm;n the biflop of Glasgow, Since whose arrival
rt.' :hr can there be goed word gotten, nor appearance
ns' any good intended them, except that they be
a!-;i co perfwade the queen's majesty. our sovereign
to make her heir apparent to the croun of England.

w.rile of this nothing less than I know, that flio

L.lth Cppken And by all means that lhe thinketh
the bht doth travaile to bring it to pars. There is
a band lately devised, in which the late pope, the
emperor, the king of Spain, the duke of Savoy, with
*,vce's princes of Italy, and the queen mother furpeaed
to be of the fame confederacy to maintain papistry
t!lroeligout Chrifliandom; this band was 'sent out of
I'iralce by Thorneton, and is fubfribed'biiythis qijen,
the copy thereof remlaining with her, and tlie 'principal
t1 he returned very fhortlie, as I hiea', by Mt. Steljhetn
Wilson, a fit minister for such a dtviliflh devise; if the
cec'pic hereof may be gotten, that (hall be lehnt ast'I 'on-
/tnlienrly may. Monsieur Rambollet came to tliis toun
upon Monday, he fploltethat light to th qiueen and lier
ltlband, but not long; the next day he h 'ld long con-
fIrences with them hoth, but nothing catme'o tie knowu
lIclgec of-any whereof they intreateld. I cannot spe.ak
w"ith any that hath any hope that there will be any good

done

done for the lords by him, though St is laid that he hath
very good will to do so to the uttermost of his power.
H1e is lodged near to the court, and liveth upon the
queen's charges.Upon Sunday the order is given, whereat
means made to many to be present that day at the mars.
Upon Candlemas day there carried their candles, wits
the queen, her husband, the earl of Lennox, and rarl
Athol; divers other lords have been called together ,nd
required to be at the mars that day, some have promifld,
as Cassels, Mongomerie, Seton, Cathnefs. Others have
refused, as Fleming, Levingfton, Lindsay, Huntly and
Bothel; and of them all Bothel is the floutefi, but
worst thought of; it was moved in council that mass
should have been in St. Giles church, which 1 bc'lev'
was rather to tempt men's minds, than intended indcc.!
She was of late minded again to fend Robert Melvin to
negotiate with such as she trufteth in amongst the queer's
majesty's fubjeCs, of whose good willis this way I t: i£i
that the bruit is greater than the truth, but in these mat-
ters her majesty is too wife not in time to be ware, and
provide for the worsl; some in that country are thought
to be privie unto the bands and confederacie of which I
have written, where of I am sure there is some things,
thi' perchance of all I have not heard the truth ; in this
court divers quarles, contentions, and debates, nothing
Co much fought as to maintain m;fchief and disorder.
David yet retaineth fill his place, not without heart grief
to many, that fee theitr overeign guided chiefly by fuel.
a fellow ; the queen hath utterly refused to do any good
to my lord of Argyll, and it is, Caid that Ihall be the firfe
voyage that fie will make after' ie is delivered of being
with child ; the bruit is common that fie is, but hardly
believed of many, and of ihis, I can assure you, ltat
there have of late appeared some tokens to the contr;ly,

.

. .,

* ) ,,' ,4 1 . ,
. i; a,,* '

No. XV. (Vol. II. p. 1l. 14.)

i) IL of a letter from the Earl of Bedford and Mr.

Tho. Randolph to the lords of the council of
England from Barwick, 27th of March x566.
Ain original in the Cotton. Library, Caligula,
b. o. fol. 372.

[a7th March 1566.]

.ity itpleafeyour Honours,
IEARING of so maynie matters as we do, and fynd-

:n e such varietie in the reports, we have myche ado to
(!' :rne the veritie i which maketh us the flower and
i.oriher to put any thing in wryting to the enrente we
would not that your honours, and by you the queen's
ij,ieftie, our fovereigne, Ihould not be advertised but
f r'le verie trothe as we can possible. To this end we
' -;:lt good to fend up captain Carewe, who was in
i '*iLourge at the time of the last attemptate, who spoke
t. ; with diverse, and after that with the queen's
i;:f and her hutband conforme to that, which we have
!L.,-,rc(d by others and' know by this reporte, we fend
'. I'nie, confirmed by the parties self, hant were there

.'!nt and affyflers unto there that were executors of

the '.ee.
''lls we fynde for certain, that the queen's husband

uI" , entered into a vehement suspicion of David, that

by lihym some thynge was committed, which was molt
;agI;(tI; the queen's honour, and not to be borne of his
1|' :I:, fyrtfe communicated his mynde to George Duglas,
wlho fynding liis sorrows so great fought all the means
he cclide to put some remedie to his griefs; and com-
municating the fame unto my lord Ruthven by the Iing's
onolnandment, no other waye coulde be found then
I'Tt l).vid should be taken out of the waye. Wherein
a- w-,IE so earnef and daylye prefled the fame, that no
CIlc could be had untyll it was put in execution. To
t!li hIat was found good, that the lord Morton, and lord
Lillfa.ye (hould be made privie to th' intente that theie
:'li' l1 have their fricnds at hande, yf nead« required;

which

which caused them to elfemble so nmayny, as tlitt
thought fufficint againlt the tyme, that this dctcrmind.
ticn of theirs should be put in executioune . which v. ,,
determined the ixth of this inflante 3 dales afor. i,c
parliament niould begyne, at which time the s.jy',
lords were allured that the eries Argyle, Molray,,
Rothes and their complyces 1holde have been foirfittd,
yf the king could not be persuaded through thia isca:s
te be their friends; who for the defyre he had that :li,
intent lflould take efftt th' one waye was content to
yielde, without all difficultie. to 'other, with this co:.
dition, that theie flould give their coDfentts, that li

anight have the crowne matrimonial. He was si. i,-.
patient to fee thfce things he saw, and were da)lye
brought to his cares, that he dayly prelfed the fail lord
Ruthiven, that there might be no longer delay: and to
the intent that myght manifefie unto the world, tlat lie
approved the a&e, was content to be at the doing of
that hirnmfelf.

Upon Saturday at night neire unto viii of the clocl;

the king conveyeth himself, the lord Ruthven, Gcorg
Duglafs, and two others, throwe his own chamber by
the privy slayers up to the queen's chamber going to
which there is -a cabinet about xI foot square in thi
fame a little low reptoing bed and a table, at the whidl
theyr were fitting at (upper the queene, the lady Arile,
and David with his capp upon his head. Into thie :a
binet there cometh in the king and lord Ruthen, %ilo
Wvilled David to come forth, faying that was no pl..
for him. T'he queen said, that it was her will. ltr
howtband anfwerede, that yc was against her honour.
The lord Ruthe, flaid, that he should lerni better lii
deutic, and offering to have taken him by the armi
David took the queen by the blychtes of hergownv anr
put hinifelf; behind the queen who wolde gladlee 11h.e
saved him' but the king having loosed hia band, and
holding her in his arms, David was thrust out tf tli
cabinet throw the bed chamber into'the chamber of P'
fens, what were the lord Morton, :or4 bindfe), w.ho
intending thatanight to have eferved, hym, and tih, lext

day to hang him, so mane being about him, that bore
him evil will, one thrust him into the boddie with a
dagger, and after hyrna great many others, so that he
had in his bodie above wonds. It Is told. for cer-
tayne, that the king's own dagger was left flicking in
him. Whsather he fluck him or n6t we cantot be here
certayn. He was not flayne in the queen's prefens, as
was said, but going down the ftayres out of the chamber
of prefens.

There remained a long tyme with the queen her

howvband and the lord Ruthen. She made, as we
here, great interceflion, that he h6old have rio harm.
She blamed greatlte her howlband that was the actor of
so foul a deed. It is said, that he did answer, that
David had more coripanie of her boddie than he for the
space of two months; and therefore for her honour and
his own contentment he gave his consent that he (hould
be ttken away. " It is not" (faythe Ale) " the wcrn in's
" part to seek the husband," and therefore in that the
faiut was his own. He said that whien lie came, (he
either wold not or made herself tick. " Well," faythe
Ile, " you have taken your lalt of me and your fare-
" well." Then were pity, fayth the lord Ruthen, he
Is your imaefty's huffand and must yield dude to eacl
other. " Why may I not," faythe the, " leage liim as
" well as your wife did her husband ?' Other have
done the like. Tho lord Ruthen said that file was law-
hilly divorced from her husband, and for ino such cnafe
as the king found himself greve. Befydes this man was
mean, batre, enemie to the nobility, flame to her, and
dcltruflion'to herfe.lfdnd country. " Well," faith (he,
" thaL iiall be dear hlude to Come of you, yf his be
" fpylt." God forbid, fayth the lord Ruthen for the
mIore your grace fhowe yourself offended, the world
will judge the worse.

Her hulband this tyme fepaketh litle, herself contl-

htially weeppth. The lord Rurhen being ill at eafi and
vMeat callethler t drlnk: and faytle, " Tlis. I mutl do
" witli youlh maijet8n pardon,.' and poeradti, hlr. in

'o;, 111,.- . .

. X ,,,
:, . 'the

the best fort he could, that she would pacify herself.
Nothing that could be said could please her,

In this mean time there rose a nombre in the court;

to pacify which there went down the lord Ruthen, who
went ftrayt to the eries Huntly, Bothwell and Atholl, to
quiet them, and to assure them from the king that no.
thing was intend against them. These notwithfland.
ing taking fear, when theie heard that my lord Murray
wold be there the next day, and Argile meet them,
Huntly and Bothwell both get out of a window and so
depart. Atholl had leave of the king with Flyfh and
Glandores (who was lately'called Deyfley the person cf
Owne) to go where they wold, and bring concorde out
of the court by the lord of Lidington. Theie went that
night to such places where they thought themselves in
most fauftie.

Before the king leaf' talk with' the queen, in tht

hering of the lord Ruthen she was content that he fhculd
lie with her that night. We lsnow'not how he X hitm
self, but came not at her, and excused bymfelf to his
friends, that he was so fleepie, that'hec coild not walke
in due season,

There were in this companie two that came in with

the king the one Andrewe Car of Fawdenfide, whom
the queen fayth would have ftroken her with a dagger,
gnd one Patrick Balentine, brother to the juf:ce clerk,
who alto her grace fayth, offered i dag against her helly
with the cock down. We have been earnefily in hand
..with the lord Ruthen to know the varitie; but he as-
fureth us of the contrarie There were in the quel,'t
chamber the lord Robert, Arthur Arfkin, one or two
others. They at the firlt offering to make.a defener,
the lord Ruthven drawd his dagger, and 4 mo weapons
then, that were not drawn nor fcen in her .prefcni, as
we are by this lord aflured.

[The letter afterwards gives an account of the flight

to Dunbar Castle, whither resorted ,tip lords Hklntly and
Botlwell:' That the earl of Morton ,nt, lord Ruthven
:fnd thtmfelves left by the king for aJl his fair. promifts,
Ibonds' aind'"alrcriptions, .Thbit'tl h ad protestcd belor

*'~ 1 '
* .' ' ' ....' tilh

e council, that he was never conrenting to the death
oi David, and that it is fore against his will: " That of
' tle great Cubfiance David had there is much spoken,
' Come fay in gold to the value of i " f,. His apparel

wa'. very good, as it is said, 18 pair of velvet hose.
His chamber well furnithed, armour, dagger, pyflo-
lttts, liarquebufes, az swords. Of all this nothilng
i (poyld or lacked Caving 2 or 3 daggers. He had the
: custody of all the queen's letters, which all were deli-

v vered unlocked upon. We-hear of a juill, that be

" had honging about his neck of Come price, that can-
' not be heard of. He had upon his back, when he

was flayn, a night gown of damask furred, with a
"' fztteh d&ubler, a hole of ruret yelvet."]

No. XVI. (Vol. II p, 23.)
Part of a letter from Randolph to Cecil, Jan.'i6,

1565-6..

- I ANNOT tell what mifliking of late there hath
keen between her grace and her hulband, he prefflth
carneftly for the matrimonial crown, which ihe is lotli
haltily to grant but willing to keep fomewhatin fIore,
until the know how well he is worth to enjoy such a'so-
veieignty; and therefore it is thought that the parlia,
niect fora time .hall be deferred,t ut hereof I can write
no certaintyi ' i'
From Mr. Randolph's letter to Secretary Ceci.

(4 April r566, Paper-office, from the orlginal.]

'I'ilE juflice-clerlk in hard terms, more for ills br.-

thc:'s cause than any desert, and as faras I can hear the
ki11n of all other in worst, for neither hath the quean
good opinion oihim for attempting of any tiling that
wv;as against her will, nor the people that he hqth denijd
so m:iniftfl a matter, being Opoveed tobe done bY his cpcq.
itandnmcnt, and nivw himself to be the accuser' and pur-

x , fucr

suer of them that did as he willed them. This Sc:,.
that was executed, and Murray that was yeferday,.
raigned, were both accused by him. It is written to me,
for certain,' by one, that upon Monday las spoke .vii!»
the queen, that the is-determined that the house of Len-
nox shall be as poor in Scotland as ever it was i'
earl continueth sick, fore troubledin mind i he fa;ith
in the a'l'y, his fern hath been once with hi., and he
once with the queen, mnce she came to the castle. The
queen hath now seen all, the covenants and bands that
yaiffth between the king and the lords, and now findeth
that his declaration, before her and council, of.his innoe.
ctency of the death of David was false. and grievoully
o'fendcd that, by their means, he lhould. seek to cmae
to the- crown matrimonial.
Part .m a letter from Randolph to Cecil, frolii

3.erwick, 25 April 1566. ·

Tl-lERE is continually very much speech of tht

discord between the oueen and her-hufband, so for sdat,
that is commonly 'i'd andb:elieved of'himfelf,- that lMr
James' Thorntoh'is gofie to Rome to fue'for a divo;c.
between themn. It is very certain that Malevafier had
not fjjoelen with him within these three 'days. HI is
ticithei accompanied 'nor lookedupoil of any nobleman:
attended upobn hy certain'of his' on servants, and lix
or seven of 'the guard; at liberty to sid; and go wllere
·aid '(vliat'iic will, they have no liope yet among tlem-
felve's!of quletnefs ' " :

-- David's brother 'nnmed Joseph, who came this

wjay'with 'Malevafier, unknbwn to any man licrc, is
becomc secretary in Isis brother's place.
- 1 *'MVSEV

BRITANXICVM

No. XVII. (Vol. II. p. 27.)

The Earl of Bedford to Cecil, 3d August 1566,

THE queen and her husband agree after the old man-

ner, or rather worse. She eateth but very seldom
with him, lieth not, nor keepeth company with him,
nor loveth any such as love him. He is so far out of
her books, as at her going out of the caftie of Edinburgh,
to remove abroad, he knew nothing thereof. It cannot
for modesty, nor with the honour of a queen, be re-
ported what the said of him. One Hickman, an English
merchant there, having a water spaniel which was very
good, gave him to Mr. James Melvill, who afterwards,
f:.r the pleasure, which he saw the king have in such
kind of dogs, gave him to the king. The queen there-
upon fell marvellously out with Melvill, and.lled him
diffcmbler and flatterer, and said she could not truRt one
who would give any thing to such one as (he loved not.

The Earl of Bedford to Cecil, Aug. 8.

TH disagreement between the queen and her hulband

continueth, or rather increafeth. Robert Melvill draw-
ing homewards, within twelve miles of Edinburgh,
could not tell where to find the queen; sith which time
fle is come to Edinburgh, and had not twelve horses
attending on her. There was not then, nor that I can
heal of since, any lord baron, or bther nobleman in her
company. The king her husband is gone to Dumferm-
!in.,, and paffeth his time as well as he may; having at
is fa;rewell, such countenance as would make a husband
hi:lvy at the heart.

,Wir John ForfRer to Cecil, 8 Sept. from Berwick.

THI queen hafil her.hufband in fma lleftimation, and

the earl of Lennox came not in the queen's fight since
the death of Dayy.

.'',

Sir Johll Forfer to Cecil. I th Dec.

THE earl of Bothwell is appointed to receive the am-

baffadors, and all things'for the chrificning are at his
lordihip's appointment, And the fame is scarcely well
liked of the nobility, as is aid. The king and'queen is
pr.frntly at Craigmillar, but in little greater familiarity
than he was all the while pait;
Advert;fements out of Scotland from the Earl ol

Bedford.

[August 1566. Paper-office, from the original.]

THAT the king and queen agreed well together two

days after her coming from - , and after my lord
of Muiray's coming to Edinburgh, some new difcoi
has happened. The queen had declared to my lord ot
Murray that the king bears him evil will, and has said
to her, that he is determined to kill him, finding fault
that Ihe doth bear him so much company i and in li:.e
manner hath willed my lord of lMueray to fpiere t!e
king, which he did a few nights since in' the queen's
prrfente, and in the hearing of divers. The king con-
feted that reports were made to him, that my lord of
M,.rray was not his friend which made him speak dlt
thing he repented ; and the queen affirmed, that l;c
kIing had spoken such words unto her, and confeilldl
before the whole house, that flie could not be contint
that either he or any other should be unfriend to nmy
lord of Murray. My lord of Murray enquired the fame
lou!y, and used his speech very modaltly, in the IraiJ
tinme the 'king'departed very grieved: he cnnot b.ar
that the queen (hould use fam'liarity either with man cr
woman. and efpccitlly the ladies of Arguile, Murrny,
and Marre, who keep mofl company with her. Mly
lord of Murray and Bothwell have been at evil words
for the 1. of Ledington,.:before the queen, for he a;d
fir James llilfoure had new Come from. Ledington, wilt
his answer upon ruch heads' of' articles as Bothwell aid
he should agree upon, which being reported to the i:1,l

* *
. - * (..rl

earl in the queen's presence, made anRver, that ere he
parted with such lands as was desired, he sh0ould part
ówith his life. My lord of Murray (aid floutly to him,
thtr twenty as honest men.as he should loft their lives
ere le reafte Ledington. The queen spake nothing, but
heard both i n there terms they parted, and since, that
T hear of, nave not inet. The queen after her hunting
came to Edinburgh, and carryeth the prince thence to
Stirling with her. This latl Saturday'was executed a
I;rvant of the lord Ruthven's, who corfeifed that he
wvjs in the cabinet, but not of council of the fat. The
queen hath also opened to my lord of Murray, that
money was Tent from the pope, how much it was, and
by whom, and for what purpose it was brought.

No. XVIII. (Vol. II. p. 42.)
Part of aletter from Elizabeth to Mary, Feb. 20

1569. A copy interlined by Cecil. It con-
talins an aniifer to a complaining letter of
Mary's' uponi the imprifonnent of the Bilhop
of Ross.

--AFTER this [i. e. Mary's landing in Scotland]

I;ow patiently did 1 bear with many vain delays in not
ratifying the treaty accorded by your own commifliob-
crs, whereby I received no (mall unkindness, besides
the manifold cautes of suspicion that I might not here-
;lftr trult to any writings. Then followed a hard
nIlnner of dealing with me, to entice my fuhjed and
'rc;r kinisiai, the lord Darnly, under colour of private
fuirs for land, to come into the realm, to proceed in
triary of marriage with him without my knowledge,
ye;. to conclude the fame without my aflent or liking.
And how many unkind parts accompanied lthat sac, by
rcc.iving of my fubjesf that were base runnegates and
o.l ndctls at home, and enhancing them to places of cre-
dict .gaint my will, with many fuc like, I will leave for

tlhat

that the remembrance of the fame cannot but be noy-
some to you. And yet all these did I as it were suppress
and overcome with my natural inclination of love to-
wards you ; and did afterwards gladly, as you know,
chritten your son, the child of my said kinsman, that
had before so unloyally offended me, both in marriage
of you, and in other undutiful usages towards me his
sovereign. How friendly also dealt I by metsages ta
reconcile him, being your husband, to you, when others
nourished discord betwixt you, who as it seemed had
more power to work their purposes, being evil to you
both, than I had to do you good, in rerpet of the evil I
had received. Well I will overpats your hard accidents
that followed for lack of following my council. And
then in your mofl extremity, when you was a prisoner
indeed, and in danger of your life from your notorious
evil willers, how far from my mind was the remcn:-
brance of any unkindrnes you had (hewed me. Nay
how void was I of refpet to the designs which tha
world had seen attempted by you to my crown, and the
security that might have ensued to my slate by your
death, when I finding your calamity to be great, that
you were at the pit's brink to have miserably loft your
life, did not only intreat for your life, but so threatened
some as were irritated against you, that I only may
fay it, even I was the principal cause to save your
life.

No. XIX. (Vol. II. p. 6I.)
Letter of Q Elizabeth to Q. of Scots. Tlim

marked on the back'wit1 Cecil's hand.-
Copia Lit.rarrunt Regie MajeJqatis adl Re^inint
Sotorum, VIIIP Aprilis.

[Paper office.]

MADAME, vous ayant trop moleflt par M. de
Crocq, je n'eullo cu si pcu d .conflderation de voui

farlih'

fischer de cette lettre, si les liens de cllarite vers les
r-uincz, et les plieres d'es miserables ne m'y conrraig-
rilrfnt. Jeenten, que un edit a et divulguc de parvous,
naadame, quc ung chafcun, que veult jufilier qiue ons este
les meurtriers de vorre feu mari, et mon feu cousin,
viennent a le faire le xilme de ce mois. La quelle
chose, comme c'eft plus honorable et neteffaire, qui en
i.l cas fe pourra faire, ne y ellant cache quelque miltere
o. finefle, ainfi ]e pere et amis du mo'rt gentelhomme
:nont humiblement reqiis, que je vous priaffe de pro-
'.nge le jour, pource qu'ilz cognoiffent que les iniques
fe fonc combines par force de faire cequ.e par droict ils
;e pourront pas faire; partant, je ne puis mais finon
tour l'amour de vous mcme, a qui il touche le plus, et
.uL' la consolation des innocens, de vous exhorter le'

!,.ur conceder cette requefte, laquelle, si elle les feriit'
ni,,, vous tourneroit grandement en foujlioh, de plus
<qu' j'efpele ne pensez, et que ne voudriez volantiers
ouyr. Pour I'amour de Dieu, madame, usez de telle
sncerite & prudence en ce cas qui vos touche de si pres,
que tout le monde aye raison, 'de vous livrer comme
;,rnocente d'ung crime si enorme, chose que si ne fifes,
&cridz dignement efbloye hors de rancz'de princelfes, &
non fans cause faite opprobre de vulgaire, et plutct que
cila vous avienne, jc vous fouhaiicrois une sepulture
honorable, qu'une vie macule8; vous voiez madame.
qltc ie vous traite comme ma fille, et vbus promets, que

'i j'en eulfc, ne luy fouhaiterois mieulz, que je vous de-

!::,, conime le Seigneur Dieu.rne porte te'moignage, a
it;l ie prie de bon cocur de vous inspirer a faire ce qui
v,u:; sera plus a honneur, et a vos amnis plus de confola-
tion, avec hies tres cordialles recommendations comme
a icclle a qui fe fouhaite le plus de bien, qui yvous pourra
ci cc monde avenir.- De Weft. ce 8 jour de Janlvier '

'' A mistake in the date cbrre ed Witl Cccil', hind VJI.
A!.rlis. '.

No. XX. (Vol. II. p,75.)
Account of the sentence of divorce between tli:

Earl of Bothwell and Lady Jean Gordon his
wife. From a mauufcript belonging to Mr.
David Falconer, advocate. Fol. 455.
UroN the 29 of Apryle 1567, before the richt hon.

Mr. Robert Maitland dean of Aberdene, Mr. Edward
Henryson do&or in the laws, two of the senators of the
college of justice, Mr. Clement Little, and Mr. Alex-
ander Syme advocattis, commiffers of 'Edn ; corn-
peered Mr. Henry Kinroffe, procurator for Jean Gour-
doune countes of Bothwell, Conflitute be her for pur.
fewing of ane proces of divorcement intendit by hci
contra James erle Bothwel her husband for adultry,
committed be him with Beffe Crawfurde the pursuers
servant for the time ; and ficklyke, for .the said erie,
compeared Mr. Edmond Hay, who efter he had purfuea
and craved the pursuer's procurator's oath de calumnia,
if he had jufR caus to purfew the said a&ion, and ob.
tained it, denyed the libell, and the laid Mr. Harrie tool:
themorne, the left day of Apryle, to prove the farr.
pro prima. The quhilk day, having produced some
witnetles hetook the next day, being the I of May. to
do farther diligence Upon the quhilk I of May. he
produced' rome moe witnefies, and renounced farther
probatioune. After quhilk, he desired a term to be
afligned to pronounce ntentce.' To whom the said
commiflars assigned' Satterday next, the 3' of May, to
pronounce sentence therein, fectndum allegata et pro-
bata, quhilk accordingly was given that day in favour
of the purfewar.

At the fame time' there was another proces intendit

be the erl of Bothwell contra his lady, for to have their
marriage declared nul, as being contrasted 'againRt tle
canons, without a difpenfatlon, and'he and hit lady being
within. degrees defendand, viz., erdis a'kin' and tlit
wyfe for expeding of this proces, there was a commis-
fioune grantlt.to. tht achbi(hop of Bt, 'Ahdrois to cog.

nol'c

notce and determineit, and Rot'biJhop of Dunkeld,
William bifliop of Dunblane, Mr. Andiro Craufurd cha-
non in CGafgow, anld parson of.Egelfhame, Mr. Alexan*
der Creichtoun, and Mir. George Cooke chancellor of
Dunkeld, and to'Mr. Johne Manderftouie chanon in
Dunbar and prebendar of Beltoune, or any ane of them.
This commilione is datit 7-Aprile t 67i was presented
.o two of the saids commiflioners, viz. Mr. Andr Craw-
surd and Mr. John Manderftoune on Satterday-3 May,-
by Mr. Thomas Hepburne parson of Auldhamftocks,
procurator for the erie o£,Bothwel}, who accepted the
delegatioune, and gave out their citation by precept,
dircted, Decano Chriflianitatis de Hadingtone, nec non-
vicario feu curato eccle. parochie de Creichtoune, sea
cuicunq; alteri cappellano debiti requifitis, ser funm-
rsoning, at the said cries instance, both of the lady
personally if the could be had, or otherways at the
pairofche kerk of Creichtoune the time of service, or at
her dwelling, place before witnefles, primo, fecundo,
tertio et peremptoric, unico tamen contextu protuplicc
cdifto. And likeways to be witnefres in the (aid mat-
ter, Alex. bilhop of Galloway,.who did marry the said
crle and his lady, in Halerud-houfe kirk, in Feb. 1565,
fr John Bannatyne of Auchnoule-juflice clerk, Mr.
Robert Creichtoun of Elliok the queen's advocate, Mr.
David Chalmers.provoft of Creichtoun and chancellor of
RofR, Michael - abbot of Melrofs, and to compear be-
itce the said judges or any one of them in St Cei)l
kirk in Edr on Monday the 5 of May, be tlamfelves, or
their procurators. Upon the said q day, Mi. John
Ma.nderftoun, one of the.judges delegat, only being pre-
f.ltit, compeared the fame procurators for both the parties
that were in the former proces, Mr. Edmund Hay
( . articulatlie * ) and some of the
witnessS fumnmoned produced, and received for proving
of the fame. The -(aid procurator renounced farder
probatioune, and Ihe jldge afigned the morne, the 6th
a Mlay, ad publicandum produda, nempe dcpofitionoa

* Two .words in ,b garenthbcGs -illegibkl s

~~~- Ijiptflornm

ipforum tefium., The quhilk day, poll publicatas de-
positiones praediaas, Mr. Hen. Kinrofre, procurator fcr
the lady instanter objecit objeeiones juris generaliter,
contra produ&a, infuper renunciavit ulteriori defenfioni -
proinde conclufa de confenfu procuratorum hinc inde
caufa, judex prsditus Ratuit craftinum diem pro ter-
mina, ad pronunciandam fuam fententiam definitivam,
ex dedu&is coram eo, in prefenti caufa et proceffu.
Conform hereunto, on Wednesday the 7th of May, the
said judge gave out his sentence in favour of the erie,
declaring the marriage to be, and to have been null
from the beginning, in refpe& of 'their contingence in
blood, which hindered their lawful marriage without a
dispensation obtained of befoir.

No. XXI. (VoL I, p. 79.)
A letter from England concerniig the murder of

King Hicnry Darnley. .

[E. of Morton's Archives.a Bundle B. No; tg.]

HAvi N the commodity bs this bearer Mr; Clark, 1

tbo't good to write 'a few words'unto yOtl; ' Shave
eet frome writs from yoU'l and fome'I' hiav seen lately
se'nt to others from ybu, as namely'to' the"earl of Bed-
ford of the t6th ofMay. '

have participit the contents

thereof tb fucli as I thought meet, this hrieklt I can
assure you; the intelligence giveh hither by thF'irehch
was untrue, for there tas .not.oQ. , papll or protefant
which did not confeint hat juflice f(ould be donre, Ic
the queen my fovnla ad and support, a ainft such as had
tommitted talit abominable iil mrttrdierlh your country;
but t,fay .truth, thel Il; and coldhtrf did not rilfe froi
such' ' were 'alled. o coQupil, bu fiSm f' icn, 'ai1 ould
tive life arid'execiition *theietiid. ' Ai iurtier, I 3f-
sure you, I rlie'lknW* li1o m'att 'of. blate propondd
whichb hd ( mny/favourefaof'lit so ri o . 1uionI as
.hibiatd4 i',e¢an fy Unto.touj, * rllUhrprQtmoid
; ,1'" '' , 1,.1 . . the

'Ihe matter with greater affc&ron, than the Spanilh am-
t;niadhor. And sure I am that no man dare openly be
of any other mind, but to affirm that whosoever is guilty
es this murder handfanled with advoutre, is unworthy
t, live, I shall not need to tell you, which be our letts,
r.,d flayes from all good things here. You are ac-
,qu.inted with them as well as I. Needs I must con-
iufs, that howsoever we omit occasions of benefit, ho-
rcrcr, and furey ; it behoveth your whole nobility,
..nd namely such as before and after the murder wele
dtcmed to allow of Bodwell, to prosecute with sword
and justice the punifliment of those abominable ais,
tiough we lend you but a cold aid, and albeit you, and
divers others, both honourable and honest, Ie well known
t> me, and sundry others herL, to be juRtifiable in all
rheir aftions and doings; yet think not the contrary
but your whole nation is blemished and infamit by these
dt.irgs which lately p!asted among you. What we shall
do I know riot, neither do I write unto you afruredly,
for we be fubjefa unto many mutations, and yet I think
-ie lhall either aid you, or continue in the defence and
f-ieguard of your prince, so as if appcai to us that you
nean his safeguard indeed, and not to run tle fortune
of France,. which will be.your c wn d.eftriCtion, if you
iL unadvised. I know not. one, no not one of any
qiality,or, elate in this country, which does allow of
tle queen your fovercign, hut would gladly the wotld
were rid of her, ro.ps the ame wCere one wiliout far-
iler ninder, that is to fay by.ordinary jultice. This
I fend thea3d of May,

. ,"

P o. XXIIl (VNiol. Ti. p.o8.7k.
Part of a'ICtier frpim ir Nicolas Throkmoytbh to

Cecil, il't ,of July i567, frotni rwic '"

I [is Odrigsil,, Pals-oie],,

.-S1R, yóUr letter ot :th« 6th r.J)Uy, :I reeld,

the lotharB'ir*lkit I am fforry tofet thattlh4lr
VOL., II majesty'

majesty's disposition altereth rot towards the lords, for
when all is done, it is they which mult (tand her more
in stead, than the queen her cousin, and will he bettcr
inflruments to work some benefiri and quiernefs to h .-
majefly and her realn, than the queen of Scotland which
is void of good iame.
A letter from Sir Nicolas Thirokmorton to Cecil,

from Faticaitle, izth of July 1567.

[Paper-office.l .

SIR, as you might perceive by my letter of the Irt.

July, I lodged atFaticaille that night, accompanyed w)ni:
the lord Hume, the lord of Ledington, and Jarrn.
Melvin, where I was intreated very well, accordinr tu
the slate of that place, which is fitter to lodge prisoner;
than folks at liberty, as it is very little, so it is vc:y
firong. By the conference I have had with. the lord ,
Ledington I find the lords his aflociates and he hath 1.i
nothing unthought of, which may be either to t;ir
danger, or work them surety, wherein they do not for.
get what good and harrme France may do them, ,il
ihkevife they confider the fame of England; but as fair
as I can perceive, to be pla'n with yow, they find more
perril to grow unto themn through the queen's majelly'a
dealing than either they do by the French, or by any
contrary fa'tion amongell themselves, for they affu:
themselves the qten will leave them in the bryers if
itey run her fortoun, and though they do acknowvledle
great benefit as well to them as to the realm of Eng-
land by her majcfly's doings at Leith, whereof they
fay mutually her majefly and both the realms have ;:
ceived great fruit: yet upon other accidents which ha.i;
chanced since, they have observed such things. in Ihl
majesty's doings, as have ended to the danger of flieI
as fle hath dealt withal, to the overthrow of your ovwn
dafignments, and little to the surety of any.party : and
upon these considerations and difcourtes at tength,
metbiinketh I find a disposition in them, that either tey
mind to make their bargain with France, or clfe to dell

neither

neither with France nor yow, but to do what they Ihall
think meet for their state and surety, and to ure their
remedy as occasions shall move them meaning neither
to irritate France nor England, until}fuch time as they
have made their bargain assuredly with one of yow ;
for they think it convenient to proceed with yow both
for a while pari paffu, for that was my lord of Leding.
ton's terms. I do perceave they take the matter very
unkirdly, that no better answer is made to the letter,
which the lords did fend to her majefly, and likewise
that they hear nothing from yow to their fatisfasrion,
I have answered as well as I can, and have alledged
th.ir own proceedings so obscurely with the queen, and
their uncertainty hath occasioned this that is yet hap-
pened, and therefore her majefly hath sent me to the end
I may inform her throughly of the fIate of the matters,
.nd upon the declaraticn of their minds and intents to
such purposes as shall be by me propofedon her majefty'i
behalf unto them, they shall be reasonably and resolutely
inlnwered. At there things the lord of Ledington smileds
and Ihook his head, and said it were better for us yow
would let us alone, than neither to do us nor'yourfelves
good, as I fear me in the end that will prove ; Sr if there
he any truth In Ledington, le Crocq is gone to procure
i{.imboilet his coming hither or a man of like quality,
;acrl to deliver them of their queen for ever, who iball
lead her life in France in an abbey reclutCld the prince at
tie French devotion, the realm'govert by a council of
their elea ion of the Scottibh nation, the forts committed
to the cuflody of such as shall he chosen amongst them-
'elves, as yet 1 find no great likelihood that I Ihall have
access to the queen, it is objected they may not so dif-
plcnfc the French king, unless they were Cure to fnd the
liucen of England a good friend; and when they once
by iny accers to the queen have offended the French,
t!hln they fay' yew will'make your profit thereof to their
undtfing; ; and as 'to the' queen's liberty, whicli was'the
flfiI head thartI' pFboofed, they said that thereby they
did perceive that tlie;'qieeti 'wnts'their undoing, for :a
for thl relt of thetiiiat'ters it"Wia but folly to talk of

Y X them,

them, the liberty going before; but said they, if you will
do us no good, do us no harm, and we will provide for
ourselves. In the end they said, we (hould refuse our
own commodity,, .efore they concluded with any other,
which I lhould 4hear of at my coming to Edin'; by my
next I hope to fend you the band concluded by Hamil-
tons, Argyll, Huntly, and that facion, not so much
to the prejudice of the lords of Edinr, asthat which
was sent into France; thus having no more leisure, but
compelled to leap on horseback with the lords to go to
Edinr, I humbly take my leave of from Faftaftle tiei
1zth of July 1567.
To Sir Nicolas Throkmorton, being in Scotland.

By the QOeen, the 14th July 1567.

TR USTY and well beloved we greet you well, though

wve think that the causes will often change upon variety
of accidents, yet we think for sundry refpeas, not amiss,
that as you flall deal with the lords having charge of the
young prince for the committingof him into our realm,
so shall yow also do-well, in treaty with the queen, to
offer her that where her realm appeareth to be- ubjec
to sundry troubles from time to time, and thereby (as it
is nianifeft) her son cannot be free, if ile fha)l be con-
tented that -her son -may enjoy surety and quietncfs,
within this-our realm, being so near.as Ihe knows it is;
we fliall not faillSo yield her as good surety therein f.:
her child, as can be devised for any that might be out
child born of our own body, and shall be glad to siew
to her therein the trew effec of nature and herein Ihe
may be by yow rcemembered how much good may cn-
fe .to, her Con' to be nourished and acquainted with our
country; and thlereforeallthings coniidered, this occa-
sion for. her child were father to be- fought by her and
the friends of him, than offered by.us; and to this end,
we mean that yow,fhall so. deal.with her, bothto day
her 'jndeeed from inclining.o, thbe Frenclh pragi,.- wlhich
is.to us 'notorious, to; convey lcer, and tile iprinco into
rance, and also to avoid any.ju3 flf qfIel that (he,,might

, , hereafter

lIlreafter conceive, if lhe (hould hear that we should deal
xvith the lords for the prince.
Vir Nicolas Throkmorton to Queen Elizabeth,

i4th July I567, from Edinburgh.

[An Origilal. Paper-offce.J

JIr may pteafe your majelty to be advertired, I did
.I'nfie unto Mr. Secretary by my letters of the 7rth and
j:.tt of July, the day of mine entry into Scotland, the
c.cfes of my flay, my lodgirg at Faflcaflle, a place of the
;m;d Hume's, where I was met by the said lord and by
nle lord Lidington, and what had passed in conference
!-:iwixt us, whilst I was at the (aid Faftcaftle. Since

Y!,ich time, accompanied with the lords aforesaid, and
· ith 400 horses by their appointment for my better
t. ndue, I came to Edinr the r th of this present. The
j3th being Sunday appointed for a folemne communion
itr this town, and also a fotemne fafi being publilhed, I
coJid not have conference with the lords:which he as-
enlihled within this town as I desired, that is to fay the
ear!i of Athole, and Morton, the lord Hume,, the lord
oi Lidington, fir James Balfour captain of the catle, Mr.
James M'Gill, and thd president of the fe(fion.

Nevertheless I made means by the lord of Lidington

t'it they would use' no protract of time in mine au-
d2 r.nce, so did I Iikewif to the earle of Morton, whoin

' r.et by chance; I was answered by them both, that
il'btit the day were defined to sacred exercises, such as
*,j . there of the council would consult upon any moyen
:',T::htng my access unto them and my conference with
:;sctn, and said. allb, that in the afternoon either they
w.uld come to Ise, or I should hear from them. About
A of the clock in the afternoon, the said r3th day, the
lo:d of Lidiogton came to my lodgings, and declared
tnto me on the behalf'of the lords and others, that
they required me to have patience, though they had
I'.luTrretd my conference with them,which was grounded
principally upon the absence of the carles of Mar and
l;lencairn, the lords Semple, Crighton, and others of

v 3 the

the council, faying also that they did confider the matters
which I was on your behalf to treare with them
of, were of great importance, as they could not satisfy
nor conveniently treate.with me, nor give me anfw':
without the advice of the lords, and others their affo-
ciates; the lord of Lidingron also said unto me, that
where he perceived, by his private conference with mne
in my journey hitherwards, that I pressed greatly to have
speedy access to the queen their sovereign, he per-
ceived, by the lords and others which were here, that in
that matter there was great difficulty for many reftpeit:
but specially because they had relufed to the French :in-
4alfador the like access, which being granted unto ne,
might greatly offend the French, a matter which they
desircd and intended to eschew i for they did not fine
by your majefly's dealings with them hitherto, tliht it
bthoved them to irritate the French king, and to lore
his favour and good intelligence with him: 1 anfweirc.,
that as to their refusal made unto the French ambafl'dor,
monsieur de Ville Roye was dispatched forth of France
before these accidents here happened, and his special
errand was to impeach, the queen's marriage with ich
earle of Bothel (for so indeed since my coming hither I
learned his conmmrfion tended to that end, and to lmake
offer to the queen of another marriage), and as to
monsieur de Crocq, ihe could have no order forth ,f
France concerning these matters, since they happenici;
and therefore they might very well hold themfufpeftic, l
to have conference with the queen, leaR they miigl
treate of matters in this time without inlttuctions, and so
rather do harm thnr. good i but your majeny being ad-
vertized of all things which had chanced, had fnt nme
hither to treat with them, for the well of the rcal.n,
for the.confervation of their honours and credit, lind
for their surety; and I might boldly fay unto him, that
your rnajelty had better deserved than the French Ihd.
I-e said, for his own part, he.was much bound unto your
majelty, and had always foundgreat favour.and courtesy
in England; but to be plain with you, fir, fayed he,
thIere is not many of this affitibly that have found (i,

great

;,eat obligation at the queen your sovereign's hands, as
at the French king's, for the caries of Morton and
Glencairn be tte only persons which took benefit by the
r)ueen's majelly's aid at Leith, the reft of tic nohlemen
,.-cre not in the adion; and we. think, (aid he, the
q!cen's majefly your sovereign, by the opinion of her
c,.vn council, and all the world, took as great benefit,
!y that cliarge as the realm of Scotland, or any particu.
n!- person ; and not to talk with yow as an ambaftador,
' ;t with fir Nicolas Thrckrorton, my lord Morton, and
iuch as were in pain for'the death of Davie, found but
cold favour of the queen's inajefy's hands, when they
were baniflltd forth of their own country ; but 1 would
al! our whole company were as well willing to accom-
jliifl tle queen your sovereign intents and defites as-I

:,; for mine own part, I am but one, and that of the
ireanclt fort, and they be many noblemen and such as
have great interelt in the matter, mary yow fhlall be as-
.i.cd I will imploy myself to irnploy my credit, and all
that I may do, to fatisfie the queen your miflrefs, as
mr.uch as lyeth in me, and for your own part you have
a great many friends in this aflnembly, with many other
good words. But for conclusion I muff take this for an
arfwer to flayuntil the other lords'were come, and
hlereupon I thought meet to advertize your majefly
vhat lhah pasl:-d, and how far forth.I have proceeded l
your expectation being great to hear from hence.

And now to advertize your majcfty of the flare of all

things, as I have learned since my coming hither, it may
plt.ife your niajcfly to underfland as followeth:

'he queen of Scotland remaineth in good health in

tli caflle of Lochleven, guarded by the Ib:d Linfay and
ochllcvcn the owner of rthe ouse; for the lord Ruth.
ven is imployed in another coinmiflion, because he began
'o (hoxw great favour to the queen, and to give her in-
cllihgenc:. She is waited on with 5 or 6 ladys, 4 or 5
gentlewomen, and z chamberers,wbereof one is a Frcneh
woman. The earle of Buchan, the iarle of Mlurray't
1lrotlir, hatli also liberty to come to her at his plofaure
:!ic lords aolbte!aid, Which liave her in guard, doe keep

her

her very firaitly, and as far as I can perceive, their r?-
gour proceedeth by their order from there men, because
that the queen will not by any means be induced to
lend her authority to prosecute the murder, nor will not
content by any perfwafion to abandon the lord othel:
for her husband, but avoweth conflantly that she will
live and die with him ; and faith that if it were put to
her choice to relinquish her crown and kingdom, or the
lord Bothell, (he would leave her kingdom and dignity, to
go as a simple damfell with him, and that (he will r!..
ver consent that he fhal fare worse or have more harm.
than herfeif.

And as far as I can perceive, 'the principal cause of

her detention is, for that these lords do fee the queen
being of so fervent affefsion towards the earle Bothell
as (he is, and being put at, as they Should be compelled
to be itn continuall arms, and to have occasion of many
battles, he being with manifelt evidence notoriously de-
teEted to be the principal murderer, and the lords
meaning prosecution of justice against him according to
his merits.

The lords mean also a divorce betwixt the queen and

him, as a marriage not to be suffered for many refpesls,
which reparation cannot take place if the queen be at
liberty, and have power in her hands.

They do not also forget their own perill, conjoined

with the danger of the prince, but as far as I can per-
ceave, they intend not either to touch the queen in furcty
or in honor, for they do speak of rher with refped and
reverence, and do affirm, as I do learn, that the con-
ditions aforesaid accomplifllnd, they will both put her to
liberty, and rettore her to her estate

These lords have for the guard of their town 450

harqubufhers which be in every good order, for the en-
tertainment of which companys, until all matters be
*compounded, they did sue unto your majefry, to aid
them with such (umr of money as hatl been mentioned
to Mr. Secretary by the lord of Lydington's writing,
amounting 'a I1 perceivP to ten or twelve thousand
rowns of thp

They

They were lately advertized that the French king'

doth mind to fend hither mnonlieir de la Chapell des Cr-
fine, a knight of the French order, and always well
aifffionare to the house of Cuyfe, and howsoever la
Foeclt, Villaroy, and do Crocq have used language in
the qu, en's. (avour and to these lords disadvantage iheie,
to ynur m:jefly ; la ( rocq doth carry with him fucl.
mailer as Ihall be little to the queen's advantage.; so as
it is thought the French king, upon his coming to his.
presence, will ra.:her fatisfic the lords, than pleasure
the queen ; for they have Iheir party so well made, as
the Frenih will ratlir nake their profit by them, than
any oiher way.

·Heiewith I fend your majffly the last bond agrcrd
en, and fgned by the Hamiltons, the earl of Algyl, -
Hluntly, and sundry others at Dunmbarton.

·Nevertheless, since my coming to this town, the

Hamiltens have lent unto me a gentleman of their fur-
name named Robert Hamilton, with a letter from the
bitllop of.St. Andrews and the abbot of-Arbroth, the
copy whereof I fend your majesty and mine anfwer'unto
t'(emt, refevring 'to' the' bearer the declaration of some
things, as' these (lid by hiir unto me.

'ho earle of Argyll hath; in like manner, sent an-

other unto me wihl a letter and credit, I have used him
a. Itlid the orlhis, the crpy of both. wlich. letters I
lenrd yaur niajefty alli, The lord Hatlrys hlath also sent
111to me but 'nt Wiitien, ond I have rctunlld unto him.
in like fort. . . ' '
..

Againfl the z0othl-ay.hf this month there is a gcnerall

::lTinblly of all the clhurches, Ibii'cs, and horouglls towns
.,l lii realm, namely of filch as' e contenttd to rrepait:
to itheec lords'to this town,' lherel it:' is thought (li
whole flhitu of.this hiatter will hbe handeled, and l.eir'
ine much to lle queen's rlfadtlitta:ge and danger un-
l:if the lord 'ds Lidinropn :;and fornc others which be.
belt affated 'unto lier do .prvVido folt remcdy ; fotl-
ipercave tha 'grehl number, ;antd in, mann'er all, hut
':liifly the cosmlbn '

peop ltc,, .'liehlinave afilild in thlcf
"l ngts, do greatly d(ilhonour tle queen; ::ad -mind

fcriouily

seriously either her deprivation, or her dellruaion; I
uic:l the best means 1 can (conlidering the furie of the
world here) to prorogue this assembly, for that appe;lr-
eth to me to be the heft remedy: I may not speak of
dissolution of it, for that pay not be abiden, and I
filould thereby bring myself into great hatred and peril.
The chiefelt of the lords which be- here present at this
time dare not show so much lenity to the queen as I
think they could be contented, for fear of the rage of
the people. The women be nmot furious and impudent
against the queen, and yet the men be mad enough; ()
as a firanger over bufie may soon be made a sacrifice
amongst them.

There was a great bruit that.the Hamiltons with tleir

adherents would put their force into the fields again(t
the z4th of this month, but I do not find that intent to
true, as the common bruit goeth.

The earle of Argyll is in the Highlands, where there
is trouble among his own countrymen..

The earle of Lennox is by. these lords much-defired

here, and I do believe your majesty may so use himand
diret him, as he Ihall be able to promote your purpose
with there men.

The earle of Argyll, the Hamiltons and he,be incom-

patible. -- I do find amongf the Hamiltons, Argyll atid
the company two lrange and sundry humours.

Hamiltons do make (how of the liberty of the queesn,

and prosecute that with great earne(tnefs, because they
would have these lords destroy her, rather than the should
be recovered from them by violence ;. another time they
seem to desire her liberty and Bothwell's deftruion,
because they would compass a marriage betwixt the queen
and she lord of,Arbroth.

The earle of Argyll d6th asset her liberty, and Toth-

well's deflrudion, .ecaufe. he would marryithe queen
to his brotlher, ,.. ,
.

And yet neither of them, notwithfianding their open

concurrence (as appeareth by their bond), doth dircover
their minds to each other, nor mind one end ; Knox is
f9t he're, but in the weft parts, lie and the reft of ihe

miniftcl

niiniflers will be here at the great assembly, whose
aiutterity against the queen I fear as much as any
llan's.

By some conference which I had with Come of his

council?, me thinketh that they have intelligence that
the:e is a disposition in the queen of Scotland to leave
this realm, and to retire herself into either England or
ito France, but most willingly into England, for such
.-- and miflikeings as the knoweth hath been, and is
nenant unto her in France, leaving the regiment either
t, a number of p;rfons dleagued, and authorized by her,
ir to some one or more.

And it please your majefly, I think it not amiss to

put yow in remembrance, that in cafe the said queen
colt: into England by your allowance, without theFrench
ki;,g's consent, she fliall loose her dowery in France,
ar.l Ilave little or nothing from hence to entertain her;
,nd in cafe the do go into France with the king's content-
ment, the may be an infirument (if the can recover fa-
vour, as time will help to cancel) her disgrace) either by
-alching with some husband of good quality, or by some
thler devifei to work new unquietne's to her own con-
tiy, and so consequently to your majesty's.

Therefore it may please your majelty to confider of

;,' matter, and to let me kndw your pleasure with con-
,enicnt speed, how I ilall anfiver the fame, if it he
1,)opounded unto me, either by the queen or by the
councill, as a piece of the end and compofirion. For I am
iuke, of late, h'e hath seemed very desirous to have the
matter brought to pats that she might go into England,
retaining her efate and jurifdiliodn in herself, though
fte do not exercise it; and likiwite I underfland that
f(ine of ihis council which be Ical affe6t&d to her safety
dc tiilik there is nrio ther Wsty to save her. Thus Al-
nighty God pterfelvd'your mnjefly in heaJth, 'hnoir,
and all felicity ar':ldin' the 14th Jtly Ij6'7 . ' '

-

... .

' : u.i " , '"

.
i

IS;, .~

Sir- Nicolas Trilokmorton to quccin Eliza't.ii,

the i8th of july 567. From Ediiburgh.

[An Orlginlal. Paper-oftic ]

IT may please your majefly, yow nmight perceave by

my letters of the i6th, how far. I had proceeded witi
there lords, and wvhat wias their anlf\er; since wlih:l;
tnme I have spoken particularly with the earle Mortoln,
the lord of Lidington, and fir James Balfour captain ,of
this caflle; at whose hands I cannot perceave that as
yet access to the queen to Lochleven will be granted mr,
flaying the.felves fill by the absence of the lord. anii
others their aflociates, which (they fay) they look for
within two days; and for that 1 find, by likelihnidrl
and apparent presumptions, that mine access to the qucen
will hardly be granted, I have thought good not to
defer this dispatch until I have a ref6Jlue answe.r in tiat
matter.

May it therefore please your majesty, to underiland

Roberc Melvin returned from the queen in .ochlevin,
to this town the 6th of July, and brought a ltter from
her written of her own hand to these lords, which ldth
contain, as I underfiand, matter as followet l-A request
unto them to have conlidcration of her health, and if they
will not put her to liberty, to change 'ihe place of rr-
ftraint to the catile of Stirling, to the end the migni
have the comfortand company of her son, and if thry
will not change her from Lochlev.n, nhe required cti
have some other,gentlewomen about her, naming none,.

To hbve her apodhecary, to have frone modest ninil-

ter.--To haye an imbroiderer to draw forth filch
wurk as she would be occupied about, and to hai a
vai let oi the cl!mber.,---Touchiog the governlnallt of
the realm fle maketh two ofltrs, which are but generally
touched in her letter, the particularitys be not fpcitlitl,
but referred to. Robert'Mlilvin's credit, tel'.,one is Ii
.commnit it only and wholly to the earle of Murray, lhe
other is to the lords vwlofle .namcas. ensue, afflted wi:h
.rich *thers as they Ihall. call unto. thm, that is to fvy,

the duke of Chattelrault, the earls of Morton, Murray,
Alarr, and Glencairn.

She hath written unto them that I might have accefi

xunto her.- She requireth further, that if they will
not treat her and regard her as their queen, yet to use
her as the king their sovereign's daughter (whom many
of them knew) and as their prince's mother. She will
by no means yield to abandon Bothell for her husband,
nor relinquilh him ; which matter will do her most harm
of all, and hardeneth these lords to great severity against
lilc'.

She yieldeth in words to the prosecution of the mur-

der.

I have the means to let her know that your majefly
,:th sent me hither for her relief.
I have also persuaded her to conform herself to re-

nounce Bothell for her husband, and to be contented to
fiffer a divorce to pass betwixt them'; she hath sent me
word that Ihe will in no ways consent unto that, 'but
taLher die grounding herself upon this reason taking
herself to be seven weeks gone with child; by renounc-
ing Bothell,. The should acknowledge herself to be with
child of a baflard, and to have forfeited her honour,
which die will not do to die for it I have perfwaded
!ihr to save her own life and her child, to choose the
liaft hard condition.

Mr. Knox arrived here in this town the 6th of this

month, with whom I have had fame conference, and
vwidl Mr. Craig also; the other ininlfter of this town.

1 have perfwaded with them tb preach and 'erfwad

lenity. I find them both very austere in this conference.
whait they thall' do hereafter I know not, they are fur-
,iilied with many arguments, some forth of the scrip-
tu;'e, tome forth of hillories, forme grounded (as they
fay) upon the laws of 'thi' realm, some Upoh pta&ices
fed in this realm, and some upon the conditiona and
oath made by their prince at her coronatioh.

The biqiop of Callowny, uhlel to the earle of Hunt-

lcy, hath sent hither to thdie lordsa that his nephew tlie
earle and frmi;nth'eri*df tlIf tidenmBay, t

r lzlllfgow br
VOL. 1ll. . '

at Stirling, have some communication with rome ap-
pointed on this fide, assuring them that there is a good
difpotition in the lords of the other party to concure
with these, assuring further that they will not difrent for
triffles or unnecessary things, and (as I am given to un-
derftand) they can be pleased the queen's restraint be
continued until the murder be pursued in all perlons,
whereby the separation of the queen and Bothell is in-
plyed, the preservation of the prince, the security for all
men, and a good order taken for the governance of tie
realm in tranquillity.

Captain Clerk, which hath so long served in Dennmaie

and served at Newhaven, did the i6th of this month
(accompanied with one of his soldiers, or rather tic
soldier as the greater fame goeth) kill one Wilson a sea-
man, and such a one as had great estimation with there
lords both for his ikill, his hardynefs, honesty, and
willingness in this a&ion ; whereupon Clerk hath re-
tired himself; their quarrel was about the (hip which
took Blacketer, which ship was appointed by these lords
to go to the north of Scotland to impeach the passage of
the earle Bothell, in cafe he went either to the isles, or
to any other place; by the death of this man this enter-
pl ife was daDled.

- The bithop of Galloway is come to Linlithgow, and
doth delire to speak with the lord of Lidington.

The abbot of Kilwinning hath sent for fir James

Balfour, captain of the cafle, to have conference with
him.

As I. wrote unto your majefly in my lalt, the Hnamil-

tons now find no matter to difever there lords and thenl
affunder, but would concur in all things (yea in any ex-
tremity againfl the queen) so as that they might be as-
lured the prince of Scotland were crouned king, ard
fliould die without itrue, tlat the earle of Lenox's son
living Ihould net inherit the croun of this realm, as next
heir to his nelphew.

And although the lords and councelors rpeak reve-

rently, mildly, and charitably of their queen, so as I
cannot gather by thir fpeecih any intention to cruelty or

8 wviolencq

violence, yet I do find by intelligence, that the queen
is in very great peril of her life, by redfon that the peo-
ple arfembled at this convention do mind vehemently
the destruction of her.

It is a public speech amongst all the people, and

arnongft all efatce (saving of the counsellors) that their
queen bath no more liberty nor privilege to commit
murider nor adultery, than any other private person,
neither by God's laws, nor by the laws of the realm.

The earl of Bothwell, and all his adherents and aflo-

,ates, be put to the horn by the ordinary ju(iice of this
rowv, named thelords of the feflion ; and commandment
:,ivcn to all fhirriffs, and all other officers, to apprehend
hin, and all other his followers and receiprors. The
ei:l of Bothell's porter, and one of his other servitors of
iht chamber, being apprehended, have confefred fucli
'undry circumflances, as it appeareth evidently, that he
the raid earl was one- of the principal executors of the
mnurder, in his own person accompanyed with sundry
oters, cf which number I cannot yet certainly learn the
.a.ies but of three of them, that is to (ay, two of the Or-
ialfons of Tivotdall, and one Hayborn of Bolton; the
lords would be glad that none of the murderers should
hlave any favour or receipt in England, :nd hereof their'
d!ciie is, that the officers upon tie border may be warn-
ed ;Bothwell doth still remain in the north parts, but
t!e lord Seaton and Fleming, which lhave been there,
lave utterly abandoned him, and do rgpair hitlherwards.

Tlhe intelligencc doth grow daily betwixt there lords,

and those which held of; and notwithflandiing these
lords have sent an hundred and fifty iarqubtufhers to
Stirling, to'keep the town and parlage from fiirpritb ;
iand Co have they done in like manner to St. Johnflon,
which lie the two pRafages from tie north, ard vwelf to
th:i town, I do underfland the captain of Dunbar'is
iuclh bu'ie'd in fortifying that place, I do'mervile tlio
Larriages be not impeaclhed otlierwife tlhin alley be.

OC late this queen' hath written a letter to the cap-
tain of the said' cflle, which hath been furprized i and

: ' ': 2 .' '' 'tlh iebly
t,.

thereby matter is discovered which maketh little to '.
queen's advantage.

Thus, having none other matter worthy your ma-

jefty's knowledge, I beseech God to prosper your imajcfl,
with long life, perfec health, and prosperous feliic).
At Edinburgh the iSth of July 1567.
Letter of Sir Nicholas Throkmorton to tit

right honourable the earl of I,eicefter, knt. o(
the order, and one of the lords of her majei v'
moRs honourable privy council.
[z4th of July 1567. Paper-office. From theoriginaL]
BY my former dispatches sent to her majefit), and

Air. Secretary, since the I2th ofJuly, your lordfhin
might have perceived the slate of this country, ani
to what end these matters be like to come: so as nt
to trouble your lordship with many words; this queci
is like very shortly to be deprived of her royal estate,
her Con to be crowned king, and file detained in prifn
within this realm, and the fame to be governed, in the
young king's name, by a councel, confifing of certain
of the nobility, and other wife men of this realm; so
as it is easy to be seen that the power and ability to do
any thing to the commodity of the queen's majesty, and
the realm of England will chiefly, and in manner a.ctliiry
aeft in the hands of these lords, and others their also-
ciates, aflembled at Edinburgh. Now if the queen',
majelly will fill prfifl in her former opinion towarls
the queen of Scotland (unto whom i(he shall be able to
do no good), then I do plainly fee that there lords. and
all their accomplices will become as good 'renc), as Ilir
Fiench king can wiflh, to all intents and purposes. Anls
as for the Hamiltons, the earls of Argyll, Huntlye, and
that. faaion, they be.already so far inclianted that way,
as there necdoth little devise to draw them to the French
devotion,, Then. this is the flare of things so come t
,pafi of this country, that France has Scotland now as
7mclch conjoined unto them, to all purposes, as ever it

.. . . . ,,al;s :
ii;,, .

was; and what an infirument, the young prince will-
prove, to unquiet England, I report me to your lord-
ihips wisdoms, and therefore confidering the weight of
the matter, and all the circumiftances, I trust your lord-
(hips will well bethink you in time (for 'tis high time)
how to advise her majesty, to leave nothing undone that
may bring the prince of Scotland to be in her pofie(fion,
or, at the least, to be at her devotiop. And amonlf!
other things, that I can imagine, for the firfi degree no-
thing is more meet to bring this to efteft, than to allure
this company here atiembled, to bear her majesty their
favour, Some talk hath passed between the lord of Lid,
dingSton and me, in certain conferences, about this mat-
er. By hin I find, that when her majefly shall have
w\on these men to her devotion, the principal point that
xill make themn conformable to deliver their prince into
tl.iland, will reft upon the queen, and the realms en-
;biing blin to the succession of the crown of England,
£or fault of issue of the queen's majesty's body, foiie
other things will also be required, as the charge of the
fdid prince and his train to be at the charge of England.
I do well perceive that these! men will never be brought
to deliver their prince into England, without the former
condition, for the fucceflion of England; for (faith Lid-
iinRgo!n)that taking place, the prince liall be as dear
to the people of England as to the people of Scotlandl;
.iid the one will be as careful of his preservation as the
other, Otherwise, he faith, all things confidered, it
will he reported that the Scottithmen have put their
princ.c to be kept in fafcty, as those which commit the
1hccp to be kept by the wolves. So as for conclusion,
your lordnlips riay perceive here will be the scope of
iths matter. As unto the delivering of him upon
I/)itages, he fayeth, let no man think, that the concfi-
tion of the succession not being accomplilhed, the nobi-
li ,t and the gentry will never confeat to leave themselves
Idclitute of their fovcreign, upon any hostages, neither
upon any promises, nor likelihood of good to ileic in
timle to come. It were not good for yourselves (fakth
he) that the mitter were so handlctc for lhen ypu

3 htPi!4

flould adventure all yopr goods in tne Ihip, which
might have a dangerous effeEt, confidering the unwil-
lingnefs of the queen your sovereign to consent to efta-
hlifluing any successor to the crown. And then, how
unmete were it, that her majesty having in her possel-
sion already all such persons as do pretend to it, or be
inheritable to the crown, to have our prince also inl her
custody. For so there might follow, without good ci-
pitulations, a fgrange and dangerous issue, tho' the queen
your mifirefs do think that such imaginations could not
proceed but from busy heads, as you have uttered unto
us on her behalf. What is come to pass since my lIft
dispatch, and how far forth things are proceeded, I refer
your lordlhip to be informed by my letters sent unto h.r
majesty at this time. -And so I pray Almighty God,
prefeive your ldrfhip in much honour and felicity. At
Edinburgh this Z4th of July 1567.

It may please your good lordship to make my lo:-i
Stuard partner of this letter.

The Q0een to Sir Nicholas Throkmorton.

By the Queen.
[6th Aug. I567.]

TRUSTY and right well beloved, we greet you well,

for as much as we do confider that you have now a long
time remained in those parts without expedition in t!le
charge committed unto you, we think it not meet, fee-
ing there hath not followed the good acceptation and
fruit of our well meaning towards that flare, which
good reason would have required, that you flould con-
tinue there any longer, our pleasure, therefore, is, ti:tt
you Ihall, inmediately upon the receipt hereof, fend
your servant Middlemore unto the lords and eftites ,1
that realm, that are assembled together, willing him to
declare unto them, that it cannot but seem very fliahge
unto us, that you having been sent from us, of fuhcl
good intent, to deal with them, in matters tending si
much to their own quiet, and to tlw benefit of the whol;

enite

estate of their country, they have so far forgotten them-
fclves, and so slightly regarded us and our good meaning,
not only in delaying to hear you, and deferring your
accJs to the queen their sovereign, but allo, which is
firangef of all, in not vopchfafing to make any answer
unto us. And altho' these dealings be fuch,.indeed, as
were not to be looked for at their hands, yet do we find,
their usage and proceeding towards their foveraign and..
queen, to overpass all the reRf in so strange a degree, as
wve for our part, and we fitppofe the whole world be-
ie.ls, cainot but think them to have therein gone so far
Le)ond the duty of fubjeds, as must needs remain to
t!hir perpetual tauche for ever. And iherefore ye [hall
fay, that we have tho't good, without consuming any
longer time in vain, to revoke you to our presence, re-
quiring them to grant you licence and pafport so to do,
which when you ihall have obtained, we will that you
rnike your repair hither, unto us, with as convenient
:need as you may. Given, &c.

Jndorfed 6th Augult 1567.
Throkmorton to the rihLit honourable Sir Wil-

liam Cecil, knight, one of her majesty's privy
council and principal fecrctary, give tlefe.
[izth Aug. 567. Paper-office. From the original.

SIR,

WHAl1' I have learned, since the arrival of my lord

Murray, and Mons. de Linnerol, you Ihall underltand
by my letter, to her majesty, at this time. The -French
do, in their negotiations, as they do in their drink, put
water to their wine. As I am able to fee into their
d:.ings, they take it not greatly to the heart how vtih
qileen seep, whether ile live or die, whether Ihe be at
hlberty or in prizon. The mark they shoot at, is, to re;
new their old league; and can be as well contented to
talke it of this little king (howsoever his title be), and
*he fame by. the order of these lords, as otherwise,
ILyneroll came but yesterday, and methinketh he will not
ter ry long, you lmay gucfs how the French will seek to

difplcafc

displease these lords, when they changed the coming of
la ( hapelle des Ourfins for this man, because they
doub'ed that de la Chapelle should not be grateful to
them, being a papist. Sir, to speak more plainly to you,
than I will do otherwise, methinketh the earl of Murray
will run the course that those men do, and be partaker
6f their fortune. I hear no man speak. more bitterly
against the tragedy, and the players therein, than he,
so little like he hath to horrible fins. I hear an inkling
that Ledington is to go into France, which I do as much
mislike, as any thing, for our purpose. I can affuie
you the whole protestants of France will live and die in
these men'; quarrels ; and, where there is bruit amongit
you, that aid Thould be efnt to the adverse party, anj
that Martigues Ihould come hither with some force;
Mons. Boudelot hath affired me of his honour, that ir-
stead of Marrigues coming against them, he will co;Ic
with as good a force to succour them: and if that bi
efnt under meaner condu&, Robert Stuart (hall come
with as many to fortify them. But. the confiable ha.h
assured there lords, that the king meaneth no way to
Offend them. Sir, I pray you find 'y revocation con,
venient, and (peed you to further it, for I am here now
to no purpose, unless it be to kindle there lords more.
againfl us. Thus I'do humbly take my leave of you,
from Edenburgh the lzth of Augufi 1567.

Yours to use and command,

The Queen to Nicholas Throkmorton.

TR vs'TY and well beloved, we greet you well. W't

have, within these two days, received three sundry leitci
of yours, of the zoth, izd, and 23d, of this iioiil',
having not before those received any seven days tbcfoic;
and do find, by these your letters, that you have verr
diligently and largely advertised us of all the llafly andl
peremptory proceedings there; which as we nothin!;
like, so we trust in time to fee them vax colder, and to
receive Come reformation. For we cannot perceive, ihlt
they w[1h whom you have dcalt.'qn Anfwyr the (lut.lit

l10
l) l

moved by the Hamiltons, who howroever they may be
carried for their privatererpeas, yet those thihgs whichl
tcly move, will be allowed by all reasonable persons.
.,; if they may not, Itping'noblemen of the realm,. b.,
qlitrered to hear the queen their sovereign declare her
!iinf concerning the reports which are made of her, by.
'uch as keep her in captivity, how Should they believe
the reports, or obey them which do reportit? and there'-
Core our meaning is, you shall let the Hamiltons plainly
understand, that we do well allow of their proceedings
(as fat forth as the fame doth concern the queen their
i\.vreign for-her relief, ::nd in such things as (hall ap-
,ear reasonable for us therein to do, for the queen o ir
.tiler, we will be ready to perform the fame. And
, hcere it is -so required, that upon your coming thence,.
''c lord Scroope should deal with the lord Herris to
;mpart their meanings to us, and ours to them, e are'
well pleased therewith, and we require you to advertize
;!c lord Scroope hereof by your letters, and to will him
to shew himself favourable to them in their ationst that
tmay appear plainly to tend to the relief of the queen,
-ind maintenance of her authority. And as we willdd
our secretary to write unio- you,- bat'upon your rmef-
..ie done to the earl of-Murray, you might return, so

nllr meaning is you 'flall. And if these out letters h'a.

;iit you on the way, yet' we will lhave-you advertire
; h the lord Scroope asid the Hamiltons of our meaning.

Indorfcd 2gth Aug. i56y,

No. XII'I. (Vol. II. p.93,)
:..' Nicholas Tli:rokmorton the Airclhbi'fiop ofp

St., Aindrew's altd the Abbot.of Arbrothic.
t ;ilh Aug. .567. Paper-ollice. From a copy which Sir

Nicholas sent to theQeen.] l'

AI'TEK my gqod commendations to your good lord-
llh,. this shall be to advertize you, that the queen's
tlmiefty my forereign Ihaving funt me hither her nim-

baflador

batfador to the queen her fifler your Sovereign to ccnm.
municate unto her such matter as she thought meet,
confidering the good amity and intelligence betvixt
them, who being detained in captivity (as your lordihipi
know) contrary to the duty of all good fubjecls, for ti.
.enlargement of whose person, and the refliiution of he.
to her dignity, her majefly gave me in charge to treat
with these lords assembled at Edenburgh, offering them
all reasonable conditions and means as might be, for the
safeguard of the young prince, the punifbment of th!
late horrible murder, the dissolution of the marriage
betwixt the queen and the earl of Bodwell, and laill'
for their own fuecties. In the negociation of which
matters I have (as your lordlhips well know) spent d
long time to no purpose, not being able to prevalr in
any thing with those lords to the queen my iovs-
reign's fatisfaaion. Of which strange proceedings to.
wvards lher nmjelty, and undutiful behaviour towaids
their sovereign, I have advertised the queen's majclly,
ihe (nor being minded to bear this indignity) hath given
me in charge to declare her further pleasure unto theng,
in such fort as they may well perceive her majefly dotl
disallow of their proceedings, and thereupon hath re.
voked me. And further hath given me in charge to
communicate the fame unto yout lordships, requiriig
you to let me know, before my departure hence, (w!ich
fliall be, God willing, as soon as I have received anftver
from you) what you and your confederates will as,
filredly do, to set the queen your sovereign at liberty,
aicl to restore her to her former dignity by force or
otherwise; feeing these lords have refused all other
mediation, to the end the q.ueen's maiefty my fove-
reign- may concur with your lerdfhips in tfiis honoutr
able enterprise.

And in cafe, through the difperflon of your afrociates,

:your lordihips can neither,communicatu this m:tter
.amongfl you, nor receive resolution of them all by iltat
time, it may pleate you to fend me the opinions of to
:many. of you as may confer togethelr,.within two nr
'three 4ays: o as. Jmay.hlave. your. anewer, here in All's

,*a~~; t'l)W~ itowi

town by Monday or-Tuefday next at the farthefR, being
the I9th of this August for I intend (God willing) to
depart towards England, upon Wednesday following.
ThIus I most humbly take my leave of your lord/hips at
Edenburgh; the i3th of Aug. Xr 67.

Indorfed r3th of Aug. 1567.

Sii Nicholas Throckmorton to the Lord HIarrs.
[z4th Aug.-l567. Paper-office. From a copy which Sir

Nicholas sent to Secretary Cecil.]

YOUR good lordihip's letter of the i3th of August

I have received the i9th of the fame. For answer
whereunto it may like your lordship to understand, that
J will signify unto you plainly, how far forth I am al-
ready thoroughly inftru4ced of the queen's majefly my
sovereign's pleasure concerning the detention of the queen
your sovereign, and concerning her relief.

To the first her majefly hath given in charge. to use

ail kinds of persuasion in her name, to move there lords
afTnebled at Edenburgh to desist from this violent and
undutiful behaviour, which they used toward their
sovereign. And in this part, besides the Ihew of many
reasons, and sundry persuasions of amicable treaty with
them, her majesty hath willed me to use fume plain and
tevere speech unto them, tending so far forth, as if they
v.ould not be better advised, and reform these their out-
rageous proceedings exercised againff their sovereign,
that then they might be assured her majesty neither woyld
uor could indure such an indignity to be do'ne to the
queen, her good cousin and neighbour.

And notwith(landing there my proceedings with them,

they have made proof to be little moved thereby; for
as yet neither will they conrent to the enlargement,
icitlher fiffer me to speak with her. So as it (eemeth
1I me, it is superfluous to treat any more with them after
this manner. Whereupon I have advertised the quecn's
imajelty my sovereign, expecting daily her majesty's fur-
ilowr order 'and as. Ihnll be advortifed thereof, so will
not fail to lignify the fame to your good lordlhip ; and

in the mean.time will advertise her majefly also, what
your lordship hatlh written unto. me. Thus with my
due commendations to your good lordlhip, I commit tlh
fame to Almighty God, refling always to do you lie
plea(ure and'fervice that I can lawfully. At Edenbur!h.,

JIndorfed 24th Augtllt 1567.

No. XXIV. (Vol. 11. p. 104.)
Account of Lord Herreis's bellaviour ii; the Par,

liament held Dccember 15, 1567.

. [Paper-dffice.

TLE lord Herrys made a notable harangue in the

name of the duke and himself, their fricnds and .
herents (the duke him(elf, the earl of Caffilts, and tlu
abbot of Kilwirinihg being also present) to persuade ti,i
union of the whole realm in one mind. , hcicin Ie
did not spare to fct fortl folcmnly the great praise that
part of this nobility did deserve, which in the beginning
took imeanes for punilhncht of the earl Bothwell, as
also feeing the queen's inotdinat affe'aion to that witl;ed
rtan, and that the coild not be Induced by their per-
luafion to leave him, that in fequeflring her perf,,n
Within Lochlevin, they did the duty of noblemen. 'lh:li
their honourable doings, which had not'fpared to fiaz.id
their lives and lands, to avenge iheir iative country
from the (landerous repoits that were rpbcen of it armon:g
'bthet nations, had well defirved that all tleir'brethlilt
thould join widlth 'em in so gobd a cause. That he :and
they, in whore names ie did fipeak, would willingly, .nd
without any compulhfon, enter tlienifllves in the fame
yoke, and put thdlt lives arid landt In the like hnzar(i,
for maintehance of our ctufc.: And if the queen he liif
"*ere iti Scotland, accompanied *,ith loao6 c nien, tley
*Will be of the fame mind, 'and fight in our'quarrel. Ic
;lriped 'the remainder Aloblemen of their 'part;, Huuntly,
*Arguile, and others, Wliit lihald ot-as"yedaclhov led;'d

* 9 w i; W : i i Li[i'

the Icing, would come to the fame conformity, where-
unto he would also earnestly move them. And if they
viil remain obstinate, and refuse to qualify themselves,
;hen will the duke, he and their friends, join with us
to correct them, that otherwise will not reform them-
felvcs. So plausible an oration, and more advantageous
jor our party, none of ourselves could have made. He
;!; not forget to term my lord regent, by the name of
rJgent (there was no mention at all of the earl of
Mlurray), and to call him grace at every word, when

, speeches were directed to him, accompanying all his
;words with low courtesies after this manner.

No. XXV. (Vol. IL . i26.)
Queen Mary to Queen Elizabeth.
[Cott. Lib. Cal., 'A copy, andprobably a tranlation.j

MADAM,

ALTHouGH .the necessity of my cause (which maketh

;ic to be importune to you) do make you to judge that
.1 an out of the way; yet such as have not my pafion,
lior the rcfpeCts whereof you are persuaded, will. think
t!:t I do as my cause ddth require. Madam, I have not
accused you, neither in words, nor in thought, to have
u!cl yourself evil towards me. And I believe, that you
hC.ve no want of good underflanding, to keep you from
?erfwrafion against your natural good inclination. But
in the mean time I can't chufe (having my senses) but
p rceive very evil furtherance in my matters, fnce my
cuming hither. I thought that I had sufficiently dif-
coorsed unto you the difcommodities, which this delay
biiigeth unto :me. And especially that they think in
this next pnonth of August, to hold a parliament against
me and all my servants. And in the mean time, 1 am
staycd here, and yet will you, that I Ihould put myself
further into your country (without feoing you), and
'monove me further from mine ' and ihort do me this
VOL, JlI. A diftonour

diflonour at tlih rrquell of my rebc!s, as to fend r-i.-
mnitionerr to hear them againlf r nc, as you wold dto -,
a mere fubje&, and not hear me. ,y mou;l . Now, n:a.
dam, I have promised you ro come to you, and ha\. :i
tlhere made my moan and complaint of. these rehels. ai
they coming thither, nor as iofflelTlb, hut as subj;el; to
answer. I vwould hJave befiuihit you to hear my jui' .-
cation of that which they ha-ve fallly set furth a:.: 'i
me, and if I could not purge myfeil thereof, you ' ;;q:
then difchare your hands of my causes, and Ict nlK: i:,
for such as I am. But to d.) as you faj, if I were i '-
pable I would be better advised ; but being not fC, 1
can't accept this dilhonour at their hands, that being :r,
possession they xill come and j;ccufe me before y [c
commiffloners, whereof I can't like: 'and feeing yr
think it to be againlt yo:ur honur and confignage to ,
otherwise, I hefech you that you will not be nI.c
enemy, untill you may fee how I can difclarge my',;
every way, and ro susser me to go into France, whoiel
have a dowry to maintain me; or at lea:st to go In:o
Scctlaid, wirh assurance that if there come any stringers
-thirher, 1 will hind rnyfelf for their'return without any
prejudice to you. or if it pitis you not to do tliis, I
protefl that-l will not itnhpute it to' fal(iood, if I rc-
Ciive flra'ngers in my country, without making you any
6ther discharge for it. ' Do with my body as you will,
the honour or blame shall le yoLur. For 1 had rather
die here, anti that my'faiihful servants may be filccouro!
(tlho'you would iot 'so) by flrapgers, than to ftiL'cr
them to he utterly undone, upon hope to receive, in
tirhe to dome, particular ccmiodlii. 'There Ie m:n;:'
thintis to rhove mp'to fear tiat I tliall have to do, in
this oouttry, with oth'tss than wilh you. But sori(s-
much a northing hath lollowed tupon'my last mnan, I
fiold 'my peace,'h'a'p',ecn what' iay li;p. I have as lees to
ieniksc my of'rtune, a# to f:ck, it, and not find it. Fur.
ther, it pleafd :you to give license to my fubjeos to go
ard come. 'Tlhis has, hern rcfufed by my jord Scroop
and Mr. Knolls (aa they fay) by'your commandment,

,, ,.. ,' . .

. ... . . .'.

,,;..: ." bccauf[

, '
,

bccaufe I Would not depart helice to your charge, untill
1 had inf'ver of this Itrer, tho' I llew'ed therhf that you
required my answer upon the two points, contained in
!':du r lutter.

'The one is to let you briefly urnderfland, I am come

to you to nake my moan to you, the which being heard,
I would declare unto you mine innoc'ency, and then
iequire your aid, ard for ti.ck thereof, I can't but
n-,:ke my moan and complaint to God, that I am not
hcardtn my jufi quaircl, and to appeal to other princes
to lave refpte tiereunto as hmy cafe requireth; and to
you, madam, first of all when you (hall have examined
your conscience before him, abd havie him for virnefs.
-And the othlir, which is to come ftlrther into yourt
counrry, and not to come to your prefehce, I will
eileem that as no favour, but will take it for the con-
trary, obeying it'-as a tling forced. In mean time, I
itfccLsh you to return to nmemy lord Herries for cant
be without him, having none of nmy counfcl here, and
aRfo to susser me, if ir please you, without lurther de-
iity, to depart hence whithersoever it be out of this
country; I am flre you will not deny- me this finiple
request for your honour's fake, feeing it doth not please
you to use your natural goodness towaids me other-
wife, and feeing that of mine own accord, I am come
hither, let me depart again, with yours. And if God
permit my causes to'fucceed well, 1 fiall be bound.to
you for it i and happening utherwife, yet 1 can't blame
y,ul. As for my lord Fleeming, feeing thal uponrny crcdit
)ou ;have suffered him t o go ome to hi !louse, I war-
rdi,t you he (hall pals no lurther, i ut shall reiurn when
it flall please you. In that you trust me, I will nut (to
die lor it) deceive you. B1utfiotim perhaps for DtUm-
barton I anfwcr not, when my 1. Fleeming flall be in
thc Tower. For they which are with.n it, will. not
;,il)ear to receive succour, if I don't aflure them of
yoit; no, tho' you would charge me withal, for I
in.,e left them in charge, to have more rcfpeCt to my
frrvants and to my eilate, thanl to my Jlie, Qood rifler,
br of another mind, win the heart, and all Ihall be yours,

A A A and

and at your commandment. I thought to satisfy you
wholly, if I might have seen you. Alas ! do not as the
serpent, that ftappeth his hearing, for I am no enchanter,
.but your filer, and natural cousin. If Cafar had not
disdained to hearor read the complaint of an advertiferr
he had not so died; whyfdhould princes ears be flopped
feeing that they are painted so long w meaning that they
Should hear all and be well advised, before they an-
fwer. I am not of the nature of the basilisk, and lets
of the chamelion, to turn you to my likeness, and tho'
I should be so dangerous and curs'd as men fay, you
are sufficiently armed with constancy and with jullice,
which I require of God, who give you grace to use it
well with long and happy life. From Carlile, the 5tit
of July 1568.

No. XXVI. (Vol. II. p. 27.)
Part of a Letter- from Sir Francis Knollys to

Cecil, 8th Aug. 1568, from Bolton,

[Au original. Paper.office.]

-- BUT surely this queen doth seem, outwardly,

not only to favour the form, but also the chief article
of the religion of the gospel, namely jutification by faith
only: and the heareth the faults of papifiry revealed hy
preaching or otherwise, with contented ears, and with
gentle and weak replys, and (he doth not seem to like
the wo rfe of religion throw me.

Part of a Letter from Sir Francis Knollys to
' Cecil, 21 Sept. 1568, from Bolton.

· . IT came to this que n's ears of late that (he

was bruited to be lately turned to the religion of the
gofpell, to the great disliking of the papifis here-
abouts, which thing she lerfelf confessed unto me, and
yesterday, openly in the great chamber, w hen the al-

'n' ' " ' fmbly

Ifetrbly was full, and some papills prerent, she took occ
caion to fptak of religion, and then openly she pro-
.lii.d herself to be of the papist religion,' and took upor'
!i'r to patronize the fame, more earn'efly.than file had
d-.ne a great while afore, altho' her defences and argu-
nien't were so weal; that the effed of her speech was
(.cny ro (hew her zeal; and afterwards to me alone,
when I mifliked to fee her become so confidently back-
ward in religion; Wily, said she; vwould you have, me
io loie France and Spain, and all my friends in other
i'.ies; hby seeming to change my religion, and yet I anm
not aTured the queen my good siser will be my a,.
fured friend, to the fatisfation of my honour and ex-
p.' ation.

No. XXVII. (Vol. II . . 128.)

1i Letter from my Lord Herries to my Lord

Scroop and Sir F. Knollys, September 3d,>
.568.
[Cott. Lib. Cal. C. An original in his own hand.]
My lords, pleafit your honourable lordfhrps, I am
.:lomeild by James Borthwick, lately come from the
,, cn's majtity your foverane, that is fchawin to, her
;ilirlnefs, I hmuld have ridden in Cra'furdinure; fen my
!,( cuni'ing into this realm, upon the earl of Murray's
rpelndants. And that 1 fuld have caufit, or been of
',:.itft.ll to Scottifmen to have riddin in Ingland, to flay

fipulzie her niajt:ity's fubjecs.
My lords, I thought it right needful becatife yout

lrdlliips is, by your foverane, commanded to attend
.;)on the queen's majefly my mistief, fCo having daily
:i:t;ii in thiir atter6, to declare'iipo'i the truth ; hum-
i,; desiring that' your lordfhils will, for God's cause,
c-:- ificat tile queen your"fover;nc the fatle.

As od' lives, I have neither consented, nor'any wit
had kllowi'cil' of aiy Sc'ti'fmnti riiding in £illald,

A A t

to do the subjects thereof hurt in bodies or goods, frer
the siege of Leith i and as I understand it Ihal! be fun l
true, that gif orry sic open hurt be done, it is by th:
queen my sovereign's disobedients, and that I have i:ot
ridden nor hurt no Scottifiman, nor commanded no
hurt to be done to them fen my coming from the queen's
majefiy of England, it is well kend, for that never ani
will complain of me.

I have done more good to Crawfurdmure nor ever

the earl of Murray has done, and will be loather to do
them any harm than he will. Except the queen's ma-
jelly your sovereign, command fie false reports to b:.
tryit, quhereof this is altogidder an inventit leafing, her
grace fall be trublit, and tyne the hearts of true nun
here, quhom of ftc report fall be made, that baitih
would serve hir, and may, better than they unworl,.y
liars.

My lords, I underfland the queen's majefly your so-

vereign is not contented of this bruite, that there shou!d
ony Frenchmen come-in this realm, with the duke if
Chattelhorault. Truth it is, I am no manner of way
the counfall of their cuming, nor has no sic certainty
thereof, as I hear by Borthwick's report from the queen's
majefly your love eign. And gif I might as well fay it,
.as it is true indeed, her grace's self is all the wyitt,
and the counfall that will never let her take order v.:ith
my mailrefs cause. For that our sovereign havand i r
mnajefly's promise, be writing, of luff, friendflip, ;i:d
affiflance gif need had so requirit, enterit that reainl,
upon the i 6 day of May, fen that ;ime the queen's ImlI-
jelly has commanded ine diverse times to declare Ihe
would accept her cause, and do for her, and to put her
in peaceable polfenfion of this realme, and when I rc-
quired of lher majefly, in my maiflrefs name, that hcr
highness would either do for her, (as her.fpecial tllit
was fle wold) accolding to her former promires, or
othFr.wi(e give !!er counfal, wold not consent, (as I llowr
her grace I sand diverfo repugnant) than that (he would
permit her.toapafs in France or to some other prince to
ptekfusporb, or failing hereof, (quhilk yasa ains all

P,

.
. ' v roafn)

r-e.fol) that Ihe would permit her to'retuim in her awiri
cuntrie, in sic Cempil manner as (he came out of it, and
:,.id to her majesty ane of thir, for'her honour, would
not be refufit, feeand that -she was coined in her realni
upon her writings and promises of' friendthip. And
fckiike, 1 (aid to'her highntfs, gif my maiftrefs had the
like prormife of her nobility and estates, as she had of
herself, I should have reprovit them highly, gif they had
not condefeendit to'one of thir three, and so I fay, and
1 I write, that in the warld it ihall be maiit repre.
hendable, gif this promise taketh not other good effe&,
nor yet it does. Notwithstanding, I get gud answer
of thir promises of friendship made to my sovereign, and
to put her grace in this her awin countrie peaceably,
we have fund the contrary working by Mr. Middlemore
dire&tit from her highness to flay the army that cuiit
down our houCes. And alfua, in the proceeding of this
]atr pretendit parliament, promised twenty days before
the time to myself to have caused it been difchargit.
,nd yet contrary to this promise, have they made
their pretendic manner of forfalture of 31 men of guid
reputation, bishops, abbottis, and barroni, obedient
fubje6ts to our sovereign, only for her cause.

They have also difponit, fen our fovcreign's cause

was taken upon hand be the queen's majefly of that
realm, an hundred thousand pound Scots worth of
her awin true fubjefs geir, under the color of the
law, groundit upon their false, treasonable, 'fowin,
aunlhority.

The murders, the oppreffrons,' the burnings, the ra-

vifhing of women, the deflrulion of policy, both ec.
cicfialtical apd temporal, in this mean time, as in my
fommer writings I said it was' lamentable to ony christ-
ian man to hear of, except Cod gif grace, the profefRioi
of the evangile of Jesus Christ profeflit be your prince,
counfall and rcalme, be mair myndit, nor the auld'id-
:mily that has fland'betwixt the realms, many bof iy
,.tuntrymcn will doubt In this'articlei aid their pro-
~cvdingSs putis mzy (elf in Sanl'Ttiomia belief.' '

PTow, my lords, gif the queen's majefly of that rcili,

upon quhais promire and honour my matflrel' c;;.,
there, os I have said, will leave all the French wrir,);O
and French phiafes of writings, quhiJks amongis theci
ib over meikle on balh the fides unfit, and plainly, ac-
cording to the auld true cuflom of Ingland and Scut.
land, qihereir be a word promitf truth was obferv d,
promilfe, in the nanie ot the eternal God, and upon lle
high honour of that nobill and princely blude of t:
kings of Ingland, quhereof Ihe is defcendir, and pi.-
fently wears the diadem, that ihe will put my maiftri;,
in her awin counitry, and cause her as queen thereof :n
her authority and slrength to be obeyit, and to do thli
fame will appoint an certain day within two months at
the fartl4hft. as we underfland this to be our weil, lui
will we, or the maif part of us all, follow upon it,
leaving the Flenlctimeri, and their evil French phrases
togidder. And therefore, and for the true perp.tril
friendlhip of that realm, will condit;on, and for (it
part, with the grace of Almighty God, keep lic heads
and conditions ot agreement, as noble and wile men ci:!
tondefcend upon, for the weill of this haiil island. As
I have been partlings declaring to the queen your fove.
reign, quhilk I sIhew to your lord(hips felfis both in r-
ligion, in the punishment of the earl Bothwile, for
the queen's last husband s (laughter, and for a mu:Lu.I
band of amity perpetually to remain amangis us.

Doubtless my lords, without 'hat, we may find (ic

time and friendly working, as may gif us u ecafion batrh
to forgtice Middlemore and his late pretendit parliament,
we will turn the leaf, leaving our sovereign agains cur
will to rell where fise is, under the promise of frind!-
fi(ip. As I have baith said, and will ever affirm, rnacle
by your hfvereign, quhilk was only cause of her grace.':
coining in that realme, and seek the help and moyen if
li!tenoh, or Spanish, till expulfe this treasonable aind lalli
pretendit authority, quhilk means to reign. above us.

My lords,.l desire your lordship. confider, that it is
he, that mailt defirua tli amity boewixt Jngland antd

S.cotl0nl

Scotland to continue, and of a poor man belt cau£s has,
that writ this.

My brother, the laird of Skirling, fchaws me, that in
your lordlhip's communing with him, it appearit to
him, your mind was we (hold susser the earl of Murray
to work, altho' it were agains reason to us, and comr
plain thereof to the queen's majesty, and her highners
wald fee it reformit. My lords, her majesty will be
over meikle troublit to reform the wranges we have
fuflainit already. For I am fdre, gif reason 'and jultice
may have place, our maiftrefs, and we her subje&s,
have received express wrang, far above two hundred
thousand pounds sterling, in the time of this unhappy
government, feeing the reformation of fa great causes,
comes, now a days, so flowlie and the ungodly law of
oblivion in sic matters so meikle praftis'd, I think,
nowther for the queen's honour, nor our weill, ybur
lord(hips would fua mean, nor that it is good to us to
follow it. And that ye will give your sovereign fie
advertisement thereof, as your good wisdoms shall find
in this cause meet. It.will' be true and frindful working
for us, indeed, and nowther French phrases, nor boat-
ing, and finding little other effet, that will cause us to
hold away the Frenchmen. This is plainly written,
and I desire your lordihip's plain answer, for in truth
and plainness langeft continues gud friendship, quhilk
in this matter I pray God may lang continue, and have
your lordships in his keeping. Off Dumfries, the 3d day
9f September 1568.

Your lordships at my power

tp command leifully,

HERRIS.

QOeen Mary to Q Elizabeth.

[r56.8 Cott. lib. Cal. I. An original.]

MADAmM ma bonne foeur. J'ay refceu de vos lettres,

d'une mermo dete p I'une, ou vous faites mention de
i'cxcufe de Mon(r de Murra pour tenir fIn pretendu
Plarleinenr, qui tn? fenble bien froid, pour obtenir plus

de

de tollerance que je m'eftois perfuadcc n'avoir par vofre
promelfi, quant a n'ofler donner commiflion de venir
(ans un parlement pour leur peu de nombre de nobleire
alors, je vous rtefpns, q'uils n'ont que trois ou quacre
d'avantage, qui euffent auffl bien dit leur opinion hiois
de parlement, qui n'a efit tenu tant pour cette effe, mais
pour faire ce qu'exprefement nous avions requis eflic
emperchis, qui eft la forfalture de mes fubjeds pour
m'avoir eflcs fidelles, cc quc je m'affurois, jufques a heir,
avoir eu en promefle de vous, par la lettre ecrite a mi
lord Scr up e maiflre Knoleisvous induire a ire conire eu!x,
voire, a Its enfayre refentir ; toutefois je vois que je
i'ay mal pris, j'en fuis plus marrie, pour ce que fur voire
lettre qu'il me montrerent, et leur parole, jel'ay si di-
vulguement affuray que pour vengeance quej'en defir.
affe, si non mettre difference entre leur faux deportemens,
et les miens sinceres. Dans voftre lettre auffi datee du
Iome d'Aouft, vous metties ces mots. " I think your
" adverse party, upon my sundry former advices, v. ii
" hold no parliament at all; and if they do, it (hall
" be only in form of an aflembly, to accord whom to
" ,fend into this realm, and in what fort; for otherwise,
"if they shall proceed in manner of a parliament, willi
" any a6 of judgment against any petfon, I (hall not in
" any wife, allow thereof; and if they thall be so over-
' seen, then you may think the fame to be of no other

moment, than the former procedures and by such
" their'rahi mannet of proceeding, they flall molt pre-

judice themnfelves and be assured to find me ready

"to condemn them, in their doings." Sur quoy, j'ay
contiemiuind mies fervitcurs, les faiffant retirer, fouffrant
ftlon voftre commandernent d'etre faufftment nomnics
traitrcs, par cculx, qui le font de vray ; et encore d'ere
provoquec par efcarmons dies, ct par prinfes de mes gens
et lettres, et au contraire vous etes informce que nmes
fubjedls ont evahia Its voftres, madanmc, qui a tlit cc
rapport n'clt pas homme de: lien, car laild de Sesford et
son fils font et ont elles ines rebeller deplis le comnience-
mcnt; etiquiris vous, s'ils n'cfoient a 15onfris aveques
culx, j'avois oftri rerp'ondrc de fa frontiere, ce qui me ut

refus',

etnl c, ce qui m'en devroit arses defcharger, neanmoina,
-.,,ur veus faire preuve de ma fidelitc, et de leur. falfite,
:;'ri vous me fayte donner le nori des coulpablcs, et rne

i, i ltier, je coninanderay. mes fubjt&s les pour fui re, ou
,U ,,:.s voules que ce foit les voltres, les miens leur
).yJeront; je vous prie m'en mander voftre volonte, au .
reli; mles fubjees fidelles feront refionfables a tout ce
c e leur sera mis fu les contre vous, ni les voflres, ni
ues iebelles, defpuis, que me confeillates les faire re-.
:I et QuaintauxFrancois,j'e(crivisque P'on m'en fitnulle
-.onirfuite, car j'efpcrois tant en vous, queje n'en aurois
,h'foign,-je ne sieu si le dift aura en mec lettres, mais
', .vous jure devanr Dieu que je ne fcay cliofi du monde
Je leur venue, que ce. que m'en aves manday, ni n'en
!, oui de France mot du monde, cr ne le luis croire pour
i .l occasion, et si ils si font, c'eft fans mon fceu ni con-
,, ternenr, Pourquoy je vous fupplie ne me condamncr
:'in m'ouire, car je fuis prest de tenir tout ce que j'ay
..Urc a Mefler Knoleis, er vous atire que voftre amirt,
!;li vous pleft m'offrir, sera rescue avant toures les
' '$es du ncnde, quant France fervit la pour preifer leur
i'our a cefte condition, que prenies mes affaires en
riren, en foeur, et bonne ami, comme ma France eo en
v.,is; mnais une chore feule me rende confuse, j'ay tant
J't einis qu'ont votre orcille, la quelle ne pouvant avoir
.*i parolle, toutes mes aftions vous font defguifees, et
i.l:(mcnt raportees, par quoi il m'eft impolfible de
mi'.ili'rer de vous, pour les manteries qu'on vous a f'ait,
pour deftruire voflre bonne volente de moy ; par quoy

d(firerois bien avoit cc bien vous faire entendre ma

lincce et bonne alfctdion, laquclle je ncepuis sI bien del;
cril'r, que mes enemnis a tort ne ladecolole. Ma bonne
fneu., gagnes moy i envoy;s moy querir, n'efltics en
ialoinfe par faulx raports de celle que ne desire quo.
votre honne gracej je me remettriy fur Metier Knoleis a'
dl"i je me fuis lilrement cefcouverte, ct apres vous avoir
hlif(e les mains, je prierai Dieu vous donner en f;inr6,
longue et heucutre vie. De Boton, ou je volts promcts,
,i n'erpere pertir, qi'avequcs.voflre honne,grai9,ct.quoy-
q ko Is menteurs mnente, . Ce a6,d'Aoua.,

No. XXVIII. (Vol. II. p. 129.)

Queen Elizabeth to the Earl of Murray.
[Paper-office, from a copy corre&ed by Secretary Cecil.]
RI GHT trusty and right well beloved cousin, we greet

you well. Where we hear fay, that certain reports
are made in sundry parts of Scotland, that whatsoever
lhould fall out now upon the hearing of the queen of
Scotts cause,' in any proof to convince or to acquit the
(aid queen concerning the horrible murder of her late
hulband our cousin, we have determined to restore her
to her kingdom and government, we do so much mislike
hereof, as we cannot indure the fame to receive any
credit: and therefore we have thought good to assure
you, that the fame is untruly devised by the authors to
our dilhonour. For as we have been always certified
from our (aid tifer, both by her letters and mefrages,
that £he is by no means guilty or participant of that
murder, which we with to be true, so surely if she
Should be found jufly to be guilty thereof as hath becn
reported of her, whereof we would be very sorry, then,
indeed, it thould behove us to confider otherwise of her
cause than to satisfy her desire in restitution of her to
the government of that kingdom. And so we would
have you and all others think, that should be disposed to
conceive honourably of us and our actions.

Indorfed zoth Sept. 1568.

No. XXIX. (Vol. II. p. 135.)
Sir Francis Knollys to Cecil, the 9th of Oftobcr

I568, fiom York.

[An original. Paper-ofice.]

--M Y lord's grace of Norfolk fending for me to

Bolton, to attend upon him here Thursday last, I mada
my repair hither accordingly, meaninSg o fay here until

MQlonday

Monday next; as touching the matters of the com-
zniffion, that his grace and the reft have from-her high-
ness, his grace hath imparted unto me of all things there-
unto appertaining, and what hath hitherto passed, and
sltho' the matters be too weighty for my weak capacity,
to presume to utter any opinion of mine own thereof,
yet I fee that my lord Herris, for his parte laboureth a
reconciliation, to be had without the extremity of odious
occufations; my lord of Ledington also faith to me,
that he could with there matters to be ended in duke
altner, so, thaZ it might be done with safety; of the
reRf you can conceive, by the advertisements and writings,
sent up by our commiflioners.
A ietter from the Bilhop of Ross to the Queen

of Scots, from York, Otober 1568.

[Cott. Lib. Calig. C. t. A copy.]

PL.EI your majefly I conferred at length with A.

ane great part of a night, who affurit me that he had
reasoned with B. this Saturday C. on the field, who de-
rerminate to him that it was the D. determinit purpose
not to end your cause at this time, but to hold the fame
in fufpence, and did what was in her power, to make
the E. pursue extremity, to the effect F. and his adhe-
rents night utter all they could to your diflionour, to
the efilet to cause you come in disdain with the hail
fiuhjcls of this realm, that ye may be the mair unable
tn attempt any thing to her difsdvantage. And to this
RffeCt is all her intention, and when they have pro-
duccd all they can against you, D. will not appoint the
inatter infiantly, but transport you up in the country,
taid retain you there till fle think time to flew you
favour, which is not likely to be hafIily, because of
your uncles in France, and the fear fle has of yourself
to be her unfriend. And therefore their counsel is, that
ye write an writing to the D. meaning that ye are in-
fo0nmit that your fubjeets which has offcndit you,This

voL il.. 1
. in

in effect that your majefly hearing the estate of your
afFairs as they proceed in York, was informed that her
in.jefty was informed of you, that you could not gutdly
remit your uhbjers in such fort as they might credit
you hereafter,. whicl was a great cause of the flay of
this controversy to be ended. And therefore persuading
her D. effectually not to trull any who had made such
narration. But like as ye had rendered you in her hand,
as most tender to you of any living, so prayit her take
na opinion of you, hut that ye wauld use her counfell in
all your affairs, and wald prefer her fiiendfhip t,
all others, as v ell uncles as others, and assure her to
keep that thing ye wvald promiie to yourfubjes by her
advicc. And if D. discredit you, ye wald be glad to fa-
tisfy her in that point be removing within her realm ill
secret and quiet, manner, where her G. pleased, unti'-
the time her G. wcre fully fatisfecd, and all occasion ci
discredit removed from her. So that in the mean time
yonr realm were holden in quietness, and your true ful-
jets restored and maintained in their own eflatei and tic
other things tending to this effet. And aflirms that
they believe that this may be occasion to cause her credit
you that ye offer so far; and it may come that.within two
or three months (he may become better minded to your
grace, for now fihe is not well minded, and will no:
thesw you any pleafuire for the causes albrefaid.

N. B. The title of this paper is in Cecil's hand.; the
fCllowing key is:added in another hand.

A. T'hq lar of Lethington,
B. The duke of Norfolk.
C. Was the day lie rode to Cawood.
D. The queen of England.
E. The queen of Scops commiiftoners.
F. The earl Of Murray&

1%. XXX. (Vol. II. . x47.)
Dflibcration of Secretary Cecii's concerning

Scotland. Dec. 21, i568.

[':'ap.r-office.]

T:E heft w'y for Enlanid, but not tile eafief, that

^'i queen o' Scots night rermain deprived of her crown,
ani (le state continue as it is.

T;he second way for England profitable, and not so

i-.,id.That the qtlen of Scotts might be induced, by
f-nme perfwafions to agree that her son mightlcontinue
:;n., because he is crowvned, and herself to remain also
*qcien; and that the government of the rtalhi mighr be

mrnitted to such persons as the queen of England should.
-: me, so as for the nomination of tht.m it might be
.:,-.-td, that a convenient number of persons of Scot-
ianfl hould be frit named to the qgl.en of England, in-
*.fi'rently for the queen of Scots, and for her son, that
is c, fay the one half by the queen of Scots, and Ihe
;:i.cr by the earle of Lennox and lady Lenriox, parents
to ihe child; and out of those, the queen's majelly of
'n:iaind to make choice for all the officers of the realm,
'h:t are, by the laws of Scotland, dilpofilble by the king
* queen of the land.
T'l' t until Ihis may be done hy the queen's majefr,

tli: :overnment remain in Ihe hands of the earle of Mur-
-r;y as it is, providing lie (hall nof dispose of any offices
:;r perpetuals to continue any longer but to thcfe of-
f::rd of tile premises,'

'!'hat a parliament be runirrioned in Scotland by re.
::ral conmmandcnts, hot'h'f thef queen Qs Scots ann) of
,h: young king.

-- That lhofages be delivered unto England on the

y'wi. g king's behalf, to the number of twelve persons
of the earle of Murray'b part as tile queen of Scots niall
.e;me i and likew;il on the queen's belijf, to the like
ullmber as tle earle of Murray firall name ; the fame
not to be any that have by inheritance or office cause to

In , be

be in this parliament, to remain from the beginning of
the summons of that parliament, until three months aftrc
that parliament; which hoRfages shall be pledges, that
the friends of either part ilall keep the peace inl all cafcs,
till by this parliament it he concluded, that the ordinanc:
which the queen of England [hall devise for the govein-
ment of the realm (being not to the hurt of the crown
of Scotland, nor contrary to the laws of Scotland fct
any man's inheritance, as the fame was before the por-
liament at Edinr the Decemr 1567) shall be eftablifhcu
to be kept and obeyed, under pain of high treafor. fr
the breakers thereof.

--That by the fame parliament also be eftab1ine!

all executions and judgments given against any perfoa
for the death of the late king.

--That by the fame parliament, a remifdion he

made urniverfally from thp queen of Scots to any Itr
contrarys, and aflo from every one subje&t to anot!ecr,
saving that restitution be madeof lands and houses, L-2
all other things heritable, that have been by either site
taken from them which were the owners thereof at the
committing of the queen of Scotts to Lochlevin.

That by the fame parliament it be declared who flian

be successors to the crown next after the Q.of Scots an!.
her iflue; or else, that such right of the D. of Chatel-
herault had, at the marriage of the Q.of Scots with thl
lord Darnley, may be criferved and not prejudiced.

That the QL of Scots may have leave of the queen's

majefly of England, twelve months after the laid par-
lianment and that ihe shall not depart out of England,
without special licence of the queen's najefty.

That the young king (hall be nourilhed and brought
up in England, till he be years of age.

It is to be confidered, that in this cause the compofi.

tion between the queen and her subje&s may be madrl
with certain articles, outwardly to be seen to the world
for her honour, as though all the parts mhould come of
her, and yet for the surety of contrarys, that certain
betwixt ser and the queen's majefly are to be coQ-
cle del,.

The Queen to Sir Francis TiKolleys, 22 fan.

1568-9.

[Paper-office.]

WE greet you well, we mean nor, at this point, by

any uwriting, to renew that ,vhicb ir hath pleased God
to make grievous to us and forryfull to yow ; but for-
b.tring the f(ai.e as unmeet at thi- point, having occa-
fitn to command you in our service, and yow alto
whileft you are to serve us. We require yow to con-
ic&r of this that followtth with like consideration and
Jiiigence, as hitherto yow have accuilomate in our
fervie ; at the time of our lalf letters wvriien to yow
t;,e fourteenth of this mon!h for removing of the queen
of Scots, we had undertfandinig out of Scotland of cer-
t-iin writings sent by her from thence into Scotland,
ingffrt the which one is found to contain great and
panif-ft tintruths touching us ard rothrs also, as fllall
,nd may plainly appear unto yow by the copy of the
t.rnm, which likewif e fe rnd you, and bccaufe at the
f, rn, time we were advertised, that it tliould be shortly
Froclaimed in Scotland, though' thcn it was not, we
tholghtl good firfl to remove the queen, before we would
,i.r;uie thle falme and then expet tihe irTue thereof; and
rmw, this day. I') letters from our cousin of Hunfdon
w ' are afcc tafned, that lince ta t tinm thhi flame matters
contained in the writing, are puhlifled in diverse parts
ol Scotland, whereupon we have thought it very meet,
fir the discharge of our honor, and to confound the
f.ilftlhod contained in that writing, not only to have
lte ane rc nproved by open proclamation uplon our fron-
;:tii, the copy whereof wou do herewith tInd yow, but
,:i!fu in convenient fort to charge that queeh therewith,
ro as flie may he moved to declare tle aulilors thereof,
n.ld pertitaders of her to write in such nlanderous fort
such untruths of us ; and in lhe mean ieafon, we have
here ilayed heFr commiffiociers, knbwing no otlier who;m

l 3 we

we may more probably presume terbeparties -ereuntc,
than they, until the queen shall narme some other, and
acquit them; who being generally charged, withoutex-
pressing to' them any particularity, do use all manner of
speeches to di(charge themselves; wherefore our plea.
sure is, that ye (hall, after ye have well perused the
copy of thiaswritiffg sent to yow, speedily declare unto
her, that we have good nnderflanding given us of diverse
letters and writings, lent by her into Scotland, signed
by her own hand, amongst which, one such writing is
sent: with her commandment exprefly as now it is al.
ready published, as we are much troubled in mind that
a princess as the is having a cause in our hands so in-
plicated with. difficultys and calamitys, should either
conceave in her own mind, or allow of them that should
devise such false, untrue, and improbable matters again!i
us, and our honor, and specially to have the aventu:_
to have the fame being known so untrue to be pub-
lifhed ; and you /hall also fay, because we will not think
so ill of her, as that it /hould proceed of her ftlf, buL
rather she hath been counselled thereunto, or by abufi
made to think some part thereof to be true, we require
her, even as the may look for ony favour at our hands,
that (he will diburden herself as much as truly [he may
herein, and name them which have been the autlol;
and perfwaders thereof, and so the thall make as gre.a
amends to us as the cafe may require after you have
thus far proceeded, and tome answer of her, whether
hle /hall deny the writing absolutely, or name any that
have been the advisers thereof, you (hall fay unto her
that we have flayed her commiflioners here, untill we
may have rome answer hereof, because we cannot but
impute to them rome part of this evil dealing, untill
by her 'answer the authors may be known; and as Coon
as you can have direct anfwvers from her, we pray you to
return us the fame; for as the cafe flandeth, we cannot
but be much disquieted with it, having our honour so
deeply touched contrary to any intention in us, and for
any thing we know in our judgment the earl of Murray
ad pcthers namtd in the fame writing void of thought

for

for the matters, 'to them therein imputed; you may im.
part to the queen of Scots either the contents of the
landerous letter, or thew her the copy to read it, and
you may also impart this matter to the lord Scroop, to
join with you there as you Ihall think meet.
Sir Francis Knolleys to queer. Elizabeth, from

Wetherby, the z8th January r568,

[An Original. Papei.office.

---I Wi.L suppress my own griefs, and pars them

over with silence, for the present learning of your ma-
jefly-and for this queen's answer to the coppie of her
£uppofed letter sent unto Scotland, I muff add this unto
my brother's letter, sent unto Mr. Secretary yefernight
lar ; in process of time the did not deny but that the
fiiff lines contained in the fame copie, was agreeable to
a )eter that the had sent unto Scotland, which touched
uoy lord of Murray's promire to deliver her son into your
mlajefly's hands, and to avoid that the fame /hould not
he done without her consent,' made her, he faith, to
write in that behalf; (he faith also that'ihe wrote that'
t.cy thould cause a proclamation to be made to Itir her
people to defend my lord of Murray's intent and pur-
pl;fe, fur delivering or her said Ton, and impunge his
icbellious government, as the termed it, but fie utterly
denyeth to have written any of the other slAnderous part
of the said letter touching your niajefly; fle said also,
that rhe fufpeeted that a Frenchman, now in Scotland,
might be the author of tome, Scotch letters devifed'in,
her name, but the would not allow me to write this for'
:.y part of her answer.

. .

No. XXXII. (Vol. II. p. .)
Sir Nicholas Throkmorton to the right honour.

able the lordof'Liddington.

[zothof uly 1569. From the Original.]

YOUR letter of the 3d of July, I have received the

i5th of the fame. For anfwer-whereunto you (hall uri
derftind, that friends here. to my lord regent and ytu
do wiih.luch a concurrence in all doings, as in matcer
and circuifilances there arise no dissention, or at the
least, no more nor other than the difference of countries
doth necessarily require. We here do think convenient
that as few delays be used as may be, for the confuni-
mation'of the matter in hand, which principally to a-l
vance, your allowance, prosecution, and speedy promo.
tion in Scotland, is molt requilite, for you are so wile,
and well acquainted with the state of the world, and
with all our humours, as you know that fume do allow
and disallow for reason, some for refpe' of multitude,
some for refpec of persons, and so the cause is to go
foi ward as men do like to set it forward. You are not
to seek 'that tome will use cautions, some neutrality,
Come delays, and some will plainly impunge it. And
yet all and every of these forts will alter their doings,
when they (hall. fee tie regent and his favourers accord
with the heit. and greatest part there, and agree with the
wifell- and trongelt part here. Tho' the matter la.s
taken its beginning here, upon deep and weighty con-
fiderations,..for the weil of both the princes and tlhir
realms, .as well presently, as in time to come, yet it is
thought molt expedient, that ile regent and realm of
Scotland, by you, ihotuld propose the matter to tie
.queen our sovereign, if you like to use convenience,
good order, or be disposed to leave but a fear, and no
,wound of the hurts past. . I would be glad that this my
letter should come to your hinds.betloe the conventioi,
wvilereat it feenas your queen ' reltoration and niarna;igc
to the duke of Norfolk fhould.be piopounded, eitlher to
*lipne, jn tl!em both allowance or rejedion. To wlhc!h

p occed.l

proceedings, because you pray me to write frankly, I
fay and realbn thus, me tlinketli you use a prepoflerous
crler, to demand the consent of such perlons, in such
-.itters, as their ninids to a good end hath rather been
firr cr prepared, and therefore there muff needs follow
either a universal refusal, or faaious division amongit
y,;%, whereby a blouflci ing intelligence muff needs come
to queen Elizabeth of the intended marriage from thence,
which ought to have been secretly and advisedly propound-

ud unto her highness ; hereby you fee then the meaning

is, by this dealing, her majesty /hall he made inexorable,
aid so bring the matter to such passe,' as this which
fi.ould have wrought furity, quietners, and a flay to
'.nih queens and their realms, shall augment your cala-
mity, and throw us your best friends into divorfe with
you, and into unhappy division amongst ourselves; for
you may not conjecure that the matter is now in deli-
beration, but expeEeth good occasion for executing;
sure I am you do not judge so flenderly-ofthe managing
of this matter, as to think we have not cast the worst,
or to enter therein so far without the affiflance of the
nobility, the ablest, the wisest, and the mightiest of this
realm, except queen Elizabeth: from whom it hath
tecn concealed until you, as the fitter minister, might
.ropound it to her, on the behalf of the regent, and the
cobility of Scotland. How far mafler Woddes defama-
:ons do carry them of queen Elizabeth's affeLtion,s, and
nafter secretary's, to assist the regent and to fuppreft
': queen of Scots, I know not, nor is it not material;
'at I do assuredly think, that her majeity will prefer
ier Iurety, the tranquillity of her reign, and the con-
vei:ation of her people, before any device, which'may
procced from vain discourse, or imperfeaions of paifions,
:.nd inconsiderate affeclions. And as for Mr. Secretary,
you are not to learn, that as he liketh not to go too
tait afore, so he coveteth not to tarry too far behind,
anid pecially when the reliques be of no great value or
power. If I could as well affureyou of his magnanimity,
and copflancy, as of his present conformity, I would fay
confidently, you may repofc as well of him in this mat-

ter,

ter, as of the duke of lorfolk, the earls of Arundti,
'Pembroke, Leicester, Bedford, Shrewsbury, and the r,'
of the nobility ; all which do embrace and protefli h',e
accomplishment of this cafe. I have, according to y,;;
advice, written presently to my lord regent, with tl!
fame ze: and care of his well doing that 1 owe to hiU.
whom I love and honour. Mr. Secretary hath affurc's
unto him the queen of Scotland's favourand good opinico,
wherewith he feeneth to be well fatisfy'd. If ycrr
credit be, as I trust, haften your coming hither, for :
is very neceslary that you were here presently. QOE:-
zabeth both doth write to my lord regent in such for',
as he may perceive Mr. Wood's discourses of her m-.
jefty's affection to be vaid, and Mr. Secretary otherwlve
bent than he conjeEtureth of him, the effet of wi'-i
her majcRy's letter you shall- underfand, by my lord
Leicester's letter unto you at this dispatch. At ths'
court, 2oth July I569.

No. XXXII. (Vol. II. p. I6o.)
Part of a letter from the Earl of Murray to L. B.

pfrobably Lord BurIligI.

[1569. Harl. Lib. 37. B. 9. so.,43.]

--' BECAUSE I fee that great advantage is tal:.!.

o frmall occasions, and that the mention of the marri;il,;
betwixt the queen my sovereign's mother, and the d. or
Norfolk hath this while paR been very frequent in both
the realms, and then I myself to be spoken of as a mo-
tioner, which I perceive is at the lalt come to her rra-
jetty's ears I will, for satisfaction of her lighincfs, ai'l
the discharge of my duty towards her majesty, manifelt
unto you my intsreft, and medling in that matter, fromn
the very beginning, knowving whatsoever Is prejudicial
to her highness, cannot but be hurtful to tlh.'king mny
sovereign, this his realm, and me. Wliat eonferencei
was betwixt'the duke of Norfolk, and any of thini thla

Wcl:'

were with me within the.realm of England, I am not
able to declare but I am no wife forgetful of any thing
that passed betwixt him and me, either at that time, or
since. And to the end her majesty Itay understand how
I have been dealt with, in this matter, I am compelled
to touch some circumstances, before there was any mep-
lion of her marriage. In York, at the meeting of all the
conlr.,iflioners, I found very - and neutral dealing with
t:ie duke, and others her highness's commission.ers in the
bcginning of the cause, as in the making of the others to
proceed sincerely, and so furth. During which time, I
tirered into general speech, tficking at our just defence
in the matters that were objected against us, by the (aid
(cuten's commiflioners, looking certainly for no other
thi,rg, but lummary cognition in the cause of contro-
verfly, with a final declaration to have followed. Upon
a certain day the lord Lithington fecrerary rode with the
dule to Howard, what putpofe they had I cannot fay,
but that night Lithington returning, andentering in con-
:rence with me upon the state of our action, I was ad-
vised by him to pass to the duke, and require familiar
cnlerence, by the which I might have fume feeling to
t.vhat issue our matters would tend. According to which
advice, having gotten time and place convenient in the.
allhry of the house where the duke was lodged, after
:v wing of our firfl acquintance made at Berwick, the
;ime before the assize of Leith, and fdmic.fpeeches passed
hetwixt us; lie began to fay to me, how ihe in England
had favour and credit, and I in Scotland had will and
ilinndftlip of'many, it was to be thought there could be
n'il: more fit initruments, to travel for the continuance
oi tlit amity betwixt the realms, than we two. And
lb ihlat discourse upon the present slate of both, and how
I 'vws entered in that action tending so far to the queen's
d'iiilnour, I was willed by him to conlider how matters
t',odl in this, what honour I ad received of the queen,
and what inconveniences her defamation in the matters
laidt to her charge might breed to her. poserity. Her re-
tpcift was not little to'the crown of .England, thetr was
LIl one heir. Tho .amiltons my unfriends, had the

next

nxt: refpel, anmd that I Ihould esteem the iffeu of her
bddy would be'the more affectionate to me and mine,
tha'n iny other that could attain to that crown. And
so'ir (hould be meetelt, that the affirme'd her difmitfion
niade in'Lochlevin, and we do abtran& the letters of
her hand write, that ale should not be 'defamed in
hglandd. My reply to that was, how ;the matter had
paired in parliament, and the letters feet'o f many, so
that the abft'rlalng of the fame could not then secure
her to any purpose, and yet' nhould we, in that doing,
bring the ignominy dpon us. Affirming it would not be
fair for us that way to proceed, feeing the queen's majesty
of England was not made privy to the matter as Ihe
ought 'to be, in respeCt we were purposely come in'
England for that end, and for the - of the grants of our
cauft. The duke's answer was, he would take in hand
to handle'matters well enough at the court. After this,
on the occasion of cerla;n articles, thit were required
to be resolved on,' before we entered on the declaration
of the very ground of our ation, we came up to tie
court; where some new comniflioners were adjoined
to the former, and the lhearing of the matter ordained
to be in the parliament house at Weltmin(ter, in presence
of which commissioners of the said queen, and
through the - rebuking of the queen of England's
own commitfloners, we uttered the whole of the aeiion,
and produced such evidences, letters, and probations, s
we had, which might move the queen's rhajefly to rtli!lk
well of our cause. Whereupon expecting hel highii'
declaration, and feeing no great likelihood of the fame
to be suddenly given, but daily motions then made to
come to an accord with the said quctn, our matters in
hand in Scotland, in the mean season, standing in hazard
and danger, we were put to the utttcrmiol point off( l!
wit, to imagine whereunto the matterm would tend, tho'
albeit we had left nothing undone fo'r justification of
our causes, yet appeared no end, tut continual motions
niiade to come to tome accord with 'the, queeni, and re-
store her tb whole or half reign. I had no plier an-
(ser to give thom, but that I should ncither' d asainif

c OImi

*.n!ci~s ce or honour in that matter. Notwithftading
; ing this my plain anfwerr wrought no enrd, nor dif-
: - to us, and 'that I was informed that the dule be.
-a!' to mislike. of me, and to speak q'ome, as that I had
r.Iorted of the Laid queen irreverently, calling her c -
ip': obubly srduiterrr] and murderer, I was advised to. pass.
to 1 ljm, and give him good words and to purge myfelfof
;tic things objedttd to me, that I Ihould not open the
,u0Jdcn entry of his evil grace, nor have him. to our ene-
iny--- confideting his greatness. It being therewithal
Aiui'iered, and flierved to me, that if I departed, he
.'l.ading discontented and not satisfied, I might perad-
V.rni::. find such trouble in my way, as my throat
ln:I;!t be cut before I came to Bcrrick. And therefore

i::;. it might well enough appear to her marriage, I

tllci'd not put him in utter despair, liat my good will
cuil.I not be had therein. So few days before my de-
S.;:ing I came to the park in Hampton court, where
; C oulke and I met together, and there I declared unto
hil: that it was come to iny ears, how some misreport
lii;urd be made of me to him, as that I should speak ir-
r;'vertntly and ratlfly of the said queen my sovereign's
r:itlier, such words as before exprefled, that he might

f- [probablyfuspeR] thereby mny affetion to be so

2lcina;ce fiom her, as that I could not love her, nor be
:.i:;unt of her preferment, howbeit he might perfwvade
!::.i:elfoflthecontrary, foras fle oncewas theperlon in the.
world that I loved belt, having that honour tobe to near
urto her, and having received such advancement'2nd ho-
no:ur by her, I was not to uingrate or lo unnaturai ever to
* ltI her body harm, or to speak of her as was untruly re-
Pil ted of me, (howfoevcr the truth was in the fefl) and as
ro the preservation of her son, now my fovelt'ign, had
ni)ved me toenter into this cause, and that her own pref-.
ling was the occasion of that was uttered to her
[probably dimo;.ur] whensoever God flould nqve her
ih:at to repent of her bypast behaviour and life, and
after her known repentance, that Ihe should he reparate
finin that ungodly and unlawful marriage that fie was
¢ptired in, and thfl after eyre joined with such I godly.
VOL, I, ' CC and

and honourahlea personage, aswereaffe&ioned to the 1- i
religion, and whom we might trust, I could find in i,:y
heart to love her, and to Ihew her as great pleaure. .-
vour and good will, as ever I did in my life: anid n
cafe he (hould be that perronage, there was none wlho. i
could hetter like of, the queen-- in -- of Englan:r,
being made privy to the matter, and the allowing therie i
which being done, I flould labour in all things'that I
could, to her honour and pleasure, that were not prci;
dicial to the king my sovereign's efate, and prayed hirn
not to think otherwise of me, for my affecion was ra-
ther buried and hidden within me, awaiting until t:d
ihould diret her to know herself, than utterly alienat i
and abftraCed from her; which he seemed to accep: in
very good part, faying, Earl of Murray thou thinks
me that thing whereunto I will.make none in Englin:,l
or Scotland privy, and thou haft Norfolk's life in ;'
hands. So departing, I came to my lodging, and hy
the way and all night, I was in continual thought -td
agitation of mind, how to behave myfelfin that vei;;:tv
matter, firit, imagining whereunto this (hould tern. i,'
it were attempted without the queen's majesty of Yng.-
land's knowledge and good will, this realm and I leuy'if
in particular having received such favour and comfort at
her highness's hands, and this whole isle fuli pea'e i n'
quietness, since God possessed her majesty with i./:r
crown. And on the other part, feeing the dulte !:',-
disclosed hirn to me, protefling, none other wer.. .'
Ilould be privy,to our speech, I tho't I could not find in
my heart to utter any thing that imight endanger him ;
moved to the uttemnoff with these cogitations, antd: ;
desire of sleep then removed, I prayed God to fend mni
some good relief and outgate, to my difclarge, and fa;.
tisfaCion of my troubled mind, which I found indeitl;
for upon the morn, or within a day or two thereafter,
I entered in conversation with my lord of Leicester, in
his chamberat the court, where lie began to find firaing
with me, that in the matter I made so difficult to hin,
flanding so precisely on conference, and how when 1'
had in my communication with the duke, come to

9 fJt

r -- and there he niade some difcburfe with me,
about that which was talke betwixt us, I perceiving that
the duke had - [probably disclosed] the matter to
my lord of Leicefler, and thinking me thereby discharged
a: the duke's hands, therefore I repeated the fame com-
!innication in every point to my lord of Leicester, who
dcfircd me to [hew the fame to the queen's majesty,
which I refused to do, willing him if he tho't it might
i'rport her highness any thing, that he as one - by
Iker majefly, and for many benefits received at her high-
rcfs's hands is obliged to wifli her well, fliould make
dtclaration of the fame to her majefly, as I underfand
by some speech of her highness to me, he did. This my
declaration to the duke was the only cause, that staid the
violence and trouble prepared for me unexecuted, as I
have divers ways underltood. The fame declaration I
vas obliged to renew since in writings of -- - sent to
niy servant John Wood. The fum whereof, I trust, he
ihewed the duke, and Something also I wrote to himself,
for it was tho't this should redeem some time, that the
duke should not fiuddenly declare him our enemy, for
his greatness was oft laid before me, and what friendship
he had of the chief of the nobility in England, so that it
might appear to the queen's majety of England-fo cold
towards us, and doing nothing publicly that might feeni
favourable for us, we had Come cause to fjulpeh that her
highness should not be contrarious to the marriage when
it (liould be proposed to her. The flarp meifage Cent by
fit.r majesty with the lord Boyd, who had the like com-
mit1ion from the duke tending so far to the said queen's
Ir'f'rmnent, as it were proposing one manner of condi-
t!ons from both, gave us to think that her highness had
i,,-t n foreseen in the duke's delign, and that the might
;). induced to allow thereof. But howbeit it was devils
Li ;i England, that the lord of Lethington should come
a;I from me, and break the. matter to her highness, as
hcr majefly in a letter declared that fie looked for his
coining, yet that devise proceeded never of me, nor the.
i,:)blemen at the convention could no wife accord to his
:dnding, nor allow of the matter motioned, but altogether

C C z mif.

mifliked it, as bringing with the fame great inconvi-.
encies to the surety and quietness of this whole ilee; iu%
our proceedings have declared our miliking and dif-
allowance of the purpose from the beginning, and if we
had pleased he was ready for the'journey. And in like.
wife it was devised to give consent that the - [pio
bably divorce] between the said queen and Bothw()l,
lhould be suffered to proceed in this realm, as it was
desired by the (aid lord Boyd, by reason we could not
understand what was the queen's majesty's pleasure,
and allowance in that behalf - And whereas ye
mean, that her highness was not made privy of any such
.intention, the fault was not in me. The tirlt motion
being declared, as I have written, to my lord of Lei-
ccfer, and by him imparted to her majefly, so far as ?
could perceive by some speech of her highness's to me,
before my departing. Thus I have plainly declaied
how I have been dealt withal for this marriage, and
how just neceflity moved me not to require directly,
that which the duke appeared to-- unto. And for
mny threatenings, to afent to the fame, I have expressed
the manner; ite jerfuits thia laid the matter before
me, were of my own company. But the duke since
hath spoken, that it was his writing which saved my
life at that time. In conclusion I pray you persuade her
majefly, that the let no speeches nor any other thing
patsed and objeaed to my prejudice, move her majclly
to alter her favour-towards me or any ways to doubt
of my assured constancy towards her highness; for in
any thing which may tend to her honour and furery, I
will, while I live, bellow myself, and all that will do
for me, notwithitanding my hazard or danger, as
proof Ihould declare, when her majelty finds time t.
employ me.

No. XXXIV. (Vol. II. p. 71.)
WVilliam Maitland of Ledington, to my Lord

of Leiccfter, March 20thl, I570, from Lc-
dington.

[An original.] .

THE. great desolation threatened to this whole realm,

Ite the divisions thereof in dangerous faQions, dotli piess
;n, to frame my letters' to your lardfhip, in other fort,

wi:n 'ere behovefull for me, if I had no other refpek,

hut only to maintain my private credit; therefore I am
>ilien to furniih them with maiter, which 1 know not
to Le plausible, whereupon by mifconitruing tiy mean-
rg, Come there may take dccafion of offence, thinkiig
t!.at I lather utter my own passions, than go about to
inform your lordship truly of the slate ; but I truit Mry
plain dealing shall bear record to the sincerity of my
nicaning; to make the fame sensible, I will lay before.
your lordflip's eyes, the plat of this country i which
firt is divided into two factions, the one pretending the
maintenance of the king's reign, the other alledging the
queen to have been cruelly dealt withall, and unjustly
leprived of her state the former is composed of a good
number of nobility, gentlemen, and principal burroighs
of the realme, who ihall have, as Mr. Randolph beareth
us in hand, the queen's majety your sovereign's allow-
ance and protecion; the other hath in it some moi
principall of the nobility, and therewithall, good num-
bers of the inferior fort, throughout the whole realm,
vwhich also look afluredly that all kings do allow their
quarrel and will aid them accordingly. Wihat conte-
qluence this dlivifion will draw after it, I leave it to
y.yur lordlhip's consideration ; there is fallen out-anoilher
dlvifion, accidentally, by my lord regent's death, which
is like to change the state of the other two fations,
to encreafe the one, and diminilh the other, which is
grounded upon the regiment of-the realm. Some num.
ber of noblemen aspire to. the government, pretending
igmht th!ceto by reason of the quen't demifion of tlh

s c 3 group,

croun, and her commission granted at that time for tr.
regiment during the king's minority; another faftin
doth altogether repine against that division, thinking It
neither fit nor tolerable, that three or four of the menia-
eft fort amongst the earls, shall presume to challeng'
to themselves a rule over the whole realme, the ncxr cf
the blood, the first in-rank, the greatest alway both f.r
the antientry of their houses, degree, and forces, bein;,
negleckted ; this order they think plepofttlous, that
the meaner fort (hall .be placed in public tuncion t;
command, and the greater (hall continue as private
men to obey; besides that, they think if the commnr.
sion had in the beginning been valewabie, (which tihe
mofi part will not grant) yet can it not be extended to
the present, for that the conditions thereunto annexed
are ceased, and so the effe& of the whole void; the
latter part of this division hath many pretences, for
besides the queen's fation, which is wholly on that fid,,
a great number of these that have heretofore profeiidtl
the king's obedience, do favour the fame, and will not
yield to thegovernment of theother, whose preferment for
refpets they mislike, when the queen's faation shall be
increased, with a part of the king's, and these not of
lea(t fuhftance, and yow may judge what is like to en-
sue; an other incident is like to move men to enter in
further difcourres, it is given out here in Scotland that
the queen's majesty is setting forth some forces towards
the border, which (hall enter this realm, to countenance
there, that aspire to the regiment, and suppress the con-
trary faction, and bruits are spread,' tht the fame (hall
be here out of hand ; there dhat think.themfelvesof equal
force with their contrary fation at home, are rather an
overmatch to them, yet not able to encounter with the
forcesof another prince, rather than yield to their in-
feriors, will, I star, take advice of neceflity, and evil
counsellors, and seek also the maintenance of some
foreign prirnce, whereby her majery (altho' no further
inconvcaient were tobe feared) multlbe driven to ex-
celfwy cJqrgesj n ;it,wauld appear ahler, wcre a con.

~,:.~, ~i . ~
{~(fpiracy

(piracy of all the elements t one time to set us together
i'y the ears, for now when the rumour oi your forceS
c;-ming towards the border is frlead abroad, even at tlie
,amne time is arrived at Dumbarton, a galzeon ivith a
incfengcr sent exprefly from the king of France, to that
prt of the nobility that favours thl queen,'to learn the
tai:e of the country; and what support 'they lack or
IrCele, either for furtherance of her affairs, or for their
,wn safety ; afforedly this message will he well received,
and iffcfred accordingly, this is the prefen'r fate of Scot-
iand. Now, if your lordship would also know my
opinion, how to choice the befi, as the cafe flandetli;
7 -:ill in that also fatisfie your lordthip, I am required
ioTrh them to deal plainly, and your lordfllip (hall judge
,.hdecr I do so or not; for I think it plain dealing,
.-iien I simply utter my judgment, and go not about to
d:IfguiLe rmy intents. I trust the queen's majefly bath a
:',ire to retain at her devotion the realme of Scotland,
,.hich Ihe hath gone about to purchal:e, with beflowing
ereat charges, and the loss of some of her people; this
dfirer is honourable for her highness, profitable for both
the countrys, and of none'to be disallowed ; specially if
,t be (as I take it) to have the amity of the whole
realm, for it is not a portion of Scotland can serve her
turn, nor will it prove commodious for her to suit the
flicndfhip of a faction of Scotland, for in so doing, in
t' iinin the best, ihe may lose the more, and the fanie
-tould bring all her acions with us in suspicion, if he '
:houll go about to nourish flations amongtl us, which
,i.cming I am fore never entered into her majesty's
lArtr; then if it he the friendlh.p of the whole the
l othi demand, let her not, for pleifure of one part, go
bouit to overthrow the.remnanr, wlhich will.not be (o
'.lli;ble, as roome may give her to underf(tnd; but ra-
iulr, by way of treaty, let her go abhout to pacify the
'cliole Ilare, hi-ing the parties to an accord, reduce us
all by good means to an' uniformity, so fh.ll (he give us
a1ll occasion, to think well of her'doings, that ite'rendetli -
our wealth, and provol' us uis verally to winII unto

hot

her majefly a nofl prosperous continuance; by the cc,.-
-trary, if,; fortbte pleature of a few, she will fdnd foi,,
to suppress thef: whom they miiflke, and foconfequen,; .
fferdcd many-: 'tnens he not: .so faint hearted, but th),
have courage tQ, proyilt for their own safety, and int
only will.embrace the means partly offered, but will :a'i
procure further, at the hand of other 'princes. 'I" .
for mine .own part, I do abhor, and protest I deire fne -r
to fee forces of firangers to set foot within this land, y>;
1: know not what point necessity may drive men into,
ps if men in the middlc of. the sea were in a ship, which
ftddenly l(ould be set on fli£,.the fear of burning wv.eo:!
4nake therm leap into the sea, and soon afier the faai
the water, would drive them to cleive again to the 5 :.
ghip, so for avoldinla present evil, mnen will many nm!
be.ipffrced to have recourse to another, no less dam'. .
vtOs,. ',ru(t tme forces will not bring forth any ,i.d
irgit tp hcr majelly'.s behove, it muff he :on-e way of
.treaty (lal firve the turri, whelcin by my formenr let-rs
.yptir 19prdfhip dctllj lkow already what is my judgment;
youl. fe how plainly I do write, without- confideraticn
ii what payt my letters may be taken, yet my hope :s
:that, such a .will. favourably interpret thcm, shall tlhiti
that l.rnean as well to her majelly, and that realmh, ..
itliefs that will utter other language. I with the con-
tinuanice of thle amity betwvixt the two countrys, witl!-
.gut other refpl)Et, and will not conceal froin her r.a-
jefly .ny thing, to ipy knowledge, tending to the pit-
judice thereof' . if I (hall pcrceave her majelty tak>!.g
Irank.dcalings in evil part, I Ihall from thenceforth frr-
begar; in the .mean cfafon I will not cease to trowvb!i
your lord(hip, as 1 Ihall have accafion to write; 4nd !
[ take my .leavY of your 1Prdthip:
'*,.' *i

No. XXXV. (Vol. II. p. 177.)
.,tter of QCeen Elisabeth to the Earle of

Suileks, July 2d, 157o.

[Calderw. MS. History, vol z. p. Pi9.]

RIGIT trufly and well beloved cousin, we greet you

wcel, this day we have received your letterj of 28 the
lait month, with all other letters, sent from Scotland,
and mentioned in your letters, whereunto answer is
delired to be given before the tenth of this month;
.vhich is a very (hort time, the wcghtincfs of the mat-
rers, and the diflance of the places confidered j;never-
lihdlefs we have, as the thortnef; could susser in, resolved
to give thi5 answer following, which we will that yox,
3y warrand hereof shall cause to be given in our name
co the earl of Lennox and the reft of the noblemen con-
v,.ned with him. Where it is by them, in their letters,
and writings aliedged, that for lack of our resolute an-
fwer, concerning the eflablifhing of the regiment of the
realm, under their young king, great inconvienieniet
have happened, and therefore they have deferred now at
their lait convention to determine of the famine, who
shall have the place of governour, until the 2zfr thig
mnnth, before which time they require to have our ad'-
vil'c, in what person or persons the government of that
realin llall be eftablithed, we accept very thankfully the
gv.:,dwill and reputation they have of us, in yielding so
!i::nkly to require and follow our advif' in a matter, that
e:, therh the slate of their king, theirfelves, and-realm 'To
i.ear, wherein as we perveive, that by our former for.
bcl.ing to intermeddle therein, they have takun some
iilconlolrt, as though that we would not have regard tu
tlheir. aate and firety, so on the other pare, they, of their
wvlilomns ought to think, that it might be by the whole
world evil interpreted in us to appoint tlern a form of
government, or a governour by name, for tiat howfo-
ever we (hould mcan well if we Ihould do so, yet it
could not be without tome jealousy in the heads of the

elate

efate, nobility, and community of that realm, tliat i!,c
government thereof Ihould be. by me specially nll,,a!
and ordained i so as finding difficulty on both parts, and
yet mifliking moft.that they should take any dircomri.rt
by our'forbearing to oho.w our mind therein, we '
rhought in this fort for to proceed, confidering ,vi)
ourselves how now that realm had been a good fi.,a
of time ruled in the name of their king, and by real i,
of his base age, govdrned heretofore by a very caiirc.l
and honourable person, the earle ofMurray, untill that
by a mischievous perfop, (an evil example) he was mir.
dered, whereby great disorder and confusion of necrLhyv
had, and will more follow, if determination be not m;:'
of some other special person, or persons, to take Ihle
charge of governor, or superior ruler, fpeciall for ::.
miniitration of law and justice, we cannot but very we!l
:,llow the desire of these lords to have some special go.
.yernor to be chosen ; and therefore being well afiu'ld,
that their own underflanding of all others is belt to
confider the afate of that realm, and to discern the
abilities and qualities of every person meet and capat!,
for such a charge, we Ihall better fatisfie ourselves, whonm
hey by their common consent flall first choose, and aS.
point to that purpose, then of any to be by us aforehand
Uncertainly named, and that beinufe they shall perceave
that we have care of the person of their king, who by
ncarnefs of blood, and irn refpe&l of his so young ye-rs,
oought to be very tender and dear to us, we shall not
hide our opinion from them, but if they /hall all accrdl
to name his grandfather, our cousin, the earl of Lcn.
nox to be governor alone, or jointly will oilers,
(whom we hear to be in the mean time by their conl-
mon consent appointed lieutenant-general) reason niov-
eth us to think that none can be chosen in that whole
realm, that (hall more desire the prefitrvation of lie
Icing, and be more meet to have the government for
Iis safety, being next to him in blood of any nobleunan
of that realm, or elsewhere; and yet hereby, we do
not mean to prefcrive to them thi, choice, except they
nlall of tihemfelves fully and freely allow thereof; iurdler-

iCrrl''

:,iore ne would 'have 'thel well iffured, that wl'atfoevet''
,-c'orts of dcvifes are, or n(;ll be spread or invented,
:!,:. we have already yielded our mind to alter the

f i. of thi king or government of that realm, the fame
- . withour jult cause or ground by us given, for as we

! .,- already advcrtized them, that although we have
,:el ird to hear, which in honour we could not refute,'

!i:1r the queen of Scors on her part shall fay and offer,
: ot ily for her own assurance,' but 'for the wealth of
!.i1 i;eahn, yet not knowing \what the fume will be,

('.ir shall he offered, we mean-not to break the order
,' la and jullice, by advancing her'caufe, or'prejudg-

h;, her contrary, befor e

we halr deliberately and- a-

fii.clly fee, upon-the hearing of the whole, Come place'
nect.'iry, and jufl cause to do ; and'therefore ftliding'

.. rea:In ruled by a king, and the fame affirmed by

;.:, of that realm, and thereof investtd by coronation'
.;,;! [inler folemnities used and requifitc and generally so

c.i. 'cl be the whole estates, we mean.l.not by yielding

ti !h'ar the complaints or informations of the queen
z-ainlt i:er son, io do any at whereby to make conclu-
ion of governments, but as we-have found it, so to,
iiTicr the fame to continue, yea not to susser it to be
licred by any means that we may ilpefhe, as to our
l' mour it doth belong, as by your late actions hith
in inleflly appeared, unrill by some jultice, and clear
c; use, we fliall be direfly induced otherwvife to' d:clare
.t!I opinion ; and this we would have them to Ktnow

.he our determination and coutle that we' mean tO
old, whercon we trust they for their king may .ee how
ip.intly and honourably we nieai: to proceedi and
:u. little 'cause they hb:ve to douuh of us) whatibever

,, the contr;,ry they havo'or fliall hear; and on the
tilher part, we pray them of their wisdoms to think
linw unhonourable, and contrary to all human order'
,t were for uts,; when the queen of Scotland doth !i
many ways require to hear her cause, and doth offeci t
be ordered be us in the fame, as well for matters be-
twixt ourerlves and her, ai botwixt herfolf and her fort
and his party of lt ;c rcalin aailnft which Offers no

reason

(ihould liotrban~ optntyyand d1 4 beItort

h lt cdufrs:

rnonifh them, 4hat ; tiJ~y., A
,Sgo l xrk nipg toards them ,,~ lJi~~: 'BEtii~V o
Zhceir adversary grounded on~untrbths, liinetEi'b, v~jk·p
thir own' cGi4fo, in: utch fort, .thxtc-iurR ooond -th óAnin
:4owar~ds ! .the shl not :takc fucticfLth tows rs tisr,
.s -they shSII detire, ,or, emselvcs'have,~erd' of. All
this 159pran'fwer ye (bS11 %ause-!b':givetihhei ' td !
Lhem know, Xbactfor:tbe thortnes~ ofs .,ime,-thisbeiis
the end of thc; second of .this,,month, we neittl cEold
make any longer Oeclaration Qf.ourT mind, nor yetwrite
any several letters, as if time might have served W
lave donc. -d July 1,570.

i·'.NO XXXVI. (Vol. iT.p. 11.)
The Biflop of RoTs to Secretary Lidingtott fror

Chattifwvorth, -

I i. Ir~vs&Tec~iv@ yo ~4ettuns datqd the,',26uh'os May,

be re at Cl~¶riswpri hD

]he ao of, January., hu*rn thY rc

gipt theteoiI had ir~i~tes1;tOi y~w~ta t.Jenyth, 4lik:' a9'rtbe
q~u~e~did wj~h, ~ay~ord, AcniRgstoIl:hy,: rhe~which 3t~u
Wili, 5p re4o1ygd, of. nVany. piointtsedcootained.in yóbIr said
js 4:: Wrrc,·ril.~ , .you .hab L.~i, rveiod youi. letter and
cr~dic4X~olr): ;Fb9gn4Aa (oCwy arLsgnon,.and btl to Let-
~.~~i ; ·~~r~w~r q~cn of .Jnskrnd'r Imind whctli~r~

4],9~4ld,"qmc heoi o"gosi ki. fene.rkie .word, thxt

IlsvA(y $OLnW, & Qe00 of thie ,stmid
ii~p~r :i~~a~ci;·lk~c, isvyex Fltkndecl~hith tyau, ', on.'4herc-

:Rppin · ,Pjhare5P ~u~l~ · ~u(yoi. wyir(som and, dilipencei
uay~~eLR :yairciy~u~cg·. t ilw Quiec~a' ta~fsirajl io~ kpa~c

.your. weillnd.f^fety( dependó hwereon 'in Witea'of the
.great fcid andmnnimlty bornaagainft yot by' your Scits
peopje,, nd,. the.agreat,.heirbip taken of your fither's
landis; both Iwere lure drmoilrations of their mallce.
Yet I am enncogrged. by your stout and deliberate mtind.
Assure yourelf no.,diligence ihall be omitted to procure
.supports forth off a 'pparts where it miy- be had. We
will not refyfe the aid neither of Papifl, Jdw' nor Geii.
til, after my;advice 'i and to this end, during this treaty,
let all things be veHll prepated. And feeing my'lord
Scaton is.defirous to.go into Slanders: the queen thinks
.it very neceflary that he so do, for the 'duke D'Alva has
gotten' express command of the king of Spain to give
fkpport, and I am sure that there he /hall have aid both
of Slanders and the pope; for it abides only on the
crmingpf: some men of countenance, to procure and
receive the fame. He must needs tarry there, on the
preparations thereof, during the treaty, which will be a
great furtherance to the fame here. The queen has already
written to the 'dlce'D'Aiva for this effedf, advertizing
of his comiig there is certain rarns of'money coming
for (upport of the Englilhmrien, as I wrote to you.before
fronm the pope. .Wherupor1 I would he had a general
commiflion to deal for.. hem, and: receive such fums ai
£ftil be given. The means shall be found to cause you
to be anfuerit of the fums you writ for, to be difpgifit
upon the furnishing of the catlesof Edi, butrgl,; so bein;
foinc honest and true man were font to Flanders'to re-
ccive it, as said is, which I would you prepired an'rd
lent. Orders Ihall be taken for the metals as yotb wr't
of. We have proponit your avyce in'enterir to treit
with'the queen of Englandi for retiring of her fottre
puntyoally for lack'of aid, your anfwets to the Eig- '
lithmen are tho't very good, but above all Keep'yor
wedll our of their hands, in that care, cRore prudentc
ficut firpunrcs. You may rake experiencowith the dhlra
dealing with me, how'ye w6uld be used If'yewere here,
and yet 'am no, forth of danger, being' n'"medileona.
tioni. prave. ,alwayc no feCr with;Oods 'gtace, 'hall
rmake .

tno lnkl: hon .her majfify'efetice, ; 'Sirce the
,voL, 14. D queDa

queen of England has refused that you come here, it
appears to me quod nondum ell fedata malitia amorre-
orum, &c. and therefore if Aihol or Cathends might bh
any means be procured' to come, they were the' most fit
for the purpose, Rothes wtrs also meet, if he and I were
not both of one firname; so the treaty would get the left
credit either in Scotland or here. Therefore avys, and
fend the belt may serve the turn, and fail not Ro-
bert Melvil come with them, wthever comes; for so is
the queen's pleasure; in my lat' packet with James
Fogo, to you, in the beginning of May, I lent a letter of
the queen's own handwriting to 'him, which I truR yz
received. I am ferry ye come not for the great relief l
hoped to have had by your prefene;, for you could wvcll
have handled the queen of England, after her humour,
as you were wont to do. The reft I refer to your good
wildom, praying God to fend you health. From CGattif-
Worth the ijth of January.

No. XXXVII. (Vol.-II. p. 19.)
The declaration of John Cais to the Lords (f

Grange and Lethington zouitgare upoi tlie
8th day of Oft. 1571.
WHEREAS you desire to know the queen's majesty's

pleasure, what /he will do for appeasing of these contro-
verfiLc, and therewith has offered youtfelves to 1be at lher
commandment, touching the conimon tranquillity of the
whole idle, and the amity of both realms.; her pleasure
is in this behalf, that ye should leave off the maintc
nance ofetbis civil discord, and give your obedience to
the king, .whm ,fli will maintain to the utrnoft of
her, power.

.And in this 4dpig, fh4 ,wiil deal with the regent andl

thei.king'e party,, to receive ypu into favour, upobn rea.
fonable conditipls for', fcu rity, of (i^ anl livings,

' Al'b..hf,fayI.;! stt queFenot~ Sotto.s, otr die t e
Ahas praiftcd with the pyle .and other princes' aniilifo

9 . W illh

with her, own fubjeles in England, great and dangerous
trcfCons against thq slate of her own country, and alW6
to ;lie dcftruiion of her ovyn.perfon, that si hall never
bear authority, nor have'liberry while (he lives.

If ye refuse these gentle oiffers, now offered unto you,
lie will presently aid the king's party, with men, am-
munition, and all zecclary things, to be had against
you.

Whereupon her majefly requires your answer with
ueed, without any delay.

No. XXXVII. (Vol. I. p. a;o.)
iArticles fentby Knox to the general Affeinbly3

A-uguit 5th, 1572.

[Calderw. MS. History, vol. ?. '356.]

FIRST, defirirg.a.new. a& to be.made ratifying all

things concerning the king and his obedience that were
enaEted of before without any change, and that the
ministers who have contraveened the former adCs bp
correted as accordeth.

That fute be:made to the regent's grace and nobility

maintaining the king's caure, that wlhafoever proceedeth
in this treaty of peace they be mindful the kirk be not
prejudg'd thereby, in any fort, and they especially of the
ministers, that have been robbed' of theirpoffefiiops
wit iin the kirk (luring the tirm of the troubles, or other-
wife dung and injule'd, niay'be rtftlord. ';-

To fuie at the rtegent, that no gifi; f'any bifioprick

or qther benefice blegiven tio any'poeron 'contrauy to the
tenor of'the at mcade In tlbe'tlin'C of 'thle firit regent-of
good memory, an'd tiey.'thli:are 'ive'n' 'Contrar ilherfaid
ats, or to any unqua)ifipd person, may be trvoked ain
made null bae ic'au' Ofn' c'acre't'couritli; arild that, ill bi-

lopincs tovacaoiYnsailtbeelprented; and qualified

perfpns n ormilat t'lmre'sito; Withiil a year after the vaking
theeiioi, aco'rdTng'"'tris' otileftaktn'i* n'liLithl e the

1" ,,' )fJt lc '!

L , ,;1 , 'D ! .D

" ' ,' . ' ', " K' '
,

comnifiiloners of the nobility and of the kirk in ti,
month of January last, and in special to complain upon
the giving of bithoprick of Ross to the lord Methven.

That no pentions df:benefices, great'or finall, be

given be simple donation of any lord regent, without
Consent of the possessor of the said benefices having titnle
thereto, and the admifion of the fuperin'endent or corn
mitfltners of the province where this benefice lyeth, cr
of the bishops lawfully eleced according to the (aid
order taken at Leith; 'and desire an at of council to he
made thereupon, until the next parliament, wherein
the famine may be (pecially inacled, with inhibition to
the lords of session to give any letters or decreets, upon
such :simple gifts of benefices or pentions not being
given in manner above rehearsed, and that the kitrk
pr.esently assembled declare all such gifts null so far is
jyelh in their power.

That the first form of presentation to benefices, which

were in the firit and second regent's time, be not changed
as now it is commonly ; but that this clause be contained
in the presentation, that if the perfor presented make
not refidance, or be slanderous or found unworthy either
in life or dotrine be the judgment of the kirk (to which
alwife he liall be subjea) or meet to be transported to
another room at the fight of the kirk, the said pirefnta.
tion and all that (hall fall thereupon shall be null and of
no force nor cfft; i and this to have 'place also in the
ioniination of the bilhops.

That an aa be made in this assembly that all things

done in prejudice of the kirk's assumption of the third,
either by papists or others, by giving of fews, liferents,
or taks, or any'otherwife difponing the said aftumed
thirds, be declared null with a solemn proteRtation the
whole kirk difafenteth threito.

aIllar an a' be rnade dece:inin' and ordaTning 'ail bi-

ifiops, adm't'd t'o i' tdorder of ithe kiik now' received,
td give accobnt of thieir' wioe tents, anid ittromi ofs
therewith' once I ithe'yeir, as the kit' k (hail appotlnt, for
fichfcaufei i"ie'i'ki ; &rtysal cophri'det ther faine tb

ic b'i f"ipcdient'M'lnd 'necesat. '
' '"

** *··~ ~ ~

~~''' :'
, Anent

Anent the jurifdilion of the kirk, :that the fare. be

determiineld : isn ti aflcrmbly, because. this, article Iath
long be.en pofiponed .tQ make ,futc ,tg, he regent and
counci-for remely. againtnll meffengets and exi'!oiPuni-
cate persons;,, : . ;

: ,

, . .

'Laif thatocrderg.be taken anens the procurers .ofthj

kirk, who procure againa miniftrs and ministry, iad for
futting of jufIic' of the. ir k's. a ions io .the sci-on.

. -' '

. ' .

,I

No. XXXIX. (Vol. II. p. 216.)
Declaration of Henry Killigrew, Efq; :upon the

peace concluded the 23d Feb. 157z.

BE it known to all men, by these pretents, that I

iienry Killigrewe, efq } ambassador for the queen's riha-
jefly of England. Forasmuch as, at the earnest motion
and solicitation being made to me, on her highness's
behalf, there' is accord and pacification of the public
troubles and civil war within this realm of Scotland
'agreed and concluded, and the fame favourably extended
tow:rds the right honourable George earl of Huntly,
1or1 Gordon and Baidzenuch, and the lord John Hamil-
t.,n, son to the duke's grace of Chaftellarault, and com-
Iendatour of the abby of Abirbrothoqk, for the surety
oi their lives, livings, honours, and goods of them, their
iinsfolks, friends, servants, and partakers, now properly
,'cpending on them i in treating of the which (aid pa.
cification, the murderers of the late earl of Murray uncle,
and the earl ofiLevenax, grandfather, late regent to the
i.ing's majesty of Scotland his realm and 'lieges, as alro
an article tiuching the difchirge 'fol tihofiutis pr move-
able goods, wii:h the said peifois i vic talken fifra p4r
sons prose the lkig's ob ediencc, before tie a age
done or cStmitted by thet, finc' the t day of
I d ot y

o:f hl tcla '

pau; dt

by r e9o n

'a t?. ,io onp ,as

org ny

,hig cldeeni'inFI
billcrcupon, being thtaughlt, ty ;t, k^,^, in anPrieu

, t »» 3
D njittdrr

nratteris of fucbh vtrcht and impotaincc, as the. k;i-'t
jrf:'ent regent could .nct converiently, -of himself, -r:.
-mit or difbairge the farme. Yet n1 refpea of the 4r:'-
ct fity of the prefcr.er pacificaticn, arnd for the 'i!l of
Yth king, and common quietners of this re.lm and
.liEges, it is accorded, that. the matters of Iemiffion uo
the said muidrters,.- and of the, discharge of the said
irrctis, moveabit goods;, ;nd

other damages bhe n-nriv,

hy the perfons.dtfiring the rs!id remifiions and difchl, Pi
to the queen's m.ajest.y .my sovereign, as to the pi-'iccl;
nearest both ,in blood and hahitation to, the kissg cf
SCots. And wl)atfoever .ihr majcfty shall. aidvlif,; :in
cotin;cl touching -the said remission and difciharge, the
,said lord regent, so; the weill of.the kilngand unive '.:
quiernefa of-the realm of Scotland, shall perform, oh.
serve, and fulfil tile fame. -And in.likevwife, tle said
carl Huntly, and cot-ior e datour of AbitiLotioc;; bei:g
urged to have dlivered 1-ledgcs and holt;ves for obl
fervation-of the. conditions of i he- said accord: and *;.
ciFcation,' hath required me in place thei;oebi, in ier
mnajeliy's name, by vii ru of my conn'niffon, to promile
ior them, that they fla!l truly atd faithfully ohferve and
lkeep the said pacifi.sation, and all articles and conditioiti
.Ilt-reoft for their .pars, anld il at it would p)cafe h:r
majeftly to interpoke lherfcif, as suret.y and cautiontr fli
i!! -tn -r:rhat effed, to the king's rtl:jitfly of Scolard
tlht-ir (overeign and his laid regelnt, wllicih 1 lha"e drt
;ind.pronife to do, bly viituc of helr rnmjtfiy'.s clmrli.
iorn, asby l hy l houi;obllle and plain dcl li;ug of itlc rI;i
eirl and lord, theil intention to peace .well appsai'i. 'ie
.i;infn hbing most agie¢:lbie, to .l)e nnnd of tllu qmtun's
!tiatijiy my fovcreign, yliicll so long by her miiniltes
Ja;1! , tra,'tllcrl for the staid p.r:ifcation, and in r Ie cell,
at ier letion anidl (Ii iciitaion the fame is accorded,
ktnowhiqK lir m:titly.. defite, that the fame may con-
.l it q -In-yaolatct, al11t.1 thlle .tnoblemn;n and others now

':;< iurnilg, tO til . .kilti's ohediitce 0luill

.il;vw; futl.it ':-

.fi!!ty ,ifoUr theci': !liFt:-s, liviigts, ihonlours. and

a good:.

'"l,'hit,)le r;: iin bel minlje sy's naie;, a!id by vi tue osi , y
:. ;:*.t':,?,ul . J prEpnif .to tile alrtcfaid eail iJuntly :,"I

co)lllllls d;I''

commendator of Abirbrotl.oc!.:, that by he mariaefiy's
good means, the said rerrilfion and discharge shall be
I.orcihafed'and obtained to then, theirkinsfolks; friends,
i'ecvrits,. and partakers, now properly depending upon
then- (the ptrfons fpccified in the firt -abftinncne always
c.tcepted), as also that the said pacification shall be truly
o!,ierved to them,- and that her majesty ihall interpose
i:r.c-if as confervatrix thereof, and'endeavour herlelf to
caure the fame to be truly and sincerely kept: in all
pintr:; and articles thereof accordingly. In witness
wivhreof, [ h:;:c to this present subscribed with my
i'and, and fialed the fame with mine own feal the i3th
*,ay of Feb. Anno Doiliini 572. And this to. be per-
i), med by me, bettvixt the date hereof; and-the parlia-
r:c.ir which flall be appointed for their reflitttion, or
at the furtheit before the end of the said parliament,
Sic jbifcribitur,
The Bishop of Glasgow's note concerning the

Queen of Scotland's dowry.
[1576. Cott, lib. Calig. B. 4.1

TIlE queen of Scotland, dowager of France, had for

.hir dowry, besides other possessions, the dukedom of
?Tu-ne, which was solemnly contracted and given to
hcr by the king and eflates of parliarrent; which duke-
dr'ln n:e possessed peacefully till 1567, and then, upon
t:ie p:cification betwixt the king and Mons. his brother,
te a;l gment whose appenage this dutchy wvas givcn, to

hichl rthe queen of Scotland yielded upon account of
pr.imr.cs, who were her near relations, provided the
eq!'":ilenr. which was promised her flould he faitl,;ully
i .'flrmicd, So that yeai,, after a great many folicita-
trnn., in lieu of that dutchy', he had granted her the
coni;cy of Vermandaife with the lands anrd bailiwilirs
ol i;eivIy and Vetry tho' 'tis known that county and
tlih othr lands were not oi equal valu: with Turcne,
11t 1wa:; pronlifed to have an addition of lands in the
.ilighhotirhood to an equal value. ipon this lettors
i, .tct wt c giantedi which wcrCe'onitrm.;d in the courts

of

of p4rlianqent, clhamlr of account%, court,,of aiaj.
ch
, of the trfa.(ry, and others ncgeflbry~ *-up~

-hich

The eattrc4 ~into Foe . 9f .ii cqUntY, &c.

Afterwards,. by~a valuation of the cniMpiriQners of the
chamber of Acconnts,,it was. found. that the revenue of
that county, &,c. di& ~ptamount., lo those, of,'ur,~ne,
by. 3ooQ,livres. Bpat intlead ot ~rnahdngA~ tbis.deficiency
according ,t jgflit,..sope . of_0 . pTivy..Fduncib. vi7~. M.
de. Chevemey, thip preedents of.Delliecrvr ,Nicocholay,

and St Bonei, in ofthekg, nqwithilhnding

of, her asrli~o~, did', ifea andialionatri;titlleiarnp 'Of
Senlis, gpo the dus4y.p Eftairp O, zadam de

eonhpenher, ., fcom them kihp.recived mnpney;

of which fale~the counfeUors asidobigecjhemslv~i
to be guar~antees, 'wbich bath. hindered. the aforesaid
queen to-.haye justice, done.,her., So that madam de
Montpenfier hath begn put in poi$'flsion, of these lands
of Senlis, contrary to all the declaratioi, prqtesRation.
a.d -aifrranaes of tAe, tking of France to. queen.Mary's
arnbaffadoro. So that taefqueen.of Scotlant. is.dirpof.
ftffed of her dowry, contrary to all equity, without any
regard to her quality.

No. XL. '(Vol. IL p. 222.)
A, letter from the~ Lord of; Lochlevin to the

lRegent' Mortoun. 2
[3di Ir)IarCh, 1577.'''t. of Mvrt 's Anibive. Bundle 13.

121. Wii p1PR(R yqdu igrac., j, recoivsd,,ypuX grace's

le~et,~ and.Pi)~ qonCHICler tbi (awe. ~.pprFn of
c l pbre( h p r 4ipt,tiercoj, di-
reC~ec~,fra qiyord~pf Nlaxr, and 4ce· an r~avecnt piy In~b

lctter,

Bctter, that I behuiffit to be besyd SanC'Androlis at
ane friends tryst, which I might not omit; I undertand
hy my said cousin, that the king's majesty is to write to
rivers of the nobility to come there, anent your lord,

;p's trial, and that he had written before his departure

to my lord Monthrois. 1 understand likewise, he will
*wsrite to your grace to come there for the fame effed,
which I tho't good to make your grace foreseen of the
fame, praying your grace, for the love of God Almigh-
ty, to look upon the best, and not to deep in fecuriry,
bot to turn you wth unfeigned heart to God, and to
ronfider with yourself, that when the king's majefly wai
-cry young, God made him the instrument to divert his
mother from her authority, who was natural princess,
for offending of his Divine Majesty, and that there ran
no vice in her, but that the fame is as largely in you,
txcept that your grace condescended not to the delfruc.
'ion of your wife. For as to harlotry and ambition, I
ihink your grace has as far offended God, and 'far more
in avaritioufnefs, which vyces God never left un-
plagued, except speedy repentance, which I pray God
giant to your grace, for otherwise your grace can never
have the love of God nor man I pray your grace
flatter not yourself; for if your grace'believes that ye
i.ive the good will of them that are the king's good
'illers ye deceive yourself ; for surely I fee perfecly
that your own particulars are not contented, lat be the
reft, and that molt principally for your hard dealing.
I pray your grace, heir with me that I am thus hamlie,
ifr cerrainly it proceeds from no grudge, but from the
vry aterlion of my heart towards your grace, which
Ilhas :ontinued since we were acquainted. And now I
fee, hecaufe the matter stands in your grace's handling
wilr the king's majefly, for certainly if your grace fall
forth with him now, I fee not how ye Ihall meet here-
atrer; pray I your grace to call to God, and look on
thi best, and cafi from your grace both your viecs, 'to
,it, ambition and tvaririotunefs. I am'ridingthii day'
to Sand Aridoisr, and' thft to return: on Wednesday at'
the farthest. f your grace will 'tonmnaid' inhd In any

offices

offices that are honest, that I may do your grace pleaif!e
in at Sterling, advertise of your grace's mind, and shall
do to my power and knowledge, and this with my h:art.
lie, &-c. &c.

To our trulty cousin the Lord Lochleven.
[From the original. E. of. Morton's Archives, Bund. %.

No. 31.]

TRUSTYY cousin, after our most hearty'comm;:.da.
· tions, we received your letter of the 3d of March, and

is we take your plainness therein in good part, as p',.
ceeding from a frield and kinfrman, in whose good as-
fe1ion towards us we never doubted, so ye may not
think it strange that we putge ourself so far of your ac.
cufatio'n, as in conscience we find not ourself to have of.
fended in. As touching our offence to God, we intend
not to excuse it, but to fubrnit us to his mercy : for nam.,
bition surely we think none canjuftly accuse us; for in
our private estate we could, and can live as well con.
'*,:/'(ia91 l;ast;asl.o o.X,,.gdee in Scotland, without fur.

ther aspirin. ,The bearing too the charge of the govein.
ment of ,tle realm, indeed, mon lead us, or any other
that (hall occupy that place, not simply to refpe& oul self,
;but his majesty's roowmje .which we supply, and thelein
,not transcending the bounds of measure, as, we trufi,
it iaall not be f9tlnd we have done, it ought not to be
'ttributed t9 any. amtbition'ii us. For as soon as ever
it TJiil aUll hinli{ hi.n.IlT ready and able for his own
g.qXrnsmc t, nQne .lhall nnore willingly agree and actd:vce
.ttle filmeor 1,i fnce I think never to set my face against
.INm, wbofe holour/, safety, and preservation has hten
,o dear unt, ne, nor I will never believe to find tther.
,rfe at his .hand tlhan favoq, although all the unftirndl
I have in tSle'arl th ere abo't bhitm to persuade him to
thq cotr1arsy, ..Aa We writc upto 'ou, oir friendly decl.
ing ld, .copfidenc. ilp tle' house of Mar is$ tnt tldinklfulI
acqu;,; as we

a trui

yopW lif confidirs,; but hecaufe tht

4mbaffladors of gnglaii qr riy ' rd'bf Angus, 'ith'chaicel.
' l9, treafurcr, and sorb 'nobleiin 'ride w'ft this dl)

)l

to fee the king, we pray you heartily address yourself to
be thele e as soon as ye can, and as ye shall find the like-
lihord of all things, let us be advertized thereof, with
o ,!r own advice, by Alexr Hay, whom we have thought
i.oed to fend well, feeing my lord of Angus from Ster-
ng rides to Douglas. e And so we commit you in the
,.roetion of God. At Holyrood hoUse, the 4th of

irl 1 577. ' '

For the avaritioufnefs laid to our charge, indeed it lies

not in us so liberally to deal the king's geare,.as to fa.
ti,fy all cravers, nor never f(all any.fovereign and na-
tiv born prince, le: be any officer, efchew.the disdain4
of i'ch, as thinks them judges to their own reward ; in
manv causes I doubt not to.find the aflfitance of my
fril '-ds, but where my acions shall appear unhoneft, I
,,il not crave their atfltlnce, but let me bear my owe
but then.

No. XLI. (Vol. I, p.. .249.)
ifcter of Walsingham's to Randolph, Feb.. 3,

I58o-i.

[Cott. Lib. Calig. C. 6.]

SIR,

I HAVE received from my lord lieutenant the cdpy of

your letter of the z'sth of the last dirteed unto his lord-
ilip, containing a report of your negotiation vwith the
king and his council, in your Ceonda audience, where,
wilt having made her majefly acquaihted, the seemed
foincwlhat to mijic,,that you nlould t

olosl'fo r to deal

f. thcenlargement of Enmpcdocles. But I made'infwrer in
your behalf, that I thougtht. you were' dircted by t(je
advice of the l' id Eip'edoclel frin,'s, ih thefoiiiti' pof
ltlit caul,, who. knI w what 'iimEe was fittest fior yo' to
take to deal, t heriq, with 'Tlinio eftfd, ana bef'ticcWtfs,
w'th wh jch aYiwr, ' Sier maJelty,<ned i in

lhit endQ feti ',t'ry
well f *t,.( c h tIt pInt "'l'.

your

Your putting of us in hope that d'Aubigny :ii!, a

fily be won at her majeflty's devotion, was at hI,. ie;-
preted to have been ironie'fpoke by you. !ac. l;i, it
(femeth you infill tpon.it, I co!d .win; you were . ;'ic;
wife pcrfuaded of the man, or atleaft kept thatopin;ori
to yourself, for cponidering theend and purpose e hi,
corning into Scotland, _a's may be many ways fuffici;til
proved, was only to' advlo ce thl'e queen's liberty, ,l.i
reception into that gover:nmenc, to overthrow religicn,
and to procure a foreign match with Villenarius, vihicr.
in the inclosed copy, which you may ure to good pu-rp('f
there, nail .partly give you some light ; there is nc ir..n
here can be persuaded that he will change his purh .'c,
for so small advantage as he is likely to find by it, ir,
therefore you shall do well to forbear to harp an) :>:.
upon that firing, as I have already written to you. TLc
prince of Orange fending, ! fear will not be in t:rn'ir ihat
it may do any good ; for besides that these people . , iii
themrelves flow in their resolutions, their own affairs ?.i,
at present, to great, their slate so confused, and td,,
prince's authority so small, that he cannot so soon *akc
order in it: and yet for mine own part, I have not brhCr
negligcnt or careless in the matter, havii;g, more llail
three weeks past, sent one about it, from whom n.'::'r-
thelefs I do yet hear nothing. The letters you (dl.'re
lllould be written thither by the French ministers, I
h.ve given order to Mr. Killingrlw to piocurei wv!o,
t1 oubt nor, wi;l carefully pcrfrlrlm it, so that, I hlio,
I lI:all have tihe to fctnd you by the next. And 0 I
commit you to God. At Whitehall, the 3d of Fcbruar'
15 0.

Your very loving cousin and servant,

FRA. WALSINC;IHAM,

9fI1i Ilrtt.v i an original, 07J1 in o
t.' l piarr of it twrsle ir

fhtbhes and te.piained /ll anothr; balJ. ly Em:r.!i'"'

it unirnrflod A1lo1toi'. By Villknaorius the kintlg L'.tr,(
D'lubiinry i ; t.,;arkd ia.r o I o.

-Vcli

rnote:s` 'athcred upt good dzbgetcc
'rv'r it, a.d -a time to b'betr tcer manifcicd,

\.n15 o 110W tbougitt to'

ieet mC i O crlit

iort used and Tald ngainfit I)'Aubigny, to
proo;e haim abufilg the king, tbe nobility. tt

Z Cott. Lib. Calig. C. 6. 111'n

l~IPYat' It hath been infornmid cv, crmeible re eiis,

~ii;ti D'A ltribi:ny v;'a pjivy and acrri'ain wt' with Ia Nevez
.C 1ini's mother's focrotary, oommtj inro Scot>.nd, and

ris errand there, ieteding Bhroiey to ptrfuade die Mr.g
t,iinl: and etllcrr, ii an ecil presrirdea for princes that
i mig(9s sliiht e power to deprive their la(fnfove·
r,,kij, ,is they did his tliothr, who ra not r[Arded,

'?iy iriCai, to :]efeat him, cithor of the prefcnt govern-
''s of that re-ailn, or yet of thle pofreffierl of the Crowu

,ilcd~itlranee trerof, but rather tc, atirrhe rfarne to

and that for the accorrplislimect of thot aiTurance,

;.i:l iing slould have heen advised and drawn to ha-e
":,' n~ed, for some short rime, as orince, calling D'At-

to rule as governor of rho prince, by commifflon

fl :n tle queer uikn mother until the king's ens'riie; wer,
,I: pressd T after which time D'Aubivy hbsu have
wer -iven to ellabliih aid reirn that kingdomn io the
gip., hy !iis mot her's vain im conret r, whei'eby all

!eel), -ii:hd before been in asion theinst tiiC qtierl or0
;'L i'I·Tiiy, riglt he brought to sland ill the Icing's
ti. A nl ici. tati lhe king. might li'r' in asore ruiety,

igl,;"i:ry (hloli he d hria

rd oti I second peCrion it:

fb
, i of that crowriw, ard Aifo lieu mani ntaneral vc

t ail, l

: al Wo ulli gy h' foi ; his rieptri II rr out

ita sit2C:ji

noo:isi n 1mm the In mother
thjr:, hrl.eishlId coni r.tctr: 1i .l, tiit l opIsi.lp of (Aa.si>

I,,airi Rolai i r~rc ltahsji J, with vhic

jii., mil witit thIe duke of tltritr, .
h had and listli

,*tI.. in. ~~~It Ybli.

frequcrit intelligence, and by fir James Baford he was
advised to confer with the.lord John Hamilton before l.s
!epair into Scotland, whereunto he agreed, and yet :f.
terwards he f'etit one John Hamilton to the said I1.,:
John to excuf him in this part, ailedging, that he :'jd
forbear td come to him, lefl thereby he should mar 'j
hinder greater effcts to be executed by him in Scot-
land.

That before his coming into that realm, the nobility

and country were well quieted and united in good con-
cord, with.great love betwixt the king and nobility, an.r
t.mongf: the noblefle, but bath both drawn the king
againfi sundry of the chiefeft of his nobility, that have
been most ready, and have- expended their blood a:id
pofleffions to preserve religion, and defend the king's
person, his government and eflate, and also hath gi;en
oc:afion of great suspicions and offence to be engendered
betwixt the Iing and his nobility, and especially with
such as have been in afion against the king's mother,
and'h'er authority, wih by force and means of the fdid
c6rirhtifl'on and pracice, should have been brought into
most dangerous condition ; and who alfd mhy find them-
selves in no faall .perill while he pofreffes the king's ear,
abufeth his presence, and holdeth such of the principal
keys and ports of his realm, as he presently enjoyeth.

That he hath drawn the king not only to forget the

great benefits done to him and his realme, by tihe
queen's inajefty of England, but also to requite the fame
with sundry signs of great unthankfulners, and wound-
ing therewith the honour ds: her majelfy, and therrby
hath adventured to hfigke the happy amity long timn
cgntinued beiwixt thobe piinces.', '

And wheieas Iiele 'tilcf Were t'o' i 'rpairc hyj gentle

letters 'aidB ood :off'rs, 't6' hav p'dffd and ben donie he.
twixt thorm; In which reflef the king.and council hdv-

g pfo.ved to

d rite

to wri hr mrajefly, for her lhighncfs'

. ,e er tshefat'ion

-in tlijte ,negiatioti of l Mr. Alcx-

!,spder.'in of, o' ibtierickf, iact given o rdtr to the
Iting'B secretary' ro rfrahIn 'tlat letter 1' H1e mhding to
Crealc the bond of amityr i "f'inaer, willed tie 'ecretiry

·~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~C

to be sure that nothing fnould be inrerted in that letter
w hereby tile king (hpuld crave any thing at her hands,
feeling thereby to cut off all loving courtesies betwixt
rlhm, as by the declaration of the said fecretary.ray be
ltrtter learned, and thereupon further approved.

That under the hope and encouragement of D'Au-

bigny's protedion, Alexander King presumed with that
boldncfs to make his lewd harangpe, and by his means
iill hitherto escaped chastisement and correaion, due
"our his offence.

That fir James Baford, condemned of the laughter

rs the king's father, hath been called into the realm by
Lennox, without the privity of the king. And whereas
thre aid fir James found in ; green velvet desk, late the
.;:i of Bothwell's, and saw and had in. his hands .the
principal b;and of the conspirators in that murder, and
can belt declare and witnefi who were'authors and exe-
c.ulors of the fame; he is drawn by Lennox to fppprefs
tle Iruth, and,to accuse such as he himifc noweth te.be
iinocent; and as by order of lawii.be fo:.,nd,if
they may have .due^,rial,.which,, .frary.to allice,
is by Lennox meR denied. :' ' :.

Tbis is tbe bharge £against D'AUli'gnr, meintiaond n- t'te

fJ,:toitg letter by WalJF nghbn; but b BtIJrd Itky me.ai fir
'7an.s BaiJo r .' ' '

No. XLII. (Vol. 11. p, 767.) ;
The copy of the King of 'France Ii' dir'ici'is

. ilt to. Scotand. witl Seircur de i.la'Mo te
Fenelon. 'raftflated ogut of£ti e FlregiF ,
.1.

[Caldeorxv. MS; History, vol. gY.p.;o8.]' ' .'

FIRST, on their moi chriflian ijty. 'attie mi

,ll'

rnake the moi l1ionoutable filutatin ianlii'rltiqg' to the
miolt fcrenc king of Scot1iind.l thei o6 dtr'bbicr ind
li:t.c fonr thlat in hi5m is pollae.i ' '

*

*, -

'

" 1~

' : ' ' '' *
o .

To give him their letters that are closed, such and

such like as they have written to him with their hands,
and to Ihow expressly the perfet friendship and fingulsr
affection, that their majeltys bear to him, and to bring
back the answer.

To take heed to the things which touch near the moR

serene king, to the effeRt that his person may be in no
danger, but that it may be moR surely preserved.

And that he be not hindered in the hones liberty that

he ought to have, and that no greater, or fraiter guards
be about him than he had before.

And such like, that he be not impeached in the aut!ho.

rity, that God hath given to him of king and prince io.
vereign above his rubjeas, to the effec he may as freely
ordain and command in his affairs, and in the affairs of
his country, with his ordinary council, as he was uFc
to do of before.

That his nobility, barons, and commonality of his

country may have their free liberty to resort to his rerene
majelty without suspicion of greater guards or more arm-
ed men about his person than the use was, that they be
not afraid and hindered to resort ; and further that the
fegnieur de la Motte Fenelon fall liberally and freely
speak to the said serene king and council, requiring the
re-.cfablithing of that that may or hath been changed o.
altered.

And that he may know if the principalls of the nobi-

lity, and other men of good behaviour of the towns and
commonality of the country conveens, and are content
with the form of government presently with the said
forone king, to the end that if there be any miscontent
he way travalle to agree tlhem together, and that hI.
return not without the certainty of the famine.

And if he may underhand that there be any who have

not tifed them so reverently towards the (aid fcrene king
their Sovereign lord, as the duty of their obedience re-
quired, that he may pray on this behalf of his majcfty
modt hriRian the said serene king his good brother, giv.
nJg him council wholly to forget the fame, and exhort-
ing them to do their duty towards his majelty, in time

coming,

:cming, in all refpeas with- ttie obdierce and true sub- '
jAiusn they ought him, .r

. . . .
.

And if the said feigncur de.la t otte,,pltceives the said

;'crene king to be in any- mano nriconstrained of si per..
lin, authority, liberty, and dirpofitionr Of. hisjiafflirs,
tiahi lie used to be, and not convenient for his: royal' dig-
airy, or aó;tbe sovereignty ofa. pirince:does, eqtUireithat-
he utcf all.moyen lawful-'and honest. torplaoudtlnt jn the
l;,mine, and that he impl)y .as inuch as tIle-creditt f his
nm.,rt christian majesty may do toward the,- nobility, and
:uijcts of that country, and as muci-.as rray hisname,
vitli the name of hiscrown.towardX th.::Scottjh na.ion,
d!ic v:ich he loves and confides in as-fnuchl as. thy were
yi lpcr French n . ; , -. : .

And that he witness to the faid,fckr<en iting, and. his

cil;:tes, of his consent, and to all the nobilityand puj'.-
ciall 7erfonages of the coniry, that Iis most chriflian
r: ieflie will continue on his palt in.:the most ancienc
illiance and confederacy, which he. hath had witlj. the

said serene king-his good brother, praying .his nobility

ard contry, with his principall fubjetts, to. perfetere
,i thle famine, in all good undeillanding and friendlhip
fvitli him ;, the which, on his-pari, he fiall do, obfcrv-
:', :he lfmine roll inviolabl . . .

i'trtler his moll chriltian najefly underflanding that

e. 'eicne king his good brother was contented with, the

:!lc of Lenox, anld his ftrvi.e,.,t itlid figlnieur de la
.!i:rt: had charge to pray his ferune iajelty -that 'he
)nigilt reain-ine beoide Iln to his. cointenirnelt, believing
thai he flould more. willingly inkertain. the points of
jiov and confedleracic, betwixt -their,: mjcllys and th;ir
.:itlrys, tbecaul'e he was a gopd, ftbjot to. tlem.botl';
,a1dI if he mightrnot rcmain,.withoutfome alturationof
tii. tsrnquillityof his eia:te,.,t^at hc might retire him to
!i. own house in the, faidcontryt in.,fuerns,. or if hc
tr-fcd. to.retturn' to.Frpnce ,that lihe msiglit ,,flrely eiy
;<:d if it pliclc. hiutfornec majefly, to: caufce ceafetand
fly tlh impeaclHntit,. tlt,,ar.ce madebfnei, upontrjilt
f:nutierr, :to.th;erfftit tl!ht tim natural fjioochmni ; ry

enter rs frct'ny into the co.;:rly ;s ihey were. *ot: . .
oi' bes -:ic,

And tiat there n:ajy he no isrpoCe of diit'mtii-o

'io,' no fpecch !h.It honourable of the moit chritiia,, i:;,:
in that cootry, but 'icil like as is fpoker rr.nooi one .
a3h:y of hc 5reti:. 'ting of Sco;land in Franc..

He had anotlhr hei.d to pproune, which he concealL

till a !ittle beforc lis depacture, -o wit, that the que.n,
the king's mothier, o.'is content.tco receive her so; :;,:C
,oci.tio:' of tile .itig.1om.

No, XLIII. (VoL. II. p. 23.)
.Lord Hunfdon to Sir Francis Wallingham, .

taith of Auguit 158+, from Benvic'k
[('alderw. .;.l.. Hiitory, vol. 3. p. 37'.4-

- SlPR.,
Accoa tuNG to m)ry former letters, touching rny n- .-.

ing with the earl of Arran upon Wednesday iai', ;hc,
came hither to me fronm the earl-, the jultice ti rk, a:
fir Wiliiam Stuart, captain of Dumbarton, bort of t!.
lingi' privie council, to ire:t with me albout hil c,-, .
of our mecting, rtfecrinig wholly .-o me to apoointit i.
homt, and the number we fhodild nme:t with.l ; Co a:' ,..
conc!ludd the ).':.:. to be Foolden, the hout' i:> '.;c ti
o'clock, and the numbet with ourfelvcs to hbe x .if i
fide; and the reft oi orl troops to s(and each ,rs ;'.:;: n
mile from the town the one on the one idc, the othe, 0.i
t'ic other tide, so as r'ur troop; were two miles afuic:Cr;
i was not many tirfemicn, but I foppllied it with loout
,.ten, where I had rc.o (hot on horse,, but the.y were vcrn
near 0So horse well appointed : According to whichl !
",oilntirnnt, .\(; met ylterdlay, and after fomct conlg, ..
.lniorn, rhe tr:le fell iln tilh lile protcllariornj of his 3;, "l
.ill arnl xeadtrn es to lc rve tile ilucn's nimljefty, Ih, I' ;
:;ny prili:; in tile world, ni:Xt hiq sovereign, as I' hi
..loln hcl;cto' lloc y liis ilttrl;, .ni(d r;:iltr morc; v.'
fititl *,'l' t *re vo';.', as iinl'I.f; }!et' Ih wol'Ife th;all 1.I ltVII,

her

it'd deai~~ng ta nid'ini tttn~iy, ie;tdotto -,sy
1U Cl i s- hich . ie ac-v (:.Sia.y hebt; vid ii

il e by--.' i tir: sajil c'', it!e

so u

e ii nt.) hirp, fie awpin'inedIr with

n:iocOC eiicu'llii- r es, but. to this eireQ. Then I
, icit ho to sin the poitit of tier mijay si ltif,.

for the U't 'tin (U h pra:Isic,:.n li been ja!nly

* r t tot CP, iin of liiE mi llyiid Iti

-ec vao riratcis i soii. suidIy tienUrset, Wil-it rcar-.
sivu,: beencli ed to hiL niajeflite by s'lrndirie priiscrs,

.id y h .t
w n means th es cale has feught to li'Cie thew,

i. o rlO whtl li urt s j !. one, for th.At' bbe nirriag

-'o ;paini or -rance, lie muit also ahur his ci in,
:::ch as he is (ure t(le kcing will nevec dcc. so MvilI h' ni..
its: linii to her-ikcl ticro it, so long, as [.e his any

ocilt ih him ; lie denyr rot but the king has hettn

i.: wi tia be Gra~ticos te ikal aeaigil h er in.jctl,
bie h ic

l has so far dcried and relufed to enter it ns,

:2 i, av
Ily J ]c.i daing therenhut \1ltte i lie

wrni lie !'n.,wirih hei am, thist il he n'ic )111(1.
if )c ii h er 7ajeily, as lher majuity ibs;l [:nio" veui 2
½ y firlly II le it, by his sieeches, that if tile kint
sc!' halve yi(e-ded thei-uinto liele c boi hen tao int1;J1

of Fren,.1 in Scotland eye it't't disijniee lee

I·; ye -.-· -This hi a~g en nlLl, I dc- i!r iii Iim earit-
;,i tur thu J1:Y ot this iliciowhich ro'asmi

1i ti the kait tlitt thlci e ma be ho luing (lone ln-ri:.-

tv ' ira prejudiii: (( ilieft noblenien -intl wheiri *leviin
i'd, foeth foiriasitein of thecir liIinpb-ti allt]

l'ii~iu it; nia.rie a hciir 'ltu'ib c

i~i*. tI
-,, Io' Aitgus [kaipgai tS: itJ oii t,'

(.'if sl is going ou~tntyti~niigi irt grit:4ci~ v

.2 r Ii klc Wil ld inuiInim, l r,s91lci ~n d ID4 uh.

b'i,vho ihiat Aj

s~ tx at' they 11ii Gic inhu's p-S

!:ing, for 1)ltil I tIo f tile dii lie Outwo l;caeli
L~

king refufedc so todo, they told him. plainly that if !ie
wvould not:he Lhol!d-have-the.earJ of.Arran's head in a
dirn ; the. king afked'what offence tile eal. had made .
and they answered iC mnuf be so, and thoud: be-fo; here.
upon, forthe: safeguard of- I rran's -life, the kingi was
consent to fend .away.y.-the duke;. and yet Arran afrer.
wards fundrie times,.in danger of his life I.alledgel-
unto him the king's.letter to the queen's. majesty, and
his a$ls in councili thatrthey had ione noshing but for
his .fervifei. and with his good liking and.contentnmeit,
who anfw\ered:me lie dur. do noa otherwise, nor coe'l
not do any thing- but that.!which pleased- themi, wii
such a number of other their dealings, with the .;ing
whilelt he. was. in their h:nds-as are too-long to he
%written, and too -bad if they were true; I said lile
king might-have- let the queen's majesty's ambaif.hcr
have known his mind secretly, and her majefly weuli
have relieved him ;:.he.anfwered, that the king was not
ignorant that the apprehepfions in that manner, pro-
ceeded from Mr. B.o.w's prafice5 and. thereby durfi not
impart so much to himi :and yet the- king. was content,
and did give remission to as many as would acknot.v
ledge their faults, and.alk remission, and such as would
not, -he though.t fit;to banish, to try.their rurtherloyaltr
in- which . time they. conspired the king's second apple-
henfion, and the:killing of the earle, and others, airi
seduced the. ministers to their. fadtion, and yet not fa-
tisfied. ,ith thcfe confpiraciesi'and treasonable dealing;
(as he terms them), are entered into a third, being hi
Englannt under her mnajety's prntedion, to difl)onour
her majesty as far as in them lycth, or at least to cafre
the king conceave some unl;indnefs in her majesty,. for
harbouring .of them ; I wrote to yow what. the confli-
racy was, the taking of the king, the killing of the e:rle
ofis:rran, and come others, the -takin'g of the cafile of
Edin'..and bringing home the carles, to take the chairge
of ,the king; all which (fays he).is by Drummond con.
flTed, and by the provost of Glencudden not greatly de.
nied,- and the constable of lhe afcnllb thereupon ftel;
tit ca-l Ibrought DrUnipiond!withb him

n far as Langi-r,,
.'".,,',/} ¥ hrInC

where he lay, to have confetfed the conspiracy before me,
but having at his lighting received a blow on his leg with
a horse, so as he could bring him no further, I replied that

thought verily they would not -work any such pracfices
in relpet of the queen's majefly, abiding within her
realms, and if there be any fueh pra&tices, they have pro-
cecded from others, and they not privie unro them : and
'.hat if it be not apparently proved against them, that it
will be thought to be-ome pratlice to aggravate the fault,
and to makethem the more odious to the king. He an-
fwered me, that it Ihould be proved so sufficiently, that
they should not be able with truth to deny it, for their
own hands is to be showed to part of it, and therefore
concluded, that if her majefly should to press the king for
thtm at this time, that would rather hinder this matter of
the amity, nor further it, and that since they seek chiefly
his life, he could not, in any reason, seek to do them any
grcd; and besides he assured me, that if he would, he dare
,ot, this lafl matter being fallen out as itis; and surely
if this matter-had not fallen out, ' would not have doubt.
ed the restoring of the earl of Mar very shortly, if her
majetly would have employed me therein, but for the
Barl of Angus, I perceive the king is persuaded that
both he, and the reft of the Douglasses, have con-
ceived to mortal an hatred againfi him and the earl of
Arran, about the death of the earl 6f Morton, as if they
vere at homei to-morrow next, they would not leave to
praOcice and conspire the death of them both, and there-.
foe a hard matter to do any thing for him: finally, he
concluded and required me to aflure her majesty from the
klin,, that there Ihall nothing be hid from her, nor any
tlliig -left undone that may fatisfie her majesty with rea-
{on, and that the king (hall never do any thing, nor con-
sint to have any thing done in her prejudice, so long
as lif: had any credit with him, or authority under him.
-:tvlxig this far proceeded, he deftred to fhew,'me his
tcin:lidion, whiLh is under the great feal, to himself
cn)ly, which is as large as may be; and yet 'undrie ds
il-r plivie council there with him,. but not'oiefint coin-
anl.iun, nor present, nor near us all this.time-, having

spent

spent almost five hours in these matters ; he prefenred
to me the mailer of Gray, who delivered to me a leter
from the king in Iris commendatiori, whom 1 perceiv thie
king means to fend to her majesty, and therefore re-
quires a safe condu&t for his palTage, which I pray y:;w
procure, and to fend it as fcon as you may. I let ulm
underttand of the lord Searon's negociation with the
French king. He swore to me, that Seaton was but a
knave, and that it was partly againfl his will that he
Ihould be sent thither. But his commitflon and inlft ic-
tion ;.uing of no great importance, he yielded the foop: !;
and if Seaton has gone beyond his inftruoions, whilci
Arran drew himself, he will make Seaton smart for it,
Touching William Newgate, and Mark Golgan, he p!o.
telted he never heard of any such; he fays there wa- a
.little poor foul, with aaeck beard, com'e thither a bec-
ging, who fai e,.vd an enemy to Desmond, to wlich
he gave a cr/^dni^ ut never heard of him since, and for
any SEoats. nan-oing into Ireland, he fays there is no
fuchi nmtter: if itere be, there may be some few raflais
that he ,nows hiot of; and touching the coming of any
Jesuits into Scotland, he fays it is but the fandercut 1ie-
vise 6f the king's enemys, and such as would have the
world believe tie' king.'.were ready to revolt in religion,
who the'world Ihall well fee will continue as conftlnt
therein, as what prince soever professed it moRl; and
the eatl hiimfelf dos protest to me, that.to his knowledge,
he never saw a Jesuit in his life, and did assure me if
there was any in Scotland, they (hould not do so me!ch
harm in Scotland, as their iminifters wxould do, if they
preach futh doctrine as they did in Scotland; and touch!
ing one Ballenden, of wl6in I wrote to yow, I her.,j
from Mr. Colvill, the earle avows con'ftintly that ic
know's hot, nor hath hot hiard- of any such in;m,
bdit he"v'Wold ihqbiir'at the justice clerk, and would in-
formn re vhat he 'culd learn of that thus' l have nm;ide
yow is Ihdrr a discourse 'as I' cab oT so tiriany matters, lo
Ihnr,'difr.oifrfe' iipOt, but tie'e are the 'prlncipal points
ds all 6ur tilk, (o 'neol tr 1: ca'n 'einitmcr it, "and for

'., '

,

. *

* '
.i

t:li time, I commit yow tothe Almighty. At Berwick
:h1 ssth of Augult, :584.

The 1;ing is very desirous to have

n(y Con Robert Cary to corns to him.
1 pray yow know her majesty's pledui e.
Arran's aiifvers to the griefs or articls pro-

poned to the Lord Hunafdon, set down in
another form.
As to the strait and severe persecution of all fiich, as

have been noted to have been well atflced to the
;ucen's majesty, ir cannot appear they were either for
:;t caufie punished, or hardly dealt wiih, since his ma-
:;sty of late has been so careful and diligent to choice
oult good inftrumenrs to deal betwixt her majcfly and
himi, as his rajefly has done in eleling of your lord-
ibip and me; besides that in all their accusations, ih};ir
* ,.d wvill and affetlion born to lier.mnjeily was, at no
i;:;e, laid to their charge, but capital a&ions of treason
,,eany way tried now be the whole three eltares, and
:li.r: than manifest to the world.

As for his majefly inhibiting, by publick proclamation,

!!:ch as were banilhed, not to repair in England; the
bh-uits and whisperings that came to his majefly's ears,
.i their conspiracies and tieafons, which since fyn they
aczconipliflied, sofar as in them layj moyed..his ..rajefyt
.,. inhibit them to repair to any,p)ace, so .ear his na-
.ily's realm, left they flhouid have attempted these
lhiris, which Thort!y they did atltempt, being farther
' I, and more distant both bjr sea a:id land.:

As for reception of Jesuits, and oDliers, her ma,1
.;)'s tugirives, aid' not dcliverintl tI m according to
;,i proniife, as your ,lorddhip prol)pnels,lis'mRnjefty
.Vo,' IbeI , moll glad, that (f,it nl sglt fall, ut ,by your
.l (fl ilp'S travies,, that no fngirtve ps

e itled Ircame

lhi,,il be recived of *either, anFd wl llet so' }all e,, i
:l,.il not yil oh ln w

maf; ytl ,pajrt rabeit ip, very dped

t'i, tirne'bygonill his majlny has been conflraincd to re-
*ipt lher majelly's mean rcbells and fugitives, conn'ar

his

his-good naturall, fnee-'her majesty hath receipt, in
effeRt, the whole and greatelt rebells and traitors his
majesty in his own'brod~iier'badi as for the agreement
with his majefiy's'fiiother aitent their ailbdcition, his
majesty has coimimihdeI me,; isr'pr'enc'of ydi'r lord.
ship's servant to afTuie her i'ijeRfiyan'd ybur lordflaip, in
his majetty's name, -atlt'-it a isaigether falel and an
unbfuth, noraiy. fiuch H't'i:Mlater*ithe: yet.

His majtiy has iffco ci'ini '

M hie to' afiure your

lordship, that it is also fife niiii;uitrue, tlat hiL majety
has, by any means 'direa " o6rdlhte;,' 'ist any 'nieffage
to the pope, ofr"eii d any from 'iii 'r 'haelirs ma.
jeRlt has dealtlvith"^pain or anty.for9"i Aers,'to harm
her mijeflyor'lte raiht,"' whilci his majetfy 'coiild iiave
no honour to do, thii'gobd intelligence tiafng place, as
1 hope ii God it lial1 ";'' " '

: '

As concarnif'g the 'contemptuous ifcfie of her ma.

jefty's miniffers, tfent uno' his niajefty, his ihijeIty ut'd
none of them (o; and if his -majesty ' id, fiufficient
cause was given by them, as rome of their own writs do
yet telltify ' a I more particularly f Iowed y6'di lordllhip
at' Fouldtn at ourlite mneeting. ' ' ' ' '

No. XLIV. (Vol. II. p. 287.)
The Scottib, 'Qeen's osi'ers I pon thje'efc& of

lier lhberty lprORpunled by her fecreta Naw,
,November 1584,
: . , . ,,..-

. f. {Cott. I.ib. Calig; C. 3. A opy;]

TH' queen' my miflrefi bring' onee wvell ,anurdd of

your 'niajrty's trnityi ,
1"' ' '

x; Willidoclit'iopenly tliat' lieWlll (as it rifidteerel

her meaning) flraitly to join unto your majeflty, hhd t
thie fame to'yicld and bear the-;hiif' hduitur'id rCfpct,
befódHaillirother kinvg 'niwd princes I.ntl Chdrfleh'dti
.

z. She will swear, and protest, (olemnly, a finceri

forothflneft of ' ill wrbngs6 which lHerm'Rtlim'f d to
haWv.debl dono into lie i
t ihls reaita'ndwillunevtr,

'n .!),. In

in any fort, or manfner.whatfovel ,, hheew

offence for.tahe
lame... , ; .: ,

3.. bhe, will aow an- _ckiowledge,.s well in her

own particular naet 'as. al-so -or br. heihR.and othbe.s
<! fcending&ofhbesr.\ ser,, ygur Sijefty .for-juit, true,
anid lawful quee t of.4ln d . . .. -

4. And con eqluen.tl, will ren.uncec, as,.well f or;her..

fess as for her.faid. bin,rllrigsbt o ps rtnces whicht
(he may c4iiw tbo he oa own ,f. gislas4, ·during your
majefy's .life,.and otsLerp, ldie. . · .... .,

5. She wi1l rvoke.all As and. em,, by- her hereto.

f.re made,. of.pretence to this said .own to.. te .pre-
judice of your .jajefty, as my be. thse takingof the armps
and ilile of quoen of England, by the copnmandmqnt of
kiig Francis hr late. lord and h and. . .....

6. She will renounce the pope's bhlt for so nmuch a«

may be expoun.ed to. turn. in her..favour,. or for her
behoof, touching the. deprivation.of her. majety, anr,
v.:ll declare thac. lhe will never help .and serve berlf
wi:h it.,. ,. ... ,. ;

7. She will not.profecute, during.your majeity's life,.

bh open force or otherways, any publick, declaration of
her right in the fuccemfon of this realm, so as secret
.lrurance be givefrtnmtoher',-ouratethe leat publick
prl)mire, that no deciding thereof Ihall be made in the
prejidice of ber,,or of the king. hei fon,,duriog your
:;iajefty' life, not after your decease, until fucl.tiime
t.s ;hey have bcr heard thereupon, in publick, fre, and',
gencral afltibly'of the parliament of tHe:iidirea'ln. '

S. She will not praaife, dirertlyor indlraflly:, with

any of your majclty's fubjci6,. neither within nor out
of your realmn, aoy. thin&, tending, to war ,,:civil lor
foreign, againlt your, majesty and your .eate, b it t yn-
der pretext of,.reliion,,,or foor civil and., pliirjk. g9-
VO&IIInI ntft.,) ,,

' ", ,,. 'J*.', :, ,' n I. :' ; ,';,';O 'i;
ftbjedP,d ll ,brsb, it,,andoi.nviiaed,9f tr.fo.tfgzinsti.

to. oW.tncni pW ij.ptlriffofbiotln,. whufI wn»:
VflOed lir ..Witn F. thP frPtyif. yPr Ulje
VOL. il, PFP life,

life, so as there be mended or right' explicated fcrne
clauses which I will (hew to your majesty, when I
(hall have the copy thereof, as I have before time re-
quired.

i i. She will not treat with foreign kings and princes,

for any war or trouble against this slate. and wi!i re.
nounce, from this time, all enterprises made or to be
made in her favour for that refpec.

xr. Furthermore, this realm being assailed by any

civil or foreign war, she will take part with your 13.
iefly, and will assist you in your defence with al !lr
forces and means; depending of herself and wiit: all
her friends of Christendom.

13. And to that effect, for the mutual defe'nce and

maintenance of your majesty, and the two realms o;
this isle, (he will enter with your majesty in a Iclegue
defensive, as (hall be more particularly advised, and *il
perfwade as much as in her, the king her son to do
the like.

The leagues with all parts abroad remaining firm, and

especially the antient league between France and Scot.
land, in that which shall not be againsf this present.

Y4. She will enter into a league offensive, having

good afluranc. or secret declaration and acknowledg-
ment of her right in the fucceflion of this crown, anil
promise that happening any breach betwixt Frane :]dul
this realm, (which she prayeth God never to ha:,ppn)
the just value of her dowry lhall be placed for lhr in
lands of the revenue of the crown.

5. For assurance of her proinifes and covenants, Ihe

doth offer to abide herself in this realm for a certnin
'time (better hoflage can (he not give than her ovwn
person) which, so as the be kept in.the liberty hlcc i*
fore propounded, is not in cafe to elcape fecietly out
of this country, in the sickly slate lhe is in, anid wish
the good order which your majetiy'can takl tiherein.

i6. And it, cafe your majelty do agree to'her full

and whole deliverance, to retire herself at' lie will dit
of this realm, the (aid queer of Scots «hb will give fufi
ficient hoflage for such timie As will be advised,

17. 1s

17. If the abide in this realm, file will promise not

') el:I.Art out of it, without your licence, so as it he
p;,,C)sed unto her that her state, in such liberty as

hl;.!ii be accorded unto her, Shall not be in any fort

.i;:retd, untill after tryallto have attempted against your
,, or other trouble of your.eftate.
8. If the go into Scotland, the will promise to

::cr nothing there in the religion which is now uscd
tlre, the being suffered to have free exercise of hers,

er her and her houthold, as it was at her return out

of France; and further, to pull out every root of new
:-lvilion between the fubjeits, that none of the fubje$ts
if Scotland thall be sifted for his conscience, nor con.
frained to goeto the service of the contrary religion.

rg, She will grant a general abolition of all offences

done against her in Scotland, and things shall remain
theie as they are at- this present, for the refpe;, saving
that which hath been done against her honour, which
fl:: nleaneth to. have revoked and annulled.

20. She will travel to fettle a sure and general recon.

ci!iaticn between the nobility of the colintry, and to
cauie to be appointed about the king her son, and in
his council, such as (hall be fit for the entertainment
of the peace and quiet of the country, and the amity
o' the realm.

2 i. She will do her befl to content your majefly, in

f.isour of the Scots lords baniflied and refuged hither,
ul)on their due fubmilfion to their princes, and your
Iml.jcly's promise to alffit the laid queen and king of
!'coiland againll them, if they happen to fall into their
so nicr faults.

.z. Slih will proceed to the marriage of ,he king

liei son, with the advice and good council of your
'ni .i ly.

23 As '(he will pats nothing without the king her

foil, to doth the deire that he intervene conjointly with
lier in this treaty, for the greater and pcrleaer afflince
lil:; of; for,otherwife any thing can hardly be lfta-
l'nil1ed to bp found and continue,

1' 2 .E, 24. Tbi

24. The raid Scotch queen trufleth, t hat the Fren;;

king, her good brother, according to the good aefli.ion
which he hath always (hewed her, and hath been airesr
teffified unto me by Mons de Manniffiere for this f..l
treaty, will very willingly intervene, and will afiift ii<r
for the surety of her promires.

z5. And so will the princes of the house of Lorrain,

following the will of the (aid king, will bind themselves
thereunto.

26. For other kings and princes of Christendom, fe

will array to obtain the like of them, if for greater so-
lemnity and approbation of the treaty it be found to be
necessary

27. She doth desire a speedy answer, and final con.

clufion of the premises, to the end to meet in time vwi:h
all inconveniencies.

28. And in the mean time, the more to strengthen

the said treaty, as made by her of a pure and frank will,
the defireth that demonflration be made of some re.
leafement of her captivity.

Objetions against the Scottilh Queen under Ie.
cretary Walsinghame's hand, November 1584.
THE queen of Scots is ambitious, and standeth ;11

affeaed to her majesty, and therefore it cannot bi, but
that her liberlv (hould bring peril unto her majefiy.

That her enia;gement will give comfort to papisi,

and other ill affected fubjeds, and greatly advance the
opinitn had of her ti'le as successor.

That as Inng as the shall be continued in her nia.

jerfy's po!,]lT;*n, {he may serve as it were a gage of I.:r
majelly's furetl, for that her friends, for fear of tie
.danger Ihb. in.y be ithrown into, in cafe aly,thing should
be done in ler fivour, dare not attempt any thing in
offence of her jnajetiy. r .

I". , , I F.: .1,,1

" '. '
,. ', ,., ' 'Novermber

No.iemlber )- ywith thei queen of Scots, either

15;14.- .otol.be eni/lrged or no.t.

[Cott; Lib. Cal. S.]

T iE course to be taken with the said queen may be
tonlidered of in three degrees either,

r. To continue her under custody in that fltae the
!1'WV is.

2. To refflain her of the present liberty she now
ha.ith.. . ..

3. Or to Cet lier at liberty upon caution:
i. Touching the first, to continue her under custody

in that slate Ihe now' is ; it'is to be confidercd,'that the
;,rirncc that favour that queen, upon the complaint the
.!.]l:tilh of hard usage, are greatly moved with commi-
f.ral!ion towards her, and promise to do their endeavour
foi her liberty, for which purpose -er minifiers solicit
tliem daily.

And to move them the more to pity her cafe, Ihe ac-

qJ;ainteth them with her offers made to her majesty,
whch appeared to be no. less profitable than reasonable
i - r emajety, so as the refusal and rejeaing giveth her
1':cnrds and favourers cause to think her hardly deilt
w.'iilial, and therefore may, with the better ground and
reason, attempt f6mcwhat for the setting of 'her at
l;i,'l ty. ' '

It is also likely that the said queen, upon tlis re-

fliil, finding her care desperate, will continue her pYac-
tiLc under hand, both at home and abroad, not only for
!Irr delivery, but to attain to the piefent possessio'n of
elhs crown upon her ptetnded'title, as hie hath hithiotb
dore, as appearcth; 'and is most manifef by letters'itlir
plots intcrcepted, and chiefly by that'llate alte'rri'o6n of
Scotland, which lath' proceeded aitbgether byi:lid'[-
reclion, whereby a gap is laid open f'r thid 'lice'dita'll
iher majely's enemies, so as it appearcth that this man-
ner of keeping her with tfuh number of persons as
(ite now hatlit and with liberty to write pnd receive

r r $ JClcet'

Jerters '(being duly confidererl),;is offensive to the princes,
the said queen's friends ; rather chargeable than profit.
able toi he majefy ; atd. fubjoCt:to al-fuch practices as
may peril herniajefty's.perfonlor'Aate;' without any pro-
vision forrh'er majefly's.fafety,-:and therefore no 'way to
be liked of; . . , .*

, ; ,, -.,

';z;,'Touching the.fecond, to,,refirain her' in a more
firaighter degree of. the ,liberty she ,hath hitherto en.
joyed'.

; . ;
- : ".·;.' . '.'I" ' ''.' :'

It may at first; fight be-,thlought a tremedy very apt to

stop the coure... o...the 'dangerous.' praffices softered
heretofore by her :for, true it is, that this remedy might
prove very' profitable; if the. realm of Scotland flood in
that fort devoted. to her majelty,' as few- years pal it
did; and if the king of that realm were not likely, .as
well for the. releafe-ofi his. mother, asfor.. the advance.
ment of both their pretended.titles to attempt' fnme-
what '"against this .realm and her imajefty, wherein he
should neither lack foreign .aflfiance, nor a parry here
within this r ealm s but the king and. that realm fland-
ing affedted as they do, this restraint, infead of re-
medying, Ig likely to breed tbere inconveniencies fol,
lowing: .. '

.; Firt,:it will increase the offence: both.in him,. and
in the ret of the princes her friends that mifiked of her

n ftr aint. ' .'

* -

* --- .: ' ' . :. . .

''Secondly, It will give them.juRf caufe.to take.foinm
way of: redreisw . . ....
' La(tly, it ls to be doubted,. that It may provoke some
desperate ill disposed person, all hope' of.herliberty
removed, 'to atlempt ,fdmewhat Jagainfl her' majefly's
own perron '(a matter above' all 'other to be weighed),
which inconveniency being duly confidered,:.t will ap-
pear' manifcflty, that the reftraint,';in a firaightcr
degreei is likely to prove a relhedy fubjeet to very hardl
'Cvents' ' !

. j, '

* : .. . i', ,

i The 'latteri degree,' whheter it were

,fitto fct' tbe

laid qvtcui' at libertyi; miniftruth fonfe caufej6f dauht,
toauhing: themanntr;olf.the liberty', in /whalIfort rtLe
fimnbrtl$to be performed, whether to be continued hler

willin

wirhin the realm, or to be 'refored Into her own'
country.. : ; '.''

Bur tirf, this ptopoflticn,, before the.partieularitieL

be weighed, is to be c6infidered- in generalityr,. -..: , :.

For it is very hrd'- for.a:wellaffektd subject, that

rendereth her majelry's surety, and weighethreither. tle.
nalore of the Scottish queen,'being inclined to amnbition
and revenge, or,;her former:;a'diols,',what: ptafices lhe
!,.cll sett on foot most dangerous for her majesty andthis
realm, to 'allow: of. helrliberty, 'being not.made ac-
quainted with'.fiuch causes '.s tme',.hath wrought, :;t
make it less. perilous than it hath been, -nor.with such
cautions as ..may. in fore fort,b 'be 'deviLfeLd to' prevent
both her ambition and ,malice; and therefore, to ,makt
this apparent, ',: . '

... . * *-,

Jt is to be coifidered,: that the. danger- that was in.

the mother, is now.grown .to-be in the'fon. '- He pre.
tendeth the fame title ihe doth r Such- as do affe&.therb.
hoth at home and abroad, do assed him- (and he is' the
more dangerous.for thatt he .is untarnied,- wbch may
greatly advance hisfortune-; and',that he is a:nmal ,
whfiieby he may enter into aftirn in ,hies.own perfCln)
where the is restrained, he is at liberty; his own
re;ln1 is nowaltogetiher athiis.dev'otiom, and the-party
alreced to this crown.nbafed ; so as the inatrer :duly
conlidered, neither her liberty nor restraint doth greatly
!rer the cafe for, perils.tpwards her vmajel.y,: unlefsby
fich promises as may be made by way of: treaty,witb,
her, thle danger likely to growi.from the kiog Jler:fon
to Ibe providod for oi !' , ' '. '

! ;

", ' .
...' ;'

lBt in this behalf:i.t.may.,be objestd, :tat:folonffga,

e'

, mother remainsin her majesty's hands,,theiing will-
:;tren)pt nothlng.for.fearl of his im)thcr'rporil,.,,i id.,!ev

'Jo this objalion:iitcmay le anfwercdj: firfa,: Thaet

they hope that hIer :majeAty being, ? prinr1opof.jki6il;e
and inclined to mercy, will not punish the mothoir,foat
tilV son's offenca,,unlefs& lhorethall,:bBifoundji:hygQod
proof,, culpable. .$e8ondarilyriThtltaN ;mcn vilJi.'1,y !t:
v.i .-haltyl.. nadcprinl,,ia what -prudioamtnti tha::kixn¢

~*' ' .

2

. ..

' . :' ,

',,-
. ;; . ,, ,; i f )) llr

flandeth touching his expe&ation of this crown, to ad.
vise any thing that in time future may be dangerou: to
the giver of such councll:as ma' rci-each to lhis imother's
peril.

And lafily, the taking away ds is' mother, 'he being

firong in the field through'both' foreign affinance, did
a party here within'the aealm, will appeir so 'cakl a e-
inedy (which'may rather exa'fpcrat 'both him, and l.cr
party, to proceed with more courage and' leat to r
venge, if any such. hard :iea(urtefhduotd be iffieried unto
her),- as they will'fuppofe for the refdon'aboVe fp'ecifi.',
that no such extremity will be 'used'.

*It may also be objeaed, that the fettingof her' at lI-

berty will greatly encourage the papists both at home
and abroad; but hereil, if the provision be duly copfi.
dered, that may be'made by parliament botli here and
there, rhey fhafl rather find cause of discomfort than
otherwise:

These two doubts being resolved, and the perils that

was in the mother appearing most manifeflly to be fc-n
in the son accompanied with more danger, with due
consideration had also of such remedies as may be pro-
vided for the prevening of the dangers, that her liberty
may minister juit caule tq doubt of; there will be goodt
cause of hope found, that the fame will rather Lrvede be-
nefit than perIs.

Now it rclfeth, in what fort the faird liberty (hall be

performed; if it thall be thought meet (he (hall hb con-
tinued within the realm will some limitation, erpecial!y
in that place where she niow refideth, the country round
about being lo inseRted in religion as it Is, it is greatiy
to be doubted that 'will very much incredfe the cori-lr
tion, and falling away in that behlf. Besides, (he
flould haavc commodity, with ruchli' moi.e'eafe andl
fpeetd,' to emterriin' prat;ice Within thi' teah;'l than by
being in her own country. ' ' ".

.If abroad frt'ely withoit imrntatibn ei'ther:li' Scotland

er France, thnirifniinlrl er'itiajejfl 'lore'te gaes'ocf her
f4aet), then flall Ih; be at hand to give jivice in fur.
;, .. . (hemnc

lleralnce of such pra&ices,.as have been laid for to stir
trouble in this realm, wherein sle hath been a principal
?anoy.

For the air, it is answered before, that the refpe&t

of any perils-that may befal unto her, will in no fort
i-flrain her son. For tile .oter, if it be confidered
vh lat harm ier advice will work unto herfelf,.in refpe&
,.f the violation of the treaty, and the provision that
may be made in parliament here, it is to be thought,
ti':t (he will then be well advised, before the attempt
any such matter, whichhnow the may do nWithout perill.
ltUiiees such princes, as have interposed theit faith and
promise for her, cannot with honour affill her, wherein
tihe French king will not be. found very forward, who,
r . ioft friendly fort, hath lately rejefted all such requests,
;.,.ounded either by her, or r

er on's minillers, that

mi;ht any way offend hermajetty. And so to concludei
L-irg the cause of her grief shall be taken away; "the
;:!clih king gratified, who is a mediator for her, and
;vii! mislike, that, by any Spanilh pralcice, fle Ihouluc
tb drawn to violate her faith, that the reft of, the
prirces thall have no jult cause of offence, but rather to
think honourably of her majesty confidering the Scottith
ccen's carriage towards her, which hath deserved no
w.iy any fuci favour; the noblemen of Scotland Ihall
be riltored, who will be a good flay of such coonfells as
mry lend to the troubling of this realm, especially havy
iD;t so good a ground of warrant as the parliament to
l.ird, unto ; the charges, nd perills which her pra&ices
tnaht have bred to this realm (all bp avoided ;,and
litly, thehope of the papist shall be taken away, by
iti.h good provisions, as in both the realms may be
:adOc, whereby the perills that might fall into her ma.
ifl.iy' owvn person, (a mnater of all Others to be weigh-
e!, iiall he avoided, when hy the change that may
g;ro by any ftyci wicked and ungodly pracice, they
lhill fee thtir cfe n o way rcle!ed in point of religion.

'..)). ;. .
. :, Rea so

Rearons

Reasons to induce her majesty to proceed in ti;'

treaty under secretary Walsingham's hanl.

[Cot. Lib Cal. C. 8.]

THAT suc!h plots as have of late years been de i.d

(tending to the raising of trouble within this rc.ln)
have grown from the Scots queen's ministers, and ii.
Vourers, notwithout her allowance and seeking: Or,

That the means used by the said ministers, to indue

princes to give ear to the said plots, is princip:,lly
grounded upon some commiseration had of their re.
itraint.

That the flay, why the said plots have not been pat

in exectiton, hath proceeded, for that the said prlnccs
have, for the most part, been entertained with hone
and domeftick troubles.

That it is greatly to be doubted, that now lieir

realms begin to be quiet, that somewhat will be atternpt
ed in her favours by the said princes.

That it is also to be doubted, that somewhat may 1;I

attempted by some of her fautors in an extraordinary
fort, to the perill of her majefly.

That for the preservation thereof, it shall be conss

nient for her majesty to proceed to the finishing of the
ireary, not long fithence begun between her and the
said queen.

No. XLV. (Vol. II. p. 297.)

Letter of QLMary to Q Eliz.abeth.

[Cott. Lib. Col. B. VIII. Fol. 147. An Original.]

Madame ma bonne Seur,

M'AssueuHANT qte V.ous avez en, comlnmnication

d'une lettre de G ray que voftre hoimme Semer rie livra lier
foubz le nom de mon filz y recongnoiffalt quasi de met
a l mot'lefs mefimes raifops que Cl dit Gray m'cfcrivit
, ,

cn chiire cflant dernierement pres de vous defmontrant
la 'uffifance & bonne intention du personage je vous
prieray feulement fuivant ce que si devant je vous ay rant
inftantetient importune que vous me permettiez def-
claircir librement & ouvertement ce point de 1'affociatidn
d'entre moy & mon filz & me deffier les mains pour pro-
ceder avec lui comme je jugeray eftre requis pour son
hicn & le mien. Et j'entreprendz quoi que 1'on vous
die & puiffe en rapporter de faire mentir ce petit bruillon
qui persuade par aucuns de vos minifires a enterpris cetre
fcpanrqrion entre moy & mon enfant, & pour y commen-
cer je vous fupplic m'oc6royer qui je puifle parler a ce
ji(lice clerk qui vous a este nouvellement envoy6 pour
miander par luy a mon filz mon intention fur cela, ce
(ui jr ile promis que ne ma refuserez, quant ce ne feroit
Iue pour. demontrer en effe& la bonne intention que vous
in'avrz areuree avoir a 1 accord &entreiien de naturel de.
-.'ir entre la mere & l'enfant qui dit en bonnes te rmes efire
'.npel'cle pont vous me tenant captive en un desert de
q"e v)ous ne pourrez mieux defmentir & faire paroitre'
violrc bon defir a notre union que rne donoant les moy-
-ins d'y proceder, & non m'en retenir & empefclhr
L.':Inle aucunede vos miniitres pretendent a fin de laiffer
ti.ujours lieu a leur mauvais & finiflres pratiques cntre
nus. 'L.a lettre porre que I'affociation n'eil pas pari ee,
nurf n,? luy ai je jamais dir, bienque mon filz avoit ac-
ceipt:; & que nous en avions convenu ensemble, comme
I'dte firhn de fa main, & ces lettres tant a nmoy, que
':r F3ance en font soy, ayanr donne ce mee emoig-
natc ;le fa bouclle propre a plulieurs ambafladeurs &'per-
fonnes de credit, s'excufant de ne l'oser faire publier par
craint de vous feulement, demandant forces pour vous
iefirter d'avant de cc declarer si ouvertemen: ertant jour.
nelicnient perfur:de au contraire par vos miniftres qui
Iuy pronmeoyent avecque une enrreire a Yorck le faire
i'rclarer votre heretier. Au surplus Madame quand mon
enfant (croiit fl m'lhlulreiix tlue de s'opihiaflrer en certe
extreme imi1piet4 ^ ih' ratituci'"vers ma v, je ne puis pen-
kcr que voul nboll 'ls 'qu acr aultre prince de la

' " ' ' "' ' ' '
' '"" Chrctientc

Chretiente le vouliffiez eu cela applaudir ou meintenir
pour luy fayre acquerir ma malediftion ains que plutos
introviendrex pour Iuy faire recongnoitre la raison tr;(p
jufli & evidant devant Dieu & les homines. Helas & en,
cores ne luy vouloier j'en ofter, mays donner avec drit
ce qu'il tient par usurpation. Je.me fuis du tout corn-
mile a vous, & fidekment faites fil i vous pleft que je
ne en foye pis qu'aupravant, & que le faulfete des uns
ne prevale defvant la verite vers vous pour bien re.
cevant mal, & la plus grande afffliion que me fcauniloit
arriver a fcavoir la perte de mon fils. Je vous fupplhl
de me mander en cas qu'il perifile en cette m'efconnoiC-
fance de son devoir, que de luy ou de moy il vous piifa
advouer'pour legittime roy ou royne d'Ecoffe, *& si ous
aves agreable de.pourfuivre avec moy a part la traiit
commenc6 entre nous de quoy je vous rcquiers fans prin
attendre de response de ce mal gouverr. enfant vous en
requerrant avec autant d'affeLtion que je fens mon ccrur
oppress d'ennuy. Pour Dieu fouvenez vous de la pro-
mneffe que m'avez faites do me prendre en voire protec-
tion me raportant de tout a vous, & fur ce prian. Dieu
qu'il'vous viueille preserver de touts vos ennemys & dif-
fimulez amys, cornme jo le dfire de me consoler & de
me yenger de ceulz qui pourcbaffnt un tel mnalleulr en
tre la mere & I'enfant. Je cefferay de vouou ultr ler,
mais non a m'ennuier que je n« recoive quelque confo
lation de vous & de Dieu encore un coup je ie fupplic de
vous garder de tout peril. Futhbery xil Mars.

Votre fidelement voue fcirur

& obeiflant coufine,

MARIE Qa

A la reyn d'Angletterr
madamenA bonne f(our &

'
\

No. XLVI; . (Vol. IL pi 298 .)

A Teflanment by ,Q May .
[Cott. Lib Vefpac. L. i6. p. 4 .]J

J. B. The following paper was transcribed by the revd.
Mr. Crawford late regius professor of church hifto-
ryin the university of Edinburgh. Part of this pa.
per, according to him, is writtena by Naue, Mary's
iecretary, the reft with the queen's own hand.
What is marked " is in the queen's hand.
CON5IDERANT par ma condition prefente 'eftat de

,e linumaine, si incertain; que perfonne ne s'en peuft,
c u doibt alreurer, finnon foubs la grande et infinie mi-
fericorde de Dieu. Et me voulant prevaloir d'icelle con-

e roits le dangers et accidens, qui me pourroient inopi-
rlenient furvenir en cette captivit6, mefines a cause des
r-.indes et longues maladies, on j'ay ete detenu6jufq'4le

pcreent; j'ay advir tandis que j'ay la commodite, ou
ralifon en jugementy de potrvoir apres ma' mort la falit
: moln atne, enterriment de mon corps et disposition de
; -,n iien, eftat, '&affaires, par ce present mon tefa'-
ment et ordonnance'de mdn 'derier volonte,' qul 's'en
si!! t.

Au nom du Pere, du Filz, et du l'enoite St Eflirit.

Prrimierement, merecongnr6lfTnt indignepecHereflb aac
pill' d'offences envertt'mon Dieu, quie de fatifatlion'par
t:,utes les adverfites que' j'ay'foufTert; 'dontje la louc fa
heont. Et m'appuyant fur la croix de mon Sauveur et
Irterdmipteur Jesus Christ. Jc recommende mon ame a
i ltcnoifle et individue Trinite, et'Atix prierei de Ia glo-
,icllrY 'Vierge Marie, et de tous les anges fains &fan fas idte
ti pa)aradis, efperant par leur merites et inttrceflon;
citer aydei a obtenir de eltre faiCe participantc avec
cl:! de felicite eternelle. Et pour m'y acheminer de
L;Icur plus net ct entler defpouillant des a present tout ref-
('ntimcnt desinjures, calomnies, rebellions, et aultres of-
f:nfCes, qui me pourroient avoir eft6 fates durant ma viv,
P'a mes fubjets rebllles et aultrosl nnennii j J'en retriet la

vOL all, . vengeance

vengeance a Dieu, & le (upplie leur pardonner, dc I, :i, .
affection. que je luy requiers pardons a mes fa.,:!
et a tous ceuls et celles que je puis avoir offense de ;'cl'<
ou de parolles Je veulx et ordonne, &c. ['/. :
follo.vitng paragraphs contain direSiions concerning rthb ila,
and circnyfances of her burial. ]

Pour ne contrevenir a la gloire, honneur, et c;iiir.

'vatibn de I'Egiife catholique, apoflolique et Rorii.e,,
en la quelle je veuix vivre et mourir, si le prince i Es.
eofle mon filz y pueft ene rcduiet contre la ma'nvaifi
nourriture, qu'il a prise a noDn tres grand regret en !'i;.
refic de Calvin entre mes rebelles, je le laliTe fctI ti
unique heritier de mon royaume d'Efcofft, dc 'tiroi
que je pretende juflement en a la couronne d'Angl' trrt
et pays qui en dependent, et generallement de tou 1.
chacun mes meubles et immeubles qui resteront :;ic:
ma mnrt, et execution de ce present teflament.

Si non, et que mon dit filz continue a vivre rn ';

dite herefie, Je cede, tranfporte, et faicle don " d
" touts et chacuns mes droiCs, que je pretende & pu;
" pretendre a la couronne d'Anglcterre, et. uliEtl
' droits, feigncuries, oun royaulmes en dependal-., ii
0' roy catholique, ou aultrc dc fiens qu'ir luy ji..;;i
" avcfques advis, confrentement de fa faintet6 ; tant poei

le voyr aujourhuy le foul feurs appui de la reili.r

" catholiquc, quc pour reconnoiffance de gratuitcs ia
' vcurs quc moy, et les miens recommandcz par nmoy
" ont avons receu de luy en ma plus grande necc:i:L
' et refguard auffi au droit que luy mefnle peut Iretcel
"' dre a ces ditz royaulmes et pays, je le fupplic qu'en
" recompence il prcign alliance, dte la maifon du )L(n
"' raine, et si il c plcut de celle de Guise, pour mnriiile
"' doe la race de laquelle je fuis sortie au cofe de N1i',
' n'a ayant de celuy de mon pere, que mon fenl ani.,t,
' lequel eflant Catholique j'ay tousjoulr vouc por Irne
"' de fes filles, si il luy plaifoit de J'accepter, ou f'illant
I' une de fes niepces mariee comme fa fille.

" Je layffe mon filz a la protection du roy, de prilnre

" et dues do Lorrayne et de Ouife, et du Maync, aux
" quglz je iecommcnde ot ion eflat eon Efcolf, ct nOn

' s droi(

droitq en A ngeterre, si il eft catholique, et quelle Ie
" oarlie de cefte royne."

Je faitz don au " comptc de Lenox" de compte de

.Lenox tenu par feu Con pere, et commande mon filtz,
cornme mon heretier et fuccetfeur, d'obeyr en celt en
,iiit a mon volonti.

]J vcuix et ordonne toutes les sommes et deniers, qui
. iroveront par moys deues, tien mis cauie de droi:t efl
,ie faits " 2. Lohliven" etre pronpternmnt payee er ac-
qtlttces, et tout tort et griefs repares par ljfedts execu-
;cc. r defquelz J'en charge la conscience. Ouirre, &c.
ic!.ozo ntoo or three paragraphs conernting particular t glcics,
r' ;he is addedl Fai& au manior de Sheireld en Angle-
terre le jour d.--- Mil cinq cens foixant & dix sept.

1s/'er a large blank page fv!slsws in the queen's hand:

Si mon filz meurt, au'comte de Lenox, au Claude

: amilton lequel fe montrera le plus fidelle vers moy,
' t plus constant en religion, au jugement de - Dues
" de Li,>raineetde GJuyfe, ouje le rapport furtcede ceulx
" a quej'auray donnay le chaige de trayter avefque eux

d" t par moy et ceulx, a condition de ce marrier ou al-
lier en la dite mayfon ou par leur advis."

Fol/ou near two patgs of pca'ticltar lagacies.

Et le remets ma tante de Lenox au drdit quelle

'peut piretendre a la contc d'Angous avant I'acnrt fait
},i|r mon commandlement entre ma dile tante de Lenox

" et le conmte de Morton, veu quil a elte fair & par le
"fecu ruy mon Mary et moy, fur 1;1 promeli: de .1;f si-
" delle atli(tance, li luy et moy encourions dangier et
" helbing d'ayle, ce qu'il rompit, a'entendant secrete-
" ment au ies nos ennemis rebelles, qu'attemnp'prient
' cmtlte fa vie, et pour ceft effcvt pris les arnles, et
" onrt mrt. les bannierep defploices, contre nous. je re-

votue aufli toute autre don que je luy Ay fa;it de con.
"t6 de Morton fur promqflis de fe .bonns ferviqes a ad-

v"nir, et.cntends quo Ia dite Conre6 fil rounie a la
" couronne). si :ll so trpove y .pa'tenir, .pfnnic,fOs tra,

a G a ' lifons

'" hifons tant en la mort de mon feu Mary, que ec
" mon baniffement, et pourfuit de la mien hne l'ont me
, rite. Et defends a men filz de cc jamays fervirt dc
" luy pour de luy pour la hayne qu'il aye a fes parcnts

la quelle je crains ne s'eftende jufques a luy, le con

" noiflant du tout affeaionnE aux ennemis de mon
" droite en ce royaurne, du quel il eft penconnaire.

" Je recommende mon nepveu Francois Stuart a n,o:

" filz, et luy commande detenir pres de luy et s'enfervit
'C et je luy lairfe le bien du conte de Boduel son oncle
" en refpct qu'il efl de mon fang, mon filleul, et n:
" esei laiffe en lutelle par Con pere.

" Je declare que mon frere baflard Robert Abb.

" St. Croix n'a en que par circonvention Orkenay, t
"qu le ne fut jamays mon intention, comme il ;;
" par la revocation que j'ay fayte depuys, et etc at:i,
" faite d'avant la afge de xxv. ans, ce que j'aimois dr
" liberer si il ne m'euffent prcnner par prison de fe '
" defayre aulx eftats je veulx donc que Orkenay t.a
" reune a la couronne comrnc une de plus neceffaire
" pour mon filz, & fans mayfon ne pourra etre b;:
" tenue.

" Le filles de Morra ne parvicnt accefti heriter, aii5

"' revient la conte a la Couronne, si il luy pleft luv y ld
" ner a ou fille en !narriafge, et il nomp I'cr si
" cnne ligne."

No. XLVII. (Vol. II. p. 309.)
A letter from Mr. Archibald Douglas tu til

Qteen of Scots.

[April-- Harl. Lib. 37., B. . so. a6.]

L
'pEA r your majelty, I received your letter of til
date of the z1th of Nov. and in like manner has leen
some pal:t of tiie contents o' one other of the fame d:ite
dlirc&e'd'd toldon. de' Movifir, .imbafiador for his nijer
ty, thie rior Chriftiian king, both which are agrecacbk

;a our princely dignity, as by the one your highness de-
ircs to know the true cause of my banishment, and of-
i-s unto me all fayour if 1 lhould be innocent of the
! .inous acts committed in the person of your hulband of
i:o)d memory, so by the other the said ambassador is
-,,;:d to declare unto me, if your husband's murder
.cld be laid justly against me, that you could not solicit
. ny cause, neither yet for any person that was parti-
;,nt of that execrable faLQ, but would seek the revenge
i,.-eof, when you Ihould have any means to do it;
-.ur inajefty's offer, if I be innocent of that crime, is
:ctfl favourable, and your desire to know the truth of
,; fame is most equitable; and therefore that I Ihould
:ath all my simplicity, sincerity and truth answer there-
J:nto is most rcafonable, to the end that your princely
:ligiity may be my help, if my innocence shall sufficient-
'r .inipear, and procure my condemnation, if I be culpa-
: in ;any matter, except in the knowledge of the evil
..! 'ofed minds of the most part of your nobility against
clir said husband, and not revealing of it ; which I air.
;i,:rid was finticiently known to himfie', and to all
;!:;t had judgment never so little in that realm 7 which
,.lif 1 was confltained to understand, as he, that was
:1eicially employed betwixt the earl Morton, and a good
number of your nobility, that they might with all hu-
rnility interctcle at your majelly's hand for his relief, in
iCu.h matnrs as are more specially contained in the de-
*.! ,ation following, which I am constrained for my owo
., tmii,ion, by this letter to call to your inajefty's re-

(nlbtirarce. Notwitlftanding that 1 am afluired, to my

EIIctL, the reading thereof will no fmially offend your
;': rnly mind. It may please your mrajefty to remem-
i.!, that in the year of God 566. the said earl of MNor-
'.l v with divers other nobility and gent. were declared
: iels to your majefly, and hanifhtd your realm for in-
lcnt murder coiniittod in your niajelty's own cham-
tecr, which they alledged was done by coinmmld of your
itiba.nd, who notwirhftanding aftirmln that lie wis
comnpelled by them to subscribe thui wvarrant giveln for
:;Lt effecti, IIowocvcr.tlie truth of t!lt mratter rermains

O a 3 mons<t

amongst them, it appertains not to me at this time ta
he curious; tite it is that 1 was one of that numjer.
that heavily offended againfl your majesty, and p:.i!l
into France the time of our banishment, at the defir .,f
the reft, to humbly pray your brother the most Chr.!it.an
king .to intercede that our oflences might be pardvl *cl,
and your majesty's clemency extended towards u,, i
beit divers of no small reputation, in that realm, .,d
of the opinion, that the fald fact merited neither to bt :
quifite for, nor yet pardoned. Always such was Ihn
careful mind of his majesty towards the quietness of ti,.i
realm, that the dealing In that cause was committrel 1.
Mionsr. de Movifir, who was directed at that time t , o
into Scotland, to congratulate the happy birth of ,jilr
son, whom Almighty God of his goodness may long plce.
serve in happy estate and perpetual felicity ; the cai-:ul
travail of the said de Movifir was so eftecu;dl, and ycl;r
inajefty's mind so inclined to mercy, that within lh.Ort
space thereafter, I was permitted to repair in Scotladiis,
to deal with earls Murray, Atlol, Bodwel, Arguile, ati
secretary Leding;on, in the name and behalf of the f!:id
Carl Morton, lords Reven, Lindsay, and remanent c m.
plefis, that they might make offer in the names ot the
said eail, of any matter that mg;iht satisfy yotur majclty'
wrath, and procure your clemency to be extended in
their favours at my coming to them, after 1 had oi;:
ed the cffect of my nm:irage, they declared that the mil.
riage hetwixt you andl your husband had been the occa-
lion already of great evil in that realm, and if your lhf.
band 'hlould be suffered to follow ihe appetite and i.nd
of. fulh as was about him, that kind of dealing li,,igl
produce with time worse effetd ; for helping of fucl, in.
convenience that might fall out by that kind of de<iiil!',
they had thought it colinenient 'to join themselves il
ileague and band with Tome other noblemen, irefolvcl ic
obey your majesty as their natrial fovorcign, and alve
.nothing to do'with your hu/band's commfand whaltf(
,ever, if the said earl would for 'himself enter into tha:t
band and copfederacy with them,'they cduld be contect
;o humbly rcquft" and travel by all meanbs with your

*'

* ' ' '
'm alcl/y

majelty for his pardon, but before they could any farther
proceed, they desired to know the said earl's mind here-
il ; when 1 had answered, that he nor his friends, at
:ny departure, could not know that any such like mat-
'r would be proponit, and therefore was not inftrut-
sd what to answer therein, they desired that I should re-
ui r fufficiuntly infiruaed in this matter to Sterling, be-
,ce the baptism of your son, whom God might pre-
(2rve; this meflage was faithfully delivered to me at
Newcafile in England, where the laid earl then remain-
xd, in presence of his friends and company, where they
;iil condefeended to have no farther dealing with your
1:ui1,and, and to enter into the said bands With this
d!thbcration I returned to Sterling, where at the requeff
of the most Chriflian king and the queen's majefly of
England by their ambassadors present, your majefly's
gi;cious pardon was granted unto them all, under con-
dition always that they should remain banified forth of
tile tca!m, the space of two years, and farther during
your majely's pleasure, which limitation was after mi-
tiguied at the humble request of your own nobility, to
tliat immediately after the said earl of Morton repaired
ir:t) Scotland to Quhittingaime, where the earl of Bod-
v(ll and secretary Ledington come to him ; what speech
Tplled there amongst them, as God [hall be my judge, I
Iknew nothing at that time, but at their departure I was
rq,'uclictd by the said earl Morton to accompany the earl
iM;dvell and Secretary to Edinburgh, and to return with
Inch answer as they should obtain of your majefly, which
bhing given to me by the said persons, as God thall' be
';y judge, was no other than these words, " Schnw to

tin: earl Morton that the queen will hear no speech
of that matter appointed unto hinm:" when I crafit

ti:t hle answer might be made more sensible, secretary
L.cdington said, that the earl would sufficiently under-
ilarIdit, albeit few or none at that time underfand wlhat
!.Iled amongfl them. It is known to all men, alr'veill
ic i;lilling letters passtd betwixt the said earl and Le-
lihgton when they becolme in divers facdions, as also one
'auck sot furtcl itby tili. ptiniiters wherein they affiirm

that

that the earl of Morton has confessed to them, befo:e iii;
death, that the earl Bodvell came to Quhittingaime to urc.
pen the calling away off the king your husband, to ihe
which proposition the said earl of Morton affirms that i:c
could give no answer unto such time he might know vyur
majefly's mind therein, which he never received. As to
the abominable murder, it is known too by the depof!.
tions of many pelfons that were executed to the death i)r
tile committing thereof, that the fame was executed hy
them, and at the command of such of the nobility, ,s
had fubfcrivit band for that effect by this unplJii.rnt
declaration, the most part thereof known to your(rff,
and the remainder may be understood by the atoreif.
witnesses that was examined in torture, and that ::
extant in the custody of the ordinary judges in Scotlan!,
my innocency, so far as may concern any face, does ap.
pear sufficiently to your majelty. And as for my dtil.
ing aforesaid, I can be no otherwise charged therein, %'it
as what would accife the vefrel that preserves the wnir.
from harm, for.the intemperancy of such as immode.
Lately use the fame. As for the special cause of my ba.
nifhment, I think the fame has proceeded upon ane
opinion conceived, that I was able to accuse the earl of
Morton of so much matter as they alledge himfell to
have confessed before he died, and would not be in.
duced, for loss of reputation, to perform any part there.
of. If this be the occasion of my trouble, as I fuiqtofe
it is, what punishment I should deserve, I remit me to
your majety's better judgment, who well knows how
careful ever ilk gentleman lhould be of his fame, repu a.
tion and honour, and how far ever ilk man should ab-
hor the name of a pultroun, and how indecent it would
have been to me to accuse the earl of Morton, being si
near of his kin, notwithflanding all the injuries 1 'is
confirained to receive at'liis hand all the time of his !"'
vernment, an ifor no other cause, but for Ihewi!g of
pairticular friendihip to particular triendslin, he till: vi
ther laltcruel troubles in Scatland. Sorry I, be now to
accafe him in'any matter being dead, and more ferry
that being on lyff, be such kind of dealing obtained tiat

titslnc

name of Ingrate. Always for my own part I have
been banihled my native country those three years and
faur months, living in anxiety of mind, my holl guds
in Sco'land, which were not small, intermittit and de.
polit upon, and has continually ince the time I was re-
:.- ed out of my last troubles at the desire of monsa de
MJovilir, attended to know your majefly'spleafure, and
to dait upon what service it should please your majesty
;,r to command. Upon the Sth of April inR. your
:ood friend secretary Walfinghame has declared unto

tne, that her highners tho't it expedient that I [hould re-

zi're myself where I pleased, I declared unto him I had
, I mieans whereby I might perform that desire, till such
tiie as I Ih buld receive it from your majelty. Neither
;i ,v I where it would please your highness to dire&
;,ie, until such time as I (hnuld have received further in-
lrrmation from you. Upon this occasion, and partly
! pi;eniflion, I have taken the hardrefs to write tlis

;: :cnt letter, whereby your majefly may understand.
my part of my troubles past, and flrait present. As to
rty intention future, I will never deny that I am fully
'eforived to fpcnd the reft of my days in your majefly's
fcrvicc, and the king your son's, wheresoever 1 Ihall be
d<i.ced by your majesty, and for the better performing
tcicof, if Co fliall be her majesty's pleasure, to recom-.
::'l.nd the tryal of myinnocency, and examination of

., verity of the preceding narration, to the king your
fan, with request that I may be pardoned for such of-
fences as concerned your majesy's service, and var com-
irl to all men the time ofltis les aige and perdonit to
all, except to ine, I flould be the bearer thereof myself,

h· e dlirc'ed in wliatfoever fervico it Ihould please

: l"r mjefly for to commiand. M6ft humble I ticfeech
).ur mnajefty to confider hereof, and to be tfogra.ios ai
'" ,lve oldel', ltbiit I may have means to serve your ma-

ajfty -ccording to the lIncerity los my Teanirig, and "'('

'Yp]ta'ing your majes1ty' alrfwtr,' after the' isn'yl;'tiut,
I IJ with all lluiijity," 'taik'l icyc frqm Lodtdop,

: , ,; j {I. . .

No. XLVII. (Vol. II. p. 317.)
A letter from Sir A'mias Paulet.

[Origin. Cal. C 9.]

SIR,

I DID forbear according to your direction signified in

your letters of the fourth of this present, to proceed to
the execution of the contents of Mr. Waade's letters
unto * ou, for the dispersing of this lady's unnece!Try
fervat-.s, and for the seasing of her money, wheiII, I
was bold to write unto you my simple opinion (although
in vain as it now falleth out), by my letters of the 7th
of this instant, which I doubt not are with you hef'r.
this time; but upon the receipt of your letters of tile
ith, which came not unto my hands until the 8th il ithe
evening, by reason, as did appear by indorfement. that
they had been mistaken, and were sent back to Win:''cr,
after they were entered into the way towards me, I
confidered, that being accompanied only by mylowiln er.
vants, it might be thought that they would be intrea.cd
to fay as I would command them, and therefore thoughl
good, for my better difelarge in these money manterls
to crave the assistance of. Mr Richard Baggot, who ie.
pairing unto me the next morning, we had acoefs jo tilil
queen, whom we found in her bed, troubled after the olk
mrnner with a defluxion, which was fallen down intc
the fide of her neck, and had bereft her of th ift lol
one of her hands, unto whom I decl:,red, that upon ¢c.
cation of her former praCfifes, doubting left she wouli
persist therein by corrupting underhand rome bad nmcm
hers of this ftatc, 1 was exprelly commanded to talte he
eioney into my hands, and to reft answerable lti' iti
when it shall be required ; advising her to deliver tie
(aid money unto im with quietness. After many dr.
nials,.many exclamations, and many bitter words againt
you (I fay nothing of her railing against nmyellf), wmnt
flat affirmation that her majefly might have her body,
.but her heart (he llould never hlave, refuting to slil'vcr
the key of the cabinet, 1 called my servants, and lent for
.f , , liirrt

hurrs to break open the door, whereupon die yielded,
.11:d causing the door to beopened, 1 found there in the
,:-iers, mentioned in Mr.Waade's remembrance, five
,lls o canvas, containing five thousand French crowns;

t o! two leather bags, whereof the one had, in gold, one

;;urrdred and four pounds two (billings, and the other
' H! three pounds in'filver, which bag of silver was left
..:li her, affirming that she had no more money in this
! otfe, and that the was indebted to her servants for their
X.'g. M Mr Waade's notemaketh men- Curie can tell
r!on of 3 rolls left in Curie's chanmer, yo e tr:;b
wilerein, no doubt, lie was misreckoned, ti matter.
which is evident as well by the teftimo-
:;te and oaths of diverse persons, as al(o by probable
onlelures Cfo as in truth we found only two roils,
; ry of which containeth one thousand crowns,
·.viictl was this queen's guifte to Curie's wife at her
;ir'li ige. There is found in Naw's chamber, in a ca-

1enut, a chain worth by estimation one hundred pounds,

and in money, in one bag nine hundred pounds, in a
f cond bag two hundred fourscore and fix pounds eighteen
(thlilngs, All the foresaid parcels of money are beflowed
in bags, and fealed by Mr. Richard Bagot, saving five
hi:)ttled pounds of Naw's money, which I refcrve in my
mdlils, for the use of this houwhold, and may be repaytd
at London, where her majefiy flall appoint, out of the
nmoney received lately by one of my servants, out of the
i!:chequer. I feared left the people might have dif-
prfled this money in all this time, or have hidden the
;inte in some secret corners; for doubt' whereof I had
cluffed all this queen's family, from the highest to the
lrl«' ot, to be guarded in the several places where I found
rili:R, so as yff I had not found the money with quiet-
iefs, I had been forced to have fearclh flit all their
tludgings, and then their own persons. I thank God
viil all my heart, as for a singular blefling, thlat that
filleth out Ib well, fearing eft a contrary fuccafs might
:lrve moved some hard conclets in her majeflty
'J'huching the dispersing of this queen's servants, I
"ru't I have done so mulch, Al may fuffie to'fatisfy her

mnajcfly

majesty for the time, wherein I could not take any ab-
solute course, until I heard again from you, partly be.
cause her majefly, by Mr. Waade's letter, doth refer to
your consideration to return such as shall be difchar,'ed
to their several dwellings and countries, wherein, as i,
feemethi, you have forgotten to deliver your opinion;
partly, for that as yet, I have received no anfwel fri-in
you, of your resolution, upon the view of the Scotti!:t
family sent unto you, what persons you will appoint ;,;
be difmift; only this l have done, I have bellowed al;
such as are mentioned in this bill inclosed in three or
four several rooms as the fame may suffice 'to contain
them, and that their meat and drink shall be brought
unto them by my servants. It may please you, to advert:rf
me by your next letters, in what fort, and for avlai
course, I hall make their palfports, as also, if they :i),!
fay that they are unpaid of their wages, what (hall I d(c

therein. Yt is said that they have Ibt.cn

T'isladybatb accustomed to be paid of their wages at
goodfore ofms. Christmas, for the whole year. Her na-
ey at prefrt in jelly's charge will be somewhat di-
htthde'c am- minifhed by the departure of this pco.
bards. ple, and my charge by this occasion will

be the more easy. But the persons, .,l

save BaRian, are such filly and simple fouls, as there nas
no great cause to fear their practices, and upon this
ground, I was of opinion, in my former letters, that all
this dismissed train (hould have followed. their miti.ers
until the next remove, and there to have been dif.
charged upon the sudden, for doubt that the said re-
move might be delayed, yf {he did fear, or expest any
hard measure.

Others thall excuse their foolish pity as they may;

but for my part, I renounce my part of the joys of hea.
ven, yf in any thing that I have said, written, or done,
I have had any other refpedt than the furtherance of her
majesty's service i and so I shall mot carnefily pray you
to affirm for me, as likewise for the not feading of the
money by Mr.. Manners, the other commissioners, and
myself, I trust Mr, Waade luth anfwored, in all hunrlk

duties,

duties, for the whole company, that no one of us did so
miuch as think that our commifion reaching only to the

,arlrs, we might be bold to touch the money, so as
there was no speech of that all to my knowledge, and as
,,u know I was no commissioner in this search, but had
mny tands full at Tyxall, discreet servants are not hastily
. deal in great matters, without warrant, and es.
really where the cause is such as the delay of it car-
,ied no danger.

gour advertisement of that happy remove hath been

greatly comfortable unto me. I will not fay, in refpef
ns rnyfelf, because my private interest hath no measure
of ,omparifon with her majefly's safety, and with the
riluit of this realm. God grant a happy and speedy
vflue to these good and godly councels; and so I com-
mit you to his merciful protecion. From Chartley the
lctil of September I.5 6.

No. XLIX. (Vol. II. p. 330.)
Letter from the King of Scots to Mr. Archi-

bald Donglafs his ambaflador in England,
O&ober i586.
[Cott. Lib. Calig. c. 9. An original in the king's hand.]
RESERVE up yourself na langer in the earnest deal-

irg for my mother, for ye have done it too long; and'
think not that any your travellis can do goode if hir
i: 1 he taken, for then adieu with my dealing with theime
:Iit ar tile special inflruments thairof ; and theirfore,
:il yv look for the contineuance of my favour towartis
you, fpair na pains nor plainnes in this cace, but redde
ni letter wrettin to Williame Keith, and conform your-
elf quhollie to the contentis thairof, and in this requcift
let me reap the fruiis of your great credit there, ither
'now or never. Pairwell. October 1586,
:'Otflle IIt *'

Letter to Sir William Keith, ambassador in

England, probably from secretary Maitiand.
Nov. 27, X586.

[A copy in the collea. of fir A. Dick. Vol. A. fol. ..!,

BY your letters sent by this bearer (albeit conce:rinS

no pleasant fubje&), his majesty conceives well of !cur
earnestness and fidelity in your negotiations, as a'foi
Mr. Archibald's ativity and diligence, whom ycn so
greatly praise and recommend, I with the ifl'u c :cf.
pond to his majesty's opinion, your care and t;;!.'!,
and his great diligence as you write. His majefly !nhki
this rigorous proceeding against his mother deep i: I
heart, as a matter greatly concerning him both isr hl.
nour and otherwise. His higlineffes aftions and be.
haviour utter plainly not only how far nature prcva;!;,
but also how he apprehends of the sequel of that rno.
cess, and of what moment he esteems it. There isin
ambafade shortly to be directed, wherein will be employ.
ed an earl and twocounfellors, on whose answer wil! de.
pend the continuance or dissolution of the amity and
good intelligence between the princes of this ill,:. In
the mean season, if farther extremity be used, and, lI
majcfty's suit and request disdained, his higlines will
think hirnfelf diflionoured and contemned far befiles hii
expectation and deserts. Ye may perceive.his majltly'i
disposition by his letter to you, which you Ihall Inparl
to Mr. Archibald, and both deal according thereto. 1
need not to recommend to your care, concerning you
master's service both in wcill and in honour. As yol
and your colleague Ihall behave yourself in this hlcalli
so for my own part, will I interpret your affeaion l
your mailer. I am glad of that I hear of yourself, and
I do fully credit that you write of Mr. Archibald, whelo
friends here make great account of his profefl'd devotiio
to the queen, beifdes the duty lie owes to the king's nl'
jetly her son. Farther I am constrained to remit II
next occation, having scarce time to Icribble tbfcre t

. 3i ' Mlin

ili.s; (which of themselves may bear witners of my
i!-.ic. Wishing you a prosperous issue of your negoci-

1;ito, I cornnil you, &c. Halyrudhoufe, Noyr37th,

T'ic people, and all estates here are so far moved by
;,: ,igorous proceedings against the queen, that his ma-
;iIy, and all that have credit are importuned, and may
ict : o abroad for exclamations against them, and impre-

R;onos againit the queen of England.

No. L. (Vol. I. p. 334.)
To the King's Majesty, from Mr. Archibald

Douglas.
s.'i' C&c. i5S6. From the original ii tle colle. of fir

A. Dick. Vol. 1.. fol. 524.J

'.PEASS. your majesty, I received your letter ot the

dc'c the zgth of September, the Stli of O&ober, which
w.s the fame day that I directed Wan Murray towards
yur higilnefs by such letters as he carried, and others
of lever;il dates, your majesty may perceive that I had
omitted nothing so far ls my travel might reach unto,
ar;,nt tle performing of the two chidf points contained
i',, aiid leter bIcfor the receipt thereof, which by there
r-:';'s I nIuft repeat for anfwcringof the faidis. As to
t': tirl), so far' as may concern the Interceding for the

yIc(rn vour mrajefy's mother her life, I have divers

ils, and in every audience, travelled with this queen
!h it matter, specially to know what her full deter-
i.1t rior mult be in that point, and could never being
1l, t any further answer, hut that this proceeding againlt

', !'v order of juflice was no less against her mind, than
"in;lt their will that loved her beR: as tdwards'Her
it ilbe could give no antwer thereinto, un'tll tbcih'trinm
the law hath declared whether 'he wai Infiocent or
[ili'. Herewithal it w,1S her pleafrde thus sa'r'to in-
ra) me, 'itat it was a number of the aiTdcitiitsvtliat
aneftly preflbd her that the law itilght: proceed'again'ft

1 11 % her.

her, giving reaoons that so long as (he was suffered to
deal in matters, so long would never this realm be in
quiet, neither her life, neither this fate in alfurance, and
in the end they used this protestation, that if the would
not in this matter follow their advice, that they lciild
remain without all blame whatsoever Ihould fall out,
whereupon she had granted them liberty to procLed,
left such as had made the request might here;,it,
have charged herself with inconvenience if any fino:uil
happen.

And by myself I know this her speech to be true, be.

cause both papist and proteflant has behaved them, as
it hath been her pleasure to declare, but upon divers le.
speds, the onp to avoid suspicion that otherwise was
conceived against them, the other upon zeal, and cars
that they will be known to have for preservation of
their sovereign's life and state in this perilous time,
upon consideration whereof, I have been constrained a,
enter into some dealing with both, wherewith 1 nra&i
her majefly acquainted ; the protestants, and fucll ai
in other matters will be known to bear no small favour
unto your majeaty's fervije, hath prayed that they miay
be excused from any dealing in the contrary of that,
which by their oath they have avowed, and by their
speech to their sovereign requested for, and that before
niy coming in this country i if they should now otliej-
wife do, it would produce no better effet but to mn;l;e
them fubje& to tlie accusation of their sovereign, 'iihin
it should please her to do it, of their inconstancy, in
giving councel Whereby they might incur the dangcir of
ill .cbuncellors, aidl be consequent worthy of puniifliniet.
,Such of the papists, as I did deal with, went iinmedi.
ately, and told her majesty what I had fpoken:to theni,

lho' albeit the uuderftood the rnatter of before, sect for

'me and declared to me myown'fpeech that I had uttered
to them, willing me for the weil of my master's fervic:
to abftair from dealing with such, as were not yet luiii.
ciently moved to think of my mailer as hle 'did. I
'ci'ated leave o6;her najefty, that I might inform themi
of your majely'sr late behaviour towadrds heri and th[

thI

late of this realm, whereunto with tome difficulty Ihe
gave her consent. At my late departure from court,
which was upon the Sth of this instant, and the day after
that the lords of this grand jury had taken their leaves
of her majesty to go northward to Fotheringham, it
was her pleasure to promise to have further speech in
this matter at the returning of the said lords, and to give
full answer according to your majefly's contentment to
the remainder matters, that I had proponit in name of
your majefly. As to the zd part concerning the affo-
ciation, and desire that the promise made to the matter
of Gray concerning your majefly's title may be fulfill-
ed; it appears by the laid letter, that the very point
whereupon the question that may bring your majelly's
ritle in doubt, hath not been rightly at the writing of
ihe said letter confidered, which I take to have proceed-
c' for lack of reading of the at of parliament, wherein
is fulfilled all the promise made by the queen to the said
mailer, and nothing may now cause any doubt to arire
againf your raid title,except that an opinion (hould be con-
ceived by these lords of this parliament that are so vehe-
ment at this time against the queen your majesty's mo-
ther, that your majesty is, or may be proved hereafter
assenting to her proceedings, and some that love your
majefly's service were of that opinion that too earnest
requefl might move a ground, whereupon suspicions
might grow in men so ill affeaed in that matter, which
I tho't might be helped by obtaining of a declaration in
parliament of your majesty's innocence at this time,
and by reason that good nature and public honefly would
confltlin. you to intercede for the queen your mother,
which would carry with itself, without any further, some
iufpicion that might move ill affected men to doubt. In
my former letters I humbly craved of your majcfty that
iome learned men in the laws might bc,moved to advice
with the words of the aflociation, and the mitigation
contained in the nat of parliament, and withall to advise
what fufpiclous effiaes your majesty's requelt might work
in these choleric men at. thi time, and how their minds
miighft be bcft moved to receive reason. and upon all

It 11 3 these

these considerations they might have formed the words
of a declarator of your majesty's innocence to he ob-
tained in this parliament, and failing thereof, the very
words of a protestation for the fame est'e that might
befi serve for your majelty's service, and for my better
information. Albeit this was my simple opinion, I fiall
be contented to follow any direcion it lhall please yonr
imajefty to give; I havealready opened the fubflance
hereof to the queen of this realm, who seems not to be
offended herewith, and hath granted liberty to deal
therein with such of the parliament as may remain in
any doubt of mind. This being the fum of my pro-
ceedings in this matter, betides the remainder, contained
in other letters of several dates, I am constrained to lay
the whole open before your majefly, and to humbly
pray that full information may be sent unto me what
further to do herein; in this middle time, while I (hall
receive more ample direcion I (hall proceed and be
doing according to such direction as I have already re-
ceived. And so, most gracious sovereign, wishing unto
your majelty all happy success in your affairs, I hum-
bly take my leave from London, 16th of Ocr this
1586. Your majelty's most humble subje&t and obed'
servant.
A memorial for his Majetty by the Mailer of

Grty.
[litl Jan. xc;6. An original in his own hand in the

collec. of fir A. Dicd. Vol. A. fol. aaz.]

IT will pleale your majesty, I have tho't meeter to

fCt down all things as they occur, and all advertifneents
as they come to my ears, then jointly in a lettre.

I came to Vare the a14th of Deer, and sent to Wi

Keith and Mr. Archibald Douglas to advertise the queen
of:it :lik as they did at their audience. She proinifed
the queen your majelty's mother's lif efhould be spared
till.we were, heard. The 17th they came to Var to
me, the whidhi day. Sir Robt came to Vare Wthere they
<fhvecd ui how far they, had aliready gonecin their ne.

gociation,

*gociation, but for that the difcoure of it is let down in
our general letter, I remit me to it, only this far I will
retlify unto your majesty that Wn Keith hath used him-
f!fi right honefly and wifely till our coming, refpefting
:li eircumflances, and chiefly his colleague his dealing,
wvhich indeed is not better than your majesty knows
already.

The 29th day of Decr we came to London, where

we were no ways friendly received, nor after the honest
(orL it has pleased your majesty use her ambassadors;
,cver man sent to welcome or convey us.' The fame
day we underitood of Mr. de Bellievre his leave taking,
.nd for that the custom permitted not we sent our exp
cufes by Mr. George Young.

The ift day of JanY Wi Keith and his colleague ac-

cording to the custom sent to crave our audience. We
received the answer contained in the general letter, and
iou)d not have answer till the 6th day, what was done
that day your majefly has it in the general, yet we was
not out of esperance at that time, albeit we received
haid answers.

The Sth day we speak with the earl of Leicefer,

where our conference was, as.is.fet down in the gene-
ral. I remarked this, that he that day laid plainly the
t!,lininig of the queen of Scotland prisoner was for that
lie pretended a fucceflion to this crown.. Judge. then
tby this what is tlo't of your majefly, as ye Ihall hear 4
litle ifter.

The 9th day we speak with the French amrbalador,

whom we found very plain in making to us a wife dif-
,liri'e of all his proceedings, and Mr. -de Blliavre we
thanked him in your majcfiy's name, and opened such'
things as we had to treat with this queen, (ave the last
point, as more largcly:fet down by our general.

It is tho't here, and ,some friends of your majelty'i*

alvired mne, that Bellievre his negociation was not effec-
tual, and that the resident was not privy to its as in-,
dedl I think is true, for 'ince Bellievre his perting, there'
is a talk of this Chflteauneuf lisf;ervants taken with hist
whole papers npd pacquets :.wbh he was frndlng in

a Frknnur

France, for that the; charge him with a conspiracy of
late agaietft the queen here her life. It is alledged hi,
servant has confelfed the matter, hut whom I shall truit
I know not, but till I fee proof 1 Shall account him an
honest man, for indeed Co he appears, and one (without
doubt) who hath been very instant in this matter. i
chew him that the queen and earl of Leicester had de.
fired to speak with me in private, and craived his opi.
nion ; he gave it freely that he tho't it meeteft, I Ihtc;
him the reason why I communicate that to him, for
that I had been fufpetled by Come of her majefly's friends
in France to have done evil offices in her service, that lie
fnould be my witness that my earnest dealing in this
(hould be a sufficient teflimony that all was lyes, and that
this knave Naue who now had betrayed her, had in that
done evil offices; he desired me, feeing (he saw only
with other folks eyes, that I Ihould no ways impu;e
it to her, for the like the had done to himself by
Nau6 his persuasion. I answered he /hould be my wit-
ness in that.

The 9th day we sent to court to crave audience,

which we got the loth day ; at the first, she said a thing
long looked for ihould be welcome when it comes, I
would now fee your master's offers. I answered, no
man makes offers but for some cause; we would, and
like your majelty, firl know the cause to be extant for
which we offer, and likewise that it be extant till your
majesty has heard us. I think it be extant yet, but I will
not promise for an hour, but you think to (hist in that
fort. I answered we mind not to inift, but to offtr
from our sovereign all things that with reason may ie;
and in special, weoft'ered as is let down in our general, nil
w.vs refused and tho't nothing. She called on the three
that were in the loufj, the earl of Leicefier, my lord ;d.
miral, and chamberlain, and very delpit'fully repeated
all our offers in presence of themall. I opened the lalt
part, and said, Madam, for what refpec is it that mea
deal againf your person or estate for her cause ? She
answered, becaure they think ihe. nal .fuccted to me, ani
for that lbeais a papist; appearingly,ftid I both the

cauld

aufies may be removed, lhe said (he would be glad to
uinerftand it. If, Madam, said I, all that she Iha of
right of succession were in the king our sovereign's per-
ion. were not all hope of papilts removed ? She an-
Iwt :d, I hope to. Then, madam, I think the queen
lis mpther lhall willingly demit all her rights in his per-
son. She .nfwered the hath no right, for /he is de-
. laed unhabil. Then I said, if flhe have no right, ap-
pecalingly the hope ceafss already, so that it is not to be
:crcd that any manl attempt for her. The queen an.
i.-cred, but the papills allow not our declaration ; then
if- it fall, fays i, in the king's person by her aflignation.
Thie carl of Leiceiter answered, Ihe is a prisoner, and
liow can the demit ? I answered the demission is to
her son, by the advice of all the friends lie has in Eu-
rcpe, and in cafe, as God forbid, that any attempt
ci:ttis the queen here away, who (hall party with her to
prove the deminfion or aflignation to be ineffelual,. her
ii;r being opposite party and having all the princes her
trierids for him, having bonded for the efficacy of it
with his majesty of before.. The queen made as the
could not comprehend my meaning, and fir Robt opened
tie matter again,; he yet made as the' the understood
,; t. So the earl of Leicefler answered that our meaning
ris, that the king ihould be put in his mother's place,
1: it so, the queen answered, then I put myself in a
n'.orc cafe than of before ; by God's paflon, that were
i t. cvt my own throat, and for a dutchy,-or an earldomr
rn yourself, you or such as you would cause Tome of
;';*r dcfpernte knaves kill me. No, by. God, he (hall
1.i',tr be in that place. I answered, he craves nothing
,' your majefly but only of his mother. The, earl of
L.cicufter answered that were to make 'him party to the
'uo,:n my miflrefs. I laid, lie will be far more party, if
b, he ii her place thro' her death. She would flay no
longer, but said the fhouldriot have aworfe in his rio-
thlc's place. And.faidi' tell your king wvharlgood.l.have
done for him' in holding the crown ot his head finca he
wv:,, born, and that I mind to' iep the league, that now
nlinds btcwten i t' Mdridf hi tbroki it iall, J& double

aHus,

fault, and with this minded to have bidden us a fars.
well; but we atchevit [i. . finished arguing upon this
point]. And I fpnke craving of her that her li/c uay
be spared for 15 days; the refused. Sir Rob' C::i, d
for only eight days, the said not for an hour; andc i
geid her away. Your majesty fees we have deiive!d
all we had for offers, but all is for nothing, for fie all

elrr councel has laid a determination that they iniid ca
follow forth, and I fee it comes rather of her codrcil
thap herself, which I like the worse; for without dote ;,
fir, it shall cut off all friend(hip ye had here. Aithi 'i;
were that once they had meaned well to your nm:.'. 'l
yet remembering themselves, that they have medled \ :!
your mother's blood, good faith they cannot hope gpeat
good of yourself, a thing in truth I am sorry for; fiu-
ther your majesty may perceive by this las difcotur(; f
that I proponit, if they had meaned well to your tii.
jefty, they had used it otherwise than they have done,
for reason has bound them. But I dare not write all.
I mind something to (peak in this matter, becaufc we
look (hurly our letters shall be truffit by the way.

For that I fee private credit nor no means can alter

their determination, altho' the queen again and th- earl
of Leicefier has desired to speak with me in particuriir;
3 mind not to speak, nor shall not; but assuredly fl;:'
let all men fee that I in particular was no ways tycd to
England, but for the refpeEt of your maj;fty's fervicc.
So albeit, at this time, I could not effeAtuate that I de.
fired, yet my upright dealing in it ihall be manifeslt. to
the world. We are, God willing, then to crave ;iu.
dience, where we mind to use tharply our inflruLin,
which hitherto we have used very calmly, for we can,
for your honour's caure, fay no less for your najelt/,
than the French ambairador has said for his master.

So I pray your majesty confider my upright dealing in

your service, ahd not the.effe&, for had it been double
(i. e. possible to be done] by any I might have here hrd
credit, but being I came only for that catufe I will not
my credit (hall serve hior to any further purl]'.
Ipray God proferve your majesty and fend you a trot

and

and sincere friendliip. From London this I2th of
Jan. ra86.

I understand the queen is to fend one of her own

.c your majesty.
To the Right Hon. my Lord Vice-cliancellor

and Secretary to his Majesty, from the Marer
of Gray.
f[2th Jan. 1586. An original in the colleCt. of fir A.

Dick. Vol. A. fol. 179.]

My lord, I fend you there lines with this inclored to

his majeft), whereby your lordfllip ihall underhtand how
matters goes here. And before all things I pray your
lorc'Ihip move his majefly to refpecf my diligence, and
not the effed in this negociation, for I swear if it had
Iten for the crown of England to myself I could do no
nmre, and let not unfriends have advantage of me, for
tie world shall fee that I loved England for his majefly's
f.rvice only. I look shortly to find your lordflip friend
.s yc made promise, and by God I (hall be to you if I
cnr. W'n Keith and I devyfet, if matters had gone well,
to have run a course that your lordship might have here
been in credit and others disappointed, but now 1 will
do for you as for myself; which is to care for no credit
h re, for in concfience they mean not hlonefily to the
king our fovercign, and if they may, he will go the
get his mother is gone or shortly to go, therefore my
loid without all kind of scruple, pray you to advise him
tlh best is not this way. They fay here, that it has
bt n f.id by one who heard it from you, that ye de-
iiretd not the king and England to agree, because it would
rick the noblemen, and gave an example of it by king
Janes the fourt, 1 answered in your name. that I was
altfiicd you never had spoken it. Mr. Archibald is-the
sprcaker of it, who I ffrure your lordlhip has been a
p.ifon in this matter, for they lean very mickle to his'
opinion. He cares not, he fays, for at length the king
vwll be fain to deal this way, either by fair means or

neccneity,

necessity, so that when he deals this course he is assured
to be welcome , to set down all that is past of the like
purposes, it would consume more paper tlian I have
here, so I defer it to meeting. There is a new con..
fpiracy alledged against the queen to have been intend.
ed, for the French ambafador resident three of his men
taken, but I think in the end it Ihall prove nothing. Mr.
Stafford who is ambassador for this queen ip France, i;
touched with it, his brother is taken here, always it ias
done this harm in our negociation, that all this council
would not move this queen to meddle with the queen
of Scotland's blood, till this invention was found foith,
I remit all other things to the inclosed. We minded to
have sent to his majesty a discourse, which we have set
down of all our proceedings finct our hither coming,
but we are surely advertized that the bearer is to be
trussed by the way for our.pacquets, so that we delcr i;
till ourown coming; this lhave put in a privy part bclieic
the pacquet. We shall Ithink take leave on Fryday the
13th day, where we mind exa6ly to follow the rigour of
our inftruaions, for it cannot fland with the king's
honour that we fay less than the French ambalfadol,
which was, le roy mon mailtrc ne peult moins faire que
fe refentir. So that.about the 24th-I think we flall,
God willing,. be at home, except that some flay cont
which we look not for. The queen and the earl of
Leicefier has desired to speak with me. I refused save
in: presence of my colleagues, by reason I fee a deter
mination which particular credit cannot help, and I
crave no credit but for that cause. It will pleace your
lordship retire the inclosed from his majesty and keep it.
So after my service commended to yourself and bld-
fellow, I commit you to God, From London the x th
of Jan, sj86.

To

'o the King's Majesty, from Sir Robert Melvil.
rSoth Jan. 1586. An original in his own hand, in the col-

left. of fir A. Dick. Vol. A, fol. $ii.]

Ir may please your majesty, since the dire&ion of our

iormner letters, we had audience, and her majefly ap-
pcared tc take our overtures in good part in presence of
iie- council; albeit no offers could take place with them,
I.:-ving taken resolution to proceed with extremity, not
ile tle's it pleased her majesty to desire us to flay for two
Jays on taking our leave, untill lhe had advised upon
1,ur propositions since which time, her miajefty is be-
conmc more hard by some letters (as we are informed)
has came from Scotland, making some hope to believe
:1 at your majesty takes not this matter to heart, as we
kino the contrary in effeft, and had of before removed
thL like opinion out of her majesty's mind, which by
fnller information was credited, thir reports has hin-
:!cred our commission, and abused this queen, fearing in
I .. manner we liall be flayed until answer come from
Scotland by such person as they have intelligence of.
inid albeit that it will be well enough known to all men
lic. heavily your majesty takes this proceeding to heart,
' e truth is, that they have by this occasion so perfuad-
e' the queen, that it is like to hinder our negotiation.
As alto Alchinder (i. e. Alexander) Steward is to be di-
ricted in their party, by our knowledge, who has
aa'antyt more of his credit, than I believe he may per-
form, and we wrest him to desist from this dealing, fay-
ing it does harm, and he is not meet for that purpose,
remitting to your majesty's good discretion to take order
herein as we lhall be'anfwerable to your majesty not to
t'nfit any point we have in charge, as the truth is, the
nmafter of Grhaye has behaved himself very uprightly and
discreetly in this charge, and evil tayne with be divers
in these parts who were of before his friends. We have
been bahalding to the menftrals who has born us belt
company, but hat not been troubled with others, Wyl-

VOL. 11A, I zaem

zeme Kethe hlth left nothing undone that he hath ir
charge. As for master Archibald he has promired ac al
times to do his dewoyr, wherein he (hall find true reporl
made to your majesty, craving pardon of your majps
that I have been so tedious, after I have kissed yori
majesty's hand I humbly take my leave. Praying Goc
to grant your majesty many goods days and happy, ir
whose prote&ion I commit your majefiy at London, ihi
2cth of Jan. 1586.

SIR,

ALBEIT Malter George has not been in comrmifiior

he is not inferior in his service to any of us, as well by
his good advice and diligent care he takes for the ad.
vancement of your service, wherein we have not be;..
fittle furthered.
To the King's 1MajelRy, from the Master of Cr, r

and Sir Robert Melvill.
rtlft Jan. 1586. An original in the collet. of fir A. Li;',

Vol. A. fol. 180.]

PLEASE it your majefly'in the last audience we had:

since our last advertisement by Wm Murray, we fine
lher majesty at the resuming our offers something miti.
gated, and inclined to confider more deeply of them, ,e.
fore we got our leave, at our reasoning, certain of tai
council, namely, my lord of Licefter, fir Chrilophli!
Haton, my lord Hunfdon, and my lord Hawart beinm
present in the chamber, gave little show of any grea!
contentment to heare her from her former refohition:
now caffin in perplexitie what the Ihould do, always we
left her in that slate. and since we have daily pressed conl
fcrence with the whole council, which to this hour we
have not yet obtained. Tllis day we have sent down tc
crave our leave. The greatest hinder which our nego
tiation has found ithlierto is a persuasion they have here
that eitl)er your majeQty deals superficially in this mattel,
or that witll time ye may be moved to digest it, lwicll
when with l;reatdifficulty we had expugnit, we find ance

that

that certain letters written to them of late from Scotland
has found ofme place of credit with them in our contrare.
So that resolving now to clear them of that doubt by a
special mentage, they have made choice of fir Alexander
Stewart to try your highness's meaning in it, and to per-
fuade your majeffy to like of their proceedings, where
1;om no terror we can fay out unto him is able to divert
l;in, he has given out that he has credit with your ma-
j.ifty, and that he doubts noc to help this matter at your
hiiglnefs's hand. If he come there that errand, we think
,-.rr majesty will not oversee the great disgrace that his
.tetnpts (hall give us here, if he be not tane order with
5fre that he be further heard, and if so be that any
rther be directed (as our intelligence gives us there flall)
*ur humble suit is to your majefly, that it may please
your highness to hear of us what we find here, and at

:.,hat point we leave this matter with her majfRly, be-

ic c l;::r. they find accidence, the causes whereof remit-
iln; to our private letters. We commit your majtfty
fc' the present to God's eternal protec'ion, From Len.
.oni tihis zift of Jan. 1586.

No. LI, (Vol. II. p. +I'.)

Copy of a letter from the Earls of Shreswiuty

;#.,l, Kent, &c. touchilng tlhei prceedilg
with regard to thle death of the Scoti;i
(ic en, to her Majelly's council.
1 r may please your honbic good lordships to be ad.

xcirifel, that, on Saturday the 4th of this present, f
Robert Beale came to 'tih hcue of me the earle of Kent
in the county of -tio whom' your lordlhips letter
and nieirage waS delivered, ind'her li'aj!ty'b commi(ffoq
tcv l; whereiupon I the' earl' fortlhwih sent precepts
;ir thle Ifaying of fuoh lueie and crie'si hld'troubled thi

$ 1 . country,

country, requiring the officers to make fRay of all fucli
persons, as should bring any such warrants without names,
as before had been done,, and to bring them to the next
justice of peace, to the intent that, upon their examina-
tion, the occasion and causes of such seditious bruites
might be bolted out and known. It was also resolved
that I the said earl of.Kent should, on the Monday f£.
lowing, come to Lylford to Mr. Elmes, to be the near;i
and readier to confer with my lord of Shrewfbuy,
Sunday at night, I Robert Beale. came to Fotheringay,
where after the communicating the commiflion, .c.
unto us fir Amice Pawlet and fir Drue Drury, by reason
that fir A. Pawlet was but late recovered and not :;bi
to repair to the earl of Shrewsbury, being then at Orton,
fix miles off; it was thought good that we fir Druc

rur.y and Robert Beale thould go unto him, which .re
did on -- morning; and together with the delivery
of her majefiy's commi'fion, and your lordibip'S ltkte'
imparted unto him what both the earl of Kent and wve
thought meet to be done in the cause, praying his rci-d
ship hither the day following, to confer with me th;
(aid earl, concerning the fame;' which his lordflhip Iro-
nifled. And for ghe better colouring of the matter, I
the said earl of Shrewsbury sent to Mr. Beale, a jultice
of peace of the county of Huntingdon next adjoining, to
whom I communicated that warrant, which Robert Bleale
had under your lordfliip's hands, for the flaying of the
hues and cries, requiring him to give notice thereof to
the town of Peterborough, and especially unto the juificts
of peace of Huntingdonflire, and to, caure the pursuers
and bringers of such warrants to be flaye:l, and broughl
to the next juflicc of peace and to bring us word to
Fotheringay' castle on Wednesday morning what he had
done, and what.lle should in the mean time undcr(i.nd
of the althors of such bruitcs. Which like order, 1 als
fir Amjin Pawlet bad taken on Monday morning in thii
town, and other places adjoining. The fame night, nit
sheriff of tile county of Northalmpton upon the recilpt of
. our Iqrdtlip'g;leltsr.came to Arundcl, and, lettcrs we'

(Cen

Sct ro Tie the earl of Kent of the earl of Shrewsbury's
iniendin and meeting here on Tuesday by noon; and
<.ther letters were also sent with their lordships assent to
lii EdAvard Montagu, fir Richard Knightly, Mr. Tho.
jji Loelell, &c. to be here on Wednesday by eight of the
io,-'T in the morning, at which time it was thought
mleet that the execution fliould be. So upon Tuesday,

.: i;e earls came hither, where the Iheriff met us ; and
' on conference between us it was resolved, that the

...re for the fending for the surgeons, and other neceflary
profi/ioi flhould be committed unto hin againlt the time,
.nd v.,e forthwith repaired unto her, and first in the pre-
!:.cs of herself and her folks, to the intent that they
.r.:sh;r fee and report hereafter that (le was not other-
clit proceeded with than according to law, and the
C ' m of the Itatute made in the z 7th year of her majesty's
;'gn. it was thought convenient that her majetty's com-
.iifion fliould be read unto her, and afterwards she was
by sundry speeches willed to prepare herself against the
ntxt morning. She was also put in remembrance of her
.i rt, the honourable manner of proceeding with her,
arid the necessity that was imposed upon her majesty to
proceed to execution, for that otherwifeit was found that
i cy could not both Itand together; and however, flthence
ti lord Buckhurit's his being here new conspiracys wore
'tempted, and to would be still; wherefore since fle
: i lnow a good while since warning, by the said lord
:d iRobert Ileale, to think upon and prepare herself to
Iic, \we doubted not but that she was, before this, fettled,
,nrt therefore would accept this mclhige in good part.
'ind to the effect that no Chrififan duty might be said to
; omitted, 'that might be for her comfort, and tend to
rtl salvation both of her body and foul in the world to
conme, we bflered unto her that if it would please her to
confer with the bi(hop and dean of Peterborough, die
Mnildht; which dean, we had, for that purpose, appointed
to, le lodged within one mile of that place. 'Hereto she
replied, crofing herself In the name of the Failie.r the
Son, ;and the Holy GBoef, fying that fle was ready to die

113 in

in the catholic Roman faith, which her anceflors had pro.
feFied, from which the would not be removed. And
albeit we used many persuasions to the contrary, yet ve
prevailed nothing; and therefore, when (he demat:idr
the admittance of her priest, we utterly denied that unto
her. Hereupon, flie demanded to underfand what en.
fwer we had touching her former petition to her mar,..
concerning her papers of accounts, .and the beftioiing
of her body. To the first we had none other anfwei to
make, but that we thought if they were not sent befJ-e,
the fame might be in Mr. Waade's custody, who '..-as
now in France, and feeing her papers could not any wife
pleasure her majetly, we doubted not but that the !.'ne
would be delivered unto such as she tfould appcl t,
For, for our own parts, we undoubtedly thought that her
majesty would not make any profit of her things, andl
therefore (in our opinions) she might set down what f;ie
would have done, and the fame should be imparted unto
her majesty, of whom both fie and others might exlpef
all courtesy. Touching her body, we knew not her na-
jefty's pleasure, and therefore could neither fay that her
petition thould be denyed, or granted. For the prat'ic
of Babington, the utterly denied it, and would have in-
ferred it that her death was for her religion: whereunto
it was eftsoons by us replied, that for many year.s a(h
was not touched for religion, nor should have been now,
but that this proceeding against her was for treafan, in
that the was culpable of that horrible conspiracy for di.
flroying her majefly's person; which she again denied,
adding further, that albeit the for herself forgave them
that were the procurers of her death, yet (he doubted not
but that God would take vengeance thereof. And being
charged with the depositions of Nau6 and Curie to pro''
it against her, (he replied, that hie accured none, bilt
that hereafter when tlie 'hall be dead,, and they remain
alive, it (hall be seen how indifferently (he had been lealt
with, 'and what measure liad been used unto her; and
asked whether it'had been heard before this, that flr-
vants had been practised to accuse their 'iiftrefs, and

hertlipon

lierupon alto required what was become of them, and
where they remained,

Upon our departure from her, for that it seemed by
h!; commission, that the charge of her was in the difpo-
i;ion of us the earls, we required S. Amias Paulet and
5. Drue Drurie, to receive, for that night, the charge
vwiich they had before, and to cause the whole number
ot soldiers to watch that night, and that her'folks hould
be put up, and take order that only four of them hfould
br at the execution. remaining aloof of and guarded with
,ertain persons so as they (hould not come near unto
;ir, whicb were Melvill her steward, the physician,
cfugeon, and apothecary.

XVtdnefday morning, after that we the earls were re-

, ared unto the cafle, and the sheriss had prepared all
'iings in the hall for the execution, he was commanded
rc go into her chamber, and to bring her down to the
pdace where were present, we which have signed this
Jetter, Mr. Henry Talbot, Efq; fir Edward Montague,
knt. his ton and heir apparent, and William Montague
i,- brother, fir Richard Knichtly, knt. Mr. Thomas
Bi udenell, Mr. Beuill, Mr. Robert and John Wingeield,
:!r. Forieft, and Rayner, Benjamin Piggot, Mr. Dean
o(f Peterborough, and others.

At tile flairfold, the paused to speak to Melvil in our

learing, which was to. this effect, " Melvil, as thou
hall been an honest servant to me, Co I pray thee con-
'imlie to my ton, and commend me unto him. I have
!.t impugn'd his religion, nor the religion of others,
tl't with him well. And as I forgive all that have of-
finded me in Scotland, lb I would that he should also;
and bciiech God, that lie would fend himn his Holy
Spirit, and illuminate him." Melvill's anfvier was,
thilt li would so do,, and at that iuotant he wqpld be-
iccl} God to a(ffiu lahi with ,his fyirit. Then fie de-
iilinded to speak with her pries, which was deric
:J)s:' her, the rather for, that nhe came with. a fuperfti
.o' pair of beads and a crucifix. She thei desired t9
i:l'cl her women to help her, and.uppii he eprnefl o-

qucft,

quest, and faying that when other gentlewomen vcre
executed, s(he had read in chronicles that they had vwo
men allowed unto them, it was permitted that she thould
have two named by herself, which were Mrs. Curie aid
Kenedy. After the came to the scaffold, firi in p:efenice
of them all, her majesty's commission was openly re:adi
and afterwards Mr. Dean of Peterborough, according tc
a dire&ion which he had received, the night befric,
from us the earls, wou'd have made a godly admonition
to her, to repent and die well in the fear of God ai1)
charity to the world. But at the firfi entry', the uttely
rcfuted it, faying that the was catholique, and that it
were a folly to move her being so resolutely minded, and!
that our prayers would little avail her. Whereupon,
to the intent it might appear that we, and the wh!, .c
assembly, had a christian dcfire to have her die well. a
godly prayer, conceived by Mr. Dean was read 'and
pronounced by us all. That it would please Almighty
God to fend her his Holy Spirit and grace, and also, ii
it were his will, to pardon all her offences, and of his
mercy to receive her into his heavenly'and everlaiiing
kingdom, and finally to bless her nrajefty, and confound
all her enemies; " whereof Mr. Dean minding to repair
up lhortly, can thew your lordships a copy.

This done, she pronounced a prayer upon her knees

to this effec, "to beseech God to'fend her his Holy
Spirit, and that the trusted to receive her salvation in his
blood, and of his grace to be received into his kingdom,
bcfought God to forgive her enemies, as the for!gTr
them i and to turn his wrath from this land, to bless the
queen's majeftie, that (he might serve him. Likl\vif
to he merciful to her fon,'to have compafnion of hI
thurch, and altho''the was'not'worthy'to be heard, yet
Ieiliad a confidence in his mercy; and prayed all tht
faints' to'pray unto her Sa;iou6 l to receive'her." Afite
this' (tdrning towards her tervdhts) fhc desired then l0
pray for her, that her Saviour would receive her. 'Iheri
upon petition made by the executioners, the pariolid
tlihan and'faid, fli was glad that the end of all lih

' ' ' { > v for i

sorrows was 7o near. Then the disliked the whinning
and weeping of her women, faying that they rather
ought to thank God for her resolution, and kifling them
willed them to depart from the scaffold, and farewell.
And so resolutely kneeled down, and having a kercheff
binded about her eyes, laid down her neck, whereupon
the executioner proceeded. Her servants were inconti.
nently removed, and order taken that none should ap-
proach unto her corps, but that it should be embalmed
Ih the surgeon appointed. And further her crosse, ap-
ijcIl, and other things are retained here, and not yield-
ci unto the executioner for inconveniences that might
lollow, but he is remitted to be rewarded by such as
tent him hither.

This hath been the manner of our dealings in this

rfrvicc, whereof we have thought good to advertice
y,?ur lord(hips, as particularly as we could, for the
luie, and further have thought good to signify unto
your lordflhips besides, that for the avoiding of all
.iniler apd slanderous reports that may be raired to the
u:ntrary, we have caused a note thereof to be ionceiv'd
to the fame effec in writing, which we the laid lords
have ubfcribed, with the hands of such other there' the
ll,:ights and gentlemen above named that were present
at the afion. And so beseeching Almighty God.long
to bless her majesty with a most prosperous reign, and
to confound all his, and her enemies, we take our
leaves. From Fotheringay castle, the Sth of February
ls86, in hat.

Your Iordfhips at conimandment

N. U. This, as well as fi;veral other papers in ttis Ap-

pendix, is talcen,fron ' collecion made by Mr. Craw-
fuld of Drumroy,. hifto.iographer to queen Annc,
nowv in the .library ofth,e fcu)ty of Advocates.
Mr. Crawfur4's tranfcribcr ha!s oQpitted topnmrtion
ghc book in the Cqt.ib, whcr, jlt i tp be found .

No. LII. (Vol. II. p. 346.)
The objeiftons againfi Mr. Davison, in the

cause of the late Scottish Queen, must con.
cern things done either, I. Before her trial at
Fotheringay, 2. During that session, 3. After
the fame.

[Cot. Lib. Cal. C. i.]

X. BEFORE her trial, he neither is, nor can be charged

to have had any hand at all in the cause of the said querll
or done any thing whatsoever concerning the fame di.
re&ly or indirecly.

2. During that session, he remained at court, wl;cee

the only interelt he had therein, was as her mnjeCry';
Secretary, to receive the letters from thie commifion.:;,
impart them to her highncfs, and return them her an.
fwers.

3. After the return thence, of the raid commiffloners,
it is well known to all her council,

1. That he never was at any deliberation or meeting

xwhatfoever, in parliament, or council, concerning the
c3ufe of the said queen, till the fending down of her ma-
j.fty's warrant unto the comnmifioners, by the lords and
others of her council.

z. That he was no party in signing the sentence palled
againfO her.

3. That he never penned either the proclamation

phblilhing the fame, the warrant after her death, nor
any other letter, or thing whatsoever concerning tie
f:,me. .And,

That the only thing which cap be specially and truly

imputed to him, is the carrying up tire said warrant unto
her majesty to be signed. She funding a great counsellor
unto himi, with her pleasure to that end, and carrying
it to the great feal of England, by her own special di-
retion and commandment.

For

i or the better clearing of which truth, it is evident,
r. That the letter, being penned by the lord trea-

, ],er was delivered by him unto Mr. Davison, with
i;-r majefly's own privity, to be ready for to sign, when
Ihe ilhoioId be pleased to call for it.

.. That being in his hands, he retained it at the least

1 i c or fix weeks unprefented, nor once offering to carry
ir up, till she rent a great counsellor unto him for the
s me, and was fiarply reproved therefor by a great
r-! in her m.jefty's own presence.

.. That having signed it, the gave him an express
;in:m.ndinent to carry it to the feal, and being fealed
:. rndc it immediately away unto tl;e (ommiffoners, ac-
t ,inhg to the diretion. Eerfelfappointing the hall of

t:ringay for the place of execution, miniking the

. ... I y.ird, in divers refpeCis, and in conc!ufion abfo-
!:1:Iy sorbad him to trouble her any further, or let her
he:.. Aiy more hereof, till it was done. She, fJr her
!:[ti, having (as the laid) perrormed all that, in law or
:c.afln, could be required of her. e

W. Which direflions notwithflancing, he kept the

-t1lant fealed all that night, and the greatest part of

rie jrext day in his hands, brought it back wlth him to

;:.. court, acquainled her majesty withal, and finding
1 '1 maijety resolved to proceed tl:erin, according to her
. ,rnerr direcions, and yet desirous to carry the matter

aI si the might throw the burthen from herfelt, he ab-
til.:tcly resolvcd to quit his hands thereof,

5. And hereupon went over unto the lord treaftire'r's

:li.mnber, together with Mr. vice-chamberlain Hatton,
.nd in his presence re(tored the fame into the hands of
!:c laid lord treasurer, of whom he had before received

'who from henceforth kept it, till himself and the

.' I of the council sent it away.

Which, in 'ubllance and rtlth, is all the part and

;i:eccll the said Davison had in this caufr, whhatfoevir
,, or may be Vretend'd to tihe contrary.

Touching

Touching the fending down thereof unto the corn.

nmiffioners, that it was the general at 'of her majeii.',
council (as is befoic-mentioned) and not any private ac
of his, may appear by,

r. Their own confession. 2. Their own letters sent

down thtrewith to the commissioners. 3. The teftini.
nies of the lords and others to whom they were di!:r.
ed. As also, 4. of Mr. Bealc, by whom they wtre
tent. 5. The tenor of her majesty's first commifilie
for their calling to the flar-chamber for the fame, and
private 'appearance and fuibmillion afterward inuei
thereof before the lord chancellor Bromley. 6 l,
corfefilon of Mr. Attorney-general in open court , r.
firmed. 7. By the sentence itself upon record. ,. li.
files a common at of council, containing an anfwcrvl
he verbally delivered to the Scottish ambassador thlin rc
maining here, avowing and jufiifying the fame.

Now where some suppose hinm to have given some cx

traordinary furtherance thereunto, the contrary may rvi,
dently appear by,

1. His formerabfolute refusal to sign the band o;

&

fociation, being earnefily pressed thereunto by her n:m
jefly's self.

2. His excusing of himself from being used as a com

niffioner, in the examination of Babington and hi
complices, and avoiding the fame by a journey to th
Bath.

3. His being a mean to flay the commiffioncrs fron

pronouncing the sentence at Fotheringay, and deferrin,
it till they should return to her majefly's prefende.

4. His keeping the warrant in his hands fix wedt

unprefented, without once offering to carry it ul, i
]hcr majefy sent expressly for the fame to sign.

5. His deferring to fend it away after it was Icall

unto the comniffioncra,'as he was specially commaln
ed, flaying it all that night, and the grcatde part of i
ncxt day in his honds,

:, 6k. Al

6. And finally, his refloring thereof into the hands

of the lord treasurer, of whom he had before received
the fame.

Which are clear and evident proofs, that the said

Davison did nothing in ,'is cause whatsoever, contrary
to the duty of the place he then held in her majesty's
service.

Cal. C. 9.
[This fccms to be an original. On the hack is this title,
The innocency of Mr. Davison in the cause of the
!ahc Scottilh queen.]

I, . ___

No. LIII. (Vol. III. p. 77, line 3.)

Lctter from o, to his majelty King Jamesb.
FI-rom theoriginal. Bibl. Sac. Jur. Fdin. A. r. 34. No. 4.]

MO;T worthy prince, the depending dangers upon

your affedlionates have been such, as hath inforced ii-
lence in him, who is faithfully devoted to your person,
nnl, in due time of trial, will undergo all hazards of
tlolune for the riaintenance of the jut: regal rights,
that, by the laws divine, of nature and of nations, is
invelted in your royal person. Fall not then, most no-
h'le and renowned prince, from him, whole providence
hiat in many dangers preserved you, no doubt to be an
inlrurnent of his glory, and the good of his people.
Some secrets, I find, have been revealed to your prrju-
dice, which mufl pioceed from some ambitious violent
spirited person near your majefly in council and favour;
no mnn in particular will I accuse, hut Iam furs it haIth
no foundation from any, with whom, for your service,

b In the formter editiois, I printed this as a letter from ir

Robert Cecil, but am now satisfied that I was miflaken in
firiingi this opinhpn. See lit P. Dalrymple's Rem. on tlhe
llil'. of Scot. p.t33. As tie letrer is crious, I repiblifl
t, though I cannot pretend to fay to which of the king's nu-
mcrous coircfpondents in England it Ihould be tcrtibed.
VOL. t11. K C I have

1 have held correspondence; otherwise, I had, long
since, been disabled from performance of tlhoe duties,
that the thoughts of my heart endeavoureth; being only
known to this worthy nobleman, bearer hereof, one
noted in all parts of Chriltendom for his fidelity to your
person and slate, and to Mr. David Fowlis your moi
loyal fcrvant, my firfl and faithful correspondent; and
unto James Hudfone, whom I have found in all thlngs
that concern you, most secret and aliured. It may,
therefore, please your majefly, at the humble motion
of E, which jargon I defirc to be the indorfcment of
your commands unto me, that, by some token of your
favour, he may understand in what terms you rcgar,
his fidelity, secrecy, and service. My passionate aflec.
tion to your person (not as you are a king, but as you
are a good king; and have just title, after my fovceigs,
to be a great king) doth transport me to presumption.
Condemn not, mofi noble prince, the motives of care
and love, altho' mixed with defees in judgment.

i. I, therefore, first beseech your majesty, that for

the good of those whom God, by divine Providence,
hath defined to your charge, that you will be pleased
to have an extraordinary care of all praticers or prac.
tices, against your person ; for it is not to be douhted, but
that in both kingdoms, either out of ambition, facion,
or fear, there are many that desire to have their fove-
reign in minority, whereby the sovereignty and fliat
might be swayed by partiality of subalternate persons,
rather than by true rule of power and justice. Prefcrve
your person, and fear not the pratices of man upon the
point of your right, which will be preserved and main.
tained against all assaults of competition whatever.
Thus I leave the protection of your person and Ro;al
poflerity, to the Almighty God of Heaven, who hkfi
and prefcrve you and all yours, in all regal happiness to
his glory.

%. Next to the preservation of your person, is tle

conversation and secret keeping of your councells, which,
as I have faidi are often betrayed and discovered, either
out of pretended zeal in religion, turbulent faction, or

bbo

!'Iae conception, the which your majesty is to regard
,v.ii all circulmrpection, at a matter most dangerous to
7oun person and slate, and the only means to ruin and
.if;;-oy ill those that lfand faithfully devoted to your ma-
.-cfy's frvice. Some particulars, and persons of this
i-.:ture, 1 make no doubt have been discovered by the
cndeavours of this nobleman, the bearer hereof, of
whom your majeity may be further informed.

3. 'he third point considerable is that your majesty,

by all means poflible, secure yourself of the good assec-
icin of the French king and states, by the negotiation
o: tonme faithful secret confident; the French naturally
iflafling the union of the Britilh ilands under one mo-
n. icli. In Germany, I doubt not, but you have many
aliies and friends, but by reason of their remote slate,
they do not so much importe this affair, which must be
;'iiled by a quick and sudden motion.

4. When God, by whole Providence the period of

:.:i petfons and times is determined, shall call to his
Ilngdom of glory her majesty (although I do assuredly
hope that there will not be any queflion in competition,
yet for that I hold it not fitting to give any minute en-
;rince into a cause of so high a nature), I do humbly
:)cleech your majesty to design a secret, faithful and ex-
pdiencedconfident servant of yours, being of an ap-
prov d fidelity and judgment, continually to be here re,
!iIlent, whose negotiation, it were convenient your ma-
jelly thould fortifie, with such fecrer trust and powers,
Ias there may not need I4 cays respite to poRt for autho-
,:ty, in a cause, that cannot endure. Io hours rcfpite,
v;liout varieties of danger. In the which it is to be
.rilidered, that all such as pretend least good to your
fthliliflinment, will not in public oppugn your title, hut
out of their cunning ambition will seek to gain time, by
alledging their pretence of common good to the .fate,
Ili prlpounding of good conditions for difburthening the
'omrmon xveale, of divers hard laws, heavy impoilions,
:oitrujtiols, opproffions, &c. which is a main point to
lead the popular, who are much difgufled with many

K x par-

particulars of this nature. It were therefore convenit:rt.
that these motives, out of your majefly's providenct
should be prevented, by your free offer in these poinL
following, viz.

i. That your majefly would be pleased to aboiift.

purveyors and purveyance, being a matter infinitely rs,.
fenfive to the common people, and the whole kingdom,
and not profitable to the prince.

x. That your majesty would be pleased to diflolvc tile

court of wards, being the ruin of all the noble and .n-
cient families of this realm, by base matches, and evil
education of their children, by which no revenue of the
crown will be defrayed.

3. The abrogating the multiplicity of penal laws, go.

nerally repined against by the fubjecr, in regard of t!leir
uncertainty, being many times altered from their true
meaning, by variety of interpretations.

4. That your majesty will be pleased to admit free

outplor of the native commodities of this kingdnm,
now often restrained by subalternate persons for private
profit, being most prejudicial to the commerce of all
merchants, and a plain deftru&ion to the true industry
and manufacture of all kingdoms, and against the proht
of the crown.

These, being by your majesty's confidents in the

point of time propounded, will afluredly confirm unto
your majeftie the hearts and affections of the whole
kingdom, and absolutely prevent all insinuations and
devices of dfigned patriots, that, out of pretext of con-
mon good, would seek to patronize themselves in popu-
lar opinion and power, and thereby to derogate fron
your majesty's bounty, and free favour, by princely mc-
rit of your moderation, judgment, and justice.

Your majesty's favour, thus granted to the fubjefr,

will no way impeach the profits of the crown but Id-
vance them. The difproportionable gain of fomc cli:-
quer officers, with the base and mercenary profits of
the idle unncceliliry clerks and attendants, will only
susser some detriment; but infinite will be the good un-

to

to the kingdom, which will confirm unto your majefly
the universal love and affe6tion of the people, and efta-
blilh your renown in the highest esteem to all posterity.

The Lord preserve your majeftie, and make you tri-

umphant over all your enemies.

My care over his person, whose letters pats in this

pacquet; and will die before he leave to be yours, Ihall
be no lels than of mine own life, and in like efleem I
will hold all your faithful confidents, notwithstanding I
will hold myself reserved from being known unto any of
them, in my particular devoted affections unto your
majesty, only this extraordinary worthy man, whose as-
fociate I am in his misfortune, doth know my heart,
and we both will pray for you, and if we live you Ihall
f.nd us together.

I beseech your majefly burn this letter, and the

others; for altho' it be in an unusual hand, yet it may
be discovered.

Your majesty's most devoted,

'and humble servant,

C, , ,
/1 , .J i

# INDEX.

IN D E X.
N. B. The Numeral Letters refer to the

Volume, and the Figures to the Pages.

/

A

D DAMSON, Archbiflop of St. Andrews, is excom-
municated by the fynod of Fife, ii. 3c7. he excommu-

nicated his opponents, ibid. is restored by the general as-
fembly upon conditions, ibid. hib mean fubmillion to the
general a.lfcnbly - - iii. a

Atbany, Alexander Duke of, cabals with his nobles arainllt

his brother K J.Imes 11. i. 55 is made prisoner, but es-
capes to France, ibid. concludes a ticatv with Ed. IV. of
England, 56. procures affiltance to invade Scotland on
mean conditions, ibid. returns to Scotland, and is restored to
fivour, 57. cabals again, but is forced to fly to France 58

- Duke of, made Regent during the minority of K.

James V. i. 3 1. 6 . after several unfuccel'ful truggles with
the nobility, he is forced to retire to France - ib.

Alenfon, Duke of, Q Elizabeth long amufet the court of

France by carrying on a treaty of marriage with him ii. 239

Alll/n, Cardinal, published a hook proving the lawfulness of

lkilling excommunicated Princes - ii. 293

.4'/z, Dulke of, his intrigues in favour of Q Mary, ii. 95.

199. 213. is recalled from his government of the Nether-
lands - 221

.An:hqi;ldors, their office - i. 85
..frdrcwos, St theArchbilhop of, remarkably cured of a dangetr

ous diliemper, i. 135. governed the church with great
moderation, 166. peifecutes the Reformers, ibid. is inm-
pliloned for celebrating Mass, 295. ruin Q: Mary's as-
tiirs by his imprudent condut, ii. i . is taken prisoner
in Dumbarton Caftie, and hanged - i. i86

- - the catle of, demoliiled by the French i. Is6

the prior of, promotes a treaty between the Q Re-
gent and thPe Rformcrn i. 77. is irovoked to leave the

court,

court, 179. is one of the chief promoters of the reform.
ation, 194.. some account of him, ibid. artful endcavlars
uled to undermine him,. 95. is fenr by the convention to
invite the Queen to Scotland, 247. is received by her .irh
confidence and affection, 248. retrains the turbulent spirit
of the people againrl popery, z63. is sent to rerrain the li-
centious practices of the borderers, a68. a conspiracy
against him discovered, 277. is created Earl of Mar, 279.
See Mar and Murray.

Angus, Gilbeit de Umfreville, Earl of, was the only man who
aflerted the independency of his country - i. xi

Douglas, Earl of, affumcs the Regency during the

minority of n. James V. i. 35. 6z. is attainted and t!i.3
into England, 63. obtains leave to teturn into Scotland, ii,
26z. surrenders himself to K. James VI. 272. he with
several others seize the cafle of Stirling to oppose Arrin,
276. they are forced to fly into England at the approach of
the King with an army, ibid. he is attainted and his efate
forfeited, 283. is concerned in a plot in favour of SpAI.,
iii. 7. is seized and committed prisoner to the cafsle of
Edinburgh, 8. escapes and flies to the mountains, ibid. of-
sers to submit to a trial, 13. sentence pronounced ag.iiit
him, ibid. he refuses to submit -. - 14

Anjou, Duke of, a marriage proposed between him antd (,

Elizabeth - - ii. 1;
Anne, a princess of Denmark, married to K. James VI. ii.

367. her arrival in Scotland and coronation, iii. I. heads
a party that opposes the chancellor .-' 10

Archbbihops, RBihops, Deans and Cbapters revived in Scotland

during the King's minority, ii. o20, zo9, z0o. an act of
aflembly againlt thrfe offices, 256, 257. Biibops n.wdc
subjet to prefbyteries and aflemblies - 307
drgyll, Earl of, is appointed to carry the crown matrimonial

to the Dauphin of France, i. 163. ulis his interelft vitlh
the Reformers to make a treaty with the Q Regent, 177.
leaves her court in resentment of her treachery, 179. re
fuses to accedc to a treaty with Murray the Regent, ii. xS5.
is soon after forced to submit, 152. acs as lieutenant It
the Queen after theRegent's murder, 174. is prevailcd on
to join the King's party, 189, quarrels with Atholc, .zz .
confederates with him againf Morton the Regent, lor
their mutual defence, ibid. they remonfirate agaiiif him
to the'King, z29. they raifc forces againlt him, 234. n'

gotiatc

otia;te t treaty with him by the mediation of Q.Elizabeth,

a35. is promoted to the ofice of chancellor, 237. -the

King's authoriry delegated to him and Lord Sorbes again(t
the popilh Lords, iii. 17. his forces are defeated in an en-
gagement witnl them - - 17, t 8

.riocrrary, predominant in Scotland - i. 259
..lrmado, Spanifhl preparations for it, ii. 355, 356. it is de-

stated - - 36T
4, ,rn, Earl, is appointed Regent during the minority of Q.

Mlary, i. 93. becomes.fufpicious of the Earl of Lennox,
ioo. is forced torenounce the friend rip with England and
declare for France, orl. and to persecute the Reformers,
103. publicly abjures the doetrines of the Reformers, ibid.
attempts in vain to seize the murderers of cardinal Beatoun,

r z. is forced to make a truce with the conspirators, l3.
his eldesR son is conditionally excluded all right of fuccef.
sion, z7. his mean conceflion to the court of France,
x14, z2s. gets the title of Chatelherault, z25. is under-
mined by the Q Dowager, 13z, 133. propofgls and argu-
ments for his resignation, 134. he consents to iti 135. rec

srals, but is at last prevailed on and gets advantageoun

terms, 137. See Cbatelherault.
-- eldest son of the Duke of Chatclherault, joins in an

albciation with the Reformers, i. 192. narrowly escapes
intended ruin at the court of France, y93. the Congregation
fulicit Q Elizabeth to marry him, 239. his great impru.
dence with regard to Q. Mary, 269. discovers a confpira-
cy againf the Queen's fa ourite, z77. loses his reason, ii,
237. is imprifined by Morton - 238

.--- late Capt. Stewart, gets that title and estate, ii. 250.

is appointed to conduct Morton from Dumbarton tl Edin-
burgh, ibid. his infamous marriage with the Countefa of
Marcb, z53. his variance with Lennox, 254. is frufrated
i In attemrp: to rescue the King at Ruthven, zou. is con,
tinrad prifoue to the caffle of Stirling, ibid. regains his li-
I .rry and the King's regard, 269. resumes his power and
;irogance, ibid. gets the Rstrhven conlpirators declire(

!'Irilty of hiigh treason, 272. is deterted as author of a per-
le:ction againfl the clergy, -79. is gained over to Q. Eli-
talbth's interett, z8g. gets leveral forfeited eltates, 284.
ii. corrruption and inlblccc, 9go. is made chancellor and
ha!, unlimited power, 290, 9g1. his venality is exceeded
by that of his wlfe, ibid. hie mionftrous tyranny an4 'op.

rcfsioln,

preflion, 293. his power undermined by Wotton the IE,
liih envoy, 302. is confined in the castle of St. Andrew:v,
but soon recovers favour, 303. is fripped of his honours
and spoils, and reduced to his original station 3o0

wdrticles, Lords of, their origin and bufinef, i. 80. by whom

chosen - - 8z,

.,L undel, Earl of, is appointed a commissioner to the confer

ence at Weftminler .- ii. 14

.,7h4by, ambassador from Q. Elizabeth to Scotland, ii. ;,.

his great pron-ifes to King James are soon forgot, ,61.
he withdraws privately from Scotland - i.lii
Afjaffination, the fiequency of it in Scotland, how acco:lrtd

for, ii. 2o. several initances of it in France, 2o, !. .1
stop put to it there and in Scotland, 2z, 22. prev..il,
greatly afterwards - ii. .
Aj.mbly of the church of Scotland, the first but feeble .'id

irregular, i. 246. another aflembly, their demands sion
the convention, 270, 271. two other assemblies in vain so-
licit an augmentation of their revenues, z88. they addiefs
Q Mary in high frains.of complaint, 335. an affe:lli
proceeds at Glasgow notwithstanding the King's interdic-
tion, ii. 256. two assemblies yield many of the priviicgc
of the church to the King, iii. 36, 37. declare it lawiul
for ministers to fit in Parliament, 40. See Clergy.

.4gciation, formed in defence of Q Elizabeth against Q:Ma.

ry -. - ii. zSu
thbole, Earl of, the occasion of his quarrel with the Earl of
Argyll, ii. zS5. joins with him in opposing Morton the
Regent, ibid. dies soon after an entertainment at Morton'i,
236. suspicions of his being poisoned - ibid.
:ubigne, Lord de, second son of the Lord Lennox, arrive; is

Scotland from France, ii. z40. high titles and polis be-
itowed on him, ibid. notes against him, Appendix, ii.
313. See Lnnox.,
dufirian family, their origin and power i. 86, 7S

B

labington, Anthony, some account of him, ii. 311. thl rilf

of his conspiracy against Q. Elizabeth, 312. the fchrlle
of operations of his aflbciates, ibid. they are betL.iyed.
seized and executed - - 312, 113
riocon, Sir Nicholas, appointed one of the commiflionern to
the confederates at Wclmiliter - ih- i

A'1 .!,/.

>/iol, John, his claim to the crown of Scotland, i. 9, is

preferred by Edw. 1. 1 . soon forced by him to resign ib.

Ballarld, a trafficking priest, solicits an invasion of England

from Spain, ii. 3zo. joins in a conspiracy to murder Q Eli-
zabeth, 3 r . is taken into custody, ibid. and executed 3 13

Barons, their jurifdi6tion very extensive, i. 0o. the difference

between the greater and lesser, whence, 77. three hundred
of them remonstrate against the conduc of the Q. Dow-
ager, I51. the lesser admitted by their reprefentarives in
Parliament, ii. 354. petition of the lefler Barons to Par-
liament, Append. iii. 191. See Nob/es.

Bafi/icon Doron, a book published by King James VI. trertgth-

ens his interest in England iii. 42

Br£?.oun, Cardinal, made use of by K. James V. to mortify

the nobles, i. 66, 67.' his pretensions to the Regency on
the death of that Prince, 9z. forges a testament of the late

ing, 93. his charater, ibid. opposes the Earl of Arran,
Regent, 96, 97. excites most of the nation againit the
English, 99 seizes the young Q.een and her mother, ibid.
cajoles the Earl of Lennox, ibid.. obliges the Regent to re-
;iounce England and declare for France, ioo. and to per-
fecute the Reformers, 103. engrosses the chief direction
of affairs, ibid. his double dealing with the Earl of Lennox
resented, o14. is murdered, xl2. his death fatal to the
Catholics, ibid. a vain attempt to revenge it, z12,. 1r3.
scandalous reports concerning him - 146
I/edford, Earl of, comes as ambassador from Q. Elizabeth to
witness the baptifmofJames VI. ii. 41. his instructions, 43.
his letters to SirW. Cecil, Appendix, iii. 221. 227. 233.
,ellihen, Sir Lewis, justice clerk, K. James's resident at
London, ii. 30r. joins in promoting Q Elizabeth's inter.
eft in Scotland, ibid. is sent with her envoy into that
country - ibid.
.','ack, Mr. David, minilter at St. Andrews, his ridiculous

and seditious expreflions in the pulpit, iii. 27. is con-
demned by the privy council, 29. it; sentenced by the
King to relide beyond Spey - ibid.

I;/ackadder, captain, and three others, executed for the mur-

der of Darnly - -. ii. g1

It'iihius, Hetor, his hilfory of Scotland, some account of i. 4
I':'ron Cf/l/e, Qe Mary confined a prisoner there ii.. 1 5
Ioors, a foreigner, made governor of Orkney i. 1zS
Iddrdrrs, an attempt to restrain their liccatioru practice., i.

6B8.

26S. Q. Mary visits them, ii. 33. a scuffle ther, ;,
which the Engliih warden, &c. were made prisoners, i. 23
,Borthwick, Lord, affilts the Q. Regent in defending Leci:

i. 2!:

BothJwell, James Hepburn, Earl of, intercepts a fum of nin.

ney from England to the Congregation, i. 208. favtir,
the Queen Regent, but resides at his own house, .tn. is
by the Earl of Murray summoned to a public trial, 31),
prevents it by leaving the kingdom, ibid. a sentence ot
outlawry againfl him prevented by the Q.een, ibid. is per.
mitted to retyrn, 328. escapes with her after the mraiter
of Rizio, ii. 16. Come account of his former behavio:r,
:4, 25. conmmnces a favourite of the Queen, 26. .?' re.
conciles him to several Lords, with whom he was .r va.
riance, ibid. he increases in favour with her, .S. Ic i;
wounded in attempting to seize one of the bordere,.r .
the Queen's extraordinary regard for him on this lcc.tirn,
ibid. to fecute adherents he obtains a pardon for Mior;on
and his aflociates, 44. proposes the restoration of tei po.
pith ecclefialtical jurildicion, 47. is fufpeated the '.:lhr
of Darnly's murder, 54. is charged with it by Lennox, 56.
but Itill favoured by the Queen, 57. appointed governor o!
Edinburgh Castle, ibid. his trial is hurried on, 58. re:na k.
able partiality in his favour, 60. I.ennox accuses him open.
ly, ibid. comes to his trial with a great retinue, 61, 6z,
is acquitted by a jury, 6c. the trial universally ccnlurrd,
ibid. challenges any that would accuse him, 63. fcemrii
ads of Parliament pafled in his favour, 63, 64. lie pro.
cures an a& in favour of the Reformation, ibid. previil
on several of the nobles to recommend him as a hiufi.an
to the Queen, 6S. leizes the Queen on a journey froin
Stirling, and carries her to Dunbar, 72, 73. obt.ins 2
pardon under the great feal, 74. procures a divorce iron
his wife, ibid. carries the Queen to the caltle of ldin-
burgh, 75. is created Duke of Orkney, and manirld to
the Queen, 76. is not allowed the title of King, 77. I1
watches the Queen very closely, and endeavours ti' get
the Prince into his cultody, 78, 79. is alarmed sitlh an
aflbciation of the nobles against the Quecea and hinm, Ps,
i8. carries the Qecen to the catle of Boltlhwicl;, Si,
raifee forces. against the confederate Lords, ?,2. hie Inlicht
againlt them, 83. proposes a single combat, 84. thli hiv
prvcnted,,85. ttakes his last farewell of the Quccl, ani

ji

i forced to fy,-ibid. fends for a calket of letters from Q.
Mary to him, 89. they are intercepted by the Earl of
Morton, ibid. his miserable fate, JoI, loa. copy of his
divorce from Lady Jean Gordon, Appendzi, iii. 235

Btrrhl'd!, Francis Stewart, created earl of Bothwell, ii. 363.

is imprisoned for consulting witches, iii. 3. efcpes and
attempts to break into the King's preferce, 4. retires to
the north, ibid. He and his adherents are attainted, 6.
failb in anl attempt to seize the King, ibid. is taken under
prote&ion of Q.Elizabeth, who solicits for him, 9. fcizce
tbeeKing's person, io forces him to dismiss the chancellor,
and his other favourites, 1 . and togrant him a remiflion,
ibid. his bold and insolent behaviour as erwards, z;, makes
anocther att;inpt to come at the King, 15. is repulsed and
obliged to fiy to the north ofEngland, 16. is abandoned by
Q(Elizabeth, and forced to fly into Spain and Italy 2o

--- Adarn, Bilhop of Orkney, performs the ceremony

of marriage of Q Mary to the Earl of Bothwell ii. 76

JPtb alh-i.bugl b, See IHamilton.

3o:'ltogne, wrested by the French out of the hands of tha

-nglih,l i. xz4. they conlint to restore it and its depend-
ercies to the French - - 1z6

F!. ves, Envoy from Q. EIzabeth, accuses Lcenox of disturb-

ing the peace, ii. a44. is refused an audience, ibid. is sent
to nicoirage thre conipirators at Ruthven, 26z. to inquire
:Ibout King James'scorrefpondencewith the Pope iii.44

L'yid, Lord, his ambitious views in the time of K. James 11l.

l'rullrated - - i. 35
- is prevailed on to join the King's party against (..
Ml.ry, ii. 189. joins the Ruthven conspirators - 259

]I1',,e11, Counr de, comes an ambaflador from France to wit-

nels the bpiltifm of K. James VI. - ii. 4

Br:,n, Robert, his claim to the crown of Scotl;nd, i. 9. his

l;randfon afllrts his right, and vindicates the honour of
Iis count y, ia. he attempts to reduce the power of the
iobiles -- -*44, 45

-- a prielt, employed by the King of Spain to fcduce the
Scotch nobles - ii. 36
--- Mr. Robert, a prcibyterian minifler, performs tle
ceremony of the coronation of K. James's Queen iii. 4t

E- dward, Abbot of KinIofs, icquiits himftneflith reputa-
tion as ambaffldor at the court of-England ' " iii. 42

lroL. 11, t., L, .titu

Bruce, Mr. Robert, a minister, his resolution in refusing to

publish the King's account ofGowrie's conspiracy, iii. 66.
is deprived and banished on that account icid.

Buchanan, George, his history of Scotland, some account of,

i. 5. remarks on his dialogue De Jure Regis, g81. alone
accuses Q(Mary of a criminal correspondence with Rizio,
ii. i . approved of afaflination, 22. attends the Reg;nt
into England when called on to accuse QMary, z19. s .,
one of the preceptors of K. James Vl. ii. z27. co-n:
mended for'his great genius iii. 98

BJ3rleigh. See Cecil.
lirotgbs, when firfi represented in Parliament ii. 353

C
Cais, ohn, a declaration of his in name of Q Elizabeth to the

Lords of Grange at Lethington, Appendix iii. . 7.
Caithness, Earl of, his protest at the trial of Bothwell for ,ih

murder of Darnly - - ii. (6Z

Calvin, the patron and restorer of the preibyterian church

government - - i 244

Camden, some mistakes of his - ii. 4, 43. 70
Canongate, near Edinburgh, a Parliament held there ii 187
Cardan, some account of him, i. 135. his remarkable c;ie

of the Bishop of St. Andrews - 136
Carey, Sir George, sent ambassador from 'QElizabeth to

encourage the conspirators at Rutiven ii. :.6
- Robert; cfut by Q Elizabcth to sooth K.James after the
death of his mother, ii. 3461 is not permitted to enter
Scotland, 347. was the firfl that brought K. James in.
telligence of the death of Q_ Elizabeth iii. 87

Casket of letters from Q Mary to Bothwell, seized by the Earl

of Morton - ii. ~9

Cafils, Earl of, joins the King's party ii. iS)
Caftelnau, the French ainbaffauor, is employed to procure i!:

consent of his court to Queen Mary's marriage with Darn-
ly, i. 311. he endeavours to make up the differences be.
tween the Queen and him, ii. a8. his interceftlon in behalf
of Qeeen Mary - - 296
Catberine ofMedicis, aflumes the government after the death

of FranciaII. her son, i. 241. her harfl treatment ntf Q
Mary, ibid. her views in behaving mote friendly t o I.r,

A s958.

298. bends her whole endeavours to destroy the Protelt-
ants - - ii. 193

Cecil, his great capacity as a minister, i. 227.2 50. is employed

to negotiate a peace with France, 251. over.reaches the
French ambassador in the treaty of Edinburgh, ibid. a letter
of his cited to shew that <. Elizabeth had no intention to
intercept Q Mary in her return to Scotland, 258. is ap-
pointed a commillioner to the conference at Weftminfier,
ii. 141. is Cent by Q.Elizabeth with proposals to Q Mary,
ii. 178. has an interview with her, which excites QEliza.
beth's jealousy, 221. is treated harshly by Q.Elizabeth
for consenting to Q Mary's death - 346

-- Sir Robert, son to the former, heads the party against

Effex, iii. 70. his character, ibid. 71. enters into a private
correspondence with K. James - 77
G/ibacy of the popish clergy, a chief engine of their policy

i. 144. 17Z

Charles V. Emperor, his great power, and unlimited am.

bition, i. S6, 87. is checked by Francis 1. ibid.
-- K. of France makes a league with Q.Elizabeth ii. 200
Caitelberault, Duje of, that title conferred on the earl of

Arran, Regent of Scqtland, i. 1zS. his right of succession
to the crown of Scotland maintained, 157. enters a pro-
tciration to save his right, 161. joins the Reformers, in
endeavouring to expel the French army, 189. His pufilla.
nimity, 206. becomes obnoxious to QLMary, 269. de-
prived of his French pension, g29. is alarmed at the Earl
of Lennox's return to Scotland, 306. an accommodation
brought about by the Queen's influence, ibid. adheres to
Murray in opposing the Queen's marriage, 330. is par-
doned on his humble application, but forced to reside in
France, 333. his partisans grumble at Murray's being ad-
vanced to the Regency, ii. 106. returns from France and
heads the queen's adherents, 50. is made her licutenant-
general, ibid. His resolution wavering, the Regent com-
mits him prisoner to the castle of Edinburgh, X 5. is set
at liberty by Kirkaldy, and joins the 0Qeep's party, 1az.
is proclaimed traitor by Lennox the new Regent, 177.
is reconciled to Morton the Regent, 216. articles of a
treaty between them, ibid. his death - 223

Cl,'rb of Scotland, revolutions in it after the Uinion of thq

crowns, iii. 96, 97. See Airnbly, Clergy.
brurck Landa annexed to the crown by Parliament ii. 35!

X L a Clan,t

Claim, tle inltitution and nature of i. 2i, 2y
Clergy, popilh, their gEeat riches and power, t. 65. 14o.

wele made use of by K. James V. to lupprefs the nobles,
67. aade a confidetable body in Parliament, 142. their
great influence over the laity, 143. their power increarLd
by celibacy, 144. they seized the cfates of' the inteilltc,
ibid. and tried all matrimonial and testamentary causes, x4.;
become obnoxious to the laity, ibid. their great corrujp-
tions, whence, 146. their weak defence ds their tenet,
147. try in vain to impose faltl miracles, 14S. their im-
politic conduct to the Reformers -* 106
-- reformed, try in vain to recover the revenues of the
.thurch, i. 246, 247, 248. procure a demolition of all re.
lies of popery, 249. a new regulation concerning their
revenues, 270-274. their stipends, what in those days,
ibid. are offended at the moderation of their leaders, z05.
crcation a tumult among the people, ibid. g,96. more ccom
plaints of the;r poverty, 307. 40o. are jealous of Q2C.,
Mary, ii. 46. the small allowances appointed to fuppo t
them all, ibid. their application for payment of their fli-
pends, of little effec, lo5. fresh complaints of the deti-
ciency of the funds for their maintenance, 165. are put of
with fair words and promires, ibid. archbilhops, &c. in-
troduced among them by Morton, o28. their grievancii
u'nder his administration, 222. they approve of the Rutlh in
.conspirators, 163. severe laws made againit them, 27S,
279. they of Edinburgh fly into England, 279. as do
several others that were most eminent, ibid. more vigorous
measures against them, 184. they obtain no redress on the
relloration of the exiled Lords, 306. represent theirgriev-
ances to Parliament, 350. a maintenance provided lor
them by Parliament, 35:, 353. they prevail toget Pelby-
trcian gcvernmlent eltablifhed by law, iii. 5. their zcal
againli the popish Lords, iz, 13. 23. their ralh proceci-
ings, z1, 24. they errt a standing LCouncil of the Church.
.5. vindicate one of their number who declined the civil
j.irifdicioa, a7, 18. their handing Council ordered to le.Iv
Edinbulgh, z9. this occasions a violenr tumult there, 3;,
31, 3 ". they use their unioft efFortp to spirit the people,
13. are deserted and fly to England, ibid. 34. their power
greatly reduced, ibid. pre prevailed onto give up man1y of
their privileges, 37. are restored to a feat in Parliamenlt,
38. 4-o, holie entitled to this privilege arc laid under niiny

regulltiont

regnlations and refcriltions, 47. the revolut'ons among
them since the Union of the Crowns - 96, 97

C/Ito, Lord, appointed a commillioner at the conference at

WeRtminfter - - ii. 141

Cockburn, of OrmiRfon, receives a supply of money from the

English to the Congregation, i. o20. is intercepted and
robbed of it -ibid.
cin, in Scotlaqr, some account of - i. zo3. ii. zzz
Cl,.i//;rics ,i appointed to try causes in place of the Spiritual

Court, i. 2.35. they are deprived of all authority ii. 46

Cot'lji/n of faith by the Reformers, consented to by Parlia-

ment - - - i. 345

Ca,;regation, thel'roteftants diftinguifled by that name, i. 1 73.

their leaders enter into an afrociation, ibid. are involved in
difficulties, ao6. apply to Q Elizabeth for affifance, 207.
money sent them by her intercepted, 208. make a rash and
tcfperate attempt on Leith, and are repulsed, ib. 209. are
noi less unfirtunate in a second fkiimith, ibid. are quite dif..
pilitrd.and retreat to Stirling, 2 o. are joined by th. body of
the nobles, 2i x. their army dwindles away, ibid. are ani-
ima;ed byKnox, z 2. theyapply again toQElizabeth, iid.
their parties haiafs the French, 21 . are affifred by a fleet
from England, z29. conclude a treaty at Berwick, with
the D. of No.folk, ibid. zzo. negotiate a peace with
France, 27 . articles of the treaty, 2z8. Sec Reformation.

C(venInt, national, framed in defence of the King and Go-

vernment - - - ii. 358

CGurtefy of Scotland, what - - i. r15
GCrig, a minister, boldly teltifies against Q Mary's marriage

with Bothwell - - ii. 76
(.zi.ford, Capt. of Jordan Hill, furptifes Dumbarton Caftie,

ii. 183

--- Earl of, one of the heads of the Spanilh facion, ii.

357. 36z. ofters his service to the K. of Spain, 363. joins
il rebellion againlt the King, 365. is forced to submit,
and imprisoned a short time -- ibid.

(Crhiktn, Regent during the minority of K. James II. his

barbarous policy - - i. 51
--- a Jesuit, a plot against Qiflizabeth discovered by
his mean ii. 05
Cr-iMiaia/l, a remirkable instance of the difficulty of briiging

lthem tojulice - - - i. 19, o

L L 3 Croc,

Mary's marriage with Bothwell, ii. 77. attempts in vwi;
a reconciliation between the Qteen and the confederate
Lords, 83, S4. mediates a truce between the King a:n
Queen's party in Scotland - - ii. lot
.7rewn matrinmonial of Scotland, rights conveyed by the grapm

of, i. 156. is granted by Parliament to the Dauphin of
France, 58. deputies appointed to carry'f'ts but are pre-
veted, 161. is demanded by Darnly .- ii. 3

Cusminngkam, Robert, appears at the trial of Bothwell in nairs

of the Earl of Lennox, ii. 6x. demands a delay, which i;
refused -- i-i-i.
Curle, one of Q. Mary's secretaries, is seized and carried

prisoner to London, ii. 3 7. is produced an evidence again;t
her - ' '- i

D
Parnly, Henry, Lord, proposed as ahulband to QM.ary, .

30o. his right of fucceflion confidered, ibid. 303. is per-
ritted to visit the court of Scotland, 309. arrives there,
and quickly gains the Queen's heart, 310. his charater,
312. disgusts several of the nobles, particularly Murlay,
ibid. cultivates a familiarity with David 'Rizlo, 313. is
despised on that account, 314. grows intolerably insolent
and haughty, 3±1.. schemes to affafinate Murray, 3z3.
a plot to seize and fend him to England prevented by the
Queen, ihid. his marriage with the Queen celebrated, 317.
is honoured with the title of King of Scotland, ibid. is
implacable with' refpet to the exiled nobles, ii, . .lolf
thg Queeu's affeaion by his untoward behaviour, 7. de.
nlands.the crown matrimonial, S. becomes suspicious of
Rizio's ill offices with the Queen, ibid. his refolutlon to be
avenged of him encouraged by the nobles, zo. articlfs
agreed on between them for that purpose, 1I. heads the
confpiratort who perpetrate the murder, 13. cqntines the
Q.cen after it is committed, 1 . prohibits the meeting of
the Parliament, ibid, makeshis escape with the Queen, 16.
her hatred to him increases, 13. is nsegleced by her nld
treated with little refpet by the nobles, a. 'rcfolves to
leave Scotland, q9. his ftrangc behaviour at the baptfin
ot tl)e Prince, 41, 41, 43. retires to Ihil father at Glasgow,
.4S. fl1s sick there, 47. is nele$tcd by the Qacn, 4.

fie afterwards visits and ,exprefles affelron for him, 5o.
he is prevailed on by her to come to Edinburgh, 5.. is
lodged in a separate house, and is murdered there, 53. his
characer, 54. a proclamation ifluced for difcovcring the
murderer,, 55. a remiss enquiry made into it, 56.62. Capt.
Blackadder and three others executed on that account, ii,
iS. theconfecnion of Morton the Regent at his death con,
cerning the murder, 25r. a diflertation concerning his mur.
der, iii. o15. paper of objections of the court of England
againit his marriage with Q. Maryi Appendix zoS

David I. King of Scotland, his profufiun to the church i. 4r
- II. troubles during his minority - i; 3?
?azvifjn, sent into Scotland by Q. Elizabeth, as a spy on the

French ambafihdor, ii. a66. is sent to gain Arran's intere4
to QLElizabeth, zSz. brings the warrant for Q. Mary's
death at Q. Elizabeth's desire, 335. is charged by her with
disobeying her orders, 345. is imprisoned, tried, and fined,
and loses all favour, 346. objetions against hhin in the
cause of the late Scottifi Queen, Appendi'. -i iii. 370

Trhi', Mons. is sett with a supply of forces to afift the French
against the Englifl in Scotland, i. 124: his success there

-',, , ..* .. i nibid.

')iQiptiine in the Church, thefirft book of, conpofed, i. 246.

othy objdeted againfl in a convention of the states, ibid. an.
other attempt in favour of Church discipline frultrited

I..- ' ii. 255

Ic:i/'as, the power and property of thab:ftmnilv, i. 33. they

alpire to independency, 34. William Earl of, murdered
by K.Janres ll. 5x. his fun endeavours to tecent it, 5n. is
forced to fly into England -. ibid.

*--- William, Q Mary committed a psifoner to hi call le

of Lochleven - - ii. 88
.- George, brother to the above, aflifRs the QUeen in
making her escape - i. 107
- Archibald, one of Darnly's murderrrj, ii. 309; un-
dergoes a mock trial for that crime, and is acquitted, ibid.
is sent ambafTadnr to England, ibid. lettet fiom him tb'tlie
Q of Scots, Appendix, iii. 34.o. totheKing -' 351
l'ru'y, Sir William, enters Scotlandvith an army to support
the King's party, ii. 174. they join him adrd drive ofF tht
Qteena', ibid. he procures a truce between the King and
Queei)' partics, qtX. :'comes with foVces to'ailft Morton
in besieging the castle of tdinburgh, a17. which' is forced
o furrclep -r 2 18

Prury,

Drury, SirDrue, is appointed one of Q.Mary's keepers ii. a F
Dudley, Iord Robert, recommended by Q Elizabeth a; a

huiband to Q Mary, i. 299. why a favourite of Q.Eliza-
beth's, ibid. is highly promoted by her, ibid. becomnrs
;ufpiicious of Cecil - - 3oi
Dumbarton Cafle, surprised and taken in the King's name

by the Regent - - ii. S2-

Dury, a ninifter of Edinburgh, banished from his charge by

K. James for his free inveatives against the courticis,
ii. 257. after being reflored, he is driven from it a fccon,;
time, for approving the Raid of Ruthven zi7

EdinBlurgb, is taken and burnt by the Englilh, i. Io,. a

great fray there between the French and Scots, zSg, ,7':
is seizcd by the Reformers, 183. its inhabitants are teriib:'
allnmed by the French, zoS. a treaty there with the FiL. ih
and Englilh, 2z8, 229. a loan demanded of it byQ.M. y,
334. which is granted for the superiority of Leith, ii,n.
the treaty of, in filed on by (. Elizabeth, ii. 43, 4{. '
pofleflcd by tie Queen's party, 172. and fortified by them,
186. the city and cattle. hold out against the King's so;:s,
i98. are reduced to great straits by famine, I99. are Ie-
lieved bya truce, 200. the citizens take up arms to pron.)oe
the King's marriage, 367. they rife again and insult the
King and his ministers on the murder of the Earl of.Mur-
ray, iii. 4, 5. assist the King against Huntly, s5, a violeni
tumult there on account of the Clergy, 30. 3z. they art
severely punished for it by the King, 32. 36. theirmiiiiler
return to their charges, 37, 38. divided into parishes, .:,:
number of ministers increased, 38. they decline publifliig
the account of Cowrie's conspiracy, 65. all except on.0
who is banished, are persuaded by the King to do it It
EJ.dward I. of England, lcitroyed the public archives of Scot

land, i. 4. is made umpire between Bruce and Baliol, To
hal art to acquire the superiority of Scotland, ibid. hia wan
with the Scots under Robert Bruce ~- I, Iz.4
Eglington, Earl of, is prevailed on to join the King's ,ail

ii. 1b
Elizabeth, her peaceable acceflon to the Crown of Englanil

i. 163. supports the Congregation in Scotland, 207, Z"8
is sparing in her supplies, ibid. resolves to support them on
fscond application 2, 1. motives that determined her t

aill

t*ilt them, 13. zi5, 2i6. her deliberate and rcfolute
condut, 218, 9g. fends a flrong fleet to their afifiance,
2v9. concludes a treaty with them, ibid. zzo. her right to
the Crown of England aflerted by Francis and Mary, in
France, 22z. obtains advantageous terms for the Scots, :29.
is solicited by the Parliament of Scotland to marry the Earl
of Arran, .39. this the declines, ibid. the feeds of her dif-
(ontent.with'Q Mary, 250, 251. herjealoufy of the fuc-
ceifion, 2Sz. 254. her exceflive vanity and jealousy of
Mary's beauty, 255, 256. her dissimulation to'her, z56.
refuses her a fate conlduct ibid. evidences that she had no
intention to moles Mary in her passage to Scotland, a59.
£ends to congr -ulate her arrival in Scotland, 264. refuseó
a conoeffion made by Q.Mary, 265, 266. a personal in-
terview with Q.,Mary proposed, 287. ie artfully declines it,
ibid, her views in regard to Q. Mary's marriage, zg 1, 29z.
assumes a disagreeable authority, 29z. names one for a hus-
band to Q.Mary, a99. dissembles with Q. Mary about
ber marriage, 300, 31o,. and ikewife with regard to L.
Darnly, 303. affronts Q.Mary by her insinuation con-
cerning Lennox, ibid. is perplexed about the marriage of the
Scottilh Qieen, 308, 309. permits Darnly tovifit the court
of Scotland, 309. assets to declare against Q Mary's
mnarriage to;b'im, 3, 316. her great diffimulatipo in
that affair, 322. her harsh and deceitful behaliouo to
Murray and his aflhicates who had fled to her, 332. is
firuck at hearing of the birth of James VI. ii. 27. con,
sents to Rand godmother to him, ibid. the Parliament
address her to fettle the succession, 34. this greatly em-
barraffes her, 35, 36. the sooths and gains her Parliaiment,
37. endeavours to acconmmodate her diferlences with Mary,
43. writes to her to delay the trial of Darnly's murderers,
60. iRterpofes in her belalf when a piifoner, 91. her am-
baflador is refused acccfs to Q. Maty, 92. lie fO'Trs at-
lilance to the other nobles, 93. her iclbera'tions con-
cerning the disposal of Q Mary on Jer arrival in England,
lS1, I16. resolves to detain her there, i s,7.,.fends her
lettcrs of condolence, ,altd gives orders to wacch hel con-
duf, JI9, i20. ihe gladly accepts the otfice of umpire
.between her and her fubjces, 1t r, ,21. receives a very
prelling letter trom Q. Mary, 1z3. her precautions agaiuitl
her;. 114. appointr commissioners tc hear Q; Mary and
her accutFers, 30.. Irceives, the Rcgcent'srlilndsa, :56.

renilovc

removes the conference to Wetminfter, 138. her mean
artifices to get the evidence of Q. Mary's guilt from the
Regent, 145. treats her with greater rigour, 146. writ.s
a harfl letter to Q Mary, 147. (he dlifemies the Regent
without approving or condemning him, 148. but secretly
supports his party, 149. makes proposals to the Regent in
her favour, 152. Norfolk's project concealed from her,

5 7. discovers and defeats a rebellion in Q. Mary's favour,
16r, 162. resolves to deliver her up to the Regent, 166.
her great concern at his death, 169. continues to encourage
facions in Scotland, 170, 171. her political condut with
regard to Lennox, 175, 176. is excommunicated, and de-
prived of her kingdom, &c. by the Pope, 176. fupporty
the King's party in Scotland, and names Lennox to be Re.
gent, 177. proposes a treaty of accommodation between
Q. Mary and her subjects, ibid. procures a cessation of hol.
tilities, 178. fends proposals to Q.Mary, 179. appoints
commiflioners to frame a treaty, r8 x. finds a pretence to r i-
der their meeting fruitless, 1 z. a marriage proposed between
her and the D. of Anjou, 192. declares openly against tilh
Queen's party, i98. concludes a treaty with France, zoo.
negotiates a treaty between Morton and his adverfarirs,
235. her answer to K. James's demand of a poffeflien
of an estate in England, ibid. 236. a marriage between her
and the D. of Alencon propostd, z:9. interposes in beh:.lf
of Mo:ton, 244. her measures in order to save him, z46,
247. countenances the conspirators, at Ruthven, 262. is
alarmed at a conspiracy againit herz 279, 280. the dcfitgn
of Q Mary's adherents againit her, 2.8. endeavours to
recover her interest in Scotland, and gains Arran to her
interest, z2z. amuCes QMary with a fruitless negotiation,
z85. a new conspiracy againit her, ibid. a. llbciation
formed for her defence, 286, 287. her suspicions of Q0
Mary, ibid. her life endangered by a conspiracy, 9) . this
how discovered and prevented 294. is in a dangerous litl-
ation from the progress of the holy league, z99. endeJ-
yours to form a confederacy of the Protestant Princes, ibi.l.
300. and to proceed with rigour againit Q Mary, 301.
advances her interest in Scotland, and proposes a league
with it, ibid. 301. fettles a pension upon K. James, ibil.
concludes a treaty with Scotland, 308. account of Bahing-
ton's conspiracy againli her, 310-313. her'diflimulaioni
after Q..Mary'a copviieon, 3S8. her answer to K. Janieo's

interccliin

snterceflion for her, 331. her farther diflimulation and
anxiety, 334. signs the warrant for her execution, 315.
her speech to Davison on that occasion, ibid. affects to la-
ment Q. Mary's death, 344. file endeavours to sooth K.
James, 346. provocations given by her to Spain, 355,
356. prepares to meet its relentment, 357, 358. endea-
vours to secure Scotland, ibid. tries to prevent K. James's
maiTriage, 366. solicits him to treat conspirators against
him wth rigour, iii. 9. evades the decision of K.James's
right of succession to the Crown of England, 41, 42. is
difgslled at several of his proceedings, 43, 44. discovers
his correspondence with the Pope, 45. frelh grounds of her
suspicion, 70. her condlia with regard to the carl of Effex,
70, 71. her irresolution concerning his death, and great
concern after it, 73. receives ambafiadors from K. James
with regard, and increases his subsidy, 76. her last illness,
So. her death, 83. and characer, ibid. 84. declared the
King of Scots her successor, 86. some of her letters,
Appendix, 196. 223. 235, 236.. 245. 3 26. 276,

29-. Zii:hir.fon, secretary to K. James VI. deceives him into a
corrcfpondence with the Pope, iii. 45. is tried and found
guilty of high treason, ibid. and pardoned on the Queen's
interceflion - - ibid.
l, .In,,, the English seize and detain K. James I. of Scot-
.and long a prisoner, i. 33. the nobles there humbled, 37.
had early two houses of Parliament, 78. they invade Scot-
laId, io6. their depredations there, T07. a peace between
England, France, and Scotland, lo8. invade Scotland
.*gain, 218. gain a greatvictory, x19, izo. they force
thr Scots into a closer union with France, azz. conclude
a peace, Iz6. an Englilh fleet arrives in Scotland to assist
the Congregation, 218. a peace concluded between them,
119, 22o. they enter Scotland and besiege the French in
Leith, 220. are repulsed, zzz. articles nfa treaty of peace,
230. they quit Scotland, ,31. refle&ions on the right of
Iicceffion to their Crown, 253,254, 255. the Parliament
fav;urs Q Mary's right of fucccflion, ii. 34. a league
lbetween Englnd and anFrance, zoo. between England and
Scotland, 308. the national covenant adopted in Eng-
land _ 360
Flta;ls, with what view introduced ~ i.21,
Ifplio tl government in the Church, some account of ir, i.
242. an attempt to revive it, ii. ao8. it is abolished by the

Aflncmbly,

Assembly, 2o8. jurifdi&ion abolilhed, i56. See 4cI-
bisi:Ps -- - - iii. 3
.Erol, Earl of, one of the heads of the Spanish faftiou, ii.

357. his offers of service to the K. of Spain, 363. ap-
peas in rebellion, 364. is forced to submit to the Kings
365. imprisoned for a Ihort time, ibid. joinj in another
conspiracy, iii. 7. is fumnoned by the King to surrender,
8. offirs to submit to a trial, iz. sentence pronounced
against him - - 13
.Er/fine of Dun, is employed by the Queen Regent to deceivc

the Protestants, i. 174.-his resentment of this usage ibid.
·-- Lord, governor of Edinburgh Castle, aas a nec!rAi

part between the Queen Regent and the Congregation,
2ro. receives the Queen Regent into the Castle, zi. i;
created Earl of Mar, 283. See Mar.

- Alexarder, has the chie direaion of the education
of K. James VI. ii. z26. admits some of thenobles to
nake complaints to him againit Morton the Regent, 2z:.
is turned out of Stirling Castle by his nephew the Eail of
Mar - - -. 3

Eflieval, the French Envoy, endeavours to obflrut a treaty

between England and Scotland - ii. 3`'

Ejix, Earlof, set up by the English Papists, as a candiduat:

for the Crown, iii. 20. heads a party in England, 70. his
chara&ter, ibid. is greatly diltinguilhed by the Queen, ibid.
71. favours the King of Scots, ibid. obtains theoflicec of
Lord Lieutenant and Commander in Chief in Ireland, ib:d.
is unsuccessful in that expedition, ibid. receives a lhrirl
letter from the Queen, ibid. returns to England and is con-
fined, 72. is tried and censured, ibid. endeavours to spirit
up King James, 73. his rash and frantic LonduCt, 74. is
again talcen into custody, 7S. his deatl, ibid. his fun ial
afbociates are restored to their honours after the accelflon ,f
K. James - -

. 76
Europe, the ltate of, at the beginning of .the sixteenth cen.

tury - i

. S3
Zxcommniiat;in, a terrible engine of the Popifi Clergy i. 145

F
Fdion, an Englishman, fixes the Pope's excommuication of

QERliztabth on the gates of the Bilhop of London's pit.
lace - , ii. 1;7
. ,a ttii'W

Faelon, M. de la Motte, sent by the French King to inter.

pole for K. James when confined by the Ruthven confpi.
rators, ii. 266. is forced to return without success 267

kliudal government, its origin and ariftocratical genius, i. s4,

1 5, 16, 17. casues which limited the power of feudal
Monarchs, x6. feudal vaflals liable to few taxes, 17. a
remarkable inffance of the feebleness of feudal govern-
ment, 2o. the molt perfec idea of the feudal system, how
attaiied, 42. slate of it in England, 76, 77, and in Scot-
land - - - 74, 75, 76

Fife, a populous and powerful country, much devoted to the

Congregation i. 217. is destroycd and plundered by the
French, ibid. the fynod of, excommunicates the Archbiflop
ol'St. Andrews for contumacy, ii. 307. they excommuni-
cate the Popihi Lords - iii. 1

Flozod.'n, the battle'of - i. 60
Forba, Lord, with the Earl of Argyle, is sent agalnft the

Popiih Lords, iii. r7. are defeated by them lS

Fordun, John de, his history of Scotland, when wrote i. 4
2'icfler, Sir John, warden of the Englilh border, a scuffle be.

tween him and the Scots - - ii. 303

-Fohi.'itigay Castle, QMary's imprisonment, trial, and death

there - - _. ii 7-r-34

France, the consequences of the fubverlion of the feudal go-

vernmentthere, i. 84. a body of French arrive in Scot-
land to rupport the Catholics, ix6. they reduce the cafle
of St. Andrews, ibid. another party of them arrive there,
124. their tranfadtions there, ibid. li7. conclude a peace
with England, 126. they leave Scotland, 1z7. their arti-
sices ;n a treaty of marriage between the Dauphin and the
Q. of Scots, 56, 157. the Proreltants endeavour to ex-
pel the French army out of Scotland, 88S. another party
of them arrive there and fortify Leith, 196. they exafpe-
sate the people by their insolence, I97. they are fbnt
againl the Congregation, 216. they detroy and plunder
Fife, and are much haralltd by parties of the Congrega-
tion, 1 7, 2. 8. are greatly alarmed by the arrival of the
Inglinfh fle ft, 2z8. they return to Leith greatly haiafled
and exh.aufed, zr9. are befirged there by the Englilh and
the Congregation, 2 .21 they gain several advantages,
22z, 223. their motives for concluding a peace, z25. ne,
gotiations tbr that purpol,, 227, a.i8. articles of the
treaty, 228, a29. they leave S«etland, 231, the Fsrech

VJu . l. M M advrf

advise QMary to moderate meafuies, 24S. their proporals
by an ambassador reje&ed, ibid. they agree to Q Mary's
marriage with Lord Darnly, 312. the licentiousness of
their morals - - ii. 51
France, King of, a copy of his direetions sent to Scotland,

Appendix - - - iii. 315
Francis I. gives a check to the ambitious projecs of Charles

V. i. 87. his fidelity to the Scots, slo. his death 116

II. comes to the'crown of France, i. r1i. his cha-

racter, ibid. 240. is guided by the Duke of Guise and Car-
dinal of Lorrain, ibid. he treats the Protestants with great
rigour, 226. his death - 240

G
Giords, Do&or and Gilbert, their notion concerning the

lawfulness of killing heretical excommunicated Princes, ii.
310. they join in a conspiracy to kill Q.Elizabeth, ibid.
Gilbert being gained by Walsingham betrays his aflbciates,
312, 313. is employed to carry on a foreign correspond-
ence with Q Mary - - 314, 315

Glamis, Lady, is condemned to be burntfor witchcraft i. 67
- _ Lord Chancellor, intimates the King's order to

Morton to surrender the Regency, ii. 230. is killed in a
rencounterat Stiling - - 23
_- -the tutor of, joins the conspirators of Ruthven, ii.
z59. his bold speech to K. James, 260. he, with the other
conspirators, seize the Castle of Stirling and erect their
standard, 276. he is attainted, and his etate forfeited 28;
Glarfgow, Bilhop of, a note of his concerning the Qeeen of

Scotland's dowry, Appendix - iii. 30,

Glencairn, Earl of, joins the Ruthven conrpirators ii. 259
Glentivat, the battle of - - i. 1S
Gordcn, Sir John, a scuffle in the streets of Edinburgh be-

tween him and Lord Ogilvie, i. 2Xo. being confined for it,
ie makes his escape, aS1. when ordered by the queen to
surrender himself, he takes up arms against her, 282, 283.
is defeated, and, together with his brother, made prisoner,
184. he is beheaded and his brother pardoned 285

-- Lord, fetat liberty -. i. 328
·-- Sir Adam, exerts himself for the Q'uen's interest

in the north, ii, 98S. his chrasor and good condut as
* soldies - zo

Goewrirs

Goerrie, Earl of, joins in a conspiracy to fiize the King at

Ruthven, ii. 259. is vilitcd and pardoned by the King
after his escape, z7o. becomes lilfpeled, and is ordered
for France, 275. delays his voyage, and is t.ken into
custody, 276. he is triedand executed 277
-- John and Alexander, sons of the above, their character

and conspiracy, iii. 48, 49. their dead bodies brought into
Parliament and condemned, 65. their estates and honours
forfeited, and name abolished for ever, ib. See Ruthven.

Gatiah, Sir David, of Fintry, accused ofa conspiracy with

the popish Lords in favour of Spain, iii. 7. is convicted
and beheaded - - 8

CGiy, matter of, some account of him, ii. 289. he becomes a

favourite of K. James VI. ibid. is gained to QZElizabeth's
interest, ibid. betrays Q, Mary. 29o. persuades K. James
to write a harsh and undutiful letter to her, 297. joins with
others in promoting Q.Elizabeth's interelt in Scotland,
So3. his treachery when sent to intercede for Q Mary,
333. his baseness discovered, he is disgraced, 349. his
vain attempt againlt secretary Maitland, 350. ads in Italy
as a spy from the court of England, iii. 43. a memorial of
his for his Majetly, ApPendix, 354-36a. to the fecre-
tary of tate - -- 359

Guise, Duke of, his violent counsels with regard to the Scots,

i. 19g, 192. is murdered at the siege of Orleans 290
- his intrigues against Q_ Elizabeth, ii. 380, 381. is a

principal promoter of the holy league, 299. 356. drives
the French King out of his capital - ibid.

H

islddin.toun) seized and fortified by the Englifli, i. x.z. is re.

lieved by the French - - 1i4

Jaimii/on, the rife of that family, i. 35. arbitrary proceedings

of Mortun the Regent against it, ii. 137, 238. See Clhael.
krraulr.

of Bothwellhaugh, taken prisoner at the battle of

l.angfide, ii. z15. is tried and condemned for rebellion,
ibid. obtains a pardon from Murray the Regent, by the
interceflion of Knox, ibid. an account of his murdering
Murray 166, 167. makes his sefapc, 167. is received in
triumph at Hamilton J70.

----- - Mr. Patrick, the first who fuflered in Scotland for
the Protcltant religion - i. 64

M M a lation,

Hatton, vice-chamberlain of England, the argument by which

he prevailed on Q. Mary to plead at her trial ii. z20
Henry 11. of France, fends forces to aflift the Scots, i. i 6. a

marriage propored between his son the Dauphin and the
young Q._of Scots, r23, 124. excites the Scats to invade
England, a2S. his infamous impolition on Q. Mary in the
treaty of marriage, 156, 157. persuades his son and Q.
Mary to assume the titles of King and Q(een of England,
x69, hisdeath - 190

--- III. degenerates greatly on his acceflion to the crown

of France, ii. 29g. enters into a private negociation wi:h
Q Elizabeth, 300. ritcrpofes feebly in behalf of (1.
Mary - - - 329

-- VIII. of England, by his system of reformation be-

comes formidable both to Papidts and Protflants, i. 6S.
proposes an interview with King James V. ibid. is difap-
pointed by him, and declares war against Scotland, 69,
70. invades it, but is forced to retreat, 70. his importance
as to the balance of power in Europe, S8. his influence in
Scotland how obtained, go. his schemes with regard to it
An the death of James V. 94. were ill-conucktcd by him-
self, and odious to the Scots, 95. his treacherous fizure
of Scots ihips that toolk helter in his ports, 98. attempts
to gain the Regency by great promises, loo. invades Scor-
land, 1o6. this being ill-conduced turns to no account,
ilid. receives and rewards the Earl of Lennox, log. e:-
courages the murderers of Cardinal BieatouJ, 1 1 3. his death
and charader, 1t4, 115 his inconfiltent condue&, s68.
excluded the Scotch line by his tefamnent ibid.
ilcrries, Lord, joins Chatellherault in opposing the Regent, ii.

,5r. comes' to a treatytwith hin, ibid. he and the Dule
are committed prisoners to the castle of Edinburgh, 151.
intimates the King's order to Morton to redign the Regen.
cy, zza. account of his behaviour in Parliament, Appen-
dix, iil. 175. a letter from him to Lord Scroop apd Sir F.
Knollis ' - - 6
,efrtford, Earl of, invades Scotland with an English army, i.

1o6. infirucions of the privy council to, o07. burns
Edinburgh and Leith, ibid, is made Duke of Somerfct,
and protector ofEngla'nd,,sr 1 Set Soierfet.

SWPiord, fccritary to the Duke of Norfolk, betrays him by
diJsovcring hisintrigue withx Q<gMary ii. Jy9

. lligblanh

iligblands and Ijies, an attempt to civilize them by K. James

V1. iii. 78. regulations for that purpose, ibHd. three towns
endued with the privileges of royal boroughs ordered to be
built there - - 79
.Hodgson, a priess of Rheims, maintained the lawfulness of

killing heretical excommunicated Princes ii. 310
Hone, Alexander Lord, thwarts the measures of the Duke of

Albany, Regent -- i. 35
-- Lord, tent by K. James VI. with a secret embafly to

the Pope - - iii. 46
lowoard. See Norfolk.
Jlunfilon, Lord, governor of Berwick, his interview with

Arran - - ii. 282, 283
Ilrntlly, Earl, though a catholic, joins the reformers in op-

posing the French army, i. i89. aflifts them only with
fair prornifes, 2zo. his further concurrence with them,
223. some account of that family, 279, 280. his enmity
againff the young Queen's ministers, o80. his refentmient
inflamed by an accident, ibid. appears in an open rebellion
against the Queen, 283. his plot against her ministers dif.
appointed, ibid. breaks out into open rebellion, ibid. is
trodden to death in a battle, z85. his family prosecuted
with rigour, ibid. several anecdotes and conjetures con-
cerning his plot, ?.86, 287. is attainted by Parliament,
294. the attainder repealed, and the family reflored to
estate and honours - - ii. 64
-.--- his attachment to Bothwell, ii. 59. 69. refuses to
rubmit to the Regent, YI . is forced to do it, 152. ass as
lieutenant to the Queen after the Regent's murder, 174.
is proclaimed a traitor by Lennox the new Regent, 177.
receives some money and promises ofafliftance from Spain,
ibid. 173. agrees to a treaty with Morton the Regent, 2 6.
is one of the heads of the Spanifl faction, 357. engages
to the Prince of Parma to serve the King of Spain, 36z.
is inmprifoned for a short time, 364. ret&s a standard of
rebellion, but forced to submit to the King, 365. is
again imprisoned, ibid. is soon set at liberty, ibjd. receives
a commiflion from the King, iii. 4. his barbarous murder
of the Earl of Murray, ibid. is fulmmoned to surrender to
juitice, ibid. flies to the mountains, 8, osiers to submit to
a trial, 1z. sentence pronounced againfl him, 13. refuses
to submit, 14, makes another delperate attrmpt, but is
forced to fly - 1 6, 17

M 3 yame

I
Yanam I. was detained long a prisoner in England, i. 33.

troubles in Scotland during that time, ibid. 34. was much
improved by an English education, 46,47. his policy on
his return to Scotland, 47. his characer, ibid. 48. sup.
presses the power of the nobles, 49. they being exafperited,
conspire against, and murder him - 50
- II. troubles in Scotland during his minority, i. 34. his
attempts againff the nobles, o5, .5. murders the Earl ut
Douglas, 51. procures several good laws to be pafled, 53.
reduces the power of the nobles, ibid. his death 54

- II. the state of Scotland during his minority, i. 3+. his

impolitic condut, 54, 55. kills one of his brothers, and is
invaded by another, 55. is greatly inl'uled by his nobles,
57. his despicable minions, ibid. was the first that appoint-
ed a standing guard to his person, 58. the nobles are pro-
voked to take arms against 'him, 59. is killed in a battle
against them, ibid. his character - ibid,
- IV. his characrer, i. 60. is killed in a battle againll
the Englilh at Flowden - ibid. 6t
-- V. his minority long and turbulent, i. 35. tranfations

during that time, 6r, 62. aftffes the government while
very young, 63. his character, ibid. 64. his Icheme lor
humbling the nobles,'64-67. is diverted from it by thl
clergy, 69, 70. takes aims for the defence of his kingdom,
70. his nobles refusing to follow him, throws him into a
deep melancholy, 7r, 72, 73. which is incicafed by a fur-
prifing defeat of his forces, 73. his death, ibid. he retfred
an alliance'with Charles V. Emperor - 90
-- VI. his birth, ii. 27. his baptism, 41. the care of him
tommiittcd to the Earl of Mar, 57. is by'him preserved
frorrifalling into the hands of Bothwell, 78. is crowned,
96. the nobles opprefl'ed by Morton the Regent, turn tlhei
eyes to him for redress, 226. his education and difpofitiois,
ibid. ti7. he becomes fifpicious of the Regent's power,
227. dllcovet' early a great attachment to favourites, 23'!.
adopts two of dlifferent dispositions, 40o. enters Edinburgh
with great folemlnity, ,42. is by his favourites engaged in
:u'rdpllarrheafutes; 15S, a'59 is seized by a party of no-
:hles at' Rutlhven', i6rt. and forced to receive complaints
'al'Rit hi?'favouritei, ibid. dilembles with them, inSd ba-
ilhdif Ltmhoxo-i6' , is broiuht to'Stking pd ,Holyrood-

*
.. :. bhon~kfe,

lhoufe, 264. his concern for Lennox's death, and regard
for his memory, ibid. receives the French ambassador with
great respeCt, 266. makes his escape from the conlpirators,
267. rcfolves to treat them with moderarion, 268. visits
Gowrie and grants him a pardon, z69. renews his fondncls
for Atrat, ibid. is by him pcrfuaded to violent measures
sgainft the conspirators, ibid. his answer to a haughty letter
from Q. Elizabeth on their behalf, 270. is by her interpo.
lition rendered more violent against them, z27. is pro-
voked by the clergy, 273. his steps to humble them, 276.
his profusion to Arran, -83. fends a new favourite to Eng.
land againit the banifled Lords, 88. devolves the whole
regal authority on Arran, 290, 291. writes an undutfiul
letter to his mother, 297. is threatened to be disinherited
by her, ib. receives a pension from Q. Elizabeth, 302. is
reconciled to the exiled Lords, 304. becomes popular by
concluding a treaty with England, 308. his Icaindilous be.
haviour with regard to ArcLd Douglas, 309. his endeavours
to save his mother's life after her condemnation, 3z9, 3.30.
is greatly incensed at her death, 346. arguments uled by
the English ministers to pacify him, ibid. 347. is forced
toltifle his resentment, 348. .attempts to unite the noblest
350, 351. is courted both by Spain and England, 356, 357.
refulves Yigorouflyto adhere to the latter, 357. takes fIvc-
ral (teps with that view, ibid. his skill in the popilh con-
troverfy, 363. wrote a commentary on the Revelationsq
ibid. his mnaxims with regard to popery, ibid. 364. his .:x,
ceflive lenity to confpiratprs against im, ibid. resolves to
marry the Prinvefsof Denmark, 365. arts uscd to prevent
it, 366. the mairiage is consummatcd in Norway, 367.
paflls several months in Denmark, ibid. his arrival in
Scotland with his QLeen, iii. 1, indulges the Pxciby-
teriar;>:, ibid. :. the ill consequences of his lenity, ibd. 3.
hlis teal -gainlwitchcraft, ibid. is solicited by QlElizatblt
to treat the Conspirators againit him with rigout, 9. is Pus-
pccted of conniving with them, io. is furpril'd and fctged
by B]othwell,ibid. I s. and tjirctd to comply with his terms,
ibid. hisi lenity to Bothwell abuftd,,.3, is fufpe4tcd of4-
vouring the 1'opiHh Lords, 14. is in new danger,from thcrm,
I S. delegates his autbority to Argyle nQp I'orbc sagal(t
them, 17. Gos .in person against them, ig., waft th;ir
lands and gl lrifons their catles,ibjd. his right of the, fyqf;.
ion to to le;row ,of' ZeglnsJ oppp fct;y y ,:,}ilt'(P ,'

his lenity to them incenfcs the clergy and people, 23, 24.
is provoked by the obstinacy of the clergy, 27. gives orders
against them, zS. is insulted, and in great danger at Edin-
burgh, 28-32. leaves Edinburgh and proceeds with feve-
rity against the citizens, 33 -36. acquires abfolutedominion
in eccleiaftical affairs, 36, 37. flrengthens his interelt in
Parliament, by restoring the feats of the ecclesia tics, 39-
41. endeavours with success to gain a party in England, 45.
increases his reputation by puhlilhing his Bafilicon Doron,
4z. is accused by Q. Elizabeth of corresponding with the
Pope, 44. is at great pains to gain the Roman catholics, 45.
his regulations with regard to the church, 47, 48. the
nmyfterious affair of Cowrie'a conspiracy, 48-69. his cau-
tious behaviour in regard to the Earl of Effex, 73. fenms
ambassadors to five him, 74. they arrive too late, ibid. he
restores his son and associates to their honours after his ac-
ceflion, 75. continues his intrigues in England, ibid. 76,
. 77. his interest greatly strengthened there, ibid. endeavour':
to civilize the highlands and isles, 7S, 79. is proclaimed
King in England, after the death of Q Elizabeth, 85. is
proclaimed likewise in Scotland, 87. prepares for his jour-
ney to England, 87, 88. enters London, and takes poflef-
sion of the throne, 89. his character how different from
that of Q Elizabethb ibir. a letter from him to Mr. Archi-
bald Douglas, Appendix, iii. 349. curious letter to him from
an unknown English correspondent - 37;
Jnvern.fs castle, refuses to surrender to Q Mary, i. 283. i-

is firced, and the governor pugifhed - ibid.
Italy, the liberty of, how preferred i. 84

K
Ke;tb, Sir William, Cent to intercede for Q: Mary when un-

der fnence, ii. 330. letter to him from ecretaly Maitland,
Appendix iii. 350
entr, Earl of, appointed to fee the sentence againfi Q. Mary
executed - - i. 337
Ker of Ferniherf, ravages England on the munder of Mutrry

the Regent, ii. 170. his delign, :73. has a fculle with
the English -. - 303

Ce-Go. brother to L. Newbottle, is 'ifcovered when

ready to fail to promote a plot in Spain, iii. 6. 'his fchene
opened, ibid. efcapcsout of prison '- ' ' y
Killigrcw, Hcnry, hi dcglaationon the peace, Ap ii. 3S5

King ,

Kilns, feudal, the moRl limited of all Princes, i. 14. general

.raufes of this, 16. their revenues were but small, ib. 17.
had no Pfanding armies, g1. and jurifdiclion limited, 19.
means used to extend the royal authority, 38. their jurif-
diction enlarged, 40. the extraordinary influence of the
Scottih Kings in Parliament - 4

Ki!kaldy of Grange, one of the murderers of Beatoun, is re-

called by the Q. Dowager, i. s 54. his attainder reversed in
Parliament, z94. offers to fight Botlwell in single combar,
ii. 8.a. his interview with Q.Mary, in name of the con-
'ederate lords, 85. relues Maitland from confinement, r 6.
labours to fupporc the King's authority, and reflore har-
mony after the murder of the Regent, 17, r 17.. accedes to
the Queen's party, 172. provides for a siege by increaring
lis garrison and fortifying Edinburgh, i6i, proclaims Len-
nox's authority unlawful and usurped, ibid. attempts in vain
to pr'eent a meetinlg of the Parliament, 187. forms a
.cheme for firprifing the King's party, r yo. is at firt fIur.
:cefsful, bitt afterwards defeated, 9i.g comes near to an
-greement with Mar the Regent, 206. a treaty with Mor.
ton, breaks it off, z14, r215. fires upon Edinburgh from
the caitle, 215. is besieged by the Regent, affired by the
Englifi forces, a16. is forced by mutiny of the garrilbn to
capitulate, 18. surrenders to Drury the Englih general,
ibid. is by orderofQ Elizaboth delivered up to the Regent,
2zo. he and his bro'her are executed 221

Kiiollys, Sir Francis, Cent by r. Elizabeth with letters of con-

dolence to Q. Mary on her arrival in England, ii. z19.
some of his letters, Appendix, iii. 269-273. i76--283.

KnMx, John, a famous reformer, his charadter, i. 130. after

being some time abroad, lie is recalled by the persecuted
Prorelftnts, 175. inflames the multitude at Perth with
rage againf the Papists, ibid. his notion concerning the
government efwomen whence, xIS. his residence fixed in
Idinburgh, 186. complains of the lulcewarmnetfsof;tlhe
retfrlners,.2oo, his opinion to the convention of reformers
that it is lawful to resist and deprive tyrannical 'lrinces, o22.
nnimates and revives the derponding Congregatian, zx2.
complains of the neglet of the reformers, in providing
maintenanoc for their preachers, 137. reco6nmenidsthe Ge-
neva model of Church Government, 244. propote super-
intendants inn th church, 45. composea tle firlr bonol of
difciplinc, 246. enounces friendflip with the Earl of Mur-

ray

ray for his moderation, 296. is tried for encouraging a mu
tiny among the people, and acquitted, z97. is publicly ac-
cufed by Maitland of preaching seditious docrine concern-
ing refifance, 30S. charaters of the two disputants, ibid.
approved of several instances ofaffaflination, ii. 22. agrees
to some regulations concerning the election of Bilhops, z .
his death and characer, ibid. z11. specimen of his tlo.
quence, 211. his eulogium by Morton the Regent, z21.
articles sent by him to the general allembly, Ap. iii. 3c3

L

Langflde, the battle of - - ii, I r
Laureau, Cardinal, is sent as a nuncio from the Pope with a

present to Q. Mary of Scotland, ii. 38. is itopped at
Paris - - - 39
Lecgue,, holy, a confederacy of Roman catholics so called, ii.

299. was universally agreed to by them all over Europe ib.

Learmnig, the revival of, promotes the reformation i l12
Leicejier, Earl of, appointed a commissioner to the confercnei

at Weltminfter - ii. 141
Leith burnt by the Englilh, i. o16. fortified by the French,

196. besieged by the Englilh, 2zo. Q. Mary lands thc c
from France, 259. the superiority of jt granted by her to
Edinburgh, 334. is fcized and fortified by Morton the
Regent - - ii. 116
lennox, Earl of, arrives in Scotland from France, i. Ico.

his prerenfions to the fucceflibn how founded, 163. rcletin
Beatoun's deceitfulnelf to him, 104. heads tll refornicrs
and the advocates for the Englifli alliance, ib. lurprifes lie
Regent and Cardinal, los. is outwitled by the Cardina!,
ibid. continues alone in the inteleft of England, o107 is
forced to fly to that court, where he is rewarded, loS. i;
married to a niece of K. Henry't, by which he became f.
ther to a race of Kings, ibid. his claim to the fucceflion,
302. is imprisoned for a secret corrcfpondence with Q.
Mary, 303. is invited fectetly by her to return to Scotlainl,
304. arrives in Scotland, and is received with preat fanbii
liarity by her, 305, 306. his forfeiture is repealed, anid lc
is reflored to his eitate and honours by the Parliameit,
306. his lady sent prisoner to the Tower of London, 1 17
and treated with rigour, 322. he inlifls on the profecutili
f his son Darnly's murdercrs, ii. 56. charges Bothwell

vhihl

with it, ibid. the prosecution is hurried, 58. he craves a
delay, which is refused, 60. solicits Q Elizabeth's inte-
reft to obtain a delay, ibid. inlifts on it by proxy at the
trial, but is over-ruled, 6r. being apprehensive of danger
he flies towards England, 63. his counters accuses Q.Ma-
ry of the murder to QElizabeth, rzi, he appears at the
conference at Weftminlter, and accuses Q. Mary of the
murder upon oath, 143. returns to Scotland protected by
an Englilh army, 174. is eleced Regent, 177. his pro-
grefs against the Queen's party, ibid. appoints commillion-
ers to frame a treaty with those of the Qteen, ISi. fur-
prii:s Dumbarton catle, 183, 184, 185. joins the Earl of
Morton at Leith, 186. holds a Parliament in the Canon-
gate, 187. another at Stirling, 189. he' is surprised and
killed theie - 19!

Lennox, Lord Aubigny, his character, ii. 240. joins with

the King's other new favourite to undermine Morton, 242.
renounces Popery, 243. Q Elizabeth demands him to be
removed from the privy council, 244. is accused by her
ambaflador, 248. Arran tries in vain to supplant him, 254.
is commanded by K.James at the request of the nobles to
leave the kingdom, 261. puts off his departure on various
pretences, 262, z63. returns unwillingly to France, where
he soon dies, 264. his memory vindicated and much re-
garded by the King, 265. died a'proteftant ibid.

--- Earl of, left as the King's lieutenant in the north

after dispersing the popilh Lords - iii. 19-

Leslie, Norman, murders Cardinal Beatoun, i. rro. he and

his aflociates keep poffeflion of the caele of St. Andrews,
i . makes a truce with the Regent, 113. are encouraged,
by Hen. VIII. - - 14

- Biflop of Ross, Is sent by the Catholics in Scotland to

engage Q. Mary in their interest, i. 47. his proposals to
her rejeited, 248. his negotiations in England in favour of
Q.Mary, ii 194.. is confined long in the Tower, and as-

,

terwards banifed England - - 9

Lim/ay, Lord carries the proposal from the confederates to ^

Q.Mary, that Ihe lhould resign the government, ii. 95 .
joins the Ruthven conspirators - S59'

.Lochlevin caflle, Q. Mary committed a prisoner there, ii. 88.
her escape from thence - - 107

- Lord, lttus to and from hiUn Appendix iii.,30o

lgan

Logan of Rctalrig,'an alleged accomplice in Cowrie's corfp;.

racy, iii. 55, 56. is tried, 'and his state forfeited longr as
ter his death -

, *_ ;6 .r 7
Lords, confederate, aflbciate'again Bothwe. and Q<iary,

i. 79. raise forces againt them, 81. publiA the motis,:
of their condiuc, ibid. prevail on the queen to fulrelndr to
them, S5. afitime the title of Lords of the secret couIncl,
and the royal authority - - ,x

Zordsf popilfh coafpire againfi K. James, ii. 362. are tlelrt.

cd by him with great lenity, 364. form a new confpil.acv,
·ii. 6. tie King proceeds againit them, 7. more of his I1-

tity to them, z1. freth dangers from' them, x6.' they ic:
teive money from Spain, ibid. zeal of the clergy againll
them, ibid, are declared guilty of treason, and their eflair
forfeited, 17. defeat the Kingrs army, 18. nre dilpeffcd
n the King''s approach t'g9. go abroad and give fecutity
to keep the peace, ibid. return to Scotland, and petirict;
ser leave to reside in their own houses, 24. this granted
by a convention of estates, ibid. recant their errors, al:l
are absolved from excommunication, 37. relapse, and air
again reconsiled to the church of Rome, ibid. are rePoiud
to their estates and honours - 3.
Lorrain, Cardinal, gets form of the best benefices in Scotland,

i. 16;

_-- - PPrincesof, their ambitious views, i. 167.. inlig.icr

the 'Dauphin and Q_ Mary to tlke the title of King and
(_ueen of England, 169. tefolve to invade England, iIJd;
and to check the Reformation in Scotland, 170. the Car-
elinel's great influence over the young King, g19. drivrs
the ueen Regent of Scotland to violent measures, 197.
their violences occasion a confpiracyaaianft them, 226.
i re forced to withdraw their troops from Scnrland, 227.
they insult the Scottibh amballador, z23. have gleac poi.
cr over the young King and Qieen, 240, 241. are fon(,l
to eontracl theirviews on the death of the King. 2,

l.ntstvr, a bold and principal promoter of the Reformatibi, i.
139. the rapid progrcfl of hi doftrint ' 4

M .'

Major, John, hlls Tiftory of Scotland, some aecount of i. 4
Mfaitlaed of Lethington, secretary to Maiy Quen Regent

ltelve her Alpvicr and jijoas 'te Congrteation, i. o21. hll

thara^tsr,

charater, air. is sent by them ambatVador to Q.Eliza-
beth, 212. fends thcm afrurances of her protection, 2 6.
is sent by Q Mary to the court of England, aó6S. makes
a conceflion to Q .Elizabeth, ibid. accompanies Q. Mary
in a progress to the north, zS. he is employed by Q. Ma-
i; to dcfire a personal interview with QC.Elizabeth, 2z7.
publicly accuses Knox of preaching seditious dotrine con-
cerning retilrance, 308. intimates to Q Elizabeth the in-
tentions of QO Mary to marry Darnly, 315. prudently
conceals her relcntment from Q. Elizabeth, 37 ;. propdfes
moderate measures with regard to Q. Mary when implifon..
ed, ii. 93. attends the Regent when called on to accuse
her in England, 129.. he disapproves of this mcafure, r30.
his intrigue with tue Duke of Norfolk, 134. 154. is imn
prisoned by tle Regent, x6o. is relieved by Kirlcaldy, aind
secured in the caftlc, 16r. proposes a coalit'ion of the two
parties after the murder of the Regent, 171. accedes to
the Queen's party, 172. is deprived of his office of fecre-
tauy, and pr6clailmed traitor, 177. is attainted in a Par-
liament of the Kinig's party, 187. agrees with Mar, 206,
-zo-0. his views in refusing a reconciliation with Mortbn

the Regent, '.14, 2,1 5. rejecs overtures of a treaty with
himn, ibid. is besieged by himn in the castle of Edinburgh,
217. is forced to capitulate and surrender to the Englifil
general, 28. to avoid the Regenc's resentment he dil-
patches himself, zzr. feve;;il of' his letters, Appendix,

ii. 293-

M;:,'andd, Sir John, is made secretary for Scotland, ii. gor.

concurs with 'othcts inproimoting Q Elizabeth's interest
there, ibid. attempts against him by Capt. James Stewart,
late Arran, 349. they prove abortive, and he is advanced
to.be chancellor, 350. an attempt to remove him from
that office frustrated, 365. his death, iii. 21. a copy of
verses in honour of him wrote by the King ibid.
.2ar', Earl of, that title, conferred on the Prior of St. Au-
drews, i. 279. accompanies the (ueen in a progrcls to the
north, z28. he and his ailbciatcs iarrrwly lccape aftani-
nation, 282, 283. is created Earl of Murrjy, zs3. Sec
Murray.
---the title is conferred on L. Erskine, i. 283. the person
of the young Prince put into his handl, ii. 57. his rerfo
lution in preserving him from Bothwell, 78. is chofcn Rce-
gent, 191. laboura to brinng aboul a gcagral pac¢, 205.

vOL. 11n N . is

is thwarted by Moytrn and his afneioates,. o6'. das-.
melancholy, 207. his charater '- ibid.

Mar, the young Earl, being imposed on by Morton, turi4

out his uncle 'rom the caile of Stirling, ii. ,32. join
the Ruthven conspirators, 259. he mith the others feiz,
Stirling caitle, and erec their standard, 276. is atrtinted,
and his estate forfeited, 383. is pardoned, and sedtored to
eitate and honours - 3o0

Mirccb, Countess of, her infanmonu marriage with the Earl of

Arran ' ii. z

Mary of Guilfe, QDowadger of Scatland, takes a confierabte

Ihare in the government, i. 1z2. is mmuch adilited to tle
French intereltj ibid. projedts a mnarriage of her daughtc:
to the Dauphin of Finnce, i3-. becomes infunileltal iil
promoting the Reformation, 32. aspires' to htl officct.
Regent, ibid. :33. proiotes difaifl.ction to the preiFls
one, and favouis the relormers, 133, 1- 4 visit the co,'r
of France, s34. rtturns to Scotland to talte poflWfeion ,
the Regeircy, 135. alter some oppotition she obtains ii,

37. confers feveral-oflices of truftlupon strangers, T;-,
proposes to lay a tax upon land, I-Tr. is forced to drop it,
X151, 1a. tries in vain to excite 'a war with- E'iglun,i,
152. the nobles vigorously oppose her m'eafiircssi £1.
treats the Reformers with great refpe&, ihid. obtqins
oonceffon from the Parliament in favour of rie Datuhir,
r6o. her artful tnangeiment of the refrmicrs, i6r, t(6:.
bestows the vacant benefices on foreigners, r62. she altrr,
her condu&t to the reformers,' 167. remonlranets againt
the violent measures of the Princes of Lotrain, 170. is
pcrfu;.led by them to persecute the reformers, i7l.; li
'raih answer to their temonfrahce, 'ibid. 'I17. Is'ubinm:
' their preachers to appear before her I7J. blreks a'promii';

Ihe had made them, 174. marches with an arry agair!
theri, 76. concludes a treaty with themn -1'7-this ilh-
agiii' breaks, z178.her fe*crity at Perth, ibid: her fch. ,~
dircoqrede ibid. 179. he go's 'to dittak 'thenm, i'.
has agiin'rtcourfe to negotitioii, 18o .'Iheis flirtie -'

' thlir.decmands, and ge timneto aitfwdrthemsin ''I .-- vi;
, lareiastiother treaty, ibidsa loses Perth ind! ftcea' td ab,.:

d''son Sttlihc sB'nd'Edinbuirghihe fetltedlivth'precipit.ire

iI to Dunba,* S3, S84.

: hirt.ahes t heaa i lth rrformi'l n'
'" 'E.itlnburgh, 1 87. nakes ahbthr 'tri'*ty' ith' thtpi;' ihid.

1 8' he irtificet to ut*dcrminia the Pioi O'ff St'?Adrc .

* ·. ' - .,

,gA94. gets a reinforcement of French troopr, who fortify
Lcith, 196. Jhe disregards a remonftraoce of the reform-
ers, 197. .i influenced by French counfrclors, and per.
luaded to violent measures, ,98. retires to Leitl, on the
approach of the reformers army, g99. her prudent and
artful conduct there, o00. I:er haughty and imperious.an-
'wcr to a freil remonirance from them, ibid. i5, by a
convention of them, deprived of her ,ffice of Regent, 203.
foments diff:rences among them, zo6. is derwred by her
principal secretary Maitland of Lethington, 2 o, ieoids
French troops againfl the reforrner, iG. retires-,into the
castle of Edinburgh on the approach of the jnglilh, azi.
her death and charaser, zZ4. repented of her vioicln
nmeaures, 2z5. liltened to the in!truion of a refornicd
pieacher - . z

2
Miry Queen of England, her persecuting reign, i. 137. her

death - - 163

.. Queen of Scots born, i. g9. a proposal to marry her

to Ed. VI, 9'. she is demanded by Henry VIII. ibid. her
marriage to the Dauphin of France proposed, tjg. a treaty
for that purpose concluded, 124, 125. she is sent to be
cducated il France, z15. is imposed on by the artifices of
the Fiench in t!e treaty of marriage, I56. her marriage
celebrated with great pomp, z57. they take the title of
King and Qgeen of England, 169. she makes concefflina
to the Congregatiun, 2z, z aZ declares QElizabeth's
right to the crown of En3land, 2g8. he acquires an entile
.a(iendant over her hulbanJ, z .o Ihe is overwhelmed with
great afflition.on his Jeath, and retires to Rheimhn&, 4.1.
dhe is Jnvited by the Convention to return to Scotland,
:47. an emissary from the catholics in bcotland propored
violent .neafurcs to her. ibid. Ihe is determined to mode-
ration by the French and to.u riol of Sr. Andrew;, 248.
is prevailed on to prepare for her return to Scotlanld, 249.
the origin of the discord between her and QFliiabetli,
'.5o. her pretensions to the crown of Englan1, e.SL is
envied on accoint of her beauty, s55. demands a fife
conduc from QrEliizbethl, which js rcfured, 256. leaves
Fiance with great. reluctance, c57. lands tt Lcith, s59.
it much nfletfed by the chlnge of her firuaion, ibid.
'evcrll disadvantages attending her accefli0n, 29, 26o.
bet accomplihtmonsr of body and minlid, tZl. the lervant
of her. chapel insulted, aza. procurea the ftee cteraife of

yW vSh t

her religion, 213. ifriues a proclamation in favour of the
' rotefltnts, ibid. employs them solely in the adminiffra-
tion, 264. attenpts to gain QL Eli'zabeth's favour, ibid.
malces a concefflon to her, 265. which is rejected, 266.
- ie make's her public entry into Edinburgh, 767. an in-

fult.offered to her religion on that bccaiion, ibid. dif-
courages the attempts of the papists to gain her favour,

68. her aversion to the family of Hamilton, 269. makes
a progrfcs into tlenorth, 28 , z82. her minifiersnariowiy
escape aaffaination, 282. is refused acress to the cafle of
Jnvernefs, 2z3. when in the utmost conflernatiorr, is
relieved by the Monros and other clans, ibid. her forces
defeat Huntley's rebellion, 284. she desires an interview
with Q.Elizabeth,2z,7. negotiations concerning her mar-
riage, 288. is solicited by different Prihces, '83o,29go.
her deliberations concerning it, zc,o. is forced to bear the
authoritative behaviour of Q. Elizabeth, 293. to-pleafe htr
fubjecs, determines against a foreign alliance, ibid. de-
termines not to ratify the treaty of Edinburgh, i94. fur-
ther negotiations for her marriage, 297. discovers the
views of Catherine of Medicis,. ibid. Lord Robert Dudley
Tecommended to her as a husband by Q.Elizabeth, 299.
the is highly offended at this, ibid. aiftembles with Q.
Elizabeth, 301. entertains thoughts of marrying Lord
Darnly, 302; Conceals Lennox, 304. is affronted' at a
letter of Q.Elizabeth's, ibid. her prejudice against the
reformed, and zeal for the catholicreligion, 307. is taken
with Darnly at fifft fight, 310. is greatl) movedc arQ.
Elizabeth's iilfulting traftinefs, ibid. 311.-' negotiateS wsith
the court bs Rome for a difpcnfation to marry Darnlv,
ibid. '-nd the coifcrit of the court of Frante, ibid.
imppfes on Randolph, hut appli.s to Q.Elizabethi fnr
consent to her martiagc, 315; which The affccts tole-
fife, ibid. in resentment lhe proposes tdifend ari:angry
'inefilge to Elizabeth, whichl Maitland prevents; 317. jul.
tifies her conduil to thelEnglislh ambalfadori 3zi. erid:..
vours to get M'urray's collent, '3 9. cdurts the 'Pode's
proteaion;'ansd receives a subsidy from .lm, 320;.' her
great addrel's I gaiining the conlilnt ds her llih"reiCt ; z .
322. preveiltd a plot againlf Darnly, 323. fumina hsr
vafibils o'takc anns a'gniin Mnsray, 3S . an.d'hirdi:to ap-
pear bcfi;re (icr; 326. her marriage with Datnly cel6iratrd,
327. fleconfers tletitle bs KiHng f Scots dpon hirn, ibid.
this ftep censured, 328. hcr'refentmcnt againlt the male-

contents,

Aontents, 32. Ame marches again/t thern, 329. rejcts
the iterceifionr of Q Ellizabeth in their behalf, 330.
continues her march agailf(t the rebels, ibid. drives thcnt

lut of Scotland, 31. her further rci'ntment againit
them, 332, 333. has recourse to several devices to raise
money, 334. her prolperiry promotes her re igion, 335.
her deliberations concerning the exiled Lords, ii. i. de-
termines to treat them with lenity, 3. is diverted from
this by hei religion and French influeice, ibid. 4. this the
source of her after.misfrtunes, 6. her intention to rcfiore
popery, ibid. is difgulted with Darnly's infolcAt beha-
viour, 7, 8. familiarity with Ririo offends the King, so.
vindicated from any criminal correspondence with Rizio,
xI, iz, x3. uses her utmo(t endervours to prevent his
murder, 14. fihe is confined by the confpirstors, x5. ihe
gains the King, and escapes from them, x6. is recon-
ciled to the exiled nobles, ibid. her hatred to Darnly in-
creafts, z3, z... and favour for Bothwell cominences,

i4.. extinguilhes some domnefli feud': 4mong the nobles,
:6. is deliveled of her Ibn James vI. in the Cafile of
Eidinburgh, 27. inyites leveral foreign princes to his bap,
tim, ibid. continues to treat Darnly with neglet, ibid.
her attachment to Bothwell increases, al. prgvents Darn-
ly's intended .fliht, 3 r. visits the borders, 32. an inflance
of her regard for Bothweli on that occasion, ibid. how (he
rivalled Q Elizabeth, 3. her right of fuccefion favoured
by the English pirliament, 34. fie endeavours to avail
herelf of that opportunity, 36, 37. lhe takes an extraor-
dinary siep in favour of popery, 18. receives a present from
the Pope, but flops his nuncio at Paris, 31. endeavours
to procure a better fubfictnce for the reformed clergy, 4 .
her avcrfion to the King eoceslive, becomes melancholy,
ibid. goes to Stirling to celebrate her son's baptifn, 41.
ij greatly offnded ut the King'd behaviour on that occa,
sion, 42. restores the popish occlefiaftic4l jurifdiAion,
47. her neglect of the Kiig during his ickilefi, 48. the
breach between them becomes irreparable, 49. flie vilits
him at Clafgow, o5. the motives of her dissimulation on
that ogcafion, 50, v. prevails on him to come to Edin.
burgh, (5. her fulpicion, behaviour to him there, 53.
iflues a proclanation for dicovering his murderers, 55.
i.' supposed to have been acceffry to it, ibid. 56. is charged
, ith it argods 4 well as at home, ibid, 6cI to vifie

$iN 3 licr

her son at Stirling, 72. is met on her return by Bothwell,
who seizes and carries her to Dunbar, ibid. 73. this flip.
posed with her consent, ibid. is condulced to Edinburgh,
75. and married to Bothwell, 76. fends nn apology to thl
courts of France and England, 77. her condu&t caufc:; '
general indignation againfl her abroad, 78. is alarmed at,
combination of the nobles againit her, So. file publiihc:
manifeiln to vindicate her condu&, 81. is condutl.-
to the catlle of Borthwick, ihid. marches with Bothwel:
forces sgainlft the confederate Lords, 83. an ittempt ot :-
accommodarion proves vain, ibid. 84. is forced to f -
renrder to the confederates, S . is infllted by the soldi(;
and mob, ibid. is carried toEdinburgh, where many abui.
are offered her, ibid. is sent a prisoner to Lochlevin Cai'il,
S8. Q Elizaheth inlterpofes in her behalf, 91. the Englili:
ambaiiador is refilfed accels to her, 92. various propol:is.
among the confederates concerning her, 93. they oblige lih.

, to resign the government, 94. is much moved :ith tr

freedom of the Eirl of Murray, lo. her party amtnL'.
the nobles become dilpirited, sc3. her relignation of rh':
crown accepted by the larliament, and her imprifonmcn:r
declared lawful, 105. her letters to Bothwell read, ;i!i
i fe decia:ed accessary to the King's murder, ibid. elcape'
from Lochiei'in, ro7. arrives at Hamilton, 1oS. is :
tended by many nobles and a numerous army, ibid. Tc..
-an aficiation ligned in her defence, ibid. her impruden,..
in hazarding a battle, i x . her army defeated by the cc :-
federates, ibid. her precipitate flight into Galloway, i :.
rafllv determines to retire to England, 1 3. goes thithli.
againif the advice of her attendants, x14. arrives at t..,
lisle, 15. writes to Q.Elizabeth, imploring her g'l.
offices, ibid. receives letters of condolence from her, .l:,i
demands admittance into her prellnce, : i8, 19. ltli
refused, and why, 119. offers to submit her canlc to i.
Elizabeth, ibid. is much deceived in her expectation ftnl :
this, 1a2. and offended on discovering the artifices of .
l.lizabeth, 323. rarnelfly solicits to be admitted into her
presence, ibid. tihe is carried to Bolton OCltle, v z5. chagrined
at finding herfellf prisoner, ia6. agree troan inquiry inl:
her condut, ibid. her diflimulation with regard to re.
ligiorslz 7. commiflioners appointed to appear in ler
name, 1g9. consents to moving the confeleice to WeCl-
minttcr, 138. nhe i carried to Tuthbury in Stafordlhirc,

» 139.

r39. is much offended at the regard hiswn the Regent,
and recail her confenc to the conference, 140. the accufia
tions againlt her produced by the Regent, 14 . is accufec
likewise by the E.irl us Lennox, 14+. her coinmiflioners
refuse to answer, and demand a personal interview, ibid.
144. they protcft againif fiture proceedings, ibid. a
suspicious circumfitance againlt her, ibid. 145. her com-
mifionirs witlTdraw from the meeting, ibid. her resolute
answer ro a harsh propolsal of Q. Elizabeth, 147. avoids
any farther progrels in the inquiry, ibid. is enraged at the
proceedings, and proposes defreerare measfres, 143, 149.
spreads chimerical conjeclures with that view, T49, pro-
puses a divorce from Bothwell, rSz. is influeiced by the
D. of Norfolk's schemes, 153. exchanges many letters
and love-tokens with him, 154. contents to proporals
from the Erglilh nobles, s17. their views in this tranll-
.tiion, 57, 158. a rebellion by her adherents againlt Q -
Eliz.!beti, 16t. is removed to Coventry, 163. Q Eliza-
beti thinks of dslivering her up to the Regent, 165. this
projec how difippointed, x66. accession of several to her
party after the murder of the Regent, 173, 174. the en-
deavour to fitment a w.ir .vith England, ibid. her autho-ity
proclaimed at Liolithow, ibid. her parties defeated by the
new Regent, 177, 17'. lie anfivers propolals by Q. Eliza-
beth, 179. attrnlpts in vain toget foreign alli(tnce, ilb. 18c.
appoints commiflioncis to frame a treaty for her liberation,
181. this proving fruitless, the is more (tritly confined,
182. the invalidity of her resignation declared in a par-
liament held by her adherents, 187. aft of parliament in
England to curb her and her party, g19. fle looks for
protection from theKing of Spain, 19g. is denied the
privilege of an ambafljdor at the Court of England, 198.
is more clofcly confined and watched, ibid. proceedings
agnlinf her in England, zox. her interest neglcCted by the
French, o02. is hurt by tile mafaclre .t Paris, zo3, zo4.
her adherents divided into two factions, 2 13. one of then
joins with Morton the Regent, 215. review of the charac-
ters of her adherents and opponents, 218, 219. her for-
lorn situation, 219. is carried to Buxton Well,, 27.o
loses several of her friends by death, a2I. fends a letter
and presents to her son, z38. her meflinger, why dif-
miffed without Iceing him, ibid. her uneasiness at his
confincmcnt by the Ruthven conspirators, 265. com-

plailns

begs her interceation for tihe King her fin, ibid. '"hnk..
morton's conspiracy in her ivour, 279z-.1. a truitlels
negotiaion wit Q lith, Q8hC. is a!armed at an auro
ciation in defence of Q2 Eliz.beth, X7. is committed to
more severe keepers, 28, betrayed by Lord Gray the
Scotch amhb.lifdor, 2a9, zo. a itatute for the preferva-
tion of Q(Elizabeth proves fat.r to her, 94.. is mn(lre
rigorously treated, 195. her complainits to (Q.Eli2aberd.
difreglrded, ato6 is, by the French ambafgidr"'s interest,
removed to 'uthbury, ihid. is undutitilly treated by th,
King her son, ibid. aq7. her piliiunaie complaint to the
Frenrch anmbaifdo(r on r;ht occaiion, illid. threatens Lt
disinherit him, ibid. fIveral difcoveris alleged againfi hct,
314, 31g. file is g w.ltded with unuila' vigilance, 316.
lcer dameftics, papers, e&. are seized, ibid. the is orn-
veyed to Frthecingay Caflle, 31-. icliberation concern-
ing the method of pronce,:ing ;igaillt hrr, 31S, 31o. i
fuipicious of poison or private mnudr., 319. vindicat.i
helfelf to the D. of Guifk, ihid. the commillioners t>:
trying her arrive at Forlheringay Cafile, ibid. her 'piritv.l
fpcch when tefufing to plead, p,.o. is at length prevailcJ
on, 321. ihe protelts againill the authoriry of the coutr,
ibid. the accusation g.ainIt lher, ibid. her defence, 3z2---
324. her fentcnce, 324. inregilaritics in her trial, 321.
her 'entence is conlirtred by P'arliament, 326. who dJ.
mand the execution of it, 3Z7. France interpol'es feebly
in her behalf, 329. the iertence against her publifli',;,
311. Ihe is treated with the utmost rigour, 331. her l;il
requeif to Q. Elliabeth, ibid. rel'ues the nlliftince of a
Protestant Bishop or Dean, ibid. artifices uv.f to infl.nme
the people sgainft her, 314. her behaviour at her death,
337 -34t. sentiments of hitolitns concerning her, 3 .
her charnaer, 341, 341. her perlbn described, 341. i'
buried firi at Pctetborougl, and »ftertwaid In Weit-
inilter Abbey, 344. lettert fom her, Append. iii. :65.
ay3. I's4. her will, App. 337. objectons agrlint her l y
Walsingham, App. 69). vwhpt coufC to be taken witri
her, ibid. a Difllttationon the genuincneaf of her letters
to Bnthwel- - ill. 10'

Manemrll, Lord, arrive from Spain, and prepares forces to

join the Spaniardsl, . 357. his followers dlfpetfed, he is
wcn Orti(o - S

AI'i1V

Metivilis sent by the F'rench King to observe the motions of

the Queen Regent and her advcrfaries, i. 90o. sent to
make up a differelnce between Elizabeth and Mary, 305.
and brings about an appearance offrictidfhip between thlnn,
ibid. is sent to inlobtr Qt Elizabeth of the birth of K.
James VI. ii. ?.7. puts a ietter into the Q!een's hand
againlt her marriage with lotliwell, 71. is forced to lly
from court, 72. advises K. James to moderate mneafures
upon his efcapc form the Rutliven cotfpirators · z68

-- hMr. Andrew, a clergyman, his cllaraier, ii. ~24.

zealously nppofes cpilcopacy, ibid. declines the civi jurif-
dicion in ecclcfialtical matters, 274.; is forced to fly into
England to avoid persecution - 275

AMtlwv;li, Mr. James, niniftcr of Anftruther, his'encomium

on the eloquence of Knox the reformer - ii. 56z

- .. Sir Robert, sent by K. James to intercede with Q.

Elizabeth for Q Mary while, under sentence, ii. 313. a
memorial of his to the King, Appendix . iii. 361

---- .MaRcr of the houlehold to Q. Mary, takes his last

Ifirwell of her, ii. 3'9. her parting fpeccil to him ibid.

ililidray, Sir Walter, sent by Q.Elizabeth with proposals

to QMary - - ii. t78
Meliuc, Bishop of Valence, employed by the French to con-

clude a peace with England and Scotland, i. 217. tetms
agreed to by'him - 227- 30 '

AMsntgmtroy appointed Archbishop of Glrfgow, ii. a56. is

rcftfed and excommnunicated by the General Assembly for
his immoral life - - ibid.

M lstsiwreny, Conlaibleof France, endeavours to prevent the

Dauphtn'id marriage stith (QaMnry, i. r55. his prudent
advice.to Henry 11. ibid, makes a lender app»rarnce in
I.vourrQ. Mary - - ii. tot

.l'a'ort, Earl of, his irresolute conduts as to the Refornm-

ation, i. nso. accompanies Q.Mary in a progress to the
north, z21. instigates )Darnly to be avenged of Rizio,
ii. 9. taket the direction of that enterprifl, i. ibl ad-
mitted ilto the. Qeen's presence, who pronifes himn a
p.lrdon,., j6 is forced to fly into Eiigllnd, ibid. obtains
his pardon on', othwell's interceflion, .14. feiaes a calket
with letters from Q.Mary to-Bothwell, 'l9. he-is hy
(Q- Elizabeth's interposition, in favour with the Kings
party, este. thbemnrdor of the Regent, 17i. appointed
one of tlhecommniflieonci to treat with theaieco' pirty,

Is1.

r81. his demands fruflrate the meeting, ibid. I82. ;s en.
tirely influenced by the Court of England, 189. com-
mands the' King's forces at Leith, 195. has fTeeral Ikir-
miihes with the Queen's foices, 199. closely beliegec
Edinburgh, and commits great cruelties, ibid. a fulpelfion
procured by the English and French ambassadors, 200oo.
a coalition of parties prevented by him, zo6. he is.chofen
Regent, 207. his mcrctnary ingratitude to the Eirl of
*Northumberland, ibid. obtains the temporalities of the
Archbiflropric of St. Adieds, 20zo. labours to procure a
peace between the two parties, axz. attempts il vain to
gain kMaitland and Kirkaldy, 14 .makes a treaty with
Chatelhe.ault and H.intly, aii. gers poffeflion of tlhe
Castle ot Edinburgh, 2S. his level ty to Kirkaldy and his
brother, 219. his adimniftralio', becomes odious, z2l.
.onnives at the difte of tne.cleig, Zz4. he irritates the
nobl.s, 225. Aigyll and Athol lefufe to answer his Cfun.
rons, ibid. makes a vain attempt against Lord Claud Ha.
milton, zz6. dicov. rs the designs of the nobles againif
him, and prupo(es to elign his ollice, 228, 139. his re-
*ignation accepted by the'King gives univerfla joy, 229
z30. obtains an approbation of his conductA and a par,
don in ample form, .Z30. conitinues to watth the Ila-
tlons of his adversaries, z23 . is torced to lirrender rile
Cafle of Edinburgh, ibid. resumes his authority, 2,.S.
gains the Caitle of Stirling, and a fRai in the Privy Conn-
cil, ibid. procutre a roeeti.,g of the Prrliamcit at Stirling,
ibid. his fecusity ratified in it, ibid. fuict are rtired tor
and againit him, 1 5. he'is reconclel to his adverCari,
by the interceflion of Q:EliZabeth, ibid.' is fCfpected of
foul ply at an entertainment at his own houfi:, 36. his
illegal proceedingsasainit the fanily of iHmilt,)n, 237.
the Klng's' ew favourites undernine hin, 241, 240. he
cndeavours to prevent them, z42. QE lilizaber inteir',-
'poses in his favour, z44. is charged with being accei-
fary to the late Kiog's..death, 145' he i confineJ In dif.
ferent prlfons, 246. sdifcdurages an atteijht 't rescue hinm,
247. all his friends a'r turned out of u,ticer 2io. he is
tried ind condetnned, 5il. his tcfilutc calm ieha"inul a11
coniflhlon before and at his death, ibid. '21. his bldy ic
trteted with igsnominy - '

- .5

MAIrraj, Earloa, late Prlor of St. Andrtew,; goe with a

.:;,. ii' ifu). i f'j rih i'ail. n Hundy, 1. 1. aS. l bY.l ats ill

". :'··~rs
J~pun 1 * ** *;

and courage ie gains a complete victory, 284, Iis grant
is confirmed by Parliament, -94. cabals against him by
L.ennox and Darnly, 3I3. his aversion to Darnly and other
Court favourites, 318. calls Bothwell to fland a trial, 319.
hisfreafons for oppofng Darnly's marriage with the Qucen,
ibid. hit and his aTfociates. are made the dupes of Q Eliz-
abhetl's policy, 32z. concerts to frize Darnly and carry
him to England, 3,3. this prevented by the Queen, ibid.
voids aliaflination intended him by Darnly, 324, 3z5,
i.G6. evidences of thele plots, 3j4. the Qcen's valrals ale
ct .sl'to arms againit him, 325. he is fulmmoned to ap-
pear before her, 326. is, again luinmoned and outlawed on
his non-appearance, 32S. is forced to fly with his aafo-
ciares into Argylefhire, 329. they are iilterceded fbr by Q.
Elizabeth, ibid. are piurlued by the Queen, and obliged
to fly into Ex;.land, 331. they meet with unexpeócd ill.
treatment from' Q.:'EIzaLbth, 332. courts Rizio to inter-
ccde with the Queen for him, ii. 2. many of his old friends
lolicit for him, ibid. 3. the Queen's favour how intercepted,.
4, 5. a Parliament is called to attaint them, 6, 7. this how
prevented, ibid. hie and his associates arriveat Edinburgh,i 5.
are graciotifly received by the King and QEeen, ibid. are
alarmed a the Queen'sefcape, but soon reconciled to her, 1 6.
he is appointed Regent during the minority of K.James VI.
Joo. his har'th behaviour in avifit to the Queen, loz. the
success of his wife adminillration 10o3. procures many of
the Queen's'party to join him, ibid. 104, gets the places of
fi'engtl into his hands, xo4, 105. his officeof Regent con-
firmed by Parliament, ibid. his fvere and haugh$y beha,
viour diliftls several, so6. his adherents in grl.;t con-
flernation at the' Q.ecn's escape from Lochlevin, 108.
iis prudcnt' conduat on that occasion, 1og. defqats the
Qjeent' ariny at Langfide, :l2z. he improves this victory,
324. his lenity to the prisoners, ibid. he calls a Parlias
nment, 127. i called upon by Q Elizaheth to vindicate
hlis condu&, ibid. he arriyest at York, 30. complaints of
the Queenl's ; 'sommifliondes 'against hhir, i3a lihe behavea
wi thi'reat refrve ni .this occasion, 133. initrgucl with
tlec Vuke of.Norfol , 135. his 3enianc ('rvm the Bniilh
conmliffoners, 13g rj6. anrwcrs to tbo. copliiitpsog
the Qeen's comnmirhfipners yithut touching on tA.ur-

1 W " ,rces' tq, hbconyf l's ig1- to
Wcahioinietr, 13. it affetiwonatstlyt tmdv. by O. s -oth

tbothy

abeth, which offends Q. Mary, 140. is prevailed on by
Elizabeth to accuse Mary of the murder, 142. produces
his evidences, 145. is difmifled by Q. Elizabeth without
approving or condemning his conduc, 148. his party is
secretly supported by her, 149. returns to Scotland, and
by his vigorous conduct breaks the Queen's party, 150.
he receives proposals both from Q. Elizabeth and Q.
Mary, 152. he disappoints Norfolk, 158, 159. an ac-
count of his murder, x66, 167. his character, 168. his
death much lamented by Q.Elizabeth and the King's
party, 169. much anarchy the consequence of it, 170.
his heir murdered by the Earl of Huntly, iii. 4. part of a
letter of his, Appendix - - iii.z86

N

Naue, Secretary to Q Mary, is sent by her with a letter

and presents to her son, ii. z38. why difmifled without
feeing him, ibid. is sent with offers of humble resignation
to Q Elizabeth, 287. is seized and sent prisoner to Lon-
don, 317. is produced an evidence against her 325

Newtr discovers and prevents Parry's design to murder QL

Elizabeth - - - ii. 294
Nobles, their extensive power, i. zo, zi. become turbulent

and formidable, a2. their power greater in Scotland than
in any other kingddm, 24. the causes of this, 24-3z.
their power of long duration, 36, 37. it becomes into-
lerable to the Princes, ibid. they are humbled in France
and England, ibid. but continue vigorous in Scotland, 38.
discords among them encouraged, ibid. their jurifdiflion
circumscribcd, 40. are greatly mortified by K. JamesV.
64-67. are disappointed in a scheme to shew their rc-
fentment, 70. refuse to attend the King into England,
ibid. they s'ize the revenues of the church, 236. refuse
to part with them to the reformed clergy, 237, 238.
diflenfions among them, 275, 276. a convention of them
approve the Q.een's marriage to Darnly, 310. several of
them recommend Bothwell as a hulband to her, ii. 68,
69. a trange combination of them on this occasion, 69,
70. a body of them associate against her and Bothwell, 79.
a party of them favours the Queen, 89. they are much
dispirited by the good conduct of Murray, 103, lo.
they arc much provoked by Morton the Regent,' SS.

think

think of redress from the King, 226. infuse suspicion
of the Regent's power into him, 227. a meeting of them
by him, 229. a party of them conspire against the King's
favourites, 259. they seize his person and drive them
oft, 260; 261. their negle&t of, and ingratitude to the
clergy, 306. the King attempts to reconcile their feuds
and unite them, 350. See Lords.

Norrfolk, Duke of, appointed a commissioner to hear the

cause between Queen Mary and her accusers, ii. 130.
forms a fcberre of mounting the throne of Scotland, 133,
134. intrigues with the Regent and Maitland with that
view, ibid. 135. he represents the demands of the Scots
to Q, Elizabeth, 136, 137. his farther negotiations with
refpe& to Q.Mary, 153, 154. endeavours to conceal
his design from Q Elizabeth, 154. is imposed on by the
artifice of the Regent, ibid. 155. gets the consent of
many of the Engliih nobles, 156. his proje& approved at
foreign courts, 157. isdifcovered and defeated by Q.Eliz-
abeth, 159, 16o. flies to Norfolk, 160. he surrenders on
a second summons, and is lent prisoner to the Tower,
ibid. is set at liberty, and continues his intrigues with
Q Mary, 194. is betrayed by his secretary, ibid. is seized
with his dependants, and accused by them, 196. is exe-
cuted - 97
NIortbrmherland, Earl of, attempts a rebellion in favourof

Q Mary, ii. 161. his scheme defeated, 162, 163. he is
seized by the Regent, 164. is delivered up to the go-
vernor of Berwick, and put to death at York ii. 207

NAottingham, Countess of, bome account of the trarafalion
conceWling the Earl of Essex's ring - iii. 8z

0
Ol7aiians, their inffitution and extensive powers, iii. 21.

they undermine the King's minifiers, 22. become odious,
and a combination is formed againit them, ibid. being
Iflit into factions, and envied by the courtiers, they
telign their commission - -
Ogil.vie, Lord, has a scuffle with Sir John Gordon in thl

flreets of Edinburgh - i. 280

Oliphant, Matter of, joins the Ruthven conspirators ii. 259
Orange, Prince of, fends an agent into Scotland, ii. 249,
his iliftrudlions, ibid, is a(liflinated - a9

vUL. in. c' oo ' D'Oi2/l

D'Oyfid, commnidner of the French troops in Scotland,'ee-..

deavours to promote a war with England, i. 153. 'hi
'design fuftrated, i54. the number of troops under his
command, 179. instigates the Queen Regent to violent
mealures against the Reformers, ibid. is sent by Q. Mary
to demand a fife-conduCt from QL Elizabeth, during her
voyage to Scotland - -
- 256

P
Paij7ey, Abbot of, arrives in Scotland, i. 0oo. creates a £us-

picion of the Earl of Lennox in the Earl of Arran, Re-
gent, ibid. is made Archbilhop of St. Andrews . r6

Paris, the maflacre of, ii. 2o2, zo3. rejoicings of the Pop fl

party on account of it, ibid. the coniternation and horror
of the Protestants - -04.
Parliament, the nature of their original constitution, i. 75

78. particularly that of Scotland, 7S-- z. 31. a Parlia-
ment, held on an extraordinary occalion, 231. adifficulty
started and answered, 1z3. their proceedings with regard
to religion, 233, c34. condemn the popifi and approve
the reformed doctrines, 235. several other regulations of
the fame tendency, ibid. 236. their validity called in
question, 137. exceed their powers, z3B. their procecd-
ings laid before the King and Qcen, ibid. 239. a Parlia.
nment in favour of Bothwell, ii. 63. passes an at inrr fa-
vour of the Reformation, 64, 65. confirm, thq procc:-
inga of the confederates, xo4. Parliaments held both by the
King's and Qeen's parties, 187. another of the Queen's
adherents, ibid. attaint upwards of aoo of their opponents,
189. a Parliament at Stirling by the King's parly, ibid,
surprised. by the Queen's adherents, j go. another at Stir-
ling, 134. one at Edinburgh, 2.4z. and on the King's
being of age, 350, 351. several new laws madethere,.354
-354. the leffcr Barons admitted into Parliament 3 54
Pairry, Uotor, undertakes to murder Q._Eliabeth, ii, 491.

is encoumaged by and gtts absolution .frwm the Pope, z94.
his design how prevented, ibid. is executed. ibid.
'arsons, a Jcfuit, publilhes a book in favour,.of tbe Infanta
of Spain's right of fucce(fion to tleCirown.fEnnallnd

'; s.~ ,, .i - :jii. zo

Paf'ruitada.s and PiOures, accusing Bothwell of Darnlysr mur-
de i. 55s56, 63.'a law iade against them '65

.Pitttni.

Patefn, William, his account of the Scottih ancient mili-

tary discipline ' - - i. 120, IX

Paurt, Sir Amias, is aplpointed one of Q_ Marys keepers,

ii. zaS, his rigid severity to her, 295, 296. discovert her
foreign correfpondenc, 31,3. his rude treatment of her,
33a. refules to be concerned in privatelyaflaflinating her,
ibid. a letter from him, Appendix - iii. 346
Selle/, BilJop of Amiens, is appointed to support the

popiih interest in Scotland, i. 198. drives the Queen Re-
gent to violent measures against the Protestants ibid. 199

Perth, an infurreeion of the Reformers there againfi the

papists, i. 174, 175. its inhabitants are severely treated by
the Q.een Regent, 177. a French garrison placed there,
17S. is besieged and taken by the Protestants, 183. a
great tumult there on account of Gowrie's conspiracy

iii. 53

Philip II. of Spain, married to Mary Queen of England,

i. 137. reinforces his army with her troops, r15. his
great power, ii. 298. joins in the holy league, 299. e-
solves to invade and conquer England, 356. his prepar.
ations for it dilatory, 360. his design frustrated, ibid.
"meditates an invasion of England through Scotland, 362.
intrigues with some Scoitilh Lords with that view, ibid.
remits money'to them - iii. 16

Piniy, the battle of - - i. rx9
Pius V. Pope, exconmmunicates Q. Elizabeth, deprives:her

of her kingdom, and absolves her fubjecs - ii. 176

Pol/y, one of'Babington's conspirators against Q.Elizabeth,

i. -31xr discovers the plot - - 312
Polrot, a frantic zealot, aflaffinates the Duile of Gusie at'the

siege of Orleans - - i. 2

Posnt, 'Ar. Robert, a min'iter, and one of the Lords os'Sef-

lfion, protests against laws opprelfive to the Church ii. z78
¢opely, where most iourifling, i. 140. vihat kind prevailed

in Scotland, ibid. ivas partly grafted on Heathenifoi, 184.
is much hurt by the Congregation, 234. their dotrlihe
condemned by Parliament, 235. the urifdidtion of their
qurts abolished, ibid. their worlhip jtrohilbltda, ibid.
attempt in vain to gain Q Mary's favour, 268. thli great
Influence of Popery '

. :
.> .

* 4
f.orr, the balance of, the rceat consequence of preserving

-it - '
*i '`"'Rg;.tg6

002, '' tfrft.ia

Prflyietrian church - governMent cRtiblio edd'ih ScotlahJ, ;.

i4z. is idnfirri'ed by Kihg Jafies VI. ' iii. $
Prtortanti, in France,' violently persecuted, i; I93, fg94.

are riodtiate on Qt Mary's arrival 'from France 263.: are
employed'by her in the adminifiration, 6'4. a scheme for
fupprefling them all over Europe, ii. 4. a league fo'med
for thatpurpofe, 299. See Rtformition.
Ran;fey, a favourite of K. James III. narrowly escapes being

hanged with his associates, i. 57. is appointed Captain of
the King's guard,' and created Earl of Bothwell, Ss. See
BotLbwell.
.Randan, Sieur de, employed by the French to negotiate a

opeace with England and Scotland, i. zz7. terms agreed on
by him - - ibid. '28
.Rlndolpb, sent to encourage the Congrcgation, i. o07. con.

gratulates Q Mary's arrival in Scotland, 264, urges the
ratification of the treaty of Edinburgh, z65. is imposed
on by Q. Mary in the affair of her marriage with Darnly,
315. sent into Scotland on the murder of Murray, ii; i7r.
interposes for Morton, z47' 248. flie from Scotland in 4Se
night, 50o. ,is sent again there, and concludes a tteaLt
with England, 308. several of his letters, App. iii. i98.

aoo. i6. i. 2Z7. zt2

Ratei: See Sufcx..
Reovmation, its progress in Scotland, 1. z. account of its

tirft preachers, ibid. is much influenced by England, 130,
13i. two remarkable instruments of promoting it, ibid.
it makes great progress, 1 37, causes contributing to pro-
rnote it, 138. its'adyanlages over popery, 139. is favourcd
by the Q.Regect, 154. an inftanceof iegard for it in Scot-
land, r 55, 56. the whole party not chargeable with Car-
dinal Beatoun's murder, 1 64. a priecf hrntforerrqbracing it,
165. the reformers violently persecuted by the Archbillop
of St. Andrews, ibid. are proteced by the Q(. R'eent,
ibid. apply in vain to the Popilh clergy, 166. a perfcct-
tion against them pulled onr by the Frendc intgret, y7p,
171. the preachera summonld befor t'he Regcit ').
they 4re deeeived and declared ctic.laws by her, r74'. ' ri-
4tous inruiTidon of t,hem at 'ert thag l 'the a(ts,

' ' d.

id. prepare to defend themselves against the Q een, 175,
176. conclude a treaty with her which fle presently
breaks, 177, 178. they rake arms against the Queei, 179,
I8o. infiR on redreeling civil as well as religious griev-
ances, 18o. the influence bs the Reformation on liberty,
ibid. they besiege and take Perth, 183. they seize Stir-
ling and Edinburgh, ibid. commit great violences on
churches and monasteries, ibid. an in(tance of their mode.
ration, 185. fix their residence at Edinburgh, 187. the
Queen prepares to attack them, ibid. make; another treaty
with her, ibid. are forced to abandon Edinburgh, &c. but
allowed the exercise of their religion, 88. demand the ex-
pulfion of the French army, ibid. are aware of their dan-
ger from France, i92. their party ihengthened, ibid. re-
monftrate against the French fortifying Leith, 197. take
arms in their own defence, 199. remonstrate again to the
Regent, 2oo. are highly incensed at her imperious answer,
ibid. oxI. by advice of a convention deprive the QOeen
Dowager of the office of Regent, 203, 204. examination of
the different principles on which it was con!ducted in dif-
ferent countries, 243. the growth of it encouraged by
parliament, i. o05, lo6. See Congregation.

Regalities, the ample jurifdiCion of - i. o2
Rtepd'ging, the privilege of, to whom belonging i. z2
.Re7ege, encouraged both by custom and law i. 38
Reventes of the church, proceedings of Parliament concern-

ing them - - i. 236
RidelpAi, an agent for the Pope at London, negotiates for

Q Miary, ii. 194. his arguments with the D. of Norfolk

ibid. 195

Rizio, DaWvid, ome account of him and his rife, i. 313, 314.

Darnly's onnetion with him, 314. his good offices
courted by Murray, ii. -. his great interest and familiarity
with the Queel:, 8. incurs the hatred of Darnly, 9. and of
the friends of the -xiled Lords, i' id. a combination formed
to murder him, Io. he is murdered in the Queen's
palace - 3, 14

Romans, invade Britain, i. z. give the earlielt accounts of the

Scots - - - ibid.

Jfi, Bilhop of, zealously promotes Queen Mary's interest at

,London, ii. -15, i96. is confined to the Tower, and
threatened with capital punfiliment, r89, 19. is ret at
liberty and banithed the kingdom, ibid, fwme letters of his,
Appendig m -_ ill, Z77. o00

003 Rubal

Ruibay, a foreigner, made keeper of the great feal of Sent-

land - - i. l 50
Rutbevcn, Lord, the nmurder of Iizio proposed to him by

Darnly, ii. 9. heads the conspirators against him, x3. his
part in that tranfa&ion, 14, 15. is admitite into the
Q.een's presence, who promises him a pardon, 15. did
not repent of it at his death 2
... created Earl of Gowrie, he and his afrociates seize
the King, and remonstrate aga;in his favourites, ii. z 5,
60o. drive them fromhim, ibid. their conduc approved iii
an assembly of the ftatns, 263. the King eftapes from
them, 267. by Arran's influence violent measures are de-
termined againm them, 269. Q. Elizabeth intercedes in
their b:half, 270. are declared guilty of high treason, 27z.
take refuge in foreign countries, ibid. are harshly treated
by (Ellzabeth, 90o. a reconciliation with har brought
Obout, 3or, 30o. return to Scotland, and are reconciled
to the King, 304.. their moderation on being ireltored ts
their eltates and honours, 305. their negle& of their friends
the Clergy - 30

- that name aboliflied by parliament, iii. 66. Scc
Gowrie.
Ruthvun raid, what - - 1. i6i

S

Sadler, Sir Ralph, his representations of the resentment of

the Scots, for the seizure of their ships by THenry VIII. i.
98. appointed a commiflioner to hear the caule between Q.
Mary and her accusers - ii. 130

Sandilands of Calder, Lord St. John, sent to lay the proceed-

ings of the Congregation Parliament before the King and
Queen in France, i. 238. is coldly received and dimifled
without a ratification by them - ibid.

Soaqge, a Spanilh officer, his decperate resolution to kill Q.

Elizabeth - ii. 310, 3 1

Scotland, its ancient hiltory fabulous, i. .. the origin of the

·Scota, ibid. their hi(tory why remarkably obrcure, 3. ofme
account of the writers of jt, 4, 5. is divided into four pe-
riods, 5, 6. a review of the third ara, 6. fotne account of
the controversy concerning its independency, 6-iz. this
the cause of great animofities and much blood hed, xI. the
dtat of Scotland when Brsce began hiii reign, 13. It be-

gill

gins to have an influence on the fate of distant nations, 8g.
influence as to the balance of plwer, 90. irate of Scotland
at the birth of Q Mary, 92. is invaded by the English,
and several places burnt and plundered, o105, 06. much
alienated from the English, ibid. 107. a peace concluded
between England, France, and Scotlond, aio. computa-
tion of damages done by the Englill in Scotland, 109. I l.
a new breach with England, ji6. is invaded by a great
Englihl army, rIS. the Scots are deftated with great
slaughter, 119, 120. their manner of fighting at that
time, IoC, 11., a marriage agreed of their young Queen
and the Dauphin of Flance, 1X3, 124. they soon repent
this itep, 129. a fray at Edinburgh rccafions their utter
aversion to the French, z12. this inladmcd by another in-
cident, 150, 151. they decline a war with England, 152.
fend repreecntatives to witnefr Q Mary's mqarriage, 156.
their care as to the marriage articles, ibid. they refuse con-
sent to the demands of the French, 151). four of their de-
puties fufipcted to be poisoned, ibid. which muchincreafes
the aversion, 160. grant the Crown matrimonial to the
Dauphin, ibid. they apply to the English for assistance
againit the French, 207. 212. an English fleet arrives for
that purpose, 2zi . conclude a peace with England alid re-
ceive an English army, 219. all parties agree in detesting
the French; 223. a treaty between England, France, and
Scotland, 227, zzi. both Englilh and French armies leave
Scotland, 23I. they rejoice much at the death of the
young King of France, 242. fend to invite the Queen to
Scotland, 247. reject proposals of an amba/fador from
France, 249. fate of Scotland on Q.Mary's return from
France, 259. great zeal of the nation againtf Popery, z6z.
the Scots brought into contempt by Q. Mary's conduct,
ii. 79. in a mifcrable condition after the murder of Murray
theRegent, g88. fate of faaions at that tinte in it, ibid.
y89. a league concluded between Scotland and England,
3o8. a view ofthe revolutions of Scotland (ince the accef-
son of James VI. iii. 89- 03. of the policy of the tate,
gc.-96. and of the clurlc, 96, 97. of the genius and
tafie as to learning - - 97-'I9
Scott of iucclcugh enters and ravages England after the mur-

der of Murray the Regent, ii 170. the delign of this, 173

Stroop, .ord, sent to condole with, and watch Q, Mary on
hpr arrival in England, ii, 119. h e is committed to his

cuftodly

cul-ody at Bolton cattle, zs5. why his fidelity is diflruiled,
and the Queen removed - - r39
Seffaw, Lords and Court of, by whom filft appinted, i. 4i. the

President and one half of their number of the Clergy 14.3

Saton, Lord, affiRts the QRegent in defending Leith, i. 210
Sirew/bury, Earl of, the charge of Q. Mary's person com.

mitted to him, ii. 139. why removed from that office,
S88. is appointed to fee the lentence against her executed,
337. letter from him and the Earl of Kent concerning her
death, Appendix - - iii. 363
Sinclair, Bilhop of Ross, a zealous Papif, concurs, as Prefi-

dent of the Sefion, in acquitting Knox of a charge of
treason i. 297
Scmrrfet, Duke of, enters Scotland with a powerful army, i.

a 8. is reduced to a very critical situation, ibid. defeats
the Scots with great slaughter, 19. this vicory why of
little advantage, iaz. cabals against him at the court
of England force him to return, Iaz. is ruined by his
enemies - - i26
Spain, great warlike preparations there, ii. 356, 357. See

Armado. The Infanta of, set up as candidate for the
crown of England - - iii. 20
Spatnii ambassadors ordered to leave England, for intriguing

in favour of QeenMary - ii. 189. 38%
rprot, his discoveries concerning Gowrie's conspiracy, iii.

55-58. is executed - 58
Stewart, James, Prior of St. Andrews, is appointed to carry

the crown matrimonial to the Dauphin of France, i. 163.
See S:. A.ndrews.

_ Efme, Lord Aubigne, his arrival in Scotland, ii.
240. See Arbigny.

Captain James, his charater, ii. 240. becomes a

favourite of King James, 241. accuses Morton of the
murder of the late King, 245. is created Earl of Arran.
See Arran.

·--- Col. William, commanderof the King's guard, con.

tributes to his escape from the Ruthyen conspirators, ii.
267. ftizes the Earl of Cowrie -- 76
---- Francis, created Earl of Bothwell, ii. 363. joins in

a treafonahle corrcfpondence with the Popifi Lords, ibid.
See Botkr;l,.
-- al! of that name combine in opposing the Chancellor,

iii. to
3 .Stirlit

Stirling seized by the Reformers, i. r83. a Parliament there

by the King's party, ii. 189. is surprised by the Queen's
adherents, and a great fray ensues. . ibid. 19o
Strozzi, Leon, commands a body of French sent into Scotr

land, i. la6. reduces and-demolilhes the castle ps St. Aon
drewr, ibid. See France,

S&cerion, a remarkable statute concerning it i. 1 r7
Suberintte:dents proposed in the Church of Scotland, i. z45.

their business - - ibid.
Suffex, Earl 9f, one.of the commifloners to hear the cautf

between Q. Mary and her accusers, ii. 3o.. affemblea a
powerful army on the borders, 172. he and Scroop enter,
and ravage Scotland - ._ 173

T

i'x upon land first proposed in Scotland i. 15
7Trokmortcn, Sir Nicholas, lent ambassador extraordinary

from Q Elizabeth, to oppose Q.Mary's. marriage with
Darnly,,i. 317, 38. his interceflion for the exiled lords Is
much regarded, ii. 2, 3. his enmity to Cecil, 2. is ent to
.neotiate Q; Mary's liberation, 91. is refused access to
hei ;by the confederates, 92. some letters of his, Appendix,

iii. 41, 242. 25.. . 256. 59,,260, 26I

* 'l

_ Francis, is charged with a conspiracy against Q_

Elizabeth, ii. z79. at firit he denies, but afterwards son-
fefes it, ibid. z8o. rcflections on his confellionn Ibid.
is executed - - 282
icbbournrc designs to affalinate Q4Elizabeth ii. 311
Treafn, perfors guilty of it, tried aftcr their death by the law

o' Scotland - - iii. 56, 57

., - ., . U .

rllmort, a foreigner, made comptroller of Scotland, i.. l5
U#ioi ps Scotland and England, the advantages of iii. 94

; .*, ,,,"

* ,

^ - ,'1 , ' .' .

YWallace, Sir William, bravely afTerted the liberty of his
* country,; *i :;. ..(. · *- ' 1 1. xI
Wayingbamr, secretary to Q. Elizabetl, sent ambaffidor to

King James VI. ii. 271. returns without success, ibid.

mnakes

nakes a favourable report to her concerring Jimes, t2t.
intcrpofea il faRvour of %_ Mary, Z87. discovert Rabing-
tonts'confpitacy, '31z. why a dtermined aud 'nvetate
Onciy to MQ Mary, 3a6. a heeter from him, Appendix,

iii. 3l»

WYarr?,ick, Earl of, succeeds Somerset in the government of

England - i. iz6

Wtfinirkflte, the conferences concerning Q.Mary thenr ii. 38
fflmorliand, Earl of, attempts a rebellion in favour of QO

Mary, ii. 6r . hs schemes discovered and defeated, i63;
164. he efcapet to the Netherlands - ibid.

Wr'itborn, the Prior.of, imprisoned for celebrating mass i. a95
.Yillox, a minister, declares for relitlance and deprivation of

tyrannical rulers, i. zoz. is called to attend the QDowa-
ger on,her death-bed' - -

.

F'yihart, George, his illegal execution revenged i. I r
1Ftcreraft, vigorqufl prosecuted by K. James VI. in Scot-

land ii. i3
Wotton, dean of Canterbury, employed to negotiate a peace

with France - . - i. z27
_--- Sir Edward, sent by Q:Elizabeth into Scotland, ii.
30.o. fl is arafter, ibid. soon gets into high favour witli
K. James, ibid. procures a league between the two king-
donms, ibid. 30o. undermines Arran's power, 302, 303.
forms'a plot on King James,' *nd forced to withdraw with-
out ttking kalve, *, -:

. 303i'30,4
tork, the conferences there ontening Q. Mary If. 3$

z .''

Zoucl'e, Lord, Cent ambaffTdor by Q. 1Elizbeth to remonfrate

againlt K.James's lenity to th'e Popish lords, iii. 14. hli
treaherv on that occafioa -., 1$

BRITANNICVM
