/'

THE

HISTORY

S C T A
O DS

oSCOTLAND..
VOL. I,

# Published by the same Author,

Publijhed by the J'ime Author,

i. Ip
H E H ISTORY of the REIGN ofthe

1 EMPEROR CHARLES V. with a View

of the Progress of Society in Europe, from the
Subversion of the Roman Empire, to the Begin-
ning of the Sixteenth Century. In three Vo-
luines, Quarto.

*,* Another Edition in 4 Vols. 8vo.

2. THE HISTORY OF AMERICA, Vols. I,
iand II. Quarto.

**' Another Edition in 3 Vols. 8vo.

iilli~~~i~~jJJ~~t((11 ~ IV/1l1,
I ________~~~~~~~~

K;~iiiI "I'I
/ ;.. .,

THE
HISTO R Y

OF

S C O T L A N D
SCOTLAND

DURING THE REIGNS OF
QUEEN MARY and of KING JAMES VI.

TILL
His AccEssION to the Crown of ENGLAND.

WITH A
REVIEW of the SCOTTISH HISTORY previous to that Period;

And an APPENDIX COntaining ORIGINAL PAPERS.

IN TWO V OL U M ES.
By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.

PRINCIPAL OF THI U1NI I RSITY OF EDNI N I/iT , AND
HIStTORIOGRAI'HIER r() H11S MAJI-STY FOR SCOTLANIN)

V 0 LI EU M 1.
TIlE ELEVENTH EDITION,

WITH EMENDATIIONS ANI) ADDITIONS.

L O N I) O N:
PRINTED FOR T. CADELL, IN TIIE STRAND.

M I)CC LXXX VII.

# PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.

P R E F A C E

TO THE
F I R S T EDITION.

Deliver this book to the world with all the
diffidence and anxiety natural to an Author

on publiihing his first performance. The time
I have employed, arid the pains I have taken,
in order to render it worthy of the public ap-
probation, it is, perhaps, prudent to conceal,
until it be known whether that approbation
ihall ever be bellowed upon it.

BUT as I have departed, in many inflances,

from former historians, as I have placed faCts
in a different light, and have drawn characters
with new colours, I ought to account for this
condud to my readers; and to produce the evi-
dence, on which, at the diflance of two cen-
turies, I prefulme to contradlic the teflimony of
less remote, or even of contemporary hiflo-
rians.

TIE tranfacions in Mary's reign gave rife to

two parties, which were animated againfl each
other with the fiercest political hatred, embit-
tered by religious zeal. Each of there pro-

VOL .
I. (al ced

duced historians of confidcrable micrl, who
adoptcd all their fcntiments, and defended all
their at.ioris. Truth was not the iole object
of tlelfc authors. llinded by prejudice;, and
heated by the part which they' thlcmiilvcs had
adted in tlie Icencs they delcribc, tlhey wrote
all apology for a iitdion, rather than the hit-
tory of their country. Succeeding Hifitorians
have followed these guides alniol implicitly,
and have repeated their errors and milreprc-
lentations. But as the fame paflions which
inflamed parties in that age have dclccnded to
their polieritv; as alinofi every event in Mary's
reign has become the objec of doubt or of
di!iptc; the eager spirit of controversy Loon
ditcovcred, that without Iome evidence more
authentic and more impartial than that of Iluch
1Hifiorians, none of the points in question could
be decided with certainty. Records have there-
fore been learchcd, original papers have been
produced, and public archives, as well as the
rcpofitories of private men, have ben raniack-
cd by the zeal and curiosity of writers of dif-
ferent partics. The attention of Cecil to col-
let whatever related to tllat period, in which
ic adctcd io conipicuous a pIart, liatli provided
lich an irmnclfe flore of origiial al)l'c ftr
illfltrarting this part of the I'ngllifh l.11i Scot-
ti fh hifiory, a are all I s

II linu lliliciellt to fltisfy

tle utnioil avidity ollan Anltiquarian. 'Sir l'lo-
bert Cotton (wliole library is now the prlo-
pc]rty of the Ptbll)ic) mlade great anl d valiable
.Jdclitioi:s to Cecil's collctlion; alld friom tliis

Il.lgn -

magazine, Digges, the compilers of tle Cab-
bala, Anderson, Keith, Haynes, Forbcs, have
drawn most of the papers which they have
printed. No I-iflory of Scotland, that merits
any degree of attention, has appeared fl1ce
these collections were publlilhed. 13y conIfilt-
ing them, I have been enabled, in many in-
itances, to correLt the ilaccuracies of former
Historians, to avoid their millakcs, and to de-
tec their milreplrciletations.

BUT many important papers lhave cfcaped

the notice of thole indultlious Collcdorls, and
after all they have produced to light, much
still remained in darkness, unoblerved or un-
published. It was my duty to search for thcll,
and I found this unpleasant talk attended witl
considerable utility.

TIlE library of the Faculty of Advocates

at Edinburgh, contains not only a large col-
lection of original papers relating to the afIhilrs
of Scotland, )but copies of others no leis curious,
which have been preserved by Sir Robert
Cotton, or are extant in the Public Olsices in
Englalnd. Of all tliefe the Curators of that
library were plcated to allow me tlhe perusal.

TIiouci the Britifhl Musc:um be not yet

opecn to thle Public, 1)r. 13irch, wl iofc obli-
ging dilfolition is well known, procured ime
acce's to that noble collclion, whlich is worthy
the magniicence of a great and polillled nation.

L 2 TlLT.,r

THAT vast and curious collection of papers

relating to the reign of Elizabeth, which was
made by Dr. Sorbes, and of which he publish-
ed only two volumes, having been purchased
lince his death, by the Lord Viicount Royfton,
his Lordship was so good as to allow me the
ife of fouricen volumes in quarto, containing
that part of them which is connected with my
fu l)jet.

SIR Alexander Dick communicated to me a

very valuable collecion of original papers, in
two large volumes. They relate chiefly to the
reign of James. Many of them are marked
with Archbishop Spotifwood's hand; and it
appears from several passages in his history,
that he had perused them with great attention.

MR. Calderwood, an eminent Presbyterian

Clergyman of the last century, compiled an
History of Scotland from the beginning of the
reign of James V. to the death of James VI.
in fix large volumes: wherein he has inserted
many papers of consequence, which are no
where else to be found. This Hiflory has not
been published, but a copy of it, which still
remains in manuscript in the pofleffion of the
church of Scotland, was put into my hands by
mny worthy friend the Reverend DodorGcorge
AVifiart, principal Clerk of the church.

SIR David Dalrymple not only communi-
cated to me the papers which he has collecded

relating

relating to Gowrie's conspiracy; but, by ex-
plaining to me his sentiments with regard to
that problematical pafrage in the Scottish hifto-
ry, has enabled me to place that tranfadion in
a light which dispels much of the darkness
and confusion in which it has been hitherto
involved.

MR. Goodall, though he knew my senti-

ments with regard to the conduc and charac-
ter of Queen Mary to be extremely different
from his own, communicated to me a volume
of manuscripts in his possession, which con-
tains a great number of valuable papers copied
from the originals in the Cottonian Library
and Paper Office, by the late Reverend Mr.
Crawford, Regius Professor of Church History
in the university of Edinburgh. I likewise re-
ceived from him the original Register of let-
ters kept by the Regent Lennox during his
adminifiration.

I HAVE consulted all there papers, as far as

I thought they could be of any use towards
illustrating that period of which I write the
history. With what fiicccls I have employed
them to confirm what was already known, to
ascertain what was dubious, or to determine
what was controverted, the Public mult judge.

I MIGHT easily have drawn, fiom the dif-

ferent repositorics to which I had accels, as
many lapers as would havc rcndercd my Appen-

dix

dix equal in size to the most bulky collectionr
of my predecessors. But I have satisfied my-
self with publishing a few of the most curious
among them, to which I found it necessary
to appeal as vouchers for my own veracity.
None of thele, as far as I can recollect, ever
appeared in any former collecion.

I II.AVE added a Critical DjFirtation con-

ccrnzizr the lulrdteri o' K(ing Henry, and the ge-
ninciicfs of the .teen's letters to Bofthwell. The
fadts and oblervations which relate to Mary's
letters, I owe to my frieid Mr. John David-
son, one of the Clerks to the Signet, who hath
examined this point with his usual acuteness
and indufiry.

# PREFACE TO THE ELEVENTH EDITION.

PR E F A CE

TO THE
ELEVENTH EDITION.

T is now twenty-ciliht years since I pub-
lifhed the History of Scotland. During

that time I have been favoured by my friends
with fcveral remarks upon it; and various
ftridures have been made by perlons, who
entertained sentiments different from mine,
with refpcdc to the tranlfations in the reign
of Queen Mary. From whatever quarter in-
formaltion came, in whatever mode it has been
communicated, I have conlidcrcd it calmly
and with attention. Wherever I perceived
that I had erred, cithcr in relating cvents, or
in (Idlincatilg clralctclrs v,

I wv, ithout hle-

litation, corrected thole crro'rs. W\'llclrcvcr
amll satisfied that mly original; ideas were jul:t
and lwcll-foillcd, I adh-re to thlcin; and reCi-
ing ll)onl their coniollrmity to evidellce allready
pIotlIIccd, I eCnter illto no d ilcutlion or colltro-
v\crljy ill order to illpport tlcm. \\herever
tiic o1pportunity of conilultilig original palpers

cither
8

either in print or in manuscript, to which I
had not formerly access, has enabled me to
throw new light upon any part of the History,
I have made alterations and additions, which,
I flatter myself, will be found to be of some
importance.

COLLEGE OF EDINBURGH,

MARCH 5th, 1787.

THE

# BOOK I. Containing a Review of the SCOTTISH History previous to the death of JAMES V.

THE
HI S TO RY

F
SCOTLAND.

BOOK I.
Containing a Review of the SCOTTISH HiJfory

previous to the death of JAMES V.
IT E first ages of the Scottifl history are B o OK

) 1.

dark and fabulous. Nations, as well as --_-
men, arrive at maturity by degrees, and the The origin

of nations

events, which happened during their infancy or fabulous
early youth, cannot be recolleced, and deserve andobfcr"
not to be remembered. The gross ignorance
which anciently covered all the North of Europe,
the continual migrations of its inhabitants, and
the frequent and deftrucl-ivc revolutions which
there occasioned, render it impoflible to give any
authentic account of the origin of the different
kingdoms now eftablifled there. Every thing be-
yond that short period to which well attested an-
nals reach, is obscure; an immense space is left for
invention to occupy; each nation, with a vanity
inseparable from human nature, hath filled that

VOL. I. B void

B 0 0 K void with events calculated to display its own an-
.-. tiquity and lustre. An History, which ought to

record truth and to teach wisdom, often sets out
with retailing fitions and absurdities.

O.iPin of THE Scots carry their pretensions to antiquity
the Scots.

as high as any of their neighbours. Relying up-
on uncertain legends, and the traditions of their
bards, still more uncertain, they reckon up a
series of kings several ages before the birth of
Christ; and give a particular detail of the oc-
currences which happened in their reigns. But
with regard to the Scots, as well as the other
northern nations, we receive the earliest accounts
on which we can depend, not from their own, but
A. D. Si, fiom the Roman authors. When the Romans un-

der Agricola, first carried their arms into the north-
ern parts of Britain, they found it possessed by the
Caledonians, a fierce and warlike people; and
having repulsed, rather than conquered them,
they erected a strong wall between the firths of
Forth and Clyde, and there fixed the boundaries
of their empire. Adrian, on account of the dif-
ficulty of defending such a distant frontier, con-
A .,) traaed the limits of the Roman province in Bri-

tain, by building a second wall, which ran be-
tween Newcastle and Carlife. The ambition of
succeeding Emperors endeavou red to recoverwhat
Adrian had abandoned; and the country between
the two walls was alternately under the dominion
of the Romans, and the Caledonians. About the
beginning of the fifth century, the inroads of the
Goths and other Barbarians obliged the Romans,

il

in order to defend the centre of their empire, to B o o I
recal those legions which guarded the fiontier _
provinces; and at that time they quitted all
their conquests in Britain.

THEIR long residence in the iland had polished, A. D. 4:-

in some degree, the rude inhabitants, and the Bri-
tons were indebted to their intercourse with the
Romans, for the art of writing, and the use of
numbers, without which it is impossible long to
preserve the memory of past events.

NORTHI BRITAIN was, by their retreat, left un-

der the dominion of the Scots and Pid-s. The
former, who are not mentioned by any Roman au-
thor before the end of the fourth century, were
probably a colony of the Celta or Gauls: Their
affinity to whom appears from their language,
their manners, and religious rites; circumstances
more decisive, with regard to the origin of na-
tions, than either fabulous traditions, or the tales
of ill informed and credulous Annalists. The
Scots, if we may believe the common accounts,
fettled at first in Ireland; and, extending them-
selves by degrees, landed at last on the coast op-
pofite to that island, and fixed their habitations
there. Fierce and bloody wars were, during several
ages, carried on between them and the Piss. At
length, Kenneth II. the fixty-ninth King of the
Scots (according to their own fabulous authors) A' D. s38'
obtained a complete victory over the Pits, and
united under one monarchy, all the country, fiom
the wall of Adrian, to the northern ocean. The
kingdom, henceforward, became known by its

B 2 prcfenc

B o1o . present name, which it derived from a people who
av__ at first fettled there as itrangers, and remained

long obscure and inconsiderable.

Iifory of FROM this period the history of Scotland would
Scotland
peculiarly merit some attention, were it accompanied with
obscure. any certainty. But as our remote antiquities are

involved in the fame darkness with those of other
nations,a calamity peculiar toourfelves has thrown
almost an equal obscurity over our more recent
tranfaations. This was occasioned by the mali-
cious policy of Edward I. of England. Towards
the end of the thirteenth century, this monarch
called in question the independence of Scotland;
pretending that the kingdom was held as a fief of
the crown of England, and fubjeated to all the
conditions of a feudal tenure. In. order to erta-
blifh his claim, he seized the public archives, he
ransacked churches and monasteries, and getting
poffefion by force, or fraud, of many hillorical
monuments, which tended to prove the antiquity
or freedom of the kingdom, he carried some of
them into England, and commanded the reft to be
burneda. An universal oblivion of past tranf-
adions might have been the effect of this fatal i
event, but some imperfect Chronicles had escaped
the rage of Edward; foreign writers had recorded
some important fads relating to Scotland; and the
traditions concerning recent occurrences were fresh
and worthy of credit. These broken fragments
John de Fordun, who lived in the fourteenth
century, collected with a pious induflry, and from

a Innes, Essay 55Z.

them

them gleaned materials which he formed into B 0O K
a regular hiltory. His work was received by his
countrymen with applause; and, as no recourse
could be had to more ancient records, it supplied
the place of the authentic annals of the kingdom.
It was copied in many monasteries, and the thread
of the narrative was continued by different monks,
through the subsequent reigns. In the beginning
of the sixteenth century, John Major and Hector
Boetlius published their histories of Scotland, the
formler a fuccinEt and dry writer, the latter a co-
pious and florid one, and both equally credulous.
Not many years after, Buchanan undertook the
fame work; and if his accuracy and impartiality
had been, in any degree, equal to the elegance of
his taste, and to the purity and vigour of his style,
his history might be placed on a level with the
moil admired compositions of the ancients. But,
inifead of rejecting the improbable tales of Chro-
nicle writers, he was at the utmost pains to adorn
them; and hath clothed, with all the beauties and
graces of fiction, those legends, which formerly
had only its wildness and extravagance.

THE history ofScotland mayproperly bedivided Fourre.

into four periods. The firif reaches from the ori- ,eras in the
gin of the monarchy, to the reign of Kenneth II. hS'ry.
The second from Kenneth's conquest of the Piets,
to the death of Alexander III. The third extends
to the death of James V. The last, from thence to
the acceiflon of James VI. to the crown of England.

THE first period is the region of pure fable and
conjecture, and ought to be totally neglected, or

B 3 abandoned

B 0 0 K abandoned to the industry and credulity of an-
,e _; tiquaries. Truth begins to dawn in the second

period, with a light, feeble at firit, but gradually
increafin,; and the events which then happened
may be slightly touched, but merit no particular
or laborious inquiry. In the third period, the his-
tory of Scotland, chiefly by means of records
preserved in England, becomes more authentic:
not only are events related, but their causes and
effects explained; the characers of the acors are
displayed; the manners of the age described; the
revolutions in the confiitution pointed out: and
here every Scotfinan should begin not to read only,
but to study the hillory of his country. During
the fourth period, the affairs of Scotland were so
mingled with those of other nations, its situation
in the political state of Europe was so important,
its influence on the operations of the neighbouring
kingdoms was tb visible, that its history becomes
an objec of attention to foreigners; and without
some knowledge of the various and extraordinary
revolutions which happened there, they cannot
form a j lit notion with reflpe& either to the moit
illustrious events, or to the characters of the most
ditinguified personages in the sixteenth century.

A r,. 'c TIlE following history is confined to the lall of
ot h
lc Tird thlle periods: To give a view of the political tlate

of the kingdom during that which immediately
preceded it, is the delign of this preliminary Book.
The inmperfict knowledge which l-tangels have of
the affairs of Scotland, and the prejudices Scots-
mncn them!'elves have imbibed with regard to the

various

various revolutions in the government of their o o0 K
country, render such an introduction equally ne- .
cefary to both.

THE period from the death of Alexander III.

to the death of James V. contains upwards of two
centuries and a half, from the year one thousand
two hundred and eighty-fix, to the year one
thousand five hundred and forty-two.

IT opens with the famous controversy concern- Rife of the

ing the independence of Scotland. Before the controverf
union of the two kingdoms, this was a question of thedinde-

c ' i pendence of

much importance. If the one crown had been Scotland.
confidered not as imperial and independent, but
as feudatory to the other, a treaty of union could
not have been concluded on equal terms, and every
advantage which the dependent kingdom pro-
cured, must have been deemed the concession of a
Sovereign to his vassal. Accordingly, about the
beginning of the present century, and while a
treaty of union between the two kingdoms was
negociating, this controversy was ag :ated with all
the heat which national animofities naturally in-
spire. What was then a fubje& of serious concern,
the union of the two kingdoms had rendered a
matter of mere curiosity. But though the objects
which at that time warmed and interested both
nations, exist no longer, a question which ap-
peared so momentous to our ancestors, cannot be
altogether indifferent or uninlrrutive to us.

SOME of the northern counties of England were

early in the hands of the Scottifl Kings, who, as
far hack as the feudal customs can be traced, held
t.hcfe pofllions of the Kings of England, and did

B + homage

B 1o K0 homage to them on that account. This homage,
,„_ due only for the territories which they held in

England, was in no wife derogatory from their
royal dignity. Nothing is more suitable to feudal
ideas, than that the fame person flould be both a
Lord and a Vassal, independent in one capacity,
and dependent in another `. The Crown of
England was, without doubt, imperial and inde-
pendent, though the Princes who wore it were,
for many ages, the vassals of the Kings of France;
and, in consequence of their possessions in that
kingdom, bound to perform all the services which
a feudal Sovereign has a title to exat. The fame
was the condition of the Monarchs of Scotland;
free and independent as Kings of their own coun-
try, but, as possessing English territories, vassals
to the King of England. The English Monarchs,
satisfied with their legal and uncontrovertcd
rights, were, during a long period, neither ca-
pable, nor had any thoughts of usurping more.
England, when conquered by the Saxons, being

b A very singular proof of this occurs in the French history.

Arpin fold the vicomtc of the city Bourges to Philip I. who
did homage to the count of Sancerre for a part of there lands,
which held of that Nobleman, A. D. loo. I believe that no
example, of a King's doing homage to one of his own fubjeds,
is to be met with in the hillories either of England or Scotland.
Philip le Bel abolilhed this practice in France A.D. 1302. lHe-
wtat Arfg; Chronol. Somewhat similar to this, is a charter of
the Abbot ofMclrofs, A. . 1535, conflituting James V. the
Bailiff or Steward of that Abbey, vetiing in him all the powers
which pertained to that oflice, and requiring him to be an-
fwerable to the Abbot for his cxercifc of the fame. Archiw.
publ. Edin.

divided

divided by them into many finall kingdoms, was O0 K
in no condition to extend its dominion over Scot-
land, united at that time under one Monarch.
And though there petty principalities were gra-
dually formed into one kingdom, the reigning
princes, exposed to continual invasions of the
Danes, and often fubjeEted to the yoke of those
formidable pirates, seldom turned their arms to-
wards Scotland, and were little able to establish
new rights in that country. The first Kings of the
Norman race, busied with introducing their own
laws and manners into the kingdom which they
had conquered, or with maintaining themselves
on the throne which some of them possessed by
a very dubious title, were as little solicitous to
acquire new authority, or to form new preten-
sions in Scotland. An unexpected calamity that
besel one of the Scottish Kings si-ft encouraged
the English to think of bringing his kingdom un-
der dependance. William firnamed the Lion be-
ing taken priboner at Alnwick, Henry II. as the
price of his liberty, not only extorted fiom him
an exorbitant ransom, and a promise to surrender
the places of greatest strength in his dominions,
but compelled him to do homage for his whole
kingdom. Richard I. a generous Prince, so-
lemnly renounced this claim of homage, and ab-
solved William from the hard conditions which
Henry had imposed. Upon the death of Alex-
ander III. near a century after, Edward I. avail-
ing himfelfof the situation of affairs in Scotland,,
acquired an inluence in that kingdom which no

Englifl

B 0 0 K English Monarch before him ever possessed, and,
i_-^ iimitaiding the interestcd policy of Henry, rather

than the magnanimitv of Richard, revived the
clain of fovercignty to which the former had
pretended.

pr<.c rlns NIARC 'ART of Norway, Grandaughlter of Alex-
.id B 1,1 ander, and heir to his crown, did not long survive

ri cd lhimn. The right of fucccftion belonged to the de-

Icendants of David Earl of Huntingdon, third son
of King David I. Among thcle, Robert Bruce,
and John Baliol, two illustrious competitors for
the crown, appeared. Bruce was the son of Isabel,
Earl David's iccond daughter; Baliol, the grand-
son of Margaret the eldest daughter. According
to the rules of fuccelfion which are now eftablih-
ed, the right of Baliol was preferable, and, not-
withttanding Bruce's plea of being nearer in blood
to Earl David, Baliol's claim, as the representative
of his mother and grandmother, would be deemed
inconteftible. But in that age, the order of fuc-
ceflon was not alcer-tained with the fame pre-
cilion. The question appeared to be no less intri-
cate, than it was important. Though the prejudices
of the people, and perhaps the laws of the king-
dom, favoured Bruce, each of the rivals was sup-
ported by a powverful fafction. Arms alone, it was
feared, mult terminate a dispute too weighty for
the laws to decide. But, in order to avoid the mi-
series of a civil war, Edward was chosen umpire,
and both parties agreed to acquiesce in his decree.
This had well nigh proved fatal to the independ-
ence of Scotland and the nation, by its eager-

ness

ness to guard against a civil war, was not only ex- B 0 0 K
posed to that calamity, but almost fubjeted to a
foreign yoke. Edward was artful, brave, enter-
prifing, and commanded a powerful and martial
people, at peace with the whole world. The anar-
chy which prevailed in Scotland, and the ambition
of competitors ready to sacrifice their country in
order to obtain even a dependent Crown, invited
him first to seize, and then to fubjeCl the kingdom.
The authority of an umpire, which had been un-
warily bcftowed upon him, and fi-om which the
Scots dreaded no dangerous consequences, en-
abled him to execute his schemes with the greater
facility. Under pretence of examining the quef-
tion with the utmolt folemlnity, he summoned all
the Scottilh Barons to Norhall, and having gained
tome, and intimidated others, he prevailed on all
who were present, not excepting Bruce and Baliol,
the competitors, to acknowledge Scotland to be
a fief of the Englifl Crown, and to swear fealty
to him as their Sovereign or Liege Lord. This ftep
led to another fRill more important. As it was
vain to pronounce a sentence which he had not
power to execute, Edward demanded pofilffion of
the kingdom, that he might be able to deliver it to
him whole right flould be found preferable; and
such was the pusillanimity of the nobles, and the
impatient ambition of the competitors, that both
assented to this strange demand, and Gilbert de
Umfraville, Earl of Angus, was the only man
who refused to surrender the castles in his cultody
to the enemy of his country. Edward finding

B. liol

o o0 K Baliol the rnoft obrequious and the least formi-
.-y--. _ dable of the two competitors, loon after gave judg-

ment in his favour. Baliol once more profefied
himielf the vaiTl of England, and submitted to
every condition which the Sovereign whom he
had now acknowledged was pleased to prescribe.

ED'WARD, having thus placed a creature of his

own upon the throne of Scotland, and compelled
the nobles to renounce the ancient liberties and
independence of their country, had reason to con-
clude that his dominion was now fully established.
But he began too soon to assume the master; his
new valfals, fierce and independent, bore with
impatience a yoke, to which they were not accuf-
tomed. Provoked by his haughtiness, even the
paflive spirit of Baliol began to mutiny. But Ed-
ward, who had no longer use for such a pageant
King, forced him to resign the Crown, and openly
attempted to seize it as fallen to himself by the
rebellion of his vassal. At that critical period
arose Sir William Wallace, a hero, to whom the
fond admiration of his countrymen hath alcribed
many fabulous acts of prowess, though his real
valour, as well as integrity and wisdom, is such
as needs not the heightenings of fiction. I-Ie, al-
nmot single, ventured to take arms in defence of
the kingdom, and his boldness revived the spirit
of his countrymen. Alt last, Robert Bruce, the
grandfbn of him who flood in competition with
Baliol, apl)eared to afiert his own rights, and to
vindicate the honour of his country. The nobles,
ashamcd of their former baseness, and enraged at

the

the many indignities offered to the nation, crowd- B 0 O K

I.

ed to his standard. In order to crush him at '-
once, the Englifl Monarch entered Scotland, at
the head of a mighty army. Many battles were
fought, and the Scots, though often vanquified,
were not subdued. The ardent zeal with which
the nobles contended for the independence of
the kingdom, the prudent valour of Bruce, and
above all a national enthufiafin inflired by such a
cause, baffled the repeated efforts of Edward, and
counterbalanced all the advantages which he de-
rived from the number and wealth of hLs sub-
jests. Though the war continued with little
intermission upwards of ieventy years, Bruce and
his posterity kept poffeflion of the throne of Scot-
land, and reigned with an authority not inferior to
that of its former Monarchs.

BUT while the sword, the ultimate judge of all

disputes between contending nations, was employ-
ed to terminate this controversy, neither Edward
nor the Scots seemed to distrust thejuftice of their
cause; and both appealed to history and records,
and from there produced, in their own favour,
such evidence as they pretended to be unanfwer-
able. The letters and memorials addressed by
each party to the Pope, who was then reverenced
as the common father, and often appealed to as
the commonjudgeof all Christian Princes, are still
extant. The fabulous tales of the early British
history; the partial testimony of ignorant Chroni-
clers; supposititious treaties and charters; are the
proofs on which Edward founded his title to the

sovereignty

B 0o0 K sovereignty of Scotland; and the homage done by

L--__ the Scottish Monarchs for their lands in England

is preposterously supposed to imply the fubjetion
of their whole kingdom'. Ill-founded, however,
as their right was, the English did not fail to re-
vive it, in all the subsequent quarrels between the
two kingdoms; while the Scots disclaimed it with
the utmost indignation. To this we must impute
the fierce and implacable hatred to each other,
which long inflamed both. Their national anti-
pathies were excited, not only by the usual cir-
cumitances of frequent hofilities, and reciprocal
injuries; but the English confidered the Scots as
vassals who had presumed to rebel, and the Scots,
in their turn, regarded the Englifl as usurpers
who aimed at enslaving their country.

1306. Ar the time when Robert Bruce began his reign

State of the .
kingdom in Scotlandv. the fame form of government was
when Bruce
began his established in all the kingdoms of Europe. This
feign. surprising similarity in their constitution and laws

demonstrates that the nations which overturned
the Roman empire, and ereted these kingdoms,
though divided into different tribes, and diltin-
guifhed by different names, were either derived
originally fiom the fame source, or had been
placed in similar situations. When we take a view
of the feudal system of laws and policy, that flu-
pendous and singular fabric erected by them, the
first objeLt that strikes us is the King. And when
we are told that he is the sole proprietor of all the

c Andcrfon' Ilifaorical Essay concerning the Indepcnd-
ency, &c.

lands

lands within his dominions, that all his fubjets B 0 0 KR
derive their poffefirons from him, and in return -
consecrate their lives to his service; when we hear
that all marks of diftin'tion, and titles of dignity,
flowv from him as the only fountain of honour; when
we behold the moif potent peers, on their bended
knees, and with folded hands, swearing fealty at his
feet, and acknowledging him to be their Sovereign
and their LiegeLord; we are apt to pronounce him
a powerful, nay an absolute Monarch. No conclu-
sion, however, would be more raffi, or worse found-
ed. The genius of the feudal government was purely
ariftocratical. With all the ensigns of royalty,
and with many appearances of despotic power, a
feudal King was the most limited of all Princes.

BEFORE theyfallied out of their own habitations Orin of

to conquer the world, many of the northern na- ,,e,,-
tions seem not to have been fubjct to the govern- ie',,".
ment of Kings'; and even where monarchical go- cratical ge-
vernment was eftabliflied, the Prince possessed but
little authority. A General rather than aKing, his
military command was extensive, his civil jurifdic-
tion almnoft nothing . The army which he led
was not composed of soldiers, who could be com-
pelled to serve, but of such as voluntarily followed
his flandard'. These conquered not for their
leader, but for themselves; and being free in their
own country, renounced not their liberty when
they acquired new settlements. They did not ex-
terminate the ancient inhabitants of the countries
which they subdued, but fcizing the greater part of

d CXf. lib. vi. c. 23. c Tacit. dc Mor. Germ. c. 7. 1 .
f Ca;f. ibid.

their

B 0 0 K their lands, they took their persons under pro-

-v- teftion. Tle difficulty of maintaining a new

conquest, as well as the danger of being attacked
by new invaders, rendering it necessary to be al-
ways in a posture of defence, the form of govern-
ment which they established was altogether mili-
tary, and nearly resembled that to which they had
been accustomed in their native country. Their
general frill continuing to be the head of the co-
lony, part of the conquered lands were allotted to
him; the remainder, under the name of beneficia
orfiefs, was divided amongst his principal officers.
As the common safety required that these officers
Ihould, upon all occasions, be ready to appear in
arms, for the common defence, and should conti-
nue obedient to their General, they bound them-
selves to take the field, when called, and to serve
him with a number of men, in proportion to the
extent of their territory. These great officers
again parcelled out their lands among their follow-
ers, and annexed the fame condition to the grant.
A feudal kingdom was properly the encampment
of a great army; military ideas predominated, mi-
litary subordination was established, and the pof-
fefion of land was the pay which soldiers received
for their personal service. In consequence of these
notions, the possession of land was granted du-
ring pleasure only, and Kings were elective. In
other words, an officer disagreeable to his General
was deprived of his pay, and the person who was
most capable of conducting an army was chosen
to command it. Such were the first rudiments, or
infancy of feudal government,

2 BUT

IuT long before tlih beginning of the four- °00 Ko

tcenth! century, tihe feud.l fyl-Cem had undergone _
im;ny changes, of which the following were the
most conlidcrable. Kings formerly eleftive, were
then 1hereditary ; Iand fiefs, granted at firflt during
pl)afure, dcl'eendc1d frlom fatlher to son, and were
become perpetual. T'hiele changes, not lels ad-
vantageous to the nobles than to the prince, made
no alteration in the ariflocratical spirit of the
feudal conf:itution. The King, who at a cif- oenr.l
tance leemcd to be invefled with majesty and v,I,i, l;.
power, appears, on a nearer view, to poflefs al- 01"V"'r"e
mnol none of those advantages which bestow on 'ic l,, al

mor. rth .

monarchs their grandeur and authority. His
revenues were scanty; he had not a Itanding
.army; and the jurifdition he poll'effed was cir-
cumfcribed within very narrow limits.

ii AT' a time when pomp and splendor were little Ti&r: reve-

'known, even in the palaces of kings; when the nImI.
officers of the crown received scarcely any salary
Ibclides the fees and I)erquifites of their office;
wihen einbaflies to foreign courts were rare;
wvhen arlmies were compoled of soldiers who served
w ithout pay; it was not necclfary that a king
lhould pofiifs a great revenue; nor did the con-
jition of Europe, in those ages, allow its princes
o be opulent. Commerce made little progress
n the kingdoms where the feudal government
was eftablified. Inflitutions, which had no
ether objeLC but to inlifire a martial spirit, to
srain men to be ioldiers, and to make arms the
bnly honourable profcfion, naturally discouraged

VOL. I. C the
I

B 0o KI the commercial arts. The revenues, ariling

_--^-- from tie taxes imposed on the dils'crcnt branches

of commerce, were by confecquence inconfider-
able; and tle princc's trealury received little
lfupply from a source, which, among a trading
people, iov/s wih fucih abundance, and is almoit
ilexhlauilible.A i xc! tax was not levied cven
on land; such a burthen would have appeared
intolerable to men wlo received their efates as
the reward of their valour, and who conlidercd
their lervice in tie field as a full retribution for
what they pofit'ilicd. The king's domci';/s, or the
portion of land which he fiill retained in his own
harnds unalienated, furniflhed ifubiftience to his
couLt, and defrayed the ordinary expence of go-
vernmient . The only stated taxes which the
feudal law obliged vassals to pay to the king, or
to those of whom they held their lands, were
three; one when his eldest ton was made a
knight; another when his eldest daughter was
married ; and a third in order to ranloin him if
he ifould happen to be taken priloner. Besides
theie, the king received the feudal calflalties of
the wairl, marriage, cc. of' his own vanills.
Andt, on ioine cxtraordinary occalions, his sub-
jedls granted him an aid, which they diRinguilhed
by the naine of l a'dnev/cline, in order to declare
that lie received it not in conlcqucnce of any
rilht, but as a gift, flowing froln their good
will . All thel ;,added together, produced a

e Craig,. dtl FciJd. lib. i. Dieg. it. 1)i C:iige Glofr.
voc. .Doniiiiicuni. > l)Du CIangl , voc. iiilim.

revec nue,

revenue, so scanty and precarious, as naturally in- B °0 K
cited a feudal monarch to aim at diminifing tle -c -
exorbitant power and wealth of the nobility, but
inflead of enabling him to carry on his fchicmcs
with full es-et, kept him in continual indigence,
anxiety, and dependence.

NOR could the king supply the deft- of his Tley had

nou l1nding

revenues, by the terror of his arms. Mercenary ,armI,.
troops and flanding armies were unknown, as
long as the feudal government 1ublitlled in vi-
gour. Europe was 1)peoplecd with soldiers. T1 he
vaflals of the kini,, and the fub-vaffals of the ba-
rons, were all obliged to carry arms. And while
the poverty of princes prevented thelm firom for-
tifying their frontier towns, while a campaign
continued but a few weeks, and while a fierce and
impetuous courage was impatient to bring every
quarrel to the decision of a battle, an army,
without pay, and with little discipline, was fuffi-
cient for all the purposes both of the security and
of tie glory of the nation. Such an army, how-
ever, far from being an engine at the king's dif-
pofal, was often no less formidable to hirn, than
to his enemies. The more warlike any people
were, the more independent they became; and
the fame persons being both loldiers and fubjets,
civil privileges and inmmunities were the conlf-
quence of their viAories, and the reward of their
martial exploits. Conquerors, whom mercenary
armies, under our prelcnt forms of government,
often render the tyrants of their own people, as
well as the scourges of mankind, were commonly,

C 2 under

B 0o K under the feudal constitution, the mofi indulgent
. -.--,. of all princes to their fubjets, becaule they stood

mofl in need of their assistance. A prince, whom
even war and victories did not render the master
of his own army, pofefied hardly any shadow of
military power during times of peace. His dif-
banded soldiers mingled with his other fubjets;
not a tingle man received pay from hin; many
ages elapied even before a guard was appointed to
defend his person; and destitute of that great
instrument of dominion a standing army, the au-
thority of the king continued always feeble, and
was often contemptible.

Their ur;f- NOR were these the only circumstances which
limilcid. contributed towards depressing the regal power.

By the feudal system, as has been already ob-
served, the king's judicial authority was extremely
circumscribed. At first, princes seem to have
been the supreme judges of their people, and, in
person, heard and determined all controversies
among them. The multiplicity of causes soon
made it necessary to appoint judges, who, in the
king's name, decided matters that belonged to
the royal jurildiction. But the Barbarians, who
over-ran Europe, having deflroyed most of the
great cities, and the countries which they seized
being cantoned out among powerful chiefs, who
were blindly followed by numerous dependants,
whom, in return, they were bound to protect fromn
every injury; the administration ofjuftice was
greatly interrupted, and the execution of any
legal sentence became almost impraaicable.

Theft,

Theft, rapine, murder, and disorder of all kinds B 010 K
prevailed in every kingdom of Europe, to a de-
gree almost incredible, and Icarce compatible
with the lubiltence of civil society. Every of-
fender flhltered limlfelf under the protection of
fonme poverful chieftain, who screened him from
the puriuits of jufice. 'o apprehend, and to
punifll a criminal, often required the union and
elfirt of half a kingdomn'. In order to remedy
there evils, many perlons of diftinstion were en-
trufled with the adminiltration of justice within

iA remarkable initance of this occurl s

o in thc following

itiolry, io l;te as the )ye:lar (ol tlhot!i d five hundred and
fixty-one. Mary, having appointed a court of jultice to be
held on the borders, tbc inilh:italitas of no less than eleven
counties were fuilnonled to guard the person, who was to aa
as judge, and to enibllc liin to enforce his dccilions, p. 234..
The words of a procl;tnl:tion, wllich afTord lfuch a convincing
proof of the fecl)icnef of lie f'tudal government, defrve our
notice.-"' And hlcafuli it is neccCflhry for the execution of her
Iliglincfs' comrnandinents and lervicc, that her jicllice be
'veil ;I. colipanied, :iald lher al tl horiy filicicenlly fortified, by
the cnlculllrence (' a gIood pwc r of her fiithful full)jecs-
Therefore cominrandlls nindl carges all and Ifundry Earls,Lords,
Barons, Freeholders, Landed-men, and other Gentlemen,
dwelling within the laidt coulntics, that they, and every one
of tlhem, with their kin, friends, servants, and Iioulllid-nlen,
well lodin in feir of wvar in tlie oll fulil)ltantious mannnr,
[i. c. completely armed and Irovidcl,] and with twenty (lays
-viliials to meet and to p:(ss i frward with hiim to the borough
of JedCibrgh, and there to realllin during the said l'pace of
twenty days, and to receive foiilI dircicl;On and comm;ands, as
lhall he given by himl to them in our Sovercign Lady's name,
fur ([qicLtncs of' tIle countr'ry ; aId to i ul tllle fl'ame in execu-
tion under the p:ain of loling their life, lands, and goods.'
Kcith's lift. of SeotLlanll, 198.

C 3 their

B 0 0 K their own territorics. But what v'we may prefinme

was, at first, only a temlporary gSran t, or a perfolal
privilege, the incroaching f)irit of the nobles gra-
dually converted into a righ, and rendcred Ihere-
ditary. The lands of [li;ne were, in proce'l of
time, erected into Bar;i/ies, tlhofe of others into
RL'ail/is. 'The jurihldiction of the former was
extensive ; that of the latter, as the Ina1me itmplies,
royal, and almost unbounded. All causes, whe-
ther civil or criminal, were tried by judges, whom
the lord of the regality appointed; and if the
king's courts called any pcrlfn \wiliin his terri-
tory before them, the lord of rc,; lity might put
a flop to their proceedings, and by the privilege
of rcplcdgihg, remove the cause to his own court,
and even punifil his vaflal, if he submitted to a
foreign jurifdic-ion k. Thus almolt every quef-
tion, in which any person who resided on the
lands of the nobles was interested, being deter-
mined by judgcs appointed by the nobles them-
selves, their valfiis were hardly fenfiblc of being,
in any degree, ilbje& to the crown. A feudal
kingdomn was split into many finall principalities,
almotn independent, and held togcther by a feeble
:and commonly an imperceptible bond of union.
The king was not only firippcd of the authority
annexed to tlie perlon of a fil)rcnie judge, but
his revenue ufi'ierel no fi0all diminution, by the
lols of tllofe pecuniary cmoluments, which were,
in that age, due to the person who adminifter'd
jullice,

It g.

('r';ii . ;ii .
) .D iCgI. 7.

I1

IN tie fame proportion that the king funk in B °0 K

power, the nobles rose towards independence. ---
Not iatislH( with having obtained a hereditary
right to their liefs, which they formerly held
during pleafuric their ambition aimed :at iome-
thing bolder, and by introducing e;in/ils, endea-
voured, as far as hunman ing uuity and iilvention
can reach that end, to render their )ofRellions
unalienable and everlafling. As they had full
power to add to the inheritance tranfmiitted to
them fi-om their ancestors, but none to diminifil
it; time alone, by means of marriages, legacies,
and other accidents, brought continual accfeions
of wealth, and of dignity; a great family, like a
river, became confilerable friom the lengthl of irs
courfc, and as it rolled on, new honours and new
property flowed fuccefively into it. Whatever
influence is derived from titles of honour, the
feudal barons likewise pofTefced in an ample
manner. lThefe marks of dinlinEtin are, in their
own nature, either official or personal, and being
annexed to a particular charge, or bellow:ed by
the admiration of mankind upon illull-rious cha-
raaers, ought to be appropriated to theft. But
the son, however unworthy, could not bear to be
stripped of that appellation, by which his la-
ther had been diftinguilhed. His 1prefiumtion
claimed, what his virtue did not merit; titles of
honour became hereditary, and added new lullre
to nobles already in poffellion of too much power.
Something more audacious and more extravagant
still remained. The fulremc direction of all as-

C + fairs,

B Oro K fairs, both civil and nilitar!, beIinm coimmitted
L--- to the g reat officers of the crown, the fame and

la-fi-ty of princes, as well as of their people, de-
pended upon the fidelity and abilities of thc-fe of-
ficers. But such was the prclpof!erous ambition
of the nobles, and so fiucccefsfUil even in their
wildefl attenlmts to algrandize t!remflves, that in
all the kingdoms where the feudal inltitutions
prevailed, imol of the chief offices of itate were
annexed to great flanilics, and held, like sirss, by
chreditary right. A perfcn whole undutiful be-
haviour rendered hinl odious to his prince, or
whole incapacity exposed him to the contelmpt of
the people, often held a place of power anl trufi
of the greatest importance to both. In Scotland,
the offces of Lord Justice General, Great Cham-
berlain, High Steward, I igh Confl-able, Earl
Ma-rflal, and High Admiral, were all hercditary;
and in many counties, the office of SherifF was
held in the fame manner.

NOBLEs, whosel property was so extensive, and

whose power fb great, could not fail of being tur-
bulent and formidable. Nor did they want iln-
fliruments for execuiitinig their boldlfl. tlc defg;.
That portion of their lands, wlhich they parcelled
out aminn g their f[ollowers, fipi-illi(c theil with a
nunlierous band of fait lful and dctcrniined vas-
fals; wh;il that which they retainlcd in their
own hands, cinabled them to live wilh a lpr-incely
fplendlor. The great hall of an amlitious baron
was often more croluded than the court of his
lovcrcign. The flrong cat:.ls in which they re-

fided,

f1ded, afforded a fccure retreat to tlhe dilcoicntcd LB oo K
ancd ilditious. A great part of their revCnue was

w _-._

fcpnt upon multitudes of indigent, but bold re-
tainers. And if at any time they left their re-
treat to apipear in the court of their loverci-rn,
they were accompanied, even in times of pea.ce,
with a vafl train of a;ined followers. '1 Te ufl
retinue of \William the sixth .Earl of Diu'.;:ias
confilted of two thousand horlf. Thole of tlhe
other nobles were magnificent and formid.a;le in
proportion. Impatient of subordination, a ,d for-
getting their proper rank, iuch potent and
haughty barons were the rivals, rather tlhan the
fu[ljócts of their prince. T hey- often dlpilid his
ordt-rs, inluiltcd his perfor, and wrefled from himi
his crown. And the hiflory of Europe, during,
several ages, contains little clie, but the accounts.
of the wars and revolutions occasioned by their
exorbitant ambition.

BUT, if the authority.of the barons far exceeded 'Tli.:iro,.

?e - -r 'ri

its proper bounds in the other nations of E.urope, :,. ,i,.j
we may affirm that the balance which ought to ,,hl.,l'ri`nY
be prelerved between a kin and his nobles was roL'"
entirely loul in Scotll.nd. The Scottifif nobles
clljoycld, in colmmlon wil h thofr of other nations,
all the means for extrndliliig their authority which
aril from the ariltocr;atica;l gclius of the fuludil
goveirnmenlt. Be1sides thlefe, tlicy pofclfflc( ad-
vanta;igs peculiar to thlelelvcys: thet accidental
foulers of rlteir power were considerable ; and
singular cir(umlll. anices concurred witli the f)tirit
of the confL itution to aggrandllize tlhem. 'Jo e(.11- Tl'rP p,

ilel 'ae .l r

i .itil,
1 ic ItCe of tisi ,

B o 0 : IKcrat tle ll mofe remarkabe of ilihe, will serve

, bo'-I- tvo Cplaill tle polC Iitica;l 11t re of the kling-

(do:n, and to ill.il'trate Imay iml)ort;,nt occur-
rences, in the period now undLeri our lV'iw.
T're naiire I. TE nr of thl i- C)iilntrl. was one catlfe

'ou,:,. of t;e Ot.cr :nd in d pcndne[CC of, tle Sco tiif

n;L'i li;-y. .,e-. l ndop jn c ioinl;'ic s arc fiLrmcd
o',r I :r\'iltudc. 'I1 !e authority of the l\iti rCime
mitia"il'ra-e reac;cls with cale to the moIul diitant
corners; and when nature has crcdted no barrier,
and aiflrds no retrcat, the ,tilty or obnoxious
are soon de(ted anl puni ilied. o itun tains, and
fcl;,, iand river-s sec bounds to tlciotic power,
and amidfitl- thclfe, is the natural I at of fre'edom
and inldepeendence. In I-ih places, did the
Scottifl nobles usually fix their refi(cllee. By
reniring to his own calPle, a mutinous baron
could defy the power of his lov'leign', it being
almoil ilmpIraCticable to lead an a-rmy, through a
barren country, to places of difficult access to a
tingle man. The IallilC caulfs which checked the
progrels of' the Roman arms, and rendered all
the effol-ts of l:dward I. abortive, often protected
the Scottifi nobles from the vengeance of their
pincec; and they owed. their personal inde-
pn,.ldelncc, to tlole very mountains and marflles
u
wiih saveld their country from being con-
qtu-red.

Tri.e 'm1, 11. TI 'TE want of great cities in Scotland con-
s,,, ::;'.:', tributed not a little to increale the power of the

nobility, and to weaken that of the prince.
\\'herever numbers of men ailiemble together,

order

orlder murP be cflablifhcd, and a regular form- of B o0o Ic
government inflitutcd, the aut.!ority of the nm-

11-.

irllrate mutll be recognizcJl, anld his dccilions
netc with )promp! t and full obedience. Latws
;and ll)ordl;ition take rile in cities; andl wiere
tllClrc arc xv' cities a, in Poland, or non111 as in
T artary, there are few or no tra.:cs of a wc ll-ar-
rilngcll police. But ui. cr the Feudal govern-
iienlts, comminerce, ti'he chi fllt means of atfr i1 bllin
mankind, was nlgleclc'L ; the nobles, in olderl to
iirc'len^rhen their influence over their va.ltls, re-
sildtd aImong thlem, and le ldomi a!pel.re at court,
wherlC they found .a -iipl

ior, or dwelt iln citi(s,

w lecre they met 'wi'ii cquIls. In Scorland, the
fertile coluntie in tihe South ivyilng op'n to tile
L;'ngliih, no town Fiuatt'ed tllci could riife to be
great 0or populous amidll: continual inroads and
alarmss: thle residence ()lo our monarchs was not
fixed to any p:m'ticu;lar place ; manlly parts of the
country were barren and uncultivated ; and in
conl(queltce of theel- peculiar cicuiiiiftances,
added to the general caul Is flowing firoIn the na-
ture of tle feuda;l inillitutions, the towns in Scot-
land were extrtlenllly few, and ve'r inconll(icerable.
The valTals of everCy baronl occlupied a dill in&t
portion of the king'ioi , and forilled a fI'eplrate
and alloll independenC t lo.icty. Illie.it of
giving aid towards reducing; to obldicnce thelir
fiditious chieftain, or ally whonll lie too)!, un!der
his prOt(el&ion, they were all in arims fOr Iis de-
fence, ;and ob)l'lile tlie pc'i alions of jtullice to
the utmoil. 'cThe prince was obliged to connive

at

B 0o K at crillinials, w'!'om he couil not reachl; Whe
-.---.w nobles, coliicious of this :atvanta'.., were not

afraid to offelnd and

tie: di.ily 'f .rlifhing

almos:t aflFued theml ot inmpinity.

r'r^i;,,.;. III. 'l rl!i divilion of the c(ontlrv into clans 1hacd
.1i.' no flrall ccil- in renderli inlr the lnobls conlide-

rablc. 'I he n:atiol;s, vwhlich over-ran FIurolpe,
were ori';illaly clividledl into mnany fimall tribes;
and when they came to parcel out the lands
wiiich they liad conqulered, it was natural for
every clhieftain to bell-ow a portion, in the first
place, upon thol- oF his own tribe or family.
T'hele all held their lands of him ; and as the
fafcetv of eachI individ0uall depended on the general
union, thtle f-C TiMll icietics cluln, together, and
were diltinguiilhcd by tobme colmmnon appellation,
either platronymiical, or local, lolng before tlie in-
trodeuction of fillrnamis, or Be.i's

armorilz/. But

when thiefc became common, the defccndants and
relations of every chieftain afilimedd the faiim
naime and arms with him ; othelr vafiails were
proudl to imitlate their example, and by degrees
thlC were communiC:ated to all thuof who held of
the fame Tlperior. Thus clanfhiips were formed;
;rnd in .a gen-ra:tion or two, that COfllanutlilitry
whichl was, at fir-, in a great ieaflirt, imaginary,
was believed to be real. An artificial union was
convertedl into a natural one; nlen willingly
t;ll,\wed a la Icad1r, wholi tihey regarded both as
thle fl)perlior ol tl(ir ladl,(s, ;-,d tle chief of iheir
blood, and lervedl himl not only \Villi tile fidelity
of vafl'als, but with the altl i'ton of friends. In

the

the other feudal kingdomls, we may oltierve B o()
Ilch unions, as we have delcribed, imperf ly

-_ _--

formed; but in Scotland, whet!lhr they were thlc
produtlion of chance, or the clf ct of plolicy, or
introduced by thle lrifi colony above men-
tioned, and itrengthened by caref'llv prelcrrv-il
their genealogies both genuine anl d fabulous,
clanlfips were univerlal. Such a tconlfderacv
might be ove-rcome, it could nor be broeni ; and
no change of manners, o0r of government, has
been able, in lome parts of tlhe kingdom, to (dii'-
hilve aflociations which arce lFoundedi upon prcju-
dices so natural to the human mind. I Iow fbr-
midable were nobles at the headc or followcrs,
who, counting that c;aultil juil: and honourable
which their chief approved, rulhcd into the field
at his command, ever ready to lacrifice their lives
in defence of his person, or of his sal;e ? Againl f
such men, a king contended with great dlifal-
vaYntagce;annd that cold Icrivice, which money
putrclhaes, or auttholity e:xto)its, wvals IIOL 11 equal
match for their ardour and t]eal.

IV. THIE fma11lllneFs of tir',i nmlllIer IllaV be Thr fiall

mentlioned among the ca;ults of the ;r.lndcuir of '',l,.',,L^,f
tle Scottilh nobles. Our annals reach not ba;c
to tle tir(l: division of Iproperty in thc king(doln;
but lo far as we can trace the matter, the original
tpolkt.l£ins of the nobles seem to have bCeen C;-
teiltivr. The ancient 'ITlihnes were tlhe equals and
tlie i vals of their prince. Many of tlce carls and
barons, vwho isuccceded ihc, were Ila!c; s of ter--
ritories 1o Ic's ample. I-ranc and En gand,

6 countries

B o O K countries wide and fertile, afforded settlements to
.-, '- a Lnulero!us and powerful nobility. Scotland, a

kingldom neithcr extensive nor rich, could not
contain man)y Inch overgrown proprietors. But
the power of a a aristocracy always diminishes, in
proportion to the increase of its numbers; feeble
if divided among a multitude; irresistible if ctn-
tered in a few. When nobles are numerous, their
operations nearly resemble those of the people;
thiy are rouled only by what they feel, not by
what they apprehend ; and fuibmit to many arbi-
trary and opprcilve aEs, before they take arms
againtl their sovereign. A finall body, on the
contrary, is more sensible, and more impatient;
quick in difccrning, and prompt in repelling
danger; all its motions are as sudden, as those
of the other are flow. Hence nroceeded the ex-
treme jealousy with which the Scottifi nobles
observed their monarchs, and the fierceness with
which they opposed their incroachments. Even
the virtue of a prince did not render them less
vigilant, or less eager to defend their rights;
and Robert Bruce, notwithlitanding the splendor
of his viEtorics, and the glory of his name, was
upon the point of experiencing the vigour of
their refiflance, no less than his unpopular de-
fcendant James III. Besides this, the near al-
liance of the great falnilies, by frequent inter-
marriages, was the natural consequence of their
final nIumber; and as consanguinity was, in
those ages, a powerful bond of union, all the
kindred of a nobleman interefled theinJlves in

5 his

ils quarrel, as a colmmon caufie; and every con- 1' °0 K
tefli the king hadi, though 'illh a tingle baron, ---
loon drew upoln him the arms of a whole confe-
deracy.

V. TH-osE natural connexions, both with their Their

1:- .,c~ and

qcluals and \with their inferiors, the Scotti:h nobles c:S ,ib.Ad-
llerngthcnced by a device, which, if not piccll.u I:r
to therltnlves, was at leat inore frcqucnt an.onlg
theml, than in any other nation. I.' vn in tiies
ot profound peace, they forl,,r.l a.:; io.'S,,
which wlien imade with their eq i;;':, '.i c:.!i

c i

l/eCrue'S cf mutual dfjsence; !ani v.!in v.,irh t:,ii
interiors, boinds of ailr'.en. :v t.c: fcIlme.', the
contracting ).urtiec boulnd tli.'ailvs mIutually t0
afliit eacl other, in all c,::'.. s, a an:d jijl all
persons. By the latter, irotc'icn ;,'a.; iliiitlatcd
on the one hand, and fidcliry ;an! It;r;..,ndl ,irvice
promised on the other'. Self-p'.relrva.ion, it is
probable, forced nmen at fii';: in'lo theili cc .iedc-
racics; and while difordll a;d r.:'pine were un1i-
verlal, while govecrnment w\v; tAlnl'itlcl, aind tile
authority of laws little liknown or reg Ild, near
neighbours foiund it nec'fn.lir to unitte in tlis
manner for their ctcuriity, and the weak were
obligl to cour t the patronage of the tirong. By
deglrees, thcl allbociations became to manay al-
liances offenfire and d(efenlvce ;i:;ainfl the throne;
and as their ollil.ition vw'as hceld to be more fa-
crel than any tic whatever, tlie.y ;gave ntuch um-
brige to our kinisd, and conirributed not a little
to the power andi ine(icpedlence of the nobility.

1 A5fl 30 o .. 1t . I.l. . i\A 1 .3. 1),rl,. 1,;;.

In

B o K In the reign of James II. Willian the eighth

earl of Doutlas entered Into a league of this kilnd
with the earls of Crawford, Ross, Murray, Or-
nmond, the lords !lanilron, Balvcny, and other
powcr'tul baronls; andt i forinidable wvas this
conll;naltion to the tking, that ie adl recourse to
a imelaillCe no eI's violent than unjull, in order to
diflolve it.

lie fre- VI. TE: ftrequcnt wars between Ingland and
q u!'rl? wars
w'i:l Eng- Scotland proved anothlr ciaulf of ;ulllgmnting the
i'"'i. power of the nobility. Nature 1has placed no

barrier between the two kingdomls; a river, al-
nioflt every-where fordable, d(ivid.is them towards
the east: on the welt they are Ipariated by an
imaginary line. The ilender revenues of our
kings prevented them from fortifying, or placing
garrisons in the towns on the frontier; nor
would the jealousy of their fubljets have per-
mitted ilich a method of defenlce. The barons,
wivrfe estates lay near the borders, confidered
themfclves as bound both in honour and in in-
terell' to repel the enellnl. The warderJiips of
the ldi !crellt miar.hcs, officcs of great power and
dignity, were generally bellowed on them. This
gained theln the leading of the warlike counties
in the south ; and their variTf.s, living in a state
of perpetual hollility, or enjoying at belt an in-
fecurc peace, became more inured to war than
even tlhe reft of their countrymen, and more wil-
ling to accolllpan)y their cliiefitaii in his most
hardy and danelrrous etllntrpr)les. It was the va-
lour, no leis than the number of their followers,

that

that rendered the Douglases great. The nobles B 010

o K

in the northern and midland counties were often
dutiful and obsequious to the crown, but our
monarchs always found it impraticable to subdue
the mutinous and ungovernable 1pirit of the bor-
derers. In all our domestic quarrels, those who
could draw to their fide the inhabitants of the
southern counties, were sure of vicory; and con-
fcious of this advantage, the lords who pofTeffcd
authority there, were apt to forget the duty which
they owed their sovereign, and to aspire beyond
the rank of fubjeccs.

VII. THE calamities which besel our kings The fre.

quent mni-
contributed more than any other cause to diminish nities

which hap.

the royal authority. Never was any race of mo- pe,'n'e i
narchs so unfortunate as the Scottish. Of fix Scotl"and
fucceflive princes, from Robert III. to James VI.
not one died a natural death; and the minorities,
during that time, were longer, and more fire-
quent, than ever happened in any other king-
dom. From Robert Bruce to James VI. we
reckon ten princes; and seven of there were called
to the throne while they were minors, and alinoft
infants. Even the most regular and bcft elta.
blifled governments feel sensibly the pernicious
effets of a minority, and either become languid
and inactive, or are thrown into violent and unna-
tural convulsions. But, under the imperfct a;nd
ill-acdjuLfted system of government in Scotland,
these effecs were still more fatal; the fierce and
mutinous spirit of the nobles, unrestraincd by the
authority of a king, scorned all fubjc'tion to the
delegated jurisdiction of a regent, or to the feeble

VOL. I. D commands

B 0o K commands of a minor. The royal authority was
aI- -_ circumscribed within narrower limits than ever;

the prerogatives of the crown, naturally incon-
fiderable, were reduced almost to nothing; and
the ariftocratical power gradually rose upon the
ruins of the monarchical. Left the personal power
of a regent Ihould enable him to a& with too
much vigour, the authority annexed to that office
was sometimes rendered inconsiderable, by being
divided; or, if a tingle regent was chosen, the
greater nobles, and the heads of the more illus-
trious families, were seldom raised to that dignity.
It was often conferred upon men who possessed
little influence, and excited no jealousy. They,
conscious of their own weakness, were obliged
to overlook some irregularities, and to permit
others; and in order to support their authority,
which was destitute of real firength, they endea-
voured to gain the most powerful and ative ba-
rons, by granting them possessions and immuni-
ties, which raised them to fill greater power.
When the King himself came to assume the reins
of government, he found his revenues wafted or
alienated, the crown lands seized or given away,
and the nobles so accustomed to independence,
that, after the struggles of a whole reign, he was
seldom able to reduce them to the fame state in
which they had been at the beginning of his mi-
nori ty, or to wrest from them what they had usurped

Revicw of during that time. If we take a view of what hap-
the events
favourable pened to each of our kings, who was so unfortu-
to tilhe
nobler dur- nate as to be placed in this situation, the truth and
milncr' . importance of this observation will fully appear.

THE

TI-E minority of David II. the son of Robert B 0 0 K

Bruce, was disturbed by the pretensions of Edward I
Baliol,who, relying on the aid of England, and on )Dai3d2.
the support of some d(ifaflte(ed barons among the
Scots, invaded the kingdom. The success which
at fir-P attended his arms, obliged the young king
to retire to France; and Baliol took poffelion of
the throne. A finill body of the nobles, however,
continuing faithful to their exiled prince, drove
Baliol out of Scotland; and after an absence of
nine years, David returned fiom France, and took
the government of the kingdom into his own
hands. But nobles, who were thus wafting their
blood and trealure in defence of the crown, had a
right to the unJifturbed poffefrion of their ancient
privileges ; and even some title to arrogate new
ones. It seems to have been a maxim in that age,
that every leader might claim as his own, the ter-
ritory which his sword had won from the enemy.
Great acquisitions were gained by the nobility in
that wa : and to there the gratitude and liberality
of David added, by distributing among such as
adhered to him, the vast poffefflons which fell to
the crown by the forfeiture of his enemies. The
family of Douglas, which began to rife above the
other nobles, in the reign of his father, augmented
both its power and its property, during his mi-
nority.

JAMES I. was seized by the Fnglifh during the 14o0.

continuance of a truce, and ungenerouflv detained Jame I
a prisoner almost nineteen years. During that pe-
riod, the kingdom was governed, firlt by his uncle
Robert duke of Albany, and then by Murdo, the

D 2 son

B o0 K son of Robert. Both these noblemen aspired to
i-,_* the crown; and their unnatural ambition, if we

may believe most of our hiflorians, not only cut
short the days of Prince David, the King's elder
brother, but prolonged the captivity of James.
They flattered themselves that they might ftep
with less opposition into a throne, when almost
vacant: and, dreading the King's return, as the
extinction of their authority, and the end of their
hopes, they carried on the negociations for ob-
taining his liberty with extreme remissness. At
the fame time, they neglected nothing that could
either Iooth or bribe the nobles to approve of their
fchen-ie. They slackened the reins of govern-
ment; they allowed the prerogative to be en-
croached upon; they suffered the most irregular
acs of power, and even wanton initances of op-
prefflon, to pass with impunity; they dealt out
the patrimony of the crown among those whose
enmity they dreaded, or whose favour they had
gained; and reduced the royal authority to a fate
of imbecility, from which succeeding monarchs
laboured in vain to raise it.

1437. DURING the minority of James II. the admini-
Jamcb 1I.

flration of affairs as well as the cultody of the
King's person were committed to Sir William
Crichton, and Sir Alexander Livingston. Jea-
lousy and discord were the effects of their conjunct
authority, and each of them, in order to strengthen
himnlelf, beflowcd new power and privileges upon
the great men, whose aid he courted. While the
young earl of Douglas, encouraged by their di-
visions, erectcd a fort of independent principality

within

within the kingdom; and forbidding his vassals B 0 0 K
to acknowledge any authority but his own, he _
created Knights, appointed a privy council, named
officers civil and military, assumed every ensign
of Royalty, but the title of King, and appeared
in public with a magnificence more than royal.

EIGHT persons were cho1len to govern the king- 1460.

dolm during the minority of James III. Lord Jam"lll'
Boyd, however, by feizi ng the person of tile young
King, and by the afccndantwhich lie acquired over
hiin, loon engrossed the whole authority. He
formed the ambitious projeft of raising his family
to the faime pitch of power and grandeur witl
rhofe of the prime nobility; and he effected it.
'While intent on this, he relaxed the vigour of go-
vernment, and the Barons became accustomed,
once more, to anarchy and independence. The
power, which Boyd had been at so much pains to
acquire, was of no long continuance, and the fall
of his family, according to the fate of favourites,
was sudden and deftruttive; but upon its ruins,
the family of Hamilton rose, which soon attained
the highelt rank in the kingdom.

As the minority of James V. was longer, it was Iames v.

likewise more turbulent than those of the preced-
ing Kings. And the contending nobles, encou-
raged or protectcd either by the King of France,
or of England, firmed themselves into more re-
gular faftions, and difi-egarded more than ever
the restraints of order and authority. The French
had the advantage of feeing one, devoted to their
interefl, railsed to be regent. This was the duke
of Albany, a native of France, and a grandson of

D 3 Jamnes

oB o K James II. But Alexander Lord Home, the most
(- -1 eminent of all the Scottish p-ers who survived

the fatal battle of Flowden, thwarted all his mea-
fures during the firit y)ears of his administration;
and the intrigues of the Queen Dowager, sifter
of Henry Vlli. rendered the latter part of it no
less feeble. Though supported by French auxili-
aries, the nobles defpiled his authority, and, re-
gardlefs either of his threats or his intreaties, per-
emptorily refused, two several times, to enter
England, to the borders of which kingdom he
had led them. Provoked by there repeated in-
flances of contempt, the regent abandoned his
troublesome station, and, retiring to France, pre-
ferred the tranquillity of aprivate life, to an office
destitute of real authority. Upon his retreat,
Douglas Earl of Angus became matter of the
King's person, and governed the kingdom in his
name. Many efforts were made to deprive him of
his usurped authority. But the numerous vassals
and friends of his family adhered to him, because
he divided with them the power and emoluments
of his office; the people reverenced and loved the
name of Douglas; he exercised, without the title
of regent, a fuller and more absolute authority
than any who had enjoyed that dignity and the
ancient, but dangerous, pre-eminence of the
Douglases seemed to be restored.

To these, and to many other causes, omitted

or unobserved by us, did the Scottilh nobility
owe that exorbitant and uncommon power, of
which inrtances occur tb frequently in our his-
tory. Nothing however dcmonftrates fu fully the

extent

extent of their power, as the length of its duration. B O0 K
Many years after the declension of the feudal sys-
tems in the other kingdoms of Europe, and
when the arms or policy of Princes had, every
where, shaken, or laid it in ruins, the founda-
tions of that ancient fabric remained, in a great
measure, firm and untouched in Scotland.

THE powers which the feudal institutions veited The power

of the (euo

in the nobles, soon became intolerable to all the da nobles
Princes of Europe, who longed to possess rome- becarlein
thing more than a nominal and precarious autho- Princes.
rity. Their impatience to obtain this, precipi-
tated Henry III. of England, Edward 1I. and
some other weak Princes, into rash and premature
attempts against the privileges of the Barons, in
which they were disappointed or perished. Princes,
of greater abilities, were content to mitigate evils
which they could not cure; they fought occupa-
tion for the turbulent spirit of their nobles, in fre-
quent wars; and allowed their fiery courage to
evaporate in foreign expeditions, which, if they
brought no other advantage, secured at least do-
meftic tranquillity. But time and accidents ri-
pened the feudal governments for deftrudion.
Towards the end of the fifteenth century, and be- The at-
ginning of the sixteenth, all the Princes of Europe fhulmbte the
attacked, as if by concert, the power of their ',bll.fu,,I
nobles. Men of genius then undertook with !ra'ie and

c-' inEngland.

success, what their unskilful predecessors had at-
tempted in vain. Lewis XI. of France, the mos
profound and the most adventurous genius of that
age, began, and in a single reign almost com-
pleted the scheme of their deftrudion. The sure

D 4 but

1x o K but concealed policy of Henry VII. of England

e-r produced the fame effect. The means, indeed,

employed by these monarchs were very different.
The blow whi, h Lewis Irruck was sudden and
fatal. The artifices of Henry relembled thoie
flow poisons, which warfe the conflitution, but
become not mortal till some distant period. Nor
did they produce consequences less opposite.
Lewis boldly added to the crown whatever he
wrested fiom the nobles. Henry undermined his
Barons, by encouraging them to fell their lands,
which enriched the commons, and gave them a
weight in the legislature unknown to their prede-

B'othe no. ceffors. But while there great revolutions were
bIes conti-
nue to carrying on in two kingdoms with which Scot-
g:ther ftngrh in land was intimately connected, little alteration
Scotland. happened there; our Kings could neither extend

their own prerogative, nor enable the commons
to encroach upon the aristocracy; the nobles not
only retained mofl of their ancient privileges and
poffefiions, but continued to make new acquifi.
tions.

Our K;ngs THIS was not owing to the inattention of our
endr ,tv ured .
to exte 'd Princes, or to their want of ambition. They were
,he .'il abundantly sensible of the exorbitant power of the

nobility, and extremely -olicitous to humble that
order. They did not, however, posess means sus-'
ficient for accoinplifling, this end, Thle resources
of our monarchs were few, and the progress which

.ellerii they made was of course incoLfiderable, But as
.ud this the number of their followers, and the extent of
ald.' their juiifdiction, were the two chief circum-

tlances which renldred the nobles formidable; in

order

order to counterbalance the one, and to restrain n 0 0 K
the other, all our Kings had recourse to nearly --
the fame expedients.

I. AMONG nobles of a fierce courage, and of Encourge

unpolifhed manners, surrounded with vassals bold mong ,he
and licentious, whom they were bound by interest ob.
and honour to protect, the causes of discord were
many and unavoidable. As the contending
parties could feldorn agree in acknowledging the
authority of any common superior or judge, and
their impatient spirit would seldom wait the flow
decisions of justice, their quarrels were usually
terminated by the sword. The offended Baron
affrnbled his vassals, and wafted the lands,or fled
the blood of his enemy. To forgive an injury,
was mean; to forbear revenge, infamous or cow-
ardly m. Hence quarrels were transmitted from

" The spirit of revenge was encouraged, not only by the
.nanner s, but, what is more rema-lrkable, by the laws of those
ages. If any person thought the profccuttion of an injury of-
'tferd to his family, too troublcfoine, or too dangerous, the Sa-
li(quc laws permitted hlim publicly to dcfift from demlanding
vcngeance ; but the falne laws, in order to punilh Iis cow-
llrdicc, and want of afidcion to his family, deprived him of
the right of ficccllon. Hcnautlt's A.brcg6 Chr-olol. p. ,.
Among the Anglo-Saxons, we ffind a iingtlar: inllmitution dif-

iinguilhcd by the namc of i/oda/irium ; at volul;tary afLociation,
the objet whicreiof was the pcrlnal i'curlity of tlofe who
juined in it, and which the fc)clcnefl s of goverlnnent t Ihlalt
time rendered nccclllry. A nong otlcir regullat ions, which
are contained in one of thefc fill extant, the following dc-
fervcs notice: If any :aficiate fliall cither cat or drink with
a person who has kille(l itny member of the fodan/lirtni, unless
in pe c o the

the 1inc o h g, the Billlop, or the Count, andC

unlef hie can prove that he did not know the person, let hliil
pay a great fine." Hicks Diffcrt. Epillolar. apud Thefau'r.
,Ling. Septentr. vol. i. p. 21,

father

B 0 OK father to son, and, under the name of deadly feztn,
u s--,- iubfifted for many generations, with unmitigated

rancour. It was the interest of the crown to so-
ment rather than to extinguish these quarrels;
and by fcattcring or cherishing the feeds of discord
among the nobles, that union, which would have
rendered the aristocracy invincible, and which
muf1 at once have annihilated the prerogative,
was eflfeually prevented. To the fame cause,
our Kings were indebted for the success with
which they sometimes attacked the most powerful
chieftains. They employed private revenge to
aid the impotence of public laws, and arming
against the person who had incurred their difplea-
sure, those rival families which wished his fall,
they rewarded their service by sharing among
them the spoils of the vanquiflied. But this ex-
pedient, though it served to humble individu-
als, did not weaken the body of the nobility.
Those who wcre now the infiruments of their
Prince's vengeance became, in a short time, the
obljecs of his fear. Having acquired power and
wealth by serving the Crown, they, in their turn,
set up for independence : and though there might
be a fliltuation of power, and of property; though
old families fell, and new ones rose upon their
ruins; the rights of the ariltocracy remained en-
tire, and its vigour unbroken.

Txten. tlh 1I. As the adminifl-ration of jufl:ice is one of
't'11'"" the muol: powerful ties between a King and his
<OiBz' fuibiae&s, all our monarchs were at the utmost pains

to circumlcribe the jurillifcion of the Barons,
and to extend that of the crown. The external
forms of subordination, natural to the feudal sys-

temn

tern, favoured this attempt. An appeal lay fiom B o o K
the judges and courts of the Barons, to those of -y-
the King. The right, however, of judging in
the first instance, belonged to the nobles, and
they easily found means to defeat the effect of ap-
peals, as well as of many other feudal regulations.
The royal jurifdilion was almost confined within
the narrow limits of the King's demesnes, beyond
which his judges claimed indeed much authority,
but possessed next to none. Our Kings were fen-
fible of these limitations, and bore them with im-
patience. But it was impofiible to overturn in a
moment, what was so deeply rooted; or to strip
the nobles, at once, of privileges which they had
held so long, and which were wrought almost in-
to the frame of the feudal constitution. To ac-
complifh this, however, was an objelc of uni-
form and anxious attention to all our princes.
James I. led the way, here, as well as in other
instances, towards a more regular and perfect po-
lice. He made choice, among the estates of par-
liament, of a certain number of persons, whom
he diftinguifhled by the name of Lords of Sefon,
and appointed them to hold courts for drtermin-
ing civil causes, three times in the year, and
forty days at a time, in whatever place he pleased
to name. Their jurifdilion txtended to all mat-
ters which formerly came under the cognizance
of the King's council, and being a committee of
parliament, their decisions were final. James I.
obtained a law, annexing all regalities, which
should be forfeited, to the crown, and declaring
the right ofjurifdiftion to be unalienable for tile

future.

B 01 K future. James III. imposed severe penalties upon

^-w those judges appointed by the Barons, whose de-

cifions should be found on a review to be unjust;
and, by many other regulations, endeavoured to
extend the authority of his own court . James IV.
on pretence of remedying the inconveniencies
arising from the filort terms of the court of Session,
appointed other judges called Lords of Daily Coun-
cil. The Scj/ion was an ambulatory court, and met
seldom : the Daily Council was fixed, and fat con-
ftantly at Edinburgh; and though not composed
of members of parliament, the fame powers
which the Lords of Setffon enjoyed were vested in
it. At last James V. erected a new court that still
fubGifts, and which he named the College of JuzJice,
the judges or Senators of which were called Lords
of Council and Seffon. This court not only exer-
cifed the fame jurifdi&ion which formerly be-
longed to the Session and Daily Council, but new
rights were added. Privileges of great import-
ance were granted to its members, its forms were
prescribed, its terms fixed, and regularity, power,
and splendour conferred upon it°. The persons
conflituted judges in all thele different courts
had, in many relpeds, the advantage of those who
presided in the courts of the Barons; they were
more eminent for their flill in law, their rules of
proceeding were more uniform, and their deci-
sions more confient. Such judicatories became
the objcts of confidence, and of veneration.
Men willingly submitted their property to their

" At 26 P. 1469. AA 94 P. 1493. ACt 99 1. 1487,
v l-ci'l, alpp. 74, &c.

deter-

determination, and their encroachments on the B 0 o K
jurifdiEions of the nobles were popular, and for -
that reason successful. By devices of a similar
nature, the jurisdiction of the nobles in criminal
causes was restrained, and the authority of the
court of Yliliciaiy extended. The crown, in this
particular, gaining insensibly upon the nobles,
recovered more ample authority ; and the King,
whofejurifdiEtion once resembled that of a Baron,
rather than that of a sovereign ", came more and

more

P The mofl perlfet idea of thi feudal fy lem of government

may )e attained by attending to the ltlat of Gerni:uny, and to
the hitlory of France. In the former, the feudal inflitutions
flill subsist with great vigour; and though altogether aboliflied
in the latter, the public records have been so carefully pre-
served, that the French lawyers and antiquaries have been
enabled, with more certainty and precision, than those of any
other country in Europe, to trace its rife, its progref, and
revolutions. In Germany, every principality may be con-
fidered as a fief, and all its great Princes as vfllfals, holding
of the Emperor. They polcrfs all the feudal privileges: their
fiefs are perpetual; tlhciljuriiliCtionis within t hei own\ territo-
ries separate and extenlive ; and the great offices of the em-
pire are all hereditary, and annexed to particular famnilies.
At the fauie time the Emperor retains malny of the prero-
galives of the feu;dal nlolltrchs. Like thein, his claims and
)pre.tenions are innulmerable, 1and his power finall; his jurif-
dicion withinl his own lednelths or hereditary countries is
complete ; beyond the bounds of these it is alinoll nothing;
and lb permanent are feudal principles, that although the ftu-
dal fytfern be overturned in almolt every particular (tate in
(cermany, and although the greater part of its Princes have
become ahllolute, the original feudal confkitution of the em-
pire fill remains, and ideas peculiar to th;t form of govern-
ncnt direi all its operations, and determine the rights of all
its Princes. Our observations with regard to the limited ju-

rifdialion

B 0 0 K more to be confidered as the head of the com-

.--w-. munity, and the supreme dispenser ofjuftice to

his people. These acquisitions of our Kings,
however, though comparatively great, were in
reality inconsiderable; and, notwithstanding all
their efforts, many of the separate jurifdiations
possessed by the nobles remained in great vigour;
and their final abolition was reserved to a distant
and more happy period.

Eachofour BUT besides these methods of defending their
Kings pur-
sucd fme prerogative, and humbling the aristocracy, which
~lan of
umbling may be confidered as common to all our Princes,
the nobles. we fiall find, by taking a review of their reigns,

that almost every one of our Kings, from Robert
Bruce to James V. had formed some particular
system for depressing the authority of the nobles,
which was the objeEt both of their jealousy and
terror. This condu&t of our monarchs, if we
reft satisfied with the accounts of their historians,

rifdi&tion of kings under the feudal governmcnts, arc greatly
illustrated by what happened in France. The fecblenefs and
dotage of the descendants of Charlemaigne encoul;ged the
Peers to usurp an independent juriiidilion. Nothing re-
mained in the hands of the crown ; all was seized by them.
When Hugh Capet afccnded the throne, A. D. 987, he
kept poflillion of his private patrimony the Conte of 'Paris;
and all tlhe jurifdition which the Kings his 1hccfnors ccer-
cifed for tome time, was within its territories. There were
only four towns in France, where he could efhtblilll Grands
Baillis, or royal judges ; all the other lands, towns, and bail-
lages belonged to the nobles. The methods to which tle
French monarchs had recourse for extendingl their jurifdic-
tion, were exactly similar to those employed by our Princes.
-Ienault's Albrcg, p. 617, &c. De l'Elirit dcs Loix, liv.
30. ch. 20, &c.

a~2 ~ mus[t

must be confidered as flowing entirely from their B o0 0
resentment against particular noblemen ; and all '
their attempts to humble them, must be viewed
as the sallies of private passion, not as the confe-
quences of any general plan of policy. But, though
some of their ations may be imputed to those
pafTions, though the different genius of the men,
the temper of the times, and the state of the na-
tion, necessarily occasioned great variety in their
schemes; yet, without being chargeable with ex-
ceflive refinement, we may affirm that their end
was uniformly the fame; and that the project of Th;s prov-

. ed by a re.-

reducing the power of the aritfocracy, Sometimes view of he
avowed, and pursued with vigour; sometimes ther'reign
concealed, or feerningly suspended; was never
altogether abandoned.

No Prince was ever more indebted to his nobles Robert

than Robert Bruce. Their valour conquered the
kingdom, and placed him on the throne. His
gratitude and generoGity bestowed on them the
lands of the vanquilhed. Property has feldor
undergone greater or more sudden revolutions,
than those to which it was fubje&, at that time,
in Scotland. Edward I. having forfeited the
etlates of most of the ancient Scottiflh Barons,
granted them to his English fubjeAs. Thcfe
were expelled by the Scots, and their lands seized
by new matters. Amidst such rapid changes,
confusion was unavoidable; and many possessed
their lands by titles extremely defective. During
one of those truces between the two nations, oc-
cafioned rather by their being weary of war, than
desirous of peace, Robert formed a scheme for

checking

B 0 0 K checking the growing power and wealth of the

_--_ nobles. He summoned them to appear, and to

shew by what rights they held their lands. They
assembled accordingly, and the question being
put, they started up, at once, and drew their
swords, " By these, said they, we acquired our
lands, and with there we will defend them."
The King, intimidated by their boldness, pru-
dently dropt the project. But so deeply did they
resent this attack upon their order, that, notwith-
standing Robert's popular and splendid virtues,
it occasioned a dangerous conspiracy against his
life.
David I. DAVID his son, at firfl an exile in France, as-

terwards a prisoner in England, and involved in
continual war with Edward III. had not leisure to
attend to the internal police of his kingdom, or
to think of retrenching the privileges of the no-
bility.
Robert II. OUR historians have been more careful to relate

the military, than the civil tranfa&ions of the reign
of Robert II. Skirmifies and inroads of little
consequence they describe minutely; but with re-
gard to every thing that happened during several
years of tranquillity, they are altogether silent.
robert I1. TIE feeble administration of Robert III. muff

likewise be passed over slightly. A Prince, of a
mean genius, and of a frail and sickly constitution,
was not a fit perlbn to enter the lifts with active
and martial Barons, or to attempt wresting from
them any of their rights.
James t. T-TE civil tranfaitions in Scotland are better

known since the beginning of the reign of James 1.

and

and a complete Series of our law s fpicsthe de- B o0 K
fe&s of our historians. T'Ih1 Englih made some -,--.
anmnds for their injuflice in c'.c:.ining thi;t l'iinrc
a prisoner, by their generous care of his educatirn.
During his long residence in Fn llani, he had an
opportunity of oblerving the fuLidal fyflem in a
more advanced slate, and refined from manv of
the imperfelions which still adllered to it, in his
own kingdom. I-e ftw tllere nobles great, but
not independent ; a King powerful, though far
fiom absolute; he litw a regular adminiflration of
governnent; wife laws enadced; and a nation
lourilhing and happy, because all ranks of men
were accustomed to obey them. Full of these
ideas, he returned into his native country, which
presented to him a very different fcnc!. The
royal authority, never great, was now con:empt-
ible, by having been so long iJlegat::d to regents.
The ancient patrimony, and revenues of the
crown, were almost totally ali:rn itcd. During his
long absence the name of Kin,, was little known,
'and less regarded. The licence ot Inany years had
rendered the nobles independent. U Unverfal
anarchy prevailed. The weak were expofucd to the
rapine and oppreflion of the dlrong. In evely
corner some barbarous chieftain ruled at pical'lirc,
and neither feared tllhe King, norpiticd the people's.

' :A cntcmnporary Monkifli writer d.l';'ric, ; ilicl c:aliJiiiL's

very feelingly, in his ritlc Latin. In dlicl,tts illis, n n crat IC x
in Scori;a, i'd quilibet ipolcntiolr n juniiorcin olnpprcit; ct
lo lln regnum fuiL unumn l,.itrociiiiio i ; loinmiiidi;, (dpr.l. ll-
(liiiics, inccndia, ct c tcera ,nilll,'i a.t rIi1;iiiJ.ri.t i ijirimlm il:t;
ci jnillii;. rclcgata cxtra. tclr ili s Ilcgli (c.<iilvit. Ci rtlul.Ir.
Mlorav. ap.ud Inncs Ell'ty, vol. i.p. 272.

VOL. I. E JAMES

B O K JAMES was too wife a Prince to employ open
,-- force to correct such inveterate evils. Neither the

men, nor the times would have borne it. He ap-
plied the gentler, and less offensive remedy of laws
and statutes. In a parliament held immediately
after his return, he gained the confidence of his
people, by many wife laws, tending visibly to re-
eftablifl order, tranquillity, and justice, in the
kingdom. But, at the fame time that he endea-
voured to secure there bleflings to his fubjeEs, he
dilcovered his intention to recover those posses-
lions of which the crown had been unjustly be-
reaved and for that purpose obtained an a&, by
which he was impowered to summon such as had
obtained crown lands during the three last reigns,
to produce the rights by which they held theme.
As this statute threatened the property of the
nobles, another which passed in a subsequent par-
liament,. aimed a dreadful blow at their power.
By it the leagues and combinations, which we
have already described, and which rendered the
nobles so formidable to the crown, were declared
unlawful'. Encouraged by this success in the
beginning of his enterprise, James's next flep
was ill bolder and more decisive. During the
fitting of parliament, he seized, at once, shis
cousin Murdo Duke of Albany, and his sons;
the Earls of Douglas, Lennox, Angus, March,
and above twenty other peers and barons of
prime rank. To all of them, however, he was
immediately reconciled, except to Albany, and

' Ad 9 P. 142. Aq 3 P.
1424.

his

his sons, and Lennox. These were tried by their B 0 ° K
Peers, and condemned; for what crime is now
unknown. Their execution struck the whole
order with terror, and their forfeiture added vail
possessions to the crown. He seized, likewise,
the earldoms of Buchan and Strathern, upon dif-
ferent pretexts; and that of Mar fell to him by
inheritance. The patience and inactivity of the
nobles, while the King was proceeding so rapidly
towards aggrandizing the crown, are amazing.
The only obftruilon he met with was from a
flight insurrection headed by the Duke of Alba-
ny's youngest son, and that was easily suppressed.
The Iplendour and presence of a King, to which
the great men had been long unaccustomed, in-
spired reverence: James was a Prince of great
abilities, and conduEced his operations with much
prudence. He was in friiendfiip with Eng-
land, and closely allied with the French King:
He was adored by the people, who enjoyed un-
uflal security and happiness under his adminif-ra-
tion: And all his acquisitions, however fatal to
the body of the nobles, had been gained by at-
tacks upon individuals; were obtained by deci-
sions of law; and being founded on circum-
stances peculiar to the persons who suffered,
might excite murmurs and apprehensions, but
afforded no colourable pretext for a general re-
bellion. It was not so with the next attempt
which the King made. Encouraged by the faci-
lity with which he had hitherto advanced, he
ventured upon a measure that irritated the whole
body of the nobility, and which the events flew

E 2 cither

B1 0 o K cihicr to have been entered into with too much
-- -_ I)precipitiancy, or to have been carried on with too

much violence. The father of George Dunbar
Earl of MIarch had taken arms against Ro-
bert III. tile King's father; but that crime had
been pardoned, and his lands restored by Robert
Dukic of Albany. James, on pretext that the
regent had exceeded his power, and that it was
the prerogative of the King alone to pardon
treaibn, or to alienate lands annexed to the crown,
obtained a sentence, declaring the pardon to be
void, and depriving Dunbar of the earldom.
Many of the great men held lands by no other
right than what they derived from grants of the
two Dukes of Albany. Such a decilion, though
they had reason to expe& it in consequence of the
statute which the King had obtained, occasioned
a general alarm. Though Dunbar was, at pre-
sent, the only sufferer, the precedent might be
extended, and tleir titles to poffeflions, which
they conlidcrcd as tlle renwards of their valour,
mighlt be fubjec(ed to the review of courts of
law, whole forms of pr):cecding, and jurifdition,
were in a martial age little known, and extremely
odious. Terror and (lil'content spread fast, upon
this difcovcry of the King's intentions; the corp-
inon danecr called on the whole order to unite,
and to make one bold stand, before they were
ltripped Ilicctllively of their acquilitions, and
reduced to a ilate of poverty and insignificance.
''lie prevalence of there lentiments among the
nobles encouraged a few desperate men, the
friends or followers of those who had been the

chief

chief sufferers under the King's adminifration, n o0 K
to form a con-piracy against his life. The first _
uncertain intelligence of this was brought him,
while he lay in his camp before Roxburgh cattle.
I-Ie durst not coifide in nobles, to whom he had
given so many causes of difgbift, but instantly
dismissed them and their vassals, and, retiring to
a monastery near Perth, was toon after murdered
there, in the most cruel manner. All our hiflo-
rians mention, with afLonifhment, this circum-
stance of the IKing's disbanding lis army, at a
time when it was to necessary for his prfclrva-
tion. A King, fay they, surrounded with his
Barons, is secure fromn fecrcl trealon, and cmay
defy open rebellion. But thofi very Barons were
the persons whom he chiefly dreaded ; and it is
evident from this review of his adminifiration,
that he had greater reason to apprehend danger,
than to expect defence from their hands. It was
the misfortune of James, that his maxims and
manners were too refined for the age in wlich lie
lived. -Tappy ! had he reigned in a kingdom
more civilized; his love of peace, of juflice, and
of elegance, would have rendered his fchlimes
iiccefsful ; and inflead of perilhing becaulse he
had attempted too much, a grateful peolle
would have appiauded and flconded his efln'uts to'
reform and to improve them.

CRICHTON, tie moll able man of tliole who JamncII.

had the direction of affairs during the mi nority of
James II. had been the minil'er of James I. and
well acquainted with his relblution of hilltilnli),
the nobility. He did not rclinquifl the dclign,

E 3 and

B 0 0 K and he endeavoured to inspire his pupil with the
t_ - fame fenriments. But what James had attempted

to effea slowly, and by legal means, his ton and
Crichton pursued with the impetuosity natural to
Scotsmen, and with the fierceness peculiar to that
age. William the sixth Earl of Douglas was the
first vicim to their barbarous policy. That young
nobleman (as we have already observed) con-
temning the authority of an infant prince, almost
openly renounced his allegiance, and aspired to
independence. Crichton, too high spirited to
bear such an insult, but too weak to curb or to
bring to justice so powerful an offender, decoyed
him by many promises to an interview in the castle
of Edinburgh, and, notwithstanding there, mur-
dered both him and his brother. Crichton, how-
ever, gained little by this aft of treachery, whicl
rendered him universally odious. William the
eighth Earl of Douglas was no less powerful, and
no lels formidable to the crown. By forming the
league which we already mentioned with the Earl
of Crawford and other Barons, he had united
againfl his Sovereign almoil one half of his king-
domn. But his credulity led him into the fame
Inare which had been fatal to the former Earl.
I'elying on the King's promises, who had now at-
t,ained to the years of manhood, and having ob-
tained a ltale-conduct under the great fital, he ven-
tured to meet him in Stirling cattle. James
1urged him to diflolve that dangerous confederacy
into which lie had cntcred ; the Earl obltillately
refutFted(; " I you will not," laid the enlraged
mlonarch, drawing his dagger, ( l'This ilall;" and

flabbed

tiabbed him to the heart. An action so unworthy B OO oK
of a King filled the nation with astonishment, and --
with horror. The Earl's vassals ran to arms with
the utmost fury, and dragging the fafe-condu&,
which the King had granted and violated, at a
horse's tail, they marched towards Stirling, burnt
the town, and threatened to besiege the castle.
An accommodation ensucd ; on what terms is not
known. But the King's jealousy, and the new
Earl's power and resentment, prevented it from
being of long continuance. Both took the field,
at the head of their armies, and met near Aber-
corn. That of the Earl, composed chiefly of
borderers, was far superi.or to the King's, both it
number and in vajour; and a single battle must,
is all probability, have decided whether the house
of Stewart or of Douglas was henceforth to pof-
iCfs the throne of Scotland. But, while his troops
impatiently expeted the signal to engage, the
Earl ordered them to retire to their camp; and Sir
James Hamilton of Cadyow, the person in whom
he placed the greatest confidence, convinced of
his want of genius to improve an opportunity, or
of his want of courage to seize a crown, deserted
him that very night. This example was followed
by many; and the Earl, despised or forsaken by
all, was soon driven out of the kingdom, and
obliged to depend for his fubfiftencc on the fi-iend-
flip of the King of England. The ruin of this
great family, which had so long rivalled andover-
awed the crown, and the terror with which such
an example of unsuccessful ambition filled the
nobles, secured the King, for some time, from

E 4 opposition ;

B 0 0 K opposition; and the royal authority remained un-
<( controlled and almofn- abfolutc. James did not

fuffir this favourable interval to pl)is unimnproved;
he procured the consent of parliament to laws
more advantageous to the prerogative, and more
fubverflve of the privileges of the ariltocracy, than
were ever obtained by any former or subsequent
monarch of Scotland.

By one of these, not only all the valf possessions

of the Earl of Douglas were annexed to the crown,
but all prior and future alienations of crown lands
were declared to be void, and the King was im-
powered to seize them at pleasure, without any
process or form of law, andoblige the possessors
to refund whatever they had received from them'.
A dreadful instrument of opprefion in the hands
of a Prince !

ANOTHER law prohibited the wardenship of the

.marches to be granted hereditarily; restrained, in
several inflances, the jurisdiction of that office;
and extended the authority of the King's courts".

BY a third, it was enaaced that no Regality, or

cxclufive right of administering juttice within a
man's own lands, should be granted in time to
come, without the content of Parliamentx; a con-
dition which implied alinoft an express prohibi-
tion. Thofie nobles who already poffefred that
grea.t privilege, would naturally be solicitous to
reCVCent it from becoming conimon, by being be-
lloc oni many. Tholfe who had not theifelves
;ticained( it, would envy others the acquisition of

A ,' 11 P. I 5. "11i. AJl 42.
l Ibidl. ALl .; '.

such

such a flatteringdiftinEtion; and both would con- B 0 0 K
cur in rejecing the claims of new pretenders.

BY a fourth at, all new grants of hereditary

offices were prohibited, and those obtained since
the death of the latt King were revoked Y.

EACH of these ftatutcs undermined some of the

great pillars on which the power of the aristocracy
refted. During the remainder of his reign, this
Prince purl-ued the plan which he had begun,
with the utmoir vigour; and had not a sudden
death, occasioned by the splinter of a cannon
which burit near him at the siege of Roxburgh,
prevented his progress, he wanted neither genius
nor courage to perfect it: And Scotland might,
in all probability, have been the first kingdom in
Europe which would have fcen the subversion of
the feudal system.

JAMES III. discovered no lels eagerness than his James lr.

father or grandfather to humble the nobility; but
far inferior to either of them in abilities and ad-
dress, he adopted a plan extremely impolitic, and
his reign was difaptrous, as well as his end tragical.
Under the feudal governments, the nobles were
not only the King's ministers, and pofiieifed of all
the great offices of power or of trust; they were
likewise his companions and favouritcs, and hardly
any but them approached his person, or were en-
titled to his regard. But James, who both feared
and hated his nobles, kept theln at an unusual dif-
tance, and bestowed every mark of confidence and
affection upon a few nmean perflons, of profefions
so difhonourablc, as ought to have rendered them

v Ac.t - 4.

unworthy

B o 0 K unworthy of his presence. Shut up with there in

c_ l-- his cartle of Stirling, he seldom appeared in pub-

lic, and amused himself with architecure, music,
and other arts, which were then little efteerned.
The nobles beheld the power and favour of these
m-inions with indignation. Even the sanguinary
measures of his father provoked them less than
his neglec. Individuals alone suffercd by the
former; by the latter, every man thought himself
injured, because all were contemned. Their dif-
content was much heightened by the King's re-
calling all rights to crown lands, hereditary offices,
rcegalities, and every other concefilon which was
detrimental to his prerogative, and which had
been extorted during his minority. Combinations
amongl themnfelves, secret intrigues with England,
and all the usual preparatives for civil war, were
the eflfets of their resentment. Alexander Duke
of Albany, and John Earl of Mar, the King's
brothers, two young men of turbulent and ambi-
tious spirits, and incensed agaiift James, who
treated tlhcm with the fame coldness as he did the
other great men, entered deeply into all their ca-
bals. The King deteEted their designs, before
they were ripe for execution, and, seizing his two
brothers, committed the Duke of Albany to Edin-
burgh caltle. The Earl of Mar having remon-
trhated witl too much boldness againlt the King's
conductl, was murdered, if we may believe our
hiflorians, by his command. A lbany, apprehen-
five of the iame fate, made his escape out of the
callle, and fled into France. Concern for the
King's honour, or indignation ;It his meafurcs,

we're

were perhaps the motives which first induced him n o o K
to join the malecontents. But James's attach- -
ment to favourites rendering him every day more
odious to the nobles, the profpe& of the advan-
tages which might be derived from their general
dilfaffecion, added to the resentment which he
felt on account of his brother's death, and his own
injuries, soon inspired Albany with more ambi-
tious and criminal thoughts. -le concluded a
treaty with Edward IV. of England, in which he
airumed the name of Alexander King of Scots;
and in return for the assistance which was promiled
him towards dethroning his brother, he bound
himself, as soon as he was put in possession of the
kingdom, to swear fealty and do homage to the
Englifl monarch, to renounce the ancient alliance
with France, to contrta a new one with Eng-
land, and to surrender some of the ftrongefl caflecs
and most valuable counties in Scotland t. Tlhar
aid, which the Duke so basely purchased at the
price of his own honour, and the independence of
his country, was punctually granted him, and the
D)uke of Gloucester with a powerful army con-
duciedl him towards Scotland. The danger of a
foreign invasion obliged James to implore the as-
fiflance of those nobles whom he lhad so long
treated with contempt. Some of them were in
close confederacy with the Duke of Albany, and
approved of all his pretensions. Others were im-
patient for any event which would restore their
ord(er to its ancient pre-eminence. They feemled,
however, to enter with zeal into the meafurces of

. Abcrcr. MI.rtr. Alchi. v. ii. p. 443.

their

0 oo K their sovereign for the defence of the kingdom
_~- againftl its invaders , and took the field, at the

head of a powerful army of their followers, but
with a flronger disposition to redrels their own
grievances, than to annoy the enenmy; and with
a fixced rcfolution of punifhiing thol l minions,
\vholh insolence they could no longer tolerate.
This relblution they executed in the camp near
Lauder, with a military dispatch and rigour.
Having previously concerted their plan, the Earls
of Angus, Huntly, Lennox, followed by almost
all the barons of chief note in the armly, forcibly
entered the apartment of their fbvereign, seized
all his favourites except one Ramsay, whom thev
could not tear from the King, in whose arms he
took shelter, and, without any form of trial,
hanged them inflantly over a bridge. Among the
nmoft remarkable of thole wlio had engrossed the
King's affection, were Cochran a malon, I-lommil
a taylor, Leonard a finith, Rogers a musician, and
Torfifan a fencing-mafler. So despicable a reti-
nue dilcovers the capriciousness of James's cha-
ra(tcr, and accounts for the indignation of the
nobles, when they beheld the favour, due to them,
beltowed on fucli unworthy objedts.

JAMES had no reason to confide in an army so

little under his commnand, n, dlifinifing it, shut
himself up in the castle of Edinburgh. After va-
rious intrigues, Albany's lands anld honours were
at lengthl rcflored to him, and he seemed even to
have re gilined hlis brother's fa.vour, by tome i m-
portant lrviccs. But their fr1icnfclflip was not of

hk L

9rl\i ,s
,E s, i.,!. 6 .l

lonl

lonrz duration. James abandoned himfclrf, once L' o o K
ilmore, to the guidance of favourites ; and the f.:c --.
of those who had fiulclred at Lauder, didl not 1de-
tcr others from courting that dangerous pre-em!-
nence . Albsan, on pr:etcxt that ,an attenpt hd
been made to i.xtc away his lii' by poison, fl'd
from court, and, ertir;-i'.'r o hiis catcle at Dunbar,
dei;v thithl:r ea ,1, ca:tr niluber of Bar-ns 'han at"
teliCedl on the Kiti imi-. iAs the lae ti
he renewed his former confederacy with idl ward;
the 1.ar-l of Aing ,u opet nly ni-gociated that infamous
tr.eaty; other Barons were readyl, i. concur with
it; and if the fuldden death of rEdward had not
prevented A.lbany's receiving any aid fiom Eng-
land, the crown of Scotland would probably have
been the reward of this ulnworhyly combination
with the enemies of his country. But, instead of
any hopes of reigling in Scotland, he found,upon
the death of 1Edward, that he could not reidec
there in safety; and flying fi-'.t to Englanl, and
then to France, he feeins from that time to have
taken no part in the affairs of his native country.
lhiboldlnell d by his retreat, the King and his
Mlinifi-trs multiplied the insults which they of-
sered to the nobility. A tanding guard, a thing
unknown under the feudal governiments, and in-
consistent with tlce familiarity and confidence
with which monarchs tthen livedl amidlll tihir
nobles, was rai lid for the King's defence, and the
commanld of it given to Ramsay, lately created
Earl of Bothwell, the fame perlon who had so
narrowly cfcapcd when his companions were put
to death at Ladler. As if this precaution had

5 not

B 010 K not been sufficient, a proclamation was ifflue-l,
---... forbidding any person to appear in arms within

the precincts of the court ; which, at a time
when no man of rank left his own house without a
numerous retinue of armed followers, was, in es-
feEt, debarring the nobles from all access to the
King. James, at the fame time, became fonder
of retirement than ever, and, funk in indolence
or superstition, or attentive only to amusements,
devolved his whole authority upon his favourites.
So many injuries provoked the most considerable
nobles to take arms, and having persuaded or
obliged the Duke of Rothesay, the King's eldest
Ion, a youth of fifteen, to set hirnfelf at their
head, they openly declared their intention of de-
priving James of a crown, of which he had dif-
covered himeilf to be so unworthy. Rouscd by
this danger, the King quitted his retirement, took
the field, and encountered them near Bannock-
burn ; but the valour of the Borderers, of whom
the army of the malecontents was chiefly com-
posed, Toon put his troops to flight, and he him-
self was slain in the purfulit. Suspicion, indo-
lence, immoderate attachment to favourites, and
all the vices of a feeble mind, are visible in his
whole conduct; but the character of a cruel and
unrelenting tyrant teems to be unjustly affixed to
him by our hiflorians. I-is neglect of the nobles
irritated, but did not weaken them ; and their
dicontent, the immoderate ambition of his two
brothers, and their unnatural confederacies with
England, were sufficient to have diflurbed a more

b Fcrrerils, 398.

6 vigorous

vigorous admiiniftration, and to have rendered a B 0 0 K
prince of superior talents unhappy.

THE indignation which many persons of rank

expressed against the conduct of the conspirators,
together with the terror of the sentence of excom-
munication which the Pope pronounced against
them, obliged them to use their vicory with
great moderation and humanity. Being con-
fcious how detestable the crime of imbruing their
hands in the blood of their sovereign appeared,
they endeavoured to regain the good opinion of
their countrymen, and to aton-e for the treatment
of the father, by their loyalty and duty towards
the son. They placed him instantly on the
throne, and the whole kingdom soon united in
acknowledging his authority.

JAMES IV. was naturally generous and brave; Jam: IIV

lie felt, in an high degree, all the passions which
animate a young and noble mind. He loved
magnificence, he delighted in war, and was eager
to obtain fame. During his reign, the ancient
and hereditary enmity between the King and
nobles seems almost entirely to have ceased. l-Ie
envied not their splendor, bccaufe it contributed
to the ornament of his court; nor did he dread
their power, which he confidered as the ficurity of
his kingdom, not as an objct of terror to hilm-
self. This confidence on his part met with the
proper return of duty and aflFction on theirs;
and, in his war with England, he experienced
how much a King, beloved by his nobles,
is able to perform. Though the ardour of his
courage, and the spirit of chivalry, rather than

the

B oO K the profpec: of any national advantage, were the

.----i motives of that expedition; such was the zeal of

his subje&s for the King's glory, that he was fol.
lowed by as gallant an army, as ever any of his
ancestors had led upon English ground. But
though James himself formed no scheme danger-
ous or detrimental to the aristocracy, his reign
was distinguished by an event extremely fatal to
it; and one accidental blow humbled it more
than all the premeditated attacks of preceding
Kings. In the rafl and unfortunate battle of
Flowden, a brave nobility chore rather to die than
to desert their Sovereign. Twelve Earls, thir-
teen Lords, five eldest sons of noblemen, and an
incredible number of barons, fell with the King c.
The whole body of the nobles, long and sensibly,
felt this disaster; and if a Prince of full age had
then ascended the throne, their consternation and
feebleness would have afforded him advantages
which no former monarch ever possessed.
James v. BUT James V. who succeeded his father, was

an infant of a year old; and though the office of
regent was conferred upon his cousin the Duke of
Albany, a man of genius and enterprise, a native
of France, and accustomed to a government
where the power of the King was already great;
though he made many bold attemp:s to extend
the royal authority; though he put to death
Lord Home, and banished the Earl of Angus,
the two noblemen of greatest influence in the
kingdom, the aristocracy loft no ground under
his administration. A firanger to the manners,

c Aber. ii. 5 [o.

the

lthe laws, and the language of the people whom B 00 K
i he was called to rule, he actel, on some occasions, v_
' rather like a viceroy of the French King, than the

'; governor of Scotland; but the nobles aflerted
, their own privileges, and contended for ]i'e in-
reueft of their country with a boldness, which con-
vinced him of their independence, and of the im-
p)otence of his own authority. After several un-
i successful truglgles, he voluntarily retired to
F I'rance; and the King being then in his thir-
tceenth year, the nobles agreed that he flould
asSume the government, and that eight persons
| should be appointed to attend him by turns, and
to advise and aflif him in the administration of
tpublic affairs. The Earl of Angus, who was one
of that number, did not long remain satisfied with
i fich divided power. He gained some of his col -
leagues, removed others, and intimidated the reft.
\When the term of his attendance expired, he fRill
retained authority, to which all were obliged to
lisbmic, becaule none of them was in a condition
to dipute it. The affection of the young King
was the only thing wanting, to fix and perpetuate
his power. But an acQive and high- fpiirited Prince
i'ibi nitted, with great impatience, to the reftlaint
ill which he was ciVt. It ill suited his years, or
dilpioiution, to be confined as a prisoner within his
own palace; to he rreated with no relpct', ant to
be dcprlived of all power. I-Ie could not, on
lome occasions, conceal his resentment and in-
dignation. Ansgus forl fitw that he hadt much to
(Ic'ad firoln tiel'c; :liid as he could not gain the
King's hea;rt, le relulvcld to make lure of his per-

Vol-. I. 1' tn.

B 0o0 K son. James was continually surrounded by the
I_--_ Earl's spies and confidents; many eyes watched

all his motions, and observed every ftep he took.
But the King's eagerness to obtain liberty eluded
all their vigilance. He escaped fiom Falkland,
and fled to the castle of Stirling, the residence of
the Queen his mother, and the only place of
strength in the kingdom which was not in the
hand of the Douglales. The nobles, of whom
some were influenced by their hatred to Angus,
and others by their refpeec for the King, crowded
to Stirling, and his court was soon filled with per-
sons of the greatest diftin&tion. The Earl, though
aftonifled at this unexpeted revolution, resolved,
at first, to make one bold push for recovering his
authority, by marching to Stirling at the head of
his followers; but he wanted either courage or
fIrength to execute this resolution. In a parlia-
ment held soon after, he and his adherents were
attainted, and after escaping from many dangers,
and enduring much misery, he was at length ob-
liged to fly into England for refuge.

JAMES had now not only the name, but, though

extremely young, the full authority of a King. 1-Ie
was inferior to no prince of that age in gracefulness
ofperfon, or in vigour of mind. Hi-s understand-
ing was good, and his heart warm; the former ca-
pable of great improvemnent, and the latter fufcep-
tible of the best impreflions. But, according to the
usual fate of Princes who are called to the throne
in their infancy, his education had been negleced.
HI-s private preceptors were more ready to flatter,
than to inifruc him. It was the interelt of those

who

who governed the kingdom, to prevent him fromn B 0 o Kr
knowing too much. The Earl of Angus, in or- t'-
der to divert him from business, gave him an early
taste for such pleasures as afterwards occupied and
engrossed him more than became a King. Ac-
corcdingly,we discover in James all the features of a
great but uncultivated spirit. On the one hand,
violent passions, implacable resentment, an immo-
derate desire of power, and the utmost rage at dif-
appointment. On the other, love to his people,
zeal for the punifliment of private oppressors, con-
fidence in his favourites, and the moit engaging
openness and affability of behaviour.

WHAT he himfelfhad suffered from the exorbi-

tant power of the nobles, led him early to imitate
his predecessors, in their attempts to humble them.
The plan he formed for that purpose was more pro-
found, more systematic, and pursued with greater
constancy and steadiness, than that of any of his
anceltors: And the influence of the events in his
reign upon those of the subsequent period, render
it necessary to explain his conduct atgreaterlength,
and to enter into a more minute detail of his ac-
tions. He had penetration enough to discover those
defects in the schemes adopted by former Kings,
which occasioned their miscarriage. The example
of James I. had taught him, that wife laws ope-
rate slowly on a rude people, and that the fierce
spirit of the feudal nobles was not to be subdued
by these alone. The eflects of the violent Inmeaures
of James II. convinced him, that the oppreflion of
one great family is apt either to excite the suspicion
and resentment of the other nobles, or to enrich

F 2 with

B 0 0 K with its spoils some new family, which would soon
1; , / aadopt the lanme sentiments, and become equally

formidable to the crown. He saw, fiom the fatal
end of James III. that neglect was still more in-
tolerable to the nobles than oppression, and that
the Ministry of new men and favourites was both
difionourable and dangerous to a Prince. At the
fame time, he felt that the authority of the crown
was not sufficient to counterbalance the power of
the ariflocracy,and that,witlhout some new acceflion
of strength, he could expec no better success in
the struggle than his ancestors. In this extremity,
he applied himself to the clergy, hoping that they
would both relinl his plan, and concur, with all
their influence, in enabling him to put it in
execution. Under the feudal government, the
church, being reckoned a third eltate, had its re-
presentatives in parliament; the number of there
was considerable, and they pofleffed great influ-
ence in that afTembly. The fuperf-ition of former
Kings, and the zeal of many ages of ignorance,
had liefowed on ecclefiafiics a great proportion of
the national wealth; and the authority which they
acquired by the reverence of the people, was fu-
perior even to that which they derived fiom their
riches. This powerful body, however, depended
entirely on the crown. The Popes, notwith-
fianding their attention to extend their ufurpa-
tions, had negleCted Scotland as a diflant and
poor kingdom, and permitted its Kings to cxer-
cifc powers which they dil putcd with Inore con-
fiderahle princes. The Scottifl Inonarchs had
the folc right of nomination to vacant biflpoprics

and

and abbeys '; and James naturally concluded, B o° K

I.

that men who expecEed preferment from his fa-
vour, would be willing to merit it, by proimoting
his designs. Happily for him, the nobles had
not yet recovered the blow which fell on their or-
der at Flowden ; and if wxe may juldge either from
their condut, or from the character given of them
by Sir Ralph Sadler the nglifh envoy in Scot-
land, they were men of little genius, of no expe-
rience in business, and incapable of afting either
with unanimity, or with vigour. Many of the
clergy, on the other hand, were diftinguiihed by
their great abilities, and no less by their ambi-
tion. Various causes of disgust had arisen be-
tween them and the nobles, who dcflpifed their
character, and envied their power, or their wealth.
By acting in concert with the King, they not only
would gratify him, but avenge themifelves, and
holPed to aggrandise their own order, by depref-
lilr those who were their sole rivals. Secure of
so p)werful a concurrence, James ventured to
proc'ed with greater boldnefis. In the first heat
of rclintlnent, he had driven the Earl of Angus
out of the kingdom ; and, flenfible that a person lb
far fiiupriior to the other nobles in abilities might
create many obflaclcs which would retard or rcin-
der inefli'cttal all his schemes, he foiemnly lwore,
that he would never permlit him to return into
Scotland; and, notwithilldinlig tle repeated soli-
citations of the King of I"rgland, lihe adhered to
his vow with unrelenting obllinacy. 1 ie then pro-

1 Lpit. Reg. Scot. i. 197, &c. Ad 12s. 1. 15.io.

F 3 ccc.dcl'

B 0 0 K ceeded to repair the fortifications of Edinburgh,

L - Stirling, and other castles, and to fill his maga-

zines with arms and ammunition. Having taken
these precautions by way of defence, he began to
treat the nobility with the utmoit coldncfs and re-
serve. Those offices, which they were apt, from
long possession, to confider as appropriated to
their order, were now bestowed on ecclesiastics,
who alone possessed the King's ear, and, together
with a few gentlemen of inferior rank, to whom
he had communicated his schemes, were intrufded
with the management of all public affairs. These
ministers were chosen with judgment; and Car-
dinal Beatoun, who soon became the most eminent
among them, was a man of superior genius. They
served the King with fidelity, they carried on his
measures with vigour, with reputation, and with
success. James no longer concealed his distrust
of the nobles, and suffered no opportunity of mor-
tifying them to escape. Slight offences were ag-
gravated into real crimes, and punished with fe-
verity. Every accusation against persons of rank
was heard with pleasure, every appearance of guilt
was examined with rigour, and every trial proved
fatal to those who were accused: The banilhing
Hepburn Earl of Bothwell for reasons extremely
frivolous, the beheading the eldest son of Lord
Sorbes without sufficient evidence of his guilt,
and the condemning Lady Glamis, a sifter of the
Earl of Angus, to be burnt for the crime of witch-
craft, of which even that credulous age believed
her innocent, are monuments both of the King's
hatred of the nobility, of the severity of his go-

vernment,

vernment, and of the stretches he made towards B O0 K
absolute power. By thele ats of authority, he ,-- -
: tried the spirit of the nobles, and how much they
were willing to bear. Their patience increased his
contempt for them, and added to the ardour and
boldness with which he pursued his plan. Mean-
while they observed the tendency of his schemes
with concern, and with resentment; but the
King's sagacity, the vigilance of his ministers, and
the want of a proper leader, made it dangerous to
concert any measures for their defence, and im-
possible to act with becoming vigour. James and
his counsellors, by a false ftep which they took,
presented to them, at length, an advantage which
they did not fail to improve.

MOTIVES, which are well known, had prompted

Henry VIII. to disclaim the Pope's authority, and
to seize the revenues of the regular clergy. His
fyftern of reformation satisfied none of his fubjets.
Some were enraged because he had proceeded so
far, others murmured because he proceeded no
farther. By his imperious temper, and alternate
perfecutionsof the zealots forPopery, and the con-
verts to the Proteftantopinions, he was equally for-
midable to both. H-enry was afraid that this gene-
ral diffatisfation of his people might encourage his
enemies on the continent to invade his kingdom.
He knew that both the Pope and Emperor courted
the fiiendfhip of the king of Scots, and endeavour-
ed to engage him in an alliance against England.
-le resolved, therefore, to dilfapoint the effecs of
their negociations, by entering into a closer union
with his nephew. In order to accomplifl this, he

F 4 tranfnit-

B 0 0 K transmitted to James an elaborate nemnorial, ro-
.--. _* presenting thle numerous encro.achmll ents of tlhe

fee of Ronme upon the rights of tovereigns ; and
that he Inight induce himi mlore certainly to adopt
the fame measures for abolilhiing papal ulurpa-
tion, which had proved lbo c(;caciot. s in England,
he lent anba-fltdors into Scotland, to propose a
personal int-rview witli him at York. It was
plainly James's interefl to accept this invitation,;
the afilltance o0f ls powe\-rful an ally , the high ho-
nours which were promiiiled hilm, and the liberal
subsidies he might have obtained, would have
aIddcd no little dignity to his donlteic govern-
imenti, and iwufl have greatly iiciiitated the exe-
cucion of his favourite plan. On the other hand,
a war with England, which he had reason to ap-
prehend, if he rejectld lI- lnry's oflirs of firiend-
ihip, was inconfillent witih all his views. Th is
would bring him to dep cild on his barons; an army
could not be rairtd without their aftiltance: To
call nobles incensed againf( their p:ince into the
field, was to unite his enemies, to make tlhelnl Ien-
fible of their own ll:ren-th, and to alSord them an
opportunity of revtnging their wVrongs. Jaes,
who was not ignorant that all tlheft consequences
might follow a breach with l.nngland, liflcened at
firll to 1ienrl's pIropofal, and collcntecid to the
interview at Yoork. Butl the clergy dreaded an
union, whiclih mlll have beeln clt.ablilfhd on the
ruins of the church. Ilenry had taken great
pains to inft'fc into his nephew his own senti-

)e Lt1ypc, E'cf.!. C Ap.
I ir) 155

men.ts

linents concerning religion, and had fiequently B 010 K
:I iolicited him, by ambassadors, to renounce the ---
M ulfulrpcd dominion of the Pope, which was no
, lcis dishonourable to princes than grievous to

t: their -lUbIc'Cs. Thle clergy had hitherto, with
: great aiddrefs, diverted the King fiom regarding
these solicitations. But, in an amicable confer-
ence, Henry expcSted, and they feared, that
., lames woulcd yield to his entreaties, or be con-
v vinced by his arguments. They lnew that the
revenues of the church were an alluring olject to
: a Prince who wanted money, and who loved it;
d that the pride and ambition of ecclefiaflics railed
.the indignation of tihe nobles; that trleir indecent
lives gave ofience to the people ; that the Pro-
j tlfant opinions were spreading fast throughout
i tli nationi; and that an universal defection from
. thc ctlablilhed church would be the consequence

of ' iving the inialleft degree of encouragement
t ro these principles. For there reasons, they em-
t ployed all their credit with the King, and had

r,'oi;lfe to every artifice and infinuarion, in or-
(1r to divert himn fiom a journey, which must
li.av been so fatal to their intercit. They endea-
voured to inspire him with fear, by m;agnifyilng
thle danger to which ihe would expose his person,
by venturing to far into Enland, without any
f-'curity but the word of a Prince, who having
violated every thing venerable and itecred in re-
ligion, was no longer to be trusted; and by way
ol compenfaltion for tle ruins which he inight
ihave received from H-enry, they offered an an-
IMal donative of fifty thousand crowns; they

1pron)1milcc

B o0o K promised to contribute liberally towards carrying

.
-.-- on a war with England, and flattered him with

the prospect of immense riches, arising from the
forfeiture of persons who were to be tried and
condemned as heretics. Influenced by these con-
fiderations, James broke his agreement with
Henry, who, in expectation of meeting him,
had already come to York; and that haughty
and impatient Monarch resented the affront, by
declaring war against Scotland. His army was
soon ready to invade the kingdom. James
was obliged to have recourse to the nobles, for
the defence of his dominions. At his command,
they assembled their followers; but with the
fame dispositions which had animated their an-
ceflors in the reign of James III. and with a full
resolution of imitating their example, by punish-
ing those to whom they imputed the grievances
of which they had reason to complain; and if
the King's Ministers had not been men of abili-
ties, superior to those of James III. and of con-
fiderable interest even with their enemies, who
could not agree among themselves what victims
to sacrifice, the camp of Fala would have been
as remarkable as that of Lauder, for the daring
encroachments of the nobility on the prerogative
of the Prince. But though his ministers were
laved by this accident, the nobles had soon an-
other opportunity of discovering to the King
their diffatisfaftion with his government, and
their contempt of his authority. Scarcity of pro-
visions, and the rigour of the season, having
obliged the English army, which had invaded

3 Scotland,

Scotland, to retire, James imagined that he B 0 0 K

I.

cojld attack them, with great advantage, in _
their retreat; but the principal barons, with an
obstinacy and disdain which greatly aggravated
their disobedience, refused to advance a ftep be-
yond the limits of their own country. Provoked
by this insult to himself, and suspicious of a new
conspiracy againif his ministers, the King in-
flantly disbanded an army which paid so little
regard to his orders, and returned abruptly into
the heart of the kingdom.

AN ambitious and high-fpirited Prince could

not brook such a mortifying affront. His hopes
of success had been rash, and his despair upon a
disappointment was excelfive. He felt himself
engaged in an unnecessary war with England,
which, instead of yielding him the laurels and
triumphs that he expeced, had begun with such
circumstances, as encouraged the insolence of
his subje&s, and exposed him to the scorn of
his enemies. He saw how vain and ineffe&ual
all his projects to humble the nobles had been,
and that, though in times of peace a Prince may
endeavour to depress them, they will rife,
during war, to their former importance and dig-
nity. Impatience, resentment, indignation, filled
his bosom by turns. The violence of these pas-
sions altered his temper, and, perhaps, impaired
his reason. He became pensive, fullen, and re-
tired. IIe seemed, through the day, to be
swallowed up in profound meditation, and,
through the night, he was disturbed with thofc
visionary terrors which make impreflion upon a

weak

B 0 0 K weal, understanding only, or a dilordered fancy.
.--.-i In order to revive the King's fpiiirs, an inroad

on the welftern borders was concerted by his mi-
niiters, who prevailed ulpu.i tile B.arons in the
neighbouring provinces to raile as many troops
as were thought neceflhary, and to enter the ene-
my's country. But nothing could remove the
King's aversion to his nobility, or diminifhl his
jealousy of their power. IHe would not even in-
trlui them with the command of rtie forces which
they had assembled ; that was relerved for Oliver
Sinclair his favourite, who no iooner appeared
to take poil'clfion of the dignity conferred upon
him, than rage and indignation occasioned an
universal mutiny in the army. Five hundred
English, who happened to be drawn up in fight,
attacked the Scots in this disorder. Hatred to
the King, and contempt of their general, pro-
duced an effect to which there is no parallel in
hiltory. They overcame the fear of death, and
the love of liberty ; and ten thouland men fled
before a number so far inferior, without ltriking
a single blow. No man was desirous of a victory,
which would hive been acceptable to the King,
and to his favourite; few endeavoured to save
themlflves by flight; the English had the choice
of what prisoners they pleased to take; and al-
most every perlbn of distinction, who was en-
gaged in the expedition, remained in their
hands r. This aftonifling event was a new proof

to

r According to an account of this event in thi I-Ilmiltro
MSS. about tiirt. .- .crIc killed, above a tlloulhnd wGic t.kcii

..2 l u r .....

ito the King of the general difaffetdion of the no- n o 0 K

tiiltv, and a new dilcovery of his own weakness, ,
aniild want of authority. Incapable of bearing

i cthefe repeated insults, he found himllif unable
*:to revenge them. Thle deepell melancholy and
:'dct'ifair succeeded to the furious tranlports of
arage, which the first account of the rout of his
army occasioned. All the violent passions, which
are the enemies of life, preyed upon his mind,
a;nd wafied and conlfumed a youthful and vigor-
ous conflirution. Some authors of that age im-
, pute his untimely death to poison; but the dif-
cafes of the mind, when they rife to an height,
arc often mortal; and the known cffe(ts of dif-
'}nppointmnnrt, anger, and relcntiment, upon a
iltl-rine and imllpetuous temper, ififlciently ac-
coul;t for his unhappy fate. " His death (fays
D ;-uinmond) proveth his mind to have been
rail;cd to an hizgh flraiin, and above mediocrity;
lhc roul d die, but could not diget: a difaller."
I lacd James furvivec this misfortunc, one of
itwo things mullf have liappened: Either the
violence of lis tenlp"tr vwould Ihave en;agdccl hiln
'openly to attack tiie nobles, who woultl have
fiound in Henry a willing and powerful pro-
ttoor, and have derived the famne alfiltance fron-

lim, which the malecontents, in the succecd-

ing reign, did from his daughter I li.zabeth ; in
that cafe, a dangerous civil war mutli have been
the certain conlcquence. Or, perhaps, necef-

prifoncr,:, and, among them, a hlundl and

n sixty Plcrii; if

condition, Vol. ii. 286. The fin:All nui ber of the l'l'glitli
rl'cvcnted their taking more pril;ncrs.

fity

B o1 K fity might have obliged him to accept of Henry's
-_
- -.. offers, and be reconciled to his nobility. In that

event the church would have fallen a sacrifice to
their union; a Reformation, upon Henry's plan,
would have been eflabliihed by law; a great part
of the temporalities of the church would have
been seized; and the friendfhlip of the King and
Barons would have been cemented by dividing
its spoils.

SucH were the efforts of our Kings towards

reducing the exorbitant power of the nobles. If
they were not attended with success, we must
not, for that reason, conclude that they were
not conducted with prudence. Every circum-
fiance seems to have combined againfl the
crown. Accidental events concurred with poli-
tical causes, in rendering the best concerted mea-
fures abortive. The assassination of one King,
the sudden death of another, and the fatal de-
fpair of a third, contributed no less than its
own natural strength, to preserve the aristocracy
from ruin.

AMIDST there itruggles, the influence which

our Kings possessed in their parliaments, is a cir-
cumftance seemingly inexplicable, and which
merits particular attention. As these afemblies
were composed chiefly of the nobles, they, we
are apt to imagine, must have dilcated all their

The extra- decisions; but, instead of this, every King found
fi,,en.,f', them obsequious to his will, and obtained such
tiecSc>uitif laws, as he deemed necessary for extending his
Kings in
Pariamcnt. authority. All things were conducted there with

dispatch and unanimity j and, in none of our

historians,

historians, do we find an inflance of any oppofi- B o0 K
tion formed against the court in Parliament, or G
mention of any difficulty in carrying through the
measures which were agreeable to the King. In
order to account for this singular fadt, it is ne-
cenary to inquire into the origin and constitution
of Parliament.

THE genius of the feudal government, uniform The reaon,

in all its operations, produced the fame effects in
flall, as in great societies ; and the territory of a
Baron was, in miniature, the model of a king-
donm. He possessed the right of jurisdiction,
but those who depended on him, being free
men, and not slaves, could be tried by their
Peers only; and, therefore, his vassals were
bound to attend his courts, and to aTfift both in
palling and executing his sentences. When
assembled on there occasions, they eftabliihed, by
mutual content, such regulations as tended to
the welfare of their small society; and often
granted, voluntarily, such supplies to their Supe-
rior, as his necelfities required. Change now a
single name: In place of Baron, fubfitute King,
and we behold a Parliament in its first rudi-
ments, and observe the filft exertions of those
powers, which its members now possess as
Judges, as Legislators, and as dilfenlers of the
public revenues. Suitable to this idea, arc the
appellations of the King's Courtg, and of the
King's Great Council, by which Parliaments were
anciently diftinguified; and suitable to this,
likewise, were the constituent members of which

g Du Cangc, voc. Curia.

it

B 0 0 K it was composed. In all the feudal kingdom,,
-.,, fiuch as held of tie King in chef were bound.

by the condition of their tenure, to attend anid
to affif in his courts. Nor was this efleemed a
privilege, but a service . It was exacted like-
wife, of Bishops, Abbots, and the greater ecclc-
fiaftics, who, holding vast poffeflions of tl;he
Crown, were deemed fubjeEt to the fame bur-
den. Parliaments did not continue long in this
state. Cities gradually acquired wealth, a con-
fiderable share of the public taxes were levied
on them, the inhabitants grew into eftilnation,
and, being enfranchised by the Sovereign, a
place in Parliament was the consequence of their
liberty, and of their importance. But as it would
have been absurd to confer such a privilege, or
to impose such a burden on a whole community,
every borough was permitted to chufe one or
two of its citizens to appear in the name of the
corporation; and the idea of reprefJntation was
first introduced in this manner. An innovation,
still more important, naturally followed. The
vaflals of the crown were originally few in num-
ber, and extremely powerful; but as it is impof-
fible to render property fixed and permanent,
many of their porflefions came, gradually, anl
by various methods of alienation, to be split an(l
parcelled out into different hands. Hence arose
the diftlintion between the Greater and the Lqf'er
Barons. The former were those who retained
their original fiefs undivided, the latter were the

'h Id. voc. Pl:tciinl, col. 5r9. Ma.gna Charta, art. 1.I.
Aft.Jac. I. 1. 25. C;Ipj. 52.

I ncew

,new and less potent vassals of the Crown. Both B o 0 K
iwere bound, however, to perform all feudal ser-
vices, and, of consequence, to give attendance
'in Parliament. To the Lelier Barons, who
formed no inconsiderable body, this was an in-
).tolerable grievance. Barons sometimes denied
i their tenure, boroughs renounced their right of
~elecing, charters were obtained containing an
! exemption from attendance; and the anxiety
Iwith which our ancestors endeavoured to get
free from the obligation of fitting in Parliament,
is furpaTfed by that only with which their pofte-
rity solicit to be admitted there. In order to ac-
commodate both parties, and, at once, to secure
to the King a sufficient number of members in
i his great council, and to save his vassals from an
iunneceffary burden, an easy expedient was found
Tiout. The obligation to personal attendance was
continued upon the Greater Barons, from which
the Lefter Barons were exempted, on condition
of their electing, in each county, a certain num-
bcr of Representatives, to appear in their name.
IThus a Parliament became complete in all its
members, and was composed of Lords Spiritual
aind lTemporal, of Knights of the flires, and of
B13urgenes. As many causes contributed to bring
I)overnment earlier to perfeccRion in England,
,lian in Scotland; as the rigour of the feudal in-
Ilitutions abated sooner, and its defeEts were
ltiil)llied with greater facility in the one king-
ilotn, than in the other ; England led the way in
all there changes, and Burgefles, and Knights
tI' tlhe hire, appearcd in the Parliaments of that
VOL. I. G nation,

B 0 0K ination, before they were heard of in ours. Bur.
-,-_ geffes were first admitted into the Scottiih Par-
A.. 1326. liaments by Robert Brucei; and in the pre-

amble to the laws of Robert III. they are ranked
among the constituent members of that assem-
bly. The Lefler Barons were indebted to
IT47* James I. for a statute exempting them from

personal attendance, and permitting them to
elect representatives: The exemption was eagerly
laid hold on; but the privilege was so little va-
lued, that, except one or two inflances, it lay
negletced during one hundred and sixty years;
and James VI. first obliged them to fend repre-
feintatives regularly to Parliamentk.

A SCOTTISH Parliament, then, consisted an-

ciently of Great Barons, of Ecclesiastics, and a
few representatives of boroughs. Nor were theft
divided, as in England, into two houses, but
compeoed one aflembly, in which the Lord
Chancellor presided'. In rude ages, when the

science

i Abcrcromly, i. 63;.
k Etihvs ol Li-it. Anitiq. Ell' . 1. Dtlrymp. I-Iif. of Scud.
Prop. ch. 8.

I In Eniglandl, tlle 'Pecls and Crc!nlons fccm early to ;have

nict inl frp:rl.tat houlcs; and J:miitcs I. who was iO0nd of' hli-
.tt ing the l'nglilli in :ill their C tul ln.;, had pro l);liy an in-
tcItia ('t illlt)tIlCiller folniC CollitCl';llC dilfiilOiif l)cbctwLcn
l ce Greater ;anl 1cllcl Blarons'; in Scotl;nd ; at lc:ie lie de-
termnined rliai thicr cnfiifuilttioiiq flnlild not 10e ctrried oil
und(ler lthe lirl.ctionl of 1:le lrunc Prclidlnt ; lolr Iy hlis l\w,
A. 1). 13 27, it is pr ovilcd, " thal t ot t ol t.ll t Contiiil er1o11 .;^
of all the liHircs hli:li he cholfn a wile ;:lln cxperlt 11;111, callted
the c') l )ln Speaker of' the illiclii' , \wh1() ihall j)rhO )(i:
all anti dI'n ry necds and catilcs pcrt.inill, t th) Iel Coiil)1illii

In

ifcence of government was extremely imperfelt B 00 oK
:mong a martial people, unacquainted with the . -
:,.rts of peace, itrangers to the talents which make
a figure in debate, and despising them, Parlia-
rnents were not held in the fame eftination as at
ireient; nor did haughty Barons love those
.'courts, in which they appeared with such evident
nmarks of inferiority. Parliaments were often

ihatlily afTembled, and it was, probably, in the

;King's power, by the manner in which he iflued
*his writs for that purpose, to exclude such as
lvere averse from his measures. At a time wlen
{deeds of violence were common, and the re-
ilraints of law and decency were little regarded,
.no man could venture with safety to oppose the
King in his own court. The Great Barons, or
Lords of Parliament, were extremely few; even
iso late as the beginning of the reign of James VI.m
i they amounted only to fifty-three. The Eccle-
fiafrics equalled them in number, and being de-
voted implicitly to the Crown, for reasons which
i have been already explained, rendered all hopes
i of vitory in any struggle desperate. Nor were
the nobles themselves so anxious, as might be
inmagined, to prevent acts of Parliament favour-
able to the royal Prerogative; conscious of their
own ftrcngth, and of the King's inability to carry
theef ads into execution without their concur-
rence, they trusted either to elude, or to contemn

inl thl Parli;ment or pnelral council." No ficli Speaker, it
\vm onld I'ciI, wa;s ever clioli'll ; adcl by a ifufcqueciit law tho
Clih.icellor wa;s declarcd perpetual Prcfidcnt of Parliament.

" And. Cull. v. i. pre. .1o.

G 2 them;

B 0 0 r them; and the statute revoking the King's pro.

perty, and annexing alienated jurifdiftions to the
Crown, repeated in every reign, and violated
and despised as often, is a standing proof of the
impotence of laws, when opposed to power. So
many concurring causes are ftfficient, perhaps,
to account for the ascendant which our Kings
acquired in Parliament. But, without having
recourse to any of these, a tingle circumftancc,
peculiar to the constitution of the Scottish Par-
liament, the mentioning of which we have hither-
to avoided, will abundantly explain this fa&,
seemingly so repugnant to all our reasonings con-
cerning the weakness of the King, and the power
of the nobles.

As far back as our records enable us to trace

the constitution of our Parliaments, we find a
committee, diftinguifled by the name of Lords of
Articles. It was their business to prepare, and to
digest all matters which were to be laid before
the Parliament. There was rarely any business
introduced into Parliament, but what had passed
through the channel of this committee; every
motion for a new law was firll made there, andl
approved of, or rejected by the members of it;
what they approved was formed into a bill, and
presented to Parliament; and it seems probable,
that what they rejected could not be introduced
into the. house. This committee owed the extra-
ordinary powers veiled in it, to the military ge-
nius of the ancient nobles; too impatient to sub-
mit to the drudgery of civil business, too impe-
tuous to obfcrvc the forms, or to enter into the

ldetails

·'etails necessary in conducing it, they were glad B °O K
'to lay that burden upon a finall number, while -
they themselves had no other labour than simply
'to give, or to refuse their assent to the bills
.'which were presented to them. The Lords of
.Articles, then, not only directed all the proceed-
ings of Parliament, but possessed a negative be-
'fore debate. That committee was chosen and
fconflituted in such a manner, as put this valuable
privilege entirely in the King's hands. It is ex-
Itremely probable, that our Kings once had the
.iole right of nominating the Lords of Articles.
They came afterwards to be ele&ed by the Parlia-

, It appears from authentic recordr, that a parliament was
lappointed to be held March 12, 1566, and that the Lords of
IArticles ere chlofeni and met on the 7th, five days before the

iaflcibling of Parliament. If they could ec regularly ele ed
,so long before the meeting of Parli:mecnt, it is natural to con-
'clude, that the Prince alone polfelled tile right ofelecing theni.
'ler'lc ar;e two different accounts of the manner of their clec-

ition at that; time, one by Mary herself, in a letter to the arch-
.billop of Glasgow: " We, acconipallied with our nobi-

lity for the time, palt to the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, for
j" ldinilg of our Parliaincnt on the 7th d:ay of this i nftant,

,ii" nd clected the Lords Articulars." If we explain thecie

wen'rds, according to the Irisct gramllmar, we mulll conclude
itliit the Q.ueen icrlfcf clcftcd themn. it is, however, more
l',bl)alle tlha:t Mary lleant to fity, thlat tlie nobles thein pre-
I'ii:lt with lher, viz. her priivy counCfllors, and others, CIcdled
lthc Lords of Articles. Keith's Hilt. of Scotlanld, p. 331.
ThelI othlr account is Lord RutIliveln's, who cxpreI) sly AIflirni
tihat tli Queen hlrcllcll clctd tliemi. K ciih's

A. ppend. 126.

\\'hliether we embrace the one or thlie o ther of tIhelC pinioni:,
i. ol no confe(lucncel. 11 thle privy counilellors ,ned nlllcs a;l-
I'ndliilg the court had a rigil to eleoI the L.ords of Article.;,
it \w;is equally advaI;Itigeoiils f t l( Cro'\vl, as if thle Piiiic.
11id h;al the bolc loinination of tlheun.

G 3 ment,

BOO K ment, and confifed of an equal number out of eaci
L»--^- estate, and noft commonly of eight Temporal and

eight Spiritual Lords, of eight reprefcntatives of
boroughs, and of the eight great officers of the
Crown. Of this body, the eight ecclesiastics,
together with the officers of the Crown, were
entirely at the King's devotion, and it was scarce
possible that the choice could fall on such Tem-
poral Lords and BurgefTes as would unite in op-
position to his mealfres. Capable either of in-
fluencing their election, or of gaining them when
ele&ted, the King commonly found the Lords of
Articles no leTs obsequious to his will, than
his own privy council, and, by means of his au-
thority with them, he could put a negative upon
his Parliament before debate, as well as after it;
and what may seem altogether incredible, the
molt limited Prince in Europe actually pof-
sessed, in one instance, a prerogative which the
molt absolute could never attain .

To

0 Having deduced the history of the committee of Iords n'

Articles as low as the flbjet of thi. preliminary hook re-
quired, it may be agreeable, perhaps, to lomine of my 'rC:dCr,,
to know the ftlbfertlent valriations in this tinrtlilar inflitittion,
and the politica lisle which our Kings made of these. Whenl
Parliamrents became more numlcrous, and inore confidc:ra!bl
by the admiflion of the reprerfnt:atives of the I,clfir Barols,
lle prCefrving their influcnce over tle Lords ns Articles he-
came, likewif;i, an o)jcCt of greater importlnce to nur1 Killn'.
James VI. on pretence that the Lords of Articlc'; could ni
find leifuire to conidelr the great rntiltittde of affairs laid in,
snore them, olbtained an aft, allpoinltlnrr tr perifons t( I'
mitmed ont of each ejlatc, who lihoild meet twenty days I.c-
lore the comnmencemenit of Parliament '*, to receive all fitp-

* Aet 2'.. .. 159t.

plicatio:,:

'I'o this account of the internal constitution of B O o K

-'Scoiland, it will not be improper to add a view of .-
,the political state of Europe at that period, where st"8,1fE,.

rope at the
th1e following history commences. A thoroughi bginn.ng

of the' fix

I knowledge of that general fyitem, of which every t-enh ctn-
'kingdom in Europe forms a part, is not less re- 'Ury
quilice towards understanding the hillory of a na-

-;~~~!~~~~ ~~~tion,

plications, &c. and rcjccting what thle thought frivolous,
, i;ould cngrofs in a book what they thought worth thy te attcn-
tion of t lie Lords of Articles No provili(n is made in the ad
,f ,r the choice of this feled body, and the King would, of
c c)tiic, have claimed that privilege. In 633, when Charles I.
v'a. beginning to intlrduce those innovations which g:av so
much oflence to the nation, he dreaded the opposition of his
Par liament, and in order to prevent that, an artifice was made
I le of to Cculre the Lords of Articles for the Crown. The
i icllll'oral Peers were appointed to choose eight Bilhops, anti
the Bishops eight Peers; these iixtccn met together, and clet-
.d cight Knights of the Shire, and eight Burgeflcs, and to
thlic the Crown officers were added as usual. If we can only
li)pp)ofi eight pcrrfos of so numerous a body, as the Peers of
Scotlandc were become by that time, attached to the court,
tlclic, it is obvious, would be the men vwhom the Bilhops
. oulld choose, and of consequence the whole Lords of Articles
were the tools and cretures of tlle King. This pr..iaice, j
inconlillent with lillerty, was abolishld duttring tlie civil war :
And tll llatuet ol James VI. was repealed. After the Re-
[Iloilion, '.irliamncnts became more lervile than ever. What
was onlyv a temporary device, in the reign of Charles I. was,
lhcn, converted into a 1landing law. '" For my part," fays
the author from whom I hIave lorrowed many of these par-
iicnulas, (' I Ihotild have thought it lel'i criminal in our Re.
" loration Parliament, to have openly bellowed upon the
" King a negative hefi re debate, than, in lichl an underhand
"; rtilicitl ImaniCer, to betray their conltltuc;, s, tnd tilhe na-
"tion." El1'hy, on Brit. Anttiq. 55. It is probable, how-
.vcr, from a letter of Randolph's to Cccil, lo Aug. I 6o,

C 4 printed

B o0o K tion, than an acquaintance with its peculiar go-
<--_- vernment and laws. The latter may enable us to

comprehend donmeflic occurrences and revolu-
tions; but without the former, foreign tranfac-
tions must be altogether mysterious and unintel-
ligible. By attending to this, many dark palfages
in our history may be placed in a clear light; and
where the bulk of historians have seen only the
efsc&t, we may be able to discover the caule.

'HE subversion of the feudal government in

France, and its declension in the neighbouring
kingdoms, occasioned a remarkable alteration in
the political state of Europe. Kingdoms, which
were inconsiderable when broken, and parcelled
out among nobles, acquired firmness and strength,
by being united into a regular monarchy. Kings
became conscious of their own power and import-
ance. They meditated schemes of conquefl, and
engaged in wars at a distance. Numerous armies
were railed, and great taxes imposed for their sub-
fiftence. Considerable bodies of infantry were
kept in constant pay; that service grew to be ho-
nourable ; and cavalry, in which the strength of

printed in thlc Appendix, tl!;at this P'rlii;alncnt ha;id fti e a:p-
ic:itl:llcC (Cf ;IlciCle t precedent to julliy their tlli\wotlihv coil-
tluci'. 'Variousl (jteflions concerning tlic conflittcnlt inciibers
of the Scottili ]'.trli;iiint; Concerning ih e ri a:'it wlhieil tlh
IclCi:-l'nt;itiv(s ,ii lJ lroigIi.s \\CIrC inltroduced intio i t t ;iatl' l-
bly ; ;ind clc c llrn i l {l i"'iliiinll po1v.'r (if the Comnniitt'c
of,' ord, s ol, A rtici( 's, occur, ;andll li:c li)ccl ;giateld \witih
great;i wirtlh. Since the firi p]ul)lication ol titis wor'k, all
slhlt l difptlitd hliilts li btvc e 'C t cm lilc'rc(I with ci;:il ;it ; .,il
;ticll.:cy ill Mr. \\'Wi t'S Ilquiry into Ihe RI ilC; a11n lrogrc

P l',irlil.niLci l, "'c. 4'o Edit. 1. 17,, & .

European

European armies had hitherto consisted, though B o o K
proper enough for the short and voluntary ex- --
curfions of Barons who served at their own ex-
pence, were found to be unfit either for making,
or defending any important conquest.

IT was in Italy, that the powerful monarchs of

France and Spain and Germany first appeared to
make a trial of their new strength. The division
of that country into many finall states, the luxury
of the people, and their effeminate aversion to arms,
invited their more martial neighbours to an easy
prey. The Italians, who had been accustomed to
mock battles only, and to decide their interior
quarrels by innocent and bloodless victories, were
astonished, when the French invaded their coun-
try, at the fight of real war; and as they could
not resist the torrent, they suffered it to take its
course, and to spend its rage. Intrigue and policy
supplied the want of strength. Necessity and self-
preservation led that ingenious people to the great
secret of modern politics, by teaching them how
to balance the power of one Prince, by throwing
that of another into the opposite scale. By this
happy device, the liberty of Italy was long pre-
e:rved. The scales were poised by very flilful
hands; the fimalleft variations were attended to,
and no Prince was allowed to retain any fuperio-
rity, that could be dangerous.

A SYSTEM of conduct, pursued with so much

success in Italy,was not longconfined to thatcoun-
try of political refinement. The maxim of pre-
serving a balance of power is founded so much
upon obvious reasoning, and the situation of Eu-

rope

B 0o0 K rope rendered it so necessary, that it fuon became
Lt---. a matter of chief attention to all wife poiiticians.

Every ftep any Prince took was obierved by all his
neighbours. Ambafiadors, a kind of honourable
spies, authorised by the mutual jealousy of Kings,
resided almost constantly at every different court,
and had it in charge to watch all its motions. Dan-
gers were forefecn at a greater diltance, and pre-
vented with more cafe. Confederacies were formed
to humble any power which rose above its due pro-
portion. Revenge or felf-defence were no longer
the only causes of hostility, it became common to
take arms out of policy; and war, both in its
commencement and in its operations, was more
an exercise of the judgment, than of the passions
of men. Almost every war in Europe became
general, and the inoft inconsiderable states ac-
quired importance, because they could add veight
to either icale.

FRANCIS I. who mounted the throne of France

in the year one thousand five hundred and fifteen,
and Charles V. who obtained the Imperial Crown
in the year one thousand five hundred and nine-
teen, divided between them the flrength and
affections of all Europe. Their perpetual enmity
was not owing either to personal jealouly, or to
the caprice of private paflion, but was founded
ib much in nature and true policy, that it sub-
sifted between their posterity for several ages.
Charles Ifucceedcd to all the dominions of the
houle of Auflria. No family had ever gained lo
much by wife and fortunate marriages. By ac-
quifitions of this kind the Aultrian Princes role,

in

in a flort time, from obscure Counts of Hapf- B O0O K
bourg, to be Archdukes of Austria, and Kings I_
of Bohemia, and were in poffcfrion of the impe-
rial dignity by a fort of hereditary right. Betides
these territories in Germany, Charles was heir
to the crown of Spain, and to all the dominions
which belonged to the house of Burgundy.
The Burgundian provinces engrolFed, at that
that time, the riches and commerce of one half
of Europe; and he drew from them, on many
occasions, those immense fumns, which no people
without trade and liberty are able to contri-
bute. Spain furnilhed him a gallant and hardy
infantry, to whose discipline he was indebted
for all his conquests. At the fame time, by the
discovery of the new world, a vein of wealth was
opened to him, which all the extravagance of
ambition could not exhaust. These advantages
rendered Charles the first Prince in Europe;
but he wished to be more, and openly aspired
to universal monarchy. His genius was of
that kind which ripens slowly, and lies long
concealed; but it grew up without obtervation,
to an unexplc&ed height and vigour. He pof-
filsed, in an eminent degree, the characteristic
virtues of all the different races of Princes to whom
he was allied. In forming his schemes, he dif-
covered all the subtlety and penetration of Ferdi-
nancl his grandfather; he pursued them with that
obstinate and inflexible perseverance which has
ever been peculiar to the Austrian blood; and in
executing them, he could employ the magnani-
mity and boldnes of his Burgundian anceflors.

HIis

B 0O0 K His abilities were equal to his power, and neither
.__ of them would have been inferior to his designs,

had not Providence, in pity to mankind, and in
order to preserve them from the worst of all evils,
Universal Monarchy, railed up Francis I. to de-
fend the liberty of Europe. His dominions were
less extensive, but more united than the Em-
peror's. His fubjc&s were numerous, active, and
warlike, lovers of glory, and lovers of their King.
To Charles, power was the only object of desire,
and he pursued it with an unwearied and joyless
industry. Francis could mingle pleasure and ele-
gance with his ambition and though he neg-
lected tome advantages, which a more phlegmatic
or more frugal Prince would have improved, an
active and intrepid courage supplied all its de-
feEts, and checked or defeated many of the Em-
peror's designs.

THE reft of Europe observed all the motions of

these mighty rivals with a jealous attention. On
the one fide, the Italians saw the danger which
threatened Christendom, and in order to avert
it, had recourse to the expedient which they
had often employed with success. They endea-
voured to divide the power of the two contending
Monarchs into equal scales, and, by the union of
several finall flates, to counterpoise him whose
power became too great. But, what they con-
certed with much wifllom, they were able to ex-
ecute with little vigour; and intrigue and refine-
ment were feeble fences against the iaicroachmcnts
of military power.

ON

ON the other fide, HenryVIII. of England held B o o K

the balance with less delicacy, but with a fRronger _
hand. He was the third Prince of the age in dig-
nity and in power; and the advantageous situation
of his dominions, his dorefitic tranquillity, his
immense wealth, and absolute authority, rendered
him the natural guardian of the liberty of Europe.
Each of the rivals courted him with emulation;
he knew it to be his interest to keep the balance
even, and to restrain both, by not joining entirely
with either of them. But he was seldom able to
reduce his ideas to pradcice; he was governed by
caprice more than by principle; and the palfions
of the man were an overmatch for the maxims of
the King. Vanity and refentmnent were the great
springs of all his undertakings, and his neighbours
easily found the way, by touching there, to force
him upon many rafli and inconsistent enterprises.
His reign was a perpetual series of blunders in
politics; and while he efieemed himself the wisest
Prince in Europe, he was a constant dupe to
those who found it necessary, and could submit,
to flatter him.

IN this situation of Europe, Scotland, which

had hitherto wafted her strength in the quarrels
between France and England, emerged from her
obscurity, took her itation in the fyflem, and be-
gan to have some influence upon the fate of dif-
tant nations. Her afliltance was, frequently, of
conlcquence to the contending parties, and the
l.l,ance was often lb nicely adjulled, that it was
it her power to make it lean to either ide. The
'1:.1t ;allI(Ignd her, at tiis jun&ture, was to divert

I-enry

B 01o K Henry from carrying his arms into the continent,
rr ,, That Prince, having routed the French at Gui-

negat, and invested Terouenne, France attempted
to divide his forces, by engaging James IV. in
that unhappy expedition which ended with his
life. For the fame reason Francis encouraged and
aflifted the Duke of Albany, to ruin the families
of Angus and Home, which were in the interest
of England, and would willingly have persuaded
the Scots to revenge the death of their King, and
to enter into a new war with that kingdom.
Henry and Francis having united not long after
against the Emperor, it was the interest of both
Kings, that the Scots should continue inacive;
and a long tranquillity was the effect of their
union. Charles endeavoured to break this, and
to embarrass Henry by another inroad of the
Scots. For this end, he made great advances to
James V. flattering the vanity of the young Mo-
narch, by electing him a Knight of the Golden
Fleece, and by offering him a match in the Im-
perial family; while, in return for these empty
honours, he demanded of him to renounce his
alliance with France, and to declare war against
England. But James, who had much to lose,
and who could gain little by closing with the Em-
peror's proposals, rejecqted them with decency,
and keeping firm to his ancient allies, left H-Inry
at full liberty to act upon the continent with his
whole tfrength.

IENRY himself began his reign. by imitating

the example of his ancestors with regard to Scot-
land. He held its power in fuich extreme con-

3 teCmpt,

tempt, that he was at no pains to gain its friend- B o010
s iip; but, on the contrary, he irritated the whole -
narion, by reviving the antiquated pretensions of
the crown of England to the sovereignty over
Scotland. But his own experience, and the ex-
ample of his enemies, gave him a higher idea of
its importance. It was impolfible to defend an
open and extenfivc frontier, against the incursions
of an active and martial people. During any war
on the continent, this obliged him to divide tle
strength of his kingdom. It was necessary to
maintain a kind of army of oblervation in the
north of England; and after all precautions, the
Scottifl borderers, who were superior to all man-
kind in the practice of irregular war, often made
successful inroads, and spread terror and defola-
lation over many counties. He fell, at last, upon
the true secret of policy, with refpec: to Scot-
land, which his predecessors had too little pene-
tration to discover, or too much pride to employ.
The situation of the country, and the bravery of
the people, made the conquest of Scotland impof-
fible; but the national poverty, and the violence
of faction, rendered it an easy matter to divide,
and to govern it. He abandoned, therefore, the
former design, and resolved to employ his utmofl
adldrefs in executing the latter. It had not yet be-
comle honourable for one Prince to receive pay
fromi anotler, under the more decent name of a
iibfidy. But, in all ages, the fame arguments
h1;ve been good in courts, and of weight with
nilnifl-crs, faclious leaders, and favourites. What
WiTc the arguments by which I lenry brought over

lo

B o0 K so many to his interest during the minority of

- James V. we know by the original warrant frill

extantP, for remitting considerable fums into
Scotland. By a proper distribution of these, many
persons of note were gained to his party, and a
facion which held secret correspondence with
England, and received all its direEions from
thence, appears henceforward in our domeflic
contests. In the sequel of the hiflory, we shall
find Henry labouring to extend his influence in
Scotland. His successors adopted the fame plan,
and improved upon it. The affairs of the two
kingdoms became interwoven, and their interests
were often the fame. Elizabeth divided her at-
tention almost equally between them, and the au-
thority which she inherited in the one, was not
greater than that which the acquired in the other.

P Burn. Hist. Ref. vol. i. p. 7.

# BOOK II.

THE
H I S T O RY

OF
SCOTLAND.

BOOK II.

ARY Queen of Scots, the daughter of B o o K
James V. and of Mary of Guise, was born _ ._
a few days before the death of her father. The Birth of

Mary, Dec.

situation in which he left the kingdom alarmed 8,s142.
all ranks of men with the prospect of a turbulent the king-
and disastrous reign. A war against England had dom"
been undertaken without necessity, and carried
on without success. Many persons of the first
rank had fallen into the hands of the Engliffi, in
the unfortunate rout near the firth of Solway, and
were still prisoners at London. Among the reft
of the nobles there was little union either in their
views, or in their aflfccions; and the religious
disputes occasioned by the opinions of the reform-
e'rs, growing every day more violent, added to the
ra;ec of thole f(ac"ions which are natural to a form
of government nearly arif;ocratical.

VOL. I. 1! THE

B 0 0 K THE government of a Qjeen was unknown in
..v Scotland, and did not imprint much reverence in

the minds o' a martial people. The government
of an infant Queen was flll moie destitute of real
authority; and the prortc& of a long and feeble
minority invited to fL:ion by the hope of impu-
nity. James had not even provided the common
remedy against the disorders of a minority, by
committing to proper pcrfons the care of his
daughter's education, and the adminifiiration of as-
fairs in her name. Though he saw the clouds ga-
thering, and foretold that they would quickly bur-t
into a storm, he was so little able to dil-perfe them,
or to defend his daughter and kingdom against the
imminent calamities, that, in mere cefpair, he
abandoned them both to the mercy of fortune, and
left open to every pretender, the office of Regent,
which he could not fix to his own satisfaction.

Pretenflins CARDINAL Beatoun, who had for many years
of Cardinal
Beatoun to been confidered as prime niinifler, was the firfL who
thercgency. clailed that high dignity; and in support of his

pretcnfions, lie lproduced a tflanment;', which he
hiimlrlf had forged in the name of the late King;
and without any other ri lght, instantly assumed the
title of Regent. tl-e hoped, by the aniflance of the
clergy, the coun c.i ance of France, the connivance
of the Q(2ccn Dowager, and the support of the
whole popif faction, to hold by force, vhat he
had fcizcd on by fraud. But Beatoun had enjoyed
power too long to be a falvourite of the nation.
1Those among the nobles who wifled for a Reform-

a $.rlc2" t'; Lct. I]i. IT Lyncs , State PIppcrs , 486.

ation

ation in religion dreaded his severity, and others B O O K
confidered the elevation of a Churchman to the i
highest office in the kingdom as a depreflion of
themfelvcs. At their instigation, James t-Tamilton
Farl of Arran, and next heir to the Q1een, routed
limfeclf frolm his inactivity, and was prevailed on
to airiie to that station, to which proxirmity of
blood gave him a natural title. The nobles, who .rl ,of Ar-

ra n ohosen

were afiembled for that puripole, unanimnoufly Rcgct.
conferred on him the office of Regent; and the
public voice applauded their choice b.

No two men ever differed more widely in dif- Chlra-er

position and character, than the Earl of Arran
and Cardinal Beatoun. The Cardinal was by na-
ture of immoderate ambition; by long expe-
rience he had acquired address and refinement;
and insolence grew upon him from continual fuc-
cess. His high flation in the church placed him
in the way of great civil employments; his abili-
ties were equal to the greatest of these; nor did
he reckon any of them to be above his merit. As
his own eminence was founded upon the power
of the church of Rome, lie was a zealous de-
fender of that fuplcrftition, and for the fame rea-
son an avowed enemy to the dorine of the Re-
formers. Political motives alone determined him
to lupport the one, or to oppose the other. H-is
early application to public bulinefs kept him un-
acquainted withi the learning and controversies of
the age; he ,ave judgment, however, upon all
points in diltite, with a precipitancy, violence,

" Llill. IR g. Siot. vul. ii. p. 3C.,8.

II and

B o0 K and rigour, which contemporary hillorians men.
c_.- tion with indignation.
of Arran. - THE character of the Earl of Arran was, in al-

most every thing, the reverie of Beatoun's. He
was neither infecced with ambition, nor inclined
to cruelty: The love of cafe extinguifled the for-
rmer, the softness of his temper preserved him
fi-om the latter. Timidity and irrelolution were
his predominant failings, the one occasioned by
his natural constitution, and the other arising
firoln a consciousness that his abilities were not
equal to his itation. With thele dispositions he
might have enjoyed and adorned private life ; but
his public conduEt was without courage, or dig-
nity, or consistence. The perpetual slave of his
own fears, and, by confequencc, the perpetual
tool of those, who found their advantage in prac-
tifing upon them. But as no other person could
be set in opposition to the Cardinal, with any
probability of success, the nation declared in his
favour with such general content, that the arti-
sices of his rival could not withstand its united
flrengtih.

Shcmesn of THE Earl of Arran had scarce taken possession
i,,ryvl.dl of his new dignity, when a negociation was opened
toScotlc.nd. with England, which gave birth to events of the

nmoft fatal consequence to himself, and to the
kingdom. After the death of James, H-enry
VIII. was no longer afraid of any interrupltion
from Scotland to his dcfigns againlt France; and
inmmediately conceived hopes of rendering this
security perpetual, by the marriage of Edward
his only son with the young QCeen of Scots.

i Ile

lie communicated his intention to the prisoners B 0 1 Kc
taken at Solway, and prevailed on them to favour t---
it, by the promise of liberty, as the reward of
their success. In the mean time he permitted
them to return into Scotland, that, by their pre-
fence in the Parliament which the Regent had
called, they might be the better able to persuade
their countrymen to fall in with his proposals. A
cause, intrusted to such able and zealous advocates,
could not well miss of coming to an happy issue.
All those who feared the Cardinal, or who desired
a change in religion, were fond of an alliance,
which afforded protection to the doftrine which
they had embraced, as well as to their own
persons, againit the rage of that powerful and
haughty Prelate.

BUT Henry's rough and impatient temper was 111 condua-

incapable of improving this favourable conjunc.. self.
ture. Address and delicacy in managing the fears,
and follies, and interests of men, were arts with
which he was utterly unacquainted. The designs
he had formed upon Scotland were obvious fiom
the marriage which he had proposed, and he had
not dexterity enough to disguise, or to conceal
thenm. Instead of yielding to the fear or jealousy
of the Scots, wTiat time and accidents would soon
have enabled him to recover, he, at once, alarmed
and irritated the whole nation, by demanding
that the Queen's person nllould be immediately
committed to his custody, and that the govern-
ment of the kingdonm fiould be put into his hands
during her minority.

I1 3 III:NRY

B O K HENRY could not have prescribed more igno-

II.
_c--^-- minious conditions to a conquered people, and it

todiS to1, is no wonder they were rejected, with indignation,
though in by men who scorned to purchase an alliance with
part acr-pl-
ed by them. England at the price of their own liberty. The

parliament of Scotland, hoiwever, influenced by the
nobles who returned from England ; desirous of
peace with that kingdom; and delivered, by the

Tarch T2, Regent's confining the Cardinal as a prisoner,
2543' from any opposition to which he might have given

rife; consented to a treaty of marriage and of
union, but upon terms somewhat more equal.
After some dark and unfuccelsful intrigues, by
which his ambatfador endevoured to carry off
the young Queen and Cardinal Beatoun into Eng-
land, Henry was obliged to give up his own pro-
pofals, and to accept of theirs. On his lide, he con-
lented that the Queen mhould continue to reside in
Scotland, and himself remain excluded from any
share in the government of the kingdom. On the
other hand, the Scots agreed to fend their Sove-
reign into England as soon as she attained the full
age often years, and inffantly to deliver fix per-
sons, of the first rank, to be kept as hostages by
I-enry till the Queen's arrival at his court.

Tinured by THE treaty was frill so manifestly of advantage
the Regent.

to England, that the Regent loft much of the
public confidence by confcnring to it. The Car-
dinal, who had now recovered liberty, watched
for such an opportunity of regaining credit, and
he did not fail to cultivate and improve this to the

,pnfdhby utmost. I-e complained loudly that the Rcegnt

tile Vljdi.
nJ1. had betrayed the kingdom to its moll inveterate

enemies,

enemies, and sacrificed its honour to his own am- °o ° K.
bition. He foretold the extinction of the true ca-
tholic religion, under the tyranny of an excom-
municated heretic; but above all, he lamented to
fee an ancient king loin conf-nting to its own ser-
vitude, defcen1di.i into the ignominious station
of a depenldunr province; and, in one hour, the
wea knefs or treachery of a insgle man surrendering
every thing for which the Scottifi nation had
fl u.i ed and fought during io many ages. These
rcmnonltrinces of the Cardinal were not without
el 'ct. They were addrefsced to prejudice and
pa'iions w':ich are deeply rooted in the human
heart. The finme hatred to the ancient enemies
of their country, the fame jealousy of national
honour, and pride of independence, which, at the
beginning of the present century, went near to
prevent the Scots firom consenting to an union
with Engiand, upon terms of great advantage,
did, at tilit time, induce the whole nation to de-
clare again&c the alliance which had been con-
cluded. In the one leriod, an hunldred and fifty
years of peace between the two n:tions, the habit
of being fibjctecd to tile fame King, and governed
by the fame maxiims, had considerably abated old
animofities, and prepared both people for incor-
porating. In the ollher, injuries were still frefi,
the woundb u;! both fides were open, and, in the
war;l:!h of relenrtment, it was natural to leek re-
venge, and to be averse from reconcilement. At
the Union in one thousand seven hundred and
fevecr, the wifdomr of parliament defpifecl the
groundlefz murmurs occasioncd by antiquated

H 4 p'reju-

B O°1I K prejudices; but in one thousand five hundred and

_- - forty-three, the complaints of the nation were

better founded, and urged with a zeal and lyna-
nimity, which it is neither just nor safe to difre-
gard. A rash measure of the King of England
added greatly to the violence of this national
animosity. The Scots, relying on the treaty of
marriage and union, fitted out several ships for
France, with which their trade had been inter-
rupted for some time. These were driven by
ltrefs of weather to take refuge in different ports
of England; and Henry, under pretext that they
were carrying provisions to a kingdom with which
he was at war, ordered them to be seized and
condemned as lawful prizes . The Scots, afto-
nifhed at this proceeding of a Prince, whose in-
terest it was manifestly, at that junEture, to court
and to tooth them, felt it not only as an injury,
but as an insult, and expressed all the resentment
natural to an high-fpirited people'. Their rage

roTfe

Kcitli, 32, 34. Epift. Reg. Scot. ii. App. 3 1. Ha-
riilton MSS. vol. . 039.

1 I1 the MSS. Collclion of r;lPpci b hclonling to the I)l.k'

of IHmilllon, Sir R;alph)1 S;lclcr dcfcrcilbs llec spirit of tlhe
iScnots as1 C'xtreniely otttl gcous. In llis

lIttCe ' 0 i d

E illn-

burghli, SeCitc;mlcr r, 1543: '" Tlie fly of the Illips hllas
l)ro:ghtl the pcolei of this town, lot (t11h men in(1d womenli, and
CIICLi.iI lC

the IIcrIcl;inl1s, inlo fuclia age1 .inc n

. i 'ry, thl it tll i

\\'Ilcl' Il\c'n i s roiniivii\cd :ilI;i liii mlC, adii I'wear_" grlc;t oatlhs,
tiha il thelir lit ls are nolt rclltorc , that tli e). wotllid lh;tl their
;111 ilt . S I)' n 1i ;111t i lilld ;ie, ;ndtl tha l

t ICy \\i i1Iil l ct I ly ho1fc

]lirc oln ire over ii) lic:;L!, lo th1iat. O( :

i olis n oliiil.l t Ci al)ci

ali\ve ; :1;in :;llt) it 11:Il l nn111.1 iliccllf'i' L ;lnd provoked tlc pc1r-
plc gin.illf tthe Gclolcrnior ying, tllhit he hithl colourecl ,t

pjiCice

rose to such an height, that the Englilh anbaf- B O O K
fadl-or could hardly be protected from it. One
i)irit seemed now to animate all orders of men.
' The clergy offered to contrib:te a great fum to-
wards precerving the church from the dominion
of a Prince, whose fyltern of Reformation was so
fatal to their power. The nobles, after having
mortified the Cardinal lb lately in such a cruel
manner, were now ready to applaud and to second
him, as the defender of the honour and liberty of
his country.

ARGYLL, Huntly, Bothwell, and other power- rne excite

aimolt the

ful Barons declared openly againit the alliance ,hi naI-
with England. By their aflifance, the Cardinal ot glinlt
seized on the persons of the young Queen and her
mother, and added to his party the splendour and
authority of the royal na.me: . 1 Ie received, at
the fame time, a more real acceflion to his

pctce with your Mlirjcfl j on!)' t ilI: o tlir;. Tl'i:, is the

1 l-

ic linb;llhlcis o(1 the people \\ c'i livc e iCi in itch

: t 'il

l]!)irl , lliat they neilther r;;i r (hyl 1n01n G LcT,:rI ; nGor yt

v ill lie none il;: tidin e

lirc Iim e \irlniit d.ln cr." V\'(. .j.

In lN I ttlCI'o1' Septe be)lL 5, hI V, rites, tll;it tilh' r:1e (oi tlhe
I K'1 li' ill coliilile ot.l i)x tiolc!il, "l'it lneitielr nor ;Iny of

1;. l,!k'l; til;re ,;o o sll (I lly (.Itor;; ;land the Provoll of the

:\\ 11, \ hl) hlatIi in il ado to llay th llm I fromn ill ltli lr Ie
i, i V liotlfe., ;lll.1 kci',:ct t \:itt'cl tlicrci'o c nightllv, halitll fcnt

In IiC

m ioin.lc ) tltinn., :; dJ lr:li l ie toIn keep mlL' I ily l linJ ly

Il'l kss \ithin, for it is;. lrntin ihirs power In rit'r ; or rclill the
liiry of the peoplce. 'They l y pv l lily, 1 liall 1evel p:iss oint
. thlle town :llivc, xcp]t tIhe) h.ivc Ihcir fliiis I'lo)t)h'd. 'lTlhis

l; e i' c and hC:1illlincfsl(, '

o if Ii . lIion, vwihich Gold keel) all
JI I:, llc n nt li lron.' II1). 1 71.

c Kcith's H-ill. of Scotl, 30.

fl rc lngtll,

B °° K strength, by the arrival of Matthew Stewart Earl
_c^- of Lennox, whose return from F.rance lie had

earnefnly foliciccd. This young nobleman was
the hereditary enemiy of the houii of Hainilton.
1-e had many claims upon the Regent, and prc-
tended a right to exclude him, not only fi.oi fi-uc-
cecding to the Crown, but to deprive himn of the
pofreflion of his private fortune. The Cardinal
flattered his vanity with the prolpect of marrying
the Qeien Dowager, and affeijed to treat him
with lo much refpecr, that the Regent became
jealous of him as a rival in power.

THIS suspicion was artfully heightened by the

Abbot of Paisley, who returned into Scotland
some time before the Earl of Lennox, and afted
in concert witli the Cardinal. Te was a naCui-Lal
brother of the Regent, with wlom l;e liad gIreat
credit; a warm partisan of France, and a zealous
defender of the eltablilicd Religion. -le tool
hold of the Regent by tlhe proper handle, an.l en-
deavoured to bring about a change in his fcln-
timents, by working upon his fears. The de-
fertion of the nobility, the difanlfecion of tlhe
clergy, and the rage of the pcople ; tle rifentlment
of France, the power of tlie Cardinal, and tlec
pretensions of Lennox, were all reprelfnted with
aggravation, and with their mol t threateninl
afpeca.

MEANX while, the day appointed for tile ratifica-

tion of the treaty witlh I ngland, and the delivery
of the hoflages, approachled, and the Regent was
flill undctermincd in his own mindi . lie ac-cd to
the last with thlit irrclolution and inconfifllnce

wvbich

which is peculiar to weak men when they are To B O 0 K
unfortunate as to have the chief part in the con- -
dust of difficult affairs. On the 25th of Augurs, 'l, ge the
he ratified the treaty wi.li II.enry ', and proclaimed ro .in e

li ra

-

. th, irienad.

the Cardinal, who lill coltiinued to oppose it, an nfl).v
enemy to his country. On the third of Sep- Eiilind"
tember, he fCciletly wit!hdrew firom Edinburgh,
met with the Cardinal at Callendar, renounced
the fiien(dfhip of England, and declared for the
intercfts of France .

HENRY, in order to gain the R'cgent, Ihad not

spared the Inof't magnificent tpromiles. I-T had of-
sered to give the Princess Elizabeth in marriage to
his eldest son, and to conflitute him King of that
part of Scotland,which lies beyond the riverForth.
But, upon finding his interefll in the lkingdonl to be
less considerable than he had imagined, tlhe Eng-
lifli monarch began to treat him with little respect.
The young Queen was now in the cuflody of his
enemies, who grew every day more numerous
and more popular. They formed a separate court
at Stirling, and threatened to elctanotherRegent.
The French King was ready to afiford tlemn his
protection, and the nation, out of hatred to the
Englifhl, would have united in their defence. In
this situation, the Regcnt could not retain his au-
thority, without a fuidden change of his men;fures;
and though heendeavoureld, by ratifying the treaty,
to preserve the appearances of good faith with
England, he was oblisged to throw himself into
the arms of the party which adhered to France.

f Rymier, 'l(FoC. xv. p. 4.
c S.ilclr, 339, 356. l';Inilion MESS. i. 470, &c.

SooN

B 0 0 K SOON after this sudden revolution in his politi-

--- cal principles, the Regent changed his sentiments

f'c~tope,- concelrning religion. The fpiritofcontroverfywas
Reformers. then new and warm; books of that kind were

eagerly read by men of every rank; the love of
novelty, or the conviction of truth, had led the
Regent to express great elleem for the writings of
the Reformers; and having been powerfully sup-
ported by those who had embraced their opinions,
he, in order to gratify them, entertained, in his
own family, two of the most noted preachers of
the Protestant doctrine, and, in his first Parlia-
ment, consented to an at:, by which the laity
were permitted to read the Scriptures in a language
which they underfrood''. Truth needed only a fair
hearing to be an over-match for error. Abfurdi-
ties, which had long imposed on the ignorance
and credulity of mankind, were deteced and ex-
posed to public ridicule; and under the coun-
tenance of the Regent, the Reformation made
great advances. The Cardinal observed its pro-
grefs with concern, and was at the utmost pains
to obstruCt it. He represented to the Regent his
great imprudence in giving encouragement to opi-
nions so favourable to Lennox's pretensions; that.
his own legitimacy depended upon the validity of
a sentence of divorce, founded on the Pope's
authority; and that by suffering it to be called
in question, he weakened his own title to the
fucccflion, and furnifed his rival with the
only argument by which it could be rendered

'' Keith, p. 36t, 37.

cloubt-

doulbtf'ul . There insinuations made a deep i-n- B 0o1 K
pe rcifion on the Regent's timorous spirit, who, at
the profpe&t of such imaginary dangers, was as
much startled as the Cardinal could have wihed ;
and his zeal for the Protestant religion was not
long proof againfi: his fear. lIe publicly abjured
the doEtrine of the Reformers in the Francilcan
church at Stirling, and declared not only for the
political, but the religious opinions of his new
con sidents.

IHE Proteflant doctrine did not futTer much by

his apoftacy. It had already taken so deep root in
the kingdom, that no discouragement or fcvcrity
could extirpate it. The Regent indeed conlented
to every thing that the zeal of the Cardinal tnought
neceia.ry for the preservation of the eftablilhed reli-
gion. TheReformers were persecuted with all the
cruelty which superstition inspires into a barbarous
people. Many were condemned to tlat dreadful
death, which the church has appointed for the pu-
nifiment of its enemies; but they fufTered with a
iiirit so nearly resembling the patience and for-

' l'he prctcnlrions (f tlic E.i,1 o(f lcLnnis It Llle filcccfLiou

;'.'Ter thuIlls ,l;bIlcd. lM. , the dali;lhtcr of' Ja;mcs 11. w:as
i;i:t'rici rt J:It icI'' lord l .H:iill tonl , \'.lo( il JjaiIes 111. crIC.tted
I:':,l ;1f A rranm oil llitit ;Cc.i ;t' i '. Lli/.;i bl) , ; dal.i litcr of
I ll.t mIlrriiigc, \ .ls lic \\ilc '

Nl MItllhew Iil ,f Lennox, and

ii [i tI'iii 1Irt wV:I, IIcr r.;mdii; n. TiI' Recgcnt \\as likcevife
illte grinilu ol'll I the 1 l'i, cl . Miry. BI',: ls't hll 'It ' ilIving mar-
I dl Jiil c atc; itiin llc cl nl'.i l 11 1 i her, ;lLter lh c ia 1 obt;iincd
.1 livo : cce Ii i Elliii.etllhi ll{ ,c li. llel'r wilt, Il.cnox prc-
IcIlId(. tliat tlie Il. sc'c

Il divol ii c wa is iijull, Iandl tli;t the

lt.igcnt b. einig hl or1n w Ili!c Eli.zablet Ii \\'h1 ;is flill Ialiv C, (oligllt
:u be confidered is illI ,
iliillll.. (Craxf. Peer. 192.

titude

B 0 0 K titude of the primitive martyrs, that more were

_..-_. converted than terrified by such fipeiacles.

B.r:nn, THE Cardinal, however, was now in poffreron
ethecrief of every thing his ambition could desire; and ex-
direrfio ercifed all the authority of a Regent, withoot the
of affairs.

envy of the' name. Hei had nothing to fear from
the Earl of Arran, who having by his inconstancy
forfeited the pu bli esteem, w;s contemned by one
half of the nation, and little trufced by the other,
The pretelfions of the Earl of Lennox were the
only thing which remained to embarrass him. He
had very fucccfsfally made use of that nobleman
to work upo)n the Regent's jcaloufy and fear, but
as he no longer flood in n, ed of such an inftru-
ment, he was willing to get rid of him with de-
cency. Lennox soon began to fulfpc hlis intention;
promiles, filttery, and respect, were the only re-
turns he had hitherto received for substantial ser-
vices; but at lafI the Cardinal's ar'ifices could no
longer b, concealed, and -Lennox, inifead of at-
taiing power and dignity himself, saw that lie
had been employed only to procure tlife for ano-
ther. ]-eflentnlcnt and dilappointcd ambition
urged him to feck revenge on that cunning pre-
late, who, by facriticing his interest, had so un-
generoiuny purchased the Farl of Arran's friend-
ship. He withdrew, for that reaont, from conrt,
and declared for the party at cnmirty with the Car-
dinal, which, with open arms, received a convert
who added fol much lustre to their cause.

TIEr two fitfions vwhich divided the kingdom

were fill the tlime, without any alterations in their
views or principles ; but, by one of those firange

revolu-

revolutions, which lwere frequent in that age, they B o o K
had, in the course of a few weeks, changed their _-
leaders. The Regent was at the head of the par-
tifans of France and the defenders of Popery, and
Lennox in the fane station with the advocates for
the English alliance, and a reformation in reli-
gion. The one laboured to pull down his own
work, which the other upheld with the fame hand
that had hitherto endeavoured to destroy it.

LENNOX'S impatience for revenge got the itart

of the Cardinal's activity. I-e surprised both him
and the Kegent by a sudden march to Edinburgh
with a numerous army; and might easily have
crufled them, before they could prepare for their
defence. But he was weak enough to liften to
proposals for an accommodation; and the Car-
dinal amused him so artfully, and spun out the
treaty to such a length, that the greater part of
the Earl's troops, who served, as is usual wherever
the feudal inflitutions prevail, at their own ex-
pence, deserted him; and in concluding a peace,
instead of giving the law, he was obliged to re-
ceive it. A second attempt to retrieve his afTlirs
ended yet more unfortunately. One boody of Iis
troops was cut to pieces, and the reftl diicrfed;
and with the poor remains of a ruined party, lie
must either have iubmitted to the conqueror, or
have fled out of the kingdom, if the approach
of an Englilli army had not brought him a fliort
relief.

HENRY was not of a temper to bear tamely the rTnry ;n-

indigniity w.ith which he had been trcared, botlh i",,''.'t
by the lRegent and PIarliamcnt of Scotland, who,

a l:

B o0 K at the time when they renounced their alliance
~ j.-. with him, had entered into a new and strider con-

federacy with France. The rigour of the season
retarded for some time the execution of his ven-
geance. But in the spring, a considerable body
of infantry which was destined for France, re-
ceived orders to fail for Scotland, and a proper
number of cavalry was appointed to join it by
land. The Regent and Cardinal little expeccd
such a visit. They had trusted that the French
war would find employment for all H-enry's forces;
and, from an unaccountable security, were wholly
unprovided for the defence of the kingdom. The
Earl of Hertford, a leader fatal to the Scots in
that age, commanded this army, and landed it,
without opposition, a few miles above Leith. He

MAy 3, was quickly master of that place; and marching
'i44' directly to Edinburgh, entered it with the fame

cafe. After plundering the adjacent country, the
richest and most open in Scotland, he set on fire
both these towns, and upon the approach of tome
troops gathered together by the Regent, put his
booty on board the fleet, and with his land forces
retired safely to the F.ngliflh borders, delivering
the kingdom, in a few days, from the terror of an
invasion, concerted with little policy, carried on
at great expence, and attended with no advantage.
If lTenry aimed at the conquest of Scotland, lec
gained nothing by this expedition; if the marriage
lie had proposed, was 1fill in his view, he lonf a
great deal. Such a rough courtflip, as the Earl of
bluntly humorously called it, difgufled the whole
nation ; their aversion for the match grew into ab-

horrence;

e horrence; and, exasperated by To many indig- B O°O K

nities, the Scots were never at any period more
5 attached to France, or more alienated from Eng-
land.

THE Earl of Lennox alone, in spire to the Re-

gent and French King, continued a correspond-
ence with IEngland, which ruined his own interest,
without promioting Henry's k. Many of his own
valfrals, preferring their duty to their country
before their affeciorl ro him, refused to concur in
any design to favour the public enemy. After a
few feeble and unsuccessful attempts to disturb
the Regent's administration, he was obliged to
fly for safety to the court of England, where Henry
rewarded services which he had the inclination,
but not the power to perform, by giving him in
marriage his niece-the Lady Margaret Douglas.
This unhappy exile, however, was destined to be
the father of a race of kings. He saw his son
Lord Darnley mount the throne of Scotland, to
the perpetual exclusion of that rival who now
triumphed in his ruin. And, from that time, his
poltcrity have held the sceptre in two kingdoms,
by one of which he was cafl out as a criminal,
and by the other received as a fugitive.

MEAN while hostilities were continued by both A pe*ce

concluded.

nations, but with little vigour on either fide.
IThe hiflorians of that age relate minutely the
cii-cumfiances of several fkirinifles and inroads,
vhllich, as they did not produce any considerable
'1ilic., at this diflance of time deserve no reincm-

k Rynicr, xv. p. 22.
VOL. I. I brance.

B o0 K brance'. At last an end was put to this languid
%-_ and inactive war, by a peace, in which England,

J Though this arwasdilinguitlied by no important or dc-

cifive aAion, it wa, however, extremelcy rltiiouts to indivi-
du:al. There llill remain two original papers, which give us
fomn i1de: of thie mif crics, to which follc of the miolt fcrlti!;
cnnil ic iill lic le kiilong were cxpoled, b1! the iiiddlcn and de-
tllriuc'c incillionis of the borderers. The liri feeins to be
the report made to Henry by the En-lilli wardens of the
nmarclhes, for tlhe yealr 1544, and contaiiis their exploits lroiii
the 2d of July to the 17thl ofNovemlber. The account it give.
of the different inroads, or Forrays, as they are called, is very
minutile; ,and in cnneitlfion, the fiilt total of nflhlicf theri;
did is thus computedc:

Towns, towers, llcdes, barnekyns, parifhl-ciLhurcles,

baftel-houlek, call dowvi or burnt - 192

Scots flai - - 403
Prisoners taken - - 1 ,
Nolt, i. c. horned cattle, taken - o,3s'
Shccp - - - - 2,491
Nags and gcldigs - - 1,2/6
(oats - - - 2,3
Bolls of corn - - -5
Infiglit-gc.a, i. e. hloufl0old filllitllrl, not reckon(ed.

I-I;ynes's State l',pers, .^.

The other contains an account of an inroad by the Earl ls

Icertford, between the 8th and 23d of Septemblier, 545 ; tlie
narrative is more general, but it appears tliat he h:ad buiiil,
rafld, and dellroycd in the counties of B3rwick and Rox-
burgh only,

Monalteries and Friar-houfes - 7
Cafllcs, towers, and piles - - 6
Market towns - -
Villages - - 24.
Milns - * '3
I-Iofpitals, - 3

All thief were c;all down or burnt. I-Iayncs, 52. As the Scots
were no less skilful in tlhe pradcice of irregular vwar, we l;lay
conclude tllat the damage which they did in Enigland was llot
inconfidcralle ; and that their raidr were no les walf lefil thl.oi
thefcrrtyl ol the E£nglicl.

Francr,

FI1ance, and Scotland were comprehended. Henry B o0 K
laboured to exclude the Scots from the benefit of i-
this treaty, and to relerve them for that ven-
geance, which his attention to the affairs of the
continent had hitherto delayed. But although a
peace with England was of t'e lacf consequence
to Francis I. whom the Emperor was preparing
to attack with all his forces, he was too generous
to abandon allies, who had served him with fide-
lity, and he chose rather to purchase Henry's
friendship with disadvantage to himself, than to
leave them exposed to danger. By yielding some
things to the interest, and more to the vanity of
that haughty Prince; by submission, flattery, and
address, he, at length, prevailed to have the Scots
included in the peace agreed upon.

AN event which happened a fliort time before The mr-

der of Bcao

the conclusion of this peace, rendered it more toun.
acceptable to the whole nation. Cardinal Beatoun
had not used his power with moderation, equal
to the prudence by which he attained it. Not-
wirhftandirng his great abilities, he had too many
of the pafflons and prejudices of an angry leader
of a faction, to govern a divided people with
temper. His resentment against one party of the
nobility, his insolence towards the reft, his feve-
rity to the Reformers, and, above all, the bar-
barous and illegal execution of the famous George
Wifhart, a man of honourable birth and of pri-
mitive sanctity, wore out the patience of a fierce
age ; and nothing but a bold hand was wanting
to gratify the public wilh by his clcftrudtion.
Private revenge, inflamed and fanificd by a

I 2 fallif

B o0 K false zeal for religion, quickly supplied this want.

_- Norman Lefly, the eldest son of the Earl of

Rothes, had been treated by the Cardinal with
injustice and contempt. It was not the temper
of the man, or the spirit of the times, quietly
to digest an affront. As the profession of his ad-
verfary screened him from the effets of what is
called an honourable resentment, he resolved to
take that fatisfation which he could not demand,
This resolution deserves as much censure, as the
singular courage and condut with which he put
it in execution excite wonder. The Cardi-
nal, at that time, resided in the castle of Saint
Andrew's, which he had fortified at great expence,
and in the opinion of the age had rendered it
impregnable. His retinue was numerous, the
town at his devotion, and the neighbouring
country full of his dependents. In this Situation,
sixteen persons undertook to surprise his castle,
and to assassinate himself; and their success was
equal to the boldness of the attempt. Early in
:'9, ,), the morning they seized on the gate of the castle,

which was let open to the workmen who were
employed in finishing the fortifications; and
having placed sentries at the door of the Cardcli
nal's apartment, they awakened his numerous do-
mes-ics one by one, and turning them out of the
cattle, they, without noise or tumult, or violence
to any other person, delivered their country,
though by a most unjustifiable action, from an
amlbitious man, whose pride was insupportable to
the nobles, as his cruelty and cunning were. the
great checks to the Reformation.

ISi'

His death was fatal to the Catholic religion, B O o K

and to the French interest in Scotland. The fame a
zeal for both continued among a great party in TheRmein
the nation, but when deprived of the genius and vaintofeize
authority of so skilful a leader, operated with less dercr,.
effete. Nothing can equal the consternation
which a blow so unexpected occasioned among
such as were attached to him; while the Regent
secretly enjoyed an event, which removed out of
his way a rival, who had not only eclipsed his
greatness, but almost extinguished his power.
Decency, however, the honour of the church,
the importunity of the Queen Dowager and her
adherents, his engagements with France, and,
above all these, the desire of recovering his eldest
son, whom the Cardinal had detained for some
time at SaintAndrew's in pledge of his fidelity, and
who, together with the castle, had fallen into the
hands of the conspirators, induced him to take
arms, in order to revenge the death of a man
whom he hated.

HE threatened vengeance, but was unable to

execute it. One part of military science, the art
of attacking fortified places, was then unknown
in Scotland. The weapons, the discipline, and
impetuosity of the Scots, rendered their armies as
unfit for sieges, as they were active in the field.
An hundred and fifty men, which was the greatest
number the conspirators ever assembled, refited
all the efforts of the Regent for five months ", in
a place which a tingle battalion, with a few bat-
tering cannon, would now reduce in a few hours.

m Epilt. Reg. Scot. 2. 379,

I 3 Thia

B o0 K This tedious siege was concluded by a truce.

Ii.
c»-^- The Regent undertook to procure for the confpi-

rators an absolution from the Pope, and a pardon
in parliament; and upon obtaining these, they
engaged to surrender the castle, and to set his son
at liberty.

IT is probable, that neither of them were fin-

cere in this treaty. On both fides, they 0ought
only to amuse, and to gain time. The Regent
had applied to France for affiflance, and expected
soon to have the conspirators at mercy. On the
other hand, if Lefly and his afTociates were not
at first incited by Henry to murder the Cardinal,
they were, in the sequel, powerfully supported
by him. Notwithlitanding the silence of coteni-
porary historians, there are violent presumptions
of the former; of the latter there is undoubted
certainty n. During the siege, the conspirators
had received from England supplies both of mo-
ney and provisions; and as Henry was preparing
to ren;cw his proposals concerning the marriage
and the union lie had projected, and to second his
negociations with a numerous army, they hopei,
by concurring with him, to be in a situation, in
which they would no longer need a pardon, buc
might claim a reward.
jiinnary zs, TiHi death of -lenry blafled all these hopcs. It

happened in the beginning of next year, after
a reign of greater splendour than true glory;
bufiing, though not active; oppreflive in domeflic
governlment, and in foreign politics wild andl
irregular. But tle vices of this Prince were more

"Kcitii, 6o.

beneficial

beneficial to mankind, than the virtues of others. B 0 K
H-Is rapaciousness, his profusion, and even his -v
tyranny, by deprefling the ancient nobility, and
by adding new property and power to the Com-
mons, laid or ltrengthened the foundations of
the BritifJ liberty. His other paflions contri-
buted no less towards the downfal of Popery, and
the establishment of religious freedom in the
nation. His refentinent led himn to abolish the
power, and his covetousness to seize the wealth
of the church ; and by withdrawing these supports,
made it easy, in the following reign, to overturn
the whole fabric of superstition.

FRANCIs I. did not long survive a Prince, who

had been alternately his rival and his friend; but
his fucceflor Henry II. was not neglectful of the
French interest in Scotland. He sent a confider- Troop ar-

rive fiom

able body of men, under the command of Leon France.
Strozzi, to the Regent's afiftance. By their long
experience in the Italian and German wars, the
French had become as dexterous in the condut of
sieges, as the Scots were ignorant; and as the
boldness and despair of the conspirators could not
defend them against the superior art of these new
alfailants, they, after a flort resistance, furren- Force the

caItie of St.

dered to Strozzi, who engaged, in the name of Andrew's
the King his master, for the security of their tdr"' ''
lives ; and, as his prisoners, transported them into
France. The castle itself, the monument of Bea-
toun's power and vanity, was demolished, in
obedience to the canon law, which, with admi-i
rable policy, denounces its anathemas even against
the houses in which the sacred blood of a Cardi-

1 4 nal

B 0 0 K nal happens to be flcd, and ordains them to be

I.
A_--- laid in ruinso.

'THlE archbishopric of St. Andrew's was bestow-

ed by the Regent upon his natural brother Jolh
Hamilton, Abbot of Paisley.

New breach THE delay of a few weeks would have saved the
mi:h Eng-
land. conspirators. Those ministers of Henry VIII.

who had the chief dire&ion of affairs during the
minority of his son Edward VI. conducted them-
selves, with regard to Scotland, by the maxims
of their late master, and resolved to frighten the
Scots into a treaty, which they had not abilities
or addrels to bring about by any other method.

BUT before we proceed to relate the events

which their invasion of Scotland occasioned, we
shall flop to take notice of a circumstance unob-
served by cotemporary hiflorians, but extremely
remarkable for the discovery it makes of the fen-
timents and spirit, which then prevailed among
the Scots. The conspirators against Cardinal
Beatoin found the Regent's eldest son in the castle
of St. Andrew's; and as they needed the protec-
tion of the English, it was to be feared that they
might endeavour to purchase it, by delivering
to them this important prize. The presumptive
heir to the crown in the hands of the avowed
enemies of the kingdom, was a dreadful profpeft.
And, in order to avoid it, the Parliament fell
upon a very extraordinary expedient. By an at
made of purpose, they excluded " the Regent's
"eldest son from all right of fucceflion, public
"or private, so long as he should be detained a

° Burn. lif. Rcf. I. 338.

1< prisoner,

c prisoner, and substituted in his place, his other B 0 0 K
, brothers, according to their seniority, and in -
i failure of them, thofv who were next heirs to
, the Regent P." SuccefTion by hereditary right
is an idea so obvious and so popular, that a nation
seldom ventures to make a breach in it, but in
cafes of extreme neceflitv. Such a neceflity did
the Parliament discover in the prefcnt situation.
Hatred to England, founded on the memory of
past holtilities, and heightened by the smart of
recent injuries, was the national passion. This
ditated that uncommon statute, by which the or-
der of lineal succession was so remarkably broken.
The modern theories, which represent this right
as divine and unalienable, and that ought not to
be violated upon any consideration whatsoever,
teem to have been then altogether unknown.

IN the beginning of September, the Earl of Scotland

invaded hb

Hertford, now Duke of Somerset, and Protector the Englih.
of England, entered Scotland at the head of
eighteen thouiand men, and, at the fame time, a
fleet of ixty ships appeared on the coast, to Iecond
his land forces. The Scots had for some time
oblerved this storm gathering, and were prepared
for it. Their army was almost double to that of
the enemy, and potted to the greatest advantage
on a rising ground, above Mufelburgh, not far
from the banks of the river Efke. Both there
circumstances alarmed the Duke ofSomerfet, who
saw his danger, and would willingly have extri-
cated himfclf out of it, by a new overture of peace

P Epif. Rcg. Scot. 2. 359.

on

B o0 K on conditions extremely reasonable. But this

moderation being imputed to fear, his proposals
were rejeced with that scorn which the confidence
of success inspires; and if the conduct of the Re-
gent, who commanded the Scottifl army, had
been in any degree equal to his confidence, the
deflrution of the Engliflh must have been inevi-
table. They were in a situation precisely similar
to that of their countrymen under Oliver Crom-
well in the following century. The Scots had
chosen their ground so well, that it was impossible
to force them to give battle; a few days had ex-
haufted the forage and provision of a narrow coun-
try; the fleet could only furnish a scanty and pre-
carious fubffilence; a retreat therefore was necef-
fary ; but disgrace, and perhaps ruin, were the
consequences of retreating.

ON both these occasions, the national heat and

impetuosity of the Scots saved the Englifli, and
precipitated their own country into the utmost
danger. The undisciplined courage of the private
men became impatient at the fight of an enemy.

Battle of The General was afraid of nothing, but that the
Pinkey. FEnglifli might escape from him by flight; anti
septemher leaving his strong camp, he attacked the Duke of
0, '547. Somerset near Pinkey, with no better success than

his raflhnefs deserved. The ProteEtor had drawn
up his troops on a gentle eminence, and had now
the advantage of ground on his fide. The Scot-
tifh army confilled almost entirely of infantry,
whose chief weapon was a long spear, and for that
reason their files were very deep and their ranks
close. They advanced towards the enemy in three

gr-eat

i great bodies, and, as they palled the river, were B 01 0

considerably exposed to the fire of the English L
fleet, which lay in the bay of Mulfelburgh, and
had drawn near the flhore. The English cavalry,
fluflied with an advantage which they had gained
in a flirmifh some days before, began the attack
with more impetuosity than good condut. A
body so firm and compa& as the Scots, easily re-
filled the impression of cavalry, broke them, and
drove them offthe field. The English infantry,how-
ever, advanced, and the Scots were at once exposed
to a flight of arrows, to a fire in flank from four
hundred foreign fifileers who served the enemy,
and to theircannon, which were planted behind the
infantry on the highest part ofthe eminence. The
depth and closeness of theirordermaking it impof-
fible for the Scots to fRand long in this situation,
theEarl of Angus, who commanded the vanguard,
endeavoured to change his ground, and to retire
towards the main body. But his friends unhap-
pily mistook his motion for a flight, and fell into
confusion. At that very inflant, the broken ca-
valry having rallied, returned to the charge ; the
foot pursued the advantage they had gained; the
profped of victory redoubled the ardour of both:
And in a moment the rout of the Scottish army
became universal and irretrievable. The en-
conter in the field was not long nor bloody;
but in the pursuit, the English discovered all the
rage and fierceness which national antipathy,
kindled by long emulation, and inflamed by re-
ciprocal injuries, is apt to inspire. The pursuit
was continued for five hours, and to a great dif-

tance.

B °0 K tance. All the three roads by which the Scots

II.
_,_-- fled, were firewed with spears, and swords, and

targets, and covered with the bodies of the flail.
Above ten thousand men fell on this clay, one of
the most fatal Scotland had ever fcen. A few were
taken priloners, and among these some perfcns of
diftinerion. The ProteEtor had it now in his
power to become master of a kingdomn, out of
which, not many hours before, he was almost
obliged to retire with infamy i .

BUT

s The following paflage in a curious and rare journal of

the Protector's expedition into Scotland, written by W.. P.it
ten, who was joined in commission with Cecil, as Judge
Marshal of the army, and printed in 1548, deserves our no-
tice; as it gives a just idea of the military discipline of the
Scots at that time. " But what after 1 learned, specially
touching their order, their armour, and their manner as well
of going to offend, as of flanding to defend, I have thought
neceftry here to utter. I-Iackbutters have they few or none,
a:nd appoint their figh-t nofl commonly always a-foot. They
come to the field wcll ifrnilhed all witlx jack and skull, d;ag-
ger and buckler, and twvords all broad aind thin, of exceeding
good temper, and univcrlllly To made to lice, lhal as I never
saw none so good, so. I think it hard to devifc the

t bett rc'.

Hereto every man his pike, and a great kcrciherwr.lppcd twicc
or thrice about his neck, not for cold, bul lfor cutting. In their
array towards joining with the enemy, hlic cling antld tllrllt
so near in the fore rank, fliouldcr and (hoiildci-r togctlier, willt
their pikes in both their hands ir:tiglit ;Ilirc thCel, ;lnd Ilhiir
followers in that order so hard at thei r b1)cks, layinig thllir
pikes over their foriegoers fliotlclers, that, if they do :;illil
undircnvecred, no force can well i fl;and tlem. Stan:lding .
d'efence they thlirtfl loulderis likcswilce ro nigh together, Ilit
rfre ranks well nigh to kneeling, noop low beforc, tllhir
fellows behind holding their pikes witli bothl hands, niiil
thcrts ith in their left their bucklcr:,, the one iend of tllii'

IniLi

BUT thllis victory, however great, was of no real B OO K
-I utility, for want of skill, or of leisure, to improve T e-

it. Every new injury rendered the Scots more tory'ofli
averse fiom an union with England; and the Pro- benc.to
',tctor neglected the only measure which would
have made it necessary for them to have given
their consent to it. He amused himself in warsing
the open country, and in taling or building several
petty caitles; whereas, by fortifying a few places
which were accessible by sea, he would have laid
the kingdom open to the English, and, in a short
rime, the Scots must either have accepted of his
terlms, or have submitted to his power. By such
an improvement of it, the victory at Dunbar gave
Cromwell the command of Scotland. The battle
of Pinkey had no other effect but to precipitate
the Scots into new engagements with France.
The situation of the English court may, indeed,
be pleaded in excuse for the Duke of Somerset's
conduct. That cabal of his enemies, which oc-
cafroned his tragical end, was already formed;
and while he triumphed in Scotland, they secretly
undermined his power and credit at home. Self-

pikc againfl their 'ri.tln foot, and the r her ag:ilnfl i c enemy
lir (l}-hihrI ; thelir followers crlTing tlheir pil c poillts wvith
ileil fonarl I; lind thus each with otlher f nigh ;Is fpacc and
'l:tce wvill fnilf r, thlrol) h the whole wan;1 , so tlick, that as
t'lily 1111al a hare finger pierce through thc (kin of an :angry
ItihcIc-1hog, aIs :;ny ellCiOllnter the front of' their pikes.' Olther
I'nirIll p:rt icil.trr; irc l lnd ill this journil, f'roli wviicli Sir
J.lin II a .lw,' lr a bi orl Cwed hi,, .i ccICO ll of' thlis expCl e it ion.

l.il' of Edwl'l.il VI. 279, &*c.

''le Iclngth of tihe Scotch pike or fpcar was appointed vy
A't..t. P. 1471, to be fix ells: i . eighteen eect fix incihes.

3 pre lcrva-

B .oo K preservation, therefore, obliged himi to prefer his
v_>,_' safety before his fame, and to return without reap-

ing the fruits of his victory. At this time, how-
ever, the cloud blew over; the conspiracy by
which he fell was not yet ripe for execution; and
his presence suspended its effect for foine time.
The supreme power frill remaining in his hands,
he employed it to recover the opportunity which
Apr:,i5,ls. he had lust. A body of troops, by his command,

feizedc and fortified Haddingtoun, a place, which,
on account of its distance from the sea, and from
any Englilh garrison, could not be defended with-
out great cxpence and danger.

Forces the MEAN while the French gained more by the
l)'f-r un'ion defeat of their allies, than the English did by their
ihFiaice, viyory. After the death of Cardinal Beatoun,

Mary of Guise, the Queen Dowager, took a con-
fiderable share in the direction of affairs. She was
warmly attached by blood, and by inclination, to
the French interest; and, in order to promote it,
improved with great dexterity every event which
occurred. The spirit and ifrength of the Scots
were broken at Pinkey; and in an assembly of
nobles which met at Stirling to consult upon the
situation of the kingdom, all eyes were turned to-
wards France, no profpe&t of safety appearing
but in assistance from thence. But Henry II.
being then at peace with England, the Queen rc-
presented that they could not expect him to take
part in their quarrel, but upon views of personal
advantage; and that without extraordinary con-
cessions in his favour, no afiftlancc, in proportion to
their prcfent exigencies, could be obtained. The

preju.

prejudices of the nation powerfully seconded these B o o K
representations of the Queen. What often hap- -
pens to individuals, took place among the nobles
in this convention; they were swayed entirely by
tlieir passions; and in order to gratify them, they
deferred their former principles, and difiegarded
their true interelt. In the violence of rcfcntment,
they forgot that zeal for the independence of Scot-
land, which had prompted them to r.jec: the pro-
pofals of Henry VIII. and by offering, volun-
tarily, their young Queen in inarriage to the an to.r rr

their Q2eren

Dauphin, eldest ion of Henry II. and, which was in marri'ge
Rill more, by proposing to iend her immediately "ph'i Da
into France to be educated at his court, they
granted, from a thirst of vengeance, what for-
meerly they would not yield upon any confider-
ation of their own safety. To gain at once such
a kingdom as Scotland, was a matter of no small
consequence to France. Henry, without hefita-
tion, accepted the offers of the Scottifl ambaf-
fadors, and prepared for the vigorous defence of
his new acquisition. Sixthoufand veteran soldiers,
under the command of Monsieur Defs6, aflifled
by some of the best officers, who were formed in
the long wars of Francis I. arrived at Lcith.
'They served two caimpaigns in Scotland, with a
Jpirit equal to their former fame. But their ex-
ploits were not considerable. The Scots soon be-
coming jealous of their designs, neglected to
illpport them with proper vigour. The caution
of the Englifl, in ating wholly upon the dc-
fenfive, prevented them from attempting any
enterprise of confequcnce; and obliged them to

7 exhaust

B 0o K exhaust their strength in tedious sieges, under.

_ taken under many disadvantages. Their efforts,

however, were not without some benefit to the
Scots, by compelling the Fnglifl to evacuate
Haddingtoun, and to surrender several finall forts,
which they possessed in different parts of the king.
dom.

BUT the effets of these operations of his

troops were frill of greater importance to the
French King. The diversion which they occa-
sioned enabled him to wrest Boulogne out of the
hands of the English ; and the influence of his
army in Scotland obtained the concurrence of
Parliament with the overtures which had been
made to him, by the assembly of nobles at Stir-
ling, concerning the Queen's marriage with the
Dauphin, and her education at the court of
France. In vain did a few patriots remonitrate
against such extravagant concessions, by which
Scotland was reduced to be aprovince of France;

The treaty and Henry, from an ally, raised to be master of
rotecon- the kingdom; by which the fi-iendlhip of France
eluded. became more fatal than the enmity of England;

and every thing was fondly given up to the one,
that had been bravely defended against the other.
A point of so much consequence was hastily de-
cided in-a Parliament assembled in the camp be-

une s, fore Haddingtoun : The intrigues of the Queen
J548. Dowager, the zeal of the clergy, and resentment

against England, had prepared a great party in
the nation for such a (tep; the French General
and Ambafador, by their liberality and piomifes,
gained over many more. The Regent himself

was

lvas weak enough to sloop to the offer of a pen- B o 0 K
sion from France, together with the title of Duke A_
of Chatelherault in that kingdom. A confider-
i:able majority declared for the treaty, and the in-
terest of a faction was preferred before the honour
of the nation.

HAVING hurried the Scots into this rash and m'.y ,tnrt

to .,e tdu-

fatal resolution, the source of many calamities to cated in
lthemfelves and to their Sovereign, the French Fra"ce.
' allowed them no time for reflection or repentance.
The fleet, which had brought over their forces,
was frill in Scotland, and, without delay, con-
voyed the Quieen into France. Mary was then
fix years old, and by her education in that court,
one of the politest, but most corrupted in Europe,
i the acquired every accomplishment that could add
to her charms as a woman, and contracted many
of those prejudices which occasioned her misfor-
tunes as a Queen.

FROM the time that Mary was put into their

hands, it was the interest of the French to susser
the war in Scotland to languish. The recovery
the Boulonnois was the object which the French
King had most at heart; but a flight diversion in
Britain was sufficient to divide the attention and
llrength of the Englifl, whose domestic factions
( deprived both their arms and councils of their ac-
cullomed vigour. The government of England
hiai undergone a great revolution. The Duke
of Somerset's power had been acquired with too
much violence, and was exercised with too little
moderation, to be of long continuance. Many
good qualities, added to great love of his coun.

VOL. 1, K try,

n o o K try, could not atone for his ambition in ufirping
;-___ the sole direction of affairs. Many of the moli

eminent courtiers combined against him ; and the
Earl of Warwick, their leader, no less ambitious,
but more artful than Somerset, condu(ed hij
rneafures with so Inuch dexterity, as to raise him.
self upon the ruins of his rival. Without the in..
vidious name of Protector, he succeeded to all the
power and influence, of which Somerset was de-
prived, and he quickly found peace to be necef-
faiy for the establishment of his new authority,
and the execution of the vast designs he had con-
ceived.
Peace con- HENRY was no flranger to Warwick's situation,

and improved his knowledge of it to good pur.
pose, in conducting the negociations for a general
peace. He prescribed what terms he pleated to
the English Minifler, who scrupled at nothing,
however advantageous to that Monarch and his
March 24, allies. Engl:nd consented to restore Boulogne

55 and its dependencies to France, and gave up all

pretensions to a treaty of marriage with the Queen
of Scots, or to the conquest of her country. A
few finall forts, of which the Englifl troops had
hitherto kept poffefloon, were rafed; and peace
between the two kingdoms was eftablifled on its
ancient foundation.

BorlTH- the Britifl nations los- power, as well as

reputation, by this unhappy quarrel. It was on
both fides a war of emulation and resentment, ra-
ther than of interell:; and was carried on under
the inlluence of national animofities, which were
blind to all advantages. The lrench, who en-

tercd

tercd into it w rli greater coolness, conducted it B °o K
| viit more skill; and by dexceroufly availing a

thcincltclves of every circum itance which occurred,
! recovered poffeliion of an importalnt territory

vwhich they had loll, and added t their monarchy
4 a new kingdom. The anabirion of the ELnglifh

M jVlinifler betrayed to themi the former; tile in-
considerate rage of the Scots against their ancient
enemies bestowed on them the latter; their own
addrlefs and good policy merited both.

IIMEDIATELY after the conclusion of the peace, The Scots
the French forces left Scotland, as much to their j: als of

the F rench ,

own satisfaction, as to that of the nation. The
Scots soon foundl, that the calling to their affii--
ance a people more powerful than thernftlves, was
a dangerous expedient. They beheld, with the
utmoit impatience, those who had come over to
proteEt the kingdom, taking upon them to com-
mand in it; and on many occasions they repented
the rash invitation which they had given. The
peculiar genius of the French nation heightened
this dilgufl, and prepared the Scots to tlrow off
the yoke, before they liad well begun to feel it.
The French were, in that age, what they arc in
tihe piefent, one of the molt polilhed nations in
Europe. But it is to be observed, in all tleir
expeditions into foreign countries, whether to-
wards the south or north, that their manners have
been remarkably incompatible with the manners
of cvery other people. Barbarians are ten icious
of their own cullloms, because they want know-
ledge and taste to discover the reasonableness and
propriety of culloms which differ from them.

K 2 Nations,

o0 0 K Nations, which hold the first rank in politenefk,
_-_- are frequently no less tenacious out of pride. The

Greeks were so in the ancient world; and the
French are the fame in the modern. Full of
themselves; flattered by the imitation of their
neighbours; and accustomed to confider their
own modes as the standards of elegance, they
scorn to disguise, or to lay aside the distinguishing
manners of their own nation, or to make any al.
lowance for what may differ from them among
others. For this reason, the behaviour of their
armies has, on every occasion, been insupportable
to strangers, and has always exposed them to
hatred, and often to deftrution. In that age,
they over-ran Italy four several times by their
valour, and loft it, as often, by their insolence.
The Scots, naturally an irascible and high-fpirited
people, and who, of all nations, can least bear
the most distant insinuation of contempt, were
not of a temper to admit all the pretensions of
such assuming guests. The symptoms of aliena-
tion were soon visible; they seconded the mili-
tary operations of the French troops with the ut-
nmott coldness ; their disgust grew insensibly to a
degree of indignation that could hardly be re-
firained; and on occasion of a very flight ac-
cident, broke out with fatal violence. A private
French soldier engaging in an idle quarrel with
a citizen of Edinburgh, both nations took arms,
with equal rage, in defence of their countrymen.
The Provost of Edinburgh, his son, and several
citizens of diftintion, were killed in the fray;
and the French were obliged to avoid the fury of

the

he inhabitants, by retiring out of the city. Not- B o0 K
vithftanding the ancient alliance of France and a
Scotland, and the long intercourse of good offices
between the two nations, an aversion for the
French took its rife at this time among the Scots,
,tlhe effets whereof were deeply felt, and operated
powerfully through the subsequent period.

FROM the death of Cardinal Beatoun, nothing Progrersof

the Reform-

has been said of the Rate of religion. While the atiof.
war with England continued, the clergy had no
leisure to molest the Protestants; and they were
not yet considerable enough to expe& any thing
more than connivance and impunity. The new
doLrines were frill in their infancy; but during
this short interval of tranquillity, they acquired
Itrength, and advanced by large and firm steps,
towards a full establishment in the kingdom. The
first preachers against Popery in Scotland, of
whom several had appeared during the reign of
James V. were more eminent for zeal and piety,
than for learning. Their acquaintance with the
principles of the Reformation was partial, and at
Iecond hand; some of them had been educated
in England; all of them had borrowed their no-
tions from the books published there; and, in
the first dawn of the new light, they did not ven-
ture far before their leaders. But, in a short time,
the doctrines and writings of the foreign Re-
formers became generally known; the inquisitive
genius of the age pressed forward in quest of
truth; the discovery of one error opened the way
to others; the downfal of one imposture drew
imany after it; the whole fabric, which ignorance

K 3 and

B 0 0 K and ftperflition had erected in times of darknefi

--- began to totter; and nothing was wanting to

complete its ruin, but a daring and active lead(i
to direc the attack. Such was tlhe famous Jo n
Knox, who, with better qualifications of le;rn-
ing, and more extensive views th.n any of lhi:
predecessors in Scotland, pofinfled a natural i~;-
trepidity of mind, which set him above fear. hic
began his public ministry at St. Andrew's in the
year one thousand five hundred and forty-fevecn
with that success which always accompanies a
bold and popular eloquence. Inflead of amusing
himself with lopping the branches, he struck di-
reEtly at the root of Popery, and attacked bothl
the doctrine and discipline of the cefablifie:i
church, with a vehemence peculiar to himflr.
but admirably suited to the temper and wishes .i
the age.

AN adverlary so formidable as Fnox, vo!! i

not have easily eicaped the rage of the clergy,
who observed the tendency andl progrejl- of li;:
opinions with the utmost concern. But, at ii,.
he retired for lafety into the cafile of St. iA-
drew's, and while the conspirators kep't t)ollfiifi
of it, preached publicly under their lrotec ;;ji.
Thle great revolution in England, which follvwcd
1upon the death of llenry VIII. contributed 1;o
less than tie zeal of Knox, towards demolifhiiv:
the Popiifli church in Scotland. Hlenry ihad
loofined the clhains, and liglhtened the yoke of
Popery. The mlinilters of his son Edward VI.
canr theil off altogether, and fllablinlcd the 'ro-
teflant rcligion upon alimofl the famle footing

wlicr'coY!

whereon it now ftandsin that kingdom. The in- B o) K
fluence of this example reached Scotland, and the _
happy efi-ets of ecclesiastical liberty in the one
nation, inspired the other with an equal desire of
recovering it. The Reformers had, hitherto,
been obliged to conduct themi-lves with the ut-
molt caution, and Ieldom ventured to preach, but
in private houses, and at a distance from court;
they gained credit, as happens on the first publi-
cation of every new religion, chiefly among per-
sons in the lower and middle rank of life. But fe-
veral nobleillen, of the greatest diftinltion, having,
about this time, openly espoused their principles,
they were no longer under the necessity of ating
with the fame reserve; and with more security
andt encouragement, they had likewise greater
success. The means of acquiring and spreading
knowledge becanie more common, and the spirit
of innovation, peculiar to that period, grew every
day bolder and more universal.

tHAPPILY for the Reformation, this spirit was

flill under some restraint. It had not yet attained
firmness and vigour, sufficient to overturn a syste-i
founded on the deepelt policy, and supported by
the imoft formidable power. Under the present
circumiftances, any attempt towards aEtion must
have been fatal co the Protestant doctrines; and
it is no finall proof of the authority, as well as pe-
netration of the heads of the party, that they were
able to relfrain the zeal of a fiery and impetuous
people, until that critical and mature juncRurc,
when every ftcp they took was dccilivc and fuc-
ccfsful.

K 4 MEAN-

B o 0 K MEANWHILE their cause received reinforce-
L-_,,i ment from two different quarters, whence they

never could have expected it. The ambition of
the house of Guilf, and the bigotry of Mary of
England, hastened the subversion of the Papal
throne in Scotland ; and by a singular disposition
of Providence, the persons who opposed the Re-
formation in every other part of Europe with the
fiercefl zeal, were made instruments for advancing
it in that kingdom.

The Queen MARY of Guise possessed the fame bold and
D,,w .ger
=)r,-Sto aspiring spirit which distinguished her family.
the fice of
Reen. Bur in her it was softened by the female charaEter,

and accompanied with great temper and address.
Her brothers, in order to attain the high objets
at which they aimed, ventured upon such daring
measures as suited their great courage. Her de-
signs upon thefupreme powerwere concealed with
the utmost care, and advanced by address and re-
finements more natural to her sex. By a dexte-
rous application of those talents, hle had acquired
a considerable influence on the councils of a na-
tion hitherto unacquainted with the government
of women; and, without the fialleft right to any
share in the adminifiration of affairs, had engrossed
the chief direEtion of them into her own hands.
But she did not long reft satisfied with the enjoy-
ment of this precarious power, which the fickle-
ness of the Regent, or the ambition of those who
governed him, might so easily diflurb; and the
began to set on foot new intrigues, with a design
of undermining him, and of opening to hcrfelf a
way to succeed him in that high dignity. HIer

brothers

brothers entered warmly into this scheme, and B 0O K
supported it with all their credit at the court of -,
France. The French King willingly concurred
in a measure, by which he hoped to bring Scot-
land entirely under management, and, in any fu-
ture broil with England, to turn its whole force
upon that kingdom.

IN order to arrive at the desired elevation, the

Qeccn Dowager had only one of two ways to
chule ; either violently to wrest the power out of
the hands of the Regent, or to obtain it by his
content. Under a minority, and among a war-
like and factious people, the former was a very
uncertain and dangerous experiment. The latter
appeared to be no less impracticable. To per-
Iuade a man voluntarily to abdicate the supreme
power; to descend to a level with those, above
whom he was raised; and to be content with the
fccond place where he hath held the firift, may
well pass for a wild and chimerical project. This,
however, the Queen attempted; and the pru-
dence of the attempt was fufficientlyjuflifiecl by
its success.

FTlE Regent's inconstancy and irreSolution, to-

gether with the calamities which had befallen the
kingdom under his adminifiration, railed the re-c
judices both of the nobles and of the people
against him, to a great height; and the Qeen
secretly fomented thele with much induflry. All-
who wished for a change met with a gracious re-
ception in her court, and their spirit of (lil. f-
section was nourifled by such hopes and prollilcs,
is, il) every age, iimpofe on the creduliry of the

fa.t iou(s.

B 0 0 K fahious. The favourers of the Reformation be-

ll.

, - I- n ging the mofr numerous and 1ireading body of
c'eourntr the Recent's enemies, fie applied to them, with ,

particullr attention ; and the gentleness of her r! i1
polition, and seeming indif(;rcence to thc religious
points in dispute, macde all her promiicfs of pro-
teeion and indulgence pals upon them for sincere.
Finding so great a part of the nation willing to fall
in with her mealLrcs, tle Qu2een let out for
France, under pretence of viitin lier ldaughter,
Da. ;s5o. and tookl along wilh her tliofe noblemen who

pofInficle tle greatest power and credit among
their countrymen. Softenel by tile pleasures of
an elegant court, flattered by the civilities of the
French King, and the carefils of the house of
Guilt, and influenced by the seasonable dillribu-
tion of a few favours, and the liberill promise of
many more, they were brought to approve of all
the Queen's pretensions.

WHILE flh advanced by tliefe flow but sure

fleps, the Regent either did not fortcle tile d.ln-
ger which threatened him, or neglected to lrovidc
aigainft it. The filr: difcovcry of the train which
was laid, came fromn two of his own confidents,
Carnegie of Kinnaird, and Pantcr B, lhol of lotl,
whom the Qecn lhad gained over to her interlil,
and then employed as the imoll proper inltrui;lntL
for obtaining his conlent. The overture was mai!c
to him in tllh name of the Frcrle K ing, enfrocci:
by proper tlhreatenings, in order to work uponi
his natural timi(lity, and vctrcned by every ;'ro-
lnlic tlhat could reconcilc hil to ai propol'l lo (li!--
;.grecable. On tlhe one hand, tili con li iriaiot)n <!i

his French title, together with a confiderabl< B 0 0 K
pension, the parlianmentary aclkrowl'di;m, nt of -
his Iight of fucctfion to tlhe Crovwn, n ,l : public
ratification of his conlii durin-lr his rernc- ,
were offered hiim. On the o:er hand(, the ii!-
pleasure of the French KTinr, the p)pwer antl po-
pularity of the Qleen Douvwaer, the (lilfct ion of
the nobles,with the danger of an afrcr recikon ing
were reprfented in the itronlret colours.

IT was not ;pof ible to aIre e to pr1-(,ofi fTo

extraordinary and unexpecfled, wi .hou t fjme pre-
vious struggle; and had the Arc' bihGcp of St.
An:ltrew's been present to fortify the irresolute and
passive sI iritof the Re:ent, he, in all probability,
would have rcjcLtcd it with disdain. I-a;pily
for the Queen, the figacity tndl ainbition of that
Prelate could, at this time, be no ob)iriiruion to
her views. l-e was lying at the point of death,
and in his absence, the influence of the Q(een's
agents on a flexible temper countecrl.:ianced fe-
veral of the flroncgft: passions in the hIumnan mind,
and obtained his conrent to a voluntar-y surrender
of tile lupreme plowtr.

AFTrEr gailiing a point of fiichli fficulty with Dec. r1x.

so imuch C.fle;, th-e Queen returned into Scotland,
in full cxpectation of t;iking imlldil.te rpoflfiiol
o(f her new (lii. ,ity. But, by thili till, the Arch-
b';0 op of St. Andlrew's had recovered of that dilf
t:('l-'lm r, whic h the ilnora:nce li f lihe Scottini lphy-
lici' lls hlad pronounced to lbe incurable. This he
owc, ro the alTnifllC(' of the fllamotlS Car;dan, one
of thl(' irregular adventturrs in l)liloloph', of
whom Italy produccd 1b man11y abou: this l)pe(iodl.

A bold

B o0 K A bold genius led him to iome useful discoveries,
.-- - wliich merit the esteem of a more discerning age;

a wild imaln inarion engaged him in those chime-
rical fcienci-, whilch drew the admiration of his
cotemporaries. As a pretender to aflrology and
magic, he was revered and consulted by all Eu-
rope; as a proficient in natural philosophy, he
was but little knowii. The Archbishop, it is
probable, confidered him as a powerful magician,
when he applied to him for relief; but it was his
knowledge as a philosopher, which enabled him
to cure his difeafer.

TOG ETHER with his health, the Archbifslop re-

covered the entire government of the Regent, and
quickly persuaded him to recal that diihonour-
able promnie, which he had been seduced by the
artifices of the QOLeen to grant. However great
her surprise and indignation were, at this fresh in-
fiance of his inconftiacy, she was obliged to dif-
femble, that fly- night have leisure to renew her
intrigues with all parties; with the Protestants,
whom llie favoured and courted more than ever;
with the nobles, to whom she rendered herself
agreeable by various arts; and with the Regent
himself, in order to gain whom, fle employed
every argument. But whatever impressions her
emissaries might have made on the Regent, it was

' Cardan liimfclf' was more dclirnus of ibeing confidered as

an Aflt-ologcr-t hl;n ia ]'hiilphcr ; in his book De Grniturrir, we
find ;l calculaition (o' tIll ArchhilliIo)p's niat ivity, if'oni w\hich he
prrctcllis ih(,l Ilo hiave prlcl.edi Iis tli c;ti,; andl to h;ave cffctc(d
Jiis cure. H}-e reccivcl, fr-om thec Arcllibihopl, a rcwa rl o1'
1 Co crowns.'II A great fiim in th;t ;iac. De vitafiau, p. 32.

no

no easy matter to over-reach or to intimidate the B °0 K
Archuifhop. Under his management, the nego- --- .'
ciations were spun out to a great length, and his
brother maintained his itaion with that address
and firmness, which its importance so well merited.
The universal defctaion of the nobility, the grow-
ing power of the Pruteftants, who all adhered to
the Queen Dowager, the reiterated solicitations of
the French King, and, above all, the interposition
of the young Queen, who was now entering the
twelfth year of her age, and claimed a right of no-
minating whom file pleated to be Regents, obliged
him, at last, to resign that high office, which he Prvii:s on
had held many years. He obtained, however, the to rC,,i' n,
lamne advantageous terms for himself, which had ofHc.
been formerly stipulated.

IT was in the Parliament which met on the she obta'n

ithe Regen-

tenth of April, one thousand five hundred and cy.
fifty-four, that the Earl of Arran executed this
extraordinary resignation; and at the fame time
Mary of Guise was raised to that dignity, which
had been so long the object of her wifles. Thus,
with their own approb ition, a woman and a
itranger was advanced to the supreme authority,
over a fierce and turbulent people, who seldom
fibmitted, without reluEtance, to the legal and
ancient government of their native Monarchs.

WHILE the Queen Dowager of Scotland con- Rcforma-

on cohiii-

tributed so much towards the progreis of the Re-, . to,
formation, by the protection which she afforded pogr,,'l.
it, from motives of ambition; the Elglifll Qe(n,
by her indiscreet zeal, filled the kingdom with

Lcflcy, de rcb. gect. Scot. ap. Jcbb. i. iR-

persons

Do o K persons active in promoting the ftme cause. Manr
_.--__ ~ alcendled the throne of l:n]gland, on tle death (o

J-"Y 6, Iher her

b Edward, and fton after married Piii-
:$53,

lip II, of Spain. To the pe'rccuting lfpirit of thc
Ronifh ft)upcriition, and the fierccncls of that
age, flhw adidled the private refentnment of her otwn
and of her mother's ltiinerings, with wliich sic
loaded the rcformed religion; and the peevifi-
neis and Ifcverity of her natural temper carried the
acrimony of all these passions to tie utmofl ex-
treme. The cruelty of heIr peislecution equalled
the deeds of tihofc tyrants who have been tle'
grcater reproach to human! nature. The bigotry
of her clergy could scarce keep pace with tlie
impetuosity of her zeal. Even the unrelenting
Philip was obliged, on tome occasions, to miti-
gate the rigour of her proceed ings. Many among
the molt eminent Refoirmners fuIfIered for the doc-
trines which they had taught; others fled fi-om
the flor-ii. To the greater part of there, Swit-
zerland and Germany opened a secure aflllun;
and not a few, out of choice or necellity, fled into
Scotland. What they had Ifcfn and felr in Eng-
land, didi not abatc the

t wamth and zeal of their

indignation agail:fl. Popcryy. Thleir attacks were
bolder and lmore I-i ccelfsful than ever; and thllir
doctrines made a rapid progrecs among all ranksL
of' nicn.

TIIESE doclrines, calculated to recrify the opi-

nions, and to rcform the manners of mankind, had
hitherto produced no other clfcCts; but they ofon
began to operate with greater violence, andl provel
the occasion, Inot only of fubvcrting the elltabliflilcd

religion,

religion, but of fhiking the throne, and enwdan- B 0 0 Kc
gicrin" tile kingdom. 'Th caulis which facili- -
tited the irtrocldlu-ion of these nlCv' O')ilions into ," p

' :""i

Scotland, and which diliTl-minated tl,em il fast cI" fC
through the nation, merit, on that account, a par- ti!, td t-

,v. . ils Lthldr,

ticular and careful inquiry. The Refiormation is
one of the grcaitcilt cents in tile hiflory of man-
kind, and, in whatever point of light we view it,
is inflrustive and inrerefting.

TI-IE revival of learning in the fifteenth and

fixtecnth centuries rouPed the world from that le-
thargy in which it ihad been funk for many ages.
The human mind felt its own ftiength, broke
the fetters of authority by which it had been so
long rettrained, and venturing to move in a ;lrger
sphere, pushed its inquiries into every fuljecL,
with great boldness and surprising success.

No sooner did mankind recover the capacity

of exercising their reason, than religion was one
of the first objets which drew their attention.
Long before Luther published his famous Thlles,
which fiook the Papal throne, science and phi-
lofophy had laid open, to many of the Italians,
the imposture and abfuirdity of the clablilhed
superstition. That Lfbtle and refined people,
satisficd with enjoying tlio!e discoverics in fc-
cret, were little difpold to afi'nie the dangerous
cliaracer of Reformercs, and concluded the
knowledge of truth to be the prerogative of
the wife, while vulgar minds mull: be ove-ranved
and governed by popular errors. But, ani-
mated with a more noble anl di[initcrfllcd z7cal,
the German Theologian boldly e:ccd le

6 llandard

B °0 K standard of Truth, and upheld it with an

I1.
_--- unconquerable intrepidity, which merits tle

admiration and gratitude of all succeeding
ages.

THE occasion of Luther's being first disgusted

with the tenets of the Romish church, and how,
from a small rupture, the quarrel widened into
an irreparable breach, is known to every one
who has been the leaPt conversant in history.
From the heart of Germany his opinions spread,
with aftonilhing rapidity, all over Europe; and,
wherever they came, endangered or overturned
the ancient, but ill-founded system. The vi-
gilance and address of the court of Rome, co-
operating with the power and bigotry of the
Austrian family, suppressed these notions on their
first appearance, in the southern kingdoms of
Europe. But the fierce spirit of the north, ir-
ritated by multiplied impolitions, could neither
be mollified by the fame arts, nor subdued by
the fame force; and encouraged by some Princes
from piety, and by others out of avarice, it easily
bore down the feeble opposition of an illiterate
and immoral clergy.

THE fuperltition of Popery seems to have grown

to the most extravagant height in those coun-
tries which are situated towards the different ex-
tremities of Europe. The vigour of imagination,
and sensibility of frame, peculiar to the inhabit-
ants of southern climates, rendered them fulcep-
tible of the deepest impreflions of superstitious
terror and ,'reduliry. Ignorance and barbarity
were no les favourable to the progress of the fame

fpiitr,

spirit, among the northern nations. Tley knew B o o K
little, and were ditpofed to believe every thing. _-. -
'The most glaring absurdities did not shock their
iofis understandings, and the molt improbable
litrions were received with implicit ailcnt and
admiration.

AccoRDINGLY, that form of Popery, which

prevailed in Scotland, was of the most bigotted
and illiberal kind. Those doctrines which are
molt apt to shock the human understanding, and
those legends which farthest exceed belief, were
proposed to the people without any attempt to
palliate or disguise them; nor did they ever call
in queltion the reasonableness of the one, or the
truth of the other.

TIHE power and wealth of the church kept

pace with the progress of superstition; for it is
the nature of that spirit to observe no bounds in
its respect and liberality towards those whose
characer it esteems sacred. The Scottifl Kings
early demonstrated how much they were under
its influence, by their valt additions to the in-
munities and riches of the clergy. The profuse
piety of David I. who acquired on that account
the name of Saint, transferred almost the whole
crown lands, which were at that time of great
extent, into the hands of ecclesiastics. The ex-
ample of that virtuous Prince was imitated by
liis successors. The spirit spread among all or-
ders of men, who daily loaded the priesthood
with new poffeflions. The riches of the churcl
all over Europe were exorbitant; but Scotland
was one of tlhofe countries, wherein they had

VOL, I. L farthelt

B o0 K farthest exceeded the just proportion. The Sc't-

- tifh clergy paid one half of every tax impoccl on

land ; and as there is no reason to think that, in
that age, they would be loaded with any unequal
flare of the burden, we may conclude that, by
the time of the Reformation, little less than one-
half of the property in the nation had fallen into
the hands of a society, which is always acquiring,
and can never loec.

TI'E nature too, of a considerable part of their

property, extended the influence of the clergy.
Many estates, throughout the kingdom, held of
the church; church-lands were let in leafc at an
easy rent, and were poffcfed by tile younger sons,
and descendants of tlhe best familiest. The
connection between Jfiperior and vafJal, between
landlord and tenant, created dependences, and
gave rife to an union of great advantage to the
church; and in estimating the influence of the
Popifi ecclesiastics over the nation, there, as well
as the real amount of their revenues, must be at-
tended to, and taken into the account.

THIS e\:traordinary mhare in the national pro-

perty was accompanied witl proportionable
weight in the fuprcme council of the kingdom.
At a time, when the number of the tcmporal
Peers was extremely fnall, and when the lesser
Barons and reprefcntativcs of Boroughs seldom
attended Parliaments, the 1].cclefuiftics formed a
consliderable body there. It appears fiom the
ancient rolls of Parliament, and from the man-
ner of chluifng the Lords of Articles, that tile

' itRh, 21. Nrtproc
(eb)

procecd-

proceedings of that high court muli: have been, in B 0 l0 K
a creat meauire, under their direCtion . t.-- -

TrHE reverence' due to their ]acrcd characer,

which was often carried incredibly far, contri-
buted not a little towards the growth of their
ipower. The dignity, the titles, and precedence
of the Popiflh clergy are remarkable, both as
causes and ef:ccts of that dominion which they had
accquired over the reft of mankind. They were
regarded by the credulous laity as beings of a i ·.
perior species; they were neither lfbjeCt to the
fi.me laws, nor tried by the mtiie judges ". Every
I u;rd, that religion could fipply, was placed
;ro-und their power, their poffcffions, and their
persons; and endeavours were used, not without
;iicccfs, to represent them all as equally 1tacred.

THE reputation for learning, which, however

inconsiderable, was wholly engrofled by the clergy,
added to the reverence which they derived fiom
religion. The principles of found plhilofophy,
and1 of a jurf taste, were altogether unknown ; in
place of tlefe were substituted ftiudies, barbarous
and uninftruLtive; but as the Ecclesiastics alone

Spoif. IIist. of the Churcl of Scotl.n., 4-49
How fal this clairn of lhe clcrg!y to cxcmil) tion from ;lay

jiritlicioln extendedllC, ippel;rs f )ron lll a c'ni.irkai )lc tiraif;l ltion
in tilc lalrliarncint hld inl 154.6. Whcia thlt courlt was pro-
(C.clinig to the forfi:citr-c of tIie miuii-tlerers of Ca'rdin:tl Bca-
tlill, ;lnd were

\ al)olut to inclhdlce a pricll, who wias: oc of the

:Ill:niNis, iln e igcncral fi;ltcnce of condcinala;t i(o, odious is

iL. criIe wais to Ecclcfi:lllics, a dceleg:at ;i[)pc;ieled in thlci

J1inlic, a dl rple/,egd or cl.ailed CXCIl ItiOll 1i' limii from tlie
iilditinciii of 'arliairncint, as afiiritual man. This cl;iinm was
l(ll.lincld; a:id his na;m is nlot infecrtc in tic AIl of. For-
litit', E 'pilt. RLg. Scot. ii. 350. 361.

L 2 were

B 0 0 K were converlant in them, this procured them

eftecm ; and a very slender portion of knowledge
drew tlhe admiration of rude ages, which knew
little. \Var was tic sole proflnion of the nobles,
and Iiunting their chief amufcim- nt; they divided
tliiri time between tche : unacquainted with the
arts, and unimproved by science, they disdained
any employment toreign from military affairs, or
which required rather penetration and address,
than bodily vigour. Wherever the former were
necessary, the clergy were intrluied ; becau.se
they alone were properly qualified for the trult.
Almofl: all the high offices in civil government
devolved, on this account, into their hands.
The Lord Chancellor was the firfi fubjecf in the
kingdom, both in dignity and in power. From
the earliest ages of the monarchy, to the death
of Cardinal Beatoun, fifty-four persons had held
that high office; and of these, forty-three had
been Ecclefiaflics Y. The Lords of Seflion were
supreme Judges in all matters of civil right;
and by its original constitution, the President
and one-half of the Senators in this court were
churchmen.

To all this we may add, that tle clergy being

separated from the reft of mankind by the law of
celibacy; and undiflra&ted by those cares, and
unincumbered with those burdens, which occupy
and oppress other men, the interest of their order
became their only object, and they were at full
leisure to pursue it.

Y Crawf. Offic. of Statc.

TnrI

THE nature of their function gave them access BH 0 K

to all persons, and at all seasons. They could y
employ all the motives of fear and of hope, of
terror and of consolation, which operate molt
powerfully on tlhe human mind. They haunted
the weak and the credulous; they besieged the
beds of the sick and of tle dying. They sufferec
few to go out of the world without leaving marks
of their liberality to the church, and taught them
to compound witl the Almighty for their fins,
by bestowing riches upon those who called them-
selves his servants.

WHEN their own indufry, or the superstition of

mankind failed of producing this effect, the Eccle-
fiaftics had influence enough to call in the aid of
law. When a person died itlitate, the disposal
of his effeets was vested in the Bilhop of the dio-
cefe; after paying his funeral charges and debts,
and distributing among his kindred the tums to
which they were refpecively entitled, it being
presumed that no Christian would have chosen to
leave the world without deliining some part of
his fublsance to pious uses . As men are apt to
trufl to the continuance of life with a fond confi-
dence, and childiflly flun every tling that forces
them to think of their mortality, many die with-
out fettling their aflairs by will; and the right
of adminiflration, in that event, acquired by the
clergy, must have proved a considerable source
both of wealth and of power to the church.

. FfIys on Brit. An i(. 174. Ann:il; of Scotl;an, by Sir
L)avidl Dahlrymplc, Vol. i. Alppend. No. ii.

L 3 AT

U () K AT the fame time, no matrimonial or tesla-
L.- -n mentary cause could be tried but in the spiritual

courts, and by laws which the clergy themselves
had framed. The penalty, too, by which the deci-
lions of these courts were enforced, added to their
authority. A sentence of excommunication was no
less formidable, than a sentence of outlawry. It
was pronounced on many occasions, and againfl
various crimes: And besides excluding those,
upon whom it fell, from Chrillian privileges, it
deprived them of all their rights as men, or as
citizens; and the aid of the secular power con-
curred with the superstition of mankind, in ren-
dering the thunders of the church no less de-
ft-rusive than terrible.

To these general causes may be attributed the

ijmmenfe growth both of the wealth and power of
the Popifnl church; and without entering into any
more minute detail, this may serve to difcovcr
tlie foundations on which a ftruCuIrc tb ftuien-
dous was erected.

BUT though the laity had contributed, by their

own fuperfi'ition and profufcnels, to raifc the clergy
Ir-il poverty and obscurity to riches and emi-
nence, they began, by degrees, to f(cl and to
iiuimulr at their encroachments. No wonder
haughty and martial Barons flould view the power
and polrTflions of the church with envy; and re-
gard tle lazy and inaative character of church-
men with tlhe utmofl contempt; while, at the
lfame time, the indecent and licentious lives of
tile clergy gave great and just- offence to the pco-

ict, and consi.derably abated the veneration which B 0o K
tllcy were accust:omed to yield to that order of -
11Ilt 1.

IMMENSE wealtl, extreme indolence, gross ig-

liorance, and, above all, the severe injluncion of
celibacy, had concurred to introduce this corrup-
tion of morals among many of the clerl , who,
ipr'f'iuming too much upon the -ubmifliion of the
people, were at no pains either to conce.l, or to
dilluilf their own vices. According to the ac-
counts of the Reformers, confirmed by fcveral
Popifnh Vriters, the moitt open and scandalous
difllution of manners prevailed among the Scot-
tifl clergy ". Cardinal Beatoun, with the fame
public pomp which is due to a legitim-ate child,
celebrated the marriage of his natural daughter
with the Earl of Crawfurd's fonl'; and, if we
may believe Knox, he publicly continued to the
end of his days a criminal correspondence with
ler i-mother, who was a woman of rank. The
other prelates si;en not to have been more regu-
lar and exemplary than their Primate c

MEN

" \V'inz .. :p. Keit Iil Ippcnil. 202. 205. 1.l0l. tlc R b).
Ltill. Sco0. 232.

1 The III;tTiIagC atrticlc';, ftlLcrihl' i \ll lis Owl handil, ill

Iv. iii l ie calls licr -.'v i /ightt} , :lc fl ill exta t. Kciltl, p1. 42.

A rentarkablel prools ol' tie (lirtbolutt mailcl', ii, the cil c i'y

:Iitlti; ill t ie public rcoids. A jlgreatet ' mlibeIr of le Ictrs

,l l itimiati/o. \w;ts

. ritiWc'

o .

ild ( l ing the si l-ll thirl) ye a.rs i;tltcr

lie R{fotii:ttiion ,, llthi tltiing thie wh*ltlc pe ti.il tli.at lit,;
,p.tdl rfir: llt;tt time. T'hefic w rce nlbtained , y t1 1 lin', . u

;ie Popiill, CClergy. '1'The L]rclcfialllcs, wio \\w.'rc allotwed t
ictaisl their I, clclices, ;tlicnalel tlic lh to tlicir chlildrci ; who,

· . \\lie..

B 0 K MEN of such chara(ters ought, in reason, to
*.-.. have been alarmed at the first clamours raised

against their own morals, and the dotrines of the
church, by the Proteflant preachers; but the
Popish Ecclesiastics, either out of pride or igno-
rance, negleted the proper methods for silencing
them. Instead of reforming their lives, or dil-
guising their vices, they affeed to despise tle
censures of the people. And while the Reform-
ers, by their mortifications and aufterities, en-
deavouied to resemble the first propagators of
Chriflianity, the Popish clergy were compared to
all those persons who are most infamous in
hiflory, for the enormity and scandal of their
crimles.

ON the other hand, inflead of mitigating the

rigour, or colouring over the absurdity, of the
eftablithed docrines; initead of attempting to
found them upon scripture, or to reconcile them
to reason; they left them without any other sup-
port or recommendation, than the authority ofthe
church, and the decrees of councils. The fables
concerning purgatory, 'the virtues of pilgrimage,
and the merits of the faints, were the topics, oil
which they insisted in their dlicourfes to the
people ; and the duty of preaching being left
wholly to Monks of the lowest and molt illiterate
orders, their compositions were lill more wretched

ilcen tley accliiircd wc;lltl, w iere desirous thalt the fln ,il (
illc(;itiiii:tcy mlli[;llt no ]io ', rem ;llin uponl t h'/l i nilic,.. Il
jrit'/s Ca(las/ge of //c Scolti/h Biy1hops, w\c flind fever'i ill-
jfliiiccs ol' si'' ic ll:li(jio, oIf C11iiircIh 11inds, by the Popilli in.
cunibclts, to tlicir n;iLturl clillren,

and

and contemptible, than the fubjeLts on which they B o 0 K
insisted. While the Reformers were attended by . i
crowded and admiring audiences, the Popish
preachers were either universally deilrted, or
lillned to with scorn.

iTHE only device which they employed in order

to recover their declining reputation, or to con-
firm the wavering faith of the people, was equally
imlLprudent and unfucccfsfull. As ma;ny doctrines
of their church had derived their credit, at first,
fi-om the authority of falcf miracles, they now en-
deavoured to call in these totheir aid d. But those
lying wonders, which were beheld with unfufpi-
cious admiration, or heard with implicit faith, in
times of darkness and of ignorance, met with a
very different reception, in a more enlightened
period. The vigilance of the Reformers detected
there impofiures, and exposed not only them, but
the cause which needed the aid of such artifices,
to ridicule.

As the Popifhi Ecclefiaflics became more and

more the objects of hatred and of contempt, the
discourses of the Reformers were ]iflened to as so
many calls to liberty; and besides the pious in-
dignation which they excited againlt thole corrupt
do.trines, which had perverted the nature of true
Chriitianity; bleides the zeal which they infpiricd
for the knowledge of truth, and the purity of re-
ligion; they gave rile allo, among the Scottifli
nublcs, to otlier views and pafions. They hoped
to lhake off the yoke of ecclesiastical dominion,
which they had long felt to be opprcflive, and

" ipotliwooJ, 69.

which

B 0 o K which they now discovered to be unchristian.

11.
,- _i They expe&ed to recover poffeflion of the church

revenues, which they were now taught to confider
as alienations made by tleir ancestors, with a
profusion no less undifcerning than unbounded.
They flattered thenfelves, that a check would be
given to the pride and luxury of the clergy,
who would be obliged, henceforward, to confine
themselves within the sphere peculiar to their fa-
cred charaater. An aversion for the eftablilhed
church, lwhich flowed fiom to many concurring
causes, which was railed by considerations of
religion, and heigh:ened by motives of policy,
ipread fast through the nation,' and excited a
spirit, that burfl out, at last, with irresistible
violence.

RELIGIOUS considerations, alone, were fufficicnt

to have routed this spirit. The points in contro-
vcrfy with the church of Rome were of so much
importance to the happinels of mankind, and lt
clrcntial to Chritlianity, that they merited all the
zeal with which the Reformers contended in order
to eflablifh them. But the Reformation having
been reprelented as the eftfet of some wild and
enthufialtic fienzy in the human mind, this at-
tempt to account for the eagerness and zeal with
which our ancestors embraced and propagated the
Protestant doctrines, by taking a view of the po-
litical motives alone which influenced them, and
by flewing how naturally thele prompted them
to ad with so much ardour, will not, perhaps, be
deemed an unnecessary digreflion. We now re-
turn to the course of the hiflory.

6 Tri

T'I-I. Qeen's elevation to the office of Regent B O0O K
:eins to have transported her, at first, beyond the --
k nown prudence and moderation of her charater. '5i.
Shei bCegn lier adminiltration, by confe rring upon 'r!,r Qoen
foricigners several offices of trust and of digniry; g..,:r,,
a flcpl which, both from the inability offtrangerl:s ,,i:ilr,n',,
to diicharge theft: offices with vigour, and from n""J

(i'r.

the cnvy which their preferment excites among
!ie natives, is never attended with good conic-
Teucnces. Vilmort was made Comptroller, and
intrrfted with the management of the public re-
venues ; Bonot was appointed Governor of Ork-
ncy; and Rubay honoured with the custody of the
Great Seal, and the title of Vice Chancellorc. It
was with the highest indignation, that the Scots
beheld offices of the greatest eminence and autho-
rity dealt out among strangers '. By there pro-
motions they conceived the Queen to have offered
an insult both to their understandings and to
ltheir courage ; to the former, by supposing them
unfit for those stations, which their ancestors had
filled with so much dignity; to the latter, by
iinglninig that they were tame enough not to
comlplain of an affront, which, in no former age,
would have been tolerated with impunity.

WIIILE their minds were in this dilpofition, an

incident happenred whicl inflamed their aversion
from French councils to the higheR- degree. Ever
lince the famous contcft between the houses of Va-

' L,cny, doe Rlc. (cen. Sco,t. 1 9.
f '1hc rTcf(t'llitiicL ('1 ic ii:ili

i, ;:I.;1 infl the 'French rof'. to

sll, ;h

ih ci, lt, lithart an ;t'l 1' l'd rili.ncnt va; |i itlK'dl ,f plir-
]'i' to 'rcttl'ai or iIodicraitc it. PLru. 6. Q( MaLrv, c. (6:.

lois

B 0 0 K lois and Plantagenet, the French had been ac-

cuflomed to embarrass the Englifi, and to divide
their flrength by the sudden and formidable in-
curfions of their allies, the Scots. But, as these
inroads were seldom attended with any real ad-
vantage to Scotland, and exposed it to the dan-
gerous resentment of a powerful neighbour, the
Scots began to grow less tr-a&able than formerly,
and scrupled, any longer, to serve an ambitious
ally a; the price of their own quiet and security.
The change, too, which was daily introducing in
the art of war, rendered the afiftance of the Scot-
tifh forces of less importance to the French Mo-
narch. For these reasons, Henry having resolved
upon a war with Philip II. and foreseeing that the
Queen of England would take part in her hus-
band's quarrel, was extremely solicitous to secure,
in Scotland, the affitiance of some troops, which
would be more at his command than an un-
disciplined army, led by chieftains who were al-
most independent. In prosecution of this design,
but under pretence of relieving the nobles from
the expence and danger of defending the borders,
s555. the Queen Regent proposeld, in Parliament, to

regi-fler the value of lands throulghout the king-
dom, to ilpofe on them a finall tax, and to a)-
ply that revenue towards maintaining a body of
regular troops in confant pay. A fixed tax upon
land, which the growing expence of govern-
mient hath introduced into almolt every part of
Lurope, was unknown at that time, and feemcl
altogether illconfiflent with the genius of feudall
government. Nothing could be more flockinll;

to

to a generous and brave nobility, than the intrust- B O O K
;ing, to mercenary hands, the defence of those _
territories which had been acquired, or preserved,
by the blood of their ancestors. They received
this proposal with the utmost dissatisfaction.
About three hundred of the lesser Barons repair-
ed in a body to the QQueen Regent, and repre-
sented their sense of the intended innovation,
with that manly and determined boldness which
is natural to a free people, in a martial age.
Alarmed at a remonflrance delivered in so firm a
tone, and supported by such formidable numbers,
the Queen prudently abandoned a scheme, which
fie found to be universally odious. As the Queen
herself was known perfectly to understand the cir-
cuifltances and temper of the nation, this mea-
sure was imputed wholly to the suggestions of
her foreign counsellors; and the Scots were ready
to proceed to the most violent extremities againit
them.

THE French, instead of extinguishing, added At!emptsto

fuel to the flame. They had now commenced kCngomin
hostilities against Spain, and Philip had prevailed " ",wtwith

0

/-> r T'

i i * r , . ~ England.

on the Queen of England to reinforce his army
with a considerable body of her troops. In order
to deprive him of this aid, Henry had recourse, as
he projected, to the Scots; and attempted to ex-
cite them to invade England. But, as Scotland
had nothing to dread from a Princcfs of Mary's
character, who, far from any ambitious fchcm of
dliturbing her neighbours, was wlolly occupied
in endeavouring to reclaim her heretical liubjccts;
the nobles, who were assembled by the Q.een

Regent

B 0 0 K Regent at Newbattle, listened to the solicitation3

-;-- of the French Monarch with cxtreme coldncKf,

and prudently declined engaging the klngdom il
an enterprise so dangerous and unnecefTuiry. 1What
fie could not obtain by perluafion, tlhe Queen
Regent brought about by a stratagem. Notwit!i-
standing the peace which fubfisled between the t;.o
kingdomls, she commanded her French soldiers to
rebuild a fmiall fort near Berwick, which was ap-
pointed, by the last treaty, to be raled. The
garrison of Berwick sallied out; interrupted the
work; and ravaged the adjacent country. This
insult routid the fiery spirit of the Scots, and
their promptneis to revenge the least appearance
of national injury, dissipated, in a moment, the
wife and pacific reoblutions which they had so lately
formed. War was determined, and orders in-
ilantly given for railing a numerous army. But
before their forces could assemble, the ardour of
their inldignation lad time to cool, and the Eng-
lilh having ldi^covered no intention to puih the
war with vigour, the nobles rcfumned their pacific
fyflelm, and rclblvcd to fhand altogether upon tile
1556. dcfenfive. They imarched to tle banks of the

Tweed, they prevented the incurlions of the ene-
my; and having done what they thought futfi-
cient for the lItfety and honour of their country,
the Q iccn could not induCce them either by hler
cntrcatices, or her artifices, to advance another
tlcl).

WVILE the Scots perfified in their inaclivity,

D'Oyfel, the Commander of the French troops,
who pofffftcl cntirely the confidence of the Qgeen

Regent,

]Regcnt, endeavoured, with her connivance, to B o o K
clngaLe the two nations in hostilities. ConTrary to -
tile orders of the Scottifl General, he marched
over the Tweed with his own foldicrs, and in-
veftecl Werk, a garrison of the English. The
Sc6ts, inifead of seconding his attempt, were en-
raged at his presumption. The Queen's partiality
towards France had long been fufpejced; but it
was now visible that flhe wantonly sacrificed the
peace and safety of Scotland, to the interelft of
rliat ambitious and afiSiming ally. Under the

leudal governments, it was in camps that fib-
jccs were accustomed to address the boldest- re-
n:onflrances to their Sovereigns. While arms were
in their hands, they felt their own strength; and
at that time all their representations of grievances
carried the authority of commands. On this occa-
sion, the resentment of the nobles broke out with
iLch violence, that the Q-cen, perceiving all at-
tempts to engage them in adtion to be vain, ab-
ruptly dilifinitlid her army, and retired with the ut-
mnolt liame an ddlifguft; lhavi ng di fIovercd the im-
potence of her own authority, without eTfec.i ing any
thing whicl could be of advantagec to I'rancc ..

IT is obfcrvable, that th is firlt inflance of' con-

tempt for the Regent's authority can, in no Ilc-
grce, be imputed to the influence of the new opi-
nions in religion. As the Qccen's prrc'tenfions to
the Regency had been principally fIlpi'uirted by
thole who favoured the Reforlrl.tioln, alnd as Ith
lill neceded them for a counterpoise to the Arch-

z Stllrypc's clll iiior . iiid. l] nd ,
27.4. I, fL, ), r(i.

bi flnpl

B o0 K binlOp of St. Andrew's, and the partisans of the
.- --- house of lHamilton; the continued to treat them

with great refpec', and admitted them to no in-
considerable share in her favour and confidence.
Kirkaldy of Grange, and the other surviving con-
fpirators againll Cardinal Beatoun, were, about
this time, recalled by her fr-om banilhment; and,
through her connivance, the Protestant preachers
enjoyed an interval of tranquillity, which was of
great advantage to their caule. Soothed by thefi
inllances of the Queen's moderation and huma-
nity, the Protestants left to others the office of re-
monftiating; and the leaders of the opposite sac-
tion set them the first example of dilputing the
will of their Sovereign.

TheQleen's As the Queen Regent felt how limited and pre-
,^,.i-, carious her authority was, while it depended on
,''pin. the poise of there contrary factions, she endea-

voured to eLlab'iifh it on a broader and more
secure foundation, by lhaftcning the conclusion
of her daughter's marriage with tle Dauphin.
Amiable as the Queen of Scots then was, in the
bloom of youth ; and considerable as the territo-
ries were, which she would have added to the
.Irench Monarchy ; reasons were not wanting to

rdifilade lHenry from completing his firil- plan of

marrying hler to his son. Tle conflable Mont-
morency had enmployed all his interest to defc'at
anl alliance, which reflected so much lultrc on tlhe
Princes of Loriain. l e had reprelfnted the im-
poflibility of maintaining order and tranquillity
nmong a turbulent people, during the abfcncc of
tlhir Sovereign and for that rcafon, had advifc(l

7 Hcenly

Henry to bestow the young QOeen upon one of B O 1 K
the Princes of the blood, who, by residing in _-
Scotland, might preserve that kingdom an useful
ally to France, which, by a nearer union to the
Crown, would becomne a mutinous and ungovern-
able province''. But, at this time, the Contftable
was a prisoner in the hands of the Spaniards ; the
Princes of Lorrain were at the height of their
power; and their influence, seconded by the
charms of the young Q22een, triumphed over
the prudent, but envious, remonltrances of their
rival.

THE French King accordingly applied to the rec. 14,

Parliament of Scotland, which appointed eight of 1557.
its members' to represent the whole body of the
nation, at the marriage of the Queen. Among
the persons on whom the public choice confer-ecd
this honourable character, were some of the moitl
avowed and zealous advocates for the Reforma-
tion; by which may be estimated the degree of
refpcD't and popularity which that party had now
attained in the kingdom. The inflrutiions of the
Parliament to those Commissioners flill remain <,
and do honour to the wifldom and integrity ofthat
aflemlbly. At the fame time that they manifested,
with respeCt to the articles of marriage, a laudable
concern for the dignity and interest of their Sovc-

h Mclv. Mem. 15.
Viz. The Archbiflip of Clagow, the Binlsop of Ross,

the Billlop of Orkney, the E;arls of Rothes and C;flils, Lord
MI'lcing, Lord Seton, the Prior of St. Andrcw's, and John
Fl'jkine of Dutn.

. Kcith, Append. 13,
VOL. I. M reign,

B o K reign, they employed every precaution which pru-

s- - dence could dictate, for preserving the liberty

and independence of the nation, and for fecurinl
the fucceflTon of the Crown in the house of Ha-

ail ton.

A tiii r rn, Wi H regard to each of theft, the Scots ob-
tl e I :ench

. .i rilar- tained whatever fatisfil§iion their fear or jealouly
2age-.irdy. could ldemand. The vounlg Q/2een, the Dauphin,

and the King of France ratified every article with
the rnofl is)emn oaths, and confirmed them by
deeds in f!iin, under their hands and feals. But
on the part of France, all this was one continued
scene of fludied and elaborate deceit. Previous
to these public tranfatlions with the Scottilh de-
puties, Mary had been perl'uaded to subscribe pri-
vately three deeds, equally unjust and invalid;
by which, failing the heirs of her own body, flie
conferred the kingdom of Scotland, with what-
ever inheritance or fucceflion might accrue to it,
in free gift upon the crown of France, declaring
all pronIiles to the contrary, which the neceflity
of her afrairs, and the solicitations of her fubjets
had extorted, or miight extort from her, to be
void and of no oblig;ationll. As it gives us a
p)rope'r idea of the charaCtur of the French court
under H-lenry II. we nmay oblhirve that the King
liimleljf, thle Keeper of the Great Seals, the D)uke
of (Ciil-e, and ttle Cardinal of' Iorrain, were the
per'lns engaged in C()lldiling this 1erfidious and
dillhonourable projct. l The ()Itee11 of Scots w\as
the only innocent actor in that scene of iniquit'y.
I ler youthl, her inexperience, hecr education in ;

I Cors l1)ililnl;at'. toWl. v. 2[. Kc:cli, 73.

foreign

foreign country, and her deference to the will of B o ( K
her uncle, miuft vindicate her, in the judgme]nt i
of every impartial person, from any imputation
of blame on that account.

I'Hls grant, by which Mary bestowed the in-

heritance of her kingdom upon strangers, was
concealed with the utmost care from her fuihjcs.,
They feern, however, not to have been unac-
quailited with the intention of the French to
overturn the settlement of the succession in favour
of the Duke of Chatelherault. The zeal with
which the Archbilhop of St. Andrew's olppofcd
all the neafures of the Queen Regent, evidently
proceeded from the fears and suspicions of that
prudent prelate on this headl'.

THE marriage, however, was celebrated with April 14,

great pomp; and the French, who had hitherto as- 558.
sc'ced to draw a veil over their designs upon Scot-
land, began now to unfold their intentions without
any lifguife. In the treaty of marriage, the de-
puties had agreed that the Dauphin should assume
the name of King of Scotland. This they confi-
d&red only as an honorary title; but the French
laboured to annex to it some solid privileges and
power. They infiflted that the Dauphin's title
nhould be publicly recognised ; that the Crown
llatrimnoiial should be conferred upon him ; and
tliat all the rights pertaining to the husband of a
Qiceen should be veiled in his person. By the

" About this time the French fccm to have had fiome dc-

sign of reviving the Earl of I,cnnox's pretensions to the ftic-
cllion, in order to tin datet and alarm the Du)ke of Clatel-
hirault. Hayncs, s15. 219. ForbcI's CollcA. vol. i. 199.

M 2 laws

B o0 K laws of Scotland, a person who married an heii-efs

_-· » kept possession of her estate during his own life, if

he happened to survive her and the children born
of the marriage ". This was called the courtejy of
Scotland. The French aimed at applying this
rule, which takes place in private inheritances,
to the fucceRilon of the kingdom; and that seems
to be implied in their demand of the CrovJn Ma-
trimnonzial, a phrase peculiar to the Scottish hifto-
rians, and which they have neglected to explain",
As the French had reason to expeE difficulties in
carrying through this mealure, they began with
founding the deputies who were then at Paris.
The English, in the marriage-articles between
their Queen and Philip of Spain, had set an ex-
ainple to the age, of that prudent jealousy and re-
serve, with which a foreigner should be admitted
so near the throne. Full of the fame ideas, the

" Reg. Maj. lib. ii. 58.
o As fLr as I can judge, the husband of the Queen, by the

grant of the Crown Matrimonial, acquired a right to afli'me
the title of King, to have his name stamped upon the cur-
rent coln, and to sign all public inf-luments togetlher with
thle Qic'n. In confcequencc of this, the fubjcts took an :a;th
of filcliry to him. Keith, Append. 20. His authority be-
caLme, iln i'l mcan liirc, co-ordli.nte with that of the Quecn;
and without h]is.concurrence, nianiltefied by signing his
namc, no public deedl fiemns to ihave been co'niidered as
valid. By the oath of filelity of the Scottifll. Colmiltloners
to the Dauphin, it is evident that, in their opinion, the
rights belonging to the CroVwn Matrimonial fubllfted only
luring the continuance of tlhe. marritng. Kcith, Append. 20.
But the conlfpirators againfl Rizio bindcl them;elves to pro-
cure a grantl of the Crown, Matri/oJtial to Darnlcy during all
tli clays of his lif'c. Keith, Append. 2zo. Good. i. 227.

~~2 S ~$Scottifl

Scottish deputies had, in their oath of allegiance B °0 ° K
to the Dauphin, expressed themselves with re- ._
narkable caution P. Their answer was in the
fame spirit, rcfpe&Lful, but firm; and discovered
a fixed resolution of consenting to nothing, that
tended to introduce any alteration in the order of
fucceflon to the crown.

FOUR of the deputies q happening to die before

they returned into Scotland, this accident was uni-
verfally imputed to the effets ofpoifon, which was
supposed to have been given them by the eminia-
ries of the house of Guise. The historians of all na-
tions discover an amazing credulity with refpeca to
rumours of this kind, which are so well calculated
to please the malignity of some men, and to gra-
tify the love of the marvellous which is natural to
all, that in every age they have been swallowed
without examination, and believed contrary to
reason. No wonder the Scots should easily give
credit to a suspicion, which received such strong
colours of probability, both from their own.re-
fentment, and firom the known character of the
Princes of Lorrain, so little scrupulous about the
justice of the ends which they pursued, or of the
means which they employed. For the honour of hu-
man nature, it muff, however, be observed, that as
we can discover no motiye, which could induce
any man to perpetrate such a crime, so there ap-
pears no evidence to prove that it was committed.
But the Scots of that age, influenced by national

I Keith, Append. 2o.
(I The Billop of Orkncy, the Earl of Rothes, the Earl of
Calils, and Lord Fleming.

M 3 animo-

B o1 K anirnofities and prejudices, were incapable of ex.

i1.
IL-- amining the circumstances of the cafe with calm.

ncfs, or of judging concerning them with can-
dour. All parties agreed in believing the French
to have been guilty of this detestable adcion ; and
it is obvious how much this tended to increale
the aversion for them, which was growing among
all ranks of men.

TieReRgent NOTWITHSTANDING the cold reception wiich
prevails oll
the Parlia- their proposal concerning the Crown Matrimonii l
granti. met with from the Scottifl deputies, the French
Nov. 29 ventured to move it in parliament. The partisans

of the house of Hamilton, suspicious of their de-
signs upon the succession, opposed it with great
zeal. But a party, which the feeble and unsteady
condut of their leader had brought under much
difreputation, was little able to withstand the in-
fluence of France, and the address of the Queen
Regent, seconded, on this occasion, by all the
numerous adherents of the Reformation. Be-
fides, that artful Princess dressed out the French
demands in a less offensive garb, and threw in so
many limitations, as feemled to render them, of
finall confecuence. These either deceived the
Scots, or removed their scruples: and in com-
pliance to the Qjeen, they passed an act, confer,
ring the Crown MAatrimonialon the Dauphin; and,
with the fondest credulity, trulled to the frail le-
curity of words and flatutes, against the dangecrous
encroachments of power r,

r The AcS of Parliament is worded with thei ntmoft carc,
wil h .a vicv to guard againiit any breach of the order of ficccl

fti' .

1'THi concurrence of the Protestants with the B 0o K

()(-eln lReent, in promoting a mealure tb ac- -.-
cc-rltble to France, while the Popiflh clergy, under c,,"rh
the influence of the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, Ptt1o"s.
o'ppo!'d it with ft much violence , is one of
thofl; lingular circulmftances, in the conduct of
parties, for which this period is so remarkable.
It may be afcriibd, in loine degree, to the dex-
tetrous man;laement of the Queen, but chiefly to
the m,)deration of thole who favoured the Re-
timnation. The Protestants were, by this time,
alnrft eq.ual to lthe Catholics, both in power and
in nn.itl:b-r; and, conlcious of their own flrength,
ithey tibmittted with impatience to that tyrannical
autilority with which the ancient laws armed the
Ct c,~fitllics againf- them. They longed to be
cxci pred frolm this opprcffive jurii;lition, and
publ!cly to enjoy the liberty of profefting those
opinions, and of exerciling that worihpip, which
so great a part of the nation deemed to be founded
in truth, and to be acceptable to the Deity.
This indulgence, to which the whole weight of
priestly authority was oppoled, there were only
two ways of obtaining. ither violence Imuft ex-
tort t froml the rcluc.ant hand of their Sovereign,
or by prudent conpliances they might expect it

fni,. Ihit the Duke, not rcl'/ii!, on tliis a iloin, citcicrd si.,-
l1.]In lroCl'.titiotl tO liccliric Iis owni ri) L.

I. c ili, '6. it it

pl: hil, lh:t h. hli c'tl: d lie 1ren thill ol '

hayin nlicll i),

to le' ;t i .lc lii:. iighit o' i; ii'c llion ; .tiln , ii 'eed, if Lley ha:id
nT del(iil l

l'li.t i kind, tilnhe 1C.*

i iiL'C', t

\[ill \ iLh li tic ll urged
thlcir dc :iil.ti , \\.; i cldilii.

' IMJv. 47.

1M 4s . oi

B; 1 0 K from her favour, or her gratitude. The former

is an expedient for the redress of grievances, to
which no nation has rccourfe suddenly; and sub-
je'ts Icldom venture upon rcfil!ancc, which is their
last remedy, but in catcs of extreme necessity.
On this occasion the Reformers wifely held tle
opposite courlc, and by their zeal in forwarding
the Quecn's designs, they hoped to merit her
protetion. This disposition the Queen encouraged
to the utmofi-, and amused them so artfully with
many promifcs, and some concessions, that, by
their assistance, she furnnounted in Parliament the
force of a national and laudable jealouly, which
would, otherwise, have swayed with the greater
number.

ANOTHER circumstance contributed somewhat

to acquire the Regent such considerable influence
in this Parliament. In Scotland, all the bishop-
rics, and those abbeys which conferred a title to
a feat in Parliament, were in the gift of the
Crown t. From the time of her accelfion to the
Regency, the Queen had kept in her own hands
almost all those which became vacant, except such
as were, to the great dliguft of the nation, bc-
flowed upon foreigners. Among thele, her bro-
ther the Cardinal of Lorlain had obtained the
abbeys of Kelfo and Mclrolf, two of the molt
wealthy foundations in the kingdom" B. By this
conduct, ihe thinned the ecclcliallical bench',

t c Book I. " Lcfly, 202.
xI ll ipe c:ir 'soim the .olls .f t ii:;i ].'liaincit,' which l.cfl

c:lls. .a vcr' 1',1l ('o , thlat unly fevcl 3il

B hops alud iixtccn Al\ -
Lbot: V; jirc icj t.

wliIchI

which was entirely under the influence of the B 0 0 K
Archbishop of St. Andrew's, and which, by its
-numbers and authority, usually had great weight
in the houic, so as to render any oppolition it
could give, at that tinle, of little conftqueince.

Tl-IE Eiarl of Argyll, and James Stewart Prior

of St. Andrew's, one the m1ioft powerful, and
the other the molt popular leader of the Pro-
teflants, were appointed to carry the Crown and
other ensigns of royalty to the Dauphin. But
fiom this they were diverted by the part they
were called to at in a more interesting scene,
wlich now begins to open.

BEFORE we turn towards this, it is necessary to Elizabeth

oblfrve, that on the seventeenth of November, th,',,rw
one thousand five hundred and fifty-eight, Mary of EnOland.
of England finished her flort and inglorious reign.
Her litter Elizabeth took pofTflion of the throne
without oppolition; and the Protestant religion
was, once more, cltablilhed by law in England.
The accefflon of a Quecn, who, under very dif-
ficult circumiftances, had given strong indications
of those eminent qualities, which, in the tequcl,
rendcred her reign io illuflrious, attradc(dl the eyes
of all Europe. Among the Scots, both parties
obflrved her firftl motions with the utnlof lolici-
tuide, as they easily forellaw that the would not
remain long an indiilslrcnt lpectator of their tranl-
ailions.

UNDER many dilciouiragemcnts, and muIch op-

Iprlnion, the Reformation advanced towards a full
telablilhiment in Scotland. All the low country,
the moll populous, and, at that time, the most

warlike

B (0 K warlike part of the kingdom, was deeply tinctured
---owith the Protestant opinions; and if the fame im-

preflions were not made in the more diflant coun-
ties, it was owing to no want of the fame difpofi-
tions among the people, but to the scarcity of
preachers, whose mo(t indefatigable zeal could
not satisfy the avidity of thole who desired their
infrruttions. Among a people bred to arms, and
as prompt, as the Scots, to act with violence; and
in an age, when religious pafiions had taken such
strong poffcflion of the human mind, and moved
and agitated it with so much violence, the peace-
able and regular demeanor of so numerous a
party is astonishing. From the death of Mr. Pa-
trick Hamilton, the first who suffered in Scot-
land for the Protestant religion, thirty years had
elapsed, and during so long a period no viola-
tion of public order or tranquillity had proceeded
from that set Y ; and though roused and irritated
by the most cruel exceifes of ecclesiastical ty-
ranny, they did, in no inflance, transgress thole
bounds of duty which the law prescribes to sub-
jcfts. Belides the prudence of their own leaders,
and the protection which the Queen Regent,
fiom political motives, afforded them, the mo-
deration of the Archbishop of St. Andrew's en-
couraged this pacific disposition. That Prelate,
whose private life cotemporary writers tax with
great irregularities z governed the church, for

Y The 1murn dert of' C.tirlinail 3Bcatloln w:;s occ;llioncil by pli-

v;it e revCenl(, siial beinig conLrivedl :anl excciilct 1)' si xtccn
perfoiis only, cannot, with jullicc, be iniputcd to the whole
P}rotcl.ault p:,rty. JKnllox, Biclih;inu, ,
lK itl, 208.

some

some years, with a temper and prudence of which B o I K
there are few examples in that age. But some
time before the meeting of last Parliament, the
Archbiflop departed from those humane maxims
by which he had hitherto regulated his conduct;
and whether, in spite to the Queen, who had en-
tered into so close an union with the Protestants,
or in compliance with the importunities of his
clergy, he let loose all the rage of persecution
against the Reformed; sentenced to the flames an
aged prieft,who had been convicted of embracing
the Proteflant opinions; and summoned several
others, fufpeded of the fame crime, to appear
before a fynod of the clergy, which was soon to
convene at Edinburgh.

NOTHING could equal the horror of the Pro-

teftants at this unexpected and barbarous execu-
tion, but the zeal with which they espoused the
defence of a cause that now seemed devoted to
deftruEtion. They had immediate recourse to the
QLeen Regent; and as her success in the Parlia-
ment, which was then about to meet, depended
on their concurrence, she not only fleltered them
from the impending storm, but permitted them
the excrcife of their religion with more freedom
than tley had hitherto enjoyed. Unsatisfied with
thils precarious tenure, by which they held their
religious liberty, the Protestants laboured to
render their pofllcnion of it more secure and in-
dependent. With this view they determined to
petition the Parliament for obme legal proteation
againfl the exorbitant and oppressive jurifdiltion
of the ccclcfiaitical courts, whicli, by their arbi-

trary

B oO K trary method of proceeding, founded in the canon
-- ---' law, were led to sentences the Imoft flockir;g to

lhumanity, by maxims the most repugnant to jus-
tice. But the Queen, who dreaded the fcti:( of
a debate on this delicate fubjeci, which could not2
fail of exciting high and dangerouspaffions, pre-
vailed on the leaders of the party, by new and
more solemn promises of her protecion, to dcii,;
from any application to Parliament, where their
numbers and influence would, in all probability,
have procured them, if not the entire redrels, at
least some mitigation of their grievances.

THEY applied to another assembly, to a convo-

cation of the Popish clergy, but with the fame ill
success, which hath always attended every proposal
for reformation, addressed to that order of men.
To abandon usurped power, to renounce luc:ative
error, are sacrifices, which the virtue of indivi-
duals has, on some occasions, offered to truth;
but from any society of men, no such effort can
be expeEted. 'The corruptions of a society, re-
commended by common utility, and justified by
universal praeice, are viewed, by its nlembers,
without shame, or horror; and reformation never
proceeds firom themflclves, but is always forced
upon them by sone foreign hand. Suitable to this
unfeeling and inflexible spirit, was the behaviour
of the Convocation in the preefcnt conjtuncture.
All the demands of the Protellanlts were rcjec6cd
with contem pt; and the Popilh clergy, falr fromn
endeavouring, by any prudent concflions, to
sooth and to reconcile such a numerous body,
afTerted the do&rines of their church, concerning

so me

ibme of the most exceptionable articles, with an B 0i0 K
ill-timed rigour, which gave new ofience '. -c.

DuRING the fittinrn of t!h Convocation, the Pro- 559'

teflants firfi bcegan to tfi!l'.:. i)::' c!h:il.ue in the
Rcgt-ent's 11ipofici(on to':\vr tcSll. houth
joined vith th em for a

ian y :::e.'::, , i;:tc're-'rl, and

united, as they conce ive J, i ',

t r" ) ties

of afielion and of gr.Ciitic, i:- crii:overcLd, on
this occasion, evident ;'

1 :*;, nat(-., not only of

coldnets, but of a gro.ini: dlii;.i - ;lil aversion.
In ord(Tr to accounit so;- tlil:.,o o ir hiillorias do littlle
more than produce the trite observations concern-
ing the influence of prolperiiy to alter tile cha-
rac elr, and to corrupt the heart. The Queen,
fay they, having reached the utnmoTc point to
which her ambition aspired, no longer preserved
her accullomed moderation, but, with an info-
lence usual to the fortunate, looked down upon
those by whose afTiflance fihe had been enabled to
rife so high. But it is neither in the depravity of
the human heart, nor in the ingratitude of the
Qecen's dipofition, that we must learch for the
motives of her present conduca. Thfc were de-
rived from another, and a more remote source,
which, in order to clear the fubliequent tr.nfac-
tions, we ffiall endeavour to open with lome care.

Tln ambition of the Princis of I.orrain had Ambitiour

been no lels fuccelbful than daring ; but all their 'ititff,'t
fcliemes were diltinguifhed by being vast and un- Lorrai"l
bounded. Though strangers at the court of
France, their eminent qualities had raised them,
in a snort time,. to an height of power, luperior

a Kcith, 81.

B o o K to that of all other subjects, and had placed them

it.
- -,-._ on a level even with the Princes of the blood them-
'S59. felvcs. The church, the army, the revenue, were

under their direc:ion. Nothing but the royal dig-
nity remained unattained, and they were elevated
to a near alliance with it, by the marriage of the
Q2cen of Scots to the Datuphin. In order to gra-
ifv tiheir own vanity, and to render their niece
more worthy the heir of France, they set on foot
her claim to the crown of England, which was
founded on pretences not uinplauifible.

THE tragical amours and marriages of Henry

VIII. are known to all the world. Moved by the
caprices of his love, or of his resentment, that im-
patient and arbitrary Monarch had divorced, or
beheaded four of the fix Queens, whom he mar-
ried. In order to gratify him, both his daughters
had been declared illegitimate by Act of Parlia-
ment; and yet, with that fantastic inconsistence
which dilfinguifles his character, he, in his last
will, whereby he was impowered to fettle the or-
der of succession, called both of them to the
throne upon the death of their brother Edward;
and, at the fame time, pafling by the posterity of
his eldeflt ifler Margaret Qi een of Scotland, he
appointed the line of flicceflion to continue in the
drlcendants of his younger filler, the Duchess of
Suffolk.

IN consequence of this destination, the validity

whereof was admitted by the English, but never
recognized by foreigners, Mary had reigned in
England without the least complaint of neigh-
bouring Princes. But the faime causes, which fa-

cilitated

cllitated heracceffion to the throne,wereobflacles B o K
to the elevation of her sifter Elizabeth, and ren- _
dered lher poffeiion of it precarious and insecure. '59
Rome trembled for tile Catholic f irh, under a
'rotcflant (itcen of fllch eLinent abilities. The
Line fiicrflitiouis fears a]in-nd tlhe court of

ain. Frl''iance beheld, with concern, a tirone,

t;) which thle (2elen of Scots coild sorn lbo many
pretencions, occupied by a rival, hlofe birth, in
t[le opinion of all gool Catholics, excluded her
froml any legal right of fucceflcon. The impotent
hatred of the Roman Pontifi, or tlhe flow councils
of Philip II. would have produced no i;Jdden or
formidable effet. The ardent and impetuous
ambition of the Princes of Lorrain, who, at that
time, governed the court of France, was more
decisive, and more to be dreaded. Inffigated by Theyprr.
them, Henry, soon after the death of Mary, per- tio ar,,'
fuaded his daughter-in-law, and her husband, to t'eil 6of
affuine the title of King and Queen of England. Enland.
They affected to publish this to all Europe. They
used that style and appellation in public papers,
foine of which still remain b. The arms of Eng-
land were engraved on their coin and plate, and
borne by them on all occasions. No preparations,
however, were made to support this impolitic and
premature claim. Elizabeth was already feated on
her throne; she possesscd all the intrepidity of fpi-
rit, and all the arts of policy, which were necessary
for maintaining that llation. England was grow-
ing into reputation for naval power. The marine
of France had been utterly negleated; and Scot-

b Andcrf. Diplom. Scot. No. 68 and 164.

land

B o0 K land remained the only avenue by which the ter-

, ritorics of Elizabeth could be approached. It was
Re on that fide, therefore, that the Princes of Lorrain

inade Eng- determined to make their attackc; and, by uling
land. 0

the name and pi-erceniions of the Scottifl Quetn,
they ho}ped to rou'e the Enqli;n Catholics, formi-
dable at thll: timne by their zeal and numbers, and
ex.ife-rared to the utmofit against i1lizabeth, on
account of tile change which she had made in the
national religion.

in order tr IT W;s vuin to exp c't the affltance of the Scot-
this, neLef-
faryr,,check tifl Proreltiants to dethlrone a Q(een, whom all
the Ret',r-
,mailn In Europe elleemed the guardian and defender of the
Sctland. reformed faith. To break the power and reputa-

tion of that party in Scotland, became, for this
reason, a necessary ftep towards the invasion of
England. With this the Princes of Lorrain re-
solved to open their scheme. And as persecution
was the only method for fupprefTing religious opi-
nions, known in that age, or dictated by the de-
fpolic and sanguinary lpirit of the Romish super-
ftition, this, in its utrnofi violence, they deter-
mined to employ. The Earl of Argyll, the Prior
of St. Andrew's, and other leaders of the party,
wvere mnlli ked out by them for imnmediate cldenruc-
tion ; alnd tiley hoped, by punifling them, to
inliniidare their iollowvers. Inflructions for tiis
ptrpol( were fern ft ro;l France to the QLeen Re-
gent. Tlhat hIumaiinc and fargacious Princess con-
demncd ai nmcaf1rc, which was equally violent
and iml)olilic. By long residence in Scotland, ihe

c Fcrb-s, Collc-l. i. 253. 2si. 279. 404.

had

hiad become acquainted with the eager and impa- B O oi K
tient temper of the nation; she well knew the --,-
power, the number, and popularity of the Pro- 5j59'
rcliant leaders; and had been a witness to the in-
trcpid and unconquerable resolution which reli-
(rious fervour could inlIpire. What, then, could
be gained by routing this dangerous spirit, whicli,
hitherto, all the arts of policy had scarce been
able to refirain ? If it once broke loose, the au-
thority of a Regent wotuld be little capable to
subdue, or even to moderate its rage. If, in
order to quell it, foreign forces were called in,
this would give the alarm to the whole nation,
irritated already at the exceflive power which the
French poflcfied in the kingdom, and suspicious
of all their designs. Amidst the flock which this
might occasion, far from hoping to exterminate
the Protestant dotIrin-, it would be well if the
whole fabric of the eltlablilhed church were not
ihaken, and perhaps overturned fiom the founda-
tion. Theic pi udent rcnontllrances made no im-
pression on her brothers; precipitant, but in-
flexible in all their resolutions, they infillced on the
full and rigorous execCti on (f fh'ir plan. Mary,
pafiionately devotedl to the interelt of lFrance, and
ready, on all occasions, to sacrifice her own opi-
nions to the inclinations of her brothers, prepared
to execute their comllmnnds with implicit flb-
miflion' ; and, contrary to her own j udlgmenlt,
and to all the rules of found policy, lhe became
the iniflumlcnt of cxcitinlg civil commotions ill

Mclv. ,18. MAcm. id C.lelcn:nl, ;ip. JcLL, vol. ii. 4.16.
VOL. I. N Scotland,

B 0 0 K Scotland, the fatal termination of which she fore-

if.

_i saw and dreaded.

The Regent FROM the time of the Queen's competition for
alters her the Rcgency with the Duke of Chatelherault, the
conduFt Z
wi.lh iega!d Popifl clergy, under the direcifon of the Arch-
to 1he 1 ro-
tenarns. biffop of St. Andrew's, had let themselves in op-

position to all her mncafures. IHer firit ftep toward
the execution of her new scheme, was to regain
their favour. Nor was this reconcilement a mat-
tcr of difficulty. The Popish ecclefiattics, fepa-
rated fiom the reft of mankind by the law of ce-
libacv, the boldest ,and most fticcefsful invention
of human policy; and combined among them-
fclves in the closest and moftl iacrcd union; have
been accustomed, in every age, to sacrifice all
private and particular passions to the dignity and
interest of tleir order. Delighted, on this occa-
lion, with the profp<at of triumphing over a sac-
tion, whole encroachments they had long dreaded,
and animated with the hopes of re-eitablifliing
their declining grandeur on a firmer balls;
they, at once, cancelled the memory of pafL in-
juries, and engaged to second the Queen in all
her attempts to check the progrefC of the Refor-
mation. The Queen, being secure of their as-
fiftance, openly approved of the decrees of the
Convocation, by which the principles of tle Re-
formers were condemned ; and at the fame time
she issued a proclamation,.enjoining all perlbns to
observe the approaching efltival of iallctr ac-
cording to the Romish ritual.

As it was no longer poflible to miflake the
QOecen's Ultuntions, the Protcilants, who law the

danger

a

danger approach, in order to avert it, employed B o 0 I-
the Earl of Glencairn, and Sir Hugh Campbell --
of Loudon, to expostulate with her concerning '559.
this change towards severity, which their former
services had so little merited, and which her re-
iterated promises gave them no reason to expe(t.
She, without disguise or apology, avowed to them
her resolution of extirpating the Reformed religion
out of the kingdonm. And, upon their urging
her former engagements with an uncourtly, but
honest boldness, she so far forgot her usual mo-
deration, as to utter a sentiment, which, however
apt those of royal condition may be to entertain it,
prudence fiould teach them to conceal as much
as possible. " The promises of Princes, fays she,
ought not to be too carefully remembered, nor
the performance of them exaaed, unless it suits
their own conveniency."

THE indignation, which betrayed the Queen Summons

their

into this rafi exprefTion, was nothing in comparion prehers to
of tlat with which she was animated, upon hearing apear be
that the public exercise of the Reformed Religion
had been introduced into the town of Perth. At
once, fle threw ofF the mask, and issued a man-
date, summoning all the Protestant preachers in
the kingdom to a court of justice, which was to
be held at Stirling on the tenth of May. The
Protestants, who, fiom their union, began, about
this time, to be diftinguifled by the name of the
CONGREGATION, were alarmed, but not intimi-
dated by this danger; and instantly relolved not
to abandon the men to whom they were indebted
for the Inoft valuable of all blessings, the know-

N 2 ledge

B o o K ledge of truth. At that time tliere prevailed in

_-- Scotland, with respect to criminal trials, a cultom,
5'59' introduced, at firfl, by the inflitutions of vassalage

and clanfl1ip, and tolerated, afterwards, under a
feeble government; persons accused of any crime
were accompanied to the place of trial by a re-
tinue of their friends and adherents, assembled
for that purpole from every quarter of the king-
dom. Authorised by this ancient practice, the
Reformed convened, in great numbers, to attend
their pastors to Stirling. The Queen dreaded
their approach with a train so numerous, though
unarmed; and in order to prevent them from ad-
vancing, she empowered John Erikine of Dun, a
person of eminent authority with the party, to
promise, in her name, that she would put a stop
to the intended trial, on condition the preachers
and their retinue advanced no nearer to Stirling.
Erskine, being convinced himfielf of the Queen's
sincerity, served her with the utmost zeal. And
the Protestants, averlf from proceeding to any
aft of violence, listened witl pleasure to to pacific
a proposition. The preachlers, with a few leaders
of the party, remained at Perth ; the multitude,
which had gathered fiom different parts of the
kingdom, dillpcrfed, and retired to their own ha-
bitations.

re.lck a Bur, notwithflanding this folenll promise, the
whcl lll''ny tcelln, on the tenth of May, proceeded to call
.id relied. to trial the perlons who had been liummoned, and

upon their nion-alpparance, the rigour of jullice
took place, and they were pronounced outlaws.
By this ignoble artifice, so incompatible with real

dignity,

dignity, and so inconsistent with that integrity B O ° K
vhiich should prevail in all tranfastions between --
Sovereigns and their fubjeds, the Queen forfeited '559'
the efleem and confidence of the whole nation.
'The Protestants, fiocked no less at the indecency
wvith which fle violated the public faith, than at
the danger which threatened themselves, prepared
hoidly for their own defence. Erskine, enraged
at having been made the instrument for deceiving
lis party, instantly abandoned Stirling, and re-
pairing to Perth, added to the zeal of his afFo-
ciates, by his re)presentations of the Q3een's in-
lt:xible resolution to suppress their religion.

TH'E popular rhetoric of Knox powerfully fe- This occca.

I j ? * ,- . ' sions an in-

conded his representations: He having been car- furreEtion
ried a prisoner into France, together with the at "eh.
other persons taken in the castle of St. Andrew's,
loon made his escape out of that country ; and
residing sometimes in England, fometilnes in
Scotland, had, at last, been driven out of both
lingdoms by the rage of the Popish clergy, and
was obliged to retire to Geneva. Thence he was
called by the leaders of the Protestants in Scot-
land ; and, in compliance with their folicita-
lions, he set out for his native country, where
lie arrived a few days before the trial appointed
;at Stirling. lie hurried inflantly to Perth, to
share with his brethren in the common danger,
or to assist them in promoting the common
cause. While their minds were in that ferment,
which the Queen's perlidioufnefs and their own
danger occalioned, he mounted the pulpit, and
by a vehement harangue against idolatry, in-

N 3 flamed

o 0 0 K flamed the multitude with the utmost rge. The

_LI--^ indiscretion of a priest, who, immediately after
J5S9 Knox's sermon, was preparing to celebrate mars,

and began to decorate the altar for that pur-
pose, precipitated them into immediate action.
With tumultuary, but irresistible violence, they
fell upon the churches in that city, overturned
the altars, defaced the pictures, broke in pieces
the images; and proceeding next to the mo-
nafteries, they, in a few hours, laid those fuinp-
tuous fabrics almost level with the ground. This
riotous infurretion was not the effect of any con-
cert, or previous deliberation: Censured by the
reformed preachers, and publicly condemned by
the persons of moss power and credit with the
party, it muff be regarded merely as an accidental
eruption of popular rage .

The Regent BUT to the Queen Dowager these proceedings
ag.iinit appeared in a very different light. Betides their

' anifeft contempt for her authority, the Protest-

ants had violated every thing in religion which
she efleemed venerable or holy; and on both
there accounts, The determined to inflict the fe.
vereft vengeance on the whole party. She had
already drawn the troops in French pay to Stir-
ling; with there, and what Scottish forces flic
could levy of a sudden, she marched direcl-ly to
Pertlh, in hopes of surprising the Proteflant lead-
ers before they could affcinble their followers,
whom, our of confidence in her disingenuous pro-
minis, they hadl been rashly induced to difiniis.
fntellicncce of these prclp.rations and menaces

J Xulox, Iill. 127, 122.

Was

was soon conveyed to Perth. The Protestants BD o , K
would, gladly, have soothed the Queen, by ad- ---
dresses both to herself, and to the persons of '559.
greatest credit in her court; but findling her
inexorable, they, with great vigour, took mea-
fures for their own defence. Their adherents,
animated with zeal for religion, and eagter to ex-
pose themselves in so good a caule, flocked in
such numbers to Perth, that they not only Ifcur-ed
the town from danger, but, within a few days,
were in a condition to take the field, and to face
the Queen, who advanced with an army leven
thousand strong.

NEITrER party, however, was impatient to en-

gage. The Q(een dreaded the event of a battle
with men whom the fervour of religion raised
above the sense of fear or of danger. The Pro-
tcllants beheld with regret the Earl of Argyll, the
Prior of St. Andrew's, and some other eminent
persons of their party, still adhering to the Queen;
and det-itute of their aid and counsel, declined
hazarding an action, the ill success of which
might liave proved the ruin of their caule. The
profpe&e of an accommodation was for these rea-
Ions highly acceptable to both fides: Argyll and
the Prior, who were the Queen's commillioners
for conduting the negociation, seem to liave been
sincerely desirous of reconciling the contending
factions; and the Earl of Glcncairn arriving un-
cxpL)clldly with a powerful reinforcement to the
Congregation, augmented the Qileen's cagernelf
for peace. A treaty was accordingly concluded, A irctv
in which it was tipulatecl, that both armies should c, ll

N 4 be

B o0 0 be disbanded, and the gates of Perth set open to

II.
---.- the Q,1een; that indemnity should be granted to

the inhabitants of that city, and to all others
concerned in the late infurreEtion; that no French
garrilon should be left in Perth, and no French
soldier should approach within three miles of that
place; and that a Parliament flouild immediately
be held, in ordcr to compose whatever differences
might still remain.
Mzy sz. THE leaders of the Congregation, distrustful

of the Q2ecn's sincerity, and t'nfible that con-
cessions, flowing not from inclination, bat extorted
by the nrccci;,tv of Ihcr af.liirs, could not long re-
mai n fin foic' elltered into a new aflociation, by
,hich thcy boundl them;llvcs, on the firti in-
ifringcment of the prelent t;arty, cr in the least
appearance ot danger to the ir cligion, to re-
aflemble thei-r followers, and to toakie arms in de-
fence of what thvey dt ecd the cauli of God, and
of their country :
IPr-- L' T H QU!een, by her1 conduct, demonltrated

these prccactio'ns to be the relult of no groundlels
or unnecelTi'rv fear. No iboner were the Protelt-
ant forces dilihifidl, tlian flie broke every article
in the treaty. She introduceld French troops into
Perth, lined (obme of the iiilnibiirntss, banifhcdn
othiers, removed the Magi frates orit of of-lice, an(d,
On iler retiring to Stirling,, 11w left hellinJl her a
g.rrFilbn of lix hl1ndred men, wirh order' s to a)-
low the exercif otf ni) ortier religion than tlhe

)Roman Catho1lic. The lituatiioi of Perth, a
pltace at tlihat timec of lbnit irlrecng;tii, and a tOWn

:' KJ't ilil~l, . I.)' X. thq.

the

the molf proper of any in the kingdom for the B o0 K
Itation of a garrison, seems to have allured the
Queen to this unjustifiable and ill-judged breach '559.
of public faith ; which fie endeavoured to co-
lIur, by alleging that the body of men left at
Il'trh was entirely composed of native Scots,
though kept in pay by the King of France.

TIil Queen's scheme began gradually to un-

fold ; it was now apparent, that not only the re-
ligion, but the liberties of the kingdom were
threatened ; and that the French troops were to
be employed as inlfruments for subduing the
Scots, and wreathing the yoke about their necks.
Martial as the genius of the Scots then was, the
poverty of their country made it impossible to
keep their armies long ailnmbled; and even a
very inall body of regular troops might have
proved fornmidable to the nation, though con-
1ilting wholly of soldiers. But, what number of
French forces were then in Scotland, at what
times, and under what pretext they returned,
after having left the kingdom in one thousand
five hundred and fifty, we cannot, with any cer-
tainty, determine. Contemporary hifrorians often
fclet, with little judgment, the circuimfnances
which they translilit to poflerity; and with re-
spic& to matters of the grc'atclt curiolity and im-
portance, leave fiucceeding ages altogether in the
dark. We ma:y conjictur however, fiom some
pafEages in Buchanan, that the French and Scots
in French pay amounlted att leaf( to three thou-
tand men, under the command of Monsieur
)'Oyfel, a crcatule of the house of Guite; and

9 they

R 0 0 K they were soon augmtented to a much more for-
L ...-.o midable number.

Js59 THE Queen, encouraged by having so confider-

able a body ofvell-dilsciplined troops at her com-
mand, and instigated by the violent counfcls of
D'Oyfel, had ventured, as we have observed, to
violate the treaty of Perth, and, by that rall
action, once n,ore threw tle nation into the moll

The Pro- dancgrous convulsions. The E:arl of Argyll anti
,e1t ants a
gain!e ' Prior of St. Andrew's inflantly delerted a court,
arns. llwhere faith and honour fecmed to them to be no

longer regarded ; and joined the leaders of the
Congregation, who had retreated to the eaftcrn
part of Fits. lThe Barons from the neighbourl
ing counties repaired to them, the preachers
rouled the people to arms, and wherever they
came, the fame violent operations which accident
had occasioned at Perth, were now encouraged
out of policy. The enraged multitude was let
loose, and churches and monasteries, the monu-
ments of ecclesiastic pride and luxury, were facri-
siced to their zeal.

IN order to check their career, the Queen,

without losing a momlent, put her troops in mo-
tion ; but the zeal of the Conlgregation got thl
flart, once more, of her vigilance and activity.
In that w.arlikc a e, when all men were accullon.-
ed to arms, and on the lcall prospect of d;angcr
were realy to run to tlhem, the leadLrs of the
Protcft;lnts lbu111d n1o dilliculty to railfc an army.
IThough they lct out fiom St. Alndrew's with a
(lcndelcr train of an hundred hollie, crowds flocked
to ltheir tlalllnrds Iru n every corner of the country

thI . \ro. ,.,I

through which they marched; and before thiey B °o K
reached Falkland, a village only ten miles dillant,
they were able to meet the Queen with superior 'js'9
forcei.

THE Queen, surprised at the approach of so

formidable a body, which was drawn up by its
leaders in such a manner as added greatly in ap-
pearance to its numbers, had again recourse to ne-
gociation. She found, however, that the preferva-
tion of the Protestant religion, their zeal ior which
had at first routed the leaders of the Congregation
to take arms, was not the only objecl they had now
in view. IThey were animated with the warmett
love of civil liberty, which they conceived to be in
imminent danger from the attempts of the French
forces; and these two paions mingling, added re-
ciprocally to each other's flrength. Together with Theyim at
more enlarged notions in religion, theReformation cvi:.,wi
filled the human mind with more liberal and ge- ga'eacl,'
ncrous sentiments concerning civil government.
The genius of Popery is extremely favourable to
tile power of Princes. The implicit fubmifiion to
all her decrees, which is exacted by the lRominf
Church, prepares and breaks the mind for political
servitude; and the doctrines of the Reformers, by
overturning the eftablilhed Iyllemn of fuperflition,
weakened the firmedl foundations of civil tyranny,
That bold spirit of inquiry, which led men to re-
iect theological errors, accompanied them in otler
cilences, and discovered every-where the faImne
manly zeal for truth. A new Ltudy, introduced at
the fame time, added greater force to the spirit of

i Kl.[txib
l.rl.

liberty,

B 0 o K liberty. Men became more acquainted with the

-...-. a Greek and Roman authors, who described exqui-
sj59 frite models of free government, far superior to

the inaccurate and oppressive fyflem eftabliihed
by the feudal law; and produced such illutrious
examples of public virtue,, as wonderfully suited
both the circumstances and spirit of that age.
Many, among the most eminent Reformers, were
themselves considerable masters in ancient learn-
ing; and all of them eagerly adopted the maxims
and spirit of the ancients, with regard to govern-
ment . The most ardent love of liberty accom-
panied the Protestant religion throughout all its
progrefsi and wherever it was embraced, it roused
an independent spirit, which rendered men atten-
tive to their privileges as fubjests, and jealous
of the encroachments of their sovereigns. Knox,
and the other preachers of the Reformation, infused
generous sentiments concerning government into
the minds oftheirhearers; and the Scotcifl Barons,
naturally siee and bold, were prompted to assert
their rights with more freedom and boldness than
ever. Instead of obeying the Queen Regent, who

k The e:ccffive adiirpaion cf ancient policy was the ocCa-

linn of Knox's faonlus book concerning the Gc.vcrnmznt of
i'oimenr, , whercin, conformable to the maxims of the ancient
lcgiflators, which modern expcrience has proved to be ill
found (d, he pronounces the elevation of women to the flipreme
auithority, 'to be uttcrly delruL'ive of good governmcent. His
principles, authorities, and examples, were all drawn from
ancient writers. The fame obfcrvation may be made with
regard to Buchanan's Dialogue, De 7ure Regni apud Scoion It
is founded, not on the maxims of fcudal, but of ancient re-
publican government.

had

had enjoined them to lay down their arms, they B o G K
demanded not only the redress of their religious a,
grievances, but, as a preliminary toward fettling 1s59s
the nation, and securing its liberties, required the
immediate expulsion of the French troops out of
Scotland. It was not in the Queen's power to make
so important a conceflion without the concurrence
of the French Monarch; and as some time was re-
quifite in order to obtain that, fle hoped, during
this interval, to receive such reinforcements from
France, as would insure the accomplishment of
that design which the had twice attempted with
unequal strength. Mean while, she agreed to a Junei3.
cefation of arms for eight days, and before the
expiration of these, engaged to transport the
French troops to the south fide of the Forth; and
to fend commissioners to St. Andrew's, who should
labour to bring all differences to an accommmo-
dation. As she hoped, by means of the French
troops, to overawe the Protestants in the southern
counties, the former article in the treaty was
punctually executed; the latter having been in-
ferted merely to amuse the Congregation, was no
longer remembered.

BY these reiterated and wanton inrfances of per- A econl

fidy, the Qneen loft all credit with her adversaries; ^trda Yi'
and no safety appearing in any other course, they
again took arms with more inflamed resentment,
and with bolder and more extensive views. The'
removing of the French forces had laid open to
them all the country lituated between Forth and
Tay. The inhabitants of Perth alone remaining
fubjeted to the insolence and exaftions of the gar-

r.if n

B 0 0 K rifon which the Queen had left there, implored

11. .-k---i the afTiftance of the Congregation for their relief.
'59. Thither they marched, and having, without effect,

required the Queen to evacuate the town in terms
of the former treaty, they prepared to besiege it in
form. The Queen employed the Earl of Huntly
and Lord Erikine to divert them from this enter-
prile. But her wonted artifices were now of no
avail; repeated so often, they could deceive no
longer; and without listening to her offers, the
Proreflants continued the siege, and soon obliged
the garrifun to capitulate.

AFTER the loss of Perth, the Queen endeavour-

ed to seize Stirling, a place of some strength, and,
from its command of the only bridge over the
Forth, of great importance. But the leaders of the
Congregation, having intelligence of her design,

~R;ii r prevented the execution of it, by an hasty march
iu,' . o,,t thither with part of their forces. The inhabit-
eita',. aants, heartily attached to the cause, set open to

them the gates of their town. Thence they ads
vanced, with the fame rapidity, towards Edin-
burgh, which the Queen, on their approach, aban-
doned with precipitation, and retired to Dunbar.

TiHE Protcfeant army, wherever it came, kin-

dled, or spread the ardour of Reformation, and the
utmofi excefies of violence were committed upon
churches and monasteries. The formerwere spoilcd
of every decoration, which was then esteemed lia-
cred; the latter were laid in ruins. We are apt,
at this distance of time, to condemn the furious
zeal of the Reformers, and to regret the overthrow
of so many ifately fabrics, the monument6 of our

7 ancclors

anceltors magnificence, and among the noblest B 0 K
ornaments of the kingdom. But amidst the vio- _
lence of a Reformation, carried on in opposition '5ss5
to legal authority, iome irregularities were un-
avoidable; and perhaps no one could have been
permitted more proper to allure and interest the
multitude, or more fatal to the grandeur of the
established church. Ilow absurd soever and ill-
founded the speculative errors of Popery may be,
some inquiry and attention are requisite towards
discovering them. The abuses and corruptions,
which had crept into the public worlhip of that
church, lay more open to observation, and by
flriking the senses, excited more universal di;guft.
Under the long reign ofHearhcnifin, fuperftititio
seems to have exhausted its .talcnt of invention,
so that when a superstitious spirit fcizcd Christ-
ians, they were obliged to imitate the -Icathens
in the pomp and magni'cence of tleir ceremo-
nies, and to borrow from them the ornaments
and decorations of their temples. To the pure
and simple worship of the primitive Christians,
there succeeded a species of splendid idolatry,
nearly resembling those pagan originals, wlhence
it had been copied. The contrariety of fich ob-
fervances to the lfpirit of Christianity, was almost
the first thing, in the Romiflh fyflem, which
awakened the indignation of the leformers, who,
applying to these the denunciations in the Old
Tellament againfl idolatry, imagined that they
could not endeavour at fuil)pprefing them with
too much zeal. No task could be more accept-
able to the multitude, than to overturn those

kfats

B 0 0 K feats of superstition; they ran with emulation to

Ii.

__--^- perform it, and happy was the man whose hand
I559. was mofl adventurous and successful in executing

a work deemed io pious. Nor did their leaders
labour to restrain this impetuous fpiric of Re-
formation. Irregular and violent as its sallics
were, they tended diretly to that end which they
had in view; for, by denolifhing the monasteries
throughout the kingdom, and setting at liberty
their wretched inhabitants, they hoped to render
it imponible ever to rebuild the one, or to re-af-
femble the other.

BUT amidst there irregular proceedings, a cir-

cumftance, which does honour to the conduEt and
humanity of the leaders of the Congregation,
deserves notice. They so far restrained the rage
of their followers, and were able so to temper
their heat and zeal, that few of the Roman Ca-
tholics were exposed to any perlonal insult, and
not a single man suffered death'.

AT the fame time, we discover, by the facilirt

with which these great revolutions were effeced,
how violently the current of national favour ran
towards the Reformation. No more than thrc(
hundred men marched out of Perth under the
Earl ofArgyll and Prior of St. Andrew's "1; with
this inconliderable force they advanced. B13
wherever they came, the people joined them il a
body ; their army was ieldom les nrlmerous thalln
live thousand men ; the gates of every town wclc
thrown open to receive them; and, without

Lcfly, ap. Jbbl, vol. i. 231, in Keith, 94.

triling

tiliking a tingle blow, they took possession of the B ° ° K
capital of the kingdom. i

TrIs rapid and astonishing success seems to June59.

have encouraged the Reformers to extend their
views, and to rife in their demands. Not satis-
fled with their first claim of toleration for their
religion, they now, openly, aimed at establishing
the Protestant dotrine on the ruins of Popery.
For this reason, they determined to fix their refi-
dence at Edinburgh; and, by their appointment,
Knox, and some other preachers, taking posses-
sion of the pulpits, which had been abandoned
by the affrightened clergy, declaimed against the
errors of Popery with such fervent zeal, as could
not fail of gaining many proselytes.

IN the mean time, the Queen, who had pru-

dently given way to a torrent which she could
not resist, observed with pleasure that it now
began to subside. The leaders of the Congre-
gation had been above two months in arms, and
by the expences of a campaign, protracted so
long beyond the usual time of service in that
age, had exhausted all the money, which a coun-
try, where riches did not abound, had been able
to supply. The multitude, dazzled with their
success, and concluding the work to be already
done, retired to their own habitations. A few
only of the more zealous or wealthy Barons re-
nained with their preachers at Edinburgh. As
intelligence is procured in civil wars with little
difficulty, whatever was tranfafed at Edinburgh
was soon known at Dunbar. The Queen, regu-
lating her own conduct by the situation of her

VOL. I, 0 adverfa-

B 0 0 K adversaries, artfully amused them with the pro-

II.
.--,-. fpeft of an immediate accommodation ; while,

J559 at the fame time, flhe, by fludied delays, spun

out the negociations for that )urpofe to such a
length, that, in the end, the party dwindled to
an inconsiderable number; and, as if peace had
been already re-efl-ablifiedt, became cari-cls of
military ditcipline. The Queen, who watched
for ifch an opportunity, advanced, unexpected-
ly, by a sudden march in the night with all her
forces, n an apearing before Edinburgh, filled
that city with the utmost conflernation. The
Protestants, weakened by the imprudent dii-
pcrfionl of their followers, durst not encounter
the French troops in the open field; and were
even unable to defend an ill-fortified town againil
their afTaults. Unwilling, however, to abandon
the citizens to the Queen's mercy, they endea-
voured, by facing the enemy's army, to gain
time for collecing their own allociatcs. But the
Qccn, in spite of all their refiltance, would
have easily forced Iher way into the town, if the
1falbnable conclusion of a truce had not procured
her admillion without the eFufion of blood.

'I'IERl dlangerous lituation easily induced tile

leaders of tlie Congregation to liflen to any
ovcrturtis of peac ; anld as the QCiecn was look-
i n, daily for thie arrival of' a irong rI c ii reli n

cc n

flm11 F.'aice c, alld cx!c&cd greCat ladcvlntages f'lo'0
a ccl;ltiu oul larls, le allo agreedl to ir upoln no
ill'e(plt~l c('(llditioll:,. Togethllcr with a ulj)icnli'.)n
of lI ,ilili.tic, (fin ilie twelnty-Jlurtil of July to
tir- tL.enil of J.anuary, it was ltitulatI e il ti}is

tlrcal y,

treaty, that, on the one hand, the Protestants B o° K
li,)ild open tle gates of E.dinburgh next morning
to the Queen Regent; remain in dutiful sub- 1559.
,:lcioni to her government; abstain fiom all future
violationl of religious lIoules; and give no inter-
ruiition to the eiltablilled clergy, either in the
dilclahrgc of their functions, or in the enjoyment
of thlir benefices. On the other hand, the Queen
agreed to give no molestation to the preachers or
profCflors of the Protelfant religion; to allow the
citizens of Eldinburgh, during the cessation of
hostilities, to enjoy the exercise of religious wor-
ship according to the form molt agreeable to
the conscience of each individual; and to permit
the free and public profellion of the Protestant
faith in every part of the kingdom ". The Queen,
by these liberal concessions in behalf of their re-
ligion, hoped to sooth the Protestants, and ex-
pectd, fi-om indulging, their favourite paflion, to
render them more compliant with refpr't to other
articles, particularly the expulsion of the French
troops out of Scotland. The anxiety which the
()ueen expreflcd for retaining this body of men,
rendered them, more and more, the objec&s of
national jc;lloufy and aveirion. The immediate
expulsion of them was therefore demanded anew,
and with greater warmth ; but the Queen, takling
advantage of the liltlcls of the adverife party,
eluded the request, and would conentt to nothing
more, than that a French garrison Ihould not be
introduced into L.dinburgh.

Kciiih, 98. lM iilantl, Ilidf. of Edin. 16, 17.

0 2 Tn

B 0 0 K THE desperate state of their affairs imposed

II.
.-,--w on the Congregation the neceflity of agreeing to

1559' this article, which, however, was very far from

giving them satisfaction. Whatever apprehen-
sions the Scots had conceived, firom retaining
the French forces in the kingdom, were abun-
dantly justified during the late commotions. A
finall body of those troops, maintained in con-
slant pay, and rendered formidable by regular
discipline, had checked the progress of a martial
people, though animated with zeal both for reli-
gion and liberty. The finalleft addition to their
number, and a considerable one was daily expet-
ed, might prove fatal to public liberty, and
Scotland might be exposed to the danger of be-
ing reduced from an independent kingdom, to
the mean condition of a province, annexed to the
empire of its powerful ally.

IN order to provide against this imminent cala-

mity, the Duke of Chatelherault, and Earl of
Huntly, immediately after concluding the truce,
desired an interview with the chiefs of the Congre-
gation. These two noblemen, the most potent, at
that time, in Scotland, were the leaders of the
party which adhered to the cftablifhed church.
They had followed the Queen, during the late
commnotions, and having access to observe more
narrowly the dangerous tendency of her councils,
their abhorrence of the yoke which was preparing
for their country, surmounted all other coridera-
tions, and determined them rather to endanger
the religion which they professed, than to give
their aid towards the execution of her pernicious

I designs,

designs. They proceeded farther, and promised B 0 o K
to Argyll, Glencairn, and the Prior of St. An- _
drew's, who were appointed to meet them, that 'ss59
if the Qeecen fiould, with her usual insincerity,
violate any article in the treaty of truce, or refuse
to gratify the withes of the whole nation, by
difiniffing her French troops, they would, then,
instantly join with their countrymen in compel-
ling her to a measure, which the public safety,
and the preservation of their liberties, rendered
necessary °.

ABOUT this time died Henry II. of France; July .

just when he had adopted a system with regard to
the affairs of Scotland, which would, in all proba-
bility; have restored union and tranquillity to that
kingdom P. Towards the close of his reign, the
Princes of Lorrain began visibly to decline in
favour, and the Constable Montmorency, by the
affittance of the Duchess of Valentinois, reco-
vered that ascendant over the spirit of his master,
which his great experience, and his faithful, though
often unfortunate services, feemedjuftly to merit.
That prudent minister imputed the infurredions
in Scotland wholly to the Duke of Guise and Car-
dinal of Lorrain, whole violent and precipitant
counsels could not fail of trantporting, beyond all
bounds of moderation, men, whose minds were
pofflcled with that jealousy which is inseparable
from the love of civil liberty, or inflamed with
that ardour which accompanies religious zeal.
Montmorency, in order to convince Henry that
he did not load his rivals with any groundlcfs ac-

O Knoj, 154. P Mclv. 49.

0 3 cufation,

B 0o K cur.ltion, prevailed to have MVilvilq, a Scottish
---~-o gentleman of his retinue, di fpatched into his n;a-

t9 ive country, with instructions to observe tie
morions both of the Regent and of her adverili-
ries; and the King agreed to regulate his future
proceedings in that kingdom, by Melvil's report.

DID hiflory indulge herllf in thcli: fpccula-

tions, it would be amusing to inquire what a dif-
ferent direction might have been given, by this
resolution, to the national ipii-it; and to what a
different ifiue, Melvil's rqport, wllich would have
set the condu&t of the Inalecontents in the mno;l
favourable liglt, might have conduclLed the pub-
lic disorders. Perhaps by gentle treatment, and
artful policy, the progrcfs of the Reformation
might have been checked, and Scotland brought
to depend upon France. Perhaps, by gaining
pofiellion of this avenue, the French might have
made their way into lngland, and, under colour
of ifpporting Mary's title to the Crown, they

ini ht not only have dcfealted all Elizabeth's

measures in favour of the Reformation, but have
re-eftablified the Roman Catholic religion, and
def troyed the liberties of lhat kin gdlom. But, into
this boundless field of fancy and conjecture, the
hillorian mnufl make no excursions to relate real
occurrences, and to explain their real caufies and
efFects, is his peculiar and only province.

(,,n. . ,,f ''ui. tragical and untimely d(eath of the French

r.. ,' r,.n n Monlarchi put an end to all moderate and pacific
i.illcm Illeafuinres with regart to Scotland. The Duke

(
f Guiit, and the Cardinal his brother, upon the

T1 hein:
T ,h i ilolo ot1 1ac mccfi son

arcc'eftlon

acceflTon of Francis II. a prince void of genius, B o o K
nnd without experience, assumed the chief direc- -,_-
iion of French affairs. Allied so nearly to the 1559.
tillone, by the marriage of their niece the Q(jeen
of(Scots with the young King, they iiow wanted(
but little of regal dignity, andl nothing of re-
;,l power. This power did not long remain in-
active in their Ihands. The fame valft s-chemes of
ambition, which they had planned out under the
.Crmer reign, were again refurmned; and they
were enabled, by pofn'iling, such amplle auth!ority,
to purfle tlhem with more vigoulr, anci greater
prob;ability of ft!ccels. They beheld, with infi-
nite regret, the progre fs of the Protefllant religion
ii Scotland ; and, fenlible what an unfurnmount-
;)Ile obflacle it vwould prove to their designs, they
lent all their iti cngth to check its growth, before
it rose to any greater height. For tlis pulrpofe,
they carried on their preparations with all pof-
fible expedition, and encouraged the Qcjeen their
fill-r to expea, in a flort time, tle arrival of
an army, 1b powerflul, as the zeal of their adver-
Ialries, however d(elierate, would not venture to
oppose,.

NoR were the Lords of tle Congregation either

ignorlant of thole violent counliCls, which pre-
vailed iri tle court of France since the death of
I lInry, or careless of providing against the dan-
ger wliiclh threatened them from that quarter.
l'lie fnccefs of tlieir cause, as well as their per-
ounal l'af'ty, depending entirely on the unanimity
and vigou r of thecir own resolutions, they cndlea-
vourced to guard againnf: divilion, anid to cemcent

0 4 to(,c-

B 01 K together more closely, by entering into a ftrieer
A,-_- bond of confederacy and mutual defence. Two
'I559 persons concurred in this new association, who

brought a great accefTion both of reputation and of
power to the party. These were the Duke of Cha-
telherault, and his eldest son the Earl of Arran.
This young nobleman, having resided some years
in France, where he commanded the Scottish
guards, had imbibed the Protestant opinions con-
cerning religion. Hurried along by the heat of
youth, and the zeal of a proselyte, he had uttered
sentiments with refpeE to the points in contro-
verfy, which did not suit the temper of a bigotted
court, intent, at that juncture, on the extinction
of the Protestant religion; in order to accomplifl
which, the greatest excesses of violence were com-
mitted. The church was suffered to wreak its
utnoft fury upon all who were fufpeted of he-
refy. Courts were erected in different parts of
France, to take cognizance of this crime, and by
their sentences, several persons of diftintion were
condemned to the flames.

BUT, in order to inspire more universal terror,

the Princes of Lorrain resolved to feleAt, for a
:acrifice, tome person, whose fall might convince
all ranks of men, that neither splendour of birth,
nor eminence in station, could exempt firom pu-
nilhment, thole who flould be guilty of this un-
pardonable transgression. The Earl of Arran was
the person deflined to be the unhappy vicim'.
As he was allied to one throne, and the pre-
limptive heir to another; as he possessed the firtl

' huan. lib. xxiv. p. 462. Edit. Fran.cof.

rank

rank in his own country, and enjoyed an honour- B 0° K
able station in France; his condemnation could
not fail of making the desired imprefTion on the '559-
whole kingdom. But the Cardinal of Lorrain
having let fall some expressions, which raised Ar-
ran's suspicions of the design, he escaped the in-
tended blow by a timely flight. Indignation, zeal,
resentment, all prompted him to seek revenge
upon these persecutors of himself and of the
religion which he professed; and as he passed
through England, on his return to his native
country, Elizabeth, by hopes and promifies, in-
flamed thole paflions, and sent him back into
Scotland, animated with the fame implacable
aversion to France, which possessed a great part
of his countrymen. IHe quickly communicated Earlof A-
these sentiments to his father the Duke of Chatel- t',ol,,t.
herault, who was already extremely difgulted with
the mealures carrying on in Scotland; and as it
was the fate of that nobleman to be governed in
every instance by those about him, he now sus-
sered himself to be drawn from the Queen Re-
gent; and, having joined the Congregation, was
confidered, fiom that time, as the head of the
party.

BUT with rerpe&t to him, this diftindion was

merely nominal. James Stewart, Prior of St. An-
drew's, was the person who moved and adtuatel
the whole body of the Protcftants, among whom
he possesed that unbounded confidence, which his
strenuous adherence to their interelt, and his great
abilities, so juflly merited. He was the natural
fpn of James V. by a daughter of Lord Erficine;

and

B 0O0 K and as that amorous Mlon:rhl had left fevernl

11.
.s---- .others a burden upon the Crown, they were all

559' deflijned for the church, where they could be

placed in flations of dignity and affluence. In
conlequence of this refolutiun, tle Priory of St.
Andrew's had been conferred upon James : But,
iduring it bul, a period, he toon became difgultId
with the indolence and retirement of a motraflic
lifie; and his entcrprifing genius called him forth,
to at a principal part on a more public and con-
fpicuolis theatre. The Icene in which lie a)-
peared, required talents of (iifierent kinds : Mili-
tary virtue, and political dilcern-ienrt,wcrc equally
neceflary in order to render himn illufrrious. These
he poflrld in an eminent dcgree. To the most
unquctlionable perl;nal bravery, he added great
ikill in the art of vwar, and in every enlerprie hiis
arms were crowned with fucceis. His sagacity
and penetration in civil aftairs enabled him,
amidll: the reeling and tur)bulenCec of faceions, to
Ihold a iproflcrous) cuti-'li; lwhile his boldness in
tcli'rce of the I[lefulrmaiO, togcthllr with the
decency, and even fevcerity of his m;inlners, fe-'
cured hiimi the -replutation of hcint illncccely at-
tached to reli.;ionl, wtitlhout it was inpof-
fible, ia: that tagc,, to gain an alfceIldant over man-
kind.

Ir was not without reason, that tle Qteen

dreaded the enmity of a man, lo capable to
obflrul her dcefigns. And as she could not, with
all her add(rel, make thlea I implrenion on his
fidelity to his associates, lhi endel;vourld to lessen
hii inflluncc, and to lCttier among5 tlCill the feeds

of

ical(lotif an;l (dirfh-tf, by insinuating, that the B 0 0 K

:i;,i)irion of the Prior aspired beyond the condi
:cn of a fulii'j:, and aimed at nothing le's than l5:9'
It,c Crov.'n itle-lf.

A'n acculi.ltlin so) improbable gained but little

c i lrit. \\'a Itecver tlioughts of tl!is kind, the prc-
lVm-lution ¢f' unctxpcdleId [success, and his elevation
tl the Iii;clhc fl di(ignity in the king. om, may he
aill:ec; d to I have inlflpircd( at any lI.lUcl(qucnt period,
it i. c.itlaini that, at this junfture, he could ifo-br
no inlh \ ail dclfign. To detlrone a QLCeen, who
.:s lineal heir to an ancient race of Monarchs;
Who lhad been guilty of n0o a.lion by which lhe
c(,ulld forfeit the cleein and aflntition of lier ifb-
, .:is; whio could e1mploy, in defence of her rights,
the forces of a kingldom, nuch mlore poweirful
;i.tn her own; and to lubtlitute, in her place, a
'erlon whom the illegitimacy of his birth, by the
practice of all civilized nations, rendered inca-
pable of any inheritance, eilher public or pri-
vate; was a pr'ojct so chimerical, as lhe lmoll:
t xtrava(ant ambition would hardly cntertr.inj and
could never conceive to be pratsicable. The
j)ronlife too, which the Prior made to Melvil, of
refidling conl-antly in France, on condition tile
public grievances were relrcfTled'' ; the confidence
riepoled in himn by tle Duke of Chatelhcrault and
his son, the pri llumplltive heirs to the Crown ; and
rie conclurrecce of ailloft all the Scotti f nobles,
in pr omotin g the nmeafures by which he gave of-
fence: to tle French court, go far towards ills vin-
d ilication froml choe illegal and criminal dclfigns,

" ^ clvi, il, w5.i

witlI

B OO K with the imputation of which the Queen endea-

II.

voured, at that time, to load him.

Trroop ar- THE arrival of a thousand French soldiers com-
rrlnroand penfated, in some degree, for the loss which the
fLahr'y Qeen sustained by the defection of the Duke of

Chatelherault. These were, immediately, com-
manded to fortify Leith, in which place, on ac-
count of its commodious harbour, and its situation
in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, and in a
plentiful country, the Queen resolved to fix the
head-quarters of her foreign forces. This unpo-
pular measure, by the manner of executing it,
was rendered still more unpopular. In order to
bring the town entirely under their command,
the French turned out a great part of the ancient
inhabitants, and taking poffeflion of the houses,
which they had obliged them to abandon, pre-
sented to the view of the Scots, two objecs
equally irritating and offensive; on the one hand,
a number of their countrymen expelled their ha-
bitations by violence, and wandering without any
certain abode; on the other, a colony of so-
reigners, fettling with their wives and children,
in the heart of Scotland, growing into strength by
daily reinforcements, and openly preparing a
yoke, to which, without some timely exertion of
national spirit, the whole kingdom muff, of ne-
ceffity, submit.

ThlProten IT was with deep concern that the Lords of the
ft.trc.Ains1 Congregation beheld this bold and decisive flep,
"1'' ttaken by the Queen Regent: Nor did they hefi-

tate a moment, whether they should employ their
whole strength, in one generous effort, to rescue

their

their religion and liberty from impending deftruc- B 0°10 s
tion. But, in order to justify their own conduct, ,- ,
and to throw the blame entirely on their adverfa- '559'
ries, they resolved to preserve the appearances of
decency and respect towards their superiors, and
to have no recourse to arms, without the most ur-
gent and apparent necessity. They joined, with Sept. 29.
this view, in an address to the Regent, represent-
ing, in the strongest terms, their diflatisfaEion
with the measures ihe was pursuing, and beseech-
ing her to quiet the fears and jealousies of the na-
tion, by defifing from fortifying Leith. The
Queen, conscious of her present advantageous
situation, and elated with the hopes of fresh fuc-
cours, was in no disposition for listening to de-
mands, utterly inconsistent with her views, and
urged with that bold importunity, which is so
little acceptable to Princest.

THE suggestions of her French counsellors con- The Regent

tributed, without doubt, to alienate her still far- Idirgards
ther from any scheme of accommodation. As the mcnftrn-
Queen was ready on all occasions, to discover an
extraordinary deference for the opinions of her
countrymen, her brothers, who knew her secret
disapprobation of the violent measures they were
driving on, took care to place near her such per-
sons as betrayed her, by their insinuations, into
many acions, which her own unbiased judgment
would have highly condemned. As their success
in the present juncure, when all things were
hastening towards a crisis, depended entirely on
the Queen's firmness, the Princes of Lorrain did

t Hayncs, 21 .

not

B 0 0 K not trust wholly to tilhe influence of thcir ordi1.;iy.

11. L-,_, agents; but, in order to add the greater wcilti

'559. to their councils, they called in aid the Miniilc;:

of Religion; and, by the authority of their
sacred character, they hoped effctually to re-
commend to their filer, that system of ieverity
which they had espoused . With this view, bui
under pretence of confounding the Protef-ants by
the flill of Ituch able mafiers in controverly, tllh
appointed several French divines to reside in Sco'-
land. At the head of there, and with the charac-
ter of legate from the Pope, was Pelleve Bifllop
of Amiens, and afterwards Archbishop and Car-
dinal of Sens, a furious bigot X, iervilely devoted,
to the houie of Guise, and a proper inlfrument for
recommending or executing the molt outrageous
measures.

AMIPST the noise and danger of civil arms,

there Doctors had little opportunity to display,
their address in the use of their theological wea-
pons. But they gave no small offence to the na-
tion by one of their acions. They persuaded the
Queen to leize the church of St. Giles in Edin-
burgh, which had remained, ever since the late
truce, in the hands of the Protefiants; and hav-
ing, by a new and Ibleinn consecration, purified
the fatlric firom the pollution with which they
fiiul)pollc rlhe Iprofae minittrations of tle Protc(t-
ants to have t1(cilced it, they, iln direcl conLtraIic-
tion to onle ailic le

in the lute trea, re-CeftiablihCl

" IA l'.l, 215. C..il cll til, ;p1). Jcib, 'ol. ii. 4 6. 473.
x D.t\ i:.,, B,'i.iluiitc.

there

tilcrc the rites of the Romiifh church. This, h °o° K
allded to the indiffcrence, and even contemlpt,
v.'iili wlich tile Queen received their rlmon- ,559'
illrincs, convinced the Lords of the Congreg:I -
tion!, that it was not only vain to expect any re-
drlis of their grievances at her hands, but ablb-
luic-lv necefiary to ttake arms in their own defence.

'J'iIE eager and impetuous 1pirit of the nation, TlicytJLkc

as cell as every consideration of good poliicy, tu, .lon
prompted them to take this bolld fep withlout de-
liy. It was but a finall part of the Frcnch auxi-
liaries which htad as yet arrived. T'he fbrlil-iei-
tions of Leith, though advancing fail, were flill
far frolm being compilete. Under these circunl-
l.iiices of di.tad van tage, tlhey conceived it pofiible
to lri-pril-e the (Qcen's party, and, by one fud-
den and dccifive blow, to prevent all future
bloodilhcd and contention. Full of thele expecta-
ti;ans, they advanced rapidly towards Edinburgh-
wviti a numerous army. But it was no ealy Ilma- oa<J e 6
tcr to deceive an adversary, as vigilant and atten-
tive as the Qeen Rlecent. With her ll'ual si-
gacity, lc bioth lorIclaw tile danger, and took the
only i'roper co;urlc to avoidl it. Iifltcad of keep-
ing thc (iclI! ::gaini llo eniies, fuipcinor in numbter,
andl f;orlid.iblc on a ;day of battle, by the ardour
of teir coirla, Ilhi reilred into Leitlh, and de-
terml.ilned Ipaticnlv to wait tlic arrival of new re-
iliforCeecl its. Sli lit an.i iinliiillud as the for-
ilie.t ionis of' t!,.t town tll-n were, lie did rnot
d trea'.l tile eiili; i l ;f a ai'.,i', plovi(ed neitler

I\\ 'll lu i'>y ii

l ollorj ; Ilo' wiLil 11111 Iry lloles, and

uI.Li i iouiiit l l ll: 11t
i me1tl o t L attickii a;lny

9 place

B O O K place fortified with more art than those ancient

AL-^ towers, ere6ted all over the kingdom, in defence
I559. of private property against the incursions of ban.

ditti.

NoR did the Qieen, mean while, neglet to

have recourse to those arts, which fle had often
employed, to weaken or divide her adversaries.
By private solicitations and promises, she fliook
the fidelity, or abated the ardour of some. By
open reproach and accusation, she blasted the re-
putation, and diminished the authority of others,
Her emiflaries were every where at work, and,
notwithstanding the zeal for religion and liberty,
which then animated the nation, they seem to
have laboured not without success. We find
Knox, about this period, abounding in com-
plaints of the lukewarm and languid spirit which
had begun to spread among his party y. But if
their zeal slackened a little, and suffered a mo-
mentary intermiflon, it soon blazed up with fi-efl
vigour, and rose to a greater height than ever.

Reewitheir THE Queen herself gave occasion to this, by
^ljllran-the reply which she made to a new remonstrance

from the Lords of the Congregation. Upon their
arrival at Edinburgh, they once more represented
to her the dangers arising fiom the increase of the
French troops, the fortifying of Leith, and her
other measures, which they conceived to be de-
itrufive to the peace and liberty of the kingdom
and in this address they spoke in a firmer tone,
and avowed, more openly than ever, their refolu-
tion of proceeding to the utmost extremities, in

y Knox, 180.

order

order to put a stop to such dangerous encroach- B o ° K
ments. To a remonstrance of this nature, and -
urged with so much boldness, the Queen replied butihu
in terms no less vigorous and explicit. She pre- fuccels
tended that fle was not accountable to the confe-
derate Lords for any part of her conducl-; and
upon no representation of theirs, would fie either
abandon measures, which fIhe deemed necessary;
or difinifs forces, which she found useful; or de-
molifh a fortification, which might prove of ad-
vantage. At the fame time, the required them,
on pain of treason, to disband the forces which
they had afTembled.

THIS haughty and imperious style founded

harfl-ly to Scottish nobles, impatient, fiom their
national character, of the slightest appearance of
injury; accustomed even fiom their own Mo-
narchs, to the most respectful treatment; and
possessing, under an ariftocratical form of govern-
ment, such a fliare of power, as equalled, at all
times, and often controlled that of the Sove-
reign. They were sensible, at once, of the in-
dignity offered to themselves, and alarmed with
this plain declaration of the Queen's intentions;
and as there now remained but one ftep to take,
they wanted neither public spirit nor resolution to
take it.

BUT, that they might not seem to depart from Dcliberate

the ellablifhed forms of the confitution, forwhich, ,'tle'cure
even ami(lfd their nofl- violent operations, men whi'lthley

i * (

,1"ug lit to

always retain the greatest reverence, they as- take.
fembled all the Peers, Barons, and Represent- od at.
atives of buroughs, who adhered to their party.

VOL. I. P These

B 0 K These formed a convention, which exceeded in

Ii.

_--- number, and equalled in dignity, the uftal
'559' meetings of parliament. The leaders of the

Congregation laid before them the declaration
which the Queen had given in anfver to their rc-
monftlance; represented the unavoidable ruin,
which the measures fie therein avowed and jufti-
fled would bring upon the kingdom; and re-
quiring their direftion with regard to the obe-
dience due to an adminiflration io unjust and
oppreflive, they submitted to their decision a
question, one of the inofl delicate and intererting
that can poflibly fall under the consideration of
fubjecs.

THIS atiembly proceeded to decide, with no

less dispatch than unanimity. Strangers to those
forms which protrad bu1incts; unacquainted
with the arts which make a figure in debate;
and much more fitted for ascion than discourse:
A warlike people always haiten to a conclusion,
and bring their deliberations to the fhortefl i1fue.
It was the work but of one day, to examine and
to resolve this nice problem, concerning the be-
haviour of fliubjects towards a ruler who abuses his
power. But, however abrupt their proceedings
may appear, they were not destitute of tolemnity.
As the determination of the point in doubt was
conceived to be no lels the office of divines than
of laymen, the former were called to afill- with
their opinion. Knox and Willox appeared for
the whole order, and pronounced, without liefita-
tion, both from the precepts and examples in
fcripturc, that it was lawTul for subjects not only

~~~~I ~to

to rcfifl tyrannical princes, but to deprive them t 0o K
of that authority, which, in their hands, becomes
an int-rument for destroying those whom the Al- - 559
mighty ordained the;n to protec. The decision
of perlons revered so highly for their sacred cha-
racter, but more for their zeal and their piety,
had great weight with the whole assembly. Not
fin'sfied with the common indiscriminate manner
of f1gnify'ing content, every person present was
called in his turn to declare his sentiments, and
riling up in order, all gave their suffrages, with- They de-

o0 ~ ~ ~ n c

. . &. . priv: the
out one dilienting voice, for depriving the Queen Qscn of

the office of

of the office of Regent, which fle had exercised Regent.
fu much to the detriment of the kingdom 2.

TriIS extraordinary sentence was owing no less The mo-

to the love of liberty, than to zeal for religion. tir on-
In the a& of deprivation, religious grievances are du.
slightly mentioned ; and the dangerous encroach-
ments of the Q(jeen upon the civil constitution are
produceCd, by the Lords of the Congregation, in
order to prove their conduct to have been not
only jult, but neceflary. The introducing foreign
troops into a kingdom, at peace. with all the
world ; the lfizing and fortifying towns in differ-
ent parts of the country ; the promoting strangers
to offices of great power and dignity; the debaf-
ing the current coin '; the subverting the ancient

laws;

1 K.nox, Iq4.

I 'I'c .sllhld, ' (.1 ll niln ill ;,1-oil111ad s contin alll y va-

r', iTl. Ln 1 t t i6 i o1' J;ies V. i\. 1). 1529, ;i pound wcight
o ilt ll, \llc ll co)inedll ,l'ltillihrtl tiS [iutllldl , (, '

clrre l llonery.

BlItt III.Ller thle (Q, :el Rie;,l l nt\ :i dl inili l tiall, A. 1). I 56, a
.rptmlt \%cilh l;' );;hl :I, ahlt, ll. ! i t l ;tillaniilty Of alloy was

1' confi-

B 0o0 K laws; the imposing of new and burdensome taxes;

11.

and the attempting to subdue the kingdom, and
1559' to oppress its liberties, by open and repeated a&t,

of violence, are enumerated at great length, and
placed in the strongest liglit. On all these ac-
counts, the Congregation maintained, that the
nobles, as counsellors by bii th-right to their Mo-
narchs, and the guardians and defenders of the
conflitution, had a right to interpose; and there-
fore, by virtue of this right, in the name of the
King and Qjeen, and with many exprefions of
duty and fubmifiion towards them, they deprived
the Q(een Regent of her office, and ordained,
that, for the future, no obedience flould be
given to her comimands h

VIOLENT as this ation may appear, there wanted

not principles in the constitution, nor precedents
in the history of Scotland, to jutify and to au-
thorife it. Under the ariftocratical form of
government eftablifled among the Scots, the
power of the Sovereign was extremely limited.
The more considerable nobles were themselves

confidecrably ;]icrcIiftccl, produccd 441. ciiurrclnt money. 1l
1 529, : po n1111! cilt Oi fil\ ,'rI , \hc cninlcd, proill 'Ccd 91. 2 s.;
but iln ij55, it produced i 1. current money. Riddclm;in.
I'rrxfitr. ad Aindcrf. Dliploni:it. Scotia, p. 8o, Si, from wfi'dl
it ;il))i':irs, hi c ip i ,

thl iiith ilccoltel ts often
rcpclti't cdIl, \.is ot ;iligc lJlcr dcflituite c of iLliiul;ition.

,
M. C:1iflcl1n:1, :ilicr conideliniig Ilie (d;1igcrous co nllcils

ofillh I 'riiiccs. o l' orr,;,ii, with r.'jirl I l elh affll.irs of Scol-
lndid., ;Ilckoilwl\lllfrTc;:, \i s il l (':ildoir', 111alt' t Scols
d(icl:irctl ; war ;Ii:inlll Ith ()ICCIcn Rcgecnt, rI;llcr from a dclciLe
of vindlictlniii th'i civil libcrtie', thlli flroli ; y mlottive o'
rcigiun. Mcmii. 46.

petty

petty princes, poffiffing extensive jurifdicions, B ol0 K
alnoft independent of the crown, and followed -.
by numerous vasSals, who, in every contet, 's,9
elpoufed their chieftain's quarrel, in opposition
to the King. Hence the many instances of the
impotence of regal authority, which are to be
found in the Scottiflh history. In every age, the
nobles not only claimed, but exerciied the right
of controlling the King. Jealous of their privi-
leges, and ever ready to take the field in defence
of them, every error in adminitration was ob-
served, every encroachment upon the rights of
the aristocracy excited indignation, and no prince
ever ventured to transgress the boundaries which
the law had prescribed to prerogative, without
meeting resistance, which ihook, or overturned
his throne. Encouraged by the spirit of the con-
ftitution, and countenanced by the example of
their ancestors, the Lords of the Congregation
thought it incumbent on them, at this juncture,
to inquire into the mal-administration of the
Queen Regent, and to preserve their country
from being enslaved or conquered, by depriving
her of the power to execute such a pernicious
scheme.

THE aft of deprivation, and a letter from the

Lords of the Congregation to tle Quieen Regent,
are still extantc. They difeover nor only that
masculine and undaunted fpiirit, natural to men
c;lpable of so bold a resolution; but are remark-
able for a precision, and vigour of expreflion,
which we are furpriled to meet with in an age ol

Knox, 184..

P 3 unpo-

b o0o K unpolifhed. The fame observation may be made
i- with refpeEt to the other public papers of that pe-
'5ss9 riod. The ignorance or bad tafle of an age may

render the compositions of authors by proefflion
obscure, or affeated, or absurd; but the language
of business is nearly the fame at all times; and
whlerever men think clearly, and are thoroughly
intererted, they express themrnelves with perfpi-
cuity and force,

# BOOK III.

T i E
H I S T O R Y

F
SCOTLA N D.

B 0 0 K II1.

H E Lords of the Congregation found, B o o K
that tlhir zeal had engaged them in ; .il .,

undertaking, which it was beyond their utmoit o i.9.
ability to accompliffl. The French garrison, e-cgiiin,
defplfing their nuimerous but irregular forces, ifficualtis.
refused to surrender Leith, and to d(p.irt out of
the kingdoml; nor were they sufficiently lkilful in
the art of war to reduce the place by force, or
pofltfcdl of tlc artillery, or magazines, requisite
for that purpose; and their followers, though of
undaunted courage, yet being accuf-omed to de-
cide every quarrel by a battle, were strangers to
the fatigues of a long campaign, and soon be-
came impatient of the severe and constant duty
which a liege requires. The Queen's emifllries,
who found it easy to mingle with their country-
men, were at the utmost pains to heighten their
ldiiguti, which discovered itself at first in murmurs

P 4 and

B °0 K and complaints, but on occasion of the want of

Ill.
»--.-- money for paying the army, broke out into open

5i9' mutiny. The most eminent leaders were hardly

secure from the unbridled insolence of the fol-
diers; while some of inferior rank, interposing
too rafily in order to quell them, fell victims to
their rage. Discord, consternation, and per-
plexity, reigned in the camp of the Reformers.
The Duke, their General, funk, with his uiual
timidity, under the terror of approaching danger,
and discovered manifest symptoms of repentance
for his rashness, in espousing such a desperate
cause.

Applv to IN this situation of their affairs, the Congrega-
Eliiahbth
f- dfift, tion had recourse to Elizabeth, from whole pro-
ance. teEtion they could derive their only reasonable

hope of success. Some of their more sagacious
leaders, having foreseen that the party might pro-
bably be involved in great difliculties, had early
endeavoured to secure a reoburce in any such exi-
gency, by entering into a secret correspondence
with the court of England'.. Elizabeth, aware of
the dangerous designs which the Princes of Lor-
rain had formed against her Crown, was early
sensible of how much importance it would be,
not only to check the progress of the French in
Scotland, but to extend her own influence in that
kingdoml"; and perceiving how eflfetually the
present infurretions would contribute to retard or
defeat the schemes formed against England, fie
listened with pleasure to thcfc applications of the

Burn. IIif. Rcf. 3. Append. 278. Keith, Append. 2r.
b Sec Append. No. i.

7 malecon-

mlalecontents, and gave them private aflllrnccs 0 (° K
of powerful support to their cause. Randolph!, .
an agent extremely proper for conducting any 9
dark intrigue, was diifatched into Scotland, and
residing secretly among the Lords of the Conre-
gation, observed and quickened tleir- 'notionls.
Moncy seemed to be the only thintg they wanted
at that time ; and it was owing to a lealonable re-
mittance from England'l , that the Scottilh nobles
had been enabled to take the field, and to ad-
vance towards Leith. But as Elizabeth was dif-
trustful of the Scots, and studious to prelfrve ap-
pearances withl France, her subsidies were be-
flowed at first with extreme frugality. The lib-
filtence of an army, and the expences of a siege,
soon exhausted this penurious tipply, to which
the Lords of the Congregation could make little
addition from their own funds ; and the ruin and
dispersion of the party must have instantly fol-
lowed.

IN order to prevent this, Cockburn of Ormifton sihe fend

was lent, with the utmost expedition, to the go- f., :ti,,
vernors of the town and castle of Berwick. As otfl"""ly
Bcrwick was, at that time, the town of greatest
importance on the Scottilh frontier, Sir Ralph
Sadlcr and Sir James Crofts, perlons of conlider-
able figure, were employed to command there,
and were entrusted with a discretionary power of
supplying the Scottinf malecontents, according to
the exigency of their affairs. From them Cock-

c Keith , Appcind. 29.
KCnox, 214. Kecilh, Append. 4l-1

burn

B o K bl.rn received four thousand crowns, but little to

In.

I_- . the advantage of his party. The Earl of Both-
,^'i·i' i well, by tile (Qeen's initigation, lay in wait for

ttd i n hiis return, dilperifd his followers, wounc.-d

him, and carried c'r the money.

TIHIS unexpeLtte. difappointnent proved fatal

to the party. In Ilere (clipair, some of the more
,ealous atrtptedpd to affailt Leith; but theFrench
beat thlemn back with disgrace, ieized their can-
non, andl purlfig them to the gates of I[din-
burgh, were oCi the point of entering along with
them. All the terror and confusion, which the
proFpcr or pill ageo of massacre can excite in a
place taken by florin, filled the city on this occa-
iion. The inhabitants fled from the enemy by the
oppofice gate; the forces of the Congregation
were irresolute and difinayed; and the Queen's
partisans in the town openly insulted both. At
lafc, a few of the nobles ventured to face the
enemy, who, after plundering some houses in the
suburbs, retired with their booty, and delivered
the city from this dreadful alarm.

A SECOND ikirmifl, which happened a few

days after, was no less unfortunate. The French
lent out a detachment to intercept a convoy of
provisions which was designed for L dEinburgh.
The Lords of tle Congogegation having intelli-
gence of tlis, marched in all hafle with a confi-
derable body of their troops, and falling upon
the enemy between Reflalrig and Leith, with
nmore gallantry than good condu(lt, were alilof:
frirounded by a Iecond party of French, who
ad(van.ced in order to support their own men. In

this

this situation, a retreat was the only thing which B 0 0 K
could five the Scots; but a retreat over marlhy -
ground, and in the face of an enemy superior in '559
number, could not long be conducted with order.
A fimall body of the enemy hung upon their rear, They retir.
uiTlfe and foot fell into the utilloft confufiton, and

l -

in conl

it was entirely owing to the over-caution of the no".
French, that any of the party escaped being cut
in pieces.

ON this second blow, the hopes and spirits of

the Congregation funk altogether. They did nor
think themtlelves secure even within tile walls of
,dclinburgh, but instantly determined to retire to
ibme place at a greater distance from the enemy.
In vain did the Prior of St. Andrew's, and a few
others, oppose this cowardly and ignominious
flight. The dread of the present danger prevailed
over both the sense of honour, and zeal for the
cause. At midnight they set out fi-om Edin- Novemb. 6.
burgh, in great confusion, and marched without
halting till they arrived at Stirlingr.

D)UlING this last infurreetion, the great body

of tle Scottish nobility joined the Congregation.
The Lords Seton and Borthwick were the only
perlons of rank who took arms for the Queen, and
all5fed her in defending Leith F. Bothwell openly
favoured her caulc, but resided at his own houl:e.
The .arl of Hluntly, conformable to the crafty
policy which distinguishes his charaLer, aminu ed
the leaders of the Congregation, whom he hadc
engaged to aflift, with many fair promires, but

Kciih, Appecnd. 21-45, f Kcith, Append. 31.

nevcr

B 0 0 K never joined them with a tingle man . The

Ill,
Cp _j Earl of Morton, a member of the Congrega_
1559. tion, fluctuated in a state of irrelblution, and

did not aa heartily for the common cause. Lord
Erskine, Governor of Edinburgh Castle, though
a Protestant, maintained a neutrality, which lie
deemed becoming the dignity of his office; and
having been intrusted by Parliament with the
command of the principal fortress in the king-
dom, he resolved that neither fation Ihould get
it into their hands.

Maitland A FEW days before the retreat of the Congre-
r v.,lls frop
the Queen gation, the Queen fufiered an irreparable lots
uwaer. by the defection of her principal Secretary, Wil-

liam Maitland of Lethington. Hils zeal for the
Reformed religion, together with his warm re-
monstrances againif the violent measures which
the Queen was carrying on, expoled him so much
to her resentment, and to that of her French
counsellors, that he, fufpefting his life to be in
danger, withdrew secretly fiom Leith, and fled to
the Lords of the Congregation h; and they, with
open arms, received a convert, whose abilities
added both strength and reputation to their caufc.
Maitland had early applied to public business ad-
mirable natural talents, improved by an acquaint-
ance with the liberal arts; and, at a time'of life,
when his countrymen of the fame quality were
following the pleasures of the chnce, or serving as
adventurers in the armies of France, he was ad-
mnitted into all the secrets of the cabinet, and put
c Keith, Appenld. 33. Knox, 222. h Knlox, 192.

lupon

upon a level with persons of the nmot conlftum- B ° ° K
mate experience in the management of affairs.
I-Ie p)ollcled, in an eminent degree, that intrepid 1559"'
isirir, which delights in pursuing bold designs,
and was no lecs matter of that political dexterity
which is neccefary for carrying them on with
lfuccefs. But these quali'ties vere deeply tinc-
tured with the neighbouring vices. His addrcfs
Ilmetimeis degencrated into cunning; his acute-
nels bordered upon cxccFs; his invention, over-
fertile, fuggelted to him, on some occasions,
chimerical l fLtems of policy, too refined for the
genius of his age or country ; and his enter-
prizincg i)irit engagecd himi in provjets vlaf and
fplcndid, but beyond his utmost power to exe-
cute. All the cotemporary writers, to what-
ever fa(cion they belong, mention him with an
admiration, which nothing could have excited
but the greatest fillcriority of penetration and
abilities.

THE precipitate retreat of the Congregation

increased to such a degree the terror and con-
furlon which had seized the party at 'Edlinburgh,
that, before the army reached Stirling, it dwindled
to an inconsiderable number. The Jc irit of' Knox,
however, still remained undaunted and ereC, and
having'mounted the pulpit, lie adldrfcned, to lhis
desponding hearers, an exhortation which won-
derfully animated and revived them. 'lhe heads
of this discourse are inferred in his hifnory ', and
afFord a striking exampll e of the boldnel s and.

I Kino, 19j.

frcedomn

o0 O K freedom of reproof affu.ned by the firlt Re.

Ill.
i-_-J flformers, as well as a specimen of his own skill

'"59 ill chufing the topics molt fitted to influence and

roule his audience.

The L.ords A MEETING of the leaders being called, to co(n-
eCTiOon"" fider what coil-lc they should hold, now that their
il:iz abe.] ownr resources were all exhausted, and their dc-

Ilrucll-ion appeared to be unavoidable, without so-
reign aid, they turned their eyes once more to
England, and relblved to implore the aiftalnce
of Elizabeth towards finishing an enterprie, in
which they had tb fatally experienced their ow;
weakness, and the strength of their advrefaries.
Maitland, as the most able negociator of the
party, was employed in this embassy. In his ab-
ience, and during the inactive season of the year,
it was agreed to dilfnifs their followers, worn out
by the fatigues of a campaign, which had so fir
exceeded the usual time of 1ervice. But, in or-
der to preserve the counties molt devoted to their
interest, the Prior of St. Andrew's, with part of
the leaders, retired into Fife. The Duke of
Chatelherault, with the reft, fixed his rcfidencc
at Hamilton. There was little need of Maitland's
address or eloquence to induce Elizabeth to tiike
his country under lher protection. She oblerved
the prevalence of the French counfiels, and the
progrclfs of their arms in Scotland, with great
concern; and as fle well forclaw the dangerous
tendency of their schemes in that kingdom, she
had already come to a rclblution with regard to
the part the heric'lf would act, if their powcr
there should grow fill Imore formidable.

IN

IN order to give the Queen and her Privy 0 o K.

Council a full and diftinst view of any important -.
matter which Inight come before them, it seems .'s:"'
:u have been the praaice of E lizabeth's minileLrs ,'l,: -..
to prepare memorials, in which they clearly stated i t:1 ti alii
the point under deliberation, laicd dowvn the tc
grounds of the conduic which they held to be
inof reasonable, and proposed a method for carry-
ing their plan into execution. Two papers of' this
!.ind, written by Sir William Cecil with his own
hand, and submitted by the Qjcen to the cnn.-
fideration of her Privy Council, still remalin :;
thev are entitled, " A fiort dift.:llion of the

weighty matter of Scotland," and do honour

to the induflry and penetration of that great MNi-.
nifter. The motives which determiined the (Qeen
to espouse so warmly the defence of the Congre-
gation, are represented with perfpict'.:v and force;
and the confcquences of futifFring ti F'rench to
eftablifli themselves in Scotland, are predicted
with great accuracy and dlifcernment.

HE lays it down as a principle, agreeable to

the laws both of God and of nature, tllhat every
society hath a right to defend itfclf, not only from
present dangers, but fiom such as may probably
ensue; to which he adds, that nature and reason
teach every Prince to defend hinmfclf by t; " Iaime
means which his adverfarles employ to dilrl's
him. Upon these grounds, 'I cliabliflies the
right of England to interpose in the affairs of

k Burn. vol. iii. Append. 283. Forbcs, i. 387, &C.
Keith, Append. 24.

Scotil ll d,

()1 o K Scotland, and to prevent the conquefc of that

ill.
------ kingdom, at which the French openly aimed.

I559- The French, he observes, are tle ancient and

implaclabcl enemies of England. -Hofilities had
fiibfifc(lc between the two nations for many centu-
ries. No treaty of peace, into which they entered,
had ever been cordial or sincere. No good efi'ct
was therefore to be expec&ed fi-o the peace lat]ly
agreed upon, which being extorted by prciBnl
necessity, would be negligently observed, and
broken on the slightest pretences. In a very short
time, France would recover its former opulence;
and though now drained of men and money by a
tedious and unsuccessful war, it would quickly be
in a condition for aCting, and the restless and
martial genius of the people would render aclion
neceEfary. The Princes of Lorrain, who at that
timle had the entire direction of French affairs,
were animated with the mofl virulent hatred
against the English nation. They openly called
in question the legitimacy of the Queen's birth,
and by advancing the title and pretensions of their
niece the Queen of Scotland, itudied to deprive
Ellizabeth of her Crown. With this view, they
had laboured to exclude tle Englifl fi-om the
treaty of Chateau en Cambrefis, and endeavoured
to conclude a fcparate peace with Spain. They
had persuaded Ilenry 1I. to perlmit his daughter-
in-law to aflumne the title and arms of Queen of

ningland and even since the conclusion of tlhe

peace, tlicy had Iolicited at Rome, and obtained
a bull, declaring Elizabeth's birth to be illegiti-
mate. Though the wisdom and moderation of

the

the Conflable Montmorency had, for tome time, B 0 0 K
checked their career, yet there restraints being ----
now relmoved by the death of Henry II. and the '5s9.
dlilgrace of his minister, tlhe utmost excefles of
violence were to be dreaded from their furious
anmbition, armed with sovereign power. Scotland
is the quarter whence they can attack England
vwith moos advantage. A war on the borders of
that country exposes France to no danger, but
one unsuccessful aclion there may hazard the
Crown, and overturn the government of England.
In political conduct, it is childish to wait till the
designs of an enemy be ripe for execution. The
Scottish nobles, after their utmol: efforts, have
been obliged to quit the field; and far fiomn ex-
pelling the invaders of their liberties, they be-
hold thle French power daily increasing, and muit
at last cease from fltruggling any longer in a con-
test lo unequal. The invading of England will
immediately follow the redution of the Scottifl
malecontents, by the abandoning of whom to the
mercy of the French, Elizabeth will open a way
for her enemies into the heart of her own king-
dom, and expose it to the calamities of war, and
the danger of conquefQ. Nothing therefore re-
mained but to meet the enemy while yet at a di-
tance fiom England, and by supporting the Con-
gregation with a powerful army, to render Scot-
land the theatre of the war, to crush tile clefgns
of the Princes of Lorrain in their infancy, and,
by such an early and unexlpeted effort, to expel
the FIrench out of Britain, before their power ihad
time to take root, and grow up to any formidable

VOL. 1. Q height.

r, o o K height. But as tle matter was of as much import-

ill.
L-v-. ance as any which could fall under the confidcra-

'j59. tion of an English Monarch, wisdom and mature

counsel were neceilary in the firt place, and after-.
wards vigour and expedition in conduct; the
danger was urgent, and, by losing a tingle mo-
rmenrt, might become unavoidable'.

TIHESE arguments produced their full effect

upon Elizabeth, who was jealous, in an extreme
degree, of every pretender to her Crown, and no
less anxious to preserve the tranquillity and happi-
ness of her subjects. From these motives flhe had
acted, in granting the Congregation an early sup-
ply of money; and from the fame principles fie
determined, in their present exigency, to afford
them more effecual aid. One of Maitland's at-
tendants was instantly dispatched into Scotland
with the strongest assurances of her protection,
and the Lords of the Congregation were desired to
fend commiftioners into England to conclude a
treaty, and to fettle the operations of the camn-
paign with the Duke of Norfollk .

Thc Qecen MEAN-WHIILE, the QuCeen Recent, fiom whom1
Djwagecr

n Wa,

I wlcilc no motion of the Congregation could long be

f'llml her
Frncil, concealed, dreaded the luccefs of this negotiation
grao,,lcm. with the court of lEngland, and forefiaw how little

the would be able to rcfift the united effort of the
two kingdoms. For this reason Ihe determined,
if pofrlble, to get the flart of 'llizabeth ; and by

I Tle rg iiiCntl ; v. 'h11ci the Scotls cuiloycJd, ill o(clcr . L

silt l I''.li/.:tl),;'ts's ;llllill:iltcc, ; Care r'Cd \ith l ?*Iret'.i lurcc, inll

t
p ]'ipr .,' MA illi:itl':. Scc LAX )cn(li', No. 11.

1'" K iLh, I1.[. R)yiUr, xv. p. 569,

venturing,

-Venturing, notwithstanding the inclemency of the B ° ° K
twinter season, to attack the malecontents in their -
present difper:dl and helpless situation, the hoped ,559'
to put an end to the war, before the arrival of
their English allies.

A CONSIDERAI'LE body of her French forces,

Vwho were augmentedl about this time, by the ar-
riva. of the Count de Martigues, with a thousand
vcteran foot, and fuae cavalry, were commandedc
to march to Stirling. laving there croifed the
Forth, they proceeded along the coast of Fife,
destroying and plundering, with excelrive out-
rage, the hioufes and lands of thole whomr they
leemed their enemies. Fife was the most po-
pulous and powerful county in the kingdom, and
mnoL decvoted to the Congregation, who had hi-
therto drawn fiom thence their molt considerable
fi.pplies, both of men and provisions; and there-
fore, besides puniflhing the difaffcdtion of the in-
habitants, by pillaging the .ountry, the French
prop)olcd to seize and fortify St. Andrew's, and
to leave in it a garrison fuf-licient to bridile the
mutiinous spirit of the province, and to keep pof-
feflion of a port situated on the main ocean ".

13u'i on this occasion, the Prior of St. An-

drew's, Lord Ruthven, Kirkaldy of Grange, and
a few of the moln active leaders of the Congrega-
tion, perfornmed, by their bravery and good con-
dutd, a service of the utlmofl importance to their
party. HIaving assembled fix hundred horle,
they infelRed the French with continual incur-
sions, beat up their quarters, intercepted their

n I Iinc s, 21, S&c.

0 2 convoys

E 0 0 K convoys of provisions, cut off their flraggling
k_-- pIarties, and io harassed them with perpetual

350' alarms, that they prevented them for more than

three wceks fiom advancingo.

A1 lall the Prior, with his feeble party, wa.,

conllrained to retire, and the French eft out from
Kirklaldy, and began to move along the coast to-
wards St. Andrew's. They had advanced but a
:i:nuir =. few miles, when, from an eminence, they descried

a owerful feet fle-cering its course up the Frith of
Florth. As they knew that the Marquis D'Elbeif
was, at that time, preparing to fail for Scotland
with a numerous army, they hastily concluded
that thee fihips belonged to him, and gave way
to the mofl: immoderate transports of joy, on the
propect of this long-expected succour. Their
great guns were already fired to welcome their
fiiends, and to spread the tidings and terror of
their arrival among their enemies, when a finall
boat friom the opposite coast landed, and blafled
their premature and short-lived triumph, by in-
forming them, that it was the fleet of England
which was in fight, intended for the aid of the
Congregation, and was loon to be followed by a
formidable land army r.

'rThe Enit: 'Flf Ti uc vouT' her whole rei gn-,Elizabeth was
flet arrives
to thiir cautious, but decisive; and by her promptitude
'.snillitlcc.

in executing her relflutions, joined to the delibe-
ration with which she formed them, her aldmini-
1tration l)ccamie rclmarkablecno less for its vigour,
than for its wildtom. No bloncer did fIhe (eter-
mine to allfrd her protcition to the Lords of tlie

"l h()., 20)2. P [lJ .
d .c.-3.

Co nt c

Congregation, than they experienced the acEivity, B 0o K
as well as the extent of her power. The fcafon ~--
of the year would not perinit her land army to '50'
t.;ke tle field ; but left the French should, in the
mean time, receive new reinforcements, fie in-
li.ntly ordered a f-rong squadron to crulil in the
Irith of Forth. She fccms, by her instructions
to Winter her Admiral, to hlve been defirons of
prclerving the appearances of friendfhlip towards
the French. But these were only appearances;
if any French fleet should attempt to land, he was
conmmianded to prevent it, by every a&t of hoflility
and violence. It was the fight of this fqluadron,
which occasioned at firfi so much joy among the
French, but which soon inspired them witrh such
terror, as saved Fife from the effects of their ven-
,eance. Apprehensive of being cut off from their
companions on the opposite ihore, they retreated
towards Stirling with the utinoft precipitation,
and, in a dreadful season, and through roads al-
nmoft impassable, arrived at Leith, harafled and
exhauftced with fatigue' .

Ti-E English fleet cast anchor in the road of

Ieith, and continuing in that station till the con-
clufion of peace, both prevented the garrison of
Leith from receiving succours of any kind, and
considerably facilitated the operations oftheirown
forces by land.

SOON after the arrival of the Englifli squadron, They con.

tlhe Commiflioners of the Congregation repaired ..ly wiih
to Berwick, and concluded with the Duke of .ngL."nd.
Norfolk, a treaty, tile bond of that union withl
i \cliti, A\pl cntl ix 45. 1Ityncs, 231. ' Knox, 203.

(. 3 Elizabeth,

B 0 0 I Elizabeth, which was of so great advantage to tle

.^--- cause. To give a check to the dangerous and
1560. rapid progrels of the French arms in Scotland,

was the professed design of the contra&ting partic:.
In order to this, the Scots engaged never to fut-
ser any closer union of their country with France;
and to defend themselves to the utternmoll againl:
all attempts of conqucft. Elizabeth, on her part,
promir'ed to employ in Scotland a powerful army,
for their afiftance, which the Scots undertook to
join with all their forces; no place in Scotland
was to remain in the hands of the Englifl ; what-
ever should be taken fiom the enemy was either
to be rafed, or kept by the Scots, at their choice;
if any invalion should be made upon England,
tlhe Scots were obliged to assist Elizabeth with
part of their forces; and to ai:ertain their faith-
ful observance of the treaty, they bound them-
fclves to deliver hostages to Elizabeth, before the
march of her army into Scotland; in conclusion,
the Scots made many protcflations of ol)e ience
and loyalty towards their own QCeenl, in every
thing not inconsistent with their rcligion, and t;e
liberties of their country '.

ThcEn i;nfl TiIl: Einglifl army, confifing of fix thoufluidil
fircg ,o foot, and two thousand horse, un(de the cointn.iil
ApIli. of l. ord Gray of WilCon, entered Scotland ciily

in the Slriing. The members of the Congrcga.l-
tion afieinmblcd f-.;; all parts of the kiigdom to
meet their new allies; and lhavi!lg joilcled ticiii
with great multit llcs of their foi!lov c'rs, they a:d-
vanced together towards Leith. The II rc -t

1 Kiiox, 217. 1 l;)llc,, '53, &c.

wVerc

were little able to keep the field against an enemy B O O K
so much superior in number. A strong body of -
troops, destined for their relief, had been scat- '560.
tered by a violent storm, and had either perished
on the coast of France, or with difficulty had re-
covered the ports of that kingdomt. But they
hoped to be able to defend Leith, till the Princes
of Lorrain should make good the magnificent
promises of afiftance, with which they daily en-
couraged them; or till scarcity of provisions
Ihould constrain the Englifi to retire into their
own country. In order to haflen this latter event,
they (lid not ncg!e&- the uful, though barbarous
precaution for diftreflin, an invading enemy, by
burning and laying walte all the adjacent coun-
try . The zeal, however, of the nation, fi-uftrated
their intentions; eager to contribute towards re-
moving their oppressors, the people produced
their hidden stores to support their friends; the
neighbouring counties supplied every thing necef-
fary, and far from wanting fubfifence, the Eng-
liih found, in their camp, all forts of provisions
at a cheaper rate than had for some time been
known in that part of the kingdom x.

ON the approach of the English army, the

Queen Regent retired into the castle of Edin-
burgh. Her health was now in a declining fate,
and her mind broken and depreftied by the mif-
fortunes of her admniiTration. To avoid the
danger and fatiguc of a ficge, (he committed
hcrfllf to the protsction of Lord lEfk lnc. This
noblemaln fill pr-clcrvcd his neutrality, and by

i' MCIi. dc Cillcl. 50o. " KInox, 225, X Knox,'ibiLl.

Q .;+ Ilis

B 0 0i K llis integrity, and love of his country, merited
_- ~-. equally the elleem of both p.lrties. I-e received

s60o' the Qiceln hierfclf with the iutlmof honour and re-

fpe&t, but tool care to admit no such retinue as
might endanger his command of the caflle ).
April 5. A FEW days after they arrived in Scotland, the

Fnglifh inveited Leith. The garrilfn, fihut up
,within tle town, was almofl half as numerous as
the army which fat down before it, and by an
obsPinate defence protracted the liege to a great
length. The circumstances of this liege, related
by contemporary hillorians, men without know-
ledge or experience in the art of war, are often
obscure and imperfect, and at this diflance of
time are not considerable enough to be enter-
taining.

AT Girif the French endeavoured to keep pof-

ieflion of the Hawk H1ill, a rising ground nor
April 5. far di.lant from the town, but were beat fiom it

with great slaughter, chiefly by the furious attack
of the Scottill cavalry. Within a few days, tile
French had their full revenge; having sallied
out with a itrong body, they entered thle EnLflifh
trenches, broke their troops, nailed part of their
cannon, and killed at lcaft double the number
they hlad loll in tile former Ikirmifil. Nor were
the Engli fl more fortunate in an attempt which
they made to take the place by aliault; they were
met witli equal coura-ge, and repuilfed with con-
May 7. idert:bc lots. Flroin tlie deltail of tlictl cilrctinl-

ilances by the writers of that age, it is caly to
)obfrvc tie difftrent cllaraldlrs of the French

' l ,ll).cs '. C 'llc'l. . l. i. 5'-'3. Kl ll, 122.

anld

and Englifi troops. 'The former, trained to war, B o0 K
under the active reigns of Francis . and HenryII.
defended themselves not only with the bravery,) s560
but witll the skill of veterans. The latter, who
had been more accustomed to peace, Rill pre-
served the intrepid and dcfperate valour peculiar
to the nation, but dilcovered few marks of mili-
tary genius, or of experience in the pracicc of
war. Every misfortune or dii appointment during
the siege mnllt be imputed to manifest errors in
conduEc. The filccefs of the besieged in their
sally was owing entirely to the security and negli-
gence of the lEnglifh : many of their officers were
abcLlnt; their soldiers had left their flations; and
the trenches wvere alinoft without a guardl. The
ladders, which had been provided for tle afTault,
wanted a great deal of the necessary length ; and
the troops employed in that fcrvice were ill sup-
ported. The trenches were opened, at first, in
an improper place; and as it was found expedient
ro change the ground, both time and labour
were loft. The weakness of their own Generals,
no less than the strength of the French garrioln,
rendered the progress of the Englinf wonder-
fully flow. The long continuance, however, of
the siege, and the loss of part of their magazines
by an accidental fire, reduced the French to ex-
treme dilfrefs for want of provisions, which the
1 rol)lct of relief made them bear with admirable
fortitude.

WHILE the hopes and courage of tle French
protraaced the liege lb far beyond expectation,

z IIayncs, 2)-1. 298. 305, &c.
9 the

B 0 O K the leaders of the Congregation were not idle.

.--j. By new aaociations and confederacies, they ia.

boured to unite their party more pcrfecily. By
publicly ratilYing thle treaty concluded at Bcr-
v.ick, they endeavoured to render the alliance
with England firm and indifroluble. Among the
fublfcriblers of tlefe papers, we find the Earl of
1-l,;ntly, and lume others, who hiad not hitherto
concurred with the Congregation in any of tlhir
mcafures '. Several of rhefe Lords, particularly
the Earl of Ilutmly, flill adhered to the Popifli
church ; but on tils occasion, neither their re-
ligious sentiments, nor their former cautious
maxims, were regarded; the torrent of national
efentiment and indignation againll; the French
hurried t.hem! on .

).oith n.-i TIHE - ceC Regent, the inflrument, rather
hle.rd;'of than the caul- of involving Scotland in those c;i-
D.v.wcr. lamities under which it groaned at that time,

died durin, the lieat of the siege. No Princes;
ever pofeittlled qualities more capable of render-
inJg her aclinilnitlation illufrious, or her people

i r'':lr.ii . 2vo .

ii. 287. !:m ;, 221. ITi:i ncs, 261. 2..

b Ti

q i .':

. .iJd ,' tris liu iir ' )'.('xr dil on 1 I) :IH'i,

f brt l. 'it il t 1

n / (|.1'; \''li

xl I 't'l ll jl;

'\h *'Il '

s : id >!l s li~ (i(Ll' l ,tic ,{ 'i

. -

furra(,iBit i cth il.l ii.

1 lO,11.: C::

h l,>ic

B: ,,;, /i .

r h:l.t l 1' thetc ,c -

liTion. l, l;ilcs tl Ii )r iC';I1IIllivc civiictli {l'r

ct i, :I ti'"n ;

1fi'mll .11 5t iric ly l 'li.l

. inclnilm l ! ,b' , llni'nel, I 'lil}. ol the " R'c-

(sI'IIInion, 'vol. iii. 2,l. ;iil pi {blilicd 1)' iy lin, A\pI p. 2P ;;;
tllim ifltsiruLills (i' l';l!i/,tl] lcli t o /R;tn lll o h [llher ;11;.211l ,:j)tl il1',--
yril;, :,11 ilt hlll)n , llhl.l 11).m;tll ' 7/c;lllir'; 1Pti[llsI ll/ iol;lIt t

l l',-' ;l: li.llliI(

v'xilh 1':n. ;l:iii! l, bc l c('l 't{tl' ill' i' '

i, : ;ll, til' li l,.crt v :l!il

inilc[,l cn cincc i,'ll hc k.inii^.lin . Keiilh, i 'i ];lslnily lihil-
fel' 1,'..li;a;1im 1 t}rpc'lpi i ld:m'c \\wLi l''l./.il)I 's

(iiieill'rs, 1.c-

f{ I ,ll,c n li:;!tl] ,<'lc ', l :

' :lill, :1 ny in l'ic. i .1l.t .

] ,.{ )'

lc',s
St;ilc J';ll't1., :6 1. 2(63. ''Cc A\1J>,ctl. No. l l.

h pp)y.

happy. Of mucll discernment, and no lets ad- B 0 0 o
drcfs; of great intrepidity, and equal prudltcnce;
gentle and humane, witl;out weaknl5i; zealou3 '5'°'
for her religion, without bi'otry ; a lover of
julice, without rigoiu. iOnC circunII ancc, how
ever, and that, too, the excess of a virtue, rather
than any vice, poisoned all theft great cqualitics,
and rendiered her- government untortunatlc, alnd
her name otlious. Devoted to the intlirif: of
France, her native country, and attached to the
Princes of Lorrain her brothers, with nmoft pas-
fionate fondnefls ; fle departed, in order to gra-
tify them, fi-rom every maxin which her own wit.
dom or humanity wvou! hl.ave 'approved. She out-
lived, in a great Ieafure, that reputation and
popularity which had fmloothed her way to the
higheflt tation in the kingdjom; and many ex-
amples of fatllchood, and fonme of severity, in the
latter part of her administration, totally alienated
from her the afIFcions of a people, who had
once placed in her an unbounded confidence.
But, even by her enemies, thcle unjuftiliable
actions were inmputed to the facility, not to tlhe
malignity of her nature ; and while they taxed
her brothers, and French counsellors, with ralh-
ncfs and cruelty, they slill allowed her the prail:
of prudence and of lenity . A few dlays before
her ldeatl), flhe defirced an interview with the Prior
of St. Andrew's, the Earl of Argyll, and other
chiefs of the Congregation. To them fie la-
mlented the fatal ill'ic of thofle violent councils,
which lhe had been obliged to follow ; and, witl

c ]uclhilan). 32.I.,

the

B 0 0 K the candour natural to a generous mind, con-

c- ~sessed the errors of her own administration, and
I560. begged forgiveness of those to whom they had

been hurtful; but, at the fame time, ihe warned
them, amidst their struggles for liberty, and the
flock of arms, not to lose fight of the loyaly
and lubjeEtion which was due to their sovereig"n '.
The remainder of her time the employed in re,
ligious meditations and exercises. She even in-
vited the attendance of Willox, one of the moss
eminent among the Reformed preachers, liflenc,,
to his infiructions with reverence and attentioni',
and prepared for the approach of death with a de-
cent fortitude.

Ffoi;vcs of NOTHING could now five the French troops,
the French
to Lon lue filut up in Leith, but the immediate conclusion
apeace. of a peace, or the arrival of a powerful army

fiom the continent. The Princes of Lorrain
amused their party in Scotland with continual ex-
pecations of the latter, and had thereby kept
alive their hopes and their courage. But at lafl,
the situation of France, rather than the terror of
the Engliih arms, or the remnonir-ances of the
Scottifl malecontents, confirained them, though
with relu(tance, to turn their thoughts towards
pacific councils. The Protestants in France were,
at that time, a party formidable by their number,
and more by the valour and enterprising genius
of their leaders. Francis II. had treated them
with extreme rigour, and discovered, by every
siep he took, a lettled resolution to extirpate their
religion, and to ruin those who profefled it. At

1 Lcfly, .c 1Rl us Gell. Scot. 222. Kinol , 228.

the

rie profpet of Lhis danger to themselves, and to B o o K
their caulC, the Protestants were alarmed, but --
not terrified. Animated with zeal, and inflamed 'S6O
wvith resentment, they not only prepared for their
own defence, but resolved, by iome bold action,
to anticipate the schemes of their enemies; and
as the Princes of Lorrain were deemed the au-
tlhors of all the King's violent mcafures, they
marked them out to be the first victims of their
indignation. Hence, and not from any disloyalty
to the King, proceeded the famous conspiracy of
lnboife ; and though the vigilance and good for- Mnircl 1.
tune of the Princes of Lorrain discovered and
dilappointed that design, it was easy to oblcrve
new florns gathering in every province of the
kingdom, and ready to burst: out with all the fury
and outrage of civil war. In this situation, the
ambition of the i-Ioufe of Lorrain was called off
from the thoughts of forcign conquests, to de-
fend the honour and dignity of the French crown,
and inltead of fending new reinforcements into
Scotland, it became necell;ry to withdraw the
veteran troops alreadly employed in that kintig-
dolll '.

IN order to condu&t an ali ir of lb much irm- Tlie ngo.

portance and delicacy, the Princes of Lorralin i t1 pur-
ladel choice of Monluc B!iflopl of Valence, and of' oruc
the Sieur de 1R;anldan. As both these, cfcpcially
the former, were reckoned inferior to no qerfolns
of that age in ;adllrefs and politicil refiinmienrt,
l:,lizabethl oppolfed to tiemt A llba;iltdors of equal
abilities Cecil lher Primie Miniller, a man per-

Lclly, 224.

haps

B o K haps of the greatest capacity who had ever held
^__- - that office; and Wotton Dean of Canterbury,

I60o. grown old in the art of negotiating under three

si cceflve Monarchs. The interests of tile French
and Elnglifh courts were soon adjufled by men of
so grear dexterity in business; and as France easily
coinlnted to withdraw thofi forces, which had
been the chief occasion of the war, the other
points in dispute, between that kingdomn and
England, were not matters of tedious, or of dif-
ficult difcufIlon.

'TirH grievances of the Congregation, and their

demands upon their own Sovereigns for redrets,
employed longer time, and requclird to be treated
with a more delicate hand. After so many open
attempts, carried on by command of the King and
Queen, in order to overturn the ancient conffi-
tution, and to suppress the religion which they
had embraced, the Scottilf nobles could not think
themelves secure, without fixing some new bar-
rier againfl the future encroachments of regal
power. ]But the legal fleps towards accomplish-
ing this were not so obvious. The French Am-
ball'tdors confidered the entering into any treaty
with liuljecs, and with rebels, as a condcfcenfion
unworthy the dignity of a Sovereign ; and their
lcruples on this head lmight have put an end to
the treaty, if the inipatiencce of both parties for
peace I1had not fuiggcfe'd an expedient, whicl
ltemcd to provide for the security of the fubjcci,
without deroitilg from the hIonour of the Princc.

AT'lcr of 'The Scottiflh nobles agreed, on this occasion, to
tic ,t'Y pals from the point of right and privilege, and to

accept

accept the relrefs of their grievances as a matter n o o K
of favour. Whatever additional security their .---.
anxiety for personal safety, or their zeal for public j56S'
liberty, prompted them to demand, was granted
in the name of Francis and Mary, as aEts of their
royal favour and indulgence. And les concenions
of this kind ihoultd fccm precarious, and liable to
be retracted by the lame power which had made
them, the French AmbafiTdor agreed to infect
them in the treaty with Elizabeth, and thereby to
bind the King and Quleen inviolably to obfcrve
them g.

IN relating this tranfation, contemporary hiflo-

rians have confounded the concefflons of Francis
and Mary to their Scottish fubjeEts, with the treaty
between France and England ; the latter, besides
the ratification of former treaties between the two
kingdoms, and stipulations with regard to the
time and manner of removing both armies out of
Scotland, contained an article, to which, as the
source of many important events, we shall often
have occasion to refer. The right of Elizabetl
to her crown is thereby acknowledged in the
lirongeft terms; and Francis and Mary solemnly
engage neither to assume the title, nor to bear
the arms of King and Queen of England in any
time to come'.

I IONOURI nLE as this article was for Elizabeth J'ul 6.

hcrfelf, the conditions ihe obtained for her allies
the Scots were no less advantageous to them.

r. lceilh, 134, &c.

' Ilbi. 134. .Rylncr,

xv. p. 581. 591, &c. Iliynei,
325-36+.

3 Monluc

B 00 K Monluc and Randan consented, in the nani ci
xI ^-_ 1 Francis and Mary, that the French forces in Scot.
i560. land should instantly be sent back into their ownl

country, and no foreign troops be hereafter intro.
duced into the kingdomn without the knowlc!ge
and content of Parliament; that the fortification(s
of Leith and Dunbar flould immediately be ralefd,
and no new fort be ereted without the permission
of Parliament; that a Parliament flhould be held
on the firit day of August, and that assembly be
deemed as valid, in all refpets,'as if it had been
called by the express colmlnandment of the King
and Queen; that, conformable to the ancient laws
and customs of the country, the King and Qicen
flhould not declare war, or conclude peace, with-
out the concurrence of Parliament; that, during
the Queen's absence, the adminiltration of govern-
ment should be vefled in a council of twelve per-
sons, to be chosen out of twenty-four named by
Parliament, seven of which council to be electcd
by the Queen, and five by the Parliament; that
hereafter, the King and Queen fliould not advance
foreigners to places of rull or dignity in the king-
dom, nor confer the offices of Treasurer or Comp)t-
roller of the Revenues upon any ecclcfiaflic; th;t
an ad: of oblivion, abolifling the guilt and me.
mory of all offences committed lince the 6th of
March one thousand five hundred and fifty-
eight, should be passed in the enfiing Parliament,
and be ratified by the King and Queen; that the
King and Queen Ihould not, under colour (f
punifling any violation of their authority du ringl
that period, feck to deprive any of their fubjcóts

of'

C.. the offices, benefices, or estates which they B 1 °
iiow held ; that the redress due to churchmnen, for _---
:lic injuries which they had sustained lduring the 1560.
lite infurretions, should be left entirely to the
cgnizance of Parliament. With regard to reli-
,ious controversies, the A.mbaff:idors declared that
tiey would not presume to decide, but permitted
the Parliament, at their firrf meeting, to examine
the points in difference, and to repreflnt their
sense of them to the King and QLeen'.

To such a memorable period did the Lords of T1;,v .rcs

the Congregation, by their courage and perle-
verance, condutc an encerprifc, which, at firfr,
promised a very difFerent iflue. From beginnings
extremely feeble, and even contemptible, the
party grew by degrees to great power ; and being
favoured by many fortunate incidents, baffled all
the efforts of their own Queen, aided by the forces
of a more conliderable kingdom. The sovereign
authority was, by this treaty, transferred wholly
into the hands of the Congregation ; that limited
prerogative, which the Crown hlad hitherto pol-
ilrfed, was almost entirely annihilated; and the
aritocratical power, which always predominated
in the Scottish governmient, became supreme and
incoiitrolable. By this treaty, too, the influence
of 'Irance, which had long been of much weight
in thr a fli rs ol Scotland, wa;s greatly (dimliniflied ;
tn(l not only were the i rclent cncroacllments of
lhat amtli tious ally reli rained, butr, by conlcderati n,;
with L.iiglandl,protc'ion was provided a aainft any
flture attempt from tlh e fame quarter. At the fam

1 Keith, ,f7, &c.
VOL, I. R time,

B 1 0 K tiLne, the controvei-icss in religion being left to the

--.-- consideration of Parliament, the Protestants might
'36o. reckon upon obtaining whatever decision was molt

favourable to the opinions which they professed.

A FEW days after the conclulion of the treaty,

both the French and English armies quitted Scot-
land.
A rii;A- THE eyes of every man in that kingdom were

turned towards the approaching Parliament. A
meeting, summoned in a manner so extraordinary,
at Ifich a criticaljunature, and to deliberate upon
matters of so much consequence, was expeEted
with the utmost anxiety.

A SCOTTISH Parliament, suitable to the aril-

tocratical genius of the government, was properl]
an afiTmbly of the nobles. It was composed of
Bifllops, Abbots, Barons, and a few commiflioners
of boroughs, who met all together in one houfc.
The Lesser Barons, though poffiefed of a right to
be prelent, either in person-, or by their reprc-
I'ntatives, seldom exercised it. The expence of
attending, according to the fafilion of the times,
with a numerous train of vassals and dependants;
the inattention of a martial age to the forms and
lectail of civil government; but above all, thle
exorbitant authority of the greater nobles, who
had (!rawn the whole power into their own hands,
made thlis privilcge of si little value, as to be
almoll negletl.d. It appears from the ancient
rolls, that clurinig times of t;raiiquillity, few corn-
lliltionclrs of borouitgs, and almolt: none of the
lciffer IBarons, appeared in Parliament. The or-
dintarv admiiilltration of government was aban-

doncd,

doned, without scruple orjealoufy, to the King B o o0
and to the Greater Barons. But in extraordinary '
conjunaures, when the struggle for liberty was 5
violent, and the spirit of opposition to the Crown
rose to an height, the BurgefTes and Lesser Ba-
rons were roused from their inactivity, and flood
forth to vindicate the rights of their country.
The turbulent reign of James III. affords ex-
amples in proof of this observation k. The pub-
lic indignation againfi the rafi designs of that
weak and ill-advifed Prince, brought into Par-
liament, betides the greater nobles and prelates,
a considerable number of the Lesser Barons.

THE fame causes occasioned the unusual con-

fluence of all orders of men to the Parliament,
which met on the firfi of August. The uni-
versal pafion for liberty, civil and religious,
which had seized the nation, suffered few per-
sons to remain unconcerned fpeftators of an as-
fembly, whose acs were likely to prove decisive
with refpea to both. From all corners of the
kingdom men flocked in, eager and determined
to aid, with their voices in the senate, the fame
cause, which they had defended with their swords
in the field. Besides a full convention of Peers,
Temporal and Spiritual, there appeared the re-
presentatives of almost all the boroughs, and
above an hundred Barons, who, though of the
lesser order, were gentlemen of the firfi rank and
fortune in the nation'.

TIIE Parliament was ready to enter on business
with the utmolt zeal, when a difficulty was started

k K ith, 147. I Ibid. 146.

R 2 con-

B o0 K concerning the lawfulness of the meeting. No

_-- Commissioner appeared in the name of the King
1560" and Queen, and no signification of their conlent

and approbation was yet received. These werc
deemed, by many, essential to the very bcing of
a Parliament. But, in opposition to this fen-
timent, the express words of the treaty of Edin-
burgh were urged, by which this aftemibly was
declared to be as valid, in all relpeds, as if it had
been called and appointed by the express com-
mand of the King and Queen. As the adherents
of the Congregation greatly outnumbered their
adversaries, the latter opinion prevailed. Their
boldcft leaders, and tholfe of most approved zeal,
were chofcn to be Lords of the Articles, wlho
formed a committee of ancient use, and of great
importance in the Scottilh Parliament '. The de-
liberations of the Lords of the Articles were
carried on with the mnoft unanimous and active
zeal. Thle aLt of oblivion, the nomination of
twenty-four persons, out of whom the council, in-
truled with supreme authority, was to be elected;
anc every other thing prescribed by the late
treaty, or which seemed necessary to render it es-

is proceed- fetual, passed without cdifpute or delay. The
, .s INith

t, re- article of religion employed longer time, and was
'' l"ul , attended with greatcr difficulty. It was brought

into Parliament by a petition from those who had

1'" IFrom ;1 origin'll IIttcr of TI;lnilton, Archhilflop Lo

Sl. Andrew's,, il ;Ip'rs, thait the LorJd., of Articles were

hliolnl ill tli milelinI r ;ia'cr\wiC l s ;llplUintcd by an Aci (1o
I'.trla; mcnc t' 1633. KIith, p. 4h7. Srottil\'oo(l icems to
c:onlidtlc this to.have bccn lcthe cu i
c lll i .lo cc. Ilili. 149.

adopted

adopted the principles of the Reformation. Many B 1 0 K
dlocrines of the Popifhl church were a contra-
tliticn to reason, and a disgrace to religion; its l56"'
discipline had become corrupt and opprefflvc;
and its revenues were both exorbitant and ill-.
applied. Against all there, the Proteflants re-
montr-ated with the utmost alperity of ftylc,
which indignation at their ablslrdity, or exne-
ritnce of their pernicious tendency, could inipire;
and encouraged, by the number as well as zeal
of their friends, to improve such a favourable
junlture, they aimed the blow at the whole fabric
of Popery ; and besought the Parliament to in-
tcrpofe its authority for reEtifying these multi-
plied abules".

SEVERAL prelates, zealoutny attached to the an-

cient fuperflition, were present in this Parliament.
But during these vigorous proceedings of the Pro-
teflants. they flood confounded, and at gaze;
and persevered in a silence which was fatal to their
cause. They deemed it impoflible to refife or
divert that torrent of religious zeal, which was
lill in its full irrength; they dreaded that their
op)pOsition would irritate their adversaries, and
(xcite themn to new a&s of violence; they hoped
that the King and Quieen would soon be at leisure
to put a flop to the career of their insolent sub-
jccs, and that, after the rage and havoc of the
present Itorm, the former tranquillity and order
would be reltored to the church and klingdom.
lThey were willing, perhaps, to ficrifice the doc-
trinc, and even the power of the church, in order

,, 1'v,, 23 7.

R 3 to

B 0 0 K to ensure the safety of their own persons, and to

111.

_- _-^ preserve the possession of those revenues which
J560. were frill in their hands. From whatever motives

they atted, their silence, which was imputed to
the confciouflnefs of a bad cause, afforded matter
of great triumph to the Proteflants, and encou-
raged them to proceed with more boldness and
alacrity °.

THE Parliament did not think it enough to con-

demn those dotrines mentioned in the petition of
the PRotestants; they, moreover, gave the fanc-
tion of their approbation to a Confession of Faith
presented to them by the Reformed teachersP,
and composed, as might be expected from such a
performance at that juncture, on purpose to ex-
pose the absurd tenets and practices of the Romish
church. By another aat, the jurifdiftion of the
ecclesiastical courts was abolished, and the causes,
.which formerly came under their cognizance,
were transferred to the decision of civil judges q
By a third flatute, the exercise of religious
wvorfnip, according to the rites of the Romish
church, was prohibited. The manner in which
tlie Parliament enforced the observation of this
law dilcovers the zeal of that afTembly; the firif
tranfgrlefron fubjeted the offender to the for-
feiture of his goods, and to a corporal punifi-
incnt, at the discretion of the judge; banish-
ment was tlhe penalty of a second violation of
tile law and a third aa of disobedience was de-
clared to be capital . Such firangers were men,
at that time, to the spirit of toleration, and to the

lKuox, 253. P ld. ibid. '1 Kciib, 152. ' Knox, 254.

laws

laws of humanity; and with such indecent haate B o00 K
did the very persons, who had just escaped the ri-
gour of ecclesiastical tyranny, proceed to imitate ;'
tliofe examples of severity, of which they them-
f-lves had so justly complained.

T'isE vigorous zeal of tile Parliament overturn- Wnih re.aid

ec1, in a few days, the ancient system of religion, '"''".7
which had been eftablifhled so many ages. In re- ,l=th
forming the do&trine and discipline of the church,
the nobles kept pace with the ardour and expeaa-
tions even of Knox himself. But their proceed-
ingjs, with reflpe to thele, were not more ripid
and impetuous than they.were flow ant dilatory,
when they entered on the consideration of eccle-
fiaftical revenues. Among the lay members, lonb
were already enriched with the fpoilsofthe church,
and others devoured in expc5tation the wealthy
benefices which still remained untouched. The al-
teration in religion had afforded many of the dig-
nified ecclesiastics thelmfelves an opportunity of
gratifying their avarice or ambition. The demo-
lition of the monasterics having set the Monks at
liberty from their confinement, they instantly dif-
perfed all over the kingdom, and commonly be-
took themselves to tome secular employment.
The Abbot, if he had been so fortunate as to em-
brace the principles of the Reformation firom con-
viition, or so cunning as to espouse them out of
policy, seized the whole revenues of the fraternity,
and, except what he allowed for the subsistence of
a few superannuated Monks', applied them en-
tirely to his own use. The proposal made by the

, Keith) 496. Appendci. 190, 191.

R 4. .eformed

1B (0 K Reformed teachers, for applying thele revenues

towards the maintenance of MinifLers, the edu.
cation of youth, and the iupport of the poor, was
equally dreaded by all thefc orders of men. They
opposed it with the utmost warmth, and by their
nulnebrs and authority easily prevailed on the
Parliament to give no ear to fich a disagreeable
demand'. Zealous as the fitr: Reformers were,
and animated with a spirit superior to the low con-
fiderations of interest, they beheld thele early
Iy'rptoms of feli:ilhnefs and avarice among their
adlhrents with amazement and iorrow; and we
find Knox cxpreflTngr the utmost sensibility of that
contempt, vwith which they were treated by many
froml whom he expe)ted a more generous concern
for the success of religion, and the honour of its
Minilters

Thevalidity A DIFFICULTY hath been ftirted, with regard to
of this Par-
liament, a the ats of this Parliamnent, concerning icigion.
cdin quef l'his dificulty, which at such a diltancc of timne

is of no importance, was founded on the worls
of thle treaty of Edinburgh. 3ythat, the Par-
liamlent was permnittted to take into consideration
tile state of religion, and to signify their finti-
inents of it to thle King and c'Jen. But, instead
of prelenting their desires to their Sovercigns,
in the humble form of a supplication or addrclls,
tihe Plarliiament converted them into tl many a&cs;
which, although they never received the royal
aiTent, obtained, all over the kingdoim, the
weight and authority of laws. In compliance
with tlheir injunfions, the cLt ablilhed fyl(tli, o(

t ;CC A\piicld. No. IV. 1K l o^t, 239. 256.

re'ligioll

religion was every where overthrown, and that B OO K
recommended by the Reformers introduced in its -
place. The partiality and zeal of the people 1560.
overlooked or ifupplied any defect in the form of
there aRs of Parliament, and rendered the ob.
fcrvance of them more universal than ever had
eeccn yielded to the statutes of the most regular
or conrfitutional afrembly. By those proceedings
it mult, however, be confessed that the Parlia-
ment, or rather the nation, violated the last article
in the treaty of Edinburgh, and even exceeded
the powers which belong to fubjets. But when
once men have been accultomed to break through
the common boundaries of fubjetion, and their
minds are inflamed with the paflions which civil
war inspires, it is mere pedantry or ignorance to
incaCfure their conduct by those rules, which can
be applied only where government is in a tlate of
order and tranquillity. A nation, when obliged
to employ such extraordinary efforts in defence
of its liberties, avails itfclf of every thing which
can promote this great cnd ; and the necessity of
lie cafe, as well as the importance of the object,
uillify any departure fiomn the common and efta-
bliflied rules of the constitution.

IN consequence of the treaty of Edinburgh, as Amrbanr-

dolts riOr

well as by the ordinary forms of business, it be- y,,e',r,.
caime neceTfary to lay the proceedings of Parlia- )irnt:." t
ment before the King and Queen. For this pur-
pose, Sir James Sandllands of Calder Lord St.
John, was appointed to repair to the court of
Flrance. After holding a course so irregular, the
leaders of the Congregation had no reafbn to flat-

9 ter

B O) K rer themselves that Francis and Mary would ever

Iii.
... approve their conduEt, or confirm it by their

so60. royal assent. The reception of their Ambafador

was no other than they might have expeted. He
was treated by the King and Queen with the ut-
mofl coldness, and difiniffed without obtaining
the ratification of the Parliament's proceedings.
From the Princes of Lorrain, and their partisans,
he endured all the scorn and insult which it was
natural for them to pour upon the party he repre-
flnted '.
anr, . C:- THOUcGH the Earls of Morton, Glencairn, and

Maitland of Lethington, the Ambassadors of the
Parliament to Elizabeth their ProteEtrefs, met
with a very different reception; they were not
more successful in one part of the negotiation
intrusted to their care. The Scots, sensible of
the security which they derived from their union
with England, were desirous of rendering it in-
diflfluble. With this view, they empowered
these eminent leaders of their party to testify to
Elizabeth their gratitude for that seasonable and
efeci&ual aid which she had afforded them, andt
at the fame time to beseech her to render the
firicnd(lfip between the nations perpetual, by con-
descending to marry the Earl of Arran, who,
though a fubjeEt, was nearly allied to the royal
family of Scotland, and, after Mary, the un-
doubted heir to the Crown.

To the former part of this commiflion Eli-
zabeth listened with tle utlmofit frifati ion, and

Kny,, 2Si. Bnllh. ]27. State Paprs ptlbliflhcd lhy
Lord lIairdwickc, vol. i. tP. l5, &c.

CeCOLl-

encouraged the Scots, in any future exigency, to B 0o0 K
hope for the continuance of her good offices; --
with regard to the latter, the discovered those ,s0ho
sentiments to which she adhered throughout her
whole reign. Averse from marriage, as some
maintain through choice, but more probably out
of policy, that ambitious Princess would never
admit any partner to the throne; but delighted
with the entire and uncontrolled exercifeofpower,
lhe lfacrificed to the enjoyment of that, the hopes
of tranfinitting her Crown to her own pofteriry.
The marriage with the Earl of Arran could nor
be attended with any such extraordinary advan-
tage, as to Ihake this resolution; she declined it
therefore, but with many expressions of good-
will towards the Scottish nation, and of refpeR
for Arran himfelfy.

TOWARDS the conclusion of this year, diftin- The death

of Frano

guifhed by so many remarkable events, there ,s 1i.
happened one of great importance. On the fourth
of December died Francis II. a Prince of a
feeble constitution, and of a mean understanding.
As he did not leave any issue by the Queen, no
incident could have been more fortunate to those
who, during the late commotions in Scotland,
had taken part with the Congregation. Mary,
by the charms of her beauty, had acquired an
entire ascendant over her husband; and as flfe
transferred all her influence to her uncles the
Princes of Lorrain, Francis followed them im-
plicitly in whatever track they were pleated to
lead him. The power of France, under such

' Blun. 3. Append. 308. Keith, 154, &c.

direction,

B 0 1 K diretion, alarmed the Scottifl mnalecontents with

ill, -,j apprehensions of danger, no less formidable than
560o. well founded. The intefline disorders which raged

in France, and the seasonable interposition of Eng.
land in behalf of the Congregation, had hitherto
prevented the Princes of Lorrain from carryingr
their designs upon Scotland into execution. But
under tieir vigorous and decisive administration,
it was impofiible that the commotions in France
could be of long continuance, and many things
might fall in to divert Elizabeth's attention, for
the future, from the affirs of Scotland. In either
of there events, the Scots would frand exposed to
all the vengeance which the resentment of the
French court could inflit. The blow, however
long fufipended, was unavoidable, and must fall at
last with redoubled weight. From this profpeft
and expecation of danger, the Scots were deli-
vered by the death of Francis; the ancient con-
federacy of the two kingdoms had already been,
broken, and by this event the chief bond of
union which remained was dilfblved. Cathe-
rine of Medicis, who, during the minority of
C!arles IX. her fccond son, engrosscd the entire
direclion of the French councils, was far fro:n
any thoughts of vindicating the Scottifli Q(een's
authority. Catherine and Mary had been rivals
in power during the reign of Francis II. and had
contended for the government of that weak and
unexperienced Prince ; but as the charlms of the
wife easily triullphled over the authority of the
mother, Catlhriine could never forgive such a
diflpp)ointicnt ill ler favourite passion, and be-

icld.i

held now, with secret pleasure, the difficult and B 00 -
perplexing scene on which her daughter-in-law
was about to enter. Mary, overwhelmed with s6-
all the sorrow which so fad a reverse of fortune
could occasion; flighted by the Q(een-motherV;
and forsaken by the tribe of courtiers, who appear Mary re-
only in the funfline of prosperity, retired to the ourtof
Rheims, and there, in solitude, indulged her 'rancc.
grief, or hid her indignation. Even the Princes
of Lorrain were obliged to contraL their views;
to turn them from foreign to domestic objets;
and instead of forming vast pro.c&ts with regard
to Britain, they found it necelTary to think of
acquiring and eflablifling an interest with the
new adminiItration.

IT is impossible to describe the emotions of joy,

which, on all these accounts, the death of the
French Monarch excited among the Scots. They
regarded it as the only event which could give
firmness and stability to that system of religion andt
government, which was now introduced; and it
is nowonder cotemporary historians should ascribe
it to the immediate care of Providence, which,
by unrorefeen expedients, can fccure the peace and
happiness of kingdoms, in tholfe situations where
human prudence andt invention would utterly de-
lpair.

ABOUT this time, the Protclant church of Scot- rna ii,.

land began to affulic a regutlar form. Its prin- ptin,>,,II
ciples had obtained the f.intion of public autlio- vhr"h ,.-
rity, and tome fixed external policy became nc-
ceffary for the government and preservation of

z Hcnault, 340. Caflcn. 45[. . I(il,.X, 59.

tie

B 0 0 K the infant society. The model introduced by the

Reformers differed extremely from that which
G560. had been long eftablifled. The motives which

induced them to depart so far from the ancient
system, deserve to be explained.

THE licentious lives of the clergy, as has been

already observed, seem to have been among the
first things that excited any suspicion concerning
the truth of the docrines which they taught, and
routed that spirit of inquiry, which proved fatal
to the Popish system. As this disgust at the
vices of ecclesiastics was soon transferred to their
persons, and shifting from them, by no violent
transition, fettled at last upon the offices which
they enjoyed; the effects of the Reformation
would naturally have extended not only to the
cloctrine, but to the form of government in the
Popitl church; and the fame spirit which abo.
lilhed the former, would have overturned the lat-
ter. But in the arrangements which took place
in the different kingdoms and states of Europe
in consequence of the Reformation, we may ob-
serve something similar to what happened upon
the first cftablilhment of Christianity in the Ro-
man Empire. In both periods, the form of eccle-
fiaftical policy was modelled, in tome reafure,
upon that of the civil government. When the
Chriltianchurch was patrcnifed and established by
the slate, the jurifdition of the various orders of
ecclefialtics, difiinguifhecl by the names of Pa.
triarchs, Archbifiops, and Bilhops, was made
to correspond with the various divisions of the
Empire; and the ecclesiastic of chief eminence

4 in

in each of there possessed authority, more or less B 0o0 o;
extensive in proportion to that of the civil ma- __
giltrate who presided over the fame diftriEt. i6-
When the Reformation took place, the Epifco-
pal form of government, with its various ranks
and degrees of subordination, appearing to be
most confifent with the genius of Monarchy, it
was continued, with a few limitations, in several
provinces of Germany, in England, and in the
northern kingdoms. But in Switzerland, and
omne parts of the Low Countries, where the po-
pular form of government allowed more full
scope to the innovating genius of the Reforma-
tion, all pre-eminence of order in the church was
dcftroyed, and an equality efltblifhed more suit-
able to the spirit of republican policy. As the
model of Episcopal government was copied from
that of the Chriitian church as eftablinfed in the
Roman Empire, the situation of the primitive
church, prior to its establishment by civil autho-
rity, seems to have foggested the idea, and fur-
nifhed the model of the latter system, which ha;
since been denominated Presby)terian. The firit
Christians, oppressed by continual persecutions,
and obliged to hold their religious assemblies by
fealth, and in corners, were contented with a
form of government extremely simple. The in.
fluence of religion concurred with the sense of
danger, in extinguishing among them the spirit
of ambition, and in preserving a parity of rank,
the effft of their sufferings, and the cause of
many of their virtues. Calvin, whose decisions
were received among many Protestants of that age

with

B 0 0 K with incredible submission, was the patron rn(]

I .

't .- restorer of this scheme of ecclesiastical policr,
'560. The church of Geneva, formed under his cy)

and by his direction, was deemed the most per-
se&t model of this government; and Knox, who,
during his residence in that city, had studied and
admired it, warmly recommended it to the imi-
tation of his countrymen.

AMONG the Scottifi nobility, some hated the

persons, and others coveted the wealth of the dig.
nified clergy; and by abolishing that order of
men, the former indulged their rcfentment, ani
the latter hoped to gratify their avarice. The
people, inflamed with the most violent aversion
of Popery, and approving of every scheme that
departed farthest from the praEtice of the Rormifi
church, were delighted with a system so admi-
rably suited to their predominant palion: while
the fiiends of civil liberty beheld, with pleafuire,
the Protestant clergy pulling down, with their
own hands, that fabric of ecclefiaflical power,
which their.predeceffors1 had reared with so much
art and industry; and flattered themselves, that
by lending their aid to strip churchmen of their
dignity and wealth, they might entirely deliver
the nation from their exorbitant and oppreflive jl-
rifdislion. The new mode of government ealily
made its way among men, thus prepared, by tlcii
various interests and paflions, for its reception.

BUT, on the first introducion of his fyftcm,

Knox did not deein it expedient to depart alto-
gether from the ancient form '. Inltead of Bi-

b Slpfwood, 15 R.

2ho1l,,

llhops, he proposed to establish ten or twelve Su- B o°° K
.F'rintrndants in different parts of the kingdom. t--
'Thele, as the name implies, were empowered to '5
;ilaycD& the life and do5trine of the other clergy.
They presided in the inferior judicatories of the
church, and performed fcvcral other parts of
the l'pifcopal function. Their jurifdiion, how-
ever, extended to sacred things only; they
claimed no feat in Parliament, and pretended
no right to the dignity or revenues of the former
3i f(iops.

THE number of inferior clergy, to whom the

care of parochial duty could be committed, was
llill extremely small; they had embraced the prin-
ciples of the Reformation at different times, and
from various motives; during the public commo-
tions, they were fcattcred, merely by chance,
over the different provinces of the kingdom;
and, in a few places only, were formed into re-
gular clafes or societies. The firfl general as- Deccm. 20.
flmbly of the church, which was held this year,
bears all the marks of an infant and unformed
lociety. The members were but few in number,
and of no considerable rank; no unifornm or con-
lilcnit rule reems to have been obfcrved in ,lt':t-
ing them. From a great part of the kingdom,
no reprefcntarives appeared. In the name of
loine entire counties, but one pcrfon was prelcnr;
while, in other places, a single town or church
sent several nmembers. A convention, so feeble
and irregular, could not pofllcs extcnfive autho-
rity ; and, conscious of their own\ weaknces,
the meimbers put an end to their debates, with-

Vol.. I. S out

B 0o0 K out venturing upon any decision of much iln..

i1.
L--J) portance'.

i'61. IN order to give greater firength and confil:e!;>.

to the Prelbyterian plan, Knox, with the aflitancc
of his brethren, composed the fir-st book of dil-
cipline, which contains the model or platform of
the intended policy' . They presented it to a
convention of estates, which was held in the bc-
jan. 1, ginning of this year. Whatever regulations were

proposed with regard to ecclesiastical discipline
and jurifdidion, would have easily obtained the
fanEtion of that assembly; but a design to recover
the patrimony of the church, which is there in-
finuated, met with a very different reception.

IN vain did the clergy display the advantages

which would accrue to the public, by a propl;
application of ecclesiastical revenues. In vain
did they propose,. by an impartial diffiribution ot
this fund, to promote true religion, to encour;age
learning, and to support the poor. In vain did
they even intermingle threatenings of the divine
dilpleafure againit the unjuit d(etainers of wlhai
-'as appropriated to a sacred use. The noblcs
held fall: the prey which they had seized; andl
bes'owing upon the proposal the name of a de-
:'.oat i;i aginatiol, they affected to confider it as a
pii-jcct altogether vilionary, and treated it with
Ihe u rImollti sCorn.

ic><.-:, 'l'iIrs ConvenCtion appointed the Prior of Sr.
ri i, o Andrew's to relair to tlohe Queen, and to invite

'l lher to return into her native country, and to as-

' ci:l)th, 49. d SpoLf. 152. K 1uox, 256.

funle

i',;ne the reins of government, which had beeln ° ° K
,oo long committed to other hands. Thougih -
onine of her fubjels dreaded her return, and 15"'
ut!iers foresaw dangerous consequences with which
ic milght be attended , the bulk of them desired
;r vwih so much ardour, that the invitation was
?ivcn with the greatest appearance of unanimity.
But the zeal of the Roman Catholics got the start
of the Prior in paying court to Mary; and Lefly,
afterwards Bishop of Ross, who was commiiffoned
hy tihenl, arrived before hiii at the place of her
rclidenceeL. Lefly endeavoured to infuse into the
Q()un's mind fuifpicions of her Protestant fuib-
jecls, andl to perftadle her to throw ierfelf en-
tilrly into the armns of thole who adhered to her
ovren religion. For this purpose, he infilled that
fie should lancl at Aberdeen ; and as the Pro-
telcant doctrines had made no considerable pro-
areses in that part of tile kingdom, he gave her
afflirance of being joined, in a few days, by
twenty thousand men ; and flactered her, that
with such an army, encouraged by her presence
a;il authority, flhe nmight easily overturn the Re-
f;imlUlcll church, before it was firmly fettled on its
tfoulndations.

BUT at this juntlure, the Princes of Lorrain

were not cdifpofud to lillnl to this extravagant and
dangerous propof.C l. Intent on defending them-
f'lvcs againfl Catlherine of Mcdicis, whole in-
lilio us policy was elplloyed in u ndcermii inng their
exorbitant power, they had no leisure to attend to

f Sce .\1pci1d. No.V. g Lefl), 227.

S 2 the

B o O K ihe affairs of Scotland, and wished their niece to
I ---- take pofletTion of her kingdom with as little diF,

i56'. turb:nce as possible. The French officers, too,

who had ierved in Scotland, dissuaded Mary firomn
all vilent Ineafures ; and, by reprefcnting thli
power and number of the Protestants to be irrc-
fii'iblc, determined her to court them by every
art and rather to employ the leading men of that
party as her rinitlers, than to provoke them, by
a fruitless opposition, to become her enemies .
Ilence proceeded the confidence and afiction
with which the Prior of St. Andrew's was received
by the Queen. His representation of the fl-ae oi
the kingdomn gained great credit; and Lelly be.
held, with regret, tie new channel in which couir
favour was likely to run.

ANOTHER Convention of Estates was held in

May. The arrival of an Ambafiador firom
France, seems to have been the occasion of thii.
meeting. lie was inftruced to solicit the Scotr.
to renew their ancient alliance with France, to
break their new confederacy with England, an;:
to rellore tile Popifl~ eccleliaftics to the polfeiiu;;:
of their revenues, and the exercise of their fuilc-
tions. It is no ealy matter to form- any conjectlrc
concelrninrn the intentions of the French court, in
l:aktinr, thefet extraordinary and ill-timed pro-
1ofitions. They were rejcedcd witl that fcorl
whicih lniililt well have been expel.ed friom tile
ti !n')Ie of the nation .

IN tllis Convention, the Proteflant clergy diit
I,,t obtain a more favourable audience than for-

11 Mciv. . '1 KInox, 269. 273.

nicrly,

i'crly, and their profpet of recovering the pa- B 0 K
trimony of the church still remained as ldifant '----.-
and uncertain as ever. But, with regard to an-
o.ier point, they found the zeal of the nobles in
nto degree abated. The book of dilecipline ieemied
to require that the monluments of Popery, which
flill remained in the kingdom, should be de-
iolifhced; and, though neither the lfailm pre-
tence of policy, nor the fime ungovernable rage
of the people, remained to jullify or cxculi this
barbarous havoc, tie Convention, confidering
every religious fablric as a relic of idolatry, palled
1enience upon them by an asS in form; and per-
I;;ns the molt remarkable for the aCtivity of
tracir zeal, were appointed to put it in execution.
Abbies, cathedrals, churches, libraries, records,
and even Ehe fcpulchres of the dead, perified
in one common ruin. The storm of popular in-
fTirrecion, tthough impetuous and irrefiliible, had
extended only to a few counties, and soon spent
its rage; but now a deliberate and universal ra-
pine completed the dlvaftation of every tling,
venerable and magnificent, which had eltlaped its
violence '

IN tl]e mean tilme, Mary was in no h1afle to re- Mary begin;

tullrn into Scotland. Accustomed o the elegance, tf''''I'"
fIplendour, and gaiety of a pillice court, flie (iill
londly lingclred in France, the scene of all these
enjoyments, and contemplated, with horror, the
l) rbarilfl of her own country, and the turbl)lle nce
,f her lfubjces, which prlenlitcd her with a very

qptf\wooI, ,153. 1 l i.. 17.1.

S 3 dill;erent

1 0 K ditfrent face of things. IThe impaticncC, :':,'.
.---....J ever, of her people, the persuasions of' hri- 11,-

56-' cles, but above all, the Iudiecd and mortifyi r,

neglect with which she was treated by the (2Qecn-
mothcr, forced her to think of beginning tis
disagreeable voyage m. But while sle was Fre-
paring for it, there were town between her in'
Elizabeth the feeds of that perlbnal jealouty and
discord, which embittered the life, and fhor-tncl
the days of the Scottifhl Queen.

ori in rs THEii. ratification of the late treaty of Edinburil-
he!n i,, .er was the immediate occasion of this fatal aniniofity;
hsl.a z the true causes of it lay much deeper. Almoll

every article in that treaty, had been executed by
both parties with a scrupulous exactness. The
fortifications of Leith were demolished, and the
armies of France and 1England withdrawn within
the appointed time. The grievances of the Scot-
tilh malecontents were redrelTed, and they had
obtained whatever they could demand for their
future security. With regard to all these, Mary
could have little reason to decline, or Elizabeth
to urge, the ratification of the treaty.

TriLr sixth article remained the only source of

contelt and difficulty. No Minister ever entcred
more deeply into the fclhmcis of his Sovereign,
or 1purfi' them with more dexterity and fulcccfs
than Cecil. In the condulltl of the negoci:ation
at lIdinburgh, the -olund understanding of tlhis
able politircian had proved greatly an overnlatch
for Nlonluc's rclinllcJits in intrigue, and had

m'" 1 IlantinC, Jibb, v(l. ii. qRz2.

artfully

.'rtfully induced the French Ambassadors, not B 0 lo K
only to acknowledge th,,t the Crowns of England --
and Ireland (lid of right belong to Elizabeth alone, 5-
but allo to promilc, that in all times to come,
?Mary should ablltin fron using the titles, or
bearing the arms of thole kingdoms.

THE ratification of this article vwould have

been of the miofl- fatal confctqence to Mary.
Tle Crown of iElngland was an objeLC worthy
of her ambition. IHer pretensions to it gave her
great dig,-ity and importance in the eyes of all
E.lrope. Y]3y many, her title was esteemed pre-
ferable to that of E1lizabeth. Among the Englili
tlChemfelves, the Roman Catholics, who formed,
ai that time, a numerous and active party, openly
espouscd this opinion ; and even the Proteflants,
who supported Elizabeth's throne, could not
deny tlie Queen of Scots to be her immediate
heir. A proper opportunity to avail herself of
all there advantages, could not, in the course of
tlhings, be far liflant, and many incidents might
fall in, to bring tlis opportunity nearer than was
explecedl. In rthclc circumlltances, Mary, by ra-
tifying the article in dilputc, would have loft that
rank which file had hitherto held among neigh-
bourilng Princes; tle zeal of her adherents niufl-
liave gradually cooled ; and fle might have re-
nouncedl , from that moment, all hopes of ever
weaiing the Englif h CrownI"

NON: of thcle beneficial consequences escapcd
the penetrating eye of Elizabtlh, who, for this

"I ;llync s, ;37;, &c.

S 4. rcafon,

B 00 K reason, had recourse to every thing by whic)h si,
-.-..- could hope either to sooth or fiighten the Scoitt:i

51('. Queen into a compliance witlh her demands ; an.l

if that Princess had been tb unadvifeid as to rat;,
the rafl concelions of her Amballsi:ors, Eiiz:-
beth, by that deed, would have acquired an ad-
vantage, which, under her managmlent, n-i,'l
have turned to great account. BIy Juch a renun;-
ciation, the queflion with regard to the right of
iuccelEion, would have been left altogether opl)
and undecided ; and, by means of that, r lizabet
might either have kept her- rival in perpetu;al
anxiety and dependlance, or, by the authority of
her Parliament, ite Ilight have broken in upon;
the order of lineal succession, and transferred t!ih
Crown to tome other descendant of the royal
blood. The formecr conduct flhe oblerved to-
wards James VI. whom, during his whole reign,
fihe held in perpetual fear and fubjeetion. Ti'l
latter, and more rigorous method of proceedinl,
would, in all probability, have been cmplo)ye
against Mary, whom, for many rcafons, flhe both
envied and hated.

NoIt was this llep beyond her power, unprece-

dented in the hiifory, or inconfiftcn t with tli:
conflitution of England. Though licceclion by
hereditary right be an idea lo natural antd ib po-
pular, that it has been eldablinfed in almost evcry
civilized nation, yet England affords many me-
morable inllfanccs of dcviations firom that rule.
The Ciown of that kingdom having once been
seizcd by the hand of a conlqueror, this invitt
t!e bold and entcrpriling in every age to imitate

such

ftlch an illustrious example of fortunate ambition. B O O K

H!r.

lFrom the time of William the Norman, the re- t_-
I;ular courts of dcfcent had flldom continued '5c'
tlhrolgll three fucccflive reigns. Tho'se Princes,
v'huole intrigues or valour opened to them a way
to tle throne, called in the authority of the great
council of the nation to confirm their duCbious
t i ls. I ence parlin.amntary and !hercditary ri;,;ht
lbeciame in .1ngland of equal consideration. 'That
,Ireat afrembly cl. imei and actually pofQ.il'dC a
p:)wer of altelring the olrder of rIegl t-lutccelinon l and
even lo late as Ilenry VI[I. an act of Parliaelnt
liad autllorifed that capricious Monarch to fettle
the order of filcceiflon at his pleasure. The Eng-
i:ih, jealous of their religious liberty, and averle
fI'om the dominion of lirangers, would have ea-
; crly adopted the paRlions of' their lovereinn, and
ili'iht have been easily induced to exclude the
Scottifn line from the right of succeeding to the
Crown. l'ile i- em to have bcen the views of
both tQueens, and thl'l- were the difficulties
which retarded r

the r:tisication of the treaty of
E".diniburgh.

BUT, if the fburces of their dlifcord were to be

traced no higher than this treaty, an inconfider-
a;ble alteration in the words of it might have
brou:ght the pre-. li t tluellion to an amicable iltue.
''Ihie illdefiniite and aniLigtuous explreilion which
Cecil had inlulte(l into the treaty, mright have
been changedn into one more limdited, but lmore
rci; fe and IMary, illllead of Ipronifirng to ab-
Ptin- (from helaring tlhe tiiltl of Queen of l.ngland
i1 all tilmes to colme, Ilight have engaged not to

a.nl'u lnc

Be o K aifuine that title, during the life of Elizabeth, o;i

II.
,._ _.o the lives of her lawful pofrerity".

j6i. SuchI an amendment, however, did not suit the

views of either Queen. Though Mary had been
obliged to suspend, for tome time, the profecu-
tion of her title to the English Crown, she had
not however relinquished it. She determined to
revive her claim on the firfl profped- of success,
and was unwilling to bind herielf, by a positive
engagemn-ent, not to take advantage of any such
fortunate occurrence. Nor would the alteration
have been more acceptable to Elizabeth, who,
by agreeing to it, would have tacitly recogniscd

o This expedient for termina:ting the cifclrence elwcec.i

Eli;abcth ;ld Ma;) was so obvious, that it could not f.l i ,:'
prelentinir i: !lel to the view of the Englilh AMiniiters. '" Theicr
hath ,beeln a: ini.tcr Iccretly tlholught of (ltys Cecil in ;a l],t;
to Th!il-,:it, ' , Jii v 14, 156: ), ), liell I tIr1e co(!i nli';:
tYn oi(, ;:'.:' I>::;ih ) 1 in.in never to be an aluthor thercof; ;!!';
that is, il an aiccC'rl nltighlt be made betwixt our Mitrti-, C.:ci
tJhc Scnotrill Q(ci't, tlliat thiis flionli by P;iriliaimcnt ill Sr
l.iad, &cc. irendcier iunto teie Q(uecn's Ma.jcfR alll mattelr (t'
cl.imi, ;andl ulnto tle heirs of lielr bodly; and ill conlilcier;til;
thercof, the Scottiih Qcicn'l iiltclrcl IlI)iil be ack'tio'
]edicdcl in d(!lhll i of hlcirs of ellc body of the Qicnn's iMa.i Iji.
¥'cll, God fend our Mileli-c .a iiif/i.ind, and by tilne :I I1:
tha;t we ma;y olope oitr pollcrity 1fi;1ll liave ia i;i!ciuinc 1','
cefTion. Ih'lii.s tinalter is too bi- lsor we:'k fflks, and t(,o ticr.)
for inlmple. ThcQeen'.s MiajeIlly kntiwetl of it." Il.irdI.
State J'ap). i. 174. Bi 'ii rega.rd to evcry point rlealinlu,
to tile fi:rcclion, llia;il)let was so je;llots, nland so apt to t;il.
ofn'ncc, tli:it hicir niofi confidential ilinilters dllurt not irgc
her Io a;dv;ance onle Ilep f.tiiLcr tlil;n Ilie hcrlfci chliofe t .
('ccil, incn( iolii ;n filli. I L'tlci oe ,bilit: the fiicccllloii i' lilt
Qcl(ein fllold 1nol mn1.r1 or lea:ve iilC illfi, adds, \itll his ifirl.
i.:iilt on: "''l'lis ngr hiath 1ilny plarl. ; luti, for m.y parl,
ltc iii no lki;li lLIt in jlaini lbing.' lliid. 178.

tlhc

t!ic right of her rival to ascend the throne after B 010 K
her decease. But neither tlie Scottish nor lnglifh -,
2QuCeen durst avow these secret fentimencrs of their 1561
hearts. Any open discovery of an inclination to
diftiur the tranquillity of England, or to wrest
the fccptre out of E.lizabeth's hands, might have
proved fatal to Mary. Any ofui.icion of a design
to alter the order of fucccefion, and to let aside
the claim of the Scottish( Queen, would have xe-
p:>-ild Elizaierlt to much anl dfccrvcd cen lfure,
and have railed up againtl her many and dan-
gerols enemies. Thfic, however carcefilly con-
ce(led or artfully difguified, were, in all proba-
bilitv, the real motives which determined lhe one
(Qeetn to !olicit, and the other to refuse the rati-
fication of the treaty in its original formi; while
neither hlad recourse to that explication of it,
whiich to an Iheart unwarped by political intereflC,
and sincerely dcfirous of union and concord,
wouIld have aippeared to obvious and natural.

BUr th!oughi confid-rations of ilntlereft il: oc-

cafioned this riitOi:, e bc)twle(el the ; riti ih Qleens,.
riva (Iltl of a;llt her kind conltrilbuted( to widen the
breach, ;and fte ia;le j<;lo ily iiicrc.il;e tlie violence
of their political haircd. liza. be rl, /irli all thofic
eXIlraordina;r qualities by wVlich li h cequalled or
furl'lila(ld uchl of her ftx as lhave nmeited the
greareit renown, dil'cvccl ered a llmiration of her
ow)n lr);iOI, to a dcLre'e which women of ordli
nary uIlldrfltanldills cithr Ido) not cntertain, or
prudently enlleavour to co0nceal. ler attention
to drcfs, her folicitudcl to display lier charmls, her
love of flattcry, were all excefJivc. Nor were

tliefc

B o 0o K thcfe weakncfes confined to that period of life
L--J-i when they are more pardonable. Even in very

'56' advanced years, the wisest woman of that, or

perhaps of any other age, wore the garb, and
affected the manners of a girl P. Though Eliza-
beth wa.s as much inferior to Mary in beauty
and gracefulness of person, as ffie excelled her in
political abilities and in the arts of government,
Ihe was weak enough to compare herself with the
Scottinf Queeng; and as it was impossible ile
could be altogether ignorant how much Mary
gained by the conmparilon, she envied and hated
her as a rival by whom she was ecliplfed. In
judging of the conduct of Princes, we are apt
to ascribe too much to political motives, and too
little to the passions which they feel in common
with the reft of mankind. In order to account
ior Elizabeth's present, as well as her fublequetnt
conduct towards Mary, we must not always con-
fider her as a Queen, we must sometimes regard
her merely as a woman.

ELIZABETH, thougIh no stranger to Mary's dif-

ficulties with relpet to the treaty, continued to
urge her, by repeated applications, to ratify it'.
Mary, under various pretenccs, still contrived to
gain time, and to elude the rcqueft. But wlile
the one Queen solicited with persevering impor-
tunity, and the other evaded with artful delay,
they both fludied an extreme politeness of behia-

P Johnfion T-Tifl. Rcr. B ait; n. 346, 347. Catrte, tol.iii. 6'i).
(':ir:i,>nc nl Royal aind Noble Attiri. Arih:le :Lt7;x.

'" ,'I9'.', s9 '. r Kc'iti ,, \ 7 16 r; &c.

violnl'

viour, and loaded each other with profel ons of B 0 0 K

I.

filt:clly love, with reciprocal declarations of un- -
changeable e(teen and amity. 156.

Ir was not long before Mary was convinced, EIzabeth

refu Tes Mary

,hat, among Princes, these expressions of friend- a .rfe-cou-
flip are commonly far dillant from the heart. In dua.
faillng f1rom France to Scotland, the course lies
along the English coast. In order to be safe fi-om
the insults of the Englihf fleet, or, in cafe of tem-
1cfluous weather, to fccure a retreat in the har-
boors of that kingdom, Mary sent M. D'Oyfel
ro demand of Elizabeth a fafe-co(nduict during

v'r voyage. This requef:, which decency alone
ol iige one Prince t(o prant to another, Elizabeth
rt 'lcCed, in ioch a manner, as gave rile to no aight
fillpicion of a design, either to obflrucit the pas-
sage, or to intercept the person of the Scottifil
Q1een l.

nIMARY, in a long conference with Throk-

il;orton, the E1nglili Amnbaffador in France, ex-
plained her fentidments concerning this unge-
nerous behaviour of his Mistress, in a tirain of
dignified cxpollulation, which conveys an idea
of her abilities, address, and spirit, as advan-
tageous as any traniaction in her reign. Mary
was, at that time, only in her eighteenth year;
and as Throkmorton's account of \'hat pasTed in
his interview with her, is addrctled direAly to
E.lizabeth , that dexterous Courtier, we may be
well an'iurd, did not cmibellill the diicourfe of

' Kicilt, I7I. C:tlrLdcn. S.ic Apuc'ndi.x, No. VI.
: C lb:tl.;, p. 3 1-.. Kc htli, xu, &c.

B o o K the Scottish Queen with any colouring too fa-

vourable.

Mary be5 WHATEVER refenentnt Mary might feel, it
gins her did not retard her departure from France. She

was accompanied to Calais, the place where she
embarked, in a manner suitable to her dignity,
as the Queen of two powerful kingdoms. Six
Princes of Lorrain her uncles, with many of the
most eminent among the French nobles, were in
her retinue. Catherine, who secretly rejoiced at
her departure, graced it with every circumstance
of magnificence and respect. After bidding
adieu to her mourning attendants, with a fad
heart, and eyes bathed in tears, Mary left that
kingdom, the short but only scene of her life in
which fortune smiled upon her. While the
French coast continued in fight, lhe intently
gazed upon it, and muting, in a thoughtful pof.
ture, on that height of fortune whence fle had
fallen, and presaging, perhaps, the disasters and
calamities which embittered the remainder of her
days, fie sighed often, and cried out, " Farewel

France ! Farewel beloved country, which I
fihall never more. behold I" Even when the

darkness of the night had hid the land from her
view, she would neither retire to the cabin, nor
tafie food, but commanding a couch to be placed
on the deck, she there waited the return of day
With the utmost impatience. Fortune ioothecl
her on this occasion the galley made-little way
during the night. In the morning, the coast of
France was itill within fight, and flhe continued
to feed her melancholy with the profpe6l; and

Jr as

as long as her eyes could difcinguinl it, to utter B or K.
the fame tender expressions of regret'". At last -
a brifl gale arose, by the favour of which for 's'"
some days, and afterwards under the cover of a
thick fog, Mary escaped the English fleet, which
lay in wait to intercept her"; and on the nine-
teenth of August, after an absence of near thirteen Arrives i;
years, landed safely at Leith in her native king- sC"tl4'"i4
dom.

MARY was received by her fubjeds with shouts
and acclamations of joy, and with every demon-
ilration of welcome and regard. But as her ar-
rival was unexpeced, and no suitable preparation
had been made for it, they could not, with all
their efforts, hide from her the poverty of tho
country, and were obliged to conduct her to the
palace of Holyrood-houle with little pomp. The
Queen, accustomed from her infancy to fplen.

l'r;antomle, 483. HIe lhimfelf was in the fame galley witb]

1ie Qeen.
x Goodal, vol. i. I75. Camden insinuates, rather than as-

finms, that it was the object of the Englilh fleet to intercept
Mary. This, however, seems to be doubtful. Elizabetb
pofitvely iaferts, that at the request of the King of Spain lie
h.ad fitted out a few ihips of slender force, in order to cleax
the narrow seas of pirates, which infested them; and ihe ap-
peals for the truth of this to Mary's own Mini£ters. App.
No. VI. p. 328. Cecil, inl a letter to Throkmorton, Aug.
26, 1561, informs him, that " the Qjeen's ihips, which were
upon the seas to cleanse them of pirates, saw her [i.e. Mary)
and saluted her galleys, and flaying her Ihips, examTined
them of pirates, and difiliflcd them gently. One Scottish
Ihip they detain as vehemently lhilpeecd of piracy." Hard.
State Papers, i. 176. Callelnau, who accompanied Mary in
this voyage, confirms the circumfiance of her galleys being
in light of the Eniglilh fleet. Mem. ap. Jcbb. xi. 455.

dour

B 0 K dour and magnificence, and fond of them, as ..1
..-. natural at her age, could not help oblervin) r!,

5'5' change in her situation, and seemed to be dlceiy'

affc'ted with it'.

Stiae of the NTrVER did any Prince ascend the thrlone :i
kin!:i,~Im dC
thJt time. juncture which called for more wifdiom in coI;' ;!,

or more cotrage and fteadinels in action. 'i.
rage of religious controvelfy was flill unab.:edi.
The memory of pans opprclmion exa;.lerated [ikc
Protestants; the finart of recent injuries rcndt'rti
the Papists dellprate; both were zealous, fiece,
and irr-econcilable. The absence of their Sou.-
reign had accustomed the notoles to indepri-li.
ence; and during the late commotions, they 11.!.!
acquired 1such an increase of wealth, by the i])uili
of the church, as threw great weight into t;it
scale of the aritocracy, which stood not in ncc.l
of any accellion of power. The kingdotm lI::i
long been under the government of Regrnt.,
v.vho exercised a dclegated jurilldtiion, atteli(c
wVi il little authlority, and which inlpired no r1-
vercntce. A irace of pure anarchy had prevai'c.i
for the two lail years, without a Regent, withoul
a ltuprecl)l council, witllout the power, or ev(i
tle form of a regular government L. A lilccr
tiols Ipiriit, tIunacquainted with fu bordlinlation,
and cil(laiing the rcftraints of law and jil(licc.
ihad f(iread among all ranks of meni. The hi
fluence oLi 'lance, the ancient ally of the k;ii;',
(doln, was withdrawn or d clpilld. ''he l:englilli.
of enemiels become colifederates, had grown ilnl

y Ul.ill.t .1° z Kcith, Append:i x 7

con:!-

,-,;.!!!dence with the nation, and had rgained an ° 0° Kc
,i:ellndant over all its councils. The Scottifhi -,
Mornarchs did not derive more lflendour or 156'
1,Owcr fiom the fiiendflip of the former, than
they had reason to dread injury and diminution
from the interposition of the latter. Every con-
fideration, whether of interest or of felf-prefer-
v.rion, obliged Elizabeth to depress the royal
authority in Scotland, and to create the Prince
Perpetual difFiculties, by fomenting the fiirit of
dissatisfaction among the people.

IN thispofl-ure were the aftairs of Scotland,whven

the administration fell into the hands of a young
Q(cen, not nineteen years of age, unacquainted
with the manners and laws of her country, a
firanger to her fubjecs, without experience, with-
out allies, and al!inofL without a fiiend.

ON the other hand, in Mary's situation we find

f!Mne circumfcances, which, though they did not
ialance thlei difadvan tages,, con rri butcd,howcvcr,
to alleviate thelm; and, with flkilful manarnment,
might lhave produced ,great efFc -ts. Her si .jJls,
unaccuftomlecl io long to the refidenceC of' their
I'rince, were not only dazzled by the novelty and
pl)cndour of the royal p)relelie, but infpiirled with
awe and reverence. Betides the places of' powcr
anld profit bestowed by tile favour of a ' illc (',
his protcct ion, his f;lu iliarity, andt even hi;s liiiils,
confer honour and win the 1hearts of men. From
;11 corners of the kingdom, the nobles crowded
to tellify their duty and affelion to tlhir- I;ve-
reign, and studied, by every arr, to wipe ou;. the
memory of past mifconclu:t, and to lay in a flock

VOL. I. T of

B °01 K of future merit. The anmuements and gaiety of

.----, hler court, which was filled with the molt accomi.
Jj61.' pliflhed of the French nobility, who had atten led

her, began to Joften and to polish the rude man.
ncrs of the nation. Mary herself pofflfeId many
of those qualifications which raise aFction and
procure cfLiem. The beauty and gracefulness us
her person drew universal admiration, the ele-
gance and politeness of her manners commianded
general relpJed. To all the charms of her own
ltx, she added many of the accomplilhmlnts of
the other. The prugrefs m e had made in all the
Arts and Sciences, which were then deemed
neceTTary or ornamental, was far beyond what is
coimmonly attained by Princes ; and all her otier
qualities were rendered more agreeable by a cour-
teous affability, which, without lessening the dig.
nity of a Prince, steals on the hearts of fubjecs
witl a bewitching insinuation.

FRoMI tlhele circumstances, notwithflanding the

threatening alpefl- of affairs at Mary's return into
Scotland, not\withllanding the clouds which ga-
thered on every liand, a political observer would
have predicted a very different ifile of her reign;
.andl whatcver luddeln gulis of fiaction he migil
have cx pcdled, lic would never have dreaded tl;c
dtlelrucstive violence of that fl-orm which followed.

Wiiii.-: all parties were contending who flould

dlilfover the molt dutiful attachment to the Qu(en,
the zealous and impatient fpiirit of the age broke
out in a remarka;ble inflancc. On the Sunday
after lher arrival, the QjCeen commandel(d mass to
be celebrated in the chapcl of lier palace. The

6 fi'll

sirS rtumour of this occasioncd a secret murmur- B o0 K
ing among the Protestants who attended the -
court; complaints and threatenings toon fol- 's6X
lowed; the lfrvants belonging to the chapel were
inliul;cd and abuled; and, if the Prior of St. An-
drew's had non seasonably interposed, the rioters
might have proceeded to the utmost excclles ,.

I1r is impo)nible, at this dillance of time, and

under circumstances so very different, to conceive
the violence of that zeal against Popery, which
tlhen poffTffed the nation. Every instance of con-
icfcenfion to the Papilts was deemed an at of
apoltacy, and the toleration of a single mals pro-
nounced to be more formidable to the nation than
the invasion of ten thousand armed men b. Un-
der the inluence of there opinions, many Pro-
teftants would have ventured to go dangerous
lengths; and, without attempting to convince
their Sovereign by argument, or to reclaim her
by indulgence, would have abruptly denied her
tile liberty of worflipping God in that manner
which alone fie thought acceptable to him. But
the Prior of Sr. Andrew's, and other leaders of
the party, not only restrained this iimpetuous Ipji-
rit; but, in spite of the murmurs of the people,
and the exclamations of the preachers, obtained
for the (2)een and her domeltics the undisturbed
exercise of the Catholic religion. Near an hun-
dred years after this period, when the violence of
religious animofities had begun to fublide, when
rime and the progress of learning had enlarged

lKnox, 28.. I'iayIcs, 372. b l1lox, 2S7.

T 2 the

1 o O K the views of the human mind, an Englifi Ilout!f
>-.,/--- of ComImons refused to indulge the wife of tlie:i

' Sovereign in the private use of the mass. Tei

Proteltant leaders deserve, on this occasion, tl!
praise both of wifldom and of moderation for con-
cduiC so diflirent. But, at the fame time, Wv'io-
ever refleCts upon the encroaching and sanguinary
fiJiri of Popery iii that age, will be far firo:n
treating the fears ard caution of the more zealous
Refor:ncrs as altogether imaginary and destitute
of any real foundation.

T.1-: leaders of the Protestants, however, b)

tliis prudent compliance with the prejudices of
their Sovereign, obtained from her a proclama-
tion highly favourable to their religion, which
Ag,' 25. was ifued fix days after her arrival in Scotland.

The Reformed docrine, though cftablifled over
all the kingdom by the Parliament, which met in
consequence of the treaty of pacification, had
never received the countenance or fanc-ion of
royal authority. In order to quiet the minds of
those who had embraced that ldoctine, and to
remove any drciad of moldllarion which they
mighit tenterta;in, Mary declare.d, that until fie
h1ouild take nlinl orders concerning religion, with
aluvice of Parliament, any a;t

l:, nt to alter or

lubvcrt thd relitioIn which lihe funtil univcrfally
ipra.'ili(' in the realim, lhould b dlcemed a ca-
;i ial Cril' cin . Next year, at second proclamation
to Ilic l.int: c ie-l was lubhlillicd'.
-S!1c tin-. Tni (.i'cn, conforma;tble to tie ti 'l.in which had

,,o(.bll,', bn co1nccrtLctl ill l'ranlcC, coummllittcd the admini-

lniinira- i li ti, ,; . * licl. 510.
'""'
{ flration

i-r.iion of affairs cntirely to Pirtefants. Tier ° °o K
, ):;ncil was filed with the Iol cmicn it Inrlons

ci..i.

;'tilhat party; not a finale Papip- was ad.'ittcd 'I'

0i::o a n d(1gree of co, fiJcn cc'. The Prior of
'r. Andrllcw's and lNIi anc of' Lcthinton fecinCe
to Iu;'.i ti'e tL Cfi' pla.cc in thie (QLcn's afi-ccion,
:and po f-f(i-l all the power and reputation of fa-
v' ul ite Miniicrs. J r choice could not have
fallen upon pcr(lons more acceptable to her people;
ndl, by their prudent advice, Mary condutul'd
Ilcri-! f' with so inuch moderation, and deference
to the fcntiiients of the nation, as could not f.,il
of gaining the alFcction of her fubjjcLs r, the
irminief foundation of a Prince's power, andc the
only genuine source of lis happiness and glory.

A cor. Dr.AL reconcilement with Elizabeth was "Atemfpto

g.ain Eitz.i.

another ol)je&- of glreat importance to Mary ; and bclh's ta-
t!houch flic tfeems to have had it much at heart, iln
the beginning of her adminiflration, to accomplifil
fuhll a desirable conjunlion, yet many events
occurred to widen, rather than to close the
breach. The lormnal offices of friendllhip, how-
ever, are feldolm neglccted among Princes, and
'.lizabcth, who had attempted so openly to ob-
firu l the Queen's voyage into Scotland, did
not fail, a few days after her arrival, to com-
mand Randollph to congratulate her safe return.
Mary, that flhe might be on equal terms with
her, fient Maitland to tlhe Engli si court, with
many ceremonious exprlfflons of regard for I:li-
zabeth '. Both the AmbalTadors were received

"It : 5.
l.lcfl, 23^. g Kcithlll, lSi, &c.

T 3 with

B o0 K with the utmost civility; and, on each fide, the

-,-_ professions of kincnefs, as they were made withl
1561w little sincerity, were lillened to with proportional

cred it.

BOTHI were intrufled, however, with formething

more than mere matter of ceremony. Ranlolph
urged Mary, with fresh importunity, to ratify tlic
treaty of Edinburgh. Maitland endeavoured to
amuse Elizabeth, by apologizing for the dilatory
conduc& of his Mistress with regard to that point.
The multiplicity of public affairs since her arrival
in Scotland, the importance of the question in
dispute, and the absence of many noblemen, with
whom flie was obliged in decency to consult, were
the pretences offered in excuse for her conduct;
the real causes of it were those which have
already been mentioned. But, in order to extri-
cate herself out of these difficulties, into which
the treaty of Edinburgh had led her, Mary wai
brought to yield a point, which f)ormerly llIh
feemeed determined never to give uip. Slhe ii-
firnucilt Mailand t to niy er willing Fs to (il-
claim any right to the crown olf 'nlr111nd, durilil'
tihe life of Ilizabeth, and the lives of her poltc..
rity; if; in failure of tlelfe, fiic were (declared
nt::t heir by ac of Parliament"

REASONABLE as this proposal might Iappear to,

M.tr-y, who thereby precluded herl ie f

li' o difi: rh-

ill,; Ellizalbclih's polllillon of the thllone, Inotliiil,'
could bce Illre inconfllent with EliZi;l)ethCI ill
ic'c[l, or mnore contraldii oriy) ro a pallion, wlicl;

1t O'jnul.kn, Cam den-,"': I''!.!.:j
',

I~'lC(lJ.

prcdlonilinated in the character of that Princess. B 0 0 K
,No.'withilanding all the great qualities which _--_.
threw l'-ch lutlre on her rcin, we imy obfcrvc, 56'
that fih was tintvulr.dl witih a jealoii(i of her right
t,) the Crown, which often betrayed her in to mcan
.lndl ungencrous al'iols. 'lThe pecui.la-ity of her
l;tit.ition heightened, no ldoutlr, and Increalkil,
but did not infule this pafiion. It defcclnld to
her fi-om H-enry VII. her grandfather, whon, in
;':veral features of his charac&er, file nearly re-
leiiblled. Like him, flie iLiffcred the title by
wlic lle held the Crown to remain ambiguous
aiud controverted, rather than fubrnit it to parlia-
nicntary discussion, or derive any addition to her
rig ht from such authority. Like him, she ob-
served every pretender to the succession, not only
with tlhat atcention which prudence prescribes;
but with that aversion which suspicion inspires.
The plreI'nt uncertainty with regard to the right
of lucce'ion, operated for Elizabeth's advantage,
both on her fubjecis and on her rivals. Among
the former, every lover of his country regarded
ler life as the great security of the national tran-
quillity; and chose rather to acknowledge a title
which was dubious, than to fcarch for one that
was unknown. The latter, while nothing was
decided, were held in dependence, and obliged
to court her. The manner in which fle received
tlis ill-timed proposal of the Scottish Queen, was
no other than might have been expeited. She
rejected it in a peremptory tone, with many ex.
preflions of a resolution never to permit a point
of lb much delicacy to be touched.

T 4 ABO UT

B 0 0 K ABOUT this time, the Queen made her pubiic
\--v-; entry into Edinburgh with great pomp. Nothing

156r. w
s..p5). was negleaed, which could express the duty and

aff'edion of the citizens towards their Sovereign.
But amidst there demonstrations of regard, the
genius and sentiments of the nation discovered
thenfelves, in a circumfrtance, which, though
inconsiderable, ought not to be overlooked. As
it was the mode of the times to exhibit many pa-
geants at every public solemnity, most of there,
on this occasion, were contrived to be reprelenta-
tions of the vengeance which the Almighty had
infli&ed upon idolaters . Even while they studied
to amuse and to flatter the Queen, her subjects
could not refiain from testifying their abhorrence
of that religion which lhe professed.

Rctrains To restore the regular administration ofjuftice,
the Iicence
ofthebor- and to reform the internal policy of the country,
derers. became the next obje&l of the Queen's care. The

laws enadced for preservation of public order, and
the security of private property, were nearly the
fame in Scotland as in every other civilized
country. But the nature of the Scottifi coilfi-
tution, the feebleness of regal authority, the
exorbitant power of the nobles, the violence of
faaion, and the fierce manners of the people, ren-
dered the execution of these laws feeble, irregular,
and partial. In the counties which border on
England, this defe& was most apparent; and the
consequences of it moif sensibly felt. The inha-
bitants, strangers to industry, averse from labour,

and

and unacquainted with the arts of peace, tub- ~ o o K
sifted chiefly by spoil and pillage, and, being I_ .,
confederated in septs or clans, committed thcfe 1561-
(xceffes not only with impunity, but even with
honour. During the unsettled state of the king-
dom from the death of James V. this dangerous
licence had grown to an unusual height; and the
inroads and rapine of those freebooters were be-
come no less intolerable to their own countrymen
than to the Englifl. To restrain and punish these
outrages, was an aSion equally popular in both
kingdoms. The Prior of St. Andrew's was the
perlon chosen for this important service, and ex-
traordinary powers, together with the title of the
Qtlecn's Lieutenant, were vested in him for this
ptlrpofe.

NOTHING can be more surprising to men ac-

customed to regular governrnent, than the pre-
parations made on this occasion. They were such
as might be expected in the rudest and most im-
perfect state of society. The fieeholders of eleven
several counties, with all their followers com-
pletely armed, were fummrnoned to aflift the Lieu-
tenant in the discharge of his office. l[.very thing
resembled a military expedition, rather than the
progress of a court ofjuftice k. The Prior exe.
cuted his conmiiflon with such vigour and pru-
dence, as acquired him a great increase of re-
putation and popularity among his countrymen.
Numbers of the banditti fufFired the punilhment
due to their crimes; and, by the impartial and

Keith, 198.

rigorous

B o o K rigorouiS aldiniFtraion of julice, order and tran-

L--^ (lquillity were restored to that part of the kingdo;.

T'n'. DURING the ablence of the Prior of St. An-
ari , C rew's, the leaders of the Popish faction seem to

ro, I - --et
ini.i.. h.r have taken Iome fIeps towards infnilnuating theml

selves into the Queen's favour and confidence'.
But the Ar;1-clibifh) of St. Andrew's, the mopl.
,rem arkablle perl n in the party for abilities and
political addrec!-r, was received witli little favour
at couri; ndl wsatever secret partiality the (Qijcecl
i-iigh!t Ihave towards thole who profeflcld the laihm
religi)ion ;iitli ;e!feTlf, 11ie cldicovered no inclin:1-
tioil, at that thlite, to take the ad llini ftration of
arTairs out of the hands to which the had alireadv
committed it.

Tn!.: cold receprtion of the Archbishop of Sr.

Andrew's was owing to his connealion with the
l-ou!e of Hailton; fromi which the Queen was
much alienated. The Duke of Guise and the Car-
dinal could never forgive the zeal with which the
Duke of Chatelherault, and his son the Earl of
Arran, had elfpoufed the cause of the Congrega.
tion. Princes jeldom view their fucceTfors witlhout
jealoutfy and dil-ruft. The Prior of St. Andrew's,
perhaps, dreadcd the )Duke as a rival in powcr.
All tlifcl causes concurred in infusing into the
(Qeen's mind an aversion for that family. The
Duke indulging his love of retirement, lived at ;
diflance from l

court, without taking pains to in-

sin;uate hinilelf into favour; and though the Earl
of Arran openly aCpiredl to marry the Queen, lie,

Kcnit i, 203.

by

lv a most unpardonable aft of imprudence, was B O K
the only nobleman of dlillinflion who opposeid ,--
Mary's enjoying the exercise of her religion ; and 'ljl,-
by rashly entering a public proteflation againfl: it,
entirely forfeited her favour '. At the falie rilme,
the fordid parsimony of his father obliged him
cither to hide himself in l;ume retirement, or to
appear in a manner unbecoming his dignity as
firlt IPrince of the blood, or his high ipr ietnions
as lulitor to the Qtieen". His love, inflamcdl by
elilappointinent, and his impatience exafl-eratcd
by neglc&, preyed gradually on his reason ; and,
after many extravagancies, broke out at lallf in
ungovernable frenzy.

TOWARDS the end of the year, a Convention Dec. =,,

of L.ftates was lield, chiefly on account of eccle-
fi.llical affairs. The aflembly of the church,
which fat at the fame time, presented a petition,
containing mnymay demands with respect to the fiup-
prefning of Popery, the encouraging the Protclt-
ant religion, and the providing for the main-
tenance of the clergy-. The lalt was a matter
of great importance, and the fleps taken to\ards
it deftrve to be traced.

'I'IHOUGH- the number of Prote(lant preachers A ,.w re-

Was now considerably increased, many llore were il-,.
fill wantred, in every corner of the kingdom. No '.''',,;
legal provision having been made for them, they lii,,,h.
had Ilitlerto drawn a sc.anty and I)precarious fubfiflt-
ence from the benevolence of tlheir people. To
lufler the Miniftcrs o` an e si tablilhed cthurch to con-

'" Kciit, 201. 204. Knoi,
- S. "Kcili, 196.

Kecilh, 210.

tinue

v o00 K tinue in tlis fateofindigence and dependence, w,si!;

.,,,... an indlcccncy equally repugnant to the principlc1
J56'' of rcliion, and to the maximls of iound polic;

and would chave iuf lrficld all tie imputations of
avarice with which the Ref'ormiation was thl.
lo:ded by?' its enemies. The revenues ofthePol,pil:
churcTh v. crc the only fun d which coulld be em-
ployed for th'eir relief; but during the three lall
years, the ,°'ate of these was greatly altered. A
great Imajority of Abbots Priors, and other hcald
of rclij0ious Ihoulis, had, cither fiom! a fenlc ri,;f

.luty, or from views of intcreli, renounced il;c

errors of Popery ; anld, not.vithfianding t!i,
chrn ;;i: in theilr ic:;rimerll s, they retained thlic
an!cie!lt revenues. lAimoft the whole order o;
BifLopV, and several oftlhe other d ignitaries, fii
,l(,aCredC to ti.e Ton lh l 'tlCirfliion : And thonil
debarred 1r"0o: ccWry i' ittiul funclion, continucld
to enjoy tl': tilempora!liiies of their benefices.
,Somec laync:;c!, cfpccially tlio:e who had lbccl
active in prl-;moiilig the Reforlmation, had, uniicr
various pretences, and amidfli the licence of civil
w;ars, got into their hands ilofl;efions whici ' ;be-
longcd to the cllurchl. Thus, before any part (c
the ancient ccclrfeiallical revenues coulld e a:p-
plied towards the nmaintenance of the l'rotctl:lii
initnifiers, many (lifi'crent inerejfs w'ere to be ;dl-
jufedI; many cl;imns to be examinedt ; and tinc
prejudlices ;and pallions of the tVO coint(enllJilj
parties re-quired tlie application of a delicate
hand. Aftetr much contention, tle following
plan was approveCd by a maority of voices, alin
aeqtui;c.ed in even by the Popifl clcrgy tliel-

fe1l,,'"3

jilvcs. An exact account of the value of eccle. BO O K

i11.

iji!lical benefices throughout the kingdom was L
appointed to be taken. The present incumbents, Is56
t) lwhlateve party they adhered, were allowed to
;ecip poleslion: Two-thirds of their whole re-
venue were reservcd for their own ule, the re-
mn:aindcr was annexed to the Crown ; a.nd out of
that, the Queen undertookt to aQi,.i a fufnicient
maintenance for tle 'roteftant clergy''

As mofl: of the lii'_-lis and flveral of the othier

dignitaries were 'il n1 a'.:.:!, [ 1 :I.

.or P, li;-l-

relilgion, the exCil'patir ;nl oi tiloe .i ; iec, ra'ji cr
than an aCt of fuich ei; ctrardiny ilnrt!i incec,
nilight have been c;lcted from the zal of the
preachers, and froi the fliri t which had hitherto
animated the n :aion. 3L-ut, on this occasion, other
principles obftruddcc the operations of' I'ch as
wcre purely religious. Zeal for liberty, and tlhe
love of wealth, two pa:iions extremely oppofitc,
concurred in dctcrminingi the Protecltant ieaders
to fall in with this plan, which deviated so ma-
nifefily from the nmaxims hic tey had hi-
therto regulated their conduc-.

IF the Reformner s hadl been allowed to at with-

out controul, an to level all dictincic ns in the
church, the imn ncni;: revcnues annexed to eccle-
fiaflical dignities could not, with anv colour of
jufiice, have ben ret;iined bLy thole in whole hands
they now were b but imuil citlher have been (dil-
tributed amongst the Protellant clergy, vwlo per-
so rimed all religious offices, or niuift have fallen to

l Kciili, Apilpcnd.. 1,. Kuox, 194.

the

o0 K the Queen, f;-om the bounty of wlhofe anccic(,-
.--,- the greater part of them was originally deriv;'

'35'ó The formner fheme, however suitable to the rei-

gious Ipirite of' many among tice people, was ar-
ten;ded wvith maniiold dl<anger. The Poiilh c-cil-
!a'llics had acquired a fli:re in the natioinal pro-
perty, which far exceededl the proportion that we.
confillent wvith! the happiness of the klingcdo;ii;
and the nobles were determined to ,uard a;aini'r
this evil, by preventing the return of tholte v,!u
pofliiEfions into the hind(s of tihe clurch. Nor ;sj
the latter, which expoied the conflitution to n.)mo
imnminent hazard, to be avoided with less care.
Even that circumifcribed prerogative, which tiie
Scottifn Kings pofrefifed,was the ob jca ofjealoul,'
to the nobles. If they had allowed the Crown to
seize the spoils of the church, such an increafc of
power mull have followed that accession of pro-
perty, as would have raied the royal authority
above controul, and have rendered the molf li-
mited Prince in Europe the molt abbflute and in-
dependent. The reign of Henry VIII. prefnttcdl
a recent and alarming exanmple of this nature.
The wealth which flowed in upon that Princc,
fi-om tle fupprcflion of the monafleries, not only
changed the maxims of his govcrnment, but tlic
temper of his mind; and he who had formrcly
iubmitted to his Parliaments, and courted his pco-
plc, dictated, from that time, to the former with
intolerable insolence, and tyrannized over thlc
latter with unprecedented severity: And if his
policy had not been extremely fliort-fighted, if lie
had not squandered what he acquired, with a pro-

ftlfion

fuflion equal to his rapaciousness, and which (l- Bn 0
l.atced his ambition, he might have citablitlhd ,_
Icl-l)otifim in lngland, on a balls so broad and 's,61.
ll '.On, as all the clibOrLs of the iflbjdcs would
ilcvcr have been able to fliake. In Scotland, where
the riclhs of the clcrigy bore as great a proportiol
to thc wealth of the linglom, the acquilirion of
churchi-lands would have been of no les imr-
portance to tlc Crown, and no less iatal to the
arifucracy. The obles, for this rcalbn, gilarded
againdt such an increase of the royal polwer, and
thereby fccured their own independence.

AVARICE mingled itrilf with their concern for

the interest of their order. The re-unitingl the
pof'cfions of the church to the Crown, or the
befilowing them on the Protcitant clergy, would
have been a fatal blow, both to those nobles who
had, by fraud or violence, seized part of these re-
venues, and to thole Abbots and Priors who had
total'y renounced their ecclelia[tical character.
But as the plan, which was pro)poied, gave iome
linction to their ulilr)nations, they promoted it
with their utrmolt inllilcncc. The lPoinfh eccle-
fiaftics, though the loppinL offi a tllird of their re-
venues was by no lmeans agreeable to them, con-
sented, under their present circumitances, to fa-
criice a part of their pofletlions, in order to pur-
cha.le tile Iccure enjoyment of the remainder; and
after deeming the whole irrecoverably loft, they
confidered whatever they could retrieve as 1o llmuch
gain. Many of the ancient dignitaries were mlen
of noble birth ; and as they no longer elntrt.iilicd
hopes ofrcfloring thc Popilh religion, they wilhed

th ir

B O0 O K their own relations, rather than the Crown, or tl;;.
~t_,=-. Protestant clergy, to be enriched with the -poij;,

1561. Of the church. They connived, for this rcaior,

at the encloachmernts of the nobles; they even
aided their avarice and violence; they d;e 1t ot;c
the patrimony of the church among their own re-
lations, and by grantin(gfes and perpetual lcell-
of lands and tithes, gave, to the utmost of th!iir
power, some colour of legal poficflion, to wiar
was formerly mere usurpation. Many vestiges (of
luch alienations itill remain. The nobles, wviL'i
the concnurencc of the incumnbents, daily extended!
their encroachmlents, and gradually stripped ri;c
ecclesiastics of their richest and moit valuable po'-

iefTions. Even that third part, which was given up)

in order to filcnce the clamours of the Proteif.:!-
clergy, and to be iome equivalent to the Crown
for its claims, amounted to no considerable i;ln.
The thirds due by the more powerful nobles, es-
pecially by such as had embraced the Reformation,
were almollf universally remitted. Others, by
producing fraudulent rentals; by efilmating thc
corn, and other payments in kind, at an undler-
value; and by the connivance of collectors,
greatly diminished the charge againfl. themflrfvesl':
And the nobles had much rcalon to be fatislied
with a device which, at To finall expence, i'curcli
to them fucl vast polreffions.

Th(Prnoit- NOR were the Protestant clergy considerable
anrt cl.r gy
n, gaines gainers by this new regulation ; they found it to
by it. be a more easy matter to kindle zeal, than to cx-

q Keitih, 507. Sp ,''f . 17S.
' Keith, .Appicid. i.;{. Sl )otLvr . 1i.in ui i

t Ungun

tinguiih avarice. Those very men, whom for- B 00o K
rnerly they had swayed with absolute authority, -
were now deaf to all their remonflrances. The '56',
Prior of St. Andrew's, the Earl of Argyll, the
Earl of Morton, and Maitland, all the molt
zealous leaders of the Congregation, were ap-
pointed to afTign, or, as it was called, to modify
their Itipends. An hundred merks Scottish was
the allowance which their liberality afforded to
the generality of Ministers. To a few three
hundred merks were grantedS. About twenty-
four thousand pounds Scottish appears to have
been the whole hum allotted for the maintenance
of a national church established by law, and
efteened, throughout the kingdom, the true
church of Godt. Even this fum was paid with
little exactnels, and the Ministers were kept in
the fame poverty and dependance as formerly.

THE gentleness of the Queen's adminifLration, rs62,

Diflnfie)on3

and the elegance of her court, had mitigated, in among the
some degree, the ferocity of the nobles, and ac- obles.
cultomed them to greater mildness and humanity;
while, at the fame time, her presence and autho-
rity were a check to their factious and tumultuary
spirit. But, as a state of order and tranquillity
was not natural to the feudal aristocracy, it could
not be of long continuance; and this year became
remarkable for the most violent eruptions of in-
teftine discord and animosity.

AMONG the great and independent nobility of
Scotland, a Monarch could possess little autho-

' Klox, 301. ' Keith, Append. 188.
VOL. 1. U rity,

B 0 0 K rirv, and exercise no extensive or rigorous juril

_- C- ldiSion. The interfering of interest, the unsettled
T56z' state of property, the frequency of public com-

motions, and the fiercenels of their own manners,
lowed, among the great families, the feeds of
many quarrels and contentions. IThefe, as we
have already obierved, were frequently decided
not by law, but by violence. The offended Baron,
without having recourse to the Monarch, or ac-
knowledging his superior authority, assembled his
own followers, and invaded the lands of his rival
in an hostile manner. Together with his el-ate
and honours, every nobleman tranlinitted ofme
hereditary feud i.o his pollerity, who were bound
in honour to adopt and to prosecute it with the
fame inveterate rancour.

Sucri a dissension had subsisted between the

house of Hamilton and the Earl of Bothwell, and
was heightened by mutual injuries during the late
commotions ". The Earl of Arran and Bothwell
happening to be in waiting at the fame time,
their followers quarrelled frequently in the itrects
of Edinburgh, and excited dangerous tumults in
February. that city. At lall, the mediation of their friends,

particularly of Knox, brought about a reconcile-
ment, but an unfortunate one to both thele no-
blemeii '.

A F.:w (lays after, Arran came to Knox, and,

witlh the utmost terror and confusion, confefred
first to him, and then to the Prior of St. Andrew's,
tlatJ in order to obtain the sole direction of affairs,

u Kcitli, 215. l.Kno(x, 305.

lBothwell

Bothwell and his kinfinen the I-lamiltons, had B °0 K
conspired to murder the Prior, Maitland, and the
other favourires of tlhe Qeen. The Duke of 1560.
Chatclheirault regarded the Prior as a rival, who
1had supplanted him in tile Qjeen's favour, and
who filled that place at the helm, lwhlich he ima-
gined to be due to hiniielf, as lirf Pr'ince of the
blood. Bothwell, on account of tie per-lonal in-
juries which lie had received from the Prior during
the late commotions, was no less exasperated
ag;ainlt him. But whether he and the Hamiltons
had agreed to cement their new alliance with the
blood of their common enemy, or whether the
conipiracy existed only in the frantic and difor-
dered imagination of the Earl of Arran, it is im-
poflible, amidlt the contradic&ion of historians and
the defecivenefs of records, positively to deter-
mine. Among men inflamed with resentment,
and impatient for revenge, raffl expressions might
be uttered, and violent and crimninal expedients
propofc d; and on that foundation, Arran's dif-
tempered fancy might rear the whole fupe llfruc-
ture of a conifiracy. All the persons accused,
denied their guilt with the utmoilt confidence.
But the known charaters of the men, and the
violent spirit of the age, added greatly to the pro-
bability of the accusation, n and abundantly jullify
the condu& of the Queen's minitters, who con-
fined Bothwell, Arran, and a few of the ring-
leaders, in separate prisons, and obliged the Duke
to surrender the flrong caltle of Dumbarton,
which lie had held ever since the time of his re-
sign ing the office of Regent Y.

Klnox, 307, 308.

U ^ THE

B O O K THE designs of the Earl of Huntly against the

,lIll. zl'

_ Y7 Prior of St. Andrew's were deeper laid, and pro-
The 6rlof duced more memorable and more tragical events,
Hnuiyllv'v George Gordon Earl of FIuntly; having been ont
enmilv to
the Q(ein's of the nobles who conspired against Janes III.
Minilitrs.

and who railed his ion Jamies IV. to the throne,
enjoyed a great fhiare in the confidence of that ge-
nerous Priince '. By his bounty, great acceflion,
of wealth and power were added to a family al-
ready opulent and powerful. On the death of tha
Monarch, Alexander the next Earl, being ap-
pointed Lord Iieutenant of all the counties be-
yond Forth, left the other nobles to contend for
offices at court; and retiring to the north, where
his estate and influence lay, resided there in a kind
of princely independence. The Chieftains in rhat
part of the kingd(om dreaded the growing domi-
nion of such a dangerous neighbour, but were
unable to prevent his encroachments. Some of
his rivals he icretly undermined, others he sub-
dued by open force. 1lis efl'ate far exceeded thlt
of any other subjei, and his ilaiorities and jl-
rildi;.tions extended over many of tle northern
counties. With powcr and poclt:iions so iImmnenfel
under two lonlg and fcicb!e minorities, and amiidf
the Ihock of civil comllotrions, tle llarls (o
lturinly might have indulged the molt elcv;atied
hopes. But happily for tile Crown, an. a c'tivc ;ll(i
cnterpriling spirit was not the charac'er itic of iti;Ml
family, and whatever obje& their ambition niglit
have in view, they choli rather to acquire it by
political addrelss, than to ltize it openly, and by
force of arms.

z Crn.a . Officers of' Stteb , T6.

TIn:;

T'rE condut of George the present Earl,during B olO K

the iate commotions, had been perfecsly suitable ' .
to the cllaracter of the family, in that age, du- 156
b;ou-s, variable, and crafty. \hile the furcefs of
the Lords of the Congregation was uncertain, he
allifted the Quicn Regent in her attempts to crush
th)ien. When their affairs put on a better aspeA,
he pretended to join them, but never heartily fa-
voured their caule. He was courted and feared
by each of the contending parties; both connived
at his encroachments in the north; and, by ar-
tifice and for-e, which ihe well knew how to em-
ploy alternately, and in their proper places, he
added every day to the exorbitant power and
wealth which he polfeffcd.

HE obl.i-ved the growingreputation and autho-

rity of the Prior of St. Andrew's with the greatest
jealousy and concern, and confidered him as a
rival who had engrossed that share in the Queen's
confidence, to which his own zeal for the Popish
religion feeined to give him a preferable title.
Perlojial injuries soon increased the mifunder-
fianding occasioned by rivallhip in power. The
Qucen having determined to reward the fCrvices
of the Prior of St. Andrew's, by creating him an
L".arll,fne mlade choice of Mar, as the place whence
lie fiould take his title; and, that ie might be
better able to fupporr his new honour, bellovcd
upon him, at the fame time, the lands of that rcb, o.
name. These were part of the royal d.cmeienes ",
but the Earls of -luntly had been permitted, for

a ;yaws. Pec. r. 97.

U 3 several

B 10 0 K several years, to keep pofielrion of themb. On

_ ,-- this occasion, the Earl not only complained, with
J562. tome reason, of the lois which he fui-ained, but

had r-al cause to be alarmed at the intrusion of
a formidable neighbour into the heart of his
territories, who might be able to rival his power,
and excite his oppre!ed vaflals to flake off his
yoke.
June 27. AN incident, which happened soon after, in-

creased and confirmed Huntly's suspicions. Sir
John Gordon, his third son, and Lord Ogilvie,
had a dispute about the property of an eftare.
This dispute became a deadly quarrel. They
happened, unfortunately, to meet in the streets of
Edinburgh, and being both attended with armed
followers, a fcuffleenfuecl, in which Lord Ogilvie
was dangerously wounded by Sir John. The Ma-
giftrates leized both the offenders, and the Q(ecn
commanded them ;o be flrictly confined. Undur
any regular government, Iuch a breach of public
peace and order would expose tlhe person offend-
ing to certain puniihment. At this time, fonme
heverity was neccefllry, in order to vindicate the
Q2lcen's authority from an insult, the nmot heinous
wliicl; had been offered to it lince her return into
Scotl,id. But, in an age accustomed to licence
and anarchy, even this moderate exercite of her
power, in ordering them to be kept in cufiody,
was deemed an adt of intolerable rigour ; and the
fiiends of each party began to convene their vis-
fals and dependants, in order to overawe, or to

b Ii.cfh. 33rae

fri urate

frufti-ate the decisions of ilufice . Mean while, B 0 o K
Gordon maie' his escape out of prison, and lying
into AberdlcCnilhaire, complained loudly of the in- 56i'
(dlinity with which he had been treated; and as
all th'- Qeecn's aftions were, at this j.unture,
i.'puted to tl e Earl of Mar, this added not a
little to the re-intiment which Huntly had con-
ceived ag;insb that nobleman.

Ar the very time when these passions fermented, Au^,:.

v'itl tihe utii-olt violence, in the minds of the
Earl of Iil nt!v and his family, the Queen hap-
pened to lct out on a progress into the northern
parts of the kingdom. She was attended by the
l'arls of Mar and Morton, Maitland, and other
leaders of that party. The )prcence of the Queen,
in a country where no name greater than the Earl
of Iluntly's had been heard of, and no power
filperior to his had been exercised, for many
years, was an event, of itself, abundantly mor-
tif'yin to that haughty nobleman. But while
the QUeen was entirely under the direction of
Mlar, all her actions were more apt to be mil-
rcprlented, and conetrued into injuries; and a
tlhouilnid circtumfltances could not but occur to
awaken I untly's jealousy, to offend his pride, and
to inllane his rcl'ntment. Alnidft the agitations
of lo Imany violent pallions, onme eruption was
unavoidable.

ON Mary's arrival in the north, Huntly cm-

ployed hiis wilb, a wom1ant capable of cxccutiliig
the cominiflion with abundance of dcxterity, to

Kciith, *'!.2 .
U.l 4 footi

B l 0 K ooth the Queen, and to intercede for pardon to

_

-, . their fun. But the Queen peremptorily required
1J6z. that he should again deliver himself into the

hands ofjuflice, and rely on her clemency. Gor-
don was persuaded to do so; and being enjoined
by the Queen to enter himself prisoner in the
castle of Stirling, he pronmied likewise to obey
that command. Lord Erskine, Mar's uncle,
was, at that time, Governor of this fort. The
Queen's severity, and the place in which she ap-
pointed Gordon to be confined, were interpreted
.to be new marks of Mar's rancour, and aug-
mented the hatred of the Gordons against him.
SCpt. . MEAN time, Sir John Gordon set out towards

Stirling; but instead of performing his promise
to the Queen, made his escape from his guards,
and returned to take the command of his fol-
lowers, who were rising in arms all over the north.
These were destined to second and improve the
blow, by which his father proposed, secretly, and
at once, to cut off Mar, Morton, and Maitland,
his principal adversaries. The time and place
for perpetrating this horrid deed were frequently
appointed; but the executing of it was wonder-
fully prevented, by some of those unforefccn ac-
cidents, which so often occur ro disconcert the
schemes, and to intimidate the hearts of alfillins'.
Htuntly's own house at Strathbogie was the last
and molt convenient scene appointed for coin.
mitting the intended violence. But, on her jour-
ney thither, the Qceen heard of young Gordon's

"d citl, 230.

flight

flight and rebellion, and refuting, in the first B 0O rO
tran[lports of her indignation, to enter under the . --
father's roof, by that fortunate exprefion of her 1,56.
rcfentment, saved her Ministers fiom unavoidable
dcf'trua&ion .

TuE ill success of these efforts of private re- T.ke arrn

a,.lin(t the

vcnge precipitated Huntly into open rebellion. oecc.
As the Queen was entirely under the direcLion
of his rivals, it was impossible to comnpafs their
ruin, without violating the allegiance which he
owed his Sovereign. On her arrival at Inver-
ncfs, the commanding officer in the catle, by
H-untly's orders, thut the gates against her. Mary
was obliged to lodge in the town, which was open
and defcncelefs ; but this too was quickly fur-
rounded by a multitude of the Earl's followers'.
The utmofi consternation seized the QLeen, who
was attended by a very slender train. She every
moment expected the approach of the rebels, and
foine ships were already ordered into the river to
fIcure her escape. The loyalty of the Monroes,
lFrazers, Mackintoshes, and tome neighbouring
clans, who took arms in her defence, saved her
from this danger. By their aliltnance, fie even
forced the castle to fir-render, and inflitcd on the
Governor the punilhment which his inlblcncc
deserved.

' I'il open acl of dilobedience was the occasion

of a measure more galling to Huntly than any the
Queen had hitherto taken. Lord Erlkinc, havinl
pretenled a right to the Earldom of Mar, Stewart

Knox, 3tR. f Crawf. Officers of Statc, 87, 88.

resigned

B o0 K resigned it in his favour; and at the ftne time

._,_ Mary conferred upon hiin the title of Eail of
'56Z. Murrav, with the ellate annexed to that diWn i;,

which had been in the poffietion of the Earla,-1
I-luntly since the y}ear I548 . From this en-
croachmrent upon his domains he concluded tl;i.t
his family was devoted to (defl-rution; ..;
di-eading'to be firipped, gradually, of those pui-
jielfons, wl:ich, in reward of their services, the
gratitude of tle Crown had beliowed on himlclf,
or his ancefiors, he no longer disguised his in-
tentions, but, in defiance of the Queen's pro(ch-
ilation, openly took arms. Instead of yieldlinr
thofie places of itiengtih, which Mary required
him to surrender, his followers dispersed or c.i:
in pieces the parties which file dilpatched to t;ikc
pol'effion of them''; and he himself advancing
with a conliderable body of men towards Aber-
deen, to which place the _Queen was now re-
turnedl , filled her l;i]all court with confternlatio,.
Murray hiad only a handful of men in whom lic
could conlfice . In order to form the appearance
of an arnny, lie was obliged to call in the alfillI:n;c
of the neighbouring barons; but as no oft tlli'l
either favoured I-Juntly's designs, or flood in aw;c
of his power, from them no cordial or Cfi0ti.l
fervicc could I cxl exeted.
Ofob. i. WITl'rH these troops, however, Murray, wiho

could gain nothing by delay, marched brifklly to-
wards the enemy. H le found them at Corric!'ic,
polted to great advantage; he colmmanded iV1
r C'.-.'a . I': r. 359: 1 Kn:, 3,^, K ciih,2

northlcril

northern associates instantly to begin the attack; B OO K
but on the first motion of the enemy, they treache- >-
roufly turned their backs; andc Huntly's fillowers, j56G.
throwing aside their spears, ant breaking their
ranks, drew their swords, and rulhed forward to
the lpurfuit. It was then, that Murray gave proof, fe is '-

fe'alled by

bothl of steady courage, and of prud!ent conduce. ihe .
l Ic flood imnlmoveable on a riling grounJ, with Mlury.
the fl;all but trulty body of his adherents, who
jrecfenting their spears to the enemy, received
them with a deternlined rclolution, which they
little ex-'d-ed. Thle Higihland broad f\vord is
not a weapon fit to encounter the Scottish spear.
In every civil comn:otion, the fuperiolity of the
latter has been evident, and las always decided
the contefs. On this occasion tle irregular at-
tack of Huntly's troops was easily repulled by
Murray's firm battalion. Before they recovered
from the confulfon occasioned by this unroreiten
refiltance, thoie who had be-gun the flight, wil-
ling to regain their credit with the victorious
party, fell upon them, and completed the rout.
l'lltly himi!Clf, who was extremely corpulent,
was trodden to death in the purfuir. I lis foils,
Sir John and Adam, were tiaken, and Murray
returne(l in triumph to Aberdeen with his pri-
funers.

T'IL trial of men taken in aCual rebellion

against their Sovere-iln was extr-emeley fhorr.
Three daiys after the battle, Sir John Gordon
was beheaded ;at Aberdeen. Ilis brother Adam
was pardoned on account of his youth. Lord
Gordon, who had been privy to his father's de-

signs,

B 0 0 K signs, was seized in the south, and upon trial

i-- found guilty of treason; but, through the Queen's

5 .clemency, the punishment was remitted. The

first Parliament proceeded against this great fa.
mily, with the utmost rigour of law, and reduced
their power and fortune to the lowest ebb k.

As

k This conspiracy of the Earl of Huntly is one of the moi

intricate and mysterious passages in the Scottilh history. A, it
was a tranfaEtion purely domestic, and in which the Englill
were little interested, few original papers concerning it have
been found in Cecil's Colletion, the great storehouse of cvi.
dence and informationwith regard to the affairs of this period.

Buchanan supposes Mary to have formed a design about

this time of deftloying Murray, and of employing the power
of the Earl of Huntly for this purpose. But his account of
this whole transaction appears to be so void of truth, and cven
of probability, as to deserve no serious examination. At that
time, Mary wanted power, and seems to have had no incli-
nation to commit any at of violence upon her brother.

Two other hypotheses have been advanced, in order to ex-

plain this matter; but they appear to be equally rcnov\ed
irom trutl.

I. It cannot well be conceived, that the Queen's journey to

the north was a scheme concerted by Murray, in order to' rtii
the Earl of HIuntly. i. Huntly had residcd at court alncll
ever since the Queen's return. Keith, 198. Append. i;,
&c, This was the proper place in which to have fcized him.
To attack him in A.berdeenflirc, the feat of his power, an;1
in the midLf of his vaffalls, was a projecC equally abfrilld lil
hazardous. 2. The Queen was not accompanied with a bo,'y
of troops, capable of attempting any thing again t H-untlyby
violence ; her train was not more numerous than was uluiil
in times of grcatefl tranquillity. I.Kith, 23q. 3. There rc-
main two 6rigiinal letters with regard to this conspiracy, oneC
from Randolph the English Resident, and another fiom
Maitland, both directed to Cecil. They talk of Huntly's mc;i-
ifrcs as notprioufly trcabonablle, Randolph mentions his re-

peatcd

As the fall of the Earl of HEuntly is the most B O o K

important event of this year, it would have been ---
improper to interrupt the narrative by taking no- 56
tice of lefier tranfations, which may now be re-
lated with equal propriety.

IN the beginning of funmer, Mary, who was An inter-

view be-

desirous of entering into a more intimate corre- twen Eli-
ipondence and familiarity with Elizabeth, em- ,ar prn
ployed Maitland to desire a personal interview porJe
with her, fornewhere in the north of England.

peated attempts to aftfinatc iMurray, &c. No hint is given
olfany previous resolution, formed by Mary'sMinifters, to ruin
Iluntly and his family. H-ad any such design ever existed, it
was Randolph's duty to have discovered it; nor would Mait-
land have laboured to conceal it from the Englilh secretary.
Keith, 229. 232.

II. To suppose that the Earl of Huntly had laid any plan

for seizing the Queen and her Ministers, seems to be no less
improbable. i. On the Queen's arrival in the north, he la-
boured, in good earnest, to gain her favour, and to obtain a
pardon for his son. Knox, 318. 2. He met the Queen, first
at Aberdeen, and then at Rothemay, whither he would not
have ventured to come, had he harboured any such treason.
able resolution. Knox, 318. 3. His conduct was irresolute
and wavering, like that of a man disconcerted by an unfore-
seen danger, not like one executing a concerted plan. 4. The
most considerable persons of his clan submitted to the Queen,
and found surety to obey her commands. Keith, 226. Had
the Earl been previously determined to rife in arms against
the Queen, or to seize her Minifcrs, it is probable he would
have imparted it to his principal followers, nor would they
have dc'crted him in this manner.

For these reasons, we have, on the'one hand, vindicated

the Earl of Murray fiom any deliberate intention of ruining
the family of Gordon; and on the other hand, we have im-
puted the violent conduc of the Earl of Huntly, to a sudden
start of resentment, without changing him with any preme-
ditated purpose of rebellion.

As

B1 (o K As this proposal could not be rejeced with de.
.-,.. cency, the time, the place, and the circumfitances

I56z. of' the meeting were inflanrly agreed upon. But

Flizabeth was prudent enough not to admit into
her kingdom, a rival, who outfione herfiif, so
far, in bc::uty, ;and grtacculnefs of perlbn ; and
wvho excelled, ol c'incntlv, in all the arts of in-
linlarion and acldrels. Under pretence of being
confined to London, by the attention which 1lie
vas obliged to ive to the civil wars in France,
fi{e put off the interview for that season ', and
prevented her fubjecs fiom secing the Scottili
Q;Ueen, the charms of whole appearance and
behaviour (he envied, and had some reason to
dread.
Jlne 2. DURING this year, the Afembly of the church

met twice. In both these meetings were exhi.
bited many complaints of the poverty and de-
pendence of the church; and many murmurs
against the negligence or avarice of those who
had been appointed to collec, and to diflribute
the small fund, appropriated for the maintenance
of preachers"'. A petition, craving redress of their
grievances, was prelented to the Qleen; btr
without any effect. There was no reason to ex-
pect that Mary would discover any forwardnels
to grant the requests of such supplicants. As her
Minilters, though all most zealous Proteffants,
were themselves growing rich on the inheritance
of the church, they were equally regardless of
the indigence and demands of their brethren.

Keith, 216. m Knox, 311. 323.

MARY

MA.,RY had now continued above two years in B 0 0 K
ia l}are of wi.lowhood. fler gentle adminiitiation .- -.

L, ...1 ^ ....56 3.

li.td I eculrC the hearts of lher lIu hc ts, who were N1,,5.
iilt,)aticnt fur her marriage, and witlied the Crown tln,,lil,
t.) dclcer;l in the right line fi-om their ancient Q, lt's
iionlrchs. Sht ihcrlIf hi was th-e m-ost amia)lc " C
\w:)!,an of the age, and the t!fame ors lr accom-
ili!hincnlt;, tocrtheir twih the favourable cir-
<;.':l;lbance of heit_ hav;ng o(n:e k .dom alrea:dy in
i:.'r pOlflclion, and tl:e pioii: o:it t mlloC'Uilt tie
tihrone of ai:o(ther, iromn!:ted manny dii'rereit
f i:aces to foiilit anL alliance lo illui.rious. Scot-
l.tnd, by its fii:tation, threw fbo nl(c'i .weiht and
power into lwhatever scale it fell, that all Elurope
wlited with fulicitudc for IMary's determiniation;
and no event in that age excited Rtronger political
fears andjealou0es ; none interetred inore deeply
the passions of itveral Princes, or gave rife to
more contradiclory intrigues, than the marriage
of the Scottish QCeen.

'TI'-i Princes of the IIoufe of Austria remern- she; iso;-

bered what vast proje'ts the French had founded i'^
on their former alliance with the QOieen of Scots; Pince9,
and though the unexpeaed death, first of Henry
and then of Francis, hlad hindered these from
taking effiet, yet if Mary fliould again make
choice of a husband among the French Princes,
the fame designs might be revived and prosecuted
with better success.

IN order to prevent this, the Emperor entered By the

into a negociation with the Cardinal of Lorrain, charics,
who had proposed to marry the Scottish QLecen to
the Archduke Charles, Ferdinand's thir-d son.

2 'lhe

B 0 0 K The matter was communicated to Mary; and

1P.
- -i Melvil, who at that time attended the Elet&,r
1563. Palatine, was conmmanded to inquire into the ca.

ratcqr and fituation.of the Archduke ".

BvDhn Car- PHIIrpr 11. though no lcfs apprehensive of M.;.
losof Spaiin. .
a. ' .

soo Si. ry's falling once more into the hands of Fran,

cnviced his uncle Ferdinand the acquisition of iJ
iinportant a prize; and as his own insatiable ar.;
bition g'.i!l)ed at all the kingdoms of Europe, he
emplnyiel, d hlis amblladcor at the French courr,:,
foli.:it the IPrinces of Lorrain in behalf of his ):lu
Don Carlos, at that time the heir of all the ex-
tensive dominions wlich belonged to the Spanill
monarchy O.
*RytieDuke CITHJERINE of Medicis, on the other hand,

o ij dreaded the marriage of the Scottish Queen with

any of the Austrian Princes, which would have
added So much to the power and pretensions of
that ambitious race. Herjealoufy of the Princes
of Lorrain rendered her no less averse fromn an
alliance, which, by securing to them the pro-
tectiop of the Emperor or King of Spain, woulil
give new boldness to their enterprising spirit, ;!l
enable them to set the power of the Crown, vw.hicli
they already rivalled, at open defiance: And as
fle was afraid that these splendid proposals of tlie
Auflrian family would dazzle the young Quecn,
she infllantly dlif)atched Caflelnau into Scotland,
to offcr her in marriage the Duke of Anjou,

" Mclv. 6.6. Kcilh, 239. Sce Append. No. VII.
Calltein. 461. Addit. a Labour. o5i, 503.

the

the brother of her former husband, who soon after O K
monntced the throne of France P.

MAiR attentively weighed the pretensions of Mr'3Je-

so many rivals. The Archduke had little to re- io,,r;aio,
commend him, but his high birth. The example it.
of I lenry VIII. was a warning againit contracting
a marriage with the brother of her former hus-
band; nor could fie bear the thoughts of appear-
ing in France, in a rank inferior to that which
Ilic had formerly held in that kingdom. She
liltcned, therefore, with partiality to the Spanish
propositions, and the prolped of such vail power
and dominions flattered the ambition of a young
and aspiring Princess.

THREE several circumifances, howevwr, con-

curred to divert Mary from any thoughts of a
foreign alliance.

THIE sirs of these was the murder of her uncle

the Duke of Guite. The violence and ambition
of that nobleman had involved his country in a
civil war; which was conducted with furious ani-
mofity, and various success; At lafft the Duke
laid siege to Orleans, the bulwark of the Pro-
teftant caule; and he had reduced that city to
the lalt extremity, when lie was aflaffinated by
the firantic zeal of Poltrot. This blow proved
fatal to the Queen of Scots. The young Duke
was a minor; and the Cardinal of Lorrain, though
subtle and intriguing, wanted that undaunted and
enterprising courage, which rendered the ambi-
tion of his brother io formidable. Catherine, in-

P CaclInau, 461.
VOL. I. X sicad

B " 0o K fead of encouraging the ambition, or furthering

III. 0
,--,-- the pretensions of her daughter-in-law, took
1563. pleasure in mortifying the one, and in diilp-

pointing the other. In this fituarion, and wvithou
such a pi!OteRor, it became neceflary for M,-ry to
cjntradt her views, and to proceed with caution;
and whatever profpet of advantage might allure
her, she could venture upor: no danlgerous or
doubtf;;l measure.

The v-,ws TfIE fcconc1 circumstance which weighed with
bcih. ,5/Mary, was the opinion of the Quieen of England.

IThe ima-iage of the Scottish Queen intcrefred
Elizabeth inore deeply than any other Prince;
andl lte ob!urvcd all her deliberations concerning
it with the moll anxious attention. She hcrlclf
seems early to lhave formed a resolution of living
unmarried, and she discovered no fimall inclina-
tion to ilnpofe the filae law on the Queen of
Scots. She had already experienced what use
might be made of Mary's power and( pretensions,
to invade her dominions, and to disturb her pof-
feIfion of the Crown. The death of Francis II..
had happily delivered hcr from this danger, which
she determined to guard againfl for the future,
with the utmost care. As the refilefs ambition
of the Aulftian Princes, the avowed and bigotted
patrons of the Catholic l;fucrflition, made her, in
a particular mllanncnr, dread! their neighbourhood,
she inLtruC}:d landolph to relnonfirate, in the
iii-ongell terms, againi any alliance with them;
and to acquaint Miary, that as nhe herrelf would
conlider liich a mlatch to be a breach of the per-
lonal fricnd lliipl in which they were so happily

united i

united; so the English nation would regard it as B °o K
the dissolution of that confederacy which now I.--
rfibfifcd between the two kingdoms: That, . 15n63
order to preserve their own religion and liberties,
they would, in all probability, take some flep
)rejtl(licial to her right of luccefion, which, as
fle well knew, thiey neither wanted power nor
.tr,-terces to invalidate and let aside. This threat-
ening was accompanied with a promise, but ex-
priese:d in very ambiguous termns, that if Mary's
,Ihoice of a husband flionuld prove agreeable to the
l',nJlifb nation, E:lizabeth would appoint proper
perlons to examine her title to the fucceflon, and,
if well founded, command it to be publicly re-
cognised. She observed, however, a mysterious
silence concerning the person on whom flhe
twillhed the choice of the Scottiih Queen to fall.
The revealing of this secret was reserved for
some future negotiation. Mean while fie threw
out lome obscure hints, that a native of Britain,
or one not of princely rank, would be her
ilffll: and moif inofiFnfive choiceq. An advice
offered with fiich an air of superiority and com-
mand, mortified, no doubt, the pride of the
Scottifi Qjecn. But, under her preCent circum-
fiances, file was obliged to bear this indignity.
D)ellirute of all foreign afillance, and intent upon
the lnglifll fuccerfion, the great objec of her
wifiles and ambition, it became necefll'uy to court
a rival, whom, without manifeil imprudence, she
could not venture to offend.

Kciil, 242. 2.}5.

X 2 TIl

B o O K THE- inclination of her own fubjeis was aio-

HII. ...i. ther, and not the least consider-able circumiltance,
hs6 ,. which called for Mary's attention at this con-
mn, ..'sher juncture. They had been taught, by the fatal
(-w-. sub- J -
jeas. ex)priment of her former marriage, to dread an

union 'ithl any great Prince, wholb power might
be employed to opprels their religion and li-
bertics. 'I hey trembled at the thoughts of a
match with a foreigner; and if the Crown flonld
he fi.rcngthened by new dominions or alliances,
they foresaw that the royal prerogative would
s'on be firctched beyond its ancient and legal
li Tits. 'I heir eagerncfs to prevent this could
hardly f;ail of throwin,. them once more into the
arins of lEngland. }lizabeth would- be ready to
aifli-d then herI aid;, towards ob.tru(cing a nmea-
sure tb difagrecabli to herrelf. It was ear) for
them to licize the person of the Sovereign. By
the afiitance of llte FI.nlifh fleet, they could
render it dim'iciiit for any foreign Prince to land
in Scotland. The Roman Catholics, now an in-
considerable party in the kingdom, andt difirited
by the lols of the Earl of H-untly, could give no
oblirfluion to their dcfigns. To what violent
extrcmes the n:tional abhorrence of a foreign
yoke mighct have been carried,c is manifest firom
what Ihe itd alreadly Ifen and experienced.

I:ox thelf rcallbs, Mlary laid aside, at that

tiime, all thoughts of foreign alliance, and
seemed willing to sacrifice her own ambition, in
order to remove the jealousics of Elizabeth, and
to quiet the fears of Ler own fubjeccs.

TIIE

Tnor Parliament met this year, for the first B o K

time since the Queen's return into Scotland. -
Mary's administration had hitherto been extremely A ,i.
popular. Her Miniflers poffeficd the confidence 4t"y' _ld'
of tie nation ; and, by conicquence, the proceed-
ings of that assembly were conduced with per-
sect unanimity. The grant of the earldom of
Murray to the Prior of St. Andrew's was con-
lirmed: The Earl of Huntly, and several of his
vassals and dependants, were attainted: The at-
tainder againlt Kirkaldv of Grange, and some c-f
his accomplices in the murder of Cardinal Bea-
toun, was revcrfed : The act of oblivion, men-
tioned in the treaty of Ediiiburgll, received the
royal sanction. But Mary, who had determined
never to ratify that treaty, took care that this
fan&ion should not be deemed any acknowledg-
mcnt of its validity ; fie granted her consent
merely in condescension to the Lords in Parlia-
ment, who, on their knees, besought her to allay
the jcaloufies and apprehensions of her fubjedts,
by such a gracious law'

No attempt was made, in this Parliament, to N,;innde.

procure the Queen's assent to the laws etlablifling , ih r'grd
the Proteflant religion. Her Ministers, though to 'lig"on
zealous Protel{ants themselves, were aware that
this could not be urged without manifest danger
and imprudence. She had consented, through
their influence, to tolerate and protect the re-
formed dofurine. They had even prevailed on
her to imprison and prosecute the Archbishop of
' Knox, 330. ' Parl. 9 Q(Miry, c. 67. Spotfv. 188.

X 3 St.

B 0 1 K St. Andrew's, and Prior of Whithorn, for cle-

.--_ > brating mass contrary to her proclamatiojun
'1'3' Mary, however, was fill pafionattely devored to

the Romish church; and thoutghI, fl-om polirical
motives, file had granted a temporary prote:dio!
of opinions which Ihe cliftapprved, th-ere were
no grounds to hope thait the would al cPC tI)
eftablifl them for perplt-tuity. Tlhe mloderai-i(
of those wlo profelTed it, was the bei method fur
reconciling the Queen to tler Proteicant religion.
Time might abate her bigotry. T-er prcjudicc;
might wear off gradually, and at lafl ihe mirnl,
yield to the wilhes of hler people, what their iim-
portunity or their violence could never have cx-
torted. Many laws of importance were to he
proposed in Parliament ; and to dcfe.t all ;1 (Ck,
by luch a firuitlefs and ill-tiiicd aipplication to
the Queen, would have been cq ually inj ilious to
individuals, and detrimental to the public.

,.,ici of- THE zeal of the Prorcetant clergy was deaf to
fetnA, the
cI,,Cy, all these conliderations of policy. Eager and im-

patient, it brooked no delay: Severe and in-
flexible, it would condescend to no comlpliances.
The leLading men of that order infilled, that this
opportunity of ef-ablilhiln religion by law, ais
not to be neglcdted. They pronounced the mo-
deration of the cortiers, apo Itacy ; and thcir Cn-
deavours to gain the Q leen, they reckoned cri-
minal and sei vile. Knox io]cinn ly ricllouin ce(d tli
friendthip of the lF'arl of Murray, as a man (de-
voted to Mary, and so blindly zealous for hcer

' Jicith, 239.

feirvice,

lervice, as to become rcgardlefs of those objects B o0 K
which he had hitherto efteemce most sacred. L---i
'I'lis rupture, whici is a strong proof of Mur- 53'
ryv's finccrc attachment to the iQjeen at that pe-
riod, continued above a year and tan half".

'Fi-i preachers being ;disappointed by the men

ii whom they placed the greatefl confidence,
gave vent to their indignation in their pulipits.
T'hese eccloed moore loudly than ever, witll decla-
rations against idolatry; witi diinal presages
conc'rni ng tle Qi een's marriage with a foreigner;
and with bitter reproaches againtt those who,
from inte-relled motives, hlad deserted that caulle
which they once reckoned it their honour to sup-
port. The people, inflamed by Ikich vehement andoccaafins

a tu ll' ,t-

declamations, which were dictated by a zeal more mung the
sincere than prudent, proceeded to raflh and un- pc'"
,jutiifiable acts of violence. During the Queen's
ablence, on a progress into the weft, mass conti-
nued to be celebrated in her chapel at Holyrood
houle. The multitude of those who openly re- Auttl.
forted tllither, gave great offence to the citizens
of d dinburgh, who, being siee fi-om the re-
Ltraint which tile royal presence iimpofed, as-
fimbled in a riotous manner, interrupted the
lervice, and filled flich as were preclcnt with the
titiolt conflernation. Two of the ringleaders
in tilis tulullt were fcized, and a day appointed
To, their trial .

KNOX, w11o deemed the zeal of these persons Kno tried

tn that ac-
laudable, and their con(luct meritorious, con- c1,.l but

n, quitted.
" luo, , 331. x Ibid. 335. October 8.

X 4 fidcred

B O K fidered them as fifferers in a good cause; and in
i.--J order to screen them from danger, he iffutld c:'-

'563. cular letters, requiring all who profefled the true

religion, or were concerned for the prei;rva-
tion of it, to afemrble at Edinburgh on the d(.i
of trial, that, by their preelnce, they mighl; (')111.
fort and afIftI their ditrefTcd brethren . Onie of
these letters fell into the QOiceen's hands. To
alfemble the subje&s without the aithcoljity of
the Sovereign, was conffrued to be trealun, andI
a rcfolution was taken to prosecute Knox for tllhi
Dectm 15. crime, before the Privy Council. I1 appily for

him, his judges were not only zealous Protll
ants, but the very men who, during tlhe lte
commotions, had openly refifi'd and ser at dc-
fiance the Queen's authority. It was ulnder )prt-
cedents, drawn from their own conldui', tllha
Knox endeavoured to fhiclter hilmfelf. Nor vwould
it have been an easy matter for thlelf Counlclior
to have found out a diflintiion, by which ti'ey
could cenflre him, wiitiout condemning tcliln-
selves. After a long hearing, to the alifli-
ment of Lethington and the other courtiers ', lhe
was unanimously acquitted. Sinclair 1Bifllo of
JZofs, and Ptrfidenlt of the Court of Seffiorl, ;
.:ealous I'ip)il, heartily concurred with the otli r
Counsellors in this decision '; a remarkable ladt,
which shows the unfettlld state of governmnent in
that age; the low condition to which r-egl ;it-
thority was then funk ; a;dl the implunity witl

y Knox, 336. Z Calclrw. M.SS. Hi-1. i. 832.

hKnox, 343.

which

;l'hich subjects niight invade those rights of the B 0 K
Crown which are now held sacred. _.-__

TnIE marriage of the Scottiflh (Qeen conti- N ,o6^.

nlued still to be the obje&t of attenLiun and in- ti.',1ith.
trii(ue. Though Elizabeth, even while she wijifhed l' ,; Ql;-'

~~~~~'--)~~~~ . ~~~~~~ ~niitIig r o

to dire&t Mary, treated her with a dilfgufitri re-
it'rve; though the kept her, without necetlity, in
a slate of fli)elnfc; and hinted often at the
picrbn whom Ihe deflined to be her husband,
witliout directly mentioning his namele; yet
7Mar-y framed all her ations to exprcls fucli a
prudent refpct t for the Englifil (Rjetl, that
foicign Princes began to imagine ic had given
hcrfelf up implicitly to her dii cion . 'Tlie
protfpct of this union alarmed Catherine of Me-
dicis. Though Catherine had taken pleasure,
all along, in doing ill offices to the Qiccn of
Scots; though, soon after the Duke of G.ile's
death, lfih had put upon her a mol mortifying
indignity, by ttopping the payment of her dowry,
by depriving her subjcd the Duke of Clatl-
herault of his p)ension, and by beflowingr trh
commnand of the Scottifi Guards on a French-
man'; lcie rellolvcd, however, to prevent this
dangerous conjuncliun of tle Britifl QLJeens.
Io'r tlis Ipurpol , fle now employed all hcr art to
appcale Mary'l, to whom flte had given ft many
cItufes of of[ence. 'lhe arrears ofl her dowry
welr in(tl;ntly paid l; more i)unctuIal remnittalnces
were promisled for the future; andt o(ltrs i; adc,
not only to rellore, but to extend the privilt(es

b licilh, 248. d.
c 4. d Sec Appepntli::, No. VIII.

of

B 0 0 K of the Scottifil nation in France. It was easy fri
C.--. Mary to penetrate into the motives of this fuddc,

S564. change; file well knew the chara&cer of her mo-

ther-in-law, and laid little ft-res upon proife' iii;
of fi'iendfhip which came fi-om a Princles ci
fiich a falle and unfeeling heart.

THE negotiation with England, relative to the

marriage, fufTiered no interruption fiom this al.-
plication of the French Queen. As Mary, in
compliance with the witjhes of her ful jeets, .r(!
prefled by the flrongeftt motives of interelt, de-
termined speedily to marry, Elizabeth was
obliged to break that unaccountable le:nce,

M.rch. which she had hitherto asserted. The secret wus
E'o., hid, disclosed, and her favourite Lord Robert Dud-
1I. 'ctitt) ley, afterwards Earl of Leicester, was decl.ired to
hr tl fr a
Lita.:d, be tlie happy man whom fhle had chosen to be

the husband of a Queen courted by lt main
Princes '.

ELIZABeTMI'S *wifldoml and penetration were re-

markable in the choice of her Minilltrs; in tli-
tingtuiihing her favourites, thole great qutalirics
were lc s coinqpicuous. She was inluenced in
cwo caitis io opposite, by merit of very dife.'rnt
kinds. Their capacity for bufrnefs, their know-
ledge, their- rudetncc, were the talcnts; to whichl
alonce fie atte:Idcd, in cliufing her Minifics;
whereas bc;auty and

; lratccfulnlefs of pecrlon, lo-

litlhdl ma;lnnlrs, and courtly addtlreis, were t:li
;.accomjilimllnllt.ts on wlich flil bellowed her l1-
VrlI. Slihe adc'l ill lte one ca(l with the wilidoln

Kli.;, 2.
5.~ ^~of

of a Queen, in the other file difcovcrcd the B 0 0 K
weakness of a woman. To this I. iceftrcr owed t-(L. ,
}is grandeur. Though remarkable neither for s564
(n)illence in virtue, nor su.periority of abilities,
the Queen's partiality distinguished him on every
cca.fion. She railed iiin to the hi1ghest honours,
she befdoweel on hini the moll: ilmpoi tanlt elmp1l.y-
iicirnts, and manl;ifcilt'd an afi&,'ion o dif, ropor-
tiallte to lis merit, that, in the o;i.iion of that
;,l c, it could be accounted for only by the power
oT planetary inrlu:nce f.

'I'HE high fIpirit of the Scottiflh ueen could .rr.y or,

trt ., at

rnt well bear the firfi overture of a match withl a tis.1
fdllj-t. Her own rank, the splendour of her
formenr marriage, and the iolicitations, at this
time, of so many powerful Princes, crowded into
her thoughts, anl made her fenlibly feel how
huLImbling and clifrefpe&ful Eliza'beth's proposal
was. She dlilTembled, howvccr, with the Enlli l
,endlsent; and though lfie declared, in strong
terms, what a degradation lhe would deem this
alliance, which brought along with it no advan-
tage that could jullify such ncglc&l of her own
dignity, fe mentlioned tle l.arl of Lcicclter,
notwithllandin.g, in terms full of rees)e(".

I. Iz.xnr..rn, we may presume, did not wiih r;izbeh',

that tlhe proi'pol Ilhuld be received in any other ..ill',i ..
mannller. Arfter the extraordinary m;arks The hadl inl'"m.
I'ivcn of her own attachment to Leiceller, and
while lie was still in the very height of favotur, it
is not probable f-e could think ltcrioufly of be-

' CjimCn, 5.{9. g Kitl, 252.

lowiig

252
flowina

B °o ;. fLowving him upon another. It was not licr a;i
.-i - to persuade, but only to amuse Mary h. Almoll

*56;' three years were elapscd since her return into

Scotland; and though solicited by her ulibicrs,
and courted by the greatest Princes in Europe,
Ite had hitherto been prevented from marryin,
chiefly by the artifices of Elizabeth. If, at tii
time, the Fngolifhl Qjeen could have ennga.cl
Mary to liiten to her proposal in favour of L.-i-
ccfter, her power over this creature of her ownr
would have enabled her to protract the nego-
tiation at pleasure ; and by keeping her rival uln-
married, ihe would have rendered the prolpeCt of
her succession lets acceptable to the En-,liJh.

LEICESTER'S own situation was extremely de-

licate and enibalrrlalng. To gain )poffLfon of
the moit amiable woman of the age, to carry
avay this prize friom so many contending Princes,
to mount the throne of an ancient kingi(om,
mighlt have flattered the ambition of a fil!j&ct
much more confidernble than him. Hie Iaw all
these advantages, no doubt; and, in fIcrct, they
made their full imnprerlion on him. But, without
oflt'nding Elizabeth, he d urft not venture on tlie
molt distant discovery of his sentiments, or take
any ftip towards facilitating his acquilition of ob-
jcLts so worthy of delire.

ON the other lland, lElizabetihs partiality to-

wards him, which f(le was at no pains to conceal',
might infpir- him with hopes of attaining the lu-
prcle rank in a kingdom more illullrious tllan

' Mdv. 104, 105. Ibid. 93, 9'1*

Scotland.

Scctland. Elizabeth had often declared, that B o o c
norhing but her resolution to lead a single life,
and;¥ his iein=g born her own subject, would have '54t
liiniered her from chufing the Earl of Leicester
for a husband. Such coniiderations of prudence
aic, however, often surmounted by love; and
Leicefler might flatter himself, that the violence
of her affel:ion would at length triulmph both
ovcr the maxims of policy and the fcruplcs of
);-iRie. These hopes induced him, now and then,
to conclude rie proposal of his marriage with the
Scottiffi Qtcen to be a projeCt for his deftruc-
tion; and he imnI;'ted it to the malice of Cecil,
wv]ho, under the ipecious pretence of doing him
honour, intended to ruin him in the good opinion
bloti of llizabteth and M.!r k.

A TREATY of miarriage, proposed by one

Qtcen, who driadted its fuccels; listened to by
another, who was secretly determined against it;
and scarce desired by the mnan hinmfelf, whose in-
tcrelt and reputation it was calculated, in appear-
:IIce, tO promote; could nor, under so many un-
favourable circIIltIlanrces, be b-rought to a for-
tunate illuc. Both Elizabeth and Mary con-
tinued, however, to ac't with equal dilfimulation.
'I'he formrc, notw.ithflanding her fears of losing
LeiceltLr, lolicited warmly in his behalf. The
ltter, though fle began about this time to cafl
her eyes upon another lubjeet of Engaland, did
not, at once, venture finally to rejcst Llizabetl's
favourite.

ni Mdv. iol.

Tr E

B 0 0 K TrE person towards whomn Mary began to tilr,-

111.
_-- her thoughts, was Henry Stewart Lord Darnlv.
14M y eldest son oi the Earl of Lennox. That noble-

trra.ns man, having been driven out of Scotland under
vhugh!s of
nirryin the regency of the Duke of Chatelherault, h.id
-,i d U a r ty-
lY. lived in banifhmnent for twenty ycars. His wife,

Lady Margaret Douglas, was Mary's mofit dan-
gerous rival in her claim upon the Englifl fuc-
ccflion. She was the daughter of Margaret, the
eldei- lifter of Henry VIII. by the Earl of Angus,
whom that Queen married after the death of her
hullband Jaln-es IV. In th:at age, the right and
order of iwuccclion was not fettled with the fame
accura.cy as at prelenl. Time, and the decision
of almost every cafe that can possibly happen,
have at last introduced certainty into a m.itter,
which, naturally, is fubjct to all the vari-ty
arising frorn the caprice of lawyers, guided by
obscure, and often imaginary analogies. The
Cotintefs of Lennox, though born of a second
marriage, was one degree nearer the royal blood
of I'. ng;land than IMary. She was tlhe daghtter
Mary only the ,;rand-dlaulhter of PvMlu-gret.
This was not tlh only advantage over Mliiry
which the ('",,untcfs of' l, nnox clnjoy'cd. She
was born in lEngland, and by a maxim or law in
that country, with regard to private inlherit;lncs,
" whoever is not born in England, or at le.llt of
parents who, ar the tiime of his birth, were in the
obedience of the King of England, cannot cnjoy
any inheritance in the kingdom'. This miaxim,

Carte, l ill. ufI Ejl. vol. iii. .122.

Hales,

.I .iles, an 1English lawy er, produced in a treatise, B o o K
whlich he published at this time, andl endeavoured I_
to apply it to the right of fucceflion to the Crown. I54G
In a private caule, thele pretexts might have
g;iven rife to a long and doubtful litigation;
where a Crown was at stake, such nice di)putes
and fubtilties were to be avoided with the ut-
noft care. If Darnly should happen to contract
an alliance with any of the powerful families in
lEngland, or fhlould publicly profess the Pro-
:.anlt re li gion, thele plausible and popular topics
mi;ght be so urged, as to prove fatal to the pre-
tenlions of a foreigner and of a Papist.

MIARY was aware of all this; and, in order to

p'event any danger from that quarter, had early
tntdeavourced to cultivate a friendly correspond-
ence with the family of Lennox. In the year
one thousand five hundred and fixty-two'", both
the Earl and the Lady Margaret were taken into
cul!tody by Elizabeth's orders, on account of their
loldinc a f!crct cori:'cfontdence with the Scottish
{)aeen.

Ie'.O'i the time that Mary )bc.amie finfible of Elit.beth

the difilicltic s whliici would attend ecr niareyinng llcdyw:th
a forciln Pr'incc, fhc clltered into a flill cioifr l''
C(onllnixion witli the iEarl of L .ennox ", andl in-
vitc(l hilm to rturn intoScotland. Thils fe n-
dtI'avoul d to conceal from i lizablct ; but a tranl-
aftion of' lb ilucll iillortance d(id anoticfcape the
notice of th.lt dilicerning Pril cess. She oblfrved,
but did not intt' ulpt it. Nothilng could fall in

'" C,.mld. 389. " Ibi.l. 7,29 o.

more

B o 0 K more perfectly with her views concerning Scoft
- v-. tifh affairs. She was pleased to fee the pride (if

'I64' the Scottish Queen stoop, at last, to the thouo!ts

of taking a fubjc to her bed. Darnly was in
no situation to excite her jealousy, or her fears.
His father's estate lay in England, and by means
of thlis pledge fle hoped to keep the negotiati)o:
entirely in her own hands, to play the fame gamn
of artifice and delay, which ihe had planned out,
if her recommendation of Leicester had been
more favourably received.

As before the union of the two Crowns, no

fiuhjet of one kingdom could pass into the other
without the permission of both Sovereigns; no
sooner did Lennox, under pretence of p)rofccuting
his wife's claim upon the earldom of Angus, ap-
ply to Elizabeth for her licence to go into Scot-
land, than lie obtained it. Together with it, ffle
gave him letters, warmly recolmmending his p-r-
son and cause to Mary's friendflip and protec-
tion ". But at the fame time, as it was her man-
ner to involve all her tranfaitions with reglard to
Scotland in flme dlegree of perplexity and con-
tradiution ; she warned Mary, that this iiidul-
gtr'nce of Lecnnox mighlt prove fatal to hCrl'lf, as
liis return could not fail of ruviving the ancient
animosity between hilm and the house of Ha-
miltoii.

Tll;s admionition gave umbrage to Mary, and

drew from ller an angry reply, which occasioned,
fur folmc tilme, a total interruption of all corre-

" Icitli, 255. 268.

fpondence

fpondence between the two Queens P. Mary was B °0 K
not a little alarmed at this; flte both dreaded the '-
el-reds of Elizabeth's resentment, and felt sensibly 5f'4'
tie disadvantage of being excluded from a free
intercoulfe with England, where her Ambafiadors
hlid all along carried on, with tomne success,
fccrct negotiations, which increased the number
of her partisans, and paved her way towards the
throne: In order to remove the causes of the
prellent difficulty, Melvil was sent express to the
court of England. He found it no difficult mat-
ter to bring about a reconcilement; and soon
re-eftablifiled the appearance, but not the con-
fidence of friendship, which was all that had
subsisted, for some time, between the two
Q eeens.

DURING this negotiation, Elizabeth's profef-

sions of love to Mary, and Melvil's replies in
name of his Mistress, were made in the language
of the warmest and most cordial friendship. But
what Mclvil truly observes, with respect to Eli-
zabeth, may be extended, without injustice, to
both (ueens. " There was neither plain deal-
ing, nor upright meaning, but great diflimula-
tion, envy, ant fear '."

LENNOX, however, in consequence of the II- Lennox r-

cence which he had obtained, set out for Scot- sictlard.
land, and was received by the Queen, not only
with the refpea due to a nobleman so nearly al-
lied to the royal family, but treated with a dif-
tinguifled familiarity which could not fail of in-

P Keith, 253. Mcl. 83. q Mclv. 104.
VOL. 1. Y spiring

B O°O K spiring him with more elevated hopes. The

-.. --.. rumour of his son's marriage to the Queen began
1564. to spread over the kingdom; and the eyes of all

Scotland were turned upon him as the father of
their future Master. The Duke of Chatelherault
was the firfl to take the alarm. He confidered
Lennox as the ancient and hereditary enemy of
the house of Hamilton; and, in his grandeur,
iaw the ruin of himself and his friends. But the
Queen interposed her authority to prevent any
violent rupture, and employed all her influence
to bring about an accommodation of the dif-
ferences '.

THE powerful family of Douglas nolefs dreaded

Lennox's return, from an apprehension that he
would wrest the earldom of Angus out of their
hands. But the Queen, who well knew how dan-
gerous it would be to irritate Morton, and other
great men of that name, prevailed on Lennox to
purchase their fiiendfhip, by allowing his Lady's
claim upon the earldom of Angus to drop'.
December. AFTER there preliminary fieps, Mary ventured

to call a meeting of Parliament. The aft of for-
feiture, passed against Lennox in the year one
thousand five hundred and forty-five, was repealed,
and he was publicly restored to the honours and
ellate of his ancestors .
junr i5. THE ecclesiastical tranfadions of this year were

ecc. 2. not considerable. In the assemblies of the church,

the fame complaints of the increase of idolatry,

r Kith, 259. " Ibid. 268. Note (b).
t Scc Appendix, No. IX.

thc

the fame representations concerning the poverty B °o K
of the clergy, were renewed. The reply which _
the Queen made to these, and her promises of TlIi564r'
redress, were more satisfying to the Protestants fu(iioe''suF

* Oe QLeen's

than any they had hitherto obtained u. But, not- zal for Po-
wifhftanding her declarations in their favour, they p 'Y
could not help harbouring many suspicions con-
cerning Mary's designs against their religion. She
had never once contented to hear any preacher of
the reformed doctrine. She had abated nothing
of her bigotted attachment to the Romish faith.
'Tie genius of that fupertlition, averse, at all
tines, from toleration, was, in that age, fierce
and unrelenting. Mary had given her friends on
the continent repeated assurances of her resolution
to r-e-ftablifh the Catholic church . She had
industriously avoided every opportunity of ratify-
ing the a&s of Parliament one thousand five hun-
dred and sixty, in favour of the Reformation.
Even the protection, which, ever since her return,
Ihe had afforded the Protestant religion, was
merely temporary, and declared, by her own pro-
clamation, to be of force only " till fle should
take omlc final order in the matter of religion Y."
The vigilant zeal of the preachers was inattentive
to none of thele circumflilnces. The coldness
of their principal leaders, who were, at this time,
entirely devoted to the court, added to theirjea-
lousics and fears. Thelc they uttered to the
people, in language which they deemed luitable
to the neceflity of the times, and which the QIccen

"' K it, 533. 539 x C;art ,

J.iii. 115.
Y I(eiti, 504.5 xo.

Y a c. L:rned

B o0 K reckoned difrefpeRful and insolent. In a meet-
_..-.. ing of the General Assembly, Maitland publicly

j564. accused Knox of teaching seditious doctrine, con-

cerning the riglht of fubjecs to refilt thole Sove-
reigns who trespass against the duty which they
owe to the people. Knox was not backward to
justify what he had taught; and upon this ge-
neral cloctrine of refiflance, Ib just in its own na-
ture, but so delicate in its application to parti-
cular cafes,. there enfired a debate, which ad-
mirabiy displays the talents and charaCter of both
the disputants; the acuteness of the former, em-
bellifhed with learning, but prone to fubtlcty;
the vigorous underflanding of the latter, de-
lighting in bold sentiments, and superior to all
fear .

;.- ' Two years had already been consumed in fruit-

tio, 't,,h of less negotiations concerning the marriage of the
land Ml1, Scottish Queen. Mary had full leisure and op-
wib t O;d portunity to discern the fallacy and deceit of all
t , her mar-
rale. Elizabeth's proceedings with refipec to that as-

fair. But, in order to fit the real intentions of
the Engliflh Queen in a clear light, and to bring
her to tome explicit declaration of her finitiments,
F..b 5. Mary, at lal-, intimated to Randolph, that, on

condition her right of fuccellion to the Crown of
l:ngland were publicly acknowledged, lie was
ready to yield to the solicitations of his Millrcfs
in behalf of Ieicecler:. Nothing could be far-
ther than this from the mind and intention of
Elizabeth. The right of fuccelcion was a myf-

" Knox, 349. Keiit, 269.

8 tcrJ

tery, which, during her whole reign, her jealousy o

ol K

preservcd untouched and unexplained. She had --.
promiled, however, when fie first began to in- I
terell herself in the marriage of the Scottish
Queen, all that was now demanded. I-low to
retreat with decency, how to elude her former
offer, was, on that account, not a little per-
plexing.

THE facility with which Lord Darnly obtained

pcrmififon to visit the court of Scotland, was
owing, in all probability, to that embarrafTilent.
From the time of Melvil's embassy, the Countess
of Lcnnox had warmly solicitcd this liberty for
her son. Elizabeth was no firanger to the am-
bitious hopes with which that young nobleman
flattered himself. She had received repeated ad-
vices from her Ministers of the sentiments which
IMary began to entertain in his favour b. It was
entirely in her power to prevent his stirring out
of London. In the present conjuncture, how-
ever, nothing could be of more advantage to her
than Darnly's journey into Scotland. She had
already brought one actor upon the stage, who,
under her management, had, for a long time,
anulfed the Scottifi Queen. She hoped, no le!s
absolutely, to direEt the motions of Darnly, who
was likewile her fubljcfl; and again to involve
Mary in all the tedious intricacies of negotiation.
Thcef motives determined Elizabeth and her
Ministers to yield to the solicitations of the
Countess of Lcnnox.

Kcith, 229. 26. 266.

Y 3 BUT

B 0 0 K BUT this deep-laid scheme was in a moment
- ,- disconcerted. Such unexpected events, as the
Da'n565 fancy of poets ascribes to love, are, at Tome times,
Darni jr-
rives in really produced by that passion. An affair, which
Scotland.

had been the objet of so many political intrigues,
and had moved and interested so many Princes,
was at last decided by the sudden liking of two
young pc:fons. Lord Darnly was, at this time,
in the firit bloom and vigour of youth. I:
beauty and gracefulness of person he furpafi d
all his cotemporaries; he excelled, eminently, in
such arts as add cafe and elegance to external
form, and which tnabl- i: not only to dazzle, but

cains thle to please. Mary was of an age, and of a temper,
~i,';t. to feel the full power of these accomplifhiments.

The imprefion which Lord Darnly made upon
her was visible from the time of their first in-
Feb. 13, terview. The whole business of the court was

to amuse and entertain this illustrious gucfti;
and in all those scenes of gaiety, Darnly, whose
qualifications were altogether superficial and
showy, appeared to great advantage. His con-
quest of the Queen's heart became complete and
inclination now prompted her to conclude a mar-
riage, the first thoughts of which had been fug-
gelted by considerations merely political.

ELIZABETH contributed, and perhaps not with-

out design, to increase the violence of this pafTion.
Soon after Darnly's arrival in Scotland, fle, in
return to that message, whereby Mary had fig-
nified her willingness to accept ofLeicefter, gave

Knox, 369.

anll

an answer, in such terms as plainly unravelled B O i K
her original intention in that intrigued. She
promised, if the Scottish Queen's marriage with h 565'
Leicester should take place, to advance him to
great honours; but with regard to Mary's title to
the Fnglifl fucceflion, she would neither susser
any legal inquiry to be made concerning it, nor
permit it to be publicly recognized, until she
herself should declare her resolution never to
marry. Notwithltanding Elizabeth's former pro-
imifes, Mary had reason to expe&t every thing
contained in this reply; her high spirit, however,
could not bear, with patience, such a cruel dif-
coveryof the contempt, the artifice, and mockery
with which, under the veil of friendihip, she had
been so long abused. She burst into tears of in-
dignation, and expressed, with the utmost bitter-
ness, her sense of that disingenuous craft which
had been employed to deceive here.

THE natural effeEt of this indignation was to

add to the impetuosity with which The pursued her
own scheme. Blinded by resentment, as well as
by love, she observed no defects in the man whom
she had chosen; and began to take the necessary
steps towards accomplishing her design, with all
the impatience natural to those passions.

As Darnly was ob nearly related to the Queen,

the canon law made it necessary to obtain the
Pope's dilpenfation before the celebration of the
marriagc. For this purpose, fie early set on foot
a negotiation with the court of Ronme.

dlKeith, 7o ppnd. i,

Append. KiAend. 159.
C;tidl. 396.

Y 4 SHIE

B 0 0 K SHE was busy, at the fame time, in procuring

III.

L- ---» the consent of the French King and his mother.
The F65;,h Having com!nunicated her design, and the mo-
court ap- tives which determined her choice, to Caftelnau
prove of
thematch. the French Ambassador, fle employed him, as

the lmofi proper person, to bring his court to fall in
with her views. Among other arguments to this
purpose, Cailelnau mentioned Mary's attachment
to Darniy, which he represented to be tb violcn;
and deep-rooted, that it was no longer in her own
power to break off the match . Nor were thel
French Mi nifters backward in encouraging Mar' s
taffion. IHer pride would never sloop to an al-
liance with a fubjeci of France. By this choice,
they were delivered from the apprehension of a
match with any of the Aufl-rian Princes, as well as
the danger of too close an union wit!i Elizabeth;
and as Darnly professed the Roman Catholic re-
ligion, this suited the bigotted schemes which
that court had adopted.

r.rplvd;i- VvWILE Mary was endeavouring to reconcile
gufis several

l th.C no- foreign courts to a measure which Ihe had so mucl.
hie''' at heart; Darnly, and his father, by their beha-

viour, were raising up enemies at home to obflrut)
ir. Lennox had, cluring the former part of 1is
life, dilcovered no great cornpafs of abilities or
political wisdom; and appears to have been a
man of a weak undrclranding, and violent paif-
sions. Darnly was not fiIpcrior to his father in
understanding, and all his pallions were fRill more
inpetuous '. To these, lie added that insolence,

g Cafeln. 4(4. h cii 272, 273.

which

twhich the advantage of external form, when ac- B o0 0
companied with no quality more valuable, is -
apt to inspire. Intoxicated with the Queen's 565.
favour, he began already to assume the haugh-
tinels of a King, and to put on that imperious
air, which majesty itself can scarce render to-
lIrable.

IT was by the advice, or at least with the con- pticu~.."v

lent of Murray and his party, that Lennox had
been invited into Scotland ; and yet no iooner
did he acquire a firm footing in that kingdom,
than he began to enter into secret cabals with
thole noblemen who were known to be avowed
enemies to Murray, and, with regard to religion,
to be either neutrals, or favourers of Popery k.
Darnly, still more imprudent, allowed some rash
expressions concerning those favours which the
Qeeen's bounty had conferred upon Murray, to
escape him '.

BUT, above all there, the familiarity which

Darnly cultivated with David Rizio, contri-
buted to increase the suspicion and disgust of the
nobles.

THE low birth and indigent condition of this Th rifr of

man, placed him in a station in which he ought ,uo'",
naturally to have remained unlknown to potlc-
rity. But what fortune called him to ad and
to iuff'er in Scotland, obliges hiflory to descend
fioml its dignity, and to record his adventurcs.
Hle was the son of a musician in Turin, and
having accompanied the Piedmontefe Amnbaf-

Kl.n , 367. IK ith, 274. k Keith, 272. Ibid. 274.

fador

B 0 0 K fador into Scotland, gained admission into the

I_'^-_ ) Queen's family by his skill in music. As his de-
1565. pendant condition had taught him suppleness of

Ipirit, and insinuating manners, he quickly crept
into the Queen's favour, and her French Se-
cretary happening to return at that time into his
own country, was preferred by her to that office.
He now began to make a figure in court, and to
appear as a man of consequence. The whole
train of suitors and expectants, who have an
extreme sagacity in discovering the paths which
lead most directly to success, applied to him.
His recommendations were observed to have
great influence over the Queen, and he grew to
be confidered not only as a favourite, but as a
Minister. Nor was Rizio careful to abate that
envy which always attends such an extraordinary
and rapid change of fortune. He studied, on
the contrary, to display the whole extent of his
favour. He asseted to talk often, and fami-
liarly, with the Queen in public. He equalled
the greatest and most opulent fubjeas, in riclh-
ness of dress, and in the number of his at-
tendants. He discovered, in all his behaviour,
that assuming insolence, with which unmerited
prosperity inspires an ignoble mind. It was
with the utmoit indignation that the nobles be-
held the power; it was with the utnoft diffi-
culty that they tolerated the arrogance of this
unworthy minion. Even in the Queen's preftnce
they could not forbear treating him with marks
of contempt. Nor was it his exorbitant power
alone, which exafpcrated the Scots. They con-

fidered

filered him, and not without reason, as a dan- B o0 K
gerous enemy to the Protestant religion, and sus- f--
peted that he held, for this purpolc, a secret cor- 156s5
rcfpondence with the court of Rome ".

IT vas Darnly's misfortune to fall under the D.rnly's

connexion

management of this man, who, by flattery and withlhim.
afliduity, easily gained on his vanity and unexpe-
rience. Rizio's whole influence on the Queen was
employed in his behalf, and contributed, without
doubt, towards establishing him more firmly in
her affctions". But whatever benefit Darnly
might reap from his patronage, it did not coun-
terbalance the contempt, and even infamy, to
which he was exposed, on account of his fami-
liarity with such an upstart.

TnouGH Darnly daily made progress in the

Queen's affe&ions, fle conducted herself, how-
ever, with fiuch prudent reserve, as to impose on
Randolph the Engliih Resident, a man otherwise
shrewd and penetrating. It appears from his let-
ters at this period, that he entertained not the
least suspicion of the intrigue which was carrying
on; and gave his court repeated assurances, that
the Scottilh Queen had no design of marrying
Darnly °. In the midst of this security, Mary
dispatched Maitland to signify her intention to
Elizabeth, and to solicit her content to the
marriage with )arnly. This cmbaffy was the
first thing which opened the eyes of Ran-
dolph.

m Bnchan. 3..o. Mclv. 107. nMclv. i .
u" Jcitl, 273. atnd Appcnd. i'5 .

ELIZA.

0 0 K ELIZABETH affected the greatest surprise at tlhis
Ill.

L<-V- sudden resolution of the Scottifhl Queen, but
Ap'is'. without reason. The train was laid by herlelf,
Elizbheth and the had no cause to wonder when it took
tleclares
a-,in,( the effcct. She exprefild, at the fame time, her
Q",25e dilapprobation of the match, in the filongclt
tch Djarn- terms; and pretended to foresee many dlngers

and inconveniencies arising from it, to both
kingdoms. But this, too, was mere affecation.
Mary had often and plainly declared her reiolu-
tion to marry. It was imnpofible fle could lmake
any choice more inoffensive. The danger of in-
troducing a foreign interest into Britain, which
Elizabeth had so julfly dreaded, was entirely
avoided. Darnly, though allied to both Crowns,
and poffefled of lands in both kingdoms, could
be formidable to neither. It is evident fiomn all
these circumfitances, that Elizabeth's apprehen-
lions of danger could not possibly be Ieriots;
and that, in all her violent declarations againll-
Iarnly, there was much more of grimace than of
reality P.

TUhRE were not wanting, however, political

motives of ifuch weight, to induce that wile Prin-
ccfs to put on the appearance of great difplceafure.

P lEvn the hilioriins oCf that tgc acklmwl'dgr , tiI:. t lhc

;:tirrhti -: cr tle Sconltifi (Qtcln with :t I\hc edl xi Is ft'lr ii>]l
Iringr (dir,!grcc;ll)Ic to Elizabethil. Knox, 3(t6). 373. 1u-
critlo . '.9. C;iflcll;l:, , wvilo at ti.it l ime was iwell ac(iintciiltit

lih i ic inlri.g~t s (es bloth the Britill/ cotill , ;afi r.s, titJou

,7(.nin!,.of - r 'c;lt |)o, l;ilil tily, l t
i:t l r lc matlcih wa\ s wlilly Eli-

t/;l))t ll>; o tt wor-k: ,(,,,,[clin. 462. and tha1t 1i c

l r joi(icd .it

llc :n. cotillpil]nllt(.'nl of it, ;ppc:i , l; -oli the letters I of lilc't (i<W
A ltl)lld'ii.iors. ,citlh, 2'U;. 2;..

Mary,

,Mary, intimidated by this, might perhaps delay B 0 o K
her marriage; which Elizabeth desired to ob- .--
ftruft with a weakness that little suited the dig- 565
nity of her mind and the elevation of her charac-
ter. Betides, the tranquillity of her own king-
dom was the great object of Elizabeti's policy;
and by declaring her diffatisfacion with Mary's
conduci, she hoped to alarm that party in Scot-
land, which was attached to the :.ngSli!h interefl,
and to encourage such of the nobles, as fecrctly
(liiapproved the match, openly to oppose it. The
feeds of dilcord would, by this means, be scat-
tered through that kingdom. Intetline commo-
tions might ariie. Anidit these Mary could form
none of thole clanigerous fcihcms, to which the
union of her people might have prompted her.
Elizabeth would become tle uimpili between the
Scottish Queen and her contending fubjecs ; and
England miglht look on, with ficurity, while a
florm, whicll ie lihad railed, wafted the only king-
1dom which could potfibly disturb its peace.

IN profccution of this scheme, fihe laid before My ,.

her Privy Council the mdtllge firom the Scottihf
Queen, and consulted them with regard to the
anliwr flie ftlould return. Their determination,
it is easy to conceive, was pcrfcEly conformable
to her fccret views. 'Ihicy drew up a rcmonftirance
againfl the intended match, full of the imaginary
(langers with which that event threatened the
kingdom *'. Nor did file think it enough, to fig- S: nd
nify lher disapprobation of the mealrfue, either by ,Thrroior.

ftrutl it.
Kcitl,, 274. Sec Append. No. X.

Maitland,

B O O K ELIZABETH affected the greatest surprise at this
L-N-- sudden resolution of the Scottifl Queen, but
.'pi6' without reason. The train was laid by herficf,
i1i7aheth and the had no cause to wonder when it took
declares
a.ninf the effet. She exprefeTd, at the fame time, her
m",,i2e disapprobation of the match, in the ftlongcit
with Drn- terms; and pretended to soresec many dcincgrs

and inconveniencies arising fiom ic, to both
kingdoms. But this, too, was mere affecauior.
Mary had often and plainly declared her refolu-
tion to marry. It was impossible he could make
any choice more inoffensive. The danger of in-
troducing a foreign interest into Britain, which
.lizabeth had so julcly dreaded, was entirely
avoided. Darnly, though allied to both Crowns,
and possessed of lands in both kingdoms, could
be formidable to neither. Ic is evident from ail
thcfe circumstances, that Elizabeth's apprlien-
iions of danger could not poflibly be leriouls;
and that, in all her violent declarations againllt
Darnly, there was much more of grimace than of
reality P.

TriERE were not wanting, however, political

i-otives of fich weight, to induce that wile Prin-
cess to put on the appearance of great dilfleafilre.

P I\'en tlhe iifloliians of that .isc ulcknl wledg(nc, tli.i t il

Daatrli:l:r, (if tie Scn': ifi (i cclln witlh :t Iil)bjcl ;is 1t. 11 ),n
1'ingl, (di£!' 'cc;il)lc to .liz.:llcrll. KIl(x, 369. 373. i, ;-
<r:iol. 339. C;lf(lcln;iI, wIo ;it

1 .ith. timle wa.s W\\cv ;icqll a ;,itctl

v. illh lt inltriglues ofr both the BIritil ll coi fls, l.t, ll
-c'(,tlii'. o)' $'c:t plriib:tlilithv, tiat tt lie m;til c t \':s whilly Ili-

;,luhcll 's; ow\ i wolk : C:lnfcll . .46 . nin thtt !itt !e rcjic iicl :ir

ti,' :o( ( nlllllilllllcn t ('l it, .;p'1' :t's Isroin the lettcrs

(if lhcr

o vn
½t\lllhil):tidors. I\ciith, 2c'o. 2 8.

M ary,

Mary, intimidated by this, might perhaps delay B O0 K
her marriage; which Elizabeth desired to ob- ---~
ftruct with a weakness that little suited the dig- 1565.
nity of her mind and the elevation of her charac-
ter. Betides, the tranquillity of her own king-
ldom was the great obje& of Elizabeth's policy;
and by declaring her diffatisfacltion with Mary's
conduCt, she hoped to alarm that party in Scot-
land, which was attached to the E;.nglih interest:,
and to encourage such of the nobles, as fecrctly
diilipproved the match, openly to oppose it. The
feeds of discord would, by this means, be scat-
tercd through that kingdom. Intef:ill commo-
tions might arile. Amidfl these Mary could form
none of thole dangerous fchcmcs, to which the
union of her people might have prompted her.
Elizabeth would become the umpire )btween the
Scottifi Queen and her contending fubljeCs ; and
England migiht look on, with security, while a
flori, which fie lhad railced, wafted the only king-
dom which could polTibly disturb its peace.

IN prosecution of this scheme, she laid before My ,..

her Privy Council the mnt'gce fi-om the Scottish
Quirn, and consulted them with regard to tie
anFwcr she should return. Their determination,
it is caf )

to conceive, was perfectly conformable

to her ficret views. They drew up a remonfirance
againfl the intended match, full of the iimaginary
dangers with which that event threatened the
kinlgdlon '. Nor did fihe think it enough, to fig- s n,
nify her disap)probation of the measure, cither by troll hto-

firutl it.
q /Kcith, 274. See Append. No. X.

Maitland,

1 o o0 K Maitland, Mary's Ambassador, or by Randolph,
_-,-_ her own Resident in Scotland; in order to add

1565. more dignity to the farce which fle chose to act,

fle appointed Sir Nicholas Throgmorton herArn-
balfador Extraordinary. She commanded him to
declare, in the firongefl terms, her dissatisfaction
with the ftep which Mary proposed to cake; and,
at the fame time, to produce the determination
of the Privy Council, as an evidence that tle
sentiments of the nation were not different from
her own. Not long after, she confined the Coun-
tcfs of Lennox as a prisoner, firit in her own
house, and then sent her to the Tower .

INTELLIGENCE of all this reached Scotland, be-

fore the arrival of the English Ambassador. In
the firit transports of her indignation, Mary re-
solved, no longer, to keep any measures with Eli-
zabeth ; and sent orders to Maitland, who ac-
companied Throgmorton, to return infrantly to
the English court, and, in her name, to declare
to Elizabeth, that after having been amused so
long to so little purpoft; after having been fooled,
and imposed on so grossly by her artifices; flhe
was now resolved to gratify her own inclina-
tion, and to afl no other content, but that of her
own fubjcl-s, in the choice of an hufland. Mait-
land, with his usual sagacity, foresaw all the es-
fcts of fi.ch a rafli an ngry meflge, and ven-
tured rather to incur the displeasure of his Mil.
trels, by disobeying her commands, than to be
made the inflrument of tearing asunder, Jb vio-

Keith, Append. 16r.

t)~~~9 ~lently,
9

clntly, the few remaining ties, which till linked B O O K
together the two Queens.

MrARY herfelffoon became sensible of her error. 1565-

She received the English Ambassador with re-
speC; justified her own conduct with decency;
and though unalterable in her resolution, the as-
sected a wonderful solicitude to reconcile Eliza-
beth to the measure; and even pretended, out of
complaisance towards her, to put off the confumr
ination of the marriage for some months'. It is
probable, however, that the want of the Pope's
dispensation, and the profpcct of gaining the con-
lent of her own fubjcEts, were the real motives
of this delay.

THIS content Mary laboured with the utmost Murrjay'

induifry to obtain. Thle Earl of Murray was the Do,,:" '
person in the kingdclom, whose concurrence was
of the greatest importance; but she had reason to
fear that it would not be procured without ex-
treme difficulty. From the time of Lennox's re-
turn into Scotland, Murray perceived that the
Qtueen's affections began gradually to be estranged
from him. Darnly, Athol, Rizio, all the court
favourites, combined againfl: him. His ambi-
tious spirit could not brook this diminution of his
power, which his former ferviccs had 10 little
merited. I-lc retired into the country, and gave
way to rivals, with whom he was unable to con-
tend'. The return of the Earl of Bothwcll, lis
avowecd enemy, who had been acculfci of a design
upon his life, and who had rcfided for I)mc time

Kcithi, tApipncil . 16o. t Ki.tii, 27H.
Ibid . 27z. Appcnd. Id.9.

in

B O0 OK in foreign countries, obliged him to attend to is;
'-^.--' own safety. No intreaty of the Queen could per-

1565s fuade him to a reconcilement with that nobleman.

IHe insisted on having him brought to a public
trial, and prevailed, by his importunity, to I;ave
a day fixed for it. Bothwell durst not appear in
opposition to a man, who came to the place of
trial, attended by five thousand of his followers
on horf:back. He was once more constrained
to leave the kingdom; but, by the Qecn's
cojmmand, the sentence of outlawry, which is in-
curred by non-appearance, was not pronounced
against him .
iJy g8. MARY, ifnnfible, at the fame time, of how much

importance it was, to gain a subjed so )powerful
and so popular as the Earl of Murray, invite
himt back to court, and received him witlh mny
demonitrations of respect and confidence. At ilt
Ihe desired hlim to fe: an example to her oric'r
fubjecds by fubfcrib;ng a paper, containing a
formal approbation of her marriage with Darnl".
Murray had many reasons to hefitatc, and even
to withhold his aflent. Darnly ]lad not only uin-
derlmined his credlit with the Qtleen, but dil;co-
vercd, on every occasion, a rooted averlion to lis
person. By conlicnting to his elevation to ti:
throne, he would give him such an acccniui ti!
dignity and power, as no man willingly blctno'v
on an enemy. The unhappy consequences wvl hl
might follow upon a breach with England wci'c,
likewise, of conliderable weight witl Murri:.

Kt:it;Ji, idi.bi. I6o.

lI¢

ITe had always openly preferred a confederacy n ° ,, K
with England, before the ancient alliance with
lFrance. By his means chiefly, this change in the '565.
Ivfteim of national politics had been brought
about. A league with England llad been efta-
bliflhed; and he could not thilk of fihrrificing, to
a rafl and youthful palion, an alliance of so much
utility to the kingdom; and which he and the
other nobles were bound, by every obligation, to
maintain r. Nor was the interest of religion for-
gotten on this occasion. Mary, though fur-
rounded by Protestant Counellors, had found
means to hold a dangerous correspondence with
foreign Catholics. She had even courted the
Pope's protection, who had sent her a subsidy of
eight thousand crowns . Though Murray had
hitherto endeavoured'to bridle the zeal of the re-
formed clergy, and to set the Queen's conduct in
the most favourable light, yet her obstinate ad-
herence to her own religion could not fail of
alarming him, and by her resolution to marry a
papilt, the hope of reclaiming her, by an union
with a Protestant, was for ever cut offa. Each
of there considerations had its influence on
Murray, and all of them determined him to de-
cline complying, at that time, with the Queen's
request.

THFI Convention of nobles, which was assem- May 14.

bled a few days after, discovered a greater difpo- tio0 of the
fition to gratify the Queen. Many of them, nslaespf'
without hesitation, expressed their approbation lthe r-

Y Keith, lig9. * Kcilh, 295. Mclv. 14.
a Keithi, Appc11n . 160.
VOL. I. Z of

B 0 0 K of the intended match; but as others cerr

il.

L^ flartl-ed at the fame dangers which had alai;'it.l
3565M Murray, or were influenced by his example [t

refufc their confient, another Convention was a'?-
pointed at Perth, in order to deliberate inoo:
fully concernIing thlis matterl.

MEAi' N wiL c, Mary gave a lpijlic evidence (,

her own inclina.tion, by conferring upon 1)arnl',
titles of honour peculiar to the royal family. The
opposition lhe h.Id hitherto met with, and the
niany con tiv.-liccs employed to thwart and cldii;-
poinlt her inclination, produced their ufuil elfcdi
on her heart, they confirmed her pailon; and ill-
creased its violence. The fimlplicity of that ai(
imputed an .ifFection so excefive, to the influence
of witchcraftc. [t was owing, hIowcvcr, to no
other charm, than the irrefiiliblc power of yot;'.
and beauty over a young and tender heart. Darnly
grew giddy with his prolperity. Flattered by tlhe
love of a Queen, andl the applaufc of many among
her fubjeEts, his natural haughtiness and infblencc
became insupportable, and he could no longer
bear advice, far leis contradiction. Lord Ruth-
ven, happening to be the firlt person who in-
formed him that Mary, in order to sooth 1Eliza-
beth, had delayed, for some time, creatillng him
Duke of Albany, he, in a frenzy of rage, ldrew
his dagger and attempted to stab him d. It re-
quired all Mary's attention, to prevent his falling
under that contempt to which such behaviour
deservedly exposed him.

b Keith, 2R3. Knox, 373. a Keith, 2S3.
I lI'itcl, Appind. 160.

IM

IN no fcenc of her life was ever Mary's own B 0 0 K

adllrls ore remlarklably displaycd. Love flarp- - _
cnCed her invention, and made her fludy every Mary'6d-
meho(l of gaining her fulbje(s. Many of the drfs in

gaining her

nobles lhe won by her addrcefs, and more by her luLjccs.
priomifcs. On some f(e bestowed lands, to others
ihe ,gave new titles of honourc. She even con-
delcccnded to court the Protcfiant clergy; and
having invited three of their fuperintendants to
Stirling, fie declared, in strong terms, her refo-
lution to p-otcct their religion, expressed her wil-
lingne;f to be prelent at a conference upon the
points in doltrine which were disputed between
the Prottitants and Papifis, and went so far as to
ihow foomc desire to hear such of their preachers as
were mofi remarkablk for moderation '. By these
arts, the Quleen gained wonderfully upon the
people, who, unlels their jealousy be raised by
repeated injuries, are always ready to view the
a&ions of their Sovereign with an indulgent eye.

ON the other hand, Murray and his associates

were plainly the dupes of L lizabeth's policy. She
talked in bl high a fi'ain of her difpleafurc at the
intended march; file treated Lady Lennox with
bo much rigour; Ihe wrote to the Scotti(h Queen
in such forong terms; she recalled the Earl of
Lennox and his son in fiich a peremptory man-
ner, and with such fevcre denunciations of her
vengeance if they fliould lprfume to difobeyg;
that all thele cxprcflions of aversion fully per-
fuaded them of her sincerity. This belief for-

c Keith, 283. K11nox, 373'. e KciJi, 285, 286.

Z : tified

B 0 0 K tified their scruples with refpeE to the match,

Ill.

-. -i and encouraged them to oppose it. They began
1565. With forming among themielves bonds of con-

federacy and mutual defence; they entered into
a iecret correspondence with the lEnglifh Resident,
in order to secure Elizabeth's afliftance when it
should become needfulh; they endeavoured to
fill the nation with such apprehensions of danger,
as might counterbalance the influence of those
arts which the Qljeen had employed.

Schermvc. f BESIDES these intrigues, there were secretly
Darnlv and
Mur , - carried on, by both parties, dark designs of a
gair f. eath
other. nmore criminal nature, and more luitcd to the

spirit of the age. Darnly, impatient of that op-
position, which he imputed wholly to Murray,
and resolving at any rate to get rid of such a
powerful enemy, formed a plot to affafinate hiim,
during the meeting of the Convention at Perth.
Murray, on his part, despairing of preventing
the marriage by any other means, had, together
with the Duke of Chatelherault, and the Earl of
Argyll, concerted measures for seizing Darnly,
and carrying him a prisoner into England.

IF either of these conspiracies had taken cffet,

this convention might have been attended with
consequences extremely tragical; but both were
rendered abortive, by the vigilance or good for-
tune of those against whom they were formed.
Murray, being warned of his danger by some re-
tainers to the court, who still favoured his in-
tcrcft, avoided the blow by not going to Perth.

Kh ciih, 289. 292. 298.

Mary,

Mary, receiving intelligence of Murray's enter- B 0 o K
prise, retired with the utmost expedition, along --
with Darnly, to the other fide of Forth. Con- 1565
fcious, on both fides, of guilt, and inflamed with
resentment, it was impoflible they could either
forget the violence, which thenmfe:lves had me-
ditated, or forgive the injuries intended againfli
them. From that moment, all hope of recon-
cilement was at an end, and their mutual enmity
burst out with every symptom of implacable
hatred '

ON

Thc reality of these two opposite confp)iaces s s given

occ;alimn to imanv diptnts land much contraldicioin. Some
dcil) that any dclig.n was iormcd ag;in f the life of Mlurray;
others call in iqellion the truth of the conspiracy againit
la:rnll. 'There i'Cem, however, to le plautilble rc;fons for
b)cliviillig that there is i;lmc iMundation for what has been as-
cirtedl whh r:ith 'L to boli ; thliogh the zeial and credulity of
party-writcrs lhave added to c:tch mIany exaggerated circuin-
ilnticcs. The fe lllowing argumcnts render it probable, thliat
litmc violence w\;s intciietled againtill MII;ray.

I. 'lhis is pioliively iiflreted 1)v Buclhanan, 341. 2. The

Engh lit lRclidnt rite s to Cecil, li.itt Murray was tafil'redly
intllu-,nlcd that a dIclign was for liued of murdricng him at
Perth, :ud1 mel iolit , va;siouts cilrcunlllttices coIIcerilinll t lie
mI:tInnter in \whicll the crile w\a to Ibe commiittedl. If the
whole lIad beeln :t li;lioI ofd his own, or o)1 Mlurray, it is ini-
pofliile that lie could halve writieii ill this ltraiin to ftchi a
(lil'Cirn'ing MinillCer. Keitll, 287. 3. Murray hlinmllf con-
llai:tly a:tnd pttl liciv pCie illed in afll ir hliig thtl fitch a delig n
was tf'riced :tg:tilll hii s life. Keith, App. o08. He was re-
(qiired by tlie Oeeiti to t Mranfnit in writing al accountt of tlle

(roslitracy w lil, lie )rtellttldd had been 1o'r11ed againlt lis
lif'. Tilhs hie ,lid accotillylv ; bul t ' whlen it was lroiught to
hlic MNt i lly ly l:r l I' l;rv ts l lnt lir tlhi pulitm sl , it ;a)'ici 's

. liehr 1lighlnefs alnd lier Council, that hlis Ipurg;tiuo inl thiat

Z 3 bcl.ldf

B 0 0 K ON Mary's return to Edinburgh, he summoned

_-yrt her vaff4ls by proclamation, and solicited them by

Mar6fum- her letters, to repair thither in arms, for the pro-
mals her teaion of her person against her foreign and do-
take arms meftic
sgainft
Murray.

behalf was not si sufficient as the matter required." Keith,
App. o.9. He was therefore summoned to appear within
three days before the Queen in Holyrood-houfe; and in order
to encourage him to do so, a fafe-condut was offered to him.
Ibid, Though he had once contented to appear, he after-
wards declined to do so. But whoever confiders Murray's
situation, and the characer of those who directed Mary's
councils at that time, will hardly deem it a decisive proof of
his guilt, that he did not chufe to risk his perfun on such fe-
Purity. 4. The furious paflions of Darnly, the ficrcenefs of
his resentment, which scrupled at no violence, and the man-
ners of the age, render the imputation of such a crime lets
improbable.

II. That Murray and his associates had resolved to seize

Darnly in his return from Perth, appears with fill greater
certainty; i. From the express testimony of Mel il, 112.; al-
though Buchanan, p. 341. and Knox, p. 377. assec, without
reason, to represent this as an idle rumour. 2. The qucilion
was put to Randolph, Whether the Governor of Berwick
would receive Lennox and his son, if they were delivered at
that place ? His answer was, " that they would not refuie
their own, i. e. their own tubjecs, in whitfoever fort they
came unto us, i. c. wlhether they returned to England vo-
luntarily, as they had been lequired, or were brought thither
by force." This plainly /hews, that fomen flch design was in
;hand, and Randolph did not ditcourage it by the aniivcr
which he gave. Keith, 290. 3. The precipitation with
which the Queen retired, and the reason fie gave for this
sudden flight, are mentioned by Randolph. Keith, 291.
4. A great part of the Scottifll nobles, and among there the
Earls of Argyll and Rothes, who were themfelvcs privy to
the design, aflert the reality of the confplracy. Good.
vol. ii. 358.

,Al

meftic enemies k. She was obeyed with all the B 0 o K
promptness and alacrity with which fubjeEts run _
to defend a mild and popular administration. This S56S.
popularity, however, she owed in a great measure
to Murray, who had directed her adminifh-ation

All these circumstances render the truth of both con-

fpiracies probablc. But we may obfcrve how far this proof,
though drawn from pullic records, falls fiort, on both fides,
of legal and formal evidence. Buchanan and Randolph, in
their accounts of the conspiracy againfl Murray, differ widely
in almost every circumflance. The accounts of the attempt
upon Darnly are not more confidtent. Melvil alleges, that
the design of the conspirators was to carry Darnly a prisoner
into England; the proposal made to Randolph agrees with
this. Randolph iays, that they intended to carry the Queers
to St. Andrew's, and Darnly to Castle Campbell. The
Lords, in their declaration, affirm the design of the confpi-
rators to have been to murder Darnly and his father, to
confine the Queen in Lochleven during life, and to usurp the
government. To believe implicitly, whatever they find in
an ancient paper, is a folly to swhich, in every age, Anti-
quaries are extremely prone. Antient papers, however,
often contain nothing more than the slanders of a party, and
the lie of the day. The declaration of the nobles referred to,
is of this kind; it is plainly rancorous, and written in the
very heat of faction. Many things aflerted in it, are evi-
dently false or exaggerated. Let Murray and his confede,
rates be as ambitious as we can suppose, they muff have had
some pretences, and plaulible ones too, before they could
venture to imprison their Sovereign for life, and to fcize the
reins of governmcnt; but, at that time, the Queen's conduct
had afforded no colourable excuse for proceeding to fueh ex-
tremities. It is likewise remarkable, that in all the procla.
mations against Murray, of which so many are publiflcd in
Keith, Appendix io8, &c. neitlher the violent attempt upon
Darnly, nor that which he is alleged to have formed against
tle Queen hcrfclf, are ever once mentioned,

IKeith, 298,
Z 4 withl

B 0 0 K with great prudence. But the crime ofoppofing
\.--- her nm:rriage obliterated the memory of his

565· former services; and Mary, impatient of contra-

dition, and apt to confider those who difputerl
her will, as enemies to her person, determined to
let hin fedl the whole weight of her vengeance.
For this tpurpofe fle summoned him to appear
before her upon a short warning, to answer to
such things as should be laid to his charge'. At
this very time, Murray, and the Lords who ad-
hered to him, were assembled at Stirling, to de.
liberate what course they flould hold in fucl a
difficult cotnjln&ure. But the current of popular
favour ran so strongly againlf them, and, not-
with[lahiding fomc fears and jealousies, there pre-
vailed in the nation such a general dillofition to
gratify the Queen in a matter which so nearly
concerned her, that, without coining to any
other conclusion, than to implore the Queen of
England's protecion, they put an end to their
inlffeitual consultations, and returned every man
to his own house.

TocE.rTErR with this discovery of the weakness

of her enemies, the confluence of her fthl)jds
fiom all corners of the kingdom, afforded Mary
an agreeable proof of her own strength. While
the QLcn was in this jrofperous situation, flie
detcllerined to bring to a period an affair, whlich
had 1t long engronled her heart, and occupied her

i-:ric, attention. On the twenty-ninth of July, 1ie
>i ,.v,!> married Lord Darnly. The cerci'lil,v was pcr-

1c 'i, ;\)p[cnd,. ic..

forined

formed in the Queen's Chapel, according to the BR O K
rites of the Romin; church ; the Pope's bull -- _
(liflenfing with their marriage having been pre- 1565.
vioufly obtained '%. Sle issued, at the fame time,
proclamations, conferring the title of King of
Scots upon her hufbland, and commanding that
henceforth all writs at law flould run in the joint
names of King and Queen". Nothing can be a
fironger proof of the violence of Mary's love, or
the weakncls of her councils, than this last ftep.
Whether fie had any right to cliihut a husband
without consent of Parliament, was, in that age,
a mattcr of fiole dispute"; that fle had no right
to confer upon him, by her private authority, the
title and dignity of King; or, by a finple pro-
clamation, to rails her hufbaind to be the naft-cr
of her people, fieins to be beyond all doubt.
Francis II. indeed, bore the fame title. It was
not, however, the gift of the )Qeen, but of the
nation; and the content of Parliament was ob-
tained, beforeihe ventured to afTume it. Darnly's
condition, as a subje&l, rendered it fill more ne-
ccffiry to have tle concurrence of the supreme
Council in his favour. Such a violent and un-
precedented llretch of prerogative, as the fubfli-
tlting a plroclamation in place of an a&t of puar-
liament, might have juflly alarmed the nation.
But, at that time, tile Qjeeln poicffied lo entirely
the confidence of her lihjects, that, notwith-
flanding all the clamours of the malecontents, no

'i Kch, 307. " Aiidcrbin, 1. 33. SC ' AppCrlc . N' . XI.
°o th
l i;,ain. 31. to

3,1~ ~ ~ ~ ~ smpo~

EB ° K sympto-ms of' gci: .1 discontent appeared on that

- ,--. account.
1565. EVEN amidfl that scene of joy which always

accompanies Iiiccefsful love, Mary did not if!licr
the course of her vengeance against the malecon-
tent nobles to be interrupted. Three days after
the marriage, Murray was again funmnoned to
court, under the severest penalties, and upon his
non-appearance, the rigour of juitice tool pl ice,
and he was declared an out-law P. At the fllme
tiime, the Queen set at liberty Lord Gordon,
who, ever since his father's infurretion in tice
year one thousand five hundred and fixty-two,
had been detained a prisoner; she recalled the
Earl of Sutherland, who, on account of his con-
cern in that conspiracy, had fled into Flan.lcrs;
and the permitted Bothwell to return again into
Scotland. The firfi and last of these were
among the most powerful fubjets in tle king-
dom, and all of them animated with implacable
hatred to Murray, whom they deemed the enemy
of their families, and the author of their own
sufferings. This common hatred became the
foundation of the strictest union with the
Qteen, and gained them an ascendant over
all her councils. Murray himself confidlercd
this confederacy with his avowed enemies, as
a more certain indication than any neaftre
ihe had yet taken, of her inexorable rclent-
ment,

K.citl, 309, 310.

Ti ;1:

'FTr mnalecontents had not yet openly taken up B 0 o K

arms'. But the Queen having ordered her ti'b-
iedls to march againit them, they were driven A,,~c6s'.
to the last extremity. They found themlfdlves gi""t 'llr-

-

. - ray and his

iunable to make head against the numerous forces airoiates,
which Marv liad afiembdled ; and fled into Ar-
rgylcnfirc, in expectation of aid from Elizabeth,
to whom they had secretly dilfatched a mef-
fcngcr, in order to implore her immediate as-
fifance r.

MEA.N while, Elizabeth endeavoured to embar- Elizabeth

intcrpofcsir

rals Mary, by a new declaration of difguffl at her theirfavour.
condut. She blamed both her choice of Lord
Darnly, and the precipitation with which fle had
concluded the marriage. She required Lennox
and Darnly, whom she (till called her fubjedts, to
return into England; and, at the fame time, she
warmly interceded in behalf of Murray, whose
behaviour the repreflnted to be not only innocent,
but laudable. 'This mefiage, so mortifying to
the pride of the Queien, and lo full of contempt
for her husband, was rendered Rill more infup-
portable by the petulant and saucy demeanour of

' A!itcr ithir fluitleis confultlition in Stirling, tlc Lords

lrtir.cl i thlcir ou\wn hotiis. iecith, 304. Murray w\;s till
;it St. Anldrcw's on July 22. Keith, 306. By the pl;tccs ofl
Ircic'/.votl, ;appointed fir thec inlh;l)aitants (of tlhe differcnr
c('111t .'s,

; A

. i ull 4, it :ppc; t-s tllht tile t llcns iniclliio n was

it Inar cl into l'ilc, thl county in which Murray, Rotlies,
l'irk:ll y), ;and oti hl' 'hlijs o'( thie inllcoitents rcfidlcl.
iKcitlh, 30. Th.i,' flight int) the welt, KCith, 312, prc-
uinctl tii', \pi:etlii()o ;i,ni.[ tihc furner renitde/.votis was ail-
lcrcid. citlh, 310.

Kith, 312. Kuox, 380.

Tamworth,

B 0 0 K Tamworth, the person who delivered it . Mary

___ vindicated her own conduEt with warmth, but
565'. with great itrengrh of reason ; and rejeccted the

intercclion in behalf of Murray, not without
figis of resentment at Flizabeth's pretending to
intermneddle in the internal government of hler
kingdom '.

SHE did not, on that account, intermit in the

leafi the ardour with which flhe pursued Murray
and his adherents . They now appeared openll
in arms; and having received a finall fupiply in
money from Elizabeth x, were endeavouring to
raise their followers in the western counties But
Mary's vigilance hindered thenl froml af;nmbling
in any considerable body. All her military opc-
rations, at that time, were concerted with wil-
domn, executed with vigour, and attended with
fucce i. In order to encourage her troops, che
helrelf marched along with them, rode with
loaded piflolsY, and endured all the fatigues of
war with admirable fortitude. Her alacrity in-
spired her forces with an invincible resolution,
which, together with their fuiperiority in nulmber,
deterred the malecontents from facing them in
the field ; but having artfully paired the Queen's
army, they marched with great rapidity to 1:din-

' C;miit. 398. ' Kcilhl, Append 99.

TIe inoll conrflci)lcle person s who joincd -Miirr:iy, wcrr

t he D)uk n Cli:iCll-Cr:ni lt, 1 l 'e Eirls of A .rgy'll, G(lcnc;iirn,
Rot l csi l.ord I1nyl :tl Ochilt rcc; lie I .;iird of Gr.nm;;c,
C('llliii r

,l];h lII' C:'I l, I.ll clc nic, Co l ilrylic, L.;i\ 'r'ls, ] 1:r, |1)r':-

lrii, l';tIrrow\\-, Coiiiptirollri, iand the

l utor s

m l'

( l'ii,>
Klir 1,:', Rbz.

K nioxi, 3o0. Y Keillh, Append. r(.it

burgh,

burl-h, and cndeavoured to rouse the inhabitants B o0 K
of that city to arms. The Quleen did not susser
them to remain long unmolelted; and, on her Augs'.
app)roach, they were forced to abandon that
place, and retire in confusion towards the western
borders .

As it was uncertain, for some time, what route They are

they had taken, Mary employed that interval in ,rlgein,,
providing for the security of the counties in the Er'and-
heart of the kingdom. She seized the places of
ilrcngth which belonged to the rebels; and ob-
liged the considerable Barons in those shires
which fle most fulpected, to join in associations
fur her defence . Having thus left all the
country behind her in tranquillity, flie, with an
army eighteen thousand strong, marched towards
Dumfries, where the rebels then were. During
their retreat, they had sent letters to the Queen,
from almost every place where they halted, full
of fubmifnon, and containing various overtures
towards an accommodation. But Mary, who
determined not to let flip such a favourable op-
portunity of crufiing the mutinous spirit of her
fubjccts, rejected them with difilain. As she ad-
vanced, the malecontcnts retired. And, havingl
received no effcitual aid fiomn Elizabeth b, they
despaired of any other means of safety, fled into
England, and put themselves under the pro- Lobb.
te&ion of the Earl of Bedford, Warden of the
marches.

Kcitih, Append. 3 i5. Id, . , Se Appcndix,
'No. XlI. XlI. ,

NOTHINc,

B O O K NOTHING, which Bedford's personal firicnd(l);

- sneor Murray could supply, was wanting to rcnie';

5Th65i their retreat agreeable. But Elizabeth herfl;'

They meetr
with unex- treated them with extreme ncglcnt. She h;
peited III
treatrnt- fully gained her end, and, by their means, ihal
from Elza-
bfbch. excited such ldilcord and clealoufies amonr' l.:

Scots, as would, in all probabiJiy, long diil.,:¢.
and weaken Mary's couniils. 1-cr bulinefl no,.'
was to save appearances, and to juitify hericlfto
the Minieftrs of France and Spain, who acculf(
her of fomenting the troubles in Scotland by her
intrigues. The expedient fthe contrived for lier
vindication strongly displays her own charader,
and the wretched condition of exiles, who arc
obliged to depend on a foreign Prince. Mulrr.-
and Hlamilton, Abbot of Kiiwinning, being :1p-
pointed by the other fugitives to wait on lliz.i-
beth, instead of meeting with that welcome re-
ception which was due to men, who, out of con-
fidence in her promises, and in order to forward
her designs, had hazarded their lives and for-
tunes, could not even obtain the favour of an
audience, until they had meanly conlrnted to
acknowlcdge, in the prefcnce of the Frencli ant
Spanith Armbafladlors, that Elizabeth had given
them no encouragement to take arms. No
sooner did they make this declaration, than f11c
aftonifihed them with this reply: " You have dc-
clared the truth; I ain far from setting an ex-
ample of rebellion to my own fubjc(Es, by coun-
tenancing those who rebel againit their lawful
Prince. The treason, of which you have been
guilty, is detcftable; and as traitors I baniflh you

I flsrom

fi-,nm my prlcencec'." Notwithilanding this scene B o o K
,of Lirce andi of fal-fclood, so diflsonourable to all -,-
the p)crlons who aded a part in it, Elizabeth x565.
pclrmitted the malecontents peaceably to rclide
in her (lominions, suppli(ed rhem secretly with
nliutcy, and renewed her intrceflion with the
Scottillh Queen in their favour'.

T'IIE advantage fli had gained over them did

ncr, lfttilsfy Mary ; nfl relilved to follow the blow,
!iAl to Iprevent a party, whicll the dreaded, from
c'cir recovering any footing in the nation. With
this view, she called a meeting of Parliament;
and in order that a sentence of forfciture mighl
ce legally pronounced against the ban;fied Lords,
ihe slummoned them, by public proclamation, to
appear bcfore it',

THE Duke of Cliatelherault, on his humble ap- Decemb. l.

plication, obtained a separate pardon; but not
without difficulty, as the King violently op-
posed it. He was obliged, however, to leave
the kingdom, and to relide for I:me time in
Flrance .

'THE numerous forces whichl M,.rv brought into

the field, the vigour with which Inc a&ctl, and
the length of time fie kept them in arms, re-
femble the cfforts of a Prince with revenues much
more considerable than tliorf which fle poflCfrcd.
But armies were then levied and a:iiitintained by
Princes at finall charge. The valfal followed his
iluperior, and the superior attended the Monarch,

Mclv. 112. d Knox, 389. KCil, 320.
f Klox, 389.

at

B o0 K at his own expence. Six hundred horlfei--e,

II1.
--- however, and three companies of foot, betides her
z565- guards, received regular pay from the Quen.

This extraordinary charge, together with the dc-
burfements occasioned by her marriage, exhaulled
a treasury, which was far from being rich. In
this exigency, many devices were fallen upon for
rairing money. Fines were levied on the towns
of St. Andrew's, Perth, and Dundee, which were
fufpeEted of favouring the malecontents. An
unusual tax was inpofld on the boroughs throught-
out the kingdom ; ant a great ium was demanded
of the citizens of Edinburgh, by way of loan.
This unprecedented exaction alarmed the citizens.
They had recourse to delays, and flarted diffi-
culties in order to evade it. These Mary con-
itrued to be ats of avowed disobedience, and in-
fiantly committed several of them to prison. B3ut
this severity did not subdue the undaunted lpirit
of liberty, which prevailed among the inhabit-
ants. The Queen was obliged to mortgage to
the city theJirpitorioiy of the town of Leitih, by
which Ihe obtained a considerable tuin of money c.
The thirds of ecclesiastical benefices proved ano-
ther source whence the Queen derived losmc
flupply. About this tine, we find the Protcltant
clergy complaining more bitterly than cvcr ct
their poverty. T1he army, it is probable, cx-
haufted a great p:l-t of that fund which was ap-
propriated for their maintenance '.

c Knox, 383. 386. h M;itl. Hil.. of Edinburil, 2-7

7 'fTi

ltur: afY,:nblics f rthe church were not uncon- B o,° K
..:rcll(c fipctators of the commotions of this tur- -

1565.
liulent year. In the meeting held the twenty- Ch5rch as-

) ,, Cfairs,

!flil-rth of June, previous to the (ueen's marriage, si
(-vcral of the maleconrent nobles weere prefnr,
and seem to h:lve hI:d gr-eat influence on its de-
cifions. The hitgh firain in which the assembly
tddrfiirel d the OQleen, can be imputed only to
thl)ol fears and jealousies with regard to reli-
gion, which they endeavoured to infuse into the
nation. T'he afi:embly complained, with Ibme
bitterness, of the rop lwhlich hacd been put to the
progrcfs of the Reformation by the Queen's ar-
rival in Scotland; they r:equired not only the
total suppression of the Popish worship through-
out the kingdom, but even in the Queen's own
chapel; and betides the legal eftablifimnent of the
Protestant religion, they demanded that Mary
herself should publicly embrace it. The Queen,
after some deliberation, replied, that neither her
conlilience, nor her interest, would permit her to
take such a ftep. The former would for ever
reproach her for a change, which proceeded fiom
no inward conviction; the latter would fuller by
the offence, which her apoftacy mufl give i) the
King of France, and her other allies on the
continent .

!T is remarkable, that the prosperous situation

of the Queen's afftirs during this year, began
to work some change in favour of her rcli-

Knox, 374. .17(
Vol, t.. A gion

B 0 0 K gion. Tie Earls of Lennox, Athol, and Ca;i

f ils, openly attended malfs; flhe herself afibrild
'565t the Catholics a more avowed protecfion tlhan

formerly; and, by her permission, some of the
ancient Monks ventured to preach publicly to
the people k.

k Kn1o, 3S9, )30.

# BOOK IV.

T II E
1[ I S 'T 0 R Y

0 F
S CO 'T L A N D.

BOOK IV.
A S thc ;day appointed for the meeting of Par- B o o

liament approached, Mary and her Mi-
nifters were employed in deliberating concerning ' 66.

Mary's de-
the course which it was most proper to hold with libermions

concerning

regard to the exiled nobles. Many motives the exiled
prompted her to set no bounds to the rigour of nobles.
justice. The malccontents had laboured to de-
feat a fchcme, which her interest conspircd with
her paflions in rendering dear to her; they were
the leaders of a party, whole friendlhip fle had
been obliged to court, while lhe held their prin-
ciples in abhorrence; and they were firmly at-
tached to a rival, whom flie had good realbn both
to fear and to hate.

BUT, on the other hand, several weighty con-
fiderations might be urged. The noblmcin,

A a 2 whose

B 0 0 K whose fate was in suspense, were among the rmoor

iV.
. .1.. powerful fubjeEts in the kingdon; their wealth

1566. great, their connexions extensive, and their ad-

herents numerous. They were now at mercy,
the objec&s of compafiion, and suing for pardon
with the most humble submission.

IN those circumstances, an aa of clemency

would cxlak the Queen's charater, and appear no
Icl-s splendid among foreigners, than acceptable to
her own IfubjeCs. Mary herself, though highly
incensed, was not inexorable; but the King's rage
was impl!acable and unrelenting. They were .o-
liciced in behalf of the fugitives fi-om various
quarters. Morton, Ruthven, Maitland, and all
who hbad been members of the Congregation, were
not forgetftul of their ancient union with Murray,
and his fcllow-fuflercrs; nor neglectful of their
safety, which they deemed of great importance
to the kingdom. Melvil, who at that time pof-
f;ficd the (Queen's confidence, icconded their so-
licitations. And Murray, having fiooped lb low
as to court Rizio, that favourite, who was'dc-
firous of securing his prote&ion against the King,
whoie displeasure he had lately incurred, seconded
the intercessions of his other friends with the
whole of his influence". The interposition of
Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, who had lately bcen
Elizabeth's Ambafltdor in Scotland, in behalf of
the exiles, was of more weight than all these, and
attended with more success. Thrognorton, oul
of enmity to Cecil, had embarked deeply in all

a Ml'.4. I zs.

!i1C

ihe intrigues which were carried on at the Eng- B °V° K
lifil court, in order to undermine the power and ~-,--
credit of that minister. lle elpoufed, for this 566.
reason, the cause of the Scottifli Queen, towards
whole title and pretensions the other was known
to bear little favour; and ventured, in the present
critical juncuire, to write a letter to Mary, con-
taining the most salutary advices with regard to
her conduit. lie recommended the pardoning
of the Earl of Murray, and his afrociates, as a
mealure no lets prudent than popular. " An
action of this nature, fays he, the pure effect of
your Majefly's generosity, will spread the fame of
your lenity and moderation, and engage the
English to look towards your accellion to their
throne, not only without prejudice, but with de-
fire. By the lame means, a pterfect harmony will
be reflored among your own subjects, who, if any
rupture flould happen with England, will serve
you with that grateful zeal, which your clemency
cannot fail of inl)iringb."

I'HESE prudent remonstrances of Throgmorton, she rerfIsc

to which his reputation for wisdom, and known ti, )lih
attachment to the Q3)een, added great authority, clcme"cy.
made a deep impreflion on her spirit. IIer cour-
tiers cultivated this happy difpolition, and pre-
vailed on her, notwithstanding the King's in-
flexible temper, to lacrifice her own private rc-
lintment to the intercefion of her fiibjecs, and
the wishes of her friends 1. With this view, the
Parlialment, which had been called to meet on the

MhI Iv. i 'x). ' 1(1. 125.

A a 3 fourth

B Ovo K fourth of February, was prorogued to the fevenra

_ -- -- of April' ; and in tile mean time, she vwas busy in
'j66. confidering the manner and form in which ileh

should extend her favour tD the Lords who wtrc
unr.r disgrace.

iz dvcred THOUL:-L lMary discovered, on this occasion, a
froim tI 15

Urcl,.i, mind naturally prone to hu:nanity, and capable
by thoe ui- of forgiving, fle wanted firlnnefs, however, to
F ance, and resist the influence, which was fatally empl)oyd
h r zeal lor
Py.pry, to dilappoi
i it the effects of this ainable dillpoi-

tion. About this time, and at no great distance
fr-om each other, two envoys arrived fromi tlc
clruary 3. prench Ki; g. The form1er was intruled withi

mn.tttrs of Ilerre ceremony alone; lie congatu-
lated the Qjecn on her marriage, and inveitcld
the King with the enrgns of the order of St. Mi-
chael. Ihe inlIrutions of the latter relatdl to
inalUer-S o' lorle i.liortance, anld produced grcatcr

fiects' r.

AN interview between Charcls IX. and! Ii,

Silter the QAc cn of Spain had been of't n pro-
poled ; and after IallnyI oblll)aclcs arising si-on, ti
op)ofitioni of political intrclft, was at 1!l ;:i)-
poiiited ;t B.:yonie. C.l..':-illne f Icdicis ac-
Loilanld1lied I'Lr I-n i; tlie DIulke of' Alva ;tticnlcd!
his Mlillrfs. Amiidll- tlhe I'enes of public p)mP
and cidal'l;re, Xv'hilli fceh edl to bC tlhe uole occu-
patioii of both courts, a fhcleme was formed, alnd
nlealilures conce(rted, for exterminating the Ilu-
gonots in Fraince, tI' 'l otCell'ans in the I xow
Countries, and for ftipplrclling the Reforlnatllun
, C( )h d,. v(il. i. 22.1.. K itili, 325. A'tP)ltlc I'.'

. throLugh'out

throughout all Europe
, c. The a&tive policy of B °o K

IV.

I'ote Pius IV. and the zeal of the Cardinal of -
i,oirain, conh-liitedi and encouraged dilfofitions 156.
to suitable to tie genius of the Romish religion,
and ib bcneficial to their own order.

Ir was an account of this holy league which

the second F'renchl envoy brought to Mary, con-
jurinll her, at the fame time, in the name of the
Kin;- of France and the Cardinal of Lorrain,
not to restore the leaders of the Protestants in
her kingdom to power and favour, at the very
time when the Catholic Princes were combined
to dcftroy that flt in all the countries of Eu-
rope"

POPERY is a species of false religion, remark-

able for the Itrong poftmllion it tales of the heart.
Contrived by men of deep infight in the human
character, and improved by the experience and
obfcrvation of manly tuccefi-;ve ages ; it arrived at
,la(l to a degree of perfetion, which no former
l'\cmlm of fupilerflition had ever attained. There
is no power in tile undertanding, and no paflion
in the heart, to which it does not prelent objects,
adapl)ted to route;, and to interest them. Neither
the love ofl plealure, whichl, at that time, pre-
vailed in the court of France, nor the pursuits of
a;i.bnirion which occut)Iled the court of Spain, had
ICcured them froml the dominion of bigotry. Lay-
men and courtiers were agitated with that furious
and unmlercifull zeal which is commonly confi-
lcured as peculiar to ecclesiastics; and Kings and

Thu.im i. il). 3 7. r, Mclv. 126.

A a 4 Miilfters

Bo o K Ministers thought themselves bound, in con-

IV.
I I^ science, to extirpate the Protrefant doctrine.

1566. Mary herself was deeply tinctured with all the

prejudices of Popery; a paflionate attachment to
that superstition is visible in every part of her,
character, and runs through all the iccncs of Li:
life : She was devoted, too, with the utrntofit if
mniiion to the Princes of Lorrain, her unles ; and
had been accuftomced, from her infancy, to lilie!,
to all their advices with a filial rcjeCt. 'Il.e
profpea of restoring the public exercise of ilcr
own religion, the pleasure of complying vith
her uncles, and the hopes of gratifying t:i'
French iMonarch, whom the prefcnt liru.ion , i
her affairs in England made it neceai-ry to ce;rt,
counterbalanced all the prudent confidcrarions
which had formerly weighed with her. 5'Ke ir-
il-antly joined the confederacy, which hal bLcn
formed for the de(irLcrion of thle P-rore:airs, andl
altered the whole plan of her conduc wir!. cg,Ird
to Murray and his adherents".

To this fatal resolution may be imputlrcid al the

iijbfequent calamities of Mary's lifec. livcr lsimne
her return into Scotland, fortune may be l.i:i
to have been propitious to her, ratier thin
adverse; and if her profpecrlty did nor rife rn
any great height, it had, however, f'uiTcred nm
considerable interruption. A thick antd Irttled
cloud of adversity, with few gleams of hope, an:
none of real enjoyment, covers the remainder or
her days.

1 ; ec App)cd. No. XIV.

1'T i.

Ti.C efFe(-s of the new system, which Mary had Bn 0 o
adopted, were loon visible. The time of the pro- -

i s66,

rogation of Parliament was shortencd ; and by a A '6rlix
new proclamation, the twelfth of March was mecca1tc"

lto attaint

fixed for its meeting'. Mary resolved, without the eili
any further delay, to proceed to tle attainder of "obcs;
the rebel Lords, and, at the itfame timie, deter-
niined to take obme ficps towvards the re-eia-i-
1)lilhiment of the Romifhl religion in Scotland=.
'1'he Lords of the Articles were choltn, as uftai,
to prepare the bufincls which was to come befor-
the l'ai-liamcnr. Thley were all persons in whom
the Quiecn could confide, antl bent to promote,
her dlligns. The ruin of Murray and his p).rty

K eith, ",20.

' I: is ;, i.n the a;tlql?'i- r.s Kn-cax :lolnc, thait

w*, c!.l;ur,-:

to', (, lc i with the de.il l of r,' -c i ;lliab lifiin tiec iRo, nan ';1.

honlio' 1r. !;n, or ;t lc:all '1' cyi-nptinig tihe pr-ofcelf()r o it
!'rr'm tr riollir of tiloft pcnil I.i vs to x\;iich they :'crc ftl..,

I.?I'(. I 1., inleed, atli:rts ti:r tlh: :.tit.,:, whiid li tld li av

I,' n Cl Cl"V , ill t; l ilt( i of' S . C( ile':, ve' ' liIc.tre tlv p'r-
vIc!"l, 3;,. i. iry cr in i:1 liter to thle Archhiliitliop
',I (;!,:si ,,a,.-, ie']- .A il;:f,:iti,(r in lir;;('c, nkl IIw lctla cS, "ti (;at
1:1 l lit l' .t lia ;Iitn:II J )I iin.c( io

( i v t d(n ' lile (;o0 l

w.itlh Li.; l' to r, lliig tl ,l rL liihin." eii., 5 31.

2.. e'iic

;ili itl::,l lnr, , i. . the PIlailh lth .Ii. |li s, 1h;dl, b'.-
Ih'r ililt llhlilt , ircfiullc ti l cir ;li('icllt l.l (i i In (i t ; tlfcnil)l,.

IbII. 3',;i'le h.nld jrltcd tic

1 (C: o ,ilrac v a;t B.n'.' tie. KVi.

;,.

j l) p.in. Ca,1

. 4. Sihe ;nw d

: t, ) .l. ,:a e i ;i-

"c , 1.el' s ,f the c'.; ;; ,,,n,

t.ibli, ; ::;il .1 .

d ].,c , til;,r t ,:

.'(. l iAl hlavc Ialls , rc tI;- :ill nli'n xa li, \,, lil,!

h 1. - it. (,, (1.

X1. i. 27.1.. 5-. l:l:l().\vnt(ul, \v\hl \wa',i, irnil}c.lil(. 1h the Arc!h-

ilillop (l' (I;,lg w, w itli m t:clri'ls fol, writ:in hlis ,arlyrf e dr

.'i n s,,,,

:lliI's thiat Ihch Qencll illtentle to 1lave lloccted,, ill

tlhis I';li:nll .nl, i f lol tihe rc-ell.t.iliilnent (i tIhet C hil lit'
-eligiin, a1t Ichll fllnmctlhing lsor the cal:t (. Clo.itlc,. [cI)1)
vol. ii. 204..

fccmcd

B o e K seemed now inevitable, and the danger of the

IV. _,--.J Reformed Church imminent, when an event ua-

J cxpcetledly happened, which saved both. If we

regard either the barbarity of that age, when
Iuch acts of violence were common, or the mean
condition of the unhappy person who fuf!-'crdl,

nd pre- the event is little rcmarkable; but if we reflcft
the cinl:- upon the circumnlances with which it was at-
Rig"'inf tended, or upon the consequences which followci(

it, it appears extremnely memorable; and the rife
and progress of it deserve to be traced with great

care.

Darnol lshf DARNLY'S external accomplilhments had ex-
atTeai'n. cited that sudden and violent passion which raildl

him to the throne. But the qualities of his
mind correPponded ill with the beauty of his
perlbn. Of a weak understanding, and with-
out experience, conceited, at the fame time, of
his own abilities, and ascribing his extraordinary
fluccels entirely to his diftinguilted merit. All
the Queen's favour made no imnprefion on fulcl
a temper. All her gentleness could not bridle
Iis illperious and ungovernable spirit. All her
.attention to place about hiri persons capable
of dircWting his condult, couldc not prelervce hinn
friom ral li aind imprLcudenl t altions'. Fond of ;all
the amlulle nts, and even prone to all the vices
of youth, lie became, by degrees, careless of
lhcr l(Ir!;n, ;and a fIranger to her company. To
;l woman,11 and a Q(tieen, flch beliaviour was
intolerable. hlice lower flie had slooped in onler

1( ' :, l. vo ,
i. 122.

ro

to raise him, his behaviour appeared the more B o o K

Iv.

ungenerous and criminal: and in proportion to i-
the ilrength of her firfl affec'tion, was tie vio- 1566.
lence with which her disappointed paflion now
operated. A few months after the marriage,
their domeAfic quarrels began to be observed.
lThe extravagance of Darnly's ambition gave rife
to these. Instead of being satisfied with a share
in the adminiltration of government, or with the
title of King, which Mary, by an unprecedented
firetch of power, had conferred on him, he de-
manded the Crowln Matrimonial with most in-
Iblent importunity''. Though Mary alleged that
this gift was beyond her power, and tliat the au-
thority of Parltiament mufl be intcrpolfd to be-
fiow it, he wanted cither un:derft:!nding to com-
prehend, or temper to iadmit, t jut[ a defence;
and often renewed and urged his request.

RlZlO, whomll thle King had at firfl taken into Slfrpa,
great confidence, did not humourl hii in tlcie lRi;"" o be

(tw CaUtc

follies. B3y this he incurred lIenr-y's dilpleafure; ot it.
and as it was imnpollible for Mary to behave to-
wards her husband with the flme ;ll;:ection which
dlil.iningifhced the fir-li andcl appy days of their
uioiin, ihe imputed this coldnilles, not to his own
behal;viour, wvlicli had to well Imerited it, but to
tle infin ations of Rizio. Mary's own condu&c
'cuJoIl-irdl and llrecngthcncd tlefe suspicions. She

o" Kcili, '? J),. II. App. ,6si, 166. Knn:, 40-,.. TIhe

( ,', , l',, 1'c . , ,. in 1,1 ,h!.

l .i, i d:

t

rb. h (7.,o:.i ;l ,m'imr / 1io i > il n .

lIlI'il 1,'l, \\xM ll the' (...t,;:t ' 1li' t1 p

1 N't.r. , \ }li\l th.lt till,-

]f.lXC it(l, ;I, c',]),,;iilc i, ll i

{ c -te :I l ,
{ II l' 1' I )4., is t::k,-n

lo

''" -~ ir t
ll i- C -,,

: i I:
t ,| .I', hrIated

trcated

B o0 K treated this sl-anger with a familiarity, and ad-
t_^- i mitted him to a flare in her confidence, to which

s566. neither his firit condition, nor the office the had

lately beflowed on him, gave him any title. lie
was perpetually in her presence, intermeddled in
every bufnefrs, and, together with a few favourites,
was the companion of all her private ainufre
ments. lThe haughty spirit of Darnly could not
bear the intrusion of flch an upstart; and impa-
tient of any delay, and unr-ferained by any
scruple, he inflantly relolved to get rid of him by
violence.

nizin hated AT the fame time, another dcfign, which took

eby of its
ite fi-om very diftlerent motives, was carrying

on against ie life of Rizio. Morron, Ruthven,
Lindsay, and Maitland, were the contrivers of it.
In all former co;nmotions they had been strictly
united with Murray, though in the late infur-
rec'ion they had deferred him, for various reasons.
Morton was near-l allied to the family of Angus,
;rd, dluring tlie minority of the present Earl, acted
as chief of the name of Douglas. Ruthven was
married to the King's aunt. Lindsay's wife was
of the fame blood. All these had warmly con-
curred with the Qulcnl in promoting a marriage
which did so much honour to the house of Dou-
glas, and naturally expecrted, that, under a King
of their own blood, the chief management of
nallirs would be committed to them. Maitland,
with his ufulal 1ftgacity, foreft.w that Murray's 0o)-
position to the match would prove dangerous and
inenfeclual; but whoever ruled at court, he hoped,
by his dexterity and talents, to render himself ne-

celrtry

ccftary and of importance. They were aii equally B ° o K
tlifappointed in their expectations. The King's --
hcad(irong temper rendered him incapable of ad- i66.
vice. The Queen could not help difirufling men
who had been so long and so intimately connected
with Murray, and gave herself up entirely to such.
Counsellors as complied with all her inclinations:.
The return of that nobleman and his followels
ias therefore the only event which could restore
Morton, Maitland, and their aflociates to their
former ascendant over the Queen's councils. For
this reason, nothing could be more mortifying to
them, than the resolution which Mary had taken
to treat the exiles with rigour. This they im-
puted to Rizio, who, after he had engaged to aid
Murray with all his intcreft, was now the most
aaive instrument in promoting the measures
which were concerted for the ruin of that noble-
man. This officious zeal completed the disgust
which they had conceived against him, and in-
spired them with thoughts of vengeance, in no
xifc Iflirable tojuflice, to humanity, or to their
own dignity.

WHILE they were ruminating upon their They cm-

bine in or-

fchmee, the King communicated his resolution to dr,"o mur-
be avenged of Rizio to Lord R uthven, an( im- dcl m"
plored his aliftance, and that of lis friends, to-
wardls the execution of this delign. Nothing
could be more acceptable to them than this over-
ture. They saw at once all the advantages they
would reap, by the concurrence of such an aflI-
cilte. Their own private revenge upon Rizio
would paTs, they hoped, for an ad of obedience

8 to

B O O K to the King; and they did not despair ofobtain-

._. ...- ing the restoration of their banified fiiends, anl
1566. security for the Protestant religion, as the price o'

their compliance with his will.

BUT as Henry was no lets fickle than rafL,

they hesitated for foine time, and determincd to
advance no farther, without taking1 evcery ponlibi
precaution for their own fatfcty. They did niot, il
the mean time, susser the King's refentmenit to
abate. Morton, who was inferior to no man of
that intriguing age in all the arts of insinuation
and address, took the young Prince under his
management. He wrought upon his ruling pas-
sion, ambition to obtain the Matrimonial Crown.
He reprelented Rizio's credit with the QLccen to
be the chief and only obitacle to his fuccels il
that demand. This minion, alone, he said, pof-
seied her confidence; and out of complaifalnce to
him, her subjects, her nobility, and even her liuf-
band, were excluded from any participation of
her secret councils. Under the appearance of a
confidence merely political, he insinuated, .and
the King perhaps believed, that a familiarity of
a quite different and very criminal nature might
be concealed". Such various and complicated

paniolns

D Of all oilr hiflori:ns; , Buchanan alone avowdcly ;I(-c iil

M;ary of a crilminall love for Rizio, 340. 344. Knox Iliglll;
inlfiiiates th.at ulchl a lit liicion was cnlcit:iiiicin , 391. MIl-
vil, in a conlverfationI viilli lic (eccie, iintli;mtes tlhail he \V.i,
afraid her familiarity with i.io nightl be liablel to llii(ln-
llruflion, I o. The King hli ilif fcilcs, bolt ly NIc vil's
accounr, and by his cxKpotlullaion with tlle QteCCi, .wli'h
Rutlivel mentions, 1 Ihave givcu crediL Lo thlefi fuli)ic'i"'

M·'blv.

pafiions raged in the King's bofonm with the B o K

IV.

itiiioll fury. lie became more impatient than .-
ever of any delay, and even threatened to t-rike 15G6.
the intended blow with his own hand. At last,
I)prlimlinaries were cfttled on both fides, and
.articles for tllir mlutual security agreed upon.
The Iingl engaged to prevent the attainder of tie
b.Iiified Lords, to content to their return into
Scotland, to obtain for them an ample reiiflion
of all thellir c'liilcs, and to Iuipporit, to the utinofi

hi Iis power, the religion which was now ell-a-

liiilhed in tle Lkingdomn. On their parts, they
tlndtertook to procu re the Crovwn Matrimonial for
lienn), to I(:cure his right of fuicceflion, if the

\ :. I -. ' ciill, ,\ lenll . J 2 , 12 i. ']' lt 1'- in s

fll.

l'i',r!i]s \\C'Ic 1i:'i,,n , i. lik wil c\' .kl

C i'\''il l'riCu t '

papecr pub-

l li}.!

, \Il].;] iN .

.l .

N . XV. Bl , ili opplofitlni t1. hci ;ulI)i-

iil.,:i,.l li. v ;i" l

: '

C n, h li g nI r]c, 'we 11 v ,b ir-vc tlIaI Rau-

] tA, tlie Q i i.'',

l.l li S -crcl .i \V, \. , I. :

:ii, '.! I''i.l ]lr1

c. r,1 'I., :J l" i/i,, :;l\i:iic.i to, litit ( c:. ill D leI:4'Ll I;15j.
I 1iihll, 2.6S. Il .1 ; il t1 i!'(]ilucicc (i tllis prc01i'cr': t, t(;;it

liC' ', ([ il 'l Li', ,Ircil (CrcJiL i t1 thlil e (1 iu 'l. M cl. l 7.

1

1),I, 1lY :il'i\vc 'l i ,S i l :ild I;t;ou t tvu () II( !tIi s .iL,, cI K. citil,

f2j9. 'lih (I)I,,Ln iCim liu:lil) | 1';;.. '>'.c '1r' li;n : p:1!i ln,
Ihi. l Ilh:i.l ,ihi lit; s) mpIlL ItS il'

0 f Zi':ll'il;' ;a11 ilnd violc t'l i Vcc'.

Ri/i, ;i lidd.l ltis palitol, ;:n1ld proiltio ul t!il,: i:n' ri: e 'iti all

ii.li,., , ii (0Zt.ccn's, IiliKlu.; tir

1)s .r ly houtinucd. Slic boon

[in \ i\il 1 (Iilid. li' l

o 11 li., ciltlil.iol iono circ ll tasnccs,

It .,ip'I.' ; :t;liiill iiip(llil, I l tll.it tlie Q.I'CIl, itilcl's we lhppofl
lier tl Lhav

Il e ) II ;i XVolII:Il lit lcrly 11l);ti .lllC.cl, col .lt carry on

.1ny crilimiu1il inl riglne w\il Rizio. But tilc ilcince of Ran.
dtlpil, the L''.n;lil I.cfidc.lit, ;a main l IId,til l.Lily ready to
mcnltioll, :nld to ;t:g ,Mr.p;iitt Mv:try', I'.tih., :11l] \vllO (leC nlot
o(lce iliiiu: ttc le li1l Iic cotiifiiliCl('C inl Rli;io conrc lcld any
thin ig cril.li;il, is ; itlll a ;iulllic.icnL vitlindiion of her iu-

Q cn

B oo K Queen should die before him, and to tefl(nd tihai
_--J_ right to the uttermoflt , againfi whatever i:cr;i'

1566' flould presume to difp)te it; and if either Kiit,.

or any other person, should happen to be lzill(;<
in profecuring of the design, tle King promli,
to acknowledge hiimfelf to be the author of i:
enterpriie, and to p.rotcct those who were 'al:-
barked in it .

Pcrpetrate NOTHING now remained but to concert rij
that crime
in the plan of operation, to chule the actors, and to ai
h .ens ,G sign thern their parts in perpetrating this dcteftabl

crime. Every circumflance here paints andl c!a-
racterizes the manners and men of that age, n?.,
fills us with horror at both. The place cl:oii
for committing such a deed, was thle Qeen's bc!
chamber. Though Mary was now in the li:'i
month of her pregnancy, and though Rizio might
have been fcized el .'where without any difficuli.
the King pitched upon this place, that he mighl
enjoy the maliciouS pleasure of reproaching Riizi
with his crimes before the Queen's face. 'The
Earl of Morton, the Lord 1-igh Chancellor of
the kingdom, underlool to dircl- an cntcrl)ril,
carried on in defiance of all the laws of wvhich
he wvas bound to be the guardian. The I,ord.
R.uthven, who had been confined to his bed for
three months, by a very d:tngcrous diftenper, ;ind
who was fill so feeble that he could hardly walk,
or bear the weight of his own armour, w;s i1-
truifed witlh the executive part; and while In:
hinufelf needed to be iupportcd by two menl, i

O (Good7. vl'. i. :6,i.

calcne

cale abroad to commit a murder in the presence B o0 K
of his Sovereign.

ON the ninth of March, Morton entered the 1566.

court of the palace with an hundred and lixty
lmen; and without noise, or mceting with any re-
fifl-;nce, seized all the gates. While the Queen
wa.s at fuip er with the Countess of Argyll, Rizio,
and a few donmefiics, the King suddenly entered
the apartment by a private passage. At his
back was Ruthven, clad in complete armour, and
with that ghadfly and horrid look which long sick-
ncls hadi given hin. Three or four of his noft
trusty accoimplices followed him. Such an un-
lfu;al appearance alarmed those who were present.
Rizio instantly apprehended that he was the vic-
tim at whom the blow was aimed; and in the
utinolt consternation retired behind the Queen,
of whom he laid hold, hoping that the reverence
due to her prflon might prove some protection to
him. The conlpirators had proceeded too far to
be refr-ained by any consideration of that kind.
Numbers of armed mnen rushed into the chamber.
Ruttliven drew his dagger, and with a furious
micn and voice, commanded Rizio to leave a
place of which he was unworthy, and which he
had occupied too long. Mary employed tears,
and entreaties, and threatenings, to save her fa-
vourite. But, notwithf-anding all these, he was
torn from her by violence, and before he could
be dragged through the next apartment, the rage
of his enemies put an end to his life, piercing his
body with fifty-fix wounds P.

P See Appcndix, No. XV.
VOL. 1. B b ATLIOL,

B o K ArTIIO , Tluntly, lotlhvell, and other coni-

IV,
I .._ dents of the Queen who had apartments in tl1

i66.- palace, v/ere alarmed at the up roar, a lnd fill'l

with t!h: utinoi tterror on their ow;n acoun5t; Ia:
either no violence was intended .gaillt thlem or
tle conflpirators durit not fledl the noblest blooi
in tlie kingcdom, in the fame illegal ma lncr \vi'
which tllie had ventured to take the i'll- of ;
firanrger. Some of them were dilfifliid, .!;ld
others made their eicape.

Ilrv cm- TH'IE conspirators, in the mean time, kept pof.
Qc ~,c iher. tlefion of the palace, and guarded the QIceen wirlt
'"iJt tlte utmost care. A procl;amation was piubilflc.d

by the Kinzg, prohibiting the parliament to met'CC
oni the day appointed ; and meacures lvwcre t;aken
by him for preventing any tumullt in the city,
NMtlrray, Rothes, and their followers being in-
formed of every il-ep taken againif Rizio, arrived
at Edinburgh next evening. Murray was GEa-
cioufly received both by the King ani Qulecn:
by the former, on account of the ;arIicls .wlich
had been agreed upon between thien; by. the
]attcr, bccail flile hloped to prevail on hlilil, by
genlltle trearmelnlr not to take part x iili lthe nIirll
ti''rers of K i/.io. l'heir p')ower file ill felt, ,idl
lI'ctdL 'l ; and tlhe inlllit which they 1;td o1lit'rec to
her autitority, and even to hr- perlobn , b1 fl-ar c:
cc(ccltl any crilile flc could inlpu)te to oMurrIy,
that in }lopes of wrcaking helr veng-ance on tihei,
nle became extremely willing to be reconciled to
himll. The obligatiolns;, howeverwli nch Mnlrray
lay tundel to m111C w iho ad ia ard;ed their lives

rl
K ilth, ;\ i,.Jld. 126.

n11

i,:l In1 a(cojnt, tenglraged himi; to labour for tlecilr 0 0 K
1..ty . T',l (QLjen, who Icarce had the liberty L ----
,f' Ii;oi'c' lCuf', Wais )'crfiLtadlcd to admlit Mortonll
:indl ItIliv(cl iniro her plreflncc, and to grant
li'crn tih lirl'iif of pardon in whatever terms
licly 1ilulll (I(ccin licccfTl ry for tlheir own i'curity.

l'lT 1 Kin;i , i1c.'1 i whlile, ilood afl-onifll cd at tlie nr (r,

i)uldnc lS, and ,licccls of Ils ()\\n c ntclrpris, and ,I .

d ,.i,,l

tincertaii what coIllrl to hold. The Q(ceCn ol)-

'^'' Tr

flrvced his irrltfOlltion, and availcd herllf of it.
She clnploycd all i her art to disengage him fiom
hiis new aliociates. HIs confcioufrncs of the in-
tlilt which lie had oftlrced to so iilullrious a be-
nefaifrefs, inilpired lim with uncommon facility
and complailance. In spite of all the warnings
lie received to diftrult the Qucen's artifices, file
prevailed on him to difii!s tle guards which the
confiirators had placed on her person; and that

nlac night he made his elcape along with her,
attcnded by three persons only, and retircd to
D)unbar. The ieliei:e of their nilght had been .!.rch 1i,
communicated to Huntly and Bothwell, and they
were quickly joined by them, and fevcral other
of the nobles. Bothwell's ellate lay in that corner
of tlie kingdlom, and his followers crowdedl to
their Chief in filch numbers, as loon enabled the
(Qcun to set the power of tile conl)jirators at
defilance.

i'ls fuI dden fliglit filled thel witl illcxpre- .rrcnr.

iible conllernation. 'l hey hadl obttin(di a plronlil ' (il, ,'j..e..
of pardon; and it now appeal ed fromi thle Qi(uClees 1I
condueil, that nothing more was intended by rthis
promilc tlian to amulie them, and to gain tlime.

1 b 2 ''lhcy

B 0 0 K They ventured, however, to demand the accotm-

rv.
,.--, plifiment of it; but their m-efiTenger was detained

. a prisoner, and the Queen advancing towards

Edlinburgh, at the head of eight thoufland men,
talked in the highest firain of refentmenc and re-
venge. She had the address, at the fame time,
to leparate Murray and his associates fi-om the
conspirators againfl Rizio. Sensible that the
nnion of these parties would form a confederacy,
which might prove formidable to the Crown, fle
expressed great willingness to receive the former
into favour; towards the latter she declared her-

Marh ,r. self inexorable. Murray and his followers were
Tlhe corl;'i-
r.t.rsieaini no less willing to accept a pardon, on her terms.
Riio fly
int Eng- The conspirators against Rizio, deprived of every
nd'". resource, and incapable of resistance, fled preci-

pitately to Newcastle, having thus changed situ-
ations with Murray and his party, who left that
place a few days before.

No man so remarkable for wifdorn, and even

for cunning, as the Earl of Morton, ever en-
gaged in a more unfortunate enterprise. De-
ferted basely by the King, who now denied his
-knowledge of the conspiracy, by public procla-
mations, and abandoned ungenerously by Murray
and his partyr, he was obliged to fly from li;
native country, to resign the highest office, antl
to part with one of the most opulent fortunes in
the kingdom.

ON her return to Edinburgh, Mary began to
proceed against those concerned in the murder of

, Mclv. Ixc.

Rizio,

Rizio, with the utmost rigour of law. But, in B °0 K

i V.

praise of her clemency, it must be observed, that
only two persons, and there of no considerable ,'56
rank, suffered for this crime'.

IN this conspiracy there is one circumstance,

which, though foinewhat detached, delcrves not
to be forgotten. In the confederacy between the
King and the conspirators, the real intention of
which was assassination, the preserving of the Re-
formed Church is, nevertheless, one of the moif
considerable articles; and the fame men who were
preparing to violate one of the first duties of mo-
rality, aieccled the higielt regard for religion.
Fliftory relates these extravagances of the human
mind, without pretending to justify, or even to
account for them; and regulating her own opi-
nions by the eternal and immutable laws ofjuftice
and of virtue, points out such inconfittencies, as
features of the age which lhe describes, and re-
cords them for the inftrucion of ages to come.

As this is the second instance of deliberate as- An accoun

fallination which has occurred, and as we shall qii,..ry of
hereafter meet with many other instances of the ,io,,
Iame crime, the cautfs which gave rife to a prac- that 'g''
tice so fiocking to humanity, defcrve our parti-
cular attention. Resentment is, for obvious and
wile realons, one of the strongest passions in the
human mind. The natural demand of this pal-
sion is, that the person who feels the injury Ihould
hin[lllF infici the vengeance due on that account.
' he permitting this, however, would have been

' ,Jcith, Appendix, 130. 334.

B b 3 detructive

B OO K ldeftrucive to society; and punishment wvouol
I -V-_ have known no bounds, either in feveritv or( il

3566. duration. For this reason, in the very ilfil fai',' i

the social slate, the Iworld was taken out of ';i-
vate hands, and coiinittcd to the /Ma;ilifliinl,.
Bll: at first, while laws aimed at refl iniing, t!;, v
lea!Ily ftrenlgt hlned te lin'1incil)l: of( recvcnc' , ''},
c .ilictl: aidi nioil film;itle plunliilnli!(.l t fo,-r C. ..,
. as; retaliatioul; ;the oi- iller forfl iteil li bl s,
linib, anrd life i)r lilk. 1'Thc ayment of a co[,-
jpcnllation to the ICel I1; i niL ICd, I;Cccec-ld e 'o i.o
rigouir of the fori-lr! iniitu tion. In both t hc.,
the gratilicatiorl c; [,i: va; recv c

t ec was thei (l).l r

of law; and he \Nv;o lfsllcredl the wlcong, was il
only perfoIn whlo had a liglit to purluc, to cx;l:i,
or to remic l the t llnifh l( cnr. Vhiile laws allowi
-ich£ full if:ol e to theo

reve; e of' one party, lt

intelr-els of the other were nor ncglctited. If tI,
evidence of his guilt did not amllOullt to a i;i:l
proof, or if lie reckoned himnifclf to be unijitl.
acculled, tle perlon to lwhomn a cI 'iiin was i m-
puted ;had a right to challenge his adlverlhry I
iingle combat, and, on obtainingi the vilorvy, vill-
dicated his own honour. In almoll every (cunii-
derable cauic, whethecr civil or criniinal ,'1.1:
were appealed to, in defence, either of' tihe i-
nocence, or the property of the parties. Jullieic
had feldoml occasion to use her balance ; the

vword alone decided every conteftl. The palli,;
of revenge was nourillfed by all thebf nrl'.iii-,
and grew, by daily indulgence, to be incredibly
firong. Mankind becamine lhab;ituated to bloold,
not only in times of war, but of peace ; and ft'oi

3 this,

this, as well as other causes, contraaed an amaz- B o0 K.
in<g ferocity of temper and of manners. This fe- --
rocity, however, mnade it necessary to dilcourage 1566.
thel rial by combat; to abolifi the payment of
co:npenfations in criminal caes ; and to think of
1inme millde:- nthod of terminating dl'putcs con-
cerni ng civil riiits. 'The tI'inifllients for crimes
became muore f' vere, and the rtgulations con,
C(rnin g property Imore fixed; but the Princes,
\vhole piovillce it was to infliEt the one, and to

ifurcc thc e olther, polceffed little power. Great
ofl'endlc diel-[ide their authority; fmnaller ones
Illhltered thelmflves under the jurifdietion of
thole from whole protection they expected im-
punity. Tle administration of justice was ex-
tremely feeble and dilatory. An attempt to
puniih the crimes of a Chieftain, or even of his
vasldls, often excited rebellions and civil wars.
To nobles, haughty and independent, among
whom the causes of discord were many and una-
voidable, who were quick in difeerning an in-
jury, ant impatient to revenge it; who deemed
it infamous to fuIbmit to an enemy, and cowardly
to forgive him ; who confidercd the right of pu-
nilhing thole who had injured them, as a privi-
lege of their order, and a mark of independence;
ILch flow proccedilns were extremely unfatif-
faicory. The blood of their adversary was, in
their opinion, the only thing which could wash
away an afnront; where that was not sied, their
revenge was disappointed, their courage became
fufpcl)Ced, and a slain was left on their honour.
That vengeance, which the impoten; hand of the
Magifrate could not infRit, their own could

B b 4 easily

B 0 V K easily execute. Under governments so f('li,

_ s- , men assumed, as in a state of nature, the riiht ot
3566. judging, and redrefling their own wrongs; and

thus aflflfination, a crime of all others the moi(,
defiruc'ive to fuciety, came not only to be al-
lowed, but to be reckoned honourable.

THE history of Europe, during the fourtccetiL

and fifteenth centuries, abounds with dcterll)ij
initances of this crime. It prevailed chiefly anmonr
the French and Scots, between whom there wva
a clole intercourse at tlat time, and a filrprifing
resemblance in their national characters. In one
thousand four hundred and seven, the only bro-
ther of the King of France was inurdered I ub-
licly in the fireets of Paris; and so far \was ti:.
horrible aCtion from meeting with proper ptmnili-
ment, that an eminent lawyer was allowed to
plead in defence of it before the Peers of FI;:ncc,
and avowedly to maintain the lawfulncsl > ;if-
faffination. In one thousand four hunldred and
seventeen, it required all the eloquc-ncl aei;(l .it1-
thority of the famous Gertfo, to i. vail on iie
Council of Conltance to condemn this Iropofi-
tion, ' 'That thli'i are tome cjals in whicli
aliafination is a virtue more meritorious in a
Knight tha n na Squire, and more merictorioll
in a King than in a Kniight)'." '1The number ul
enminent persons who were murdered in t'r'tnce
and Scotland, on account cither ot privare, or
political, or religious quarrels, durin'. the sis-
teenth and sixteenth centuries, is alimol incre-
dible. Even after those cauftes, which firfl gave

t L'nfant, -lill. Conc. de Conll.

rife

rife to this barbarous practice, were removed; B °0 K
after thejurifdidtion of Magistrates, and the au- -,
thority of laws, were better efabliflled, and be- ,566.
come more universal; after the progress of learn-
ing and philosophy had polished the manners,
and hutnanized the minds of men, this crime
continued in some degree. It was towards the
close of the fcventeenth century before it difap-
pcared in France. The additional vigour, which
the royal authority acquired by the accclion of
James VI. to the throne of England, seems to
have put a flop to it in Scotland.

THf- influence, however, of any national cuf-

torn, both on the understanding and on the heart,
and how far it may go towards perverting or cx-
tingui hing moral principles of the greatest im-
porrance, is remarkable. The authors of those
ages have perfectly imbibed the sentiments of
their cotemporaries, with regard to aTaffination;
and they, wlio had leisure to reflect, and to idge,
apipar to be no more flocked at this crime, than
the pcrfons who committed it during the heat
and illpetuofity of passion. Buchanan des(cribes
the lilurder of Cardinal Beatoun, and of Rizio,
without expressing those feelings which are na-
tural to a man, or that indignation which became
an hillorian". Knox, wlofe mind was fiercer
and more unpolifled, relates the death of Bea-
toun and of the I)uke of Guilf, not only without
cenlure, but with the utmost exultation . On
the other hand, the Bifflop of Ross mentions the

' luchaln. 295. 345 x Kino.X, 334.

alfafli-

B O O K affaftnation of the Earl of Murray, with IbOne

IV.

_-_-. ddegree of applause r. Blackwood dwells upon it
1566. with the molf indecent triumph, and ascribes it

diretly to the hand of Godz. Lord Ruthvcn,
the principal aEtor in the conspiracy againtt
Rizio, wrote an account of it some fllort time
before his own death, and in all his long narra-
tive there is not one expression of regret, or one
symptom of compunEtion, for a crime no lel;
difionourable than barbarous a. Morton, equally
guilty of the fame crime, entertained the fame
sentiments concerning it; and in his last mo-
ments, neither he himself, nor the Ministers who
attended him, seem to have confidered it as an
action which called for repentance; even then he
talks of David's Jlaugbter as coolly as if it had
been an innocent or commendable deed '. The
vices of another age astonish and shock us; the
vices of our own become familiar, and excite
little horrorc. I return from this digrefion to
the. course of the hiflory.

TrnE

Y Anders. 3. S4. Z Jebb, 2. 2s3. a Keith, Append.
119. b CrawF. Mrcm. Append.

In the firl accounts of Rizio's murider sent to England,

therc fccn to havc been mingled (;is is IufU;il in relating Cx-
tr;anrdin;lry evcnts) Ibmc circumlt.inccs, which aftc::'wai.;
;Ippealrcd to Le failfct amlong othcrs, that ;a Friar, named;
Black, had bccn slain at the fame time with R.izio. Park-
J1ull. Brillol) of Norwnich, in comninnicating this intclligency
to his corr'cltindcnt Bullingcr, an eminent ReColrmed LDi vine
cf Zurich, cxprlcllcs no condcmnation of' the inimurder of Ri-
/io, and c!,ilts over the i'ipplotfd cdeathl of the Friar, in
tcrmlS \lhich, in our tilmes, will appcar as fliocking as they

arFj).

TH E charm, which lad at first attached the B O K

I v

Qeen to Darnly, and held them for some time A
in an happy union, was now entirely dissolved; Th5u66en'
and love no longer covering his follies and vices hatred to

°Larnly in-

with its friendly veil, they appeared to Mary in crcir:s.
their full dimension and deformity d. Though
Henry publified a proclamation, disclaiming
any knowledge of the conspiracy against Rizio,
the Queen was fully convinced, that he was not
only accessary to the contrivance, but to the corn-
miflion of that odious crime C. That very power
which, with liberal and unfufpicious fondness,
the had conferred upon him, he had employed
to insult her authority, to limit her prerogative,
and to endanger her person. Such an outrage,
it was impofiible any woman could bear or for-
give, Cold civilities, secret diftrufl, frequent
quarrels, succeeded to their former transports of
affection and confidence. The Queen's favours
were no longer conveyed through his hands.
The crowd of expe&ants ceased to court his
patronage, which they found to avail so little,
Among the nobles, some dreaded his furious
temper, others complained of his. perfidious-
ness; and all of them despised the weakness
of his underfianding, and the inconstancy of

are puerile: " Fratcrculus quidam, nomine .Black, Papifla-
rum antelignanus, coderm tempore in aula occiditur: Sic
niger hic ncbulo, nigra quoque morte pcremptus, invitus ni-
grum subito dci'ccndit in Orcum." Burn. Hist. of Reform.
iii. App. 360.

'c See Appcndix, No. XVI. ,i Keith, 350.

his

B 0 0 K his heart. The people themselves oblervcd

s-ome parts of his condu&t, which little suited
r566. the dignity of a King. Addiced to drunken-

ness, beyond what the manners of that age could
bear, and indulging irreg¶lar passions, which even
the licentiousness of youth could not excuse, hIe,
by his indecent behaviour, provoked the Q)ueen to
the utmost; and the pafTions which it occafoned,
often forced tears fi-om her eyes, both in public and
in private'. Her aversion for him increased every
day, and could be no longer concealed. He was
often absent fi-or court, appeared there with
little splendour, and was trusted with no power.
Avoided equally by those who endeavoured to
please the Q(Qeen, who favoured Morton and his
associates, or who adhered to the house of Ha-
milton; he was left alm-ost alone in a negleceed
and unpitied folitudeg.

Thr rT, f of ABOUT this time a new favourite grew into great
,(,i,=.' credit with the (Qeen, and soon gained an ascend-

ant over her heart, which encouraged his enter-
prifing genius to form designs that proved fatal to
himself, and the occasion of all Mary's fubfequcnt
misfortunes. This was James H-epburn, Earl of
Bothwell, the head of an ancient family, and, by
his extensive poffefions and numerous vassals, one
of the nioft powerful nobleinmen in the kingdom.
''vcn in that turbulent age, when tb many vail
proj7ect were laid open to an alpiring mind, and
invited it to acnion, no Inan's ambitiun was more

h it il, 320. g t clv'. 1i1, &c.

dlaring

daring than Bothwell's, or had recourse to bolder B 0o K

0 n~~~~- IV.

or more singular expedients for obtaining powerh.
\When almost every person of diftinftion in the '5'-
kingdom, whether Papiit or Protestant, had joined
the Congregation in opposing the dangerous en-
croachments of the French upon the liberties of
the nation, he, though an avowed Protestant, ad-
hered to the Queen Regent, and ated with vi-
gour on her fide. The success which attended the
arms of the Congregation having obliged him to
retire into France, he was taken into the Queen's
ftrvice, and continued with her till the time of
her return into Scotland'. From that period,
every ftep of his condu& towards Mary was re-
markably dutiful; and amidlt ail the flifi:ings of
faction, we scarcely ever find him holding any
courfc which could be osTensive to her. W\hen
Murray's proceedings with regard to her marriage
gave umlbrage to the Queen, Ihe recalled Both-
well from that banifiment into which lie had with
rclultance driven him, and confidered Ils zeal and

h The erIc. erpri lI I,'ir. of B, thi:l. Ill \v is so conf>iI :rous

;'. it pro 1c rei hlii ct'ver l

ni:L' k, l's dcillinfltion durirn iis re-

lidlcee in Fr.tniee. l-lHu-dwiekc's S;ri. ]'a.,l', i. 143.
'J'ihrokmnortln, he Entlillh AmIlidor tiL Par'i, ad1 one us

ir ll fi''.E;atio Miniflcrs cnluphly cl 1 li.:il)CIi,ved
by poills

olii 0111 ai is l irlon \vlo) w.IS to) r dilr;adcd :rnd o1i)fervcd.

" he

'li '.l oF ot lhwncll, I er- ,; lic in a; letir, Nov. 28, i56o,

is ldeparted to letilril into Scotllandi, :nld hath made boall
that lie will do great things, and live in Scotland in dcpl)it:
o(1 all melln. lc is ;i jrloriou:s rl, l and l;ii7.;trdollS young

a11:111; :iIdl l er1CeClo it wv.' e. illet tl:ilt lis idvcrl ircs sho ld
lol Ili;\'e ;i ee o hlim, ;t:ld alrfo keep) lim llort. Ibid.
p. 1,I-9.

i Aderf. . 0. .

8 abilitics

B o o K abilities as the most powerful lupports of her atl.

IV.
L-V- thority. When the conspirators againit R.izio

1566. seized her person, he became the chief inftrumeni

of recovering her liberty, and served her, on that
occasion, with to much fidelity and fnccefs, as
made tile deepel: impression on her mind, and
greatly increased the confidence which the had hi-
therto placed in himi k. Hier gratitude loaded him
with marks of her bounty; she raited him to ollices
of profit and of tr;ft, and traniatccd no mattcr osc
importance without his advice'. By cornlaifin:'
and alsiduity, he confirmed and fortified these lii-
positions of the Qleen in hlis favour, and i:lbn-
libly paved the way towards that vail projic-,
which his immoderate ambition had perhaps al-
ready conceived, and which, in sp)ite of man;
difficulties, and at the expence of many crilimc.
he at last accomplifleed.

TiiE hour of the Queen's delivery now ap-

proached. As her palace was defended only byv
slender guard, it seemed imprudent to expo!fc hlc
person, at this time, to the insults fle might tfi-
ser in a kingdom torn by factions, and prone to
mutiny. For this reason, the Privy Council ald-
vised the Queeen to fix her reficence in the callle
of Edinburgh, the litongeft fortrcfs in the kinlg-
dom, and the molt proper place for the fcucritv
of her perfonl". In order to render this licti ti
more perfect, Mary laboured to cxtingilih the do -
mcllic feuds which divided soule of the prilcil p.

k Alndir. . 92, 9.3' Mclv. 133. Kniox, 3K"1

i,,litLll, 335.

nobl:s.

!:noblcs. VlMurray and Argyll were exasperated o o K
againil I luntly and Boithwell, by reciprocal andl _
repeatedl injuries. 'The Q(jeen, by her authority ls56.
:lndl entreaties, effccted a reconcilement among
theml(, andi dcew from them a promise to bury
ilheir dilicoics in everlafliinr oblivion. This rc-
councleillent Mary had to iIch at heart, that tite
m1:icde it tlhe conlirionI on which fnl ag:an received
Murlray ilntO avour'.

(') the iiineteenili of June, Mary was deli- Pirth nS

vci'ed ot her only -Ion James, a Prince wholle Jm VS."
birti; v.'.s inapi) for the whole island, and unfor-
tun.:te to Iher alone. llis accelfion to tle throne
ofi .ilrlnand united the two divided kingdoms in
one Iligity nlonlrchl, and eflablilhed tlie power
of Great Britain on a firm foundation. \Vhile
f!nc, torn early from her son by the cruelty of her
fa'e, was never ailowed to indulge those tender
p:iflions, nor to tale thole joys whichi fill the
leart of a mother.

Mni:r.\Lr. was inflantly dil)patclied to Iondon

vitrl an account of' this event. It tiruckl Eliza-
[betl, at firfl, in a min

ible mannerl-; allnd the ad-

vantage and fupelriority which her ival had ac-
(luircd by the birth of a son, forced tears from
Ier1 e'yes. But before Mclvil vwas admitted to au-
dielnce, Ihe had lbt far recovered the command of
herlilf,; as to receive him not only with decency,
ullt with excellive clherfulncls; and willingly ac-
cep)ted the invlitatiol w\liclich Marly gave her, to
aIlnd (odmlother to 1her oll.

l\cith,, 336. Alpcnd. ' 139. °
o LI\. 1.3S.

As

B o0 K As Mary loved splendour and magnificence, ihe

1v.
»-«_- resolved to celebrate the baptifin of the young

1566. Prince with great pomp; and for that purpose

sent invitations of the fame kind to the French
King, and to the Duke of Savoy, the uncle of
her former husband.

Tie Qp.n THE Queen, on her recovery, discovered no
tri a.nly change in her sentiments with relpea to the
with ndfd King P. The death of Rizio, and the counte-
teglet. nance he had given to an acion so insolent and

unjuiiifiable, were fl-ill fresh in her memory. She
was frequently penlive and dejecedq. Though
HIenry sometimes attended at court, and accom-
panied her in her progresses through different
parts of the kingdom, he met with little reverence
from the nobles, while Mary treated him with the
greatest reserve, and did not susser him to possess
any authorityr. The breach between them be-
came every day more apparents. Attempts were
made towards a reconcilement, particularly by
Callelnau the French Ambassador; but after
such a violent rupture, it was found no easy
matter to bind the nuptial knot a-new; and
though he prevailed on the King and Queen
to pats two nights together', we may, with
great probability, pronounce this appearance of
union, to which Caftelnau truiled, not to have
been sincere; we know with certainty that it
Was not lasting.

r Sec Append. No. XVIr. q llbid. 148. r Kcili,

3 0. Mclv. 132. ' Kcith, Append. 169. t Ibid.
16).

BOTch-

OTI-IWELL, all this while, was the Qudeh's B °0° g

IV.

prime confident. Without his participation no -
business was concluded, and no favour bestowed, Hr ttach-
'ogtether with this ascendant over her councils, m,'
Bothwell, if we may believe the contemporary i;icracai.
historians, acquired no lets sway over her heart.
Bur, at what precise time this ambitious Lord firfi
allowed the sentiments of a lover to occupy the
place of that duty and refpetl which a subject
owes his Sovereign ; or whien Mary, inflead of
gratitude for his faithful services, felt a palFron of
another nature rising in her bosom, it is no easy
matter to determine. Such delicate transitions of
passion can be discerned only by those who are
admitted near the persons of the parties, and who
can view the secret workings of the heart with
calm and acute observation. Neither Knox nor
Buchanan enjoyed these advantages. Their hum-
ble station allowed them only a distant access to
thce Queen and her favourite. And the ardour of
their zeal, and the violence of their prejudices,
rendered their opinions rash, precipitate, and ini-
accurate. It is by the effects of this reciprocal
paflion, rather than by their accounts of it, that
fubfequcnt historians can judge of its reality.

ADVENTUROUS as Bothwell's projet to gain the

QQueen may appear, it was formed and carried on
under very favourable circumflances. Mary wwa
young, gay, and aflable. She poffesred great fen-
fibility of temper, and was capable of the utmost
tenderness of afl'ction. She had placed her love
on a very unworthy objet, who requited it with
ingratitude, and treated her with neglect, with

VOL. 1. C c info-

B 0 0 K insolence, and with brutality. All these the felt,

IV.
.--.-- and resented. In this situation, the attention and
1566. complaisance of a man, who had vindicated her

authority, and proteced her person; who entered
into all her views, who soothed all her paflions,
who watched and improved every opportunity of
insinuating his design, and recommending his
passion', could hardly fail of making an impref-
sion on a heart of such a frame as Mary's.

The King THE haughty spirit of Darnly, nursed up in
rellives tu
leave Scot. flattery, and accuflomed to command, could not
land. bear the contempt under which he had now

fallen, and the state of insignificance to which he
saw himself reduced. But in a country where he
was universally hated or despised, he could never
hope to form a party, which would second any
attempt he might make to recover power. He
addressed himself, therefore, to the Pope, and to
the Kings of France and Spain, with many pro-
felions of his own zeal for the Catholic religion,
and with bitter complaints against the Queen, for
neglecting to promote that interelt": And loon
after, he took a resolution, equally wild and
desperate, of embarking on board a hlip, which
he provided, and of flying into foreign parts.
It is almost impofflble to form any fatisfatory
conjecture concerning the motives which influence
a capricious and irregular mind. He hoped,
perhaps, to recommend himself to the Catholic
Princes on the continent by his zeal for religion,
and that they would employ their interest towards

U Anders. i. 93, 94. x Knox, 399.

rein-

reinstating him in the possession of that power B °°0 K

IV.

which he had loft. Perhaps, he expected nothing -
more than the comfort of hiding the disgrace 1566.
under which he was now fallen, among strangers,
who had never been witnesses of his former pro-
fperity.

HE communicated the design to the French HWscapri-

ciou bcha.

Ambassador Le Croc, and to his father the Earl viour.
of Lennox. They both endeavoured to dissuade
him from it, but without success. Lennox, who
teems, as well as his son, to have loft the Queen's
confidence, and who, about this time, was fel-
dom at court, instantly communicated the matter
to her by a letter. Henry, who had refused to
accompany the Queen from Stirling to Edin-
burgh, was likewise absent from court. He ar-
rived there, however, on the fame day she re-
ceived the account of his intended flight. But
he was more than usually wayward and peeviih;
and scrupling to enter the palace unless certain
Lords who attended the Queen were diliniffed,
Mary was obliged to meet him without the gates.
At last he suffered her to conduct him into her
own apartment. She endeavoured to draw from
him the reasons of the flrange resolution which
he had taken, and to diveit him fiom it. In
spite however of all her arguments and intreaties,
he remained silent and infi-xible. Next dlay the
Privy Council, by her direclion, cxpoftulated
with him on the fame head. 1-e perfilled, not-
withltanding, in his fullliinels and olfllinacy;
and neither deigned to explain the nlo(ivcs of his
conduct, nor signified any intcntion of altering

C c :' it,

B o0 K it. As he left the apartment, he turned towards

IV.

a--,.- the Queen, and told her, that she should not fee
j566; his face again for a long time. A few days after,

he wrote to Mary, and mentioned two things as
grounds of his disgust. She herself, he said, no
longer admitted him into any confidence, and
had deprived him of all power; and the nobles,
after her example, treated him with open neglect,
so that he appeared in every place without the
dignity and splendour of a King.

Mary en- NOTHING could be more mortifying to Mary,
de v ,irs to
P.',chnlls than this intended flight of the King's, which
'- ced would have spread the infamy of their domestic

quarrel all over Europe. Compafflon for a Mo-
narch who would then appear to be forced into
exile by her negleEt and ill usage, might have
disposed mankind to entertain sentiments con-
cerning the causes of their discord, little to her
advantage. In order, therefore, to prepoftcfs
the minds of her allies, and to screen her reputa-
tion from any censure with which Darnly might
endeavour to load it, the Privy Council tranf-
ritted a narrative of this whole tranfaftion, both
to the King and to the Queen Mother of
F rance. It is drawn with great art, and fe;s
Mary's conduct in the most favourable point (ol
light ".

ABou'T this time the licence of the borderer:

called for rcdrefs; and Mary resolving to hold a
court of jullice at Jcdburgh, the inhabitants of
several adjacent counties were lnummoned to at-

Y Kcith, 345' 347.
n tcnil

tend their Sovereign in arms, according to cuf- B O K
tornm. Bothwell was, at that time, Lieutenant --
or Warden of all the marches, an office among I566.
the most important in the kingdom; and though
usually divided into three diftinft governments,
bestowed by the Queen's favour upon him alone.
In order to display his own valour and activity in
the discharge of this trust, he attempted to seize
a gang of banditti, who, lurking among the
marshes of Liddefdale, infested the reft of the
country. But while he was laying hold upon one
of those desperadoes, he was wounded by him in oaober x6.
several places, so that his followers were obliged
to carry him to Hermitage castle. Mary in-
ftantly flew thither, with an impatience which
has been confidered as marking the anxiety of a
lover, but little suited the dignity of a Queen:.

Z Keith, j53. Good. vol. i. 302.
a The distance between Jedburgl and Hermitage iN

eighteen Scottiflh miles, through a country alimuofl iimpailf
ailc. The season of the year was far advanced. Bothwell
ecems to have been wounded in a fcufle, occasioncd by the
deflair of a single man, rather than any open infurrcition
of tlhe borderers. It does not appear that the QLcen was
:ttended thither by any considcral)e train. Ilad any niill-
t;lay operation bcen nccc(llie, as is fiuppofcd, Good. vol. i.
304. it would have been extremely improper to riftuic the
QUeen's person in an expedition againl thieves. As Ibon
.,i tile (Qccn found Botliwell to be in no danger, flie in-
:t intly returned, and after this we h 'ar no more of the in-
lilrel&ion, nor have we any proof that the rioters took re-
ftuge in England. As thee is no farthler cvidence with re-
Il cjt to th1e mot i ies of tllis extraordinary journety, the reader
irii'il jutl r wihat dcrrcce of clredit is diue to Knox :and Bu-
(li.;i,1i , wlio afcril), it to the Q iecen':; lv\e of Bothliwell.

C c 3 Find-

B vO K Finding that Bothwell was threatened with no

IV.

dangerois symptom, she returned that fame day
S56-. to Jedburgh. The fatigue of such a journey,

added to the anguish of mind flie had suffered on
Bothwell's account, threw her next morning into
a violent fever b. Her life was despaired of, but
her youth, and the vigour of her conltitution, re-
sifted the malignity of her disease. During the
continuance of the Queen's illness, the King,
who resided at Stirling, never came near Jed-
Novemb. s. burghl; and when he afterwards thought fit to

make his appearance there, he met with such a
cold reception, as did not encourage him to
make any long ftayd. Mary soon recovered
strength enough to return along the eastern bor-
ders to Dunbar.

WHILE fle resided in this place, ler attention

was turned towards England. Elizabeth, not-
withltanding her promise, and even proclamations
to the contrary, not only allowed, but encouraged
Morton and his associates to remain in England e
Mary, on the other hand, afforded her protecion
to fcveral English fugitives. I'aclh Qjeen watched
the motions of the other with a jealous . ttcntion,
and secretly countenanced the pri- aics which
were carrying on to diiturb the adlminifiration of
her rival.

ThcEg(l:h FOR this purpose, Mary's Ambaffidor, Robert
I'atlilia lncnt
favour, ha- Melvil, and her other emilffries, were extremely
fiY^, ,P'he acive and successful. We may impute, in a
lu L :c nlo .

b Keith, 351, 352. C Ibid. ,Append. 133.
'i Knox, 400. C (C;il. vol. ii, p. 15.

good

good degree, to their intrigues, that spirit which B 0 0 K
appeared in the Parliament of England, and v-
which raied a storm that threatened Elizabeth's i566.
doineflic tranquillity more than any other event
of her reign, and required all her art and dex-
terity to allay it.

ELIZABETH had now reigned eight years with-

out dilcovering the least incention to marry. A
violent distemper, with which she had lately been
seized, having endangered her life, and alarmed
the nation with the profpe&t of all those calamities
which are occasioned by a disputed and dubious
succession; a motion was made, and eagerly lif-
tened to in both houses, for addrefling the Queen,
to provide against any such danger in times to
come, either by signifying her own resolution to
marry, or by consenting to an at, establishing
the oider of fucceifion to the Crown r. Her
love to her fubjeEts, her duty to the public, her
concern for posterity, it was asserted, not only
called upon, but obliged her to take one of these
flep3. The insuperable aversion which ihe had
all along discovered for marriage, made it im-
probable that fie would chute the former; and
if Ihe complied with the latter request, no title to
the Crown could, with any colour of juffice, be
fit in opposition to that of the Scottith Queen.
Elizabeth was sagacious enough to fee the re-
moteft consequences of this motion, and observed
them with the greatest anxiety. Mary, by re-
furing so often to ratify the treaty of Edinburgh,

f D'Ewec Jouin. of Pail. i 5.

C c 4 had

D o o 1lc had plainly intimated a design of embracing the

IV.
i --. firil- promliing opportunity for prosecuting her

right to the English Crown; and by her secret
niigotiations, fle had gained many to favour her
title g. All the l oran Catholics ardently wifled
for her fuccelion. -Her gentlenels and humanity
had removed many of those apprelhcnfions whicil
tile Proteltants entertained on account of her rc'-
ligion. The court faclion, which envied the
power of Cecil, and endeavourcd to wrest the
admniiiltration out of his hands, advanced tle
p-ctcnfions of the Sco tifn Qucen in opposition
to himT. The uijioil of the two kingdomns was a
desirable objec to all wile men in both nations;
and the birth of the young Prince was a fecuriity
for the continuance of this ble.fing, and gavc
hopes of its perpetuity.

Elizjbefh't UNDER these circumrncances, and while the na-
n thdt c- tion was in such a temper, a parliamentary decla.
CUU"lt. ration of Mary's title would have been highly de-

trimental to Elizabeth. The prelfnt unsettled
state of the succession left much in her power.
I-er refentmcnt alone niglt have gone far to-
vwards excluding any of the competitors from the
Crown; and the dread of this had hitherto re-
firaincd and overawed the ambition of the Scot-
tilh Lucen. But if this check should be removed
by the legal acknowledgment of her title, Mary
would be more at liberty to pursue her dangerous
designs, and to a2t without fear or reserve. I-er
partlians were already meditating schemes for in-

c Mclv. 136.

furrc ions

firtredtions in different parts of the kingdomrl; °0 K
and an a&t of Parliament, recognining the rights -- .--S
of that Princess, whofepretenfions they favoured, i 5'
would have been nothing lets than a signal to
arnms; and notwithftandcing Elizabeth's just title
to the affections of her lfubjcLc, might have
shaken and endangered lher throne.

\W'ttILE this matter remained in suspense in Mr"."'i,

boti hioufes, an account of it was tranfmiitted to ir:r ..ovh:
MIary by Melvil her AmbafEador. As flic di(l not P il
want advocates for her right, even among thole
wvho were near Elizabeth's perlln, she endeavoured
to cultivate the disposition which appeared to-
wards fectling the right of ficceflon in ier favour,
by a letter to the Privy Counsellors of England.
She expressed in it a gratcful sense of EIlizabeth's
friendship, which she ascribes chiefly to their good
offices with their Sovereign in her behalf. She
declared her resolution to live in perpetual amity
with England, without urging or pursuing her
claim upon the Crown, any farther than finould
be agreeable to the Queen. But, at the fame
time, as her right of fuccefflon was undoubted,
flc hoped it would be examined with candour,
and judged of with impartiality. The nobles
who attended her, wrote to the Fnglifi Privy
Council in the fame fIrain'. Mary artfully gave
there letters the air of being nothing more than
a declaration of her own, and of her fuljeas gra-
titude towards Ilizabeth. But as she could not
be ignorant of the jealousy and fear with which

J\lIclv. 147. ,' iKcilt, 3'r ; .A pplelnd. 13r.

I',lizabeth

() o K flizabcLh obtlerved the proceedings of Parlia-
IV. .,__.. ment, a f p io uncoinmon as this, of one

36 J. p rince's cntci ing into public correspondence with

the Privy Counsellors of another, could not be
otherwile conitrued than as taken with an inten-
tion to encourage the spirit which had already
been railed among the Englifl. In this light it
teems to have appeared to Elizabeth her'elfk.
But the disposition of her people rendering it ne-
celfary to treat Mary's perion with great decency,
and htr title with much regard, fle mentioned it
to her only in the softest language.

Eliz.dwtii NOTHING, however, could be a more cruel
gilthr,,d mortification to a Princess of Elizabeth's cha-
ai.am:ir.t, .racer, than the temper which both houses of

Parliament discovered on this occasion. She
bent all her policy to defeat or elude the motion.
After allowing the firit heat of their zeal to eva.
porate, The called into her pretence a certain
number of each house. She soothed and carefled
them; fle threatened and promised; the remit-
ted subsidies which were due; and refused those
which were offered; and in the end prevailed to
have this formidable motion put off for that fef-
lion. -lappily for her, the conduft of the Scot-
rilh Q2een, and the misfortunes which besel her,
prevented the revival of such a motion in any
future Parliamlent'.

MEAN time, in order to preserve the reputation
of imnpartiality, and that she might not drive

' Kcilh, t3 7.
I)'l';c, , Jonlrn. 1 .1- 13 . C.1md, 399. Mclv. 19.

Mary

Mary into any desperate measure, she committed 1 °0 K
to the Tower one Thornton, who had publifled .>. -
fomiething derogatory to the right of tile Scot- 'x66
tifh line"'; and signified her difplc.ifure againit
a Member of the IHoufe of Commions, who
seemed, by some words in a speech, to glance at
Mary".

AMIDST all her other cares, Mary was ever so- An extra-

or.linary ftep

licitous to promote the interest of that religion ,.fMry'sip
which she professed. The re-eitablifllment of the fpopur:
Romith doctrine seems to have been her favourite
pafion; and though the dcfign was concealed
wich care, and conducted with caution, Ihe pur-
sued it with a persevering zeal. At this time, fie
ventured to lay aside somewhat of her usual re-
serve; and the aid which fle expected fiom the
Popish Princes, who had engaged in the league
of Bayonne, encouraged her to take a fRep, which,
if we confider the temper of the nation, appears
to be extremely bold. Having formerly held a
fccret correspondence with the court of Rome,
she now resolved to allow a Nuncio from the Pope
publicly to enter her dominions. Cardinal Lau-
rea, at that time Biflhop of Mondovi, was the
person on whom Pius V. conferred this office,
and along with hi:n he sent the Quecn a present
of twenty thoulfind crowns". It is not the cha-
raLt&r of the Papal court to open its treasury
upon diflant or inmaginary hopes. 'The bufinei-s
of the Nuncio in Scotland could be no other,
than to attempt a reconciliation of that king-

m C iared. .lO) "
.il.; cs, 119

'Vila C'ard. I.L;ar. :li. IBuirI. vul. iii 1). j2 ,

domn

B o0 K dom to the Romish fee. Thus Mary herfeli

IV.

. ,,-.i understood it; and in her answer to a letter
J>e'ó which she received from the Pope, after exprelf-

ing her grateful sense of his paternal care and
liberality, fie promises that she would bend her
whole strength towards the re-eftablilhment and
propagation of the Catholic faith; that fie
would receive the Nuncio with every poflible
dernonftration of refpe&, and concur, with the
utmost vigour, in all his designs towards pro-
moting the honour of God, and restoring peace
to the kingdom ; that she would celebrate the
baptfinf of the Prince according to the ceremo-
nies which the Ronifll ritual prescribes, hoping
that her fubjicts would be taught, by this ex-
ample, again to reverence the sacraments of the
church, which they had so long treated with con-
tempt; and that fle would be careful to infil
early into her ion the principles of a sincere love
and attachment to the Catholic faithlP. But
though the Nuncio was already arrived at Paris,
and had sent over one of his attendants with part
of the money, the Queen did not think the junc-
ture proper for his reception. Elizabeth was pre-
paring to lend a magnificent embassy into Scot-
land, ag'iinlt the time of the Prince's baptifin,
and as it would have been improper to offend
her, fle wifely contrived, under various pretences,
to detain Laurea at Paris'. The convulsions
into which the kingdom was thrown soon after,

P Conxi Vita Mlaria anp. Jcbb, vol, ii. p. g,
q ICcith, Append. 135.

inladC

made it impossible for him to pursue his journey B 0o K
any farther. --

AT the very time that Mary was secretly car- 566

rying on these negotiations for subverting the
Reformed Church, she did not fcrtple publicly
to employ her authority towards obtaining for its
Ministers a more certain and comfortable fib-
fiftencer. During this year, fie issued several
proclamations and aAs of council for that pur-
pose, and readily approved of every fchme
which was proposed for the more efifectual pay-
ment of their tfipends. This part of her con-
duct does little honour to Mary's integrity: and
though justified by the example of Princes, who
often reckon falsehood and deceit among the ne-
ceffary arts of government, and even authorised
by the pernicious casuistry of the Roman Church,
which transfers breach of faith to heretics from
the lift of crimes to that of duties, such difi-
mulation, however, must be numbered among
those blernifhes which never stain a truly great
and generous character.

As neither the French nor Piedmontefe Am- ncccmh.r.

kt averion

baffadors were yet arrived, the baptifin of the fur irhKing
Prince was put off fiom time to time. Mean CX"ccti"e.
while Mary fixed her residence at Craigmillar'.
Such a retirement, perhaps, suited the present
temper of her mind, and induced her to prefer
it before her own palace of Holy-rood-houfe.
Iler aversion for the King grew every day more
confirmed, and was become altogether incurable.

' Kith, 561, 562. Knox, 401. Kcitli, 355.

A deep

B 0o K A deep melancholy succeeded to that gaiety of

IV.
__ spirit which was natural to her. The rafhnels

I56. and levity of her own choice, and the King's in-

gratitude and obstinacy, filled her with shame and
with despair. A variety of pailions preyed at
once on a mind, all whole sensations were exqui-
site, and all its emotions strong, and often ex-
torted fiom her, the last wifl of the untortunate,
that life itlelf might come to an end'.

BUT as the Earl of Bedford, and the Count de

Brienne, the English and French Ambassadors,
whom flie had long expeted, arrived about this
time, Mary was obliged to suppress what passed
in lier boson, and to set out for Stirling, in
order to celebrate the baptifrn of her son. Bed-
ford was attended by a numerous and splendid
train, and brought presents from Elizabeth,
suitable to her own dignity, and the refpe't witli
which she affiected, at that time, to treat the
Qleen of Scors. Great preparations had been
made by Mary, and the magnificence dilplayed
by her on this occasion, exceeded whatever hadl
been formerly known in Scotland. The cere-
D¢cem.7. 1. ony itself was performed according to the rites

of the Romish Church. But neither Bedford,
nor any of the Scottifi nobles who profefled the
Proteltant religion, entered within the gates of
the chapel". The lpirit of that age, firm and
uncomplying, would not, upon any inducemenr,
condescend to witness an acion which it deemed
idolatrous.

Keith, Prct vii. Kcith, 360.

1 1H-IEN RY'S

1 IENRY'S behaviour, at this jtuntturc(, 3

rfcly o K

discovers the excess of his caprice, as well as of '--,
his folly. He chose to reside at Stirling, but con- .'rh: n, .
fined himfilf to his own apartmnent; and as tile C'irc.tI. S

b, hiaimir
Queen distrusted every nobleman who ventured to aU th h).,p-

iftm of [he

converfi with iiim, lie was left in absolute soli- ,i',lce.
tude. Nothing could be more singular, or was
less expected, than his chufing to appear in a
manner that both pubiifhed the contempt under
which lie had fallen, and, by exposing the Queen's
domestic unhappinels to the oblervation of to
many foreigners, looked like a flep taken on pur-
pose to mortify and to oflend ler. Mary felt this
insult sensibly; aind notwithllanding all her cTflorts
to assume the gaiety which suited the occasion,
and which was neceffilry for the polite reception of
her guests, she was iometimcs obliged to retire,
in order to be at liberty to indulge her fiorrow,
and give vent to her tears . The King flill per-
sifted in his design of reti:ring into forei.gn parts,
and daily threatened to put it in exccution '.

1 HE

X Kcith, Prcf. vii.
Y Camden aflirms, 4ol, l1 it Bcdordl w\.; coiniiiii:ldcdl lv,

Fliz;bcth not to give )Dirnly iic litlc of' Ki!j. A ,

Ii s xv.

i

an indignity, not to be borne, citlllr ly TM.II) 1r ,l.r Iuifni :tril,
il hath been afrertecl to b: e t

hc c if ol'thl c liii ,'s

;il.l a :c Ironi

lic cremony of his fil's lb.li li:l. KcilH!, ;f.,. ,(,,1. 31 9.
But, i. No filch thing is to l)c 1 n;)i i ,l

ii; l')tli l' l r1lc-

tiouns, thle original of' w\ li hl

lh

11 cli.iii;. Kciilt , 3 ,7s. 2. Bi.ed-

ford's advice lo the i ycn

l( 1y Mlclvil is; iittIc ly iic)nliflcint

witli Canidei's al_'rlibr i. Mclv. 1S3. MJclvil' . :iccn il i.s
confiirmed by li/.;abcilh's iii'liith'ilis lo Sir I Icnry .Nir ri,,
wherle sic allilrils thllt ile Comllc li ndlei l Blcdtl; ld tol C.i|li1)y
his bes officcs to\;nwars rcconicilin;i hi .l ty lier hiclli. lll,

v !i c i'

B O0 K TiHE ceremony of witncffing the Prince's bap,

IV.

a_- tifm was not the sole business of Bedford's eln-
,Ei;z66. bafiy. I-is inftruEtions contained an overture,
endeavors owhich ought to have gone far towards extin-
t1s accom-
mcdaie htr guifhing tlhole jealousies which had so lonr sub-
diffre nces
.iith'Mhar. silted between the two Queens. The treaty of

Edinburgh, which has been so often mentioned,
was the principal occasion of there. The spirit,
however, which had risen to such an height in the
late Parliament, the power of the party which fa-
voured the Scottish Queen's title, the number
and activity of her agents in different parts of the

vwhich lic h:ad attcimptcd to no purpose. I)igges's Compl.
Ambaif. ). 13. A p:ipr published Append. No. XVIII.
prove.s the time thing. 3. Le Croc the French Refidct
mentions the King's abiTnce, but witiont giving that reafein
for it, which has been fo)unded on Caruden's words, though,
if that had been the real one, it is hardly polfible to conccive
tha:t lie hiould i:ave nc-lelcd to mention it. Le Croc's firl

lttcr is dated December 2, fnmie time prior to the arrival (f
thc EIarl of Bedford in Scotl:ld ; ;nd when his inllrucRions,
eitlher publi or lictcre, could lhardly be known. Lc Croc
piainly lilppcfs that the difeord between the King arn
ijccnl w\.s the c;lule (ol hii . aIfence fromn the baptifin, ;lid
hii. ;CCOCU:;t (f tllis mi;tt er ih. that which I have followcd,
K cilt, Pref. vi .

4. I iiiinf()ns his court, that on account

of tlie dlilTercnce bctwiK.t thic King :nd the Q-ccn, lie lihadl
rt. fused to hold any fiirtlicr corrceflondcnce with the ibrmicr,
tlicugh he applclars,in ny

in lla initccs, to have been his grc.il

confdlent. Ilhidl. 5. As the King was not p-rcfcnt at tli1
baptifin, he feerns to h:i\'e been excluded from any flarc ill
the ordinary adminiflration of bulinefs. Two ads of Privy
Council, one on the 2otli, a11d tlIc oh othe n tlhe 21f. of 1)c-
comber, are fbund in lKitil, 562, They both run in Ihli
Qccen's nnlme alone. '1lie King fecnis not to have brcn
prescnt. This could not be owing to Elizalbelh's ifl.truioiisl
to Bedford.

kingdom,

]kingdom, alarmed Elizabeth, and induced her to B °° K
forego any advantage, which tile ambiguous and -
artful exprecflions in tlat treaty might afford her. '566.
Nothing was new demanded of Mary, but to re-
pounce any title to the crown of England during
'llizaberll's life, and the lives of her posterity;
vwho, on the other hand, engaged to take no ftep
which might prove injurious to Mary's claim upon
the fuccefion '.

MARY could not, with decency, rejct a pro-

position so equitable; she infilted, however, that
Elizabeth should order the right upon which fl(e
claimed, to be legally examined, and publicly re-
cogniled, and particularly that the testament of
lenry VIII. whereby he had excluded the de-
fcendants of his eldest sifter the Qoieen of Scot-
land, from the place due to them in the order of
fuccellion, might be produced, and confidered by
the ELnglifh nobility. Mary's Ministers had cre-
dulouly embraced an opinion, that this testament,
which they so justly conceived to be injurious to
their mistress, was a mere forgery; and on dif-
ferent occasions had urged Elizabeth to produce
it. Mary would have fuilered considerably by
gaining this point. The original testament is
itill extant, and not the least doubt can be enter-
tained of its genuineness and authenticity. But
it was not Ellizabeth's intention to weaken or to
let aside the title of thle lioufe of Stewart. She
aimed at nothing more, than to keep the queflion
concerning the fucccffion perplexed and unde-

, Keith, 35I .
Vol., I. 1 d cided,

B O ) K cided, and by industriously eluding this request,

- le did real lervice to Mary's caufea.
Z'36j' A ri:w days after the baptifii of the Prince,

Morion and all the other confrpirators against Ri-
zio obtained their pardon, and leave to return
into Scotland. Mary, who had hitherto conti-
nued inexorable to every entreaty in their behalf,
yielded at lA1k to the solicitations of Bothwell
Ice could hope fur no success in those bold de-
signs on which Ils ambition relolvcd to venture,
without drawing aid from every quarter. By
procuring a favour for Morton and his aflociates,
of which they had good reaion to dcepair, he ex-
pecl-ed to secure a band of faithful and determined
adheren ts.

THE King frill remained at Stirling, in solitude,

and under contempt. His impatience in this situ-
ation, together with the alarm given him, by the
rumour of a design to seize his person, and con-
fine him to prison c, was the occasion of his leav-
ing that place in an abrupt manner, and retiring
to his father at Glasgow.

J.ln 7,. TTwo affitll lies of the church were held during
])(c nR, Zt,
(cliirh at- this year. New cnomplaints were made, and upon
.'"" ' god g rounls, of the ?rovertv and contempt un-

der which the Plroteltant clergy were ffl-e'erd to
la:npiiih. Penurious as the allotment for thei,
libfill.nce was, they lhad not received the leaif
part of what was due for the preceding year'.

L' Rymr, :v. p. r-p .

1 ;,, ;.

c l ,,. Note (c).
'\iull iln, ;,,.

" (;,od. ol. i. 1.4 , Mclv. 4. K. 1. c , Pref. viii.

lld;.1. r(,,.

Nothing

Nothing less than a zeal, ready to endure and to B 0 0 K
susser every thing for a good cause, could have -
persuaded men to adhere to a church, so indigent I566.
and so neglected. The extraordinary expences,
occasioned by the Prince's baptifn, had exhausted
the Queen's treasury, and the fums appropriated
for the fubfiflence of the clergy were diverted into
other channels. The Qujeen was therefore obliged
to prevent the just re-nonflrances of the assembly,
by falling on some new method for the relief of
the church. Some symptoms of liberality, some
stretch towards munificence, might have been ex-
p'tced in an aflig:.-nent which was made with an
intention of footl.ing and silencing the clergy.
But both the Queen and the nobles held fast the
riches of the church which they had ifized. A
finm, which, at the highelt computation, can
hardly be reckoned equal to nine thousand
pounds flerlingc, was deemed fuflicient for the
maintenance of a whole national church, by men
who had lately seen tingle monaflerics pofllffed of
revenues far superior in value.

Ti-iE ecclesiastics in that age bore the griev-

ances which afilcted themselves alone with afto-
nifhing patience; but wherever the reformed
religion was threatened, they were extremely
apt to be alarmed, and to proclaim, in the
loudest manner, their apprehensions of danger.
A just occasion of this kind was given them, a
iuort time before the meeting of the assembly.
Tlhe usurped and opprcflive juritfdidtion of the

KeCIth, 5(62.
D d 2 spiritual

B °IV K spiritual courts had been abolified by the Parlia-

-,. ment in the year one thousand five hundred and
J566. sixty, and Commiffaries were appointed to hear

and determine the causes which formerly came
under their cognizancef. Among the few ads
of that Parliament to which Mary had paid any
regard, this was one. She had confirmed the
authority of the Commiffaries, and had given
them inftrudions for direting their proceedings::,
which are fiill of great authority in that court.
From the time of their lirft appointment, thes'e
judges had continued in the uninterrupted exer-
cife of their function, when of a sudden the
(Queen ii'ued a proclamation, restoring the Arch-
bithop of St. Andrew's to his ancient juriifdic-
tion, and depriving the Commiffaries of all au-
thority :.

A IMOT'IVE, which cannot be justified, rendered

the Queen not unwilling to venture upon this rash
a&ion. She had been contriving, for some time,
how to rc-eftablifh the Popilh religion; and the
restoring the ancient ecclelialics to their former
jurifdition, seemed to be a considerable ftep to-
wards that end. The motive which prompted
Bothwell, to whose influence over the Queen this
action must be chiefly imputed', was still more
criminal. His enterprising ambition had alrealy
formed that bold design, which he soon after put
in execution ; and the uife which we (hall hereafter
find him making of that authority, which the Po-
pifil ecclcfiaftics regained, discovers the realons

r Keith, 152. ' Id. 251. h Knox, 403.
id. ibid.

of

of his prefcnt conduct, in contributing to revive B ° V K
their power. The Protestant clergy were not un-
concerned fpeStators of an event which threat- I565
ened their religion with unavoidable deftruition;
but as they despaired of obtaining the proper re-
medy from the Queen herself, they addrefted a
remnont-rance to the whole body of the Protestant
nobility, full of that ardent zeal for religion,
which the danger to which it was expolcd at tlat
tinme, feenemd to req uir-c . What efscts this ve-
hclment exhortation might have produced, we
hIvc no opportunity of judging, the attention of
the nation being quickly turned towards events of
another, and more tragical nature.

IMMEDIATELY upon the King's leaving Stirling, The K;ng

fals tick at

and before he could reach Glalgow, he was seized Glfgow.
with a dangerous distemper. The symptoms which '567'
attended it were violent and unusual, and in that
age it was commonly imputed to the effeEts of
poison'. It is iinporfible, amidst the contradic-
tions of historians, to decide with certainty con-
cerning its nature, or its caife"'. HIis life was

in

t Kecith, 567 I l.

1 Mrlv.- Knx, 401.

l Buclia :iii; ; l K x ire poilti\v tlli the lili,'; t been

i>;lilcld. ''llhey icniinil, tle black and pulrid p.ilttl ol which
,l'okc t all ovelr hils bodly. B1uclhan ;il, Ilthat Abernethy
tlhe Kings puliiyisiii, plilally Icc(l:'ae l ithat poitlim wa the

i c:tiif

(sI tlheli fyil|)t(ins, and that the Qecen rIl'1'tlit to :ill\v er
'\in i ll ni ln to tttend liim. blucli. 3.49. Kio2,.o40. 2. Black-

(llod1, C:atilin. &c. Jel)I), vol. ii. 59. 214. .ltcrt, tllhat 1lie t ll-

p{)x w;s llthe lilc;ktfc with whichl the King was si icd.

wlie iq

';illed a Pncklih man in the Q Cueen's letter. God. vi'l. ii. 15 .
'l'he rcaloin given hy French /.'aris fOr lo(gillng the Kling ;i the
Ki(irk of Field, vl/.. lell tlle y voln Prii nce llould catch tler

1) d 3 insulcioc

B °? K in the utmoPc danger; but after languifling for

s_ ifome weeks, the vigour of' his confiitution fur-

s567. mounted the malignity of the disease.

Negrlaej MARY'S negledt of the King on this occasion,
b' Mar. was equal to that with which he had treated her

during her illness at Jedburgh. She no longer
felt that warmth of conjugal affe&-ion which
prompts to sympathy, and delights in all those
tender offices which looth and alleviate sickness
and pain. At this junclure, fie did not even put
on the appearance of this passion. Notwithftand-
ing the King's danger, fle amused herself with
excursions to different parts of the country, and
ffifered near a month to elaple before flie visited
him at Glasgow. By that time, the violence of
the distemper was over, and the King, though
weak and languifling, was out of all danger.

The Lieach THE breach between Mary and her husband
th m irrc- was not occasioned by any of those flight difgutls

p 'a which interrupt the domestic union, without dif-

solving it altogether. Almofl: all the pafTions,
which operate with greateli viole'nce on a femilale

ilt'CtifOtn if' e flaid ill the pi;l.ecc, ccmns to f.vouI thli; ( .ii-
ni)n. Atidel: vtl. ii. 193. (';:t c mentions it ;is a ptrout il,
Ml.try's tclidcrlncls lto iher htfb;nt ., tltt.l L ljuhh ili ec never hl t I
thile lti;li-pox licitiel, Ilic vetilti'ed to ICttcl lim, vol. ii.
44.6. T'lhis, il i Ihd lbeen truc, wouldl lhaive ;tlI'dc(l ;it geod
prctelnC el o 1101 \l'im ifllin1 l hiJ e

.

jrr; it) M atry l d lie i;I'm ill-

pOX> iln her itd .t:o!ry. ;Sa; ller's ,cttlcrs, p. 33,c. All ;alldi-
tionil proo'f ol' tJl)i, is prilit C('d [fom'1 ;I ptcill of' Aili.ll
Tulrnl c us, by thc [ illillill ol ;ncicint Scottilii ]iCnis, p1. 3c:.
3. Billiol) l..ily ;illil-r is, tllla t f1, King's dwii;.:li '.ts tlce
I'reitih pox. Kcillh, ,364. Note (b). In thalt agIc, llih
tdiftcafe wats cllccmncl 1; coitltlghi ts, that. perliis iscdlcd wilti
it \wcri' rIcilov'ed wi'itilout te1c w\;lls of cities.

4'I~~~I- ~mind,

mind, and drive it to the most dangerous ex- B O K;
treies, concurred in raising and fomeniting this
unhappy quarrel. I ngrati ude for the favours flic '167
liad bellowed, contempt of her person, violations
of the mIarriage- vow, encroacments on her
power, conlpiracics againfll Icr favourites, jea-
lousy, insolence, and obl-inacy, were the injuries
of which Mary had great reaion to complain.
She felt them with the utmost sensibility; and
added to the anguifl of dilappointed love, they
produced those fymrptoms of dclfair which we
hiave already dcfcribcd. I er resentment altiinilt
the King seems not to have abated from the tilne
of his leaving Stirlingc. In a letter written with
her own hand to her iAmbaiador in France, on
the day beforec she fct out for Glasgow, no tolkens
of iudden reconcilement appear. On the con- J.i :n.
trary, Ihe mentions, with iome bitterness, the
King's ingratitude, the jealousy with which lie
oblfrved her aitions, and the inclination he dif-
covered to diflurb her government, and at the
fame time talks of all his attempts with the
.itimof scorn ".

AFTER this difcovcry of Mary's sentiments, at vi,; .}hc

the time of her departure from IEdinburgh to t.,ow.
Glalgow, a visit to the King, which had been
neglected when his situation rendered it niofl
neccefary, appears singular, and it could hardly
be exptecte that any thing but marks of jcalouly
and clifltrufi lhould alppear in fucl an inter lviw.
l lis, however, was far fiom becing the cafe; flic

Kc llh, Pi- '. viii.

D d 4 not

B 0 0 K not only visited Henry, but, by all her words and
;-__- aations, endeavoured to cxprefs an uncommon

156.7 affection for him : And though this made im-

pression on the credulous piirit of her husband,
no les flexible, on tome occasions, than obiti-
nlate on others; yet, to those who are acquainted
with the human heart, and who know how fcl-
domn and how slowly such wounds in domeflic
happiness arc healed, this sudden transition will
appear with a very futpicious air, and will be
confidered by them as the efFe(' of artifice.
H-r dni- BUT it is not on suspicion alone, that Mary is

charged witli diflimulation in this part of her
condu&. Two of her famnous letters to Both-
well were written during her stay at Glasgow, and
fully lay open this scene of iniquity. He had
ib far fuccceded in his ambitious and criminal
dcfign, as to gain an absolute afcenlant over the
Q(teen; and in a situation filch as Mary's, meric
not so conspicuous, services of far inferior im-
portance, and addrelfs muclh I's insinuating than
Bothwell's, may be fulppoetd to (leal impercep-
tibly on a female heart, and entirely to overcome
ir. Unhappily, among those in the higher ranks
of life, Icruples with regard to conjugal fidelity
are, often, neither many, nor i-rong: Nor did
the manners of that court in which Mary had
been educated, contribute to increase or to fortify
them. The amorous turn of Francis I. and
I-enry II. the wildners of the military characaer
in that age, and the liberty of appearing in all
companies, which began to be allowed to women,
vlio had not yet acquired that delicacy of senti-

11C'1nrT

mnent, and thole po1li:'d manners, whi'h lone G ° 0° K
can render this liberty innocent, had introduced, -
amnong the irench, a licentioufiiefs of m'o.rals that ':
rore to an latonifhing height. Such examples,
which were famniliar to Mary from ler infancy,
could hardly fail of dimininfiing that horror of
vice which is natural to a virtuous mindi . The
King's behaviour would render the firl approach
of Forbidden fcntilinc'ts ]tefs thoelking,; re sent-
ment, and disappointed love, would be apt to
reprelent whatever soothed her revenge, as jufti-
i.ible on that account; and it many concurring
caules might, almoftl imperceptibly, kindle a
new panlion in her heart.

BUT whatever opinion we may form with re- Themotive,

gard to the rife and progress of this pafilon, the o it
letters themselves breathe all the ardour and ten-
dernefs of love. The afi'etion which Mary there
cxprefies for Bothwell, fully accounts for every
iublequent part of her conduc; which, without
admintting this circumstance, appears alogether
mysterious, inconsistent, and inexplicable. That
reconcilement with her hutband, of which, if we
allow it to be genuine, it is impoflible to give
any plausible account, is difrovered, by the
Queen's own confession, to have been mere arti-
lice and deceit. As her averlion for her hulband,
and the utfpicious attention with which flhe ob-
Served his condulft, beccame univerfi-lly known,
hler ears were officioully filled, as is fulal in lucl
,rlc:s, with groundless or aggravated accounts of
his actions. By lbme the was told, that the
King intended to feizc the pcribn of the Prince

h is

B o K lhis son, and in his name to usurp the govern-

I V.

-, .

me-, nnt; by otlhers he was aifured, that he relblved
2567. ijniantly to leave the kingdcom; that a vessel was

hired for this purpose, and lay in the river Clyde
ready to receive himin. The last was what Mary
chiefly dreaded. H-enry's reahring into a foreign
country inuit have been highly dirnonourable to
the Queen, and would have entirely dilfconcerted
Bothwell's nmeaflurs. \While he resided at Glaf-
grow, at a dilsance from her, and'in that part of
the kingdom where the int-eret of his family was
grcatecl, lie might, with m1ore facility, accomplili
his designs. In order, therefore, to prevent his
executing any such wild scheme, it was necessary to
bring him to tome place where he would be more
immediately under her own eye. For this pur-
pose, file first employed all her art to regain his

Picvils on confidence, and then proposed to remove him to
i't:to the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, under pre-
idinlbuilh. tence, that there he would have easier access to

the advice of physicians, and that she herself
could attend him without being ablent from her
lon'. The King was weak enough to fullfer him-
self to be persuaded ; and being fill feeble, and
incapable of bearing fatigue, was carried in a
litter to Edinburgh.

TNE place prepared for his reception was a

lioufe belonging to the Provost of a collegiate
church, called Kirk of FIield. It flood almofl
iTponi the faiine spot where the house belonging to
the Principal of the univcrfity now ftancs. Such

o K<c h, Prdl. ,;.i. p CGo lod. vol. ii. 8.

a situ-

a situation, on a rising ground, and at that time B o0 K

' t, ]V.

in an open field, had all the advantages of health- ,
ful air to recommend it; but, on the other hand, '567.
the solitude of the place rendered it extremely
proper for the commiiffon of that crime, with a
view to which, it tiems maniteftly to have been
choSen.

MARY continued to attend the King with the rismir

most assiduous care. Sle seldom was abl('nt from dr, 'ld"t'
him throulh tie cay; fie slept two nights in tie
chamber under his apartment. She heaped on
him so many marks of tenderness and coifidence,
as, in a great mealure, quieted thole suspicions
which had so long disturbed him. But while he
was fondly indulging in dreams of the return of
his former happiness, he flood on the very brink
ofdeftrucion. On Sunday the ninth of Febru-
ary, about eleven at night, the Qljeen left the
Kirk of Field, in order to be present at a masque
in the palace. At two next morning, the house
in which the I(ing lay was blown up with gun-
powder. The noise and flock, which this Hud-
den explolion occasioned, alarmed the whole city.
The inhabitants ran to the place whence it came.
Thle dead body of the King, with that of a ser-
vant who slept in the faime room, were found ly-
ing in an adjacent garden, witholit the city wall,
untouched by fire, and with no bruise or mark
of violence.

Sucr was the unhappy fate of Ilenry Stewart li; charac.

Lord Darnly, in the twenty-firnl year of his age.
The indulgence of fortune, and his own external
accomplifhmcnts, without any other merit, had

rai fce

B 0 0 K raliid him to an height of dignity of which

Iv.?
._.-. he was altogethcr unworthy. By his folly and

1'5/' ingratitude, he lofl the heart of a woman who

doated on him to dilfraction. His insolence
and inconstancy alienated from him such of the
nobles as had contributed nmoft zealously to-
wards his elevation. His levity and caprice ex-
posed him to the scorn of the people, who once
revered him as the descendant of their ancient
Kings and heroes. Haad he died a natural death,
his end would have been unlaincnted, and his
memory have been forgotten; but the cruel cir-
curmftances of his murder, and the flameful re-
iiffnefs in neglecting to avenge it, have made
his name to be remembered with regret, and
have rendered him the object of pity, to which he
had otherwise no title.

Iothwcli EVERY one's imagination was at work to guess
("_'),. iwho had contrived and executed this execrable
p-le, of deed. The suspicion fell, with almost a general
,he muid~r. 1

content, o.n Bothwell; and some reflections were
thrown out, as if the QuLeen herself were no
firanger to the crime. Of Bothwell's guilt there
remains the fullest evidence that the nature of the
action will admit. The QQueen's known Ienti-
ments with regard to her husband, gave a great
appearance of probalbility to the imputation with
which lhe was loaded'.
q Melv. 155. AntidcrC. vol. ii. 156.

Scc l1)ifilrt;: ioiin conccl'ninll tlie In rdet r o(' ]-lnr

P1):nly, ;snd thc gcnuic ncil ,l l, Mary' Is letters to 1B()ti-
,well. Appcnlir\.

Two

Two days after the murder, a proclamation RB O K

was iftled by the Qceen, offering a considerable
reward to any person who ihouldl discover those 1567.
who had been guilty of 1ihch a horrid and detcef-
able crime'; and though Bothwell was now cne
of the greatest fiubjeóts in the kingdom, formli-
dable on account of his own power, and pro-
te&ed by the Queen's favour, it was impoflible
to suppress the fcntiments and indignation of the
people. Papers were affixed to the nlolt public
places of the city, accusing him of the murder,
and naming his accomplices; pi(tures appeared
to the fame purpole, and voices were heard in
the middle of the night, charging him with that
barbarous action. But the authors of these ru-
mours did not confine their acculhtions to Both-
well alone; they insinuated tlat the Queen her-
fclf was acceflary to the crime'. This bold ac-
culation, which lo directly attacked M\ary's re-
putation, drew the attention of her coulcil ; and
by engaging them in an inquiry after the authors
of thel- libels, diverted them fromn fearclin( for
the murderers of the Kinr". It could scarce be
expe&ted that Mary herfilf would be extremly
solicitous to discover those who had rid her of an
hunland, whom flle had so violently hated. It
was Bothwell's interelt, who had the frtilremec i-
rcction of this, as well as of all other affairs, to
flifle and suppress whatever evidence should be
otfered, and to cover, if poftible, the whole tranf-
adion under the veil of darkness and of lilcnce.

A dlcrl'. vol. i. 6,' .ld, vul. ii. 156.
"Id. vol. i. 38.

Sorme

B 0 o K Some inquiry, however, was made, and some

IV.
.-- persons called before the council; but the ex-

567. arnination was conduced with the most indecent

remissness, and in such a manner as to let in no
light upon that scene of guilt .

IT was not her own fubjets alone who fulpe&ted

Mary of having been accessary to this unnatural
crime; nor did an opinion, lo dishonourable to
her charaLcter, owe its rife and progress to the
jealouly and malice of her fatious nobles. The
report of the manner and circumstances of the
King's murder spread quickly over all Europe,
and, even in that age, which was accustomed to
deeds of violence, it excited universal horror. As
her unhappy breach with her husband had long
been matter of public discourse, the first con-
jc&ures which were formed with regard to his
death, were extremely to her diladvantage. Her
friends, at a lols what apology to offer for her
conduct, called on her to prosecute the murderers
wirh the utmost diligence, and expected that the
rigoulr of her proceedings would prove the belt
and fullel vindication of her innocence'.

Lennox ,c- LENNOX, at tli tltme time, incited Mary to
cures I'ot01 h-
,rCUlof(lhe vengeanlce with ince:"aint imporlunity. This no-

g'e ur- blcIiman had fl:iared in lih.; son's dilgracc, and being

trceated by Mary with ncglect, ulually resided it
a dil'L ncci from courLt. Roul ed, however, by an
event no lcls ihocling to the heart of a father,
than fatal to all I!is schemes of ambition, he ven-
Fcb. i,. tured to write to tlhe Qieen, and to ollir his ad-

x \ l,;;l vl. iv. p.ivl jj'. in;,(, Kiith, Pref. ix.

vice

vice with refpe& to the most effectual metlod B Oo K
for discovering and convicting those who had cto
cruelly deprived him of a ion, and her of a s56-7
hufhand. He urged her to prosecute those who
were guilty with vigour, and to bring them to a
s£)eedy trial ; he declared his own suspicion of
.Bothwell, and of thole who were named as his
accomplices; he required that, out of regard to
decency, and in order to encourage evidence to
nppear against them, the pertons accused of fiucl
:in atrocious crime Ihould be commiitted to cuf-
to(1', or at least excluded fionr lher court and
pic'lnce ".

MARYI was then at Scaton, whithcr s-he hlad re-

tired after the burial of the King, .whose body

a..s deposited among the Monarchs of Scotland,
1 a private but decent manne.Ir'. The former
pari of the Earl's demand could not, on any pre-
t:ncc, be eludeld; and it was resolved to bring
Bothwell immediately to trial. But, infltead of
coiiining him to any prison, Mary admitted himn Mryco,-
into all her councils, and allowed a person, unii- 'ti.1 r,
vefally reputed the Tmurdterr of' her hulband, to
enjoy all the security, the dignity, and the power
of a favouritel'. The offices which Bothwell al-
ready pofi'cfied, gave him the command of all the
foutli of Scotland. The caille of E1:dinburgh,
however, was a place of lb much colnfcquencc
that he willed earlncflly to have it in his own
po.ver. The Queen, in order to prevail on the
IEarl of Mar to surrender it, conlented to put M.Irli ,.

Kithll, 36(). " lnlct, v'l. i.

'·
b Id, ibid. '4, &c.

the

B 0 0 K the perbin of the young Prince in his hands, and
i- - _ ~immediately belfowed the government of that
Ma67. important fortress upon Bothwell'. So many

iteps in her condu&-, inconfitlent with all tlih
rules of prudence and of decency, mufl be ilm-
puted to an excess either of folly or of love.
Mary's known character fully vindicates he!
from the former; of the latter, many and ftril;-
ing proofs soon appeared.
n-Tens on No dire& evidence had yet appeared againll

Bothwell; but as time might bring to light the
circumitances of a crime in which so many ac-
complices were concerned, it was of great im-
portance to hurry over the trial, while nothing
more than general suspicions, and uncertain fur-
mises, could be produced by his accusers. For
this reason, in a meeting of Privy Council held
on the twenty-eighth of March, the twelfth of
April was appointed for the day of trial. Though
the law allowed, and the manner in which cri-
minal cauifs were carried on in that age re-
quired, a much longer interval, it appears; from
fevcral circumstances, that this short space was
conliderably contraRed, and that Lennox ha(!
only eleven days warning to prepare for accusing
a person, so far superior to himself, both in power
and in favour't. No man could be less in a con-

dition

c AnJidet. . i. Prcf. 6.. Kctll, 379.
d The ald ot ' Privy Conmiil, appointing the .;iy of 1l1'I-

well's trial, bc.irs d;itC M;riCh the 28th, w\hliclI lh;1pp)ncd(l (11) .
TJlll'fdilay. iitl l .

A lIr' .

v o.i. 'I. ' (;uccni's w\;rr:ant tl i'

mreingers, iili) on criii tli hrtl ti fitmll no ll cnnox to l ])he C i-'cin's
is dated on thi: :, l h1. Aln crl . vol. ii. P7. ]1c- w s fit uni(). !

1,v

dition to contend with an antagonifl who was B °0 K

IV.

thus supported. Though Lennox's p.iternal _ -
eflcate had been reflored to him, when he was re- ,567.
called into Scotland, it seems to have been con-
fiderably iimpaired during his banishment. His
vassals, while lie residcd in England, had been
accustomed to some degree of indei)ndence, and
lie had not recovered that ascendant over them,
which a feudal chief usually poffefled. Ite lad
no reason to expe& the concurrence of any of
thoSe fa&ions into which the nobles were di-
vided. During the flort period of his son's pro-
fperity, he had taken such steps as gave rife to an
open breach with Murray and all his adherents.
The partizans of the house of Hamilton were
llis hereditary and mortal enemies. Huntly was
linked in the clofefi confederacy with Bothwell;
and thus, to the disgrace of the nation, Lennox
flood alone in a cause, where both honour and

lb public proclamation at the Cross of Edinburgh on the fame
da.v. llbid. Ico. I-Ie was summonid at his dwclling-onlltfes in
(;la;gow and Dunib;arton tlhe 3orli of M:ircl, the it :and 2d
diys of' April. Ibid ioi lie was lintmonled atr Perth, Aipril
il1. Ibid. io:. Though Lcnnox rcfidcd :it lihlt tnien forty
miles from Edinburgh, the citation inight have beein giv\ei
iiin fooncr. Such an unncccll.try del;iy afllOIs Iobic ca;ulie
'or fulfpicion. It i:; true, hM.ry, in hicr letter, March 21tll,
iinitecd Lennox to conm to Edinburgh thle cniing week;
Iliis gavc hini warning llnc days flooiir, that llic intelnd.ed
tl bring on the tria.l witlhout delay. But the precilf tiliul
cillid not be legally or certaiiily knlown to ILeiiox fbolncr
I in ten or twelve daiys bdeore lhe daiy on iwhich he was re-
iiiircd to appac;: . By tllc law and Ipra;tice of Scotland, at
ithat time, parlties were filnrmoned, in catlcs of ticafon, forty
dayLs previous to the trial.

VOL. 1. E e huma-

') K humanity called so loudly on his countrymen to

iV.
....-.v second lIim.

' IT is remarkable too, that Bothwell himfalf

was present, and fat as a member in that meeting
of Privy Council, which gave directions with re-
gard to tle time and manner of his trial; and he
still enjoyed not only full liberty, but was re-
ceived into the Queen's pretence with the fame
distinguished familiarity as formerly =.
d,-,i NOTHING could be a more cruel disappoint.

ment to the wilhes and resentment of a father,
than such a premature trial; every ftep towards
which seemed to be taken by direEtions fiom the
person who was himlelf accused of the crime, and
calculated on purpose to conceal rather than to
detet his guilt. Lennox forelaw what would be
the issue of this mock inquiry, and with how
little safety to himself, or success to his cause, he
could venture to appear on the. day prefixed. In
his former letters, though under exprefflons the
most refpecful, tome symptoms of his diftru(tinr
the QCeen may be discovered. He spoke out
now in plain language. He complained of tih
iniury done him, by hurrying on the trial with
such illegal precipitation. He represented once
more the indecency of allowing Bothwell, not
only to enjoy personal liberty, but to retain hii
former influence over her councils. He agail
required her, as fle rcgarded her own honour, tt
give some evidence of her sincerity in profccutinF
the murder, by confining the perlon who was, o0

Alndierr. ol. i. o.

g 0t(

good grounds, fufpedted to be the author of it; B ° , K
and, till that were done, he signified his own re- -
solution not to be present at a trial, the manner i567.
and circumstances of which were so irregular and
unfatisfacloryf.

I-E seems, however, to have expeced little Applies for

success from this application to Mary; and there- t'oeEPza
fore, at the fame time, besought Elizabeth to beth.
interpose, in order to obtain such a delay as he
demanded%. Nothing can be a stronger proof
how violently he fufpe&ed the one Queen, than
his submitting to implore the aid of the other,
who had treated his son with the utmost con-
tempt, and himfclf and family with the greatest
rigour. Elizabeth, who was never unwilling to
interpose in the affairs of Scotland, wrote in-
ltantly to Mary, advised her to delay the trial for
some time, and urged, in such strong terms, the
fame arguments which Lennox had used, as might
have convinced her to what an unfavourable
conftrution her conduct would be liable, if ihe
persisted in her present method of proceedingh.

NEITHER her intreaties, however, nor those of Thetrial

Lennox, could prevail to have the trial put off. proce'ds.
On the day appointed, Bothwell appeared, but
with such a formidable retinue, that it would
have been dangerous to condemn, and impossible
to punifli him. Besides a numerous body of his
friends and vassals aIrembled, according to cuf-
tom, from different parts of the kingdom, he
was attended by a band of hired soldiers, who

f Andcrf. vol. i. 52. g Good. vol. ii. 3e2.
h Anders. Prcf. 60, Sec Appendix, No, XIX.

E c 2 marched

B 0 0 K marched with flying colours along the streets of
.-A.,, Edinburgh'. A court of justice was held with

1567. the accuftonmed formalities. An indictment was

presented against Bothwell, and Lennox was
called upon to make good his accusation. In his
name appeared Robert Cunningham, one of his
dependants. He excused his Master's abferce,.
on account of the shortness of the time, which
prevented his assembling his friends and vassals,
without whose assistance he could not, with
safety, venture to set himself in opposition to
such a powerful antagonist. For this reason, he
desired the court to stop proceeding, and pro.
tested, that any sentence which Ihould be passed
at that time, ought to be deemed illegal and
void. Bothwell, on the other hand, insisted that
the court should instantly proceed to trial. One
of Lennox's own letters, in which he craved of
the Quecn to prosecute the murderers without
delay, was produced. Cunningham's objections
were over-ruled ; and the jury, consisting of
Peers and Barons of the irfit rank, found Both-
well not guilty of the crime.

Bothwell is No person appeared as an accuser, not a tingle
acquitted.

witness was examined, nor any evidence produced
againit him. The jury, under these circum-
frances, could do nothing else but acquit him.
Their verdict, however, was far from gratifying
the wifies, or silencing the murmurs of the
people. Every circumstance in the trial gave
grounds for suspicion, and excited indignation;

Andcrf vol., i, 35,

and

and the judgment pronounced, instead of being 0 0 K
a proof of Bothwell's innocence, was esteemed _,
an argument of his guilt. Pasquinades and libels 1567>
were affixed to different places, expressing the
sentiments of the public with the utmoit virulence
of language.

THE jury themselves seem to have been aware

of the censure to which their proceedings would
be exposed; and, at tle fame time that they
returned their verdi& acquitting Bothwell, the
.arl of Caithness protested, in their name, that
no crime fhoould be imputed to them on that ac-
count, because no accuser had appeared, and no
proof was brought of the indictment. He took
notice, likewise, that the ninth instead of the
tenth of February was mentioned in the indiEt-
ment, as the day on which the murder had been
committed: A circumstance which discovers
the extreme inaccuracy of those who prepared
the indictment; and at a time when men were
disposed, and not without reason, to be fufiicious
of every thing, this finall matter contributed to
confirm and to increase their suspicions k.

EVEN Bothwell himself did not rely on the

judgment which he had obtained in his favour, as
a full vindication of his innocence. Immediately
after his acquittal, he, in compliance with a
cultom which was not then obsolete, published a
writing, in which lhe offered to fight, in tingle
combat, any Gentleman of good fame, who

k lotliw. Tiiil, Andcrf. vol. ;i. 97, &.

F. e 3 fiould

B 0, K fihould presume to accuse him of being acceilary
L-tr. to the murder of the King.

x567. MARY, however, continued to treat him as if

he had been cleared by the most unexceptionable
and satisfactory evidence. The ascendant he had
gained over her heart, as well as over her coun-
cils, was more visible than ever; and Lennox,
who could not expect that his own person would
be safe in a country where the murderer of his son
had been absolved, without regard to justice;
and loaded with honours, in contempt of de-
cency; fled with precipitation towards Eng-
land '.

A Parlia- Two days after the trial, a Parliament was
ment held,
April 14. held, at the opening of which the Queen diftin-

guifhed Bothwell, by appointing him to carry
the sceptre before her m. Most of the ass pafied
in this Assembly were calculated on purpose to
itrengthen his party, and to promote his designs.
He obtained the ratification of all the poffeflions
and honours which the partiality of the Queen
had conferred upon himn; and the aat to that
effea contained the strongest declarations of his
faithful services to the Crown in all times pal.
The surrender of the castle of Edinburgh by
Mar was confirned. The law of attainder againfl
H-untly was repealed, and he and his adherents
were restored to the estates and honours of their
ancestors. Several of those who had been on the
jury which acquitted him, obtained ratifications
of the grants made in their favour; and as pal-

Keith, 378, Note (d). Id. ibid.

quinadc;

quinades daily multiplied, a law passed, whereby B o o

'(

tlolF, into whole hands any paper of that kind .-. -'
fi'll, were commanded inflantly to destroy it; ; 5:;'
;iil if, through their neglcCt, it fiould be al-
lowed to spread, they were fubjcqced to a capital
punilhiment, in the falc manne ir as they had
bcen the original authors .

BeTr the ablolute dominion which Botlwell R.: rritL;,!:'-:

hiad acquired over Mary's mind, appearced in the -.-ur,,
clarelft manner, by an as in favour of the Pro- dii,.
teflant religion, to which, at this time, fie gave
her afient. Mary's attachment to the Romifli
faith was uniform and fuperltitious; fihe had
never laid aside the design, nor loft the hopes of
restoring it. She had, of late, come under new
eongagoements to that purpote, and, in conie-
qulnce of these, had ventured upon tome fleps
more public and vigorous than any she had for-
merly taken. But though none of these cir-
cmiftances were unknown to Bothwell, there
were powerful motives which prompted him, at
lhis junclure, to conciliate the good-will of the
I'ioteflants, by exerting himself in order to pro-
cure for tlem some additional security in the
exercise of their religion. That which they en-
joyec at prelent, was very precarious, being
founded entirely on the royal proclamation if-
sued soon after the arrival of the Q .een in Scot-
land, which, in express terms, was declared to
he only a temporary regulation. From that
period, neither the solicitations of the General

n Kcitil, 30o.

1i, c 4 Aflcmblics

B 0 o K Assemblies of the Church, nor the intreaties of
.-a her people, could extort fiom Mary any concef-
1567. sion in favour of the Protestant religion, on

which the professors might reft with greater con-
fidence. This, however, by the more powerful
influence of Bothwell, they now obtained. An
act was paifed in this Parliament, repealing all
the laws canon, civil, and municipal, adverse to
the Reformed religion, and exempting such as
iad embraced it fiom the penalties to which
they might have been fubjeEted by there laws,
either on account of their past conduEt or present
profeflion; declaring, at the fame time, that their
persons, estates, honours, and benefices, were
taken under public proteRion against every court,
civil or ecclesiastical, that might attempt to
molePf them on account of their religious senti-
ments. Thus the Proteflfants, instead of holding
their sacred rights by no better tenure than a
declaration of royal indulgence, which might be
revoked at pleasure, obtained legal and parlia-
mnentary protection in the exercise of their re-
ligion. By prevailing on the Queen to assent to
this law, Bothwell seems to have flattered him-
self that he would acquire fucli merit bothl witll
the clergy and with the people, as might induce
their to favour his ambitious schemes, and to
Fonnive at what he had done, or might do, in
order to accomplish them. The Protestants, ac:
cordingly, though this a&t was far from amount-
ing to a legal effabliihment of the Reformed
faith, seem to have confidered it as an additional
security of such importance, that it was pub-

a0^~~~ ~~lifhed

lifhed among the laws enaEted in a Parliament B O o K
held towards the clole of this year, under very .- .
different leaders0. 567.

EVERY ftep taken by Bothwell had hitherto Bo th ,el
been attended with all the fuccetl which his most t'le ,i'!1'

to rr'ci-r
sanguine m.nd ,inm

a, an hs.-
vl"n, to :he

I am indebted to the accuracy of Sir I)avid Dalrhmple, Qpce, .

for pointing out (Remarks cn l'te -liilo-r of Scotl;,n.i, ch. 9.)
a conlfdcrable error into w'hich I had fallen witlh r-cf)c to
this a&, )y fuplofing it to be so favourable to the docth-ine
of tlie Rcformation, that the Parliamcnt whlich met Dec. i5,
could fubltitute nothing stronger or more explicit in its
p:l'cc, and thought it fifficient to ratify it word for word.
Thlis error I have now cor-rcecd ; but afrer confidc:ing- the
acl with particular attention, though I am satisficd that it
neither established the Reformed religion as the religion of
the state, nor aboliflled Popery, yet it granted filch new and
l;gal security to the Protestants, as was deemed, in that age,
an acquisition of great value. The framcrs of the law fccm
manlifefcly to have viewed it in that light; after reciting " that
the Queen, since her arrival, had attempted nothing contrary*
to tlhe slate of religion, wh]iclh lie found publicly and univer-
f;,ily standing, on which account fle was molt worthy to be
fcrved, honoured, and obeyed, &c. "-the ac: goes on, " that
as lfhe intends to continue the fame goodness :nd governmcnt
in all times coming, the profelTors of the religion atorefitd may
and hliall have occasion topraife God for herhappy anldgracious
government, &c.: and to the effect that the proft(flrs of the
religion aforesaid may allure themselves to be in full surety
thereof, and of tllcir lands, lives, &c. and may with the better
will jeopard and hazard their lives and goods in her High.
ncfs's service, againfl all enemies to her, and to the common-
wvell of this realm, &c. therefolr our Sovereign, with the ad-
vice of the whole eflates in Parliament, &c.": then follow
the flatutory clauses mentioned in the text. The intention
of paflng thc a;t is apparent, and it is drawn with great uart.
'his art is peculiarly imanifefl in the concluding claule. In
her firIt proclamItion tih Qeen had declared, that it fliould

continue

B o oK fa nguine winses could expect. -Ie had entirely

IV. ~...,... gained tlhe Q ecen's heart; the murder of the

i King had excited no public commotion; he had
been acquitted by his peers of any share in that
crime; and their decision had been, in some fort,
ratifed in Parliament. But in a kingdon where
the regal authority was so extremely limited, and
the power of the nobles so formidable, he durst
not venture on tle last action, towards which all

contilnuci in fiorce only until she should take final order con-
eLoning religion with tlie advice of Parliament. In this att
lic illtcntin t

,f taking flrnther order concerning religion ii

;iUlntioj.ned, probaibly with a view to plcafe the Qeen ; but
it is \wdcd w\ith flch fludied dexterity, that the )protediiolt
gr.iitctJ iby this l.aw is no longer to be regarded as temporary,
1or idpcnding upon the Q.(ceCn's takingb such final order. Pa'l,
K. Ja. VI. c. 31- In the fame light of an important ac-

quifition of fecurily to the Reformed religion, this act is rc-
)prefc nted ly the Privy Council in a proclamation iflied MIav
'3, 1567. Keith, 571. Mary's principal adhrents, in a
pj:tC fIperll)fribed lby them Sept. 12, 1568, declare, that hce,
'' )y the advice of the three eltates, had faitisfied the dcfire
(, the whole nobility inn l111 at concerning all the points of
religion paflcd ill tle Parliament held April 1567," Goodal,
ii. 35. Tli' famec is arferted to be the ienention and effct
of this a:St in lnother public paper in the ycalr 1570. I-laynes,
6>21. l'romn confidcrilg 1all thiel particulalis, one need not
wondlcr that ;a law " anent cafling (as its title l)ears), an-
nulling, and abrogating of all :111 , afts, and conflitutions,
c:inonc, civile, and inunicipa)l, with other conPtitutions, con-
lrvre to the religion now profelfit within the reailnic," con-
ii-nmed by the royal ailint of the Qfeen, Illould be publiflled
on ong thle llaiutecs fcecuring the Prnte(lant religion. We
find iccordinlgly, in a; vcry rare edition of the :ads of Parli;L-
jihelt, imprintit at E ldiinburgh by Robert Lekprevik, printar
to the King's Majellic, 6 day of April 1568, the act of
April 19 inferied amollg the ads of the Regent's Parliamcnt
in Deceimbes

his

his ambitious proje&s tended, without their ap- B °0 K

IV.

probation. In order to iccure this, he, inmme-
diately after the diffilution of Parliament, in- Api617.

aAril 19.

vited all the nobles who were present to an en-
tertainment. Having filled the house with his
friends and dependants, and surrounded it with
armed men P, he opened to the company his in-
tention of marrying the Queen, whose consent, he
told them, he had already obtained ; and de-
manded their approbation of this match, which,
he said, was no less acceptable to their Sovereign,
than honourable to hirmlelf . H-untly and Seaton,
who were privy to all Bothwell's schemes, and
promoted them with the utmost zeal; the
Popilh ecclesiastics, who were absolutely devoted
to the Queen, and ready to sooth all her paflions,
inltantly declared their fatisfadtion with what he
had proposed. The reft, who dreaded the exor-
bitant power which Bothwell had acquired, and
observed the Qteen's growing aff'ecion towards
him in all her aftions, were willing to make a
merit of yielding to a measure which they could
neither oppose nor defeat. Some few were con-
founded and enraged. But, in the end, Bothwell,
partly by promilcs and flattery, partly by terror
and force, prevailed on all who were present to
fuibfcribe a paper, which leaves a deeper stain
than any occurrence in that age, on the honour
and chara&cer of the nation.

This paper contained the atrongefl declarations
of Bothwell's innocence, and the molt ample ac-

r Good. vol. ii. 14X. q Andecr. vol. i. 9.;

knowledg-

B 0o Kr knowledgment of his good services to the king-

IV.
-----. dom. If any future accuiation should be brought
'5'' againfl him, on account of the King's murder, the

fiblcribers promiid'c to stand by him as one man,
and to hazard thlir lives and fortunes in his dc-
fence. They recommended him to the Queen as
the nofll proper perfotn he could chufe for a
h:ilnd ..l and if lhe filould condescend to bcetow
fa ii;m that mark of h-cr regard, they undertook
to promote the marriage, and to join him with all
;;.'si:' o;-ces in opposing any pcrion who endea-
voured- to obt-uft it'. Among the subscribers
'>f this lpaer, w find oe wn ho were the Queen's
ciicf conl'enC:, others who were strangers to her
councils, ani oblnoxious to her difplcafure ; ome
who faithfi;lly adhered to her through all the vi-
.ifdludes of her fortune, and others who became
t;e Dri!ci"i'il authors of her sufFerings; some pas-
:'inatcly attached to the Romifl superstition, and
'icri-s zealous advocates for the Protestant faith .
No common interest can be supposed to have

;Il'ed cmen of such opposite principles and parties,

ir- recommending to their Sovereign a flep io in-
jilious to lier honour, and so faral to her peace.
'I'is (I-range coalition was the cfFet of much ar-
t;Fice, and mult be confidered as the boldelf and
Ioull mIafterly irolke of Bothwell's address. It is
oblfervable, that amidfl all the altercations and
iii:tual relroacles of the two parties which arose
in the kingdom, this unworthy tranlsation is
lilldom mentioned. Conscious on both fides,

r Anl crf. vol. i. 177. ' Kcili, 382.

that

that in this particular their condua could ill B o0 K
bear examination, and would redound little to ,
their famle, they always touch upon it unwil- i.:7
lingly, and with a tender hand, seeming d(firoti.u
that it should remain in darknels, or be buried
in oblivion. But as so many persons, who, bothf
at that time, and ever after, polfeflTd the Q ecen's
favour, subscribed this paper, tie fuilicion be-
comes strong, that Bothwell's ambitious hopes
were neither unknown to Mary, nor disa)pproved
by her'.

Tuisr.

t Ofall the dilfrent fy)flems with regard to this tr:ir alio',.

that of Caniden ifcems to be thec l;eat acci ' r;t;!,

: L Lt ll:- \-\i.i

founded. He fiuppofes that ]othwv.ll \waVis ad li Mlairr,
Morton, &c. who had been his alibciates in thie iurider -f i:-!
King, and thalt they now w;intcd to ruin him. l ;:L iri :, ;:t
the liume time, that the iiblcripti)onis to this alpcer w -r olh-
talned by then out of fear thiat Bothwell iniihi l;:,k ii i;is
hopes, and betray the whole uc loody lclcrc, 40-.. 1;: bIicl.li.
the abf)rdity of futppof(lng that any man's CI Cil: S \;o:ld
contribute towards raililg Ilim to filCu high dign iit, on t1:,
uncertain hopes of being able afte:rward; to :depri; hiini ,,f
it; belides the impollibility of aecconiplillliing Iich a

i t:.

riagc, if it had been cither unllnuwn to lthe Quecn, 1i' dUi..
grccable to her; we nmay obfcrvc that tlhi:s fiuppolitiou is ,it-
stroyed by the dire& tcflimony of the (Qieen licrfelf, liho
;Ifc:il)cs the consent of the nobles to Bouthlwll'.; artiicec; , L'/.
plurchanJfl it by g iving tlcm to urnrljiait:l hat wure i,.'re coni.nt
therewizth. Anidcl.l vol. i. 94. 99. It would have bcc; no
finall advantage to Mary, if fle could have Irel)clcntcd the
confient of the nolblcs to have been their own voluLntaly deed.
It is Iill more fiurprifing to find Les y aferihing tlli.s p)a:per to
Murray and his fation. Andcrf. vol. i. 26. The Bilfiol)
Iliifcl f was one of tlie pcrfons who fil li(:ibcd it. Keith, 38'3.
'The King's conmllifliiclers, at tlhe conferenice lild at York
x568, pretcndcd that none of tlh nolics, cxcpcl lthe Earl of
I unstly, wouuld fuifcribc this paper till a wa.lrralt fron ltie

Q'ccin

8 o0 K THESE suspicions are confirmed by the most

JV.

»-- ddire& proof. Melvil, at that time, enjoyed a
J567. considerable share in her favour. He, as well

as his brother, kept a secret correspondence in
England with those who favoured her preten-
sions to that Crown. The rumour of her in-
tended marriage with Bothwell having spread
early in that kingdom, excited universal indig-
nation; and Melvil received a letter from thence,
which represented, in the strongest terms, what
would be the fatal effects of Iuch an imprudent
ftep. l-e put this letter into the Queen's hands,
and enforced it with the utmost warmth. She
not only disregarded there remonstrances, but
communicated the matter to Bothwell; and Mel-
vil, in order to save his life, was obliged to fly
from court, whither he durst not return till the
Earl's rage began to abate ". At the fame time,

Eliza-

O(lecn wns pr(oduccd, by which they were allowed to do so:
this warrant. they had in their custody, and exhibited. An-
dcrf. vol. iv. part 2. 5. Tlis differs from B1uchanan's ac-
coint, who filpplfcs that all the nolles present subscribcd tli
paper'on the I9th,alnd that next day they obtained the approl
bation of wla; thlicy had done, by way of security to thenl-
selves, 355.

u Mclv. 156. According to Melvil, Lord -Ierries likc-

wife rcmonllrated againfl the marriage, and conjured the
Qcceen, on his knees, to lay aside all thoughts of such a dil:
honourable alliance, 156. But it has been observed, that Hcr-
ries is one of the nobles who subscribcd the bond, April 19.
Keith, 383. 2. 'That lhe is one of the witnefers to the mar-
riage articles between the QOeen and Bothwell, May 14.
Good. vol. ii. 61. 3. That hie iat in council with Bothwell,
May 17. Keith, 3G6. But this rcmonftrance of Lord Herriic.

Lg .iail

Elizabeth warned Mary of the danger and infamy B °0 K
to which flie would expose herself, by such an in- _
decent choice: but an advice from her met with 1567.
frill less regard x.

THREE days after the rising of Parliament, Bo'hwell

carries the

Mary uvent from Edinburgh to Stirling, in order Q,.cn by
to visit the Prince her son. Bothwell had now fnbaf.
brought his tchemes to full maturity, and every
precaution being taken which could render it
safe to enter on the last and decisive f-ep, the na-
tural impetuosity of his spirit did not susser him
to deliberate any longer. Under pretence of an
expedition against the freebooters on the borders,
le assembled his followers; and marching out of
Edinburgh with a thousand horse, turned suddenly
towards Linlithgow, met the Queen on her return April z4.
near that place, dispersed her slender train without
resistance, seized on her person, and conducted
her, together with a few of her courtiers, as a
prisoner to his cafRle of Dunbar. She expressed
neither surprise, nor terror, nor indignation, at
such an outrage committed on her person, and

against the marriage happened before those made by Melv'l
lhizfelfci 157. Melvil's reinoni;iance iniilt have happCened
fonmi time before the neeting of Parliamentt; soir after of-
fending Bothlwell, le retired from court; he allowed his rlage
tiinc to ftil)lcde, and ha;d gain joined thl Q n, when il
wais seizcd, April 24. 158. Thc time lwhich muff haI.tv
clapsed, by this account of! the ilaLtcr, was perhalps fiifliiciri
to have gained Herrics froni being Ian oppioler to become a
promoter of the marriage. Perhaps Mclvil i ay have conm-
mnitted sonic miltake with reg;rd to this fa6t, so far as relates
to Lord Herrics. I Ic could nlut well be nlillikcni with regard
to what himrfelf did.

Andcrf, vol. i. 1o6.

fuchl

B o0 K such an insult oiTered to her authority, but feemled

IV.

_-, to yield without struggle or regret y. Melvil
x567. was, at that time, one of her attendants; and the

officer by whom he was seized, informed him, that
nothing was done without the Queen's own con-
sent'. If we may rely on the letters publificed
in Mary's name, the scheme had been communi-
cated to her, and every ftep towards it was taken
with her participation and advice:.

BOTH the Qljeen and Bothwell thought it of

advantage to employ this appearance of violence.
It afforded her a decent excuse for her conduCt;
and while file could plead that it was owing to
force rather than choice, lhe hoped that her re-
putation, among foreigners at lealt, would escape
without cenifre, or be exposed to less reproach.
Bothwell could not help diiC'rufting all the me-
thods which had hitherto been used, for vindi-
cating him from any concern in the murder of
the King. Something was still wanting for his
security, and for quieting his guilty fears. This
was a pardon under the Great Seal. By the' lavws
of Scotland, tile mollt heinous crime mulf bl
mentioned by name in a pardon, and then ;;l
lesser offences are deemed to be included undler
the general clause, and all other crimes whC'/'j-
't.'r 'T. To seize the person of the Prince, is
ligh trcalon; and Bothwell hoped, that a pardon
obtained for this would extend to every thing ol
which lhe had been accuscd .

y K3ith, 3g M3 \. . a G:oocd 3
o . vfl.ii. 37.

,b 1'.r. 6 J.c, V, c. 6. L
6 .\ndc J. vol. i\ . p1itL ii. 61.

BOTI-

BOTHWELL, having now got the Queen's per- B ° ° K
son into his hands, it would have been unbe- --'-

1567.

coming either a politician or a man of gallantry Is divorced
to have delayed consummating his schemes. The rvn 'ie.
first ftep towards this was to have his marriage
with Lady Jane Gordon, the Earl of Huntly's
Lifter, dissolved. In order to accomplish that, in
a manner consistent with the ideas of the Queen
on one hand, and with the sentiments of his
countrymen on the other, two different processes
became necessary. One founded on the maxims
of the Canon law, the other accommodated to the
tenets of the Reformed Church. Bothwell, ac-
cordingly, commenced a suit, in his own name,
in the spiritual court of the Archbishop of St.
Andrew's, the jurifdiEtion of which the Queen
had restored, by a special commifflon granted for Apil 7.
this purpose, and pleaded, that Lady Jane and
himself being cousins within the prohibited de-
grees, and having married without a papal dif-
penfation, their union was null from the begin-
ning`'. At the fame time, he prevailed with

Lady

d In her own time, it was urged as an aggravation of the

Qncen's guilt, that lhe gave her coIntent to m;urry the hulf
b.;id of. another woman;; and the charge lhas been often re-
peaced lince. But, according to Mary's own ideas, concfo
n;lnt to the principles of her religioll, the Im:lrrliage: of Both-
well with Lady Jane Gordon was unllawful and void, and Ifli
conlidered themn as living together not in thle hl:illowed bods
ol ni;at.rimony, but in a (late of crimina:tl intcrcouirfe. Both.
.vcll's ;addrclCis, which firuck her Protlcllint ilbjeAs, not
(,nly as indecent hut flagitious, coulil not applar in the fhnme
liilht to her; and this may be pleaded in cxtenuation of the

VOL. 1. F f crime

B ° v K Lady Jane to apply to the Protestant court of
. -,- Commiffaries for a divorce, on account of his

1567. having been guilty of adultery. The influence

of Bothwell was of equal weight in both courts.
In the courfc of four days, with the fame in-
decent and suspicious precipitancy, the one de-
clared the marriage to be illegal and null, the
other pronounced a sentence of divorce .

WHILE this infamous tranflvtion was carrying

on, the Queen resided at Dunbar; detained as
a prisoner, but treated witl the greatest refpet.
May 3. Soon after Bothwell, with a numerous train of

his dependants, conducted her to Edinhurgh;
but, initead of lodging her in the Palace of Holy-
rood-houfe, he conveyed her to the castle, of
which he was governor. The discontent of the
nation rendered this precaution neceflary. In an
house unfortified, and of easy access, the Queen
might have been rescued without difficulty out of
his hands. In a place of flrength, she was fe-
cured from all the attempts of his enemies.

ONE finall difliculty still remained to be fur-

mounted. As the Queen was kept in a fort of
j ' n. ,Illllllt l to her ofI havinll lli illienc to lcni. Bi i,

x "trnlp Iic r sion' m l. h ch rgc (si g e.Li ilillprlltdUlC 'c iI

.]i', . it'ii'ltn ' j.

.'< ftrl). Mciry x t v:cll :. l l C

;x(i; theI

"i]c~ is > li ;: kne 'w 'hall t lley \\o1ld thllii; ol' lcr
grl'ivi r t.:,; i '.>,,,1 ,i .

niln c o tmlc ctcilmn' lp) o)f :at mian i;ttcly

inl,;r 'ic 1 ,

iiW.' :! r

I r)\, cynt, ill Ilh church of hcr p;Il:,cc.

.Al.'ljp iuli':s, bh. XX .\v. lE'.N ry) c<tl, > dl=i 'rttiell 1h'1lt II:IP'C
··idl ilr'.incd l:x' Il', lrl i;,!'minill ltli. ulli'l'l, whlicli l<> hlcr pc(o,'!C
.nil hi\''hlc .ipp)c'.tirc lit , :andl lmh ckinl . tlcnilibk on I
{ll lLy ,,;' ; '(Il.Ilill, d; . 1" I ) , &.C.

' 'A/IJ L|Il. i .. I, p
n.!. ' No. XX.

·I captivity

captivity by Bothwell, a marriage concluded in B o ° K;
that condition might be imputed to force, and be -
held invalid. In order to obviate this, Mary ap- 1s6' /
peared in the Court of Session, and, in prel-nce
of the Chancellor, and other judges, and several
of the nobility, declared that flc was now at full
liberty; and though Bothwell's violence in i.izing
her person had, at first, excited her indignation,
)'et his respectful behaviour since that time, liad
not only appeared her resentment, but determined
her to raire him to higher honours'.

WHAT these were, soon became public. The Ts mariied

title of Duke of Orkney was conferred upon %:R,
Bothwell; and on the fifteenth of May, his mar-
riage with the OQeen, which had so long been the
objeRt-of his wifles, and the motive of his crimes,
was solemnized. The ceremony was performed
in public, according to the rites of the ProL.'fant
Church, by Adam Bothwell biffop of Orkney,
one of the few Prelates who had embraced the
Reformation, and on the fame day was celebrated
in private, according to the forms prescribed by
the Popifll religion>'. The boldness with which
Craig, the Minil-er who was commanded to pub-
lifli the banns, testified against the design; the
finall number of the nobles, who were present at
the marriage; and the fullen and dili'efpec'tful
silence of the people, when the Queen appeared
in public; were manifefl fymptoims of the vio-
lent and general dissatisfaction of her own lfb-
jc(s. The refusal of Du Croc, the French am-

Ail.1. i. 87. g IJ. 136. ii. 276.

F f 2 baidor,

B o o K baffador, to be present at the nuptial ceremony or
a__v- entertainment, discovers the sentiments of her

allies, with regard to this part of her conduct;
and although every other action in Mary's life
could be justified by the rules of prudence, or
reconciled to the principles of virtue, this fatal
marriage would remain an inconteftible proof of
her rashness, if not of her guilt.

MARY'S first care was to offer some apology

for her conduct, to the courts of France and
England. The inftruEtions to her ambassadors
fill remain, and are drawn by a masterly hand.
But under all the artificial and false colouring she
employs, it is easy to discover not only that many
of the steps she had taken were unjustifiable, bur
that flhe herself was conscious that they could not
be justified h.

THE title of King was the only thing which

was not beflowed upon Bothwell. Notwith.
standing her attachment to him, Mary remem-
bered the inconveniences which had arisen from
the raflh advancement of her former husband to
that honour. She agreed, however, that he
ihould sign, in token of consent, all the public
writs issued in her name . But though the
Queen withheld from him the title of King, he
possessed, neverthclefs, regal power in its full
extent. The Queen's person was in his hands;
flie was surrounded more closely than ever by
his creatures; none of her fubjefts could obtain
audience without his permission ; and, unless in

b And. i. , 8. i Good. ii. 60.

hi,,

Ilis own presence, none but his confidents were B 0 0 K

IV.

permitted to converse with her k. The Scottish
Monarchs were accustomed to live among their '567'
fubjeRs as fathers or as equals, without dilfruft,
and with little state; armed guards flanding at
the doors of the royal apartment, difficulty of ac-
cess, distance and retirement, were things un-
known, and unpopular.

THESE precautions were necessary for securing Znd eavour

to become
to Bothwell the power which he had acquired. manerof

the Plin¢¢'d

But, without being malfer of the person of the person.
young Prince, he esteemed all that he had gained
to be precarious and uncertain. The Queen had
committed her son to the care of the Earl of Mar.
'lhe fidelity and loyalty of that nobleman were
too well known to expect that he would be wil-
ling to put the Prince into the hands of the man
who was so violently fufpeated of having mur-
dered his father. Bothwell, however, laboured
to get the Prince into his power, with an anxiety
which gave rife to the blackest suspicions. All
his address, as well as authority, were employed
to persuade, or to force Mar into a compliance
with his demands'. And it is no flight proof,
both of the firmness and dexterity of that noble-
man, that he preserved a life of to much import-
ance to the nation, from being in the power of a
man, whom fear or ambition might have prompted
to violent attempts against it.

THE eyes of the neighbouring nations were Canerlln,

dignation
fixed, at that time, upon the great events which wiich the

(Queen's
¢condlud ex.
And. i. 136. ' Mclv. 16o. 3uch. 36i. coid.

f3 had

3B ' K had1 happened in Scotland during three months.

IV.
tL----J A King murdered with the utnoft cruelty, in the

j567. primne of his days, and in his capital city; the

person fulfpeced of that odious crime suffered not
only to ap1pear publicly in every place, but ad-
nirted into the pretence of the Quteen, difin-
guifhed by her favour, and intrulted with the
chief dlirection of her aT'airs; Iubjecedc to a trial
v.hich was carried on with Imot shameless par-
tiality, and acquitted by a cfntence, which served
only to confirm tle fufpticions of his guilt; di-
verced fi-onm his wife, on pretences frivolous, or
irndecent; and aftcr all this, inltead of meeting
vwith the ignonminy due to his actions, or the pu-
nillihent nmrited by his crimes, permitted openly,
and without oppol)tion, to marry a Queen, the
wife of tle Prince whoml he had affafTinated, and
the guardian of those laws which he had been
guilty of violating. Such a quick fucceflion of
incidents, so singular and lo detcihtble, in the
fipace of three months, is not to be found in any
other hifcory. lThey lert, in the opinion of so-
reigners, a mark of infamy on the character of
the nation. The Scots were held in abhorrence
all over Europe; they dcurfl hardly appear any
where in public; and after fulfcring 1b mlany
atrocious deeds to pals with impunity, they were
universally reproached as men void of courage,
or of huma;nity, as equally regardless of the re-
putation of their Qeuen, and the honour of their
coullltry "

"' A dcir. 'Vol. i. 13'8 .

1 clv.

I v 3 . Sc A.ppen i

'i ,
No. XX 1.

TIIESE

THESE reproaches roused the nobles, who had B ° ° K

been hitherto anmuled by Bothwell's artifices, or --,-J
intimnidated by his power. The manner in which T1, ie5'ob s
le exercised the authority which he had acquired, combine

againfl her
his repeated attempts to become master of the ald ltlil

well.

Prince's person, together with some rash threat-
enings againfl him , which he let fall", added to
the violence and promptitude of their resolutions.
A considerable body of them assembled at Stir-
ling, and entered into an affo&iation for the de-
fence of the Prince's person. Argyll, Athol, Mar,
Morton, Glencairn, I-Iome, Lindliay, Boyd, Mur-
ray of Tullibardin, Kirkaldy of Grange, and
Maitland the Secretary, were tile heads of this
confederacy . Stewart Earl of Athol was re-
markable for an uniform and bigotted attachment
to popery; but his indignation on account of the
murder of the King, to whom he was nearly al-
lied, and his zeal for the safety of the Prince,
overcame, on this occasion, all considerations of
religion, and united him with the mofl zealous
Protestants. Several of the otb.-r nobles 4Ace4
without question, from a ia'dabe Concern for the
safety of the Prince. and the honour of their
country. But the spirit which some of theml
discovered du-ing the -fubfeqlucnt revolutions,
leaves little room to doubt, that ambition or re-
fentment were the real motives of their conlducT;
and that, on many occasions, while they were
pursuing ends jtlfl and neceflhry, they were ac-
tuated by principles and paflions altogether un-
, nlitliable.

" iclv, 61i. 16o Kcitli, 394.

1 fr4 TEr

B o0 K THE first accounts of this league filled the

IV.
-I _ ( 2Queen and Bothwell with great consternation.
'567. They were no firangers to the sentiments of the

nation, with refpe& to their conduit; and though
their marriage had not met with public oppoli-
tion, they knew that it had not been carried on
without the secret disgust and murmurings of all
ranks of men. They forelaw the violence with
which this indignation would burst out, after
having been so long fuppreifed; and in order to
May zS. prepare for the florm, Mary issued a proclama-

tion, requiring her fubjets to take arms, and to
attend her husband by a day appointed. At the
fame time, she published a fort of manifelto, in
which the laboured to vindicate her government
from those imputations with which it had been
loaded, and employed the firongeft terms to ex-
press her concern for the safety and welfare of the
Prince her son. Neither of there produced any
considerable effect. Her proclamation was ill
obeyed, and her manifesto met with little credit P.

TheB Qhen THE confederate Lords carried on their prepa-
and Both.
well retire rations with no less activity, and with much more

success. Among a warlike people, men of so
much power and popularity found it an ealy mar-
ter to raise an army. They were ready to march
before the Queen and Bothwell were in a condi-
tion to resist them. The cattle of Edinburgh was
the place whither the Queen ought naturally to
have retired, and there her person might have
been perfetly safe. But the confederates had

P Kcill, 387. 395, 396.

fallen

fallen on means to shake, or corrupt the fidelity B O Kg
of Sir James Balfour, the deputy governor, and -
Bothwell durtt not commit to him such an ir- 1567-
portant trust. He conducted the Queen to the June 6.
cattle of Borthwick, and on the appearance of
Lord Home, with a body of his followers, before
that place, he fled with precipitation to Dunbar,
and was followed by the Queen disguised in men's
clothes. The confederates advanced towards
Edinburgh, where Huntly endeavoured, in vain,
to animate the inhabitants to defend the town
against them. They entered without opposition,
and were inftantlv joined by many of the citizens,
whose zeal became the firmneft support of their
cause q.

IN order to set their own conduct in the moit

favourable light, and to rouse the public indig-
nation againit Bothwell, the nobles publifled a
declaration of the motives which had induced
them to take arns. All Bothwell's past crimes
were enumerated, all his wicked intentions dif-
played and aggravated, and every true Scotsman
was called upon to join them in avenging the one,
and in preventing the otherr.

MEAN while, Bothwell afembled his forces at

Dunbar, and as he had many dependants in that
corner, he loon gathered such strength, that he
ventured to advance towards the confederates.
Their troops were not numerous; the suddenness
and secrecy of their enterprise gave their fiiends
at a distance no time to join them; and as it does

q Kcitll, 3 58. r AnlIcr;. vol. i. 128.

not

B 0 0 K not appear that they were supported either with

IV.
t_-,-j money or fed with hopes by the QLeen of Eng-

1567' land, they could not have kept long in a body.

But on the other hand, Bothwell durt-: not rif; a
delay . I-is arlmy followed him with reluctance
in this quarrel, and freved himn wiiLh no cordial
aii'etion; so that his only hope of I'icccl' was in
surprising the enemy, or in tiriking the blow bc-
fore his own troops had leilure to rccollcd[ thenm-
ielves, or to imbibe the fame unfavourable opi-
nion of his a&cions, which had spread over the
reft of the nation. Theft: motives determined the
Queen to march forward, with an inconsiderate
and fatal speed.

The n.-'ies ON the first intelligence of her approach, tlic

marcha- T y su
ga.nil tlem. confederates advanced to meet her. They found
July 15. her forces drawn up almost on the fame ground

which the English had occupied before the battle
of Pinkie. The numbers on both fides were
nearly equal; but there was no equality in point
of dilcipline. The QuLeen's army consisted chiefly
of a multitude, haflily assembled, without courage
or experience in war. The troops of the confe-
derates were composed of Gentlemen of rankl and
reputation, followed by their most trufly depend-
ants, who were no less brave than zealous'.

An accom. IE CROC the French Ainbarfa(lor, who was in
attirnptcd. the field, laboured, by negotiating botl with the

(Ccleen l and the nobles, to put an end to the quar-
rel without tle cll'ifion of blood. HIe Ireprellcnted
to the confelderates tile Qcen's inclinations to-

Ki i ,ill) 4-01, ' C'it. \ul. ii. Je, 41') -

wardls

wards peace, and her willingness to pardon the B o ° K
offences which they had committed. Morton re-
plied with warmth, that they hlad taken arms not 1567'
against the Quleen, but against the murderer of
hcr husband; and if he were given up to jufl-ice,
or banished from her presence, hfe should find
them ready to yield the obedience which is due
from subjects to their Sovereign. Glcncairn
added, that they did not come to afl pardon for
any offence, but to punish those vwho had ofFended.
Such haughty answers convinced the ambaftl'dor,
that his mediation would be inefYl-;ctial, and that
their passions were too high to allow tiem to liflen
to any pacific propositions, or to think of re-
treating after having proceeded so far".

THE Queen's armv was posted to advantage,

on arising ground. The con'!cderates advanced
to the attack resolutely, but slowly, and with the
caution which was natural on that unhappy field.
IIer troops were alarmed at their approach, and
discovercd no inclination to Fight. Mary endea-
voured to animate them ; fle wept, fle threat-
ened, fle reproached them with cowardice, but
all in vain. A few of Bothwell's immediate at-
tendants were cager for the encounter; the reft
flood wavering andl irresolute, and lome began to
fleal out of the field. Bothwell atremplted to in-
i)iriit them, by offering to decide the quarrel,
anl ( to vindicate his own innocenc in tingle
c,')mll)l with any of his adveriitrics. Kirkaldy of
t;'ran,,, Murray of Tullibardin, and Lord Lind-

" Kcitll, .loi.

aly

I O K fay contended for the honour of entering tle lifts
»^ _ aagainit him. But this challenge proved to be a

567 mtmere bravade. Either the confcioulhcfs of guilt

deprived Bothwell of his wonted courage, or the
Queen, by her authority, sorbad the combat .

AFTER the symptoms of fear clifc:ovred by her

followers, Mary would have been inexculable,
had the hazarded a battle. To have retreated in
the face of an enemy, who had already surrounded
the hill on which she tsood, with part of their ca-
valry, was utterly impraticable. In this situation,
she was under the cruel neceflity of putting her-
jflfinto the hands of those fubjecls who had taken
arms against her. She demanded an interview
with Kirkaldy, a brave and gentrous man, who
commanded an advanced body of the enemy.
i-le, with the consent and irn the name of the
leaders of the party, promised that, on condition
The would difmnifs Bothwell from her pretence,
and govern the kingdom by the advice of her
nobles, they would honour and obey her as their
Sovereign Y.

Bothwell DURING this parley, Bothwell took his las
igsy. t s farewell of the Queen, and rode off the field with

a few followers. This difinal reverie happened
exactly one month after that marriage which had
colt: himl o Inany crimes to accomplish, and which
leaves lo foul a tflin on Mary's memory.

Mary f.r- As soon as Bothwell retired, Mary surrendered
r ilucra to
th»e ,oU., to Kirkaldy, who conduled hler toward the con-

federate army, the leaders of which received her

Cald. vol. ii. 5o. Y Good. vol. ii. 6 I.. Mclv. I(6.

withl

with much refpe&; and Morton, in their name, oov K
made ample professions of their future loyalty and -
obedience Z. But she was treated by the common 1567.
soldiers with the utmost insolence and indignity.
As she marched along, they poured upon her all
the opprobrious names, which are bestowed only
on the lowest and most infamous criminals.
Wherever she turned her eyes, they held up be-
fore her a standard, on which was painted the
dead body of the late King, f-retched on the
ground, and the young Prince kneeling before it,
and uttering these words, "Judge and revenge

my cause, O Lord !" Mary turned with horror

from such a shocking fight. She began already
to feel the wretched condition to which a captive
Prince is reduced. She uttered the most bitter
complaints, she melted into tears, and could
hardly be kept from finking to the ground. The
confederates conducted her towards Edinburgh;
and in spite of many delays, and after looking,
with the fondness and credulity natural to the un-
fortunate, for some extraordinary relief, fle ar-
rived there. The fl-reets were covered with mul-
titudes, whom zeal or curiosity had drawn to-
gether, to behold such an unfuiial fcenc. The
Qecen, worn out with fatigue, covered with dust,
and bedewed with tears, was exposcd as a spec-
tacle to her own fubjeds, and led to the Provolt's
house. Notwithstanding all her arguments and
iiitreatis, the fame standard was carried before
her, and the fame insults and reproaches rc-

Good. vol. ii. i6.,

peatcd.

B o o K peateda. A woman, young, beautiful, and in

1V.
_- . dif-refs, is naturally the object of compaflion.
3567. The comparilon of their present misery with

their former splendour, usually softens us in
favour of illustrious sufferers. But the people
beheld the deplorable situation of tleir Sovereign
with infenlibility; and so strong was their per-
suasion of her guilt, and so great the violence of
their indignation, that the sufferings of their
OQeen did not, in any degree, mitigate their re-
fentment, or procure her that sympathy, which is
seldom denied to unfortiunate Princes.

" Mclv. 166. Buch. 364.

# BOOK V.

T H E
-i I S T O R Y

F
SCOTLAND.

BOOK V.
T HE confederateLords had proceeded to such n o o t

extremities againfl their Sovereign, that it V.

now became almost impossible for them either to ,567.
flop short, or to pursue a course less violent. ti .sn 'fthe
Many of the nobles had refused to concur with irlingtiho
them in their enterprise; others openly condemned QCCin"
it. A small circumflance might abate that in-
dlignation with which the multitude were, at pre-
sicnt, animated againnf the QlIcen¢, and deprive
thein of tlat popular applause which was the
chief foundation of their power. 'I hcfe conlider-
:itions inclincd fomc of them to treat the Q(ccn
with great lenity.

Bur, on the other hand, Mary's afllciion for

Bothwell continued as violent as ever; fie oblli-
nately refuscd to liearken to any proposal for di'-

iolvinl

B 0 K solving their marriage, and determined not to

V. _'-^- abandon a man, for whose love fle had already
I567. sacrificed so much'. If they should allow her to

recover the supreme power, the firt- exertion of it
would be to recal Bothwell; and they had reason,
both from his resentment, fi-om her conduct, and
from their own, to cxpeac the severest effects of
her vengeance. These considerations surmountcd
every other motive; and reckoning themselves ab-
solved, by Mary's incurable attachment to Both-
well, from the engagements which they had come
under when she yielded herlelf a prisoner, they,
without regarding the duty which they owed her
as their Queen, and without consulting the reil
of the nobles, carried her next evening, under a

Thy im- strong guard, to the castle of Lochlevin, and
Loh'nh. si gned a warrant to William Douglas the owner

of it, to detain her as a prisoner. This cafile is
situated in a finall island, in the middle of a lake,
Douglas, to whom it belonged, was a near rela
tion of Morton's, and had married the Earl of
Murray's mother. In this place, under ftril
custody, with a few attendants, and fubjeed to
the inluilts of a haughty woman, who boallcl
daily of being the lawful wife of James V. Mary
suffered all the rigour and miseries of captivity'.

IMMEDIATELY after the Queen's imprifonmcnt,

the confederates were at the utmost pains tc
itrengthen their party; they entered into nes
bonds of association; they assumed the title o
Lords of thefccirel Council, and without any otllc

a Kcili,419g.446.449. Mclv. 167. Sec Append. No. XXII
b Kleith, 403. Notc (b).

right

right, arrogated to themselves the whole regal B O ° K
authority. One of their first acts of power was to .-,
search the city of Edinburgh for such as had 156;7
been concerned in the murder of the King. This
Jlhow of zeal gained reputation to themselves, and
threw an oblique reflection on the Q(leen for her
remissness. Several ffilpeEted perions were seized.
Captain Blackadder and three others were con-
demned and executed. But no difcovcry of in-
portance was made. If we believe rome hiltorians,
they were convicted by sufficient evidence. If we
give credit to others, their sentence was unjust, and
they denied, with their lalf breath, any knowledge
of the crime for which they suffered'.

AN unexpected accident, however, put into the

hands of Mary's enemies what they deemed the
fullest evidence of her guilt. Bothwell having
left in the cafile of Edinburgh a calker, contain-
ing several sonnets and letters written with the
QuLeen's own hand; he now sent one of his con-
ildents to bring to him this precious depofite.
But as his mellciiger returned, hle was intercepted,
and the calket fiized by Morton '. The contents
of it were always produced by the parry, as the
most ample jultification of their own con(luLc,
and to theli: they continually appealed as the
modt unanlfverable proof of their not having
loaded their Sovereign with the imputation of
imaginary clim-cs'.

C;ad. v,,l. ii. 53. Ci.ikf. Micm. 35.

d A ell rCf. vol. ii. 92. Good. vol. ii. i).

See Diiltrtation at tlihe end of hc l lill'vy.
VOL, I. G g 1T r

B o0 K BUT the confederates, notwithstanding their

V.
t_
-- extraordinary success, were fiill far from being
Sor 6f the perfecly at ease. That so fiall a part of the nobles
n.,blsfa- should pretend to dispose of the person of their
¥ollr the
QUen. Sovereign, or to assume the authority which be-

longed to her, without the concurrence of the
reft, appeared to many of that body to be unpre.
cedented and presumptuous. Several of there
were now assembled at Hamilton, in order to
deliberate what course they should hold in this
difficult conjunture. The confederates made
some attempts towards a coalition with them,
but without effect. They employed the media-
tion of the Assembly of the Church, to draw
them to a personal interview at Edinburgh, but
with no better success. That party, however,
though its numbers were formidable, and the
power of its leaders great, soon loft reputation by
the want of unanimity and vigour; all its con-
fultations evaporated in murmurs and complaints,
and no scheme was concerted for obftruling the
progress of the confederates.

:lizabeth THERE appeared some profpeft of danger from
interpofesin
.br bhaJlf. another quarter. This great revolution in Scot-

land had been carried on without any aid from
Elizabeth, and even without her knowledge.
Though she was far from being displeased at
feeing the affairs of that kingdom embroiled, or
a rival, whom she hated, reduced to distress; she
neither wished that it flould be in the power of
the one facion entirely to suppress the other, nor

f Keith, 407. Id. 1.1 .

could

could The view the fleps taken by the confederates I °' K
without great offence. Notwithstanding the po- '--
pular maxims by which flle governed her own '56
fubjets, her notions of royal prerogative were
very exalted. The confederates had, in her opi-
nion, encroached on the authority of their Sove-
reign, which they had no right to controui, and
had offered violence to her person, which it was
their duty to esteem sacred. They had set a dan-
gerous example to other fubjeats, and Mary's cause
became the common cause of Princes", If ever
Elizabeth was influenced with regard to the affairs
of Scotland by the feelings of her heart, rather
than by considerations of interest, it was on this
occasion. Mary, in her present condition, de-
graded from her throne, and covered with the
infamy attending an accusation of such atrocious
crimes, could be, no longer, the object of Eliza-
beth'sjealoufy, either as a woman, or as a Queen.
Sympathy with a Sovereign in distress seems, for
a moment, to have touched a heart not very sus-
ceptible of tender sentiments; and, while these
were yet warm, flie dispatchcd Throkmorton into June 3V
Scotland, with power to negotiate both with the
Quleen and with the confederates, In his in-
ftrucRions there appears a remarkable solicitude
for Mary's liberty, and even for her reputation;
and the terms upon which fle proposed to re-
eltablifh concord between the Queen and her
subje&s, appear to be so reasonable and well di-
gelled, as might have ensured the safety and hap-

Keith, 4i. 415.

G g 2 pines

B O0 K pinels of both. Zealous as Throkmorton was to
L_,-,r accomplish this, all his endeavours and address

J567. proved ineffetuai. He found not only the con-

federate nobles, but the nation in general, so far
alienated from the Queen, and Ib much offended
with the indecent precipitancy of her marriage
with the reputed murderer of her former husband,
as to be incapable of listening to any proposition
in her favour.

DURING the state of anarchy, occasioned by the

imprisonment of the Queen, and the dissolution
of the eftablifled government, which afforded
such ample scope for political speculation, four
different schemes had been prupofed for the set-
tlement of the nation. One, that Mary should
be replaced upon the throne, but under various
and flrit limitations. The second, that she
should resign the crown to her son, and retiring
out of the kingdom, fliould reside, during the re-
mainder of her days, either in England or il
France. The third, that Mary fiould be brought
to public trial for her crimes, and after con-
r^ ~vi(tion, of wlich no doubt was entertained,

should be kept in perpetual inmprifonment. The
fourth, that after trial and condemnation, capital
punlifliment should be inflictd upon her. Throk-
morton, though ldifpoled as well by his own in-
clination, and as in conforming to the fpirii of
his inflrutions, to view matters in the light moll
favourable to Mary, informed his Court, that the
mnilder tchemes, recommended by Maitland alone,
would undoubtedly be reprobated, and one of the
nore rigorous carried into execution.

IN

IN jutification of this rigour, the confederates B O°o K

maintained that Mary's affetion for Bothwell-
was still unabated, and openly avowed by her; 56,7
that she rejecqted with disdain every proposal for
(lilolving their marriage; and declared, that she
would forego every consort, and endure any ex-
tremity, rather than give her conlfnt to that mea-
;lure. While theic were her sentiments, they con-
tended, that concern for the public welfare, as
well as attention to their own fafetv, rendered it
necefTary to put it out of the Queen's power to
reilore a daring man, exalperated by recent inju-
ries, to his former ifation, which must needs
p'ove fatal to both. Notwithstanding their soli-
citude to conciliate the good-will of Elizabeth,
they foresaw clearly what would be the effe't, at
this junaure, of Throkmorton's interposition in
behalf of the Queen, and that she, elated with
the profpecl of protection, would refuse to liften
to the overtures which they were about to make
to her. For this reason they peremptorilyl de-
nied Throklmorton access to their prifonr; and
what propositions he made to them in her behalf
they either refused or eluded'.

MEANWI-ILE they deliberated with the utmost shemesof

anxiety, concerning the fettletent of the nation, dlratc no'
and the fiture difpofil of tie Queen's perlon. hl"C.
I.lizabeth, observing that 'l'hrokmorton made no
progrcfs in his negotiations with them, and that
liey would litten to none of his demands in Mary's
favour, turied towards that party of the nobles

Kcith, 417. 427.

G g 3 wlho

B o0 K who were assembled at Hamilton, incited theim

V.
t--.-- to t:ike arms in order to restore their Queen to

3J67. liberty, and promised to afift them in such an at-

tempt to the utmost of her power . But they
discovered no greater union and vigour than for-
merly, and, behaving like men who had given up
all concern either for their Qeeen or their coun-
try, tamely allowed an inconsiderable part of
their body, whether we confider it with refpec to
numbers or to power, to fettle the government
of the kingdom, and to dispose of the Queen's
person at pleasure. Many consultations were hell,
and various opinions arose with regard to.each of
there. Soine seemed desirous of adhering to the
plan on which the confederacy was at first formed;
and after punishing the murderers of the King,
and dissolving the marriage with Bothwell; after
providing for the safety of the young Prince, and
the security of the Protestant religion; they pro-
posed to re-establish the Queen in the poffclfion
of her legal authority. The success with which
their arms had been accompanied, inspired others
with bolder and more defpcerate thoughts, and no-
thing lcfs would satisfy themi than the trial, the
condemnation, and puninfhient of the Quecn hcr-
self, as the principal conspirator against the life of
her hulband, and the safety of her son : the for-
mer was Maitland's fyltem, and breathed too
much of a pacific and moderate spirit, to be
agreeable to the temper or wishes of the party.
The latter was recommended by the clergy, and

SccAppcndix, No. XXIII. Keith, 420, 42 ,422.5 '.

warmly

warmly adopted by many laics; but the nobles B °0 V
durst not, or would not venture on such an un- --
precedented and audacious deednl. 1567.

BOTH parties agreed at last upon a scheme, They oblige

,

, r ,, *

r

-1 the 4e . n

neither so moderate as the one, nor so daring as to rfign the
the other. Mary was to be pcrfuaded or forced to government
resign the Crown; the young Prince was to be
proclaimed King, and the Earl of Murray was
to be appointed to govern the kingdom, during
his minority, with the name and authority of
Regent. With regard to the Queen's own per-
ioil, nothing was determined. It seems to have
been the intention of the confederates to keep
her in perpetual imprisonment; but in order to
intimidate herself, and to overawe her partisans,
they itill reserved to themselves the power of pro-
ceeding to more violent extremes.

IT was obvious to foresee difficulties in the exe-

cution of this plan. Mary was young, ambitious,
high-fpirited, and accultomned to command, To
induce her to acknowledge her own incapacity for
governing, to renounce the dignity and power
wvhich flie was born to enjoy, to become depend-
ant on her own fubjeats, to confcnt to her own
bondage, and to invest those perlons whom she
conliderlet as the authors of all her calamities
with that honour and authority of which she her-
It' was stripped, were points hard to be gained.

m hlc intention of pulling the Qucen to death seems to

I.vCe .1)ccn ctaried on by obmc of her ful)jets: at this time we
fIcI"I lindl Elizilaectll I)oa:tilng that Mary owed her lile to Iher
"lrl"'litioln. D)iggcs's Comipl. Amb. 14, &c. See Append.
~.v XVJII,

G g ' These,

B oVo K These, however, the confederates attemlted,

V. _-_ and they did not want means to insure success.
1567. Mary had endured, for several weeks, all the hard-

ships and terror of a prison; no profpedt of liberty
appeared; none of her fubje(ts had either taken
arms, or lo much as Iblicited her relief'; no per-
son, in whom the could confide, was admitted into
her presence; even the Ambassadors of the French
King, and Cueen of England, were refused ac-
cels to her. In this lolitary slate, without a coun-
ftllor or a friend, under the pressure of distress
and the apprehension of danger, it was natural for
a woman to hearken almost to any overtures. The
confederates tool advantage of her condition and
of her fears. They employed Lord Lindsay, the
fiercefl zealot in the party, to communicate their
scheme to the Queen, and to obtain her fubfcrip-
tion to thole papers which were necessary for ren-
dering it effectual. He executed his commifflon
with harshness and brutality. Certain death was
before Mary's eyes if fie refused to comply with
his demands. At the fame time Ihe was in-
formed by Sir Robert Melvil, in name of Athol,
Maitland, and Kirkaldy, the persons among the
confederates who were most attentive to her in-
tcreft, that a resignation extorted by fear, and
granted during her inprifonienit, was void in
law, and might be revoked as loon as fle reco-
vered liberty. Throknorton, by a note which he
found nleans of conveying to her, fuggefled the
;fmie thing"°. Deference to their opinion, as
re Kci;J, 425. Idl. ibil. Note f(), Mcl,. 169.

well

well as concern for her own safety, obliged her B O O K
to yield to every thing which was required, and _
to sign all the papers which Lindsay presented to 1567.
her. By one of these, she resigned the Crown,
renounced all flare in the government of the
kingdom, and contented to the coronation of the
young King. By another, she appointed the July 4,
Earl of Murray Regent, and conferred upon him
all the powers and privileges of that high office.
By a third, she substituted orne other noblemen
in Murray's place, if he should refuse the ho-
nour which was designed for him. Mary, when
fle subscribed these deeds, was bathed in tears;
and while she gave away, as it were with her
own hands, the sceptre which file had swayed so
long, fle felt a pang of grief and indignation,
one of the severest, perhaps, which can touch the
human heart P.

THE confederates endeavoured to give this James VI.

resignation all the weight and validity in their and Murray
power, by proceeding without delay to crown ghofen"R
the young Prince. The ceremony was performed
at Stirling, on the twenty-ninth of July, with
nmuch solemnity, in pretence of all the nobles of
the party, a considerable number of lesser barons,
and a great assembly of the people. From that
time, all public writs were issued, and the go-
vernment carried on in name of James VI q.

No revolution to great was ever effected with

mol-e ease, or by mneans so unequal to the end. In
a warlike age, and in less time than two months,

P Kcitlh, 430. Crawl. Mcin. 38. q Kcith, 43".

a part

B o o K a part of the nobles, who neither pofreffed the
---.. chief power, nor the greatefl wealth in the na-
x567. tion, and wlo never brought three thousand men

into the field, seizcd, imprisoned, and dethroned
their Queen, and without fihedding a single drop
of blood, set her soln, an infant of a year old, oi0
the throne.

ReAroninEs DURING this rapid progress of the confederates,
CAl bl II1
pitits. the eyes of all the nation were turned on them

with astonishment; and various and contradicory
opinions were formed concerning the extraordi
nary fleps which they had taken.

EVEN under the ariftocratical form of govern-

ment, which prevails in Scotland, said the fa-
vourers of the Queen, and notwithstanding the
exorbitant privileges of the nobles, the Prince
pollTbfes considerable power, and his person is
ttreated with great veneration. No encroach-
ments ihould be made on the former, and no in-
jury offired to the latter, but in cafes where the
liberty and happinels of the nation cannot be
secured by any other means. Such cafes feldorn
exist, and it belongs not to any part, but to the
·whole, or at least to a majority of the society, to
judge of their existence. By what aEtion could
it be pretended that Mary had invaded the rights
or property of her fubjeas, or what scheme had
fle formed againit the liberty and conflitution of
the kingdom ? Were fears, and suspicions, and
surmises, enough to justify the imlpriloning and
the dlpofing a Queen, to whom the Crown de-
scended fiom so long a race of Monarchs ? The
principal author of whatever was reckoned cul-

pable

pable in her conduct, was now driven from her B O0 K
presence. The murderers of the King might .-.
have been brouight to condign punifliment, the I567.
ffetyv oi the Prince have been secured, and the
l'roteflant religion have been cftablifhed, without
wrlcfing the sceptre out of her hands, or con-
demning her to perpetual imprisonment. What-
ever right a free Parliament might have had to
proceed to such a rigorous conclusion, or what-
ever name its determinations might have merited,
a lentence of this nature, passed by a firall part
of the nobility, without acknowledging or con-
fulting the reft of the nation, must be deemed a
rebellion against the government, and a confpi-
racy againit the pcrfon of their Sovereign.

THE partisans of the confederates reasoned very

differently. It is evident, said they, that Mary
either previously gave consent to the King's mur-
der, or did afterwards approve of that horrid
aaion. Her attachment to Bothwell, the powers
and honours with which fihe loaded him, the man-
ner in which fie suffered his trial to be carried
on, and the indecent speed with which flie mar-
ried a man, stained with so many crimes, raise
firong suspicions of the former, and put the latter
beyond all doubt. To have suffered the fu-
prene power to continue in the hands of an am-
bitious man, capable of the m( ft a'rocious and
lefperate actions, would have been disgraceful to
the nation, diflonourable to the Queen, and
dangerous to the Prince. Recolirfe was, there-
fore, had to arms. The QuLeen had been com-
t)clled to abandon a hufbandcl so unworthy of

herself.

B o 0 K herself. But her affeEtion toward him ifill con-

V.
v-- tinuing unabated; her indignation against the
5"7' authors of this reparation being visible, and

often expressed in the ftrongelt terms; they, by
restoring her to her ancient authority, would
have armed her with power to defiroy theinfelves,
have enabled her to recall Bothwell, and have
afforded her an opportunity of pursuing schemes
fatal to the nation with greater eagerness, and
with more success. Nothing, therefore, remained,
but by one bold action to deliver themselves and
their country from all future fears. The expe-
dient they had chosen was no less respectful to
the royal blood, than necessary for the public
safety. While one Prince was set aside as inca-
pable of governing, the Crown was placed on his
head who was the undoubted representative of
their ancient Kings.

WHATEVEI opinion posterity may form on

comparing the arguments of the two contending
parties, whatever fintiments we may entertain
concerning the justice or necessity of that course
which the confederates held, it cannot be denied
that their conduct, so far as regarded themselves,
was extremely prudent. Other expedients, less
rigorous towards Mary, might have been found
for fettling the nation; but, after the injuries
which they had already offered the Queen, there
was none so cifcctual for securing their own safety,
or perpetuating their own power.

To a great part of the nation, the conduct of

the confederates appeared not only wife, butjult.
The King's acceflion to the throne was every

9 where

where proclaimed, and his authority fiubmitted to B °VO K
without opposition. Though several of the nobles -v.
were still assembled at Hamilton, and seemed to 15s7.
be entering into some combination against his go-
vernment, an afrociation for supporting it was
formed, and signed by so many persons of power
and influence throughout the nation, as entirely
discouraged the attemptr.

THE return of the Earl of Murray, about this Murray as

fumes the

time, added strength to the party, and gave it a o,,vr.mrct.
regular and finiflhed form. Soon after the murder
of the King, this nobleman had retired into
France, upon what pretence historians do not
mention. During his residence there, he had
held a close correspondence with the chiefs of the
confederacy, and, at their desire, he now returned.
He seemed, at first, unwilling to accept the of-
fice of Regent. This hesitation cannot be as-
cribed to the scruples either of diffidence or of
duty. Murray wanted neither the abilities nor
the ambition which entitled him to aspire to this
high dignity. He had received the first accounts
of his promotion with the utmofl: litisfaclion;
but by appearing to continue for tome days in
fulfpente, he gained time to view with attention
the ground on which he was to a ; to bail.nce
the ltrcngth and reflurces of the two contelnding
factions, and to examine whether the toundation
on which his future fame and fucccfs mull relt,
were found and firm.

BEFORE he declared his final resolution, he
waited on Mary at Lochlevin. This vilit, to a

Andcrf. vol. ii. 23r.

filter,

B o00 K sifter, and a Quieen, in a prison, from which hi:
- --J had neither any intention to relieve her, nor to
*567' mitigate the rigour of her confinement, may be

mentioned among the circumstances which dif-
cover the great want of delicacy and refinement
in that age. Murray, who was naturally rough
and tincourtly in his manner", expoftulated so
warmly with the Qieen concerning her past con-
duct, and charged her faults so home upon her,
that Mary, wlo had flattered herself with more
gentle and brotherly treatment from him, melted
into tears, and abandoned herself entirely to de.
fpair . This interview, from which Murray
could reap no political advantage, and wherein
he discovered a spirit so severe and unrelenting,
may be reckoned among the mofi bitter circum-
stances in Mary's life, and is certainly one of the
most unjustifiable steps in his conduct.

SOON after his return from Lochlevin, Murray
Augrft 2z. accepted the office of Regent, and began to ad

in that character without opposition.

Fate of AMIDST so many great and unlexpected events,
bwell. the fate of Bothwell, the chief cause of them all,

hath been almoff forgotten. After his flight
from the confederates, he lurked for some time
among his vafials in the neighbourhood of Dun-
bar. But finding it impossible for him to make
head, in that country, against his enemies, or
even to secure himself from their pursuit, he
fled for shelter to his kinfinan the Biflop of
Murray; and when he, overawed by the confe-

Lithl, 96. ' Ibid. 445, 446.

derates,

derates, was obliged to abandon him, he retired B 0 0 K
to the Orkney Isles, Hlunted from place to _
place, deserted by his fi-iends, and accompanied 156;7
by a few retainers, as desperate as himself, he
suffered at once the miseries of infamy and of
want. His indigence forced him upon a course
which added to his infamy. He armed a few
finall flIips, which had accompanied him from
Dunbar, and attacking every vessel which fell in
his way, endeavoured to procure fubfitence for
himself and his followers by piracy. Kirkaldy
and Murray of Tullibardin were sent out against
him by the confederates; and surprising him
while he rode at anchor, scattered his finall fleet,
took a part of it, and obliged him to fly with a
single flip towards Norway. On that coast, he
fell in with a vessel richly laden, and immediately
attacked it; the Norwegians failed with armed
boats to its assistance, and after a desperate fight,
Bothwell and all his crew were taken prisoners.
His name and quality were both unknown, and
he was treated at first with all the indignity and
rigour which the odious crime of piracy merited.
His real character was soon discovered, and
though it saved him from the infamous death to
which his associates were condemned, it could
neither procure him liberty, nor mitigate the
hardships of his imprisonment. He languished
ten years in this unhappy condition; melancholy
and despair deprived him of reason, and at last
he ended his days, unpitied by his countrymen,
aud unassisted by strangers ". Few men ever ac-

Mdlv. 168.
.3 complifhlect

8 °0 K complifhed their ambitious projects by worse
L_-V.1 means, or reaped from them lets satisfaction.

1567. The early part of his life was restless and enter-

prifing, full of danger and of vicifitudes. His
enjoyment of the grandeur, to which he attained
by so many crimes, was extremely fliort; imbit-
tered by much anxiety, and disquieted by many
fears. In his latter years, he suffered the molt
intolerable calamities to which the wretched
are subjet, and from which persons who have
moved in so high a sphere are commonly ex-
empted.

Succef, of THE good effects of Murray's accefion to
the Regent's
adminittra. the Regency were quickly felt. The party form-
tO""' ing for the Queen was weak, irresolute, and did-

united; and no sooner was the government of
the kingdom in the hands of a man so remark-
able both for his abilities and popularity, than
the nobles, of whom it was compored, loft all
hopes of gaining ground, and began to treat fe-
parately with the Regent. So many of them were
brought to acknowledge the King's authority,
that scarce any appearance of opposition to the
established government was left in the kingdom.
Had they adhered to the Queen with any firmnels,
it is probable, from Elizabeth's disposition at that
time, that ihe would have afforded them such al-
fitance as might have enabled them to face their
enemies in the field. But there appeared so little
vigour or harmony in their councils, that she was
discouraged from espousing their cause; and the
Regent, taking advantage of their situation, ob-
liged them to submit to his government, without

granting

granting any terms, either to themselves or to B O K:
the Queenx.

THE Regent was no less successful in his at- '567'

tempt to get into his hands the places of strength
in the kingdom. Balfour, the deputy governor,
surrendered- the castle of Edinburgh; and as the
reward of his treachery, in deserting Bothwell
his patron, obtained terms of great advantage to
himself. The Governor of Dunbar, who dif-
covered greater fidelity, was soon forced to capi-
tulate; some other finall forts surrendered without
rei stance.

THIS face of tranquillity in the nation encou- A parlia-

raged the Regent to call a meeting of Parliament. Decem. 15.
Nothing was wanting to confirm the King's au-
thority, and the proceedings of the confederates,
except the approbation of this supreme court;
and after the success which had attended all their
measures, there could be little doubt of obtaining
it. The numbers that resorted to an Assembly
which was called to deliberate on matters of so
much importance, were great. The meeting was
opened with the utmot solemnity, and all its'
adcs pafled with much unanimity. Many, how-
ever, of the Lords who had discovered the warmcft:
attachment to the Qoeen, were prefcnt. But
they had made their peace with the Regent.
Argyll, Huntly, and Hcrries acknowledged,
openly in Parliament, that their behaviour to-
wards the King had been undutiful and crimi-
nal Y. Their compliance, in this manner, with

l.iith, 447. 450. 463.

Y AjiLlcd. vol. iv. 153. Scc Appendix, No. XXIV.
VOL, 1. II h the

B o 0 K the measures of the Regent's party, was eitlher

.--,-.. the condition on w!ich they were admitted into
1567. favour, or intended as a proof of the sincerity of

their reconcilement.

Ccnfirms THE Parliament granted every thing the con-
the pro-
ceedings f federates could demand, either for the safety of
dcrates. their ovwn perlons, or the security of that form (,f

government which they had established in the
kingdom. Mary's resignation of the Crown was
accepted, and declared to be valid. The King's
authority, and Murray's elcction, were recognilclJ
and confirmed. IThe impriloning the Queen, arnd
all the other proceedings of the confederates, wcrI
pronounced lawful. The letters which Mary h;.a
written to Bothwell were produced, and she was
declared to be acceliary to the murder of tli
Kingo. At the fame time, all.the afts of Par-
liament of the year one thousand five hundred and
sixty, in favour of the Protestant religion, were
publicly ratified; new statutes to the lame pur-
pose were cnacted ; and nothing that could
contribute to root out the remains of Popery, or
to encourage the growth of the Reformation, nwa
ntpleclcd.

ir is obl;rvable, howevcr, that the fame pnr-

fimonious spirit lrevailed in this Parliament, a;r
in that of thec year one thousand five hundred and
sixty. The Proteflant clergy, notwithftandinll
many dlilk'co;oragemcnts, and their extreme po-
verty, hadl, for Ilevei years, performed all reli-
gious oflices in the kingdom. The expedients

Gz ood. vol. ii. (66. And;rf. ol. ii. 206.

si llcl

fallen upon for their fiubliftence had hitherto B 0 o

V.

proved ineffectual, or were inteidecl to be so. -
But notwithli-anding their known indigence, and 1567'.
the warm remonflrances of the Afei-nbly of the
church, which met this year, the 'Parliament did
r:othinir more for their relief, than prcfcr-ibe tome
niew re:;ulati'lons concerning the- paylmnt of the
tiirds of benefices, which did not I'rodeice any
considerable change in the situation of the clergy.

A FEW days after the difolution of Parliament, is68.

fo)ur of Bothwell's dependants were cnnvictded of Jaury
being guilty of the King's murder, and fLiflered
death as traitors. Their confrfions brought to
light many circumstances relative to the manner
of committing that barbarous crime ; but they
were persons of low rank, and ftem not to have
been admitted into the secrets of the conipi-
racy a

NOTrWITHSTANDING the universal f ibmifllion to

the Regent's authority, there still abounded in the
kingdomn many ftcret mturimurs and cabals. The

iartilans of the Iiouec of Hamilton reckoned

Murray's promotion an in.jury to the I)uke of
Chatelherault, who, as first Prince of the blood,
had, in their opinion, an unldoubtCed righlt to be
Regent. The length and rigour of Mary's sus
fcrings began to move many to commiifrate her
ca.il. All who leaned to thle ancient opl)nio1ns in
rcligion dreaded tlhe eficlds of Murray)'s zeal.
/Aind he, though Ills abilitiic; were gre'ar, (dild not
pocrl's the talents requisite for soothing the rage

*' A neci I . vol. 1i. 1i .

I I 01 or

B o0 K or removing the jealousies of the different sac-
..-.. tions. By ininuation, or address, he might have

1568. gained or softened many who had opposed him;

but he was a firanger to these gentle arts. His
virtues were icver ; and his deportment towards
his equals, especially after his elevation to the
Regency, ditlant and haughty. This behaviour
offended some of the nobles, and alarmed others.
The Queen's fa&ion, which had been so eafil)
dispersed, began again to gather and to unite,
and was secretly favoured by some who had hi-
therto zealoufy concurred with the confederates'.

Mar SUCH was the favourable dilpofition of the na-
ctcapes
from Loch- tion towards the Queen, when the recovered her
""en. liberty, in a manner no less surprising to her

friends, than unexpe&ed by her enemies. Several
attempts had been made to procure her an op-
portunity of escaping, which some unforeseen
accident, or the vigilance of her keepers, had
hitherto disappointed. At last, Mary employed
all her art to gain George Douglas her keeper's
brother, a youth of eighteen. As her manners
were naturally affable and insinuating, she treated
him with the most flattering diftintion; she even
allowed him to entertain the most ambitious
hopes, by letting fall some expreflions, as if fie
would chufl' hin- for her husband'. At his age,
and in such circumstances, it was impossible to
rerift such a temptation. He yielded, and drew
others into the plot. On Sunday the second of
May, while his brother fat at supper, and the rclt

iM clv. 17g. cKeith, 469. 481. Note.

of

of the family were retired to their devotions, one B 0 0 K
of his accomplices found means to steal the keys -
out of his brother's chamber, and opening the x56S.
gates to the Queen and one of her maids, locked
them behind her, and then threw the keys into
the lake. Mary ran with precipitation to the
boat which was prepared for her, and on reaching
the fihore, was received with the utinoft joy, by
Douglas, Lord Seaton, and Sir James Hamilton,
who, with a few attendants, waited for her. She
initantly mounted on horseback, and rode full
specd towards Niddrie, Lord Seaton's ifat in
Weft-Lothian. She arrived there that night,
without being pursued or interrupted. After
halting three hours, fle set out for Hamilton;
and travelling at the fame pace, she reached it
next morning.

ON the first news of Mary's escape, her friends, Arrives at

irllamilton,

whom, in their present difpoftion, a much smaller and iaifc a
accident would have routed, ran to arms. In a rmy"
few days, her court was filled with a great and
filendid train of nobles, accompanied by such
nulmbers of followers, as formed an army above
fix thousand strong. In their presence flhe de-
clared that the resignation of the Crown, and the
other deeds which the had lignedl during her im-
pritonment, were extorted fiomi her lv fear. Sir
Robert Melvil confirmed her declaration ; and
on that, as well as on other accounts, a council
of the nobles and chief men of Ihr party pvro-
nounced all these tranfa(Cions voiid and illegal.
At the fame time, an association was flrmnd for M'yS.
the defence of her perlon and authority, and

H h 3 ftb-

B o0 K subscribed by nine Earls, nine Bifnnos, eiFghtep;
---- Lords, and many 'gentlemen of diltinction.

x563. Among them we find several who had bcenl

present in the last Parliament, and who h;.d
signed the counter-afibciation in defence of lthe
King's government; but l'uch sudden changes
were then so common, as to be no matter of
reproach.

Connerna- AT the time when the Oueen made her escape,
tion of the
Regent's the Regent was at Glasgow, holding a court of
adher:nts.

juflice. An event so contrary to their expecta-
tions, .nd tl fatal to their schemes, gave a great
fiock to his adherents. Many of them appeared
wavering and irresolute; others began to carry
on private negotiations with the Qieen; and
iobne openly revolted to her 'fide. In lo difficult
a juncture, where his own fame, and the being
of the party depended on his choice, the Regeni's
most faithful aifuciates were divided in opinion.
Some advised himi to retire, without lols of time,
to Stirling. The Queen's armny was already
strong, and only eight miles diflant; the al-
jacent country was full of the friends and de-
pendents of the house of Hamilton, and other
Lords of the Queen's faclion; Glasgow was a
large and unfortified town; his own train con-
sifted of no greater number than was usual in
times of peace; all these reasons pleaded for a
retreat. But on the other hand, arguments were
urged of no inconsiderable weight. The citizens
ps Glasgow were well affeited to the cause; tlie

d Keith, 475..

vaff.lils

vassals of Glencairn, Lennox, and Scmple, lay n 0

o K

near at hand, and were both numerous and full --V.-
of zeal; succours might arrive fiom otlhr parts 6.
of the kingdom in a few days; in \ar, success
depends upon reputation, as much as upon
nu:ibers; reputation is gained or loft by the
first ftep one tales; in his circumilanccs, a re-
trceat would be attended with all the i:gnomniny of
a liight, and would at once diflypirit li;s si nlds,
andl inspire his enemiies with boltdnes. In fuchli [-l'iPent
dangerous exigencics as ithis, the luperiirity of

iMurray's genius appeared, and enabled himi both
to chufe with wiflom and to a&t with vigour.
lie declared against retreating, and fixed his
head-qcuarters at Glasgow. And while he am.uTfed
tle QOeen for tome ldays, by pretendling to hcarlken
to some overtures, which ffie made for accoin-
inodating their differences, he was employed,
with tile utnmot induftiry, in drawing togethiler his
adlhcrents froin diflcrent parts of the kingdoim.
lIe was loon in a condition to take the field;
and though far inferior to the enemy in number,
lie confided ib much in the valour of his troops
and the expericnce of Ihis officers, that lie broke
ol: thle negotiation, and dctermn

i incd to h azard a
battle .

Ar tle lfae time, the Q(lecen's Ige lrals Iad NMry 13.

conmmanded hler army to move. llThir iiltnlltioi
was, to conduct her to Dunbariton -cafile, a place
of gr:eat frengtlh, which tlie Regent had not been
a101c to wrefl out of tile hands o(f ldorId FIlei-in

Pe l~IIu.IHI . 369,

I- h thile

B o0 K the governor; but if the enemy should endeavour

V. C-,-j~ to interrupt their march, they resolved not to
2568. decline an engagement. In Mary's situation, no

resolution could be more imprudent. A part
only of her forces was assembled. Huntly, Ogil-
vie, and the northern clans were soon expected;
her sufferings had removed or diminished the
prejudices of many among her subjects; the
address with which fie furniounted the dangers
that obftruted her escape, dazzled and interested
the people; the sudden confluence of so many
nobles added lustre to her cause; ihe might as-
furedly depend on the friendship and countenance
of France; file had reason to expet the pro-
tecion of England; her enemies could not
poflibly look for support from that quarter.
She had much to hope from pursuing flow
and cautious measures; they had every thing to
fear.

BUT Mary, whose hopes were naturally fan-

guine, and her passions impetuous, was so elevated
by her sudden transition fiom the depth ofdiftreis,
to such an unusual appearance of prosperity, that
she never doubted of success. Her army, which
was almost double to the enemy in number, con-
sifted chiefly of the Hamiltons and their de-
pendants. Of these the Archbiflop of St. An-
drew's had the chief dire&tion, and hoped, by a
vicory, not only to crush Murray, the ancient
enemy of his house, but to get the person of the
Queen into his hands, and to oblige her either to
marry one of the Duke's sons, or at least to com-
mit the chief direcion of her affairs to himself.

[lii

-His ambition proved fatal to the Queen, to him- B o K
self, and to his family . -.

MARY'S imprudence, in resolving to fight, was Battlieof

not greater than the ill conduct of her generals in L"sngfid
the battle. Between the two armies, and on the
road towards Dunbarton, there was an eminence
called Langfide Hill. This the Regent had the
precaution to seize, and posted his troops in a
finall village, and among some gardens and in-
closures adjacent. In this advantageous situation
li waited the approach of the enemy, whose fu-
periority in cavalry could be of no benefit to
them on such broken ground. The Hamiltons,
who composed the vanguard, ran so eagerly to
the attack, that they put themselves out of breath,
and left the main battle far behind. The en-
counter of the fpearmen was fierce and desperate;
but as the forces of the Hamiltons were exposed,
on the one flank, to a continued fire from a body
of mufqueteers, attacked on the other by the Re-
gent's most choice troops, and not supported by
the reft of the Queen's army, they were soon TheQueea's
obliged to give ground, and the rout immedi- scatcd.
ately became universal. Few victories, in a civil
war, and among a fierce people, have been pur-
ftied with less violence, or attended with less
bloodflhed. Three hundred fell in the field: In
the flight almost none were killed. The Regent
and his principal officers rode about, beseeching
the soldiers to spare their countrymen. The
number of priobners was great, and among theiu

f Anders. vol. iv. 32, Melt. 181.

manr

B 0 K many pcrlbns ofdiftin(ion. The Regent marcil'h

V.
v_-,-J back to Glasgow, and returned public thanks

J56s. to God for this great, anl, on his fide, almolt

bloodless victory .
Her flight. DURING the engagement, Mary flood on a hill,

at no great distance, and beheld all that pafled in
the field, with such emotions of mind as are not
easily described. When site law the army, which
was her laflt hope, thrown into irretrievable con-
furfon, her spirit, which all her past misfor-
tunes had not been able entirely to ifubdue, kfunk
altogether. In the utmost conlternation, fihe be-
gan her flight, and so lively were her impreflions
of fear, that Ihe never closed her eyes till she
reached the abbey of Dundrenan in Galloway, full
sixty Scottish miles fi-om the place of battleh.

TI-iSE revolutions in Mary's fortune had been

no less rapid than singular. In the flhrt space of
eleven days, flie had been a prisoner at the mercy
of her nmoft inveterate enemies ; fe had seen a
powerful army under her command, and a pu-
merous train of nobles at her devotion: And now
fle was obliged to fly, in the utmost danger of
her life, and to lurk, with a few attendants, in a
corner of her kingdom. Not thinking herself
lase, even in that retreat; her fears impelled her
to an action, the mol:t unadvised, as well as the
moif unfortunate in her whole life. This was her
retiring into England, a ftep, which, on many
accounts, ought to have appeared to her rafli andl
dangerous.

g Kl ith, 477, b It. q81,

BE iOhR

BBEFORE Ma;1:'s arrival in ScotlamIl, mutual B o0) K

V.

ifl rul: and jealousics had ai-len between her and
I'.lizaetlh. All their fub!'quent tranl lldions had /

i',s.

! ..'r-n butec! to exafpcnrate and inflailme tlic!' pas- i''¶,""',o
lrons. She had endeavoured, by cfcret negoti- lind.
anion:l andi inrlri,-';os, to (dii'urb the tranquillity of
I:lizabe'trh's aoOVerlini nlt, and to advance hler own
pl'er'nlillns to the linglifli Crown. Elizabeth,
who plofi'eicl great power, and aetcld vwith lel's
rcelkrve, liad openly supported Mary's rebiilious
Is.i),'cts, and fomented all the dill-nflins and
troubles in which her reign had been involved.
'The.' maxims of policy flill authorilcd that (Qieen
to purlule the fame courl-; as by keeping Scot-
Iil;d in confulion, fie effc6iually secured the peace
of her own kingdom. Tle Regent, after his vic-
tory, liad marched to E.dinburgh, and not know-
inig vlwhat courie the Queen had taken, it was ife-
vcLral days before he thought of purtling heri.
She might have been concealed in that retired
corner, amlong filujets devoted to her interlet,
until her party, which was difiIprl:ed rather than
broklen by 'the late defeat, fliould gather such
flrcngth that fihc could again appear witli safety
at their h1ead. There was not any danger, which
thie moght not to have run, rather than throw her-
self into the handls of an enelmy, fromI whonm sei
had already fuln'c.red so many injuries, and who
was prompted, both by inclination and by interell,
to renew them.

BUT, on tie other lhand, during Mary's con-
Piiemcent, Elizabeth had declared againll: the pro-

I Ci;av.'f. Mci.ln 59.

ceedings

B o o K ceedings of her fubjeds, and solicited for her
--.V- liberty, with a warmth which had all the appear-
356&. ance of sincerity. She had invited her to take

refuge in England, and had promised to meet her
in person, and to give her such a reception as was
due to a Queen and an ally k. Whatever ap-
prehension Elizabeth might entertain of Mary's
designs while she had power in her hands, fie
was, at present, the object, not of fear, but of
pity; and to take advantage of her situation, would
be both ungenerous and inhuman. The horrors
of a prison were fresh in Mary's memory, and if
she should fall a second time into the hands of her
subjects, there was no injury to which the pre-
fumption of success might not embolden them to
proceed. To attempt escaping into France, was
dangerous; and, in her situation, almost impof-
fible; nor could she bear the thoughts of appear-
ing as an exile and a fugitive in that kingdom
where she had once enjoyed all the splendour of
a Queen. England remained her only asylum;
and, in spite of the entreaties of Lord Herries,
Fleming, and her other attendants, who conjured
her, even on their knees, not to confide in Eliza-
beth's promises or generosity, her infatuation was
invincible, and (he resolved to fly thither. Herries,

Mtrrecep- by her command, wrote to Lowther the deputy-
n"aar. governor of Carlisle, to know what reception he

would give her; and, before his answer could re-
turn, her fear and impatience were so great, that
May 16. she got into a filher-boat, and with about twenty

L Camb. 489. Ander. vol. iv. .
99 io. Murdin, 369.

attendants,

attendants, landed at Wirkington in Cumberland, n O v K
and thence she was conducted with many marks v-
of refpeet to Carlisle'. s568.

As soon as Mary arrived in England, the wrote El'zabe.h

a long letter to the (Qeen, representing, in the doncbrateg
itrongeft terms, the injuries which fie had suffered the man"e
fi-om her own fubjeEts, and imploring that pity her.
and affitance which her present situation de-
manded m. An event so extraordinary, and the
conduit which might be proper in consequence
of it, drew the attention, and employed the
thoughts, of Elizabeth and her council. If their
deliberations had been influenced by confider-
ations of justice or generosity alone, they would
not have found them long or intricate. A Queen,
vanquished by her own subjects, and threatened
by them with the loss of her liberty, or of her life,
had fled from their violence, and thrown herself
into the arms of her nearest neighbour and ally,
from whom fle had received repeated assurances
of friendship and protection. These circum-
flances entitled her to refpeet and to compassion,
and required that flie should either be restored to
her own kingdom, or at least be left at full liberty
to seek aid from any other quarter. But with Eli-
zabeth and her counsellors, the question was not,
whit was most just or generous, but what was
most beneficial to herself, and to the Englifll
nation. Three different resolutions might have
been taken, with regard to the Queen of Scots.
To re-inflate her in her throne, was onc; to al-

' Keith, 483. Andcrf. vol. iv. 2. "' 13. 2(.

lQW

B 0 o K low her to retire into France, was another; to

*,-_ detain her in lngland, was a third. Each of
I56t3 thel; drew cofcc'quences after it, of thle utnmcf

importa n'e, wh'ich were examined, as appcar,
from papers flill extalnt", with that minute ac-
curacy wilich l:lizabeth's Ministers employed in
all their conlulltations upon affairs of moment.

'o retlolre MIary to the full exercifi of thic

royai authority in Scotland, they oblcrvcd, wouil
render her 1more powcrful than ever. The nnbl's
who were molt firmly attached to the L.n.lilll i!l-
tercft would (uickly feel the utnmlof weighlt e,
her relilntment. As the gratitude of Princes ib
seldom {Itrong or laling, regard to her own in-
tei:elt might loon elffice the memory of her obli-
gations to Elizabeth, and prompt her to renew
the alliance of the Scottish nation with France,
and revive her own pretensions to the EnglilL
Crown. Nor was it pofible to fetter and cir-
cumfcribe the Scotifli Queein, by any conditions
that would prevent thlle dangers. 1cr party in
Scotland was numerous and powerful. -ler re-
turn, even without any support firon England,
would inlpiire her friends with new zeal and cou-
rarge ; a lingle viclory might give thern the fupe-
riority, which they had lolf by a tingle defeat,
and render Mary a more formidable rival than
ever to Elizabeth.

THE dangers arising fromn suffering Mary to

return into France, were no less obvious. 'r'le
French King could not refuse his assistance to-

n A\i 'crl1 . v l. iv. 3.1. 99. 102.

wvI ',s

wards ref:oring, his filer and ally to her throne. B 0 0oK

V.

Ilizabeth would, once more, fe a foreign army n --,
in the iland, overawing the Scots, and ready to Iss'
lenter her kingdomn; and if the comlmotions in
France, on account of rcligion, were fettled, the
Plrinces of Lorrain might reliime thleir ambitious
proec'ts, and the united forces of France and
Scotland might invade England, where it is
weakeli and most defenceless.

NOTHrING therefore remained but to detain her R.f,lve: to

in Fngland ; and to permit her either to live at i,, glrnd.
liberty there, or to confine her in a prison. Tlhe
former was a dangcrous experiment. 1Ier court
would become a place of resort to all the Roman
Catholics, to the ciilllff-ted, and to the lovers of
innovation. Though Elizabeth affcltedl to repre-
sent Mary's pretensions to the English Crown as
altogether extravagant and ill-founded, fle was
not ignorant that they did not appear in that light
to the nation, and that many thought them pre-
fcrable even to her own title. If the activitr of
b.r elminfaries had gained her so many abettors,
her own perlonal iill(llunce was much n ore to be
treaded ; her beauty, her addli, her fIl f-rings,
by the admiration and pity which they would ex-
cite, could not fail of makinzg many converts to
her party ".

IT was indeed to be alpprehended, that the

treatingl Mary as a )lpifoner would excite Iuli-
verlIl indignation ngainfil Elizallcth, an't that by
tlis unexampled severity towards a (Queen, who

° Anders. vu'. iv. , 'o.

B O K implored, and to whom ihe had promifted her

vAI protection, she would forfeit the praise ofjultice
,568. and humanity, which was hitherto due to her ad-

ministration. But the English Monarchs were
often so solicitous to secure their kingdom against
the Scots, as to be little scrupulous about the
means which they employed for that purpose.
Henry IV. had seized the heir of the Crown of
Scotland, who was forced, by the violence of a
storm, to take refuge in one of the ports of his
kingdom; and, in contempt of the rights of hof-
pitality, without regarding his tender age, or the
tears and intreaties of his father, detained him a
prisoner for many years. This action, though
detested by posterity, Elizabeth resolved now to
imitate. Her virtue was not more proof than
that of Henry had been, against the temptations
of interest; and the possession of a present advan-
tage was preferred to the prospect of future fame.
The fatisfation which she felt in mortifying a
rival, whose beauty and accomplishments she en-
vied, had, perhaps, no less influence than politi-
cal considerations, in bringing her to this refolu-
tion. But, at the fame time, in order to fcreeR
herself from the censure which this conduct me-
rited, and to make her treatment of the Scottifih
Queen look like the effect of necessity, rather
than of choice, she determined to assume the ap-
pearance of concern for her interest, and of deep
sympathy with her sufferings.
May aW. WITH this view, she instantly dispatched Lord

Scroope warden of the weft marches, and Sir
Francis Knollys her vice-chamberlain, to the

9 Queen

Queen of Scots, with letters full of expreflmons of B OO K
kindness and condolence. But, at the fame time,
they had private inftruaions to watch all her mo- 68
tions, and to take care that fle should not escape
into her own kingdom P. On their arrival, Mary Mary de-

n a/d; ad-

denmanded a personal interview with the Quecn, mt'anc in-
tliat Tle might lay before her the injuries which tblli's pre.
ile had Luffered, and receive from her thol: f"ce'
friendly offices which fle had been encouraged
to expec. They answered, that it was with re-
luEtance admiflion into the presence of their So-
vereign was at present denied her; that while lhe
lay under the imputation of a crime to horrid as
the murder of her husband, their mifl-rces, to
whom he was so nearly allied, could not, without
bringing a stain upon her own reputation, admit
her into her presence; but as loon as fie had
cleared herself from that aspersion, they promised
her a reception suitable to her dignity, and aid
proportioned to her diflrefs''.

NOTHING could be more artful than this pre- Shenftersto

vindicate

tence; and it was the occasion of leading the hercondu.
Queen of Scots into the snare in which Elizabeth
and her Minilters wifled to entangle her. Mary
expressed the utmiofl furprize at this unexpectcd
manner of evading her requeil; but as ihe could
not believe so many profcffions of friendlhip to
be void offincerity, flhe fiankly oilcred to ftnbmii
her cause to the cognizance of llizabeth, and
undertook to produce fuich proofs of her own in-
nocence, and of the falfchood of the accutltionll

P Andiitrl . vol. iv. 36. 70. 92. i ·. . .
VOL.. I i broughit

B 0 v K brought against her, as should fully remove tle
L--. scruples, and satisfy the delicacy of the English
,l6csh Queen. This was the very point to which Eliza-
takesad- beth laboured to bring the matter. In confe-
viltJage of
this offcr. quence of this appeal of the Scottish Queen, she

now confidered herself as the umpire between her
and her fubjeds, and foresaw that ihe would have
it entirely in her own power to protrac the in-
quiry to any length, and to perplex and involve
it in endlets difficulties. In the mean time, flhe
was furnished with a plausible reason for keeping
her at a distance from court, and for refuting to
contribute towards replacing her on the throne.
As Mary's condu&c had been extremely incauti-
ous, and the presumptions of her guilt were many
and strong, it was not impoflible her fubjets
might make good their charge against her; and
if this should be the result of the inquiry, flhe
would, thenceforth, cease to be the object of re-
gard or of compassion, and the treating her with
coldness and neglect would merit little censure.,
In a matter so dark and myfrerious, there was no
probability that Mary could bring proofs of her
innocence, so incontefted, as to render the con-
dut of the Engliih (Queen altogether culpable;
and, perhaps,. impatience under restraint, fufpi-
cion of Elizabeth's partiality, or the discovery of
her artifices, might engage Mary in such cabals,
as would justify the using her with greater
rigour,

ELIZABETHI early perceived many advantages

which would arise fiom an inquiry into the con-
dutl of the Scottifih Queen, carried on under her

3 Jdirction.

direction. There was some danger, however, that B 0°0 K
Mary might discover her secret intentions too *---.
soon, and by receding from the ofer which she 256S
had made, endeavour to disappoint them. But
even in that event, she determined not to drop
the inquiry, and had thought of several different
expedients for carrying it on. The Countess of
Lennox, convinced that Mary was accessary to
the murder of her son, and thiriting for that ven-
geance which it was natural for a mother to de-
mand, had implored Elizabeth's justice, and soli-
cited her, with many tears, in her own name,
and in her husband's, to bring the Scottish Queen
to a trial for that crime'. The parents of the
unhappy Prince had a just right to prefer this
accusation; nor could she, who was their nearest
kinswoman, be condemned for listening to so
equitable a demand. Betides, as the Scottilh
nobles openly accused Mary of the fame crime,
and pretended to be able to confirm their charge
by sufficient proof, it would be no difficult matter
to prevail on them to petition the Queen of Eng-
land to take cognizance of their proceedings
against their Sovereign; and it was the opinion
of the English council, that it would be reason-
able to comply with the request'. At the fame
time, the obsolete claim of the superiority of
England over Scotland began to be talked of,
and, on that account, it was pretended that the
decision of the contest between Mary gnd her
fubjecs belonged of right to Elizabeth'. But

Camld. 412. I-ayncs, 46g. ' And. vol. iv, part i
37. ' Ibid.

I i 2 though

B 0 K though Elizabeth revolved all these expedients in

.

- .-... her mind, and kept them in reserve to be made use
J568' of as occafon might require, she wished that the

inquiry into Mary's conduEt flould appear to be
undertaken purely in compliancewith her own de-
mand, and in order to vindicate her innocence; and
so long as that appearance could be prcferved, none
of the other expedients were to be employed.

WHEN Mary coniented to submit her cause to

Elizabeth, file was far fi-om fufpectingthat any bad
consequences could follow, or that any dangerous
)retenions could be founded on her offer. She
expected that Elizabeth herself would receive and
examine her defences"; flhe meant to confider her
as an equal, for whose fatisfacion ile was willing
to explain any part of her conduct that was liable
to censure, not to acknowledge her as a superior,
before whom she was bound to plead her cause.
But Elizabeth put a very different sense on Mary's
offer. She confidered herself as chosen to be judge
in the controversy between the Scottish Queen and
her fubjecrs, and began to ad: in that capacity.
She proposed to appoint commissioners to hear the
pleadings of both parties, and wrote to the Re-
gent of Scotland to impower proper persons to
appear before them, in his name, and to produce
what he could allege in vindication of his pro-
ceedings against his Sovereign.

MA.ryrreitly MARY had, hitherto, relied with unaccountable
1li ,' ith'Cs credulity on Elizabeth's profeflions of regard, and
cunldut. expetecd that so many kind fpcechcs would, at

" Ainlcrf. vol iv. 1,.

lafl,

lafc, be accompanied with some suitable a&lions. B 0 0 K
But this proposal entirely undeceived ler. She _-,-
plainly perceived the artifice of 1 lizabeth's con- J568
dul, and saw what a diminution it would be to
her own honour, to appear on a level with ler re-
bellious fubjeIs, and to stand together with them
at the bar of a liuprior and a judge. She re-
trated the ofler which flie had made, and which
had been perverted to a purpose -o contrary to her
intention. She demanded, with more ernefltnefs
than ever, to be admitted into Elizabeth's pre-
ience; and wrote to her in a fllrain very difil'rent June 13
from what flhe had formerly tufed, and which
fully discovers tile grief and indignation that
preyed on her heart. " In my present situation,"
fays ihe, " 1 neither will nor can reply to the
"accusations of my fubjeJcs. I am ready, of my
" own accord, and out of frienctdhip to you, to
"satisfy your fcruplcs, and to vindicate mIy own
"condu&t. My lfubjeCds arc not my equals; nor
c will I, by fubmiitting mly cauec to a jluicial
" trial, acknowledge them to be lo. I fled into
"your arms, as into thole of my nearell relation
"and mon- perfecr fiiend. I lid you honour, as
" I imagined, in clufing you, preferably to any

other Prince, to be tle rct'eor'er of an injured
" Qjleen. Was it ever known that a Prince was

blamed for hearing, in perlon, tlhe complaints

"of those who appealed to his juflice, ;gainfl
" thl falif accufaitions of their enemies? You
" tdlnittedl into your pl)efence my baflaril bro-

ther, who had been guilty of rebellion; and
, you deny me that honour ! Gold forbid that I

I i 3 " llouldi

B o0 K c should be the occasion of bringing any stain

V.
---J ' upon your reputation! I expeEted that your

156 c manner of treating me would have added lustre

" to it. Suffer me either to implore the aid of
c other Princes, whose delicacy on this head will
c be les, and their resentment of my wrongs
"greater; or let me receive from your hands
"that assistance, which it becomes you, more
c than any other Prince, to grant; and by that
cc benefit bind me to yourself in the indiffuluble
'c ties of gratitude x."

June 2o. THIS letter somewhat disconcerted Elizabeth's
El;zabeth's precations plan, but did not divert her from the prosecution
1lsiiPt her. of it. She laid the matter before the Privy Coun-

cil, and it was there determined, notwithstanding
the intreaties and remonstrances of the Scottifl
Queen, to go on with the inquiry into her con-
duSt, and until that were finished, it was agreed
that Elizabeth could not, consistently with her
own honour, or with the safety of her government,
either give her the assistance which flie demanded,
or permit her to retire out of the kingdom. Left
she fiould have an opportunity of escaping, while
Ihe resided so near Scotland, it was thought ad-
vifable to remove her to some place at a greater
distance from the borders r.

Prorecciing WHILE the English court was occupied in these
of he Re-
genht a,ir, deliberations, the Regent did not neglect to im-
ith Q:ntecs' prove the victory at Langfide. That event was
idl.i'rentso .

of the utinoll importance to him. It not only
drove the Qleen herself out of the kingdom, but

5' Ail\,,cl; v sol. iv. plrl i. 94. r Id. Ibid. 102.

left

left her adherents dispersed, and without a leader, B 0 0 K
at his mercy. He feerned resolved, at first, to --,-
proceed against them with the utnoft rigour. Six '5SY
persons of some diftintion, who had been taken
prisoners in the battle, were tried and condemned
to death, as rebels againfc the King's government.
They were led to the place of execution, but by
the powerful inrerceffion of Knox they obtained
a pardon. H-amilton of Bothwellhaugh was one
of the number, who lived to give both the Regent
and Knox reason to repent of this commendable
a&L of lenityZ.

SOON after, the Regent marched with an army,

consisting of four thousand horse and one thou sand
foot, towards the weft borders. 'The nobles in
this part of the kingdom were all the Queen's
adherents; but as they had not force sufficient to
obftruft his progress, he must either have obliged
them to submit to the King, or would have laid
waste their lands with fire and sword. But Eli-
zabeth, whose interest it was to keep Scotland in
confusion, by preserving the balance between the
two parties, and who was endeavouring to sooth
the Scottish Queen by gentle treatment, inter-
posed at her desire. After keeping the field two
weeks, the Regent, in compliance to the Englifli
Ainbaffador, difiiffed his forces; and an expe-
dition, which might have proved fatal to his op-
ponents, ended with a few acts of severity .

THE resolution of the Englilh Privy Council Marycarliea
with regard to Mary's person, was soon carried tloBul'"'

7 C.dl, vol. ii. 99. a Ibid.

i 4 ' ito

B o0o K into execution; and, without regarding her re-
t.--- monttranccs or complaints, the was condulced to
Jul, 63' Bolton, a castle of Lord Scroop's, on the bor-

ders of Yorkflhire . In this place, her corre-
fpondence with her fiiendls in Scotland became
more difficult, and any proflpc of making her
escape was entirely cut off. She now felt herself
to be entirely in Elizabeth's power, and though
treated as yet with the refpec due to a Queen,
her real condition was that of a prisoner. Mary
knew what it was to be deprived of liberty, and
dreaded it as the worfl of all evils. While the
remembrance of her late imprisonment was flill
lively, and the terror of a new one filled her
Juily 2. mind, Elizabeth thought it a proper junture to

renew her former proposition, that the would sus-
ser the Regent and his adherents to be called into
England, and content to their being heard in de-
fence of their own conduct. She declared it to
be far from her intention to claim any right of
judging between Mary and her subjects, or of
degrading her to far as to require that she should
answer to their accusations. On the contrary,
Murray and his associates were summoned to ap-
pear, in order to jutify their conduct in treating
their Sovereign so harshly, and to vindicate them-
selves fi-om thole crimes with which ihe had
charged them. On her part, Elizabeth promised,
whatever thould be the iifue of this inquiry, to
employ all her power and influence towards re-
placing Mary on her throne, under a few limita.

b Arn. vol. iv. r4. See Appcndix, No. XXV.

tions,,

tions, by no means unreasonable. Mary, de- R 0o oK
ceived by this seeming attention to her dignity as I -
a Queen; Ioothed, on one hand, by a promifi:e A5;h,t
more flattering tihan any which Ihe had hitherto '"1 i' ,slrY
received from Elizabeth, and urged, on the other, ierrcundua.
by the feelings which were natural on being con-
ducted into a more interior part of Englgiand, and
kept there in more rigorous conlfin:nent, conl-
plied at length with what Elizabeth required, and
promiled to fend coinmifloners to the conferences
appointed to be held at York .

IN order to p-rfuade E.lizabeth tlhat she desired -r.!ir;i.

]At oil ,lth

nothing so muclh as to render the union between , .-,,,..

,

them as close as pofTible, she filewed a dirfofition 1 gion.
to relax somewhat in one point; with regard to
which, during all her past and fiubfieq(lcnt iiisFor-
tunes, fie was uniformnly inflexible. Slhe (exrefiCd
a great veneration for the liturgy of the Ciurc
of England; she was often preiiln at reigiou:
worship, according to the rites of the Reformed
Church ; made choice of a Plrotetant c!ergvlm:i
to be her chaplain ; heard him preach agiinil: thic
errors of Popery with attention and tleciingi plea-
sure; and discovered all the fynr-.toms of an ap..
proaching converfiond. Such was Mary's known
and bigotted attachment to the Popish religion,
that it is impoflible to believe her sincere in this
part of her condulc; nor can any thing mark
more strongly the wretchedness of her condition,

c Andlcrf iv. piart .

pi . 1 r, 2, . 09, &c. IIaync;, 468,
&c. Si.atc 'I'rials, Edit. I-l[rgr.tve, i. 0o.

' Andcrf. vol. iv. part i. 1 13. H;iyac;, 509. Sec Ap-
pendix, No. XXVI.

I and

B O o K and the excess of her fears, than that they be-

.-- trayed her into difimulation, in a matter con-
J''' cerning which her sentiments were, at all other

times, Icrupuloully delicate.

pAu-ua rIs. AT this time the Regent called a Parliament,
,en in in order to proceed to the forfeiture of those who
Scjtind. -refu.ed to acknowledge the King's authority.

The Queen's adherents were alarmed, and Argyll
antd f untly, whom Mary had appointed her lieu-
tenants, the one in the south, and the other in the
north of Scotland, began to assemble forces to
obftruit this meeting. Companlion for the Queen,
and envy at those who governed in the King's
name, had added so much strength to the party,
that the Regent would have found it difficult to
withstand its efforts. But as Mary had submitted
her cause to Elizabeth, she could not refuse, at her
delire, to command her fiiends to lay down their
arms, and to wait patiently until matters were
brought to a decision in England. By procuring
this cessation of arms, Elizabeth afforded as sea-
ionable relief to the Regent's faction as fle had
formerly given to the Qoeen's".

T'HE Regent, however, would not content, even

at Elizabeth's request, to put off the meeting of
Parliament r. But we may ascribe to her influ-
ence, as well as to the eloquence of Maitland,
who laboured to prevent the one half of his coun-
trymen from exterminating the other, any ap-
pearances of moderation which this Parliament
discovered in its proceedings. The mol: violent

- Andcrf. vol. iv. I25. I Scc Appendix, No. XXVI.

opponen ts

opponents of the King's government were for- B Oa i K
feited; the reft were allowed still to hope for ---. a
favour g. 1565'

No sooner did the Queen of Scots submit her Ei;zabeth

reqlires the
cause to her rival, than Elizabeth required the Re- Keelt to

dticnd his

gent to fend to York deputies properly inftru&ed condua.
for vindicating his condu&t, in presence of her
commifiioners It was not without hesitation and
anxiety that the Regent consented to this mea-
sure. His authority was already established in
Scotland, and confirmed by Parliament. To sus-
ser its validity now to be called in queltion, and
fubjefted to a foreign jurisdiction, was extremely
mortifying. To accuse his Sovereign before
strangers, the ancient enemies of the Scottish
name, was an odious task. To fail in this ac-
cufation was dangerous; to succecd in it was dif-
graceful. But the strength of the adverse faction
daily increased. He dreaded the interposition of
the French King in its behalf. In his situation,
and in a matter which Elizabeth had tb much at
heart, her commands were neither to be disputed
nor disobeyed h.

TNti neceflity of repairing in person to York, nth tni

added to the ignominy of the ftcl) which lie w s Q-,p,;in
obliged to take. All his affociares declined the C/,',,"""o"-
office; they were unwilling to cxpole tlicmln.'lvcs
to the odium and danger with which it w;a; ca(ly
to forelfe that the dilciiharge ol it swouljl bl at-
ttndced, unless he hiinfilf conrf-nrlc :d t) nll!.-c Itllc
in coimmon with tlhei. 'Ihe FI',il of Morton, Stpt. lS

: Bucli. 371. 1' Buci. 372. Se ACppeuI N,. N\ XV I [I.

B1uthwcll

B o o K Bothwell Bishop of Orkney, Piccairn Commen.

_--- dator of Dunfermling, and Lord Lindsay, were
1568. joined with himn in colinilloin. Mlacgill of

Rankeilor, and lSalnaves of' I allhill, two eminent
Civilians, George Buchanan his faithful adherent,
a man whose genius did honour to the age, Mait-
land, and fcveral others, were appointed to at-
tend thei as afiiulants. ain owed this dif-
tinEion to the Regent's feir, railter than to his
asse&ion. He had warmlny rcni.inilr.lted againit
this measure. 1-1e wifled tlis counltry to continue
in fi-iendfllip with England, but not to become
depcndant on that nation. IHe was desirous of
re-eftablifiing the Queen in obme degree of
power, not inconfitent with that which the King
possessed; and the Regent could not, with safety,
leave behind him a man, whose views were so
contrary to his own, and who, by his superior
abilities, had acquired an influence in the nation,
equal to that which others derived froim the anti-
quity and power of their families i

MAIRY impowered Lefly Bilhop of Ross, Lord

Livinit-on, Lord Boyd, Lord lierries, Gavin Ha-
milton Comnmecndator of Klilwinning, Sir John
Gordon of Lochinvar, and Sir James Cockburn
of Slirling, to appear in her namek.

I.LlzBEli Hl nominated Thomas Howard Duke

of Nolfollk, Thomas Ratciiif Earl of Suffex, and
Sir Ralph Sadler, her Commiflioners to hear
both parties.

Bitlch. 37 . Andlcrr. vol. iv. 35. Mclv, 186. 188.
k .\ndlcII rl . i, 33.

T'li

THIE fourth of Otober was the day fixed for B 0 0 K

opening the Confcrence. The great abilities of --
the deputies on both fides, the dignity of the T'l)l,5n-
judges befire wllom they were to appear, the frenc,' at
high rank of the persons whose cauie was to be
heard, and tie importance of the points in dif-
putc, rendered the whole tranfadion no less il-
luftrious than it was singular. The situation in
which Elizabeth appeared, on this occasion,
firikcs us with an air of magnificence. Her
rival, an independent Queen, and the heir of an
ancient race of Monarchs, was a prisoner in her
hands, and appeared, by her Ambassadors, before
her tribunal. Tlhe Regent of Scotland, who re-
presented the majesty, and poflcffed the authority
of a King, flood in person at her bar. And the
fate of a kingdom, whose power her anceltors had
often dreaded, but could never subdue, was now
at her dilpofal.

THE views, however, with which the several vi'., o

parties consented to this Conference, and the issue p,il r.
to which they expeted to bring it, were extremely
different.

MARY'S chief object was the recovering her

former authority. This induced her to content
to a measure againfl- which lhe had long flrug-
gled. Elizabeth's promises gave her ground for
entertaining hopes of being rellored to her king-
dom ; in order to which, ile would have wil-
lingly made many concessions to the King's party;
and the influence of the EInglif Qoleen, as well
as her own impatience under her prctF'nt situation,

might

B 0 K might have led her to many more '. The Re-

v.
,_ gent aimed at nothing but securing Elizabeth's
s56%. protecion to his party, and seems not to have

had the most distant thoughts of coming.to any
composition with Mary. Elizabeth's views were
more various, and her schemes more intricate.
She seemed to be full of concern for Mary's ho-
nour, and solicitous that she should wipe off the
aspersions which blemished her character. This
she pretended to be the intention of the Con-
ference; amusing Mary, and eluding the soli-
citations of the French and Spanish Ambassadors
in her behalf, by repeated promises of assisting
her, as soon as {he could venture to do so, without
bringing disgrace upon herself. But, under this
veil of friendship and generosity, Elizabeth con-
cealed sentiments of a different nature. She ex-
peaed that the Regent would accuse Mary of
being accessary to the murder of her husband.
She encouraged him, as far as decency would
permit, to take this desperate ftep". And as
this accusation might terminate in two different
ways, ihe had concerted measures for her future
condut& suitable to each of these. If the charge
against Mary should appear to be well founded,
the resolved to pronounce her unworthy of wear-
ing a Crown, and to declare that she would never
burden her own conscience with the guilt of an
action so deteflable as the refloring her to her
kingdom". If it Ihould happen, that what her

1 Andcrf. vol. iv. i:rl ii. 33. Good. vol. ii. 3;7.
In iX A nllier viil. i\ . pail't ii. 1. 45. Iliylcs, 487.
n And..rl vol. iv. parlL ii. 11.

acc urclrs

accusers alleged did not amount to a proof of B 0 K
guilt, but only of mal-administration, fle deter- - -j
mined to set on foot a treaty for restoring her, ij6
but on such conditions as would render her
hereafter dependant not only upon England, but
upon her own fubjeEtso. As every ftep in the
progress of the Conference, as well as the final
result of it, was in Elizabeth's own power, fle
would frill be at liberty to chute which of there
courses she would hold; or if there appeared to
be any danger or inconveniency in pursuing
either of them, she might protract the whole
cause by endless delays, and involve it in inex-
tricable perplexity.

TnE Conference, however, was opened with Compltint

much solemnity. But the very first ftep disco- Q.,een'
vered it to be Elizabeth's intention to inflame, ,m^"a"n'
rather than to extinguish the dissensions and ani- thc Rg"nto
mofities among the Scots. No endeavours were
used to reconcile the contending parties, or to
mollify the fierceness of their hatred, by bringing
the Queen to offer pardon for what was past, or
her fubjedts to promise more dutiful obedience
for the future. On the contrary, Mary's corn- Oaobcr .
missioners were permitted to prefer a complaint
against the Regent and his party, containing an
enumeration of their treasonable actions, of their
seizing her person by force of arms, committing
her to prison, compelling her to rclign the
Crown, and making ule of her son's name to co-
lour their usurpation of the whole royal authority;

Andcrf. vol. iv. part ii. 06.

and

B O v K and of all these enormities they required such
----i speedy and eflfecual redress, as the injuries of one
'6S' Qtueen demanded from the justice of another P.

IT was then expected that the Regent would

have disclosed all the circumstances of that un-
natural crime to which he pretended the Queen
had been accessary, and would have produced evi-
dence in support of his charge. But far from ac-
cufing Mary, the Regent did not even answer the
complaints brought against himself. He disco-
vered a relucEance at undertaking that office, and
started many doubts and scruples, with regard to
which he demanded to be resolved by Elizabeth
herfelfq. His reserve and hesitation were no leti
surprising to the greater part of the English com-
miflioners than to his own associates. They knew
that he could not vindicate his own conduct
without charging the murder upon the Queen,
and he had not hitherto flown any extraordinary
delicacy on that head. An intrigue, however,
had been secretly carried on, since his arrival at
York, which explains this mystery.

Intrues of TIHE Duke of Norfolk was, at that time, the
Noriolk
with the rmoft powerful and molt popular man in England.
Regent. His wife was lately dead; and he began already

to form a project, which he afterwards more
openly avowed, of mounting the throne of Scot.
land, by a marriage with the Queen of Scots.
He saw the infamy which would be the confe-
quence of a public accusation againfi Mary, and
how prejudicial it might be to her pretensions to

P Andcrr. vol. iv. part ii. 52. t IlIayncs, 478.

the

the English fucceflion. In order to save her froim B O V°
this cruel mortification, he applied to Maitland,
and expressed his astonishment at feeing a man of 1563
tb much reputation for wisdom, concurring with
the Regent in a measure tb diflionourable to
themselves, to their Queen, and to their coun-
try; submitting the public tranfadtions of the
nation to the judgment of foreigners; and pub-
lifhing the ignominy, and exposing the faults of
their Sovereign, which they were bound, in good
policy, as well as in duty, to conceal and to cover.
It was easy for Maitland, whose sentiments were
the fame with the Duke's, to vindicate his own
conduct. He assured him, that he had em-
ployed all his credit to dissuade his countrymen
from this measure; and would fRill contribute, to
the utmost of his power, to divert them from it.
This encouraged Norfolk to communicate the
matter to the Regent, He repeated and en-
forced the fame arguments which he had used
with Maitland. He warned him of the danger
to which he rmuft expose himself by such a violent
action as the public accusation of his Sovereign.
Mary would never forgive a man, who had en-
deavoured to fix such a brand of infamy on her
character. If flie ever recovered any degree of
power, his deftrudion would be inevitable, and
he would juilly merit it at her hands. Nor
would Elizabeth screen him from this, by a pub-
lic approbation of his conduct. For whatever
evidence of Mary's guilt he might produce, the
was resolved to give no definitive sentence in the
cause. Let him only demand that tho matter

VOL. 1. K k tould

B °00 K lhould be brought to decision immediately after

V.
I--,- hearing theproof, and he would be fully convinced

I568I how false and insidious her intentions were, and,

by consequence, how improper it would be for
him to appear as the accuser of his own Sove-
reign'. The candour which Norfolk feerned to
discover in these remonstrances, as well as the
truth which they contained, made a deep im-
prelion on the Regent. He daily received the
strongest assurances of Mary's willinrgnefs to be
reconciled to him, if he abstained from accusing
her of such an odious crime, together with the
denunciations of her irreconcilable hatred, if lie
a&ed a contrary part'. All these considerations
concurred in determining him to alter his pur-
pose, and to make trial of the expedient which
the Duke had suggested.
O(EoScr9. HE demanded, therefore, to be informed, be.

fore he proceeded farther, whether the Englifli
commiflioners were empowered to declare the
Queen guilty, by a judicial aAt; whether they
would promiife to pass sentence, without delay
whether the Queen filould be kept under fich
*restraint, as to prevent her from dilturbing the
government now eftablified in Scotland; and
whether Elizabeth, if fle approved of the pro-
ceedings of the King's party, would engage to
protect it for the future'. The paper containing
these demands was signed by himnfelf alone, with-

Mlclv.. sI87. Haynes, 573.

a" Andcrfl vol. iv. part ii. 77. Good. vol. ii. jS7. S&e
Append. No. XXIX.

Andcrf. vol. iv. part ii. 55. State Trials, i. 91, &c.

out

out communicating it to any of his attendants, B 0 0 K
except Militland and Melvil ". But left o many _--
precautions should excite any fuipicion of their 5Sa'
procceding, from some confcioufincis of defcet in
the evi.lcnie which he had to produce against
his Sovereign, Murray empowered Lethington,
Mackgill, and Buchnanan to wait upon the Duke
of Norfolk, the E arl of Suliftx, and Sir Ralph
Sadler, and to lay before them, not in their pub-
lic character as commissioners, but as private
persons, Mary's letters to Bothwell, her sonnets,
and all the other papers upon which were founded
the charge of her being accessory to the murder
of the King, and to declare that this confidential
communication was made to them, with a view
to learn whether the Queen of England would
confider this evidence as fulfficient to establish the
truth of the accusation. Nothing could be more
natural than the Regent's solicitude, to know on
what footing lie flood. To have ventured on a
siep so unconllmon and and ngerous, as the accusing.
his Sovereign, without previously ascertaining that
he might take it with safety, would have been
unpardonable imprudence. But Elizabeth, who
did not expea that he would have moved any such
difficulty, had not empowered her commiflioners
to give him that fatisfacion which he demanded.
It became necessary to tranfiit the articles to
herself, and by the light in which Norfolk placed
them, it is easy to fee that he wished that they
should make no flight impreflon on Elizabeth

Anders. vil. iv. prTt ii. 5'6. tclv. 9o.

K k 2 and

B o0 K and her ministers. " Think not the Scots, said
L.---. ' "he, over-fcrupulous or precise. Let us view

'68. (, their conduct as we would wifn our own to be

" viewed in a like situation. The game they

play is deep; their estates, their lives, their
c' honour are at stake. It is now in their own

power to be reconciled to their Queen, or to
offend her irrecoverably and in a matter of so

' much importance the utmost degree of cau-
" tion is not excessive L."

WHILE the Engliff commissioners waited for

fuller inftruaions with regard to the Regent's
demands, he gave in an answer to the complaint
which had been offered in name of the Scottifl
Queen. It was expressed in terms perfectly con-
formable to the system which he had at that time
adopted. It contained no insinuation of the
Queen's being accessory to the murder of her
husband; the bitterness of style peculiar to the
age was considerably abated; and though he
pleaded, that the infamy of the marriage with
Bothwell, made it necessary to take arms in order
to dissolve it; though Mary's attachment to a
man so odious justified the keeping her for some
time under restraint; yet nothing more was said
on these fubjecs than was barely requisite in his
own defence. The Queen's commissioners did
oaobcr 17. not fail to reply Y. But while the article with

regard to the murder remained untouched, these
were only firmnifhes at a distance, of no confe-
qucncc towards ending the contest, and were

x Atdcrf. vol, iv. 77. y Ibid. vol. iv. part ii. 64. 80.

little

little regarded by Elizabeth or her commis- B 0o K
fioners.

1568.
THE conference had, hitherto, been conduted Theconfe-

fence re-

in a manner which disappointed Elizabeth's moved o
views, and p.oduced none of these discoveries W'fimi'
which she had expected. The distance between
York and London, and the necessity of consulting
her upon every difficulty which occurred, con-
funled much time. Norfolk's negotiation with
the Scottish Regent, however secretly carried on,
was not, in all probability, unknown to a prin-
cess so remarkable for her sagacity in penetrating
the designs of her enemies, and feeing through
their deepest fchemesL. Instead, therefore, of
returning any answer to the Regent's demands,
she resolved to remove the conference to Weft-
minfler, and to appoint new commissioners, in
whom she could more absolutely confide. Both
the Queen of Scots and the Regent were brought,
without difficulty, to approve of this resolution a.

WE often find Mary boasting of the superiority

in argument obtained by her commissioners
luring the conference at York, and how, by the
strength of their reasons, they confounded her
adversaries, and silenced all their cavils b. The
dispute flood, at that time, on a footing which
rendered her vitory not only apparent, but easy,
H-er participation of the guilt of the King's
murder was the circumstance upon which her

z Good. vol. ii. 16o. Andcrf. vol. iii. 24,
a Hayncs, 484. Andcrf. vol. iv. 94,
' Good. vol. i. 186. 284. 350.

K k 3 subjed&.

B O oK subjects ought to have refted, as ajutification of
-,_ their violent proceedings against her; and while
'S65 Ethey induftrioufy avoided mentioning that, her

cause gained as much as that of her adversaries
loft by suppressing this capital argument.

ELIZABETH resolved that Mary flould not

enjoy the fame advantage in the conference to be
held at Weftininlter. She deliberated with the
utmost anxiety, how file might overcome the
Regent's scruples, and persuade him to accuse
the Queen. She confidered of the most proper
method for bringing Mary's commissioners to
answer such an accusation; and as she fbrefaw
that the promises with which it was necessary to
allure the Regent, and which it was inmpofible to
conceal from the Scottish Queen, would naturally
exasperate her to a great degree, file determined
to guard her more narrowly than ever; and
though Lord Scroop had given her no reason to
distrust his vigilance or fidelity, yet because he
was the Duke of Norfolk's brother in-law, (he
thought it proper to remove the Qjeen as soon as
possible to Tuthbury in Staffordshire, and commit
her to the keeping of the Earl of Shrewsbury, to
whom that castle belongedc.

Aliay's si- MARY began to fufpe& the design of this fe-
Elizabeth's cond conference; and notwithstanding the satis-
Otoberi. faction fle expressed at feeing her cause taken

more immediately under the Queen's own eye',
ihe fiamed her inftrutions to her commiflioners
in such a manner, as to avoid being brought

' I-;lyles, 497. d Andcrf. vol. iv. part ii. 95.

under

under the necessity of answering the accusation of B OO K
her fubjets, if they should be so desperate as to A-
exhibit one against her'. These suspicions were L563.
loon confirmed by a circumstance extremely mor-
tifying. The Regent having arrived at London,
in order to be present at the conference, was im-
mediately admitted into Elizabeth's presence, and
received by her, not only with refpeE, but with
affeition. This Mary justly confidered as an open
declaration of that Queen's partiality towards her
adverlfrics. In the first emotions of her resent- Nl"'.ima

Claims a
ment, she wrote to her commifiloners, and corn- personal au-

dience of

inanded them to complain, in the pretence of the Elizabeth.
Englifl nobles, and before the ambassadors of
foreign Princes, of the usage she had hitherto
met with, and the additional injuries which flhe
had reason to apprehend. Her rebellious sub-
jets were allowed access to the Queen, file was
excluded from her presence; they enjoyed full
liberty, she langu'ished under a long imprison-
ment; they were encouraged to accuse her, in
defending herself fle laboured under every difad-
vantage. For there rieafons she once more re-
newed her demand, of being admitted into the
Queen's presence; and if that were denied, fle
inltruded them to declare, that ihe recalled the
content which she had given to the conference at
Weftmintler, and protelted, that whatever was
done there, flould be held to be null and in-
valid '.

THIS, perhaps, was the most prudent resolution
Mary could liave taken. The pretences on which

* Goodtl.. v!. ii . f Ibid. v1l. ii. 184.

- k 4 the

B °0 K fle declined the conference were plausible, and
a_ ti the juncture for offering them well chosen. But

J568. either the Queen's letter did not reach her com-

miffloners in due time, or they suffered them-
selves to be deceived by Elizabeth's profcflions
of regard for their Mistress, and consented to the
opening of the conferenceE.
Nov. 2s. To the commissioners who had appeared in her

name at York, Elizabeth now added Sir Nicholas
Bacon, Keeper of the Great Seal, the Earls of
Arundel and Leicester, Lord Clinton, and Sir
William Cecilh. The difficulties which ob-
struted the proceedings at York were quickly
removed. A satisfying answer was given to the
Regent's demands; nor was he so much disposed
to hesitate, and raise objections, as formerly. His
negotiation with Norfolk had been discovered to
Morton by some of Mary's attendants, and he
had communicated it to Cecil'. His personal
safety, as well as the continuance of his power,
depended on Elizabeth. By favouring Mary,
she might at any time ruin him, and by a question
which she artfully started, concerning the perfori
who had a right, by the law of Scotland, to
govern the kingdom during a minority, fie let
him fee, that even without restoring the Queen,
it was an easy matter for her to deprive him of
the supreme direction of affairs k. These confi-
derations, which were powerfully seconded by
most of his attendants, at length determined the

g Andcrf. vol. iii, 25. 5. Id. vol. iv. part ii. 99.
i Mclv. 191. F Hayncs, 484.

Regent

Regent to produce his accusation against the B o ° K
Queen. ---

zS68.

HE endeavoured to lessen the obloquy with The Regent

which he was sensible this action would be at- Qeen ofbe-
tended, by protesting, that it was with the utmost iogaccffiry
reluciance he undertook this disagreeable talk; bdnd'snur-

der.

that his party had long suffered their conduC& to
be miifconftrued, and had borne the worst impu-
tations in silence, rather than expose the crimes
of their Sovereign to the eyes of strangers; but
that now the insolence and importunity of the
adverse faction forced them to publish, what they
had hitherto, though with loss to themselves, en-
deavoured to conceal'. These pretexts are de-
cent; and the considerations, which he mentions,
had, during some time, a real influence upon the
conduct of the party; but since the meeting of
Parliament held in December, they had disco-
vered so little delicacy and reserve with refpea
to the Queen's actions, as renders it impossible to
give credit to those fludied professions. The
Regent and his associates were drawn, it is plain,
partly by the neceflity of their affairs, and partly
by Elizabeth's artifices, into a situation where
no liberty of choice was left to them; and they
were obliged either to acknowledge themselves to
be guilty of rebellion, or to charge Mary with
having been accessory to the commission of mur-
der.

THE accusation itself was conceived in the
strongest terms. Mary was charged, not only

Andcrf. vol. iv. part ii. 1l5.

with

B °00 K with having conlented to the murder, but with
.-.---. being acceliory to the contrivance and execution

68 of it, Bothwell, it was pretended, had been

screened from the pursuits of jufice by her fa-
vour; and flie had fortned designs -no less dan-
gerous to the life'of the young Prince, than sub-
verfive of the liberties and constitution of the
kingdom. If any of there ciiines fliould be de-
nied, an offer was made to produce the mofl
ample and undoubted evidcince in confirmlation
of the charge '.
N-o9. =. Ar the next meeting of the commiflioners, the

Earl of Lennox appeared before then; and after
bewailing the tragical and unnatural murder of
his son, he implored Elizabeth's justice against
the Queen of Scots, whom he accused, upon oath,
of being the author of that crime, and produced
papers, which, as he pretended, would make good
what he alleged. The entiance of a new ator
on the stage, so opportunely, and at ajunEture so
.critical, can scarce be imputed to chance. This
contrivance was manifestly Elizabeth's, in order
to increase, by this additional accusation, the in-
famy of the Scottilh Qu(een".

1-errcnm- NMARY'S commissioners expressed the utmost
Ifl'"roit° surprise and indignation at the Regent's pre-
irfw er.n fumption, in loading the Queen with calumnies,

which, as they affirmed, fle had so little merited.
But, inltead of attempting to vindicate her ho-
nour, by a reply to the charge, they had recourle
to an article in their instructions, which they had

n Alndcrf. vol. iv. part ii, 1I9, n Id .
ii. 122.

formerly

formerly neglected to mention in its proper B oo K

0 V.

place. They demanded an audience of Eliza- -
beth; and having renewed their Mistress's request, 5s6S-
of a personal interview, they protested, if that
were denied her, against all the future proceed-
ings of the commifioners". A protefftation of
this nature, offered just at the critical time when
such a bold accusation had been preferred against
Mary, and when the proofs in support of it were
ready to be examined, gave reason to suspect that
she dreaded the event of that examination. This
suspicion received the strongest confirmation from
another circumstance; Ross and Herries, before
they were introduced to Elizabeth, in order to
make this protestation, privately acquainted Lei-
cefter and Cecil, that as their Mistress had, from
tfic: beginning, discovered an inclination towards
bringing the differences between herself and her
fubjeds to an amicable accommodation, so ihe
was still desirous, notwithstanding the legent's
audacious accusation, that they fiould be ter-
rninated in that manner P.

SUCH moderation seems hardly to be compati-

ble with the strong resentment which calumniated
innocence naturally feels; or with that eagerness
to vindicate itself, which it always dilcovers. In
Mary's situation, an offer so ill-timed must be
confidered as a confession of the wcaknefs of her
cause. The known character of her commnillion-
ers exempts them fiom the imputation of folly,
or the suspicion of treachery. Some secret con-

0 Andcrfon, vol. iv. part ii. 133. '5P, &c.
P Ibid. iv. 134. Cabbal;t, 157.

3 viRion,

B o0 K viSion, that the conduct of their Mistress could

V.

not bear so strict a Scrutiny as must be made into
'563. it, if they fihould reply to the accusation prefer-

red by Murray against her, seems to be the most
probable motive of this imprudent proposal, by
which they endeavoured to avoid it.
D- e.b.. IT appeared in this light to Elizabeth, and

afforded her a pretence for rejecting it. She re-
presented to Mary's commi ffioners, that, in thepre-
f'nt junAure, nothing could be so dishonourable
to their Mifcrefs, as an accommodation; and that
the matter would feein to be huddled up in this
manner, merely to suppress discoveries, and to
hide her shame; nor was it possible that she
could be admitted, with any decency, into her
preience, while she lay under the infamy of such
a public accusation.

UPON this repulse, Mary's commissioners

withdrew; and as they had declined answering,
there seemed now to be no further reason for the
Regent's producing the proofs in support of his
charge. But without getting these into her hands,
Elizabeth's schemes were incomplete; and her
artifice for this purpose was as mean, but as fuc-
cefsful, as alny she had hitherto employed. She
commanded her commissioners to testify her in-
dignation and displeasure at the Regent's pre-
fumption, in forgetting so far the duty of a
subje&t, as to accuse his Sovereign of such atro-
cious crimes. He, in order to regain the good
opinion of such a powerful proteatrefs, offered to
flcw that his accusations were not malicious, nor
ill-grounded. Then were produced and submit-

ted

ted to the infpeaion of the Englifli comnmilion- B °O o
ers, the acts of the Scottifl Parliament in con- -
firmation of the Regent's authority, and of the j56S"
Queen's resignation; the confefflons of the per-
sons executed for the King's murder; and the fatal
casket which contained the letters, sonnets, and
contracts, that have been already mentioned.

As soon as Elizabeth got these into her pof- Eli:aheti

- - treats Marv

session, she laid them before her Privy Council, with greater
to which she joined, on this occasion, several no- rDgor.,
blemen of the greatest eminence in her kingdom
in order that they might have an opportunity of
confidering the mode in which an inquiry of such
public importance had been hitherto conducted,
as well as the amount of the evidence now brought
against a person who claimed a preferable right
of fuccelfion to the English crown. In this re-
fpectable assembly all the proceedings in the con-
ferences at York and Velftminfte r were reviewed,
and the evidence produced by the Regent of
Scotland against his Sovereign was examined
with attention. In particular, the letters and
other papers said to be written by the Queen of
Scots, were carefully compared " for the manner
of writing and orthography," with a variety of
letters which Elizabeth had received at diflerent
times from the Scottifl Queen; and, as the result
of a moi. accurate collation, the members of tho
Privy Council, and noblemen conjoined with
them, declared tlat no difference betwecn these
could be difcovcred,1. Elizabeth, having efta.

9 AlJderfon, vol. iv. parl ii. 170, &c.

blifled

B 0 0 K blifhed a sac so unfavourable to her rival, began

V.

to lay aside the expreflions of friendflip and re-
'56S. fpet which she had hitherto used in all her letters

to the Scottish Queen. She now wrote to her in
such terms, as if the presumptions of her guilt
had amounted almost to certainty; she blamed
her for refusing to vindicate herself front an ac-
cufation which could not be left unanswered,
without a manifest injury to her charaEter; and
plainly intimated, that unless that were done,
no change would be made in her present fitua-
tion'. She hoped that such a discovery of her
sentiments would intimidate Mary, who was
hardly recovered from the Ihock of the Regent's
attack on her reputation, and force her to confirm
her resignation of the Crown, to ratify Murray's
authority as Regent, and to content that both her-
self and her son should reside in England, under
English protecRion. This scheme Elizabeth had
much at heart; The proposed it both to Mary and
to her cominiffioners, and neglected no argument,
nor artifice, that could possibly recommend it,
Mary saw how fatal this would prove to her re-
putation, to her pretensions, and even to her per-
fonal safety. She rejeced it without hesitation.

Death, said she, is less dreadful than such an
ignominious ftep. Rather than give away, with
my own hands, the Crown which descended

"to me from my ancestors, I will part with life;
" but the last words I utter, shall be those of a

Queen of Scotland'."
' Andl.c'. vol. iv. parl: ii. 179. 183. Good. vol. ii. 260.

-Iiayucs, 497. SccApp.No. XXX. Good.vol. ii.274.30o.

AT

Ar tile I-am e

time flc fteilms to have bcen fen- B 0 0 K

fible liow open her repuitation lay to cenllure, while -
Ill llel- cired such a public acculfaion to remain 5g
unanl\Vwred; Iand though tlie conference Was nowt
liiTolved, fie empowered h2r conmifri'oners to
prclrit a reply t) the :llegartions of her cnelmi:s,
in xwhici ie (denicd, in te ronge ter the
c(rinmeS imt to her; a'il recrini inatel upon Deccrn. .
the Regent and his party, by accusing them of
ihaving devifel and executed the murder of the
King . The Regent and his associates aflcrted
their innocence withl great warnmth. .Mary' con,
tinued to insist0 on a personal interview, a condi-
i.on which si e knew would never be gRranted .
Elizabeth urged her to vindicate her own. ho-
nour. But it is evidenit fromn the delays, tie
evations, and subterfuges, to which both Queens
had recourse by turns, that Mary avoided, and
Elizabeth did not desire to make any furthet
progress in the inquiry.

Ti4E Regent was now impatient to return into ,569.

Feb. Z.

Scotland, where his adIverslries were endeCvourO- I.fmias
ing, in his abFcncc, to raise some comlmlotionsi. ,h'lsget!
Befor e he et our, he was called into tie Privy tilerJp-

. pm,'(io ming or

Council, to receive a iinal declaration of Elliza- cnnacmninr
beth's fentimenrs. Cecil acquaintcd him, in her h' ,, CldU;
name, that on one hand nothing had been ob-
.jeced to his condu&l-1, which ile could reckon
detrimental to his honour, or inconfiflent with
his duty; nor had he, on the other hand, pro-
duced any thing against his Sovereign, on which

' Good. ii. 2?5. a tt:id. :; l. C.,bb;l.a, 157.

nilc

B 0 K she could found an unfavourable opinion of her

V.
-^-.. actions; and for this reason, ihe resolved to leave
3569. all the affairs of Scotland precisely in the fame

situation in which she had found them at the
beginning of the conference, The Queen's
commiflioners were difiiffed much in the fame
manner .

AFTER the attention of both nations had been

fixed so earnestly on this conference upwards of
four months, such a conclusion of the whole ap-
pears, at first fight, trifling and ridiculous. No-
thing, however, could be more favourable to
but recrety Elizabeth's future schemes. Notwithstanding her

yos his seeming impartiality, mhe had no thoughts of con-

tinuing neuter; 'nor was she at any loss on whom
to bestow her protection. Before the Regent left
London, she supplied him with a considerable fum
of money, 'and engaged to,fupport the King's
authority to the utmost of her powerY. Mary,
by her own conduct, fortified this resolution.
Enraged at the repeated instances of Elizabeth's
artifice and deceit, which she had discovered
during the progress of the conference, and de-
fpairing of ever obtaining any succour from her,
she endeavoured to route her own adherents in
Scotland to arms, by imputing such designs to
Elizabeth and Murray, as could not fail to in-
spire every Scotchman with indignation. Mur-
ray, she pretended, had agreed to convey the
Prince her son into England; to surrender to
Elizabeth the places of greatest strength in the
x Good. ii. 315. 333. Y Ibid. 213. . Cartc, iii. 478.

kingdom,;

kingdom; and to acknowledge the dependence n o° K
of the Scottilh upon the Englilh nation. In rc-
turn for this, Murray was tb be declared the law-
ful heir of the Crown of Scotland; and, at the
fame time, the question with regard to the IEn!lIf
fuccellion was to be decided in favour of the iFa'rl
of Hartford, who had promised to marry one of
Cecil's daughters. An account of there wild
and chimerical proje&ts was spread indufltiouly
among the Scots. Elizabeth, perceiving it was
calculated of ptupofe to bring her government
into difireputation, laboured to dcfiroy its effecs,
by a counter-proclamation, and became moie
diflgurlcd han ever with the Scottifl Queen'.

THIE legent, on his return, found the kcingdom hErI '

in the utlmolf tranquillity. But the rage of the Iiernr a-
Q2een's adherents, which had been fuipended in it
expectation that the conference in England would
terminate to her'advantage, was now ready to
break out with all the violence of civil war.
They were encouraged, too, by the appearance
of a leader, whole high quality and pretensions
entitled him to great authority in the nation.
This was the Duke of Chatclherault, who had
resided for forne years in France, and was now
sent over by that court, with a fina;ll supply of
money, in hopes that the presence of the firtl no-
bleman in the kingdom would fr-cngtheln the
Queen's party. Elizabeth hadc detained him in
England, for some months, under various pre-
tences, but was obliged at last to iufifr hijn to

I-ayne,;, soo. S3. Scc Append. No. XXXI.
VOL. 1. 1t 1 proceed

B O K proceed on his journey. Before his departure,
A-_ 1 Mary invested him with the high dignity of her

569' Lieutenant General in Scotland, together with
Feb. 25.

the fantastic title of her adopted father.

Hisvigorous THE Regent did not give him time to form his
bak her party into any regular body. He affeinbled an
party. army, with his usual expedition, and marched to

Glasgow. The followers of Argyll and Huntly,
who composed the chief part of the Queen's sac-
tion, being feated in corners of the kingdom
very distant from each other, and many of the
Duke's dependants having been killed or taken
in the battle of Langfide, the spirit and tfrength
of his adherents were totally broken, and an ac-
commodation with the Regent was the only
thing which could prevent the deftrudion of his
estate and vassals. This was effected without
difficulty, and on no unreasonable terms. The
Duke promiled to acknowledge 'he authority
both of the King and of the Regent; and to
claim no jurifdition in consequence of the com-
mission which he had received from the Queen.
The Regent bound himself to repeal the adt
which had passed for attainting several of the
Qteen's adherents; to restore all who would sub-
mit to the King's government, to the poffeflion
of their cftates and honours; and to hold a Con-
vention, wherein all the differences between the
two parties should be fettled by mutual consent.
The Duke gave hostages for his faithful perform-
ance of the treaty; and, in token of their finc-
rity, he and Lord Herries accompanied the Rc-
gent to Stirling, and visited the young King.

9 The

The Regent set at liberty the prisoners taken at B o°° K
Langfide. --

ARGYLL and Huntly refused to be included in

this treaty. A secret negotiation was carrying on
in England, in favour of the captive Queen, with
£o much success, that her affairs began to wear a
better afpe&, and her return into her own king-
dom seemed to be an event not very diflant. The
French King had lately obtained such advantages
over the Hugonots, that the extinction of that
party appeared to be inevitable, and France, by
recovering domestic tranquillity, would be no
longer prevented from protecting her friends in
Britain. These circumitances not only influenced
Argyll and Huntly, but made so deep an impref-
sion on the Duke, that he appeared to be waver-
ing and irresolute, and plainly discovered that he
wished to evade the accomplishment of the treaty.
The Regent saw the danger of allowing the Duke
to shake himself loose, in this manner, from his
engagements; and instantly formed a resolution
equally bold and politic. He commanded his
guards to seize Chatelherault in his own house
in Edinburgh, whither he had come in order to
attend the Convention agreed upon; and, regard-
less either of his dignity as the firtf nobleman in
the kingdom, and next heir to the Crown, or of
the pronil-fs of personal security, on which he
had relied, committed him and Lord Herries
prisoners to the castle of Edinburgh b. A blow
so fatal and unexpected dispirited the party.

"C;il)bal;a, 1.61. Ciawf. Mcm. 106. Id. ir-
tdlv. .oc2.

L 1 s Argyll

B ovo K Argyll submitted to the King's government, and
-,.--I made his peace with the Regent on very easy
Apr 566. terms; and Huntly, being left alone, was at last

obliged to lay down his arms.

July 2T. SOON after, Lord Boyd returned into Scotland,
A propnfal
in t.,vurof and brought letters to the Regent, both from the

.r English and Scottifhl Queens. A Convention was

held at Perth, in order to confider them. Eliza-
beth's letter contained three different proposals
with regard to Mary; that she should either be
restored to the full poffelion of her former autho-
rity; or be admitted to reign jointly with the
King her son; or at leafi be allowed to reside in
Scotland, in lome decent retirement, without any
ihare in the adminitriation of government. These
overtures were extorted by the importunity of Fe-
nelon the French Ambassador, and have some ap-
pearance of being favourable to the captive Queen.
They were, however, perfectly suitable to Eliza-
beth's general system with regard to Scottish as-
fairs. Among propositions so unequal and dif-
proportionate, tfie easily saw where the choice
would fall. The two former were rejeced; and
long delays must necessarily have intervened, and
many difficulties have arisen, before every cir-
cumftance relative to the last could be finally
adjufed c.

MARY, in her letter, demanded that her mar-

riage with Bothwell flhould be reviewed by the
proper judges, and if found invalid, should be
difTolved by a legal sentence of divorce. This

c Spotfvw. 230.
8 fatal

fatal marriage was the principal source of all the RB O K
calamities she had endured for two years; a di- , -.
vorce was tlie only thing which could repair the i569o
injuries her reputation had suffered by that fltp.
It was her interest to have proposed it early; and
it is not easy to account for her long silence wirl
refpet to this point. Iler particular motive for Nrrolk'r
proporing it, at this t;!me, began to be lo well mirrying
known, that the demand was rejet cd by the Con- of s5ts.
vention of estatesd. They imputed it not so
much to any abhorrence of Bothwell, as to her
eagerness to conclude a marriage with the Duke
of Norfolk.

THIS marriage was the obje& of that secret ne-

gotiation in England, which we have already men-
tioned. The fertile and projecling genius of
Maitland first conceived this scheme. During
the Conference at York, he communicated it to
the Duke himself, and to the Bishop of Ross.
The former readily closed with a scheme so flat-
tering to his ambition. The latter confidered it
as a probable device for restoring his Mistress to
liberty, and replacing her on her throne. Nor
was Mary, with whom Norfolk held a corre-
fpondence by means of his sifter Lady Scroop,
averse from a meafilre, which would have re-
stored her to her kingdom with so much fplen-
dour%. The sudden removal of the Conference

d Spotfw. 23 1. Tn a Privy Council, held July 30, 159, ilhisk

demand was confideredl ; and, of fifty-one nmemberls p)rCfect,
only seven voted to comply with the (Qeen's rcquci. Re.
tordls Priv. Counc. MS. in the Lyon Ollice, p, 148.

' Carinl. 419. 1lia)nes, 573. Statce Trials, 1. 73.

L 1 3 from

B o0 K from York to Wefttinfter suspended, but did

V.
»-- not break off this intrigue. Maitland and Ross
3569. were still the Duke's prompters, and his agents;

and many letters and love tokens were exchanged
between him and the Queen of Scots.

ConceA, it BUT as he could not hope, that under an ad-
from Eliza-
bctb. ministration so vigilant as Elizabeth's, such an

intrigue could be kept long concealed, he at-
tempted to deceive her by the appearance of
openness and candour, an artifice which seldom
fails of success. He mentioned to her the ru-
mour which was spread of his marriage with the
Scottish Queen; he complained of it as a ground-
less calumny; and disclaimed all thoughts of that
kind, with many expressions full of contempt
both for Mary's chara&er and dominions. Jealous
as Elizabeth was of every thing relative to the
Queen of Scots, she seems to have credited there
professions'. But, instead of discontinuing the
negotiation, he renewed it with greater vigour,
and admitted into it new associates. Among thelet
was the Regent of Scotland. He had given great
offence to Norfolk, by his public accusation of
the Queen, in breach of the concert into which
he had entered at York. He was then ready to
return into Scotland. The influence of the Duke,
in the North of England, was great. The Earls
of Northumberland and Weltmorland, the molt
powerful noblemen in that part of the kingdom,
threatened to revenge upon the Regent the in-
juries which he had done his Sovereign. Murray,

1 Hayncs, 57A. State Trials, i. 79, 8c.

inl

in order to secure a safe return into Scotland, B 0° K
addressed himself to Norfolk, and after some .-
apology for his pall conduct, he insinuated that ,s9'
the Duke's scheme of marrying the Queen his
fitter was no less acceptable to him, than bene-
ficial to both kingdoms; and that he would con-
cur with the utmost ardour in promoting so de-
firable an events. Norfolk heard him with the
credulity natural to those who are paflionately
bent upon any design. He wrote to the two
Earls to desist from any hostile attempt against
Murray, and to that he owed his pafage through
the Northern counties without disturbance.

ENCOURAGED by his success in gaining the Re- cainsthe

i 0i _. i Ts

ien, i con"ent of

gent, he next attempted to draw theEnglifi nobles the Engliif
to approve his design. The nation began to de- oble,.
fpair of Elizabeth's marrying. Herjealoufy kept
the question with regard to the right of fuccefflon
undecided. The memory of the civil wars, which
had desolated England for more than a century,
on account of the disputed titles of the houses of
York and Lancaster, was still recent. Almost all
the ancient nobility had perifled, and the nation
itself had been brought to the brink of deftrutiion
in that unhappy contest. The Scottish Qieen,
though her right of succession was generally held
to be undoubted, might meet with formidable
competitors. She might marry a foreign awd a
lPopiih Prince, and bring both liberty and reli-
gion into danger. But, by marrying her to an
:Engliflmnan, a zealous Proteltant, the moil power-

g Antlr. iii. 31,

L1 4 ful

B 0 0 K ful andt most universally belovcd of all the nobles,

_-----. an etl'cAtual remedy seemed to be provilded against
5óc9· all thele evils. The greater palrt of the Peers,

cither directly or tacitly, approved of it, as a
_ .ilutary projcTi. The Earls of Arundel, Pem-
br!oke, Lcicecfler, and Lord Lumley, subscribed
a lctter to the Scottish Queen, written with
Ieicect:er's hand, in wh,ch they warmly recomn-
mended the ima:ch, but insisted, by way of pre-
liminl::r, on Ma'y's promise, that she ffould at-
tempt nothing, in consequence of her pretensions
to the Englifi Crown, prejudicial to Elizabeth,
or to her poflerity; that lhe should coneint to a
leaue, offensive and defensive, between the two
kini dolms; that she should confirm the present
eliabliihment of religion in Scotland; and receive
into favour such of her subjects as had appeared
in arms against her. Upon her agreeing to the
marriage, and ratifying these articles, they en-
gaged that the English nobles would not only
concur in refloring her immediately to her own
throne, but in securing to her that of England in
reversion. Mary readily conflnted to all there
proposals, except the second, with regard to which
sic demanded some time for consulting her an-
cient ally the French King '.

'1 E whole of this negotiation was industriously

concealed from Elizabeth. Her jealousy of the
Scottifl Queen was well known, nor could it be
expected that she would willingly come into a
mniafure, which tended so visibly to save the re-

h Anders. vol. iii. iT. Carnd. 420.

putation,

putation, and to increase the power of her rival. B °o° K
But, in a matter of tb much consequence to the ---
nation, the taking a few teps without her know- ''
ledge could hardly be reckoned criminal; and
while every person concerned, even Mary and
Norfolk themselves, declared that nothing fllould
be concluded without obtaining her content, the
dluty and allegiance of fubjec's leemed to be fully
prelerved. The greater part of the nobles re-
garded the matter in this light. Those who
condutEed the intrigue, had farther and more
dangerous views. They llw the advantages which
Mary would obtain by this treaty, to be present
and certain; and the execution of the promises
which she came under, to be diltant and un-
certain. They had early communicated their
fcheine to the Kings of France and Spain, and
obtained their approbation'. A treaty concern-
ing which they consulted foreign Princes, while
they concealed it from their own Sovereign,
could not be deemed innocent, They hoped,
however, that the union of such a number of the
chief persons in the kingdom would render it
neceflary for Elizabeth to comply; they flattered
themselves that a combination so firong would
be altogether irrefiflible; and fiich was their
confidence of success, that when a plan was con-
certed in the North of England for rescuing
Mary out of the hands of her keepers, Norfolk,
who was afraid that if fie recovered her liberty,
her sentiments in his favour might change, used

Andcrf. vol. iii, 63.

all

B O ° K all his intercfl to difluade the conspirators from1

V. -

.__.-_ attempting it .
J'-'' IN this lituation did the affair remain, when

Lord Boyd arrived fiom England; and, betides
the letters which he produced publicly, brought
others in cyphers from Norfolk and Throkmorton
to the Regent, and to Maitland. Thele were
full of the Inoli languine hopes. All the nobles
of }Eng1iland concurred, said they, in favouring
the dclign. Every preliminary was acljufled; nor
was it possible that a scheme so deep laid, con-
duded with so much art, and supported both by
power and by numbers, could miscarry, or be
defeated in the execution. Nothing now was
wanting, but the concluding ceremony. It de-
penlded on the Regent to haften that, by pro-
curing a fclntence of divorce, which would re-
move the only obstacle that stood in the way.
This was expected of him, in consequence of his
promise to Norfolk ; and if he regarded either his
intercl: or his fame, or even his safety, he would
not fail to fulfil thele engagements'

BUT the Regent was now in very different cir-

cumfiances from those which had formerly in-
duced him to affect an approbation of Norfolk's
schemes. He saw that the downfal of his own
power muff be the first contequence of the Duke's
success; and if the Queen, who confidered him
as the chief author of all her misfortunes, should
recover her ancient authority, he could never ex-

k Carnd. 420. i IL)yncs, 520. Spots. 230. Se
Appcn. Jix, No. XXX!I.

pea

pea favour, nor scarce hope for impunity. No B ° ° K
wonder he declined a ftep so fatal to himself, and '-
which would have established the grandeur of '569'
another on the ruins of his own. This refusal oc-
cafioned a delay. But, as every other circum-
fiance was fettled, the Biflop of Ross, in name of
his Mistress, and the Duke, in person, declared,
in pretence of the French Ambafihdor, their mu-
tual content to the marriage, and a contract to
this purpose was signed, and intrusted to the
keeping of the Ambassador m.

THE intrigue was now in so many hands, that A^uguI,1.
it could not long remain a secret. It began to difcovcrsthe

Duke's de-

be whispered at court; and Elizabeth calling the fn,, and
Duke into her pretence, exprefled the utmost in- defeatsit.
dignation at his condua, and charged him to lay
aside all thoughts ofprofecuting such a dangerous
design. Soon after Leicester, who perhaps had
countenanced the project with no other intention,
revealed all the circumstances of it to the Queen.
Pembroke, Arundel, Lumley, and Throkmorton,
were confined and examined. Mary was watched
more narrowly than ever; and Hastings Earl of
H-untingdon, who pretended to dispute with the
Scottish Queen her right to the succession, being
joined in commission with Shrewsbury, rendered
her imprifonmnent more intolerable, by the ex-
cess of his vigilance and rigour". The Scottifl
Regent, threatened with Elizabeth's displeasure,
meanly betrayed the Duke; put his letters into
her hands; and furnilhed all the intelligence in
A Carte, vol. iii. 486, Hayncs, 525, 526. 530. 532.

his

B 0o 0 his power . The Duke himself retired first to

V.
---_ Howard-houfe, and then, in contempt of the

-'9' f1uminons to appear before the Privy Council,

fled to his feat in Norfolk. Intinmidated by the
imprifonmcnt of his aflociates; coldly received
by his fiiends in that county; unprepared for a
rebellion; and unwilling perhaps to rebel; he
hesitated for some days, and at last obeyed a fe-
on. ;, cond ca!l, and repaired to ¥Windsor. He was

firfL kept as a prisoner in a private house, and
rhen sent to the Tower. After being confined
ihere upwards of nine months, he was released
upon his humble fubmilTion to Elizabeth, giving
her a promiJc, on his allegiance, to hold no far-
ther coi-rcflondenice with the Queen of Scots P
During the progress of Norfolk's negotiations,
the Qjeen's partiians in Scotland, who made no
doubt of their ifi'uing in her restoration to the
throne, with an increase of authority, were won-

ai'nd derfully elevated. Maitland was the foul of that

iTrn p iffi ned
by he Re. party, and the person whose activity and ability

D the Regent chiefly dreaded. He had laid the

plan of that intrigue which had kindled such
combuf:ion in England. He continued to so-
ment the spirit of difaflection in Scotland, and
lh.d seduced from the Regent Lord IHome,
Kirkaldy, and several of his former associates.
.While he enjoyed liberty, the Regent could not
reckon his own power secure. For this reason,
having by an artifice allured Maitland tq Stir-
ling, he employed Captain Crawfurd, one of his

Scc Append. No. XXXIII. P H-;lynes, 525. 597.

creatures,

creatures, to accuse him of being accef)Try to the B O o K
murder of the King; and under that pretence he -.'
was arrested and carried as a prisoner to Idin- '"59
burgh. Ile would soon have been brought to
trial, but was saved by the friendflip of Kirkaldy,
Governor of the castle, who, by pretending a
warrant for that purpole from the Regent, got
him out of the hands of the perSon to whose care
he was committed, and conldu&ed him into the
caflle, which fiom that time was entirely under
Maicland's command '. The loss of a place of
so much importance, and the defection of a man
so eminent for military skill as Kirkaldy, brought
the Regent into some difreputation, for which,
however, the success of his ally Elizabeth, about
this time, abundantly compensated.

THE intrigue carried on for rcftoring the Scot- A rc.;:,,.

tifh Queen to liberty having been discovered, and zabeLh by
disappointed, an attempt was made, to the fame hei.d '
purpose, by force of arms; but the issue of it
was not more fortunate. The Earls of Nor-
thumberland and Westmorland, though little
distinguished by their personal abilities, were
two of the most ancient and powerful of the
English Peers. Their estates in the northern
counties were great, and they poffieTed that in-
fluence over the inhabitants, which was heredi-
tary in the popular and martial families of Percy
and of Nevil. They were both attached to the
Popish religion, and difcontcnted with the court,
where new men and a new fy(teni prevailed.

q Spotfw. 232.

E vcr

B o0 K Ever since Mary's arrival in England, they had

V.

,

- -1 warmly espoused her interest, and zeal for Po-
1569. pery; opposition to the court, and commifera-

tion of her sufferings, had engaged them in dif-
ferent plots for her relief. Notwithstanding the
vigilance of her keepers, they held a close corre-
fpondence with her, and communicated to her all
their designs'. They were privy to Norfolk's
schemes; but the caution with which he pro-
ceeded did not suit their ardour and impetuosity.
The liberty of the Scottish Queen was not their
sole object. They aimed at bringing about a
change in the religion, and a revolution in the
government of the kingdom. For this reason
they solicited the aid of the King of Spain, the
avowed and zealous patron of Popery in that age.
Nothing could be more delightful to the restless
spirit of Philip, or more necessary towards faci-
litating his schemes in the Netherlands, than the
involving England in the confusion and miseries
of a civil war. The Duke of Alva, by his di-
retion, encouraged the two Earls, and promised,
as. oon as they either took the field with their
forces, or surprised any place of strength, or
rescued the Queen of Scots, that he would sup-
ply them both with money and a strong body of
troops. La Mothe, the Governor of Dunkirk,
in the disguise of a sailor, founded the ports
where it would be mofl proper to land. And
Chiapini Vitelli, one of Alva's ablest officers, was
dispatched into England, on pretence of fettling

' HI-yncs, 595. Murdin, 44. 62, &c.

Come
* - -

some commercial differences between the two na- B °VO K
tions; but in reality, that tie rebels m-ight be --.
sure of a leader of experience, as soon as they 1569'
ventured to take arms'.

TIIE conduct of this negotiation occasioned Defeated.

many meetings and messages between the two
Earls. Elizabeth was informed of these; and
though fle suspected nothing of their real design,
Ihe concluded that they were among the number
of Norfolk's confidents. They were summoned,
for this reason, to repair to court. Conscious of
guilt, and afraid of dicovery, they delayed giving
obedience. A second, and more peremptory
order was issued. This they could not decline,
without ihaking off their allegiance; and as no N'r.g.
time was left for deliberation, they instantly
ereted their standard against their Sovereign.
The re-ellablifling the Catholic religion; the
fettling the order of fuccefilon to the Crown;
the defence of the ancient nobility; were the
motives which they alleged to justify their re-
bellion'. Many of the lower people flocked to
them with such arms as they could procure; and
had the capacity of the leaders been, in any de-
gree, equal to the enterprile, it muIlt have soon
grown to be extremely forlnidablle. Elizabeth
nlced with prudence and vigour; and was served
ly her Ifbljets with fidelity and ardour. On
tlie firflt rumour of an inlfirrcclion, Mary was re-
moved to Coventry, a place of Itrength, which

' Cairr , vol. iii. 489, 490. Cilid. 421.
Str)ypc, vul, i. 547.

cotul1

B o0 K could not be taken without a regular fiegc; a

V.
_ - detachment of the rebels, which was sent to
5r' rescue her, returned without success. Troops

were afiembled in different parts of the king-
dom ; as they advanced, the malecontents re-
tired. In their retreat their numbers dwindled
away, and their spirits funk. Delpair and uncer-
tainty whither to direL thcir flight, kept to-
gether for some time a finall body of them
among the mountains of Northumberland but
they were at length obliged to disperse, and the
chiefs took refuge among the Scottifhi borderers,
isszi. The two Earls, together with the Countess of

Northumberland, wandering for some days in
the waftes of Liddifdale, were plundered by the
banditti, exposed to the rigour of the season,
and left destitute of the necessaries of life. Weft-
morland was concealed by Scot of Buccleugl
and Ker of Ferniherft, and afterwards conveyed
into the Netherlands. Northumberland was
seized by the Regent, who had marched with
some troops towards the borders, to prevent any
impression the rebels might make on those mu
tinous provinces".
Church as- AMIDST so many surprising events, the affairs

of the church, for two years, have almost escaped
our notice. Its General Assemblies were held
regularly; but no business of much importance
employed their attention. As the number of
the Protestant clergy daily increased,. the de-
ficiency of the funds, set apart for their fubl

u Citbbal., 171. Ci;md. 422.

fillentce

liftence, became greater, and was more sensibly B ( ° c

V.

felr. Many efforts were made towards reco- .-
vering the ancient patrimony of the church, or at 6'
least as much of it as was poffefled by the Popifl
incumbents, a race of men, who were, now, not
only useless, but burdensome to the nation. But
though the manner in which the Regent received
the addrefLes and complaints of the General As-
femblies, was very different from that to which
they had been accutromed, no efftcual remedy
was provided ; and while they sufFered intolerable
opprefTion, and groaned under extreme poverty,
fair words, and liberal promises, were all they
were able to obtain .

ELIZABETH now began to be weary of keeping c i-.

such a prisoner as the Queen of Scots. During l''l
the former year, the tranquillity of her govern- piv' ...
ment had been disturbed, first by a secret combi- R.'.
nation of some of her nobles, then by the rebel-
lion of others; and fle often declared, not with-
out reason, that Mary was the hidden cr.,/c of
both. Many of her own fulbjets favourld, or
pitied the captive Queen; the Roman Catholic
Princes on the continent were warmly interellcd
in her cause. The detaining her any longer il
England, ihe foresaw, would be made the pretext
or occasion of perpetual cabals and inllurrll ions
amnong the formerl; and might c:exofc lc'r to the
hostile attempts of the latter. Slie relulvcil, there-
fore, to give up Mary into the hanlds of the Re-
gent, after ftipulitilg with hlim, not onl, tin:t hiCr

x C':,l . .,'I. ii. '.-, ' .
VoL. . I.M 1i (s.l.'s

B o0 K days should not be cut short, either by a judicial

V.
*- .. Sfentence or by secret violence, but that she should

157o. be treated in a manner suitcd to her rank ; and,

in order to secure his observance of this, she re-
quired that fix of the chief noblemen in the
kingdom thould be sent into England as hof-
tages Y. With respect to the safe custody of the
Queen, hie relied on Murray's vigilance, whose
security, no less than her own, depended on pre-
venting Mary from re-afcending the throne. The
negotiation for this purpose was carried some
length, when it was discovercd by the vigilance
of the Bishop of Rolts, who, together with the
French and Spanish Ambassadors, remonflrrated
against the infamy of such an action, and repre-
sented the surrendering the Queen to her rebel-
lious fubjecas, to be the fame thing, as if Eliza-
beth should, by her own authority, condemn her
to instant death. This procured a delay; and
the murder of the Regent prevented the revival
of that design .

Blut he is HAMILTON of Bothwellhaugh was the person
nurdcred. who committed this barbarous adcion. He had

been condemned to death soon after the battle of
Langfide, as we have already related, and owed
his life to the Regent's clemency. But part of
his estate had been bestowed upon one of the
Regent's favourites, who teized his house, and
turned out his wife naked, in a cold night, into
the open fields, where, before next morning, ihe

Y ] I;t l cs, 5!24. Carte, v ol. iii. 491. Aidecrf.
vol. iii. 84.

became
7

became furiously mad. This injury made a B °0 K

V.

deeper impreftion upon him than the benefit
which he had received, and from that moment I570o
he vowed to be revenged upon the Regent.
Party-rage strengthened and inflamed his private
resentment. His kinsmen the Hamiltons ap-
plauded the enterprise. The maxims of that age
justified the most desperate course which he could
take to obtain vengeance. He followed the Re-
gent for some time, and watched for an oppor-
tunity to strike the blow. He resolved at last to
wait till his enemy flould arrive at Linlithgow,
through which he was to pass in his way fiom
Stirling to Edinburgh. He took his fland in a
wooden gallery, which had a window towards
the street; spread a feather-bed on the floor, to
hinder the noise of his feet from being heard;
hung up a black cloth behind him, that his
shadow might not be observed firom without;
and after all this preparation, calmly expected
the Regent's approach, who had lodged during
the night in a part of the town not far dillant.
Some indiftinC information of the danger which
threatened him had been conveyed to the Re-
gent, and he paid so much regard to it, that he
resolved to return by the fame gate through
which he had entered, and to fetch a conpaifs
round the town. But as the crowd about the
gate was great, and he himrnelf unacquainted with
fear, he proceedecl diredly along the street; and
the throng of the people obliging him to move
very slowly, gave the afTafin time to take so true

M m 2 an

B 0 ( K an aim, that he shot him with a single bullet

V.
^.__ through the lower part of his belly, and killed

5'70' the horfi of a gentleman who rode on his other

fide. I is followers instantly endeavoured to
break into the house whence the blow had come,
but they found the door firongly barricaded;
and before it could be forced open, Hamilton
hlad mounted a fleet horse, which flood ready for
him at a back-paffage, and was got far beyond
their reach. The Regent dicd the fame night of
his wound'
I- istarac- "'IrRE is no person, in that age, about whom

' hifiorians have been more divided, or whose
cllaracter lhas been drawn with Iuich opposite co-
lours. Pc,'fonal intrepidity, military ilkill, fa-
gacity and vigour in the administration of civil
afliirs, are virtues, which even his enemies allow
him to have pofl-flcd in an eminent degree. His
moral qualities are more dubious, and ought
neither to be praiseed, nor censured, without
great reserve, and many dillinEtions. In a fierce
age, he was capable of using victory with hutlla-
nity, and of treating the vanquilhed with mode-
ration. IA patron of learning, which, among
martial nobles, was either unknown, or defl)ifed.
Zealous ofr religion, to a degree which dliflin-
,gui i]ed l him, even at a time when profcffions of
rlhat kindl were not uncommon. Ilis confidence
iln his frieinds ws extrelme, and inferior only to
hlis liberality towards them, which knew no

uLIIli.:11. 38S. CrIwl. IMc . 124. C',i,;l, 17r

bounds.

bounds. A disinterested pafllon for the liberty B o o K
of his country, prompted him to oppole the per- I _..
nicious system, which the Princes of Lorrain had 'l5.
obliged the Queen-mother to pursue. On Mary's
return into Scotland, lie served her with a zeal
and afTfction, to which he Ifacrificed the friend-
ship of those who were nolt attached to his per-
son. But, on the other hand, his ambition was
immoderate; and events happened that opened.
to him vast projects, which allured his enter-
prifing genius, and led him to a-ions inconsistent
with the duty of a subjeI. I lis treatment of the
Queen, to whose bounty he was so much in-
debted, was unbrothcrly and ungrateful. The
dependence on Elizabeth, under which he brought
Scotland, was disgraceful to the nation. He
deceived and betrayed Norfolk with a baseness
unworthy of a man of honour. His elevation to
such unexpected dignity inspired him with new
passions, with haughtiness and reserve; and in-
ifead of his natural manner, which was blunt and
open, he affecaed the arts of dissimulation andl
refienement. Fond, towards the endl of his life,
of flattery, Iand impatient of advice, his crea-
tures, by fIotlin"t his vanity, led him afl:ray,
while his ancient tfiends flood at a ditlLince, and
prediLCted his approaching fall. But, amildfl the
tlurbulence and colinlfionl of that fadcious pe-
riodl, lie difin ll'd jull ice withi bo much impar-
tiality, lie reprefc. the licelltious bordlerers with
t'o lmnuch colirage, Iand c[ftablifilId fuich i uncoIl-

111)11

i o o K mon order and tranquillity in the country, that

._._> his administration was extremely popular, and
3570. he was long and affetionately remembered

among the commons, by the name of the Good
Regent.

EN ID OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

# ERRATA.

E R R A T A.

I'a"c z. line 2.
: ', An.

alntrpinhill. rc./ .-nl that ot't'm C .lc.loni.is.

12. - 24. for is liU., as 5ne;is, ,rri/,.ire luch as i.red.
19.- 13. die At d.
24.· - 22. c.Jd whose power \ .is htI great.
25.- Ib. d.-ie And.
- - 24. tuea aimrfl enirely.
31)- S. read were alliimol f'ie.

5. - S. ,rtii. An .ic.nC:l'i! I...' hwlvsi'r, eclird

Co. - S tron b tolnt>-, / .I Jii.

<wing lti.i) ci',,, 'c.

92. 16. fr its de:rt ,, ., :.;: .letCls, .
oo. - 7. fol-r fl ni1-,

m ti

: :' i,

c:-.

o 13.- 12. /ir p'ii'lict ' . sprrjudlccs.
Ii * - O1 fruni .['Ir: ,i.' Ai.d.
1j --7 9 fln).':llu ,l,/ro 'llknown,r r.ad imperfealy underflood.

120. - 5 ftrom Ano:

.m,,./! A:d.

127.- penulr. ocr them, .ra.li the French.
jz.- 9. di/, And.
16, - 2.. fr uncle, read uncles.
17S - 19. fcr whole encruachnients, read the encroachments of

which.

iS5. - 1. for the muso proper, ,-.cd among the mo! proper.
19. - lS. ftremeire, '.adlmn.iill.n:.
202- 4 trom bottom, ilt/ Alnd
207.- ult.for utterly ignorajt, rtea little acquainted wi'l.
25.- - 9' dele totally.
2:g. - S ftr,,i bottom, for tInwirthvy, isd unlui .able to.
zs5. - \;. for aversion 1,, rc.,d ,verfi n tu.
290. - i1 hlio bo:tom, for hJrpc i.ng to be 1i waiting, re.J h.p-

pening to;atend hlie comt.

421. - penult.Jr him, read Bolliwrll.
4 52. - 6 Irim blttom.rn. jld.l, l coitol t m inl,,i csd s iDn cotnforllity.
492. - , /or his faillilul, riaJ Murray'o i.itllful.
